 
Foi the Switjer t^'^eynoyidl SABIN W. COLTON, JR. MEMORIAL FUND 



, ' 
't, ■ va 
fei' r 


te • ■ 
■ ■ ^7 

- J 
■; A' 
is 
-7^1 

ST 
A 
■fat'.'a 


THE 

HISTORY 
OF THE 
Miss BALT I MORES; 
IN A 
SERIES OF LETTERS, 
VOL. I. 
LONDON: 
PRINTED FOR T. HOOK HAM, 
At his Circulating Library, New bond street, Corner of bruton street. 
m.dccilxxxiii. 

£ 
5 
THE 
r H I S T O R Y, cc. 
UK 
2 
H 
t 
> 
d 
r 
< 
i 
LETTER I, 
MISS BALTIMORE TO., 
M I .S S CHAMBERS. 
B — L School. 
I HAVE taken up my pen to try to express the Joy I feel at my dear, lucy’s return to England, I and vol. I B my 
04^-350 
( '-) 
my Sister have misted you very much Since you left School: you ask, if all the ladies are here still? They are. The ladies Betty and Lucy Modeiy talk of quitting it Soon; they are as proud and haughty as ever, therefore none of us will regret their departure : all the rest are here still. You Say, you are contented and happy; I don’t know, my dear, what reply to make; I have no particular reason to be otherwise, and yet there is Something hangs upon my Spirits which I cannot account for; but I believe it is be cause I have not Seen nor heard from Sir Edward nor i^dy Baltimore for for Some time. Is it not rather Suri 

I ’ prising, 
( 3) 
piifing, my dear, that our father and mother Should keep my sister and me So long at School? but they know what is best for us; and as we are perfectly astured of their affection, ought to make ourselves contented, till they think proper to 
recall us. -- My dear friend will 
think me very dull; therefore will hasten to conclude, with asturing my dear Lucy of my unalterable affection and esteem. 
your’s, 
Kitty Baltimore. 
P. S. My sister writes by the same post. 
B 2 
L E 
(• 4) 
LETTER II 
FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME, 
Perhaps when my Lucy receives this, she will not deign to 
open it; but forgive me, my dear, 1 forgot to whom I was writing; I know you are above Such meanness, and will pity the misfortunes of those you once honoured with the appellation of friends. I therefore will hasten to inform you what has befell us Since I last wrote : on the 
Wednesday after, Mrs. M -- proposed 
giving usa ball, and inviting Some of the young ladies’ friends, to it; among the number, were 
miss 
( 5) 
Mlfs nevii’s father, mother, and brother; the latter’s discourse tiirn ing upon poetry, he drew out of bis pocket a newspaper, and read Some very fine verses therein; when he had finlfhed reading, I begged him to lend it me. I took the fatal japer, and turning it on the other side, the first paragraph I cast my 
eye upon, was the follbwing : -- -- - 
“Yesterday morning as Sir Edward Baltimore was riding in hyde park, he was thrown from his korse, and 
killed on the Spot.” -- -- I Saw no 
more, but Sunk on the floor; how long I continued So, I know not; but when I recovered, found my dear sister in the Same condition, fly B 3 having 
( 6) 
having taken up the fatal paper to find out the cause of my fainting, which reduced her to the Same condition. We immediately quitted 
the room, and went to Mrs. M -- -- --, 
when the first person we law was one of my father’s footmen : Mrs. 
M -- -- -- looked' the picture of de ‘ 
fpair. I could not help exclaiming, ’ O! my God, what will become of us! Tell me truth, (turning to the man) how is our dear mother? — “O! miss, ” cried he, “I am Sorry to inform you that she is very ill, and I am come to fetch you to receive her last blessing.” We went upstairs, hurried on our hats, and went into the coach;; got home, 
and 
and run up to our dear mother’s chamber; but, oli! ray Cod, what did we behold? — the onco beautiful Lady Baltimore, now pale and emaciated! stretched on her bed, Seemingly without sense or motion. We approachetl the bed, * sunk on our knees, and each taking a hand,, bathed it with our tears : she faintly Said, O! my children, do I once more behold you 1” Then, calling her nurse, bid her raise her up with pillows, and then quit the room; She then addrested us both : “My dear children, cease your mourning, this is but the beginning of Sorrows, my time is short, hear what I have to fay'; I B 4 am' 
( 8) 
am going to a better place; all my affliction is, about you; prepare to hear the fatal news; you have hitherto been brought up to high expectations, but, my children, what must you feel, when I inform you, that you have not a penny in the world to call your own; your poor father has entirely ruined himself by gaming; but for my sake, my dears, whatever befalls you, never reflect upon him, who was the author of your being, but remember we are all Subject to errors. My dearest children, whatever you Suffer, whatever you go through, never forsake the paths of virtue; whenever you are in any trouble, 
pray 
( 9) 
pray to the Almighty to help you out of it; though you meet with trouble and vexation for a while, yet put youttrust in God, and walk in the paths of virtue, and he never will forsake you. You, my Kitty, ” turning to me, “area twelvemonth older than your sister, and though you may justly say, that eighteen is not ah age to have much discretion, yet I trust you are both endowed with fense enongli to get your bread by honest industjty, rather than be beholden to any of your former ace]uaintance.” She then, pointing to a drawer, bid us go and open it, and we should find a thousand pounds, all she had in B 5 her 
( 10) 
her power to Save for ns: She desired us to put it by, as the creditors would, the moment the breath was out of her body. Seize on all they could find; She then gave us a letter to give our uncle, who inherits the estate and title from our dear father; She told us she had recommended us to his protection, but she bid us not rely on him, as he was very proud and haughty; she then took a last embrace. As for us, we were unable to make any reply, but with our tears. She made a motion for us to withdraw; we Sent the nurse into the room, and returned ourselves in about half an hour. We approached the bed; 
she 
( ”) 
She cast her eyes upon us; then lifting them up to Heaven, closed them for ever. We Saw no more,, but Sunk in a fit on the floor : when we recovered, we found ourselvcs, in another room. You, my dear friend, can best judge how we felt the next morning my uncle arrived, we gave him the letter; he Said he was Sorry for our misfortunes,, but we must quit the house immediately, as it was filled with creditors; he was Sorry he had it not in his power to help us,, but the estate was So engumbered with debts, that he did not know how to clear himself: if we chose to go to his house, we might, till we could think of B: 6 
Sbmier 
( 12) 
Some way of getting our bread. For our parts, we were So petrified at his behaviour, that he might have talked for ever, and not met with any interruption from us; but when I found he had done speaking, and waited for a reply, 1 made him the following : ‘‘we arc much obliged to you, Sir, for your kind offer; but you Should remember, that though we are without money, and consequently without friends, yet we are the daughters of the late Sir Edward Baltimore; and though we are obliged to beg our bread from door to door, we never will be beholden to you for a penny, God, who will always protect the 
innocent 
( 13) 
innocent, will protect us, tvvohelp less orphans : adieu I and may you one day repent, before you die, the usage you have given the children of one of the best of brothers; for Such he always was to you.” Saying this, I flung out of the room, my sister following me : we then once more visited the chamber, where our dear mother’s corpse lay, and watering it with our tears, quitted the house in a state of mind easier to be conceived than described;; have taken a lodging, and changed our name to Mountfort; therefore, my dear, if you deign to honour us with a letter, direct in 
that 
( H) 
that name. I went and paid Mrs. 
M -- -- what was due to her, and 
fetched our clothes away ^ She Seemed Sorry at our leaving her, yet Showed that kind of pity. So common to little minds, that told me She heard in what manner we were left. I have wrote this while my Sister is laid downmy fingers are fo cramped, and my eyes So heavy,, I must conclude. I am. 
My dear miss Chambers, 
Kitty Bal t i m o re 
1. E T( 
() 
LETTER nr. 
MISS CHAMBERS 
T O 
MISS BALTIMORE. 
A ND could my dear friends be So ungenerous to think their Lucy would mind the vain talk of the world? Fie, my dears; but as I intend this as a letter of comfort, not of chiding, I will Say no more on that Subject. O! my God, what must you have gone through I That vile uncle! I could freely tear him to pieces. My dear, I stihi make this but Short, as I intend instantly Setting off for London ta 
. see 
() 
see you; therefore you may expect to See me perhaps as Soon as my letter. Pray give my love to my dear Harriot, and affure her and yourself of my unalterable esteem and alsectlon. 
your’s, more than ever, 
j 
•, Chambers, 
, 7 oil 
LET( 
() 
LETTER IV 
MISS CHAMBERS 
T O 
LADY SOPHIA MORELAND. 
London. 
I ARRIVED here late last night, but would not delay complying with my dear sophia’s request longer thaii this morning. Immediately on my arrival, I went to my dear friends lodging; I found them reading when I entered; we flew into each other’s arms, unable to utter a Syllable : joy for the present, and grief for the past, alternately took place; I begged them to make use of my 
house( 
() 
house and fortune, but all in vain ^ they will not hear of any Such thing; their present intention is to wait on ladies; but that I shall distuade them from, as they never can brook the usage of our modern ladies of quality. It was in vain for me to plead that for an excuse; they Said they had been So inured to misfortunes, that would be nothing : I then laid before them the risk they run of being known, if they waited on ladies; and besides, you will find few inclined to take two such handsome young women into their houses. They said, as to being known, there was little fear, as they were Seldom or .erat home; to be Sure, if any 
of 
( 19) 
of their schoolfellows Should find them out, they would certainly ex pose them : they then started another Scheme of being governesises to two young ladies, and then they Should not care if they were found out, though they would rather not. I told them that would never do, as no lady would care to trust her children with two Such young peo ’ pie : “No, my dears, take my advice, come live with me; I promise never to control you in anything.” But all in vain; they would not hear 
me. 
Wednesday, 
( 20) 
Wednesday, four o’clock. 
* I went to my young friends early this morning, and found them quite in Spirits, as they had just; heard Some good news. “But before I acquaint you with it, my dear Lucy, don’t attempt to control me, ” Says 'Kitty; the person where we lodge is a very good Sort of woman; So we asked her to help us to Some needlework;; night, after you was gone. She came up, and told us ‘she had just received a letter from her sister, who was a milliner at Bath, and desired her to inquire if there was any young gentlewoman that wanted a strop, as stie and her 
husband( 
() 
husband were going to retire from business;; as I heard you Say, ladies, you should like Such an offer, I thought I would let you know, as she will make the terms very easy.' I told her 1 should be glad of the offer, but we understood nothing of the business - Said that was nothing, as there were three very deserving young people, who had been with her sister ever since she had been in business, and nothing was required of us but to wait on the ladles, and give out materials for the work: : told her we should consider of it. And, now,, my dear friend, tell us sincerely, don’t you think this a good fclieme.” 
I could 
( 22) 
I could not help bursting into tears; ‘‘ O my God I my dear friends, ’* Said I, “why won’t you accept my offer.” They replied, weeping, “Do not ask us, we cannot consent to it.” I found it in vain to press them any farther; So told them it was the most eligible undertaking; I Sat an hour or two, and then left them, to tell Mrs. Green (the mistress of the house) they intended to accept her offer. I think this is the best they can do, as So much beauty and innocence cannot long be concealed. Adieu, my dear friend. Believe me your’s, 
L Chambers. 
P. S, 
() 
P. S. As Soon as the dear girls are gone to Bath, I Shell Set off for Moreland Abbey 
LETTER VI 
EDWARD BALTIMORE, ESQ. 
T © 
\ 
COLONEL RAW DON. 
DEAR CHARLES, London: 
I ARRIVED in this Scene of bustle last night, and this morning went to my father’s house;; received me very kindly, but as he was in deep mourning, 1 guested Some of his relations must be dead. You Seem surprised, Edward, ” 
Said 
( 24) 
Said he, “to see me in this drels, and more So, when I tell you, your uncle and aunt Baltimore are both dead; he entirely ruined himself by gaming; and she, poor woman, I believe, died of a broken hearn” — O! my God, Charles, what did I feel when I heard of the death of this worthy couple; I was So affected, that, in Spite of my Sex, tears started into my eyes. “But tell me, Sir, ” Said I, turning to my father, “what is become of my lovely cousins ?” He replied, reddening, he knew nothing of them; then looking at his watch, he Said, “You will hardly have time to dress for dinner, therefore I will 
leave 
( 25) 
leave you.” I went up to my room in a state of mind not to be described; as by my father’s behaviour, I am led to think he has not behaved well to my cousins; where can they be? They certainly ought to be in this house, as they have no other relation. I long, yet dread to hear the particulars. I hear my father coming, and have not began to dress, So must break off. Adieu. 
Eleven at Night. 
vvell, Charles, I am Set down to write, but in Such a state of mind, I hardly know where to begin. I broke off abruptly; I told you my father was coming; he entered my vol. I. C room 
( 26) 
room with So gay an air, he Surprised me. “Heyday! Edward, ” Said he, “what, writing instead of dresting; I Suppose to Some favourite mistress.” “No indeed, Sir, ” Said I, “I am not; it is to my friend, Colonel Rawdon.” “Well, ” Said he, I shall not inquire into your amours abroad or at home, as I Shall always leave the choice of a wife to yourfejs, provided She is a woman of family and fortune.” I was drested in a Short time, as you know that is a bufiness I abhor; when my Servant had quitted the room, I Said, “Will you oblige me. Sir, with the particulars of my dear uncle and aunt’s death, and 
likewise 
( 27) 
likewise tell me what is become of their daughters, as I long to embrace them?’* “Indeed, Edward, ” Said he, “this is a very wrong time to start Such a Subject; but, however, I will tell you as Short as postible, as for the future I Shall insist upon your 
never mentioning their name. -- -- - 
When you quitted England, the girls were at School, and there they continued till three months ago; Sir Edward wrote me he had entirely ruined himself by gaming, and desired to See me immediately in town, for I was then in the country; I intended Setting out on the following day; just as I was stepping into niy chaise, a Servant arrived, to inform C 2 mc 
) 
me, that Sir Edward, riding in hyde park, was thrown from his horse, and killed on the Spot; and that his lady was very ill, and desired to See me before She died : you must think how this furprised me; I got into the carriage immediately; but being sofar off, (for I was in Wales at the time) I arrived too late to See her alive. Her daughters presented me with a letter from their mother; I read it, and found thereby that their father had left me little or no estate, as he had totally ruined himself by gaming; I found the house full of creditors, and thought it a very improper place for the young people to stay in; So offered 
them 
( ?9 y 
them an asylum in mine, till they could think of Some method to provide for themselves.” O, Charles! what a galling Speech! provide for themselves 1 his own brother’s children! But to go on; (for I did not think it consistent ^ith my duty to interrupt him,) “but Miss Kitty, ” continued he, “made a very Saucy reply, which I do not care to repeat, nor do I remember. I have now done, Edward, ” Said he. “O, Sir 1” cried I, “why could you not make them stay in your house; you have money enough to Support them, till they met with men they could approve of for their husbands;; I am Sure there are many who would C 3 be 
X 3°) 
be proud to have Such lovely accomplished women for their wives. 
1 here left off Speaking. “Well, Edward, ” Said he, this is your opinion; but consider, young man, you are too young to dictate to your father; therefore, say no more on the subject, as I have one to communicate, which I hope will prove more agreeable.” He looked at me with a very penetrating eye; I bowed, but made no answer;; he thus went on : You mustknow^, Edward, that having met with a lady who has taken a liking to my 
person” ” -- -- -- may be Sur, 
Charles, this roused all my attention,) -- -- - “I have made her an 
offer 
(3!) 
offer of my hand and fortune; in Short, I am going to be married.” 
“Married, Sir 1” repeated I; “Yes, married, Sir replied my father, 
“why not ?” reddening, “I Shall not hurt you by it, any more than if I remained single.” A loud rap at the door announced company. — “There !” cried he, - with a lover like impatience, which made me Smile, “is Lady Charlotte; cheer up, my lad, and I will present you 
to your future mother in law.” -- - 
Saying this, he quitted the room, and, I followed. I am So tired and sieepy, my dear friend, I cannot go on. So adieu. your’s, 
Ed. Baltimore. 
e 
LET( 
( > 
LETTER VIII 
FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME. 
Wednesday morn, two o’clock. 
Well, my friend, here am I Seated, at this early hour, or rather late, to go on with my narration. I followed my father into the parlour, where were about Seven or eight ladies and gentlemen asisem bled; my father presented me to one of the ladies. Saying, “This is Lady Charlotte Herbert, the lady I mentioned to you I, for my part, looked more abashed than the lady, she having too much quality afsh rance to be out of countenance; the 
eyes 
( 33) 
eyes of the whole company were upon me, I Suppose to See how I Should receive my future mother in lawr When the compliments of welcoming me to England, and So forth, were over, I took my Seat, and thoroughly' examined Lady Charlotte : and now, Charles, for a description of her. She Seems to be about nineteen or twenty; — — a very fit age for a man of sixty I — ► but mum for that: She L rather above the middle size.. rather dark; her eyes black; her mouth is well enough, if She did not Spoil it by an almost inceltant laugh, which, I fuppose, is to Show her 
fine teeth, which are really Soc 
5 Well( 
() 
Well, Charles, there is her picture, as nearly as I can give it; as to her behaviour, it was Such as, I am Sorry to say. i’m Sure will make my poor father very unhappy, if he has her, which is past a doubt; in Short, I pasted a very disagreeable day, and was glad to plead fatigue, for an excuse to retire early. — — Well, my friend, what think you of all this? But, Oh! my God, where are now my lovely cousins wandering? My beloved Kitty! did I think of this when I took my leave of you to go upon my travels? Good God! I think 1 now hear her say these words, with tears running down her lovely cheeks, Adieu, Edward! 
. God 
( 35) 
God bless you, and send you a Safe journey; and if ever we meet again, may we love'^'each other as well as we do now we are going to part.” Ye, Kitty, I do love you still, with the Same pure affection as I did then. I was then young, and had not Seen any other woman, to know the difference. You know, Charles, I was but fifteen when I left the University, to go upon my travels; Kitty was but fourteen, Harriet thirteen; So you See there is one year difference between all three. You have often wondered, that I never was touched with any of the fine women I have Seen abroad. You will perhaps say, it was not acting like a c6 friend, 
( 3^) 
friend, not to tell you of this; bist indeed, Charles, I hardly knew I loved, till 1 came to England, and 
found I could not see her. -- -- It is 
now four o’clock, and I am very tired; I suppose you will be the Same before you reach the end of this long letter j therefore I will bid you adieu, 
% 
yours Sincerely, 
Ed. Baltimore, P. S. Pray write soon. 
L E T “
( 37) 
LETTER IX 
MISS K. BALTIMORE. 
T O 
MISS C HAM B E R Sv 
Bath. 
Well, my dear friend, here we are as happy as our situation will let us; ’tis true, it appears hard at first, but why? there are many young people who look as delicate as any of our fine ladies do; nay, more fb; therefore, why Should we think it harder? we were not brought up to that expectation; that is all the difference, my dear. I think it is the best thing that could have happened to us, as it will teach 
us 
( 38) 
US to Set a proper value upon those who contribute to the ornament Vnd convenlency of us, and not to give ourselves airs, as the ladies do here to us : indeed, my dear friend, I am quite content; I can laugh at all the impertinence they are pleased 
to honour .me with. though my 
dear friend has forbid me to Speak, I must, or my heart will burst with gratitude : did you think to slip that hundred pound note into my pocketbook without my perceiving it; — ought we to repine, when, in the midst of our distress, God has raised us Such a friend as you, when every one, even him who was our nearest relation, slighted us, — Apropos J 
I wonder 
( 39) 
I wonder whether our cousin Edward is come to England, and if he has forgot us; he promised to love me s long as he lived as the Song Says, but he was too young then to know what he Said, and has Seen too many women since ever to think of his dear Kitty, as he used to call me. heigh ho! I think I am very dull, therefore had best leave off! Adieu, my deafest friend, ever as usual, 
K. Baltimore 
P. S. I ibrgot to tell you we go by the name of Mountfort. 
LET. 
( 40) 
LETTER X 
COLONEL RAW DON 
T O 
EDWARD BALTIMORE, ESQ 
And So my dear friend is really in love! — nay, don’t start, man, for it is really So. I thought you could not have been So indifferent to all our beauties here, who have displayed every charm to catch the insensible Angloas, as they called you, if that sty urchin, Cupid, had not stole into your breast. Well, my friend, I will try now to be serious : So your father is actually going to play the fool, and marry; 
Lord, 
( 4i) 
Lord, man, never mind it; her young ladyship will Soon break his heart. “Fie, Charles !” cries my fqlier friend, “do you know who you Speak of?” Yes, Ned, who I Speak of, but I forgot to whom I was writing; well, I know you will excuse me, as it is impossible for me 
to be Serious. -- -- If you can’t live 
happy at home, why come to me : O .h cry ye mercy; I forgot, 1 suppose you are going in Search of your little Kitty; well, but fuppose you can’t find her take a trip to me, who will receive you with open arms. Well, I shall still hold to my maxim, that when love once gets hold of you Sentimental fellow 
there 
( 42) 
there is nothing but sighing and dying, and So forth; while we, gay fellows, are never troubled with the 
V 
Sly urchin half an hour together; you have often told me, I Should one day suffer for it: well, be it So, I can’t help it; but pray, Mr. Cupid, keep off as long as possible; and with this prayer I will conclude So keep up your spirits, man, and ?.ll will go right at last : remenaber it is your friend Charles prophecies this. So adieu.. 
/• 
your’s, 
C Rawdon. 
% 
P. S. Pray write fooii, and tell me how you go on. 
LET( 
() 
LETTER XL 
MISS CHAMBERS 
% TO 
MISS MOUNTFORD 
I RECEIVED my dear kitty’s letter, and am glad to hear you are tolerably happy; but am sorry to inform you, I slant have the pleasure of feeing you and my dear Harriet at Bath this feason, as I ani" obliged to go to France with Lord and ladymourland; he is going for the recovery of his health, and she, like an affectionate wife, accompanies him, and they both Say they can’t do without their dear Lucy; 
both 
( ' 44) 
both my Lord and his lady have always been more like a father and mother, than distant relations, as you know, Kitty, my Lord was only my uncle’s wife’s brother; this leads me to think what a difference there is in relations; and as I am upon this topic, will tell you a piece of news, my dear; your uncle is going to be married, and who do you think to? no other than Lady Charlotte Herbert; you, I believe, have never Seen her, though I have often Spoke of her to yqu; (he is not above twenty, and what can induce her to marry Such an old man, except She intends to break his heart Soon? To be Sure, she has 
little 
( 45) 
little or no fortune, and So giddy and flighty, that no man would care to venture on her for a wife; but he is going to have her, So let him look to it. I am afraid, my dear friend, I can’t have the pleasure of hearing from you before I leave England, but I will write as Soon as I arrive at Paris, and let you know where to direct to me; I Shall long to hear from you both. Pray give my love to dear Harriet, and believe your’s, as usual, 
Lucy Chambers. 
LET( 
() 
LETTER XII 
EDWARD BALTIMORE, ESQ. 
T O 
COLONEL RAWDON. 
ELL, Charles, the deed is donc) and my father is really married; it is now three weeksi and I mayven* ture to affirm, they both as heartily repent as any couple in England. As to the wedding, I Shall pass over: about a week after ffie was married, She had all the old*fashioned furniture removed, and new put in its stead; you may be Sure that did not please my father; but he Said nothing : the week after. She com i plained 
( 47) 
plained the Servants dooked like a parcel of Welch goats, just come 
from the mountains. -- “Do, my 
ddr” ” She, turning to Sir Edward, who sat biting his lips, “do lefme bespcak new liveries for them ' tomorrow“ “as your Lady ship pleases” ” he, “but you are the first of the family that ever found fault with them.” Saying this, he left the room in a pet; She laughed, and the next day new ones were Set about. — — — The dinner bell rings; therefore will finish this after. Adieu. 
Eleven 
C 48) 
Eleven at Night. 
WELL, Charles, 1 have a great deal to tell you. When 1 left off, I told you I was going to dinner; I went down, and was surprised to find nobody in the parlour but Sir Edward and his lady, as, since they have been married, the house has never been free from company; She 
looked dressed, as if going out. -- -- -- 
We took our Seats; I Saw they looked each discontented: for my part, I did not know what to Say; at last, I Said to my father, “Have you been out this morning, Sir r” “No,"^’ was all the answer I received; I Said no more. When dinner was over, 
^ (for 
( 49) 
(for we none of us eat much) rhy lady, turning to the footman, Said, in a haughty tone, “Order the Qpach to be here at Seven !” The 
Servant bowed, and withdrew. -- -- -- - 
“Where is your ladyship going now, pray ?” Says my father. “I did not know, ” fiiys She, “when I mansied sir Edward Baltimore, that i must never stir out without giving him an account where I was going; but. Sir, if you must know, I am a going to Ranelagsh with Lady Betty Newman.” “I thought madam, you would have staid at home tonight“ “God !” cried She, do you think I am to be pinned to your fide like a child; I have staid vol. I. D ^ 
( 5®) 
it home all the morning to contei^ you, though I had promised to go to the museum with Lord Carleton, but through your absurdness I have been obliged to disappoint him, and now you would have me Serve Lady Betty the fame.” “promised to go to the museum with Lord Carleton !” repeated Sir Edward; “Well, I now too late see my own folly; O! Edward, if I had taken your advice, ” looking at me, “I might have been happy fayingthls, he quitted the room. Though he Spoke this low, yet it did not escape her ladjlhip’s car. O 1” Said She, it is very well.” What is very well, ma?” 
?” I, (fori thought I had 
beer 
a 
( 5‘) 
been dumb long enough) what is vcty well ?” .repeated I. “It is no matter, Sirreplied she“ “I don’t make the least doubt of your distiiadlng your father against the match.” “Certainly, madam, ” Said I, “I did try all that was in my power to distuade him from it and if I could have done it, it would have been better for you both, I believe; you, my lady. Should have considered well, before you married a man of my father’s age, whether ' you could put up vlth his humour.” 
“I did not think he was Subject to any Such humours, ” cisied she, in' ' me, “as he Seemed to dote on me, and I was fool enough ' D 2 to 
( 52) 
to think he would deny me nothing I think, madam, ” Said I, “that he has let you do as you wouj d, as you have made great alterations in 
this house.” -.... A rapping at the 
door announced company; when they entered the room, I left it, and Went in Search of my father, who I found walking about the room, in great difcrder; but what pasted between us, yon must wait for till tomorrow, as I am So tired I cannot go on; therefore adieu till tomorrow. 
E. Baltimore. 
LETE 
53) 
LETTER XIII 
FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME. 
Well now, Charles, for a continuation of my narrative, for So it justly may be called. As I told you before, 1 entered the room, where my father was walking about, in great disorder;; stood for Some moments silent; but finding he did not perceive me, I Said, “My dear Sir, why afflict yourself thus ?” “O, Edward T replied he, “when I 3'eflect how ridiculous I have made myself, by marrying Sush a young chit, how can you wonder? — why could I not be content? I had one D 3 good 
( s)) 
deserving wife; why must I go to take another ?•’ “Well, Sir, ” Said I, “what is done cannot be recalled; therefore, have a little patience; and who knows but a little gentle treatment, and a few milcl admonitions may in time alter her, as She is young and inexperienced. She is, you know, very handsome, ' consequently fond of admiration; therefore, Sir, let her pursue pleasure till she is quite tired of it, and then perhaps she may return to her duty.” “Well, my Son, this is your advice; I will try, but remember, Edward, 1 give her in your charge; take care of the precious trust, for still I lovelier to distraction.” ' Saying this, he. ' * left' 
( 55) 
left me: So you see, Charles, what ail unpleasing talk 1 have Set; but, however, it amuses my other thoughts, O, Kitty! where are you now wandeising? I am distracted when I think of her. Therefore, adieu. 
Ed. Baltimore. 
P. S. I forgot to tell you her la dystiip is not yet returned from ra nelagh. 
D 4 
L S ■} 
( 56) 
LETTER XIV 
MISS CHAMBERS 
T O 
MISS MOUNTFORD. 
Paris, — — 
Well, my dear, here am I arrived at this gay metropolis; and I asture you, that though I have been here but one week, have got halta dozen lovers already. Now you muss know, that amongst them all there is not one that I have the least penchshit for : but as I am going to a ball this evening, I fuppose if I am to lose my heart, I Shall See the phenomenon that is to have it; So, 
my 
( 57) 
my dear, I think you will excuse my bidding you adieu, when I tell you that I am going to adorn myself for conquest. 
Past five o’clock In the morning. 
WELL, my dear, as steep Seems to have fled my eyes, I am fet down to give you an account of the ball, or rather of a man. Nay, don’t start, my dear, for it is even as I prophesied. We entered the ballroom, that is, Lord and Lady Moreland, and your humble Servant. I looked round the room to see what sort of animals were there; but Seeing nothing but a parcel of French pup d 5 pets 
C 58) 
pets dreited out quite a-la-mode de Paris, I hastily turned my eyes, when casting them towards the door, ' -1 Saw a figure entering which Seemed to attract the eyes of the whole as fembly. A general buz run through the room upon his entering — u 
“There he is !” cries one; Is he quite recovered cries a Second; “How glad I am to see him I” cries a third. — You may be Sure these exclamations made me observe the man more particular : he was leaning on the arm of another gentleman. — Now, my dear Kitty, Shall I give you a description of this man or not! — Yes, cry you, by all means : well, then to begin — He Seems to be about 
twenty( 
() 
twenty six, about the middle size, neither lean like a Frenchman, nor sat like an Englishman: — now for his face; his eyes are black and have a kind of archness in them, that when he looks upon ypu, it Seems as if, he was trying to dlfcover what pasised in your heart; he has a good mouth, and very good teeth well, my dear. So much for Colonel Rawdon, for that is his name.. A f t ter paying his compliments to all ia the room, he. advanced tome, and, bowing, begged the honour of mine hand, if not already engaged., I bowed my afisent; — we then joined the dancers;, — a general whispec; run through the ladies, -- - “O, he. -. 
6 has 
C 6o) 
has found out his fair countrywoman.” After dancing three dances,. I offered to sit down, as he looked fatigued. He asked me how long I had been: here; I told him about a week : — he Said it could not have been, longer; but he had been very ill, and that was the reason he had not had the pleasure of feeing me Sooner. His conversation was both polite and gallant; and I think he‘ Seems to be one who will improve on acquaintance. When the time drew near for our departure, he begged my permission to wait on me at iny lord’s. I answered, that I made no doubt but Lord Moreland would always be happy to see Colonel Rawdon 
: 
() 
don : — He bowed, and handing me into the coach, withdrew. While we were going home, my Lord and Lady rallied me on my conquest, I dont know how it was, but I could not answer their raillery as ufual bless me, there is Seven o’clock, and I not in bed yet. Adieu, my dearest Kitty; ar believe me, your’s as usual, 
Lucy Chambers. 
P. S. Direct for me at the Hotel Anglois a Paris. 
IX E T. 
C 62) 
LETTER XV 
COLONEL RAW DON 
T O 
EDWARD BALTIMORE. 
WELL, Edward, I think I concluded my last, with desiring Master Cupid to keep off as long as possible; but do you know, that the Sorry dog has come upon me unawares. — The weapons he chose were a pair of the Sweetest blue eyes in the world; and their fire was So quick, that my heart caught the flame immediately. — And is it postible that thy friend Charles is in love? — impossible! let me consider; it was at a 
ball 
( 63) 
ball I met and danced widr her. Well, but Master Cupid had no bu ness in the dancing room : — well, I will go and have t’other peep at my charmer, and then will tell you more about her. 
C Rawdon 

LETTER XVI 
FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME. 
ELL, Edward, from the con cjufion of my last, you certainly think me down right in love; but not So fast as that neither, man: — but I will tell you the whole— — must know, since my last I have •'• * been 
( 64) 
been very ill of a fever, which confined me to my room almost a fortnight; but yesterday I found myself well enough to go to a ball which was to be given that evening. Accordingly I went; but on entering the room, the first person I Saw was one of the most beautiful young ladles I think I ever Saw. I inquired of Gordon, who was with me, if he knew who (he was; — he Said She was a Miss Chambers; that she was with Lord and Lady Moreland, the former being come for the recovery of his health. To make Short of my story, Edward, I danced with her; — I asked her permlstion to see her next day; — She answered She made 
no 
( 65) 
no doubt but Lord Moreland would always be happy to See Colonel raw don. About two o’clock this day I went to their lodgings; — the Servant conducted me into the parlour; — Lord and Lady Moreland were Sitting at a window, and miss Chambers at her harpsichord; — they all rose at my entrance: — after we were Seated, and the usual compliments were pasted, I begged Mils Chambers to go on with her Song, which I had interrupted. She immediately astented, and played So delightfully, 1 could have listened for ever. I soon afterwards withdrew, not without a pressing entreaty to renew my visit, which you may be 
Sure 
( 66) 
Sure I Shall. Upon my soul, Edward, She is a charming girl, and has a fortune of thirty thousand pounds; therefore I think my father can have no objection to her, as mo ney, you know, is his chiefdefire. Apropos, now I am talking of my father; — do you know I have had a letter from him, desiring me to throw up my commission, as he says my fortune will enable me to live without being in the army. Now I know that very well; but if my father should take it into his wife noddle, not to approve the lady that I choose for a wife, he can cut me off with a shilling : and you know, though L am of age, he only allows 
me 
( 6;) 
me eight hundred a year, the title he cannot take from me; but the title of Lord, with only eight hundred a year, — I, wsith my notions, can never think of offering to the woman I shall choose for a wife; therefore, Edward, I will keep my commishon, at least till I hear my father’s reasons for wishing me to give it up. Now you must know, that I think my father has a wife to propose;; she has, he is jiist a week too late; or if he had Sent to me, before I Saw Miss Chambers, I might have conformed to his will; but now it is too.late, as I never can think of marrying any other woman but the divine Lucy Chambers. Therefore, 
Edward, 
( 68) 
Edward, with this pious refolutioiij I will conclude myself 
Your sincere friend, 
C Rawuon. 
P. S. I long to hear how you and your sine mother in law go on: — pray let me hear from you Soon. 
LETTER XVII EDWARD B AT. T I M O R E, ESQ. 
T O 
COLONEL RAWDON. 
Well, Charles, So you arc really in love: you, that have So often boasted that the sty urchin stiould 
'never 
(. 69) 
never enter your breast more than half an hour together. I approve your design of not throwing up your commission, as I think with you, that your father has provided a wife for you. I met his Lordship the other day in the Park : he ashed me when I heard from you; I told him not for Some time, and I was afraid you was ill; he Said he was the Same, as he had wrote but received 
I. 
nb answer: : -- - shall write again tomorrow” ” hsi, “for I long to see him in e/gland, as I grow old, and he is the only one that is not Settled— — should choose to See him provided with a good wife before I die.” — Another gentleman I coming 
( 7°) 
coming up, our conversation stopped here; therefore, Charles, you know what you have to expect. Now for my own affairs: — I believe I concluded my last with telling you, that her ladyship was not retuijed from Ranelagh; — that was about one o’clock; about three she came home. At nine the next morning I went down to the breakfast parlour, where I found my father reading. We had not been there above a quarter of an hour before my lady entered. I wished her a good morning : she did the same to me; and feating herself, rung for breakfast. We sat silent Some time, till at last I broke the 
charm. 
( 7') 
charm, by asking her ladyship how she was entertained at Ranelagh. She made answer, never better in her life, I asked her where she proposed going this morning? “To the Mufeunty if I am not disappointed, ” Said she, casting her eyes at my father: he then rose from his Seat, and left the room. “If you have no objection. Madam, ” Said I, “I will attend you there “As to that, you may do as you please, ” Said she; “but I expect Lord carle tonne.” As she Spoke his name, he entered the room : stew to her ladv ship, and catching her hand, almost devoured it with kistes. “How does your ladyship } I hope you 
caught 
( 72) 
caught no cold last night ?” aiid half a hundred Such Sort of Speeches, which She answered much in the same manner. At last She got up and left the room : — After his lordship had twirled himself round two or three times at the glass, he condescended to See me : — “Lord bless me, Mr. Baltimore, I beg your pardon; I really did not See you before, Sir: I hope you are well.” I Smiled and bowed, which was all the answer I thought worth my while to return the puppy. My lady just thfen returning, hindered his Saying any more. I immediately asked her if she was ready? “Yes, 
Sir, ” was her, answer: : -- -- 
giving 
( 73) 
giving her hand to his lordship, he led her to the coach, I following. He Seemed both furprised and vexed that I was to be of the party. Wc then joined in Something like a conversation; in short, Charles, after staying at the Museum a couple of hours, .* we returned home. For three days after I attended her ladyship wherever she went : she has been at home all this morning, for I really believe she is quite tired of having me for a beau; and I am iiire she cannot be more sick than I am. And now, Charles, you probably ask me what I think of her behaviour? I don’t believe she means any harm; but at the same time I vol, IE don’t 
( 74) 
don’t like that fellow Carleton always being at her fide, as I know he is a deep laid villain after wo jnen, and he is both handsome and infinuatlng. The dinner bell rings, therefore I must break off; but if anything happens during our meal, I will let you know. Therefore I will not close this till I return. 
Ed. Baltimore. 
LET( 
() 
LETTER xvin. 
THE SAME TO THE SAME 
Past ten o’clock. 
ELL, Charles, here I am. I think I told yon I was going dowa to dinner : well, I entered the dining parlour, where sat my father jogging his foot, and my lady at Some little distance, playing with her lapdog. The Servants coming in with the dinner, we Seated ourselves at the table in profound silence. When dinner was over, and the Servants withdrawn, my father thus began; “My dear, ” turning to his wife, I suppose you can make no ob e a jection 
( 7*5) 
jection now to going into the country, as this is the month I always choose to go in.” Sir Edward pau sed here as if waiting for a reply; at length she returned him this answer: : So you really think. Sir Edward, I will confpnt to be buried alive at this time of the year in the odious country: no, Sir, I asisure 
you that I will not stir from here 1. h 
.till after the birthday” ” “my 
dear, ” returned my father, “you can easily come to town time enough for the birthday.;.; I am Sure, my dear, the country will be more conducive to your health than this nasty Tmoaky London.” “It is in vain. Sir, ” Said she“ “talk thus; for, 
let 
( 77) 
let the consequence be what it will, I will not quit town yet. Good God! leave town at this time! no; though you have for Some time treated me like a child, and Set a watch over my conduct, ” casting her eye upon me, “yet you shall not rule me in this : therefore. Sir, be assured, that 1 will not leave town till the 4th of June is past, ’* She Spoke this in a peremptory style, which gave us rea ifon to think she would not alter her resolution. My father rose from his Seat, and walked about the room in great perturbation; at last he exclaimed, “Well, Madam, have your own way with these words he left the room. We continued Silent e3 •, for 
( 78) 
for Some time, till at last I was determined to see whether my tongue was glued to my mouth or not 5 and therefore began, by asking her ladyship why she had Such an implacable aversion to the country? her answer was, the very thoughts of the country threw her into vapours. I Said I was furpisized at that, as I thought her ladyship was too fond of variety to be long contented in one place. She curtseyed, and Said she was Sure there was no variety in the country; therefore she chose to stay in town : — “But I did not know when 1 married Sir Edward Baltimore, that I was to be under the direction of his Son.” Saying these 
words. 
C 79) 
words, she flung out of the room, and retired to her own, where she has been writing ever since, but is now gone to bed; to which place I shall retire; So good night. Adieu, 
Eu. Baltimore. 
■B 
LETTER XIX 
X 0 R D .R A W D 0 N 
T 0 
COLONEL RAW DON 
Rawdon Place, April I?, 1773* My dear Son, 
JN^Y fears for your Safety makes 
me send this, as 1 am afraid, by re 
\ 
4 ceiving 
( 8o) 
ceiving no answer to my last, it has either miscarried, or what is much 
f 
worse, you are rendered incapable of reading, or at least writing me an answer. Ah f a letter fl*om my dear Charles! give it me! — O, my Son! — I find my fears were too prophetic, and you have indeed been ill; but, thank God, my Son is better. There is but one thing, my dear Charles, which gives me pain, the slight way you mention coming to England; but if you have the least regard for mei beg" you to hasten immediately to me : — As to tell you the truth, 1 have looked out a wife for you; one, whom I Shall expect you to marry, and one 
wuoj 
() 
who I hope yon wsill approve of; ■ now as Soon is your health is recovered, I hope you will Set off for London, and from hence for.daw don place, where you will find me ready to receive you with open arms; : therefore my Son adieu, and may God restore you your health, and grant you a Safe journey to England, is the prayer of 
Your affectionate father, 
C Rawdon. 
E S 
LET( 
() 
TETTER XX 
COLONEL R AW DON 
T O 
EDWARD BALTIMORE, ESQ. 
ELL Edward, I will suppose you have read my father’s letter, which I eiiclofe; and now cry you, what do you intend to do? why. Set out for England directly, and what is to follow Heaven only knows. Now Edward, would I give Something to have you near me, that I might ask your friendly advice; but as you are not, I hardly know what to do; 1 sometimes think that I will go and throw myself at 
the 
( 83) 
the feet of my adorable Lucy, and then again 1 think to quit Paris without any formal leave, but only send a note to inquire after their health, and to let them know in dispenfible bufiness calls me to England. I certainly love Lucy Chambers better than any woman I ever Saw, and I believe without vanity, I may say fiie has no dislike to me, at least not to appearance, * though women are in general deceitful; you will probably wonder at my heroic ‘ resolution of quitting France, without telling miss Chambers' how much I adore her; why you must know, Edward, as I have not Seen the lady whom my father E 6 has( 
() 
has picked out for lue, I am not sure whether I; may not like her as well as Miss Chambers r and’ as you See my father commands as well as desires me to approve the lady, I think it the wifest way to accept her, if She is anything tolerable. As tq fortune, that I am Sure Ihe has, or She would not be my father’s choke;; but indeed, Sir, if She is Some ignorant ape of quality, I will not have her, if She is as rich as an Eastern' princess. I have never Said anything but common gallantry to Miss Chambers, which I am Sure every man will pour inta her ears that sees her; but you will say, perhaps she may marry and you may losb 1 her; 
( 8'5). 
her: why, that is true, Edward X but if it is So, I shall be Sure She had no regard for me, and a natural good stock of Spirits will Soon carry it off again. I hope, you wont be gone into the country when I arrive in England, as I havea thousand,, to say, but must now bid .youi adieu to prepare for my journey.': '., ^ 
‘ y<?ur%. 
, C Rawdqn^ 
t E T( 
() 
LETTER XXI 
MISS MOUNTFORT 
'• - TOM 
I S S CHAMBERS 
I suppose my dear Lucy is very angry with me for not having wrote Sooner; but indeed my dear I have not been well, but thank God I am. now quite recovered. I have read your last letter Several times over, wherein you mention Colonel raw don, and hope and like wise think he will prove worthy your esteem, nay even love, my dear; for, don’t be Surprised when I tell you your heart is touched. 1 make no doubt 
( 87). 
you will be surprised at my saying I think he will prove worthy your esteem: you must know he was an intimate of my cousin Baltimore, and though I have never Seen the Colonel I have always heard Edward give him the best of characters, but at the Same time I have heard his father is a very stingy man, and whatever he Sets his mind on, he will have done at any rate. His money is his idol, or at least used to be, except he is altered; but that you know my dear you have enough of, therefore that can be no objection. The Colonel is quite difisercnt from his father, as he was always doing'something or other to relieve 
the 
•( 88) 
the poor, and many a time Edward has told me that my Lord has lectured him upon the little regard he had to money, but I believe he takes after his mother, as she bore the best of characters. All this i have heard from Edward as he and charlesrawdon were intimate from children, except they have falleni out lately : fa much for Colonel Raw don’s character, for as to himself I never had the honour of feeing, which I believe I told you before; but one thing more my dear,, and then for an end to this Subject i I beg you never to mention my name to the Colonel,, nor let him know you have any acquaintance 
with 
( »9) 
with me. 1 am interrupted, there adieu for the prctent. 
MISS MOUNTFORD, HI Continuation. 
W E L L my dear, I left off rather abruptly, for i was called into the Shop, were I found a footman, who told me that Lady Betty Modeiy and her sister wanted to see Some caps, but desired I would come with them myself. You may be Sure my dear Lucy the sound of their names alarmed me, but as I knew it was utterly impostihle to, ‘ ‘ ’ avoid 
( 9°) 
avoid Seeing them, I mustered up all my resolution, and putting my hat as much over my face as postible, I went to their lodgings. After waiting Some time, a footman came and conducted me into the parlour, where sat Lady Betty and Lady Lucy, with another lady and gentleman. ' When the Servant told her here was the milliner, she turned and asked me if I had, brought any caps : when I opened the box, lord bless me! cried she, they are not mourning caps; did not the Servant Inform you I wanted a Suit of mourning? Indeed my Lady he did not. Said I; ah! Loid, cried she, perhaps I did not tell him what '. caps 
( 9') 
caps I wanted, for (turning to the lady) I hate the thoughts of going into mourning; then turning to me, do send me Some others : then as if recollecting herself, I think Lucy, (turning to her sister) we had better go to Miss mountford’s, and then we can please ourselves; with all my heart, Said her sister: about an hour after I got home they came, and after tumbling over two or three Sets of linen, they each of them chose one, at the Same time telling me, they Should be there again the latter end of the year, and then they Should be better customers; but they intended Setting off the next morning for town. They 
then 
( 93) 
then went awaj, and I have the pleasure to inform you, they Seemed not toshave the least recollection of me or my sister, which I astlire you pleased us exceedingly. Is it not Surprising my dear there Should be So' great a change in us that they stiauid not know us I it must be the alteration in Our dress, as that is the only reason I can give for it. I inquired of a person who knew them, who they were in mourning for; She Said it was for their uncle, who was lately dead, and has left them a very large fortune at their own disposal,. This, was all I wanted to know, as I knew the rest; and now, my dear, we may Set ourselves. 
( 93) 
Selves quite at ease, as they did not know us, I think no one else will; and now my dear I think it high time to put an end to this long epistle. 
Adieu my dear friend and let me hear from you Soon. 
C Baltimore, 
L E 1^: 
( 94). 
LETTER XXII 
MISS CHAMBERS 
T O 
MISS MOUNTFORT. 
J Am Set down to write to you my dear Kitty, to try if I can Shake off a Splenetic fit which had got hold of me. Do you know, my dear, I quarrel with everybody that comes in my way, and as for my poor maid, I believes She thinks me mad, for nothing She does now is right, and what is the most provoking, do you know, they only laugh at me? O 1 a letter from my dear Kitty, the reading of that will Set me to 
rights 
( 95) 
rights. Adieu till 1 have perused the dear contents; and So my dear Sagacious Kitty will have it I am in love; indeed my dear you are very much mistaken, as well as all my friends here; upon my word you give Colonel Rawdon a fine character, and I hope he deserves it; he Sent me a note the other day with his compliments, that he hoped we Were well, was afraid he Should not have the pleasure of feeing us again, as his father had Sent for him to England; fo you see my dear was I ever fo inclined to inquire about Edward I could not: now, my dear, don’t you think it a little odd, that a man who Since 3 he 
( 96) 
he became acquainted here, has Scarce pasted a day without feeing us, Should go to England without calling to bid us adieu. Sure I liked Colonel Rawdon better than any person I had ever Seen; but as to love my dear I never thought of, but what the meaning of it is I know not; though everybody thought he was in love with me, but you see how mistaken people are Sometimes; fo there is an end of this Subject. I am very glad the Lady Modelys did not find you out, as when my dear friends are discovered I hope it wont be by suck flirts as those;; to news, my dear, 
I have none here of any sort,. therefore 
f 97) 
fore my letters cannot be'diverting. Heigh bh! fwish I was in England i again, with all my heart; the dinner bell rings, So must conclude with love to my dear Harriet. 
, > t your’s as usual, 
'' ' JL. Chambers, 
P. S. Pray write Soon. 
.. i ■ i 
vol 1.^ F 
L E T( 
() 
tetter XXIII 
COLON El. RAWDON 
T O 
EDWARD E A L T I M O R Ei 
Rawclon place. 
M Y dear friend may see by this that I am arrived Safe here. My father received me with open arms, as likewise did my Sister Charlotte, 
I 
who chooses to reside with him preferable to either of her sisters. You know Charles, I was always fond of this dear Saucy sister of mine, and once I was in hopes, not knowing then of your attachment to your 
fair 
( 99) 
fair coufinf. of having the happiness of adding the title of brother to that of friend through her means, provided vou liked each other; but all those hopes are over, therefore I must look out for a man, if not altogether as amiable, as near, as posi ble to your worship, as She has often declared she should prefer a man of her brother’s choosing to any other. I always thought her a fine girl, but three years have made a vast improvement in her personas well as understanding; So much for my sister Charlotte; let me see where did I leave off? O, with telling you how glad iuy father and sister were to See me. After a few F 2 questions 
( loo). 
questions pasted on alhfides, my' lather called tor Supper, saying, he luppofed I should be glad to go to bed early. Nothing pasted after this inateisial, and about eleven we retired to our apartment; but steep had fled my eyes, and whenever I closed them for a moment Lucy Chambers appeared before them. About three o’clock I got a little steep, but was awake again atfeven, and finding the drowsy god not inclined to visit me again, I arose, and dresting myself, not choosing to disturb my servant, as perhaps he is not lovesick like his master, I sauntered into the garden, where the first person I law was Charlotte. 
After 
( lol) 
After the usual good morning, and how do ye, and So forth, fly began by asking me, if I had brought my heart back to England with me. The little devil put the queslion So Suddenly to me, that although I am not apt to do Such wo^mahish tricks, h could not help changing countenance. Ah! brother, brother, (continued she, without giving me timi5 to reply) I See your heart is nolj your own; well, never mind it, man 1 here thought it high time to interrupt her : for god’s Sake Charlotte, (cried I) don’t run on So fast; who told you I was in love, child \ but pray if you can be feisious for a moment, let me know what my F 3 father’s 
() 
father’s intentions are concetning : me : why, my dear Charles, to put you out of your suspense, freplied the little gypsy his intentions are to present you with a wife, and Such a one as you,, like a prudent Son, will accept of: O my dear Charlotte, catching hold of her hands, do tell me who she is, and what’s her name; why brother, it is no other than Lady Maria Melcombe, youngest daughter of the Earl of Lovel; and pray, sister, what sort of a Woman is she, as I don’t remember ever to have Seen her? No, what not remember the lady you 
danced with at Lady B -- -- -- -- -- -- ’s 
aftembly, just before you left England. 
'( 103) 
gland. God bless my heart, was that Lady Maria? the very same, Said she; and 1 think, my dear brother, joking apart, she is the last woman that you would choose for a wife, as she is conceited and proud to a degree. You Say very right my dear, for Lady Maria shall never be the wife of your brother Charles: well, you know best, but I know not what you will do, as my father Seems bent upon the match, continued she, — it was but yesterday morning I took the liberty of expostulating with him, and told him 1 did not think you would ever think or consent to take Such an idiot for a wife. His answer was, F 4 I was 
( 104) 
I was a fool; what signified the woman being an idiot, as you are pleased to call her; though I believe you are the first, if stie brings her husband a clear eight hundred a year, and twenty thousand pounds ready money; and I desire miss you don’t put any of your foolish notions into your brother’s head. 1 only repeat this conversation, that you may know what you have to expect from our father : 1 thanked her for her intelligence, butafeiv vant just then coming to acquaint ITS that breakfast was ready, put an end to our conversation, and Gharlofte had only time to desire I wuuld take no notice of what had 
passed( 
() 
pasted, which I ast'ured her I woultl not. We thcq entered the breakfast parlour, where we Sound my fatiier with two gentlemen; therefore there was no opportunity for any particular discourle.. When our repast was finished my father and his companions went to take a ride. I excused myself by laying I had letters to wuite : my Sister went out to pay Some visits, and I to my chambers, where I have been scribbling to your worship ever since; hark! there is my stster returned from her visit, she taps at my door, and says she supposes I am writing to Some favourite mistress. You are welcome to come in Taid I) and F 5 see 
( io 5 
\ 
See who I am writing to ^ CL ta Mr. Baltimore; well pray give my compliments to him, and tell him; — stop my dear sister and take my pen and sinifh my letter, there that’s a good girli take it. 
'~ ■miiiiiiiririttwilii^. 
MISS R A W D O N, in Continuation, - 
M Y brother, Sir, has forced the 
pen into my hand, and now if I was 
not the best sister in the world, 
might i discover all his Secrets; 
for I am Sure he must have been 
talking about his favourite mistress, 
to have been writing So long, for 
* 
do you know, Sir, that I with half a C C : dozen 
( i) 
dozen of my female friends, have been fettling the whole etiquette of our dress for the Summer: well indeed, brother, I can Say no more, except I tell your friend Edward how rejoiced 1 am to See you; but perhaps this may make you vain, therefore, Sir, I will conclude with begging you to present my respects to Sir Edward and Lady Baltimore, 
, 
r ’ '■I 
Yours, 
% 
L Rawdon. ' 
F 6 
LET( 
( 
BETTER XXIV MISS R AW D O N 
T O' 
MISS MILFORD. 
Am afraid my dear Emily will? chide her Charlotte for not writing an answer to her Sooner. But indeed my dear I have been So taken up with receiving and paying visits since I have been hercy that it has ben out of my power, and now my dear I will tell you ^ piece of wel come news. My dear brother Charles is returned to England, you have never Seen him, though you have often heard me Speak of him. 
I fhals 
( J) 
I fiiall say nothing about him as ymu will Soon See him yourself, only advise vou'as a friend, to have Frederic Mountague by your side whenever you See Charles Rawdon; Fil leave you to interpret this as you think proper. You ask me what could induce me to leave London at this time of the year one reason was that I was loath to let my father come here alone, as he has not been at this place since my dear mama’s death; another was, that I knew my dear brother would come here immediately on his arrival in England, and 'another weightier than ail the rest was, to get rid of a troublesome lover, for Such Lord 
Carletoii 
() 
carletoh ever was, and ever will be to me; and what can make my sister Loveit So warmly espouse the cause of So profligate a man as his lordship;; can’t imagine as yoii know, my dear, all the world are 'acquainted with his charaster. My father don’t like him any more than I, though he Says, if I could like the man he stiould have no objection, as he is rich; but as I do not, he will never persuade me. I am interrupted, therefore must bid you adieu.. ‘ 
your’s, 
C Rawdon. 
L E T 
111 
LETTER XXV 
LORD CARLETON 
T O 
COLONEL SEDLEY. 
Dear Sedley, 
I Write because I am almost mad. Oh! Sedley, did you ever think your friend Carleton would be seri oufly in love? Yes, I was, and 1 am afraid am still; butjl am slighted, yes, I repeat it again, I am slighted;; the little gipsy had best take care, for 1 will have her in Spite of men and devils : well, now I have vented my Spleen a little, I will inform you 
who and what She is; why, you 
/ 
must 
( lla) 
must know stie is youngest daughter to Lord Rawdon; (he has two sisters but they are both fnarried, the one just like herself, to Mr. Barren; the other, who is my friend, to Lord Loveit; I say site is my friend, but suppose if She knew the real truth of my intentions, stie would cease to be fo; at present the little devil is out of town, but is expected again Soon, sober sister tells 'me, but my, dear child fhan’t stay long here; for the moment site arrives, if possible.... Shall hoist her off to my seat in Wales, 'and there I shall try to bring down her little stubborn Spirit; what makes me In a greater hurry is, that her brother Charles Rawdon is, 
come. 
( II) 
come, and as he is an intimate of young Baltimore, I Suppose he will take care to inform him what sort of a fellow I am, therefore it behoves me to be quick in my motions. As to Lady Charlotte I have let her alone Some time, as I found her a poor married, inoffensive, conceited being. I must conclude in haste. ^ 
Yourh 
Carleton. 
LET. 
( ” 4) 
LETTER XXTI. COLONEL SEDLEY 
, T O 
LORD CARLETON. 
Dear George, 
I Dispatch this by a fpeckl mesten* ger to prevent, as I hope it is not too late, the vile Scheme you have formed of carrying off miss raw don. For god’s sake, George, are you out of your senses; you certainly are : a young lady with her fortune, and Such powerful friends! I must be in a dream, but your letter here convinces me I am not. You say, you love Miss Rawdon to 
madness: : 
( ”) 
madncss : no, no, George, you have no more love for her than I have; for believe me, the man who sincerely loves a woman, will never offer any rudeness. If she had been placed in an obscure situation, thenv indeed you might have tried her; though then if you had found her thoroughly virtuous, you would, have been a villain to have rendered her otherwise; yes, I again repeat it, a villain : you are very Sensible that I am as fond of the Sex as you or any other man; yet I can Safely Say that I never attempted to draw any girl from her friends; no, George, I have too much respect for virtue' to abuse it, where it is to be 
found. 
( ii) 
found. I have no more to say than to desire yo will immediately give up the horrid Scheme of carrying off Miss Rawdon, or renounce the esteem of your hitherto sincere friend. 
Sedley. 
LETTER XXVII 
EDWARD BALTIMORE 
"- - * * ^ 
T O 
T 
COLONEL RAWDON. 
Westbury park. 
"Y OU see by' the date of this, Charles, that we are got into the 
odious 
( ” 7) 
odious country, as Lady Charlotte calls it; but before 1 proceed with my own affairs, let me talk a little about yours. I received your’s with miss rawdon’s agreeable fostscisipt, for which I beg my respects and thanks, for I need not tell you, my friend, ' how concerned I am to hear that you are like to have a woman proposed to you that you can’t like; but take courage, man, perhaps as you Said in one of your letters, you may like the lady; or perhaps your father may relent, when he finds your affections are pre engaged. By this time I suppose you are in London, where I propose directing this, and beg to know how you go 
on 
( ii) 
on immediately. Well now, I vv^ill tell you how I go on here : Lady Charlotte was at length prevailed on, partly by persuasions and partly by force, to come into the country, and my father So strenuously begged of me to accompany her; I was obliged to comply. My Lady is difeontented, my father unhappy; for my part you know Charles, I am not very happy — therefore you must not expect agreeable letters from me — but 1 hope you will write often and tell me all the news you can. — Adieu! 
P. S. 
( ” 9) 
P. S. I forgot to tell you we Saw nothing of Lord Carleton, for Some time before we left town. 
your’s 
r 
Ed. Baltimore. 
LETTER XXVIII 
'LORD CARLETON 
T O 
\ 
COLONEL SEDLEY. 
H XV ha! ha! if I can forbear laughing at the wretched Scrawl that now lays before me; is it possible that this ‘comes from him that used to be called the gay Jack Sed 2 lay? 
( 120) 
lay } Why, man, if you were not a Soldier, I should think you was going to turn parson; for god’s Sake come among us again. Jack, for your wife brother and no less wise fister in law have almost Spoiled you for the Set you used to belong to; but come away, man, we will rouse up your Spirits ' again, never fear. As to how I go on, or what i am doing here, I shall not Inform you till I See whether you have got a parson’s^own and band, or a Scarlet coat and Smart cockade; So adieu! ' 
your’s according as I find you. 
‘ " G. Carleton. 
( II) 
LETTER XXIX 
COLONEL RAW DON 
T O 
EDWARD BALTIMORE, 
E L L Edward, I ain once more got to London, and am not a little angry to find you have just quitted it: but however that can’t be helped. The morning after that in which my father, sister, add Self, arrived in town; niy father told me that he was going to pay a visit to the Earl Lovel, and desired me to accompany him, which I Vol, I. G accord( 
() 
accordingly did, and was received by the Earl and countess with Seeming cordiality. My father asked after their daughter; the Earl Said She was very well, and they expected her home every moment; then turning to me, you have al mosl: forgot Maria, Sir, I Suppose?? bowed; but the door opening prevented me from making any reply; and in came the Lady herself; She made a slight courtesy, then flinging herself into a chair, protested Site was tired to death. The countess asked her, if she had walked far! ho, not a great way, answered she. Her father then rose, and taking her' young Ladyship by the hand, presented 

( ‘^3) 
Seated her to me, Saying at the Same time, “this is Lord rawdon’s Son, my dear.” I bowed, kifised her hand, and believe looked very awkward. After We had resurried our Seats, a conversation was begun by the old folks; for neither Lady Maria or I bore any share in it: more company coming in, put an end to their conversation, and our, to me, tedious visit, and I fancy her Ladyship thought it fo as well as jjie‘; but the Earl and Countess both p rested me to come often; In short, Edward, I paid her ladyotip three more visits, and in every one found her the same proud conceited flirt I alwnys thought hen My G 2 father 
( 124) 
father asked me no questions till this morning at breakfast; he Said, well, Charles, what think you of Lady Maria Melcombe for a wife? My opinion is Sir, returned I, with a firmness which I did not think I could have astumed, (as you know Edward, with all my boldness, I always had great re Spec! for fathers and mothers) my opinion. Sir, continued I, is, that Lady Maria is the last woman I should choose for a wife. How, Sir, cried my father, with a fierce tone, the last woman, you stiould choose for a wife! What do you mean? I am sorry. Sir, to dispute your will, and believe I may venture to say it It the first time; 
but, 
( 125) 
but, Sir, it is utterly imposiible for nie ever to marry Lady Maria. He got up, and taking his hat and cane, was going out, but turning back just as he got to the door, and Shaking his cane at me, Said these words: ‘‘take care, Charles, take care; you had best consent to take her for a wife, or by G — d I will cut you off with a stilliing. I give you till tomorrow to consider of it; but have a care how you decide.” With this he quitted the room. Poor Charlotte then gave a loose to her tears, and I did all in my power to comfort her. She dreads my father’s resentment, So do I; but let what will be the consequence, I G 3 never 
( 126) 
never will hiake Marian Melcombe mine : therefore adieu, my dear friend. You Shall hear from me as Soon as this great affair is decided. 
your’s, as usual, 
C Rawbon, 
h E T' 
( 12?) 
LETTER XXX 
THE HON. MISS RAWBON 
T o 
MISS MILFORD. 
Have just taken up my pen, my dear Henny, to ease my heart. O, my dear, my father and brother have quarrelled, — I need only tell you, that Charles won’t consent to marry Lady Maria, and you may guess the rest. I am quite sick at heart, and what is worse, they will force me to a masquerade that is to be tonight. Lady Lovelt called F 4 this, 
( 1^8) 
thib morniiig, and though I told her all that passed between my father and brother, this giddy sister of mine insisted upon it that I Should go with her. My father just then coming in, site told him that I was averfe'to going; he turned to me, and with a stern look, bid me get a dress and go, not stay at home to make my brother more undutiful than he was. My Spirits were already low, and this unkind Speech affected me fo much, that I burst into tears : he desired me to cease wimpeising, and go with my sister, for it would be of no use to stay at home, as, I Should not see my brother till he Iiad: agreed to perform 
his 
( I z9) 
his duty; then I am afraid it will be long enough; therefore I put on my hat, and followed my sister and now must bid you adieu, to prepare for this ugly masquerade; for Something tells me that I Shall have reason to call it So. 
Adieu, my dear friend,, 
C rawdonv 

G 5 
LET( 
() 
LETTER XXXL 
MISS M O U N T F O R T 
T O 
MISS CHAMBERS. 
[ Have taken up my pen, my dear friend;, to inform you that my sister and Self received your welcome packet yesterday; and it made us very happy to hear you talk of being in England soon, as I hope then my dear, miss Chambers will honour Bath with her presence, as by that time it will be pretty full; just now it is very dull, as there is hardly anybody, 
( 53») 
body, except a few invalids, who are come for the recovery of their health. My dear friend I hope will excuse my making this Short, as I really have no Subject to write on : My sister desires her love, and will write Soon. 
I remain yours, sincerely, 
(. 
H. Mountfort, 
G k 
LET 
Jt2z 
TETTER xxxin.. 
COLONEL RAWDON 
T O 
EDWARD BALTIMORE, ESQ. 
E are ali here in the utmost confusion, mj father and sister Loveit forced my dear sister char lotte, very much against her inclination, to a masquerade last night. Lady Loveit says, She never stirred from her side the whole' evening, but at going, a gentleman, whom She thought to be Lord Loveit, handed her to her chair. When 
She 
( IJ3) 
she came home, she inquired if Charlotte was there : the Servants Said no. My Lord returning a few minutes afterward, his lady asked him if he had Seen Charlotte horr^ to her father’s house; no, cried he, I have Seen nothing of her. My sister, very much alarmed, Sent a Servant, to know whether she was at 
her father’s, — the answer was no. 
\ 
My father forgetting all his resent ment. Sent for me, and desired I would immediately go in Search of my sister; I did, but could get no tidings of the dear girli inquired of Lord and Lady Loveit, if they could give a guess who had tra panned her away.' Their suspicions, 4 
( 134) 
as Well as my father’s, seem to light OH Lord Carleton, I think I have heard you mention him; and what is more, he is not in town, though Lady Loveit Says, She is Sure he was at'the vile masquerade. I Shall Set off directly for his seat in Wales, as if he has the dear creature, that will be the most likely place to find her; I can Say no more, as the chaise is at the door. 
I am your’s, as usual 
■ Rawdon. 
L E T. 
( *35) 
letter xxxiiiv 
EDWARD BALTIMORE, ESQ'. 
T O 
COLONEL R A W D O N. 
Westbury park.. 
Dear Charles,. 
J Send this with all Speed, to beg you would immediately send for ^ 
Dr. P -- -- -- -, and beg him to fet 
off directly for this place,. as my poor father is violently attacked with the gout in his stomach, and I am alarmed for his life. Pray, my dear ' friend; ^ 
( 136) 
friend, desire Dr. P - 
not tor 
delay a moment, but come post, and I will Satisfy him for whatever expense he may be at. I dispatch this by my own Servant; he is ready, therefore adieu! But for god’s sake, my dear Charles, urge the Doctor to be quick. 
Adieu, pray be Speedy, tour’s, 
E. Baltimore. 
- P, S. My Lady really Seems to be alarmed 
L E T 
('37) 
LETTER xxxiya 
^ Ar THOMAS BROWN 
T Q 
EDWARD BALTIMORE esqj^ 
Honoured Sip, ♦ 
According to your orders, as Soon as I arrived here, I went to Lord rawdou’s house, but found the family ail in confusion, as miss Rawdon had been carried off by nobody knows who; and..,, Colonel 
( 138) 
Colonel Rawdon, the Servants told me, Sir, was gone in pursuit of his sister. They told me if I chose, they would let his Lordship know I was there; they did, and my Lord Sent for me, I told him how ill my master was, and that I had a letter for his Son; he asked if he might see it: I ventured to tell him yes, and the moment his Lordship had read it, he called for his Servant, 
and Sent for Dr. P -- -- -- -, who is 
going to Set ofif directly, and will give your honour this. My Lord desires his compliments, is very Sorry, my dear master is So ill, but God Send he may be better; I shall 
Set 
, ( 139) 
Set off tomorrow night for the park. :, 
I am. Sir, > 
With due respect, 
Your most dutiful Servant,, 
T. Brown. 
I.ET. 

t 140) 
LETTER XXXV 

MISS CHAMBERS 
T O 
MISS H. M O U N T F O R T. 
Cislais/july csh. 
I Received my dear Harriotts letter, just before I left Paris, and did not intend anfweising it till 1 got to England. But when we arrived here, my Lord called on a Mr. Douglas, a particular friend of his, who insisted on our pasting a week or two with them. His wife is a very agreeable. lady. 
( 141 > 
lady, as likewise is their daughter; they have a Son, but I have not Seen him yet, as he is on a visit: So much, for the Douglas family. My dear Harriot maybe sure, when I arrive in England I' shall immediately visit Bath, as I long to see my dear friends. Miss Dauglas is just come to tell me tea is ready, therefore must conclude myself, fny dear Harriot and kitty’s sincere friend, 
Louisa Chambers, 
LET 
( 142) 
LETTER xxxvt. ' 
THE HON. MISS RAW DO ro 
MISS MILFORD. 
grosvenor squarc., 
^x'hank God, my dear Emily, I am at length permitted to write to you; but I have Such an history to relate, that I hardly know where to begin : I think I told you in my last, I was going to a masquerade;; was very loth, as I had a Sort of presentiment that I Should repent it. Soon after we entered the room, 
1 ob( 
() 
I observed a gentleman, in a pii domino, who followed me wherever I went; but tcis he never Spoke, I thought nothing of it: about twelve o’clock I missed him; Lord Loveit was in a blue domino, trimmed with white; Lady Loveit, and Self, were in the characters of nuns. I stall pass over all the nonsenfe that occurred during our stay; but at one o’clock) I begged my lady to iquit the room, which ste at length consented to; but when I turned round, was Surprised to find Lord Loveit not there. I eagerly asked my sister where he was; he is only gone to Speak to Lord Harly, replied ste; his Lordstip, as we I thought. 
f 144) 
thought, that moment came up and cried in a hasty manner, miss Rawdon, are you no ready to go? O, yes; cried I, I have been ready this hour : Seizing my hand, he turned to my Lady, saying, Sir Charles wul take care of you, my dear, meaning one of the gentlemen that was with us. He hurried along at Such a rate, that I Soon lost sight of my company, which a little alarmed me; and turning short about, my Lord, died I, you shall unmask before I get into my chair; pooh 1 pooh! Said he, in a laughing tone, which I have since found was to difguise his voice, what are you afraid of, child? just as I 
was 
• () 
was going to reply, two gentlemen came up, aid rather rudely Seizing my other hand, Said, dear madam. Show us that lovely face before you quit the room. I tried to disengage myself, but found it impossible; my Lord at last Said, pray gentlemen, let the lady go. “Lord Loveit, by my Soul, cried one of them, in a whisper, and I fuppose this is his wife then by jingo, cried the other, we will See her face You,, my dear Emily may easily guess how much this talk disconcerted me, (though I have since found it to be all a tri^k) at length we got to the place, where the chairs were and these men were So troublesomey Vol. L' H that 
( h6) 
\ 
that I was glad to get into the first chair that was opened for me, 
npt doubting but it was my own. 
\ ■ 
As Soon as I was Seated, I began to think it strange, that Lord Loveit did not more peremptorily insist on the gentlemen’s leaving me; and weighing all circumstances together, I began to be frightened, and hastily putting down the window of the chair, found myself in the middle of a large Square. 1 knew it was impossible for it to be Grofvenor square, though to be Sure they had carried me with amazing rapidity. I was just going to call to the Servants, when they stopped: I was very much Surprised, when a man 
coming 
( u7) 
coming up to the fide of my chair, opened it, and Seizing me in his arms, rather flew than ran with me, the length of two or three yards, then put me into a chaise that was wait ing. I gave a violent Scream, but he jumping in, stopped my mouth in an instant; think, my dear Emily, what a condition I must be in, when I had a little recovered myself, I turned to my companion, and desired to know by whole orders he had taken me away in Such a vile manner, from my friends; he replied, that at present he was not at liberty to say; but that I might affure myself that no harm was intended me, and that I was H 2 going 
( h8) 
going to a person that adored me. I Said no more, as I thought it was to little purpose, as I make no doubt he was bribed, to commit the outrage he did: by this time it was broad daylight, and a Sweet morn ing it was; if I had been in any other situation I should have enjoyed it much, but the thoughts of the anxiety my friends would undergo, and likewise of my own danger, So oppresied my Spirits I could hardly keep, myself from fainting, but by the help of my Salts recovered my selsi I Several times attempted to open the door, but was always Slopped by my companion, who told me, he should be Sorry to life force 
to 
( h9) 
to detain me in the chaise, as he had particular orders to the contrary; but, if I was So resolute, he must have recourse to violence, as if lie let me escape, his life was to pay for it: about eleven o’clock tiie chaise stopped at a Small house in the road. My companion got out, and handed me into the house, where breakfast was ready: they prested me very much to drink Some tea, and cat Some toast; 1 drank two cups of tea, but could eat nothing. I inquired of the man, if that was the house 1 was to stay in, he Said, no; and if I chose to change my dress, he would send st woman H 3 to 
( i) 
to afiist me : I told him, if I must travel any farther, I certainly would;, for you must think, my deai'j I cut an odd figure, as I was in my masquerade dress. A woman appearing, condufled me to a room upstairs, where I found two or three riding habits; I chose a white one, being the plainest I could find. While I was putting it on, I tried all I could to tempt the woman, but all in vain; I Said, if She would convey a letter to my friends, She Should have whatever Sum She chose to name r her answer was, no; She knew there was no harm intended me, therefore She would not betray 
( 151) 
tray her trust. As I found it im postible to bring her to my interest,, and being by this time equipped, I went downstairs, when the man asked me, whether I was ready togo? I Said, it was just as he pleased. He took my hand to lead me to' the chaise, but, good God 1 what was my astonifhment, when I got to" the door, to behold Lord carle tonne. Surprise, indignation,, and. horror. So overpowered me, that I Suffered him to lift me into the chaise, and Seat himshlf by my fide, before I had power to Speak; So my Lord, cried I at last, it is you that have taken all this trouble, I find H 4 upon 
( 152) 
upon my word, you have put your ielf to an amazing deal, and pray what recompense does your Lord ihip intend to make my friends and self?? Spoke this in Such an ironical manner, that he really looked foolish; but when he had recovered himself, he began a long Speech, which you may easily guess the purport of, how much he loved me, and So forth, which I stopped him Short in. Well, my dear, to make Short of my story, we went on in this manner, till evening, when we stopped at a large farmhouse, where Supper was ready. At first I resufed to eat any, till 
finding 
( 153 O 
finding myself quite faint with hunger, I took a bit of a chick, and drank a glass of water, which I pumped myself: after Supper my Lord took his leave, telling me, he made no doubt, I was very much fatigued, and wanted rest; So saying, he wished me a good night, and quitted the room. A woman dame in, and conducted me to my chamber; she asked me, if she should ashst me to undress; I told her no, for I should not go cto bed at all : she then left me, and locked the door after her; and recommending myself to the protection of Providence, I flung myself on the bed to try to get a little rest. I H 5 must 
C 154 y 
must refer the rest of my story, my dear Emily, till anotlrer opportuni as I am Sosteepy, and my fingers So crampt, I cannot go on.. 
'Adieu, my dear Emily, 
ydur’s as usual, 
V 
C Kawdon^ 
LITE 
y 
LETTER XXXVII 
LORD CARLETON,, 
O 
COLONEL SEDLEY 
Bath, 
well, Sedley, what think you of me now? don’t you think I have made myself a pretty fool? Death I to have Such a. fine girl in my power, and to part with her tamely! Why, even, the Sober Jack. 
H 6 Sedley 
. * Here Lord Carleton gives the same account as Miss Rawdou gave, in her lad letter to her friend i ■* 
( *56) 
Sedley will call me a confounded blockhead; but if it had not been for your worship’s threats, about the devil knows what, I should not have made Such a puppy of myself; but by jingo, as my friend, Tom Martin, Says, you shall Smart for it, you shall have a true and full particular account of all my proceedings, you may be Sure, Jack : I went to bed, glad to rest my wearied bones, but whether my fair Penferofa did, 1 can’t pretend to Say, for I am Sure the next morning she looked as if she' had had none for a month. I offered to take her hand, when she came down to breakfast, but the little devil gave me Such a push, that my 
tender 
( *57.) 
tender fcame could hardly Supports icself. I tried to draw her into con verfatioir, but the little gypsy turned all I Said into ridicule, that at last I thought best to hold my tongue, and let her have her own way, for the present; however, as Soon as breakfast was over, she went upstairs to her own apartment, and was but just gone, when my Servant entering, told me a gentleman Insisted on feeing me; before I had time to reply, Mr. Rawdon entered the room, and walking up to me, cried, in a fierce tone, where is.my lister, my Lord? your sister, Sli, I ^ don’t know what you mean; don’t you, Sir? cried he, almost choked 
with 
( *58) 
with pafiioii; then I will make you, defend yourself, (drawinghis Sword)' stop, Sir, Said I, don’t be So warm r defend yourself, repeated he, and don’t add eowardice to your other villainy. This Speech, Jack; had the desired effect of my Sword, which lay on the window seat, was nnfheathed in a moment; but he,, boiling with pasiion, made Such a furious pass at me, that before ILIAD time to defend myself, the point of his Sword was hurried in the flesiiy part of my right arm; 1 was just going to return it, when Mr. Conscience started up, and I cried, no, I will not murder the brother of the wopman I adore; cool 
yourself( 
() • 
yoiirself, Sir, and hear what 1 have to say; you sister is fate, and will be here presently, I believe she will have no reason to complain, except Indeed, my depriving her of the conversation of her friends; you' will do better to compose yourself, and see your sister Safe home, and then. Sir, 1 shall be ready to give you any Satisfaction you may re (juirc. I should never have committed, ' continued I, the rash action' I did, if I had not loved'your sister to distraction : at that instant the door opened, and in came the dear girl herself, — she stew to Mr. raw don, exclaiming, O, my brother! sunk into his arms almost lifelest; 
^ he 
C io) 
fie embraced her tenderly, and when She recovered herself, he asked her if She was ready to depart; She cried, with Some emotion, O, yes : her brother then turned to me, saying, well, my Lord, I will take your advice, and bo wing, was going, but I Springing across the room, exclaimed, for heaven’s sake, madam \ say, you forgive me, before you go; She gave me her hand, which I kified, and She hurried out of the room, with tears in her eyes. They got into the chaise, and I returned to the room they had left, determined to make no reflections, ordemd my chaise, and whirled to town in an instant. I must defer the rest fill I tomorrow, 
( ii) 
tomorrow, Jack, as I go on; therefore adieu! 
* your’s, 
can 
G. Carleton. 
LE t0 
( ■ 1^2) 
LETTER XXXVIII. 
LORD CARLETON, in contlnuatron.. 
ELL, Jack, to proceed, the morning after my arrival in town, I received the following letter, which I will here transcribe for your perufah 
T a 
() 
TO THE 
RIGHT HON. LORD carletonr My Lord, 
A S my sister, is willing to forgive the trouble you have given her, I am ready to do the same, only She begs your Lordship will never attempt to see or Speak to her more. For my own part, I am. Satisfied, if your Lordship is I hope you will remember my sister’s de sire, as the sight of your Lordship will very much alarm her. 
I remain. 
Your lordship’s obedint Servant, C Rawdon. Well, 
C 164) 
Well, Sedley, I will suppose' bj this time you have read the colonel’s letter, and I, like a good boy, quitted London immediately, and came to this place, where, if you have any charity, your worship will join me, for here is no company, and it is confounded dull; but hark, Sedley, don’t attempt to condemn my conduct, for remember I have done Schooling. 
your’s sincerely, 
G, Carleton. 
P. S. Let me know directly, whether you come or not; for, if you don’t, I slant stay here.,; — Adieif! 
LET( 
() 
LETTER XXXIX 
C 
'hnward BALTIMORE, ESQ 

tv. 
T O 
: *i€ O L O N E L R A W D O N. 

I Need not tell my dear Charles how happy I am to hear of the amiable Miss rawdon’s Safe return, and must own with you,) that upon the whole his Lordship has acted pretty well, considering the vile outrage he dared to commit; as to your obliging inquiries after my 
father. 
( i66 )' 
hither, I am Sorry to Say, he is very poorlj, though thank God, the gout is got out of his stomach into his right leg; but the doctor Seems to fear a relapse. Alj father sends for me! O, my God, Spare his life! but my heart forbodes me Sadly. 
Adieu, my dear friend, 
Ed. Baltimore. 
JLET 
() 
LETTER XL 
COL ONEL SEDLEY 
LORD CARL ETON. 
J N Spite of your prohibition to the contrary, George, I shall take the liberty to tell you, how much I despife you for your late conduct, and am Surprised hpw Mr. Rawdon could So tamely put up with Such an affront offered to his sister, as I fancy if I had been in his place, 1 should not have been So patient, but have been tempted to have given 3 your 
() 
your Lordship a good cooling ni a horse pond. I make no doubt but this will raise your choler, but your good feiife, (for good sense you do pofsefs, George, if you knew how to put it to a right ufej will tell you, that all, nay more than I have Said, your worship deserves: : to coming to Bath, at present, lean not; but if you are inclined to take a trip to this place, I will insure you a good reception; and if you behave like a good boy, 1 may, perhaps, return with you to Bath, when the season comes on. You must not expect to find much company, therefore, perhaps you may call Sedley park ag dull as you did 
Bath, 
( 1^9) 
Bath. Hark! I hear the Sound of carriages, Sir Ralph Colbroke, his lady, Son, and daughter; well, George, you know them, therefore if you have a mind to come, come; and I will make you welcome : 
Adieu! your’s, 
J. Sedly. 
vol 1.^ 
1 
LET( 
() 
XLI 
COLONEL RAWDON 
T O 
EDWARD BALTIMORE, esoj, 
JO Y, joy, to you my dear friend! yesterday morning Lady Maria Melcombe eloped with a young ensign in the guards, Charlotte went this morning to pay a visit to Lady Harly, where stie heard the news, and the dear girl hurried home, to inform her father and me of it. His Lord Ship was chagrined at first, but afterwards Said, he was very 
glad 
( il)) 
that I had not declared myself her ladyship’s lover; and now, Edward, I have the pleasure to inform you, that I am reestablished in my father’s good graces, and may venture to say, that we three are as happy as this world will let us — a proposi Lord Carletou has Set off for Bath, I suppose to hide his chagrin. Well he may, but now my friend, I will tell you Something, which has never yet escaped my breast. I think my sister Charlotte loves Carleton, though she tries all in her power to conceal it; nay, even from herself; if Carleton was not quite Such a reprobate, I should have no objeffion to him, as I 2 he 
( 17^) 
he certainly has a great many good qualities; but unless he was to reform, he is the last man I Should wlsti for a husband, for Charlotte. Heigh, ho, I wonder ifmiss Chambers is come to England, I am growing dull, my dear friend, So will bid you adieu, 
And remain your’s, sincerely, 
C Rawdon. 
P. S. I hope Sir Edward is better, pray write when you have time. 
LET. 
r ' 
( 1/3) 
LETTER' XLII 
LORD CARLETON 
T O 
COLONEL SEDLEY. 
Up ON my honour, I take more from jacksedly than I would from any other man in the kingdom. Cool me in a horfe pond! did ever any mortal hear the like? though I intend Setting off for Sedly park tomorrow morning, yet 1 could not forbear taking up my pen, to vent my rage. I remember, when, you and I commenced friends, I desired you would never Spare me, 
I 3 and( 
() 
and faith, Jack, you never have j now, if I knew where to find a fiii" cere fisiend, I would renounce you this instant, but as true friends are hard to be found, I must keep to my old one„. Adieu, till I see yon, which will be on imonday. 
,, your’s, 
. ^... i ' - V C,., 
G. Carleton. 
i.et 
( 175') 
LETTER xliir. 
EDWARD BALTIMORE, ESQ. 
T O 
COLONEL RAW DON. 
Dear Charles, 
J Need not say how rejoiced I am to hear that you are happy, would to God, I could say the same; but indeed I am afraid my poor father is dying; the gout is again in his stomach, and we are all in the utmost confusion; his Lady has never stirred from his bedside these two days. I have been up all last night, I 4 and 
( 176) 
and have just stole away while he is dozing, to write these few lines to you. Hark! I am called; adieu, my friend, till I can resume my pen, but my forbodeing heart tells me, I shall resume it with an aching one. 
Adieu! 
LET( 
() 
LETTER xliy. 
THE SAME TO THE SAME. 
ivly God, Charles, what a Scene have I just been witness to! my father is no more; I told you, yes terday, I was called, and flew to his chamber, wh^re I' found him in agonies; when he was a little more composed, he desired everybody to quit the room but me, when he. Said, (taking my hand) Edward, I 5 I am 
( *78) 
I am dying; do not weep, my Son, but hear what I have to say. If ever you see your cousin Kitty Baltimore, tell her, that her wish is come to pafs, for I do sincerely repent the usage I gave her and her sister. I have, my dear Ned, (in cafe you ever find them j left them five thousand pounds each my estate, which devolves to you, is eight thousand a year, besides ready money; only out of that you must pay twelve hundred, yearly, to Lady Baltimore. I have now, my fon, nothing more to add, therefore adieu, and remember we must au die. Call my wife, that I may 
1 take 
( 179 3" 
take my last farewelt* I did So, but was almost incapable to utter a' Syllable. He embraced my Lady and me, then lifting up his hands and eyes to Heaven, cried, 'all is over, and expired without a groan Ishurried my Lady out of the room, and Soon after left it myself, and retired to my own, to try to get a little rest. As Soon as I rose, I went to my Lady, and persuaded her to go to town immediately, which She very readily consented to. She Seemed Sorry, but it is a kind of Sorrow which will Soon wear off. When my father’s funeral is over, I Shall Set off for town also, where I 
I 6 hop€ 
( '8o) 
kope to find you; but in the mean time beg you will write to me. 
Adieu, my ever dear friend, 
E, Baltimore, 
LET. 
( ii) 
LETTER XLV 
COLONEL RAWDON 
T D 
EDWARD BALTIMORE, ESQ, 
X Have no occasion to tell my friend, how Sorry I am for his loss. We Set off tomorrow morning for Rawdon place, where my father, sister, and Self, beg you will join us: do, my dear Edward, oblige us with your company, as I long to see you; and Charlotte bids me tell 
3 
( i8z) 
you, that She will do all in her power to divert you., ^ 
Adieu, my dear friend; ' 
And believe me 'to be, 
your’s sincerely, 
: ^ ^ - ^ L C Rawdon 
L E T: 
: 
( 183) 
LETTER XL VI 
THE HON. LORD CARLETON 
tr o 
THOMAS M artin, esct; ^ 
Scdly park, Aug. 25," 1773, 
ELL, Martin, I have been here just one week, and am more than half sick of this very Sober place already. So I told Sedly this morning, he stiook his wish head, and Said, 1 was a Sad fellow; ah, Tom, I wish you and I were half as good as Jack Sedly, but courage, 
( 184) 
rage, man, we Shall mend in time. I had almost forgot to tell you a piece of news : Sir Edward Baltimore is dead; and i have been more than once tempted to go and throw myfeif at the feet of the fair widow, only, td tell you the truth, I am afraid to venture on her; So I believe, stiall stay where I am. I fancy Sedly, and your humble Servant, will Set off for Bath in about a week, or fortnight, at farthest, where we Shall be glad to meet your worship. Sedley calls, therefore adieu. 
tour’s, 
G. Carleton. 
L E Tw 
i8 
letter XLVII 
THE HON. MISS RAWDON 
T © 
r MISS M I L E O R D 
Eawclori*place. 
E arrived here last week, and I Should have wrote to my dear. Emily Sooner, but have had a very bad cold, though am now much better. Sir Edward Baltimore came here, yesterday; I was quite Shocked, to see him, for he looks very pale and thin; he told us, that Lady Baltimore is gone to France, 
where 
( is) 
where She intends to pas^ the en suing winter. I fancy we Shall leave this place, the latter end of September, or early in November; as it grows very damp. Sir Edward talks of leaving us. Soon, as he is going to Bath, where, I believcj we Shall Soon follow him, when we leave this place. I have no adventure to relate, my dear Emily, therefore must bid you adieu; 
And remain your’s Sincerely, 
C Rawdon. 
h E T 
C S/) 
LETTER XLVIII 
MISS CHAMBERS 
T O 
MISS M 0 U N T F 0 R T. 
London, Sept. 5 th. 
Arrived here, last night, but would not defer writing a few lines, to let my dear friends know I was returned, as I long to hear from you. I am Sorry to add, that I Shall not have the pleasure of feeing you So Soon as I intended, for Lord mouiiaad has Some bufiaess to settle, 
which 
() 
which will detain him a month, or six weeks longer; therefore I beg, my dear Kitty, or Harriot, will write every post, that the time may appear as short as possible, till the moment arrives for my embracing you both. I am So fatigued, I can add no more, but remain 
■ ' Your sincere frknd, 
L Chambers. 
LEN 
{) 
LETTER XLIX 
MISS MOUNTFORT 
T O 
MISS CHAMBERS. 
\ 
I Leave my dear Lucy to guess the joy we feel at her return to England, but will wave all ceremony, and proceed to relate what has befell us since I last wrote. Bath, at present, is very full; a few days ago I was Sent for, to Lady Betty 
Modely; 
() 
Modely; the first person, I faw> when I entered the room, was Colonel Sedly, a former intimate acquaintance of my cousin Edward; and another gentleman, who I found was a Lord, but wshofe impertinent stare I did not at all like; and less fb, when I heard him make the following exclamation. Good God! Sedly, what a Sweet creature! you may be sure, my dear, I made as much haste as postible, to Serve Lady Betty with what She wanted, as the two gentlemen never took their eyes off me the whole time I was there; the next morning, as my sister and Self were in the ihop. Colonel Sedly and his friend, s.ord 
Carle tonne, 
( 3^91) 
Carleton, (for I fiiad that is the impertinent lord’s name) came in to see Some laced ruffles. From the time that Colonel Sedly entered, to the time he left the Shop, he never took his eyes off my sister; whilst 
his Lordship talked Such a profusion 
/ 
of nonsenfe to me, as made me quite sick; and heartily glad was I, when Lady Betty Modely, and her sister, entered, to put an end to his stupid talk. Many other ladles coming in, my Lord and the Colonel left the shop all of a Sudden. Lady Betty, exclaimed, look, look, miss Heartfree, there is that divine fellow. Sir Edward Baltimore: you may be Sure, this made me turn 
my 
C Ip) 
my head, when I indeed, beheld my cousin Baltimore; luckily for me,, (for my sister was not there they were too busily employed, with looking at him, to See the confusion I was in. By this time they had ordered what they wanted, when they left the Shop; and now, my dear Lucy, wshat think you of this? Their calling him Sir Edward, and his mourning habit, leads me to think, his father is dead. Well, as all is, we must leave the rest to the diredion of Providence. I wonder if he will know me, as Soon as I know him; though he is very much altered for the worse. Adieu, my 
dear 

( >93) 
dear friend, for I am called, but will write again Soon. 
rt ™ 
\ ■ 
Yours, 
K. MO UNTFOR® 
Vol. 
te T 
C *94 : 
LETTER XLVII 
COLONEL SEDLEY. 
T O 
SIR ROBERT SEDLEY. 
Bath, 
W ELL, Bob, I may now Say, I am over head and ears III love; and what sort of a person do you think it is with? But however, I will tell you the whole affair. You must know, the first thing Carleton 4 and 
( IS) 
and I did, was to go and pay a visir to Lady Betty Modely, and her ' sister; while we were there, the millenerwas announced; when stie entered, I must own, I was myself struck with her sine form, and no less sine face; as for Carleton, he was in raptures, which She could not avoid feeing, and I Saw it difcon • certed her, as She looked as modest as she was handsome. She Soon afterwards left the room, and George would not let me rest, till I consented to go with him, to her own house, especially when he was told by Some gentlemen we met, that She and her sister were called the K 2 beauties,. 
( >96) 
beauties of Bath. The next morning, George went, and dragged me along with him, as I really had no inclination to go. However, it was my fate to go, and lose my heart. We entered the Shop, where Sat Miss Mountfort, and her lovely sister : but O, Bob! never did I behold Such a divine creature, as the gentle Hansiot. She Seems to be about eighteen; her skin is of a most dazzling whiteness, with the finest bloom in her cheek imacin 
o 
able; and her Sweet blue eyes, make her a perfect Goddess. Ah, Bob, if ever I marry, it must be just Such a w’uman as Harriot Mountfort; or, 
by 
( '97) 
by Heavens, it Shall never be at all. I can add no more, but remain 
Your affedflonate brother 
J. sedley. 
P. S. Pray remember me to Lady 
K, 3 
LET( 
() 
letter xlvni. 
COLONEL RAWDON 
T O 
EDWARD BALTIMORE, ESQ, 
liondon, 
I Think in one of my former letters, Edward, I desired you to give me joy, for having lost a mis tress, but now my boy, give me joy, for having found one; but to be more explicit: last Monday night my sister and Self, were engaged to go to a ball; when we entered, I' Saw a lady at the upper end of the 
Toom, 
( 199) 
room, whose face I was not unacquainted with, and instantly recollected it to be no other than the divine Lucy Chambers; if you remember, Edward, It was at a ball I first beheld her. I immediately went up to the place, where stie and Lady Mourland sat, and paid my compliments to them. A faint 
blush overspread the lovely lucy’s face, at my approach; and indeed, Edward, I may, without vanity, say, that She did not seem difrleafed when I addrested her. I asked, 
whether She was engaged with a partner; stie replied, with a Sweet Smile, I do not intend to dance at all, I begged leave to introduce my K 4 sister; 
( 200) 
Sister; it wlil be a great pleasure to me, answered stie, to be acquainted with ^ colonel’s rawdon’s Sister. I presented Charlotte to the lovely louisa, and they both Seemed equally pleased with each other; but as Charlotte was Soon called to join the dancers, I had the pleasure to entertain miss Chambers, the whole evening; and I think, Edward, I never Spent a more delightful one.' When the company was about re -- tiring, Lord Mourlanst came up, and prested my Sister and me very much to come and See them, which you may be Sure I was not backward of accepting, nor my Sister neither. Do you know', the Saucy 
stut 
( 201) 
flut Says already, she sees the reasoii of my refusing Lady Maria mel comb. 1 am interrupted, therefore must bid you adieu. 
your’s sincerely, 
C Rawdon. 
K 5 
LETE 

( z02) 
LETTER XLIX 
MISS CHAMBERS 
T O 
MISS MOUNTFORT. 
We L L my dear Kitty, I have Seen Colonel Rawdon; and more than that, he and his almable sister are here almost every day. It was ■at a ball, I again had the pleasure of Seeing him, and he paid his com pliments with Such a grace, that it was imposiible not to be charmed with him. It does not signify 
mincing 
( 203) 
mincing the matter, Kitty, for I certainly do like Colonel Charles Rawdon, above all the men I ever Saw : we have been twice at his father’s house, and I asisure you, I am a great favouisite with his old lordshlp, who, though turned of Seventy, is a fine looking man, you think how happy he and his aim able Son and daughter Seem to live: but now my dear friends, I think it is high time to talk a little about your affairs. In the firs place, I, am very glad to hear your cousin Baltimore is at Bath, as I make no doubt, if he is good for anything, he will Soon discover you. I have inquired about him, and find his K 6 father 
( 204) 
father is dead, and that Lady Baltimore is gone to France. I beg, my dear, you will write as often as you possible can, and let me know how you go on, as I am in great hopes your trials are almost over. Adieu, my dear Kitty and Harriot, for 1 hear Colonel Rawdon is below, therefore I am Sure you will excuse 
me. 
I remain. 
Your affectionate friend, Louisa Chambers, 
LET, 

( 205) 
LETTER L 
THE HON. MISS RAW DON 
T O 
MISS MILFORD. 
Well. Emily, here we are,, once more in this gay metropolis, and very loth was I to quit the peaceful shades of rawdon place; but since we came, I have met with a lady, whom next to yourself, I 'Shall most esteem. • It is a miss Chambers, a distant relation of the Earl of Mourland, whose houle She 1 is 
( 2o6) 
is at; and if I am not very much mistaken, my brother nor She have' any distike to each other I wish it ' may be So, as She Seems to be a most deserving young lady, and is a great shvou rite with my father, who, after he had inquired what fortune she had, (and she has thirty thousand pounds) Said, she Seemed to be a good Sort of a girl. She is very merry, and he likes merry folks; witness, his partiality for a certain friend of your’s. O, I had almost forgot to tell you, Sir Edward Baltimore has left us, and gone to Bath, where he proposes pasting a week or two, and then I think he talks of. going abroad, in Search r»of his two 
cousins. 
( 207) 
cousins. It Seems, it was his father’s dying request, that he sihould, if poflibie, find them out, and make some recompense, for his usage to them. Good God! my dear, only think, to turn them adrift, as he did, when they lost both father and mother, and fortune. I never had the pleasure of Seeing either of the ladies, but have always heard a very fine chara(ster of both. I fancy, Sir Edward has a motive, even more strong than his father’s desire, to difeover them, though I am Sure his father’s wisti was sufficient, as he was always reckoned one of the most dutiful Sons of the present age; but you must know, I think 
his 
( 2o8 -) 
his chief motive is all powerful love, as he never Spoke of the eldest Miss Baltimore, but in raptures. Well, So much for the Baltimore family. Pray, my dear, when am I to have the pleasure of feeing you in London? I suppose, when we are going to Bath, your Ladyship will be coming to town; for my part, I don’t care how long the Bath journey is deferred, as I hear Lord Carleton is there, — and, my dear, shall I confess to you, that in spite of that man’s behaviour, I cannot distlke him, as I ought; therefore 1 should be loth to meet him, my Spirits are So weak and low, to what they used to be, that everybody. 

( 209) 
body perceives it; but I hope the lively conversation of Lucy Chambers, and your no less agreeable correspondence, will Set me ta rights again. Adieu, my dear friend. 
your’s as usual 
C Rawdon. 
LET( 
() 
LETTER LI 
MISS MOUNTFORT 
T O 
MISS CHAMBERS. 
Bath, Nov. 15th. 
I Need not tell my dear Lucy, that to hear of her happiness always adds to mine; therefore, without farther preface, willproceed to my own affairs. yeslerday about one o’clock. Lord Carleton, and Colonel Sedly, came to See Some point ruffles; 
they 
( 211) 
they had not been here but a few minutes, when Lady Betty, and Lady Lucy Modely, Lady Maria Lenox, and two Miss Harringtons entered, one after the other; and now my dear, that you may understand it right, I will write it dialogue fashion. 
LADY BETTY MODELY, 
Dear Lady Mary, how happy I am to see you; when did you come, and how long does your Ladyship propose staying at Bath? 
LADY 
( 212) 
LADY MARY LENOX, 
Dear Lady. Betty, how do you? I only came yesterday morning, but as to how long I Shall stay. Lord, my dear, how could you ask me Such a question. 
* LORD CARLETON. 
Why, my Lady, I must confess the question was rather mal a pro pos, as I have heard, a lady Seldom knows her own mind. 
LADY LUCY MODELY, 
I am Sure, his lordship Says very 
true, for I never continue in the 
Same from one hour to another. 
C O li( 
() 
COLONEL SEDLY, 
Heavens, Madam, I hope your ladyship never intends to marry, 
LADY LUCY, (eagerly) 
Not marry Colonel 1 pray, why noti., ^ 
r' 
COLONEL SED LY, 
Because, if your Ladyship is So changeable, you may change your mind just as you are going to church. 
XOR D 
C) 
LORD CARLETON, 
/ 
Now, Jack, if I was you, I would make up to Lady Lucy, myself, and try whether she would or not. 
COLONEL SEDLY, 
'No, my Lord, when I marry, it must not be with a lady who changes her mind So often. 
LADY MARY LENOX, 
Pray, ladies, what sort of company is there here } 
LADY 
( «*5) 
. LADY BETTY MODEL Y, 
Indeed, my dear, I can hardly say, but the most approved of the gentlemen, ^ is, Sir Edward Baltimore. 
LADY MARY LENOX, 
Lord, who is he? I have heard of that name before. 
LORD CARLETON, 
He was only fon to Sir Edward Baltimore, who inherited the estate and title from the late Sir Edward, who was killed by a fall from his horse, two or three years ago. 
MISS 
( 216) 
MISS HARRINGT©N, 
I believe he has not been dead So long, my Lord, but I have heard Say, the present Sir Edward is come in Search of his cousins. 
LADY LUC y MOD ELY, 
- Good God! are his cousins here, then? 
MISS HARRINGTON, 
That I cant pretend to say. 
COLONEL SEDLY, 
Good God! is the present Sir Edward, nephew to the late Sir - ' Edward 
( z17) - 
Edward Baltimore, who ruined himself by gamin g i 
LAPY BETTY MOD ELY, 
The very famei ^ - 
* ~. .1 -. COLONEL SEDLY, 
Pray, my Lady, don’t you know whyt is become of Sir edward’s two daughters ?they were at the same School with you and Lady Lucy. 
LADY BETTY MOD ELY, 
No, indeed I know nothing of them. I heard once, ^ that they were companions to two young la vol. 1.^ L dies. 
() 
dies, who were going to France. Poor things, I really pittied them, for they were brought up in. Such an expensive manner, that it must be Shocking for them to get their bread by their labour. 
.LORD CARLETON, 
Pray, Colonel Sedly, hwe you ever Seen either of the Miss balti mores? 
COLONEL SEDLY, 
I have, while they were very young, but I have no recollection of them now; therefore I am Sure, I Should not know them. 
LADY 
( 219) 
LADY BETTY MODELY; 
Look, look, ladies, there Edward: 
At that instant he entered the Shop, only think, my dear Lucy, what a tremor we must be in, by his Sudden appearance, and by the preceding discourse. He bowed to all in general; and going up to poor Harriot, desired to See Some point ruffles. All eyes were on him, and well for us they were; as for him, L 2 he 
’ ( 220) 
he Seemed buisied in thought, and I really believe, had he been asked if a man or woman Served him, he would hardly have known. He boi^'ht two pair and paid for them, bowed to Lord Carleton in particular, and the rest in general, and withdrew. As Soon as he was gone, Lady Mary exclaimed, he Seems to be an insensible wretch: but, nobody making any answer, she ordered us to send honie the things, wished all a good morning, and quitted the shop. Lord Carleton then taking Colonel Sedly by the arm, went also, and the rest of the ladies having by this time, bought 3 what 
( 221) 
\ 
what they wanted, test It like wise; in short, this insenfible wretch, (as, Lady Mary called him) Seemed to silence all. And now, my dear Lucy, what would you advise us to do? He Seems unhappy : miss Harrington Said, he was come in Search of his cousins; in short, neither my sister nor Seif know what is best to be done. We are quite bewildered; do, my dear Lucy, give us your advice. They say, wear gone to France; therefore, it behoves us to be Speedy, if he should have any intention of going in Search of us. He looks dejected, — why should he? perhaps it is 
L 3 upon 
( 222) ' 
upon our accounts; but I don’t know what I would say, therefore will conclude myself 
V 
, Your sincere friend, 
K. Mountfort. 
END of the FIRST VOLUME, 
- Cji! T 'ri. ' 

V ^ ^ iv ^ 
’ > 
m 

, *?>: A’ j) 
A A 

, Tf 


W; 

T’*' 
is m&h 
LI i'? 4 
A i 

V I 



v. 

SABIN W. COLTON, JR. MEMORIAL FUND 
"poxcbasecl 
Vor 
ive w\emoy\cxl 
rv 
I'. • 
\» 

'r 



hh 
i 

I ■ <t*r/ 

t H E ' 
STORY 
OF THE 
• Miss BALTIMORES; 
I N A 
SERIES OF tetters. 
V O L II 

LONDON; 
PRINTED FOR T. HOOK HAM, 
At his Circulating Library, New bond street, Corner of bruton street. 
M.DCC.LXXXIII. 
T t 
r 


> * 
\ 
\ \ f ■ \^ V {' 
, v’ r - *■> i, >{ 

!'< ............... 
THE 
I 
o 
tf 
. w 
UK 
I 
<3 
A 
■j 
H I S T O LI Y, c. 
RSM 
BETTER I. 
COLONEL RAW DON 
ltxj ( H 
T © 
. : d‘ v'cd i bi;; 
SIR EDWARD BALTIMORE. 
oi 
/* 
> 
oi 

i 
THE diyine Lucy Chambers loves me, and thy friend Charles is happy; and now, my dear Edward, say that A 3 N you 
'144?. SI 
y( 
() 
you are So likewise, and my happi ’ ness will be complete. My father approves my choice, and, more than that, tells the dear girl, if he thought he (hold have any chance, he would make love to her himself. There are two things which allay my happiness;; one is, knowing that you are not content, the other that my poor Charlotte is indisposed with a cold; but, however, I hope it will be attended with no bad consequence, and I likewise hope the next letter I have from you will tell me you have found your lovely cousins, and then thy friend Charles 
will 
■( 7) 
will be one of the happiest mortals on earth. 
Adlen, my dear friend 1 
your’s 
C Rawpok. 
A 4 
LET( 
() 
LETTER ir. 
SIR EDWARD BALTIMORE, 
T O 
COLONEL RAWDON, 
J. O hear of your happiness, my dear Charles, always gives me pleasure, but for my part, I don’t be 
\ 
I Shall ever taste it more; but, good God! how dare I repine? Am I not blested with affluence, while my lovely Kitty and and her no less lovely sister are, perhaps, in the arms of indigence, or, what 
is 
( 9) 
is worse, exposed to all the wiles and arts of our Sex } Oh, heavens! there is horror in the thought 1 To be Sure, I have heard, (if report shys true) that they are gone to France as companions to two ladles, whither I am preparing to follow them; therefore, my dear friend, if you will let me have one more letter before I depart, it must be by the return of the post. I have. Since I came here, met with a gentleman, whose father was a former intimate acquaintance of my dear uncle. Sir Edward Baltimore. It is a Colonel Sedly; he was at the University at the same time I was, A 5 and, 
( 10) 
and, when I went to See my un^ cie, he generally went with me; but on my leaving college our acquaintance broke off; but since I came here, we have renewed it. He is a very agreeable young gentleman, and is likewise a great intimate of carlton’s. You will Say, 'he is never the better for that, but I believe his Lordship would be worse if it was not for him. 
Adieu, my dear/riend, 
/ 
E. Baltimore. 
L E r( 
( ”), 
III 
COLONEL R AW DON 
T O 
SIR EDWARD BALTIMORE. 
My dear Friend, 
Wh E N I received your last letter, I was with Miss Chambers; 
t ' 
and So much did the contents chagrin me, that I could not hide it; and the dear girl made So many tender inquiries after the cause, that I ventured your displeasure, N. A 6 and 
t 12) 
( Jt 
and told her the whole in fev/ words. — She Said nothing, but Seemed affected. I Soon afterwards took leave; but this morning, judge of my Surprise, when calling at Lord mourland’s, the Servant informed me, that miss Chambers and his lady Set off for the country early this morning. I eagerly asked, what part they Vere gone to, or if my Lord was at homehe Said no; and as to what part they vrere gone, he did not know, but at the Same time gave me a letter, which I hastily Snatched, and found the following contents: 
‘‘ SIR. 
C 13) 
c6 
SIR, 
I MAKE no doubt you will be very much Surprised at my abrupt departure, but hope you will make yourself easy, when I affure you, that it is no fault of yours, but to Serve your friend Sir Edward Baltimour, which occasions it. wten I think proper to dis close the mystery, I will write to your sister, whoi|i I hope will Soon recover from her indisposition : — till then rest content, and be assured I stiall always remain, s I R, 
Your sincere friend, 
L Chambers.” 
Well, 
( 14) 
I 
Well, Edward, what think you of this? My mistress gone to Serve another man, and not to let me into the Secret 1 Now, don’t you think I have great reason to be jealous? But, my friend, if the dear girl can any ways Serve you, it will render me completely happy. What She has in her head I can’t possibly divine, but, let it be what it will, I would advise you not to quit Bath just yet. My sister, thank God, is much better, and I alsohave the pleasure to inform you that She has in a great measure recovered her charming Spirits. Now, Edward, I hope very Soon to hear ' that you have found, or at least 
^ heard 
( 15) 
heard of your cousins; I don’t care how Soon, as well for your Sake, as to behold my adorable Lucy Chambers. 
Adieu, my dear friend. 
And remain your’s sincerely, 
G. Raw’don. 
.4 1. 
L E T) 
) 
E T T E R IV 
MISS CHAMBERS 
T O 
THE HON. MISS RAW DON. 
Eathj 
Dear miss Rawdon, 
J Arrived here last Monday night, and on tuesday morning went, without any previous notice; (which, by the by, I blamed myself very much for, as the dear 4 girl 
( I?) 
girls turned as pale as death) but Lady Modely being there, it gave them time to recover. She immediately recognised, and Saluted me in avery friendly manner. As Soon as the usual compliments were over, I desired to Speak to the eldest miss Mountfort, for that is the name they go by here. You, my dear Charlotte, may easier guess, than I describe, the joy we each of us felt at this (to Miss Baltimore) unexpected meeting. I told them, (for by this time Harriot had joined us) I was come to serve them; and then related, in few words, what I had heard from you, and your brother. apropos— — does 
that 
( '8) 
that Same brother of jour’s do, my’’ dear } does he bear mj loss like a man, or is he whimpering like a schoolboy?? to go on; I, at the Same time told them, that they must be governed by me, and conform, in every shape, to my will and pleasure;; they, with a Smile, agreed to. I then took my leave, telling them, I should perhaps Send next day, and desired they would come immediately; then, bidding them adieu, hurried home to Lady Mourland. We started a thousaiid Schemes, before we' could hit upon one plausible enough to bring Sir Edward Baltimore to our lodgings. As I had no ac 
quaiii' 
( 19) 
qiiaintance, or even knowledge of him, I could not think of any method to bring it about, but telling him the whole affair, which I did not like, as I wanted to Surprise him. While we were in this perplexing dilemma, Colonel Sedly 
f -. 
was anounced, who is an Intimate 
acquaintance of Lord and Lady 
mourland’s, and I affure you a very ‘ 
great favourite of mine. After the 
usual compliments were over, he 
begged to know, what had brought ' # 
us to Bath without his Lordship?? Lady answered, that Some important bufiness of mine had brought me, and she had come with me for company Sake; as for my Lord, 
ho 
( 20) 
he had Some affairs to Settle, which rendered it impofiible for him to attend us. My Lady, in the course of conversation, asked the Colonel, if he knew Sir Edward Baltimore? he Said: yes, he knew him very well. We then both Said, if he would wish to oblige us, he would, the following evening, bring Sir Edward to tea, as we wanted very much to be acquainted with him. He answered, 
with a Smile, he was very ready to oblige us, but if we had a design upon his heart, it would not 
do, in Spite of all our charms, as he was pretty Sure he was already engaged. Some more company, coming in, put an end to our conversation, 
( 21) 
verfation, and the Colonel Soon afterwards took his leave. To be Short, rny dear, the next evening brought Colonel Sedly, Sir Edward Baltimore, the two Lady mode lys. Lady Mary Lenox, and the two Miss Harringtons, to our house, to tea. When they were all come, I Sent a card to the two Miss mount sorts, desiring their company at eight o’clock. A little before the time I expected them, I turned to Sir Edward, and bluntly asked him if he had Seen his cousins lately? he turned first pale, and then red, at the Same time, saying, no, madam, 1 have not; I wished to God 1 had. Indeed, my dear, I felt for 
him; 
( 23) 
him; I turned from him to the two Lady modelj’s, and desired to know whether they should recollect the two miss Baltimores? They, with the two miss Harringtons, answered, they believed they should. Lady Mary Said, she had never Seen them; Tnd Colonel Sedly replied, they were So young, when he Saw them Iasi, he should not have the least knowledge of them. As to Sir Edward, he Said nothing, therefore turning to him, you Sir, Said I, I make no doubt, would know them. I am afraid I should not, he returned, as we were very young, when we parted; but for god’s Sake, rna dam, (rising, and taking my hand, 
with 
( 23) 
with Such a wiidness in his looks as made me Shudder) for god’s sake, madam, (repeated he) why do you ask those questions? at that Instant the ^ door opened, and the Servant announced the two Miss Mountforts - — All eyes were fixed on the door; when 1 repeated miss Mountforts. I know no Such name; but they 'entering at the Same time, I exclaimed, good God! the two Miss Baltimores! Surprise now was plainly depicted in every countenance; but all on a Sudden, our attention was called to Sir Edward Baltimore, who, uttering a deep groan, Sunk on the floor, without fense or motion. Thlsmearly reduced 
() 
duced his Sweet cousins to the same condition: good God! my dear, how I then repented bringing them together in this clandestine manner. When he recovered, he started up, and taking Kitty by the hand, exclaimed, my God! how could I take you for any other than the lovely Kitty Baltimore! you my dear, may easier guess, than I describe, the Scene that followed between the three cousins. As for the 
% 
rest of the ladies, they Seemed quite at a loss what to Say; and therefore Colonel Sedly attending them, took their leave. As Soon as they were gone, Lady Mourland and I left the room, and by the time we returned 
to 
( 25) 
to them again, they were upon the best footing imaginable. Sir Edward has offered his hand and fortune to Kitty; as for Harriot, She it Seems was provided with a hus band long ago; for Colonel Sedly had offered to marry her, before he could have the least intimation of her birth and connexions, therefore I am Sure he deserves her. As for the biifinefs, they have given it up to their young women. Now, my dear, there is nothing wanting but your presence, that of Lords raw don, Lovel, Mourland, and a Somebody else (who shall be nameless) to complete our felicity. If any of you have any goodness, you will Vol. B Set 
( 26) 
Set off immediately for Bath; therefore my dear, with this wifii, 1 will bid you adieu. 
. i 
your’s, 
L Chambers. 
P. S. If you choose to show your brother this, you are welcome. — Adieu. 
LET.? 
( ^7) 
L E T T 'E R V 
THE HON. MISS RAW DON 
T e 
MISS CHAMBERS. 
Have taken up the pen, just to inform my dear Lucy, we' are all (that is Lord Mourland, my father, brother and Self) preparing to Set off for Bath. I Shall say nothing, till we meet, of the pleasure we ' B took 
( 28) 
took in reading your pleasing recital of the lovers rencountre. Adieu, my dear Lucy, till we meet. 
your’s, 
C Rawdon. 
P. S. Mv brother writes himself. 
LS T. 
V i i! 

( 29) 
LETTER VI 
X Q R U C A R L E T O N 
*■ o 
THOMAS MARTIN, ESQ.. 
We LL, Martin, It is in vain longer to conceal what I hitherto have endeavoured to hide from myself; but love, all powerful love, B 3 has 

{ 3°) 
has at length conquered thy wild friend; yes, Tom, it is no other than the all beautiful Charlotte Rawdon, who has inspired it. But I will endeavour to be more concise. Yesterday, Sedly, (who by the by is going to marry the young lady I mentioned in one of rny former letters) came, and told me, that Miss Rawdon, with her father, and brother, were coming to Bath. O, Tom! what did I not feel at that moment? Indeed I felt So much, that I directly laid, my whole heart open before him. Or elfe'you may asture yourself, Tom, you would not have been the first who would, 
2 have 
( 31) 
have known it. As Sedly has always proved himself not only the warmest, but sincerest friend I ever had; and 1 can justly Say, that I have never concealed one of my faults (which have been pretty numerous, to my stiame be it Spoken from him and I must own, he has never Spared me an inch; but that is what I esteem him for, and next 
'S 
to him your worship is the one, I have most regard for : — well, where did Heave off— — telling you Miss Rawdon was come to Bath. After consulting together what was best to be done, we concluded, that i should pretend to leave Bath; but at the Same time, only go two B 4 miles 
( 32) 
miles off; and then Sedly told me, if he found me really sincere in my repentance, he would try to do Something for me. So, Tom, here am I pent up in a sort of farmhouse, till dame Fortune pleases to pay me a visit, and She will be a Sorry jade, if she forsakes me now. Well, Tom, I have been looking over what I have wrote, and if I write a stroke more, shall be in the vapours; therefore adieu. 
year’s, 
G. Carleton. 
P. S. 
( 33) 
P.S.. I have Seen my charmer once on horseback, from my window, and ihe looks more lovely than ever 
B S 
LET( 
( 
L T T E R vir. 
THE HON. MISS RAWDON 
T O 
MISS MILFORD. 
Bath, Jan. 23dy 
I Arrived at this place last Tuesday; and next thursday, my dear Emily, is to join six of the most amiable people in the world, viz. Sir Edward and mis's Kitty Baltimore; 
Colonel, 
( 35) 
Colonel Sedly, and'miss H. Baltimore; and last of all, Colonel raw don, and miss Chambers: So you See, 'my dear, I am the only one of the Rawdon family, unprovided for; and I fancy I Shall remain So. Heigh ho! my dear! is it not a pity that Lord Carleton Should have rendered himself So obnoxious to our family? but I cannot here omit giving you a little anecdote, concerning him, which I heard from Several, and in particular from Colonel Sedly, who still continues a warm friend, in Spite of all his faults. 
B 6’ 
SOME 
( 36) 
SOME time ago, as Lord carle tonne was walking in a Solitary mood, a boy begged charity of him, which his lordship at first refused; but the boy still continuing to press him, he turned about, and asked him, if he had no father nor mother: The child answered, he had both, and it was to help them he thus begged his charity. My Lord, touched with his recital, bid him Show him to the place where his father and mother were. The boy did as his Lcrdfhlp desired; but, good God! when he entered, what a Scene did he behold! the father stretched on a miserable bed, Seem 4 ngly 
( 37) 
ingly without fense or motion; the mother sitting by his fide, pale, and almost breathless;; a lovely girl, who Seemed to be about Sixteen, kneeling on the other fide the bed. When my Lord beheld this Scene of horror; he was unable to utter a Syllable, for Some minutes. As Soon as he had power to Speak, he turned to the boy, and giving him money, bid him fetch a bottle of wine, which he soon procured; when my Lord taking it out of his hand, poured out a glass, and giving it to the woman, made her disink it; then pouring another, gave it to the girl, to give her father; and at the same time, putting 
five 
'( 3^) 
five guineas into her hand, bid her be comforted, telling her, he would send a friend to them in the afternoon. He then found out Sedly, and telling him the whole, begged he would go to them, and inquire into the cause of their distress; in short, my dear, through his lordship’s bounty, the old people were Set up. To their daughter he gave two hundred pounds, and she is married to a young farmer, hvho has long loved her; and the boy his Lordship has put to a School. All this he had done through the hands of the Colonel, as he has never Seen them since the first day. Everybody is full of his praise, 
the 
( 39) 
the Brownlow family having been always regarded, as deserving people. Well, my dear, I must again repeat it — don’t you think it is a pity that his Lordship has rendered himself So despisable in our eyes? Adieu, my dear Emily, for I am fo tired, that I can’t write a stroke 
more. 
your’s, 
C Rawdon. 
LET( 
() 
LETTER Vlir. 
THE SAME TO THE SAME, 
Well, my dear, the weddings are over, and I will venture to say, never were three couple better matched in the kingdom. In about three weeks we shall all Set off for town, where I hope to have the pieasure of Seeing my dear Emily. Sir Edward Baltimore had a letter from Lady Charlotte, yesterday, 
wherein 
( 41) 
w herein She tells him. She is married to a Captain Marchmont, in the Guards, and that they Shall Soon be in England. I have no other news to write; therefore adieu, my dear Emily 
your’s, 
C rawnon* 
LET( 

() 
LITTER IX 
RIGHT HON. LORD CARLETON, 
T O 
TT. MARTIN, E S 
Give me joy, Tom, give me joy I Charlotte Rawdon, the divine Charlotte Rawdon loves me I Yes, Tom, I again repeat it, she 
loves 
( 43) 
loves me! I was riding or rather walking my horse, about a week ago, 'wlien another pasted So rapidly by me that I hardly knew whether it was mortal or not, till I heard the Scream of a woman. 
I staid for no more, but 
putting Spurs to my horse, gal lopped, or rather flew after her, and got just time enough to ^ receive her in my arms,, as stie was falling to the ground, unable to 
keep her hold any longer : But, good God 1 Martin, what were my sensations when I beheld the lovely Charlotte Rawdon! — In a few minutes she opened her lovely eyes, 
and 
f 44) 
and faintly exclaiming, Lord carle tonne I closed them again. Good heavens! what would I at that moment have given to have had Somebody near me! I pressed her cold hands to my lips a thousand times, invoking heaven and earth to recover her. At length my prayers were heard, and the dear angel opened her lovely eyes. 
A faint blush overspread her cheek; " as She tried to disengage herself from my arms; but I Shll ventured to detain her in them, begging her not to be alarmed, but to affure herself She was quite Safe; She Said, if I would wish. 
. 
( 45) 
to oblige her, I would see her Safe home to her father’s. I immediately complied, at the same time offering my arm to Support her, which the dear creature was forced to accept, as She was not able to walk without help. we then proceeded,, and I made Such good use of my time, that I obtained Something like a promise of forglve ness before we reached home They wxre all astonifhed to See me with her, but I Soon informed them of the reason: My Lord, and the Colonel, coldly thanked me for my Service, and Soon afterwards 
( 46) 
wards I took my leave; but the next morning ventured to renew my visit, and had the Satisfaction to find myself received by the whole family in a very different style from that oh the day before, the dear girl herself not excepted,, who thanked me for my, protection, with a Sweet Smile of complacency. In Short, Tom, through sedly’s intercestion, and my own eloquence, I have made my peace, and now am received as miss rawdon’s lover. — - I begged for an early day, and next thujsday seven night is to make me the 
happiest 
( 47) 
happiest of men. Adieu, Tom, for my angel calls. 
Yours, as usual. 
G, Carleton. 

{ 48) 
LETTER X 
HON. LADY CARLETON, 
T O 
MISS MILFORD. 
/ -■ 
Wh A T do you think, Emily They tell me that I am married! Impossible!! Rawdon can never So tamely have parted with her liberty! But hold, here is Lord Carleton; let’s hear what' ' 
( 49) 
he has to Say. Well, my dear, it is even So, and your once gay friend is dwindled into a Sober wife. You know, Emily, it is an old Saying, that a reformed rake makes the best husband, and I really believe it; for that Lord Carleton is that very thing, a reformed rake, everybody here is willing to allow; but as we shall positively be in town liy next Friday', you may then judge for yourself 
Therefore, my dear Emily, 
I remain, yours sincerely, 
C Carleton. volmi.* ^ C P. S. 
C 5°) 
P. S. I had the honour of a visit from Lady Charlotte Marchmont, to give me joy on tyre occasion. 
LET( 
() 
LETTER XI 
THE RIGHT HON. LORD GARLETON, 
T O 
THOMAS MARTIN, ESQ 
London, March 25th. 
We L L Martin, I have been married now three weeks, and never did I taste true happiness till this time. You See, by the date of this, where we are; but in about three weeks time we Shall Set off for our respective country seats, and do' you know, Tom, I never C 3 more 
C 52) 
more ardently wislied for anything than the time we are to Set off in my life! At present we are at Lord rawdon’s hoiife, except Sir Edward, and Lady Baltimore; that couple Seems to be a pattern of conjugal happiness; the deserving Sedly and the no less deserving" Harriot a mofl: generous and happy pair; the lively Colonel Rawdon and his no less lively louisa Seem to live but for each other, but at the Same time will enjoy all the pleasure this vain world can afford; as for my charm in C Charlotte and Self, I shall leave nameless, as it is imposhble to describe our happiness: And now, Martin, let me give you a word of 
advice; 
4 
( 53) 
advice; if ever you intend to taste true Irappinefs, leave your present pursuits, and marry dome deserving woman; for, take my word, that is the' best way to be happy. We men of pleasure think mansiage Such i bugbear, but believe me, it is all a mistake, for there is more plea fare to be found in a virtuous connexion than all the loose ones you men of pleasure may form. Therefore, Martin, take my advice, and, as you have hitherto followed my evil steps, now follow my good ones, and let me perstwde you to marry. We stiali Set off for the country tomorrow morning, but Shall be in town C 3 against 
( 54) 
against the birthday.. I stiall be glad to see you, and will then introduce you to my adorable. 
Adieu, my dear friend, 
And believe me to be 
your’s Sincerely, 
G, Carjleton. 

( 55) 
LETTER XII 
L A n V BALTIMORE, 
T 0 
THE HON. MRS. R A W D O N. 
Westbury park. 
My dear louisa, 
HAVE just fet down to tell you, that I think I may now venture to Say my happiiiefs is complete. Have I not, my deaf, got 
r 
the man I loved from my infancy! and is not that man endowed with C 4 every 
( 56) 
every requisite to adorn his Sex t So, my dear, I think, was 1 not contented now, I should cleferve to go through all the trials over again which I have hitherto Suffered; but ought I to call them trials, when they have been the means of rendering me So Superlatively happy! In short, there is nothing left me to wish or desire, except it is, praying the Almighty to prolong my edward’s days; but hark I I hear his voice, therefore will bid you adieu! 
And remain yonr’s, sincerely', 
/ 
K. Baltimore. 
P. S. 
(; 57). _ 
P, S. We Shall be in town by next Monday, where I hope to meet with you and the rest of my dear friends. Adieu! 
X 
I. 
- -5 
LET; 
'i < 
() 
LETTER XIII 
T. MARTIN, E S 
TO THE 
RIGHT HON. LORD CARLETON. 
London, 
LI HURRIED to town in hopes of catching your Lordship before you quitted London, but was too. ' late.’ I wanted to see you much, but before I proceed to my own af 2 fairn, 
( 59) ■ 
fairs, will talk a little about your’s. So, George, you are really married I Well, much good may do you! -- As'for your letter of Sober advice, I Shall pafs it over, as before a twelvemonth is at an end, I think you will repent it. With regard to Sedly, I wish he may prove the fisiend you have always taken him for. I Shall long for the time of your coming to town, for it is devilisii dull at present, and if it was not for this cursed law Suit, I would not be here now; but the lawyers are So dilatory, and the cause So intricate, that it renders it impossible to be done in a C 6 hurry. 
() 
hurry Adieu, George! for I have nothing farther to say, but beg you will write Soon *. 
And remain your’s, 
T. Martin. 
Axe 
LET. 
( 6i) 
LETTER XIV 
COLONEL SEDLEY 
TO THE 
RIGHT HON. LORD CARLETON, 
Dear George, 
My dear Harriot and I received your letter last Monday, and it made us very happy to hear you and your amiable spouse were in health. My Harriot, Lady Baltimore, Sir Edward, and Self, are all well, and perfedfly happy, but we all regret very much the birth ‘ ' .1 clay’s 
( 62) 
day’s being So near; as the country is So delightful, we are loth to quit it. Mr. and Mrs. Rawdoii come to this place tomorrow, and in about a week’s time we Shall all Set off for London, where we hope to meet you and Lady Carleton. I have nothing farther to add, but begging you to present our compliments to your Lady, 
Remain, dear George, 
Your affectionate friend, 
J, Sedly. 
LEX' 
( 63) 
L E, T TER XV 
T. MARTIN, ESQ 
T O 
ROBERT BOYLE, ESQ 

O, BOB! I am almost mad I Would you believe it, Carleton is married; yes, and by that means has blasted all my hopes : curse on Sedly, on her brother, and all • the 
( 64) 
the world beside. I hardly know what I Say, but will now try to explain myself. You know. Bob, about nine or ten months ago, you was called to your old dying father; about that time Carleton had formed a Scheme of carrying off miss Rawdon : He came to me, telling me I musl be one of the principal actors in it; at the same time saying. She will be at the play tonight, where I propose being also, and want you to go with me. Well, to make short of the story, we went, and Carleton took care to place himself and me exactly opposite the box where she was to sit. She Soon afterwards entered, 
with 
( 65) 
with another laefy and gentleman. When I came to examine the you, ng lady, I found her to be excessively hand Some, and asked George who fly was, and what fortune Sire had. 
He made me the following answer— — Tom, (lie is youngest daughter tq Lord 'Rawdon, and the oiily unmarried one; He had two married, and they had fifty thousand pounds a piece; but this has Seventy, as an old aunt, who died Some time ago, left her twenty thoufaiid, for She was ahvays a great favouisite of the old lady’s : But, you must know, Tom, it is not So much her fortune that I 
want 
C 66) 
want as herself, as I think her one of the loveliest women on earth. Next Wednefdaj there is to be a masquerade, where I hear She is to be, and where I propose being also. You must go with me, as perhaps I Shall have occasion for Some of your assistance. — Here George ended his long Speech, and Some more people coming into the box prevented my making any reply. When I came to consider, 
I thought, if I could by any means, get this lady for a wife, it would Set me up. In Short, Bob, I concluded on the following Scheme As Soon as Carleton got Miss raw' don, he proposed taking her to his 
Seat 
(6/) 
seat ill Wales, where I was to join them. Then I proposed telling the lady a long story, that I was come to rescue her from the hands of his Lordship, and that She might depend on my feeing her Safe to her father’s, if stie would trust herself with me. You may be Sure, Bob, I had no intention' of taking her to town, but intended to take her a cross road, and So get into Scotland, where I would have forced her to have married me. This I could have done very well, I dare say, as they could not have guested where She had been carried: But the devu just then had a mind to play me a 
trick; 
( 68) 
trick; for before Carleton had got her halfway, they were overtaken by her brother, and George was Such a confounded fool to give her np to him; and now he is married. Death and fury! I could tear the ground up.;, but I ondy wait for their coming to town, when I hope .to ’ revenge myfelfi If I could but mstlce a difference between that fellow Sedly ^^and George, 1 Should he able to, carry on my schemes better; but, however, I will leave all to time. -- IHAVE nothing farther to add; 
therefore adieu!,. 
T. .Martin.' 
P. S. 
C ^9) 
P. S. I have just heard that, Carleton and his Lady will be in town next tuesday. 
LET( 
() 
LETTER XVI 
LADY CARL ETON, 
T O 
MISS MILFORD. 
London 
E arrived here last Tuefdav, and should have wrote to my dear Emily Sooner, if I had not been taken up with mantua makers, milliners, hair dresters, and So forth. As for my dear Lord, he is not 
very 
( 7*) 
very well, as he has got a cold. He calls, So adieu for the prefeiit! 
Sunday, ten o’clock, 
\ 
I TOLD you, yesterday, my Lord was to introduce a Mr. Martin to me. I must own I thliik he has Something very forbidding in him. I will give you his‘picture, Emily., Pie Seems to be 'about Seven or eight and twenty, complexion rather dark, his eyes are dark likewise, 
( 7^) 
wife, and rather inclinable to a kind of Squint, which, in my mind, renders him very disagree able; his forehead is high, his nose and mouth are awrj; and, if I am not mifraken, his mind is as disagreeable as his person. Well, my dear. So much for Thomas Martin, Esq— — brother Charles has taken a charming house in Cavendifh square. Sir Edward and Lady Baltimore are at present wittemr. and Mrs. Sedly, as they propose quitting town as Soon as the birthday is over— — 
'my dear, I have no other news to write, and, besides, Shall 
have 
( 73) 
have but just time to dress for dinner; therefore adieu! 
your’s, 
C Rawdon 
vol. II D 
n E T( 
() 
letter XVII 
T. MARTIN, E SCUT 
O 
ROBERT BOYLE, ESQ 
Well, Bob, last Tuesday 
Carleton and his lady arrived in town; and on Saturday I went to pay him a visit. He was very glad to see me; his lady was not there; but Soon after I went in, he called her down, telling her, he had a 
friend 
( 75) 
friend to introduce her to. When Ihe came in, this, my dear, (Says he) is Mr. Martin, a gentleman you have often heard me Speak of; and this, lady, my dear Tom, is my wife, who has done thy wild friend the honour to take him for better for worse. I staid about an hour, and then took my leave, you may be Sure, Bob, to plot mischief. I asked after Sedly, he Said, he was very well; he and his lady, continued he, are to dine here on tues day, with Sir Edward, and Lady Baltimore, and if you will come, Tom, I will present you to them. You may be Sure I consented to it; and as this is the day, must bid you D a adieu, 
( 7^) 
adieu, to prepare for my visits, but will resume my pen on my return 
your’s, 
T. Martin, 
LET( 
() 
LETTER xviin 
THE SAME TO THE SAME, 
Tuesday Evening, 9th of October. 
Well L Bob, here am I, just returned from my visit, and must own I have been entertained very' agreeably : there was a great deal of company, and among the rest Lady Charlotte Marchmont. doivt you remember a young lady, two or D 3 three 
( 78) 
three year's ago, who was called Lady Charlotte Herbert? but Soon afterwards She was married to a Sir Edward Baltimore. However, the old fellow is dead, and she is married to this Marchmont; but I don’t believe she is very happy with him, as I have heard say, he only had her for her j’ointure, which is twelve hundred a year, besides ready money. Now you must know, she is as errant a coquette as ever existed; therefore if I could bring it about for her and Carleton to have a little intrigue together, it would, I make 'no doubt, make his lady jealous; thenifl can by any means raise. a - doubt in carleton’s breast, of his 
* lady’s 
( 79) 
lady’s honour, it will do very well. You will, very possibly ask, how I prppose to manage that? Sedly is often here, and George and his wife make very much of him: now, if I can infuse into carleton’s ear, that Sedly and her lady Ship make too free, he may, by my turning and winding him about, propose Setting me as a watch over his. wife’s conduct. This, I at first may refuse, but at length, by his; persuasions, and to Serve a man, I have So much regard for, consent to; then by that means, you know Bob, I stiall have free access to the lady, and death — who knows what 
may follow........ Adieu, my dear 
D 4 Bob,. 
( 8o) 
.Bob, I wish you Was here, when you Shall know more; as it' is impossible to commit every thought to paper. 
Your's Sincerely, 
T. Martin. 
LET. 
( 8i) 
LETTER XIX 
LADY CARLRTON 
T £> 
MISS M I L FOR Df 
OOD God! rny dear Emily, what a vile Scheme have we jusi: discovered 1 we cati never be thankful enough to Providence, that it: has been foundout So Soon.. My God! what uneafiness might it not. 
D 5 • have. 
( 82) 
have been productive of! It makes me shudder even now, but I will try and give you an account of the affair. I believe I told you in my last, that my Lord was rather in disposed with a cold. Colonel Sedly Sent a card, to invite my Lord and me to dinner On Thursday, the day we were to go, my Lord, at breakfast, Said, my dear, my cold is So bad, I can’t go to Sedly, today, but beg you will; and make my excuse.” I tried all I could, to persuade him to let me stay at home also; but all in vain, he Said, he had much rather I would go; at the same time Saying, mar tin has promised to come and keep 3 me 
( %) 
me company. Well, my dear, I went, but could not be persuaded to stay longer than eight o’clock.. When I came home I must own I was very much Surprised to see Lady Charlotte Marchmont, who I mentioned to you in my last, '^ Setting close to my Lord, on one fide, and the villain Martin on the other. My Lord, Said, rather in a Surly tone, hey I my Lady you are Soon returned frorn your visit: : make Short of my story, my Lady, and Mr. Martin Soon took their leave, but I thought my Lord behaved very, D 6 differ 
* letter does not appear. 
( 84) 
different to what he has done since we have been married, but still I imputed it to his not being well, ho>vever, yesterday Martin came to breakfast: after our repast, my Lord took up the news paper, and I went to my tambour. We had not been in this situation above a quarter of an hour, when a Servant entering, told my Lord, a gentleman begged to Speak to him directly. A tew minutes after he had quitted the room, Martin came, and drew his chair close to mine, under a pretence of examining my work. At last he broke forth, don’t you think my lord’s cold continues bad a long time, madam? why, indeed 
( 85) 
deed (replied 1) I am very uneasy about him, I wlfh I could persuade him to have Some advice. I lifted up my eyes from my work, and was Surprised to See with what concern he looked. Good God! my blood boils at the artful diftembler; but to go on — what a pity So much innocence Should be deceived? muttered he to himself. You, my dear, may think how this amazed me; and more So, when taking my hand, good Heavens! madam, what would I give if he was here? Interrupted by a Servants coming in, who announced Mrs. Sedly, I cried with Some haste, where is your master, John? he is with Mr. Boyle, still, 
madam. 
( 86) 
madam. Mr. Boyle! repeated Martin, then I am betrayed. With these words, he ran out of the room. I had hardly time to recollect myself, when my Lord entered, followed by another gentleman. He flew to me, exclaiming, at the same time time, my God! how could I a moment doubt you? Where is that villain? cried he: here, my dear, (presenting me with two letters) read these, and it will explain the vile plot. The letters I enclose for your perusal, Emily, and when you have read them, tell me if ever you heard Such a villainous Scheme. How it will be concluded, I know not; but as Soon as it is decided, 
will 
( 87) 
will write again : Adieu, for the present. 
your’s 
C Carleton 
L E 
( 88) 
LETTER XX 
THE SAME TO THE SAME. 
My dear Emily, 
(j O O D God! How have I been alarmed for my hiisband’s life. The wretched Martin is no more : as Soon as I had finished my last, I went downstairs, and found Mr. Boyle in the parlour, with a letter in his hand; but on my entering, 
I he 
( 89) 
he hastily put it into his pocket, and Soon afterwards quitted the room. I, for my part, was alarmed, for fear my Lord Should challenge Martin, as he went out in the morning, and has not yet returned. I Sent for Mrs. Rawdon, and Mrs. Sedly, (as for Sir Edward, and Lady Baltimore, they are Set off for their country Seat.) Think how happy it made me; when my Lord came home to dinner, he brought Mr. Boyle with him. I asked Several questions about Martin, but my Lord evaded them all. About eleven Mr. Boyle took his leave, as my Lord could not per suade him to accept of a bed in our 
house( 
() 
house. We Soon afterwards retired ourselves; but So many ideas crowd ed into my mind, that I could not get to Sleep for two or three hours. At length, my Lord finding me So uneasy, told me, that Martin had decamped, but that he and Sedly had Sent in Search of him. Though I did not much believe this, yet it quieted me for the present, and I Soon afterwards fell asleep;; my God I think how alarmed I must be, when waking, about six o’clock, I found my Lord not there. I rang for my maid, and had just hurried on my clothes, when I heard a knocking at the street door. I flew downstairs, expecting every 
moment 
( 9j) 
moment to see my hushand’s corps, but just as I got to the bottom of the' stairs, he stew to me, crying, why are you out of your bed at this time, my angel? My God! are you Safe, Said I? He tried to put me back, but turning my head towards the. door, 1 Saw Martin brought in, to all appearance dead, 
. between the Servants. I Saw no tmore, as the sight quite overpowered me. When I recovered, I found myself on the bed, my hus band by me. I begged him to tell me the particulars, which he did, in the following manner. I Sent a note (Said he) to Martin, to desire he would meet me in hyde park, at 
five 
( 92) 
five o’clock this morning. I got there about half past four, but was Surprised to See two men fighting, which I Soon discovered to be Martin and Boyle. Just as Sedly and I came up, Martin received a thrust in his fide, and instantly dropped, crying, all is over with me, Boyle. You are clear; I provoked you to fight. This, my dear, is all I know. I asked him, if the poor wretch was dead, he Said, he was. The next morning Mr. Boyle gave me the following letter; 
To 
( 93) 
To R. Boyle, E s q. 
BOB, as you have thought fit. to act as you have done, your life shall pay for it, therefore meet me tomorrow, in hyde park, by four o'clock. 
tour’s. 
T. Martin, 
Mr. Boyle went as he directed him, and then followed what I have already related. Mr. Boyle is honourably acquitted, but talks of going abroad. Good God I my 
dear 
( 94) 
dear Emily, if this vile Scheme had taken place, what must have become of me. It has really Shocked me So much, I don’t know when I Shall come to myself. We Set off next Sunday for Carleton abbey, where all our friends are to join us, and if my dear Emily has any regard for me, stie will come like wsife. 
Adieu, my dear friend 1 your’s Sincerely, 
C Carleton. 
LET( 
() 
LETTER XXI 
HON. LADY CARLETON, 
- T 0 
MISS MILFORD. 
I Need not tell my dear Emily, how loth I was to part with her. We Shall now in a very Short time Set off for London, for the winter. I hope now, my friend, my happi nefsis complete, as my Lord Seems quite content with me and our 
Sweet 
( 9«) 
Sweet little boy, who grows charmingly; we have already made a I match for him and little miss Sedly, ' As for Lady baltimore’s Edward, he is to wait for my little girl; fo you see, my dear, we have Soon matched our children:, as for Mr. and Mrs. Rawdon, I have the pleasure ^ tell you, they seem to have over | the loss of their Sweet little girl, pretty well. — I have nothing more to add, therefore adieu, my dear Emily, and believe me to be, 
yonr’s sincerely, 
C Carleton. 
L E T( 
() 
L E T E R XXII 
MISS MILFORD 
TO THE 
HON. LADY CARLTON. 
HOPE your Ladyship is So well afsured of my friendship, that you will believe me sincere, when I declare I rejoice at yoiir happiness in posi'effing the affection of your Lord, and the pleasing prospect of V an heir to his estate and title. — vol. II E Mr. 
t 98) 
Mr. Boyle has paid me a visit, and related the unfortunate adventure between him and the villain mar tain, in fo humane, and at the Same time manly a style and manner, that I must own prejudiced me not a little in his favour. Though I am So unfashionably religious and impolite as not to approve of duelling, I thiirk, if excuse can be admitted, Boyle stands justifiable in ridding society of a wretch, whose glory it was to stab the reputation, and wound the peace of a profested friend. A man, who from a real principle of feeling can thus stand forth to vindicate the wrongs' of others, must be a respectable mem i flier 
( 99) 
ber of Society, and I am inclined to think, cannot fail of making a gpod husband. To be plain, my dear, the beauties of boyle’s mind have attached me to his person, and I perceive a kind of refistlefs penchant for the fellow. I beg you would not by any means disclose the Important Secret, lest the hero should grow proud of a conquest, and play the tyrant, which in love is, of all the whims of pashon, most tormenting. — Commend me to all friends; to Lord Carleton in particular; and believe me to be 
your’s most sincerely. 
Emily Milford. E 2 LET( 
() 
LETTER XXIII 
HON. LADY CARLTON 
T « 
MISS MILFORD. 
My dear emily’s friendly and Sensible letter, gave me the greatest pleasivire and fatlsfadlion, as I sincerely wlih the merited fate of a wrthlefs individual may bring about the union of two Such re 
fpectabie 
( 
I 01 
) 
Spectable characters as Mr. Boyle and miss Milford. — To be happy in the married state, great men tell us, there must be a similarity in general opinion: I must own 1 was not guided by that maxim, when I gave my hand to Lord Carlston; but I am now covinced, that if ever love made a convert from gallantry to constancy, his Lordship is as errant an husband as ever was ridiculed by the wit of libertine, and stands a living proof of the old adage, “that a reformed rake makes “the best of husbands— — day, as you may remember you wrote me from Bath, was to join six of the most amiable people in E 3 the 
( 102) 
the world : that day happily arri^ ^' ed, and I hope from the respect I bear the parties, will long be held' Sacred to the anniversary of conjugal biiss. When, when. Shall I have the pleasure of congratulating, my dear Emily, on the like happy occasion? You enjoin me to secrecy as to your penchant fox Boyle; but if I remember right, or can judge of the Sex from my own feelings, you muss give mb leave to put my own construdlon upon your request; and, from reversing the matter, take the first opportunity of hinting to Mr. Boyle, that he has had the honour of being mentioned with respect by 
miss 
() 
Mlfs Milford. 1 will pledge my veracity on the effect of the hint, for I am persiiaded a man of boyle’s principle and discernment, cannot be inattentive to the notice of a lady, possessed with the highest: mental and personal endowments. 
I remain ypur’s, cc. 
Carleton. 
E 4 
L K T( 
() 
LETTER XXIV 
HON. LORD CARLETON 
T 0 
ROBERT BOYLE, ESCL 
Dear Bob, 
As you know I am dwindled into a very husband, you will not be Surprised at my immediate compliance with the request of a wife. It Seems her good friend Emily 
Milford, 
( J) 
Milford, has taken Some pains to disclose to her, in confidence, a Sneaking kindness for Bob Boyle, and no less pains to enjoin her to fecresy. — My Charlotte, who is not wanting in the discernment of female finefie upon love occasions, immediately Saw through the artful guise, gave Emily to understand She perfectly comprehended her meaning, which, under the influence of the little blind boy, generally Substitutes no for a.yq; and assured her she would take the sirst opportunity of hinting the matter to the object of her regard, conscious that a man of boyle’s good sense and ingenuous principles E 5 could 
() 
could not be unaffected by So re spectable a prepoffefiion in his favour. Some unknown cause having deprived us of the pleasure of a visit from our good friend and Social companies For a few days; Tady Carleton grew extremely anxious for freeing her dear Emily from a very disagreeable state of fufpense, and requested me to represent to you the opinion conceived by the young Lady in your favour; hoping, in consequence, to transmit Such intimation as might afford the agreeable prospect of a return of affection This, then, is the Sum and Substance of the present epistle, it is brief and concise, 

( lo;) 
cise, though highly important and interesting; and though easily joined, we cannot be disjoined but by death, requires deliberation and Serious attention. 
I am. 
your’s sincerely. 
'Carleton, 



( los) 
LETTER XXV 
ROBERT B O Y L E, E S Q. 
TO THE 
K Ok - ^. 
HON. LORD C A R L E T O N. 
Dear George, 
Y OUR last favour Surprises me as much as it puzzles me to an swer. Little did I think that on putting a period to the existence of au’rastiistin, I should commence the 
ra( 
() 
of love. Indeed I discovered Some faint blushes in the countenance of the lovely Emily, on my recital of the unfortunate rencounter;, but this r^ttributed rather to a noble and generous impulse, than any prepossession in my favour. — Had I conceived the cause, as I have the Satisfaction to find from your representation it really was; I Should have improved it to every advantage, for I console myseif in the very idea' of reciprocal affection with fo'dovely, and So respectable an object. Your Lordship is a living, a glaring proof of the influence of beauty ihiited to virtue t, you have ransacked the world 
in 
() 
ill quest of personal charms, which you no Sooner enjoyed, than the appetite palled, and by that means you was incefsantly harrasted with continual pursuit. Now you have cast anchor, and repose on the downy pillow of virtuous’love. I have had my youthful follies, and my youthful Sallies, and most ingenuously own, that I wisti to be indissolubly tied by the Gordian knot of one object. My better stars through your direction, point to the lovely Emily Milford; nor will I lose a moment in conveying the Sentiments of my heart to the adorable fair. In a Short 
Space 
( III) 
Spiice you may, perhaps, hail me as Benedick the married man. 
I am 
Your lordfliip^s Humble Servant, 
R. Boyle. 
^ njcuc'rr V', 
Y 1,; : 
LET( 
() 
L E T T T E R XXVI 
R. BOYLE, ESU; ^ 
T O 
MISS MILFORD. 
Madam, 
I TAKE up my pen to write on a Subject to me entirely novel, and as I am conscious of the rectliude of my intentions, Shall wave all apology as foreign to the matter I 
wish 
( ” 3) 
wish to communicate. There may appear in my manner of address a bluntness unadapted to an humble Suitor, but when I affure you that my declaration of love proceeds from the heart, I flatter myself, if I judge rightly of your disposition, it will have a greater and more permanent effect than all the parade of Sounding epithets or flowing periods. I received the good opinion you entertain of me as communicated by Lord Carleton, with all the glow of the most exquisite sensation, and should deem myself the most obdurate of mortals, did I not endeavour at least to make an adequate return. — It is 
my 
( lu) 
my Speculative opinion that minds congenial must constitute the happiness of the matrimonial state, into which I must ingenuousty confess I had no idea of precipitating myself, till urged by the im pulse of a flattering persuasion that Miss Milford thought kindly of her humble Servant. The eventual cause of your notice I could wish had not occurred, as if I had known anything of my heart,, I hold the life of my fellow-creature as dearly as my own, and Shudder at the thought of being accessary to its depnvation : but as it proceeded from a desire of vindicating ^ injured 
() 
injured innocence, and wresting an amiable female character from the efforts of malevolent traduction, I stand justified by my own conscience, and hope it will plead my cause with the Sex in general. I have now, Madam, only to Solicit the favour of an interview, which may furnish an opportunity of enlarging on the theme, the pleasing theme barely hjnted on the present occasion. Will you deign to notice my humble request, and permit me to hope that the return of the post will convey the favour Solicited: till then, I am all impatience, for I burn with desire of celling my 
adoreable 
( ii) 
adoreable fair with what devotion, love and esteem, I am, and stiall ever remain 
Her most obedient Humble Servant, 
Robert Boyle. 
LET( 
() 
LETTER XXVII 
MISS MILFORD 
T O 
ROBERT BOYLE, ESQ, 
S I R, 
X he'polite world may deem me unfashionable in complying with a suitor’s first request; for I know most of our Sex love a good deal of courting, lest they may be thought 
too 
( n8) 
too forward. I have made up my opinion as to that matter, and am determined the law of custom Shall never bind me, unless it appear to 
I 
be founded on truth and reason. You address me with frankness and ingenuity. Your declarations Seem to be the dictates of good fcnse, honesty, and candour; and I Should think myself destitute of those feelings that are estential to human happiness, could I Suffer them to pafs by unnoticed. Air. Boyle may indulge the expectation of an interview, which in point of time de pends on himself. I persuade myself he is too much the gentleman to take an illiberal advantage of the 
open 
( ” 9) 
open behaviour of a frail female; nay I am certain, that as a man of honour, he must disdain even the thought of a base action. But why Should I surmise an improbability, or harbour a thought that Mr. Boyle can deviate from hlmsclfi Adieu to reflection. 
tour’s, 
Emily Milford. 
h B T 
C 120) 
LETTER XXVIII 
THE HON. LADY CARLETON 
T O 
MISS MILFORD. 
Well, my dear Rmily, I find the plan has Succeeded; my Lord, at my request, gave the hint to Boyle, who immediately broke through the rules of form, made the astault like a warm and pastlonate 
lover, 
() 
lover, and it Seems from what I have heard whispered among our friends, is likely to Succeed. Lady Baltimore and Mrs. Sedly did me the honour of a visit, yesterday, and made me happy beyond expression, in feeing the extreme Satisfaction they appear So evidently to deisive from their union with Sir Edward and the Colonel. The dissipated' world may laugh at the marriage bond, and libertines and coquettes may ridicule the idea of constancy; but let me tell you, Emily, that an enstaved mind is the weariest of drudges, and that there can be no real liberty, but that which results from conscious virtue — by a kind vol. 11.^ F. of 
( 122) 
of happy fatality, a Short Space of time has produced an union among a Select circle of friends, that at present Seems to promise the most agreeable consequences. We have the pleasure of congratulating each other, on our mutual bliss; and contrary to the opinion and practice of the beau monde, one object appears, to engross our attention and regard. Our visits are frequent, and we enjoy the pleasure of Society unalloyed by rancorous envy, and heightened in participating our general bliss— — - have dwelled on the Subject of matrimony;, because 1 hope my dear Emily will Soon enter into that honourable state. We I all 
( 
I 2 
) 
m 
all long to give you joy on the oc cafion, and hall the moment which you gave your hand to Mr. Boyle. — You both stand in equal esteem with your acquaintance in general, and I sincerely wish that my next epistolary address may be to Mrs. Boyle. 
I am, 
your’s most cordially, 
C Carltton. 
F a 
LET( 
() 
LETTER XXIX 
COLONEL SEDLY 
T O 
R. BOYLE, ESQ. 
Dear Bob, 
I Was extremely happy to hear at Lord carletoii’s, that you had conceived a passion for miss Milford, or rather that She had previously conceived a pafiion for you. However that circumstance may be, 
whether 
( 125) 
whether antecedent or consequent, is of no Importance; Suffice it therefore to Say, that the expected event diffuses a general joy throughout the circle of your friends. Carleton informs me, that you have indulged an humorous vein on the Subject, and talked of being hailed as Benedick the married man.' Be not dejected, Sir, upon good ground make the trial; you have lately Seen many instances of the daring attempt; and have I the consolation to add, not one of the pities have hitherto repented. Carleton is another creature, absolutely transformed, and exhibits a most striking proof of the prevalbnt influence of female merit, F 3 Indeed 
C 126) 
Indeed where there remains a Spark of ingenuity in the disposition of man, nothing can awaken his feelings So effectually, as the kind offices of an amiable woman. Sir Edward and Lady Baltimore made us happy by a visit a few days ago; we pasfed many hours in the most pleasing converse, and I reflected with Sir Edward, on the heartfelt Satisfaction, of having been providentially accessary in rescuing two most respectable female characters from a state of dependence, and advancing them to a situation in some degree equal to their wmrth. You see Bob, in matrimonial affisirs I am becorhe almost an enthusiast; my Harriot, 
by 
( 127) 
by her endearing attention, fans the flaine, So that you jxaist pardon these rhapsodical Sillies, and believe they proceed from a heart lufcepti ble. of the most pastionate im prestions. 
Adieu! 
Sedly. 
F 4 
LET( 
() 
LETTER XXX 
MRS. S E D L Y 
TO THE 
HON. MRS. RAWDON. 
My dear Louisa, 
M Y sister 1 find has been before hand with, me in acquainting you with the completion of her happiness. That information I am per suaded, you received with pleasure, 
nor 

( 129) 
nor can I admit a doubt, that you will be less delighted, when I alfiire you that the poor and once unfortunate Harriot Baltimore, is made the most blessed of women, in having been honoured with the had of Colonel Sedly — Misfortunes and disap pointments in life are irksome while we labour under them; but when the dark Scene is changed, and the face of things brightens upon us; they Serve to heighten omr felicity; for none can So truly relish the gifts of fortune, as those who have known the want of them. To persons accustomed to affluence and its concomitant accomodations, as well as respectability in early life; a reverse F 5 of 
() 
of circumstances peculiarly poignant. Of this, neither myself nor my dear Kitty could be insensible;; we reconciled matters as we could, patiently waited the event of time, and are now gratified to our most Sanguine wishes. If our trials have been Severe, our endurance has been fully repaid; and perhaps, if we had not been So particularly circumstanced, we should never have known the happiness we now So fully enjoy — Apropos, — report whispers that Mr. Boyle is on the point of marriage with our dear friend Emily Milford. It Seems she was vanquished by heroism, in the affairs of the wretched Martin. I must own 
1 wished 
( II) 
I wished to have her in the noose with the rest of us, and I fancy the period is not very distant, as I understand both parties, are equally impatient till the knot is tied. 
I am 
your’s sincerely / Sedly, 
F 6 
LETE 
)> 
LETTER xxxr. 
the HON. MRS. R A W D O N 
T O 
MRS. S E D L Y. 
My dear Harriot, 
Y O U find I take the earliest opportunity of communicating to you the infinite pleasure I feel in the t|appiness you express, from your union with^colonel Sedly — He was ever esteemed by all who knew him. 
( '33) 
a worthy character; exemplifying in his general conduct, the Soldier anti the gentleman. But, he derives the greatest honour from discerning merit, under the veil of misfortune, and raising dejected virtue to that rank it justly demands. My dear Charles has been lately very much indispofed, and 1 have laboured under the most alarming apprehensions of his loss. Good Heavens avert the fatal stroke, nor let me live to follow the bier of the most loving, and most beloved of men. But to turn from the melancholy Scene y ou intimate, that we shall shortly have ano^ier wedding, and consequentlyan opportunity 
( 134) 
tunity of congratulating our respectable friend, Emily Milford, on her nuptials with Mr. Boyle. I Sent a teard of invitation to her, this morning, and expect her company to a party at quadrille, tomorrow evening — I am told She is over head and ears in love. So that it is probable. She may be more disposed to porrr over Sonnets, than to dip into the history of the four kings. I expect Lord and Lady Carleton to be of the party, and have acquainted Lord and Lady Baltimore, if they are disengaged, that we Should be extremely happy if they would join us. You know we wave ceremony, esteeming freedom upon proper 
prin( 
() 
principles, the life and soul of Social intercourse. You will present my best respecfs to the Colonel, with sincere wishes for the perfect restoration of his health, particularly as conducive to the happiness of my dear Harriot, whose I remain 
as ever. 
L Rawdon. 
L E 
( 136) 
LETTER XXXII 
RIGHT HON. LORD CARLETON 
R. BOYLE, ESQ 
TH 
E birthday being .over, and the ceremony on that occasion pasted through, I propose in a few days with my dear Charlotte Setting off for our country Seat, in order To imbile a little fresh and fragrant air. 
1 I heard 
■ 
( 137) 
I heard lately at Colonel rawdon’s, that the day for your nuptials with the lovely Emily Milford is fixed for next week. You must therefore permit me, at the request of Lady Carleton, to desire the favour of you r Spending Some time with us, as I think nothing contributes more to advance the felicity of united lovers, than the pleasures of rural retirement. In town we are all noise, hurry, and bustle; scene continually Succeeds to scene;; have Scarce a moment to reflect; from uprising to down lying, the mind is perpetually agitated with trifles, and upon the whole my opinion, contrary to my former fen 
tlmcnis 
( 138) 
timents is, that nothing can be more irksome or palling, than the life of a man of falhlon in London — Be entreated then to join ns with your amiable bride at Carleton hall; 1 am persuaded we Shall pafs many happy hours, as I flatter myself there cannot be a doubt entertained on either fide, of the sincerity of our friendship — Lady Carleton most anxiously wishes to hail her dear Emily as Mrs. Boyle; and is induced to believe, you think every day a year, till your happiness is completed. The great world is, distracted with politics, and the gene -- ral cry is about the ins and the outs; but that is a topic on which I am 
deter( 
() 
determined never to Spend a moment’s thought. 
Providence has afforded me a competence, and I am determined to enjoy it. Adieu, ’till we have the pleasure of Seeing you and Mrs. Boyle, which we hope will be very Soon. 
b 
r • i 
I remain your’s, 
.. Carleton. 
L E 
( '40) 
LETTER XXXIII 
R B O Y L E, E S Q. 
TO THE 
RIGHT HON. LORD CARLETON. 
Dear George, 
our'warm and friendly invitation calls for the sincerest acknowledgment, which you, together with Lady Carleton, will please to accept both from me, and in behalf of my 
adorable 
( II) 
adorable Emily. We could have wished your Lordlliip and Lady, would have graced our nuptials with your presence; but as you ex press much disgull: at continuing in town, I cannot be urgent on the occasion. I perfectly coincide in opinion with you, as to the pleafuies of rural retirement; and hope shortly to have the exquisite enjoyment of the same in that particular instance to wshich you Seem to refera few days elapsed, the parade and ceremony attending those occasions will be over; indeed it is our determined resolution, to use as little as poshble. As my Emily was invited 
to be 
( h2) 
to be present at Bath, at the marriage of her three particular friends, Kitty and Harriot Baltimore, and louisa Chambers, though biisiness of importance detained her in town. I have invited those ladies, with their fpoiifes, who will compose the whole of the company. — Poor Lady Carleton (then miss Rawdon) lamented her fate in an epistle to Emily, and uttered upon the oc cestion a melancholy heigh ho! as the only one of the Rawdon family unprovided for. But now she can boast the best of husbands * glory in posteiling Such charms and Such influence, as to have made a real convert of a professed rake. 
May 
( 143) 
May your bliss be long continued and unalloyed, is the prayer of 
youi’s, 
R. Boy I E, 
LET( 
() 
LETTER XXXIV 
•MISS MILFORD 
T o 
LADY BALTIMORE. 
Thursday Noon. 
Dear Kitty, 
OT many months ago I was made happy by the joyful news of your having been wedded at Bath, to your very" t*efpectable relative Sir Edward Baltimore. The particulars 
( h5) 
, culars of the interview, and the fortunate circumstances that followed it I read as related in a letter from. Colonel rawdon’s lady to her fister in law, now the honourable spouse of Lord Carleton, in a manner which adds grace to the delicate feelings of the polite writer. It Seems, the humane design of that very benevolent lady, was to find out her two unfortunate friends in their obscurity, having received a personal defcriptlon of you, from a .gentleman of her acquaintance. She had conceived and executed the Scheme with wonderful adroitness, vol. IL G and 
( 14.6) 
and So conducted matters as to introduce Colonel Sedly in the luckiest .moment, and thereby render him the means of introducing his good friend Sir Edward Baldmore, to an unexpected interview with his lovely cousins. But why should I recount to you a story that can never iofe it’s impreshon on your mind. It is pleasing to call to remembrance the happy events of our life; you will therefore in your wonted gccd nefs of disposition, pardon a trifling digresiion — You must have heard of my penchant for Boyle; * the cause from whence it arose, and I should suppose, from your con flection 
( h7) 
tioii with Some of my bosom friends, and Its whole progress, from the hour I difclosed my passion, and received his plighted vows, to the moment in which the day was fixed for the consummation of our happiness. The business of the present epistle is to Invite you to the celebration of the nuptials, which is fixed for Saturday morning next, at ten o’clock, at St. george’s, Hanover square. No excush can be admitted, So take warning, and be prepared. I have written to Mrs. Sedly on the same business, and been as peremptory as to her compliance. Boyle requested the hog 
2 
Hour 
/ 
( h8) 
nour of carleton’s presence, with' that of his Lady, on the occasion; but on his lordfhip’s intimating great disgust at continuing any longer in town, and the Strongefl: desire of revisiting Carleton abbey/^ The request was waved, on condition that we should take the earliest op iportunity of Spending Some time with them in the country. The hour approaches that fixes my future fate; I have read, and I believe that there is no alternative in the state into which L am about to enter : it is for better and for worse: : it fb — Courage, child; I will boldly 
venture. 
( 149) 
venture, and trust my Boyle with all I hold most dear. 
Adieu, till Saturday morning. 
E. mitford. 
G 3 
L E 
( 150) 
LETTER XXXV 
I. A D Y B A L T I M Q R ET 
O 
MISS MILFORD 
My Dear Emily, 
o N E would imagine by the flights of your last, that love had affected your intellects. It is an old maxim, that there is a pl'eafnre in madness which none but mad men know S’ the Same I believe might be 
Said 
( >51 
) 
Said of love; at least the ciause might be Softened into, “there are raptures in love which none but lovers feel.” — Some little experience 1 have had myself, though I cannot boast to have Soared So high as you. 
I must candidlyown, you bring to my memory, Some agreeable events, and that I have reflected on them with heartfelt pleasure and Satisfaction, Your invitation I communicated to Sir Edward, who will do himself the honour of attending as well as your friend and humble Servant, Colonel Rawdon, and his lady are, I hope, of the partj^, they G 4 are 
C '52) 
are respectable characters, and will promote the general felicity. 
year’s, 
C Baltimore. 
L E T( 
() 
LETTER xxxvr. 
C O L O N EE. S E D E Y 
T a 
R. BOYLE, ESQ, 
Dear Bob, 
M Y Harriot has Shown me miss milford’s, polite invitation to the celebration of your intended nuptials, which I propose to myself the pleasure of attending. — Lord Carleton, I find, has declined, from, a Squeamish disgiist to this town, and all its amusements, and a de ^ G 5 ^ ter 
( 154) 
terminate resolutioii of precipitately withdrawing himself to his villa. — That new convert to constancy and Sobriety Seems to excel ns all in a rigid attachment to the rules of precision, and the pleasures of rural retirement. For my part, I Vvilh ever to avoid extremes, and as 1 would not be fantastically volatile on the one hand, So neither would I be fententiousty dull on the other. There is a mediuirr, called the golden, mean, which Should direct us in all human affairs. The advice given to Phaeton, in ovid’s Metamorphosis, is a lestbn worthy of universal attention, • — ** The middle path is the Safest.” — 4 Your 
( >55 )' 
Your lovely Emily was detained in London by Some indispenlible business, and' we were therefore deprived of the pleasure of her presence on th memorable day which jomed six warm friends III the Sacred band. Your happiness' I hope to be both eye and ear wsitnefs to r and, from a knowledge of your dispositions, entertain not a doubt of its continuance during life. I have not found. Bi'atrimony to be that frightful, thing represented in So odious a light by many; indbed, I had made up my mind both as to the resolution and the persoii before I had the least intimation of my Har g 6 ‘ riot’s. 
( *56) 
riot’s birth or connexions. If I may have been deemed by Some unguarded in an affair of the last importance, my credulity has been amply compensated, for I find in the adorable object of my choice all that my heart can wish or desire. That you may experience the Same is the fervent prayer of 
Your sincere friend, 
J. Sedly* 
t E T( 
( > 
LETTER XXXYII. 
ROBERT BOYLE, ESQ. 
T O 
COLONEL SEPLY. 
Dear Sedly, 
Wi T H this I close my epistolary correfpondencej till the dis mistal of more important matters Shall afford vacant time for resuming my pen. Well I you find your old friend will be caught in th noose at last. An heart of adamant cannot be proof against the 
arrow 
( *58) 
arrow of the little blind boy Bachelors may talk stoutly, but the stoutest will bend at the Shrine of love : don’t you think I am an expert Scholar } — It is Surprising what a rapid progress we make in any System., when prompted to the pursuit by propensity of disposition 
We have warned our friends, made every rrecestary preparation, and wait with impatience the Solemn, though joyful occasion. 
You have given me Some excellent lectures on the advantages of the married state; indeed the general happiness I have had lately '. ^ had 
( S) 
the pleasure of Seeing dlffufed throughout the circle of our friends, not only consoles me as attached to their interests, but affords me the most brilliant prospect, as to the event of the transadion in immediate view. — My dear Emily has written largely on the Subject to Lady Baltimore, with a most pressing invitation, and received in return Some very friendly and pleasant repartees, which at once indicate the good sense and candour of her ladystiip. — I need not enjoin you to punctuality in attendance, Emily having Secured that point with your Ladytherefore 
fare( 
( X 
# 
farewell till the wished morning 
arrives. 
Yours with truth,. 
R. Boyle. 
L E TV 
( ii) 
LETTER XXXVIII 
THE HON. MRS. RAWDON, 
T O 
MRS. S E D L Y. 
So, I understand, my dear Harriot, that Mr. Boyle, the gallant avenger of perfidy in friendship, is to be married in a day or two to miss Emily Milford. At the request of Hady Baltimore, She has Sent me a preliing invitation to the wedding, which I can by no means 
de( 
() 
decline; especially, as I find Sir Edward, the Colonel, and his dear Harriot are to * be of the party. 
I think, when the approaching ceremony is over, we may deem the link of friendship perfected, as there will not remain one of our juvenile intimates in the unmarried state, ^ and the Several matches have been confined within the limit of a particular circle of acquaintance. — My Colonel has been lately indisposed with a cold, but, thank Heaven, is now much better. So that I have prevailed on him to accompany me, and I think we Shall form a moil; agreeable and happy Society. -- -- -- - — The return 

C 163) 
turn of these occasions revives in the memory the Scene of our own union, and if it has proved eventually fortunate, must be attended with the most pleasing reflections. It Seems, from what I can learn, that it will be a match of inclination, not of what is falsely termed interest; from which we have every ground to congratulate the parties on the commencement of their mutual happiness. To say that those who enter into the bonds of matrimony from the Sordid principles of aggrandizing either their name or their property, are actuated by genuine motives of interest, is a groundless and absurd 
notion; 
( 1^4) 
notion; for if by interest we are to understand our present and future felicity, if minds are not congenial, real bliss must be excluded from the state, nor can the mines of Peru in that cafe procure it. — But why do I preach to you on a Subject, when I am So perfedly Convinced of your fixed opiilioii ■concerning it. If pre Sfstction, detached from every paltry idea of an inferior nature, Over joined .a happy pair, it must have been in the instance of Colonel Sedly and the amiable Harriot Baltimore, wliofe sincere friend 
Will ever remain 
Louisa rawnoni 
h n T‘ 
( i65) 
LETTER XXXIX 
MRS. S E D L Y 
T O 
THE HON. MRS. RAWDON. 
methinks, my dearest friend, I wait with the greatest Impatience for the arrival of' the happy day when we shall meet by invitation to congratulate the .gallant Colonel Sedly and his agreeable consort, on what it is to be hoped will prove the most fortunate tranf i astion 
( '66) 
action of their lives. You have favoured me with Some brief, but pertinent remarks upon the main consideration that constitutes matrimonial bliss, and I have the pleasure of being experimentally confirmed in your opinion. — You know the history of my life, which has been chequered with variety of fortune: I had been cruelly treated, together with an amiable sister, by an unfeeling relation; we were banished from the Society of our equals, consigned to a temporary oblivion, and reduced to the northeast cesiity of following an employment much inferior to our former rank, and the prospects in life we had a 
right 
( 167). 
right to entertain. In this forlorn situation the benevolent Lucy Chambers was amongst the foremost to go in quest of her unfortunate friends, at the instance of the worthy Sir Edward Baltimore. Heaven Seemed to have Smiled on the undertaking, and to have rendered your kind willies, ray dear, happily conducive to bring about a restoration to our former rank. Of your Services I Shall ever retain a most grateful sense, which, indeed, have So effectually imprested my sister, that fne hardly ever sees me without mentioning Mrs. Rawdon with the warmest regard and most profound 
respect: 
( '68) 
respect: Apropos, my sister and Sir Edward were at our house yesterday, kindly inquired, after ou and the Colonel, and Seem to promise themselves abundance of pleasure from our general interview at the wedding. -- -- -- IHAVE 
only to add, that my best wishes attend you, as 1 shall ever remain 
Yours sincerely, 
Harriot Sedly. 
LET 
(-169) 
LETTER XL 
ROBERT BOYLE, ESQ, 
T O 
THE RIGHT HON. LORD CARLETON. 
Dear George, 
J txvke the earliest opportunity of acquainting you, that my happiness is at length completed, being postested of the treasure of my Seul, and the enjoyment of 
all I hold dear. -- -- -- Many former 
events in life havq affordest me fatisfactlon, but never did I expe vol.1l* H rience 
( lyo) 
rieiice Such heartfelt pleasure as upon the late occasion. Sir Edward and Lady Baltimore, Colonel 
and Mrs. Sedly, Colonel and Mrs. Rawdon, did us the honour of 
their presence, and Seemed to partake most Sensibly of the general 
joy. -- -- Our friends exhibit the 
/ 
most striking examples of matrimonial bliss, and I hope we Shall add to the number of those vyho, freed from the dlfquietudes of roving life, centre their affection on one object, and calmly repose on the downy pillow of virtuous love. — Lord Mourland favoured me with a congratulatory line from the country; he Seems of late to hate 
Seceded 
() 
Seceded from the Society of his former acquaintance; and I have observed in him, since the marriage of the lovely louisa Chambers with Colonel Rawdon, a kind of affected reserve and distant behaviour, wsithout being able in any degree to account for the cause. I hope he posteffes too good a heart to envy the happiness of a worthy couple, for whom he professed the sincerest fisiendlhip; if So, his malevolence will be amply retaliated on himself; for envy, of all the baser pastions, is the 
most tormenting. -- -- -- As Soon as 
I can arrange matters in town, we stiall do ourselves the pleasure Hz of 
( ri)) 
accepting your kind invitation to carleton abbey. A little country air will be Salutary, and the pleasing reflections which rural retirement naturally' Suggests, contribute not a little to enhance the pleasures of the mind. My dear Emily joins me in respectful compliments to Eady Carleton, and I have the honour to Subscribe myself 
Your Lordihip's 
Most obedient Servant, 
Robert Boyle, 
LET( 
() 
\ 
LETTER XLI 
THE RIGHT HON. LORD CARLETON, 
T O 
ROBERT BOYLE, E S 
Dear Bob, 
Yo UR late friendly epistle afforded me the extremest Satisfaction, as it communicated the com' ' of your happiness, on which Lady Carleton desires to join me in the warmest congratulations. — I cannot allow myself to attribute the cause of Lord mourland’s H 3 re Serve 
( 174) 
reserve and moroseness to an envious disposition, because I think him too noble of Soul to harbour in his breast So vile a fiend as that despicable pastion. It is, iti my opinion, a kind of constitutional foible, which occasionally breaks forth; though 1 must hold any man culpable who does not use every effort to fuppress it. We Shall expect your arisival, with your amiable consort, at carleton abbev, every day, where nothing will be wanting that can contribute to your accommodation or felicity. We have Some singular characters about us, that will afford you entertainment ayid probably Some 
m' 
'{) 
instruction, 'Our curate, to whom I give a general invitation, is a man every way vvortliy of notice and regard : He is a gentleman, a Scholar, and a Christian, and exemplifies in private life the precepts he publicly recommends to the practice of others: His family is large, and his income very narrow, as he labours under the op prestion of a dignified pluralist, whose duties he performs in two parishes for the Scanty pittance of forty pounds a year, though the amount of the living produces the unworthy postestbr more than eight hundred; neyerthelefs, my good friend is chearfui and resigned, H 4 being 
( 
176) 
being blessed with that patient fub mifiion and unaffected humility So very rarely to be found amongst the gentlemen of the gown. — Such a man I hold it my bounden duty to venerate and cherlfh, as well as to contribute in Such proportion as my fortune will reasonably admit, towards his comfortable and respectable Support. Tady Carleton, ever disposed to acts of generosity, as well as attentive to real merit, concurs with me in that opinion, and omits no kind offices to evince her regard and esteem. But of this you will judge better when we have the 
pleasure to see you. -- -- -- -- - On the 
law 11 
( 177) 
lawn that leads to my house lives a musty old bachelor, whose niggardly soul would never Suffer him to take a female companion, while the absurd and groundless apprehension of living long enough to want will notr permit him to. take the comforts of life : Hb exists neither for himself nor Society, ai very cumberer of the earth; and as. his Suspicion and mistrust will not let him dare to venture his adored mammon in the public funds, it. is locked in. an iron chest,, which attrafls his Soul as the magnet does the steel, nor can he rest a. moment at ease if it is out of his sight. — When H 5 the 
( 178) 
the grim king of terrors Snatches Such a mortal from this Scene of existence, it will prove a stroke not inimical to the interests of humanity, as his present useless hoard may probably devolve to a poffestbr who will appropriate it to laudable purposes. — You will pardon the prolixity of this letter, in which I have branched out into Some wild Sallies of fancy. My present situation affords me time to ruminate on a diversity of Subjects, and 1 think this unbounded freedom of communicating our Sentiments, the life of epistolary correspondence : A mere adherence to prescribed rules, modes, and I forms, 
( *79) 
forms, can never'please the fancy, nor warm the heart; while the indulgence of an exuberant imagination may produce Such ideas as. shall furnish a rich repast for the mind, and in a very estentlal degree realise friendly intercourse in' the personal abfence. ^but, wishing the Speedy presence of Mr. and; Mrs. Boyle, 
I remaiiv 
Sincerely yours,, 
,. Gf C ABLE TONNE, 
■ ■ Tj? 
H 6 
L E T( 
( > 
LETTER XLII 
LADY BALTIMORE, 
T O 
MRS. BOYLE. 
My dear Emily, 
J WOULD not interrupt your felicity by obtruding any trifles of my Scattered imagination upon your attention, which for foitie days past has doubtless been engrossed by more agreeable as wtu* as important, objects. But, as I 
have 
() 
have an Interest in your welfare, and a peculiar pleasure in your frlendfhip, could no longer defer an anxious inquiry after your health, as well as that of Mr. Boyle, Tor whom, as the partner of my Emily, I hold the greatest respect, -- -- Colonel Sedly is promoted 
to the rank of lieutenant-general, and appointed to go out as Second in command of the company’s forces in the East-indies. My poor sister was struck with a panic at the first intimation of this affecting circumstance; which, though it may estentially redound to their wordly interest, threatens a temporary if not lasting • 
fepa* 
( i82) 
Separation from the man of her heart, and cannot, therefore, but fill her mind with the most perplexing apprehensions. — Love generally blinds us to refiestion, and Sometimes renders us deaf to the dictates of reason;; when a girl becomes enamoured of a naval or military hero, She little thinks of the precarious tenure by which She holds his person, and he his 
life. When the knot is tied, and 
\ 
a few months, and Sometimes, perhaps, a few years, have pasted in mutual bliss, a mandate is istued for his abrupt departure: Honour and interest are So concerned, that he cannot decline the enterprise, 
:? .•; and 
() 
and a gloom overspreads their minds, on the idea of being thus torn from each others arms. — 1 have used every effort to console heron the occasion; She Seems rather more reconciled than at the first news; and, as She and the Colonel will dine with us tomorrow, we Should be glad to see Mr. and Mrs. Boyle. I remain as ever, 
Sincerely yours, 
C Baltimore, 
L K 
( '84) 
LETTER xliir. 
SIR EDWARD BALTIMORE 
T O 
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL SEDLY. 
Westbury Park. 
Dear Sedly, 
By a letter from your lady to Lady Baltimore, I have the pleasure of hearing of your promotion on the one hand, and the mortification of learning that you are Shortly. to leave us, and many more friends, 
on 
( i85) 
oh the other. I must own it is the common fate of a Soldier, and doubt not, but you will meet the Same with that intrepidity and resolution becoming your character. Poor dis confolate Harriot is the chief object of my pity and concern; and her sister’s sympathy affects me at times So Sensibly, that I almost sink into a melancholy despondence. Man being naturally more robust of frame. Seems constitutionally difposed to Sustain the strokes of precarious events; while the other Sex, of most delicate form and habit, cannot but sink under the presture of those circumstances, which immediately ii^rest their teaderest feelings. 
If 
( i86) 
If you have a few days to Spare, let us See you both at Westbury Park; if otherwise, write me by return of post, and I will come to towm immediately; for my dear Kitty cannot rest night nor day, till She has an opportuntity of attempting at least, to con Sole her lovely sister, on the melancholy occasion. 
I find also by your lady’s letter, that her newly married friend, Mrs. Boyle ismuchhurtat thisunexpected event, as indeed are our friends in general. But I would by no meanssug gest a hint that Should tend to unman the Soldier, the preservation of whole 
honour ought to be his main, 
prill 
C '8;) 
principal concern : when his country’s Service calls him forth, and singles him out for action, he will be deaf to every insinuation that can enervate his resolution, or abate his zeal for the glorious cause, I %vait with impatience for your answer, as to determine my stay or departure, and am with truth, 
your’s, 
Ed. Bai timore. 
LET( 
() 
xliy. 
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL SEDLT^ 
T 0 
SIR EDWARD BALTIMORE. 
. Dear Ned, 
Your Spirited remarks on the unexpected event that has So much alarmed our friends in general, .have added vigour to my resolution, and fortified me against the instaence of my tenderer feelings, considered as 
referring 
( isp) 
referring to my parting with the object of my finceresl and most affectionate attachment. 
When I enrolled my name in the military list, I did it not rashly, without well deliberating on the consequences of the station into which I was about So voluntarily to enter. It was the object of my choice, I felt an irresistible impulse to signalise myself in the Service of my country. ■ Some laurels I have acquired, and Shall I tarnlsh them by receding, when the^honour So recently conferred. Should prompt me to the pursuit of glory with re ^doubled alacrity? I love my friends and am happy in their foclety; I 
adore 
( 19°) 
adore my amiable Harriot, and will ever hold her nearest my heart; but I cannot fink the man in the husband, or resign the Soldier but with life. 
I now have given you both as brother and friend, the Slate of my opinion and resolution. In terms which I conceive to be the most explicit; your own good sense and judgement will make the Inference. As it will be rather inconvenient for us to come down to Westbury Park, having numberless preparations to make, and matters to Settle prevsiousty to my embarkation, which I suppose will be in the course of a month; you will do us the favour 
to 
C 19') 
to come up to town, where you will have it in your power to render us many kind offices; and particularly to fortify in Some degree the mind of my Harriot, for the trial under which Site must unavoidably pafs. We are with love and respect, 
Most sincerely yours, Sedly. 
L E X( 
() 
LETTER XLV 
MRS. BOYLE 
TO H H E 
HON. MRS. R A W D O, N. 
Caileton Abbey. 
My dear Louisa, 
ERE am I, with my dear Bob, to contemplate in retirement the pleasures that flow from mutual affection. Carleton, from a professed rake, is absolutely become 
both 
^ 193) 
both a natural and moral philoso pher. He is continually giving us lectures upon everything almost we See and hear; and indeed I must own there occurs a great variety of Subjects that may well be improved to the purposes both of entertainment and instruction. * The Spring begins to peep forth, and as the weather of the last two months has been uncommonly Severe, the country people hope their expectations will not be frustrated by a future blight. If the weather admit we commonly ride out or walk in the garden for an hour or two in the warmest part of the day; if otherwise, Lady Carleton, vol. III who 
94 
who has an excellent voice and admirable singer, entertains us with a Song accompanied on the harpsichord. After dinner, the usiial themes are our flights of youth, tales of gallantry, love adveikures, c. between each of which are occasionally introduced Sonnets adapted to the particular Subjects. Lady Carleton frequently entertains lis with a detail of my lord’s attempting to carry her off, with the interposition of her brother on the oocafion; and embellishes her Slories with a number of pleasing anecdotes and pertinkity reflections. — • There is a clergyman, the curate of the paiilh, who contributes 4.. greatly 
( >95) 
greatly to our ainusement. He ia mail learned without pedantry, polite without affectation, and religious without ostentation or 'bigotry; — His conyersation Savours of wit .and. humour, but is never frothy, frivolous, or immoral. Thus we pafs our time in innocent recreation; and the variation of the 
< - ' A AS ■ t * 
scene from the noise, bustle, and parade of the town, proves extremely agreeable both as to the state of body and mind, wdiich arc very sensibly relieved, by thus de verfifying the objects of pursuit, ^ — Upon our return to London, we Shall take the first opportunity of paying our respects in person to I z ' Colonel 
( 196) 
Colonel and Mrs. Rawdon, till when I remain with most cordial wishes, for your welfare and prosperity. 
\ 
Your most humble Servant, 
Emelia Boyle, 
LET 
( ' 197) 
LETTER XLVI 
THE HON. MRS. R A W D O N. 
^ o 
MRS. BOYLE. 
It always gives me, my dear Emily, a Sensible pleasure to hear of every event, circumstance, and situations life, that Seems to increase your happiness and promote your interest. You have now quitted 
(;) 
ted the busy Scene, and are sola cing y^urself with the man of your heart, in the innocent and agreeable recreations of the country. — But from the respect I bear yon, I must be free enough to disclose, that I cannot admit of Lord and Lady carleton’s eijgroffing the company and Society of our friends, and expect to see you Soon at raw don Place, whither we repair next week. 1 have been informed that 
L \ • 
Colonel Sedley is promoted; tol; the rank of Lieutenant-general, and appointed Second in command of the cornpany’s forces in the East Indies,, for which quarter he; is. to embark in the course of a month. 
— This 
C '99) 
— This must be. an affecting stroke i to our dear Harriot, who had, doubtlefsj promiffd herself a considerable Series of uninterrupted enjoyment in the agreeable Society of the man, to wshom stie is tied by the most Solemn and indiltoluble bands. I find he is inflexibly bent to: plirfue* his fortune in the East, and that entertaining the nicest fense of honour as a Soldier, no argument can prevail with him to decline the enterprise; however I am determined to do all 1 can to render this unavoidable and poignant, event as tolerable as postible to his amiable lady: pray let me I 4 hear 
( 200 X 
hear from you Shortly, and see you as Soon as convenient, and believe me to be with unfeigned respect, 
't ■■ 
- i - '. N • ^ 1 N.;. i d ■ 
■ r ■ ■ ''! 
^ ' 
Louisa Rawdon. 
i.j, io, i. i 'di. i 
• : - .d ‘ I • 
» 
* ■ ' - 
L E T' 
*' () 
LETTER XLVJ^ 
LADY BALTIMORE 
T O 
MRS.. S E D L E Y. 
London. 
My dearest Sister, 
I NEED not tell you how sincerely I Sympathise .with you on the unfortunate event that calls for the absence of your best: friend and dearest companion. We made no delay in hurrying up to town, I 5 though 
( 202) 
though if matters could have been accomiuodated, Should much rather have Seen you both at Westbury Talk. From the letters which pasted between Sir Edward and the General, I find no consideration or persuafion prevail with him to decline the expedition. Sir Edward, though much attached to bis friendship and company, applauds his resolution as a man and a Soldier, and would by no means be accef sary to any instance that might Sully the reputation lie has acquired, or cast the Shadow of an impeachment on his courage or hk honour 
It 
( 203) 
It is hard, * I am persuaded, to reconcile a fond woman to the absence of the object of her affection; but We cannot love a ’man truly or' finderelj, without being tenacious of his' character; I mean as persons of rank, who regard aii elevated station in life from proper principles. — You will say, it is easy for people not immediately interested in those very nice and delicate con cernsv to give advicebut extremely difficult for those who are affected in the most feeling and exquisite manner to take it. I grant the truth of those remarks down by myself to obviate 16 your 
( 204 
your complaint. Biit there is on maxim I have to recommend to your observation and practice, which is, that it is at once our duty and interest, and consequently estential to our happiness, to Submit to Such dispensations of Providence, as cannot be adverted, nor repine at circumstances which come within the the sc?le of onr particular situation in life. — Commend me to the General, together with Sir Edward, and asiiire him, that we expect the pleasure of your company to dinner to* morrow; on which occasion, as we Shall have matters to deliberate on, that immediately 2 i affect 
C *°5) 
affect oiirselves in a relative capacity; care will be taken that there may be no interruption from pro misquous visitors. 
I am, most truly, 
Your affectionate sister, 
C Baltimore. 
L E 
( 2o6) 
i i > 
"LETTER xlvlil. 

ff / nf 
MRS, S E D L E Y 
i ‘l ' 
T a 
LADY BALT I M OR Dear Sister,, 
THANK you for the advice contained in your last, and will endeavour to follow it as far as the; force of my affection will permit.. There is much truth and reason I cgnfefs in what you lay down for 
my 
207) 
my observation and practice; but what can frail woman do, alas \ under the power of an uncontrollable pafiion? Lord Baltimore is doubtless the best of men^and husbands;; when he took you, he well knew your birth, rank, and former circumstances; nay, he was even your near relation. Not So the generous, the liberal, the benevolent Sedley, who knew neither my rank, character, nor former situation;; offered me his hand from the most distinguished principles, and took me as a child of misfortune, helpless and forlorn; — and then can it be posfible I Should, for one moment, lose a due sense of the inestimable merit of 
my 

( 2o8) ^ 
my patron, protector, nay I will add at once, husband and father? forbid it duty; forbid it gratitude— — I must crave your pardon for the warmth of expression into which I am hurried, by the prevalence of an unconquerable attachment, and believe that I will summons all the fortitude I can muster to bear the ills of fortune (forfuch I must call the late incident and its consequences) becoming a woman; more cannot be done. The General presents his respects, and will, with me, attend you to morrovy. 
I am your’s affectionately, ' 
Har. Sedley. 
LET. 
C 209) 
L E T T 6 R XLIX 
A A 
- / / ’ ■ rriv^ un ' U 0 Y L U. \ 
t •. ©'lft' ^ : ■ I 
o 
'i. - .V.. 'f ■ ' ■ '. 
D 'W A R D B A IT 0 R E. 
7f;. 
h illr.; 

-. d€arned, LO i rnc « • 
■ h > V 7 *: rvc7 rii C " ^ 
As I find the clrcumftance of of your brother in law’s speedy de pature for, the East Jndies has brought you to town, I dhali sake the earliest opportunity of paying 
you 
( 210) 
you my respects, together with Mrs. boyle’s. Sedley, I am hippy to hear, bears the idea of his approaching Separation with a Spirit he has ev6r Supported, worthy of his character— — is an amiable enchantingc ereature beyond doubt, and it requires a degree of philofdpfsyj^'as Avbll as magiianimi ty, to leave So precious a treasure— — yet pafised the honey moon; and I caiistoti answer for myself in what manner I Should be affected, or how I ‘ Should ^ actiir So trying a situation. My heart at present is Hvetted to my Tmily';! however, - wshy shoult I luppbfe ’ am 1 - si s ‘’event' 
( 21 I) 
eyeht which ill my circumstanced cannot pofstbly befall, me? wbatr ever mayibe rpy ppinioii or resolution as to. myfplf in Such. a * ]case | isedley’slconduct must be uiniverfally approved, or justifiable upon every •principle ^ofifionour and justice,. i. We Spend o; ar time very 'agreeably here; Lord - ■ kid jlhdy Carletdn are extremely. obliging, and do every thin’gi sill: theiripower to render our sttuaitihniperfeistly liappy; ^ ithe iaii*' itete pbfiestesi’ vaisiotid v requisttes t6‘ "divert and enteftaiil*: She stng^welh, plays admirably on the harpsichord and guittar, and tells 'a story with infinite grace, ' humour' aiid spmt 
in 
( 212) 
in Short, her Ladyship is the life of the company. There is st peculiar gratification in shifting the Scene; which from long continuance ever palls and disgusts ime, 'whether it be the pompous parade and bustle of the toiwn; or the still and peaceful Solitude of there country. Tis novelty and v^iety that give .a zest to enjpjment, as 'niust appear evidently from the active nature of the mind of mali We shall be in town, in a fewdays„ when X shall do myself the; pleasure of waiting on you, and hope to take my good friend the General by the hand, and hejirtily wish him success on 
his 
( 2'3) 
his departure. Commend me to your Lady and all friends, and believe me to be 
Your most obedient Servant, 
R. Boyle. 
4 r i 
LET( 
() 
LETTER L 
"i. V - : ■. L 'ri.. 
EDWARD BALTIMORE 
./ 
T O 
R. BOYLE, ESQ 
1 Rejoice, my dear Sir, to find you are So agreeably situated, together with your lovely louisa, in 'the mansion of the Lord of Carleton Abbey, However I cannot help observing, that you Seem rather 
partial 
( 215) 
partial to his lordlmp, from your long eontinuaiice on that Spot. Mrs. Rawdon hinted to us, by means of a friend of her’s who lately Called with her coi^plimeiits and those of the Colonel 4 that She could not approve of his lord ship’s engrossiiig your company, and titerefore expected tp.tee you Shortly at > Rawdon; iplace.. ' Upon myishohbur, ' as ydu ishare the regard ’and esteem of your Lriends in generar, -.! must frankly sdeclafei you. 'Should divide your visits, and let them all haves a part. This promised, you must permit me to prefer my claim, and require your pretence by vturn, either in town or 
at 
() 
at Westbury Park. — I can Vouch for myself, and aiiswer for Lady Baltimore, that we are as fingerely concerned for your welfare nd happlnefs, as any of your most Sanguine friends. Pray, then, let me have an opportunity of testifying the same. My brother Sedley is in high Spirits, and extremely active in.making the lieceflary preparations, — I hope it will prove one of the hapfiiest events of his life, and that he will return to embrace his beloved Harriot, laden with wealth and honour. 
Adieu, 
E. Baltimore. 
LET( 
() 
LETTER LI 
LADY CARLETON 
T O 
THE HON. MRS. R A W D O N. 
Carleton Abbey. 
My dear Sister, 
A Considerable time has eiapsed since I had the pleasure of Seeing you, which has often cast a gloom over our Scenes of mirth and conviviality. Our intimacy was heightened by the most agreeable and pleasing vol. II K inter( 
() 
before we became related by marriage; let us not then resemble the too fashionable part of the world, by growing distant be ^ caused allied by the ties of consanguinity. The Sudden departure of General Sedly, will bring Colonel Rawdon to town, I suppose, in order to take leave of his gallant friend; you will of course accompany him: this I believe, 'will be the case with my Lord; if it should, the Same circumstances will bring me np likewise. 
We have had the new married couple with us. Some time, and I hear many of our and their acquaintances 
( 2 19) 
tances are not a little piqued at the same; but as the like occasion will, I think, produce their removal, it will, I hope, obviate every disa greeable prejudice that might interrupt that unanimity that has long prevailed, and I trust, will continue amongst general friends, apparently attached from the most liberal and disinterested principles. Mr. and Mrs. Boyle are a very agreeable couple, and Seem formed by fimi ilarity of disposition to render each other mutually happy. When in town, they will be free to the invi f tatlon' of their other friends, who may then embrace the opportunity .K a of 
( 220) 
of their company. Sir Edward and Lady Baltimore will doubtless be too much taken up with the immediate concerns of their relation. General Sedly, on the point of departing, to enter into any parties, or give invitations for Some time at least; you may therefore without infringing the rule of decorum, request their company at Rawdon Place on your return. If you can bring this about, I will immediately join you with Lord Carleton, in which cafe, I think we may promise ourselves abundance of pleasure. Present our kind love to my brother. 
( 2 2 r) 
there, and believe me to be, my dear louisa., ^ ’ 
tour’s 
Charlotte Carleton. 
K 3 
LET( 
() 
LETTER LII 
THE HON. MRS. RAWDON 
T 0 
1. A D Y carletoni 
My dear Charktiej 
Imagine not that any 
which might escape me in the hour of levity, was dictated by an undue regard and esteem for friends in general, or to those to whom I alu attached by Such ties as must 
ever 
( 223) 
ever bind me to them in particular. From our first acquaitance, you k; iow, there was a kind of flighty humour of disposition about me, which I could never throw entirely off; it will Sometimes prevail still: So much you will permit me to offer, and request you to receive by way of apology, in which with those 1 truly respect, I cannot bear prolixity. I think the similar resolution of the parties to come up to town, to pay their compliments to the General on his departure, does them honour and him justice. He is a man of a most amiable charadf er, has given a noble proof of his disin k 4 terested 
( 224) 
terested affection, in the instance of the lovely Harriot Baltimore; and in every respect deported himself in a manner becoming the gentlemen and the Soldier. 
Your advice concerning the invl tation of the new married couple, 1 Shall take the earliest opportunity of embracing; and Shall be happy by the fulfilment of your promise, on which, from your former punctuality, I place the firmest reliance. Nothing can afford me more Supreme delight than to recognise former Scenes of youthful frolic and levity, and from the early state of our friendship, I trust its period will 
not 
( 225) 
not end but with life, as I feel I must ever remain 
your’s 
Most truly, 
Louisa Rawdon, 
K 5 
1 E T 
226 
LETTER LIII 
SIR EDWARD BALTIMORE 
T O 
COLONEL rawdoni 
Dear Charles, 
U R kind and generous instance of quitting the pleasures of rural retirement, and coming to town with no other view than that of taking my brother Sediy by the hand, at his leaving us, I confider; 
as 
( 227) 
as a favour done to me, being fo intimately connected with him, both as relation and friend. Next Sunday he Sets off for Portsmouth, in order to embark. I shari therefore Send cards of invitation to our little Select party, to dine with me on next Friday; on which occasion 1 need not affure you, that your company with that of Mrs. Rawdon, will afford a paerticular pleasure. Boyle and his lady are come to town with Lord and Lady Carleton; who, wdth the General and his lovely Harriot, and yourselves, will comprise the whole party invited.. I hope Charles no man is warmer K 6 in 
( 2ZS) 
ja his professions, or more religiously adheres to them, than I endeavour to do; but I own I was never fond of extending the circle of my acquaintance to an extensive limit Indeed, from what little experience I have collected through observation of. mankind, since 1 attained to years of maturity, it appears to me both silly and inexpedient. As my fortune is competent, and my mind happily exempt from the curse of ambition or avarice, 1 regard not popularity; and as I trust, I bear Some love to truth and candour, I abhor a Sycophant : therefore, as amongst a numerous acquaintance, there must of course be mixed Some 4. ■ at 
( 2^9) 
at least, of those odious and despicable characters; in order to avoid them if postible, I determine to have but few acquaintances, and much fewer denominated friends, —. But a truce to moralising — and as I persuade myself I need no argument to convince you, I shall merely Subscribe myself 
Your sincere Friend, and 
Humble Servant, 
Ed. Baltimore, 
Let 
230) 
LETTER LIV 
COLONEL R A W D O N 
T O' 
SIR E D W A R I BALTIMORE; 
Dear Sir, 
You write to me with your usual frankness and sincerity; and upon the same principle, I wish as ingeiui ousiy to declare, that 1 hold myself bound upon every occasion that offers, to testify the esteem and 
respect( 
( 
respect Mr. and Mrs. Rawdon bear their approved friends, Sir Edward and Lady Baltimore. The alliance between General Sedly and your family, does you mutual honour; it is founded on the basis of virtue, and will of course be perpetuated by the same laudable means. In our earlier correspondence, you expressed the keenest fensation at the fate of your lovely cousins; and in conjunction with the efforts of my adorable Loulfa, rescued them from oblivion, and conduced to ralse them to a state of honour and happlness equal to their rank and meisit. The generous Sedly con ^, 

( 232) 
Gurred in the benevolent design, and Selected the lovely Harriot as his partner for life. You Seem therefore to be connected by more than the ordinary ties of form, and attached to each other from considerations peculiarly endearing. 
We Shall punctually attend to your invitation on Friday next, and propose to ourselves much satisfaction in forming a part of fo agreeable a company. Poor Louisa is much affected by the fate of her der friend Harriot; nor will any endeavours be wanting on her part to console her. She proposes on the departure of the General, to request 
( 233) 
quest her company as long as agreeable at Rawdon Place; and if you, and Lady Baltimore will favour us with your presence at the Same time, I presume it will have a better effect towards amusing Mrs. Sedly, ^thaii if she was to retire to west bury Park; because She will there be within the immediate Scope of her relations, who cannot but discover Some concern for the Same cause which gave rise and will doubt less be, in Some degree, the Source os her anxiety during the absence of her beloved con Sort. But this I Submit to your better, judgement, and Subscribe 
( ^34) 
scribe myself, with the greatesfc esteem. 
Your most Obedient Servant, 
Charles Rawdon 
L E T. 

( 235) 
LETTER LV 
THE HON. MRS. RAWDON 
^ D 
LADY BALTIMORE. 
My dear Kitty, 
Before i took my leave of the 
party at your house, I called your sister aside, and in the most presting manner requested that stie would accompany me, and the Colonel down to Rawdon Place, in the 
course 
C 23^) 
course of next week She politely declined Immediate acceptance <!rf the invitation, as She was not determined as to her accompanying the General to Portsmouth. However that may be, I must entreat you to enforce your advice in the cafe. If She Should go, and the winds detain him there, I must desire you to obtain her promise, to come down with you as Soon as convenient, after her return : if otherwise, the Sooner you Set off the better; as I hope we shall find Some means to dispel that gloom that has So visibly fixed both on her countenance and. your’s, for the ahsencc of So loving a husband and So affeflionate a brother, 
I shall 
( -237) 
I Shall not deteimiae on our own departure ’till I know your resolution. 
Adieu 1 and believe me 
your’s Sincerely, Louisa Rawdon. 
L E T 
C 238) 
LETTER LVI 
.RADY BALTIMORE 
T O 
MRS. S E D L Y 
My dear Harriot, 
Y O U had not been Set off two hours for portsmouth, before Mrs. Rawdon Sent me a letter by her Servant, importunately requesl ing me to urge the invitation She gave you, before She took her leave 
of 
’ ( 239) 
of you at our house. I will Say no more at present on the Subject, be cashfe I am Sensible your thoughts are So entirely engrofsed by other objects, as totally to exclude anything foreign to them. compose yourself as well as you can; consider that hundreds have been, and are In your situation; and if no other motive can have weight with you, be asiured, that by discovering tokens of immediate grief, you will wound the feelings of the man that adores you, and hurt the peace of mind of one, who lives but for you. But as I know you will not cannot be So cruel, I Shall close the 
1 r 
ungrateful Subject and only request 
you 
( 24°) 
you to give me a line of information before you Set off for town. My best wsisties attend you both; believe I shall ever remain your’s 
Most affectionately, 
. C Baltimore. 
L E T( 
() 
L E T T T E R lvir. 
MRS. SEDL Y 
■T 0 
LADY BALTIMORE, 
Portsmouth. 
Dear Kittyj 
HAVE lost (how long, is only known to the dispofer of all events) luy husband, my father, my fisiend. The fatal moment arrived — we embraced, cordially embraced at parting. -- -- -- 1 left the Ship with Some 
vol, II' L other 
( 242) 
Other ladies, but could not leave the beach, till the vefsel which conveyed my all of bliss was out of sight. What I then felt, surpasses ex preftion; nor would I wish my direst foe to experience the Same. The dangers of the Seas, the dangers of the climes, and dangers of the enemy, presented at once to my view. So horrid a picture, as thrilled my very soul. I remember to have read in Dry den’s Translation of Virgil, the story of dido’s parting with jeneas. I then thought the detail beautifully romantic, and the passions finely worked up by the poet; but now I am ready to subscribe, not only to 
the 
( 243) 
the probability, but the pofiibility of So striking, So affecting a narrative. I have realised the same, nor can all the wit, or all the Sophistry of man invalidate the evidence, the all powerful evidence of my Senses, ’tis a pleasing, though a painful talk, to un bosom one’s woes, and recount even the most poignant strokes of fortune to a tried, and approved friend. You will then pardon, my dearest Kitty, the Sallies into which I have been impertinently hurried, and impute them to the real cause, which is no other, than an unbounded affection, which cannot, in any degree, be fupprested, but with life. 
L 2 It 
( 244) 
It is near three o’clock; tomorrow I shall Set off for town 
Adieu! 
Harriot Sedly. 
I. E T( 
( 5) 
LETTER LVIII 
'IR EDWARD BALTIMORE 
TO THE 
HON. MRS. R A W D O N 
Dear Madam, 
ADY Baltimore has this iii sfant received a line from her sister, acquamting her' that" She Sets out as this day for town; but, there is not a Syllable about her refolutio, II as to your kind invitation to Rav/ 
L 
don 
( ^4^) 
don Place. The epistle is extremely rhapsodical and Seems dictated by the very frenzy of Love. Harriot out does us all in her matrimonial attachment, and Seems to exhibit a pattern of conjugal fidelity unrivalled by the wives of the present age If it be a little overstrained, and very unfashionable, it is yet more than pardonable, because, being an error on the right fide, it becomes of course in Some degree commendable. Besides, as it is founded on gratitude as well as love, it is thereby rendered highly laudable — yef terday I had a visit from Lady Betty Modely, Lady Lucy Modely, and Lady Mary Lenox, who are just 
returned 
( 2+7) 
returned from France. The two former Seem to have imported with them all the fopperies and volatility of that flippant nation, which added to their natural frivolity, renders them complete characters — of what kind I will not venture to determine; because it would be the highest arrogance to dictate to Such as must be allowed from their own observations and good sense, competent to judge for themselves. i^ady Mary Lenox is just the slime, unaffectedly polite, Sprightly, and affable; neither altered by difference of clime or manners, but the very Lady Mary that Set off for Paris, 
and is returned L 4 
For my own part 
( 24b) 
part I am by no means an enemy to travelling, making the tour of eu tope, or feeing the world, as it is called : but I aver that it is necessary to form the mind and complete the characters, previously to he well acquainted with our own country, both in a local and moral sense;; unless Some standard is fixed as to customs and manners; the mind is ever liable to be warped by falstrood and folly, and the traveller, not capable of Separating what is eligible from what is rejectable; is rather disposed to adopt the latter, and returns not only no wiser, but less formed than he went : but as you, Madam, are a glaring exception 
( 249) 
tion to this kind of characters. I drop these remarks to avoid the imputation of impertinence, and with Lady baltimore’s compliments, Subscribe myself 
Your most obedient Humble Servant, 
E. Baltimore. 
P. S. You will not deem Lady Baltimore wanting in respect for not writing; astnce the ahfence of her Sister, She has been, rather indisposed. 
5 
I.ET. 
( 25°) 
LETTER LIX 
THE HON. MRS. RAWDON 
T O 
MRS. BOYLE, 
^ Hope my dear Emily enjoys the same happy state of health, and of mind, as when I last had the pleasure of feeing her at Sir Edward baltimore’s on the melancholy occasion pf ourpoor friend harriot’sparting with 
her 
(250 
her beloved General Sedly. as Sir Edward informed mo by letter, his sister was Set off for town, I stiall tomorrow morning Send my Servant with a card of invitation to tea the day following, and desire you would be kind enough to take this notice, and let us have the pleasure of your company; and if Mr. Boyle joins you, it will be the more agreeable. I affure you I derived much amuse ment, not to Say instruction, from Sir edward’s epistle, for which he apologised on account of his lady*’s indisposition, who Seemed you know' extremely to Sympathise with her poor distressed Harriot. I think he’s a mighty entertaining correspondent L 6 truly: : 
() 
truly; for he threw osfmost happily on the two ladies, Betty and Lucy Modely, who are just returned from France, with Lady Mary Lenox, and in his description of those two females, according to my opinion, held the mirror up to nature. you’ll Say I am Severe, and partake of the envy too prevalent with our sex;; I cannot avoid censuring the egregious follies of vanity, affectation, and conceit wherever I find them; and am ever concerned to see our British belles exchange those charms they derive from nature, for the paltry artificial ornaments of carmine, and especially that most destructive of lures used by way of 
enamel. 
( ^53) 
enamel. Some of the finest of our countrywomen have fallen victims cto this pernicious custom, yet Such is the influence of evil example, and the prevalence of foreign modes, that they still prevailas much as ever, and counteract reason, nature, and common seiise. I know but of one mode of rooting out this evil, from the circle of women of character at least : this is a general resolution a amongst all the handsome young fellows, never to kifs a female, whose face or neck is plastered with rouge or whitewafh — But I forgot that your once gay friend Louisa Chambers, is become the married woman; however, 
( 254) 
ever, as my opinion on the Subject ' is just the Same now, as it then was, and I believe ever will be; I think I have a right to communicate it without the imputation of violating the rules of matrimonial decorum. I know my Emily is as averse to the practice as myself, and will therefore most friendly concur with me in opinion. don’t sail our little tea table party, as I Shall want your assistance, to dispel poor harriot’s gloom, and bring her a little to herself again — perhaps I may require the same friendly aid on a like o'c eafion, So it will be only practising the golden rule, in doing as I would 
be 
( 255) 
be done by. — Farewell ’till then, and believe me to be, with great sincerity 
your’s, 
L Rawdon. 
LET( 
() 
letter LX 
lady MARY LENOX 
T O 
LADY CARLETON. 
My dear Charlotte, 
At length I have the pleasure of returning to England, after my travels; what improvements I have made by them, my old friends will decide for themselvcs. My expectations were not upon the whole disappointed; I found Some few things 
worthy 
( 257) 
worthy of imitation; but number less more to be avoided. What are .there called (I mean in France) freedom and ease, we esteem in this luugher clime, indecency and forwardness: : for a man from a princlidle of politeness, to absent himself, lest he should interrupt his wife’s enjoyment of the company of a male friend or companion; would here be deemed nothing more or less than a connivance at prostitution, or living avowedly on the wages of dishonour. 
They seem to have given rise to the manners which prevail throughout courts in general; and carry the fashions to the very extreme. 
IL 
( 358) 
If, to appear what we arc not, to Speak what we think, think not to do what we like not, to pralfe what we approve not; if, in Short, to re verseas it were our persons, as well as opinions, for reasons and caiises too obvious to need explanation, can constitute the accomplistied courtier — Versailles is the place though I must say we have Some excellent copyists, who exhibit their productions at St. james’s. But lest you stiould be tired with reading this account of mine — here break we off. Adieu, dear Charlotte. 
M. Lenox. 
IE r( 
() 
LETTER lxr. 
LORD CARLETOH 
T O 
COLONEL R AW DON 
Dear Charles, 
I Have had an entertainment conveyed by waji of episue, to your sister, that has afforded me infinite pleasure. It is a sketch of French manners and customs, drawn by a female hand; and I affure you it 
does 
( 26o) 
does no difcrecut to the Sex: amongst the painters is Lady Mary Lenox; who is lately returned from the tour of France, and has favoured Lady Carleton with a very pretty moral picture of that nation, drawn from the life, and founded on personal observations — Lady Mary blends Some humour with her Satire, has novelty in Some of her remarks, and much poignancy in Some of her conclusions. — I own, I Should not wish for a wife posieffed of quite So much understanding, or quite So much wit; and though I canpos Subscribe with Pomfret, 
“That the effect of woman’s wit is such“ 
“little is less dangerous than too much 
because( 
() 
because I would by no means pay the Sex So eoarse a compliment; yet I Should be full as well content with a mediocrity in that particular, as. ill many others — However, I am provided, and must be content, Charles, as will you, if you are wise. If we cannot boast of the heads of our wives, we challenge the female world to excel their hearts; and that with me, and I believe with you, is the main, the only point ofesisential consequence, because estential to conjugal happiness— — Charlotte: has one quality enchanting in its nature; She may truly be Said to have music in her 
soul; 

( 262) 
soul; which has a fine effect, when minds are Sweetly altered through an union of dispofition, Your Louisa is not wanting in that accomplishment, and to crown all, they are both encircled with the girdle of Venus, Good Nature, and must appear loudly in the eye of every beholder. So long as they, Shall appear visibly to wear it. I Seem to have caught fire from Lady Mary; or rather my imagination may have been warmed by reflecting on what I have Seen in the world, and experienced at home. 
Mrs. Sedly is returned from Portsmouth, having Seen the last of her 
dear 
C 2^3) 
dear General. Let me know if she accepts your invitation to Rawdon place; as we may in a little proposed excursion, when the season advances, give you a call, and So join with you a day or two, as we may with Sir Edward Baltimore, at Wesibury park. — If we carry our itinerary project into execution, we shall visit all our friends in turn; which will afford a pleasing variety, and prove equally Salutary to body and mind. — Improvement may be drawn from every occurrence and vicisiitude in human life; and if we can So manage affairs, as to render the Scenes of our lives at once useful to others, and entertaining to our i Selves; 
( 264) 
Selves; we may then be Said not to have lived in vain, .and So my dear friend and brother, farewell: — the curtain drops for the present. 
Carleton. 
THE END. 





A 


M 

J'i ': Vv --, 
'm 
■ ■ ' 
"■ ' ■ V 

■'- vlli,., 
-. ■ : ■■ 
: ■. ••! 
- 
^ ' 



cooc^e^ 
y]c, zp 
V .& 


