THE
HISTORY
OF Miss Beville.

VOL. I

WE, Proprietors of Circulating Libraries, find-
ing it impossible to continue the Business of 
Lending Books to Read on the late low Terms of Sub-
scription, with the same Degree of Reputation to our-
selves and Satisfaction to the Public, as we did at a 
time when neither So great a Number of New Books 
were published, nor the Demand for them so great as 
now, have been compelled to advance the Sum of 
One Shilling on our Quarterly, and Eighteen-Pence on 
our Yearly Subscribers, in order to avoid the disagreea-
ble Alternative of throwing up that Branch of Busi-
ness which hath so many Years been a Source of 
Amusement, and, we will venture to add, Instruction 
to the Public, or of Suffering it to languish through a 
want of a proper Supply of New Books so essentially 
necessary to its Credit and Support. And whereas, 
we have experienced the most chearful Compliance 
from our Subscribers in the Payment of the trifling 
Sum so reasonably advanced upon them; We hereby 
(each for himself) take this Opportunity of assuring 
them in particular, and the Public in general, that no 
Pains nor Expence in our Power shall be wanting to 
render our respective Libraries (in-point of Utility, Extensiveness and Amusement) of such Advantage 
over all others, who shall continue to lend at the old 
Price (if any such should be found) as shall more than compensate for the Saving of so inconsiderable a Sum 
as that abovementioned, since they may be assured,
that it is our most Serious Intention to purchase for 
the use of our Subscribers, without Exception, a 
much larger Quantity and greater Variety of New 
Books than can possibly be furnished by any One 
lending at less then

Four Shillings per Quarter,
OR
Twelve Shillings per Year.

Francis Noble, John Noble, William Bathoe,
Tho. Lowndes, T. Vernor and J. Chater, 
Thomas Jones, William Cooke.

THE
HISTORY
OF
Miss Emilia Beville.
In TWO VOLUMES. 
VOL. I.

LONDON:
Printed by W. Hoggard,
FOR
Francis Noble, at his Circulating Library, near 
Middle-Row Holborn;
AND
John Noble, at his Circulating Library, in St. Martin's 
Court, near Leicester-Square.
MDCCLXVIII.


THE
HISTORY
I
O F
Miss BEVILLE.
L E T T E R I.
Miss Emilia Beville, to Miss Harriot	Molesworth.
A few	days more, my dear Harriot, and I shall bid a long adieu to this delightful mansion, in which I have passed so many sweetly serene and happy hours. I yesterday received an order from my father to leave my aunt, with whom, you know, I have lived almost from
my infancy, and who has ever shewn for me every mark of the most tender and endearing affection. To you I have ever been accustomed to reveal my most secret thoughts, and, it is most certain, that to you only I would impart my present painful emotions. Alas! my dear Harriot, dare I confess I feel none of that joy which certainly ought to fill my breast on the prospect of so soon joining my family, from whom I have so long been separated? You know not, my dear friend, and may you never know, the anguish that heart must feel, if endued with any share of sensibility, which is obliged, in spite of every effort, to disapprove the condudt of those, for whom heaven and nature meant to inspire us with only sentiments of respect, affection and esteem.

I am ignorant of his reasons for desiring me to attend him, but whatever they may be, my heart tells me I shall not be happy. I am perfectly convinced my days of tranquility and peace are at an end. I know you will condemn me for indulging these disagreeable ideas; these presentiments have ever met with your—perhaps—just ridicule.

I expect a reproof, and am prepared to receive it with all humility; but still, my dear Harriot, I must repeat it, I am persuaded this change in my situation will be attended with more pain than pleasure. Reflect but a moment on the character of my family; you, Harriot, are no stranger to it. Ah ! how different, how very different, is their way of life from that of my ever valued aunt! Need I describe either? Here, all our amusements are truly rational, and never fail to give us the most pleasing satisfaction: our view in the search of them is not merely that we may in the most hurrying and dissipated manner dispose of our time, but, on the contrary, how we may make the most of every fleeting hour. What a contrast to those scenes I am soon to be engaged in! Ah ! why, my dear Harriot, am I not permitted to pass my life in this sweet retirement, where, free from the hurry and tumultuous pleasures of a vain and trifling world, I might have enjoyed life in some measure answerable to the design of that gracious being by whom we are placed here. But, alas! who can, on serious reflection, and a knowledge of the gay world, pronounce their plan of life to be such ? And yet it is in that rank of unthinking mortals I am destined to appear.

You have already, I presume, had recourse to your salts, and are at some loss, no doubt, to guest what has occasioned in me these so very sober and sedate reflections; nor can you, perhaps, see any thing so exceedingly dreadful in being taken from the shades of ob-scurity, to shine in a more exalted sphere. Why not be as rational in the parish of St. James, as a hundred miles from it? For this very good reason that it is there no longer the mode to be so. And I freely own to you, that I fear my philosophy will not be proof against, not only example, but, in all human probability, precept: for will not my too gay mother think it her duty to give me a thousand instructions, very different from those I have received from my amiable aunt? Yes, my dear friend, I am persuaded, from the knowledge I have of her sentiments, that I shall appear in her eyes absolutely ignorant of every polite accomplishment : for have I not, from my infancy, been buried in the country ? and what other idea than ignorance and simplicity, can a person of taste and fashion form of such a being?

But shall I tell you what has given rise to those grave reflections at which you are so much surprized ? — Know then, that I had just read, with infinite pleasure, some discourses published under the title of Sermons for young women. Nothing can be more elegant and persuasive than the language. Every line conveys the most pleasing instruction. As we ought never to read without being determined to profit as much as possible by our study, I had made a full resolution to copy in every thing, for the future, the amiable portrait
(drawn by the author) of female excellence. I was charmed to find myself at liberty to follow his plan, and rejoiced that I was by providence placed in this delightful retreat where I might pursue my design without interruption, when behold, at that moment comes my father’s letter, and at once destroys all my flattering hopes! Can you any longer wonder at my unusual gravity? I am not qualified, Harriot, to shine at a quadrille table, I shall be looked upon as a poor, weak, inoffensive creature, who has been entirely ruined for want of feeing and conversing with people of taste: I am sensible this is the idea my new acquaintance will form of me; but be it so, I will endeavour to bear with fortitude that mortification, if you, my Harriot, continue to honour me with your esteem:

Adieu — Jenny is at this moment deeply engaged in packing up, and begs my advice in that important affair. You shall, if possible, have another line before I leave this agreeable place.
Yours,
Emilia Beville

LETTER II.
To the Same.
Every thing is settled for my journey. My aunt goes with me to B—, where I am to be met by my father and sister. All my time since I wrote to you has been employed in taking leave of my friends. A thousand agreeable schemes have been destroyed by this precipitate journey. Some of our rural swains pretend to feel violent pains and palpitations at the thoughts of losing me. Flattery, you see, has made shift to find its way even to these recesses of peace and tranquillity. I have no fears that my absence will be followed by any very dangerous consequences; though love certainly reigns with more power here than in that world I am going to visit. Since I have been able to preserve my heart, in spite of all the sighs, vows, and eloquence used by the said swains, and that too in the midst of woods, groves, and purling streams, I think I need be under no apprehensions on its account for the future. This passion, I am told, is entirely banished from the gay world: people of fashion are no longer subject to that ridiculous weakness: the very name of love now conveys no other ideas to the imagination than country ignorance and simplicity.

If I am to judge by those epistles my sister has once in an age favoured me with, I should pronounce her at least as much ruined by seeing too much of the world as she will be inclined to think me for having seen too little. How far we are likely to be agreeable to each other, I'll leave you to guess. What joy would it give me, could I flatter myself I should in her meet with another Harriot! but I am too sensible this ardent desire of my heart will not be gratified. She dies for operas, plays, balls, and routs; I for reading, conversing, and in short, my dear friend, I die (to use the fashionable phrase) with desire to be the very character I mentioned to you in my last. I intend to present her with a set of those discourses. Could I but efface the dreadful word— Sermons, she might perhaps be prevailed on to peruse a few pages ; but that forbidding title is enough to deter her from any fuch design. The very idea will, I fear, give her the vapours. It is hard enough, she will perhaps say, to be obliged to hear them now and then in church, where one has the consolation of having something to amuse the eye during the tedious lecture ; but to go through such a task at home, when so many more agreeable and lively amusements present themselves, is a peice of self-denial scarce to be expeded. Have you seen them Harriot ? if not, I advise you by all means to get them immediately. I am convinced, from the knowledge I have of your taste and judgment, you will greatly admire them, and with me declare, the ladies of the present age might, by following the precepts there laid down, make some very considerable improvements in their accomplishments both of mind and person.

Adieu, Harriot, my next will be from London, the present was merely to take my leave, and to assure you, whatever change of situation I may experience, my friendship for you must ever remain the same.

Yours,
Emilia Beville.

LETTER III.
To the Same.
Lest you should believe it possible that the new scenes I am surrounded with should make me forget the promise I made of writing immediately on my arrival, I with great pleasure dedicate the ensuing hour to you. I will make no apology for not doing it before, as you will easily conceive it to have been out of my power for the first day or two.

Notwithstanding my apprehensions, the sight of my father and sister gave me great pleasure. They came, as I told you, to meet me at B— and received me with great tenderness and affection. Caroline assured me my mother was all impatience for my arrival, and would have been of their party, had she not been engaged with company at home, which she could not with propriety leave. My father expressed his gratitude to my aunt in the most polite terms for the obligation she had conferred upon him, by the care she had taken of my education, and assured her, if he might judge from my appearance, he should pronounce that I had profited extreamly by her good instructions and example. The praises he bestowed on me, and the multitude of civil things he was pleased to say to his sister, gave me infinite satisfaction; but how shall I express the painful emotions I felt when taking leave of that amiable friend ?—Impossible ! my dear Harriot, it is not to be described, Caroline was in some surprise on observing my tears.

Is it in nature, my dear, Emilia, said she, that the thoughts of seeing London and all its enchanting delights, should not banish in a moment any degree of sorrow you might feel at parting with my aunt? Bless your stars, my dear, your days of banishment are at an end, and that you are now going to enjoy the life of a rational being, which, to say truth, you have as yet known but little of. How you have found it possible to pass your time, winter and summer in the country, day after day, in the same stupid dull manner, heaven knows, but, upon my word, I have pitied you a thousand times; for, between you and me, our good aunt has none of the most lively ideas, though I believe her a very good kind of woman, nevertheless.

In this manner she continued talking, while I had scarce spirits either to hear or answer one of the many questions she every moment asked.

The company had not left our house when we arrived : they were at cards. I begged I might not be introduced to mamma in that assembly: she came to me in my apartment. She embraced me with great affection, examined me with much attention, and appeared perfedly satisfied with the observations she made. After sitting half an hour, and enquiring in an obliging manner for my aunt, she left me with Caroline, bidding us come to the drawing-room as soon as we had adjusted our dress. I would gladly have been excused for that evening, but was obliged to obey, as it was yet early, and they had not drank tea. A servant came to inform us it waited, and that his lady desired our company. The room was crowded. I was introduced in form, and received by the ladies with great politeness, nor with less gallantry by the gentlemen. You may believe I found no violent inclination immediately to commence gamester, I therefore endeavoured to find some amusement in sauntering from one card-table to another, observing the countenances of those who played : whether I found any I’ll leave you, Harriot, to guess, which you may the more easily do when I tell you, I wished most sincerely they would take their departure in peace and quietness. In due time they did so, and we were left at liberty to converse more freely on all that had past during our long separation.

I now begin to be tolerably reconcciled to my new situation : nothing is wanting but liberty to spend my time as I please ; a want of some importance you’ll grant, but this has hitherto been denied me. We have company at home, or are engaged abroad, every day, nor could Caroline, by her own confession, endure life on any other terms. As to mamma’s, conduct you must give me leave to be silent on that subject: I am her daughter, and as such ought to be blind to her faults or foibles, if she has any; to you, however, who are my other self, I will just observe that she is at present quite a Lady Townly. Would to heaven my father knew as well as her lord did how to reclaim her! but he is too much of her own way of thinking ever to make the attempt. Yes, my dear friend, their ideas of happiness are too much alike ever to give him any concern. It is to you, Harriot, I write, to no one else in life would I presume to make these remarks. I know the goodness of your heart, and that you will believe it possible for me to see those errors without violating my duty. However great or numerous they may be, they never shall induce me to forget that respect so justly due to those who gave me being. They are my parents, and as such shall ever be honoured : their will, in every reasonable point, shall ever determine mine. I make no doubt, but in a few weeks they will suffer me to enjoy my time in any way most agreeable to myself. I have as yet made no such request, but have chearfully attended them in every party where my company was desired. Had I immediately expressed any reluctance, it might have given a disagreeable idea of my temper and disposition.

Caroline is gay and thoughtless to excess, to her I may speak with freedom : I shall, certainly endeavour to inspire her with juster sentiments. I will spare no pains to give her a taste for more rational amusements, though. I believe she is fully persuaded they have ever been her pursuit, and that I only am a stranger to them. She is really a fine graceful figure, and, tho’ not absolutely handsome, agreeable. Her manner is perfectly easy and engaging. Ah! why was she not put under the care of my dear Mrs. Bellamy ? How much happier in that case might it have been for us both ! I might then have been blessed with an amiable friend, and she been taught in what manner to employ those hours agreeably which now so frequently hang heavy on her hands. She never opens a book, and work is her aversion. Judge then how she spends her time, when obliged by accident to be at home alone: she is truly worthy of pity. She is restless and uneasy, dying with impatience at its tedious length. She plays on the harpsichord, but cannot give attention enough to become mistress of it. This and the guitar, employ her by turns, though she seldom finishes a tune on either. I have not yet made her the present I mentioned : I have not forgot it, nor changed my design, but wait for a favourable opportunity.

Adieu, my dear Harriot, I will endeavour to obey you, I will be very particular, you shall know every thing that happens, whether worth or not worth your hearing, since you insist upon it. If my epistles prove stupid and unentertaining, blame yourself for ordering me to write, and that they will be so seems to me a point that will admit of no dispute; for, I beseech you, tell me what subjects am I now likely to meet with to employ my pen ? No want of company I grant, but a most woeful want of conversation, nevertheless. Ah, those vile cards ! are they not, my dear Harriot, the ruin of all society? Till they are excluded from our parties, what have we to expect but stupidity? I protest to you the very mention or sight of a card-table makes me yawn. Play I never will, if I can possibly avoid it, since, were I to do so, I should no longer have right to rail at those that do, and one would not, for a trifling consideration, give up so great a pleaSure. 

Adieu, believe me ever
Your affectionate
Emilia Beville.

LETTER IV.
To the Same.
Thank fortune I have at last got a whole day that I can dispose of as I think proper. You See, Harriot, how I mean to employ it. Say, are you not much obliged to me for devoting it thus to writing to you? Or do you tell me I could not possibly have found an employment more agreeable to myself?

Mamma and Caroline are engaged to dine with a large party at Sir John Seaton’s, after which they go to the opera, but as I particularly dislike dining with a multitude of strangers, and have no violent penchant for the said opera, I was not sorry that I could with some degree of truth, plead a slight head-ach to excuse my going with them. My apology was received by mamma with great indulgence, but Caroline was shocked at my want of taste and spirit, said a thousand things to convince me that my loss would be infinite in not seeing the divine Scoti, as well as the no less divine creatures that were to be of the party. Upon my word, Emilia, said she, our old aunt has given you such a set of antiquated, dreary notions, that I half despair of ever conquering them. How can you, my dear girl, think of staying at home, and that too alone, when you have it in your power to spend it in a manner so enchanting ? A very proper expression that, Harriot, for seriously speaking, nothing, one would believe, but the force of enchantment could induce one to give up one’s whole time to such unsatisfactory, and consequently tiresome amusements.—It must be even so. Heaven preserve you and me, my dear, from those fatal spells which can thus blind our understandings, and pervert our judgment!

I am much deceived if my gay sister has not got a lover, who, though highly	favoured by her, dares not make proposals to my father. She has not, indeed, made me her confident in this affair, but I have lately made some observations that leave me no room to doubt it. He is in the guards, of a good family, but has no fortune, excepting his commission, and his chief dependance an uncle, who, by the way, is perfectly sensible of the value every prudent man ought to set on money, and, consequently, will not, in all human probability, approve his nephew’s choice. I wish most sincerely I may be deceived, as I am certain she can have no prospect with him but that of misery, whatever ideas she may have formed. Think of an ensign in the guards for a hushand, and him too as much given to folly and dissipation as herself! I protest I tremble for her when I reflect on the consequence of such an engagement. I have reason to believe, from what my aunt has often told me, and indeed from what I daily see, that my father’s fortune is greatly impaired. Can it fail, my dear Harriot? Alas! who can answer for the event, where an inclination for gaming is so much encouraged? How many families of equal rank and superior income, have before now been by that means reduced to want and misery. He plays deep, I am sensible, nor can it be supposed he should always be fortunate ; nay, I have but too great reason to fear the contrary. Mamma too is continually engaged in the same way: indeed, what she plays for is not, I hope, so considerable as to give me any just cause of uneasiness; I rather, on her account, lament the loss of time, health and spirits, which are all sacrificed without regret. Those domestick pleasures, which ought to be the joy of every wife and mother, are all given up for that vile, that dangerous diversion. In short, my dear Harriot, the more I see of this family, and the more I am acquainted with its conduct and government, the less reason I have to be satisfied.

What, still teizing me, you cry, with grave and melancholy reflections ? But, my dear friend, tell me, have I not too much reason to make them ? Can I be otherwise than miserable, to see, as I do, my family living in a way so contrary to every principle of religion, and that duty they certainly as rational beings owe to their Creator? These are, indeed, my dear Harriot, very sober and serious reflections, and would perhaps come with more grace and propriety from an older preacher. You fancy no doubt, that I am so amazingly charmed with the sermons I have so often mentioned, that I have now begun to write a volume myself, to compleat the reformation of mankind ; but smile on my dear, it is the natural turn of my disposition to moralize when occasion offers, and to say truth, I have lately been at no loss for a text.

I have twice heard from my aunt. She writes in the most affectionate and agreeable manner, and expresses great surprize that I have not yet been informed of my father’s reasons for depriving her of my company. Says, she made no doubt but it was on a matrimonial account, which she never mentioned till now, fearing to give me uneasiness, as she was too well acquainted with my sentiments not to know, that a match projected while I was at so great a distance, could not be very agreeable to me, since in that case, it is evident, my inclination was not to be consulted. Thank heaven she is for once mistaken in her conjectures. I have nothing of that kind to fear. Any thing but this, and I will endeavour to obey as becomes a dutiful daughter: but should it be my lot to meet with a tryal of that dreadful nature, should they dispose of my hand without consulting my heart, I know not what would be the consequence. This, my dear Harriot, is one of the modern fashions, which I find it will be impossible I should ever be reconciled to. But let me not teize you with imaginary ills, it is sufficient you bear with my just complaints. Would to heaven those were removed ! With what joy would I change my dreary my disconsolate stile for one more gay and lively!

You desire me to write, you command me to be minute, take then the consequence of my obedience without murmuring. Adieu, I must now write to Mrs. Bellamy, as I shall have no time for an age if I do not take the present. To-morrow we have half the town to dine here, and in the evening cards of course. No time, you see for scribbling— Adieu.

Yours
Emilia Beville.

LETTER V.
Lo the Same.
It is now scarce six o’clock in the morning;—A strange hour for a London belle to be employed in writing— yet here I am. Seated with full purpose to scribble a few lines to my Harriot: what they may be I don’t very well know, but if they should prove of the soporifick kind and make you yawn, you will not greatly wonder when you reflect on the above mentioned hour.

What in the name of fortune, you ask, can have tempted me to rise at a time so extreamly vulgar and unfashionable ? Is the dreaded lover at last proposed to me? or have I made choice of one according to my own heart ? For this, you add, though a very different affair, might yet produce the same effect.—Neither, Harriot, but I was so intolerably fatigued with the insipid bustle of yesterday, that I could not close my eyes during the whole night. I have known agreeable reflections prevent one’s rest, and they were some consolation for the want of it; but to have it destroyed by mere fatigue and langour of spirits, is a circumstance not quite so pleasing. This is however my case at present, and not knowing very well what to do with myself, I have taken up my pen, the never failing resource on such occasions. This it is to live in town : had I now been in the country, what a delightful ramble might I have had in my dear aunt’s park, or some other of those agreeable walks with which that place abounds ? Here I may, with much more propriety, in my opinion, be said to be buried alive, than when an inhabitant of that charming place; yet this is the expression Caroline makes choice of, when speaking of any one who has that happiness.

Well, Harriot, what subject shall I chuse, with which to grace this early epistle? Shail I tell you who it was that made the violent bustle last night of which I so much complain, and also attempt to give you their different characters ? By all means, you cry, if you think there were any worthy of that honour. Nay, my dear friend, if this is the condition you make, there’s an end to my description at once, for, to say truth, there was not one of the company, either belle or beau, whose portrait, though ever so well drawn, could give you the smallest entertainment; and for their manner, conversation and so forth, there is no giving you any idea of either, at least I cannot do it by pen: every one was so lively, so witty, so immensely gay, there is no doing them justice. Yet it is not what they say, but their manner of saying it, that gains them this envied character. Let a girl be born with a temper and disposition as grave as a judge, a misfortune that will sometimes happen, she must at all events, if she hopes to attract any degree of notice, lay aside that gravity which if indulged might perchance have ripened into solid sense, and have produced sentiments worth cultivating, and assume an air of levity and thoughtlessness in, compliance with, the present taste. To be the giddiest creature alive is now to be the wittiest ; a circumstance that must be of infinite advantage to thousands. Not a company you enter but there are as many of them as you can possibly desire— and perhaps more. A thoughtful look is enough to ruin the reputation of the finest face. But enough of these remarks.

I have this moment recollected a discovery I made the other day, which I mean to tell you.

Going the day I finished my last letter to look for a seal (having mislaid my own) in Caroline’s room, she being, as I then told you, abroad with mamma, the first thing I saw, where I expected to find what I sought for, was an epistle directed for my sister unopened. I knew the hand immediately to be the lover’s I mentioned ; but that I might have no doubts about the author, I compared the writing with a card he had sent the very day before, to apologize for not dining with us as he had promised. This confirmed my suspicion. I was greatly shocked at their correspondence, as I saw evidently, by its being placed there, that it was a concealed one, and of course imprudent ; but how much more so when his want of fortune, as well as hers, was considered ! Her maid, I make no doubt, is the confidente, but I will not attempt to corrupt her fidelity to her lady, as I intend to mention it to Caroline the first opportunity I can find. You shall know the result of our conference on the important subject when it is over; perhaps this very morning may give me the impatiently wished-for opportunity.

Adieu, my dear Harriot. Her maid is this moment gone into her room,
I will follow, and if possible turn the conversation on that subject. Believe me ever
Yours,
Emilia Beville

Letter VI.
To the Same.
Yes, Harriot, it is indeed as I suspected. Our conference is ended, she has confessed to me the whole affair. I went into her room the moment I had finished my last epistle to you, as I told you I intended, I believe she had no expectation of seeing me so early, for she was sitting up in bed reading with visible pleasure the very billet-doux I had seen. She would have concealed it.
Nay, my dear Caroline, Said I, no reserve, I beSeech you, it looks SuSpicious. Finish your epistle, it must, I am per-Suacled, be an agreeable one, or you w'ould not I think, at this time, have honoured it with your attention. Come let me be your confidente; believe me C 6	I am
36 ^he HISTOR Y of
I am perfedly qualified for that trust,, and a love affair, without one.- is but imperfedl; at best.
Why a love affair?’ cried site. You: country-bred- girls think of nothing elSe. Believe me, child, I have no idea of any Such ridiculous passion.
O no, my dear Sister, one. would not. SuSped; a lady of your gay disposition-of So unpardonable a. weakneSs; but; what shall we lay for Mr. Stanhope’s want of philoSophy, for I prefume he confesses himSelf, in that pretty billet-doux, to be conquered by that passion. you are pleaSed to ridicule ? Come,, confeSs, with a good grace, that yom do not think it So very great a. folly,^ So ridiculous a weakneSs.
Why Emilia, child, laid she, with, evident marks of Surpriz-e, which how-^ ever she endeavoured to hide, you are witty this morning. I have often been, told, that early rising is the finest thing
in
Mifs BEVILLE. 3 7
in- the world to brighten ones ideas,., and I am now convinced it is truth,.
But pray now tell me, how comes Mr, Stanhope to be choSen as the Subjeft ? how has he merited this ciistindion ?'
Why, really, my dear Caroline, an-Swered I, by that very distindtion* he pays to you:
In this manner did we trifle for near-an hour without coming to the point"
I wished. Ac last, hoy/ever, she con* fessed I had Some Snare of penetration, • But what, Saidst, can you possibly hope ^ for from his addresses ? He has no for-tune, and you, I am much afraid, can* not expedl any thing very coniiderable-.
His uncle will never forgive him, should’ he be So imprudent as to marry v/ithout his approbation. Ail theSe things considered, for heaven’s fake tell me Caroline, what is likely to be- the conSe* quence of Such an engagement ?
Ali,
\
jT	HISTORY^
Ah, Ipare me Emilia, cried she with emotionj I cannot follow you through all this grave, this Sober reaSoning.— What do I expedt —wshy what but pardon and reconciliation, according to custom,, when we have done what cannot, be undone? I could name you half a hundred girls who have tried the experiment with Succefs. To afk the. conSent at preSent, of either his friends or mine, would be arming them against ourSelves. But let us once take a trip to Scotland, and trust to fortune for the event. I am amazed you, who are So wonderfully pious, fiiould not better remember the text which bids us be careful for nothing. I, Emilia, am determined, at least in this instance, to obey its very wiSe precepts. You fee 1 am not quite So ignorant of the Scriptures as you no doubt believed-me: as a proof of it I can quote you another no lefs pertinent to our preSent.
fubjedt.
Mifs B EV I'LLE. 39/
shbjedl:. “ Sufficient to the day is the “ evil thereof.” Why then, my very prudent Sister, should I, by looking So^ far forward, teize my Self to death with^ a thouSand fears and apprehensions, whesi it is So much my duty to trust, my affairs in the hands of Providence, who never fails to order every thing for the best}
Why really. Said I, to do you justice, you have made Some very Sagacious quotations, and quite a propos, I must GonfeSs; but do you, Caroline, look upon the expedition you mean to take, to be leaving your affairs in the hands of providence ? No, my dear, depend upon it, if you had any Such prudent design, this journey to Scotland would never once have entered your imagination. But I am perSuaded you are not Serious at preSent, though I am going j	to beg you will be So for a moment,
only till you promife me to give up all
thoughts
.
4:0 n'e H ISTOT yy’
thoughts of that'pretty excursion, or depend upon it I shalh as a proof of my sisterly care and affedlion^ aSk papa's, opinion of your plan, which may perhaps in Some meaSure-diSconeert it. I an abiblutely Serious, So chuSe which you think most agreeable, either this instant promiSe me to renounce all thoughts of your intended tour, or Suf-" fer me to interceed with my father for his con Sent and approbation.
Ah Emilia, Said my sister^ would’ you ruin me ? would you at once destroy all my hopes? How* can you, my dear creature, mention So horrid a design ? that wnuld indeed effectually frustrate our purpoSe. But I tell you,, when' the indissoluble knot is once tied, they will forget and forgive. Besides, I have more than half promiSed, and w^ould , you have me break my word ? that, I am Sure, Emilia, is contrary to your own principles.
Not
Mi/} BE VILLE., 41.
Not in this, interrupted!; it willi,
on the contrary, be laudable, unlels
you can prove that to persist in a bad
design is better than to. change one’s
purpoSe. Think but for a moment on /
the conSequence. Supposing, contrary to your hopes,, a reconciliation should not follow your diSobedience, you are, to Say truth, a. mighty proper perSon to figure as an ensign’s lady. Refledt, my dear Sister, on the Splendid, figure you are likely in that cafe to make^ and you will, I am perSuaded, be in no Such violent haste. And that a reconciliation will not enSue, I can, with> out the art of divination, positively foreSee:
How long we might have continued our conversation^, had we met with no interruption, is uncertain ; but mamma’s bell put an end to it at that time. I had only as much time as to insist on her pro^ miSe to think no ‘ more of Jier jaunt to
Scotland*,
42	H I S T 0 R Y ^
Scotland. She gave it me on condition I would not mention one word of the affair to any of the family, but, like a faithful confidehte, as I had declared myfelf to be, keep her fecret, and in return, added she, I will, in due time, reveal one to you in which you have full as much Concern as I have in this. I was going to intreat her to fatisfy ray curiosity immediately, when a fer-vant came to inform us breakfast waited. What the fecret can be, or whether she has really one or not, heaven knows, for I have never since had an opportunity to ash her, or to renew our con« verfation.
Need I bid you refiedl upon her situation ? It is almost the natural con-fequence of her fashionable education. She cannot think, she has never been accustomed to rested:. Ah, my dear Harriot, should she persist in her imprudent design, she may yet learn that,
neceffary,
Mifs B E VI L L E. 43
necessary duty, though it will then, I . fear, be too late to profit by it. But she has given me her Word that she will, break off her rash engagement.
Adieu, I am Sent for. I will not /
eloSe this, as I may perhaps find out this important Secret before to-morrow, and as Such will tranSmit it to you.
'	Luefday rnormng,.
Ah, my dear Harriot, what a discovery ! Good heavens ! ff what Caroline tells me should indeed be truth, your .poor Emilia is ruined and undone.. How shall I, agitated as I now am, give I	you any idea of my dreadful, appre-
benSions ?
I	Alas! my dear friend, my aunds con-
j	jedlure was but too just. I might, in-
deed, have guessed that Something more than merely the deSire of my company^ was in agitation^ since our way of life, is not calculated to enjoy the felicity^
tliaC;.
44 HIS TORT of
that ought to. ariSe from' the pleasing Society of family connexions. No, my dear Harriot, the endearing ties of natural affcXion—ties So infinitely pleasing to thoSe inird? vrsio know how to enjoy true and lasting fatisfaXion—are lost ih the hurry and bustle of trifling dissipation. That I have Some share of beauty Seems to be the only peisteXion' I am-possessed of that gives my mother any degree of pleaSure. Had nature denied: me this, I am pershaded I should have been but lightly esteemed! This, Harriot, is a- truth that cannot, you may believe, fail to give me great pain. Can there be a greater proof^but let me check my too forward pen, since it would only lead' me to make reSec-tions, which my duty bids me diScou-rage. It is of my parents I IpeakV let me then do it with reverence and reSpeX.
Gthis.
Mifs SEVILLE.. 45
O this horrid Secret! how shall I re-ipeat to you what has just been told me But you have my promife, let me then endeavour to fulfil it.
You remember Sir JoSeph Beauchamp, who behaved with So much youthful gallantry to us at the last Northampton races; his age, certainly, made his behaviour extreamly ridicu-' lous, since no charadler can possibly be more So than a fop of Seventy; but at that time it gave me neither pain nor pleaSure, as I knew very little about him, though he was So intimate with the rest of my family. You, Harriot, can witnefs that he took no Small pains to render himSelf agreeable to me, which I then imputed entirely to the natural gaiety of his youthful disposition, and must confeSs it Served only to give me ■a convincing proof of his uncommon share of vanity, which could induce one of his age to believe it possible to be-,	come
48 I:he HISTORY ef
come So. In Spite of the multitude of compliments he then paid me, I should never have recollcdled my having been So honoured, had he not been recalled to my memory by what Caroline has diScloSed. Would you believe it possible, that this old creature has absolutely made Serious propoSals to my father for your unfortunate friend ? Judge whether he had any reaSon to fear a refuSal, able as he is to make Settlements above all their most ambitious hopes could have aSpired to. His first lady brought him a fortune of forty thouSand pounds, tho’ heaven knows what could be her inducement, unlefs indeed she was of that mistaken opinion that a reformed rake makes the best hushand: I can account for her choice in no other manner, and she, poor woman, was doubly deceived, since a few months proved, beyond diSpute, that his reformation was not even be-
gum
Mifs B E V I L L E. 47
gun. He was near fifty when, to the astonishment of his libertine companions, he was Seized with the Spirit of matrimony. This lady was not young, and
had, as I told you, all this money in /
her own power, and in fine religned it, her liberty and future happinefs, into his hands. She lived but a few years, during which time, I doubt not, repentance was her chief amuSement. This man, my dear Harriot, is now perfuaded that Cupid has taken the trouble to waste an arrow upon him, and I, truly, am to Suffer for his folly ! Can any thing in life be more dreadful if really true ? I tremble every ' time I am a moment alone with my father, lest he should talk to me on this horrid Subjedt. Caroline tells me he is at prefent out of town, but is expedled in-a day or two, and imagines they wait for his return, that he may, by his preSence, add weight to thoSe
arguments
48 TA II IS TORY
arguments they mean to uSe in his favour. Now tell me, Emilia, cried my sifter, when she had finished this dreadful history, ishould I not; be very wiSe to keep my promiSe with Stanhope by way of prevention, for who knows but it may be my turn next to Smite Some old Grecian with a love-fit ? and my father is, too tender-hearted to let him sigh in vain, if he can pay as well for his cure as your Swain can do. Now tell me, continued she, which do you in your conScience think the most elig-able Schemte—Love and Stanhope—or miSery with Some Superannuated beau Her question, I own, did not appear to me quite So easily anSwered as it would have done the morning I gave her my Sage adviSe.—A day or two— ah, Harriot, think what a day orstwo may bring to paSs ! Adieu—when that time is expired you shall hear from
me
Mifs BEVILLE. 49
me again, at preSent I have not Spirits to proceed on this odious Subjedl, nor " indeed on any other.
Yours,
/
Emilia Seville.
LETTER VIL
T? the Same.
Yes, my dear Harriot, your poor Emsilia is indeed doomed to miSery and delpair. The circumstances attending this cruel affair are Such as leave me no room for expostulation. I fee my duty, but, ah Harriot, however strange the assertion* may appear, yet too certain it is that I shall, by followr ing its didlates, be forever wretched. You will confeSs the justice of this declaration, when I have given you VoL. I.	D	thoSe
50 Hhe HIST ORY of
thoSe reafons which induce me to make it. Ah, how many painful struggles will my heart endure, before I can prevail on it to comply with the dreadful commands it has just received!—
But let me endeavour to obey—Heaven, in Such a caufe, will, I trust,
enable me to make the desired facri-\
sice. It must be done, Harriot, though my death should be the conSequence, and that it will, my foreboding heart, in most expressive language, tells me.
But then, the peace and happineSs of my family, I am told, depend on my ' confent. Ah, my dear friend ! can I believe this and hesitate a moment?— Hear the particulars.
I was yesterday ordered to attend my father in his dreshng-room. My m^o-ther was there. My fears were inexpressibly painful, Sensible as I was what would be the fubjedt of their coverSa-tion.
Sit
lAifs BEVILLE> 5f
Sit down Emilia, Said my mcther, your father has an affair to communicate to you, which we hope will meet with your ready approbation. It must, if you are not blind to your own interest. It has already met with that of •all thoSe who are Solicitous to promote your happineSs and felicity.
Why thoSe tears ? Said my father; do not, Emilia, give me reaSon to doubt the goodnefs of that disposition which has ever appeared to me perfedlly Sweet and amiable: do not, at this time, when it is going to be put to the proof (for I am SenSible what I am going to propoSe, may in Some relpedls, be disagreeable to one of your age) forfeit my good opinion, but hear me with that attention and obedient temper as becomes a dutiful child, and which I, as a parent, have a right to exadt.— I could not Ipeak, he Saw my emotion, nor waited for my reply,—Whatever D 2	appearance
SZ T2? HISTORY or
appearance I may make in life, continued he, and however great the world may believe my fortune, it is now necessary, my dear Emilk, to inform you that the one is but very little consistent with the other. My condudh has not perhaps been that of the most prudent fathe’r. 1 am Sensible of my error, but that convidlion comes too late, unleSs you my daughter will, by consenting to my desires, help me to extricate mySelf out of the difficulties into which my—let me confeSs—irregularities have plunged me. Ptertune now offers the means. You, Emilia, are chofen as the instrument. If I am not deceived in the judgment I have formed, of your heart, you will not Suffer the ruin of your family, when, by a trifling Sacrifice, you can prevent it, and again restore it to peace and tranquillity. You have had the good fortune to captivate the heart of Sir JoSeph Beau-
chamo,
k. *
BE V ILL E. 53
champ, he has made the most generous proposals, and desired my permission to pay his addresses to you. Need I remind you of his immenSe wealth, or the innumerable advantages that must: reSult from being the wife of a man of his rank and fortune I A moment’s refiedlion will diScover them to any unprejudiced perSon, and you, I flatter mySelf, are entirely So. Your heart has no pre-engagement, it is free. Lei* me then, as your friend, adviSe you to conSider what is So greatly for your interest. But fliould this not have Sufficient weight to prevail, I must next ^eak in the language of a father, and command your obedience. I hope, however, there will be no neceffit}'' for this unwdshed-for leverity, a Severity which, though perfedly justifiable, both from custom and that authority nature has certainly invested in every father, I^ would never make uSe of, did not my D 3	preSent
54	III S T O R Y
preSent perplexed affairs render it but too necessary..
Ah ! my dear fir, cried I, pierced to the heart with his obliging tenderneSs, and the cruel refiedtion of his distrefs; for well I knew his affairs must indeed be dreadfully disordered, before his pride—for to you, Harriot, I may confeis no man has- more—would Suffer him to acknowledge, as he has done, the unhappy eondudt that had occasionc his trouble. My heart bled, I fay, at that cruel moment, and if my immediate death would have restored him to peace, I would have \resigned my life without a murmer. Ah ! mv dear friend, who can withstand the eloquence of a father who Submits, to plead in the language of a friend with his child, and that too to implore her assistance to Save him from ruin ?
Ah, fir. Said I, do not afflidt me witte the recital of your distrefs,, you have-
indeed
IMtfs BEVILLE. 55
indeed a right to command my obedi* ence, but, cruel as the Sacrifice is which you require, and on which you assure me your future peace and felicity depend, .1 will endeavour—though heaven only' knows the pains my heart must Suffer—yes Sir, I will endeavour to obey.—You tell me my obedience alone can retrieve your affairs—it is enough — let me be miSerable — may you,; sir, and my dear mamma never know a moment’s pain. But let me at least have this conSoiation; do me the justice to believe, my dear fir, that no interest of mine, none of thofe advantages you were pleafed to mention, would have had any influence on my heart. Alas ! every day’s experience gives me new proofs, that they cannet , enfure felicity or content.. My utmost ambition has ever been to paSs my days in peaceful retirement. The world and its So eagerly coveted dignities, D 4	h^ve
SS Lie HIST OViY of
shave never been able to inSpire me wdth a desire to poffeSs them: I have no taste, no inclination for the hurrying, and, let me Say, unSatisfadlory pleaSures, with which you would tempt me. No, iny dear fir, that education which has taught me the duty of obedience, has alsh taught me to know, that true fesicity does not conSist in. being either rich i	or great; that they are vain and empty
’'	distindlions, nor can, to a thinking mind,
I	give any real Satisfadlion: but how
much leSs. when purchaled at the price of our future happineSs ! Do not then, I befeech you, wrong me So far as to believe that any consideration, but that of j	your felicity, should have induced me to
'	listen for a moment to a propoSal So
dreadful, for fuch you must permit me to assure you it appears to me. I will not preSume to mention his charadfer; you, fir, are perfedbly acquainted with it. Alas! is it possible that a woman
of
I
Mlfs B E V I LL E. 57
of any delicacy can be otherwiSe than miserable with a man of Sir JoSeph’s principles ? But it is your pleafure ■— the reaSons you condeScend to give touch my heart too nearly to Suffer me to refiecl, I will endeavour, therefore, to banish thought till I have obeyed your commands. My tears would not Suffer me to proceed: what,, indeed, was left me to add ?
I am not deceived then. Said my father, you are, my dear Emilia, the amiable girl I ever believed you. Be affured the Sacrifice you make to your duty shall be ever properly valued. My mother embraced me with great tenderneSs,
Ah! thought I, what a situation must their affairs indeed be in that it can make this amazing change in their manner of treating me i Can you, Harriot, conceive what were my emotions, or the thouSand different ideas which at that moment filled my imagi-D 5	nation ?
5S i»/HlSTOR Y
nation ? Irlipossible. My father theii ' gave me a particular account of the" motives that induced him to preSs me So earnestly on this odious Subjedt, antS amongst a rhouSand others this was one.
Sir JoSeph had been bound with^ him fora considerable Sum of money, which he had Some time ago been obliged to borrow to diScharge Some debts of honour, as they are falSely called, which he had contradled during a long run of ill-luck, and which he then meant to pay by mortgaging part of his estate; but delaying from time to time taking an account of his affairs, confcious the review would afford him but little fatisfadlion, and fortune still continuing perverSe, he lost double that Sum, nor is it now in his power to pay either one or the other, without the utter ruin of both himfelf and family. Sir JoSeph, Sensible of this, continued my father, has generoussy promifed, on
condition
IAifs BEVILLE. 59
condition I will prevail on you to make him happy, to Supply all my preSent wants, as well as to redeem that part of my fortune which has long been in the possession of others. This, my dear Emilia, is the true state of my affairs, nor have I enjoyed an hours peace for many months, con-' Scions that my circumstances were So dreadfully disordered. Ah-! why did I not endeavour, by changing my conduft, to retrieve them before they were So far gone}
Enough, my dear sir,interrupted I; let me, by my obedience,-give you a proof how much more I value your peace than I do my own. Indulge me, I beSeech you in a reafonable time, that I may endeavour to prevail on my heart to obey you with leSs reluDance. O 'Save me, my dear mamma. Save me as long as possible from the wretched fate that awaits me! whether to facri-D 6	sice
6®	HISTORY g/’
sice my happinefs or yours, I am ienfi-ble ought not to cost me a moment’s, deliberatiom; yet, ah! do not let me be hurried into miSery and deSpair !
You shall not, my dear child, you shall have every indulgence you can desire. But why will you terrify your-Self with groundless fears and apprehensions ? Why perSuade yourSelf that you are to be unhappy ? Is it possible you fiiould really fear it,, possessed as you will be of every blessing in the power of riches and honours to bestow ?. His age is the only reaSonable objection you can offer,, and this, furely, must' appear trifling, when fet in competition with thoSe other deSirable ad-< vantages. Believe me, my dear, there are- a thoufand girls of fortune as well as family, who would rejoice with great Sincerity at a proSped So inviting. You, Emilia, have never yet experienced the least tryal of poverty : you
can
' Mifs BEVILLE. 6r
can form no idea of its horrid, conSe-quences. Believe me, who have been for Some months past in continual apprehensions at its approach, nothing in -this life can be So dreadful. Thofcj* ridiculous ideas of peaceful retirement, which you have imbibed during your residence in the country, are sit only for thoSe who are doomed to Spend their days in obScurity. Riches, my Emilia, be assured, will never fail to enSure every other desirable gratification. Take my word, I should never have known' a moment’s uneaSineSs but for the want of that best of all bleff-ings.
Ah, my dear Harriot, what Sentiments are here.^ But time may, perhaps, teach her to think more justly : heaven grant it may ! Next week this dreadful man is to be introduced to me as a lover^—need I bid you pity me ? Alas! if providence does not, by
Some
«i
62 n'e HISTORY of"
Some unforeseen means, deliver me— yet, how vain is that delightful hope?— My word is past-—my tears blind-me— let me indulge them, they may per-^haps relieve my heart from that load, of w'oe that now oppresses it. Adieu, till I am miore compoSed.—Ah! Harriot, shall I ever again Sinow a moment’s peace ?
W hile every face abound me wears the appearance of joy and gladnefs, I, my dear friend, am dead to every SenSe of pleafure. I dare not Suffer ray thoughts to wander on the odious Sub-je6l that inSpires their happineSs. Ah, why js human nature So very weak ? Why does it cost us So many pains merely to do our duty ? Alas ! Harriot, in Spite of my unfeigned affe(stion for / my family, and the Sorrow I feel at the bare idea of their being even a moment in distreSs, not even the conSo -lation of doing what my reafon tells
me
Mtfs BEVILLE:	6 j
liie is right, can Save me from thoSe dreadful confiidls that tear my heart. The more I refiedt, the more shocking does the precipice appear, on whoSe horrid brink I at this moment stand. Is it not hard, my dear Harriot, ex-treamly hard, to be obliged thus to give up every flattering proSpech in life, every pleasing hope we form of happi-nefs ? Yes, my dear friend, let me • confefs, it appears to me extreamly So. Ah, how little did 1 know, when I first Saw this hated man, that in him I beheld the perSon who was to cauSe me So much miSery! How happy is it for us, my dear Harriot, that we cannot look into futurity ! How very few' are there vdio, in that cafe, would not fee So many approaching misfortunes as must effedtually prevent their enjoying the bleshngs of the preSent hour! Some share of trouble is, 1 believe, the portion of every mortal, and I acquieSce in the
juft
64 The HISTORY of
just decree. Were it not So, we should be too apt, I am perSuaded, to forget that we are in this life only in a state of probation. We do not, even now. Sufficiently accustom ourSelves to profit by that consideration : let me, however, embrace the preSent occasion. By tryals only can our virtue and fortitude be known. You, my dear Harriot, must confeSs mine are abundantly Severe. I dare not think of them, lest I should be tempted to do what in another I am Sensible I should condemn. My father’s, my mother’s felicity !—Ah, what a consideration ! Yes, I will rejoice that I am choSen as the means to restore their lost peace ; Surely this ought to" compensate for any pains I may endure.
How often have I sighed for greater powTr to relieve the distresses of my	i
fellow creatures!' Have I not, a thousand times, with justice declared, the greatest blessing heaven could bestow
w'as
B E V I L L E. 65 '
w'as a benevolent heart, with a fortune Sufficient to gratify its utmost desire of being generous to all around us ?
Write to me, my dear friend, uSe all ypur perSuasive eloquence to inSpire me with courage to bear my fate with becoming fortitude: Adieu. Pity and continue to love your extreamly um happy and afflidled,.
Em II. IA Beville^
]
L E T T E R VIII.
, To the Same.
Al as ! my dear Harriot, I shall not live to obey my father’s cruel commands L. My Spirits have quite de-Serted mein Spite of all,my endeavours, and heaven is my witneSs J have uSed every effort in my power to prevent »	tlieir
66	HISTOR Y cf
their depression, determined to 'give my family as little pain as possible from Seeing the conflict I endure. Since L have been perSecuted with his addresses in perSon, I arn infinitely more shocked, than when only in expedtation of that misfortune. His ridiculous passion,, which he would perSuade me, as he has done himSelf, is unalterable, is diSgust-ing to the laSt degree. That I may,, if possible, forget the unlucky eir-eumstance of his being old, he is perpetually deScribing to me the amazing exploits he, performed in his youthful days. He would make me, were I inclined to listen to him, the confident of thoSe intrigues he was engaged in a thouSand years ago. Poor, mistaken mortal, to fancy that any woman of delicacy wopld esteem him the more, were he still what he So. ardently wishes! Alas! the gallant atchieve-ments of which he So feelingly boasts,
did.
Mi/s BEVILLE. 6 7
etid he but know his true interest, ought:
for ever to be buried in oblivion. Not a
woman, he Says, in thoSe days of felicity,
could resist the united force of his perSom
and addreSs. Then, with the most odious-. /
fondneSs taking my hand, he cries— Nor do I yet, my lovely Emilia, deSpate of inspiring that divine passion, since you have given me permishon to plead., that which, at this delightful moment,
. glows in my transported breast.—But Spare me, Harriot, the mortifying repetition—-I blush for the folly of the man, when I consider that very man is to be niy—Ah ! can I ever pronounce that horrid word? I tremble at the tormenting thought, Alas ! poor Lady Beauchamp^ what a fate was yours! how sincerely do I feel for the miSery-you must have Suffered during thoSe few years you v/as the companion of, this odious man. Yet yours was voluntary miSery—heaven knows what could.
be,'
68 2'i^HISTORYo/’
be your temptation—but let me banish ressedlion. Ah, Harriot, had I been one of thofe happy inSenSibles we So often meet with,, what innumerable pains might I have eScaped! Yet I Sliould not then have known the joy of adding to the peace and felicity of m)t. parents—this is-a conSolation of infinite importance. You, my friend, have drawn it in the most pleasing and flattering colours : your eloquence, believe me, is not lost. 1 have a thouSand times peruSed your inimitable letter, nor ever failed to find my reSolution strengthened by your amiably-given ad-viSe. Continue to Sooth me with your delicate praiSe, for, indeed my dear Harriot, I need every help to confirm me in the desio-n 1 have formed, thro’ no more perhaps than my duty absolutely requires.
You bid me write of Caroline : wshat can I Say of that affair ? She gave me
her.
M^s SEVILLE. 6^
her word she would think no more of the wild Scheme she had projected, but l am much afraid her lover’s eloquence will have more influence than all my prudent advice. I talk to her continually, site still promises to take my counSel, but, what I do not much approve, is, she is as much as ever perSuaded a few months would reconcile Mr. Stanhope to his nephew’s marriage. She is fond of indulging this hope, which, for my own part, I believe to be entirely without foundation ; for, however fond he may now be of him, to offend in a point So material, cannot easily be forgiven. He is here frequently, nor has any one, but mySelf, the least SuSpicion of his design ; indeed, at preSent, -every one’s attention is engaged on another affair—^Ah, Harriot, what an affair is that which gives them all So much pleaSure ! By this means they are at no loSs for opportunities to
concert
yo The HISTORY ^
concert their meaSures, but still I hope, may, am perSuaded, she will not take So rash a step after the conversation we have So frequently had on the Subjedt.
I am told Sir Joleph’s brother, whoSe Son has ever been looked upon as heir to -his uncle’s fortune, is in dreadful apprehensions about this ’odious marriage. Ah, Harriot, why can they not prevail on him to change his ridiculous purpoSe! They have ever since Lady Beauchamp’s death, pleaSed them-Selves with the proSpedh of their Son’s good fortune, little dreaming that they might be disappointed by Such a piece of folly. The young gentleman ismow on his travels. How extreamly ungenerous, after encouraging in him thoSe fiatteririg hopes, to destroy them at once by this frightful union. Alas, Harriot, 'did they but know, as you do, the Sentiments of my heart, ought they not rather to pity than condemn me as they
do.
Mi/} BEVILLE. 71
do, for Sacrificing, as they justly ex-preSs it, my peace and happineSs for the.fake of enjoying his rank and fortune ? This is the falSs light in which they See my condiKst: and what, indeed,' can even the unprejudiced think .in Such a caSe ? No wonder they should put the least favourable construdion, interested as they are in his affairs. Mrs. Beauchamp is a woman of great ambition and violent Spirit: she talks in high terms of Sir JoSeph’s folly, as she justly terms it, nor does my family efcape her cenSure, though the world, in general, will no doubt commend their prudence; for this, my dear Harriot, is an amazingly prudent age: though I cannot but obServe they have, to make room for that virtue, diScard-, cd Some others no leSs valuable, and a thouSand times more pleasing. Mr. Beauchamp is indeed a man of great good ienSe; but can this prevent his
feeling
0
•r
7.2 H I S T O R Y V’
feeling the disappointment that is preparing for him ? No, Harriot, it certainly cannot: yet he Speaks with moderation, owns bis brother has an undoubted right to dilpoSe of his fortune as he thinks proper, but adds, a man at his time of life might have given greater proofs of wifdom than in marrying a child. Ah, my good Mr. Beauchamp, how perfedlly do your Sentiments reSemble thoSe of the unhappy creature who now gives you So much uneaSineSs !
You wsill perhaps wonder how 1 came by all this intelligence, since I am not intimately acquainted with their family': indeed if I had, they would not perhaps have expressed their Sentiments sio plainly in my hearing. My Jenny’s' sister is woman to that very enraged lady, and it was by her means I came by this information. I do^ not encourage her in talking-to me of affairs in which I
have
Mifs BEVMLLE. 7 3
have no concern, nor, to do her justice, have I ever discovered in her an inclination to be guilty of this too common failing; but as I am Sensible Site has a most sincere affedion for me, I couSd not refiust to listen to what she • Seemed So deeply interested in. I am perSuaded she was in hopes—or at least unfeignediy wished it—to prevail on me to change my purpoSe, convinced as ihe is, that I am conSenting to voluntary miSery. She cannot be reconciled to my lover, notwithstanding his liberality to her, for-the most trifiing fer-vices — no Small proof this of her worth. I doubt not, her sister is ordered to tranSmit to her the Sentiments of her lady, in hopes I may by that m.eans hear them, and consequently not have ignorance to plead, in regard to the injury I am going to do her family. Ah, Harriot, with what joy would I prefer a cottage with Sweet content,
, VoL. I.	E	to
' s
iV-'b'
74 T/je HIST ORY of
to all this envied wealth! Thank heaven they do not yet preSs me to fix a day for compleating my wretchedneSs —in this mamma keeps her promiSe — but, alas! I am dying every hour with 4he dreadful apprehensions, for it will come,- my dear friend; convinced as I am of this, can I but be miferable ? How I differently is she affedted with this mortifying truth! Never was woman So happy. 1 will not enquire into her motives—they would, I fear but add to my Sorrow. It cannot be that she believes my happineSs So near, she knows my Sentiments too well to be thus deceived.
Adieu, my dear friend, I must not
indulge myfelf in any refledlions, I must
endeavour to banish thought for ever.
/
Emilia Beville.
LET-
MIfs BEVILLE. 75
LETTER IX.
STo the Same.
DO not too Severely chide ixie, my dear Harriot, for my unuSually long silence, but ever do me the justice to believe, when I am thus apparently guilty of negledl, that my fault is unavoidable. Alas! my dear, in Spite of the affiidlion I am in, I yet am obliged to give Some degree of attention to the horrid preparations making for my approaching—Ah ! Harriot, I have been fatigued to death with the disagreeable assiduities of my cruel tormentor ! He is continually making me the most valuable preSents, in hopes no doubt, of reconciling me to my fate by thoSe baubles So generally valued by our Sex. Alas, he knows but little of that heart he So vainly tries to gain !
E 2	lam
76 Vi^tfHISTORY ^
I am now peisiuaded Caroline has entirely given up her design, and this belief has relieved my heart from a great deal of trouble. Her miSery, had She followed the didates of her heart, would have been, I am well affured, absolutely unavoidable. Alas, Harriot, it is enough that one of two daughters is born to wretchedneSs!
You will not forgive me if I do not inform you of every thing that passes, or I should hardly take the trouble to tell you I have, in Spite of that ssejedion So visible on my countenance, made a Small impression on the heart of a beau I Saw for the first time the other night at the opera. A few months since^ this conquest might have given mse Some degree of pleaSure, Iptit now—ah, let me not think.
The attention he paid me was observed by all our party. . Sir JoSeph was. one, nor did he Seem much delighted
BEVILLE. 77
lighted with the compliment my lord paid to his taste and judgment, by the approving looks he cast on me. He left the box he was first in, and, being acjquainted with Some of the gentlemen in ours, came and placed him-felf near me, and, to do him justice, lost not one moment of the time we stayed. What he Said, though expressS-cd in the most elegant and patlietick strain, made but very little impression on my heart, though it made a great deal on that of Sir JoSeph, In Spite of all my caution to avoid his civilities, he led me to our carriage; as I approached it he sighed, and, v/ith per-fedtly well-bred gallantry, pressed my hand, uttering Some Soft nonSenSe, of wshich I could only gueSs the Subjedl by thoSe graces that accompanied it. Caroline adviSes me by ail means to give him that preference he. So justly deServes, and without ceremony leave E 3	my
yS	HISTORY cf
my antient lover to Seek out Some other help-mate more Suitable to hia age; but, gay and gallant as he is, he is not the man, Harriot, whoSe perfection could induce me to violate that duty I owe my family, nor. break the promiSe I have given. No, my .dear friend, every hope is fled: I have only to Subdue my rebel heart. Yet, is it in nature that I shall ever prevail on it to obey without reludtance Ah, no.
Mrs. Beauchamp being now convinced that the affair is reSolved on, and to be Scon concluded, is quite outragious: Says the most bjtter things in all companies, not only of her brother-in-law, but of ail my family. He is not ignorant of the liberties she So imprudently
takes, and Swears she shall feel the
/
weight of his reSentment, since she has,' by her proceedings. So clearly discovered her mean and Sordid disposition.
A letter
Mifs B E V IL L E. 79
A letter is brought me.—It is from you, my Harriot—let me penile the dear contents, and that done I will again reSume my pen.
Yes, my dear friend, it is possible I find, notwithstanding my deSpair, to taste a most sincere joy. How unSpeak-ably happy has your obliging, your amiable epistle made me ! My Sorrows are, at this delightful moment, almoSt forgot. Are you positive nothing will prevent you ^—Ah, Harriot, should I be disappointed after this Sweet hope you have raiSed in my breast, I stiall expire with grief. You know not, my dear friend, - nor can I deScribe to you, the transport of my heart, v/hen I read the unexpedted news. Your preSence shall Support my drooping Spirits. Coma then, my charming Harriot, come, and by your amiable, your agreeable vivacity, give .me that conSolation I stand So much in need of. But I forget E 4	to
So Lhe HISTORY of
to give you joy on the happy event that has procured me this highly valued favour; yet need I tell you how fenfi» bly I Snare in whatever gives you pleasure ? I know this addition of fortune will only be agreeable to my friend as if will enable her to extend more universally that benevolence for-which So many, even now, bleSs their amiable benefadtreSs.-—What joy in life’ can equal that power?
But adieu, 1 will not a moment longer delay to affure you how Sincerely I rejoice in your good fortune, nor how very tedious every hour will appear till I a n permitted to congratulate my Harriot on her Safe arrival in town. Be expeditious then, I beSeech you, as you value the friendship or peace of
Your
Emilia Beville. I. E T-
JMjtf BEVILLE. 81
LETTER X.
2 0 the Same.
Good heavens, my dear Harriot, to what a Scene of tumult and confusion have I been witneSs 1 Ah, my poor, imprudent sister, how truly do I Sympathize in thoSe Sorrow's that I with too much reaSon fear will be the conSequence of the ill-adviSed step you have So rashly taken! Need I, after this, tell you she is gone ? A letter she left for me with Jenny informed me of this unfortunate affair. My father declares she shall never again enter his door, nor does my mother endeavour to mitigate this cruel Sentence. I have been Severely questioned, but, alas, Harriot, was 1 not deceiv'ed ? For Some weeks past I had been fully perSuaded she had entirely laid aside any Such design: how eaSy is it to E 5	impoSe
§2 neHlSrORYof
/
impole on thoSe who are not accustomed to pradliSe deceit! Ah, my friend,. I Suffer every way by her imprudence ;-I not only feel for her as a sister, but am now more than ever perSecuted about this horrid man. All my prayers and intreaties for delaying the So justly dreaded day, are no longer attended to ; my father insists upon my immediate conSent, and cruelly Says, he doubts not I only desire to gain time that I may find an opportunity to follow the undutiful example of my Sister. Is it kind, Harriot, thus to upbraid me, at a time when I am on the point of giving him So undeniable a proof of my affedlion and care for his interest ? Yet, let me remember the too just cauSe he has to be diSpleafed: it is not eaSy to govern our words when under i	the influence of passion. I ought not
then to condemn his apprehensions.
O hasten.
iS/^BEVILLE. 83
0	hasten, I beSeech you, my dear friend, be Speedy in your journey. I cannot Support the thoughts of not having your preSence. on this dreadSul occasion, after having pleaSed myfelt with that delightful hope. — I cannot, it is impossible I ever should, name
the horrid day So peremptorily insisted '	1
on. . Come then I intreat you, and Save me from this unSpeakable mortification.
You, Harriot, shall determine for me— yet, do nor, ah, for heaven’s Sake, do not be too precipitate in that important determination.
1	Send you a copy of Caroline’s letter.—Adieu, believe me
Ever yours,
Emilia Seville.
I know, Emilia, you will condemn v“ the Step I have taken, but believe ‘	“ me, my dear girl, the only pain I
E 6	y fed
84 ne HISTORY oj
‘‘ feel on the occasion is the refiedtion “ of my having deceived your unshS-“ pedling heart. Trust me, I had well “ weighed the confequence likely to “ follow, though you, I fancy, will be “ apt to think my talents but ill Suited “ to that employment: you are, how-■	“ ever, for this once in your life mif-
“ taken. The question to be considered “ was merely this: whether I was to “ give up my charming Stanhope to “ deSpair, and thereby reduce mySelf to “ a condition not one grain better—to “ wait patiently till my prudent father * “ could find me out a SpouSe, equal in “ age and wiSdom, to the venerable “ Soul he has choSen for you; or, by “ following the Spirited example of fifty “ I could name,, not only Secure my “ own happineSs, but, alSo Save that “ honest man, whoever he might be,
“ the mortification of having — a very
“ wife—
Mifs BEVILLE. g5
wife—for a very wife, in that cafe, “ my dear Emilia, you may depend “ upon it I would have been This,.
you will grant, could not require any “ yery deep thought or refiecSion ; no, “ my dear, it really did not cost me a “ moment’s deliberation. In Snort, “ what is done cannot be undone. My “ word, as I told you, was given be-‘‘ fore your Sage advice, which, to do “ you justice, had Some share of wiS-dom in it, but I am not much given “ to follow thofe So very grave lessons “ you endeavoured to teach me. You “ forget you had been bred up in the “ shades of obScurity, and — let me “ add, my dear girl—simplicity : while “ I had been educated in the world “ of liberty and eaSe. (^lite a different “ thing, believe me.
“To your gravity I commit the “ care of informing papa of my ex-“ pedition; for this talk, I own, I
“ thought
B6 HISTOR YV
“ thought you better qualified than* “ even my Self: no Small opinion of “ your capacity in Some things, you “ See. Indeed, to do you justice, I “ find no fault in you but want of “ life and Spirit; a terrible defedt, let “ me tell you, in thoSe who mean to “ shine or make any figure in life.
Why, my dear Emilia, had I a face “ and perSon like yours (you may be “ thankful to my being So near the “ brink of matrimony for the con-‘‘ Session of this truth) I would have made Such a bustle. Such destruction “ amongst the beaus, and raiSed So “ much delightful envy in the female “ world, as should have SurpriSed you;
but having not quite So great a share “ of dame nature’s favours, I am there-‘‘ fore obliged to be content with leSs “ ambitious views—not but I have in “ my time had a little fiuitation.— y Had her ladyship, I fay, been more
y judicious.
ilL^BEVILLE. 8y
- “judicious in conferring her'-obliga-“ tions, I would have adled very dif-“ ferently from you : Yes, child, your “ ridiculous old knight should have “ expired for want of a wife, rather “than I would have conSented to be-“ come his mortified rib. I have “ told you a thouSand times at least, “ that my antiquated aunt had quite “ I]30iled you, and you are now going “ to prove beyond diSpute, that what “ I Said was truth.
“ Adieu, my dear, make the most “ favourable report you can to the “ houSe, when you enter upon this af-“ fair. You have, to Say truth, a most “ perSuaSive method of pleading. To “ your eloquence then I commit my “ cauSe, do not, I beSeech you, be “ Sparing of it, but ufe all your airs “ and graces on the important occasion, “ Soften the story as much as you “ can, in due time I will, accompanied
“ by
B8	HISTORY eT
by my Swain, come, and, heroine “ like, throw mySelf at my 'father’s “ feet, when, embracing his venera-“ ble knees, I will, in faiiltering accents, “ Sue for pardon and reconciliation, “ and the duce is in it if a Scene So “ moving does not do the buSmeSs. “ I never, in all the courfe of my “ reading, met with an instance where “ a Submission of that kind was're-jedled—no Such thing. As for my “ new uncle, leave him to my manage-“ ment. I’ll anSwer for my SucceSs with. “ his worSnip.
“ Farevv’ell—in Spite of your wiSdom, “ gravity and all that, I believe you are “ an excellently good girl, and as Such,
, “ believe me, I love you as a sister “ ought. Once more, I beSeech ypu, “ miu ster up all your stock of eloquence, “ nor forget to put on one of thoSe “ Soft, insinuating looks with which you “ gained the heart of your Superanmiat-
“ eel
Mifs BEVILLE. 89
• ed lover—no bad Scheme to interest
“him in my favour; you have only
“to command his approbation; as
“ your professed stave and Servant he
“ dares not refuSe it. Again 1 bid /
you adieu.
“ Caroline (almost) Stanhope.”
LETTER XL
Mifs Harriot Molesworth, ttx Mifs Charlotte Molesworth*
Good heavens ! my dear Charlotte, how different is the Subjedt I am now to wTite upon from that you no doubt impatiently expedl me to entertain you with ! I cannot expreSs my astonishment, nor do I believe I ever shall be enough compoSed to inform
90 ne FI I S T O R Y ^
form you as I wish v/hat has occasioned alf theSe exclamations. Mamma,, who ever tenderly loved the dear girl —for need I tell you it is of our lovely Emilia I write — is distressed beyond meaSure oii her account. The most astonishins; affair that ever Sure was known! I am not able to give you the particulars, though I die with impatience to inform you of what has-^	happened. What shall I Say to you,,
Charlotte, how will you believe it, when 1 tell you my lovely, my accomplished friend, your dear Emilia, is* gone ^ nor can any one give the Smallest gueSs either where, with > whom, or on what account. Sir JoSeph, indeed, is SuppoSed by most people to be the cauSe of her flight; but 1,, who know her to be incapable of even the appearance of deceit, cannot perSuade my-Seif that ishe would have Sufibred her family to flatter themSeives So long with
tlic
BEVILLE. 91
the hopes, nay promiSes, of Ii^r consent, unleSs she had fully determined to keep her word. I am convinced-yes, Charlotte, I would anfwer for her sincerity at the hazard of my life — I fay, I am beyond all doubt convinced, she never gave them one promiSe she did not religioussy purpoie to fulfil* Where then is she ? you ash. Why then is she not here to perform her engagement ^ I cannot—with grief I confeSs—I cannot anSwer theSe important questions. Heaven only knows. that mystery we in vain attempt to unravel ; for, in Spite of every means (and you may believe none have been omitted, either by her enraged and really much to be pitied father, let his faults be what they will, or her doating, deSpairing lover) not the least isiformation can be obtained. No language can deScribe the exceSs of his affiidlion; jealoufy, excited by the violence
,	92 LLe HISTORY of
lence of his passion, grief and reSent-ment torment him by turns, nor will he ever more, I absolutely believe, know a moment’s peace. That he adored her, is no more than every one must, who, like him, had Such frequent opportunities of feeing and becoming acquainted with her unSpeakably, amiable condudl: and disposition. She is, my dear Sister—yes, let me Say she still is, for never will I believe she will give me reaSon to change my favourable opinion—but who can expreSs her invaluable worth .?—Well may you lament your irreparable loSs, Sir JoSeph, for believe that friend who knows every Sentiment of her heart, she has not left in this world her equal. The more I refiedl: on her numsherleSs ex- | cellencies, ^ the more am I perplexed and lost in amazement. All my thoughts are darknels and confusion.
Gan
Mifs SEVILLE. 93
Can you, Charlotte, form to yourSelf any idea of my astonishment when flying To Sir William’s, the instant I arrived in town; I was informed by her half-distradted and bitterly inveighing mother, of her diSgraceful flight, as she choSe to call it But judge from thoSe emotions you will yourfelf experience, on reading this imperfedh account, what mine must have been, wdien every circumstance was heightened by the most outragious indignation. It is certain every thing at this time concurs to aggravate the misfortune. From my heart do I pity them, tho’ Sensible Self-interest has but too great share in their care and Solicitude. This is a truth known full v/ell, but it is impossible they should not alSo grieve for the loSs of a daughter So amiable, . i	So dutiful in every adlion of her life.
;	Every thing at this time, I fay, con-
I curs to render their grief more violent.
Caroline
94 ne HIST OKY of
Caroline just gone, their own affairs in Such confusion, all their pleasing hopes in a moment blasted by this fatal—what shall 1 call it.^ You must not expe(5l me to fay one word of our own affairs, I can think nor Speak of nothing but my unhappy friend.
Some people fuSpedt Lord B—as the author of her flight:—I find he has publickly declared the most violent passion for her. She mentioned him, indeed, in one of her letters, but Spoke of him So (lightly, and with Such apparent indifSerence, that I looked on what had passed between them merely as a piece of gallantry, with which every man would be induced to treat a figure beautiful as hers; but this was not the caSe, he found means, they tell me, to be introduced at Sir William’s, had been two or three times at my Lady’s rout, and behaved in a manner fo very particular to Emilia,
that
M^rBEVILLE. 95
that every one pronounced him rival to Sir JoSeph. I should, no doubt, have heard more of this in her next letter.—Ah, Charlotte!, shall I ever receive another from that amiable girl ?
This, I was telling you, is the con-jedlure of most people. Every one, you may believe, will form Some or other on So extraordinary an occasion. But how comes it then, if they are right, that he is still in town, and to all appearance more deeply affedted ^ with her loSs than either her family or lover ?—It is true, this is no infallible proof of his innocence, since he may in fadt, notwithstanding all this, be the very perfon who has been the caufe of all our Sorrow. What more likely method to prevent SuSpickn than this SurpriSe, grief, and apparent deSpair ? and that he would endeavour to conceal his guilt is, I think, a point that will admit of no diSpute. By
what
96 The HISTOR Y of
v/hat I can learn of his charadler, there is no man in the v/orld more likely to engage in Such an enterprize. But why then will the vile cenSorious town preSume to Say her flight is voluntary, and that she went off with his lordfliip in order to prevent her union with a man She justly disapproved ? It is true, they accuSe her only of having consented to a clandestine marriage, they durst not believe her capable of any greater imprudence, her charadter was too well known for that. Thus while every one talks as fancy Suggest;s, none can give any certain account of what-we So ardently wifli to be informed of. My lord declares his innocence in terms So expressive, that, I own, I cannot doubt his Sincerity; but he at the Same time Sv/ears, had he known or SuSpeded any one had formed Such a design, he w^ould, rather than have lost a creature So angelick, have given
the
Mifs SEVILLE. 97
the world just reaSon to accuSe him— Such a thought, he Says, never appeared neceffary to him^ as he had—he modesh ly confesses — the vanity to hope he might at least have gained the approbation of her family, if not that of their charming daughter, and he fancies his venerable rival had as yet gained no greater favour. He, good man, appeared to him it Seems but as a trifling obstacle, though his lordship -V might have found himSelf deceived. The terms Sir JoSeph offered v/ere, perhaps, more tempting than any he either could, or would propoSe, however violent his love; and that it is violent, he gives abundant cauSe to believe.
I have not yet told you thoSe few particulars that are known of her flight, nor when the dreadful misfortune happened ; but no wonder, I write without order or connection, since I am
VoL. I.	F	not.
58 rhe H IS T O RY
not, nor indeed do 1 believe I ever shall be, recovered from my astonishment. •
She had for Some days before been indiljDoSed.—Ah, Charlotte, is it posh-ble she should not, considering the confiid file must have endured between lier duty and inclination ? All her pro-Ipedts of happineSs on the point of being for ever blasted, by the horrid Sacrifice she was going to make! For that she meant to give them that proof of her affedlion, nothing shall ever induce me to doubt. She was ordered either to ride, or, if able, to walk every morning by way of exerciSe; of the latter she was ever particularly fond, and accordingly had, for Several-days, gone for an hour or two into Hyde-Park. On that day, which I 'shall never think of without horror, she had gone accompanied by her maid and a man Servant, to take an airing in
that
I
Mifs B £ V I L L E. 99
that fatal place. They had but just entered GroSvenor’s-gate, when Emilia, finding it rather cool. Sent the man back for a thicker capuchin, ordering him to follow her immediately. It was, you know, but a step back from thence to Hanover-Square. He obeyed , her orders as fast as possible, but returning to the Park, he Sought every part of it in vain, his lady v/as no where to be found. He then imagined she had changed her design and gone home, but, good heavens ! imagine the consternation of every one, when, after w^aiting in the utmost anxiety and un-eaSineSs, night came on and neither Emilia nor her maid appeared! The man, you may fuppofe, was questioned over and over, but all to no purpoSe: what I have told you is all he knew of the affair, nor have they, with all their diligence, been diitherto able to learn a more Satisfactory account.
F 2 '	Adieu,
ICO Ihe HISTORY t)f
Adieu, my dear Charlotte, I can write on no other Subjedt, and all I can fay on this will but .’add to my afflidlion. Mamma would have Sent you a line or two, but is prevented by Lady Seville, wlio has just Sent to beg the favour of her company. There was no refusing her request at a time like this. But two daughters, and thoSe both So unfortunate ! It is a lucky circumstance for her that she is not burthened with any violent share of natural affedlion.
Farewell, let me hear from you every posh I now rejoice that you did not
I	accompany us.'
I	\
j	Yours,'
Harriot Molesw^orth.
I	LET-
ilL^BEVILLE. loi
LETTER XIL
To the Same,
Yes, my dear Charlotte, I was Senfi-ble you would be deeply afflidted at the unfortunate affair I related to you in my last, and am glad to find your Sentiments on the occasion concur sh exadtly \vith rnine. Though still (and, alas ! 1 greatly fear there are no hopes of ever being otherwife) ignorant of her fate, I am as much as ever perSuaded she is innoceiit in every ^ reSpedl. I cannot prove my affertion — would to heaven I could ! — but ajii nevertheless convinced it is just. But time, I trust, will do her this juSdee though I cannot. ^
Her friends, with the utmost diligence, still continue their fearch, but cannot gain the fmallest information, or the most distant hope. You fee, F 3	my
102	H.ISTO R Y.D/
my dear, I have nothing to write that can alleviate your friendly care ; for my own part I am more miSerable than you can possibly conceive.
Sir JoSeph has absolutely been for this vreek confined to his bed by a fever, and but yesterday, for the first . time, w^as able to leave his room, He , one moment declares he never will give up the hopes of recovering her, and the next raves, and shews the most dreadful jealouSy lest she should have deceived him, and really be gone off with Some more fortunate — becaufe :	more favoured—lover. My Lord is
still, in Spite of every appearance, fuSpeDed by them all, but certainly without cauSe ; since, it is well known, he has not been one day out of town since her abSence—Yet she may bd in this very town; as what place more likely to conceal her ? If So, why should he leave it ? in short, 1 am weary of
conjectures:
Mtfs B E V IL L E. 103
eonjeftures: my fruitlefs refiedion?, which I yet make every moment. Serve only to torment me. I am really ill, having not enjoyed a moment’s tranquillity since my arrival. My friends may whth juSdce be highly offended at the little pleaSure or Satisfadion I ex-preSs for their unremitted civilities; but they know not, as you do, the value of our lovely Emilia : they can have no idea of the mifery I coiitinu-ally Suffer on her account.
Caroline is, I am told, returned. How extreamly unfortunate is' it for her affairs, that this more dreadful event than her own, should have happened just at this time ! She can have no hopes of obtaining that pardon she flattered herfelf with, while the minds of all. her family are thus distraded with grief and difappointment. What, influence she may have on the heart of her new^ uncle I do not know, but, jf F 4	the
'J04 H I S T O R Y g/'
the charaDer I hear of him is just, lie would have diSpcnced with any other perfedlion Sooner than that of fortune. A woful preSage this for the gay and thoughtieSs bride! Mamma would have me call upon her, but really her prefence can Serve no other purpoSe than to renew my grief; for I am not able to give her any confolation, either as to my Emilia or herfelf. Indeed site may not, at preSent, think she stands in any need of my endeavours, and I	however she may be deceived, as long
as the delusion lasts, the cafe is pretty I	much The Same as if she really did not.
To believe ourSelves happy is, in fadt, to be So. Let me not then be the first to inform her' fne is mistaken: a very few m.onths, I doubt not, will fully prove that diSagreeable trulh. Think, Charlotte, what a couple ! She nineteen, he Scarce twenty ; he an ensign, with very little or no fortune but his
Gommission,
Mtfs BEVILLE. 105
eommission, she a sine town-bred lady, with leSs, or perhaps none. Vf hat a proSpedl! a most promising pair to educate and bring up a family, upon my word. The mother wall want a governcSs as much at least as any child she can possibly have.
Every thing is Settled in regard to our legacy. Mr. OSmond has been particularly obliging in that affair. It is exadUy as we SuppoSed; never was a better man. MiSs OSmond is on the point of matrimony with young Cath-cart; they insist upon my being one of her bride-maids, MiSs Bellamy is. choSen for the other. i\las ! how little am I able by my preistnce, to add either life or Spirit to the happy Society ! They do every thing in their power to difpel my melarfcholy, but, in Spite of t-heir obliging endeavours, the thoughts of our amiable friend must ever prevent theiir Succefs. I uie all my efforts . E 5	' indeed
io6 The HI STORY
indeed to appear chearful in their company, lest I should by my gravity give a damp to the general harmony; nor could I possibly refuSe to perform the part they require at the enSuing ceremony. They talk of balls, and a thousand other gaieties on the happy oc- ' caSion, but all will be dull and insipid to me, unleSs I before that time gain Some intelligence concerning my friend.
Adieu, Charlotte, you* fee I have nothing to Say worth your reading; tho’
*	to Say truth, I believe the stupidity of
my letter is rather owing to my want of Spirit, since I am certainly Surround>- ^ ed by a thou Sand agreeable Scenes, and as many agreeable friends, which could not fail to afford me abundance of materials to fill a much larger portion of paper, were I in a disposition either to enjoy or deScribe them : but indeed, Charlotte, this is not at preSent the caSe.
!	However, as mamma is at this moment
p	writing
Mifs SEVILLE. 107
writing to you alSo, I hope her epistle will make amends for the insipidity of mine. Once more adieu, continue pundlual in writing as you value the good graces of.
Your,
Harriot Moleswortii. ^
LETTER XIII.
. SCo the Same.
STILL in the most painful Suljpence ?
Every one now begins to deSpair of ever beins; delivered from it. Is it not astonishing that all their diligence Snould-be So ineffedlual ? Not the Smallest information, in Spite of all their care^ can be obtained.
I have not yet been to v/ait on Mrs. Stanhope, but intend to go in a day or F 6	' two*
io8 HI S T O R Y c/
two. I hear she is as gay and happy" as if every thing was Settled agreeable to her most Sanguine wishes. Her sister’s affair gives her no Sort of concern. She Says she has too good an* opinion of her to fear for a moment her having done any thing that can possibly deServe cenfure, and takes it for granted that she will, in due time and place, introduce, as she means to do, a Smart Son-in-law to the family. Owns, she never believed her poffeiSed of So much Spirit, but iS' glad to find herSelf deceived; and ends by Saying, the days of Chivalry are long since at an end, this age does not abound with thoSe valiant knights, who, in days of, old, would think nothing of stealing a mistreSs in Spite of giants or enchanted castles. No, no, cries ' she, the poor o-irls are now obliged to meet their ;	Swains at least half way, or be content
!	to Spend their days in the melancholy
amuSement
Mifs B E V I L L E. 109
amuSement of lamenting the decay of pure and disinterested love. Giddy as she is", there is shme truth in what she Lays. But who, in the. nanae of fortune then, is this Smart Son ? Ah, could she but'" convince me that I have no reaSon to be thus alarmed—but his impossible.
It is astonishing to me that she is not more concerned, was it only in consideration for what her father lofes by the breaking off this match; nay, is not her own interest deeply concerned in the event ? This is a powerful argument with most people, but she looks ^ only to the preSent hour. “ Be care-“ fill for nothing,” is her favourite text, as Emilia once told me, and she gives daily proofs, it must be confessed, that it is sh.
Let me at prefent endeavour to forget this tormenting fubjedt, as I must, if possible, lay aside my melancholy air, at least for this day. I am going, as I
told
no	HISTORY^
told you I had promiSed, to attend the*-nuptials of MiSs OSmond, and would ^ not willingly appear on Such an occasion with a pensive countenarrce. My letter will therefore, you may easily SuppoSe, be a short one, as I have not yet begun the important buSmeSs of dreSs. Indeed if I did not, though in this tovrn, still continue my convenient custom of early rising, I must for once have disappointed you of your no doubt, expefted epistle. By the way, this excessive pundtuality may be attended with Some diSagreeable effeds. For instance ; I might now have found it impossible to write, hurried as I am: you, of courSe SuppoSe a thoufand frightful accidents must have happened, to prevent what I So faithfully promiSed; the conSequence of which is, you /do not enjoy a moment’s peace, till the return of another post day convinces you thoSe fe^rs and apprehensions were
entertained
Mifs BEVILLE. in
entertained without foundation. You See, my dear, the best institutions have .their inconveniencies and defects. However, I will not, if I can possibly help
it, disappoint you even once, while I /
remain in town. In our agreement we made no conditions concerning the wit, SenSe or vivacity, that was to embellish our correspondence ; it will, therefore^ not be quite So difficult, as it would in that caSe have been, to oblige you.
I do not think the following copy of a letter a bad one for thoSe who, like us, write merely with a design to hear of each others health and happi-neSs, and not by way of dilplaying their eloquence or genius in the epistolary art. Take it, in caSe you should ever be at a loSs either for time, or, what is frequently more embarrassing, a fubjedl. “ I am well if you are well—pay the “ post and all is well.” Pray now tell me, what can any one desire more ?
I have.
112 TA-HISTORY^
I have, in honour of the bride, made up a most elegant white tiffue, and the most beautiful Suit of blond you ever Saw—but I must bid you adieu, the man waits to dreSs my hair, aiid that is a work of time, as well as pain. Pride, it is Said, feels none. If So, you will tell mj.e 1 need be under no apprehensions.
Ever yours,
Harriot Molesworth.
LETTER XIV.
I 0 the Same.
SHALL I never again be able to write to you in my uSual manner Alas ! my dear, if it depenOs om the recovery of our Emilia all hopes of that nature are too Surely gone for ever ! Still lost, Charlotte, to the ardent
Wishes
Mij;s BEVILLE. 113
wishes of her numerous friends and admirers, what can I Say to your anxious enquiries? Nothing, my dear girl,-that can give you any degree of Satil-fadlion : why then should I add to your , tmeaSineSs, by dwelling on a Subjedl I have already exhausted ? That I must ever think of her is most certain, nor would I give up. that privilege tho’ my refiedtions yield me only pain. Let it rest then till Providence unravels the perplexing mystery, and restores the dear creature to our unceasing prayers ; for I dare not Suffer my Self to fancy, even for a moment^ that I am never to fee her more.
Well, Charlotte, v/ould you adviSe me to be very minute, and tell ail the particulars of my friend’s wedding, as well as who made the most Splendid figure in the crowd of company assembled on the joyous occasion ? O, by all
meansj
IJ4 ne HIS T O R Y of
means, you cry. Be it So then—thus I obey.
Let me See^—in my last, I think I told yon. Monsieur la FriSeur desired the honour of my company, and a beau of no Small figure he was, I do affure you. Vv hile I Sat contemplating his looks,, as he glided round me with amazing grace and eaSe, I was deliberating with mySelf whether I had not better order him to put on his holiday Suit, and accept the favour of my hand in the evening, as I had Some prefentlments that I should not get a ‘ Smarter partner if I took my chance gf thoSe provided by the master of th-e ceremonies ; but on his burning the tip of my ear with his curling iron, 1 felt my temper So utterly diScompoSed, that I at once laid aside my noble purpoSe, though a moment’s refieftion convinced me I ought to have made a very different determination, since it was, as you i	will
1
I
I
Mifs BE VILLE. 115-
will grant, after maturely considering the affair, the only compliment a beau, in his humble station, could preSume to pay a belle in mine ; for what but the emotions occasioned by his having an objedl So perfedly beautiful placed in his view, could have produced that tremblement which procured me the burn ? To tell me I w^as an angel (or, at least, would be So, by the time he had decorated my head according to his elegant taste) in plain terms, would perhaps, he might imagine, be rather taking too great a liberty, as he had never before had it consigned to his care, nor would then perhaps have been So honoured, had not my old friend Dupre been out of the way. Ob-ferve me well, Charlotte: I Say, he might perhaps think that would be using too much freedom for the first time, and therefore ordered his tongs to whilper it gently in my ear as they
past.
ii6 HI STORY of
past every moment that way. They did So, that’s most certain-; but would you believe it.^ So indelicate was .I, that 1 should positively have preferred the compliment expressed even in his broken English, to their language, however warm and animated. He left me, after '' parading round and round me for an age, frifee et poudree d merveille—quite the thing I do affure you ; though good mamma humbly offered that it was, in her opinion. Some /ew degrees more becoming and degagee before he began.—Fine conSolation for the torture I had .endured! A pretty joke, thought I, if the beaus should be of this antiquated way of thinl^ing. ■ I did not, however. Suffer an idea So horrid long to poffeSs my imagination, but conibled niySeif Vv^ith the consideration that they would not Speak their Sentiments quite So freely, whatever their wiSdom might induce them to
think ;
Mifs BEVILLE. 117
diink ; So I quietly put on a few ornaments.—This done, I proceeded in the pleasing tash I was engaged in, and in due time essayed my new tiffue. Shall ^ I tell you how I looked ?—impossible!
I really felt for the bride and her fair guests.' I was just then amazingly compassionate. Poor dear MiSs Bellamy, thought I; I am really vexed I should look So provokingly well.—Yet, what 4 could I do, you know, but go ? which, accompanied by mamma, I did, as Soon as the labours ot the toilet were over. At this period of my history I must positively drop my design of being particular, since I find it a very different thing to write, in that minute manner, of half a hundred, to what it is of. one, and that too, one’s Self: this is a Sub-jedb a perSon never tires of, whatever the reader may do, nor indeed can one pretend to be quite So intimately acquainted with any other, for, Know
“ thy-
t,
iiB T^^HISTORY of
»
thySelf,” is a precept of infinite importance, and consequently Slighted by none, but we are no where ordered to be So inquisitive about our neighbours. D hough you and I, Charlotte, have met with Some few good folks in our time, who Seem to have inverted the command, having ten times more curiosity to know the affairs of others than their own. There are, perhaps, various readings and ‘ transsations of this ancient maxim; that Supposition is of infinite Service and conveniency to many peo« pie on Several occasions; the Scripture, for instance. Were it not for this Supposition, we must conclude more than half of the pious inhabitants of this very metropolis were purSuing a courSe of life diametrically opposite to the tenour of that divine guide. This proves,
I Say, that there are for all dodlrines various readings^;- unleSs you will be So ; |	cenSoribus as to' pronounce, the people
’[	*	above- -
I
Mifs BEVILLE. 119
abovementioned, indifferent, or voluntarily ignorant, of either one version or the other. But pardon me, my dear, for a thought So uncharitable ; I know you better. What! to SuppoSe all the people of fashion rank and quality one fees—living, it must be confessed, in a manner perfedtly different from the rules there preScribed—ignorant, or unacquainted with thoSe So necessary truths!
—O fie—by no means—Meerly, as I observed before, owing to the various , tranfiations. This point Settled, which, lest you should have forgot during my dissertation, I must remind you was to apologize for not being able to Say So much of the rest of the company as I ' had done of mySelf, I will proceed the best Vv^ay I can.—Who can do more ?
After coiidudting the bride, in proper form and parade to the Temple of Hymen, we returned to her father’s, v^?here, to do justice to Mrs. OSnrcnd’s taste,
we
120 HISTORY c/
' we found an entertainment perfectly Superb, the company numerous, and, in general, elegantly decorated. In the evening we were condyfted to their ball-room, where excellent mulick instantly inspired us with the Ipirit, of dancing, which we did till pretty late, or, to Speak more properly, pretty early. Now,- Charlotte, gueSs who it was that had the honour of my fair hand, instead of the beau I had once formed the design of engaging—gueSs I Say. How is that possible, you an-Swer, when I have confessed there was So great a company ?—Why, only Lord B-- child.
Think what were my emotions when he was introduced to me by that alarming title. I found he had been in-formed of my friendship for our Emilia, and perhaps desired to dance with me only on that account, for certain it is, he lavished a thouSand compliments on
her
JMifs BEVILLF. I2I
her for one he bestowed on me. He , dies for her: declares there never was So angelick a creature.’ She was the continual Subjedt of our conversation, and I am perSuaded would still have been, had we been together till now. He makes the greatest jest of Sir JoSeph’s passion you can conceive, though I affured him he would undoubtedly be the man, if ever she returned diSeru-gaoed and free.
No, my dear MiSs MoleSworth, cried he with the utmost fervor, nor any man on earth but mylelf, if I have power to prevent it. Ah, would to heaven she were once returned ! I ash no more; or that I knew in what part of the world she was concealed; inform me but of this, and that she has not yet given her hand to another, and you will make me the happiest man in the univerSe.
VoL. I.	G	What
122 rhe HISTORY cf
W'hat Charlotte can one think Not that she voluntarily went off with him —far from my heart be a thought fo injurious:—but I am now perSuaded, by the conversation I have had with him, that he is the most likely man in the world to have taken her off either by force or stratagem. He was no doubt informed there was hot a mcr-ment to be lost, as every one had heard of her intended marriage with Sir Jofeph. T here wanted not a long acquaintance to compieat the conquest she begun at the opera ; the first sight was enough for one who feeks only the beauties of perfon in a mistrefs—thofe of the mind, I prefume, are by him thought of far lefs importance. No wonder then he is fo wholly her captive, poffeffed as she is of both in .fo eminent a degree.
What, 1 fay, can one think? That he would deny it is plain, but this is
I	no
!
SEVILLE. 123
no proof of his innocence. A man of his turu must be too much accustomed to play the hypocrite not to be able to deny Such a charge with a good grace. I own his Specious manner puzzles me n9t a little; yet I think he could not appear So extreamly. So very naturally anxious, to find her place of concealment were he really guilty. Heaven knows, as I havC a thouSand times Said, and what indeed but this can I fayNothing, Charlotte, with certainty. I am grown Serious, nor can I possibly help it,
. when talking on this distressing Subjedt. Imagine, if you pleaSe, the conclusion of our ball, and Suffer me to end my epistle in this abrupt manner, since if I do not, I plainly fore fee what follows will be in a very dreary stile. Adieu.
Harriot Molesworth; G 3 L E T-
124 HISTORY eT
LETTER XV.
Lo the Same.
T Have been to yiSit Mrs. Stanhope.
We had a great deal of conversation both about her own affairs and thoSe of my dear Emilia. She is still in her first opinion in regard to her charming Sister ; on that Subjedt, you may believe, nothing new remains to be Said.
She tells me she has wrote in the most Submissive and dutiful manner to her family; but, if she is to judge by the anfwer, it was thought neither one nor the other. This is her eafy way of talking on the most Serious Subjeds, and. Surely, the preSent is abundantly So. Time, she Says, may do wonders;
(	-fhe did not exped a favourable recep-
tion of her first addreSs; a little bustle is always necessary on theSe occasions.
‘	'	When
i
1^'
IArfs B E V IL L E. 12^
When Harriot is pleaSed to return, added she, we shall See how affairs are to be Settled, till then I make mySelf as eaSy as I can; and, to Say truth, I never found that very difficult.
Mr. Stanhope was out, nor was I Sorry, as I could not perhaps have Spoke with the freedom 1 did had he been at home. She is following, v/ith great exadtneSs, the steps of her prudent mother : what thoSe are I need not inform you. rH lay my life, a very few months will See this pretty couple in as much haste to be quit of each other, as ever they were to run to Scotland. Can it be otherwise, when every thing is considered ? But what of that ? you’ll Say; parting is as Sashionable as taking that excursion, and of courSe as agreeable.
We yesterday dined with her father. A good deal was Said of Emilia, and, according to custom, a thouSand different conjedtures formed of her unac-G 3 countable
ia6 HI STORY of
countable fate, though nothing v/as re-Solved on, as you may fuppofe, excepting this, indeed—that if ever she was found, and that still worthy of his hand, she should at all events be the wife of Sir JoSeph. I endeavoured to plead her caufe, upon a Supposition that she had gone off to avoid that marriage, which yet I am far from believing; but found all my eloquence on that point lost and ineffed'ual. He has got Sir William’s absolute promiSe, which he never will revoke; fays, he has proved him-felf worthy of her, by a thouSand instances of generosity. . In short, I find there are obligations which he has no other method of repaying than by the Sacrifice of his "lovely daughter.—This '	comes of prudence and oeconomy—-jthe
i	want of 'it I mean. Would to heaven
t
I	fortune would favour him with Some
!	other means of discharging thoSe fatal
obligations ! Why did not the foolish '	old
i
I
B E VI LLE. 127
old creature make choice of Caroline ? His fortune would have been, I fancy, an irresistible temptation to her, who has no other ideas of happineSs than thpSe of dreSs and show. Why then, yousti assc, did she make choice of her preSent help-m.ate ? — With the very lame view, take my word for it. His uncle is rich, fie has ever been considered as his heir, and her ladyship had not So humble an opinion of her own charms as to fuppofe an alliance with her would make him chano;e that design.
I have belpoke your guitar, and promiSe you it shall be the most elegant you ever Saw. I shall not wait till I return, but Send it the moment it is finished. I know what it is to languish in expectation too well, to delay, elpecially in an affair of Such importance. I had almost forgot to tell . ^ you I shall add to the books you name, G 4	the
I2§	HISTORY
the elegant Sermons So justly admired by our lovely Emilia. It is impossible to give you any idea of their innumerable beauties or excellence, by any thing I can Say on the Subjedl, nor would I anticipate the pleaSure you are going to receive. Had we in general, preachers like him, we should not See So many drowSy, yawning congregations. Going to church is now, by many of the honest folks who have not yet wholly laid aside that old fashioned '	custom, meant as nothing more than
going to take a comfortable nap. To this truth I have many and many a time been a witneSs: last Sunday, for instance.
I	No Sooner were the prayers over,
i	during which there is no getting a wipk
j	were one ever So well inclined; three or
I	four old dowagers, who were my com-
j	panions, as if by mutual conSent, aster
feeling for the Softest cushion, and tak-
ng
Mifs SEVILLE. 129
ing a comfortable pinch of rappee, quietly laid their reverend heads back on the pew and began dreaming of quadrille with all their might. Queiy, mio-ht not more animated diScourks
o
than thoSe we are uSually entertained with, have power to drive away the Spirit of fiumber from our eyesA differtation now and then on that very fubje<5t, for inStance ? It would no doubt be thought rather extraordinary should the good man alSo compoSe himSelf to rest ; but I vow, were I in his place I should frequently be inclined either to-follow the example of my drowSy auditors, or to walk quietly home and leave them to their Slumber.
Mamma begins to talk of returning to the country, though our friends will not Suffer her to mention it, but you may expedt her in a short time nevertheless. As for my ladyship, they, tliac is, Mr. Ofmond’s family, positively declare G 5	^ I shall
130 neHlSrORY of
I shall not leave them till they Set off for Berkshire, nor then neither, if they can in the mean time prevail on me to accompany them there. This I refuSe at all events; but how the first part of their Scheme may Succeed is not quite So clear. ^
Adieu, Charlotte, take the will for the-deed in regard to the entertainment youf will receive from this epistle, and believe me yours, as uSuaL
Harriot Moleswortir,.
LETTER XVI.
To the Same.
Ah, Charlotte, I shall expire with joy ! I am all extacy ! O my beloved friend! my lovely Emilia!— Did I not tell you she was all purity and virtue } Did I noqaffurc her mercenary
Nf^'BEVILLE. 131
nary family that their charming daughter was Superior to any of thoSe womanish weakneSles they believed her in-stuenced by ^ Have I not a thouSand dmes declared she was incapable of deceit ? She writes to me, Charlotte,
I have her dear, her inimitable letter now before me. Yet, good heavens!
Wihat a situation I what an inextricable mystery ! But begone my fears, let me no longer indulge any painful refiec-tions. She lives, and will yet return to justify her SuSpedted conduft to the vile cenSorious world. But read, read my Sister, and rejoice with your Harriot, with every one, for every one already knows the innocence of my dear, my	i
long lamented friend. Yes, Charlotte,	i
1 ran,, I fievr to communicate the un-expedled, charming news, nor was jmy	j
triumph Small.
Did I not tell you, cried I, your Emilia was an angel ? that she could,
G.-6	not
132	HISTORY^
not ad but in a manner doing honour to her Sex ? And then, with unSpeak-able joy and pride for having Such a friend, I produced the welcome packet. But read it—my resiedions on its amaz -ing contents shall be the Subjed of my next, at preSent I can only talk of the dear creature and that in a manner Scarce intelligible. Adieu—
Yours,
Harriot Molesworth.
LETTER XVII.
Mt/s Seville, to Mifs Moles-
j	WORTH.
WELL do I know the anxiety, the tormenting SuSpence my amiable Harriot must have Suffered during my
tedious—'
Mifs B E V IL L E. r jj
tedious—ah, how extreamly tedious!— abSence. I know the tender Sensibility of your heart, 1 know how tenderly I am beloved by my charming friend; judge then what I must feel for the condition to which ray very extraordh nary adventure must have reduced you. Yes, my dear Harriot, amazing beyond conception is the affair that cruelly detains me from my astonished, and no doubt enraged, family; though heaven knows how little cauSe they have to blame their poor, impriSoned Emilia, whatever appearances may be against her; and 1 am not ignorant that they must be numberleSs. My affairs were in a Situation which v/ould give but too much room to form conjedlures to my disadvantage, and the world is^ but too ready to condemn on the most trissing pretence. Yet not all. the world:—lets me not be guilty of the very fault I am cenSuring in others: there are Some,
and
T34: Ti-i? HIS TORY of
and I would hope not a fe w, v/ho arc endued with more noble and generous Sentiments,—Need I add, my Harriot is one of thatdmppy number But'you are no doubt impatient to Lear the particulars of my Surprising story; let me then endeavour to gratify,.yT3Ur friendly curiosity as far as I am permitted. You will in the See]uel comprehend the meaning of that expression.
You have already heard, I Suppofe, all that my family knov/ of my adventure, which must indeed be but little.
My man had not left me ten minutes, in order to fetch me a thicker cloak,
as I found it rather colder than I ex-
1
peded, when walking on towards KenSington-gardens, we obServed a chaiSe following us, attended by a man on hoisie-back. I imagined it was company on the Same design of airing with my-felf:—but, judge of my inexpreffible terror when, having loft fight of GroS-
venor-
m/s BEVILLE. 135:
venor-gate, it stopped, and the next moment I found mySelf forcibly Seized ' and placed in the fatal carriage. Resistance would have been vain, had I; been able to make any, but my SenSes forSook me, the moment I Saw their horrid design, nor did I recover till we, were Some miles on our journey. I then found, to my infinite conshlation,. that Jenny was permitted to be my companion. By her care I was.restored to life : but tvho can expreSs the terror and consternation I was in to find the chaiSe driving like lightning, and all ' my prayers to be informed of their defign, or by whom employed, entirely ineffedlual. It was with the utmost: difficulty she could prevent me from again falling into a Swoon. The good creature’s fears and astonishment gave place to her care and concern for me: but for her, I must have died with my dreadful apprehensions. She, to console
136 TIe HISTORY of
Sole me as much as possible, told me she had, while I lay fenSeleSs, implored the man to tell her where they meant to carry us, or by whoSe order we were thus cruelly treated. -Their anSwer was, we had nothing to fear, declaring no ill treatment was designed us, and begged we would be more compoSed.. This was all they would Say, nor would they repeat even that, but for the rest of the iourney continued silent in Ipite of all our tears and importunities. Yet tell me, my dear Harriot, what could I think of theSe promiSes, after the step they had already taken ? Was I not at that mornent receiving the most cruel treatment that could be given ? My restedbions only Served to torment and distreSs my imagination; I therefore wished it in my power to follow
j	their advice.
I	Rnny, though not much leSs terri-
fied than my Self, rejoiced with great
sincerity^
i
Mifs BEVIL.DE. 137
sincerity at not being Separated from me. By her perSuafions I was at last prevailed on to be leSs alarmed, and trusting to that kind Providence which never wholly forSakes the innocent, I resigned mySelf with tolerable resignation to its care and protedlion. This, thought gave me infinite conSolation,, nor did I fail to make it the continual Subject of my meditations, during the rest of our perplexing journey. At length we stopped at an exceedingly good looking houSe. Dark as it was, I yet could See it appeared to belong to Some perSon of distindlion. Here I was received by an elderly decent looking woman and an old man, that I found was her hushand. With great civility they led me into a very genteel apartment, tvhere, in leSs than half an hour, a Supper was Served with perfedt neatneSs, She behaved in the most re-Spedlful manner, and Spoke with SenSe
OS
138 HIST ORTA/-
on every Subjedl, except that So interesting to my peace ; on this she was invincibly dumb. , Ifl vain I implored her only to tell me by whoSe authority*
I was brought there, or what was thdr design. She affured me all that was a Secret not permitted, her to reveal, but begged I wood ■ endeavour to compoSe my Spirits, and depend on her Solemn asslirance, that no farther ill. v/as intended; me; that, I was, while I remained in that houSe, abSolute mistrefs of it; how ^	long that might be she knew not; her
orders were to treat me with care and\ relpedt during my stay. Confinement within the houSe and gardens, aded she, is all you have to apprehend *, but thoSe were both So large and pleaSant, that she hoped I should not find it SoyliS-agreeable as I no doubt feared. Seeing I did not appear quite Satisfied, notwithstanding all theSe declarations, she again repeated her protestations, adding,
1. might.
I	\
Mifs BEVILLE. 139
I might depend on being Supplied not only with what cloaths I might want, but alSo whatever might contribute to my amuSement. We have, Said she, if you are fond of muSick, a charming harpsichord; and for books, there is not a better furnished library in this dbun-try. Where that country is, heaven knows, for 1 have not the least idea (So great was my terror and confusion) of the road that was taken.
rU leave you, my dear friend, to judge what was my astonishment at this strange account, and the thouSand different conjedfures I continually formed to no purpoSe, for So they certainly were, since no one would inform me whether any of them were right.
My fears are now in a great meaSure vanished, as I really See no appearance of deceit in my old governors.. Need I tell my dear Harriot how many tedious days I have been under their care
Alas.S
140 rhe HISTORY of
Alas! how ssowly did thoSe dreary, melancholy days glide on ! It is Surely an age since 1 was So strangly deprived of liberty I
Finding all my hopes of regaining my freedom vain from any perSuasions I could uSe, and you may believe all my little stock of eloquence was displayed on the important Subjedl; I took my companion’s advice, and began to think of amusing mySelf the best way 1 could. The houSe is large and Spacious, the furniture, .though not quite in the modern taile, is nevertheless rich, and in exceeding good repair. The park and gardens, as the good woman at first assured me, are very ex-tenSive : the latter a good deal in the stile of the furniture, rather antiquated in its decorations ; but the park is 'delightful. Here I wander at full liberty to indulge my resseftions free from interruption, nor is this privilege, let me
tell
Mifs BEVILLE. I4E
tell you, a trifling conSolation : nothing is wanting but the return of Summer to enliven the Scene, but whether i am here to wait its arrival heaven only knows, as all enquiries of that nature are fruitless.
Finding, I fay, all hopes of liberty at an end—though I gave my keepers leave to name their own terms—and alSo that of efcaping absolutely impracticable, I next petitioned for permission to write; yet a moment’s refledtion convinced me, to my inexpressible grief, that this was not more likely to be granted than the other, since it was natural for them to SuppoSe I meant to inform my friends of my Situation, and consequently frustrate the design of thoSe who had taken all this caution to conceal me. At last I fortunately thought of my preSent plan, which was to beg they would permit me to write, without mentioning where, or with v/hom I
was:—
$42 Ti^CH 1ST ORY of
was:—which by the way I could not, iinleSs they would first inform me of it. They wished much, they Said, it was in their power/"to oblige me, but their orders and instructions were very stridt. I Saw they v/ere Sincere.—I repeated my request with great earnestneSs, assliring them I would not give even the most distant hint that might lead to my retreat : only Suffer me, Said I, to inform my distressed family that I am well, I ash no more. Not to your family, an-Swered the wdfe, this was absolutely forbid. To my friend then, cried I, charmed to find her likely to yield ; to a young lady, who I am Sensible is un-happy on my account. Ah, my dear madam, interrupting me, cried the good woman, what in fad; is the difference, since she will no doubt Soon acquaint them with the intelligence you Send It is not, indeed, difobeying my orders ill diredl terms, as your family were
only
Mifs B E VI L L E..	143
only named, but you must be Sensible your other friends were alSo inckided.— What can I Say ?—there is no resisting your Sweetneft and affability. — Write then to this young lady, though I am Senfible this is no very honest distinction, but pardon me if I must beg leave to fee what you write.—My bread depends on my ficlelity to thoSe who have repoSed this confidence in me. I was fully perSuaded no ill was designed you, and therefore promiSed to be faithful ^ to my trust. But write, repeated she, on this condition, and forgive my Scruples. I confeSs I judge of you only in this cafe by what I should certainly do my Self, on a like occasion, were it in my power. Yes, my dear young lady, I should undoubtedly inform my friends of my Situation the very first opportunity.
Hard as were the terms, I yet could not condemn her caution; she Spoke
with
144 HISTORY^’
with prudence, I was Sensible, and, therefore with great joy, agreed to her propoSal, expressing my gratitude for the indulgence in terms that highly pleaS-ed her.
Thus, my dear Harriot, have I transmitted to you an account of my strange adventure, at least as much of it as I am mySelf acquainted with: when it will end heaven only knows; but I have this conSolation given me, both by the good woman and her hushand, that I have nothing to fear.—Ah! might , they not with more justice affure me I have nothing to hope ^ Vv^hat can they mean ? — their diredlors I Ipeak of—wshat, I Say, can possibly be their design } Think for me, my dear friend, tell me, why am 1 thus confined? Alas! I forget while writing, that I am not permitted to receive your anSwer ! Never more, perhaps, am 1 to enjoy that pleaS-ing Satisfadlion ! This thought destroys
the
Mifs BEVILLE. 145
the joy I felt on being allowed to Send you this melancholy story. My paper will bear witneSs to the tears I at this moment shed—they blind my eyes. 1 must, for a while, lay down my pen and indulge them; when I am more compoSed I will again reSume it, and add a few more lines to this, perhaps, last epistle I shall ever be Suffered to Send you—For awliile, adieu.
A walk has a little recovered my late sinking Spirits, and I return with pleasure to converSe again with my friend. I know not how to finish this already too long letter, since writing it is the only happineSs I am ever more likely to enjoy; for I dare not Hatter rnySelf they will a Second time indulge me. Yet, let me remember your impatience to learn the fate of your Emilia; this consideration shall prevail; I hasten then to end it. What indeed is left miC to fay ? It is true 1 have a thoufand qiid-VoL. I,	H	tions
!
146 HIS TORY oj
I	tions of infinite importance, which I
'	can Scarce forbear to alk; yet to what
purpoSe, since it is not in your power to anSwer one of them \ Good heavens ! what must be the opinion of my dear family concerning this strange affair? What can they think of their unhappy daughter ? Alas ! it is but too evident! -—Yet, could they believe me capable of So much premeditated deceit ? Do they really concliide my flight was voluntary, and that, to avoid marrying the mate they had made choice of, I had been guilty of this imprudence ? Ah, they ought to have known me better! Yes, I will flatter myfelf they do, strong as appearances are against me. No, my dear Harriot, dreadful as the Sacrifice would have been, I did not hesitate a moment whoSe happineSs qught to be preferred; theirs or mine was the ' alternative. Could I, could any daughter, deliberate in Such a cafe ? may no
other
IMifs BEY ILL E. 147
other be ever So cruelly circumstanced ! Alas, I die with apprehension for what they may Suffer from this disappointment, when I consider how deeply they were interested in that event. Yes, Harriot, heaven is my witneSs, hateful as the man is to me, wretched as his morals, his Sentiments undoubtedly are, not to mention the great dilproportion in our years. In Spite of all theSe, I fay,
I would this moment, were I at liber-
f
ty, sty to Save them from the distreSs they have So often assured me must • follow my refuSal, though, by giving him my hand, I should certainly forfeit every hope of happineSs in this life. May Providence relieve their difficulties by Some other means ! Alas ! my Sister too! — who ever had So many woful Subjeds of afflidion to meditate upon as your poor forlorn Emilia ? Ah, tell me what has been the conSe-quence of her imprudence ! Again my H 2	tears
hS H I S T O R Y ^
tears obftrudl; my fight.—Oh, Harriot, can they ceaSe to stow while thinking of thoSe friends. So infinitely dear to ,my heart ?
You have no doubt been told of Lord B—’s imprudence in getting himfelf introduced to our family*. He came Several times and behaved in a manner So very particular that every one Saw it was on my account he had been So forward and intruding. He is much deceived if he thought it gave me any very favourable opinion of him: no, my dear, it on the contrary ferved only to perSuade me he had too flattering a notion of himfelf. I have Sometimesj for a moment, thought his lordship might be SuSpedfced in this affair, as he is a man of gallantry and intrigue : theSe are the Soft terms the world has made choice of, to expreSs vices which ought to be more feverely treated. I own I had for Some time the most dreadful
N/^xBRVILLE. 149
fill fears on his account; (as what C011I4 I think ?) but, thank heaven, they are now removed, and *I am per-Suaded there is no design of that horrid nature formed against me.
.Dhcy enquire for my letter, A person is going to the Post-office. Must I then take leave of my Harriot, and, by ending it, deprive mySelf of a consolation So Sw'eetly pleasing ? Adieu then, my best loved friend, adieu. Need I bid you pity meNo, rather let me beSeech you not to indulge your. Sor-rov/ on my account, but with me implore heaven to deliver me from all my troubles. I have still, I find, a thousand things to fay—Ah ! why will they hurry me ?
I blush that I have not yet mentioned your dear mamma and my amiable Charlotte, but pardon me and impute this apparent negledt to my unhappy situation, PreSent my unfeigned love H 3	t<^
150 HISTORY
to both, and befeech them still to allow me a place in their friendship.-—Ah I should they deny me this, should a misfortune like that be added to thoSe 1 already Suffer, I could not Survive it.
Continue to love me, my dear Harriot, with that affedlion which must- ever glow for you in the heart of,
Your unhappy,
Emu.ia Seville.
LETTER XVIIL
Mifs Harriot Molesworth, to Mtfs Charlotte Molesworth.
I HAVE for this week past been prevented from writing to my Charlotte. I will not pretend to tell you by what, since it was in reality a thouSand different things, ,,and, consequently, might
prove
Mifs BEVILLE. 151
prove but a tedious taste either for my pen, or your patience: I will therefore only confefs my fault and ash your pardon ; forgiveneSs follows of courSe.
Now tell me, my dear sister, what are-'your thoughts of my Emilia’s letter ^ Was there ever known or heard So strange an affair? Let us rejoice, however, that no dishonourable designs were formed against the dear creature, for I am perSuaded there are not, however unaccountable her adventure.
Hov/ Sweetly the dear girl writes! what affedtion for her (unworthy, I had almost Said) parents! How few of us, Charlotte, have So much prudence. So much resolution to adt up to thoSe Sentiments we, perhaps, know as well as she does, are right and commendable ! So young a creature too ! To know her duty and to pradlice it, was ever with her the Same thing. But why this to you, who know her .as well as I do, H 4	and
152 HISTORY/
and esteem her no leSs.?—Yet, of what elSe can I write ? Of her perplexing situation I can Say nothing. Tste more I refiedl; the more I am at a loSs, nof can I form any conjedlure that yields me the Smallest Satisfadtion.
I have not taken a moment’s rest since I received the amazing packet: I ran first to one of her friends, then to another, communicating the delightful, netvs of her Safety, and boasting not a little of my Sagacity, which, from the first, pronounced her blameleSs.
I have ceaSed for Some time to mention the Search that is continually mak--ing. Since it is still as fruitleSs as ever, and I am perSuaded must remain So, till the magician, in whoSe enchanted castle she is confined, thinks proper to releaSe her.	"
Her father is I am told Soliciting for a place which is just become vacant; defpairing, I SuppoSe, to obtain, by hia
lovely
1
Mifs SEVILLE. 153
lovely daughter’s means, that restoration of his fortune which v/as to have followed her marriage v/ith Sir JoSeph. Heaven grant he may Succeed in his deSign ! for as the- income is considerable, he will no longer have occasion for that horrid reSource. His promiSe, it is true, is still in force, but it shall not be my fault if he is not perSuaded to revoke it; nay, at any rate, Emilia is free from hers, it was only given on a Supposition that his affairs w^ere ruined, unleSs she gave her conSent: that plea, in caSe he Succeeds, will, I fay, be no longer of any weight. Should ! ever See the dear creature again, I shall certainly uSe all my rhetorick to convince her she is under np. obligation to becomic miSerable.
As for the old knight’s passion, of which he makes Such a parade, I give mySelf but little concern about either it or his worship. By the courSe of H 5	nature,
154 T/6^HIST0RY V
nature, not to mention that of his past life, the ridiculous foul cannot have many years to sigh, and should it hasten his departure a few years or So, the consequence will not be prodigioussy dreadful. It is So long since we have had an instance of pure love carried to that romantick height, that I would give the world for a martyr, who will, by a proof So convincing, do honour to that now too much flighted passion. I enjoy • the idea of all things, and will certainly give him a hint of that glory which will redound to his memory from an adfion So noble, the very first opportunity.
Mrs. Stanhope returned my visit in a day or two, since which I have Seen her Several times, both at her own houSe and at Mrs. Beverly’s, where we happen both to visit. It will be thought ill-natured in -me, should I Say I already think her repentance begun; for which
reaSon
Mlfs BEVILLE. .D5S
reafon I will Say nothing of the matter : you may however remember I have made this wiSe remark. Time will shew how far my penetration is to be depended on. She has not yet obtained any more favourable anSwer from her father: and her new uncle, on whoSe generosity she placed So much dependence, vows, with great compoSure, they may, for him, live upon love, unleSs they can, without his assistance, procure a more Substantial diet. A pretty comfortable way the fair ladp is in, to fay truth ! Who knows but it may teach her wiSdom ? Adversity is an excellent tutor, though not the molt pleasing. By the way, I have more hopes from him, notwithstanding this Speech, than I have from her father. He was ever particularly fond of his nephew, and, 1 would perSuade my Self, he only means to let him, for a while, feel the effeds of his imprudence, that .
H 6	he
156 H I S T O R Y cf
he may profit by the lesson it will teach him. I wish this predidtion may be accomplished, were it but to confirm my charadler for wiSdom and foresight, of which I am not a little proud.
Adieu, Charlotte, I am going with the MiSs Cathcarts, and Some other fair creatures, to See the School for Lovers. One ought, you know, never to loSe any opportunity of gaining instruction, particularly on that important Sub-jedt, as it is a charadler we all hope to shine' in one day or other. I expedt to be almost stifled with heat, but that’s a trifle in So good a cauSe; it will, however, be the last time I shall fiourifli in that academy this SeaSon.
I have Sent your things, and, if my abigail is not deceiver^, for they were intrusted to her care, you will get them next Thursday. I shall find you So harmonious when I return, there will be no bearing you. Adieu, Monsieur du
Pre
Mifs BEVILLE. 157
Pre is impatient for the honour of decorating my ladyship’s head.—No resisting the importunities of So Smart a beau—For the very last time—in this epistle I mean—I once more bid you adieu.
Harriot MoLEStvoRTH.
LETTER XIX.
To the Same.
WH O do you think was in the next box to ours the other night at the playI told you, I believe, 1 was going to See the School for Lovers. I had not been half an hour in the houSe before I wished it had rather been the School for wives, in hopes the perSon I am going to mention might have received Some profitable hints from the performance. Do you already gueSs I
mean
158	HIS T O R Y c/'
mean our friend Mrs. Stanhope If you do I give you credit for a considerable share of Sagacity, since the multitude of untaught matrons made it no eaSy conjedlure. Ours, Charlotte, is a land of liberty; we boast much of that bleffing, you know, and, upon my word, the good ladies here Seem to be as great advocates for it as the most zealous politician amongst us. It was, indeed, no other. There she was, gay and eafy, as if in full possession of all her new uncle’s treasiire; coqueting with every Smart fellow within her sight. I, like a simiple creature, cast my eyes, around, Surprifed not to See her So dearly purchased Swain by her side, when lo, Mr, Cathcart pointed, him out to me, peeping at his prudent help-mate from, behind the Scenes,, where he was no doubt returning her compliment on. Some of the nymphs of that benevolent Society. I told you how it would be:
^tis
M[ifs BEVILLE.	159
stis nothing more than following the taste of the times—free and eaSy. What • woman of any Spirit would be out of fashion ? I See nothing that would in fadt be a greater inconveniency than to be really and Soberly fond of one’s huS-bansh Poor Mifs OSmond is in a fair way to make the most antiquated do-mestick animal you ever Saw.	She,
good Soul, thought her SpouSe the Smartest beau in the place. And, entre ttous, Charlotte, was not much deceived. I do all I can to cure her of this old-fashioned weakneSs, but have very little hopes of Succeeding, becauSe neither precept nor example will convince her that it is one. For the precept, as I told you, she is often indebted to me; the example is not in my power.— Would to fortune it was ! But, believe me, if I expedt any Such felicity, I must with all Speed Set off for the country, since matrimony is within an ace of
being
i6o HISTORY^
being totally abolished in this improving town. One hears now and then of Such a thing, it is true, but it is generally by way of frolick, merely for the fake of a trip to Scotland, and the hopes—or rather certainty—of parting in a few weeks, or So, after their return. Here you remind me of Mrs. Cathcart, of whom I have just been giving So different an account. Very true, but her cafe is Singular ; I question whether we shall in our days hear of another instance of the kind. I will not pretend to excuSe or account for her condudt, but to be Sure, a wedding in that Sober old-fashioned way, gives one, to Say truth, rather a poor opinion of her Ipi-rit, a thing So neceffary, as Mrs. Stanhope Says, for people who mean to make any figure in life. What a contrast to the amiable charadler of my Emilia!—But peace be with her, Say I,
for
Mtfs BE VILLE. i6i
for my friend’s Sake; as her relation she cannot be indifferent to me.
I will not enter on her story, as I have not one word to Say that can give you the Smallest ConSolation: every thing remains in ‘its primitive dark-neSs and perplexity. Let me then avoid it,, since it never fails to sink my Spirits, and will confeqUently bring my epistle to an untimely end.
My mother leaves us next week, and will be with you in about ten days. She intends to make a visit to Lady Brudnel in her way : to this I adviSed her by all means, as it is what she has So long promised her. You will gueSs by this that I have conSented to stay *	the requested time—but not a day longer,
I give you my honour—not the leaSc design of going to Berkshire.
Lady B'eville below ^—Nay, then my epistle will come to an end without any violent dejedtion of Spirits, for, thank
my
i62 history^/
my stars, but for the remembrance off our Emilia’s situation, they were never better. Pray heaven her ladyship may bring me no news to give them a disagreeable turn !—Grief and joy go generally hand in hand. But adieu—I must be gone. Let me not delay giving my cofnpany to the mother of my friend.
Yours,
Harriot Molesworth.
LETTER XX.
To the Same.
No, my dear, a mere visit—insipid	*
as you pleaSe. Are not most visits So, Charlotte, where friendship is yiot the inducement ? I need not obferve how very Seldom that enlivener is to be
found
Mifs SEVILLE. 163
found in the circles of the great—or Small either, to Say truth.
Not one word of Emilia—of information I mean, for we Spoke of her a great deal. My opinion was again delivered with infinite wiSdom and gravity. My lady Sometimes, notwithstanding the dear creature’s affeding letter, shook her head.—Is it in nature she should still doubt her prudence ? Ah, how. little does'" she deServe, to be blessed with Such a ' daughter ! My friend’s Sentiments are above her weak comprehension ; she cannot form an idea of any being Superior to herSelf, and is, no doubt, conScious she would in Such a caSe have aded just as she SuppoSes her daughter to have done.—Forgive me, Emilia, this liberty, I know it is one you never Suffered me to take v/ith any of your family, nor indeed any other perSon without a Sweet rebuke. But why then will they pretend to believe
what
i64 I^he HISTORY of
what you are incapable of, becauSe, truly, they cannot at once unravel this perplexing mystery —But faith, Charlotte, as well as matrimony, is almost abolished. We believe now nothing but what we fee clear as the noon day : nor does that always convince us, since we are continually putting wrong con-strudlions on thoSe actions which are perfedlly innocent, though we See never So clearly they are So.
She mentioned the place Sir William is Soliciting for, and with justice appeared extreamly happy at the proSpedl; for 1 believe his affairs are in a situation that greatly wants a Smile or twa from lady foitune—her daughters have visited him long enough.
My mother has fixed her day for leaving town, and is, as I told ycSu, determined to pay Lady Brudnel a visit, en falfdnt. You may expedl her about the end of the month, and your
humble
NS^BEVILLE. 165
humble Servant the end of the following. It would be an unpardonable rudeneSs to depart without honouring Vauxhall and Ranelagh at least once a piece with my preSence—they are Soon to be open-td'. When I have done them this favour, I will quietly take my leave and follow the Sober example mamma Sets me, and, like her, quit all theSe vanities for the more calm and peaceful joys of the country. Do not fancy my residence in this world of gaiety and Splendor has made me loSe my taste for its infinitely Superior beauties. No, Charlotte, depend upon it I shall return to our rural mansion with inexpressible pleaSure. Nothing but the pressing intreaties of Mrs. OSmond and her family should have induced me to stay a day behind my mother; but one must Sacrifice a little to civilitv; one cannot always follow our inclinations, without wholly laying aside complaisance.
i66	HISTORY
Sance, So necessary to render Society agreeable.
Adieu — Mamma will write by this post to confirm what I Say of her journey ; and, that I may not engroSs every Subjedt, and thereby render her design the more difficult, I will conclude.
This very good-natured consideration might perhaps gain credit with you who have So great an opinion of my veracity, but for this very reaSon I will not impofe upon you. No, my dear, let me modestly confeSs my ending So Soon is merely for want of Something wherewith to embellish the residue of my paper. It is no eaSy matter, let me tell you, to write every week, imleSs the world would pleaSe to furnish me with Some more extraordinary occur-rances than it has lately done. Plays, balls, drums, routs, are Subjedts, in my opinion, So exceedingly uninteresting, that J cannot prevail on my pen to
' dwell
Mifs BEVILLE. 167
dwell on the description, and theSe are the only amuSements I have been, or am likely to be, engaged in, during my stay. It is nevertheless evident the Spirit of knight errantry, or elSe the pow'er of enchantment is not utterly ^ ceaSed in our land: witneSs the amazingly strange and unaccountable fate of our Emilia. But, it is plain, I am not destined to be choSen as the heroine
of any Such adventure. I find I may /
parade about from one diversion to another, without the Smallest danger of being arrested in my courSe by either knight or magician. I am more than half perSuaded my dear friend is in the power of the latter, v/ho, to preServe her from becoming the wife of her antient lover, has, by his art, raiSed the castle which now is honoured with her preSence; as alSo, by the touch of his wand, he no doubt produced the venerable
i68 TA history^
table pair whom he has appointed hef guardians. All this, in the days of yore, would have met with an eaSy belief; nor can I now, with alb my wiS-dom, give any more probable account of her. Would to heaven the s:ood
O
old Souls would Suffer her to continue with me her correlpondence! I See nothing to hinder Such an indulgence; I mean on the Same condition of her first; since it is too Sure our ignorance, in regard to her Situation, remains as invincible as before her packet arrived. Once more
Adieu.
Harriot Mollsworth.
/
l/R.D
Mifs BEVILLE. 169
LETTER XXL To the Same.
I NEVER make apologies for not writing, becaufe I am perSuaded one can never—1 had almost Said—find Such as ought to be accepted; for. Surely, if in health, and in a land like ours, flowing with pens, ink and paper, one may, sif violently inclined to it, always find time and opportunity for one line at leash ConScious that I have been at no loSs for any of the above-mentioned requisites, I am silent, and will, like a good sister—as I nevertheless am—take all your reproofs with the Ipirit of meek-neSs: but that my trembling epistle, (for I assure you it feels Some tremours at tlie thoughts of appearing before you) may not, as foon as opened, be ^committed with a diSdainful air to the flames, I will, in the first lines, lest you VoL. I.	, I	should
iyo HISTORY^
should not deign to cast your eyes on the following, tell you a piece of news which v/ill, I am perSuaded, at once diSpel your frowns, and deck your face with all its ufual Smiles and graces. Nay, this very Speech might, I think, do the busineSs, if you are not very, very angry indeed.
But to keep my promife. Mamma is on her journey, and is, I preSume by this time, in full chat with her old friend Lady Brudnel. Now, Charlotte, frorwn if you dare.—O, you relax, do you ? Very well; then I may proceed.
Without farther preamble or preface , then, I am this very identical evening going to Ranelagh: it is the first night, and all the world is to be there, A pretty little fcledt party, you’H grant— Lord B-- is one of ours; his lordship and your Sweet sister are, you must know, amazingly gracious, and wera it not for the idea of his Emilia, of I	whom
I
M^BEVILLE. 171
whom he talks and raves continually,
I know^ not what might happen; but her divine image, he tells me, is So deeply engraved on his heart that not Venus, with all her train of graces, would her goddeSsSnip deign to attempt the conquest, could render him in-• constant nor efface it from his breast: Ib, you know, Charlotte, it would have been a folly in mCj after So fiam-ing a declaration, to try the experiment, though, to Say truth, I have, nevertheless, been at the expence of a tew Smiles, airs and So forth, by way of gaining the little attention he has to Spare, and have Succeeded tolerably well; but I believe an opportunity to talk to me of his lost fair one was a more powerful attradlion than either one dr the other. Wonderous , humble, me-thinks.—But I am So sincere and open-hearted, you know, that I cannot diS-Semble.
I 2	Mrs.
j72 H I S T O R Y ^
Mrs. Stanhope is to be there, though not with us. 1 Saw her yesterday, and as civility, 1 simply thought, required, aSked for her dear IpouSe. Ah, heaven knov/s, cried she, for I do not; nor indeed is it a wife’s buSineSs. What,
So Soon fallen into that eaSy state returned I; why. Surely, my good friend, you forget the hazard you ran to gain this hushand, for whom you now expreSs So much indifference. Is it possible you should really be as much So as your anSwer would perSuade me?
1 know. Said she, what idea my anSwer may convey, but I am no more indifferent than is perfedlly consistent with the charadler of a wife of fashion and Spirit. Would you, my dear MiSs MoleSworth, have the man eternally at my side ? You never See me, that/you do not Seem Surprized you do not alSo -See him. Stay till you are married, my dear, you will then be Sensible you are
not
Mifs B E VILLE.' 173
not to look for the hushand in company with his wife. Fie upon you, Harriot, the very idea of Such a party / is more than enough to give one the vapours: I mean after they have been ptarried above a month. How is it possible, after So long an intimacy, they should have any thing new left to lay to each other ? and a dull repetition of the fame simple things they muSt, during that tedious time, have uttered, you m.ay eafily believe cannot be very desirable. Surely, child, you might imagine this to be the cafe, were you only to judge by what .you must have. a thouSand times experienced, while confined to the Society of your owm family only, when in the dreary country. Could you, Harriot, in that caSe, find any very Sprightly conversation to amuSe yourSelf with- ConfeSs you could not, and believe me it is the very cafe of every married pair. But do not I 3	fancy
174	HISTORY of '
fancy I was deceived in my expedla-tions :—no Such thing. I Saw every one around me in the Same situation, nor did I either expedt of desire to be singular. The Sober, antiquated notion you Seem to have formed of matrimony w'ould kill me in a month with Ijpleen and vapours: and sh, my dear Sober Harriot, never apply to me when you want any infof|nation concerning my hushandj, for whom you exprds lb much concern.
/
This, Charlotte, will give you Some idea of her preSent situation., Mr^ Stanhope is still inexorable, nor will on any terms be prevailed on to See his nephew. I am afraid he is more Seri-oully offended than I at first believed. As for her father, I am pofitive he will not be one grain more complying, were it only to Save himSelf the mortification of exposing his circumstances. While he. remains in his preSent disposition,,
♦
Mifs BE Vi.DLE. 175
sition, no fortune can be expeisted. What effeifls the expedted place maV produce I don’t know. Most peop'e,,
I find, are of opinion he will get it, as ' his interest is good. If he should be Scrfortunate, I shalhrejoice very sincerely on various accounts: Emilia the chief, ymu may SuppoSe. For, in Spite of Sir JoSeph’s constancy, by which I preSume he means to atone for all his former infidelities, she shall never be his. I proteSe I would rather marry the old Soul rnySdf, than See her So diSpoSed of.
I think I fiiould Suit him much better, if he did but know his own interest. Heavens, what an ill-matched couple would they make ! They might do admirably to sit for the pidure of death and the lady. You cannot be unacquainted, Charlotte, with that old ditty *. it’s a favourite fong of our Martha’s, who, 1 Suppofe is not yet cured of her quavering.
L4-	, Here’s
376 HISTORY^
Here’s another letter for you, filled with nothing, I was going to fay, and would Say, did it not Sound a little paradoxical; but ’tis certainly within an ace of being So, nevertheless.
The hour for drefs approaches, and then away to Ranelagh.
Yours,
Harriot Molesworth,
LETTER XXII.
To the S A M E.
WITH what amazing rapidity the hours wing their flight in this giddy town! I can hardly credit tny Senfes when I recoiled how long I have already been in it. This would imply two things which are nevertheless not
absolutely
Mifs BEVILLE. 177
absolutely true—viz. that I have not regretted my abSence from home, nor found any degree of insipidity or lan-gour in pleaSures I have continually been engaged in. But that neither of theSe confequenCes unavoidably follotv, is very evident, since I have, in the first place, a thouSand times wished to return, and Secondly, in the courSe of our hurrying visits and other diversions, as often gravely pronounced them all vanity and vexation of Spirit. Reconcile all this if you can, for, it is certain, time has eScaped me almost unnoticed; unemployed I might whth trpth have asserted, or at least to any purpoSe. Thus much for that important article, for what can be more So, though So generally wasted and miSpent.? An excellent time, you’H Say, for making that wife remark, when just confessing I have been throwing away So much without any fort of concern till f 5	it
.!
lyS ^he	of
it was irretrievably gone. Yolu’ll perhaps tell me, it looks as if 1 orsty lamented that it was So, and that I had no hopes of Iperiding what is to come' in the Same manner. Very well; Charlotte, stay till I am with you, I will then diScufs this point' at leiSure, and-hope to clear myfelf from- any Sucff accuSation.—I shall, in company with Mr. OSmond’s family and Mrs. Cath^ cart, who Spends the Summer with her father in Berkshire, take leave of London next Monday: whether you will hear from me again is not- certain. I have got Mrs. Stanhope’s promife that she will write to me very pundlually of whatever may happen to either herSelf or family : you may believe I did not forget to include my Emilia. I carmot fay I expetst her to be So very exadt, as she finds full employment for her time without the article of writing; however, unleSs she can fend me Some
information
■ IM^S BEVILLE. 179
inforrtiation concerning her charming Sister, I shall make mySelf very* eaSy. about the matter. Adieu: 1 only Send this to tell you I atn on the wing. So-you need not look upon it as a- letter, unleSs you pleaSe,. but a card, a note, or whatever yon think it most reSembles.
Yours,,
Harriot Molesworth.
LETTER XXIIL
Mrs, Stanhope to Mifs\, Molesworth.
D.DN*T be angry Harriot, I have positively begun to write to you at least fifty times, and have as often been prevented by one impertinent intruder or other. So no breach of promise, whatever you may be pleaSed 16	to
i8o	HISTORY
to think of the matter. By the way, I did not, till I tried, know the dishculty of keeping it when one has nothing to Say. Why then, yousil ash, do I attem.pt it, since you only desired to hear from me in caSe any thing extraordinary came to paSs ? Very true— here follows my aniwer. A fear that your ladyship should have thought sit to believe Some of the Said extras had happened and I hash negledted to tell you of them—no desire to lost your esteem, it’s plain—and it is as plain that every thing remains in fiatu q^noy not only amongst my frowning relatives, but the rest of the world. As for Emilia, to tell you the truth, I give her up as a lost creature in the literal SenSe of the words, for what is become of her no mortal has yet been able' to discover. It will make a most delightful history if ever she should return. I am determined it shall be published,
it
Mifs BEVILLE. iSt
it will be the finest novel imaginable. One adventure like hers is enough, when-properly embellished, to grace half a dozen volumes ; but should it not, my good man and me may perhaps, hi time to come, furnish materials for a, page or two. Shall I tell you a Secret, Harriot ? — No great Secret neither, I. believe. The dear creature has not only taken unto himSelf a wife, but alSo a mistreSs. True, as you are alive —at least I am told So. He feared, no doubt, 1 should not have taste and Spirit enough my Self to Ipend his im-menSe fortune, and therefore procured me this assistance. I am not quite certain whether it is truth, but shall endeavour to be So as Soon as, possible, and if I find it is—why, you knovr, I must Seek out for Some more worthy objedt on whom to beStow my Smiles, as one would not wsiHingly be outdone in theSe innocent amuSements:
besides.
1^2 ne HISTOR Y rf-
besides, one should- always follow a good example; not to mention'a little dear revenge. The creature’s a mere fright: you have Seen her, I am Sure, Harriot. Only MiSs *** the * player. Had not‘ his uncle proved llimSelf Such an errant miSer, the thing would not have been So much amiSs, since it is in^ reality quite the taste; but as our affairs are situated at preSent, he might,. I think, have dilpenSed with that piece of gallantry. Jealoufy is out of the question, I have, thank my stars, too much Spirit for that; but, as I Said before, a little revenge or So, for being flighted, on Such a^ creature’s account, may do well enough by way of variety.
Adieu. Twill write again very Soon.. Compliments to your mamma and Charlotte.
Yours,,
I	C. Stanhope.
P. S.
Im/s BEVILLE. . 183^
P. S.—True, as you are alive. Since' I wrote the above, MiSs Sackville came in, and, as a mighty Secret, informed., me of the whole affair: her brother, as' a Secret, told it to her,, and as Such, or not Such, just as you like, I now tell it to you. It is fa6l, Harriot, he is absolutely wdth that vile creature for ever. But the beauty of all is, that madam is at the Same time mistreSs tOi-Lord W. My Sweet SpouSe is no doubt the favourite, and the other, I fuppoSe, her purSe-bearer. Should he meet at her lodgings—but with all my Spirit, I have only to make mySelf eaSy, which-thank my stars, I can, and him uneaSy, which, pleaSe my stars, FU attempt. So, my dear, with this wifedike disposition I bid you adieu. Emilia might not, perhaps, applaud my reSolution, nor you neither perchance, but you are a pair of country-bred fouls, and have not yet entered into the holy state of
matrimony.
»-
184	STORY of
matrimony. You need not, hov/eveiv read this postscript to your prudent mother, she can be no judge in this caSe, having had Such a fellow-mind for her help-mate. I told you, I believe, that the creature is a mere fright when off the vile stage. I had half forgot one peice of good news MiSs Sackville brought me to qualify the above, which is, my father has absolutely got the place he has been Soliciting, and went to court yesterday to return thanks,
&c. &c. Who knows what effedt this peice of good-fortune may have upon his unchristian heart ? ExcuSe me, my dear, but what can be more So than not to forget, and forgive ? Some cafes, indeed, are excepted •— a MistreSs to one’s hushand, for instance.
/
Adieu,
Caroline Stanhope.
T.KT«
I
Mifs BEVILtE. igj
LETTER XXIV.
Mifs Beville, to Mifs Moles-
^	WORTH.
Again, after an age of Silence I write to my beloved friend. Bur, good heavens ! how shall I find language to expreSs as 1 wish the amazing things I have to tel!her? What a diScovery 1 Prepare, my dear Harriot, prepare to hear what will astonish you, Rejoice with your Emilia that providence at length permits her to^ write, and that too with freedom. Yes, my dear friend, my days of imprisonment are at an end, the veil is withdrawn, and I am no longer ignorant by whom or for what purpoSe I have been thus cruelly treated. How shall I begin to gratify that curiosity I have no doubt raiSed in your” friendly breast ? For I will not—no-~
I am.
f86 TZ^c.HISTOKY of
1 am convinced my happineSs is still dear to you. I know you love me still,, nor have even for a moment judged harlhly of my condudl, notwithstanding the strange astair that has So long,^ detained me from you.. I am confcious what my Sentiments would have been had our fates been changed. Had my cruel, or at least very extraordinary,, caSe been yours, I am Sensible I should not have found it possible to believe-you deServing of cenSure. But why this to my Harriot ? Attend then, and hear by what accident I am thus permitted' to renew my correspondence.
I had no Sooner dispatched my last packet, wdiich I flatter mySelf you received, as I Sent, it to> London,, knowing you was to be there about that time, than 1 determined patiently to. wait the issue of my adventure, convinced So strange an affair could not have happened without the permishoni
of
Mifi SEVILLE. . 187
of Providence. From that time I endeavoured to amuSe mySelf with reading. I found, as Mrs. SimpSon had told me, there was an excellent library, witl; a variety of authors in all languages. TheSe, and the harpsichord, shared a considerable portion of my tedious time,. I alSo frequently walked, accompanied by Jenny, who, to do her justice, has never shewn the least impatience for her own confinement, but has, by every thing in her power, endeavoured to prevent my dejedfion of Spirits, which, in Spite of all my resolution, is but too often the caSe.
I gave up all hopes of gaining the information I So earnestly wished, and, therefore, no longer preffed my jailors on the fubjedt. In this manner I past my joylefs hours,, waiting with a tolerable degree of patience for my deliverance, or whatever elfe was to be my fate.. Ah,, how little, did 1 dream V	o£
i88 r/je HISTORY of
of the manner in which that deliverance
was to be effedted !
I was, tvro days Since, Sitting at my w'indow, which fronts the avenue leading to the houSe, reading with great attention, when the found of voices, I had not been accustomed to hear, m.ade -me hastily turn my eyes that way, though, heaven knows,. I little imagim cd I should 'find in one of thoSe who had thus interrupted my meditations, the perSon who should procure me the hap-pineSs I at this moment enjoy.
A young gentleman, of a most amiable appearance, had just dismounted, and given his horSe to the Servant that accompanied him, and w’’as afking a number of questions with great earnest-neSs of Mr. SimpSon: but what Surprised me most was, the confuSioiS and anxiety visible both in him and his wife.
I could observe them every moment
casting
Mlfs BEVILLE. iSe>
■casting up their eyes to my windows with looks of infinite care and Solicitude In a few minutes they all entered the houSe, and I again took my Seat in a Situation of mind it is utterly impossible to deScribe. In the most dreadful SuS-pence. I waited near an hour. Scarce daring to breathe with freedom. So great were my apprehensions. But judge what were my emotions, to See the young gentleman enter my apartment with looks in which I could read astonishment, shame and confusion ! He stood for Some momients Silent, as if at a lofs in what manner to begin a conversation he yet plainly wished to engage in. During that time I had leiSure to examine him with more attention than I could do while viewing him from my
%
window. But ah! Harriot, how shall I give you any idea of his inimitably lovely form —Never did eyes expreSs Such amiable SweetneSs, never was person
190 HI STORY
Son adorned with So much manly beauty * So perfedUy graceful! a manner So engaging ! What shall I Say to you, my dear friend, how confeSs that, during that moment of wonder and furpriSe, my heart felt emotions it had ever till then been a stranger to ? Ah, Harriot, could you but fee the lovely youth that occasioned them, you could not but pardon my weakneSs, in thus resigning my liberty before I even knew the name or design of my conqueror. The agitation So visible in his countenance when he first entered, by degrees gave place to looks more Soft and pleasing. At last, approaching me in the most graceful manner, and observing how extream-!y I was embarrassed with his unex-pedled visit, how shall I preSume, madam.. Said he, with infinite SweetneSs in his voice, to mention what yet I die - with impatience to have explained? I blusti, nor know in what words to ex-
preSs
IMifs BEVILLE. 191
'preSs my indignation for what I have already heard, and am no lefs confounded, while I beg leave to enquire, from yourSelf, by what means, or on what design, my father’s houSc has been thus long fionoured with a guest So lovely? All I have been able to learn from thoSe-who have the care of it, has only Served to excite my curiosity to know from yourSelf the particulars, which are doubt-lefs of a very extraordinary nature. However deeply I might interest my'-felf in your affairs, before I had the honour of Seeing ’you, permit me to affure you I am now infinitely more So, nor shall I ever again know a moment’s peace, should my fears prove just, and you are detained here contrary to your inclination. Good heavens ! and that too by any of my family! — Impossible! —- But tell me then, I befeech you, and deliver me from my dreadful apprehensions, v/hich increaSe
every
192' ne H I S T O Pv Y of
every moment, while 1 fee before me the most lovely and amiable of her Sex.
I am infinitely more perplexed now, sir. Said I, than I was before your un-expeded arrival. You tell me I am in. your father’s houSe: how then can I believe it possible you should be So entirely unacquainted with their motives for treating me in the strange and unaccountable manner they have So long-done That it is by their ungenerous contrivance I am here I can no longer doubt, but what their design or mo-■ tives for tearing me thus from the arms of my friends and family, who must", during my tedious abfence, have Suffered a thouSand fears and apprehensions, is what 1 cannot give you the Smallest
account of. Permit me to obServe, it
/
appears to me very extraordinary that their Son, as you, fir, declare yourSelf to be, should be ignorant of wiiat is, if I
am
Mifs B E VI L L E. 193
am to judge by their meaSures, So ex-treamly interesting to them.
Ah, Spare me, madam, cried he with emotion. Spare that unfortunate Son, unfortunate only since you have Sup-pofed him capable of So much baSe-neSs. I dare not rested, I dread now to See thoSe parents I hoped to meet with So much joy and Satisfadion after an abSence of three years. Good heavens ! how greatly must they be changed during that time ! Yes, madam, it ' is doubtleSs owing to this abSence that lam ignorant of this astonishing affair. Spare me then, I intreat you, nor look on me with that horror which, as their Son, you have but too just reaSon to be- ' sieve 1 merit, and permit me to assure you the happineSs or miSery of my future life depends on the explanation I am So impatient to receive. I go, madam. Said he rising, I go to make a more . particular enquiry into this perplexing VoL. I.	K	story.
I
104 HISTORY c/
storyr. Heaven grant my apprehensions may prove groundleSs, and that I may not be deprived of every hope. He stopped, and bowing, left me with looks that expressed a thouSand things more tender than any he had uttered. But judge, my dear Harriot, what were my tormenting refiedbions when 1 was, by his absence, left at liberty to indulge them! Ah, cried I wsith an emotion I could not restrain, what will become of me if I am indeed obliged to refuSe my esteem to one So perfedlly amiable, and who appears So worthy of it ^ By what means can I have given offence to any of his family ? how have I deServed this cruel treatment from perSons of whorn, it is plain, I have not the least knowledge ? Ah, why is the Son of parents So unjust, thus inexpressibly lovely ?/ A stood of tears Succeeded this thought, nor can I give you any reaSon for my shedding them : the proSped of deliverance
BEVILLE. 195	'
ance, one would naturally SiippoSe, should have produced a very different efiedt: but, certain it is, my dear Harriot, that my tears fell in great abundance. He found me indulging them when he returned; but here I deSpair of giving you any idea of his emotions when he Saw me in this condition. Without refiedUng on the impropriety of Such a behaviour, circumstanced as we were, or the very short date of our acquaintance, he was in a moment at my feet, when, taking my hand, which he with a reSpedlful, yet infinitely tender air preffed to his lips; implored me rather to pity than condemn him; declared he would rather Suffer the most cruel death than See me endure a moment’s pain ; begged' I would not refufe him my compassion, and assured me, the dreadful situation, in which he then Saw me, had reduced him to one which K 2	greatly
196 Lhe HIS TORY oj
greatly stood in need of that conSola-tion.
You would be but little honoured, sir. Said I, by the esteem you Seem So desirous to obtain, were I capable of So much injustice as to condemn the innocent with the guilty. Rife fir, I beSeech you, and depend upon it, it will give me great pleafure to find you neither approve, nor are concerned in, this extraordinary affair. Yes, sir, continued I, I am perSuaded you are not. Unaccountable as the whole proceeding has been, I will believe you were ignorant of it till your arrival; but, be affured, it is not from me you can receive the information : I am as impatient to. learn as you possibly can be. You, fir, profeSs to be greatly shocked at the treatment I have met with: co^i-vince me of your Sincerity, by giving me liberty to leave a place So justly displeasing. This, sir, is all I alk : obtain
me
Mifs SEVILLE. 197
me this permission, and I will ever gratefully acknowledge the unexpedle i favour.
Give you permishon, madam! Ah, do not, distreSs me by a request lo mortifying. Is it possible you should still think So unfavourably of me ? — Yet, can I hope you should ever think other-wife of one So nearly allied to the amazingly changed, since I left him, Mr. Beaucham.p ?
Can you, Harriot, form to yourSelf any idea of my astonishment, on hearing him pronounce that well-known name.?
Mr. Beauchamp! cried I with the utmost eagerneSs; good heavens ! what do I hear ? Is it possible that you, fir, should be nephew to Sir JoSeph Beauchamp, and this the houSe of his brother ? Ah, fir, you know not into wdiat astonishment your words have thrown me, or what a conjedture they have at K 3	this
198 T/$cHISTORY
this moment given rife to in my long. • perplexed and tormented imagination.
I cannot expreSs to you my amiazement and furprife-—this strange affair is no longer a mystery. It is now extreamly clear what were their motives for their ungenerous proceedings. Pardon me, Mr. Beauchamp, for the Severity of my cxpreffions, but I am perSuaded you will not think they require an apology, when you are acquainted with the too just reaSons I have to uSe them.-
You may believe, my dear friend, tlie long wished-for explanation could not fail to Succeed this unexpedted discovery. I immediately informed him of what I imagined h^d induced his family to adt in this strange and unjustifiable manner, avoiding, as much as: possible, any expression that might give him an unfavourable opinion of mine..
It is not, my de.ar Harriot, in the power
of
B £ VILLE. 199
of language to give you any idea ql our mutual SurpriSe.
Ah, my too amiable MiSs Beville, cried he, again throwing himSelf at my feet, with every mark of grief and delpair in his looks and manner, what then is left me but miSery nnd wretched-neSs ? What can I in justice expedl but your hatred and contempt ?
Rife, Sir,Said I, nor pay me So bad a compliment as to believe me capable of indulging reSentment even against my enemies: how then fiiQuld I entertain any for one who never injured me ? That I have been cruelly treated is, indeed, most certain, but that you Have been no way accessary to it I am as fully perSuaded, and consequently yon have nothing to apprehenvd from ray diSpieaSure.—I have only to repeat ray request : Suffer me immediately to leave this houSe that I may, by my return, relieve my family from their crnel K 4	anxiety
200 SLhe HIS T O RY ^
anxiety and fuSpence. This, sir, is all the favour I require, and for this I will look upon mySelf as infinitely obliged.
Yes, madam. Said he, you are at liberty. Leave me, Mifs Beville, leave me to my unfortunate destiny. May you be happy—happy to the utmost of your wishes, whatever is the fate of him whoSe future felicity is wholly in your power. However tmfavourable this dreadful moment may be for Such a declaration, yet let me again repeat it, you are, and ever shall be, the mistreSs of my fate. Yes, madam, you are at liberty. Fly then to that Supremely happy uncle, and by compleating his felicity, enSure my death. Thank heaven this will be the confequence, and thus will all my pains be ended. He was going to add Something more in the Same dying strain, which I prevented, by telling him, the liberty he had granted would but half compleat my
happincSs,
Mifs BEVILLE. 201
happineSs, unleSs he would alSo inform me in what part of the world I had So long been confined, and dired me in what manner I could, with the most expedition, return to London.
Imagine, Harriot, if you can, the joy he expressed for my deigning, as he was pleaSed to call it, to conSult and honour him with my commands. You may alSo guels he offered with transport to be my guide to any part of the world. I found, on enquiry, that my aunt’s houSe was considerably nearer than London, and at once determined to go immediately there, not doubting her readineSs to receive me,' whatever she might have heard to my disadvantage. I informed him of mv design, but begged leave, for many , obvious reaSons, to decline his offered company. His carriage, I told himy I Would with pleasure accept, unleSs he could procure me one from any neigh-K 5	. bouring
202 HISTORY c/'
boilring town, which would be still more agreeable.
Cruel Mifs Beville! cried he tenderly, taking my hand, thus to destroy the pleasing hopes I had formed ! — Yet, dare I prefume, after what has past, to accufe you of cruelty ?—No, let me Silently bear my unfortunate destiny, I will no more torment you with my ftuitleSs complaints.—■You shall be obeyed, though in parting with you I give up every flattering hope of future blifs. The first moment I Saw that, lovely form, my heart confeffed itSelf your captive. Ah, what prolped then of ever regaining its liberty, since I have alfo heard that enchanting voice pronounce Sentiments So infinitely Sweet and amiable!—No, my charmingMiSs Bevilk, whatever Providence may'deS-tine to be my lot, without your esteem it must be wretched. I may perhaps never fee you more—I expetst it not—*
Ah
♦ ^
'	BEVILLR 203
Ah how little do I deServe it! For dare I flatter my Self yoUr justly in cenS-ed family will ever regard, but with horror, the unfortunate Son of thoSe who have So baSely injured them ?— Ah, why did I ever return, if but to be witneSs to a Scene like this ?—Why am I obsiged to refuSe my esteem and reSpetst to thoSe parents I have ever till now believed So justly intitled to it ?
In short, my dear Harriot, he So irresistibly implored me to honour him with a place in my friendship, that it was not in my power — and perhaps leSs in my inclination - to reSuSe his' request. It is true, by his accent, and the manner which accompanied his eloquently urged petition, it was not difficult to devine that friendship alone would not give him quite So much consolation as he desired; but this was the term he made choice of to exprefs Sentiments' infinitely more tender. His K 6	eyes,
204	H IS T O R Y of
eyes, indeed. Spoke in a manner not to be misunderstood; their Soft languao'e was perfedlly intelligible : but as I had never formed, even for a moment, the design of disappointing my father"s high-raiSed expedlation, I determined, if possible, to avoid any more explicit declaration, which it was, however, extreamiy plain he v/ished to make. Yes, my dear friend, dreadful as the Sacrifice will be—and, let me confeSs, it will be infinitely more So, Since I have Seen my too amiable deliverer—it must be done, if still required. Ah, would to heaven I durst flatter myfelf it .would not! with what joy would I then re-i	turn ! how different would be my emo-
'	tions from thoSe which at preSent dif-
tradt my tortured heart! But I fly, my dear friend, to restore their peace: their embarrassed circumstances demand this cruel expedient, they tell me— and dare I doubt their word ?—Yes,
Harriot,
Mifs BEVILLE. 205
Harriot, they have a thou Sand times assured me it is their only reSource. Ah why did I at a time So unfortunate See this too engaging nephew Why was my tryal to be rendered So infinitely more Severe —But it is the will of Providence '— let me not then repine. Wshen I have determined the manner of my journey I will finish and dispatch this tedious epistle. I go this mOmient to conSult with my charming deliverer, and to Settle the important affair,—Adieu till I return.
Every thing is fettled. I leave this place to-morrow, and, as I at first determined, go immediately to my aunt’s. Why, I repeat, ah why, my dear Harriot, did 1 ever See this too engaging youth ?—Alas how little was I, till now, acquainted with my own heart! 1 ever
believed
2o6	3-& H I S T O R Y of
believed it inSensible to every Sentiment but that of friendship ; till this fatal time it knew no other.—Ah Harriot, I greatly fear it can no longer boast of that infensibility But let me not too minutely examine its Sentiments.
Tell me, my dear friend, can any thing be more extraordinary than this unexpected meeting ? He tells me, he hoped to have found his, family here, it being about the time they uSually left London : he had not exadtly informed them when he should arrive, being determined to SurpriSe them.
Jenny brings me his compliments: he begs I will oblige him with the honour of my company at dinner.—Why should I refufe him this tripling favour ? It is but a Small return for the obliga'^ tion he has conferred upon me by restoring me my liberty. I have Seen him to-day, he having breakfasted in my apartment.—It is perhaps the last 1 fiiall
ever
IAifs BEVILLE. 207
ever be permitted to bestow. To-morrow I leave him—Ah, Harriot, leave him perhaps for ever !—But adieu till the evening, it will then be time enough for the posh
I have just left him, Harriot, and now return to finish my letter. Good heavens, my dear friend, how strangely am I altered wsithin theSe few days ! I did not uSe to repine nor be So much dissatisfied with the decrees of Providence. I now blush to find in my heart Sentiments So unworthy. 1 am continually lamenting that no other method was made choice of to repair my father’s shattered fortune. I now find no confolation from thoSe ressec-tions that ufed to afford me So much. I once could pleaSe mySelf with the hope that even the misfortune I fo greatly feared, might, by the blessing of heaven, which never fails to accompany thoSe actions performed in obedience
to
V
2o8 h I s t o r y e/*
to its will prove infinitely lefs dreadful I	than I apprehended. I can no longer
I	reaSon in this just manner: no, my
dear, I am no longer the disinterested j	creature I once flattered mySelf I was.
[	I am grown Selfish; I now am only
careful for my own happineSs, and forget the felicity of thoSe who ought to be at least as dear to me. Need I tell my !	friend to what she must imoute this
i	^
unhappy change ? Will she not too i easily gueSs the^ eloquence of the charm-j ing Beauchamp is alone to blame ? To you, my dear Harriot, I uSe no referve: let me then ingenuoufly confefs my I	weakneSs. Alas ! my unguarded heait
I	has not been proof against his insinuat-
I	ing SoftneSs! Unguarded becauSe I
1	,ever believed it required no other than
its natural inSenSibility. Ah, how cruelly have 1 been deceived! Know thy-felf, is, indeed, my dear friend, a difficult lesion: it is only by a long *ae^
quaintance
Mifs B E V IL L E. 20^1
quaintance one must arrive at this So uSeful knowledge. But, alas, my information comes too late, since it will only Serve to render that duty and obedience I am bound to pay, a thouSand times more difficult, hard as it ever appeared, than before I made this fatal discovery. Adieu: to-morrow, Harriot, I must bid a long farewell to the most —-but I check my too ready pen. Tomorrow, I fay, I shall quit my priSon — Good heavens! is it possible I should quit it with regret ?—and immediately Set off for my dear aunt Beville"s. Adieu, you shall hear from me the moment I arrive.
Yours,
Emilia Seville.
L E T-
I 210 r.^^HrSTORY^-
LETTER XXV.
To the S A M E.
Ah, my dear, my amiable friend, how shall I deScribe to you my unhappy situation }—Grief, for the irreparable ioSs of my affedtionate and tenderly beloved aunt, of whoSe death-you were no doubt informed, though her poor Emilia was till now unacquainted with that misfortune, has-reduced me to a. condition truly miserable. I know you at this moment grieve for me: my letter, which informed you of miy design, has, 1 am Sensible, given you great uneaSineSs on your unfortunate friend’s account, knowing, as you did, how dreadfully 1 was going to be shocked and disappointed. It was, indeed, my dear Harriot, more dreadful than you can possibly conceive.
I had
Mifs BEVILLE. 2II
\
I had pleaSed mySelf with the hopes of passing a few days with that amiable friend, before I resigned mySelf into the hands of thofe who had never So tenderly studied my felicity as she had ever done — but, ah, think, Harriot, what were my emotions, wlien enquiring of Mrs. Bethell, her most intimate friend and neighbour, what had occasioned my aunt’s houSe to be shut up, and left without the uSual Servants to take care of it, imagine, I Say, hovr dreadfully I was shocked, when informed, though in the gentlest manner, of her death ! My already too much agitated Ipirits now entirely forSook me, I fainted, in Spite of all her tendernefs and care. Hovr long I continued in that happy inSenSibility I know not, but the first life I made of my restored SenSes was, to beg she would not Sufier the news of my return to be known, till I was in Some meaSure recovered from
the
212 The HISTORY of
the afiliDion this inexpressible loSs had occasioned me. I made no difficulty of i accepting the offer, she obligingly made me, of her houSe and protedlion, till I choSe to inform my family where I was, as I could not have found a more agreeable assylum. She is a woman of the most amiable charadler and friendly disposition : she expreffed great pleaSure at Seeing me, after the strange adventure which had So long detained me from my astonished family, but could give me no particular account of their present Situation, being but little acquainted with any of them, except mySelf. One thing, however, she told me—ah, Harriot, how rejoiced should I be, durst I give credit to the report! she tells me, she is from good authority informed my dear father has got a plac9 at court of considerable income. — Ah, should it be true !—If he has indeed been So fortunate!-—but I dare not indulge
Mifs BEVILLE. 213
^ulge the delightful hope, lest your anSwer to this enquiry, which I shall long for with unSpeakable impatience, should fatally convince me I atn deceived. Good heavens, my dear Harriot,^ you know not what emotions this information has raiSed in my breast: I dare not too cloSely examine them, but till I hear from you am determined to conceal mySelf from the knowledge of my father. Ah, do not aik me what’thoSe emotions mean—do not, my Harriot, too stridily examine my heart, but write to me instantly, and if possible tell me whether since this increaSe of fortune my prefence is as much as ever desired on the odious Sir JoSeph’s account. Good heavens, Harriot, I cannot think of that man v/ith-:	out horror. Write to me, my friend,
O write to me instantly, and confirm the news of my father’s proSperity ; I aSk no other blessing. Let your first letter
contain
214 The HI ST ORYfff
contain only that affair. Ah, you know not how much depends on your anfwer! —A few lines, Harriot—'just yes, or no.
Adieu. In an agitation no pen can defcribe, I am truly
Yours,
Emilia Beville,
LETTER XXVL
Mtfs Harriot AIolesworth, bo IAifs Emilia Seville.
Thank heaven, my lovely Emilia, you are again at liberty! I will be silent, since I cannot, with alk my study, find words that will in any measure expreSs the exceSs of my joy. It is utterly impossible, therefore do not expedt it: you, 1 am perSuaded, do not feel half So much on the happy occasion ;
Mifs BEVILLE. ^15
'Sion; 1 am certain you do not: for my part I have Scarce behaved like a rational creature Since the day I received your last letter from the enchanted castle.
Ah, my dear girl, you bid me not question you, nor look into your heart! Indeed, my Sweet friend, it never could • dissemble, I See into its inmost recesses, even at this distance. No, my dear, I will not catechiSe you, nor examine your preSent emotions, since you forbid me: I shall loSe, however, but little information by my obtdience, since it does not require much Sagacity to learn what you, Emilia, are So exceedingly unwilling to believe. “ The odious Sir JoSeph?’*—You did not uSe to be fb very ill-bred, m.y friend. Alas, poor man, I think I can fee thy love is leSs likely nov/ than ever to meet with a ; return!—Pardon me, EmJlia, I am more than half out of my wits with joy.
You
2i6 r/j^HISTORY ^
You are well, you are at liberty, you are beloved by an angel, that is to fay by Harry Beauchamp; you are determined to disappoint his poor dear uncle, and lastly — but no matter, theSe are enough to produce that effedt.
Yet, do not, giddy as 1 am, think I haive forgot your good and justly valued -aunt; I knew her worth: she, Emilia, knew yours ; could 1 then fail to love her ? But, my dear, her death is no new misfortune, she died in leSs than a fortnight after you was in So strange a manner forced from us: do me justice, therefore, I beSeech you, in regard to’-her loSs, and Suffer me to write my thoughts freely as if no Such loSs had ever befalen us, since 1 cannot, for my life, be any longer Sorrowful. You are out of patience with all this impertinence ; you take my joy and gladneSs for granted, and would just now have Spared me this elaborate proof of either:
perliaps
Mifs BEVILLE. 217
perhaps you might, but till I had thus given it vent, it was not in my power to tell you one Syllable about either father or mother. So take that for my anSwer, and alSo my apology for Sending you more lines than you desired. Strangely altered indeed, Emilia ! you did not uSe to petition So emphatically for Sliort letters, my frienek Ah, Emilia, Emilia 1
Well then, shall I now anSvver your So interesting question, or begin with a minute detail of all that has happened since you left us Heaven forbid, you cry; do not, my dear Harriot, disti'adt me with your teizing impertinence. Civil, to Say truth.
Know then, that your good, reverend, and prudent father has, as dame Bethell rightly informed you, absolutely got the place; better men are not yet Served, but that’s a rrifie. And So Emilia, as I was Saying,
VoL. I.	L	he
\
\
i
2i8 neUlSrORYcf
he has got the place, which I am told is worth at least eight hundred a year. The duce is in it if the odious man— your own Soft words my dear—would have given him a better price for you than this, dear as you are to his weatherbeaten heart: but the worst of the affair is, the Said eight hundred a year has not cured the old foul of his passion, nor is your father’s promiSe yet revoked. The knight still hopes, and they still vow, you shall, if alive and worthy that felicity, be his in Spite of fate.— I prefume they mean in cafe you can be found.
This, my dear, is the prefent posture of affairs in Hanover-fquare, nor has any thing elSe extraordinary happened since you left it. It may not, however, be amiSs to tell you. Sir JoSeph had no hand in procuring the place. So no additional obligation on that account.
I have
MIfs BEVI'LLE. 219
I have not the least gueSs, you See, what are your preSent Sentiments—O no„shy no means —but, nevertheless, I may talk to you as if I had, there’s no harm in that you know. Well then, Emilia,' what is it you intend ? How comes the happinefs of your life to depend on this anSwer ? Do not be afraid to open your heart to your .Harriot, site is perfeclly well diSpoSed to approve any design you may form, and half guesses the odious man is to fed the effeds of his eight hundred a year. Let me know every thought and in* tendon of it, do not conceal one of them, and depend on my approbation. As for your Sister’s affairs, let them rest till we have Settled thoSe of more importance. Write immediately, and' depend on the fecreSy, or any other Service in the power of Your,
Harriot Molesworth.
L 2	P. S.
2 20 The H I STORY /
P. S. You fee I do not begin to mention the astonishment I was in when informed to whom it is you have So long been indebted for bed, board, and lodging; a quire would not contain half I intended to Say on that Subjedl:
'—I will only just obServe to you what were my first refiedlions when let into this impenetrable Secret. How! cried ], was it possible for us, my good mamma, not to SuSped that very family, since we were' obliged to Sulpedt Somebody Who So likely as that ambitious woman to do a thing of that kind, when it So nearly concerned her interest to prevent her brother’s playing the fool ?—Pardon me, Emilia, no diS-reSpedl to you. Very true. Said mamma, I am really SurpriSed it never occurred to us during our tedious perplexity.r— It is mighty eaSy to gueSs a thing when one knows it.
Heavens!
Mifs BEVILLE. 2 21
Heavens ! what a dust will be raiSed when there arrives a certain perSon ?
zn eclaircijfement 1 Fine eyes, you Say ?—Blue, I hope, and the kind of languish I admire.—Exadly.—Adieu, keep them in remembrance.—Write.
LETTER XXVIL JMtfs Beville, to Mifs Moles-
WORTH.
WHAT can I write to you, Harriot ?—I can reSolve on nothing. Yet I think one thing is nevertheless determined, which is, not to yeild my-Self voluntarily to certain miSery, since the only motive that made me ever conSent to Such a Sacrifice no longer Subsists. Providence has gracioussy in-rerpoSed to Save me from that dreadful L 3	fitce:
222 L’he HISTORY^’
fate:' my father’s fortune is restored without that fatal refource. ' With what unfeigned gratitude have I returned thanks to heaven for the unexpedled bleshng ! Ah may they never know a moment’s pain, whatever is reServed for their unfortunate Emilia!
Will you, m.y dear Harriot, approve of any reSolution 1 may form ? Will you indeed acquit me of ingratitude, or want of duty to my father, if I do not enable him to keep his promiSe to that odious man ? Yes, my dear, odious let me call him, in Spite of your lively remarlcs. How I am to be diSpoSed of till his fatal promiSe is revoked, or Sir JoSeph ctired of his imagined passion, heaven knows. 1 have as yet fixed on no plan, but cannot think of returning to my family, circumstanced is 1 unhappily am. Ah, Harriot, it is impossible. I will not conceal from you the inmost Secrets of my heart, I have
never
SEVILLE. 223
never been accustomed to pradliSe deceit, and should blush did I find the Sentiments I entertain for my amiable deliverer made that fault, become neccS-Sary. No, my friend, let me confesiJ without reServe, that it was impossible to hear or fee him with indifference.— Indifference, did I Say?—Ah, Harriot! Yet believe me, let this proof of m.y sincerity induce you to it; believe me, I Say, had I never Seen him, miy aversion, my dread of his horrid uncle would, I am perSuaded, have prevented my return, since my father’s interest is no longer concerned. This is most certain, nor can I think myfelf to blame; on the contrary, I am of opinion, that to enter into thoSe Solemn vows with a man I not only greatly disapprove:, but particularly diSIike, is infinitely more diSpleafing in the sight of heaven, in -	‘ wIioSq preSence thoSe vows are made,
than to diSoblige my father by refusing ^	to
■ V'
224 HIS TORY y’
to obey him.—What is it in fadt but perjuryfor, tell me, Harriot, could I either love or honour Such a man .f Obey him, indeed, I might have obliged mySelf to do, but Surely the other parts of, my engagement must have been out of my pov/er. Why then promise what I am Sensible I never could perform? No, my dear friend, after the most Serious refiedlion, my heart acquits me : by disappointing his ridiculous hopes, I certainly commit no criinc.
I have acquainted Mrs. Bethell with the whole affair, she pities; me, and affures me of her friendship and pro- , tedlion as long as it is either agreeable.' to me or necessary for my affairs. I am now tormented with a thouSand fears, lest my father should Send for' ; me to this place: for though my dear aunt is no more, he will naturally en« ' quire for me in her neighbourhood,' .
I	.	when
Mifs SEVILLE. 225
when informed of my design of going to her. It cannot be long before Mr. Beauchamip arrives in London. Ah, Harriot, I dread to think what may be the conSequence of this frightful affair ! What will my father fay when informed by whoSe means I have So long been confined } Sir JoSeph too— will they not more effedlually destroy, their hopes and expectations by this adventure, than if they had Suffered him to be as ridiculous as he olcaSed ?
X
He will certainly never forgive them, and will, no doubt, find Some other way to disappoint their mercenary views. Yet the uncommon merit of his nephew—he cannot refuSe him a place in his friendship. Impossible ! his first appearance must enSure him his esteem ; his manner So gentle. So siveetly engaging !—^^Ah, how perfeDly am I acquainted with his amiable charaSler—though not in his company above a day or L 5	two 1—»
226 HIS TORY oj
two!—I make this remark, Harriot, to fpare you the trouble.—-Yet what, my friend, did he not Say, during thoSe very few days indeed ?• Ah, one need but See to admire, but I, Harriot, both Saw and heard.
Adieu: be now as minute as you ,, , pleaSe, I am impatient to be informed of every thing that has happened, either before or since my deliverance. Do not forget to mention Caroline, though my preSaging heart tells me I shall hear nothing concerning her that will greatly add to the joy I feel in being again permitted to .write with freedom to my Harriot. Adieu,
Your affedionate,
Emilia Bsville,
/
I. E T-
'	BEVITLF. 227
LETTER XXVIIL
Harriot Molesworth, C2 Mifs Emilia Beville.
Thank you, in the first place, my dear girl, for opening your heart to me as I desired. You have, indeed, told me nothing of which I had not before a pretty shrewd gueSs, but your merit in obeying is still the Same ; you could not help my penetration, I have ever been famous for it. Why child, were I, as you bid me, to be particular in relating not all that, has happened since you first Set out on your adventures, but merely Since your return from captivity, I should never stave clone, and consequently you would have but a Small chance of knov/ing any thing of the matter. Your Swain arrived in town last week: an epistle from Mrs. Stanhope gave me the history of what L 6	follov/ed.
228 neUlSrOKY of
followed. Would you believe it poffi-ble that his mother was the contriver of the whole plot ? You know her mercenary disposition. So does the whole town. Mr. Beauchamp has been at no Small pains to acquit himfelf of the fuSpicion this naturally cast upon him, nor does any one now doubt his veracity : his rage and the diligent enquiries he is making to be informed of the truth, leaves no room to Sulpedl Isim. Why all this trouble, you ash, since-his dear fpouSe, if not himSelf, must have done it ? True, my dear, no one doubts thijs, how indeed should they,: for who could have made uSe of their houSe and Servants, without either his conSent or hers.? But madam denies the whole affair—true as you are alive, positively denies knowing any thiqg of the matter. Her Servants, she lays, must have been bribed r it is well known they had not made uSe of that feat for
two
Nf^BEVILLE. 229
two or three Summers: what interest or concern could she possibly have in MiSs Beviile’s affairs? Was it not.a thouSand times more probable that a lover had taken that method to prevent her marrying Sir JoSeph ? Who more likely than Lord B—, who publickly made So much bustle about her? How could any one, of common SenSe siilped: her of a thing fo extreamly ridiculous ? For, adds she. Supposing interest to have been my inducement, could I have taken a more effedtual way to diSoblige Sir JoSeph ? Gould I ever hope he would forgive , being So cruelly disappointed ?
This, Emilia, is the innocent creature’s reasoning, but, however Sagacious, not a Soul believes one word of all she Says on the Subjed, Sir JoSeph Swears he will rather fink his fortune in the Sea, than Suffer either her or any of her offspring to touch a penny of it. Your family cried aloud for Satisfadion, but
no
230 TIe HIST 0R.Y of
no one can determine what kind they can procure. Vfas it not absolutely certain that Mr. Beauchamp is entirely ignorant of the whole affair, your father and he (you having no brother, or elSe they might have Set the two youngsters to Settle the point) would undoubtedly have amuSed the town with a duel; but his behaviour on the occasion has been So extreamly generous and open, that it is impossible for the most prejudiced to blame him. By the way, it would be rather a hard cafe, were every man obliged to fight whoSe wife’s condudl is not quite faultleSs.
They are in Some wonderment you do not return. Since you can now have, no inducement to stay where you are. Caroline fancies you are with us, and begs I will inform her not only of that, but every thing elSe that concerns you : but trust me for that, or any other confidence you pleafeto honour'me with.
Your
Mifs BEVILLE. 23s
Your preSages on her ladyship’s account are pretty just. The dear creatures are now converted into the most fashionable pair you ever favv^. She
writes to me now and then, as I de-/
fired her, before I left town, in cafe she should hear any thing of her sister Emilia. Would you believe it ? — or rather would you doubt it ?—Her dear Charles has procured her a little assistance, in caSe she should find it too fatiguing to Spend his whole fortune ' by her own labour and care. Yes, my dear, she tells me he now keeps a mistreSs to share with her that trouble. — How kind and considerate for So young a man !—And she talks of it accordingly, but thinks she could have managed it, great as it is, without this proof of his affedlion. Uncles and fathers still continue inflexible: this is perhaps one cauSe of their mutual discontent, for love alone is but a poor
Subsistence;
23-2 HIS T O R Y ef
Subsistence; though in the days of our ancestors I have been told they required little more. It is true, they were not So well acquainted with, the various ways of Squandering money as we are.: quadrille, and a thouSand other pretty amuSements were quite unknowm to ' them. She has no SuSpicion of young Beauchamp’s passion for a friend of mine. I SuppoSe he thought this no very favourable time to mention it.
How nobly might the old knight behave on this occasion, if he had any idea of generosity! Instead of the revenge he So violently threatens, why does he not gain immortal fame and honour by yielding Some part of his fortune to his no doubt deSpairing nephew, and next remove that deSpair by presenting him with your hand I An ad like this might chance to gain him even my favour and friendship. I vow I could, on that condition, half
conSent
Mtfs B E V I L L E. 233
conSent to take the old Grecian for my own SpouSe, nay positively would, rather than the dear creature should pine for want of a wife.
But adieu Emilia. For heaven’s Sake write to me immediately, and tell me what you intend. That you may look upon our houSe as your own, is a truth you are Sensible of. So refiedl upon it.
I must again remind you that Sir ’ JoSeph is most furioiissy constant, and your father’s promiSe in flatti quo. I dare not flatter you, nor will I lengthen this letter, as I long more than you can conceive to know what this information will produce. Remember mamma loves you, at least as well as she does
• , Your,
Harriot Molesworth.
LE.D.
’ I
1
234	HISTORY 0/
LETTER XXIX.
Mifs Emilia Seville, to Mifs Harriot Molesworth.
DO not be SurpriSed, my dear Harriot, nor blame me for this change in my Sentiments. I have done nothing since I wrote to you last, but reste<5Ied on what my duty required from me, in this my dreadfully perplexing situation, and this, my dear friend, is the reSult of thoSe resieclions.
I am, at this very moment, preparing to rejoin my family. Yes, Harriot, I will resign mySelf into their protedtiori: I will, on my knees, implore my Sii-ther’s pity. He is not naturally cruel or unkind, he wdll consider the Sacrifice I voluntarily offered to make when his affairs required it. He knew my sincerity and will reward it by rccali-
I
SEVILLE. 23^
ing the fatal promiSe he then gave.
This, I trust, will be tlie confequence
of my preSent design. I am perSuaded
I cannot, with that prudence by which
1 ever wish to be governed, follow any /
Other. My duty to thoSe who have an indisputable right to my obedience in every reasonable point, demands this confidence: the violation of that duty must, I am fully perSuaded, be ever followed by remorSe. Let me not tlicn do any thing to vrliich I must look back with regret.. Tha.t I never will marry Sir JoSeph is most certain. Yes, my dear Harriot, believe me, I would prefer death to that misfortune, but I will not avoid it by any unjustifiable means. . I will indeed refuSe, bccaiiSe 1 ash perSuaded the authority of a parent does not extend So far as to force our inclinations in a point of llich importance; but I will refuSe with reSpedt, they shall have no cauSe to blame me
for
236	HISTORY^
for not paying them all they are intitlecl to, and be affured I never was inclined to think that a little : far, very far from it. In every thing but this, it ever was and shall be a pleaSure to obey, but in this caSe I am, I Say, perSuaded, a reSpedtful refuSal may be given without breach of duty. This, Harriot, is my fixed determination. You promiSed to approve m.y design,, whatever it might be: I flatter my Self you will nor nov/ change your obliging purpoSe, but encourage me to perSevere in the resolution 1 have formed, which is no eaSy one. I am but too Sensible I have infinitely more to fear than hope, yet they cannot force me to give my hand, they will not treat a child with So much unmerited Severity. Circumstances are changed since the horrid offer was made, the inducement for accepting it no longer Subsists; why then should I despair ? My tears shall prevail, my unremitted
M^BEVILLE. 237
remitted study to oblige in every instance but this, shall Soften their reSent-ment for my refuSal.
Ah, my dear Harriot, what is it you tell me of my poor Caroline.? How sincerely do I pity her unfortunate destiny! Infinitely more perhaps than she pities herSelf. Happy inSenfibility ! at least in this one instance, though not in every other. Are not parents rather to blame, Harriot, and in Some meaSure accessary, to their childrens ruin, when they thus rejedt their Submissions ? My father, indeed, at that time was embarrassed by a thouSand unfortunate affairs ; but Surely Mr. Stanhope, rich as he is, no family to provide for, might have prevented, by his favour and protedion, evils infinitely more dreadful than that he So warmly reSents. I am far from attempting to jufcify Caroline’s condud, but. Surely, I may be permitted to Say it is almost their duty to prevent a
misfortune.
238 T/peHlSrORY of
misfortune, when So evidently in their power; for I am perSuaded their for-giveneSs would have had a proper effect on the heart of my sister, gay and unthinking as she is. Do you think, my dear Harriot, they will prevent my feeing her ? 1 shall be extreamly concerned should they deny me this SatisfadBon: in a few days I shall have an opportunity to afk that favour. Ah, Harriot, shall I not alSo be again perSecuted ? But let me not look forward, or I shall not have courage to Support the dread-'ed interview.
1 forgot to tell you, that my dear aunt has left me a testimony of her af-fedtion in her will, which, Mrs. Bethell tells me, is ready to be paid me on demand : much it cannot be, but however trifling, coming from that arpia-ble friend, it will be received with gratitude.
Adieu,
lAifs BEVILLE. 239
Adieu, my dear Harriot, my next will be from London. Heaven knows what news it will contain! I have a thouSand tormenting fears and apprehensions.
/
Emilia Beville.
IEnd of the First Volume.
W"” E, Proprietors of Circulating Librarie*., finding it impnfiible to continue the Bufi-refs of Lending Books to Read on the late lo-zv Terms of Suhfc'' ' j, with the fame Degree of Reputation to . elves and SatisfaUIon to the Public as we did at a Time when neither fo great a Number of Nevj Books'fitxt published, nor the ' Demand for them fo great as now, have been compelled to advance the Sum of one Shillingon our dhiartefy, and Eighteen Pence on our Yearly Subscribers, in order to avoid the difagreeable Alternative of throwing up that Branch of Bufinefs which hath fo many Years been a Source of Amufernent, and, we will venture to add, Instruftion to the Public, or of fuffering it to languifh through a want of a proper fupply of Nezo Books, fo elTentially neceflary to its Credit and Support. And whereas, we have experienced the moll chearful Compliance from cur Subfcribers in the Payment of the trifling Sum fo reasonably advanced upon them ; We hereby (each for himfelf) take this Opportunity of affuring them in particular, and the Public In general, that no Pains nor Expence in our Power lhall be wanting to render our refpedlive Libraries (in point of Utility, Extenfivenefs and Amufernent) of iuch Advantage overall others, who fhall continue to lend at the old Price (if any Such fliould be found) as lhall more than compenfate for the fav'-ing of fo inconflderable a Sum as that abovemen-tioned, flnee they may be alTured that it is our most Serious Intention to purchafe for the ufe of our Subfcribers without Exception, a much largerQuan-tity and greater variety of New Books than can poffibly be furniihed by any One lending at lefs than
Four Shillings fer Quarter, '
o K
Twelve Shillings Year.
Francis Noble,	T. Vernor and f. Chater,
John Noble,	Thomas Jones,
'^IVddam Bathoe,	William Cook,
Thosnas Lozunds.
S^sSHH
ll■	■'	•	'	'	'■	'
-L '' ^.	-• . . \C i..//;l:-;	■''■' ■	^ - L. :. I _
I* ■ ■' ' ' ' •■■' '■' S ^ j
. ^ "^'	'	'	■	'	^	~"	•	I ■	..i«i»w'ii|-|,-i'-'-nin^j^i..; i	-	; .
I M .
' J! :
fl^ >
® 'T'
^fiS” - ^
.V	'	mt, ’:r .
P.
. . ^ |^pSBBaa=r«-..	a	.•SSSfeS	-‘ '
'ij i' - ,c -	■-■■■ " $ ■
Ki ir.	, ; L
f M ■ id. --	V	L i
■|Pl :S""- ■ '■ ' '	I'
'	I
' t'‘l	' '' ^	' ■ ^
i|'-	■ ■ .	' ■! .
f. | , :. -;	. V .	:
■■■■ . S - ■' ■ >	^	^'	:
y.
'■ ■ i - '■	■ ■ ' ' ■ ■'
" i	■,	'V .'
■( . ----------
■i. ■	■'
' A ■■_ '	f ■
. ;h :■	' ■	I	-
ill ■	■■■	■	■	■ i
P\ '	•	■	.	■ -L
4 '	- .	.	..	■ ’
^	ri ____j
; I • ■- i=r "C-£^ '\im \ • ^.a*-	',iii“_i ?7iL{i;isrLiit \
■' ------------------------------------------------
GODFREY F. SINGER
PRESENTED BY	I
MR- and MRS. JACOB SINGER
t
I ^ . .	■
h	N ^
f	:-L
'SC M
S'""'' .	■	'■	~	■■ 4’
L:'	■ ■ ;. J
, ' ' ' - - • >'.
i’ ’ 'Si
•S'^'.V
■, ^ ''^iN
• .
i' ■ •: ., ,	~ ' ffS^ ■	’
■ ' - ' \K
* 3 ■ ■
, '. ■■
,K"	.	'	■	;i'
i.;
■ ,_ r ■ ^ ■	' .	#	* -	■ '- ■ ■'
'.' *■ ' ' * ■ '
i?’ i .	^	‘
■	-. ..	■ L ■ N.,: ■ ■	' L \ .' S.
:L	‘	•	-	,	■>-	,	■
fev ■ X	' - '^0. .
< N ^■^■ ■-	' ■	■■' - '. ' ‘i :	' V
-- ■,'V ,.i
JL XA
HISTORY
OF
MiSs Emilia Beville.
In TWO VOLUMES. VOL. IL
LONDON:^
Printed by W. Hog'gard,
FOR
Francis Noble, at his Circulating Library, -neat . - -	Middle-Rok> HetbefK j
\	AND
John Noble, at his Circulating Library, in St, Martins Courtf near LeiceJier-Sjuare,
MDCCLXVIII.
1 •
■ S--.C T.':■	"■'
;	■ : ■'•N ■ .
,	s ,	;'C’ 'te
■-	,	. 'v	;	'	.	■ 'r ^	f
V ,	‘	^ S. ^	'■ '■ ■ ■'	.
’■'	• -	' ^	N ■ ^s
L .	. ' "	-	' , . . - X	■
LV - sv: ./ j rc V Cy^ T -f.I ■ oC!
: " ' ■■ •. '
|v.';. \■■:.*■:
f V- : ' L V
■ St'	- -i	■	'
^ -i-X' '	■<»'•■•■	.	■ .
V • V. ■ X ’ '.r	•	-:Y:	v,-:_ , • ■.:	-v	^
SC #	- ,v;.:c.	:;|
■ .	. X" ■	; V'-:w ^	,'i
"' -	■	^ ;:SX ■ ■'	' ■'■ ■■
V T X	U. of Pa. '
'	: ' '	I ihwjp*
IN-
>
3%	______._________________
THE
HISTORY
"	O F
MiSs B E V I L L E.
LETTER XXX.
Mifs Emilia Beville, to Mifs Harriot Molesworth.
"c<
.
5	would my dear Harriot
pity me, did she know, the VO	cruel reception I met with
from my unjustly offended family ! Good heavens, my dear friend, f you know not the trouble and un-eaSineSs I have Suffered since my re- ■ I turn. All my prayers and tears are 1
VoL, II.	B	ineffeduai,
<r
cO
^	^S5°lGo
%
2 ne HIST ORY of
ineffedual, I am perSecuted to death, I am blamed—yes, Harriot, blamed for all that has happened. Had I given (as 1 was often but with too much mildneSs desired) my hand to the man who made me Such generous. Such disinterested offers, all this vexation might have been avoided, and I been engaged in no shch ridiculous adventure. Ah, is this kind, nay, is it not cruel, cruel to excels, thus to upbraid me with a fault of which I am certainly innocent? Did I not at that time, freely yield the required obedience ? Could it be wondered at, or thought unreasonable, that J should wish, as long as possible, to delay the completion of my miSery ? Surely no ; and yet, Harriot, I am treated unkind-^ 1y; extreamly So by my father, nor does my mother endeavour to Soften his reSentment. His pride is hurt, that an affair of this nature should have
happened
BEVILLE. 3
happened to one of his daughters. I had not been at home many hours before he informed me of his unalterable resolution.
^ Do not think, Said he, that I will give I	you an opportunity to follow your
prudent Sister’s example. I will no longer be tormented with the care, qf daughters, if this is ■ the cafe. One runs away with a beggar, and' the othqr is run away with by I know not whon^. . rH have no more heroines in my family, your romantick adventures shall ended in a very few days ; and thank your stars they end So well. You shall be married child ; have as -many after that as you pleaSe, or your hiishand will let you, but while you are minp,
I will have no more of them. Look at your sister Caroline with her gay ensign : a pretty couple, and in a hopeful way they are,- it must be confessed. This it is, Emilia, to marry a fop.
B 2	Be
4 ne HISTORY/
Be thankful now, as you certainly will in a very, few months, that I have provided you a hushand whoSe wiSdom and knowledge of the world will Serve to diredl your steps and Save you from any Such inSults for the future.
In vain was all I could Say. I implored him to hear me, to refiedt a moment on my past condudt, to do me justice, nor cruelly blame me for what I could neither foreSee nor prevent. I would live Single, I would never marry to diSpteaSe him, he might in -every instance, but this, command my obedience; but ail my petitions were rejedled with the utmost rage. The vile Sir • JoSeph is to be here to-morrow, I will be very sincere with him: to him I may Speak, and most certainly will, nor can he, I think, be much SurpriSed at my determination. Yet, who ever had So great a share of vanity ? I never will, Harriot, 1 am absolutely reSolved I never
will
BEVILLE. 5
will be his, let the conSequence be what it will. There is no longer a necessity for it.—If they continue deaf to my prayers, I will fly to Some unknown corner of the globe, and rather learn to earn my bread with my hands, than Sacrifice thus my happineSs. Yes, Harriot, in peaceful obScurity I will absolutely paSs my days, rather than drag on a life of pompous wretchedneSs. What is his wealth to me ? Is it amongst the rich and great only, we are to look for Sweet content.^ Ah, no; they must indeed be little acquainted with life, who are not convinced it dwells but Seldom there. No, my dear Harriot, if you would find that blessing go to the humble cottage, the Scene of industry and health, it Seldom fails to visit, nay inhabit there ; and there, believe me, I will Seek that pleasing conSolation, if not permitted to rejedt this hated man. I have, except in this, omitted nothing B 3	to
6 T/j/HISTORY^
to oblige my family ; I have ever preferred their happineSs to my own ; this event, thank heaven, has no longer any connedtiori with it; may I not then avoid it by any virtuous means ? For to Such only will I have refource.
Adieu, my dear friend, I have nothing to add that can give you any pleaSure: should any more favourable Sentiments take place in the breast of my father, I will with joy make you a sharer in my happineSs. I have not yet had courage to mention my desire to See Caroline. Ah, Harriot, what would I give to know the preSent Sentiments of the amiable Beauchamp ! But it is impossible I ever should be acquainted with them, the bar between us is insurmountable, Pity me, my dear, my only friend, and continue to esteem
Your,
Emilia Beville.
LET-
Mtfs BEVILLE. 7
LETTER XXXI.
LIo the Same.
Read the incloSed copy, my dear Harriot, and tell me if the author is not the most generous and engaging of men. Read it, and teach me how I ought to behave in a cafe So difficult. ‘ To begin a correspondence with him, unknown to m.y family, I never will—> Ah what has he then to hope—No, they shall have no just cauSe to tipbraid-me, my rejedrng this tormenting man is the only instance in which I ever oppofed my will to theirs, and shall be the last, uaieSs they drive me to extremities by their Severity.
Jenny gave me the letter I Send you, this morning. Her Sister, you may remember I told you, is woman to Mrs. Beauchamp. By her means, he no doubt fiat-B 4	ters
8	H I S T O R Y g/’
ters himSelf his epistles will be conveyed without Suspicion. But tempting as the opportunity certainly is, I will, whatever the refuSal may cost me—and you, Harriot, may judge by the incloSed, it will be no Small mortification — I will resist it. Yet civility demands that I should give him the reaSons which induce me to ^ a6t with this apparent .Severity. Should I only return his next •unopened, would it not appear the common effedt of prudery, or a little female parade, uSual on theSe occasions No, I will anSwer it, and convince him how ' extreamly improper it would be, circumstanced as I unhappily am, to commence Such a correspondence.
Unhappy, my dearHarriot, beyondcon-ception, tormented continually with the odious assiduities of this vile knight, persecuted every moment by my family on his account, shocked to See the very imprudent unthinking condud of that family
which
lAifs B £ V I L L E. 9
which I am bound to reSped: and honour; how dreadful my condition ! They preSs me to obey, merely that they miay no more be plagued, as they term it, with the care of children. Ah, Harriot, what Sentiments are theSe for parents to entertain! Ouoht not thoSe children to be
O
more dear, ought not the care of fettling them in life to be one of their pleaf-■ ing, though perhaps difficult, designs ^ Alas, of how much true pleafure do they deprive themSelves, for the unSatiS-factory amuSements in which they are continually engaged! A family is their miSery, the very idea of it fatigues them. Can a father, wdioSe v/hole time and attention is dedicated to pleafure, as it is 'falSely called ; can' he, I fay, con-deScend to regard the pains or distreffes of his child —Can a mother, gay as -mine, rested or study what will most probably conduce to the felicity of her daughter — Ah, no —- to be deliver-ed B 5	from.
10	HISTORY c/
from the obligation of thefe duties is their only care : this is their view; to accomplish this, I am doomed to wretch-edneSs. My late unfortunate adventure is now the constant pretence for persecuting me. I have talked to the cauSe of all my Sorrows, I have implored him to pity, and not oblige me to offend my family by a positive denial. I beSought him to desist from his importunities, and thereby reStore me that peace to which I had So long been a stranger ; but he hears me with indifference, and again renews his hateful declarations. Heaven only knows what will be the event, but marry him I never will.
Adieu. I must leave you at preSent, nor shall I be able to finish this till tomorrow, as we have company to din^, and cards in the evening. Think, my dear friend, how painful it must be, depressed as my Spirits are, to appear
with
l\lifs BEVILLE. II
with a face of unconcern and tranquillity. But can I, indeed, appear So ?—Ah, no, I am not yet So pradtiSed in diS- , imulation.
^
JVedmfc.ay morning.
Who do you think was one of last night’s party, to the apparent chagrin of the old knight! Lord B—. Shall I confeSs, Harriot, that I am not free from the Spirit of revenge ? No, my dear, I really enjoyed, with infinite Satisfadion, the uneaSineSs his assiduities gave to that tormenting creature: it was this alone which could have induced me to Suffer them without regret. I hoped he might be piqued at my behaviour, and, with a becoming pride, Subdue his rebel heart. This flattering thought, I Say, made me shew the utmost politeneSs and attention to every thing my lord Said: B 6	mv
12	HISTORY ^
my condescension gave him visible pleasure. He was gay and lively to exceSs, and looked with no Small contempt on the ancient knight, who followed us continually with his eyes, nor ever failed to interrupt our conversation whenever in his power. Every one Saw the designs of both, and fmiled no doubt at the looks they cast at each other.
Need I inform you his lordship renewed his former declarations that he begged permission to wait on me on more private days ^ that my heart alone could enfure his felicity, and a thou-fand other compliments equally sincere.? For his lordship must excuSe me, if I cannot believe his felicity will ever depend on the heart of any female, how; ever fair or beautiful.. But this was the fubjed he, as a man of gallantry, made choice of to entertain me with, not doubting but thofe fpeeches from a man
of
BEVILLE. 13
of his figure, would give me more pleaSure than if uttered by his stately rival, for he did indeed aiTume most stately airs. 1 made no diredt reply to his request, but appeared eaSy, nor shewed any signs of diSpleaSure for his having preSumed to make it. You cannot imagine the joy I felt during the whole evening, in the hope Sir JoSeph would fnew a proper Spirit and reSentment. My mother was too deeply engaged to give any attention to m>y behaviour: she left that affair I SuppoSe to the care of her intended Son, and, to do him justice, he did care abundantly. I have not Seen him or any of my family since, though his venerable knightship is to breakfast here ; but mamma is not up, nor will I presume for Some hours, as it is now Scarce nine o’clock. 1 am in Some terrors, lest my coquetry should not produce the desired effed. Should I See any degree
of
V
14	HIS T O R Y 0/
of coolnefs in my Swain at his next ‘ visit, he may depend on a perfedl cure;
1 will certainly conquer his ill-fated passion by a repetition of the Same remedy, the first opportunity, and if I may take my lord’s word for it, I shall be at no loSs on that account. Yet, good heavens, Harriot, should Mr. Beauchamp' hear of this man’s visits at our houSe, should he believe it possible for me to favour a lover of his libertine principles, a man So univerSally known for his gallantry and intrigues, what an idea will he form of your Emilia’s Sentiments ! Ah, I tremble at the very thought! Nay, can he fail? Do not every one obServe Lord B—’s assiduities ? Ah, I will no longer hear his odious declarations, I will never See him more. Yet, how then shall I mor-' tify this 'tormenting knight ? I know not: I am perplexed, Harriot, I am dying with a thouSand fears: have I
not
Mifs BEVILLE.. 15
not reaSon ? What will the^ amiable Beauchamp think when informed, as he Soon will be, if not already, of his lordship’s visits } He has not yet Seen his uncle, who still vows revenge. Ah, could he but forgive ! had he once Seen and converfed with Such a nephew ! Heavens! should he have any SuSpicion that this nephew is his declared, and—> let me to you confefs—highly favoured rival, what a storm will it raiSe in his unforgiving breast!
Farewell. Write to me, diredt me with your advice, tell me, my dear Harriot, how I am to avoid this marriage, for avoided it must be at all events.
Adieu,
Emilia Beville.
LET-
i6	HISTORY^
L E T T E P>. XXXIL
Lo the S A M E.
T^T O, Harriot, my gaiety with Lord i. ^ B— has not indeed produced the ^desired effedl: instead of the Ipirit and pride 1 hoped the old knight would shew on Such an occasion, which he certainly would have done had he a proper degree of either, he mentioned it to my father, and made the favour I expressed for his lordship a pretence to hasten my miSery. My father was in a rage, and commanded me to make * no farther objedlions, but prepare to give my hand the following week without a ‘ murmur. Ah, think what were my emotions at that dreadful moment! ^ Again I fell at his feet, and bathing his hand wdth my tears, implored Isim to Spare his unhappy daughter, and be-
Sought
Mifs BEVILLE. 17
Sought my mother to intercede for me, nor Suffer me to be So precipitately hurried to deSpair. They heard me unmoved, and after a thouSand cruel re-fiedlions on my behaviour to Lord B—, left me in a Situation that would have excited pity in any hearts but theirs. I, should have died, my dear Harriot, yes, I am perSuaded my grief would have killed me, had not Providence interpoSed, and given me a reSpite from deSpair.
Sir JoSeph had not left us half an hour before he returned with a visible change in his countenance.
I come, my lovely Emilia, faid the horrid creature, to inform you of an event that almost distradts me. Could it fail, since I am thereby prevented from accepting that hand at the appointed time, on which the happinefs of my life So wholly depends? Ah, would you conSent to blefs* me with
that
i8 The HISTORY of
that inestimable gift before I go!—for go, my charming bride, I must : an affair of importance demands my immediate prefence at one of my estates., i am in deSpair at the thoughts of this delay: a fortrsight, or perhaps three weeks, without feeing my Emilia will kill me with grief. Condefcend then to my importunities.: Say, shall to-morrow be the happiest day of my life ? — My father w^as So cruel as to repeat his dreadful request. I could only an-fwer with my tears. They then began to talk of the horrid affair, as if they believed my Silence was meant as my conSent: this shocking Supposition gave me courage, I declared I could not, on any consideration in life, conSent to their propoSal; it was impossible, I should expire to be So hurried. I im-' plored them by turns not to drive me to deSpair by Such precipitation.
Would
BEVILLE. 19
Would I then.chearfully obey when Sir JoSeph returned ?
What could I Say ? 1 never will be his, Harriot, durst I then make a promise I meant not to keep ? With a thouSand impertinent Speeches, he at last took his leave. Seeing his preSence was not likely to inSpire me with any more favourable Sentiments; and I was ordered, in no very mild or gentle terms, to go and prepare for the approaching Solemnity. My joy at this delay is inexpreshble; not, you may believe, as it prevents me for a while from becoming his, for that I again repeat I never will, but as it will give me time to conSult in what manner I am to avoid it.
Now, my' dear friend, accept my unfeigned ' thanks for your obliging offer. Your houfe would indeed be a most desirable aSylum, but can I indulge the desire of my heart in agreeing to that
delightful
20 ^he H i S T O R Y of'
delightful propoSal? Would knot, when known, create a coolneSs between our families} What a return would that be for siich unmerited obligations! No, my dear Harriot, it is a felicity not permitted me to enjoy. Would to heaven it was ! but a number of circumstances render it impossible; I must, therefore Seek out for Some other. Ah. can' I ever hope to find one So infinitely agreeable ? No, my Sweet friend, I am not born to happineSs: all I have to do is to bear my fate without repining or discontent: let me then endeavour it.
Emilia Seville.
P. S. Jenny has this moment defired to Speak to me: she has a thought tq communicate, which she hopes will not be disagreeable. The good girl has ever expreffed the utmost affedlion for me, and is, 1 am perSuaded, perfedly
Sincere.
Mtfs B E V I L L E. 2 1
Sincere. You shall know her buSmeSs in my next, if it is worth your hearing.
Adieu.
/
LETTER XXXIII.
To the Sam e.
HE important point is at last de« -i- termined; I have found an aSy-lum, where I may for a while remain in peace and Safety, till my father can be prevailed on to change his cruel pur-poSe. I told you in my last, that Jenny begged leave to Speak to me on an affair of Some conSequence ;• it was indeed of the utmost. This, in few words, was the fubjedt of our conference.
She is, as you know, perfedlly ac-quainted with all my affairs : she had frequently heard me wish for Some retreat,
, 22 L'he HISTORY of
treat, to which I might for a while retire. Refiedting on this, the following Scheme occurred to her, which she with great modesty and reSpedt begged leave to propoSe, Her father is a clergyman, and has a curacy, about fifty miles from London, worth only twenty pounds a year: his Sister keeps his houSe, he having been long a widower. After many apologies for preSuming to give her opinion So freely. Ah, my dear madam. Said site with visible anxiety in her looks, would you condeScend to honour his cottage with your preSence, how happy would he be! Though poor, continued the good girl, he is honest, and, with pleaSure I tell it, greatly valued and even reSpedled by all the neighbourhood. It would be his dp-. light to make your situation agreeable. His houSe, though Small, is neat and decent: at this SeaSon too the country about it must be extreamly pleaSant,
as
M/x BEVILLE. 23
as it is allowed to be a remarkably pretty Situation, though retired. It is about half a mile from the village, and but little more, added she, from Beverly hall, Vv^here Lady Beverly constantly resides, and who is the best lady in the world. To her I am indebted for^he little education I am mistreSs of: she put us all to School at her own expence, nor has ever ceaSed being a generous ’ friend to my dear father.
T o this good man, my dear Harriot,
I am determined to go, should my parents continue obstinate in their present dreadful design; but that I may have nothing to refiedt upon when this step is taken, which heaven knows will give me unSpeakable pain, I am determined once more to try all my influence on the heart of my father :— I will promife him to live Single, or never to marry contrary to his inclinations ; that I will with pleaSure retire to any of my
relations
24 TA HISTORY of
relations he shall make choice of, and thereby relieve my mother and him from a charge they think So extreamly diSa-greeable ; in short, 1 will with joy consent to any propoSal they will do me the favour to make, on condition I may, without incurring their diSpleaSure, re-iedt the man who has been the cauSe of all my mifefy. In cafe I fail in my intercession, which heaven forbid ! this is the manner in which my design is to be put in execution.
•	My deaths, and whatever elSe I mean
to take with me, are at different times to be carried by Jenny to a friend of hers, there to wait till the day of my departure arrives. Ah, Harriot, what painful emotions shall I endure on that fatal day ! Yet, Surely, my condudt will not be v/holly unpardonable : I do ilot, to avoid one lover, put mySelf into the protedlion of another, as has too often been the cafe; no, 1 fiy from my family,
it
Mifs BEVILLE. 25
it is true, but I trust it will by every unprejudiced perSon be thought excufa-ble, wher> it is considered I am going to people of virtuous and honest cha-radlers, to a family, the master of which IS, by his Sacred profeffion, ren' dered reSpedtable. You, my Harriot, mufc vindicate your friend, should any malignant tongues take liberties and cenSure thoSe adtions the cauSe of which they ' are not So well acquainted with as you. I have very fortunately received the legacy left me by my dear aunt, which will enable me to repay the obligations I shall receive from thoSe good people: had I not been thus opportunely Supplied, I should ' have found mySelf at Some loSs, as I never was miSer enough to be at once poffeffed of any great Sum. The mo- ^ meat I have talked to my father, in Cafe he is inexorable, Jenny is to write to hers, in order to prepare him for VoL. II.	C	the
1
(
26	H IS T O R Y ^
the intended visit. A week or two after I am gone, she is, on Some pretence, to leave her place and follow me. Indeed my abSence will be reaSon fufiicient, as she properly belongs only to me.
This, my dear Flarriot, is the design I have formed, and will certainly put in pra(5i:ice, if my petition is rejedled, and I am not freed from the hated ad-dreSs of this odious man. You, and only you, shall know the place of my retreat, I will trust that Secret in your friendly breast, nor doubt its perfect Security. I will write to you frequently, that shall be my chief amufement: you too will Sometimes favour me with a letter. But why do I Speak in this
cold, this formal manner, to my Har-
/
riot ? Yes, you will write to me constantly, and inform me of every thing that happens either in your family or my own: should you alSo add, now
and
BEVILLE. 27
and then, a line concerning a certain perSon, whom it would nevertheless be a thousand times more prudent to forget, your correspondence will not perhaps be the leSs agreeable. Thus have I ended this affair, and will now proceed to tell you another.
Notwithstanding the anSwer I Sent to Mr. Beauchamp, in which I gave him my reaSons for begging he would on no consideration venture to write again, he has diSobeyed my just commands. I yesterday, to my inexpressible Surprise, found in my pocket a Second epistle from that' too amiable man.—What could I do.^—I read it, Harriot, and, let me confeSs to you, my dear friend, I read it with infinite pleaSure. He renews the declaration of a passion which he, lover like, vows no time or circumstance can ever abate : his happineSs or miSery is wholly in my ‘ power. Ah, would to heaven they I	C 2	were!
I
I
1
28 • HISTORY
W'ere! Alas! he knows not how ex-treamly that power is limited. He implores my permission to write, since all hopes of Seeing me at 'preSent are vaist and, impradlicable; begs I will by ioHie means avoid driving him to despair, by giving my hand to the man 1 So greatly disapprove. He would not, he Says, preSume to take So great a liberty w'ere he the man of my choice; no, were that indeed the cafe, dreadful as k would be, he would endeavour to bear his fate in silence; but as it is not So, he beSeeches me, both for his fake and my own, not to be terrified or perastiaded into unavoidable mifery, to give up every pleasing hope of future fesieity, merely to gratify the Self-interest and amshitious views of my family. Then, in the most reSpedlful manner, apologizes for preSuming to mention thoSe but too visible motives, which nothing but the tenderest love
and
I^ifs BEVILLE. 29
\
and esteem should have prevailed on him to do: a love that took poffeffion of his heart the first moment ste Saw me. He reminds me of that extra-ordiii,ary meeting, and Says, that Providence certainly would not have taken Such uncommon means to preServe me from wretchedneSs, nor have choSen him for my deliverer, without Some further designs in our favour.
What think, you, my dear Harriot, of his reasoning Does he Seem to understand the decrees of fate ? His pre-didions are, I am greatly afraid, rather to be wished than hoped. 1 dare not flatter mySelf v/itli the pleasing pro-Sped. As my stay will, in all probability, be but fliort in town, I am the-more indifferent about his' writing, though^ I nevertheless enquired of his friend Jane (for So I find site is in no Small degree) by what means his billet doux was conveyed into my pocket.
C 3	* She
i
30	77^^ H I S T O R Y c/’
She found means, however, to appeaSe , my wrath, and alSo courage to plead his cauSe with tolerable fucceSs. I charged her, notwithstanding, to give me no future proof of her officious dexterity,' but So very limited, as I told you above, is my power, that I have not been able to prevent her disobedience, and behold, this morning produced another.
I have at last affumed courage to beg permission to fee Caroline: it w^as rejeDed with a frown. I then wrote to her, as that was not denied me; perhaps indeed becauSe not ashed. But pray, Harriot, gueSs by whoSe means it was 1 received her anSwer — only Lord B. He gave it me with an air of vast importance, willing no doubt to make a merit of the prodigious obligation; telling me he thought him-Self the happiest man in the world in being thus honoured ; begged I would,
after
Mifs BEVILLE. 31
after perusing it with proper attention, permit him to convey my anSvrer to Mrs. Stanhope; but judge what was my Surprize when, retiring to my apartment, I found Hipped into the end of hers, one from himSelf! It was not Sealed, and consequently not to have opened it would have Signified nothing, as he would still have believed I hai Seen the contents. It contained the most pompous fieciaration of love, efreem, admiration, and ail the fine Speeches that gallantry could didlate, to confirm the Said declaration. He beSought me to permit him to think of Some • means for my deliverance from the horrid fate that awaited me. Would I con-dcScend to hear him, on the imDortant-Subject ? He was Sensible there were but a few days between him and de-fpair, if I did not favourably listen to his propoSal. Would I indulge him So far as to meet him at my sisters? She C 4	had
32 rhe m&TO'KY of
s
had promised to plead in his favour. (This she does most violently in her letter) How could I think of obeying the tyrannical commands of a father who gave Such evident proofs that he studied only his own interest in the Sacrifice he required ? (Here a thouSand wild Schemes which he had projedtecl for my deliverance) Would I but render him happy by my conSent, to whicli ever I thought the most agreeable !
1 could not but obServe, amongst the many plans he h^d laboured to prove So extreamly expedient and practicable, he had omitted to mention the only one which in my opinion is So, namely, a trip to Scotland: this, the good man quite forgot—we are to SuppoSe. Any adventure but that, and i doubt not his Lordship is my most obedient. A matrimonial one is, I preSume, rather grave, for a perSon of his gay and lively taste. Not that he
would
Mifs BEVILLE. 33
would have me think So, I dare fay, but I must be of that opinion, nevertheless. If I wrong him, why does he not openly apply to my father ? It is most" certain he would prove a formidable rival, when declared in form, to their favourite knight: I mean in their judgment, mine is out of the question:-I declare against both with equal fervor. How Caroline and his Lordship came to be So amazingly intimate, heaven knows : quite a friendship between them — a pretty friend, to Say truth. You may believe I fiiall neither trouble him with my anSwer, nor her houSe with the requested interview. j	Would to heaven I were Safely arrived
at my rural habitation ! I half tremble, lest this So ingenious projedtor, should put Some of his plans in execution, and thereby not only frustrate Sir Jofeph’s hopes, but mine alSo : no man more likely, especially as he has the C 5	plea
Cr T/J? HISTORY gT
plea of my aversion to his rival to urge in his defence. Yet 1 believe my fears on that account are ridiculous, for, as Caroline fays, the days of chivalry are at an end: we read, indeed, of Such amazing stories as ladies, in former times, having been by dozens carried off, but thoSe instances are confined to books alone, in life we meet with no Such violent doings.
Adieu, my dear friend, I go to desire an audience of my father. Ah, did he but know how wholly my future peace depends on the anSwer he is to give to my petition, he would Surely pity and remove my fears.
Yours,
Emilia BBviLLEr LET-
Mifs SEVILLE. 35
LETTER XXXIV.
Lo the Same.
ALAS! my dear friend, all my hopes are vanished! my* father was in a rage, he even uScd me cruelly, nor would hear me Speak. No Sooner did he know the Subjedl on which I had desired to be heard, than he ordered me to be silent, and learn, as my duty diredled, to obey. Said, he was informed I intended to follow my Sister’s example, but would take effedtual care to prevent my imprudent purpoSe. I affured him the accuSatiori was falSe, -and was beginning to mention thoSe promises and propofals I told you I Intended, but he would not give me leave to proceed; and, telling me, if I had really no Such design, my obedience would be the leSs mortification, he C si	left
S6 TXfHISTORY/
left me, nor would hear another word: I implored my mother to intercede for me: she declared it was not in her power, were it in her inclination, to alter my father’s reSolution. She was dreshng for Renelagh, and with great ^ eafe and gaiety desired my company. You may believe I excuSed my Self from being of her party, having a mind but little diSpofed for aay amuSement of that kind : instead of which I Sat down to inform you of my bad Suc-ceSs.
My journey then is determined, it is my only refource, and I hope an innocent one. Your approbation has, given me infinite pleaSure, it has re^ sieved my Spirits from a load of un-,^ eaSinefs and doubt. Your repeated offers of protedlion I read with tears of gratitude, but must still, from my first motives, reSuSe, and conSole my Self with the refiedion that the retreat I
Mifs BEVILLEi 37
have made choice of does not Seem in your opinion any way blameable or imprudent. I should still be more happy if your mamma knew the- whole affair, yet I tremble lest she should, from motives which might to her appear necessary, reveal to my father this important Secret. Do as you shall iudge best, my dear Harriot, tell her or not, as you think proper, I only repeat, her approbation would better enable me to Support the dreadful tryal.
Jenny is at this moment writing to her father: next Monday is fixed for the important day. To what a Scene will it be witneSs in this family! — Yet, is it not unavoidable ? — Ah, let me not refiedlr, lest I should not have power to keep my refolut-ion. — Yet, Surely, does it not require infinitely more to break it}
Jenny *has again tranSgreffed. The too prevailing Harry every day finds
means
/
3S HIS TORY oj
means to convey an epistle, and every day renews the declarations he first made, adding a thouSand others, equally pleasing. But to what purpoSe, Harriot, are all his vows of constancy, his engaging professions ? Alas! were I diS-pofed to believe him—Do 1 then doubt that word So Sweetly given ? AnSwer for me, Harriot, you know every Senti-^ ment of my heart.—To what purpoSe, I Say, are all his vows, since it is almost impossible we should, ever meet again ?—at least I may with certainty pronounce we never can with the consent of my parents, and without it he can have nothing to hope: one adt of disobedience in a family is more than enough. What then, I Say, has he to hope ? —Nothing, Harriot, it is impossible h^ should: yet he is of a different opinion, elSe v/hy should he thus importune me not to be perSuaded to my ruin ? His death, he continually affures me, will
be
' Mifs BEVILLE. 39
be the immediate conSequence of my conSent.
With what eaSe, my dear Harriot, do theSe men talk of dying! Alas, are they ^ not merely words of courSe ? Lord B— too Swears his life or death depends on my Smiles.—Pretty significant compliments theSe, could one but See now and then an instance to prove their Sincerity.—My Lord, I am per-Suaded, will never be the perSon to give if, whatever my more gentle and amiable Beauchamp may do. Yet, heaven forbid he should ! I am already but^ too fully convinced of his truth and affedlion.
His Lordship has a friend in the family, it is very evident, though I have not been able, with all my enquiries, to find out which of the Servants it is. 1 have every day found letters from him. Sometimes on my toilet. Sometimes in my work-baSket.—Jenny
declares
40	HIS T O R Y of
declares her innocence in terms I cannot doubt. Indeed site is too deeply interested in Mr. Beauchamp’s fate, to favour his rival.—He is as. violent as ever.' Begs, nay insists upon my agreeing to Some of the propoSals he has preSumed to make ; reminds me of the Snort time between me and miSery; assures me Sir JoSeph is expedled in a few days, for he knows, v/ith amazing exadlneSs, every thing that passes in our family. Declares, Mrs. Stanhope approves of his design; and, to induce me to conScnt, adds, he is well informed, the day of his arrival will be the last of my liberty. MiSerable should I be, Harriot, had I no other reSource: but, thank heaven, I shall avoid that horrid fate without his interpositions. Is it possible Caroline should approve his design ^ It cannot be that she would wish me to be obliged for my liberty to a man of his character: she knows
not.
Mlfs BEVILLE. 41 .
not, certainly, the uSe he makes of her name.—Yet, does she not herSelf plead his cauSe ? But no matter, a few days more, and I shall be indifferent about either him or his passion: his violent care and concern will then be all at an end; but should st not, you may believe 1 fiiall be perfeDly eaSy about the matter.—Ah, would I could with truth Say as much concerning another perSon i Yet why, my dear friend, should I wish to be indifferent ? That I am not So does not increaSe his pains; on the contrary, I am perSuaded, notwithstanding they tell us our peace and happineSs is infinitely more dear to them than their own, did she but know what I at this cruel moment Suffer on his account, he would rejoice with great Sincerity.
Adieu, my dear Harriot, 1 have a tliouSand things to Settle in regard to my important journey. I tremble lest
my
\
1
42 TZv H I S T O R Y ^	,
my Spirits should fail me during this 1 dreadful preparation. Write to me	:
‘ immediately, encourage me, I beSeech 70U, with your repeated approbation.
Yours ever,
Emilia Beville.
LETTER XXXV.
LIo the Same. .
1
API, my dear Harriot, with what terrors do I See the preparations making for my intended marriage ! My	*•
mother in high fpirits, is continually entertaining me with the figure I shall foon make. Jewels, equipage, court,, plays and balls, are the allurements she offers to bribe my imagination. -	1
Alas! my dear friend, she is a stranger to your Emilia’s heart and fentiments,
or
BEVILLE. 43 -
or she would be Sensible thoSe' empty insignificant vanities would make but Small impression on it, when purchaSed at the expence of her future peace.
I do not Say thoSe distindtions have no charms ; I am, perhaps, but too much perSuaded they have many ; but, Surely, not enough, my dear Harriot, to corik-penSate for the loSs of every other blessing. My condudb will, I ssatter mySeif, be thought excufable by aU thoSe who do not look on riches as the greatest gift heaven can bestow: and that there are too many that do, is most certain. But it is not their cenSure I fear, their opinion v/ill not give me any great concern; tho’, were it possible, I would adl in Such a manner as to merit every one’s esteem and approbation. Need I obServe how vain and impradicable that attempt would be
I every
I
44 Lhe HISTORY of
.1 eveiy day, in Spite of all my precautions, receive letters both from the * distressed Beauchamp, and the preSuming i. Lord B. The latter, vainly imagining, he has my good opinion. Seems fully perSuaded that I shall, before Sir JoSeph’s return, be prevailed on to accept his offered assistance, and talks, with great gaiety of the Knight’s approaching disappointment, In short, there is no end to his Schemes for my deliverance, as he is fond of expressing it; no doubt by way of giving his offered Service an air of more significaney and impor-	‘
tance. Caroline eipouSes his caufe with great warmth, fully perSuaded, I prefume, that his intentions are honoura.-ble. His Lordship, honourable as he is, must however pardon me, if I a sittle SuSped. them for this once; but	t
as I give mystlf no great concern whe-	1
ther they are or not, I read his ssanoing ..professions with perfed indifference.
Ah,.
M/5 SEVILLE. 45
Ah, Harriot, how differently am I affedted by thoSe of the amiable Beau-i champ 1 It is impossible t6 deScribe to you the engaging manner in which he writes. So pleasing. So insinuatingly Soft and perSuafive ! But are not the obstacles insurmountableOur families at variance ? Irreconcilably So ? Impossible then, my dear Harriot, it cannot be. Let me endeavour to forget him then; this tassc, painful as it is, shall be my employment, when in my ' peaceful retreat.
Adieu, till to-morrow. I am obliged to attend my mother on a visit. As it is one of form and ceremony, you may believe 1 promiSe mySelf but little pleaSure or fatisfadlion; should I be disappointed I will confeSs my error, and inform you of it. Adieu.
w ^	^ w ^	^	^	^	^
Good heavens ! my dear Harriot, who do you think was the first perSon I Saw
on
4.6 The HIST ORY of ^
on entering the room yesterday at Mrs. Blaney’s ? I am not yet recovered from my inexpressible SurpriSe. There’s no describing my emotions, nor thoSe of the charming Harry—for it was him-felf, Harriot, it was indeed, the elegant Beauchamp. Judge then whether I have not the confession to make which I promised!—Yes, Harriot, I ackow-ledge my error, and declare it was infinitely the most agreeable visit I ever yet made. Our visible agitation must have been obServed by the company, had they ijot in general been too deeply engaged at quadrille to mind any other affairs. Happy was it, for me at least, that they were So. Mamma had never Seen him before; she immediately distinguished his graceful form —Ah, could she fail ?—and was assdho: every one who. he was. I then believed they had not been able to inform her, as I faw no change in her
looks:
B E V I L L E. 47
looks: thoSe of admiration still kept
possession of her countenance, which
I fancy would not have been the cafe
had she known him to be the Son of
Mrs. Beauchamp. ■— Yet, why should /
that knowledge have produced the effeCl:
I feared ? for was it not in faft owing to him that I was restored, and their hopes from Sir JoSeph again renewed ?
I was however deceived, for as we returned home she Spoke highly in his -praiSe. Never had she Seen a more elegant perSon or more graceful manner, and for face there was no doing him justice. What is your opinion of him, Emilia? Said fiie; you have Some acquaintance with him. I own, continued she, I should not have been Sorry had he been Sir JoSeph, instead of his uncle, on condition you could have infpired him with a passion as violent as that the Knight entertains for you. I promise you I Sliould make
no
48 HISTORY e/’
no objections to Such a Son; the first good adtion you do after you are married must positively be to insist on Sir Joseph’s being reconciled to his hand-Some nephew, I am perSuaded he can i rcfuSe you nothing.
What a conversation for your friend ! Imagine, if you can, the situation I was in at that moment, for it is impossible to deScribe it. Joy, you may believe, had Some share in my emotions, though what site Said was certainly without meaning, nor could produce any of the delightful effedts I So ar- i dently wished.	j
Mamma was Soon engaged at cards.	i
I, you know. Seldom play, and you	.
may believe was not forward to offtr that evening. . Can you gueSs who alSo begged to be excuSed, or in what' mariner I w'as entertained, to compenSate for i the want of the amuSement I had re-jedled ? It was not a place where he
could
Mifs BEVILLE. 49
could fully expreSs his joy, yet had his eyes only Spoke, I should have been perfedlly Sensible he was inexpressibly happy at the unexpeded interview.
This flattering truth was visible in his every^ word and look. He found an opportunity to repeat what he has a thouSand times declared in his letters, ' . that his whole happineSs depended on my determination in regard to his uncle. Implored m.e to pity, nor reduce him to deSpair, by conSenting to their dreadful commands. Was I to blame, Harriot, in giving him my promiSe I never would ^ Ah, could I refuSe ? Was it , possible to resist his insinuating eloquence ? But what indeed is the conSe-quence ? A few days would have discovered to him my design, iflhadnot: why then refuSe him this Small conSo-lation ? My promiSe gave him a joy r. of which you, Harriot, can form no idea. He dreaded my w'ant of courage,.
- VoL. II.	D	as
r
50	HISTORY ^
as much on my account as his own ; whatever was to render me unhappy i could not fail to enSure his miSery; he wished much to kndw by what means l‘ I meant to avoid their importunities, and, notwithstanding my promiSe, ex* pressed the most violent apprehensions, lest my fortitude should forSakc me on the day of trial. I again assured ^ him he might depend on my resolution, ^	■
as nothing could have power to break it.
He then, with the most tender importunity, implored me to make a Second promise, more immediately in his favour ; but this 1 declined, convinced, ' as I told him, every hope of that kind j was absolutely vain. Begged he would no longer entertain any Such, since there' were a thouSand obstacles which must 1 ever render his design impradlicable.
He did not Seem in the least inclined to follow my prudent council, on the ; contrary, he again begged me to repeat	j
the	'
BEVILLE. 51
the promiSe I had made. A promiSe, he declared, on which he founded all his hopes of future happineSs and felicity. 1 did So, and with this conSolation left him.
In confequence of our last night’s conversation, I this mornitig early received a packet from him, lest I should have forgot what past at the delightful interview. Ah, Harriot, he need be under no apprehensions: he may depend upon it I have no design or inclination to forfeit my word. How he may approve the expedient I take, that I may be able to keep it, I do not ' know, but it is the only one I can think of to preServe me from wretch-edneSs.
I have WTstten a long letter to Caroline, in which I have given her all the ^ advice in my power, and Some hints in j	regard to Lord B—, of which she is
]	doubtleSs ignorant. I am willing how-
D 2	ever
I	\
r
52 HIS T ORY oj	I
ever to Suppofe So, as I think, did she more perfedlly know his charader, she would neither >.wish me to favour his passion, nor Suffer him to visit So frequently ht her houSe. I have given her a few rules v/hich I think most likely to regain her hushand’s wandering affections, but fear she is" too indifferent, about what would to me appear of Such infinite importance, ever to put them ^ in praDice. I have, however, the SatiS-fadlion of having done my duty in thus reminding her of what is certainly hers. f Adieu, my dear, my amiable Harriot.
If I do not die with grief, you shall hear from me as Soon as I arrive at my destined abode. Continue to love
Your affedUonate,
Emilia Beville.
.. tLC
LET-
Mlfs SEVILLE. 53
LETT E R,;xxxyi.;ji
To	fe'/l'i" i
■ "til isshj] 'ion mo']’': 1.
I AM Sensible my Harriot!will/ejoice, to hear I am Safely ; arrived, at my humble retreat, and that:I am ,afs happy as it is possible forme to be, considering the dreadful circumstances , yf|sich .induced me to malce choice of it. Tes, my dear friend, I found every thing here much more agreeable than 1 had reaSon to expedl. Could 1 but, find amongst the many purling breams which ' adorn our rural habitation, one poffeffeq. of the important virtue for which Lethe was So famed, I should, in perfect peace and tranquillity, Spend my future days in my rural abode: memory is the only Source from whence I am likely to meet with any interruption to my felicity. But ah, Harriot, is not this abundantly Sufficient to destroy it.?—I D 3 endeavour,
54 H IS T O R Y ^
endeavour, as much as possible, to banish i every tormenting refleftion. I wish—	‘
or rather let me fay—I try, to forget the past Scenes in which I have been engaged, and give my whole attention to thoSe I am now Surrounded with.
They are indeed of a very different nature; yet could I procure one draught of that precious stream, I am perSuaded they would afford me more true fatif-fadtion than all thoSe fatiguing vanities I have left. Yes, my dear friend, could I be So fortunate, my hours would glide \ on in perfedt peace. I need not tell ' you, it is not the gay, the trifiing world which I regret; its pleaSures never had for me thoSe charms So generally aScribed to them: it was not in their nature to give me any real or heart-felt Satisfac-■ tion. No, Harriot, the remembrance	,
of theSe will never give me a moment’s pain. But can I banish from my breast the pleasing image of the tender, the
amiable
i
Nf^BEVILLE. 55
amiable Beauchamp ? Is it possible to forget—Ah, Harriot, is'it possible I should desire to forget — that' elegant lover ?—Let me confeSs it is not. Where then^ can I hope to find uninterrupted tranquillity ?
I found Mr. SimpSon, as his daughter had told me, a man of good SenSe, and poffeffed of abilities that would have enabled him to shine in a more exalted station, had his merit met with its just reward; but it is not in this life we are to expedl that impartiality, and he, good man, is perfedtly diSpoSed to wait with patient resignation, till he arrives in that better world, where virtue is Sure to meet with it. However humble tlie state of its poileffor, he is content. Who can desire a greater blessingIs not this in fadt a noble reward ?
His Sister is a notable prudent woman, neat, and an excellent ceconomist; circumstances of infinite importance to one D 4	whoSe
5^ The HISTORY of
whoSe income is not more than twenty
pounds a year. This, to you, Harriot,
will perhaps appear incredible, but it j
is certain, nevertheless; nor is it a sin-
gular instance. The good man tells	,
V me, there are many curates, in Some	1
parts of England, who do not receive
anually above three fourths of that Sum.
Our mansion, which conSists' of four
Small but exceed ins; neat rooms, befides
a kitchen, is placed in the middle of
the garden. It is no eaSy matter to	ri
discover whether it is compoSed of wood	*
or stone, Siitce there is not a corner of
it which is not covered with woodbine,	I
1
jaSmine and fruit trees of various kinds.
It puts me continually in mind of your favourite arbour at B—nor is the whole ' building much larger. My apartment is pleaSant beyond description : I can	|
gather, without rising from my feat,	I
either a noSegay or deSert, the fruit trees	\
and flowers uniting, in the most agreeable	;
Mlfs BEVILLE. 57
ble manner, to shade my window from the Scorching Sun. The furniture is not, you may beli(^ve, of the richest kind, but is, I affure you, particularly neat; much m.ore So than I expedled from the income of its owner. For great part of it, Mrs. Martha tells me, her brother is obliged to Lady Beverly, who has ever been their kind friend and continual benefadlreSs. She, it Seems, lived with that lady till her Sister-in-law died; her preSence then became necessary at her brother’s, to take care of his family. He had at that time Several young children, but has now only my Jenny, and her sister, who lives with Mrs. Beauchamp. Except a cottage or two, there is not a houSe within half a mile. His church is about the Same distance ; w'hich is not So far as to prevent my attendance, as I have ever been fond of walking: and what will render it still more agVceable, they tell me the road I	'	D 5	to
i
#
HISTORY^
to it is a perfect grove. I need not inform you I have not yet been there, as you know I have had no opportunity; but shall certainly accompany the honest pair to-morrow* You must not exped a more particular account of my situation, as I have not yet Seen any part of the country, except the view 1 have from my window; that, indeed, appears extreamly pleaSant. In a beautiful winding brook, which I fee at a very trifling distance, they tell me I may angle with great Sticcefs, as there is great plenty of fish of various Sorts. This affurance may perhaps induce me to try that amuSe-ment; but where one must wait for hours, and perhaps return at last without having taken one captive, it is, I think, of all diversions, the least agreeable. Working, reading books, if I i. can procure any, and the Said angling, shall share my time amongst them.
I have alSo brought my lute, in caSe I
should
Mifs SEVILLE. ^ 59
should be inclined to warble forth my hapleSs love under the shade of Some Spreading tree, of which there are numbers that Seem formed for tins, very melancholy purpoSe. Do^uo^^be fur-priled, if in my next I should tell you,
1 have alSo purchaSed a few sheep, a crook, &c. to compleat the catalogue of my amuSements.
Adieu, my amiable friend, do not chide me for the diminutive size of my epistle, but remembei* I have not yet recovered either my fatigue, or Spirits : my next shall Supply the deficiency of this. Mr. SimpSon is waiting to carry it to the ■ post. He is going to take his morning’s walk, and promised to make that in his way. I will not, therefore, let the good man wait. Indeed, should I miSs this oppor-tiuiky, I may not So readily find another, as we have no Superfiuous Servants in waiting here; my friend Mrs. Martha D 6	being
I
6o The HIST DRY of
being both maid and mistreSs, nor is she perhaps the worSe Served on that account.
Adieu. Write to me immediately, I beSeech you, and let me know what you have heard concerning my family, and the effedt my Second flight has had upon them. I am all impatience, as you ' may believe, for your anSwer to theSe questions. Sir JoSeph, I fancy, is not	}
yet returned, though it is near the time	/
they expedl him. Believe me	li
Yours,	j
Emilia Beville.	|
LETTER XXXVII.
Mtfs Harriot Molesworth, to	^
Mtf Emilia Seville.
Be thankful, my dear girl, that you
efcaped as you did. One day	!
longer, and I should never have been
made
I
I
Mifs BEVILLE. 6f
made acquainted with my good friend Mr. SimpSon, nor his notable sister Martha. One single day later, I Say, and there would have been an end to your arcadian projedl. A friend of yours who arrived in town the morning after you left it, would have effedlually destroyed that pretty Scheme. Yes, my dear, the very next day did your woebegone Sir JoSeph come ambling, with all the impatience of a favoured lover, to claim his destined bride. What was his furpriSe, or that of your goodly parents, it is not in my power to describe, when ordering a Servant to inform you of his arrival, miSs was no where to be found. It is by a letter from Mrs. Stanhope I am, within this half hour, informed of what I tell you. The consternation was general; your father raved and loudly complained of his dear fpouSe’s careleffneSs, in not having had thought enough to have
forcSeen
62 HISTORY e/*	I
foreSeen what has happened, and by that means prevent it. She, with no leSs warmth, assures him she never was qualified for the honourable employment of a Duenna, and is, I preSume, were the true state of her heart known, quite eaSy about the matter. As for your Swain, hanging or drowning must, in a very few days, put an end to his miserable being: to live, after all this, would be absolutely out of the question. Supposing love to have no part in the affair; shame, downright shame and confuSion of face, must kill him, un-leSs he be immortal, which heaven forbid ! But do not be alarmed, I know ' we are not fond of losing a stave, however insignificant: he is yours, I do assure you, as much as ever; though, to fay truth, I believe it is horridly against his will. But this plaguy love, the diS-turber of high and of low, is, they Say, an involuntary distemper; w'ere it not, I
must
I
SEVILLE. 63
must own, I think the old foul might find a more pleasing amuScment; for this, it must be confessed, has been attended with a very Small degree of SatisfadHon. In Spite of ail this, I Say, he is still your captive, and, like a filly foul as he is, glories in his chains, finding he cannot break them. I vow I half pity the poor creature, in Spite of the miSchief he has been the occasion of: he really must look So intolerably Small, after being thus twice disappointed.
The ingenious dame Beauchamp does not eScape without SuSpicion: half the town believe her the cauSe of your be* ing again carried off. Who, indeed, can they So properly blame, as the good lady, who has before given Such proofs of her courage and contrivance ? The fame inducement still remains in force, her desires for wealth being as boundleSs as eyer. The other half are divided
in
,64	H I S T O R Y ^
in their opinion : Some blame Lord B—,
Some, more cunning than the rest, gueSs pretty near the truth, but receive no great cpnSolation from their Superior Sagacity, not being Sure they are right.
I was highly delighted with your sister’s epistle, as every line gave me | new proofs of her astonishment. Never	’
was there Such a Scrawl! In the hurly-	■
burly, her ladyship has forgot to give ^ me her own Sentiments on the occasion; but what will perhaps diSappoint you	:
more, she has alSo forgot to mention thoSe of the, no doubt, as much astonished Beauchamp. It is true, she might not be So well acquainted with them as one could wish, which I reg-ret not a little; though I am inclined to think, the youth will not be So apt to deSpair as his reverend uncle, since I believ;e he may, unleSs delperately fond of that amuScment, still find hopes enough to Subsist on, till you are pleaSed to assure
him
I
BEVILLE. 65
him they are not without foundation. I shall find no difficulty in keeping your retreat a Secret from any one but him. Should we ever meet, and should he, with thoSe Same eyes of which I have heard So much, intreat me to relieve him from his state of torment and fuSpence, heaven knov/s what may be the conSequencc; for thoSe Sort of petitioners have ever had a mdghty inssuence over my tender and too yielding heart; however, PH try what I can do. Tho* after all, I need not, I preSume, be under any violent apprehensions, as the Said meeting is one of the many bleff-ings in life I dare not staffer mySelf to hope for, lest I should be diSapp>ointcd. Whether he raves, or is Silent she does not tell me; but for Lord B—, O my dear, there’s rjo deScribing his behaviour. I ever pronounced him, at best, mere than half mad; what he is how I’ll ieave you to guests. He Swears he’U
Search
I
66	HISTORY 0?''	|
Search every corner in England, rather than not find your place of concealment. Not a houSe, either palace or ' • cot, shall eScape his Scrutiny. Should ^ he find you in the possession of a rival, j death and destrudlion is the word. — t Don’t be frightened, I only mean for the Swain ; as for you, I preSume he will, in consideration of your youth, and So forth. Spare your life, but this is all the favour you can expedt. A fine Scrape you are in, to Say truth, should your evil stars condudt him to your woodbine bower! but let that thought rest amongst the improbabilities. i Should the more gentle Harry indeed, ^ take a ramble, and find himSelf benighted near your hoSpitable manfion, the caSe would not be quite So deSperate. I I question whether they are not bcSth, by this time. Set off in quest of their strayed Dulcinea. Could they have agreed the matter in an amicable manner,
1
i
Mtfs BE VI LLE. 67
ner, they might have Set out on their
travels Something like the thing. One
of them—Harry, for instance. Sir Knight
—and his Lordship the Squire. A pretty
Sancho as heart could wish,
/
This is all your Sister knew of the affair, or could possibly tell me, though her epistle is at least half a dozen pages —no repetitions of courSe. She promises to write to me the moment they have heard any tiding of the lost sheep. A-propos^ now 1 mention thoSe pretty creatures, I would by all means adviSe you to get a few, as 1 think you are perfedUy formed to grace a crook— quite the figure for a shepherdeSs. 1 think I See you reclined by Some purling stream, your flock feeding on its verdant bank, while you, with a voice more harmonious than the nightingale’s, are warbling, to the Soft lute. Some pastoral ditty, recording the loves of Cory-don and Phillis, your throbbing heart
Sympathizing
68 Lhe HISTORY of
Sympathizing in their v/oes. At that moment. Some neighbouring Swain comes that way, in Search of a strayed lamb ;	(
is struck with wonder and SurpriSe at	|
the unuSual Sounds of muSick So divine.
He advances. Sees the fair creature from whofe coral lips thoSe Sounds proceed ;	(
gazes, is lost in tranSport, recovers, ap-proaches, throws himSelf at your feet, i forgets his lamb, and confesses himfelf your ssave,—You blush, you raiSe him from his humble posture, you are equally struck with the beauty of the youth, you part with mutual regret, he carves your loved name on every tree. Again | you return to the cooling brook. Damon [| losses another lamb. Seeks it again near ' your rural feat, his vows are repeated, ^ you hear him with a Smile—and Harry i is forgot.—Alas, poor Harry !	'	j
Let me know the progreSs of this	[
amour, or any other adventure you meet with. I do not fancy they will be of
the
1
M/rBEVILLE. 69
the marvellous kind, but no matter, a little imagination may embellish them, for this you can be at no loSs.
Adieu, my dear girl, believe me I rejoice most sincerely that you are So happily Settled; for, bad as it is, his certainly a thouSand times better than being chained for life to the old knight.
I have not yet done mamma the honour to let her into the Secret of your retreat; though, to do her justice, she loves you too well ever to betray it; but I must for a while preServe my importance by having this knowledge wholly to my-Self: in time to come I may perhaps unfold to her and Charlotte the wondrous tale. Again I bid you
Adieu,
Harriot Molesworth.
I. E T-
7®	HISTORY cf
LETTER XXXVm.
Mifs Emilia Seville, to Mifi Harriot Molesworth.
Good heavens, my dear Harriot,
how I trembled when I read your i agreeable letter! I have not yet recovered my fright; the very idea of Sir Jofeph’s unexpedted return, shocked j me more than you can conceive, tho’
I was no longer in danger of his persecution. Another day would, indeed, as you tell me, have entirely destroyed my plan, and I might now perhaps have j been, in Spite of all my resistance, his wretched wife. — Horrid! what a thought ? How extreamly happy does my prefent situation appear when com- i pared to that ?	"	|
So you really pity the poor man ^—
Upon my word, you are amazingly compassionate ! Make your heart quite eaSy
on
B E V IL L E.
on his account, I beSeech you, and depend upon it he is in no danger, he is too fond of life to resign it for Such a trifle. His nephew, indeed, deServes Some more Serious consideration. I would hope he will not So Soon forget his vows. I will preferve his inimitable epistles to witneSs against him, in cafe he should prove a perjured Swain, and give that heart to another he has So often declared was wholly mine.—Poor conSolation this ! As for-Lord B. I cannot Say I altogether admire his heroick resolution, though I think there is no great danger of his coming here to Seek me, should he really turn knight-errant for my fake. Believe me, I would with pleaSure Spare him this romantick proof of his passion. He is not, of all men in the world, the hero I would chuSe, were I to meet with any adventures, which, by the way, is not very likely, while I remain in my prefent
abode,
-it HISTORY^
abode, since nothing can be imagined more retired.	j
I last Sunday made my appearance j at church, and though not dressed quite | So much in taste as you have Seen me, i raiSed no Small commotions amongst the | rustick congregation. Curiosity v/as visible in every eye, as I followed my I friend Martha to her pew. A stranger ' i was a sight they were but little accuS-	|
tomed to, and as that stranger was nei-	I
thcr old nor yiolently ugly, the Swains, though as fieek-headed as you can con-	j
ceive, gave evident proofs that they	!’
were not quite So simple as their appear-	j
ance beSpoke them. Not a creature	I
there, either male or female, above the rank of Sliepherds or their nymphs; except Lady Beverly and her companion, a middle aged damSel, o/ no	|
very promising appearance. Nothing	j
can be more graceful then her ladyship’s	|
perSon. She is not young, but has
the
I
B E V IL L E. 73
the remains of perfedt beauty. Her eyes expreSs the most engaging SweetneSs, and Speak a disposition. Such as I am told by Mr. SimpSon it really is, gentle and benevolent to all around her. She too observed me, but it was in a manner the moSt mild and unaffuming you can conceive. As she past us in going out of church, she Spoke with great kindneSs to Mrs. Martha, and made me a most obliging curtSy, which I, you may believe, returned with one of my very best.. MiSs Smith her companion, paid me the. fame compliment. I walked both to • and from church, yet was not in the least fatigued, though I could not but obServe , they gave wondrous good meaSure to their miles in this part of the world. Mr. SimpSon did not return home with us, he alv/ays dining at the hall on a Sunday,
While we walked, I aSked a few questions about Lady Beverly, as I found that
VoL, II.	E	W'as
\
74	HISTORY c/*
was a favourite Subjedt for conversation with my companion. Yes madam, Said she, on my obServing I thought her ex-	|
treamly handSome for one of her age,	!
that she is even now, as you Say, ex-	t
treamly So ; but dear me, miSs, had you	[
but Seen her ladyship in the days of her	[
youth, as I have done, you would have Said she was a beauty indeed. But what, ^ you know miSs, is beauty without good-neSs ?—It is a mere flower, a mere no-	,
thing, if not accompanied by a good	^
heart and Christian life, like her lady-	|
ship’s; for she, to be Sure, is a Christian,	^
if there be Such a thing in this wicked	1
world. It would take up an age of time	|
to tell you half the good her ladyship does in this—aye and many other parishes. As for my brother and me, to be Sure, we have reaSon, and do bleSs her name every day we riSe. Was it not for her we should find it a very hard matter to make twenty pounds a year do as we
do. !
j
.	t* ■	•
Mifs BEV.ILL E. 75
do. It is but a very Small matter, miSs, to bring up a family with any Sort of credit, that’s what it is,—You’U grant her this, Harriot, I preSume without dispute.
I dshed if her ladyship was a widow.— Yes, madam, Said she. Sir Charles died when he w^as but a young gentleman, and left: her all his fortune, which is very great. She had indeed a Very large one herSelf: thof it was a love-match, for all that, as all marriages ought to be, to be Sure that they ought. It is a Sad caSe,'added the Sagacious Martha, to think how young folks are bought and Sold, as a body may Say, now-a-days. It was not always So, nor had we then So many unhappy couples as we have now.—But, as I was Saying, theirs, to be Sure, was a pure love-match. And So, as Soon as poor Sir Charles died, and a comely young gentleman he was—I’m Sure he ' has, many and many a time. It 2	ipokcn
y6	HISTORY^	^
Spoken as familiarly to me, aye miS$, as } familiar as thof I had been his equal,	|
God forgive me ! as we Say in my coun-	j
try.—Yes, rriadam, as comely a young gentleman he was to be Sure as one shall fee in ten thouSand, aye or as many f more, as my poor sister uSed to Say. And So my lady reSolved never to marry ^ again, and many a.deadly good offer she has had both from Squire and lord, aye ^ and justice of the quorum too, that’s to be Sure, but she was reSolved,, as one may Say, and So refuSed. To be Sure, you great folks must have a deadly deal of resolution to what we poor peo-	.
pie have, or she could not, I think, ha’	f
withstood, e’m i but she did, and then	(
reSolved to Spend the rest of her days at the hall, which she has ever since done to our great comfort. Aye, miSs, would j every family of rank and fortune follow j her ladyship’s noble example, how happy ' might thousands of poor folks be, that	;
are ■	:
Mifs BfiVILLE. 77
are now miserable for want of Such assistance. Why, madarn, the very crumbs that fall from Such great. folks tables, as a body may Say, would handSonily maintain fome poor family. -
In this manner did we converSe, during our walk home, nor would the good Martha have been at any loSs for diScourSe, I presiime, had we been going a much longer journey, as the Saying is.
In the evening her brother returned, and joined his praiSes to thoSe she had bestowed on their generous friend.
He told me her ladyship had been enquiring about me. But, Said the good man, 1 did not tell any particulars, thinking that might not be So proper, and therefore only Said you was a young perSon that my Jenny had recommended to us, in order to lodge and board for a-while during the Summer. I thought, added he, if you chofe to have her ladyship informed of any thing further, E 3	you
7^.. HISTORY of
you might do it yourfelS, as she desired me to tell you she would be extreamly glad to . See you at the hall. 1 expressed great SatisfadUon at his prudence, and i not leSs for her ladyship’s civility, and intend to wait upon her in a day or two, as her acquaintance cannot fail to P render my Situation more agreeable, nor ! can there be any fear of a diScovery, distant as this place is from London. If she is, which I indeed do not in the least doubt, the ainiable woman they I represent her, I shall, if she Seems de- , sirous to know my name and affairs, make no Scruple to inform her of both,	|
as I am not fond . of having any appear-	|
ance of mystery in my condudt.	'
I exped daily to hear from Jenny, as I ordered her to write as Soon as she had j given warning. I am,	you may	believe,	[
extreamly impatient	to	know	what past	f
when I was gone.	|
Lady	i
M/} BEVILLE. 79 ^
Lady Beverly’s coach, I protest ! this is a civility I had no reaSon to expedt.— Her companion too! I am however perSuaded it is no impertinent curiosity ' has brouo-ht her here So Soon. I will not go down till Sent for, though I doubt the visit is to me.—O, I hear dame Martha on the stairs. Adieu, till thev are gone; I will then give you my opinion, as I have already done that of the Said dame.
##########
Just gone, Harnot, and I am charmed beyond meaSure with my new acquaintance. It is impossible to imagine any perSon more affable and engaging: I mention affable, becauSe, as she neither know^s my rank nor family. Such condescension is the more agreeable. That behaviour is not extraordinary from thoSe who believe themSelves your equal, tho* that does not always enSure it, but from Superiors, how very Seldom, my dear E 4	Harriot,
!
77^? H I S T O R Y	j
Harriot, do we meet with the politeneSs [ and amiable behaviour So desirable in !
r.
thofe with whom we converSe ? Haughty \ iooSis, and a ridiculous pride, are too often the companions of Superior wealth, but I am perSuaded she has no idea_ of i this excessive meanneSs, for mean k ! * is, whatever the good folks may pleafe to think who study thole forbiding airs.
Her voice and manner of Speaking have Something So Soft So gentle and en-	j
gaging, that one cannot but wish to	1
gain her esteem. It is certain this was my desire from the moment she entered, -and I believe I may, without any violent j fiiare of vanity, pronounce a favourable fentence, she did not exprefs : and of	|
that curiosity, which in fa£t w'ould have	I
been bqt natural, I rather fancied she came on purpofe to judge whether I was I in any degree worthy thoSe civilities with which she wishes to treat every one in her neighbourhood. After an hour’s
agreeable
Mijs SEVILLE. 81
agreeable chat, in which MiSs Smith had feme Small share; and, Sorry I am to Say it, gave me no reaSon to be So much prejudiced in her favour as I was in that of her friend. She does not Seem of an agreeable temper, and I could obServe she wished her ladyship had been a little more minute in her enquiries concerning my situation, and So forth: only a little female curiosity. They took their leave, desiring to fee me the next day. Her ladyship offered to Send her carriage ; I thanked her, but assured her I preferred walking, as the distance was So trifling.
The good folks below are delighted with her civilities, as they hope it will enable me to paSs my timie more agreeably than I could otherwise have done. Had I not made this acquaintance, .1 fiiould have been obliged to follow your •advice and turn shepherdeSs, merely for want of employment. Indeed, in die E 5	manner
82 HISTORY/
manner you have defcribed it, 1 am not ' clear whether it would not still be the |-most agreeable; but, believe me, I might sing mySelf into a consumption before my voice, harmonious as it is, would have the Surprising effedt you ' mention; since I do not believe there is either a Collin or Dam.on, to anSwer your description, within a hundred miles : of the Said purling stream. ThepidSnre you have	drawn, I confeSs, is pretty,	'
and, on condition you will procure me	'
a dozen or two of thoSe rural Swains to enliven the Scene, I will resign my fiin for the crook, and begin to warble the moment you inform me they are within hearing : till then all my chanting will be to no fort of purpoSe.
Adieu : believe me yours in whatever charadler,	whether shepherdefs or belle.	I
Emilia Beville.	i
I
L E T-
ilL^BEVILLE. 83
LETTER XXXIX.
To the Same-.
HE most agreeable day I ever Spent in my life! Nothing could be more obliging and polite than the reception I met with from Lady Beverly.
I found her in her dressing-room wi'fi MiSs Smith : they were busily employed in chusing Some patterns for working a Set of chairs. Her ladyship desired my opinion, I gave it freely, and, by my expression, they guessed 1 had Some taste for drawing. I alSo acknowledged this.
I am extreamly glad to hear that, Said my lady, as I shall w'ant a little of your assistance; for though I have no genius myfelf, I can plainly See there may be great improvements made even in this I have made choice of. I assured her I * would with pleaSure either alter thoSe or draw others, and in return begged she E 6	w'oiild
84	HISTORY g/*
would allow me the honour of working Some of them, as it was an amuSement I was particularly fond of.
A pretty reward you assc for your trouble ! Said her ladyship. Smiling; but you shall with great pleaSure be indulged in your request. But before we think of work, it will not perhaps be diSagree-able if we take a view of the houSe and gardens: the day is fine and they are at preSent in tolerable perfedlion. I followed her and never was more charmed. The houSe is large and Spacious, furnished in the most elegant taste you can imagine. A piffure in full length of Sir Charles, proved Mrs. Martha to be a perSon of no Small judgment in beauty, for never did I See a more graceful figure. Need I fay more when I tell you I fancied there was a great rd-Semblance between him and a Mr. Beauchamp, you have Sometimes heard me mention?—His very eyes—as near as painting can expreSs.	The
KItfs BEVILLE. 85
The gardens are very extensive, and beyond description beautiful. Every kind of fruit and flower in the highest V perfedlion. The houSe is Situated in the midst of a noble park, which is well stocked with deer: there are shme So tame as to feed from your hand. One in particular, the most beautiful creature you ever Saw, follows my lady even into the parlour, and is already on very gracious terms with me. One Seldom Sees thoSe creatures So tame. You may believe, I ssiall endeavour, by every means in my power, to cultivate his friendship.
Here too is a fine peice of water, in the middle of which is a Small ifland, planted with flowering shrubs, of a thousand different kinds: a most elegant Summer-houSe compleats the beautiful Spot. To this we were conveyed in a Small boat, ornamented in the neatest taste you can imagine, where we found
coffee
86 TIe HIST ORY of
coffee and tea waiting our arrival. Need I tell you this voyage was performed after dinner ? I really fancied mySelf transported to one of thoSe enchanted istands of which 1 have read in the days of my youth, with So much SurpriSe and delight. It is impossible to imagine any thing more charming. When we returned I again mentioned the drawing, but her ladyship would not Suffer me to begin that day, as she obligingly Said, she hoped I Should not for the future be a stranger at the hall, if I found any thing there agreeable to my taste. In the evening she, with MiSs Smith, accom- i panied me near half way back to my ; bov/er, conversing in the most agreeable ; and eaSy manner, nor once expressed the	|
Smallest curiosity to know more of my	I
history than I Seemed inclined to reveal.
One thing of no Small importance I had 1 almost forgot to tell. There is a library silled with well choSen books in every
language:
SEVILLE. 87
•language: to this I am permitted to have free acceSs at all times and SeaSons.
Now tell me, Harriot, hav.e I not great reaSon to rejoice ? Where could I have found a more agreeable retreat ^ The only painful ressedtion is that of my having been obliged to Seek one : but since that misfortune was unavoidable, I re-joicetmost sincerely that I have been lb particularly fortunate in my Search, nor once look back to the world 1 have left, perfuaded it is in retirement only one can find true and lasting pleaSure.	'
Yet, is it possible, my dear Harriot, I should not, at Some moments. Sigh when I think of the amiable Beauchamp ? When Iconsider the anxious Sulpence he must at prefent be tormented with ? Ah, no my dear friend; let me confeSs he is, for my repoSe, but too often the Sub-iedt of my thoughts.
Adieu : write to me immediately, and, if possible, tell me—yet, what Harriot
can
88	HISTORYY	^
can you tell me in regard to .him that can give me any conSolation'?—Again
adieu.	I
Emilia Beville. ‘
L E T T E R XL.
Mi/} Harriot Molesworth, to ^ Mtfs Emilia Bevilte.	r
Till I read your last I was not ^ conScious of having any share of envy in my Sweet disposition, bu(: have been deceived, I find, as many a good creature has been before me. Yes, my ( dear, I am now perSuaded I have a great deal; I feel the most violent inclination ^ to indulge that gentle passion. When I meditate .on your preSent delightfi.il j ^situation, I die to be introduced to your new friend Lady Bountiful, and to re-poSe mySelf on the verdant banks of her enchanted issand, I shall certainly be
tempted
Mifs BEVILLE. 89
tempted to furpriSe you Some fine morning with my unexpedled preSence.
I could no longer keep your Secret from my ' mother and Charlotte, but, after a proper parade, and diSplay of my impoirtance, I unfolded, with great deliberation, your agreeable packet, and read it to them with all the necessary airs and graces proper for the occasion. Their SurpriSe was inexpressible, nor did they find a more ready utterance for their joy. You may now comfort yourSelf with mamma’s entire approbation, for which you have So often expressed Such ardent wishes. Take it, my dear, and be Satisfied : no more pining on that account. She declares, what you have done, is no more than she would have done herSelf, on a like occasion. That the proofs jo,u once gave of your duty, and affedfion, and the lacrifice you So freely offered to make when their affairs required it, are enough;
that
/
90	H I S T O R Y ^	|
that that necessity Subsisting no longer; j their authority does not, in her opinion, extend So far as to force your j inclinations, in a point of Such infinite importance. There child, this Speech from a mother may, I think. Set your heart at rest, unlefs very restleSs indeed.
1 have again received a letter from ; Mrs. Stanhope, but it is filled with more - ^ of her own affairs than yours ; but no v/onder, you will Say, since she is certainly better acquainted wdth them. VSoeful complaints of her SpouSe, and a thouSand others, which you, Emilia, foreSaw w^ould be the conSequence of her prudent marriage. Not one word of Emilia, she tells me, in Spite of all the	‘
enquiries her father can make.	^	*
Take care, my dear, how you ramble , without your friend Martha, or Some 1 other as able guard, for she declares Lord B— is Set out on his travels, v/ith
full
I
Mifs BEVILLE. 91
full purpofe to find his lost nymph, without whom the good man can take no rest by night nor by day. Heaven only knows the route he has taken; but I cannot Say I wish him to stumble upon yours, as I think his preSence might chance to disturb the peace of your tranquil Society. His genius is not formed to partake in your Sentimental parties. No, my dear, I am afraid, should he come amongst you, he would totally overthrow your preSent form of government. It is true, it is about a thou Sand chances to one, whether he will be So fortunate in his Search, but still it is in the number of possibilities.
Your family, she tells me, no longer SuSpedt your being carried off contrary to your inclination, as they find you have taken a number of things with you that I prove your Sight to be voluntary. This, you may believe, adds considerably to their wrath and indignation. Should you
be
I.
92	H I S T O R Y JT	-
be found, mercy on us, what noble revenge is preparing! Ail their wits are at work. Poor dear Sir Joey too ! — not dead yet—unwilling—very unwilling to resign his hopes. He had Surely an amazing stock of that comfortable commodity when he first commenced your admirer, since they are laiting to this ^ preSent hour.	^
Nov/ a word or two of his ncphevr,	!
and shut a word or two, for of him she	f
knows little, not having the Same reaSons to enquire that we have. She does, however, mention him, and that too in a manner tolerable enough. Says, every creature is raving at Sir JoSeph, for not doing justice to the merit of his charming nephew, since the offence given by his family—if indeed given by thenr— was while he was abSent, and of courSe could have no hand in the plot. She then delcribes him to me (not dreaming I have his pidlure drawn on my imagination
Mifs BEVILLE. 93
tion by a much more Ikilful painter) as the most accomplished, the most elegant, the most beautiful—Heavens, what a catalogue of perfedlions has she mustered up to raile my wonder and SurpriSe ! This she declares is the charadter given of him in all companies, and assures me it is perfedtly just, she having Seen him heisielf the other night at Ranelagh.. But the best part of her history is yet to come. His eyes, my dear—every one pretends to be convinced by their peculiar languish, that he has left his heart abroad.—You, Emilia, have Seen thoSe eyes—pray my dear, is this too your opinion, or can you account for the Said languish in any more agreeable manner ? You may, when at a loSs for meditation, take this singular cafe into consideration, and give me your thoughts upon the very important Subjedh.
Would to heaven his tormenting— and eke tormented uncle — was Safely
I	deposited
I
94 ne HISTORY of
deposited in his family vault! Who knows what might happen were he but well difpoSed of ? And what can an old Soul like him desire better, than to be releaSed from the care and trouble to which every mortal man is liable in this wicked world
I know not whether this curious epistle will afford you any violent Satisfaction, but I have nevertheless told you all the news I have colleded, or could colled. Not much, I grant, yet I think the report of the eyes may be looked upon as an article of Some importance ; So, reminding you of your obligation for that, I bid you adieu, and add to it, by assuring you I am wholly
Yours,
PIarriot MoLESWOkTII.
L E T-
Mifs BEVILLE. 95
LETTER XLL
JAtfs Emilia Beville, to Mifs Harriot Molesworth.
AH' Harriot, what a fright!—I yet tremble with the remembrance of my astonishment and SurpriSe! — Sure never mortal was So unfortunate as your poor friend ! No Sooner had I found as I thought an aSylum, where, free from persecution, I might pafs my days in peaceful retirement, till permitted to return to my family, than my retreat is discovered to be the most improper I could possibly have choSen.—Yes, Harriot, you will confeSs, when informed of my reafons for this exclamation, that my fears are but too just.
I was yesterday, as indeed I have almost every day been, at the hall: nothing can be imagined more agreeable ; than Lady Beverly; Sne not only gave
I	m<?
96 Irbe Ulsr OKY of 1
me a general invitation, but insisted on I my being wholly with her for the rest I ,	of the time I mean to stay in the coun- ‘
try : but what I am going to tell you has So entirely diSconcerted my ideas, that I am not able at preSent to determine whether I shall accept or decline her obliging offer.	I
1 yesterday went there in the morning. We were Sitting with great com-poSure at work, converSing on a thousand different Subjedls, and am.ongst others her ladyship w^as deScribing to me Several' gentlemen’s,Seats which were within a ‘ few miles of hers, and with great politeneSs was proposing a party to See one she thought would give ^me pleaSure. If to-morrow. Said she, turning to MiSs Smith, proves a day fit for our little tour we will carry MiSs Beville to See B—castle. The ladies are there at preSent, and will, I am perSuaded, be much obliged to me for procuring them
a companion
»	I
BEVILLE. 97
a companion So agreeable. This, and a thouSand compliments equally polite, might at that moment have been paid me without raising in my breast one ^ Ipark of vanity:—Yes, my dear, you. may believe my attention was engaged on a very different Subjedl. Good heavens ! cried I with an emotion I could not repreSs, is it possible the feat you mention should belong to Lord B—? 'I'heir anSwer confirmed my fears, and it was in vain to attempt concealing my Surprise, since it was but too visible. H^r ladyship, with infinite SweetneSs, hoped I was not ill; though she rather fancied the name she had unluckily mentioned, was neither unknown to me nor indifferent. As my Silence might have given riSe to SuSpicions more to my disadvantage than the truth possibly could do, I made no longer any difficulty on what to reSolve, but at once informed her or all the particulars of my perplexing situ-VoL. II.	F	ation.
/
9^ HIS TORY ^
ation. Her knowledge of my faniily could not possibly increafe her polite-jtiefa, as she had before treated me with the utmost reSpeD, but it relieved her from any little doubts she might entertain in regard to my conduct, or reaSons for living So retired. In return for the confidence I repoSed in her, she assured | me of her friendship and esteem, declaring she found nothing blameable in any thing I had done, and sincerely wished it in her power to prevail on my father to be leSs Severe in his determination.
She had heard of Sir JoSeph, she Said, and though unacquainted with his per-fon, she was not So with his charadler, nor did she in the least approve the choice my family had made of a Son-in-law. Of his nephew, you may believe,
I did not Ipeak with quite So ihuch freedom as I do to you : I told her, however, as much as made her declare her-Self entirely of your opinion, for she will
not
Mifs SEVILLE. 99
not Suffer me to deSpair, being perSuaded my affairs will yet take a favourable turn, in Spite of their preSent unpromising appearance; but theSe obliging predictions Serve rather to convince me of /
her regard for my happinefs, than to inSpire me with any violent hopes. As. for Lord B— she thinks I should have ieSs chance of happineSs with him than even Sir Jofeph, were he inclined to change his publickly declared refolution and commence hushand, a character she fancies he will never assume, if the lady who makes him her stave can be obtained without adding the chains of matrimony to thoSe of love. She then Said a number of civil things in favour of his present flame, affuring me she thought his liberty in more imminent danger now, than it had ever yet been.
Now, my dear Harriot, tell me whether I have not abundant reashn to dread a diScovery. Not that I think his F 2	lordship
100 The HISTORY of
lordship will come to this part of the world in hopes of finding mef becauSe he will naturally enough imagine I might know it was near his feat; but who will assure me he will not, in the courSe of thoSe travels you tell me he has begun, pay a visit to his family en pajfant? Yes, my dear, notwithstanding this may not ' happen, yet it is probable enough to ' make me tremble with apprehension.
For Supposing his love should by this time be extinguished, a thing not unlikely, as a passion So over-violent is Seldom of long duration ; yet may not my family by his m.eans be informed of j my retreat, and, consequently, the hated persecution be again renewed ? It is this 3 fear more than his lordship, since I have not the least fuSpicion of his turning knight-errant, notwithstanding' the flourishing Speebsi he once made on that Subjedl. No, my dear, love has no longer any Such power. 1 cannot Say I have
any
Mifs BE VILLE. lor
any fears of that kind: my father and his highly favoured Sir JoSeph terrify me infinitely more. Your wishes in regard to him are civil, I must confeSs: pity he did not know them, that he might return you thanks in form.
A letter.—It is from Jenny. Adieu till I have read it, you Snail then know the contents.
‘To Mifs Emilia Beville.
Honoured Madam,
1AM afraid, as I am but a poor writer, it will not be in my power to in- . form you of all that has happened since the day you left your family; but as you ordered me to let you know what was Said of your flight, I will endeavour to obey you as well as I can.
O, my dear madam, you cannot think how I rejoiced that you went as you did; for who should come to town the very F 3	next
102 HISTORY ^
next day, but your old lover! Pardon, | madam, that free expression, but really j I can hardly bear his name, when 1	i
think of the trouble and asslidtion he has	j,
occasioned in this family. I thought I ; should have died with confufion, when | obliged to Seem furpriSed at not finding you in your apartment, upon being Sent to inform you his honour was come.
But, O dear me ! it is imposhble to tell j 3/011 how your papa and my lady raved, and what a violent passion they were in j with each other about your being gone. ! As for Sir JoSeph, he turned as pale as my apron with the shock, and at first t would hardly believe but they knew where you was, and only wanted to break their promiSe; he was Soon how- i. ever convinced this was not the cafe, and, to confirm it, your papa Swore a violent oath, that if ever you returned, and lie should still think you worthy of the honour he intended you, he should
have
ili^BEVILLE. 103
have you in Spite of fate : I think that was his honour’s very expreshon. Then they all began again. I would have given the world to have been with you, madam, at my dear father’s. Every Servant in the houSe was questioned with great Severity: though, had they every one known as much as mySelf, there is not a creature amongst them wmiild
O
have uttered a Syllable to your prejudice. No, madam, they have all, from the highest to the lowest, too much affedtion for their Sweet young lady, as they always call you whenever they take the liberty to Speak of you. Finding none ' of us could or would give any information, we were all diSmiffed, though not without a great deal of anger; and ever since your papa and Sir Jofeph have been making enquiries all over the town as well as country, and they are now,
I think, more determined than ever that you shall jiave him, if ever you are F 4	found*
104 7)6^ HISTORY ^ I
found. Though if I might freely Speak . ' my mind, it Seems to me more from anger and revenge in your papa, than for the diSgrace, as his honour calls it, I you have brought on his family by your j nndutiful behaviour. ExcuSe theSe ex- ^
• pressions, madam, but you desired to hear all that was Said. Sir Jofeph too,
I think, is Sadly mortified at being	^
twice fo cruelly disappointed. To be	I
Sure, every body knows he doats upon I you madam, but yet I believe if he did . | not, his rage and jealouly, for fear you	j
should be gone off with Ibmebody elSe, i would make him obstinate in his purSuit, was it only to revenge the affront done ' to his pashon. In short I don’t very well know what to make of his behaviour, but his grief, bad as it is, does not give me half the concern as that of Mr. Beauchamp.
O dear madam, it is out of my power to tell you the condition to which that
Sweec
i
I
1
BEVILLE. 105
Sweet young gentleman is reduced. He has tempted me to tell him all I know about you, madam, not only with money, but the Sweetest perSuasions that ever were uSed. I do not mention theSe offers, madam, to make my silence the more meritorious, but only that you may thereby know the exceSs of his love, and the pains he endures from the fuSpence he ds in about your situation. All the questions put to me by my lady or your papa were nothing, in comparison of his ; I found no difficulty in keeping your Secret from them, but, indeed madam, it was hardly possible,
' when pressed, as I have almost every day been, by that amiable gentleman.
I had almost forgot, while writing of Mr. Beauchamp, to tell you that Lord B— was almost mad with rage and disappointment, when informed you were gone. He made no Secret of his passion, -(indeed every body knew it long ago) ^ F 5	but
io6 ne HISTORY of
but Swore and stormed most shockingly. i He is Set out, in order, as every body Says, to Search all over England for you rather than not find you. All this about his lordship I learnt from Madam Stanhope’s woman. Ah, madam, how Sorry am I to hear Such Sad accounts of her!
But I beg your pardon for prefuming to mention my refledlions on what I hear: I hope all is not true that’s Said.
I have taken a place in the fiy, and hope to be with you, in leSs than a | week. I am madam,	'
Your most obedient Servant,	I
to command,
Jane Simpson.
Nothing more than a repetition of ' ' what you, Harriot, told me before, except the damfel’s reflcdions, on that Sweet young gentleman; thoSe indeed are new, and exceedingly pathetick, to do her justice. Poor Sir Jofeph has but
a Small.
Mifs BEVILLE. 107
a Small share in her good graces, that’s pretty clear.
Adieu, my dear - friend, believe me Sincerely
Yours,
Emilia Beville.
LETTER XLIL
IAifs Harriot Moles worth, to Mifs Emilia Seville.
I Know you would not forgive me, my dear Emilia, were I to conceal from you an affair that has lately happened :
I am alSo Sensible you will be greatly shock’d; but what can I do} were I to be Silent, you might, perhaps, hear it in a more abrupt and unprepared manner. This consideration has prevailed on me to be the Messenger of a most unfortunate piece of news. But not to keep F 6	you
1
io8 HISTORY ^	*
j
you in pain by SuSpenSe, let me at once , inform you of what has happened.
Alas! my dear, your poor sister is in the most affedting Situation. Mr. Stanhope is in imminent danger; thei;;^are Scarce the Smallest hopes of his life.
Poor, unfortunate man! Indeed, my dear Emilia, the condition to which he is reduced, though almost the unavoidable conSequence of his imprudent and I' faulty condudt, has yet given me infinite ) uneafineSs. Yes, my dear, I really, with j great Sincerity, pity them both. But let ‘ me be more particular.	^
You have long known his intimacy ‘ with a creature belonging to the play-	I
houSe, and I believe I alSo informed you	|
she was at the fame time mistreSs to Lord W——. The unhappy Stanhope was with her continually. Your sister was acquainted with the whole affair: it is too late now to enquire whether she behaved prudently or not. The creature,
Mifs BEVILLE. 109
ture, who is the cauSe of this misfortune, had, till within theSe few days, concealed from his lordship’s knowledge her con-nedlions with Mr. Stanhope. By Some accident their intercourSe was discovered to him. He had been profuSe in his liberality, and was, till then, perSuaded he was master of her heart. How eaSy, my dear Emilia, do thoSe artful creatures find it to impoSe on the man they not only do not love, but mean to ruin! His rage was boundlefs. To be Supplanted in his fair one’s affedlions, by one So inferior both in rank and fortune, was a mortification his pride could not Support. A challenge enSued : they met in Hyde Park. Need I tell you what followed ? Mr. Stanhope was deSperately wounded; the Surgeons are of opinion he cannot recover, though not positive in their determination. Think, my dear, what must have been Mrs. Stanhope’s consternation, when he was brought home
in
no The HISTORY of	|
in this condition ! Indifferent as they had for Some time been to each other, it was impossible to be So at that dreadful moment. As he was perSuaded he had not long to live, he endeavoured to apologize for his condudl:, -confessed he had beenr greatly to blame, Said he deServed his fate, and was Sorry to leave her in a Situation So different from that in which he once hoped to have Seen her. He wished much to See his uncle, in hopes j the condition he was in might excite him to pity, and induce him to take your ‘
Sister, who was not to blame, under his protedion, in caSe he died. A friend ' 'vvas prevailed on to intercede with him : lie met with a more gracious reception than any one had reaSon to exped. He was moved with the account the gentle- | man gave of his nephew’s Situation, and,	1
aSter Some faint resistance, accompanied	!
him to make the requested visit. If he was moved at what he had been told, he ^
was
f
BEVILLE. Ill
was infinitely more So, when he-Saw his once highly favoured nephew in a situation So dreadful. He no longer remembered his faults, he considered ^only the pleaSure he uSed to receive in the hopes that he should one day become a worthy heir to his fortune. This hope again revived;' they had not informed him of his being in extream danger; he therefore flattered himSelf he should yet recover, and rightly judging his forgive-neSs would be a remedy as powerful as any they could uSe, he with great ten-derneSs affured him of it, and embraced your Sister with the utmost affedlion. This, my dear Emilia, was the unex-pedSed and happy Effedts produced by the wish’d-for interview, and confirms, what I have often Said, that he meant from the first to pardon his imprudence, when he had allowed him a Sufficient time to be Sensible of his error. It was not, you know, as if he had married into
a mean
112	HISTORY cf
a mean family or a perSon of bad cha- ' rafter: your sister was certainly his equal, nor was any thing but fortune w^anting to make it a very eligible match. [ As they managed the affair, it was cer- ; tainly imprudent to the last degree, and i for this, I Say, his uncle, I SuppoSe, in-	j
tended to let him Suffer a little penance.	I
I am perSuaded this was the caSe, from his being So easily prevailed on to See and to forgive him.	.
Your Sister had .the good fortune to pleaSe him: her behaviour to her hushand was tender, nor did she expreSs the least reSentment, though Sensible in whoSe cauSe the fatal accident had happened. She certainly, for once at leash aded a very wife part, as this mildneSs could not fail to liave a proper effeft on her new friend. ' Should he recover, and his uncle per Severe in his prefent favourable Sentiments, if is possible they may both reform, and for the future live in a manner more Saris-
ladory,^.
M'^s BEVILLE. 113
fadfory, both to themfelves and friends. On this condition heaven grant he may!
Your family were out of town when this affair happened, but were to return in a djay or two : whether they will follow the forgiving example Set them by Mr. Stanhope is uncertain; though I think they will even for their own fakes, as their daughter has now acquired So powerful a relation and friend. We shall fee ; a little time will determine that point, as well as the more material one of Mr. Stanhope’s life or death: Do not, my dear girl, be too much af-fedhed with this unhappy affair : should he recover, we may yet have cauSe to rejoice that ever it happened.—Nov/ le't me Say a word or two of your own affairs.
I cannot Say I find mySelf much delighted with your being So unexpedledly in Lord	—’s neighbourhood ; for
though you exprefs no fears on his account.
114 HIS TORY oj
count, believe me I fear a great deal. I will not pretend to affirm that he will be mad enough either to Scale your walls, or run away with you by force, if he can gain you by any leSs deSperate means; but this I insist upon, that his preSent purpoSe is to have you either by one means or other: of this lam fully perSuaded, from a thouSand weighty rea-fons. Whether he will, during his excursion, viSit his family, is a point I cannot So positively determine. That he will not do them this honour, in hopes oS finding you, is, I grant, a very clear caSe. Yet, as it is a civility he is no doubt Sometimes guilty of, who knows what may happen ? This is the SeaSon for it. You fay, his family are at their Seat: Be on your guard, my dear, that’s my advice, and the best I can at preSent give you. You only fear his lordship should discover your retreat to your family : I have my fears too, but of a very
different
Mtfi SEVILLE. 115
different nature. No, my dear, he will be the last perSon in the world, take my unerring word for it, to do them that peice of Service. What I dread, and with much more reaSon, is, lest he should not only effediually prevent their information, but alSo that of another perSon, whoSe care and anxiety give me infinitely more trouble. 1 vow, my •. dear Emilia, it is as much as ever I can do to keep your Secret. I really pity him more than you can conceive: more than you do it’s very plain, and were I in your Situation, I would at least let him know my banishment was voluntary, and not altogether without a view to his happineSs. Pray now tell me, where would be the violent crime or condescension in this i* You, my dear, may do as you pleaSe, I have only assured you what I in your caSe would undoubtedly do. 1 do not bid you tell him where you are, but merely why and
wherefore.
n6 TZv HISTORY ^
wherefore. Think of theSe things, and may they make a proper and lasting impression on your heart.
I am in no Small amaze at your abi-gaiSs fortitude. Had I been tempted as she has been, I have a shrewd fuSpicion —but adieu, no Such good fortune a-waits me, So you may be perfedlly Satisfied on this head, as well as that of my friendship and affedlion.
Harriot Molesworth,
LETTER XLIII.
ISdifs Emilia Beville, to Mifs Harriot Molesworth.
WHAT can I Say to you, my dear friend } How can I expreSs the shock I received when informed of Mr. Stanhope’s fate.? Ah, Harriot, can I think of his dreadful situation and not feel the most painful emotions } They
were
SEVILLE. 117
were not, indeed. So much the effeds of Surprise as grief, since the courSe of , life he has for Some months been engaged in, could hardly fail to be followed by Some as fatal conSequence. Were he indifferent to me, were he not the hushand of my poor Caroline, I should certainly be deeply afflided, when I refieded on the cauSe of this shocking affair. Think, my dear Harriot, how dreadfully unprepared a man of his charader must be to quit this life !
I rejoice Sincerely at t.he account you give me of my poor Sister’s behaviour' on the mournful occafion: should he recover, I flatter mySelf the accident may yet produce the most Salutary ef-feds. His uncle’s renewed favour and protedion may do wonders: heaven grant he may be restored to our wishes ! though, from what you tell me, I dare not fatter mySelf with that delightful proSped.
I am
iiS TIe HIST ORY of
I am dying with impatience for your next letter, that I may be relieved from my SufpenSe. Write to me instantly, I beSeech you, nor fail to be particular in ' every thing relating to my poor Caroline’s affairs. My own are at this moment forgot, I can think of nothing but hers.
I find it impossible at this time to an-fwer any part but this of your obliging epistle. Do me the justice to believe I have a due fenSe of the care you take in all that concerns me : your friendship is my only conSolation.	'
Adieu. > Be Speedy, as you value the peace of
Your
Emilia Beville.
LET-
ilL^BEVILLE. 119
LETTER XLIV.
I Mifs Harriot Molesworth, to Mifs Emilia Seville.
I
f * TT is past, my dear Emdlia ! The urn
I X fortunate Stanhope is no more ! The Surgeon’s first declaration was but too just : there never were any hopes of his life. During the few days he lived, he Seemed extremely SenSible of his miScondud, and deeply ashided for the crime he had been guilty of, in thus hazarding his life in a cauSe So infamous. He had the confolation to be reconciled both to your family and his own : had he lived, every thing would have been fettled in the most agreeable manner, and his faults forgotten : but it was not the will of heaven. Let us not, therefore, repine; its decrees are ever just, though they may not always appear So to us.
His
120 Lie HIST ORY of
His uncle has promiSed to look upon your sister with the Same affedlion he would have done had his conSent been given to their union. This circumstance will, I am perSuaded, give you great pleaSure. He has found the means to pleaSe him, and will, no doubt, endeavour to cultivate his promiSed friendship and esteem. The affedion he once had for his unfortunate nephew. Seems now ' transferred to her. Every one knev^ the I cauSe of her hushand’s duel with my lord, and, of courSe, pity her on that account. Mr. Stanhope Seems determined to make her all the reparation in his power for the wrongs she Suffered from his nephew, and it is certain he	|
can make her ample amends. What	j
are her refieDions on the event we will
/
not enquire; they are believed to be Such as they ought, by thoSe whoSe opi- I nion is of more imiportance than mine.
Let that Suffice, and may her future
con duel:
IAifs SEVILLE. I2S
condu6t give them no cauSe to change their favourable Sentiments. One would think a Scene So dreadful must have • made a lasting impression on her heart:, it must, my dear Emilia, if she ever truly loved him, though this, with me, still remains a doubt. Perhaps we ought to rejoice at her indifference, since sit will Save her from the infinite trouble . and asslidlion she must otherwiSe have been tormented with. Forget, my dear Emilia, her unfortunate hushand, since the remembrance can only Serve to give you pain; and think only, of your Caroline’s good fortune, in being thus [ uneixpedledly restored to the favour of I her friends and family.
!	You bid me be Speedy in Sending my
anSwer: I will obey you. I havenothiiig to add of any importance, and my uSual trifling would, at this time, be imperth nent.
VoL. II. ' G	Again
\
122	HISTORY
Again I charge you not to' give way to melancholy ressedlions.—Adieu : believe me ever
Yours,
✓ ^
Harriot Molesworth.
, LETTER XLV.
M^s Emilia Beville, to Mifs Harriot Molesworth:
Yes, my dear friend, 1 will be ad-vifed. I will, as you desire me, think only of Caroline’s good fortune, in being thus happily reconciled to her friends and family. I will endeavour to forget the unfortunate cauSe of that , happy event. My tears will not recall him from the grave, nor my refieflions afford me any conSolation. Yet, let me not forget the assurance of his sincere repentance: this circumstance cannot
fail
Mifs BE VILLE. 123
fail to give pleaSure to all who are any way concerned for that unhappy youth. If this repentance was indeed sincere, ought we to mourn his fate Had he lived, he migiit again have been Seduced. But let me leave this melancholy Sub-jedl: why should I, by dwelling longer on it, give you pain ? Nor indeed, do I find mySelf in Spirits to write on that or any other. The anxiety I have been in ever since you first informed me of that unhappy affair has entirely depressed them. Lady Beverly omits nothing in her power to restore them, or to render my situation agreeable; but, alas, my dear Harriot, are there not a thouSand reaSons to prevent my enjoying with Satisfaction thoSe pleafures her ladyship is every day endeavouring to procure me.? She has just left me, nor would Suffer me to refuSe the request she came to make. It is to accompany MiSs Smith and her in a visit they are going G 2	to
124 HISTORY £/'
to make at,a few miles distance from hence: her ladyship is perSuaded a little exerciSe is absolutely necessary to remove that dejeftion but too visible on my countenance.
They are people of no ceremony. Said she, and particular friends of mine. I mention this circumstance, my dear MiSs Beville, that you may have no pretence to refuSe me the favour of your company. Had it been a visit of mere form, I would not, at this time, have propoSed it, as I am Sensible it must have been particularly diSagreeable ; but it is quite the reverSe : we are intimate friends, and I am perSuaded the ride will do you good: So, my dear, I will call for you about ten to-morrow morning, and expedt to find you ready and in better Spirits. If you diSappoint me in cither 1 shall be very angry. So Saying she left me to write to you, as I told her I intended, and but for this I must
have
SEVILLE. 125
have gone with her to the hall. I have not yet taken up my residence at that delightful place, though I am continu-, ally importuned to quit my humble dwelling. But however humble it may be, it is perfedlly Suited to my preSenC taste: quite retired, and where I can indulge my refiedlions without fear of interruption : nor would I, on any con-Siderarion but her ladyship’s obliging intreaties, be prevailed on to leave it. That I may have nothing to cbjedt, she has desired I will make no ceremony, but bring Jenny with me, who has been here Some time.
What you Say of Lord B— has really made no Small impression upon me. I tremble, lest he should be ridiculous enough to justify your Sulpicions: I mean, should he chance to come this way. Yet I think were I indeed to meet him by accident in this part of the world, he would not uSe any vio-G 3	lence.
126 rbe HISTORY of
lence, since, tho’ he is perSuaded I sty • from the man I hate, he knows not he has alSo a favoured rival. Did he fuSpedt this, indeed, 1 would not anfwer for what his pride might induce him to, after the ridiculous bustle he has made ; but as it is, why should he uSe any other means than his eloquence and assiduity ? TheSe, from a perSon of his figure, I am perSuaded, he thinks irresistible.' That he is deceived is most certain; but of this, I Say, as well as Mr. Beauchamp’s passion, he is ignorant : why then have recourSe to any other ^
Ah why, my dear Harriot, do you tempt me with Such plausible arguments ? Ought I to write to that too amiable man? W^ould not this be giving him more encouragement than ever I mean to do, unleSs my affairs take a more favourable turn ^ Have I not a thoufand times declared I never will ^	marry
Vifs BEVILLE. 127
marry contrary to my father’s inclination ? Why then should I, by following your too tempting advice, give him thoSe hopes which ever must be fruitleSs ? Yes, my dear Harriot, the obstacles are innumerable : why then should I write 5 Will- not absence pr6ve an estedtual rerriedy for his passion ? W'ili he not in a short time, forget the unSortunate Emilia, nor feel any longer thoSe pains and anxieties you would perSuade me he at this moment endures? Yet, good heavens! should theSe dreadful predictions be verified, what would become of your forSaken friend ? Ah, Idarriot, did I really believe, what I afiedl to men' tion with Such apparent indifference, I fiiould die with grief. Jenny has told me a number of circumstances which add weight to thoSe arguments you So Sweetly urge in his favour: but I dare not, Harriot, indulge myfelf in the desire I have to obey you: I should blame G 4	mySelf
,128 HISTORY^
mySelf for it the moment I had given him this proof of .my weakneSs; for would it not be extreamly So, to give him reaSon to believe I feared his deSpair might prove fatal ^
Adieu, my dear friend, my heart is perhaps leSs at eafe than his, yet I live.
Do not tempt me then, I beSeech you, to expoSe its folly by this too convincing . proof.
Farewell. Let me hear from you Soon, if you love
Your,
Emilia Beville.
LETTER XLVI.
To the Same,	J
Good heavens, what a Surprizei—| To give you my idea of it is utterly im.possible : yet I am Set down for that very purpoSe, or at least to tell you
the
Mifs BEVILLE. 129
the occasion of it, though I am really afraid I shall be able to do neither. So violent are my emotions when I endea-i vour to Secolledt the extraordinary Scene.
Did 1 tell you of a visit Lady Beverly was going to make, and in which she desired me to accompany her? Last TueSday was fixed for our little journey, but it proved rainy; we therefore dc-, ferred it till yesterday. About ten we Set out in her ladyship’s carriage, and found the way to Mr. AnneSiey’s per-fedly delightful. The road, except for about a hundred yards, quite a Bowling-Green : this we got over in going, witte out any great difficulty. For my part,
I never Suffer mySelf to be tormented with thoSe ridiculous fears vrith which one Sees So rriany people teizing both themSelvcs and friends, when in a carriage. A stranger, from thoSe violent apprehensions, would be inclined to think the lady who expressed them iiad G 5	been
130 HISTORY 0/
been more accustomed to walk than ride. This mortifying refiedtion one would think might prevent our Sex from indulging airs they mistake for grace and delicacy.—But to proceed. I should not perhaps have mentioned that Small inconvenience in our excursion, had v/e not felt the effedts of it on our return.
We Spent the day in the most agreeable manner. Mr. Annefiey has two daughters, very amiable girls, nor is Mrs. Annefiey leSs agreeable. Their fortune, though Small, enables them, as they by their ceconomy manage it, to live ex-treamly genteel. They have no Super-fiuous attendants, yet are Served with more eaSe and readineSs than thoSe who keep five times their number. He has a Small farm, just Sufficient to amuSe, and to Supply the family with every ne-ceffary they can have occaSion for. MiSs Annefiey has the government of the dairy, and her sister of the poultry, of which
there
IAifs BEVILLE. 131
ther^ is a vast variety. Every thing both within and without the houSe is a perfedt pidture for neatneSs. Were I not in haste to inform you of what has occasioned my SurpriSe, I might expatiate for an hour on the merit of this family , and the beauty of their little Eden ; but I now leave them, and Set forwards on our return home, which we did about five o’clock.
I was expressing the pleaSure I had received from my visit, and her ladyship, with her uSual goodneSs, was beginning to inform me of a thouSand circumstances in their praiSe, which I could not	^
discover on So short an acquaintance, when we were in a moment terrified almost to death by the overturn of our coach, in repassing the piece of bad road I mentioned. How the accident happened heaven knows, but it fell with luch violence that the coachman was thrown -from the box to a considerable distance,
G 6	and
.D32 HISTORY ti/
and bruiSed in a dreadful manner. I found I was free from any hurt, and Screamed more through fear for Lady Beverly than for mySelf. MiSs Smith had near fallen into a Swoon, and certainly would, had not the Servants immediately delivered us from our confinement : the air and her Salts brought her again to herSelf, but it was not without the utmost difficulty her ladyship could recover her excessive fright. Had not the horSes been remarkably tradable, the accident might have been attended with more fatal conSequences; but, fortunately for us, they never offered to stir from the place where the coach fell. Her ladyship’s first care was to enquire for the coachman, as she did not fee him amongst the other Servants; we were then informed of the hurt' he had received. At first they feared he had broke his arm, but were happily deceived ; though he was So extreamly
stunned
Mifs BEV^ILLE,	I
stunned and bruiSed with the fall, that it was impossible for him to drive us home, nor durst any of the other Servants attempt it, after what had happened. We
were about two miles from Mr. An-✓
nefiey’s houSe, but as that was nearer than any other, her ladyship determined to. Send a man back, to get one from that gentleman who could drive. A messenger was diSpatched immediately, while we were obliged to Seat ourSelves on a bank by the road fide till he returned. Our Situation, you may believe, was none of the ihost desirable, as the poor coachman was an objedt that gave us great pain. He endeavoured to apologize for what had happened, by protesting it was not owing to want of care or attention, but merely the badneSswf the road. Her ladyship, in consideration of the hurt he had received, admitted his excuSe, though I believe she was of opinion w’hat happened was
chiessy
134 ne HISTORY of
chiefly owing to the want of both, since the road could not be So violently altered in So Snort a time: but the poor maii was in a condition that banished every Sentiment of reSentment, and excited only that of pity.
With great patience and philoSophy we Sat waiting the return of John, and conSoling ourSelves with the refledlion that, bad as our caSe was, it might have been infinitely worSe. In this manner,
I Say, we were Sitting with great gravity and compoSure waiting the Servant’s return, when who should ride up to the Spot where we were, but Lord B— ! that being the diredt road to B—-— Castle.
It was now my turn to uSe the Salts, Her ladyship knew him at once, nor was in the least SurpriSed at the efforts I made to hide ray face, by drawing my hat over my eyes, and looking another way. But all theSe precautions were in vain, he discovered me in a moment.
Heavens!
Mifs BEVi’lLE.. 13;
Heavens ! cried he, with infinite tran- ' Sport, what do I See ? — MiSs Beville here!—What inexpressible joy has this unexpedted meeting given to my heart ? Pardon me, my dear Lady Beverly, pardon me, repeated he, that I cannot regret (Since I See you have received no hurt) the accident that has procured me this unSpeakable felicity. He Seized and kissed my hand, to confirm the thouSand extravagant things he uttered; and indeed I had not the power to prevent him. So astonished was I at the unex-pedled sight. He pressed it to his lips, Swearing he would never, for the future, paSs that Spot, without expressing his gratitude to Providence, which had So fortunately ended his Search and uneasi-neSs, at that happy place. He had, for the first ten minutes, ail the conversation to himSelf, So great was our SurpriSe, that we had not power to interrupt him. It is impossible to tell you half the gallant
things
136 HISTORY^
things he Said on the occasion, nor would | he ever, I believe, have put an end to j his eloquent rhapSody, had not my lady ^ at last found Spirits to change the Subject which she Saw was So painful to me.
She, with great compoSure, not taking the least notice of all his fine Speeches, 1 enquired whether he was on his way, or had already been to pay a visit at the castle ? His anSwers were given with the utmost confusion; he had no attention for any objedt but me, who would have given worlds to have been conveyed from his dreaded sight.
Pardon, Lady Beverly, cried he every moment; pardon this, to you perhaps, unaccountable behaviour. You know not, it is impossible you should know, the infinite joy I feel at this delightful moment. Ah, my dear madam, Were you but Sensible of the pain, the deSpair I have for Some time past been tormented with, on this angel’s account, you
would
I'
I
BEVILLE. 137
would no longer be Surprized to See me wild with joy. I love that dear creature—yes, madam, love her to distraction. Judge then what must have been my miSery during that tedious time she has been abSent, and what my extacy must be, thus to find her, when I had reSigned mySelf to deSpair, convinced as ,
I was my most diligent Search would 'for ever be in vain !	.	.
In this manner did he continue his exclamations, while I had Scarce power to utter one word. To the few questions I did find courage to aSk, he made no , dired reply, but again renewed his declarations of love, joy and felicity. At last, to my great Satisfaction, John returned with not only a coachman, but Mr. Annessey and tw^o or three other of his Servants. You may, if you pleaSe, fuppofe the Speeches that passed on all sides. He too knew my lord, though not the cauSe of that gaiety So visible on •
his
13S	HISTORY gf
his countenance, at a time when a face of concern would have been rather more natural. He did not, however, chufe to enquire into his lordship’s reaSon, but no doubt thought his behaviour a good deal out of charadler. By Mr. An-nessey’s assistance we were enabled to purfue our journey, nor would he permit us to do So without his company, though my lord affured him he would protedl the ladies from any further danger. Thus attended, we arrived at the hall, for her ladyship would not Suffer me any longer to remain with the good curate. Mr. Anneiley Soon took his leave, not being able to accept my lady’s invitation to stay all night, having an engagement early in the morning: half thoSe intreaties, I prefume, would have prevailed on his lordship, but she forgot to aSk that favour. He would not, however, leave us till he was affured we had perfectly recovered our fright, '	^	nor
t
I
NS^rBEVILLE. 139
nor could we perSuade him we had, for near two hours after Mr. Annessey had left us. He aSked a thoufand questions, and expressed the greatest curiosity to know how I came there ; whether I was only On a visit, or in what part of the country I had So long been; to all which I anSwered in a very unSatisfadory manner, telling him, my stay with Lady Beverly was extreamly Uncertain. I might leave her ladyship to-morrow, perhaps not So Soon, I really knew not which, or whether I should do either. He did not Seem much delighted with the information, nor could it give him any very clear intelligence of my design. He aroSe to take his leave of her ladyship ; then coming to me, and half whiS-pering, hoped he should have the happi-neSs of finding me at the hall, wdien he returned with his sisters to pay his re-fpeds to Lady Beverly. I again assured him that was extreamly uncertain. At
last.
140 HISTORY
last, he left us, with visible regret, to^ talk over at leiSure the very unexpected meeting ; which we did, notwithstanding our fatigue, till near midnight.
Her ladyship thought I had nothing to fear from any ungenerous designs, as he had So openly declared his Sentiments, and particularly as he was ignorant of my having a preference for any other. The knowledge of that circumstance, she owned, might perhaps induce him to take other meaSures, but added, she thought it very unlikely his lordship should be informed of it in the country, since he had never heard it even when in town. Again she assured me she thought- his dread of marriage had for-Saken him, and that he certainly meant nothing but to afk my hand as well as heart. I'ill she Saw stis behaviour, dhe had ever believed it impossible he should be So much changed as to think of entering into that engagement, but was
now
!	BEVILLE. 141	'
now perSuaded his designs were honourable.
Ah, my dear madam, cried I, do not mention his designs, I have no desire to be acquainted with them, be they wdiat they will. If they are, as you believe,
I honourable, I am obliged to his lordship for his good opinion, but my gratitude is all the return I have to give. I have not, my dear Lady Beverly, concealed my Sentiments from you, you know the Situation of my heart: if ever I bestow it on any man. Lord B--------, I again re-
peat it, will never be the perSon. She Smiled at the fervor with which 1 Spoke, and affured me, she approved of my resolution, nor wifned me to change, convinced, from what I had told her, that Mr. Beauchamp was infinitely. more amiable and deServing ; and repeated her flattering predictions that we should yet be happy.
With
1
142 HIS TORY e/ ,	|
With this agreeable refiedlion we | parted for the night, having previoussy I determined to Send for Jenny and my I wardrobe in the morning. According ’ to this resolution, that damSel is now depositing my cloaths in the place appointed for them by my dear Lady Be- ! verly, and it is in my new dressing-room I am at this moment writing to my dear Harriot. What will be the conSequence of this interview I know not, but sincerely hope he will not inform my family or the vile Sir JoSeph of the diS-covery he has made. Your opinion on this point gives me great confolation: I am endeavouring to believe you are right. He hoped I would still be here when he returned to pay his reSpedls to Lady Beverly. How much is her ladyship obliged to him for his obligin'g in-* tentions !
Adieu, my dear Harriot, this epistle is now of a convenient length. I will
leave
MifsBEYlLLE. 143
leave you to make your own refiedions on what I have told you : when you are at leisure you may commit them to paper, and Send them to your affedionate
Emilia Bevtlle,
LETTER XLVIL
jMifs Harriot Molesworth, to Mifs Emilia Seville^
NO, my dear, it is not possible Sor me to commit any of my reflections to paper. I am, believe me, too much astonished for any Such Sober employment. Not but 1 have made at least a thouSand, and shall, I preSume, make as many more before I recover my Surprise. I have read your epistle fifty times, and as often talked over the contents to mamma and Charlotte. We all agree that he will not inform your family
i	c*
or
I
I
144 TIe HI Sr ORY of
of his good fortune, but cannot come into Lady Beverly’s opinion, in regard to your Safety, his honour, and all that. She, good woman, has no idea of this kind of men ; she is not acquainted with the extent of their genius. I tell you again, he would have more joy in carrying you off, in Spite of all your caution, and your Lady Beverly’s care, than he would- receive from the congratulations on his marriage. Take my word for it, my dear Emilia, he will never enter into that Sober state. 1 am well assured he looks with the utmost contempt on all thoSe silly Souls who Submit to that unfafiiionable yoke. As for his honourable views, I am perSuaded he thought his brother Lovelace a very honourable fellow^ and wishes for nothing more than a genius, fertile as his, at invention. I have often told you he had not half his capacity ; but if he had, depend upon it, he would uSe it to the Same laudable
purpoSe.
Mifs BE VI RLE. 145
purpoSe, That he loves you I am per-fedly convinced, and lam as much So that he would venture his life to get you into his power. Whether he will be precipitate in his Schemes I know not: I rather fancy the contrary, as he no doubt hopes to gain your heart by his repeated vows and assiduities, having no Suspicion of its pre-engagement; that done, he takes it for granted his ideas of honour and yours will be eaSily / reconciled. For is it not the odious opinion of every libertine, like him, that no woman can resist repeated Solicitation, if her heart has any degree of tender-neSs for the'tempter ? And his lordship , is abundantly convinced of his own per-fedions; too much So, depend upon it, to doubt SucceSs. And that this is his honourable design, I make not the least doubt: So, as a friend, I adviSe you to I	be on your guard. Should I be de-
ceived, I will patiently bear all you can VoL. 11.	H	Siy
146 Lhe HISTORY, of
Say on the Subjedt of my Sagacity. This wiSe ledlure will, I hope, convince you I have, with all my might, been ressedl-ing on your adventure; and 'if it does not alSo perSuade you I am in the greatest care and anxiety about your affairs, ■ it will but half anSwer the purpofe for which I write it.
i
I have not heard from Mrs. Stanhope since I wrote to you last; but, by a letter I got last Monday from Mifs Prodtor, I find she is in high favour with her uncle, and makes a most elegant widow. Few people believe her Sorrow extravagantly Severe, though she behaves in a manner that contradidls this opinion. It is certainly her interest to do So, and I preSume she has now learnt to think that a matter of Some importance. She viSits your family'frequently, and her undutiful wedding is forgot. She will no doubt endeavour to pleaSe them better in her nexb.—But l^e it So — your days of felicity whll ytt
arrive.
Mifs BEVILLE. 147
arrive. Yes, my dear Emilia, 1 add my
predidtions to Lady Beverly’s : I again
, pronounce you will yet be happy—and
not you alone, but alSo your handSome
Beauchamp. In every letter I receive /
from London, let who will be the writer,
I am Sure to have a line ,or two about hirn.
I believe I told you what they Say of ^ his eyes : they are determined to believe' nothing but that could make him treat the multitude of beauties he continually Sees with Such cold negledt and indifference.— Poor dear creatures! they are really to be pitied. A perSon So elegant, i	So forrned for conquest, and yet So hard-
’	hearted!—It is really, my dear Emilia,
’ . a most woSul caSe to Say truth.—-He must as they Say, have left the Said heart a-broad, or he could never treat them as he does. This thought, no doubt, gives them Some conSolation. Perhaps he is naturally inSenSible.—Is he Emilia ^ Do, II2 , tell
148 HIST ORY 5/
tell me, my dear, that I may Set their hearts at rest, for Some of them are, I believe, a good deal troubled with palpitations on your obdurate Swain’s account ; as, hitherto, all their airs and graces have been dilplayed in vain. TheSe hints may, I think, prevent your amuS-ing yourSelf with any doubts in regard to his constancy, and with them I take my leave, repeating what I have a thousand times affured you, that I am wholly Yours,
Harriot Molesworth.
LETTER XLVIIL
Mtfs Emilia Seville, to Mifs Harriot Molesworth.
Yes, my dear Harriot, your'very wife ledbure has fully anSwered every purpoSe for which you did me the
favour to wTite it, 1 am not only there-
by
Mifs B E V I L L E. 149
by convinced you read my adventure with due attention, and as you read made many grave and Sagacious reflections, but am alSo perSuaded you interest yourfelf as much in my affairs as if they were wholly your own. Depend upon it I will pay all due reverence to your Sage advice. What you Say of his IwOvclace principles shall not be forgot,
I will, as much as possible, avoid Seeing him. I have already had one opportunity.
The morning after our unexpedted meeting, he came to enquire whether, we had yet recovered our friglit and fatigue. I siaw him ride up the avenue : Lady Beverly received him alone. He ashed after the ladies in general, then in particular for MiSs Beville. Could he not, he Said, have the honour of paying his reSpedls to that divine creature ? The-ladies were gone out to take an airing, w^as her ladyship’s anSwer, which She H 3	believed
150 ira? H I S T O R Y oT	j
believed was really the cafe, we having left her for that purpoSe, but changed our design.—Which way, madam how long have they been gone ? How ex-treamly unfortunate was I not to meet them ! Can your ladyship dire6l my steps that I may follow them ? I have a thousand things to Say to MiSs Beville, which I am perSuaded she will rejoice to hear.
—That was impossible, as we had not mentioned which way we meant to go, but fancied we could not be at any great distance not having been long gone.—He took his leave in the utmost haste, determined, if poffible, to find us. You may believe we were highly diverted at her ladyship’s mistake, when I ran down on feeing him remount his horSe.
I really blush, my dear Harriot, ^for Mr. Beauchamp’s behaviour, and think the ladies you mention treat him with great civility, in making for him an
apology
Mifs BEVILLE. 151^
apology So favourable. Might they not have accuSed him of stupidity, want of taste, judgment, and a thouSand other as dreadful imperfedtions ? They certainly might, after their repeated tryals to conquer his inSensible heart. But then they are perSuaded it is not inSensible, his eyes it Seems declare the contrary. In this lays th.e very mortification of which they complain. A cruel cafe, as you Say, and ' wondrous pitiful. But vvhat can be done ? I will order a friend of yours to give him a word or two of advice on the ;	occasion, lest he should, by perSevering
I	in this cruel behaviour, utterly destroy
your preSent race of beauties.
Lady Beverly Sends to desire I will accompany her in a walk. I cannot diSobey her obliging Summons, and as I have nothing very material to add v/ill bid you
Adieu,
Emilia Beville.
H 4	L E T-
152 HISTORY ^	' «
' LETTER XLIX.
Mifs Harriot Molesworth, to
IAifs Emilia Seville.	i
Listen Emilia, listen my dear, with ,j all your attention to the marvellous things I am going to tell you. Yes, child, it is now my turn to relate adventures. Such an adventure! my predidtions are on the very point of being verified: the chief obstacle, or	'
at least a very material one, is removed.	j
Yes, my dear, your friend, with the languishing eyes, is now in as high fa- j vour with your old lover as he can possi-	I
bly be -with you. Have patience child,„	\
do not let your joy be too violent neither; he has not yet resigned his pretentions to you in his favour, not quite So civil as that comes to, but I tell you ' the accident which has conquered his ridiculous reSentment is, I am fully per- i
Suaded,
i
r
B E V I L L E. 153
‘fuaded, the forerunner of that desirable event. Are you prepared to hear with calmneSs what I am going to reveal ? if not, fay the word, and I am dumb.— Ah, ^Harriot, for heaven’s Sake Speak cn, as you value my peace! I am dying with impatience for an explanation !— O are you So? very well then, lest you should really expire with the Said impatience, here follow the particulars. Your adventure with your over-turned machine is a trifie to mine. But to proceed.
Your dear Sir JoSeph was last TueSday returning from St. James’s Coffee-houSe.
^ He had not ordered his carriage to at-i tend, having probably, when he entered I that academy, intended to keep better hours than he happened that night to do. At what time he changed, his noble pur-poSe is not certainly known, nor is it more So, what could induce his knight-I	ship to Sally forth on foot, there being
H 5	generally
i
154 r^^HI'STORY jT	I
generally chairs enough in waiting at the door. TheSe important points, I Say, are not yet revealed to the astonished world, though most people are of opinion, champaign alone had been his counsellor, as it was well known they had, during the whole evening, been on the most friendly terms. Be that as it will, certain it is his valiant' worship Set out alone, fearleSs of either death or danger. It was—Sorry am I to mention • this circumstance, since it brings a friend of yours into the fame Scrape—It was,
I Say, Emilia, past three o’clock in the morning when he begun his travels for Bond-street. He had not proceeded far on his way, when he was met by two very ill-bred gentlemen, who, without the least degree of ceremony, demanded his purSe, and, as an argument they'’had frequently, I preSume, found prevailing, Swore, if he refufed, they would blow his honour’s brains out. He; good
man.
Mifs BEVILLE. 155
^ man, conScious that he was much better provided with one of theSe necessaries than the other, found no violent inclination to dispute the point: his purSe could easily be filled again, but a fresh Supply of brains might not be So easily procured. Indeed, Some folks are of opinion his honour did not chuSe to give them So fair an opportunity to diScover he never was possessed of any Such matter, However that might be, he was in the very adS of conveying his trembling hand to his pocket, on being again urged in no veiy Soft, though very per-Suafive language, to be a little more Speedy in his motions, when, who should at that moment over-hear their threats, from the other side of the street, but his nephew; that is to fay, your friend Beauchamp. How he came to be strolling at that unSeaSonable hour is, as I before observed, a point- not yet fettled entirely to my Satisfadlion. Love, it is H 6	true.
156 The HISTORY of
true, might disturb his rest; he might chuSe that hour when every eye ought to have been cloSed in steep, as most proper to indulge his m.elancholy meditations free from interruption. This, I Say, might be the reaSon of his being from home at a time for which we So freely blame his reverend uncle, who, to Say truth, might, had he wit enough, plead the very Same excuSe.—I will leave you to form what conjedlure you pleaSe, and proceed to my story.
He heard their threats, little dreaming to whom they were uttered, and, instantly flying acroSs the street, with the hilt of his Sword, at one well-aimed blew, knocked down one of the fellows. His companion feeing this, and willing to revenge the affront, endeavoured to return the favour with a more Substantial weapon; but instead on Harry, his wrath by mistake, fell on the uplifted arm of Sir JoSeph, who Seeing his design hoped to prevent it. The fellow
thinking
Mifs SEVILLE. I ry
^	J J
thinking it not proper to make a Second attempt, took to his well-diSciplined heels, and left the field of battle without farther ceremony, as alSo his prostrate Sriend to the care of Providence. The watch coming by a moment after, they . ' consigned their charge to him. But now comes the marvellous part of the history. Can you, my dear, form to yourSelf any idea of their consternation, when, by the light of the lantern, the heroes were discovered to each other ? Harry, you may believe, thought his courage exerted in the most fortunate cauSe that possibly could have offered. Ones thoughts, you know, Emilia, are amazingly Swift in their progreSs : perhaps he at that lucky moment made all the refiedlions, and drew the fame conclusion from the adventure which I have done with So much confidence, in the beginning of my epistle. rH lay my life your ladyship was the first perSon that occurred to his
memory
!
15S	HISTORY^
memory on Seeing his uncle’s wo-begone phiz, for Such it Seems it was, the blow on his arm having given birth to Some very painful SenSations, which were strongly pictured on his naturally-Smiling countenance. But no Sooner did he cast his rueful eyes on that of his deliverer, than his pain was lost in pleasing Surprise. The champaign he had drank mightperhaps help to banish from his unforgiving breast the remembrance of past Scenes : certain it is he then Seemed only Sensible of the preSent. He embraced him with infinite Satisfadlion, calling him his hero, the hope of his family, and the only fellow in it worth his notice or regard. You, continued he,^ shave proved yourSelf deServing of both, and both you shall have. So give me your hand, and V from this hour look upon me as your friend.—Your mother—-but no matter-—
I am not obliged to forgive her, though I do justice to you, and justice I will
do.
Mifs BEVILLE. 159
do, you may depend upon it. So faying, away they Sallied with the utmost cordiality, arm in arm, nor would the old Don Suffer him to leave him that night. The next day found his worship stilldo thoSe favourable Sentiments, and
^ 'V-
the more he converSed with your Swain, •^the more they were confirmed, nor will he now, on any consideration, be a day without his company. He insists on his living wholly vrith him, and in short, my dear girl, they have been a pair of inseparables ever since. Every creature is talking of this wonderful event, nor does any one forget to mention, with a proper emphasis, the valour of your hero. Now, my dear Emilia, compare if you pleaSe your adventure with mine, and confeSs, with a good grace, that yours is not worthy to be related in the Same age.
; Never was creature So happy as I have i been ever since. Can I fail being So, convinced as I am that your days of banishment
i6o	HISTORY ^
nishment are So near an end ^ How this ‘ blessing is to be brought about I have not yet considered, but that it will be is not the leSs certain. Do, for heaven’s Sake, Send him a line or two, or Suffer me to do it for you : how elSe is he to know but you are by this time fied to the world of Spirits, and conSequemly indifferent about either him or his passion ? Till he knows, I Say, what is become of you, how should he think of breaking the affair.^—And yet, by the bye, I presume he thinks of nothing elSe. For my part I have no idea of your ridiculous Scruples. ExpoSe the weakneSs of your heart, indeed ! I tell you it will, on the contrary, prove the gentleneSs, the Soft-neSs, the goodneSs of it. Think on what I have Said, refiedt in your turn, and I am positive you must approve of my ad(^ice. Write to him, I repeat, or Suffer me to do it for you. Take my advice, and that Suc-ceSs may attend you, is the ardent wish of ^ Harriot Molesworth,
r
■	Mifs BEVILLE. i6i
LETTER L.
j Mi/s Emilia Beville, to Mifs Harriot Molesworth.
Ah, Harriot, what an adventure is yours! Yes, my dear, 1 do indeed confeSs mine is not worthy to be Set in j competition with it. - Good heavens!
I how astonished, or rather delighted, was I, when reading the welcome packet! Do not exped me to give you any idea of my emotions : it is utterly impossible, nor was it leSs So to conceal them from Lady Beverly. She Saw immediately I had received Some agreeable news, nor did I wish to leave her ignorant of its nature. Sensible I could not tell the story with half the Spirit you had done,
; I gave her ladyship your letter. It is difficult to Say whether she was most I charmed with the history, or with your lively manner of relating it., She is delighted
. 1
162 H I S T O R Y oj
lighted with your Spirit and vivacity, and wishes for nothing more than your Sprightly company, to compleat our happy Society. Yes, my dear. Said she, returning me your epistle, I am quite of MiSs MoleSworth’s opinion. I am per-fuaded the difficulty is more than half conquered. Sir JoSeph’s Love will yield ' -j to his friendship; depend upon it, it J will, when he is once informed of his nephew’s passion. The conquest will gain him infinitely more honour than he can ever expedt from his perfeverance.
Your aversion, your partiality for another, his nephew’s happineSs, all theSe, depend upon it, will gain the victory, when he is acquainted with the particulars of the affair. Felicity he cannot
expedt, were he now master of your
/
hand, convinced, as he will then be, your heart is another’s. Till thus happily reconciled, his reSentment would have been inducement Sufficient for him to
disappoint
Mlfs BE VILLE. 163
disappoint his hopes', but that dissiculty removed, he will certainly yield to his nephew’s eloquence and importunity., I may be deceived, added she, but were Sir JoSeph a man of SenSe and worth, this would undoubtedly be the condudl he would purSue. Ah, my dear Lady Beverly, cried I, you have now named the very obstacle which must for ever prevent that delightful hope. He is neither, my dear madam, he is only obstinate : his pride is piqued at my refuSal, he is mortified and determined I shall Suffer in my turn. Ah, what but this can induce him to perSecute me as he does ^ I have a thouSand times declared my Sentiments with great Sincerity, yet he perSeveres in his odious purpoSe.
In this manner did we animadvert on every line as we read. It Served us for conversation during the whole day, nor shall I want a Subjed for meditation, at;
‘ least, till I hear from you again, and
i
1 '
164 HISTORY^ -	;
you may believe I am not a little impa- , tient for that favour.
Now, my dear Harriot, let me give you my own Sentiments on this affair. Believe me, the more I resscdl on this unexpedled reconciliation, the leSs pro-Spedb I See of the effedts you So oblig-ingly predidt. Yes, my dear, should Mr. Beauchamp diScloSe to him the situation of his heart, depend upon it, the prefent friendship Subsisting between them, will vanish in a moment, and enmity, more irreconcilable than before, immediately take place. Will not my flight be imputed to himWho will perSuade Sir JoSeph that my retreat was not concerted with his nephew ? Is not every appearance against usWhen he is once informed of my Sentiments in his favour, who will be able to convince him of his mistake ? And can he ever pardon the deception ?" Will not the whole affair appear to him a premeditated
Mifs BEVILLE. 565
tated Scheme ? He has no delicacy him-Self, and consequently will not believe others have a greater share. This, Harriot, is my real opinion of the matter.
That I rejoice most unfeignedly at their preSerft Situation is most certain, but I dare not, my dear friend, be quite So Sanguine in my hopes as your partiality for me makes you. Were I to adviSe,
I should certainly be against Mr. Beauchamp’s making the important declaration. Let the affair rest as it is: Providence has, hitherto, preServed me from that dreaded fate, let us then leave the ' event to time, nor, by a too precipitate discovery, entirely frustrate our ^opes and expedbations. Trust me, I know the temper, the teasing disposition of my tormentor better than even Harry does himSelf; at leaft I should judge So, were he to hope for any noble or generous adlion from him. Yes, my dear, the * ‘ design he has once Set his heart on, he
Will
i66 HISTORY ^
will if possible accomplish, let who wsill be the Sufierer. I have but too mucli reaSon to be convinced of this horrid truth. Now a word or two, by way of conclusion, concerning my noble lord.
Last Friday a message from the castle proclaimed a visit from the ladies and their gallant brother. In due time they arrived, and fine w'omen they are, to do them justice. Nothing of the Soft, the amiably winning, which I So much admire, but quite gay and town-bred. Do you ash what charadler his lordship affumed on the occasion f All life and Spirit to the company in general, and, as oSten as he found an opportunity, as passionate and assiduous to me. The ladies, I preSume, fuppoSed his behaviour merely the effedts of his natural gallantry, but he took no Small pains to perSuade nie to the contrary. He did not fail to lament, in most plaintive strains, the dreadful disappointment he
met
Mifs B.DVILLE. 167
met with when he had last the honour of waiting on Lady Beverly. I found he had no Sulpicion of my being at home, as her ladyship feared he would.
1 was perSuaded he had too good an opinion of his own perfeDions to entertain a thought So mortifying. He expressed great curiosity to know how I came to honour that part of the country with my prefence, and assured me, whatever were my reaSons, he w'-as thereby rendered the happiest man in the world. Implored me not to leave it with Such Secrecy as I had left London: another shock like that, would infallibly kill him. He had never known a moment’s peace from that day, till the delightful one in which he had the unSpeakable felicity of meeting me with Lady Beverly. But do, my dear, SuppoSe the rest if you pleaSe: I am tired with the repetition, nor is it possible to tell you half the flourishing Speeches his honour
made,
I	'	,
i68	HISTORY ^
made, but this I remember was the conclusion of the harangue : that he was, and long had been, my most devoted, and humble stave ; that time nor circumstance could ever make him otherwiSe, v:ith a long et costera of significant declarations to the Same purpofe, to all which, you may believe, 1 paid due credit and attention: though, whether I believe him or not, the conSequence to his lord-fliip will be pretty much the Same.
Adieu, my dear Harriot, let me know what,progreSs my twm London Swains make in their renewed friendship.
Emilia Seville.
LETTER LI.
Mifs Harriot Molesworth, to Mtfs Emilia BevilleS
SO, you will possitively never forgive my long silence Why then should 1 now take up my pen, since you will,
of
Mifs BEVIL LE. 169
of courSe, commit my poor trembling epistle, without mercy, to the flames ? Do So my dear—but do you hear, Emilia? —read it first, for it brings you the most joyoufly ridiculous piece of news you ever heard. The prettiest Scheme ! Nothing wanting, child, but your conSenc and another perSon’s, wsho fliall at pre-’ Sent be nameleSs. This dear good Soul Sir JoSeph, can think of nothing but matrimony: he is dying for want of a wedding. Listen my dear: but don’t be silly, Emilia, don’t be ridiculous, nor look grave, even for half a moment, at what I am going to impart.
I need not remind you how many months our Caroline has played the widow : long enough in all conScience ; long enough, I mean, for her. friends to be talking of another SpouSe for her. — True, as you are alive! Now you are to gueSs who her next deary is to be, as the provident world Says.—
VoL. II.	I	Again
I
J70 V^cHISTORYcC '
Again I charge you, don’t be ridiculous.
—-Only Henry Beauchamp, Junior ES-quirc. Yes, my dear, So Says Sir , JoSepst, lb Says your dear papa, and So Says ypur Caroline’s dear uncle Stanhope;. for this pretty plot was concerted by thoSe three wiSe heads: by whoSe it will be difconcerted. I’ll leave you to gueSs. Donst, however, imagine the day is fixed and all that—not quite So fast ^neither; but the venerable triumvirate are of opinion that Such an alliance will do mighty w^ell. Sir JoSeph, you know, is to marry you, and So, my dear, as his nephew may perchance be disappointed, in regard to being his heir, why the very considerate old gentleman means, by this match, to repair the Said disappointment; and Secondly, Mr. Stanhope, in eoaSideration of what your Sister Suffered, while under the care of his hopeful nephew, has conSented to make her worth his acceptance. Thirdly and
lastly,
lAifs BEVILLE. 171
lastly, your papa agrees to the whole without a murmur, since nothing is required on his part, except the continuance of his promise in Sir JoSeph’s favour, should you return.
Thus have I given you the whole plan of their operations, as far as they are known or guested at. Neither the nymph or Swain are yet cohSulted, but there is no doubt of their conSent, you know. You I think can anSwer for one, and I promiSe you I can anSwer for the other. I have time for ho more, having company below, but could not delay Sending you this entertaining piece of intelligence.
Adieu. Remember I write it merely to divert you : should it have any other effedl, it shall be my turn next^ to be offended.
Yours,
Harriot Molesworth. I 2	L E T-
172 The HIST CRY of
LETTER LII.
Mt/s Emilia Beville, to Mif Harriot Molesworth.
Ah, Harriot, can I Smilecan I indeed read with indifference the frightful nev/s you tell me? Good heavens, my dear creature, should the affair you mention with So much unconcern he true, what but miSery remains for -	' your forSaken, your wretched Emilia?
Unlikely as their design may appear to you, who can enSure me it will never Succeed ? Were I preSent indeed—but, alas! he knows not, as you yourSelf confeSs, whether your unhappy friend IS any longer in being! A thouSand circumstances concur to render my apprehensions too just. Caroline is hand-Some, her fortune you tell me will be considerable. Ah, Harriot, theSe are powerful temptations! Indeed, my dear
friend.
Mifs BEVILLE. 173
friend, I cannot Smile : I own my weak-neSs, for Such you will no doubt call it. Yes, my dear, I own I cannot conquer my fears : They may be ridiculous, but I feel them, nev^ertheleSs. Ah, hasten, I beSeeth you, to restore my peace! 1 have nothing to write, nothing to tell you worth your attention. Lord B— is here continually^'he teai:eSltle to death. His importunities fatigue my Spirits.^ ' Why cannot I acknowledge to him T have no heart to give ? Surely, that would convince him his hopes are vainS He might then be perfuaded to desist/rom his ffuitleSs purSuit. Nothing but this will induce him to believe he cannot in time conquer my indifference. He has too much vanity to doubt it, believing,
. ' as he does, I have no pre-engagement or partiality for another. Alas, Harriot, how different are the effeds of this reconciliation likely to be, from what you would have perfuaded me to exped !
I 3	Ah,
174	HISTORY ^
Ah, my dear, my heart refuSed to obey : it knew the mifery I was born to Suffer. I can write no more : what I have already written will give you but little pleaSure.
Adieu. For heaven’s Sake, do not So long negledb me as you have lately done, but relieve.. mCjifrom this tormenting SuSpence: the. certainty, whatever it may be, can hardly be more, painful. , '
Emilia Seville,
LETTER LIIL
Emilia Beville, lo Mifs Harriot Molesv^orth.
WOULDyou believe it, Harriot?
MiSs Smith has absolutely betrayed my Secret to Lord B—.
I, with Lady Beverly, had thp other day been taking an airing: Mifs Smith declined going. When we returned, I
found
Mifs BEVILLE., 175
found his lordship and her in deep diS-courSe, but little imagined what had beCn the Sifbjed of their conference. I did not long remain a stranger to it, for at his next visit 1 found he was acquainted with the v/hoie affair : nor did '• he fail to lipbraid me with crtrelty, in-lsi)cerity, and a thoiiSind other imperti-nbrit complaints. He has ever since, till within' thefc two or three days, behaved 1 ike one distracted. One moment in deSpair, the next vowing revenge on his favoured rival. He will loSe his life Sooner than resign his hopes. In short,
1 am, now very Serioufiy alarmed, nor is I.ady Beverly leSs So, notwithstanding the change he has affumed in his behaviour : he is, to appearance, quite resigned, all resignation. Complains, indeed, of my Severity, but must endeavour to bear his fate : his death will Soon end his miSery, and. this is all his conSo^ lation. A behaviour So unlike himSelf,
..	I 4	the
> '
ij6 The HIST OKY of
the change too So Sudden from rage to this philoSophick calmneSs, gives me but too much reaSon to doubt its sincerity.
Lady Beverly has given MiSs Smith a reproof which does not fit extreamly eafy upon her. She has not once since that ledture favoured me with a Smile.
1 have not yet determined on any thing, but am perSuaded this is no longer a ^ place of Safety. Do, for heaven’s Sake, Harriot, think for me : adviSe me what is beSt, or whether you think I have any grounds for my apprehensions. Yet I am perSuaded you will, as you have ever been SuSpicious of his intentions.
Till this discovery, I own there did not appear to me any cauSe ; but the Scene is now greatly altered.
Adieu : I can write no more, this wil?
Suffice to diredt your refiedlions. I shall, with infinite impatience, expedl the re-Sult of them. Do, my dear friend, consult
r
SEVILLE. 177
Suit your mamma, nor fail to let me know your Sentiments on the affair 'as Soon as possible.
Yours, .
Emilia Seville.
LETTER LIV.
! Mtfs Harriot Molesworth, to IAifs Emilia Beville.
OThat vile MiSs Smith ! You muSt positively leave Lady Beverly, you are no longer Safe under her protection. I told mamma what had happened, and of the violent bustle his lordship made. She is entirely of my opinion that you ought to leave the hall immediately, and orders me to tell ymu, she insists on your giving her the pleaSure of your company I	till we fee how things are to be Settled.
No more excuSes, therefore, but Set off . instantly. Need I tell you hov/ impa-
I 5	tient
17S Thd HISTORY^
tient I shall be for your arrival ? Her ladyship, I am perSuaded, cahnot blame your precaution. She may regret her loSs, but must fee the neceshty there i¥ for your journey. In my opinion there is an absolute one for your being both Speedy and private. I may be deceived, but it will be erring on the Safe side.
Did I not tell you I never would pardon your folly if you expressed any degree of uneaSinefs at the pretty news I Sent you ? Depend upon it, I mean to keep my word t all your, apologies will be in vain. In vain will you ini-plore forgiveneSs for your ridiculous fears. While I only meant to a^muSe,you with the folly of the town, not forget-ing that of your good family; behold you are dying, deSpairing, and So forth, lest your Swain should—what I’H anSwer for it he never will—forget all his vows of unalterable love.—Ridiculous! I tell
you
M^s BEVILLE. 179
you it is not in his power. No my dear, ;thoSe who have once been your stave,, have but Small chance of ever regaining .their liberty. But what is still a greater Security, the youth has no desii'e to break them; nor could even your eloquence, I give you my word,
" prevail on him to accept his freedom. But you are fo deSperately fond of in-i dulging thoSe melancholy refiediions! However, you will in a fevr days, I hope, be under my owm eye, it shall be my fault then if you pay any more regard to sthoSe silly stories than you ought. Or they deServe. If you do not instantly accept^ mamma’s invitation I will abSo-^	lufely dispatch a line or two to a cer-
j	tain perSon, and at once deliver him-
I	from all his fears and Sufpence on his
fair fugitive’s account. I am. positively Serious, So chuSe vshich you will.
Adieu.. I am too impatient for youf j	company to occasion any delay by length-
16	cning
i8o ne HIST ORY of
ening my epistle : be you as considerate, as you value the friendship or fear the wrath of,
Your
’	Harriot MoLESwoRTm
LETTER LV.
Mifs Emilia Seville, to Mifs Harriot Molesworth.
Good heavens ! my^ dear Harriot, by what an unfortunate, unex-pedled accident was I prevented from Seeing, as I So fondly wished, your amiable family ! I yet tremble when I re-fiedt on all that has passed since the fatal day I parted from my dear Lady Beverly. Till now I have found it impossible to give you the particulars, though I So impatiently wish you to be informed of the dreadful change in my Situation. Ah,
m
BEVILLE. i8r
my dear Harriot, you know not what I have Suffered since that unfortunate day !
On the TueSday, as I informed you was determined, I leftsthe hall, accompanied by her ladyship’s woman, and a Servant on horSeback, Jenny having desired permishon to continue a few weeks with her father, who has lately been extremely ill. His lordship had been vrith us the day before, as indeed he was every day. He still continued his calm, re-figned behaviour, though it v/as eaSy to obServe, by a thouSand inadvertencies, that he was not in reality the philoSopher he appeared. Why he choSe to assume a charaCler So new, we could not determine, but were every hour more per-fuaded it was not without design to an-fwer Some important purpoSe. If he meant thereby to prevent our entertaining any SuSpicions of the vile Scheme he had in fadl concerted, his lordship was deceived, since it hastened my reSolution ' '	to
i82 neHlSrORY of
to leave the place where he was. How 1 Succeeded in my purpoSe, I am now going, if my Spirits will let me, to tell you.
He took his leave, proiriifing to return the next day with his Sisters, witii whom, and Some other company, we were-to form a party for fishing. This en> gagement, you may believe, did not pre-' vent my intended journey. I left T>ady Beverly with infinite regret, nor could any thing, but the hopes I then had of Seeing my dear Harriot, have diSpelled that, melancholy which filled m.y heart when I lost fight of that fioSpitable abode.
The weather was remarkably fine, and for the firSt day I had reaSon to believe I should receive great pleaSure from my journey; but we had not drove many miles, the next morning, when I obfe^ved a man who frequently passed our chaiSe, and whoSe manner made me conclude he meant to rob us. I expressed my fears to my companion, who aSSured me
there
Mr/f BEVILLE. i8^
there was no kind of danger, as things of / that Sort did not happen thereabouts once in an age. Notwithstanding this, I Was very much alarmed, ,and the more I So, as we were just entering an extensive common, a place of all others most likely to meet with Such an adventure. I was So intirely perSuaded this was his design, that I had almost reaSoned my Self out of my fears,'! and was tolerably prepared to obey 'the expedted commands ; but a Sew minutes relieved us from our apprehensions. We Saw' a chaiSe following at a trifling distance: this gave us new life, and we were diverting ourSelves with the man’s disappointment, if he had really any Such design, when, in a few moments, our carriage was stopped by one of thofe very people whoSe appearance had given us So much Satisfaction, and I was instantly, in Spite of all my tears and struggles, hurried, more dead than alive, into the chaiSe I had before
Seen.
.
i84 HIST ory ^
Seen. It drove off like lightning, nor can I give you any account of what was my companion’s fate, as it was a considerable lime before I recovered from the Swoon into which my terrors had thrown me.
Can you, my dear Harriot, form to yourSelf any idea of my dreadful situation, or my distraction, when I Iliall tell you, that on opening my eyes, the first perSon 1 beheld was the vile, the ungenerous Lord B——, Seated by my fide ? He held one of my hands, and was endeavouring to calm my fears by a thousand hateful protestations. I had not power to give him any anSwer, but faintly Screaming with terror and asto-. nishment, again lost my SenSes, nor can I tell you how long I remained in that condition. Ah why, my dear friend, am 1 not still in that happy inSensibility ! Infinitely happy, when compared to my preSent miserable situation ! But m.y days
of
BEVILLE. 185 .
of Sorrow were not to end So Soon : I was again restored to life and wretched-neSs. I found my Self on a bed, Sur-' rounded by Several mean looking people, who were, with great care and tender-neSs, endeavouring to assist his lordship in recovering me from my Swoon. I'hank heaven! cried she, when I began to breathe; thank heaven, tire dear creature lives! How excessive must have been her fright! But leave us now, my friends, I hope your assistance is no longer ne-*
; ceffary : you may go. Ah, for heaven’s fake, exclaimed 1 with wildneSs in my looks, do not forSake me, do not leave me in the power of this vile man! Save me, ah Save me, from his dreaded pre- ■
I Sence! O do not go! Hear me, I be-Seech you, and do not, by your abSence, drive me to delpalr ! Leave us, Said he, with great compoSure; her Spirits are j not yet calm : a few moments will re-j	store her to peace. They withdrew with
apparent
i ^ '
1
j86	HISTORY^
apparent regret, but overawed by hte repeated commands. Again he offered to take my hand. Be compoSed, my lovely creature, cried he; hear me. Suffer me to explain mylelf, permit me to give you my reaSons for what I have done : do not condemn me unheard. Ah, rsty charming Emilia, you will rather pity -than blame me, when informed of the^ motives which induced me tO' adl as I have done. You know not, my angel, with what ardour I have long loved,
'long adored you. Ah, could I then tamely resign thoSe inimitable charms to the fond wishes of another.^ By hea-' vens, my cruel, my unkind Emilia, deadi would have been infinitely leSs dreadful than Such a Sacrifice. Yes, my adored Emilia, I love you with a passion more fervent, more sincere, than ever yet^poS-Seffed the heart of man. Tell me, could I then resign you to the happy, the envied Beauchamp ?—Ah,- he is now but
too
I
r	*
Mifs BEVILLE. 187
too happy, favoured as he is by the most ,	lovely of her Sex! — Impossible ! — By
i	heavens 1 would not, to be master of the
univerSe, give up the delightful hope I have So long cherished, of one day calling you mine.
And ean you, my lord, cried I interrupting him, can you believe this the ; - way most likely to Succeed in that design ^
Is it possible you should have the vanity to perSuade yourSelf I vrould ever conSent to give you my hand, after this baSe, this ungenerous treatment ? No, sir, whatever you may reSolve upon, whatever may be your preSent honourable intentions, be assured I shall ever look / upon you as the most worthlefs and deS-picable of your Sex. I am, indeed, in your power, but take care, sir, how you j exerciSe that authority you have So meanly I	acquired: I have friends, who will not
^ tamely Suffer me to be injured. Here my Spirits forSook me, and tears, in Spite
of
iS8 The HISTORY of
of all my efforts to restrain them, ran streaming from my eyes. I did not wish him to know the exceSs of my fears.
He threw himSelf at m^y feet, nor could I prevent his pressing my almost lifeleSs hand to his lips. It was with difficulty I kept mySelf from fainting. He again began to apologize for his behaviour, assuring me I had nothing to fear from that power I So cruelly mentioned: all he meant was to prevent my marriage with his too fortunate rival. Promise me, Said he, my charming Emilia, that you will never give your hand to that happy man, and I will patiently wait till I can, by my conftant, my unremitted assiduity, gain that place in your heart I once fiattered myfelf I already possessed. Tell me you will forgive my —perhaps too rash — step,' which love alone induced me to take; Say you will forgive, and Suffer me to hope that time, and the fervor of my passion, may produce
NT^BEVILLE. 189
duce Some’ favourable change in your Sentiments ! I cannot, my lovely creature, by heavens, I cannot Support your indifference. You need not fear it, my lord, interrupted I. Believe me, my heart is not^ So inSenSible to wrohgs, as to look with indifference on the perSon who could treat me as your lordship has done: No, sir, depend upon it, I shall ever retain a due SenSe of your exalted merit. He was going to reply, when a Servant entered to inform him the chaiSe was ready. He immediately arole, and taking my hand, would have led me to it. I struggled. Screamed for help, implored him in the most moving terms not to kill me with terror: I would die, I Said, a thouSand deaths rather than be again in his power : but ail my efforts were in vain, no one heard or regarded my cries, and I was conveyed to the carriage, which instantly djove off with incredible SwiftneSs. In this manner we
travelled
190	H I S T O R Y of
travelled for Several hours, without meeting a creature from whom I could implore assistance; for this I was determined to do, from the first perfon I Saw. I took care not to let his lordship See my design, lest he should endeavour to prevent it. My prayers at length were heard.
We had just past through a Small village, where I had in vain tryed to alarm the inhabitants with my cries, when I Saw a post-chaiSe coming towards us, attended by Several Servants on horSe-back. I was determined if possible, to make mySelf heard by Some of them. My lord Seemed to SuSpedt my design, and appeared irreSoiute on what to re-Solve. I Said not a word till within hearing, lest I should confirm his Suspicions, but no Sooner were they within the reach of my voice than, colledting all my force, I gave a violent Scream, and. in the most moving terms, implored
them
Mijs BEVILLE. i6i
them to help a poor distressed creature, who was forcibly conveyed from her friends, and whoSe ruin was unavoidable, unlefs reScued from the power of him who had thus cruelly uSed her. I continued my cries, in fpite of all his ef-fortsho prevent me. My voice reached them, they drove up, his lordship leaped from the chaiSe, as did my deliverers from theirs. But ah ! my dear Harriot,
, who can deScribe my astonishment, when I discovered them to be Sir JoSeph and his nephew, the amiable Beauchamp ? The Surprize was too much : my Spirits, which 'were before almost exhausted, now entirely forSook me, I had only power to call in a faultring voice on ( his name, and instantly fell SenSeleSs down in the chaiSe. Whether he heard me I knew not, nor can I tell you what passed during my Swoon. But imagine, if you can, what was my unSpeakable ! joy, when recovered from that inSenSi-\	■	bility.
192 The HISTORY of
bility, to find at my feet my no leSs delighted and astoniflied deliverer!
They had conveyed me back to the village I mentioned, not thinking it proper to determine on any thing till I was able to join in the conSultation. My first words were ail confusion and diforder: the terror in my looks gave the amiable Beauchamp infinite pain. He, with a SoftneSs, a gentleneSs no language can deScribe, endeavoured to remove my fears, affuring me I was no longer in any danger: he would preServe me at the hazzard of his life. Then, pressing my hand with tranSport to his lips, en-tteated me to be compost’d and depend on his protedion, who only wished to live that he might convince me how inexpressibly dear I was to his heart.
Can you, my dear Harriot, conceive my joy, or the excessive pleaSure I felt, on being delivered from my frightful Situation, and that too by the only man
on
Mlfs BEVILLE. 193
on earth to whom I wished to be obliged It was long before I could prevail on him to inform me of what had passed, during my Swoon, or how I came to be conveyed to that place. He hadi,So many pleasing. So many more interesting things to Say, that it was not possible for him to give any attention to the question I every moment ashed. At last, however, though not without a hundred interruptions, I learnt that he had wounded his lordship, who grew quite outragious, when he found him-Self likly to be robbed of the prize he ’ had obtained^ by Such unjustifiable means. On Seeing Mr. Beauchamp,she instantly drew his Sword, who was then obliged to follow his example in his own defence. At that moment he Saw me. Jud ge, my lovely Emilia, Said he, whether I w'as likely to be more cool than his furious lordship, after that animating light! Any one, in your Situation, had VoL. II.	K	a right
194 The HIST ORY oj
a right to my assistance ; what then must have been my emotions, when I found the cries which had alarmed me were uttered by my long-lost, my adored Emilia! We fought: my lord was {lightly wounded, and is by this tirne Some miles on his journey. Where he means to go, I know not, but I took particular care to have him properly attended.	, "
Till that moment, I had forgot— So great was my joy and SurpriSe—that 1 had alSo Seen Sir JoSeph. This thought gave a damp to my tranfportsr, and a thouSand tormenting fears again took possession of my heart. I hastily enquired of Mr. Beauchamp what was become of him, yet trembling to hear his anfwer to my question. He told me his uncle was then in the houSe, but had, in stepping too hastily from his chaiSe, Sprained his ancle, the pain of which was So violent, that he w^as
unable
IMifs BEVILLE. 19^
unable , to move without the utmost difficulty. Need I tell you, my charm-iAgji;,.EmiJja, ..continued he, that the greatest; mortification he receives from th.Q accident is, his not being able to atteittf.. his still adored angel Ah, who that once has loved the amiable Mils BevUle, can, ever hope or wish to regain his freedom ? Impossible ! Yet, on this hope alon^s 5 depends hty future peace and felicity. At that inoment, a Ser-I	vant, informed him Sir JoSeph desired
to fee him. He left me Harriot. Need I lay it was, with infinite regret, tho’ but for a few minutes ?
It was now I had time to refiedt on the amazing adventure I had jiist met with. Though I had great reaSon to be '	thankful for my deliverance from Lord
B—’s power, and was inexpressibly So, yet was it possible, my dear friend, not to be tormented with a thouSand apprehensions on Sir JoSeph’s account ? ,	K 2	I had
196 ne HISTORY of
I had just been informed of his horrid constancy: what then had I to hope ? Nay, had I not every thing to fear from his hated persecutions He w^ stiU a stranger to his nephew’s Sentiments, nor was it likely the knowledge of them would produce any very agreeable ef-feels. My refiedlions did not in the least contribute to restore my peace; on the contrary, when my deliverer!^, returned, he found me overwhelmed with melancholy and dejedlion. The dread of Seeing my family, to whom I was now to be conveyed (for was it possible to make, with any hopes of SucceSs,. any. other propoSal ?) gave me inexpressible uneasinefs. I was really in terrors at the thoughts of meeting them, after all that had happened, yet Saw no possibility of avoiding it.
|de informed me, Sir JoSeph was preparing to pay me, his reSpedls. Do not be alarmed. Said he, with infinite ten-
derneSs,
»
Mifs BEVILLE.' 197
derneSs, on observing my emotions, at
the mention of his justly dreaded name :
hope' with ’iiie, that he will be more
^'hhrOtiS than to perfevere in a design
which he Sees So extreamly diSagreea-✓
ble.'^'' Ah^'my lovely Erriilia, what but this hope could preServe my life ? PleM t^ith him to Save you from the co'mmaneiP-ii>f;ybur tOO’Obstinate father : uSe aliCyOuF^shfit perfuaSive eloquence, while witiishim on your journey, to convince hish you must be miserable, unkSs freed from his addresses. Can he resist ?-Is it immature he should not yield to Such gentle. Such moving entreaties ^— Yet, wdll not that diSplay of your inimitable graces more deeply wound that heart you mean to Set at liberty ^—I knov/ not what to adviSe, but, thank heaven, you are again restored to my longing fight! That heaven will, I trust, remove the obstacles that at preSent diS-tradt my heart. Tell me, my adored .
K 2	Emilia,
I
198 ne HISTORY of
Emilia, Say, will you never yield; your hand, however you may be pressed on the dreadful Subjedl ? I had. only lime . to give him my hand, accomp^^nied , a look that fully anfwercd his imppftaiit question. His uncle that moment entered the room.	.
It is not in my power to deScribe to you his ridiculous behaviojjr^j,,^Wji^ with the pain of his Sprained, ancle, and the joy of Seeing your pppr terrified friend, hiS| face expressed the most extraordinary emotions you can possibly conceive. He, kissed my hand witit amazing raptqre, and would,
Surnc, have thrown himSelf at ipy ifeet^ had he been able; but, thank heaven, he was not in a condition to be So ex-treamly gallant. Much was Said . of the unexpeded meeting, and as much on the cruelty olinyjUnpenetrable heart: all which you , may,, if you pleaSe, Sup-poSe, in whatever words you think most
Suitable
i
MIfs BEVILLE. 199
Suitable to the occasion. But for the accident I met with in quitting my chaiSe, Said he, casting a most wo-begone look at his wrapped-up leg; that vile Lord B— should not have eScaped my just" vengeance: his life should have ■ paid for the outrage he has been guilty of. But rny nephew has, in Some mea-Sure, punished his prelumption, nor do 1 Believe lie \vill again be in haste to incilr my diSpleaSure.—But to shorten as much as'possible this tedious story.
You may now, if you pleaSe, imagine me Seated by his fide in the chaiSe, and dite-ing \Vith all convenieiit, Speed to LdiKion; As we approached our part of the town, I was in the most painful agitations, but when we stopped at our door, I really drought 1 should have fainted : I could Scarce breathe, my heart bear, nor was it possible for me to stir without assistance. Fortunately for me, neither my father nor mother was at K 4.	home.
i
200	H I S T O R Y of
home. I was led into the houSe by my limping companion, who, after a thousand flourishing Speeches to me, and whilpering Something to my mothePs woman, who came to receive rsitf- he took his leave, returning to the chaife in violent pain. She Saw I was ill, 'and immediately got me Some drops. This gave me Some relief, and iLfquM-Spirits to alk her a few questions about my family, which she anfvvered with amazing volubility, and would have continued talking till now, had I given tier the encouragement she wished'. My affairs v/cre a Copious fubjedt, and rny voluntary return, as she no doubt thought it, puzzled her not a little.
O mifs, faid she, how pleaSed will my lady be with this change in your inclinations! You cannot think what a violent bustle and to do, your elopement made in this family: but your return will make every thing eafy, all that’s
paft	,
BEVILLE. 201
past will be forgot and forgiven. Poor Sir JoSeph 1 O dear me miSs, you know not what that good gentleman has Suffered, on your account! Indeed I never thought he would have Survived his .cruel .disappointment; but he stems now all happinels. I was, you may believe, mist^ astonished to See you return fo; unexpectedly with his honour, but since I See’i$. is your own'free will, I rejoice at my very heart, for- I See no other way to restore peace here' but by-your marriage. Mrs. Stanhope too— may fie ma’m you haven’t heard of her ladyship’s intended match—not, indeed, that I think, it will ever come to paSs, though it’s So much talked of. And why, cried I ’with too much emotion, do you think it will not? V/hy, miSs; I think the young gentleman’s heart is otherwise engaged,^^nay, I am pretty Sure of it. It is true, ,they have not yet ashed his opinion of their design;
K 5	but
r
2oj> ^L^^HIS T^RY gT
but I think he knows it, and rather fears than wishes to be more partictu iarly informed or consulted.
This gave me Some coniblation. 1 found my mother was not to Slip home, and being excessively fatigued both in mind and body, deterihiiiedhot to fee them that night. I wrote a hote to prepare them for the ’ linexpetsted interview^^'and to apologia* fof nbt pay-ing my reSpedls to them still the niorh-ing. This L ordered the maid to deliver the moment they came home, and then retired to my apartment. In vMn I endeavoured to rest, steep fled frbih tny eyes, in Spite of my fatigue, nor diel I cloSe them till near five in the morning.
I was up by eight, finding it impoffi-ble to rest, and Sat in agonies no^ to be conceived, waiting for the dreaded interview. I wished, yet trembled at the thoughts of a meeting. I would have given worlds to have had it over. I
endeavoured
M^BEVILLE. 203
endeavoured to imagine all they would fay, and prepared my anSwers in the best and most Satisfactory manner 1 possibly ^ould. I had not courage to go down without being Sent for. My breakfast was Sent up, and about an hour after: I was ordered to attend my father..
It was. impossible to obey immediately f,.. my terrors were So great I was obliged to. take Some hartshorn, and I I	thought I should have fainted, in Spite
of all the pains I had taken to prepare mySelf, I made Several attempts to walk, but for near half an hour found all my efforts in vain. At last, v/itli great dishculty, I reached his apart^ ment, but no Sooner did the Servant open-the door, than, endeavouring to run and throw mySelf at his feet, my strength failed me: I could only reach the first chair, and instantly fainted. When I recovered, 1 found him and my mother in deep conSultation ; they were talking K 6	with
- 204 HIS T O R Y ^
with great earnestneSs, nor could I doubt its being about your unhappy friend. Now followed a Scene I never shall, forget. Good heavens! what a rageHi'I am only amazed, vveakened^as I was with the apprehensions I had "’Suffered, •that I am now alive and able to give you this account.
My father had that morning r been wdth Sir Joftph, who was- not able to wait on him. There he learned the particulars of the whole affair; I mean of his meeting and delivering me from Lord B—; more he was ignorant of, as I had not taken the trouble to unform him either where I was going, or from whence his lordship had taken me. 1 now desired leave to inform my father of both. It was not without dish-culty he would Suffer me to Speak. My mother at last prevailed, and I gave him a very particular account of every thing that had happened Since I left him, as .	well
IrIifs SEVILLE. 205
well as my motives for So doing, but when. I begvn to beg he would no longer perSektute me on that account, he stop-ped^Tsc wittefury in his looks, telling me, I ought to think mySelf extreamly fortunate,,, that a man of Sir JoSeph’s rank and?fortune, would still condeScend to accept me for his wife, after the Scan-daious^rimprudence I had been guilty of, “and thi? diSgrace I had brought on all thofe who shad the misfortune to be related to me. Thank your stars, continued he,, that I do not from this moment-abandon you for ever; and be asisiired jhe reilbn I do not, is owing to the.ginterpoisition of your^ infatuated lover, who has implored me to forgive you, as he- alSo means to do.—Rejoice at his amazing condeScenSion, and prepare immediately to accept, with gratitude, his generous, his unmerited offer.
' Go, added he, with a look that made
I	me tremble, go; and when every thing
I
2o6 history
is ready you shall be Sent for. I could only anSvver with my tears, they fell, my dear Harriot, in great abundance, but fell in vain. I returned to ^imy apartment in a Situation which must have excited pity in any hearts but theirs,, who alone were able to give this com folation ; and they, alas! refuSed it.
Ah, my dear friend, must I then at last yield to their cruel commands, after ail the means 1 have vainly uSed to prevent their horrid purpoSe ^ Alas ! I fee no possibility of avoiding that dreadful fate.
Adieu. 1 leave you to write to my dear Lady Beverly. How shocked will she be at this melancholy change in my affairs ! The only conSolation I now experience, is from my tormentor’s confinement. My father did not coiide-Scend to inform me of it, fearing, 1 SuppoSe to give me pleaSure, but one of the Servants told me, the Surgeons
are
Mifs BEVILLE. 207
are of opinion the hurt he received may be attended with very dangerous conSequences, as .it was not properly m^aged when the accident happened, nor is it,' as he then believed, only a Sprain. Of his nephew, you may believe, I Aan hear nothing. Who, my dear Harriot,, in this houSe would dare to give me any intelligence of him ? Nay, indeed, they know not that I would de- , sire it, 'V r	^
Farewell, Compassionate your
' Emilia BevillS.
I	l"e t t e r lvi.
f	To the Same,
STILL miserable! still in the most unhappy Situation ! No hopes of relief ! every one determined to render my future life coippleatly wretched !
Ah,
f,	'
2oS r^^HISTORYY
Ah, my dear Harriot, but for the fortunate accident that still confines Sir JoSeph, I must before now have been his, in Spite of all my prayers and tears. Yes, my dear friend, they only wait his dreaded recovery, which, thank heaven, is not likly to be perfedted Soon: The pain arising from his ancle which is miSerably inflamed, has thrown him into a fever, and his impatience at this delay to his happineSs, as hens pieaSed to call it, adds considerably to his disorder. Ah, why am I obliged to rejoice at the, miSery of any of my fellow®,? creatures .^ Yet can I fail to be thankful for this delay ? Do you not forgiv;p me, Harriot Am I not pardonable, when it is considered how entirely my felicity depends on that event
I have not heard, nor can I nov/ hdpe to hear, one word from his (perhaps as anxicu%) nephew. Who nqw will be So much my friend as to take the charge
of
Af/r B E V I L L E. 209
of a letter from him ? How much do I regret leaving Jenny in the country ! She novr mSight have been of Service to me. I dare not trust anv ether Servant, lest^she should betray me to my father. Ah'what then would I do ? — I know not, my d^ar Harriot, I am half diS-traded with my fears. I would give . worlds for a line from him. He is continually with his uncle: he might in ■ form me of a thouSand things wliich I die with impatience to learn. Every thing is done here with the greatest Secrecy, I am never conSultetl,' Scarce indeed Spoken to once in the day. Ah, Harriot, a letter !—’Tis abiblutely from himSelf!—O my foreboding, my beat'
I	ing heart!—I have Scarce Spirits to read
' the dear contents. It was brought me 1 this moment by one of the maids, who delivered it with an air of great Secrecy. Adieu: ymu shall know WTiat news it brings before I finish this.
It
210 72^ H ISTORY jT
It is past, my dear friend! All my hopes are vanished, and I am now indeed compleatly wretched ! iSobd hea-. vens ! what a letter !—^Yet, wTPe hot my hopes entirely vanished before ?—-Why then this new affiiDion ?■—Alas 1 know not vrhy.—Too Sure, I had fondly ^ flattered mySelf, Providence \vo9d yet, by Some-sinforefeen me^ns?'deliver me from cleshairS'^but that pleasing, that delusive liope is gone! Yes, my dear friend, gone for ever ! and I have only to wait my doom wdth patient resignation.-—Alas • -Harriot, the amiable Beauchamp is lost in deSpair!—But hear the particulars.
Finding ail my endeavours to change his uncle’s purpofe had been fruitleSs, and that my marriage was at all events to be concluded immediately on his recovery, he determined to reveal the long-concealed Sentiments of his heart,
in
M^BEVILLE. 211
I in hopes tl\at might prevail, as all other I means had been ineffedlual. — At the worst he could but be wTetched.
I	■ f
After waiting Some time for a favourable moment, be desired to be left alone with his^^ uncle, and immediately acquainted him with the whole progreSs of his Jove, declaring his future happi-neSs depemde<S wholly on the-anSwer he was ‘ going; to^t^ceive, and apologizing for having Sq , Jong concealed from his '	knowledge the important Secret.—Need
I tell you what foliow'ed ?—Alas! my I	dear friend, his rage was inconceiveable,
1	He Jristantly forbid him his houSe,
charging him never, oti any pretence, to come again into his preSence. He had now done with him and his: he from i that hour renounced him, nor would ever See, him ipore,. Ad the dreadfully ^	diSappointedcj.HarryjCqukl urge in his
defence Signified nothing, he would not hear him, nor listen to any thing he
could
212 TA- HISTORY^
could Say. His rage was more violent
than you can imagine or any language
deScribe. ' Nbiv tell me, ‘ tny dear Har-
not, am I not in a situation that highly
merits your pity and compassion.^-—
Alas I shall not live to make the desired
Sacrifice: my death will deliver me - ' .8' from that- riiore dreadful misfortune.
Yes, my •dear'friend, S feel I cannot
long Support this painful ccnfiiA, my
heart will biT'A, and at once rcleaSe
me from this world of miSery.—-Yet,
can I then leave the amiable Harry ?
Leave him a prey to grief and affiidSion }
—Ah, I cannot Support that tormenting
■	^ thought!
Pity me Harriot, pity me, for I am undone.—Adieu.
Emilia Seville.
P. S. A whilpering message delivered to my father at dinner, since I wrote the above letter, has given me great uneafi-
neSs.
i	Mij5 BEVILLE. 213
neSs. By his looks, and the haste he made to leave us, even before the cloth was taken away, I am perSuaded Something of importance is in agitation.— i What it can be heaven only knows.
1 forgot to tell you I have not yet Seen. Caroline, she has been Some days, and still is, at WindSor, with her uncle Stanhope, bur is expeded next week.
Adieu.
.
LETTER LVil.
«
'	LO S A M E.
I	,‘*fjii3f*’-
Rejoice, my amiable Harriot, rejoice with your no longer diSconSo-late, but happy friend! Do not be too much Surprised at this unuSual Salutation; it is indeed a very unuSual one with me, but Providence at length takes pity on your Emilia: her miSery is at an
end,
i
214	HISTORY cf
end, and nothing appears but prolpedls of the most perfedt felicity. Yes, my dear Harriot, thank heaven my days- of afflidion are past and gone, I hope, for ever. I am now more at a loSs for words to expreSs my joy, than ever I w^as to deScribe my grief; but no wonder, I have till now been but little accustom-ed to w'rite on siich deliglitfiil Subjeds. .
My father—yes, my dear friend—:my father forgives, and is reconciled to liis delighted daughter. My mother too, forgets my many faults, and with great goodneSs shares in my unSpeakable joy. My Caroline too—but let me not antici-pateThe pleafureyou will receive from the new^s I am going to write you, if my em.otions do not prevent my very obliging intention.—Yet let me just inform you, to compleat the rapture you are, I am perfuaded, already in, that the amiable, the transported Harry, has this moment left me, on my telling him
I v/as
:	BEVILLE. 215
I was going to WTste to my Harriot.— Whether are you more amazed or de-, lighted ^
I	You may remember I told you in my
last, of a meffage which was delivered in a whiSper to my father while at dinner. Yet, perhaps, you have forgot that circumstance, since, I blushing own, it is almost an age since you received the letter in which the Said whiiper was mentioned ; but forgive me: ah you know j not the thouSand things that have happened to prevent my uSual punctuality!
1 He left us, as' 1 told you, immediately after dinner, nor did I fee either mamma or him again till the next morning at breakfalt. When I entered they were ^ deeply engaged in conversation : there was a Something in their looks and manner, that Spoke great concern and anxie- ' ty. I would have given the univerSe could I have read their thoughts. In I vain r endeavoured to unravel the per-
plex‘og
2i6	HISTORY of
plexing mystery, not one word was uttered, in my hearing, that could give me the least information. Finding my preSence only prevented the continuation of their diScourSe, I retired the moment I had done, nor was desired to keep my Seat.
Every moment now appeared an age till dinner, as I then hoped they w'culd be more communicative, not doubting but it was my affairs that were under ’ consideration. My then anxiety is not to be expressed. The hour for dining came at last, but no explanation followed ; all was Silence; but very mysterious looks in both. 1 was again obliged to withdraw in the most tormenting SuS-pence, nor was I delivered from that painful Situation for Several tedious days. At last, when I was really almost'dead with apprehensions, I was ordered to attend my father in his dressing-room ; my mother, the Servant informed me,
was
BEVILLE. 217	•
was alSo there. With trembling steps I obeyed the command, and had very I ' near, as I had once done before, on a like occasion, fainted, as I approached the door: by the assistance of my Salts, however, this delay was prevented, and I, in obedience to orders, took my Seat.
How very little. Said my father, with a look more mild than any he had affum-i	ed for many months, do you deServe
1	the generous treatment you have ever
met with, from the man to whom you have given So many repeated cauSes of offence ! Were 1 to be governed by rriy just reSentment, I should certainly do every thing in my power to prevent what he intends, notwithstanding your treatment of him. It is by him, who still retains a friendSnip for you, that I am prevailed upon to forget what is I	past. Yes, continued he. Sir JoSeph,
I	whoSe generous offers you have So per-
!	verily, So imprudently rejeffed, is dy-
;	VoL. II._	L	ing.
2i8 r^^>HrSTORY/
irig. Whether your obstinate, your very undutiful behaviour, is in any meaSure the cauSe, I will not determine, as I • have, at his desire, promiSed no longer to upbraid or treat you with that Severity you So justly deServe. Yes, Emilia, his life is now in imminent danger : there are but Small hopes of his recovery. As a proof of that passion he has So long' honoured you with, he means to leave you a preSent which ought to make you blush for your ingratitude. He has desired I will permit you to pay him a visit; I have promiSed to oblige him, unleSs you, with your uSual per-' verSneSs, refuSe to obey my orders. If you are diSpoSed for once to oblige both him and me, prepare to accompany your mother in half an hour; by that time I shall be ready to attend you.
I will be silent, my dear friend, sitice it is impossible to give you any idea of my emotions at that moment. Never,
Sure,
MiJ} BEVILLE. 219
Sure, was situation more 'truly perplexing ! I durst not expreSs the excessive joy I felt at the hopes of being freed from Sir JoSeph’s perfecution, as that desirable blessing was to be obtained by ' Such unfortunate means. i found it impossible to make any reply, but immediately left the room, to prepare, as ' I was ordered, for the mournful visit. My thoughts were all confusion, I Scarce knew either what I did or Said. To rejoice, shocked even mySelf; yet, was it possible to avoid feeling a most unfeigned pleaSure V
I was called for before my fpirits were half compoSed, and arrived at his houSe in much leSs time than I thought it possible to do.
When the coach stopped, my heart began to beat with the most violent palpitations : my emotions were ex-treamly painful, nor was I able, for Some moments, t;o bear the dreaded in^-L 2	, terview
220 TA HISTORY g/'
ter vie vv : at last, however, I thought mySelf tolerably prepared, and offered to follow my mother, which I accordingly did. But, good heavens ! my dear creature, how v/as I firocked, when I beheld the condition to which the poor dying Sir JoSeph was reduced ! Tears instantly filled my eyes, and all the 'rcruel treatment I had received on his account, was at that mom,ent forgot. He Saw my emotions, and expressed, in faint and broken accents, the joy my pity gave him.
I am dying, my lovely Emilia, Said he, making an effort to' take my hand, which I gave him without rcludlance : yes, my cruel, my still adored Emilia, I am dying: I shall no more mrment you with an unfortunate pashon, you' will in a few hours, perhaps, be fre^d from that mortification which has al-ready given you So much trouble. Can you forgive, as well as pity the man who
has
j	mjs B E VI LL E. 221
has been the cauSe of So much uneaSi-neSs } Can you forget the pains I have unhappily occasioned ? I could not an-Swer, my tears would not Suffer me to S]5eak, but they fully expressed my Sorrow. He was Satisfied, and pressing my hand to his lips, Said, he should now die content. Then turning to my father, begged he would do him the favour to step into the next room and fetch ‘	the preSent he meant to leave me as a
testimony of his love, which he implored me to accept, and value for his Sake, if not for its own. I assured him I should ever retain a most grateful remembrance of his generous designs in my favour without any Such memorial, but I would, i	nevertheless, accept with pleaSure, any
he thought proper to offer, and for ever j	preistrve and highly esteem it on hi$
accbimt. He was going to exp refs his Satisfadtion, but was prevented by the return of my father.—But ah, Harriot,
'' L 3	who
•222	T/2^ HI STORY <f
who can deScribe my astonishment, or Sun- -priSe, when 1 Saw him followed by Mr. Beauchamp It is utterly impossible: my looks only could testify my unSpeak-able amazement. Every one, Seemed to enjoy my perplexity. At last, Sir Joleph taking his hand. This,, Said he> is the preSent I mean to leave you, my charm-' ing Emilia. Will you, as you promiSed, preServe and valiie it for my fake} or do you think it will merit your esteerp on its own ? I was So extreamly affedled with Sir JoSeph’s situation, and the noble proof he then gave of his gerje.-rous Sentiments, that my heart was not able to bear the exccffive SurpriSe, without the most violent emotions. My mother Sav/ me ready to faint and immediately led me to a chair.
Good heavens, cried I in a faultring voice, what do I See } Is k possible that my eyes do not deceive me ? Or is it indeed Mr. Beauchamp I I had power-
ft*
I	Mifs BEVILLET 223
for no rnore. He was in a moment at.-I	my feet, and pressing my trembling hand
I	with transport to his lips. Yes, my
lovely, my adored Emilia, it is indeed your delighted Harry, that thus kneeling implores you to confirm the promiSe you have just made. Say, my lovely creature, will you for ever preServe and highly value it? This is a felicity I dare not hope for on my own account, but you have assured Sir JoSeph you will ;	ever esteem it for his.
Ah, my dear Harriot, was it likely I '	should recall the promiSe I had made,,
f	on Seeing a preSent So invaluable ? Can
''	yow imagine what- w^ere my emotions at
[	that delightful moment? — Impossible,'
S	my dear friend.—Suffer me thentopaSs
f ' over in Silence a Scene no language can i	deScribe.
p	He now led me to his uncle, who,
joining our hands. Said, May you, my charming Emilia, be as happy as you L 4	justly
•’fe.
* 224 H I S T O R Y 'of .
justly deServe to be, or my fondest wishes can desire, and you will then enjoy uninterrupted felicity. The physicians now '	^
thought it proper he should rest, as they feared a longer visit might be too much for his then weak condition. We took our leave, my father promising to See him again that night.
Are you not impatient, my dear Har- . riot, to know by what means this amazing revolution was brought about ? You cannot be more So than I was, nor did I learn the particulars till after our rectum home. I then begged mamma would inform me of what had So highly raiSed my curiosity, and wshich I will now, in as few words as possible, repeat to you.
I told you, I believe. Some time ago, that Harry had revealed the So long-concealed Secret to his uncle, and of the dreadful rage which followed that declaration. They parted in high diS-
pleaSure,
,	Mifs BEVILLT. 225
pleaSure, never to meet again. Judge then what must have been my astonifn-; ment to See him enter a place where I was perSuaded he would never more be Seen : for no one had given me the most distant hint of what had pash since I received his diSpairing epistle. Fie made Several attempts to be again admitted, but entirely without SucceSs. He then wrote—ah, Harriot, who ever wrote like himThe letter met with a more favourable reception than its author. Perhaps>» his uncle’s encreasing illneSs might assist in conquering the re-Sen tment he at first expressed, on being informed he had So powerful a rival.— However that might be, it is certain he from that time began to ressedt Serioussy on the passion he had So long entertained, and to See it in its true light, and the injustice he did his nephew, while condemning him for cherishing a passion he had himSelf So long harboured in his F	L 5	own
226 Lhe HISTORY^
owfi boSom. He Saw how infinitely rhoro excuSable it was in his nephew than ic could be in one of his age, and he might now alSo add infirmity. TheSe fessedions made a deep impression : the more he considered his own Situation, and the univerSally acknowledged merit of his late favoured Harry, the more-he was perSuaded he ought, in order to ad nobly, not only to pardon his involuntary crime in becoming his rival, but alSo endeavour to render him happy, since it was sh wholly in his power. It was in conSequence of this extraordinary change in his Sentiments, that my father received the important whiSper, So often mentioned. You will, therefore, no longer be SurpriSed at their altered looks when X joined them next morning at breakfast. Sir JoSeph, who had'before informed my father of what had past between his nephew and himSelf, and of his Severe determination, now
'gav-^
M^BEVILLE. 227'
gave him his letter, telling him the effedls it had produced, and desiring his opinion and advice. What they were I do not exadly know, but imagine, from what followed, they Served to Settle the yet wavering opinion of Sir JoSeph. This affair, however, was Several days in agitation before he could determine to give up his So long-cherish-f	ed hopes; but, as his fever encreaSed,
his passion for the pomps and vanities of this wicked world became leSs violent, and the desire he had to repair the wrongs he was going to do his deServing nephew, every moment grew more powerful. At length, friendship and affedtion gained a compleat vidlory over love.—Harry was immediately Sent fof.—I will not attempt to deScribe his emotions on the occasion, but leave that part of his history for him to relate when he has the happineSs of Seeing you. It was then agreed to SurpriSe me L 6	_	in
228 SI IS T O R Y of
in the manner I have related. Heaven only knows how fully their purpofe was anSwered, for never was mortal creature half So much astonished as was your Emilia Beville ! Never, my dear, never shall I forget- the amazing Scene !
No Sooner had he Settled this important affair, than his mind was So much relieved that the physicians declared his fever was not near So violent as it had been for Some days past; and, to our unSpeakable joy, affured us they no longer deSpaired of his life. This, my dear STarriot, is still their opinion. Sir i JoSeph’s recovery is now one of the blessings I most ardently pray for: I •have only this to wish for on earth, nor do I delpair of having my petitions in his favour granted. His grateful nephew, as I told you, has just been here, and assures me the favourable fymp-toms still continue. Need I tell you it was this assurance which gave me Spirits to write So long a letter ? Caroline
I	Mifs BEVILLE. 239
Caroline returned yesterday, and wa?^ you may believe, not a little Surprized at the change -that had happened during her abSence. If she is thereby in any meaSure disappointed," she bears it with an admirable grace, nor does any one, i	you may believe, take notice of the
once intended alliance. It is particular-ly happy for both that they were neither "	of them ever conSulted in form aboufi
that affair : had that been the caSe, their preSent Situation .would have been rather disagreeable, but as it is she expresses great joy at my happy proSpedts.
1	Adieu, my dear Harriot, I have now,
I	I think, tolerably fulfilled my promiSe.
I will not at this time make any reflections on the history I Send, as I am im-^	' patient to have you informed of my un-
!	expedted good fortune. Once more
'	adieu.—Believe me, as uSual,
Your,
Emilia Beville.
L E T-
230 The HI BTORY of /
letter' LVIIL To the Same.
Thank heaven, my dear Harriot, Sir JoScph’s fever has entirely left him, and nothing now remains of his late indisposition but a weakneSs, which will for Some time confine him to his’ apartment. Our joy at this happy change is inexpressible. I was highly diverted with your congratulatory epistle, particularly your caution in regard to delays, Harry too is continually reminding me of that prudent maxim, and adds a thouSand other reaSons in order to prevail on me no longer to continue a temptation in his uncle’s way. ' Says,. I ought in return for the obligations he has conferred on me, to do every thing in my power to prevent his Suffering a rehipSe; and what w'ay So cffedtual as at once to deprive him of every hope ?
—A most
'r * .	"r--.	, .
Mifs B E VIL L E. 2.31
—A moist pleasing remedy, it muSc be confessed.—However, I See no kifid of danger, his love is now converted to a more noble passion. Yes, my dear, to ipy inexpressible Satisfaftion, Sir JoSeph entertains for me nov/ only Sentiments of friendship and esteem. He has Seen, and is entirely reconciled to Mr. Beauchamp and his lady. Our family too, have been introduced to them. What were the good lady’s emotions when Sir JoSeph presented me to her (for-* the interview was at his houSe) as her future daughter. I’ll leave you, Harriot, to judge. She did me the honour, however, to receive me with great politeneSs, and consequently no notice was takeii of • her confusion, though I preSume every one preSent could have Smiled without much difficulty, at the remembrance of her having nndeSignedly taken So much pains to preServe a wife for her Son. She now treats me with great asteclion,
and
i-
232 HISTORY^
and Seems highly pleaSed at the intended alliance—for an alliance it must be, they tell mie, in Spite of all I can Say to the contrary. Sir JoSeph is determined : how then can I diSobey, after his amazing civilities? It woiild be ungrateful beyond meaSure, and one would not deliberately be guilty of that dreadful crime. We may indeed differ about the time, perhaps, as he is in violent haste to compleat, as he is pleaSed' to expreSs it, his nephew’s felicity. But what is still more perplexing, that very, nephew is, if possible, a thouSand times more impatient than his hurrying uncle. I own 1 am a good deal at a loSs in what manner to resist their repeated importunities. Sir Joleph’s remaining indisposition is at preSent my only plea, what will be my next heaven kno\ys. Do, Harriot, if yoii can think of any one you believe will anSwer my pur-poSe, Send it me immediately, or I Shall
be
yhf^x BEVILLE. 233
be obliged, in Spite	of	my	amazing	re-
,	luDance, to comply	with	their	unreaSo-
‘	nable demands.
;	Ah, Harriot, I hear his voice !—Can
you forgive me for thus abruptly tak-ing my leave ?—But no, I will not yet bid you adieu : I will fee him first;, perhaps his visit may afford me Subjedt for a few more lines.—He is on the stairs.—• Coming this moment.—Impatient crea;-[	ture ! —Adieu.
. ####### # #
!|	But this mom.ent gone. So do not
T	blame me, my dear Harriot, if I Send
this epistle, short as it is. I told him j	it lay half' finished, and that I must
positively Send it this night — What I	could I do more ?—-Yet he_Smiled, Har-
riot, at my air of importance, nor offered to 'ffir, though I gave him ail S	theSe hints that his company was then
disagreeable.—Vfas it not rather rude, do you think ? — It certainly was. —
Yet,
234	T/3^ HISTORY n/
Yet, So thoughtleSs was I, I never made that refiecstion till he was gone.. Adieu, my dear friend, I have not a moment to lofe, as the Servant waits to carry it to the posh
Emilia Seville,
LETTER ,LIX.
To the Same.
From Mrs. Stan hops:
IT ERE I am, Harriot, like an ob©* i dient and good-natured creature, as I ever was, with full purpoSe to. give you a true and particular accourit of your friend’s wedding. Yes, my dear, her days of freedom are all at^n end: no more adventures to be hoped for now. Simple foul ! little does she at this time SuSpedt the folly she has been guilty of. Thank my stars. Shave
nothing
Mifs SEVILLE. 235
notliing to refledl on, I did my duty-:
I laid the fear of matrimony before heir eyes, in its true colours, but Sue vras blind, and deaf ro all my reaSoning.
’	Obstinate—willfully obstinate, my dear,
So she may blame herSelf for what may follow. To Say truth’, the temptation v/as rather powerful, and this is all that can be Said in her defence.—You never Saw her help-mate, did you, Harriot ?—It is full as well as it is, and might have been better for a friend of yours, had Jhe never Seen him neither. But no more of tliat, he is now out of ^	the question—quite a lost creature--^
and So fond 1 Lord help them!—Bu> no matter—a fev; months hence' and we shall See v/hat it will all come to. 1,
, ‘ you know, may Speak on the Subjedb,
I have learned a little wiSdom by ex^, periencc. And So as I was Saying, your ' friend Emilia is absolutely converted into a wife. Elappy transformation! if one
eould, ,
236	HISTORY of
could but continue to think So for any. length of time. Must I be very particular, Harriot, or -will you charitably Spare me on a Subjeft which has its mortificationsNo, you cry, by no means, not one -word; I insist il^on. your being Scrupuloufly minute. 1 will " however Spare your wife-like refiedlions. on tlie joyous Subjedt, and assure you, if you continue to embellish your nara-tive with thoSe impertinent remarks, I. ^ shall put you in remembrance of a cer^ tain fable particularly applicable to the. occasion.—O very well, my ssy friend—• but take care, my dear, that 1 do not in revenge for that pretty hint, at once put an end, not only to my refiedlions,. but epistle alSo.
Well then. —^Sir JoSeph, as if conscious he had not many months to ssourish in this wicked world—and, entre nous., I am fully perSuaded he has not:—Sensible of this comfortable truth, I Say, he
•
' Mifs B E V ILL E. 237
was, if possible, more impatient than his-— intolerably handSome — nephew, to have this silly affair concluded. Your friend, you may fuppoSe, gave herSelf all the airs and graces uSually pradtiSed on theSe ridiculous occasions, and they were, by us wiSe-ones, looked upon in a true light : but Harry, truly, was sighing, dying, expiring, at the dear creature’s cruelty.—Terrified to death,
I	no doubt, lest site should, after all the
trouble she had cost him, not take him at last.—Silly Soul!—But for me, his happy day, as he calls it, would never \ I believe have been named. I however took upon me to command, as I certainly had a right to do, on a thouSand accounts : —and So, Harriot, last Mon-i	day, every one being arrayed in their
i	holiday Suits, we led the trembling dam-
Sel to church, where the ceremony tvas performed with all becoming- gravity, and she returned home, in her own ori-
nioii
'v,
238 HISTORY ^ ^
nion — and perhaps too in mine <— the liappiest bride in the univerSe. From that hour we have had Such an intolerable hurry, and confusion, with balls, entertainments, and a thouSand other ridiculous marks of joy and gladneSs, that my Sober, Sedate head is more than Half difcradled. * You, Harriot, know I never had a' turn for thoSe hurrying amuieinents—quite a grave, staid per-Son,—And all this, truly, for a wedding ! I made no Such wonderful bustle v/hen I played the fool. It is true, I had not quite So many adviSers or diredlors : that makes Some Small difference, for to do Emilia,justice, I believe she would gladly have Spared them all this trouble ; but theSe old Jouls love to do every thing in full parade. Of what conSe-<iuence, you know, are fine cloaths, fine jewels, fine equipage, &c. &c. unleSs properly displayed, to raiSe the Spirit of envy in one’s friends and neighbours ?
To
^BE VILLE. 237
To remonstrate was in vain : Sir JoSepl\ took upon him to be master of the ceremonies. No denying that conSolation, since he could not be master of the bride. He was obstinate, as old men evd’r are. There was no Saying a word against it, nor, to Say trutli, did our lady mother expreSs any violent difiikt* to his gaudy Schemes—more than my-Self—you vvould have added, if I hadr not.
Shall 1 deScribe Harry’s figure, or leave that taste to your imagination ?—
Ah, Harriot, bright as your Said imagination may be, believe me, child, you I	will fall infinitely short of the divine
original. Heavens, my dear, what a I*	creature 1 Such eyes ! Such hair ! teeth !
!	perSon ! air ! grace !—But I forget, he
is now a poor stupid hushand.—In Spite :	of this, Harriot, let me own there’s no
end to his perfeblions.—A bad taste in beauty, indeed —but that we v/ill endeavour ''
^	1	'
240 Lbe HISTORY of
vour to forget—a perfecst being we are not to cxpedl. But you forbid my reflections.
Well, Harriot, are you Satisfied with this account ? Have I fully gratified your curiosity ? If not, you must have been blessed with an immoderate share of it.
‘ I vow I had almost diSpatched my epistle without telling you what is, in'* tc\y opinion, the most agreeable piece of news it will contain. Prepare, my dear, to receive at least half a hundred visiters.^—Do not be alarmed, we are to be with you only a Single night.—Sir JoSeph is ordered by his physicians to repair immediately to the country, in hopes ' thereby to repair his decaying frame, and to prevent his pining in Solitude.
It is agreed by the elders of the two families, that we are all to accompany his knightSnip to his mansion at H—, which they tell me is one of the finest places in England. There we are to
Spend
Mifs BEVILLE. 241 •
Spend the rest of the Summer. Whether Lshall not be apt to think it a yawning Party ?—I have not yet informed them, but to you, my dear, I may without deremony hint a thought of that kind.
Emilia orders me to tell you, you must immediately begin to pack your wardrobe, that you . may be ready at a minute’s warning to join our cavalcade.
We shall, as I told you, Spend one day and night with your lady mother, and . then proceed on our journey. This is-our plan: I hope you have no objedtions to the part you are to perform.^—but: no fear of your refusing—I am much deceived if Harry does not prove a-Susheient inducement.
Adieu, my dear girl, you owe me at least a thouSand thanks for this ao;reea-, ble epistle, which 1 shall expedl to receive when vre meet. If I was not abundantly tired, I would Ndl you hov/ very happy that expectation makes me> -VoL. II,	M	but.- ■
242 H I S T O R Y
but will reServe it for part of our conversation when that event takes place, . as well as the multitude of civ^l things I was ordered to ' Say from every one of this Society. Once more adieu.
Yours sincerely, ‘
Caroline Stanhope.
.'•A	'4.
FINIS,
■ i - -
■ V	*
II .	U. of PS
V	.	%
:	'*v	. -c-	■	•.	■ -
^ ^ . \ ' ■ : ^
.	,	^-	.	.^5
■‘ ■'•	■ " ■'	'	^ ■■'’'r-N-C ■ S'
i	.	*	-
i”-	N -	' ■	. '	,
, .	“S
Sl '	1
‘	S
-.' • ■ ■ .■ ■ !
■- '	■■ l<
-A	if ‘
v: Z-^
* . - - -i
i .
V ■ ■
I '
it'	‘s^
1|.	.-	jflSi
I /A^yj/y^^
1: '.^N.DCIIU tl^^
/ if■ ■ f 'l ~ iTrrrTipagi^Mj^ji^^ggBi i jHJ!!iLlL-%i-:==.-^-:»t?.ij'^*.-—w—. ■.~~ ,
S:	■	! I
; •	i	I
Vi	■	"	■	■ i -SI
p	i'	^
]■	:ll
!'	1f
I ■	■ I
