 
a? -7 
'A 


P 
\ 



‘V 
Tv 

m'‘ 
1 


BLANDFORD RACES. 
VOLUME I. 

II 

R V ' j /■ ‘, ■'; 
* ■* ft 
^ A ^ a. r k. 
► ^, »., i Ik'i 0 AI.. 
alkievi 

i'f?’' 
i 
BLANDFORD RACES 
A NOVEL. 
IN TWO VOLUMES. 
** The Fathers have eaten sour Grapes, and the ** children’s Teeth are seton Edge.” 
Ezekiel. 
The Ways of Heaven are dark and intricate.” 
A D n I s o N. 
LONDON 
Printed for J. B E W, in pater nofter Row M.DCC.LXXXI1. 
: i CL 
. I • '.i ^. U 
,. •. S i *. ' 0. J tt 
.1 A. O d 

.y: ’o; i : tt •/'i/ji II, 
.?1>: i ’a.?/: 
CO NTENTS 
T O 
VOLUME I. 
LETTER!. 
Pase 
R, Temple to Sir, Edward lascelles- -- -- - ^ -- -- - 
E T T R IL ' :,, 
Sir Edwaist Lafcdles to Mr. Temple 4 
ft L E T' 
CONTENTS. 
LETTER III 
Page 
Mr. Temple to Sir Edward lascelles- -- -- - -- -- -- - 
LETTER IV 
Sir Edward lascelles to Henry lyt tleton, esq. -- -- -- -- - 11 
LETTER V 
Sir Edward lascelles, to Henry lyt tleton, esq. -- -- — 17 
LETTER VI 
Sir Edward lascelles in continuation 35 With a letter enclosed from Lady lascelles to miss Bromley — ■ 36 
L E T 
CONTENTS. 
LETTER VII 
Sir Edward, Lafcellee to Will. Temple, Esq- -- -- -- -- -- -- 

6o 
LETTER Vm. 
Sir Edward Lafcelles to Henry lyt tleton, Esq- -- -- -- -- — 
IX 
Sir Edward Lafcelles to Henry lyttle tonne, Esq- -- -- - 64 
LETTER X 
Sir Edward Lafcelles to Henry Lyt'cle 
tonne, Esq- 
-- 
LET 
CONTENTS. 
LETTER XI 
Mils Farnborough to mlss Gore 
Page 
75 
LETTER XIL From ditto to ditto — - — — » 83 
LETTER XIII 
Sir Edward Lafcellcs to Henry lyttlc tonne, esq. — — — 85 
LETTER XIV 
Sir Edward Lafcelles, in continuation 

97 
LETTER XV 
Sir Pidward Lafcellcs to Henry lyt tleton, esq. — • — — 11 o 
L E T 
CONTENTS. 
Pag 
LETTER XXX to miss Claveriiig 
LETTER XXXI 
Emily to Mils Clavering — — 138 
LETTER XXXII 
Mrs. Boodi to Emily ... — 144 
LETTER XXXIII 
Sir Edward Lafcelles to Henry lyttle tonne, Esq— — ■ — — -- - 
LETTER XXXIV 
Sir Edward Lafcelles to Henry i^yttle 
tonne, Esq- -- -- -- — -<. 
ft 3 L E 
CONTENTS. 
Page 
BETTER XXXV 
Emily to miss Ciavetiitg 
ENCLOSURE T. 
To miss Emily Farnborough — 177 
I N C X O S U R E II 
To Mrs. Farnborough 

LETTER XXXVI 
miss Farnborough to Miss Gore — 185 
LETTER XXXVIL. 
Sir Edward Lafcelles to v/illiam Temple, Esq— — — — 
L E 
CONTENTS. 
Page 
LETTER XXXVIII 
miss Clavering to Emily. — - — 209 
LETTER XXXIX 
Sir Edward Lafcelles to William Temple, Esq— — — — 
It 


» > V. 
fa,, 
?3iae>.. >♦ 
rri; : • L Vf 




'■■'■■-. '■ a 
Wr‘, ’ ' 
i: if 

BLANFORD RACES. 
LETTER 
I. 
Mr. TEMPLE 
Sir EDWARD LASCELLES. 
MY DEAR FRIEND, 
"Y” oli have osten told me I have done more for you than any man besides : — I have now done Sor you what I believe no man ever did for another — I have fallen in love for you. First recover that’’ — absolutely be vol. I, B come 
a LETTER I. 
come deeply enamoured of the fairest form, and most perfect mind — and all for you! — Do not you feel your heart expand with grateful Sentiments towards me for the very uncommon obligations I have conferred upon you? — Yes! Surely you do — You, who have with So much warmth returned me thanks — and not by words alone — for trifles compared with this — I expect at least you will build temples to gratitude. But, southeast rioufly, if you, through my means, obtain the hand of my divinity, the pleasure of Seeing you happy wdll be my reward. 
You are all impatience I doubt not, to come at the name of the charmer; and wsill shim your eye over the paper till you come at it — it is miss farn borough, then, I wish to call yours; and if you see her with my eyes — (I 
have 
LETTER I. 3 
have no doubt of her Seeing you with mine) why, the work may be Soon accomplished. I have not overlooked one circumstance in your destined bride — She is of a good Samily, and will have a large fortune: — - The snore essential parts I have mentioned besore — and shall think you very unlover like, if you are constrained to turn back to discover my meaning — I hope likewise I have wtitten enough to excite 5’0ur curiosity — at least, at your age I am certain I should have felt a Sufficient portion to make me inquisitive to know more — Adieu I. my amiable pupil! 
B 2 
LETTER 
( 4). 
LETTER II 
Sir EDW. LASCELLES 
T O 
WILLIAM TEMPLE, Esq. 
Y, my good friend, you outdo Don Quixotte all to nothing. — Excite my curiosity! — I am ready to take wing this instant did I but know where to perch — 1 am afraid instindl will not guide me to the olive branch — or even to the Sedlion of the globe where my charmer dwells. This omission, however, proves incontestably the extent of your passion— — mere methodical lover would have been intelligible — but reason and love are not competent at all times — I, who at present have all my senses under command, am Sufficiently myself to attend to Such trifling circumstances; 
LETTER II 5 
ces — trifling I mean in the lover’s eye, as probability points out — Have you Sounded the shore? — Are there no rocks or quicksands? — What are her perfections?? — does fly live ^ — Is she disengagcd } — How am I to be introduced to her? — Will you insiire me success — these and a thousand other questions I want to put to you. 
I am as well disposed towards matrimony as any young man in the world — And if my enchanting miss Farnborough — (It is not Flamborough I hope, as the Sound of that name always reminds me of the farmer’s daughters in the Vicar of Wakefield, with their rosy top knots) If my enchanting miss Farnborough, as I was Saying, is Such a paragon — and my worship should answer the description you have certainly made of your pu b 3 pil. 
6 L [E T T E R II 
pil, we have nothing to do but take 
hands, and foot it away. 
Surely I enter into your Scheme with Spirit — I hope you will not complain of my coldness — judge 
then how impatient I shall be till I have an answer to all my queries — and I beseech you to relieve me as early as possible from my state of anxiety. 
I shall fancy every pretty woman I See is the divinity at wdiose shrine you have bowed as my proxy — And, while my heart is in this stuttering condition. Some one may Snap it up — hasten therefore to me the interesting particulars which So immediately concern the Suture happiness — (for, being your choice, misery is out of the question) of your ever faithful friend. 
E. L 
LETTER 
LETTER III 
LETTER 
in. 
Mr. T E M P L E 
T O 
Sir EDWARD LASCELLES. 
Certainly deserve your reprehension Sor the impersedt account I gave you of the important business in ray last — but I flattered myself that you would, wshen you had taken wing, perch at my house, — and then, in half an hour’s conversation, we might have explained and Settled the plan of future operations. 
You have however, I find, philosophy enough to wait the ordinary returns of the post; let me see how your pulse beats, when you have contemplated the beauties of my fair 
Farnborough; 
t LETTER III 
Farnborough'; if then it keeps on its even course I shall give you up, looking on you in the Same light as I do the water gruel tribe of the present men of icin. But I know it will be otherwise with you, and the charms which have “w' armed the cool bosom of age” will light up Such a flame in your youthful breast as will last as long; as vou live. 
I must answer all your interrogatories before you think it worth while to wing your airy flight to the blessed mansion where the charmer dwells. — Why this is but reasonable I allow; her praises dwell on every lip; — 
In her sweet form is ev’ry charm combin’d. And yet her form is faulty to her mind. 
I have turned poet in compliment to your mistress; I can answer two questions in one; her father is steward 
LETTER III 9 
ard of the races at blandsord, which come on in about three weeks; you have therefore nothing to do but enter one os your horses; your name and charafler will give you sufficient/cd?; you will certainly be noticed by Mr. Farnborough; and, to a man of your address and figure, everything else is a mere bagatelle. Such, however, is the plan I would pursue wtre I in your place; I cannot doubt of your success; your alliance is just what a good father would wish for his daughter; and by what I have Seen of the lady, she is quite the woman I, as your sincere friend, wish to haveunited to you. You will have a good opportunity of Seeing her at blandsord; I cannot attend you there, as my affairs continue still perplexing enough to engage me Some time longer in this place — To say I am tired of it, is Saying nothing — 
I have 
lo TETTER III 
I have ever been So — I love no Spot So well as that where all my joys are buried in the silent tomb — Why should I start that painsul Subject?? — when I am forming Schemes for your happiness, should the recol ledion of former woes obtrude themselves to blast the gay vision? — It ought not Surely to intervene at Such a moment — but I have touched a wrong string, and destroyed all harmony — i I have disabled myself from proceeding, unless I could have the cruelty to cast a sombre shade over your more felicitous views. Adieu! 
TETTER 
() 
LETTER 
IV 
Sir EDW. LASCELLES 
T O 
HENRY LYTTLETON, Esq; 
± F you have no engagement on your hands, what do you think of a party to Blandford races? — I have an inclination to try mellisont on that turf — he has already won me a plate — would you suppose Mr. Temple was my counsellor in this matter? — ■ but, true, he is. He thinks the breed of horses should be encouraged — but while we remember that circumstance, says he, do not let us forget that we are men — In short, he would wish me to give into the fashion of the times without being corrupted by follies 
By 
12 LETTER IV 
By his excellent precepts I have been enabled to steer pretty clear between Scylla and Charybdis, and hope still to maintain the character of a man os the world, ever keeping in view another wshich is to come — This last Sentence would be too pious to Send abroad — but I may confide my weakness in a bosom friend. 
Temple has not yet returnrd to his favourite lodge — How infinite are my obligations to him for that proof of his regard in detaching himself two wshole years from a Spot So dear to him, to accompany me through France and Italy! — I own I am often much Surprised to See with what avidity he enters into little Schemes — and with a grateful heart I must observe, ever for my amusement or advantage — Seeming to divest himself of all recollection of past events, and living wholly 
for 
L E T T E R IV ij 
for others — I Say, I am astonished when I See him (the business being accomplished) sink again into that state of dejedion, and bend over the tomb of his adored Lucy! — What an attachment must his have been, to Survive the grave when Such a length of years have worn themselves away? — And how good must his heart be, not to have been Soured by So adverse a stroke in the early part of his life. For a Series of years he nourished his woe, nor mixed at all with mankind, never feeing me but at holiday times, till the death of my uncle — his affection for me then showed itself — or rather, as being the only living remains of the object of his love and grief, he devoted himself to my education : and all that I am 1 owe to his 
goodness and instrudion. 
While 
14 LETTER IV 
While he can be Serviceable to mankind, he, apparently with cheersul ness, interests himself in their concerns, and, by the conduct of the bufi ness, Seems to have no other thought. 
— But there are moments when he retires within himself and inly mourns. 
— It is very Seldom he even breathes a sigh before me; and did 1 not flatter myself that repeated absences from the lodge, and variety of avocations will in time abate his habitual melancholy, I should grudge the hours he devotes to me— — will never Suffer me to attend him thither, though I have often entreated that indulgence from him — Once indeed he carried me there — just before I left England. 
— I never shall forget the impreshon it made on my mind; and, I believe, the Sensibility I discovered determined 
him 
LETTER IV 15 
him to prevent my future visits to the mausoleum of my poor mother. 
You will be So kind, my dear Harry, to let me know is you can give me your company at blandsord; come to me here as Soon as you can, and we will go from hence. — Mr. Temple wishes me to get introduced to a Mr. Farnborough, who is the Steward this year — perhaps you may know Something of him. - — My good old friend, who is ever studying Sor my advantage, Says, that gentleman has a daughter who, he fancies, I need only see to Seel attached to — I am determined therefore to have a look at her, whatever the consequence may be — I know there is no circumstance in life that would give him So much pleasure as Seeing me happily married — And it is a state I wish to engage in — • Indeed I think it is a duty every man 
owes 
ig L E T T E R IV 
owes his country, particularly men of fortune — But yet I am not patriotic enough to raise citizens without gratifying myself at the Same time — So if this Miss does not prove to my liking, I must look Sarther — I have never yet been Seriousty attached — nor ever attempted to convince any girl I was. — I have not that evil to answer for, thank heaven! — 
Adieu! — I shall expect you with all impatience. 
letter 
Co) 
L E T 
E R 
Sir EDW. LASCELLES 
T O 
HENRY L Y T T L E T O N Esq. 
A M constrained to allow your rc susal a just one, my dear Harry — And yet I yield to my disappointment with an ill grace — You have overturned my Scheme of attack entirely; I must theresore change my plan of operations, and endeavour to strike out Some other rnancsume — But, as friendship is at present the main Spring wshich actuates my movements, I shall wave what may hereafter be due to love and lay aside all thoughts of my campaign till I have obeyed your request of having Some information 
i8 L E T T E R V 
tion of the hijioire from Mr. Temple, whom you justly style a “rational mourner.’* 
His mother died while he was a child — Some Sew years after his Sather married a lady who had a daughter by a former husband, about six years old. — M;. Temple had just then obtained his eleventh year — The children became exceedingly attached to each other— — Mr. Temple had a pleasure in becoming the tutor of his beloved Lucy — Young as he was he yet felt all the emotions which love is apt to raise in older bosoms — and could not behold, without jealousy, any attentions which other boys would pay to his charmer — He prevailed on his father to admit of having a private tutor, that he might be continually with Lucy — His affection gathered strength with his years — and I 
have 
LETTER V 19 
have heard him say, their mutual passion was evident to everybody, and yet their parents Seemed to look on it as merely childish — a circumstance which, in the process of this amour, will Surprise you very much. 
During the terms which he was obliged to keep at Cambridge, he hard' ly ever omitted writing every post to Lucy — And, notwithstanding he knew she showed her letters to her mother, he could not avoid giving them a warmth of colouring which plainly painted the lover’s heelings! — At the age of twenty-one, his father proposed his making a tour with his tutor — This was what his desire of knowledge made him anxious to do — but then, Lucy — to leave that dear girl — now sixteen, and well grown — She might, nay she must have many admirers — The tenderness she had 
shown 
i9 L E T T E R V 
shown him might only be fricndsnip. — Her heart might yet be a stranger to that ardent passion he had conceived for her — A rival! A happy rival might, in his absence, teach her a warmer Sentiment — what then would become of him — All these consiiding thoughts tormented hiin — He hurried home — he Sound Lucy alone — breathless, and almost speechless, he threw himself at her feet, grasping her hand with a dying energy — Lucy, terrified at the agitation she Saw him in, ressecsted not she was the cause — but earnestly besought him to tell her what shocking mischance had betallen him — She even So far Sympathised in his distress as to shed tears — “Oh! my Lucy I my beloved Lucy cried he, “I must leave you, and then perhaps I Snail lose you for ever.” Ignorant of the old gentleman’s intentions 
with 
L E T T E R V ti 
^\ith regard to his Son, and likewise a stranger to the violent emotions os love, she naturally conclyded he had been guilty of Some crime which obliged him to quit the kingdom — Leave me! lose me for ever! wshat has my William done? — Oh! my Sweet friend, ’* continued she, throwing herarms round his neck, and joining her cheek to his, for heaven’s Sake relieve my tortured heart — I cannot, indeed I cannot. Support this cruel fuspence !” — “I adore you, my lovely Lucy — you are dearer to me than all the world — My father proposes my going abroad for two or three years — Oh! my Lucy, I must leave you behind; and then !” — What then !” cried she, interrupting him Have you not left me for months together in your attendance at college ?” — “And can you, widi Such coolness, talk os a Separation 
that 
32 
LETTER V that fills me with the utmost horror ?’* 
— “Your agony, ” Said she, led me to suppose Something more dreadful. 
— But if we part, it is to meet again“ 
“my Lucy, ” cried he, taking her hand, promise that when we met it shall be to part no more? Will you not Suffer your heart to be torn from me by Some more happy youth? 
— And may I indulge the dear hope that you will live only for me?” — “Believe me, my dear William, ” she answered, “I feel no inclination to return a negative to any of your tender interrogatories; and as far as I am allowed a voice, it shall be exerted in your favour — But I am searsul my mother Saw Something in your letters which has displeased her, as she told me the other day I must consider myself no longer as a child, and there 
4 sore 
LETTER V 23 
Sore those Samiliarities which w^re ad mishble between us while I was in that state, must now be laid aside; and that I must observe a very different behaviour tow’ards you" 
This precaution in the mother o pened the eyes of the young people; and though their attachment increased, they became more circumspedt — they even Sancied they could divine the cause; and attributed it to the small ness of Lucy ’s fortune, which was not adequate to that of Mr. Temple — Ah, ill-fated pair! how far were ye from fuspediing the true reason! 
Serenely moved on the minutes till the hour of Mr. temple’s journey approached — The lovers had fixed their mode of correspondence in Such a manner as to elude the eyes of the mother — but to avoid all suspicion he Sometimes 
ii. L E T T E R V 
times enclosed a letter for her in his father’s pacquet. 
Two years had elapsed, in which the lovers had given and received a thousand proofs of an unalterable affection — Lucy had many lovers — but none who could for a moment interest her — Their Solicitations would Sometimes make up a paragraph in a letter to her dear William, but still her heart beat only for him — At length, a gentleman made an offer which Mrs. Temple thought too advantageous to reject— — informed Lucy she could no longer indulge her in discarding admirers, and she must now use that influence she had a right to in Mr. boswell — In vain Lucy remonstrated — in vain fly objected— — Temple was inexorable — There appeared now no other Subterfuge than applying to her absent 

LETTER V 25 
Sent lover — She wrote him the whole particulars, and implored him to extricate her Srom the impending danger — Mr. bosw'eh’s fortune was as large as Mr. temple’s — His person, character, and accomplishments. Such as might make an impression on a young heart — and certainly would, on any heart totally free. 
lucy’s letter was a dagger in william’s bosom — the more he resolved the more he was perplexed; but at last he came to the resolution of hazarding every difficulty rather than his Lucy should be exposed to the rigour os her mother, or for one moment have cause to doubt his constancy — Without making any one acquainted with his intention, he took shipping at Leghorn; and the first intimation Lucy received of his having got her a larming letter, was a Ulkt which was 
vol. I. 
con 
a6 L E T T E R V 
conveyed to her hand one morning, informing her, her faithful lover was at a farmhouse about a mile from her residence, under the disguise of a common Sailor. Actuated only by her love for him, and her apprehensions from Mr. bosvvell’s address, she listened not to any didlates of prudence, but on the instant repaired to the rendezvous— — meeting must be left to the imaoination of those who have 
CD 
been under Similar circumstances 1- — Their consultation ended in the fixed resolution of going off the next night, and aster having their hands united, to return to Italy, where she might be placed in Security near her husband— — pasted Some hours together in mutually exchanging vows of everlasting love — But, notwithstanding their conversation had licen carried on in French, yet it caused much Speculation 
LETTER V 27 
tion in the farmer’s family to See a young lady upon Such intimate terms with a common Sailor — Fearing least they should be brought into Some trouble, as they Said, the old woman judged it proper to give a hint to the housekeeper at the lodge, of the Scene which was performed at her house — ^ She immediately communicated what she had heard to her mistress — The unsuspedting Lucy busily employed hersels all the day in putting up a few things which might be Serviceable to her in her expedition; and her whole Soul, given up to love and joy, Saw nothing of distrust in the features of her mother — The hour approached — the hour which was to deliver her from the tyranny os her mother — the Solicitations of a hated lover — and which was to place her in the arms of the most faithful, most beloved, of C 2 men. 
LETTER V 
men. — Judge with what tumults her tender bosom — the bosom of a young girl of eighteen, must, under Such circumstances, be agitated — She had not time, nor did she dare ressed on the imprudence of the step she was going to take — She beheld nothing but her escape — she had no doubts of her lover — and his eloquence had hushed every fear to rest, concerning her breach of duty — Silent and alone, with a trembling hand she opened the hall door, and bad adieu to the walls which she hoped she had escaped for ever — A little distance from the lode she found heistelf prelsed to the bosom of her William — He staid not to listen to her relation of the apprehensions she experienced, but hurried her away to the chaise which was in waitins' for them — The night was too dark for the fugitives to difcem the road they 
were 
LETTER V 25 
were going, and they were too much engaged in conversation to pay any attention, had they Seen it — After a bout an hour’s driving, the postboy called to them, and informed them they were coming to the first stage — In a little time the chaise stopped near a house where they perceived lights — Mr. Temple had ordered frefii honsts to be got ready — Imcy was unwilling to quit the carriage, but, on being importuned by the landlady, she cora phed — Mr. Temple, on finding himself alone with the objecst of all his tender affections, and, as he thouglir, perfectly secure, clasped her with rapture in his arms, and welcomed her on being thus far on the road to happiness— — - that instant the father and mother burst into the room • — “Wretches !” they exclaimed, to the almost petrified fugitives, ‘‘ wretches! 
C 3 what 
3© LETTER V 
what are you about to do?” — The unhappy lovers cast themselves at the feet os their enraged parents, and in the most pity moving strains implored their forgiveness os a procedure which love, the most render love, had induced them to ad — “We have doted on each other from infancy, ” cried William — ‘‘ Nothing but my pre engagemcnt, ” cried Lucy, should have induced me to Swerve from my obedience — I live but for him.” 
Miserable and guilty wretches, ” cried the Sather, “ye are both my children — ye are brother and sister 1” “Oh !” cried the mother, wringing her hands, “I take double shame to myself — and ought long before this to have confided my guilty connexion before marriage to my daughter ■ — but alas! I had no suspicion of this fatal attachment being So strong.” 
Lucy 
LETTER V 3t 
Lucy, however, demanded now all their attention, she had fainted in the arms of her wretched brother — who was in too great agony himself to afford her any relief — distradion Seemed to have taken possession of him — he furioufiy opposed their being Separated; and not till force was used w old quit his grasp— — more dead than alive, was conveyed back to the lodge, wdiich, but two hours before, she had issued from wdth Such ssattering hopes of lasting happiness— — fatal a reveisie now presented itself! 
Mr. Temple was carried by his father to the Seat of an uncle, thirty miles from the lodge — By the timic he arrived there he was quite delirious, in wshich state he continued Several weeks — and during his paroxisms he raved for ever for Lucy — His father never C 4 left 
32 LETTER V 
left the room, striving now by his unremitted tenderness to atone for the evils the indulgence of his own criminal passions had brought upon his children — dshe Same dreadful office lucy’s mother was performing at the lodge — The Srequent messengers which passed between that place and the Grange Served but, by their melancholy accounts, to increase the an guissi of the guilty parents — ’the lives of the unhappy victims were for a long time despaired of — Mr. Temple, when recovering, begged to have one interview with the partner of his grief — this was strenuoussy opposed by his father — even Lucy entreat ed he would not request it — it would be more than she could Support • — Dragging a miserable existence, he returned to Italy, and there Secluded birafelf from all Society, 
It 
LETTER V 33 
It was many months ere Lucy recovered her health, or any degree of tranquillity — reason, religion, and her natural delicacy, which was wounded at the idea of her beina* So near the commission of So horrid a crime as incest, at length encouraged her to try to live and reconcile herself and unhappy brother to the lot they were forced to bear— — Boswell renewed his addresses — but that was a compliance she could never bring herself to Support — She Sound hersels importuned by Several — and had great difficulty in prevailing on her mother to grant her the liberty of rejediing them. — At this time Mrs. Temple died — Mr. Temple, the Sather, had been in an alarming state os health ever since the Iktal discovery — Should he likewise die, she would be left without a protestor in the world, except the man C 5 ihe 
34 LETTER V 
she trembled at the distant thought of beholding — Refiecsting on all these circumstances, she took a strange resolution — Sir Edward lascelles, her godfather, turned of sixty, and crippled with the gout, otherwise a healthy lively man, and who really possessed a father's fondness for her — on him she fixed to give her hand — she had no legal claim on the fortune of her father - — and she dreaded being under the obligation of receiving a Subsistence from her brother — She assumed courage to disclose her intention to Sir Edward— — told him she knew he would never expect more than obedience from her, and that she could readily pay him. — I think it will be necessary to transcribe a letter which she wrote to a young lady, her intimate friend, as I should not do justice to her Sentiments by putting them in any 
other 
LETTER VI 35; 
Other words than her own — But really I have cramped my hand with writing So long an epistle; and shall beg leave to postpone the Sequel os this melancholy history till the next post. — Adieu! 
LETTER VI 
Sir EDWARD LASCELLES, In CONTINUATION. 
I Shall proceed with my detail. — here you have the letter which my unfortunate mother wrote by way of apology for her marriage. 
C i 
h A D y 

LETTER VI 
Lady LASCELLES 
Miss BROMLEY. 
I Mean not, my dearest Maria, to recapitulate past events — you know too well how my wretched bosom has been rent wdth anguish — you have Seen the violent struggles I have been Sorced to make, in order to reestablish any degree of calmness — Oh! what constidls have I not undergone from my unhappy attachment! and how has my own astlidions been augmented by the knowledge os what one other has Suffered! — how laudable, and how much to be wished would have been that attachment, had our unhappy, guilty parents disclosed 
to 
LETTER VI 37 
to US the fatal Secret of my premature birth! — But what am I doing? — I am adverting to a retrospedtion, when I should account to you Sor the step I have just taken. 
Should my father be Snatched from me as Suddenly as my poor mother, I should then remain unproteded, un conneded — for, could I apply to my unsortunate brother — who even now cannot hear my name mentioned without falling into agonies little short of distradion — Most likely he will continue to live abroad — what then would become of me— — nature has placed an inseparable bar between us; I yet think marriage will Seem to Strengthen that bar — I shall then have a protector, a guardian — but forgive me, if, while I take care of myself, that I am not totally unmindful of a man, to procure whose 
hap 
3s LETTER VI 
happiness my death would be a cheap and welcome purchase — • I think I owe him this consideration os convincing him that my heart can never know any attachment. Save that I indulged Sor him before I learned it was criminal to do So — My mar age with Sir Edward lascelles will Spare him that mortification, and I think his sus ferings demand it of me — Could I be as effedually protedfed I would infinitely prefer the single state — and, had I been bred a Catholic, I would have Sought a shelter in a convent. — I hope my sincere contrition Sor an involuntary crime wsill be its expiation. I pray without ceasing for the Same grace to be extended towards the ill-fated Temple — and live in hopes his reason will conquer the impetuosity of his pashons. 
Sir 
LETTER VI 39 Sir Edward is perseduy acquainted with every incident of my life — and I have, ever since the most afflidting event of it, received the tenderest proofs of his friendly regard. I feel no repugnance in fulfilling my duty towards him — and I have a Secret hope my example may have a good effect on the poor exile. 
I have assured Sir Edward he will ever be entitled to my gratitude — That I honour and will obey him — he is too reasonable to expect I should love him — I should despise myself if that passion could ever again influence my feelings. — Yes, Maria, I am convinced I am right — I experience more ease than I thought I should ever again feel. — I have made no Sacrifices to my husband, Sori had Sandlified my unhappy passion before I took the resolution of marrying — Felicity is a 
state 
40 LETTER VI 
state I was not born to taste — for in fm my mother conceived me. — I am the victim of her infamy — but I must sty from this subjed, lest my calmness prove only a beautiful vapour which will not bear investigation. — Adieu! 
In about a year and an half from my mother’s marriage 1 became an inhabitant of this world. — My birth opened a Source of comfort to her — and her attention was equally divided between my father and myself — The increase of her duties furnished her with more employment, and employment prevented her thoughts dwelling too much on the past. — She had now Something to look forward to — Something to engage her attention, and interest her likewise. 
A few months after, the death of Mr. Temple made it necessary for his 
Son 
LETTER VI 41 
Son to return to England — but he, still doubting his own strength, requested my father to undertake the management of his affairs — Sor which reason our Samily removed to the Lodge, for the purposeof Sir edward’s inspeding the papers of the deceased. There he found Several letters which but too fully proved the criminality of my mother’s parents, wdiich had been carried on many years during the life of Mr. temple’s own mother. 
While my father and mother remained there, the housekeeper, in removing Some china from a shelf, and standing in a chair to reach it, being a bulky wmman, the chair broke with her, and, besides cutting herself very much, her leg was fradtured in a most dreadful manner. — A Surgeon, who was Sent for, pronounced her to be in imminent danger of immediate 
death 
4i LETTER VI 
death unless she would consent to amputation, and even then he could not answer Sor the consequenccs. She appeared in the most violent agonies, wringing her hands, and beseeching heaven to have mercy on her, and pardon her manisold sins — one os which, she laid, terrified her more than all the rest. 
Her despair was So great that my mother judged it proper to Send Sora clergyman, who might, by prayer, compose her agitated mind, and Speak peace to her departing Soul; Sor she absolutely refused to consent to the cutting off her leg. 
The minister continued with her a long time, when coming to my mother, he told her Mrs. Ward had Something of the utmost importance to her to disclose, and begged no time might be lost, as she appeared very 
near 
LETTER VI 43 
hear her dissolution. — My mother, accompanied by my Sather, entered the chamber of the dying woman. — With many Sobs, she took my mother’s hand, and informed her she had to implore her sorgiveness for concealing a Secret, which, is known some years Since, would have Saved her all the anguish she had endured, — “But yet, ” continued she, “it was partly my regard for you, and dread of being discarded with infamy for my treachery, that urged me to confine the truth wsithin my own bosem. — Now, however I shall Soon be called to render up my account, and heaven knows how’ unprepared 1 am to meet my Maker j — Let me be brief — you are not the child of the late Mrs. Temple — you are ■ — mine.” “Gracious God 1” exclaimed my mother, “what is this I hear 
Attend, 
44 
I. E T T E R 
VI 
Attend, my child, — Sor most as suredly you are mine — attend to thy guilty self condemned parent. — I was privy to the shameful intrigue of Mr. Temple with miss Villars — I was the only one Entrusted with their frecpient meetings — I had been brought up in a manner which should have inspired me with detestation of Such illicit practises; but I had Sallen into poverty from an imprudent marriage, and was not proof against a powerful bribe. 
The consequence of their guilty commerce was a daughter, of whom miss Villars was delivered at my house. — Every hope of miss Villars depended on the Secrecy which I Swore 
to preserve. 
Her whole dependence 
was the favour of an uncle; and beggary must have been her portion if any discovery had been made — To avoid wshich, she staid but one week at my, hoiife, 
LETTER VI 4$ 
house, leaving her insant under my protection. — Three days after the child, who was born weakly, expired in a fit — I then Saw all my hopes of a maintenance fall to the nround. — 
O 
“Oh !” cried I, bursting into tears and casting a look at rny own child, only three weeks old — “Oh, thatsit had pleased heaven to have taken thee! — thou w’ouldst have been provided Sor, and thy mother might yet have possessed a Sriend by whom she might be Supported!” Something Seemed to whisper in my car, and wshy not provide Sor thysels and child by Substituting her in the dead infant’s place — My conscience made no Scruple — I admired my address — I kissed my child with transport — and took my raeasures accordingly. — I acquainted Pvlifs Villars I had had the misfortune to lose my own little girl, therefore 
should 
46 LETTER VI 
should now" devote myself Solely to the attention of her’s; and even made a merit wsith the parents on the healthful appearance of their child, which Seemed to thrive from my milk. — Mr. Temple bestowed many encomiums on me for my care, accompanied by a banknote— — pradtised on their generosity, or rather their fear os a discovery, by which means I obtained many good Sums from them. — When Mr. Villars died, his niece found her fortune Sufficient to take a Small house; and I, being So necessary a person to her, agreed, on a Settled stipend, to live wsith her — She then passed for a widow, still retaining her own name. — When Mr. Temple tvas free to marry, he honourably fulfilled his engagement by giving his hand to miss Villars, and I still continued as housekeeper“ 
“
LETTER Vr. 47 
From the first I Saw the attachment, and Saw it with pleasure, between young Mr. Temple and you — for as far as nature could plead in So bad a heart as mine it certainly pleaded for you — nor should I now have made a discovery of your elopement to Mrs. Temple, but that the farmer’s ■wife declared she would take care madam should know of it, lest her family should be brought to shame. — But how shall I account to you for my inhumanity in not disclofing my ha ving put a Suppositious child on my benefactors, when Such difclosure wmuld have given ease to So many hearts? — I can only Say — I never truly loved any one in the world but myself; and that I dreaded the reproaches I should have justly merited — At this awful moment, however, I Sec things in a different 'point of view — The 
whole 
48 LETTER VI 
whole black catalogue os crimes burst upon my affrighted Soul — and I am lost in despair. • — Let me entreat for giveness from you; as an earnest of that, this worthy gentleman bids me aspire to on my sincere contrition — I have made a true conseffion, and hope the agonies of my bodily feelings, will in a little measure expiate my Sms.” 
My mother was too much affedfed by the horror the dying sinner Seemed to labour under, to refuse her forgiveness— — knelt by the bedside, and pouring a stood of tears on the penitent’s hand, most freely pronounced her pardon — while the poor creature lived, she left not her chamber, but contributed all in her power to make her latter moments less painful. — Her penitence was very great, and I hope sincere; — she possessed Some calm I minutes 
LETTER VI 4^ 
minutes before she drew her last breath, with which she prayed Sor blessings on her daughter and her offspring. 
When my mother’s Spirits had Sub sided into a little quiet from the Scene of horror she had just been witness to; — she ceased not to express to heaven her thanksulness for the relief which now her bosom felt from the anguish she had before Sustained in the thought of Mr. Temple being her brother. — She called on her husband to congratulate her. — “Yes, my dearest girl. So I do most cordially, ” Said he, — And now I care not how Soon I follow your poor mother, as I am the only obstacle remaining to an union, where your heart has ever been most laudably fixed.” — Tears trembled in his eyes: — My husband!! — friend!” cried my mother, taking his hand and pressing it with kindness, vol. I. D Have 
o LETTER VI 
Have you discovered any remission of duty and attention towards you since this happy discovery? — Believe your Lucy — her heart, I glory in Saying it, is truly ingenuous; — believe me I feel relieved in the convidton that I have not been guilty of a crime. — But may your days be long and happy, and may mine only be lent me while I continue to contribute to their being; So!” 
It was thought very necessary to insorm Mr. Temple of this discovery, and my father undertook that talk; he made him a full and clear recitation of the whole affair, and concluded his letter with saying“ “will you not grudge the hours of an old fellow, who, while he is creeping on the earth, robs you of years of happiness? the best ot wt»men Seems to redouble her attention to me, lest I should feel 
uneasiness 
LETTER VI 5t 
uneasmess at living too long. — Believe me, I experience the sincerest pleasure in the restedtion that I have not long to remain in this world, (the last years of which have been Smothered by your lucy’s care and affection) and the certainty likewise of her being amply repaid in her union with you Sor the days of anguish she has felt. — You will be the protector os the two dearest beings on earth to me, my Lucy, and my Son, — Come, then, ray dear Temple, to your native home — live with us as a friend; — all I shall request os you is, to behave, when I am in company, as if I were absent; and in my absence always to consider me as one of the party. — From the day of the happy difclosure, I have looked on Lucy only as my daughter; do not then be jealous of the attention she shows her father; her delicate gra d 2 titude 
LETTER VI titude on the mode os my conduct; towards her, gives me more exquisite pleasure than ever a sensualist can feel.” 
Mr. temple’s answer was Sull of the most greatful acknowledgments to my father. — ‘‘ I no longer, ” Said he, have my heart rent with self accusa tions for my crime and passion; you have Spoke eternal peace to my Soul — I wish not your days abridged — I Seem arrived already at the Summit of hap piness; I may love our dear Lucy, and am allowed to avow it to my friend, — No, far be it from me to plant thorns in the pillow of him who has imothered mine; — I feel calm and composed— — shed tears, but they are tears of tenderness; not like those which have fallen, for years, from my eyes— — are Soothing — those were corroding and bitter; — Yqs; I will 
come 
LETTER VI 53 
come to England — I will thank you on my knees for the confidence' you place in me — never shall it be abused.” To avoid the censure of the world, who not knowing their worth So well as my father did, might have raised malicious stories, Mr. Temple and my mother Seldom Saw each other — my father and he constantly corresponded, and their mutual letters wtre perused by my mother. — When I was about three years old, my father was taken with a Severe fit of the gout; he perceived his dissolution near, and being a thorough good Christian, beheld it with a decent composure. — He joined the hands of Mr. Temple and my mother; and making me be brought to him, delivered me into their arms — blessing us all with the greatest fervency; — he called all present to witness his wish and request, D 3 that 
54 LETTER VI 
that as Soon as outward ap|jcarance of decency would admit, his friend and widow would cement that union tvhich he blessed with his dying breath. — I doubt not, ” added' he, “but I shall live in your memories, and that you will fbew your attachment by the care you will take of my child— — die happy, that my death will render you pershdlly and permanently So — adieu, ” Said he, taking a hand of each. — Love one another as I love you both.” — Again, he blessed them, and without a groan, expired. 
The death of Such people, though assedting, has nothing dreadful in it. — How I revere the memory of my father! — I love to dwell upon his character— — must proceed. 
My mother shed many tears at his loss, which fne could not but consider 
LETTER VI ss 
Sider as an heavy one, though by that means every obstacle to her union with the only man she ever loved, was in a manner rendered Secure; yet since the knowledge os Mr. temple’s not being her brother, and the persedt restoration of his peace, she had pos seffed Such Serenity, that she hardly wished for anything Sarther. — And my father had ever been So kind and considerate, that she felt the utmost partiality and reverence for him. 
The year was now expiring, and the lovers gave way to the most fiat tering ideas of Seeing the completion of their happiness; everything was prepared — the day Set, and their hearts beat high with expectation; but fate, that Seemed to take delight in dashing the cup of joy from their lips, now interfered and prepared to quench the nuptial torch in tears. — Mr. Temple D 4 was 
L B T T E R VI was with a party of gentlemen on the lake fishing; in throwing the net he over reached himself, and he fell into the water; however, being a good Swimmer, he Soon reached the shore, and found himself So little hurt, that he concealed the adventure from his dear Lucy, lest she should Suffer the pain of disquietude. — The next day he gave strong indications of a Sever; and by the following, his disorder became very alarming; — distradled by her tears, my mother never left him one moment; for one and twenty days his life was hanging by a thread; perhaps they had not then So good a method of treating those complaints as now; at least by keeping the patients too vv^arm, they not only made the Sever malignant, but epidemic. — Fatigue, joined to the care and anxiety of my mother; add too, her receiving 
bis 
LETTER VI SI 
his pesiiferous breath infected her with the same disorder; site was forced from his room and conveyed to bed. — Mr. Temple recovered just time enough to See her expire. — It would be an affront to his feelings to attempt a description of them. Who can fathom the inestimable decrees of Providence in its dispensations? — Let us pause a moment on the fate of these unfortunate lovers. — My heart bleeds at the recolledfion of Sufferings that appear So unmerited. 
As I Said before, Mr, Temple shut himself up, nor lived to the world; only Seeing me at stated times, till the death of my father’s brother, which happened when I was fourteen years old. — The care of my education and fortune then devolving on him, he roused himself from his lethargy of woe, and fulfilled the will of my 5 there 
■58 L E T T E R vr. 
there and unfortunate mother, in transmitting the love he bore them to me. My presence Seemed to cheer him; — but as Soon as I left him, he again sunk into the Same torpid state; but he never for one moment relaxed his care of me; nor was I acquainted with these particulars which I have now related to 3^0, ' till I came of age. He then led me to the tomb of my reverend mother, and while we contemplated her remains, he gave me this melancholy detail. We mingled our tears together; — the story left a dejection on my Spirits a long time; I have since osten wished to conyerse with him on the Sad theme, but he always past me by. — “My grief is Sacred, ” Said he, — “I will not habituate myself to Speak of it without feeling the poignancy of woe; I will ever enjoy that Sad luxur}q to vulgar 
minds 
LETTER VI 59 
minds unknown — I never cease thinking of her; but I forbear naming her to any one; I should think it propha nation to talk with calmness of her. There is one room in the house I Suffer no one to enter but myself; in that I enjoy a kind of intercourse with the departed angel — she is embalmed with my tears, and her Sepulchre is my heart.” 
How respedable is this man! how respedtable his Sorrow! it would be, as he Says, profanation to blend any other Subject with this; therefore I mention not a Syllable of my affairs — 
I am ever your’s,, 
E. L 
D 6 
J etter 
( 6®) 
LETTER VII 
Sir EDWARD LASCELEES 
T O 
WILLIAM TEMPLE, Esq. 
tto morrow, my valuable Sriend, I shall have my horse entered for bland ford races; I shall then See the woman you think likely to make an im preshon on my heart; she will have the merit in my eyes of your recommendation, which is Saying a great deal in her favour. 
I have Seen Mr. Farnborough — our first interview Savours a little of romance, which is quite in character you know for the knight errantship I am upon. — Our chaises ran foul of 3 each 
LETTER VII 61 each other in coming into town' — his was very near throwm over, and mine Suftained a pretty rude shock; — is I had bribed Tom, nothing could have happened more apropos. — Decency and humanity demanded of me to make Some inquiry after the gentleman, though a stranger; and a little common civility from a man who had the arms of Ulster on his carriage is flattering. — This rencontre rendered my introdudlion quite easy and in rule, and I felt myself exceedingly pleased in finding my polite attention had been paid to Mr. Farnborough. 
I excused myself Srom attending him to westbury park, but am to be introduced to his family, on the race ground, tomorrow morning. — 1 feel rayself rather impatient to See my fair one. — Adieu! 
L E T T E R. 
( 6z) 
LETTER 
VIII 
Sir E D W A R D L A S C E L L E S 
HENRY LYTTELTON, Esq. 
H, Harry! you should have been with me, for I feel bustness So multiply on my hands that I ought to keep a Secretary, if both you and my friend Temple expect circumstantial accounts of my proceedings. 
I shall not waste words with telling you how I made my entrk into the Farnborough family — Suffice it to Say, I danced with the charming daughter this evening, and am promised her hand tomorrow— — the ballroom, 1 mean — not at the altar — no; fair and Softly. — A business which is to last all one’s life should not be entered upon too precipitately; — was 
I 
letter Vlil. 
I Superstitious, I should draw 
63 
unfavourable 
conclusions from the commencement of this affair. — Mr. farn borough and I had like to have broken our carriages to pieces yesterday, and today my poor Cheval melli fonte was beaten on the race ground. Are not these incidents, or rather accidents, rather ominous? — But perhaps non el tutto di frincipiare hifogna Jinire, if So, f have the uifdom of nations on my side — So, couragio! — I will go to bed and dream of my fair partner, and tomorrow give you an account: — “Not of your dream, I hope, lascelles.” — No, my dear Harry, of the situation of my affairs, and how I feel affected towards this matrimonial business. — Adieu, 
I am ever your’s. 
LETTER 
( H) 
LETTER IX 
To THE SAME. 
Write accounts to Temple only of plain Sailing, but to you I shall communicate all my mancsuvres, and shist ing of winds and courses — I must, however, in the true modern Gazette style, give you a minute detail of the enemy’s coast, with the different bearings and Soundings — and what I Jloould have done, instead of what I did do, c. 
And now for a pidfure of Miss Farnborough — herperlon is critically handsome, but not touchingly So — do I explain myself? — She is tall, elegant. Sensible — and more than all, conversible. — I do affure you, I think the latter article in the catalogue a very 
northeast 
L E T T E R IX 65 
necessary one, though we too Seldom meet with it in our English women. Where does the Sault lie — not in the head; — Sori believe we have full as much seen among our females as in any part of the globe — not in the heart — for they at least poffess as many virtues as their neighbours. — I may venture at that assertion, notwithstanding we have in our female world a little relaxed of late years to be Sure, from those days, when it might have been Said of Britain at large, as it was of one particular family, — All her Sons were brave — and all her daughters chaste— — hope, how -- ever, I shall not bring all England upon my back — I cannot cope with So many enemies as that does. — We have, I doubt not, thousands of Such Sons and daughters. — But tvt Stalks boldly Sorthj and will be heard; — 
while 
II L E T T E R IX 
while virtue shrinks beneath her own apprehensions, and must be encouraged to be known. — “Holla! my Sriend where are you galloping to — as Stern, would cry, } ou arc quite out of the course) and will certainly be dijiancedp “Why I am a little eccentric, it must be allowed, and have deviated Srora my Subject, and the ground which I believe, (Sori hate a retrogade motion, and cannot look back on what I have written) was simply to discover the reason why we So Seldom meet with conversible women, — I Say I attempted to dijfover, not that I had explained the cause — that remains for Some abler man; — but I have often Seen and lamented, that V omen of remarkable good sense are not in general the most entertaining; they either have not the art, or will not condescend to pradtise it of tristing agreeably — they 
rather 
L E T T E R IX 67 
rather wish to be thought amiable than agreeable. — We readily give them credit Sor being most truly So, — but the woman who can hadinef a little keeps one awake. 
I really must now look back, just to determine how far I have proceeded in my catalogue of female virtues — pardon me, I meant to Say, excellencies in miss Farnborough. — Well, the lasi word on the list I find to be, conversible. — She Seems to poffess a good share of that lively talent, which witlings Style jmall talk. — By which term, if they have any meaning, they would be thought to express Something very frivolous, and made up of Scraps and fragments from the temple of nonsenfe. — But the small talkj or badinage, of sensible people is to the last: degree pleasing and 
interesting, 
6* LETTER IX 
interesting, as it generally makes us pleased with ourselves. 
I start for the third time for the Same post; — I really think from my Small acquaintance with the lady that she has Sevxral requisites necessary to render the marriage state happy. ■ — I am not however in love with her — at least I do not think I have any alarming Symptoms about me at present; — I know not how Soon the contagion may take effect— — have danced twice with her, and passed rny evenings very agreeably; — I breakfasted with her this morning, and attended her to the course. — I do not Seel any uneasiness that her hand is devoted to another this night. — No jealousy — no heart burnings, on the occasion; — I See her without the least emotion, — but I See her with pleasure, and she is particularly 
polite 
L E T T E R IX 6% 
polite to me; — donst accusc me of vanity; — I would not wish you to understand she Seems attached more to me than a common acquaintance. — But no woman is displeased wsith the attention of a young baronet, and with a good fortune, tolerable figure, connexions, and charaxer; — these are only appendages, and no part of me — as. 
Worth makes the man, the want of it the fellow; 
The next is nought but leather and prunello.” 
I will not Swear to the truth of my quotation — that is, I wdll not Swear to having quoted Pope verbatim; — I have preserved the sense however, and words are wind. 
I believe I have not much romance in my composition — but am content to be happy in a common way, and 
by 
70 LETTER IX 
by common'means — I love not the intervention of the machinery of heathen deities — Such as the arrows of Cupid. — I shall proceed in a methodical manner — and if love storms the outworks I will Surrender at discretion. I leave to Such enterprising ge niusses as you all the artillery of love, with its “flames, darts, and daggers, ” and Say with an old bard — 
Give me but a wife, I cxpe£l not to find “A venus’s form with a pallas’s mind.” 
Perhaps you would think me very stupid was you to See the heroine — and blame me for not breaking forth into raptures. — I mean to love rationally, the Same today, tomorrow, and for ever. — I hate honey moons’’ — mine shall knownow’ane — ever bright, full, and unchangeable! — Marriage with me, as it shall not be entered into 
LETTER IX 7i 
to blindly, and with too much haste, shall be a lise os reason, not of rapture. — The first I believe we may experience whenever we make a right choice — the last exists not but in ficiitious Scenes, the day dreams os poets. 
Bravo 1 h not this fine for five and twenty — How worthy imitation! — marry and reform, — 
Ever your’s. 
LETTER 
T o T H E SAME. 
GET on, in the sportsman’s phrase; nay I think my charmer gains ground on me — I find her possessed of Sensibility, that irrefistable beauty, in 
my 
jz LETTER X 
my eyes. — She has from a little incident discovered a tender compassion, and has in consequence, done an aft of generous charity; by which she So won upon me, that I was at the point of Sailing at her feet, and begging her to extend her generosity — her charity to me, even me also. — And this from one week’s knowledge of her 1 — If she improves as much in another I am her’s for ever and ever. 
I have written to Temple the whole transaftion, and begged him to give me his opinion of it; and whether the emotion I felt on the occasion proceeded from a growing passion — I hope to heaven it does; for I wish to love her very much in compliment to his taste. — You See I have all the dispositions towards it already. 
Mr. 
LETTER X <73 
Mr. and Mrs. Farnborough are extremely civil to me; they pressed me to go to Westbury Park with them I intend doing mysels the honour of accepting their invitation — Lord knows how it will end! I have my prefenti went — but you will Say, handsorac young fellows are always conceited — However, she has too much sense to be taken with mere outside; and I hope too good a heart to prosess a partiality without having it first excited. 
There will be quite a party at Westbury, Several people going Srom the races thither; I shall be able to judge bs the real qualities of miss Farnborough with more precision when I See her in her domestic character. — In their father’s or hushand’s houses a female shcw’s hersels in the true light • — There their amiable dispositions 
Vou I. 
E 
ire 
74 
L E T T E R X 
are Seen; it is there they establish their fame; and are admired or condemned accordins: to the tonne they teve. 
O J o 
I wish you had accompanied me, as you might have examined the outworks with me, * and being less interested would see things as they really are, with less prejudice or partiality. But as I am doomed to be alone in this arduous business I must sight my way as well as I can. 
My next will be dated from west bury Park — I have not fixed my time of stay there, So shall expect to have letters from you. 
I forgot to mention to you that I met your friend Harvey on the race ground; he has a slight knowledge of this family, having Spent Some weeks at Weymouth, where they passed Some time this Summer — he gdes with us — Adieu! 
L E T T E Pv 
( 75) 
LETTER 
XI 
^fifs FAR N BOROUGH 
T O 
Miss GORE. 
Wefttury Park. 
EXPECT you vrill call me to a Severe account for not writing to vou from the races — But only consider how much I was engaged — even So, much more than I could have supposed— — your promise! — True, my dear Harriet, I did promise; and positively at the time meant to perform; yet, as I Said before, consider the situation I figured in — The steward’s daughter! I really Selt mysels a person of great consequence — So addressed! So admired! — Danced twice E z with 
, 5 letter XL 
with the prettiest Sellow there; and what is more, deceived mysels strangely if I have net made an impression on his heart; at least his eyes expressed Something very tender when my father invited him to join the party which left Blandford with us — We have a house full I assure you, beaux and belles too — you shall have the list; — 
Lord and Lady Winchcomb — they stay but a week, going from hence to Weymouth; I shall esteem their removal no evil, he is lame and peevish from a bad Scorbutic habit; and she is stiff and proud Srom her Welch ancestry; and keeps her room all the morning in studying Sormal airs for the afternoon. 
Sir Thomas Fielding, of frivolous memory; he is eternally making love to, and making veisies on every wo 4. man 
LETTER XI 77 
man he Sees. — miss Caroline Howard, one os our belles, is the present divsinit}^, at whose shrine he offers his nonsense. — Mr. Harve}’', an agreeable disengaged man, with whom we became acquainted at Weymouth. — The last upon the list of beaux, you may read the name of Sir Edward Lalcelles — Shall 1 Say anything about him? — Oh! he is, above all praise or commendation! — I hope. Harrier, I shall Soon have the pleasure of presenting him to you; he is, above all the men I ever Saw — the thing. I hope to heaven he likes me; indeed I have very little doubt of it; I have studied hischaradter, I know his weak parts, and let me alone for improving my advantage. — But I have forgot my belles — it is true, they are not of much consequence either in themselves or to E 3 me; 
7s LETTER XL 
me; but you shall have she catalogue 
complete. 
The lively dowager, Mrs. Tomkins i she, you know, laughs all day long, and exclaims, ** what a fool am I to laugh at Such nonfense and fo she would, had she not a beautiful Set of teeth. ■ — Caroline Howard and her Sister Jenny form the iout m jhnhk of Westbury Park. 
Entre nous — It is not much amiss; most of the group are excellent soils; I think at present however I carry the palm. My triumph perhaps will not be long; but no matter, if I have got Sir Edward in my toils I shall be satisfied— — no bad figure, you know, on the whole — and a reversionary four thousand a year no bad fortune : My little Baronet has a very good estate in Yorkshire, and another in Kent — Come, come, it will do 1 very 
B. E T T E R XI 7*> 
very well on both sides. — Then he is the Sweetest tempered unpaffionate crea tu^ — Apropos! I had very near committed a faux pas while at Blandford ' — I had not then read his character all through; happily he had not made himself master of a line in mine — So J drew up.y as the jockies Say, and recovered quite in time. 
One morning I was driving Caroline Howard in the environs of Blandford, — Sir Edward and Harvey were on horseback — in a narrow lane, what Snould we stumble on, but a little cart, which had been overturned and broken all to shatters; it had been crammed quite full of poor people, who were going to make holiday on the race ground, and, in order to counter balance the expense of the vehicle, had brought Some fruit to sell; which by the malheur was mashed all E 4 to 
LETTER XI to mummy. — One woman, who Seemed to be the chief trader, was crying like a bedlamite, and dividing her Sorrow in equal portions between the loss of her merchandise and a young child whose leg was broken — Ey the way you never Saw a more gro iej\ue Scene in your life. My Servant Seeing the derangenunt of the cavalcade, rode up, and in a Surly tone called to them to move out of the way and be d — n’d — ' They could not do the one, and did not willingly Submit to the other; Robert, Sir Edward latcelles’s groom, Said mildly to James, don’t Speak So harsh to the poor creatures, you See how they are distressed.” — So young man, thought I, ou take your tonne from your master I dare say — which ressedtion put an end to the risibility that bad been excited both in Caroline and myself — I reprimanded 
LETTER XI 8i 
manded James for his inhumanity, and was begging both the Servants to use all their power to assist the honest people — and was actually getting out of the photon to administer my fel poignanjt to one os the wmmen who was fainting — in short, I aoed the good Samaritan a merveille. Sir Edward Seemed as much delighted with my charitable attention as he was distressed for the occasion — “How amiable you appear, my charming miss farnborough” ” he, pressing my hand, your eyes never looked more beau tisul than at this momentgod sor give me! I had twinkled them about till I made them appear moist ^ — “ths poor little Soul with its broken limb !’" Said I, “my heart bleeds for it; I will take it on my knees — You, miss Howard, will be kind enough to use the reins — I will carry it my e 5 Self 
U L E T T E R XI 
Self to the Surgeon — do you, James, endeavour to assist the mother — can you take her up behind you.” Thus did your friend figure in the character of Lady Bountiful — Sir Edward devouring me with his eyes, and lavishing encomiums upon me ■ — James stared like a conjurer to See Such an alteration in his lady, but followed my example, and helped the poor mother (whose clothes were all over dirt and mashed fruit. So that she reminded me of the farmer’s wife in gay’s fables) to get upon his horse, and thus we paraded into town, — I have laughed twenty times since at our disastrous procession; but my charity stopt>ed not here; I gave the mother five guineas, and two amongst the rest of the unfortunates. — I don’t know what my Baronet gave, but I dare Say the whole party thought they had made a 
pretty 
LETTER XI s3 
pretty good day’s work of it — and So much for this adventure. — It is now very late; I shall therefore make no apology for bringing my letter to a conclusion at the Same time. 
LETTER 
XIL 
To T H E S A M E. 
, LL, our affairs, go on swim ingly; I expeq; in the course os a week or two we shall come to an cr daircijfemeni. — Now don’t you put in any of your ifs andtzw^j — Lknow as well as you I should. have very little chance if Emily was at home — pray Heaven she may remain with her antiquated aunt two months longer — Wonder not then that I use all my ate 6 : 
24- LETTER XII 
traftions in her absence to fix him mine — foras that insolent fellow grove by Said once — ^ 1 am Sure you remember the time, and was as much piqued at it as rnysels — 
Yc meaner beauties of the Skies!! 
are ye when the fun doth rise? 
Oh! fortunate event, wshich brought my swtet laseelles and I acquainted while that pert minx was from home. 
— I might have looked and languished, but never have touched his heart 
— hat I make no doubt, would have fallen a Sacrifice to her all powtrful charms — ^ and yet my glass, Harriet, my glass strangely flatters me if I have not Some charms likewise — but there is Something in her, as the men Say, So interesting. So touchant, So — this is very pretty though, that I should undertake to enumerate the beauties of 
this 
letter xti. this rival Sister — no, I quit the Subject — I will pradice a few airs before the abovementioned glass, to put me in humour with mysels, and sty to my dear Baronet. — Positively I will give him all the encouragement I can — jmpress him wsith the idea that I am touched by his behaviour — and, Vitoria / shall gain the day. 
LETTER xiiii 
Sir EDW. LASCELLES 
T O 
HENRY LYTTLET6N, Esq: 
Find myself very agreeably Settled in this family — During the time of the whole party’s stay, we have 
Drank 

LETTER XIII 
“Drank and laugh’d, and danc’d and sung“ 
“left dull care behind us.” 
But most of the guests are departed; however, I have been prevailed on to remain a little longer. Indeed I could not resist the more than civil entreaties of the old folks. Seconded too by their daughter, who really does everything to contribute to my amusement — I admire her — Yet, am I in love with her.? — That is a question I know not how to answer — I like her better than any of the w’ omen here. — I cannot help thinking my mind is too much at ease for the state of a lover — • I have no’ anxieties — no disquiets. — But then, here is no difficulty; .our fortunes and families are equal — her parents Seem as. if they would be glad to have, me offer proposals; and I be -- sieve D rather experts it from, 
me. 
LETTER XIII gy 
me. — Why cannot I be content with a moderate share of happiness Why should I wish to experience the agitation which I have Seen poor musgrave labour under? how inconsistent is mankind I — A fine woman — a noble fortune — desirable connexions — all within my reach. — And yet I hesitate — I draw back— — grow foolish — I wish to love her more than all the world — I begin to think esteem is too cold a Sentiment — shall I tell you all my weakness? — I find Mr. Farnborough has another daughter younger than my intended — It was in a manner by accident that I heard of her — Why should they not have been more explicit — she is handsome— — more So than her elder Sister. — Would it not have been pretty in her to have Spoke of her to me? it would have strewed an affection 
ts LETTER xirr. tion which wmuld have endeared her to my heart. — Would you believe this concealment dwells on my mind? — There is a want of amiableness in it — The affection between two sisters, tvho are lovely women, interests me more than anything. 
I have been riding out with Eliza Farnborough. Eler polite attention and growing attachment steal upon me. — But still, not one word of this sister — I siightly mentioned her, and ashed when she was expected home — “Oh! not these many weeks I fancy.” — Do you not regret her absence?” — “We were very little together, our amusements lay in a different style.” — she then changed the discourse. — Oh! this looks not well. In a woman one loves to distradtion we may overlook or be blind to a great many imperfcdlions; but that must be 
a per 
LETTER XIII 89 
a persedt being indeed whom one marries merely Sor esteeming. — No; I must wait a little longer before I pronounce the irrevocable vow— — is it generous to keep her in suspence with regard to my future intentions? — But it is infinitely more honourable to be certain the hand I offer her is accompanied by my heart. — I arn fearful of entangling myself too far to recede — and yet if I remain here any longer time I do not See how I am to avoid coming to Some explanation — I must leave it at present to the chapter of accidents. — But before I close my letter, will relate another circumstance which rather perplexes me — It Seems to me there is Some mystery in this family. — Let me know if your thoughts coincide with mine. 
There is a young man in the house who was not thought of consequence 
enough 
5® LETTER XIIL 
enough to be introduced to me; I did not know at first what to make of him — he is Seldom present but ct meals, and then never Speaks, unless addressed by Some one who has humanity or even politeness enough to take notice of him — his figure is the most elegant and pleasing I ever beheld in man, though simple and unadorned — he has a melancholy countenance, but extremely ashduous, and Seems happy the employed. — The family I think are rather inclined to give him Such employment as Sordid minds are too apt to exact from patient merit — This however appeared not So visible while the house was silled with company. I had never heard him Spoken to but by the familiar appelsation of Charles — this you may be certain I could not adopt, and was at a loss. — I ashed miss Farnborough his name, 
and 
LETTER xm. 91 and who he was — she answered, he was the natural Son of a brother of her mother’s, and bore his name, which was Charles Neville — “Has he no provision ?” I ashed — Not from his father, ” Said she, but he has no reason to complain, he is very well taken care of here, you see he lives just as we do.” — 
“It is pity though he has not been brought up to Some profession; an idle life for So fine a young fellow is dangerous as well as unprofitable.” 
“He has no capacity, he is not three degrees from a natural — my father would have put him out Some years since, but he was So awkward and stupid that his master could not keep him.” 
I am anxious to have the history of this family at large — I'he estate which Mr. Farnborough is in possession of, 
be 
LETTER XIII longing to this young man’s father — ^ Four thousand a year! It is a great fortune for a man to come into, owing to Charles being born of parents who had not had the benediction of a priest; can he be generous, and only give this child of chance the common run of the house? — As Scrub Says, there are Secrets in all families/’ but one would wish those to wshom one means to join destinies should be a little more explicit. — Shall I ever be able to dcvelope these mysteries — Whether I am or not, I must try for it. 
I have been doing a thing I never yet put in practice in my life, and which I should, a month since, have condemned in myself or any other; — When Blundell attended me to my room tonight I asked him if he had heard the Servants Speak of Mr. Neville; he Said, they Seemed to think 
him 
letter XIII 93 
him a good Sort of young man, but he had not many Sriends in the family, as he could learn, and if it had not been for an old clergyman in the neighbourhood, and the youngest miss farnbo rough, he would hardly have been able to tell his letters. — The butler Said he was thought little better than a natural fool; but that the game keeper affirmed with an etath, that those who take young Squire Charles for a fool was deadly mistaken, Sor his tongue w” Old run fast enough Sometimes when they wtre out shooting; and it would do a man’s heart good to hear him; and there was not a better man to find a hare in the whole county. — This was blundell’s information verbatim et literatim. 
I was nor, however, Satisfied — This youngest miss Farnborough then is a favourite, no doubt, with 
Mr. 
9+ LETTER XIIL 
Mr. Neville?” — “Yes, your honour — the Servants Say she took to him while she was quite a child. — The whole hall Speaks in praise of miss Emily — they long for the time of her coming home.” — “When is she expected?” ?” asked with more Jang froid in my voice than I had in my heart. — “She would have been home by this time, or in a fortnight at farthest, but Mrs. Landen, the housekeeper, Says she has been written to, to stay as much longer as she pleases.” 
“You may leave the candles, Blundell, ” Said I, I do not find myself disposed to rest yet — call me early tomorrow— — stay, if you See Mr. Neville, or any of the Servants that attend him, make my compliments, and beg the favour of his comq>any to 
shoot in the morning.” 
As 
TETTER XITI. 95 
As Soon as Blundell quitted my chamber I applied to my port feuille. — The plot begins to thicken; — now I have Summed up the evidence, what am I to infer? — is this girl, this Eliza Farnborough, So amiable as I have been led to believe her from Mr. temple’s elaborate description — or from what I at first Saw os her? — Why should they wish to protradl the return of the younger daughter. — Eliza, is then both in love and jealous likewise. — Ought I not to be flattered? but I am not in love, — vet besjin to p; row suspicious. — How could Temple be deceived in her. — A thought has this instant struck into my mind, that overwhelms into doubt and apprehension. — Heaven forbid, that Emily should have been the miss Farnborough in v/hose praise he was So 
lavish. 
96 LETTER XIII lavish. — IS it should prove So, what a wretch am I? — yet why? — am I obliged to fall in love with the woman he has described? — no: most certainly not — but my attachment, if any, to this miss Farnborough, is not the most violent. — And — but there is no end to my surmises and conjectures. 
In this state of suspence, I must, however, remain till morning. — Oh! may my doubts be cleared away as the rising Sun dispels the dewy mist 1 I will go to bed however, but whether to steep or not I cannot tell — I have none in my eyes at present — * Macbeth hath murder’d steep.” 
1 
LETTER 
LETTER 
XIV 
T o T H E S A M E, 
In continuation. 
E T me at least be methodical, if not entertaining — I have devoted this day to investigation; but whether my researches will tend to a discovery of this mystic family I know not — “Hear all, and then let justice hold the Scale.” 
I Sound Mr. Neville ready when I came downstairs, and Seemingly very happy at the compliment I paid him. — We Sallied forth accompanied by a brace of sine pointers of charles’s own breeding. — I did not choose the company of the intelligent game keep vol. I. F er : 
5s LETTER XIV 
er; having, in truth, other game in 
view than partridges and hares. 
I find it is a fixed principle in the honse that I am to be married shortly to miss Farnborough; but with me it is quite doubtsul, by heavens! — I have got to my old plan of digressing already — I talked of the Samily to Neville — Said I only heard the other day of Mr. Farnborough having another daughter — I thought the young fellow blushed — perhaps he had been tutored — I was determined to be circumspedt — and, that I might throw him off his guard, talked in raptures of Eliza — he affeded to say as I did — I was not Satisfied — “Is miss Emily, as handsome as her sister ?” 
“Yes, Sir, most people think So.’* << Why has Mr. Farnborough given her permission to prolong her stay? — I should have thought her 
sister 
T 
LETTER XIV 9'5 sister would rather have wished for her return. — Is there a sisterly harmony between the young ladies 
Sir, I Snould be very happy to resolve you in anything — but really these questions.” — 
You are very discreet, my dear Mr. Neville — I beg your pardon, I ought not to interrogate you — and yet when I tell you I came into this family with an intention of making a part of it, I am rather inclined to have Some knowledge of it.” 
‘‘ Pardon me. Sir, it would not become a child of their bounty to Say the least thing disrespedsul of them; and my praise might be Sufpeded for an overflowing gratitude.” 
This man, as the butler Says, is little better than a natural fool — The game keeper was right — I was dead, ly wifaken in my conjedur® — This 
F 2 
dist 
to LETTER XIV dissimulation runs in the blood. — Why then don’t I file off, and Sound a retreat in time? — Something detains me. — I wanted to make a Sriend of Neville; I told him, as a Secret, that, Snould a connexion take place, I should take pleasure in being Serviceable to him — ashed him which way his inclination lay, whether to the church or the army. — He thanked me with an appearance at least of sincerity; but Said, his views and wishes were very circumscribed, and he had no ambition. 
“But, Sir, you must have views beyond the life of Mr. Farnborough, escufe me, and do not think me impertinent— — you should have had no provision made for you, what Scheme do you mean to pursue?” ?” 
“have met with unexpedled friends, Sir, already; and I depend 
on 
\ 
LETTER XIV 
7cr 
on Providence never forsaking the unsortunate, ” 
Now indeed, thought I, he talks like a Sool — But this I really believe was all cunning. 
Crossing a lane we Saw two or three little ragged children, wff.o immediately ran up to Neville. — “Oh! Sir, ’’ Said the biggest one, “pray when does miss Emily come back? my ma mmy Says she only wishes to live to See her once again.” 
How does your mother, Joe, ” ashed Mr. Neville. — “Very bad indeed, Sir; and though you are So good to her, yet she prays night and day for her blessed miss Emily to come.” 
Where does your mother live, my little man V I ashed. — “In that cottage, pleasc your honour.” 
F 7 “Who 
LETTER XIV 
Who is this poor woman, Mr. Neville? can I be of any service to her ?” 
You are very good, Sir Edward; she is the widow of a poor man who was drawn for the militia — whosc love for his vise and family being luv perior to his patriotism, he deserted to See her when she lay in about eight months Since; poor Soul! she fell into sits as Soon as she Saw him, judging what would be the consequence os his desertion. — The unfortunate Soldier had walked upwards of ninety miles in less than two days, with hardly any Support — ‘ he told a thousand stories to quiet the mind of his unhappy V ife; but too Soon she was undeceived — an osheious neio; hbour had Set the news abroad that John wilson was come back from camp — The parish officers 
r 
Seized the poor deserter; and. 
amid 
the 
LETTER XIV loj the shrieks and lamentations of the distressed family, tore hint away. — On his arrival at camp he was Sentenced to receive'five hundred lashes. — Fatigue and grief had half killed him first — the accounts we got were far from Satisfadiory; but he died in less than a fortnight, leaving his wretched wife with four children. — The family at Westbury Park have been very kind to her.” 
But miss Emily, I fancy, has been the most attentive.” 
Yes, to be Sure miss Emily was very kind indeed, and the poor vyo man is grateful.” 
By this time we reached the cottage — where we found a woman under thirty, with a child at her breast; but who herself vrore all the traces of grief upon her countenance — she looked 
“Oh 1 Safi 

4 
far gone in a decline. 
i LETTER XIV rah, ’’ Said Mr. Neville, what would miss Emily Say, is she Saw you thus employed? did you not promise. her to wean your child? — you will kill both it and yourself.” 
“My good Sir, ” cried Sarah, bursting into tears, I know I ought to do everything to preserve ray life for my little ones; but ray poor heart is quite broken; and, though I know my duty, I cannot, indeed I cannot fulfil it. — Yet I do pray, on my bent knees, night and day, that I may be Supported with the bleshngof God, till my ever kind and generous miss Emily comes home; she promised to take care of ray poor children — under her care they won’t raiss me. — “Do you, • Sir, ” to me, know miss Emily ?” 
I have not that honour at present — but you have, in a Sew words, 
drawn 
LE T T E R XIV. los drawn So amiable a character of her,, that I shall impatiently wait for So great a happiness.” 
“Oh! your honour, if I had the tongue of an angel I could not do her justice. — She is herself an angel. Had you but Seen her! you, Mr. Neville, was by, when, as our worthy Rector Says, she poured oil and wine into my wounds. — She did more — • she washed them with her precious tears. — To See Such a lady, So rich I So beautiful! tending a poor creature like me! — Had I been her equal — but hove I talk — she has not her equal on earth 
I felt myself quite overcome — and “nobly shed Sweet pity’s tear.’’ — I Vas Sorry when Mr. Neville stopped her eloquent gratitude, by telling her Sne would hurt herself by talking So much; and that her'benefadtress wish f 5 cei 
io letter XIV ed her not to mention anything of her bounty. — For my part, I would have listened all day. — “I don’t understand these matters, Mrs. wilson, ” Said I, “but if it is necessary for your infant to have the breast, can you not find out Some kind neighbour who would Sustain it with her milk for a trifling Sum of money? you then would be eased of a great fatigue, and your child will thrive. — Let us endeavour, Mr. Neville, to induce Some one to undertake this charge; I believe both you and myself will think Such an office the best: Sport we can have, ” He most readily acquiesced in my proposal; and we made the poor widow recollect a neighbour who possibly would come into our Scheme. — Her, WT Sought, and struck a bargain instantly. — She returned with us; and agreed to remain with Sarah Wilson. 

LETTER XIV 107 
Son, and nurse her as well as the babe. 
On our way home, Neville begged I would not notice at Westbury our adventure. — Mr.farnborough, he Said, was very stridl about game; and it had been alleged, that John wilson had Snared hares — on which account, Mr. Farnborough and a gentleman in the next parish had got him Set down for the militia. — There was a person who interested herself in the business, and would freely have paid a Substitute, firmly believing him innocent of the charge, as the information was given by a very infamous fellow, who was notorious Sor poaching. 
And the name of this person, ” Said I, loooking in his face, “is miss Emily.” 
“Sir? Sir ?” hesitated he, Why r — yes — it was her; but pray don’t F 6 Speak 
io LETTER XIV 
Speak of it — she would be displeased.” I readily assured him I would not. — You may believe, here was subjedt matter enough for Speculation. Everything that is praiseworthy Seems to belong to this Emily. — I have not heard of any charitable actions of poor Eliza — and yet, I remember how much comoassion she showed at 
X 
an adventure we met with near blandford— — her bounty is felt but not Seen. — Emily may be ostentatious — yet, why not hear of her merit? — her goodness to Sarah could not have that object in view — she does not dare discover her amiable benevolence, because the family of Westbury Park have already persecuted the wretched receiver — persecuted even to the death of them both; for poor Sarah Seems not likely to be long an inhabitant of this world. — Oh 1 what a world it 
T h r 
LETTER XIV loj 
Is! that one man, who may eat of all the good things of life, should assume to himself the exclusive privilege of devouring hares and partridges I and; on a villain’s oath, could hunt a poor fellow-creature to the grave! — I would not be one of the maker’s of the game a6c for the universe! 
Well, do you think the family here rise in my opinion on this day’s adventure? — Part of it has; but that part I have not yet seen. 
This may prove a very fortunate circumstance, meeting with Sarah wilson. — She does not Seem to have a padlock on her lips, as all the others have — I shall pay her a visit en pajfant; and perhaps gather Some intelligence from her — yes, tomorrow I will positively have some conversation with her; the result of which I will lay before you. — Indeed, exr 
elusive 
110 LETTER XV elusive from the pleasure of halting, as it were, with my dear Harry, I have no other method of relieving my mind; here I can have no confidant, and with the multiplicity of conjecture, without Such communication, I should run mad. 
I am ever your’s. 
LETTER 
XV 
To the SAME. 
It is now three days since our charitable visit to the cottage; — I went thither yesterday with Mr. Neville, and really think poor Sarah begins to have better looks. — This morning I shall go alone; — and may perhaps gather 
Some intelligence. 
Mr. 
LETTER XV iifj Mr. Farnborougsh is to give a ball in the evening to half the people in the country; — what must they think of me all the while? — Everybody imagines I am Soon to be married. — Oh! this bufiness has been sadly conducted. — No doubt Mr, farnbo rough is momently in expectation of my asking his consent— — am Sorry to Say eliza’s partiality is too obvious; would to heaven I had never Seen her! — And yet while I am with her, and feel myself flattered with her notice, — notwithstanding my resolution, I am ready to alk her to be mine. — My vanity and self-love will be my ruin at lash — But the breakfast bell Summons me to meet the family; if I can steal half an hour, you shall have the result of my cottage conversation. — 
^ « 
We 
SI LETTER XT. 
We did not break up our assembly till Soon this morning; — I danced most of the night with Eliza; — her party was brilliant — Some I knew. — I was congratulated by those who were my acquaintance. — I felt con fused and hurt, because it was farther from my intention than ever, to bring it to a conclusion. — Why then do I stay at the Park? — I ash myself this plain question twenty times a day; — 1 cannot answer it; — I loiter here in expectation of Seeing Emily. — Oh! Harry, to be Sure she must be the divinity, at whose shrine Temple wished me to devote myself! — ■! have a great deal to Say in consequence of my visit yesterday. — 
I desired the nurse to take the child out, being a very fine morning — and after Some preliminary chat, alkcd Sarah, what she knew of the family 
of 
LETTER XV 115 of Westbury — “I know, ’^ continued I, ” you have Suffered Srom Some part of it — but do not let prejudice induce you to Say anything which is not true. — You may confide in me, and to convince you I may be trusted, I will let you into a Secret; — I came hither, on hearing miss Farnborough Spoken of as the most beautiful and most amiable woman in the world. — I had not Seen her, but Srom the recommendation of a friend. Sought her out. — Do you think she answers the description 
Pray, your honour, will you give me leave to ask you one question? — Where did your Sriend See miss Farnborough .?’* 
He was then on a visit in Hampshire.” — Then it is as I thought — It was my blessed miss Emily who has been in Hampshire between three 
and 
LETTER XV and four months.” — God forbid!” I exclaimed. 
I have already told you, Sir, of her goodness. — Her sister — but I beg your pardon.” — 
“What of her ?” 
She is not to be compared to her for goodness— — it is plain to See the eldest is the favourite — and if Ido nor offend — I may Say it is, like to llkep 
So, thought I — then what I have feared is come to pass; — how Snail I extricate myself? — But to drown resseclion, I ashed her if Isle remembered the father of Mr. Nevisie V “Yes, that I do, indeed, your honour. — He was as worthy a man as ever drew breath.” 
But to leave this natural Son unprovided for, is a poor proof of your assertion, my good woman.” 
God 
LETTER XV ir God knows the hearts of people — Sir — but I believe there was Sad soul bussness in that affair. — The poor unhappy young gentleman died in a very strange way! — I remember there was great talk about it at the time. — It is just turned of twenty years since it happened; — if my poor father was here, he could tell your honour how it rdl was.’’ 
“I fancy, Sarah, you can tell me a great part of it.” 
“’las, a day! Sir, I was but a child to be Sure at the time — and yet I remember it as well as if it was but yesterday. — Indeed, I heard my father tell the whole matter Some few years ago — and a Sad, Sad Story it was. — I have frequently, when my poor heart has been bursting for my own Sorrows and misfortunes — I have often thought that poor people are 
not 
iis LETTER XV not alone unhappy; — Sor, with all their riches, there has been grief enough in the family at Westbury; and Sor ten times their riches I would not have the conscience of Some of them.’^ 
“Proceed, ” Said I — “go on.” Why, Sir, young Squire Neville, tvho was heir to the estate, was rather wild in his disposition; yet as good a heart as ever man had. — When he was about eighteen, he went abroad on his travels, and there Sell in love with a young nun — she was as beautiful, Sir, as I think miss Ensily.” 
‘‘ You have then Seen this lady ?’* 
“Oh! that I have, she was many times at my father’s house. — The Squire used to meet her there very often — quite by stealth; — poor creature! how have I Seen her Sob and 
cry. — 
letter XV x19 
CT5L — I was but a child, your honour. So that they did not mind me."’ 
“So the young Squire had debauched this nun, and Mr. Neville was the fruit of their intrigue.” 
Sir, ” Said she, looking about, as if fearful of being overheard. — as much believe they were lawful man and wise as I believe I am this instant Speaking to you. — As I Said, being a child, they were not on their guard before me; therefore it could answer no purpose to attempt to deceive me. — I have heard him a thousand times call her his dear wife; and, when she expressed her doubts of being received in his family, he has repeatedly told her, ray dearest Ninon, have I not given you every proof of my passion? — have I not Sworn to acknowledge you the day I come of age? — you know then I shall come 
into 
120 
LETTER XV into my fortune; — be content, my Sweet girl, with the knowledge that I am your true husband till that day; then shall my arms be opened to receive my beloved wife; and as Such, shall you be acknowledged by the ■whole family. 
“Mrs. Farnborough was sister by another mother to Mr. Neville. — She was many years older than him, and had a large fortune, which was Settled on her by the marriage articles. — But Some people never think they have enough. — How happy was I, when my poor husband could get nine shil ings a week; — I wanted no more. — However, the more folks have the more they want, I think. — One should have thought upwards of fifty thousand pounds — and married besides, to a man who had eight hundred a year, would have contented 
them, 
LETTER XV 121 
them, without tearing; and rendino poor creatures to death to get more. — But when a man will Send a poor fellow-creature for a Soldier on a false accusation, and be the cause of his death — I can wonder at nothing, for my part. 
“But I am running away from my story — and shall tyre your honour before I have half done. 
In cafe Mr. Neville died before he came of age, the estate was Settled on the Son of Mr. Farnborough. — Aye! aye! there their hearts bled enough— — is Sorely come home to them in Some things already — Mrs, Neville (for my poor father would never call her by any other name) was then big of young Mr. Charles, and being pretty near her time, Mr. Neville prevailed on his youngest sisteta who is married to a clergyman 
in 

LETTER XV in Hampshire, a Sweet tempered good Soul — to come and pay his wise a visit. — I was in the room most of the time that day; — I am Sure I heard her call her sister — besides, could one suppose he would have brought his own sister to See his mis uess? — well, the time drew nigh for the young squire’s birthday, and great preparations were made for fireworks and feasting. — All the country were eager to be present at these sine doings — - It was talked of for many weeks, before the day — Alas! that day never came — a most dreadful affair happened; and by that means, poor Mr. Charles was, I believe I miay say, wronged out of his estate.. 
“Not a week before the time So much looked and longed for, Mr. Neville eat Something that made him very Sick — He complained of his stomach being uneasy, and his sister, his 
own 
LETTER XV xt 
own sister I mean, poor unhappy lady! fearful he would not be well enough to enjoy his birthday, begged him to take Something. - — He Sent to a doctor’s for an emetic — he took it in the evening, and Soon began to reach violently, and cried out he was in agonies. — In a very little time the housekeeper Said she believed he had taken poison. — News Soon flies is it is bad,. 
— poor Mrs. Neville had come to our honse in expedlation of Seeing her husband;; neighbour ran in crying out. Oh! the young ’squire is dying! — I met one of the men going to the doctor to know what they had Sent him 
— they Say he is poisoned. * — Oh! 
how the poor Lady flirieked and Screamed! site flew like lightning to the great house (my mother was then assisting at ironing) — nobody thought of stopping her — she ran directly into. vol. I. G his 
122 LETTER XV his room; when. Seeing him in the pangs of death, she gave a loud cry, and fell on the mound senseless. — Her 
O 
dying husband cast his eyes on her, and strove to Speak — he caught his sister’s hand — he pointed to the as fiicted lady, who they were endeavouring to recover — and then, my mother Says, she well remembers it, joined his hands together — loosened them — pointed to the finger on which tvedding rings are worn — and then again joined his hands together — he Seemed in agonies because he could not Speak. — The Lady, almost sran tic, burst Srom the people who held her, and threw herself on the bed by him. — He cast the most tender look upon her, and took her hand in his — was Seized with fresh convulsions; but never quitted his hold till death had released him Srom his torture. —, 
All 
LETTER XV i All the people strove to carry the Lady away; but she made the most vio lent resistance — her grief and terror brought on labour pain; and that night, amidst all the horror and confusion which prevailed in So melancholy a house, her child was born — she lived but two hours after his birth — she implored miss Neville to believe she was the true and lawful wife of her unhappy brother — and that she doubted not papers would be found to prove their marriage, which had been Solemnised abroad — she gave a paper into the hand of miss Neville; which my mother will Swear to Mr. farnborough’s taking from her and throwing into the fire. 
There was never any papers brought to light; and poor Mr. Neville has been bred up as a base born.” 
G 2 But 
j24 LETTER XV 
“But was there no inquiry made into the death of Mr. Neville— — did the doctor Say ?” 
I mentioned to your honour, a Servant had been dispatched in great haste to the doctor; when he told his message, the doctor Seemed in violent consufion, and Said, he only Sent him Some tartar, I think they call it, and thought it could not be too strong; but that he would take horse and follow the man immediately. Saying, he only would make up Something to give ’squire Neville ease. — However, they waited in vain Sor the return of the doctor; he was never heard of from that day to this. — The family Spoke of his absconding as a proof that he had been unshilsul enough to send a wrong medicine, and feared the discovery would ruin him in his practice, as he had not been long Settled 
LETTER XV 125 
tied in the neighbourhood. — But there were not people wanting who whis percd, it was very easy to prevail on a man, Sora large Sum of money, to go off, where he might live in affluence, and unknown.a paper was Said to be found, which certainly quieted the minds of people who had no interest or concern to prove any mischief— — was Said to be the doctor’s handwriting, and contained only a few words — just to Say — Lhe dijlrefs he felt on finding he had. been guilty o[ fo fatal a mifiake would embitter all his days — that his life was a torment — and he would hanifh himself for ever from the world.! 
“persons of large fortunes easily find the means to bias juries. — ■'an inquest was taken, and the coronet found the death of Mr. Neville to be accidental.” 
G 2 “Do 
126 LETTER XV 
“Do you think Mr. Charles Neville has any suspicion of Soul play ?” It is hard to Say, your honour — but, no doubt, he has been kept in ignorance as much as possible. — And it was very easy So to do, as he was only born the very day both his un happy parents died. — I know Some persons are of opinion, that proof still remains of the marriage of his father — but those persons are poor — and wdiat can poor people do against the rich 
« Why, the laws are equally favourable to the one as the other.” 
True, Sir, but 1 have heard my father often Say, with sighs, that unless a man had a great deal of money to pay lawyers, might ‘ve'culd overcome rightv 
“You have often mentioned your father, my good woman, during your 
in 
LETTER XV lar 
interesting narrative; pray what was he ^ for, from the language you use, yon must have had some education.” 
“He kept a little School, Sir, and was clerk of this parish; but, having a large family, he could only give us a little learning.” 
“Is he living r” 
“Yes, Sir, he has quitted this place a good while, having been very much distressed— — are very unfortunate; the ’squire’s family has, Some how or other, always been a gainst us; and when the richest man in the place Sets his face against a poor one, it is not difficult to See how things must go with him. — Yet, I am Sure ’squire Farnborough ought rot, os all men, to be So Severe on my father, Sori believe he, if any one in the world could, might make him tremble — but he defies everything. 
G 4 — All 
xzi LETTER XV 
— All the neighbours reported the house was haunted; and the Servants were going to give warning, being afraid to stay in their places — I w'ar rant they would not have gone into “Squire neville’s room for the world 
— however, Mr. Farnborough had courage enough; So he and Madam used to lie there every night, wshich made the Servants choir easy; for, as they Said, they had done no harm; and if their master and mistress was not hurt, to be Sure the Spirit must be a very harmless one; but yet everybody wondered how they could be So presumptuous as to venture themselves in that room, ” 
I obtained of her the name of the place where her father lived; and giving her five guineas for the trouble 1 had given her, took my leave, cautioning her not to mention this con 
very 
2q 
LETTER XV versation to any living creature. — “Indeed, Sir, I never will; and you are the only person I have ever talked to on the Subject— — father made me promise I never would — IS, Says he, it pleases Heaven to raise this child up a friend, it will then be time enough — I yet flatter myself that the verse in the psalms will be verified — ■■ / never yet Jaw the righteous forsaken, or his seed begging bread — besides, I have received Such kindness from miss Emily, that I should be Sorry on her account any trouble should come on her family.” 
I could have staid with pleasure to hear her talk more on this affair; bu" it grew late; and I was obliged to dress early, as Some of the guests were expected to dinner; So homeward I bent my way, absorbed in a train of thoughts. — Very near the Park I met G 5 wit 
io LETTER XV with the much injured Neville. Lest he should discover I had been to See Sarah wilson, I informed him os my visit. — He congratulated me on the goodness os my heart. — Poor fellow, he little knew how much I was interested in his future fortune. — I beheld him with a kind of reverence; as I believe him ignorant of the wrongs that have been done him and his parents; burr, if knowing the truth of the case, he could Submit to eat of their bread I should despise him. — Yet, what can he do? — I have a strong Suspicion this father could clear up matters very much — I must and will Seek him out — This then determines me to stay longer. 
I had Some difficulty to suppress my feelings when I met the Samily — I fancied myself in the Castle of Otranto — and thought I discovered the murderer 
LETTER XV 131 
derer and ufurperj Momfred, in the features of Mr. Farnborough. — I have more to learn os Mrs. "wilson; for she Spoke of a Son they had — I must pay her another visit. Adieu! 
LETTER 
XVI 
Miss FARNBOROUGH 
T O 
Miss GORE. 
H! Harriet! death to all my hopes; Emily is coming home! — we have this day received a letter Srora her, informing us she intended Setting off the next day — Our letter then, which I persuaded Mama to write, G 6 whi 
132 LETTER XVI will not reach her till the evening before she Sets out — And this Sir Edward too! — how I am teased! — Is it not very odd he should not have applied to my Sather for his consent > — ' He still behaves very stothsully — and yet, if I had a mind to torment myself, I could Sometimes fancy he cools a little — I think there is a constraint in his deportment; perhaps it is only conjetsture — Oh! grant. Heaven, it niay! — "What would become of me if Emily should rob me of his heart? 
■ — There is distra(siion in the idea! — What possessed her t return So Soon? — 'Or rather, what evil demon ruled to prevent our writing Sooner to her— — fate over rules us I believe. 
I intended giving you an account of our ball — indeed, it was very much like the last; only, enlivened by the blooming lascelles.he danced almost 
LETTER XVI *23 most the whole time with me; his behaviour was quite as I would have wished — not So particular as to make me ridiculous; yet Sufficiently tender and attentive to inspire me with the most pleasing ideas. — He gave his hand to two other ladies; but they were both married; and neither very handsome. — There was Something gallant in that procedure — was there not? 
My father thinks it odd he does not disclose his intentions — I am Sure we have done all in our power, and paid him every civility; but the truth is, the time of our acquaintance has been very short — it is not yet a month since we first Saw him. — I would not have you suppose, my dear Harriet, I am in a hurry to be married — was not my sister to return, or had he made a formal declarationa I should rest contented 
334 n E T T R R XVI tented — But I am conscious of being nothing while she is by; and though my reversionary estate is Such an aid to my person, yet you know Emily, without Speaking a word, “would even Srora the bidding of the gods command.’^ — Yes, yes, I see too plainly I shall neither gain or retain lovers while she is by — I wish Some Hampshire ’squirewould have fallen in love with her, and kept her there for ever — even that insensible wretch, that 
“Cymon, a clown, who never dreamed of love.” 
That Charles neville’s stupid eyes can brighten up when she is by! — But she has ever shown Such partiality to him, that to be Sure he could not poffess the Smallest Spark of gratitude without paying her Some attention — believe me, I am not jealous at all of it; yet it Serves to show how much she out blazes me in every 
body’s 
LETTER xvr. 135 
body’s eyes, my father and mother ever excepted — there, I think I am certain of being the favourite — they both dote on this Baronet. — Oh! why does he not explain himself! — I give him all the opportunity and encouragement I can. — I don’t suppose it proceeds from any mauvaije honte; for although he has not mixed much in the toni yet his education, which has been highly cultivated, must have cor redfed that natural infirmity of the English — his fortune, rank, and figure likewise entitle him to acceptance 
— and his wish of being introduced, is an incontestable proof of his inclination towards us; and 1 am certain the whole style of his behaviour indicated a man rather attached than otherwise 
— add to all this, he has not the least Symptom of coquetry in his disposition. 
— I repeat it again, what then withholds 

136 I. E T T E R XVI holds his Speech? — He must See that it wouldbe highly pleasing to my father; and, I doubt not, he has mad the discovery of its not being altogether disagreeable, or unlocked for by me. 
Itisadelicate point; buti couldalmost wish my father would take notice to him that the world thinks it particular his remaining at our houle — men can contrive to say Such things to one another, only to our weak Sex it is given to conceal our feelings, and sigh in Secret. — In short, he is the only man whom I really loved for his own merit — I have had my palpitations — but then, they have been produced from a desire of gaining conquests — I now wish for nothing else than to Secure one — whether I shall be So happy or not, time must prove — but what will equal my chagrin, should I 
to 
LETTER XVI 137 be destined to have my laurels cropped by a younger sister! — Yet, when I ressedl on her personal charms — but why should I attempt to enumerate them — to you, Harriet, they are as well known as to me. 
“And envy magnifies whate’er the fliews.’'" 
We are to have a little musical party this evening; I fiiall practice that little tender air you Sung here — perhaps the words and manner, which shall be as Seducingly correspondent with the words as possible, may Soften his heart. — Would he but once declare himself I should not have a doubt remaining, as I believe him to be a man of strict honour; therefore he would not falsify his word — whereas, should he desert me now, he might Say, “I never made her an offer, ” — But are not men as much to blame, 
who 
LETTER XVI who Seek, by every means, to make an interest in your heart? — nay, more, for here they leave )mu not the right of complaint, though they give you So much cause Sor it. — This, I am Sensible, my dear Harriet, is not a theme I ought, for your Sake, to dwell much upon — I doubt your wounds are not yet So callous as to bear touching without feeling pain — insolent Groveby! — Why can you not despise him as he ought to be despised?? — could you not treat him with the same contempt Emily did? and yet, at that moment, I believe you wtre rather more displeased with her than him — you thought, but for her, he might have been your’s — she revenged your cause by rejecting him with Scorn — you have that 
But I know 
obligation however to her. 
LETTER XVII 13^ know you do not love her — I shall, is she does not inter Sere with my petit amant — if she does — “vengeance is mine!'’ Adieu! 
LETTER XVII 
■sir EDW. LASCELLES 
T O 
HENRY LYTTLETON, Esq; 
i HIS morning I paid another visit to Sarah wilson, to make the farther inquiries necessary to develop this mystic Saniily. — She appeared very willing to renew the conversation — ■ upon my ashing her wshat became of 
Mr. 
3t4<? 
LETTER 
Mr. farnborough’s Son 
xvir. 
“Oh! Sir, ” Said she, “they had a heavy loss in him; he was a very promising youth, astd vtmuld have done honour to the best family in the world. — When Mr. Charles Neville was born, Mr. farn borough was about eight years old; my mother had been his, wet nurse, and he had a great affedhion for her — nothing gave him more pleasure than talking to his nurse, as he always called her — and, as he had an understanding beyond his years, (indeed, my mother used to Say he was too wise to live) he would talk to her more like a man than a child. — I believe the family would not have consented to breed up poor Mr. Neville, but for the extreme desire, and earnest persuasion of their Son. — He took a great fancy to the child; and Said he would teach him to read and write as Soon as 
he 
LETTER xvir. i he was big enough. — As he increased in knowledge, his attachment increased likewise; and the little infant Seemed to be Sensible of his kindness, and grateful to him for it. — Master Farnborough, within a year of his death, told my mother, that if he lived to be a man, he would take care cousin Charles should want for nothing, or ever have cause to regret the loss of his fortune. — I love him, he would Say, with So much real affection, that I think I could freely give up everything to him, and trust to his generosity and affection for a Subsistence. — Mr. Charles, however, received but little advantage from his cousins goodness, he being Snatched away just when his endeavours might have been Serviceable. 
“Master Farnborough had just attained his fourteenth year when he 
was 
ia LETTER XVIL was attacked with a fever — poor young gentleman! he gave hiraself up from the first — he insisted on my mother’s attending him in character of nurse, and would not take anything from the Servants — ‘‘ No, ” he used to Say, “let nurse give me my medicine ■ — it will do more good from her than anybody else.” He used to talk in So heavenly a manner — it was as good as to hear a Sermon to listen to him. — He was persedly resigned to his fate; and Said, his only regret was, that he was not come of a proper age to make his will — “Oh! my poor Charles 1 my adopted !” cried he, “what will become of you when I am taken from you! — My dear Eliza and Emily are children like yourself— —! nurse, that my father and mother would but do for him what I would have done had it pleased God 4 to 
LETTER XVII 143 to prolong my life Seven years longer. — I will beg it of them. — Perhaps a dying child — an only Son — and one whom they have ever tenderly loved, may infiuence'them. — Young as I was, I remember the deaths of his father and mother — that they were his parents, no one denies — Surely then, he ought to have Some provision made out of So large a fortune, which we inherit by that fatal event — Do, nurse, call my father and mother! — She obeyed him — they knelt by his bedside— — made my mother witness his request — perhaps. Said he, I am Snatched away as a punistt ment. — Mr. and Mrs. Farnborough looked both shocked and astonished. — What have you been Saying? Said the lady to my mother, in a haughty tone, what notions have you instilled into my child? — “Indeed, my lady, nothing 
144 LETTER XVII thing — I have never opened my lips either to praise or blame any one.” — ‘‘ She is not in Sault, my dear mother; don’t hurt me, by blaming my poor nurse, who would grieve for having offended you — The expression I used was didated by my own reflections. — I should not be happy till I had made an ample provision for the soil of my brother, if I was in your place — you can do it — my father can do it — I cannot. — I feel that no blessing will attend our house rill that justice is done — I am dying — grant me that felicity and I shall die in peace. — But, if I am denied, my last moments will be embittered; and you will, when too late, regret the anguish with which my Soul will quit its mansson.” — “This boy has been tutored, ” whispered the father. Yet who could have tutored him? — 
mv 
LETTER XVII *4$ my mother, a poor ignorant womast, could not be supposed to have taken Such an office upon her — the Servants did not care about the poor little orphan — No; rather it was the inspiration os heaven. — But what did it signify? — they indeed made his last moments easy by promises — promises which they never fulfilled; perhaps never meant to fulfil. — Oh! wffiat hearts they have! — Surely one would have thought the death of Such a Son 
— a Son for whom they had violated So many ties, might have Softened their hearts. 
“The dying Saint begged to See his little Savourite, together with his Sisters, of w’hom he was equally Sond 
— miss Farnborough was then Seven, and miss Emily five, years old. — He killed and embraced them Several times, and shed tears over them — 
vol.i. H they 
14-6 LETTER XVII they mingled thcir’s with his — My dearest companions, ” cried he, in a broken voice, ‘‘ I am going to leave you — I am torn from you, my dear Charles, at a time when you are just capable of receiving instrudion from me — those flattering hopes are vanished. — But you, my dear father and mother, you have promised (and by that promise have Smoothed my dying pillow) that this brother of my love shall experience no loss in me — Oh! be kind to him, my dear sisters — •love him for my sake — I am much deceived if he does not prove himself worthy to be beloved for his own. — Cherish him, my dear parents, and he will be a comfort to you — reject him, and misery must ensue.” these wtre almost the last words he Spoke; he did not live above an hour after. — The distress of the parents was very 
vio 
LETTER XVII 147 violent; and everybody thought they. were Sufficiently punished Sor their misdeeds, in losing Such a prop to their house. 
“They were So much overpowered by the affliction their loss occasioned, that they left Westbury Park, and went to reside, for near four years, at a house which belonged to them besore the death of Mr. Neville — and to show their attention to their son’s dy ing request, very humanely left Mr. Charles to the care of the Servants here during that Space os time, declaring, he put them So much in mind os their beloved James that they could not Support his sight. — Plad he not been os the most tradtable and engaging disposition, I doubt not he would have Suffered very much from their neglect— — the Servants all loved him — an old Servant of the Neville H 2 family 
*48 LETTER XVII family used to show him the utmost kindness — and has been frequently checked for styling him my young maf ier. — I cannot help it, ” the old man would Say, “I still think he has the best right here — in that opinion I shall live and die.” 
After the expiration of the Sour years, the Farnboronghs returned thither. — The distance Suited them better, on account of the young ladies eoinsc to School at Dorchester; and they Seemed to have entirely overcome their s; rief — Mr. Charles Neville no longer reminded them of their Son — and they beheld him with their accus tomed indifference. — Not So miss Emily — she Sawq with great concern, that at an age when boys, in particular, should be far advanced in Latin, poor Charles could Scarcely tell his letters — Though a year younger, she 
under 
LETTER XVII 149 undertook to be his schoolmistress, and the six weeks she remained at home, had taught him to read tolerably — she obtained the favour os her mother to allow him to go to a little day school in the parish, kept by an old woman, that he might not forget what she had been teaching him; — but, on her return, she found him very little improved, and that he had contradsed a disagreeable tone in pronunciation — this she was at great pains to correct; and applied herself closely to his improvement. — The family have ever Said he wanted a capacity; but I have heard miss Emily say, she was astonished at the rapidity with which he took his learning. — In these holidays she had broke him in tirely of his tone, and had begun wri ting joining hand — she would not Suffer him any longer to goto School; 
H 3 but 
ISO L E T T k st. XVII but left him talks to do in her absence. — Having; now discovered he had Some genius, she resolved to cultivate her own to the utmost, that Ihe might be able to transmit to him the improvements she made. — For this purpose she learned Latin, and pos seffed hei'self of what is generally called School learning for boys. — He was Sensible of the pains she took for him 5 and made Such a progress while ihe was with him, as delighted and astonished her — but he could never apply in her absence — • while she was with him he Seemed all alive, all animation — as Soon as the time came for her quitting home, he Sunk again into his original stupidity, as they called it — dejedtion might have been a better word. — Suffice it to Say, all that Mr. Neville knows, or is, he owes to miss Emily — without her affis 
taiice 
LETTER XVII 151 tance he would have been nothing. — She, poor young Lady! has got the ill-will of her Sather and mother by her affection for him — but she Says, 1 remember the dying words of my dear brother; and I mean to prove, that I do not, or ever will forget his last request.” — She, however, is the only one that has paid that testimony to his memory; and may all blessings be her’s for that, as well as every other good she has done!” 
Now you have before you, my dear Harry, the petite hijioire of the westbury park folks, and a precious family it appears to be, Srom this picture, for an honest man to wish a connedlion with; — ever excepting the divine Emily! — I must See her — yet what may be the consequence, will it not prove fatal i — Ah! I cannot stay to investigate the matter; — H 4 I must 
I5Z LETTER XVII 
I must and will See her. — If I can make an interest in her heart; — I will struggle hard but poor Neville shall enjoy his right in the paternal estate; — let Eliza take the fortune Settled on younger children, and if Emily will take me, I shall be rich enough. 
“Do thou snatch treasures from my lips, 
“And i’ll take kingdoms back from thine.’* 
Thus will I sing to her — don’t you adore her character — a more agreeable figure, with Such a mind and disposition, would be an inestimable gem; — but when I am told she is infinitely handsomer than Eliza, who I allow to be very much So — oh! how my heart dances at the idea! — I am all ecstasy, and am wsilling to forgive the old folks everything 

LETTER XVII j53 tiling for only producing Such a creature! 
I have not Seen Eliza yet, or indeed any the family since breakfast; having most of my morning taken up with my new acquaintance. — I hope the poor wmman’s reputation will not Suffer from the visits of a gay young Baronet. — Serioussy, I was afraid for her, I mean on account of her health. But talking, I believe does not injure the Sex; — she looks infinitely better than when we first Saw her; — I have clothed her children and put them to School. — I feel a pleasure in anticipating my charming Emily in her charities I hope she will be pleased with the care we have taken of the family, whose cause she espoused. — Oh 1 what a mind must her’s be! how shall I manage to stay till her 
return? -- -- -1 must fabricate Some 
H 5 plausi 
1^4 LETTER XVII plausible excuse for that purpose, — anything — but an immediate offer of my hand to her sister. Indeed I blame myself for my equivocal proceedings respefting Eliza, but what can Ido? — am I to Suffer for the mistake of my zealous friend? — yet what right have I to keep another woman one moment in suspense myself?? — I not in suspense, the most cruel suspence myself? — fine method of reasoning this! — how it will end I know not — I foresee nothing — I prophesy nothing — I determine on nothing, but of remaining now and for ever ray dear harry’s steady friend. 
E. L 
LETTER 
( *55) 
LETTER XVIII 
To THE SAME. 
When I went into the drawing-room, I thought I perceived a gloom on the features of miss Farnborough, I tenderly inquired the cause, and I observed my manner dispelled the vapour in an instant, and the Sun began to shine. — She made a trifling excuse for her penferofo Jiik, and immediately became allegro. She told me she had prepared a little music for the evening, Searing the eternal sameness which prevailed at Westbury, should pos sess me with ennuii. This demanded a gallant ansever, and I was tempted to kiss her hand; in short, I Sound myself quite disposed to play the fool, and if we had not been interrupted, H 6 her 
156 LETTER XVIII her softness, of which I never had Seen her display So much, might have drawn me in to Say or do Something I might have repented of. — 
Mr. Farnborough had been out all the morning; while at dinner, Mrs. Farnborough Said, “I have not Seen you all day, my dear; we have had a letter from Emily, and by it I find vre may expect to See her tomorrow.” 
‘‘ How So? I thought you had written to her to stay as much longer as she liked.” 
True, I did So, but that permission only arrived the day her letter was dated, and she had fixed to return.” ‘‘ Well then, we shall have an addition to our family party. Sir Edward, you will have no objection to See another pretty girl, will you ?” 
The application to me was rather droll; I Saw a change in eliza’s 
coun 
LETTER XVIII 157 
countenance, and was conscious she might have Seen the tumult of ray Soul in mine; — I should have been quite a bear not to Say iomething civil— — when once a woman is attached, a trifling civility may be easily construed into tenderness; — ^ I Saw she was flattered — and when the Sex is flattered they are delighted. Every one Seemed brightened up; — ^ I then began to fear I had gone too far, but my cursed promptitude of Speech is always doing me disservice. I just cast my eyes on Neville; his whole frame Seemed glowing with pleasure; — all the Servants look enlivened. 
Not till Some hours after did eliza’s chagrin return to my idea; — she knew of this letter; ' — perhaps it was owing to that knowledge that fly 
appeared 
158 LETTER XVIJI. appeared dejected, she dreaded the power os her sister’s charms over the heart of the man she is partial to; — that delicate apprehension is flattering, and ought to have weight with me. But my wayward heart! — no, Eliza; you are not the woman to six it, as it wishes to be fixed. — O! tomorrow; tomorrow;; — do I long for tomorrow! — Fly Swift, ye firey footed steeds!” — and oh may our meeting be propitious! — I have got into a confounded hobble. — How I am to be: extricated none knows !^ — Adieu. 
LETTER 
( 359) 
LETTER XIX 
To THR SAME. 
In CONTINUATION. 
There is no contending against destiny — yes, I was decreed to bend before the shrine of Emily farnborough;; — Harry what a prize she is! — shall I attempt a description of her? — shall I endeavour to paint the beauties that over power my senses?? — love reasonably! — I engage in the charming passion with circumspection!! — no! — 1 cannot command my ideas one moment: they are centred and bound up in her. 
We were just assembling to dinner when the chaise. arrived; — Charles had like to overset the table in ssying 
out 
o LETTER XIX 
out to meet her. As a stranger, I was obliged to remain behind — but my heart followed him — and never returned again; — she entered — my lovely Emily entered; — her dress was en caviller os Derby green. — From the journey her hair was a little derange; her Sweet face was shaded by a black hat and Seathers — Oh! altogether, how enchanting she looked! she paid her compliments in the Sweetest manner to her father and mother; to her sister likewise. — A rosy blush overspread her cheek when she received mine — perhaps my heart was in my 05^8 — I felt agitated — a little Spaniel os the French breed, ran rejoicing to his mistress; — she cast a look of gratesul tenderness on Neville, while she was careshng the little animal — My thanks are due to you, my dear cousin, for your care of 
Mignon; — > 
LETTER XIX j6i 
Mignoii; — I wonder the Sweet little creature’s gratitude has not obliterated his remembrance os me.” — I thought this a fair opportunity of addressing her; — can miss Emily believe it possible that anything endued with — I will not Say reason, but Sensibility, can forget an impreshon made by So amiable an object?” ?” — Smiling, replied, “you are very gallants Sir Edward — yet whatever you may do by me, I promise you, you do not overrate the worth my petit Mignon, for he is fidelity and Sensibility itsels, He used Sometimes to be the subjedi of my panygeric, while at my aunt’s; — So that I feel myself a little entitled to his attention.” — I almost envied the whelp the carreffes his Sair mistress bestowed upon him. 
“Pray how have you amused your self ashed her mother. — ‘‘ By various 
i62 LETTER XIX ous domestic means, my dear madam. My aunt keeps very little company, yet, unless when my thoughts dwelled on Wcstbury Park, I felt no regret— — ennui at all; — your aunt requested I would prcsent her love to you, Charles, as did Mr. Booth iikewise. He is an extreme pleasant mand' — 
“Well, well, we will talk of family affairs another time, ’* cried the father. Why Will they not let this dear girl talk for ever, thought I; — her voice is melody, and would create a soul under the ribs of death. 
Come, Charles, ” Said Emily — “pray let me judge whether you have acquitted yourself properly as a poultryman— — must See my bantams, ” — and away she tripped with Neville. 
He, poor fellow, Seemed now to feel himself of Some consequence; 
for, 
LETTER XIX 163 
for, notwithstanding the overtures I have made, he has appeared rather shy of me. — • Perhaps, considering me as one who was to render his situation still more unpleasant; but now he is all life. — Emily continually addresses him to take share in the conversation. — • She has thrown a new light on him, and be appears to more advantage than I have ever Seen him. 
I thought the time long till she again appeared. Her presence would make J'un/jeine all the year; I examined both sisters as critically as I dared, lest Suspicions should arise which might thwart my future designs. — I told you on my first rencontre with Eliza, I thought her handsome, but not touchant; — she is certainly hand some; if sine features, height, and complexion, constitute beauty. — But the heart tells us there is Something 
still 
LETTER XIX 
a touch of the Pro 
164 
still wanting; methean torch to enliven the whole. There is a likeness between the Sisters; Eliza, however. Seems to be a picture ill executed of Emily; — the painter has not given it those vivid strokes, those nameless graces, that Speak immediately to the heart, and render all circumspedion vain; — for we love it on the coup d.’oeil. 
Emily complained of fatigue, and retired early; I pleaded having letters to write, in excuse Sor calling for candles; — I wished to be by myself, to be indulged in the ecstatic pleasure of contemplating the charms of my angelic Emily. — She is, at this moment enjoying peaceful stumbers; ■ — may her’s be ever Such I — But I would not exchange my waking feelings Sor the Soundest nap I ever took. 
But 
LETTER XIX 165 
But perhaps you will think I had better be abed and asteep than dwelling on the beauties os this charming woman, who may make my heart ach I — true, my philosophic friend. — Yet have you not heard there is a pleasure in being mad, which none but madmen know? — I begin to experience the delights of insanity. — If I am in an error, the delusion is too Sweet, too bewitching, to forego. 
“O! let me be deceiv’d! ” 
Temple has drawn me into this Scrape — his genius must extricate me. I Set off with good dispositions, — I Sought an alliance with this family — I Seek it still — more than ever it is the wish of my heart — you are not So Scrupulous as me. — Will you come and try your fortune with the elder sister But don’t starter yourself that 3 you 
i66 LETTER XIX 
you shall have the Neville estate. No, justice shall be done that heir of the injured brother of Mrs. farnborough— — me tell you, ’squire Lyttelton, Eliza Farnborough and fifty thousand pounds is no despicable match, what say you? — 
Done, strike hands, and take my offer, 
“Farther on you may fare worse.” 
I will freely forgive you for superse ding me; the treaty shall be quite Snug between ourselves — all that is wanting is your presence — I admire my Scheme extremely; and depend on your friendship for the furtherance of it. 
The great clock strikes two — We take no note of time but from its loss” ” Dodfor Young — I shall however, take warning that it is high time for Sober folks to be a bed. — In 
six 
LETTER XIX 1c7 
six or Seven hours I shall be blessed with the view of my beauteous Emily — Oh! Harry, were you but to See her! 
■ — But it would be dangerous. — No, come not hither, unless you Swear on the altar of friendship to marry her Sister — yet, Sor her, even an oath might be absolved 1 — 
“Jove laughs at lover’s perjuries.” 
I do not know how to leave my de/k — I wish to communicate every thought, every Seeling to you — I could watch the moon and stars — and Say to the ristng Sun, if my Emily were by. 
All that pleases in its view, 
“Is my hope to look on you.” 
Mad! mad by this light 1” Adieu! 
LETTER 
( is) 
LETTER 
XX 
FROM 
EMILY 
T O 
Miss C L A V E R I N G. 
"YES, my dear Charlotte, I am permitted a Sree and unreserved communication to you — in a Short time you shall have every event of my lise, nay, I may Say, the history of all the Samily, ready for your inspedfion. 
I rely, my dear girl, on your prudence; your own good sense will convince you of how much importance the trust I repose in you is of to myself and others. 
I fiat 
LETTER XX 
I flatter myself this renewal of our friendships will be lasting as our lives. — I rested; with pleasure on the emotion with which I was Seized, when I learned that the Sweet girl I met in Hampshire was my old friend and companion at School — my heart, as it were, stew out to meet you as its counterpart— — years had added So charming. So finished a polish to my elegant Sriend, that I had lost all traces of your person; but my memory furnished out a thousand grateful instances of your mental perfections. Yes, my Charlotte! I repeat it; I trace with joy those years we passed together in Dorchester — when I Spent my time in improving my mind, and Strengthening my judgement, in order to become a fit tutoress to my ever amiable Charles. — If ever I have the happiness of presenting him to my fair vol. I. I friend. 
17® LETTER XX 
friend, he shall assure you, his love for you equals mine. 
Where shall I find expreshons to paint to you my exquisite delight when I beheld my dear Neville ^ — yet I was forced to restrain my joy — or rather crowd it ail in one tender look — He stew to the chaise to meet me — but we had observers — not till twm hours after had I an opportunity os disclosing how extreme my felicity was — he was too affeded to find words — think what a Separation! — four months! 
But you are a stranger — you know not what I mean by these tender, rhese disjointed Sentences; you shall, however, have the whole drama besore you. — Oh! my Charlotte, you will find much to condemn, much to cen sure, both on my part and that of others. 
Mine, 
LETTER XX 171 
Mine, is an error, is a venial one — love must plead my excuse. — Neville, yes, one view os my Neville would justify me in the eyes of the young and amiable. — Shall I draw his picture? — in my narrative the features of his mind will be portrayed. — Figure then, to yourself, the most beaxiteous casket, fit to contain the brightest gem. — Oh! how eloquent Such a pashon and Such an object makes us! 
I meant to have given you Some information of the family here in this letter; but must write to my amiable aunt Booth. — She has a double claim now to my preference — You will be more thoroughly acquainted with her virtues when you have perused what I have already written, and what I shall still write, 
I 2 Ignorant 
173 
T T E R XX 
Ignorant of what the consequence might be of the event for which I left my father’s four months Since, I wrote down all the circumstances of my life. — They will, however, require Some addition now. — I will send it to you as my leisure will permit — I have already bespoken your indulgence — you must not expect to meet with persedtion in your friend — you have too good an understanding to expedf it at all in a mortal. — Love me then, as a mortal who may have been guilty of errors, meaning however to do justice. — Let me, in the mean time, be cheered with your letters. — I will give you leave to comment on my life — But Seek not to convince me that I have acted wrong — what is done, is done — I repent not of any 
step 
LETTER XXI 173 step I have taken — I may Suffer in future for my zeal; but not one circumstance would I alter. — Adieu! 
LETTER 
XXL 
EMILY 
T a 
Mrs. BOOTH. 
I Am charmed, my beloved aunt, with the reception I have met with. — 'Can you suppose I mean neville’s? — No; from my father and mother, nay, my sister too; I never experienced So much tenderness in all mv life, as has been crowded into one short day. — To what miracle, you will I Say, 
If 4 LETTER XXI 
Say, can this change be owdng. — ■ There is a worker os miracles here — a very agreeable and handsome man, Sir Edward lascelles, wsho is the professed adorer of Eliza. 
She, you may believe, is in raptures with him. — They became acquainted at blandsord races — and my poor sister Seems to date all her happiness from going there unattended by mk — ' I, who never Sought for conquest — whose heart was formed for one dear youth; and who have been So blessed as to gain his tenderest, warmest affection! — Oh! the world would Sue in vain to me! — My hopes, my fears, my bliss are all centred in him; and that dear part of him I have consigned to your maternal bo some t — Ah, my dear aunt, how my heart sties out to meet, and hang over my cherub. — I must nor, however, 
dw d! 
LETTER XXL 175 
dwell too much on the fond, new, and delightful theme, lest the n>other overpowers me. * * ^ ^ 
My much loved Neville met me at the chaise door — we dared not Speak — indeed, I believe, we were incapa ble of Speech — 
Silent as the ecfiatic bliss“ “souls that by Intelligence conyerfe.** 
So in one glance I read a volume in my neville’s eyes, and answered him vfith mine. 
In a few moments I felt myself pres fed to the bosom of my parents — Ah! had they ever been thus tender! — my sister kissed my cheek; and yet, I thought I perceived her cast a look of doubt on her lover, when he advanced to pay his compliment — Yet, why should fne? why should she be I 4 blind 
ni LETTER XXL blind to her own charms, and So clear Sighted to my Small stock? 
But envy magnifies, c.” 
Did she but know what passes in my heart, she need entertain no Suspicions of me — she might enjoy her conquest with the utmost Security;, — But unhappily Eliza has not a Soul to whom I could lay open mine — the bliss of communicated happiness was not given to me to know, till you discovered my tenderness for my amiable Neville. — To you I could have no Secret — your penetrating eyes Sooiy Saw through the thin disguise, and made my confession needless — and yet, how kindly you gave me credit for the trust I reposed in you — - Oh! my more than mother! how much do 1 feel your goodness! how shall I ever repay it, 
^ ^ ^ ^ I made 

LETTER XXL 177 
I made an excuse to leave the dining parlour as Soon as I could — and took Charles with me to visit my bantams — At that time I knew all the Servants were in the hall at dinner — I retired with my beloved into the temple of Apollo; which, you know, has a communication with my poultry yard — there I gave a loose to the joy which posseffed my whole Soul — I recounted to him my Sufferings, and my recovery — described to him the charms of our Sweet pledge — Oh! what tenderness! what delicacy there is in his love! — It cannot be expressed!! cannot be equalled! 
He told me of my sister’s attachment to Sir Edward — doubts not it will be a match; but thinks he has not yet declared himself in form. — I wish he would. — Perhaps, amidst the general joy which then will reign, my I 5 father 
17$ LETTER XXI 
father may think it necessary to do Something for his nephew — Ah! what would he Say, did he know he was his Son! — Yet, can we always live thus? — I know not how to answer that question; I am too happy at present to look forward to the future. While my sister is single I need not fear any lovers being proposed to me — and if she marries, I will confine myself at home to the dear delight of pleasing my Neville. 
I have written to Charlotte clavering— — have promised, first receiving permission from my husband, to inform her of everything relative to myself and dearer half; yet I shall want your assistance, my dear Madam, as you Said you could inform me of Some circumstances respeding the family of Mr. Neville. — If you will be fo kind as to transmit me that intelligence. 
LETTER XXT. 17* 
gence, it will be adding to my obligations and my love. 
My Neville tells me, he has lately learned Something concerning his birth, that gives him hopes. — Is that story then untrue that has been propagated? — pray insorm me of everything — Neville Says, he neither will, or can tell me anything till I have heard from you — ' but to silence, though not to inform me, he presses me to his faithful bosom, and Says, “while I poffess my charming Emily I Seel no other want — let them take all the rest.®’ 
I Srequently alk myself what I have done to deserve So much Selicity? Am I made an instrument of rewarding the wants of my Neville? How grateful ought I to be to Providence for appointing me to Such a blessed employ! — How Sweet the office! — I I 6 have 
io LETTER XXL have nothing to wish Sor, but a continuance of his love and truth. 
Imprint a tender kiss on the lips of my enchanting epitome of Neville — I kiss the paper with a kind of holy rapture, while I trace my fond request. ^ 
Say everything kind to my dear Mr. Booth — Receive the duteous love of the two on earth the most happy in each other; and whose only contention shall be, that of proving their affection and gratitude to the best of all possible aunts. — Adieu! — My dearest, and most revered friend, — ■ Adieu! 
LETTER 
( isi > 
LETTER 
XXII 
Sir EDW. LASCELLES 
T O 
HENRY LYTTELTON, Esq. 
I F the bright charms os the divine Emily consumed my vitals at first sight, when in the unfavourable eclipse of a riding dress — how has she riveted her adamantine chains, by appearing truly Seminized! — ■ And yet, I believe, ray friend, I shall discover her person is her least charm — Such sense — So much Soul — Such vivid tints of glowing health — Her figure. So animated that it would fire a voluptuary — yet her manner, 
Chafle 
letter 
XXII 
Chaste as the ificle “Which hangs on dian’s temple.” 
In fiiort, she creates, and corrects desires. — We languish, but there is a delicacy, a female reserve, that — I cannot find words to express my meaning— — strive to prevent my eyes following her footsteps, and fixing on her enchanting form — Oh! stis not in nature. — Thank heaven I think, yet, Eliza Sufpedts nothing. — 1 am more attentive than ever — but, ye gods! what a talk is mine? — how shall I touch my emily’s heart while she imagines me the lover of her Sister? — I must and will apply to Temple — He may strike out Some manoeuvre to Set all right — for, oh! I feel at present I am Sadly wrong, and wretched. 
The house is again going to be filled with company, — Whether I am 
slad 
LETTER XXII 183 glad or Sorry Sor it, hang me if I can tell. — Perhaps it may give me Some enviable opportunities with the Sweet mistress of my Secret thoughts — Oh! what a glorious Scheme is overturned by temple’s not informing himself of farnborough’s having two daughters, I Sometimes think I will apply to Neville; but he is So shy — I believe I have repeated this very Sentence before — if So, pardon me, my dear Harry — man is not a very consistent being at any time, — a man in love is never So. 
She behaves to me in the most easy manner imaginable — but then, she thinks I shall Soon be her sister’s husband— — by Jupiter! my lovely Emily! — No, — at thy shrine I bow the humblest and most faithful of love’s votaries. 
Dear 
184 LETTER XXII 
Dear Harry, go to Temple — tell him the fracas he has drawn me into, beseech him to think on Some expedi dient, by which I may escape the Snare being Spread Sor me — ■ I hope to be extricated with honour; — but, by Heaven, Some way or other I must get out of this hobble; for I feel I shall Soon run mad, if I Seast my eyes only on Such bewitching beauties. — Adieu! — 
LETTTER 
( ^§5) 
LETTER XXIIL 
EMILY 
T O 
Mrs. BOOTH. 
Th I S brother elect will become a great favourite with your Emily, my, dear madam; — I find he is endued with that godlike virtue, charity, — He has behaved in the most generous manner to a poor unfortunate pensioner of mine. — Oh! how amiable is Such a man compared with too many others! — Sarah Wilson was enjoined Secrecy, but the gratitude of that worthy creature equals the merit of the gift. — She was e]oc]uent in his praise, and concluded with 
move 
i86 LETTER XXIII more zeal than prudence. — “Oh! my dear good miss Emily, is he not better than mlss Farnborough ought to have for an husband— —! how you would Suit him !” 
Is it not amazing, my dear aunt, that no one should susped my attachment to Mr. Neville — What ad dress we both must have to elude the Argus eyes of Suspicion. — My faithful Martha, and yourself alone, are in the Secret. — I do not think the riches of the world would bribe Martha to betray her mistress ■ — yet, how wonderful is her modesty; she never presumes on the confidence we are forced to place in her; — still honourable — still unassuming. 
I find Several people are invited to come in a few days; — I am glad when the house is full, as then I have more time to mystlf, and have less 
observers. 
LETTER XXIII 187 
observers. — Eliza does not Seem quite happy about Sir Edward; — she has even condescended to tell me; — she is perplexed at his not coming to an ecclairciffement. — His conduo: is reprehensible in that particular to be Sure; — he must See her partiality Sor him; — why will men play the niggard to themselves— — loves him, and will take pains to render herseif agreeable to him; — her accomplishments are many, — and if she will be at the trouble, fiie may easily corredh the errors of her disposition. — My Neville Sends his duty, and blessing to Sweet Charles; — mine most truly accompanies his in both 
particulars -- ever most faithfully, 
your’s 
E M I L y. 
LETTER 
() 
LETTER 
XXIV 
EMILY 
T O 
Mirs C L A V E R I N G. 
A M now going to acquit mysdf of my promise to my amiable friend. It will be Some time before you have the whole history before you, as I am obliged to transcribe from Some papers to methodise my story. 
My aunt Booth has been So good as to transmit Some particulars, which will be necessary to wtave into the circumstances you are now to be acquainted with; I muss:, therefore, go back to events before my birth; and believe me, my dear Charlotte, I feel 
great 
LETTER XXIV 185 great repugnance at relating incidents, in which those, who from nature are entitled to my resped, have acted a part unworthy of themselves. 
I have told you Mr. neville’s his tory and mine is connedsed all the 
way 
through.' 
I shall begin V ith 
that of his unfortunate father, and not less unhappy mother. 
You have heard my mother was only half sister to my neville’s father and my aunt Booth; — she was Several years older than them, and was heir to her mother, who possessed a large fortune the Second wife of Mr. Neville, by whom the other two were born, had only a beautiful per son in the place of wealth. 
Thus far is very necessary to premise;; you may have been acquainted with it before. 
My 
190 LETTER XXIV 
My father vras appointed guardian to his brother-in-law, who could not dispose of a shilling of his fortune till became of age, the estate being Settled on my mother’s children. — Mr. Neville was in France, and lived as other young men of fortune usually do. Spending both time and money in a thousand Schemes of dissipation. 
His return to England was both Sudden and unexpedled; — my aunt was apprised of it by a letter, where he begged to See her directly at a house in the neighbourhood; — eager to meet a brother very dear to her, she obeyed the Summons: — I shall now transcribe from her papers. 
From the manufeript of Mrs. Booth. 
abstraded from the pleasure of Seeing my brother, I had the most earnest 
LETTER XXIV nest wsish to be informed by him of an adventure which had out travelled him, and had been Spread about to his disadvantage. — I knew him to be giddy and dissipated, but bad the highest opinion of the goodness of his heart; — having, from infancy, been accustomed to receive proofs of it; — » as it showed itself in his brotherly love for me, in a thousand instances; I, therefore, very unwillingly listened to the stories which had been So industri oussy propagated of his libertinism and profiigacy. 
I met my dear brother with that heartfelt joy which ever marked our conduct to each other. My Sweet Ellen, ” Said he, “I have a treasure to show you, — Such a variety I have ^ brought to England! — I exped all the cognofcenti will run mad, and Seek to deprive me of my prized’ 
*< Pray 

tt LETTER XXIV 
“Pray descend, Charles, ’" I replied. — Let me hear you talk common-sense to a woman of common understanding. I am all impatience to See your prodigy, but hope you came honestly by it, • • Sori believe 
the real man os virtue does not always confine himsels within the pale of justice, and Sometimes to Swell the catalogue os his museurn, whl invade, or at least purloin, his neighbour’s property.” 
“‘no Such matter, Ellen. — But my dear little prudent Sister Snail be Satisfied; — I would rather clear my sels in your opinion, than to all the antiquated prudes, or formal grey beards in the universe. — Let them think, or censure as they please; I care not Sor their praise or honour. — But here, my dear Ellen, here is mj treasure.” 
Saying 
LETTER XXIV 193 Saying which, he opened a door into the next room where was a lady sitting, leaning on her hand, Seemingly in deep meditation. The noise my brother made roused her; she startled, and rising in great confusion, made a faint exclamation. Charles siew to her, and taking her hand; — “Forgive me, my Sweet angel, I ought to have apprized you of the visitor I meant to introduce to you. — This lady is my sister; — except your dear Self, the dearest thing on earth to your Charles; ■ — Speak to each other, my Sweet girls, and love each other, both for my sake and your own.” 
I approached her, — she held out her hand, but Seemed too much oppressed to articulate Sounds; — her looks were the most interesting in the world; — I took her offered hand, and pressed it to my lips. — Surprise vol. I. K and 
194 LETTER XXIV and joy flushed in her face; — she cast a glance on me, then on my brother. — “Oh! Neville!” exclaimed she, “am I So happy as to be received thus by your family 1 — will this charming young lady allow me to love, to resped her?” 
“Most willingly, my dear madam, ” 
I returned; — and hope we shall become So dear to each other, as will render us both more So to ray beloved, brother.” 
“Oh !” cried she, throwing her arras round my neck. — “You are just Such as your brother represented; — be not alarmed at my tears — they are tears of joy and gratitude; — of joy too, too great for words to ex press.” 
Charles threw his arras round us both, and my tears accompanied those of the beauteous Ninon. — Oh! what 
grace 
T. E T T E R XXIV. 195 grace, what dignity there was in ail her movements and gestures I — what exquistte beauty in her Sace! 
My brother Seemed the most delighted of men. — Now, my lovely girl, Said he to her, will } ou not be Satisfied that I have ever meant you well, since I have brought my sister to encrease and enliven our Society “Indeed, my dear Neville, ” she answered, “I never wished for other Society than your’s; — all I wanted is not to be obliged to silence my feelings, in regard to my attachment to you, ever to be concealed behind a veil. Suits not the explicitness of my Soul; — you have removed this evil in part already; — may I not esteem it a happy presage that the envious cloud will Soon be dissipated“ 
“glory, my dear madam, I glory in my attachement to your amiable K 2 and 
196 LETTER XXIV 
and charming brother; — I will Say my attachment is laudable, why then be constrained to conceal my attachment? — His honourable! — stis praise worthy! — ‘.dh! my beloved, ” cried she, folding her hands, and looking up to him with beseeching eyes.' — “Why am I not at liberty to tell all the world, that every affection of my Soul is your’s? and that in Saying as much, I Say no more than duty demands.” 
Have patience a little longer, my an^el. Soon, very Soon, I will claim you in the Sace of day; — you can have no doubts — Ellen! — this dear girl is my wife — but she has indulged me with confining that truth to her own bosom till I come of age; you know rill then I can make no provision for her, I am unwilling to have any consultations with my guardian; — the 
dis 
LETTER XXIV 197 disposition of Mr. Farnborough you are no stranger to; I shall avoid all conversation with him till my birthday — I then shall take possession of my estatc, and then my dearest Ninon shall be hailed mistress of Westbury Park, My wedding and natal day shall be celebrated at one time; and indeed, ” continued he, Surveying her with a droll look. — “It will be just in time to Save our credit; na, don’t blusn, my angel, the loss of that enchanting shape has added to my love tenffold.” 
’tis there my dear Mr. Neville, ’’ Said she; “It is on that accoiinr, my dear madam, that I am wretched; it is not Singly on my account I feel, should it remain for one moment, a doubt with any one whether your Son ought not to inherit your fortune as K j well 
LETTER XXIV well as mine? — blame me not then, my much loved husband for the inquietude that preys on my heart 
What am I doing,, my best beloved, but putting everything into a proper train ^ — I mean to clear all doubts; — there is. not two months to the day of my becoming legal pos seffor of my Sortune — I shall bring Sufficient proof os your having been my wife long enough to avoid all Scandal; f will not have you dwell on melancholy idea, you will injure your health and rob me of happiness“ 
“! two months! — what an. age! — how many unforeseen misfortunes may be crowded into that Space Should any event happen, which I; tremble to think of; hov/shall I, a stranger, an alien, unknowing, and 
unletter 
XXIV 199 
unknown — how am I to Support the claim you have allowed me to assume r the Secrecy of our nuptials — the dread of my incensed parents.” 
“Vfell, you are taking up Sorrow at a pretty large interest, it must be owned, my dear Ninon. — ‘but do you Suppose the englishman’s wedding at Doilay will be Soon fo"gotten? — Besides, I have indubitable proofs; ™ I miust laugh at your follies and whims; — am I not the most healthy man in the world.? — Come, come, you shall laugh at them too. — don’t let me have Such an april faced angel — for she could not help Smiling through her tears; — poor, unhappy! ill-fated Ninon; by what a fatal prejjerdiment thou wert possessed! 
I have Said a story had been propagated, greatly ressedling on the moral K 4 character 
200 LETTER XXIV cbaradter os my brother. It was reported he had run away with a young nun, whom he had Seduced Srom her convent and parents, and had betrayed into a sham marriage, and by prac tistng on her attachment to him induced her to live with him, even after she had been convinced of his dishonourable conduct, d his, w ith even aggravating circumstances, was talked of in our family. Judge then how earnest I was to have this stain on my dear brother’s, character done away. On ray Second visit to poor Ninon, I entreated her to inform me of every particular concerning; her con nexion with my brother; for though I was not fo outrageousiy virtuous as our sex is said to be, yet I had that regard to my reputation as made me desirous of proving there was no blot in her’s. 
She 
LETTER XXIV 201 She thanked me for giving her an opportunity os unbosoming herself, and relieving her mind by a Friendly communication. 
I am, ” Said she, the daughter of Colonel Macarthy, in the Irish brigade; I have Several brothers and Sisters; as my father had not much fortune besides his regiment, it was judged proper Sor Some of us to make choice of a religious life; one of my brothers went into the church, and two others took the Sword. A sister, one year younger than myself, with me was Sent to a conventwe were both in the first novitiate, and led lives agreeable enough, only that Sometimes the love of the world would interfere with our exercises of religion; — and then we should be wholly ast'radted fromi all Secular views. 
K 5 Our. 
202 LETTER XXIV 
Our thoughts would return to the scenes of pleasure we had enjoyed in my sather’s house, which was always open to genteel company. 
We had Srequently visitors, • — among the rest the Marquis Montcalm used often to attend my brother, the abbe, and pass whole hours in the parlour. — It was my Sat to please the Marquis, who was older than my father, but rich and powerful in his alliancesthough L had never Seen' any man So disagreeable in my eyes,, yet I own to you with shame, that I received a declaration of love from him xvith a pleasure I. could ill conceal, as it gave me hopes of escaping a living tomb, for Such I considered my convent. 
“I dreaded lest my father should have fixed his mind on having me professed; — I felt a horror at a Seel u Sion. 
LETTER XXIV 203 elusion' from the joys of life at So early an age as sixteen; I wished my parents had been Protestants; — lamented the Solly of the government of England, which constrains So many loyal subjects from Serving their own country and king; and depending on their natural enemies for bread. I dwelled upon these things; and a life Spent in the Society of an unpleasing man. Seemed a life of rapture to the gloomy one I had pidlured to myself within thosc hated walls — Alas! I had never loved, therefore to .me all men were alikco 
I was charmed to find my father only considered my becoming a nun, as convenient.to the arrangement of his fortune; he received the notice of the Marquif tender with infinite pleasure, and communicated his Satisfac' K tion 
2 04 LETTER XXIV tion to me on his next visit. It was Soon known at the convent that I should not take the vows, — The Superior affected to condole with me on the harsh decrees of my parents, who had interfered with my eledtiost; and talked of tne impiety of robbing the blessed Saviour of So Sweet a Sacrifice. I listened to her with Seeming attention, because 1 was obliged So to do; but I knew the premium which must be left in her hands would console her, and I expected a life of continual gaity and plcasure would Suit me much better than one of mortification and restraint. 
In one of the. entertainments which were given by the Marquis, I first Saw Mr. Neville; — his figure struck me. He danced with Adelaide; who, at my request, had been 
permitted 
LETTER XXIV ^05 
permitted to accompany me from our convent. I Sanded she Seemed pleased with him; — I Secretly breathed a wish that he might be So with her; I ssatttered myself, as he was a man os fortune, if she touched his heart, she likewise might escape the prison from which I was Soon to be enlarged. I went up to them, to give her a hint to use every charm to Seduce him. — My dear sister, Said I, in a whisper, practice every alluring grace to captivate that handsome Englishman. — Alas! cried she, in the Same tone, it would be all in vain; he has been Soliciting me to intercede, with you to honour him with your hand; he has been entertaining me this hour in your praise. — Oh! my dear Ninon! what a difference between him and the Marquis Montcalm, look. 
i at. 
2 36 L E T T R XXIV at them both; — but See the lovely Neville is coming to entreat for him sels; — I had cast ray eyes on him — his were fixed on me; — I turned away, but with involuntary impulse looked again; — still he gazed, I blushed, and then throwing a glance on the Marquis, I indeed Saw Such a contrast as made me sigh. — By this time Mr; Neville approached me; — I Selt stuttered and confused— — Mademoiselle, Said he, may I statter myself your sister has informed you cs my presumptuous wishes — may L dare indulge the enchanting hope of being your, partner in the next dance; I replied, with Some embarrastrnenr, that if the Marquis had no objedition, rcould form none. 
Cruel creature, exclaimed he; -■ — musti owe your, condefccnsicn to a 
duty. 
LETTER XXIV 207 
duty which is not yet imposed? — you are not yet bound to the Marquis. — Oh! how is he to be envied! it would be vain, and not to the purpose to repeat to you all he Said; — I listened to him with a fatal prediledsion, — I Seemed only to live while he was Speaking, and when I dared lift up my eyes, they expressed nothing if they beamed not with the most ex quisste delight. — Oh I how odious, did the poor Montcalm appear! — I dreaded his coming near me; — his address was irksome,. and I' never Spoke to him,, but when I was constrained So to do., — When the hour; came for my sister and myself to return to.the convent, a fickness overcame my heart. — The Marquis accompanied us; — I thought we should never arrive — I, longed to retire ro 
my. 
o letter XXIV my cell, to give a loose to my refections; — restecuions at once So new. So delicious. So perplexing! 
‘‘ Alas! cried I, — what am I doing? — I was happy at the idea of quitting these walls. — The Marquis Montcalm appeared my better angel, and I almost, in my joy, forgot his deformity; — now what a change! — This midnight taper; — these humid walls — 
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- Where never dies 
The fuilen echo of repentant sighs V 
these have their charms, because T can here undisturbed ruminate on this new passion. — Here. I can dwell without interrudtion on the charms 
i. 
which reign unrivalled in the hand some Englishmian. — Ah why did I not See him Sooner, or why have I 
ever 
L E T T E R XXIV. 2p9 ever Seen him? — Better would it be for me to take the irrevocable vow directly than remain in a world where I, am liable to See and be Seen by him. — But what crime have I committed that I should consign myself to So Severe a puniotment? — “Am I to blame for having eyes — ■ Is he to be censured for possessing all the graces of his Sex? — And have I not been assured by him, that his heart, is devoted to me ^ — With thoughts like these, I Spent the whole night. — The morning came, and Sound me deeply meditating on Neville. — A nun came to me to inform me Some one from home wished to. Speak with me; — At least thought I, I shall See Some one who has Seen the most lovely and amiable of men, - — Ah! stwas he himselt! — adorable Ninon! 
cried 
zxo L E T T E R XXIV cried he, pardon my temerity; — alas! if you knew what it was to love; to languish as I do, you would readily for give the effects of a passion too violent to be under control. — Leave me not I entreat you; — drive me not to despair, but Suffer me to have permission to breathe my vows, vows northeast: t more tender than constant. 
“I cannotj; indeed. Sir, — I cannot stay to listen to words So repugnant to my duty. ^ — You know I was to have been profelsed, but the generosity of the Marquis overlooking my want of fortune” — 
“Call it not generosity my angel! what has he done, which I would not do ten thousand times over. — 1 should think myself only generous to myself; Will he not, in poff. ssing you, gain a treasure which kingdoms cannot porch ale?, 
LETTER XXIV ii chase — Oh! what were my stars doing that prevented me the glory of enlarging you from these dreary walls— — life would have been nothing to have Secured happiness to you. — Ah! cried st sighing, your death would have been the greatest evil I ever felt. 
“What is that you Say? exclaimed he, taking my hand through the grate. — Oh! my lovely creature, bless me again with those tender accents. — Alas! I replied, I hardly know what I did Say; — I Seel So fluttered and confused, that is you do not Suffer me to retire, I believe I shall Sink into the earth. 
“Suffer me then to See vou again this asternoon. — I told him I believed I should be Sent for to my father’s; — no, no, cried he, I must See you here. — 
Cannot 
ziz LETTER XXIV Cannot you write to me. Said I, with a faint voice; — I fed I am indisposed— — I cannot See you again without infinite hazard and pain to myself; — I hurried from him, and throwing myselfon my bed, burst into a violent stood of tears; — I felt relieved by weeping, and I again gave myself up to the pleasure of dwelling on his loved idea. — I never once ashed myself,. how' is this to end? — I was really a novice in love as well as in everything dfe; — all I knew was, that Mr. Neville was the most amiable of men, and that to Suffer my thoughts to fix on him, constituted all my happiness, and that whenever the Marquis obtruded on ’my .mind, I rejected his idea vfith horror. — All the gay Scenes I had painted to myself, vanished from before 
LETTER XXIV 213 
fore my eyes; they were as the dewy vapours of the morning, which the rising Sun dispels, 
End of the F i r s t V o L u m e. 
O 
'M: - 

sri: : 

w 
ri; 
'"' 
W 
'.; V ji£i /, 
ima 


w 
islnger* MENDENHALL COLLECTION 
ee.7i.fi/0i'. 7f at vi 


a i 7i 




t ■ > 
sea. ^ 
.'*1 
N' 
v.. 
< -<'?, ■■'•■, i • 
X 

"vxc 
"i r ^lrf/ 
r. V 

'A 
A 



^1 

diri '■»; V 
t Js; :. 
■v'c hhhcl 
'‘tt. fi' ' 

■., '" 
\. -, v: .-: w •, 2>.'.■ ljt^rri - 
...mfrl'li".., 
■' V ' 
■ VI: 
» 
’ 

/ -'' ' “i 
rii> i 
BLANDFORD RAGES. 
VOLUME II 

P V ' 


BLANDFORD RACES 
A NOVEL. 
IN TWO VOLUMES. 
The Fathers have eaten sour Grapes, and the “children’s Teeth are seton Edge.” 
Ezekiel. 
The Ways of Heaven are dark and intricate.” 
A D D 1 s o N, 
Printed for J. B E W, in pater nofter Row; m.dcg.lxxxil. 
J L n 
. ' ''has ■ 
.': bnv “-^ 
/. '■ ''30 -‘ 
, ».!«-|.; .1 X 't' ' 

':; i _bux : hd’ V n rr^^xi r 'ri 
r AQ Fr : ■/,, vc 


’ V ■■> a VI U a 
T tvfl VI 'i'jjt>^i^a ^'/r.'fjr, |^ '; (, u. ho!,;!, TIJ; : x<j.t>oa.'k 

CONTENTS 
T O 
VOLUME II 
C 
Page 
Ontinuation of ninoivs history i 
Charles Neville to Emily farnbo lough -......... - .... ....... — 48 
VOL. II 
L E T 
CONTENTS. 
L Page 
L E T TER XXV 
Emily to miss Clavering — - 71 
LETTER XXVI 
■£ir Edward Lafcelles to Henry lyt tleton, esq. - — — — 
LETTER XXVII 
miss farnborou gh to Miss Gore 
105, 
LETTER xxvill. 
miss Gore to miss Farnborough — 114 
LETTER xxix. miss Farnborough to Miss Gore — 118 
LET 
€ O N T E N T S. 
LETTER XVL 
Page 
Mifs farnborough to miss Gore 13 u 
LETTER xvir. 
Sir Edward lascelles to Henry lyttle tonne, esq.. -- — ' -- -139 
LETTER xviir. 
Sir Edward lascelles to Henry lyttle tonne, esq. -- -- -- — 155; 
LETTER XIX 
Sir Edward lascelles to Henry lyttle tonne, esq. ■ ■■ -- -159- 
LETTER XX. 
From Emily to Miss Clavering 
— 1^3'. L E T 
C O N T E N T S. 
f 
LETTER XXI From Emily to Mrs, Booth - — 
LETTER XXII 
Pace 
73 
Sir edw^ardlafceiles to Henry lyttle tonne, esq. — ............ 18 
LETTER XXIIL Emily to Mrs. Booth — — 
LETTER XXIV 
Emily to miss Clavering 
i 
blandfopvd RACES. 
CONTINUATION 
NINON’S HISTORY. 
1ST after dinner one of the lay sisters brought me a letter Srom my attentive lover. — After the most flattering assurances of his unalterable passion, he entreated me to in struo; him in Some method of at least delaying my nuptials with the Marquis; declaring that the day wshich Saw me the wife of Montcalm would vol. II B “behold 
G LETTER XXIV 
behold him stretched on his bier — He neither could nor would live without me “If I gave him but hope, that he had been So happy as to touch my heart — His fortune was large, and himself Sree and independent — He had friends who could ashst him in any enterprise; but that he must be assured he adls with my consent — for if I really had a partiality for the Marquis, he would endeavour to Submit — but he could not help flattering himself the violence of his pashon had made Some impression on me. — He presumed not to request an answer, but Would avail himself of the invitation he had received from my Sather, and hoped he should read his destiny in my eyes. 
The agitation of my mind was too visible in my looks and actions, 
not 
LETTER XXIV f 
not to betray my inward Seelings — 
I was too young and too inexperienced likewise even to form the resolution of concealing my perturbation — and Heaven knows how ill I should have Succeeded, had I attempted it — Mr, Neville plainly discovered my partiality Sor him — He Sought not to oppress me, by obliging me to sive utterance to the Sentiments I had conceived in his Savour — In a dance, he just took my hand Sora moment, and gently pressing it. Said, in a sost voice, ‘ bless me with one look only — that shall be all the answer I require.’ — I felt my face all of a glow — and just raised my timid eyes to his — but that one glance conveyed all the intelligence he wanted — ‘.dhank you, my angel, ’ he cried, ‘ I am Satisfied.’ — 
B 2 I be 
4 LETTER XXIV 
I believe my father began to sus pect his, future son-in-law would Suffer from the comparison every one must make between him and Mr. Neville 
— He told me, in a manner that Sully .explained his meaning, that there 
should be no more entertainments given till that which celebrated my marriage 
— If he had fixed his eyes on me, he must have Seen the cffed: his Speech had on my whole frame — My very blood froze in my veins Yet I knew this event must take place — nor could I stoshbly make the least reasonable objection— — once appeared pleased with the preparations — now the bare sound of them gave me the most exquisite concern — Mr. Neville, with that attention which none but those who love can be Sensible of — Mr. Neville, I say, took the earliei^oppor tunity of inquiring what had produced 
So-so 
visible a change 
LETTER XXIV 5 
I informed him, what my father had the moment before communicated to me — ‘ Something mu St be done, cried he, 'and that Soon — Shall I venture to Speak to your father ?’ — Alas! no, I anfvvered;. I too well know my father’s rigid honour — He would Sooner Sacrifice me with his own hand than falsify his word to the Marquis — My ipirits are So much perplexed, I can think of nothing — There is but one way I can evade a match, now So hateful to me. ‘ ah! what is that, my love ?’ — To make a Scruple of conscience in quit tino: the conventual life, and bes; leave to ratify the vow I w’as to have taken ‘ And So make your escape Srora thence tvith your faithful Neville?’ — Do not think me So impious, I replied — be Sure if I take the vows, I mean they should be Sacred — All my wish ■ B 3 is, 
$ LETTER XXIV 
is, to avoid being constrained to give my hand to a man, V ho can never interest me enough to make my inclination correspond with my duty. 
“‘ Good God !’ exclaimed Neville, ‘ how cooly you talk; am I then deceived in you ^ — I flattered rnysels your tenderness for me would have So far operated in my favour, as to have induced you to join in Some little stratagem, only to gain time — If I am to lose you for ever — you may as well be Separated from me by the bonds of marriage as the grate of a convent — Nay much better — To that bar an end may be made by death But why do I Say So — mine will too Surely be the consequence of your perseverance in making yourself miserable.’ —. 
“Our conversation was here interrupted bv the marquis’s coach being 
announ 
LETTER XXIV 7 
announced. — All the way home to our convent he was pressing me to comply with his wish of being married in the following wtek. — 1 made Several objedlions to being So much hurried — Pie obviated them as Sast, and fondly told me my father had insisted on my compliance. — Ah! how odious did his Solicitations render him in my eyes — i^thought he had never appeared ugly till then — His caresses were detestable — indeed I ever felt a great repugnance to his assiduities before I Saw Mr. Neville; but now his touch was poison — I shrunk from him as from a reptile — and should not have lost a moment in deliberation which to prefer, the convent or the Marquis — So delicate does a tender passion make us. — 
“All the night the image of Mr, Neville Swam before my eyes — but B 4 my 
S LETTER XXIV 
my agitation and perplexity increassng my night proved not only a sieepless, but a sorrowsul one — I found myself entangled in a labyrinth, and how to proceed or extricate myself I knew not — I Sickened at the thoughts with which I was overwhelmed — and being unable to arrange them to my liking — I wiscly resolved to give over all reasoning and Suggestions, and deliver raysdf up to what would happen — and depend on incident Sora remedy. — 
Whether my Sather overheard any part os our conversation, I know not — but the next morning he came to my grate — and, in the presence of the Superior, informed me everything was finally determined, and in two days I was to leave the convent, to return to it no more. — I felt all horror at the implied Sentence — I fell on 
my 

LETTER XXIV 5 
my knees, and humbly requested another week — My Sather, with more sternness than was usual to him — 'Said — ‘ No more words, Ninon — Either you are my daughter — or you are not — I have my reasons — You must and shall comply.’ — I knew it was in vain to attempt arguing the matter with him — So rising, I staggered away to my cell, and gave the only vent to my grief that was in my power. — My Sister came to me — and finding me drowned in tears — fell on my neck, and entreated to be made a partaker in my Sorrow — Oh! Adelaide, cried I, Sobbing as is my heart would burst — you know not how miserable I am — I fancied my aversion to the conventual life had been greater than it is — I would rather be a nun a thousand times than the wife of the Marquis Montcalm. — ‘ Ah! my dear Ninon, ’ B 5 Said 
lo 
LETTER XXIV 
Said she, shaking her head, it is not the convent that you prefer, — it is the handsome Englishman that causes this unhappiness in my sister. — 
Indeed, cried I, had I never Seen him, my repugnance to the Marquis would have been extremely great 
— I only Saw my union with him at a distance; while my taking an everlasting vow Seemed dreadsully near, 
“That is all very true, my dear; 
— but then you know nothing of the Sweet passion of love; — however, you have made great progress in three days to have arrived at the exquisite of pain— — my dear Sister, I tremble Sor you; — and am resolved to grow wise from your misfortune — I shall enter on my Second novitiate the day you leave us — ■ and by prayer strengthen my heart against any attack 
from 
LETTER XXIV II from love — ever keeping these lines from shakespeare in my mind, 
. “The maid who loves, 
“Ventures to sea upon a fhatter’d plank, 
“And puts her trust in miracles for fafety.’* 
‘‘ Alas, cried I, redoubling my tears, — my dear Adelaide, you lead me to the brink of a precipice — and there leave me to my fate — Why do you show me the danger, and not extend your friendly hand to Save me? 
Oh! how willingly I could do So, Ninon, if it were in my power : — my prayers and fastings may incline the Preserver of the universe to have mercy on you — Yes, my Ninon, I will drop a tear with each bead; — I will invoke all the Saints in your behalf; — I wsill enjoin Some of our holy Sisterhood to unite their orisons to mine. — Thus this dear girl strove B 6 to 
L E T T E R XXIV to.comfort me — but, alas! my heart was too deeply pierced to admit of comfort. — I Saw nothing before me but misery — Should I have resolution to avow my invincible dissike to the Marquis, I could’ plead no excuse for not renewing my vows in the convent — My soul shrank from the idea of the perjury. • — Ah! what an Offering was I going to make to my God! — I shuddered at the thought! What blasphemy! — what impiety! — My mind was torn with the most cruel agitation — My whole frame was disordered — I becamfe feverish; — and almost frantic. ^ — On one side, I Saw an enraged father; — on the other, an offended Deity. — Oh! what conssidts for So young, So tender, a heart as nsine! 
Adelaide knelt and prayed by me the whole night. — As for myself, asi 
I was 
LETTER XXIV 
I Was too disturbed even to form an ejaculation, — I Seemed as if already doomed to despair, — and strove not to deprecate the wrath of Heaven. — “The morning found me almost a lifeless corpse; — pale, dejeded, agitated; — and So debilitated, as to be Scarce able to move. — All that day I Saw, I heard, nothing, either Srom my family, the Marquis, or Mr. Neville. What a state of dreadful Suspense!! — hardly breathed — A stupid languor possessed my every faculty; — and despair Seemed to have blunted the arrows of adversity. 
“On the following day my father’s coach came to the convent, with two of my brothers, and a governess of the younger children. — I was too much oppressed with grief to make any resistance to the orders they brought with them. — I fell on the neck of my 
kind. 
14. LETTER XXIV kind, Sympathising Adelaide. — My voice was choked by sobs. — Her distress nearly equalled mine. — Just as I was stepping into the coach, a friar came up close to me — ‘ I bless thee, my Sweet maid !’ cried he; — ‘ may the tears which thou sheddest on leaving these holy tvalls be converted into Smiles of joy 
“This uncommon address roused me from my refuerie; and I turned my head to thank my ghostly comforter; — when I felt him put Something towards my hand — It was a paper — ^ Be discreet, ’ Said he, in a still lower voice, ‘ and happy — I siid the paper into my pocket. — ‘ What did the father Say alked one of my brothers. — ‘ He bestowed his benediction on me, ’ I answered— — ‘ told me, I should be happy if I was discreet, ’ — ‘ True, ’ replied he; 
‘ no' 
LETTER 
^ nothing else is wantine 
XXIV $5 
g; — and my father is extremely surprised you should make any difficulty of compliance, when it was once So much your — I know not what return I made to this address of my brother — my thoughts were too much devoted to the friar. — I wished to get home, that I might examine the D as I could not help flattering myself Mr. Neville had Some interest in it. — I was not deceived; — for, on opening it, I discovered his signature. — it contained but three lines — only to in treat me to keep up my Spirits, and, if possible, put off the evil day till the next week; — but should I not Succeed in that, he should be apprised of it — • Desired I would insist on the ceremony being performed at a particular church he named — He had a Scheme in agitation, which, as he only wanted 
my 
i6 LETTER XXIV my passive compliance in, he would not communicate by paper; — and added, now he was convinced he had been So happy as to have a tender interest in my bosom, he would die before he gave me up. 
“these assurances Served to console me very much; — yet I did not understand what farther conviction he had obtained of my strong attachment to him; and not till Some time after did I gain the information. — My dear, tender Adelaide, distracted with the dis tress she Saw me labour under, kindly dispatched a note to him, conjuring him to contrive Some means of breaking off this hated match; — and likewise giving him to understand that he alone was the obstacle to its taking place. — She expatiated on the tender ness I felt for him. — It was from this intelligence he acted. 
“I Saw 
LETTER XXIV n “I Saw the preparations Sor the horrid ceremony in great forwardness. 
'— I begged my mother to interceed for me to have it protracted — I knelt to her : — in vain, however, I knelt and wept : — she had no pity Sor me. 
— ‘ You have once consented, Ninon 
— the cause of this retraction is extremely disagreeable to ns : — you must, you shall comply.’ — I then mentioned my earnest desire that the marriap e might be performed at the. church at St. Agnes, because I liked the priest that officiated there; — however I found I was to be overruled in that too; — the favourite priest could perform the ceremony at any other church — or even at home. — I made life of a thousand entreaties — addressed by turns to the whole family. — The Marquis was not forgot. - — I might as well have Submitted patiently 
— “
»8 LETTER XXIV ently — I only created enemies where I meant to conciliate friends. — In short, the following day was fixed on. — I had nothing to support me but the distant hope that Mr. Neville wmuld Save me Srom the impending ruin. — My reliance on him strengthened as the time drew nigh; — and that reliance Served to keep up in me Some degree of Spirits. 
“When the morning came I Suffered myself to be dressed; — but it is not possible to express what were my feelings at the time. — 1 made no opposition — My faculties Seemed Suspended; — an awful kind of cal ns possessed me, like that which frequently precedes a violent storm — I neither Spoke nor looked at any one — I started at hearing the clock strike, and the carriages drive into the court. * — The Marquis came up, and expressed 

LETTER XXIV 19 
fed great satissadtion on the choice of my ornaments. — My God! I had no more to do with them, nor felt more interest in them, than the poor lambs used to do that were led to Sacrifice — however his encomiums neither fiat tered nor displeased me; — 1 was too much absorbcd in my ovtm ideas — or rather, they were benumbed with terror and despair; — I Sat like a stupid statue; — apparently without sense or motion. — The Marquis gave me his hand; — I involuntarily drew mine back: — my father Snatched it in anger, and put it into the marquis’s — he took the other himfels; — and thus I was in a manner dragged down to the coach. — I remember looking in a distradted way, first on one fide, and then on the other, as if imploring help. — ‘ It is all in <vainl Said my father, who transtated my looks; — 
Lhen 
2 0 LETTER xxrv. 
Lhen God have mercy on me! I exclaimed, — The tears now strayed down my cheeks; — I wanted to rake my handkerchief, — but each held my hands the faster for the efforts 1 made to remove them. — The Marquis Spoke not one word all the way. — My father looked very much dissatif sied and gloomy. — The coach stopped; — my father lifted me out, and hurried with me up to the altar. — My head became giddy — I clapped my hand to my forehead with an air of distradiion — The priest began — A confused noise astailed my ears — I looked up, and Saw' the church silling with people. — The noise increased— — heard voices; — I though I distinguished Mr. Neville. — ■ ‘ Proceed, ’ cried my father, ‘ I wdll answer for her — My eyesight now failed me; — my limbs tottered; — • and I recollect 
LETTER XXIV 21 left no more. — When I opened my eyes, — I found myself in my own apartment, in bed. — I had a consu sed remembrance os what bad happened; — but what horror feised me. Jest they fiiould have taken advantage of my fainting, and completed the Service. — I shook like one in an ague 
— I drew back the curtain, and perceived only one os the maids in the room. — Annette, Said I, tell me all that has happened. — Oh 1 my dear lady, ’ cried she, ‘ how happy am I to hear you Speak — It is now three days since you was brought hither; — you have been in continual sits ever since. 
— The family are distradted on your account.’ — I am Sorry, cried I, to have given them So much trouble; — but, Annette, I must be insormed os all that Succeeded to my Sainting. — Have you heard anything? — I am 
not 
a2 
LETTER XXIV not married? — Say, I am not married? — ' No, my dear mademoiselle, .that you are not indeed The marquis’s valet told me all. 
“The holy father had but just begun the Service, wten a tumult arose from Some persons breaking into the church ’ — Who! who! I exclaimed 
— ‘ Mr. Neville, and Several people with him — He stew up to the altar 
— You, Madam, then fainted; — and ever since there has been but little hopes of your recovery.’ — But wshat became of the rest? alked I, eagerly; 
— oh! what became of Mr. Neville? 
— ‘ There was a bustle amongst them; but no mischief ensued — 'However all parties Soon Separated. — Mr, Neville came hither in the evening, and attempted to vindicate himself; but my master would not hear him — I find it is Settled, that as Soon as you 
4 are 
LETTER xxrv. £3 are recovered, the ceremony is to be performed with all Secrecy in your chamber.’ — My good Annette, cried I, taking her hand, will you stand my friend? — ‘ Alas! mademoiselle, what can I do ?* — Only, Said I, to inform my mother, or any one that enquires after me, that I still remain insensible— — at least shall gain time from this deception; and when I have recovered a little strength, I may be able to fix on Some Scheme to avoid the sin of marrying the Marquis — Be assured, my good girl, I will reward you liberally if you are faithful to me. — She vowed never to betray me — I trusted, and was not deceived. 
“In the evening my mother came into the room, and approached my bed; — I counterfeited a stupid stare, and want of recolledlion; — I talked incoherently, and a<sted my part So 
well, 
24 LETTER XXIV well, as to make the doctor Say he feared I should never recover. — By this means, the Samily were possessed with the idea, that my recovery would be a long time effedsing, while the ease this Subterfuge conveyed to my heart really made me get better apace“ 
“Annette fixed in her principles of Serving me, I begged her to convey a note to Mr. Neville if he was still in Paris; — she promised she would learn his situation, and give it to him hersels; — I told him a few words, that I found myself in imminent danger of becoming the wife of the Marquis; — ‘and that I doubted my own weakness, since I should certainly by this time have been the most wretched of all women, from my want.of resolution in declaring besore peer Louis, that I could 4 never 

LETTER XXIV ^5 never consent to So detested a marriage; — Save me then, I added, — Save me, I conjure you; — If you will promise to treat me with honour I will fly to ymu; — Annette is faithful to our interests — confide in her as I have done. 
‘‘ Annette brought me an answer fullof tenderacknowledgements, vows, arid protestations. — In the evening, I Saw my beloved Neville at my feet; Annette had procured his admission without my knowing he had even re tjuested it. 
“After the first emotions of joy and Surprise were over, I told him to consider what a confidence I was going to repose in him, and entreated him to examine his heart, and inform me if I might trust to that for a reward. — He knelt down, and in the most Solemn manner called Heaven vol. II C to 
26 LETTER XXIV to witness the purity of his intention towards me; — and imprecated the most Severe curses on his head, if he did not make me his wife as Soon as we wtre in a place of Safety. — He continued in my apartment more than sm hour, and emplo}'^ed all that time in laying plans for my elopement, Sind in painting the happiness I should enjoy from the Society of one I loved, Sind one who was So Sensible of my merit, and grateful for my indulgence. I fondly believed and trusted him; — Annette was to be the companion of my flight. — The proposal came Srom Mr. Neville, and I own his delicate attention was infinitely more than all his professions“ 
“family were still deceived in regard to the establishment of my health, but as that deception could not last much longer, it was agreed 
on 
letter XXIV a? on that the following night I should remove from my confinement. — Annette had told my mother I never got my rest. — Early in the evening of that day on which it was destined I never more should behold them; — my mother, and all the Samily received intelligence that I had fallen into a doze, and that by my desire Annette was to remain in my chamber to prevent my being disturbed. — I should certainly have felt great com pundion at pradtising So much deceit had I not considered that all the Solicitude of my relations for my recovery, was only to consign me to misery; I freely own that refiedfion silenced all my Scruples, and absolvcd me from my breach of duty.' 
Suffice it to Say, about eleven o’clock Annette and I Sallied out of the house; — having before hand C 2 thrown 
e5 letter XXIV thrown out of the window whatever we judged necessary to take with us. At the end of the next street we found my hero ready with a coach to convey us to a place os Safety. — I wished to have Set off for England immediately, but Mr. Neville apprehended that the seaports would be Sent to as Soon as our flight should be discovered; • — vve, therefore, took the route to Flanders, meaning to make our residence there for Some time, till we could form Some plan for our future proceedings. — At Douay, Mr. Neville begged me to consent to the celebration of our nuptials; — I wished not for a dela)^ and therefore consented to an union with the most loved of men; — 7 Security made us happy, and Mr. Neville gave way to the natural inclination of his heart, and made entertainments for the whole 4 town— — 
XXIV 29 town. — We lived there about two months in the utmosc gaiety and felicity, when v/e received a fitock from poor Annette! — our faithful confidant! being Seized with a violent fever, which in about three weeks terminated in her death; — I mourned for her as a dear and tried friend. — Her deafh burr ’mv'n my Ipirits a 'i.,.. iscville, to arr: ue 
me, i.; ie little excuifions to different places merely to change the air and Scene. — Just before her death I had discovered I w’as in the way to en crease Mr. neville’s family— — circumstance, which in happier times wmuld have been a felicity to me, now added to my chagrin. — My husband had told me, that till he came of age, he must conceal his marriage; he had particular reasons for it. — He had an invincible distike to his C 3 guardian 
30 LETTER XXIV guardian, and Scorned to have any ashstance from him; — but assured me we should go to England Some time besore his attaining the age of twenty-one; — and planned the Scheme of Surprising his relations with his wife. — By our calculations we were certain I should not become a mother till Some time after that period; — his love and attention calmed my unea siness, and I again gave myself up to the dear delight of pleasing the lord of all my wishes. 
As I fancied I owed my happi ness to my dear Adelaide having informed Mr. Neville of my disposition towards him. — I was resolved to write, her a letter, relating to her every circumstance that had happened to me zince I last parted from her; I gave her a full account of my marriage, the loss I had Sustained pn poor Annette, 
LETTER XXIV 3i nette, and above all, the happiness I enjoyed in an union with the best of men. — I waited with the pleasing expectation of receiving an answer from my beloved sister near a month, when a pacquet was brought to me Superscribed by an unknown hand. — Oh! what a melancholy presage Seized me when I found my own paper enclosed“ 
“young novitiate undertook to inform me of all that had happened. — My dear tender Adelaide was no more! — A deep dejedion had overtaken her Spirits Srom the time of my leaving the convent. — She had been Severely reproached by all my family for the concern she showed, but above all, her gentle heart had fallen a Sacrifice at the time mine did; — she too loved the too charming Neville; ■ — all these conssiding pashons were too much C 4 for 
3 2 LETTER XXIV 
for her delicate frame, and she fell into a rapid decline. — I now Seemed to have lost every tie to my own family; she had ever been the dearesi: to me in it; — ‘ her unparallelled affection — her delicate manners, bound np my soul with her’s; — but fne was stone, and if I looked round the world I Saw no one to love but my dear husband;; — indeed, was worthy all my affedfion, nor since my union with him have I had the least reason to regret my confidence in him, which niakes me more readily comply with this desire of his, of remaining under these suspicious appearances till his birthday— — shall, however, feel great alleviation, my dear madam, if you will now and then indulge me with your Society; — the pidfure your amiable brother drew os you made me still more anxious to come to 
England, 
LETTER XXIV 33 England, as I find even love itself sills not my capacious heart — it wants friendship likewise.’’ 
I continued to visit the Sweet Ninon very often; — my brother returned to westbury park; — but to Mr. farnborough’s inquiries, aster the adventure that had been So much talked of; — he only gave evasive answers. Ninon began to grow very uneasy; — the Solitude of her life rendered her more liable to entertain melancholy ideas. — The time, however, that was to clear up all ambiguities was now drawing near, when the most dreadful, the most unexpedled, and ever to be lamented event happened; — I mean the death of my dear unhappy brother. — Alas! what horror seized me! — I was, in part, the wretched causej — I persuaded him to take an emetic; — I C 5 wonder 
34 LETTER XXIV wonder I kept my senses when the fatal effects showed themselves. — Never can it be worn from my memory; — my Soul was distraded with the keenest apprehensions, when the frantic Ninon burst into the room. — “My husband! Oh! my husband S’ she exclaimed, and threw hersels on the floor. — Alas! her poor dying husband could not Speak — the sight of her encreased his agonies; — he made signs; — he meant to declare her to be his wise; — his groans, his groans of torture roused her, she flew to the bedside — he took her hand — he cast a dying look on her — he expired! — violent convulsions Seized the wrethed Ninon; — “who is this woman, ” exclaimed my sister; — the wife of my brother” cried I; — his lawsul wife!” — hold your Said Mr. Farnborough j — > a “she 
tongue/’ 
LETTER XXIV 35 “he had no wise 1” — The Sound of Mr. farnborough’s voice reached poor Ninon; — she waved her hand, and raising her eyes to heaven; — I am, I am his wife.” — I never shall forget her look; — it was the steady countenance of deep despair; — we led her out of the room, and in a little time she was seised wsith labour. 
In the intervals of her pains, she gave me a paper from her bosom; — I cast my eyes upon it, and found it a certisicate from my brother of their marriage, by a Mr. Ben Son, minister of the Protestant chapel at Douay. Mr. Farnborough, with a view best known to himself, took it from me, and twisting it together, threw it in the sire. “I can Swear to the contents, ” Said I; that will avail but little, ’" Said he. Amidst the horrors of the night, the wretched widow of my dear bro c 6 there 
36 LETTER XXIV 
there was delivered of Charles Nevilte; and in about two hours after, she followed her beloved husband— — grief and anguish had damped all Solicitude Sor her infant, — She never Spoke from the time of her delivery, but continued in an insensible state. — Thus perished this unfortunate pair! 
The death of my beloved brother was scrutinised into; — nothing transpired to affix guilt on any one, but people yet had their thoughts; — and mine bore very hard on those who could deprive an innocent babe of his possessions; — as I firmly believe Mr. Farnborough could himself have no doubt of the legality of my brother’s marriage. 
My fortune was too limited to undertake the cause of my nephew; — neither did I think it would at all signify at that time. — I was resolved, 
if 
LETTER XXIV 3^ if ever I could raise him friends I then would assert his claim. — I would have brought him up, but my sister chose to undertake that charge; if I blame her, I beg her pardon, but it struck me as if she was unwilling he should gain friends out of the family. 
I was not very happy at remaining in a house where everything reminded me of the grief I had Sustained, and quitted my sister’s family, going to a relation’s in Hampshire; there I became acquainted with Mr. Booth, with whom I have ever lived hap pily. 
I thought it a duty incumbent on me to apprise Colonel Macartney of the fate of his unfortunate daughter. I Sent him a letter full of the particulars; — begging he would ashst me in proving her marriage, as that would 
be 
a? LETTER XXIV 
be the only method of ascertaining her son’s claim to the Neville estate. I waited a long time for an answer— — it arrived, I Sound it filled with bitter inveoives against the memory of my dear brother and sister. — He Said he was happy to find his curses had overtaken them, and that lie abjured her offspring. — I endeavoured to find out Mr. benson, the minister, at Douay; — he had lest the place, and no one knew where he had retired. — No papers that I could find led to any confirmation of their marriage. — ■ I yet hope Some proos may arise; Sori have not the least doubt but those who enjoy the fortune of young Neville know too well that they have deprived him of his right, 
Ellen Booth. 
You 
LETTER XXIV 3^ You have now, my dear Charlotte, a melancholy detail before you; — you have wept, I doubt not, over the unhappy pair; — alas! how truly wretched they were; — poor Charles has been mingling his tears with mine. — Ill sated parents!” he cried — Am I heir to your misfortunes alone — then looking on me; — “Let me recall that expreshon; — my emily’s virtues counterbalance the cruelty, the injustice of her parents, yes! my Sweet love; — thy never-failing affection has amply repaid all my Sufferings, ” 
Yet ought he to be Satisfied without asserting his claim — Oh, no! he ought not. ■ — There is now a more cogent reason than ever for asserting his claim; — and yet how much happier might we be had it never been known. 
Dear 
4® LETTER XXIV 
Dear Neville! in what an hour didst thou first draw breath — Thy parents torn — hurried out of the world? — thy infant years consigned to strangers! 
But I must proceed with my story. From my earliest infancy I felt myself attached to my cousin Charles — for by that appellation my dear brother used to bid me call him. — The grief of parting with him dwelled on my mind, even longer than the death of my brother. — With what joy I beheld him, after an absence of four years; — I was then in my tenth year — Charles, one year older. — Fond of readingj I wished to communicate my pleasures to my cousin, and I gave him a book which had “beguiled me of my tears.” — Oh! with what grief and shame I was struck — when the Sweet youth, with 
burning 
LETTER XXIV 4* burning blushes and streaming eyes, told me he could not read. — “Not read 1” — I exclaimed. — “What shameful neglect!” 
“Indeed my dear coussn, it is not my fault; — I have begged of the Servants to teach me, and they that are capable of ashsting; me have refused.” 
‘‘ No, ” Said I — “tliose who are capable of assisting you have not refused, my dear Charles. — Behold in me one who will endeavour to improve herself for your sake; — will you, my Sweet coussn, consent to be my Scholar — your want of learning is the strongest censure that can fail on my parents. — But you shall no longer remain in ignorance; — do not let a false shame prevent you; be as I Said, my Scholar, and I have no doubt you will make a proficiency.’* 
'Wc 
4^ LETTER XXIV 
We commenced our studies that very hour, and before I returned to Dorchester, my Sweet Charles could read tolerably; — when the next vacation brought me home I found my pupil had gained very little. — A day school which I had prevailed on my mother to Send him to, had occasioned his acquiring a provincial accent, which gave him a vulgarity that shocked my ears; — I could not help informing him of the bad habit he had fallen into, and by way of example, read a Sentence with propriety of tone, and then repeated it in his manner. He burst into tears, and lamented his w’ ant of capacity; — saying“ “remark was true which my father made of him, that he was a stupid blockhead; — I consoled him all in my power, and reserved my application. — You cannot conceive 
the 
LETTER XXIV 43 the pleasure I had in Seeing his improvement; — his mind was an opening flower, which daily expanding discovered new beauties. ■ — I now began writing, and common accounts; he took all my iiistrudions rapidly, but alas! when the tutor was absent the lesson was Sorgot. — ‘‘ How is it he would Say, while you are by I feel enlightened, * — I learn more by one glance Srom your Sweet eyes than in a week’s reading, when you are not with me.” — I did everything I could to encourage him, and when I left him again, took an opportunity of writing to him, to enforce my plea, that he would employ himself to Such purpose, that I might find him improved. — Perhaps, Charlotte, you will laugh when I tell you, my letter was written in a printing hand, 
for 
44 LETTER XXIV for my dear pupil could not read common writinp. 
O 
You remember being surprised when you Sound I was learning Latin, My dear, I only considered myself as a book which my cousin was to read; a mere machine for him to improve by. — I learned everything with the greatest avidity, that I might communicate to him all the knowledge I acquired. — In two years, it was asto nisiiing 'what a progvess he had made; I believe I miay Say, he was very little behind hrnd with moil boys ot his age; — and I shall never sin'gct my triumph and transport, when he construed a line in Virgil better than a lad who had been six or Seven years at a grammar school; — - and yet this triumph was a Secret one too; — for I dared not to Speak of it to any one. — * Notwithstanding his mind was en 
largedj 
LETTER XXIV 45 larged, and he conversed Sensibly when we were alone, * yet, as he wtas not allowed to open his lips in the parlour, I am Sure neither my father nor mother had the least suspicion of his abilities, much less how they had been cultivated. — They knew, indeed, — for that was impossible to be concealed 
— that I had taught him to read, wtite, and cast accounts; and they often wondered at my patience with Such a dunce, as they pleased to call him. — I let them Say wshat they would about it, wdiile I had the exquisite Satisfaction of Seeing his improvement, and hearing him acknowledge he ow^d every think to me. 
That his person might keep pace with his mind, I taught him dancing 
— and prevailed on him to go to Blandford, when a recruiting party was there, to learn to Sense; — as I had 
heard 
46 LETTER XXIV heard that Science contributed more to finishing a gentleman than anything beside — Nature had done a great deal for him, in giving him an elegant form; — and yet, I could not Sometimes help thinking him an automaton; for he would appear quite inanimate except I Spoke or looked at him. So Sensible an alteration at once struck me, and made me cautious, lest others might make the Same observation as I did, and construe it to our disadvantage — I have therefore pasted hours without Speaking or looking at him; — but I made myself large amends whenever I had opportunity in private. 
I procured him books of all Sorts, to instrudt and amuse him; — and his great pleasure was, to sit whole mornings, and read to me while I worked. 
One 
LETTER XXIV 47 
One day a gentleman hinted to my father, that it was a pity Charles Neville should not be put in Some method of gaining a livelihood. — My father promised to think of it; and actually sent him upon liking to a grocer in Blandford. — I was at that time on a visit from home. — Poor Charles could do nothing without me; — and dared not make the least objection to So ignoble a plan. — How my little heart Swelled with indignation wshen I heard what a Scheme was put in execution! — The Son of Mr. Neville to be put to a little contemptible shopkeeper in a country town! — What a restection! Indeed all the neighbourhood cried out at Such a proceeding. — I had consented to my dear cousin’s writing to me during my absence. — The first intimation I received of this 
pretty 
4s LETTER XXIV pretty affair was from Charles himsels His letter ran thus: 
CHARLES NIVILLE 
T O 
EMILY FARNBOROUGH. 
HOW will you be surprised, my most amiable friend, at the resolution of your father! — You have ever wished him to form Some plan Sor my future advancement; — he has, I dare believe, gone beyond your wishes and expedations. — You know, I am nothing when my Sweet diredlress is not present; — therefore you will not wonder at my passive obedience. — Will you recognise your pupil in a 
grocer s 
LETTER 
grocer s apprentice f 
XXIV 
Yes, my Emily, 
the fnan who has been dignified with the title of your Scholar is doomed to weigh out Sugar and plums. — ' Is it pride, or what is it, that stirs wsithin me, and tells me I ought to move in a higher Sphere? — No, it is not pride; ■ — for, to please thee, my gentle mistress, I could descend to the lowest functions in life — You might make anything of me; — but, I am persuaded your father can never make a tradesman of me; — my reason— — Soul rejedis the low idea; — and yet I have Submitted to go thither. • — Ah! return, my better angel! thou! who Wert born to bless the most grateful of men. — I would die for you; but I feel I shall never become a mean mechanic, — because I am convinced my Emily never would enjoin it, — Adieu !” 
vol. II D When 
50 LETTER XXIV 
When I came home I reprobated the idea, and, 1 believe, made my sa there quite ashamed of his sine Scheme of providing for his nepi 'w. — I offered to give up a legacy of a thousand pounds, which I became poffes sed of at sixteen, from the bequest of my godmother— — a commishon might be purchased for Charles, who wis the Son of a man of four thousand a year — that, however, could not be disputed. — I thought this necessary for his establishment; though I felt p; reat concern at the idea of the hazards 
O 
a soldier’s lise was exposed to. 
My father would not consent to Such an ast of generosity, as he styled it though, by the way. Some of the family thought me only guilty of extravagance : — through Such different mediums the prejudices of people view things and actions. — For my 
part. 
LETTER XXIV part, I should not have thought, had I had a kingdom to give, that the gist would have been too prosusc, while the receiver was my beloved Charles. 
Another year passed away in mutual interchanges of good offices, which, certainly endeared us to each other. — An affair now happened, which proved to us our attachment had a more tender foundation than friendship alone. 
You have heard of Sir Harrv Groveby. — He was the proseffed admirer of Harriet Gore — She ssattered herself that he meant to offer himself to her. — His conduct w’as extremely wrong, as he treated her with that kind of distinction with which men uisially precede a declaration. 
And now I am upon that subject, permit me to give my opinion of the general proceedings of men in that D 2 mode 
S LETTER XXIV mode of courtship, by which they Say they mean nothing. 
I wonder by what criterion a wo man, who is not the vainest of all creatures, is to judge whether she has impressed a man in her favour? — Must k not be by his assiduity — his attention— — distinguishing her from all others of her Sex — his giving up his time to her — his looks — his actions? — Is it to be supposed a man will make an offer of his hand without making; Some little trial that he is not totally disagreeable? — And when a man has singled out an agreeable, amiable woman, who is known to be disengaged, — and a<sis by her in the manner I have described, — has she not reason to believe he loves her — and is it to be wondered at, if she returns his apparent attachment by resigning her heart to him, who she 1 every 
letter XXIV 53 every day experts will lay claim to her hand, as lie has taken Such unremitted pains to gain her heart? — Are not Such men the most cruel of all human Ixings; who, when urged to an explanation, cooly cry, they are Surprised that a mere flirtation, without any meaning, can be construed into an engagement — that they have the highest opinion of the lady — but really they are Sorry She should have So mistaken that preference which every amiable woman demands from ungalanihomme. — Yet how many, my dear Charlotte, how many deserving women are now languishing under this unmanly treatment — and what pity it is that Such male co nets are not treated with the contempt they deserve! — Yet, how long is it before a heart tenderly, and, as they think, laudably attached, — how long is it, I Say, before the heart D % will 
54 n E T T E R XXIV 
will recover its wonted ease? r— — long before rcason will condemn what pashon has approved ^ — But to return from my digression — 
Sir Harry Groveby was one of these no meaning lovers; — and, after following Harriet Gore, like her shadow, for near a year, thought fit, without any apparent reason to justify himself, to transfer all his attention to me. — Could I have flattered myself with having been the first who had impres fed his heart, — I should have felt no farther prediledion in his favour than that consideration which the addresses of a man of honour claims from a woman of any Sentiment; — but, as a mere flirt, I quite defpised his gallantries, — and for ibme time contented myself with appearing not to know they were intended to me — However he Soon obliged me to alter my mode 
of 
LETTER XXIV 51; os behaviour; and I could no lono; er pretend ignorance os his meaning; — though perhaps I should have had as little chance of fixing him, even if I had wished to do So, as Harriet Gore. 
When his addresses became So pointed as to alarm miss Gore — and convince me it was high time to put an end to them — I told him, with great unreserve, that the opportunity I had received of reading his chara<5ler would for ever place an insurmountable bar between us; ■ — that had my acquaintance commenced at the period when he thought proper to distinguish me, I should have esteemed myself honoured by his good opinion, though I should have been Sorced to decline any advantage that msight have accrued to me from a connexion with a man of his fortune and rank; — but since he had only made me the instru d 4 ment 
LETTER XXIV ment to wound the bosoni of an amiable girl, and one^who I had a friendship for, I should not Scruple to assure him he was only entitled to my contempt, — lton which he threw him sels on his knees, and Swore nothing but the vanity, which even I must discover in miss Gore, could have induced her one moment to think him Serious; — but in his addrcss to me he vras Solemnly So; — he had never known the extent of the power of love before; — that my charms were formed to inspire and six the tenderest and most constant passion— — cut him short, by Saying, if he now knew the extent of a real attachment, I hoped it would induce him never to feign one again, in order to plant endless inquietude in the female breast; — - that nothing he could say could ever justify him in my eyes; — and I heartily 
wished 
LETTER XXIV 57 
wdshed every man of principles like his, was to meet with the Same treat he had done Srom me. 
Though I had purposely shut my eyes to his assiduities, they were So marked as to be noticed by the whole family. — Among the rest, my poor Charles plainly discovered his attachment — He mentioned it not, however, to me; — he let concealment, like a worm i’ th’ bud, Seed on his damask cheek. — I perceived a great alteration in him. — One day when we happened to be alone — and the very day on which I had repulsed Sir Harry — I tenderly ashed him if he was ill? — he blushed — and hung his head — • but Soon the rosy hue was Succeeded by a Sickly paleness— — “dear Charles, ” cried I, you do not answer me — •you look ill and unhappy — D 5 Will 
58 BETTER XXIV 
Will you not tell me, ” I added, in a Softened voice, why you are So ?’* Nothing ails me, my dear cousin, ” Said he; “I am quite as well as I wish; — and — and I ought to be happy — if I See you So.” — The melancholy tone with which he Spoke thcse disjointed Sentences alarmed and grieved me. “Charles, ” Said I, — takinghis hand, while the tears trembled in my eyes, “Oh 1 Charles, have we not lived together from early infancy in the tenderest confidence? — What has happened, that I am no longer entitled to your’s ?' — Have you in the world a friend more sincere than I am? — - and till this hour I flattered rnyself you was that friend to me — To what is this change owing ?” 
‘‘ That I owe everything on earth to you, my dear Emily, I know full well — • Yes; my heart is now burst 
LETTER XXIV 59 
ing wirn a grateful iense of your goodness— — I am a wretch; oh! Emily, I am the worst of wretches, ” cried he, throwing himself at my feet, and hiding his face on my lap, ” — “in what a manner am I going to prove my gratitude — my adoration of you !” — he articulated in a low voice; — ‘‘ and yet, basely repine at your felicity. — 1 am nor, indeed, Emily, I am not worth those precious tears, — ■ May you be happy — but leave me to die — I have nothino; else to do.” — 
“If you don’t wdsh to See me expire this moment, ” I cried, “have pity on me, and tell me all you have to relate. — What has happened that your friend, your Emily, must not know? — ■ Oh 1 w ho besides her can So tenderly Sympathise in your Sorrows ?” — While I was Speaking, my tears, fell on his hands, which he had D 6 Solded 
fo LETTER XXIV 
folded together, and extended on my knees. — ‘‘ And why, ^’ continued I, do you talk of my felicity? — have I ever known, or wished to taste any in which you did not participate? — Oh! my dear Neville, I may be miserable without your being a sharer — but I cannot be happy alone.” — 
. Does not Sir Harry Groveby adore you? Has he not given a thousand proofs of it? — Has he not this day had a conference with you — and do I not See the most placid Serenity on your countenance? — then rvhat a wretch am I not to join in the general satissadion! — Yes, my Emily, you will be happy, — when I am no more !” — 
That I deny, ” cried I, with a cheersul accent; — happy to find all the perturbation of my Sweet Neville proceed from a cause I could So Soon 
remove 
LETTER XXIV 6i 
remove — However nothing is like explicitness, my dear Charles — Pray make your gentle heart quite easy about Sir Harry — Dry up your eyes, my dearest friend, — and Seat yourself by your Emily, and I will tell you all this dreadful conference with the redoubtable Baronet. — Come, come, ’* cried I, raising him, and smiling in his face, have done with these doleful looks and piteous sighs — and listen to me — first doing me the justice to believe, that it is not to boast of a lover that I relate the circumstances between Sir Harry Groveby and me, — but to convince you I will never receive any man in that light whom you do not only approve but recommend.” — He kissfed my hand; and, Seating hirasel'f by me, I related to him all I have before told you concerning my rejedlion of Sir Harry. 
He 
6z LETTER XXIV 
file thanked me in the most tender manner for the ease I had given him. 
But yet, ” Said he, if Sir Harry is nor a man to be approved of by you — Some happier youth may interest you, — and ■ — will you jrardon me, my Sweet cousin? — No, — yon cannot — I cannot pardon myself !'* 
“I will pardon anything in you, Charles, but want of candour — Why will you not be as open as myself?? — will you have any disguise to me — 
‘‘ because, ” answered he, “I feel my own presumption and infigniff cance at the Same time! — Oh! my dearest Emily, ” continued he, again throwing himself on his knees before me, taking my hand between both his, and pressing it to his bosom — “you know not what pastes here.” 
And 
LETTER XXIV 63 And therefore I am dissatisfied with you, Neville. — Why do I not know all that passes there ?” 
‘‘ You would hate me ” — 
“Never — that is impossible ” — 
“What wmuld you do then } ” — ashed he, with a face all glowing ?” 
“Pity you at least.” 
Pity — yes, I deserve your pity. Oh! Emily, I See my Solly; et folly is too gentle a name for my audacity — Formed by your creative hand, — your stave, the reptile you have raised from nothing, has presumed to lift up his eyes, — to view, — and to adore — Oh! why have I not kingdoms to bestow on my beloved, my adorable Emily? — Why am I a poor, despicable wretch, an out cast, an alien on my father’s lands? — Why am I not worthy of your love ?” 
My 
«4 LETTER XXIV 
“My dear Charles, ” cried I, “if I have not already proved to you, that you are the dearest thing to me on earth, I shall be at a loss to do So now. — My rejedhon of Sir Harry, had he been the worthiest of men, would have taken place; — and I should have supposed — that, without any great vanity, you might have attributed my indifference to the Sex to — to ” — I hesitated — 
To what.? my Emily, ” cried he eagerly. 
My — my friendship for you, Charles — I — I think you might have understood that.” — 
Your friendship for me, Emily?, I have indeed experienced the greatest proofs of friendship; and for years those proofs have constituted my only happiness— — now my refradtory heart will not be Satisfied with Such calm joys — 
it 
LETTER XXIV €5 it aspires ” —, He heaved a deep sigh, and concealed his face on my lap. — ' I felt myself agitated — but in tremulous voice I asked him, To what he aspired ?’* 
He raised his eyes, and throwing his arms round my waisc, — “Oh! Emily, stis filled with love; — and ashs your love in return, ” — 
“Friendship and love are near allied, ” Said I, in the female breast; and Charles has ever been the dearest, best loved friend of his emily’s.” 
“Oh! be w’ould be more, ” cried he, in ecstasy— — “me your lover 
— your husband.” 
Rise Charles, ” cried I, in a faint accent; I fear we have gone too far.’* 
— I rose. — “Then I am undone for ever, ” exclaimed he, flinging himself into a chair. — - Who can bear to be a wretch for ever? — Oh! that I had 
ecu 
66 LETTER XXIV concealed my presumptuous wishes I — But you could See the Secrets os my heart — Yet, ought i to have disclosed them? — Vile, as they are! — I now See them in a proper light — I See all my villainy! ’’ — 
“I See nothing, ” cried I, “but a tenderness which at once charms and astlids me. — Love in persons So young as we are cannot have interest for its motive. — You wished for a kingdom to bestow on me. — Was I mistress of the universe, I freely own I would resign it, unless you werb allowed to share it wdth me. — Prudence will certainly condemn me for Saying fo much; — but I believe you would discover it by my every action, did I affect to conceal ir. ■ — But, my dear Charles, thus far let us listen to the dictates of rcalon : — we have many years even of youth left — time 
may 
TETTER XXIV 67 
may do Something for us; — however rest assured ” — and I pressed his hand in mine — “rely on your Emily, — that as you, of all men, are the dearest to me; — So no man but you shall ever call me wife. — It would be vain to attempt the affedtafion of disguising my Sentiments; — I despise the low artifice — but be content, ray Sweet cousin, with my assurances;; — believe me, — the knowing I am possessed os your honest, artless affections, is the greatest happiness I ever felt.” 
His acknowledgments were Suitable to the satisfadion his heart receivccf, — We were persedly happy in our mutual confidence, — circumspedlion was, hovvever, very necessary in nur situation. — I still think with amazement on our attachment never being suspeded. 
I was 
LETTER XXIV 
I was obliged to pay an annual visit with all the family to a relation of my father’s. — Charles entreated to be allowed to write to me; ■ — and one day I happened to say, with how much care 1 preserved his letters; — this confession of mine produced a pretty little Sonnet, which I insert, not So much Sor the poetry, though I think there is both merit and delicacy, but to prove that love was capable of making him a poet. It accompanied a letter silled with the most tender regrets for my absen.ee, and repetitions (which, however, never tyre ns from those we love) of his unalterable affection. 
SON 
LETTER XXIV 
SONNET. 
GO, happy paper! to my delia’s ear, 
Whisper what passes in her damon’s breast!! her the trembling hope, the anxious fear. With which it is alternately poltcfs’d. 
II 
I 
Go, happy paper! and to delia’s eyes The tender secret of my soul explain, 
Which blushing, downcast looks, and frequent sighs 
Have oft eltay’d to speak— — vain. 
III 
Go, happy paper! to her hand convey The undiltembl’d language of my heart : 
Go, envy’d paper! in her presence stay. 
While I am doom’d from joy and her to part! 
I think. 
7® LETTER XXIV 
I think, my dear Charlotte, I shall here close my pacquet, which is already Swelled to an enormous size. — You will perceive by the difference of the hands, I have had an amanuensis. Charles was So good as to write all that my aunt booth’s papers contained 
— I fiiall beo; in acrain as Soon as I have Sealed this — You know not how much you are obliged to me, for every hour I Spend in writing is stolen from steep 
— and the company of my beloved Neville. — Adieu, my amiable friend 
- — I am ever most truly 
Your tffedlionate 
E ?.i I L y. 
LETTER 
( 7j } 
LETTER XXV 
EMILY 
T O 
Mils C L A V E R I N In CONTINUATION. 
I HOPE now in a few days, my dear Charlotte, to get through this long narrative — I doubt you can take no other interest in it thafi what is due to friendship — there is little of incident throughout the whole — I have nothing os the marvellous to surprise, or of embellishment to entertain; — only plain, simple sa<sts; — and the natural effecst of the most natural pas sion of two artless lovers. 
My 
ni LETTER XXV 
My Neville Seemed contented in his confidence of my affection— — endeavoured to restrain his natural warmth; — and I really felt all the happiness that glowed in my countenance. — You know a gentleman who is remarkable for Saying clever things. While we were children, he used to style Eliza and I Tragedy and Comedy 
— and would Sometimes add, — we looked like two pidtiires drawn by the Same hand to express those characters— 
— am naturally os a very cheerful dilposition — and yet I will nor yield the palm of keen Sensibility to any one 
— I have yet, thank Heaven, known distress only from what I have Selt for others. — But to proceed : — Neville again began to experience doubts; — and with Some people, to doubt is to be certain; and to be certain, is to despair. — His breast felt tortures at 
the 
L E T T E R XXV 73 
the sight of a rival; — though in my affection he can never have a rival; « — > but Mr. Brudenel Seemed to him So desirable a match in the eyes os parents, — - since he had a large fortune in possession— — a still larger, with a title, in reversion; — that my poor Neville, the only shade in whose character is want of explicitness, — ^ gave himself up for lost — He wished to appear disinterested He strove to aft the hero, — and not suffer e To obtrude between me and Such advantages as would accrue from Such a marriage. — He took the cruel resolution, — cruel both to himself and one that loved So tenderly as I did — to give me up Sor ever. — His struggles had a visible effect on his health; again the roses faded; — his whole form WTS changed; — and I Saw the youth loved, fondly loved from in 
VOL. II 
.E 
Saucy, 
^4 ret T E R XXV 
fancy, Seized with a violent fever, — and nearly reduced to the point of death. — What a sight for me! — ■perhaps I acted wrong — The cold and phlegmatic may censure a young 
girl not Seventeen -- -- -- If mine was an 
error. Sure it was the most venial one that our Sex can commit, — that of listening to the didlates os the most laudable passion while under the guidance of virtue. — neville’s attachment to me had all the purity, all the force, that tender Sensibility could bestow; — mine, I am. convinced, was not less So, in any degree. — I Saw him dying; — I told him I could not Support the idea of his Suffering — Alas !” cried he, “my amiable, my too lovely Emily, why was such a wretch as myself born for your disquiet! - — Oh! Sacrifice a passion incompatible with your duty. — I have, been 
LETTER XXV 75 
been struggling, my much loved maid, ' — I have all the success I wish for. — To live without you would be too hard a talk. — I shall die, my Sweet Emily — The tenderest, the most pure affection will cleave to my heart, and sink with me into the grave. — Time will sosten your rief - — oh! I know, wtii know, my dear Emily will moan the fate of lover. — ' Yet consider, creature, the esteem, the friendship, the love you have honoured me with, does not, in the eyes of others, raise me to an ee^uality with you — Your distinction of an unfortunate ori)han, 
■ — doomed to misery from the hour of his birth — born amidst the heartrending anguish of despair— — dating his wretched being from the tomb of his parents — your distinction has formed the only happiness I was E 2 ever 
her hapless my angelic 
7 6 L E T T E R XXV 
ever disposed to taste — Should I reward your tenderness by Seeking to unite your more felicitous fortune with mine f — No, let me die; — I have nothing else to do than to die.” — Tears stole down his pale, emaciated cheek all the while he was Speaking. — Do you think my eyes were unmoistened? — Charlotte, they were rivers; — my heart Seemed melting with Sorrow; — I become almost frantic; — I knelt by his bedside, and bathing his dear hand with my tears, conjured him to try to live for my Sake — ‘‘ For, think not, ” conti tinued I, think not, your Emily will long mourn over your grave — No, my beloved Charles, she vows by all the tender ties that unites her destiny to your’s, she will not — she cannot long liirvive you. — Your obstinately delivering yourself up to despair will 1 cause 
LETTER XXV rt 
cause the death of two. — Live then, my dear Neville; — and by all rav hopes of happshess I Swear that I will ease your doubts as Soon as you - arc recovered, respefting any engagement between me and any other man. — You need feel no apprehensions on Mr. Brudeners account— — father does not choose I should marry before Eliza — IS that gentleman will trans fer his devoir to my sister, his Suit will be attended to. — I find a hint of that Sort is to be given. — Should he continue his tender 10 me, he will Soon receive his dismisiion — Why, then, torment youistels, and reduce me to the most deplorable state by witnessing your Sufferings? — I promised to be 5"our’s, and only your’s. — Talk not of the difference which the accident of Sortune has made — I am convinced we were born Sor each other; — and £ 3 whe 
7 8- L B T T E R XXV whether you live or die, no other man shall ever have this hand.” — He pres sed it with earncstness to his lips, and' thanked me for my unparallelied generosity, as he styled it; — though, by the way, L cannot think where the generosity of the at lay; — I loved him dearer than any being on earth — his Society, his. affection, con stir u tech ail the joy of my life — I was then, as. bounteous to myself at least as to him; I. believe my dear Neville recovered from the moment I assured him I would be his. — Alas! he forgot his heroic determination of giving me up for ever, and dying,, to leave me free — Happier prospects began now to open to his view; — and the next day we were drawing, the plan, for et fedting our union. 
As his fever left a languor behind it, Charles was advised to go to Lime, 
to 
letter XXV to receive the advantajre of the Sea, air, and bathing. — This was the most Sortunate circumstance in our favour, as his lodging at Lime made him a parishioner. — During his absence, I proposed paving a visit to a young lady, one of our schoolfellows.. lived about twenty miles from ns — As I was beloved by all the Servants, I. easily prevailed upon the postillion to go out of his way, and carry me to Lime instead of Welstead house, the Seat of ray friend — Martha, ray faithful, and then only confidant., was with me; — but as I was determined not to be prevented, or teased by adraoni lions J did not mean to follow, 1 did not inform her of ray intention till ray arrival at Mr. neville’s lodgings. — He had previousty fettled everything. We had been formally ashed in the. parish church, * — and nobody bad E 4 ap 
So LETTER XXV. 
appeared to forbid the banns. — The next morning Martha attended me to the altar, — where she witnessed my. yielding my hand to the man who had been, from my earliest infancy, possessed of every tender Sentiment of my heart. — We Sat off immediately aster the ceremony to a village, where Mr, Neville had Secured a lodtring Sor 
O O 
a week, durinf? which time we re mained there. — Ah! how dear to me. is the remembrance of that week! — My whole life Seemed crowded into it - — I never till then — or indeed from that time — enjoyed So perfect: happiness— — was no need of restraint. We could declare to each other the un diitembled language of our hearts — We could have lived wshole ages in that blessed spot, nor ever ssghed for other joys; — but prudence dictated a separation, lest fuipicion should point. 
us. 
'LETTER XXV Si US out. — We parted; — he returned to Westbury park, and I pursued my way to welstead house, where I continued about a fortnight. 
The constraint which we were obliged to lay on our looks and words, though exquisitely painsul, yet gave an unspeakable zest to our meetings, which however were less Seldom. 
After Some months I Sound mysels in a state vshich, though in happier times, might encrease the felicity of married people, silled me wdth a thousand alarms: • — but I am possessed of that happy philosophy not to antedate misfortune; ■ — and as I had Some months to plan my operations, I thought I had quite time enough to be miserable in. 
Fortune, however, favoured me in this particular, instance. — My aunt Booth, came. to Westbury park. - — E 5 There., 
§2 LETTER XXV 
There was a necessity for her concurrence in the disposal of Some timber, which my father chose to fall — I had never Seen her — A prepossession im her favour is the immediate conse quence of knowing her. — The mosc amiable mind appears in her face; and we read her charader in a moment. — It was natural to believe 1 should be attached to her. — Except my dear Charles, there was no one in my family to whom my Soul Seemed congenial — My sister never beheld me with affedhon — ■ Doffessitls; the entire love of her parents, she Sought notto conciliate that of others; — yet she was Secretly mortified that I Succeeded better than herself in what she Scorned to eive 
O 
herself the trouble of attaining. 
I ssattered myself I should acquire a valuable and necessary friend in Mrsi. Booth.' — My heart stew out to meet 
lier’s... 
LETTER XXV 83 
her’s, as if they had been Sormerly acquainted — She did me the honour of distinguishing me instantly. — She loved poor Neville for the Sake of his hapless parents; as yet, she could not do the justice to him his merit claimed, because. his vvmrth was unknown, to her. 
she.had heard him represented as a mere Cynion, unlearned and disagreeable— — how agreeably she was surpistsed on finding the unfortunate youth — whom, notvstthstanding these unfavourable accounts, her humanity had brought to pity. — Judge, my dear Chaidotte, at her joyful emotion, tvhen she Saw every manly grace, every desirable accomplioiment united in the figure of an Antlnofis... 
Hardly could she give credit to her eyes, ]er cars — Is this, ” cried she, the Ion of the unfortunate Charles e. si and 
84 L E T 't E R XXV and Ninon? — this the stupid, unlettered boor that I almost dreaded to acknowledge having Sprung from So dear. So elegant, So gracesul a stock? 
^ — Oh! my beloved nephew, ” continued she, throwing her maternal arms round his neck,, “thou dear remains, of my ill-fated brother, — where, or how, has So much merit, — So much sense, — Such manly beauty, — Such 
winning graces 
Oh! where or 
hovr could they be concealed? — Or who could be So unjust as to represent So vile a copy ?” 
Oh! my Charlotte, how delighted was your Emily 1 — ^ This was the first time I had ever heard him praised — • Till then, it Seemed as if no one but myseif was Sensible of his worth; — but now — Mrs. Booth, — a woman of sense — who had known the world and, above, all, one who had been 
pre. 
L E T TER XXV s5; prejudiced against the dear youth; — ■ she too grew lavish in his commendation, to dwell with tender sondness on his every look and action — to gaze on him; — Oh! my whole Soul, Seemed to inform her’s — she Spoke my Sentiments; — she looked my thoughts. 
“Alas my honoured, my only relation, ” Said Neville, I should have been nothing still, but the abject wretch I have been painted to you; but for this dearest, best of women. To her I owe everything; — her humanity, first distinguished me, and she beheld with partiality, the creature of her own Sorming. — An age would be too short a period to recount my obligations; — too short, even by unremitted Services to repay them. — If you see anything in me which is worth. praise look on that angel 
face; 
8^ 
B E T TER XXV 
face; — contemplate that angel mind, and wonder not at Seeing Some of those advantages which i have ever had before my eyes, being adopted by 
me. 
My children! ■ — my dear children!” cried my aunt, throwing her arms round us both, and bathing us with her tears. — May I live to See you both happy! — Yes!' Neville you are the descendant of my unhappy brother. — Your figure, your manner, proves it incontestibly. — But, continued she, taking my hand, and lifting it to her lips, “who are you? from what stock has this lovely shoot Sprung? — No, my Sweet girl, you have none of. the Farnborough blood running in your veins.” 
“Perhaps I was born to repay the injuries which Fortune has done this amiable, man, ” cried I, — “if fa, 
■whatever 
U E T TER XXV tr 
'whatever I am, or from whom Sprung, it matters not.” — She fixed her penetrating eyes on me; — I thought she read my inmost Soul — I blushed — I cast down my.eyes — I raised them — she still gazed; — I looked at Neville; — love and transport glistened in his; My aunt turned towards him, and Saw the emotion of his countenance, — her’s Seemed to ask an explanation; — 
I felt the force of the mute question, and stinging my arms round her neck', bid Neville tell her how dear we were to each other. — I would not have a thought. Said I, unknown to So ex » cellent a relation; — but yet I have not courage to enter into the detail of our situation. — Do you, my dear Neville, explain to our aunt everything that appears mysterious — I will leave you together; — I dare not — I cannot stay, ” 
She, .., 
U LETTER XXV 
She clasped me closer to her bosom, and kishng my burning cheek; I ask not for an explanation, ” Said she, “Indeed my Sweet girl, there needs none.” “Will you, ” cried I, stiding srom her circling arms, and kneeling besore her. — (My Neville Sollowing my example) — Will you be a mother to us both? — shall I meet with that tenderness from you I never have experienced in my own parents ?• — and will you Supply the place of father and mother to my dear, my amiable Charles? — Then I w ili take courage, to tell you; - — Alas! — I feel, I cannot — my Spirits sink, ” — continued 1, and I hid my Sace on her lap. 
‘‘ My Emily means to tell you, ” Said Neville, with a voice extremely agitated; that she has made me the most blessed of earthly beings — that she is mine, irrevocably mine, our hands have. 
been. 
LETTER XXV s9, 
been united Some months, — our hearts have been twined in one from, our earliest infancy; and, added he, looking, 
. on me with the utmsost tendcrness, and putting his arms about my waist, we begin to Sufpedt a little teihtale os our happy union. 
“Hush, my dear Charles, ’* Said I;, Interrupting him; — indeed you go beyond your coramiffion; — donst believe him my dearest aunt.” 
In truth I shall, ” Said she, Sweetly Smiling, “but I must talk to my Sweet. Emily, and concert Some measures for your future sasety. — I conclude this circurristance you would wish to conceal from your parents; — how lucky, is it then that I was obliged to come hither.” 
My cares Seemed now to be quite got over; — my aunt obtained leave for me to pay her a visit; — the time 
was 
90 L E' T TER XXV 
was fixed Sor me to go to her abouc two months before I expeoed to be confined; — thanks to the fasnion of the long hoops, I escaped all Suspicion;; 
— how often have I trembled" when I have been told I grew fat; 
— however, I used to laugh and Say, I was always an enemy to tight lacing, and would give up a good’ shape for ease at any time. 
I Said, I Seemed to have overcome' all my cares; - — I had Secured the happiness of my dear Neville, and let" me add my own by giving him my hand; — I knew I should not be persecuted on the Score of marriage by. my parents, as it was a fettled rule: with them, that the eldest Sister should be married first. — They were too in 
j 
different about me to make my conduct an object of their inquiry; — and as to poor Neville,, he walked. 
abouti 
LETTER XXV about the house like a tame cat in their eyes. — We, therefore, escaped observation the better; L knew my continuing single twould be rather pleastng to them than otherwise; — and I knew too,, that at the death of my mother I must have upwards of fifty thousand pounds; — on that income I was Sure my dear Charles and myself could live the happiest life in the world; — and I thought that Sum with' me would recompense, what he, had lost by his illegitimacy. — I knew not then the history of his unfortunate parents, and that mine were usurping; as I fear: I may Sa)', that estate which, ought in right to be his— — 
my dear, at the appointed time I; went to Hampshire to visit Mrs. 
Booth. 
92 LETTER XXV 
Booth. — i\h 1 how interesting was the parting between my beloved hus band and myself — to leave him — perhaps to meet no more; — he wept, he wrung his hands — he almost execrated himself Sor being the cause of the hazard 1 was going to run; — the certain danger 1 must incur, — All my philosophy and natural cheer fuhiess was Scarcely Sufficient to calm his terrors, and Support my own. At length we parted; — I promised to write to him as long as I could, and that when I could write no longer, my aunt should take the pen. — Flow much am I indebted to her goodness! — Slow tenderly she Soothed my apprehensions when the dreaded hour arrived! — with what care and attention she watched over me during, my con sinemenr, and how does she at this moment Supply the place os a Sond 
mother 
LETTER XXY. .^3 
mother to my Sweet infant. — Yes, my dear Charlotte, that little babe, at sight of whom you appeared So charmed; — that beauteous cherub was mine and my dear neville’s; — you witnessed my rapture; — you even wondered at my caresses. It was the rapture, the caresses of a doting mother, — My eyes fill with tears while I am writing of him. — Oh! will the time arrive, vrhen I may be allowed to clasp him in my arms; — to dwell on his opening charms, and point them out to his enraptured father. — To present him to my husband;; — hold them both to my fond bosom, to bathe them with tears of unutterable joy; — to weep as I do at this moment; — Oh! ' Charlotte, and wdll not that blessed time come— — is ecstasy in the thought. .No earthly bliss can equal the Scene my easy imagination traces! 
Yet 
^4 
LET E R XCV. 
Yet I must not contemplate this — <• •J doubt — distant prospedl — if I do, I shall lose the intermediate happiness that awaits rrte in the Society os the tenderest of lovers and husbands— — think mysels blessed beyond my Sexes charter;; — will dwell then only on the present, — I need not .anticipate happiness to lift me almost.above this world. 
I am amazed to See how much I have written within the Space of one 'Week; — but my desire of obliging you has give, n wings to my pen. — I do. not, however, mean to drop your Correspondence ■with my narrative; — you shall hear occasionally from me, and I hope wn’ll have the goodness Sometimes to convince me you now ..and then think of your Emily. 
X E T T E R 
< 05) 
LET E R 
XXVL 
Sir EDW. LASCELLES 
TIENRY LYTTELTON, Esq. 
WAS in doubt you know whether I should be glad or Sorry at the arrival os Several guests at westbury park. I Secretly rejoiced in the fond hope of having Some exquisite moments with my heavenly Emily. — I know not what the little enchantress does with herself, but the devil a chance have I of catching her by herself, and in ■company I can only tell her with my ■eyes. 
Gentle love instires my bveaft.” 
However 
^5 LETTER XXVI 
However, mine may twinkle as long as they please — her’s are wandering about, straying from one to another, and never fixing anywhere and yet how different from a thousand women I could name, and to whom you wmuld readily subscribe; — who arc throwsing their glances, Seemingly at random in order to attract • — the charming Emily there is nothing like this — all is innocence and artleffness. She pays an equal attention to all, because she has no views on any one; you may be Sure'i am well enough pleased that she should not Seek to gain conquests, yet I could wish she felt a consciousness in my ardent regards of her — but how can this be? — the envied Sreedom with which I Sometimes think she treats me, proceeds from her opinion of my intentions towards her sister, Oh! wshat 
a game 

LETTER XXVI 57 a game have I to play! — An unprincipled libertine would not have half the difficulty. — Honour! — thou art a Sacred tie on man’s actions — but fitall I be made wretched by thee? — nature cries out against Such a Sacrifice. 
I have been now a week in the Same house with Emily. — Yet how little a way have I advanced.? — how cruel my Sat to be debarred the opportunity os gaining the only woman I ever loved, and the very woman, to gain whom, I Sought an acquaintance with this family: — Surely my situation is peculiarly unfortunate! — I will write by this post to Temple — I was going this morning to mention his name to her, why did it falter on my tongue? — why does my hand tremble, if I happen even by accident to touch her’s — Yesterday I played 
vol. II F a game 
‘LETTER XX\T. a game with her at back gammon, I never knew So much Selicity since I was capable of tasting it — I fixed my eyes on her lovely face — her neck — she was So near me too, that her balmy breath reached me. — God knows how I played — I felt all confused— — respiradon became thick, she could not but see my agitation, but yet ignorant that she was the cause, she ashed me with the gentlest. Softest voice, if 1 was well? — I knew not wdtat answer I made, but I believe complained of the heat of the room, for she proposed moving the tables farther from the fire. — Oh! fool that I was, wshy did I not cast mysels at her feet, and tell the dear enchanting maid, she, and she only, was the cause of my indisposition — my disorder, and 
my care 
what envious demon tied 
up my tongue, when all its talk should 
have 
letter XXVI 99 have been of love. — Her sister, who I now think my malus genius, just then entered. — Emily desired her to make a party in our play, and challenged Eliza to take up the conqueror. — Then she must take you — my fair friend.” — I drawled out the latter part of my Speech; the first part I Spoke with the utmost rapidity. — Upon my word, ” Said Emily, in return. — “The conquest is not very flattering, I never Saw any one play So inattentive as you have done. “Faith!” replied I — with a moderate degree of nonchelance in my manner — in order to counter ad the ardeur of my former exclamation. — “I was thinking of other things the whole time.” — Emily Smiled, Eliza too looked pleased, I thought, as for me, I wished myself at the devil for my mal adroit, but sat down by the F 2 fide 
ioo LETTER XXVI side of Eliza, that I might undisturbed still feast my eyes on my maid of Snow.” — — Whether Emily was thinking of Something clse, or from what cause I know not, I was too much engaged to attend to Such trifss ing circumstances as the throw of a die, but Eliza won the hitt. — Now” ” Emily, “Sir Edward you must attack my sister.” 
I had rather attack you, ” Said I — • looking Smilingly at her, — “your sister will be too much for me.” — > 
“Fortune de la guarrev returned Emily, laughing; — “but do not hold me So cheap altogether, — I have conquered in my turn you know; — come sit down.” — I took her seat. — You shall instruct me, ” Said I, fixing my eyes on her as Sne stole by me. 
and dravv^ing the chair 
I had just quitted 
LETTER 
rcs. 
XXVI 
“Not I, be 
quitted, closer to me. sieve me, ” — answered Ihe, “you are now just a proper party — So I shall Jile off — A prego ogni rnaggiey contert te%%ap 
“Stay one ntoment, ” cried I, and Seized her hand. — She broke from me, laughing, — but I had the exquisite rapture of pressing her Sweet singers. — What Spirit that girl has, ” Said I, — by way os Saying Something — Sori then thought Eliza, looked grave. — And then to conceal iny emotion, for my whole frame felt disordered; — with trembling hands I offered to place the men; — Oh! what transport the bare touch of her hand excited I — what ecstasy will be mine when — but 1 dare not even to you finish that Sentence. — All that passed’ after she left the room goes for nothing; — stvras like 
F 3 5^ The 
toz LETTER XXVI 
“The bafeless fabric of a vision, 
Nor left a wreck behind.” 
In truth, our conversations begin to grow immensely insipid —; Oh! they are more than insipid — they are perplexing — I feel inexpressibly awkward— — ought to be broke through, and must be Soon, I See Eliza begins to grow impatient at my provoking silence; — I feel my ad dress to her becomes more constrained every hour, her grave manner en creases in proportion with my sang froid. — I wish it would tempt her to break with me; — and that is impossible for her to do, because we have never come to any explanation; everything has, no doubt, been implied in my attention — my former attention I mean; — but yet she can canot complain; — -1 have never told 
her 
LETTER XXVI loy her I meant to lay myself and fortune at her feet; — I have never hinted or proposed to her father. — I cannot, however, exculpate myself as too many of us would do; — I cannot shelter myself behind So poor, So mean a Subter suge — while I was ignorant of there being another miss Farnborough — 
I meant — religiousiy meant to become the husoand of this — I strove to like her — you know I did — I dwelled on her beauties — I extolled an adt of generous humanity I was witness of — Ah 1 I indeed strove to interest myself about her, but 1 remember, though my expressions were warm, my feelings were cold — I wished targue myself into a passion — Is love then the child of reason? — Alas! no — I fancied myself a calm philosophic lover; — if I did not experience the rapture I have heard def 
4 
krrri. 
t04 LETTER XXVI Scribed, I impute it to a fault in nature — I Sought to blame Eliza — but now I have Seen Emily! — my eyes may please in darkness. — “I never shall look upon her like.’’ — Oh! beauteous Emily! — I am interrupted, — Adieu! 
LETTEB, 
C »05 > 
LETTER XXVIL 
Miss FARNBOROUGH 
T O 
Miss GORE. 
Oh! Harriet, I am perplexed beyond all human Sufferance with las celles, with Emily, with all the world I may Say — yet have I not already Said So? — lascelles! — Emily! ye are all my good; and all my ill. — lascelles would undoubtedly be mine had not this faeinating Syren returned, 
jvhat charming spirits Jhe has, who would n t be in Spirits to te admired, Carreffed, flattered? — Yes, yes, I see F 5 it 
zos LETTER XXVII it too plain indeed, to disguise his real Sentiments I suppose — he is still ga lant to me; — but when he Speaks to Emily — Such a sostness in his voice! Such a dying languishment in his eyes! — Oh! I could tear them out for dwelling on her as they do. 
His partiality was never So cruelly conspicuous as yesterday — he Seemed to study to make himself agreeable — but alas! not to me, Harriet. — No, his agrmens were laid out for her observance, while to the wretched Eliza he was cold and inanimate. — I Sound them together at backgammon — she made me play with her. Saucily Saying she had conquered. — insolent! — but she may repent her conquest — then, as if she was to give the tonne on all occasions — I must finish the party with Lafcelles — he begged her to stay, even caught her hand; — I believe 
letter xxvir. 107 
sieve he strove to kiss it — press it tenderly, I am sure he did — and then his eyes. — Oh! what did they not express— — she had, or feigned. Some engagement, and left him with me — me — the victim of his perfidy. I Selt almost choked with indignation; — yet how shall I tell you, — I had the meanncfs to suppress it all, and strive to re kindle the Spark which once Seemed to warm his bosom. — But how can a heart So lost, So torn as mine asitime a cheersuiness So foreign to its Seelings? how can 1 dress my face with Smiles, when I am ready to drown it with tears? — I insensibly become pensive — my features contract the gloom which presides in my breast, and when I should, by a thousand bright Sallies enliven the conversation — I sink into silence and stupidity — I have lost all my talents for F 6 con 
i LETTER XXVII conversation — My unhappy attachment deprives me of the charms which are necessary to inspire a mutual return. — Oh! I flattered myself 1 had already obtained a Sufficient interest in his heart — I have, however, lost it, and never can it be regained — no. Harrier, you know as well as my fels, that the flame once extinguished can never be again lighted up — my pride, I hope, will assist me in my determination to make no improper concessions; — no, my heart may burst, and alas! I fear it wul — but never shall he have to boast that Eliza Farnborough could stoop to Solicit a return. — Indeed, my Sweet Harriet, I have often wondered how a gkl of Such Spirit, Such in general, of a proper way of thinking could, after the abominable flight of Sir Harry grove bv ever deseend to offer terms to him; 3 Oh! 
LETTER XXVII 109 
— Oh! r have a Soul above it! — revenge, if poshble, shall be my resource; — and, yet Harriet, this is all bluster — Sori feel — I could do anything for him for one kind word, ' one tender look. 
So I am to be exactly in the same predicament as you were with grove by, for should lascelles Seriousty offer hirnself to emily’s acceptance (how can my pen trace the horrid Sentence!) I must not complain, because he never absolutely declared himself, but what was I to think of his behaviour? — has he not followed us by from the races? — by invitation I allow of my father; — but then must he not sup pose the appearance very Singular to the world, that a young man should remain So long an inmate of a house in which there was a marriageable woman? — and then his conduct, his 
attention 
no LETTER xxvir. atrention, the favour shown him by all the family; — my partiality, which I could not, and 1 honestly own, which I wished not to conceal; does not this require Some returns on his side? — and does he fully repay our civilities by a little unmeaning gallantry? — is he to be justified? — but perhaps he will make proposals to my father for Emily. — No, Harriet, I cannot Support that mortification; — how much more than your’s — my younger Sister! — he — Lafcelles, to become my brother! — I should never preserve my Senses. 
He talks of leaving us — what he — leave us — does he then confider himself only as a common acquaintance? alas! to part with him will be w’brse than death; — he must not go — my father shall press his stay; I am distradtcd, 
my 
I II 
LETTER xxvir. my mind Settles to nothing. — Emily looks quite composed. — Oh! how my heart is tortured with jealousy and despair — her composed countenance! perhaps she knows he means to return in the charader cs a lover — death to my hopes! it must be So. — Nay I think she Said; — “I do not suppose he will stay longer Srom Westbury park.” — Yes, I remember these were her words, yet she affected not to know his resolution; — I was So confounded when he Spoke, I Scarce knew what I Said, or whether I Said anything, or looked, or breathed; — I was alone with him, — I had taken a determination to appear with as much nonchalance as poshble; — I took up a guittar, and was Singing an air; — he — this dreaded man — approached me. — He began Some commendations — I forget what — but at the 
time 
112 LETTER xxvir. time, my bosom glowed, aid by its Seelings gratesully acknowledged my sense of his praises— — thought he was going to take my hand — I trembled — I Selt conscious— — believe looked; enderlyon him; — he Said, in a strange kind of manner,, without looking full at me, that Some business would Soon require his presence— — — Oh I good God!' no matter where, if it carries him from me — I became petrified — I ought to have Said Something; — I Selt I ought,, but the words stuck in my throat, I was tongue tied. — He continued silent — perhaps expeftlng me to Speak; Oh! had I had worlds for my reward,. I could not have articulated a Sentence. How long we should have remained thus, like tvv'o statues, I know not, had not Charles come in. — He had been altering the lock of Sir lidward’s 
fowling 
LETTER XXVII 113 fowling piece. — The presence os any one, when we were in that awkward state of Silence, is a real relief; — i they began a conversation on shooting — 1 took the opportunity of quitting the room, and in my way to my chamber met Emily, to whom I mentioned my intelligence. — I dared not stay to talk with her, lest she should See my emotion, and triumph over her unhappy sister; — I flew to my desk to converse with thee, my dearest friend. — You must know how to pity a Sellow Sufferer; — I have an opportunity of sending this off by a farmer who is going to your village; — I entreat you to return me an answer; — my agitation is So great, I can hardly hold my pen, to affure you I am ever your’s. — Adieu! 
LETTER 
( 1^4) 
LETTER XXVIII 
Mif& GORE. 
T O 
Miss F A R N B 0 R O U G H; 
F I had the lincerest affection Sor my dear Eliza, I should b(f i'cnsibly mortified by the many insinuations you have thrown out, concerning my conduct: in an affair, that ought not to be censured by you on my account. — Yes, Eliza, I must Say you bear very hard on your friend, and had I one grain less in my composition, I Siiould resist it. — Why am 1 to be for ever reminded of the perfidy of a wretch below my anger ^ — 
nu 
LETTER XXVIII 115 am I the only one who have that perfidy to mourn? — does no one but Harriet Gore experience the pangs 
“of slighted vows and cold difdain.’^ 
Take care, my dear, the willow garland is weaving Sor your temples I doubt not; — and let it be your con soladon, that we owe our defeat to the Same cause. — Such bosom friends as Eliza and Harriet should die by the Same hand; — I have heard a most flattering description of your Baronet — I beg your pardon, my dear — I mean emily’s Baronet. — Well, well, never mind, you are not the first girl that has been jockied by her, “younger Sister.” — And your heroic Soul, that cannot Jlcop to conquer, will Support you through your malheur. You will get the better of it; — you have not forgot your sister’s lover 
Erudenel 
ii LETTER xxviir. Brudenel — let me whisper in the car of Sweet Eliza. — blow did you feel when a certain o; entleman gave a hint, that he had an elder daughter whom he wished to have disposed of first. — Do you recollect brudenei’s answer? he left westbury park that very afternoon; — you ought to thank me for calling up these instances to Support your drooping Spirits; — the evil we have experienced we may again bear with tolerable philosophy; — keep this maxim in your mind, Eliza — perhaps when Emily has got a hus band, you and I may Succeed better; and, “better late than neveris another excellent adage. — Pray, my dear, let me know how this affair goes on, or off as it happens — I am impatient to show my gratitude to you, by using all the consolitary arguments you have Srom time to time honoured me 
with. 
LETTER xxviir. 117 with, as marks of your sincere friendship, which, believe me, 1 have ever known how to estimete according to its worth. — Yet, hang it, what a pity it is that you could not rivet the padlock besore “the facinating Syren returned.” — Oh! you should learn to strike wliilc the iron is hot. — I wish I had been with you; ■ — I could have advised you better, — what luck this girl, this Emily has; — Sure she is irrown handsomer than ever. — What, two baronet’s in little more than a year and a half! — Oh! Eliza wshat wtu become of you and me? 
LETTER 
C Iis) 
LETTER XXIX 
Miss FARNBOROUGH. 
T O 
Miss GORE. 
RUEL Harriet! how can you trisse thus with my distress? Surely though your heart is now So happily at ease, you might yet Spare me; — but I shall not fall into reproaches, I hope the time is yet Sar off, when the willow garland will be twined Sor your friend. — You are rather Sarcastic, my dear Harriet, shut my memory is not less retentive than your’s, — and I well remember how Salutary you then thought my advice, however ill you may now take it; — for I See you are 
a 
LETTER XXVIII a little piqued, which you should not be, at only plain Sadts being recited. — Indeed I agree with you, my dear, had you been with my, I might have availed myself of your counsel. — You could have instrudled me in a thousand petits foins, which as Sir Edward lascellcs is not So much a man of the world (in other words a libi rdne as Sir Harry Groveby) might have succed ed well enough, but I still adhere to mv resolution of not ‘'stooping to conquer, ” notwithstanding your lively and Smart insinuation about Mr. Bmdenel. — I could not help a whim of my father’s, you know Harriet; — nor am I more answerable for that interference of his, than your father was for the letter you wrote to Sir Harry, we are apt to justify causes by the event; — that is a Setttled rule amongst that part of the world which does, not 
elucidate 
120 
LETTER XXIX elucidate every circumstance properly; So no doubt you stand condemned in the opinion of many; as for myself I See you in the Same light I ever did; No difference of state would have made any alteration in my Sentiments. Yet I dare Say there are many, who, had your negotiation Succeeded, would have applauded Lady Groveby, (how do you like the appearance of the name, when written, my dear?) though they made no Scruple of ridiculing the ■disappointed Harriet Gore; — but I Secretly triumphed, because I had an opportunity of defending your cause in all companies; — I doubt not, my dear, you have heard how elaborate I was in your vindication; — these are •obligations, child, which I think will •cancel any I have laid inyself under to you; — however, i thank you for your good intention, and shall continue 
LETTER XXIX 12a tinue to acquaint you how matters go on here. 
I have heard nothing more of Sir edward’s leaving westbury park; — I hope I was deceived in my conjectures concerning him. and Emily; — his behaviour to me all day yesterday, Served to confirm that hope, I wish I had not written in Such haste; — but one is So apt to repose all one’s griefs in the bosom of a tender Sympathising friend that one runs naturally to one’s pen; — lam convinced, my dear Harriet will receive the utmost pleasure in hearing my Spirits are more com posed than when I wrote last, indeed I am quite another creature. — I hope Soon to give you cause to congratulate me. — My little sit os jealousy is quite worn off; — thank Heaven its influence was not Sufficiently violent to vol. IL G. r<_.cmake 
,, UPOU 
o. 'i 
txt LETTER XXIX make me do any ridiculous things and to render it necessary Sor my dear friend to enter into my vindication; — that is an obligation I wish never to owe even to you. — Adieu. 
I 
il : E T T E R. 
< *^3 > 
L E T T E R XXX EMILY 
T O 
luif« C, L A V E R I N G. 
THINK, my dearest Charlotte, our lover here does not proceed quite as he should do. — I shall be extremely Sorry to alter my opinion concerning Sir Edward lascelles. — Some little circumstances had arisen to raise him in my esteem — he had shown Some adis os well placed charity, which in So young a man is too frequently a miracle; — and altogether, without precedent — I shall really be hurt if I am forced to rank Sir Edward in the G 2 list 
124 LETTER XXX lilt of Such men as Groveby, and too many others I could name; — those pra3tftiotters of unmeaning gallantry, — I fancied everything was en train., and that Eliza would Soon figure in the matrimonial charader os Lady lascelles— — all Seems now at a stand. — I can See ray sister is not pleased — she even glances her suspi cious eye at me; — oh! that I could ease her doubts at once; — and, by being permitted to show where my heart, my Soul, my every affection, is centred, convince her, that to view any other man than that dear one with any degree of partiality, is totally out of ray nature! — That felicity, however, Charlotte, is not mine. — How hard to conceal? — Alas! more difficult than ever — and I fear more necessary than ever. — The emotions of tender nes I feel encrease every day — 
In 
LETTER XXX 125 In every point of view my beloved Neville is endeared to me; — he was the early companion of my youth; — he was my pupist who delighted to draw instruction from me, whole hap ])inefs consisted in communicating all he knew, and idolised the tvork of her own hand. — He was my only friend; — in his dear, faithful bosom, 1 could repose all the little affections of my childhood — 
.• Our hopes and fears 
“Were to each other known." 
He was the first, the only man, that taught my heart to siatter. — A man, my dear, has no Small merit on that account. — The first impression is the deepest. — He was then my lover — he is my husoand. — I have in the most Solemn manner, in thepresence of God, devoted my hand to him — He G 3 is 
iz6 LETTER XXX is the father os my Sweet child; — that dear pledge of our happy union.. I See in him a thousand reasons to en crease my attachment, added to his dcserts. — Think of his birth! — his wretched parents! — See him stigma tiscd with the title of baseborn!! — character of his parents cruelly mutilated! — himself dispossessed of his right! — an alien, as he once Said, on his father’s lands! — Oh! Charlotte, still more : — • A lawful heir most wrongfully wsith held from his patrimony; — and by whom? — my heart shudders to Say, — his uncle! my father! — Can Such riches — obtained in So unjust a manner, can they, can the possessors, prosper? Ought not Neville to assert his claim? — And yet, can I arm my hushand’s arm against my parents? — Oh! I am infinitely distressed whenever this thought 
occurs • — 
LETTER XXX rij occurs — and too frequently it occurs of late. — I See an alteration in ray Sweet.charles; — he looks pensive — How can he look otherwise,. when in. my father he contemplates the unjust usurper of his rights? — for, oh I my dear Charlotte, to you I must own, that in my father’s and mother’s minds there could rest no doubt of the marriage of Charles and Ninon, — The death of that unhappy devoted young man too — Feeling minds must make a fearful pause when they resseo: on every circumstance that attended it — At So critical a time — A young man hiyii in health - — I dare not Suffer mv 
O -• 
thoughts to wander that way; — it is too, too alarming. — Merciful God! defend me from entertaining too dreadful an idea, of its being premeditated! 
« — Yet, should not their Subsequent behaviour to the poor friendless orphan G 4 — linust 
j LETTER XXX 
— I must not dwell on it — no not to you, my dear friend, not even to you will I venture to declare my opinion. 
In a calmer hour I have perused what I had written — - I could destroy the sheet, but that I know to you I may Say all I dare think — With my Charlotte my perturbations will find a Safe repose. 
I wandered from my Subject: : — was the theme of the first part of my letter — I have my Sears about him; — there was Something in his manner, and more in his eyes, than I wish ever to see in any one’s beside my neville’s. — Sir Edward two or three times fixed his on me with that kind of steady gaze, as only in my Neville can give me emotions of Yet he is not a bold man — - 
He 
delight 
LETTER XXX 129 
He has been uncommonly attentive to me; but I know not whether that would have struck me; because men used to the world will ever be So to young women who are tolerably handsome, and any ways agreeable — But there is a softness in his voice when he addresses me — Heaven forbid, on every account, that he should See greater perfections in me than in Eliza? — No vain coquette ever washed half So earnestly to Secure a conquest, as I do, that Sir Edward may not behold me with eyes of partiality. — What shall I do if Such a calamity should befall me? 
I will, however, avoid him as much as possible. — lam Sorry our company has left us; as then I had a Sair pretence never to be alone with him; — Indeed I never have since the time I hinted at. — I had been practising at G 5 the 
i3cr LETTER XXX 
the harpsichord — He came in — He is extremely Sond of music, and a good judge. ■ — After apologising for interrupting me, he entreated me to play him one of Scholarfs lessons — I complied — He affeded to be in raptures — Now you must know my sister had been playing this very lesson the day before — I had not been particularly struck with it at first; — but, on the Second hearing, one passage quite charmed me; and now I was practising it. — You have heard this piece before. Sir Edward."” • — 
No, never, ” cried he, looking too particular to be pleasing to me. 
“My sister played it to you yesterday.” 
“Your sister! — Why, it is possible she might have played it — but, upon my honour I never heard it before; — I have done more now; — I 
have 
LETTER X}CX. 13* have Selt every note vibrate on my heart.” 
Why yes, ” Said I, ’tis a charming lesson - — one passage particularly So — and I ran the keys over lightly, to point out which I meant j — and continued — don’t you think that part very pleasing, Sir Edward? ” 
‘‘ Oh! that part, and every part! I could feast my eyes Sor ever! ” — He Seemed in extasy — I looked at him with an affected air of surprise — though I Selt truly abashed; — and,, laughing, Said, You may be really called a musical Soul indeed, to dwell with delight on the notes only — But come, ” added I, — as I perceived, and feared, he was going to Say Something I wished not to hear — ‘‘I have played to you, now I will play with you — What do you Say to a game of backgammon } ” — The tables were in G 6 the 
I3Z LETTER XXX the room, as my Sather and he had had a game that morning — I thought this the most prudent method of proceeding, as I did not like to appear to understand him; — and if I had left the room, he might have entertained that idea — However I did not much approve of his behaviour during the game — Often when I thought he was studying Sora move, on my looking up, I Saw him ardently gazing; — in short, he Seemed not to know what he was about. ■ — 
Happily Sor my feelings, Eliza cams into the room; — and I contrived as Soon as possible to leave them together. I endeavour not to think of this little adventure, but it hangs upon me the more because it is not of a nature to communicate to my husband— — never have till now had a thought concealed from him; — • nor, indeed, 
as 
letter XXX 131 as I have nothing to blame myself for, need I be So Scrupulous; — but there is an appearance of vanity, which, as I poffess nor, I wish to. avoid, in talking of the assiduities of the men; — and 1 believe I have hinted, that my dear Neville has too humble an opinion of himself; — and thinks my praises of him the result of my affection, and not the consequence of his great merit — Indeed he has been little used to commendation, — and never met with that encouragement he ought to have done — To you, then, only, my dear Charlotte, can I unbosom myself— — wish to have your advice how to conduct myself in what appears to me a difficult Situation — I wish I may be mistaken. — It would be better Sir Edward was lowered in my opinion, than that he should be seri ousty attached to me, — In my case, 
his 
ET ^ ET T E R’ XXX his intimacy in the family will be attended with inconvenience; — for I doubt Mr. Neville will not tamely Submit to have his fortune Settled on eliza’s husband— — terrifies me by Sayinghe will apply to counsel for advice — I tell him I wish him to let the matter rest peaceably till he comes of age. — Oh! Emily, ” he cried,. 
have I not already lost enough by procrastination? — Am I not the victim of delay? — Had not my unhappy father waited till that period — he yet — forgive me, my angel — he yet might have been living; — at least, I should not have been an outcast— — poor wretch. Subsisting on the bounty of those who have basely robbed me of my estate; — and not content with defrauding me of my natural right, — cruelly left me ignorant of everything. The meknest Servant in my father’s 
house 
LETTER XXX 135. house had a better education than was allotted to me. — Had not your com pashon wrought in my favour, my mind had been as poor as my fortune— — you, my heavenly girl, I owe a thousand, thousand obligations. Am I not forced to steal to your arms like a nightly thief? — but let the usurper of an orphan’s right take care, 
— Much has he to answer for, — and little mercy has he reason to expect— 
— had worked himself quite into a passion. — I threw my arms round his neck : — “Hush, my beloved, ’* Said I, “consider the man you vow vengeance against is the father of your Emily.” — 
True, my love : — and I consider likewise I am the Sather of my emily’s Son. — Shall I poorly barter his birthright for any paltry consideration which may be instigated by fear? 2 — No! 
X LETTER XXX 
— No! my dear creature; — I will rake Such measures as will Secure me sugcess. — Too lontr have I already put up with the greatest indignities — Surely my Soul Sunk with my situation, or I could not So many years have born ‘ the proud man’s contumely : ’ ■ — but the time is approaching when I shall stash on them all at once in the brightness of truth; — while they shall hide their guilty heads, and shrink from the touchstone, ‘ as ghosts from the opening day! ” — I had never Seen Mr. Neville So resolute besore. — I thought it better not to oppose him, as he appeared So fixed in his opinion. — I only begged him to allow me to change the subjeds Sor that night, — and I would, at his request, resume it Some other time. — He Saw I was pained; — his gentle ness overcame his heat in a moment; 
he 
LETTER XXX 137 he entreated my pardon for this ungovernable Sally, and assured me my peace os mind was dearer to him than all the world beside. — He praclised a thousand agremens to Sooth me — My love pleaded in his cause, and Secured him success; — and I Sunk to repose in a quieter manner than I flattered myself I should have done. 
LETTER 
( > 
LETTER XXXI 
To THE SAM E. 
I WROTE by the Same post as niy last to you — to my aunt Booth. — I related toi her a little circumstance, which I will mention to you, to illustrate Some passages of herletter, that would otherwise not be So clear to you. 
I know not whether, in the course of my narrative, I took notice of a poor woman,, who is a kind of pensioner to me. — Her distresses had. given her great interest in my bosom but unfortunately her husband had rendered himself obnoxious to my father by Some trespass in the game aft;, 
which; 
LETTER XXXI which, I am Sorry to Say, the gentlemen in this part of the county are too strict in — However, I am not going to give you a detail of the history of Sarah wilsdn, as that is foreign to my purpose at present: — only thus far: — I called on her the day that I wrote to Mrs. Booth. — The poor creature has the most grateful heart in the world. My dear young 
lady, ” Said she, “I think I could almost Say, It is good for me that I have been affiiffedy since I have met with So much assistance from your generous hand, and that of Sir Edward lascelles— — Madam, I believe there is not a better heart in the whole creation except your’s; — and then, he has no more pride in him than you or Mr. Neville. — I never met with Such civility in my life. — He does not Seem as if he was doing an adt of 
charity; 
140 LETTER XXXI charity; — but as IS he was talking to an equal — He ashed me a great m^ny questions about Mr. Neville; and I hope, Madam, you will not be angry with me, but my heart was Softened by gratitude, and I could not refuse telling him what I knew concerning him, as Sir Edward declared he wished to Serve him in everything — that ste had taken a great liking to Mr. Neville, who notwithstanding Seemed always shy of him; — But, Said he, I will prove myself his friend; and Mr. Neville may rest assured! will never enter into any engagements with the Farnborough family that shall interfere with his interest.’* 
I ashed Sarah, what she could have Said to Sir Edward Lafcelles, to bespeak So much favour from him to Mr. Neville? — Her reply was, “I only related to him all I knew of the 
mis 
LETTER xxxr. 141 misfortunes of Mr. neville’s Samily, 
— which, my dear Madam, I was well able to do, both Srom my own memory and the frequent discourses of my poor father on that Subjcd; .” — I did not press her to repeat to me the information she had given Sir Edward 
— To Speak the truth, my dear Charlotte, I dreaded, lest her relation should bear too hard on the character of those wdio have a natural risht to my respect— — soon after took my leave; — and, by letter, gave Mrs. Booth the whole account. — I enclose her answer for your perusal— — will Sind she conceives a happy fre fentiment from the friendship Sir Edward expresses for Mr. Neville. — I know not w hat to think of it: — I doubt the denouement will not prove an happy one to us. — 
At 
sa LETTER XXXI 
At the time of my union with my dear Charles, if I can be Said to have looked beyond that period at all, — this was my view— — knew not then he had any lawful claim t the Neville estate.; — he had ever been accounted illegitimate. — I knew, that at the deaths of my parents I should be entitled to fifty thousand pounds — On that Sum I was convinced we should live in a Sufficient affluence; — and hoped that our marriage might xemain a Secret till those events gave US liberty to declare it publicly. — I had given ease to his heart, and hap piness to my own; — and 1 certainly closed my prospedts at that point. 
Shall I whisper to my dear friend, I could almost wish I was not obliged to open my eyes to a wider field. — I she nothing now bcsore me but perplexities, and, I fear, never ending 
trouble. 
LETTER XXXI 243 trouble— — Neville becomes every hour more strenuous to assert his birthright; — but yet, how much ex .pence and trouble will attend the proof of it! 
My aunt has, however, I think, fixed on the best plan. — I hope it will coincide with neville’s opinion. 
— I know not how to advise him : — it is a very difficult and delicate point for me to determine on — A husband!! 
— Sather! — My apprehensions on the issue os this business is Such, that 1 dread it beyond. measure. — Heaven prosper us! — lam Sure you will join in that prayer. — Adieu .1 
LETTER 
( 144) 
LETTER XXXII 
(enclosure;) 
Mrs. BOOTH T O 
E M I L y. 
AM equally desirous with my dear nephew that he should be reinstated in his natural right; — and Seel myself extremely obliged to you, my dearest Emily, for the insormation you gave me. — I have not the least doubt os proper proof being Sound to justify the assertion; — but still, great management is requisite in the conduct 
of So interesting a business. 
As 
LETTER XXXII 145 As he emphatically Says, he is the viflim of delay — and yet, till he comes o: age, I See no use in attempting to investigate his claim — though at the Same time I think no time should be lost in striving to clear away the clouds of darkness with which it is enveloped. 
7v11 my dear Charles he has a fast friend in his uncle; — he feels ail the interest of a parent, and will use every endeavour to accelerate the cause of justice. — He, in the most generous and endearing manner to me, declares, the fortune he received at our marriage 
O 
shall be devoted to that end. Early in the Spring he will go to Paris, and endeavour to prevail on Colonel ma carthy to join with him in rescuing the charadser of the unhappy Ninon from the disnonour that has lb long disgra ced it. — He will Seek what proofs he vol. II H can 
146 LETTER XXXII can from the town of Douiiy, and immediately will Send over to the present minister of the Protestant chapel to gain what intelligence he can of his predecessor, Mr. benson. — Oh! my dear children, how' easily might all this trouble and expense be Saved, would but Some folks adt upright', and do justice! — I am very well convinced the present possessor knows he can Set up no other claim than posseshon. — It is a common Saying, that possession is eleven points of the law.' — It is certain a bad cause may be easier defended than a good one proved, when the riches are on the side of the oppressor — But I have great hopes from Sir Edward lascelles — That Sentiment which you repeat from his conversation with Sarah Will son raises the bright hope that he will assist the poor injured orphan. — May 
Heaven 
LETTER xxxir. 147 
Heaven reward him for it! — I am Sorry Mr. Neville should be So reser ved to him — Perhaps, my dear, you may find Some opportunity of Speaking to Sir Edward in his behalf: — but I would have you preserve the Secret of your marriage : — as it has yet escaped ail suspicion, I should hope it might still remain concealed. - — It will look bad in the eye of the world to have the daughter unite even with her husband against her fath^v — When everything is Settled, the heir of the Neville estate marrying one of the daughters of the former pos seffor will not appear cutre. ■ — In a little time it will be forgotten that you had trespassed against your ciuty, by entering into engagements without the consent of your parents. — I am convinced you, my dear Emily, will See the propriety of this conside h 2 ration — 
148 LETTER XXXII ration — It will ease your mind of a great load; and I hope it will meet the approbation of my nephew. 
If I remember right, Sarah wilson is daughter to James Adams, who kept a little School in the neighbourhood of Westbury Park — from him Some intelligence of great consequence may be obtained, — My dear brother was very fond of him; — and it was at his house I was first introduced to poor Ninon. — 
Do you, my dear, learn from Sarah where her father now lives — Pie may possibly throw Some farther light on this affair. - — But, above all, conciliate the friendship of Sir Edward lascelles — It would not be just to let him marry Eliza under the expedfation of her inheriting an estate to which she has no right; — though I should think, from what Sarah wilson has 
told 
LETTER XXXII 149 told him, he must have his doubts — and that may be the cause for not bri ntiino; his affair to a conclusion. 
Your Sweet little babe is now within the arms of my husband - — See its enchanting Smiles, and they prove a strong incentive to us to expedite the business which is So interesting to his dear Sather. — I can only add how earnest vve are in our wishes for a happy accomplishment of the cause we mean Soon to take in hand. — Surely Heaven wul not desert the caife of the' fatherhfs and him ‘who has no helper. — The united bleshng of this house attends vou both. — Adieu! 
H I 
E M I L y. 
< 15° > 
E M 
Y, 
IN CONTINFATIO 
A FEW lines only, my dear Charlotte. — About an hour since I had an opportunity of exchanging a word with my husband— — read my aunt’s letter to him; — and enforced that part of it where she wishes Charles to lay aside his reserve to Sir Edward. — I am convinced, my love, ’’ Said I, “he will be your friend, ” — Oh! Emily, ” he answcrecl, with a half luppreited sigh — “he is too amiable — and too susceptible to be a disinterested friend, — Give me leave to adt in this business according to my own opinion.” — 
'“Certainly, my dear Neville; -- -- I will not dispute your right to do So. 
^ but 
LETTER XXXII jsx 
— But let me remind you — that had your unfortunate father listened to the persuasions of his wife, all this succeeding misery might have been spared— — 
Saw I was hurt — he clasped me to his bosom, and told me I knew not what he Suffered. — We heard at that moment the Sound of feet coming towards us; — therefore was obliged to Separate. — I now shall be doubly cautious, left our union should be discovered. — 1 intend to entreat my Neville not to attempt to visit me in my chamber while this affair is in agitation. — I hope he will See the propriety of my requesr, and impute it to the real cause— — only cause indeed that can actuate me, — my unbounded affection for him. — Adieu I 
II 4 
RET T E B. 
( 15 2 > 
LETTER xxxilf. 
Sir EDWARD LASCELLES 
T O 
H E N R V LYTTELTON, Esq. 
Have informed Temple os the de rangement of affairs in this quarter ■ — and tell him I rely on his Stiperior wisdom to disengage mysels — indeed I feel the necessity every moment in crease upon me. — This lovely girl grows on me each hour; — yet, whether from a want of Sensibility, or Srom her persuasion, that I have addressed her sister, she appears, — affects, I may Say, — not to understand my ardent looks and impassioned expressions. 
LETTER xxxiir. 153 pressions, — I must and will deprive her of that subtersuge; — she shall be forced to confess she Sees my passion let her treatment of it be what it may — the devil is in the whole Samily, I think. — There is Neville, — I have striven to draw him out, — but I can make nothing of him, — I would be his friend. — Have pressed him to tell me how I could Serve him : — I even went So far as to Say I thought he had been ill treated; — he turned upon me with a haughty air — “When I complain to you Sir Edward of my situation, I then will claim your offers os friendship and protection— — an odd dog it is, — but I will not waste a thought on any one os the Samily, but my divine Emily; — and by heavens I will begin my attack the first time I am alone with her; — wish me success — but that I know H 5 you 
154 LETTER XXXIIL you will, my heart stutters at the idea, — yet if I Succeed, the world will not see So happy a fellow as your friend. Adieu. 
^ j; ^ J b 
T : • - 
5 tw'? 
f * t t 
‘fr it ( \ ^ 
'r 
^ V 
t t 
LETTER 
C 155) 
LETTER. 
XXXIV 
T o X H E SAM E. 
T H E icc is broken, — a very proper metaphor for the purpose, — I doubt I shall find my divine girl as cold as ice; — but time and my removal of her prejudices may do much for me. 
I caught her this morning as she was passing through the drawing-room. — Stop one moment, “my angelic Emily, ’^ cried I, taking her hand in the most respedsul manner, that I might not alarm her, — “I have Something of the utmost importance to reveal to you.” 
Ta 
156 LETTER XXXIV 
To me. Sir Edward? — What can you have of So much importance for me to hear ?” 
Is it then impossible that my eyes should not have confessed Something.” 
I never consuit eyes, ” — Lid she in a lively tone, — don’t think I know the colour of yours.” — 
I would to heaven I did not know the power of yours! — But since you are determined not to understand their language, you must allow me to tell you in plain, but artless words, you are tne absolute mistress of my destiny; — ■ I have been watching this opportunity with a dying impatience, — and now that it is arrived, I have Scarcely power to Say how dear you are to me; 
. — I live but in the hope of touchins; your heart.” 
“My 
LETTER XXXIV 157 My heart!” — she exclaimed — with a look os the utmost Surprise — I cannot add pleasure, — My heart. Sir Edward lascelles! — Your gallantry, Sir, is thrown away upon me, — is I was at all disposed for this ha dinagey I look on the professed lover os my Sister in too Sacred a light to listen to him for one moment. — lam Sorry I shall be forced to alter my opinion of you — but I will leave you till you recoiled what you are, both to me and yourself.” 
“Hear me, madam, I beseech you on my knees, to hear me, — I hope to justify myself in your opinion; and believe me, it is the wish next my heart to do So. — I have been very unfortunately situated with respecl to my supposed devoir to. miss farnborough— — you permit me, my dear madam, to recount the circumstances 
15? LETTER XXXIV stances which induced me to Seek an alliance with your Sarnily ?” 
You have begun at the wrong end, Sir Edward, — I might have listened to your relation — but your palpable breach of honour will throw a tarnish on everything you now Say — I cannot conquer my prejudices.’* “Allow me but to try to remove them, — Suffer me but to Speak, — I am convinced I shall be able by a faithsul detail, to vindicate myself from the charge of dishonour. — Yes my adorable Emily, you will allow me to be an object: of your pity, if you cruelly refuse anything more.” 
I then communicated to her the information I had received from Mr. Temple, — and in few words told her my obligation to that respedt able friend, — and how much I relied upon his judgement. — I took from 
my 
LETTER XXXIV 159 my pocketbook the letters he had written on the fubjefl: of her excellencies, and avowed the purity of my intention, in striving to form an acquaintance with her family. — That, ignorant of there being two ladies in the family, and of the personal accomplishments os miss Farnborough, joined to the deserence I paid to Mr, temple’s choice, had determined me to attempt an introdudlion; — the civility I had met with, prejudiced me still farther in their favour, — and my not feeling all the emotions of passion which I had heard described to others, — I imputed to a natural equanimity of mind, — or to there appearing So little difficulty in the prosecution of the business; I even strove to feel those little partialities which are necessary in an attachment, — and wished to argue my 4 Self 
io LETTER XXXIV 
Self into a belief, that I really possessed a passion for miss Farnborough; — but that even before the arrival of her beauteous scls, I began to have my doubts, that all the pleasure I experienced in the company of her sister, was from my sels love, being flattered from the partial distindlion os So fine a woman. — Some circumstances too had arisen, which rather made me icss desirous os coming to an explanation, — that while I remained in this auk ward kind of suspence, with regard to my future proceedings, 1 had learned, — though not from the family, which I own, Surprised me very much and wore a singular appearance; — there was another daughter, — an angel both in person and mind, — in short, just Such a one as Mr. Temple had painted, — just Such an one as I now Saw before me, — that I was prepared 
LETTER XXXIV ii pared to admire; — that my earnest desire to See her, had induced me to practice rather an equivocal conduct to Mil's Farnborough, because, had I quitted the house without Seeing her, I could hereaster frame no excuse Sor renewing my acquaintance, — that although by an unsortunate error in Mr. temple’s negotiation, I had been Introduced to the wrong person, — yet my addresses were certainly meant Sor her alone; — that my heart fell a victim to her charms the moment I Saw her, — that my reason was convinced and united with my passions, in assuring me no one but herself would make me happy. After this consession, I hoped she would allow at least, that my missortune compensated my error. — I had never declared mysels to miss Farnborough, and though I still thought myselsin Some 
measure 
162 LETTER XXXIV ineasure reprehensible, there were many young men who would have indulged themselves in a greater latitude of gallantry, without thinking they had proceeded too far. — I went still farther, and urged everything that was possible to obviate her doubts, — I knelt and expressed myseis with all that warmth, none but those who love can feel — and which I am convinced, cannot be Seigned. 
She looked distressed — • yes, tltc dear Emily Seemed to labour under a visible concern — ■ Sne bei^rcd me to leave her — she dreaded any os the sa mily’s coming that way; I in my turn begged her to give me Some hope. 
‘‘ Indeed 1 cannot — 1 must not — you know not how mmch I am distressed. — Fray Sir Edward, — let me entreat you to lay aside any ■ there is a bar — 
thoughts os me 
an 
LETTER XXXIV 163 an insuperable one, which is placed between us — I must retire — I Seel myself very much agitated — I do not know what the consequence v/ili be os your detaining me.” 
“I could defy all but the fear of offending the only woman who ever touched my heart — dear, lovely Emily! — Sweet arbitress of my fate 
— Oh! condescend to feel Some compassion for me — the world cannot produce a man more enamoured than mysels — there may be dishculties — I am not yet entitled So much to your favour, as to dare hope you will encounter any for my Sake. — • Let all the difficulty, all the danger fall on me, 
— I will preserve and defend my charming Emily; — talk not of insu parable bars, — I will overcome all and everything; — do you but pity me — I will do stridjustice to all — 
Say 
164 LETTER XXXIV 
Say but you pity me — dear, dear Emily! — Soul os my Soul! — more dear to me than lise — give me only one look of pity.’' 
Let me hear no more, Sir Edward; — indeed you must not endeavour to stay me; — take my advice, never again resume this Subjedf, if you would Spare the woman you Say you love, from. endless anguish.” 
She hastened from me; — not resume the Subject! — yes! I must disobey thee. — What can I gather from her tvords? — does she not say there is an insuperable bar? — can she mean neville’s claim to the estate which will make an alteration in her fortune? — Oh! that she knew how disinterested my love is; — how freely would I resign all pretensions to that shining dress. — Yes, I will tell her' I am determined to See justice done 
that 
LETTER XXXIV 165 that amiable unfortunate young man; I have heard more of the story of his parents misfortunes; — I have found out the father of Sarah wilson, he informs me he has testimony Sufficient in his hands to point out a method of establishing the legality of their marriage; — but that he was determined to let the matter remain in his own breast till he was assured Some one of property, and a lover of justice would undertake the cause of the helpless orphan. — My heart is bent on accomplishing this business; let miss Farnborough enjoy the estate of her father and fortune of her mother; — let them but give me Emily and I shall be rich indeed. — There will however be difficulty in this affair; but, if I can make the dear girl imile on my labours, those of Hercules would appear trissing in my eyes. — Adieu 1 
LETTER 
( i66) 
LETTER XXXV 
E M 
T O 
Miss CLAVE RING. 
A L AS! my dear Charlotte, the evil I dreaded has overtaken me. — Sir Edward lascelles, this morning, declared himself my lover; — at first I affeded not to understand him, however that pretence he Soon deprived me of; — I would have lest him, judging flight the only Subterfuge left me. — He threw himself on his knees and held my hand while I was thus compelled to hear his eager protestations of passion; — I felt myself dis 
p leased, 
LETTER XXXV is? pleased, and even Sorry to entertain a contemptible opinion of him; — I expressed my anger. — He then would enter into his vindication, — to prove the truth of his assertion, he obliged me to listen to two letters Srom Mr. Temple. — Your old friend and favourite, my dear, with whom I twice dined at your house; — you remember how particularly civil and attentive he was to me. — Sir Edward lascelles was partly brought up by him; — that unfortunate lad", whom, your father mentioned to us, under the name of Lucy, was the mother of Sir Edward. — Mr. Temple, I find, was uncommonly pleased with me; — » how could he be charmed with my inferior beauties, when my Charlotte was present? — Oh! that he had become enamoured of you by proxy for 
his 
i68 LETTER xxxv his young friend! all might then have been happy. 
But to proceed; — on the strength of Mr. temple’s encomium. Sir Edward lascelles run a hoisie at bland ford races; — I remember Saying at your house that my father was to be steward. — Mr. Temple never heard of my having a Sister; — and, there sore, from his ignorance of that circumstance, Sir Edward, when he was introduced to our family naturally concluded, the miss Farnborough he Saw, was the one with whom imr. Temple wished him connected. — Her person, as he Says, attracted him; indeed I do not wonder at it, she is certainly a sine figure, and very handsome;; — don’t miean to flatter or depreciate; — but I think her features rather too regular, fly has a pleasing way with her, to those whom 
site 
LETTER XXXV she wishes to please; — has a great share os wsit, and possesses conversiblc talents — the ccdmikewise of a large estate made Sir Edward very well pleased with the business Mr. Temple had planned Sor him. He never, he Says, mentioned his friend’s name to my sister from a point of delicacy; he wished her to think it was wholly owing to accident that they ever met. He declares he strove to feel a passion Sor her; — and had almost argued himself into a persuasion of it, when quite by chance, he discovered there was another daughter in the Samily. It then struck him, this other was the woman designed for him by Mr. Temple. He heard this other was Soon expected home, ’ — he then owns he gained Some intelligence from a poor woman, whom she was So happy as to relieve, concerning Mr, Neville, — He Spoke highly of vol. II I him, 
170 LETTS R XXXV him: So Seldom do I hear his praises that I Sound myself listening with an air of delight. — Poor Sir Edward, I Sear, mistook my complacency; — he pressed me to git^e him hopes. — Good God! what hopes could I give him, I feared to trust my lips to utter the feelings of my heart, — I know not what I Said, I begged him to leave me, to lay aside all ideas of me; — I told him there was an insuperable bar to an union between us. Ah! did I not say too much? — would it not be hazardous to trust him with the Secret of my marriage? — besides 1 have no right to do So, but by the concurrence of Mr. Neville. — and I have my doubts concerning him, for that he let drop the other day of Sir Edward lascelles being too amiable anti too jujceptihle to he a difinterejled friend, — If my dear Neville should fuspect the tender of Sir 
Edward, 
LETTER XXXV i i 
Edward, I know his disposition, he will draw So many conclusions Srom his own imagined inferiority, as wsill make him wretched. — He So frequently Says, he is Sure my compassion alone is the foundation os mv love; why will he not See himsels with my eyes? — why will he not have a proper confidence in his own merit, and my sincerity? — and yet how easy for me to find excuses Sor him! — how irksome his situation has ever been? — Spurned and contemned by those — Oh! I muss Say, by those who have So deeply. So cruelly injured him! 
How" I am to be extricated from perplexities, I am quite at a loss to foresee— — to Heaven my aunt was with us; — her Superior understanding and knowledge of the world might point out a clue to direct me through this labyrinth i — could I but I 2 Secure 
172 LETTER XXXV 
Secure two hundred a year in Some peaceful Spot to retire with my beloved Neville, and be rid of all my fears; — Oh! how gladly would I resign all future prospects of wealth and grandeur! — but we are bound 
to abide the issue be it what it may. 
^ ^ * 
The storm is burst, my dear Charlotte, and I am likely to be overwhelmed by the torrent; — I can carry on the metaphor no farther. — What use of figures, when “plain honest words best pierce the heart with grief; ” indeed I feel too much disturbed to relate the particulars. — I will try to compose myself; — good God! how wdll this end! 
I had flattered myself I should avoid the sight of Sir Edward by keeping cl6fe in my room, till dinner tvas near ready. — My mother wanted me 
ta 
LETTER XXXV 173 to give Some direciions to the housekeeper; — in returning Srom bailey’s room I met Sir Edward. — “How cruel you are !” cried he, in a tender tone of voice and melancholy air. — “Dear Emily, either be less Severe, or teach me to Support your disdain. — You Seem industriousty to strive to avoid me.” 
“It is true. Sir Edward, I do So, both for your Sake and my own; — I wish you wmuld copy my example, and avoid me likewise; — sindeed it would be better Sor you.” 
“For god’s Sake Sir Edward, do not talk thus; — why will you Seek to distress me, you know your own situation, but you know not mine.” — I felt the propriety of ray Speech; the consci ousness brought the colour in my face. My life! my Soul!” — he exclaimed, taking my hand which I in 1 3 vain 

LETTER 
XXXV 
vain attempted to withdraw. — How can it be better for me to renounce the only happiness worth living for. I would Sooner renounce my life; — this world has no charms without my love, my Emily.” 
- “Myangel, cried he — my situation is Such, that I am at liberty to olfer myself to your acceptance; I fee'your Situation is not the most desirable. — I See the partiality of your parents. — Oh! let me, let your las celles, have the ecstatic bliss of removing you from the only place where your Superior merit is not acknowledged; — allow me but to lay proposals before your father.” 
No, no, ” was all I could Say. 
“Am I then hateful to you, my lovely, my adored Emily? — > will not the ardency, the truth of my pashon plead ter me in that obdurate breast? — Oh! 
thou 
LETTER XXXV 175 thou dearest of thy Sex!” continued he again kneeling and lifting up his clasped hands. — “Will you not Suffer me to attempt to gain Some interest in your heart r” 
. While he was in this beseeching attitude, my enraged sister burst in upon us; — never had I Seen her in Such a passion;; — doubt she had been, listening Some time, but could no longer restrain her indignation. — “So madam! — So, Sir eduard I — sine doings these! — but let me not dis turb your pretty intrigue, pray don’t mind me, ” 
I was ready to expire with fright; ■ 
I leaned against a table, not able to utter a word. — Sir Edward, not at all abashed. Said, with the utmost sang froid to Eliza. — Indeed, madam,. I do not think myself accountable to any one for my conduct, yet to do 1 4, away 
176 LETTER XXXV away the imputation, which may stain this lady’s character, I must tell you there is no intrigue in the cafe; I have only been endeavouring to obtain her con Sent to make proposals to Mr. Farnboroiigh for the most laudable purpose.” 
So, Sir, for this purpose you have been an inmate of our house, and till the lady arrived, thought proper to make me the object of your amuse ment, as I suppose you do now of your ridicule.” 
‘‘ I hope madam to clear myself of any intentional affront, I shall be happy to do So; when I have related Some particular circumstances to Mr. Farnborough, I have not a doubt but a Speedy accommodation will ensue” My voice and power of Speech returned. — For god’s Sake, Sir Edward, never think of applying to my 
father. — 
LETTER XXXV 177 father. — You know I have ever dis fuaded you from entertaining hopes or thoughts of me !” 
Very pretty this, ” cried my sister. “Indeed miss Emily you manage finely — my Sather is not to be consulted in this business.” 
Her passion made her incapable of attending to the wshole of my Speech, or she could not have drawn Such an inference. 
‘‘ Dear Eliza, hear me.” 
“Dear me, no dears, Miss Emily; — I know you, Madam — these arts you are always praftising; — but my 
father shall know what a dutiful 
daughter he has; — he shall — he shall.” — The tears now began to stow too fast to give her threatening words utterance. — 
“You ought to clear me, Sir edward” ” I; ‘‘ your unsortunate 
I 5 preference 
, 78 LETTER XXXV preference will, as I Said, be productive of much mischief — My Sather 
me — You 
know how averse” — my Sweet angel, ” 
against 
— Say no more, cried Sir Edward, interrupting me, trust your cause in my handyour father will hear reason.” — 
My Sister construed this last insinuation into a censure on her violence; and she redoubled her tears, till my father hearing her Sobs, came into the room.terrified to death, I stew away, when perhaps I ought to have remained where I was to justify my sels — Flight, howtver, was the first 
thing that occurred to me; — and I waited not to ask myself which was the most prudent method. Thank God! Charles is from home! — He will not return till evening. — I hope by that time to collect my Scattered 
fenses,. 
LETTER XXXV 
^79 
senses, to inform him of everything ha this momentous affair. 
This note is brought me from Sir Edward lascelles.. — What am J to think of it? 
( E N C L O S U BL E :) 
Miss EMILY farnborougir., 
“WILL the most lovely of women pardon my presumption in writing to her, and making a request,, that she would honour me with her presence for one half hour, in the arbour near the little park gate, at the end of the garden. — I have Something of the utmost consequence to her and myself to communicate to her. 
■ — Mr. Farnborough would have been 
disposedi 
io LETTER XXXV disposed to listen to my story, had not his daughter hardened his heart. — I shall, however. Soon return with Mr. Temple. — I hope, then, Mr. farn borough will See the necessity of apologising Sora breach of hospitality. 
— I rely on the hope os the dear and amiable Emily complying with my wishes; — and shall wait till midnight in expectation of Seeing her, 
— Adieu! 
“I remain 
The most faithful of men, 
“E. L 
Good God! — my dear Charlotte, what am I to do? — If I do not meet this strange man, he Says he will stay Fill midnight. — Ought he to expose me? — the woman, he Says, he loves to Such a hazard? — Reduce me to So distressing an alternative! — Yet, 
my 
letter XXXV ir 
my curiosity is excited as well as my apprehensions. — What can this be, of So material importance both to him and me? — My father would have lijiened to him. — He will return with Mr. Pemple. — Should my father listen to proposals for me, oh! what misery will it bring on my head! — It is of So much consequence just at this time to conceal my marriage. — All our future proceedings depend on that circumstance being unrevealed. — I had better at once inform Sir Edward of my engagement — he is a man of honour. — I will implore his pity and compassion on two young persons who depend So much on his Secrecy. — My Sather loves money j — he may be pleased with the idea of marrying me off, and Saving my Sortune in his family. — Yes, I must go to Sir Edward. • — I must and will assume Sufficient 
LETTER XXXV cient courage to unbosom myself before him. — 
Dinner is near ready. — I dare not go down. — I will Send Martha to alk if I may have permishon to remain in my own chamber — Yet, a verbal message, perhaps, will not be thought respedtsul. — I will write a note to my mother. — Though innocent, I feel dismayed. — 
I will Send you a copy of my note— — • will See it blotted; — which made me tvrite another. 
EN C t 
LETTER XXXV 

<ENCLOSUB.E 11.) 
T O 
Mrs. FARNBOROUGH, 
Dear Madam, 
“I doubt the transadions of this morning will cause me (though most innocently) to be censured by my father and sister. — I hope Sir Edward lascelles has done me the justice to Say I have never encouraged his addresses; — addresses which, I declare Solemnly, till within these three days, I believed paid Solely to my sister. — However my Spirits are So much agitated by this accident, that I hope it will not be imputed to me as an ad of disresped if I beg permishon to dine in my own room. — If my dear mother would be So kind as to allow 
me 
*84 LETTER XXXV me to wait on her in her dreshng room, I should feel it as a very great obligation. — In that hope, I take leave to Subscribe myself 
Her dutisul and obliged daughter, 
Emil y.” 
Martha brought me Sor answer — I might eat my dinner where I pleased;; — that my mother would not See me by hersels. — 
A plate is brought Sor me — Judge with wshat appetite I shall eat of it. — I wish, yet I dread, to see my dear Neville. Fleaven Send my interview with Sir Edward lascelles propitious! I add, — and well over likewise. — Adieu!.. 
LETTER 
( t%s) 
LETTER XXXVI 
Miss F A R N B O R O U G H 
T O 
Miss GORE, 
Just as I thought! — Oh! Harriot, I could tear out my eyes that lighted me tb the cursed Spot — where I Saw the perfidious lascelles at the feet os the Syren — the — • where Shall I find a word expressive of my detcs tation — I am distracsted! — mad with despair and pashon! — The wretch dared to avow to my father he intended all the time to offer himself to Emily; — that by a fatal misunderstanding he had been led to believe I was the lady who had been 
recom 
i letter XXXVI recommended to his choice. — He made the most flattering offers to my father; — offers, which his attachment to money almost tempted him to listen to. — Now was my time : — All bathed in tears, I asked my Sather if he could So cooly barter the happi ness of a,. till now, Savourite child, for the idle treasure of this world, to whom they could beprodudlive of no enjoyment? — I informed him how Sedulous Sir Edward had been in endeavouring to gain my affections;; — when, from the openness of my unsuspedling nature, he became fiilly Sensible of his power over my heart, he had basely trifled with it — and Sacrificed my peace at the shrine of Emily! — I then colleded all my powers, and with all the dignity of an insulted heroine, firmly told my father, either he must put a final negative 
LETTER XXXVI five on the request of Sir Edward lascelles, or forget he had a daughter. — This rant of mine, and which Mrs. Yates could not have delivered Tvith more emphasis, had the intended cffed:. — My Sather caught me in his arms; and while he Swore I was the dearest thing on earth to him, earnestly desired Sir Edward to relinguish all hopes of an alliance in our family, — and, in as polite terms as the cafe would admit of, gave him a hint his company would be gladly dispensed with. 
“I should feel myself too base, ” Said Sir Edward, “to stay one moment after I have received Such an intimation. — I leave you, Mr. farn borough, impressed with the liveliest sense of your former politeness, which even this present behaviour, So very different, and I will Say, undeserved, 
can. 
t LETTER XXXVI can hardly cancel — I go then, Sir; — but I hope to return with Such an advocate as may, at least, insure me civility. — I am convinced you will one day be open to the truth, and believe my Solemn assertions. — If miss Farnborough does me that justice I am Sure she has too much eoodnefs to reo 

fuse, she will exculpate me from the charge she has So inadvertently laid upon me. — My condufl to her has been Such as the custom of gallantry stridlly allows, I could not pay less attention to a lady of her merit and many attractions. — When she cooly restedts on all that has passed between us, I rest satisfied I may trust my cause in her hand. — I wish all your Samily happiness — and I entreat, as the ultimate wish of my heart, that no re steclion may be thrown on miss Emily — - She has never encouraged my addresses; 
LETTER XXXVI i dress; — has ever dissuaded me from my pursuit; — but the man who can resign his pretensions to her, must be incapable of feeling the passion I do, and shall Sor ever feel.” — He bowed, and left us. — As Soon as his chaise could be got ready die departed. — Yes, Harriet — this than, .this lover departed. — I shall, then, See him no more — No more shall I be able to deceive myself into the fond belief that he loved only me 1 — Loved! — alas! how have I deceived myself; he never loved me; — I was only amusino; to him. — Oh! Pride I aid. me to drive him from my breast for ever! — He called on me to justify him — I justify him! — what, against myself! — Shall I own that he never appeared Serious in his devoirs I — No; — he has made me miserable, and my voice shall never be exerted 
t 
SQO LETTER XXXVL to confirm it. — I will persist in my assertion of his having made me the confidant of his passion for me. — Nothing he can Say to the contrary will be believed. — I shall, at least, have this comfort from it, — Emily can never be his. — No; I would die before I would live to see that day : — nay, Emily would effectually destroy me then. — 
I have gained a champion. — Just this moment I met with Charles. — Within these few days I have fancied I discovered a greater partiality than gratitude usually excites in perfidious man, — in Charles for Emily. — My eyes too informed me he felt uneasi ness, which might proceed from jealousy— — heart might have brolce with grief before I should have noticed it; — but on this occasion, because I 
thought 
LETTER XXXVI ifi thought I soresaw good to myself, — consequently mischief to others, — I told him I could perceive Something had chagrined him, and pressed to know the cause; — “but perhaps, ” I added, you have heard of our malheur, and kindly participate it. — I then gave him a full relation — not stridly of sads, I do not Say; — but, in short, Said enough to convince me part of my conjecture was right, — namely, Neville being in love with my sister. — I made my advantage of the agitation I had thrown him into — and having, a few minutes before I Saw him, learned from one of the maids that Emily had received a letter from Sir Edward previous to his leaving the house — and that she was gone down into the long walk in the outer garden, I built a good story on that foundation; — and pathetically lamented 4 the 
t^z LETTER XXXVI the ruin of the family by the imprudence of Emily, who was unquestion ably gone to meet, if not to go off with him. — I called on him to assert the honour of the house; — and, in a transport of rage little short of distradtion, he rushed from me. 
Great God! — I have this instant heard the discharge of a pistol — oh! Harriet, my coward soul shrinks at the mischief I may have done! — Lord help me — I shall never forgive myself: — and yet, my wrongs call aloud for vengeance! — ■ All is silent. 
■ — Perhaps it was only the game keeper discharging his piece. — Why should I tremble thus? — Let me not Suffer my Soul to be thus Softened. — I hate lascelles, — Emily, — and all the world. 
Write to me Soon, my dear Harriet; and I beseech you, do not dip your 
pen 
h E T T E R xxxvt. pen in gall: — I cannot easily brook your (corn : — it never Suited me; — and now I can bear it less than ever. — Besides, you ought to cherish Some consideration for me, — as 1 lay my whole heart open be Sore you. 
God bless me! — What noise is that — I think I hear dvino; groans! I must be acquainted with the cause, whatever it be. — 
Neville is wmunded. — I cannot give you particulars. — Emily is not to be found — Yes! they must be gone off together. — The Servants discovered Neville, as they thought, dead. He is living at presenr. — Oh 1 good God 1 — what becomes of me — I thought my vengeance would have Supported me : — but murder! — I caniiot — I dare not proceed. — Adieu. 
Eliza. 
Yol. II 
LETTER 
'( *94) 
L E T T E P. XXXVII 
Sir EDWARD LASCELLES. 
T O 
WILLIAM TEMPLE, Esq. 
Linwood farm. 
My dear Temple, 
I A M now beginning to write to you under the utmost distraction of mind. — I have done a deed! — the bare recollection of which fills me with horror; — yet, if unpremeditated guilt may plead for me, — most Solemnly do I declare before God and man, mine has been truly So : — but at present how dreadful the account stands! — 
4 I know 
L £ T T E R XXXVII 
I know not how to enter upon particulars; — yet find it extremely necessary to lay them before you; — as from your friendly interposition alone, next to the almighty’s, can I possibly hope for any Succour. Oh! you know not how infinitely I am distressed— — must wait a Sew minutes, to collect my hurried Spirits Alas I when will they be calm? 
I told you in my last of my determination to come to an ecclaircisse ment with Emily. I took an opportunity of disclofing my adoration of her; — ^ related every circumstance of your recommendation. •* — She heard me with impatience; urged me not to think of her; — Spoke of “an insuperable bar. ” ** — Alas! I thought she meant that which her own family vvmuld throw in the way, because * The letter alluded to is omitted. 
K 2 they 
L E T T E R XXXVII they wished me to marry her sister— — 
two days she avoided me; — and, by her caution, prevented my Speaking one word to her. — I lay in wait Sor an opportunity Savourable to my wishes, — and embraced it to renew my Suit. — I was kneeling at her feet, and pouring forth my Soul before her; — when Eliza broke in upon us. — Never was rage and disappointment more fully depicted than in her Sace and figure. — Emily Seemed sinking to the earth with terror. — I boldly defended her and myself— — passion and high words of miss Farnborough brought her father to us — Emily begged to retire. — I laboured to acquit her — at the Same time avowing my attachment, and the true reasons which had caused me to Seek an acquaintance with the family. 
— I be 
LETTER XXXVII j97 
— 1 believe Mr. Farnborough would have been inclined to listen to me, but vas prevented by his Surious daughter. 
— She protested I had gained her heart, by informing her she had, made a lasting impression on mine. — I forgot the politeness due to the Sex, — and as firmly denied anything more pashng between us than common civility demanded. — Mr. Farnborough treated me in a most ungentleman like manner; and I ordered my horses to be put to the chaise immediately. — Wishing to See Emily once more — ^ I wrote a note, entreating her to meet me in the garden. — I wisned to learn from her if her urging me to desist from my pursuit was caused by her fears of her family, or from her own prejudices — Ah! lovely and beloved Emily! why were you not more explicit with the man whose heart 
K 3 was 
19 8 L B T T E R XXXVII 
was So truly devoted to your interest, that he could cheerfully have Soregone his own happiness to have established your’s? — But a malignant star has overruled every circumstance in this unfortunate business; — and I, most wretched cf men! am doomed to destroy those whom I wmuld have died to Save 1 — 
I must not thus apostrophise, but proceed, with Some little method, to lay before you the dreadful catastrophe 1 — 
The dear, unhappy Emily, eager to know what was the purpose of my note, hurried into the garden, to learn from me what concerned her So much to hear. I left the chaise at the end of the park next the garden gate. — The arbour where I had appointed Emily was close by. — I had not beei\ in it many minutes ere she appeared. 
Half 
LETTER : ^XX\TI. 159 — Half out of breath, and in a good deal of consufion, she entreated me to tell her why I had been prompted To urge her rilking So much hazard? 
My beauteous Emily, ” I answered— — wdll not waste Such precious moments by repeating the indignant treatment I have received from your family — One siiiile from your bewitching eyes wsill amply repay all my Sufferings.” 
“Am I Sent for only Sor tills piir pose ?” she ashed How needless! — I could Sufficiently learn their opinion of you by their hardships to me.” 
No, my dear angel — The true reason of my requesting this honour is, that you will Suffer me to lay be sore you Some plan for my future operations. — I mean to go to my friend Temple immediately — I think, with his interference I shall, carry my point. 
K 4 — Your 
z&c better xxxvjl. 
— Your father loves money. — Mr. Temple can inform him of method of keeping a large Sum in his family, which may a little recompense him for that estate which, (pardon me, my Sweet Emily) he has So long, and So unjustly, with held Srom the lawful heir. — I venture to Say this to you, as 1 am convinced you have a great friendship for poor Neville.” 
And will you interest youistelf for that hapless orphan? — How exquisitely good! how kind! — Oh! Sir Edward, you know not how your character isises in my opinion.” 
Delighted with the glow of pleasure that mantled on her cheek — I threw my arm round her waist, and raised her hand to my lips, my whole heart beaming in my eyes. — She was withdrawing herself from my encircling arm, when a Sudden noise made 
me 
LETTER. XXXVII aoi me turn my head to the place Sroni whence it proceeded. It was now too dark to distinguish objects that were at any distance — A man rushed into the arbour, — and on the instant exclaiming, — “Perfidious wretches I have I detedled you S’ — discharged a pistol. — Hardly knowing wshat I did — and hearing Emily shriek, I Snatched up one of mine,, which unfortunately I had brought with me into the garden, — and firing, the person, dropped to the ground. — I think at that moment I was bereft of my Senses— — Saw Emily finking, to the earth — With a distradted air I caught her up in my arms, and running out. of the garden, put her into the chaise, and bade the boys drive aw’ay as fast as they could.. 
A long time the dear creature remained insensible— — recolledled ha 
K S 
vlug; 
20i 
letter XXXVIL 
ving a bottle of Salts, which she had given me Sometime before, and which X had Sorgot to return to her. — > I found the application of them very Serviceable to mysels, for I was exceedingly sick, — I let down the glass ses for air — I rubbed her temples and hands — At lash she gave a deep sigh; — ^ and the moon just rising, I discovered she opened her eyes, and wildly turning them around her, began a little to recollect; herself. — She clasped her hands together with a frantic emotion, — and exclaimed — “Oh! my God,, where am I V — Be gomposed, my angel, cried I — you are Safe j for that happiness I am thankful to Heaven“ 
“Said she, wringing her hands, where is he? — - Is he not dead? — Oh! Lashelles, you have killed the dearest, best — she could 
not 
LETTER XXXVII 203, not proceed — her Sobs became almost convulsive. — Distradled with the perturbation of my own feelings, — and torn to pieces at Seeing her distress, 
I called to' the boys to stop at the first kouse; fortunately this farm presented itself as a hospitable retreat; — I carried her into a room, and begged the mistress of the mansion to apply Such remedies as might restore the poor lady. — I then ordered Blundell to ride with all expedition back to west bury park, and gain all the intelligence he could of the issue of this unhappy affair. — I entreated to be allowed to see Emily, I found her in a wretched state, just recovering from' a violent hysteric fit; — I approached her more dead than alive, and throwing myself at her feet, and implored her pity and forgiveness. — She started up, and in a hurrying tone, alked me, if I K 6 could 
204 LETTER XXXVII could restore the dead? — ‘‘ Did I not See him Sail, ’’ she exclaimed. — “Why did you not murder us both? ■why did you bring me hither ?” 
“Alas!” cried I, the deed I have done was in my own defence, yet how Severely repented of. — If a life of tears and penitence could wash away my fensc of it, how freely would I devote myself to it; — I know not wshb it is I haveminhappily wounded.” 
“Oh! that I did not!” she cried. — “Oh! dear unhappy Neville; — was I doomed to be the cause of thy death? — best loved of men, ” — continued she — the tears falling in a copious shower from her eyes, which ihe bent on the ground, as if his lamented corse lay there. — “Oh! that 1 had been permitted to die with thee. Yet I cannot long; Survive the; — no. 
thy Emily, 
the companion f thy youth; — 
LETTER xxxvn. 205 youth; — thy wretched wife — and still more Sorrowing widow will quickly follow thee to thy untimely grave.” 
“Wise !” — I exclaimed — “Oh! Emily — Say that again; — could I hear thee right!” 
“Most truly So — she answered yes, lascelles! “I was just on the point of confiding that important 
Secret to you, when, -- -- -- -- Oh!! 
me not think of it; — my brain will turn with despair. — I entreat 
you. 
— she continued kneeling before me, — to repair the injury you have done me, by conveying me back again to that Satal Spot, wshere I last beheld him; — Suffer me to go ta him, perhaps his Soul may yet be hovering in the shades of death, — It may not yet have taken an everlasting leave, I may once more hear his loved 
voice t 
ao& LETTER xxxvri. voice; — > I may cheer his dying moments, by convincing him, I will' share his fate.*’ — Then starting up on her feet; — “did he not call me perfidious? — • Oh! he believes me false; — what wretch has poisoned his mind? — I! fatse to the husband of my love! — restore me — restore me quickly to him I beseech you. — Oh! it may not yet be too late. — Her agonies became too powerful for me to Support without betraying the most unmanly Sorrow. — What an account to Sum up! — I threw myself on the ground, and would have that moment put a period to my existence; I curled my being, and imprecated still Severer curses, when I reste(sted on the cruet Sorrows I had brought on this lovely woman, 
Blundell returned, he found on en quiry^ poor Nevile had been discovered 
t E T T E R XXXVII 107 covered by the Servants who had heard the report of the pistols, and had been carried into the house. — His groans were the only indication of his being alive; they had Sent for a Surgeon, who on examining his wounds, declared them to be of a very dangerous nature; though he thought his death would not immediately ensue. 
Thank Heaven my passion Seems now to be absorbed in my wishes Sor the restoration of peace and happiness to this unfortunate pair. — Oh! that I had Sooner known their connexion I yet what avails those fruitless wishes f — the dear Emily, from the great exertion of her Spirits, Seems quite exhausted, and has Sunk into a kind of deathlike steep; I have been w'atch ing her. — As Soon as it is daylight, I will convey her home, and deliver 
mvself 
o L ET T E R XXXVII myself up, that I may make every restitution in my power Sor the calamities I have innocently occasioned, — Oh! that my compnndlion for ray unpremeditated offence, may prove an expiation of it! — I mean as to the next world; — as Sor this, if an ignominious death was allotted me, and by that I could — ^ overtake occasion past; ” — I would most freely Submit my neck to the halter. 
For heaven’s Sake, my dear Temple, hasten to westbury park; your councel may ^ have weight; — I feel almost distracted — but can take no rest nor food, till things are a little more investigated.. — Adieu! 
I am, 
Your most wretched friend, E. L 
LETTER 
( i09.) 
L E T T E R xxxvm 
Miss CLAVERING, 
T O 
EMI 
Y. 
I Cannot delay one moment informing my dearest Emily, that I yesterday was So happy as to embrace my dear brother; — he is just returned from his travels; — I am not, however, going to expatiate, with a Sisterly sond ness on his amiable abilities; — you will Soon, I hope, be judge yoursels of his merits: — but I have Something to communicate, which concerns you more nearly, and you know my love for you is of Such a nature, that 1 shall come in for a large share of any hap piness that arises to vou. 
My 
Sio 
LETTER XXXVIII 
My brother lost his tutor eighteen months since, and, though my father was very willing he should be master of his own adions, yet Henry rather chose to have a witness of them, and becoming acquainted with a very worthy man, under limited circumstances, made him the offer of accompanying him the rest of his tour. — This gentleman he introduced to us, by the name of benson; — ^ the Sound struck me, and I immediately assced him — (Seeing he was a clerical man) if he had ever resided atdosiay.^^ — he answered in the affirmative; — 1 then proceeded to put Such questions to him, as convinced me, by his an svvers, that one great difficulty of my friend would be overcome. — He remembered perfectly the marriage of the unfortunate Neville and Ninon; and discovers a most laudable impatience 
LETTER XXXVIII 211 tience to give his evidence of the validity of it. — Is not this a material point gained } — I shall expe(st an immediate answer from my dear Emily, on this important business; and believe me I feel the utmost Satisfaction ill being an instrument in bringing about So desirable an event— — may all happiness attend you I 
LETTER 
( a I?.) 
LETTER XXXIX 
Sir E D W A R D L A S C E L L E S 
T O 
WILLIAM T E IMP L E, £%. 
H O W has one fatal accident overcast all my fair prospedls! — I told you in ray letter of yesterday, I had left the wretched Emily, lossng for a while her griefs, in a profound stum' her; — on awaking, her head appeared much disordered and confused. Her countenance depicted a melancholy that shot, through my Soul. — I made preparations for returning to 
the 
LETTER XXXIX 213 
the Park; — she expressed the most earnest impatience to be gone; — I urged her to take Some refreshment, and gave the most favourable turn to blundell’s relation of the affairs of Westbury; — she shook her head, as doubting the truth of my intelligence. Oh! how much I was affected by her Solemn manner! good God! what an alteration had a few hours made in her blooming, animated figure! — how unlike the Emily of two days since! 
The dear creature had two fainting fits, while endeavouring to reach the chaise— — no probability of her being able to Sustain the ride, I begged her to remain with the farmer’s wise, and promised to return and give her the truest information. — I was apprehensive she would expire in the carriage; — she had not power 
to 
214 LETTER XXXIX to make opposition to my entreaties j I lest her, and hastened to Westbury. I cannot describe to you my reception; — I hardly knew what was Said on the occasion on either side; — I remember Saying this was no time for altercation; — that I was on affairs of life and death; — that I looked on myself as a prisoner till the fate of Mr. Neville was decided. — As he was Sensible, I begged I might be permitted to See him; — it was with great difficulty he could be persuaded I had returned, and not with less did he consent to an interview. — My God— — a meeting! — to See a poor wretch dying, and by my hand! 
I knelt by his bedside, and taking his hand, entreated him to believe how unhappy this Satal accident had made 
me; 
L E T T E R XXXIX me; — that I had ever meant to be his friend, and most sincerely lamented my misfortune, in not obtaining his confidence, which he must be sensi ble I had often laboured to do — Yet hoped it was not yet too late to prove my esteem of him; — I owned my attachment to Emily, but at the same time avowed the purity of it, and my ignorance of her connexion with him. — I then proceeded to paint her extreme distress, and apprehensions lest Some suspicions should arise in his bosom, and exculpated her from every doubtful appearance. 
I was happy to find the irresistible force of truth induced him to listen to me with Some degree of conviction. He took a letter from his pillow; which Martha, emily’s Servant had 
brought 
^ See letter 35. 
ai LETTER XXXIX brought him an hour before, and which she had left to be Sent to the post. — It was Superscribed to miss Clavering — (the daughter of your friend Sir Thomas.) From the pe rusal of which, he was prepared to believe my assertions, as her ardent attachment to him was conspicuous throughout the whole. — Martha likewise delivered a letter that arrived this morning. — Mr. Neville requested me to open it; — we found it came from Charlotte Clavering, and contained the fortunate intelligence of the per son being arrived in England, who had Solemnised the marriage of neville’s parents. 
these letters were cordials to the w’ounded man — and I begged him to use every endeavour to expedite his recovery, that I might be .able to carry Some hope to his lovely wise! 
“Alas! 
LETTER XXXV 217 Alascried he, with a faint voice; I Seel the principles of life So weak, that I am apprehensive I have not a long time to continue in this world. — Let me use the time allotted me, to do justice to you; — I beg I may have Some witnesses to my Solemn asseveration of your innocence; — had I been So unhappy as to have killed you, my doom, both in this world and the next, must have been inevitable, as I meant your de strudtion. — On returning from shooting, I Saw your chaise waiting at the park gate. — By inquiring of the Servants, I learned you were going on a Sudden; — the cause they did not mention; — the first person I Saw in the house was miss Farnborough, by her malicious insinuations I was instigated to credit the worst, both of vol. II L you 
ii LETTER XXXV you and my dear injured Emily. — Fired with madness, I rushed into the garden with a loaded pistol, vowing your death. — The event is too well known, but the punishment has fallen on the right person; — to believe my Emily false, was erring against the strongest conviction— — who have from early childhood received the tenderest proofs of her love j — ^ yet, she Sweetly pleads in my excuse. I hardly thought it poshble for any man to merit the love of So divine a creature; — * and must I leave her? — must that exquisite union of Souls be dissolved?? — must; — at this early age I am doomed to leave life, and all that can make life desirable” ” 
“you must not, shall not die, ” 
I exclaimed, while the tears of anguish 
LETTER XXXV z19 
guish rolled down my cheek. “I 
have dispatched my Servant to London, 
to bring down an eminent Surgeon. — “One, who having just returned from America, must have great Skill in wounds of this Sort. — Now your mind is So easy, I conceive the most flattering hopes of your recovery.” 

“Indeed, he answered, ” I wish it most sincerely for all our sakes; — ^ but as I aiti certainly in great danger, I ought to Settle everything in the Same manner as if now convinced my dissolution would ensue tomorrow— — am thoroughly Satisfied you wsill be my friend; — he took my hand; — you wsill still be the friend of my'’ Emily. — I have another charge to commit to your care; — I have a Son; — Oh! Sir Edward be to him I. 2 a 
220 LETTER XXXVI a father, let not my early death involve the helpless orphan in the Same distress I have experienced; — there will be no Emily to watch over his tender years, and Sooth his Sorrows as she has done mine; — it will be necessary to confide to your care every proof of - my marriage with his amiable mother. — Alas! under what perplexing circumstances will he arrive at the inheritance of his paternal estate. — I appoint you his guardian; — I doubt not your worthy heart will study to redress the error of your hand.’* 
Oh! how my heart was pierced by his gentelnefs; I repressed my agonies as well as I could; — I thought I should expire by his side; — I was forced to quit the room, and give vent to my storm of grief. — Again he 
begged 
LETTER XXXVI 221 begged to See me; when I entered his chamber, I found three or four people assembled, to whom he read a paper, stating the whole process of this tragic affair, and Signing it, made.them do So likewise. — What pangs were mine, to Ste his care to exculpate the author of his death! — he, before these wsitneffes, took my hand, and Said, — I wish you to See how cordially I forgive Sir edw’ard lascelles, and acquit him of any intentional injury I look on him as my best friend, and rely on him to Support those I shall leave behind me. — Yes, he will be a father to the fatherless.” — He then desired to be left alone with me; — we consulted on the method of making the discovery of his marriage to the family. — I offered a plan, which he Seemed to incline to; — in conse l 3 quence 
222 LETTER XXXV 
quence of which, I had an interview with Mrs. Farnborough, and after Some conversation, I prevailed on her to accompany me and Martha to Lin wood farm, to fetch her daughter from thence: — In our way thither I communicated my intelligence to her; — she bore the information with Ids passion than I had been prepared to expect— — the horror and confusion that reigned throughout the house had damped their Spirits and blunted their indignation. 
I gave her pretty strong hints, that I was thoroughly acquainted with the story of her unfortunate brother, and avowed my fixed resolution of Seeing every poshble justice done to the heirs. I thought I Saw guilt sit on her sea tures, and in order to bring matters to bear more easily, I let no advantage 
slip; 
LETTER XXXV 223 slip; — at our arrival at the farm, we Sound the dear Emily in a most deplorable Situation; — a violent fever had come on, and it appeared almost dangerous to remove her, yet she So earnestly, and So pathetically entreated that favour of us, that we could not resist her importunities. Torn as ray heart was with her Sufferings, I made no Scruple to disclose my Sears to the mother, to excite her tenderest compassion Sor the angelic Emily. — I will do her the justice to Say, she Seemed most truly and maternally affected; she pressed the dear girl in her arms, and kishng her burning cheek, ashed her in an affectionate tone, if she would rely on her for accommodating every difficulty with her father, concluding by Saying, “ray Sweet Emily shall meet with no reproaches; I will show L 4 my 
£24 LETTER XXXV myself her tender mother, and she shall find all the family disposed to conciliate her happiness.’’ 
She returned an endearing answer, in Scarce articulate Sounds. — I Supported her during our little journey to westbury park. — 'Oh! how earnest were my petitions to the throne of mercy for a happy issue of this dreadful event. 
Alas! death Seems hovering over the couch of this amiable, devoted pair! — Oh! that mine could be an atonement 
* 
Emily was forced to be put to bed immediately; her Sever increased with an astonishing rapidity; — I went into neville’s chamber. — 
LETTER XXXV 225 ber. — But, good God, what hopes had I to give him; — he too plainly Saw, from my deep dejecsiion, that my Soul was over burdened with Sorrow He Sought to console me; — 
See, and pity your Sufierings, my dear lascelles, Said he; — learn resignation from me, — I am a young philosopher— — having been trained in the School of adversity I have made great progress in the Science. I must part with my Emily; — your countenance declares that truth, — but we shall die together; — and in another, and better world we shall be reunited. Support yourself, my dear and best friend; — remember the charge I have given you; — let the love you have born the mother, and the Sriendlhip with which you ha’: e honoured the father, be transmitted to our child.” 
Oh i 
ize LETTER XXXVL 
‘‘ Oh! God, Oh! God !” cried I, throwing myself in agony by the fide os the bed. — “This is too, too much! — this consideration for your murderer is too distreffing, I cannot bear it.” Hush my good friend, — betray not this unmanly weakness, — Teach me with your Superior sense and knowledge of the world; — teach me to bear the conssidt, when Soul and body part. — Show me, by your pious resignation to the decrees of fate, that you will be a proper guardian to my infant Son. — If you do not sup.. port the death of his parents with a religious sirmness, how will you execute the trust and confidence I have reposed in you?” 
“I struggled with my feelings to affure him I would devote my life and fortune to the Service of his child. — 
And 
L E T T R R XXXVI 227 And I Swear to you, I will most re ligioussy, perform my talk; — yes! thou lost branch of an ill faied house, I will be thy Support; — thou shale be my child, — to thee, I dedicate all my future life! 
Sr » 
Campbell is arrived, he has examined the wound; — alas! he gives no hopes. — The lungs are lacerated, he may languish a few days; — dear Emily! but thou wilt not remain to mourn the untimely death of thy loved Neville! — he was carried this morning into her room; — their meeting. — You must not expect a description from one So dreadfully, — So preeminently interested. — Mrs. Booth, the aunt of Mr. Neville, and vv^ho is entrusted with the care of his Son is 
Sent 
m 
428 LETTER XXXV 
Sent for; every hour she is looked for; — I write only by intervals. — My God what a Scene of distress! well may the poet Say, ‘‘ the ways of Beaten are dark and intricate.’^ 
Mrs. Booth came this evening; — the lovely infant with her. — I doubt whether I shall live to execute my trust; — 1 feel very much disordered. All proofs have been given of the legality of the marriage of this unfortunate pair. 
Mr. and Mrs. Farnborough Seem humbled to the dust. — Now they may read their crimes in their Severe punishment; — but the innocent Suffer with them. 
Never can I again witness Such a Scene as that I have just now beheld. — The unhappy Neville was carried 
on 
letter XXXV 2^9 
on a couch, and laid by the side of the bed on which the dying Emily was Supported; — all the family were assembled. — In broken accents she ashed forgiveness of her parents for all the errors she had committed; — she blessed them — and reaching out her almost lifeless hand to her Sorrowing husband, feebly pressed his. — Her child was brought to her, she breathed out a prayer for his happiness;; — united with the unfortunate father in the entreaty of my accepting the guardianship, in con jundl'ion with her aunt. — A visible change took place, and at her earnest desire Mr. Neville was removed; — he had fainted; — her eyes followed him till she could See him no longer. She clasped her hands together. — It is now all over, ” she Said, and 
Oh! 
t130 LETTER XXXVI falling back; I cannot go on — words are too weak”. 
Oh! that I was at rest with those my Soul doted on! — yet can I re suse their dying request. — I will live to prove my affection— —! 
Edward Lascelles. 
THE END. 

SINGER mendenhall col 
c 75. moo, 7 i y. alsi 

. _ 
i. sffi 
Brg. 
i7?2 
ir 
■> 
V ■ ■ ■ > •# 
»' ■' r 
'■ i; ■. 
; _; >>■ V 
$ si 
lid i Ijfc 


