CONSTANTIA; 
OR, THE 
DISTRESS’D FRIEND.
A 
NOVEL. 
IN TWO VOLUMES. 


CONSTANTIA; 
OR, THE 
DISTRESS’D FRIEND. 
A
NOVEL 
VOL. I. 

[Greek Epigraph] 

DUBLIN:
Printed for the AUTHOR, 
By Dillon Chamberlaine, in Dame Street, 
facing Fownes’s Street. 
MDCCLXX. 



sgconstanti A; 
O R, T H E r 
DISTRESS’D FRIEND 

f L E T T E R I. 
To miss Sophia Easebv. 
^ tyytell, who cares a Jot, 
I VV I envy them not, 
While I have my Dog and my Gun. 
Thus, my dear Sophia., was I humming Tune, whilst walking to the Fields in ^ pursuit of Sport, when a remarkable inci i dent put an End, Sor Some time, both to my Song and Diversion. As I know you t are inquisitive and Sond of Adventures, ‘f’and having no other News in this retired B ' Place, 
(A 
0 
h 
4 
o 
a 
tr 

[ 2 ] 
Place, m try to please you by telling it but cannot promise to gratisy you entirely, for my Knowledge of the Affair is but very impersed, and a woman’s Spirit of Curiosity not easily appeas’d. 
My Dog, as I was crossing from the Wood behind the house, and had just got into the Road, made his escape from me; but (bon returning, led me to a Brake of Briers; how great was my Astonishment when 1 perceived there, lying at his length, a young Man, elegantly dressed, his lac*d Ruffles torn, and his Hair flying about him. 
’tis Said of Sir Godfrey Knelkr., that he painted with an amazing (i^ickness, without any Appearance of Study, and often times at the first Stroke; but you must not expect that I can thus Suddenly present to your mind’s Eye the Picture of So pleasing a young Man, and a Destription that was not accurate wou’d do him the greatest Injustice. 
I imagin’d at first he had been wounded by Robbers; but observing him to be fast asleep, was Soon convinced of my Mistake. 
I stood over him for a while in fixed Attention, and should perhaps have continued So much longer, but that perceiving a Labourer at work in an adjacent Field, I went to inquire if he knew any thing^concerning him: He told me he had Seen him, about an Hour before, walk with great Precipitation to that very Place; that he appeared 
to 
[ 3 ] 
to be much Satigucd; and tho’ in a visible Hurry, he had been obliged to Submit to his weakness; and looking for the most retired Place, he Sat himsels down; that he seem’d to be for Some time lost in Thought, then agitated with all the Symptoms of frantic Sorrow, eagerly clasping his Hands together, and now and then lifting them up with his Eyes to Heaven, ’till his Spirits had been quite exhausted, and he fell into the profound Sleep in which I had found him. If, thinks I, he can Sleep So Soundly in Such a dismal Situation, what might he do were he laid in Sophia bedupon this I went and stirr’d him to make the friendly Offer, which, as I was already prepoffess’d in his Favour, I did in the best Terms I was Master of. He seem’d in the utmost Confusion, yet bow’d 
respedtfully, -- -- nay, a Ray of Gratitude 
shot from his Eyes, -- -- -- -- then folding his 
Hands across his Breast, and bending down his Head with a pensive Air, he placed himself behind me as if determined to follow my Steps. Nature when file made Man susceptible of Misfortunes, made him Suf 
ceptible of Pity also. 1 felt -- -- yet knew 
not why -- -- -- -- was lollicitous to offer him 
Comfort, yet knew not how to attempt it. 
-- -- You are. Sir, but a Stranger in this 
Country? -- -- -- He sigh’d. -- -- -- Is it in my 
Power to be of any Service to you? -- -- -- -- -- - 
He sigh’d still more heavily. Step by Step B 2 we 
[ 4 ] 
we proceeded to the house. I led him to the proffer’d Chamber, where he press’d my Hand most earnestly for the Space of a Minute, then stung himself on the Bed, and pointing to the Door, I retired. Whether he has again composed himself to steep I know not, but, as the Post is just going out. Sat down to give you this Account, which, tho’ mysterious, is as true as that I am, 
My dearest Sophias Sincerely affe<stionate Brother, 
Charles Easeby, 
LETTER' II ' 
To Sir Thomas Trevor. 
f ^ R O M lonely Groves and sequester’d Meadows, heart sprung Complacency and self enjoyment, to crowded Streets and riotous Entertainments, Sashionabie Formality and the pleasures os excess, -- Be 
not alarmed, my dear Vrewr, I do not mean to preach : I am even merry, nay very merry, in remarking the odd Contrast of Character between two Companions So long acquainted and stridly connected as 
we 
[ 5 3 
we arc. If Fortune should ever throw us into a Train of Adventures (which you know had like to be the Cafe at our Departure from France) there could not posh bly be found two Heroes better adapted to be the Subject of a modern Novel, As it is, if I had Oliver goldfmitfs Chinese Habit, and Some other requisites he makes use of, particularly the Head and Heart, I should be tempted to describe you, in the Eastern Taste, a cascade tumbling thro’ the Heights of Life, and myfelj a placid Stream stealing thro’ Some Solitary Valley: The Allegory might be further continued, by following your Fall, from one Rock of Fashion to another; whilst my Scarce discernible progress rcstedted Variety of new Objects as it pass’d in philosophic East towards the Ocean of Eternity, which you know would be the common Receptacle of both our Waves. 
The strong Assurances you gave me at our parting to keep up a regular Correspondence, make me wonder at your being Silent three Days; and not yet knowing where to diredi to you, r inclose this in a Letter to my Sisser, on purposc to urge you on to the fulfilling your promise, intending to draw all my Intelligence from the Great World through your Letters. 
Remember you have it in your Power to entertain me very Satisfadlorily, by writing every Morning, before you go to Bed, B 3 the 
[ 6 ] 
the Manner in which you made the preceding Night all Sunfmie and good humonr. Let me have likewise the newest Patterns os Complimentary phrases and polite Cant Terms, Such as made poor Bella .protest Sir Lhomas was the best bred Man alive. 
As our good mother’s advanced Age and bad State of Health, will make it impossible for her to go much into lise with her Daughter, I am confident your Friendship will protect my dear Sophia, at public Places, from the insults of those who have all your volatile Constitution, without one Grain of your Honour; but fear her stay’d Notions of lx)ve and Gallantry will be a dead Weight on your airy Conceptions of both. It is necessary for young People to See Some fashionable Scenes, as Honey may be extradled out of noxious Flowers; but a Sting is also necessary to keep off the Drones. 
My old Friend the parson visits me daily since you and the Family departed: I find his Conversation grow every Day more a greeable; nearer Acquaintance is wearing off that clerical auft«rity that made you call him Doctor crab tree, and he has a Soul really worth being intimately acquainted with. An heavy Sigh often bursts from his Heart, as it were unknowingly, which makes me think Some unfortunate Accident 
in 
[ 7 ] 
sh Life is the real cause os his rigid sedatc nefs and little Subacidity of Temper. He is also often wrapped up as it were in Silent Cogitation, which ibmetimes throws a wildncss into his Manner and discourse, that, with his acute Judgement and great Learning, will, I think, render him a most pleasing Companion to relieve my Solitude. He is now below intending to Say Grace over a Brace of Partridge and an Hare of my own Manufaflure, to which he would allow no other Sauce but plain Butter and a Toast, to be wash’d down with a good Tankard of home brew’d Ale. 
If it be possible for you to Settle anywhere,, let me know your fixed Place of Residence, and expect to hear frequently from 
Yours, 
Charles Easeby. 
b4 
LETTER 
[»] 
LETTER in. 
tomiss Sophia Easeby. 
WELL, Sophia Surely this Brother of yours is a strange young Man. I Srequently praise him as I do the Mustard, when you make it, with Tears in my Eyes. He knows nothing of the World, my Child — Nothing at all of it, tho’ he has travell’d So far; and notwithstanding I tell him all I suffer’d by having been too credulous in my earlier Days — tell it to him over and over, for old Age is narrative, yet he will not learn to be on his Guard. What do you think he has done this Day introduc’d a young Man into his house, that he knows nothing of, who had not even condescended to Speak to him. But — “He had a melancholy Look.” — Alas! ’tis a Sad Thing that our Afflidions are So many. Multitudes are forc’d to dissemble their Sorrows and wear a cheerful Countenance while they are distress’d at Heart: But ’tis a much more alarming Affair that others, can put on this Appearance of Trouble, and counterfeit Grief they do not feel. He Says it is uncharitable to distrust those who have never deceiv’d us, and that Suspicion is the Daughter of Guilt. I would not be uncharitable, I am not conscious of practising Deceit, and yet, I know not 
how 
[ 9 ] 
bow it is, my Mind misgives me that all is not right. ’tis owing, 1 believe, to a sol licitude for the welsare of your Family; For methinks I would have him cautious, and yet 1 would not purchase my own Security by being always on the Watch. 
But I know not what Opinion to Sorm of this Interloper. He could not come into a Place where he is utterly unknown, without Some design. He may be Some wrongheaded Fellow' escap’d after murdering his Friend in a Duel. — But I forget, — that’s an Affair of Honour, and every Man of Honour is bound to espouse him. He may be a Sharper, that wanted to get into polite 
Company -- -- -- My old Memory, how it 
fails me! there was no Need of Stratagem for this; Gaming is in itself a Sufficient Recommendation, and gives a distinguish’d Chair at the Tables of the Great. 
But, Sophia! -- -- there is another thing 
-- -- might he not have expected, there 
was One more in the house, than he found 
there.? — Ycu understand me. -- -- -- Take 
Care, my Girl. -- -- Female Innocence is 
no more exempted from the Toils of the Wicked, than the Dove from the Snares of the Fowler. 
Oh Sophia! what have I heard.? the 
Messenger is just arriv’d -- -- - The young 
person I was mentioning to you, I have it from under your brother’s owm Hand, is in a violent Fever, — — I Set off this Mob 

5 
menr; 
[ 10 ] 
ment; not to visit the Sick — One who is delirious can receive no comsort from my Instructions, and why should I add a Pang to my poor old Heart Sor nothing? — ’tis already pierc’d with many Sorrows. — Why stand by the dying., only to encourage the living., who, — strange Infatuation! — think is they depart in the presence of a parson, all will be well. No — I go to leave a few Directions, Such as the case rnay require, and your brother’s Inexperience perhaps overlook, and also to bring him here, for I would not have him stay in a sick house, where nurse Callaghan will be Sufficiently careful. 
I never dreaded Infection myself, but. He, tho’ willing to do all the Good he can, is not used to attend on thediseas’d; and I value his Life. Nay, tho’ I Speak harshly Sometimes, I am not So ungratesul to Providence, but I value my own. The Heat of my Youth was temper’d by astliction, and tho’ old Age appears burdensome, yet the Advances towards it are So gradual, that they make the Impression easy. Like the Index of a Watch, tho’ affected by ev’ry Moment of Time, the Motion is too Slow for the Eye to take Notice of it. And what is best of all, it is a gentle preparative for Death ^ stealing us imperceptibly away from ourselves. I pity the young Man; if He retains his senses it must be dreadful to him, to be eclips’d in his meridian Glory. 
’ But 
[ " ] 
But the Evening Twilight, while it steals away the Day from us, makes the dark ness of the Night less gloomy. 
Adieu! 
LETTER IV 
To Charles Easeby, esq. 
YOU have raised a Spirit that will constantly haunt you, nor can all your Satirical philosophy, or any other Power beside that os Sull Information, lay it again. Indeed, dear Charles., your Hint os that Incident, So likely to prove a dismal One, swell’d the. Spring of my Passions to Such an height, it was ready to overflow; when that comical Devil, Sir Lhomas, bounc’d 
into the Parlour. -- How, Sophy / — Why 
So dull today } What mighty tender Story of Some, mighty tender damsel, who tenderly condescended to be ruined. -- -- ’tis 
true his pity! and pity ’tis’tis true! be cause Some tender young Fellow threatened 
to hang himself if she resused -- - Oh! — 
He repeated this in (o dismal a Tone, and with Such a rueful Phyz, that it had a quite different • Effect Srom what he intended, completed what your Letter began, and 
I burst 
[ >2 ] 
I burst out into a Flood os Tears. - — Well done, Sophy., egad! instead os finding you under the Hands os Monsieur Frifeur; or consulting with ma’moiselle De Negligee., on the most Sashionable Patterns os Winter Silks, behold a young Girl in the Bloom of Fifteen, giving herself up to Tears, and bedewing her Handkerchief over Some dismal Ditty. — What do you mean.? Said I, Somewhat peevishly. — Nothing in the World, my Dear, but to try if I could remove Some of those unfashionable Notions your Brother has instill’d. Your Eyes will be So red you can’t think of appearing tonight, and Lady Modijh is to show away in her new dress, contrived for the Convenience of displaying an handsome Foot to Advantage. And we’re to have a new Paris Edition of Captain Whim, neatly bound and gilt. We ought to have him letter’d too, replied 1 — or I shall never be able to distinguish him from the Works of other Authors, 1 mean the Tailors: And I do intend that you shall conduct me to the Mustek hall this asternoon. Tonight you mean. ma’am; we could not think of going early. Now ceuld I Swear Srom what you have Said, that you are Charles's 
Sister, and dotstor crah trefs Pupil -- -1, 
Sir, shall be entirely guided by you in respect of Time and other Minutiae of polite ness; and depend upon your kindness for 
insormation, 
[ -3 ] 
Information, as to the Names and Characters of the (Company. -- -- That you shall 
have, replied he; my Acquaintance with most People of distindion, who frequent Places of fashionable Entertainment, will make it easy for me to indulge your Curiosity; but, Sophy continued he, I must also request a Favour of you in my Turn. Name it, Said I. -- Then give me your Attention 
for a few Moments; I was all Attention, you may Swear, and he proceeded thus : In my Excursions this Day, I had the good P'ortune to meet a Lady, with whom your Brother and I had the happi ness to be acquainted in France. She is an amiable Figure, and is poffess’d of the most engaging Accomplishments; in one Word, she unites in her own person all those Perfedions you admire. Not a little Surprised at Seeing her here, and attended too only by a Maidservant, I exclaim’d, bless me. Madam! to what happy Accident am I obliged for this unexpected Pleasure.? 
-- -- She paus’d. -- -- a Sigh endca > 
vour’d to vent itself, but was repuls’d; she look’d So much Perplexity, that, faith, I coil’d not help Sympathising. I join’d her, and we continued to walk in the Direction which she had been following. Sir Thomas and a Sigh issued forth together, nor did my Name ever strike So Softly Sweet upon my Ear but once before, from the Mouth of a near Relation of hers. Sir Thomas 
Sai 
[ '+ ] 
laid she, your Face is the most agreeable Sight I have Seen since my Arrival, for it is the only One I have known. -- -- -- -- - An entire 
Stranger to everything here, you may guess at what irksome Moments I have Spent. You have it in your Power to lay me under everlasting Obligations, by introducing me to fbme female Acquaintance of Integrity and Worth: At these Words she gave a most piercing Look, that seem’d 
to Say, I think I may depend on you. -- -- -- 
The Idea os Integrity and Worth immediately fill’d my Breast with the Image of Sophia (here I courtesy’d, and believe I was pleas’d,) and I promised even without your prior Approbation, to introduce her to a person whose Soul was entirely congenial to her own. Tho’ little shill’d in spiritualiz’d Matters, I can assure yon, Sophia, that if sameness of Sentiment proceeds Srom^ samenesa of Soul, yours and hers will match exactly. We now arrived at her Lodging, where I made her promise to accompany us to the music hall this Night, oi Condition of introducing you to her beforehand. I am to call on her, and hope you’ll be So good as to let me keep my Word by calling next on you. I must beg Pardon for making free without Leave, but pledge my Honour the Acquaintance will 
not be disagreeable. -- -- -1 gave my Consent, 
as I knew I could answer Sor my. mother’s, and he departed to the Coffeehouse, 

[ 15 ] 
house, leaving me to dine, write my Letter, and make impatient Remarks. Never was poor girl’s Curiosity railed to Such a Pitch as mine, thus beset with Mysteries; I long for tonight., I long more for next Post — I have heard you praise the Lady I am to See, but never anything of the Man you hinted at. Dear Charles indulge me with a satisfactory Account who he is — what his Misfortune — his whole his tory. My respedls to ray old Tutor, 
-- -- but hark. Sir Lhomas's Coach rattling 
to the Door -- -- his footman’s rapid Rap 
I must conclude, 
Your 
Sophia. 

LETTER V 
To Mrs, J;. Callaghan. 
Having So often experienced your Faithfulness and Love, I am under no Apprehension of either failing in the Performance of my present Desire. You must know, my dear Nurfc, there is Something So very remarkable in the little I have learned concerning the sick Stranger you have got under your Care, that I am wonderfully 
[ ] 
derfully uneasy till I hear Such Particulars about him as you can gather. 
I am pretty certain you will be very punctual in your Attendance on him, and diligent to apply every Remedy that may promise Relief, especially when I request you may use all Means the Place will afford to recover him Speedily, 
Pkom your being frequently by his Bed, you cannot but make Some Observations, either on his discourse, or his Ravings, that may prove pleasing to me, and help to give me an Insight into his Charafler and Circumstances, both which I want greatly to find out. From his Appearance and Behaviour, you may also be able to judge whether he be a Gentleman or an Impostor : At any Rate let no Assistance be wanting, for he is our Fellow-creature, and as Such claims every Regard we could poshbly wish were shown to ourselves in the Same Condition. 
Let me have a private Letter by the first Opportunity, giving a full Account of whatever you think concerning him, and no all the Methods you can to find out who he is, and how he came there. 
I am Sure my dear nurse will do all this and more, for her Child 
Sophy. 
LETTER 
[ >7 ] 
LETTER VI 
To the Rev. Mr. 
Your insinuation, my honor’d Tutor, of this unaccountable young Man hoping to meet One more in the house than he found there, I perfeduy understand as you intended, and must own there are Appearances to justify it, even to a less penetrating Eye than yours. Give me leave, however, to assure you, that I cannot think of any person, or Motive to urge any one to Such an odd Method of in trodudlion; nor can I form any Satisfactory Conjcc^iure about him. My brother’s not writing So pundlually as I requested, gives me uneasiness; Sori long to have this clouded Affair clear’d up. If I have any Part in it unknown to myself, you may rest Satisfied it is an honourable One, and shall continue So; for no Consideration shall make me Swerve from those Principles your Care has instilled, and under your Piotection I look upon myself as a tender Vine, which, twisting round the aged Elm, is preserved from the Dangers it would be otherwise exposed to. 
I must further depend upon your kind ness to be watchful over ray Brother, whole good nature may lead him into Hazards that I tremble to think on, knowing him to 
be 
[ >8 ] 
be very susceptible of infe<5lious Distempers. nurse Callaghan,, with a little of your di redlions, will be Sufficiently careful, without his venturing himself. Your Feelings, my worthy Dodfor, for a young person in Such a melancholy Condition, without a Friend or even an Acquaintance to whom he may impart the Sorrows of his Heart, are Similar to my own. Oh! who can paint the Anguish he must feel.? How horrible must that Situation to which he has brought himself appear r Happy, indeed, were he rendered incapable of thinking •, and yet I fear his Delirium arises more from a mental than bodily Fever. Let me adjure you then, like his guardian Angel, to Sooth the Sorrows of his Soul, Allay that Storm whence it is probable his disorder proceeds, and having gently explor’d the cause of his Misfortune, pour in the Balm of healing Advice; touch tenderly, if you find he deserves Reproof, on the miscondudf of headstrong Youth, and Speak Comfort from your Heart and not from your Passions. You know most young People break away from the assum’d Authority that goads them forward, instead of kindly conducing, them along. 
O, my dear Sir, how thankful ought they to be who enjoy the good Things of this World without being call’d to Severe Trials in it. 
I have 
[ 19 ] 
I have just commenc’d an Intimacy wdth a most amiable young Lady, plunged into a Sea os undeserv’d distress. Tho’ poffess’d of all those Charms which are boasted of by the gay, and all those persecstions which are admired by the good, yet is she a Stranger to Peace, and likely to be blasted in the Midst of her Bloom. Often has she attempted to communicate her Grief, of which I would gladly bear a Part, but Tears and Sobs interrupted her, and left her in a manner speechless; only a few inarticulate Sounds would Sometimes break thro’, casting Such a pale momentary Beam of Light on the Gloom, as just serv’d to oncrease my Curiosity and my Tears. She is also a Stranger, and what is more, a Foreigner; far from Home, far from her Friends and Companions, So that it is hard to know whether she or your unfortunate Charge at eafe vilk is most deserving of Pity and Assistance. I could wish you knew her as I do, she would dispel all the Doubts your good, tho’ cautious, old Heart Seems to entertain for fear of being impos’d upon, and would lay it open to every Soft Impression. That Mistrust is necessary to protect us from Fraud, daily Experience convinces: Yet it is better that ten Knaves should partake of our Bounty, and cheat us into Tenderness, than that one real Objetst of Pity should pass on without an 
alleviating 
[ 20 ] 
alleviating Ejaculation, without one Sellow Tear. — But hold. — isorget to whom I am writing, or I would leave those things to your own Refiedtions, and conclude without even reminding you of the Esteem you So deservedly poffess in the Heart of 
Your 
Sophia Easeby, 

LETTER VII 
To Charles Easeby, esq. 
DO not think, my dear Charles that the Distance of a few Miles, or all the Entertainments of Dublin, can make me forget the Companion of my Schoolboy Days, and my Fellow traveller. No, whilst this busy Heart beats you shall have a Place in it, and I cou’d heartily wish you would leave those lonely Groves you mention, to persons whom gloomy Dispositions, or distresssul Circumstances, have rendered incapable of enjoying the fpark ling pleasures of Society. I can never think that Youth, Fortune, good Education and genteel address, were intended by Nature to be buried among the rustic 
Glens 
L 21 ] 
Glens of ivicklow^ and I have ostensheard you declare an utter Aversion from everything that contradidls her wise Designs. Aprops — a favourite Maxim of your own has just come into my Head. mvox Populi, Vox Dei., hold good in Politics, why should it not do the Same in Morality; and put your Plan of lise and mine to the Poll, and ten to one I carry it hollow. Nay, gay Life, vas unanimoufiy agreed to at the Eagle last Night, maintain’d by twenty undeniable Arguments of twenty Choice Spirits, among whom Ned Green cut a very great Figure. Ned is a Man of Taste, I can tell you, for he is intimately acepiainted with many persons of Rank. 
Let me once more then request you will enjoy Life, which is a Possession too precarious to be dallied with. I have just taken a house in Merrion square, where you may either dircdl to me, or come and live with me, and tho’ not trusting to one Hat, like two Friends I read of Some where or other, yet one house will do us very well. 
The immense Number of gay Scenes which this Town affords (a pretty Antithesis this to your Solitary Scenes) would enliven any one but a Stoic; and tho’ not equal to those of Paris for politeness, or those of for Grandeur, let me affure 
you our Country is much improved even since we left it. We have remark’d that the well-bred of every Country are pretty 
much 
[ 22 ] 
much alike, and the trades folk of Dublin are rising very Sast into that class. I Saw this plainly at a Drum given by Mrs. hoi land, the Linen draper, where everything was in high Taste, and the Company dressed quite alamodc. I was curious enough ' to take the Diameter of the Back of one lady’s Head, and Sound it inferior to my dear Bellas by only the tenth of an Inch. ► The pleasing preeminence of a Traveller I feel every Day, most Sensibly. The Old appeal to me in all disputes about Customs and Manners abroad, and the Young about Fashions. Lady Flutter co'ci suits me about the genteelest Air in Dancing a Minuet, and Lady Modifb calls me her charming little Foreigner loud enough to be heard. — This is to live, my Charles, yet not one Word of Groves and Meadows in it. One would think, like Cupids and Graces, they had no Existence but in the 
Head of a Poet. -- -- -1 plead this all to no 
purpose with you, and, what is more Surprising, with two young Ladies also, con jiantia and Sophia, unaccountable Girls as they are. I cannot prevail upon them even to stir out ever since I brought them acquainted, and there is Some Mist around them that I cannot See thro’. When 1 inquire after Bella a strange Confusion appears, but no Information follows, and good Manners oblige me to desist, tho’ 
wonderfully 
[ 23 ] 
wonderfully uneasy to know the Circumstances os that agreeable Woman. Can you unravel this Clue, Charles? if you can, write Speedily to 
Yours, 
Thomas Trevor. 

LETTER VIII 
To miss Sophia Easebv. 
My dear mistress Sophy 
Having received your most loving Letter, I immediately let about Getting you know all I know myself, concerning this young Man you are So inquisitive about, which, in Troth, my Dear, is very little. That he is a Gentleman you need not doubt, for he has the prettiest black Eyes you ever Saw, and the neatest Hand; but I never Saw no more of him, for he keeps himself So wrapped up in the Bedclothes, and hates to have Light and People about him So much, that he is Scarce to be Seen at all. In my Opinion his Fever is what the Doctors call an unremitting one, being Sometimes better and Sometimes worsc; and when the raving Fit is on him, 
he 
[ 24 ] 
he would melt an Heart of Stone he looks So pitiful and Speaks what nobody can understand So Sweetly, 1 am lure he must be in Love; Sor tho’ I can’t tell what he Says, I know it Sounds like the Love versies you iised to read Sor me; and only 1 think you could not well have a Sweet heart unknown to me, I would Swear he was a Lover osyours, and, in Troth, is he had five Thousand a Year there would be no withstanding his pretty Eyes, 
As Soon as my young Master found he was taken ill, he Sent off for the parson, who, thinks, knows more than anybody else; but to tell you a Secret, tho’ perhaps I do not know as much of a Disorder as he does, I am Sure 1 could Say a great deal more on it. For when he came into the Room, tho’ the poor Creature was delirious, he only look’d at him, felt his pulse, and shrugg’d up his Shoulders, and So went out calling me after him, nurse, Says he, turning about on the stair head, this Man has all the Symptoms of a violent Fever; Yes, please your Reverence, Said I, 1 should know thatjto be his disorder tho’ he had no Symptoms at all, and I think we had better give him St. James's Powders, it has done a world os Good in our Neighbourhood; at that he look’d graver than usual, and Said no. Let Nature work her way; we know nothing about him, and therefore must proceed very cautiously. 
Now, 
[ 25 ] 
Now, ma’am, I hate your over cautioui People, who proceed So cooly to People in distress, Sori would usc any forlorn Creature as my own born Child. I will Send, Said he, to Arklow for everything necessary, and give you Directions how you should administer them. Now, ma’am, I who have been a nurse, wet and dry, these eight and thirty Years, know how to manage a Fever as well as himself. Never fear. Sir, Said I, ni warrant to take care of him; but I beg you’ll take Master Charles home with you Sora Day or two, Says I, for a Fever is a mortal Thing in this Family; he told me he would, and going downstairs bid me be Sure to keep the young Man quiet and easy, and he would call in the Morning to See him. 1 run back to my Charge, and he and your Brother went away together. It began now to grow dark, and I must tell you Something that frighted me to Death, Jenny and I were sitting by the Fire, consulting sosdy with one another who this Stranger could be; Jenny Said, may be he is Some Robber that has taken this Opportunity to ravish us all and rob the house. No, Says I, one Man could never do that; it is more likely he is Some ’squire that was benighted and lost his Way, like as you read of in the story books, I had Scarce Said this when one of the Dogs Set up the most terrible Yell you ever heard. I ran to the Window and call’d Lowzer^ but C n[ 
[ ] 
no Lowzer answer’d. Lord bless me, Said I to Jenny will you go See what Dog that was, for I never knew old Towzer give Such a Yell but there was a Death either among the People, the Cattle, or the Poultry. She was afraid to go, and So was I, and there we Sat stewing till Morning, Sor our poor thing rested finely, and I went over now and then to look at him and give him a Bottle that came from the ’pothecary. ivbout eight he wakened and seem’d much better, but he never Spoke a Word; and behold, on Inquiry, I Sound that Lowzer had follow’d your Brother to the parson’s; that pleas’d me much, but the young ’squire sooi\pleased me more, for putting his Hand under the Bolster he puu’d a Gold Watch out of his Breeches Pocket, and made Signs to me to accept of it; now he has the prettiest Hand in the County, So I look the Watch to prevent distreshng it by the Cold, It is now Half an Hour past Four by my Watch, So must put off more News till next writing. No more atpresent from your loving nurse, 
J. Callaghan. 
LETTER 
[ 27 ] 
LETTER IX 
To miss Sophia Easeby. 
That I, who am under Such great Obligations to the amiable Sophia for her Attention to an unhappy Stranger, should resuse to give her ev’ry satissadfion in my Power, must appear very unaccountable. — But my Tongue is unable to utter the fullnessof my Heart, cither with re fpedl to its own Sorrows, or its Gratitude to 
you. My Spirits are fo broken -- 1 Seem 
to have So little os the volatile Turn of my Countrywomen — that you are %11 Amazement. 
I have often attempted to tell you my Story, but Grief has choak’d my Utterance, and the Tears now Swimming in my Eyes 
will, Hear, prevent my Writing. -- But 
I must attempt it, — stis an Explanation you have a Right to, and to have a Confidant, a worthy Confidant in my distress, might perhaps give me easc. 
To a person of your refin’d Sentiments stis needless to mention that Secrecy is necessary. 
I need not tell you how Sir Lhomas and your Brother got acquainted with my Cou sm and me at Parish Sir Lbomas inform’d you of it when he did me the kindness to introduce me to you; and I am not in a C 2 Humour 
[ *8 ] 
Humour at present to run over Scenes of Gaiety and pleasure. Suffice it to mention that they became too intimate in our Family — too intimate, I mean, for the Peace of my poor Bella. The tender Passions are So implanted in our Nature, that his impossible to prevent their Growth — and Sir Thomas is every way deserving. 
After he had left Paris she told me their Hearts were mutually engaged. His Letters were Sor Some time her greatest Delight; Letters which shew’d the Man of sense and the Lover were not incompatible Characters. But at length, without any visible reason, the Correspondence dropp’d. — His netless to paint her Anxiety, — to attempt expressing her Feelings upon this Occasion. However, they were not Such as Sunk her, — the French Ladies are not So easily dejedted. -- -- She resolv’d therefore 
to visit Ireland, to be a Spy on Sir while he thought her at a Distance, and to be fully convinc’d of his Integrity or Falsehood. — In vain, did I remonstrate against this Project— — vain, urge the Difficulties she must undergo in a strange Place — unknowing and unknown. It was impossible to baffle her resolution, and as impossible, for a Friend who lov’d her sincerely as I did, to let her enter upon the Design alone. 
Our Journey was in no other respedt disagreeable, than in the cause of its being 
undertaken. 
[ 29 ] 
u?!dertaken. Wc Soon got Lodgings, we 
imagined Sufficiently private -- -- ev’ry way 
convenient, except by having a Mr. Green a Lodger in the adjacent Apartments; Sor the house being a double one, his Apartments had a View of the Street, while ours look’d only into an unfrequented Lane. 
Bella., my dear Bella being Somewhat indifpos’d, by a slight Cold and the Fatigue of travelling, I lest her in Bed one Morning and stole out to look Sor another Habitation, for this young Gentleman had began to grow very inquisitive about us, and I was not willing to run the Rifkof a strict Examination, nor did I choose to alarm the Companiori of my Danger fill the Grievance might be remedied. -- -- -- -- -- But oh! 
is it wonderful I appear So disconsolate.? Is it not rather wonderful, that I still exist.? — ■ 
Gracious Heaven! -- -- -- -- When I returned, 
Bella., I was told, had gone abroad immediately after me -- -- -- -- not being able to 
imagine whither she was gone, or with what design; I waited with Impatience, — 
with the greatest Anxiety. -- -- -- No Bella 
appear’d. Why should I mention to you the Terrors that seiz’d me? — Why fill 
your gentle bosom with -- -- -- -- -- 1 cannot — 
the Pen drops from my Hand. -- -- -- -- -- -- - 
Again I attempt to acquaint my sopeiay that I never Saw her, — never heard of her since, nor of the Maid who accompanied C 3 her; 
[ 3° ] 
her; for wc brought the Servant I rrow have from Irance along with us, and hired, on our landlady’s Recommendation, another, who has disappear’d with my Cousin. What increases my Astonishment, I dare not Say, my Fears, is, that in the Midst of my Distress, not knowing who to apply to, I Sought Relief from the very Person, who before had given me So much Pain, but was informed Mr. Green had discharged his Lodgings that very Morning. 
Your Sensibility may feel, but I can never express the Horror that News gave me 
-- -- despair wou’d certainly have put an 
End to my Life, had not Providence kindly thrown me upon your Acquaintance. Your Invitation, which your Mother So good naturedly and So earnestly joins in, to go and live with you, ’till I get Some Satisfactory Information, is the only thing could have made my Situation Supportable; and yet, my dear Sophia., how am I repaying that Kindness,,? — torturing your good 
Heart with the Sorrows of a Stranger. -- -- - 
What shall I do.? -- -- -- -- O Bella! Bella! 
would to Heaven I had died, ere We undertook this Journey — this fatal Journey! 
Yet why should I repine.? — Tis true 
She is volatile -- -- ’tis true She carries her 
Notions of Love to a romantic Height, to an Height, that often made me angry with her: But, my Sophia I may Surely aver. 
She 
[ 31 ] 
Ssie is strictly virtuous, — pure, tho’flashy as the Lightning of Heaven. 
advise me, my dear Sophia, how I shall conduct myself Sir Ihomas knows not of her being in the Kingdom -- -- -- -- IHAVE nobody 
to inquire after her; and dare not Set 
him upon the Search. -- -- -- -- Delicacy, the 
rigid Decorum of our Sex, forbids it, and you See how the transgreffing these Rules, in one Single Instance, has plunged her into Misfortunes, perhaps beyond all we can imagine; and shot the keenest Arrows of Affliction into the Breast of 
Your 
Const ANTI A.. 
L E T T ER X 
To the Rev. Mr. -- -- -- -- -- -- 
I Am Sure, my honor’d Tutor, your good old Heart will overflow on reading 
the enclosed -- -- -- what must it do then 
were you to behold the amiable person who has told the pathetic Story f 
“Shining ibrd Tears, Hike April Suns in Showers 
Otway. C 4 " At 
[ 32 ] 
At her own Request the enclosed Letter of hers is imparted to you, on my assuring her that you would keep it Secret, and give Suitable Advice how to proceed in So critical a Situation; this 1 promised, being convinced of your Integrity, Discretion and 
Humanity.' -- -- -- -- If ever the Pangs of a 
fellow-creature in Afflidiion have touch’d 
the finer Movements os your Breast -- -- -- - 
if ever you took Delight in easing an overburden’d Heart' -- -- -- O hasten the balmy 
Blessing of Direction to a bewilder’d Stranger, who implores your Assistance -- -- -- -- - 
who has no other Friend of Experience to apply to, 
Th is Night is the first of her removing to lodge with me. On my showing her to her Apartment after Supper, she threw her Arms round my Neck, and, after a pause of Some Minutes, buhl into Tears; I Soon caught the Soft infeoion, and leading, or rather involuntarily carrying her to a Seat, she reclined her Head on my Breast, and press’d my Hand most earnestly in hers. At last I rouz’d all my Spirits to the Effort, and with much ado begg’d of her to calm herself, and let me know anything she thought might conduce to her Relief. To this she answer’d in the most pitiable Accent, and with the most distressful Look. 
-- -- -- Relief, my Sophia! -- -- -- -- -- Can I 
hope for Relief.? -- -- -- Eloped from my 
Country 
[33 ] 
Country -- -- -- from my Friends — unable 
— asham’d to return without the Partner 
of my Flight’ -- -- -- Oh! my dear Sophia 
undone -- -- -- -- -- undone for ever. -- -- Yet 
why should I repine > -- -- -- -- my meeting 
thus fortunately with you, has shot a Gleam of Comfort thro’ my clouded Breast. Continue, my Friend -- -- -- now my only Friend 
indeed -- -- -- -- to assist me with your Kindness 
and your counscl, write to the worthy person you mention’d for Advice, and if 
ever I am able — be assiired -- -- -- I will 
be grateful. 
Finding her Pashons beginning to grow too violent for her to bear, I endeavor’d to allay them, tho’ hardly able to Speak myself. In this I Succeeded; and aster diverting her Attention to indifferent Matters for a little while, she again refum’d the discoursc thus: ’tis proper, my dear benefadlress, to clear up any Doubt that may naturally arise from my Circumstances or Conduct, that 1 shou’d inform you fully and truly 
who 1 am, and -- -- -- indeed you rrray rely 
on what I shall relate. For tho’ my Affection for my unfortunate Cousin Bella made me join in a rash and justly blameable Undertaking, to deceive her Friends and run away from them, yet never more will I partake of Deceit, never, let my Lips utter anything in the least foreign from Truth. To, begin then, 
C f My 
[ 34 ] 
My Grandfather, whose Name was Murphy had a pretty good paternal 'Estate in the South of Ireland where his Ancestors had, for many Generations, Supported the Dignity and hospitality for which old Irish Families are So very remarkable. He came into his Fortune at a time when Health, Youth, Vivacity and a generous open Heart, all combin’d to make him give those inherent Notions of Grandeur their utmost Scope; consequently, his house was the constant resort of pleasure, Plenty and jovial Company. He ran into Such Excesses of this Sort, that, by the time he was one and twenty, he found himsels involv’d Co deeply in Debt as much to encumber his Estate; This was a great Damp to a Sprightly Inclination, in the Midst of gay pursuits, thoughtless of ev’ry thing but how to make the most of thole Enjoyments that smil’d around him. He continued for Some Days in an undetermin’d State, framing various Methods to extricate himself from approaching Difficulties, without fixing on any, when a memorable Event brought him to a resoliuion. 
This was the Arrival of ja/nes the Second in Ireland. That unfortunate King finding his Party very strong in this Kingdom, and most Places of Note in the possession of his Friends, intended, with the Assistance of France., to make one bold Push Sor the Recovery of the Throne he had So 
shamefully 
[ 35 J. ^ 
shamefully abdicated. His Arrival encourag’d many more of the Natives to join him, and among the rest my Grandfather, tho’ I have often heard him declare it was not from any particular Attachment to his person or Government in Preference to the house of Orange., but merely with a view to retrieve his shatter’d Fortune, and urg’d on by that Ambition So natural to young Minds, of acting in the presence of a King, and risingpnto Favour at Court by Merit andi good Services. 
these being the Principles on which my Grandfather Set out, it is pretty evident he was not an idle Spedator in the business, he engag’d in; he was appointed one of the king’s Guards, with promise of a Commission very shortly. His Activity and good Conduct Soon brought him into. Notice, and he receiv’d the Lieutenancy of the Company to which he belong’d. In this Capacity he was bringing back what remain’d of his Men, after a Charge at the Boyne., to the main Body of the Army, when he met the great Duke Schomberg, just cross’d the River to head, the French' Protestants and dim who had been put into great Confusion by General hamiltop%, horse, and their Leader Qailemote. kill’d. hirq.they attack’d and wounded with their, Swords, being on full Gallop; but t’ne Inadvertency of. the Refugees sav’d them 
any 
136 ] 
any farther Trouble, for they, firing witr a Design to rescue the Duke, instead of that, you know, shot him in the Neck, of | which he died immediately, and my Grandfather taking Advantage of the Bustle, got clear off with only thirteen of his Men. 
As I imagined these Particulars of her ' Family would take up Some time in relating, ' I now requested that my Sair Guest wou’d' retire to steep and endeavour to recruit her exhausted Spirits, whilst I Sat down to write to you. tomorrow She is to continue her Story, which I long to know the End of; and you may be assstred of hearing from me every Post till this Matter is brought to Some satisfactory Conclusion. 
I am continually giving you Anecdotes of my own Life, and of the Lives of others, yet there is one History I request in vain 
-- -- might I not be indulged in knowing, 
Some Particulars of a person, that, tho’ a coy Girl, I am neither afraid nor ashamed to avow my Love for. Since, be assured, his with the greatest Pleasure, as well as Sincerity, that 1 So often Subscribe myself 
Your affedlionate 
Sophia Easebv; 
LETTER 
[ 37 ] 
LETTER XI 
To Sir Thomas Trevor, Bart. 
T 
HANK you. Sir Lhomas., for your 
pretty Sophistical Letter -- And So 
you really imagine nothing good can grow on the Mountains os Wicklow \ don’t you recolledi, that Perfius., the Satirist, tells us of fig trees that made their Way thro’ the Rocks of Italy? Tho’ I know you were once an excellent Scholar, yet I should not be So impolite, in the Midst of your gay Career, to recall your Attention to an old learned Author, but that you yourself began the Attack, and quoted Latin first — 
Jesting apart -- -- -1 believe you will Soon 
grow lick of the Town, and be as enamour’d of the Country as I am. The Enjoyments of him whom we commonly style a Man of plea/ure, appear to me like the Snow on a Hill just opposite my Window, which, fair and Iblidto the View, is cold to 
the grasp, and melts into Nothing -- -- -- -- * 
The Humours, the Frolicks, the Excesses f Life are better enjoy’d at a Speculative 
Distance -- -- -- The Charafler of Sir Harry 
Wildair has often diverted me much; but you would not persuadc me to turn Ador to incrcase the amusement. 
So much for the former Part of your Epistle; as jto th latter Part, be assured, 
though[ 
[ ] 
tho’ I never quarrell’d with a Brother in one Place, and Sell in love with his Sister in 
another, yet 1 can Seel — yes, Thomas -- -- -- - 
I Seel for the Man who has -- -- -- -- -- -- - Poor 
Bella! your not hearing from her Surprises me -- -- -- con/lantid.s noi choosing to mention 
her is more Surprising, and, what is worse, more alarming. -- -- -- -- Wear naturally 
inclined to talk of those we love; it must then be Something extraordinary that can occasion this premeditated Silence. I have been employing my Imagination and Sorming many Guesses, but shall not pay you So ill a Compliment as to repeat them. 
I am Sure you have had Address enough to find out the Secret — By this time the cause of it, as to you, is more. lan bare, 
Conjecture- -- -- -- you have occasion to go 
to France, you shall not travel alone. I should not choosc to have you at Such a; Distance from me; e.cn the little Space ( between us, at present, Sometimes make? me uneasy, tho’ at other times, 1 own, it is t kind of Satisfadlion, as it is a Proof that; our Friendship is founded on the noblest Basis; for Connexions of pleasure or Vice ’ are destroyed by the fiightest Separation of i the Parties; but your presence or absence ‘ can make no Alteration in the Regards, f whatever it may do in the happiness, of * 
Charles Easeby; 
LETTER 
, t 39 ] 
LETTER XII 
To miss Easeby. 
T T 7 H Y there it is now, Sophia! you VV Women are unaccountable Creatures. -- Never will ash Advice till it is 
too late Sorus to give any, and then, tho’ you did not at first think us capable of directing you, you are disappointed if we cannot extricate you from all Difficulties. The physician is not Sent for till the Crisis of the Disorder, yet the Fate of the Patient is attributed to him. 
What Pity it is that Good and Evil arc 
So blended in human Life. -- -- -- That the 
innocent Conjianiia shou’d Suffer for the Fault of her giddy precipitate Friend! I 
feel for her; -- -- those that Saw me wou’d 
Say So, -- -- -- but my old Eyes are apt to 
water. 
You See, my Child, why the Wicked are not always punish’d in this Life. Stab the guilty person to the Heart, ’tis true he Smarts for his Trangressions in Death', but the Smiling Infant -- -- the bolbm Companion -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- the affedlionate Friend endure 
the living Pain: I do not mean by this to accuse Bella unheard; Appearances are indeed against her. We know, however, that a dark Shadow pursues the fairest Form, and tho’ my Blood now creeps cold 
fy 
[ 4° ] 
ly thro’ my Veins, I have not yet forgot the Warmth of those Passions, which, when properly directed, are the Glory of human Nature. 
But what can I Say in this Affair.? ■ • - 
I have Seen, my Sophia- -- -- -- -- there is 
nothing So inconsistent that we may not see 
in the course of a long Life. -- -- -- -- -1 have 
Seen the fondnessof a Father force a Child into Splendid Misery, as if Titles of Honour could Supply the Want of endearing Appellations, and Gold cou’d bear Love along with it from Hand to Hand, as it does the Image of a Monarch : And I have Seen a ‘ Child Spurn at the Advice of a fond Father, as if Love, like Death, levcll’d all distindi ons, and the Tempers of the high and the low, the educated and the ignorant, cou’d blend together in this turbulent World, as their Dust will in the Silent Grave. 
Such Proceedings are perverse. -- -- -- But 
Sir Thomas is a Man of Rank and Fortune, and you have not told me what prevented a proper Declaration of their Attachment to each other. However, from the Opinion ' I entertain of Conjiantia (for her Letter and the Character you give her prejudice me much in her Favour) I am convinc’d it can be nothing materially wrong. 
I have written to an old Friend, who is perfectly acquainted in the Town himself, and has Such Connedions in the comme eial Way as to render his Intelligence almost 
universal, 
[ 41 ] 
universal, to make strict Inquiry after Bella, there must be Some Delay; but So much has been made already, that a Small Addition to it can be of no great Importance. 
Your Brother, Sophia, is in a worse Situation than yourself; still oblig’d to remain at the Hermitage os an old parson, whilst his own Seat is occupy’d by, no body can tell who; and things arc likely to continue So for Some time, the Stranger being as dumb and as bad as ever: All proper Remedies have been apply’d without Effect; and I think of going, in the Morning, to request Some Information from his own Mouth, in respedi os his person and Circumstances; that is, provided his illness will by any Means permit it; for I See your Brother is very uneasy, tho’ he endeavours to hide it from me : — What a pity it is that good Nature shou’d guide us into dis tress. 
There is an awful Gloom hangs over our present Situation of Affairs; Something like that which precedes a Thunder Shower on a calm summer’s Day: I feel I don’t 
know what Bodings -- -- -- -- -- -- -- O, my Girl! 
my Affiidlions are this Moment keen on my 
bleeding Memory. — — My Son! -- -- -- -- -- -- my 
Wife I -- -- -- -- But why should I trouble you 
with the Infirmities os an old Man? 
I need not bid you prove a true Friend to the fair Mourner, being convinc’d you 
will 
[ ] 
will be So; and if the Regards of one worn out by Years and Adversity be worth her Acceptance, assure her of mine. You are both remembered in my Prayers : May Providence conduct you Sar Srom the thorny Paths of the World, ' thro’ gentle descents to the Gates of Eternity. 

LETTER Xm. 
To miss Easeby. 
Ask as many Questions as you please, my dear Girl, ’tis good Sor your Health. The Loquacity of the Women, keeps them alive, Says the Samous Phyfiv cian of Berne 'm a Book which I found the! 
other Day on the dodor’s Table. — -•! 
Fine wholesome exercise! But then, myl dear Sister, pray consider it answers no End to put your (eries down in black and white, for you can’t Say, with King David, My Tongue is the Pen of a ready Writer;; tho’ I can answer for its being the Tongue of a ready Speaker. As therefore ihel 
committingj 
* tiltot on the direasci of literary and fedentarj Person[ 
[ ] 
committing them to writing can have no Salutary Effect on your Health, So neither is it likely to tend in the least towstdsgrati sying your Curiosity. 
I have been as inquisitive about my Incognito as you could well be, and have received just as much Satisfadlion as you have done; fo that I really begin to be uneasy. You shall have it in the Same Terms I got it. 
I went to the next Cabin, and ash’d the Owner of it if he had Seen such a person as 
I described -- -- The Man, you know, is a 
Protestant -- -- -- O yes. Says he, please 
your Honour, I did. -- -- -- Can you tell anything 
about him? — No, Master, but he was talking to himsels, and I belicve.he is a jesuit, for they Say there are a Power of them come from Some foreign Countries, where they were turn’d out. troublesome Times, Master! troublelbme Times; pray God the white hoys won’t rise again. They Say there are five and forty People in England that make a great Work there — 
but you know best. Master! -- -- -- -- 1 hope 
they love his Majesty, God bless him; for I am Sure I heard his Reverence lay, he is a Special good Husband and Father, and I am Sure that is the Sign of a good Man, and your Honour knows that a good Man is a good Man. 
I bid Giles a good Day, and went on further; In my Way I met the gardener’s 
Daughter, 
[ 44 ]. 
Daughter, and inquired of her, if she had ^ heard any News? O yes, Sir, my Unde ^ from the County Kilkenny was to See us, ^ and told us of a brave fine Gentleman tha! ^ was found on the Tester of a brave fine ^ i.ady’s Bed; we have therefore concluded * that he has made his Escape, and that’i ‘ he; and I am glad be has fallen into sud ^ Hands; for Sure there cou’d be n!! on the Tester of a Bed. ' 
All the Information I cou’d get, at Several other Places, was of the Same Stamp, being no more than the Peoples own cod jedures, vary’d according to their Natures; Some good, Some bad. Some droll, and Some melancholy, but all to no Purpose Not perceiving any prosped os success thii Way, I return’d to the dodor’s, Seriouilj musing on the Oddity of the whole advea ture, and fully relolv’d to ride amongst that neighbouring Gentlemen the next Day, and make all possible Inquiry; had Sat downio. beg you’d suspend your Curiosity till then, when I was interrupted by a Stranger d uncouth Appearance, coming to the Door to inquire the Way to Eafeville. 
The Servant was directing him; but, ai I over heard him„ I was naturally led to aft him his business there, I am told, Sir, replied he, there is a strange Person, with light color’d Clothes, brown Hair and a very pleasing Countenance, who has lately, found Means to introduce himself into the 
Family 
[ 45 ] 
Family. -- -- There was Such a Man as you 
3efcribe found in one of the adjacent Fields ifieep; the Elegance of his person and in locency of his Behaviour were So striking, shat he was ash’d in, and lies there still in a violent Fever that seiz’d him the Night os his coming; all Endeavours to find out who he is have prov’d ineffedlual, and if you. Sir, can give any Intelligence concerning So uncommon an Appearance, it ■will be very pleasing to the Family where 
he is. -- -- His answer amaz’d me. I can 
give Intelligence, Sir, but fear it will not be pleasing, for, notwithstanding his innor cent Behaviour, he is a 'common Robber, and I have this Moment a Warrant against him for stealing the Clothes he wears, from me; and a Couple of Constables are within 
Call to execute it. -- Sure, Sir, Said I, 
common Humanity will didlate soster Measures, than to throw a person near his End into Gaol, even tho’ he was as bad as you Say; it might, and certainly would finish his Life — — Damn his Life, Sir; if all Rogues were dead, it were the better for honest People; have him I must and will. 
-- -- Have him you must not, nor shall 
not, replied I, for I will enter Bail Sor his Appearance; and spurr’d on, not only by Compassion for the Sick person, but by Indignation at the Brutality of the Fellow, I went directly to the Justice, to make good 
/ 
[ 46 1 
my Assertion, and difmiss’d, for Some Time, the prosecutor and his Constables, greatly dilconcerted. 
How will this turn out? Time only can tell. But I begin to fear Our fine Gentleman deserved neither your Inquiries, nor the Care of your credulous Brother 
Charles Easeby. 

LETTER XIV 
To Charles Easeby, Esq. 
My gay Acquaintance, Ned Green who from a thorough Knowledge of the Beau Monde., and being perfectly adroit in all the Qualifications of a pretty Gentleman, is really a charming Companion, rous’d me this Morning to taka Breakfast at Ranelagh Gardens. This is a new Theatre of amusement for the People of Dublin but like the Ranelagh of 
London in nothing but the Name. -- -- -- -- - 
His a fine Morning, Says he, the Place a Novelty, and it will consequently be crowded with Company. We Soon agreed to go, and in our Way overtook a tall thin young Man, who Saluted Green with a very re spe6tful Bow, the Conclusion of which was 
dire^cd 
[ 47 1 
irefled to me. Green immediately whis er*d, you love Entertainment, and here’s northeast will give it in abundance; an Original, assure you. We join’d without any other 'eremony than that of wishing zgood mor cw. -- -- This is a fine Day -- -- Fine, Sir, 
— Says our new Companion; ’tis bright the Loves that peep thro’ Betty's Eyes, 
bft as her Smiles, and as her Kilfes cheat ng; you know Betty., Mr Green. O yes, vlr. Standijb^ very well, my old landlord’s Daughter. Ah, you arc a Wag, Mr. 'Sreen; your landlord’s Daughter tho’ she ea Coach and Six would fit her as well 
s Some Countesses oswy Acquaintance -- -- 
’ll tell you, Sir, (addressing himself to me) have written a Tragedy wherein she is he Heroine i a Comedy, wherein she isthe 
irincipal Character; an Opera -- -- Operas 
ire all the Taste now. Sir — — wherein ^ he Maid of the Mill is but a Fool to her 
— all excellent in their Kind; for there nothing like drawing from Nature. I 
hen begg’d to know if he was a profess’d 
follower of the muses -- -- No, upon my 
lonor. Sir, Said he, ’lis only for amufe ‘nent: I write Tragedy, Comedy, Epics, pistles. Novels, cc. and 1 correct he press; by the former I acquire Farne, 
? y the latter Bread. -- Drudgery is bet: 
: rewarded now than Merit, because the Create are fonder of increasing their Wealth 
Than showing their Generosity -- -- 1 shine. 
Sir, 
[ 48 ] 
Sir, in Plays, but have not Interest enough 
to get them represented- -- -- -- -- -- and 
Epistles are out of vogue, since Pope died, -- -- and as Sor Novels, not being acquainted with the Characters in Town, 1 am apt to draw Such as nobody knows, consequently nobody buys -- -- -- -- -- however, that 
you may not judge of my Performances by my success, i’ll show you an Eafiern Late which I wrote as a Specimen, having some Notion of publishing a Volume of them by Subscription. He then pull’d out a Paper and read as follows; 
An Eastern T ALE. 
IN the famous City of Balfora dwelled 7- i brahim Ebn Hajfar : Fortune had poured [ her Favours into ms Lap, and the Wife of his bosom had blessed him with two youthful Daughters; their Welfare had taken Possession of his Thoughts; he rose with the Sun to contrive their Felicity, and the Care of them interrupted his midnight Repofe’.; The Report of their Possessions had brought many Suitors to his Gate, and the Beauty • of the damsels made them gaze with Admiration, as^the Eaglet at the Orb of Day. Giafar prostrated himself at the Feet ofj Zuhma \ Nature had cast his Body in a per j verse Mould; his Shoulders rose one above ^ another, ' like the Sides of the City of 
Mec$ut 1 
[ 49 ] 
Mecca \ and his Understanding, Sor want of a proper Exertion, Seemed to have lost its Lustre, it no longer retain’d its original Spleiidor, but was dark, as the holy Stone of the Temple; he obtained not, theresore, Tom the loathing fair one his earnest Request, but she shun’d the detested Embrace, as the Sensitive Plant shrinks from the Touch; ler Father, however, earnestly wish’d the Alliance; he prels’d her, or rather compell’d her, to give him this favourite son-in-law, and vainly imagin’d her dlappiness complete. 
Fatima the younger Daughter, had teen view’d by Hindhad with Looks of affe(stion, and her Eyes, when he approach’d ter. Sparkled with Delight, for Health made uddy his Cheeks, his Limbs were Supple ^ as the Horn of the Rhinoceros, and he was nimble in the Dance as the bounding Antelope. He fed upon the Profits of his Dwn Industry, and walk’d, even in Youth, with the wisdorn of the aged: But here again the Father controlled the Will of one whom he delighted to bless, and forbid the ‘alliance which he could not prevent. In; he bosom of Riches he centred Felicity, lor dreamed She could Smile upon an hum tie State. 
But know, my Son, that we have with it ourselves the Means of calm Enjoyment, ind from the Rectitude of our Hearts must eek Satisfadfion. Our happiness will then D be 
[ 50 ] 
be like the morning Light, which increases till it comes to a persedt Day; whilst the Pleaiures, that court only the outward senses, glitter in our Eyes like the watery Bow in the Heavens, which hardly catches our Attention ere it vanishes Srom our Sight, or else is Sound, upon a nearer Scrutiny, a Coliedtion of Vapours, or a gloomy Miss 
Giafar., now blessed to the utmost of his Wishes, reclin’d in the Silken Pavilions of ease, till he found, by ungrateful Experience, that a State of Inactivity could no more pretend to Enjoyment, than the stagnant Lake to the Purity of the limpid Stream; he then renounced the Commandments of the Prophet, and dissipated his Wealth for the Juice of the Grape; he ran into every Extravagance, and perceived not, in the Midst of Intoxication, that Ziilima and he were reduced to their last Sequin,, 
Hindbad., who was despised for not hav | from a Train of Ancestors, the Means of Subsistence, now traded in the Jewels of Golcondd\ he enjoy’d witii his Fatima the frugal Meal, and reposed from the Cares of the Day on the Breast of his Love. Riches grow upon Industry, as the Acorns on the sturdy Oak, and while Giafah, Wealth melted as the Hail Stones before the Sun, his stow’d into his lap, like the fertile Nile into the bosom of Egypt! He, who had experienced the Want, knew also 
the 
Hi! 
[ 51 ] 
the Value os Money; he relieved the Distresses os the unsortunate Pair, who had formerly excited his Envy; convinced a mistaken Father that wisdom is better than Riches, and by instrudling Giafar in that Commerce, which in the Pride os his lise he had despised, he taught him the Means of accumulating more than he formerly possess’d, while Adversity, who had hover’d in a Cloud over his Head, now enlighten’d his Understanding with Discretion to ue it. 
Standijh had just concluded his Tale when we arrived at the Entrance to pane lagb. I put a Piece os Money into his Hand, and took hold os the Paper, which he readily and politely quitted, without either os us laying a Word; the trifling Sum afforded him a breaksast, and my purchase will, 1 hope, give you Some Entertainment, for, methinks, you are much in need of it in your Solitary Abode. 
On our going into the Gardens I was pleas’d to See a genteel Company, but one, among the many that were walking before me, caught my Attention in a Moment. She had the Air and Shape of my dear cc Bella exactly, and my meeting with Con 
juj Jlaniia a few Days before -- think of it, 
l)(j Eafeby! -- -- this Circumstance, to my 
fond Imagination, enhanced the Probability 
that 1 was not mistaken- -- -- -- -- if they 
D 2 would 
[ 52 ] 
would not have been together 
well, 
you directly suppose that 1 ran up to her — 
not So fast -- -- a prosoiind Reverie fixed 
me to the Spot till she got out of my Sight. I then, indeed, was Solicitous to get up to her, but could not again See her. Your Heart, arm’d as it is with philosophy, cannot Seel the Force of my Disappointment: Nor can. I Say it was lessen’d by Greens telling me, that the Charms which drew me So attentively after them, would have a quite different Ested, were the Lady to turn about and exhibit the Beauties of her Face. 
We now went into the house as the Concert was begun, and were join’d by Lord Langfton., who maintain’d a very long and Sprightly Dialogue with Green on the agreeable Topics of Love and Gallantry. His Lordship Seems a perfect Man of the Town, tho’endow’d with great sense, another good Argument this against your Notions of Life; notwithstanding which, my Mind was too busily engaged on other Matters to permit my taking Part in the Conversation, and I feign’d a fix’d Attention on the Music to avoid it the better. 
Green parted him with a promise to Spend his Christmas at his lordship’s Country Seat: which was not a very pleasing Hearing to me, as I shall thereby lose a most entertaining Friend. 
After 
om 
fps 
i 
la 
[ 53 1 
After all, Charles., I begin to lose my Relish for this unsettled Sort of lise, and believe if Green goes from me at Christmas, you shall See me once more at eafe ville. You know my Connexions with Bella., and the cause of that unfortunate (parrel with her Brother, if then we could get together, and hit upon Some Expedient to satissy the count’s vindixive Honour, we would take another Trip to Paris, and have all Matters fettled. You will here, in all Probability, “be merry, nay, very merry, ” in remarking the strange Contrast between my Brother and me; he is gone to France, and lest the agreeable Sophia, tho’ engaged to him by the consent of all Parties, whilst I would gladly go to the same Place to bring Bella away, without any other consent besides her own; but hold, I beseech you, do not grow too Satirical; I have known you to praise Conjiantia, nay, toast her and make Songs on her, yet, since she came to Ireland, I have not heard a Syllable from you concerning her -- -- -- beware. Love may have 
very extravagant effexs in other People as well as in 
Thomas Trevor. 
Hi 
D 
LETTER 
[ 54 ] 
LETTER XV 
To nurse Callaghan. 
I T H the utmost Impatience, my dear nurse, I read over your long Letter, burr, to my great Surprise and Vexation, Sound it contain’d nothing, absolutely nothing that 1 wanted. — ^ — How cou’d you use your own Sophia So cruelly? It looks as is you and my Brother were in league’to perplex me, for it is impossible but you must have learn’d Some Particulars besore this Time, that might give me Some ease and Satisfaction. 
Is he dumb Is he dead? Did he Sail from the ststjon, that nobody knows him? 
-- -- You praised his pretty Hands and fine 
Eyes on purpose to increase my longing, and yet you never was So kind afterwards as to give me one Word ol Information. I fear there is Ibmething more in the Affair than you wou’d have me know; but I will find all out by Some other Means, since my kind nurse refuses to oblige me. 
Indeed, nurse, i’ll not be pleased with you if you do ii(r Send me Some Intelligence by next Post i if he be the Gentleman you Seem to think, he will nor, cannot refuse to answer Such reasonable Questions as may 
be 
[ 55 1 
be put to him in his Intervals os ease, for you Say he is Sometimes better and Sometimes worse. 1 wish you Joy of your Watch; and hoping you will lake proper Care of your poor Patient who gave it, and also to answer this, as So osten desired, I make but one Request more, and that is, that you will not let my Brother near the house. 
LETTER XVI 
To the Rev. Mr. 
WITHOUT Sarther Preface, my reverend Friend, I shall give you the Remainder of the distress’d con/iantid.s Story, just as she continued it this Morning after breaksast. 
The unfuccesssul Attempt at the Boynej recall’d all the Coward in James's Heart; and after the Battle was over, which hs gallantly stood to look at from a neighbouring Eminence, he readily took the Advice of Count Lauzun and made a quick Retreat. His Demeanour throughout the whole of that important Adfion betray’d a very great weakness, and was So much the reverse of King William's., that the iri(h D 4 coil’d 
[ 56 ] 
coil’d not help being a little chagrin’d; my grandsather’s Difiike of it was (b strong, that it Sorced from him that memorable consession, in which he Spoke the Sentiments of most of the better Sort. “That if the English changed Kings with “them they wou’d fight the Battle over “again.” 
tyrconneu highly pleas’d with my grandfather’s Conduct, prevail’d on him to attend the unfortunate King into France \ promising all his Interest to procure him ample Amends for the forfeited Fortune he should leave behind. They made all possible Speed to jvaterford.^ and from thence into Frances where their Residence was fix’d at St. Germains. Here Lyrconnel made good his Promise to Mr. Murphy first by getting him appointed to a profitable domestic Post in James's Household, and afterwards to be a Captain in the French Troops. 
From the Income of these two Places he was enabled to live equal to his Soirit, and bein" principles and Constitution quite gallant, and agreeable to that Sprightly People, his engaging address won the Favour and Friendship of many noble and rich Families in which he became acquainted: No Party of pleasure cou’d be alive unless the degage Monsieur Murphy was present. In short, he became universally 
beloved, 
[ 57 ] 
beloved, and in his thirty third Year mar** ‘ried a young marchioness who was in Possession of a large Estate by the Death of her former Husband; loon after which he was honor’d with the Title of Count Murphy and the Command of a Regiment of horse. 
1 have hitherto been Somewhat particu * lar, in order to show you the true Series of Events which brought my Grandfather to. Settle in France. Many a lime have I heard him tell them over with Regret,, when Sorrows and Misfortunes began to bear hard upon him : But shall now pass by Some intervening Years of little Moment, in order to bring on a most interesting Relation, which 1 never heard without Tears,, nor can I ever think on it without heart issuing Sighs. 
Count Murphy fully blessed with conjugal Felicity, a competent Fortune, and a contented Mind, was now esteem’d the. happiest Man in France: He had Several Children, but none arrived to Maturity except my Mother and my Uncle, who came into the World together; happy had, they been also, were they laid in the peaceful Dust with their infant Brethren, at least I may Say So of my Mother; but Providence design’d her for a Monument of Astlidion, and that I shou’d nov, rend my, Sophias.. Heart wither distressful History.. 
D t; The. 
t 5«] 
The old Count was in his fisty third Year when his Son and Daughter were born, and you may judge they were a grate sul present to a Man who had buried all the Offspring os his younger Years; they were by Nature amiable, and he Spared neither Pains nor Expense to give them complete Education. aster Ibme time the Service os the Kingdom required that his Regiment shou’d go abroad on Duty, and tho’ very old himsels, yet being of a Sound Constitution, and poffess’d of great Spirits, he accompany’d it to Gertnany.^ and there performed the Part os an able and experienced Soldier. He was often commanded out on Skirmishes, and was particularly engaged in the Battle of Dettingen. Here it was, that among the wounded which the ally’d Army left behind them, there happen’d to be a young hdjh Officer. My grandfather’s Love for his native Country was So great, that he perfectly idoliz’d everything that came from it, and hearing of this Irish gentleman’s Misfortune, he gave the stridtest Orders for proper Care to be taken of his Wounds, and all necessary Provision made for his Accommodation. His Wounds, indeed, seemed likely to — -- -- - 
O joyful, joyful, I must break off here. Bellas Maid is just arrived with a Letter from her mistress to Conjiantia. She will not tell any Circumstances of 
their 
[ 59 1 
their Elopement, but says Bella will give full satissadtion when they meet. The good creature’s Countenance is clear’d up, and we aie all as happy — — I wish 
you and my Brother were with us. -- -- -- -- -- -- 
She is preparing to Set ofif immediately after Dinner, to See Bella., whose Letter requests she may do fb immediately, as she is unwell in Some Part of the County pvicklow, to which the Maid is to show her the Way, and has hired a Post chaise, of which her Brother is Driver, to convey them down. They are just Set off attended by one of our Servants. -- -- -- -- -- -- 1 
need not wish you Joy of this lucky Incident. I know you will exult more if posh ble than 
Your 
Sophia. 
LETTER XVII 
To miss Easeby. 
WHY will Sophia Solicit a Detail of many sorrov^sf — W hy must I live over again, in Imagination, a long Life,, ^bich 1 could hardly look upon as a Bless 
inc? 
[ 6o ] 
ing, were it not that I have an humble Confidence it will lead me to a better. -- -- - 
There are, I think, but two Sources of Curiosity, the one is Pride, or an Ambition os knowing more than other People; the Second, a laudable Desire of learning what may be useful to ourselves' or the 
rest of Mankind -- -- -- -- -1 find, my Child, 
you are strongly tindlured with this Passion, I hope it does not take its Rise from the former cause; and if it proceeds from the latter, in this Request I fear it will lose its 
Aim -- -- -- -- but you shall be gratified — 
these old transadions are recent in my 
Memory -- -- -- -- I wish, with lhemijloclesy to 
purchase the Art of forgetfulness; but 1 cannot; and Writing may be an amusement— — be the Luxury of Woe. 
Just as I was capable of knowing my 
loss -- -- -- just as 1 had sense enough to feel 
for myself and others, your Phiend was left fatherless and his Mother a Widow, with a Sum that her exad Economy only could have rendered a decent Competency. She continued me, however, in my course of Education, frequently desiring me, like Solomon to wish for wisdom, and Riches would, in all Probability, ensue. 
My Mother was particularly partial to the Church, and I cannot but Say it was the very Profession I would have chosen for myself. Let me be honest and own the Truth; I had at that time a great Opi i nion 
[ 6i ] 
iiion of my Parts -- -- -- ^ thought I should 
really be of Service to the Cause of Religion, and did not doubt but my Merit would render me conspicuous; but 1 found it was not So easy a Tash, as I fondly imagined, to reclaim the Sinner, or even give Fervour to the lukewarm Christjan; and as to 
ray deserrs, were they as. great -- -- -- -- -- - 
but LOUI'H is a Bishop, and I Sorbear. 
By the Interest of a young Nobleman with whom I got acquainted in the College, who was a well-bred, a cheerful, a Sensible Companion, I was put into Orders as Soon as 1 had taken my master’s Degree. Immediately after, my Mother choosing to remove from the Country Part of England to reside in London I there got a temporary Cure; Small is the Stipend of the inferior Clergy, but it was Some little Addition to our Income, and we lived, if not perfeduy Satisfied, at least without repining. When a Recollecstion of her past happi ness in the conjugal State brought a Tear into her Eye, I tenderly wiped it off, while a Sympathising one in my own compensated for the Injury I had done to the Memory of the deceased. Frcm these pathetic Conversations I imbibed the highest Idea of matrimonial Felicity, and was ripe for an Incident which Soon afterwards happen’d. 
A person of Some Eminence in Trade, being Suddenly attack’d with a dangerous 
Disorder, 
[ €2 ] I 
Disorder, I was summon’d to attend him, and administer Such consolations as are proper to ease us on the Bed of Sickness.. Sonify a languid Mind against the Approach of Death. In Such an awful Scene it must have been impossible to divest myself of a commiserating Pang, and cooly plan Schemes of future happiness in a transitory World; and yet here it was that the important Period of my Life began. Pity is akin to Love, and while 1 was anxious to Sooth a fair Mourner — to appease the Grief of an only Child, which, tho’ St • was excessive, the Soft Impression stole to my Heart, and I cherish’d a Passion | that I was not aware of — Oh, Sophia! who could resist the sweetncss — the Innocence of her Look Wonder not at the Warmth; of a person now in his grand Climadterick; i methinks even these dim Eyes behold her! still, her Head reclin’d upon her Hand, | and her blue Eyes snffused with Tears, Affedlation and Pride had not the least Spark in her Composition, and she had an | Honesty in declaring her Sentiments, a perseverance in her resolutions, that manifested a peculiar Simplicity of Manners and Integrity of Heart. The uncommon Attention I paid her made an Impression on us both, and I had the happiness to find, that when I fixed my Affections on the most lovely of her Sex, I had alsh engaged hers in Return -- -- -- -- -- Who knows 
she 
[ 63 ] 
Ithe Felicity of mutual Love? -- -- -- -- what 
ipcn -- -- -- what Eloquence can describe it? 
excuse, my Child, these little Sallies 
the full Heart will vent itself ^ -- Do not 
show this however -- -- -- -- -- unseeufig Fools 
would Scoff at an old Man -- -- -- -- and yet — 
why let them. It is their Want of Sentiment that keeps them free. those who were born blind could never see it; but may not we, when the Sun is Set, talk oshis meridian Lustre? Neither am I afraid of exciting your Ideas on the Subjedf; the giving you ajust Notion of it will teach you to despise the Flatterer, who repeats a Parcel of Words like a Parrot, without knowing their Meaning, at least without their making an imprelsion on himself. 
But to proceed; not ’till after the Father was perfedfly recover’d, did his Daughter or your Friend perceive that their Affections were in the least engaged, I had attributed my tenderness for her to an inferior Motive, and all her Soft Passions being raised at once, she was unconscious with what Violence they had exerted them selves. Then, indeed, it was time to think, and happy are those who go on for a time inadvertently, if, when they think, they find not reason to reproach themselves. 1 cannot Say 1 had — no base or unworthy Motive had influenced my Choice, she had every'qualification that seem’d requisite for a Wife, nay, she had many Accomplishments 
f 64 ] 
«ompllshments that were not absolutely nc ceffary to form a good one. She Sung agreeably, was beauteous without Seeming to know it, and learned without female Pedantry. To the wise Ones, indeed, I might appear to have done amiss, for if the old Gentleman could give her a fot tune, it was to be presumed he would require a Settlement; and if he could not, I was not in a Condition to take her without one. However, disguise was a Stranger to my Heart, and I determined to unveil it to him the first Opportunity: I did So, and he heard me without the least Surprise, told me it was no more than he had suspecled. Young People would take Such Whims -- -- -- -- that 1 had his consent if I 
J 
had the Ready., but that be was a trading 
Man, and could not lance down -- -- -- If not, 
why 1 was in fortune’s Way -- -- -- the Girl 
was young -- -- -- and, mayhap, if I danced 
Attendance, Some overgrown church man would give me wherewith to be as lazy as himself. But don’t be in a Hurry, Boy, Said he, don’t be in a Hurry, and God bless you both -- -- -- come and See the Wench 
however, don’t let her be pining for you, and with these Words he walk’d gravely into the counting-house, while I flew to the charming Girl to inform her of what had past. We Soon agreed that our Union should be delayed; what made me the more easily Submit to this, was the decline 
ing 
[ 65 ] 
ng State of Health into which my poor mo her had fallen; and tho’ this very circum ance rendered a Wife more necessary to my happiness, yet Decency permitted not my Seeking one; Nor, however little the young Men of thesc Times may regard their aged Mothers, had I Spirits or Inclination, while I Saw her in Such a languid Way, to carry on the pursuit further than in now and then seeking consolation from her, whose Grief I had formerly endeavour’d to appcase. Soon after my Mother died, ' and I had, with Tears of filial Duty, consign’d her dear Remains to the peaceful Grave. I was astonish’d to find that the Father, who had formerly encouraged rr.y adufcites, had order’d me to be forbid an Entrance into his house, and caused the lovely Object of my Wishes to be confined to her Chamber. In Such an unexpedled Turn of Affairs, pidiure to yourself the distress 1 must have Suffered, not only upon my own Account, but upon hers whose Peace, whose Life, was dearer to me than my own, and both of which I had rea(on then to suppose I was the Instrument dcs tined to destroy. I wrote to her immediately, and got a person to deliver the Letter; it began with Some passionate Effusions on 
what she felt for me -- -- -- I then inform’d 
her I heard a wealthy person had made Proposals for her, and^begg’d the generous Maid not to decline his Offers upon a 
Pundtilio 
[ 66 ] 
pan€\ilio of Honour. I loid her Happiness 
might await her in Some other Station -- -- -- -- 
those who Saw her with my Eyes would study to reward her intrinsick Merit — 
I knew she would be grateful, and grati i 
f 
tilde in that tender beast might turn to 
Love -- -- -- -- -- if she thought So, begg’d stej 
would leave me to mv Fate -- -- -- -- -- -- thatl 
would not even ash her Pity -- -- -- -- She had 
always my ardent Prayers for her Fclicitj. -- -- She should have them still -- -- -- -- and 
if Such Virtues as hers were too great Blessing for me -- -- -- -- if 1 was not to enjoy 
them in the amiable Object of my Desires, as 1 could nor but continually reissed upon them, So I would strive to transplant them into my own bosom -- -- -- -- that if we could 
not meet now, we might meet hereafter; at the same time, however, I offer’d her my Hand, told her, that as she once had her father’s consent, and I had done nothing to forseit his Approbation, 1 could not but think she was at perfedi Liberty to accept it, is she preferr’d an humble Fortune with me to an opulent one with any other Man. To this I received a verbal answer — 
that she could not think os marrying with 
out her father’s Knowledge- -- -- -- she 
'had positively refused the last proposal, which exasperated her Father So much, he was determined to Send her to her Uncle 
who lived in Tork. -- -- that she was to Set 
off 
[ 6? ] 
)ff in a few days, which accordingly hap len’d. 
Oh! that Parents and Guardians would consider, that the Passions in a youthsul Mind are like Vines in a rich Soil, which the ikilsul Gardener prunes with a gentle Hand, when they become luxuriant; but he tears them not up by the Roots, lest he destroy the promised Vintage, and dash to the Ground that Cup of Delight which he hopes in time to quaff as the Reward os his tender Care, 
Even there, tho’ it was a Place I had never been at, 1 found Means to keep up a Correspondence with her. Nothing remarkable happen’d on either Side for Some time; at last I received insormation that a young Nobleman was paying his Addresses to her. Titles and Wealth, tho’ with a Fool or a Coxcomb, shine glorioussy in a female Eye.. I cannot Say I dreaded they would do So in hers. I had reason to be assured of the contrary; yet I Set off immediately for the Place of her Residence, and found Means to be introduced to the Family, where I learned that her Father and Uncle were positively Set upon the Match, which she modestly but steadily remonstrated against. 
Soon after I had an Opportunity of Seeing my noble Rival. Judge my Surprise, when, in that Character, I beheld my old 
Friend 
[ 68 ], 
Friend who had first introduced me into the World. I warmly expostulated with him on the Occasion. He frankly acknowledged that he liked the Girl — 
that she told him her Affections were engaged; however, that he had but a light, Opinion of the Stability of a woman’s Affections, and was not used to Disappointments -- -- -- thatif he had known in whole 
Way he stood, he would not have push’d, the Affair So far, but that he hoped to make' me ample recompense. This he accordingly did, by not only, on the Instant, relinquishing his Claim, but by using his Influence with her Relations, and in a short time our Union was completed. What! you will Say, without any Addition to youi Circumstances.? Why not, Sophia? All the Sons and Daughters of Adam must Suffer in this World, Some Way or other; and if Providence design’d Penury for our Trial, why shrink from it with Horror, to choose, perhaps, a Severer in its Place.? ex i perience proves that Prosperity is Sometimes' more dangerous than Adversity; we find the warm Sun often Scorches the Land into barrenness, while the cold Snow renders it fertile; beside “I maintain it, ” Says Roujjeau^ “that were all the Misfortunes “imaginable to fall upon the devoted “Heads of a loving Couple, they would “enjoy far greater happiness in mixing ^ their Tears, than they would have tasted 
“it 
[ % ] 
in the highest Prosperity, had it been poiscn’d by a disunion of Hearts, ” 
The Birth of a Son enhanced our mutual telicity. Sure it was a Felicity 1 ought to 3e thanksul for, tho’ it was very short. 
he Traveller is grateful for an hasty re »ast, tho’ the Warmth and Pleasures of he hospitable Dome render him, perhaps, note exquisitely Sensible of the Cold and solitude of his remaining Journey. 
But I hurry on to the last Scene, fearful hat my Spirits will not bear me through. 
Of a summer’s Evening, after a gentle Valk, my Wife Sitting in my Lap and my rms folded round her Waist, or little oy, as yet Scarce able to stand, lupport ng himself at her Knee and Smiling in her ace, while I at once indulged all the ten lerness of an Husband and a Father: Purely, Said she, sincere Love gives us the 
ruest Foretaste of future happiness' -- -- - 
he plcasure I feel this Moment -- -- -- Good 
od, a Suddeh Pang -- -- -- ’tis over, cried I, 
my Love! -- -- -- 1 hope ’twas momentary — 
your fond Heart has been too much agitated; Scarce had I uttered ihese Words when, summon’d from the sincerest Rapture in this World to the ecstatic bliss of another, leaning across my Breast and plac ng her cold Cheek to mine, she gave an icavy Sigh and expired. — Oh my Wife My Son! 

Running 
^ 170 ] 
Running in, my Sophia, with my Head full of News to tell you about our Incognito— — found the poor Doctor at his Ddk — The little black Cap which he wears on the Crown of his Head had fallen off, his few grey Hairs were Scattered about his Face, and the Tears trickled down the Furrows of his Cheeks. I afk’d him what was the Matter; read that. Said he, pointing to the Letter, and forward it. He then retired to the other End of the Room, and flung himself on his Couch. How could you press him for a Story which must shake his tottering Frame, and which he never will be able to finish.? ’twas in Hopes of dissipating his Melancholy that his noble Friend procured him his Preferment in Ireland, by which we have the happiness of knowing him; for he thought the Change of Air and Place would contribute to his Relief; but the deplorable Fate of his Son was Such a Stroke, I have heard him say, as could not be recovered, 
I know not the Particulars, but this 1 hope will Silence your curiosity, thou Sad Inquisitive I 1 hasten to comfort the old Man. 
1 
Adieu — Adieu. 
Charles Easeby. 
LETTER 
[ V ] 
LETTER xviir. 
To Sir Thomas Trevor, Bart. 
rya HERE is not in the whole Scale I of Beings, my Lrevor, a more incon istenr Creature than Man; his Principles and Practice are perpetually at War with ach other, and his Actions almost a Series of contradi(ffions to his Judgement. 
I observe (let me Say with pleasure) that tho’ the Fog of Dublin generally obscures your genuine Sentiments at the Beginning of your Letters, yet towards the Conclusion it is blown over, and you appear, at least to the partial Eye of Friendship, a Second Lajehy., as fond of Tranquillity and philosophic ease as your charlesy provided they could be Separated from the dreary Shades of Retirement, and enjoy’d in a Crowd. — Such Wonders Love can do! and I am of Opinion that your next Step will be to Seek them even among the Mountains them selves. It is this which makes your Correspondence a double Satisfaction; first comes the mighty Bustle os a Man os Plea sure, kept up, as it were, on purpose for the Second, a thoughtful. Serious, longing Lover, to Screen his elegant Feelings from the inspedion of the polite and fashionable Part of the World, who, entre nous have no Conception of any Such thing. 
But 
1 
[ 72 ] 
But why should my Friend endeavour to } conceal Ins Heart Srom me? i am Sure it harbours no Thought you need be ashamed to avow : Your Behaviour to Bella has ever been stribtly honourable; nay, by watching carefully the Combat between the Gaieties os the Town and your Affection for her, I find she has now got a complete Victory over them. And since the whole tranlac tion will bear the stridest Scrutiny, what can there be to Sear from this out’agious Count, whose Fury was only the Effect of a Sudden Gust of Passion, that arose on your trifling Quarrel with him,? You know him to be extremely choleric, and the Rage of iuch Persons usually Subsides with the (ame Speed it rises: I do not doubt, theresore, but the Matter might have been happily Settled long ago, had not your indispenfable business called you So precipitately home from Paris. 
Life, my dear Sir Thomas was dessgn’d, by the Great Author of it, a State of crofs es and Troubles. Sorrows and Vexations; This is daily experienced in every Degree of it, from the King tp the Cottager, The very best of Men find it So; but their Griefs commonly arise from the Vices of others; ' and there is this very remarkable Difference 'between the Enjoyments of a good Man and a bad Man even in the present World,; the former has a constant Source of Comfort 

[ 73 1 
fort within himsclf, which no earthly Accident can destroy, and his Sorrows are chiefly owing to the wickedness of uhosc around him; whilst the latter is obliged to fly abroad to find a momentary ease, and Seek Shelter from the Clamours of his own Breast, in the louder Peals of Riot and con fusion of Company. 
J am now Seated in the parson’s Snug little Parlour, my Dog asleep at my Foot, a clear Turf Fire burning briskly before me, and a well chosen Library close by. Is there anything more you will Say, that Charles can wish for? — There is! — 1 could wish to get a Satisfadtory Account of an unfortunate Adventurer, that 1 have taken unwarily into my house, whose Circumstances, I suppose, Sophia has, before this, informed you of. 
And is there nought else? Are a young man’s Wishes bounded within So Small a compass? Has he no Desires beside ihose os acccommodating the unsortunate and the Forlorn? — I have ashed these Questions for you and will answer them Sor myself— — have toasted Constantia and made her the subjedi of my Song, and what is more Surprising, I intend being in Town very shortly to See, and converse with that agreeable Lady — but Patience, Trevor! — my chief business is on your Account, to try if by any Means the Situation of Bella can be found out. She must know it, but E you 
[ 7+ ] 
you appear too wild to be trusted with the Secret: I shall also have the pleasurc of Seeing you without bringing you out of your Element, which, knowing you would leave it reludanily, is a cogent reason with 
Charles Easeby. 
1 
P. S. For all your Jokes against your; Brother Henry., I not only approved of his going abroad before Marriage, but also ad vised him to it; both he and Sophia are f young enough to begin the World; and a careful Review of it by a sensible Peision, Such as Henry is, (not meaning a Compk ment to his Brother) affords the greatest Entertainment, as well as Instrudion, to a. young Mind, and gives a Relish to the f fixed Enjoyments of an Home, which is^’ the result of'experienced Ressedions on Men and Things. 

LETTER XIX To miss Easeby. 
Alack a Day! Mrs. Sophy., I havcj frightful News to tell you now indeed. My Dear, did you ever think your I honest old Nurse would be taken up fora 
Robber 
[ 75 ] 
Robber or a highwayman?? here am I Sworn against by a Fellow, Oh a terrible Villain he must be, though he was dressed as fine as a little King. — But I’H tell you the whole Story, my Love: IS my Troubles will let me. 
First of all, may a Plague, and a Murrain, and all my disorders and Griefs light upon that deceitful Rogue, that 1 have been taking So much Pains about. 1 wonder what could put it in my Head that he was a distressed Gentleman. He has brought me into a fine Scrape, and all upon your Account; for 1 would not have taken Notice of Such a strolling Cheat and Thief only for you. — Well, there is no Help for it; ’twas your good Nature to be Sure that made you desire me to take Care of him, and find out who he was, and the more ungrateful he, to have my virtuous Name brought into Question, about the Country, 
on Account of his Thievery. By -- -- (God 
pardon me I had like to Swear, I am So vexed) but if ever I live to get over this Fright, I will Swear my Life against him. I am in Such a Flurry, it has brought on the old Pain in my Head, and the Dilbrder in my Stomach, and if it was not for a little Drop of burnt Brandy that I am obliged to take while I am writing this, I should certainly saint. 
But as I was Saying, to tell you how it happened. I came to Arkkw this Evening E 2 to 
t 76 ] 
•to See my Gossip Me. Daniel and his Wife, and buy two or three little Things I wanted, and while I was sitting in the Shop, they were telling me of a mighty fine Gentleman from Soreign Countries, that came into the Town and stayed to Dinner, and was just then galloped away towards Dublin; but that Some Gentlemen, who came with him, stayed behind, and they believed he must be Some great Lord, the whole Company was dressed So grand. — O Says Jack Me Danief here’s one of them coming here. — Then in bowled a fine Man, my Dear, with as much Gold on him, and tossed out, as 1 Said before, like a little King: He ashed Jack a great many Questions about the Country, while Mrs. Me. Dantd and I Sell into dilcouise together. — I am told. Says Mrs. Me. Danief that that Sick Man you’ve got at home is a Robber, and I wonder that Squire Eafehy would let him stay in the house,. — A Robber, Says 1, with Indignatbn, not he, indeed; he’s a Sweet pretty gentlemanlike Man as ever you laid Eyes on, -- For all that. Says ssie, there was a Man here Yesterday that Swore Examinations against him for stealing Clothes, but the Squire went Bail for him. — God bless me, Says I, that’s impossible, for I never heard one Word osit; bcsides, See what a fine Watch he gave me t’other Day; with that, 1 pulled out my Watch gnd showed it to her. that’s a very prettj 
Watch, 
[ 77 ] 
'Watch, Said the strange Man in gold lace, * be So kind as to let me look at it, Madam. 
I suppose it cost you a good Price. Yes, Sir, Says I, wanting to look big for the Honour os my own Country. — Then, Madam, Said he, I Sear it will cost you dearer yet. I just Saw a Gentleman ride thro’ the Town, who, I am told, is one osthe Magistrates of this County, I must have the Honour of handing you into his presence— — bless' me, Sir, Says 1, what do you mean.? Be not alarmed, Madam, Says he; if you can prove how you came by this Watch you need not fear anything, but before the Justice you must come. — Sir, Says I, 1 would have you to know that L am Squire Eafeby\ nurse, and neither afraid, nor ashamed to go before any Man: — You know I have the Spirit of a Callaghan miss Sophy., and while my Blood was up, I told him I would not go one Foot with him, and insisted on having my. lawfully begotten Watch returned; Away he walked, and I thought no more about it, as believing he only wanted to make a Joke for himself, thinking he had met with a Soft Country Woman; when by and by down he comes again, my Dear, 
with a Warrant Signed by Justice C -- -- s; 
Faith now 1 began to be frightened Sure enough; howsomever, as I knew Justice 
G -- -- s since he was no bigger than a Turf, 
and he knew me, I went up with a good' Heart, bringing Jack along with me, tel e 3 ling, 
[ 7* ] 
ling him I would prove my Honesty as clear as the Sun, and make that fine Feb low Sup Sorrow for this Affront. — All the Eyes in the Town were upon me, my Dear, while I was going up \.ol6urvys^ where his Worship was drinking with Some Gentlemen, and 1 could not help crying to hear them making Rematks upon your poor old honest Nurse, that never deserved the ill-will of a Dog, let alone of a Christian. 
Is it possible, Judy., Says the Justice, that you are the Person this Gentleman has Sworn against, — 1 don’t know, an’ please your Worship, Says I, what he could Swear against me for; that Watch, I am Sure, I came by honestly, and I believe your Worship, and the People of the Country, can vouch for me and my Family living in Credit and Repute Time out of Mind. — Sir, Says he, turning to the Stranger, I can answer for this woman’s Honesty (a bles sing on his honest Face for saying So; God knows ’tis true) but tell me, Judy., where you got this Watch.? — Sir, Says I, it was given to me by a Gentleman that is at our house, he is very Sick or 1 would Send Sor him, tho’ if he w’as here he could not Speak, nor would you be a Bit the wiser by going to him. His Worship now called his Servant and Sent him ost Sor Mr. Charles telling the gold lace Fellow, that he would take Care and have the Matter cleared up. 
I was 
T 
[ 79 ] 
1 was now desired to Sit down and take a glass, but telling them 1 wanted to go out and write a Letter, he Said I was in Custody, and must be attended by a Constable; with that I Screeched out and Sell on my Knees, begging his Worship would not venture me in the Hands or Such Fellows, for 1 was harmless as a newborn Babe. He told me he could nbt help if, the law required it, and So, my Dear, I was Soreed to go out in the Clutches of an ill looking Fellow, who is an hundred Tirbes more like a watch stealer than your old nurse. O! don’t you pity me.? would it not vex anybody to be kept in Custody and they innocent? and if Mr. Charles should not be at Home, ’tis ten to one but I must go to ivicklow Gaol. — Ah! my Love, wlio’d ever think 1 could come to this! I shall always be afraid of a fine Gentleman hereafter, especially, if he be very mannerly, for they have been the cause of all my Trouble. 
. With a glass to your good Health, and wishing you may never live to come into the Hands of a Bailiff innocently, as I have done, coikludes 
Your loving. 
Honest and distressed nurse, 
J. Callaghan. 
E 
LETTER 
[ 8o ] 
LETTER XX 
To Charles Easeby, esq. 
* t 
I Intend, Dear Charles to publish your last Letter to me, in one of the public Papers, under the Title of a Letter from a Philosopher in^the Countny to his Friend in Town, and .an, A>^swer shall immediately follow it, in. which all your Remarks shall be applied to yourself, and stand abundantly verified. Or if it were possible to find out in what Part of the City Mr. Standijh^ the famous eastern tale Monger, has fixed his exalted residence, I would climb any Height to engage him to write, Eafeby in Town., or the, Philosopher, in Love., a new comic Opera, .to begin with the following Ode: 
all conquering Love, whose universal Sway The Sage and Savage equally obey; : 
Whose .taws intix’cj, no Rebelyan disown, 
Since ev’ry tsiart is thy imperial 'I'hrone. 
Ijfed thy gentle influebce ileal Soft thrilling thro’ my Breast: 
Well pleas’d thy nsing Empire feel, 
And stand a Slave confefs’d. 
Not all the fragrant Breath of Spring, When Zephyr fans the flow’rs; 
Not all the Notes gay Warblers Sing, 
To welcome vernal show’rs: 
Not 
w 
s. 
[ 8> ] 
Not all the Beauties Wicklow Wilds difplaj Can keep me here, when you command away. Adieu, ye flow’ry Vales!" 
Ye furry Hiils, adieu I Love, sacred Love prevails. 
And parts me.now horn you. 
Your very disinterested kindness in pro -- posing a Visit to an amiable young Lady, Sor no other reason too, but to inquire coolly after another young Lady, and that to oblige another young Man, a Friend; and your coming out of your own Element to prevent my quitting mine, are wonderful pretty Screens, but, alas! they are only Gauze ones, behind which you cunningly think to hide an enamoured Heart; Ah! Charles., Charles! ‘ Man is a very incon ‘ Sistent Creature.’ And yet what a Pity it is, that those who are So very expert at observing. this in the progress of their Fkiends pursuits, should be quite mistaken in themselves, and let their own Hearts deceive them. 
Why, Man, I could Swear you were in Love, the very Moment 1 read your melancholy Reflection upon Life; it is brought in lo very pathetically, and in a Manner detached from, and unconnedled with, the rest of your Letter, that it Seems as if you had withdrawn even from that Retreat, to • which you before withdrew from the World, into Some more Solitary Corner, with a heart ^ E 5. full. 
[ 82 ] 
full of Love, and a Head Sull os Despair, to make it. 
The Effects of Love are wonderfully diversified; It renders Some People Serious and Sentimental; others volatile and thought less. From this and a little Knowledge of your Constitution, I can with certainty pronounce your Motive for coming to Town, to be chiefly Love for Conjiantia, for I will allow Friendship to have a Share in the Journey. And now I have laid your own Heart, as well as mine, open to your View, let me congratulate you, on the near Prospect you have os Seeing her whom I know you admire. Let us leave off endeavouring to hide our Sentiments from each other: Bella has long usurped the major Part of my Affections, and left only the lesser, though not the least Sincere, for you; and Conjiantia has performed the Same kind Office for me in your Breast. Thus paired in Love, as well as Friendship, I shall be So glad to See you, that you may positively expect, at your Arrival, to drown the Fatigues of your Journey in a Bottle extraordinary. 
I have a thousand Things to Say to you, but shall postpone Particulars till I See ’'you, and at present only Turn them all up in thi^ Wish; that you may have a happy Meeting with Conjiantia., and your Inquiries after Bella prove more fortunate than hose of 
► Thomas Trevor. 
LET 
1 
[■ §3 ] 
letter XXI 
To the Rev. Mr. 
Must L my dear Sir, be for ever torturing your good old Heart with melancholy Epistles! — but how can 1 avoid it? My Mother and 1 were Solacing ourselves with the pleasing Triumphs of poor conjlantid.s Heart, on the unexpetsted Tidings she received of her Cousin, and the joyful Meeting they must have aster So dis mal a Separauon, when sr Thomas came in to Spend the Evening with us, and added not a little to our Spirits and Entertainment. 
In the Midst of our good humour a hasty Rap was given at the Door, and the Servant came in to tell me that a dying Woman wanted to Speak to me with all Speed. Not knowing what to think of this odd Request, 1 begged that Sir Thomas would go out and See what was the Matter. He did So, and found a Wretch almost at death’s Door indeed, and piteoussy bcseeching for Admittance to me: He immediately called the Servants, and helped them to remove her into the back Parlour. — You can hardly imagine what a Situation I was in during this transadion, when even my mother’s steady Countenance was fallen with Amazement, 
[ «4 ] 
T 
ment. — Sir Thomai came trembling into the Room, and desired I might make Haste, or the poor Creatu''c would certainly expire before shecou’d explain herself 
I stew to her, and, on my Entrance, re colledting her to be the Woman who had come for Conjiantia and departed with her, I cried out, Conjiantia^ killed, and gave a Shriek that alarmed my Mother and Sir Thomas., who came running in, and were just Time enough to prevent my falling, by Supporting me in their Arms. — Some Minutes pasted before I recovered; and as both the Woman, and the Cause of my Fright, were equally unknown to them, their Uneasiness was beyond Description. 
The Servants had laid a Bed on the Floor, on which they now placed this unfortunate Woman, whilst I gave Some incoherent Hints to allay the Terror that was strongly imprinted in my mother’s Countenance, tho’ our Attention was every Moment called off towards the Bed, whence issued the most heart piercing Groans that ever burst frprn an awakened Sinner. — After a little irhpatient Cessation, exerting all her Strength, she exclaimed, ‘ Pity me, ‘ — Oh! pity me; and hear me while I am ‘ yet able to Speak. — Conjiantia., Madam, * is not dead — but, alas! she is worse — in ‘ the Power of a Russian. — Oh! Greeny ‘ Green, thou hast been my Destruction! — \ A heavy Load of Guilt hangs on my Soul, 
‘ and 
[ «5 ] 
and a very horrible Gloom full of dreadful Apparitions (urrounds me. — Fly, I beseech you, and rescue an innocent Victim out of his Hands; and then methinks I can meet Death with more Confidence. — 
‘ -- -- I lee you are all confused; bear 
with me a little and I will — 1 must explain ’mysels as far as relates to your Friend, Ey Greek's Contrivance, 1 was recommended to the Service of Conjiantia and Bella., on their taking Lodgings in Dublin., who finding them two very fine Women, and entire Strangeis to the Town, agreed with me for a Price, to learn Something of their Circumstances. 
‘ This, alas! I Was too successful in, by Means of artful Flattery, and the good-natured Bellas unluspedling Temper; and having discovered the whole Secret os their coming to Ireland in pursuit of an Amour, begun in France with one Sir 'Fhomas Townly., 1 told it all to Green and Lord Langjlon., who was with him when he desired'to know what I had learned. Between these two was the hellish Plot consrived, that I should pretend an Acquaintance with Sir Thomas, and that I could bring her to a Place, where she might be a Secret Spy upon him, and prove his Integrity. 
‘ Knowing the Prudence of Conjlantig. i would never let her credit Such a Scheme,,, * * I proposed 
i' 
[ 86 ] 
I proposed an Elopement, and was forced to use a great deal of Subtle Argument, to convince her of the Necessity of it. I degraded that Caution, which is the Barrier to female Fame, into downright Prudery, and having at length represented it as quite destructive of the businefs that brought her here, she agreed to be guided by me. Accordingly we took the Opportunity of conjiantid.s going out to Seek another Lodging, and I hurried her away to Lord Langfori^ Seat in the County of fvtcklow., in a post-chaise that Green had ready. — Here ssie nobly with stood both their Entreaties and threat nings, and here she entrusted me, who still deceived her under a Show of Friendship, with a Letter to Conjiantia^ which was written at a Time that Lord Lang Jion pretended to give up his Suit, and leave the house and everything at her own disposal, and actually did come to Town w'iih Green., because he found Vexation and his perseverance had thrown her into a disorder that threatened to be fatal, I promised faithfully to give this Letter to Conftantiay but, instead of that, brought it to Green staying with him a few Days. 
‘in my absence, 1 believe Bella discovered my wickedness; for she found Some Means to escape from the House, which was a great Disappointment to his 
* Lordship. 
[ 87 ] 
Ixirdshijx He and Green had a good many conserences, the result of which was, that all Means should be tried to recover Bella., and that I should come with the Letter to Conflantia, Green having found by Some Means that she lodged here, and decoy her away to the Same Place, which you know I also effcdled.’ — Sir Thomas could C mtain hiriisels no longer, but turning earnestly to my Mother, in a great Hurry — Bv Heavens, Madam, this is too much! The Villain learned con ftantid.% Removal here Srom me, and if he be on the Face of the Earth, he shall be punished for the Use he made of it — Oh the Villain I the Villain! — He repeated these last Words darting out of the Parlour thro’ the Hall, and So away. 
The miserable dying Creature, tho’ her Spirits were almost exhausted, went on again, — ‘ I have not much more to Say: ‘ After leaving this, we drove on pretty ‘ brishly; Green and a Servant were wait ‘ ing for us at donny brooky and from that ‘ followed the post-chaise closely; going ‘ down livindgatfs htll one of the horses ‘ ran restive. Green and his Servant came up to our Assistance, and were very care ‘ full and complaisant to Conflantia., Seem ‘ ingly as a Stranger; at last we were over ‘ turned in a steep Ditch; she received very ‘ little Hurt; but I, when the chaise was ‘ falling, endeavoured to get out at the 
‘ Door, 
[ ss r 
*■ Door, and So Sell under both Carriage and horses, and was taken up I know not ‘ how; for recovering my senses after Some ‘ Time, I found mysels in a Cabin in this ‘ wretched Condition, and was told that 
* they were gone on, but had given Dircc ‘ tions I should be taken Care of — Per ‘ ceiving my End to draw quickly on, I ‘ could not die in Peace without dilburden 
* ing my Heart: — And Oh I if a Wretch 
* loaded with Iniquity, can claim your Pity ‘ and Prayers, let me now, in the Hour of ‘ my Dissolution, request and enjoy that, 
‘ even, that Scanty Gratification; — for in ‘ deed it was Green deluded me at the first, 
‘ and — it is he has now confirmed me in ‘ Guilt. — Oh! Have Mercy, Heaven — We were now, I must own, gladly interrupted by the Arrival of a Surgeon that Sir Thomas had Sent Sor, on finding the Woman had not only many shocking bruises, but also, a Leg and Arm broke.. We left him to assist the poor unfortunate with his Skill and Humanity, and withdrew in almost as great need of Assistance ourselves— — I will conclude, fost I need not impart any of the moral Lessons we deduced from the Chapter of human Life then before us, knowing they will sponta neoufiy arise in your own Mind, and draw double Beauties from that luxuriant Soil. I should be glad to hear them, your Thoughts also on Sir Tbomas'sy accidentally 

t 89 ] 
ly and unavoidably hearing of Bella's Pur suit of him, may improve and will much oblige 
Yours, 
Sophia Easebt., 
eooogoooooooeooooeoooooeoo 
LETTER XXII 
To miss Easebv. 
Food for Curiosity, Sophia., I wish I could Surfeit it at once, and then, mstead of a Bill of Interrogatories, I might hope for a Letter from you relative to Conjiantia and Bella but as Shakespeare., the great Master of Nature, allows Defdemona to Speak even after she was Smothered, So I apprehend you will have more Questions to ask, tho’ what I have to Say were to cliill you with Horror. ^, 
^ But away with this Foolery; my Spirits are So exhausted that I cannot be merry. — Only think of poor Nurse being taken up for Robbery; I went directly to Arklow to bail her out, and to withdraw the Bail I had given for the demure Impostor. On returning Home my Servants informed me that in my absence the strange Gentleman got up, and they believe intended stealing away, just as the Bailiffs came for him; for 
the 
[ 90 J 
the old Creature kept me So long protest ing her Innocence — resenting the Affront that was put upon her — reproaching ine one while for bringing her into the Scrape, and at another Time thanking me for procuring her release, that these Fellows got to Eafeville a great while before me. On being taken into Custody he appeared much disordered — they tell me he even fainted once or twice, and whenever he came to himsels, he requested to Speak to me or the Gentleman in black, who used to call and See him when he was ill; being informed that we were not in the house, his distress was So exquisite, that the Servants began to pity him; but when they recovered their Surprise at hearing him talk, whom they imagined to be dumb, and began to recolledi what their Fellow Servant had Suffered on his Account, they joined with the Bailiffs to hurry him away. — I could wish they had treated him with more j Humanity, — for the Wretch is ill — but I he deserved it — think you I ought to go and See him, Since he was So anxious for an Interview with me.? — I dread Crabtree I. know how much he’ll extol my Discernment — 1 have had Trouble enough already, and the Guilty shall never be wittingly espoused by 
Charles easf.by. 
LETTER 
[ 9' ] 
LETTER xxlll, 
To Charles Easeby, esq. 
I! Charles, what is to be thought 
of the present Situation of Affairs? rlow they may turn our, Heaven only cnows, — All the Troubles and Distresses II ’ have as yet Seen were upon Strangers, but ® iow I Sear my own Family is to be involv 1: sd; And tho’ we have felt for others, tho’ we have found Something lb very delight till in participating with 'he Unfortunate and the friendless, yet when the Trial comes home to ourselves, may we not Sail, my Brother, and sink into weakness? — You See I am imbibing the Sentiments of my worthy old pastor, and, believe me, I am proud of it; but that you may nor think I tyn growing romantic also, the following will convince you that there are Grounds for what I have Said. 
We had Scarce recovered our Spirits after the Hurry and P'right, c^ccasioned by the News of conjlantid.s imminent Danger, and the distressfu! Circumstances of the poor Woman who brought the Account (which I prdume the Doctor has imparted to you ere this) when another very trouble sume visitant made his Appearance, attended by a numerous Retinue. He desired to e admitted to Some of the Family, and 
[9^1 
pressed So closely aster the Servant whoi brought in his Message, that he was in the Room with us before the Door could be ssiut. 
He begged Pardon for his Intrusion, say i ing, that tho’ it might not be quite confistec![ with good Manners, yet the Nature ofhii business was Such, as would fully excufehis| Behaviour, Riding into Kilcoole about the Dtish of the Evening, continued he, I was stopped by a genteel person, Seemingly in they greatest Confusion, who most earnestly R quested, as I was a Gentleman, that I wouu| assist him. in recovering a young Lady oul| of the Hands of her Betrayer, and be i Means of restoring her to her distradefi Friends. — The Didiates of Honour, the Respect due to the fair Sex, everything that is noble. Says he, demand this in mud: stronger Terms than I possibly can, — 1| conl'ented and was led into a Room, wherci to my great Astonishment, I found theladj to be my own Cousin, an unthinking mil guided Cousin, who, together with rof Sister, were inveigled away, from their Family and Country, b two Irish Men, Fof | tune hunters, I suppose, with whom thej' unhappily became acquainted at Pans hli Summer. One of them was in compan|j with her; the Sight of him thus detededii; Guilt, roused my Fury to Such a Pitch, tha! my whole Attention was taken up in gra .lifying my just Revenge; and while I was 
walhins 
[ 9, 1 ] 
^ washing the Stains off the Honour of my Family, in the Blood of the villainous delu der, the Gentleman, by whom the ren •counler was thus accidentally brought about, carried the Lady away, nobody can tell ■where, and disappointed me, w hen I hoped to have made him the most thankful Acknowledgments for finding my lost Relations. 
Some People in the Town informed me, that they drove towards Dublin in a Post # ‘chaise: I rode immediately in pursuit of them, and overtook the Carriage described to me, in about two Hours, but to my unspeakable Surprise and Vexation Sound it empty. The Driver could give no Account of either of them, declaring they were both Strangers to him, and that the Gentleman had given him a most extravagant Price to drive the Lady and her Maid post haste to a Place he would show him, and to take no Notice os anything, but be entirely guided by him. I did lo, Sir, and at kilcoou got a Guinea more to drive back again empty as fast as 1 had drove there. 
These Particulars not Signifying anything, at my Desire, Madam, he has come to show me this house, for here it was he took her up, hoping to procure Such Intelligence Srom you, as may enable me to find her out. 
I was just going to inform him of everything I knew concerning her, but my 
Mother 
Mother insisted upoii hearing his reasom and Authority for inquiring So peiempto rily : That Lady has a Brother, said Ihe, but I cannot tell whether you are theperlon or not; she has been already plunged deeply into distress by the Deceit of Mankind anil her own guileless Heart; deluded by a sail Show of Friendship, she is now in all liklihood a Prey to Ddpair, Sorrow, and Indignation, and what is worse— — this Moment a Second Stranger entered the Room, and calling out in French ‘ this is ‘ Monsieur Houle, ’ the Count (for 
Count Murphy he certainly is) broke out into the most violent Passion. Heaven and Earth, is it possible! then their Villanyis clear as the Sun It is all a helj contrived Plot to deceive giddy Girls and ruin their Characters. -- -- -- -1 now See why Such a 
mysterious Bargain came to be made with the chaile man; but if there be Justice, Punishment, Vengeance to be had in the Kingdom, I will be Satisfied. Trevor has only half appeased me, Eafebys shall complete it: i’ll again, with Pleasure, rilk my own to obtain ample Revenge. — He now stamped about the Room like one | frantic, and calling in a Number of his Servants, he ordered the whole house to be Searched for Eafeby., whilst my poor Mother and 1 were Specchlefs with Fright. Our Domestics, unable to resist So many, begged that no Outrage might be offered, that 
C 95 ] 
''Mr, Eafeby was not in Town, and it was Dot proper a gentleman’s house and fa inily should be used thus. To this he answered, that no mischier should be com isiitted or insult offered, but that is Eafeby f was in the World he would find him. In Sain we endeavoured to convince him or Seven tell him how Confiantia came to be an )iour house; he would listen to nothing; but leaving ransacked every Place he thought t'tlikely to find you in, he went away quite ‘‘mad with Anger at being disappointed, X uttering the Severest Threats and exccra 4tions. 
He was not long gone, when we were alarmed a Second Time, by a Guard ossoldiers Surrounding the house; unskilled in all Such litigious Matters, we could not rest what to think, but the honest old Coachman Soon put us out of Pain, for he came in to tell us, that, Seeing we were in Danger, he ran off for the Sheriff and had now brought him. We thanked the Sherissf very sincerely Sor his kindness, and begged he might dismiss the Men as the Danger was over; he did So, and departed, promising to prote<5l us if there should be any Necessity at a minute’s Notice. 
You Southeast, Charlesy what a Succession of Disturbances we have gone through, and that they are likely to increase: I am Sure wc shall not be able to steep this Night, and as Soon as possible in the Morning, my 
Mother 
[ 96 ] 
Mother intends consulting her Friends, how she ought to adt. Indeed, Charles we are to be pitied : I fear Sir Ihomas is killed, and, Oh! 1 fear more intenscly Sor your sasety, if the Count should meet you before this intricate business is unravelled. May Providence protect you, my dear Brother, and grant that we may Soon have other Subjects to write to each other upon, besides melancholy Details of the Troubles in which we are both likely to be involved. — I can no more, — my Eyes and Heart are full. 
Adieu. 
Sophia easeby, LETTER XXIV 
To the Rev. Mr. 
Yours of the 25th instant came Safe to Hand, and particular Attention has been paid to the Contents, as the transadling os your Commission Sell chiefly to me, on Account of my master’s very il State of Health. In vain, however, have I written to all the Correspondents of thii Houle, for not one of them can procun the least Intelligence of the lost Lady; would therefore advise, to have recourse tc 
an 
[ 97 ] 
an Advertisement, as the likeliest Way to recover her. 
Should this Method meet with your Approbation, I am ready to publish a proper one, being well acquainted with writing Sor the press; the Belles Letters have been always my peculiar Delight; and tho’ now obliged to write in a merchant’s Office, I am the Author of Several excellent Productions, Sull os the modern Sublime in the' eastern Taste, notwithstanding many begin to doubt my Merits in the literary Way, because, when put to the Severe Trial, I preferred going to business to the dreary Alternative of going to Gaol. ’ 
The recent bad Symptoms in my master’s chronic disorders, together with the regular Attendance of three Physicians, portend his final Dissolution to be very near: He, therefore, requests, by all that firm Friendship which ever Subfisted between you, that you will hasten to Town and receive his last Adieu. This Seems to be the only desire he has now left, his Will and worldly Affairs being Settled; and he talks of it with Such Importunity, as you could not well refuse were you to hear him, as I do frequently; for god’s Sake, rev. Sir, gratisy the Wishes ot my dying Master. 
I am, with the greatest respedl, 
Your reverence’s most obedient, Most devoted, humble Servant, Simon Standish. F LETTER 
.[ 98 ] 
L ET T E R XXV To the rev. Mr, -- -- -- -- 
WHAT can my worthy Friend think of his.^’c^h/i?, thus perpetually importuning him for Advice? 1 am ashamed to be So troliblesomc — indeed I am, though' persedtly convinced that your benevolent Heart feels the sincerest saiissacflon in bestowing pleasure and Instrudlbn to all a round you. Hitherto you have been Solicited on Account of Strangers, but 1 mult now impart — I can no longer withhold a Secret that has been, this Ibme time pad, rankling in my Breast. 
My conne(stion with Mr, Trevor was known to you — it was Such an one as you and my Mosher approved of, and, therefore, I need not blush to mention it — the full Heart will vent itself, and yet — whether it be the natural Delicacy of the Sex, I know not — 1 cannot give you the Detail, but read the following Letter, which I have transcribed for your perusal — it will tell you everything. 
To miss Easeby. 
After enjoying three Years of the brightest Hopes, that ever filled a young man’s Breast, those of obtaining the 
truly 
t 99 ] 
'truly amiable Sophia; how great a Gloom must ensue on their being totally extinguished! Could all the Language of distressful Love, could all the eufgance inspired by the most refined Sentiments, inform you of what ij j passes in my Breast, you should know it, — jjbut when I tell you that 1 am unworthy of jjthat honourable and desirable Distindfion, jj which you were pleased to confer upon me,,, you may easily conceive that my Anguish ijjcannot be told. 
Oh, my Sophia! — What have I Said? — ‘once, indeed, you were So, once, 1 might call you my Sophia; but Misfortune nd miscondudl have fixed an eternal Bar between us. Yet I will not complain of what my own indrscreiion brought upon me: I deserve it, and will bear it, — yes, bear it, well as human Nature and my fond Heart will allow, at a Distance from you, and all that know me. 
In an unfortunate Hour, my Sophia., I! lest your fresence, to travel for Accomplishments, which I thought might enable me, with greater Confidence, publicly to demand that Hand you had before affedtio nately engaged to me. Thole Passions, that the Example of your Virtue had kept within proper Bounds, began to throw off Restraint, and break wildly out, among the more dissipated Scenes which perpetual Change exhibits: Such hasty Transitions from one Place to another, where it is the F 2 traveller’s 
[ '0° ] 
traveller’s business only to See and enjoy everything, naturally throw People off their Guard; it was So with me at least, and I ran into Excesses that have ruined me. 
Should Sophia imagine, that the Man who has had Merit enough to«ngage her Affections (for I will yet boast of it) could fall from what he was, by the Repetition of flagrant Offences or detestable Follies, it would break his Heart entirely. — No; be assured, that Penry was guilty but once, and that it may be thought only of an unguarded Action;; tho’ he Severely repents that fatal once, yet has it rendered him incapable of presuming to hope for the accomplilh ment of those Wishes which, not long Since, were his Sole Delight. 
That Honour which first prompted me to Seek your Approbation, now forbids the promised Alliance. — Could si to alleviate my own Misfortunes, draw you into Perplexity.? — Oh killing Thought! 1 am not yet So dead to the noble sensations os Virtue: It would be mean, it would be base: Rather let me breath out a Life of dull obscurity, in Ibme distant Corner of the World, regardless of everything, Since cut off from those Smiles, in which the i better Part of my Existence on Earth consists. 
Yet, generous Sophia ere 1 conclude, let me beg one Favour; — you must grant; 
it! — it is the last! -- Do not think hard 
of 
C ] 
of' me. wheresoever cast by adverse Fortune, your Welfare shall employ my earnest, my frequent Prayers. — May Heaven pour down the choicest Blessings of Life upon you, in Such a Manner, as may best keep up your Relish for them. — May you meet a Husband (the dear Title 1 have forfeited) every Way deserving of that happiness you are abundantly able to bestow; then may Love and Serenity crown all your Days: And when, at length, the Snow of many Years shall have fallen on both your Heads, may you peacefully resign your Name, your Possessions, and your Virtues, to a blooming Offspring, Sufficient to make the World amends for the loss of you. 
And if, when Surrounded with everything your Heart can wish, the Distresses of a poor Fugitive can claim one pitying Sigh, Oh! kindly bestow it — for amidst all the Rigours of adversity that may happen when he is far away, to think that he is not entirely forgotten, nor altogether lost in your Esteem, would be the greatest Consolation to your undone 
H EN ry Trevor. 
On reading these Lines I formed a thousand Conjectures, without satisfying myself what could be the Occasion of them: — My own Character — impossible — he could not Surely hear anything to my Prejudice, F 3 and 
[ 102 ] 
and choose coolly and politely to throw th Blame upon himself; fearful of this, 1 would have contrived the Means of asserting my Innocence, but that 
1 
She who disputes Admits it pojfible Jhe might be guilty. 
Your affedionate and bewildered 
Sophia Easeby. 
Confident alsh of his Honour, I was a long Time forcing myself to imagine a Breach in it, and that the Letter is an Artifice: Oh, was I Such a Fool? or, can it be contrived merely to shake me off.? The unaccountable Appearance of the Stranger at Eafevilk., made me think it a Scheme of his to answer Some purpose, that I could not gucss, and gave rise to that eager curiosity 16 often rallied Since, by you and my Brother; but the very liirprising Conclusion of that Event, together with a Letter 1 have received from Sir Thomas., in which he mentions his brother’s nor being yet arrived, confirm me I was wrong in my Opinion; what he can mean, I know not; — I 1 am quite lost in Doubts and surmises — ' if your penetrating Judgement can dispel i them, which is my mother’s Hope, as well | as mine, it will afford the only Comfort | that remains for i 
LETTER ' 
[ '03 ] 
LETTER XXVI 
To miss Easeby. 
t'hoh very ill able to write, 1 cannot help giving you an Account of the success of my Expedition. 
Immediately after quitting you, I took horse and ordered two of my Servants to attend me in pursuit of Green. At Kilcoole., we were informed that a Gentleman and Lady were waiting there, still their Cariiage was repaired: Alighting, instantly, I rushed into the Room where they were sitting, but firmly resolved to bridle my Rage in the Presence of Conjiantia., for fear of alarming and terrifying her too muchyou may judge, however, what a difficult Matter it was to keep this resolution, when Greeriy at my Entrance, attempted taking me by the Hand, with the usual Freedom of an Intimate, tlio’ confusion and Disappointment' were visible in his Countenance. 
I desired him to accompany me into another Roon»; this he refuled to do, declaring, be was conscious of nothing that might not be proclaimed before the World. Hah! Villain, replied I, does your treacherous Heart forebode the bufiness I have with you.? How can you support Such a false Declaration besore me, who know your unparalleled baseness.? From this Mo f 4 mente 
104 ] 
ment you are my prisoner. Sir! answered he, 1 Sear not your Threats, and wonder greatly, what can be the cause os this Sudden Breach in our late Seemingly Sincere Friendship, 
Observing that Confiantia was greatly amazed at this Altercation, I turned to her, requesting she might not be alarmed, but rest assured of Safety under my protedion, till I had Time to unravel the whole Plot, which I would do, as Soon as the vile Contriver of it was properly Secured. Green Seized this favourable Moment, and darted out of the Room; hearing the Door shut, 1 ran towards it, and felt greater Rage than you can possibly comprehend, on finding it locked; I rang the Bell precipitately, and, calling for my Servants, ordered the Door to be immediately opened, or it should be broken to Pieces! the Waiter answered, the Key was gone, but he would endeavour to find it. 
Confiantia^ still more Siightened at my Impetuosity, was Icarcel/ able to demand the reason of all this Confusion, nor could I well inform her, the Perturbation of my Thoughts was at that Time lb great. — She grew pale, trembled, and lifting up her Eyes, uttered in a faint and faltering Voice, ‘ Heaven! how wilt thou difpose of me!’ Fearing lest she should fall, I was approaching to Support her, when, aster a 
short 
[ 105 ] 
short but loud Bustle without, the Door flew open, and Green and the young Count Murphy came in, with drawn Swords, attended by Several others. -- -- -- -- C Confiantia 
shrieked and Sell, — 1 stood astonished. — Hah, Devil! exclaimed the fiery Count, have I Sound the Seducer of my cousin and my Sister,? Your Life shall pay the ransom of the Honour of my Family. — Green hurried to Confiantia., w hile the Count made a pass at me, that wounded me in the Arm. I was obliged to diaw in my own Defence, having in vain cried out to him, at different Times, to be patient till we could come to an Explanation. My Servants endeavoured to assist me, but were encountered by those belonging to the Count; both Parties requested the People of the house might in terpose, to prevent Murder; but they, not knowing what Opinion to form of the Affair, were uncertain how they ought to a eft in So doubtful a Matter; at length they divided into Argument, Some attempted to quiet the Combatants, others to enrage them, and Words and Blows were dealt about indiscriminately, till the (f^arrel became general, and all was Tumult and Uproar. 
(site Spent and bewildered with Fatigue and Passion, 1 was no longer able to defend tnyself, and lay open to the count’s Attack, that still continued fierce and violent, till I F 5 received 
t io ] 
received So many Wteunds, as overcame mc, and 1 fell. With my Fall, I suppose, the Heat of the Engagement began to Subside, and they gave tbemselves Time to think; Sor my Servants, tho’ Severely hurt themselves.. me out and laid me on a Bed, Sending off post haste for the nearest Surgeon, where I lay almost senseless, till Spine Time after I was dressed. 
1 am since informed, that, during the Hurry, Green carried Conjlantia out in his A, rms, and drove back again to Town, with all possible Speed, and thither also, the Count immediately followed, when he heard how Green had a<sted; So that his likely another Fracas will be the consequence of their meeting; but ait is probable, that wick, td Fellow will have Cunning enough to elude the closest Search of a Stranger, I wish you and your good Mother could find out Some Means of rescuing the innocent unfortunate Lady from his infernal designs. As Sor my Part, my Surgeon lays, East and Inaiilion are absolutely necessary Sor the reestablishment of my. Health, tsio’^ none of my Wounds are dangerous, or I would again, even with Pleasure, venture my Life, to prevent the Evils which threaten her,. 
As I imagine my Brother will now Soon return home, at least Sooner than I shall be able to get to Town, if you will let him 
know 
[ 107 ] ■ ■ 
know where to find me, it will add to the many Obligations already conferred on 
Thomas Trevor. 
OOOOOO’^OOOOO0OOOO0OQOOO0O0.< 
L E T T E R XXVIL To Miss ea seby. 
I Knew it well enough, yet his always the case — we old Men are never to be believed — the young are So wise,, and fb good-natured, and the old So foolish and fus picious; — but who is right nov, Sophia., r your Brother or 1? You know how much • I admired his Incognito., .2.^ he called him — yet I forgive him; Charles has been ashamed of it himself— — but this Moment I Sound out, that iht unfortunate strangef. is guilty of Robbery, and his benevolent Protector forced to bail him out — the Simple. Woman also taken into Custody — this was to be kept a mighty Secret from me — I can neither hear nor see, and if I knew nothing of the Matter, it was all well enough • — Ah, dear dear! what an Expense of Trouble it would Save the Novices in Life,, if, instead of buying their Experience, they would be content to accept it gratis, from 
thosev 
T 
[ io ] 
tliose Veterans who are So ready to bestow i it. ' 
Thank you, my Child, you have not only been willing to follow Such Advice as I have offered you, but you also request it upon Affairs that could not otherwise comej to my Knowledge — Indeed I am disposed tol give you every Assistance — I pity those who Suffer from a Passion, which the bed Minds alone are capable of — yet here I find my Age, my boasted Experience, of little Ule — the Fashions of the Times are not more variable than the Manners of it — What Idea can I form of the present Race of young Men? — they shun the Company of the ancient, or appear under Restraint amongst them — like persons on a Stage, they assume a Charadster agreeable to those before whom they are to perform, bill often no Way Suited to their own dif position; however, as the Passions of Men have been uniformly the Same, tho’ their atslions vary, it may nor, perhaps, be impossible for me to point out the Spring from whence your Sorrows stow. 
That Trevor appeared Sincere, 1 myself am witness; but it is a Maxim of rochefo cault., that many would never have been in Love, if they had never heard oslove — thro’ the Folly of Some, and the Caprice of others, this Passion has little left at present, except the Name. 
Men 
[ 109 ] 
Men are, nowadays, to Seek out Connexions that may correspond with every Circumstance os their Lives — they profess to fall in Love theresore, because they think it prudent; and forsake that Love, because it is Sound inconvenient to pursue it: — There was a Time, my Child, when Love was the Effort os Nature; but it is now reduced to a Science. — The Man must dress, perhaps, beyond his Fortune, and look like the Raven in peacock’s Feathers 
— must hurry thro’all the public amuse ments, tho’ he no more enjoys them, than the Slave does the Delicacies with which he is loaded, and which he cannot taste 
— must give up his Time to Trifles, and exchange Sincerity of Mind for Flattery and Deceit — thus he inures himsels to Vanity and Folly. Custom has made them, as he imagines, nectsshry to his happiness, and then the thoughtless Girl, who caused this unhappy Alteration of his Manners, is Surprised to find the whole a delusion, that he has no Relish for the matrimonial Felicities, perceives no Rapture in the endearing Names of Husband and Father. 
• This is too often the case — I know it was not So with my Sophia., but tho’ she did not ast like too many os her Sex, might he not adt like the Generality os young Men — tho’ uncorrupted by you, might he not have caught the insetstion from them? 
I have 
t no ] 
I have just received a Letter — the Companion of my Youth, and the Friend of my riper Years! — I have born many Losses, and fear 1 must bear this also; but Sorrow and I have long been bosom Friends — he is at the Point of .Death — I hasten to Dublin accompanied by your Brother — there we may talk farther of Trevor — if I judge right of his Letter, all Connexion with him is over — but the Name that was once dear to us, is still prompt upon the Tongue, and pleasing to the Ear. 1 would not at once bid you Sorget him — 1 shall not pay a Virgin Heart So bad a Compliment — but be comforted, my Child, Time and Restedlion will avail much. 
Peace be with you! -- - 
One Thing'must not be forgot — my Thoughts are So distradled, it had nearly escaped me. That poor Wretch whom Grm; has deluded, if she lives, iht Magdalen Asylum is a noble Refuge. Inform her that /hrr<?, the Weak are strengthened — the Forlorn befriended — the helpless pror tedled — Dishonour is covered — Ignorance ^ instruded — and Poverty supplied. teo her, that, in this Place, she will have a Sore,, of Heaven, which it is meant to lead | her to, where “all Tears shall be wiped from our Eyes, and Sin shall have no more Dominion over us.” If you cannot get her in otherwise, I will, when 1 go to Town, 
recommend 
I III ] 
recommend her myself to the vice patro ness — a Woman, who is, at once, a Satire and Encomium upon your Sex — think of her, sopjna; her Character, as Sar as is consistent with your Sphere of Life, is worthy your Imitation. In Lady AD, we behold what Women might be — compared with Lady AD wc. regret what Women in general are. 
m y Lpve to your Mother — If Joy can again have a Place in this aching Heart, I shall be glad to See you both; till then 
Farewell. 
d O O O O O O 0 O O O <ij O O O <5 o 0 O o ©. ■ 
LETTER XXVIII 
To miss Sophia ease.by. 
My dear mistress Sophy I have been constilting with myself, Since I wrote last, and can positively aiture you, that, let them all Say what they will, there is Such Things as Enchantments, and Witches, and Knight Errants; or how is it possible my late disaster could be brought about! I never sai.f^pravers with more Devotion, nor had less Desire to do anything amiss.. since 1 grew old, which makes me asraid (Heaven be mercisul unto us) that Some evil Spirit or other has taken ill-will 
against 
[ II ] 
against me, to persecute me for being So good, for I am troubled with the most terrible Dreams, ever since I was taken up fo innocently for a Thief, as make my poor grey Hairs stand up, like a Sheaf of ibarley, when 1 waken in one of them. Pray good ness, he was no worse Thing than a Man, that I was taking Care of, and that he is not now tormenting me in my Sleep, because he was disappointed in getting me put into Gaol. But that is not all, my Dear; I am likely to have another fine Job of Work on my Hands. Soon after his Reverence and my young Master went away, up comes young ’squire Trevor to the Door, in a one horsc Chair, and a dead Lady with him: He called Sor Help to bring her into the house; and when we had laid her on the Settee in the Parlour, he asked for, our Master, and I told him, he was gone to dub lin: you’ll be So kind then. Says he, as to take Care of this Lady, So. three or four Days, when I will call again Sor her. Heaven preserve us, jsir, Says I, what Care can be taken of a dead Woman : ’squire Eafeby is not at Home, and we have only just got shut of a dumb Man, who had like to have cost me my Life. for*god’s Sake, Says he, let us apply Some Means to recover heti she is not dead, but rendered senselefs by Fatigue and Fright; i’ll engage you ssiall incur neither Damage nor Mr. Eafeby^ displeasure on her Account. When 1 heard 
she 
1 
I 
[ t ] 
isle was not dead, I began to rub her Temples with Vinegar, while Jenny applied to the Palms os her Hands, and she began to show Some Signs of Life in earnest; though J was very loth to meddle with her at all; but lure a Body could not help doing any Thiiig to bring a dead Creature to Life. She now began to look about her, and, indeed, file is a lovely Lady to be Sure; Such a Face, and Such Eyes’ but in Troth, my Dear, I am afraid to praise her, Sor fear she should turn out like my other Charge, She Spoke a good deal to Mr. Trevor, and I also welcomed him home, when he took me aside, and, Hipping a Piece of Gold into my Hand, requested I would take great Care of the Lady, and keep his being in the Country a Secret: He was hindered Saying any more, by a loud Scream from the Lady; immediately after which, she fell into the most terrible Shakings and Fits I ever Saw, out of one Fit into another, Sori don’t know how long, till at last she Spoke just So as to be understood. Oh! the Watch, the Watch, and pointed to where my un sortunatc Watch was hanging against the Wainlcof, for Mr. Charles had left it out, 
as Justice C -- -- was to call for it this Day : 
You may be lure this frightened me out of my Wits, and 1 went ringing my Hands about the Room, and telling Mr. Trevor., that if he left the Lady here, he must stay and take Care osher himself, for that Watch 
had 
1 
[ 114 ] ■ 
had brought me into a great deal of Trol^ ble before; and if you’ll consider, my Love, what elfe could I Say; for, thinks I; there is now a fair Opportunity, when neither inj Master is at Home, nor his Reverence, who could lay any evil Spirit that would, go about to ruin an honest old Woman like 'me; and ft is plain, that if the Lady, if (he be a Lady, is not in League with the Per son who gave me the Watch, at least (he knows Something about it; you know a burin Child dreads the Fire, So I resolved to have nothing tg do with her, but fcl down on my Knees, and began to (ay my prayersmr. lrev»r was in the greateil Fright and Flurry that could be, the Lady in.fits again, and the rest of the Servants in Some Doubt too. However, he prevailed upon Jenny and the cook maid, to help the Lady upstairs to a Bed, and I left them all, to write the whole Story to you; and wishing I may live to See you once more in good Health, and free from all Harm, 
I remain 
"Yicur loving Nurse, till Deaths J. Callaghan. 
LETTER 

r IT 1 
LETTER XXIX 
To Sir Thomas Trevor, Bart. 
I Always hated the Bustle of a City, Trevor \ but to mend the Matter now, my own Family, which was wont to be a Refuge from the Din of the World, is all Hurry and Confusion; the precipitate, I may Say, mad Count, will wait for no Explanation: reason has not the least i'hstu ence on the Decisions of his Mind, but Thought follows a(stion instead of leading It. — lour putting him to Death, or even wounding him, must have been an invincible obiedliomto.your Union with Belhy if file should be found; but when, after offering him all the Information, satissae tion, and Assistance, a rational Man could expert, nothing would please him but my Blood; what reason had I to dread fighting him? I think a Wound from my Hand, thus circumstanced, could not be condemned by the most Scrupulous conscience, tho’ cool, disinterested Heads might call it indiscretion, to risque my Life for the Caprice of a rash, Knight Errant. 
Whilst these Sentiments were glowing in my Heart, I received and answered a Challenge from him; the cautious old Doflor, by Some Means, got Information of this, and prevented our Interview, by 
laying. 
[ i ] 
laying both under an Arrest; and has Since read me Such a Lecture on the salse Notions of Honour, among modern Bravos, as he calls them, proving the Folly os Duels, for determining disputes, So strongly, that 1 am almost ashamed of being concerned in such a business. 
It is not easy to form an Idea of the count’s Chagrin on this Occasion; he is resolved to take every possible Step, that may tend to disturb and trouble me and my Family; you allb come in for a Share of his good Intentions and Services. How far the Law may alsist these kind Endeavours, I cannot Say, but will take proper Advice on the Occasion immediately. 
What 1 feel for poor Conjlantia.^ it is needless to express. My resentment of the Villainy of Gretn^ and the Folly of the Count, keep my Spirits from sinking. — But can it be unmanly, my Friend, to shed Tears for the distrefs’d, ^ Some Misfortune, Surely, brought her from her own Country; and must Green — a Wretch, whom you countenanced, yes, I repeat it, whom you countenanced, be Suffered to heap still greater Calamities on her innocent Head? Heaven forbid! — Hitherto, he has found Means to elude our most earnest researches, but I am confident that Vengeance will Soon overtake a Caitiff, So monstroufly overloaded with flagitious Crimes. 
There 
[ II ] 
There is not a Syllable os Compliment, or anything elie from your Brother yet; and you may be assured he is in the Kingdom, from .Dints that Sophia has let drop to me, since 1 came. 1 can just discern that there is Something relative to him, in Agitation, between her and the Parson, which is not yet ripe Sor my Acquaintance : It is to be hoped, he has not got into the Same Cloud of Romance, that has already enveloped So many of his Friends. Your eager Inquiries about him, when 1 Saw you on my Way to Town, make me think you know Something concerning him; if So, you will impart it; for w’ere he not your Brother, I should begin to doubt his Integrity. 
You See I have been puntflual to my promise, of giving you an Account of the Situation of Affairs in Town, and can’t but regret that my Endeavours will only afford Such Information, as, instead ol proving agreeable to our Wishes, must give the utmost Anxieties to us both. However, as we Seem to be equally linked together, in good Ftertune and in bad, I shall continue to impart every Incident, of whatsoever Tendency, that may occur in the progress of my Endeavours to recover Bella and Conjlantia., in whose Fortunes, I now con fess myself to be, perhaps, too deeply interested. 
And 
t Ii ] 
And here I cannot help bewailing that blindness to their own Interests, which too osten infatuates Men; they are prone to form hasty Conclusions Srom the little Materials that must necessarily be represented to them in the Moment os a Sudden Event, and afterwards think themselves obliged, from a Puridfilio of self-importance, to Support a Judgement, formed without ever considering causes or Consequences. If the headstrongcount, instead of opposing every Effort of mine, to vindicate ray Friends, and let him into the true Circumstances of his Sister and Cousin, as far as I am acquainted with them, would join me in taking the proper Measures for recovering them, we might then, in all Likelihood, Speedily extricate ourselvcs from the Maze of Mysteries in which we are at present bewildered. Tho’ I am not yet Satisfied, whether his Inattention to Reason renders him an Object of Pity, lo much, as the Turbtilence of his Passions makes him a fit Subject for Correction; for 1 cannot help thinking, that when a Man permits his Passions to break out, So as to become noxious to others, they have a Right to repress them. 
Let me See you as Soon as your Health will possibly admit; and if the least Change has happened for the worse, or anything that might detain you longer than 1 expect, 
inform 
[ ” 9 ] 
linform me of it by the returning Posh Ndieu! 
Your 
Charles Easeby. 
LETTER XXX 
To nurse Callaghan. 
Never was poor Clrl So Sadly circumstanced as 1 am, with respecl to a private Correspondent. Your Lettersjust give Hints enough to raise my Curiosity, and there leave it, without the least Gratification. For goodness Sake, my dear nurse, follow my dirediions for once, and never sit down to write me any more of your Adventures, until they are quite over, and your Mind iettled after them, and then, perhaps, I may be able to draw Some Satisfactory Intelligence from them; but in your present Manner of writing, while you are in a Fright yourself, and forming frightful and foolish Notions of everything about you, I cannot tell what to think, or what to make of your Epistles, but am obliged to pick up as much as 1 can from other People, from whom I could wish to 
keep 
[ 120 ] 
keep my Curiosity and Inquiries, after the Affairs at Eajevilk, a Secret. 
I trusted that you would have informed me of everything 1 wanted, especially, when I made So many earnest Requests to have every little Particular told me, but find myself greatly mistaken, for you are relblved to give no Information, that does not chiefly concern yourself; however, you have it yet in your Power to make me amends for the past, by inquiring closely into Mr. Trevors Affairs -, what he is doing in the Country, what he intends doing, and alh), who that Lady is he has brought to Eafeville^ where he met with her, and how she came to be in Such a distressed Situation i but, above all Things, find out what she knows about that unlucky Watch of yours, and how she comes to be So deeply interested in it, and that’s an Affair which may, you know, prove very pleasing to youriels. 
To tell you the Truth, nurse, I was immensely angry with you, when I began this Letter, because you did not let me know a thousand Particulars about Mr. Trevor and that strange Lady; but you may make it all up, by answering fully and directly every Question I have ashed above. You may be Sure I have very good Rtafons for being So desirous to have them answer ed, and, therefore, beg I may hear from you as Soon as possible, that there may be 
no 

[ 12" ] 
no falling out between honed old Nurse and her impatient 
Sophy. 
^&OOOC>OQOO0OOOOOG>QOOOQ&OO'9 LETTER XXXI 
T 
To Charles Easebv, esq. 
H O’ always desirous of holding a distinguished Place in the Esteem of my Eajehy^ and forming my Condudf after his admired Model, I fear Necessicy has obliged me to ad a Part, in which ap* pearances will make the Sincerity of my Inclinations doubtful, even to you. However distressing such a constrained Situation must be to an honest Mind, I cannot help continuing in it a little longer; the Same Reasons that forbid my appearing publicly, since my return from hraneej are still in Force, nor should you have heard from me now, but for an Accident that rendered it improper for me to keep the Secret longer. 
But first, let me affure you, on my Word and Honour, on everything that a Man should hold*sacred and binding, that my Motives arc just and honourable: Time, which reveals the Secret purposes G f 
1 
[ ] 
of every Haart, will prove the Truth of this Assertion; for the Day will come, and that shortly, when you shall not only know but applaud my late Proceedings, tho’ at prescnt they may Seem unnaturally and un generoussy mysterious. 
If it be possible then, suspend your Surprise at finding I have been three Weeks in the Same Kingdom, with my Friend, my Brother, and my Sophia., without lec ing any one of them, until Matters are mature for Explanation; and then, — I hope to Satisfy all Parties, except myscls. — Let this Suffice to keep down any unkind Ideas which might arise in your Breast, on account of my Behaviour, and which also might prejudice you against the affecting Incident that occasioned this Letter, in the Relation of which 1 shall be Somewhat circumstantial, it being, in my Opinion, a very remarkable one. 
Riding home a few Evenings ago pretty late, and alone, I was alarmed by the Voice cf a Woman, who Seemed to be at Some Distance, imploring Help for Heaven's Sake; my Solitary Situation, and the dufki ness which Surrounded me, together with thosc mournful Accents, breaking, every now and then, thro’ the Silence of the Night, as if stealing Siom the Heart of a wo worn Female, had a very awful effest. The Sound drew me as it were, by a kind cf mechanical Influence, till I Sound myself 
on 
[ ^23 J 
On the Bank of the River, which runs between Eafeville and Arklow., about two hundred Yards to the Right of the steep and rugged Path leading from the highroad down to the Ford; there on the damp grass, her Head reclined on a Rock, I perceived a young Lady Sitting in the most melancholy Attitude. 
Luckily, the Stars, thro’ a clear frosty atmosphere, afforded Light enough to distinguish Objects, tho’ I could wish to have had a more per fed! View of a Figure, So peculiarly captivating as a lovely Woman in distress, striking the Soul with a strong Representation of Shakefpeaf^ Patience on a Monument. She took my Attention Prisoner; 1 Sat down by her, and laised her Head against my Breast; for a while, she Seemed insensible to every consolation 1 could offer, but at length requested to be led to Some charitable Roof. Finding that her Limbs were unable to Sustain her, I carried her in my Arms to a little Fa m house, near Half a Mile distant, and there Supplied her with the best Accommodation the Place could afford. 
When she became a little composed, and I had Time to look about, it astonished me to think, how a person, wiiosc dress and Appearance bespoke her of no Small coni'equence, could be left in the Manner 1 found her; her Clothes were rich, but tumbled to the last Degree, and her Bcha g 2 viour 
[ 124 ] 
viour was that of Dignity and good Senfc in Affliction : However, as it was no proper Time Sor inquiry, and a certain wild ness mixed with dcspair appeared in her Countenance, I desired the Woman of the house to put her in a warm Bed. Soon as this was mentioned, she started up, declaring she must go look for a person who fell into the River; then Suddenly recollecting herself, she grew quite calm again, and assured us, that a Gentleman, who rode before her, was, file feared, actually drown’d, for, she imagined, he mistook his Way, and attempting to cross the River, at an improper Place, the horse gave a Plunge off the Bank; feeling him fall, as if down a Precipice, she caught hold of a Tree that hung over, and by that Means, with much ado, recovered the Bank again, while both horse and Rider were carried down the Stream. She then wandered up and down in the greatest Agony, not knowing which Way to turn, till sickness and Fear Sunk her down in the Place where 1 had the good Fortune to come up to her. 
This, tho’ Somewhat incoherent, was plausible, if we consider, that the Road he attempted going is chitst/ used, by the Neighbourhood, for a short Cut across the Country, atid the Ford not only dangerous, but hard to be found by those who are not well practised by frequent crossing it; there was also, at this Time, a high Flood in the 
River, 
t >25 ] 
River, and is it was near the Place where she was Sitting, the Water could not be less than twelve Feet deep. these Considerations made me hasten out, with what Men 1 could gather, in order to make a Search, but my Design proved unsucecssful: Towards Morning we returned, and finding the Lady very ill, and a Fit of sickness likely to be the consequence of the Cold and Fatigue she endured, I thought it adviscable to remove her to where proper Care and Attendance might be expetsted Srom a generous Hand. 
For this purpose, I procured a Chair, and drove her to Eafeviile, where, thoj the Family was not at Home, I took the Freedom to leave her. \s\xx\t Callaghan was very unwilling to receive her, and gave me Reasons for it, that I could not understand; but Surely, tho’ I may Seem to have forfeited every Claim to your Regard, and you may even think me unworthy os making the Request, Humanity will didlate Orders from you, that this unfortunate Stranger have the respedt paid to her which her Condition requires. 
1 have daily visited her since, and can form no Judgement of Weight Srom her unconnedled Ravings of her Family and Friends, for 1 think her absolutely delirious; but as Business calls me immediately out of the Country, your Direction's for her Accommodation become absolutely northeast g 3 ceffary, 
ecffary, in the present unusual disposition that rages among your Domestics. 
As no Apology will excuse me in your Judgement, Sor acting as I am forced to do, till you come to know the Truth; So, I think, no Apology will be required by your feeling Heart, for throwing a forlorn Woman upon you, for her Preservation; nay, you will thank me for affording you an Opportunity of doing good; but I deserve no Thanks, for I have put that godlike Property out of my own Power. — Oh Charles! I did hope to call you by the dear ' Name of Brother; but now, instead of that enlivening Hope, there is a Worm gnawing in the Breast of 
Henry Trevor.. 
P. S. A few Days shall clear up my Character. 
LETTER XXXII 
To Charles easesy, esq. 
DID you ever imagine, Charles that there was So much as a Possibility of my turning Moralist.? What! the gay, the giddy, the dissipated Sir Lhomas? — Yes, 
my 
[ '27-. ’• *. 
my Friend, all human Things are Subject to Change, and behold your once volatile Trevor grown Serious as an Hermit. Whilst there was the least Probability of your being able to find Conjiantia^ the pleasing Hope, that Bella might also be Sound, invigorated my Soul, and enabled me to endure my Situation with Some Degree of Fortitude and Serenity; but now, the flattering Dream is over, and their Ruin, which, without Doubr, is accomplished ere this, has irremediably overturned the very Basis of our happiness. 
Your own Heart will convince you of what I oughtho feel on this Occasion; but' lest you should think, that the extravagant pursuiis of a Man of pleasure have entirely counteradled the genuine Bent of my Passions, which is too often the case, I would gladly enable you to form even a faint Idea of my present Situation. Search your own Breast, and to all the tender Sentiments you find there, add the Softest Delicacies of virtuous Love, and heighten the Whole with that intense Anguish with which a Sensible Heart must throb, when cut off from every Hope of being happily united to the Object of its ardent Wishes : Need 1 add to this, the alarming Fear, that ihose loved Objects are betrayed into the Power of the most terrible, the most inexorable Animal of the Creation, a r G 4 human 
human Brute, loo much! — 
f 128 ] 
By Heaven, Charles it is 
yet.how vast has the Benefit been, which these Troubles have afforded me.? I now See the Danger os Dissiparion, and keeping loose Company, in the strongest Light; but fear I shall not be permitted to give a living Example of my resormation : The Disturbance of my Mind, my Apprehensions Sor Conjlantia., and my Distreffes for Bellas are more destriidtive than the count’s ’sword : My Wounds mend ssowly, .and a Fever is dreaded; my Hopes and promises Soon to be in Town, and join my Endeavours to yours, are now over. All Things are at the disposal of Heaven, and I am convinced, that whatever Determination they come to, will be just and best; yet I could wish to live to be the Means of Greefts Punishment; tho’ 1 think a milder Term than what you make ue of to ex press my Connedfion with him, would be justifiable. 
Your Hints concerning my Brother add greatly to my uneasuicis, elptcially, as I have no other Grounds on which I can form an Opinion of his Conduci : You know his Feelings to be of a most delicate Nature, and his Notions of Love and Honour So very refined, as to be oftentimes troublesome, and even inconsistent with the natural course of Things in this, material World; the Fear too, of being thought particular 
[ 129 ].. 
ticular and vain, makes him osten keep the most exalted Motives Secret, and So renders .many of his Actions liable to appear ridiculous to those whoconsider them slightly, or are unacquainted with his uncommon, iho’ noble Cast os Thought. If his late Behaviour flows from this Source, the first hour’s Conversation with ihose concerned, will Set all to Rights. — You can’t help excusing this much in behalf of. a Brother. 
As all the happiness of the little Remnant of Life that is, in all Probability, al -- lotted to me, from the present Moment, depends upon the Welfare and success of those I hold dear, I again renew the Requests you have as yet been kind enough to comply with, and, notwithstanding any Indiscretion of Benrys, of which I protest myself entirely innocent, insist on hearing from you daily, while I continue to be, even the Shadow of 
THOMAS Trevor. 
G 5 
LETTER 
[ '3° ] 
LETTER XXXIII 
To miss ea^eby. 
I Have just Time to inform you, my dear Sister, fhat I have had a long Conference with the person who drove con ftantia to Kilcoole., and find good reason from what he Says, compared with the Opinion of her Maidservant, to imagine that she is Simewhere about Lord Langjiotis Seat: It is not probable Green would bring her there directly, as he must judge, from what has happened, that his Plot is detected, and the Same infernal Policy, which has hitherto rendered his iniquitous Undertakings successsul, if I may be allowed Such an Expression, will prompt him to evade a pursuit. 
His first Orders, at hiring the post-chaise, were to drive to a little Village which lies on one Side of lungflon houit.^ at about three Miles Distance, and Matters wde So contrived, that they should arrive there at Midnight, where a private chaise was to meet and receive them, whilst Greens Man returned to Town in the hired one, on Some Pretence that required post haste, but, in reality, to rnissead any Enquirers who might put Questions to the Driver on his Way home, by giving them Such answers, as would promote his master’s purpose; So 
that 
1 
[ 1 
that it would be next to an Impossibility, to have traced them, had nothing intervened; and altho’ an unexpedled Accident did happen, you know with what perse vering Sagacity he prevented the conse -- quenccs which were hoped for from it. 
The very Shadow of retrieving this amiable Lady from Sorrow and Ruin gives me Delight; but when my desire to realise my. fond Wishes, brings me to a Part of the Country where 1 am likely to meet a Trisser, who has abused my sister’s Confidence and Affection, the Delight becomes • double. Yes, Sophia! tho’ 1 fail in attempting to relieve Conjiantia., 1 hope to ’ give you a good Account of the falle and ungratetuj Henry Lrevor. I shall also have, an Opportunity of Seeing s’wlhomas., in my Way dowm, about whose Recovery I am very.anxious. 
All ihese together urge me on So hastily, that I Set off this Moment, from the convenient End of the Town I am at, without returning to bid you and my Mother farewell. 
I have just heard of the dodlor’s increase ■ 
Fortune; let him have the inclosed. -- -- -- -- - 
You shall hear constantly of the progress ■ and success of 
Your 
Charles Easeby.^ L E T T E Rri 
[ >32 ] 
LETTER XXXW. 
To miss Easley. 
My dear mistress Sophy., 
I Am heartily glad 1 have got News to tell you now again, that I am Sure you’ll be rejoiced to know; bccause it is •about young Mr. Trevor. As to the Lady he brought here, 1 neither meddle nor make with her; but he comes every Day, and orders whatever she wants, and Jenny well Sor attending her, and Seems very angry with me, because I won’t bring my sels into another Scrape; but no Matter Sor that, 1 have Sound him out: He has Sold every Inch os his Estate, my Dear, and the Sweet pretty Place he had, and all the Stock; there is not a Single pin’s worth but is gone. And I am told for confident, that he is to go live Ibmewhere abroad, and, between you and I, 1 suspedt this fine Madam at Eafeville is to go along with him; and yet, God bless us, what Impudence young People have nowadays: How he could have the Assurance to bring her here; but they must certainly pack off with ihem selves, for this Country would be too hot 
Sor them, because -- -- 
I had got this far, when the post man «ame; and I don’t know what I have done to deserve So hardhearted a Letter from 
you, 
[ ^33 ] 
yon, as he brought me; Sure I always laid open my whole Heart to you, and told you every Thing I knew concerning what you wanted; and if Things fell out wrong, nd went cross, what could 1 help it. I little thought ever to hear you tell your poor niirse, that she was old and Soolish, for doing her best to Serve you; but hnce my Letters only Serve you to make Game ot. i’ll be bound you shall be troubled with no more of them. What I told you about ’squire lre vor., I fished out cunningly from his Servant, for he thought to carry it all on mighty close and Secret, yet I am the worst in the World to employ in (hch a business; but no Matter for that; only you vexed me I could tell you a great deal more: I could tell you, how his Rent is to be paid to Some Merchant in Dublin: How his Estate was Sold, on Account of Some French Gentleman, and how 1 intend turning his fair Damsel out of this, because my young Master left me mistress of the Place when he went to Town. 
I love you, my dear mistress, and your Cruelty has made me cry; but my Tears are old and foolish — I hope my dear good old mistress is well, and Mr. Charles., and I hope you are well also; but until you make it up with me, you shall hear no more from 
Your honest and affetstionate nurse, 
J. Callaghan, LETTER 
1 
[ '34 ] 
LETTER XXXV 
To miss Easeby. 
IN a few Hours aster you received my last, I stopped at Kilcoole., as the first Stage of my intended Rout; where, instead of a joysul Meeting with Sir Ihomas., I have found my Companion, my other Self, lying almost at the Point of Death. — What Words, my Sophia., can express the Anguish of my Heart at this Moment Love, Friendship, Anger, alternately take the Lead, and overwhelm my reason like a Torrent — I will not attempt the Description. 
Notwithstanding my eagerness to bring the reprobate Green to condign Punishment, and at the Same Time, if possible, free Con jiantia from the Horrors of a Situation, which, exclusive of the Danger she is in, might rouse the most indolent Heart to feel and to fight for her, I cannot leave this, I am riveted here, till the Crisis of my friend’s Fate is ‘determined; His Physicians are to hold a consultation this Evening, and, till the result os it is known, I cannot tell how I shall proceed. 
Oh, Sophia., is not my case truly pitiable! — My Pkiend dying by my Side, and brought to an untimely End by the rash Hand of a Man he was endeavouring to oblige: — My Sister affronted by his Brother, 
[ >35 ] 
there, — and the dear objed of my Wishes ravished Srom me by Villains : Where shall I find philosophy erough to Support all this? — Pardon me. Heaven! Forgive me, Sophia! Sori am weak — I am distressed; but I will bear up the Load like a Man, tho’ I know not to which afflidling Circumstance my Attention should first turn. 
Ill as Sir ’thomas is, he strove to inquire after you and Henry; but I could not tell him the Truth— — would be unkind to sharpen the last Pangs this World can in flidl. 
Think too, how my Indignation heightens my Sorrow, when 1 behold the Chamber of Death, close waiched by a strong Guard, which the Count has put on Trevor., by Virtue of Some Step he has taken in Law, being resolved to carry his mistaken Fury to the utmost. — Vain Man I His Spirit will Soon force thro’ your ssender Ties, and rise Superior to every Prejudice. How thanksul ought the Sons of Mortality to be, that they have a Relource which wih one Day free them from the Tyranny of Passion and Misfortune, without which'^lifc would be oftentimes insupportable. There is nothing else could possibly Sweeten the bitter Draught Providence has Thought fit to prepare for 
Your afflicted Bi other, 
Charles Easebt. 
End of the First Volumi. 
Z." 
N; \;. t, ” 
S'di ‘e ' rh;; ''i' • ‘}, rist 
Ur) ori: r. jiii hi ti. i .1 
'ji ' •■ o J, ' r K;; f U'‘' h 
V., »!-■.. tate:, 
■.' I^ti >0; ^tib iuld •«>: '( 
-’ i -. •t'l; ' it : m; >^xjd!t£'sh; t=*’ h' 
mionv a9.. k A, .••, >.'{ K: !i 
ji n j vbstio>i 1 .i if; va : L if' ' ».<• h •• i.ur •»»• _ ti; r ri > ■ jf;;. ■■' 'ri 'iwh 
i 7: 

..i st;; t ■ ( 
. H.'. i > > f ^ 'jk/ns'i. i t: •> I V, wi>tu,, r { f: ti^jj 
. ' J L •) oliit a 
1; :, ■ .•1 -*■>.( ■ 5-1 1 ’.■ )t.. 
• Ti ' : : t' ' 
/ i /, 
••■ 
■' ■•'i 
M n.. 
I 
. 1 
r.'; j 
1. 
^■ r ^ " b pc; ..*4 
i 1 • ibn fc f 'j f ' ’nj 
t '.• T' ' ■ ' ■’■. ■ ." V 
oi.. ' ■ '; ■•■’ 
i., .7; ■ ■ luti 'jl.vv 
>>}.'■ iv, ■., j L 'j .■ " ' ' 
oj. >^4'. •’*> • <. ■ ‘i ic ^^ai* 
• >. ■ ■ k.i^ 
-4 It L 
, * I 
•- il... ... / 


„ ■ 
u 
CON STA NTI A; 
OR, THE 
DISTRESS’D FRIEND. 
NOVEL. 
VOL. II 
Litera scripta manet. 
DUBLIN: 
Printed Sor the AUTHOR, 
By Dillon Chamberlai me, in Dame Streak,; facing fownes’s Street. MDCCLXIX. 
; < it; AT C NO 
s 
LI 
H T ©. 
CM]; n (.ra2h.>it8!c 
I V (j 
'V sh 
: >'. Oi 
ft 
>- 
•orft, f ' ' ij' 'j■j>l 1 
'si L * 
'■ I A ■ - r ^ \ A CV 
ltiji V ■ ■ 
V ri. » j 
‘ti L ' 
.. -- I' 
'■ 
■ ii -( a. • i 
''.'xwitii .= >■!' vi. 
.Cl n' •!' J 
., xo: i; r:; i'' 
CONSTANTIA; 
OR, THE 
DISTRESS’D FRIEND. 
€>OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOQOOOQO&0OO 
LETTER I. 
To Charles Easeby, esq. 
Not one Word of comfortable Intelligence concerning the poor stray Girls is there to be had here; and I am persuaded, if you had any to impart, I should have been Seasted with it, instead os those congratulatory Compliments which the increase of my Fortune Sorced Sri m you. 
Indeed, my Son, 1 am rich, if one hundred Pieces of Paper, valued at two hundred Pounds each, can make me So; and yet I cannot find the least Alteration in my 
sels: 
[ HO ] 
fds: I breakfast, dine, Sup and steep, and dress, and talk, and think in the very Same course, and with the Same Habit os Mind, as when I had not one Supernumerary Guinea. Is not this a plain proos, that there is no real Difference between a very large Fortune, and a very moderate one; between a Heap of Gold, and a Heap of dross; but what lies in the different Estimations of Mankind? This much I can aver; if I were lo lose my whole new Acquisition Tomorrow, 1 should not look on myself to be one Shilling the poorer. 
But I cannot better express my Ideas of Poverty and Riches, than by giving you a few Thoughts, which I committed to writing the last Time l.was in Dublin., on Seeing the Earl of Northumberland go in State to Parliament: It is a Sort of Parallel between his Situation, and that of a poor crazed Beggar, who afforded me inexpreshblc Delight, by his marching in the Procession with as much Importance and self fatif fadtion, as if the Whole, not even excepting his Excellency, was purely attendant n him. 
It is a common Notion, that Fortune and Honours make the poffeltor Superlatively happy. Let us try the Truth of this, by drawing a Parallel between Lord nortbim berland and the Pauper; for whom can we Suppose to enjoy more than the chief Governor of a Kingdom, endowed with all the 
Social 
[ II ] 
Social Virtues which adorn private Life, and bless’d with all the Power and Splendour os So great a public Employment? And who can possibly be supposed fo much the reverseas a Pauper, a poor destitute Being, wholly Subsisting on the Charity of others? 
First then, — his Excellency goes out in all the Pomp of Royalty, is attended with the utmost Grandeur and Magnificence Heart can wish : If he is gratified in beholding the vast Extent of his Retinue, and the rich ness of their costly and elegant Habiliments; the Beggar is equally fo, and struts thro’ the Ranks of Soldiers and Spedfators, as highly elated and proud of the Cavalcade; and may tell my Lord, what the chinese Hermit told the gay Mandarin, ‘ I am ‘ obliged to you for your Finery, it can ‘ yield you no other pleasure, beside that ‘ of looking at it, which is a happiness I ‘ can enjoy to the Same Height of Luxury, 
* and with more Convenience from your ‘ Back than from my own, tho’ you be 
* never fo proud of it.’ 
Again, — His Excellency is in Such an elevated Station of Life, and is, besides, Such an Honour to that Station, as procures him universal respect and Love. Is his Ambition Satisfied? Are all his Views confined to their proper Objects? Has he no Desires to which his vast Possessions are in .adequate? If So, he is certainly as happy as Mortality will admit : Yet, the Beggar 
IS 
[ 142 ] 
is full as happy. Being obliged to beg for his Livelihood, his ambition, his Views, his desires reach no higher than a hearty Meal, of which he is Seldom disappointed in this charitable City; and whilst an Earl wants a Dukedom, poor St. John wants no more than a Penny; nor is it pos Sible for the vainest Nobleman to feel greater Joy at the Acquisition of a new Title, than he does at receiving the trifling Charity of a Sixpence. 
Again, — his Excellency is Surrounded with every Gaiety of this World, and various pleasiire but waits his Command to attend in the desired Form: Has a Beggar this to boast of toohe has indeed; and tho’ he may (ecm to drag on a loathsome Life in the Same dull round of Poverty, he is capable of sensations delicate as an emperor’s : His Ear is delighted with Harmony, his Taste with eating even the coarsest Fare, and every sense is preserved in its highest Degree of Perfection, -, never palled by Riot or e.xcefs in their re sptdlivc Objects. Besides all this, tho’ a poor Man, his Mind may be So refined, as to afford him the noblest Ideas, a Pleasure by far superior to the highest Stretch of Senfualiiy. 
Lastly, — If his Excellency draws his Enjoyments from the truest Source, from the Testimony of a pure conscience, and the pleasing reflection of having acted the Sincere 
[ '45 ] 
cere Christian and truly honest Man, in all the great Occurrences of his Life; Has not an humble Beggar the Same Stream of Satisfatstion, stowing from the very Same Spring? May not the Sincere Christian and truly honest Man, be clothed with a tatter’d Garb, and lie on a lowly Bed of Straw. 
Where, then, is this mighty Difference between the Prince and Beggar! The Happiness of each consists in the due Regulation of their Passions; Ahab the King, was wretclied because he could not obtain the Vineyaid of Naboth., whilst Naboth., happy in that little Possession, could look with Disdain on the Selfish proposals of the Owner of a Kingdom. Men, born to Fortune and Honours, too often think ihem felvts above every Tie of reason or Religion, and running out beyond all Bounds of io ciety and Virtue, are Sure to make them selves wretched; but the Man who is below those Seeming Enjoyments, is also below the real Dangers and Vexations which attend them, and having no Views beyond his narrow Sphere, is Seldom disappointed in his reasonable Desires. besides, should we grant that the happiness of a rich Man is preferable to the Happiness of a poor Man, which by no Means follows from an impartial Review of both, will not a few short Years lay them both on a level, and Death annihilate every Such Distindtion, by mingling them together in kindred Dust! 
Fond 
[ h4 ] 
Fond Man! consider thyself in this poor man’s Place. We have a little Journey to make, at the End of which every one must meet at the Same long Home; and shall 1 think it intolerable to walk this Road, because another drives it in a Coach, when, at the Same Time, I am not in hals So much Danger of being overturned? -- -- -- -- - 
1 have purposely omitted the mention of a future State in this dispute, as the Balance may be kept on a level without it, and it is an Argument of So much Weight, that when put into one Scale, there is no Power on Earth can prevent the other from' kicking the Beam. The Maxim I could wish to be deduced from the Whole is this: you ‘would injure to yourself whatever hap pinejs this State will permit., make your Defim equal to your Fortune., not your Fortune to your De fires. 
What! you will Say, is there then nothing at all desirable in Riches? — A very natural cluestion for a young Man. — Yes, my Son, Money has its Uie; to persons beginning Life, It procures respedt and Friendship, and puts them on a Footing to be taken notice of in the World, which are very great Advantages when properly managed; and the pleasing prospect of providing comfortably for a rising Famtly, must give an Energy to the Enjoyments of every Bread that partakes of Humanity and Love, or beats with parental fondness. — I had a 
Wife; 

Wife; 
[ 145 ] 
I had a Son I 
But they 
are no more, and your Family has enough: What pleasurc theresore could Millions bring now to me There is one Satisfadlion which the aged in common with the young may extradi Srom Wealth, the only true Delight it is capable of yielding; to clothe the naked, to feed the hungry, to raise the 
Burden off the opprcss’d and destitute. -- -- -- 
IS 1 could with all my thousands restore your Friend Sir Lhotnas to Health, and Conjlantia to her long lost Friends, and Relations; to be the Author of Such a happy and joyful Meeting, were to be rich indeed. 
A very long Letter from a very old Man is nothing extraordinary, but it would be odd if 1 should forget to inform yon how 1 came to be So rich. The old Man who Sent for me, on finding his Dissolution at Hand, and whom I always esteem’d, and this Moment regret, as the worthiest Friend, was Nephew to my dear wife’s Father, and came into Possession of his Fortune and business on his Death: All I got with her (tho’ an only Child) being an Assurance that as she married me who had no Fortune, when she might have got a very rich Husband, I should never get one with her, but everything 
should go to his Nephew. Mistaken Man, I got a Fortune, a large For 
H tunc 
[ 146 ] 
tune with her, I got Possession of a Heart full of treasure that could be dug from o earthly Mine, and 1 got a Breast overflowing with tenderness and Affection: : these 1 was rich while she was with me; in resteding on them I am rich enough during our little Separation; tho’ the Deceased has, according to his constant promise, left me the rich Dowry which he Said was her Right, with a handsome Addition to it. — address, Charles and correspond as usual with 
your old Friend 

LETTER II 
To miss Easeby. 
CA N my Sophia believe that Confirm is at Eafevilk! I could hardly be convinced os it myself, tho’ upon the Spot: It is wonderful! burr, instead of apostrophizing, l.will continue the Detail of my Journey, according to promise, as the Surell Way of gratifying you extensively. 
My last Letter left me in the utmost Perplexity, not knowing what to do, or what to Say; A few Hours aster that was written, the Physicians met, and Sir Lhomta 
had 
[ >47 ] 
had So many bad Symptoms, that even do(stor Rohinfon had no Hopes os Saving his Life. They stay’d all Night: towards Morning the Disorder took Such a favourable Turn as made a visible Alteration, for the better, in his whole Frame, as well as in the Appearance os every person about him. Indeed, Sophia., if I Sell anything like Pleasure that Day, it was in remarking the Attendants Countenances to rise and Sail with my friend’s Distemper, The Man is beloved, whose sickness produces Such Sympathy. 
I could not quit him till the doors allured me he was past Danger, which was about two o’dock next Day; when, leaving a Servant behind, to follow me with a farther Account the Succeeding Morning, 
I rode on to Eafeville., where 1 met my Aunt Eafeby, who stopp’d herein her Way to Dublin. From her 1 learn’d that the, Lady, of whom Mr. Trevor gave us Such a particular description, is named Constantia. 
Good Heaven! cry’d 1, is it possible! -- 
It is, answer’d my Aunt, and she has this Evening told me the melancholy History of her coming to Ireland, in which she often mention’d your Sister: When she had done, I told her my Name was Eajeby, and that she was now at the Seat of my Nephew Charles, at hearing this she seiz’d my Hand, and Tears put an End to the Conversation a little before you arrived. 
H 2 How 
[ h8 ] 
How fortunate, my dear Sister, was this chance Visit of the good old Lady; it not only accommodated Conjlantia with a Sema'c Companion, most opportunely, but absolutely prevented her being thrown upon the uncertain World again; for nurse having Imbibed an utter Abhorrence from all Strangers, since her late Troubles, was resolved she should have the use of the house no longer; but your aunt’s coming Settled the poor woman’s Doubts, as she undertook the Care of the Stranger herself, and has postponed her going to Town till Cow jianlia is able to accompany her, being yet confined to her Bed. 
I wish I could give as pleasing an Account of other Affairs: Many People alk me Questions about the unknown Man, who gave us all So much uneasiness; but not one can help me to the least Intelligence: ft is certainly most Surprising that Such a person should remain thus long unclaim’d and unnoticed, and without even attempting an Explanation of himfdf, whilst the whole Neighbourhood expect his Trial with the greatest Impatience; but we Seem to have got into a Course of Wonders, 
Ungrateful Lrevor too; 1 fear to mention his Name to you. -- -1 was once hap 
1 
py in your Approbation of him; Prudence, Virtue and wisdom seem’d in him So engaging, they demanded your Esteem; if 
they 
[ h9 1 ■ 
they are gone, Lrevor has no Sarthcr Claim to your Regard. His an hard Tash to forget; but his condudi has been very unaccountable, and unworthy a single Thought — I am credibly insorm’d he has Sold, in Some mean, underhand Manner, 
his whole Estate, and is gone off. -- -- -- -- -- 
Learn with me to wish him a cool Farewell. 
1 am all Desire to converse with Conjlantia., therefore long most ardently for her Recovery. My Aunt tells me she intends exerting her Strength in order to write a long Letter to you, which is to acquaint you with everything that happen’d since she left you. Let me also hear from you immediately; a Letter Srom Sophia will cheat Some of the anxious Mofnents that are now allotted to her 
affedlionate Brother, 
Charles Eassby. 
P. S Sir Thomas continues to grow better. 
H 
LETTER 
[ 15° ] 
LETTER m. 
To miss Easebv, 
SOPHIA! 1 yet live! -- -- -- -- To tell 
you So, is only giving, in a few Words, a weary Succession of wretched ness; My Days are but Transitions from one Sorrow to another, and the latter still exceeds the former. In Grief, my Mothec knew few Equals; it accompany’d her Blessing to me, which was all she had to leave, and 1 have increas’d the Inheritance 
largely. -- Thanks to Heaven! I have 
no Child to drag on the lengthening Chain! 
Nor is the Trouble and Disturbance which 1 have occasion’d to thole who kindly interested themselves in my Misfortunes, the Smallest of my Woes : Oh! Sophia., how can 1 repay the generous Tears you have shed and are now shedding. -- 1 cannot 
; the Author of all Goodness will recompense them. 
What happen’d immediately after my Departure, you have heard from others: But where’s the Tongue can tell what pafs’d in my Breast! The Joy conceived at hearing Srom Bella, and the pleasing Hope of Soon Seeing her, were like the shooting of a Meteor in a dark Night, whole transient 
Tl 
[ 15' ] 
lient Blaze just Serves to heighten the Horror os the Gloom. 
When the Carriage was overturn’d, to See Mr. Green So near me was no pleasing Omen ^ but he behaved So politely, and interested himself So genteelly in my Behalf, that my difiike began to wear off, especially as he appear’d not to recolle<5t who I was: The dangerous Condition the poor Servant Maid was reduced to by the Fall, threw the first Damp on my Spirits : 1 began to despair of Seeing my cousin (b Soon as 1 wish’d; Mr. Green would not let me go near the Woman who was hurt, or even look at her, fearing it would shock me, but proposed and insisted on leaving her in a house hard by, at which he was acquaintedi Ltold him I had rather return to Town, where proper Care could be take nof heti Heaffured me there was a good Surgeon in the Neighbourhood, and he would be particular in leaving Directions at his friend’s house, that no Care might be wanting. I knew not what to do; my Eagerness to See Bella got the Po( session of my Thoughts; and while Mr. Green., his Servant and mine were accommodating the unfortunate Creature, the post chaife boy drove on. 
It was Some time before my Confusion let me remember that I knew neither the Road nor the Place to which I was going; the Thought overcame me; but, calling H 4 to 
[ ] lo the Driver, he stopp’d, and told me he knew where he was hired to drive me to, and he supposed the Servant, who would Soon overtake us, knew the house. 1 desired him to go no farther till they came up, which he objetsted to. Saying, that he could drive but very fiowly till the Chaifc was repair’d aster the Fall, and there was a good Inn a little besore us, where every filing might be Settled, 
At this Inn we arrived after a Sew very tedious Miles. Mr. Green stopp’d also, and was very assiduous in ordering Matters lo Rights, tho’ I requested he might not delay on my Account, as 1 had a Servant who would take Care os any necessary busi nefs, and 1 thought it too late to proceed farther that Night. Not at all. Madam, answer’d he; if you are going to See your Friend, who lodged with you at the time I had the pleasure os first Seeing you, you liad better not delay; I shall go a good Fart of the Same Road, and will take Care of you. She is perfectly well. ma’am, I dined at the house, where She is, two or 
three Days ago. -- -- -- I felt an abrupt Blush 
all over me; my Heart throbb’d lb 1 could not Speak. 
I was condiksted into a Room, where shortly after Mr. Green follow’d me, to recommend a glass of Wine. He sat down and was striving to enter into Conversation 
1 
[ >53 ] 
versation, when Sir Lhomas Trevor frantic and almost breathlcss, burst in and seiz’d him. At Sight of this, I believe my senses fail’d me, Sor what pass’d afterwards is just like a Dream : I remember Seeing Count Murphy and to hear the clashing of Swords; and, O that I had not yet waked from that Dream, dreadful as it was! 
The first Thing I can rightly recoiled, is the finding myself in Greetis Arms, on horseback, Seemingly about Midnight, and almost stiff with Cold. I begg’d to know where I was, and what was, to be my Fate.? He bid she not to fear: That I was very Safe and just escaped from extreme Danger, — Again, 1 inquired where he was bringing me to, and what was become of Count Murphy and Sir Lhomasf He an swer’d, that he had left them engaged [?, a sharp Combat on my Account and had he not watch’d a favourable Minute, and carried me away, i must inevitably have been kill’d between them; adding, that he had but just parted them, and, was now near a Place of Security, where I might remain till their Rage was Subsided. 
In a little Time he stopp’d at a house, and rais’d the People out of Bed: The stridtest Attention was paid to my wretched Condition, and no Means left untried that seem’d likely to be Serviceable, but all their Care could not prevent alarming Symptoms H 5 of 
'[ *54 ] 
of a Fever from appearing next Morning. Mr. Green behaved very humanely; and, when I wanted to Send for Some of my Friends, put me off it with very plausible reasons, telling me he would convey me to my Cousin Bella Soon as ever my lllness would admit of it. 
This had a better Effect than Medicine, my desire to See her was So strong; and in two Days I found myself able to remove; but he still deferr’d it, alleging my Health as an excuse. My Mind was strangely disturb’d, tho’ I had all the respetst paid to me 1 could wish; the Affair at the Inn stunn’d me whenever 1 thought on it, nor could I get the least Satisfaction, on that Head, from him; and Something So vague appear’d in his whole Behaviour, that 1 was resolved to get away from him, and the wild arid mountainous Country that Surrounded me, as Soon as possible. 
For this purpose 1 b^gan to Sound the People of the house, but wksiqut Success, The Succeeding Evening Saved rtv® any farther Trouble; for he got a Pillion on his horse, upon my Seeming desirous to depart, and taking me behind him, we Set off, 
may I Say joyfully -- -- No, 1 forget what 
Joy is. 
Thro’ Paths, and by places, where horse never trod before, did we Saunter on, my Heart fill’d with Searful Apprehensions : 
C 155 ] 
Sions : At length we arrived at the Bank of the fatal River, fatal, I then thought it, as it put an End to all my Hopes of ever feeing my dearest Bella. I had prepared myself however for death’s resistless Stroke, when the Gentleman who brought me ioeafeville rais’d me from the Ground, — Providence has thought fit I should live a little longer. It must be So. An Eafehy alone could make Life Supportable; and that I am bless’d with in your Aunt; tho’ I could complain of the Burden of dt till I had fill’d a Letter as long, again as what I have written : But why increase my. Torture by adding the Pangs of distress’d Friendship to it; I will not. 
-- -- -- My Sophia may be at ease; this World 
cannot afflict me more; ’tis like a vast Sandy desart wherein no object is found, on which 1 could fasten even a Wish; ' what Benefit then can Pity bestow on 
your hapless 
constantia. 
LETTER 
I >56 ] 
LETTER IV 
To Count Murphy. 
OWEVER your Treatment of my person and Character might justify me, in not only totally withholding Srom you the common Offices of Humanity and good Manners, but even in behaving to you with indignant Negletst; yet the desire I have to Support the Cause of hospitality, which is due to Strangers os whatever Complexion or Denomination, and the respetst I bear to your Family, a very worthy Part of which might unjustly continue immerged in the Severest distress, were your Proceedings to be pundlilioussy regarded, oblige me to overlook the Obstacles which Passion and Prejudice throw in the Way that leads to Friendship. — I should, indeed, be defective in that Dignity which a Man owes to himself, as well as in the Compassion he owes to the Mistakes and Misfortunes of others, if I thought that another person’s acting rashly and passionately could exculpate me, when remiss in pursuing the Dictates os reason and Christianity. 
confirm’d in this Principle, I did all in my Power to recover your lost Friends; and my Intentions, tho’ not altogether suc cesssul, have been of Some Service. con fiantia is Safe under my Protection at 
Eafevillt^ 
1 
[ >57 1 
Eafevillc, after a wondciful escape from Danger and Sorrow; but I assume little Merit in her good Fortune; for the Events which brought her there, may be esteem’d the immediate Interpositions of Providence. 
Ht me now address you as a Man, who ought to be endow’d with reason; .and if he js nor, should, at least, keep up the Appearance of Such an Endowment, that he # may with Some Degree of Propriety answer the charader Naturehas stamp’d upon him. Were you to Sec a person, obliged to walk thro’ abrupt Steeps and hidden Precipices, to which he was a Stranger, refusethe prof er’d Hand of a Guide acquainted with the Safest Footing, you would be apt to exclaim against him; but how would you condemn this wilful Madman, should he, at the time he stood in Such Need of Assistance, shut his Eyes also? 
I could befriend you : To do So would be the highest Gratification to me; but you withstand my earnest Solicitations. Why will you add unnecessary Pangs to the loss of a Sisterfor Sure you must have Some fraternal Feelings, which would prompt you (at least) to relieve So near a Relation. Persist not then in aggravating the Anguish of an unfortunate Woman, and, at the lame time, in laying a Foundation of end less Reproach to yourself: To do either, wilfully, can never be charatsteristic of a 
Man, 
[ 158 ] 
Man, of a Man of Honour too, which is the great Title you are ambitious of. 
Be not deceived; true Honour consists in goodness of Heart; Soar above every, mean Prepossession, and look on Things with a candid and generous Eye: Then hasten to Eafeville^ where Conjiantia longs to Sec you, because her ill State os Health renders it dangerous for her yet to leave it. There, in a friendly and affedfionate Manner, I will disclose to you all the Particulars, which have come to my Knowledge, of the Difficulties that have attended, and still attend, 
the Affairs of your Family. -- -- -- -- Come, I 
conjure you, and we will make a thorough joint research after Bella; could she be found, the unspeakable Saiisfadlion of wiping away the Tears from the Eyes a of luckless Sister, would yield abundantly Recompense for all past Troubles, and convince you how much I am 
your Sincere Friend, and very humble Servant, Charles Easeby. 
LETTER 

[ ] 
LETTER V 
To comstantia. 
WHAT shall I Say to my Conjlantia on her happy, her providential escape from unutterable Ruin: Shall I dress it pompoufiy in the Flowers os Rhetoric, or use the pathetic Energy osan interested Friendship? -- No: A religious pause! 
-- -- -- a fervent Ejaculation, will express 
piy Sentiments thereon more aptly than 
the finest Form os Words. -- -- How are 
thy Dispensations wrapped up in Wonder, O King of Heaven; and thy Ways past finding out! 
The Saiisfadlion I Seel, in your Safety, is nearly equall’d by knowing you are at Eafeville, a Place which, 1 hope, will ever be Sacred to hospitality and Virtue; and that you were So fortunate as to meet my Aunt there, in whom you will find good Nature and good Sense, improved by the most endearing (i^alifications, Social sprightliness and harmless Wit. Were I to wish you a Companion Suited to your present Circumstances, she should be the one. I would not then have you think of coming to Town, at least till your Health is perfectly establish’d, altho’ I am strangely desirous of your Company again. 
Why 
[ io ] 
\yhy will Conjiantia abandon hersels to Orief and despair? Heaven has yet been kind to her by preserving her, and that in an unexpected Manner, from the mod imminent Dangers, Cannot the Same Hand that gave us Life, give ushappinefs also, when we are found to deserve it? 
O, my Friend! what different, very different purposes Providence can effect by the Same Instrument! The Man to whom you are indebted for your present Situation and Safety, is most ungratefully trampling on my Affections. To you, who So freely imparted the Secrets of your own Heart without hinting one mean suspicion, Surely I may, in like noble Manner, lay open mine. I know you will Sympathise with me, and a Sympathising Friend is everything that Such a Sorrow as mine can expect- -- -- can I, ought I, deliberately, 
to heap a Share of my Burden on a Person already sinking;; -- -- Thought tortures 
me. 
Yet 1 am at a loss. I have a Mother, a dear, an affectionate Parent; tho’ 1 love and esteem her most sincerely, there is a reverential Awe upon me, that I am unable, freely, to unbosom myself to her. Equality of Age and Condition are absolutely necessary for the Foundation of Such an Intimacy; and you and 1 have met fo accidentally, and enter’d into each others 
Concerns 
r 
[ i6. ] 
Concerns with So much Alacrity, that we stem destin’d Sor mutual Confidence. 
Your gently impassion’d Breast must feel Sentiments of Pity for me, when I tell you 
I love. -- -- Oh! dote todistratstion, upon a 
Man who has forfeited a just Claim to my Hand. Mr. Trevor the person who brought you to Eafeville.^ is Brother to Sir Ehomas Trevor and youngest Son to the late Sir Henry Lrevor. The Vicinity of our houses in the Country, where we mostly resided, and a Bent of Inclination every way correspondent, occasion’d a stridl and B happy Neighbourhood to Subsist between their Family and ours: The Friendship of the Trevors and the Eafehys is still a pleas ing Topic of discourfe amongst their Acquaintance that remain behind. Each look’d upon the other’s House as his own, made equally free in it, and was equally welcome. 
, The old People were Seldom asunder. My Brother Charles and the present Baronet went thro’ their Studies, and their Diversions together; and bid fairly for a Continuance of the Same uncommon con ne<f\ion, which render’d their father’s Lives So remarkably happy; and Henry and I were nurs’d by the Same Woman, fed by the Same Hand, lull’d in the Same Lap. We imbibed a Love for each other together with our Milk, which 
“Grew 
[ i62 ] 
Grew with our Growth, and strengthen’d with our Strength, ” 
still it became an essential Part of our Existence. Our Parents mark’d the rising Attachment with Approbation, and would rehearse to each other our tender Pratde, with Such a Sond Delight, as Fathers and Mothers only know; They foresaw and encouraged our Passion, long besore our innocent Tongues knew what Name to give our Wishes Sor each other’s Welfare. 
United thus in every Stage of Life, Srom the Cradle to the Moment my Henri was Sent abroad to travel, you may guess what Pangs the Separation cost us. 1 (hall never forget his manly, his delicate Protestations of the warmest Love and everlasting Attachment; his Expressions the most exalted, and his Sentiments the most refined; I gave my whole Soul to him in tender Looks, and having mutually promis’d to Seal up our Affections for each other, we 
parted, -- -- -- parted as dying Mothers part 
their newborn Babes. 
Often, to relieve his tedious absence, has my Imagination run over the happy progress of our infant Days, and dwelled with pleasure whole Hours together on Some darling Incident, — but, alas! it is all over even the Recolledlion, now is terrible. He is salse, — Salfe as Man can be; His Falsehood too is worse than that of others; ’tis not a vulgar, a contemptuous, a glaring 
Falsehood; 
I 

[ >63 ] 
Falsehood; he shakes me off in a Manner fo genteel, So like himself, that there is no bearing it. 
Some other Love must have insedled him, and got the better of mine; I know not what to think, as 1 cannot see him; perhaps you took Notice of Something in him that might help me to form a Judgement, and let my Heart at ease; anything on the subjest, and from you, will be agreeable to 
your unhappy 
Sophia Easeby. 
C'OOOOOOOOOQQOOOOOOOOOOOOOO 
LETTER VI 
To Charles easesy, esq. 
PAT I E N C E, my Son, is, undoubtedly, the Sovereign Remedy for all Complaints : What other Expedient could make Life Sit easy on the Children of Mortality, who are born to affli<5tion as the Sparks sty 
upward? -- -- Let me define it. -- The 
genuine and Serviceable Christian Patience, that everybody should endeavour to attain, is a Mixture of pious Hope and Sincere 
Dependance 
t 164 ] 
Dependance on the goodness of the Deity, Sounded on a firm Belief that he is our Maker, our Saviour, and our all wise preserver. 
• -- -- -- This will Smooth the Bed of Anguish 
; this will allay the Torrent of De spair; this, with the assured View ofaday of Dissolution, can qualify the bitterest Calamity So, that frail, Seeble Man may drink it and be whole. Heaven too, can look down upon Such a Disposition with pleasure, and will be engaged to let causes operate together for its Relief, whilst the refradlo ry and Profane shall sink deeper and faster; and I am satisfy’d your own Sagacity has often pointed out to you, how persons always enjoy Serenity of Mind, with its numerous happy Attendants, in Proportion as tijcy uuujveucu u1i3 uivincr vjiiuc. 
Perhaps the lucky Circumstance I am going to mention, took its rise in the Manner just hinted; at least it gives an old Man, who loves you all, pleasure to think So, and to look upon it as an Earnest of a happy Conclusion to our present Troubles, 
Standijb,, whom I still employ to Settle the Accounts, and call in the Debts, of my deceas’d Friend, requested Yesterday that I would appoint an Hour to meet two Gentlemen, on the Settlement of about ten ihousand Pounds, to which Amount his late Master had answer’d Foreign Bills, on Account of one Henry Trevor esq. 
At 
T 
V 
[ i65 ] 
Atliearing the Name of jienry Trevor my aged Blo^ climb’d briskly to my Face; I felt my whole Frame in a Glow, and eagerly inquiring farther Information, stan difb went on thus: “.This Gentleman, on his going abroad, knowing my master’s Reputation in the mercantile World, procured Letters of Credit from him to Some eminent houses in France, upon which he might draw Bills as his occasions should require, taking Care to give Directions, that his Agent should pay the like Sums into our counting-house.” 
“It happen’d, a few Weeks before my master’s Death, that this Gentleman drew for'very large Sums, for Some particular purpose, near ten thousand Pounds more than his Rents, in the agent’s Hands, amounted to, and Papers arrived, at the Same Time, impowering proper Persons to mortgage his Estate for the Money. We granted the Sum on the Mortgage, tho’ it was nearly the Value of the Estate; and I understand the business of the Meeting, now desired, will be, to know whether the Representative of my deceas’d Master would choose to purchase the Estate throughout, or have the Money repaid; for it Seems the Thing must be fold.” 
I inquired into Several other Particulars, of which he could give no satisfaclory Account : This much, however, I learn’d from him beside; that Count Murphy is the 
Second 
[ >66 ] 
Second person concern’d, and that Lrevor Is ignorant who the Representative os the deceas’d Merchant is; which, altho’ a natural Question, he never ash’d; and Standijh imputes this Neglect, to a Perturbation ot Mind, which was visible in his whole Demeanour. 
Six this Evening is the appointed Hour of Meeting; and now, Charles ’tis now, and at Such Periods as this, that I feel the good Effects of heaven’s chastening Hand. Were it not for mytryals in Life, which have taught me Patience, 1 should be wretched till this Hour came, when I expect to be able to remove a Weight that has too longdepress’d poor Sophias Spirits, — to be in doubt is to be wretched; to know the worst is happiness in Comparison. 
The Circumstances all tally together fo fortunately, that even an old .Man cannot forbear to predidt happy consequences from them; but, excuse the bqast, 1 am used to exult even in the most distant Idea of relieving the distress’d in any wise, and must'confels 1 have strong Hopes that Trevor is not warp’d from the Standard of Integrity and goodness which he had from 
Nature. -- -- There must be Something in 
the Perplexity a Stranger could remark in him; when he was unconscious too, who the person was with whom he desired a Meeting. 
But 
t 1^7 ] 
But what End will Cqnjeftures answer Soon as ever the Conference is over, you (hall have the Facts; and be as happy as your old Friend can make you. 
Adieu! 
P. S. Sophia knows nothing of this Incident yeti It would be unmerciful to ac' quaint her with it at this critical Jundlure. 
ogoooooooeooooeooeooooooo® 
LETTER VII 
To the Rev. Mr. -- -. 
PRISONS! Racks! and Death! -- -- -- -- -- - 
but what are they to write on,? I could out weep the dewy Eyes of the Morning, and raise a Din that should stun the Ears of the habitable World, if that would avail anything in a Land of Savages, where 
My Lodging is on the cold Ground, 
And hard, very hard is my Fare. 
What art thou Patience! for I know thee not. -- -- Canst thou bear insults, Treacheries 

- [ i68 ] ' 
.f uries and Wrongswhy So could I, or So could any Coward: 
T 
But where’s the Balm can lull felf tortur’d Minds? 
Bear with me. Reverend Sir, a little longer, and by and by I shall come down to a plain Story, unadorn’d with woman’s Sighs and half convincing Looks -- -- -- Can 
t)istress Sorget to complain, or good Nature to pityi have Seen your venerable Face; I have felt the tenderness of your lenient Hand: Need I then Say more than that 1 am distress’d, very terribly distress’d! in closed by dreary Walls, which keep out the wholesome Air, and admit nothing but Hunger and wretchedness: terrify’d with Apprehensions that my own unadvised Condutst is the Source of all these Sorrows, in which I am not the only Sufferer; and afraid to' think what is become of an innocent Relation, ' whose Affection forced her to accompany me in a romantic, a foolhardy Undertaking. 
Indeed I have a Gaoler too, a forbidding Sort of a hard featured Man, whose Appearance makes me tremble : He binds up my Hands from doing Good or Harm, and Speaks most unfeelingly in Favour of his Impartiality, and the great Lenity of his Magistrates and Laws. How then can I let you know all my Griefs? my Hands yoked together with Cords of Affliction, 
my 
t .69 ] 
my Body worn with Fatigues, my tjttcrv ranee choked up with Sobs, my Heart oppressed with Sighs, my Brain fired with 
horrible Thoughts. -- -- Oh, what would 
I give to hide my Head in the Grave, were I not afraid thesc Thoughts would follow me there! 
But you will Say, perhaps, like the rest of the World, that these Complaints are artfully put together, to force the unwary into a compassionate Regard for a person whose Crimes justly deserved Such Punishment. Let me beseech you, dear Sir, not to think soit is the common Conclusion of every vulgar Breast, that never thrill’d with a noble Wish to relieve the Unhappy, nor felt a pleasure Superior to that of filling their Coffers. — Such Comforters as these! 
-- -- -- My Heart shrinks back from therh 
like the Sensitive Snail from ah early Frost. Should I complain to the rude Winds; they would Scatter my Complaints abroad: But the steel’d Remarks of ungenerous Hearers ressedt them on me again, with encreased Intensity. 
Tho’ I am afflicted, there is Surely a Possibility I may be innocent; and if Innocence be worth rescuing, is it not worth inquiring into.? Come to my lothsome Dungeon; I will lay my whole Soul open to you. — Trees weep Amber; but a Superficial Search into my Repository of Woes, shall force the pearly Drops of Pity I from 

I 
[ 170 
from the Eyes of Men. Every little Spirit judges from Appearance; it is the Part of good sense, and elevated Endowments to lift out Realities: Bring then a Dagger with you, and if you find a tainted Spot in my Heart, strike it there. But, if upon a strict Review, my Misfortunes should appear to have risen from an Error, a pardonable Error in Conduct, .and not from blame worthy Principles, Oh! will you not endeavour to relieve me! 
L am told I must stand a Trial for Robbery, and why not for Murder too.? -- -- - 
1 have robb’d only myself, of my Peace of Mind. The Murder is more atrocious; '’tis that of an affedlionate Friend, of a dear Relation: She could never outlive our disastrous Separation. No, she had a Heart as tender -- -- -- -- - 
Again my ^ distemper’d Senses begin to rage — - hasten to me Reverend Sir — hasten to me, or I will exhibit Such a Spedlade of Woe, as shall make Justice weep herfdf blind; and leave the whole Country ifl mute Astonishment at the Sorrows of an 
I ( 
Unfortunate Stranger.; 
letter 
[,. .71 ] 
* i. * 
LETTER VIII 
[ 
To Charles Easeby, esq. ‘ 
WERE I not Sincerely adfuated by the Principles of true Honour, which neither your Practice nor Precepts are So much' as tinged with, I should throw off every .Restraint the Law has laid on me, and openly revenge the Affronts your in solent Letter heaps on my Conduct, my Affections, and my Understanding: but you need not fear, I will show Pity, not to Say Contempt, for a no man, who got his Hands ty’d up, that he might fight southeast .curcly with his Tongue. 
How far your Parade of reason and Religion is reconcileable with the Sedudion of unsuspeding Females, I am not casuist enough to determine; and hope I shall never be Knave enough to comprehend the intricate and deep laid Schemes, of Villainy, by which you and your Accomplices have conveyed and Secreted them from me, when providentially met' with. Yet weak and wilful as you would persuade me that I am, I can See thro’, and despise the Artifice which first deprived me of my Relations, and my Family of its Honour, and afterwards, when pursued, would make a Merit of having them in your house, Safely proted «d, as you are pleased to term it. 
I a After 
[ n] ] 
Spending a little Time in considering your consummate Assurance, I imagined there was nothing that could Surprise me; but I must confess that the Conduct of my Sister and Cousin is rather more extraordinary; they know I am 
in the Kingdom, -- -- -- -- know upon what 
Account, yet choose to be concealed from me. I once fondly flatter’d myself with the Hope of their being able to resist the Force of evil Communication; it is now all over; and they will henceforth be pointed out as a striking Instance of the contagious Power of Vice. 
I have performed the Part of a Brother; My Character cannot be Sullied; my ‘con science is clear. I shall now leave you to your own Determinations; persist, till the Work you have undertaken be completed; and when the Same ignoble Disposition, that Set you upon betraying Innocence, flail at last urge you to shake them off to Infamy and Ruin, which is ever the Conclusion of a ravisher’s Attachment, let them not think I will shelter them; No, what they have obstinately chosen, notwithstanding my counsel, and unwearied Endeavours to the contrary, shall, assuredly, be their unpi tied Portion. 
Lest you should imagine I accuse you wantonly, I will condescend So far as to inform you, that one of my Servants hat 
Sworn 
I 

[ '73 ] 
Sworn to my sister’s Watch, which was Sound in the Custody of Some Per Son belonging to your Family. — Eafeby., where’s ypur Honour.? I know the whole of that base transadlion; how pitifully you evaded it by Sending a Man, that no body knew, to Gaol. But this fresh Instance was necd less, for every Occurrence, since my Arrival, confirm’d the Truth of what I have here asserted. Justice shall have its course; and, I will take Care to leave proper persons behind me to prosecute this last Affair, that all the World may See thro’ your hypocritical Maik, as well as 
Murphy. 
00<!>t!>00000000000000©0000000 
LETTER IX 
To miss Ease BY. 
IT would be most unnatural in me, not to Sympathise with Sophia who became a voluntary Sharer in my Troubles; and it would be as ungratesul not to attempt consoling' her who has often Successfully applied cordial Restoratives to my fainting Spirits; The World ought to avoid me like a Pestilence, for, wherever I am received, 13 Sorrow 
1- 
[ >74 ] 
Sorrow and Tribulation follow me quick. 
The Infedlion was born with Me. -- -- -- -- --; 
Burr, merciful Heaven! may 1 not be' blessed with the comfortable Refiedlion that one of my Friends jis happy! 
The heavy Hours creep ssowly on by Day, and the counted Vibrations of a chamber Clock afford the only Comfort of my fleepfess Nights; everything is 'rowing flat and wearilbme; nor could anything, beside my Friendship for you, engage my Attention So far as to write thii short Scroll. 
If it will be any Alleviation of sophiii Anguish to know, that Mr. Trevor is still endowed with the most exquisite Sensibilities; a Gentleman whosc politeness immediately proceeds from his goodness of Heart, and not the constrain’d Formality of mere good Education and Company; I can aver to her that it is So. No Man could behave with more respedful Tenderness, or natural Simplicity of Mind and Manners; full of Dignity, Affability, and the most ingenuous Concern for me. 
This is hischarader, as far as my Troubles would permit my Judgement to extend, as indeed they prevent my examining c!ofe ly into anything, they have absorb’d all my Faculties. To you there is yet a prospcst of returning happiness; for tho’ your present Apprehensions may be dreadfully af stiding, yet if the Man 1 have described be 
the 
[ 175 ] 
the only cause, they cannot. Subsist long. 
• -- But to me, Joy has bida final Adieu, 
for the short Time I have to remain your 
constantla. 
000000(^0000000000000.000000 • 
LETTER X 
To Charles ea6eb.y, .dsq. 
• t f ■ 
ARLES, the imaginary Exultations 1 indulged, will Soon, I trust, be 
realised -- -1 hope yet to live to See you 
all happy. Trevor is honest, is noble, is. Superior to himself; Had you Seen with what Dignity he met my inquisitive Eye; how modestly he approach’d me, with an undetermined yet fearless Step, you would be angry with yourself for having harboured one ungracious Thought of him. 
Agreeable to my Wishes, he happened to come Some time before the Count. A Silent Look of Astonishment, concluded with. Good God! Doctor, is it you.? Scarce articulately pronounced, was all that passed, between us for the Space of a few Minutes. At length, recovering himself, he drew near to me and Said, my worthy, my reverend Friend, be not missed by Appearances 
I am not Sunk So low, as to be altogether 1 4 unworthy 
[ >76 ] 
unworthy os still calling you by that Sacred Title; it is cruel Necessity has cast the burdensome ast upon me; and perhaps this unexpected Meeting with you, which, 1 consess, had it been premeditated, would be most dreadful, may conduce to what I most earnestly desire; a Vindication of my 
Conduct towards Eafebys Family, -- -- -- -- -- 
There lies the ever bleeding Wound of my Peace : Sophia must despisc me, and I must be wretched. 
But, Sir, how could I act otherwise? I have been very unfortunate, very indiscreet. 
-- -- -- He seem’d to stop here on purposc 
that I might ash Some leading Questions; the presence of Count Murphy interrupted me. — Everything exceeds my expedati ons, and not in this Particular only, a flattering prospect begins to open from another Quarter. 
I am impatient to finish this Letter, it will contain So much good News; my Hand trembles with Joy, more than Age, For once you must be a rapid Reader, and be at the End of it Ibon as it is begun, or you cannot keep Pace with my Desires. Did I ever think it possible that my weak Subsiding Pashons could thus agitate me at Fourlcore. But to the business : 
My Man, who came to Town last Night, brought me a Letter, that had been left at my house a few Days before, by the 
Gaoler 
1 
t '77 ] 
Gaoler of fvicklow\ it is from a prisoner in his Custody, who undoubtedly knows Something concerning pe//af the Tenor of it not being applicable to anybody I can think of except her and Constantia I read it with Astonishment; again, and again, without being able to comprehend it: The Writer is certainly in exquisite distress, or else a 
most consummate Cheat. -- -- -- My Son, it 
stiook my tottering Frame 
The Bearer brings it to you, that you may judge for yourself: He could give no farther Account of it, than what 1 have told'you above; on you I depend for perfect Information. -- -- -- -- O, Charles examine 
into it Speedily; to you 1 need not urge the Gratifications which must ensue, on clearing up the dark and dreary Mysteries that Surround us; and has not the Gleam now shot across us given Some Hopes of a Succeeding Day I shall be uneasy till I know the rtsult of your Inquiries. 
Should it prove to have come from that unaccountable person who caused Id much confusion at Eafeville^ it may, indeed, be a Juggle to procure his Enlargement. And now 1 recolletst the Watch Affair, he certainly must be the Author, -- -- -- -- -1 am 
lost in Thought -- -- -- -- every Incident is 
So fraught with Wonder, that I am almost afraid to draw Conclusions: I can only again recommend Speed and Application, 
I 5 aad 

[ ‘78 ]. 
and leave the rest to Providence. Secrecy also will, I think, be necessary : It will prevent the prying Stare os Curiosity, and the Meddling of busy Mockers, both which are very offensive to Delicacy, and must be additionally irksome to the unhappy Bella., if we should be able to discover her. 
O, Charles Charles., how vain is human Foresight I What a chequer’d Scene is the lise os Man! In the full Stretch of our gay Career we are stopp’d short by Adversity: 111 the very Height os our Security, when we think our Designs establish’d for ever, comes the Whirlwind of the Almighty, and behold we are Chaff before it. ’tis meet it should be So; otherwise vile Earth might arrogate, might grow presumptuous. 
A few Minutes ago, I fondly thought this Letter could never be ficish’d Time enough to convey to you the good News I had to impart. 1 now wish it were never 
to be finish’d at all. -- -- -- But 1 must go 
thro’ with the ungrateful Tash. -- -- -- Sophia, 
is gone, is lost, 1 fear, for ever, and her 
poor Mother is distradted. -- -- -- The whole 
house resounds with nothing but Tears and Sobs, and Lamentation?, for the dear, the a 1 belov’d Girl. The Confusion is So great, 1 was hard Set to obtain Information of the Matter, and now I have got it, 1 am only the more distressed! 
With 
[ '79' ] 
With Some Difficulty she was prevailed upon to accompany a Sew Semale Friends this Evening to the Play; In her Way back the Chariot was stopp’d by Count mur~ pby at the Head of a despcrate Banditti. — He hurried her off to Some Place, where I. am told k Vessel only waits his coming to Set Sail for France. This haughty Madman desired the Servants to tell their mas tcr that he had’taken this Method of making Reprisals for sthe loss of his Sister and Cousin, which he still imputes to you and' Sir Thomas. O, my Son, what shall we 
doi^ -- -- -- -- You must leave all other Care. 
to Providence, and sty.to the Relief of her: who gave you Birth / 
will have a‘■dreary Journey; but remember there will be a Day when all those Accounts shall be balanced, when pas sion and Disappointment .shall no more break in upon the everlasting repose of Virtue and Love. -- -- -- -- God bless you! 
< •! 
/ 
\ 
I 
letter: 
[ o ] 
■LETTER XI 
To'sir Thomas Trevor, Bart; 
O W shall I begin, what Arguments shall I usefo avert the Reproaches of a Brother, who thinks himselsdespised atid his Family dishonoured by me.? Truth alone can be prevalent, and a dlsmal Train of Truths I can produce. They shall apologise, if anything can. 
To begin then with those you know already, in order to lead you on to others you are unacquainted with; you must re^ member, that, whilst yet very young, amu tual Esteem grew up between miss Eafthy and me: It was beheld with Approbation, and received the joint Encouragement of both our Friends; Tho’ her Fortune was far Superior to the greatest Settlement I could make, they were pleased to think us capable os rendering each other happy, which was their rational, tho’ unfashionable Aim in Marriage. 
I was happy in this Opinion, happy, my Brother, beyond Expression! She was en twisted in the Fibres os my heart’s Core, and every fervent Wish or silent Ejaculation that isslied thence to Heaven, was ennobled by her bearing a Part in it. 
Youth, 
[ I ] 
Youth, and Want os Experience (the con fequence os being young) was the only Obstacle that prevented our immediate Union : You advised me to travel; it was agreed to rather reludantly; Sor to part fi-om Sophia was, in my Sond Imagination, the greatest Evil that could hesall me. 1 loved her Sincerely, and felt all those Anxieties which the purest Pashon, inspired by the most amiable Woman, could impress on a young and warm Heart. 
This was the Source of my Misfortunes; when I got to Paris., in order to relieve the painful Hours of absence, 1 engaged, perhaps too indiscriminately, in Parties of f*lea stire and Dissipation:. Frequent Repetition began to throw me off my Guard, and at length I took Delight in Such Appointments. At one of these Meetings, in the festive Hour, while good humour and a Flow of Spirits snatch’d the Rein from the guiding. Hand of reason, and Mirth and Jollity wantoned without Costroul; in Such a dangerous, unsuspeding Moment was I importuned to sit down at a gaming Table. 
By losing at first I was urged to continue, to try if my Losses could be retrieved; this involved me deeper: I became anxious; I trembled with Sickly Hope; I persevered. The Morning dawned on my Ruin, and roused me to a feverish Sort of Thought, when it was too late; for on casting up the Demands of all those who had won from 
me. 
[ ] 
me, I Sound it amounted to upwards of nine thousand Pounds, beside what Cash I had about me, I was incapable of Conducts and obliged to request that Count Murphy one of the Company, would pafs his Word as Security for the Money; thus my Honour became doubly bound. 
What could I do } My Credit depended on the Payment of it, tho’ it ruined me: I feared my Friends, I Sophia. Was ever Such a critical Situation I For Some Days I was absolutely delirious; at last the despcrate Resolution to Sell my Estate was fixed upon, and put in Execution; and the Count, who had now cleared off all the Debts for me, having Some private business to this Kingdom, 1 accompanied him hither to Settle the few Affairs I had left, and, make good the Sale. 
And why, you will Say, needed this tt have been done So Secretly } I will tell you, 
I knew your goodness might prompt' you to bear a Part in my Sufferings, which is a kindness my miscondud does not deserve; and I knew Sophias generous Heart would Seek an Opportunity to throw her person and Fortune into my Power, ruined as I was; 
there -- -- there was the Consideration that 
tortured me. How far her Affection for an impiudent Man might draw her in to share his Punishment, was what I could not reflect on with Patience, and the very 
Thought, 
[ S 1 
Thought, that, on my Account, she should Sail from the Sphere os Life she was born to ornament, was So exquisuely dreadful, that I was determin’d to Suffer anything rather than hazard it. 
This rriade me acl in the Manner I have done, being fully rcsolved not to See any of my Friends, till everything was prepared for my Departure; then to take a Sudden, an everlasting Farewell, and retire to Some sequester’d Corner of America. 
My design was frustrated, for the mean Part of my business led me unknowingly to 
Doctor- -- -- --, was thunderstruck : But 
this venerable Teacher, who is a practical Supporter of the Dignity of the Church and an Honour to human Nature, Soon restored me to my former State of Mind; his well judged Arguments dropped like Balm upon my wounded Spirits; while his goodness Surpassed my Wishes. 
When the Count and 1 Had Settled Affairs here, we adjourned to a Tavern, intending to finish the Deeds there: We had not been long Seated before a Man came in and called him assde; they remained a little while in a low Debate, after which, returning to his Seat, he Said to a person sitting beside him, “She goes to the Play to “night, and I have ordered Matters accor “dingly.” I did not take the least Notice, tho’ the Words struck me strangely. 
Having 
f 184 ] 
Having finished here, I went to my Lodging, and a faithsuloid Servant, whom I entrusted to find out Some of miss Eafebyz Engagements, that if possible I might get a glimpse os her without asslidling her with my presence, brought me Word that she intended going to the Play that Nighr. As a better Opportunity than this could not offer, I prepared to Seize it, and, un seen, enjoyed once more the pleasure of beholding her. 
The Play over, I fixed myself in a convenient Place till I Saw her go into the Carriage, and then intended following it Home to see her go out. As it drove very fash I turned up a back Way to meet it coming round : I wondered what could delay it, and went back to be latif fied. I found the Servants in the greatest Consternation; immediately Couu\. Murphy ^ Speech, “she goes to the Play tonight, ” rushed on my Memory; I ashed which Way he brought her; they showed me, and 1 Soon overlook him. 
I drew my Sword, and calling as it were to a Number of People behind me, attacked the Count; the rest of his Confederates fell off on hearing me mention the count’s Name: He alone stood the Combat, and 1 fear I have wounded him Severely, before I could recover my dear amazed Sopha from him. Having collected a Body of the Watch, I gave him in Charge to 
them, 
[ i85' ]■ ■ 
them, and led her Home in Triumph, where I was received like a Demi god, for the Servants had ran there before, to give the Alarm and get Help. never did Hero, aster gaining a Conquest that established the Liberty of his Country, feel greater Complacency than I now did, nor could his Labours be better rewarded than mine were, when thanked in unspeakable Looks by the mistress of my Soul. ~ I am exalted above the Comprehension of'men who are not in the same Situation. 
. I could not steep still you were acquainted with this Transaction;; now you know the reasons of my late Condutst, can you 
deny me an affectionate Reception? -- -- -- -- 
1 appeal to your own Breast, to the Feelings of Nature, and am convinced you will’ not refrain a joyful Tear at the Return of 
your lost Brother' 
Henry Trevor. 

LETTER 
[ i86 J 
LETTER XII 
To Sir Thomas Trevor, Bart. 
Ever Solicitous for the Welfare, and desirous of the Company of him whom Choice hath made the Friend and Companion of my gayer Hours, and Providence hath thought fit to link in the Same Calamities, I cannot omit the earliest Opportunity to acquaint you with the Situation of your beloved Bella. 
O, my Trevor., ’tis incredible! you cannot believe it, tho’ I should attest it in the most Sacred Manner : — She is w Wicklow 
Gaol! -- -- ’twas I who Sent her there! 
— Ybu are all Astonishment: I am more! It would be madness to attempt describing myself,, nor could I depend on the Evidence of my senses. Our Affairs Seem to be transported into Some fairy Region, where everything is Delusion, and, I dare say, the World would mock the rehearsal of our Adventures, as the Offspring of Some romantic Brain. 
I cannot gratify my own.duriosity with Particulars half Satisfactory enough, how vain then to attempt gratifying yours.? but if you can possibly remove from where you are, let me See you at Eafeville. My Thoughts whirl round with Such Rapadity, 
that 
I 
[ >87 ] 
that they grow giddy; perhaps you can Settle them: — I never wanted your Sriendly afsist^nce So much. Again I request you’ll hasten to me: You shall have all the Stiprizing Particulars of Bellas Story; you shall once more have hersels; ' and the Sight of your Felicity will make ample Amends for the recent Sorrows df 
your 
Charles Easeby. 
•00000000000€0<50000000©00© 
* LETTER XIII 
To CONSTANTIA. 
I' Have heard, my dear Conjiantia., what to me is greater treasure than the Wealth of both the Indies., from the best authority‘too, from the venerable Doctor, whose Penetration is not to be imposed upon. -- Henry is not false! He has ever 
loved me with unremitted Ardour! Even his Seeming unkindness proceeded from the noblest Principles; Such as would procure him my Esteem had I been unacquainted with him before. 
'O, my 
t i88 ] 
O, my Conjiantia^ my Heart is So elate, it longs to power the Overflowings of its happiness into your Breast, where there is, 1 fear, too much Room for it; if there be pleasure, a Sad plcasurc, in. sharing our Distresses with a Friend, what must there be in imparting our Joys? But yet, I could not think of buzzing my Felicity thus abruptly in your Ear, had I not well grounded Hopes also, that your’s will make up a very considerable Part of it; Bella has been heard of by Some unexpected Means, and will Soon bring repose to your weary Eyes. My fond Fancy frequently amuses me by anticipating those delightful Scenes which will attend our being restored to Peace and to each other. 
Be not afraid that ibis' is intended to buoy you up with vain Hopes; I never would join in Such a tantalising Deceit: The News may be depended on, tho’ you cannot be Satisfied till the Conclusion is brought about. Indeed you have reason to doubt the Smiles of Fortune, which have So often been the Harbingers of Some dire Event, but, as 1 think, it may now be presumed that you have filled up the Measure of your Misfortunes; a happy Turn in your Affairs may be reasonably expected. 
The cause of my worthy Henry s Seeming unkindness was this; during his Stay in France he was led in to game too high, and by endeavouring to recover what a continued 
[, 89 ] 
tinued Rstn of bad Luck had Sunk, lost the greatest Part of what he was worth. His Fortune, by this unguarded Step, falling So far short of what my Friends had a Right to exped, he could not presume to alk the Hand of one he wished to raisc instead 
of depressing. -- -- Beloved me, dearly 
loved me; but that was a reason why he should wish me a happier Union than with one Sunk in Poverty and disgrace. 
Was not this Generosity, Honour, Love in the Purity of platonism.? Testeem him ten Times more than ever. — Ah! my faithful, my dearest iienry\ to Superintend the Dairy, whilst you tilled the Ground; to meet your returning Steps each Night from daily Toil, and chcar you after Labour with the fond Assiduity, the Smiling officious ness of an affedlionate Wise, were preferable to a Diadem procured with all the unnatural Formalities of Deeds and Parchments. His the Heart alone can reward Such Constancy and Merits as his; but besides that, Confiantia., I have a Fortune to give him would maintain us in an easy Mediocrity, above Drudgery, tho’ beneath Affluence. 
The very fortunate Manner of our accidental Meeting, you shall have when I See you; the whole of his Life has Something very interesting and uncommon in 
it, -- -- As it is certain that your Cousin 
Bella will shortly be at Eafeville, let me 
hear 
I '9° ] 
bear from you Soon as your transports will permit. The only i)amp that riscs in our present assured prosped of Felicity is, that after haying Sounded a Sincere Friendship in distress, and lived to See each other restored to Tranquillity and happiness, wc shall Separate into different Kingdoms, and Conjiantia perhaps be no. more Seen by her,. 
Sophia Easeby. 
I 
LETTER XIV 
To the Rev. Mr. 
ON hearing from Conjiantia., that the Watch, you have So often been told of, did assuredly belong to Bella; and having likewise received a Letter from the Count, which threatncd me wish a prosecution on that very Article, (the person who apprehended nurse Callaghan in Arklow being, it Seems, a Servant of his) I was resolved to Search into the Matter most closely; and had left Home, for that purpose, the Morning of the Day in which your last Letter was brought to Eafeville. 
I did 
[ »9> ] 
1 did not return till Yesterday Evening, hen, reading the alarming News os my sister’s disaster, I mounted instantly, intending to be in Town early next Morning. 
I had not travelled more than two anxious Miles, when I met my Friend Sir Thomas on his Way to Eafeville. I believe the Joy I Selt at Seeing him again restored to Health and me, was just capable of Suspending the Disturbance in my Breast for about the Space of a Minute: I showed him the latter Part of your Letter. He soon removed the uncasiness it had given me, by affirming that Sophia was again Safe in her mother’s house, and telling me every Particular of the Affair, as he had it in a Letter from his Brother Henry. 
A Reprieve was never more grateful to a condemned Criminal, than the Contents of this Letter to me : We reached to Ease vine in tolerable Spirits, for Sir Thomas expected to meet Bella there, having received Notice from me the Day before, that she was found; and I did not care to undeceive him, till I should get an Opportunity of disclosing the whole Narrative to him calmly and leisurely. 
Soon as he had alighted from his Carriage, I could observe his Eyes Searching for her; my Soul took Fire; 1 hasted 
to relieve his Perplexity. -- ’tis a Debt 
due to you also, because your generous » Heart 
[ 192 ] 
Heart will enjoy it, and impart • it to all concerned. 
Among bther Places of Inquiry I went to Wicklow as the most likely to receive the Sullest and stirest Intelligence from the Prisoner which had been Sent there from my House, and who, as you may remember, had recovered his Faculty of Speech. On my stopping there, the Gaoler's Wife, a very decent, orderly Woman, called me aside, and whispered that she had Something extraordinary to tell me. 
I followed her into a back Room, where she thus accosted me; “For the Love of God, Sir, don’t let that poor Creature, you Sent to Gaol, be prosecuted. 1 believe you did not know your prisoner was a Woman, a Gentlewoman, I assure you. Sir: Her Story would turn you upside down.” — It would be foolish to postpone the Sequel by throwing an Account of my Amazement 
in its Way. -- -- -- “Poor Thing, Sir, she 
is quite a Stranger here; nay, by her Way of Speaking I take her to be a Foreigner, fo that she may die in Gaol before she could be able to procure Bail or acha rader here; and the Thoughts of this Sets her Sometimes beside herself.” 
“The other Day, Sir, she got Pen, Ink and Paper, and wrote to the Clergyman your Neighbour, who has the Name of being a mighty good Man; my Husband 
went 
[ >93 ] 
went there with it out of Charity, but she has heard nothing more of it since; So that having no Hopes, she difeovered herself to me, beseeching me that I would hide 
her Shame and” -- -- -- -- -- -- Here the poor 
Woman burst into Tears; and could I then withhold my Tribute.? 
After a short Interval, wc entered into farther difeourse, and I was convinced from many good reasons, in comparing what 1 then heard, with what 1 knew before, that the Perfen described could be no other but the Object ot my Search, the 
long lost Bella. -- -- You must now pity 
my Situation; I was not in a State of Mind fit to (ee her; it would have been improper, indecent: I could not tell how to behave. 
I contrived, however, to hide my Concern from the Woman, and leaving Money, and dire<stions to take particular Care that this unknown person should be well Served, and have a good Bed, I dispatched a Messenger to Kilcoole to acquaint Sir Thomas and hasted Home myself to consult with my Aunt, but instead of that, the Receipt of your Packet gave Affairs the very different Turn just recited. 
Sir Lhomas and I had now Time to reflect on the various and Surprising Incidents which we and our Friends were bewildered in, and Ressedtion did no more than give us additional cause for Wonder, K and 
[ 194 ] 
and make us congratulate each other on the prospect of a Speedy Conclusion to all our Troubles, which might be presiimed Srom the present aspedt of Things both in Town and Country. This Set us upon consulting the best Method for releasing Bella from her present Confinement, and laying open the Situation'of Affairs by little and little, So as not to overcome her by a Sudden Introduction to her Friends. 
Conjlantia had received Some Hints of her being heard of by a Letter from Sophia but gave not, ihe least Credit to them. My Aunt, however, undertook to prepare her for the Interview, and having, by Degrees, brought her to believe the Certainty os it, she fainted away. It was Some Time before she recovered Strength enough to utter this Sentence : “Bella! Bella! is it possible 1 shall again See you 1” 
A person was di(patched to Wicklm with a female Habit and a Letter to the gaoler’s Wise, bidding her to alter the dress of her Prisoner, and acquaint her that a person would call for her next Day to bring her to Some of her Friends; for it was agreed that my Aunt should go in her Chariot to carry her away. Sir fho mas and I riding there before to have everything ready against she came, but not to appear to Bella till she came to Eafe 'ville, and be introduced as Opportunity Icrved. 
* Every 
[ '95 ] 
Everything thus fixed, and Bail en tered before a Magistrate, we Spent the Night in Such anxious Inquietude as People feel on the Eve of Some important Event, which is to determine the future Good or Evil of their Lives. Sir Thomas could Scarce be dissuaded from Setting off to ivicklow dire<stly; I Sat down to write this, and shall take it with me tomorrow, in order to finish and forward it fromuhe decisive Spot. 
Good Night! ' 
pvicklow. 
Our Hopes are all blasted! About an Hour before we came into the Town, Bella was released by an Order from a neighbouring Justice: The poor Woman was Sure it was the person I had Sent Sor her, and never hesitated to let her depart. I went directly to the justice’s house, to know who had entered Bail for her; but he was not at Home, and no Account can be got. Sir Thomas is almost frantic, laying the whole Blame upon me for detaining him last Night. We know not what to do, and are afraid to return to Eafevillc. 
-- -- -- -- It will kill the tender Confiantia\ 
nor can it fare much better with my Friend and 
your 
Charles Easeby. 
K 2 
LETTER 
[ 196 ] 
LETTER XV 
To Henry Trevor, esq. 
IN a very Savorable Hour, my dear Brother, did I receive your long delayed Letter, when my Heart was opened to every Soft Impression, by just hearing Intelligence of a Lady, on whom my Happiness depended, and from whom I had been long iinsortunately Separated: But it was at a timealso, that rendered an immediate An swer impossible; my Desire to See her hurrying me away with all the Impetuosity of a Lover, Of this Neglect, however, you have no Right to complain, your own Example abundantly justifies it. 
Henry it would be cruel to upbraid you; but I must needs Say your Diffidence in acquainting your Brother with the Circumstances of your Fortune, ’till it was too late, is unkind, and inconsistent with the Love and Harmony that has ever Subsisted between us. I know half an hour’s Conference will reconcile all Points; but let it be .Soon: Hasten to the Arms of a Brother who longs to embrace you, and tell you his dif tresses. 
I have had my Troubles too; no Doubt you have heard of Some of them, but they are now completed. With much Difficulty 1 obtained Freedom from the Arrest' 
which 
[ 197 ] 
which Count Murpljy had laid on me at Kilcook^ upon giving very large Securities; and having at last overcome every Opposition that mistaken Passion could throw in my Way, I stew to eafevilv flush’d with the most alluring Hopes os meeting my dearer Self Here, while my desires were at their Sull Stretch, and my expedla tion pn tiptoe, was 1 awakened Srom a Dream of Elyftum by the Torture os real Disappointment, 
To give you an Idea of my Trouble, I need only tell you that the Lady, who is So’ unaccountably Spirited away from me, is 
as eager Sora Meeting as lam. -- -- Henry, 
she is my wise, in the genuine unprejudiced sense os the Word: Her Hand, influenced only by her Heart, joined iisels to mine, and built the Sacred Union on a Foundation alone able to Support it; the stable Pillars os Virtue and mutual Love. Is it strange then, that I am ashided, that 1 have entirely lost my wonted Gaiety 
Our Acquaintance commenced at a Place of public Entertainment in Paris., and it Soon increased to what 1 have told vcai; Sor her Merits do not grow out of Intimacy, but appear at once Sull blown, without a Possibility of withering. We Sought every Opportunity of meeting together, ’till an unlucky Quarrel with her Brother, the peremptory Count iaurphy, and which was K 3 his 
[ igs ] 
his own Seeking too, brought on an unavoidable Duel between us. A Wound he received in this Combat irritated him So much, that he did all in his Power to prevent any farther Intercourse with his Sister, but we contrived Means to elude his utmost Vigilance, and were privately married the Day besore I received the Account of my father’s Death. 
The great Hurry I was called Home in, and a Fear of incurring the Sriendly Rebukes of my Associate Charles whose Sedate phi losophy had bore hard on Some of my looser Sallies while abroad, made me determine to keep this private till my Affairs could be Settled, and 1 might be enabled publicly to demand the Wife, 1 am now deprived of. 
-- -- -- Oh! my Brother, Fortune has done 
its worst : It has robbed you of an Estate, on which you might have lived happily with the mistress of your Affedfions; it has left me the Estate, but taken away her, on whom alone the Enjoyment of it depended. 
How all this happened, I am now too much troubled to inform you; perhaps you could hear a more perfedf Account at Mrs. Eafebys than even I could give; and the very fortunate Means by which you have renew’d your Acquaintance with that Family, make me hope you will not again relinquish your Claim; I am Sure it is still agreeable to them, and that it may be foto 

[ '99 ] 
fo you also, I will Settle one thousand Pounds a Year on you, which will replace what you have lost. 
.Di not hesitate a Moment, to accept of this Offer; it is no Compliment; what I ssiall have left will be rather a Burden than otherwise, and you shall Soon have it all. The Produce of a Farm will Suffice me, and that I will cultivate and manage myself; the Employment will be pleasing, and useful to prevent my Sinking into listless Indolence, which is what I fear from my present State of Mind. Let not then a mistaken Modesty refuse the only remaining Source of Comfort 1 can expect, that of contributing to the happiness of a Brother; and remember it is the earnest Request of 
your 
Thomas Trevor. 
q>o'qooqooooqqo&ooo0ooooo<o'o<» 
LETTER XVI 
To CONSTANTIA. 
TO preach Patience and a Contempt of Pain, with a supercilious Gravity, to persons in your Situation, is only throwing Gil upon a Phre as a Means to extinguish it. Every human sensation must be dead in the K 4 Heart 
[ 200 ] 
Heart that could Sit under your Load oflifc> and not Seel the Weight of it: The Heart must be as bad that could look on without partaking in it. This stoical Apathy, believe me, is all empty Parade; Mankind was blessed with Social and sensible Endowments for wise and good purposcs; and however prosperity or vicious Depravity may impose a false Bias on the Mind, and destroy its tender Feelings, a seasonable Lesson of Afflitsiion will convince us that this acquired sternness is a Violence to our Nature, and degrades its original Dignity. 
But tho’ I cannot, nor would I wish to root up the natural Produce of a noble Soil, and pave it with Stoic Marble, I may justly endeavour to keep it clear of Briers and Weeds, which might take root and grow troublesome in the foul Weather of Adversity. these Trials, (my fair Mourner, I Speak from Experience) are to the Mind, what Thunder is to the Air, they dispel the unwholesome Combinations of the af fedlions and Desires, and purify the intellectual Faculties. 
To explain myself. -- -- -- We feel within 
us a natural Longing after happiness; Some hidden impulse continually urging us on to attain whatever we think likeliest to fill up the Want wear conscious of. The Vicinity of worldly Objects, and their fitness to catch the senses, very frequently leads Perfbns of Superficial Thought into a Dependance 


t 201 ] 
pcndance upon them Sor that;, purpose. But tho’ this Correspondence between our Passions and the Things around us, was wisely designed by our great Creator, to render the Passage thro’ Life convenient and pleasant, which, without Some Thing to engage us intimately, would be the worst of Bondage. It may very aptly be compared to Wine; -- -- -- -- -- used moderately 
and in season, it invigorates our Spirits, improves our Constitution; but, indulged too liberally, intoxicates, gets the better of our Reason, and is attended with the most disgraceful consequences. 
Astlidion shows all these alluring ob jedls thro’ a proper Medium, forcibly impressing on our Minds the Insufficiency of them; and how unequal to the Capacity of an immortal Soul are the united Gratifications of every worldly Enjoyment. It is therefore the best Curb to the Passions, humbling us Sora Moment in the Dust, in order to exalt us on everlasting Thrones. 
Be not alarmed at what 1 have here advanced r They are not the thoughtless phrases of unfeeling Levity, but the calm resulc of a Mind Schooled in Adversity. I am a Fellow sufferer, and know what it is to be troubled : Join with me then, in admiring the goodness of God, who has given us Such Marks os his Regard (for Surely those unsought Sor Helps, which necessarily lead us to a just Knowledge os ourselves, K 5 ought 
[ 202 ] 
ought to be deemed Marks of the most sincere Regard) and falling down before him,, cry out in the Fervour of Adoration, “Lord! Thou hast made many rich; Thou hast made many great; but happy are they, to whom thy merciful visitaiions teach Wisdom.” 
I cannot help Sending you a little Hymn, the Overflowing of a corrected Heart. To the Gay and the Giddy it may afford Matter for Laughter and Wit; but your Sufferings will relish it. It has often comforted me, and if it can now alleviate the Pungency of one throbbing Pang, what care I for the Sneer of scepticism? His more than all their laboured Philosophy could do. Depend upon Heaven and fear Nothing. 
Adieu! 
RESIGNATION. An Hymn. 
^ RISE my Soul, thy Maker praise, jvhat thd. my Griefs are great, Tet surely God, in all bis ivays, Regardetb Mans ejlate, 
Bui 
[ 223 J 
His beavieji Rod corrects with Love 
i0 Joy our Sorrows tend,, 
In Pity looking from above,, 
He s mofi the Mourner s Friend. 
All gracious Father! when ajlray Thy wretched Children run,, 
Thou kindly jhewji to Heavn the pvay, In Mercy, through' thy Son. 
Their Hearts on Gold how many six. And yet we often find jvithin a splendid Coach and Six A discontented Mmd. 
Religion only brings Content, 
And brightens all our Tears, f No earthly Joys can ivoe prevent, • 
Or dijfipate our Cares, 
Then let me gladly Jing thy Praise ■ 
For all, 0 Lord, that's pa ft, ikteankfulnefs admire thy Ways, -- And meet Thee at the lafi. 
Here purify my finftil Soul, 
And, - when 1 yield my Breath, Secure with Thee ball Ages roll. 
Then welcome -- -- -- -- welcome Death. 
LETTER 
[ 20+ ] ' 

LETTER XVII To miss Easebv. 
IS it necessary, my dear Sophia to cba raoerize the Heart of which you are mistress? -- -- -- To lay it is wholly devoted 
to you, is to draw all the Encomiums, Words could express, into a Point. As the Rays of the Sun cannot help giving Warmth and Light, So nothing but what is amiable can proceed from a Breast elevated by your Love and inspired by your Example. 
O, Sophia., I feel the Value your Clioice has stamped upon me. 1 am filled with your Image, and lifted up above the common Level of Mankind. Need I then Say what Tortures I have Suffered Since my last Letter to you? -- -- -- -- -- It would be 
endless! and, thanks to Heaven, it is need less! 1 can even recoiled! them with plca lure now they have lost their Sting; but yet an Explanation of my Conduct! will not be amiss. 
The Steps, which alarmed you So much, at the Same Time they brought me to the Doors of madness, were owing to a very peculiar Delicacy of Sentiment, that has often led me into Appearances far distant Srom Reality, even at a Time when my Intentions 
[ 205 ] 
tcntions were the most refined. I have been accounted uncharitable, because 1 could not think of affronting distress with Professions of my Desire to Serve, when 1 knew the Means were not in my Power; and have theresore passed by in Silence, tho’ inwardly bleeding with the complicated Wounds of Seeing a fellow-creature wretched, and feeling rnysels unable to relieve. Heaven can witness with what a pure Passion my Soul was linked to you, while I was re solving to tear myselsaway, tho’ my Heartstrings should crack with the violent Effort. 
You are well acquainted with the cause and consequences of my late Proceedings already; 1 need not now enlarge upon them; any Particular you may have a desire to inquire into more minutely, shall be faithfully laid open to your inspedlion, whenever you please, for I never harboured a Thought I could wish to hide from you. 
And now, my dear Sophia., let me come to the Point. If my indiscretion lost me a Fortune, did it not also put it in my Power to rescue you, whom I esteem beyond all the Possessions in the World, from the Hands of an inraged and prejudiced Man.? Had not the business of my Losses led me into Count mirp/.^’s Company, on the Evening his Plot was to be put into Execution, might you not at this Moment have been 
far 
[ 206 ]’ 
far away from Joy, your Country and your Friends? United almost in our Birth, I cannot live without you; yet do not think I mention this fortunate Circumstance, with a Selfish View to influence your Determinations towards me. 1 detest Such low Intentions, and only remark it to show that, many times, what we deplore as our greatest Evil, may be productive of our greatest Good. 
My Ideas os the matrimonial Union arise from nobler Principles, unmixed with the base Alloy of Self, or the Subtlest Tincture of Compulsion. I could not be happy with the Hand, unless it was given me by the Same Simplicity of affecfion, and the Same Purity of Heart with which I received it: And I will maintain it, that not one in an Hundred’ of the Matches, which are daily transacied in this City, is considered in its natural Light, or concluded on with any other View than as a profitable con nedfion, or at Snug Settlement. How it makes my Indignation rise, to hear a dull, plodding, Self sufficient Freeman talk of the most Sublime Elevation human Nature is capable of, in the Sentimental phrase of Debtor and Creditor! His Children are to be viewed like his Merchandise. You pitch upon one, and the Marriage, by which I mean the Bargain, is computed according 
1 
to 
r 207 ] 
to*ealgates Tables of Interest. and’yet People are apt to wonder at the Number of unhappy Husbands and Wives, 
How unlike to this is the Connexion between Sophia and her Henry? I am Satisfied 
the Conclusion will prove it So. -- Your 
Mother and Friends are again reconciled to me : My Soul hovers round you, enlarged 
with pleasing Expectation -- Oh!! 
let tomorrow determine my Fate. 
Perhaps you may imagine 1 am a Changeling, and Seek today w hat Yesterday 1 avoided : No, Sophia; I was ever the Same Sond, faithful Lover; ’twas Circumstance that changed, and not your Henry. The Generosity of my Brother has again enabled me to Seek, without hurting my Honour, a Completion of happiness which 1 had forfeited by miscondua The Attainment now can make me blessed : Before, I was truly wretched, every Joy concentred in you, and I dared not So much as 
wissi to behold you. -- -- This Afternoon 
will 1 plead to your Face, the Fears, the Hopes, the Doubts and the Longings, with all the nameless Attendants of a Sincere pas sion, which I have experienced Since I left Ireland. Meet me with the tender Smile of our playful Days, when Love was in the Bud: Let your Eyes beam forgiveness on 
a re 
♦ A je’w, famous for His nice Calculations in pecuniary Matters. 
[ 2o8 ] 
k returning Prodigal, and every Suffering 
will Soon be forgot by 
Henry Trevor. 
ooooooooooooooo&oooooooooo 
LETTER XVIII 
N 
To miss Easeby. 
OW, my Sophia the Tragedy is 
finished. -- -- If I live to gratify you 
with the Remainder of my p’amily History, his all I desire; that when Some groaning Mortal hereafter tells you his Tale of Sorrow, you may repeat my unceasing Round of Afflidlions, and make the Complainer happy with his trifling Share. 
O, my Friend, when my weary Body lies shrouded in the Earth, which will shortly be the case, do thou, in every melancholy Hour, when the dismal Sound of ibme untimely Knell tingles in your Ears, or the dire mischances of unproteded Orphans wring your agonising Heart, call me to Remembrance, and dropping a 
friendly Tear, whisper to yourself, -- -- -- - 
She is now at Peace. -- -- -- - 
When the Irish Officer, who, as you may remember, was left among the wounded 
[ 209 ] 
CD after the Battle of Dettingen, had recovered, he waited on the old Count, to return Thanks for his generosity and Humanity. He enlarged on the kindness of the Behaviour he had experienced, with Such Warmth, and his whole Demeanour was So very engaging, that my Grandfather was charmed with him, and returning Home Soon after, on Account of his Age and a violent Fit of the Ague, obtained Permission for this young Man to accompany him. 
He introduced him into his own house, and there entertained him as one of the Family, till he should be exchanged or procure his Liberty by Some other Means. A very Sprightly Genius, Supported by Sentiment and manly seuse, rendered him a mosh agreeable Companion, and my Mother and he being constantly together, as her Brother, the present count’s Father was abroad in the Army, it is very natural to suppose that a fondness Soon took Place between two persons So perfectly qualified Sor making an Impression on each other- -- -- all delicate softness ^ he unexceptionable, 
nay, beloved by her Parents. 
To be brief; he professed a Sincere pas sion, and was happy in a mutual Return: But there was yet an Objection to their Marriage, a Difference in their religious Tenets; my Mother was educated in the Doctrine of the Church of romcy and he 
a most 
[ 210 ] 
a most zealous Protestant. This Bar, however, was Soon removed; for he not only plainly proved the Harmony that should unite all the Professors of christ’s Religion under the general Name and Practice of Christians, but, by a Variety of forcible and undeniable Arguments, pointed out the Errors of the Romish Church; and So Sully convinced the old People of Several abfur dities therein, that they were not only pleased, but desirous their Daughter should consorm to his Dudfrine, tho’ they deemed it necdless for themselves, an old Couple, just at the Verge of Life, to undertake So Solemn a Work as the Change of Religion. 
Soon as this Matter was adjusted, and Letters received from his Friends in Ireland. their happiness was completed by a Marriage, which both Parties ardently wished for. -- -- -- But, alas! it was a shortlived 
happiness : Malice, or Envy, or Some Such infernal Passion; instigated a young Parisian, who had made proposals for my Mother, that were not approved of, to pro jedf and complete their Ruin. 
He insorm’d the Magistrates of the Pf> lice, that a Foreigner, whose Principles, both as an English Subject and a Heretic, proved him an avowed Enemy to Church and State, had been received into the house of Count Murphy, a Servant to his Most Christian Majesty, and having poisoned 

[ II ] 
foned the Minds os his Family with the most damnable Doctrines, and deluded his Daughter to abjure the true and Catholic Faith, and become a vile Apostate, afterwards married her. 
This was Sufficient to cancel all the Services of a faithsul General and a valiant Soldier, In the Height of their innocent and heart sprung Festivity, just as three hasty Months of conjugal Delight had given them a Dawning of domestic Felicity,, was the Count, with his Lady, their Daughter and new son-in-law, dragg’d to a loathsomc prison. 
I cannot enumerate the different Effects that this unexpected Stroke must have had upon them; attended too, with the most aggravating Circumstances. Even the poor Gratification os being confined in the same Dungeon was denied them; nor could their earnest Entreaties to be informed of their Crime procure the least Satisfaction;; Infirmities of Age, the Intercessions of grey Hairs, were disregarded; and as for the Ardour of youthful Kemonstrations, it Served to sharpen the Cruelty of zealous 
Bigots -- -- They were torn from each 
other, without being Suffered to mingle a few parting Tears. 
’for five Months did they thus Separately undergo all the Hardships of Imprisonment, that could' be inssided on the vilest Malefadors; not a human Being, except 
their 
[ 212 ] 
their Gaoler, (if he deserves an Exception) admitted to Speak, or See one of them; and in this dreadful Space of Time was my Grandmother Seized by the more powerful Hand of Death. During a tedious and heavy illness, her only Desire was to be indulged with the Sight of her Husband 
and her Children, -- -- -- -- “Let me, (he 
would cry, take a final Farewell of ray Husband, my dear, my honourable huf band! Sure it would be the greatest Cruelty, after a happy Union of near forty Years, to debar us of this : And may I not imprint a mothers Bleshng on my innocent Children with a dying kiss.” 
O, Sophia., could an Infidel refus the pious Boon } Mistaken Zeal could do more. In the very wanionness of resusal, her Keeper told the Count how his Wife was 
Situated. -- -- Then it was he felt himself 
confined; before this, his honest, indignant Spirit was equal to the undeserved Treatment; but now! -- -- -- -- -- Heavens! to be 
Separated from the faithful, the affedlionate Partner of his Years, at the awful Hour of her Dissolution, when not a charitable Hand was by to perform the last kind 
Offices of Humanity! -- -- -- To think that 
she, who was tenderness itself, should die like an Outcast of the Earth; and that he, for whom alone she ever wished to live, could not be present, tho’ under the Same 
Roof, 
t 3 
Roof, to assist her in the parting Sniggles 
of Life; -- -- To recollect all the Virtues 
of her Mind, and picture the Pangs which must attend them, thus called away, instead of grasping her Children in either 
Hand, and -- -- -- -- when her Tongue refused 
its Office — -- -- -- pouring forth her Breath 
in the bosom of her old Husband: : -- -- -- -- -- 
Nature, in the Heart of a Lion, bear 
this.? -- -- The General, the Soldier -- -- -- - 
dissolved into an Infant, and weeping over his Misfortunes -- -- touched even the flinty 
Breast of the Keeper who brought the News. 
Pity prevailed; The Keeper informed him that it was not in his Power to grant what he ashed without an Order from Government. My Grandfather then requested he would allow him Materials for Writing, which, after a little Time, were brought, and he drew up a most pathetic and dutiful Petition to the King, Sending it to a Nobleman, his Friend, to present, and forward with his Interest; -- -- -- 
I am interrupted, my Sophia., by a Letter your Brother has received from Lord Langjion, which he has Sent up for me to read. He is very kind in trying if ought 
can assuage my Grief -- -- but his in vain! 
after So many disappointed Hopes, built upon more promising Grounds, can I expect Relief from him, who has, in a great measure, been the Author of my Sorrows.? 
— No, 
[ «'4' ] 
-- -- No, Sophia \ Hope, the Stay and Inspirer 
of human Fortitude, has forsaken the truly miserable 
Good Night fume my Pen. 
CONSTANTIA. tomorrow I will rc 
eooooooooooooocooooooooood 
LETTER XIX 
To Charles Easebv, esq. 
NO T merely with a View of vindicating my own Character, in order to obtain a more favourable Reception, have I dispatched this precursory Epistle: It may prove useful to you in Matters of more Importance. To make this credible, I am resolved to hide nothing from you, notwithstanding the Truth may make me blush. plain dealing is the most convincing and most engaging to an ingenuous Mind.' 
There is not in the World, perhaps, a more dissipated Liver than myself. It was my Misfortune to become possessed of a large Estate while very young; and the Peribns, to whose Care my Youth was entrusted, thinking the Surest Way to share Some of my Riches would be to pay their 
Court 
t *15 ] 
Court to my Foibles, let a warm Imagination and lively Passions take their Sull Swing, without attempting to give my rational Faculties the proper Bent. 
From an unprincipled, tho’ polite Education, 1 was led to look upon Virtue as a Superstitious Phantom, raised by Priestcraft to keep weak, unaspiring Minds in the Fetters of Religion; which I considered as a gainful Profession to the Deceivers. Hence 1 learned to gratify my Desires, with a Superior Degree of Delicacy indeed, when compared to those who had received no Education at all, but free from the least Notion of restraining them within any Compass; So that I felt not even the Shadow of a Scruple when engaged with persons whose Inclinations corresponded with my own; but never wished to break in upon the Economy of those, whom I Sound foolish enough to be confined by any religious Tie, charitably considering them as grovelling Mortals, and leaving them to their own Devices with a contemptuous Sneer. 
Green has all the Talents requisite in a genteel Pander. By an insinuating, unalarming Behaviour, he generally works himself into the good Opinion of Strangers, and moulds them almost imperceptibly to his own purposes : In this Capacity he has been employed by many as well as by * me. 
[ 2i6 ] 
me, which produces him a tolerable Livelihood. 
Some unlucky Hits as a Gambler, another Occupation of his, had Sunk him a good deal in Debt, and he applied to me for Relief, Swearing that I should Soon be Supplied with two of the finest Girls in Ireland. On this Condition I gave him what Money he wanted, and, in a few Days, he procured me an amiable young Lady indeed, representing her as a Girl ol no Reputation or Family, which drew me into a Successful Plot to get her down to my Seat. 
Unacquainted with Resistance, 1 hasted to Enjoyment; but was Surprised with the most peremptory and obstinate rcpulses: These increased my Ardour, and they still increased along with it. Every Mode of Attempt proved ineffedlual, and, for the first Time, I began to feel the Force of Virtue. A majestic Sorrow, which beamed around her, commanded my Respect; and a Complaint that she had been inhumanly and unjustly carried away from the only Friend she had in this Kingdom, made me Send immediately for Green. 
He came, and 1 expostulated warmly with him on the Affair; to which he answered, “that it was a common Trick of hers to enhance her Price, or perhaps she is willing that the Friend she has mentioned should become a Sharer also; I * know 
[ 217 ] 
know her well, let us try and bring this female Friend, who is her Cousin, to keep her Company.” I told him my appre hensions that he was doing wrong. “How ?” returned he, “have you not heard, by her own Confession, that an Intrigue with Sir Lhomas Lrevor brought her from France, and why not intrigue with a Lord, as well as a Baronet?” 
This, added to my growing Desire for the Girl, Sorced me to acquiesce in his Scheme for procuring the Cousin; to try how far that might forward my Intentions. The dcsign Sailed, and he narrowly escap ed drowning in endeavouring to effect it; and during my Stay a few Days in Town, the one I was possessed of, found Means to get off in man’s Clothes. 
On my Return to the Country, Green told me a plausible Story of a poor prisoner who was confined in irvicklow Gaol, and prevailed upon me to enter Bail for his Appearance; I the more readily granted his Request, perceiving it would oblige him, who had just run the Hazard of his Life to Serve me. Overjoyed he rode off with the Order for the prisoner’s release, the very Moment be received it; and very fortunately did 1 meet him returning with the Lady, who had eloped from Langjion house, behind him. 
L When 
[ ] 
When she Saw me, she exclaimed in a Sort of Srantic Tone, “Am I again betrayed! O unhappy Bella V- -- -- -- -- -- -- interrogated 
Green closeiy, and finding him hesitate, made use of Some Menaces, which brought him to confess the whole Truth : “That by the Help of his Scouts, many of whom he employs about his bu siness in various Places, he was enabled to trace the fugitive Bella., but all Efforts to regain her proved ineffetstual till now; and that he was under a Ncceshty of keeping her private, as he had found out, she had Acquaintance of Fortune and consequence, who were informed of the Methods by which she was inveigled away, and resolv ed to punish the Perpetrators Severely. That self-preservation being the first Law of Nature, he had again Secured her, hope # ing to procure his own Pardon by delivering her up to them Spontaneoussy, and Submissively, and throwing himself upon their Generosity for Mercy.” 
Hearing this, I Secured them both, and shall never forgive myself, for being the cause of So much Confusion and Trouble, as my Inquiries too fully convince me I have been. The Lady shall be restored to you in the Morning, pure as a newborn Babe, and I will keep Green in cus tody to await your Determinations. ^ 
I never 
[ 2'9 ] 
I never regretted a misdeed more sincerely, than my thinking or doing anything derogatory Srom the Honour of that Sex, whose lovely Virtues I shall henceforth live a professed Admirer of; and shall think myself happy, if, by a thorough Repentance and Reformation, I may be deemed worthy of Admittance into your little Circle of Friends, who are the Admiration of the Neighbourhood, and a greater Honour to their Country than a thousand Such Noblemen as 
Langston. 
000000000000000000000000€0 
LETTER XX 
To miss easedy. 
My Sister, the long wished for Day is now arrived: Conjiantia and Bella are, for certain, restored to each other, 1 hope never to part as before. Lord Lang jion^ true to his Word, brought her at the promised Hour in his Chariot, and introduced her in the politest Manner; he even shed Tears on the Occasion, professing the most unfeigned Sorrow for what had passed. 
L % But 

’[ 220 ] 
But how shall idescribe the joyful Meeting! Sir Lhomas was the first who Saw her, and bursting into the Room, he cries out to me; “By Heaven, Charles here is beu la /” and immediately leapt away to embrace her. Never was anything more catching than the transport os thde eager Lovers; it diffused itself like Fire thro’ the house, and in a Moment the melancholy. Gloom was dispelled, and every Countenance lit up with Joy. A Secret too came out, which I am very glad I did not know before, or 1 should have been doubly uneasy 
-- -- Bella is, assuredly, Lady Trevor. -- - 
Sir Thomas like one distracted, would run to me exclaiming, “Ought not I to rejoice beyond measure, thus happily united to the mistress of my affedions, to the Wife of my Choice; ” and then to her again, “O my Bella, how much have you suffered, Since last we parted, ” 
My Aunt hasted with the w elcome Tidings to Conjlantia, but Sound it no easy Matter to make her credit them: Her frequent Disappointments having Sunk her into a Sort of careless Apathy; and 1 was desirous to have the first Interview below, that Lord Langjlon might be a speciator of it; at length she was prevailed upon, and at the Height of Sir Thomas s rapturous Exclamations came down, in all the Majesty of Sorrow, a perfed mclpomency only divested of her resolute Features. 
You 
[ 221 ] 
You would be amazed to See with what Silent Reverence every Eye was fixed upon her, as if Some Superior Being commanded our Attention. 
Bella vvas the first, who interrupted this Calm, “Conjlantia.^ Conjlatitia., do I again behold you within my Reach They rushed upon each other, and Confiantia heaving a collected Sigh, Sell in the Arms of her Cou sin. Their Breathings were echoed by all around them; and every pulse beat unjson 
with theirs. -- -- -- -- Nothing could be more 
expressive of our Situation at that presenr, than what Lord Langjion., catching my Hand with an eager grasp, uttered abruptly O Eaftby! still this Moment I never felt the Dignity of human Nature.” 
After an Interval that beggars even Imagination, we got them all Seated, and endeavoured what was in our Power to divert the Current of tumultuous Jov, which had absorbed their Faculties : The Attempt was vain; Bella., indeed, Sometimes gave way to a Burst of Words, or the Overflowing of a Passion i but Confiantia could only look and sigh; and, Seizing Bella in her Arms, hang on her Neck with speechless Pathos. 
My poor Aunt was as much affedied as anybody, being Scarce mistress of Words Sufficient to bid us depart (for we Seemed riveted to the Place) and leave them together for a while, till Nature could struggle L 3 through[ 
[ ] 
thro’ the Conibat, and recover in her own Method. This was accordingly done, and Lord Langjion appearing desirous of a private Conference with Sir Thomason finding he was married to Bella., I withdrew to acquaint Sophia with the luxurious Banquet which So highly Seasted her Brother. 
Pure Nature, in her native Simplicity, affords the truest Entertainment to the Mind of Man; it ennobles the Understanding”, whilst it fills with gratifi’eation. The exulting Lover in Sir thomasy the Sincere Penitent in Lord' lang/loiiy the unexpedled Meeting of Separated Friends, in Conjiantia and Bellay mingled and enlivened with the Joy of everybody present, and heighten’d by a wonderful Concurrence of Circumstances, composed Such a Sublime Scene, a would render the Pomp of Darius a very pitiful Pageant in the Eyes of 
Charles Easeby. 
LETTER 
I 223) 
LETTER XXI 
A 
To Miss Easeby. 
GAIN, my dear Scfhia^ am 1 Scaled 
to the melancholy Tash -- -- -- -- it will 
loon be ended, and lo will all my Trouble. O Death! Death, ithou Sriendly resuge Sot the Unfortunate, Soon as Sophia is gratified, Snatch me to thy peaceful Empire. 
The count’s Petition did not produce the least Alteration in their Behalf: His Friend was given to understand, by Some of the Court Favourites, that nothing, could or would be done for him till after their try al, for which there was yet iio' appointed; Time; So that not perceiving any Likelihood of Speedy Redr«ss, and having learned that his Lady was dead, he fell into a kind of lethargic Calm, which continued uninterrupted. by anything particular, till the three Surviving Prifbners were Summoned to appear before their Judges, who Sat in a thronged Court, with all the Severe Solemnity that could possibly attend Such a Trial. 
The old Count was conduced thither first, and not Seeing his Children, he imagined they were to be tried Separately, and was meditating his Defence, when his son-in-law was brought into the Same Bar: They were preparing to meet each other’s L 4 Embrace, 
[ 224 ] 
Embrace, but were prevented by the Arrival of my Mother, now in the last Month of her Pregnancy, Supported on either Side 
by a Keeper. -- -- -- Sephia.^ what a Meeting 
was here! -- -- -- -- After a Separate Confinement 
of near six Months, in which Time the Mother was buried and the Daughter almost become a Mother. -- -- -- -- The Spectators 
could not weep for Heretics, but Nature made them Silent as Death, while each gave and received the Suitable Pledges of real Affection. 
Passing by all the Vexations of a malicious prosecution, and a prejudiced Trial, it will be Sufficient to inform you, that after an Examination of about three Hours, they were commanded back to the Same Imprisonment they before experienced: My Mother, on her Knees, implored the Compassion of the Court, that she might be indulged at least So far as to Spend a few 
Hours with her Husband I -- -- -- -- but, alas! 
the Court was a religious one. 
Next Day a Paper was Sent to the Count, informing him, that, as it had appeared, he was no farther guilty than in countenancing the Apostasy of his Children, his Majesty was gracioufiy pleased, on Account of his Services, and at the Instance of Some of his Friends, to give him his Life, his Liberty and private Property. “And will he pardon my Children?” ?” the old Man to 
the 
[ 225 ], 
the Messenger, “for where’s the Value of my Dregs of Life I let him give it ihosc 
who can enjoy it, -- -- -- Yeti will accept 
of it; perhaps my Freedom may be of Service to them.” 
He was immediately dismiffed, and stew to inquire into the Fate of his Children, -- -- It was impossible to come at the Knowledge os it; their Sentence could not be 
divulged. -- -- Every Remonstrance that 
could arisc from the casc, was urged in the most engaging and humble Manner: The Pregnancy of his Daughter; the Education and Country of his son-in-law; the Freedom of conscience; the Spirit of Christianity : And the Father was fondly comforting himsels, with Some Hopes of Success which had been given to him, when his Servant routed him up one Morning by Saying, “the whole Town was flocking together to see an Execution, and he feared it was Some of his Family.” 
Almost frantic with apprehension, he hasted out; and had not gone far until he met the dismal Procession. — His Daughter 
and the unfortunate Captain Richard -- -- -, 
his son-in-law, Surrounded by a Band of Soldiers, and Such a Crowd of Priests and Friars as rendered it impossible to get near them. Sorrowful and stow he kept Pace with the Victims, as close to them as the press of the Throng would admit, and this L 5 from 
from 
[ 226 ] 
a mere Impulse of Nature, for his 
Mind was too much distradted to be capa ble of forming a resolution. 
My Father advanced with an undaunted Resignation; his Countenance, tho’ pale, expressive of Something Superior to the Fearot Death, now and then, as he turned aside to behold the tender Partner of his distress, big with the Pledges of their plighted Love, a Tear of Affection would steal from his Eye, which, in’vain, he endeavoured to hide, and when at last she grew faint with Fatigue and Sorrow, he requested they would permit him to Support her: — Hwas granted. — Sustaining her in his Arms, after a Look of inexpressible Energy, he encouraged her to exert herself a 
little longer. -- -- -- - “We are now, ” Said 
he, “almost at the End of our Journey; “one short Hour will disentangle us from “the Prejudices of Country or Education, “and place us above the Reach of Super“ “and Part) zeal, in a Kingdom of 
“eternal Felicity.” -- -- -- - “O, Father of 
** Mercy, look down upon.us! strengthen “us in this Hour of fiery Trial I” — “Have 
“pity, jefuv -- -- -- -- To this she uttered a 
hearty Amen! and went on. 
They Soon arrived at the fatal Stake, and whilst the Executioners were binding them, the Priests were very urgent with them to acknowledge the heinousnefs of their 
Crime, 
[ 227 ] 
Crime and show themselves truly penitent, by returning to the Bosom of the Catholic. Church, which was merciful and willing to receive and restore them the Lives they had 
justly forfeited by their Backshdings. -- - 
“No, ” replied my Father, “then were I unworthy to be acknowledged for a “Member of it, if a mean dcsire of Life “was the Sole Motive that compelled me “to embrace its Tenets, contrary to the ** Conviction of my reason. — But here, ” turning to my Mother, “here is the Tic “which holds me down— — innocent “Wise, ’tis 1 have brought you to this: — “Innocent I may (urely call you, not being. “■ guilty of anything which an earthly tri bunal has Power to take Cognizance of;. “yet here are you fastened to an ignomini “ous Stake. — Merciless Wretches, has my“ “Babe been criminal too, that it “must Suffer with the unhappy Parents?” 
-- -- Here my Mother, interrupting him, 
requested he would not stagger her Resolution, by reminding her of the Situation she 
was in : -- -- -^ “It is the Will of Heaven“ 
“my Child should never be born, 
“and I am Satisfied; ’tis better it should “be So, than be left without a Guide in a 
** dangerous World.” -- -- -- -- -- “Mercy is 
still extended, ” reply’d the Priests, ** let not your Obstinacy add the destruclion of a harmless Infant to that of yourselves, but accept of the Terms, and become the 
happy 
[ 228 ] 
happy Parents of an Offspring thus doubly indebted to you for Life.” 
While these Words were pronouncing, a noise was raised among the Guards, and my Grandfather forced thro’, exclaiming, 
“I must and will See my Children! -- -- -- -- 
“no Power shall withhold me!” And throwing himself into the most pathetic 
Attitude -- -- -- “Oft have I beheld Death 
“in bloody Fields, without being terrifi 
“ed: -- -- -- -- But, oh I what a Scene is 
“here!” -- -- -- Captain -- -- -- -- -- -- beholding 
him, thus addressed him: “Father, See what we are brought to for exerting Christian 
Freedom; -- -- -- what shall I do -- -- -- - 
I have but few Minutes to consider: Must my Wife and my unborn Babe be burnt? 
-- -- -- -- will you not Ipare her till her Child 
is born? -- -- -- his but a short Period.” — 
Being told it was impossible, unless on the 
proffered Terms; he answered; -- -- -- -- -- -- - 
** Then farewell Life! -- -- -- -- Haste, light 
up the fa’ggots, ' nor torture us with vain Delay — but lead that venerable old Man aside, that he may not behold his children’s fearful End; and O, Father, pardon me for being the innocent cause of the Pangs which now rend your affeiffionate Heart, ” 
-- -- -- -- “Pardon you, my Son! replied the 
old Count, ay, and perish with youand leaping into the Midst of the Faggots, he clasped his Son and Daughter in his Arms, 
who 
[ 229 ] 
who were Sastned to the Same Stake, desiring them to take Courage, Sor they would all die glorioufiy together. 
The Priests observing the Struggles os natural Affection to be So strong, renewed their Solicitations, “How happy. Said they, might this Sond Family live, would they but listen to the Voice os reason and 
of Mercy- -- -- -- wicked must that 
Religion be, which tears you thus Srom everything that is dear to you, and how foolish are you to persist in it, when the holy Catholic Church, with all the ten derness of an indulgent Mother, importunes you to live and be blessed in your Children and Friends! With her you will be liable to no Such Torture, either here or hereafter; accept then of her Invitation 
I and j'ave your Wife, -- -- -- -- your Child, — 
yourself, fi-om the destruclion denounced against Heretics, and bring not the grey Hairs of this aged Father with Sorrow to the Grave.” 
Too closely engaged in pathetic Embraces, they returned no answer. -- -- -- -- -- It 
was again repeated; and the Count forced 
away from them.' -- -- -- -- Fora while they 
gazed on each other with steadfast Eyes — 
at length my, Father broke Silence -- -- -- -- -- - 
“It is resolved! -- -- -- When my Rights, 
as an immortal Soul, are attempted to be bounded, 1 can lay down Life with Plea sure, for then am 1 free from the enforced 
Limits. 
Limits. 
[ 
No!' 
230 ] 
since nothing but 
Terms, which would disgrace the Father, can purchase the child’s Life, light up the Faggots which shall blaze forth to 
your Shame and Confusion. -- -- -- -- -- O my 
Love, we perish not! -- -- -- my Father! you 
shall exult in the firmness wherewith we will grasp the immortal Crown that hangs over us.” 
Twas done -- -- -- -- In horrible Clouds the 
curling Smoke ascends and dims the Face of Heaven. -- -- -- The crackling Blaze approaches 
the Delinquenrs, who stand calm and Serene with uplifted Eyes, while Shrieks and Groans break from the astonished Multitude. The Fire first caught my Father. -- -- He shrunk a little from it, and looking at the Count, hrs last Words were, “Pray, that 1 may be strengthened.” 
The Sorrow, Fatigue and Apprehension hastened my mother’s Labour -- -- -- -- -- - 
she groaned, -- -- she lunk. those next 
to her hear the Cries of an Infant, and rushing up to the Fire Seize me in their Arm.. * 
my Sophia! thus was I' born: The Flames were my Midwife; would they had been my Swaddling Clothes also: 
-- -- And tho’ you will'think it impossible, 
it was strongly debated whether they should not return me to the Blaze; but the Count, roused from a State of Insensibility, 
r 2^^ ] 
biliiy, by feeing what passed, fell on his Knees, and wetting his furrow’d Cheeks with his Tears, begged me from them in the most moving Terms: “Inhuman Murderers, ” Said he, “will you destroy an Innocent which is incapable of Harm! -- -- -- -- 
Let Nature plead for a wordlefs ’ Infant, whom Heaven has pushed forth from the Fire on purpose to try if you have any Humanity left. O have Pity for the Tears and Sorrows of an old faithful Servant, who has sought your Battles and pro leded your own little Families from Ruin 
and Death -- -- -- -- Grant me this precious 
Babe I It will be a living Monument of my Children : I will live to make it thank you 
for its own Life and mine -- -- -- -- let me 
show it to the dying Parents.” 
With Some Rcluiflance I was granted. 
-- -- My Grandfather pressed me in his 
Arms, and holding me forth to my Mother, she heard my Cries; and, raising her dying Head, uttered, “God bless my Child!” and immediately expired. My Feather was dead already; and when they were both reduced to Ashes and thrown into the Seined the Count, having previously wrapped me up in Something warm, brought me Home, had me nursed in his own house, and every Day of his Life shed Tears of direful Remembrance over me. 
I am enabled to give you my Story thus particularly, by a written Memoir, which 
he 
[ 232 ] 
he compiled on purpose for me, lest the Tragedy of my Birth should ever slip from my Memory, It is all the Memorial I have of his kindness — but to conclude — 
I was educated with the present Count imurphy and his unsortunate Sister Bella., who are likewise Grandchildren to the old Count So osten mentioned, by my mother’s Brother, and his only Child after her Execution, in whole Family 1 lived since the decease os my Grandfather, which happened in my tenth Year, and, his ninetieth. 
And when he died, my Sophia, I lost my all; the good old Man doted on me, and Seldom viewed me without Tears in 
his Eyes -- -- -- Come, he would frequently 
cry, thou Child of my Affliction, at whose Birth I felt all the Pangs of a Mother, and for (Whom alone I pray Heaven to prolong my weary Life; come, let us weep together over the Story of thy Parents: Then he would enlarge upon every Particular, inculcate the Dotstrines they Suffered for, and draw Such lamentable Inferences, that, hiding o’y. infant Head in his bosom, I. would sob myself to Sleep. 
But he died Suddenly, and without making any Provision for me. So that 1 was left an helpless Orphan indeed; but Heaven was my Friend, and 1 lived happily with my Uncle and Aunt for Some time; they 
are 
[ 2j3 ] 
are now dead also; and by accompanying Bellas unwarrantable Steps, I am involved in the deepest Calamity. 
’ Sophia -- -- -- Sophia! my Hand trembles So I cannot write -- -- -- 1 have once 
more beheld Bella. -- -- Pressed her to my 
Heart. But ah! how changed Srom what I last Saw her! -- -- what immense Hardships she must have Suffered! -- -- -- but 
I have her, and may yet be happy. 
constantia. 

LETTER XXII 
To Sir Thomas Trevor, Bart. 
WITH Reluctance, my dear Brother, and Sincerely Sorry at the Necessity, did 1 Sorcc mysclf to accept of your late generous Offer. The Scale Is now turned, and you may, in all Probability, have Occasion for it yosirsclf; nay, you must give me Leave to restore it; I can do it with Alacrity, notwithstanding my hap piness with Sophia is So nearly concerned in the Sacrifice. 
But is it meet that you should Suffer for my Folly.? No, my Brother, the re steistion would embitter the Blessings of 
your 
[ 234 ] 
your Bounty; I could never enjoy it. -- - 
.Dis I alone deserved to Seel the punifh ment; therefore with the Same Sincerity that you first made the Settlement, do I now decline i Let me wait till Some civil Employment becomes vacant, the common Remedy for shattered Fortunes, and I have good Hopes, that thro’ the Interest of my Friends, 1 shall be able to procure the Appointment for myself I believe soia will be Satisfied. -- If not -- -- 1 am only 
where my own Imprudence left me at my Return from France. 
Count Murphy is still in Confinement at the house of a sheriff’s officer: His Wound' mends rather slowly on Account of the Violence of his Passions, and the Disturbance of his Mind, which is visibly very great. At his own Request, I visit him frequently; and have laid the whole progress of his Family Affairs before him, as 1 learned it from Sophia, ^ and her Mother. He is all Amazement, andean scarce credit me: The blindness of his Prejudices, against you and Eafeby., prevented his examining into Matters deliberately, and properly; but now that I have traced out every Particular from its real Soutce, and made Such Comments upon the Whole as were necessary to lead him into the just sense of it, he begins to be ashamed of his late Errors; and professes a hearty Concern for the Disturbances he has occasioned; voting 
[ 235 ], • 
ing the Severest Vengeance against the Parties really guilty. 
I believe the Fear of our Laws operate pretty strongly on him also, as he often wishes he had never made the Attempt on Sophia \ but always mentions it as a Compliment to me. Indeed he is a striking Instance of that Coniradiflion of cha ra^cr, which a passionate Man, who is, in reality, sensible and good-natured, must unavoidably be branded with. 
Let the consequence be what it will, 1 am resolved upon the Scheme laid down at the Beginning of my Letter: 1 may be happy without distressing you, vvhosc Welfare is equally dear to me as my own. — — O my shother, I am formed of uncommon Mould; I must be either exquisitely 
happy, or exquisitely miserable. -- -- But 
1 have done -- -- -1 feel your good Fortune 
with all the Fervency of an affectionate Brother, and will Soon in person convince you of the Sincere Love of 
Henry Trbvor. 
LETTER 
t ] 
LETTER XXIII 
To Charles Easeby, esq. 
IF you had a Feast 'of exquisite Delight at the Meeting of Bella and Conjiamia^ 1 had one, I dare Say, not a Whit inferior to it, on the dodlor’s reading conftantid.'s last Letter, wherein she gives an Account of the Execution of her Father and Mother. 
O Charles! her Story is sh interesting, that the most obdurate Heart must be touched with it; but my reverend Tutor and worthy Friend, was unaccountably engaged, from my first acquainting him with the Particulars of that lady’s Misfortunes. and I was amazed, when reading her father’s Name, which, by Some Means or other, never occurred till the.donclusion of her History, to See him start up from his Chair, and falling on one Knee, utter, with uplifted Hands, and pious Precipitation, “Heaven, it is enough! -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- my 
Tears are rewarded; and my Years of Sorrow lost in Immensity of Recompense!” Then rising, he Seized my Hand 
“Sophia! I have found my Child, a Child which might do Honour to a crowned Parent, 
-- -- -- -- my Breast is Swelled widi Thank 
fuloefs and Joy, -- -- -- -- -- my Heart is too 
full to vent itself. -- -- -- 1 must withdraw 
and Spend Some Hours in private.” 
He 
[ 237 ] 
He left me, lost in Wonder, and impatient Sor the Explanation of an Incident that So highly affetsted me, and Seemed So nearly to concern him: IF I may judge from his Agitation, it must be Something very extraordinary; but I must have Patience, not only Sor this but Sor other Matters also: How comes it to pass, that you were never kind enough to clear up the Mystery of Bellas getting to Eafeville^ in 
the very Surprising Manner she did? -- -- -- 
but I must not be angry with you; a young Fellow, whose mistress is just restored to herself and to him, is not obliged to think of anybody else for Some Time. 
My Brother, what Sort of Materials is this dear Henry composed of? Equally capable of blessing and of being blessed, thro’ Some refined Infatuation, he is perpetually tormenting himself and me. Beloved, admired, even giving happiness to all his Acquaintance, he Seems designed for a Scourge to the person whole Affections he Sought to fix with the most earnest Assiduity, and whose Welfare, I am convinced, is immediately essential to his own. 
His visits here are constant as ever, since the late Settlement of his Affairs and Gift of his Brother; ought I to tell you they are likevvisc as agreeable. Yes; the Laws of Gratitude will justify my avowing a Passion, which female Modesty might 
blush 
[ 23* blush to acknowledge] 
] 
I not indebted 
to him Sor my present Safety; perhaps my Life, or, what is equally dear to me, my Mother and my Brother? 
But thesetwo Days past, although he is the Same entertaining Companion, an unsatif fied Look, an unsettled Manner of Sitting and walking by frequent Turns, and tacitly implying his being under Some Engagement by often taking out his Watch, when, at the lame Time, 1 can discern plainly that he dreads going away, plainly prove to me that Something is the Matter. 
You are our common Friend. -- -- -- -- -- -- - 
He had better not provoke me. Were it 
not that my Thoughts are kept on a continual Stretch, by the Series of wonderful Events which have attended my Family this Some time past, and Seem now to be Subsiding very Satisfadlorily, I might vex him more than I could wish, by obstinately continuing to Subscribe not only the usual Compliment, but the old Name of 
your affectionate Sister, 
Sophia Easeiy. 
P. S. I have just received a Note from Henrj; and Such a one! -- -- -- -- O! Cbarkiy 
what can be done? He acquaints me with the cause of his uneasiness. -- -- -- He could 
not think of accepting his brother’s Offer, 
novf 
[ z39 1 
now he has found his Wife, and must nc celsarily want it to Support his own Dignity; And he is likewise obliged to refuse a generous proposal of the dcxstor’s, to Settle six thousand Pounds on him, which I heard nothing of before, because he has found a Granddaughter, who is worthy of all he can give her; and this he maintains with Such Sublimity of Realbn, and pleads So affcdlionately for being forced to relinquish his Claim, at least for Some Time, that I fear I am to Suffer the Fate of many of my Sex, and be rendered unhappy by being too fond. 
<50^000000000000 OOOGOOOOOO^ 
LETTER XXIV 
To constantia 
The uncommon Attachment I felt, So forcibly uniting me to your Interest, is now accounted for. — Conjiantia! it was that of a Parent for his Child. 
Your Father, Captain Richard — -- -- -- -- -- -, 
was my Son, my only Child. The Same noble Friend, who procured me the Living I now enjoy in Ireland., Soon as Dick was of a Sufficient Age, presented him with a Commission on this Establishment. After 
a little 
[ 24° ] 
a little while he was ordered abroad. It was a Severe Stroke to a fond Father, whose Sole Enjoyment of Life devolved upon him 
when his Mother deceased- -- -- -- -- my 
Regret at parting him was allayed, by considering that he went to fight Sor his 
Country and his King. -- -- -- -1 prayed for 
him — 1 blessed him -- -- -- and committing 
him to the Supreme disposer of all Events, who is a Guardian to the Just, took an af sedionate Farewell, and dilmissed him without a Fear for his Safety. 
An unbroken Correspondence was my chief amusement aster his Departure. At the Battle of Dettingen he was left as you describe, of which, together with the generous Behaviour of old Count Murphy., he wrote me a very particular Account. The last Letter 1 received from him was written in the Height of his happiness, just after he was married, in which hepromised to gratify an earnest Request of mine, by shortly bringing.over his wise to See me. 
To many Letters, afterwards Sent him, I received no answer, which Surprised me more than I can tell you; byt 1 now perceive he was at this Time in Confinement, and rendered incapable os writing; and at last weary with disappointed Expedations, and a Confusion os Doubts and surmises, I Sat down, persuaded that he was dead. 
'And 

[ 241 ] 
And he did die like a Hero, and a Christian! 
-- -- -- -- O, my Boy! never did Cato 
exult more sincerely in the honest Wounds of his Son, than I in thy heroic Martyrdom! -- -- -- -- Jn the Crowd and Tumult of 
Battle, the weak Heart has not Time to reflection Danger; and even a Coward might by Chance do a brave Action;; to walk in horrible Pomp to the adjudged Stake, requires a Superior Degree of Fortitude in the Soul. 1 am rejoiced my Son was called to the glorious Trial, Since Heaven endowed him with Strength to perform it worthily; and methinks I now abide the Arrest of Death with Courage, and feel a Sacred Longing to See how eminently distinguished he will shine among the blessed Inhabitatus of the Realms above. 
My Daughter! lam more than happy 
-- -- -- -- my Breast, this Moment, heaves 
with Something So vast, I cannot utter it. — O, my Child I my Child! I long to fold you in my aged Arms, and pour out upon you the precious Tears of a Parent : To repay you for all the Sorrows you have been Smitten with, and make amends for the tender Offices of a Mother, of which your infant Days were cruelly deprived. 
No longer shall you be dependent on the Kindness of another for the Necestaries of Life; I have a Fortune, the unwieldy Bulk whereof was cumbersome to my declining Years, without a Friend whosc Want might M entitle 
w 
f[ 
[ ] 
entitle him to assist me under the Burden; and you are come just in Time to claim an Inheritance intended for the Orphan and the Poor. But what is better, you are come to a Father, rich in Experience; tutored in the Discipline os Adversity; who will explain to you the Justice of Providence, and pointing out the Shoals and Quick sands that endanger the Voyage of Life, teach you to steer your little Bark So as to avoid them. It will afford Such heartfelt pleasure as I never expected to taste on this Side the Grave! 
I have more to Say to you than ten thousand Letters could convey expressively; to expedite the Matter then, 1 will depart Tomorrow, and be present with you Speedily as my Infirmities will allow. And then, my Daughter! -- -- -- -- We will join in grateful 
praises to that divine Providence which hath been gracioufiy pleased to make 
‘ “One bright Gleam 
“Of setting Life shine on my Evening hours.” 
LETTER 
[ 243 ] 
LETTER XXV To the Rev. mr. r — 
Notwithstanding your promist that I should See you So Soon, I could not help dispatching this short but Sincere 
prosession of my Duty, to meet you -- - 
Accept, reverend Sir, at once, all those Acknowledgments which should have been paid to your Son and my Father during the course of my lise, had he been permitted 
to receive them -- I cannot Say more — 
is possible 1 will do more. 
My grandsaiher Count Murphy., a short Time before his Death, intended making an Inquiry after my leather’s Friends in this Kingdom; knowing that he had a Father, who, if alive, would, in all Probability, be glad to receive me, and was re solved, provided Matters answered his ex pedation, to Send me over to him, ere he departed this Life himself; but Fate Snatched him too Soon to put this in Pradfice. 
What he was thus prevented doing, Providence kindly did for me, and that in a Manner So much more emphatical, that the good fortune becomes double. In a strange Country, where, not many Days ago, I expedfed nothing but Sorrow and distress, am I now lifted up to Affluence and happincss; So many circuqjstances M 2 combining 
[ 244 ] 
combining to enhance the Value of the Blessing, my Heart is overcome with the joysul Weight. 
I can now no longer lament the Sudden Death of the old Count, which did not give him Time to make a Provision for me. He left me a Surprising Fortune in the written Account of my Parents before mentioned, by which I have been able to relate the Particulars of a Story that has procured me a Friend, a Benefactor, and a Father! 
If it be possible for departed Shades to engage in the Concerns of those they have left behind on Earth, with what pleasure will my Father and Mother look down on my present Situation? -- O never let Virtue 
despair, tho’ fallen into the lowest Extremity; it shall one Day obtain its just Requests, and be exalted to the Shame and Confusion of its Oppressors: Is not the last Petition of my Mother, “God bless my Child, ” in which she uttered her very Soul, now most amply fulfilled in the person of 
Const ANTI a. 
LETTER 
[ 245 ] 
LETTER XXVI 
To Count Murphy. 
TH E Time is come, my dear Count, when I can write to you with Some Assurance, because the Partner of my Flight is happily restored, without whom I could never think of Seeing you, or of being restored to your Favour. 
That I have been guilty of a flagrant Piece of misconduist, the Progress has Sufficiently proved; I do not pretend to jus tify it, but is ever miscondud carried its Punishment along with it, Surely mine did : Death was my only Hope, my only Wish, to shelter me from pungent distress, from my own Thoughts and from you, whose Anger I knew to be justly raised against me. 
It is ncedless to repeat the unbroken Series of Misfortunes which have attended us since we departed from France., becausc I am informed you have been acquainted with them already; it is also needless for me to mention anything of Bella., as a Letter from her accompanies this to you. 
The Same Motive which prompts me to be silent on those Subjects, which I am Sure would torture your good-natured Heart, makes me desirous of imparting Inielli m 3 gence 
■ [ 246 ] 
gence that will have the contrary effed; not only Bella has been granted to my earnest Prayers, but I have likewise Sound a p’ather! -- the kindest, worthiest Parent! -- -- There is nothing wanting now 
but your presence and forgiveness to render my happiness complete. 
You, on whom my Dependence was built besore this Satal Elopement, will not, I trust, withhold your Concurrence, which is So essential to the persedlion of my (i^uiet. I have osten experienced your Bounty; — • let the result atone for the Undertaking: Come now to Eafeville., (Mr. Trevor will procure your Enlargement) where we long to receive you. We will then have it to Say, that tho’ our Fault carried its Punishment along with it, yet never did Repentance, consequent upon Such Fault, purchase more Joy and Serenity to ihe relenting transgreffori than ours to your affectionate ' ■. 
Const ANTI A -- -- -- -. 
LETTER 
'IL 
^ 1 
LETTER XXVII 
To Count Murphy. 
My dear Brother, you must be pacified, and Sor these three reasons; first, because Conjiantia has got a Parent, and I an Husband, which entirely withdraws us Srom under your jurisdustion, and theresore your continuing in Anger will be of no effcd; Secondly, because you are in Some Measure guilty yoursels; and thirdly, which will have more Force than any other. i’ll tell you a Story, 
When I first Saw Sir Thomas Trevor in Paris 1 was wonderfully struck with his 
Appearance, -- -- -- Something So degag}! 
-- -- Such a well proportioned Irijbman! 
I always felt a great tender for an 
Irishman and for no other reason, tjiat I can tell, but bcc.iuse my nurse, who was an Irifhwoman., Srequcntly predidled to me that 1 should be hiarried to one. 
In a short Time after our becoming acquainted, he professed' a Passion, in Such uncommon phrase, and Deportment, I loved him Sor the Novelty of the Thing. Let Man, the refined Realoner and Lord of the Creation, lay open the Springs of capricious Attachment, 1 never inquired into them; but at the Time you challenged M 4 Trevor 
[ 248 ] 
Trevor to combat, would have been happy in following him thro’ the World, He could not make public proposals Sor me without his father’s consent; to obtain this he was preparing to return Home, when Letters arrived acquainting him with the Death of his Father, and requiring his immediate Presence in Ireland. He wa now his own Master, and to prevent any Doubts of his Sincerity, until he could visit France again, married me in private; for which purpose I stole Half an Hour, notwithstanding all your Vigilance; 
He departed; and all the pleasure I tasted was in reading Letters from him, who had my Heart and my Hand. At last a Packet arrived out of which I received none, it was the first he missed, and I became very uneasy; a Second and a third Succeeded in like Manner, but the fourth divested me of all Patience; My jealous Love accused him, and 1 resjlved to be speedily Satisfied by coming to Ireland. 
I engaged Constantia in the hazardous Undertaking, which laid the Foundation of So much Trouble and Confusion; and had I been guided by her Advice, or Submitted to her Management in the Affair, it would have Saved us both a Number of Tears; but thinking her Manner too cool and tedious for my impetuous Desires, I listened to proposals more likely to keep Pace with them. 
The 
11 
[ h9 ] 
The consequences of this I blush to recollect, it was Such a thoughtless Step; but luckily for me you have been told them by another Hand. May the Anguish I fell, which Soon convinced me of my Folly, be a Warning to giddy Youth how they break thro’ the Rules not only of Virtue, but of Decorum, which is rightly termed the Armour of Virtue : It is So particularly in my Sex; if we Suffer ourselves to be stripped of the latter, the former lies open to every Attack. 
Thanks to Heaven, I came off with 
Honour, as well as Experience. -- -- -- But 
my Sufferings were extreme. During my Stay at Lord Langflons it is impossible .to express the Horrors of my Mind : Bereft of every Friend and Acquaintance, .and Surrounded by the Creatures of a profligate Nobleman, who were hardened in the de strudion of Innocence. His Lordship, indeed, was very polite, and his Attempts entirely free from that gross Brutality which degrades even a depraved sensualist; So that at length 1 Sought his Company as a resuge from the greater Indelicacy of his Domestics. 
When 1 found myself growing ill, I casily obtained Leave to write for Conjian -- tia; and knowing my Letter would be in speded, was obliged to deliver myself in Such Terms as could not give Offence; by M 5 which 
t[ 
[ ] 
which Means my Cousin was deceived with regard to my true Situation, and led into greater Misfortunes than before. 
Lord Langjion at this Time lest Home, and I was watched with the greatest stridt ness, till early one Morning, a young Lady of very engaging Peribn, whom I had never yet Seen, came into my Chamber before 1 was up, and representing with great Warmth the Danger I was in if I remained longer in that house, offered her aisistance to effect my escape. This I readily a greed to, willing to catch at any opportu nity os getting away, tho’ it was plain, by the Tenor of her difeourse, that my Supplanting her in his lordship’s good Graces gave Rise to the kind Offer. 
She left me, and in a short Time returned with a complete Suit os my lord’s Clothes, obliging me to get up and dress in them; taking Care, however, to Secure mine, and everything I had of any Value. She then unlocked a Door which opened on the Lobby of a Pair of back Stairs, and descending along with me, led me'thro’ a Side Walk os the Garden to where the Gardener was at Work, and desiring him to open a little Gate at the upper End of it, passed me thro’ as a Relation who had come to see her. 
When we had got out, she directed me in the way to Arklow., and, putting my Watch into my Hand, departed, telling 
me 
[ 25> ] 
me 1 might easily raise as much Money on that as would bring me from Arklowio Dublin. 
1 pursued the Path she pointed out with Fear and Trembling, frightened at every noisc, and alarmed at every Person 1 Saw, imagining every Eye looked me thro’. Not caring to stop, to make Inquiry, I hasted on strait Sorward, and believe had gone about fifteen Miles when my Strength failed, and, unable to go one Step farther. Sought out (bme Cover in a Field, where I might lie down and die, being Satisfied that, if 1 went into an House, I would soon be brought back to Lord Lang jioiis 
Here, overcome with Fatigue and Hardship, Sleep for a‘ while got the better, of my Fears, out of which Mr. Eajeby., my hushand’s Friend and Companion roused me, I knew him immediately, burr, in that Conditiiiii and dirgmse, it is no Wonder he did not recollect me. Struck with my Appearance, in Such an odd Situation, he kindly ashed me to his Home, where Shame and Confusion would not let me Speak to discover myself, knowing the tenderness of female Reputation, and how nearly he was interested in Sir Ihomas's Honour; His not being privy to our Marriage was likewise another reason why I resolved to be silent, until a fit Opportunity should offer. 
* A Fever 
[ ] 
A Fever, the Effetst of my late Troubles, now fell heavy on me, in which I Suffered greatly both in Body and Mind. During an Interval of Ease I remembered my Watch, and presented it as a Token of Giatitnde to the honest and careful old Woman who attended me, with a Hope also that file would show it to her Master, whom I never saw in my illness, trusting that he must discover me by an emblematical Picflure of mutual Love in the Cafe, which Sir Thomas gave me, with his Name and mine in a Cypher at Bottom. 
But what 1 intended to Serve the old Nurse, and Save me the Blushes of a personal Discovery, had a very different Effect. She did not show it to her Master till she had removed the Picture 1 depended Upon, and then there was no reason why he should know it; and carrying it with her to Arklouo it was stopped by a Servant of yours, who had her taken into Custody. 
While she was abroad, 1 had got out of Bed and procured Paper to write to Mr. Eafeby^ intending to make myself known * to him in that Way, but was prevented by the Servants Seizing and delivering me into the Care of two Constables, who were waiting for me, and letting me know that that was the Second Robbery was Sworn against me; for it Seems one of Greeris Associates bad found out where I was, and thought * to 
[ 253 ] ■ 
to recover me by Swearing the Robbery of Lord Lang florid Clothes against me. 
Mr. Eafehy was from Home, and the Servants all incensed, So that it was in vain to remonstrate. Nor could I be angry with any of them, Appearances were So much against me; therefore Submitting quietly, I was conducted to Gaol, where all my wonted Spirits forsook me, and I fell into a melancholy madness, only interrupted at Some Times by Srantic Fits. 
What I (uffered in this dismal Place, without Money or Friend, you know already, and I do not love to enlarge on doleful Circumstances; 1 am convinced your Heart is bleeding at the Small Share you have heard; and as you were partly the cause, by stopping Sir Thomafs Letters in Drrfi, which occasioned my coming over here, you must now make me a mends, by forgetting all that has passed, and freely conlenting to my public Marriage with the Husband I have So dearly 
earned. -- -- -- -- Come, my dear Count, 
let all be forgotten; 1 have Suffered more than you by far, and am content, since, alter all, I can Subscribe myselsyour affectionate Sister 
Bella Trevor. 
LETTER 
[ 254 ] 
LETTER XXVIII 
T o Lady Trevor and Const a n t i a —. My dear Girls, 
I Am not mad enough to persist in a wrong measure, when once convinced of my .Mistake : What I did stowed from a pure Motive of rendering you a Service;, but 1 am now too fully persuaded of the rashness of my Proceedings, to continue longer in the Same course. 
My Bella., you were right in laying your Story would have more Force than any other reason, in making me Sensible of my Error. The Thought of what you both have Suffered, makes me almost ashamed to meet you : I am now become the accused, and you the accusers. 
If anything in my Power can make you Amends, you may command me: 1 am too hasty to command myself; only let us meet, my dear Girls, as if nothing had happened; and as 1 suppose you are now to be icttled here for Life, 1 will turn all my Effects in France into Cash, and fix my Abode in this happy Country, where I will endeavour to renew the Splendour of my Ancestors, whose Fame is not yet dead in it, and be happy in your Company and Prosperity. 
Mr. 
[ 255 1 
Mr. ijenrylrevor has obtained my Freedom; I will immediately enjoy it, by hastening to See you and my Friends, and hope to meet with Such a Reception as will assure me that all animosities are forgotten : My Fault will admit of Some Extenuation, if you consider, that I was ignorant of your being married to Sir Lhomas at the Time 1 intercepted his Letters. 
1 must now require a good Office of you, which is, to be a Mediator between me, your Husband, and Eafeby. I believe' it is in your Power, and yours alone, to make them pardon my unwarrantable Proceedings : I am heartily ashamed of them, and must insist on Greens being turned over to my chastiscment, that I may revenge on him all their Wrongs and my own, which is a Judgement Scarce adequate to his deservings; 1 have not Patience when 1 think on his reprobate prac lights. 
It Is needless to write more, Sori believe you will scarce have read this, before you shall Sec ' 
Murphy. 
LETTER 
[ 256 ] 
LETTER XXIX 
To Sir Thomas Trevor, Bart. * 
YOU cannot possibly, my dear Sir, be more Sensible os the Impropriety of my condudi, than I am myself: My Letter to Bella, upon whose Account 1 have the Honour of calling you Brother, may in Some measure convince you of this; but I intend with Speed to do it more effedlually in person. 
Your Attachment to my Sister, being truly honourable, I have no Doubt of your readiness to make a Settlement on her Suitable to her Fortune, which amounts in the Currency of this Kingdom to eight thousand Pounds, and whxh shall be immediately paid on the Consummation of your Marriage. 
1 have, since my Arrival here, received the purchase Money of an Estate belonging to your Brother, in Payment of Bonds which he perfeded to me in Paris: Be pleascd to accept of this also as a Token of my respedt for you, and by Way of Recompense for what you have Suffered on my Account. If you think fit to restore it to the person who unfortunately lost it, he is worthy of the Gift, but too delicate to receive it from me. 
When 
t *57 ] 
When I was at Variance with you, I treated you as Sir Thomas Trevor a Man 1 thought guilty os a flagrant Offence; you are now my Brother, and as Such 1 trust will receive 
Murphy. 
ooo©ooooooooooooooooooooo«?> 
LETTER XXX 
To Henry Trevor, esq. 
YO U can’t imagine how much Concern it gives me, when I consider ail the uneasiness your strange Peculiarity of Temper has occasioned, not only to your self but to every person desirous of your happiness. For goodncss sake, dear Henry dfvest yourself of thole Superfine Ideas, they are too Subtle for any Latitude on this gross Earth, where Virtue as well as Zeal is more eminently Serviceable when kept down from enthusiastic Flights, which mount above the Sphere of mere Flesh and Blood. 
Come, my Brother, we may rally each other’s Foibles, now we have got clear of our late Disturbances and Troubles. 1 dare (ay you have by this time drawn an imaginary System of Platonic Love to be 
maintained 
LI 
[ 2ss 3 
maintained between Sophia and you: -- -- -- -- 
Let me whisper you; that’s an iinseeling philosophy, much out of Fashion among the Ladies now, a Sew old Maidens excepted, who can’t endure the Troubles and Vexations os a State they were never ashed to enter into. 
Away with Such whimsies; the idle Fancies os enervate Men; and is you will condescend to marry, like the common Run os Mankind, I have hit upon an Expedient that will Settle all your Scruples, and, 1 hope, make you happy. 
Count Murphy has, besides the Fortune his Sister was entitled to, made me a Present of the purchase Money he received on the Sale of your Estate, by Way of making me Amends for the Trouble and Danger his Conduct involved me in : Now as 1 married Bella without the least Expedlation. of Such Addition, nay of any Fortune at all, I think you cannot have an objedfion to accepting what was formerly your own, and the Recovery of which has not put me to the Expense of So much as a Farthing,, or even a moment’s Care or Thought, 
But lest you should form a Doubt that the Intention of the Donor should not be fulfilled by this Means, 1 must acquaint you that he hints in his Letter, how agreeable it would be to him if I thought proper to restore it to the original Owner; 
and Doctor- -- -- -- -- upon it that you 
resume 
[ 259 ] 
resume your Estate immediately, for which purpose the Money is already paid into his Hands, and the Title Deed will be remitted to you as Soon as properly Settled, 
As 1 cannot think you weak enough to, dppose your own Interest by more Speculative resusals, I hope to hear that you will have Matters brought to a crisis, and be ready to bear a Part in the Marriage Ceremony next Week, when we all intend to be in Town Sor that purpose; for as Charles and Conjlantia are then to be united, and my Marriage with Bella was in private besore; we have agreed to defer the Con summation of the Nuptials till we are pub lickly married with them. It is in your Power to make a third Party with Sophia,, therefore we all depend upon you for a farther increase of our Mirth and Felicity: And if you are not afterwards effedfually cured of a Passion for platonism, 1 will not own you to be^is the Same Flesh with 
Thomas Trevor. 
LETTER 
[ 26o ] 
w 
LETTER XXXI 
To All my Children. 
HY should I not call you all my 
Children? -- -- 1 feel a Tenderness 
for every one who is labouring under the common Lot of Humanity; but for you 1 have a fatherly affe<5bon. The Storm is now blown over, which makes this Succeeding Sunshine more than doubly delightful; When I get among you, my Heart is So filled with the Satisfied Looks that glow around me, 1 cannot Speak, and have therefore withdrawn from that Scene of plcasure for half an Hour, to leave you a written Testimony of my happiness and my Love. 
After a Number of disasters and Disappointments, you have all arrived at the Point where the romantic pursuits of Youth generally end, and the (bcial ones begin; Matrimony, the true Source of earthly Felicity : And I dare Say it would be no casy Matter to find three different Characters in each Sex, So nicely fitted to make each other happy; yet a Word os Remark from an old Man may not be amiss, for Life has its Cares and its Crosses, which necessarily diminish the Beauties of the Body and too often reach those of the Mind. 
Good 
t 26> ] 
good humour, my dear Girls, hath everlasting Charms! -- -- -- The Cora! of your 
Lips shall fade, and the Sparkling of your Eyes grow dim; but sweetness of Temper, refined by Innocence, and Sensibility of Heart, will yield Delight when Beauty shall be no more; and one unaffetsted Smile of Sincerity and Love pour more real Joy into the Breast of a Sentimental Husband, than a thousand transitory Attainments. 
good humour, like a good Soil, is capable of every Improvement, whilst the contrary, like a bad one. Scarce repays the Toil of Cultivation. 
good humour is ever pleased itself, and consequently adapted to please all those with whom it is connected;; the Glory of Women is to please. Your other Virtues will make you happy in Heaven; this will make a little Heaven ol your own houses. 
As the Glory of Women is to please, that of Men is to be heroic. Cultivate then, my Sons, that generous Disposition, which takes in all Mankind. Unbounded by the narrow Limits of Party or Prejudice, look with an equal Eye on every Son of Adam: Philanthropy enjoys ten thousand little Particulars which the Vain and self interested have no Conception of; it can extract Delight from a desart, and make the Cottage of a peasant, surpass the Palace of a King. 
O, my 
[ 262 ] 
O, my Children, cherish the divine Attribute! It is the true heroism of Man; nor meanly shrink from the Part you must bear in the Sufferings of your Fellow-creatures; you will return from the house of Mourning doubly capable of enjoying the Happiness of your own little Families, by Means of the Spontaneous Effusions of a corredled and thankful Heart; and, contrary to the general pradice of Mankind, ever make your own house a Place of Refuge from the World, and not the World a Refuge from your house. 
Each of you is blessed with a competent, not to say affluent. Fortune; yet let me affure you, he only is rich who wants nothing : Learn then the Art of Contentment, it is the true Source of Christian Perfections, and the very Foundation of that Sublime generosity which 1 have been recommending. Your Mind will be exalted above every Sordid View, and you will enjoy a Fund of treasure that makes a Bankrupt of both the Indies. 
\ am now rejoiced at the Distresses you were involved in; they have taught you more than all the Schools of philosophy put together. You have Seen how Heaven, at the Same Time it is Scourging us for our Faults, may be promoting not only our real Good, but our earnest desires. acquiesce in the dispensations of Providence, 
[ 2^3 1 
■dence, with a saithsul and true Heart, cajl ing all your Care upon him., who careth for you,, since you are Satisfied that no Foresight, no Design of your own, could ever bring your Affairs to the present happy Conclusion, 

LETTER XXXII To the Rev. Mr. 
Rev. Sir, 
Having, with allshe Reason in the World, the highest Opinion os your Generosity, I make bold to approach with an humble Request, which I hope you will not deny; nay I have So great Confidence in the goodness os a person who could Settle thirty Pounds a Year on a poor Lover of Literature like me, that I am Sure of your granting it when you know my Design. 
In my last Letter to your Reverence, I had the Honour to inform you of my great Veneration for the Belles Letters, and likewise intimated my being obliged to quit them and engage in a counting-house, in order to accommodate Nature with Matter Sufficient to satissy Some very urgent Demands 
t 264 i 
mands she daily makes for prompt Payment, commonly known by the Names of Hunger and Thirst, which are Bills all Mankind are obliged to accept, tho’ I think, if there had been an Exemption in Favour of the Sons Helicons we, the Writers of the present Age, could live much easier than we do; and the Fields of Science, which arc remarkable for producing a very fine Spring of Flowers, without being followed by a Harvest of good Fruit, would be infinitely better cultivated by a Number of good Ruricolists. 
When I waited on my Printer (for we are obliged to be as Submissive as possible) with my last new Novel, he condescended a Scornful Glance at the Title Page, and then returned it to me, and, with an averted Look, told me, “Indeed, Mr. Standijb, f the press is groaning with these Sorts of Productions already; 1 could not afford to give more than five Guineas for it.” Upon my attempting to remonstrate, he withdrew, telling me, “that People of Taste never cared for looking into the Works of an Author, the Light of whose farthing candle is visible tfiro’ the Roof of his Study.” 
thetrirth of the Matter is this, unless a Man can make a respcdable Appearance, Such as may entitle him to become Dilator to a Circle in the coffeehouse, by which Means he may praise his own Labours and point out the Beauties of them, or else has 
Influence 
[ 265 1 
Influence enough to engage others for that purpose, his Works may lie idle from Chnjimas to Chrijlmas, 
Now, rev. Sir, your very uncommon generosity has established me on this Footing; I am therefore desirous of attaining an exalted Reputation in the literary World, which it is likewise in your Power greatly to promote. The Adventures in which you and many of your Friends have been lately engaged, appear to me to be the finest Subject for a Novel that could possibly be thought on. Such an amazing Variety of Character and Incident as can icarcc ly be imagined real, and Such an happy Conclusion as must delight every Reader — I love to have Things end happily. 
IS you would be So kind as to complete the Bounty you have extended towards me, by adding a Life of Same to that of learned leisure, my Gratitude shall, if possible, be doubled. Do, rev. Sir, let me have the Materials for compiling the desired history;; will be doing Good to the World, it will be agreeably instilling the best Morality into the Minds os the rising Generation; or, which I humbly think would do much better, give me Leave to publish the Letters that passed between the different persons concerned; I am Sure the Diction is fine, and will require no Alteration either in Manner or Matter. 
N As 
[ 266 ] 
As Sor the Profits, indeed I cannot*be Sure, but expect to rise from Six Guineas, which is the most 1 ever got Sora Novel, up to Forty, which is the most anybody gets, at least any Irish Author. I have been Speaking to my Printer about it ^ he now ashs me into his Parlour, and promises to recommend the Work to Johnston in London, whole very Name at the Bottom of the Title Page will tell a great Number. 
To prove that I am not altogether unequal to (he Undertaking Solicited Sor, and, at the Same Time, to give a Small Specimen of my eternal Gratitude and Obligation to you, I beg leave to lay the following epi ihalamium at your Feet, composed on pur pose for the Marriage of your Granddaughter and Friends. If it has no other Merit besides that of being executed on a new Model, it is thereby rendered preferable to most of our modern poetical productions;; I will show you, that it is construded according to Horaces Art ol Poetry : It is a Savorite Maxim with him, and with me also, Ntc Dtus intersit, nisi dignus vin dice nodus inciderii*.” Now as 1 think there cannot be any Knot So worthy the Attention r>f the Gods as the Marriage Knot, I have not been Satisfied with introducing 
• Nor let a God in Person (land difplay’d, 
Unless the laboiing Plot deserves his Aid. 
Francis. 
.[ 267 ] 
ducing one, which, tho’ Sufficient for a common Wedding, would not afford Dignity enough to the Union of So many worthy persons as 1 had to celebrate, and therefore a Number are deeply engaged on the Occasion. 
I have likewise adapted the Words to Music (I have a Turn that Way too) that it may be represented as a little musical Drama on the \wdding Day; and, if you think proper, 1 will attend to regulate the Performance, and fill the Character of dr, my Voice being naturally harsh and fitted to Such a Part, 
1 am, rev. Sir, 
your most obedient, most devoted, 
and very humb. Serve. 
Simon Standish. 
N 2 
A N 


'4- 

A N 
Allegorical, Moral, Dramatic, Musical 
ENTERTAINMENT 
B Y W A y O F 
EPITHALAMIUM. 


N 3 

DRAMATIS P E R S 0 N AE. 
Minerva, Goddcfs of Wisdom. 
curid, God of Love. 
Hymen, God of Matrimonj. 
Venus, Goddess of Enjoyment. 
Dis, God of Wealth. 
Two fidlitious Deities attending Dis, in Charafler of Hymtn and Cupid. 

[ ] 

An allegorical, moral, dramatic, musical ENTERTAINMENT; 
l)y Way of E P IT H A L A M I U M. 
Enter cupid. 
Air I. Tune, Hope, thou Nurse, c. CUPID. 
From /dds Top once more I come, 
To bless each faithful loving Pair; 
At length, with Joy, i’ve light on some Who seek, and prize my heav’nly Care. 
Enter Hymen, meeting Qvbi'o and not knowing him. 
Air II Tune, How can you t lovely Nancy, 
HYMEN. 
I. 
Ah! what Phantom art thou, which fo pleaseth my Sight! 
Methinks I (hold know thee, the God of Delight! But departed from Earth, and unknown among Men, Can I ever hope here to meet him again? 
N 4 
CUPID, 
L 272 ] 
CUPID, embracing him. 
II 
Dear Hymen, is’t thou? -- -- Yes, I know thy lov’d 
Voice, 
And have happily met thee, once more to rejoice; 'Yet say, once foie Partner, and i'under’d too long. How Adairs arc conduced in this mortal Throng? 
Air III Tune, In Infancy, c. 
HYMEN. 
I. 
When thou, dear Cupid, took thy Flight, 
And left me here below. 
With thee fled ev’ry chaste Delight The human Mind can know : 
My Torches blaze, but oh! the Flame Nor Love nor Beauty raise: 
My Rites are but another Name For Bargain, Sale, and Seize. 
II 
Hence mighty Illsdifturb the World, 
By Wealth and int’reft toft. 
Soft Peace and Union forth are hurl’d, 
Bliss, Ease and Pleasure loft: 
Fury and Difeord hold their Sway o’er wretched Man and Wife; 
Who not by Fondness join’d, but Pay, 
Live not In Love, but Strife. 
'Enter Venus. 
Air IV Tune, When the Trees are all hare, c. 
Fen. My arch little Wag, and his Comrade, both here 1 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- - 
Kind Fates how pfopitioufly done? 
To the Wedding, i’ll wager, they both of them steer, 
Tho’ an Age since they’ve both been at one. 
Wherever 
[ 273 ] 
Wherever they go 1 must surely attend; 
Cup. To you I was just on the Wing: 
Him. And I, mighty Queen, -- -- -- to request you’d 
bc.riend -- -- - 
Vert. And the same Supplication I bring. 
Air V Tune, Harnoefl home. 
VENUS, [io Hymen.] 
I. 
By unthinking Rtkes, without thee I am Sought, Who would fix ev’ry Pleasure in Change: 
But in making the Trial they’re Speedily taught, That I from your Side never range. 
unhai^pily blind, too late they (hail find Enjoyment is not without thee. 
Without thee, [To Cupid. 
Chorus. Without thee, 
Enjoyment is not without thee. 
II 
The wealth loving Wretch, without thee hopes to taste [To Cupid. 
My Joys all in Riches combin’d; 
But at last he’s convinc’d, with his Money unblest, That he wants the true Treasure of Mind. Unhappily blind, too late they (hall find Enjoyment is not without thee, 
Without thee, [To Hymen. 
Chorus. Without thee. 
Enjoyment is not without thee. 
III 
dll. Our Separate Aid, foolish Mortals, in vain, To bless with Enjoyment, implore: 
’tis thus Hand in Hand we our Empire maintain. And equally bless Rich and Poor. 
Who to thistruth is blind, (hall wofully find, Fen. ' Enjoyment is not without me, 
Qup. Without me', 
Him. Without me, 
AIL Enjoyment is not without me. 
Enter 
[ 274 ] 
Enter Dis, and his false Deities. 
Air VI I'une, A Cobbler there njoas, he. 
D I S fsrtgs; the others bearing Chorus. 
I. 
What a Pother is here with all those fine Names! Their Loves and their Darts, and their Fires and Flames! 
Will such pretty Fancies e’er comfort the Cold,. 
Or fet the Mill going like sovereign Gold? 
Derry down, 
II 
Has Beauty the Power to please ev’ry Sedl, 
And in ev’ry Station to purchase Respect?? 
Love, was a Kingdom or State ever sold? Indeed for no Love, but the Love of good Gold, 
Derrydown, bfr* 
III 
’tis this that improves ev’ry Virtue and Grace and 
gives Life and Perfection to every Face; 
Nor was any One yet either ugly or old Whose Pockets were lined with good sterling Gold. 
Derry down, 
IV 
Without it in Wedlock could any be blessed?? 
young ones are fquallingj the Wife mud be dreil: 
But i’faith let them squall, and let Madam too scold. there’s Music drowns both in the Chink of her Gold. Derry down, ic. 
V 
Take your fine Wife to Market, and swear you adore her; 
there’s nought in the World you value before her:. Yet, in buying a Dinner, i’ll venture to hold, 
The king’s Picture has ten times more Charms in Gold. Derry down, Wf. 
VI In 
[ 
275 
VI 
} 
In Love, Law or State, if a Favour you’d gain, Without this grand Pleader your labor’s in vain: And since Money gains all Things, you need not be told; 
Thai the Person gains all Things who gains mighty Gold. Derry down, centre 
Minerva, at sight of uohom Dis, bfc. attempt fleaiing out, but are stopped ^yvenus, Cupid, ic. 
A 1 R VII Tune, Novj can 1 slay, c. in the Oratorio of ejiher. 
MINERVA. 
Hah! mighty Wretches, are you found! 
1 wilh for ever you were bound; 
Not here to wander and delude A giddy Multitude. 
Strip them of those borrow’d Clothes, 
And all their native Filth expose: : 
foolish Mortals take a View: 
What Measures you pursue I Hah! 
Here tke o there Deities ftripoff their outfidedrefs, after which they appear hideous. 
I R VIII Tune, If der the cruel Tyrant ci. 
Unhappy Man, who thus bestows Life's only balmy Joy; 
True Pleasure that from Reason flows. 
For such a gilded Toy. 
II 
Say what is Love? -- -- -- A Ray divine. 
Imparting pure Delight: 
And what is Gold -- -- -- A sordid Mine, 
But glittering to the Sight. 
III 
Who choose the first, all real Bliss, 
And more than Wealth, (hall aid : 
Who choose the last, of all (hall mil's. 
And prel's an empty Shade. 
A I R 
[ 276 ] 
A I R IX Tune, Sad colhnet, l^c. 
\. 
Some dear lov’d Friends, by Virtue fway’d, This Night in w’edlock join; 
Bestow, kind Deities, youi Aid, [To Cup. Him. Which still must perfect mine. ' & Fen. Cup. Each fav’rite Swain and Maid i’ve blefs’d; 
The fondefi, truest Pair, 
That e’er a mutual Love profefs’d, 
Or claim’d my godstiip’s Care. 
II 
Him. In blooming Wreaths their Hearts are twin’d, 
. Like Wreaths (hall twine their Hands, 
Nor (hall my Influence be confin’d * j But Time improve the Bands. 
Fen. Domestic Peace (hall smile around. 
And Joys on Joys arise;; 
when their Years are weighty found. they’ll claim their native Skies. 
'III 
Min. The choicest bleltings of his Care Each guardian God (hall (how’r. 
And Earth, their peaceful Path to cheer. Spread ev’ry balmy flow’r; 
Their happy Lives the wondering Sage Shall copy, and approve. 
And form by them the rising Age To Wisdom, Virtue, Love. 
* Alluding to the Honeymoon, which generally terminate the Rapture of modern Marriages. — It takes about the lame Tinae to wear the Gloss oft a new Coat. 
. LETTER 
t 277 ] 
LETTER XXXIII 
To Mr. Standish. 
I Have considered your proposal for publishing the Letters which lately passed between me and Some of my Friends ^ and, tho’ not altogether So Sanguine in my ex pedlations as you are, cannot help thinking they will compose a tolerable good Novel, if properly managed. 
As they were all written at a Time when the Parties were deeply interested in the business, they must undoubtedly exhibit a glowing Picture of the human Heart; I therefore approve of your Intention to publish them just as they are, and have, for that purpose, tranfiated the few which were originally in French : But when 1 reflect on certain Things called Critics, who apply a Scale to the Mind, and judge of the Affections by Rules and Precedents, my Heart trembles for the Fate of this little piodu(5lion, which contains the pure Sallies of unbounded Nature. 
The Name I leave entirely to yourself; and must give it as my Opinion, that you cannot Single out a Hero or Heroine in the whole; the Interests and Affairs of the Persons concerned being So iniwisted and com 'mixt, it will be improper to entitle it the Adventures of any one of them. And 
here 
[ 278 ] 
here let me mention a Hint os nurse cal laghatis: She happened to be by when 1 communicated your Letter to the Gentlemen and Ladies, and declared it would make the prettiest Story she ever heard, if I would be So kind as to mend her bad Spelling; and that as it was a true Story, she thought it might be called. Real Facts,, an Irish Novel. 
I have thought fit to disguise Names, by adding Seigned ones to the proper Titles of the persons who are the Subject of the Piece, and am content myself to be noted by the Epithet of Reverend only, w hich I think implies the whole Duty of my Function. 
Perhaps it may be necessary, by way of completing the Novel, to inform your Readers, that I had the pleasure of marrying, at one Time, Sir Thomas to Bella, Mr. Trevor to Sophia, and Mr. Eafehy to my Granddaughter; and also, that the unfortunate Woman who was So much hurt when the post-chaise was overturned, and afterwards recommended by me to the Magdalen Asylum, is Wise to Green, and has lately Sent me Such a description of her present Situation, and Account of her own Life, as may, if this Effort Succeeds, become a Second Step for you in the Ladder of Fame, which you Seem fo desirous to ascend. 
This 
[ 279 ] 
This little History was accompanied by a Supplicatory Letter in favour os her reprobate Husband, begging of us not Danish him here, where she might often be told of it. Accordingly we proposed tranfpor tation to him, which he was glad to catch at, and is to be shipped off .immediately to the Plantations. 
1 now Submit the Whole to your own Management and discrction, happy ccjuld it cheer gloomy dtspondence with a Ray ^ of Hope, and by throwing a proper Light on the false Steps of the chara(ffers exhibited, caution the Unwary against piirsuing the Same Tract; or should it even in Part answer your desires, be assured it will afford Satisfaction to 
Your Friend and Well wisher 
F J N I d. 
Advertisement. 
f 
Mr. Standijb presents his Compliments to the World; begs Leave to assure them, that he has not varied in the Smallest Tittle Srom the original Letters, of which thaprecedingvolumes are composed, except iiv*\pdernizing the Words, honorfavor., which Manner os Spelling, tho’ not uiiiversally adopted by that learned Lexicographer Doctor Samuel Johnson., yet Mr. Standijb cannot^help recommending it as a very usesul Refinement, because People of fassiion.may Safely affirm upon their ho nor., or promise to grant a Favour., without being at all bound to U in either. 
List of BOOKS, piiblissied in 1769. 
Sold by D. cmamberi aine, at faulkner’s Head ia Dame street, facing fownes’s Street. 
The Works of laurence Sterne, A. M. Prebendary of York, and Vicar of Sutton on the Forest, and of Stillingion near York. With the Life of the Author. Embellished with a head of Mr. Sterne, a striking Likeness, and other Cuts. In Six Volumes. Price 16s 3d. 
Sermons by the late Rev. Mr. Sterne. Vols. 5th and 6th. Price 4s. 4d. 
T HE Fourth Volume of the Fool of Quality; or, The History of Henry Earl of Moreland. By Mr. Brook. Price 38. 3d. 
The exemplary Mother, or. Letters between Mrs. Villars and her Family. Published by a Lady, from the Original in her pofteltion. In two Volumes. Price 53. 5 d. 
The Man of Gallantry; or, The History t; f Sir William Lovcdale, and Miss Sophia dightoi.<^^hn a Series of Letters. Price 2s. zd. { 
Letters supposed to have passed betwecri Ivl. de St. Evremond and Mr. Waller. Price 2 s. 8 | d. 
The History of Miss Sommerville. Price 2s. d. goldsmith’s History of Rome, 2 Vols. Price 6s. 6d. 
The History of Paraguay. By Father Charlevoix. In two Volumes. Price 10 s. lod. 
The Cottage; a Novel. By Miss Minifie, Author of Barford Abbey. Price 2 s. 8 |d. 
Two Novels, viz. The Delicate Distress;; The Gordian Knot. By the Authors of Henry and Frances. In two Volumes. Price $ s. 3d. 
The Delicate embarraltments. A Novel. Price 2 s. 8 |d. 
True Delicflcy; or, The History of Lady Frances Tyiney and Henry Cecil, e('q. Price 2 s. 8 | d. 
The Life of alexandertope, Esq. With a critical Essay on his Writings and Genius. By Owen Rutfhead, Esq. To which are added, Mr. pope’s Letters to a Lady (never before published). In two Volumes. Price 5 s. 3 d. 
An 
List of B O O K S, published in 1769. 
An Account of Corsica, the Journal of a Tout lo that Island;; Memoirs of Fafchal Paoli, with his Head, By James Boswell, Esq Price 2 s. 8| d. 
Th e Adventures of Telemachus, the Son of ulylfes. Translated by j. Hawkefworth, LL. D. I'rice bound in Sheep 3 s. 6d, in Calf, tooled, 3 s. 9i d. 
The History of the Reign of the Emperor Charles V With a View of the Progress of Socipty in Europe from the Subversion of the Roman Empire, to the Beginning of the sixteenth Century. By W. Robertson, D. D. In three Volumes. Price 16 s. 3d. 
An experimental Hidory of the Materia Medica, or of the natural and artificial Subdances made use of in Medicine. By W. Lewis, M. B. F. R. S, In two Volumes. Price tos. 10 d. 
ththidory of Emily Montague. By the Author of Lady Julia Mandeville. In two Volumes. Price 
5®... 
The Patriot King difplay’d, in the Life and Reign of Henry Vlll. King of England. From the Time of his Quarrel with the Pope to his Death. By E. Lewis, .A. M. Price 2s. 8 |d, 
Frederic and Pharamond: or. The confola tions of Human Life, By J, Langhorne, D. D. Price 
IS. id. 
The Hidory and Adventures of an Atom. By Dr. Smollet. Price 2s. 8| d. 
Letters concerning the Present State of the French Nation. With a complete Coraparifon between France and Great Britain. Price 5 s. 5d. 
Tales, translated from the Persian of Inatulla of Delhi. Price 2s. 8 |d. 
The Hidory pf Lord Clayton and Miss Meredith. Price 2s. d. 
Constantia and her Daughter Julia. An Ttalian Hidory, With a Difeourfe on Romances. Price 2s. 81d. 
Memoirs of Madam de Granfon, an Historical Novel. Price 2s. 2d. 
Agreeable Ugliness; or. The Triumph of the Graces. Exemplified in the teal Life and Fortunes of a young Lady of Didiodion. Price as. ad. 
i 
ERRATA. 
Page 85, line 11, from the Bottom, for Tonunly, read Tremor. 
P. 168, 1. 8, from the Bottom, delebefore featured. 
P. 188, 1- 2. f. potoer r. pour. 
Pi 198, 1. 8, f. before T. after. 
In the Second Volume of this Work Letter XX was by Mistake number’d XXI in the MS. and Letter XXI numberd XX The Reader is desired to rectify the Mistake by reading the xxift Letter before the xxth. 


.. ■ AF: 
’1 f: ■ J' - y CL 
tti' * P ' ‘ ' ' i; ?'' * [ '. 
, MC- -- 
. -. ^ Lf., 1 
■ ■ A ‘.nh. .■ ^ 1 hsi'm! 
•■• '. •_, ' i ■. * ^ < 
., - »■* 1 h V 
rar j, .'- ■; iv •ifl’c’ h" V i 
IV. ■< LV ’.•if : -*■. ' ♦ii ' 
/1 rt ‘ f ■ ' ’ S - II ‘ t ■■ ' * • 
V f i. :; '; '.; P k 

f - >'. 
r »tv 
Tk 
AN crt, 
V lt... 
st«.jj 
s (* 

V'v^ 
^ rii •.. f ^^tte ^ 
U, of Pa. 
1 a W nr ti ‘ 

T? : f 
- r 

otr A C 
-- N 



‘■u 
'i • ' ■' ■ ' •,, "’ » • L '■ '■., ’■ '•. D ■ •’ ■^..- ’ "■; [~ 
y. ■ ■-■" 
■ • f ■■ '• L ’ ''T*'‘ '.. h ' * ' *. 
dit/ « 7i. '' stci' ^ ■' < ” ■ L ' • ■ '■.. 'cn’m V* ‘y A,, ' '• 7-. V :, 'v..., •. V • V i Vf'v' C * ' ■ -_- ' : V N, C oc • • ' -, '■; .e ■■ >-■ ■ ■•'' ' ‘^- 
f ‘ '3 



30213 

