 


f '■ ‘i. \.. ’yn 
ri: ^ X 
'V \rivari h'' ...DONNN■'■■'■ 
v: : „ IX ■ 'A / i ■ /.- ]/>•■ '. : a ..-■ ' 
\ ’ 

■! I 
A.txvx -.. 
LC i/sv^ccf't. 'v‘ar ' 
;;. 
S; V' ' !' 
.0'; \ 

” ri: •: v^v 
/v i'm. A llarir " 


hfncs,, ' 
D’' ■ r;; 

Di c /, .'S 
■ 
KVL 
AK; : '/ ■ \; '! ^ ‘ I •■ ■ •. » R \.. ‘- V A. „ ■ 1, 
A ’'A.' ..'AA, A, : y 
T '■’ / i ..4 vlvtv •' i «- A.' /.' ■ 
, T' TV 
^ ■ 
VT V 
1 J •'■ 

'.■' : V ■ 
, ■ n ■ 
• / .: 
I. .sr 
, - -. "I 
rau 
/■. ■■' 
'Si? ‘‘ 
sr, 
, /; yi; ‘ ^ 
i ri 
■' i 
r " si 
/■ 
. T, 0, -. N ^ '. ' 
J 'i, ■ •■ ■ ^ -- ^ L i \ -.. V '■ 
•' ■ .h 'anv, •■ ^ ■■ ^ ' 
■ i / '■ r. 
i b.l L 
h v f •^■i 
i b V I'br v ■; •) / b; 
b t jvalt hcc, 

... n. 
.. ■ ■' J r ^ 
'■ ■■/: ■'' ( 
'V,, 
r \; 
, ' .' i j 
V - ' \/‘ '■' Vf| 
■f J 
., 4x. 
SC - N 
if 
i t 
h fr 
L V 
NV /tec ' 0> Axe, v.a.tvi 
V s t '■ V ia ■ 'V 
’. 'f. I - V bv 
k. 
.., :. f 
vi „ /; NB.; 
.- //■ J V : V : '^..■ : = K.. / 
'■ ■ ■ ' K f 

A 
/■''. '"'ts 
X "m 
) Jr 
!j: st 'b 
V.. ■- ■ '\ ■ X 1 1. -. ' b' V - ''' •. V.. : f; if 
't bf) A ■. X 
J • dl 
b }... \ ■. s .■ : : VA 
/ r. / 
0 _ : ... : 
'f 
\- L I; ' 
I. 'Sri 

V '4, 

■i' 
fd 
, '' ' / 
/-, 
i, 

, / )■ / K 
/ 
'.1, V f 

vi‘ A 
\ i’ i, ■■ ’, 
: rt; '•■; ■/; 
'; ' 
LI 
I ri. 
! ■.;, ■, 
V 
'■ ' ■ 

V, 
,. • "■ d., 
A' 
^/ ■ ■ r, i 

4 4'./.. ', /> 
i' 4\ I ■ ■ 
H :, h.. 
/.. \ f 
t 
- ■ ■’ 
'1 : ' LV V 

A ' f' ' / ■ ' ■ 4 
'tv..: ..:? /: .: 
VA si 
h • •. 
f ■ V. 'Very 
• V ■ 
4,, \vf ri \ 
'h'" s,, 
■•■ ■ (ri/ri 
■ ■ V .■ 
\ .’ 
'' ', V • ' 
; ' / 
.i J \ VVY ■,,, 
f' v' 4C 
''ii '• '■* ■■ 
rii .’v; " ■ / '4 L; cs 
l44 v' lrv; ' yrif A kua^^ af rri'ri 
v'driyaa 
■. ^ ■ i/j : ■■ o ... 
A 
F 
bk 
'K ■ / 
: y CI 
- y h y v. : i 
'Arid. ■ : -; sa.y 
y', '' ■ ri 
'■’ i %'■'■ Ir' h VS 
4 r r II' : / if 
V VC' t vy,; 5- ■ :; 4 
4 n 
V i' 
-^'40 '4 
I v' 
Ctek' > v'c^'^i y wa ^vi^ ' •■■■.■■n.is'ni,; V. \-' :; a 
, ^...; VK.. 
■fv'’ •>; ■■•■ \ '- V .., '» 
ai: : 
la 
■.'• 'i 
■ / ', V. 

.•N 
%vvf\ A /■ 
■' ■ ■.■ ■ ' '■ ■.•: '■ i ■ .: .>. 
'
va iji&aiv v;; - 

A 
fsvri'v.. --, ■ .' • rr 
■ t' 
M ‘ OV*^ V ', ’ ' 
..1-. 
T A: ■:. iv a ■ 'L ■ -'‘ l v 


A 
'r.ti., 
: V /.■ 
-'■:; V v >v iv=t' ‘ r 
..■,, ir j: 
t i - a; L ■ 





nest; ri 
■ A 'i ■ \ ' '^ ■ \ 
•. - Ayr • • .•, ■ y ai' ' ': - y i'c 7v i. '" ■ ‘iva V 'i 4; A' rr 
! ^ ' ■ /;., A V -.; y, r, 
"C .a; .-; ^• -■■ ■ AI; IV A ■ 
IV i Kr ■ 1 •. -, '■ 1 

V A 
■'f 
'ci' 
/' V 
V 
!.J ■ ■. • -, V ■ i. 
.; - V ■ ')•'■ ■■■ 
: ' ': akt: :. '\ -. 


L. \ 
N. L: V " 
■; : A •- \ ^ ■ 

N 

A ■ 

■"'aa/'' 
rid 
■ \ 
■ y ' 'V '\ 
/. •/ :. ■: 
A s'fa ‘ V SA 
rvri" A; ’ N 
tv AA ' A" 
\ \\ 
yri A' F]; V’.V 
/ / "• A 
•r ‘.; 
A. ■, • > 
f; 
aa’': 


\- 
V '/ 'vjfc 

THE 
CONFESSIONS 
O F A 
C O QUE T. 
A N O V E L 
In a Series of LETTERS. 
Par Ccnfefjions farfaite Vous jugez de uamour. 
CUPIDON. 
LONDON: 
•; Piinted for W, LANE, Leadenhall street, 
1785, 

ft' '■ 

fk 


■ 
‘X.. 

'VV ’i ..•; -•': LV 
vv*. 
# v 

■ '€5 

- • ■'' "f; 

38^’5 -- ‘r.^‘«^ -- -, : S, 



It rtf f^ 
m 

PREFACE. 
T3EFORE it was determined that ^ the following letters should be exhibited ill an English dress to the public, the Transtator often turned in his mind their tendency, and the probable reception they might receive on their introduction. A variety of reflections encountered the idea of increasing the literary stock ' of the public", by their contribution; 
till reason and Sentiment combined' : in their favour; and at length it was d decreed that So faithful a delineation of human nature ought not to be withdrawn from the light, or con demned to obscurity. 

C tel 
Were the errors which milled the heroine of the piece, and her noble correspondent, interrupted or given oyer by an abject Servility to the opinion of the world, we Should' instantly conclude that their amend ¥ 
ment was at best Suspicious j but when we behold the Spontaneous emotions of the soul, the genuine dictates of the heart, and the un biasted operations of the judgement, concurring decidedly in condemnation of that giddy and culpable career, which must certainly terminate in remorse, and grasping at virtue for its own sake, we cannot refuse our tribute of applause to Such generous and animated efforts of reason, nor refrain from uniting our 
f V ] 
effusions of congratulation on the concluding happiness of the different recitals. <; 
Permit then, indulgent reader, an injured exile to Say, that once he tasted (for what is irretrieveable absence but death) the Sweets which virtuous friendship can impart; a friendship where vivacity, affability, sedateness, and good-humour, formed, the basis of a quadruple alliance, between four of the most amiable and innocent of their Sex; whose value the respect due to virtue always enhanced. 
As if increase of appetite had grown From what it fed on.’* 
Permit 
[ VI ] 
Permit me then to place this offspring of my industry under their wings, of whom I may truly say, 
“How can they forrow who never knew fin.’* 
And with your indulgence address them in this dedicatory apostrophe: 
Ladies, 
/fv Were I not fully convinced of that liberality of fentirnerit, that general philanthropy, which actuates your judgments, and animates your hearts, this address would miss its object. 1 may now judge, as absence has not impaired, but on the contrary more deeply imprinted on my bosom, the inestimable value of those qualities which first endeared 
yon 
[ VII ] 
you to me; that your candour, consistent with itfelst will pity, not insult the frailties of an unthinking 
o 
person of your own sex, whose life of giddiness and levity is So justly described, and rigidly condemned by herself; were we not liable to human frailty, where would be the value of that godlike attribute, mercy? Am I an advocate for licentiousness?? That placid influence of virtue which inspired even me to quit the career of distipatlon, and taste the pleasures of felf denial by your example, ought to be the only tribunal before which I Should not wish to appear the advocate of such a cause, were I even to suspend my abhorrence of vice, and hardy enough to make the attempt. Receive 
( viil) ^ 
ceive then, at my hands, this naked portrait, and let me put it into yours, to cloth it with compassion. 
Adieu, my friends, happy women! whose lives are one continual feast of refledsion, to whom no sting or thorn can give pain, unless it be for the woes of others! Breathing in the tomb of absence, accept the tendeyest wishes, and purest friendship of a well wisher to the fair part of the creation. 
THE 
CONFESSIONS 
OF A 
C 0 u E r. 

Paris, 
L E T T E R I. ^ 
; FROM 
Th Marchioness T O 
Lady Fanny. 
f j A H E confessions, my dear friend, which you require of me, are seldom made to a woman, and especially to an English lady, who differs much from others in the principles of gallantry' 
'With 
C O N r E s3 I ON 5 OF 
'With you a cool reserve cloaks with the veil of Sentiment, • the propensity'which all women have to gallantry. We are less circurhspetst. : Sometimes we blame intrigues and Intimate connedlions as well as you, 'we do not imagine how a woman cam forget her duties, and obligations, and whilst we are declaiming against the con dufl of others, we unfortunately conclude by falling into the same mistakes. 
Thus women applaud and condemn themselves according to circumstances, or their particular interest; and thus the most culpable are oftentimes thedeast Indulgent. 
The first intrigue is carefully concealed; another Succeeds with less circumspedtion, a familiarity with the feelings insensibly gains ground, and in the end sh little attention is paid to reserve, that the matter becomes the Secret of the public. In 
A Co QUE T. 3 
In England you observe a different conduct' ' at least as many failings as we, you conceal them with more care; a woman, who passes at London for a lu cretia, is, in reality, often nothing better than a downright prude. 
But, perhaps you will tell me, the English ladies are more constant than the French, and consequently less addicted to gallantry. 
That may be, my dear friend; but your English gentlemen are not Such proficients in the art of Sedudion as the French. If by chance you find one who can prepossess you, you do well to preserve his affections, least perhaps another may not be found to replace him. This conduct evinces more policy than virtue. 
B 2 
Do 
4 C 0 N F E S S I O NS O F 
Do not Imagine that I mean to excuse my own foibles, by descantingon your manners; no, my dear friend, I would wish, on the contrary, that my confessions would •serve as examples to all my Sex, to guard them from the Snares which vice lays before them, and not Suffer themselves to be led astray by its deceitful allurements. 
Adieu, my dear Fanny, let us not treat with importance the homage which men pay us, nor be Simple enough to love beings Scarce capable of a sincere attachment to the exclusion of men of Sentiment. In my next letter I will begin the recital of my adventures. After this confidence can you entertain any doubts of my friendship for you? 
LETTER 
A Co CUE T. 5 
LETTER II 
'from the same to the same. 
O U have promised me a mutual fe cresy; I rely on the word of an English lady; and on that confidence I un bosom myself to you without reserve. Come then, my dear friend, let us not hesitate longer; let us enter my closet together; let us with blushes unveil the errors of my youth, and take a review of thole improprieties, which are the Source of my daily Sorrow. 
Oil my first introdiidlion to the world, I brought into it an heart upright and sus,, : whether from a desire to please, or a weak inclination to be caressed, I never was content but in receiving compliments. Credulous, like all other young persons B 3 without 
6 Confession s of 
without experience, I took those common attentions, which are merely ' things of course, as So much homage paid to my beauty. Divested of duplicity, and looking upon all men as ingenuous as myself, 1 had no Suspicion of their'snares. ' The vigilance of my husband prefer ved me for Some time; the weaker, the most dangerous in overcoming our Sex, is to flatter our vanity. self-love cannot long resist So fedudive a Snare. Every man who manages it well, if he does not Succeed So far as to please us, is at least Sure to be heard with pleasure. 
Nevertheless my heart did not always remain insensible. The Marquis de sa lencey, whose accomplishments and person had ruined many a woman, was amongst the foremost who pleased me. I had by this time acquired a little more experience; 
the 
AC O UE T. 7 
the circumfpe<5hon which I observed in my conduct ought to have cautioned me against danger; but it accelerated his triumph, and the loss of my peace. 
He had my duties, my principles, and my religion to combat a long time : to the reproach of my Sex shall I tell it? It was^a woman that Succeeded to make me abandon them. 
Yes, my dear fanny, all the men on earth united are less dangerous than these oshcious associates. Would it not be better that we had been taught in our infancy, to be on our guard against them; and that in admonishing us to mifirufi men; this advice had also been added, 'particularly to mifirufi women. 
Men are only dangerous when we want B 4 experience; 
8 Confessions of 
experience; then we listen to them with fear only; whilst on the other hand our confidence with women is unlimited. Adieu, my precious friend; this letter is long, for one that sat up late; receive the tenderest wishes of, c. 
LETTER 
A Co IT. 9 
London 
LETTER III 
Lady Fanny 
TO THE 
Marchioness. 
T SHOULD indeed, my dear Marchioness, find myself very much embarrassed to give you any Satisfadlion in the incidents of my life; and, notwithstanding the readiness of my disposition, admitting they were worth imparting to you, I know not how lean possibly arrange in order my narrative. 
Spare me, I beseech you, my dearest friend, the pain of giving you uneasiness; draw no unfavourable conclusion from my refusal, in which my heart is less concerned B 5 than 
10 Co NFESSIONS OF 
than my reason. It is not from a wish to break my word, that I request this favour. Your request is So pressing, I must not decline my engagement; but you involve me in embarrassinents, for a trifle nofworth the trouble. 
I am very well convinced that you have reason to be displeafed with me, I have led you into the confidence you profess to me, and you have an apparent right to complain; but consider, my dear lady, that it was not curiosity that induced me to a desire of being your considante. Friendship, which participates in everything, would make me participate in your Sorrows as well as your joy. Yes, my estimable friend, you ought never doubt the tenderness of my Sentiments to you; my heart is united to yours for the remainder 
of 

A C O q^tt E T. 
II 
of my life. Farewell, my dearest friend, do not Suffer yourself to be difpleased with me, unless you would wish to make very unhappy the Sympathising bosom of your affedionatc 
A Vl 
Fanny Stapleton.’^ ^ 
mvit: ^ 
f 
ii: V n 
LETTER 
13 
COITFESSIONS OF 
, • L E T TER IV 
Them archioness ' 
r • f 
'> 1-: ■ 
'TO 
ladyfannv. 
yo not imagine I desire that the ac knowledgement of my weaknesses should be offered as an excuse for them. No, my dear friend, my only wish is to teach you to understand men, and not Suffer yourself to be Seduced by a deceitful exterior. 
In my last I made mention to you of a woman, whose advices were to me the Source of Sorrow and regret. It was the Countef^ de Vertimant; that perfidious woman, linder the mask of friendship, meditated jt\y downfall. In concert with the Marquis 

A Co Ct, U E T. 
13 
quis and the Chevalier de Salencey, her intimate friend, she proposed to me an excursion to the country. We were highly entertained; everything passed on as well as could be desired, to the very moment allotted to make me forget my'duty. She made a pretext of having orders to give, to leave me alone with the Marquis; I proposed following her, she excused herself; at length, she disengaged herself So dex tcroussy of me, as to leave the Marquis full time to execute his design of Seducstion. He used all means, sighs, tears, oaths, to prevail on me. I was too weak to flatter myself with a long resistance; he discovered his conquest in my eyes, and availed himself of a weak moment to render me guilty. : r. L, 
Ah! my dear friend, how many tears and sighs on my fide has that japse cost 
me! 
Co N F E S S I 0 N S OF 
me! every moment was now embittered with remorse. The countess became in tolerable to me; I caused my door to be shut against her, without ever wishing to come to an explanation. And what have you done with the Marquis, you will ask me? He was at least as blameable as the countess; I agree in that; but love, which, has more dominion than friendship, pleaded for him. 
I attribute my conduct towards Madam de Vertimant to the opinion I always entertained, that I should never have fallen into vice, if that dangerous friend had not facilitated the occasion. 
Company is just announced; I must therefore take my leave of you for the present, and go listen to the insipid chat of the president Distgut, This magistrate is a 
mere 
: 
A' Co E T. 15 
mere dabbler in news, which he retails with the confidence of a prime minister, to make himself appear a man of consequence. — Adieu, my lovely friend, the tender confidant of ' ■■■ — 
LETTER 
i6 
CONFESSIONS OP 
LETTER V 
FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME, 
lehold what a proficient I am become in state affairs : what an advantage for a woman to be So well informed! when I am Spoke to concerning America, at least I will escape the mishap which befell the Baron Celant, and Madam Delancourt, who has the reputation of a wit. 
The Baron maintained with warmth that America was but an issand, and the gulf of Mexico but a seaport in that issand. ' 
Madam Delancourt, in conversing one day with Some men of letters, told them in a Scientific tone, that the Diet of ratis. bonne was one of the principal rivers of Germany. It was in vain that these gentlemen 
Co U E T. 
»7 
tiemen wished to undeceive her; she gave no credit to what they Said, but laughed at their ignorance. 
But let us leave this lady and literature, and turn to ourselves, 
It was not long, my dear Fanny, till the Marquis felt that sting which tyrannises over the heart, and poisons the Sweets of a mutual intercourse; his jealousy became insupportable; he was no longer that tender lover as formerly, but a rigid judge. Incessantly watching" my own - condust, I became melancholy and insupportable. I found myself deserted, and had no other Society than his. Our tiresome tete a tetes were taken up with complaints, reproaches and repining; he became odious to me; and being no longer able to bear with it, I broke off with him. 
'When 
j8 
Confessions o k 
When a man ceases to be worthy ofj love, is one obliged to love him? 
I forgot to tell you, my dear friend, thaf ' the Marquis invented a stratagem pleasant enough, whilst we were upon good terms, to convince himself that he was Sole'master of my heart, and prevent a Successor, isle.. my affections. He had the art to = make me consider mysejf virtuous through vanity. At another time I shall unravel to you this mystery. Lwish,. prior to my. communicating it, to know Something of your adventures: notwithstanding your, great reserve, I do not believe that your virtue has been proof against temptation; in that cafe you would have too great an advantage over me. Farewell, dear Fanny, confide in the affection of ■ 
LETTER 
A Co (UE T. 19 
LETTER VI 
Lady Fanny 
TO 
The Marchioness, 
T N Spite of my coyness, and the reserve *** reproach me with, I would overcome both one and the other, had I anything worth notice to communicate to you; but in truth, my dear lady, my adventures are So little interesting, that I am certain befcre hand they will only tyre you; a moist climate, and the gloomy Smoke of our mineral walls, engenders in us a melancholy that borders on languor. 
Steadfast in our principles, we are perhaps as much indebted to nature, as to •duration. Sedate people are not So easily 
inflamed 
zo 
CONFESSIONS OF 
instamed as those in whom vivacity che -- rishes a stock of combustible materials : ae Small Spark is Sufficient to blow up the. latter. 
On the other hand, our restrve is more ^ the result of cool deliberation than of virtue, where restedion aids the decisions of the. heart. Peopje of a lively turn refiedlr but little; they do not. give themselves timec for it. 
When we are in love, our hearts arc uniformly devoted to the object of our attachment; our manner in love is simple; instead of which, with you it is a continual, bustle, in which all the passions have a part to play. We startle at dissipation, same ness dejeds you. I know very well your : manner in love is preferable to ours : So far. from condemning it, I should be very 
happy 

A ^G 0 E T. 21 
shappy to think like the French ladies, and "free from the misfortune of a thoughtful head, I would enjoy everything with them, having no violent attachment to any; this is the only philosophy worthy of recommendation, in a world where everything is calculated for the moment. Continue, my dear friend, the recital of your adven tures, without requiring a confession of mine : I repeat it again, they are not worthy your attention; I would wish to Spare you the pain of being wearied. 
Be persuaded, my dear, sthat I will always participate in your Sorrows as well as your pleasures; and that death alone will be able to dissolve the friendship pledged to you oy — — — 
LETTER 
22 
Confessions o 

LETTER VII 
The Marchioness 
TO 
Lady fanny. 
LIST I not have an unlimited confidence in you, to continue recounting my errors, imprudencies, weaknesses, or whatever name you please to bestow on my past conduct, as long as you, with a full pretence, elude the promise you have given me. Indeed I am uneasy at these Subterfuges, they evince a defect of confidence injurious to friendship; but 1 make an allowance for the pain it may give you to confess a weakness, and am generous enough to excuse your timidity. 
But notwithstanding the right I have to 
complain 
A Co E T. 
25 
complain of you, 1 will continue my recital. 
*• 
Having quitted the Marquis, I avoided every other engagement. I became virtuous through fear. You will alk me, perhaps, where is the necessity of having another intrigue I agree. with you, there would be most prudence in avoiding it: but how to avoid it, when a thousand examples are leading us on? When the first barrier is removed, a woman Seldom stops there. • How can one, in the bustle of life, avoid recoiling at the Severity of virtue ^ the Sensibility of the heart in youth, the employment of the understanding, or its want of occupation, at a more Settled age, and above all, the obliteration of those Solid principles, which alone can guard us against frailty, is the general cause of gallantry in our Sex. If all our fine ladies would Speak 
cakdidly, 
24 
Confessions of 
candidly, they would agree, that after a first intrigue, they have not avoided the occasions of falling into a Second. They are much to blame, my dear friend, they are only preparing farther cause of regret. At every slip, we feign a return to virtue, thereby to enhance the value of our defeat. Men are not our dupes, they See thro’ all our artifices the true state of our thoughts. Were we virtuous in reality, would we not avoid a Second weakness from our experience of the former? and whilst we assume the vestal, we inwardly wish to extinguish its Sacred flame, and would be very Sorry to inspire that respect which is due to virtue. 
Such are the artifices which authorise men to ad with duplicity to us. When we Set them Such examples, can we complain with justice? * This 
A Co QUE T. 25 
This digression prolongs my letter, and draws me away from my principal Subject. We shall resume it next posh Farewell, my friend, accept the confi dence and esteem of - — - 
e[. 
C 
LETTER 
^ 6 
Confessions O’F 
LETTER vm. 
THE SAME TO THE SAME. 
LE T us avoid our former remarks and digressions, if not, my dear, bid ^ adieu to the confessions. — I was then at ‘ variance with the imarquis, whose jealousy i punished me Severely. This was the moment' to make a sincere ireturn to myself, and avoid the confusion of a Second weak ^ But I was deaf to remorse, and only followed the bent of my own heart. 
Fear for a long time made me wise, tho’ fusceptible in Sentiment. Many men paid their addresses to me; but not one suc .ceeded to determine me; not that my heart was indisposed to a new engagement; it was born fusceptible; but the 
deceit 
A Co Q^V E T. 
z; 
lecelt of the Marquis, which I have al eady mentioned, and which 1 will unfold 1 my letters, was my obstacle. 
Love at length triumphed : the estima )le qualities of the Chevalier d’ anguo me, decided me to prefer him to his ither rivals. Our pashon lasted long, and f kithful as the heroes of ancient romances. 
The Marquis often repeated to me, 
hat a man less enamoured than he was, 
\ 
would quickly be tired of me. Curiosity, o make a trial of the Chevalier, led me to bek an occasion. I wished to be convinced o' f he loved me in earnest. In short, my lear friend, one easily falls into the Snare, : • shen there is no desire to avoid it. 
C 
11 
The Chevalier appeared to me more namoured than when I treated him with 
C 2 
rigour. 
28 
Con FESS I' 0 N S OP 
rigour.' I attributed his behaviour to the j excess of his complaisance, or the fear os ^ displeasing me. I never was at peace : the least coolness alarmed rhe, I was.expedting j every instant to See hirn changed. j 
Such a situation is the more to be ^ pitied, as self-love is So deeply concerned ^ in it. How often have I regretted to see ^ myself exposed to it; but it was too late, the aft was irrevocable. 
We had a Slight altercation together; he remained two days without feeing me) now I was convinced that my fears were well founded, and that he only wanted the first opportunity to break with me. At length he returned : how, you will ask * V Not like a man, on terms of dif pleasure, but as a tender, Submiffive, and affeflionate lover, whom the fear of having 

A C O (UE T.. 29 
^ ing given me an offence,, had reduced to despair. Had I experience, what an ad antage would that discovery have given e over him? But I was yet a bad politician in love; and in that reconciliation I only followed the emotions of my heart; my fears were discovered by the excess of my joy; he would not understand any hing, and I was obliged to enter upon the most mortifying details. Whenever I reflect on that circumstance, 1 am astonished woman can expose herself to So 
: !1 
pany humiliations. Love undoubtedly blinds us, it even stifles our vanity. 
I formed a thousand ridiculous projects to be revenged on the Marquis, but quickly my reason exposed their extravagance, h! my dear friend, I sincerely regret the 
j 
appy days os innocence; the experience of every day Separated us farther from it, C 3 and 

.10 
Confessions of 
and at the end of Some years we can only! discern it through a mist. 
! 
Adieu, my dear Fanny; the experience of the world is dearly bought; tisa re stetstion which afflitsts your 
letter' 
hr -- 
A Co QUE T. 
3« 

L E T T E R IX 
Lady F an n y' 
TO THE 
Marchioness.' 
my dear friend, I am determined to return your confidence; your letters are too entertaining not to wish to merit them, but your confidence is yet dearer to me. 
The picture of my life will be drawn in colours less lively than yours; you will not find in it any of those marked lines which distinguish the pencil of a master. 
Do you recollect Lord Stately you used to worry So often at Spa ^ well then, my dear friend, would you imagine that that C 4 man 
32 
Confessions op 
man who appeared to you unengaging and singular, made a conquest of me one day. ^ It was he then that caused me to forget my principles and my indifference. Our custom in England of passing Seven months ( in the year in the country, gives us an opt portunity of being acquainted in our neigh j bourhood. His lordship’s mansion house 1 was very near mine. Whether from timi C dity, or the fear of a repulse, (for since my j hushand’s death, his Lordship paid me very little attention) he passed by my door every day. Saluted me, but never at ^ to Speak to me. 
It happened one morning that we met; t he is a good horseman, and fond of horses. d I was mounted on a very sine one; he a praised it, and we entered into a conversa V tion on the good qualities of our horses. LI 
At 
A Co QUE T. 33 
At the end of a cross road he took leave of me to continue his ride. 
The country, in England, Seems to be one continued garden, inhabited during the Summer, by all people of ease. Besides country diversions, we have assemblies, and horse races, where all the people of fashion in the country meet. At Such places I often Saw his Lordship. 
/ 
You will tell me, there is nothing Said in all this. True, but a little patience. 
My park was Surrounded with handsome meadows; there I walked Sometimes. One day, thinking myself alone, his Lordship appears from behind a bush, accosts me, walks with me,, and requests the permission of attending me home j I consestted, C 5 and 
34 
Confessions of 
and from that time his visits became very frequent. 
I was not long at a loss to perceive that he loved me; he was not indifferent to me; but I ought to be better acquainted with him before I permitted him to discover my true Sentiments. I Spent six months in studying his character;; the mean time we often took an airing together on horseback. 
I learned from this, that my liking for these beautiful animals had determined him to aim at pleasing me; and that the interview in the meadows had awaked him to Sensibility. 
I 
You See, my dear friend, that every in | has his own peculiar manner of | inspiring love; and that it is impossible to I Speak decisively on the art of pleasing. 
I am 
E( 
81 
A C O QUE T. 35 
I am to have a route this evening of all my neighbours; I must leave you to receive them, and make tea. 
Farewell, and confide in the increasing affeflion of — — 
to 
c6 
LETTER 
3-6 
Confess 1^0 NS' of 
LETTER X 
The Marchioness 
TO 
Lady Fanny. 
SIX months in studying the man one loves! From the moment he becomes pleasing, do not we attribute to him every Species of merit? Ah! my dear friend, what a methodical condu(5b! If the French adopted the same means, the whole nation would pass in review, without running a risk of falling into error. 
I have no conception how a person ean oppose their liking So long. In my opinion, the beginning of a passion affords the most attractions; novelty gives a vivacity which is palled by custom, 
Do 
M 
ll! 
L 
A Co E T, 37 
Do you know the reason why volatile women are more attended to than those of a Serious turn ^ It is simply this; that they are continually attentive to please, and omit no means to accomplish their views. This is what gives the French ladies the Superiority over those of other nations. Perhaps these poffess more essential qualities, but they are deficient in the grand art os seduduon, 
Have you never remarked, my dear Fanny, that an amiable woman is more dangerous, than one whose merit consists in her beauty alone? The first awakes the passions, the Second inspires taste. The Same effects are wrought by men. I have known very ugly men preferred to adonis’s; these tyre one out, whilst one knows no fatigue in listening to the others. By the repeated sight of an handsome statue the eyes become habituated to It. 
Illusions 
38 
Confessions of 
Illusions are the food of love; but it is' only their great variety can give the charm j any duration, i 
A Duke of Burgundy, whose name III forget, Sell in love with a very amiable lady, but not a beauty; the courtiers, who at other times were witnesses of the duke’s sickleness, were astonished at Such constancy. One day, whilst they were Speaking very freely, the Duke overheard them; he came up to them, and Said, ’ “Gentlemen, do not wonder I find everyj 
“day in Madam de Millmour, another' 
1 
“mistress, who causes me to be guilty of V infidelity to Madam de Millmour.” j 
1 
After a possession of twelve years, hej was more enamoured than the first day,! Such a lover undqubtedly merited Such aj mistress,. j 
You 
A Co E T. 39 
You will tell me, perhaps, that they studied each other a long time before they loved. I do not believe So : I rather attribute their love to an irr^sistable Sympathy, which is the basis of the great passions. 
Adieu, were I to follow my own inclinations, there would be no end to my letter. I feel myself in a singular mood for arguing. But I do not wish, in writing, to run the rilk of that reproach we are charged with in Speaking. Do they wrong us, my good friend? adieu, remember her 
who thinks on thee! — 
LETTER 
40 
Confessions of 
LETTER XI 
THE, SAME TO THE SAME. 
0 U are, without doubt, impatient ' to know the result of my adventure. | 
My dear Fanny, I am anxious to Satisfy 
1 I 
you. I made laws for the Chevalier, j which I received formerly from the Mar j quis. But for an accident, I should have j preserved to myself the poor Chevalier I for a long time, and he really deserved to be loved. 
Being one day, on'a visit together. Sentiment became the fashionable topic. A man maintained that a woman was commonly governed by the man she loved. I argued against him with w ^armth, that when once a woman lost the reins, her Subjedlion was irredeemable. 
i The 
A Co CUE T. 41 
The Chevalier listened to me; he took mbrage at it, and from that moment his ondud visibly altered. 
— You have done wrong, my Lady Marchioness— — allow it, my Lady Fanny; but the evil was without remedy; confidence being lost, the illusion Speedily vanished. 
Everything had the appearance of a it rupture between us. Unwilling to be deft Serted I feigned business, and retired for Some time to my country house; there I sincerely regretted the Chevalier; he deserved more attention; but he was Sufficiently revenged afterwards by the vis count Crillon. 
From this new attachment my heart has felt pangs which will never be obliterated. The recital I reserve for another letter. In 
the 
42 
C O N^F'E S S r O N S O F 
the mean time continue me yours; tffesin trodudion pleases me, it is entirely in the English style. 
Adieu, my dear friend, if you wished to make me happy, you would come to Paris, and impart your Sentiments to me. mistress of your own actions - pre. vents you but Some assignation of the heart. Some meeting Swains; for whom you languishingly Spend your days in rural retirement. Why do you not bring the tender dove to France there he will receive Some lessons in gallantry which will make him more amiable. He is not the first 
j 
Englishman that has been formed in this 
■. .* 1 
country, ' Believe me, my fair friend, that 
it is the best School in the world to make 
a man agreeable. Remember one to whom 
your happiness is dear,. 
LETTER 
A Co UE T. 
43 
LETTER XII 
I/aoy Fanny 
01 
TO THE 
Mar chioness. 
TOR the future I will write to you every post without waiting for an answer to my letters. In adhering to this plan, we will communicate our ideas and adventures with more regularity. Do you approve of it, my good friend. At present I fiiall fesume my narrative. 
jealousy wrested from me that avowal which I refused to make for a long time. Good God! how one is to be pitied who is infected with that cruel malady! to what folly are not both Sexes exposed thro’ its influence ^ 
. Lady 
44 
Concessions op 
Lady St. Albin was with me in the ' country; although she had not the advantage of me as to youth, still she had muck gaity in her manner. She disputed a good deal with his Lordship, and I fancied 1 perceived he was equally pleased with, her as with me. 
I observed them very attentively; one day, whilst they were walking together in the park, I followed them, and feigning to be very tired, I went into a grotio, in hopes his Lordship would follow me. Lady St. Albin was determined to continue her walk. I begged his Lordship to accompany her; he Seemed to consent with little regret. 
When I was alone an agitating Sorrow Seized me, I wept; and instantly afterwards his Lordship returned, and feeing > ' ' me 

A C O que T. 
me bathed in tears, he wished to know what afflicted me So violently. 1 denied anything was the matter, but my eyes and my voice, I believe, betrayed me. 
There is not a doubt, my dear, but love has its own language; his lordship discerned it, for he became very tender •and pressing. It cost me a good deal of pain to conceal my agitation, and I could no longer command my reason; at length, my dear friend, I forgot in one instant the painful study of six months, and I made an avowal of my Sentiments to him : h, e doubted not my sincerity; he testified his gratitude by the most lively transports. Had not Lady St. Albin luckily rejoined us, I believe that the loss of my honour would have followed close that of my reason. The one is in great danger when the other is forgot, From this time forth we lived in 
the 
r 
46 
C O N F .E S S I O N S 0 F 
the greatest friendship, my passion daily augmented, I had not as yet fallen; I thought my virtue beyond the reach of taint; but one ought not to rely too much on their own strength. The following Will show you that I was easier overcome than I apprehended. A woman can never be Sure of not falling, but when guarded by prudence, she avoids the occasion. 
We walked one evening into that meadow which I mentioned besore; the weather was sine, and the moon shone; all things conspired to feed in my bosom the dangerous passion which Swayed ray heart. 
The silence of the night, the reviving odours of the Surrounding verdure, the sound of a fall of water which runs through my park, and purls across the meadow, the resiecstion of the moon on the gently moving water, altogether inspired me with 
at 
m 
to 
tf 
nc 
01 
it 
ir 
f( 
A Co Q^V E T. 47 
a throbbing tenderness unknown till then; my Soul too much agitated, gave itself up to a pleasing suspension; all my senses were h penetrated. Ah! my dear friend, from that moment your poor Fanny has been ie|no strangeruo remorse, and is lost to her et own esteem. Why did I expose myshlf to it? ought I not to attribute my fault to myself, I cannot reflecst, .on it withoirt Sorrow. 
Adieu, my dear marchioness, this recital revives in my heart those griefs that will neyer be effaced. Receive the tender wishes of -- -- -- -- - 
tic 
il' 
LETTER 
48 Confessions or 
N, 
LETTER XIII 
The Marchioness TO 
Lady Fannv. 
S it possible you can have more cause 
to complain than I? No, I shall northeast 
ver hurt your Sensibility, tho’ I appear to 
be very volatile; believe me, dear Fanny 
I know the resped due to virtue, it is the ♦ 
best ornament of our Sex. 
I feel as well as you the misfortune of possessing a susceptible heart, that it Sub jeds us to a thousand evils, strangers to indifference; but do there not disadvantages arise from that state of vegetation! at least we imagine So. Perhaps now vve are Speaking against indifference, to e cuse our foibles, we are ingenious to deceive ourselves. 
A Co E T. 49 
Love well regulated has its charms; it may be the offspring of wisdom, as well as pleasure. Love is given to man as an alleviation to those troubles which are inseparable from life; how often do we abuse the benefits of providence. But let us not, my dear, examine our faults too stridlly; our conditions would be too happy if we had no faults. 
Adieu, my Fanny, let what is pasted Serve as a lestbn for the Suture; by attending to that, I hope we shall accomplish the Subjedlion of our pashons. 
vs 
01 
D 
LETTER, 
o .Do NFESSI0K3 OF 
TETTER XIV 
Lady Fanny. 
TO THE 
Marchioness. 
letter has afforded me Some ^ consolation; you have mentioned matters which often engaged my attention; had I once been Sufficiently impressed with them, I should have no occasion to blush today. But, my dear mar chioness, by the recovery of our reason we hold our errors in a true light. 1 was missed by this unhappy blindness for above the Space of four years. 
As long as 1 remained in the country I enjoyed tranquillity, and apprehended nothing from the natural levity of men, On returning to London the Scene of peace 
was 
10j> 
F 
A Co £ T. 51 
was Soon changed. I know not whether his lordship was more jealous than I; but this I know for a certainty, that we were extravagantly So; our lives were a perpetual vicishtude of doubts and explanations; a look, a word, gave an alarm; all our time was taken up in quarrels and reconciliations; we became insupportable to each other, and we could not exist one moment happy asunder. 
What imprudence! tho’ we knew the weight of our chain, we had not the power to break it! I often regretted the happy day when indifference afforded me an undisturbed tranquillity; and I had not the strength to withdraw mysels from the tyrannising dominion of love. 
At last, four years were Spent in this wretched state, I neglected all my acquaintances, having Spent the best part of my time in the country. 
52 .D O N F E S S IA K S O F ^ 
But would you believe me, my dear Fiend, just, at the moment when I thought I shad the greatest share in his lordship’s affections, he quitted me to marry a girl with a large fortune, but a very disagree able person?? was not able to withstand this Separation with fortitude; it had like to have .cost me my life, a melancholy remained which was very difficult to remove. It was in consequence of that ill ness I went to Spa, and first acquired the pleasure of your acquaintance; your friendship, and pleasing chearfulness produced an effect on me which I could not hope either from time, or absence. Continue to me that same friendship, my dear mar chioness; his a sensation above the reach of events, and which leaves no sting. 
LETTER 
p’s 
A Co CUE T. 
LETTER XV 
The Marchioness 
TO 
Lady Fanny. 
JAM going into the country, my dear friend,, from whence I shall not return till Autumn. Our party consists os four ladies and Seven gentlemen.i shall acquaint you with all that occurs. Adieu, write often to me; address your letters to Paris. Why are you not here, my dear Fanny we would Sometimes make our remarks; we should repeat those delightful evenings we passed at Spa; or we would review all the follies of the day. -- 
d3 
LETTER 
54 
Confessions of 
LETTER XVL, 
THE SAME TO THE SAME. 
From the Cajik of Belvilkr 
T AM nov fixed with the viscountess de 
Altamant, a lady of a Sweet and agreeable disposition;; is a young widow, ^ but a little religious. Count de. Allamelle pays his addresses to her; she Seems to listen to him with confusion; but she is alarmed if he is too attentive to other women, - 
Let us remark the result of a conduct So singular, and without anticipating by false conjedlures the event of this comedy, let us entertain ourselves with the pleasant incidents it will offer. 
One happened in my presence, with which I was highly diverted. The Count, 
in 
A Co E T. 55 
in a fit of pleasantry, took her ladyship in. his arms; she instantly exclaimed with an air of dignity, “Sir, you do not consider “what you are about! can a man take “Such liberty with a woman he respedls !’* How, my lady. Says I Smiling, you forgot your situation. I was confused, she an swered me coolly. 
1 must confess, my dear friend, that one must be very extravagantly confused, when jt s is clasped for a quarter of an, hour in a man’s arms without perceiving it. This Scene was exhibited in his closet, where he went with her. 
She is in other respecsts a good woman, does the honours of her house perfectly well, and does not meddle with the con du6l: of others. 
The marchioness d’ a.ngelome, and the Bavarian ambassador’s lady, are the two D 4 other 
5^ 
Confessions op 
other women, who remain during our visist the former is lively and gallant; her decisive manner amuses while it Surprises; though without attraflions or youth, she has every pretension to the chara(5ter of an amiable woman; her dress is like that os a girl at fifteen, it is green, with the colour of the rose prevalent all over her. On her arrival here, the Servants were two hours unpacking her coach of the bandboxes which were stifling her women. My God, how foolish! I cannot keep from laughing when I see it. represent to yourself a tall thin woman, who steps like a man; she is' absolutely the queen of fpades^mth. the headdress of mademoselle Bertin. - 
She has in her train a little Superannuated chevalier, whom she worries and caresses, whom she loves and hates twenty times in a day. But especially at 
cards 
A Co QUE T.. 57 
cards the unhappy poor man has every reason to complain; he receives all the shocks of his hard fortune. 
The ambaffadress is of a winning and lively turn, loves pleasure, which Seems destined for her. I vfill take another opportunity of Speaking of the men; and let us return to my recital. 
Where did we leave off, was it not at the beginning of my connexion with Vif.. count decrillon? 
What a monster, my dear friend! I became first acquainted with him at the house of Madam Villefranche. Wishing to get him off her hands, she Spoke of me in the most flattering terms; her design Succeeded: she introduced the viscount to me, who appeared very much pleased at it. He visited me often, and difguised him d 5 Self 
58 
Con sessions' o f 
Self with much art. Hitherto he entertained me with Subjects osgallantry, without pretending love. Without mistrusting him, his name was announced to me; I was alone, and received him very familiarly : after Some indifferent chat he Spoke to me about the Chevalier, paid me many compliments, lamented the injuries I received, and concluded by showing me the sickleness os my conduct, which gave me much affliction. 
He took this opportunity of changing the subject;; Spoke to me only on the desire he had to please me, and cause me to forget the chevalier. Pleading his cause thus, he became rash: a conduct like his should have opened my eyes, but he had the address to excuse it; the cares, the attentions the most indefatigable, made 
me 
A Co q^v E T. 59 
me hope, and assure myself that this con connedtion would be happy in its conse quences. 
I was cruelly deceived! — the bell rings for dinner. Farewell, I leave you, but not without regret. ■ — - 
II 
t. 
lil 
R 
I 
d6 
letter 
6o 
Confessions of 
L E T T .D R XVII 
THE SAME TO THE SAME. - 
NO, never did embarrassrnent equal mine! Who do you think I met in coming downstairs to the drawing-room? thfctt very Same viscount at whose villainy I shudder! that tyrant of our Sex, who for a long time inspired me with an horror against his own. 
In crossing the hall a carriage stops : who do I see step out of it but that de' testible man? I totter and fall back with fear; he accosts me, offers me his hand, and presses it malicioussy. I had no power to make my escape; I was lost in confusion; we go in together; he Says to me in a low voice, “Do you remember our intimacy, madam ?’* 
Ah! 
A Co QUE T. 61 
Ah! my dear, how shocking is restraint, when it obliges us to pay attention to those we despise? 
I then feigned illness, unwilling to be exposed to disagreeable events, which always give uneasiness' to our friends, and erve to amuse those who are not friends. 
^ [ But to let you understand this monster well, I will resume my adventures. 
Quickly the fair beginning of his pash 3ns degenerated into a harsh dcspotism. I ivas more restrained than whilst I was married. 
Nothing escaped him without a sarcasm. rhe most relpedlable women were not pared; he made bitter epigrams upon my ‘riends; gave out that I was the author, nd caused me many Secret enemies. I was ooked upon in Society as a dangerous 
woman; 
6z 
Confessions of 
woman; every person avoided me, and no one had friendship enough to inform me osthe injuries 1 was suspedted to do. 
Reduced to live excluded ’from the world in the company of this abominable being, I Spent my days Sorrowfully with him. Surprised at So general a desertion, I complained of it; he had the cruelty to attribute it to the report of my condudb in the world. I looked into myself sincerely, and resolve to retire to my estate, until the memory of my errors was no more. I imparted to him my intention. Instead of commending So wise a project, ‘he had the audacity to behave to me with a great want of decency; he threatened me, if I 
broke with him, to publish our connedlion, In his pashon, Some words escaped him which opened my eyes: I pretended not to comprehend him, firmly resolved, nevertheless 

311 
th 
A Co que T. 5^ 
theless to get light into the matter the first opportunity. 
I went in consequence to Madam de Bouquet, the first woman who shut her door peremptorily against me. I had re course to a pretext to gain admittance; after much difficulty we came to an explanation; she informed me of a string of calumnies attributed to me in the world, that made me shudder; she informed me also that the viscount laid them at my doors. 
Nothing could equal my astonishment; I never loved him, but from that moment he became detestable to me. 
Nevertheless I was embarrassed how to get rid of him, Madam de Bouquet ad viscd me to feign illness; she Sent me her own physician, who ordered me to drink 
the 

64 Confessions of 
the waters of Barege; we chose those at a great distance, on purpose to avoid the danger of meeting the viscount. 
I Set out, and on my arrival at Barege 1 wrote to him an account of all I learned os him, and my firm resoiution never to see him again. He answered me that 1 was imposed upon, and made the dupe of my own credulity. Our correspondence ended there, as I did not answer his letter. 
On my return, he had the impudence to come to my house; I had much company, his deportment was reserved; at a moment when I least expected, he Spoke to me with a Sarcastic turn, and in retiring treated me with ridicule. 
I knew him too well to be uneasy at his conduct;; avoided each other; and this is the first time I have Seen him since. 
If 
A Co QUE T. 65 
If he stays any time here I will take my tl leave; there can be little pleasure in company that one fears, otherwise my frank ness would draw me into disagreeable sub jedls, that would be better avoided. 
Adieu, my dear; you will, without doubt, think this letter very long; but; oyou must pardon the effusions of the h5 heart of — • 

if] 
LETTER 
66 
Confessions of 
LETTER XVIIL, 
L A D y Fanny. 
TO THE 
Marchioness. 
Walter Parkt 
T is not, my dear Marchioness, an interest of the heart, as you fuppose, that detains me here; they are motives in which friendship is Solely concerned. ctam one think of love a Second time, when the first passion has been unhappy? is I thought otherwise, perhaps I would not avoid a Second occasion; but I think too Serioussy of the engagements formed by the mutual Sentiments of our hearts, to expose my Seif again. 
By resteding much upon my adventure, I came to discover at last that the fault lay 
at 
A C O QUE T. 67 
t my side. To form a durable attach nent, the humour. Sentiments, and man er of Spending ones time should agree; thervfise one is making, or requiring con inual Sacrifices, in which complaisance has more to do than the heart. 
My lord’s taste and mine were very >ppofite; he loves bustling pleasures, and tl! can only entertain myself with what one astes in the Simplicity os nature; for which 6 ’eason we never agreed, and consequently 
4 
ister weighing the matter, there appears no g ioubt, but he married to enjoy greater iberty. 
I have been this month past in the ountry at Lady St. Albins; that lady, y dear friend, who is the innocent causc )f all my grief. 
Her 
68 
Confessions of 
Her Son, whom she loves tenderly, is sick, I share the trouble she feels for him, for she never leaves his bedside unless I replace her, or that she goes to rest a little. Lord George is certainly one of the best creatures living : if her ladyship should have the missortune to lose him, it would make rne inconsoleable, as much on his own account, as for the friendship I bear his mother. Did you know him, my dear, 1 doubt not but you would love him. 
poor young man! he Suffers with Such patience! it would be shocking to be taken out of the world at the age of sive and twenty! a young man of talents, fense, and that Speaks several languages well, particularly French; he has a good fortune, and a sine figure: I cannot think of him without pain! but we must Submit to the decrees of providence, that dispofes of 
■'life 
A Co E T. 69 
, l31fe and death. We cannot escape his will. 
I am in Such a state of Sorrow that my eyes cannot bear the light; yes, I behold it with repugnance, I had rather it would rain all the time his lordship is sick. Tisa singular disposition in nle, my dear friend, when I am very uneasy, sine weather is unpleasant to me; my weak head thinks that all nature should partake of my pain. Do you find the same? You do not; you French ladies are too dissipated to know these overwhelming melancholies; however you are not insensi ble, and notwithstanding your levity, you feel tenderly for the pains of your friends. May you never be exposed to feel pain So exquisitely as I do. Adieu, my dear mar chioness, and remember — ~- 
; II 

LETTER 
70 
COKFESSIONS OF 
LETTER XIX 
THE SAME TO THE SAME. 
T HAVE received three of your letters and am anxious about nothing Sc much as to answer them. Do not adc 
1 
new uneasiness to my pain; I entreat you to be on your guard; I shudder at the history of the viscount. How is it possible a man can be guilty of So maiij 
crimes } Is it not self-love induces a mar 
to respedl the woman he loves? Do n remain in the Same house with Such a vil lain. Perhaps he is capable of taking i deadly step; when a man can invei things So unbecoming his birth, what he not capable of for revenge; 1 would no remain two minutes alone with him, unlej my will was made. j 
B 
C 0 
que T. 
But suppose he does not proceed to the violence I apprehend, may not he take Such revenge as a Mr. Lany did here? 
He was in love with a very rich young lad, miss Georgiana Smitterton; she did not Seem to reject him, but that was only thro’ timidity, for she never loved him; another was her objest, which she had not courage to declare to Mr. Lany. This man demanded her in marriage os her parents. 
They would not decide till they had consulted the inclinations of their daughter. When her mother Spoke to her about it, miss expressed her repugnance, and at the Same time avowed an affection for a Mr. Smith. This was not So advantageous a match, tho’ her parents consehted to it. They communicated their Sentiments to 
Mr. 
73 
Confessions of 
Mr. Lany, and thanked him for his good intentions. ^ 
Lany, outrageous to See one preferred to him, watches miss Smitterton one even, ing coming out of theopera house, throws in her face a bottle aqua fof tis by which 
she became, from being one of the finest women in England, a frightful' monster. Mr. Smith was willing to fulfil his engagement; she had the generosity to decline it. A post-chaise waited for Lany, who got off to France, and from thence to America, 
You See by this example you must not entrust yourself with a bad man, and that one cannot be too much on their guard with Such monsters. 
Lord 
A Co Q^V E T. 73 
Lord George, is not better, my dear friend, my uneasiness redoubles every moment; what will become of poor Lady St. Albin if he should die? I shudder at that idea. Adieu, be circumspetst for the Sake of. 
ui 
E 
LETTER 
jt 
1, ^, Co n f es s I o N's o? 
L E T T E R XX 
The Marchioness 
TO 
IL A D Y Fanny. 
P |™^HE arrival of the ambassador has made the viscount decamp; we knew he hated him; I am rejoiced at it, my dear friend. I am now rid of him, his departure had all the appearance of a slight; I ain the more diverted at it, as it overturned all his projects. He made Some pretensions to the ambassador’s lady who is ariiiable and gallant; you can Scarce conceive how he looked; I enjoyed his cmbarrassinent, and took care to let him know I Saw it. 
Yesterday 
A Co E Ti 
/3 
I 
2 
1 
Yesterday we had a pleasant adventure, the Chevalier Bellevue, whom we mention as the modern Cato, Seemed not to be taken up with any one; his indifference gives Surprise to every one; every one admired the warmth with which he declaimed against intimate coniiedtions. A dreadful storm happened at night, the whole castle was alarmed, we run from a partment to apartment waking the whole family. 1 entered the viscountess’s chamber, and Sat myself down upon her bed, the Count follows me, and after him all the family, except our Cato, 
The storm redoubles; a terrible clap of thunder makestheambaffadress take refuge in the viscountess*s bed. She had Scarce been there when a shriek announced her fear; she quits it, and tells us there was a robber there; the viscountess tells her she E 2 
IS 
t 
C 0 N' F E ■ S S I O N S Otis 
Soolishj and that the fright had turned her head. She persists, and declares that fomeman was concealed behind the tapis try; we look there and discover .... who do you think? PH give you ian hundred guesses; the grave and moral .Dhevaster de Bellevue. You have 'no idea of this apparition. He was in the dishabilleofa gallant, justrlike one that had Succeeded to his wishes. The viscountess Said not a word; d‘extricated her out of her embar rassment, affecsting a loud laugh. “I have ‘^ deceived you well, my Lady ambaffa dress; this terror will cure you of that of the thunder: Chevalier I am quite “Satisfied with you, I did not think you “So, good an actor, you have played your “part well.’* “How then! replied the “ambassador’s lady, you knew that the “gentleman was in the bed “Without 

it 
A go'ci^u E Ti 77.. 
out doubt, stwas I that hid him there; Madam de Altamont was not inclined, to consent to it; but I had a mind to give you another fright besides, that of “the storm;, for I knew a lady of. your, courage would not forget the protedlioii: “of - a bedd’ My. stratagerm.'succeeded all the company gave into it, except the Count de Allencelle, who Said to me. ironically, “Has not 'there been a little, corisu “fion in this adventure 
1 Spared the vifeountess the awkwardness of a Surprise, and that was all I wished; every one was at liberty to make their own conclusions afterwards. 
It is. very difficult, my dear friend, for one who has a fusceptible heart, to aft the prude long. Is it not better to appear what one really is, than to deserve the sar casms to which false virtue is exposed? 
i 
E 3 Adieu! 
C o 
KFESSI, ONS OF 

Adieu! I wait for your letters with the most lively impatience, two posts are now passed without bringing me one. Are you ill, my dear f I beseech you Soon to relieve my present anxieties, and let me hear from you; as my happiness is entirely centred in yours -- -- — - ’ 

letter 
Ai C O QUE T. 
79 
LETTER XXL 
H 
THE SAME TO THE SAME. 
T HAVE just received two of your letters;; give me but Small assurances of your “health; I am not Satisfied with you, my dear friend; friendship transports you, it engages you in cares above your strength;! had a proof of it at Spa; a slight indisposition made you fear for iny life; your tender soul partakes too lively in the troubles of your friend. Aft more moderate, dear Fanny; So great a Sensibility is a misfortune; it debilitates the Soul, and overturns our health. 
Your uneassness, with regard to the vis count, is groundless; a bad man takes a liberty in evil expressions, but Seldom E 4 - makes 
'^0 
Confessions of 
makes use of any other vengeance; very few have the audacity of Lany, whom I am impatient to See punished. What a monster! I do not recoiled if I wrote to you concerning my stay at Barege. No, we are at the conclusion of my adventures with the viscount. My health requiring no regimen, I diverted myself at Barege, and partook of all the pleasures of Society, vshich is not So brilliant as at Spa; There are crowds of high and mighty Lords of Upper and Lower Languedoc, and Some inhabitants of the banks of the Garonne, 
This Society is agreeable, generally Seii' Sible and lively, they poffess an inexhaustible fund of gaiety. 
There I got acquainted with the Chevalier de Clavanac, he lodged in the Same house with me. From the first moment we were inseparable, and after a Sew hours he 
made i 
11 
'0 
31 
U 
0 
U 
t 
A Co E T. 8l 
made an avowal of a violent passion: : follies amused me a good deal. 
Some ladies arrived from Bordeaux; my enamoured Chevalier leaves me, and stays three days without Seeing me; I am picjued at it. 
He comes and presents himself to me; I deny him admittance to my apartment; he Is not discouraged, and whites she the following note : 
“Madam, 
“Unlucky circumstances have forced “me to neglect you for three days; will “you permit me to atone for it, by offer“ “you my adoration. I depart after 
tomorrow' ' 
reply instantly. 
“Sir, 
bufiness prevents me Seeing you. — I y wish you a good journey, ”. 
E 5 He 
82 Confessions of 
He watched the moment when none of my people were in the way, and introduced himself as usual. I received him coolly; my dignified air disconcerted him; but quickly recovering his natural assurance, he told me I ought not to be displeased, that that was doing him too much honour, and that he must believe he had inspired me with tenderness. 
I wished to humble him, I answered, that notwithstanding all the merit I sup posed him possessed of, I did not believe, that whether absent or present, he' was dangerous to my repose. 
r 
I was wrong, my dear friend, to give Such importance to his conduct. I discovered more pique than indifference. He observed it and persisted. He concluded by obtaining his pardon, but nothing more 
We 

'ei 
A Co QUE T. 83 
We dined together, and instead of leaving Barege as he Said, he remained till the very last moment, when 1 quitted the waters. We travelled together to Bordeaux, where business detained him. On parting he promised to come to Paris; but I did not depend on him. An head like his does not retain the same idea two minutes. 
I never was better entertained than in that excursion. I advisc all ladies who have the vapours, to undertake Such another, in company with a gascon Chevalier. The good humour'of these gentlemen is a Specific remedy against all maladies. 
Adieu, my dear and good friend, you want a Clavanac to give you a little variety. -- -- - 
E 6 
LETTER 
84 
Confessions of 
LET T E R XXII 
THE SAME TO THE SAME. 
ON E'piece of confidence more, my dear Fanny, and you will then be the repository of all my errors. But would it not be more proper to make this confession when your mind will be more tranquil, and when you will be out of fear for the health of Lord George. But we must dispell this obscure cloud which enwraps youj my follies will perhaps excite a gentle Smile, and for a moment divert your uneafiness. 
You know me, my dear friend, and that a woman of my character is under the necessity of finding occupation for her heart or her head. A part of last winter we dedicated to reading, I often Spent my 
evenings 

A Co E T. 85 
evenings at home, a very bashful young man was my company; when we were alone, he read. 
• 
Thro’ his timidity he discovered an affection for me; wishing to have a declaration of it, 1 gave an opportunity; he did not avail himself of it: disappointed at his want of discernment I thought no more of it, and we continued our reading. Our subject one day happened to be So tenderly, interesting, it made an impression on him, and encouraged by the picture before his eyes, he threw himself on his knees, and addressed me very fervently. His air corresponded with his Sentiments; I heard him attentively. All things went on well hitherto. 
At times he Spoke with an impediment; this defetst Seemed to increase in proportion to his tenderness; and in this agree -- * able 
86 
Confessions of 
able declaration 1 perceived it more than ever. Unhappily his voice Seemed to me to resemble a capuchin preaching, and very much affected with his Subject. That ridiculous idea struck me So forcibly, that it extorted a fit of laughing from me. The timorous lover got up, and imagining I mocked him, asked a thousand pardons for his rashness. I encouraged him; but he never after Spoke to me about his Sentiments. I was Sorry to have lost the remainder of So handsome an address, which was indeed very affectionate. 
We passed our winter in great tranquillity, the first, reasonable one, since my entrance into the world. 
My good friend^one insensibly conforms to the taste peculiar to®'each stage of life. A woman at thirty Sees the world in a different light to what she did at twenty, 
Expe 
: 0s 
A C O QUE T. 87 
Experience would not be worth the acquisition without applying it to use. One looks upon youth with less regret, when the errors os that age Serve as lesions for the time to come. 
Farewell, dear Fanny, love me as I love you. I am impatient to hear news from you, and Lord George. -- -- -- -- -- - 
i 
LETTEK 

88 Confessions op 
LETTER XXIII 
Lady Fannv 
TO THE 
Mar chioness. 
Ah! my dear! — ah! my estimable friend; pity me, pity Lady St. Albin : her Son has had a crisis, he was on the brink of the grave; he is indeed now a little better; but may not he have a relapse? may he not be Snatched away from us entirely? I will not leave his pillow; if he dies, I must then catch his last sigh, I will mix it with mine, and they together shall pierce the heart of his poor mother! 
Could I ever believe I had courage enough to stay by a dying person ^ But 
friend 
A Co E T. 89 
friendship gives us Superior strength. I have just left him a nioment while he is dozing. -- -- -1 am called ^ Good God, how 
my heart pants! Is it another? — he is better, my dear; the Doctor gives us great hopes. What Satisfaction I feel this minute.? With what rapidity one thought Succeeds another! 
Adieu, my dear friend, I must leave you; my patient and his mother wait for me; I give you a thousand blessings. 
LETTER 
, Confessions of 
LETTER XXIV 
The Marchioness.. 
I TO 
Lady fanny, 
O not deceive yourself, you are in in love: yes, you are in love with that Lord George whose loss you feared So much. You misrepresent to yoursels. your true Sentiments; friendship never feels Such poignant alarms : consult your heart, you will find my conjedures well founded. 
I Congratulate you on his lordship’s,, recovery; he is nov out of the question; you have nothing to fear for now but your own heart, it is very ill, my dear Fanny, it will quickly have a crisis, but it will not be mortal. Follow your inclination, the remedy is infallible. 
I beg 
A Co QUE T. 
91 

I beg of you to express to Lady St, Alin, the share I have in her happiness; hat she is your friend is Sufficient to in pire rne with the most lively concern. 
Change of air will be very Serviceable to his Lordship; engage him with his mother to accompany you to France. Come to See me, my dear friend. Such a journey will be a double advantage to me; it will procure me the pleasure of embracing you, and that of being acquainted with your friends : we shall Spend the autumn at my estate. Do not refuse me a satisfa<5lion I have a long time wished for. 
Adieu, dear Fanny, when you are determined, I shall propose it to Lady St. Albin, whose acquaintance I impatiently desire, 
.LETTER 
C o n: F E S S I on s or 
LETTER XXV 
THE SAME TO THE. SAME. ' 
T HAVE not patience to wait for your answers, my dear friend; I must therefore be talking to you, that I may inform you osi an intrigue which affords me much amusemeiit. 
To make you understand it better, I must inform you of the real manners of our company i 
Since the adventure of the bed, the Count d’ Alencelle has paid his addresses to our Ambassadress : she presses me by a thousand entreaties not to rejet the advances of her husband. Madam d’ Anga. lanne listens to the insipid addresses of an Abbe, who stupifies her, but who will bear four rebuffs Successively without repining. 
Madam 
ttl 

A Co Q^V E T. '93 
adam de Altamont begins to be recon iled with Society, and humanises with the [Chevalier Bellevue. The other gentlemen make up our parties at billiards, and accompany us in walking. 
The Ambassador is all attention to me; 
E he addresses me in a style of gallantry, in which he unites the most profound respect with the greatest tenderness; his foreign accent and idiom divert me very much. 
k 
The other day we took an airing in a cabriole. I told him one evening that I would prefer that carriage to any other in the country. 
Next day he Sent me the following bil* et: its Singularity deserves your attention. 
“The Count de Baissandry, in conse “quence of the high resped he bears' to 
“the 
§4 clonpesstdks OF 
“the marchioness, cannot, notwithstand “ing his wishes, present himself before “her, at So early aii hour, without her permission;; the wish her “Ladyship expressed, to take an airing in “the cabriole, has induced him to take “the liberty of offering to attend her oil “that occasion this morning, if the favour P is agreeable to her Ladyship. The “Count will very sensibiy value this pre“ “
'“If my request is acceptable, her La“ “will be pleased to appoint an] « hour.” -- -- -- — 
How do you like this billet, my dear' friend? It is not deficient in respedt, Were I an highness, more could not be ■ 
lavished on me. 
* 
I agreed to the party, and informed the Count that it was not too early for me; 
but 
A Co Q^V'E T. 95 
bu'thb did not come for an hour after, unwilling to derange me. 
We got on our way towards the wood in the neighbourhood of the Castle. The morning was fresh, the roads handsome, and the Ambassador very tender : he Spoke to me in a most gallant style. He made use of metaphors to give me a better idea of the fervency of his passion • amongst other things he compared me to a fine oak, whose noble aspest attracted the eyes of passengers; he requested me to permit him to offer Sacrifice to it, like the Druids of old, and prayed I would acceptshim for the favourite priest of the forest, over y^hich I presided. 
The idea appeared to me equally singular and gallant. I consented in good-humour; We returned to the castle where we Sound all the company met in the diningroom. 

l 
9^ Confessions of 
room. Madam de Angalome told me very harshly, that she had been awaked by Some persons, and instead of forming parties, and losing time, people should determine more Speedily, without having a dozen messengers disturbing every one. 
We discovered through her ill humour, her pretensions on the Ambassador. I then took it into my head to draw him one side, and divert myself with him. 
In my next I shall inform you of Some pleasant artifices, which I am contriving. In the mean time let me hear from you, and do not forget the proposal of — 
LETTER 
il 
inu' 
n 
A Co E T, 97 
LETTER XXVI 
L A D y Fa n n y TO 
The Marchioness, 
( 
T ADY St. Albin, and her Son, have commishoned me to return you thanks, my dear marchioness; she hopes to accept of your polite invitation as Soon as Lord george’s health will permit. 
No, my dear, I have no fears for the feelings of my heart; my first passion will protect me from the dangers of a Second. My Soul is no longer susceptible of the same impressions, it has exhausted all its teshderness upon one object; it is no more capable of love; but it will never be.insen fible to the Sweets of friendship, 
F ' Lord 
p8 
Confessions or 
Lord George is visibly recovering; his gratitude is divided between his mother and me. He has often expressed that he does not know which of us he loves best; but he Sees we, are both equally indispen -- fible to his happiness, 
If I am absent one moment he is un easy. I do not know what to do : indis pensible business requires my presence at home; and'! dare not acquaint him with it, for fear of assliding him. I must nevertheless do it at last. 
Shall I never be at rest? at present the Situation of my friends gives meuneasiness. I must depart; but I will make Such Speed that my absence will be hardly perceived. 
The idea of Separation makes me Sorrowful. I imagine I shall not See again those people So dear to my heart. Good God! how ingenious we are in tormenting ourselves; 

otii 
A Co CUE T, 
Selves; when we have no real cause of af fiidlion, our busy imagination is creating liditious ones. But I am moralising, and do not consider that my reflections must give you uneasiness; tisa fault Seldom excused, but where there is indulgence equal to that of my dear marchioness.' — Adieu, 
Gi 
F z 
LETTER 
too 
CONFESSIONS O 
LETTER XXVII 
The Marchioness 
TO 
Lady Fannv. 
Y dear friend, let me ask your'attention; I have an excellent Scene to lay before you. 
My cabriole parties shave produced Some desires; all the other ladies have wished for a seat in it, particularly the marchio ness, who thinks it very becoming for a lady. 
We appointed a day for a general party, and we agreed to dress like amazons, after the English fashion. 
Instantly Madam de Angalome Sends to Paris, and orders a new riding^^dress: she keeps it a Secret from us all. 
The 
tfo; 
ti 
Ut 
A C o UE t. 101 
The morning of our excursion all thfi ladies assembled in the drawing-room; the Marchioness arrives in a rose coloured riding habit, with all the Seams laced with ^ silver; she resembled a drum major. Am enormous hat, covered with a quantity of feathers, shaded a part of her long figure, and made her more ridiculous than ever, this strange dress was the admiration of every one, and all the company was conv plimerting her on her taste. 
At length the parties are arranged, 'and not one offers to drive for her; her little Chevalier presents himself; she does not chuse him; she thinks him too'weak, and fears he might break his neck. She then throws herself on the Abbe t he declares that he is ignorant of managing horses. Willing to enjoy a complete triumph, I went up to the Ambassador, and whispered F 3 him 
102 
Confessions of 
him to undertake the charge; he refuses; and he did not consent till I assured him I would esteem his compliance as a favour. 
I then address the marchioness, ‘‘ The “Ambassador would wish to become your 
condudtor, but he did not presume to y propose it to you.’’ 
In the first instant of her joy she could not believe it. At length resuming the most melting tone, she addresses him. “Am I then, my Lord, So inaccessible, “that you cannot make your proposals “yourself to me. Do not fear, added she, “we are in too great a company. Come, “let us Set out, my dear condudlor, let us “have the honour of taking the lead.” 
Human vanity! to how many vicissitudes is thy dominion exposed! The marchioness in mounting ships, her nose falls against the shaft, her two knees on the 
ground. 
ec 
O QUE T. 
103 
ground, and disorders all the elegance of her headdress. The sits of laughter that were stisied for a quarter of an hour, burst out at once; but this accident is nothing in comparison to what happened in the wood afterwards. 
The Ambassador more attentive to me than his horse, negleds him; the cabriole jostles violently against a tree, and instantly overturns. The haughty amazon cries out frightfully; all the company Surround her; luckily she is not hurt, but outrageous against her condudor; she calls him stupid, awkward, and gives every liberty to the volubility of her tongue. He makes no answer, nor dares look at her, for fear of laughing. In the violence of lihe fail, the weight of the hat brought with it the few hairs of her own which were under it; the front is turned to her ear, T 4 and 
m 
104 
Confessions of 
and one of the curls in the middle of her face. The elegant silver laced habit shares in the general misfortune, and its colour is Scarce discernable from the dust that covered it. * 
She would not remount, but returned to, the castle on foot. The Ambassador offers to attend her, she refuses, and gives the preference to the Abbe and her little Chevalier, whom she had rejected a moment before. 
On our return we found her at play; she Said she was overturned designedly, be cause her dress was envied. However, her anger was Soon appeased by Some pointed conceshons from the Ambassador, of which she is ridiculoussy Sond. I engaged him to Sooth her, he consented to it again, but it was not without imposing new conditions on me. 
What 
1 
A Co QUE T, 105 
What imprudence, my dear friend! By entertaining mysels at the expense of the marchioness, I am perhaps exposing myself to future regret. When will it happen that an intrigue will have less to do with the heart, and be the instrument of greater Satisfaction. The Count de Boistandry is not disagreeable to me, but ought I to encourage his passion? Is it not time to at reasonably? Levity leads me oh, but re, fledlion will punish me. -- — -; 
f5 
LETTER 
i Confessions of 
letter xxvm. 
THE SAME TO THE SAME. 
.DW! bring myself to avow a weakness that fills up the measure of my transgreshons.? Ah! my dear Fanny, I have Sorgot mysels! Ask me. no more; Spare your friend the shame of a confession. 
Madam de Angalome thinks that she has the preference; she has no reserve in that illusion; every day produces Some new extravagance in her. She goes farther than the Ambassador in her caresses; she is all attention to him; she makes the whole world her confidants : she tells Some she loves the Ambassador to distraction; to others she Says that no person has a better judgement than he, that he knows how to Set a true value on beauty. 
A Co QUE T. 107 
Be indulgent on your fide, my dear friend, and be affuredthat this adventure shall be the last. I even venture to foretell that I shall put an end to it as Soon as 1 conveniently can. 
I begin to ressed how before I al; at other times I did not rested: but when it was too late. Adieu, I love you sincerely. I have only time to Say to you two words. 
t 
F e 
LETTER. 
]o8 
Confessions of 
LETTER XXIX Lady F a n n y, ^ 
TO THE 
Marchioness. 
MUST have very forcible motives, my dear marchiohess, to be able to part from my‘friends. This little absencehad like to have produced very fatal consequences. The day after my departure Lord George had a Second attack of the fever. His mother, unhappy at his condition, discovered that I was the cause: : instantly Sent express after me, entreating my return, if I had a mind to restore her son’s health. That mesage has totally unstrung my nerves; I did not imagine his lordship’s friendship for me could have 1 isen to Such a pitch : you see the effects of familiarity. 
1 disi 
C o E T. 
ic 
01! 
COI! 
Jit 
ti 
I dispatched my business with all expedition, and returned immediately. I had Scarce alighted from the carriage, when that tender mother comes up to meet me, and taking me by the hand leads me to her son’s apartment. He left his bed, comes down to the parlour, expressed to me the most lively joy, and ashed me with fear, if my business obliged me to go'away again, and if at present I would remain with his mother? I replied I wmuld stay as long as friendship required, or I could 
be Serviceable to his lordship. -- -- Ah!! 
lady, rejoined he, that will be during life. He then looked at me and blushed. 
I fear, my dear friend, that his Sentiments towards me exceed the bounds of friendship. But is one Sensible of love thus recovering from the brink of the grave? No, that is impossible, I deceive 
myself; 
I lo 
Confessions op 
myself; he feels a tender friendship for me, joined to much familiarity, or perhaps an excess of gratitude. 
For these two days past he is free from the Sever; he has already taken an airing in a carriage. tomorrow we go to take tea at a house in the neighbourhood; there are two young ladies there very rich, and handsome; I am not acquainted with them. Lady St. Albin Speaks very well of them, but she is of a very indulgent disposition, perhaps she is blind in favour of their merit: I shall See that tomorrow. I am obliged to conclude my letter, a messenger waits to takie it to the Post Office. Adieu, dearest marchioness, — — 
LETTER 
C O QUE T. 
II I 
LETTER XXX 
The Marchioness 
TO 
'H 
Lady Fannv. 
T AST night there happened a pleasant adventure here. I cannot think of it without laughing. When all the company had retired, the Ambassador in cross ing the lobby, found a door open. He is naturally a little off his guard; he imagined it was his wife’s apartment: he goes in, the voice of a woman in bed awakes him from his reverie, and mistake. She gets up, follows him, and forces him to tell who he is. As Soon as she knew it was the Ambassador, she challenges him to stay with her; he refuses; she Says a thousand inviting things to detain him j but he perseveres 

1 I 2 
contfcs slons OF 
sev eres in making as many excuses. Their conversation became very warm, the one in tender compliments, the other in farfetched expressions, signifying his Sorrow for having disturbed her. They both Spoke very loud: I was not as yet gone to bed; and I heard distindly all they Said. 
A pleasant thought came into my head; 1 had a mind to divert myself at the expense of the enamoured marchioness. It was her Ladyship. I Send my waiting woman to inform the Abbe and the little Chevalier, to go to Madam de angalome’s apartment. I desired her to tell them that she was taken very ill, and that she desired to See them instantly. 
Whilst this was doing, I go into the ambassadress’s apartment, tell her briefly all that passed, and engage her to accompany me. 
The 
(ft 
k 
, A ■ C O U E t. 113 
The Abbe and the Chevalier run together half asseep. They hit against the chamber door of the marchioness; the Abbe falls and loses his nightcap;; Chevalier stumbles over the tail of the others night gown, and knocks his nose against his slipper which was thrown to the bedside of the amorous lady. We run together at the noise, and beheld this sine group on the floor; all this happened in an instant. We ash the cause of this confusion; the marchioness makes no reply; the Abbe and the Chevalier rise mutually ashing pardon; the Ambassador laughed immoderately; and his.lady and I persisted in Saying we knew the cause which brought them to the marchioness’s apartment at So late an hour. All this happened by the glimmering of a watch light. 
The Abbe assured me he feared for her 
life. 
114 Confessions of 
life. The Chevalier goes to the bedside, and ashs her how she finds herself the: Abbe wants to Send for a physician instantly, and Says that So Sudden an attack ought not to be neglected. She ashs them are they fools? Who told you I was sick? — Her head is affected, Says the Chevalier to me in a dismal tone. The more she denied, the less they believed. 
The ambassador’s lady gees out unperceived by Madam de Angalome. She desires them to ash the Ambassador if he found her sick; the Count, she says, did not find me ill: her maid comes in and lights up the candles; the Marchicnefs ashs, who desired them to come to her We came by your orders. Madam, replied the Abbe. You are raving; I am/not sick, and have very little thoughts about you. 
I Said 
A Co CUE T. I 15 
I Said then ’tis certain these gentlemen [walk in their steep. Let them be led I back to their chambers, let us avoid Such [dangerous maladies. She got up, and by [the assistance of her waiting woman we got rid of these importunate gentlemen. They I Suffer themselves to be led back quietly to [their chambers, which we locked, and [took away the keys. 
Next morning we gave them their liberty; and we took pains to persuade them that they were asteep when they came into. the lady’s chamber. 
We enjoined it on my woman to keep this affair a Secret. She told us that one of the marchioness’s women left the door of her mistress’s room open in going to [look for Madam de altamont’s butler. This girl, whose conducst appears to me equivocal, is perhaps influenced by dangerous examples, Al 
n6, 
Confessions of 
Altho’ this affair had diverted me, yet it gave rise to a thousand ressedlions; How can we restrain the conduct of those under us, when our own example authorises them : how many resteclions must arise on Such a Subject; and how much it would be in favour of virtue were masters to Set the example. But in moralising I am forgetting you, and I perceive that you require other Subjects to dishpate the melancholy you complain of. Adieu. -- -- -- -- -- -- 
LETTER 
A Co que T. i 17 
.DEXTER XXXI 
i 
Lady Fannv 
.TO THE 
, M A R C H I O N E S S. 
TAKE this opportunity, my dear friend, to Send you my letter. Sir John Wray is Setting off for Paris : he is happy; he will have the pleasure of Seeing you. I have desired him to put it into no other hands but your own. 
He is a young man I Saw in the house, where we took tea the day before yesterday. Hesis in love with one of the daughters of Lord riverson; the younger of ij these two ladies, whom Lady St. Albin thinks So handsome. I like her much better than the elder, altho’ Lady St. Albin 
gives 
IIS 
confessions OP 
gives the preserence to the latter, who Js her favourite in every respect. 
After our return, her ladyship informed me that she had a notion of marrying her Son to the elder; before his illness, there had been Some talk about it, and he Seemed not to be averse to it. She intended to Speak to him about it; she even requested I me to Sound his disposition thereon. * 
I promised to Satisfy her; but I do not know why I have Such a repugnance to interfere in it. 1 do not love, in general match making. If they do not turn out happy, one reproaches ones Self for having contributed to the misery of others. Indeed I think the lady has too much affectation; she examined me during the. whole time of our visit with an unbecoming curiosity. When ever Lord George’ addressed a word to me, he reddened up. 
Do 
A C 0 UE T. 1 
Do not you think Such behaviour very improper? Indeed I feel it impertinent, insupportable. If, oh a Second visit, I find the Same impression, I shall not go there again. I do not wish that little being should imagine I have any pretensions on Lord George; 1 should be very Sorry for it, and yet I wager she thinks So. 
But perhaps I am mistaken; one is Sometimes inconsiderate in forming conjedlures. We shall reser it to another time to clear it up. In the mean time I shall do my best to enjoy, peaceably, the pleasure of being amongst my friends. You only are wanting, my dear triend, to make my happi ness complete 
LETTER 
120 
Confessions of 
letter XXXII 
THE SAME TO THE SAME. 
WANT to consultyou, my dear friend, my doubts are verified. We returned to Lady riverson’s. The moment' we were announced, miss Juliet retires by the door opposite to that we entered at. I alk her mother how she does; she answers me ' that her daughter is Sick. miss Charlotte, who is candour itself, Says, that her sister was better, but she did not chuse to stay in company because Lady St. Albin was there. 
Charging myself with this absence, I Said not a word, but I Set myself to observe everything. Lady St. Albin Said that she would go heiiself to sind out her charming fugitive, and return immediately with her. miss, all the time we remained, affected 
A C 0 QUE T. 121 
fetsted not to peak to me, nor even to deign me a look; when Lord George addressed her she Scarce answered him. 
After this discovery, I resolved to acquit myself of my commission, and Seize the first Savorable moment to Speak to Lord George. I did not wait long. Lord George and I took a walk in the park; I introduced Some conversation on the family of riverson, I extolled the merits of the young ladies, and I told his lordship it was time to think of Settling himself. — 
1 wish for nothing else, answered he; let me have the object of my love, and I will marry tomorrow. 
This ready acquiescence gave me un easiness, I wished for more opposition. — Well, Lady Fanny, will you Speak out? Tis you, my Lord, should Speak, I do not G know 
122 
, C 0 N F evs SIGNS OF 
know the object of ymur love; Lady St. a1 bin told me that^miss Julia is not indifferent to you, — miss Julia, Madam? He Said not a word more, whistled all day. Seemed to be very absent, and looked on me sighing now and then. 
Does he love me, my dear friend I fear it and desire it. — Ought miss iriver fon to inspire me with a design that reason should oppose? What must I do? What ought I to make of all this Perhaps Lord George has not a thought about me; per • too, she does not'wsish his Secret should be discovered: — It is not impossible but he conceals his real Sentiments, for fear of being rejected— — men in England have that delicacy. 
Tell me what you think; does he Seem to have any liking for me? Adieu my 
dear 
A Co cue T. 
*2? 
dear friend, continue to acquaint me with all that happens to you; these pleasant incidents divert me much. Your marchioness d’angalome is a very extraordinary being; when one ads inconsistent with the dignity of their age, ridicule is just. 
Whatever may happen, do not imagine I will censure: my heart will always be your advocate. — ~ 
G 2 
LETTER 

Con f e s s I o n s o p 
X E T T E X XXXIII 
The marchioness 
T O 
Lady Fanny,, 
Everything is sh confusion; - the women are jealous, the men full of Suspicion: one entertainment has Set all their wits afloat. — The Ambassador, like a man of gallantry, prevailed on us all the the day before yesterday, after dinner, to take a walk into the wood: he detained us out till nightfall. — When we came to the oak I mentioned before, we beheld It all of a Sudden illuminated. Men in the habit of druids, dressed in long white robes, their heads crowned with the leaves of the oak stopped our carriages; they persuaded 
us 
A" C O QUE T, 
X 2? 
us to alight, and assist at a Sacrifice which ’ they were going to offer to the deity of the forest. They Seated us on benches of turf, and instantly an enchanting Symphony was heard at a distance; it in senfibly drew nearer, and as Soon as It wa near the oak tree it ceased Suddenly. — * these were Succeeded by the lyre, accompanied by the voices of women, which we distinguished easily to be those of the first virtuojd.s of the opera; these again in their turn, were interrupted by the .voice of Richet le Gros and Larrivk^ accompanied by the whole orchestra: It was concluded by a general Cantate. At this moment all the trees around the oak were illuminated; the lights of this oak were turned into transparent devices; at the foot of the trunk appeared an altai* with the following inscription: Lo her ‘ivhofe n'lajejiic mien resembles this oak. 
125 Confessions of 
Madam d’angalome whispers me, Tt is to me that is addrejfed. All the women attributed it to themselves. The vis countess, altho’ too little a person to pretend to it, assured us it was designed for her. She imagined that the Ambassador, as her guest, could not, with propriety give an entertainment where sht was not the object, and that he had choseii that singular emblem for the better con gcalitient of his intention,. The men sus pedled they were the dupes of those they paid addresses to, and that the Count de Boissandry had the preference as a lover. 
The entertainment concluded with an exhibition of sire work?, and with bouquets with devices, vshich the High Druid presented to the ladies. 
Madam 
A C o q^v E T. 
327 
mham d’aitamont invited all the actors to the castle, where the music played till day break. 
Next morningsthe countenance of every one was altered; a Secret malice was distinguishable amongst the men; and with the wornem, discontent and envy was visible: not one besides the marchioness d’angaiome and I really enjoyed this agreeable Surprise. She lavished a thousand extravagant expressions on the Count, called him her gallant Chevalier, her charming friend; and although he denied the entertainment was of his contriving, she persisted in her suspicions. 
I am apprehensive, my dear, that Such a piece of gallantry may discover our connefhon: we are observed very stridlly, and one does not enjoy that ease which is the charm of Society. 
G 4 
Whatever 
lag 
C O N F E S S I b N 
OF 
Whatever event may happen I will impart to you. Adieu, I am going to a party of quadrille; the marchioness is impatient, she has already Sent me three messengers. Adieu. 
LETTER 
A Co que T, 
129 
LETTER XXXIV 
THE SAME TO THE SAME. 
HAVE just received your last letter;. I am impatient to answer it. You alk my advice, my fair frend, to what effect can I give it, in an affair where the emotions of the heart are the principal guide 
It is very evident you are in love, even * that you are jealous; you fear to lose Lord George, and you have not the power tokeep'^him. — It is plain he loves you, but that he has not the power to avow it. 
Extort his Secret like an expert woman i pretend business; propose a desire of G 5 leaving 
130 
0 N P E S S I 0 N S OP 
leaving the house; advise him to marry miss riverson, and See what affetst this will produce. Above all, take care he does not discern your view: — In love as well as in war, tis Secrecy that makes ambushes Succeed. 
But before hand, consult yourself well. You cannot retradb if he decides in your favour; as to the rest what rilk do you run? You are much better adapted to be the wife, than the mistress of the man you love. One of your principles will make but a little figure in the career of gallantry. 
Marry Lord George, my dear friend; I perceive he desires nothing better. In poffestion of every quality that is desirable in marriage, you will be an ornament to it. 
Are 
A Co E T. 131 
Are you not Surprised at this conversation? You would not attend to Such advice. Do not wonder, my dear friend, people leave off their faults Sooner or later. those who have had experience can give the best advice. 
But what will Surprise you much more I have not, myself, determined but that I will take another husband. Sometimes I deliberate on the idea of marriage. I attend to that principle with pleasure. If ever I am determined, it shall be in favour of a man without a fortune, but for whose birth I will have no reason to blush: our prejudices differing from yours, obliges me to take this precaution; you intermarry without degradation; but in France a woman loses her first rank by a Second connexion; even a duchess forfeits her G 6 rank 
tp 
Confessions of 
rank if she marries a man of inferior quality. It is not ‘ the Same in England; youpreserve your prerogative even though you marry a plebeian. 
Adieu, my dear friend, if I meet another Lord George I shall Soon follow your example. 
LETTER 
A Co QUE T. 
*3: 
LETTER XXXV 
THE SAME TO THE SAME. 
TT7HAT I feared has happend; my ^ ^ connexion with the Ambassador is discovered; I am out of my wits about it. Hitherto I was vain upon it; but today it makes me blush. 
This humiliating matter happened in the night between thursday and Friday Since the entertainment in the forest we were watched closely. The Chevalier de Bellevue, whose corroding disposition looks for employment, tried every means to come at the knowledge of the objcd of So particular a piece of gallantry. 
The 
^34 
Confessions of 
The Superannuated Chevalier, and the little Abbe, were as busy on their side to fatissy their importunate curiosity. 
D’allencelle, mad to See himself Supplanted by a young Swede, whose figure and accomplishments Succeeded to please the ambassador’s Lady, meditated vengeance also. 
Whether these four men acted in concert, or that chance united them, I know not; but they came to discover those Secrets which ought to be covered with an impenetrable veil. 
They placed themselves behind the window curtains, at the head of the'stair; case, into which the doors of the different apartments all open : They did not uit their stations till they were convinced that their suspicions were realised. 
A Co QUE T. 
HSI 
heard people walking all night: 1 r was in extreme embarrassrnent: I thought it was the family of the viscountess. The Ambassador came toconverse with me; I did not know how to get him out without discovering mysels. I consulted my waiting woman; we agreed to dress the Count in one of her gowns; to cover his head with a large calash, and Send him in this disguise to find out his own apartment. 
He goes out; the Abbe accosts him; under a pretence of gallantry, he requested to attend the pretended waiting woman. During the delays of ceremony, the calash falls off, and there stands the Count an object to the four inquisitors. 
A Similar incident happened in the am bassadreff’s apartment which was equally unlucky. • — She is fond of sitting up late, 
and 
1 
136 
Confessions op 
and permitted the Baron Tranquin, the young Swede, to read a book which they shad monopolised to themselves. The reading of this work, which is equally dangerous and agreeable, had kept them up most part of the night. There was now a necessity of getting the Baron out. She puts on him her hushand’s night gown, and he conceal’d his face with a pocket handkerchief. Just as he was going out, d’allencelle addressed him, and alks him, How does the ambassadress? He makes no answer, but pursues his way. He follows him to the stairs, and compliments him upon his disguise. The Baron answers him in a rage, that was it not for the respedb he had for Madam d’alta mont, as well as for the lady he insulted, by judging from false appearances, he 
would 
A C O q^v E T. ‘ 137 
would return his compliment in a different manner. This adventure had like to be terminated with very fatal consequences. 
Madam d’altamont’s steward had chosen the hours of steep to communicate Some orders to the iv|archioness’s waiting woman. This girl Succeeded in extricating herself better than we did. She conceals him in a trunk, opens the chamber door, goes into her mistress, accompanied by the little Chevalier. 
His design was to take her unawares and be revenged for all the caprices he had born for eight years. He goes in, looks round about him; he perceives nothing, goes into the closet, thinks to find his rival there. 
Madam 
.138 
Confession's of 
Madam dnj.ngalome, amazed at So singular a curiosity, demands an explanation : he gets beyond hirnself in reproaches; -, tells her she is a deceiver She listens to him quietly; but as Soon as he mentioned the name of the stev/ard; “get out of ‘‘ miy sight, ” she exclaims in a fury, “are “my favours then fa despicable as to lavish them upon inferiors; I refuse noblemen “and courtiers, and do you think I should demean myself in Such a manner after that. — Is it not Sufficient that I permit 
“you, — -- -- -- -- without adding to that hu“ 
“; -- -- -- -- begone this instant, 
“or -- -- -- -- -- P Xhe Chevalier did not 
wait for a Second order, but retires precipitately: the marchioness gets up, and came to give me an account of this adventure. 
I went 
A Co Q^V E T. 139 
I went into Madam de boissandry’s apartment, she was. all in a tremor: she told me her situation. I Said, is your hus band Speaks to you about it, ask him about his new * dress. She did not understand me, and I was compell’d to enter into Some humiliating detail. I perceived that one does avow with impunity to the per son offended, the injuries done them. 
We vent down together to breakfast; we looked at each other with stolen glances. The marchioness reprimanded her Chevalier, whom she treated as a vissonary; recounted to the company the insolence he treated her with, and how she imposed Silence on him. The company was plea sant upon her; she gets angry in earnest. Madam de Boissandry and I Spoke not a Syllable, our silence betrayed us. The 
Count 
140 
C O N F E s S I on g O F 
Count d’allencelle had a very warm’altercation with the Baron; we reconciled them; but our Secret was presently knowrf to all the company. 
The marchioness, her Chevalier, and Abbe go away today;; cannot forgive Count de Boissandry for having deceived her. 
M, d’allencelle m.d. the Chevalier de Bellevue depart tomorrow; Madam d’al tamont attributes all this disturbance to the improper curiosity of the latter; she j remembers that she is under an obligation to me, and calls the Chevalier an ungrateful man. The rest of the company will part at an early day. 
The Count, though he is not Ignorant ‘ of the baron’s; idventure, dares not, for 
all 
A Co QUE T. - 141 
all that. Speak to his wife about it; he Tcnows he has very little right to blame her 
Farewell, my dearest friend, I will receive Sir John Wray with pleasure. — Does he Speak french? 
LETTEH 
142 
Confessions of 
LETTER XXXVI 
Lady Fanny. 
TO 
The Marchioness. 
Your advice is excellent, it has produced the effect you foretold : but, my 
friend, it leads me into embarrasshient; I must now make fresh connedions. How shall I ad.? I have gone too far to return back : I fear my heart has deceived me. I scarce discovered my own Sentiments, but I found myself engaged. Can one be too much on their guard in an engagement, on which the happiness of our future life depends? But could I bear with 
composure 
A Co E T. 1^2 
composure his marriage with another woman; I am Sure I could not; that idea shocks me. No : Lord George is des tined for me; I perceive I love him, and yet I wish to doubt with myself. — What an illusion! 
After our conversation the other day, he avoided me; my heart sighed at’i?; I attributed his conduct to a suspicion I thought he might entertain, that I wanted to extort his' Secret indiscreetly: I also imagined he would impute other motives, to me. 
Matters were in this state when I received your letter; it encouraged me, and gave me confidence to come to an explanation with him. 
1 Soon found an opportunity. 
The 
Confessions of 
The family of the Riverfons dined at Lady St albin’s. — After dinner I went up to my chamber, and staid long enough to let my absence be noticed. Lord George passed very often under my window and Seemed uneasy; at last he requested his mother to Send and let me know that tea was going to be Served up. I came down and appologized for quitting the company; and I added, that a letter I hadjuf ^ived required an immediate answer. 
When the Riverfons were gone, I staid alone with his lordship. I told him I must be under the necessity of leaving him; many ladies of my acquaintance were appointing to Spend Some time at my house. He grew pale; - — his trouble prevented him Speaking. “Well, my Lord, 
f 1 hope 
A Co QUE T. 145 
“I hope you have decided in favour of Miss Julia; shall I have the pleasureos “Seeing this match Soon? She is rich “and handsome, you cannot make a bet“ “choice.” He approaches me, and takes me by the hand; ah! my dear friend, (how he trembled!) “Good God, “Lady Fanny, Says he to me, how blind ‘‘ you are! ought Such proposals to come “from you? Do you not know her, “whom I prefer Co all the women on earth? If you consent to my happiness, ‘‘ it totally depends upon you.” I trembled in my turn, my dear. How is it in my power, my lord? Speak; you are not ignorant of my friendship for you. 
Your friendsnip, madam; that is a cool Sentiment. Can you make no ad“ “to that title? Speak, Lady “Fanny! Do you wish to make me mi y Serable “I do not understand you, H “mv 
-14^ 
(Confessions of 
my Lord.” “Then, madam, I must explain to you the true Sentiments of my heart. I am resolved never to have any other wise but you. I love you; and it will be my study to make you happy See then if you will accept my hand; do not let me languish, my dearest Lady “Stapleton; flatter me with the hope that “I am more indebted to your heart, than your reflestion.” -- -- -- -- 1 hesitated, I begged 
time to consider on it; be entreated me to pity him; he was at my feet; he was amiable, pressing, and prevailing; I Jiad not power to resist him; I accepted him. He was transported with joy. “Let us See my mother, Says he, let us impart “to her this good news.” He instantly goes out, and acquaints her with it before I had time to answer. 
I know not how to express to you, my 
jdear, the fatisfadign that good mother 
ex 
A C O CUE T. 147 
‘expressed. She embraced me with the most lively transports, and avowed to me that she never could presume to hope I would have accepted her Son, 
Behold me now on the point of a Second engagement. I requested to deser our marriage for Some months. My Lord opposes. He is hurrying the lawyers. I believe we shall be married before it is long. 
That you were but here, my dear mar chioiiess! promise me that you will come to See us : do not refuse me that Satisfaction, the only one wanting to make me happy. 
P. S. I take the liberty of requesting you will choose me a watch, a box, and an etwee cafe, to the amount of twelve hun h 2 dred 

Confessions op 
dred guineas. Your jewellery is neater than ours. Mess. Giraldot and Haller the bankers, have an order to remit you that Sum. A thousand pardons, my dear friend, I fear 1 am troublesome. 
LETTER 
A Co E T. 
i'49 
LETTER XXXVII 
Parii 
The Marchioness 
TO 
Lady F a n n y. 
T AM now returned to Paris. I had Scarce arrived when the ambaitac’or informed me os his going to departhe is not recalled, hut his Court requires his presence Some time. This news is dis agreeabie to me, miy dear Fanny. Accustomed to See him often, I was beginning' to love him. J have Seen, the time when such a Separation would not have affested me. Unlike other women, my Sensibility grows with my age; but 1 think I was always equally susceptible, and that my H 3 levity 
ISO 
Co NFESSIONS OP 
levity only concealed the Sentiments of my heart, but did not stifle them. 
1 was the other day to pay a visit to Madam de Angalome; there 1 found all the good company of the tax colledlors, and the lower class of the Excise officers. She even was entertaining Some of the city tall women : judge of the company. Her house is the rendezvous of every Species that Paris produces;. So that she has company enough to make up a party 5 everything else is indifferent to her. 
Adieu, my good friend, I expect: yoh this autumn; no excuses; you cannot re fuse me; you must consent to it, or I wdll sail out with VQU. 
letter 
Ai Co 
E T'. 
li 
LETTER XXXVIII 
THE SAME TO' THE SAME.. 
IR JOHN WRAY came to See me, my friend; he has given me your letter. I think this young man very po' site; he only wants a little practice, which he will Soon acquire if he keeps good company. Strangers in general prefer the company os women of the town; amongst whom they contract an air of aukwardness that attends them, when they are in that of modest women. Did they know the disadvantages of living" amongst these women,, they would renounce their Society. I know many families where they would be received with pleasure; but they do not persevere long enough in their visits. How can they expect one should be concerned 
‘ for 
i; 2 
Confessions of 
for them, when they take no pains to be agreeable? 
o 
It is a false opinion that strangers are not liked in Paris. It is a mistake : Ash ' those who have lived in good company; they will acknowledge that after Some time they have formed many agreeable accjuain tances. It is Sufficient to be received well in one good family, to receive every po liteness from the rest of the company. I will undertake for Sir John, if he answers to my good wishes, i will make his stay here very agreeable. tomorrow I will bring him to visit Madam de Altamont; from thence I shall introduce him to Some very amiable women. I wish to give him a good opinion of the French ladies, and that he will be our champion at London, when we are attacked; for you English do not Spare us. 
Farewell, 
A Co QUE T. 153 
Farewell: love me tenderly, and do not forget me when you will be Lady St. ai bin. Bring me your husband, that I may judge if he merits Such a woman as you are. 

LETTER 
54,; CONF E's S T 0 N S - O' f 
LETTER XXXIX 
Lady Fanny; 
•9 
TO T H E 
Mar C h 1, 0 n .e 9 s. 
FTER tomorrow, my dear Mkr^ chioness. Gods, how I am agitated I fear and wish for that important day. But my happiness' is alloyed for the trouble of poor miss riverson. She loved him, my dear friend. Poor Julia !'I pity her.,. When she will hear of his marriage, she wfil experience, a thousand shocks. Was It not very natural that she did not like me. i/orgive her humour to me; I am even Sorry for having suspefted her of capriciousness; what would I not do to console her 1 I would Sacrifice everything except my, lover, Xes, my dear, I love my Lord, beyond what I imagined myself capable. You were very clear sighted,, 
you, told me my defeat was at hand, when, 
I. even 
A C O' V E T. 1 
/ 
r even had no doubt of my heart. My Lord is coming in, I do not wish he should read my letter;. he would gain too great an advantage over me thereby : but why not? Ought one to be a niggard of proofs of tenc derness, when the beloved object merits it? — come, its all over, he has read it — he wishes to add a few lines 
Lord St. Albin to the Marchioness, ’ “Permit me, .Madam, to assure you of “my perfect esteem; I know the friend“ “that Subsists between Lady Stapleton “and you; on whose account I crave the “honour of your friendship. Accept, I beseech you, the wishes I make, to be “considered as her friend and yours, “Grant me a little of that confidence, of which she is So jealous. 
“George, St, Albin, ” 
. Do not refuse him the favour he alks, he 
merits it every way; 
i :; 6 
Confessions op. 
LETTER XL 
The M a r C h I o n e s. 
TO 
ladvfanny. 
A JOURNEY to Chantilly has prevented me receiving your letters. I will dispatch the commishon you have given me. Sir John Wray undertakes to convey them to you by one of his friends, vbo is going to et out for England. 
Then you are bound; my dear Fanny I Congratulate you; this marriage cannot fail of being happy. I have a very good opinion of your husband;; if he accepts the invitation I have given him, rshash' have a better.. 
Like an humble wise, perhaps, you would not Solicit your husband So warmly 
as 
A Co q^y E T. 1^7 
as X can. 1 undertake it in this letter, which I request you will deliver from me. 
“My Lord, 
When a man has the happiness os “possessing an amiable wise, whom her friends will not part from with impunity “the husband must expect to be exposed to “continual quarrels : unless. you wish to “have a perpetual one with me,, restore. “her to me for a moment; but do not “you part from her who is the cause of “your happiness. Come and receive the assurances of a friendship totally devoted “to you; prevail upon your mother to be “of the party; I ardently wish for the “honour of receiving her at my house. f would desire, that my amiable Fanny “should have no affection out of the little “circle, that will reunite us at my estate “next Autumn, ’tis only on these terms, 
mj 
158 
Con f e » s 10 n s of 
“my Lord, we can be friends, and that' “you will share all my thoughts with yout, “charming wife.” 
“I will not distradt you with long let“ “my dear, your time is more pre“ “; it ought to be better employed' “than in reading mo.” 
Apropos; I have formed an acquaintance at Chantilly with the Count de Durore; I am afraid he will make me for f^et the absence of the Ambassador. I am nevertheless determined to be on my guard | but he is very amiable, - 
letter 
r 
Ar Co 
E T, 
150 
L e t t e r xll 
Lady St. A L e i 
TO THE 
Mar C h i o e s s. 
T is done, the word is pronounced,., the * knot is tied, and behold me once more under the rule of Hymen. Ah! my dear, .' ought I to applaud myself? Independence has many charms; but what use have I made of it? Can I flatter myself with being always reasonable? Love led me astray once, ought I not to fear a Second fall ^ Honour and duty will be my guardians;.! resped an engagement made at the altar; my heart will Second these two powerful motives which will be the 
guides. 
io 
Co N F E's S I O N S OF 
guides of my future condudb. Your Fanny is out of the reach of the Snares of Seduction; she will only live for him to whom her life is engaged. Adieu; my dear friend, why are we asunder?? — — - 

C O QUE T, 
ll 
LETTER XLII 
The Marchioness 
TO 
Lady panny St. Alejn. 
HAT unknown power over rulesr me? Is it your example, my dear friend? Where are the amiable qualities of the Count that are over powering me V I am a stranger to myself: I feel, on my heart, an attack hitherto unusual; I am enchanted in every respect with him. I love his fweetness, his good'. sense, his polite ness, the equality of his character;; weighs with me to be worthy of him. 
V 
Had I the happiness. to have known a ■ man like him, at my first entrance into the world, what Sorrow might L net have 
escaped 
l6z contessrons f 
escaped! He had an attachment during' ten years; he made her he loved respectable: : dissolved the knot. Every day he Speaks in her praiie; is not that also.. honour on his own heart; his age everything confirms me in the Solidity of his judgement, and makes me anxious to please him. ^ 
Yes, my dear friend, the greatest happr ness a woman, carried away by the torrent of the world, can desire, is to meet am honest man, as the object of her attachment. Hia advice Spares her impruden eles without number, and only tends to make her estimable. 
But why should we Seek advice elsewhere?? one has the happiness to marry a Sensible man, does not his experience furnish advice? Is it not his inte jest to See us respeded .f Youth blinds us, 
with 
A C 6 que T. ■ 163 
with prejudices; we are deaf to the counsels of an husband; we often attribute his advice to jealousy, or a wish to control. 
The knowledge of these truths is acquired only thro’ a thousand perils, and an infinity of hateful mistakes. 
IS one would be confined to their duties,, would there be a neceshty for So painful a study? would one be exposed to indis cretion or deceit 
Ah.l rny dear Fanny, an honest woman has great' advantages; - what enjoyment does the pleasure of having done her duty afford her. I envy her happiness every step that is volatile draws us from it. 
The light of reason differs widely from that of passion; the one enlightens us, the other blinds us. 
Yes, 
164 
Con f e s s I o' n 
o F 
Yes, had, I less to lay to my charge, I would form a new attachment, rich enough to marry a man without fortune, I would make that of the Count de Durore; but what confidence can he have in me What assurance that I will lay aside my levity? But, may not the knowledge of the errors of my past condtidl Serve as a Surety for my future condudb Will 1 not the bond I agree to prove to him. the sincerity of my repentance? Besides, 
I am advancing to an age when good sense corredls our faults. Next October I shall be thirty years, my dear friend. Thirty years! and I have Spent twelve of them 
-- -- ah!! -- -- how have I .employed 
them? Precious time! I blush at it S’ Reflection kills me! That I were worthy of the man I love and esteem! — but let us drop it; I would not wish to expose him to regret. 
In 
A Co ET. 
In an honourable conneflion you live happy. I envy your happiness for the first time; do not think light of me, my dear friend; it is the return of my strayed soul — it is my sincere return to virtue. 
LETTER 
i66 
Confessions or 
L E TT E R XLIIL 
Lady Fanny 
TO 
The marchionesss 
OUR last letter, my dear mar chioness, has silled me with joy. Yes, you are restored to virtue. That heart So noble. So generous, merited it. Your errors were those of youth, which age and resiedion correct. Why are you So Severe? Why do you judge yourself with So much rigour? .Dis my turn now to chide you. Where is that strength of mind, that wonderful fortitude? must the timid and reserved Fanny encourage you ^ Did I oppose my passion for my Lord? Did not I yield instantly? Had I less reproof than you 
Believe 
A Co UE T. j5j, 
Believe me; decide instantly; nothing is to be had by stow deliberation. We often chuse the worst fide. He that offers will make you happy; do not refuse him. 
My Lord is delighted with your letter; he commissions me to tell you he will not quarrel with you; he will accept of your invitation with his mother: She is not acquainted with France; you will See a good English woman in the full fense of the word. She is an excellent woman, who will love you tenderly. 
Adieu, my most amiable marchioness; marry at once your honest Count; you will not be fbrry for it., 
LETTER 
Confessions of 
LD T T E R XLIV 
I 
The Marchioness 
TO 
Lady fannv St. A L e i n.‘ 
T HESITATE, I contend with myself; 
one resolution overturns another, and 1 determine upon nothing. What a situa^ tion, my dear friend! I must conclude and take one decisive step. I will come to an explanation with the Count; Such a state of uncertainty would destroy .me, .You Will Say, perhaps, wait a little; why anticipate him? I agree that it would be more becoming; but his candour prevents him to Speak to me. 
Knowing that I am very rich, perhaps, he apprehends a refusal. His cares, his assiduities everything proves to me that 
he 
p 
! 
Jie 
. 'ils' 
- If 
: i 
ikj* 
% 
A Co QUE T. 
169 
lie loves me. Then let me anticipate him, and communicate my Sentiments. — What have I to fear? If he renounces an honourable engagement he must renounce me. 
IV 
Adieu! you shall Soon hear again from 
me. 
f 
LETTER 
lyo 
Confessions of 
LETTER XLV 
THE SAME TO THE SAME. 
T 
ihe Count came to see me at the j — usual hour; I immediately shut the door. I requested him not to interrupt me, for I had to consult him in an affair on which my happiness depended. 
“I must confess to you. Sir, that you “are not indifferent to me and I flatter myself you have a friendship for me. “I have views, perhaps, wshich may not “meet your approbation. My intention “is to marry again; but before I engage “myself, I would give a mark of my “confidence to the man who is to be my husband.. 
}; 
A Co c^tr E T. 171 
“I have been guilty of many impru p “dencies, by which my reputation has “suffered;; sigh for it; but the evil is done, and cannot be recalled; but the time to come depends on me i if 1 re“ “into the Same errors, 1 shall be unpardonable. I only Seek for tranquil “happiness in this new marriage: rich “enough to chuse, my intention is to “share my fortune with a man whose “character I approve of. I am very “well pleased with yours, which I think “can make me happy. Consider then, 
“after this avowal, if you think me “worthy of your hand. refuse me with “the Same frankness. I know that my “levities entitle me to no right to com“ “-- -- -- -- - 
He 
»72 
C0NPE»3I0N^S OF 
He cast himself at my feet, and Said a thoirsand obliging things; confessed that he had often a design to prevent my declaration, but that the smallness of his fortune had always been his impediment, he feared that I should have attributed his passion to an unworthy motive of interest; but to convince me he Sought the alliance on my own account, I should promise him i would remain absolute mistress of my own fortune. tis only on these terms. Says he, 1 will engage. 
We then Settled the point, and agreed on the day for the ceremony. Yesterday I went to my notary; I directed him to draw up an adt of donation, of forty thousand livres per annum, the half of niy fortune. In the evening I made the Count give me his word that he would accept the 
paper 
A C 0 QUE T. ryj 
paper I was going to give him. He ashed to See it before he would promise; I re fused him, and wished he would give me a proof of his confidence in me. After much argument on both sides, he yielded- 
-- -- Said I, I am going to marry a 
•man as rich as myself : we both are independent : we are only united by Sentiment. 
I never experienced So perfea a fatis fadion, and for the first time I felt the advantages of fortune. 
I shall See you then, my dearest Fanny, 'That hope makes me happy. Come Soon; do not let me languish; the hours arc long when one counts them; com pleat my happiness. With what pleasure shall I embrace my dearest Fanny! 
Formerly 
»74 
Confessions op 
Formerly we could not indulge our hearts without a blush. novi we can avow it ' publicly. What an advantage is found in the pursuit os one’s duty! 

LETTER XLVI ladyfanny * 
TO THE 
„mar CHIONESS. 
.T HAVE received your last letter. I have only time to Say we are Setting out. I shall then have before six days are, expired, the happiness of Seeing you! I can Scarce believe it: my Lord and his mother share my joy. 
. Adieu : I pant for the moment of See" ing you, to renew all the astiirances of my sincere friendship. 
LETTER 
ACO CUE T. 175 
LETTER LXVII 
The Marchioness 
. ' TO THE 
Viscountess of Altamont. 
A LL my friends are assembled here ^ ^ but you my dear, what detains you? come and share my happiness. After tomorrow the marchioness de Fellcamour will bear ihe name of the ‘ Count de Durne. 
It is from your hands he will receive her whose life will be Spent in making him happy; and who will remember with pleasure that you have contributed to her felicity; and that .she is convinced that true happiness can only consist in lirtue, 
FINIS, 
Fhefollowing NEW NOVELS art juf puhlijhed. She Nabob, a Novel, z vols. izmo, s. sewed. Liberal American, 2 vols. \zmo. ^s.fewed. Adventures of a 'flea, zvcfs.izmo.^sfewed. 
And speedily will be puhlijhed. 
jfrancis the Philanthropist, vnfajhion ahie ^ae, 3 vols. i zmo, 71. hd. Jewed., 
The Quaker, « Novel, HAS }zfno, "js. fid Jewed. 
W. Lane hegsto inform any Per Jon, either in Town or Country, dejirous of commencing a Circulating Library, that he has always, ready hound, Jeveral Xhoufand Fclumes, in History, Voyages, Novels, pays. Sec, Juitahlefor that Purpoje; and that he will be happy in injirusl ing them in the Manner of keeping a Reading * Library. — — On an adhrefs io him, as above, they may receive an immediate Supply pj enter -- taininz Books. 
Wanted Jeveral Novels in manupeript for publishing the enjuing Seajon. Addrejs as abpvjt. 
U. of I 

V SIR; 
- i - >, "’'i!;, 4k rtarif tr^a : ■ 
-, d, '..>, ' ik 4: * ■ • \. ■-■' 
, i'.. v 1"' .1 ■ A ■ i' 
vi 
'■ 
\\'r''. vv 1'' “Si'., ’. is, i'' ■■s. ii ■ \ 
'i' ' ' ' '"■ '■ '( -- AUS 

, .VC X., ^•., :.. ■^, .'-. /.rvn^", ia 
ririari. ri ^.. V A' r ■ ■ 
’ljia'r A X"' AAA va; d. 
% s .• ' I ('• ri,, ■ it 
la'rika. V 
■ ri ■ S 'a s rih i 'A: : ’ -' ■■-'• •■■'-> 'i 
AK V i.,, -, .., 
'■' ' ’h V \ ' 
i V ' 4. >./' 
■'' if 
'■V ’ji'i 
, d. kria AA). r?^ifr 
'ii ■, .•.• A,. I ... 
na VV V : xvii" ■" ■; Sh, V V bs )J ■>■ 
.Ad ri>t.a ' i': ':., ‘A. A ■ -- ■/.■ ■ V ii 
A: mr/riiaa'‘ a ^rri affl^ 
■ •■- 'T! VA 
fdit'riaf' \ avf>: ^, ria. 
, T, /: 'ai[h' 
ridiri'f 
V " 
is'hns. 
A ■, .t 
■ -■: ri 
\ 
V t 
AI 
,,., ~AV.; '. .y r./vv 
‘ '.1/ T i. 
'. K 7?.. 
A: 
^., Ffl h.. V 
! • i ■' - ' o,. \;, !' i \ f. ' bt 
,. 
i f; t bi br' b 
y'' -- i, -. i .•'s.. ./ ^ A ' '.’ s'vb AS A k7.u' bx r i 
"b'' ^'' ■''' (, X / .T X', 
', ' O' ■. • - V 
1. A" 'i, 
■v/b ^ ' 
N' Nb '•, bf'v' ’ 
: in. f b 
■ 
i 
■ /*■ 
^ 
■; i 
/ i 
i. si ia, ': rk 'x 
’ : V : ■'!: > ', .-■■ ■ 'I' /rya'x .y rivi -: 1. 
: rs/i .s A V, : 1^, ^ isis' ./) ab i, '- s 
ir - ' ' ' V, 'A ■. ' ^ 
'- I ' ■'• V "'T" A' ' ''' N X / NR 
ri" if 
-^ ■ ■ J. 
; vj*asia 
, aa.'h - 
'. r: A il fj: 'AL.:, suo, A,,, 7 ^ ^ i.... 

OX 
'■, A .■ - 
■ .st 
A): 
{■ yr' ' 
■/ >; 'a' f 
'.. 1 II h I A '.. 
i 1 Id aa'ifv, 
y X _ ' A, ' / A Ay 
V/’. '.y .y A S! % 
/ A' '( cf/acc 
S ■ V ' v ^ 
'A ■ ■ 
't 
rf^: 
A : ' ■/■'%■( - J. : •A v.. ■ • '■•'■' 
di dda : 
'I AIL: ■ ( 
'iy: ^r.aat, ■." / ./. >. s: y.; sa; A, ''' ' ' ■''' N V 
^ ‘ i A.VA hv 'f ^ ' // ' • I ■t f;; - V 
■^: /■ A ' ' i A ■’■ ra 
A,, yd ' V ‘ ' -/' j 
'': ■ '■■/ i.' 
V: 
./: ■ 
h - .( > ■- ' 
. ■■■ r r 

• ' 'i,.. N,, S 
1 .'A •^' 
'/■' t' ' ./■;. 
d '/ ' 
. - \ \ ■ ‘. ''SV' \ '' ■ 
J. A, '^, • '■> 
t A, ' ^ ■ ■ \ A ••{•. ■ vr i ■’ 
\; 
Vv 1 ■ "■ 
1' .•■. P1 
. i ^ : X '. \ - V 


S i W 
i ir 
ffd J' tv: 
'" 
fr 
V 'Vv 
A V 
') A ' : A] ] 
y VI • A V 
A ' .' j ..• / 
'.r'. ' ' s. 
2 
I : V Arii 
r:, X, lf.„, ri - ' ', / t 
ydy a' y A.' •■■ 
■ •-; 'u A., •♦■ i' C' ' 
^ " : ' • r 
j', '■ 
'/-, / A: " ^ ' i 
N 
; K. 

r: 
''' •■ \ 
a > ■- 
tv. 
■■^' ■ ' A dby V AL ■ 
■' "ac' 'c.hc.arrv v .cl' 
'r 
/. !>' -! t' / L ‘ ixv J 
>'■ V 
'. ^ V y y, ./ .vvr^ :., A rv 
■ ■ ■'■ .‘hfi. i ■. V y ■■: / 
adaa AAA: 
t - .^^rys^i; AAA 
->•!'. i..,, V V 
'A', AA" 'I 
\ vlaad.'.' 

Colombia, C 1400 
EXIT 


llt!^ 
USA., 1945 
u '"AI tw^ 
1^ QJ Q Alaska, C 1900 Greece, C 1400 B.C.. ES ^ 
France, 1924 
Persia, C 1250 
Paris, 1919 
m 
Egypt, C 3600 B.C. 
X' 
mt 
FANTASTIC 
AND 
MYSTERIOUS 
Argentina, C 1400 

hi France, 1945 

USA., 1941 
• ^ 
Italy, C 1500 | 
Africa, C 1900 
3 Guatemala, C 1100 
Germany, 1937 
I Germany, 1921 
Italy, C 1740 



\0^ 
France, 1912 
France, C 1895 



Colombia, C 1400 I France, 1927 
iiuuuja 
uimurv 
uiinils 


China, C 1235 
ENTRANCE 
^ Africa, C 1900 rj France, 1928 
Greece, C 300 B.C.. 
IE 
Palestine, 

Africa, C 1850 
Greece, C 
1. Sung Dynasty: Dragons and Landscape. Grisaille. Attributed to ch’en Jung. 1235-1255 A.D.. 
Collection Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York 
2. Paul Cezanne: Pines and Rocks. Oil, 1895-1900 
Collection Museum of Modern Art, New York 
3. Pablo Picasso: 'majolif' Woman with Guitar). Oil, 1911-12 
Collection Museum of Modern Art, New York 
4. Giovanni Piranesi: Prison Interior. Etching, C 1740 
Collection Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York 
5. Paul Klee: Architecture. Watercolour, 1921 
Collection Buchholz Gallery, New York 
6. Alberto Giacometti: The Palace at 4 A.M.. Construction in wood, 1932-1933 
Collection Museum of Modern Art, New York 
7. Chimbayan Gold Figure. Colombia, C 1400 
Collection University of Pennsylvania Museum, Philadelphia 
8. Jacques Lipchitz: Woman and Guitar. Gilded bronze, 1927 
Collection Curt Valentin, New York 
9. Sudanese Wooden Figure. Africa. Nineteenth century 
Private Collection, New York 
10. Pablo Picasso: The Painter and His Model. Oil, 1928 
Collection Sidney Janis, New York 
11. Gabun Funerary Figure. Wood covered with metal. Africa. Nineteenth century 
Collection University of Pennsylvania Museum, Philadelphia 
12. Archaic Greek Horse. Bronze, C 800 B.C.. 
Collection Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York 
13. Mary Callery: Horse. Bronze, 1942 
Collection Museum of Modern Art, New York 
14. Canaanite Idol. Bronze. Palestine, C 1000 B.C.. 
Collection Walters Art Gallery, Baltimore 
15. Hellenistic Runner. Bronze. Greece, C 300 B.C.. 
Collection Walter C Baker, New York 
16. Etruscan Warrior. Bronze, C 600 B.C.. 
Collection Walter C Baker, New York 
17. Wilhelm Lehmbruck: Standing Youth. Cast stone, 1913 
Collection Museum of Modern Art, New York 
18. Pablo Picasso: Horse (Study Iot Guernica). Oil, 1937 
Collection Museum of Modern Art, New York 
19. Mask Representing Deer. Barkcloth. Panama. Nineteenth century 
Collection Museum of the American Indian, Heye Foundation, New York 
20. Edward Munch: The Cry. Lithograph, 1895 
Rosenwald Collection, National Gallery of Art, Washington 
21. Early Christian Head. Stone, C 400-600 A.D.. 
Collection Dr. Jacob Hirsch, New York 
22. Georges Rouault: Christ Mocked by Soldiers. Oil, 1932 
Collection Museum of Modern Art, New York 
23. Romanesque Crucifix. Wood. Spain, C 1200 A.D.. 
Collection Museum of Art, Rhode Island School of Design, Providence 
24. Unknown American artist: Henry Ward Beecher. Wood, C 1850 
Collection Museum of Modern Art, New York 
25. Hyman Bloom: The Synagogue. Oil, C 1940 
Collection Museum of Modern Art, New York 
26. Coptic Madonna and Child. Ivory. Syria or Egypt. Ninth century A.D.. 
Collection Walters Art Gallery, Baltimore 
27. Christoffel Jegher after Rubens: Hercules Fighting Envy and Deception. Woodcut, C 1600 A.D.. 
Collection Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York 
28. Jacques Lipchitz: Prometheus. Bronze, 1942 
Collection Buchholz Gallery, New York 
Greece, C 700 B.C.. m I France, C 75000 B.C.. 
Austria, C 75000 B.C.. 



VOLUME AND 
FORM 
Cycladic Islands, C 2500 B.C.. 

Plan 
of the 
Exhibition 
••••ft* 
Q Q o Cycladic Islands, C 2500 B.C.. 
01 France, C 1915 
Arabia, C 1 A.D.. 
□ 
Jif 

Italy, C 1913 
Germany, 1913 
Etruria, C 600 B.C.. 
Micronesia, C 1850 
• ________________ 
Norway, 1895 ghj 
England (?), C 500 


m 
Q Panama, C 1900 

••• 
France, 1932 
STYLIZATION 
jy France, 1937 
AND EMOTIONAL 
CONTENT 
USA., 1942 
. 800 B.C.. 
USA., 1942 
Flanders, C 1600 

Palestine, C 850 USA., C 1940 I 
USA., C 1850 
29. House Mask. Painted wood. Mortlock Island, Micronesia. Nineteenth century 
Collection University of Pennsylvania Museum, Philadelphia 
30. Amedeo Modigliani: Head. Stone, C 1915 
Collection Museum of Modern Art, New York 
31. Sabaean Head. Alabaster. Saudi Arabia, C 1 A.D.. 
Collection University of Pennsylvania Museum, Philadelphia 
32. Cycladic Figurine. Alabaster. Third millennium 
Collection Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York 
33. Cycladic Figurine. Alabaster. Third millennium 
Collection Brooklyn Museum, New York 
34. Cycladic Figurine. Marble. Third millennium 
Collection Walter C Baker, New York 
35. Cycladic Figurine. Marble. Third millennium 
Collection Walter C Baker, New York 
36. Palaeolithic Figure 'Venus of Lespugues." Reconstruction of original, C 75, 000 B.C.. 
Collection Dr. Harry L Shapiro, New York 
37. Palaeolithic Figure 'Venus of Willendorf.” Cast, C 75, 000 B.C.. 
Collection American Museum of Natural History, New York 
38. Archaic Apollo. Bronze. Greece, C 700 B.C.. 
Collection Boston Museum of Fine Arts, Boston 
39. Egyptian Female Figurine. Clay. Predynastic, C 3600 B.C.. 
Collection Brooklyn Museum, New York 
40. Constantin Brancusi: Bird in Spaxte. Bronze, 1919 
Collection Museum of Modern Art, New York 
41. Giorgio de Chirico: Delights of the Poet. Oil, C 1913 
Collection Museum of Modern Art, New York 
42. Piero di Cosimo: Building of a Palace. Oil, C 1500 
Collection John and Mable Ringling Museum of Art, Sarasota, Florida 
43. Yves Tanguy: The Five Strangers. Oil, 1941 
Collection Wadsworth Atheneum, Hartford 
44. Paul Klee: Letter Ghost. Gouache, 1937 
Collection Museum of Modern Art, New York 
45. Disc with Two Faces. Copper. Northern Argentina. Before 1500 A.D.. 
Collection Museum of the American Indian, Heye Foundation, New York 
46. Maya Painted Bowl. Ceramic. Guatemala. Eleventh or twelfth century A.D.. 
Collection University of Pennsylvania Museum, Philadelphia 
47. African Mask. Wood. Ivory Coast. Nineteenth century 
Collection Brooklyn Museum, New York 
48. Joan Miro: Woman in the Night. Gouache on canvas. 1945 
Collection Mrs. Pierre Matisse, New York 
49. Mycenaean Figurine. Clay. C 1400 B.C.. 
Collection Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York 
50. Eskimo Mask. Wood. Nineteenth century 
Collection University of Pennsylvania Museum, Philadelphia 
51. Eskimo Mask, Wood. Nineteenth century 
Collection American Museum of Natural History, New York 
52. Eskimo Mask. Wood. Nineteenth century 
Collection Museum of the American Indian, Heye Foundation, New York 
53. Alexander Calder: Petals and Yellow Half moon. 
Mobile. 1945 
Private Collection, New York 
54. Chibcha Gold Ornaments. Colombia, C 1400 A.D.. 
Collection University of Pennsylvania Museum, Philadelphia 
55. Persian Deep Plate. Rayy Ware. C 1250 A.D.. 
Collection Walters Art Gallery, Baltimore 
56. Henri Matisse: Arabesque I. Transfer lithograph, 1924 
Collection Museum of Modern Art, New York 



'i... ’yn 
v .f; S.. ■;, '■■■ ’v ' ■ TF. < J. 
■ • ' \ ’ i 
'i't l'l ri ■'^ ■ ’ i - Ar' '■' 
, C i ii " i '■ 
!r' il 
"'■■ V S i • 
VA A 
io;, 'va: A>„A I ii.. >•. -- 
At P .■' 
wt 
F" ' y t' jri A \ 
.'■ ''XO 
L 
X L AV' 
Xf4x\ 
i's ■’■ 
■ XX V ^ 
r XXX; A', y; 
-' ' -; N, r'l XX t: ■: '’ X? 
I, ‘ I CV X 
V -• ^ • ■ X 
'X;; • I ■. 
S' S ■; / i / ■ 
I. A. A 
C s ' X \(- ', I 

'SV 

■lyd. ' 
A ■ ^ -, ' •■', V, 
sct A ■ ■ ' ■■' 
mfari' 
xmm 
ri / V i'. : 
N" 
■• II 
i.r'v, : V ^ ii 
,, /: .'i ■ t'f i ' / ■ 
r' i xbt's' 
'L / '. ‘ 
•1 
■ ■ V I '' V ', J 
IV "■ J I .'. 
‘ A, : -. -\ - 
'■■ CV /' XX r ' 
/ \ X 
X XV f i, 
W;;,;;. 
'■ ref A, 
\' 
ri: \, x 
y ^ 
p' 
'^', \ - ■ ■ ■ 
, ' X M d.f 
xm 
Si' 
:? y 'x II 
■ ii. 
\ k 
ffva X I ’ ^ ', .A .r V ^,... 
- VC, V X - v X,, : c/cv^ ^ ■,, 
; 'odx ' ■' V'.V^'0"' s ^.•'/ 'v.’v'.;;, ■ ■; V -- | 
V V " ■ \ ' ' V > ' V - \ - 
xxi: J t : V; x x XX '' X ^ C : ■ T( ' ^'‘ / 
,,,, ( ■.. ■ /■’ X 
\ 
XX ^ i ta : V 
I f. V, vi 
riw. f d' ’ %, .XV' ■' ' : ' 
r XX,, ■' A u, ■ V 
A ■■ '■ •, .' X ■. V ■ 
: X, - X / 
0 h 
\- L I; •» ri' d I 
.' '■ '.r 
•i, vl 
I ' - I 

R.? 
1 i 

■V 
f./nn ... T, 
: h ^'\ V ■' ■ 
AI 

-■' 
■ tit: : 

'', F 
/ 
- -- ■ 

\ ■ < 

■/V 
J 
f : -\: 
"i 
- '\ yav ^ M Vy 
■ ' ' \[., VK ‘ ' 
, J ■ /, ••' ^ ' 
. \ 
./'■ 
N ’ d ■ ■ •■ ' ' k '\ '■., t X 
,. T" -" ■. ■. b ■ 
V t "Ari 
■, .'^ ■'(■ 
A 
A: 
X : ■-■ 
O' ' ' ‘ ■ siv' '^r‘ St i 
■ ',. *■ ‘ ' II *, - K i: S 
f ■‘.' ■' t; - ■ '’■ A V 1. / r^ri' 
■ : A •-, ■•. \ 
.''O • .• 
AR 
i A! 
> t L! K ■ ’! 
is ■ S, v ■■ ■ 
■: fri 
C b iria>)f 
Atri, : va 
hi, - XI - •; r Y; ' ■ Y AT,, 

■■A 
vb 
Vc(y' 
f • 
y 'Ost; t ia, 
L y', V’ i ■ : 
A 
t, \ ■', ' ‘‘ '* ■ 
, ‘r ■' ■'■■ ■ V 
Ay: 
,,. .h) 
s i ■' X ■, 
; s.ti tt 
S'[ t ■; ■■ 
ovt, .WV,, 
'^ / / - i: : rv L SS ^ Ast ' A A (■' : S.' -, 'V ■ ''' ^ 
■ IF's Y ' • ‘ '•i aasv a i: - .* 1 1 
]r J t ■■: ' S "'. Vl'i i ’ > ' ■ - V / 
4 r > ■, k t,. ■c' k 
Ki. V ■ 

V Y '. L \ 
v s. 
f cs mss..... ■ \. 
; rv, -.'■? ' ’ >- ‘'>V ■- AVA" ,"t Y: v ■c ct.clc ■ ' '■ ■’ is '«c..' 
X CH 'h, A ' 
vtyfr; -■ ■’H t \ 1 v, ■/■, ' : ■ A V 
VC .'■; / ' V ' S' ■' 'A'' ■ / C - ■; -.?! f s'^s 
\ - ■ -, L i ' •'. ■. Nx ■ V ■( "■ - ■ V Vj V 
r • s ■•/.. >.•'' V Lt 


C; ■'• '■] 
j; ' M ■ -- 
b. >' rt, A' 
V: V 


F •■■ .■:; A •■'■ F. >-. ‘ \ -.. ■ ■ - r •- 
V CAN" VC ■ : ■ ■.; .^^: T, 
’, V\ 'l>n'c ■t'v t... J 
■v dv AP^AL' /■''V. a/aav^y\ 
-■ ■' ^ ’ V'V. : ■ '>\! •' / ■. V v 
r. 
rima ft;; • • X ‘ 

V ■, ' L •♦/ x'tey'ci 
• - XC ■■ t • i' b 
'A7 f 
VS '-^ ■ 
rif N 
'hia;; .• 
NNC \., /‘d. ’ : 
.^; ’CCNS Cm !■ ‘ " ■ ' ’'. Ac 
vac: <' vc'" 'vas''"" '■ ■’ ■ V ■ 
‘ay'■;.. VA >' a 'i i ' ■ “t •■. ■. ■• 
'' "S' : '• ■., ' K ^ 
■■ ■'oy c’c.' ■., ■ ^ " 
df 
m. 
VV"' te;; 
/ 
■ •• \= 
., .■ ■ •. ■,, ■ yr 
. t. 0 
a^yrifx ■ ' - 
, \ I ■ V ■ :.,, y, i. ■ ■ 

L (1- 
( - ' ■ " 
'VV 
'A 
i ' i hari Kri ■' 
\ V. '. rt - f. 
\ ‘ 
'CL 
ikl ^^■ 
I ' 
K'' F ' /■ X ’V 
-■. ^ ' .■ : Wy / ■,. .’ f rir ■ ey 
/. 
'.- './■ 
.X ■ ' ■ A VW 
C '; V ■ AC: --, k 
'bte 
AA 
>■■ V, .- .'' "•. 
■ V V\ 

THE 
CONFESSIONS 
O F A 
C O QUE T. 
A N O V E L 
In a Series of LETTERS. 
Par Ccnfefjions farfaite Vous jugez de uamour. 
CUPIDON. 
LONDON: 
•; Piinted for W, LANE, Leadenhall street, 
1785, 


■; .v; 
; ^K, t 
*- 
& 

^ ■■ 
in 
C 

ri: 
Af ■ ■ i 
atmz%£€: 
A aqd.f: ril 
A 
- VI i ■, 


“stj 

Si ■■.. ■'■'■ ■•? 
•1 ': L h 

V 
■ -, 
(I rtf f ^ 



PREFACE. 
T3EFORE it was determined that ^ the following letters should be exhibited ill an English dress to the public, the Transtator often turned in his mind their tendency, and the probable reception they might receive on their introduction. A variety of reflections encountered the idea of increasing the literary stock of the public", by their contribution; till reason and Sentiment combined' in their favour; and at length it was d decreed that So faithful a delineation of human nature ought not to be withdrawn from the light, or con;; to obscurity[ 

[ 
Were the errors which milled the heroine of the piece, and her noble correspondent, interrupted or given oyer by an abject Servility to the opinion of the world, we Should' instantly conclude that their amend ¥ 
ment was at best Suspicious j but when we behold the Spontaneous emotions of the soul, the genuine dictates of the heart, and the un biasted operations of the judgement, concurring decidedly in condemnation of that giddy and culpable career, which must certainly terminate in remorse, and grasping at virtue for its own sake, we cannot refuse our tribute of applause to Such generous and animated efforts of reason, nor refrain from uniting our 
f V ] 
effusions of congratulation on the concluding happiness of the different recitals. <; 
Permit then, indulgent reader, an injured exile to Say, that once he tasted (for what is irretrieveable absence but death) the Sweets which virtuous friendstiip can impart; a friendship where vivacity, affability, sedateness, and good-humour, formed, the basis of a quadruple alliance, between four of the most amiable and innocent of their Sex; whose value the respect due to virtue always enhanced. 
As if increase of appetite had grown From what it fed on.’* 
Permit 
[ VI ] 
Permit me then to place this offspring of my industry under their wings, of whom I may truly say, 
“How can they Sorrow who never knew fin.’* 
And with your indulgence address them in this dedicatory apostrophe: 
Ladies, 
LV Were I not fully convinced of that liberality of fentirnerit, that general philanthropy, which actuates your judgments, and animates yonr hearts, this address would miss its object. 1 may now judge, as absence has not impaired, but on the contrary more deeply imprinted on my bosom, the inestimable value of those qualities which first endeared 
yon 
[ VII ] 
you to me; that your candour, consistent with itfelst will pity, not insult the frailties of an unthinking 
o 
person of your own sex, whose life of giddiness and levity is So justly described, and rigidly condemned by herself; were we not liable to human frailty, where would be the value of that godlike attribute, mercy? Am I an advocate for li centiousnefs? No. That placid influence of virtue which inspired even me to quit the career of distipatlon, and taste the pleasures of felf denial by your example, ought to be the only tribunal before which I Should not wish to appear the advocate of such a cause, were I even to suspend my abhorrence of vice, and hardy enough to make the attempt. Receive 
( viil) ^ 
ceive then, at my hands, this naked portrait, and let me put it into yours, to cloth it with compassion. 
Adieu, my friends, happy women! whose lives are one continual feast of refledsion, to whom no sting or thorn can give pain, unless it be for the woes of others! Breathing in the tomb of absence, accept the tendeyest wishes, and purest friendship of a well wisher to the fair part of the creation. 
THE 
CONFESSIONS 
OF A 
COQUET. 
Paris, 
L E T T E R I. 
^. j r FROM 
The Marchioness 
^ 
Lady Fanny. 
f IA H E confessions, my dear friend, which you require of me, are seldom made to a woman, and especially to an English lady, who differs much from others ifi the principles of gallantry 
■ ' With 
C O N r E s3 I ON 5 OF 
'With you a cool reserve cloaks with the veil of Sentiment, • the propensity'which all women have to gallantry. We are less circurhspetst. : Sometimes we blame intrigues and Intimate connedlions as well as you, 'we do not imagine how a woman cam forget her duties, and obligations, and whilst we are declaiming against the con dufl of others, we unfortunately conclude by falling into the same mistakes. 
Thus women applaud and condemn themselves according to circumstances, or their particular interest; and thus the most culpable are oftentimes thedeast Indulgent. 
The first intrigue is carefully concealed; another Succeeds with less circumspedtion, a familiarity with the feelings insensibly gains ground, and in the end sh little attention is paid to reserve, that the matter becomes the Secret of the public. In 
A Co QUE T. 3 
In England you observe a different conduct. 
'Having at least as many failings as we, you conceal them with more care; a woman, who passes at London for a lu cretia, is, in reality, often nothing better than a downright prude. 
But, perhaps you will tell me, the English ladies are more constant than the French, and consequently less addicted to gallantry. 
That may be, my dear friend; but your English gentlemen are not Such proficients in the art of Sedudion as the French. If by chance you find one who can prepossess you, you do well to preserve his affections, least perhaps another may not be found to replace him. This conduct evinces more policy than virtue. 
B 2 
Do 
. 

4 C 0 N F E S S I O NS O F 
Do not Imagine that I mean to excuse my own foibles, by descantingon your manners; no, my dear friend, I would wish, on the contrary, that my confessions would •serve as examples to all my Sex, to guard them from the Snares which vice lays before them, and not Suffer themselves to be led astray by its deceitful allurements. 
Adieu, my dear Fanny, let us not treat with importance the homage which men pay us, nor be Simple enough to love beings Scarce capable of a sincere attachment to the exclusion of men of Sentiment. In my next letter I will begin the recital of my adventures. After this confidence can you entertain any doubts of my friendship for you? 
LETTER 
A Co CUE T. 5 
LETTER II 
FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME. 
O U have promised me a mutual fe cresy; I rely on the word of an English lady; and on that confidence I un bosom myself to you without reserve. Come then, my dear friend, let us not hesitate longer; let us enter my closet together; let us with blushes unveil the errors of my youth, and take a review of thole improprieties, which are the Source of my daily Sorrow. 
Oil my first introdiidlion to the world, I brought into it an heart upright and sus,, : whether from a desire to please, or a weak inclination to be caressed, I never was content but in receiving compliments. Credulous, like all other young persons B 3 without 
6 Confession s of 
without experience, I took those common attentions, which are merely ' things of course, as So much homage paid to my beauty. Divested of duplicity, and looking upon all men as ingenuous as myself, 1 had no Suspicion of their'snares. ' The vigilance of my husband prefer ved me for Some time; the weaker, the most dangerous in overcoming our Sex, is to flatter our vanity. self-love cannot long resist So fedudive a Snare. Every man who manages it well, if he does not Succeed So far as to please us, is at least Sure to be heard with pleasure. 
Nevertheless my heart did not always remain insensible. The Marquis de sa lencey, whose accomplishments and person had ruined many a woman, was amongst the foremost who pleased me. I had by this time acquired a little more experience; 
the 
AC O UE T. 7 
the circumfpe<5hon which I observed in my conduct' ought to have cautioned me against danger; but it accelerated his triumph, and the loss of my peace. 
He had my duties, my principles, and my religion to combat a long time : to the reproach of my Sex shall I tell it? It was^a woman that Succeeded to make me abandon them. 
Yes, my dear fanny, all the men on earth united are less dangerous than these oshcious associates. Would it not be better that we had been taught in our infancy, to be on our guard against them; and that in admonishing us to miftrufi men; this advice had also been added, particularly to mifirujl women. 
Men are only dangerous when we want B 4 experience; 
8 Confessions of 
experience; then we listen to them with fear only; whilst on the other hand our confidence with women is unlimited. Adieu, my precious friend; this letter is long, for one that sat up late; receive the tenderest wishes of, c. 
LETTER 
A Co IT. 9 
London 
LETTER III 
Lady Fanny 
TO THE 
Marchioness. 
T SHOULD indeed, my dear marchio ness, find myself very much embarrassed to give you any Satisfadlion in the incidents of my life; and, notwithstanding the readiness of my disposition, admitting they were worth imparting to you, I know not how lean possibly arrange in order my narrative. 
Spare me, I beseech you, my dearest friend, the pain of giving you uneasiness; draw no unfavourable conclusion from my refusal, in which my heart is less concerned B 5 than 
10 Co NFESSIONS OF 
than my reason. It is not from a wish to break my word, that I request this favour. Your request is So pressing, I must not decline my engagement; but you involve me in embarrassinents, for a trifle nofworth the trouble. 
I am very well convinced that you have reason to be displeafed with me, I have led you into the confidence you profess to me, and you have an apparent right to complain; but consider, my dear lady, that it was not curiosity that induced me to a desire of being your considante. Friendship, which participates in everything, would make me participate in your Sorrows as well as your joy. Yes, my estimable friend, you ought never doubt the tenderness of my Sentiments to you; my heart is united to yours for the remainder 
of 

A C O q^tt E T. II 
of my life. Farewell, my dearest friend, do not Suffer yourself to be difpleased with me, unless you would wish to make very unhappy the Sympathising bosom of your affedionatc 
A Vl 
r 1 
Fanny Stapleton.’^ ^ 

7 -- ''sivit: ^ 

f, 
, n 
LETTER 
13 
Confessions of 
LETTER IV V j 
Them a r C h I b n e s s ' 
r • f 
I > i ■ 
'
ladyfannv. 
yo not imagine I desire that the ac knowledgement of my weaknesses should be offered as an excuse for them. No, my dear friend, my only wish is to teach you to understand men, and not Suffer yourself to be Seduced by a deceitful exterior. 
In my last I made mention to you of a woman, whose advices were to me the Source of Sorrow and regret. It was the Countef^ de Vertimant; that perfidious woman, linder the mask of friendship, meditated jt\y downfall. In concert with the Marquis 

A Co Ct, U E T. 
13 
quis and the Chevalier de Salencey, her intimate friend, she proposed to me an excursion to the country. We were highly entertained; everything passed on as well as could be desired, to the very moment allotted to make me forget my'duty. She made a pretext of having orders to give, to leave me alone with the Marquis; I proposed following her, she excused herself; at length, she disengaged herself So dex tcroussy of me, as to leave the Marquis full time to execute his design of Seducstion. He used all means, sighs, tears, oaths, to prevail on me. I was too weak to flatter myself with a long resistance; he discovered his conquest in my eyes, and availed himself of a weak moment to render me 
J 
Ah! my dear friend, how many tears and sighs on my fide has that japse cost 
me! 
*4 
Co N F E S S I 0 N s OF 
me! every moment was now embittered with remorse. The countess became in tolerable to me; I caused my door to be shut against her, without ever wishing to come to an explanation. And what have you done with the Marquis, you will ask me? He was at least as blameable as the countess; I agree in that; but love, which, has more dominion than friendship, pleaded for him. 
I attribute my condu(5t towards Madam de Vertimant to the opinion I always entertained, that I should never have fallen into vice, if that dangerous friend had not facilitated the occasion. 
Company is just announced; I must therefore take my leave of you for the present, and go listen to the insipid chat of the president Distgut, This magistrate is a 
mere 
: 
A' Co E T. 15 
mere dabbler in news, which he retails with the confidence of a prime minister, to make himself appear a man of consequence. — Adieu, my lovely friend, the tender confidant of ' ■■■ — 
LETTER 
i6 
CONFESSIONS OP 
LETTER V 
FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME, 
lehold what a proficient I am become in state affairs : what an advantage for a woman to be So well informed! when I am Spoke to concerning America, at least I will escape the mishap which befell the Baron Celant, and Madam Delancourt, who has the reputation of a wit. 
The Baron maintained with warmth that America was but an issand, and the gulf of Mexico but a seaport in that issand. ' 
Madam Delancourt, in conversing one day with Some men of letters, told them in a Scientific tone, that the Diet of ratis. bonne was one of the principal rivers of Germany. It was in vain that these gentlemen 
Co U E T. 
»7 
tiemen wished to undeceive her; she gave no credit to what they Said, but laughed at their ignorance. 
But let us leave this lady and literature, and turn to ourselves, 
It was not long, my dear Fanny, till the Marquis felt that sting which tyrannises over the heart, and poisons the Sweets of a mutual intercourse; his jealousy became insupportable; he was no longer that tender lover as formerly, but a rigid judge. Incessantly watching" my own - condust, I became melancholy and insupportable. I found myself deserted, and had no other Society than his. Our tiresome tete a tetes were taken up with complaints, reproaches and repining; he became odious to me; and being no longer able to bear with it, I broke off with him. 
'When 
is 
Confessions o k 
When a man ceases to be worthy ofj love, is one obliged to love him? 
I forgot to tell you, my dear friend, thaf ' the Marquis invented a stratagem pleasant enough, whilst we were upon good terms, to convince himself that he was Sole'master of my heart, and prevent a Successor, isle.. my affections. He had the art to = make me consider mysejf virtuous through vanity. At another time I shall unravel to you this mystery. Lwish,. prior to my. communicating it, to know Something of your adventures: notwithstanding your, great reserve, I do not believe that your virtue has been proof against temptation; in that cafe you would have too great an advantage over me. Farewell, dear Fanny, confide in the affection of ■ 
LETTER 
A Co (UE T. 19 
LETTER VI 
Lady Fanny 
TO 
The Marchioness, 
T N Spite of my coyness, and the reserve *** reproach me with, I would overcome both one and the other, had I anything worth notice to communicate to you; but in truth, my dear lady, my adventures are So little interesting, that I am certain befcre hand they will only tyre you; a moist climate, and the gloomy Smoke of our mineral walls, engenders in us a melancholy that borders on languor. 
Steadfast in our principles, we are perhaps as much indebted to nature, as to •ducation. Sedate people are not So easily 
inflamed 
zo 
CONFESSIONS OF 
inflamed as those in whom vivacity che -- rishes a stock of combustible materials : ae Small Spark is Sufficient to blow up the. latter. 
On the other hand, our restrve is more * the result of cool deliberation than of virtue, where reflection aids the decisions of the. heart. Peopje of a lively turn refiedlr but little; they do not. give themselves timec for it. 
When we are in love, our hearts are uniformly devoted to the object of our attachment; our manner in love is simple; instead of which, with you it is a continual, bustle, in which all the passions have a part to play. We startle at dissipation, same ness dejedls you. I know very well your : manner in love is preferable to ours : So far. from condemning it, I should be very 
happy 

A G 0 E T. 21 
shappy to think like the French ladies, and "free from the misfortune of a thoughtful head, I vv^ould enjoy everything with them, having no violent attachment to any; this is the only philosophy worthy of recommendation, in a world where everything is calculated for the moment. Continue, my dear friend, the recital of your adventures, without requiring a confession of mine : I repeat it again, they are not worthy your attention; I would wish to Ipare you the pain of being wearied. 
Be persuaded, my dear, that I Will always participate in your Sorrows as well as your pleasures; and that death alone will be able to dissolve the friendship pledged to you by — — 
LETTER 
22 
Confessions o 

LETTER VII 
The Marchioness 
TO 
Lady fanny. 
LIST I not have an unlimited confidence in you, to continue recounting my errors, imprudencies, weaknesses, or whatever name you please to bestow on my past conduct, as long as you, with a full pretence, elude the promise you have given me. Indeed I am uneasy at these Subterfuges, they evince a defect of confidence injurious to friendship; but 1 make an allowance for the pain it may give you to confess a weakness, and am generous enough to excuse your timidity. 
But notwithstanding the right I have to 
complain 
A Co E T. 23 
complain of you, 1 will continue my recital. 
*• 
having quitted the Marquis, I avoided every other engagement. I became virtuous through fear. You will alk me, perhaps, where is the necessity of having another intrigue I agree. with you, there would be most prudence in avoiding it: but how to avoid it, when a thousand examples are leading us on? When the first barrier is removed, a woman Seldom stops there. * How can one, in the bustle of life, avoid recoiling at the Severity of virtue ^ the Sensibility of the heart in youth, the employment of the understanding, or its want of occupation, at a more Settled age, and above all, the obliteration of those Solid 'principles, which alone can guard us against frailty, is the general cause of gallantry in our Sex. If all our fine ladies wbuld Speak 
cakdidly, 
24 
Confessions of 
candidly, they would agree, that after a first intrigue, they have not avoided the occasions of falling into a Second. They are much to blame, my dear friend, they are only preparing farther cause of regret. At every slip, we feign a return to virtue, thereby to enhance the value of our defeat. Men are not our dupes, they See thro’ all our artifices the true state of our thoughts. Were we virtuous in reality, would we not avoid a Second weakness from our experience of the former? and whilst we assume the vestal, we inwardly wish to extinguish its Sacred flame, and would be very Sorry to inspire that respect which is due to virtue. 
Such are the artifices which authorise men to ad with duplicity to us. When we Set them Such examples, can we complain with justice? * This 
A Co QUE T. 25 
This digression prolongs my letter, and draws me away from my principal Subject. We shall resume it next posh Farewell, my friend, accept the const dence and esteem of — - — 
C 
LETTER 
^ 6 
Confessions oif 
LETTER vm. 
THE SAME TO THE SAME. 
LE T us avoid our former remarks and digressions, if not, my dear, bid ^ adieu to the confessions. — I was then at ‘ variance with the imarquis, whose jealousy i punished me Severely. This was the moment' to make a sincere ireturn to myself, and avoid the confusion of a Second weak ^ But I was deaf to remorse, and only followed the bent of my own heart. 
Fear for a long time made me wise, tho’ fusceptible in Sentiment. Many men paid their addresses to me; but not one suc .ceeded to determine me; not that my heart was indisposed to a new engagement; it was born fusceptible; but the 
deceit 
A Co Q^V E T. 
z; 
lecelt of the Marquis, which I have al eady mentioned, and which 1 will unfold 1 my letters, was my obstacle. 
Love at length triumphed : the estima )le qualities of the Chevalier d’ anguo me, decided me to prefer him to his ither rivals. Our pashon lasted long, and f kithful as the heroes of ancient romances. 
The Marquis often repeated to me, 
hat a man less enamoured than he was, 
\ 
would quickly be tired of me. Curiosity, o make a trial of the Chevalier, led me to bek an occasion. I wished to be convinced f he loved me in earnest. In short, my lear friend, one easily falls into the Snare, : • shen there is no desire to avoid it. 
C 
11 
The Chevalier appeared to me more namoured than when I treated him with 
C 2 
rigour. 
28 
Con FESS I' 0 N S OP 
rigour.' I attributed his behaviour to the j excess of his complaisance, or the fear of ^ displeasing me. I never was at peace : the least coolness alarmed rhe, I was.expedting j every instant to See hirn changed. j 
Such a situation is the more to be ^ pitied, as self-love is So deeply concerned ^ in it. How often have I regretted to see ^ myself exposed to it; but it was too late, the at was irrevocable. 
We had a Slight altercation together; he remained two days without feeing me; now I was convinced that my fears werej well founded, and that he only wanted the first opportunity to break with me. At length he returned : how, you will ask ■ V Not like a man, on terms of dif pleasure, but as a tender, Submiffive, and affectionate lover, whom the fear of having 

A C O (UE T.. 29 
^ ing given me an offence,, had reduced to despair. Had I experience, what an ad 'ivantage would that discovery have given me over him? But I was yet a bad politician in love; and in that reconciliation I only followed the emotions of my heart; my fears were discovered by the excess of my joy; he would not understand any ' thing, and I was obliged to enter upon 
iffl 
the most mortifying details. Whenever I reflect on that circumstance, 1 am astonished woman can expose herself to So 
: !1 
pany humiliations. Love undoubtedly blinds us, it even stifles our vanity. 
I formed a thousand ridiculous projects to be revenged on the Marquis, but quickly my reason exposed their extravagance, h! my dear friend, I sincerely regret the 
j 
appy days os innocence; the experience jof every day Separated us farther from it, C 3 and 
ai' 

Confessions of 
and at the end of Some years we can only; discern it through a mist. 
! 
Adieu, my dear Fanny; the experience of the world is dearly bought; tisa re stetstion which afflitsts your 
letter' 
hr -- 
A Co QUE T. 
3« 

L E T T E R IX 
Lady F an n y' 
TO THE' 
Marchioness.' 
my dear friend, I am determined to return your confidence; your letters are too entertaining not to wish to merit them, but your confidence is yet dearer to me. 
The pi(5bure of my life will be drawn in colours less lively than yours; you will not find in it any of those marked lines which distinguish the pencil of a master. 
Do you recollect Lord Stately you used to worry So often at Spa ^ well then, my dear friend, would you imagine that that C 4 man 
32 
Confessions op 
man who appeared to you unengaging and singular, made a conquest of me one day. ^ It was he then that caused me to forget my principles and my indifference. Our custom in England of passing Seven months ( in the year in the country, gives us an op j portunity of being acquainted in our neigh j bourhood. His lordship’s mansion house 1 was very near mine. Whether from timi C dity, or the fear of a repulse, (for since my j hushand’s death, his Lordship paid me very little attention) he passed by my door every day. Saluted me, but never at ^ to Speak to me. 
It happened one morning that we met; t he is a good horseman, and fond of horses. d I was mounted on a very sine one; he a praised it, and we entered into a conversa V tion on the good qualities of our horses. LI 
At 
A Co QUE T. 33 
At the end of a cross road he took leave of me to continue his ride. 
The country, in England, Seems to be one continued garden, inhabited during the Summer, by all people of ease. Besides country diversions, we have assemblies, and horse races, where all the people of fashion in the country meet. At Such places I often Saw his Lordship. 
/ 
You will tell me, there is nothing Said in all this. True, but a little patience. 
My park was Surrounded with handsome meadows; there I walked Sometimes. One day, thinking myself alone, his Lordship appears from behind a bush, accosts me, walks with me,, and requests the permission of attending me home j I consestted, C 5 and 
34 
Confessions of 
and from that time his visits became very frequent. 
I was not long at a loss to perceive that he loved me; he was not indifferent to me; but I ought to be better acquainted with him before I permitted him to discover my true Sentiments. I Spent six months in studying his character;; the mean time we often took an airing together on horseback. 
I learned from this, that my liking for these beautiful animals had determined him to aim at pleasing me; and that the interview in the meadows had awaked him to Sensibility. 
I 
You See, my dear friend, that every in | has his own peculiar manner of | inspiring love; and that it is impossible to I Speak decisively on the art of pleasing. 
I am 
E( 
81 
A C O QUE T. 35 
I am to have a route this evening of all my neighbours; I must leave you to receive them, and make tea. 
Farewell, and confide in the increasing affeflion of — — 
to 
c6 
LETTER 
.^6 
Confess 1^0 NS' of 
LETTER X 
The Marchioness 
TO 
Lady Fanny. 
SIX months in studying the man one loves! From the moment he becomes pleasing, do not we attribute to him every Species of merit? Ah! my dear friend, what a methodical condu(5b! If the French adopted the same means, the whole nation would pass in review, without running a risk of falling into error. 
I have no conception how a person ean oppose their liking So long. In my opinion, the beginning of a passion affords the most attradlions; novelty gives a vivacity which is palled by custom, 
Do 

A Co E T, 
L 
37 
Do you know the reason why volatile women are more attended to than those of a Serious turn ^ It is simply this; that they are continually attentive to please, and omit no means to accomplish their views. This is what gives the French ladies the Superiority over those of other nations. Perhaps these poffess more essential qualities, but they are deficient in the grand art os seduduon, 
Have you never remarked, my dear Fanny, that an amiable woman is more dangerous, than one whose merit consists in her beauty alone? The first awakes the passions, the Second inspires taste. The Same effects are wrought by men. I have known very ugly men preferred to adonis’s; these tyre one out, whilst one knows no fatigue in listening to the others. By the repeated sight of an handsome statue the eyes become habituated to It. 
Illusions 
38 
Confessions of 
Illusions are the food of love; but it is only their great variety can give the charm any duration, 
A Duke of Burgundy, whose name I forget, Sell in love with a very amiable lady, but not a beauty; the courtiers, who at other times were witnesses of the duke’s sickleness, were astonished at Such constancy. One day, whilst they werel Speaking very freely, the Duke overheard them; he came up to them, and Said,! “Gentlemen, do not wonder I find everyj 
t 
“day in Madam de Millmour, another “mistress, who causes me to be guilty of V infidelity to Madam de Millmour.” ■ 
After a possession of twelve years, he was more enamoured than the first day, * Such a lover undqubtedly merited Such a mistress, 
You 
A Co E T. 39 
You will tell me, perhaps, that they studied each other a long time before they loved. I do not believe So : I rather attribute their love to an irr^sistable Sympathy, which is the basis of the great passions. 
Adieu, were I to follow my own inclinations, there would be no end to my letter. I feel myself in a singular mood for arguing. But I do not wish, in writing, to run the rilk of that reproach we are charged with in Speaking. Do they wrong us, my good friend? adieu, remember her 
who thinks on thee! — 
LETTER 
40 
Confessions of 
LETTER XI 
THE, SAME TO THE SAME. 
0 U are, without doubt, impatient ' to know the result of my adventure. | 
My dear Fanny, I am anxious to Satisfy 
1 I 
you. I made laws for the Chevalier, j which I received formerly from the Mar j quis. But for an accident, I should have j preserved to myself the poor Chevalier I for a long time, and he really deserved to be loved. 
Being one day, on'a visit together. Sentiment became the fashionable topic. A man maintained that a woman was commonly governed by the man she loved. I argued against him with w ^armth, that when once a woman lost the reins, her Subjedlion was irredeemable. 
i The 
A Co CUE T. 41 
The Chevalier listened to me; he took umbrage at it, and from that moment his ondud visibly altered. 
— You have done wrong, my Lady Marchioness— — allow it, my Lady Fanny; but the evil was without remedy; confidence being lost, the illusion Speedily vanished. 
sfi 
Everything had the appearance of a it rupture between us. Unwilling to be deli ferted I feigned business, and retired for Some time to my country house; there I sincerely regretted the Chevalier; he deserved more attention; but he was Sufficiently revenged afterwards by the vis count Crillon. 
From this new attachment my heart has felt pangs which will never be obliterated. The recital I reserve for another letter. In 
the 
42 
C O N^F'E S S r O N S O F 
the mean time continue me yours; tffesin trodudion pleases me, it is entirely in the English style. 
Adieu, my dear friend, if you wished to make me happy, you would come to Paris, and impart your Sentiments to me. mistress of your own actions - pre. vents you but Some assignation of the heart. Some meeting Swains; for whom you languishingly Spend your days in rural red tirement. Why do you not bring the tender dove to France? there he will receivej Some lessons in gallantry which will make him more amiable. He is not the first Englishman that has been formed in this 
. I 
country, ' Believe me, my fair friend, that it is the best School in the world to make a man agreeable. Remember one to whom your happiness is dear,. 
LETTER 
A Co UE T. 
43 
LETTER XII 
I/aoy Fanny 
01 
TO THE 
Marchioness. 
TOR the future I will write to you every post without waiting for an answer to my letters. In adhering to this plan, we will communicate our ideas and adventures with more regularity. Do you approve of it, my good friend. At present I fiiall fesume my narrative. 
jealousy wrested from me that avowal which I refused to make for a long time. Good God! how one is to be pitied who is infected with that cruel malady! to what folly are not both Sexes exposed thro’ its influence? 
. Lady 
44 
Concessions op 
Lady St. Albin was with me in the ' country; although she had not the advantage of me as to youth, still she had muck gaity in her manner. She disputed a good deal with his Lordship, and I fancied 1 perceived he was equally pleased with, her as with me. 
I observed them very attentively; one day, whilst they were walking together in the park, I followed them, and feigning to be very tired, I went into a grotio, in hopes his Lordship would follow me. Lady St. Albin was determined to continue her walk. I begged his Lordship to accompany her; he Seemed to consent with little regret. 
When I was alone an agitating Sorrow Seized me, I wept; and instantly afterwards his Lordship returned, and feeing > ' ' me 
A C O que T. 
me bathed in tears, he wished to know what afflicted me So violently. 1 denied anything was the matter, but my eyes and my voice, I believe, betrayed me. 
There is not a doubt, my dear, but love has its own language; his lordship discerned it, for he became very tender •and pressing. It cost me a good deal of pain to conceal my agitation, and I could no longer command my reason; at length, my dear friend, I forgot in one instant the painful study of six months, and I made an avowal of my Sentiments to him : h, e doubted not my sincerity; he testified his gratitude by the most lively transports. Had not Lady St. Albin luckily rejoined us, I believe that the loss of my honour would have followed close that of my reason. The one is in great danger when the other is forgot, From this time forth we lived in 
the 
46 
C O N F .E S S I O N S 0 F 
the greatest friendship, my passion daily augmented, I had not as yet fallen; I thought my virtue beyond the reach of taint; but one ought not to rely too much on their own strength. The following Will show you that I was easier overcome than I apprehended. A woman can never be Sure of not falling, but when guarded by prudence, she avoids the occasion. 
We walked one evening into that meadow which I mentioned besore; the weather was sine, and the moon shone; all things conspired to feed in my bosom the dangerous passion which Swayed ray heart. 
The silence of the night, the reviving odours of the Surrounding verdure, the sound of a fall of water which runs through my park, and purls across the meadow, the resiecstion of the moon on the gently moving water, altogether inspired me with 
at 
m 
to 
tf 
nc 
01 
it 
ir 
f( 
A Co Q^V E T. 47 
throbbing tenderness unknown till then; my Soul too much agitated, gave itself up to a pleasing suspension; all my senses were h penetrated. Ah! my dear friend, from That moment your poor Fanny has been no strangeruo remorse, and is lost to her own esteem. Why did I expose myshlf to it? ought I not to attribute my fault to myself, I cannot reflecst, .on it withoirt Sorrow. 
Adieu, my dear marchioness, this recital revives in my heart those griefs that iwill neyer be effaced. Receive the tender wishes of -- -- -- -- 
i] 
LETTER 
48 Confessions or 
N, 
LETTER XIII i 
The Marchioness | 
TO I 
Lady Fannv. 
S it possible you can have more cause 
to complain than I? No, I shall northeast 
ver hurt your Sensibility, tho’ I appear to 
be very volatile; believe me, dear Fanny 
I know the resped due to virtue, it is the ♦ 
best ornament of our Sex. 
I feel as well as you the misfortune of possessing a susceptible heart, that it Sub jeds us to a thousand evils, strangers to indifference; but do there not disadvantages arise from that state of vegetation! at least we imagine So. Perhaps now w are Speaking against indifference, to ex cuse our foibles, we are ingenious to dc' ceive ourselves. 
A Co E T. 49 
Love well regulated has its charms; it may be the offspring of wisdom, as well as pleasure. Love is given to man as an alleviation to those troubles which are inseparable from life; how often do we abuse the benefits of providence. But let us not, my dear, examine our faults too stridlly; our conditions would be too happy if we had no faults. 
Adieu, my Fanny, let what is pasted Serve as a lestbn for the future; by attending to that, I hope we shall accomplish the subjection of our pashons. 
vs 
01 
D 
LETTER, 
C 0 N? E S S I 0 N 3 or 
TETTER XIV 
Lady Fannv. 
TO THE 
Marchioness. 
TOUR letter has afforded me Some ^ consolation;; have mentioned matters which often engaged my attention; had I once been Sufficiently impressed with them, I should have no occasion to blush today. But, my dear mar chioness, by the recovery of our reason we hold our errors in a true light. 1 was missed by this unhappy blindness for above the Space of four years. 
As long as I remained in the country I enjoyed tranquillity, and apprehended nothing from the natural levity of men, On returning to London the Scene of peace 
was 
10j> 
F 
A Co £ T. 51 
was Soon changed. I know not whether his lordship was more jealous than I; but this I know for a certainty, that we were extravagantly So; our lives were a perpetual vicishtude of doubts and explanations; a look, a word, gave an alarm; all our time was taken up in quarrels and reconciliations; we became insupportable to each other, and we could not exist one moment happy asunder. 
What imprudence! tho’ we knew the weight of our chain, we had not the power to break it! I often regretted the happy day when indifference afforded me an undisturbed tranquillity; and I had not the strength to withdraw mysels from the tyrannising dominion of love. 
At last, four years were Spent in this wretched state, I neglected all my acquaintances, having Spent the best part of my time in the country. 
52 .D O N F E S S IA K S O F ^ 
But would you believe me, my dear Lriend, just, at the moment when I thought I shad the greatest share in his lordship’s affections, he quitted me to marry a girl with a large fortune, but a very disagree able person?? was not able to withstand this Separation with fortitude; it had like to have .cost me my life, a melancholy remained which was very difficult to remove. It was in consequence of that ill ness I went to Spa, and first acquired the pleasure of your acquaintance; your friendship, and pleasing chearfulness produced an effect on me which I could not hope either from time, or absence. Continue to me that same friendship, my dear mar chioness; his a sensation above the reach of events, and which leaves no sting. 
LETTER 
p’s 
A Co CUE T. 
LETTER XV 
The Marchioness 
TO 
Lady Fanny. 
JAM going into the country, my dear friend,, from whence I shall not return till Autumn. Our party consists os four ladies and Seven gentlemen.i shall acquaint you with all that occurs. Adieu, write often to me; address your letters to Paris. Why are you not here, my dear Fanny we would Sometimes make our remarks; we should repeat those delightful evenings we passed at Spa; or we would review all the follies of the day. -- 
d3 
LETTER 
54 
Confessions of 
LETTER XVL, 
THE SAME TO THE SAME. 
From the Cajik of Belviller 
T AM nov fixed with the viscountess de 
Altamant, a lady of a Sweet and agreeable disposition;; is a young widow, but a little religious. Count de. Allamelle pays his addresses to her; she Seems to listen to him with confusion; but she is alarmed if he is too attentive to other women, - 
Let us remark the result of a conduct So singular, and without anticipating by false conjedlures the event of this comedy, let us entertain ourselves with the pleasant incidents it will offer. 
One happened in my presence, with which I was highly diverted. The Count, 
in 
A Co E T. 55 
in a fit of pleasantry, took her ladyship in: his arms; she instantly exclaimed with an air of dignity, “Sir, you do not consider “what you are about! can a man take “Such liberty with a woman he respedls !’* How, my lady. Says 1 Smiling, you forgot your situation. I was confused, she an swered me coolly. 
1 must confess, my dear friend, that one must be very extravagantly confused, when Sf s is clasped for a quarter of an, hour in a man’s arms without perceit^ing it. This Scene was exhibited in his closet, where he went with her. 
She is in other respecsts a good woman, does the honours of her house perfectly well, and does not meddle with the con du6l: of others. 
The marchioness d’ a.ngelome, and the Bavarian ambassador’s lady, are the two D 4 other 
5^ 
Confessions op 
other women, who remain during our visit, the former is lively and gallant; her decisive manner amuses while it Surprises; though without attractions or youth, she has every pretension to the character of an amiable woman; her dress is like that os a girl at fifteen, it is green, with the colour of the rose prevalent all over her. On her arrival here, the Servants were two hours unpacking her coach of the bandboxes which were stifling her women. My God, how foolish! I cannot keep from laughing when I see it. represent to yourself a tall thin woman, who steps like a man; she is' absolutely the tiueen of spades, mth. the headdress of mademoselle Bertin. - 
She has in her train a little Superannuated chevalier, whom she worries and caresses, whom she loves and hates twenty times in a day. But especially at 
cards 
A Co QUE T.. 57 
cards the unhappy poor man has every reason to complain; he receives all the shocks of his hard fortune. 
The ambaffadress is of a winning and lively turn, loves pleasure, which Seems destined for her. I vfill take another opportunity of Speaking of the men; and let us return to my recital. 
Where did we leave off, was it not at the beginning of my connexion with Vif.. count decrillon? 
What a monster, my dear friend! I became first acquainted with him at the house of Madam Villefranche. Wishing to get him off her hands, she Spoke of me in the most flattering terms; her design Succeeded: she introduced the viscount to me, who appeared very much pleased at it. He visited me often, and difguised him d 5 Self 
58 
Con sessions' o f 
Self with much art. Hitherto he entertained me with Subjects osgallantry, without pretending love. Without mistrusting him, his name was announced to me; I was alone, and received him very familiarly : after Some indifferent chat he Spoke to me about the Chevalier, paid me many compliments, lamented the injuries I received, and concluded by showing me the sickleness os my conduct, which gave me much asslidion. 
He took this opportunity of changing the subject;; Spoke to me only on the desire he had to please me, and cause me to forget the chevalier. Pleading his cause thus, he became rash: a conduct like his should have opened my eyes, but he had the address to excuse it; the cares, the attentions the most indefatigable, made 
me 
A Co q^v E T. 59 
me hope, and assure myself that this con connedtion would be happy in its conse quences. 
I was cruelly deceived! — the bell rings for dinner. Farewell, I leave you, but not without regret. ■ — - 
.11 
t I 
I 

d6 
letter 
6o 
Confessions of 
L E T T .D R XVII 
THE SAME TO THE SAME. - 
NO, never did embarrassrnent equal mine! Who do you think I met in coming downstairs to the drawing-room? thfctt very Same viscount at whose villainy I shudder! that tyrant of our Sex, who for a long time inspired me with an horror against his own. 
In crossing the hall a carriage stops : who do I see step out of it but that de' testible man? I totter and fall back with fear; he accosts me, offers me his hand, and presses it malicioussy. I had no power to make my escape; I was lost in confusion; we go in together; he Says to me in a low voice, “Do you remember our in ‘ timacy, madam ?’* 
Ah! 
«( 
A Co QUE T. 61 
Ah! my dear, how shocking is restraint, when it obliges us to pay attention to those we despise? 
I then feigned illness, unwilling to be exposed to disagreeable events, which always give uneasiness' to our friends, and erve to amuse those who are not friends. 
^ [ But to let you understand this monster well, I will resume my adventures. 
Quickly the fair beginning of his pash 3ns degenerated into a harsh despotism. I ivas more restrained than whilst I was married. 
Nothing escaped him without a sarcasm. rhe most relpedlable women were not pared; he made bitter epigrams upon my friends; gave out that I was the author, nd caused me many Secret enemies. I was ooked upon in Society as a dangerous 
woman; 
6z 
Confessions of 
woman; every person avoided me, and no one had friendship enough to inform me osthe injuries 1 was suspedted to do. 
Reduced to live excluded ’from the world in the company of this abominable being, I Spent my days Sorrowfully with him. Surprised at So general a desertion, I complained of it; he had the cruelty to attribute it to the report of my condudb in the world. I looked into myself sincerely, and resolve to retire to my estate, until the 
I 
memory of my errors was no more. I imparted to him my intention. Instead of commending So wise a project, ‘he had the audacity to behave to me with a great want of decency; he threatened me, if I 
broke with him, to publish our connedlion, In his pashon, Some words escaped him which opened my eyes: I pretended not to comprehend him, firmly resolved, nevertheless 

311 
tm 
A Co que T. 5^ 
theless to get light into the matter the first opportunity. 
I went in consequence to Madam de Bouquet, the first woman who shut her door peremptorily against me. I had re course to a pretext to gain admittance; after much difficulty we came to an explanation; she informed me of a string of calumnies attributed to me in the world, that made me shudder; she informed me also that the viscount laid them at my doors. 
Nothing could equal my astonishment; I never loved him, but from that moment he became detestable to me. 
Nevertheless I was embarrassed how to get rid of him, Madam de Bouquet ad viscd me to feign illness; she Sent me her own physician, who ordered me to drink 
the 

64 Confessions of 
the waters of Barege; we chose those at a great distance, on purpose to avoid the danger of meeting the viscount. 
I Set out, and on my arrival at Barege 1 wrote to him an account of all I learned os him, and my firm resoiution never to see him again. He answered me that 1 was imposed upon, and made the dupe of my own credulity. Our correspondence ended there, as I did not answer his letter. 
On my return, he had the impudence to come to my house; I had much company, his deportment was reserved; at a moment when I least expected, he Spoke to me with a Sarcastic turn, and in retiring treated me with ridicule. 
I knew him too well to be uneasy at his conduct;; avoided each other; and this is the first time I have Seen him since. 
If 
A Co QUE T. 65 
If he stays any time here I will take my tl leave; there can be little pleasure in company that one fears, otherwise my frank ness would draw me into disagreeable sub jedls, that would be better avoided. 
Adieu, my dear; you will, without doubt, think this letter very long; but oyou must pardon the effusions of the 15 heart of -- -- -- - 
le 

DO 
bi' 
LETTER 
66 
Confessions of 
LETTER xvm. 
L A D y Fanny. 
TO THE 
Marchioness. 
Walter Park 
T is not, my dear Marchioness, an interest of the heart, as you fuppose, that detains me here; they are motives in which friendship is Solely concerned. Cam one think of love a Second time, when the first passion has been unhappy? is I thought otherwise, perhaps I would not avoid a Second occasion; but I think too Serioussy of the engagements formed by the mutual Sentiments of our hearts, to expose my Seif again. 
By restecsting much upon my adventure, I came to discover at last that the fault lay 
at 
A C O QUE T. 67 
t my side. To form a durable attach nent, the humour. Sentiments, and man er of Spending ones time should agree; thervfise one is making, or requiring con inual Sacrifices, in which complaisance has more to do than the heart. 
i 
My lord’s taste and mine were very LI >ppofite; he loves bustling pleasures, and tl! can only entertain myself with what one i : astes in the Simplicity os nature; for which 6 ’eason we never agreed, and consequently 
4 
ti ister weighing the matter, there appears no; g ioubt, but he married to enjoy greater d iberty. 
I have been this month past in the : ountry at Lady St. Albins; that lady, my dear friend, who is the innocent causc ds all my grief. 
usher 

68 
Confessions of 
Her Son, whom she loves tenderly, is sick, I share the trouble she feels for him, for she never leaves his bedside unless I replace her, or that she goes to rest a little. Lord George is certainly one of the best creatures living : if her ladyship should have the missortune to lose him, it would make rne inconsoleable, as much on his own account, as for the friendship I bear his mother. Did you know him, my dear, 1 doubt not but you would love him. 
poor young man! he Suffers with Such patience! it would be shocking to be taken out of the world at the age of sive and twenty! a young man of talents, fense, and that Speaks several languages well, particularly French; he has a good fortune, and a sine figure: I cannot think of him without pain! but we must Submit to the decrees of providence, that dispofes of 
■'life 
3 
II 
A Co E T. 69 
31fe and death. We cannot escape his will. 
I am in Such a state of Sorrow that my eyes cannot bear the light; yes, I behold it with repugnance, I had rather it would rain all the time his lordship is sick. Tisa singular disposition in nle, my dear friend, when I am very uneasy, sine weather is unpleasant to me; my weak head thinks that all nature should partake of sny pain. Do you find the same? You do not; you French ladies are too dissipated to know these overwhelming melancholies; however you are not insensi ble, and notwithstanding your levity, you feel tenderly for the pains of your friends. May you never be exposed to feel pain So exquisitely as I do. Adieu, my dear mar chioness, and remember — ~- 
LETTER 
70 
COKFESSIONS OF 
LETTER XIX 
THE SAME TO THE SAME. 
T HAVE received three of your letters and am anxious about nothing So much as to answer them. Do not add new uneasiness to my pain; I entreat you to be on your guard; I shudder at the history of the viscount. How is it possible a man can be guilty of So maiij crimes } Is it not self-love induces a mar to respedl the woman he loves? Do nol remain in the Same house with Such a vil lain. Perhaps he is capable of taking i deadly step; when a man can inven things So unbecoming his birth, what I he not capable of for revenge; 1 would no remain two minutes alone with him, unlel my will was made. 
Bu 
C 0 
que T. 
But suppose he does not proceed to the violence I apprehend, may not he take Such revenge as a Mr. Lany did here? 
He was in love with a very rich young lad, miss Georgiana Smitterton; she did not Seem to reject him, but that was only thro’ timidity, for she never loved him; another was her objest, which she had not courage to declare to Mr. Lany. This man demanded her in marriage os her parents. 
They would not decide till they had consulted the inclinations of their daughter. When her mother Spoke to her about it, miss expressed her repugnance, and at the Same time avowed an affection for a Mr. Smith. This was not So advantageous a match, tho’ her parents consehted to it. They communicated their Sentiments to 
Mr. 
73 
Confessions of 
Mr. Lany, and thanked him for his good intentions. ^ 
Lany, outrageous to See one preferred to him, watches miss Smitterton one even, ing coming out of theopera house, throws in her face a bottle aqua fof tis by which 
she became, from being one of the finest women in England, a frightful' monster. Mr. Smith was willing to fulfil his engagement; she had the generosity to decline it. A post-chaise waited for Lany, who got off to France, and from thence to America, 
You See by this example you must not entrust yourself with a bad man, and that one cannot be too much on their guard with Such monsters. 
Lord 
A Co Q^V E T. 73 
Lord George, is not better, my dear friend, my uneasiness redoubles every moment; what will become of poor Lady St. Albin if he should die? I shudder at that idea. Adieu, be circumspetst for the Sake of. 
ui 
E 
LETTER 
ji 
1, ^, Co n f es s I o N's of 
L E T T E R XX 
The Marchioness 
TO 
IL A D Y Fanny. 
P |™^HE arrival of the ambassador has made the viscount decamp; we knew he hated him; I am rejoiced at it, my dear friend. I am now rid of him, his departure had all the appearance of a slight; I ain the more diverted at it, as it overturned all his projects. He made Some pretensions to the ambassador’s lady who is arniable and gallant; you can Scarce conceive how he looked; I enjoyed his cmbarrassinent, and took care to let him know I Saw it. 
Yesterday 
A Co E Ti 
/3 
I 
2 
1 
Yesterday we had a pleasant adventure, the Chevalier Bellevue, whom we mention as the modern Cato, Seemed not to be taken up with any one; his indifference gives Surprise to every one; every one admired the warmth with which he declaimed against intimate coniiedtions. A dreadful storm happened at night, the whole castle was alarmed, we run from a partment to apartment waking the whole family. 1 entered the viscountess’s chamber, and Sat myself down upon her bed, the Count follows me, and after him all the family, except our Cato, 
The storm redoubles; a terrible clap of thunder makestheambaffadress take refuge in the viscountess*s bed. She had Scarce been there when a shriek announced her fear; she quits it, and tells us there was a robber there; the viscountess tells her she E 2 
IS 
t 
C 0 N' F E ■ S S I O N S Otis 
Soolishi and that the fright had turned her head. She persists, and declares that feme man was concealed behind the tapis try; we look there and discover .... who do you think? PH give you ian hundred guesses; the grave and moral .Dhevaster de Bellevue. You have 'no idea of this apparition. He was in the dishabille of a gallant, justrlike one that had Succeeded to his wishes. The viscountess Said not a word; d‘extricated her out of her embar rassment, affecsting a loud laugh. “I have ‘^ deceived you well, my Lady ambaffa dress; this terror will cure you of that of the thunder: Chevalier I am quite “Satisfied with you, I did not think you “So, good an actor, you have played your “part well.’* “How then! replied the “ambassador’s lady, you knew that the gentleman was in the bed “Without 
k 

it 
A go'ci__u E Ti 77., 
out doubt, stwas I that hid him there; Madam de Altamont was not inclined. “to consent to it; but I had a mind to give you another fright besides, that of “the storm;, for I knew a lady of. your, courage would not forget the protedlioii; “of - a bedd’ My, stratagerm.'succeeded all the company gave into it, except the Count de Allencelle, who Said to me. ironically, “Has not 'there been a little, corisu “fion in this adventure 
1 Spared the vifeountess the awkwardness of a Surprise, and that was all I wished; every one was at liberty to make their own conclusions afterwards. 
It is. very difficult, my dear friend, for one who has a fusceptible heart, to aft the prude long. Is it not better to appear what one really is, than to deserve the sar casms to which false virtue is exposed? 
i 
E 3 Adieu! 
C o 
KFESSI, ONS OF 

Adieu! I wait for your letters with the most lively impatience, two posts are now passed without bringing me one. Are you ill, my dear f I beseech you Soon to relieve my present anxieties, and let me hear from you; as my happiness is entirely centred in yours -- -- — - ’ 

letter 
Ai C O E T. 
79 
l 

LETTER XXL ' 
THE SAME TO THE SAME. 
T HAVE just received two of your letters;; give me but Small assurances of your “health; I am not Satisfied with you, my dear friend; friendship transports you, it engages you in cares above your strength;! had a proof of it at Spa; a slight indisposition made you fear for iny life; your tender soul partakes too lively in the troubles of your friend. at more moderate, dear Fanny; So great a Sensibility is a misfortune; it debilitates the Soul, and overturns our health. 
Your uneassness, with regard to the vis count, is groundless; a bad man takes a liberty in evil expressions, but Seldom E 4 - makes 
'So 
Confessions of 
makes use of any other vengeance; very few have the audacity of Lany, whom I am impatient to See punished. What a monster! I do not recoiled if I wrote to you concerning my stay at Barege. No, we are at the conclusion of my adventures with the viscount. My health requiring no regimen, I diverted myself at Barege, and partook of all the pleasures of Society, vshich is not So brilliant as at Spa; There are crowds of high and mighty Lords of Upper and Lower Languedoc, and Some inhabitants of the banks of the Garonne, 
This Society is agreeable, generally Seii' Sible and lively, they poffess an inexhaustible fund of gaiety. 
There I got acquainted with the Chevalier de Clavanac, he lodged in the Same house with me. From the first moment we were inseparable, and after a Sew hours he 
made i 
t 
A Co E T. 8l 
made an avowal of a violent passion: : follies amused me a good deal. 
Some ladies arrived from Bordeaux; my enamoured Chevalier leaves me, and stays three days without Seeing me; I am picjued at it. 
He comes and presents himself to me; I deny him admittance to my apartment; he Is not discouraged, and whites she the following note : 
“Madam, 
“Unlucky circumstances have forced “me to neglect you for three days; will “you permit me to atone for it, by offer“ “you my adoration. I depart after 
tomorrow' ' 
reply instantly. 
“Sir, 
bufiness prevents me Seeing you. — I y wish you a good journey, ”. 
E 5 He 
82 Confessions of 
He watched the moment when none of my people were in the way, and introduced himself as usual. I received him coolly; my dignified air disconcerted him; but quickly recovering his natural assurance, he told me I ought not to be displeased, that that was doing him too much honour, and that he must believe he had inspired me with tenderness. 
I wished to humble him, I answered, that notwithstanding all the merit I sup posed him possessed of, I did not believe, that whether absent or present, he' was dangerous to my repose. 
r 
I was wrong, my dear friend, to give Such importance to his conduct. I discovered more pique than indifference. He observed it and persisted. He concluded by obtaining his pardon, but nothing more 
We 

'ei 
lit 
LI 
ui 
A Co QUE T. 83 
We dined together, and instead of leaving Barege as he Said, he remained till the very last moment, when 1 quitted the waters. We travelled together to Bordeaux, where business detained him. On parting he promised to come to Paris; but I did not depend on him. An head like his does not retain the same idea two minutes. 
I never was better entertained than in that excursion. I advisc all ladies who have the vapours, to undertake Such another, in company with a gascon Chevalier. The good humour'of these gentlemen is a Specific remedy against all maladies. 
Adieu, my dear and good friend, you want a Clavanac to give you a little variety. -- -- - 
E 6 
LETTER 
84 
Confessions of 
LET T E R XXII 
THE SAME TO THE SAME. 
ON E'piece of confidence more, my dear Fanny, and you will then be the repository of all my errors. But would it not be more proper to make this confession when your mind will be more tranquil, and when you will be out of fear for the health of Lord George. But we must dispell this obscure cloud which enwraps youj my follies will perhaps excite a gentle Smile, and for a moment divert your uneafiness. 
You know me, my dear friend, and that a woman of my character is under the necessity of finding occupation for her heart or her head. A part of last winter we dedicated to reading, I often Spent my 
evenings 

A Co E T. 85 
evenings at home, a very bashful young man was my company; when we were alone, he read. 
• 
Thro’ his timidity he discovered an affection for me; wishing to have a declaration of it, 1 gave an opportunity; he did not avail himself of it: disappointed at his want of discernment I thought no more of it, and we continued our reading. Our subject one day happened to be So tenderly, interesting, it made an impression on him, and encouraged by the picture before his eyes, he threw himself on his knees, and addressed me very fervently. His air corresponded with his Sentiments; I heard him attentively. All things went on well hitherto. 
At times he Spoke with an impediment; this defetst Seemed to increase in proportion to his tenderness; and in this agree -- * able 
86 
Confessions of 
able declaration 1 perceived it more than ever. Unhappily his voice Seemed to me to resemble a capuchin preaching, and very much affected with his Subject. That ridiculous idea struck me So forcibly, that it extorted a fit of laughing from me. The timorous lover got up, and imagining I mocked him, ashed a thousand pardons for his rashness. I encouraged him; but he never after Spoke to me about his Sentiments. I was Sorry to have lost the remainder of So handsome an address, which was indeed very affectionate. 
We passed our winter in great tranquillity, the first, reasonable one, since my entrance into the world. 
My good friend^one insensibly conforms to the taste peculiar to®'each stage of life. A woman at thirty Sees the world in a different light to what she did at twenty. 
Expeti 

: 0s 
A C O QUE T. 87 
Experience would not be worth the acquisition without applying it to use. One looks upon youth with less regret, when the errors of that age Serve as lesions for the time to come. 
Farewell, dear Fanny, love me as I love you. I am impatient to hear news from you, and Lord George. -- -- -- -- - 
I! 
i 
LETTEK 

88 Confessions op 
LETTER XXIII 
Lady Fannv 
TO THE 
S 
Mar chioness. 
Ah! my dear! — ah! my estimable friend; pity me, pity Lady St. Albin : her Son has had a crisis, he was on the brink of the grave; he is indeed now a little better; but may not he have a relapse? may he not be Snatched away from us entirely? I will not leave his pillow; if he dies, I must then catch his last sigh, I will mix it with mine, and they together shall pierce the heart of his poor mother! 
Could I ever believe I had courage enough to stay by a dying person ^ But 
friend 
A Co E T. 89 
friendship gives us Superior strength. I have just left him a nioment while he is dozing. -- -- -1 am called ^ Good God, how 
my heart pants! Is it another? — he is better, my dear; the Doctor gives us great hopes. What Satisfaction I feel this minute.? With what rapidity one thought Succeeds another! 
Adieu, my dear friend, I must leave you; my patient and his mother wait for me; I give you a thousand blessings. 
LETTER 
, Confessions of 
LETTER XXIV 
The Marchioness.. 
I TO 
Lady fanny, 
O not deceive yourself, you are in in love: yes, you are in love with that Lord George whose loss you feared So much. You misrepresent to yoursels. your true Sentiments; friendship never feels Such poignant alarms : consult your heart, you will find my conjedures well, founded. 
I Congratulate you on his lordship’s recovery; he is now out of the question; you have nothing to fear for now but your own heart, it is very ill, my dear Fanny, it will quickly have a crisis, but it will not be mortal. Follow your inclination, the remedy is infallible. 
I beg 
A Co QUE T. 
pi 

I beg of you to express to Lady St, Alin, the share I have in her happiness; hat she is your friend is Sufficient to in pire rne with the most lively concern. 
Change of air will be very Serviceable to his Lordship; engage him with his mother to accompany you to France. Come to See me, my dear friend. Such a journey will be a double advantage to me; it will procure me the pleasure of embracing you, and that of being acquainted with your friends : we shall Spend the autumn at my estate. Do not refuse me a satisfa<5lion I have a long time wished for. 
Adieu, dear Fanny, when you are determined, I shall propose it to Lady St. Albin, whose acquaintance I impatiently desire, 
.LETTER 

C o n: F E S S I on s or 
LETTER XXV 
THE SAME TO THE. SAME. ' 
T HAVE not patience to wait for your answers, my dear friend; I must therefore be talking to you, that I may inform you osi an intrigue which affords me much amusemeiit. 
To make you understand it better, I must inform you of the real manners of our company i 
Since the adventure of the bed, the Count d’ Alencelle has paid his addresses to our Ambassadress : she presses me by a thousand entreaties not to rejet the advances of her husband. Madam d’ Anga. lanne listens to the insipid addresses of an Abbe, who stupifies her, but who will bear four rebuffs Successively without repining. 
Madam 
ttl 

A Co Q^V E T. '93 
adam de Altamont begins to be recon iled with Society, and humanises with the [Chevalier Bellevue. The other gentlemen make up our parties at billiards, and accompany us in walking. 
The Ambassador is all attention to me; 
E he addresses me in a style of gallantry, in which he unites the most profound respect with the greatest tenderness; his foreign accent and idiom divert me very much. 
k 
The other day we took an airing in a cabriole. I told him one evening that I would prefer that carriage to any other in the country. 
Next day he Sent me the following bil* et: its Singularity deserves your attention. 
“The Count de Baissandry, in conse “quence of the high resped he bears' to 
“the 
§4 clonpesstdks OF 
“the marchioness, cannot, notwithstand “ing his wishes, present himself before “her, at So early aii hour, without her permission;; the wish her “Ladyship expressed, to take an airing in “the cabriole, has induced him to take “the liberty of offering to attend her oil “that occasion this morning, if the favour P is agreeable to her Ladyship. The “Count will very sensibiy value this pre“ “
'“If my request is acceptable, her La“ “will be pleased to appoint an] « hour.” -- -- -- — 
How do you like this billet, my dear' friend? It is not deficient in respedt, Were I an highness, more could not be ■ 
lavished on me. 
* 
I agreed to the party, and informed the Count that it was not too early for me; 
but 
A Co Q^V'E T. 95 
bulhb did not come for an hour after, unwilling to derange me. 
We got on our way towards the wood in the neighbourhood of the Castle. The morning was fresh, the roads handsome, and the Arnbaffador very tender : he Spoke to me in a most gallant style. He made use of metaphors to give me a better idea of the fervency of his passion • amongst other things he compared me to a fine oak, whose noble aspest attracted the eyes of passengers; he requested me to permit him to offer Sacrifice to it, like the Druids of old, and prayed I would acceptshim for the favourite priest of the forest, over y^hich I presided. 
The idea appeared to me equally singular and gallant. I consented in good-humour; We returned to the castle where we Sound all the company met in the dining, room. 
re 
9^ Confessions of 
room. Madam de Angalome told me very harshly, that she had been awaked by Some persons, and instead of forming parties, and losing time, people should determine more Speedily, without having a dozen messengers disturbing every one. 
We discovered through her ill humour, her pretensions on the Ambassador. I then took it into my head to draw him one side, and divert myself with him. 
In my next I shall inform you of Some pleasant artifices, which I am contriving. In the mean time let me hear from you, and do not forget the proposal of — i 
LETTER 
il 
A Co E T, 97 
LETTER XXVI 
L A D y Fa n n y TO 
The Marchioness, 
( 
T ADY St. Albin, and her Son, have commishoned me to return you thanks, my dear marchioness; she hopes to accept of your polite invitation as Soon J, as Lord george’s health will permit. 
No, my dear, I have no fears for the - feelings of my heart; my first passion will protect me from the dangers of a Second. My Soul is no longer susceptible of the Same impressions, it has exhausted all its teshderness upon one object; it is no more capable of love; but it will never be.insen sible to the Sweets of friendship. 
n 
F 
Lord 
p8 
Confessions or 
Lord George is visibly recovering; his gratitude is divided between his mother and me. He has often expressed that he does not know which of us he loves best; but he Sees we, are both equally indispen -- fible to his happiness, 
If I am absent one moment he is un easy. I do not know what to do : indis pensible business requires my presence at home; and'! dare not acquaint him with it, for fear of assliding him. I must nevertheless do it at last. 
Shall I never be at rest? at present the Situation of my friends gives meuneasiness. I must depart; but I will make Such Speed that my absence will be hardly perceived. 
The idea of Separation makes me Sorrowful. I imagine I shall not See again those people So dear to my heart. Good God! how ingenious we are in tormenting ourselves; 

ail 
A Co CUE T, 
Selves; when we have no real cause of af fiidlion, our busy imagination is creating liditious ones. But I am moralising, and do not consider that my reflections must give you uneasiness; tisa fault Seldom excused, but where there is indulgence equal to that of my dear marchioness.' — Adieu, 
otii 
Gi 
F z 
LETTER 
too 
CONFESSIONS O 
LETTER XXVII 
The Marchioness 
TO 
Lady Fannv. 
Y dear friend, let me ask your'attention; I have an excellent Scene to lay before you. 
My cabriole parties shave produced Some desires; all the other ladies have wished for a seat in it, particularly the marchio ness, who thinks it very becoming for a lady. 
We appointed a day for a general party, and we agreed to dress like amazons, after the English fashion. 
Instantly Madam de Angalome Sends to Paris, and orders a new riding^^dress: she keeps it a Secret from us all. 
The 
tfo; 
ti 
Ut 
A C o UE t. 101 
The morning of our excursion all thfi ladies assembled in the drawing-room; the Marchioness arrives in a rose coloured riding habit, with all the Seams laced with ^ silver; she resembled a drum major. Am enormous hat, covered with a quantity of feathers, shaded a part of her long figure, and made her more ridiculous than ever, this strange dress was the admiration of every one, and all the company was conv plimerting her on her taste. 
At length the parties are arranged, 'and not one offers to drive for her; her little Chevalier presents himself; she does not chuse him; she thinks him too'weak, and fears he might break his neck. She then throws herself on the Abbe t he declares that he is ignorant of managing horses. Willing to enjoy a complete triumph, I went up to the Ambassador, and whispered F 3 him 
102 
Confessions of 
him to undertake the charge; he refuses; and he did not consent till I assured him I would esteem his compliance as a favour. 
I then address the marchioness, ‘‘ The “Ambassador would wish to become your 
condudtor, but he did not presume to y propose it to you.’’ 
In the first instant of her joy she could not believe it. At length resuming the most melting tone, she addresses him. “Am I then, my Lord, So inaccessible, “that you cannot make your proposals “yourself to me. Do not fear, added she, “we are in too great a company. Come, “let us Set out, my dear condudlor, let us “have the honour of taking the lead.” 
Human vanity! to how many vicissitudes is thy dominion exposed! The marchioness in mounting ships, her nose falls against the shaft, her two knees on the 
ground. 
ec 
O QUE T. 
103 
ground, and disorders all the elegance of her headdress. The sits of laughter that were stisied for a quarter of an hour, burst out at once; but this accident is nothing in comparison to what happened in the wood afterwards. 
The Ambassador more attentive to me than his horse, negleds him; the cabriole jostles violently against a tree, and instantly overturns. The haughty amazon cries out frightfully; all the company Surround her; luckily she is not hurt, but outrageous against her condudor; she calls him stupid, awkward, and gives every liberty to the volubility of her tongue. He makes no answer, nor dares look at her, for fear of laughing. In the violence of lihe fail, the weight of the hat brought with it the few hairs of her own which were under it; the front is turned to her ear, T 4 and 
m 
104 
Confessions of 
and one of the curls in the middle of her face. The elegant silver laced habit shares in the general misfortune, and its colour is Scarce discernable from the dust that covered it. * 
She would not remount, but returned to, the castle on foot. The Ambassador offers to attend her, she refuses, and gives the preference to the Abbe and her little Chevalier, whom she had rejected a moment before. 
On our return we found her at play; she Said she was overturned designedly, be cause her dress was envied. However, her anger was Soon appeased by Some pointed conceshons from the Ambassador, of which she is ridiculoussy Sond. I engaged him to Sooth her, he consented to it again, but it was not without imposing new conditions on me. 
What 
SJ 
1 
A Co QUE T, 105 
What imprudence, my dear friend! By entertaining mysels at the expense of the marchioness, I am perhaps exposing myself to future regret. When will it happen that an intrigue will have less to do with the heart, and be the instrument of greater Satisfaction. The Count de Boistandry is not disagreeable to me, but ought I to encourage his passion? Is it not time to at reasonably? Levity leads me oh, but re, fledlion will punish me. -- — -; 
f5 
LETTER 
i Confessions of 
letter xxvm. 
THE SAME TO THE SAME. 
.DW! bring myself to avow a weakness that fills up the measure of my transgreshonsah! my dear Fanny, I have Sorgot mysels! Ask me. no more; Spare your friend the shame of a confession. 
Madam de Angalome thinks that she has the preference; she has no reserve in that illusion; every day produces Some new extravagance in her. She goes farther than the Ambassador in her caresses; she is all attention to him; she makes the whole world her confidants : she tells Some she loves the Ambassador to distraction; to others she Says that no person has a better judgement than he, that he knows how to Set a true value on beauty. 
A Co QUE T. 107 
Be indulgent on your fide, my dear friend, and be affuredthat this adventure shall be the last. I even venture to foretell that I shall put an end to it as Soon as 1 conveniently can. 
I begin to ressed how before I al; at other times I did not rested: but when it was too late. Adieu, I love you sincerely. I have only time to Say to you two words. 
t 
F e 
LETTER. 
]o8 
Confessions of 
LETTER XXIX 
Lady F a n n y, ^ 
TO THE 
Marchioness. 
MUST have very forcible motives, my dear marchiohess, to be able to part from my‘friends. This little absencehad like to have produced very fatal consequences. The day after my departure Lord George had a Second attack of the fever. His mother, unhappy at his condition, discovered that I was the cause : she instantly Sent express after me. Entreating my return, if I had a mind to restore her son’s health. That mesage has totally unstrung my nerves; I did not imagine his lordship’s friendship for me could have 1 isen to Such a pitch : you see the effetsts of familiarity. 
. ■ 1 disi 
C o E T. 
ic 
01! 
COI! 
It 
CI 
I dispatched my business with all expedition, and returned immediately. I had Scarce alighted from the carriage, when that tender mother comes up to meet me, and taking me by the hand leads me to her son’s apartment. He left his bed, comes down to the parlour, expressed to me the most lively joy, and ashed me with fear, if my business obliged me to go'away again, and if at present I would remain with his mother? I replied I wmuld stay as long as friendship required, or I could 
be Serviceable to his lordship. -- -- Ah!! 
lady, rejoined he, that will be during life. He then looked at me and blushed. 
I fear, my dear friend, that his Sentiments towards me exceed the bounds of friendship. But is one Sensible of love thus recovering from the brink of the grave? No, that is impossible, I deceive 
myself; 
I lo 
Confessions op 
myself; he feels a tender friendship for me, joined to much familiarity, or perhaps an excess of gratitude. 
For these two days past he is free from the Sever; he has already taken an airing in a carriage. tomorrow we go to take tea at a house in the neighbourhood; there are two young ladies there very rich, and handsome; I am not acquainted with them. Lady St. Albin Speaks very well of them, but she is of a very indulgent disposition, perhaps she is blind in favour of their merit: I shall See that tomorrow. I am obliged to conclude my letter, a messenger waits to takie it to the Post Office. Adieu, dearest marchioness, — — 
LETTER 
C O QUE T. 
II I 
LETTER XXX 
The Marchioness 
TO 
'H 
Lady Fannv. 
T AST night there happened a pleasant adventure here. I cannot think of it without laughing. When all the company had retired, the Ambassador in cross ing the lobby, found a door open. He is naturally a little off his guard; he imagined it was his wife’s apartment: he goes in, the voice of a woman in bed awakes him from his reverie, and mistake. She gets up, follows him, and forces him to tell who he is. As Soon as she knew it was the Ambassador, she challenges him to stay with her; he refuses; she Says a thousand inviting things to detain him j but he perseveres 

1 I 2 
contfcs slons OF 
sev eres in making as many excuses. Their conversation became very warm, the one in tender compliments, the other in farfetched expressions, signifying his Sorrow for having disturbed her. They both Spoke very loud: I was not as yet gone to bed; and I heard distindly all they Said. 
A pleasant thought came into my head; 1 had a mind to divert myself at the expense of the enamoured marchioness. It was her Ladyship. I Send my waiting woman to inform the Abbe and the little Chevalier, to go to Madam de angalome’s apartment. I desired her to tell them that she was taken very ill, and that she desired to See them instantly. 
‘ Whilst this was doing, I go into the ambassadress’s apartment, tell her briefly all that passed, and engage her to accompany me. 
The 
k 
It • 

, A ■ C O U E t. 113 
The Abbe and the Chevalier run together half asseep. They hit against the chamber door of the marchioness; the Abbe falls and loses his nightcap;; Chevalier stumbles over the tail of the others night gown, and knocks his nose against his slipper which was thrown to the bedside of the amorous lady. We run together at the noise, and beheld this sine group on the floor; all this happened in an instant. We ash the cause of this confusion; the marchioness makes no reply; the Abbe and the Chevalier rise mutually ashing pardon; the Ambassador laughed immoderately; and his.lady and I persisted in Saying we knew the cause which brought them to the marchioness’s apartment at So late an hour. All this happened by the glimmering of a watch light. 
The Abbe assured me he feared for her 
life. 
114 Confessions of 
life. The Chevalier goes to the bedside, and ashs her how she finds herself the: Abbe wants to Send for a physician instantly, and Says that So Sudden an attack ought not to be neglected. She ashs them are they fools? Who told you I was sick? — Her head is affected, Says the Chevalier to me in a dismal tone. The more she denied, the less they believed. 
The ambassador’s lady gees out unperceived by Madam de Angalome. She desires them to ash the Ambassador if he found her sick; the Count, she says, did not find me ill: her maid comes in and lights up the candles; the marchicness ashs, who desired them to come to her We came by your orders. Madam, replied the Abbe. You are raving; I am, not sick, and have very little thoughts about you. 
I Said 
K 
I 
H A C 0 E T. I 15 
I Said then ’tis certain these gentlemen walk in their steep. Let them be led back to their chambers, let us avoid Such dangerous maladies. She got up, and by the assistance of her waiting woman we got rid of these importunate gentlemen. They Suffer themselves to be led back quietly to their chambers, which we locked, and took away the keys. 
Next morning we gave them their liberty; and we took pains to persuade them that they were asteep when they came into. the lady’s chamber. 
We enjoined it on my woman to keep this affair a Secret. She told us that one of the marchioness’s women left the door of her mistress’s room open in going to look for Madam de altamont’s butler. This girl, whose conducst appears to me equivocal, is perhaps influenced by dangerous examples, Al 
n6, 
Confessions of 
Altho’ this affair had diverted me, yet it gave rise to a thousand reflections; How can we restrain the conduct of those under us, when our own example authorises them : how many reflections must arise on Such a Subject; and how much it would be in favour of virtue were masters to Set the example. But in moralising I am forgetting you, and I perceive that you require other Subjects to dishpate the melancholy you complain of. Adieu. -- -- -- -- -- -- 
LETTER 
A Co que T. i 17 
.DEXTER XXXI 
i 
Lady Fannv 
.TO THE 
, M A R C H I O N E S S. 
TAKE this opportunity, my dear friend, to send you my letter. Sir John Wray is Setting off for Paris : he is happy; he will have the pleasure of Seeing you. I have desired him to put it into no other hands but your own. 
He is a young man I Saw in the house, where we took tea the day before yesterday. Hesis in love with one of the daughters of Lord riverson; the younger of ij these two ladies, whom Lady St. Albin thinks So handsome. I like her much better than the elder, altho’ Lady St. Albin 
gives 
IIS 
confessions OP 
gives the preserence to the latter, who Js her favourite in every respect. 
After our return, her ladyship informed me that she had a notion of marrying her Son to the elder; before his illness, there had been Some talk about it, and he Seemed not to be averse to it. She intended to Speak to him about it; she even requested I me to Sound his disposition thereon. ' 
I promised to Satisfy her; but I do not know why I have Such a repugnance to interfere in it. 1 do not love, in general match making. If they do not turn out happy, one reproaches ones Self for having contributed to the misery of others. Indeed I think the lady has too much affectation; she examined me during the. whole time of our visit with an unbecoming curiosity. When ever Lord George addressed a word to me, he reddened up. 
Do 
A C 0 UE T. 1 
Do not you think Such behaviour very improper? Indeed I feel it impertinent, insupportable. If, oh a Second visit, I find the Same impression, I shall not go there again. I do not wish that little being should imagine I have any pretensions on Lord George; 1 should be very Sorry for it, and yet I wager she thinks So. 
But perhaps I am mistaken; one is Sometimes inconsiderate in forming conjedlures. We shall reser it to another time to clear it up. In the mean time I shall do my best to enjoy, peaceably, the pleasure of being amongst my friends. You only are wanting, my dear triend, to make my happi ness complete 
LETTER 
120 
Confessions of 
letter XXXII 
THE SAME TO THE SAME. 
WANT to consultyou, my dear friend, my doubts are verified. We returned to Lady riverson’s. The moment' we were announced, miss Juliet retires by the door opposite to that we entered at. I alk her mother how she does; she answers me ' that her daughter is Sick. miss Charlotte, who is candour itself, Says, that her sister was better, but she did not chuse to stay in company because Lady St. Albin was there. 
Charging myself with this absence, I Said not a word, but I Set myself to observe everything. Lady St. Albin Said that she would go heiiself to sind out her charming fugitive, and return immediately with her. miss, all the time we remained, affected 
A C 0 QUE T. 121 
fetsted not to peak to me, nor even to deign me a look; when Lord George addressed her she Scarce answered him. 
After this discovery, I resolved to acquit myself of my commission, and Seize the first Savorable moment to Speak to Lord George. I did not wait long. Lord George and I took a walk in the park; I introduced Some conversation on the family of riverson, I extolled the merits of the young ladies, and I told his lordship it was time to think of Settling himself. — 
1 wish for nothing else, answered he; let me have the object of my love, and I will marry tomorrow. 
This ready acquiescence gave me un easiness, I wished for more opposition. — Well, Lady Fanny, will you Speak out? Tis you, my Lord, should Speak, I do not G know 
122 
, C 0 N F E s SIGNS OF 
know the object of ymur love; Lady St. a1 bin told me that^miss Julia is not indifferent to you, — miss Julia, Madam? He Said not a word more, whistled all day. Seemed to be very absent, and looked on me sighing now and then. 
Does he love me, my dear friend I fear it and desire it. — Ought miss .Diversion to inspire me with a design that reason should oppose? What must I do? What ought I to make of all this ^ Perhaps Lord George has not a thought about me; per • too, she does not'wsish his Secret should be discovered: — It is not impossible but he conceals his real Sentiments, for fear of being rejected— — men in England have that delicacy. 
Tell me what you think; does he Seem to have any liking for me? Adieu my 
dear 
A Co cue T. 
*2? 
dear friend, continue to acquaint me with all that happens to you; these pleasant incidents divert me much. Your marchioness d’angalome is a very extraordinary being; when one ads inconsistent with the dignity of their age, ridicule is just. 
Whatever may happen, do not imagine I will censure: my heart will always be your advocate. — — 
G 2 
LETTER 

Con f e s s I o n s o p 
X E T T E X XXXIII 
The marchioness 
T O 
Lady Fanny,, 
Everything is sh confusion; - the women are jealous, the men full of Suspicion: one entertainment has Set all their wits afloat. — The Ambassador, like a man of gallantry, prevailed on us all the the day before yesterday, after dinner, to take a walk into the wood: he detained us out till nightfall. — When we came to the oak I mentioned before, we beheld It all of a Sudden illuminated. Men in the habit of druids, dressed in long white robes, their heads crowned with the leaves of the oak stopped our carriages; they persuaded 
us 
A" C O QUE T, 
X 2? 
us to alight, and assist at a Sacrifice which ’ they were going to offer to the deity of the forest. They Seated us on benches of turf, and instantly an enchanting Symphony was heard at a distance; it in senfibly drew nearer, and as Soon as It wa near the oak tree it ceased Suddenly. — * these were Succeeded by the lyre, accompanied by the voices of women, which we distinguished easily to be those of the first virtuojd.s of the opera; these again in their turn, were interrupted by the .voice of Richet le Cros and Larrivfe^ accompanied by the whole orchestra: It was concluded by a general Cantaie. At this moment all the trees around the oak were illuminated; the lights of this oak were turned into transparent devices; at the foot of the trunk appeared an altai* with the following inscription: Lo her ‘ivhofe n'lajejiic mien resembles this oak. 
126 C O N F E S S I 0- N S OF 
Madam d’angalome whispers me, Tt is to me that is addrejfed. All the women attributed it to themselves. The vis countess, altho’ too little a person to pretend to it, assured us it was designed for her. She imagined that the Ambassador, as her guest, could not, with propriety give an entertainment where sht was not the object, and that he had choseii that singular emblem for the better con gcalitient of his intention,. The men sus pedled they were the dupes of those they paid addresses to, and that the Count de Boissandry had the preference as a lover. 
The entertainment concluded with an exhibition of sire work?, and with bouquets with devices, vshich the High Druid presented to the ladies. 
Madam 
A C o q^v E r, ‘ 327 
mham d’aitamont invited all the atstors to the castle, where the music played till day break. 
Next morningsthe countenance of every one was altered; a Secret malice was distinguishable amongst the men; and with the wornem, discontent and envy was visible: not one besides the marchioness d’angaiome and I really enjoyed this agreeable Surprise. She lavished a thousand extravagant expressions on the Count, called him her gallant Chevalier, her charming friend; and although he denied the entertainment was of his contriving, she persisted in her suspicions. 
I am apprehensive, my dear, that Such a piece of gallantry may discover our connefhon: we are observed very stridlly, and one does not enjoy that ease which is the charm of Society. 
G 4 
Whatever 
lag 
C O N F E S S I b N 
OF 
Whatever event may happen I will impart to you. Adieu, I am going to a party of quadrille; the marchioness is impatient, she has already Sent me three messengers. Adieu. 
LETTER 
A Co que T, 
129 
LETTER XXXIV 
THE SAME TO THE SAME. 
HAVE just received your last letter;. I am impatient to answer it. You alk my advice, my fair frend, to what effect can I give it, in an affair where the emotions of the heart are the principal guide 
It is very evident you are in love, even * that you are jealous; you fear to lose Lord George, and you have not the power tokeep'^him. — It is plain he loves you, but that he has not the power to avow it. 
Extort his Secret like an expert woman i pretend business; propose a desire of G 5 leaving 
130 
0 N P E S S I 0 N S OP 
leaving the house; advise him to marry miss riverson, and See what affetst this will produce. Above all, take care he does not discern your view: — In love as well as in war, tis Secrecy that makes ambushes Succeed. 
But before hand, consult yourself well. You cannot retradb if he decides in your favour; as to the rest what rilk do you run? You are much better adapted to be the wife, than the mistress of the man you love. One of your principles will make but a little figure in the career of gallantry. 
Marry Lord George, my dear friend; I perceive he desires nothing better. In poffestion of every quality that is desirable in marriage, you will be an ornament to it. 
Are 
A Co E T. 131 
Are you not Surprised at this conversation? You would not attend to Such advice. Do not wonder, my dear friend, people leave off their faults Sooner or later. those who have had experience can give the best advice. 
But what will Surprise you much more I have not, myself, determined but that I will take another husband. Sometimes I deliberate on the idea of marriage. I attend to that principle with pleasure. If ever I am determined, it shall be in favour of a man without a fortune, but for whose birth I will have no reason to blush: our prejudices differing from yours, obliges me to take this precaution; you intermarry without degradation; but in France a woman loses her first rank by a Second connexion; even a duchess forfeits her G 6 rank 
tp 
Confessions of 
rank if she marries a man of inferior quality. It is not ‘ the Same in England; youpreserve your prerogative even though you marry a plebeian. 
Adieu, my dear friend, if I meet another Lord George I shall Soon follow your example. 
LETTER 
A Co QUE T. 
*3: 
LETTER XXXV 
THE SAME TO THE SAME. 
TT7HAT I feared has happend; my ^ ^ connexion with the Ambassador is discovered; I am out of my wits about it. Hitherto I was vain upon it; but today it makes me blush. 
This humiliating matter happened in the night between thursday and Friday Since the entertainment in the forest we were watched closely. The Chevalier de Bellevue, whose corroding disposition looks for employment, tried every means to come at the knowledge of the objcd of So particular a piece of gallantry. 
The 
^34 
Confessions of 
The Superannuated Chevalier, and the little Abbe, were as busy on their side to fatissy their importunate curiosity. 
D’allencelle, mad to See himself Supplanted by a young Swede, whose figure and accomplishments Succeeded to please the ambassador’s Lady, meditated vengeance also. 
Whether these four men acted in concert, or that chance united them, I know not; but they came to discover those Secrets which ought to be covered with an impenetrable veil. 
They placed themselves behind the window curtains, at the head of the'stair; case, into which the doors of the different apartments all open : They did not uit their stations till they were convinced that their suspicions were realised. 
A Co QUE T. 
HSI 
heard people walking all night: 1 r was in extreme embarrastrnent: I thought it was the family of the viscountess. The Ambassador came toconverse with me; I did not know how to get him out without discovering mysels. I consulted my waiting woman; we agreed to dress the Count in one of her gowns; to cover his head with a large calash, and Send him in this disguise to find out his own apartment. 
He goes out; the Abbe accosts him; under a pretence of gallantry, he requested to attend the pretended waiting woman. During the delays of ceremony, the calash falls off, and there stands the Count an object to the four inquisitors. 
A Similar incident happened in the am bassadreff’s apartment which, was equally unlucky. • — She is fond of sitting up late, 
and 
1 
136 
Confessions op 
and permitted the Baron Tranquin, the young Swede, to read a book which they shad monopolised to themselves. The reading of this work, which is equally dangerous and agreeable, had kept them up most part of the night. There was now a neceshty of getting the Baron out. She puts on him her hushand’s night gown, and he conceal’d his face with a pocket handkerchief. Just as he was going out, d’allencelle addressed him, and alks him, How does the ambaffadress? He makes no answer, but pursues his way. He follows him to the stairs, and compliments him upon his disguise. The Baron answers him in a rage, that was it not for the respedb he had for Madam d’alta mont, as well as for the lady he insulted, by judging from false appearances, he 
would 
A C O q^v E T. ‘ 137 
would return his compliment in a different manner. This adventure had like to be terminated with very fatal consequences. 
Madam d’altamont’s steward had chosen the hours of steep to communicate Some orders to the iv|archioness’s waiting woman. This girl Succeeded in extricating herself better than we did. She conceals him in a trunk, opens the chamber door, goes in to her mistress, accompanied by the little Chevalier. 
His design was to take her unawares and be revenged for all the caprices he had born for eight years. He goes in, looks round about him; he perceives nothing, goes into the closet, thinks to find his rival there. 
Madam 
.138 
Confession's of 
Madam dnj.ngalome, amazed at So singular a curiosity, demands an explanation : he gets beyond hirnself in reproaches; -, tells her she is a deceiver She listens to him quietly; but as Soon as he mentioned the name of the stev/ard; “get out of ‘‘ miy sight, ” she exclaims in a fury, “are “my favours then fa despicable as to lavish them upon inferiors; I refuse noblemen “and courtiers, and do you think I should demean myself in Such a manner after that. — Is it not Sufficient that I permit 
“you, — -- -- -- -- without adding to that hu“ 
“; -- -- -- -- begone this instant, 
“or -- -- -- -- -- P Xhe Chevalier did not 
wait for a Second order, but retires precipitately: the marchioness gets up, and came to give me an account of this adventure. 
I went 
A Co Q^V E T. 139 
I went into Madam de boissandry’s apartment, she was. all in a tremor: she told me her situation. I Said, is your hus band Speaks to you about it, ask him about his new * dress. She did not understand me, and I was compell’d to enter into Some humiliating detail. I perceived that one does avow with impunity to the per son offended, the injuries done them. 
We vent down together to breakfast; we looked at each other with stolen glances. The marchioness reprimanded her Chevalier, whom she treated as a vissonary; recounted to the company the insolence he treated her with, and how she imposed Silence on him. The company was plea sant upon her; she gets angry in earnest. Madam de Boissandry and I Spoke not a Syllable, our silence betrayed us. The 
Count 
140 
C O N F E s S I on g O F 
Count d’allencelle had a very warm’altercation with the Baron; we reconciled them; but our Secret was presently knowrf to all the company. 
The marchioness, her Chevalier, and Abbe go away today;; cannot forgive Count de Boissandry for having deceived her. 
M, d’allencelle m.d. the Chevalier de Bellevue depart tomorrow; Madam d’al tamont attributes all this disturbance to the improper curiosity of the latter; she j remembers that she is under an obligation to me, and calls the Chevalier an ungrateful man. The rest of the company will part at an early day. 
The Count, though he is not Ignorant ‘ of the baron’s; idventure, dares not, for 
all 
A Co QUE T. - 141 
all that. Speak to his wife about it; he Tcnows he has very little right to blame her 
Farewell, my dearest friend, I will receive Sir John Wray with pleasure. — Does he Speak french? 
LETTEH 
142 
Confessions of 
LETTER XXXVI 
Lady Fanny. 
TO 
The Marchioness. 
Your advice is excellent, it has produced the effect you foretold : but, my 
friend, it leads me into embarrasshient; I must now make fresh connedions. How shall I ad.? I have gone too far to return back : I fear my heart has deceived me. I scarce discovered my own Sentiments, but I found myself engaged. Can one bej too much on their guard in an engagement, on which the happiness of our future life depends? But could I bear with 
composure 
A Co qjg E T. 143 
composure his marriage with another woman; I am Sure I could not; that idea shocks me. No : Lord George is des tined for me; I perceive I love him, and yet I wish to doubt with myself. — What an illusion! 
After our conversation the other day, he avoided me; my heart sighed at’i?; I attributed his conduct to a suspicion I thought he might entertain, that I wanted to extort his' Secret indiscreetly: I also imagined he would impute other motives to me. 
Matters were in this state when I received your letter; it encouraged me, and gave me confidence to come to an explanation with him. 
1 Soon found an opportunity. 
The 
Confessions of 
The family of the Riverfons dined at Lady St albin’s. — After dinner I went up to my chamber, and staid long enough to let my absence be noticed. Lord George passed very often under my window and Seemed uneasy; at last he requested his mother to Send and let me know that tea was going to be Served up. I came down and appologized for quitting the company; and I added, that a letter I hadjuf ^ived required an immediate answer. 
When the Riverfons were gone, I staid alone with his lordship. I told him I must be under the necessity of leaving him; many ladies of my acquaintance were appointing to Spend Some time at my house. He grew pale; - — his trouble prevented him Speaking. “Well, my Lord, 
f 1 hope 
A Co QUE T. 145 
“I hope you have decided in favour of Miss Julia; shall I have the pleasureos Seeing this match Soon? She is rich “and handsome, you cannot make a bet“ “choice.” He approaches me, and takes me by the hand; ah! my dear friend, (how he trembled!) “Good God, “Lady Fanny, Says he to me, how blind ‘‘ you are! ought Such proposals to come “from you? Do you not know her, “whom I prefer Co all the women on earth? If you consent to my happiness, ‘‘ it totally depends upon you.” I trembled in my turn, my dear. How is it in my power, my lord? Speak; you are not ignorant of my friendship for you. 
Your friendsnip, madam; that is a cool Sentiment. Can you make no ad“ “to that title? Speak, Lidy “Fanny! Do you wish to make me mi y Serable “I do not understand you, H “mv 
-14^ 
(Confessions of 
my Lord.” “Then, madam, I must explain to you the true Sentiments of my heart. I am resolved never to have any other wise but you. I love you; and it will be my study to make you happy See then if you will accept my hand; do not let me languish, my dearest Lady “Stapleton; flatter me with the hope that “I am more indebted to your heart, than your reflection- -- -- -- -- hesitated, I begged 
time to consider on it; he entreated me to pity him; he was at my feet; he was amiable, pressing, and prevailing; I Jiad not power to resist him; I accepted him. He was transported with joy. “Let us See my mother, Says he, let us impart “to her this good news.” He instantly goes out, and acquaints her with it before I had time to answer. 
I know not how to express to you, my 
jdear, the fatisfadign that good mother 
ex 
A C O CUE T. 147 
‘expressed. She embraced me with the most lively transports, and avowed to me that she never could presume to hope I would have accepted her Son, 
Behold me now on the point of a Second engagement. I requested to deser our marriage for Some months. My Lord opposes. He is hurrying the lawyers. I believe we shall be married before it is long. 
That you were but here, my dear mar chioiiess! promise me that you will come to See us : do not refuse me that Satisfaction, the only one wanting to make me happy. 
P. S. I take the liberty of requesting you will choose me a watch, a box, and an etwee cafe, to the amount of twelve hun h 2 dred 
148 
Confessions op 
dred guineas. Your jewellery is neater than ours. Mess. Giraldot and Haller the bankers, have an order to remit you that Sum. A thousand pardons, my dear friend, I fear 1 am troublesome. 
LETTER 
A Co E T. 
i'49 
LETTER XXXVII 
Parts, 
The Marchioness 
TO 
Lady F a n n y. 
T AM now returned to Paris. I had Scarce arrived when the ambaitac’or informed me os his going to departhe is not recalled, hut his Court requires his presence Some time. This news is dis agreeabie to me, my dear Fanny. Accustomed to See him often, I was beginning to love him. J have Seen, the time when such a Separation would not have affested me. Unlike other women, my Sensibility grows with my age; but 1 think I was always equally susceptible, and that my H 3 levity 
ISO 
Co NFESSIONS OP 
levity only concealed the Sentiments of my heart, but did not stifle them. 
1 was the other day to pay a visit to Madam de Angalome; there I found all the good company of the tax colledlors, and the lower class of the Excise officers. She even was entertaining Some of the city tall women : judge of the company. Her house is the rendezvous of every Species that Paris produces;. So that she has company enough to make up a party; everything else is indifferent to her. 
Adieu, my good friend, I expect: yoh this autumn; no excuses; you cannot re fuse me; you must consent to it, or I wdll sail out with VQU. 
letter 
Ai Co 
E T'. 
li 
LETTER XXXVIII 
THE SAME TO' THE SAME.. 
IR JOHN WRAY came to See me, my friend; he has given me your letter. I think this young man very po' site; he only wants a little practice, which he will Soon acquire if he keeps good company. Strangers in general prefer the company os women of the town; amongst whom they contract an air of aukwardness that attends them, when they are in that of modest women. Did they know the disadvantages of living" amongst these women,, they would renounce their Society. I know many families where they would be received with pleasure; but they do not persevere long enough in their visits. How can they expect one should be concerned 
‘ for 
1^2 
Confessions of 
for them, when they take no pains to be agreeable? 
It is a false opinion that strangers are not liked in Paris. It is a mistake; Asse I those who have lived in good company; they will acknowledge that after Some time they have formed many agreeable accjuain tances. It is Sufficient to be received well in one good family, to receive every po liteness from the rest of the company. I will undertake for Sir John, if he answers to my good wishes, i will make his stay here very agreeable. tomorrow I will bring him to visit Madam de Altamont; from thence I shall introduce him to Some very amiable women. I wish to give him a good opinion of the French ladies, and that he will be our champion at London, when we are attacked; for you English do not Spare us. 
Farewell, 
A Co QUE T. 
*53 
Farewell: love me tenderly, and do not forget me when you will be Lady St. ai bin. Bring me your husband, that I may judge if he merits Such a woman as you 
are. 

LETTER 
54,; CONF E's S I 0 N S O' f 
LETTER XXXIX 
Lady Fanny; 
•9 
TO T H E 
Mar C h 1, 0 n .e 9 s. 
FTER tomorrow, my dear Mkr^ chioness. Gods, how I am agitated I fear and wish for that important day. But my happiness' is alloyed for the trouble of poor miss riverson. She loved him, my dear friend. Poor Julia !'I pity her... When she will hear of his marriage, she wfil experience, a thousand shocks. Was It not very natural that she did not like me. i/orgive her humour to me; I am even Sorry for having suspefted her of capriciousness; what would I not do to console her 1 I would Sacrifice, everything except my, lover, Xes, my dear, I love my Lord, beyond what I imagined myself capable. You were very clear sighted,, 
you, told me my defeat was at hand, when, 
I. even 
A' C O' V E T. 1 
/ 
r even had no doubt of my heart. My Lord is coming in, I do not wish he should read my letter;. he would gain too great an advantage over me thereby : but why not? Ought one to be a niggard of proofs of tenc derness, when the beloved object merits it? — come, its all over, he has read it — he wishes to add a few lines 
Lord St. Albin to the Marchioness, ’ “Permit me, .Madam, to assure you of “my perfect esteem; I know the friend“ “that Subsists between Lady Stapleton “and you; on whose account I crave the “honour of your friendship. Accept, I beseech you, the wishes I make, to be “considered as her friend and yours, “Grant me a little of that confidence, of which she is So jealous. 
“George, St, Albin, ” 
. Do not refuse him the favour he alks, he 
merits it every way; 
i :; 6 
Confessions op. 
LETTER XL 
The M a r C h I o n e s. 
TO 
Lady Fannv. 
A JOURNEY to Chantilly has prevented me receiving your letters. I will dispatch the commishon you have given me. Sir John Wray undertakes to convey them to you by one of his friends, vbo is going to et out for England. 
Then you are bound; my dear Fanny I Congratulate you; this marriage cannot fail of being happy. I have a very good opinion of your husband;; if he accepts the invitation I have given him, rshash' have a better.. 
Like an humble wise, perhaps, you would not Solicit ycur husband So warmly 
as 
A Co q^y E T. 
as X can. 1 undertake it in this letter, which I request you will deliver from me. 
“My Lord, 
When a man has the happiness os “possessing an amiable wise, whom her friends will not part from with impunity “the husband must expect to be exposed to “continual quarrels : unless. you wish to “have a perpetual one with me,, restore. “her to me for a moment; but do not “you part from her who is the cause of “your happiness. Come and receive the assurances of a friendship totally devoted “to you; prevail upon your mother to be “of the party; I ardently wish for the “honour of receiving her at my house. f would desire, that my amiable Fanny “should have no affection out of the little “circle, that will reunite us at my estate “next Autumn, ’tis only on these terms, 
mj 
158 
Con f e » s 10 n s of 
“my Lord, we can be friends, and that' “you will share all my thoughts with yout, “charming wife.” 
“I will not distradt you with long let“ “my dear, your time is more pre“ “; it ought to be better employed' “than in reading me.” 
Apropos; I have formed an acquaintance at Chantilly with the Count de Durore; I am afraid he will make me for f^et the absence of the Ambassador. I am nevertheless determined to be on my guard | but he is very amiable, - 
letter 
Ar e 0 E T, 
»59' 
LD T T E R XLL 
Lady St, A L e i 
Nv 
TO THE 
Mar C h i o n. e s s. 
T is done, the word is pronounced,,, the knot is tied, and behold me once more under the rule of Hymen. Ah 1 my dear, .' ought I to applaud myself? Independence has many charms; but what use have I made ofit? Can I flatter myself with being always reasonable? Love led me astray once, ought I not to fear a Second fall? Honour and duty will be my guardians;.! resped an engagement made at the altar; my heart will Second these two powerful motives which will be the 
guides 
io 
C o N F E's SIGNS OF 
guides of my future condudb. Your Fanny is out of the reach of the Snares of Seduction; she will only live for him to whom her life is engaged. Adieu; my dear friend, why are we asunder?? — — - 

C O QUE T, 
ll 
LETTER XLII 
The Marchioness 
TO 
Lady panny St. Alejn. 
HAT unknown power over rulesr me? Is it your example, my dear friend? Where are the amiable qualities of the Count that are over powering me 'r I am a stranger to myself: I feel, on my heart, an attack hitherto unusual; I am enchanted in every respect with him. I love his fweetness, his good'. sense, his polite ness, the equality of his character;; weighs with me to be worthy of him. 
V 
Had I the happiness. to have known a ■ man like him, at my first entrance into the world, what Sorrow might L net have 
escaped 
16?. C o N r E s s ro N sf cr^ 
escaped! He had an attachment during' ten years; he made her he loved respectable: : dissolved the knot. Every day he Speaks in her praish : is not that aifo. resseding honour on his own heart; ~ his age everything confirms me in the Solidity of his judgement, and makes me anxious to please him. 
Yes, my dear friend, the greatest happi’ ness a woman, carried away by the torrent of the world, can desire, is to meet am honest man, as the object of her attachment. Hi advice Spares her impruden eies without number, and only tends ta make hej: estimable. 
But why should we Seek advice elsewhere?? one has the happiness to marry a Sensible man, does not his experience furnish advice? Is it not his interest to See us respedled Youth blinds us, 
with 
A C que T. ■ 163 
with prejudices; we are deaf to the counsels of an husband; we often attribute his advice to jealousy, or a wish to control. 
The knowledge of these truths is acquired only thro’ a thousand perils, and an infinity of hateful mistakes. 
IS one would be confined to their duties,, would there be a neceshty for So painful a study? would one be exposed to indis cretion or deceit ^ 
Ah.l rny dear Fanny, an honest woman has great' advantages; - what enjoyment does the pleasure of having done her duty afford her. I envy her happiness every step that is volatile draws us from it. 
The light of reason differs widely from that of passion; the one enlightens us, the other blinds us. 
Yes, 
164 
Con f e s s I o' n 
o F 
Yes, had, I less to lay to my charge, I would form a new attachment, rich enough to marry a man without fortune, I would make that of the Count de Durore; but what confidence can he have in me What assurance that I will lay aside my levity? But, may not the knowledge of the errors of my past condtidl Serve as a Surety for my future condudb Will 1 not the bond I agree to prove to him. the sincerity of my repentance? Besides, 
I am advancing to an age when good sense corredls our faults. Next October I shall be thirty years, my dear friend. Thirty years! and I have Spent twelve of them 
-- -- ah!! -- -- how have I .employed 
them? Precious time! I blush at it t' Reflection kills me! That I were worthy of the man I love and esteem! — but let us drop it; I would not wish to expose him to regret. 
In 
A Co ET. 
In an honourable conneflion you live happy. I envy your happiness for the first time; do not think light of me, my dear friend; it is the return of my strayed soul — it is my sincere return to virtue. 
LETTER 
i66 
Confessions or 
L E TT E R XLIIL 
Lady Fanny 
TO 
The marchionesss 
OUR last letter, my dear mar' chioness, has silled me with joy. Yes, you are restored to virtue. That heart So noble. So generous, merited it. Your errors were those of youth, which age and resiedion correct. Why are you So Severe? Why do you judge yourself with So much rigour? .Dis my turn now to chide you. Where is that strength of mind, that wonderful fortitude? must the timid and reserved Fanny encourage you ^ Did I oppose my passion for my Lord? Did not I yield instantly? Had I less reproof than you 
Believe 
A Co UE T. j5j, 
Believe me; decide instantly; nothing is to be had by stow deliberation. We often chuse the worst fide. He that offers will make you happy; do not refuse him. 
My Lord is delighted with your letter; he commissions me to tell you he will not quarrel with you; he will accept of your Invitation with his mother: Sh is not acquainted with France; you will See a good English woman in the full fense of the word. She is an excellent woman, who will love you tenderly. 
Adieu, my most amiable marchioness; marry at once your honest Count; you will not be fbrry for it., 
LETTER 
Confessions of 
LD T T E R XLIV 
I 
The Marchioness 
TO 
Lady fannv St. A L e i n.‘ 
T HESITATE, I contend with myself; 
one resolution overturns another, and 1 determine upon nothing. What a situa^ tion, my dear friend! I must conclude and take one decisive step. I will come to an explanation with the Count; Such a state of uncertainty would destroy .me,, You Will Say, perhaps, wait a little; why anticipate him? I agree that it would be more becoming; but his candour prevents him to Speak to me. 
Knowing that I am very rich, perhaps, he apprehends a refusal. His cares, his assiduities everything proves to me that 
he 
A Co E T. 169 
lie loves me. Then let me anticipate him, and communicate my Sentiments. — What have I to fear? If he renounces an honourable engagement he must renounce me. 
Adieu! you shall Soon hear again from me. — — 
LETTER 
lyo 
Confessions of 
LETTER XLV 
THE SAME TO THE SAME. 
T 
ihe Count came to see me at the j — usual hour; I immediately shut the door. I requested him not to interrupt me, for I had to consult him in an affair on which my happiness depended. 
“I must confess to you. Sir, that you “are not indifferent to me and I flatter myself you have a friendship for me. “I have views, perhaps, wshich may not “meet your approbation. My intention “is to marry again; but before I engage “myself, I would give a mark of my “confidence to the man who is to be my husband.. 
}; 
A Co qt E T. 171 
“I have been guilty of many impru 
“dencies, by which my reputation has “suffered;; sigh for it; but the evil is “done, and cannot be recalled; but the “time to come depends on me : if 1 re“ “into the Same errors, 1 shall be unpardonable. I only Seek for tranquil “happiness in this new marriage: rich “enough to chuse, my intention is to “share my fortune with a man whose “characfter I approve of. I am very “well pleased with yours, which I think “can make me happy. Consider then, “after this avowal, if you think me “worthy of your hand. refuse me with “the same frankness, I know that my “levities entitle me to no right to complain.” -- -- -- -- -- - 
(t 
He 
»72 
C0NPE»3I0N^S OF 
He cast himself at my feet, and Said a thoirsand obliging things; confessed that he had often a design to prevent my declaration, but that the smallness of his fortune had always been his impediment, he feared that I should have attributed his passion to an unworthy motive of interest; but to convince me he Sought the alliance on my own account, I should promise him i would remain absolute mistress of my own fortune. tis only on these terms. Says he, 1 will engage. 
We then Settled the point, and agreed on the day for the ceremony. Yesterday I went to my notary; I directed him to draw up an adt of donation, of forty thousand livres per annum, the half of niy fortune. In the evening I made the Count give me his word that he would accept the 
paper 
A C 0 QUE T. ryj 
paper I was going to give him. He ashed to See it before he would promise; I re fused him, and wished he would give me a proof of his confidence in me. After much argument on both sides, he yielded- 
-- -- Said I, I am going to marry a 
•man as rich as myself : we both are independent : we are only united by Sentiment. 
I never experienced So perfea a fatis fadion, and for the first time I felt the advantages of fortune. 
I shall See you then, my dearest Fanny, 'That hope makes me happy. Come Soon; do not let me languish; the hours arc long when one counts them; com pleat my happiness. With what pleasure shall I embrace my dearest Fanny! 
Formerly 
»74 
Confessions' op 
Formerly we could not indul ge our hearts without a blush. novi we can avow it ' publicly. What an advantage is found in the pursuit os one’s duty! 
1 
LETTER XLVI 
V 
L A D Y F A N N y ‘ ‘ ^ 
TO THE 
Marchioness. 
HAVE received your last letter. I have only time to Say we are Setting out. I shall then have before six days are, expired, the happiness of Seeing you! I can Scarce believe it: my Lord and his mother share my joy. 
. Adieu : I pant for the moment of See" ing you, to renew all the astiirances of my sincere friendship. 
LETTER 
ACO CUE T. 175 
LETTER LXVII 
The Marchioness 
. ' TO THE 
Viscountess of Altamont. 
A LL my friends are assembled here ^ ^ but you my dear, what detains you? come and share my happiness. After tomorrow the marchioness de Fellcamour will bear ihe name of the ‘ Count de Durne. 
It is from your hands he will receive her whose life will be Spent in making him happy; and who will remember with pleasure that you have; ^ contributed to her felicity; and that .she is convinced that true happiness can only consist in 'virtue, 
FINIS, 
Fhefollowing NEW NOVELS art juf puhlijlied. She Nabob, a Novel, z vols. izmo, s. sewed. Liberal American, 2 vols. \zmo. ^s.fewed. Adventures of a 'flea, zvcfs.xzmo.^sfewed. 
And fpeedilj will be puhlijhed. 
jfrancis the Philanthropist, an vnfajhion ahie ^ae, 3 vols. i zmo, 'js. hd.fewed., 
The Quaker, « Novel, HAS }zfno, "js, (idfewed. 
Wt Lane begs to inform any Person, either in Town or Country, dejirous of commencing a Circulating Library, that he has always, ready hound, several Xhoufand Volumes, in History, Voyages, Novels, pays. Sec. fuitahlefor that Purpose;; that be wild be happy in injirusl ing them in the Manner of keeping a Reading * Library. — — On an adhrefs io him, as above, they may receive an immediate Supply of enter -- taininr Books, 
Wanted several Novels in Manuheript for fuklijhing the ensuing sea/on, Address as kbqvt, 
U. of I 


- A A 'i ' 1 ' ' r vst 
! \ A. ■, i ■.,, 1 '• ' ' y ''y., 
y" f s '"'T ' A'' '' : A' -' ' '. '.ct A A ■: t ■ Ad. 
,. V, 
'A j ■ ' i' 1 .' 7^ 
<yte; '.. '■ ■• • : 7 V "■A Ay A • A. ' V "N ' - i : ■'• A: Lr r 
•V f / 
V ^ 
II f ■ V' .ri -; ' ■, ', : 
;.. 
'A 
A: 
H. 

■. " / / 
'>., ti' /, 
y • \ ■ '' V 
Y V yd. Ad' 
'■'"' / da i' r; 
YY;. : ■ 'j'.' ya dy;; 
A;; F. A' a V \ AH' ■’■ Tr ’ ' / 
d. ‘ia ■ .'; ' 

. - \ 
S: '; X 
\, ■ ^ m 


I. -- 
\ 
\ / 
. ■ r r 
■. ' r ' ■ 'S j Y '• " 
1^ y' )ayiyty 
A. 
Y -- ^YS Ad 
f/y., rifa/ri^ 
afl'ku 
- ya Ari - 
'■'/' ■'- tv. ■'■■., '■. ■ / L : /, 
A ' ' st.., Si 
■ ■ jd. 
YY4 
S 1 1: 1^ ■ .ti. 
i. 
t' 
/', 
AAA. 
T; ' ■' lt: : ' ' :, ii': -, -.. 
rv: .'•: '=.; 
F 
•■yyyriafd. AAA r{ aa\ ad.a: ya 
Y '• 

'>■ aria, 
AA 
a, a VI i ■ \ 'A. 'Ad. 'f’lj 
"■■•' (.. •; > : V r ■ V ' i ■ " 
yd. [ft"d.'^d.: aad.%aid.{ 
At V ■• • A 
da / vi‘? .Y t AI.., ' - 
: .r: L A '. i ' 
ibaad. A 
A' 
■' ' '■■/ r 
^ ■: -: ■. ■ / A' ' 
\ :; .: h \, 'Y ' 
V 


Colombia, C 1400 
EXIT 


ra; : : t.rv>f 
llt!^ 
USA., 1945 
^ QJ Q Alaska, C 1900 Greece, C 1400 B.C.. 
France, 1924 
Persia, C 1250 
Paris, 1919 
m 
Egypt, C 3600 

m'xd. 
0m 
FANTASTIC 
AND 
MYSTERIOUS 
Argentina, C 1400 
in France, 1945 

USA., 1941 
k4 
Africa, C 1900 
m Guatemala, C 1100 
Germany, 1937 
Italy, C 1740 
France, 1912 
France, C 1895 
C 



\0^ 

Colombia, C 1400 I France, 1927 
iiuuuja 
uimurv 
uiinils 


China, C 1235 
ENTRANCE 
^ Africa, C 1900 m France, 1928 
r 
A 
Greece, C 300 B.C.. 
Palestine, C 
Africa, C 1850 
Greece, 
1. Sung Dynasty: Dragons and Landscape. Grisaille. Attributed to ch’en Jung. 1235-1255 A.D.. 
Collection Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York 
2. Paul Cezanne: Pines and Rocks. Oil, 1895-1900 
Collection Museum of Modern Art, New York 
3. Pablo Picasso: 'majolif' Woman with Guitar). Oil, 1911-12 
Collection Museum of Modern Art, New York 
4. Giovanni Piranesi: Prison Interior. Etching, C 1740 
Collection Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York 
5. Paul Klee: Architecture. Watercolour, 1921 
Collection Buchholz Gallery, New York 
6. Alberto Giacometti: The Palace at 4 A.M.. Construction in wood, 1932-1933 
Collection Museum of Modern Art, New York 
7. Chimbayan Gold Figure. Colombia, C 1400 
Collection University of Pennsylvania Museum, Philadelphia 
8. Jacques Lipchitz: Woman and Guitar. Gilded bronze, 1927 
Collection Curt Valentin, New York 
9. Sudanese Wooden Figure. Africa. Nineteenth century 
Private Collection, New York 
10. Pablo Picasso: The Painter and His Model. Oil, 1928 
Collection Sidney Janis, New York 
11. Gabun Funerary Figure. Wood covered with metal. Africa. Nineteenth century 
Collection University of Pennsylvania Museum, Philadelphia 
12. Archaic Greek Horse. Bronze, C 800 B.C.. 
Collection Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York 
13. Mary Callery: Horse. Bronze, 1942 
Collection Museum of Modern Art, New York 
14. Canaanite Idol. Bronze. Palestine, C 1000 B.C.. 
Collection Walters Art Gallery, Baltimore 
15. Hellenistic Runner. Bronze. Greece, C 300 B.C.. 
Collection Walter C Baker, New York 
16. Etruscan Warrior. Bronze, C 600 B.C.. 
Collection Walter C Baker, New York 
17. Wilhelm Lehmbruck: Standing Youth. Cast stone, 1913 
Collection Museum of Modern Art, New York 
18. Pablo Picasso: Horse (Study Iot Guernica). Oil, 1937 
Collection Museum of Modern Art, New York 
19. Mask Representing Deer. Barkcloth. Panama. Nineteenth century 
Collection Museum of the American Indian, Heye Foundation, New York 
20. Edward Munch: The Cry. Lithograph, 1895 
Rosenwald Collection, National Gallery of Art, Washington 
21. Early Christian Head. Stone, C 400-600 A.D.. 
Collection Dr. Jacob Hirsch, New York 
22. Georges Rouault: Christ Mocked by Soldiers. Oil, 1932 
Collection Museum of Modern Art, New York 
23. Romanesque Crucifix. Wood. Spain, C 1200 A.D.. 
Collection Museum of Art, Rhode Island School of Design, Providence 
24. Unknown American artist: Henry Ward Beecher. Wood, C 1850 
Collection Museum of Modern Art, New York 
25. Hyman Bloom: The Synagogue. Oil, C 1940 
Collection Museum of Modern Art, New York 
26. Coptic Madonna and Child. Ivory. Syria or Egypt. Ninth century A.D.. 
Collection Walters Art Gallery, Baltimore 
27. Christoffel Jegher after Rubens: Hercules Fighting Envy and Deception. Woodcut, C 1600 A.D.. 
Collection Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York 
28. Jacques Lipchitz: Prometheus. Bronze, 1942 
Collection Buchholz Gallery, New York 
Greece, C 700 B.C.. m I France, C 75000 B.C.. 
Austria, C 75000 B.C.. 

• / -- X •• 
AND 
FORM 
Cycladic Islands, C 2500 B.C.. 
LI 

Plan 
of the 
Exhibition 
Cycladic Islands, C 2500 B.C.. 
•_ -- -- -- T *•••« 

J France, C 1915 
m 

Of 


»••• 
Italy, C 1913 
Arabia, C 1 A.D.. '' ' 
I 

Germany, 1913 1 
Etruria, C 600 B.C.. 
m 
Norway, 1895 
Micronesia, C 1850 
t __ 
VI 
England (?), C 500 



Panama, C 1900 
France, 1932 
. 1000 B.C.. 
STYLIZATION 
jy France, 1937 
AND EMOTIONAL 
CONTENT 
USA., 1942 
USA., 1942 
Flanders, C 1600 

S' 
Spain, C 1200 
Palestine, C 850 USA., C 1940 
USA., C 1850 
29. House Mask. Painted wood. Mortlock Island, Micronesia. Nineteenth century 
Collection University of Pennsylvania Museum, Philadelphia 
30. Amedeo Modigliani: Head. Stone, C 1915 
Collection Museum of Modern Art, New York 
31. Sabaean Head. Alabaster. Saudi Arabia, C 1 A.D.. 
Collection University of Pennsylvania Museum, Philadelphia 
32. Cycladic Figurine. Alabaster. Third millennium 
Collection Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York 
33. Cycladic Figurine. Alabaster. Third millennium 
Collection Brooklyn Museum, New York 
34. Cycladic Figurine. Marble. Third millennium 
Collection Walter C Baker, New York 
35. Cycladic Figurine. Marble. Third millennium 
Collection Walter C Baker, New York 
36. Palaeolithic Figure 'Venus of Lespugues." Reconstruction of original, C 75, 000 B.C.. 
Collection Dr. Harry L Shapiro, New York 
37. Palaeolithic Figure 'Venus of Willendorf.” Cast, C 75, 000 B.C.. 
Collection American Museum of Natural History, New York 
38. Archaic Apollo. Bronze. Greece, C 700 B.C.. 
Collection Boston Museum of Fine Arts, Boston 
39. Egyptian Female Figurine. Clay. Predynastic, C 3600 B.C.. 
Collection Brooklyn Museum, New York 
40. Constantin Brancusi: Bird in Space. Bronze, 1919 
Collection Museum of Modern Art, New York 
41. Giorgio de Chirico: Delights of the Poet. Oil, C 1913 
Collection Museum of Modern Art, New York 
42. Piero di Cosimo: Building of a Palace. Oil, C 1500 
Collection John and Mable Ringling Museum of Art, Sarasota, Florida 
43. Yves Tanguy: The Five Strangers. Oil, 1941 
Collection Wadsworth Atheneum, Hartford 
44. Paul Klee: Letter Ghost. Gouache, 1937 
Collection Museum of Modern Art, New York 
45. Disc with Two Faces. Copper. Northern Argentina. Before 1500 A.D.. 
Collection Museum of the American Indian, Heye Foundation, New York 
46. Maya Painted Bowl. Ceramic. Guatemala. Eleventh or twelfth century A.D.. 
Collection University of Pennsylvania Museum, Philadelphia 
47. African Mask. Wood. Ivory Coast. Nineteenth century 
Collection Brooklyn Museum, New York 
48. Joan Miro: Woman in the Night. Gouache on canvas. 1945 
Collection Mrs. Pierre Matisse, New York 
49. Mycenaean Figurine. Clay. C 1400 B.C.. 
Collection Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York 
50. Eskimo Mask. Wood. Nineteenth century 
Collection University of Pennsylvania Museum, Philadelphia 
51. Eskimo Mask, Wood. Nineteenth century 
Collection American Museum of Natural History, New York 
52. Eskimo Mask. Wood. Nineteenth century 
Collection Museum of the American Indian, Heye Foundation, New York 
53. Alexander Calder: Petals and Yellow Half moon. 
Mobile. 1945 
Private Collection, New York 
54. Chibcha Gold Ornaments. Colombia, C 1400 A.D.. 
Collection University of Pennsylvania Museum, Philadelphia 
55. Persian Deep Plate. Rayy Ware. C 1250 A.D.. 
Collection Walters Art Gallery, Baltimore 
56. Henri Matisse: Arabesque I. Transfer lithograph, 1924 
Collection Museum of Modern Art, New York 
