 
ri 
. 'i 
RAKE BOOK COLLECTIOM 
LIBRARY 
gislversityor 
PENNSYLVAMIA 
VL1> 

THE 
GODFREY F. SINGER MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY 
MR. AND MRS. JACOB SINGER 






\r‘ =. ’ 
V ' ’^•l 
. fsa *•», - J.. 
?- '^' 
'- - 


r. ' '’■ ' '5v; 
^r r=§;, -- 

*'* 'Ti" " * -' 


1. 
; 

MV 


cil 
-, ■ ', -, ■ - V .'■ 


iv '•■ - : -,, ' 
S C. 
. ' ■ A., - -• ■ i .'"- 
'-; VN"S: ..cte -, vvt 

. IV o' -' H 

A -- 

Is - >■ - '■ 
; V '' ' N 
‘e^h V ■' •■ ' ... 
.r ‘i; 
nfc -;. 
', V ■ .-. 
- 
w 
r: 
: : 
.', _■- 
. 0 ■ ASP 
‘ ‘r 





r.. 

d: 

-: 

/ 
e aj: 



M 
'*■ 
; J' 
■■■'■-' 
■ -- ■V, mr ^ 

it 
A. 
. if' ' ' -- ' 
''■ 
. * 'A' ' 


. ' C 
- r 
■M 
THE 
A DVANTAGES 
O F 
DELIBERATION. 

i 

if’i 
THE 
K D V A N T A G E S 
O F 
'DELIBERATION; 
OR, THE 
FOLLY 
O E 
INDISCRETION. 
. The life of a libertine cannot be known without abhorrence, nor Ihared without danger of ruin. 
The Adventured. 
INTWOVOLUMES. 
V O L I. 
LONDON; 
f*fin ted for Robinson and R o b e r t No. 25, Paternofter row. 
M DCC EXXII, 
s',. 
L •. ""WA 
is » 


D -- ■' ‘■- 
A 5 ‘ ' i 
S.... .... 



'■ ■*.srr' Cja 
. ym its 

CO 
COO" 
CU 5 
00^ 
THE 
ADVANTAGE S 
O F 
DELIBERATION; 
OR, THE 
FOLLY of INDISCRETION. 
5^ 
A 
0 
a5 
1 
4- 
'i. 
V 
LIE T T E R I. 
Lady Camilla Myron to ivirs. Burton. 
YO U may laugh; but it is my fixed determination never to marry : I have a thousand rersons against matrimony, all which appear to me So very Sufficient, that I shall vol. I. B ed 

f 2 ] 
certainly keep clear of it for the remainder of my life. — I have acquainted Lord Stanfield over and over with my resolution; but where is the man who will listen to anything against himself, or hear disagreeable truths from a woman’s lips? 
Lord Stanfield, from his rank and fortune, may, I grant, with great propriety, make pretensions to me; he is very handsome, and I will even venture So far as to Say, that I believe — ^ and no woman in an affair with a man can, I think, decently adopt a stronger expression — he loves me at present. — But who can assure me that he will love me always? 
You laugh again. You will probably tell me, after richardson’s miss Howe, that I love ardours. — Do not all women love them, in Some degree? For my part, I honestly 
eternally 
till 
confess, that I should not like to hear the man who had fwmrn to love me eternally, cry out in the language of the witty Dodlot Young, with a Sneer of Self satisfadion, 
But say, my all, my mistress, and my friend What day next (hall end? 
And I do as firmly believe that Lord Stanfield to be Such a Sort of a man, as I do positively declare that I never wdll marry him. What a long list could I give you of hus bands, the veriest devils in nature, who were all, when lovers, violently loving, and the fondest creatures breathing, * — O my dear, dear Burton, say no more, I beseech you, upon this subject: for, till the number of Smiling faces with aching hearts in the married world are considerably lessened indeed, you cannot say anything to the purpose upon it. 
B 2 
you 
[ 4 ] 
You tell me, (because he is your relation, and because you have a high opinion of him) in order to make me yield to his lordship’s importunities, that my person alone is Sufficient to fix the most wavering heart. — Go, you flatterer — I know that lam handsomc; but I know also, too well know, that the finest form nature ever produced, with all the glowing bloom of two and twenty into the bargain, will not long keep the fickle heart of inconstant man from wandering. For a while, perhaps, he may be in all his ardours as you Say; but how short, how very short, will be their duration! 
You judge of my feelings, my dear louisa, by your own — Still young, still lovely as you are, and posteffed of talents Superior to many of your Sex, to the majority, I may Say, you have 
not 
[ 5 I 
rot the Smallest idea of that Soft attachment, that tender friendship which can alone promise permanent happiness between the two Sexes. You, my dear, though faithful to your hus band, and not in the least inclined to encourage any other man (I will venture to answer for your fidelity and your constancy) are not displea sed with general admiration. ten derness is not your predominant passion— — have a strong understanding, and yet you prefer the glitter and parade of life to the more endearing joys arising from the union of two hearts beating to each other in the same if I may borrow an expression from music— — now should think such an union, without any interruption, the highest felicity this wmrld can bestow. Tcu have an exalted idea of friendship., I of — what B 3 you 
[ 6 ] 
you call romantic love. In Short, my dear Burton, prtd.e is your foible, and vanity mine. 
But perhaps I Speak too plain. — Pardon me. — My aim is only to convince you that I cannot gratify my favourite passion by marrying Lord Stanfield. — I have too quick a sense of honour to permit him to entertain hopes which will never be accomplished. Let him know, therefore, when you see him, that he may be assured my refusal neither results from affected modesty, nor impertinent coquetry, but Springs from a sincere resolution not to give up my freedom to any man living; especially to the man whom I do not love. 
LET[ 
[ ] 
LETTER II 
From the Same to the Same. 
N D So, my dear Burton, be cause you did not find your self a fufiicient advocate for your favourite, or rather believed that the eloquence of a pretty fellow is more prevailing on certain occasions, than the most persuafive eloquence of a woman, you Sent Mr. Moil to plead for his brother. But were neither you nor my lord afraid to trust him with me? Upon my word he is very handsome, does not want fense, and has an amazing diffidence for a young man of fashion. — “He only presumed to make me a visit, as he was just arrived from Dublin, in order to do himself the honour of B 4 letting 
[ 8 ] 
letting me know that Mrs. Burton was well.” After this pretty compliment he artfully enough began to insinuate how happy Lord Stanfield and both were in being related to you; and then, by imperceptible degrees, introduced Such a character cf his Lordship, So heightened by the pencil of the brother and the friend, that, I confess, I thought him a masterly painter, though his portraits were overcharged. However, 
I kept my conjectures to myself; and as there was apparently a great deal of sincerity in the warmth of his expressions about his brother, I could not treat him with incivility : you ' know what an enthusiast I am with'" regard to family astedion, yet, while I approved of his panegyric on my Lord, I at once gave him to understand 
[ 9 ] 
stand that I could not change my opinion of him. 
He looked abashed at the ease and easiness with which I delivered these Sentiments, and, after a melat^oly pause, Said, “Will Lady Camilla permit me to ask her a few questions?’* 
I Smiled assent j L had not the heart to be angry; for he is, though a Soldier, gentle as, a western breeze on a bed of violet. 
“What requisites. Madam, arc wanting in his Lordship, for the .attainment of your favour ?” 
Poshbly, Sir, ” Said I, “to Speak: modestly, I am not deserving of his. lordship’s --! want inclination.’* ’ 
“Can Such a face. So beautiful. So Sweetly expressive .of Sensibility be accompanied with a heart indifferent to.the.joys of mutual love? joys of B... 5 the.: 
[ 10 ] 
the most transporting kind, and Superior to any others to be conceived.” 
I Smiled again — He expressed himself in So warm a manner that I Supposed him to be perfedfly well acquainted with the joys which he So feelingly described; but I was mistaken. 
He proceeded with his interrogations : 
“You will allow, then, Madam, that my Lord has merit, though you are not touched by it 
“I will allow my Lord, Said I, all the merit to which he is, I think, justly entitled; but I cannot ascribc to him anymore.” 
‘‘ I wish your ladyship will not think me impertinent in desiring to be informed of the defeats which you have discovered in my lord’s person or manners, which prevent 
him 
"[ ” ] 
him from being as agreeable in your eyes as he longs to be.’* 
I now began, really, louisa, to feel myself teased by him; having, therefore an engagement upon my hands, and being also in a humour to be quite sincere — I replied, “Lord stanfield’s assiduities, Sir, might, certainly give pleasure to many women, but I have never been in the least affected by them; and had they been ever So pleasing to me, my knowledge of his licentious principles would have hindered his agreeable qualifications from making any impression upon 
5> 
me. 
** You give me, Madam, Said he, Such an enchanting proof of the excellency of your heart, while you justly condemn my brother’s late principles (I say late, because he is now governed by more laudable ones) that B 6 I can 
[ U ] 
had still more to Say, or wished to be detained himself. 
I only repeated my desire not to see or hear any more about Lord Stanfield, he was therefore obliged to take his leave. 
Certainly his Lordship is happy in the affection of his brother, who is uncommonly affectionate: : — don’t you think of returning to England? Are we never to meet again? 
jast wshen I was going to dispatch this, Mr. Myron came in; you have Seen the amiable old man — I never behold him without recolledting a number of little circumstances in my life while I was in the marriage state. The first matrimonial month, you may remember, I Spent at Oakly park : he was like a father to m?, and though only the uncle of my husband, and though that husband 
has 
[ 14 ] 
has been dead three years, is still a much esteemed, as much, nay more revered than ever. I was complaining to him of the persecution I hourly meet with from Lord Stanfield; for indeed I cannot stir abroad without being followed by him. My worthy uncle, for So I shall always call him. Said, that did he not, imagine I Should find Oakly park very dull; he had half a mind to ask me to come to make him a visit this Summer. 
Would you believe it, I jumped at this offer. I am just now weary of London, and all its pleasures: : will, therefore, go down with the good old men : I call him old, in opposition to younger man : yet he is ^ but fifty-five, and a fine erect figure, tall, and like all the Myron family, hand Some, He has only a niece 
of 
[ '5 ] 
of his late wife’s with him, whom he has promised to take care of since the death of her father, a miss Greaves. I have never seen her: I am not fond of your misses, in general; but I am a violent lover of the country, you know, at this Sea Son of the year, and Mr. myron’s library, ' with my music, my drawing, and now and then an airing, will amuse me : to say nothing of his conversation, which ought to have been first mentioned, as it is at once Sprightly, Solid, and entertaining. 
LET 
>6 ] 
LETTER III 
From the Same to the Same. 
7^ O U R letter was fihort, and. very little to the purpose — if I dare Say So without making yom angry. — But have you not heard,, my dear, from either of your young, fellows.? for indeed they deserve. no higher appellations, and therefore I will leave them, if you pleasc, and proceed to give you a description of Such a couple of — ^ -- -- - 
what shall I call them? — don’t think, however, that they are married : never were two Such angels joined together -- -- -- no, no — married pairs 
rarely live in Such harmony. They are Brother and Sister, neighbours to Mr. Myron. 
b.ellville,, 
[ '7 ] 
Belville, the agreeable, amiable Beilville, is possessed of a moderate estate, which descended to him from his father: but he has made Such improvements upon it that he has already doubled the original value of it. - — Why do I bestow a line upon his estate, when he himself is an objecst So deserving of my attention? — His gardens, however, are elegant beyond expression — But to himself — The delicate foftness of an Adonis, and the masculine beauty of an Apollo, are happily united in his person, to render it at the same time commanding and attradtive. Symmetry and grace have combined to finisti the completest figure you ever beheld : his teeth are exquisite, and his hair the finest to be imagined j but his eyes — his eyes, my dear, are out of the reach of description. With these external 
I i8 ]■ 
ternal charms, he has a cultivoteff understanding, a correct; taste, and the best heart in the world : he has a modesty which is absolutely astonishing in a man who has made the tour of Europe; and he is as well-bred as if he had lived in a court from his earliest infancy. these are the outlines of this accomplished fellow. Elis Sister, the Sweet, the innocent Lucy, the child of nature and simplicity — no — there never was Such an angel. In her person, she is the exact picture of her brother, only So enchantingly feminine. So amiably tender — What excessive Sensibility! No, my dear Burton, I never w’’as handsome : you, and Stanfield, and Moil, and twenty more, do not know what beauty is, if you have not Seen Lucy Bellville. She has hitherto lived a very retired life: an old 
aunt 
f '9 I 
aunt had the care of her while her brother was abroad; but when she comes to be Seen and known, the men will all be distradled about her. Yet her personal beauties are her faintest charms. Goodness is strongly painted in her countenance. So strongs ly, that the most abandoned libertine would, I believe, be awed in her presence. 
I am So in love with this Sweet girl, for she is but sixteen, that I shall endeavour to prevail on her brother to let me take her to London with me. He is So very careful of her, that pos fibly he may be afraid of even trusting her with me. — I think, however, that I am not indiscreet, though Sometimes a little giddy; — but it is not right to behave to young people with too much Severity. — I am quite a matron to Lucy; and I feel a kind 
of 
[ 20 ] 
of growing affecffion for her, which will not let rne exercise any Sort of Superiority over her. 
By the way, I don’t think that I am a favouiite of beuvllle’s. — He ia very polite — nothing more; he is, indeed, the first man wlio ever clifco* vcred a total indifference to me — but no wonder! — Having been used to See Such a lovely figure as his sister constantly before his eyes, all other women musi appear of no consequence to him — The dear Lucy, however, loves me j or at least would make me believe she does — Deceit Surely can not lurk under So innocent a countenance. 
She brings her work and sits with me : Sometimes she walks with me, and Sometimes tries to play upon my mandoline. She has already copied Some of my drawings extremely well. 
. 
I 2> I 
though upon my expressing a little astonishment at the freedom of her pencil (as She had not, before I came down, received much instrudlion) she freely owned that her brother had assisted her, and had desired her to ask me to lend her a few drawings to copy: accordingly I gavo him one of my best landscapes, telling him that I did not doubt but he could very much improve it. He Seemed extremely pleased with this proof of my complaisance;; pos iibly I may, in time, gain his friendship. — That is the most I can hope for, as it is all I have to return. — But she is here. 
LETI 
22 ] 
LETTER IV 
From the Same to the Same, 
JDID not Intend to write'again to you till you had answered my last; but I find a pleasure I cannot describe in talking to you about this Belville, 
• — (Lucy I mean) — In return foi the trifling drawing I gave him, he brought me a nosegay made by a nun at Rome, who presented it to him. — Poor girl! stie gave her heart, I fear, at the Same time : how I pity her! — You never Saw anything So natural, or So elegant. — Everything which he has collected abroad does honour to his taste. — His paintings are capital ones, and his drawings are executed in a masterly manner. 
I was. 
t 23 ] 
1 was, I confess, pleased with his flowers— — I have been told that he is extremely generous. — He is a prodigious favourite with my uncle, and Bell Greaves Seems to have a penchant iox him : it will however come to nothing, I believe— — is not striking either in her person or her manners — not to me at least; though, to be Sure, these very handsome fellows often prefer a plain woman, as there can be no competition between them. -- -- 1 will not 
believe that Bellville is capable of Such meanness. — No mm appear vain. 
In Continuation. 
The day is over, and I am horridly out of Spirits. We have had a great deal of company, among whom 
were 
[ 24 ] 
were a gentleman and lady who live about eight miles off; they are reckoned very agreeable people, and have a daughter with whom Bellville Seems to be too well acquainted. But who do you think they brought with them? — Possibly you already know, having been concerned in the Scheme, — I was vastly Surprised to See Mr. Moil step out of the coach with Mr. and Mrs. Ogden; he accosted me respedtfully, but in a manner that discovered a disiigreeable intimacy; he absolutely teased me So that I could not possibly watch Bellville and miss Ogden, whom I suspedt to be lovers. Yet my uncle and Bell Greaves declare, that nothing yet in turtle way has passed between them. — I don’t care to ask Lucy. — What is it to me whom he loves. 
LET 
25 I 
LETTER V 
From the Same to the Same. 
ELL then, I will confess, since you have discovered what I had not art to conceal, (I really cannot tell whether I wished to conceal it) that I certainly would not have Bellville quite indifferent to me. — I will tell you all. 
Piqued, I believe, (nay, I may as well own it) to See him So attached to Mrs. Ogden I took a hint from his behaviour for the regulation of my own, and gave as much encouragement as I decently could to Moil, when we returned the Ogden visit. Bellville looked, I thought, rather dissatisfied at it. He was uncommonly Serious, absent, and pen vol. I. C five. 
[ 26 ] 
five, falling into frequent renjeriei, ■which gave him a dilcontented appearance. On a Sudden he went to miss Ogden, Sat by her, took her by the hand, chatted, and Seemed So as fiduous. So lover like, that I was hurt by his behaviour: yet, as it could be nothing to me, I strove not to See what was, however, too plain not to be perceived. But the heat of the room, and the crowd of people op prested me So much, that I Sunk back in my chair without motion. 
How, my dear Burton, shall I de scribe bellville’s eager Solicitude about me 1 He started up from miss Ogden, flew to me, and, by numberless astiduities, endeavoured to restore me to myself. 
The first object I beheld was him, hanging over me with an expression of pity in his countenance which touched 
[ 2? ] 
CD me to the heart. Having, 1 own, a strong inclination to See how far his compastion would carry him, I was in no hurry to recover; but still continued in the languishing attitude into which I had fallen, though I declared I was better, to give him both rhyme and opportunity to pay me a thousand little attentions. 
miss Greaves, who was, I believe, very much disgusted by bellville’s behaviour, came up to me, and endeavoured to drive him away, telling him that by crowding about he prevented me froih receiving any benefit from the air of a large window which Mr. Myron had thrown open. 
He drew back with a. respcctful motion, though his eyes were earnestly fixed on my face with a tender concern, which gave me inexpreffiblc Satisfaction. 
C 2 The 
f 28 '] 
The company proposing a walk in the garden, I rose; Bellviile still kept near me, and, more than once, offered his arm to Support me. I declined accepting of it: but refused it in Such a manner as to give him no reason to imagine that I had any dis like to his assistance. He cannot be distiked' — I am only afraid of liking him too well: yet neither on account of his birth or his fortune do I think him too inconsiderable to pretend to an alliance with me — Supposing his situation in life less genteel than it is, the charms of his person and the accomplishments of his mind would make ample amends for the deficiencies in point of riches and extradfion - — But to what purpose should I wish to be loved by him.? I will not, cannot, bring myself to marry. — No, I shall he contented with his 
esteem. 
[ 29 ]' 
esteem, and his friendship; thinking myself more flattered by the approbation of Such a man, than by the fulsome compliments of all the coxcombs in town. Actuated by. this laudable.ambition, I shall be clear from the imputation of coquetry, as I take no pains to be admired or to be loved, — I shall be quite Satisfied with beliviile’s regard. 
Lucy, his lovely Sister, has been, with me: she came before I was up, to know how I crd, and, after a multitude of excuses, told me that the earliness of her. visit was entirely occasioned by her brother’s impatience to hear about my health, ad ding, that she had promised to go back to him directly. 
I stopped her just as she was upon she wing, and sent a servant to desire C 3 Mr. 
[ 30 I 
Mr. bellvule^s company, to meet his sister at breakfast. 
He came immediately, and appeared pleased with the invitation. We all chatted together in the garden upon a variety of Subjects, for three hours — What sense 1 what taste! How very insignificant are our mere young fellows compared to him 1 Certainly, Burton, if a woman Should be tempted to fall in love with Such a, man, her tendrejfe might be forgiven. But he is, I believe, perfectly indifferent to the whole sex— — that indifference will Suit me extremely. 
I fancied that he was particular to miss Ogden; I fancied that he (how silly I was) felt himself affected when he Saw me So indisposed— — politeness, nothing more, hurried him to my assistance. There 
are 
[ 3 > J 
are few Such men, I believe, who are not Narctjjujfes. I Speak by experience— — I must confess that Bellville did not appear to me to be that kind of man. But I will Say no more concerning him. If I do, 
you will imagine that I can write on no other Subject,. 

LETTER VI 
From the Same to the Same.' 
AS I am a woman, my dear louisa, I am consequently unable to keep my resolution. I must talk of Bellville, or be totally Silent, He has been frequently here, and I have as frequently returned lucy’s visits; and, as often as I could, without Bell Greaves. He is always C 4 ' good 
[ 32 1 
good-humoured and obliging, but entirely different from all other men; he never has addressed one civil thing to my person: : never gives me any preference but when he thinks that my rank demands it — How I des pife Such a preference! how un satis fa(5tory is it, compared with that to which merit is entitled! Neither has he discovered any emotion since he appeared, according to my observation, agitated on my flirting with Moil; I have therefore nothing to apprehend from him as a lover : there is no fear of my being teased with his bellepafjicn. 
I asked Lucy, the other day what I must do to prevail on him to let her go to town with me : She looked up innocently in my face, and told me that there was nothing else, She was Sure, he could refuse me. 
I took 
^ t 23 ] 
I took an opportunity to let him know how much I wished for his leave to have his sister’s company. He answered that it gave him a great deal of pain to deny any request' with which I honoured him, but added with a Smile, “The appearance of Such a young girl, bred up in retirement, and little acquainted with the customs of the world, with your ladyship, may be attended with the most disagreeable consequenccs. Happily, her ignorance has kept her hitherto out': of danger. Into what Scenes of dishpa tion must she be thrown in your ladyship’s Sphere of life, and how fatal may those Scenes be to her, as sh' ' not your ladyship’s understandings i experience, and discretion!” 
Without this well timed'com.pji ment (though it hardly deserves the name of one, as it could not hand c 5 Somely: r 
I 34 ] 
Somely be avoided) I Should have been not a little offended; I could not help ashing him, however, if he thought that I Should have been happier if I had never seen London? 
He replied, “That people of different dispositions required different amuse ments; but that he believed those who had a relish for a private and retired life felt less anxiety, and consequently more peace of mind, when they did not sind themselves lost in the whirl of pleasure: that they were, at least, more free from that languor and restlefsnefs which constantly attended the votaries of gaiety, who are never happy out of a crowd.” 
“Weil but, ” said I, eagerly, “let me only have Miss Bellville with me, I promisc you that Lwill keep little company, and regular hours, 
and 
[ 35 I 
and introduce her to places and people just Sufficient to change the Scene agreeably, and to make a pleasing diversity in her amusements.” 
“I am not afraid to trust her with s your ladyship, ” replied he, " but with herself.” 
‘‘ Gome then to town, ” Said I,. (blushing to almost court a man thus only for his fisterv company), “to See her often, and Superintend a conduct which will, I dare Say, rather merit your approbation thande Serve your reproofs.” 
He Shook his head. I told hini4 that I looked upon his silence as an > astent, and Should, therefore, prepare. his sister to bid adieu to the country; ’ in another week, 
Lucy. Seems delighted with my having gained this point: • she is « fond of lier brother, but novelty is. 
C 6 f? 
'[ 36 ] 
So bewitching to young minds, .that few can withstand its charms. 
I really mean to deal justly with Bellville, and to take the greatest care of a girl who is too lovely to be neglected, and for whom I have conceived a sincere esteem. 
LETTER VII 
From Mr. Bellville to Mr. Manwayring. 
I HAVE lived from day today in expedfation of Seeing you here, till I am wearied with my repeated disappointments. I cannot wait for you any longer : I miijl write, at length, what I should have cho sen to have delivered in another 
[ 37 ] 
there way upon a Subject which has So engrossed ■ my thoughts, that there will, I think, be a necessity for my coming to Some determination Soon, or else they will steal me from myself. 
Tou., my friend, have, ever since my father’s death, been the guide of my youth, and even when you believed me Sufficiently fortified by your Salutary precepts to be trusted by my own direction, you kindly promised to give me your best advice in any embarrassing situation. I am, at this time, my dear Manwayring, in Such a situation, and want your advice and assistance more than ever. But you ought certainly to be with me at present, in order to be capable of giving your admonitions with the greater propriety. 
You 
I 38 ] 
You know, my friend, with what circumspedlion I have ever avoided those women, who, though poffes fed of the most engaging qualities, and highly favoured by nature in their persons, were by no means formed to make me happy, according to the plan of domestic life, which. is, in my opinion,, the only life productive of true and permanent felicity. I have lately fallen in the way of a lady, whom, as She is abundantly more beautiful and more accom -- plished than any woman I ever met with, I cannot postibly entirely, avoid not that she made an im preshon upon me at first too deep to ^, 
be effaced by.time and absence- -- -- -- -- 
to all human probability) especially as I looked upon her in a light Sar above my hopes, and from her rank, fortune, and beauty, very, 
unfit. 
[ 39 ] 
unfit for a man who prefers tranquillity and retirement to all the parade of the gay worlds and all its most alluring pleasures. 
With these unfashionable Sentiments I first met Lady Camilla Myron at my good neighbour’s, the uncle of her late husband, who was the eldest Son of Lord Conquer; but dying about a year before his father, the title descended to a younger brother. 
Lady Camilla is, perhaps, one of the finest women existing: her figure is commanding, and she is delicately formed : her complexion is brilliant, and her eyes — the most Seducing ones to be imagined : she has an extreme pretty mouth, her teeth arc exceedingly even and white, and her light shining hair grows thick about her fair face. — But this 
lovely 
[ 4° ] 
lovely woman, though I have not done justice to her personal charms by defer!bing them, is still more bewitching by her manners, her disposition, and her conversation. With Such a woman, my dear friend, you will allow that I have been in no Small danger. It has been my whole employment, indeed, to regulate my behaviour in Such a manner as not to give even the most indifferent observer room to fuppose that I am in the least affetsted by Such striking beauties:. my greatest difficulty was to keep my heart untcuched by her amiable attradlions — I could only arm myself against the power of them, by considering that I could not expedb to enjoy any felicity with a woman So. universally admired and followed, admitting ffie liked me well enough 
to. 
[ 41 I 
to give me an opportunity to avow the passion which ssie had kindled in my breast j an opportunity which I 
dared not, for the Sake of my 
tranquillity, wish for — But now I 
am coming to the point — She has, by her looks, and by every part of her behaviour, given me all thcreason in the world to think that I am not at all neglecsted by her, or beheld with indifference. 
Will you not, after the perusal of this last paragraph, Set me down for the most ridiculous of all coxcombs? — don’t be in a hurry, however : come and See me with lady Camilla before you pronounce the Sentence against me, which I should be Sorry to deserve. 
L am at this moment Summoned by her ladyship to go with her, miss Greaves, and my sister, to the 
next 
[ 42 ] 
next village. When I return, you shall hear farther from your 
Charles Bellville. 
LETTER VIIL From the Same to the Same 
7 E walked to Frampton, ^-^ Yes — Lady Camilla walked women of quality can dance, and can romp, 1 know; but walking never was supposed by me to be one of their accomplishments. Frampton is at least five miles from myron"s, > yet this delicate angel — I could almost Say, robust woman — Set out with an alacrity and Spirit which Surprised me, and gave no signs of weariness 
till 
r 43 ] 
till she was within a mile of home 'on her return : she then began to grow very much fatigued. We were behind the rest of our company, for she had detained me in order to point out Some fine views. She draws in an amazing style; but her observations upon the face of the country, and the manner in which they were delivered, gave me infinitely more pleasure than I ever received from the happiest productions of her pencil. 
Having exhausted both her strength and Spirits, she turned pale, and the most inviting languor Succeeded the charming sprightliness with which she entered upon her walk. 
I offered my arm for her Support, — I had once done So before, when she was indisposed. It was then refused, but there was Something So enchanting in her refusal, that the acceptance 
of 
I 44 J 
f my offer would hardly have giveu me more pleasurc. 
She was now' in another situation There was no person in sight; She therefore leaned on my arm, and with suchsatissadion, strongly expressed by every look and motion, that I could not help being touched, ray friend. Who, what man, not divested of Sensibility, could Support So sine a creature, and not be affected by having her So immediately under his protection! — I trembled with delight; yet I strove to fuppress; ?zjyfeelings, while She kindly Seemed to give a modest loose to hers. Her beauteous eyes met mine with a languid Sweetnefa in them which I never observed before; and her melodious voice was unusually Softened when she Spoke. 
How, dangerous are Such interviews as those! She not only, however. 
[ 45 1 
ever, appears pleased with them, but Seeks them, contrives them, and enjoys them with an avidity Scarce to be credited. She is also extremely fond of Lucy, and will not hear of my opposing her request to take her to town. When Such an angel condescends to ask a favour! O Manwayring, if I had denied her, I should have been — not a man Surely — yet I donst approve of lucy’s leaving me, to run into high life with Such a captivating companion. 
When you read this you will pos sibly Say, that because a fine woman is tolerably civil to me now and then, I am vain enough to encourage the most idle and romantic fancies. Were her civilities only conferred on me now and then, I might justly be Set down for an egregious coxcomb for 
reck 
I 46 ] 
reckoning upon them; but she is always particular to me. 
“That is, because there is no other man ready.*‘ 
But again : she has a professed admirer here, a handsome insinuating young fellow, and yet I have indisputably the preference. 
“Probably she is a coquette.’" 
I never Saw her in the least incli ued to flirt with any man. No, her whgle conduct is uniform and consistent : she singles me out from all the rest of the company, not only today, tomorrow, and next day, but every day; every day, my friend : read these words over again. 
Mr. Myron had his house full the other night: all the men adored Lady Camilla : they Sung, played, danced, romped — but Jhe would not romp with anybody. She gave her hand 
to 
r 47 1 
to me to lead up the ball. They all ashed her to sing; she refused. At last I took it into my head to beg the favour of a Song; she immediately complied. 
Some of the most astured among the men began to attempt little freedoms, which, though impertinent enough, could not properly be very severely resented. — Lady Camilla af fe^ed not to be angry with those which were offered to her ^ but eagerly breaking from Mr. Moil, who strove to detain her hand, flew tome, and almost throwing herself into my arms, cried, half out of breath, “O Mr. Bellville, faveme from these rude creatures !’* 
I pressed her to my bosom 5 and, while L enclosed all that is lovely in woman, swore to protect hen 
She 
[ 48 [ 
She Smiled with ineffable sweet nefs, and told me She was happy under my care. I cannot describe my feelings at that instant — I can only say that I was in Elysium — in paradise— — hardly knew, in short, where I was. 
v/hat am I to think of this behaviour, my Manwayring? do I dream? have I been only penning the visions of a heated imagination in the language of a lunatic? Or, may I seriously venture to believe that Such a lovely woman, lovely in the highest degree, will ever be Sufficiently prejudiced in my favour, to listen to me upon a subject on which I long to Speak, though I tremble at the thoughts of Speaking it? — What do I not feel! — O what a conflict is there between my heart and my lips! 
LET[ 
[ ] 
LETTER IX 
From the Same to the Same 
YOU told me I might venture -- I have ventured, and am undone; but yet I know not what to say — there never was Surely Such a bewitching creature. We grew more and more intimate every hour. She gave me every modest encouragement a woman could give. Presuming upon that and your advice, (let me say rather your positive injundlions) I threw myself and all I was master of, at her feet, declaring, at the Same time, that being thoroughly consci ous of my demerits, I trusted entirely to her goodness to pardon a liberty of which my admiration of her various charms had made me guilty. 
vol, I. D “I very 
[ JO ] 
“I very readily pardon you, Mr. Bellville, ” Said She, with the most engaging Smile, if you really believe that you have done anything to require my forgiveness; and, in return, shall only desire the continuance of your esteem.” 
My esteem. Madam !” I exclaimed, all astonished. 
“Aye, ” replied she, ‘‘ you look surprised j but I have, on Some occasions, a very particular way of thinking : I see no reason why two people, though they do not chuse to enter into indissoluble engagements, must avoid each other as if they were on the most disagreeable terms, and never converse as freely as they do with their common acquaintance. Far from being offended with the man who thinks well enough of me to wish to end his days with me, I 
am 
[ 51 ] 
am obliged to him; and provided he does not revive a Subject on which I have already delivered mysentiments, lam at a loss to know why we may not chat together in the same easy manner we did beforec 
Still more Surprised at her free avowal of Sentiments So new to me, I began to flatter myself that pofiibly Site imagined she had been too hasty in pronouncing my Sentence, and already repented of her Severe behaviour : I therefore, with all the timidity attendant on a real passion, begged to know, that since she honoured me So highly as to appear to wissi for what she might ever command, myssneerest esteem, why she still cruelly forbade me to hope for anything more from her? 
ru tell you honestly and truly, ’’ Said she, with a beautiful, glow on D 2 her 
[ 52 ] 
her cheeks, which rendered her almost a divinity; “had I not determined not to enter into a Second mansiage, I don’t know a man in the world, to whom I would with more pleasure give my hand than to Mr. Belville : but I have Such strong, Such unanswerable reasons, against a connexion of that nature, or indeed against any other, being firmly resolved to admit the addresses of no mortal whatever, that unless you will be Satisfied with only looking upon me as a friend, I shall be obliged to break off an acquaintance which has, I frankly con fess, given me the greatest Satisfaction.’ “A friend, my lady !” cried I, quite amazed and disappointed, yet charmed with this unaccountably alluring woman. 
“Yes, Mr. Bellville, ” replied she, y I requirejy(?z^r friendship, and promise 

[ 53 I 
mise you mine in return: that is. Supposing yours to be pure, sincere, and unmixed with any passion of a tenderer kind; for the resolution I have mentioned I fully intend to keep.” 
“What a strange carriage!” However, I bowed and Subscribed to the restrictions stie insisted on. Who would refuse Such a lovely creature’s fisiend/hip who would not heartily promise his own in return? yet there is Something So extraordinary, So wild, in this way of proceeding. — Surely file is not an absolute Platonist; if file is, I fiiall not think So highly of her as I have done. Such romantic flights are above tny comprehension : by endeavouring to Soar above human frailty, are we not Sometimes most deplorably mortified! 
D 3 
This 
[ ] 
This conversation has disturbed me excestively: I love Lady Camilla better than I ever loved any woman; yet I love her as a man, and as a rational being; consequently I wifia to find her not a goddess, but a woman.. As she is adorned with all the charms which can make a female irresistible, let her not be exempted from the amiable weaknestes of her Sex, which necestarily render them desirous of flying to us as their protedlors — I want not the woman whom I wish to make my wife believe herself endued with intelledfual strength Sufficient to justify her running into the way of temptation, on purpose to rise Superior to it. But, perhaps, I am too hasty : perhaps her refusal So disconcerted me that I did not rightly understand her. — I am certainly very unhappy, and stand in need of all 
my 
[ 55 I 
my reason to Support me under my infelicity. 
Lucy, to whom I have complain i CD about her Ladyship, tells me, that she will be as unhappy as I am if she does not‘see me as cheerful as usual. — I would not have her teach my sister her Platonics; for, to a girl young and innocent as lucy^is, I look upon platonism to be very damnable doctrine. 
LETTER X 
Lady Camilla Myron to Mrs.’ Burton. 
ELLVILLE loves me, and I am happy — yej: I shall not long be So, if I am not to See him and hear him as uiiial. No man ever D 4 addressed[ 
[ ] 
addressed a woman with more res pect and tenderness: I refused him notwithstanding, positively refused him — But though I would not accept of his love, I begged his friendship' 
'— the mention of that word he looked quite astonished— — as I told you before, I will not marry. You may call my entire disapprobation of a Second marriage a foolish delicacy perhaps: call it what you will, I am my own mistress, and may adt as I think proper. I will admit no lovers, but I cannot have too many friends; and for what reason upon earth, can anybody tell me. Should I give up the conversation of one of the most amiable men who ever existed only because I do not choose to marry? I am quite sick of love and lovers; but I esteem and value all 
men 
[ 57 3 
men who are capable of making unchangeable Sriends. 
I have Seen bellvule but once since the interesting conversation abovementioned. He was polite and obliging, yet uncommonly Serious, and Seemed rather willing to avoid mei — Possibly he may be governed by other motives — That mad wretch, Lord Conquer, is come down to See Mr. Myron. Meeting Lucy Bellville, he was in Such raptures at her beauty, and the Sweet simplicity osher behaviour, that I am pretty Sure he appeared, in her brother’s eyes too dangerous a man to fall into So innocent a young creature’s way. Bellville, therefore, was not very ready to make ran acquaintance with himj but George, who never wants what he calls an easy assurance, invited himself to the Wood that is the D 5 name 
[ 58 ] 
name of beliville’s place. Lucy, if I am not exceedinglymistaken, thinks my wild brother a wondrous pretty fellow. Poor child! little is She acquainted with the ways of men — little does She consider how absolutely necessary it is to guard her heart against them — If I could find her a man as good as her brother I would give her leave to love him immediately. 
In Continuation 
My Sweet little novice already feels her own consequence, and keeps George at Some distance, though the rogue will toy and romp with her more than he ought to do; but in Such a manner that the most Scrupulous cannot well be offended at his freedoms. He is, however. So artful 
t 59 ] 
full a devil that one ever is Scarce Secure. 
Bellville stays from the Park. I ashed my unde this morning, with all the napoete in the world, if his neighbour was ill, as he never came near us. 
‘‘ As if you did not know every thought in his bosom, replied he -- But believe me. Lady Camilla, you will never find a man moredeserving of you.” — 
“I don’t think I Shall uncle, Said I, therefore I will not marry at all j women who are in a hurry to take yrrowhufi^ands, proclaim their disregard to the memory of their first.” 
I am of a contrary opinion now Said Mr. Myron; a woman who has had an agreeable husband, is, I think, less able to live alone, and the more excusable in looking outfor another. 
D 6 People 
[ 6o ] 
People who have been once happy in the marriage state, are Seldom happy out of it.” 
Lucy came in Soon afterwards as blooming as May, followed by lord Conquer, who patted her neck behind, untied her necklace, and played a thousand foolish tricks with her. She blushed, she Smiled, she even sighed when he left us to go with Mr. Myron into the garden. By the way, George is very handsome. A glance which Lucy shot after him Sufficiently informed me of the true situation of her heart. 
And So you love this wild fellow ?” Said I to hen 
She looked like a blushing rose, and hung her head. After a silence of about five minutes she recovered, came to me, and throwing her arms round my neck, cried, “My dear, 
dear 
[ 6i ] 
dear lady Camilla, how strangely you think of your Lucy!” 
“No longer mj Lucy, ” replied I, “but lord conquer’s Lucy.” 
“Indeed, ” Said the charming girl, still more confused, Lord Conquer is nothing to besides, my brother — 
“O ay, child, ” replied I briskly, “where is this brother of yours? He never comes hither : he does not behave agreeably to my expectations : tell him if he will not come to See me I will come to See him!' 
In Short, bellville’s obstinacy vexes me. As he cannot have me upon his own terms, he will not have 
me at all -- -- -- But men were ever 
perverse creatures. — How lucky lam in not being married to him. 
LET[ 
[ ] 
LETTER XI 
From the Same to the Same. 
E are all here in the utmost confusion and distress. Lucy Bellville and lord Conquer are both missing, and we all fear that they are Somewhere together. The simple girl has indeed been most probably decoyed by his lord Ship. During her brother’s absence from home, a Servant came with a coach, and told her that Mr. Bellville had been thrown from his horse near a gentleman’s house almost five miles off, who had, at his request. Sent his carriage to fetch her to him. The unsufpeding creature hurried away, with tears in her eyes, and has not been heard of since. 
Bell[ 
[ ] 
Bellville is half distracted. this event, added to my refusal (for I am Sure he loves me) is too much. 
Mr. Myron and I went to visit him yesterday; he was pale, wretched, and disordered all over. You cannot imagine how I felt for him; and my concern was doubled by thinking that any person with whom I was connected Should have behaved So infamousty as to Seduce the sister of the most amiable and worthiest of men. I grieve also for that Sweet innocent girl, the very image of her brother j Sor though I rallied her about Lord Conquer, She was, 
I am certain, too good to yield willingly : Some diabolical arts have been used to undermine a virtue founded on principle, and strengthened by education. Poor dear girl, could we but learn where She is! — But we 
have 
[ O I 
have no news about her, and Lord Conquer has written a letter to Mr. Myron from Brighthelmstone, at which place, I have heard from people who have Seen him there, he actually now is. Bellville grieves for her as much as if She was a favourite mistress : few men love a sister So well j but there is a tenderness in his nature peculiar to himself, 
I Sat by him two hours, and strove to amuse him to very little purpose, though he was still polite to me: he declared that he should never know ease again till he had recovered his dear lost Lucy, and shown his resentment to her Seducer. 
I tremble to think os the conse quences with which this affair may be attended. I Set before him, in the strongest colours, the madness of exposing a life a thousand times more 
Valuable 
[ 65 ] 
valuable than his enemy’s, and for which I told him, he vas answerable to him from whom he received his existence. 
He acknowledged the truth of what I Said; but added, that though HO body abhorred duelling more than himself, honour and justice both loudly called him to defend a poor helpless orphan sister, left to his care by the tenderest of mothers on her deathbed, by the utmost exertion of his courage to Seize her from the hands of her Seducer, and punish him for his infamous behaviour. 
Mr. Myron also strove, by every argument he could think of, to calm his mind; but we were obliged to leave him in a very agitated state; and I confess, for my own part, that I am not much better. What trouble and uneafiness do men occasion in the 
world. 
[ 66 ] 
world. I begin absolutely to hate the Sex — yet I mujl Seel for bell viile. 
LETTER XII From the Same to the Same. 
1h A V E been So much alarmed by this strange affair, that it has actually disordered me; and Belville, on his return from London, (whither he 'wtulfojiy to make all possible inquiries after his sister) calling at Mr. myron’s, found me fo ill, that, though I was below stairs, I could hardly lift up my head from the back of my chair. 
He expressed great concern and anxiety on my account. Engrossed as 
his 
[ (>7 I 
his thoughts were by Lucy, of whom he has not yet heard anything, his behaviour was even tender, and I had not, I confess, power to chide him at a time when I knew he was So very unhappy. I took a pleasure in his little assiduities about me. I cannot yvcll Say at present what I would have more than to See him made easy by the return of this poor lost girl. 
Moil has been also here; he tells me that Lord Stanfield is the intimate friend of Lord Conquer, and that he is certain if miss Bellvilleis with htm^ his brother will Soon hear of her. How Scandaloufiy do these men de base the Sacred name of friend, by thus associating merely for the destruction of our helpless Sex! 
LET[ 
[ ] 
LETTER Xlll. 
Lord Conquer to the Earl of Stanfield. 
Brigbtheimflone, 
I Have Secured the do\xly prize which I mentioned to you when we met last : Such a jewel, Harry, you never yet had in your poffestion, I made use of rather a stale trick though to decoy her: however, as She is simplicity itself, it Succeeded. I was, indeed, a little apprehensive hli your flame, my fine sister, Lady Camilla, might have told her what wicked wretches livelyfellows are, and taught her a little of her Saving knowledge. Camilla, you know, hates what she calls a man of pleasure — But to my Sweet innocents 
When 
[ 69 ] 
When I first jumped into the coach to her, as Soon as it was far enough upon the road to prevent suspicion, she Seemed exceedingly alarmed, and begged and prayed me, with her pretty eyes almost drowned in tears, to let her go back to her brother. But after the first flow of resentment was over (women, Harry, have a great advantage over us by their tears, for weeping is a glorious vent to their passions) she grew much less dis composed, and appeared not to oppose my amorous Solicitude about her, while I kept my feelings within proper bounds; but I must take care of my movements, I find she is ignorant yet, I think, innately chaste — If I can once gain her heart, and I am encouraged to hope for a triumph over it, a sham divine finishes my business in a few minutes. I must 
not, 
IO I 
not, however, hurry things, neither : I would choose to have her yield willingly,, and not lay me under a necessity of proceeding to violent measures, And yet if that Sober fellow, her brother. Should find us out before I am master of her person, I Shall be tempted to run him through the body — He may have her as Soon as he pleases asterwards. Upon my Soul She is a d — d fine creature. Sweet tempered, and gentle as she is beautiful. But to prevent interruption, and to throw him on a false Scent, I appear in public here Some part of every day, while my prey is Secured in an obscure cottage a few miles off, which I make my home, and in which I avail myself of every enticing art to win her very Soul, and fing Le Deiim over her stubborn virtue. You may See her if you think you can trust 
your 
I 71 1 
your heart in her company; but i would not even let you have one peep at her if you were not my dearest friend, and if I did not believe that the little dissembling huffey loves me, though She will not own her sensations in my favour — But as I have taught her the first deceit She ever pradtised, I believe, in her life, I can forgive her on condition that 7 alone reap the advantage of it; and that She, at last, freely confesses the passion which ssie at present, pretty blushing fool, is ashamed to encourage. 
LET[ 
[ I 
LETTER XIV 
Lady Camilla Myron to Mrs. Burton. 
am now going to give you a pleasure, my dear Burton, that you little expect from me : I am going to write an encomium upon Lord Stanfield : he has indeed obliged us greatly; for he has brought home the dear but undone Lucy to her distressed brother, and restored my young friend to me. There are Some circumstances attending this affair truly Shocking, for Lord Stanfield arrived not time enough to prevent a marriage, which cannot be valid. I really don’t know what to make of it. As Lucy tells her story. Lord Conquer absolutely terrified her into 
a consent 
[ 73 ] 
a consent, on vowing to take by force every liberty without marriage; but certainly no woman in her scnses would consent to marry a man in Such a way on Such terms. However, I will relate the facts as I have heard them from Lord Stanfield (confirmed by herfels) and you Shall make your own comment upon them. 
Flis Lordship delivered his narrative to me in the following terms: 
“On receiving a letter from Lord Conquer relating to the carrying off miss Bellville, I immediately Set out for Brighthelmstone, with a resolution to deliver her, - if possible, as my brother told me that you had interested yourself in her Safely; but, upon my arrival, I could not meet with his Lordssiip, and as he had not trusted me with the name of the vol. I. E place 
[ 74 ] 
place where he had concealed his captive (for she certainly was one) I was obliged to wait there till he returned; and return he did not till Some days after the marriage ceremony had been read to them by one of his creatures. On our meeting. Lord Conquer carried me directly to the house in which he had lodged this poor deluded girl, and introduced me to her as his bride : I declare I was quite struck with the downcast modesty of her appearance, which rendered her person still more beautiful; yet certain I was of her having been cruelly drawn into a situation in which she could never taste any hap piness. I felt myself .extremely loth to make her acquainted with the advantage which had been taken of her credulity, as she really believed herself to be legally married; and, 
though 
[ 75 I. 
though She afterwards confessed tha^ she was forced to give her consent, 
I was once almost inclined to leave her as she was, having first endeavoured to persuade my Lord to make her his wife publicly, as he would, in all probability, one day marry; and to induce him to think that no woman on earth could be more Suitable to him. With these views I returned with Lord Conquer to Brighthelmstone, and attacked him with every argument which I judged likely to effect my purpose; but being treated only with an insulting Sneer for my trouble, I Seized the first opportunity, when I knew his Lordship was engaged with a party, to go back to the village: there, in the gentlest terms I could devise, I informed poor Lucy of her situation. The unwelcome news shocked her E 2 So 
{ 76 I 
So much, that she fell motionless at my feet; and it was Some time before I could bring her to her Senses. As Soon as she recovered, she burst out into pathetic lamentations, wdiich would have moved the most obdurate heart. 1 Soon, however, put a stop to the violence of them, by telling her that she had not a moment to lose; and that I would carry her, with all expedition, to the Wood, if she wished to return to her brother. 
“Her reply was, with her hands lifted up to heaven, “O my God! whom fiiall I trust } I have already been deceived by one man, ” continued she, fixing her eyes on me, “and who are you, who can affure nie that you have not as bad a design as he had who has already imposed upon me? Whither whither can Such a poor distressed creature as I now am, sty for Security ?” “You 
[ 77 I 
You may depend upon Security with me, Madam, ” Said Ij and may believe me when I tell you that I will not quit your fide till I have Seen you Safe in your brother’s house.” 
re affured a little by this Speech, she cried, in a pious attitude, 
“Almighty protestor of the innocent, be my guide — But go where I will, I must be miserable.” 
“A flood of tears followed that ejaculation. After having endeavoured to Soothe her with the most comforting expressions in my power, I hurried her into my post chaife, and brought her Safe to the where Bellville 
received me with open arms.” 
Here ends his lordship’s narrative.’ He has certainly acted a laudable part, though he had no occasion to make a merit of the adfion to me when he came to wait on me to E 3 lucyj. 
r 78 ] 
Lucy. He has behaved handsomely, I will allow; but I donst like him the better for being So closely connected with Lord Conquer and his vices. The avowed friend of Such a man cannot be a much left amiable 
You will' magnify this incident now, I know, into a piece of prodigious heroism j but I must judge for myself. I complimented Lord Stanfield, however, on his being So Serviceable to my friend; but could not help, at the Same time, advising him to break off acquaintance with people who could only dishonour him. 
His reply to this Speech was pretty enough : 
“If your Ladyship will recoiled, that without having been intimate with Lord Conquer I should not have come to the knowledge of Miss 
bellville^s 
r 79 1 
bellville’s situation, nor have been able to assist her in her escape, you will, I flatter myself, be more considerate.” 
these men, Burton, have always their apologies ready. 
Bellville, though glad to have his sister again, will ever lament her not being as pure as She left him; and not all my uncle’s rhetoric, nor my eloquence, will, I imagine, be Sufficient to hinder him from challenging Lord Conquer. On every other occasion how mild, how gentle, how patient how forgiving ^ is this man! But, what man of fp’rit can bear an insult of this kind unmoved? I, myself, I am, afraid. Should be apt to depife him if he tamely Submitted to it — « and yet — to think of his being in I die with terror — 
Oh! my louisa, I am.the weakest E 4 of 
danger 
[ So ] 
of women — Poor Lucy! She gives but a very imperfect account of what has past. Her intellects are, I doubt, disturbed : She certainly had a kind of partiality towards this devil who has undone her, and will never, I fear, find peace in this world. Yet how exquisitely beautiful is the! rendered infinitely more So by her blushes and her tears — 
Lord Stanfield has, Ihave told you, endeavoured to make a merit of his heroic action to me— — if I have any eyes, he would, I dare say, willingly supply the place of his vile— — such friends! He has not Seen her, however, since he brought her home - — She will not be Seen by anybody, except her brother and me — Dear, unfortunate girl, how I pity her! — Glad am I now that I did not take her to town — I should have been dis 
tracfed 
t 8i ] 
tradled to have had Such an affair happen while she was under tny care. 
Bellvilje has an amiable man with him, between forty and fifty, whode ferves indeed the appellation of friend: he and Mr. Myron are continually Setting before him both the guilt and the folly of duelling, and ashing him if the killing Lord Conquer, or being killed by him, will restore his sister’s honour or her peace. 
Mr. Myron will write to Lord Conquer : but what impression will the most Sensible, the most afi'etsting remonstrances make upon So hardened a wretch! 
P. S, I had almost forgot to tell you that Lord Stanfield has again revived the old story of his pashon; and that I have again given him a. definitive answer. 
E 5 LET[ 
[ J 
LETTER XV 
From the Same to the Same.' 
E L L VIL L E, to my great happiness, is preservcd from sacrificing himself to the honour of his sister. 
Lord Conquer challenged Lord Stanfield for depriving him of Lucy : they met; they sought. Lord Conquer is dangerously wounded. Lord Stanfield is arrived Safe at Calais. Mr. Myron, having been desired by the former to see him before he dies, is gone to London. 
As for myself, for Bell Greaves is nobody, I sit the greatest part of every day by Lucy, from whom we have concealed this news, endeavouring to make her more Satisfied with herself; 
but 
I 83 J 
but I have not yet met with any suc cess, She weeps till She Is almost blind; and when wearied with grief, and quite worn down by forrowa throws her arms round my neck, lays her head on my bosom, and gives herself up to despair; while Bellville sits on the other fide, holding my hand in his, and Saying everything he can think of to rouse us both from our stupidity, which alarms him. He makes hourly acknowledgments to me for condescending to Sltew So much Solicitude about his sister;; at the Same time begs me to have some compassion for him and no longer to refuse him the blessing he So earnestly implores. I do not now. Lady Camilla, Said he, while vou are thus overwhelmed with grief and uneasiness, presume to request the favour of your hand; but as I hope, E 6, con[ 
[ ] 
continued he, with a deep sigh, that these troubles will one day be over, may I not also hope that your pity will extend to me., to ?northeast who Suffers from my uncertainty on your account as much as I endure on this dear girl’s ?” 
“I have told you, Mr. Bellville, i' Said I, more than once, since the commencement of our acquaintance, that from your intrinsic merit, and the propriety of your behaviour, you were entitled to my esteem and friendship; but no man must expedr anything more from me.” 
He sighed at my ansv/cr. I have often assured him that I am Serious in my declarations, but I have no great opinion of his faith in them; for though I have forbade him to Speak upon the Subject: of love, his eyes are talking all day long upon it, 
and 
[ 85 ] 
and I am only too much afraid that mine betrayed my heart. 
How lovely is he, even in the midsk of distress! Whenever he, overcome in a manner with it, finks down in his chair, covers his fine expressive face with his band, and is unable to utter a Syllable, my heart is almost bursting to relieve him; I forget all that I have Said, run to him, stand looking on him, and finding that he. pays no regard to me, cry, Speak, Bellville; I can’t bear this silence: Speak, and remove my anxiety.” He then starts up, catches my hand, and presses it ardently to his lips, while I have not power to refuse him So trifling a fatisfadfion, 
1 ailced Lucy yesterday, as she Seemed Somewhat more composed, how She could have been prevailed on to give her hand to this wretch, as ssie 
might 
[ 86 J 
might have ratioxnally imagined that her friends would have found her out, and would have delivered her. She declared that she had no notion of Such a deceitful proceeding, and was indeed fo frighted and ccnfused as hardly to know what passed; adding, that she should on no account have consented to be married had she entertained the least Suspicion that the person v^/ho performed the ceremony vas not a real clergyman. When Lord Stanfield, concluded told me of the trick which had she, been played upon me, and that my marriage was not a legal one, I was lo astonished and shocked, that the horrid news almost deprived me of my senses.” 
In Continuation. 
Here is an express from Mr. Myron with a letter to Mr. Bellville, 
With 
I 87 J 
With his leave I have transcribed It for your perusal. 
Copy of Mr. myron’s Letter to Mr. Bellville. 
Dear Sir, 
I have found Lord Conquer as bad as possible I yet he retains his senses. Heaven Seems to have Spared him in pity to you, and dear miss Bellville, that he may have it in hia power to make Some, indeed the only, reparation now lest him. He speaks not now of anything but the earnest desire to call her legally his wife; and to leave his name and fortune to her, as he can have no hopes of enjoying his fortune with her. He has insisted on my acquainting you and your sister with this last request, with all imaginable expedition j begging that 3 the 
[ 88 ] 
the Same expedition may be used in bringing miss Bellville to town, lest her arrival may be too late for him to do her the justice to which she is entitled. Tou^ Mr. Bellville, best know how this request of his lordship’s will affect your sister: but if my advice, as a real friend, can have any weight with you, cornply with it. What is past cannot be recalled; there is no other way for the restoration of the charadfcr and peace of the injured young lady, but this; and this will, in time, I make no doubt, prove as efficacious as it is sincerely wished to be, by 
Your obedient 
Humble Servant, 
G. Myron. 
As Soon as bellvuie had read this letter, he Sent to desire the faveur of 
fpeaki. 
nr 
[ 89 ] 
Speaking to me, having left me with Lucy when he went down to Mr. myron’s Servant. 
I met him in the parlour. Putting the letter into my hand, he entreat ed my opinion of it. 
I gave him the following answer“ 
“Lord Conquer in a fair way to recover, I would be the last person in the world to advise you to consent to Such an alliance, because I think that to be united to a man of his lordfhip’s vile principles, is not only to live a disagreeable life, it is to be also in a dangerous situation; but, as he is fo near his end, I entirely fub fcribetomr. myron’s sentiments, with re: ard to the silencing those calum niating tongues who would be ready to refiedlupon miss bellville’s conduct in reproachful terms: by complying wsith my brother’s request, 
yoa. 
[ 90 I 
you will at least give Such a turn to the affair as to make people believe things are not really So bad as they wtre at first represented: besides, there is in fact, no other remedy lest; it will certainly therefore be the prudent thing to accept of the invitation immediately, as a moment's delay may put it out of your power. You will find the most difficult task. to prepare Lucy for the journey; but I, with your assistance, will endeavour to preparic her.” 
We then, both of us, returned to Lucy's apartment. 
After a short but Severe invedlive against libertines, (I often inveigh bitterly against them) I assced her if she should not be glad to hear that the injury lord Conquer had done her was revenged by lord Stanfield, who had dangerously wounded him in a duel. 
[ 9' ] 
She turned pale as death diredt ]y, fetched a deep sigh, and fainted away. 
I had not, I confess, believed die could have been So much affedfed by the approaching dissolution of a man whom die had So much reason ta abhor. 
Proper remedies, however. Soon restored her to life: She appeared extremely frighted and (hocked, burst into tears, but Said nothing. 
Her brother then told her of my lord’s dying request, and begged her to assume all the fortitude (he was mistress of, as it would be neceltary to Support her at Such a trying moment 
“Oh! I cannot go — I cannot Sec him die, ” cried She, hiding her face with her hands, 
“My dear Lucy, ” Said I, listen to mcy. for whom you ever professed 
a par[ 
[ I 
a particular affection; listen to your brother, who is still dearerto you, and be persuaded to accept of this poor wretch’s earnest invitation, as he is So desirous of making his peace with heaven and with you.. Do not, my good girl, prevent him fresh doing the only just action he has ever found himself capable of, but go to him, and let him Sec that though So highly injured, you have, nevertheless, magnanimity enough to pardon the gross insult you received from him. — — You would not, added I, Seeing her hesitate, let him perish, I hope, without your pardon. Culpable he is certainly to a very great degree; but we are commanded to forgive even our enemies, and to return good for evil; and he can have no consolation now but Uom your acquiescence with his last desire.” ' 
I can. 
[ 93 ] 
I can, ^ I do forgive him, ” replied She, sobbing, “but I cannot See him die — I was almost as much to blame as himself— — ought not to have been So credulous.” 
On the entrance of a Servant to tell his master that the chaise was ready, I bade her maid put on her cloak, and Bellville joining his per suafions to mincy stie went willingly with him. I believe indeed, from all I could observe, that she felt more concern at my brother’s being fo near death, than at anything elsc, She undoubtedly loves him, worthless as he has been. I am transported, however, that he has, in Some measure, repented at length of his errors, and looks upon 'them in a right light. Bat, as I Said before, I never would have advised her to marry him had he not been in Such a 
par[ 
[ j \ 
ticular' condition^ No woman can he Safe with a man who Spends his life in ruining as many of her Sex as are weak enough to be Seduced by him. Neither her principles nor her honour are Safe; the first are every moment liiibie to be corrupted, and the latter violated. No woman can either esteem or respedt a man who is destitute of every virtue. Nay, her charadfer too Suffers by her connexion with him; for the world is always kind enough to suppose that the woman who gives her hand to an avowed libertine, is not extremely nice in her notions concerning Semale reputation. Not to mention the many tedious, I may add, torturing hours, a woman So married must Spend in refiedtions upon her huf band’s neglect or ill treatment, which are of themselves Sufficient to embitter 
[ 95 ] 
bitter life, without being rendered more cutting by the, calumny, pf the jtvorld. Melancholy experience, my dear louisa, has taught me to give these Salutary cautions to all my female friends who wish to be happy in the married state. 


LETTER XVI 
Fom the Same to the Same. - 
bell ville is returned. I received the following account from him : Lucy bore her journey beyond his expectation, but was very much affected at the sight of Lord Conquer, pale, and like the image of death. He Seemed to have but just breath left to aslc her pardon, and to offer the intended 
[ 96 ] 
dead reparation. She replied only with her tears; but readily gave her assent, when Mr, Myron ashed her if she was willing to be married to Lord Conquer. A clergyman of my uncle’s acquaintance — is he not a worthy uncle? — attended : a Special licence had been procured, and bell ville joined his sister’s hand to my lord’s. ' When the ceremony vas over, Mr. Myron told Lucy, now Lady Conquer, when he had Saluted her by her new title, joined to that of niece, that he would not detain her in So melancholy a place; adding, that if she chose to return to the ivocd with her brother, he would take as much care of my lord, and of everything belonging to him, as if file was present, The amiable girl however (I always Saw that she loved him) with streaming eyes, begged she 
might 
r 97 I 
might not be Separated from her hus band (as he now really is) and declared that no affedfionate care Should be wanting on her part. In short, whether the Surgeons were mistaken about his case, or whether lucy’s tandernefs ’ had any effect, we know not; but he mended greatly from the moment he was married. Poshbly, I Say, he may ere long wish himself fairly out of the world to be released from his wife. 
Bellville staid two nights in town, and left quite out of danger, and his sister altogether Satisfied with her lot, for the present at leash 
We expect Mr. Myron every hour: 
I wish he was come, for bellville’s mind is So mich at ease about Lucy, that he has nothing toido but to dangle after me and tease me for what I shall not grant. 
vol. I F Mr. 
[ 98 ] 
Mr. Manway ring, his friend, is come to congratulate him upon this happy revolution, after So disagreeable an event; and the gentleman, who is indeed a winning man, has been pleading foreellville these two hours. 
I must fiy for it at lost. \ How ridiculous these rnen .are! — I must Speak to none iinless J will admit them as lovers. — If they would let me alone, I might by and by love Bellville in my own way; but if I do J will never own my passion, and So he will not be much the better for it. 
LET[ 
[ ] 
LETTER XVII 
From the Same to the Same. 
London. 
lellville and I have absolutely had a difference, and he has taken his leave of me in a pet: —. yet I am not angry. I Shall be in town for a few days. 
I have called upon lady Conquer: my Lord is amazingly recovered. I wanted to See this new Benedict: I thought he would have rattled his chains by this time, but he appears rather more discreet than one could have expected him to be. if I am not 'an unshilful physiognomist his discretion will not last long. 
The Sweet, amiable Lucy, is the most engaging the loveliest of women: with what joy did she fly to ' F 2 her 
[ 100 ] 
her dear Lady Camilla! (as She calls me) how blooming was her face! how elegant was her figure! what a vivacity Sparkled in her eyes! all her innocent mirth, her Sprightly playful ness is returned. She is now but just sixteen, and as she is happy for the present, everything about her gives her newpleasure. But a finehouse, a number of Servants, always at command, variety uf elegant dresses, crowds of admirers whenever She appears, these, these louisa, certainly conspire to dazzle a girl of her age, who was Scarce ever out of her native village till She became acquainted with Lord conquer, who Seems neither much delighted nor yet displeas ed with her; while She, with all the liveliness of youth, laughs and toys with him till She forces him to Smile on her. She is indeed a perfect 
Hete 
[ )0i J 
Hebe, and might most properly fit for the picture of that charming dl vinity. 
She asked me Several questions about her brother, her dear Charles, and wished to have the honour of calling me sister as well as friend; See how the pretty chit has improved her language. Lord Conquer keeps what is commonly called the best company in town j but what I call the very worst; to Such company, however, his lovely wife Seems to have no Sort of aversion — We all love admiration too well — but I will take an opportunity to give my young friend a little advice: I hope she will not be too giddy to listen to it. 
Your lafl^ in favour of Bellville, made me Smile: you are now, I find, become as violent an advocate for him as you were before for the Moyles, F 3 and 
[ 102 ] 
and you know' nothing concerning him but what I have told you; possibly too I have been too partial. Were he not a man, and consequently a sickle changeable creature, I might, perhaps, break my word, and — but I know by fatal experience, that man is by nature false — with all his imperfections, he has, you See, still power Sufficient to employ my thoughts, and to take up my time, or I should have told you ere now that I was astonished to behold Lord Stanfield come to Lord conquer’s while I was there: I had indeed heard that Lord Conquer, on falling, entirely exculpated his antagonist from having formed any malicious designs against him, owning himself the aggrestbr : this ingenuous proceeding had immediately brought the earl 
to visit him upon his recovery, and 
♦ v (=» 
[ ] 
the reception lord Conquer gave him renewed the intimacy which had Subsisted between them. 
Lord Stanfield was, I thought, rather Sweet upon lady Conquer, and I believe I was very much in his way : he could have difpensed with my absence, for he began fo grow more upon his guard, Seeing, me observe him. 
Before I left them I took lady Conquer into her dresting room, and desired her to pay a little attention to what I was going to Say to her, as stie well knew that I was “her real friend. 
She thanked me, and promised everything I could desire ere she had heard my lecture, and was insormed of what I intended to Say. 
I then told her that she was young, handsome, and above all F 4 ' new; 
f ^*^4 1 
new: every young fellow would be talking nonsense to her, and that if She listened to them, she would b undone : “The young fellows, my dear, whom you encourage, continued I, will be ready to believe, after what has lately happened, that they may easily triumph over you; and the character of Lord Conquer will not tend to lessen their presumptions. 
She Smiled, and Said she was very much obliged tome; but Seemed not to attend to me, as lady Conquer, in the manner she had done when Lucy Bellville: I therefore shortened my visit at that time, but not without resolving to See her again Soon, and to vv^arnher of the danger into which she Seems, 1 think, ready to run headlong. Not that I really imagine that she Vvsili be ever, with her own consent, corrupted, — No — she still looks 
as 
[ i I 
as Innocent as she is beautiful: but she is too young, and has had too little experience to be trusted without a friend to advise, toperfuade, and eyen to restain her, when launching out into the torrent of dissipation, without a guide. Her brother, next to her husband, who will, in a short time, if I am not much mistaken, give himself very little trouble about her, is the properest person : but it is a nice point to touch upon to bin;; I am at present quite out of favour, because I will not listen to the only Subject on which he chuses to con verse. Yet I will not give him up on hisjiftevs account — 1 will not. 
F 
LET[ 
[ 1 
L ET T E R XVIII 
From the Same to the Same. 
Oakly parfc. 
A M here again, and have behaved So very simply, that did I not believe a full consession of my follies Some sort of punishment for the commission of them, I should confine them to my own breast. 
I was not happy while Bellville shunned me: he told me just before I left the Park, that the continual sight of what he was never, he found, to poffess, had increased his uneasi ness So much as to make him determine to shut himself up, and try, by absence, to forget me; Such was his dcspairing Speech. 
Three 
[ i I 
/ 
Three days had I been at the Park ' without Seeing the least glimpse of him. I was, I confess, monstrously piqued at his folly, in persisting to keep So ridiculous a distance just as if I must be obliged to marry every man whom I Speak to. I thought he would have come, only to inquire after his sister, as he knew that I intended to see her. That inquiry would have been the finest excuse in the world for the concealment of his inclination, if he really had any for me. 
In Short, I could not bear this nonsensical, indifference any longer, and So I told my uncle I would take a walk with him to the Wood one 
morning. 
When we arrived there, his Servant conducted us into the parlour, and Said he would let his master (who was in the carden) know immcdiate f 6 lyj, 
[ ] 
ly i but I stopped him. ‘‘ We will go and find him ourselves, ’* Said I. 
My good uncle agreed to my pro posal, and discovered Bellville before I did. I believe I generally See as far as most people. 
I wandered on, certainly quite lost in thought; for I almost stumbled upon him, ere I knew where I was. On coming close to him (he lay upon the grass) I observed him looking earnestly on a miniature which he held in his hand — I could See it was thepidure of a woman. I will not tell you how I felt, but I will own that I advanced as softly as pos fible, in order to difcoverwho the favourite nymph was whose resem blance fo rooted his attention. 
He started up, and hustled the picture into his pocket, while I, Shocked to death at being caught in acting 
with 
I rs9 ] 
with So much indiscretion, Screamed, and ran away. 
He pursued me. Seized my hand, and gently drew me back, blushing at my folly, to a little green Seat, He then expressed a melancholy kind of pleasure at the unexpected sight of me. 
I believe I Said, with an ironical Smile, “that I was as little desired asexpeded.’* 
“What cruelty!” replied he, “could you but be Sensible of what I have felt, of what I still feel, on your account, you would not talk thus.” 
Tour Sensibility, Sir, ” Said I, rather warmly, “will not be much hurt, I imagine, on my account, while you have a favourite whose pidurc you carry in your pocket.” 
No Sooner had I pronounced these words in the most fretful tone, than 4 
[ iro J ' 
he instantly looked like another manr instead of a gloom in his countenance, there appeared the most enchanting Smile to be conceived. 
With an archness which I never had before observed in him, ‘‘ What would I not give, lady Camilla, ” Said he, “to have my conjedfures confirmed, and to be Sure that you are really jealous.” 
You cannot imagine. Burton, how Hooked : I almost think I hated him at that instant. I actually wondered at his assurance, and could not help crying out, while my face glowed with indignation, “Jealous, Sir !” Yes, my lovely creature, ” replied he, catching hold of both my hands, and looking eagerly in my face, “did you but know how this affected anger charms me !” 
“The insoient, ” Said I to myself, “now he appears in his true colours 
[ 111 I 
yet I could not help sighing at the Same time, while I struggled to dis engage myself, to think that I Should be So grossly deceived in the only man of whom had I a tolerable opinion : I could not bear it — I broke hastily from him, and rushed into a little labyrinth to hide myself from the sight of every living creature, till I had recovered from the confusion which the consciousness of my silly behaviour had occasioned. Would you believe it, louisa, I was weak enough to Shed tears — my heart was fo full it was ready to burst — I threw myself upon a seat in the most retired corner, took out my handkerchief, covered my face, and gave a free vent to the various sensations which distrefied me. 
Lifting up my eyes, after a heavy sigh, I Saw Bellville at my feet, holding the miniature in his hand. 
Forgive 
[ 112 ] 
me, my dear Lady Camilla, '’ cried he, with a voice tenderly Softened, ‘‘ forgive me; it is your own Sweet resemblance which you See — Did you imagine that I could admire any other pi<5lure but yours 
picture!” replied I, with an affected disdain, though I never felt myself more at ease, “a very likely thing indeed! How should you come at my picture. Sir? I am as Sure I never gave it you, as I am certain I never shall.” 
“Nay, ” Said he, now you carry your resentment too far; but if an ample confession of my fault would bring you to acknowledge sincerely, that you was provoked at my Supposed inconstancy, and that you are happy in finding yourself mistaken, I am ready to give Secret for Secret.” 
Here 
[ *13 J 
Here was an assurance!! — was' indeed provoked, but it was at myself, for not having been able to hide the movements of my heart from this penetrating impertinent. I re solved, however, to punish him as much as I could — “Well, ” Said I, “give me the picture, and tell me how you got it, and then I may possibly agree about what you sh“ 
“will never resign the picture, ” replied he, “unless you promise to give me the original.” 
Since then you are So obstinate, ” answered I, “take your own way.” 
Mr. Myron, at that instant, joined us, with Mr. Manwayring, who had been a few days with Bellville. The latter made a polite apology to me for his intrusion. 
I affur 
[ i ] 
1 assured him, with all the gaiety f could assume, that his company was never more welcome, and that I was coming to look for Mr. Myron, who would, I hoped, make him go home with us, 
“Have you then engaged my friend Said he, looking at Mr. bel ville, who Seemed to have lost his Spirits on a Sudden, and stood with his fine eyes anxioussy fixed an my face, 
I made no answer, Mr. Myron insisted upon their both dining with us. I was angry with Bellviile while he believed he could do as he pleased with me; but the moment he looked unhappy, my heart was no longer ateafe. 
Just before we parted, as the gentlemen were to dress and comie after us to the Park, Bellviile, under 
the 
r "5 ] 
the pretence of Showing me Some very fine exotics which he had lately purchased, put the picture into my hand, and with the most de jedted countenance imaginable, again begged my pardon for So clandestine a proceeding, but confessed, that as there was an eminent miniature painter down at Mr. ogden’s, who had taken Several likenesses in a very striking manner, without troubling the parties to sit in form to him, he was strongly tempted to procure mine adding, that since he was now perfectly convinced of his having no hopes to possess the original, he believed it his duty, out of respedt to me, to resign the copy. — “Sure I am, ” concluded he, “that it will be necessary for me, if I value my peace, to avoid both the one and the other as much as possible.” 
I took 
[ ] 
I took the picture : he behaved handsomely in giving it to me, did he not 
I Said nothing then but made him ample amends for my past carriage to him, all day long, by my good-humour. Yet I could not bring him into Spirits again, though I was strangely condescending: I talked to nobody but to him : 1 Sung to him, walked with him in the garden, and lent on his arm. — Nothing will do, I sindy if I don’t marry him. — What a pera verse creature it is! 
In Continuation. 
Bellville left us still melancholy; 
and I was- -- -- you believe me? 
fo silly, that I had half a mind to give him back his pitsture. 
The next morning, as soon as breakfast was over, Mr. Manwayring 
came 
1^7] 
■came in, as if by accident. My uncle was retired to his library. When I ordered the Servant to tell him who was come, Mr. manwavr ing stopped him. Saying, that his visit was to me, if I would do him the honour to let him sit with me for half an hour. 
I replied, that he would give me considerable pleasure by his company. His behaviour indeed is So polite, and his conversation So agreeable, that I have a better opinion of Bellville for his judgement in making choice of Such a friend. However, I was not a little Surprised at his opening, and you will, no doubt. Smile, when I tell you that I have pitched upon him for my friend also : but you shall immediately know why. 
He Soon came to the point. 
After a few well turned compliments to my person and understand[ 
[ ]........ 
; ing, &c^iie added, *’^v/hile I b.c." hold your ladyship with admiration and listen to you with delight, I cannot help feeling the sincerest concern, 
^ that by a levity in your carriage, and a desire to give pain to a heart which dotes on you to distradion, you should diminish the power of attractions, which, under a proper management, might render you Superior to your whole Sex. excuse me. Lady Camilla, ” continued he, feeing me draw up a little, “but as you are the loveliest of women in your person, and the most entertaining of women in your conversation, I cannot but earnestly wish your mind was not So exceptionable as it is. — Your trifling with my honest, my amiable friend, Bellville, leffensycz/, madam, as much as it distresses him. He loved you as Soon as he became. 
acquaint 

I i ] 
acquainted with you. What rnani of his age and taste, with a heart dis cngaged, could behold you with indifference! And as you appeared neither coy nor cruel, he hoped, by a respedisul tenderness^^ito gain your affections, but you refused him; and if you felt no inclination for him, you, by refusing him, acted honestly: but why, when he strove by absence to forget you, and drive you from his fond bosom, why would you agajn present yourself before him? Whywillyou, even at this time, pursue him, and force him to be miserable, by continually letting him see that he might, but for your coquetry, be happy? If you dislike either his person or his manners, you are, certainly not to be blamed for rejecting him; but then leave him for ever, and do not endeavour, by every enchanting 
[ '20 ] 
chanting art, to make yourself stillj s more lovely than nature has formedl you : do not wantonly increase V your power over a heart you every hour declare you never intend to ac i cept of — Let me only alk you a cou i pie of plain qucfions before I leave f this part of the country. Do you I not believe yourself guilty of inexcusable barbarity? and Should you like, 
^ fadmitting you were as capable of feeling the Same pafiion for Bellville as he felt for you) to be tortured thus ^ 
These last words, full of just reproach, struck home — Vexed to death as I was, I could not help saying“ “cannot imagine it possible for a man of Mr. bellville’s understanding to love a woman void of sensibility, as he Supposes me to be.^’ 
While I spoke, Burton, involuntary tears rolled down my face, and 
[ 121 ] 
convinced this stern man more than a thousand words, perhaps, would have done, that he had mistaken my character. He actually looked a shamed of having treated me So harshly. He begged my pardon, but I could not articulate it: I was too much moved with the strong description of bellville’s uneasiness on my account; yet I wsilhed to clear myself from imputations which I by no means deserved. I never was called a coquette: I always detested the name, and can truly say I never gave any man, whom 1 Solemnly did not intend to marry, encouragement; nor did I by this carriage, which Mr. Man way ing So vehemently condemned, mean to distress, or even to trifle with beli vllle. I liked him — I am afraid I may add, I loved him, almost as Soon as I law him; and nothing upon vol, I. G earth 
- [ j22 ] 
earth but the certainty of my being unhappy in the marisiage state could have brought me to reftise him. This I osten have told you, but you would never believe me; and this I told Mr. Manwayring. 
“And why, my lady, why should you be So certain of unhappiness, Said he, with a man who has all the requisites to ensure the felicity of the woman who loves him 
“1 don’t deny what you say about Mr. Eellville, Sir, I replied; I esteem him more than any man : and as I have So high an opinion of his character, and have had So many proofs of the arniableness of his manners, I wish to retain him as an agreeable acquaintance, as a valuable friend. One may certainly like a man’s conversation, and yet not chuse to marry him.” 
But[ 
[ ] 
“But if Bellville, madam. Said he, cannot coiwerse with you, without feeling his passion for you increase, would you not discover a kinder disposition by Shunning him entirely? Would you not also pay a properer attention to your reputation, by Seeing him no more, than to encourage him to dangle aster you, and occasion a thousand idle stories, which must lower you in the eyes of numbers if not in the esteem cf everybody? You vfill, probably, tell me, that yoii despise the censures of the envious and the malicious, and I now believe you do not deserve them, becaiife your intentions, are not criminal: but I hope your ladyship will stllowi that it is, better not to provoke the venomous tongue of stander.” 
“What then would you have me 
do, Sir V Said I. 
g2 
‘‘why, ^. 
[ 124 3 
« Why, really, replied he, I would have you marry Mr. Bellville, who certainly loves you, and who, I will venture to Say, deserves you; and if you are sincere when you declare you had no intention at all to flirt with him, why, neither he nor I, nor any person who has Seen you together, can question your loving him. He has more than once flattered himself with the thoughts of having given you pleasure, and yet I know not a man in the world who has less vanity. When I have Seen you solli citous to oblige him in numberless trifles, So defiroustof engaging him in conversation, and So inattentive to all the company but him alone, how could I rationally suppose but that you were as passionately fond of him as he was of you !’* 
Here, louisa, my face glowed like fire. What a strange unac 
[ ] 
countable man! To clear myself of this last charge, I told him the real truth. 1 own, Sir, Said I, that I had So much friendfiiip for Mr. Bellville as not to bear to see him unhappy : whenever he appeared So, I took the methods you have just now mentioned to enliven him, and to draw him out of a melancholy which hurt me, as L was vain onough to fed myself the cause, of it.’* 
“e’en marry him, madam, marry feim at once, ” Said he. “I own, Lady Camilla, I have but a poor opinion of violent friendships between two young amiable people of different Sexes, and will sincerely asifure you, that I never yet met with an attachment of that kind which did not in the end make the man a villain, and the woman — Something which I forbear, out of respect to G 3. your 
[ j26 ] 
your ladyship to mention. But Supposing it possible for a pure, refined, Platonic friendship to Subsist between two people of different Sexes, uncon netsted with love, yet, take my word for i*, the world will certainly Set them down for a couple of as downright lovers as ever followed the dictates of nature. Marry him, therefore, I say again, madam, or resolve to See him no more.” 
bless me, my dear Burton, how this man flurried my Spirits: I could not come to any Sort of resolution one way or other. At last, after being closely pressed, I told him that I had been So unhappy in*my f, rji marriage, that I dreaded nothing So much as a second. 
This declaration excited Mr. manwayring’s curiosity So much that he confessed himself very desirous of bein 

[ 12/ J 
ing acquainted with the Spring from which all my conjugal unhappiness stowed; and as I had no other apo logy to make for my rejection of Bcllvilie, I complied with his importunate request: but as my narrative, for So it may, I think, be called, will not come within this Sheet, I will send it in my next packet as I related it to him for your own inspedlion, as well as to prevent you from teasing me again with your interrogations concerning my reasons against a new engagement of the everlasting kind; reasons with which I have been till now too lazy to amuze you with. 
LETI 
^28 J 
LETTER XIX 
From the Same to the Same.! 
J Shall begin my little history at once, having a mortal aversion to long preambles. 
You were, I believe, in France when I first married. My father, you have often heard me Say, had a great desire to see me disposed of to his mind during his life j which desire, as I had lost my mother, was, they told me, a strong proof of his affection, and of his Solicitude about me. 
Mr. Myron, the eldest Son of the late Lord Conquer, was young, handsome, and had all the advantages arising from fortune and fashion to reo 

commend him to a gay giddy girl 
of 
r 12^9* I 
of Seventeen. He was also, or pretended to be, in love with me.; So that being possessed of a great Share of Sensibility, and having no other attachment, I naturally — where is the wonder? — found him, in a Short time, very agreeable; and as I received perpetual excitement both from his family and my own, to encourage my growing inclination, I Set no bounds to it but those which the modesty of a girl, brought up with rather more restraint than women of fashion generally are, pointed out to me. I will consess, likewise, that though I had a thousand terrors at the thoughts of my change of life,, yet my Sincere affection for Mr. Myron blunted almost every other sensa tion but the pleasing one which I felt on going to be united to him forever. 
G 
For[ 
[ I 
For about two months no woman upon earth was' ever more Satisfied with her hushand’s love than I was with Mr. myron’s j but after that time I perceived a considerable alteration in his behaviour to me. He was ever ready to frame Some excuse to leave me; ever in pursuit of Some new amusement; and whenever he was at home appeared either anxious and eager to be gone from me, or Sullen and silent when detained by any accidental occurrence; for as to myself I never offered to dispute his pleasure in anything. As I Soon Sound that I was entirely ignorant of the art to keep him, I only strove, to the utmost of my power, not to disgust the man whom I could not possibly please. But though I was dumb and Submissive in his presence, I gave way, in his absence, to my 
dis 
[ 13' ] 
discontent, and bitterly lamented thb loss of a heart I had for a while believed to be in my own poffellion. — Frequently, on his flinging from me with a chilling indifference which stabbed me to the Soul, have I ran to my glass to See if I was altered: I beheld no alteration in my features but that which the disquietude of the moment occasioned : nay. So far was my countenance from having lost its animated complexion,. or my eyes their lustre, that the former was heightened, and the latter grew more Sparkling in proportion to the resent ment Lfelt on being So cruelly neg letsted; in my own, perhaps partial opinion, So undeservedly. 
I did not, however, depend entirely upon my opinion with regard to the change in Mr. myron’s carriage to me. Wherever 1 came I found' G 6 all 
[ '32 J 
all the men unanimously of my way os thinking about it, and no woman had greater reason to be happy in her own eyes if the value of beauty was to be estimated by the number of its admirers. 
We retired as usual to green lands,. 
in N -- -- -- stiire, for the Summer Season. 
We were visited by all the neighbouring families, who, with Mr. Myron, were always Scheming new diversions: but as we were left to be company to each other for many more hours than would have lain heavy on our hands in London, wshere people are continually coming in, I Soon perceived that Mr. Myron was wearied to a degree with those hours of privacy and quiet, which, had he loved like me., would have been the most desirable ones of his life. At first I made no complaints; but neither 
did 
[ j33 ] 
did I strive, I must confess, to diversify our amusements: : was piqued by his indifference, and foolislily fancied, that by unabated fondness, I Should re attach him to me.. 
The very method I took to carry my designs into execution, defeated them : he grew absolutely Satiated with the endearments of a woman whose person alone liad charmed him, and having no taste for intellectual pleasures, he had no idear^s that tender friendihip which only can Supply the place of mere passion; and which, at all times, fills the heart of Sensibility with raptures far Superior to the highest transports Springing from fensual gratifications. He languished for V A RIE T Y, and repented every hour of having tied himself for life to one woman, as there were So many to be occasionally procured > be[ 
[ 1 
gan to sty from my caresses, and to appear totally disgusted with those. little winning ways which had once So violently charmed him. 
In consequence of his being heartily tired of his situation at green lands, we removed to London. 
As it was, I thought, my duty, as it certainly was my inclination, to accompany him, 1 told him lwas ready to leave a place which was no longer agreeable to him.’* 
He coolly replied, “that I might do as I would; but that for his part he should not stay long in any. place, -, and might, poshbiy, be not two days in town without changing his quarters, as the only pleasure in life was variety.” 
The negligence with which this ansivver was delivered, piqued my pride, and shocked my tenderness : 
how[ 
[ 3 
however, T strove to concealmy feelings : yet, still wishing to find Some remains of affection in him, I Said, “Do you not, then, expect me to go with you ?” 
“Why, no child, ” Said he, picking his teeth, and but just glancing his eyes towards me, a man would have a pretty time of it to have his wife follow him everywhere: that would be to drag his chains after him indeed, and mine are Sufficiently heavy where they are, ” 
“You repent then already, ” Said I, with my eyes full of tears, and my heart bursting with sighs, “of having married me ?” 
With a Smile of ironical pity, he replied, “Pretty fool! and So you thought we were to live and love, and bill and coo to the end of the chapter : but don’t cry, Camilla, I am 
dead 
I > 36 ] 
dead sick of the word wife j ust now; by and bye, perhaps, when I have had a little change in my diet, I may return with as much appetite as ever, but then you must not expect it to last. You are young, and know no better, my dear, and are whimpering for your husband as if he was your baby.” 
It is impossible for me to describe the grief and indignation which I alternately felt during the utterance of this taunting Speech. I never was inclined, and indeed totally unaccustomed to make sharp and ill natured answers, (having being always reasonably indulged by those wdio had the care of me from my earliest infancy,) but I could not. So provoked, help replying, as well as my tears (for I: was almost chraked with them); ' would let'me, That I was Sorry we 
thought 
[ >37 i 
thought So differently j that I confes fed that I was disappointed, as I had hoped, by marrying, to have found a tender friend, who would be as desirous of my Society as I was of lois that undoubtedly I was very young, but that youth was a fault Seldom complained of in women; and that as to, my want of experience in life, I had believed I should, by marrying a man of sense and character. Soon acquire knowledge of every kind, enough for the regulation of my conduct, which I should always try to render agreeable to the man Vvdio could be Sensible of my endeavours to oblige him.” 
He looked at me with a contemptuous Sneer while I was Speaking, and then Said, “you have shade me a very pretty Speech; have a good opinion of your own understund 
ingr. 
[ *38 J 
ing, and I am extremely happy iti having met with a woman with So many fine qualities.” 
Any answer to this Speech would have been Superfluous, as it would only have occasioned a more stinging reply. Besides, my heart quite Sunk within me at the treatment I had received. So very different from that which I had reason to expect from Mr. myron’s fondness for me, both before and after we were married. I therefore left the room to give an uninterrupted vent to my sighs and tears, which, instead of moving his pity, had only excited his mirth. 
With a cool kiss and a “goodbye, Camilla, ” he Set out the next morning for London. 
When he was out of sight my tears flowed afresh. I had flattered myself till there was no longer any 
room 
[ '39 3, 
room for hope, that when it came to the point he would not be able to leave me in So Short a time, after having appeared lb excessively fond of me — Were I to repeat the rapturous expressions he made use of 
while he was permitted to visit me 1 
as a lover, and till within a week of his quitting Grecnlands, as ahushand, they would Seem almost too extravagant to be credited. 
I shut myself up in my room. I wept till I could hardly See, and feigned myself sick (I was indeed far Srom being well) to apologise for my not feeing company. 
Three days I continued in this Solitary state, preyed upon by melancholy and discontent. Then, wearied with dwelling upon nothing but what was disiigreeable, I resolved to ^0 in Search of that peace which had 
fiown 
[ 14° J 
flown from me with Mr. Myron. Hope again prompted me to believe,, that he might possibly, by that time, wish to see meas much as I longesh to hthim. But I immediately checked that belief, by Saying to myself,. 
Why docs he not return to me ^ Why does he not at least Send for me to come to him?” Thinking, however, afterwards, that he had in all probability only a mind to discover the strength of my affection, I ordered the carriage to be got ready, and prepared to follow him. 
Just before I was going to step into it. Sir George Powers, a young baronet, who had a ssne estate a few miles from Greenlands, came to, pay me the compliment of inquiring after my health, as he had; heard Mr. Myron was gone to London, and had left me much indif posed. 
1 have. 
[ 14* ] 
I made Sir George but a short reply, only telling him abruptly, that I was going to London; tho’ he was a man on whom few women who had no attachments would have looked on with indifference. 
My answer did not intimidate him. He told me that he was quite happy in being engaged in a journey upon the Same road, as he should consequently have the honour of protedling me from any impertinence to which So lovely a creature, travelling with only a Servant, might be liable to. 
I replied, that I should be apprehensive of no insult in my chaise, and with my own people, and therefore would not give him the trouble of attending me. But there was no getting rid of him. He travelled as I travelled, stopped when I stopped, and among the member of flourishing 
[ 142 ] 
Speeches he addresled to me, took care to mix a word of astonishment that Myron could leave Such a woman in So short a time after being united to her. 
I made no answer but with my eyes, full of Scorn : my looks, however, gave no interruption to bis proceedings. He attended me to the very door of my house. 
As Soon as I entered I was informed that Mr. Myron had just Set oqt for Southampton. 
This intelligence occasioned new Sorrows to me : 1 had, however, no time to brood over it, as I received Soon afterwards an exprefsto acqi^aint me with my father’s being danger oufiy ill. The affection of the wife yielded to that of the daughter. I stew to give him every tender mark of filial duty in my power; but I was too late — He had lost his intellects 
[ h3 ] 
ledts before I readied his chamber; and I was lest at little more than Seventeen, without a friend in the world. 
I had, it is true, a numerous acquaintance; but of what Service are mere visiters in the hour of affliction? people who only have been your companions in pleasurable parties, and who sty from the house of grief with as much celerity as if it was contagious. 
my dear louisa, were, at that time, with Mrs.burton in France; and if you remember, our intimacy did not commence till I became a widow. 
I was now more deeply afflicted than ever I had yet been : and my afflictions were the more Severe as my husband was not with me to' lighten it by participation. Not that I wished to have him made uneasy: I only wished to have him to be So far Sen[ 
[ ] 
fible of my distress as to be induced to life his utmost entieavours to remove it, or at least to render it more Supportable. 
As the death of my father made his presence in London necessary, he returned the day after he was informed of that event — But my hand is tired, my louisa; you shall have the remainder of my narrative in another letter. 
LETTER XX 
From the Same to the Same. 
[Continuation of the Narrative begun in the preceding Letter.] 
WHEN I heard that Mr Myron was at the door, I stew to him with open arms, hoping I might be permitted to shed my 
tears 
I HSI 
tears on the bosom of the man who had. been my lover, who was my husband, and in whom I wished to find a comforter, a protector, a friend. -- -- But I was cruelly disappointed. 

He nightly kissed my cheek, and cried, “What, always in tears, Camilla! — Come, come, my dear, dry your eyes, old people cannot live for ever — Here, Jones, ’* continued he, turning to his Servant, have you ordered my mourning?” Then re addreffing himself to me, “I think, child, you had better go back to green lands till we can apperin public; it will be mighty dull for you to be shut up in town.” 
‘V Any place with you, Sir, ” said I, sighing, “will be the most desirable place' to me — I have no other friend — ” 
vol. I. H ‘‘friend!* 
[ h6 I. 
“Friend!” Said he, repeating the' word with a careless tone and half a Smile, what dost talk of friends for, child? The fortunate have always friends. You have nothing to do now, Camilla, but to please yourself, As I am assured of your discretion, I shall leave you to your own condudf, my dear.” 
“Leave me, ” replied I, you don’t intend, I hope, Mr. Myron, to be So long absent again.” 
After a loud laugh at my simplicity, I suppose, he Said, ‘ * Why Sure, child, you don’t imagine I am to be tied to your apron strings — fond wives, Camilla, make coolhushands: but yet I protest, child, there is Such a "Je northeast fcai quoi about thee, that let me die if I do not believe I shall never be tired of thee, though at present I am in chase of as sine a girl as — 
Here 
I 147 ] 
Here all my patience forsook me. Do you tell me this, Mr. Myron, ” Said I, interrupting him, “by way os consolation? or have you only a mind to try my temper, already terribly affected by the loss of the most indulgent of fathers, the best of friends ?” 
“Ay, upon my Soul, I did not think of that just now, I must confess” ” he; “but you are too serious to be in a humour for raillery, I See, and as I hate whining as I hate the devil, we shall be but stupid companions — I will therefore call at Lord scamper’s and — ” 
Stay, Mr. Myron, Said I, laying my hand on his arm; stay, and tell me if I have really done anything to change your tenderness into this dreadful indifference j or does th very great alteration in your behavi h 2 our 
[ 148 ] 
our to me only arise from the natural iickleness of your disposition 
‘‘ Entirely, child, ” Said he, No, no, I have just told you that you were mighty discreet — I would not have you imagine though that I am more sickle than any young Sellows of my age and person, (Surveying himseif in the glass) all men when they have got the women they wanted, grow cursedly tired in a much shorter time than I have been, and So you will find when you come to know a little more of the world.” 
“I desire then never to know the world, nor man, nor woman, nor anything, ” cried I, in a sit of downright despair: “since all my hopes of reciprocal affection with the man on whom my heart doted are vanished, I give up felicity for ever.” 
Poor 
I 149 1 
Poor girl !’* replied he, with a sheering Smile on me as I Sat Sobbing in my chair; “But indeed you are quite a Spoilt child — Your head, Camilla, is absolutely turned. I am afraid you have read too many romances, in which the men are all drawn sighing, dying, lying dogs, and the poor nymphs Soft, tender, melting things, my pretty Camilla; in which they talk of nothing but everlasting love and eternal constancy, and jurnble together Such a heap f inconsistencies, that it requires a very strong head to comprehend the meaning of them. Dry your eyes, dry your eyes, I tell you j wash your face, and See whether you look best with or without powder, and consult with your Woman what complexion will best Suit with your Sables.” 
The last Sentence, by throwing into So ludicrous a light the Solemn 
H 
ap[ 
[ ] 
appearance I was to make, deprived me almost of my reason, and drew from me an answer which I am as unable as unwilling to recollect. I remember only that the words barbarous, unkind, and injurious, were frequently repeated, and uttered with a voice So exprestive of the bitterness of my grief, and the keenness of my resentment, that he replied, If your ladyship is disposed to quarrel with me for endeavouring, by a little gentle raillery, to draw you out of your melancholy, I must quit the house, for I shall not stay to be insulted in it.’* 
I cannot describe, my dear Burton, what I felt at this threat — Now I glowed with rage at his relenting a behaviour which he had, by his own wanton cruelty, occasioned; and now I melted in floods of tears at the thoughts of having lost a heart So 
lately, 
[ II ] 
lately, I believed, attached to tn alone. But neither my tears nor my resentful looks had any effect upon him. He left me with indignation, and never returned the man I had once known him, the man I So ardently wished to See him. — Yet I could not drive from my breast the dear image of the once loved, once charming Myron — But the recollection of what I Suffered with hiniy has made me resolve never to put it into the power of another husband to use me in the Same manner. It was Some time however before I had occasion to know whether I had strength enough to keep that resolution, 
Mr. Myron left me agreeably to his menace, and I was really too much afflicted by my father’s death to See company. I shut myself up, therefore, till I grew weary of my H 4 beings 
[ 112 ] 
beings and of everything in the world. 
After having lived in a very re cluse manner for near four months, (during which Mr. Myron, who had taken a girl into keeping, as I was informed, called at home twice or thrice, saw me, was barely civil, and returned back to the place from whence he came) I received my friends, paid visits, and appeared now and then in public: but I Soon experienced all the ill consequences northeast ceftarily arising from an union with a man of loose principles. 
As I was still young, and from the behaviour of the men not frightful, I had a numerous train of admirers; too many of whom, presuming upon the indifference and negletst of an inconstant husband, formed hopes as iniurious to my honour as 
their 
t 153 I 
their freedoms were disagreeable to me. Whatever you, my friend, or Mr. Manwayring may think of me, from my partiality to Bellville, I have no idea of any passion that is not attended with resoedt and esteem, 
X \ 
neither of which could accompany an inclination for a woman already engaged by the most Sacred ties, Mr, myron’s infidelity would not authorise a breach of the marriage vow in me, Supposing I had been inclined to infringe it: but I actually loved Myron, loved him notwithstanding all his coldness and his contempt; even notwithstanding his detestable principles, which deprived him of the real, stubstantial, and permanent happiness arising from virtuous love, to which he was ever actraneer.^ — Oh! louisa! 
o 
with what flattering expectations did I enter into the marriage state with him 1 H 5 Among 
[ 154 ] 
Among the sighing danglers who crowded round me. Sir George Powers was the foremost, and would not for a considerable time (though he had vainly attacked me before I came to town) relinquish hopes which could never be gratified; fo that I was at length forced to retire into the country, and almost Shut myself up, before theridiculous herd of coxcombs could believe it possible for a woman in the prime of life, and wedded to a man totally infensibleand negligent of her, could be fo very coy to every man but that husband, who might have been, I will venture to say, the happiest, as well as the most beloved of men, had he been able to Subdue passions which only hurried him to Iris destruction. 
A violent fever carried him off in less than a twelvemonth after our 
marriage. 
I 155 I 
He was brought home danger oufiy ill to his house in grosvenor street. I hastened to town with my heart once more beating with hope, that he would be restored to my prayers; that my Solicitude for his recovery, my constant attention to procure him everything most conducive to his ease and felicity, would revive a pastion which had So long lain dormant, but he appeared almost insensible to everything during his illness, and expired without discovering any particular marks of Satisfaction or any disgust to me. 
I will not pretend to Say that I as deeply regretted him as if he had loved me better; but I felt enough to make me desire to return to my retreat, in which I happily became acquainted withyc^/, my dear Burton, my agreeable, cheerful neighbour and ’ H 6 friend. 
r 156 ] 
friend, Tou^ ignorant of the real motives by which I was actuated, insensibly drew me from retirement into the world again. From your real affection for me, which made you wish me happy, and from your sincere opinion that my happiness could not be So complete while I am single, as if what you call well married, you proposed openly to me Lord Stanfield. Finding me not ta entertain Sentiments in favour of his lordship, you endeavoured to persuade me to like a connedlion with his brother: your designs have both proved unfuccessful, because I do not approve of the characters of the men, and because I am convinced by fatal experience, as I have told you before, that the woman must be miserable who is wedded to a man void of honour. Mr. Bellville is the only man 
I have 
[ 157 I 
I have met with who appears poffef sed of those principles which caa alone render him fit to be trusted t but even those principles cannot keep his eyes from wandering to, nor his heart being charmed by, a newiob jedl, though they may prevent hina from indiscreetly indulging his pas fion; and I freely declare you that though I very ill Supported Mr. myron’s negledf, I Should feel bellville’s indifference So much more acutely, that it would, I fancy, bereave me of my reason. Should I not therefore be guilty of the extremest folly to deprive myself of the tranquillity which I at present enjoy? 
This question, which I put to Mr. Man wayring at the cfose of the above narration, was immediately a nswer ed by him in the following terms: 
Your ladyship then, by your own 
con 
r 158 ] 
confession, must certainly feel a much stronger passion for Mr. bell ville at this moment, than you ever felt for Mr. Myron.’" 
I blushed like Scarlet at this home truth, but was silent, 
“And do you not think, ” continued he, that you will discover great weakness in depriving your self of a certain felicity, by not consenting to be the wife of a man whom you love, and by whom you are tenderly beloved, only from an irrational apprehension that this man should behave like Mr. Myron, who is totally z/?2 like him in every respeist. If you cannot indeed be contented with a husband, unless he is always in ecstasies and transports, you will undoubtedly be disappointed; but if you can be Satisfied with a tender iinalterable affection, a Sober, 
Set[ 
[ 3 
fettled esteem, you will, I venture my life, be happy with my young friend.’" 
“That Mr. bellvule will always treat me with good manners, Sir, I am very ready to believe, and if I fall not into errors, through perverseness, he will, I doubt not, think me worthy of his esteem. So far I look upon him quite Superior tomr.myron, or I could not have So high an opinion of him: but the best of men cannot help being delighted with one woman, and disgusted with another — Bellville, should he behave to me evce So well, yet at the same time liked another better (and jealousy is eagle eyed) would make me the most miserable of women. Shall I not therefore acst more prudently never to expo Sc my Seif to Such a hazard 
“Doubt[ 
[ J 
“doubtless, Madam, ’* replied be, if your fears are too strong to be conquered; but then you ought, ia honour to yourself, and pity to him to break off an acquaintance that can be of no Service, and that only tends to make him very wretched, as he cannot converse with you, without finding his passion increase too much to let him enjoy any peace unless you were kinder; whereas time and absence might make him think of Some other woman when you have banished him from your Society, ” ' 
I made no answer to this Speech : but I shuddered at the conclusion of it — What will become of me, Burton } You will, I know, call me capricious : I know that Manwayring thinks me So; and perhaps I am, for I can neither be happy with Bellville, nor without him. — His 
friend. 
[ ii ] 
friend, however, took his leave of me with great politeness, and Said that if I could pardon the liberty he had taken, with the Sole view of Serving his friend, he would entreat me to give him leave to visit me Sometimes. 
As I really could pardon very readily everything he had Spoken but what related to that other woman I replied, “that I should be glad to See him among my other fiicnds.” 
Now tell me freely, Burton, what you think of all this. 
Q v ic : 


.yru 
L E T[ 
[ 
LETTER XXI 
From the Same to the Same, * 
I AM in London, but weary of the place, weary of myself, weary of the whole world. 
I staid three or four days after Mr, manwa/ring’s visit at the Park, but heard no news about Bellville. He has been trying his friend’s recipe I fuppose, another woman and has Succeeded. — Well, be it So — a man who could change So Soon could not be^violently in love, nd consequently would not have Suited me — I was right, you See, to refuse him — Yet — Oh, louisa! I must tell you all my folly — what have I not felt during these melancholy tedious hours. 
I arrived in grosvenor Street more dead than alive, my first visit was 
[ 163 I 
to lord conquers. bellville’s lovely likeness, his dear thoughtless sister, is become a woman of the world, and makes herself mighty easy, I believe, about her husband. She loves him too, I fancy, in her way; but she will certainly not pine herself to death at his inconstancy. She gives, him, I dare engage. Sufficient encouragement to be fickle. How beautiful did she look I She fie w to me with Smiles So like her brother’s, that I almost thought I Saw him in her clothes. Sweet girl! — But she is no longer the amiable rustic which I formerly So much admired — She has caught all the elegance of a court: but with its elegance she has caught, I am afraid, all its follies, I will not say any more concerning her, till I make farther observations on her behaviour. 
She 
[ i64 ], 
She pressed me to stay dinner, and I complied, hoping to have the whole day to prate of Rellville; but how was I mistaken! 
We had Scarce been alone a quarter of an hour, when there entered a ' crowd of morning visiters : my lady tbit., and my lady that with lords, baronets, colonels, c— — curious melange 1 .affure you — With each of them her young ladyship was quite lively, easy, and familiar, ready to entertain, and to be entertained. 
As I Sat Silent, being willing to make all the remarks I could, Lucy told me I was grown very Serious, asked me if I was not well, and tried to exhibit me as well as herself to the company; but her efforts would not do — However, I promised to be of her party to the opera, not from the stightest inclination to appear in public[ 
[ I 
lie, but purely to watch her, for I do not think that She is in a right way. 
In Continuation. 
I returned from the opera-house out of humour with everything. My once innocent Lucy is become an arrant coquette, but one of the most: enchanting ones that ever existed. Your old friend, lord Stanfield, is still buzzing abonther, and myhandsome gentle Edward too seems to be quite taken in : he did not appear to be So when he Saw her in the country; but men are given to change. — I don’t think stie is averse to Mm neither; and yet I Swear, I believe, from what I have Seen of her behaviour to lord Conquer, that if it had been possible for him to make a good husband, she 
would 
f 166 3 
would have made one of the best of wives; but being left to herself, as my lord was always flying from her in pursuit of new pleasures, stic was Soon Surrounded by pretty fellows, who practised every Seducing art to render themselves favourites in her eyes, and there are, I think, now Small hopes of her reformation. For her own Sake however, forbellville’s sake, I will make an effort to Save her. 
I endeavoured to let her See, by my carriage, that I did not approve of her trifling with the men, but She paid little regard tome : I was indeed So teased all the evening by the provoking afiiduities of Lord Merton, whom I met at Lady conquer’s the day before, that I was prevented from doing what I designed. 
The moment the entertainment was over Lord Merton took my hand. 
[ i I 
Stanfield and Moil each Seized one of Lady conquer’s, and So between the two brothers, the beautiful laughing little hoyden was led to the coach, the rest following. 
As the men Supped with us there was no Speaking that Eighty though I was determined to outstay them, through real charity to her, and would willingly have sat up till morning could I have hoped to gain the point I So earnestly wished for. 
Before they thought of going, in came lord Conquer. 
Lord Stanfield ran to him with open arms. We have just come from the Haymarket, my Lord — I have taken care of my Lady. 
The husband, for George was at that moment perfetstly a married man with a Surly air replied, “I am obliged to you all, gentlemen, for taking 
I 168 ] 
king care of my wife, ” — Softly adding “d — n her.” 
Looking round, he Saw me. 
Lady Camilla, too 1 — 1 can trust hr with your ladyship.” 
Lucy then went up to him, and taking his hand, cried, in a wheedling tone, looking fondly at him at the same time, “and canst you trust me with anybody? not your own Lucy! Come Georgy, sit down, you look fatigued — bring up the Supper again.” (Speaking to the Servants.) 
She then Sat down by him, threw her pretty white arm round his neck, and in a Soothing voice asked him if he was not well. 
“Coaxing hussy, ” Said my lord. 
The men took the hint, all rose, Lord Stanfield Said he should go out of town next morning, and Lord Merton begged Lord Conquerto give him leave to wait my hoiir of returning 
I 189 ] 
Ing home, that he might 
attend 
me. 
“Oh! to be Sure, my lord, ” replied he, gravely bowing, while I insisted upon his not staying for me, as I knew not when I should go, and had Servants. 
The peremptory air with which I Spoke those words, made Lord Merton, I believe, think it best ta move off; though he looked aa if he could be exceedingly troublesome. 
When Lord and Lady Conquer and I were left, my lady, with great good nature, strove, by a number of little attentions, to please, andto bring him into humour; but he was rather peevish : there was Something, however, So extremely winning in her manner, that it was almost impossible to resist her. Yet, I consess, I 
vol, I. X should 
■ [ '7° ] 
should have thouo; ht a little more re serve, even to her husband, before other men, would have been better. The groffest men Seldom overlook, or fail being'disgusted with the least indelicacy in their wives; but this poor young thing has been entirely Spoilt by marrying Such a man as Lord Conquer, who treated her from the first like what be designed her to be, only his mistress. That treatment, and the frequent visits of his debauched companions, have given her unbecoming airs — I don’t Say that she has lost entirely the look of innocence and modesty, which was ever So Sweetly charming in her, and which would melt any heart but Lord conquer’s. He is, I think, almost weary of her; yet, might he not be recalled by a discrcet behaviour? At least her flirting with others 
will 
[ '71 ] 
will only drive him still farther from her. 
■ As Soon as I got rid of Lord Merton, I left them, and went home, determined to call the next morning, and talk very Serioussy with Lucy. 
I went early, and was Surprised to find Moil fitting close by her, with a book in his hand, t6 Save appearances, I suppose. 
She Was in the most elegant un dress that could be fancied, and reclined in an easy chair. On my entrance Site made a motion to rise; but I desired her not to disturb herself, as I concluded she was not well, from every appearance of ill health, except in her countenance, which never looked more brilliant. 
“What a rosy bloom indeed !” cried Moil, gazing eagerly on her, I 2 while 
[ 172 ] 
while he Softly pressed her hand, yet what a delicious languor is there in those charming'eyes !’* 
** psiiaw, ’'replied She, withdrawing her hand, and patting his, “what nonsensc — But indeed, my dear lady Camilla, ” continued She, “I am almost dead with the headache— — the way (he is with child) — My lord, you Saw how he came home last night, has not had any rest, and I rose early to Send for Some advice for him.” 
“What, is he sick then? Said I.” Yes, ” answered She, he drank too much last night; has had doctor Faddle this morning, taken a draught, and is now trying to compose himself.” 
I lifted up my hands and eyes, while Moil endeavoured to bring us into Something like conversation. 
[ J7J I 
Lucy was ready enough; but as he found tm very reserved, he Soon took his leave, ^ 
Rejoiced at his absence, I now thought I had gained the wished for opportunity, and alked Lady Conquer how she came to admit Moil wheoir my lord was ill, and herself alone. With all the naivete imaginable, she cried, I quite forgot to Send down orders to the porter, to be denied to everybody, and Moil is always calling upon us; we don’t make any stranger of him.” 
“So I find, ” replied I. 
“But we have nothing to do with his visits, for I dare Swear he only comes to See your ladyship.” 
“And do you not conceive the danger, ” Said I of letting Such a fine young fellow visit you at all hours? and when my lord is sick, or when he is abroad ?” 
I 3 I de[ 
[ ] 
“I declare I never thought about him” ” she : ‘‘ he is lord stanfield’s brother, you know, who is Lord conquer’s friend, and iny friend also;; I cannot well differ with a man of family to whom I am under Such obligatiqn§c^ -- r: : : =, »^ 
“discreet woman, ” replied I, \ will be under obligations to no j body but to her husband.” j 
“Well, but my dear Lady Camilla, you know that I was unsortu nately circumstanced, and that he was of great Service to me.” 
“those obligations, as you call them, will, in hisopinion, be cancelled by that part of his behaviour which deserved them, if he is a man of nice honour. No man ought to reckon upon a Service done to a woman in distress, because it may be impostible for her (as in your cafe) to repay him 
for 
[ J I 
for it but by general civility; and indeed to a generous mind, the remembrance of a cood acstion is a suf ficient reward for it. When vve are urged only by mercenary motives to do good, we hardly deserve thanks for doing it. No, my dear Lady con* quer, the pleasure arising from having been Serviceable to another, is air ample recompense.” 
“Well, I don’t suppose” Said she eagerly, “that they expect anything but politeness j they are certainly in titled to that.” 
“And So you would think your sslf impolite, by refusing to see Mr. Moil, Lord Stanfield, or indeed any man when yoii were alone, attending on my lord, or at any other improper time.” 
She blushed a little, and cast down her Sweet eyes : then raising them I 4 up 
f J 
tip all at once, she threw her arm round my neck, and with a Smile of simplicity and good-humour — (Oh how like her brother did she look!) cried, ** My dear Lady Camilla, don't be angry; if I have been wrong, I am very Sorry for it — I am indeed." 
Bewitching girl," replied I, ** don’t Say a word more to flatter me from my purpose, I came to talk Serioufiy with you, to tell you in how dangerous a situation you are, merely for want of reflection. As you are So young, and So pretty, and married to a man So careless of his own reputation, you ought to be the more Solicitous to preserve yours; for Such men are but too often the first to condemn the very faults in their wives of which they are guilty them selves, and the readiest to be disgusted at them. I have known many a sober 
man 
[ 177 J 
man put up with, and excuse fallings in a woman, for which a libertine would have almost murdered her, jfconsider, therefore, my dear Lady Conquer, before it is too late, how I difficult it is, with the nicest and niofir! guarded behaviour, to escape detraction. Can then expect toescape who think not at all about it? I will believe you intend no harm at present; but that unreserved behaviour, that easy, playful familiarity with men, artful enough to seize an opportunity So heedlessly given them, may, in the end, prove fatal both to your character and peace. You will say possibly, that my lords neglect: authorises you to receive the polite neffes of other men; but take care, his errors can never apologise for jours— — are only answerable for gurselves. Besides, by a more cir cumspedt and discreet carriage, you. - I 5 
[^78] 
may, in time, make my lord So Sensible of your Superiority in point of ^ merit to the women with whom he, associates, as to gain him entirely from ' them, and six him yours for ever : ' and from what can a woman derive • more honour, than from her having been able not only to preserve her hushand’s heart, but to lure him from his vices, to render him happy here, and worthy of felicity in a future 
state jt__ — — -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 
Here I stopped, that I might not overwhelm her with more than she could take in at once. 
She thanked me for my friendly admonitions and gentle reproofs; but they made, I thought, little or no impreshon upon her. I did not, however, take leave of her till I had pointed out even the minutest dangers to which her unaltered conduct 
might 
[ 179 J 
might expose her; and begged her, with all the warmth of friendship, to resist, at the very first, every excitement to improper pleasure, ‘‘.by improper pleasures, my dear, I mean those” continued I, “which tend to make a woman deviate from the paths of discretion. As a woman you should oppose, with all your strerigth, every temptation to Such pleasures; and as a wife you should doubly fortify yourself against them. Above all things avoid the stightest appearance of evil: many a married woman has lost her reputation without having her virtue impeached • and consequently with her reputation, the affection of her husband and the esteem of her friends.” 
I am. indeed very much afraid that this unthinking creature will occasion great uneafiness toher family; and! 
I 6 ' actually 
[ ’iso ] 
adually tremble at the apprehension 'of what I foresee, but what it will not be in my power to prevent. 
LETTER XXII From the Same to the Same, ' 
IH A V'E visited Lady Conquer almost 'every day since I wrote to you. Notwithstanding the sly insinuation in your last, I have been unlucky enough never to meet with Bellville.. I have indeed often, very often, met Lcrd Merton, who applies himself So asiiduoufly to please me, that if I cannot make him Sensible of his inability to touch my heart, I must give up my favourite Scheme upon Lucy, who has So far 
Forgot 
r i ] 
forgot her brother’s interest, that Ilia has even Solicited me on Lord merton’s account. What a poor giddy creature stie is grown! and So I told her, adding, that after my having rcfused Bellville, She might be assured I ishould never have anybody else. 'Yet, Merton, I believe, thinks to win me by downright obstinate perscver ance. He studies my taste and ray humour in everything, finds eery thing to admire in me, and nothing to disapprove of — Oh! how Soon would the tables be turned, were I inclined to take him at his word!. but I detest those flatterers. I See my own faults, and love them best who point them out to me. Men who say just as I Say, and do just as I do, are mere shadows: one may as well converse with one’s own image in a glass, as with Such insipid echoes. 
4 .1 have 
[ >82 ] 
I have no creature to Speak to here: I must go down to my good Mr. Myron again.. ' 
Bellvilie has quite forgot me: he will not accept of me oily as a friend — Manwayring does not approve of Such friendships— — had better have conversed with me upon my own terms — He might have, by this time, perhaps — but I will not discover all my weakness — I know that I am excessively out of humour just now : nothing pleases me; nor do I imagine that change of place would mend me — I would have — 
I don’t know what I would have — I would fiy from myself— — can write no more now — I will throw away my pen, and not take it up again till I am capable of Saying Something less trying to your patience. 
la 
[ >83 ] 
In Continuation. 
How dreadfully have I been alarmed! — I am Scarce yet Sufficiently recovered to tell you what has happened. 
I went yesterday morning to Lord conquer’s, as usual — Her pretty ladyship was sitting in the midst of Some of the gayest fellows in town. 
Lord Merton stew to place me most agreeably to himself, that is, where he could have a Seat by my fide. I know not what was the matter with me, but I was not in Spirits to make the accustomed resistance to his tiresome Socilitude about me, I felt an unaccountable nonchalance. 
I was absolutely inattentive to all that he was Saying, and he could dray from me only monosyllables. 
On 
[ i84- 1 
On a Sudden, Lady Conquer,, (starting up from her chair,, asked me if I had got the fine agate box', mounted in gold, which fiie So much admired, in my pocket, as She wanted to Show it to Sir William Wilbey. On my replying in the affirmative,, the baronet rose to look at it, and after it had been handed round the room, to the ladies, as well as to the gentlemen, it came into Lord merton’s possession, who Said fo many fine things about it, and kept it fo long, admiring its beauties, that I began to grow tired of listening to him. 
Turning to Speak to Lady Susan Joylove, who should come in but Bellville. 
I' I felt my face in a glow, and drew out my handkerchief to hide it, while he paid his circular compliments, not forgetting me among 
the 
I >85 ] 
the rest. “Who is he ?’^ whisper ed Lord Merton, “he is a very pretty gentleman.’* ‘‘ Lady con quer*s brother, ” Said I, with aa emotion which I strove in vain to suppress. 
Merton looked at him, and then at me, with eyes, as if he wislred to dive into my Soul. You cannot think how I hated him. 
All at once, recolledling my box, which I had forgot, I alked him for it, 
I know not how to part with it, ” replied he. Softly; “do, let us make an exchange: I have one which I brought from Paris, which I am Sure you will like better.” 
‘‘ Indeed but I sha’nst, Said I, and.; therefore, give me my own.” 
Never, ” answeredhe, looking at me in a very insolsnt manner; I will 
keep 
f i86 ] 
keep it, out of a tender respect for the dear hand which gave it to rnep “I never gave it to you, Sir, ” replied I, loudly “and I will have it.” ‘‘ Why then, positively, ” Said he,, between jest and earnest, “I will not part with it.” 
“Not part with it, my lord !” Said. I, full of anger and disdain;; “part with, my box, which you received from one of the company, only .to look at it.” 
“No! never!” answeredhe, ^ pressing my hand; but you have my heart, my Soul, and all that belongs, to me in return.” 
“You grow insolent, my lord, ” Lid I, raising my voice, and struggling to get from him. 
Belville, at that moment, starting up,, and flying cross the room to us, cried, “what’s the matter. Lady 
Camilla? 
[ i87 ] 
Camilla? Will you give me leave to, offer my Service ?” 
Nothing, Mr. Bellvsille, ” Said I, trembling. 
“Nothing! Surely you would not be thus alarmed about nothing ?” 
“It is certainly nothing to jyouf* Sir, replied Merton; “though it is very impertinent in you to interpose between a lady and me.” 
“The impertinence is entirely on joitr fide, ” Said Bellville, in a tone which increased my terrors; “I Shall therefore insist upon your complying with the lady’s commands, whatever they are.” 
“I have no commands, Bellville, ” answered I, hardly able to articulate these words, through tenderness and fear. 
“I stiall not be dicstated to by you, Sir, ” Said Merton, fiercely. 
“You 
[ i ] 
You fiall return the box to thet lady, is She chusestohave it, ” replied Bcllville, fiercely. 
“I Sir!’*^ Said Merton, quite furious with anger, “I am not used to take Such language; nor shall you dare to give it me with impunity, ’*" i — drawing his Sword half out of the Scabbard, at the sight of which I Screamed, and laid my hand on bellville’s arm, to stop him j but hist Sword was out in a moment. 
The men interposed, the women Shrieked— —! violently than the rest — they made, however, passes at each other before it was possible to Separate them. 
Lord merton’s Sword pierced bellville’s fide; but on his drawing it out, Bellville had addrefe enough to dis arm him, while he, foaming with, rage, was held by Sir William, Colonel Pike, and Moil,. 
I ■ 89 1 
Frantic with my fears, I rantobell ■ville, and forgetting who was pre lent, cried, “My dear Bsllville, are you not dangeroufiy wounded? — For heaven’s Sake, ” continued I, to Lady Conquer, who was ia tears for her brother on the other fide of him. Send for a Surgeon directly“ 
“is no occasion for one, ” Said he, leading me to a Sopha, and sitting down by me, it is nothing but a Scratch. “But you are very much frighted. Lady Camilla: I sincerely afic your pardon; but I could not stand tamely by and See you insulted.” 
I was indeed ready to saint! I was never So ill. 
The men, who all condemned Lord merton’s rashness, ran for drops, cc. Bellville held one ef my hands in his, and with the 
other. 
[ 190 j 
Other, an eau de luce bottle to my nose. His tender solicitude, and repeated assurances that he was not much hurt, focn restored me. 
Lord Merton, havin; ^ been in the miean time convinced by Sir William and the Colonel, that the vt/armth of his temper had hurried him to acst in an unjustifiable manner, and that his whole behaviour had been extremely indiscreet, came to us, (with a very ill grace, I thought, and a mortified countenance) made a complimient to Eeliville, and restored my box to me, with an apology for having detained it. 
I made no reply: I hated the sight of him, and only entreated Bellville to let a Surgeon See whether he had received much hurt. 
While I was Speaking, the Surgeon came, and Bellville withdrew 
with 
[ ii ] 
with the gentleman into the next parlour. 
They Soon returned, and Said, that the wound was a mere trifle; of no Sort of con Sequence. 
Lady Conquer would have per suaded her brother to stay and take up his lodging with her while he remained in town; but telling her that he had promised to be at manwayring’s, who was hourly expected in town, and that he must go immediately, he took leave of us. But though Lord Merton had made his adieus besore, I could not Suffer Bellville to depart till he had assured me this affair stiould go no farther. — I have a thousand fears, in Spite of all his assurances— — ever I — I who have So true an esteem for him, stiould have endangered his life! The thoughts of having endangered it L ■ distradl 
[ 192 ] 
'distrad: me — I Send John every two hours to know how he does. 
In Continuation. 
Soon after I Sat down to break sast, though I could not touch a bit of anything, Bellville entered the room, and almost overturned the table, by his precipitate advances to me. 
I Scarce knew what I Said or did; but I know he caught me in his arms, with a warmth and eagerness he had never before attempted, and which friendship, I thought, would not allow of; therefore broke from him — “Hold, Mr. Bellville, ” Said I, with all the resolution I could mus ter up on Such an emergency — “Mr. Bellville !” replied he — stepping back, and looking petrified at 
my 
[ 193 ] 
my coldness— — was your dear Bellville yesterday.” 
“Oh! donsttalk of yesterday, Said I — yesterday I was frighted out of my senses, because I thought you was dangerousty wounded.” 
“Would to heaven, ” Said he, “I had been covered with wounds to have kept your tender fears for my Safety alive — the gentle pity which you yesterday fo charmingly expressed — 
“Horrid!” Said I, with my eyes full of tears, occasioned by the dreadful ideas which he had raised in my mind j “do you then wish me So ill as to See the brother of my Lucy in that terrible condition ?” 
“I know not what I wish, replied he, coolly, since I can never, by my most ardent pashon for you, nor by any other means, warm your heart vol, I. K with 
[ j94 ] 
with sensations equal to those I feel at this instant in my fond liosom.” 
An impertinent morning visiter, as Soon as he had pronounced thesc words, entered, and staid Such an unconscionable while, that Bellville got up (in a pet, I suppose) and left the room with an indifference (real or affected) which mortified me beyond expression. 
I had no peace all day — no rest all night— — having time even to aste him how he did — I never was fo disturbed : I waited all the next day, expedling to see him every hour, but was cruelly disappointed — I neither eat nor stepped — I dreaded Some new m i Sc hie f. 
In the evening, I went to lady conquer’s — she was abroad. 
The next day pasted in the same manner — with this difference oiily, 
she 
[ IS ] 
she called on me, to tell me she had been to See Charles, and that ho was better. 
“Has he been ill, then ?’* Said I, trembling, while I waited for her, reply. 
No — only with his wound, ” an swered she, carelessly. 
“I thought it had been too slight to be attended with any disorder“ 
“canst tell — he Said he was better;; as he expected a gentleman about business, I did not stay.” 
This account increased my anxiety : it vas too late when she left me to send to him — I blamed myself exceedingly for not having Sent to him before. 
I closed not my eyes all night. As Soon as I rose, I dispatched a Servant immediately : the answer was, that he would wait on me in a short ime. K 2 ^ The 
[ 196 ] 
The moment he came in, he looked So pale. So altered, that my first words were, “Why did you come out, if you were ill: I did not know of your illness — pray go home, and take care of yourself.” 
‘‘ There needs no care now. Said he, but my wound, though a very slight one, bled again, Soon after I left you that morning, and I was obliged to keep within doors.” 
You cannot conceive how this Speech affected me — I made him no answer. I sat down, and leaning my head on my hand, wept bitterly : I could not hide mv tears. 
How inconsistent is your behaviour, Lady Camilla, Said he: how unnecessarily do you torment your self, when it is in your power to give yoursels instantaneous ease.” 
“Gracious G — d! replied I, can 
1 cure 
[ 197 ] 
I cure your wound — I was indeed the first cause of it, and am therefore So grieved, that I rather would have died, than have occasioned Such an unfortunate affair.” 
“You dear deceiver, ” Said he, throwing his arm round me, and laying his face close to mine, “how can you Say you would have died to have prevented my receiving any hurt, when you, by your constant refusal of me, give me infinitely greater pain of mind than I ever yet endured. No, Lady Camilla, • you only fancy you pity me: did you really for me, you could not thus persist in making me wretched.” You cannot imagine. Burton, how these reproaches struck me. I could not bear them — “What must I do, then, Said I, to convince you, incredulous as you are, how rnuch I K 3 esteem 
.[ 198 ] 
esteem you, and how I trembled for your Safety 
promise me now, this instant, to be mine, ” Said he — 
What could I do? or what could I Say I had gone too far to recede j and yet I was ready to die with apprehension, while he hung over me, waiting for my answer. 
At last, in a voice inexpressibly Soft, while his penetrating eyes read every Secret of my heart “tell me, cried he, only tell me, could you have been So alarmed about a man whom you had not loved.? 
My face and neck were crimsoned— — replied — “Well — I do “love you; and, to give you the strongest proof that a woman ever gave, I will con Sent to be wretched myself, if my wretchedness will make you happy.” 
My 
K 
I 199 ] 
My dear Camilla, ’' replied be, gazing on me with tr.aniport, “why wretched! Can you possibly be f(j with the man whom you, according to your own confession, love? You cannot conceive how that insinuation damps my delight.” 
“I ssiall not yet, perhaps, be wretched, ” Said I, Sighing, “but when you grow weary of me — • Oh Bellville! the terrifying apprehension of Such a moment almost bereaves me of my understanding.”. 
Banish those apprehensions, 'banish every intruding fear, my life, ” replied he, pressing me to his bosom, “and think only, of love and joy. My angel, my Camilla, how can you suppose that your Bellville, who dotes on you, who adores you, will ever change, will ever love you less. than he does at this transporting moment ?” 
K 4 I Said 
[ 200 ] 
I Said little to him, Burton : I have given my word; 1 cannot go back; I wiflr not to deceive him; I love him but too well — Heaven grant that I may be able to keep a heart fo very dear to mine! So absolutely necessary to the continuation of my existence! 
LETTER XXIII 
Mr. Bellville to Mr. Man 
WAYRING. 
T HAVE gained her at last, my dear Manwayring: the lovely, amiable Camilla. I cannot now stay to write particulars: ’ besides, I expect you every moment in town, and wonder you are not yet come. 
Let 
[ 201 ] 
Let this Spur you, to share my happi ness. 
You know what a delicious creature Site is; yet she is now a thousand times more charming : now, as she no longer strives to hide her love, but Suffers me to bury her Sweet blushes in my bosom, while she confesses all her tender fensations. What nervous sense!! uncommon female sostness! 
You, are not to be told, my friend, that I am a very Sober Sellow; were you, however, to See me at this. time in my ecstasies, you would not, I am afraid, be So ready to vouch for my Sobriety as you have been; I am almost tipsy with joy, and yet this lovely woman will not permit num berless endearments which I am now, 
I think, authorised to Seize, and about which th extreme deference I pay to her amiable delicacy might 
K 
bin[ 
[ ] 
hinder her from being alarmed, though I see, and have long Seen that I am beloved by her, I am Sure fly consented at last with reluctance,, is still apprehensive of meeting a Second Myron in me. If I know my own heart, her apprehensions are all groundless : though she will hardly, I imagine, place any confidence either in me cr her own charms, till we have been married these ten years. Teople, it is truen have changed in the marriage state, \ after a long union and a very happy one : a passion kindled by beau ^ alone, may indeed be expedfed to grov/ weaker and weaker every year;, j but when virtue, delicacy, and discre / tion, all combine to render the most elegant of female forms irresistible, • the admirer of that form, with Such * additional advantages, must Surely 1 
have / 
[ 2°3 1 
have a very depraved taste, if he is at y^any time prompted to wander in Search of a new object. 
As Lady camilucs fortune, exclusive of her jointure, is superior to what in the common way of nego ciating I had reason to expetst, I would make a Settlement, Sufficient to convince her that love alone, detached from any lucrative views whatever, urged me to offer my acldreffes to her: but this design must not be divulged till it is carried into execution. 
I am thoroughly per funded thaf this intended step will meet with your approbation. 1 had always the happiness of thinking wixh. you on subjects of this kind. But come and tell me that you approve of my measurcs in person. I have no time for letter writing; I miist fly to my Camilla. K 6 L E. TT 
204 ] 
LETTER XXIV 
Lady Camilla Bellville to Mrs. Burton. 
’the Weed. 
IT is all over, my dear Burton. I have given up my liberty in presence of his and my friends, to the man who is — I have all the reason in the world to think, So deserving of my heart. 
My good Mr. Myron acted as my father upon this occasion, and expressed as much Satisfadlion as if he had been equally related to us both. 
When the ceremony was over, ' which made me tremble, he took hold of my hand, and Said, “Now, Lady Camilla, you have^conducted yourself agreeably to the good sense I 
always 
[ 2°5 ] 
always thought you possessed of: you have made the worthiest and most amiable os men, one of the happiest; and I will venture to answer for your increasing felicity, with Such a lover, friend, and husband united.” 
I blushed, while Bellville almost devoured me with caresses, for wshich I chid him Severely. The most violent love Soon cools. But I am his wife; therefore let what will happen, I cannot recall what’s past. Heaven, who Sees my inmost thoughts, knows how dearly, how truly, I love him, and how well He merits the kindest returns I am capable of making. 
He has acted nobly with regard to the Settlement, presents, &: c.twas not Surprised at his generosity, but I did not imagine that he had been master of So large a fortune. Mr. 
Myroa 
[ 2o6 ] 
Myron has indeed very well accounted for it, by telling me that he .has always been (though of a very benevolent temper) an exceeding good ceconomist; and that, by not running into the many follies which impair the constitutions, as well as drain the purses of most of our young men of fashion, he has not only enjoyed a considerable share ot health, but very much improved his estate. So that I find we, with our taste for retirement, Shall have more than Sufficient to gratify all rational desires. 
Bellville begged me to go down immediately to the Wood., that he might have me entirely tohimself: I consented because I chose to be out of the way of general observation. With Such a companion, indeed, every place must be delightful, especially the Spot 
whicil 
[ 20/ ] 
which derives all its charms from his cultivating hand. 
We wander about like the first happy pair in paradise; but I must Shorten our stay; a too long residence may strip our Eden of half its beauties; and should I once let bell ville grow weary of me here, he rnay never be able to endure the sight of me, or of this place again. But I wrong him, at least for the present; after every momentary Separation, he sties to me with new ardour. 
You will naturally aste me, “How comes he then ever to leave me at all if he loves me fo ardently?” 
His frequent absences are of my own contriving — I Scheme our Separations, merely for the Sake of beholding the transports in his eyes when he returns to me. He (]uarrels not a little with me, whenever he Sees 2 throihrh 
o 
[ 2o8 ] 
through my designs. But the satisfaction with which I receive him again, and the continual variety I am every hour making in my dress, my looks, my language, and my manners, in order to fix his heart. Seem to bid fair to preserve it in its present state; that is, 'without the siightest inclination to wander. 
But we have yet Seen few days in matrimony — I am sure, however, his dispositions is very different from Mr. myron’s. His manners are ‘'persedtly delicate, and his principles unexceptionable : on them alone, I mean his principles, I build all my hopes of happiness. The woman who marries a man of a contrary character must be, sometime or other, exquisitely wretched. Her honour, her reputation, her health, her peace of mind, are ail in danger 
of 
[ 20 9 ] 
of being destroyed. How very care' fill, therefore, ought every woman to be in making the strictest inquiries into the morals of the man who addresses her, before (he consents to be married to him! Men are, in general, the most finished hypocrites,; j; hcj31pfb artful deceivers? ^ut my bellville’s heart is as as his person is pleasing : the former is adorned with every virtue, the latter embellished with every grace. 
I would fain have persuaded my lovely sister to come down with us, as well to vary the Scene a little, as to Snatch her for a while from the pursuit of pleasure, which Seems, at present, to overpower her reason, and to render her deaf to the voice of discretion; but I could not prevail on her. I am very much afraid that she is unwilling to leave Moil — I wish I may be mistaken. 
r 2‘o ] 
taken. I desired her brother to insist upon having her company; but he did not go about it with any Spirit. He told me, indeed, that with ?northeast he enjoyed all the fatisfadlions of life, and that no other woman engaged his attention — Will he talk in this style three or four years hence } I must not expect Such language — if he will then be only my fisiend. Myron not even condescended to protect me, but left me to my own condudf, which would not, I doubt, have been blameless, had not disappointed love given me a distaste to everything. I should think it would be of the greatest advantage to lady Conquer to retire for a while from the public eye, and lead a life of privacy and quiet. In her condition. Such a perpetual hurry, up from one amusement to another, may throw 
her 
f 2” ] 
her Into embarrassing situations, and, not improbably, be attended with fatal consequences. Lord Conquer may, perhaps, be weary of his wife; he will, I fancy, be still more So if she brings him not an heir. 
I have just received your congratulations : you tell me you have written to Moil about my sister : I wish he may pay a proper regard to your necessary and wholesome advice. 
LETTER XXV 
Mr. Bellville to Mr. Manwayring. 
Tie y/ood. 
I AM the happiest of men, in the poffeshon of the dearest, the loveliest of women. Never wa 
ka8«‘fiest 
T 212 ] 
there So beautiful a creature — and she is as good withirtt as she is attradive without. Never anybody had So many winning ways, and she varies them So agreeably, that flte heightens the lustre both of her virtues and her charms. There is but one part of her amiable character which de serves, I think, the charge of inconsistency — At the very instant she ex prestes a Satisfaction almost bordering on rapture with me, my house, gardens, and everything about her here, she urges me to leave them and herself; or else to carry her to Some other place. 
When I was So urged the other day, I replied, “From the pleasure which you have declared at your situation, my dear Lady Camille, I am willing to hope that there is nothing disagreeable in itp 
“No/’ 
[ ]- 
‘‘ No, ” Said She — “I dote upon the Wood; but I Shall dote upon it still more when I return to it, after an absence os a month or two.” 
She shall be obeyed. I will go with her anywhere — every place with her must be preferable to an elysium without her. 
She makes a visit to Mr. myron’s, at a time when I have laid out lome Scheme to pursue at home, which will, she knows, prevent me from attending her conveniently; and there she stays four or five hours with him, and is frequently shut up with Mils Greaves, who is not in the least entertaining. On thde occasions, however, I break through every engagement to follow her, as I cannot be happy long without her. She either refules to come down to me, or looks on me as if she wished 
1 had 
[ 214 ] 
1 had not come in her way. Yet, I am Sure she loves me — almost beyond expression — for one day when I complained more warmly of her unkind proceedings than I had ever ventured to do before, she discovered So much concern for having rendered me uneasy, and was So uncommonly tender and endearing, that I told her, if she made Such Sweet and ample amends, I should be tempted to differ with her continually, for the Sake of So delightful a reconciliation. 
She laughed at me, threw her Snowy arms round my neck, called me the best of creatures, and then, as if all at once recollecting herself, withdrew her arm, assumed a very grave face, and trdked of matters as foreign to love, as if she had never entertained the least idea of that 
passion: : 
[ ] 
passion : and thus will she behavejust when I most wish to enjoy her dear Society alone. 
She has made me promise to go to Brighthelmstone, though she knows that I have no taste for the fashionable watering places; and I have as often heard her declare, ' that Such places are most disagreeably dull and tiresome to her. Comedown, therefore, my good Man way ring; be a witness to my happiness, and assist me in persuading my Camilla to increase it, by giving me still more of her enchanting company, where I can enjoy it with the least molestation. 
We had a long argument upon this Subjedf yesterday : she maintained that love is like a standing pool; that it will stagnate if it is not agitated by the breath of variety; and that even when 
rustled 
[ ] 
ruffled by a brisk gale, it is productive of more pleasure than if totally becalmed. On the contrary, I asserted, that a regular, constant passion, for a favourite object would not only be kept alive, but would also be railed to a greater height by a proper quantity of fuel, and discover no tendency towards extinction. 
“What!” cried ffle, “do you compare your passion to the ashestos, which tho’ continually thrown into the flames, comes out not only un diminished, but still purer than it went in ?” 
“Undoubtedly, my dear Lady Camilla, ” Said I, “for my love, the more it is indulged, grows warmer and brighter.” 
A Smile, which makes her look more beautiful than the “laughter loving Dame, ” and a kiss sweet 
beyond 
[ 217 ] 
beyond description, commonly end our disputes. Yet though She always manages them with humour and wit, I wish she would not, by frequently flying from my arms, occasion my calling forth her talents to defend a condu(5t, which cannot, I think, be properly defended. I love her too fondly, too ardently, to bear with patience these interuptions to my conjugal felicity. 
Come, my friend — she admires, she reveres you — come and convince her that it is impossible for her to love her husband too well. 
C B. 
vol. I, 
LET[ 
[ ] 
LETTER XXVI 
Lady Camilla Bellville to Mrs. Burton. 
making 
7e were, agreeably to my request, going in a great hurry to Brighthelmstone 3 but our journey was put off. 
While I was in town. 
Some few preparations. Lady con quer^s Servant came to let me know that she was taken very ill, and that it was believed she would Soon be in labour. 
While I was hastening out of my dressing room, Bellville met me. 
‘‘ Whither are you going, my life, ’" Said he, “at this time of night, ?” 
** To my sister, ” replied I, ** who is extremely ill.” 
[ 2'9 I 
I am Sorry to hear you Say So; but you must give me leave to detain you in your own house; in the first place because I love you too tenderly to Suffer you, in situation, to be fatigued; and in second because you will, being both a couple of novices, frighten each other. No, my Camilla, let Lucy send for the most experienced matrons among her acquaintance; but do you my love, rest contented in my arms at home : dear as my Sister is to me, I cannot rilk my camilla’s Safety for her.” 
Do you know, my louisa, that I am all obedience to this dear charming man, who has discovered Such uncommon. Such tender anxiety about me, since I have been in a state So new to me, that I cannot Sufficiently repay his kind attentions. 
L 2 In 
[ 2 2 0 ] 
In short, Burton, I do not well keep up my design of being indifferent or capricious, in order to make variety: his excessive affedfion and melting persuasions, added to the many forcible reasons which he produces to prove the necessity of my complying with his will, quite overcome me, and make me very yielding to his wishes. I am indeed blessed beyond my most Sanguine expedfations, in my dear Bellville — I never believed it possible for a man to be half So amiable 
In Continuation.; 
My sister is Safely delivered of a: fon : my Bellville himself carried me to pay our congratulations. “I will not trust you by yourself, ” Said he, “these idle, prating women, will 
odly 
[ 22‘ ] 
only put athousand more apprehensions into your head, than are in it already — how considerate! how tender I how different from Lord Conquer! 
We found his lordship Sufficiently negligent both of his wife and his heir, though he discovered more satisfaction at his being a father than I expected. But neither the birth of his Son, nor the confinement of his Lucy, can bring him to Spend much time at home; and she, who has of late lived So dissipated a life, bears the gloominess of a sick chamber very indifferently. She has entreated me So earnestly to come and See her often, that I believe I shall stay in town a week or two longer on purpose. She is surprisingly well, considering all things — The boy too is the finest and healthiest child I ever Saw. 
3 
LET 
I 
2 22 
LETTER XXVII 
From the Same to the Same, 
Y complying with Lady con quer’s request to see me frequently, I have had Several opportunities totalkmoreseriousiyto her than I have done concerning her condudf; which, though not according to my real opinion, intentionally blameable, certainly appears to be highly So. But she has not yet paid much attention to me. 
Yesterday, instead of making a di reo: answer to what I Said to her, she fell into a number of little compliments on the fancy of my dress, and ashed me where I bought my cap, which was, she said, most elegantly pretty, and who made my negligee 
tel[ 
[ 3 
telling.mc at the Same time how Sweet a silk it was. 
“My dear Lady Conquer, ” Said I, “leave off trifling, and let me know sincerely, whether you did not love Lord Conquer when you married him ?’* 
Undoubtedly !” 
And do vou not love him 
now r” 
‘‘ Yes.” 
“Why then do you, by living almost in public, and encouraging visits from all the idle fellows in town,, give him reason to believe that you are weary of his company, and they room to imagine, that they are as welcome to you, if not more fo; than my Lord ?” 
My dear Lady Camilla, ” replied site, with a Smile which added new graces to her lovely features,, L ty 
(( 
[ 224 T 
‘‘ what would you have me Say to you? I am al ways pleascd to See my Lord when he is either reasonable or good-humoured; but were I to sit at home, waiting by myself, till he was the one or the other, I might stay tilf I was dying with the vapours. When my Lordcarried me from my brother’s,, no man could be more fond, nor obliging : he was the Same for about a w’eek after we were married : but from that time to this, his house and his wife have been, I believe,, equali ly indifferent to him every place where I am not in his way is agreeable, and every wmman he meets with is preferred to me. And would you,, my dear, think me prudent in teasing him to alter his behaviour,, when i kpow he never can bring himsdf to make a change in it; or sit down in the pcittsj and by weeping myself 
blind. 
[ 225 ] 
blind, tell the whole town that I anv neglected by my husband?? to mention the entire ruin ofmyperson, which would not, I imagine, help to recall him, I am Sure Such a conduct would encourage all the fellows to suppose that they should be well received; nothing: in the world being: So likely to facilitate an affair with a married woman, as the declared neglect; of her husband.” 
My pretty sister, thought I, is wondrous knowing — how 
C 
grown 
astonishingly company and admiration? improve a woman!'” 
“Well, but my dear Lucy, ” Said I, “are there no methods left to re“ “this wanderer, and lure him back to that love which he first discovered? It were, methinks, well worth while to endeavour, by every Soothing blandishment, every modest. 
L 5 endear[ 
[ ] 
endearing art, to make him Sensible that he will be mistaken, if ever he expetsts to find a woman of your age handsomer, and more desirous, as. well as more capable of pleasing than yourself.” 
“How you talk, my dear Lady Camillacried she, “married aa you are, to a man who adores you, who never did, who never can. love any other woman, you fancy it is a mighty easy matter to please one’s husband, because you find it imposh ^ ble to displeasecharlcs' — Bat, indeed,, my good sister, were you married to Lord Conquer you wmuld Soon feel the difference; and, feeling yoursclf in my situation, v/ouldacl consequently as I do.” 
Never, ” answered I, with an earnestness which plainly (hewed an entire condemnation of her carriage. 
“Why 
[ 227 1 
Why, how would you adt upon Such an occasion ?” 
“As I did when married to Mr. Myron, ” Said I. “Finding mysels utterly unable to make him Sensible of the undeserved negledf with which he treated me, I ceased to appear in public, lived retired, chiefly in the country, and confined my conversation to bis relations, and a few Seledt female friends ofimblemiflied characters, by which means I totally esca ped the asperfions which calumny might have levelled at me : had I hurried into connedlions of all kinds, without rriaking any distinction among my companions; had I appeared everywhere, with all Sorts of people, and flirted with every pretty fellow who came in my way — ” 
“My dear creature, ’’ interrupted She, you were, I am Sure, ever dis 
'creet. 
[ 228 ] 
creet, and indeed I always intetui to be So, though I am Sometimes a great deal too giddy. But when I get abroad you shall See a great alteration in me for the. better. 
No body who had Seen her at that moment would have Scrupled to declare that she was the very image of innocence, the pidfure of truth. She was sitting in an elbovsi chair, in a white flowered lutestring negligee,, a fine blond hood was crossed under her chin, the lappets were pinned up, part of which hung over her fore liead, Sometimes hiding, Sometimes discovering her dark browm hair, and. gave an elegant appearance to her figure, making it lock still more beautifully piduresque. 
At that instant Moil, who had not, I found. Seen her since her lying in, entered the room. 
[ 229 ] 
She made a slight motion to rise, but he, Seizing both her hands, which never, I thought, looked So delidoufly white, stopped her, and; with a tenderness in his eyes and manner,, gave her joy on the birth os her Son, and her own recovery, ashing if he might not See the little: stranger. 
The boy was brought, and placed; by the nurse in Lady conquer’s lap. 
He kissed him till really fancied, as well as his mother, that he would have Smothered him. 
Hold, hold, ” cried She, laugh i ing, ‘‘ you will hurt my little: George. I declare he is almost stifled, ” continued she, kissing him: herseif, while Moil almost devoured her with his eyes. 
However, Seeing me observed him— — I actually began to think that 
the 
I 230 I 
the Scene grew too interesting — he again turned his attention from the mother to the child. I told him that I imagined he had not been used to make many visits of that nature, and advised him not to repeat them. 
He then became less particular; but I Saw plainly that he was very much charmed with her lady Ship, and that She did not behold him with, indifference.. 
Where will this end.? I am truly in. pain for her — v/hat mischief may not Lord Conquer have to answer for, on account of his conduct towards this lovely and once innocent girl.? Once I — let me hope She is So still — let rne hope Ihe will ever be So. Even now, I affually believe that if Lord Conquer returned to her with his first fondness, and treated her with all the affection she had reason to expe^j^dhe • would 
[ 231 ] 
would think no more of Moil, nor of any other man, but would be the best of wive? and mothers. When a husband indeed is absent, and a handsome insinuating fellow throws himself continually in his vv^ife’s way, her conjugal fidelity is, no doubt. Severely tried. 
Have you, my dear Barton, written to Moil? — if you have not, let me beseech you to write immediately — but say nothing about me. Neither must I mention this affair to my dear Charles; the communication of it may be destructive to his peace, and perhaps endanger his valuable life. He has the highest fense of honour, and a great regard for this poor, thoughtless, but lovely gkl. 
LET 
232 
LETTER XXVIIL 
From the Same to the Same.. 
1 THANK you, my dear Burton; your talking to Lord Stanfield, who is now So near you, and persuading him to write to his brother, may be better than your doing it yourself. Men are perverse creatures, and So vain of their imagined Superiority over us, that they will listen to their own Sex, when they will not pay the flightest attention to a woman, though She may deliver her Sentiments with as much propriety as aiiy lord of the creation whatever, 
. 
I 233 J 
ever, and most probably with far more gentleness: 
I hear that Lord Stanfield has carried off a young girl of education, though with but a slender fortune; and that his elooement with her is 
i 
really his bufiness in Ireland, given out at this time — Fine fellows for husbands, these Moyles! 
Indeed, my louisa, you were strangely out in your men. I was only a week at Brighthelmstone : I don’t want to stay long in a place. By keeping Bellville always amused, I hope to keep him always mine. There is a transidort in that thought which would animate me almost to anything: though indeed he is lo unalterably kind, that I begin to fancy he will ever love me as well as be does at present; or at least lam. 
inclined' 
[ 234 ] 
inclined to believe, that when the; raptures of passion Subside, a steady friendship will Succeed them, not to be impaired by fickness, age, absence, or time. Pray heaven it may prove So! and that I may not deceive myself. But should I, after all, ex perience the So much dreaded change { fondness to indifference — I shall, however, have the Satisfaction of knowing, that as I made choice of a man of the strictest honour, that honour will prtserve his esteem for me, and the esteem of one virtuous man is more to be prized than the love of all the libertines upon earth. my heart may pine for the loss of the tenderness which was more valued by me than my life, but it can never upbraid me for d^aving chosen a man for pajjion alone; and as love. 
without 
I 235 1 
without esteem can neither be satis fadlory nor permanent, I stiall hope, by my unwearied endeavours to de serve the latter, to Secure the former to the latest hour of my dearest bell ville’s existence. 
End of the First VOLUME. 

CV 'L ii/vrtieefio ' 
f: 0; 
'atict ^fff e'uavi 01 tisn'i .l '.'jdsov'ia 
.; .' *li vl itetiisib VC.: ri vh^l siou cl : : rh ot 
fc ■'/ • .zbfau^'^'olld 


■ K ■' 
: •€ r’'v< r 
awu.io'r a : sit C : i lo. 
- 1 ■ 

1' -■ 7 ^#1 
N' '; .- ' V 
V " c ' he C ' 

THE 
ADVANTAGES 
O I 
deliberation. 

hi > ' t C * c. vri, rv 
rt" 
'ii' 
h 

r'” *• 
: t>’: C 
THE 
A DVANTAGE S 
O F 
DELIBERATION; 
OR, THE 
FOLLY 
O F 
INDISCRETION. 
The life of a libertine cannot be known without abhorrence, nor shared without danger of ruin. 
The Adventurer. 
INTWO VOLUMES. 
VOL. II 
L O .N D O N; 
Printed for Robinson and Roberts, No. 25, Paternofter row. 
'mdcclxxn. 

r • —.. ♦. f, *■ -- y r —. 
I.;. t;; V k * 
4 ^ ^ A •.. ... .A > V 
^ G 
T y ^ 
/' ^ 
n1 
'1 
K., > 
(.) 
■ ytj 
A 
'■. - S -- 
M i 
ii 
vra "r V. 

; r L V 
.'ri'. 
O T 
'.. 4'. 
'u 
T H E 
ADVANTAGE S 
O F 
D E L I BE R A TI O 
OR, THE 
FOLLY of INDISCRETION. 
LETTER XXIX 
Mr. Bellville to Mr. Man 
WAYRING. 
E talk of returning to the Wood in a few days, where I hope to have the pleasure of feeing you, according to your promise. 
As the least of my camilla’s desires Shall ever be complied with, I ac vol, II B com[ 
[ ] 
companied her to Brighthelmstone; but why we hurried thither, and why we returned from thence in a week’s time. She only can inform you; nor can I learn what extraordinary pleasure or Satisfaction She found there : herpleasure there could notarise from the exhibition of her person, for she Seldom went to the rooms: she declined play, and would not stay an Tour in the ballroom. Her condition, indeed, will not admit of much exercise; but had she been ever fo able to bear it, she would not, I am Sure, have danced. Neither could she have received any Satisfaction from her finery, for no woman was drefifed in a plainer style; thoroughly elegant she always is in the choice of her clothes, but equally fo at home or abroad. She has ever, indeed, complimented me in a 
pari 
3 j 
particular manner by drefiing with rather more neatness, and making a greater variety in her appearance when we are by ourselves, than when She goes into the world and as to the encouragement of admiration, > no woman upon earth is less the coquette. Lively She is at times to a degree ^ which is quite transporting at home; but abroad She always appears with a modest dignity, and a noble simplicity So striking in, her features, her manners, and her conversation, that while She attra<fls the eyes of all beholders. She inspires them with awe. unobserved with me alone, how amiable, how enchant ingly tender She is! Why then, why Should She, when her whole heart Seems devoted to me, want to fly from place to place? With Such a dear lovely creature by my side, I B 2 Should 
[ 4 ] 
Should be the happiest of men in my Sweet retreat : Nr Smiles of contentment would render the dullest Spot a paradise. But though I dote on tranquillity, I dote on her still more : everything, therefore, proposed by her, Shall be agreed to by me. I love her too sincerely, not to give up *j*y pleasure io hers. 
LETTER XXX 
Lord Conquer to the Earl of Stanfield. 
WHY the devil did you carry her to Ireland? Was not England large enough to hold you iind your girl? but you are a lucky 
self 
5 ] 
fellow, to prevail on her to leave everything and follow you f I had 
not So much influence over my -- -- -- — 
what Shall I call her? How 1 detest the word wife! but I could not, you know, do anything without the appearance at least — ’tis true, indeed, there was no necessity for my marrying her again and again, as if I never could have enough of matrimony — But I was afraid — pox take my fears! that the devil was going to fly away with me — poor cowardly rascal as I was. — You dielped me into all this mischief by undeceiving Lucy, and contriving her escape. However, as Ave have Settled that old reckoning, I shall Say no more about it; only I wish Somebody else would carry her off with all my Soul; and faith your brother Ned Seems as busy about her as anybody : I shall let them alone, B 3 and 
[ 6 J 
and probably they may manage the affair, when they find I don’t disturb them. A divorce would be the very thing, for I am in love at this moment up to the ears, let me perish elfe, and with as fine a girl as — but nothing will go down except matrimony with her neither : — no, to be Sure — I would not live with a man for the world.”. — But I am got into Such a d — d noose, that I cannot tip the parson upon her while my lawful wife, my plague, my torment, is aboveground. Everybody knows there is a Lady Conquer; she takes care to make herself pretty conspicuous. Such a handsome b — h cannot be hid if she were willing, and there are fellows enough to take advantage of my indolence : nobody minds the poor devil of a husband. If I once get out of this confounded Scrape, 
catch 
[ 7 1 
catch me at marriage again if you can. However, it has happened well enough hitherto : if I can burr take her in the fact with Some of her flirts, if I do but get rid of her, I Shall not value what is past. I must have had an heir, you know, Some how or other : one likes to have one’s name. See. transmitted to posterity, and I think I may venture to Say this boy is my own; but as for another I could not Swear to it, though my life was at stake. Women are Such cur sed hypocrites that Old Scratch himself cannot outdo them in deceit; and ny woman is as ready at double dealings as the best of her fly Sex. — What a pretty Soft innocent she was 
when I married her! -- -- oh!d — n 
her. -- -- But I shall watch my opportunity 
— Poshbly Ned may do the bufinessfor me — Faith, I shall observe B 4 him 
[ 8 ] 
him narrowly; the young dog handsome, and he Seems to long to be at her. She likes handsome fellows, or She never would have liked me — Hey, Stanfield. 
L E. T TER XXXI 
The Earl of Stanfield to tha Hon. Edward Moil. 
IH A V E heard and Seen So much of your indiscreet attachment to Lady Conquer, that out of pure friendship I sit down to advise you Soberly and Serioussy to have nothing more to do there. I know very well that you will directly avail yourself of my pafiion for Biddy Floyer; but only think of the difference, Ned — 
She 
She 
r 9 ] 
Is under no engagement, and 
consequently at liberty to give herself to me as Soon as to any man — The cafe is widely different between you and Lady Conquer, who is the wife, and, of course, the property of another j and you may, with as much justice on your side, rob george’s house, or pick his pocket, as Seduce his wife from him, My affair is only a little simple fornication; whereas yours, my friend, is downright adultery. Besides, do but consider the preposterous folly of your proceeding : if you are not fond of the woman, why any other may answer your purpose every whit as well; and if you are, reflect, Moil, on the distress in which she mustne ceffarilybe involved by your dangling after lier — Conquer, who suspeds you, Swears he will Seize every opportunity to catch you; and you know the consequcnces which may probably 
B 5 
anlt 
[ lo ] 
arisc from Such a discovery: a heavy penalty, which your fortune can but ill Support, and utter destruction to the poor girl, who gives up same, character, and everything most dear to the ambitious Sex, for the Sake of a man, who will not, it is likely, be able to maintain her, when, on his account, alone She has no other resource left. Think of this Seriousty, Ned, and if Lady Conquer is only pursued by you from the love of variety, why will you not leave her for one as handsome, who may be easily found? But if you actually have a passion for her, show your regard by let ing her alone. She was an amiable artless creature when George stole her, basely stole her, from her home; and though I believe she really loved him, I dare Say she never would have yielded upon improper terms. 
• I was 
[ u J 
I was, I confess, touched with her situation — Fond of the Sex as I am, you very well know, Ned, that I never went Such lengths as Conquer has done. I Scorn to deceive any woman. Do you So far follow my example as to quit this unfair pursuit after the wife of the man whom you call your friend — after any wise indeed, and start other game. Before Ihe was legally married to George, stie was free for you, for me, for every man; and had I not believed Ihe loved him too well to afford me any hopes of fuccess, I should have, I fancy, attacked her myself. But at that time I was not quite in despair about Lady Camilla, and flattered myself that my deliverance of Lucy would she a great step towards gaining her good opinion. Could I have persuaded her to be my wife, it is my firm be b 6 lies 
[ 12 ] 
lies that I Should have relinquished’ all my follies, and have become a new creature. 1 loved her most ferioufiy, most sincerely j too well in truth to bear the loss of her without the deepest regret — But as I could by no methods gain her heart, I endeavoured, by amusing mysclf with other women, to forget her. 
I have brought Biddy Floyer hither, but I have not taken the advantage of our intimacy, which every man in my place would have done. The poor girl, it is my real opinion, is fully convinced that she has taken a wrong step in leaving her family to go with me — Were I to attempt to Seize what she thinks she ought not to grant, she would certainly be very unhappy, as she never has discovered the siightest deviation from that modestycarriage generally 
I '3 ] 
rally to be met with in young girl during their noviciate in love matters. 
You will pofiibly ask me, if by leaving her family and friends, and flying with a man who never made any promises to give the least Sandtion to her precipitate elopement, exhibited any proofs of a virtuous disposition. 
Appearances are, I own, against her; but you must make Some allowances for love, my dear Ned. The poor young creature lives, I will venture to affirm, only in my Smiles: and her tender passion for me, which she has not been able to hide, added, perhaps, to my want of passion for her, have hitherto kept me from plunging her into vvretchedncss, merely to enjoy a momentary pleasure, without feeling my heart in unison 
to 
I 1+ I 
. hers : she is however extremely pretty and delicate; She has a good understanding, and has been politely educated. In Short, she has every requisite (high birth and fortune excepted) to recommend her as a wife. But she is not Lady Camilla — Yet her innocent chit-chat amuses me; and as I am no way conscious of having done her any injury, bating the blot upon her reputation, which it is still in my power to wipe out, I do not, cannot, think myself So culpable as the man who tramples on all laws, human and divine, and tears a woman from her husband and family, to drive her into eternal misery and 
shame -- -- -- Take care, Ned, art thou 
not too near being that man? 
LET[ 
[ ] 
LETTER XXXII 
The Hon. Edward Moil to the Right Hon. Earl of Stanfield. 
’'Y^OUR letter, my Lord, comes too late if it is designed to cure me of a passion for Lady Conquer, which can end but with life — I do not, however, inser from this declaration, that I am running headlong into the train Conquer is laying for me — No — my passion itsclf will be my great, my only Security : for I too ardently dote on that dear lovely creature to be capable of doing anything to injure her reputation or her peace, both which must undoubtedly Suffer by the proceeding of which you are So apprehensive. I am not the vile character you Seem to think me 
• — Were 
f I 
i* .were I to believe this amiable woman capable of encouraging a propensity, which discovers a man to be So lost to honour. So regardless of the world and of himself, her condudl would extremely lessen, if not quite eradicate every tender Sentiment in my breast in her favour. No, my Lord, I have never entertained the stightest thought of Soliciting favours, which, on being granted, would render us as odious to each other as we Should be to the world; and whatever opinion your lordship may have formed of me, you are mistaken if you think I could love any woman capable of deceiving So grossly even the very worst of husbands. But though I would not wish Lady Conquer to adl unjustly, merely to gratify my pashon, I must ever love and adore her, love her for the beauties 
of 
[ >7 ] 
of her charining person, and exquisite Sensibility, and adore her for her innate modesty and extraordinary patience under a treatment which would inflame mostwomen, and make them the very worst of wives. I must pity her, I must wish— — I must endeavour to alleviate her uneasiness;; by every allowed admitted intention, strive to Soften the Severity of her fate, and render it less insupportable. Who indeed, possessed of the least Sensibility, can behold So lovely a. woman Suffering under Such mortifying neglect, brutality, and ilk nature, and not desire to take every method to lighten the load of her domestic griefs.? 
It was a considerable time before I could obtain her permission to attempt, by the gentlest and most inoffensive methods, to divert her attention 
[ >8 ] 
tentlon to Something less disagrceable than what engrossed it; and I could not obtain her consent till site Saw me, almost finking under the weight of the provocations which, file endured, to take any the least sensu rable measures to remove or lessen them — You are not to be told how heavenly a mind is united to a per son uncommonly beautiful; nor how Soon file would be alarmed at receiving even the fafiiionable gallantries from any man, who might be fup posed to have tenderer motives than others for offering them to her — No — She is all beauty and all good ncss. 
Is it probable that Lord Conquer, careless as he is of his morals and his health, Should outlive his charming wife } May I not venture to hope that I Shall one day be blessed with 
the 
[ '9 ] 
the only woman on whom my Soul dotes? 
Once, indeed, I fancied that I loved Lady Camilla j but now I find that I only admired her; and that Lady Conquer can alone give my heart that exquisite happiness for which it fondly sighs. She alone, my Lord, can bestow felicity on your 
Affectionate 
Edward Moil. 
P. S. When I first Saw this angel at Mr. myron’s, She did not, iconfess, appear to me in the light She now does: whether her extreme bashful ness, or her Seeming attachment to Lord Conquer, whom She undoubtedly loved, while he behaved tolerably 
'f 20 1' 
rably to her, kept down those charms which now blaze out in their full lustre, I cannot pretend to Say; but this I know, lam absoluttte dazzled with them at present. 
I cannot help Smiling at your account of poor Biddy; yet I honour you, my Lord, for Sparing a girl who has no other fault upon earth (you’h pardon me) but her pastioiv for your lordship. 
LETTER XXXIII 
Lady Camilla Bellville to mrs. Burton. 
O U Say all that can be done has been done for the reformation of Moil j but I am afraid he will be very Slowly, if at all, reformed : 
[ 2> 3 
ed : he is, I hear, still perpetually dangling after this*lovely Lady Conquer, who is come out from her ly dng in handsomer than ever. 
It is very remarkable that Conquer, as she has brought him a fine boy, treats her with more contempt than he did; yet, I am told She is breeding again. 
v/hat wretches are these men! — happy! — how happy am I in being united to one of a different turn! 
My dear Bellville and I prested her to come and Spend Some time with us at the Wooti j but she laughingly replied, “I don’t think I can prevail on my Lord to accompany me, and though my husband leaves mei must not leave himy you know.” 
The excuse was prettily delivered, but I with Moil may not be at the bottom ofit. 
Lord 
[ 22 ] 
Lord stanfield’s carrying miss Floyer to Ireland occasions a great deal of conversation among us; and I have heard it whispered that it is believed he has a mind to marry her. All are ready to allow that her character was irreproachable before She met with him at Ranelagh; and that her father, unlike most parents, is willing to pardon this one slip, considerable as it is, and take her home, if she will return. If there were more fathers of this considerate disposition, we should not, I fancy, see So many women irretrievably lost. The first false Step, though certainly but too often attended with dreadful consequences, might frequently be recovered, if people could be found charitable enough to overlook a constitutional failing, at least to give the indiscreet delinquents a fair chance 
to 
[ 23 ] 
to make the best atonement in their power for it by the propriety of their Subsequent behaviour. I am no friend to rigorous proceedings of any kind, and dare aver that they often make bad worse, by crushing the seeds of penitence growing in the bosom of the imprudent fair one, which might, if humanely encouraged, effectually hinder her from repeating her indiscretion, and rendering herself still less worthy of forgive ness. 
I shall not be able to keep up So regular a correspondence as I have done, because my dear Charles experts a gentleman with whom he was intimate at Rome, and as he never was in this part of the country before, we shall, I fuppose, frequently make excursions: my Bellville will not excuse me while I am able 
to 
■[ 2 4 1 
to'be of the party, I Shall consequently have but little leisurc for writing letters. He is a Mr. Frankly, a friend of Mr. manwayring’s also. When Bellville told me he was one of the handsomest men in the world, I replied, “Except yourself.” 
LETTER XXXIV 
Mr. Bellville to Mr. Manwayring. 
After having been alternately elevated by hopes, and depres fed by fears, I am permitted at length to tell you that my ever dear Camilla has presented a daughter to me as lovely has herself. You may better 
imai 
25 ] 
imagine the joy .which I feel upon this happy occasion than I can describe it : my joy too is doubled, as my dearest, best beloved wife, is out of danger. 
Frankly, whose admiration of my Camilla almost rises to idolatry, helps me to nurfenrand the little stranger. 
1 tell him that he will be the more expert when he is a married man, for having Fehearfed his part at the Wood. He Says he shall never figure in that character till he meets with a Second Lady Camilla, to play the love>fcenes with him. 
Lady Camilla is, I believe, indeed, unequalled in many respeds; especially in being unconscious of her very eminent Superiority to the majority of her Sex. She does not discover the least vanity; not the Smallest penchant to coquetry— — ex vol. II C tremely 
[ 25 1 
tremely pleasing, and in how uncommon a way is this lovely woman! I cannot Sufficiently admire Such love liness, accompanied with Such modesty 

Will you not come and see us? Doubt not my sincerity when I affure you that every Satisfaction which I enjoy will be heightened by your partaking of it. 
LETTER XXXV 
Lady Camilla Bellville to Mrs. Burton. 
F how ffiort a duration is almost every pleasurein this life! and how Soon is our vanity corrected when we sit down, and in the gaiety of hour hearts, Say we are happy !” 
O my 
[ 2? I 
O, my dear louisa! after having been So many months thoroughly Satisfied with the most amiable of men (for he is still So) after having been blessed with the birth of a lovely daughter, who was received by her father with the fincercst delight — to have known what I now know — But I have Scarce Spirits to tell you — Since the birth of my little Camilla, (for So her father would have her called) Mr. Frankly has been with us, and I have frequently given the child an airing with her nurse. 
We were in the post-chaise a few mornings ago, when the dear little wretch, as if knowing what was going forward, cried, and seemed So restless, that nurse desired to stop at a decent looking house, just out of the road, to ask for Some milk and water. Fond of my darling, I C 2 made 
[ 28 ] 
made no objcdlion to her request. 
On a civil woman’s coming out, and asking me to walk in, I consented, tbo’ I can give no reason for my acquiescence, as thedrink for the child might as well have been brought to thenurse. However, in I went, and Seeing through the back window a pretty looking garden, I had a mind to step into it. Curiosity was, you know, the ruin of our Sex from the beginning. 
How Shall I express the Surprise which I felt, when on looking over a quickset hedge, I Saw my dear, my beloved Bellvilie, with a fine boy in his arms, apparently but a few months older than my girl! A beautiful young creature, in deep mourning, who seemed to be not above sixteen, stood looking on him with a kind of tender melancholy; while he held her hand, and 
fre 
[ 29 ] 
frequently kissed the child. Let any one imagine what I felt. I could hardly believe myself awake — and even now, when I refiecst on bell ville’s Solicitude and tenderness about me in the painful hour, when he became 2. father to my child (for he was undoubtedly one Some time before) let any one, I Say, only conceive what I must have felt at feeing him fondly press that boy to his face, and with the kindest looks, talk to his mother, as I supposed her to be, notwithstanding her exceedingly youthful appearance. But has not Lady Conquer such an appearance, though she is considerably taller? There are mothers, Burton, at all ages. 
This elegant, delicate creature, just before he vent. Seemed to feel much uneafiness at his leaving her, and C 3 caught 
[ 3° ] 
caught his hand to her lips with an expression in her pretty countenance which I cannot describe, My heart was ready to break at the sight of a girl, who had, I firmly believed, deprived me of my dear hushand’s affection; but I could not feel any propensity to hate her: She was So very pleasing, there was Something So uncommonly lovely in her whole sigure. Something So touching in the melancholy which overspread her features at his departure from her, that I sighed involuntarily at her distress, though, possibly, my own grief and disappointment occasioned every sighwhich I breathed. 
I came home in a condition mortifying beyond description. — I had not Spoken a single word in the chaise, and only watered my poor infant’s face with my tears. 
When 
I 31 ] 
When the chaise stopped at the jvoodj Bellville stew to take me out. 
I strove to hide my emotions— — hope I Shall be able to conceal them. The concealment of them, upon this unhappy occasion, is the only chance I have for the recovery of his heart, if it is not strayed from me for ever; and I think I never pradlised dissimulation So well— — am chiefly amazed at his pretending So much affection for me, at the same time that he has So strong an attachment in another 
place... -- Oh men! — men! — who 
can develop their designs! — In whom Shall we find sincerity ?■. ■ I have no Spirits to proceed. 
In Continuation. 
I take breath again. 
C 4 Things 
t 32 ] 
Things are not So bad, my dear, as I had apprehended. I had patience to watch Bellville for Several days, without discovering either my Suspicions or my fears — You must imagine what it cost me to fuppress them. 
I was a little encouraged by his not offering to leave me : he cannot Surely be So prodigioufiy attached to a woman whom he Sees So Seldom : he might make his visits more frequent, without being fuspedted, as I never ask him whither he is going, and have often from choice gone out alone, leaving him to do the Same, well remembering, Burton, to have heard you laugh immoderately at those women who always like to have their husbands pinned to their sides. You recollect, I dare Say, what Mr. Myron used to throw out upon 
the 
[ 33 I 
the Same occasion; yet, in my humble opinion, those women aregenerallythe happiest — And I am certain those husbands are the most desirable ones, who, fully contented with their choice, prefer the hours Spent at home to any others. It is a fact that Mr. Myron was Soon weary of home, either from the natural restleffness of his disposition, from his love of change, or from his having indulged a violent inclination, much too violent to last long. I therefore resolv ed to prevent Bellville from following his example, by making as much variety as I possibly could in our manner of living : and he well knows I have frequently left him when he appeared to be the most pleased with my company, and the most eager to enjoy "it ■■ — But to come to the point. 
C 5 'When 
[ 3+ I 
When about a week had elapsed without my once misting him, I found in myself an insurmountable curiosity to know the real situation of this lovely woman and her child j and thought of contriving Some means to go to the place where I had Seen them, unobserved. My Surprise, and the presence of my nurse, had prevented me from asking any questions before; and I determined to make another visit by myself, and inquire very minutely into the affair which had occasioned fo much embarraf ment and uneafiness to me, 
Bellville, however, gave me na opportunity to execute my design: on the contrary, he began to fancy that I was not So cheerful as I used to be; and, though I had kept the stnctest guard over myself, he told me that he perceived a great change in 
me 
[ 35 1 
me; adding, that he feared I was not well, and that I too closely attended to the care of my little girl — fori am too fond a mother, louisa, to Suffer her to receive her nourishment from any breast but my own.) 
The mention of that dear child struck me fo forcibly, that I could no longer stifle my emotions. The tears fell from my eyes, in Spite of all my endeavours to hinder their flowing. He caught me in his arms, and kissing me tenderly, Said, “Nay, now I am Sure Milly is sick, and you fret yourself to death about her.’* 
I put him by as well as I could, but thought it not amiss to take advantage of that hint, and to return an evasive answer. I therefore made an equivocal reply with regard to the child’s health; but my kind bell ville expresised fo much concern about C 6 me. 
t 36 I 
me, So much anxiety, lest I should hurt my health or my Spirits, that I could not poshbly adl agreeably to my intentions for Some time. 
At last Frankly engaged his friend out one morning; and I, to prevent Suspicion, ordered the post chariot, as if I designed to take the air, but bade the Servants Set me down at a little cottage a few yards distant from the house I wanted, and to call for me in about half an hour. 
I then hastened to the housefroni whence I Saw the killing sight above described, under the pretence of repaying the mistress of it for her civility to me, with whom I Soon entered into conversation ’about her family and manner of life, till, by degrees, I insenfibly introduced her neighbours, and with the most careless air I could assume, asked her who 
that 
[ 36 ] 
that pretty woman was with her child, whom I had Seen from her garden? 
“Oh! dear madam, ” Said She, they are very unhappy people; it is a charming boy, but that young lady is not his mother, his mother is dead, and that is her sister : they were two handsome young women, well brought up; but their father, Mr. Westly, could give them nothing when he was alive, nor leave them anything when he died, which happened just before the birth of this boy : but though they had no money they were both very handsome, and a young gentleman of fortune took a fancy to the eldest, and married her privately. Being Sent abroad. Soon afterwards, by his father, he left her to the care osa friend, and that friend was him whom your ladyship Saw 
play[ 
[ ] 
playing with the child that day, of whom he is very fond, which friend, as Soon as Mr. Westly died, placed the two sisters in that house, with a Servant to attend them, where the eldest lay in, and died Soon after, leaving her sister, quite a girl, without a single person to take care of her but that friend, till Mr. Medley should return, who died also abroad : So that poor miss Westly lives a very melancholy life here, shunned by everybody, as I believe most people thinks she is the gentleman’s mistress, who now and then visits her, but I dare say she is as innocent as I am ^ yet people will judge according to appearances, madam.” 
This narrative, told in So plain, yet satissatftory a manner, by the good woman, who was a degree in life above the lower sort of cottagers, 
pleased 
. [ 39 ] 
pleased me very much. I respected her for not being too ready, like the malicious part of the world, to judge hardly of people under misfortunes, and to look upon everybody and everything in the worst light j but it was highly necessary for me, I thought, to have this affair thoroughly cleared up, and my honest intelligencer’s story authenticated. 
I therefore affected not to credit her, when she warmly stood up in defence of miss westly’s character : but after having asked a number of questions. Said, that I thought the gentleman I Saw with her, appeared not only fond of the child but of the young lady, and Jloe of him, 
“No, indeed Madam, ” replied my informer, “were you to hear and See as much of them as I have, you would not believe any otherwish 3 than 
[ 4° ] 
than I do. He comes but Seldom; never stays; is almost always either in the garden or in a parlour, where the windows and doors are open for everybody to See. And as to her, she declares she owes everything to him, and looks up to him with that reverence and respedt she would to her preserver, as the most benevolent of men, as he is good and generous, without expedfation of reward, these are her very words, madam : file can can talk very well, being always reading a number of books, and then file lings sometimes like any nightingale.” 
When I had got all the intelligence I could, I returned home with my head full of my generous bell ville’s care of these unfortunate people : yet I could not help thinking, pofiibly prompted by a little jealousy, 
still 
[ 4« ] 
still lurking in my breast, that the extreme youth and beauty of miss vv^estly, added to her condition, were Sufficient to tempt any man to take advantage of that situation, and indeed.to put my bellville’s fidelity to a Smart trial. 1 could not help thinking also, that while Ihe remained thus alone under his protection, both her and his reputation were injured his, as he lay under the Scandal of keeping a mistress, and hers, in being kept. Neither did I think that her retreat would prove an eligible place on its being discovered, but how to remove her from it I was very much at a loss. The point to be Settled was a nice one, and no Small delicacy was required in the management of it. To have urged Bellville to Send her to Some distant Spot, and by So doing to put it out of his power to 
assist 
_ 42 j 
afiisther, in circumstances additionally distressful, would have been cruel: and yet her living where he could see her continually, without my being acquainted with what pasted between them, was alarming to my heart. How could I be Sure that he would be always proof against frequent and uninterrupted conversations with So fine a girl 1 Besides, he had not mentioned a Syllable of this affair to me. I therefore resolved (though I would not advise any woman to be angry with her husband) to draw up a little on his want of confidence in me. 
Accordingly, a s Soon as I came home, I put on, before Bellville, an air of unusual indifference, which in an hour or two operated agreeably to my wishes. I at first appeared rather negligent of him. When he 
Seized 
[ 43 ] 
Seized my hand, I drew it back in a hurry, and when he attempted to kiss me, broke from him. Seemingly quite engrossed by Some trifle or other. 
At length he Said, “My dear Camilla, what’s the matter with you? I have certainly done Something that you do not approve of, or you are very capricious today“ 
“allow the justness of your first conjecture readily, ” Said I. 
1 am extremely Sorry, ” replied he, taking hold of my hands, to hear you shy So; but what have I done to occasion this cruel change in your behaviour? If you will not tell me my fault, my love, how shall I mend it ?” 
“Perhaps you may not look upon what you have done to occasion it in a censurable light, ” Said I: perhaps 
[ 44 3 
haps you may have no desire to remove the cause of my uneasiness“ 
“injurious furmises are these?? you know my heart, you must: also be assured that I am excessively pained at being thought to have Said or done anything to merit your disapprobation.” — 
\ My disapprobation, ” Mr, bell /ville, replied I, “is not of So much ■ consequence as that of the world; We Should not only avoid the commission of evil, but carefully guard against the stightest appearance of it : for how often is char after ruined and peace destroyed by unfavourable appearances! When we do not pay a strict regard to reputation in the purejl fense of the word, we are generally careless about our actions, and that [carelesthess drives us into 
indis 
[ 45 1 
indiscretions, if not immoralities -- ” 
''And to what does all this tend, 
my dear, ” Said he, interrupting me, why So much seriousnefs in your features? And what means the Solemnity os your Mr. Bellville r Why am I not your dear Charles? Would a lesion of morality have less effedf, do you imagine, upon me, prefaced by those endearing monosyllables ?” 
“pshaw, ” said I, smiling, and pushing him gently from me, “I was engaged upon a very serious Subject, and therefore I believed that a solemnity of aspect and language were highly proper to give dignity to my design.” 
O 
“You are a dear charming creature, ” answered he, fondly kissing me, ‘‘ what never ending variety | ‘ You don’t appear to me the same wo man two hours together, and yet aro 
always 
[ 46 I 
always most uniformly good and agreeable.” 
“Not more So than the lovely miss Westly, ” Said I Smiling on him, while I watched every turn of his features. 
“miss Westly !” replied he, a little Surprised, what, do you know poor Griffy Westly, my dears Pray how long has Shebeen honoured with your acquaintance? She would, I am Sure, think herself very happy to be undtryour protection“ 
“you Serious, my dear bell ville, ” answered I, transported to See him So calm and undisturbed at a discovery which I feared might have ruffled him. 
‘‘ Yes, I am, by all thacs good. This poor girl and her sister were left to my care by a friend, who is since dead. His wife too, the sister of Griffy, is also dead : Griffy therefore 
re[ 
[ I 
remaining with a little nephew In a very distressful way, friendship, honour, and humanity, all demand powerfully my ashstance, and I have ashsted them.” 
I commend you highly for your kindness to them, ” Said I, “but why have you shown it in So clandestine a manner? Had you made me your confidant upon the occasion, you would not have found me less willing than yourself to discharge your friend’s trust with the stricstest honour, and to be generous to tbose whom he left behind in straightened circumstances.” 
“I believe you, my Camilla — but during my friend’s life, I judged it So necestary to be Secret, lest his family should be alarmed, that I have since been So from habit. I am now trying to make his father So far reconciled to his marriage as to allow Something 
[ 48 ] 
for the maintenance of the child, and I hope to be a successsul advocate; but I own I am utterly at a loss to know what to do with poor Gisiffy, as her youth, her agreeable person, and her total want of money, may subject her to numberless inconveni encies. To leave her destitute of a Subsistence will be cruel, and — ” “Stay, ” Said I,, “let me consider.” 
I thought immediately of you, my dear — “Perhaps, ” Said I, “Mrs. Burton may be able to recommend her to Some lady who likes to have a genteel young person about her by way of companion; in which situation, at a distance from the place wsherestie has been unjustly suspetsted, She may remain free from afpersions. Till we can fo provide for her, let her be with me, As to the boy, 
you 
[ 49 J 
you may put him to nurse among the tenants. 
Bellville Seemed delighted with ray proposal, begged me over and over to pardon his unnecessary Secrecy about an affair which by no means required it, and afiured me that he never more would conceal the most: trifling incidents in which he had any concern. 
To confess the truth. Burton, the pleasure which he discovered at my desiring him to take this fine young girl home, roused Some suspicions which were rather disquieting— —. Ifincerelyhope, nay, lam willing to believe, that my amiable Charles has been attached to me alone since the union of our hands — But the way to keep him So — there’s the point — Shall I not, by urging him to bring this delicate creature under our 
vol. IL D rqol 
[ 5° ] 
roof, be answerable for any indiscretions which may arise between them? • — I flatter myself I Shall not, for my motive is a laudable one. I am loth, my dear, to trouble you, or any of your friends, with a person whosc carriage is not perfectly discreet, and whose conduct is not unexceptionable — Besides, if my dear Bellville escapes with honour from this fiery trial, I Shall feel triumphant sensa tions, and look upon his conjugal virtue to be impregnable. However, why Should I imagine that his fidelity is capable of being Shaken? — Somebody, indeed, says Somewhere, that opportimity and importunity are the devil! They certainly produce a great deal of mischief in the world; but this girl can never Surely think of the one, and i’ll take care that no harm shall arise from the other' ' 
[ 51 3 
LETTER XXXVI 
From the Same to the Same, ' 
'Y" OUR last letter, my dear friend, was particularly welcome to me, by affuising me of your extreme readiness to Serve a fine young creature, destitute of the means to Subsist herself agreeably to her education; you give me a great deal of pleasure. 
I have had her with me above a fortnight: I like her vastly; the more So, as my Charles is entirely negligent of her. 
When he brought her to me, he said“ “put you, now, miss Westly, under the protection of Lady Camilla, and you will Soon be Sensible of the agreeable change in your situation. 
D 2 A look 
I A ] 
A lock os the most refpedfful gratitude to him, accompanied by a modest downcast movement of her eyes, was all her reply. 
Mr. Frankly, who was present, Surveyed her with great attention, and I took the first opportunity to ask his opinion of her, when we were by ourselves, as he is a man of taste and Sensibility. 
He replied, that She was, according to his judgement, formed in the highest style of beauty; and that if he was not very much deceived, indeed, her disposition was as gentle as her countenance was pleasing. 
I was very well Satisfied with his decision; I love Such simplicity. Lucy Bellville appeared with Such winning naivete before She became Lady Conquer, and indeed She still retains enough of it to render her very attractive ^ 
[ s3 ] 
tractive; though the dissipation into which she has fallen, from her improper connexions, have deprived her of a considerable part of it, 
I find by your last that Lord Stanfield is inclined to do justice to the girl whom he has taken from her family. If the account which he has transmitted to his brother, be the real state of the cafe, I shall think better of him than I have ever yet done. 
Lady Conquer showed me the letter when she was down here for a few days — How came she by his letters? — I found out the affair by mere accident — We were Speaking of Lord Stanfield. She then pulled it out: I copied it, and Send you the contents of it under the Seal of Secrecy, becausc they are worth reading, and because I wish to know 
3. 
[ 54 I 
if every particular may be relied on. 
Lucy Suffered me to transcribc it without any hesitation. When I returned his lordship’s lettpr, I told her that Moil must be upon a very, fisiendly footing with her to trust her with his brother’s affairs. 
She blushed excestively, and Said, She brought it on purpose for me, be cause she knew I was very well acquainted with Mrs. Burton; who pofiibly would be kind enough to inform me what she had heard of the character of Miss Floyer, as Mr. Moil would be glad to know that she was deserving of the esteem which my lord had professed for her, “Is he not a good creature. Lady Camilla?” added she, to be fo anxious about the fate of his brother, who has, I believe, never shown fo much regard for him ?” 
[ 55 ] 
Poor Lucy! had she but married this insinuating Edward, instead of my friend George, she might have been both good and happy; but a bad man very often makes a bad woman, or at least puts her So much into the way of temptation, that if she escapes with her character unblemish .ed, she has uncommon good fortune Return the inclosed copy as Soon hs pbffible, with all the intelligence you can pick up, and be assured I remain 
Yours, 
Most affectionately, 
Camilla Bellville. 
P 4 
LET 
s6 I 
LETTER XXXVII 
Lord Stanfield to Mr. Moil, 
Dublin. 
YOU would have heard from me long ago, had I not been thrown into a situation entirely new to me, and very perplexing, 
I told you in my last, that Biddy Floyer, unable to Support the dread of not feeing me again, had, half re ludantly, half willingly, consented to accompany me hither; and that I never had been indulged in those liberties which every man has reason to think he may take with a woman who leaves her family, to put herself under his care. 
During our passage, which happened to be a quick one. She was almost always drowned in tears. 
[ 57 ] 
As Soon as we arrived here I took her a lodging at a convenient distance from my own, where I frequently visited her, to contribute to her peace, as well as my own amusement; and because I was Sure of meeting with the most welcome reception from her, in whatever frame of mind I was. 
Thus encouraged, I hoped I should, ere long, have nothing left to ask, nor she to grant. 
I was mistaken; for as 7 grew more pressing, Jlte became more reserved. It is true when she Saw me look Serious or disappointed, she endeavoured, by permitting a few innocent endearments, to revive my former cbearfulness; but if, animated by that permistion, I offered to improve my endearments to my own advantage, she as constantly drew back, and ap d 5 peared 
t 58 1 
peared Shocked to the last degree, at my presuming to take freedoms So unbecoming, at the Same moment declaring herself willing, by the languor in her eyes, to grant what she nevertheless most obstinately refused. 
As I always abhorred using force, ‘and Saw very plainly, that she loved me, I determined to let her alone, believing that she could not hold out much longer, contenting rnyself with a few kisses, while I waited for more Substantial pleasures; which, though not allowed, I frequently Seized by Some means or other. 
While I thus Suited mysels to her humour, she became So irresistibly pleasing to that I could Scarce 
enjoy a minute Spent out of her company. 
lobt 
59 ] 
I observed, however, with inexpressible concern, that She lost her Spirits, her appetite, and her colour. 
In vain I tried to enliven her, by fill the cheerful ways in my power; in vain I strove to stimulate her appetite, by procuring the greatest variety which could be brought to table — She Seemed to have no kind of desire for any food : but I attributed, her disinclination to everything Set before her to her confined manner of living, as she Seldom stirred out, and never appeared in public. 
I therefore sin fisted upon her going out every day with me in my chariot. 
She complied, but with apparent reluctance, and grew not at all better. 
I often caught her in tears, and whenever, with all poshble tender. d 6 ness, 
[ 6o ] 
nefs, I urged her to tell me the cause of them, she heaved a heartbreaking sigh, and begged me to forbear, saying, that a person in her situation could never know peace. 
I will confess that her Sorrow af feded me; that her modest carriage touched my heart most Sensibly — In those moments I caught her to my bosom, and told her that everything should be done that could make her happy, is she would but let me know on what her happiness depended. 
A fresh burst of grief was commonly her only answer, while she hastily disengaged herself from my arms. 
During; these Scenes between us my heartfelt all her distress : I Sympathised deeply with her, and became almost as melancholy as hersclf. 
One 
[ J ^ 
One day, coming into the room, ' I Saw her reading a letter, which she held in her hand, and Ihedding Such floods of tears over it, that I was absolutely alarmed for her health,, and in treated her in So earnest a manner to let me know from whence her affliction arose, that, holding out the letter with one hand, while fly covered her face with the other, There, my lord, ” cried She, read that and See if Such a father has merited Such treatment from his unworthy daughter! But I will fly to implore his pardon, and Shall lament my past folly to the end of my life.” 
I took the letter from her, and read what you will find enclosed. 
Scarce had I gone through it, when fly Said, but with much difficulty, I must go, my lord; I must leave you — May you be for ever blessed. 
with 
[ 63 ] 
with a woman who every way de serves you! and may you never think of me but when you are inclined to pity a poor lost girl, who, had stie never Seen your lordslsip, could not have been tempted by any other man thus shamefully to abandon a parent, who had never behaved So as to have reason to expect Such unjustifiable usage !” 
I was So buried in thought, and refiedted So deeply on what I had read, that I Sat silently gazing at her, till she rose hastily from her Seat, in order to pull the bell. 
I then caught her in my arms, and begged her to be composed, and to listen to me. 
“This letter, my Biddy, ’*'said I, 
is, I will own, a very astedting one; but as the cause of it can prcsently be removed, do not let it give you any 
farther 
[ 63 ] 
farther anxiety. You shall go to your father, my dearest girl, but I will carry you to him, and assist you in banishing every anxious emotion from his breast. You shall as Soon as poshble be my wife, and in that character you wsili be more capable of administering comfort to your father than in any other.” 
“Your wife, my lord !” Said she, can you poshbly be Serious r” 
‘‘ I am, by all that’s most Sacred, my dearest, ” replied I, straining her to my bosom, 'and kissing her eager 
!yo 
let me go — let me go, my lord — this is too much — I cannot bear it — you are too good — after what I have done, I am not worthy of being your wife.” 
“You have done nothing, my dear girl, ” Said I, holding her close, 
“but 
I 64 j 
but what you was, I am willing to hope, prompted to by your love for me. Do you not love me, Biddy? Only Say Soj only confess the truth — ” ‘‘ I must not answer you, ’' replied she. Sighing. “It will be no proof of my love to hurt the dear object of it— — my loyd, I beg you will let me go — I can never consent to what you have So generously proposed— — a girl without birth, without fortune, with a blot upon her reputation, which was the only treasure she had to boast of, by hav left her father’s house — is 
mg 
Such a girl fit to be ycitr wife? — Oh 
no!! 

Yes, my dearest, ” Said I, as she left her family only because she could not bear to part with me, she is, I think, the only pcrson whom I ciight to love: she is, I am Sure, the 
only 
r 65 ] 
only person whom I ever can love. tomorrow, therefore, ?this affair Shall be finished. We will then go to your father.” 
I left her as Soon as I could prevail on myself to quit the room; though she, to the last moment, stre nuousty opposed my intentions : but I positively insisted upon her making the necessary preparations for the performance of the marriage ceremony on the following morning. 
When I returned to her lodgings, ' the Servant whom I had hired to attend her told me, that she was in a high fever. 
Never in my life was I So much affected. 
I stew to her bedside, and watched over her with the tenderest sollici tude. 
She is now a little better but by no means out of danger. I never 
[ 66 ] 
leave her a moment, but when decency requires my absence; and she, Sensible of my love and concern, though incapable of saying much, frequently lifts my hand to her lips, and prcffes it with a grateful ardcur, which pierces my soul. 
If I lose her farewell to happiness: there can be none for me without this dear amiable tender creature, 
• As Soon as I found her fo ill that I could not flatter myself with the hopes of carrying her over to England, I wrote a letter to her father, which you will receive with his to her. 
I read it to her before I Sent it: she could only express the Satisfaction which she felt upon the occasion by watering my hand with her tears. 
Poor dear girl! how much has she suffered for me! how shall I reward her I — if she recovers — 
[67] 
I cannot write any more — my mind is quite distressed — how infinitely dearer is She to me now, though Some traces of her beauty are flown, than when it Slione in its full bloom! 
Say Something by way of consola tlon, if you can, Ned, for I am almost unmanned by looking on this poor, dear sick girl, who has Suffered So tnuch for me. 
Remember yourafhided, but. ever affectionate brother, 
Stanfield. 
. E IN 
I 68 3 
LETTER XXXVIII Mr. Floyer to miss floyerj 
(inclosed In the Foregoing.) 
O W Shall I begin? in what terms Shall I write to a daughter who has forgot her family and her father’s house, to ga away with a man whose very situation in life must exclude all hopes of any reparation on his part, if Such a false step could be, postibly, ever repaired? 
Oh, Biddy! Biddy 1 — was it for this I took So much care of your tender infancy? Was it for this (cutting reflection) that I denied myself a thousand Satisfactions, that I might insure the greatest of all, by leaving 
Some 
[ 69 1 
Some little matter to Save my child from the dreadful ruin into which She has voluntarily plunged hersels? — Was it for this — thou dearrelem blance of thy beloved mother, only in form — that I gazed on thee with * unutterable delight, and pressed thee to my bosom with unspeakable affection? — To have you fly from me at a time when your flight would be as destrudlive to yourself, as heavily lamented by me, at a time when I fondly, foolishly believed, that your mind was as pure as your person was agreeable! How very miserably have I been mistaken! — In whom shall I now place confidence, since my own child has deceived me? — But you have deceived yourself more. 
The man with whom you have chosen to remove yourself from your father’s protection, can only return 
your 
r 70 3 
your indiscreet attachment to him by first exciting you to strike a dagger to that father’s heart, and then leaving you to remember with horror his cruel triumph over your virtue, covered with infamy, and Smarting under the prcssures of indigence. 
Yeti cannot — cannot, let you thus perish, exposed to the loose and wanton appetite of every brutal libertine. 
Undone as you are, you shall not be rendered more wretched by being quite abandoned to the complicated miseries arising from want, added to the stings of a guilty conscience. 
Return, therefore, to me, my child, my poor ruined girl, and let us weep out the remainder of our lives together. — I feel myself a father fo much at this instant that I can only say, 2 come 
[ 71 '] 
come, come immediately. to me; continue no longer in the power of a man, who, whatever he may have Said or done to Seduce you from your home, and from your filial duty, ' must now look upon you with the just contempt which you have deserv ed from every one but from your 
Still affedlionate and 
Compassionating father, 
R. Floyer.’ 
LET. 
[ 72 ] 
LETTER XXXIX 
The Earl of Stanfield to Mr. Floyer. 
(inciosed with the foregoing one to his Brother.) 
SIR, 
OR Some time before your daughter received your letter she had So Severely repented of having left you, that the recollection of her undutiful behaviour greatly impaired her health : her repentance, however, aroseonly from the concern which she felt at being absent from fo good a father, and from the apprehended censures which might be levelled against her, on the apparent impropriety of Such a proceeding — I 
Swear 
.[ 73 1 
Swear by all that’s most Sacred, that her person is as pure as her amiable 
mind -- -- -- Would to heaven that I 
could Say that She was as well in health as she is virtuous! ' 
The anxiety which she has for Some time endured, on your account, added to your affecting remonstrances, threw her into a fever, which alone prevents me from performing my Solemn promise to marry her. 
The ceremony shall certainly be performed as Soon as she is restored to my wishes, as Soon as her health will permit. 
I cannot express what I have felt, what I still feel, for her though I hope she is rather better. 
I am also exceedingly grieved at having been the cause of fo much un eafiness to you. Sir; and wah with vol, II E the 
[ 74 ] 
the grcatcfi: impatience to call you father, as I shall ever esteem it an honour to be related to a man So truly worthy of that affectionate appellation, and who has shown So much tender consideration for So amiable a daughter, especially atatime when she appeared to you So undeserving of it. 
Be comforted, therefore, Sir, — Believe everything that you wish about your dear Biddy, whom I hope very soon to present to you by the title of 
Your very obedient, 
Stanfield. 
LETS 
75 ] 
LETTER XL 
Mrs. Burton to Lady Camilla Bellville. 
Return you the copies of the letters you transmitted to me, for which I thank your ladyship. Lord stanfield'’s letter alone would have fully Satisfied me with regard to his designs upon miss Floyer, had not his lordship himself dissipated all my doubts concerning his conduct, before the arrival of your packet. 
I had for Some time heard it reported everywhere, that Lord Stanfield would certainly marry Biddy Floyer j but as there are a thousand reports of this kind perpetually circulating about unmarried people, I gave no sort of credit to the rumour: 
E 2 
indeed. 
[ 76 ] 
indeed. Scarce ny attention to it, as I thought that I knew my lord too well to suppose that he would throw liim self away upon a woman who had really fixed a stain upon her character; and I at the Same time believed him to be more knowing in women than to be deceived. 
At length I heard that miss floy cr was dangerousty ill, and that his lordship Scarce stirred a moment from her. 
However, as many men entirely confine themselves with their mistres ses, I looked upon that intelligence as nothing extraordinary. 
To my great Surprise, he came one morning to me in a violent hurry, and told me that he was Soon to be married; adding, that as he waited for the recovery of the lady who had been extremely ill, I Should 
oblige 
, [ 77 ] 
oblige him very much by makngher a visit now and then. 
“You will pardon me, I hope, my Lord, ” Said I, not a little astonished at the freedom of this request, “when I tell your lordship, that I never visit people wh®m I know nothing of.” 
“As you will know her undoubtedly, ” replied he, rather warmed at my answer, “when she is Lady Stanfield, I see no impropriety in your being acquainted before with her.” 
Perhaps not, ” Said I, gravely, “but I wish your lordship would consider a little, that by giving your title to a woman you can neither confer real honour upon her birth, or any other qualifications necessary to render her worthy of being your wife, ” 
E 
It 
[ 78 I 
“It is quite Sufficient, Mrs. Burton, ” Said he, with a iierceness which he Seemingly wished to moderate, though he found no Small difficulty in reining it in, ‘‘ that I know her to be a woman of the strictest honour, with qualities which would adorn a higher station than I can raise her to; and as to her birth, where So much merit is So conspicuous, birth is very unnecessary, and can give but a mighty empty Satisfaction.” 
That her tender, though modest, affection for me, has injured her in the opinion of those women, whose virtue, with all their parade about it, is perhaps extremely disputable, I am not to learn; but when a woman’s virtue has been Severely tried, when it has stood firm against the strongest attacks, * even when she has had all the reason in the world to believe 
that 
[ 79 ] 
that her reputation was entirely lost, its purity is unquestionable. I Shall not, therefore, court you any longer to become acquainted with a lady whosc Society would do you honour, because She is posteffed of that intrinsic merit which is aferibed to So many women, justly aferibed to So few. But be as sured, if you decline this invitation,, you will never see me again.” 
How, my Lord !” Said I, amazed at his infatuation, “can you reasonably be displeased with your friends for (hewing their disapprobation of your marriage with a girl So far beneath you, and who, whatever (he is, has actually appeared here in the light of your mistress 
“Appearances are frequently deceitful, ” replied he, “and therefore ought to be as much guarded against, when evil, as the very actions them e 4 Selves — * 
[ 8o J 
Selves — I think, however, madam, that my eagerness to marry this lowborn girl, whom you affedtto despise, may ascertain her virtue better than a thousand asseverations, because I don’t remember that I was ever looked upon — till this present moment — as a man So very easy to be imposed upon. But whatever you choose to believe, I will stake my life in defence of her honour. She has, I grant, been guilty of a single indiscretion, of that indiscretion I myself was the cause; for it was occasioned be her love for me: the reflections which have tortured her mind since, have almost put an end to her life; and as She is still very weak and low, 
1 had wished for a lady of Mrs. burton’s understanding and converfi ble talents, to have ashsted me in trying to enliven her Sometimes; but 3 I have. 
[ 8i ] 
I have, I See, mistaken my woman, and once in my life, I believe I may venture to Say So, have been deceived.’* 
With thesc words, pronounced with all the acrimony he could discover in the utterance of them, he rose, and hurried towards the door. 
I stopped him, and told him, that if he would name the proper hour, I would call and see the lady; 
At first he looked Sullen, and was unwilling to Speak; but upon my addresting him again in a more obliging manner, he Said, “any hour, either morning or afternoon adding, that he should expect to See miss Floyer treated as if she was to she Lady Stanfield, as she would have been before, if she had not been taken ill.” 
He then walked away, rather with Stately Steps. In the afternoon, to E 5 humour 
I 82 ] 
humour my haughty cousin, Idreffed”, and ordered my chair to miss floyer^'s lodgings. 
As I had no very favourable opinion of the person to whom I was going, I consequently entered the room not in the best of humours. 
How greatly was I Surprised to see one of the prettiest women in the world, only quite emaciated and Sunk with illness, receive me with the greatest modesty and politeness! 
miss Floyer, now Lady Stanfield, is below the common size, but So elegantly formed, that you forget her want of height while you admire the fymetry of her whole figure. 
When I entered the room a beautiful blush overspread her fair face, and made her one of the most pisiorefque objects I have ever Seen. 
Her 
[ 83 I 
Her dress was Suited to her person and indisposition : it was plain, but genteely fancied. What astonished me chiefly was the great humility of her carriage, and the polite but judicious deference which (during our conversation, in which she bore a Small, though Sensible part) she paid both to my Lord and myself. 
She is actually pleasing beyond expreshon : she Seems almost to adore her lover, who behaved to her with a manly affection, which made him appear to considerable advantage in my eyes. 
When I rose up to take my leave, after a visit of an immoderate length for the first I ever made there, she politely thanked me for the honour I had done her. i 
When my lord waited on me to my chair, he also made me Some E gen 
r 84 1 
genteel acknowledgments, which I returned, by Speaking what I really thought of his favourite; and So charmed him with what I Said about her, that he asked me to promise for myself and Mr. Burton, to be present at his marriage, which was to be in a few days; adding, at the Same time, that he would call on Mr. Burton, to Secure him. 
I made no objetstion to his resolu lution : if She is all She looks to be, he cannot be unhappy; yet I have known most fallacious outsides. 
We have since been witnesses to the ceremony, and they are Set out for England. 
Now to yourself, my dear Lady Camilla.^how much do I approve of your having discovered no jealousy nor uneasiness to Mr. Bellville on miss westley’s account. Had you 
dis 
I 1 
/ discovered Such emotions, they ( might have provoked him, as he was 1 innocent, and could have been of no \ Service if he had been guilty. 
‘‘ My pride I know you will say, would have hindired ?northeast from taking notice of a husband So circumstanced.” 
Well — be it So — Pride is necessary Sometimes. 
I Shall be extremely glad to have it in my power to Send for your little Griffy, but I have not yet heard of anything which will Suit her. 
very 
LET[ 
[ J 
LETTER XLI 
Lady Camilla Bellville to Mrs. Burton, 
HAT a dreadful affair has happened! what a shocking Scene! 
Lord Conquer lies murdered by Moil, and poor indiscreet, unhappy Lucy, will not long, I fear, Survive him. 
I Scarce know how to begin a narrative, the very thoughts on which sill me with horror. 
An express arrived at Mr. myron’s, and another at our house, to let us know that Lord Conquer was dead, and that Lady Conquer was very ill. 
We Set out for London directly, after having questioned the servant 
as 
[ *7 1 
as to the manner of his lordship’s death : upon which he told us that he had been killed by Mr. Moil, in his lady’s dreshng room; but that he knew nothing farther. 
This information made me shudder; and I Secretly accused my poor friend of having been actually guilty of a crime, which now I hope was only suspected; fatal suspicion! which has deprived Conquer of life, at a time when he was most unfit to die, and driven Moil into banishment for having killed him. Few men indeed would have tamely endured the provocation which the latter received, and the wretched wife of the former will be for ever stigmatised as the Sole cause of this unfortunate affair; and it will indeed most probably occasion her death, as she is with child. 
We 
[ s8 ] 
We found her sitting in her chair, pale, trembling, and more like a beautiful corpse than the lovely Lady Conquer. 
As Soon as we entered the room She rose, advanced towards me and her brother, who Suffers extremely for her, and giving a hand to each of us, fell on my neck, without being able to utter a Syllable. 
Bellville Supported her back to her chair. 
When the first stow of Sorrow Subsided a little. She (looking on us both with a tenderncss which drew tears from our eyes, while her remained dry\hrough the extremity of her grief) Said, “I am not guilty, indeed I am not, my brother — Indeed, indeed, my dear Lady Camilla, I am innocent of this dreadful catas trophe.” 
compose 

[ 89 ] 
compose yourself then, my dear Lucy, '’ replied I, pressing her hand, “you are very ill, you burn like fire : 1st me persuade you to be put to bed immediately : quiet and rest, will, I hope, restore you.” 
“Never, ” Said she, “never : for though I have really committed no crime, I shall be ever thought guilty of a capital indiscretion; an indiscretion which has deprived my hus band of his life, which has destroyed my reputation, and which will be the death of the unfortunate Moil, who will be condemned, like myself, for an action he never attempted.” 
“I don’t understand you, Lucy, ” Said my Bellville, whose heart bled for her distress : “if you are not culpable, why do you accuse yourself?” 
“Hear me, my dear Charles, ” replied she, “I will tell you in the best 
man[ 
[ ] 
manner I can what pasted : — but my head is very bad yet."" 
I perceived that she was exceedingly out of order, and persuadedbellville to make her postpone her relation till another time; but she insisting upon clearing herself as well as she was able, we attended silently to her account, which she delivered in the following terms: 
Finding myself very much indis posed on the fatal day, 1 staid at home, and gave orders to be denied to everybody but to a few intimates i having dined quite alone, I went up to my dreffinguoom, and throwing myself upon a sopha, fell asteep.” 
“On a Sudden I was waked by a loud conversation between Lord Conquer and Mr. Moil, closeto me, ‘who Soon drew their Swords. My 
Lord 
[ 9' ] 
Lord fell, declaring, however, before he expired, that Moil was not guilty of his death, as he had provoked him to draw. 
“On the first sight of their Swords, ithrewmyfels between them, hoping by So doing, to prevent mis chief; but Moil put me by, and laid his antagonist bleeding at his feet. — The Servants could not get into the room time enough to Save their master, who died in five minutes. 
“While Some ran for a Surgeon, and others were busy about my Lord, Moil (having first earnestly charged my woman to take care of me, and to Send for you both) quitted the house. 
“From this time I can rccolledt nothing that happened, all was horror and confusion, 
“Maldon 
[ 9^ ] 
Maldon (her woman) took me out of the room when I recovered from my fainting, and never left me till your arrival.” 
Such was her dark account of a still more dark affair. We insisted upon her going to bed; and as I Sat by her with only Mrs. Maldon attending, I asked her what had passed. 
‘‘ Mrs. Maldon Said that her Lady had not been very well all day, and had declared (he would See no company : but that not having ordered the porter to deny her to Mr. Moil, who had been used to call pretty frequently, he was admitted as usual; that after a very Short time my lord came home; that She Soon heard a great noise, and upon my lady’s Screaming, ran upstairs, but came tco late to be of any Service, his lordship 

[ 93 ] 
ship being dead; that my lady fainted in Mr. moyle’s arms j who, as Soon as she appeared, strongly recommended her ladyship to her care, and ran out of the house, without being detained by anybody.” 
You may imagine, my dear loiii fa, how this affair distreffes us; and must take this impersedt account of a Scene which has been attended with Such shocking consequences, till I can procure a more intelligible one, 
I am, indeed, as well as my poor Charles, half dead with terror and fatigue. 
Mr. Myron is aso exceshvely affected with my lord’s tragical death, and with poor lucy’s very unhappy condition. 
LET[ 
[ 3 
LETTER xlil; 
From the Saivie to the Same. 
E have at length got a little farther intelligence about the dreadful Scene mentioned in my last; but what we have heard has not rendered us more easy with regard to what s past, and what is, probably, to come. 
Poor Lady Conquer continues very ill j and the letters of which I send you copies for your private perusal, do not tend to make us So Satisfied with her condudlas we wish to be. 
She has Seen them, though confined to her bed with a fever, in consequence of her fright and a mif carrkiee, 
w — 
Deaf 
[ 95 3 
Dear unfortunate Lucy! how sincerely do I feel for her! 
My Bellville too Is half distradled since the receipt of these letters. From the purport of them, there is but too much reason to believe that her thoiightless carriage (not to use a harsher epithet) occasioned all this infelicity. Should she recover, her charader will, I doubt, have an indelible stain in it; for though Moil was exceedingly culpable, no man, I think, would have gone Such lengths without great encouragement. 
these letters, though apparently written with a design to remove all the blame from her to himself, show too plainly (as he could no more conceal his passion for her than his terrors on her account) that there must have been a strange inattention to propriety in her conduct: 
, 
[ 96 ] 
dudl, if not a strong propensity to giddiness, No man, after having killed a lady’s husband, would dare to write to her and to her brother, without being very well assured that the lady at least would give his epistle a favourable reception — though he would not have you imagine that he thinks So — 
But let these extraordinary pieces Speak for themselves — 
L E T[ 
[ ] 
LETTER XLIII 
The Hon. Edward Moil to the Right Hon. Lady Conquer. 
(This and the following Letter were inciosed in the foregoing one.) 
O W shall I venture to address you, madam, with the hand which has So lately but fo unwillingly deprived him of life who ought to have been dear to you, could he have deserved the pofiefiion of Such an angel I 
I will not, however, disturb the ashes of the dead, nor force you to rested: upon the failings of a husband, which Should be, with that husband, buried in oblivion. Nor should I have hinted at them at all but in my vol. II F own 
[ 98 ] 
own justification, for having presum ed to look upon you with eyes of love while you was the wife of another. To behold you with those eyes I was encouraged by the licenti ousness of his way of life, and unmerited indifference which he discovered in his behaviour to the loveliest of women : I was encouraged also to believe that he could neither enjoy that life long, nor, while living, defer ve the warmth, the ardent affection, which almost every other man would have died to obtain. 
these, Lady Conquer, were my inducements to difclose a pafiion which preyed upon my heart j but which, though it can never be eradicated during my existence. Should have been concealed, had not the abovementioned inducements prompted me to make an avowal of it. 
I never 
[ 99 ] 
I never meant to injure, never could I have believed myself capable of injuring anything in the fiightest shape belonging to you. Certainly I never could have thought of committing an action, which must, I knew, not only drive me from your presence, but even deprive me of all future hopes, which I was at liberty to indulge before I unfortunately pierced your hushand’s breast with a thrust which struck at his vitals: 
I 
for unworthy as he was, the sight of him in the agonies of death must have filled you with the most painful sensations — But could a man who adored you like me, stand by tamely and See you insulted, defamed, and abused in the grossest language, and not vindicate you from his soul, unjust, and brutal afpersions? — No I could not. Heaven, whom I dare to in f 2 yoke 
[ loo J 
upon this awful occasion, knows the sincerity of my heart, when I Swear by all that is binding, that I had no ill intentions with regard to your ladyship, or to the unfortunate object whom I, in a luckless moment, destroyed. My extreme tenderness for you wouid\i2aq deterred me from lifting up my hand against Lord Conquer; and nothing but that impulse which nature gives us for self preser vation fiould have obliged me to draw my sword in opposition to him, in his own house. 
Pardon me, therefore, too charming Lady Conquer, and — if it be posh blei — do not too Severely condemn a man who is undone by his own folly, and who must ever deplore, with the deepest regret, a condudf, which, though perfectly unintentional, and consequently not totally undeserving 
of 
[ ] 
of forgiveness, might possibly have a very criminal appearance. 
I shall Suffer Sufficiently for that conduct by the cruel distance I am under a necessity of keeping from all my Soul holds dear, and from the corroding reflections which will crowd into my mind whenever I think of the racking disquietude I have occasioned to her, to whom, notwithanding what is past, I shall ever remain most faithfully, most tenderly devoted, as long as I am able to Subscribe myself 
Edward Moil. 
P. S. I have ventured, madam, to write to Mr. Bellville also, that you may be cleared of any injurious as perfions. 
F 3 LET 
102 
LETTER XLIV 
The Hon. Edward Moil to Charles Bellville, Esq. 
Dear Sir, 
After having brought your truly amiable sister into a situation So exquisitely distressful, what can I Say to apologise for my attempting to trouble you wdth a letter, which may probably make you start, as if the very touch of it would produce more mischief. 
But with a heart still beating wsith compassion for the assiidled Lady Conquer, I could not remain silent while her character is vilified by a thousand ssandercus tongues, and while she is not unsuspedled, even by her brother and her friends. And 
should 
f 
[ '°3 ] 
should I not deserve infinitely more anguish than I at present endure, did I not make an effort, at least, to exculpate her from calumnies which she has by no means merited; — calumnies vv’hich my egregious folly alone has occasioned } 
That I have loved your charming sister, ever since I became acquainted with her, I freely confess; and I possibly loved her more passionately than ever man loved woman; yet (I mean not to boast of my particular discretion, many men would, perhaps, have acted as circumspedlly, if inspired by So pure an object; I never took any improper advantage of the neglect, nay, groffness and brutality of the man who had once shamefully Seduced her. I could not, however, drive from my heart a passion, which from his lordship’s irregularities, F 4 might. 
[ '°4 I 
might, I flattered myself, one day be legally gratified, pre suppofing rnyself happy enough to gain Lady con quer esteem. 
Animated by this prosped, which Seemed to me not a'distant one, I strove, I confess, to render myself agreeable to Lady Conquer : I So far Succeeded as to find her repose a confidence in me; and to See her prefer me to those who adored her, with perhaps not less ardour than myself; though they could not postiblylove her with more sincerity. 
The confidence which She reposed in me, flattering as it was, could however give no alarm to her virtue; for I never offered to take any liberties, which might not, with the stridlest propriety, be admitted by Lord conquers wife : nor could all my eloquence, only to obtain a single 

I >°5 ] 
gle promise to bestow herself on me when She became her own mistress, prevail. Blushes and averted eyes, with requests not to talk upon a sub jedl which she dared not to hear, were the discouragements which I received from her. And indeed her discouraging answers were So often repeated, accompanied with looks full of Such virtuous indignation, that they struck me to the soul. They had Such an effedf upon me (when I tormented myself by imagining they arose partly from want os inclination for me, as well as from discretion) that I lost my appetite, could take no rest, and began to feel myself very ill. 
Lhetf and not till then, this adorable woman pitied me : she not only pitied me, but was indulgent enough to discover her sensations in mv fa f 5 your[ 
[ ] 
your, though neither my ill health, sighs, tears, or persuasions, weresufii ciently forcible to procure me a permission to declare my sensations in hers. She Suffered me to See her — to be near her — no more indulgencies were granted. 
To satissy her angelic delicacy, as well as to express my acknowledgments for her kind compassion duriiig my indisposition, I Submitted to everything she thought proper to require of me, and strove to wait with patience till I might be authorised to Speak upon a topic that had engrossed my attention. 
In the mean time she herself began to be out of order; and her illness naturally demanded, from a heart So filled with her dear image as mine was, all the tenderest solicitude and 
astidui 
[ i ] 
assiduities. And all were, I thought, too little; especially when I Saw her treated with rudeness or neglect, with coldness or contempt, by a husband, who, by that behaviour, plainly showed how very Small his regard was for her. 
I frequently called on her to sit with her when ssie was not wtu enough to go abroad, for an hour or two j Sometimes read to her, and endeavoured, by every innocent me. thod I could think os, to wile away the time, and to alleviate her unea ssness. 
With that view alone I called upon her on that fiital day. 
The Servants told me my lady was in her dressing-room. 
As I had been always accustomed to go up without ceremony, there was none, I thought, needed then. 
F 6 I Sound 
[ Jo ] 
I found her half reclined upon the Soph a : her lovely eyes were closed; her head leaned against the fide of it; next to which stood a chair, in which I Softly Sat down, unwilling to interrupt her repose, as I hoped it would be conducive to her ease, stie having complained much of late of a violent headache. 
I felt, I confess, a pleasure I had never enjoyed before: to Such an excess was I transported, that while I gazed on her uninterrupted, I almost devoured her beauties with my eager eyes; till tempted by a little gentle sigh, which heaved her Snowy bosum, I rastily ventured to lay my face close to hers, and to taste her balmy breath: my hands too involuntarily strayed towards hers, though So Softly that (he did not discover my presump tiom 
In 
[ 109 I 
In this, I am ready to own, indif creet attitude, I enjoyed a more lively rapture than I had ever in my wshole life felt; it was indeed too exquisitely pleasing to last. 
I had not, I am certain, been five minutes in the room, before Lord Conquer entered. 
At the sight of me he started, and from that moment looked inflamed in the highest degree. 
Advancing immediately to me, he Said, with the most taunting air, “And So Sir, I have caught you at last; andd — n me if I don’t make you pay for it, and that d — ’d b— — too my wise — 
Then stepping back to the door, he cried — Tom — Spencer — Where are you all? — But nobody appearing (he was indeed So choked with raofe that 
O 
he could not makehimself heard) he 
came 
[ UO ] 
came up again close to me and staring at me, with a Sneer, Said, And So that face and that figure have done the business— — — nher — d — n her — ’' 
“Plold, my Lord, ” replied I, in a low voice, (for my lady was still asteep, to my great Surprise, and I dreaded her being frighted) but with a resplute tone, Lady Conquer is as free from guilt, as free from the intention of it as an unborn infant; nor does stie know of my being here.” 
Tell this pretty tale to another, ” replied he, with a grin of horror, “it won’t pass upon me. Where are my people? — though I want none, my own arm will revenge my wrongs.” 
Having uttered those words, he drew, 
y Stay 
[ I i ^ ] 
“Stay, my Lord, ” Said I, putting by his Swmrd, “were I guilty, I would be the first to give you an opportunity to do yourself justice, but -- -- -- ” 
“s’death Sir, ” replied he, making a lunge at me, “I Shall not wait your leisure nor your leave.” 
At that instant the noise awake ' my lady. She shrieked and ran be tween us. 
Terrified at her danger, I begged her to retire 3 but she paying no regard to my entreaties, I strove to put her aside. 
.My Lord then, with the most barbarous fury, turning the point of his Sword from me to her, and calling her by a name too gross to be repeated, I was, I confds, no longer mailer of myself. 
To disengage him, therefore, from an object a thousand times dear 
] 
er to me than my life, I cried “Come my lord, I am ready for you." 
He ran at me, and while I was endeavouring to defend myself, I unfortunately plunged my Sword into his body. 
He fell immediately, saying“ “all over with me, Moil; but I alone am to blame, as I obliged you to draw." 
He could say no more, and in a Short time afterwards fetched his last breath. 
My lady fainted away; but I Saved her from falling on the floor, by catching her in my 
arms. 
The Servants, by this time, filled the room; while Some flew to their master, Mrs. Maldon assisted her lady. I staid till life once more animated her lovely bosom; .and then, 
pressing 
[ i ] ® 
prefiing 1^ cold hands in mine, and earnestly recommending her to the care of her woman, left the house diredfly. 
I may be Safe by quitting the kingdom; but in no place will my peace of mind be ever restored, till I have vindicated the honour of the most virtuous of women, which has I fear been, through my folly and indiscretion, too much calumniated. 
Could I by Sacrificing my life recall what’s past, I do alture you I would freely resign it— — me therefore entreat you, Sir, to pity your sister, and to clear her character;; is truly deserving of your warmest friendship and your kindest protection. Let the voice of nature plead for the most innocent, as well as the most amiable of women — If I can 
but 
[ IH ] 
but hear that her peace is re establifiled, and that fiic is generoiifly treated by her brother and her friends, I care not what becornes of myself, as I now must not dare to hope for an event, w hich I once fcndly imagined might have completed the felicity of my future lise. 
To your fraternal affection, Mr. Bellville, let me again, in the strongest terms, recommend this dear, beloved creature, who cannot but be ever adored by ‘ 
The wretched 
The inexpressibly wretched, 
Edward Moil. 
LET 
11 
LETTER XLV 
Lady Camilla Bellville to Mrs. Burton. 
Distresses crowd So fast upon us that Scarce are we recovered from one misfortune, when we are assaulted by another. 
My poor unhappy sister is, I believe, I am afraid, very near being a victim to the Manes of her Lord. 
She might have got over the loss of her husband, she might have got over a disorder occasioned by her terror and Surprise; but she cannot get over the loss of Moil. 
His letter was criven into her own 
o 
hand. She was not, indeed, at that time, capable of reading it, being very ill; but we had no right to keep it 
from 
[ 116 1 
from, her had we known from whence it came, 
That letter, added to the certainty of its being impofiible for her to admit him again, has had a fatal effetst upon her in her weak Slate, 
The day after the receipt of it, I found it in her hand as She lay in her bed, quite wet thro’ with tears. 
I asked her what heavy addition She had met with to her grief. 
After a little hesitation, looking earnestly at me, with eyes in which her approaching distblution was but too visible, She said faintly, “I will not conceal anything from you, my dear sister; but I am not worthy, ” continued She, grasping my hand, “of that affectionate epithet — I have lost all claim to every creature’s esteem - — to the regard of every being who 
bears 
[ •■? ] 
bears the least resemblance in point of goodness to my excellent relations.” 
“Why So, my dear Lady Conquer, ” replied I, Since you are, by your own account, and by Mr. moyle’s letter to Mr. Bellville, perfectly cleared from the imputation of any designed indiscretion.” 
‘‘ I am, I am. Said Ihe eagerly — Moil has generoufiy cleared me — but he could not read my heart — he could not See that his image was So deeply engraved on it as for ever to render it a stranger to felicity. Yet indeed, my dear Lady Camilla, I must Say, I believe I never Should have ventured to indulge an inclination for him, had I not been So cru' elly treated by Lord Conquer. But I will not insult his memory; I ought not to insult it, for I was unfortunately instrumental to his death. — 
Young, 
[ ii ] 
Young, thougbtless, and too much pleased with admiration, I was introduced into the gay world with no kind and discreet friend to guide my inc: ?<perienced Sleps. You, however, ^vntly warned me of the danger os listening too eagerly to the Syren accents of flattery, to the Soothing tongues of. tliofe who Speak only to destroy. 
“But my lord should have been himself that friend : he Soon growing weary of me, and Soon tuning after other pleasures than domestic ones, left me, not only to my own conduct, but left me also among a Set of wtctches, who are ever infamously vigilant to ensnare the innocent and unwary., Among these men, my hufband’s intimates, L distinguiflted Mr. Moil; who, in a short time, 
I plainly perceived, behaved to me 
in 
[ i ] 
in a very different manner, with an attention and with a resped, which, added to his fine person, and elegant accomplishments. Soon won upon my heart, and made the contrast between Lord Conquer and him but too striking for my peace — Yet I concealed my feelings, concealed every movement of my heart from him, till he grew pale, melancholy, 
and unhappy. Then -- -- -- -- -- Oh!! — 
! Lady Camilla — let any woman who loves, and has the least Sensibility, place herself in my situation, and imagine what I felt. 
“I loved — I do not— — deny it, and consequently my tender compassion discovered itself; never criminally, yet perhaps imprudently.' -- -- 
But it is all at an end. -- -- 1 Swear, 
however, by everything that’s awful, that I never was the wretched thing 
Lord 
[ 120 ] 
Lord Conquer called me : and, if I lose not entirely your affection, my dear friend, I will try to be Satisfied with my lot; though, indeed, added she, with a deep sigh, “it is a hard one: for had not Lord Conquer stole me, in a manner, from my good, kind, loving brother, I might have been now happy — happy, with my amiable Lady Camilla.” 
I was excessively affeefed with this unfortunate creature’s distress: what she had uttered was So just and rational, that, though I ought, poshbly, to have condemned lome part of her narration, yet I stopped — wondering at my presumption — Was I not nearly in the same situation } was I not wedded to a libertine whom I loved, and who left me at an early age; left me to my own conduct.?.? — I not been providentially preserved 
[ 12‘ ] 
Served, 'I might have been as indis creet as my poor Sufifering young friend. 
From our examples then let every ' woman avoid the stightest connedions with the man of loose principles. Libertines may assume virtues which they have not; they may appear to be reformed, but who, without the greatest temerity can put any confidence in them? — She who is rash enough to trust a man of a licentious disposition will pay dear for her folly. Such presumption will certainly be attended with undesirable, very probably, withdestrudive consequences. 
In continuation. 
The young, the beautiful, the amiable Lady Conquer is — no more. Death has Spread a paleness over that vol. II G face 
[ 122 ] 
face which was once So blooming : yet is she still lovely — She was simplicity itsels — Her eyes Spoke the language of her heart — How mild was she! how easy! how artless! — She was of too tender a frame to struggle with an inclination, which wounded, fatally wounded, her honour, health, and peace. 
Just when she believed her end to be approaching, she Sent to desire Mr. Myron, her brother, and myself, to come to her. 
I had not indeed long quitted the room, at which time she Said, “Adieu my dear, dear Lady Camilla, we shall Soon part for ever.” 
When we entered the chamber, she was ordering her woman to Support her with pillows, that she might (she Said) be the better able to take her last leave of us. 
At 
[ 223 ] 
At this affecting Scene, my poor Bellville covered his face with his handkerchief to hide the gushing tears, while he sighed out, “Dear, dear, unfortunate girl!” 
“Do not grieve for me my brother, ” Said she, “I shall Soon be at rest. .Dis better to die than to live. But — I have Something to ask of you — — and of you., my good Mr, Myron, my worthy neighbour in my happier days~ sit down by me while I am able to Speak So as to be understood. Let me entreat you — let me conjure you to take my poor infant Son under your protetstion — let him be brought to me, ” added she faintly, turning her eyes to Maldon, who attended. 
‘‘ Thank heaven I have not a daughter, to be one day as I am 
f 
now! 
G 2 “Dear 
(( 
[ 224 ] 
Dear little fellow! — He will Soon be an orphan; but he may never have reason to repine at his being So, is you, my honoured friends, will kindly condescend to undertake the care of him. — -1 am not, however, fo anxious about his life, or his health, as I am about his principles. — Let him, my uncle, and my brother, be very early taught to shun the vices of his father, and the indiscretion ofhis mother. — Above all, teach him not only to avoid every criminal pursuit, but everything that has even a criminal appearance; and tell him, when he has sense enough to feel what he hears, that his mother lost her life for being supposed guilty of an adfion, the bear idea of which chilled her with horror. 
“My poor boy !’’ continued she, kissing the child, who laughed, dear 
little 
[ >25 ] 
little innocent, quite pleased with his expiring mother’s caresses— — bidding Maldon put him into his uncle’s arms, “There, my dear friend, my Charles, my best of brothers, ” cried she, “receive this last pledge of your sister’s affection— — I distress you too much.” 
“I cannot Speak to you, i>ucy, ” Said my Bellville, almost Suffocated with his Sighs, “but your child shall, I Swear to you, be as dear to me as my own.” 
I know he will, I knov/ he ’ will, ” replied she; ‘‘ my excellent Lady Camilla confirms what you Say with her eyes — but do not weep for me — you ought rather to rejoice at my going to be released from a world fuilof trouble andmiserv. Farewell — I cannot Say any more — only that I die in charity with everybody, ” 
G 3 This 
f 126 ] 
This last expression v/e construed into a forgivenels with regard to Moil; though She, out of delicacy, no farther explained her meaning. 
She then desired to be laid down, and begged us ail to leave her; declaring, that She chose to be left to her own thoughts. 
Mr. Myron and I rose up, though reludlantly, to depart. 
Bdiville still lingering behind. She caught his hand, and pressing it affectionately to her lips, Said, “How hard it is to part with those we love! Oh! my brother!” — and expired. 
As none of us believed that she was quite So near her dissolution, the shock was the greater. 
I hurried Bellville out of the room, but did not atempt to say anything to him by way of consolation, till the violence olhis Sorrow began to be 
abated 
[ 127 ] 
abated — bcllville’s passions are not of the tumultuous kind, nor do they vent themself in noisy complaints: I fear, therefore, that his Sufferings on this melancholy, this very melancholy occasion, will be the more Severe. 
I advised him to go down to the Wood immediately, and he consented, as much on my account, I believe indeed, as on his ow?i. 1 am obliged to confine my concern as much as possible to my own bosom because I am afraid of making any addition to his. 
Of what advantage is it to be So lovely! — This poor girl. Scarce eighteen, was nipped in the bud of life by sharp affliction, undeserved reproach, and insupportable remorse. 
G 
LET[ 
[ ] 
LETTER XLVL 
From the Same to the Same. 
7kt woa. 
E are now here, Mr. Myron having kindly undertaken everything relating to the interment of our dear departed young friend. Her lovely Smiling infant falls under my care, and is very fond of me already, though my dear bell viile can hardly bear to See him, without increasing Sorrow. — “Poor boy, ’" does he osten Say, while the tears roll down his cheeks on those of little Geo; ge, “So looked thy unhappy mother, ” and then turns aside and Smites his breast in all the agony of grief. 
Time, 
[ 129 ] 
Time, I hope, and my endeavours to remove, or lefien the anguish of his mind, will prove efficacious. I tremble for his health : but I am not the only person concerned. Griffy West icy discovers So much tender anxiety. Such a prodigious uneafiness about my Bellville, that were I not Sure of his entire attachment to me, I should be very much alarmed at her behaviour: yet I cannot properly take notice of it. 
As to Bellville, he is too much oppressed with grief to observe anything : but Mr. Frankly, whom I Sollicitcd to return with us to the Wood has taken a great deal of notice of her carriage : it is really st uncommon that it attradls our attention. Possibly, the situation of our minds renders us the more ready to make remarks. My extreme love G 5 for 
[ '3° ] 
for Bellville makes me fearful of losing his heart; and Frankly Seems inclined, I think, to look upon this girl with very favourable eyes. However, bemyconjeduresrightor wrong, Griffy has no eyes nor ears but for my Bellville. She sits and gazes at him for hours together, and watches every ' turn of his countenance. If he sighs. She, like an echo, sighs again; and if either Frankly or myself are happy enough to Say anything to draw a Smile from him, little griffy"s features have also a Smiling appearance. With what unwearied assiduity does she watch his every motion! with what velocity does She fly to call for, and to fetch everything that he wants! 
In short, I am quite perplexed — I wish everybody should approve of my choice of Bellville, but I 
would 
[ *3' ] 
would not have every woman enamoured with him. — In every other respect this Griffy is a most amiable girl. 
What can I do with her? I cannot turn her out for loving the most charming man in the world. 
To desert her for thinking as I do, would be to act with an unpardonable barbarity. 
LETTER XLVII 
Mr. Frankly to Mr. Manwayring. 
OU R dear Charles has met with Such an addition to his trouble, by the illness of his lovely Camilla, who w’as Seized last night G 6 with 
r 132 ] 
with a violent fever, that I don’t know what to do with him. He is the more Severely afflicted upon this occasion, because he firmly believes that Lady camilla’s concern about Lady Conquer, increased by her endeavours to conceal it from him lest it Should Sharpen the edge of his Sorrow, has brought So formidable a disorder upon her. 
Sensible and rational as Bellville is, in general, I will not answer for his life, were he to lose Lady Camilla. 
He is quite overwhelmed with melancholy; nor can all my efforts, together with miss griffy’s, alleviate his an: xiety a single moment. 
I heartily wish that you would come down and try what effect your conversation may have upon him. 
From 
t 133 1 
From what I have often heard him Say concerning you, I fiiould imagine that you were the properest man in the world to make him a visit under his present dejedtion. So much com pafiionated by everybody here. 
LETTER XLVIII 
From the Same to the Same. 
I A M Sorry, very Sorry, that your affairs will not permit you to come to us. We are a diffradted family. 
Lady camilla’s illness is the Smallpox, to her very great shrprize, as file believed She had gone through that disorder Some years ago. 
bell 
I 134 ] 
Bellville has not been in the least concerned about the striking alteration there is like to be injher person: “Let her but live, ” Says he, “let me but preserve her — the various charms of her mind, her elegant and entertaining conversations, will make ample amends for any diminution of her personal beauty.” 
He is certainly sincere, for he never leaves her. He watches every turn of that nauseous distemper with as much attention as if he was contemplating the finest features in the world, while poor Gristy is as anxious upon bell ville’s account as he is on his wife’s. 
This prerty girl is not aware of the mifehief she is doing hersels, by indulging a passion, the gratification of which must be, in bellville’s situation, criminal, were he dispofed to return it; but he is too much attached 
[ US 1 
tached to his Camilla to violate hii conjugal vows. 
I have availed myself of Bellvillc's close attendance on Lady Camilla to talk more freely to Griffy than I have ever yet done, and Setting aside her penchant for my friend, I have Sound her a Sensible girl, with a good way of thinking, and Superior in point of understanding to the generality of her Sex of a similar age. 
When I first gently acoufed her of loving Bellville, She started, as if a pistol had been sired at her ear, and outblulhed everything I could compare her to; but the Sudden glow in her cheeks was immediately Succeeded by a pale cadaverous hue — Poor girl. She actually pines for a man, for whom She cannot wish without the highest indelicacy; and her Shame at my having discovered ker imprudent 
pro[ 
[ ] 
propensity almost threw her into a fainting fit. I Saved her, however, by assuring her that I would keep her Secret more Securely than she had kept it herself, as she had adfed with too little caution. 
O, Mr. Frankly, ” Said the dear trembling creature, “what have I done I am ready to die, So ashamed am I of my behaviour; but I hope that neither Mr. Bellville nor Lady Camilla have observed So much as you have — What will become of me? I would leave them directly: : would sty from a place where I only discover continually, how very unworthy I am of their generous pro tetstion, but whither can I go } — I have no relations— — friends. To whom shall I apply for relief? — And yet 1 cannot stay here. What must they think of me? — of me, who am 
under 
[ '37 ] 
under Such obligations to them. The favours which they have conferred on me, have ruined me. I felt the warmest regard for Mr. Bellville, I thought it had been only gratitude; but I find — Oh! let me not name it, let me not think of it. I dare not look upon him now — nor upon you. Sir, — nor upon any body— — ” 
desired her to compose herself, and not to give way to despair, as Ihe would only by So doing injure her health; and by weakening her rational faculties, render her less able to control a passion which time and absence might probably Subdue. 
A passion, Sir!” cried she, looking quite frighted, indeed, Sir, I have no passion, it is not come to that yet; but I will hurry away, lest, as you Say, it should prove too strong for me: but whither can I go? I am very wil 
ling 
[ ] 
ling to do anything that’s proper for a young girl to gain a Subsistence, did I know to whom to offer myself. Oh, Sir! how terrible it is to be without friends, or any means to provide for one’s Self, except by being under obligations never to be repaid !” 
Here She burst into tears, wrung her Soft white hands, and Sobbed aloud. Sweet girl! — how lovely are youth, beauty, and virtue, striving to get the better of an imprudent inclination! 
I never was So forcibly touched in my whole life. I was shocked to think I had raised a disturbance in a mind quite free, I dare Swear, from any evil intentions — but I had been acting a friendly part, to let her See her danger, of which she Seemed not to be in the least Sensible, till I pointed it out to her. 
[ >39 ] 
I strove, therefore, by every gentle Soothing art to assuage, to c]uiet the storm, which I had stirred up, by asturing her that I was, that I would be her sincere friend; that I would protect her, and put her in a way to accept of my best Services, without laying her under the stightest obligations of which she appeared to be So much afraid. * 
“Aye — how?” cried she, earnestly fixing her pretty weeping eyes on me. 
By transferring all the tenderness Seel for my friend Charles to by giving yourself to me for 
'' — T"” 
“Ostay, Sir, ” replied she, interrupting me, and blushing excessively“ “will not do.” 
Not immediately, perhaps, my dear girl, ” Said I, but don’t you 
think 
<< 
you me : ever 
[ ] 
think it possible for me, by the fondest and sincerest endeavours toplease you, to gain your heart from him, tho’ his person— — 
It is not his pdrson, ” cried She; 
'^hyyou are very handsome — but, ” continued she, sighing, “you are not Bellville.” 
She Spoke these last words in So bewitching a manner, that I caught her, blushing, to my bosom, and kissed her. 
She begged me to let her go, with a confusion in her countenance which heightened her beauty. 
“Never, ” said I, ‘'except you promise to think less ol my friend, and more of me. My advice is that you remain here till Lady Camilla is recovered; and then, after having married you, in the presence of these good friends, I will take you away, 
and 
[ HI ] 
and never bring you again into bell ville’s sight, till you are cured of your foolifii prepossession: it may be justly called a foolish one, which must be prejudicial to you in every shape.” She fetched a deep sigh, and lifted up her lovely hands and eyes but made no verbal reply. 
She is really a most charming girl, and if I can but hinder her from giving way to a passion, which, could it be indulged, (and I know it cannot, from bellville’s honour and his unalterable attachment to Lady Camilla, on whom he dotes as much now, disfigured as she is by the most loath someof all distempers, as much as he did when she first came to his arms as beautiful as an angel) must be attended with infamy and ruin. 
I think I deserve her for my pains. My constant bufiness must be, during 
Bell[ 
[ ] 
bellville’s temporary absence, while he is waiting on his Camilla, to fortify her mind against him, and to inspire her with tender fcnsations for me. 
Is not this a laudable, but is it not also an arduous undertaking? In love, however, as in war, the pleasure arising from the conquest, is doubled by our refleding on the difficulties which we have Surmounted in the acquisition of it. 
LETTER XLIX 
Mrs. Burton to Lady Camilla Bellville. 
Your silence Surprises and alarms me, my dear friend, — No new affliction, I hope, has 
pre[ 
[ ] 
prevented you from writing to me. 
You have undoubtedly heard that poor Moil is dead, but possibly are not acquainted with the manner of his decease. 
He could not bear the thoughts of having been accessary to the death of Lady Conquer — I have received Some particulars of his behaviour, after the fatal event, which occasioned him to leave England, from Lord Stanfield, who arrived here a few days ago, to take a Survey of an estate which he was about purchasing when he was last in Ireland. I will transmit them to you, as they will Serve to show to what lengths the improper indulgence of an indiscreet passion will carry people, and how very carefully those wsho are Seized with Such a passion ought to conduct themselves[ 
[ ] 
Lord Stanfield constantly corresponded with Moil aster his arrival in France. — The following account I received from his own mouth. 
On Sending him the news of Lady conquer’s death, though I Softened it as much as possible, I received an answer wrote in a style of Such deep despair, that it made me extremely uneasy, and I resolved to join him at Paris, to which place I had before pressingly urged him to repair, hoping that the amusements he might there meet with would dispel his melancholy ideas, and Substitute others of a different kind in their Stead. Accordingly I Set out with Lady Stanfield. 
We found Moil much worse than we expedfed to See him, both as to health and Spirits. He was almosc a stceleton, and never discovered the least sign of chearfulness or Satisfaction 
[ 145 ] 
tion at anything. A faint Smile only just gleamed on his pallid cheeks at the sight of me, which Smile rather gave him a ghastly appearance, and made him look a still more emaciated objedf. 
As I always had a sincere affeefion for him, I was, I positively declare, quite Shocked, but insisted upon his having a commodious apartment in the Same hotel in which I lodged, that my Biddy might Set herself about nursing him, and that we might order all kinds of restoratives procurable to be prepared for him. 
For a long time he refused to listen to any advice, and to take any Sort of medicine, saying that he had murdered the most lovely, the most innocent of women, and that he could notfuffertoo much, as it was out of his power to make her any the least reparation. 
vol. II H Fre 
[ ] 
Frequently would he exclaim in these terms, “When I think of the misery which She endured on my account, when fancy pictures her all pale, trembling, dying, as I beheld her for the last — last time, no torments upon earth are equal to those I feel at this instant, — Poor unhappy, undone Lucy I Could but the excruciating pangs which tear my heart into a thousand pieces recall thee to life, and make thee fenst ble of my remorse for what is past, I would willingly Suffer more racking ones, if such can postibly be sustained by mortality.’* 
In this manner he always replied to our entreaties to make use of remedies for his preservation j fo that I really thought it better to cease teaz ing him, as our importunities served only to revive disagreeable scenes, 
and 
[ h7 ] 
and to renew the griefs which those Scenes occasioned. 
We therefore only threw all kinds of nourishing things in his way, that he might, on finding himself faint and low, be tempted to take Some of them. 
To our great concern they remained untouched, and he visibly grew worse and worse. 
At last Seeing him but barely sti*ong enough to walk across the room, I very earnestly and warmly expostulated with him, aiking him if he was not committing a criminal action, by destroying himself through neglect: if he thought that he was doing any hp nour to Lady conquers memory by Such a procedure, or that stie would be more plcased with him (Supposing her to be Sensible of his situation) for taking pains to put an end H 2 to 
[ 1+8 ] 
to his existence, than for listening to reason, and endeavouring to recover Lis health and Spirits. 
He replied— —! that I could be but certain that she Saw me in the midst of my anguish, that she heard the language of my tortured Soul, tortured by the deepest remorse, for having destroyed, in the very bloom of youth and beauty, Such an angelic creature !> -- But his past — it cannot 
— cannot be recalled. I have pierced the dearest, the most virtuous 
bosom -- -- -- ’twas I — stwas I, who 
killed her, and I will die to make Some expiation for a crime of fo black a complexion. But death is not a punishment Sufficiently Severe — ’tis indeed a happiness, as I can taste no felicity upon earth wishout her.’* 
He Said but little after this, and even shunned his lister and myself 
as 
[ *49 ] 
as much as possible : we, however, left nothing undone which we thought capable of making a change in his disordered aiind : disordered it certainly was, for the next morning he was found dead in his bed. 
You may imagine what a shock, and how much concern I felt; and I was not less shocked, less concerned, by reading the following note, which day directed to me upon his table. 
cc < itt <( C << tt 
“I cannot quit the world, my dear friend and brother, without bidding you an eternal farewell, nor without acknowledging the kind endeavours which you and my amiable sister have used to re slore me to my former Self. — But it would not be — all that remained of me was dedicated to my lost H 3 “love : 
[ »5° I 
to her I ardently pray I may be going. May you and your wife enjoy all happiness; mine has been long centred in the dear longloved, and ever lamented, Lucy, who deserved a better fate than that brought upon her, by 
Your wretched 
ft 
Brother, 
** E. movjle/' 
I shuddered at the perusal of this note, which 'Seemed to reproach me Severely for not having suspedfed the derangements of his intellects early enough to take precautions to hinder the execution of a design for which I was totally unprepared : nor can I 
yet 
[ i 1 
yet tell by what means he released himself from the load of misery which oppressed him, as no marks of violence appeared upon his person; and I am Sometimes inclined to think that nature overcharged Saved him from the guilt of Suicide. However, I firmly believe that had he lived, he would always have been a wretched burden to himself, and an objedf pitiable in the highest degree to his friends. While I watered his remains with the tears of fraternal Sorrow, I Supplicated that Almighty Being who had mercifully Snatched me from perdition, when I was, possibly, on the brink of a precipice equally destrudive, to pardon an unhappy creature, whose passions had been too strong to be controlled by the curb of reason. 
H 
Lord 
[ 152 1 
Lord Stanfield could proceed no farther. The different sensations which he felt, occasioned by his unfeigned grief for his brother, and by his sincere gratitude for his own preservation, agitated him So much, that words in vain laboured for a pas 
His amiable wife (She is indeed really So) perceiving the conflict in his strongly feeling breast, ran to his assistance, Seized his hand, and pres fed it to her lips. “My dear, dear lord, ” Said she, ‘‘ be comforted.” My Biddy, my angel, ” replied he, Snatching her to his bosom, preserver of my honour, and' dear to me as my life, thou hast Saved me from the sharp stings of remorse: : art indeed my only comfort. From poor moyle’s unfortunate exit let no man dare attempt a woman of 
virtue. 
[ 153 ] 
virtue. I, but for thee, my dearest, might have fallen, despised and un lamented by all those who deserve to be respecsted by the innocence of their lives. The humane, however, will reflect with compafiion on edward’sfate, who, had he opposed his passions before they became too unruly to be governable, might have been the worthiest and the most exemplary of men.” Here my lord concluded his melancholy narrative, and has, I think, by his own conduct, proved the possibility of a man’s being capable of reforming, after having been thoroughly convinced of his errors. 
I now hope you will own that I was not quite mistaken in my man, when I told you I believed that his lordship had it in his power to make the woman whom he really loved happy. I would not, however, have H 5 you 
[ 154 1 
you Infer from hence that I look upon a marriage with a man who is not steady in those principles, which can alone tend to make the conjugal state happy, as an eligible step. With regard to Lord Stanfield, I am very wellaffured that the propriety of his behaviour to my lady makes her rise Superior to our expectations, as She conseffes that She feels herself powerfully impelled to equal, if not excel, those ladies of birth ancf fortune whom he left for her, who had no Such flattering advantages, and who was in manyrcspedts unworthy of him, and by the most affectionate gratitude, to deserve the ten derness which he hourly discovers for her. Indeed, I cannot find that (the indiscreet elopement from her father excepted) (he has ever been guilty of a single misdemeanour; and her present happiness most probably 
arises 
[ 155 ] 
arises from her sincere coiitritlon for that imprudent proceeding — A Striking example to young people who have taken through inadvertence a false step in life; an encouragement to them also to retrieve it as Soon as they are conscious of its impropriety I 

LETTER L 
Lady Camilla Bellville to Mrs. Burton. 
After a tedious confinement and a total change of my person, I am, at last, permitted to take up my pen. 
The 
[ 156 I 
The smallpox, my dear Burton, has So altered your friend, that you would not know hcr.what sighs hath it not cost me! what regret have I not felt at resigning a face, which was once, I may now Safely say, handsomc! Not on my own account, however, do I, can I lament the loss of 2, per Jon, once So flattered and admired; but on my bellville’s, who deserves the most beautiful and the best woman in the world. It is impossible for me to paint his anxiety or his tender ness in their true colours: I despair of doing them justice, and therefore will give over the attempt. Yet, what will you Say to me when I tell you that he Swears he loves me more than ever and what will you Say to me, after all my fusses and frights, when I tell you that I believe him tiot lay down my letter and 
laugh 
[ >57 ] 
laugh heartily at us both? — And yet, Burton, there is nothing more certain — But to write less enigmatical 
h — 
As Soon as I found out what was the matter with me, I Spent the first part of my illness in ravings and lamentations about my person which I cannot describe: not that I cared a straw whether I was handsome or ugly, if I could but have any hopes of preserving bellville’s heart in a state of ugliness, to which I was undoubtedly doomed; but not daring to encourage Such hopes, I attributed his anxiety and Solicitude about me, entirely to his humane disposition; and this belief had So fatal an effect upon me, that it struck my disorder in, and I wa thought to be dying. The apprehensions of death, however, dreadful as they are to most people, gave 
me, 
’ I 
[ *58 ] 
rne, I affure you, no uneafiness, I cxpeded the last moment as a moment of felicity; for the loss of life was preferable, in my opinion, to the loss of eellville’s affection, I therefore gave up everything; and every creature but my dearest Charles, whose aistidtion is not to be expressed, gave up me. He never left me, sat night and day by my fide, while I lay almost insensible of everything but his regard; which, when he believed I was no longer in a condition to attend to it, broke out in the most forcible manner — Never was Sorrow more poignant than his. — Shall I confess, my dear friend, that I felt a satisfaction at being fo movingly lamented. I pitied him from the bottom of my heart. — But imagine what were my emotions, when, in the midst of a consultation held by the 
phy[ 
[ ] 
physicians who attended me, at which Bellville and miss Westly happened to be present, they declared that there was no possibility of Saving me but by Some person who had never had the distemper going into bed to me and drawing the venom out of me, 
Bellville, my tender generous bell ville, instantly began to pull off his clothes in a hurry, quite regardless of the people in the room. 
“I may yet Save her then, ” cried he. 
Hold, Sir, ” at once exclaimed both doctors, “have you never had the smallpox?? would you venture to attend your lady ?” 
“Venture!” replied he, still undressing, “what would I tiot venture to Save all that’s dear to me irr life.” 
Ter 
3 
r io ] 
Terrified at his resolutlon, and unable any longer to contain myself, I raised my head, feeble as I was, to insist upon his leaving me immediately. 
, Griffy Westly then, throwing herself on her knees before him, caught hold of his waistcoat, for he had thrown off his coat. 
“For the' love os heaven. Sir, stay Said She, Oh! stop, and do not murder yowrself, and your dear lady Camilla too, for I am Sure She will not Survive you.’* 
Then turning to the physician, “Oh! do not Suffer him, *' continued she, “to stay a moment longer here — he will be killed : indeed, indeed he will — ” 
Tears prevented any farther utterance. 
Bell 
t ii ] 
Bsllvllle, deaf to her exclamations, threw himself from her, and was stepping towards the bed, 
Gristy at that instant fell on the floor — The sight of her in that situation made one of the doctors call for help, while the other persuaded Bellville to desist from trying So des perate a remedy for my preservation. — But to no purpose— — could the weak resistance which I made in pushing him from me, screaming at the Same time as loud as I could, avail. 
Instantly stepping round to the other fide os the bed, he threw off his waistcoat, while they were employed in recovering Gristy, who had fainted, and clasping me to his bosom, begged me to be composed, “We shall both do very well, ” Said he."; ' ■ ^ 
lean[ 
[ j 
I cannot tell you, my dear, what my mind endured; but I Soon felt a kindly warmth diffused all over me, the maligjiity of my distemper was thrown out, and from that hour I mended: notwithstanding my terror for my Bellville, the transporting refiedfions on his uncommon tenderncss in hazarding his life for me, Saved me. 
I cannot, however, enter into a minute detail of the different stages of my disorder : I have not leisure to send you Such particulars. My Charles caught it, but had it very favourably. He never quitted my chamber, having ordered a bed to be laid on the ground by the fide of mine. 
While we were in this disagreeable state, poor Griffy, wsho had been So much terrified on my bellville’s account. 
[ i63 ] 
count, was Seized with a fever, from which She is Scarce recovered. 
When Bellville and I began to grow better, I inquired after Griffy, He told me that as Soon as She was well enough to go abroad it would be better, he thought, to Send her to another part of the country for change of air, as the doctor imagined her case to be a consumptive one. 
I looked at him while he Spoke, and fancied that he had, as well as Mr. Frankly, discovered her love for him, and availed himself of this handsome pretence to remove her. 
How my heart adored him for his consideration! I could no longer confine my gratitude within my own bosom — I burst into tears of transport — 
“How I dote on you, my dear excellent Bellville, ” Said I, “would 
to 
[ 164 3 
to heaven — (hiding my wretched disfigured face with my hand) would to heaven I was as handsome, for your sake, as Griffy.” 
I should not like you half So well if you were, *’ replied he. Snatching away my hand from my eyes, (luckily my hands and neck are not fpoiit.) No, my dear Camilla, you are, believe me, more lovely to me than the most beautiful woman in the universe. You are a thousand times dearer to me than ever; and as to the loss of your complexion, concerning which you have Suffered So much anxiety, for want of knowing the true situation of my heart, - let it not give you the Smallest disquietude. What are the finest features and the most blooming complexion when Set in competition with those many virtues and amiable qualities of which you 
are 
I '^5 ^ 
tre possessed: no, Camilla, .while you have So many Substantial charms, you will have no reason to regret th loss of a few shadowy attradlions j and you cannot, without having the meanest opinion os me, suppose that I married you merely for your external beauties. As to grilfy’s removal, 1 only mentioned it because I am W'dl assured that Frankly loves her, and becausc I think that a different air may be Serviceable to her."’ 
How tender! how unaffected! how very lovely is he! There is no vanity — no levity in him! universal benevolence is the only passion he Seels. 
Poor, Scared, fond creature as I am, I could only express my sense of his affectionate carriage by grasping his hand, while he strained me with ardour to his heart • 
Frankly 
[ i66 ] 
Frankly came in at that moment to ask our permifiion to make gris Sy his for ever. 
“I have, but with the greatest difficulty, procured her consent to be united to me, ” Said he, “and as Soon as we are married I will take her 
into B -- -- -- (hire, where I hope new 
Scenes and another air will be of Service to her.” 
My dear charles’s countenance brightened up in a particular manner at this determination. “Take her, my friend, ” cried he, “she is, I believe, a very good girl, and may you be ever as happy together as my Camilla and I am.” 
Gristy Soon afterwards made her appearance with downcast eyes and a heaving bosom, 
She Suffered herself, though reluctantly, to be led to us by Frankly. 
Bell[ 
[ ] 
Bellville then Said, “miss Wcstly, give me leave, as your sincere friend, to put you for ever under the protection of this gentleman, who, I am Sure, loves you, and dcserves you; and let me prevail on you no longer to postone a ceremony which will place you more immediately under his tender care.’* 
Poor Griffy sighed, and only replied with a low curtesy to Bellville, while she gave her hand to Frankly, bursting into tears. 
I felt for her : we all, I thought, except my excellent Charles, made very awkward figures. 
Frankly was undoubtedly of my mind, for he hurried the weeping girl out of the room, and I shall hasten to conclude this long letter. 
I showed your affedtingaccount of moyle’s death to my Bellville, but 
ref 
168 ] 
repented afterwards; for it renewed alibis affliction for poor Lady Conquer. 
He threw the letter down, crying, * “ill-fated girl!” Then turning to nte, and taking me in his arms, he added,.. ‘‘yet how dare I repine, when heaven has Spared my ca milla r 
LETI 
*69 3 
LETTER LI 
Mr. Bellville to Mr, Manwayring. 
I A M now, my Manwayring, happier than I have been for many months. My beloved wife has perfectly recovered her health j and since site Sees no alteration in my behaviour to herj rather a more affectionate attention in it. She begins, I hope, to be better reconciled to the demolition of her beauty — Yet I still frequently catch her hiding her face with her Snowy hands, while the former makes the latter appear a thousand times more alluring. 
I do not, Manwayring, indeed I do not deceive her, when I tell her that vol. II I She 
[ >7° ] 
she is dearer to me than ever. The increasing tenderness which she hourly discovers for me, and her grateful fensations, as she will call them, for my having endangered my life to pre ierve hersy added to the extreme pain and anxiety which she certainly endured when her dear languid eyes could only lookup to heaven for help, have excited feelings in me which I am unable to dcscribc. - My mind also has been more at ease since the marriage and departure of Miss Westly. She was married a few days ago — you are no stranger to what has pasted in my family relating to her; but I solemnly declare that I never gave her the least reason to believe that I had other Sentiments for her, but what compassion for her situation, which was, I thought, particularly unfortunate, on account of her youth 
and 

[ i7‘ ] 
and beauty, inspired. She had not touched my heart before I became acquainted with Lady Camilla, and afterwards it was impofiible for me to think of any other woman. 
Frankly has behaved handsomely, and will, I doubt not, be Soon master of griffy’s heart. 
I did not press you to come among us while our house was So like an infirmary; but now, my friend, health, peace, and love, once more unite to make our mansion the mansion of happiness. 
Poor little George, and my lovely Smiling girl, have fortunately recovered from the smallpox without being marked. Hasten, therefore, my dear friend, to increase our felicity by your company. It will be necessary for me to enliven my home as much as possible, since my Camilla tells me I 2 that 
[172 ] 
that she Shall be ashamed to show her face with me in the world. I do not, however, despair of bringing her again into public, as often at least as I desire her to make apub lick appearance; and I shall only request her to consent to Such an appearance now and then to shift the Scene a little. While I am possessed of her heart, I care not who likes or distikes her face. This I am Sure of, as I was not captivated by her person alone, I can See no disa greeable change in her : she has the Same strong understanding, and the Same elegant intellectual attainments; she has the Same melodious voice and converfible powers; and is, in short, bewitching in So many various shapes, that she can never be less beloved than she is by her delighted doting 
Charles Bellville. 
■ LET[ 
[ J 
LETTER Lir. 
Mr. Frankly to mr.bellville, 
F T E R a trial of above three months, I think I may venture to pronounce, from the obliging behaviour of my wife, that Sfie is perfedly reconciled to' me and to her lot. It was indeed great presumption in me to expect to gain a heart which you, my friend, was master of : yet from your own repeated asseverations that you never made the least attempt to please her, which were confirmed by your cool and distant behaviour to her, I was encouraged to try to undermine you. Unrequited love is frequently Soon extinguilhtd for want of fuel'to I 3 keep 
[ 174 ] 
keep up the flame; and I flatter myself that my unabated attentions to give her pleasure, added to her own disposition, which Seems to be uncommonly gentle and complying, together with time, will, I hope, make a considerable change in my favour. I will not, however, bring her yet to the Wood nor to your neighbourhood; though Mr. Myron and miss Greaves, with whom you know grifty contracted a great intimacy while She was under Lady camilla’s protection, have given us many and many earnest invitations. I will stay a whole year before I venture So near the Wood. I often wilh myself among you : but the man who cannot be contented with Such a beautiful young creature as Griffy, must be very difficult indeed. You have more than once aflfured me. that 
[ >75 1 
that Lady camilla’s personal charms were the lightest inducements to make you think of marrying her : 1 cannot help Surmizing, nevertheless, my Sriend, that you must be picased* to find her improve every day upon you, asmiss Greaves, who corresponds with Grissy, insorms her, that the traces of her ladyship’s late disordei* grew fainter and fainter, though they may be never eradicated. Happy arc you in poffesting all her tender ness, of which nothing can deprive you. Every man must not expect to be as fortunate as Beliville, 
4 
LET[ 
[ 
LETTER LIII 
Lady Camilla Bellville to Mrs. Burton. 
F T E R the obliging visit you made us in England, and after you had been witness to our conjugal felicity, must I still have new disturbances to relate, not on my own account, but on my dear charles’s? I cannot be indifferent to anything in which is concerned in the Smallest shape. How can I poshbly be loved. So adored as I am, as I still am, notwithstandiug the great alteration in my person, beunaffedted with anything relating to him? No man, I think, So situated, could have gone thro’ the trials which he has encountered. 
[ '77 J 
tered, without deviating, like him, from the paths of rectitude and honour in the fiightest degree. 
You Saw Frankly and his Griffy when you were with us : Saw her make her first appearance after her marriage, near my amiable, and consequently dangerous Bellville; and you may remember that you owned yoursels pleased with the agreeable modesty of her behaviour, and the very proper and respedful reserve in her carriage to my Charles. Yet Frankly was not Satisfied with her; he must have her behave cxadly to him as I do to Bellville — She cannot possibly So behave, except she loves him in the Same manner; and I fear that will never be the case. 
I always maintained, you know, from my own first unhappy marriage, that the inconstancy of the men ge i 5 nerally 
f, 78 ] 
neraliy is the foundation of oitr indiscretions. Poor Lady Conquer felt the truth of this assertion;; Grif sy has but too much reasion to acknowledge thejustness of it. I little thought, indeed, that Frankly, who was So distractedly fond of Miss Westly as to marry her, when he knew he was not the man of her choice. Would be fa Soon weary of her. — But he lays the blame on her, and stie imprudently enough has Complained to Bellville. 
You must hear the beginning of this difference between them. 
While Mrs. Frankly was Miss Westly, the frequent interviews between us and Mr. myron’s family oe fioned an intimacy between Grilly and Beil Greaves j and the latter had Somehow or other the address to get the secret out of the former relating to 
her 
t 179 1 
her prodigious regard for Bellvitle, which was rather conspicuous to everybody. 
When Frankly brought his wife, after above a year’s absence to visit us, (Supposing her quite cured of her inclination) miss Greaves and she renewed their acquaintance. 
Frankly, who was, you observed, vastly lively, and who, though he is not foolish, behaved more like a schoolboy than a married man, took it in his head to chat and romp with Bell, and fie not being accustomed to receive Such attentions from So young and handsome a fellow, (if indeed from any being of the maf * culine gender,) very much encouraged them: nay, my Bellville says, and insists upon it, that she made the first advances; declaring that she behaved in the Same man i 6 ner 
[ io I 
ner precisely to hitrii (but that he was determined not to See her overtures) and never would let him alone till She found he was resolved to take no notice of her. 
Frankly persisted foolishly in toying with her till their behaviour became very particular; they even Sometimes romped out of sight, and remained together a great while by themselves. 
Mrs, Frankly Seemed to pay no attention to their indiscreet conduct. One day when we were all in Mr, myron’s garden, I happened to be walking with him, while Bellville, Mr. and Mrs. Frankly, and Bell Greaves were together a little behind us. 
Frankly playing with a favourite greyhound at my uncle’s, on a Sudden catched bell’s white handkerchief, 
part 
[ i81 1 
part of which hung out of her pocket, and strove to fling it over the dog’s head; upon which Ihe attempted to Snatch it from him, protesting with a laugh, that it would be torn, and that he Should give it her. 
He Swore that he would keep it for a collar for Caro. 
This kind of foolery continued till the dog breaking from him, he pursued Caro, and She him, leaving Mrs. Frankly with Bellville in the walk. 
It So happened that Mr. Myron and I turned down the next walk, which was only parted by‘a filbert hedge from that in which they were. 
Just as we entered it a Servant came to tell him that a gentleman who was just arrived wished to Speak with him. 
He 
[ i82 1 
He quitted me with a promise to return, and as Soon as he was gone I thought I heard Mrs. frankly’s voice Sound very plaintively. 
Looking through an opening in the hedge, I Saw her tottering towards a Seat, and my Charles Supporting her, at the Same time looking round as if he wished to See Somebody who could ashst him in taking care of her. 
She Sat down very near the spot on which I stood, and fetching a deep sigh, Said she was the most unhappy of women. 
“I am extremely Sorry to hear you Say So, ” replied Bellville, “when you have everything in your own power to make you otherwsise, married from pure disinterested affeistion to a young, handsome, good-natured man, possessed of an affluent fortune, 
and 
I 183 ] 
and ready to gratisy every wish of your heart.” 
“He has been willing to indulge me, ” Said she, but for a short time only, while there was no other woman in his way : you must see a great difference in him now, I believe.” 
“Why Sure, ” Said Bellville, "you are not weak enough to be jealous of Bell Greaves!” 
"Indeed I can’t tell, ” answered she, " but he prefers everybody to mev 
"You wrong him, you wrong yourself, Mrs. Frankly, ” Said he, 
"by this unkind, this injurious Suggestion. Must not a man laugh, chat, or trifle, merely for a little mirth, with any other woman, without your immediately imagining that he prefers her to you? I am persuaded that Frankly loves no woman, never 
did 
[ i84 ] 
^//vlove any woman except yourself; but he is naturally lively, and the vivacity cf his' dispofidon may pos sibly incline him to amuse himsels innocently with everything that comes in his way.” 
He isytjz/rfriend. Sir, ” ansvvered She, ‘'and you see no faults in him : but I am Sure you would not behave So yourself“ 
“am, possibly, of a more Seri, ous turn, ” Said he, “but there are none of us without our little foibles; and had you been married to me you might have found out as many weaknesses in me by this time.” 
O Heavens !” cried ssie, “what a crowd of torturing ideas have you raised in my mind! — No, Mr. bell ville, I was never destined to be So blessed. — Yet — though I See by the disdashful frown that’s gathering on 
your 
[ >8. ] 
your brow for which, though it strikes me to the heart, I honour you, that you have the meanest opinion of me — Yet I do not deserve it, Sir: (bursting into tears) had heaven permitted me to pass my days with the man whom I must ever revere, I had been but too happy. 
I was destined to a far less desirable Situation; but I strove, to the utmost of my power, to repay the affection which I received, by the sincerest gratitude. When I See, however, that a woman, much older than myself, with very few attradlions (if I may give credit to my eyes and ears) is able to draw the man from me whom I have taken So much pains to love, when I See too, the respedt, the tenderness, the almost adoration with which you have ever behaved to Lady Camilla — See you even now' 
be[ 
[ ] 
behave to her in the Same manner as if file had Suffered no alteration in her pcrfott — Oh! Mr. Bellville, how can you expert me to have patience.?” 
Was not this a pretty extraordinary address, Burton, and from Such a girl too? 
But only hear my glorious bell ville’s answcr. 
Lady Camilla and I, madam, ’* replied he, with anunusual dignity in his voice and manner, “are quite out of the question in everything relating to Mr. Frankly and you. My wife is So eminently Superior to most women, is So unalterably lovely, and poffefted of Such an uncommon share of discretion, that she almost confers merit by her distinguishing approbation; and if I did not endeavour to be the faithfullesh the tendered, 
and[ 
[ ] 
and th: most affectionate husband, I Should be very unworhty of So valuable a wife. Look up, therefore, to Lady Camilla, Mrs Frankly, as a pattern of conjugal excellence; and believe me, you will find my friend everything you can wish him to be.’* 
Having uttered those words he walked away, and left poor Gristy overwhelmed with confusion and vexation. 
Only think, my louisa, how my heart glowed when I heard my Charles talk in Such terms about me terms which the looks of the person to whom they were addressed warranted to be sincere. 
I stood immoveable with rapture. He then turned accidentally into the walk I was in, and flew towards me. I caught him in my arms, but ■ could 
[ '88 ] 
could not articulate a single Syllable. 
“What means this new Sweet transport, my Camilla, ” Said he, looking upon me with eyes overflowing with affection. 
“When I tell you that I have overheard every word you just now Said to Mrs. Frankly, ” replied I, recovering, “you will not wonder at my increasing tenderness“ 
“you, my love?” Said he Smiling, with an impassioned air j ‘‘ I did not imagine you was So near; but I would always wish to have my dear Camilla approve every inmost thought of my heart, which has ever throbbed, and will for ever throb for her alone. 
The return of Mr. Myron prevented any answer with words; but I looked one, and then ashed my 
uncle 
I 189 ]. 
uncle if he did not think us a couple of strange people, to be So ridiculously attached to each other after having been So long married? 
“Faith !” replied the good old man, “I should be glad to See all my married friends to the full as ridiculous with all my heart, ” 
This Speech naturally brought on a conversation relating to Frankly, to whom my amiable Bellville promised to talk upon this sub jedt. 
Surely my Charles has been Sufficiently tried; but nothing can corrupt Such a mind as his. 
In continuation. 
Bellville, without giving Frankly the stightest reason to suppose that Mrs. Frankly retains the least 
pari 
'9° I 
particular esteem for hitrty has made him Sensible that his idle fooleries with Bell Greaves were very absurd, and' might be produdire of very disagreeable consequences. Nay, indeed he managed the affair with So much ad dress, that Frankly believes actually his wise is monstroufiy jealous of him, and that her jealousy arises from her just beginning to feel a passion for him She never was Sensible of before. 
He confesses that he was wrong to fall into the Snare Bell had laid for iiim j and declares that she is an envious, wanton, ugly devil, whom he never should have thought of had she not began first by throwing herself in his way, which free proceeding, added to his griffy’s coyness, he Says, made him ready to play the fool with anybody. — “I am now, ” continued 
he, 
[ 191 ] 
he, ** obliged to my friend for his information and advice, and will take grisssy home again, hoping to find a great change in her for the better.” 
Poor Griffy took leave of us with a heavy heart and weeping eyes, and was utterly unable to Speak a word. 
My amiable Charles bade her adieu with a cool indifference, which I believe deeply touched her. 
She blushed extremely, I thought, at the recolledlion of what had palled' between them. When fly Sees him no longer, and finds' her husbands tenderness return, she will, I hope, become also more reasonable. 
While Frankly kept to alone 'she was contented. It is almost always in the power of the opposite Sex, my dear friend, to make us good, 
and 
[ 192 ]. 
yand to preserve us So: but naturally weak and imperfect as we are, it is no wonder we stray from the paths of discretion, when those who ought to Set us good examples, and to lure us from vice and Solly, lead us to infamy and ruin, by giving an unbounded loose to their lawless appetites. 
Let every woman, therefore, who would be happy in the marriage state, never trust her person, nor what is of more consequence to her honour and her peace, her morals, to the man of a licentious and inconstant disposition; for though she may be able to resist temptation, a virtuous woman never can be happy with such a man; she must, by having a good heart herself, and more especially if she loves him, feel the deepest regret at his want of right principles, 
♦ which 
[ 193 ] 
; which can only make him happy I here and hereafter. 

letter LIV 
From the Same to the Same.' 
S you expressed in your answer to my last. So many doubts about poor gisifify’s ever being perfectly happy, or of making her hus band So, I have the satissadlion to assure you that Frankly tells my Charles in a letter (the principal paragraphs of which he permits me to copy for your pcrusal) they are, at last, in a fair way to follow us close in their domestic felicity : ac vol. II K knowledge 
[ 194 ] 
knowledging, at the Same time, that my dear Belville has been the entire cause of it : the Bellville who once, he imagined, was the cause of his griffy’s indifference to him. 
It will be necessary, however, to tell you previoussy, that ever since they left the Wood the last time, my Charles wrote long letters frequently to his friend, which were filled with the most earnest persuafions, to treat a poor young creature with the greatest consideration, who had, he Was certain, a well dispofed heart, and who might very easily be brought to doaton him merely for his tender ness, as She had always declared that gratitude alone first prompted her to prefer the man who had appeared to her to be her best friend, to any other person. 
Frankly, in his last answer, Said, 
that 
[ '95 ] 
that he had follotved his advices in every respedt, and had strove by every method in his power to divert her melancholy, by carrying her to all the diversions round about the country. 
Take his own words. 
‘‘ I made frequent parties among the neighbouring families for amuse ment, but found that she entered into them only out of complaisancc. The most elegant entertainments, the most Sprightly conversations, had no effect upon her, nor did they in the least tend to remove her dejedtion. The more cheerful 7 appeared a amongst my friends, the more Serious she grew.’* 
I determined, therefore, to change my behaviour, and to try if I could, by falling in with her owm humour. Succeed better. ^ 
In consequence of this determina k 2 tion. 
t 196 ] 
tlon> I shut myself up with her, add entirely accommodated myself in every shape to Her taste; refused to astbciate any longer with those who bad apparently given her no pleafurcj and Spent my hours in Sometimes reading to her, and Sometimes walking with her in the garden, in which she Seems to find the greatest Satisfaction, as she is the prettiest little fiow erist imaginable : and in order to gain her favour, often ashsted her' in ranging her flower pots, in making up nosegays, and disposing them in a manner the most agreeable to her fancy, which was indeed very elegant. 
As she always appeared to be contented while I thus employed myself about her, I resolved to pursue your friendly instrudions to the utmost; and began to propose new hints for 
her 
[ '97 ] 
her to improve upon. I assisted her in forming a shrubbery at a little distance from the house. When it was almost completed under our joint di redtlons, I purchased, unknown to her, a great number of birds, many of them remarkable for their beautiful plumage, others for the melody of their tones, and Some for beine So tame that they would eat out of any person’s hand, who treated them with gentleness. This little feathered choir, being ready to be properly difposed among the shrubs and flowers for their own convenience, and to make the greatest variety, I took her out for that day to a Spot Some miles distant from us, to show her a particularly fine prospedt, which we had not yet Seen. 
As she and I were by ourselves, she Seemed more pleased than she K 3 had 
[ 198 ] 
had been for Some time. We breakfasted and dined, and drank tea at a neat farm to which I had prevsioussy ordered all kinds of refreshments to be conveyed on the preceding day. 
The weather favoured my Scheme. There was Scarce a cloud in the hemisphere. My Griffy never looked half So lively, half So inviting: she inspired me with an unusual stow of tenderness, which I however feared too rapturousty to indulge, lest by So doing I stiould take off her attention from the agreeable Scene with wshich I wished her to be delighted, and make her think me rather impertinently teasing. But still my increasing pashon, my longings to give a loose to it, and my endeavours to keep it within proper Sounds, gave a timidity to my looks and whole 
carri[ 
[ ] 
carriage, which made her, I thought, uncommonly attentive to them. 
Her Sweet eyes told me that they beheld me with a satissacstion I had never before observed in them : her voice was Softened when Site Spoke to me, and She, without the least invitation, put her pretty arm through mine, while we were walking a bout together. 
I strove to keep up this winning behaviour till we got home, very early in the evening, that I might execute the other part os my design. 
Ns Soon as we arrived, I asked her to take a turn in the garden. 
By imperceptible degrees I drew her towards my aviary, which, being planned in a new style, has really a very happy effect. 
She started with Surprise; and her Surprise increased while she continu k 4 ed 
[ 200 ] 
CD her walk through the Spots adorned and harmonised by the new inhabitants: and I observed with no Small delight, the transport which Sparkled in her eyes upon the occasion. Looking at me with the ten derest gratitude. She took my hand, kissed it affedionately, and Said, How much trouble have you taken, my dear Mr. Frankly, to please a poor girl who has hitherto been So undeserving of your love; but she will indeed study to be worthy of it, if you can prevail on yourself to forgive what’s past !” 
“there’s nothing to forgive, my dear Griffy, ” Said I, clasping her in iny arms, let me but See that charming face arrayed in Smiles, and let me only be convinced that you are really happy — I ash no more.” 
“lam happy, truly So, ” replied 
she : 
[ I 1 
She; I cannot be otherwise while you are So kind : but I must rested: with concern on what is past. If a sincere confession of my ill condud, however, will make the least atonement for it, I am ready to own all my faults, ” 
“You have no faults, my dear girl, ” Said I; “you are everything I can wish for" 
But I have been very wrong, ” anfvvered she, “and am quite ashamed of myself, I wanted to be adored like Lady Camilla, not considering the prodigious difference between us; between Such an ignorant creature as I am, and Such an accomplished woman as her ladyship is; I ought also to have thought myself exceshvely fortunate in being rescued from all the miseries which I might have endured from loss of K 5 friends. 
[ 202 ] 
friends, and want of fortune, by your generosity, wshich raised me, poor, young, deserted as I was, to a situation So much beyond my ex pcdfations. So infinitely Superior to my merit: but I will endeavour to return your affection. The late proofs you have given of it, by leaving your friends, and devoting your time to me alone, have made me thoroughly Sensible of your sincere attachment to me, and have So deeply touched me, that I wish for nothing So much as to be capable of making you Satisfied with my ten derness.” 
I am Satisfied, my dear girl, ’" replied I, pressing her to my bosom: : but in this humour, and I shall never complain.” 
While I Spoke those words, she Softly stole her arms round my neck, 
and 
[ 2°3 ] 
and laid her dear face close to mine; and I gave her a thousand fond caresses, which she Seemed to receive as if She was really transported at my behaviour to her. 
She then proposed to me to go and look at the birds; She was So charmed with their different beauties, that she made a number of rapturous exclamations, which were not lessened when she Separately examined them. I was her dear Mr. Frankly, her amiable Harry, the rest of the evening; and every day since I have found her carriage to me more and more affectionate and Satisfactory. 
Certainly, Bellville, if every man could purchase the heart of the woman whom he admired at So cheap a rate as I have done, there would be no despairing lovers in the world. Yet K 6 I ought 
[ 204 ] 
I ought not to exult and compliment my own address, since I am indebted to you for the hints which have proved So very fuccessful: and I dare believe that if I pay a due regard to your friendly admonitions, I Shall preserve the .dear creature’s 
heart for ever. ___ 
/ sotar Mr. Frankly, whose beha \ viour confirms the maxim which I \ have So often and So strongly insisted j on, that no woman will behave a miss to the man who treats her as She ought to be treated. A good husband will most commonly make a good wife: at least, stis worth every married man’s while to try to deserve that epithet. Were the two Sexes more cautious in the choice of those with whom they enter into the marriage state, with respedt to principles, temper, and a general Suitableness, 
[ 2°5 ] 
bleness, there would not be So many unhappy couples complaining of their conjugal connedlions. 
The very great uncertainty of being happy in the marriage state, prevents many women from being desirably Settled, and induces an incredible number of men to keep mis trestes, merely because they foolishly imagine they can throw them off at any time, when they are weary of them. But many a man has found, to his great astonishment and disappointment, that an insolent, extravagant, and fickle mistress, has given full as much trouble and anxiety, as he could possibly have had with a wife. A wife, if properly used, will, for her own reputation as well as for her hushand’s honour, keep at least within the bounds of decency, and may, by an affectionate and discreet 

[ 2o6 ] 
creet conduct on his part, be brought t entirely to a right sense of her duty,, should he be ever inclined to deviate from it. 
>92? 
L E T T E R ’ LV 
Lady Camilla Bellville to Mrs, Burton. 
TILL more encomiums on my husband, in an age too when Such encomiums are So unfashionable! But I fancy the reason is, that the women are not married to the men of their choice. I will, however, allow that there is an appearance of indelicacy in Such a proceeding. 

[ 207 I -- -- -- - 
i, tyet, after all, why should wc mot, in an affair of Such very great importance to our happiness, chuse' ctreely? But would our happiness be I more firmly Secured by our free choice? Might we not fix upon a man who could not like us, and then ' we should meet with a double mortification? And does not every agreeable woman stand a chance of being chosen by an agreeable man? And if he is not So, is she not at liberty to refuse him? Aye, and two or three more who offer themselves, until she meets with a man whom she can like fathers and mothers Seldom drive their children to marry, totally against their inclinations — When once a woman is Settled with the man she loves, does she not discover the greatest indelicacy, the greatest depravity indeed, by growing fickle, ■ capricious. 
{ 2o8 J 
capricious, and fond of vanity? Is She not ghilty of the very faults of which we So much complain of ii the luen? hoyy_pdious! how infinitely more odious, are such faults in a woman. Levity in a woman can never be long pleasing to any man, 
1 and as it is generally destrudlive of that esteem, which is the only Solid foundation of love, there can be nothing urged in its defence; not the fiightest apology can be framed for Nay, Should a husband change ever So much after marriage, should he give ever fo many proofs of his inconstancy, a licentious behaviour in his wife will be of no Service to her: instead of affording her the falsely expected relief, it will only make things a tsioufand times worse. She can never hope, rationally hope, to recall him by such a behaviour; 
she 
[ 209 ] 
she only degrades herself in his eyes, in the eyes of the world, and if she has a just idea of her situation, in her own. I cannot tell, indeed, how a woman feels, who, being fondly attached to one man, sties immediately, when he difeovers any indifference with her, to receive consolation from an attachment with another: I only know that I never was, that I never can be, of Such a disposition. Were my Charles to leave me for another woman, I should rather, I am very certain, endeavour to avoid the whole Sex, than listen to the addresses of any other man; It is pretty clear, however, that in this respect I differ from Some of my acquaintance. 
these reflections were occasioned by the conduct of a lady, who lately came to be my neighbour. 
Lord 
[ 2'0 ] 
Lord Lovedale, I believe I have told you, has bought the estate which was Sir William joliff’s. He has furnistied the house, in a manner, uncommonly elegant j the gardens are laid out in a fine taste, and all to please a very beautiful young wife, of whom he is passionately fond, and whom he, on account of her beauty, entirely raised to the rank and afiiu ence which she nov enjoys. As file WS.S born and bred a oentlewo 
o 
man, her father could not Spare her any fortune. 
Bellville and I are not desirous of new connedfions; but we could not politely refuse to make Lady Love' dale 'a visit, especially as my lord, who had met Bellville, desired the pleasure of his acquaintance. 
We went therefore to make our visit. I had heard a great deal about 
Lady 
[ II ] 
Lady lovedale’s beauty, but it exceeded all my expedfations. It is needless to enter into a description of every feature, it will be Sufficient to tell you that she is the most elegant figure you can conceive — She has the most expressive countenance you ever Saw. Expression of what? you will ask. Of love, of joy, of everything delightful: her attitudes were all attradfing, all her looks alluring; and she discovered Such an infinite number of graces — more graces than I ever, I think, discovered in any other woman. They all Seemed pointed at my Charles, for there was no stranger, except him, present: besides, the attention with which she beheld him, and the very particular civilities which she paid him, obliged me to conclude, that' she wished at that time, chiefly to 
draw 
[ 212 ] 
draw his admiration to herself; and I believe She was quite Satisfied, as her fuccess appeared to be answer able to her willies. My dear Charles, indeed, insenfibly Showed in his face the pleasure which he took in looking at her, and listening to her. I could not, I confess, blame him for feeling So much pleasure in her corn * pany, for I, myself, though a woman, found her persedly enchanting, flowever, I must also ccnfess, my dear Mrs. Burton, at the Same time, that I Secretly wished she had not come to live quite fo near me; and that wish Sprung up in my bosom on happening to pafs one of the glasses in the Saloon. 
We made rather a long visit, for Lady Lovedale found fo many ways of engaging bellville’s attention, that 
beg 
I 2'3 ] 
he did not give the least hint of taking his leave until it was late. 
When we were in the coach, I expatiated largely on the beauty and elegance of the lady whom we had quitted 
He returned only a Short and vague answer, and then remained silent. 
His behaviour, I own, alarmed me : I feared that his gentle, suscep tible heart, had been more affected than it had ever been, but on my ac** count; and I began to consider what would be the most likely method to cure him, A total silence with regard to my Suspicions, and the perpetual appearance of good-humour. Seemed to be the methods 1 should have recourse to. I availed myfcif of them, and I had the pleasure to see him. Soon after we came home, resume his usual chearfulness. Yet 
before 
[• 214 ] 
before we retired to rest, he told me that Lady Lovedale bad desired him to drive her in my lord’s chaise, the next day, to Mr. elm’s, at thc' Grccv, as my lord was particularly ' engaged. 
I Said nothing, but I thought the more: So Sudden, So uncommon an intimacy with So lovely a woman, I did not like; and I was not happier when I Saw my Charles dress himself with unusual care. She was, I found, to send the chaise for him, and he went every moment to the window, as is impatient at its delay, though the appointed hour was not come. 
By this behaviour of bellville’s, 1 was hurt in a manner which I cannot descisibe. So new a behaviour shocked me extremely. It was with the greatest difficulty that I stifled my 
sighs. 
'[ 2'5 ] 
sighs. I took up a book to amuse my mind, but it would not do. I knew not a Syllable of what I read — 
I Sat down to my tambour, 'and struck the needle in the wrong place, while I stole a glance at the lovely figure of my Bellville. He cannot escape, thought I; he is too handsome not to have charmed Lady Lovedale, as much as fire has charmed him. I could hold out no longer. 
I rose hastily to leave the room, that he might not Sec how much I was affected. 
He Seized my hand as I pasted him. 
Where are you going, my Camilla ?’' Said he. 
“Only into the next room, ” replied I, turning away my head to hide my emotions, which I am Sure he did not perceive, for he immediately 
I 216 
ately Said, “I will go with you, and write a card to Lady Lovedale.” 
I started. I coloured. My face was in a glow. 
A card V 
Ay, my dear; I have changed my mind: I had rather decline this party; I must write an excufe.’* 
He then Sat down before I could make a reply, and wrote the following lines: 
bellville’s compliments to Lady Lovedale — Something has just happened, unforeseen, which will prevent his having the pleasure of attending her ladyship today, agreeable to her appointment, ” 
I longed to see what he had written, but I stood at a distance until he gave it to me, I rfad it with transport, caught, the Sweet hand stretched out to me, and put it to 
my 
3 
t 2'7 ] 
tny lips. He received this proof of ihy tenderness with his usaal affection, and afterwards rang the bell for a Servant to carry the card. 
“Now, my dear Gamilla, ” Said he, “we will go into the garden.” 
I accompanied him. Nothing passed on either fide relating to the abovementioned Scene. He was all good-humour, and I was as happy as ever. 
When John came back, he gave a Sealed note to his master. 
My Charles read it twice, and then advancing with it in his hand to me. Said, “Now, my dearest Camilla, I am going to trust you with a great Secret; a Secret with which you ought to be acquainted. So my love tells me. I was struck yesterday with the beauty of Lady love dale, and pleased with her particu vol. II L lar 
t 218 ] 
lar politeness to me; though I thought ’ that her appointment for today rather a precipitate proceeding, on So Short an acquaintance. I was foolishly elated with the distindtion she paid me; yet I was not So Sensible of it until I foiind that I had taken more than ordinary care about my drefs; and that I waited with a degree of impatience, quite unusual, for a Second interview. these new sensati ons Surprised me, and I began, in consequence of my Surprise, to question myself about the meaning of them. On refledling over and over upon them, I discovered that they had not been occasioned by the charms of her person, or the vivacity of her behaviour; but by the singular attentions of a sine young creature anti alone — This discovery made me See myself in a very ridiculous 
light! 
[ 219 J 
light. I therefore determined to put a Slop to any encouragements from the lady, and her card will convince you that I have acted a prudent part.” 
“Lady lovedale’s compliments to Mr. Bellville; from his figure and behaviour at their first meeting. She had entertained ideas very much in his favour. She is greatly disappointed to See herself So grossiy mistaken. She will not, however, condemn him unheard — She permits him to apologise for his condu(st tomorrow. He will find her at home ail the 
morning. 
I returned the card with tears of transport, and could only tell him, that he was too good for me. 
“That is impofiible, my love, ” replied he; “butff vvosild advise all persons who are going to commit an i L 2 adfion 
[ 220 ] 
aciion of which they do not entirely approve, to stop, and to refietft southeast rioufiy upon the conscquences with which the ccmmiffion of it may be probably attended. Many of us, by Such a procedure, would, I fancy, escape a great deal of disquietude, and Save themselves from criminal, J as well as contemptible, situations. / 
“I was, I OWED, fo taken with the beauty of Lady lovedale’s per son, with her winning manners, and wdth her very attentive behaviour to me, that I had no conception of the extreme impropriety of her carriage, until I found myself 
too much agitated about it. 
I 
was then alarmed: by thinking of consequences, I was alarmed — and I, at the same time, beheld this woman in her true colours. Had stie been innocent, I might have 
been 
danger! 
t 221 ] 
been in danger -- -- -- -- Inno 
— For her virtue and her discretion must have prevented her from discovering any singularity in her behaviour to mea Singularity by which she strongly attradfed my notice; but as Soon as I detected the motives by which She was actuated, she became odious in my eyes. I hope, my dear Camilla, added he, that I have not Said or done anything to give a moment’s uneasiness to your gentle bosom— — the future you need not ever distrust me — The virtuous woman, however lovely, however alluring, will never make improper advances: the female libertine must always appear to me a detestable character.” 
I will not repeat the praises I bestowed on him for So virtuous. So unfafionable, a conduct. Were all 
hus[ 
[ J 
husbands like my Bellville/ there would not Surely exisf a dijjhlutq wife. 
1 am, ‘ 
'My dear Mrs..burton, 
Your's, with my usual sincerity, Camilla Bellville, 


FINIS 

A.. 


1. 
J,, ' 
'

'J 
v1 t' 
wsjj 
\: ■ 
. ^ ot -• 
f » 

■>. 
’■m 
till 



, k'‘ 
r 
?■ 


: rx 


vn.,., /' -: w 
•..i vt • i,, » '• • 
■ C ■ V ■ vc 


: CL 
^ cll 
r.. > 

?‘T 
I L nco' 

ytn^ ■'■^’ 
.■ -■ 'ft' '. 
■; •^- -^ ■ 
‘ 
lie 

. 'Ir: ' .'^ 







t.: C 
'-- ■, V 
A ' ■ 5: ^ ' Lr' ■* 'wari : 
-/ ' ■ ' r 9 ■ V - ■ *' ' -'■ ■ C •, .' ■ - i;. - 
V ■.’■6'LV ■ .' ■ A‘. / '. T''. 
■ • .' ' 
.S ' ■ ■ : 'W.. - • ' ^ ■... •., : ' 'LAPP' ■ '.- 3 ■' ' ' 
.■/ ■-,. .•■ ■ 
At ■-■>' ''A ' "-■ '. • * /: S ■ 't ■- .'. ■, ysa A ■ 
■' .* ' SSS: '..• _; r/aa a4d‘' 
A / ' ■ ' 
• A ■. 
V • ./• - 'd. ' ' L' ' ■ /■■ 
, - N ^ ' - C r, - ■' _ 
rv ■■ ■ ■ _ ' 
AH: 
if'' 

■.- V • 
W 
rt'. 

isr>. 
^ t • 
HA 
^ * 

CS' ' 
t'"' 
"- i *• ... ' 
i 
V ■■ ■ 
I PA 
r .i 

■"'r'' ’A' 
. ' /ctx 
0 
A- -- 
Tr - 
i' 

»■, 
■1 


■ 
si 

ec 
\ 



■. r, -^ 
LA; 
•; 
A •: 
r. 
fc'i: -'-" 
al 
1^.: 


30218 

