f 1 !
':*V|l:' N '	' ", ' ' '	■ ^KS,
rfiM'.'	■'■	'■	,-'^0 ■
if;: ■	.	^■■'	,	,
I' j ' ■'	'	'	^	'* /" *
'
jJPih■.	. . _	_—^—:— ■ ■■ .'W^- ‘
.. ^—-.-————--——'-
It .	_	-	----- .	:-T
I' '^2Ii ■
I ■	'
T	THE
GODFREY F. SINGER MEMORIAL
PRESENTED BY	\
MR. AND MRS. JACOB SINGER F
"A"
4
5
' - 1 "
.. '" ■ ,.. . Ii4
,	.	'	.'I >1
;•	.	•	'	■ ■ .	i .u
N	i f ■
.	.	•	Vr :
\	f : S.
\ . N	t;""
'ii :
' ■	.	' L / ' ‘^4;
. _	'	- .	' -,	'. ■	•	' T- ’ > , '
. -	.' s ;r	■■■"	' ■	,
■	■ ''	■	^ rd-^. > :
'	, -	.D V . ;- :■ :A
■	■ i .	;	■
NV	-	Nl:;.
f *	*
s'-' ' ^' ■ ■ ■ - ■■ / ;.; ;
’	’ •■-•	ix\ .V
’•.«•• ^ ." ■'-- f ■ > . . •
f ■■' •■ ■ ■	' ' ■ -
LM\	S
DISINTERESTED LOVE.
‘	. •J’
,
*	■ ’ ‘V ■	' '	■ ■
r . ■ ‘	' h	•
vr\^vi j' . d.Dc '	' - ■ ^ V .
" '.............. ' ^
A .	■ .■	■■ '■ ■; '■	-	•	^
’■C	^' . ' . ■	0 < rV ‘
B V .	'	■	■ 'S,c'
m • ■	v'
w ■.' ■	*
' DISINTERESTED LOVE:
OR, THE
HISTORY
OF
Sir CHARLES ROYSTON,
AND
EMILY LESLEY;
IN A SERIES OF
LETTERS.
VOLUME THE FIRST.
DUBLIN;
Printed for S. Price, D. Chamberlaine, J. HoEy, W. Whitestone, J. Sheppard, S. Watson,
J. Potts, W. Watson, J. Williams,
W. Colles, W. Wilson, R. Cross,
T. Armitage, T. Walker, E.
Cross, R. Moncrieffe, C.
Jenkin, M. Mills, and T. Wilkinson.
M.DCC.LXXVI.
' ■u TA '"	c i	it irv'teHP'O'T	'1
. v.-i / ^-•i> . . VitLL 4	■«. .;.-T*‘J .1 »'j	■*
■ ■"', • ' ' / ’ ■ ■ ■. ^ '.
‘ • ■ V ’ ■ kl SN -	J: A T|
r-	^ ..r -	^ .	-	I.' i.
T
. . T :,.	■ •'	-	.. J	■!
•' i F
'-i	,	\
'	■	-	-	■' - . .i
; V,:.': ■ ■: j ,i ::: 51	'	'
■ L	'	(,' '■
■ 5.0	:t?- -A tis
.T ,;l 3 -T	t'	3	a.
.N b SI X 4 b li *	^ 1-/1 U v.. (.) V . •
■: :: I' c- c u c:
-••/ •/ ..i',.-- . *	; -	^	■j-’i	i.:.'*;;,. .
- f'/ofYA i.' . ,	f-1IU-.	i-':a. aiviMW nV -
/// ,c rro4 .r
al ,.a. ...m V/ .V/ .j.'jr.ip’.j .W'
.'. .it:. - -/.W .T ,ir.;.Tii*.aiv .T	•
' / ■; . isr..*/1.'„ .>1
.aC"Zi.::iC..' -V .'i , '	/
‘. V'
“	•	■ ; V >
■ U. ofPa.
fc—T v	I ihpflftv
L E T T E R S, &c.
------—........Square.
Dear Charlotte!
YOU complain of my silence, yet my letters serve only to offend you; you suspect the sincerity of my friendship, for those very reasons that ought to induce you to believe it real. Am I to blame for wishing you to become completely amiable? for advising you to contemn the low arts which are practised by too many of our thoughtless sex, and to endeavour to attract admiration by your virtues, rather than your beauty?
I have lately renewed my acquaintance with Lady Coverly, who has taken a house very near us; as duty, not inclination, induced her to yield her hand to my Lord, his death, which happened about two years ago, has not deprived her of that agreeable vivacity, which, as it is always under the guidance of prudence, renders her inexpressibly engaging. My dear Henrietta is encompassed with admirers, but she either listens to them with the utmost insensibility, or dismisses them with an harangue in praise of liberty, and “the single soberness of widowhood.”
I am delighted with the tender friendship which subsists between Lady Coverly and her younger brother, Mr Royston; this gentleman is truly amiable, and possesses a person formed to please. He has been returned from abroad only three months, and seems to have acquired every advantage than travelling can bestow, untinctured by conceit or foppery.
2	LETTERS.
The father of my fair friend left an estate of near 6000l. a year to his elder son, Sir William, and only 300l. per ann. to Mr. Royston. With this slender pittance, for a man of his rank and education, he gains more respect by his liberality and good sense, than the former can procure with all the advantages of fortune. Before the decease of his father, Sir William imagined that his vices required the mark of concealment, but, when affluence and independence had made dissimulation unnecessary, he boldly appeared in his true colours.
How sincerely does Mr. Royston and my amiable friend regret his conduct! seldom, however, is he found in their company; his heart retains no relish for virtuous pleasures.
I was sorry to find that our acquaintance, Sir Godfrey Montague, had not left any part of his large fortune to his nephew Mr. Montague; poor man! He always expected to have inherited the whole, and the disappointment affected him so keenly, that he was seized with a violent fever, and about a month ago, went to Bath for the recovery of his health, attended by a Mr. Wilmot, with whom he is very intimate. We expect their return in about a fortnight, as Miss Montague (who was left with Lady Coverly during her father’s absence) informs us that he is much better. Mr. Montague has sold the lease of his house in Lincoln’s-inn-fields, and intends becoming your neighbour at the Thorns.
I am charmed with the lovely Louisa; her person is beautiful beyond description; sweetness, benevolence, every virtue is depictured in her expressive countenance! If I am not mistaken, this bewitching girl has already captivated the heart of Mr. Royston —they are formed for each other. —I am interrupted— a billet from Lady Coverly to request my company at Windsor for a few days; a female Trio; Mr. Royston being detained in town. I must consult my grandmother upon the occasion— The good Lady consents, and I am going to prepare for the excursion.
LETTERS.	3
Adieu ! I shall write again by Miss Montague; let me beg of you, my dear Charlotte, to cultivate her acquaintance; she deserves your highest esteem, your warmest friendship. My uncle will not be much pleased with Mr. Montague, I believe, as he is very proud, and values himself greatly upon his family—what a ridiculous vanity!
Once more adieu.
Harriet Sydney.
LETTER II.
Mr. Royston to Lady Coverly.
Your raillery, my dear Henrietta, when we parted yesterday, affected me so keenly that I was concerned my engagements in town prevented my following you to Windsor. You accuse me of want of confidence, in not trusting you with my passion for Miss Montague, which you say is so very apparent. Indeed, my dear sister, I have until lately been a stranger to the impression which has been made upon my heart.
It was the fear of losing her that rouzed me from my reverie:—what can her father mean by retiring from town? by removing from those scenes of gaiety and dissipation, which, till now, he has pursued with such avidity ? We have indeed feared, that his expences were far beyond his fortune; may he not then endeavour to retrieve it by the marriage of his daughter ?—in that case what can I expect ! a younger brother !—alas, I never before regretted my situation!—But has the lovely Louisa perceived my tenderness ? if I am not indifferent to her, we may overcome every obstacle that seems to oppose our happiness!
You desire me not to cease my enquiries after Sir William ; but, notwithstanding all my efforts, I cannot discover the place of his retreat. Unhappy man ! he delivers himself up, without remorse, to guil-
.4	LETTERS.
ty pleasures ! whilst; vice is attended by Shame, there are hopes of reformation ; but what can be expected from him who glories in his depravity ?
Farewel, my dear Henrietta! my tenderest devoirs attend your charming friend. I expect being at Windsor to-morrow. Present my compliments to Miss Sydney, and tell yourself that I love you most sincerely.	Charles Royston.
LETTER III.
Miss Sydney to Miss Freelove.
Another letter from my Harriet, and her last unanswered!—yes, Charlotte, I was willing to atone for my former neglect by this act of supererogation, though having nothing material to say, I may possibly incur the imputation of stupidity.
We are still at Windsor, where Lady Coverly must now remain some time longer, as the mother of her deceased Lord arrived here this week, and the old Lady has an aversion to London. Mr. Royston is with us. —My prognostics were true, Charlotte; he has declared his passion, and the sweet Louisa blushingly confesses her sensibility. —May their attachment meet with the paternal sanction! —Ah! my dear friend, what a variety of emotions are excited by this tremendous passion! what hopes, what fears, what groundless apprehensions, what sudden transports! may my heart for ever prefserve its present indifference, and remain uninfluenced by such tumultuous emotions—yet do not the pleasures of love overbalance its anxieties?—surely they must! and in this world every situation, which has a predominance of good, may be called happy.—
Lady Coverly is going to town this morning, and I shall attend her, in order to pay my duty to my dear grandmother.—The coach is at the door, and I am not half ready—oh! what flutterations!—Adieu till my return.
LETTERS.	5
*	*	*	*
*	*	*	*
Alas! my dear, we are all in the utmost distress. —Sir William has fought a duel, and is dangerously wounded; his servant just now arrived with the dreadful news. Mr. Royston is preparing to attend him; he is at *** which is near thirty miles from hence; his antagonist has already decamped. The quarrel arose about a woman, whom Sir William had carried off. I know not the particulars of the affair.
* *	* * *
Mr. Royston is gone; may he find upon his arrival at *** that matters have been exaggerated. The vulgar love to alarm; they always represent things in their most unpleasing colours; they even add the horrors of impossibility to the cruel tale, and the mind torn with anguish, and absorbed in the contemplation of its woes, receives without hesitation every aggravation of its distress.
I am ever yours,
Harriet Sydney.
LETTER IV.
Mr. Royston to Lady Coverly.
IT is with pleasure I inform my dearest sister, that I found Sir William much better than I expected; his wound is not dangerous, though the great effusion of blood renders him very weak and low.
The occafion of the duel is so little to Sir William’s honour, that it shall, if possible, be consigned to oblivion.
He appears pleased with my company, and has so earnestly requested me to remain with him, until he is well enough to remove from hence, that I know not how to refuse—yet how great the sacrifice! but have I not reason to think, that my presence may prevent the intrusion of those, who would endeavour to destroy the good impressions his illness has made? Sickness is the parent of reflection; oh! may it be the happy means of restoring to us this dear brother!
6	LETTERS.
Assure the lovely Louisa of my constancy; tell her—but no,—I must be allowed to tell her all myself.
My dear Henrietta, how do I wish for, yet dread Mr. Montague’s arrival! should he prove obdurate!
Farewel, dear Lady Coverly! Sir William unites in due respects with your affectionate
Charles Royston.
L E T T E R V.
Miss Freelove to Miss Sydney.
I thank you, Harriet, for your letter; you are really a good creature! but what advice have you given me? why, child, I should be an old maid infallibly, were I to follow it. What! shall the young, the gay, the blooming Charlotte Freelove, blessed with beauty to insnare, and wit to enslave, become insensible of the dear delight of giving pain? Shall these eyes, at whose fire even age would glow, become useless? to centre all one’s happiness in one! to wish only to please that one! my dear, dear Harriet, I must laugh at thee—what a pity it is, that thou shouldst have had such erroneous maxims instilled into thee! To be continually with a gay young fellow, and to suffer him to place his affections on another, and not even endeavour to supplant her! not to wish for the dear transport of exciting jealousy—thou art certainly the most unaccountable girl in the world!
And so you want me to be intimate with Miss Montague—that I may be reformed by her example, no doubt, and learn to be gentle, constant, and so forth?—really, my dear, I am quite satisfied with myself as I am; idolized by one sex, and hated by the other, what can be more desirable!—but I am a coquet it seems,—and pray, what has coquetry done, that you should dislike it?
How does Sir William, my dear? I feel myself interested in his welfare, and should certainly prefer
LETTERS.	7
him to your Mr. Royston, whom you extol so highly.
Farewel—Lord Townly is below, and I positively cannot afford you another moment.
Yours,
Charlotte Freelove.
LETTER VI.
Lady Coverly to Mr. Royston.
WITH what satisfaction did I peruse the pleasing account you sent me of our dear brother! —may the event be answerable to our wishes! assure him of my tenderest congratulations.
A letter was left here this morning for Miss Montague, who is gone to town with Miss Sydney. I expect their return with impatience, as I am anxious to know the contents; it is from Mr. Montague; perhaps he intends to remain at Bath some time longer.
* * * * * * *
Alas! my dear Charles, Mr. Montague is by this time at London, and my sweet friend must attend him there this evening. He goes to the Thorns the latter end of the week:—unexpected business, he says, obliges him to leave town thus abruptly!—my Louisa turned pale at reading this unwelcome intelligence; she regrets your absence, but Mr. Montague must be obeyed.
Adieu! my dearest brother! I must conclude, as company requires my presence below. Louisa enters the room, and with a sweet confusion informs me, that she has brought a letter for me to inclose. Once more adieu.
Henrietta Coverly.
8	LETTERS.
LETTER VII.
Miss Montague to Lady Coverly.
THE first pleasing employment I have had, since I left London, is that which at present ingrosses my attention;—yet the country is pleasant, and I used to love it; but, alas! my dear friend, your Louisa is strangely altered!—My father too appears thoughtful and dejected—I am unable to divine the occasion of that melancholy which oppresses him.
Mr. Wilmot leaves the Thorns to-morrow, but will soon return here again. I know not how it is, but I cannot like him; yet he is young, gay, and not devoid of wit, and takes pains to render himself agreeable to me; but his assiduities are distasteful. Then—he looks at me—Henrietta, his looks are too expressive! they tell me that I am not indifferent to him: these are not the suggestions of vanity, but the effects of fear. He possesses a charm, which, however it is disregarded by the daughter, is but too agreeable to the father; and mine is absolute, and entertains the most unbounded notions of parental authority—but, be gone, misapprehension! which prevents the enjoyment of present blessings by the anticipation of future ills!
*****
With what pleasure did I receive, from your dear hand, the account of Sir William’s recovery, and of Mr. Royston’s intention of visiting the Thorns! How anxiously shall I expect his arrival!
Miss Freelove is coming to drink tea with me this afternoon, and my father expects Lord Townly and Mr. Beverly. I shall be glad when their visit is over! How disagreeable is it, to be obliged to converse upon the most trivial subjects, when our minds are ingrossed by ideas of the highest importance!—
LETTERS. 9
I could not finish my letter last night, as our visitors left us not until after eleven. Miss Freelove is very different from her amiable cousin Sydney. The moment she entered the room, she flew towards me with the most lively air—"Will you forgive me,
my dear Miss Montague, said she, for not having paid my respects to you before? how is my Harriet? —Well, I hope—do you know, that you
and I are to be sworn friends?"—Thus did she ramble on. Miss Freelove is, indeed, smart and quick in her repartees, very showy in her person, and graceful in her manner; but what intolerable levity in her discourse! what a desire of attracting universal admiration, is portrayed in her expressive countenance! Those eyes of her’s would be infinitely more pleasing, were their vivacity restrained; but she encourages all; she smiles on this man, winks upon that, and ogles a third: I could, however, easily discern that Lord Townly was her particular favourite. He is a man, my dear Henrietta, who, having no character to lose, indulges himself without restraint in every fashionable vice. He is handsome, degagee, dresses richly—talks incessantly——seems perfectly satisfied with himself—and boasts of having ruined some of the finest women in England.—Good God! that any woman, who has the least pretensions to modesty, can regard with smiles of complacency a man, who glories in crimes that ought particularly to excite the detestation of our sex!
I was highly pleased with his friend Mr. Beverly. He is very lively and agreeable, and frequently shewed, by his looks, his disapprobation of Lord Townly’s behaviour; but he, inattentive to reproof, still continued his discourse, whilst the giddy Charlotte, by her affected smiles, and free address, encouraged him to proceed.
His Lordship was very assiduous and attentive to me; he wanted to attract my notice, but I regarded him with a distant politeness, which I saw piqued his vanity. We had a little concert in the evening;
10	LETTERS.
and all restraint being banished, I was able to judge very accurately of their real dispositions—indeed, there are some people who cannot disguise their tempers, even in the company of strangers.
I beg my best respects may be presented to all friends, and that you would believe me ever yours,
Louisa Montague.
LETTER VIII.
Miss Freelove to Miss Sydney.
WELL, Harriet, I have seen Miss Montague, and found her—tolerable—for indeed, my dear, she has no pretensions to any thing farther. Whilst she is novel, she may please, but she is so tall, and so—I don’t know how—and then dark eyes are my aversion. I must however—but
why the word must? it seems as if I was unwilling to allow her merits—I acknowledge then, that there is something polite and graceful in her manner; but her scrutinizing eyes were so continually taking mine to task, that I was obliged to collect all my gravity: surely she was not jealous of Lord Townly’s particularity to me; ah! no, I forgot—she is a good girl, and “in one, only one, is her joy.” Poor constant turtle! the sigh, which heaved its lovesick breast, was for the absent Charley! After tea, Miss Montague played and sung. The
gentlemen were in raptures—they are no judges of music, as I took care afterwards to inform her. At parting, Lord Townly squeezed her hand, yet the sweet Louisa did not faint: she blushed, “a blush of disdain perhaps”——true, Harriet. Mr. Wilmot is there still, and appears a more tolerable being than I at first imagined him. His person is rather agreeable than otherwise, and he does not want for a modest assurance, which is generally pleasing
 LETTERS.	11
to us females; the poor man is, I see, desperately in love with Miss Montague, and her father appears highly satisfied with his assiduities.
Lord Townly and Mr. Beverly are this moment coming down the avenue; I fly to meet them. Adieu!
Charlotte Freelove.
LETTER IX.
From the Same.
OH, Harriet, what a blank! The dear, bewitching Townly, is absolutely gone from the Thorns!—the illness of a rich old uncle forced him to leave me thus abruptly, in the very infancy of our intanglement, before I had secured him wholly mine;—how cruel! I am ready to die with chagrin at this interruption of my happiness.
“Oh! fortitude, celestial maid!
“Descend from heaven to beauty’s aid!”
My uncle taps at the door——coming, coming, dear Sir!—how can you be so impatient?
Captain Temple is below, Harriet; come to invite me to a ball he intends giving to-morrow night; I believe I shall decline the invitation; what now are balls to me? I must, however, go down to him;—stay,—Lord, my dear, what a fright I look! absolutely haggish! this will never do; give me another cap, Lucy;—there—now I am tolerable again.
* * * * * .
Would you think it, Harriet—though I went down with a resolution of refusing, yet, I know not how it was, but he overcame all my objections. I had not seen him since his return from abroad; he is really very handsome! and talked so much of our
12	LETTERS.
new neighbour, that I feared, if your Charlotte was absent, he might possibly fix upon her:—but how came I to tell you this? 
Adieu! I will not proceed with my letter till after my return from the ball, as I have nothing to say that is worthy your perusal.
* * * * * *
It is near one o’clock, but, as I am not sleepy, I will give you some particulars of the night’s diversion. The company at Mr. Temple’s was very numerous, consisting of all the gentlemen’s families within eight or ten miles around us. Mr. and Miss Montague came in Mr. Temple’s coach. She looked rather better than when I saw her last; her dress became her; it was a white lutestring negligee, trimmed with gauze, and intermixed with Italian flowers. She had on a great many valuable diamonds. Capt. Temple was in extasies with her; I thought his encomiums would never have been ended——a pretty way of entertaining a rival beauty!
Before we began dancing. Captain Temple was called out of the room, and returned in a few minutes, introducing—Mr. Royston; Louisa turned pale, whilst his eyes were, in a moment, fixed upon her’s, with the most tender languishment.
He informed Mr. Montague, that being absent when he returned to London, he had taken the first opportunity of paying his respects to him at the Thorns, and that finding him absent, he had followed him to Capt. Temple’s, with whom he was not entirely unacquainted.
Really, Harriet, this Royston is a divine fellow! so genteel! so graceful! I am more than half in love with him already. I observed that he frequently sighed, and seemed thoughtful, and even melancholy.
He engaged his dear Louisa for a partner——
Temple whispered me, “’Tis well Wilmot is not
LETTERS.	13
here.” I find by this, that he is reported to be Miss Montague’s admirer; if she prefers him to Royston—but it cannot be.
I had the honour of beginning the ball with the hero of the evening; Mr. Royston and his Louisa stood next to us: this, as I could not dance with him, was an eligible situation.
What care did he take of his fair partner! he prevailed upon her to sit down during one of the dances.
Just as he was leading her eagerly to a seat, her father entered the room, and desired her to come into the card-room for a few minutes to play for him, as he had received a letter which required an immediate answer.
About this time I had by some means lost my beau; a lively tune was played; I wanted to dance it; I ran into the card-room, and enquired of Mr. Royston for my partner; he offered to find him out, or to go down the dance with me himself; I chose the latter.
After it was finished, he led me to the window-seat, and placed himself by me; I was warm; he took my fan, and endeavoured to cool me.—How agreeable the notice of such a man! I could have sat with him thus for ever; but I observed that he seemed to wish for Miss Montague’s return, and though, by continually keeping up the discourse, I tried to secure his attraction, and prevent his leaving me, yet his eyes were incessantly turning towards the door—it opened—and she appeared—he arose, and led her to the place he had just quitted, and there being no chair near, he sat down at our feet—
I now too plainly saw the distinction he made between us; his behaviour to me had been lively, easy, and unconstrained; but to her, it was tender, assiduous, and respectful—
He addressed me, as a lively, agreeable girl; but his Louisa, as one who demanded his esteem, and affection.
14	LETTERS.
I must conclude,—it is now near three, and I begin to grow sleepy. Oh! for some pleasant dreams of love and Royston !
Your's,
Charlotte Freelove.
LETTER X.
Miss Montague to Lady Coverly.
Alas! my dearest friend, my foreboding heart presaged but too truly! I shall never be united to the object of my tenderest affection; we are separated, perhaps for ever! my cruel, my relentless father, has forbidden me even to think of him, whom, alas! I can never forget.
Mr. Royston has left the Thorns in an agitation, which I beheld with inexpressible tenderness and grief, and I send these incoherent lines to prepare you for his reception, as he will not be at Windsor so soon as this letter.
We were at Mr. Temple’s last night, when your brother arrived. He followed us there; but as a gentleman returned with us, and did not leave the Thorns till late this morning, he could not discover the occasion of his visit, till after his departure.—What a night did I pass! yet Hope, the only comfort of the afflicted, had not then forsaken me; but now despair and regret entirely ingross my desponding heart.—But to return to my sad relation:—after our visitor had left us, my father proposed a walk to Mr. Royston, which he politely declined, and then sat a few moments with his eyes fixed on the ground: at last, recoverng from his reverie, and observing that my
father surveyed him very intently——“You must, dear Sir, said he, have perceived”—then after a short pause, he resumed with a flattering voice, “the intimacy which subsists between our families; and the desire I had of congratulating you upon your late
LETTERS.	15
happy recovery, would have been sufficlent inducements to have called me to the Thorns, had I not had an additional motive for my visit;—oh! Sir, ’tis in your power to make me completely blessed!—I love Mifs Montague, continued he, love her beyond expression! she is not insensible of my affection, but ’tis you who must give a sanction to it;——answer me then, dear Mr. Montague; but oh! I beseech you, remember that upon your answer depends all the happiness or misery of my future life.” Here he stopt, whilst I, with an anxiety which no words can describe, sat expecting my father’s reply. He seemed disconcerted at the discovery Mr. Royston had made; but with a determined air, casting upon me a look that chilled my soul, “ I should act very dishonourably by you, Mr. Royston, answered he, were I not to put an immediate stop to an attachment, which is so contrary to the interest of both my daughter and yourself. Her fortune will be trifling, and your’s very inadequate to your rank—believe me therefore, Sir, however you may at present regret my conduct, you will afterwards consider it as the highest good fortune. The sentiments of passion and reason are widely dissimilar; you are now under the influence of the former, but when the latter comes to resume her sway, how would you condemn your inconsiderate rashness!—Besides, continued he, I have lately had an offer for Louisa, which exceeds my most sanguine expectations, and doubt not of her implicit obedience—you see, therefore, that it is impossible for me to comply with your wishes.” Here he stopt—Mr. Royston sat immoveable—despair and grief were painted in his countenance. I was determined to speak, lest my father should misconstrue my silence into a conviction of the justness of what he had said. Collecting therefore, all my fortitude, not daring however to cast my eyes up to his awful face, “I will always, my dear Sir, said I, endeavour to strew that duty and attention to your wishes, which religion and reason command; I will never marry contrary to them;
16	LETTERS.
but my reverence for superior obligations will not suffer me to consent to enter into engagements, which I cannot fulfill. I must own, continued I, that Mr. Royston is not indifferent to me; on the contrary, pursued I, blushing,”——“ Hold, Louisa, said my father sternly, nor dare to avow sentiments, which you ought not to have yielded to without my approbation!” “Is love then, returned I, weeping, a voluntary pastion? alas! Sir, if you think so”—Love, said he, warmly, is not an excuse for disobedience—However, continued he, indifference is no obstacle to matrimonial tranquillity,—riches will always purchase happiness.” “I hope, Sir, rejoined Mr. Royston hastily, that Miss Montague will enjoy much more than tranquillity in a married life. Esteem, Sir, continued he, is the only basis of conjugal felicity, the most permanent emotion of the human heart. The highest esteem, the purest love conjoined, to form my attachment for your amiable daughter, and I hoped—but that hope was vain!” He concluded these words in so tender and moving an accent, that I could no longer conceal the distress of my soul; I arose, without even knowing my intention.—“It is impossible,” exclaimed I, “to support”—and then, unable to proceed I sunk back into a chair, and burst into a violent flood of tears.— Your brother threw himself at my feet.— "My dear, my beloved Louisa,” said he, “by h----n, I cannot bear to see you thus! oh! Mr. Montague, will not those precious tears—my Louisa, we will kneel together, and supplicate——whom? a tender, an affectionate parent! can such a one behold an only and deserving daughter plead in vain?—” Forbear, Mr. Royston,” said my father hastily, “Louisa knows that I never suffer my wish to be disputed; if she loves you well enough to disregard all the ties of filial affection for your sake, the misery shall be her’s—for by all that is sacred I swear, that’———
"My father, my dear, dear father, interrupted I, do not thus—ah! I would die rather than disoblige you! but, tor pity’s sake, wound not my soul with
LETTERS. 17
this unkindness.”—“No, Mr. Roystbn,” returned my father, inattentive to what I had said, “ were you even in possession of the estate Sir William enjoys, I could not give you my daughter! how vain then are your present solicitations!—urge therefore no more, a request that cannot be granted—absence will soon obliterate every disagreeable impression, and restore you to reason and happiness.
“Enough, Sir, returned Mr. Royston warmly, you may one day repent—but I have done,—Good God !" to sacrifice the peace of an only child—to divest one’s self of all the noble, the delightful feelings of humanity, for the sordid gratifications of luxury and ambition!—but must I then lose, for ever lose, my Louisa!—to see her no more! an eternal separation!" Here a servant entering interrupted the discourfe. He ordered his horse, and kept walking about the room in an agitation which is not to be described, whilst my father looked angry and disconcerted.
At last Mr. Royston, recovering fortitude, advanced to bid me adieu. We could neither of us speak intelligibly. He seized my hand, and eagerly pressed it to his bosom—then turning to my inexorable parent, “As the father of my Louisa,’’ said he, “you are entitled to my respect, I once hoped to have found in you a father—a friend—but I was deceived. Alas! what has the deception cost me!—Farewel, oh! farewel, my dear, dear Louisa. —Farewel, Mr. Montague,” added he——and then hastily left the room, as if fearful of not preserving the little resolution that was left him.
* * * * *
Ah! my dear Henrietta, how cruel is my situation! to be separated from him I love so tenderly, and to fear that another may—no, Lady Coverly! no power on earth—but I am interrupted, and obliged to bid you hastily adieu!
Louisa Montague.
18	LETTERS.
LETTER XI.
Lady Coverly to Miss Montague.
Alas! my dear Louisa, how shall I support the fears which your situation has excited in my heart, and the sight of my brother’s diftress! your cruel father!—but I dare not trust myself upon the subject; I am too tenderly interested in it.
My dear, Royston begs to be allowed to send a few lines in this letter. I could not refuse his request, nor will I detain you a moment longer than to bid you adieu!
*****
“My dear, my beloved Louisa, is it possible that we are separated for ever! forbidden, by the harsh-decrees of parental authority, to entertain the most distant hope of happier days!—our fears were then, alas! but too well founded.—Ah! perhaps you not only yield to the dissolution of our attachment, but you have even accepted the vows of another—Louisa! can you have forgot, so soon forgot, those enchanting moments when you blushing confessed your approbation of my love? ye days of rapture! ye are fled for ever; ye dreams of happiness! ye will return no more. Louisa! think not that duty enjoins you to submit to the will of an imperious parent; such an obedience were criminal; honour, religion, every thing condemns it; yet I tremble for you, and for myself;—that awful restraint and fear—that tender softness—whither, ah! whither, may it not lead you?——in one moment we may be lost for ever.—Return me, I beseech you, a few lines to ease my anxious heart; forgive my doubts, pardon my weakness, “Who loves must fear, and sure who loves like me, must greatly fear.”
LETTERS.	19
"Adieu, my ever beloved and amiable friend! in vain do I seek for one glimmering ray of hope to illumine the dark, the dreary prospect! —the future presents nothing to my view but despair and wretchedness: our happiness is vanished like a dream, and has left no traces but anxiety and unavailing regret. —Oh! time never to be recalled, time irrevocably past! Louisa, my dear Louisa, the darling, the delight of my soul, farewel for ever!
Charles Royston.”
LETTER XII.
Miss Montague to Mr. Royston.
No, my dear, my tender friend, it is not in the power of fate to add to our distress! it has poured forth all its accumulated ills, and the mind sinks under the pressure of a misfortune, for which there is no redress!
In vain has my cruel father separated us; his rigour has divided our persons, but it cannot disunite our hearts; our regard is unalterably fixed, and we are neither of us capable of enjoying happiness exclusively of the other. Banish, therefore, my dear friend, those suspicions, which are injurious to us both: your Louisa forget you! —ah ! I once hoped that you had known her better.
But of what avail is now, alas! that tenderness, that similarity of taste, from whence we drew such omens of future happiness, since every flattering hope, every fond idea, is lost for ever?—yet if some favourable, though now unexpected alteration, should happen; if we should conquer those difficulties that now oppose our felicity, and heaven has indeed destined us for each other—ah! let us give way to the delightful thought I let us look forward for the reward of our constancy, and hope for better days by endeavouring to deserve them!
20	LETTERS.
Farewel, my dearest friend! my father’s volce---good heaven---he is already at the door of my apartment---if he sees this letter, we are lost!—once more adieu!
Louisa Montague.
LETTER XIII
Miss Montague to Lady Coverly.
Alas! my dear Henrietta, I prognosticated but too truly!—Mr.Wilmot returned yesterday to the Thorns, and has declared his passion for your wretched friend; in vain have I assured him of my indifference; he still persists; “time,” he says, “may conquer my objections.” I have informed him of my regard for your brother, but he is insensible of every thing: his obstinacy vexes me to the soul, my temper is entirely changed.
* * * * * 
———I went into the garden just now for the benefit of a little air, and had seated myself on one of the benches, when I perceived Mr. Wilmot advancing towards me; displeased at this interruption, I gave him a look expressive of anger and contempt. “What have I done, my dear Miss Montague, said he, to render my presence so disagreeable to you? surely I deserve your pity at least; cruel Lousi! where is that winning softness, that engaging politeness, which add such graces to vour lovely person? am I alone excluded from their influence, I, who am so tenderly sensible of their value?" “Does Mr. Wilmot, returned I hastily, wish to acquire my good opinion?"——“ah, my beloved Miss Montague, interrupted he, can you doubt it?" “Restore me then. said I, the love of my father which you have deprived me of, and, by withdrawing your address—
LETTERS.	21
cs, convert my prefent indifference into gratitude and friendfliip.” “ It is impoffible for me to obey you, madam, returned he, I can never ceafe to adore you, and hope that time may alter’’—“ never, never, rejoined I warmly, I never can regard you but with horror; 1 would prefer beggary and even death to the thoughts of fuch a connection.-” “ You muff, you ffiall be mine, anfwered he haughtily ;
no power on earth ffiall prevent’’-here he ftopt,
obferving my angry and contemptuous looks. Finding that he had gone too far, he endeavoured to {often my refentment by pleading the violence of his love. But I interrupted him with all the warmth of indignation ; “ mention not love, faid I hastily, it is too noble a paffion for your groveling foul to entertain ; it feeks the happinefs of* the beloved objeCl even at the expence of its own—but you are actuated by emotions”—“ ah 1 hold, my dearest Mils Montague, rejoined he eagerly, throwing himfelf at my feet, wound not my foul with thefe unjust afperfions ; the flame which you have kindled in my heart is as pure as the objeCt which infpires it.’’ He was proceeding when my father’s entrance put a stop to the difcourfe. “ Rife, rife, Mr. Wil-mot,’’ faid he, casting at me a look of rage and vexation ; “ fupplicate not for what ffiall foon become voluntarily your’s.—“ Louifa, proceeded he, per-verfe and ungrateful as you are, dread the refentment of an incenfed parent ; fince gentienefs and remonstrances are inesteClual, authority and force ffiall compel you to compliance.’’ I was unable to reply to this cruell declarati i. My tears, however, and Mr. Wilmot’s anfwer, ferved to foften his anger, and he rejoined in a more gentle accent, “ my dear Louifa, where is that asteCtion, that filial duty which once made fo distinguiffied a part of your character, and rendered you fo justly dearto me?”- —“ ’Tis here, anfwered I, pointing to my breast ; could the fuf-ferance of every evil this v.mrld contains procure your happinefs, I would endure it without a figh ;
every
22	LETTERS.
every temporal distrefs I would chearfully encounter for your fake; but eternal niifery,—oh ! my father, fpare your child fuch a facrifice !’’ I caught his hand, and eagerly pressed it to my trembling heart: he ssowly withdrew it, as if irrefolute how to aft;, and I was going to continue the difcourfe, when the arrival of Some company prevented my defign, and I retired to give you this recital.
* * ■ ■* * #
Oh! my dear Henrietta, rejoice with your friend. Mr. Wilmot is obliged to leave the Thoms tomorrow. Unexpefted bussnefs, I find, occassOns his departure. My father defired him to return when it was finilhed, and he eagerly, alas! accepted the invitation- Indelicate and ungenerous man I—however, I enjoy this Short refpite.; but enough, and too much upon this hateful fubjeft.
I find by your lass; letter, that Mr. Royfton is not with you at Windfor. Forget not to fend him my tenderess;—ah! what inuss: I add ? love would fay everything kind and affeftionate; but duty, alas! —do you fupply the chafm—you, my deareft friend, who know every emotion of my foul.
I fend this letter by Mifs Freelove, who is going to flay with her coufin Sydney. She is in fuch Ipirits at the thoughts of vifiting town! though die fays Bie ssrall have continual jobations from her aunt Sydney and the philofophical Harriet. I intend writing by her to that amiable friend, whom I fincerely esteem.—I am, my dear Henrietta,
Your’s,
Louisa Montague.
LETTER XIV.
Lady Cove RLY to Mifs Montague.
I Received your letter, my dear Louifa, this morning, and expeft Mifs Sydney and her coufin to dinner : I want to know a thoufand particulars from
Mifs
LETTERS.	23
MiSsFreelove concerning you- I can talk of nothing
elfe ; you engrofs every emotion of my heart-1
rejoice, however, in Wilmot’s abfence. Ah! may he never return to interrupt your tranquillity !
I forgot to tell you, when 1 wrote last, that Sir William was very much indifpofed : he is fo weak and low, that the phyficians are fearful of his going . into a confumption, and, as a preventative, have ordered him the Bristol waters. He could not, however, go by himfelf, and my dear Charles was little difpofed to attend him ; but as Sir William requested the favour in the most earnest manner, he could not refufe to accompany him—^^they are to fet off to-morrow. -What a number of inJunUions has he laid upon me ! I am to inform him of every particular that/elates to you. Love has the art of dignifying trifles, and of rendering the Smallest incidents important.'—I promifed every thing he required of me ; had I not done fo, nothing could have prevailed upon him to depart.
The ladies are this moment arrived—I must therefore bid you hastily—farewel.
Henrietta Coverly.
LETTER XV.
Mifs Montague to Lady Coverly-
HOW very far has your unhappy Louifa been from experiencing that tranquillity, which Are hoped to have enjoyed unmolested, during the abfence of Mr. Wilmot! I have nov/ learnt the fatal caufe of that melancholy, which has lately opprefled ^ the heart of my dear father ; it is, alas 1 only to be removed by a Sacrifice—good heaven! I tremble at the thought!—He last night received a letter from Adr. Wilmot, who. tenderly regrets his abfence from the Thorns, and begs my father to continue his kind interceflions. How cruel, and unnecelfary is this request ! In vatn did I endeavour to alter my father’s
Sentiments;
24	LETTERS.
Sentiments; all my remonstrances were ineffeUuah He at last fixed his eyes upon me with more tender-nefs than ufual, and fetching a deep figh, “ Louifa,” Said he in a faltering accent, “ every thing depends upon your conceffion ; your welfare, my repofe—all is at stake.—I am Surrounded with difficulties, from which you alone can Save me. My expences have for Some time far exceeded my income ; but I faw the diminution of my fortune without concern, depending upon the promifes which Sir Godfrey had fo often made me. Vain expeUation! Source of all my prefent wretchednefs ! His death deprived me of every hope, and left me only in the nominal postef-fion of this estate, which, alas! I had before mortgaged for its full value to Mr. Wilmot. I grew fick of a world, where I could no longer receive, thofe flattering distindlions I had before enjoyed, and retired with an aching heart to this Solitary manfion. The profits which arife from the place I poflTefs under the prefent ministry, are Sufficient to Secure me from poverty ; but oh ! how inadequate to my rank, and yet more fo to my wiShes!—add to this that I am involved in debt^my dear child, this flender pittance must be decreaSed, to pay off loool. which I was forced to borrow, just after Sir Godfrey’s de-ceafe, of Sir John Mordaunt. .How dreadful, therefore, is my Situation ! yet the generofity of Mr. Wilmot would diSpel every fear, and restore me to affluence and peace. He offers to take thee without a fortune, and to return to me the poffeffion of my estate. What uncommon liberality! can it fail of melting you to gratitude and tendernefs, and of removing all your Scruples! I stiould have informed you Sooner of his intentions, but that I hoped every thing from thy filial regard, and 'was willing to Spare mySelf,”—here he stopt, but Soon after added in a Softer accent, “ ah! my beloved Louifi, what joy would this connection afford thy tender father! you would be entitled to my highest gratitude, my warmest love ! Come th^, my dearest child, purSued he eagerly, embracing me, conSent
to
LETTERS.
to my wishes; let me owe all my happinefs to my Louifa, and believe me I will never be ungrateful.’ He paufed. My dear friend, what were my agitations J'-^I turned pale—my voice faltered —I was capable of refifting his menaces, and of fupporting his anger ; but thefe tender perfuafions, this gentle-
nefs !-How did 1 wifh to oblige him ; to restore
him to affluence, to make him happy, to whom I owed every thing I enjoyed ! ah ! what rapture! I began to find my heart glow with all the enthufiafm
of duty--when in a moment the recolleUion of
your brother, his fufferings, his tender paffion, intruded upon my remembrance, and every other idea
vanished before it.--My anfwer Served only to
excite my father’s refentment, and I retired to my chamber drowned in tears.
Farewel, oh, farewel ! my dear Henrietta ; my
heart wisties to impart to Mr. Royston-but all is
vain---
Your’s,
Louisa Montague.
LETTER XVI.
Mifs Freelove to Mr. Freelove.
AH! London, thou feat of pleafure, must I then leave thee! How often, my dear Sir, have I lamented your partiality for green fields. Shady groves, and purling streams! 1 have indeed heard of lovers, who longed for the melancholy of retirement, and to that Species of animals it may have its attraUions; but to the frigid heart of threescore—— heavens! what allurements can it prefent! yet Harriet, young and blooming as She is. Sighs after rural diverfions, and eagerly accepted your invitation, anticipating the pleafure She Shall enjoy in rambling over the fields with you, or in fitting under a venerable oak with her favourite Thomfon. Mercy upon us, what a taste! I already tremble for my VoL. I.	C	complexion.
I	*
26	LETTERS.
complexion, for the Zephyrs are not fo civil now as they were in days of yore ; the rude things will
tan;--oh! would you think it, Sir, the prudifli
Harriet finds innumerable faults in me ! llie has even retrenched thofe hours I once devoted to my toilette- She fays, that it is criminal to waste fo much time in adorning one’s perfon, and that I am accountable for every moment I mifpend.’’ She enters my apartment-—the day is fixed for our leaving town, and you may expedl to fee my coufm ©n Tuefday, accompanied by your ever affedlionate and dutiful
Charlotte Freelove,
letter XVII.
Mils Montague to Lady Coverly.
My dear friend, what excefs of grief have I Sustained Since I last wrote to you ! yet then, alas! I fondly hoped that my woes were incapable of receiving any addition. Mistaken wretch! my fitu-ation was at that time comparatively happy ! Henrietta, I can never Support the feeing my father struggling with poverty—yet to confent to an union —I know not how to refolve—but I forget that you are a stranger to this new misfortune. Know then, that my dear father is, by a Sudden change in the ministry, deprived cf his place, and left without any means of obtaining fubfistence. I cannot de-fcribe his agitations at receiving this dreadful intelligence ; his first conflicts were terrible. I wept, 1 implored him upon my knees to be more calm; “ Louifa,” Said he, all wild and frantic, I am lost for ever, talk not then of calmnefs—heavens ! to be expofed to the Scorn or negledt of thofe I once de-fpifed !—but no, purfued he, f will first put a period to my wretched being; I can refolve to die, but to live forgotten, cr contemned, is too great a
curfe!”
E T T E R S.	27
curSe!”	“ Oh! niy father, my dear, dear father,
returned I hastily, there cannot be a misfortune that
would render fuch a pioceeding excufeable.------
“ How, interrupted he, can you then think with patience on thoSe evils that Surround us ? good heavens! to be obliged to ferviliiy foi a precarious Support; to stoop, to cringe to thoSe whom I once conlidered as my equals; or elfe to be confined, perhaps for ever, in a dark dungeon, a stranger to that freedom the meanest reptile enjoys !’’	“ Dear Sir, returned
I, do not enumerate ills, you rr.ay never experience; the few talents I am mistrefs of, fliall all be exerted to preferve you from poverty : what we once confi-dered as embeliniments only, may now prove elTen-tiah—happy employment! delightful thought ! to Save him from want, to whom 1 owe every thing I postefs, and for whom I would freely Sacrifice—
“ Ah! LouiSa, Louifa, interrupted my father in a mournful accent, you know not the obstacles that would impede fuch a defign, and death would be a thoufand times more welcome to me than a life of ignominy—had it not been for thy obstinacy, pursii-ed he sternly, 1 had ere now been intitled to the af-fistance of a man, who from duty as well as inclination, would have Saved me from ruin—but that flattering hope is now I fear intirely fled. Mr. Wil-mot will never condeScend to take a beggar to his arras, nor to ally himfelf to miSery and fliarae,—— Louifa, wretched girl, it is you that have ruined me.”
-------My dear Henrietta, what tears did theSe
cruel reproaches cauSe me ! yet the thought of being delivered from the persecutions of Mr. Wilmot gives ire refolution to Support every distrefs.
My father requires my attendance—-I must leave you abruptly, my dearest friend, but will Soon write again.
Louisa Montague.
C 2	LET-
zS letters.
LETTER XVIII.
Mr. WiLMOT to Sir John Mordaunt.
CA N you be with me at breakfast: to-morrow ? I have bustnefs to communicate to thee of the
greatest importance.-Mordaunt, I yet hope to
poffefi the adorable Louifa ;---yes, my boy. She
must now be mine. Her father is, by change in public affairs, deprived of his place, and left without any refource, fave my friendstiip. His ill con-duft has deprived him of the esteem of his acquaintance. and he owes my proteUion and astistance intire-ly to the beauty of his daughter—could I but gain her heart at the expence of half my estate, I Should think jTiyfelf richly repaid.-But are not her affections engaged, you aflc ?-pho. Jack, all farce
and romantic nonfenfe. Royston is unable to fup-port the incumbrance of a needy wife; he has left
her to purfue fome richer fair;-the fellow is in
the right ; his perfon and accomplistiments may recommend him to fome fat dowager, or rich antiquated vir^n. “ And fo, Wilmot, you would marry this handfome beggar true. Jack, I would with tianfport, “ and why becaufe I hold it impoSIible to gain her on better terms, and that She is beautiful
beyond--oh ! Mordaunt, had you but beheld the
fnov.'^y whitenefs of her complexion, the brilliancy of her charming eyes, the delicacy of her perfon, and thethoufand graces which charm, and fire, and cap-tiva-e the foul, you would ceafe to wonder at my in ention. Wilding rallies me without mercy upon iheoccafion, and pretends to be certain that I fliall repent even before the expiration of the honey-moon-How ridiculous! he judges from my former idle attachments. But to return to the fubjeft I meant to write upon ; Montague is now deprived of every
thing,
LETTERS.	29
thing, and indebed to you loool. write to him di-reUly ; tell him an unforefeen incident obliges you to defire an immediate repayment of the nvhole fum ; and left he Should imagine you ignorant of his misfortune, forget not to condole with him upon his recent lofs. I will offer to repay you, and to relinquish my right to the eftate where he lives, till after his deceafe, upon condition that Louifa will confent to be mine : this generofity must: call forth her gratitude, and from her filial duty and affection I expedt the mod pleafing concefilons. I fiiall not fend away Illy letter till a day or two after your’s is d if patched ; their anxiety and fufpence will be favouiable to me, and forward my plan. I fliall take great liberties with you, Jack, in my letter ; the cafe requires it. Let me know by my fervant what time I may expedt you, and believe me in hafte,
Your’s,
Henry Wilmot.
LETTER XIX.
Mifs Montague to Lady Cove rly.
IMagination cannot conceive a greater Scene of dif-trefs, than what your wretched Louifa at this moment experiences ! I told you my dear Henrietta, that my unhappy father owed Sir John Mordaunt lOool. He took a note for the money with the utmost: indifference. “ This is unnecestary, Mr. Montague, Said he j I could rely upon your honour ; however do not let Such a trifle incommode you, but pay me in a manner, and at a time, that will be most; convenient to yourfelf.” Our late misfortune has intirely altered the cafe ; his mean foul, a stranger to the feelings of humanity, has even led him to infift upon an immediate repayment, and from the purport of his letter I fear—no, Henrietta, I could C 3 I	never
30	LETTERS.
never Support Such a trial! You may imagine my father’s dillrefs ; one moment he determines to implore the affiftance of Mr. Wilmot ; the next he Tecolledts that he cannot be a Stranger to his Situation, and that his Silence proves his indifference; he then finks into a lethargy of grief, and appears inattentive to my tears or tender careffes. Alas I rny dear Henrietta, there are moments in which I almost regret my not accepting Mr. Wilmot’s offers, had I been certain of dying as Soon as the fatal ceremony was
finished----Oh ! did but your dear brother poffeSs
the power---1 must throw alide my pen ; I am to®
wretched to proceed at preSent.
* » * » *
Henrietta, what will become of me ! my thoughts
are all confufion I this letter-this fatal generofity
----my forward heart----ah I Lady Coverly, Mr.
Wilmot has written, and in terms that excite my gratitude; he expreffes his concern at being fo long ignorant of our misfortunes. Sir John Mordaunt was the first who informed him of our Situation, at the fame time acquainting him with the letter he had dispatched the day before, and adding, that if he was not paid diredUy, he Should aft in a different manner. Mr. Wilmot in vain endeavoured to alter his resolution--and what is the refult}--he of-
fers to pay the demand immediately, and to leave my father in poffelTion of this estate, upon condition that your unhappy Louifa confents to—oh duty, oh love, why are you thus at variance ! can 1 refign for ever the delightful consideration of loving and being beloved by the most amiable of mankind ! to banisti
every pleafing idea--but then, to fee my father,
perhaps a prifoner. Allist me, my dear Henrietta, with thy counfels; for 1 know not what I can, nor what I ought to do.
How impoffible is it for language to deferibe my father’s emotions at receiving Mr. Wilmot’s letter !
He
LETTERS.	31
He caught me with tranfport in his arms ; he called me his preferver, his guardian angel, and then on his knees invoked the bleffings of heaven on his be-nefador.——I was (hocked to find, that he did not even fuSpedl my refnfal of Mr. Wilmot’s offers. I Vtulhed to Speak j but what could I fay ? I was ready to faint with terror and vexation. My tears and (Ighs foon undeceived him. “ Loulfa, Said he, with a voice that made me tremble, I cannot, will not, bear a denial: I have already facrificed too much to your romantic obstinacy ; but all is now over.—Ah 1
Louifa, my dear Louifa, I once hoped-but filial
tendernefs is entirely estranged from thy heart ; thou beholdest my mifery unmoved, and thy cruelty will foon terminate a life, which, but for thy unkindnefs, had been Spent in afstuence and tranquillity : had I propofed to thee a man who was unworthy thy ef-teem and affeUion, thou wouldst have retained fome excufe for thy difobedience; but where an agreeable perfon is joined to real merit, who can undertake to justify your conduct ?”
My father has this moment left me ; he Is preparing to anfwer Mr. Wilmot’s letter,-in an hour’s
time—ahl Henrietta, to confent to fuch a connexion is impostible ! but then, my father’s ruin will be
inevitable ; and his threats, his imprecations-—oh f
that Sydney was but arrived'—but her journey is un-fortunatelv postponed for a week longer, and by that
time---Lucy calls for my letter ; the post is going
away ; how can I bid you adieu ? pray for me, my dearest friend ; I must conclude ; farewel, oh fare-wel I may heaven direX me in this trying hour!
Louisa Montague. C 4	LET-
Sz	LETTERS.
LETTER XX. •• From the Same.
Henrietta, my dear Henrietta, what have I done ? ah ! perhaps you will no longer love me ; Mr. Royfton too will hate me—yet tell him, I conjure you, that it was not any evil 1 might expedl to Suffer, that made me conSent to marry Mr- Wil-mot ;—but have I then confented ? my heart trembles, an universal terror Seizes me—yes 1 have, alas! complied, and all is over-—Scarcely can I condemn a Sacrifice, which duty has compelled me to make ; ought I not to Sorego my own wilhes, to Secure a Sather’s peace, and will not the delightful conSci-oufnefs of having performed my duty, be Sufficient to Subdue every uneaSy emotion, and to Satisfy all my hopes ? Cculd I have tasted a moment’s happi-neSs whilst I beheld my father’s distreffes, and at the fame time conceived mySelf the cauSe of all his woes ? Mr. Wilmot deServes my esteem, my gratitude ; and If he dates to enter into the most Sacred of all engagements, with a woman who has gloried in avowing her indifference for him, and her regard for another, the imprudence is all his own—but honour, religion, every tye will oblige me to prevent his having reaSen to repent the step. I place all my reliance upon Providence ; I have invoked the protection of Heaven ; my distraCted Soul, torn with the most cruel conflicts, can from thence alone expeCt conSo-lation ; if I have erred, my intention at least is virtuous, and that must excuSe me.-'Yet if Mr.
Royston reproaches me, Henrietta, I would never Survive his diSpleaSure ! but you are, without doubt, anxious to know by what means my conSent to this fatal connection was obtained'—listen then to the cruel recital, and if you either wonder at the con-ceflion, or blame the rafhneSsof it, lam lost Indeed.
My
LETTERS.	33
My father entered my apartment foon after I had dispatched my letter of last night; I was affefted at his appearance ; anxiety and fear were imprinted In his countenance ; I could not restrain my tears j he came towards me, and Seating himSelf upon the So-pha by me, taking hol(f of my hand, “ My dear child. Said he, in a tender voice, I hope I find you worthy my tenderneSs. You have banifhed, I doubt not, every improper emotion, and are prepared to make me happy by your compliance with my deSires.”
I could not anSwer, but my tears and Sighs Spoke for me- He would not attend to theSe (ilent indications of my heart, but Soon proceeded,. “ I may then tell Mr. Wilmot that you have conSented.”—He aroSe, and was going to withdraw. I was alarmed beyond exprefiion, and eagerly exclaimed, “ Stay, my dear father, and do not, I beSeech you, excite hopes, which can never be gratified.’’—He ftopt
----“ LouiSa, returned he, in a Sorrowful accent,
how can you thus cruelly torment me } I will kneel to you ; yes, I wi.l thus Supplicate for your con-fent ; ah ! did ever child refuSe a kneeling parent ?”
‘‘ Oh ! rife, rife, dear, dear Sir, faid I, Sinking down by his fide, if you would not fee me expire at your feet with grief and confufion !’’ “ Will you then grant my wilhes ?” rejoined he. I remained Silent. He aroSe in a kind of phrenSy, and pulliing me from him with the utmost horror and detestation,
“ Louifa, Said he in a frantic tone, be gone for ever from my fight, and remember, when death has cloSed ■ my miserable existence, that, but for your unkind-’ neSs, I had been blested with eaSe, and Surrounded with atstuence. You will then perhaps fhed a few tears over my breathleSs corpfe, and regret, when too late, your unexampled cruelty.—^Alas ! my mind
can form nothing to itSelf, but mifery.-Great
God, Said he, falling upon his knees, his hands together in an agony of grief, and the tears rolling down his venerable cheeks, take from me a life which is become hateful to myfelsi and a burthen to others, and receive to thy mercy an unfortunate wretch, who C 5	has
S4	LETTERS.
has no other expeftation of happinefs.” I heard no more, but flew to him, and throwing my arms around bis neck, my head finking upon his Shoulder, I exclaimed--'“Oh ! my father, difpofe of me as
you pleafe, for I can no longer oppofe your will and then unable to proceed, I fell fenfelefs upon the floor.—Would to heaven I had then breathed my . last: ! but alas ! I am preferved for Still greater trials. Adieu 1 my dear friend ; I muffc inclofe a few lines for your amiable brother—yet how Shall I addrefs him ? how inform him of a circumstance that will fo tenderly affeU his peace ? Shew him this letter, and tell, oh ! tell him repeatedly, that no distance, no time, no ccnnefticn, strall ever make my friendship lefs lively—ah ! what could I not add ! but I will tear myfelf from a fubjedt too tender, too interesting ! Once more then, my beloved Henrietta, adieu.
Louisa Montague.
LETTER XXI.
Mifs Montague to Mr. Royston.
Ah ! my beloved friend, what can the unhappy
Louifa fay !-How often have I taken up the
pen, and how often thrown it aSide, unable to begin this fatal letter! I befpeak all your fortitude, your compaSfion, your tendernefs, in perufing thefe fad lines, the faithful tranfcript of my wiechednefs. Fate has now feparated us for ever ; duty torces nie to give my hand to another ; every thing depended upon my obedience; how Jong was the cruel facrl-fice with-held, and even at last Low was it torn from my bleeding heart ! A fatal tendernefs has undone me, but alb repining is vain ; my taste is dreadful, but I will fummon all my refoluticn to peifcrm it properly—do you, my beloved friend, Set me the great example, and let your heroic intrepidity teach
me
!	LETTERS;	35
me resignation. My dear Royfton, let not our pre~ fent anxiety and disappointment, prevent our considering the proSpeft that ever Seemed to await our unSor-tunate attachment ; was it ever likely to be SucceSs-^ Sul ? No—we were, alas ! condemned to drag on a miserable existence, tormented with fruitleSs wifhes, and eternal regret ; cur Sate is now determined ; and ought I not to rejoice, that Providence has enabled me to gratify a father’s fondest hopes, and to restore him to affluence and tranquillity ? Returnme then, oh Royston! thoSe letters, which are now uSelefs ; but preServe for me, I conjure you, that friendstiip which is dearer to me than life, and which I can never conSent to refign. Adieu ! dear and ami-j	able friend, to meet no more—an eternal Separation
I	•—but it must be So ! farewel, then, most beloved,
I	most—ah ! what am I doing ?—Farewel for ever !
I	Louisa Montague.
LETTER XXII.
[	Mr-Royston to MiSs Montague.
A K E back, inhuman LouiSa, thoSe letters JL which you regret having written, and which were only valuable whilst I imagined that they contained the Sentiments of your heart j as you have now convinced me of the cruel deception, know that I disdain to preServe them. But has my LouiSa then I . forfeited her right to my esteem, my tenderneSs ? ah ! no, She is become dearer to me than ever,— and yet I JoSe her—alas ! had I postested the power of relieving your distrestes, with what eagerneSs would I have flown to youraflistance ! And will not the delightful conlideration of having extricated Suffering merit from exigence and woe, be a fusticient reward to Mr. Wilmot t But perhaps he is no longer indifferent to you } LouiSa, my dear Lou-
ifa,
36	LETTERS.
ifa, am I then forgotten ?—but all is over—your confent is obtained, and you will Shortly be inflaved by thofe indiflbluble bonds, which ought only to have united thofe hearts, which I once hoped were fo firmly attached to each other, that nothing but death could dilTever them—vain imagination ! cruel mistake ! you have disturbed the repofe of my life, yet your happinefs is the first wifh of my foul; yes, my dear, my amiable friend, if it is poffible that the facred engagement you are going to enter into can fecure your felicity, I ought to be—'I will be fatisfied —yet to lofe you for ever—the very thought is mad-nefs—ah ! stay for pity’s fake—ye Sliall not tear her from me ! but She confents,—Slie refigns me—forgets me—cruel, unkind, inconstant ! I w'ill'no longer Submit—farewel then for ever !
Ch A RLEs Roys TON.
LETTER XXIII.
Mifs Montague to Mr. Royston.
Ungenerous Royston, how have I deferved thy reproaches ? If I have facrificed my own happinefs to fecure a father’s peace, Should fuch a conduct make me incur your refentment ? Had you been truly noble, you would have foothed my unquiet mind, and made my talk lefs grievous ! ah ! was it for thee to add to a did refs already too great for exprestion ? You accufe me of having fubdued every tender imprestion. Alas ! if you knew my
heart-my dear friend, I can never furvive ihy
difpleafure!
Louisa Montaguf.
1. E T-
LETTERS.	37
LETTER XXIV.
Mr. Royston to Mlfs Montague-
FOrgive me, dear and angelic Loulfa ! I fee and lament my weaknefs- But oh ! think how tenderly I love you ; and then refledl upon the excefs of my disappointment and difpair ! I will ever pray for your felicity ;-but I must; fupprefs the overflow-
ings of a heart which ought not now to pour forth its fond complaints.-How fliall I bid you eter-
nally farewel!—but fate will have it fo, and I must: fubmit ; bestow now and then a thought upon an unfortunate wretch, who lives only to esteem, to admire, to adore you !
Charles Royston.
LETTER XXV.
Mlfs Sydney to Lady Cove rly.
HO W cruelly has that happinefs been interrupted, which I expedted to have enjoyed during my abode at the Thorns, in the Society of our beloved Louifa ? What tears have we Shed, and what anxiety do we experience,' in thofe hours ef-pecially when we" are obliged to be afunder!
I received a billet from her early yesterday morning ; (lie requested me to attend her asfoon as posti-ble ; I eagerly obeyed the fummons, and found that it was occafioned by the expedled arrival of Mr. Wilmot. He came Soon after I got there. She w'as ready to faint at his approach. With what joy did her father welcome him ! Mr. Wilmot was all
rapture-how much is he attached to our fweet
friend ! ah ! who can wonder at his paffion ! llie is worthy his tenderest love. He came down in a very elegant post-coach, which is defigned as a prefent
for
38	LETTERS.
for Mr. Montague, with a pair of beautiful grey horSes. What exultation !—-his countenance Spoke the delight of his foul. My dear friend M'^as affedted at the generofity of the prefent, and the graceful manner in which it was made; She thanked him with a helitating voice ; he Seized her hand, and put it to his lips ; file did not withdraw it ; the happy father took hold of them both, and preffing them eagerly to his heart, poured forth the overflowings of his gratitude and paternal tendernefs : the Scene was truly affedling. Ah ! my dear friend, rejoice with me, fmce our Louifa is destined for Mr. Wilmot, that he appears fo fenfible of her merit.
Will you excufe my adding more, than the astu-rance of my being with the utmost tendernefs and Sincerity,
Your
Harriet Sydney.
LETTER XXVI.
Lady Cove rly to Mifs Sydney.
My dear friend, how wretched is your Henrietta !-—my poor Charles is dangeroufly ill, and I v/as Sent for with the utmost fpeed to Bristol, where I now am. But alas ! he knows me not j he calls incestantly for his dear Louifa ; he repeats my name with a melancholy tendernefs ; I take his burning hand and prefs it to my lips ; he furveys me intently, yet recolledls me not.
Sir Vv''illiam is, I believe, astefted at his Situation, but he posttifes net that fenfibility— oh ! Royflon, my brother, my friend, I cannot, will not, part with thee ! Gracious heaven ! restore to my prayers m.y companion, iny advifer, him to whom I owe every virtue 1 postefs. Let rxrt my dear Louifa be acquainted with his ntuation-- but this delire is unne-cestary.-Adieu, my Harriet ! forgive this inco-
herent letter ; 1 know not what 1 have Said. I must
attend
LETTERS.	39
attend my beloved Charles. Alas '• the time I now devote to him, may Some time hence be very dear to my remembrance-—! will foon write again—once more adieu t
Henrietta Coverly.
LETTER XXVII.
Lady Coverly to Mifs Sydney.
My brother is much better, my dear Harriet, though he remains very weak and low. How did he rejoice upon the recovery of his fenfes, to find me with him ! “ This is kind indeed, my Henrietta, Said he in a faint voice, but you were ever fo,”—then after a paufe.	I flrall die in your arms,
my beloved fifter, continued he, for you will not
leave me.-This is all I have now to wi/li for—
but tell me, I conjure you, is my Louifa really marriedI replied in the negative. “ She will fliortiy be fo, rejoined he, and therefore this refpite is of little importance ; but heaven’s will be done.”
---We Shall leave Bristol as foon as my brother’s
health will permit, and intend going to Sir William’s
feat in G-Sliire. I Shall not return to Windfor
for foine time. Sir William is very well, and left us last week; I fear that the reco'very of his health is net attended with the amendment of his morals ; unhappy man ! what anxiety has he given me !
I write to-night to my dearest friend, but fhai! date the letter from Windfor. I have left proper orders in regard to the forwardirrg any letters w'hich may be left for me at that place.
I am ever your’s,
Henrietta Coverly.
LET-
/
40	LETTERS.
LETTER XXVIII.
Mifs Sydney to Lady Coverly.
Accept my fincereft congratulations upon the recovery of your dear brother- Amiable man I how much am I intereded in his happLnefs! my Louifa eagerly opened your letter—fire iurveyed it intently ; Mr Royfton’s name was not once mentioned in it ; die looked difappointed ; ‘‘ 1 admire my Henrietta’s prudence, faid lire, at the fame time that I regret it,—yet alas! if Mr. Royston defpifes
or forgets me-but ought I not to wilTr that he
drculd forget me ?—Ah ! my father, what a tender attachment hast thou interrupted!”
Mr. Montague is continually propofing Some Scheme of plealure. I fee the reafon ; he will not Suffer Louifa to reflect upon her Situation ; flie can never be a moment alone—my coufln has been with us this week, and we have pasted it in all kinds of rural amufements. Mr. Montague has been Soliciting my dear friend to fix the time of her marriage- Mr-Wilmot is all impatience, for that (to him) happy period ; fire turns pale at the thought, but her father has this morning been fo uncommonly urgent, and even peremptory, as almost; frightened her into compliance; he too plainly fees his pov,?er over her, yet he is not generous nor even delicate in his conduU. towards her, who has Sacrificed all her happinefs to oblige him.
* * * * *
Louifa enters my chamber; stae is in tears—She follicits my advice how to ad ; I am fhocked at Mr. Montague’s behaviour,—but as the connection is unavoidable,—I must, I think, urge her to obey him.
My coufin interrupts me, and forces me to Subscribe myfelf very abruptly, your’s,
Henrietta Sydney.
LET-
LETTERS.	41
LETTER XXIX.
Mifs Sydney to Lady Coverly.
OUR dear LouiSa has at length yielded to the importunities of her father, and, on Tuefday fortnight, will give her hand to the happy Wilmot; his tranfports are inexpreflible-
I went this morning to call upon her. Mr. Montague met me at the door to inform me of her having confented ; he needed not to have told me; his looks were Sufficient indications. I hastened to her : Ihe was fitting in her chamber, her head reclined in a melancholy posture upon her hand, and her eyes fixed intently upon the floor ; She arofe to,welcome me. 1 faw her distrefs, and endeavoured to raife her dejeUed Spirits, by expatiating upon the happi-nefs her confent had given to her father, “ Yes, faid (he, deeply fighing, my fate is now determined.”'-Gracious heaven! purfued the dear crea-
ture, eagerly clafping her hands together, and lifting up her eyes with all the fervour of devotion, I expeft not tranquillity in this world, but oh ! enable me, I pray thee, fo to difcharge the duties of that awful state I am compelled to enter into, that 1 may obtain that felicity in another, which thou hast pro-mifed as the reward of virtue I”
I am going to write to Lady Sydney, to Solicit for another month or two j I cannot think of leaving my Louifa immediately after her marriage. She defires me to beg for three months at least. I will not mention any time, but confide in her generofity.
I am your’s,
Harriet Sydney-
LET-
42	LETTERS.
LETTER XXX.
Mifs Sydney to Lady Coverly.
TO-inorrow is the great, the important day, that will determine the fate of our Louifa : J have not left her a moment, and am to deep here to-night at her request-—If any perfon is equal to fuch trials, it is our lovely friend ; what piety I what virtue! every amiable endowment is her's ! She has Scarcely fpoke all this day, but hov^? expreffive are her looks ! fhe beholds the joy of her father with a pleafed attention. He prefTes her frequently to his heart with rapture. She Surveys him with a melancholy tendernefs, which Seems to Say, “ ah, my dear Sir, what have I not Sacrificed for your Sake !” Mr. Wilmot’s happineSs is So great, that one cannot help enjoying it with him. LouiSa receives his affi-duities with a SweetneSs that charms him. Ah ! my dear Sriend, I who have Seen her struggles, and know her heart, can never Sufficiently admire her behaviour! Such virtue must be the peculiar care of Providence ; can it then fail of being rewarded !
The morning is arrived, and in one Short hour— I tremble—dear and amiable LouiSa, my heart feels little leSs than thine !—Mr. Montague propoSed ordering the coach. She begged to be allowed half an hour—it is past-—and we are going—Oh! thou gracious Being, who orderest every human event,
protedl my dearest friend—I must attend her.-
Farewel! pray for the happineSs of LouiSa.----
Adieu.
Harriet Sydney.
I. E T-
LETTERS.	43
LETTER XXXI.
Mifs Sydney to Lady Coverlt.
WILL you excufe my fending only theSe few lines, to inform you that we Set off to-morrow, on a tour which will detain us about a month, if we go to all the gentlemens Seats we at prefent think of vifiting? My coufin is to accompany us.
My dear Mrs. Wilmot has juft difpatched a long letter, diredled to you at Windfor.—I have time for no more than the alTurance- of being my dear Lady Coverly’s faithful
Harriet Sydney.
LETTER XXXII.
Lady Coverly to Mifs Sydney.
I Rejoice to hear of your Safe arrival at the Thorns, and that you have had fuch an agreeable tour.
I am obliged to leave * * * Biire next week, and Suffer the utmost: anxiety in the thoughts of parting from my dear Charles ; yet for many reafons T wou'd not confent to his attending me to town, as he
propofed doing.--Sir William is Seldom at home,
yet he is far from being well, and looks pale, languid, and emaciated. My beloved Charles continues weak, and dejeUed. He Seems weary of life. I endeavour to raife his deprested Spirits, but ail my efforts are ineffectual. “ Does my Henrietta imagine, faid he gravely, that I can ever forget the past; ? or does stie wifh me to drag on a miferable existence, deprived as I am of every thing, that can render life valuable to its poffestbr —“ Ah ! fay not fo, my dear brother, returned I, embracing him ; it is true that you have loft a miftrefs, tender, amiable, and deferving your warmest: love, but you still preferve in her the
most
44	LETTERS,
most affedionate of friends; and you have in your Henrietta a Sifter who loves you beyond expreffion I” ‘‘ Alas! interrupted he haftily, how cool' is fiend-Sliip, when compared with love!—had Ihe forfeited her right to my efteem ; had inconftancy, or ambition, induced her to yield her hand to Wilmot, I
Ihould have defpifed, and forgot her,-but to be
fenfible, that ftre never appeared half fo amiable, as at that moment in which I loft her for ever,—there —there’s the fting! Can then an affedion like mine be ever Subdued ? —No, Henrietta, it is impoiTible ! the last Sigh that quivers on my lips, will be breathed forth for my Louifa.”
Adieu! my dear Harriet, and believe me ever your’s,
Henrietta Coverly.
LETTER XXXm.
Mifs Sydney to Lady Coverly-
OUR time has been fo much engaged in receiving and paying vifiis, that I have not had a lei Sure moment to devote to my dear friend. How odious are thofe ceremonies, which custom has impoSed upoa thofe occafions, and how Sincerely have Mrs. Wilmot and your Harriet regretted the trifling conversation, the irkfome restraint which we have lately been obliged to Submit to! Such are the faftilons of this world, which are founded upon caprice, and purfued through folly.
Our dear friend has this day finlflaed a letter to your Ladylhip, which was begun near a fortnight, ft nee ; Mr. Wilmot will not Suffer her to be abfent for a moment ; “ writing, or reading, is bad for her head, and Solitude will render her melancholy.”— You may eafily judge, you who know fo well the Sentiments of our Louifa, how painful this constraint must be to her aUive mind ! but Hie is all compliance;
“ It
LETTERS.	45
“ It is his tenderneSs for me, fays flie, that makes him act in this manner ; and I am therefore bound by gratitude, as well as duty, to gratify his wiOies.’’
Yet though prudence makes her endeavour to conceal every difagreeable emotion, 1 can plainly diRover that his exceflive fondnefs diftreffes her; She fre* quently casts down her lovely eyes with a dejedted timidity, and an air of melancholy takes poirdlion of every feature. Ah! my dear Henrietta, 1 like not thefe exprestions of rapture—thefe ebullitions of fondnefs. — May I infpire a tenderneSs that will exist independent of fenfuality- Such a regard would I excite in Wilniot for his amiable wife—but when I expatiate upon the fweetnefs of her temper, he extols the clearnefs of her complexion ; and when I mention the excellence of her understanding, he harangues upon the delicacy of her features, or the lustre of her eyes. Can Such an attachment as this be permanent, which is founded upon external quali- ' ties only ? alas I I fear the worst.
As to Mr. Montague, he is happy beyond expref-fion, at the contemplation of that grandeur which furrounds him ; and my dear friend enjoys his felicity.
Company obliges me to tell you abruptly that I am jour’s,,
Harriet Sydney.
LETTER XXXIV.
Mr. WiLMoT to Sir John Mordaunt.
Rally me, Mordaunt, as much as you pleafe ;
my happinefs depends not upon the opinion of others. Never was 1 blest before; never did I experience half the tranfport in my various interccur-fes v/ith the Sex, that I now enjoy in the pclTestion of my Louifa : the gentlenefs of her manners, the elegance of her perfon, inflame nry foul with rapture
46	LETTERS.
ture and ever new delight. I lit for hours together, liftenlng to the mulic of her voice; I prefs her with
the most; eager paffion to my throbbing heart.--
Mordaunt, can I ever ceafe to love her ! impollible ! you are, you must be mistaken.
My Louifa is the most affeUionate child you can imagine; I am even jealous of her filial regard ; I fee, too plainly fee, that I pdTefs only the fecond place in her heart ; my prefent happinefs is derived from her tender attachment to her father ; would to heaven I had owed it only to love! I Ihould then have been blest beyond expiestion.
Do you know Mist Sydney, Jack ? She is to stay with my wife. The girl is bandfome, and genteel; but fire is one of your fentimental fair ones. She talks of love with all the purity of an angel, and even marriage is, according to her idea, a state where delicacy ought to be preferved inviolate. Marriage delicacy indeed ! what a notion ! Did you ever hear of any thing fo romantic ? her coufin, Mifs f’reelove, is quite the reverfe, wanton and playful as a kitten ; in perfon stiowy, in converfation lively, and entertaining—in fliort, just fuch a girl as you would like to trifle with.—But the ladies are ready—I am going to attend them on horfeback—my Louifa rides admirably! how beautiful does fire look ! Farewell
Henry WiLMOT.
LETTER XXXV.
Mr. Royston to Lady Coverly.
■j|\ ,'I'Y dear Henrietta, how tenderly do I regret JLVJ. your abfence! but I am endeavouring to comply with your wiflies and to render myfelf more de-
ferving your affeUion.-Yes, J will tear this fatal
tendernefs from my heart ! fliall I continue to figh for her, who has forfaken, perhaps forgot me ! Louifa, J v.'ill follow thy example, and banifli for ever a paflion lo unfortunate ; a remembrance fo painful.
Fraternal
L T T T E R S.	47
Fraternal love and friendship fliall from henceforth engrofs my foul, and I will bid a last adieu to everj tender emotion.
I received yesterday a letter from Lord Ostory, that dear friend whom I have fo often mentioned to you. He talks of returning to England, after having been abfent from it for three years ; he is just come of age, and is in postestion of an estate in * • * strire of 5000I. ann. Lord Ostory has an improved understanding, accompanied with a fluency of language, and eiegance of exprelston ; hand-fome in his perfon, and amiable in his manners, he is admired by one fex, and estemeed by both. The French ladies (who are not in general remarkable for their modesty) have made him the most favourable advances, which he received with Such coldnefs, as gained him the title of the “ handfome infenstble.”
* * * * #
I have propofed to Sir William to give a little concert this evening to three or four of the neighbouring families ; 1 have engaged a celebrated performer on the violoncello to be prefent at our meeting. The only method of preferving him from guilty pleafures, is by rendering rational ones agreeable to him. We Shall have Some vocal mufic from two ladies. Ah! Henrietta, I fhall think of that happy time when rny Louifa—‘but restListion is my greatest curfe—I will leave this fubjeCl, as you have already had too many instances of the folly of your
Charles Roystoh.
LETTER XXXVI.
Mr. WiLMOT to Sir John Mordaunt.
I Thank thee, Mordaunt, for thy last letter.——> Thou art certainly an honest fellow, and though you often adt w'rong, it is with the best intention in the world. Thou wilt not thank me peihaps for p'-aifing thy heart, at the expence of thy head ; for,
like
48	LETTERS.
like the generality of mankind, thou hadst rather have thy morals than thy understanding depreciated. Thou art not yet a Sir Charles Grandifon,—but you defpiSe the charaUer; ah ! Jack, we too often af-fedl to condemn, what we have not virtue to imitate, ----but how I moralize ! I have lived So long in Sobriety and godlinefs with thefe pious girls, that I Brail absolutely become a mere drone. My LouiSa talks of virtue with all the wiSdom of a Socrates.— How pleafing is oratory from teeth of ivory and lips of coral! I often, however, stop her harangue by eagerly preffing her to my bofom ; (he receives my carestes, but stre does not return them.
For.Some days the brow of my charmer has been coloured with anxiety. Mr. Montague is not well, yet refufes all ailistance ; he depends entirely upon the strength of his constitution ; his phyfician is nature, but her aids are not always Sufficiently efficacious ; luxury has introduced diforders, which art alone can cure. Farewell and believe me, your
Henry Wilmot.
LETTER XXXVII.
Mifs Sydney to Lady Coverly.
I Have been highly difpleafed with Mr. Wilmot, and I know you will be no lefs fo, my dear Henrietta, when I inform you of thecccafion. We have been engaged a week for a ball, which is to be given to-morrow evening by a gentleman, who is lately come to refide at the Thorns ; but as Mr. Montague is greatly indifpofed, Mrs. Wilmot begged that fhe might be allowed to fend a card to apologize for her abfence. Mr. Wilmot appeared unwilling to confent, and fpoke of Mr- Montague’s diforder, with an indifference, that I faw affedted and difpleafed her; He appealed at last to me to decide the matter, and I determined it at once in favour of my friend ; he faid little, but he did not comply with a grace, as
I took
LETTERS.	49
I took care to obferve to him, Mrs. Wilmot retired to her chamber, and I faw afterwards had been weeping; angelic creature ! how could any niande-ferve her, except your brother, who alone can equal
her in every amiable virtue !
* * * • *
Mr. Montague is much worfe this morning; Mr.
Wilmot has Sent this moment for doUor R---.
Not all our perfuafions had been able to prevail upon Mr. Montague to have him called in Sooner ; he has imbibed a ridiculous prejudice against: the phyfi-cal tribe, and early imprestions are, you know, very difficult to conquer.
The doftor is come, and T am Impatient to hear
his opinion of Mr. Montague’s diforder.-1 have
ventured to alk him Some questions, unawed by the folemnity of his manner, and the gravity of his countenance ; but his replies were fo fhort, fo unfatis-faclory, and he appeared fo fearful of becoming once in his life intelligible and unreferved, that he left me bewildered in perplexity and lost; in confu-fion-
lam obliged to difpatch this letter, but will foon write again.
Your’s,
Harriet Sydney.
LETTER XXXVIII,
Mr. Wilmot to Sir John Mordaunt.
Your letter, my dear Sir John found us all in the utmost distrefs ; poor Mr. Montague is given over ; Mifs Sydney is in tears, and my L.ouifa —but her grief is inexpreffible ! I have a thoufand fears on her account, yet I cannot prevail upon her to leave her father a moment :—Mordaunt, would
stie thus grieve for me—alas! I doubt it--Mifs
VoL, I.	D	Sydney
50	LETTERS,
Sydney calls me—oh ! Jack, my Louifa is fainting
in her father’s arms-1 fly to her aflistance.
I have perfuaded her to lie down in order to com-pofe her Spirits, and am going to fit by her bed fide, to endeavour to footh her into refignation and trail-qiiilllty. Adieu ! I will write again to-morrow.
Henry Wilmot..
LETTER XXXIX.
Mifs Sydney to Lady Coverly.
All is over, my dear • Henrietta.-Mr.
. Montague has this moment breathed his last:, in the arms of our beloved Louifa. Good heaven ! how cruel !•--but we muft adore in filence the de-
crees of Providence! Farewel! J am unable to write more at prefent.
Harriet Sydney.
LETTER XL.
Mifs Sydney to Lady Coverly.
After a Series of anxious fears, and disappointed hopes, our Louifa is pronounced out of danger. Ah ! what a blefllng ! I received it with tears of joy ; Ihe beheld them with the utmofl: ten-dernefs, and thanked me by a gentle preflhre of the
hand.--The violence of her grief is Softened into
a tender melancholy, a pious refignation ; it is now the Sorrow of a Chriftian. She implores the forgive-nefs of heaven for the complaints fhe has poured forth against: its decrees. Oh ! how excufable were
her emotions,-how exquifite her Sufferings !
Mr Wilmot has entirely recovered his tranquillity ; I fear, my dear Henrietta, that he pofTelTes an unfeeling heart.
Lord
LETTERS.	51
Lord Townly is returned to Allrby Grove- His uncle is dead, and has left him an estate of 2Cool. a year, in Ireland. Charlotte is quite happy at his arrival in the neighbourhood. Mr. Wilmot is going to pay his lordHiip a vifit this morning ; he may now leave Mrs. Wilmot without apprehenfion.
My uncle fends up his name.-----1 must there-
fore fubfcribe myfelf abruptly, yours, See.
Harriet Sydney.
LETTER XLI.
Mr. Royston to Lady Coverly.
Alas my dear Henrietta, Mr. Montague is then no more, and of what avail is now that cruel Sacrifice which duty obliged my Louifa to make ! Ah ! had we not fo precipitately refigned every tender hope, w'e might have now been happy ! Was it for this, Louifa,, we were Separated ! inexorable fate ! cruel destiny 1 fo tenderly as our
hearts were united !--but how vain are thele
regrets ! It is the will of heaven that I Should drink
deep of the bitter cup of mifery,-it is the will
of heaven that--ah ! forgive me, religion——virtue------------yes, I will Suffer in stience, and Submit to
thy decrees with reverence and adoration. But oh ! ray Louifa I weary as I am of life and indifferent to all its purfuits, yet I am still vulnerable in her ! Gracious heaven ! Support her In thofe trials thou in-
ffidlest ! Henrietta, if llie dies-No, I will never
Survive her ; the grave fliall at least unite us, never, never more to part.
Why, oh ! why, my beloved lister, are you fo Solicitous for my welfare, fo anxious for ray recovery .? I am no longer worthy of your esteem, or de-ferving of your tenderneSs ; every focial wilh, every endearing thought is expunged from my foul ! my mind, entirely ingroffed by Sorrow, and overwhelm-D a	ed
-5'2	LETTERS.
ed with defpair, is become gloomy, felfiHi, and tin-.
fociable--Forget me then, my Henrietta, and
let not an unhappy wretch, like me, deprive thee of that tranquillity thy virtues deferve to polTefs. Suffer me, in Some distant clime, fome Solitary abode, to pafs away the strort remainder of my miSerable being, and join with me in praying for that happy period, which Shall put an end to my woes, and terminate all your cares for the unhappy,
Charles Royston.
LETTER XLII.
Lady Cove RLY to Mr-Royston.
Ho W many tears, my beloved brother, has your letter cost me ! I refpedl your grief, yet I would wiSli to have it lestened. The eye of heaven beholds the first tranfports of recent woe with pity and forgivenefs ; but it allows not the indulgence of Sorrow, nor fuffers us to refufe the cup of conSolati-on, which religion offers to our acceptance. It is not by contemplating the .elicity that would most probably have attended your union with Louifa, that you will acquire fortitude to fupport your pre-fent calamities. Alas 1 my dear Charles, how ab-furd are the emotions by which we are agitated 1 We look in vain for happinefs in a world where it ought not to be expe«ffed : could this state be called probationary, if every hope was gratified, every wiSh indulged } Had the Deity promifed us felicity in this life, we might then reafonably complain of his cruelty and injustice. Be grateful, oh my brother ! to that Providence which has preferved our dearest friend, and enabled her to fupport, with pious refig-nation, the unparalleleJ cruelty of her fate ; exchange complaint for Silence, and doubt for adoration.
The
♦
LETTERS.	^3
The conclufion of your letter SenSibly affeded
me---ungrateful as you are, to wifli -me to forget
you, and to eonfent to a Separation which my foul
ihudders but to think of!-there was a time-
ah ! is then your Henrietta no longer dear to you ?
---my tears must; Supply the reft. Go then,
wretched youth ! abandon me, fly me ; but know, that thy Henrietta can never Survive your abfence— it depends upon you then to determine her fate. Adieu !
LETTER XLIII-
Mr. RoystON ,to Lady CoVE RL Y.
Be Satisfied, my dear Henrietta,* I promife to obey you, and to endeavour to render myfelf worthy your tendernefs. Your letter has called forth all the Soft fenfations of my foul j you deferve every thing from me, and believe me 1 will never be ungrateful.
I am this moment Setting off for * * * in order to meet my dear Oflbry, who arrived in England a few days ago ; he is to return with me to Sir William’s.
I am ever, my amiable After, your’s,
Charles Royston.
LETTER XLIV.
Mifs Sydney to Lady Coverly.
I .A. M juft returned from an airing with our dear friend. Mr. Wilmot has been abfent thefe two days with Lord Townly on a hunting party, but we expedt them here to dinner j they are become inseparable. Mrs. Wilmot regrets the intimacy most: Sincerely j but alas ! her influence was not strong D 3	enough.
54	LETTER S.
enough to prevent it. A wife very foon ceafes to ' hav.e any power over a mind like Wiimot’s.
I this ihoment perceive my coufin entering the parkj .'lhe has heard, I fuppofe, of his Lord^ip’s intended vifit, and it is to that caufe we are mdebted for this nnexpeUed call-' I fhould like to have jier # mortified -by not receiving an invitation to dinner, •' but Mrs Wilinot is too polite to be guilty of *fuch an omiffion.
Mr. Wilmot, and that odious Lord, as Louifa calls him, are now arrived, and I muft leave you for the prefent.
*	*	* ■	-#	m
Lord Townly is gone home with rny coufifi. Mr. Wilmot however attended them. HisLordSliip was not a little chagrined at Mrs. Wilmot’s declining to dine with him to morrow •, I was heartily glad that fnetvfufed going.
* ■ * * * *
It is pad one o’clock, and Mr. Wilmot is'not returned. I have been reading my favourite Elfrida to Mrs, Wilmot, and it has as ufual coft us many tears.
He is come—farewel! my dear Henrietta ! *
Hap.ri£t Sydney.
LETTER XLV.
Lord Townly to Mr. Beverly.'
HOW vain are all your wifhes for my return !— Nothing could induce me to leave this inchant-ing fpot, which contains the moll angelic fair, heaven ever formed ! Do you remember Mifs Montague, Ned ? — How did fhe charm us both in that vi-fit we paid her father ! But now my heart is freed from the fetters of my then adored Caroline Villiers,
I am more at liberty to obferve her perfeUions. But fhe is married, thou wilt fay, and therefore—a truce with thy obfervations, dear Beverly, thou art become fuch a moralizer !
1 have
LETTERS.	55
I have already taken care to Secure an intimacy with the hufband, v/ho is just: Such a kind of being as I could wiih, credulous, rafh,- imperious, and entertaining a high opinion of his Superlative gene-rofityjn taking Mrs. Wilmot without a fortune,— ^ almost: fatiated with connubial joys, and fecretly ' pining for -variety. TheSe are the observations that my penetration (now doubly watchSul) has enabled me to make. Thou mayhl imagine that I will take advantage of Such favourable circumstances, and— but mjrJcHem'es are yet in embrio.
I dined with Mr. Wilmot'Iast week; Louifa did not for_ fome time make her appearance. I was romping with that little devil, Charlotte Freelove, when stie entered the room-—how lovely did ihe appear ! the melancholy languor of her eyes^—the fair-nefsof her complexion, which her mourning habit rendered more conSpi'cuous—the melody of her voice —ohl Beverly, how innumerable archer attraifti-ons 1 ilie paid her compliments to me with a cold po-litenefs that chagrined me, though 1 took care to regulate my behaviour with the IlriQest rules of decorum*} no double entendres—no felf afluming airs ; but modest, refpedtfuh and Sedate ; thou wouldft Scarcely have recognized thy old friend, under the dist. guife of the humble, the timid Lord Townly. Adrs. Wilmot's countenance bettays the fituation of her. mind—I fee that stie is far from being happy; her lovely bofom heaves with involuntary fighs, fire frequently steals from company in order (as 1 imagine) to indulge her grief. Sweet creature, how I pity her I to be configned to the arms of one iTie could not love.-.-“ ’T\tos pitiful, ’twas wondrous pitiful,'’ Oh f that stie would fiuTei- me to take her to my bofom, and diSpei all her cares !
But if her fituation excites hopes, her conduU nips them in the bud. Her prefence checks every licentious thought, and fiibdues every irregular defire- — Her behaviour to Wilmot is obliging, fubmilfive, and attentive ; and if he does not post’efs the tenderest of wives, he has at least the most amiable.
D 4	Wilmot
56	LETTERS.
Wilmot is this moment arrived. Farewell I mufl attend him, and enquire after the health of my Louifa.
Your’s,
Townly.
LETTER XLVI.
Mifs Sydney to Lady Coverly.
T Find by your letter, my dear Lady Coverly, 1. that Mrs. Luton has left my grandmother; She is now alone, and I expeft therefore to be Summoned to attend her every day ; but am inexpreffibly de-firous that my Louifa diould accompany me into Effex. Mr. Wilmot, however, does not approve of her going, and therefore the gentle creature has given up the point at once. I could not however fo eahly refign my wi/lies. “ It is well for you, faid I to him gravely, that you married Such a woman as Mrs. Wilmot! though, upon recolleUion, 1 know not if a little of my obstinacy wmuld not have done better.” “ No indeed, returned he, pastive obedience and non-refistance was always my plan.—We have been married, my dear Louifa, purfued he, turning to Mr. Wilmot, let me fee—how many months is it?—and not one quarrel yet !” “ And no probability of any,” rejoined I.—You mean that as a compliment to both, I prefume, Mifs Sydney ? I would not haveyjM be too prefuming, replied I, upon that fubjecl;.
What intolerable wretches, my dear, are thefe men ! gentle, tender, and astiduous before maniagej but afterwards, rude, imperious, and tyrannical.— Alas ! Henrietta, my fufpicions of Wilmol’s attachment were, I fear, but too well founded ! He, who could not fupport a momentary abfence without regret, now voluntarily abfents himfelf for days together ; he departs without inquietude, and returns without emotion. He is indeed greatly changed
fmce
LETTERS.	57
Since his acquaintance with Lord Townly-well
might Louifa regret the fatal intimacy ; to that connection, I amperfuaded, She owes great part of her prefent wretchednefs. Mr. Wilmot Seldom returns from their meetings till after midnight, and but too often comes home in a fituation — dear and amiable Louifa, how great are thy Sufferings ! yet how noble thy conduU ! No repinings, no reproaches, ever «fcape her lips. She affumes in public an air of content and chearfulnefs, but I often find her weeping, and file is grown pale, languid, and emaciated.—— Farewel, my dear Lady Coverly 1
Harriet Sydney.
LETTER XLVII.
Mr. Wilmot to Sir John Mordaunt.
JN vain then, my dear Mordaunt, have I endeavoured to conceal from you the Situation of my heart; yourpenetration has discovered the Secret, and guife is now become unneceffary.
I confels that I but too much deferve the raillery you are pleafed to bestow upon me ; but you might have Spared yourfeif the trouble of transcribing that letter, which I wtll remember to have written;— my heart then felt the tendernefs my pen defcribed ; I imagined thofe Sentiments would be unalterable—> but I was mistaken.
Lord Townly Soon perceived the alteration in my conduct and congratulated me “ upon the recovery of my fenfes/’ He defpifes the tranquillity of domestic life, and had frequently ridiculed the affeClion which I expreffed for my Louifa. I therefore grew afhamed of discovering the effufions of my foul, and to avoid appearing ridiculous, I became guilty.
I yesterday found Mrs. Wilmot in tears ; Ihe endeavoured to conceal them from my observation, and I chofe to appear ignorant of her fituation ; but my conscience upbraided me with being the caufe of D 5	her
S8	LETTERS.
her grief, and I bluflied at this instance of my weak-nefs.
I am, my dear Mordaunt,
Your’s stncerely,
Henry Wilmot.
LETTER XLVIIL
Mr. Royston to Lady Coverly.
I Flatter myfelst that my dear Henrietta has not imputed my late filence to a decreafe in my affection—Oh ! that the heart, of which you poffefs fo large a Share, was worthy of your acceptance !
I accompanied Lord Offory last week into Suffex, and we returned only yesterday. He has received a let- f. ter from Sir John Effex, which requires his prefence in London, and he intends fetting off Some time next week. Sir 'William has been confined to his chamber Several days ; but his Spirits are amazingly good, and that Supports him through thefe repeated trials.
I Should have attended Lord Offory to town, but that I think I ought not to leave Sir William in his prefent fituation—and I would not purchafe a pleasure at the expence of humanity. I know you will approve of my condudt, and that will be a Sufficient reward.
J am, my beloved Henrietta,
Your’s,
Charles Royston.
LETTER XLIX. .
Lady Coverly to Mifs Sydney.
My dear Harriet directed her letter to Windfor, but there was no fuch perfon as Lady Coverly to be found there. She has turned rambler of late,
and
LETTERS.	59
and arrived this morning in town, after having been abfent near three weeks on a tour with Sir John and Lady ElTex. They made the excurfion in compliment to their guest, Lord Ostbry, and invited your Henrietta to accompany them, as they obligingly imagined that her prefence would add to their happinefs. You are acquainted with Lord Ostbry by report, my dear Harriet, and believe me, highly as it has Spoken of him, the praife was but proportionable to his merits. His-perfon is uncommonly pleafing j fo much fo, that I ceafed to wonder, the moment I beheld him, at the devastation he has made amongst the ladles hearts. I Should not acknowledge this, however, to any but my dear Sydney, who can Separate admiration from tenderneSs, and esteem from love. The friendstilp I feel for Lord Ostbry, arifes in a great meafure from the regard which my brother exprestes for him—he was dear to me, before ever I beheld him.
I stiall return to WindSor next week.—You will excuSe my fending So strort a letter, as I am engaged Sor the day at Lady Estex’s. I intend writing this
evening to our LouiSa--therefore have only to
add that
I am, &c.
Henrietta Coverly.
LETTER L.
Lady Coverly to MiSs Sydney.
I AM going to the play this evening with Lady Estex, and a great deal of other company. Lord Ostbry has been at Richmond theSe two days with an acquaintance of his, a Colonel Stratmore. He was to have returned this morning, but he has altered his mind, it Seems. Lady Estex regrets the disappointment, but I am glad Richmond is So agreeable to him.
I Shall
6o	LETTERS.
I Shall leave town tomorrow morning, and have even engaged Mrs. Windham to dine with me at Windfor, that I might not be tempted to change my , mind.
»	4k •	«	«	m	*
What a detestable evening have I pasted ! fuch an • odious play!—the Inconstant, or the way to win him—strange that any one lliould wtsti to win an inconstant—but are not all men fo ? flattering, de-stgning creatures, whofe only study is to betray unwary innocence!—Oh ! OSTory was at the play— He came foon after we got there, with a young Lady whom I had never Seen before ; they fat in the op-postte box to ours. Lady Estex pulled Sir John by the steeve j “ Biefs me, exclaimed her Ladystiip, there’s Ostbry! how unfortunate that we have no room for him here !’’ “ How fortu7iate rather, returned Sir John, for he feems to be enjoying a most agreeable tete a tete wnth his fair companion.’’
Who is She, rejoined I coolly ?” “ I don’t know, replied he, but if your LadyShip is very destrous of being informed, I will make the requifite inquiries. Mr. Elvin, pu.fued he, turning to Lady Estex’s brother, l.ady Coverly is’’-“ for heaven’s fake, exclaimed I bluShing.------“ Well, well. Lady Estex,
then, wifhes to know who that Lady is with Lord Ostb''y.” “ 1 am in the fame distrefs, returned he, and cannot find any perfon who is acquainted with her name. She is really very handfome ! Ostbry told me yesterday, that he could not be here tonight j but fee what beauty will do !” Lord Ostbry obferved, and bowed to us, and then Spoke to the Lady, informing her, I imagine, who we were—I wonder whether he—but how fooliSh this curiofity ! thank heaven, his good opinion is not elfential to my happinefs. 1 hope, however, the girl will not rely too much upon his astiduities, which are as unmeaning as thofe—ah ! my dear Harriet, what an infinity of distrefs may fuch a man as this occafion !
Lady Estex being, as well as myfelst quite fick of the play, wearofe to leave the houfe before it was
finiliied.
LETTERS.	6i
flniflied. Lord OfTory perceiving enr intention, whispered Something to his fair companion, and hastily quitted the box. We met him in the paf-fage. He took my hand in order to lead me to the coach, but I hastily withdrew it, and eagerly (I know not why) caught hold of Sir John’s arm ; he looked 'Surprized and vexed. “ You will come to us by Supper, Ostbry ?” Said Sir John j he rt=plifcd in the negative, but promiSed to be with them by twelve o’clock at the latest.
The coach drove away. “ May we hope for the favour of your Ladyfliip’s company ? Said Sir John, casting a fignificant glance at me.” “ Why not ? returned I hastily ; you know I intended to fup with you, and Lord Ostbry is nothing.’’'—Was there ever any thing So foollfh ! why did I mention him! Sir John laughed immoderately at the mistake, and was going to rally me upon it ; but Lady Estex perceiving my confuSion,-—“ Be filent, Estex, Said fhe, patting him with her fan ; you, are trying to make Jornethirg out of nothing, and we will not Suffer it.” “ Oh! let him alone, my dear, returned I ; I am quite indifferent about his observations, I asture you—I strall go home with you to fupper, and instead of leaving you at ten o’clock as I intended, I will now remain with you till midnight.” “ Obliging Lady Coverly, returned the provoking wretch, to stay till the very time which my Lord fixed for his return! ah! Henrietta, Henrietta, in vain do you try to recover yourfelf from your present embarr&stinent—it is too late—poor Lady Coverly ! all is over with you !” Vv^as there ever any thing So intolerable} I could abSolutely have cried for vexation. I left them, however, before eleven, notwithstanding all Sir John’s efforts to detain me. He had triumphed Sufficiently ; I choSe not to add to his viUory, and my own mortification.
* # * * *
Upon perufing my letter, I am fearful that you stiould be instuenced, from Sir John’s fooliffi remarks, to imagine that I am in love with this Ostb-
62	LETTERS.
Ty ; when really his fufpicions are intirely groundless. It is certain, that, as his Lordfliip has been So Very alliduous and reSpeUful, one looks rather filly at being neglected ; pride, not love, is the occafion of thofe emotions, which Sir John has fo ridiculoufl7 interpreted.
Adieu, my dear Harriet! as I have not time to write to Mrs. Wilmot by this post, I beg (lie would confider this letter as addrefled to both. Believe me ever, my dear friends, yours,
H ENRIETTA COVERLY.
LETTER LI.
Mrs. Wilmot to Lady Coverly.
Ah ! my dear Lady Coverly, are you then at last intangled in that fnare, which you have hitherto fo fuccefsfully eluded!—Yes, my amiable friend, you no longer behold Lord Ostbry with indifference. In vain have you endeavoured to conceal the growing lendernefs, under the difguife of friendship ; you may, by that means. Satisfy your own doubts, but you cannot banifh our fufpicions. If Lord Ostbry’s affeCtions are not pre-engaged, he must return your regard ; and then, my dear Lady Coverly, what happinefs awaits you ! There are no obstacles to impede the union; no parental authority to interpofe, and with its rigorous decrees interrupt the tender attachment—forgive the tear—it fell unheeded. Alas ! thy Louifa’s cruel fate forbade— another teat'—this is unpardonable. I will lay afid& my pen for a few moments.
* * » * »
Our Harriet returned yesterday to her uncle Free-love's, in order to receive her grandmother, Sydney, who arrived there last night. Mifs Freelove is to accompany the old Lady and her coustn to London ; but we Ilaali keep Lady Sydney with us as long as postible.
Ad ieu !
LETTERS.	63
Adieu ! my dear Henrietta ; be not afhamed of discovering to me the Situation of your heart; as your regard is infpired by So worthy an objedt, it requires not the veil of fecrecy.
I Iliall wait with impatience for your anfwer, and remain, dear Coverly,
Your’s,
Louisa Wilmot.
LETTER LII.
Lady Coverly to Mrs. Wilmot.
Good heaven ! what a letter have I received from you, my dear Louifa ? entangled in the fnare—Lord OlTory’s affedlions pre-engaged—is it poliible then, that thy Henrietta can love a man who beholds her without emotion ? No, no, Louifa,
you are, you must: be mistaken !-And yet why,
stnce 1 have been abfent from him, why have I been tortured with the most cruel anxiety ? but pride Iliall fnatch me from this weaknefs—Ostbry, I will
fee thee no more, or fee thee with indifference !
» * * * #
Ah, Louifa, what iliall I do ? Lord Olfory and Sir John Estex are this mon ent entering the park in
their phaeton !-This vifit is fo unexpedted, fo—
how my heart throbs ? lie still, thou bufy stutterer, and expofe not thus, I charge thee, the folly of thy mistrefs—but I must attend them.
They came to condudt me to town. Lady Estex wants me to be with her for a few days j and they would hardly take a denial. Lord Ostbry was particularly presting, (I wonder how his incognita does) but I refufed him with a cold politenefs, that, I Saw, affedted him. Defirous of banistiing Sir John’s fuf-picions, and vexed at the urgency of thofe requests, which I dared not to comply with, I perfisted in my refufal with an instexibility, that almost bordered upon rudeneSs. Ridiculous that I was, not to perceive
64	LETTERS.
ceive that Such a condrU rendered me more liable to a discovery !—it is however too late for repentance.
Pardon my fending more ; my mind is reftlefs and disturbed, and 1 am on!y capable of deSpifing n)y-felf, and loving you most stncerely.
Henrietta Coverly.
LETTER IIIL
Lord OssoRY to Mr. Royston.
WHY, my dear Royston, did I ever leave thy peaceful retirement ? Never Shall 1 experience again the happinefs I there enjoyed. Why did you not prepare me for the fight of your charming lister I but how impostible was it to defcribe her perfedfions!
Had (he betrayed any confcioufnefs of her fuperior endowments, I had been fafe; affedtation or vanity had blasted all her charms : but when modesty and merit are united, how irrefistible the attraistion 1 The intimacy which fubfisted between your Sister and Lady ElTex, gave me continual opportunities of feeing her. 1 began to hope I was not indifferent to her j but, alas! I owed thofe inchanting fmiles, and the engaging freedom, with which Ihe treated me, to her regarding me as thy friend ! yet if fo, why then this Sudden coldnefs ? Am I lefs thy friend than ever .?
With what regret did I leave her, in order to pals fome days with Stratmore at his feat near Richmond !
I knew not, till then, how tenderly I loved hc-r: i I returned to town with a determinalion of acquainting her with my pastion—we met—but how distant, how referved was her behaviour ! She left Lady Ef-fex that evening, and early the next morning fet olF for Windfor. My prefence is become hateful to her ; lire has discovered my attachment, and it excites in her nothing but Indifference and conten’po	!
1 strall :
LETTERS.	65
I Shall Soon return to your friendly arms; and we will then bemoan together the cruefty of our fate ; and our Sufferings Sliall, if poflible, render us ftill dearer to each other.
OssORy.
LETTER LIV.
Mr. Royston to Lady Coverly.
IInclofe a letter, which I this moment received from Lord Oflory. How happy Should I have been, my dear lifter, at finding you had obtained his regard, but for his tender complaints of your indifference ! Is it poftible, that you can be infenfible of his merit, or that a heart, for which fo many have fighed in vain, fliould be beftowed upon one who defpifes the acquisition !
United to Lord Coverly, without feeling any pre-poSTellion in his favour, you feem to have no idea of . the exquifite felicity that muff; arife from an union which is founded on efteem and tendernefs. This happinefs (allow me to add) it is in your power to obtain j you efteem Lord Offbry—you confeSTed that you did—and your affeftions are difengaged ; may I not then hope, that my friend will foon conquer thofe obstacles that oppofe his wilhes, and infpire you with a tendernefs equal to his own ? Refledf, my beloved Henrietta, upon what he fuffers in the disappointment of his fondest hopes! Alas! what woes are equal to the pangs of hopelefs love Dear and amiable OSTory, how keenly do I feel thy dif-
trelTes!-Farewel, my dear filler ! if I have faid
too much upon the fubjed, conlider how tenderly I am interested in it, and then pardon the freedom for the motive which excited it: — after all, if you cannot love Lord OSTory, though I lhall never ceafe to regret the cruelty of his fate, yet I Shall ftill allow you aded right in not receiving his addrelTes ; but if (which heaven permit) you Should be Softened
into
66 'LETTERS.
into compliance, I Sliall confider the moment which unites you to him, as the happiest: of my life.
Take time, my dear Lady Coverly, to determine the arduous point ; acquaint me however with the deciston, and depend upon the unalterable affedion of your
Charles Royston.
LETTER LV.
Lady Coverly to Mifs Sydney.
My dear Sydney, how Shall I exprefs theemoti-ons of my foul! Ah, Ostbry, am I then indeed dear to you 1 can you forgive my folly, my petu-* lance ? Slad you but known the caufe of thofe agitations, you would have excufed my weaknefs.
I inclofe the letter, which I this ruorning received from my dear brother, with that inclofcd from Lord Ostbry. Scarce had I perufcd them, when the following billet was brought from Lady Effex, which at once bnnistied thofe fufpicions that had given Such pain to my jealous heart.
“ My dear Lady Coverly, how' pleafing is the intelligence I have to convey to you! Lord Oifory loves you, my Henrietta j he has always done fo—• but I will proceed to a relation of that eclaireilSe-luent, w'hich has given me fo much fatisfa£tion, without further trefpaiTing upon your patience.
“ Lord Ostbry returned to town this morning, after having been abfent Several days. When the first: compliments were over, I gave him a letter which I had just before taken from the fervant- He opened it with the utmost eageinefs, and having perufed a tew lines, he exclaimed, “ my dear Stratmore! you will then be happy. I am now, purfued he, fmiiing, at liberty to filence your LadyShip’s raillery about my fair incognita, who is no other than the wife of Colonel Stratmore, one of my most intimate friends.”
—“ Stratmore’s wife, interrupted I?-Why, I
thought
LETTERS.. 67
thought he was unmarried !’’ His union has been concealed from the world, returned he, becaufe entered into without the knowledge of his father, whofe confent had been in vain Solicited. Col, Strat-more informed me, in the ftricteft confidence, of the connexion ; I begged that his father might be acquainted with it, and he confented with Some difficulty to make me the meffenger of this unexpeUed discovery. I wdll not tell your Ladyjhip how this avaricious parent received the intelligence ; it is Sufficient that, upon the Second vifit which I paid him laft week, he confented to fee his Son, and I find by this letter has taken them both into favour.
“ I have been greatly mistaken indeed, returned I '; for I really thought that your Lordstiip had had a penchant for the Lady.” “Did Lady Coverly think So too, interrupted he hastily,”—“ really my Lord, replied I, it is impostlble for me to anfwer for her thoughts, but I imagine that our opinions coincided upon this Subject.” “ Ah ! Lady EfTex, eturned he Sighing, I do indeed love-—but not as you have fup-pofed j it was your amiable friend aione—but every tender hope is fled ; flie fees my paSTipn—-but beholds it only with indifference !’’ “ indeed you are deceived, my Lord, replied I Lady Coverly esteehis you highly, I know flie does j for fhame, banlsti then this pufillanimity; it is time enough to defpair when you have been rejedted,—Oh, pray ray Lord, put me in mind that 1 am engaged at Windfor tomorrow morning	may I attend your Lady-
fliip “ No, not absolutely attend—but at dinner, perhaps,”'—he bowed, and the arrival of company interrupted our tete b tete."--—1 withdrew the first
leifure moment to give you thefe particulars.-------
Adieu! I stiall be wdth you to-morrow by ten o’clock. .
Your’s, &c.
Sophia Essex.
I will not conclude this letter, till after her vifit.
Lady
68 letters.
Lady ElTex arrived here at the tiree appointed ; S enquired after Sir John’s health, “ and you must not forget Oflory’s, rejoined Jhe laughing; but he will foon be here to anfwer for himfelt.”—He came about an hour after ; how did my heart flutter at his ap proach ? I am Sure he must: have obferved my con-fufion, though 1 endeavoured to appear chearful and unconstrained.—Lady Estex at last riling from her chair, went to a glafs in order to adjust her drefs^ “ Blefs me ! exclaimed stie, why, my dear, I ana quite in diforder, and feel fo uncomfortably ; ex-cufe me for a moment, whilst I retire to your dref-fing room --faying thefe words ^he^hastily with-
drew.—I will not relate to you the conversation that enfued ; it is Sufficient to add, that we were both fo pleafingly ingrolfed, that Are had been abfent above two hours, before we either of us thought about it.—Lord Ostbry left me with regret, though he is to return with Lady Eifex to Windfor to-morrow, and they are to remain with me Some days. Lady Estex however protests that Sir John stiall accompany them, as stie knows that levers prefer a tete ii tete to a trio, and flie will not be treated in the fame manner Aie was to-day. I have a long letter to dif-patch to my dear brother, and must therefore bid you hastily—farewel,
Henrietta Sydney.
L E -T T E R LVI.
Lady Coverly to Mifs A4ontague.
A Few lines, my dear Mifs Sidney, to inform you that I have just received a letter from my brother, filled with most tender congratulations, and the warmest expreffions of his happinefs at the plea-stng intelligence, which my letter (and one from Lord Ostbry) had conveyed to him.
Sir
letters.	69
Sir William, though greatly indiSpofed, intends Setting off for Winuibr o-morrow, and i fhall then have the pleafuie of embracing my dear Roy-fton.
Your letter is now brought me.
How great would be the happinefs I ilrould experience in embracing you, after fo long an abfence, were it not for the thoughts of Mrs. VV ilmot’s Situation ! Nothing can equal my admiration of her con-du6t, but the refentment I feel against her unworthy hustand.
Lord Ostbry begs me to prefent bis reSpeUful compliments ; he is quite impatient for the pleafure of feeing you.
Adieu! my dearest Harriet, and believe me most Sincerely your’s,
Henrietta Coverly.
LETTER LVn.
Lord Townly to Mr. Beverly-
IT H A N K thee, Beverly, for thy fermonic epistle. Why, thou hast imbibed Such -notions of virtue and vice, and talkest fo gravely of moral reUitude, &c. that 1 abfolutely tremble for thee. Thou art not wicked enough yet for repentance ;— if thou pretendest to be touched with remorfe for thy trifling deviations, how marble-hearted is thy Townly, who has committed far greater enormities, as rhou call’st them, and yet proceeds in the old track without compunction ? For why did heaven blefs me with neaith, Spirit, fortune, and Such a promptitude to mstchief, if all thefe endowments are to be u elels ?—But had I even determined to be virtuous, this devililh fex would have prevented it ; I could
Subdue every other propenstty-but woman, in-
chanting woman, is not to be refisted ! give me a glim, fe of a petticoat and I am lost—his fatannic majesty has me intirely. Apropos ; W'ho do ycu think
I hav&
70	LETTERS.
I have got here ?—Caroline Villiers—th^ jade.inay be of Service; in the execution of my plans—Nobody Tcnows her, except my faithful William, whofe Secrecy is inviolable—and why?' becaufe I bribe high, and the rogue loves mifchief as well hrs master. Thou hast often acknowledged that few can equal Caroline in perfonal attractions, and as often hast lamented that fo fair a form Should contain fo debafed a mind !—Look at her fane, obferve thofe winning Smiles, that, timid Sweetnefs which She can alSume at pleaSure, and you would imagine her an angel. Had Wilmot however Seen her whilst his heart was Inflaved by his lovely Louifa, he might have beheld her unmoved—There is nothing to be done in thefe matters without circumSpeCtion. Mrs. Wilmot has now lost all influence over the heart of her hulband ; he imagines that her gentle acquief-cence, and attentive duty, are but inadequate dlf-chargOs of the vast debt of gratitude flie owes him ; and even repents that he did not Secure her upon ea-fier terms than the matrimonial ones, which ought always to be kept back as the lastrefource. Prithee, Ned, do not endeavour to trace the origin of thefe emotions; fo much curioflty Is uncommon in a male creature. But why theSe Schemes ? thou wilt fay. Surely you would not dare to attempt a crime, at which even the greatest libertines tremble ? Thou fcnowest that 1 love to be remarkable ; and as it is not fo convenient for me to be eminently virtuous, I w'iil leave thee to travel on in that dull path, M'hilst I stiike into a more conspicuous road which leads to extacies unutterable!
Wilmot faw Caroline yesterday ; he appeared much struck with her beauty, and eagerly inquired who Sire ' v/as. I told him her piteous tale, and as
you may wilh to hear the lamentable story-stis
here at your Service.
“ Her name, Said I, is Frampton. ■ She is the daughter of a merchant in London, who dying involved in debt, left this unexperienced girl destitute of friends and fortune. Educated In the most expen-
stve
LETTERS.	yi
five manner., and accuftomed to a!l the elegancies of life, her Situation was tiu y deplorab^. 1 happened accidentally to be witnefs of her di Irefs ■, I wa.s touched with her Sufferings, and captivated by her beauty- I offered her my houfe as an a'tylun:, until file could think- of Some method to'fix heritlf inore agreeably to her wiflies •, the artleSs innocent thanked me with tears cf joy, and with gratitude accepted the'propofal--She however foon'perceived my
defigns ,.againft her, and refufed all my offers with
difdain-; T am convinced that compulfion alone-^--
yet I cannot refolve to purchafe happinefs by Such means. I overheard her faying yesterday to my houfekeeper, that “ fhe might perhaps ere now have contented to my wiflies, could I have infpired her with that tendernefs her fufceptible heart was fo formed to experience, but that flie could never behold me but with indifference.” I added this lest he fliould defpair of fuccefs, imagining her a Second Lucretia- “ But, Interrupted he, has flie been
long with you at this place -“ No, rejoined I j
fhe came down with my houfekeeper this week, and knew not, till after her arrival, that I was here. “ But I beg, my dear friend, purfued I, that you would not mention this detail to any one, as' I wifh to keep both her, and her story, a Secret from the
world.”--And thus ends the doleful tale and m.y
letter.
TowNL.y.
LETTER LVIII.
LordTowNLY to Mr. Beverly..
WI L M O T has been here Several times fince 1 wrote last, and as frequently had a tranfi-ent glance of Mifs F'rampton, but never was in her company till this morning, when he came to breakfast with me.—The weather being warm, 1 ordered the things to be brought up into the library, destr-
ing
72	LETTERS.
log him to attend me there.- I hastily opened the door, and perceived Caroline, who was reclining upon a fopha oppofi'e to us ; one of her delicate feet hanging down by the fide of it, difplayed a fine turned instep, and her handkerchief, which was a little rumpled, difcovered a neck white as the new-fa len fnow. A struggling lock waved on her Snowy forehead, and fet off the fairnefs of her eomplexiori. In Short, She had Spared no arts to allure, no pains to captivate. She arofe upon our entrance ; yet not fo precipitately, but that Wilmot had taken a full Survey of her attractions j a fright, you know, Ned, frequently incapacitates us for aCtion, I apologized for our intrufion, but Ihe anfwered me only by a look of contempt, and was going to withdraw, when Wilmot Seizing her hand begged her fo earnestly to he Seated, that stie at length complied. It was Some time however before he could get her into conversation, but her eyes were frequently directed towards him, with a Soft tin)idity which did not eScape his notice. Am I not a generous fellow, to Suffer my mistreSs to be thus ravistred from me } But the conquest however must not be made too eafy, lest it Should be lefs esteemed. Could I but obtain the good opinion of my Louifa, I Should have Some foundation to raife my hopes upon; but She treats me with a cold difdain that stings'me to the foul. Yet Surely Wilmot’s negleCl must rouze her refentment, and my tender aSTiduities—ah ! could I but once obtain her pity, I were happy- That emotion, when excited by our fex, is the most dangerous lenfation of which the female heart is capable. I will feem defi-rous of hiding my paSIion, which however will appear, notwithstanding all my apparent efforts to conceal it ; fo timid yet ardent a flame must Surely ast feCt her.
Farewel, dear Ned, and believe me ever yours,
Townlv.
LET-
LETTERS.	73
LETTER LIX.
Mr. WiLMOT to Sir John Mordaunt.
YE S, Mordaunt, I have indeed been deceived, and the deception has made me miferable for ever. Louifa is become indifferent to me ;—defire
is Satiated, and reafon recovers heffway-what
follies has an imprudent paflion caufed me to commit ? ah, why did' I fo precipitately enter into engagements, which are indiffoluble ! Mordaunt, I
do indeed love Mifs Frampton-love her to dif-
traUion.—But fhall I deprive Lord Townly, the man I call my friend, of what he fo infinitely values ? Yet llie beholds him with difguft, and even horror, and he is too generous to obtain her by compulfion. I was left alone with her yesterday ; I Seized her hand, and eagerly prelTed it to my lips ; stie did riot attempt to withdraw it, but fixing her charming eyes upon me, with the most bewitching tendernefs — * Oh, Mr. Wihnot, faid fhe tenderly, I ought not to fuffer this—but my fufceptible heart is, alas, but too fenSible.”—She stopt—a crimfon blusti over-fpread her face, and I was going to throw myfelf at her feet, when the .entrance of Lord Townly prevented me. I will however no longer conceal my paffioh ; if I am not deceived, our regard is mutual ; and in that cafe happlnefs may still await me.
I will write to her immediately j every moment is now of importance.
* » * * »
I have difpatched my letter, and tranfcribe it for your perufal. “ In w'hat terms, Mifs Frampton, can I addrefs you, that will render this prefumption pardonable ? How stiall I defcribe the excefs of that palfion, which confumes me ! United to a woman, whom I behold with indifference, your loved idea ingroffes every faculty of my foul, and my fate is completely wretched, unlefs I may dare to hope. VoL, I-	E	Ah I
74	LETTERS.
-----Ah ! could I but gain your affedion, I were
blest; beyond exprestion. May I preSume to beg for an anfwer to this letter ? Suffer me to implore your
pity, your forgivenefs.--Farewel, dearest Madam,
with what impatience Shall I wait your reply—which will pronounce me the happiest; or most miferable of mankind!”
Henry Wilmot.
^ #
Mordaunt, I am blest beyond defcription.——She loves me !—thofe dear lines—^^how often have I pref-fed them to my lips ! Charming confeffion ! angelic Caroline !—but I will tranfcribe her letter.; I cannot part with the original.
“ What a talk, oh Wilmot, have you Impofed on my modesty ! must I then confefs the fatal Secret, which I have So often vowed Should never efcape my lips ? Yes, dearest and most amiable of men, the wretched Caroline can no longer difguife the tender emotions of her heart ; alas / She is but too,—too fenstble of thy perfeftions. She could not behold, unmoved, thy graceful perlbn, thy instnuating manner— She forgives—Ihe pities—She—but I arn interrupted. Lord Townly will be abfent this evening —meet me in the alcove at Seven o’clock. Do not however draw any hasty conclufions from this indulgence. You have many obstacles to Surmount
before---ah ! what am I going to fay ? Is it pof-
fible that I can ever ceafe to love that virtue, which
has hitherto been So dear to my heart '•-Adieu st’
* * * * *
I went to Lord Townly’s this evening with the most eager impatience, and found the lovely Caroline ready to receive me-but how W'as I alarmed
to fee her drowned in tears, and her countenance pale and languid ! with w'hat anxiety did I inquire into the caule of her agitations ! Oh Wilmot, Said the lovely maid. Lord Townly has discovered our correspondence—he is become master of our Secret, and my forebcdirg heart tion bles for thy Safety—
in I
LETTERS.	75
in vain have I endeavoured to inform you of this fatal accident ; I have been too narrowly watched and —here the arrival of Lord Townly prevented her faying more, whilst: I waited ia Silence for thofe reproaches which I was confcious of deferving, “ You have abufed the confidence I repofed in you, Mr. Wilmot, faid he, in a melancholy tone, and were it not for.the remembrance 6f that friendstiip, which once united us, you might expeft to feel the -effefts of my refentment. Ah 1 Wilmot, how have you deceived my unfufpedling heart, and robbed me of what I held invaluable? Yqu love Mifs Frampton, purfued he, Sighing ; Ihe returns your affection j I envy your happinefs, and lament that I was not destined to enjoy it-——But alas! every tender hope is fled. If Ihe was infenfible of my astiduities, when her heart was difen gaged, can I now expedt fuc-cefs ? I will however force her to confefs that I de-ferved her, and intitle myfelf to her gratitude, if I cannot obtain her tendernefs—take 'her then, Mr. Wilmot, continued he, and judge of the greatnefs of my affedlion, by the Sacrifice I have now made you.” I was for Some time incapable of anSwering him—•“ My dear, my generous friend, faid I, embracing him, your goodnefs amazes and confounds me ; I am incapable of thanking you as I ought.” “ Oh, my beloved Caroline, purfued I, may I then be allowed to indulge’’—“ Hold, Mr. Wilmot, rejoined Lord Townly hastily, restrain thefe proofs of your tendernefs ; they too deeply affen my peace, I can no longer be a witnefs of your felicity, nor Suffer you to vifit MiSs Frampton at my houfe; for both our fakes, her abfence may become necef-Sary ; Should I ever forget thoSe rules which have hitherto influenced my condudt—we fhould all be lost.
# # • * #
I cannot, my dear Mordaunt, fix upon any place for her reSidence ; I would be for ever near her. Should Lord Townly repent of his late generostty, he might, in my abfence. Seize upon my treafure, E 2	and
-•Ki	LETTERS.
and deprive me of what I hold invaluable—could I but introduce her into my family, under a fiditious
charader--Lord Townly has already contrived a
plaufible ftory, and my wife is innocence itfelst 1 will lay afide my pen, and rested upon the fubjed— Farewel—Your’s,
Henry WiLMOT.
L E T T E R LX.
Mn WiLMOT to Sir John Mordaunt.
I Have been abfent from the Thorns thefe two days, and am now at * * *. Mrs. Wilmot however imagines that 1 went to London, and expeds me to return this wetk with Mifs Frampton, whole cruel sttuation deeply asteds her. I made a diSmai tale of it, that is certain •, and ibe believed every fyllable with the utmost facility—but I will now inform you of thoSe particulars, which have happened stnce I wrote to you last.—The morning after his Lordfhip and myfelf had concerted our plan of action, as Mrs. Wilmot and I were Sitting at breakfast, a letter was delivered to me •, I opened it with the utmost eagernefs, and having perufed a few lines, exclaimed, “ Unhappy Caroline, how dreadful is your fate! would to heaven I could affist you!’’ Lcuifa, who is ever ready to relieve misfortune, hastily inquired into the occaston of my exclamations, and i foon eafed her of her anxiety, by giving her the following recital, part of which, Jack, is founded upon truth. “ Mr. Frampton, faid I, was a merchant in London, who, having met with many lostes in his bufinefs, became at last a bankrupt. This stroke fo affected his health that he fell into a decline. I faw him, and was deeply affedled with the Situation of a man, whom I had long known and highly esteemed. 1 prevailed upon him to fet off for the fouth of France, as focn as his affairs were a little fettled, and furnllhed him with money
to
LETTERS.	77.
te defray his expences. He remained there Several months, but without fin ing any benefit.—I forgot to tell you, that, before he left London, he begged, me with the most; affeUing earneftnefs, in cafe of his death, to take upon me the care of 500I. which had been left to his daughter by her godmother, and was now all her inheritance. I complied with his- request ; and his deceafe, which this letter from Mifs Frampton informs me of, calls upon me to perform the promile. Saying thefe words, I gave Mrs. Wil-mot the letter; (he was highly affeded with the contents; “ and what will become of this unfortunate girl, Said She, to be left an orphan ! no friend to advife, no experience to dired her! Alas! I tremble at the thought of thofe evils, which fhe is perhaps destined to Suffer.”—“ But what can be done.?” interrupted I hastily, (willing to have her make a propofal of what I had already defigned) “ There is but one way, returned fhe, of infuring her Safety—offer her, dear Sir, an afylum in your houfe; can your benevolence have a greater call for exertion? flie fhall find in me a friend, a parent.’’ “ You are very kind, my dear Louifa, exclaimed. I, to the unhappy Caroline, and I will think about the pradicability of the Scheme, as you appear fo interested in it.~Let me fee—this week I am to be
abfent with a hunting party at Lord T-s, and it
would be uncivil to difappoint them,” “ Ah, Mr. Wilmot, Said flie, interrupting me, do not delay the execution of your charitable defign ; it is cruel to negled, even for a moment, thofe Sorrows, which it is in your power to relieve. Is it not far preferable to be deficient in politenefs than humanity?
“ Excufe my freedom, purfued fhe ; my heart is tenderly fenfib'e of Mifs Frampton’s fituation, and longs to Snatch her from thofe dangers which fur-round her.”
But if Mrs. Wilmot, you fay, stiould difeover the deceit that has been praftifed against her? Well, and what then, I pray you ? Am I not her Lord and master? can fhe help herfelf? This fecrefy hasfome-si 3	thing
78	LETTERS.
thing in it that pleaSes me, or elfe I had not conde-fcended to difguife the motives of my conduct j “ but stolen joys are fweet.”
Farewel—it is late, and I am fleepy-\ our’s,
H. W.
LETTER LXI.
Mrs. WiLMOT to Mifs Sydney.
MISS Frampton arrived here yesterday, my dear Harriet, and I am still more interested in her welfare stnce I have Seen her. She is really completely lovely, and the melancholy, which at present deprestes her mind, gives a foftnefs to her voice, and a languor to her charming eyes, which render them more engaging. Mr. Wilmot recommended her to my protedion with the most obliging earnest-nefs ; fhe Seized my hand, and prested it to her lips ;
I welcomed her with the afSedtion of a friend, and embraced her with the tendernefs of a parent.
* * » * *
I have this moment received your letter, and rejoice to find that the day is fixed, which will give
our beloved Henrietta to her amiable Ostbry.-
Their happinefs is beyond a doubt. I Shall write to I her upon this agreeable intelligence ; but bow im-poSTible is it to exprefs the tender emotions of my heart! all my felicity arifes from the welfare of my friends, deprived, as I am, of every other enjoyment, and excluded even from hope, the only comfort of the unfortunate.
May every blelling attend my Harriet 1 adieu.
, Louisa Wilmotj
LET-
LETTERS,	79
LETTER LXIL
[LordTowNLY to Mr. Beverly,
CAroline has been at Wilmot’s this fortnight. She contrived to convey a billet to me yeiteiday, wherein Ihe informs me, that Wilmot grows every day more paflionately devoted to her. I dined with him to-day for the first; time fince Caroline has been there. She was playing upon the guittar when I entered the room, and Wilmot was leaning upon the back of her chair giving her Some inftruUions ; Mrs. Wilmot fat at the window reading. He received me with the utmost; cordiality j Caroline bowed with the formality of a fti anger; whilst; Mrs., Wilmot, after having made me a flight inclination of the head, continued her employment. Will Ihe always treat me with this gloomy referve ? Oh! that lire could be rouzed into refentment! that She would but retaliate her wrongs ! Surely, when flie finds how bafely he has deceived her unfufpedlihg credulity, and abuSed her generous goodnefs, fire will—fhe must—determine to revenge Such perfidy.
I am lorry to hear of thy uncle’s diforder—and fo you intend to remain with the old gentleman during his confinement ? I wiih thou dost not heartily repent of thy complaisance; but “ the confcioufnels of having performed your duty would Support you, you fay, through much greater fatigues.” I don’t understand this, Ned ; we lively fellows think more of our pleafures than our duties. Hark ye, Beverly ; has old Square Toes made his will, and dost thou know the contents } Let that regulate your condmSt —if you are Sure of his money, leave him entirely to the diSpofal of his phySicians, and they will very Soon put you in pofleflioh of his estate. I fhall always conSider dodlor S-- who attended my old
gentleman, as one of my best friends: had it not been for his kind interpofition, I might still have re-E 4	mained
8o	LETTERS.
mained in fufpenSe, and perhaps had the mortification of congratulating him upon his recovery, instead--you comprehend my meaning, Ned. Oh,
that you would concieScend to become a man of the world, and imitate in ihefe refpefts thy
Townly
LETTER LXIII.
Mrs- WiLMOT to Mifs Sydney-
I Thank you, my dear Harriet, for your particular account of that important day, which gave my beloved Henrietta to the amiable Lord Ostbry. I enjoy beyond expreffion the general happinefs which
you So feelingly defcribe.^-Mr. Royllon, yon fay,
was that day all himfelf—how must he rejoice in a union So agreeable to his wisties ! adverfity has not contracted his mind; he contemns that feififli heart, which, wretched itfelst beholds with a gloomy Satisfaction the woes of others.
You were not mistaken, my dear Harriet, in imagining, that Mifs Frampton had not Softened my pre-posteflion for her into friendstiip : poor girl, her mind has been strangely negleCted. Skilled in the arts of pleafing, and mistrefs of every polite accomplishment, stie defpifes thofe mental endowments, which can alone Secure her the esteem of the worthy, and render her truly happy. Introduced into all the elegancies of life, and attracting univerfal admiration, stie indulges, without restraint, the gaiety of her heart; (he no longer reflects upon thofe evils stie has fo recently efcaped, but elated with the grandeur that Surrounds her, stie enjoys it rather as a right than as a gift. Thofe stiort-fighted mortals, who are Satisfied v/ith viewing the pleafures of the pre-fent moment, are not to be intimidated with the representation of futurity.
I must bid you adieu, having a long letter to write to Lady Ostbry, Yours most fincerely,
Louisa Wilmot.
LET-
LETTERS.	8i
LETTER LXIV.
Mrs. WiLMOT to Mils Sydney.
I Am much diSpleafed with Mifs Frampton, my dear Harriet. She entertains opinions that are highly prejudicial to virtue. I have talked to her very ferioufly, but She appears little afFe6led with mv advice:—indeed, my friend, I almost regret— yet my intention nmst Satisfy me Mr. Wilmot has been rather unkind to me this morning ; and I was the more vexed at his behaviour, as Caroline happened to be prefent. I therefore endeavoured to conceal the agitations of my heart, but my tears would flow in fpite of all my efforts to restrain them.
---Mr. Wilmot foon after left the room j and Mifs
Frampton attempted to confole me. “ You are too gentle, my dear Madam, faid flie, and were I in your Situation, I would fliew Mr. Wilmot that I was his wdfe ami not his fl ve, and had a Spirit to refent.”—“ What do you mean, interrupted I hastily ? Inclination as well as duty, will always entitle Mr. Wilmot to my most unreferved obedience, and I Shall ever conSider his difpleafure as one of the greatest misfortunes that can befal me.’’—“ But is Mr. Wilmot fenflble of your goodnefs ? returned She eagerly ; no, madam ; tranquillity has lulled him into indifference Your constant attention to his wiilies has made him regard, as a duty, what he ought to have beheld as an obligation, and instead of being repaid by gratitude, you have received only neglect,
“ Ah, madam, how foon might you, adorned with fo much beauty, and poffeSTed of Such number-lefs attractions, how foon. might you recover a heart like his ? A little coquetry would be of Singular Service to you ; the fear of loSing your affedtion, from your apparent preference of another, would roufe
his jealoufy, and awaken all his tendernefs.”-
E 5	‘‘ How,
LETTERS.
How, exclaimed I fcornfully, could I ever hope to recover my hufband’s love, by forfeiting my right to his etteem ?”	“ The artifice I advife, madam,
faid file, would be rendered laudable by the motive which excited it’’—“ No, no, interrupted I; he would defpife the stratagem—it can never be laudable for virtue to wear the appearance of vice. To thofe who have not fubdued the fear of temporal evils, fuch deceit may be neceflary ; but to thofe who look beyond them-they are as nothing I
“ I would endeavour, by every innocent method, to regain Mr. Wilmot’s affeUion ; but I will at all events preferve the native dignity of virtue, nor aggravate misfortune by the confciouSnefs of guilt.’’— She was filent, but her looks Spoke disappointment and chagrin.
I have this moment received a letter from Lady Oflbry. Sir William is dangeroufiy ill. Good Heavens ! how fleeting are the joys of this life, but how
much more durable its Sorrows 1-
Adieu.
Louisa Wilmot.
LETTER LXV.
Mrs. Wilmot to Mifs Sydney.
I Rejoice to hear that Sir William is at length releafed from his Sufferings ; yet I wonder not at the afflidlion of Sir Charles Royston and his amiable fister : how impofllble is it, in the first moments of distrefs, to listen to the voice of reafon
Mr. Wilmot is gone out for the day ; he has taken Caroline with him in the chaife, but I Shall not be alone, as your uncle has promifed to dine w'ith me.
*****
Ah, my dear friend, what fhall I do ? how Support thefe accumulated ills! cru«l Wilmot ! ungrateful
LETTERS.	83
ful Caroline ! how could you, barbarous man, betray my unfuSpefting heart, and add infult to dif-trefsl Too much—too much already have I Suffered for thy fake—alas ! how many proofs of their deceit occur to my troubled foul—unhappy pair! would to heaven ye had felt this tendernefs before my cruel fate—^with what tranfport would I refign that which
interrupts your wiffies !-But I will try to collect
my Scattered thoughts, and to give you a recital of my misfortunes.
The weather being remarkably pleaSant this morning, I went into the garden to read, and Seated my-felf upon one of the chairs in the fuinmer-houfe.— Soon after, casting my eyes upon the table, I perceived a letter lying upon it, and found thedireftlon was to myfelf. I opened it in the utmost: fuprize ; it was a female hand, but one I was entirely unacquainted with. What were my agitations on peru-Sing it 1—‘to find my eaSy confidence had been cruelly abufed by him, who bore the facred title of an husband ! to introduce,' under a fiUitious charadler, the objeU of his guilty love, to triumph over that generofity which he ought to have refpeUed,
to—---but how numerous are my wrongs! yet I
will Suffer them in filence, and force him to acknowledge that I alone deServe his tender-hefs. I fat Some time after I had finiihed the letter, endeavouring to find out the writer; rny Sufpicions fell upon many different perfons—but all was uncertainty. I put it into my pocket, and Sauntered into
the garden.---Soon after I perceived, through the
trees, one of the gardeners going into the fummer-houfe. He did not stay there a moment, but retired with the utmost: expedition.—I guested that he was the mcfr nger of this fatal letter. I determined to discover the Secret, and taking One of the nearest: paths, I met him just by the garden gate. He pulled off his hat, and looked greatly confuSed at feeing me. I alked him with all the authority I could affume, if he had been in the Summer'houSe that morning ; and taking out the letter, commanded him to tell me,
“ if
84	LETTERS.
** If he knew who had conveyed the letter there.”— He ftammered—bit his lips—and was ready to fink with terror.—Finding him unable to fpeak, I rejoined it is now in my power to ruin you, but if you will be unreferved, and inform me of every particular, you may rely upon my generofity. “ Oh 1 ma-daiji, exclaimed the foolilli youth, pray then do not tell my Lord !” “ What do you mean ? interrupted I haftily j “why Lord Townly, my Lady— it was his Servant who bribed me to leave this letter, and they fay he is Such a fpiritous gentleman ! I did re-fufe to be concerned in the affair, but—but he offered me five guineas—and that is a great Sum for a poor man to reiufe!” Ah! my dear Harriet, what a villain is this Lord Townly! how treacherous a friend! how bafe a defigner!
I did not, however. Suffer the gardener to depart, till he had promifed to return the letter to Lord Townly’s Servant; I accordingly Sealed down the wafer, not chufing, for Mr. Wilmot’s fake, that the contents fliould be known. Surely, after this discovery of his bafeneSs, Lord Townly will not have the effrontery to appear before me.—But Mr. Freelove’s arrival prevents my adding more than the affurance of being
Your’s,
Louisa Wilmot.
letter LXVI.
Lord Towmly to Mr. Beverly.
My letter returned—without a line—this cold , contempt has flung me to the Soul ! By heaven, I will be revenged ! Such infulting Silence wounds me more deeply than the inSolence of reproach—take care—take care, thou haughty fair
one r the time may come--oh ! but for that hope !
fire expels to intimidate me without doubt-ah !
ihc
LETTERS.	85
fhe knows but little of thy friend, if Ihe dares to think fo} perverfe, obstinate, capricious 1 by niy foul, Beverly, were I to poflefs her this moment, my pride and revenge would be far more gratified than-my palHon. She has offended me beyond forgivenefs
----but why do I talk of forgivenefs as a virtue ? I
defpife it.
* ****'■
I am just returned from the Thorns, and found only Mrs. Wilmot at home. She was reading when I entered the parlour, and turned pale at nry approach ; but immediately informed me, with all the haughti-nefs fhe could affume, that Mr. Wilmot was abfent, and then arofe to leave the room. I eagerly Seized her hand, and begged her to be Seated, but flie was deaf to all my entreaties- “ Oh! Mrs. Wilmot, exclaimed I tenderly, how wretched am I to have thus offended you by a conduU which arofe from the fincerest friendihip ! Forgive my involuntary error, and I promife never »nore to incur your difpleafure
by a repetition of my fault.”-“ As the happinefs
of a married woman, returned fhe hastily, mustarife from the affedlion fhe bears her hufband, whoever Seeks to destroy that tendernefs ought to be considered by her as her greatest enemy. A prudent wife would conceal the errors of her hufband, as carefully as her own.; fhe would even endeavour to hide them from herfelf. Mr. Wilmot, purfued flie in a reproachful tone, imagines you are his friend, but
how greatly is he deceived /--let your own con-
du£l be faultlefs, before you expofe the faults of others, and remember, my Lord, that to bribe the honesty of a Servant is far from being a trivial error-” She was going to withdraw, but I threw myfelf upon my knees before her- By heaven, exclaimed I warmly, I cannot, will not, part with you. Dearest madam ! do not thus cruelly torment a heart which is wholly yours. Alas ! how little have I deferved this
refentment!-“ Wretch,interrupted fire Scornfully,
my anger, my detestation of thee is but equal to thy deferts- Have not your artifices estranged from me
the
86	LETTERS.
the affe£tions of my hufband ?-has not your ex-
ample, perhaps advice, led him into purfuits, which he would otherwise have condemned ? Seek not to hide thy guilt under the malk of innocence, nor hope to deceive a heart which fees, and abhors thy bafenefs. She hastily left the room after having pronounced thefe words, and I remained alone, overwhelmed with Shame, refentment, and defpair. Oh !
Beverly, what a woman - an angel rather-is this
Louifa ? She really is, what all the fex pretend to be ;—nothing but force can conquer here—if She has any pastions—which I begin to doubt—they are fo restrained by religion, that there are no hopes for
thy friend.-But why do I talk to thee upon the
fubjedt, when I know that thou wilt only rejoice in my distrefs !—Do not, however, exprefs the pleafure thou feelest ; for, by heaven, I will not, cannot bear it.
T OWNLY.
LETTER LXVII.
MIfs Syixney to Mrs. Wilmot.
ALAS! my beloved friend, how fmcerely do I comn)iferateyour wretched fate! Mr. Wilmot is funk almost beneath my pity. To negledl the most lovely, the most amiable of her fex, for an abandoned prostitute—'to introduce the guilty partner of his crime.s into the abode of unfufpedting innocence —to—but alas! my fweet friend, this unworthy man is your hustband ; we must therefore behold all thefe wrongs in mournful stlence, and, with an anxious wisti for his reformation, look forv/ard to happier days. The patient abiding of the meek strall not always go uniewarded. — Do not then defpond, my dearest Louifa ; Mr. Wilmot will, ere long, contemn the postestion of a heart, which virtue could not fe-curc ; when paffion is fatiated, reafon will recover her fway,—you will then appear more lovely, more
engaging
LETTERS.	87
engaging in his eyes than ever—your gentle fweet-nefs, your amiable virtues, will fhine with the more conSpicuous lustre, when contrasted with the vices of his now adored Caroline—he will find you worthy his love, and restore you an undivided heart. Your influence over him will be more unbounded than in the first moments of his attachment j his tendernefs will be the refult of esteem, not the ebullition of deSire ; it will therefore be permanent,—an honour to himfelf, and worthy the amiable objeCt who infpires it.
My reSentment against Lord Townly is inexprefli-ble ; he loves you, my dear friend, and I Ihtould tremble at your fituation, did I hot know you were equal to every trial.
Adieu ! my inestimable friend !
Harriet Sydney.
LETTER LXVIII.
Mifs ViLLiERs to Lord Townly.
IS it pofllble, that the great, the magnanimous Lord Townly, can thus figh after an ungrateful woman !—but do not defpair.my Lord ; flie may yet
be yours :--oh ! how 1 Should rejoice in her fall !
It will, however, require all our abilities to effeU it. But we Should both be fufficiently repaid for our trouble ; your Lord Ship, in the gratification of your paflion; and myfelf, in the indulgence of my revenge.
I was virtuous till Seduced by thy arts, and'now know no greater pleafure than in reducing others to my own level ;—and to fubdue Such a woman as this —would be glorious mifchief.
Wilmot grows every hour more devoted to me-—• He Seldom Speaks to his wife, and when he does, it is either with the harflinefs of reproof, or the haughtinefs of command	—yet Ihe anfwers
him with the most obliging foftnefs, and endeavours, by every endearing attention, to recover his
inconstant
88	LETTERS.
inconstant heart-—Of what advantage then isvirtuCy stnce the most steady adherence to its rules could not Secure Mrs. Wilmot’s happinefs! whilst the preaches to others the efficacy of its dodlrines, her Sufferings contradict her affertions, and prove unanswerably the weakneSs of every argument that can be urged in its defence- I am almost tired of my prefent fituation-Mrs. Wrlmot fees but little company, and here are. no diverfions to ingrofs the vacant hour. Mr- Wil-mot is horribly chagrined at the manner in which I have lately been treated by the neighbouring fami-. lies ; and but yesterday forbade Mrs. Wilmot receiving any vifits-The only place I go to is Captain
Temple’s, whofe mistrefs happens to be one of my old acquaintance. We have renewed our intimacy, and can depend upon the Secrecy of each other.
But the return of Mr. Wilmot forces me to conclude.
Your’s,
Caroline' Villiers.
LETTER LXIX.
Lord Townly to Mr. Beverly.
TO what caufe stiall I impute your late Silence ?
Dost thou really intend to put thy threats in execution, and to discontinue the intimacy which has • hitherto fubfisted ' between us.? Or has thy concern for the dead prevented thee from thinking of the living ? I hear that thou art returned from London, and that thy uncle has left thee the whole of his large estate- I congratulate thee on this pleafing, event, and defire that thou woulcist be more fenfible of the affedlion that I feel for thee.
* * » » »
Oh, Beverly, I am almost in tranfport ! LouISa
will yet (I hope) be mine-revenge and love will.
both be gratified !-but I inclofe the letter I this
moment
L E T T E R S.	89
moment received from Caroline; I am unable to
transcribe it—my joy is unutterable---Farewel.
I Shall foon write to you again—mean time may fortune be propitious ! for a disappointment now would be infupportable.
Town LY.
L E T T E ‘R LXX.
Mifs ViLLiERs to Lord Townly.
I Have impatiently waited for a favourable opportunity for the completion of our defigns against Mrs. Wilmot; and it is with pleaSure I inform your LordSliip, that one now prefents itfelf, which I hope will terminate agreeably to our wilhes.
Mr. Wilmot goes to-morrow to-------and intends
deeping there. None of the men Servants will be at home, except the old gardener ; and he, as well as the female Servants, lie at a great distance from Mrs. Wilmot’s chamber. Sally is So elated with the thoughts of the 50I. you have promiSed her, that She is as anxious for the SucceSs of our project as we could defire i and your honest William, who is the most pastionate of lovers, takes care to nourifh every pleafing hope.
I stiall not be preSent at this interesting period, as Mr. Wilmot is to leave me to-morrow at Mrs. Temple’s (as die is called) the Captain being abSent, and
i am to return with him the day after.--Be at the
park gate by ten o’clock to-morrow night, and you will find there the faithful Sally, who is to convey you into Some Safe retreat near Mrs. Wilmot’s room,, and alSo communicate to you thoSe particulars of our Scheme, which I have not now time enough to impart-
How Shall we afterwards, my Lord, enjoy the recital of our triumph over this haughty fair one, and her deceived, her credulous hufband ! I have already excited Some SuSpicious fears in his mind,
which
90	LETT E R S.
which may prove of Service to us, in cafe ourpre-fent plan fliould not Succeed. Farewel, my Lord, and believe me your’s, &c.
Caroline Villiers.
LETTER LXXL
Mr- Beverly to Mr. Shirley-
NO, my dear Shirley, I do not pretend to value myfelf upon thoSe rules I have formed, for my future condudl. Confcious of my failings, I look back on my past life with contrition and regret.
My friendfliip for Lord Townly has undone me. I was but too fenfible of his faults ; but his fpeci-ous behaviour, and entertaining converfation, ren-. dered him fo agreeable to me, that, though I lamented his vices, I had not refolution to diflblve that connexion which I condemned.
My long abfence from him, and the affe£ting Scenes I have lately been witnefs of', have awakened me to ferioufnefs and convidtion. The death of thofe we love brings amendment to the heart. It calls forth every virtuous Sentiment, and fliews, in its proper colours, the vanity of all Sublunary enjoyments.—■ You fee, my dear friend, that your Beverly is indeed altered ; but how ? he is become lefs gay—but is he lefs happy ? ah !—no j—never before did he know happinefs but by name. I am convinced,, my dear Shirley, that peace can never dwell in that bofom, from whence innocence is excluded j he only can really enjoy the prefent, who is able to Survey the past without terror, and to look forward without apprehenfion. This pleafmg confcioufnefs I cannot now experience; but, if repentance can efface my late guilt, I may dare to entertain the most delightful hopes of future felicity.
Though I am determined to put an immediate conclufion to my intimacy with Lord Townly, yet I feel the most earnest wilhes for his reformation ; and
in
LETTERS.	91
in my farewel letter to him, which I Intend fending away this evening, I Shall exprefs the genuine emotions of my heart—and alfo—but a letter is this moment given me, which comes from him * * • ♦ * — Good heaven, what infamous fchemes, ah 1 my dear Shirley—the angelic Mrs. Wilmot!—this very night is fixed upon for the perpetration of his villainous defigns againft her—her hufband’s abfence—but is it
iinpollible then to fave her.^--if I cannot prevent
the hellidi deed, I may at least—yes, I will hasten to expofe all their artifices to the deceived Wilmot ; he lhall fee what vipers he has nourished in his bo-fom, and I will either restore Mrs. Wilmot’s peace,
or, if it is too late, this fword-but it is criminal
to lofe a moment. Farewel.
LETTER LXXII.
Lord Townly to Mr. Beverly.
Friday morning, past one o’clock.
OH ! Beverly, I am returned as very a wretch as imagination can conceive :—but thou wilt rejoice in my distrefs—yes, the curfed tale will give thee pleafure—yet I must write, though recollection wounds me to the foul.—I was at the park gate exactly at the destined hour, and was conducted, by the faithful Sally, into a dark clofet adjoining Mrs. Wilmot’s chamber, unperceived by any one; my heart throbbing with expectation, and every nerve thrilling with defire. I waited here with the utmost anxiety till after eleven o’clock, when Mrs. Wilmot came into the room, and having locked the door, kneeled down by the bed fide, and offered up her prayers to the Almighty with all the fervour of religion I was affected at the earnestnefs of her ad-drefs, and the tears which fanCtified it. Will heaven, thought 1, be deaf to the fupplications of dif-trefs ! can the petitions of innocence be disregarded 1 She arofe, and Seated herfelf upon a fopha near the
clofet
92	LETTERS.
clofet where I was concealed, her eyes fixed upcm the floor with a penfive melancholy,—when I accidentally puShed againfl: the door- Her fears were alarmed—Siie came hastily to the clofet—I found it was impoflible to prevent a difcovery, and therefore appeared before her ;—but how Shall I exprels her. furprife and terror, as I approached towards her ! She gave a faint fcream, and funk lifelefs upon the. fopha. I caught her eagerly in my arms, and pref-fed her to my bofom. She recovered, and pulhing me indignantly from her, “ Monster ! exclaimed flie,. with all the haughtinefs of affronted virtue, by Vv^hat arts hast thou gained admittance ?” and then, recol-lefting her fituation, fhe added in a faltering tone,. “ Great God, for what am I referved !’’ “For hap-pinefs, my dearest creature, returned I tenderly. I love you beyond expreflion : banisti then, my angel, this unkind referve. Mr- Wilmot beholds you with, indifference i he lavisties all his affection upon another ; you have at your feet a lover, ardent and faithful ; my happincfs stiail be kept an inviolable Secret; nobody but ourfelves.’’-“ Wretch, inter-
rupted fhe fcornfully, what hast thou feen in my conduct that could embolden thee thus to forget that refpeCt, which is due to every woman who is not destitute of virtue.?—Leave me then this moment, or I will immediately alarm the family,” Saying thefe words, stie flew to the door j but I had takea care to put the key in my pocket. “ Every refource, rejoined J in a refolute tone, is cut off, and you have nothing but my generofity to depend upon-”—• Then I am lost Indeed, returned flie, bursting into tears!” I attempted to footh her, but in vain. She tried, by her fcreams, to bring fome of the fervants to her aflistance, but I held a handkerchief to her mouth, and stopt her cries. ‘‘ Madam, Madam, faid I firmly, I have not taken all thefe pains to be foiled at last ; you are entirely in my power, and, if gentle means will not avail, force stiall effeCt my purpofe. Come then, my lovely angel, be kind,
and yield to my embraces.”------“ Never, never,
returned
LETTERS.	93
returned Ihe wildly, never, never will I confent to a crime rhy foul abhors-’’—She again endeavoured to alarm the family, and I was again obliged to ufe vio~ lence to that Sweet mouth, which I could have devoured with kifles. She was perfectly frantic, and funk down at my feet, quite Spent with contending paflions- I tried to raife her, but in vain. “ Oh! Townly, exclaimed She in an agony of diftrefs, her hands clafped together, the tears running down her lovely cheeks, and her charming eyes lifted up to mine with the moH; bewitching foftnefs ; if thou haft not loft all humanity, thou can’ll not fee me thus
unmoved----1 kneel to you for mercy ; by all your
hopes of future happinefs- by that God who will Severely punifh thy premeditated crimes, I conjure you to Spare me ; rob me not of all my cruel fate has left me—for know, purfued flie, 1 will never yield to thy attempts, nor Survive the violation of my honour.” “ Chatming creature. Said I, eagerly kneeling down by her, and preffing her to my throbbipg heart, your refiftance only Serves to inflame my paf-
fion, and to render thee ftill more bewitching.”-
“ Come then, let us no longer wafte thefe precious moments.’’ Saying thefe words, I .endeavoured to lead her to the bed-fide, but She funk down from my incircling arms. “ I fee—I fee—returned She, that thou haft abettors in thy villainous defigns ; elfe why am I expofed to thy cruelty .? On heaven ! rejoined She, will you then fuft'er me to fall a vidim to this perfidious monster.?” “ My dearest Louifa,
“ interrupted 1,”—.“ thy Louifa, exclaimed She “ Scornfully ’’—Yes, mine you are—you fliall be ” I took her again in my arms ; fhe was unable to prevent me; 1 Set her dov/n by the bed-fide ; a deathlike palenefs overfpread her face, and flie funk life-lefsupon my bofom.—I was terrified—fhe Seemed to have ceafed breathing—every consideration was loft in the thoughts of her Safety-—I laid her gently upon the bed, and hastily unlocked the door, intending to call lor help-all was Silence—^—I returned ‘
ineloiute
k
94	LETTERS.
irrefolute-r-(he opened her eyes—my hopes revived
----1 fat down by her upon the bed, ajid raifing her
Softly, reclined her head upon my flioulder. She was infenfible, yet Hie Seemed reviving. I w’as leaning over her, and eagerly watching every motion of her lovely face, when I waS interrupted by a fudden
noife—I started—the found approached nearer--
I heard Somebody coming hastily up stairs, and Immediately after,—curie on the fatal period !-the
door opened, and—Wilmot entered the room. At that moment Mrs. Wilmot recovered, and lifting up her eyes beheld her hufband; furprife and joy were painted in her countenance j (he flew from the bed, and running hastily towards him, “ Oh! Mr. Wilmot, exclaimed She, heaven has Sent you for my deliverance !’’ He stood all this time immoveable ; at last he Softly cried—Can it be polTible !-—Good God ! how grofsly have I then been deceived—ungrateful woman, added he, and thou, too, perfidious Townly l’-“How fortunate was my return ! elfe, how much longer might I have been thus deluded !— “ Indeed, indeed, Mr- Wilmot, returned Are, I am innocent. That wretch has harboured the most villainous defigns upon my honour, and knowing that 1 was left defencelefs, chofe this fatal night for the perpetration of his wickednefs. In vain have I endeavoured to bring the Servants to my alTistance ; his Schemes were but too well planned, and, but for your arrival, I had perhaps, ere now, fallen a Sacrifice to his barbarity. Here her tears interrupted her difeourfe, and 1 rejoined with the most undaunted hrmnefs, “ I Shall not Submit to the meannefs of an apology, or elfe I might perhaps — but, innocent or guilty, it is Sufficient that you have found me here : you have a right to demand that Sarisfadlion which I
am ready to give you,”-“ No, returned he in a
conSuSed tone, alarmed at the reSolute manner in which 1 Spoke, there are many reafi'ns that would prevent—beSides, I ought to corSider this diScoveiy as a most favourable circuiiiSiance ; 1 might elfe have been still the dupe of a distembling woman,
whom
I
LETTER S:	95
whom gratitude, as well as duty, ought to have restrained within the bounds of virtue. The Suspicions of MiSs Frampton then were well founded ; flie has long doubted that apparent modesty which So entirely deceived me—but all is now over, and I Swear—“ Oh, hold, for heaven’s fake, interrupted Mrs. Wilmot eagerly—Speak, wretch, purSued Ihe in a frantic tone, turning hastily towards me ; bear witnefs of luy innocence ; Surely thou canst not be So vile as to refu'e me this Small atonement for my wrongs.’’ I was filent. How could the dear creature deSire a poor fellow to accuSe himfelf.? Befides, I began to entertain Some chearing hopes from what pasted—if Wilmot diScards her from him—you understand me, Ned ! But I grow tired of writing upon this unpleastng Subjedl. I Shall therefore only add, that I left the lovely mourner in the utmost distreSs, and her huSband vowing revenge upon her, yet in his heart delighted with a diScovery, that will at once free him from every restraint.---! am all impatience to know the cauSe of his unexpected return j if Caroline has played me falfe.—^^Farewel.
To WNLY.
L E T T E R LXXin.
Mr. Beverly to Mr Shirley.
Notwithstanding the rapidity of my progreSs, I did not get to the Thorns till near four o’clock this morning, So that all my endeavours to have Saved the amiable Mrs. Wilmot had been ineffeflual; but heaven graciousty interpoled in her Savour, and Sent her hu&and at the very period, when his presence Vv^as most immediately necelTary for her preservation *.
* He g^ es bis friend an account of ,'crne particulars, which being CDiitui.ied in the preceding letter are not iaferted here.
Though
96	LETTERS.
Though I arrived here at fuch an unfeafonablc hour, I found the family were not in bed, and rejoiced to hear that Caroline was abfent. I bid the Servant tell his master, that a gentleman wanted to fpeak to him upon a matter of the highest importance. I was rfiewn into a parlour, where he presently after joined me. He appeared astonisticd to fee me, and astced me hastily “ if I came from my friend, Lord Townly “ Call him not my friend, returned I warmly * I difcard him for ever from my affeUion, and bluSli to think that I was ever con-nedled with fuch a villain. You know not half his
wickedneSs, purfued I--Oh! M.r. Wilmot, how
grofsly have you been deceived, and how cruelly has the innocent Suffered for the guilty ! but T am come to restore that happinefs to Mrs. Wilmot, of which Siie has been fo unjustly deprived, and to Save you from the commistion of a crime, which might be attended with the most fatal confequences.-“ Pray,
Sir, be Seated, added I ; I have a long train of artifices to discover to you, and fuch as you have, alas ! too little reafon to fufpedl had been ever pradifed against you.
“ When Lord Townly came to the Thorns, after your marriage, he was captivated with the number-iefs attradlions of Mrs. Wilmot j he cultivated your friendship, and foon perceived (excufe my freedom, the cafe requires it) that poffestion had created indifference, and that your heart had nearly regained its liberty. He difcoveiied the fufceptibility of your foul ; the lure of beauty therefore was thrown in your way; you were milled by a tale of artificial woe ; your tendernefs was excited, your gratitude engaged, and you were lost- The treacherous Caroline, wdio has long been the mistrefs of that abandoned Townly, was introduced into your houfe, and”—“ Ah ! I wdll hdar no more. Said he, riling in a rage ; I fee the w'hole of your defigns—your pretended xeal”—“ Hold, interrupted I, hear all I have
to offer---1 infist upon it, and then determine.”
“ Proceed, proceed. Said he hastily ; but I know'”—
“ yes.
LETTERS.	97
“ yes, purfued I, Caroline has been the agent of this dark affair, and your angelic Louifa’’—“ I cannot, I will not believe it, interrupted he Scornfully ; her foul is too noble.—No, flie hates Lord Townly with the utmoft: degree of Inveteracy, and I have received a thoufand teftimonies of her tendernefs--
undeniable ones.”--“ How are you deceived, re-
joined I.? but think not that I expeU my word ibould be fufficlent to convince you ; I have only prepared you for further and inconteftable proofs.” “ Here they are, proceeded I, taking the letters
out of my pocket — read thefe—and then”---He
hastily took up one from Caroline ; his eyes were in a moment glewed to the paper ; he turned pale— his hand trembled—“ It is her writing, faid he Softly, and yet I cannot believe’’-he laid it afide, and
began another---his colour rofe-----^he Seated him-
felS, and then rifing precipitately-“ their dupe,
exclaimed he j 1 cannot bear that---perfidious, ungrateful woman, So tenderly as I loved her!”----
I then put into his hand the last letter I received from Lord Townly, with that i^lofed in it from Caroline, containing an account of their vdlainous de-fign ; he fat Some time, after he had perufed it, quite immovable j but at last rifing in a kind of phrenzy, he poured forth the agitations of his foul ; and then finking into a chair that stood near him, he burst into tears. “ Pardon my weaknefs, exclaimed he, I ought not thus to feel for an artful woman, who has—but alas ! Mr. Beverly, this cruel difco-very affeUs me beyond expreffion.” 1 endeavoured to restore him to tranquillity, and when his grief was a little abated, I begged him to fly to Mrs. Wil-mot, and acquaint her with the h- ppy alteration of affairs. He rang the bell, and a Servant appeared ; but he was fo Intirely lost in thought, that he did not perceive him. “ Pray, Said I, let your mistrefs be told, that Mr. Wilmot begs the favour of Speaking to her immediately the Servant withdrew di-redUy, and Mr, Wilmot Scornfully repeated the word “ beg!” but I hastily faid, “ Nay, Mr. Wilmot, VoL. I.	F	you
9&	LETTERS.
you can now have no doubts of Mrs. Wilmot’s in” nocence ; (he has Suffered moft unjustly—fubmistiox? and tendernefs are her due.” “ Our inclinations, returned he stghing, will not be compelled, and”—• here the entrance of Mrs. Wil-mot prevented his proceeding—^but, good heavens, how was I affeUed at her appearance! the diforder of her drefs, the wild-nefs of her eyes, and the dejedtion which had taken pofleffion of her fweet face, touched me to the foul! ‘—Oh! Shirley, had you but feen with what fervor ihe returned thanks to heaven for the manifestation of her innocence, whilst tears of joyful gratitude bedewed thofe cheeks which were now tinged with the glow of rapture—you would have wept as I did. She called me her benefaUor, her guardian angel;— never, never before did I experience fuch delightful fenfations, as now animated my foul : virtue is indeed its own rew'^ard. Ah! my friend, can any pleafure, which attends the gratification of our fenfes, be equal to this exalted pleafure of the mind ? ■--No, no, it is impoffible.
Mr. Wilmot has written to Caroline, and forbid her ever appearing before him again—her things are fent with the letter. I cannot help pityjng him ; he is melancholy, thoughtful, and unfettled. “ Oh i Mr. Beverly, faid he just now, will you not defpife me for my unmanly weaknefs, when I confefs, that I almost wisti you had Suffered me to have continued in that pleafing delufion which had fo entirely post
feffed my fenfes ? I was deceived—but happy ;-
whereas now—all is a blank. I regret the past, abhor the prefent, and am indifferent to the future. I esteem Mrs. Wilmot ; I am fenfible of her merits >—but oh ! the treacherous Caroline !”
****** # *
You may perhaps-wiiln to hear the occafion of Mr. Wilmot’s return at that critical juncture, when Mrs. Wilmot must otherw'ife have fallen a prey to the artifices of Lord To wnly- It feems that there were Several gentlemen at Mr- Tilney’s, where Mr. Wilmot was vifiting, and that in the evening they went
to
LETTERS.	99
to cards Mr. Wilmot and one of the gentlemen betted very considerably, and the former won fuc-cestively every bett. His antagonist: grew enraged at his ill-luck, and accufed Wilmot of having cheated him. Words ran high between them, the company interpofed, parties were formed on both Sides, arid Mr. Tilney very unpoiitely taking part with Wil-niot’s adverfary (who was his intimate friehd) Mr-Wilmot threw up the cards, and departed in the greatest: difpleafure ——never was there a quarrel which terminated So happily. Adieu.
I Ihall leave the Thorns this afternoon, and dm going to fend a letter to Lord Townly, of which I inclofe a copy for your perufal. * J remain your’s,
Edward Beverly-
LETTER LXXIV.
Mrs- Wilmot to Mr. Beverly-
OH ! Mr. Beverly, how is the happinefs which I owe to yOur generostty, irtibittered by my anxiety for yOur fafety 1 I am this rrionient informed, that Lord Townly fet olF yesterday for London, and that he departed vowing revenge against you. Good heaven! perhaps his fv/ord has ere now pierced the heart of my kind beriefadtor. Inhuman tyrant !—I write this in the bitternefs of my foul, to conjure you td avoid that distembling monster. But, alas! virtue can never be fufficiehtly guarded against the attacks of thofe who have long fince bid adieu to every principle of humanity. If he stiould a£t according to thofe rules, which the misjudging world term honourahley every thing is in your own power. Do not, I befeech you, Mr- Beverly, he-fitate even for a moment to refufe a challenge, which the laws of reafon and religion fo Severely condemn. The lefs guilty is not always the conqueror. Think
* This letter appears not.
F z	then,
iQo	LETTERS.
then, if your life Should fall a Sacrifice to this practised villain, of the defpairing grief of your friends., and of the dreadful fate that will attend the pre-fumptuous being who fliall dare to ufurp the divine prerogative, which has referved to itfelf alone the right of punishment. Leave, then, the poor wretch to the Stings of an accufing confcience, which will be a far deeper wound than any your fword can in-
flia. >	_
Mr. Wilmot’s Sentiments upon this occafion concur with mine, and we both hope that they will influence you to a£t conformably to our withes, which will increafe that friendship and gratitude with which we are, dear Sir,
Tour’s, ,&c.
H. L. WiLMOT..
letter LXXV.
Mr. Beverly to Mrs. Wilmot.
How truly concerned, deareft Madam, was I to find, that you were acquainted with Lord Townly’s motives for leaving the Thorns? 1 had . flattered myfelf, that you would have remained ignorant ,of his intention, fenfible that it would interrupt that tranquillity which has been, alas ! but too often a stranger to your heart.—Matters have however terminated more fortunately than I expetted, and I hope Lord Townly will never again disturb your repofe.—Believe rue, Madam, you cannot entertain a greater abhorrence against duelling than inyfelf ; but I was not left the liberty of choice: my calmaefs ferved only to encreafe his lordstiip’s refentment, and he at last forced me to draw, to repay an affront, which I would Sooner die than receive unrevenged.
My coolneis v as of great advantage to me, and a V oui'd, which he received in the arm, obliged him u d.op Ins Iwoul, He refufed every astistance I
offered
LETTERS.. lot
offered him, and retired with his Servant who had attended him, overwhelmed with confufion, rage, and disappointment. 1 have Sent twice to enquire after him, and find that he Set off for France yefter-day morning, declaring that he could not bear to Blew his face in his native country, after having been
thus foiled-Caroline attended him. It fliall be
the study of my life to merit the continuance of your good opinion, which will ever be estential to my happinefs.
I remain, with my due refpeUs to Mr. Wilmot, your and his faithful and obedient Servant,
Edward Beverly.
LETTER LXXVI.
Lady Os.sory to Mrs. Wilmot.
The last letter I Sent you, my Louifa, was, I believe, Scarcely intelligible. The rapture I felt at your happy eScape from that abandoned Townly, would not admit of coherency of thought j had I loved you iefs, I fhould have exprested myfelf better.
I truly regretted my being abSent when Mr. Beverly called with your letter ; Lord OfSory however returned his vlfit the next morning, and he dined with us the following day. He is really very agreeable, and Sir Charles and he are inSeparable.
Sydney Is gone into EfTex Vv^ith her grandmother, and I have not heard from her Since She left town. Her coufin is with Lady Bab Dormer ; the chit has made a conquest lately, and of whom think you ? No lefs a perfon than Mr. Elvin, Lady Effex’s brother. He is a foolifii fellow ; for the girl is So intolerably coquettifh, that the will teaze his heart out, and leave him in the lurch at last.
Mifs Freelove is coy, it Seems, to her Swain, and why.? becaufe he is not in posteffion of a title, the very gewgaw that her Simple heart Sighs after, and F 3	for
102	LETTERS.
for which She would Sacrifice her peace, inclination, judgment, and every thing that ought to he dear and valuable---Ridiculoys vanity! defpicable ambition !-------1 have been juft now defiring Lady Eflex
not to give Mr. Elvin any more advice upon the Subject- “ Refiftance, my dear friend, faid I, Serves only to increaSe his paflion.’’ The objeU that kindled, will herSelf extinguiSii the flame ; your brother has a diSpofition truly amiable ; he will not long continue to love, where he cannot efteetn. After having once adviSed, it is always better to leave the mind to itfelf; the eflicacy of argument is weakened by a too frequent repetition. Let him judge of your wiflies rather by your looks, than from your conversation ; he will be more afFcdled with this fi-lent tendernefs, than by the moft pathetic remonstrances j he will be charmed with the delicacy of your conduU, and feel a confeious pride in Sacrificing every thing to a Sifter fo worthy his affeftion.
Aeieu, my dearest friend ; may no cruel incident interrupt that happinefs, which I wifh for ever reinstated in your breast. Adieu, adieu !
\
LETTER LXXVII.
Mr. Beverly to Mr. Shirley.
I AM obliged to you, my dear Shirley, for your wifihes for my company, and I would with pleasure gratify them, could 1 in this cafe unite inclination with duty. But my prefence is become necef-fary at Park-Hill, an estate which my uncle left me, and the only one that I have not yet vifited. Some of the old tenants, whofe leafes are nearly expired, are apprehenfive of having their farms raifed, which is but too often done when a new landlord takes post feffion, and they therefore expedt my arrival with an anxiety, which I fliall hasten to difpel.
I received yesterday a letter from Mr. Wilmot j
he
LETTERS.	103
he comes to town next month with his amiable Lady, and intends to remain here Some time.
I find that he is heartily tired of the Thorns ; fo-litude can never be pleafing to that mind, which is unable to procure comfort from' refleUion. Poor man! to be compelled to Seek for foreign aids to obtain that tranquillity v/hich he ought to derive from himfelf! how pitiable his Situation !
I informed Lord and Lady OlTory yesterday of my intention of leaving town j they both exprested their concern upon the occafion: L.ady Ostbry appeared very defirous that Sir Charles stiould accompany me, as ihe dreads his meeting with Mrs. Wilmot, and wilhes to get him from hence before her arrival. I offered to make him the propofal, and accordingly hastened to his houfe j he started a few objections at first but they were Soon removed, and we agreed to Set off for Park-Hill on Monday.
I have nothing further to add than he affuraccc ef being ever your’s,
Edward Beverly-
letter LXXVIII.
Mr. Beverly to Mr. Shirley.
ST R Charles and mystlf arrived here on Tuefday morning, and we are much pleafed with our new abode,—The houfe, which is large and convenient, is placed.upon a Spot the most uncommonly romantic of any I ever beheld, and the lawn, woods, and water which furround it, agreeably diverfify the enchanting Scene. Yet every thing here is in direct oppofition- to the preient taste, and in my opinion infinitely more eligible. 1 am-far belter fatisfied with the verdant riclmefs of this Sweet retreat, than thoSe extenfive proSpeCls, where the eye roves, with unbounded liberty, over an immenSe traCl of land, uncertain where to fix its wearied attention-
F 4	Sir
104	LETTERS.
Sir Charles and I have diverted ourfelves with thinking of the devastation the prefent reformers would make amongst thefe venerable oaks ; who, when I entered their awful Shades, bow'ed their Sacred heads, as if to pay me homage.
About an hour after my arrival, Mr. Burton, my late Uncle’s stew’ard, came to pay his refpefts.to' me ; and accompanied us in the afternoon, in a walk we took through the neighbouring villages. Our conversation turned entirely upon rural occupations ; and he advifed me, amongst other alterations, to lay all my Small farms, which were contiguous to each other, into one ; addi.ng, that .1 stiould by that means be more certain of my rent, bestdes avoiding the trouble of having fo many different tenants.
But what will become of the prefent owners, returned I hastily “ There are employments enough for them. Sir, rejoined he, and the poorer fort ot people Seldom get any thing by farming. I have known Some industrious labourers, who have taken Email farms, and in two years time lost infenfibly the little money they brought into them.’’—His projedt feemed feafible, and I w'alked on ruminating upon it ; at length however both Sir Charles and myfelf began to be fatigued, and were not a little Surprized to find upon enquiry, that wm had rambled above fix miles from Park-hill. Mr. Burton hearing us wisti for Some refreshment, with an inundation of compliments invited us to his homely dwelling, which he affured us was only half a mile farther. We were yet undetermined torefufe, or accept his offer, and were advancing stowly, w'hen I perceived a Small cottage by the road fide, which from the peculiar neatnefs of its appearance, and the pleafantnefs of its fituaticn, engaged our attention. “ There, Sir, Said Burton, lives one of thofe farmers, I have been mentioning to you.’’ We stopt at a gate, which was oppofite the houfe, to Speak to a little rofy faced urchin, who was playing near it- Here Burton repeated his invitation, which v/e at length complied with, and he hasted away to prepare his wife for our reception,
whilst
LETTERS.	los
whilst we agreed to remain there till his return. The good woman, who lived in the cottage we had been admiring, came foon after to the gate for her little boy, and finding us talking to him, with a fmile of pleaSure, and a rustic curtfey, aflced us if we would like to walk into the houfe ? We thanked her for her civility, and immediately followed her. Never, niy dear Shirley, did I behold a Scene which afforded me fuch heart felt fatisfadtion, as 1 now experienced in reviewing this little family. Not one of them was idle ; each had their particular province ; and thofe, who were too young for the more laborious parts of industry, had employments affigned them, which their weaker powers were capable of pertorm-ing-
We foon entered into conversation with the good woman, who was as loquacious as we could wisti. She informed us, that fhe had eight children, fix of whom were at home with her.—“ And pray, interrupted Sir Charles, has your hulband no other method of Supporting fuch a numerous family, but by the produce of this Small farm “ No, Sir, returned fhe, we have nothing elSe, I do afSure you. ’Tis ceitain, we are forced to struggle hard to get a livelihood ; formerly indeed we did much better, but now every thing is So dear, that we are obliged to labour more, and fare worfe ? however, thank God, we are all of us able to work, and as long as we can pay every body their own, I am Satisfied-—But alas ! added stae, after a Short pauSe, 1 am afraid tha bad fortune will foon betide us ; for we have got a new landlord ; a London gentlenian they fay he is ; and they talk as if he intended turning out all us Small farmers, as foon as our leafes are expired, and that would be a cruel stroke upon us : I am Sure I have cried day and night about it,”—Here fhe wiped away the trickling tear that was straying down
her cheek.--My hufband, purSued fhe. Said he
would make bold to Speak to our landlord, but theSe fine gentlemen don’t mind us poor folks.”—“ You are mistaken,, interrupted I, with an eagerneSs that F 5	I could
io6	L E • T T E R S.
I'could not restrain ; your landlord has heard your complaints.; he; is affeUed, with your distrefs, and, will Immediately difpel your fears.”—Here the entrance of Mr. Burton presented my proceeding, and his arrival-foon produced, an eclaircistement.
After fome farther conversation with the honest matron, we left. her. humble abode, followed by a thoufand grateful curtefies, and as. many artlefs ex-preffions of her happinefs,—“ Good heaven ! faid I hastily, throwing, to the gate, which Mr. Burton had opened for us, what wretchednefs might I have inadvertently occastoned in this worthy family ! How could you, Mr. Burton, you who have lived amongst* theSe honest, creatures, who have been a wdtnels of their industry, how could you ever think of a fcheme fo unjust. So barbarous Could any pecuniary advantages I. Should, receive from your propofal repay me for the lofs of my humanity ?—ah ! I Should never behold them without horror, when I considered that they were purchafed at the, expence of every thing that; is. valuable to an honest mind. To be known, only to be defpifed !—To ruin thofe who were, peculiarly entitled to my protection !—No, I detest the thought, and had Sooner relinquisti my estate, than increafe it by Such unworthy methods.
*, »
But I; am prevented adding more at prefent. I stiall therefore, difpatch this uninteresting letter, and begin another to-morrow, which I will endeavour to render-more eritertaining,
Edward Be ve rly.
LETTER LXXX.
From, the Same.
T.N my. last letter, If acquainted you with my fate. L. arrival at Parkrhill,-and irelated to you thofe particulars, which.at that, time peculiarly engaged ni-y attention : f Sl?all now proceed to^inform you of fome-
occurrences
LETTERS.	107
DGCurrences, which may perhaps be more ihtereft-ing to you.
Sir Charles and myfelf have contracted art acquaintance in this retired Spot, which will render our abode here both a pleaSure and an advantage to us ; it is with a Mr. Lefley, the worthy ReCtor of this little village, who is an honour to his profeffion and to human nature. To an understanding improved by a liberal education, he joins the most engaging po-litenefs, extenfive benevolence, and exalted piety. Esteemed by his- acquaintance, beloVed almost to a-doration by the poor, he instructs by precept, and reforms by example. What a pity it is'j my dear Shirley, that Such a man stiould be restrained, by the narrownefs of his income, from indulging the natural generofity of his heart!—born as he was in a= rank the rhost exalted, and to a-fortune the most magnificent. But one fatal imprudence nipped every afpiring hope in the bud, and deprived him of all thofe enjoyments vvhich the heart of man can ex-peCt to receive from grandeur and independence.
Mr- Lefley was the fon (and only child) of Sir Thomas- LeflCy, vi^ho was remarkable for nothing but his avarice. He received his education at Oxford, and there he contracted that unfortunate attachment, which was the caufe of his being difinhe-rited by a fathei', who was a stranger to every Sentiment of humanity, and incapable of forgiving a tendernefs, which his infenfibiiity had preferved him from feeling. Mr. Lefley was afraid to divulge to Such a parent a regard, which he was certain would never receive the fanCtion of his confent ; and judging it better to marry without his knowledge, than contrary to his commands, he was united privately to the object of his affeCtions, who brought him the best of dowries, beauty, modgsty, and virtue. You	,
may eafily imagine, my dear friend, the confequen-ces of this step—he was for ever excluded from the prelence of his enraged father, who immediately altered his will, and gave every ihiiling of his fortune to a distant relation,
Mr»
io8	LETTERS.
Mr, Lefley foon after entered into holy orders, and was preiented by a friend to this living. Mrs. Lefley died about two years after their marriage, and left a daughter, who inherits, with her mothei’s beauty, all the virtues of her parents. This report has told me, but I fliall fee her this afternoon, and determine for myfelf. Adieu.
Edward Beverly.
LETTER LXXXI.
Mr. Beverly to Lord Ossory.
I This moment received your Lordfhip’s obliging letter. How worthy is our dear Sir Charles of the anxiety you feel upon his account! He is afFefted with my endeavours to recover him from that def-pondency, fo unavailing, So deftruUive- He gently thanks me for my attention to his welfare, and when the remembrance of past Scenes obtrudes itfelf upon his mind, and in a Soft forgetfulnefs he indulges the too pleafing recolledlion, on a Sudden he stops—and with a Sigh implores my forgivenefs. Unhappy, amiable Royston ! postested of a perfon fo attradtive, a mind fo noble ! adorned with every accomplisti-ment that can charm the fancy, and feoure the heart, how are all thy rare endowments lost in the Soft fol-licitude of hopelefs love !
Sir Charles has given your Lordfliip'a defcription of our little retreat at Park-hill, and of that worthy clergyman, who is fo truly agreeable to us both. He has alfo mentioned JVjifs Lefley, the amiable daughter of our new friend ; but Lady Ostbry, ycu fay, is not contented with Sir Charles’s accLunt, which is not minute enough to Satisfy her cuiiolity. She therefore expedts me to be more particular upon the fubjedt. 1 proceed to obey her Ladystiip, though confcious of my inability to dojustice to the merits of the lovely, the enchanting hmily !—Mifs Lefley is of a miadling stature, her ihape is eafy,
and
letters.	109
and every movement graceful and unconstrained. Her complexion is remarkably good and enlivened with the bloom of health, and her fine blue eyes have a Soft timidity, an expreffive fenSibility, that renders them infinitely pleafing. Nor is this beautiful outSide difgraced by a mind unworthy of it ; on the contrary, the former borrows its greatest charm from thofe amiable virtues that have made her breast their throne, and which dilFufe over her Sweet countenance that air of modesty, affability, and gentleneSs, which renders her fo truly engaging. She has received from her excellent parent a Solidity of judgment far Superior to her years; to his attentive care stie likewise owes all her acquirements, except thoSe of muSic, and drawing ; in the latter of which fhe particularly excels. Such is Emily Leffey, who, though poffelTed of every attradion that can pleaSe, every virtue that can adorn, yet is herSelf inSenfible of all thefe perfedions, and Seeks to avoid that admiration, which is in general So pleafing to a young mind, and which few of her Sex So highly merit.
I am, with my reSpedful devoirs to Lady Ostbry, Your Lordfhip’s most obedient,
And faithful humble Servant,
Edward Beverly.
LETTER LXXXII.
MiSs Lesley to MiSs Howard.
NO, my dear Clariffa, you must excuSe me, if I decline your obliging invitation j I cannot reSolve to exclude mySelf from Park hill, at this enchanting feaSon of the year. Could your uncle be prevailed upon to Spare you in compliance with my wiffies—but that you Say is impolfible. He is really very ill-natured j tell him I Say So, my dear,
I do not half enjoy your company at Bath--.
The Scenes of diffipation, which you are obliged to Submit 10, Suit not the gravity of my diSpofition ; it is
only
no	LETTERS.
only in retirement that we experience real happinefs j '—for nothing deferves that appellation, which will not bear the refledlion of a Serious hour-
Our village is very lively at prefent. We have got a new neighbour in the manlion-houfe, one Mr. Beverly, the heir of your old lover, as you ufed to call him. He is really very agreeable, and has, by his generofity, rendered himfelf the idol of all his^ tenants. He has a young, baropet to stay with him, whom I would attempt to defcribe to you, did I not find that it would be a difficult talk to give you an idea of his merits ; conceive every thing. that can be imagined accomplished, polite, and amiable, and then—think of Sir Charles Royston.
Adieu, my beloved friend, I will foon write to you again.
Emily Lesley.
LETTER LXXXIII.
Lady Gssory to Mr. Beverly.
Yes, yes, my good friend, it is Lady OITory’s hand; but do not be alarmed ; Lord Oflbry is clofe at my elbow, and I fend you his Sentiments as well as my own.
We rejoice in your account of our dear Charles, and hope every thing from the enchanting Scenes at Park-hill, and the far more pleafing conversation of the lovely Emily Lefley. With what grateful affection would I prefs her to my bofom, if—but can it be
poffible ?.-yet wdro fo worthy of lucceed-ing. my
Louifa in his regard, as this amiable, this accom-pliflied.maid ? Continue itill your agreeable recitals, I beieech you, my dear friend ; they are peculiarly interefting. to us.
Mr, and Mrs. Wilmot are in tov/n ; w'e have Seen but little of the former. I fear this London journey will not tend to the improvement of his morals ;
LETTERS.	na
rals ; he is got amongst Some of his old acquaintance, who will take care to rivet him in their fetters; the vicious delight in making others as guilty as theraSelves.
Farewel, and depend upon the Sincerity of our friendstiip-
Your’s,
Henrietta Ossory.
LETTER LXXXIV.
Mr. Beverly to Lady Ossory.
Your Ladylhlp’s letter afforded me fingular pleasure. I was happy to find that our thoughts coincided ; for I must confefs, that, upon my first acquaintance with the amiable Mifs Lefley, I wiffied that Sir Charles might become fenfible of her per-feUions. I cannot fee, however, that our hopes . have Succeeded. He esteems her—but that is all.—■ She is often the fubjeU of our conversation. L enumerate her attradions, the beauty of her perSon, the gentlenefs of her manners, the excellency of her understanding : he listens to me with attention ; he allows thejustneSsof my commendations : but his Sentiments are delivered with the Sober earnestneSs of friendship, not the enthuffastic rapture of love, — I beg of your Ladyfliip not to give Sir Charles the most distant hint of our wiShes, as it would prevent all poffibility of their SucceSs. Pardon the impertinence of this request, which your LadyJhip’s prudence ren^ ders unnecestary.—‘Time and opportunity, without importunity, may here, perform wonders. You may rely upon every afiistance, that is in the power of your, and Lord OlSbry’s, obedient Servant,
Edward Beverly.
LET-
112 LETTERS.
LETTER LXXXV.
MiSs Lesley to MIfs Howard.
WHAT can be the matter with Sir Charles R07-flon, I wonder, my dear Clarifla ? why is be So thoughtful, fo dejeUed ? perhaps he loves— yet if his paflion is returned, what occafion is there
for this melancholy-and can any woman behold
his regard with indifference ! but why do I trouble you with a matter fo uninterefting! I will immediately change a fubjeft, which I entered upon without refleUion.
I have juff finilhed Roufleau’s Eloifa, my dear friend, and am fo highly pleafed with many parts of it, that I intend giving it a Second perufal.
Unhappy Eloifa ! unfortunate St. Preux! how tenderly were their hearts united, and yet they were Separated! cruel father, to part Such faithful lovers 1 I join with you, my dear Clarifla, in lamenting their haplefs fate,—yet we know not, love has not taught us to know, the extent of their misfortunes.
Sir Charles has given me Several leflbns upon the harpfichord ; he is quite a judge of mufic, and very politely offered me his afliffance, upon my father’s gently blaming me for having but too much negleU-ed it lately. He tells me that I am already improved, and with fuch a master how can it be other wife .?
Adieu, my dearj we are going to Spend the day at Mr Beverly’s, who intends giving his tenants a dinner, and invited us to be prefent at the happy meeting. I am to be mistrefs of the ceremonies, and to entertain the rural dames- Our converfation may not be fo polite as that which paffes in more courtly circles, but it will at least be as interesting. Once more adieu.
Emily Lesley.
LET-
LETTERS.	113
LETTER LXXXVI.
Mifs Lesley to Mifs Howard.
No, no, my dear ClarilTa ; I would not be in love with Sir Charles for the world. Hope-lefs love ! my heart Shudders at the thought,—and mine must be Such j for would Sir Charles Royfton, blest with a perfon fo attraUive, a fortune fo noble, a rank fo exalted, condefcend to think of the poor, the lowly Emily ? No, he cannot, and I ought not to think of it ! Rally me no more therr, I befeech you, upon this topic—it pains—it difpleafes me—-Confcious of the impoffibility—but I will bid adieu to this hateful fubjedt.
“And fo the ’world has already given me Mr Beverly as a lover and pray, what has the impertinent world to do with us ?-1 wilh it would disre-
gard me, as much as I do it. Why will it meddle with thofe who would pafs through it unobferved, when there are fo many bufy reptiles,, who are fond of attiadting its attention ? Mr. Beverly is a most uncommon lover, to leave his mistrefs for near a fortnight, in the beginning of his intanglement too,
before he could be certain of her constancy.-He
and Sir Charles have been in B * * * ever stnce Tuefday fe’nnight, and I know not when they return, (more favourable fymptonrs against the opinion of the world.) They were tired of Solitude, I fup-pofe. Strange ! that no Scenes, however agreeable, can have power to fix the roving inclinations of thefe male animals, whilst we constant turtles find a plea-fure even in things which have no intrinfic advantage, merely becaufe they are habitual to us.
Piay, my dear—-it is an odd question—are you ever crofs, peevifh, distatisfied, you know not why ? difpleafed with every thing }—^just fo am I at this moment—could I but affign Some reafon.—Ill-nature is like a cold ; one wants to find out the caufe, tho’
we
114	LETTERS.
we afterwards think not of a cure, or even a preventative in cafe we are threatened v/ith a return of our diforder.—Ill-nature is a diforder, and the very worst; that can atiend us — but I have neither time nor inclination to add any more, than that 1 am, in fpite of ill-humour, vapours, Szc.
Yours most; fmeerely,.
Emily Llsley.
letter lxxxvii.
From the Same.
My father is writing a letter to your uncle : I fliall therefore indole a few lines in it to my dear Clarista, tliough I have nothing to fay, that is either interesting or entertaining.
Our neighbours are not yet returned to Park-hill; they were expected, it feems, yesterday morning, and my father called in the evening, to pay his compliments to them ; but they were not arrived- Mr; Beverly engaged us, before he went into B * * *, to. dine with him as to-day, it being the anniverfary of his birth day ; but he has forgot that circumstance, I fuppofe ; or if it is remembered, politenefs must be
facrificed, when it interferes with pleafures..-But
why this warmth in a matter of indifference to me ?
You will now indeed fufpeU------but it is imppffible
that you Sliould be mistaken ?
Ah ! what do I hear! Sir Charles’s voice ! yes it is—it is him—my father taps at the door—I know, I know, dear, dear Sir, and am coming immediately-----But why thefe flutteringS'——this palenefs ?
Can my Clarista’s fufpicions be just ? if fo, how have
I deceived myfelf!------but I must sty to welcome
the most amiable of mankind.
*	m	#	»	*■
We dined at Mr. Beverly’s, and are but just returned.----Never was I lefs chearful.--My father
perceived my dejeistion, and tenderly enquired the
caufe}
LETTERS.	M5
caufe ; I complained of a head-ach, but it was my heait only that Suffered. Alas ! my dear friend, I fear, I greatly fear—this unexpeUed arrival has discovered to me ail the weaknefs of my foul.—But do I then really love Sir Charks ? what prefumption ! I blulh to confefs it even to you ; yet do not defpife your Emily! you know not the amiable virtues, the numberlefs attradlions, that have captivated my too fufceptible heart. But oh ? thou unfufpedling viUim, dearly wilt thou pay for thy folly ! thou art doomed to experience all the virtues of unrequited love; for alas 1 my dear Clarilfa, too plainly do 1 fee that Sir Charles beholds your poor friend with the moft cruel indifference. And will not pride afliff: me in conquering a paffion fo mortifying ?
Adieu 1 pity me, I befeech you, and though you blame me, yet love me ffill.
Emily Lesley.
LETTER LXXXVIII.
Sir Charles Royston to Lord Ossory.
WE have been abfent from Park-hill this fortnight. Bufinefs required Mr. Beverly’s prefence in B *■ * * ; and 1 chofe to accompany him in the excurfion. The latter part of our time was wholly devoted to vifiting, and what isfalfly termed pleasure. How did I figh for this fweet retirement !— nothing pleafes me but Solitude ; I detest the impertinent gaiety of the multitude ; the coquetifli airs of the women difgust and fliock me. Ah ! how unlike
the enchanting modesty of my ever adored Lou-
what have I Said ? how unlike the Soft timidity of Emily Leffey ! that amiable maid is worthy the high opinion you have formed of her; every day discovers new proofs of her merit ; I love her with all the tendernefs of a brother ; her friendffiip, her gentle affjduities, calm my troubled foul into tranquillity.
I am
ii6	LETTERS.
I am grateful to heaven for Such ineftimahle friends as I have found at Park-hill, and were you and my Henrietta added to the number, I Should never wilh to quit this abode.
Mr Lesley’s arrival obliges me to bid you adieu ; affuremy beloved filter of my continual atfe£tion---
Mr. Beverly takes the pen--once more adieu.
Charles Royston.
letter LXXXIX.
Mr. Beverly to Lady Ossory.
SIR Charles has acknowledged then, that Mifs Lefley deferves the encomiums your LadyShip bestows upon her, and adds that he loves her -—but how ? with the unimpaffioned tenderneSs of fraternal affeUion only.—— How inadequate this to our wilhes! to mine efpecially, fince I have discovered
----ah ! madam, the 'artlefs Emily is, I fear, too
feiiSible of Sir Charles’s merit; it has excited her esteem, her admiration, her love ; yes, a thoufand circumstances confirm this fufpicion. She has not learnt the modifli art of concealing her emotions ; “ what Slie thinks in her heart, you may read in her eyes.”- —Yet Sir Charles, and even her father, appear infenfible of her fituation.
Her reception of Sir Charles, after our late ab-fence, first attraUed my attention. Our return was unexpeded—what a critical, a trying moment for her ! She endeavoured to welcome him to Park-hill, but could not fpeak without hefitation ; her looks were however fufficientb' intelligible--her eyesfparkled with pleafure, and her cheeks were tinged with the Vermillion of happinefs. She foon recovered herfelf, and with the utmost politenefs paid her ccmpliments to me. As (he felt lejs, flie could fay more ; and an obferving fpectator might have imagined that I was the objedl of her affedion. She
dined
letters.	IJ-I
dined at my houfe that day. Never before had I Seen her fo melancholy ; She Seemed quite abforbed in thought. Mr, Lefley obferved it, and tenderly enquired the caufe. She blufhed at the question, and faintly replied, that stie was not well.
Often did I perceive her looking at Sir Charles, when his eyes were turned another way, and frequently did her lovest bofom heave with involuntary fighs—and will Sir Charles remain long infenfible of Such beauty. Such tendernefs! Can he refufe to reward fo delicate, fo lively a pallion ! My dear Lady Ofibcy, matters are now near a crifis ; I will be explicit with him j the cafe requires it^—you Shall Soon know the refult.
I remain your and Lord Ostbry’s devoted humble Servant,
Edward Beverly.
letter XC.
From the Same.
The conference which 1 mentioned in my last, is now over, and the event has anfwered my ex-peUations, though not my wiihes. l et us not, however, defpair; time may be yet our friend.-But I
will hasten to relate to your Ladyfhip the particulars of our conversation, after having first informed you of the incident which introduced it.
Sir Charles and myfelf Spent the day with a neighbouring gentleman ; and the evening being uncommonly pleafant, we agreed to walk back, and accordingly Sent the Servant home with our horfes. Happening however to be mistaken in tne road, we made up to the nearest cottage we ctould difcover, in order to enquire the dirett way to Park- hill. As we approached the lowly lliade, the noifes intermixed, which refounded thence, did learning’s little tenement betray.’’ We therefore advanced, I ween, with more . cautious step, and beheld where
“ Sat
ti8	LETTERS,
“ Sat the Dame difguis’d in look profound,
“ Who ey’d her fairy throng and turn’d her wheel around,”
She foon perceived us, and with courteous demeanour anfwered all our questions. Obferving that we Surveyed her little abode with a mixture of pleafure and curiofity, stie defired us to walk in and rest our-felves, and to iTiew the Sincerity of her invitation, brought forward a chair for Sir Charles, and yielded up her own imperial feat to me. As I thought it would be too fatiguing a tafk'to contend with one, vvho was So ufed to implicit obedience from all around her, I without ceremony accepted her vacant place.
We entered into conversation about her employment, and found stre had twelve girls, to whom ilie taught the little all (he knew. I a(ked if they were Sent to her by the paristi. “ Oh no, Sir, returned stie hastily ; let them alone for that; this School is Supported by a Lady, a young one too, and the best Sure that ever drew breatli. You know the parfon, continued She, Mr. Lestey: it is his daughter, Mifs Einily I think they call her, who puts thefe poor children under my care } (he comes every week to fee how they improve in their working and reading, and thbfe of them who are good take it by turns to dine at the parfonage of a Sunday. There are few ladies that are fo charitable ; the more’s the pity j. but heaven, I coubt not, will reward her, and fend her a great gentleman for a hulband, with a power of money. That girl, purfued She, pointing to one vvho stood near her, is her God-child, and stie intends to provide for it entirely. She has given it her own name, and is fo good to the little creature, that it is never likely to want its parents, whom God has taken to himfelf- But blefs me, exclaimed stie, starting up hastily and running to the door, if here is not Madam herfelf!’’ She had Scarcely pronounced thefe words when Mifs Lestey entered the room. Her
face
letter S.	IK)
face was oveiSpread with a crimfon biufli as Soon as (he perceived us j and (lie could hardly Speak to Sir Charles, v/ho, with the most eager politeneSs, led her to the chair he had quitted upon her arrival. As Soon as file was Seated, her little God-child approached with dealing dep towards her, and looking up to her Sweet face with the mod innocent dildden'ce. Seemed to beg for thofe attentions it had been uSed to receive from her. She beheld its little actions with the mod tender delight, and took the happy child upon her lap. Never did I See her look So beautiful. Sir Charles-obServed every motion, and his countenance Spoke the tranSports of his heart.
It began to be time for us to withdraw: we offered however to attend MiSs Lestey home; but die, with the utinod politeneSs, declined our propoSal, intending to day at the cottage till Mr. Lefley called for her.
“ What an angelic woman is this ? Said I hastily, as Soon as we were gone ; Surely there never was her equal. How particularly amiable does Ihe appear, when contrasted with tlioSe giddy females we have lately convei fed with !”	“ Mist Lefley’s merit, re-
turned Sir Charles, requires not Such foils to make it appear to advantage. She needs only to be Seen to be admired. I know but one woman in the world, who—but you know her alSo.” “ Upon my word. Sir Charles, interrupted I Smiling, your praiSes are delivered v/ith Such earnedneSs, that though I allow them to be jud, I could almost SuSpeU the occaSicn of them. Is it pofTible, indeed, that you can behold nis (weet creature v/ith indifference ! No, you muii love her, and—“ how, exclaimed he hastily, I love MiSs Lelley 1 I, who have Sustered So cruelly from that fatal pallion! No, no, you were never more deceived. Did I imagine tiiat She could Sup-poSe it, highly as I esteem her, I would never Sec her more ”	“ But the cafe is far different here,
interrupted I, where there are no obstacles to impede the completion of your wisties. Why then fltould your former distreffes prevent your preSent
happineSs ?
!:20	LETTERS.
happinefs? You esteem MiSs Lestey, I know you do, and her virtues must foon Secure your tenderest regard.” “ And why, returned Sir Charles coolly, why, if you are So fenstble of her perfedlions, do you not engage her for yourfelf?” “ Becaufe the attempt would be vain, rejoined I. Had I indeed
your merits, and were I as certain of fuccefs.-
“ What do you mean, Mr. Beverly, exclaimed he ? what reafons can you have for imagining that my addrelTes would be received in preference to your’s ?” “ Ah! Sir Charles, returned I, is it postible that you have not perceived the fituation of her heart Have her fighs, her blusties efcaped your notice ?” “ Forbear, interrupted he in a melancholy tone, and let us quit the fubjedt; if you are not deceived, I cannot be more wretched.” Here the converfalion was concluded, but Sir Charles has been fince dejedl-ed and thoughtful—I will not difpatch this letter till
to-morrow evening.
*****
Sir Charles, as foon as we had breakfasted, pro-pofed taking a walk. We happened to meet Mr. Lestey in our ramble, and went with him to the parfonage. Soon*after a perfon calling there, who had bustnefs with him, he defired me to be prefent during their converfatioa ; by which means Sir Charles was left alone with Mifs Lestey for above an hour. I returned into the parlour to them as foon as postible, imagining that Sir Charles would with for my arrival; I obferved upon entering the room that Mifs Lestey had been weeping. Sir Charles has been more chearful. What must I conjedture from thefe appearances ?
*****
Ah ! Lady Ostbry, what do you think Sir Charles has done ?—only related to the dear Emily his pastion for hirs. Wilmot, and his vows of eternal constancy —I fee too plainly his reafons for adting thus. It was honourable, but—he is charmed with her fenfi-bility. She wept at the melanchcly tale, he fays: alas! how could Ihe do otherwife amiable fufferer!
would
LETTERS.	izi
would to heaven Sir Charles had never arrived to interrupt thy tranquillity !
Your Ladylliip will join with me in lamenting the undeferved diftrefles of the lovely Emily,
I am, with my most refpeftful devoirs to Lord OfTory,
Your obedient Servant,
Edward Beverly.
LETTER^ XCI.
Mifs Lesley to MiSs Howard.
All is over, my dear Clarifla, and your wretched friend is left without the Smallest: ray of hope. Sir Charles loves—he tenderly loves but not your Emily. Yet the objeU; of his affeftion is torn from him for ever'; united to one who was indifferent to her, file Sacrificed her own peace, to Save her father from ruin : how noble her conduft !•-could
your Emily have aUed thus ? Sir Charles vows never to know a Second attachment; he made me his confidante ; I wept at the relation of his Sufferings- Ah ! perhaps he meant, by this recital, to crufh my af-piring hopes. Yes. he has perceived my weakneSs, and pity prompted him to make this diScovery of his
Sentiments.-Good heavens, how am I fallen !—•
could I but recal the past—but it is now too late for repentance. How have I deSpiSed thoSe giddy females, who receive the addreffes of every admirer, without feeling a partiality for any! Happy, thrice happy, had it been for your Emily, if (he had pof-Seffed this indifference.
My father Sees my dejeftion, but imputes it to the illneSs of my Godmother, Lady ForteScue. Ah ! I would Sooner die than have him gueSs the real caufe. And is it then postible that your Emily, who valued herSelf upon her implicit confidence in the best of parents, stiould have emotions which stie wisties to conceal from his observation ? Alas! Sir VoL. I.	G	Charles,
122	LETTERS.
Charles, is it not enough that you have robbed me of my tranquillity ? must; you alfo deprive me of the fweet confcioufnefs of having adted right ?
A How foon does the indulgence of any predominant paffion interfere with the performance of our duty, and render us indifferent to thofe purfuits, which once constituted our greatest happinefs ?
Farewel, my dear Clarilfa ; may you never have reafon to defpife yourfelf; for believe me, the greatest evil the heart can experience, arifes from felf-con-demnation.
Emily Lesley,
LETTER XCII.
Mr.'Beverly to Lord Ossory.
I Have been witnefs of a dlfcovery which has af-fedled me fo deeply, that I cannot forbear imparting it to your Lordstiip j I know the tender heart of Lady Ostbry will be touched with the recital, and She will love the dear Emily more than ever.
Sir Charles and myfelf dined to-day at Mr. Lest-ley’s. The good man was however obliged to leave us immediately after dinner, and in the afternoon Mifs Lefley accompanied us in one of our rural walks. As we were returning, we were Suddenly caught in a violent storm of thunder and lightning. Mifs Lefley v/as ready to fink with terror, and it was with Some difficulty that we got her home. As foon as stie entered the houfe, stieliinkdown lifelefs upon a chair that stood near her. We ran to her aflist-ance, but all our endeavours to recover her were in-effeftual. The Servant recolledting that her mistrefs always carried a bottle of drops in her pocket, eagerly Searched for it ; but taking it out in a hurry jhe drew out along with it a little black cafe, which fell open upon the ground- Sir Charles took it up ; but, good heavens! what was his astonifhment, when he perceived in it a portrait of—himfelf! He
turned
LETTERS.	123
turned as pale as death, and had Scarcely power to bid the Servant put the cafe again into her mistrefs’s pocket. Soon after Mifs Lefley opened her eyes, and in a little lime recovered her fenfes. We left her not, however, till Mr. Lefley returned to the par-fonage. Never had I beheld Sir Charles fo abforbed in melancholy. We walked fome way before either of us fpoke a word; at last, “ My dear Sir Charles, exclaimed I, how must your generous heart be af-fefted at fuch a lively proof of Mifs Lefley’s tender-nefs for you ?”	“ Mention it not, returned he figh-
ing—it has indeed distrefled me ; unfortunate wretch that I am, to be unable to return her affeCtion ! ah ! Louifa never loved me as Emily does 1” Here he stopt, and I was fo touched with his grief, that I could only endeavour to confole him.
I must now conclude, but will begin another letter to-morrow; mean-while I am, with all due re-fpefls, your Lordfliip’s obedient fervant,
Edward Beverly.
LETTER XCIII.
From the Same-
^ IR Charles is preparing to leave Park-hill, and O though T regret his intention, yet I cannot disapprove of it.
He came into my chamber yesterday morning before I was up. “ My dear Beverly, faid he in a dejefled tone, I have formed a refolution, which you cannot, I think, condemn, I intend to leave Park-hill ; after the difcovery I have made, honour requires my immediate departure. 1 will pretend that unexpected bufinels calls me to town, and I intend fetting off the beginning of next week at farthest,” “ Oh, the poor Emily, exclaimed I—and must I then lofe you, my dear Sir Charles, purfued I, embracing him ? how (hall I regret your ab-fence ?”
G 2	We
124 LETTERS.
We agreed to go to Mr. Lefley’s to breakfast:; but found ordy Mifs Lestey at home. She received us with a pleafure that gave additional brilliancy to her lovely eyes. Never had Sir Charles addrefed her with fuch tenderncfs ; I faw the struggles in his generous foul, and felt little lefs than he did-Sir
Charles foon after, with Some hesttation, informed her of his intended journey. He coloured as he fpoke; and though his words were direfted to her, his eyes were fixed upon the floor. I did not look at her for Some moments ; at length, however, I ventured to steal a glance ; but, good heavens ! how was I affeUed ! her countenance was as pale as death. She attempted to fpeak, but her voice faltered ; and for Some time, we all preferved a filence more eloquent than words.	,
We foon after took our leave, and departed with a concern, which could only be exceeded by that the lovely Emily experienced.
Sir Charles is writing to Lady OITory, to .inform her of his.return.
I am your’s, &c.
Edward Beverly.
LETTER XCIV.
Mr. Lesley to Lady Fortescue.
I Received, with the greatest pleafure, the agreeable intelligence of your Ladylhip’s recovery.
May heaven grant you many additional years of life, v.dth the continuance of thofe bleflings, which can alone render it valuable to the polTestbr!
J am truly grattiul to your Ladylhip for your kind invitation of my daughter tc Claremont, and heartily wifli She had acicyttcl it. A change of Scene might perhaps efface—but I will be explicit—the friendship your Lacyfliip honouis me wdlh demands my unlimited
LETTERS.	125
limited confidence, and your difcretlon renders every trust unquestionably fecure.
Report has conveyed to you an idea of the perfections of Sir Charles Royston. You were charmed with his charaUer, but his merit is Superior to all praife. V/ould to heaven he had polTeffed fewer attradlions, or that my Emily had been lefs fufcepti-ble! Could I but hope that Sir Charles returned her affeUion, 1 were the happiest of men; but alas! I can find no room for Such a flattering profpeft. Is it not then neceflfary to fly from this dangerous Spot ? to bid Sir Charles an eternal adieu ? Oh ! my child, cruel is .the talk j but prudence requires the facrificei V Yes, Madam, we will attend you at Claremont ; • ' happy, if,in your maternal bofom, my beloved Emily can recover her tranquillity.
"S T congratulate your Ladyiliip upon Sir Edward’s intention of re-vifiting his native country. With what transport will you embrace him after fo long an abfence !
My Emily knows not that I write to your Lady-fliip, or flie would add her refpetlful devoirs to thofe of, dearest Madam,
Your obedient and faithful
Humble Servant,
Francis Lesley.
LETTER XCV.
Lady Fortescue to Mr. Lesley.
Ah ! the dear Emily, bow do I commiSerate her fituation ! delay not, I befeech you, your journey to Claremont. Every moment is now of importance. But I fhall write to the dear child, and repeat my invitation : I know her gentle heart had rather Suffer pain itfelf, than infliU it upon others ; and I fliall therefore tell her (and with truth) that my happinefs depends upon her compliance.
G 3	Ye.s,
126 LETTERS.
Yes, my worthy friend, in a few months I Shall embrace once more my long abfent Edward. How impatient am I for that pleafure ! Yet, alas ! I dread the confequences of his arrival. That wretched wife of his will ftiil, I fear, disturb his repofe ; lost as stie is to every fentiment of honour, and still fondly attached to that vile Belton, for whofe fake She abandoned her too amiable hulband. Who could have imagined that fo fair a form concealed fo debated a mind .? Or that a woman of Such elevated rank would stoop to be guilty of fuch vices, which even poverty would Shrink at }
Why, oh ! why did my ciuel hufband force our young and unexperienced child into fuch an engagement !---Must ambition be gratified at the ex-
pence of every other emotion of the foul! Had he been the fon of a peafant, be might have enjoyed that tranquillity, to which he is now a stranger.— He had not then been compelled to fix as interest direUed ; merit alone had determined his choice, and contentment had made ample amends to him for the abfence of grandeur.
It is not above a month ago fince this deceitful woman had the effrontery to write me a letter ; filled with complaints against Mr. Freeman, a coufin of jher’s, who remits to her the money that my fon annually allows her. I wrote to him, and inclofed her letter ; but found, by his anfwer, that it was an artifice of her’s to excite my compastion, and by that means to procure herfelf Some pecuniary advantages. Ah ! what ought stre to hope for from a tender mother, who fees the objeft of her fondest care a wretched wanderer through her means ! no,, no j fuch generofity would be weaknefs.
I am, with thelincerest esteem, dear Sir, Your affedtionate friend,
Marianne Fortescue.
; 2	LET-
r
LETTERS.	IZ7
LETTER XeVI.
Sir Charles Royston to Lord Ossory.
I Have only time to inform you, that an unexpeU-ed incident prevents my being at Windfor at the time prcpofed. You may however depend upon hearing from me previous to my journey.
As 1 am fearful, that this delay may excite Some anxious fufpicions in the tender breast of Henrietta, asture her that I am in perfed health, and that friend-fliip alone detains me at Park-hill.
1 am, my dear OlTory, your
Charles Royston.
LETTER XCVIL
Mr. Beverly to Lord OssoRY.
AS I knew that Sir Charles had Informed your LordShip of his intention of remaining here Some time longer, I imagined that he had alfo acquainted you with the occafion of this unexpeded refolution ; but from your letter I find that I was mistaken. It is however eafy to guefs the reafon of his Silence, and your LordShip will concur with me in this opinion, when I tell you that it is the illnefs of Mifs Lefley which detains him at Park-hill. The dear Emily has been confined to her chamber Several days, and was in the beginning of her diforder imagined to be m danger, but^ her lever is greatly abated, though She continues very much indifpofed. To exprefs the grief of Sir Charles upon this event, is impoffible ; I verily believe that he could not have felt more for his Louifa. The emotion however would have been different: in the former cafe, his tendernefs only had Suffered ; but here, gratitude, G 4	pity.
128 LETTERS.
pity, every gentle fenfation, united to complete his wrerchednefs.
Having received yesterday a favourable account of MiSs Lefley’s Situation, we called in the afternoon to coug,ratulate Mr. Lefley upon this happy event. The Servant informing us that he was abfent, we were going to withdraw, after having left our compliments to Mils Ledey, when hernurfe came hastily down stairs, and acquainted us, that her mistrefs, hearing of cur arrival, was delirous of feeing us, as She imagined that Sir Charles was come to take his leave ol her father, previous to his journey. We could not refufe her request, but Sir Charles looked at me with a dejedted countenance, which feemed to fay, “ alas ! what a trial have I to undergo!”
Mifs Lefley received us with a faint glow of plea-fure on her lovely face. I exprelTed my happinefs at the amendment of her health. Sir Charles too faid Something to the fame effedl, but I believe the compliment was Scarcely intelligible. His looks fpoke the Sentiments of his foul: pity and even ten-dernels were imprinted in his countenance. But, alas, how was the dear Emily changed ! the fine bloom, that ufed to overfpread her cheeks, had given place to a deadly palenels ; her eyes had lost all that lustre, whichonce gave them fuch animation : yet methought the languid foftnefs, which was diffufed over her fweet features, Served to render them more peculiarly enchanting.
Soon after we were Seated, MiSs Lefley alked Sir Charles when he left Park-hill ; to which he replied, that a late alteration in his affairs had made him rather uncertain in regard to the time, but that he believed he fhould not go at prefent. With what pleasure did stie receive this intelligence ! yet how did the dear creature attempt to conceal .her joy ! Sir Charles Saw the tender struggle, and beheld her with a look of gratitude and affeUion, which did not escape my notice* When we came away, stie gently thanked us for our vifit, and added Something in a foft voice about feeing us again.
I am
LETTERS.	129
I am obliged to conclude abruptly, with my re-fpedls to Lady OITory.
Your’s, &c.
Edward Beverly.
LETTER XCVIII.
LadyOssoRY to Sir Charles Royston.
Yes, my dear brother. Mr. Beverly has indeed informed us of Mifs Lefley’s fituatibn, and no words can defcribethe grief it has occafioned in our hearts. I have imparted to my Louifa (who is now in town) the particulars of the affeUing tale, as related to me by your amiable friend. How did her tender mind receive the cruel intelligence ? She is even oppressed with anguilh. But fhe will herfelf exprefs to you the emotions of her foul. Let me conjure you, my dear Sir Charles, to listen to her perfuassons, which are didlated by the most exalted friend strip.
Can you, who have fo keenly felt the pangs of hope-lefs love, inssidl thofe pangs upon another } Exert all your fortitude ; the greater the trial, the more glorious the vidlory. Ah! how great would be the tranfport of your Henrietta, could She fee you once more restored to happinefs, and enjoying the tender, the exquifite delights, which arife from virtuous love !
----My Ostbry joins with equal earnestnefs in thefe
wistres.—I ressgn the pen to our beloved Louifa.
“ Is it poffible that Sir Charles can refufe to gratify the ardent wistres of his friends} that he can fufer the most amiable of her fex to become the victim of hopelefs love, and bring down the grey hairs of her venerable parent to the grave with Sorrow ?
----Can any regret, which would arife from an
union with Mifs L ssey, be equal to the horrors attending fuch a retrofpcbt }-Your tender ssster is
affebled, beyond defcription, at the recital of the dear Emily’s fufferings. Lord Ossbry’s concern is little G 5	inferior
130	LETTERS.
inferior to her’s. I confider myfelf as the fatal caufe of all this wretchcdnefs- It is in your power to re-llore our tranquillity, and will you rsfufe to do it ? Shall an unlawful pallion obliterate all the rights of friendlhip, and render you indifferent to the Soft fen-fations of fraternal love ? Prove your affeUion for me, my dear friend, by a compliance with my wifhes, and believe me I will never forget your gene-rofity.
“ The lovely, the amiable Emily deferves your undivided heart. Let her then obtain the precious gift, and by a noble effort Secure your future felicity, and acquire the warmest gratitude of your friends. Adieu, my dear Sir Charles ; I have Said enough to
foften your heart.-Yet after all—but you cannot
long remain infenSible of fuch merit ; no, you must love her, and I doubt not but you will be happy.
Louisa Wilmot."
LETTER XCIX.
Mr. Beverly to Lord Ossory.
I Was fitting with Sir Charles at breakfast, when Lady Offory’s letter was brought to him. He opened it with a look of pleafure, but, at the fight of Mrs. Wilmot’s hand, the colour forfook his cheeks.
From my Louifa! exclaimed he hastily, in a tone of Surprize andconfufion—can it really be from her ! —but wherefore does five write to me—to me whom She loves no longer, and whom I belieye fhe had forgotten ?”—She has indeed forgot ipe, purfued he fighing. A union with MifsLestey !—and does my Louifa, can Ihe wifh it!—ungrateful! Prove my affedtion for her by marrying another !—ah ! would that be a proof?—perfidious woman! — too vifible, alas, has been the regard thou . ast thus recompensed I Read her letter, my dear friend, rejoined he, and tell me if you could have believed that Louifa would have acted thus?” “ My dear Sir
Charles,
letters.	131
Charles, returned I, after having finished it, you accule Mrs. Wilmot wrongfully. Her request ariSes from friendstiip towards yourfelst and compaffion for a woman who deferves a better fate. But read her letter again, and allow that you have condemned her unjustly.”
He gave the letter a Second perufal. His anger vanilhed. He could not restrain his tears. He rofe precipitately, and having begged me to excnfe his abfence for a few moments, he immediately withdrew.
About an hour after he joined me in the garden. He Said little, and Seemed studiousty to avoid the fubjedt we had just quitted.—His dejeftion tenderly affedts me—I can no longer perfist in a request, which Serves only to torment him. Dear and amiable Sir Charles, thy afFedlionate Beverly is keenly fenfible of thy grief; I will no more disturb thy re-pofe by again mentioning the evil thou lamentest.
* * * * *
Ah ! my dear Lord Ostbry, our wiShes will yet be gratified?—the dear Emily will yet be happy.— But I am impatient to relate to you the particulars
of this unexpetsted change-the agitation of my
mind allowing me no repofe till this morning, I lay in bed very late. Soon after I arofe the Servant entered my room, with Sir Charles’s apologies for not waiting upon me at breakfast, as he was engaged in writing Some letters, which he wanted to finith, I did not interrupt him till near dinner time, when, being impatient to fee him, I went up to his chamber, and giving a gentle tap at the door, was immediately admitted. I Saw by his looks that he had no rest the preceding night, and his breakfast stood near him untouched. I was beginning to chide him for the little care he took of his health, when he interrupted my difcourfe : “ My dear Beverly, Said he with a deep figh, do not upbraid me. I am endeavouring to render myfelf worthy your friendstiip. I have hitherto fought only the gratification of my ■
own
132	LETTERS.
own whiles, wheieas I ought to have been indifferent of every thing that related to my wretched Self.
I had determined never to know a Second attachment, but to pafs the remainder of my life in deploring the cruelty of my fate.-My friends forbid
the defign, and urge me to enter into an engagement, which trom the virtues of the lovely Emily, they imagine, will be produdive of the greatest; felicitv ; and your unhappy Royfton, who fees every objed thro’ the mists of prejudice, ought not perhaps to determine for himfelf. However my own welfare is nothing. I feel only for Mifs Lestey. Can She who poffestes fuch fenfibility, fuch exquifite tendernefs, be Satisfied with the attentions of politenefs, or the coldnefs of esteem ? Ah! would it not be an infult to offer to fuch merit, a man who is of all others the most unworthy of her acceptance F “ No, no, my dear Sir Charles, returned I eagerly. She would
receive your addreSTes with gratitude, with joy-
I know She would. Mr. Lestey too! how happy would it make him ! befides, Mifs Lestey knows of your attachment to Mrs. Wilmot,and therefore cannot accufe you of deceit. What pleafure will your kind acquiescence excite in the bofom of her friends? Mrs. Wilmot will now fee how worthy you are of her esteem, and you will become dearer to her than
ever.^---You will enjoy happinefs by diffufing it
to others.---“ Yes, Beverly, faid he, hastily in-
terrupting me, Louifa will now be convinced of the greatnefs of my afifedion for her—I Sacrifice the first wisti of my foul—1 relinquish for ever—but 1 obey
her—and it is enough.----Yet I must be allowed
fome time to Subdue entirely my ungovernable heart, for I will not, continued he, enter into the most Solemn of all engagements, until I am more able to
perform its duties.’’--Excellent young man ! fuch
virtue must be the peculiar care of heaven.
Sir Charles fends to acquaint me, that he is now going to difpatch his letters to town ; 1 must therefore
LETTERS.	133
fore Subscribe myfelf your LordShip’s affeftlonate and devoted humble Servant,
Edward Beverly.
LETTER C.
Mr. Beverly to Lord Ossory.
WE dined yesterday at Mr. Lefley’s. Mifs Lest ley came down stairs to tea, for the Second time only, fince her late illneSs. She still looks very poorly, but fays, “ that stie recovers her health daily.’’ I believe, after all, that Sir Charles will be the best phySician—he can cure by a word,—but we must not be too impatient—it is enough that he has consented to gratify our wifhes ; the time must be left to himSelf.
Sir Charles placed himfelf upon the Soplja, where Mifs Lefley was Seated, and inquired with the utmost anxiety after her health. His attentions Seemed to give her the highest delight; but Mr. Lefley appeared differently affeded by them, though he endeavoured to conceal his emotions.
He afked Sir Charles, in the courfe of conversation, when we were to lofe him from Park-hill.-
He replied, that the buSinefs which he imagined would have called him to town being fettled without ' his prefence, he believed he stiould remain in the country Some time longer. Mr. Lefley received this intelligence with a difquietude which he could not entii'ely SuppreSs. He cast his eyes upon Emily.— Joy was painted on her countenance; his'dejedtion increased : I beheld with tender pity, the struggles , of parental affedtion, and wistred that moment to have the eclaiiciffeinent made, which would at once have diSpelled every fear.
After tea, Mr- Lefley advifed his daughter to return to her chamber. She made Some trifling excufes that stiewed her unwillingnefs to leave the company ; but upon his foon after re-urging the request, She
immediately
134	LETTERS.
immediately complied. Sir Charles offered to Support her to her room. With what pleaSure did (he receive his propoSal! When we were Seated, I congratulated Mr. Lefley upon the great amendment in Mifs Lefley’s health, ^nd found by his reply, that he intended going with ner to Claremont, (the feat of her God-mother, the Dowager Lady Fonefcue) as foon as ffae could bear the fatigue of the journey, to try if change of air would not intirely re eftablilh. it.
I mentioned to Sir Charles, as we were returning, the pain I had felt at obferving Mr. Lefley’s agitations, upon hearing of his intention of remaining at Park-hill. Sir Charles had likewifefeen his emotions upon that occaflon, as well as the dejeUion which had appeared in his countenance throughout the day. The caufe of his grief could not efcape us: it was, alas! but too apparent. “ In a little time, faid Sir Charles fighing, his difquletudes will ceafe ; but how wretched is he, whofe mifery is abfolutely incurable F
* * * * *
Sir Charles came into my room early this morning.
I faw by his looks that he had fomething to communicate to me. He feated himfelf by the bed fide.— “ My dear Beverly, faid he, my determination is
fixed---1 can no longer fuppori the fight of Mr.
Lefley’s diffrefs. The filent grief of that venerable and best: of men, has affedted me beyond expreflion. I will peftore his tranquillity, though at the expence of my own.—It is a trial—but my life has been nothing elfe--1 will fee you when I return. I chufe
this early hour, becaufe I would avoid the fight of Mifs Lefley—avoid the fight of her who will flaortly perhaps become—but it muff be fo—Farewel, faid he retiring precipitately, as if fearful of not preferv-ing his prefent fortitude, till the arduous time of its exertion was come.
* # * # »
Sir
r
LETTERS.	135
Sir Charles was quite unrestrved with Mr. LeSley. He informed him of his regard for Mrs. Wilmot, and of the cruel incident which had deprived him of every hope—of the intention he had formed of remaining in his prefent lituation, but that his friends, who deferved from him every conceOion, had dif-fuaded him from Such a refolution—and he knew no one fo worthy of Succeeding Mrs. Wilmot in his affection, as the amiable Mifs Lefley, if flie would conde-fcend to accept of a heart, which had been avowedly in the poffellion of another.
Mr. Lefley was at first: unable to exprefs his joy at this unexpeUed declaration ; but as foon as be had a little overcome his emotions, he poured forth the
rapture of his foul.-Heaven grant that the event
may be anfwerable to our willies!-1 remain, with
proper compliments to Lady Oflbry,
Your Ladyfliip’.s obedient ^	Humble Servant,
Edward Beverly.
LETTER	CL
From the Same.
I Accompanied Sir Charles yesterday afternoon to Mr. Lefley’s. With what fweet confufion did the lovely Emily receive hiiii !—His agitations were
at least equal to her own.--I pitied them both at
that aukward juncture.--After tea, I defired Adr.
Lefley tofliew me Some alterations he had been lately making in his garden. He immediately obeyed the Summons, and Sir Charles was left alone with Mils . Lefley. I fliall give your Lordfhip the particulars of their converfation, as I had them from Sir Charles. The gentle Emily received the declaration of his fen-timents with a modesty that failed not to render him more affured, and to excite in his heart the most favourable
136	LETTERS.
vourable emotions towards her.—“ That I love you, Sir Charles, returned She with a hefitating voice, has been, I fear, but too apparent. Educated in innocent fimplicity, I have not learned the modifliart of difguifing my feelings. Your rank and fortune (which Seemed indeed to place infuperable bars to the completion of my wiilies) had no Share in exciting the regard I acknowledged to have conceived for
you-----it was your virtues alone that conquered my
heart. Yet, Sir Charles, highly as I esteem your generous offer, a fenfe of my unworthinefs, and a
fear----here She paufed : but Sir Charles begging
her to proceed----(lie rejoined, “ may I then hope,
that the humble Emily is indeed dear to you ?——— that you can return her affection .?—for if, with your hand, you can bestow your heart, I fliall receive it
as the richest gift of heaven ”-“ N ble, exalted
Emily ! returned Sit Chrrles, touched at this proof of her affedtion, is it pofiihle that fuch merit can be beheld with indifference—it strall be the study of my life to deferve voui tenderne.fs, and to repay it with
equal ardour.”----“ Enough, enough, Sir Charle.s,
exclaimed Slie ; every doubt is Satisfied—and Emily is yours for ever-’’ Sir Charles Seized her hand, and
preffed it to his lips.-At that moment Mr. Lefiey
opened the doer.----This tender parent was fearful,
that the interesting difeovery might too povv^erfully affedt the delicate frame of his beloved child, and therefore interrupted the conversation. Mifs Lefiey blufhed at her father’s entrance. Her hand was still in Sir Charles’s. The good man preffed them both to his delighted bofem. “ Ah, my Emily, faid he in a tone of rapture, what a fight is this for a tender
parent I----Dear Sir Chatles, how happy have you
made me !-----Be it your study, my child, to repay
his generofity----and may heaven blefs you both!”
Here his voice faltered, but his countenance declared the transport of his heart more forcibly than language could have done.
I joined in their felicity, and in a half whifper,
unobserved
r
LETTERS.	137
unobserved by them, I exprelTed to Sir Charles 1117 approbation of his conduU.
My refpenful devoirs attend Lady Ostbry.
I am, with the utmost: stncerity,
Your Lordfhip’s obedient.
And faithful humble Servant,
Edward Beverly,
LETTER CII.
Mrs. WiLMOT to Mifs Sydney.
Yes, my dear Harriet, I confefs that this proof of Sir Charles’s tendernefs has deeply afFedted me. Alas ! had he known what it cost me to make
the request---but ought I not to have made it,—
convinced, as I was, of the merits of the lovely Emily, and touched at the recital of a pastion fo delicate, fo unfortunate ?-had I been with-held by
any felfifh consideration, I had defpifed myfelst Sir Charles is formed for domestic life, and the tendernefs and prudence of the amiable Mifs Lestey feem to promife a certainty of future happinefs to both;—of	happinefs, I fay, becaufe it cannot
be expedled that Sir Charles will be able to Subdue at once thofe imprestions, which your Louifa, fo vainly, alas 1 excited in his heart*
As to niyfelst misfortunes have purified my mind ;
•---excluded from all hopes of felicity in this world,
I am taught to look beyond it Adverfity then has been a friendly, though an unwelcome guest; — its evils are tranfitory, its blefli; gs eternal. Yet there are moments — but we v.dll change the fubjedl.—— Lady Sydney must not inr.igine, that my refufa! of her invitaticn into Estex, proceeds from want of inclination to vifir friends fo de.'.r tome ; nor will Ilie, I hope, fufpedlthat I have no good motives to allign fo;^ my conduct, becaufe I do not acquaint her with them : Silence is often a duty.
In
138	L E T. T E R S.
In the company*.of my beloved Henrietta, and her amiable Lord, I experience a never failing Source of confolation, against the ills which fometimes op-prefs my heart. Happy pair ! what uninterrupted felicity attends them ! Good heavens ! why was your
wretched friend----but v. here is that fortitude, of
which I just now fo vainly boasted ? Alas ! my beloved Harriet, how difficult is it to know one’s Self!
Adieu.	Louisa WiLMOT.
letter cm.
Mr. Beverly to Lord Ossory.
I Found your Lordfhip’s letter at Park-hill, whither we returned yesterday, after having been abfent from it near three weeks.-Sir Charles ac-
quainted you with the obliging invitation we received from Lady Fortefcue to vifit Claremont, with Mr. and Mifs Lefley.—We were at that delightful fpot above a fortnight. Both Sir Charles and myfelf
are charmed with Lady Fortefcue.----She is every
thing that Is excellent and good.—Her behaviour to my friend was more than polite j it was affetlionate; Ihe confidered him as the declared lover of one, whom ihe regards with the fond anxiety of maternal tender-nefs.
From Claremont we went to Bath, and Spent Some days with a Mr. Howard, whofe niece is Emily’s most Intimate friend : the young Lady returned with
us to Park-hill.---The excurfion has been of the
greatest Service to Mifs Lefley, who is become more blooming and beautiful than ever; and even Sir . Charles feemed pleafed with the tour, and declared to me that he, had not, for a long time, pasted his hours fo agreeably.
The prefence of Mifs Howard is highly beneficial —no perfon can be dejefted long in her company— She draws Sir Charles from ihofe reveries, in which he appears fometimes lost.
A Scheme
f	- '
^	LETTERS.. 139
A Scheme of pleafure is propofed, the party fixed, and every care is forgptten.
Mifs Howard was this morning exprefllng her wKhes, that the union between Sir Charles and Mifs Lefiey, might take place durihg her vifit at Park-hiil, Emily caft down her eyes with the utmost contufion ; Sir Charles coloured at this unexpected declaration of Mifs Howard’s, which friendfiiip had inadvertently
extorted from her-----She foon obferved, by what
pasted, that She had aCted wrong, and by her modest blusthes atoned for the error-
Mr. Lestey interrupts me------he finds that I am
writing to your Lordstiip, and defires me to add his refpeCtful compliments to yourfelf and Lady Ostbry. Mine attend you ever.
Edward Beverly. END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
’V. \
' ■ * :- • ■ . ■■ ' '1 -.'Cf c-';.	.1
A *
*	. y 'i .
/	'	*	, . - ;	V ^ u i Ik-	.	^
j	-	■
V	-V.	-
••■•	0 ,c‘ , _	>• _:;. / . ->
^ -V ;, ; :v;. :	. . -N-_	j
' ^\:,:S i
!
PA-'- L:
rp'	•
*
disinterested love.
i
I
I
■ I
K -.avoj aaTaanaTHKia 1
'"''	■ ' i
S'"	'•*,	^
it' ■	‘
Sr-
■/" N'Cv. -^.’■,' ■	**	■■ ■
V-	.	„■-- .,;i;*.L -	,	^--	;!_'J
,	. a.',■■•:	' ■■-,	■	-• LS
DISINTERESTED LOVE:
I	O R, T H E
HISTORY
O F
Sir CHARLES ROYSTON,
AND
EMILY LESLEY:
IN A SERIES OF
LETTERS.
VOLUME THE SECOND.
DUBLIN:
Printed for S. Price, D. Chamberlaine, J. Hoey, W. Whitestone, J. Sheppard, S. Watson,
J. Potts, W. Watson, J. Williams,
W. CoLLEs, W. Wilson, R. Cross,
T. Armitage, T. Walker, E.
Cross, R. Moncriepfe, C.
Jenkin, M, Mills, and T. Wilkinson.
M.DCC.LXXVI.
O '	■ ,N?-' .i. * ttFr.r' 'A'f\
t -	i {
p.	KNr^^N-t’
I- ' X' ve/::-L-f<:rr	/-.-nst r>;? ' i;\.
V..	.•	.0/r/n'iTfe' /■/.*	k/
f. - T 5,0X«.»‘» /. • //;■•'•-■•-^* V 7/. UTIV-5':*
/A-'^' ';■ " !; f f,’-K A V >’ '■■''■>■■'*
j^L-N	L i	-•■'V*	.	■’-’
’ '■	''te' -Si r I AF ■'■	■ -
• ■ - • ■	;	'’■ V ' ■	.	■ y
Komzf, i ns: -krcsyt^D*
.,	..:_____::a;..	____*. .
•T^	■5'''	'T	1	' tA	' ■ - r '
-i f	is	-J^	i	'jf,	.	D
■ ■ ■ ,.
. •; • I w V a -K L' 11; 2 o fc • "
■ . ;■■■■; E,.^i IVL ."‘T F sj; a;’	'
V	r.' ■	^ V S
r. A A K - r a: ii 'S":" s'' •' •'
O L :, '	, ■	.	.	■	, .
l:i	i	;<	X	r'i	IS
jf;	■	.	■ /- rf‘ j- V. --.	.
I ]V8lX.i.H'A> .Lir:r; ro/C: - v/
..	. r, »	. y .	.	,	-
r
L E T T E R S,
LETTER CiV.
Mr. Beverly to Lord Ossory.
UNEXPECTED buSineSs obliges me to leave
Park-hill, and to vifitmy estate in N-(hire.
How long I stiall be detained there is at prefent uncertain ; but your Lordstiip will readily believe, that I stiall Seize the first opportunity of returning to this beloved fpot.
Sir Charles is extremely chagrined at my departure. He propofed accompanying me ; but this I immediately objedled to ; and he, with a deep figh, allowed the impropriety of the request.
The gentle Emily stiares in the grief of her beloved Charles, and, by her kind attentions, endeavours to restore his tranquillity.
I am to write every week to Sir Charles, and he intends anfwering my letters with equal exaUnefs— yet I leave him with regret ; but I am a woman upon thefe occafions.
I intend writing to your Lordstiip upon my arrival
in N-----Shire, and Shall with pleafure continue
a correspondence fo agreeable to ray wiShes.
My best compliments wait on Lady Ostory.
I am, with the greatest refpeU,
Your Lordship’s obedient Servant, Edward Beverly.
VoL. II,	B	L E T-
146	LETTERS.
LETTER CV.
Mifs Howard to Lady Fortescue .
Your Ladylhlp will Scarcely believe, that I have for this week, been tempted to make love to Mifs Lefley,—and why at this juncture particularly, you Say ? Why, for the very reafon that half the pretty fellows of this age make love——out of idle-
nefs--for want of other and better employment.
Mr. Beverly has left Park-hill j Sir Charles is engaged
with his Emily ; and my good man and I-what
mull we do?--But no, I will not be in love neither
—I am an avowed enemy to that wicked paflion, which has almost • robbed me of the heart of my dearest Emily—yet Ihe is offended at my fufpicions, and declares that I am more tenderly beloved by her than ever. Can I believe this ?
I have been rallying Sir Charles upon the melancholy, which has been vifible in his countenance ever Since Mr. Beverly’s departure.—But Emily took his part with all the eagernefs of love, and Sir Charles thanked her by a gentle prelTure of the hand.
And how is our fweet friend, your Ladyffiip alks ? why, more blooming and happy than ever
---“ for her Shepherd is kind, and her heart is at
eafe.’’
Mr. Lefley calls me to take a walk with him-1
must therefore fubfcribe myfelst Your Lady Blip’s
Obedient Servant,
Clarissa Howard.
LET-
LETTERS.	147
letter CVI.
Mifs Freelove to Mifs Sydney-
WHAT, ftill chiding, Harriet ?-------------- why will
you not let me manage “ Poor Mr. Elvin as I pleafe ?” the man is delighted with my veracity, and if I do, now and then, go too far, a gracious Smile Sets all to rights again—ought he not to efteem it a favour, that I will condefcend to trifle with him thus ?—But as your uncle confents to the attachment, why is the union delayed, youalk ? My dear girl, be not hasty ; fee you not an Indecorum in thefe ready alTents, and will my Harriet advife her Charlotte to be guilty of a breach of delicacy ? She that is too eafily won, is as eafily defpifed—nothing is valued long, that is hastily obtained ;—thefe are excellent maxims, child : I leave them fo your consideration.
And fo you regret the long vifit I have made at Lady Bab Dormer’s—what reafon can you have for difliicing a woman, whom the heau ntonde fo highly extol }—Is virtue incompatible with grandeur } and. must we feelc her only in retirement ? — Virtue is an
afiive quality, and it is in Society alone-but how
came I to moralize thus—Oh ! I forgot to chide you. Harrier, in my last letter—^confefs that you had been instilling Some of your grave advice into the mind of my honoured uncle, previous to his feeing me in town. The old gentleman was very obferving, tenacious, and fo forth •, and had I not called a few tears to my afllstance, and promifed to be particularly civil and all that to Mr, Elvin, I had alTuredly been obliged to have returned with him to the Thorns.-
And you ought voluntarily to have done this, me-thinks you anfwer. Why, child, he has got his favourite Mr. Norton to stay with him, and they play back-gammon, and are fo happy !—that my prefence B 2	would
14S	LETTERS.
would only Interrupt their felicity, and you know I hate to be an intruder.
But Lady ElFex is below-this is an unufual
favour. I must therefore receive it accordingly-. —• Adieu ! I hasten to attend her Ladyfliip.
Duty, love,, &c. to all the friends of your
Charlotte Freelove.
LETTER evil.
Lord OssoRY to Mr- Beverly,
My dear Beverly, what emotions will this letter occastonyou .?—Ah ! could we have forefeen —but it is now, alas ! too late—I will hasten to the relation of the event, which has put us all in confu-fion, .and occastoned an univerfal fadnefs.
Mrs. Wibnot came yesterday to Windfor. Mr. Wilmot was gone to * * * * hut promifed to be with us by dinner, and we accordingly waited for him till near five o’clock, when Mrs. Wilmot imagining that fomething unexpedted had detained him, we went to dinner without him. After tea I withdrew into my lib: ary, and left the ladies by them-felves. Scarcely was I Seated, when Mr. Wilmot’s fervant entered the room, and, with all the abrupt-nefs of vulgar minds, who love to alarm, hastily informed me, his master had been thrown from his horfe, as he was going to Windfor, and was carried into a public houfe, about three miles distant, more dead than alive. As he pronounced thefe words. Lady Ostbry came into the library. I acquainted her with the fatal intelligence, and defired her to break it gently to her friend, whilst 1 hastened to Mr. Wilmot.
As we w'ere going along, the fervant told me that he had advifed his master not to venture upon that horfe, which was a fiery creature belonging to Sir John Mordaunt, but that he was angry at the request, imagining it a refkflicn upon his (kill.
It
LETTERS.	149
It Vv’as with difficulty we got Mr. Wilmot to Wind-for. He was quite infenfible, but frequently attempted to lift his hand up to his stomach. He has voided a great deal of blood. How is Mrs. Wilmot affedted } She fainted away when he was first brought into the houfe.
Poor man .b to be called fo hastily into a state, for which, I fear, he is entirely unprepared !—unhappy Wilmot! alas! my dear friend, how greatly does it behove us, wretched mortals, whofe life is as a vapour which difpeifeth in a moment, to be constantly
prepared for the awful time of our distblution ! **■»»*•
How tender, how amiable is the behaviour of Mrs. Wilmot !	“ My dear Henrietta, faid llie
just now to Lady Ostbry, what comfort do I derive, at this affedling period, from the refledlion of having performed my duty to Mr. Wilmot—how dreadful, where the heart accufes us of negledl, when no . v future atonement can be offiered !”
*	St	*	*	»
The post is going^ away-1 must therefore con-
clude this letter—if Wilmot lives—but that, I fear, is impoffible.
Farewel, my dear, dear Beverly ; our unhappy
Royston—but I cannot bear the refledtion-once
more farewel.
OSSORY.
LETTER CVIII.
Lord OssoRY to Mr. Beverly.
All hope is sted—Wilmot has just breathed his last in my arms — he expired without a groan —may he be happy!
Write to me immediately, I conjure you, and tell me how I ought to adl refpedling Sir Charles.
I cannot proceed—I Shall impatiently expedl your anfwer. Do you advife and diredl your
B 3	OsSORY.
ISO	LETTERS.
LETTER CIX.
Mifs Howard to Lady Fortescue.
Mr. I.efley vill be the bearer of this letter;
ah 1 no ; he will not neither, for the dear man is already equipped for his journey, and' I have only now begun to write,—Well—well—it matters not — Emily has written, and the post: will convey foon enough this uninteresting chit-chat to your La-dyssiip. Were it to go now, it would only divert your attention from matters of far greater importance.
And fo I am left alone with the lovers——I wisti
Beverly was here-what charming tete a tetes we
might have had!
We have got a new neighbour at Park-hill, one Mrs. Mordaunt, a widow—rich too, they fay, and as handfome—as it is necestary for a woman of fortune to be.-We have already been twice at her
houfe, and are engaged there to-morrow—ihe feems quite pieafed with our Emily.
# * * * *
Oh ! madam, what a catastrophe! what Shall we do ? How will the dear Emily fupport this great, this unexpeUed trial}—Mr. Lestey too—that tender parent, can he ever Survive the disappointment of his fondest hopes 1
Why, ah why was my beloved friend deceived with the expedlation of a happinefs, which stie was never destined to enjoy !—but how I trifle with your Ladylhip’s impatience—forgive me, dear madam— I hasten to the affefting recital, leaving it to you to acquaint Mr. Lestey with the fatal event, in the manner your judgment Shall direct.
We went to Mrs. Mordaunt’s yesterday afternoon —hateful vistt! — the hours pasted away agreeably.
Sir
LETTERS.	151
Sir Charles was uncommonly chearful, and the dear Emily, delighted at his vivacity, was herSelf unufu-ally lively.—Sir Charles played on the harpSichord, Mifs Lefley on the guittar, and Mrs. Mordaunt and I accompanied them with our voices.
When our little concert was finiHied, we begged leave to order Mrs. Mordaunt’s coach, (which had conveyed us there.) The orders were Scarcely given, when we Saw a gentleman riding up to the avenue, which leads to the houSe ; and Mrs. Mordaunt running to the window, exclaimed hastily, “ BleSs me,
there is my brother-in-law, Mr. Mordaunt -
“ I am glad of it, returned Sir Charles, for he is an old acquaintance of mine—he ufed to be a good na-tured, lively creature !’’ Mr. Mordaunt entered the room, and having paid his compliments to the ladies, turned to Sir Charles, and clapping him gaily on the Shoulder, what, my old friend Charles Royston ! I rejoice to fee you—but where have you kept your-felf this last century —and then before his question could beanfwered, he entered into converfation with his Sister, who chid him for not coming Sooner, according to his promife. “ You must not blame me, child, returned he ; an unexpected event obliged me to postpone my journey-but how now, Roy-
ston, proceeded he, turning hastily to Sir Charles, what a deuce keeps you here at this period .? art thou inconstant at last ? Or is not a lich young widow worth riding after ?”	“ I do not understand
you, replied Sir Charles coolly—“ ha! not understand me ! why, don’t you know that Wilmot is dead F—‘‘ Wilmot dead ! rejoined Sir Charles in a faint voice.” “ Yes, dead and bui ied, returned he; it was my being obliged to attend his funeral, that prevented my paying my devoirs Sooner to that lady, bowing to Mrs. Mordaunt.” Good heaven ! what were my emotions at this difcovery ! I cast down my eyes upon the carpet, not daring to look at my Emily;— at length I ventured to steal a glance at Sir Charles.
B 4	His
\Sz	LETTERS,
His countenance Spoke the diSorder of his foul. He was as pale as death, and I faw him lift his eyes to the ceiling with a look of delpair-—The coach came to the door—we got in—I was obliged to fuppoit my trembling friend—all w'as filence—Sir Charles Seemed loft in thought, and frequently fighed.
Mr. Beverly’s Servant was at Mr. Lefley’s with a letter from his mafter. Sir Charles made this a pretence for returning home ; he left us abruptly. I led my Emily into the parlour- She threw herfelf
into a chair, and gave vent to her tears.-At laft,
starting up haftily, ftie exclaimed, “ Must I then lofe him—lofe him for ever .?—ah ! ’tis too, too much.”— I fat down by her j stie reclined her head on my ihoulder; we w'ept together. What a night did we pafs! I did not clofe my eyes till near five o’clock in the morning. J flept for about an hour, but awoke
in the utmost terror. I Spoke to Emily----nobody
anfwered—I was alarmed—fhe had left the bed—I arofe hastily—fhe was fitting in her clofet. I embraced her tenderly, and fhe returned my careftes.
“ My dear Clarifta, Said fhe, all is now over.-
Sir Charles loves me no longer---alas ! he never
loved me—it was compaffion—it was generofity---
mortifying refledlion! But how weak are thefe emotions, when oppofed to a pallion fo constant, fo tender, as that with which Mrs. Wilmot has infpired him! Ought I then to wisti to keep up our prefent connexion }—No—prudence, delicacy, every thing forbids it—1 arn determined how to adt—the trial requires all my refolution—but heaven, whofe aid I have invoked, will not forfake me in this arduous
moment-----yes, I will force Sir Charles to confefs,
that your Emily was not undeferving of that tender-nefs, which it would have been her highest glory to have acquired.
Sir Ciiailes came not till after breakfast. It was unnecestary, when we met, to inquire after the
health of each other--our countenances fpoke for
us. SirChailes faid Something, however, in a low voice, to Mifs Lefley, concerning her’s; but flie
could
LETTERS.	153
could not anfwer the enquiry.--------Notwithstanding
the efforts stie had made to astume refolution, against this interesting period, yet all her fortitude forfook her at the Sight of Sir (t^harles, and fhe burst into a violent flood of tears. How was he affected ! He Seized her hand, and preffing it tenderly to his lips, “ My dear A'lifs Lefley, Said he in a low voice, it
is, alas ! but too apparent—this fatal event-—but
forgive me—pity me- I fee my folly—my ingratitude—and my future condu6t fliall atone for”-.
“ No, no. Sir Charles, interrupted my noble friend, every flattering hope is baniflied. We were never
defigned for each other-the wretched Emily was
never destined for Such happinefs ’’	“ We must part
then, Sir Charles, continued fhe, with a deep Sigh,— Adrs. Wilmot is now freed fiom that fatal engagement, which oppofed your felicity—your heart has long been her’s—fhe deferves your tendernefs-” Here stie stopt to wipe away the tears that flowed hastily down her lovely face—and then proceeded : “ Whilst it was impcfllble for you to gain Mrs. Wilmot, I received your addielfes with pleafure. The fw'eet-nefs of ycur manners, the noblenefs of your Sentiments, Seemed certain pledges of my happinefs. I even dared to hope that my grateful attentions, and unremitted endeavours to difcharge my duty, might in time acquire your undivided affeCtion. But heaven has otherwise ordained, and I Submit to my fate without repining, Since the disappointment of my W'ifhes w'ill infure the felicity of him, who is dearer to me than life.” “ My dear, my generous Emily, returned Sir Charles in a tone of rapture, how stiall I exprefs my gratitude, my admiration ! I confefs that I deferved only your reproaches. I w'as not master of myfelf at receiving, fo Suddenly, Such unexpedted intelligence. It excited in my foul vvisties injurious to my honour ; but I will, I have Subdued them, and am returned with a determination of being wholly your’s.”-“ No, Sir Charles, rejoined
my truly heroic friend, your wifhes are conformable to reafon ; Mrs. Wilmot’s prior right, her fupeiior B 5	met it,
154 LETTERS,
merit, demand the preference. Mr. Wilmot’s death has diflblved our conueUion-You are free, I re-
peat it ; I refign all my pretenSions to your heart. But, oh! Sir Charles, if you forget me entirely, I am loft indeed ’’ Her agitations at pronouncing thefe words were fo violent, that She was unable to proceed. Sir Charles endeavoured to vanquiili her resolution; his behaviour was truly noble. How difficult a part had he to adt, divided, as he certainly was, between honour and inclination ?—But the generous Emily foon delivered him from his inquietude. “ Ur^,e no more a requeft, my dear Sir Charles, Said fire tendeily, which I ought not to comply with. I know that were I now to become your's, I could never enjoy a mom.ent’s tranquillity, I Should continually reproach myfelf with having pXrchafed the gratification of my own wiShes at the expence of honour—humanity—at the expence of every thing that is dear to a virtuous mind ”	“ But
Mr. Lefley, interrupted Sir Chatles hastily, what will he fay ? He u:uft defpife me, and 1 Ihould have the cruel mortification to tl irk that I deferved his
refentment.’’-“ Ah! fear it not, returned Mils
Lefley ; he is always guided by reafon—he will esteem and love you still,’’ Emily—but I cannot de-feribe the affecting parting—how often did flie bid Sir Charles farev;el, and how often return again, unable to leave him for ever! We all wept—we promised an eternal friendship. Sir Charles withdrew—and Emily faiiited in my arms. I was unable to confole her—1, who felt little lefs than Ihe did.
*****
This morning, as we were fitting at breakfast. Sir Chari es’s Servant brought a letter for Emily. I in-clofe a cepy of it, with my beloved friend’s anfwer.
»	*	*	m	Hf.
“ How impr-flible is it, my dear Mifs Lefley, to exprefs the gratitude, the admiration, which ycur genercSi y has excited in my foul !—But I flrould be the most unworthy of mankind, were I to take advantage of Such goodnefs. Suffer me then, my dear
Emily,
letters.	155
Emily, to continue an attachment, which ought not to be diffblved. The gentlenefs, the delicacy of your manners, and the numberlefs perfeUions, by which you are fo eminently distinguished, cannot fail of Subduing every illaudable emotion, and of Securing my undivided heart. Could I ever hope to experience happinefs, when deprived of the Sweet confcioufnefs of having adted conststently with honour—with justice? No, no, my excellent friend ; I ought to be only your’s. No one had ever reafon to repent of having performed a duty.
I am, with the utmost refpedl, gratitude, and af-fedlion.
Your devoted humble Servant,
Charles Royston.”
*	If	*	*	*
The following was my exalted friend’s reply. Alas, how many tears did it cost her 1 But nothing can induce her to Swerve from the stridtest rules of duty.
» » » »
“ Trust not, my dear friend, to the delustons of fancy ; the excefs of your generostty would involve you in eternal repentance. And must I v/arn you of the impending danger 1 1—who am fo deeply interested ? Yes, my dear Sir Charles—virtue requires the Sacrifice, and 1 Submit to her decrees. Can She, who, from felfisti confiderations, voluntarily deprives another of happinefs, have a right to expedl a lasting affedtion ? Were I even defirous of listening to your Seducing perfuafions, prudence, if not honour, Should prevent my compliance.
“ The bleffing I had deprived you of, viewed thro’ the medium of pastion, would appear with greater advantages than it really postested ; you would behold your poor Emilv with difgust, nay, perhaps
with hatred.--What! the tender Emily be hated,
and
156	LETTERS.
and by him ihe loved fo ardently ! Forgive the tear
'—it would fall-Let not thefe Suggestions appear
improbable ; the heart is frail, my beloved friend, and we are often adtuated by emotions we condemn-Urge then'no more, too generous Sir Charles, a request which I cannot—I ought not, to comply with. Emily will never be your’s ;—yet did (he never love you half fo tenderly, as at the moment in which She refigned you for ever. Her best willies, her most ardent prayers, will be continually offered up to heaven for your welfare ; adieu, my beloved friend ; bestow Sometimes a thought on her, W'ho wdll never ceafe to be, with the utmost tendernefs, gratitude, and refpedl, dear, dear ^ir Chailes,
Your faithful and obliged friend and Servant,
Emily Lesley.
I will difpatch this letter to your Ladyfliip, and begin another to-morrow. Emily is writing to Mr. Lefley. She brings me her letter to inclofe in mine. Oh, Madam, how I pity you I what a painful talk have you to perform ! Adieu, dear Lady Foitefcue.
Your’s, &c.
Clarissa Howard.
LETTER CX.
Mifs Howard to Lady Fortescue.
I Have just parted from Sir Charles. He leaves Park hill to-inorrow, and is going to Mr- Beverly’s feat in N * * fliire, before he returns to London.
My dear friend being engaged this morning in her clolet, I Sauntered into the adjoining fields, and was deeply ruminating upon the affeeing Scenes I had lately been witnels of, w'hen hearing a rustling behind me, I turned my head and perceived Sir Chark-s approaching tov, ards me. He eagerly inquired after
L E T T E R S.	157
ter the health of wy beloved Emily, and when I had anfwered his questions, heexprested, in the warmest terms, the gratitude which her letter had excited in his foul. “ But, has time made no alteration in her Sentiments, rejoined he earnestly .? her happinefs ought to be my first wisti.’'—•'* No, Sir Charles, replied I ; on the contrary, her refolution appears
strengthened by reflection—-/he will never neglect
the performance of her duty, nor revoke a denial So justly given.” Sir Charles informed me, that, as that was the cafe, he fliould leave Park-hill to morrow ; but that, before his departure, he intended fending a few lines to his friend, Mr- Lefley. I left him with reluctance : he pre/Ted my hand to his lips '—I know not what I Said—when the mind is Softened by affliction, every circumstance makes the deepest ^ impieflion. We are even afleCted by incidents, which, at any other period, would have been beheld without emotion.
The dear Emily is ail impatience for the arrival of her father. She weeps in private, and feeks for opportunities of being alone. 1 have chid her for concealing her forrows from the eye of friendfliip.
I am, with the utmost refpeCt,
your Ladyfl)ip’s affectionate
humble fervant,
Clarissa Howard.
LETTER CXT.
Mr. Beverly to Lord Ossory.
After the contents of my last letter, your Lordihip will not wonder when I inform you that our dear Sir Charles arrived here last night-Oh, my Lord, how nobly has Mifs Lefley aCted f I rejoice that ilie was able to rejeCt Sir Charles, who, as he was Situated, did not—could not, deServe her.
This
158	LETTERS.
This world cannot recompenfe fuch virtue-how
large a portion of bliSs niuft fhe inherit in the next!
----where her Spotlefs foul will look down on us,
who, though admitted (as we will prefume to hope) into thofe heavenly regions, mult be contented with a glory, far, very far inferior to her’s.
How many questions has Sir Charles alked me, concerning the accounts which 1 have received re-fpeUing Mrs. Wilmot ? He is all impatience to fee her,—but I have prevailed upon him to remain with me, till the next letters arrive from town. I have talked to him upon decorum, propriety, &c, &c. with all the delicacy of a virgin ; but love will not eafily fubmit to the tyrannical restraints of custom. Satisfied v/ith the rectitude of his intentions, he is indifferent to the cenfures of a misjudging world, which is governed by appearances alone, and often condemns even without conviUion.
»	#	«	*	at	w
I this moment received your Lordfhip’s letter. How is Sir Charles chagrined at Mrs. Wilmot’s journey into Estex 1--“ Mis. Sydney, you fay, will
return with her to town”--“ but, when does (he
return ? fays Sir Charles ; in a month—or a year ? Could not Lord Ostbry have gueffed near the time at least ? how vexatious is this fufpenfe See the impatience of lovers.
Sir Charles talks not now of leaving me. I would rally him a little upon this occafion, but his heart is not fufficiently at eafe to bear a jest.
I am, with my refpedfful devoirs to Lady Of-fory,
Your Lordstiip’s
Obedient fervant,
Edward Beverly.
LET-
LETTERS.	159
LETTER CXII.
Mifs Howard to Lady Fortescue.
Mr. Lefley arrived here last night. How affeU-ing was the meeting between him and my dearest friend ! He prested her wdth rapture to his paternal bofom ; he called her by all the tender epithets of love ; he laviflied upon her all thofe enco-mi'u'ms which She had fo justly merited.—“ You are then fatisBed with the condudf of your En?i!y, faid
She tenderly ?’’-“ Satisfied ! repeated the fond
parent,-ah, my beloved child !”-he could not
proceed, and Emily stew into his arms. I joined my tears with theirs—we all wept—yet was the emotion not devoid of pleafure.
***** »
Mr. Lestey read to us a letter, which he had received from Sir Charles-it was worthy of him.
Emily begged it of her father—fhe reads and weeps.
--My friend was truly affefted at your Ladystiip’s
letter ; stie prested it tenderly to her lips. “ My dear Clarista, faid (he, ought I not to think myfelf happy, amidst all my fufferings, postesting, as I do, fuch friends—fuch a parent!—yet have I dared to murmur against the decrees of heaven.” Ungrateful, prefumptuous Emily ! hast thou not reafon to fear, lest the Deity, offended at thy unjust complaints, (hould deprive thee of advantages, of which thou hast proved thyfelf fo unworthy ?
“ Alas ! what evils, continued stie, might have arifen from my union with Sir Charles, evils, which my fond heart could never have fupported !—or fup-postng my tender wiilies had been gratified, and that connection had been productive of that happinefs I hoped to experience, have I not reafon to fear that my foul, farisfied with its prefent felicity, might have looked forward with apprehenfion and regret, with terror rather than joy, to that awful period,
when
i6o	LETTERS.
when every earthly tie Siiail be as nothing ! whereas adverfity takes off thoSe gay Ci.lourii.gs, with which prcfpeiiiy cecorates the things of this world, ana we bluih to lee upon what tiauSient enjoyments, what trifling.puifuits, we have placed cur afteclions, and ctiiteieu all our willies.
My uncle peremptorily inlifts upon my returning to Bath, Some time next w’eek. Mr. Lefley and my Emily will accompany me. 1 See m’y beloved friend regrets leaving Park-hill ; but her tender father is delirous of her quitting a place, where every objedt reminds her.of her too dear Sir Charles. They intend {.aying your Ladylhip a vifit as they return.
I am lorry Sir Edward’s journey is poftponed to
another month---nothing but- difappoimments, I
think, in this world. 1 am lure I am half Sick of it, and am grown as grave as a cat.
I have the honour to be your Ladyfliip’s I -	Afiedlionate humble Servant,
Claruss-v Howard.
LETTER CXIII.
Mr. Elvin to Lady Essex.
My dear Lady Eftex, when am I to have the happinefs of feeing you again in town ? I lament your partiality for the country, fince it deprives me So long, of the pleafure of your company.
J would gladly have accepted your invitation to * * * *, but Latiy Dormer v/Guld not part with her fnend j and my Charlotte Seemed little Inclined to bid adieu to theSe Scences of gaiety and diftipation. How often have I regretted the intimacy which Sub-fifts between them .L would to heaven, Mr. Frcclove had influence enough to diftolve the connexion ! But he is So fond of his niece, and has So little authority
over her--and Chariette has too high an opinion of
her own judgment, and too mean an opinion of his,
to
LETTERS.	i6i
to yield to him that obedience which duty requires of her.---Mr. Freelove would indeed be more amia-
ble if he was lefs defirous of being beloved. He, who blindly confents to every follicitation, betrays either his imprudence or his folly—by gratifying All, he obliges None. No man thinks himfelf indebted to him, who has not learnt the refolution to deny even an improper request.
You alk a thoufand questions concerning Mrs. Wilmot, Sir Charles Royston, Lady Ostbry, &c. &c. I must only anfwer a few of them, and thofe briefly, as I am going with Lady Bab and Mifs Freelove to the opera this evening, and her Ladystiip deflred me to be with them before five.
Sir Charles came to town yesterday, but Mrs. Wilmot does not return from Effex till the latter end of this M'eek : fo that 1 cannot yet fati.sfy your La-dyfliip’s impatience, by an account of a meeting fo interesting to you. Neither have 1 leifure to enter into a difcuffion of that part of your letter, which relates to my Charlotte. Your Ladystiip argues justly, I believe ; but what is argnment to a man in love ! 1 befeech you then, my dear Sophia, not to torture me any more with a fubjedt fo difagreeable.
■------Suffer me to continue in a delufion, which i.s
become neceffary to my repofe. Reafon, I fear, is against me ; but love, all conquering love ! — Adieu, my dear fister. The destined hour of attendance is just ai rived—a real lover is always punflual-Re-
member me to my brother.
Your’s,
T. Elvin.
m
LET-
i6z	LETTERS,
LETTER CXIV.
Lord OssoRY to Mr. BeveRLY.	'N
I This moment received your letter. Sir Charles has not then given you the particulars of his late interview with Mrs. Wilmot } Never, furcly, were there two people who loved each other fo tenderly.
*---Yet how did Mrs. Wilmot attempt to conceal a
paffion, which. Sire thinks, ought not to be indulged. Sir Charles is affeded, beyond description, at a conduft which arifes frcm her compaffion for the
amiable Emily.-‘‘ She has refufed you, my dear
Sir Charles, fays this admirable woman ; but her very refufal strews the greatnefs, the delicacy of her affection. She refignsyou without murmuring to the grateful Louifa : stre even prays for our happinefs ----exalted genercSity! And strall not we, my beloved friend, endeavour to imitate fo bright an example.? Ought not the prefervation of her tranquillity to be the first: confideraticn of our fouls }—stre has vowed never to become your’s. But would stre not —ah 1 stre must be far lefs wretched, if you gave
not your hand to another. I strall never be his-
would stre fay-but he refrains from entering into
a connection, which would render my paffion for him
unlawful. I may therefore still think of him----
esteem him--love him. What a confolation ! stre
deferves every Sacrifice we can offer. Let us not then, my dear Sir Charles, be outdone in genero*
fity.’’-He endeavoured to obviate her objections
•—how pathetic is the language of tendernefs ! Mrs, Wilmot however remained inflexible, and Sir Charles, after having complained of her cruelty, funk into a dejection, which deeply affeCted her. She arofe, and holding out her lovely hand to him with inexprestible fweetnefs—“ my dear Sir Charles, faid stie, I cannot bear to fee you thus—doubt not my affection— it is
as
LETTERS.	163
as lively, as tender as ever ; but gratitude, compaf-Sion, plead fo ftrongly—however, we will now quit a fubjeU, which my prefent Situation renders highly improper.”
I rejoice to find that you are preparing for your journey to town, and that you intend Hopping at Claremont in your way to London, as I long to hear how the dear Emily does, and Lady Fortefcue can undoubtedly inform you.
Lady Oflbry defires her beft compliments.
I am ever your’s,
OSSORY.
LETTER CXV.
Mr. Beverly to Lord Ossory.
I Arrived at Claremont yesterday morning. I found
here Mr. Lestey, and his amiable daughter.-
The dear Emily turned pale upon my entering the room. Yet flie appears pleafed with my company, and joined her intreaties with thofe of Lady Fortefcue and Mr. Lestey, in order to prevail upon me to remain here till the latter end of the week-— Angelic creature ! how has stie increafed the admiration I had before conceived for her ! But I will inform your lordstup of the particulars of a conversation, which has just pasted betw'een us, relative to Sir Charles,— 1 was w^alking in the garden, ruminating upon the Scenes that had pasted Since my former vifit at Claremont, when the appearance of Mifs Lestey interrupted my reverie. I hastened towards her, and we entered into a difcourfe, which inlenfi-bly led us to mention Sir Charles. She inquired after him with the most tender follicitude. I informed her of his interview with Mrs. Wilmot, of her motives for rejeding his addrestes, and the dejeUion which Sir Charles experienced upon this disappointment of his hopes. Emily fighed at the detail, and, after a Ihort paufe-“ Mrs. Wilmot is truly gene-
rous,
i64 LETTERS.
rous, and my heart is fenfible of the obligations to her. —'-'But tliall I confent to purchafe tranquillity
at the expence of Sir Charles’s happinefs ?-Ah !
it is impoffibie that I can experience any, whilft he
is wretched.----Let her then no longer oppofe Sir
Charles’s wifhes—their felicity diall be nsine. Ady loul difdains an enjoyn’ent, which is incompatible with virtue. 'The pleating confcioufnefs of having performed my duty, has enabled me to Support the cruelty of my fate ; but if J retign this Sweet conSo-lation, from whence can I derive comfort ? 1 have learnt to bear every evil, but that which arifes from guilt----there are no other inSupportable, I there-
fore defire, I intreat Mrs Wiimot, no longer to reject Sir Chailes’s addretfes. I tball confider her acceptance of them as a favour conferred on mySelf!
---- Good heaven ! Sir Charles to be refufed !”-
Here IVlr. Lefiey interrupted our conversation ; but Emily had informed him of what had palled, and he joined, with equal earneftnefs, in the wiilres of his amiable daughter.
I was Soon after left alone with him, and he was more urgent than before. He told me that he Should rejoice to hear of Sir Charles’s marriage, as he then hoped his Emily would intirely recover her tranquillity :---“ For, cf n'inued the good man, though
my child is determined, at all events, never to give her hand to Sir Charles, yet, whilst; he continues fin-gle, fhe will unknowingly be influenced by emotions, which must prevent the re-establistiment of her peace. But, when he is once united to another, every thing ceaSes---her tendernefs will be no longer in-
dulged as an innocent, far leSs as a laudable fenfa-tion ; it will become criminal. She will behold it with strame and regret, and my Emily will not long harbour a Sentiment, for which stie has caufe to bluih.”
* # *
As I have bufinefs to tranfadl at Park-hill, which may postibly detain me Some days, I intend writing
this
letters.	165
this very evening to Mrs. WHmot, to inform her of thefe paiticulars. I lliall alfo fend a few lines to Sir Charles.
My befi: compliments attend Lady OITory.
I am your LordHiip’s
Obedient humble fervant,
Edward Beverly.
LETTER CXVL
Lord OssoRY to Mr. Beverly.
TH E generofity of the lovely Emily has cost: M rs. Wilmot many tears; but tire event is anfwerable to our wisties. She has promifed to give her hand to Sir Charles, as foon as the laws of decorum will permit, and he is become the happiest; of mankind.
My Henrietta partakes, beyond exprestion, in the felicity of a brother fo dear to her, and is again the life of our little circle.
Let not the unfeeling stoic deride the pleafures of this world, and defpife a happinefs which his gloomy foul is incapable of tasting. It prefents many enjoyments which the eye of reafon may behold with approbation.
Lady Ostbry enters my apartment-Writing
my Lord ! and to whom ?--to our Beverly.-
Tell him then, that nothing can add to our happinefs but the pleafure of his company—tell him alio, that our beloved Sir Charles —but you have already described his felicity.”
Adieu, my dear Beverly : our best compliments attend you ever.
OsSORY.
LET-
i66	LETTERS.
LETTER CXVII.
Mifs Fr-eeLOVE to Mifs Sydney,
Another eScape, Harriet! Fortune favours beyond expectation. The very week, nay, day, was fixed for niy returning to the Thorns, and I was absolutely devoured v.dth chagrin, when Lady Bab’.5 illnefs retarded my journey, and the phyficians having advifed her Ladylhip to try the Bath waters, my dear good natured unde has confented to my attending her to that enchanting place. Mr. Elvin is
to be our efcort.-By the bye, Harriet, we have
had a most: tremendous quarrel, and I fliould not have forgiven him again fo Soon, had we not wanted him
at this jundure---a lover to contradidl his mif-
trefs ! amazing prefumption ! Yet he is infenfible of his fault, and continues grave, nay Sullen.—What proud wretches thefe men are, my dear ! fo averfe to owning their tranfgreffions! the creature did not even kifs the lily hand vvhich was extended to him,
as a fign of reconciliation-1 muft not lofe him
however.
Adieu, my dear. Lady Bab has this moment defined my company.
Charlotte Freelove.
letter cxviii.
From the Same.
WE have been at Bath near ten days, and Lady Bab has already recovered her Spirits. It is the only place in the world for thofe who are fond of company and difiipation. Every hour is devoted to pleafure; and health, which is the profelTed de-fign of the journey, is in general the lafl; thing that is thought of.
For
LETTERS.	167
For the first day or two after our arrival, her Lady ihip Saw nobody, except a Mifs Howard, a cou-fin of her’s--who, by the way, is a pretty oblig-
ing girl, and I believe, with a few of my instrufti-ons, would make a figure in the world. Lady Bab has already attempted to ridicule her out of two or three old fafhioned notions, which Spoil her for a fine lady ; but the chit has no ambition to acquire thofe excellencies, which are necestary to constitute that
charaUer.-----She glories in her fenfibUity^ her mo-
dejly, and a hundred other aukward qualifications, which are entirely exploded from ihe beau monde.— She has already interceded for the gentle Elvin ; her tender heart is Softened by his distreSs; stie wonders at my compoSure—yet this girl is lively, chatty, and degagee. What a pity that Such endowments Ihould be attended with emotions, that render her talents
uSeleSs !-'But company obliges me to bid you
adieu for the prefent.
* * » ■ *
Oh ! my dear. Such a triumph ! your Charlotte has made a conquest, and Such a conquest !—None of your commoners, child ; but the young, the janty, the accomplished Lord Byron. Elvin—but he is beneath a thought—let him carry his addrelTes to thofe, whoSe beauty and endowments intitle them to look no higher.
But who is this Lord Byron, you alk? Why, my dear, all I know of him is, that he is quite the fa-Sliion } that he is just returned from abroad, where he has learned every thing that is necestary to constitute a fine gentleman; and in Short--but here
he is-----
«	«	«	*
I am preparing for the ball to-night ; Lord Byron
to be my partner for the evening--’how Elvin will
stare ! I expedl him here every moment, but he must
learn to give place to his Superiors.
*	*	*	*
Poor Elvin was indeed chagrined. He danced with MiSs Howard ; but the Lady had no reaSon to
be
i68	LETTERS.
be Satisfied with her partner. My Lord and I en-gaged all his attention ; yet he endeavoured to look careleSs, and even happy. Poor Elvin ! he is not half a hypocrite—h» was quite rude to Byron, and barely civil to me. “ V/ho is that impertinent fellow ? Said Lord Byron to me.” “ Oh ! never mind him, returned I carelefsly; one cannot fatisfy the wishes of every pretender.”
But do you then really intend to difcard Mr. Elvin, Charlotte ? What will your uncle' fay to your refo-lution ^ How ! can my uncle condemn his niece for being prudent ? for ennobling her family ?—Impoffi-ble, child ; he will, he muft approve my conduft. But is it honourable .? Pho, mere farce and nonfenfe 1 We girls of Spirit are above being confined by Such vulgar notions.
Farewel, my dear Harriet, and expedt not to equal me in grandeur, unlefs you will bid adieu to thofe rigid precepts, which interfere with every pleasure, and prevent every enjoyment.
I am your’s,
Charlotte Freelove.
LETTER CXIX.
Mr. Elvin to Lady Essex.
Yes, my dear Sifter, I am now but too plainly convinced, that Mifs Freelove beholds me with indifSerence. Would She elfe treat me with this mortifying negledt for the fake of one, who is known only to be defpifed, and whofe fliattered fortune renders the motive of his addreftes but too apparent ? Shall I then continue to think of Such a woman ! - Forbid it pride—forbid it every hcneft, every laudable emotion ! No, dear as it will coft me, I am determined to bid adieu to her for ever, unlefs She will promife to relinquifti all thoughts of Lord Byron.
I will
LETTERS,	,69
I will fee her this morning, and infill: upon coming to an eclairciflement, which fhe has hitherto ftudi-
oufly avoided-and why ? but that fhe might ftill
triumph over my weaknels ! Oh, Lady EfTcx, had I but followed your advice! But forgive my folly: never, never more fhall my fancy miflead my judgment.
Adieu ! you fliall know the refult of my vifit by the next post: j I cannot write more at prefent.
T. Elvin.
LETTER CXX.
From the Same.
AL L is over, my dear Sophia, and your brother’s peace is facrificed. No, I defpife her too much. Ungrateful, perfidious as fhe is, fhe expeUs that I fhould return to her again no doubt ; ah ! how greatly is flie deceived ! I fhall remain at Bath on purpofe to convince her, that it is poffible to be rejected by her, and yet to be happy. I am not unhappy ; were I fo, I fhould detest myfelst fo meanly as fhe has treated me. Lady Bab defired me not to difcontinue my vifits ; did flie imagine, that I would Submit to be a witnefs of my rival’s triumph ? Can the inconfiderate Charlotte expeCl, that Mr. Freelove will ever confent to her union with Lord Byron ? A title will not induce him to forego every other confideration—but it matters not to me, whether he is fuccefsful or no ; my refolution is unalterably fixed.
Farewel, my dear Sister, and be afTured of the fin-cerity of ray regard.
J. Elvin.
VoL. II.	c	L E 7’-
lyo	LETTERS.
letter CXXI.
Mifs Free LOVE to Mifs Sydney.
Well, well, my dear, 1 cannot help it-Lord blefs me, muft I be fubjefl to all his caprices ? “ DiScard Lord Byron,and why fo pray ? I thought, Harriet, that you had been above listening to the malicious representations of a cenforious world ; but I find that 1 was mistaken. You absolutely write with all the acrimony of an old maid, and against a man who is perfedtly unknown to you. P.*-ay, is this confistent with thofe rules which I always imagined direSed your condudt ? “ Make it
up with Mr. Elvin-acknowledge your errors-
nothing is more anstable than an ingenuous confeflion
of our faults.”-Yes indeed ! and be defpifed ever
after by him.—No, no, child, I will never exalt his charafter by debafing my own. Befides, were I dist pofed to obey you, it would he impofiible, for he has vowed never to fpeak to me more. But perhaps you would have me introduce the fubjeU, and, with a blustiing timidity, implore his attention, whilst I enumerate my tranfgrestions ? Methinks, I fee him listening, with a fcornful Superiority, to the felstac-cufing tale, and Slowly avowing his forgivenefs, lest the Sudden tranfport stiould too pow^erfully affeU me. Yet this is the humiliation you were preparing for the poor Charlotte. I'hank heaven it is unneceSTary.
I am going with Lady Bab, and Some ether company, to the ball this evening. Lord Byron is uncertain whether he can meet .us.-No fear, how-
ever, of your Charlotte’s not getting a partner, as She is quite the ton, and aliowed to excel the generality of her fex as much in wit, as in beauty. But I Should not have told you this ; you will add the imputation of vanity to the other Saults of your
CII A R I. 0 T T E F R E K LO V E .
LET-
LETTERS.	171
LETTER CXXII.
From the Same-
OH! Harriet, what a mortification ! that odious
Elvin !■-but you wfill not pity me-yet I
must tell you my distrefs. We were at the ball last night—Mifs Howard and Some other ladies accompanied us. I was chatting with the former, when Elvin entered the room—what an opportunity for him to have made his peace with me ! Lady Bab Spoke to him, but he anfwered her with a cold po-litenefs ; yet So devoid was I of malice, that I thought the creature looked handfome, and even perceived graces in his perfon, which had before efcaped my notice.
You fee, Harriet, I was not like the fox in the fable ; my fruit was fixeeter for being out of reach. He came up to Mifs Howard, and though I stood next her, and was, as he heard me tell her just before, difengage, dyet the malicious wretch had the effrontery to folicit her hand for the evening- Oh ! how I wilBed for Byron’s prefence ! I was ready to die with vexation. He is lost, that’s certain—but who cares } Jenny taps at the door, “ Mifs Howard is below. Madam”—lire comes to proclaim her triumph no doubt—to repeat all the foft things that Elvin faid to her ; but I will, in that cafe, mortify her fufficiently : the chit is not ufed to be complimented, I fuppofe-
*****
Mifs Howard is gone-^fliedid not mention Mr.
Elvin—1 was ready prepared for her if fire had, but did not chufe to begin the fubjedt- bhe looked uncommonly ill this morning. Do you like black hair, Harriet t It is my averfion.
Adieu.
Charlotte Freelove. C 2	LET-
172	LETTERS.
LETTER CXXIII.
Mifs Sydney to Mr. Free love.
The duty I owe you. Sir, and the interest; I take in my CouSin’s welfare, will not Suffer me to keep you ignorant of an affair, which may be attended with the most; difagreeable confequences.
Charlotte has difmifled Mr. Elvin for the fake of a new admirer, Lord Byron ; whofe Superior rank alone has gained him the preference. His Lordihip is perfbnally unknown to me, but I am not unacquainted with his character Did an exaltation of rank neceflarily produce an elevation of Sentiment, Charlotte’s ambition would be laudable ; but alas ! goodnefs and greatnefs are rarely united : Such will ever be the cafe, whilst: fortune can command that refpedl, which is due only to merit.
I ha ve long regretted my coustn’s intimacy with Lady Bab Dormer ; and to that connexion imputed many of her errors. Charlotte’s volatility renders thought painful to her ; ffie therefore Submits to the guidance of thofe, who are, of all others, the most improper to be her conduftors. She has, by this means, been led into mistakes, which flie might otherwise have avoided.
I have informed you of my coufin’s sttuation, not doubting but your prudence will extricate her from the dangers which attend it; and I will only add, that if matters cannot be amicably adjusted between her and Mr. Elvin, the Sooner llie leaves Bath the better.
I am, dear Sir,
Your’s most affeUionately,
HaRRiET Sydney.
LET-
LETTERS.	173
LETTER CXXIV.
Mr. Fr EELOVE to Mifs FrE ELOVE.
IF report may be believed, you have adted very indiscreetly, Charlotte. Will you, never learn prudence Did not I fettle every thing with Mr. Elvin .? Had I not found his fortune beyond my mofb Sanguine expectations.? And yet this man is difcarded, becaufe he does not happen to be poflefled of a title, the only advantage your new admirer has to boast; of- Fye upon you, Charlotte ! for a girl of fenfe, you adt very foolishly. But you were fpoiled by my late Sister, and were too much wedded to your caprices when you came under my care, for me to eff^edt any reformation.
Your Coufm Harriet now, what a good child She is! Devoting her time to her worthy grandmother, and Indifferent to idle gewgaws, which constitute all your happlnefs- I wilh you had profited more from fo amiable an example ; but how can one expedt amendment from thofe who are infenfible of their errors .? “Who call evil good, and good, evil Who glory In their faults, and place them in the catalogue of their attradlions ; I will not fay virtues ; the very found is disagreeable to the delicate ears of a fine lady.
I expedt being at Bath in a week, or ten days at farthest ; and stiall then endeavour to adjust matters between you and poor Mr. Elvin, who, I doubt not, has Suffered much from your unkindnefs. And remember, Charlotte, that I will have no appeals to the judgment of Lady Bab in matters, where I ought to determine. I like, not that friend of your’s.—but this by the bye.
I am, dear Charlotte
Your affedtionate uncle,
Robert Freelove.
C 3	LET-
174	‘ LETTERS.
L E T T E R CXXV.
MiSs FRtELOVE to Mr, Freelove.
There never was a gtil who endeavoured to aggrandize her family, by procuring her-felf an elevated fituation in life, that was ever treated like your Charlotte. Instead of being applauded for my prudence, I am condemned for want of thought: my care is termed folly ; and my ambition, raShnefs.
My coufin Harriet is propofed as a pattern—I am far from depreciating her merits—but furely your Charlotte—has stie ever attracted the attention of the beau monde } Who are her admirers} the Curate of the village perhaps, or Some of the neighbouring fquires, to whom her notability and prudence (rare accomplishments !) may render her agreeable. But amongst people of taste — you understand me, Sir ?
You coming to Bath my dear Sir ! amazing !-
but your journey will not be attended with the con-fequences you expedl—'poor Mr. Elvin is purfuing a more yielding damfel. 1 believe the wretch quarrelled w'ith me, on purpofe to have a pretence for withdrawing his addrelfes.
Mifs How^ard now engages all his attention ; he dances with her at every public place, and the girl is fo happy ! he always liked her, and has frequently praifed her, even in my prefence, before our last altercation happened.
I am ignorant what report may fay of Lord Byron, for I defpife it: but of this I am certain, that every thing which, tends to depreciate his character, must be falfe. He is the politest—gentlest—most enchanting creature you ever beheld. 1 know he will foon remove every unfavourable impreSlion you may have received of him. The world condemns him, and why ?—becaufe it hates thofe excellencies it
cannot
LETTERS.	I >5
cannot obtain—by the world I mean, every perfon of vulgar and contraUed ideas.
And fo you diflike Lady Bab, my dear Sir.? I cannot divine the cauSe. Her LadySliip attracts universal refpe<St, and I think deferves it;—Surely Harriet has not—but I must be filent.
Adieu, dear Sir ; depend upon my prudence, and believe me you Shall never have reafon to regret the confidence you place in
Your
Chari.otte Freelove.
^ P. S. What intolerable weather v/e have had lately !-----it will render travelling very diSagreeable—
and your gouty diforders-but my care will be
fuSpeisted.
LETTER CXXVI.
Lady Essex to Lady Ossory.
TH E event has happened, which you have fo long predidled. My brother is grown weary of an attachment, from which there could be no reasonable expectation of happineSs. He looks back with astonifliment at the infatuation, which lately poSTelTed him. Where are now the graces that allured his heart ! Thofe lively Sallies, which once appeared to be adorned with all the poignancy of wit. Seem now only the reSuIt of unblulhing confidence ; the ebullitions of a gaiety, which was unin-
fiaenced by reitraint--So true it is, that nothing
can long charm the mind, which is unSupported by modesty and virtue-
I intend going to Bath next week. So that I strall not yet have the pleaSure of embracing you.
Sir John defires his reSpeclfsl devoirs to Lord OS-
Sory---but he commands me to tell your Lady strip,
that he has not forgiven your last fancy note to him, C 4	and
176	LETTERS.
and that he Shall anfwer it with the greatest virulence---how will you compromise the affair ?
My refpeUs wait upon Lord Oflbry and Sir Charles.
Your’s,
Sophia Essex.
LETTER CXXVII.
Mr. Fr E ELOVE to MiSs Sydn E Y.
A Fine piece of work Charlotte has made of it !
—oh, thefe girls ! I intended, you may be Sure, to have been very arfgry with her upon my arrival ; but the artful huSfey found means to fubdue my refentment, by enumerating the advantages, that would attend her prefent connexion, and Lady » Bab joining in the fame strain- I began to think the girl had adled very wifely. However I Said nothing, but went the next morning to Lord Byron’s, in order to determine what plan I Should pur-fue.
His Lord strip, as foon as he heard my name, received me with an inundation of compliments ; yet notwithstanding all his efforts to conceal it, I discovered a confufion in his countenance, which Seemed to be an unfavourable omen. It was Some time before he would Suffer me to introduce a word, and I began to be tired of this foolery, when a momentary paufe happening in the conversation, I mentioned my niece : he hastily Interrupted me, and poured forth the most high-flown compliments in her praife; he declared “ that She was the master-piece of nature, that in her were comprized all the excellencies of her Sex, &c.” “ I doubt not, my Lord, returned I gravely, your affedtion for my niece, but it is alfo neceffary to think of other particulars. Her fortune”—“ mention it not, interrupted he ; stie is
herfelf a treafure, and”-“ but a little cajh^ my
Lord, rejoined I Smiling, will be no incumbrance, I
fuppofe.
LETTERS.	177
SuppoSe.” He coloured ; as for that, anfwered he hefitatingly, money to be fure, is but too necefla-ry—1 wifli from my foul it were otherwise, for my part—but every thing of that fort can be foon adjusted.” “ Not as we proceed, my Lord, returned I hastily.” , “ I beg your pardon. Sir, rejoined he coolly ; I really did not imagine, that you would enter fo foon into a difcustion of thefe points, about which people of rank are generally Indifferent. My
steward---but I can write to him, indeed.” “ I
always wifli, my Lord, replied I, to be upon a certainty. My Niece’s fortune will amount to 2o,oool. —5000 1, of which will be paid on the day of her marriage (in cafe I approve the connexion) and 115,0001, when ilie comes of age—flie is not yet twenty. But if (he marries contrary to my wilhes, /he forfeits all right to the first 5000I. which comes immediately into my postestion.”
I cannot give you his LordOiip’s anfwer, it was fo incoherent, and delivered in fo confufed a manner. I was convinced, that the reports concerning him were but too well founded, and that he only paid his addre/Tes to Charlotte, for the fake of that fortune he would have appeared to defpife-
Company coming in delivered him from his em-barra/Tment, and 1 immediately after withdrew. Upon my return I wrote to his Lord/Iiip, and forbade his future vistts to my niece.
The affair, by fome means, became public, and my gentleman was arrested, two days after, for 3001. by a tradefman who had omitted taking this step fooner, from having heard that his Lordihip was going to be married to a rich heirefs- My Lord was fo hurt by the affair, that he left Bath the next day.
I have not feen Mr. Elvin yet, as he is abfent upon a party of pleafure. We /hall remain here fome time longer, (as Lord Byron has decamped) for C 5	Bath
178	LETTERS.
Bath is very agreeable to your coufin, and the poor girl has been fufhciently mortified lately.
I am, with due refpefts to Lady Sydney,
Your affectionate uncle,
Robert Freelove.
LETTER CXXVIII.
Lady Essex to Lady Ossory.
UPON our arrival at Bath yesterday, we found my brother juft returned home from a little excurSion. He received us with the most; lively pleafure. I was rejoiced to fee him look fo well, and appear fo chearful.
This morning, as we were fitting at breakfast:, the fervant entered with Mr- Freelove’s compliments, who was below, and defired to Speak with Mr. Elvin. My brother ordered the fervant to fhew him up stairs ; yet appeared furprifed at the mef-fage. For my part, I was horridly chagrined at the mention of that formidable name. “ Fear nothing, my dear Sophia, faid he (perceiving my agitations) my resolutions are unalterable, becaufe founded upon reafon The old gentleman’s entrance prevented his adding more. He received him with the utmost politenefs. Sir John withdrew prefenily after his arrival, and left us to ourfelves.
Mr. Freelove, after Some hefitation, informed my brother, that he wanted to Speak to him in private. “ You may be perfedUy unreferved before Lady Estex, returned my brother ; I have no Secrets that I wisti to conceal from her ; and upon this occafion I particularly defire her prefence.” Mr. Freelove then told my brother of his Surprize and vexation at the condudl of his niece, but faid that he hoped it was not too late to procure a reconciliation, as he came for that purpofe to Bath, and had found Mifs Freelove fenfible of her imprudence, and difpofed to make every reafonable ooncesticn—adding,
that
LETTERS.	179
that Lord Byron was intirely dlfmifled. He then expreffed, in the warnieft terms, his regard for my brother, and the pleafure he Should have in his alliance. Mr. lilvin thanked him for his civilities, but politely declined his farther interpiofition.
“ That I once tenderly loved Mifs Freclove, proceeded he, I need not tell you ; but that time is now over. I could not therefore return to her with honour. S'le trifled with my heart, whilst: it was in her poflelnon ; but it has now recovered its freedom.
----1 wiiB her happy, but am certain that it is not
in my power to render her fo. Our inclinations are widely different—different in eSfentials. Mifs Free-lovc is fondly attached to pleafure ; my greatest enjoyments arife from retirement We Should be partial to our own purfuits, and behold thofe of each other with a contempt that would frequently appear, and a refentment that could not be always fuppreffed. The defires of prudence, and the Solicitudes of af-feUion, would perhaps be construed into the petulance of caprice, or the haughtinefs of command j and I stiould either be obliged to Sacrifice my own. inclinations, or to obtain the gratification of them, at the expence of my tranquillity.” The old gentleman appeared chagrined at a refolution which he could not condemn, and left us rather abruptly, highly diffatisfied, no doubt, with his vifit.
I Shall not leave Bath direUly, as my brother has requested my stay, and it is a place I was always fond of.
Our united compliments attend your LadyShip, and Lord OstTory.
I am,
Your’s,
Sophia Essex. j	_	L E T-
180	LETTERS.
letter CXXIX.
Lady Fortescue to Mifs Howard.
I Thank you, my dear Mifs Howard, for your obliging congratulations, upon the arriral of Sir Edward ; and Ihould much Sooner have anfwered your letter, but for the various avocations which his prefence has occafioned.
Mr. Beauchamp, an intimate friend of his, accompanied him from Paris. He is come over w'ith a resolution of feeing every thing in England, that is worthy observation. They let off on their intended tour next week.
1 had yesterday a letter from our good friend, Mr. Lefley. Emily, he fays, is Serious, but not melancholy ; and takes pleafure again in thofe pur-fuits, which once constituted her greatest happinels. “ My beloved child, adds this w'Oithy man, is a proof of the efficacy, the fuffaiency of religion to moderate, and even Subdue, every temporal affliction.” But Mr. Lefley, my dear Clariffa, is not well. I intend vititing Park-hill in a few days, and Shall endeavour to prevail on him to return with me to Claremont. Change of air may be beneficial to him.
My Son defires his refpeUful compliments.
I remain ever dear Mifs Howard’s affectionate huipble Servant,
j Marianne Fortescue*
I
L E T-
LETTERS.	i8i
LETTER CXXX.
Lady Essex to Lady Ossory-
I Know my dear Lady OfTory will partake with me in the joy which has taken polTeffioa of my heart. I will therefore relate the occafion of it, without any further preface.
I was fitting with my brother this morning, in a
pick-tooth way--Sir John abfent--when the
conversation fell infenfibly upon love (by the bye lie had been very thoughful for Several days.) The SubjeU, you know, is very exhauftin e. My brother, however, interrupted me in one of my harangues, by afking me gravely, what I fliould think of him,
if he were again to be enflaved by that palTion.-
“ Would you not blame my raihneSs, continued he, and wonder at my irreSclution ?'!	“ Not at all, re-
turned I hastily ; the emotion is laudable, w'bere the objeft isdeServing, and I need not fear your chu-stng improperly.’’ “ I am not entitled to Such a compliment, rejoined he, though I hope experience
has taught me wiSdom ;-It is I only, who can in
this cafe be undeServing ”—“ How! interrupted 1, is it then really So } But the Lady, the Lady, dear brother!’’—Can’t you gueSs ? Yes, wrong, I fup-
pofe—is She fair or brown—handSome or-give
me Some hints at least. V/ell then, stie is beautiful without affectation, chearful without levity, modest without prudery. Indeed, I know none that de-Serves theSe encomiums, except—Mifs Howard. It is stie herfelf. Then I am happy—why, brother, this is the very girl I had fixed upon for you ; and I wondered, the moment I beheld her, how you could perfist in your addreffes to the giddy Charlotte, after you had Seen that fweet creature. I always admired Mifs Howard, returned he, and wistied that Mifs Freelove had copied fo fair an example ; but fince my heart has recovered its liberty, I have been
more
i3z	L E T T E R S.
more at leiSure tt> obferve her attraSions ; and the engaging manners ot the one have appeared So amiable, when contrasted with the airy flights of the other, that I may now perhaps love her with far greater tenderneSs, than if my inclinations had at first given the preference.’’
The post is going away ; adieu then, my dearest friend.
Your’s, &c.
Sophia Essex.
LETTER CXXXI.
Mifs Fre elove to Mlfs Sydney.
WHAT do you think, Harriet } Mr Elvin has absolutely offered himfelf to Mifs Howard, and is accepted. Amazing ! The girl is reckoned handfome indeed --- but then to forget me So focn ! Mrs. Bruton, a coufin of Mr. Howard’s, was the first
perfon from whom 1 received this intelligence-
Spiteful creature ! flie meant to mortify me, no doubt ; but 1 kept my countenance to a miracle-—-
Heigh ho ! This won’t do, though, Harriet-----1
fhall begin to thlnk---but away refidlion, which I always detested, and am now most unfit for. 1 stept to my glafs, to fee how this new emotion Suited
my complexion------good heavens, what a wretch!
Why 1 have abfr.Iutely got the defpai. ing look of antiquated Virginity. If I had loved the man indeed ! but I never felt the least inch ation for him,
till after his difmijjion.- do, my dear, let me call
it So.
My uncle leaves Bath on Monday, and your humble Servant must accompany him. I fhall Spend Some time with you in Eflex, however, before I return to the Thorns—but don't be m.ilicious, child, and let not the name of Elvin eScape your lips, as you value the friendlhip of
Charlotte Freelove.
L E T-
LETTERS.	183
LETTER CXXKII.
Lady Fortescue to Mifs Howard.
IT is unnecelTary to tel! yo how Sincere y I partake in your prefent happinefs. You are too well convinced of niy friendfliip to require any further afTur-ances of it, and know that luy bell willies are ever your’s.
I am no stranger to Mr. Elvin’s charader, nor is he indeed perfonally unknown to me. I can therefore repeat the praifes >011 So justly lavisti upon him. What can be expeUed from Such an union, but the most permanent felicity ! Oh! how unlike that fatal connexion ! —forgive me, my dear t larista, for thus intruding upon thofe moments, which ought to be
devoted to far different emotions-1 will lay astde
my pen for a few minutes.
I left Park-hill last week. Mr- Lestey was then much indifpofed, but intended vlfiting Claremont in a few days. Heaven restore the health of that valuable man, which is fo effential to the welfare of our Emily, and to the happinefs of all his friends! That dear creature frequently mentions Sir Charles Roy-ston. She Speaks of him with tendernefs, but without regret. She no longer repines at the interruption of an attachment, of the impropriety of which stie is fully convinced. “ Ah, mv dear lady Fortefcue faid She to me one day, when we were taikingupon this fubjedl, how little able are w^e, stiort-fighted mortals, to judge what is best for us .? Had my union with Sir Charles taken place, might not the Solicitudes of a new connexion have rendered me inattentive to thofe duties, which now constitute mv greatest- happinefs .? And how much does declining age require the tender astiduities of filial love!—Can I then murmur'at the decrees of ProviJence No— my h.-art Submits without reludlance to the will of heaven, convinced that whatever it ordains, is r;ght.”
Mr.
LETTERS.
Mr. Beverly was at Park-hill Some days last; week. He is going to Ireland with his friend Mr. Shirley, who has lately purchafed an estate there, and wants him to he prelent whilst he is making Some alterations upon it.
Mr. Beverly destred his refpeUfal compliments “ to the agreeable Mifs Howard.”
I must now bid you adieu, as Mr. Beauchamp and Sir Edward are this moment arrived, and I am impatient to weiccme them to Claremont.
Your’s,
Marianne Fortescue.
LETTER CXXXIII.
Mifs,Free LOVE to Lady Dormer.
Yes, my dear Lady Bab, I am still in Estex. I had only to chooSe between two evils, gnd
this was the least-and bad enough, on my con-
fcience. To be excluded horn all thoSe Scenes of
gaiety my heart delights in !-Oh, that I were
free and independent—but the time will come—still then, I must Submit, as patiently as I can, to what is unavoidable.
M rs. Wilmot has been in Estex Some time; Sir Charles is therefore a frequent guest. He is really a divine fellow, but fo engrosted by his fair widow, that he has no eyes for any one elfe. Lovers are odious animals! But Sir Charles will foon become rational again : marriage is an excellent restorative for the fenfes.
Lady Sydney doats upon this Mrs. Wilmot; and why ? Self love, child !—becaufe fhe listens with at^ tention to her Antediluvian tales, nor interrupts the tedious harangue—like a certain perfon of your acquaintance, with a—“ Yes, madam; fo I remember you told me before, &c.’’
But why fliould I write further about thefe filly fouls! Yet, alas! what elfe have I to fay ?
Farewel;
LETTERS.	185
Farewel; I am devoured with the vapours, and therefore, in pity to us both, 1 will conclude my Self abruptly, your’s,
Charlotte Freelove.
LETTER CXXXIV.
Lady Essex to Lady Ossory.
SI R John has received a letter this week, which will hasten our return to London : we intend leaving Bath the latter end of next week.
Mifs Howard, in compliance with our wilhes of having the nuptials performed, previous to our departure, has confented to give her hand to my brother on Monday, and we are all fo bufy in making
preparations for that important day !-for Mr-
Howard is determined to have a public wedding, contrary to the v^^iil-kes of his fair niece ; but (he will not oppofe his inclinations. Mr. and Mifs Lefliey were the first invited guests ; but the former is not well enough to undertake fo long a journey, and Mifs Lefiey could not think of leaving him. How tenderly are thefe amiable friends attached to each other, and what fervent prayers does the lovely Emily offer up for the happinefs of her Clarista ! may they
be esteUual !-but indeed, my dear Lady Ostbry,
there is no room fot doubt.
Our dear friends will not return with us to town, as Mr. Howard cannot part with his beloved niece fo foon after her marriage ; but Sir John is to get every thing ready for them in Berkley-fquare, as they do not intend to be long abfent. —What pleafure Shall I experience in prefentingto your ladyfhip my amiable Sister, who is prepared to love you !
Compliments to Lord Ostbry and his Henrietta, from Sir John, and your
Sophia Essex-L E T-
i86	LETTERS.
LETTER CXXXV.
Mifs Freelove to Lady Dorm er.
WE were Sitting at breakfaft this morning, when
a Servant entered with the news-papers.--
Lady Sydney, who dearly loves thefe bufy intelligencers, put on her Specs, and began reading; when, !o ! the name of Elvin caught her attention, and ihe turned to the interesting period, which contained an account of his marriage with Mil's Howard. BleSs, me, my dear, what a profuston of endowments
w’ere bestow^ed upon the bride !-not one of which
ihe probably postestes.
I hope Lady Estex is Satisfied, now her brother is So prudently diSpofed ost — Hew I detest thefe matchmakers ! Lady Syc'ney looked at me, when stie had stnist-ied the paragraph. Harriet wilhed them happi-nefs, and the gentle Wilmot—but, after all, v/ho could have imagined, that he would have forgot me fo foon ! me, whom he feemed to love fo tenderly ! ■—had I not thought him fecurely mine, i Iliould not have trifled with him as I did ; but how came I to make this confeflion, fo unworthy a girl of fpirit ! I have abfolutely lived with thefe Soft fouls, until I have acqui.'-ed all their dove-like qualities. But think how I am lituated, amongst iliady groves, and purling streams, with the continual prefence of two the
most tender lovers in England----what virgin heart
of twenty would not be Lfttned by fuch feducing feenes ?
Lady Sydney and Harriet are just gone into Mrs. Wilmot’s apartment, after having had a long conference in private with Sir Charles. I fancy there is Some Secret going forward—stay—the partition is
thin---1 will listen--“ No longer defer Sir
Charles’s happinefs ;-pundtilio has been enough
regarded.”------Well Said, Harriet!------------
I am
L E T T E R S.	187
I am ignorant, however, of the reSult; but fuppofe their endeavours were Succefsful: theSe widows are Seldom hard-hearted.
y\*dieu. When fliall I aflure you perfonally how much I am
Your’s,
Charlotte Freelove.
LETTER CXXXVI.
Mrs- Elvin to Lady Fortescue.
JAM truly Sorry to find, that I Shall be obliged to leave Bath, without paying my reSpeUs to your Ladyiliip at Claremont. My uncle, after having kept us a long time in fuSpenfe, has at length determined to Set off for London on Monday next ; and Mr. Elvin is to accompany me to-morrow to Park-hill, where we propofe Spending twm or three days.
I am impatient to fee my Emily, yet dread the meeting ; for, alas! Madam, the good Mr* Lefley — but you know, you regret his fituation.
I will not finidi this letter till my return from Park hill, as I (hall then be able to give your Lady-
Ihip a particular account of our friends.
* * * * *
We returned to Bath last night. Oh, how did the fight of Mr. Lestey affeU me ! he wilhed me joy, but I could not Speak to him. Emily preiTed me to her bofom. We endeavoured to restrain our tears, but our looks too expreliively declared the agitations of our hearts. Mr- Lestey Soon after withdrev/-My beloved friend then unburthened all her Sorrows. She eagerly afked our opinion of her father’s fitua-tion ; yet her very inquiries Shewed her defpair. What could we fay ? Is it honest to excite hopes, w'hich cannot, I fear, be gratified ? Never did Mr, Lestey appear fo amiable as at this interesting period. He endeavours to render Emily chearful ; but how vain are his attempts! stie gazes upon him with a
melancholy
i88	LETTERS.
raelancholj tendernefs j the tears gufh into her lovely eyes ; ilie tries to conceal her emotions, and retires to give vent to a gtiest which is too violent for restraint. O, thou gracious Being, to whom every event is postible, restore to my Emily this best of parents !—or, if thou hast otherwife ordained, grant her fortitude equal to fuch a trial !
I cannot defcribe our parting. Scarcely could I bid Mr. Lefley adieu, when I refledted that it might poflibly be the last time 1 Should ever behold him. Mr. Elvin begged me, in a whifper, to conced my a-gitations, for the fake of our dear friends. Mr. Lefley wept—I Seized his hand, ana prtfl'cd it tenderly to my lips j and having again embraced my Emily, I threw myfelf hastily into the chaife; and Mr. Elvin following me—it drove away.
I rejoice to find that your Ladyfliip will return to Park-hill, when Mr. Beauchamp and Sir Edward leave Claremont. Our Emily’s Situation requires all the aids of fiiendfliip, to render it Supportable.
Mr. Elvin begs leave to add his refpedful devoirs to thofe of your Ladyfliip’s
Alfettionate humble Servant,
Clarissa Elvin,
LETTER CXXXVII.
Lady Fortescue to Mrs. Elvin.
TT was no stnall mortification to me, my dear J. Mis. Elvin, that I could not have the pleafiire of your company, before you left Bath. I had promised Sir Edward, that I would introduce him to you, and our beloved Mifs Lefley, (whom he has not Seen Since her infancy) and he was not a little chagrined at the difappoinunent He fet off with Mr. Beauchamp last wmek for * * *. He does not intend leaving him until he returns to France. I am uncertain when I fhall fee him again at Claremont.
I went to Park-hill the day after the gentlemen
had
LETTERS.	189
had left me, with the defign of fpending Some time with our dear friends; but the very morning after
niy arrival, I received a letter from Lady C-,
informing me, that her Ladyfliip w'ould be at Claremont that week in Her way to London. 1 w’as truly concerned to hear of her intention ; bat it w'as then too late to postpone the vlfit.
Mr. Lefley w’as rather better when I left Park-hill ; but a letter, which I received yesterday from Emily, has filled me with apprehenfions upon his account ; and to add to my vexation, Lady C----is
confined to her room with a rheumatic complaint, w'hich must necestarily delay her journey to town.
I remain, with my best compliments to Mr. Elvin and your uncle, dear Mrs, Elvin’s fincerely affectionate
Marianne Fortescue.
LETTER CXXXVIII.
Mifs Lesley to Lady Fortescue.
OH ! Madam, what will become of the wretched Emily !—My dear, dear father is very bad-'^ his eyes have a dying languor—'Good heavens I must J then lofe him !—lofe him for ever! the thought is distraUion! Hasten, dear Lady Fortefcue, I conjure you, to my astistance—fupport your Emily in this trying hour—greatly does She stand in need of your prefence.
* * * * *
My father called me just now to his bed-fide. He wisties to fee you before—■! cannot proceed.
I fend this letter by a Special mestenger, and remain, in the utmost anxiety and impatience, dearest Madam,
Your’s,
Emily Lesley.
LET-
,90	LETTER S.
LETTER CXXXIX.
Lady Fortescue to Mrs. Elvin.
I Imagine Lady C-------informed you, that I was
at Park-hill. I found Mr. Lefley much worfe than even my fears had foreboded..
Emily flew to meet me, as foon as I got out of
the coach.---“ Oh, Madam, faid She weeping,
and is it thus we meet again ?” I could not fpeak to her for fome moments But at length, recolledling that the principal motive of my vifit was to confole this dear creature under the impending trial, I af-fumed all my fortitude, and ufed every argument which reafon and religion luggefted, to mitigate her diftrefs.
She withdrew, foon after, to inform Mr. Lefley of my arrival; and returned immediately, in order to condudl me into his chamber.
I was greatly affedted at feeing him. He prefled
my hand----the tears came into his eyes-and he
turned away his face to conceal his emotion. Emily withdrew from thebed-fide. “ My dear Lady For-tefcue, faid he at last;, in a faint voice, all will now
be over in a few days--do not, however, purfued
he, perceiving my agitations,—do not thus forrow as one without hope. Remember, my dear friend, that this is only a momentary Separation, and that we fhall meet again, in a far better state I trust, to part no more. Let this thought be your confola-
tion.---O! my friend, continued he in a joyful
rapture, you know not what foretastes-what delightful hopes.’’--------------------But alas ! my Emily—there-—
there’s the sting—to leave my child—that indeed is dying.” “ Ah, my friend, my dear, dear friend, returned I, half drowned in tears, if we must lofe you—the dear Emily—my care—my tendernefs—I could not proceed.” “ Enough, enough. Madam, rejoined he; to that care, that terdernei's, I conlign
her.
LETTERS.	191
her- I thank thee, O my God! for this inestimable friend ; every wiili of my heart is Satisfied ; and death has lost all its terrors.”
Adieu, dear Mrs. Elvin ; I will Soon write again.
M. F 0 R 1 E s c u E .
LETTER CXL.
Lady Fortescue to Mrs Elvin.
My dear friend, what a Scene have I this night been wiineSs to! Never will it be effaced Srom my remembrance. 1 retired to my chamber about eleven o’clock, in order to get a little reft, not having ffept above an hour the two preceding night^s. Emily,) who has had a bed put up in the cloSet adjoining to Mr. Lefley’s room) had lain dowm in her cloaths. I was juft Sailing into a gentle Slumber, when Somebody knocked at the door. I flew to open it; it was the Servant, who, wdth diftraUion in her countenance, eagerly Informed me, that her dear mafter was dying. I haftened to his apartment —but, good heavens! what an affedling Scene presented itSelf! Emily leaning upon the bed. Supported her expiring parent—their faces cloSely united, and the fame clay-cold paleneSs vifible in each. Mr. Lefley w'as in a fainting fit, and it was a long time before he recovered his fenSes. At length, however, he opened his languid eyes, and fixed them upon the darling of his heart ; he could not Ipeak, but he endeavoured to preSs her to his almoft liieleSs boSom, whilft file Sunk between thoSe paternal arms, which had So often strained her with the most enraptured fondnefs.
»	m	*	*	*	«
Oh ! Mrs. Elvin, I cannot proceed. Mr. Lefley
is no more-he expired about an hour ago in the
arms of his beloved Emily.
* * * * *
TueSday night.
Mi.
192	LETTERS.
Mr. Howard is just; arrived. Emily has read your letter, and will endeavour to anSwer it. Farewel, my dear friend. My Spirits are too much agitated to Suffer me to write further.
Marianne Fortescue.
LETTER CXLI.
From the Same.
I Have anxiousty waited for an opportunity of vi-fiting, unperceived by any one, the remains of my dear departed friend, and this morning chance favoured my wifhes.
I Softly entered the room where the coffin flood ; it was not yet fastened down ; I removed the cloth which covered his pale face. Ah ! my dear Clarista, how awful, how affeUing is fuch a fpedacle! I Scarcely Seemed to breathe—a thoufand fad ideas took posteffion of my foul. I cast back ray thoughts to that period, when nothing intruded to interrupt our
iappinefs-alas, what a change ! I then looked
towards the tremendous future—at fuch a profpeU, every worldly tie Seems to be distblved ; every af-piring wifh is Subdued. Ye fleeting, ye unsatisfactory enjoyments, where are ye now, and what is your amount! I gazed upon him, without even knowing what I beheld ; I was abfolutely lost in contemplation, when Suddenly starting from my reverie, I perceived the wretched Emily. She hastily approached the mournful receptacle, and after having Surveyed it for Some moments with the most eager attention—She took one of his clay-cold hands, and prested it to her lips. “ And is this the last time, exclaimed stie—(hall I never—never fee thee more, my excellent parent!—To belaid in the dark grave, a prey for worms!—Great God, purfued stie, her hands clafped together in an agony of grief, why,
why are we thus Separated?-Oh! ray father,
would to heaven I had died with thee !
#**•**
I have
LETTERS.	193
« » « >
I have this moment received your letter, and rejoice in your intention of vKiting Park-hill. 1 hope our united influence will be powerful enough to prevail upon Emily to leave this melancholy fpot, where every objett reminds her of her irreparable lofs.
Mr. Howard returns to Bath immediately after the funeral.
Adieu ! I long to embrace you.
Marianne Fortescue*
LETTER CXLII.
Lady Fortescue to Sir Edward Fortescue-
IT was indeed owing to the idlenefs of my beloved friend, Mifs Lefley, that your last letter remained So long unanfwered. The dear ceature has been in the greatest danger. Mrs- Elvin and I never left her bedflde, but flie was for Several days infenfible of our preSence, and called inceflantly for her father. How affecting was Such a Scene ! I Sometimes feared that Mrs. Elvin would have funk beneath the trial, but heaven gracioufly interpofed in our favour, and restored to us our invaluable friend.
The phyficians judging the Bath waters neceflary for the perfedl re-establifhment of Mifs Lefley’s health, we have at length prevailed upon her to un-, dertake the journey, and I iliali attend her to Mr. Howard’s next week.
Mrs. Eivin wifhes her to go to London immediately after her leaving Bath ; but the gaiety and diffipa-tion of the great world, would but ill Suit w'ith the dejection of her tender mind ; and the intimacy, which fubfists between Mr. Elvin and Sir Charles Royston, is an additional reafon for her declining the invitation. I believe therefore (lie will be with me at Claremont ; her company will enliven my Solitude, and render me truly happy-
VoL. II,	D	Mr.
194	LETTERS.
Mr, Lefley has left the little fortune of Emily in-tirely at her own difpofal. Independence can have no danger for a mind like her’s. She polTefles at nineteen that prudence, which is generally the attendant only upon maturer age-
When does Mr- Beauchamp leave England ? Pre-fent my heft compliments to him ; and believe me ever
Your most: affeUionate mother, and stncerest friend,
M. Fortescue.
LETTER CXLIII.
MiSs Freelove to Lady Dormer.
TO-morrow is the important day, that will give the lovely Louifa Wilmot to' the eager wilhes of her dear Sir Charles. Harriet and I are to be bridc'maids. The ceremony is to be performed here, at the earnest request of Lady Sydney. Lord, and Lady Oflbry are expelled this evening,
I doat on the bustle, and Ihould not much care if I was the occafion of it.
This marriage was to have taken place Some time ago, but was postponed upon Mifs Lestey’s account; for her father dying just at that period, the tender Louifa would not give her hand to Sir Charles, whilst Emily was in fuch a sttuation. “ The hearing of our union, faid Mrs. Wilmot to him, would at any time, I fear, affedt her ; but how greatly fo, in this hour of fori'ow ! What must the dear creature have luffered in loSing fuch a parent ? And strall we add to her distrefs—we, who owe every thing to her generofity !'’ Do you understand this. Dormer ? Such confideration for a rival is rather uncommon. But thefe fentimental women are fuch eccentric beings !
Lady Sydney and Harriet are gone to take an airing in the chariot. Sir Charles drives Mrs, V/il-
mot
LETTERS.	X95
mot In his phaeton. I was invited to be of the party, but choSe to devote my time to your Ladyliiip—
an interruption for the prefent.
*	* *	* *
Sir Charles has brought meTuck a delicious nofe-
gay for to-morrow.--Oh ! this to-morrow !—we
can none of us think of any thing elfe !-another
interruption-Lord and Lady Oflbry are arrived,
and I have not another moment to Spare.
Adieu, my dear; your’s,
C«ARL0TTE FaEELOViE.
LETTER CXLIV.
Lady Fortescue to Mrs. Elvikt.
MISS Lefley has been with me at Claremont near a month. I left Bath greatly indifpofed ; what did not the dear creature fufrer during my confinement! She upbraided herfelf with being the occafion of my diforder. “ It is I, Said Ike weeping, I, who am fo highly indebted to your goodnefs, who am, alas ! the fatal caufe of your fufferings. Intirely engrofled by my own Sorrows, I have been inattentive to all the duties offriendfliip. Ungenerous Emily ! thy concern for the dead has rendered thee ungrateful to the living.——Ah, if heaven Ihould. deprive me of my inestimable friend, could I dare to lament the cruelty of my fate—I, who have been fo infenfible of her value !”
In a few days, however, my indifpofition abated, and every other emotion was abforbed in her joy at my fafety. I no longer lamented ray illnefs, fince it w^as that which first drew her from the delirium of Sorrow, which, till then, had engrofled all her faculties.
Soon after, Lord Merton and his two daughters came to Spend a week at Claremont.
My health not being perfefliy re-establiShed, Mifs Lefley was left to entertain them. A'diverfity of D 2	Scene
'
ig6	LETTERS.
Scene neceflarily produces an alteration of fenti-ments,- and Emily became every day lefs melancholy.
It was at this time that we heard of Sir Charles Royfton’s marriage. The intelligence tenderly af-fedled me, but Emily’s condudl Soon difpelled every fear.
I am obliged to you for your enquiries after Sir Edward, whofe return I am in daily expeUation of, Mr. Beauchamp having left England. He is well, and ignorant of my late confinement.
Lady Frances Merton is ftill at Claremont. I re-quefted the favour of her company on Emily’s account- I would not have her continually alone with me- Youth is the feafon for chearfulnefs, and ilie is naturally but too much difpofed to melancholy.
I remain, witlr compliments to Mr. Elvin,
Your’s,
Marianne Fortescue-
LETTER CXLV.
Mifs Freelove to Lady Do rm e r.
SYdney Grove has been the feat of pleafure, fince
Sir Charles’s marriage-nothing but feaftings,
balls, and entertainments—a propos^ did you know Sir Harry Wilton was come to live at H— } which is only four miles from hence. He gave a magnificent ball, this w’eek, to all the neighbouring families, and who do you think were amongll theguells ? No other than Elvin and his dainty fpoufe; they
came wdth Mrs.-----. I W'as confufed at feeing
him j but the wretch regarded me only with a look of carek-fs Indifference. His wife too cbfeived me
without
letters.	197
witliout emotion. Detestable compofure ! Could I have excited one uneafy fenfation in her mind, I had been happy. Contempt, nay, infolence had been Supportable; but Surely, my dear Lady Bab, there can be nothing So provoking, as the finding one’s Self too unimportant even for refentment.
On Monday next Sir Charles and Lady Royston, Harriet and your humble Servant, Set off* for the Thorns.
May I not expeft to See you in the country this Summer Your preSence can alone render it agreeable to me, and novelty might give it charms, even in the eyes of your Ladyistip.
Charlotte Freelove
LETTER CXLVI.
Sir Edward Fortescue to Mr. Beauchamp.
I Rejoice to hear of your Safe arrival at Paris, and that you found Sir William Beauchamp, and the rest of your amiable family, in perfect health.
I came to Claremont on Tuefday last. The ladies were gone to a concert, given by Colonel Alhby.' I immediately changed my drefs and followed them. The concert was begun, but I found a vacant Seat near Lady ForteScue. After the first compliments were over, I enquired after her fair guests, and particularly which of the ladies was MiSs Lefiey. “ What think you, returned stie, of that lady in whitecasting her eyes upon Lady Frances. I looked distatisfied. “ How, Sir Edward,” rejoined my mother, perceiving my disappointed countenance, “ why, is fhe not very handSome “ True, Madam ; but that lady next her, in my opinion, is
infinitely more So.’’ Lady Fortefcue Smiled-■“ I
believe you have deceived me. Madam, returned I.” D 3	“ Yes,
igS	letters.
“ Yes, my fon, faid Ilie, that indeed is my EAily
----the other is the much-admired Lady Frances
Merton.’’
A common obferver might, perhaps, think the latter as beautiful as Mifs Lefley. Her features are as regular, and her complexion as delicately transparent i but where is that air of fenfibility, thofe expreffive graces, which would render deformity agreeable, and without which even beauty cannot charm 1 Yet, alas, how often are thefe winning attractions aflumed, on purpofe to betray the unwary heart, which was too honest: to fufpeft, that infm-cerity and vice could dwell under So fair a form! Deceitful, dangerous fex ! But, hold! general re-BeCtions are always proofs of a weak or wicked mind, and I detest; them.
We are going to Lord Merton’s next week, to carry home Lady Frances, and are to remain Some time at the hall.,
HisLordstrip is half in love, it feems, with Mifs Lefley, whom he calls his rofe-bud. The young ladies, however, are jealous of his encomiums, and of her apparent Superiority in every acquirement.
A country girl to excel Such courtly ladies!—— amazing ! they are not a little puzzled about it.
I beg you would prefent my refpeCtful devoirs to your family, and believe me ever.
Dear Beauchamp,
Your’s,
Edward Fortescue,
LET--
LETTERS.	X99
LETTER CXLVir.
Mifs Sydney to Lady Ossory.
WE have had fuch a multiplicity of engagements, ever fince our arrival at the Thorns, that -I have not had a leifure moment, to devote even to my dear Lady Oflbry.
But after having been perSeeuted almost: to death, and going through all thofe tedious ceremonies, which custrom has impoSed upon thefe occafions, we are at length left to be happy in our own way, and to enjoy all the tranquil pleafures of this Sweet retirement.	A
O, Lady Ostbry, when I cast back my eyes to thofe painful fcenes I was once witnefs of in this place, when I recoiled: the tender regret, the anxious fears, which the sttuatlon of our Louifa then excited in my foul, and view the great, the delightful change—behold her amiable virtues fo justly rewarded by your excellent brother, my joy is beyond exprestion, and I have nothing to wisti for, but the continuance of her felicity.
It is the constant study of Sir Charles and Lady Royston to diffufe happinefs around them. Their charity is not confined to the temporal wants of the necestitous ; it extends alfo to their w'dl-being in a future state of existence.
“ We complain, faysSir Charles, of the wickednefs pf the lower clafs of people ; but do we take any pain to prevent, or impede the progrefs of immorality, either by the weight of precept, or the force of example ? On the contrary, is there a vice to be found amongst the meaner part of mankind, which is not equally praftifed by thofe who vainly stile themfelves their fuperiors ? The clergy, whofe particular duty it is to lead them gently in the paths of virtue, too often ne-gleft the important work, and even, I blusth to fay it,
1^4.	hy
ioo	L £ T T E R S.
their own irregularities, render religion an objedt of ridicule to feme, and ofdifbelief toothers. The redtor of this parifli, continued he Smiling, is not a little difpleafed at the n)oderaiion of my Sentiments with regard to the methodifts, of which we have a pretty large number; but, belides motives of policy (for oppofition wou'd but increafe the evil he laments)
I have other reafons for my Silence-, Any religion is -
I believe, better than none at all :---;—and thefe:
itinerant gentry, though they weaken the head, may Sometimes perhaps amend the heart ; at least, pur-fued he, I would have him uSe no Other methods to recal his v/andering stock, than the gentle arts of perfuafion and advice.”
«	«• * , ' *	*
Just returned from a benevolent- round with Sir Charles and Lady Royston. This amiable pair entered the dwellings of their stek and indigeqt neighbours with a SweetneSs and humility that charmed me- They eagerly inquired after their webare, and listened to the at thfs detail of their Sorrows, with the attention of hearts dilpofed to relieve them.
My coufin happened to meet us in our ramble, and we went home with her to tea. The giddy Charlotte rallied Sir Charles upon the care he took to provide for a Set of Creatures, whofe sttuation, stie Said, rendered them beneath the notice of a man of his rank, and who, it was probable, were undeServing of his favours, or at least inSenSible of his bounty.
The exprestive countenance of Sir Charles betrayed his contempt of her observation. “ I hope, Madam, returned he gravely, I (hall never think any of my fellow creatures unworthy my regard ; and indeed in what reSpeU are they inferior to me, except in the advantageous circumstances of rank and fortune ? in merit, perhaps, how greatly my Superiors !
“ I allow that there may be Some amongst them, who deServe the reproaches, which you unjustly la-viili upon all. But llull virtue Suffer for the Saults of the vicious Shall benevolence be extirpated, be-cauSe Some are undeServing of her favours ?
“We
r .
letters. 201
I	“ We are apt to fet too high a value upon our be-
!	nefaUions, and consequently to expeU inadequate
L	returns ; whereas we ought not to be disappointed,
!	if the relief ^ve have afforded is not always paid by
gratitude. ---But what of that -----------we Shall
’ diave our reward, and of that being, from whom '• alone it ought to be expefted- Good heaven 1 pur-fued Sir Charles, his colour rifing as he Spoke, and his eyes Sparkling with benevolence, can there be fo great, fo godlike an aftion, as that of diffufing hap-* pinefs ! To difpel the cares of poverty, to wipe the trickling tear from palfied age, and pay its grey hairs each due reverence ? Can any gratification,
, which pomp or luxury affords, be equal to this luxury of the mind, this inexpreflible, delightful fenfa-,tion, which elevates the foul to heaven, and prepares it for the joys of immortality !” “Well, well, faid
my gay coufin, every one has his tafte----but I am
amazed Lady Ro-yston fliould have the complaifance
to attend you in your charitable vifits.”-“ Indeed,
Mifs Freelove, interrupted Lady Royfton hastily, I will not have you impute my attendance to Such a motive, the pieafure I receive from them, is greater than any I ever experienced in the politest circles.
“ I have found more happinefs in a cottage, than in '	the most Splendid drawing-room ; deceit and Scandal
are banilhed the lowly roof, and innocence, and rustic -	piainnefs adorn the peaceful dwelling.’’ Charlotte
replied only with a look of astonistiment, and. a care-
lefs fhrug of her flioulders.-But I refign the pen
to our dear Louifa.
***•*»
,	My Harriet has allowed me to perufe her letter—
blefs me, what encosniums ! Thofe stie bestows upon Sir Charles are Justly merited, Heisthebest—the tenderefl—but fo 1 have told you a hundred times
I	before,---AndTow does my good brother and his
faucy wife } Botii well, and preparing for a journey to the Thorns. Remember your promifes ; they are facred things, child—befides, in your sttuation, delays are dangerous,
D 5	Sir
302	letters.
Sir Charles enters the room. Writing my dear Louifa ? and to our Henrietta?——Will you allow me to finish the letter ? Most certainly.——He is going to chide you, my dear friend ; and, what is more astonishing still, your Louifa confents to it.
» * » * *
Tell me, my obstinate fister, do you not repent of your not accompanying us to the Thorns ? I know you do, though like a true woman, you fcorn to acknowledge an error. And how dare you, my inSolent brother, make this'remark upon the Sex, and
your wife at your elbow ?-Why, child. She is
an angel, not a woman, and consequently the remark is not fo ill timed as you imagined My Louifa, however, disclaims all right to the appellation, nor will She ever accept of a compliment at the expence of her Sex.
Adieu, my dear Henrietta. Say every thing for me to my OSTory, and believe me your
Charles Royston.
LETTER CXLVIll.
Lady OssOry to MiSs Sydney.
I Was Sitting in my drawing-room yesterday, dozing over a novel,, which accidentally lay upon the window, when the Servant entered, followed by Mr. Beverly. He could not have come at a more favourable jundure. I was tired of my employment, of mySelsi and all around me, (take notice, by the bye, that my good man was abfent) and received his unexpected visit with peculiar fatisfaUion.
He Sets off for the Thorns to-morrow, being quite impatient to fee Sir Charles, and my stfter Royston. His stay, however, will be Short, he has engaged to meet Mr.Shirley in towm on Saturday next.
Did my sttuaiion allow me the liberty of following my inclinations, I Should certainly accompany him in his flying vistt-—but this is impoSTible. After all,
Harriet,
LETTERS.	203
Harriet, it is an odious circumstance——but we will talk no more of it.
Ladj Sydney came to townyesterd^, and I paid my compliments to her this morning. The good lady begins to talk of your return. Confider, child, you have already staid a month beyond your time j but you are an unconfcionable girl.
Adieu. I have nothing to fay—‘and therefore will hasten to fubfcribe myfelst Your
Henrietta OssoRY.
LETTER CXLIX.
MiSs Lesley to Mrs. Elvin.
WE left Merton-hall last week. I am charm-ed with the amiable owner of that delightful feat. The franknefs of his manners pleafe me far better than all the unmeaning politenefs of the Great —— truth can never be difagreeable to thofe who are not compelled to fear it.
His Lordfliip is extremely attached to Sir Edward Fortefcue ; nor is Lady Frances, I believe, infenfible ot his merit. Sir Edward's Situation has Something in it fo truly pitiable, that it excites in every feeling mind a pieposteffion in his favour, which, in a heart fo young and tender as her Lady-(hip’s, may be eafily converted into a Softer emotion. Who indeed can behold, unmoved, a man fo amiable, So formed for domestic happinefs, united to one, who difregards every thing that ought to be dear and Sacred, and is known only to bedefpifed ?
I have for Some time been attempting to take a likenefs of my dear Lady Fortefcue, and have at length Succeeded tolerably well ; at least her Lady-strip is pleafed to think fo.
She has requested me, with an earnestnefs which I could not refufe, to draw Sir Edward fur her ; as stre has Several pictures of him, but none of them
like
204	LETTERS.
like the original: I have confented, upon condition, that they never mention it as rny performance, and Sir Edward will not Suffer me to forget my promife.
This employment Serves to divert my thoughts from more Serious fubjeUs, and as Lady Fortefcue and Sir Edward are So affiduous In their endeavours to divert me, it would be cruel in me to appear melancholy,
# *
I have this moment received your letter, and rejoice to hear’of your intention of vifiting Claremont,
in your way to Bath,--But, my dear friend, have
you then accepted of your aunt’s invitation, and do you and Mr. Elvin really propofe going to Holland in a month at farthest? Lady Effex, Sir John, and your uncle are to accompany you—1 am half angry with them for their complaifance.
I have informed Lady Fortefcue of your vlfit to Claremont, and ilie will write to you by the return of the post, to thank you for an intention, fo agreeable to her wishes.
Sir Edward Foi tefcue is gone into G-stiire, fo
that you will not have the pleafure of Seeing him, as you feem to hope for.
Adieu, my dear friend ; 1 long to embrace you-
Emily Lesley,
LETTER CL.
Mrs Elvin to LadyEssex.
Your, predifSlons were well founded, my dear Lady Estex; we did not leave Claremont till the latter end of last week.
The company of nty beloved Emily, was a pleasure I could with difficulty bring rnyfelf to reiign ; my intended voyage too, rendered the feparaiion more alfeding, and our adieus were more melan-Ciiol/.
Sir
LETTERS. 2C5
Sir Edward Fortefcue was abfent during our vifit, but he Spent two days with us at Bath in his way to Claremont.
I	1 am, more than ever, incenfed against the un-
worthy Lady Lucy, Since I have Seen this amiable man ; who has merit Sufficient to Secure any heart, except that, which he ought wholly to have poS-fested. He mentioned MiSs Leflty with all tl-e ten-dcrneSs of fraternal affection, and listened with plea-lure to the praiSes I So justly befiiowed upon her—a propos, 1 forgot to tell you, that the dear creature has made a conquest, and no inconstJerable one, I affure you.
Do you remember Colonel Stanly at Bath ? tie has taken a houSe near Claremont, and is a frequent vifitor at Lady ForteScue’s.
Her Ladystiip perceives his partiality for her fair friend, and Seems defirous of increafing it. His fortune is very confiderable, and his charadter unquestionable.
We made two or three little excurSions, during our stay at Claremont, and the colonel always contrived to be of the party ; all his affiduitles were di-refled to Emdy j stie received them with the utmost politeneSs, unaccompanied by any tender emotion.— Her blindneSs to her own perfeUions renders her in-fenfible of the motives of his attention the discovery of them v/ould make her unhappy- —I therefore took care to conceal my SuSpicions, and Lady Fortefcue for the fame reaSon is equally reServed.
I wilB to fee her engaged in a connexion, from whence arifes the greatest happinefs in life j but So well do I know her Sentiments, as to be convinced, that if ever Ihe stiould be again entangled by a paf-lion, which her past Sufferings have rendered obnoxious to her. She must be infenfibly drawn into the fni-ue, nor difeover the danger till it is too late to avoid it.
The affiduitles of an amiable man may perforin wonder;; ffis fees few befides him, and none more
agreeable ;
2o6	LETTERS.
agreeable ; thefe circumftances are greatly in bis fa*-vour.
How often, Since my acquaintance with Sir Eid-ward Fortefcue, have 1 wiShed him diSengaged ?-— His uncomuion merit—the ^Similarity of their fenti-ments—I am interrupted—and have only time to add, that we fiiall be in London on Friday evening, and that my uncle is impatient to begin his journey.
Your’s, &c.
Clarissa Elvin.
LETTER CLI.
Sir Edward Fortescue to Mr. Beauchamp.
I Returned to Claremont yesterday, and was received by Lady Fortefcue with her ufual tender-
nefs. Mifs Lestey too--my lister Emily, I iBould
fay, for fhe allows me to call her by that endearing epithet—feemed pleafed to fee me-
For my own part, 1 rejoiced to embrace again two friends fo dear to my heart. All ray wifhes are confined to this enchanting Spot; it is here only that I experience true happineSs,—fay what you will, Beauchamp, there is a foftnefs, a delicacy, even in the friendstiip which we feel for the female fex, that we men can never experience in our connections with each other-
Don’t you remember the grotto at Claremont, which you ufed to viSit with delight ? It is now the favourite retreat of the fair Emily.
I have had a rustic bench placed near it, and adorned it with jestaniine and honey-fuckle; thefe, fince my abfence, have been her care,—“ and under her fair tendance gladlier grew.” With what rapture do I fit here, listening to the mufic of her mciO-dious voice, which the murmuring of the distant caf-cade renders more inchanting • O-li! my friend, how exquifite are thefe deh’ghfs, how preferable to thofe tumultuous pleasures the giddy v/orld purfues!
I have
LETTERS.	207
«	«	«	»
*	«	«	•
I have this moment received a letter from Mr. Freeman, with one inclol'ed in it from Lady Lucy to him.
That wretched woman is again involved in debt— Sire has begged him to interpofe in her behalf—he knew not how to a£l—unworthy as ilie is of the favour (lie petitions for. This affair interrupts, flie fays, the repofe of her life ; ah ! can the guilty nii:id exped repofe!
Never was I fo averfe to her petitions; I cannot, will not listen to them ; stie is become more detestable in my fight than ever ; the virtues of the lovely Emily-----but it is criminal to think of them to-
gether.
I will write to Mr. Freemm, but it strall be a denial—I cast her off for ever. Were I to grant her request, my prefence would be necelTary in London, and I will not leave Claremont upon fuch an account. No, let her fuffer—what are her woes compared to mine! Ah ! my father, little did you imagine the evils your ambition would inflid upon your unhappy fon, elfe furely you had withdrawn the stern decree, that forced him into this fatal connedion !— But who could have fuppofed, that one educated in the austerity of a convent—yet might not that feclu-fion be the occafion of ihofe errors I lament.?—But hold, 1 fee Mifs Lestey entering the park—a Sufficient apology for my throwing afide my pen.
* «	* « *
What an alteration ! my refolutions are vanished <—I have contented to iVlr- Freeman’s request, and
am even preparing for my journey to town.--You
are furprifed---and whence the mighty change you
fay !----Ah ! who could effed it, but that irrefisti-
ble maid, Vvi^hofe power is unlimited ! She interceded
for the wretched Lucy-----how impoffible to refist
fuch eloquence !-----1 Sacrificed my refentment to
her intreaties- She hopes for her reformation from
my
2oS LETTERS.
my generofity.-“ Who knows, Sir Edward, Says
the amiable girl, whether this kindnefs of your’s may not excite her gratitude, and render her once more worthv your atfeclion.” No, no—1 can never love her again ; 1 may pity, I may forgive her ; but more is irnpoffible. Blest with the friendship of the lovely Emily, and the tendernefs of the best of parents, I have not a wifh beyond.
Adieu!
Edv/ard Fortescue.
LETTER CLil.
From the Same.
V OU afk me “ whether 1 have forgot the promife I uiade at parting, of writing to you every month ?” I anfwer in the negative. Yet perhaps it would have been better that 1 had done So, than to remember and not perform it.
But I returned only last night, from a tour with my brother and iViifs Lefiey to * * and * *. Colonel Stanley and his fister Lady Daire were of the party. No attention was wanting to render the ex-curfion agreeable, but I must confefs that I never fpent my time with lefs fatisfadion. Lady Daire is lively ; stie would fain be humorousty fo, but generally fails in the attempt. She chofe to be very particular in her behaviour towards me; 1 was never
lefsdifpofed for gallantry ; yet politenefs-1 verily
believe that, had the jaunt lasted a day longer, I Sliould not have preferved my complaifance.
T he Colonel is lefs gay than when I knev/ him at Paris. He Ipoke with feen ing pleafure of the hours he had pasted in my company, and wiShed lor the
renewal ol our acquaintance.-What could I—or
rather
LETTERS.	209
rather what did 1 fay ? How detestable are thoSe civilities, which are made at the expence of our fincerity !
I like not Colonel Stanley;------'he is strangely al-
tered fince I first knew him, and yet I cannot at
prcfent tell you in what refpeds.--Lady For-
tefcue is prejudiced in his favour ; stre feems pleafed with his attachment to Mifs Lestey, which is indeed but too apparent----furely fire does not endeavour----------------Emily at least-1 know not what I
was going to fay.
An interruption---Colonel Stanley is below.—
And why is my company defired } His vistts-arc
they made to me ? Adieu I
Thi.s letter is unconnefted, ridiculous; I have not time however to write another.
I am your’s,
Edward Fortescue.
L E T»
210	LETTERS.
LETTER CLIII.
From the Same.
X70UR letter has chagrined me beyond exprefiion ;
X you are mistaken, however, in the Sentiments I teel for Mifs Lefley.
It is impostible for me to converfe with an agreeable woman, without feeling emotions, which my un-happy fituation would render criminal ! Must I quit the only fpot where I taste felicity, lest it stiould become too interesting to me ! Alas! how few are my pleafures—and must thofe fevr be refigned ! but your advice is as unnecdfary, as your fufpicions are without foundation—let us quit then this difagreeable fubjeU.
I am going to drive Lady Fortefcue in my phaeton to S-----, this morning. Mifs Lestey will not ac-
company us, as stie is bufy in writing letters to her friend^ abroad.
1 intend (out of curiofit)') to found my mother refpeUing Colonel; Stanley ; it was one of the motives that induced me to request her company—but why did I tell you this ? It will only ferve to increafe your fufpicions.—The carriage is at the door—I hasten to attend Lady Fortefcue.
Adieu, for the prefent-
* * « # *
Oh, Beauchamp, can it be postible !-Good
heavens !—what a difwvery—Mifs Lefley-Colo-
ia! Stanley—yes, stie returns his pastion.
I faw him prefs her hand to his lips ; fhe withdrew it indeed, but it was at my approach.-
Deceitful woman ! it was for him then flie waited at
home this morning--he has obtained that heart
which I—what am I going to fay ?—can your fufpicions then be just !—Ah ! Beauchamp, hide me, hide me from myfelf, from the Suggestions of my own mind.
Where!
LETTERS.	211
Where! alas, is that indifference folately avowed,
and gloried in 1--Forgive me—pity me—I have
deceived myfelf •— what will not this fatal deception cost me I—dearly Hiall I pay for my weak credulity /
* • * * *•
The family are retired to rest, but deep will this night be a stranger to my eyes.
I have treated Mifs Lefley this evening with a
coldnefs, that I Saw furprifed her—-but, alas,
of how little confequence is my difpleaSure ! yet (he Seemed dejefted, thoughtful.—What could occaSion her melancholy .?—Loving and beloved, can there remain a wiili unfatisfied !
»	*	»	•
Colonel Stanley has been here this morning ; Mifs Lefley behaved to him with a referve that amazed
me------If file means to hide her regard, under
the mafk of diflimulation — can Emily then stoop to deceive? Ah, if fo, I were lefs wretched.——But has fhe not discovered the distrefs of my mind, and may not the fweetneSs of her diSpofition induce her to a£t thus ?—If this is really the cafe, fhe ought to be dearer to me than ever-
»	»	»	«
My dear friend, I want words to defcribe the transport of my foul 1-----Mifs Lefley has refufed
Colonel Stanley’s addrefles.———	She can never
think of him but with indifference, and therefore
would not keep him a moment in fufpenfe.’----
Angelic creature!——But he would not be fo hastily repulfed——his vistt this morning difpleafed her
—ihe
212	LETTERS.
“(lie has refolved never to fee him more, unlefs he will treat her with the distance of a common acquaintance. Her Sincerity chagnnshim—my mother too regrets the impostibility of a connexion, which (he has always thought of with pleafure.
Colonel Stanley has long willied to come to an edaircistement with Mifs Ledey, but stie always carefully avoided being alone with him.
He chanced to meet her yesterday in the park, where stre wmnt to walk after having stnistsed her letters.
My dear Beauchamp, how happily has this meeting terminated ! I may still enjoy the pleafure of feeing her. of endeavouring to cultivate that friend-
strip, which constitutes all my happinefs ; of—--
but no--- I ought, you fay, “ to avoid her — to
leave Claremont immediately”-alas / how many
obstacles oppofe Such a defign! peihaps I take a pleafure in encrcafmg the number.
But is it then impostilste to feel this tendernefs, without exceeding the bound.s which honour prescribes } Can there be any thing to fear from fo amiable an objeft ! No, no, my dear fiiend, were I ever to forget thofe ties which have hitherto restrained me, the fight of m,y Emily would immediately banistr every unworthy emotion ; the pastjon stie infpires is likeherfelst pure and fpotlefs.
Can it then, I repeat, be necestary to leave her— to fee her no more—-to renounce the pleafure of con-
verfing with her.--Ah ! how I detest that austerity
----forgive me, Beauchamp—I know that friend-
strip Suggested your advice, and esteem you always.
Ei'Ward Fortescue.
LET-
LETTERS.	213
LETTER CLIV.
MiSs Lesley to Mrs. Elvin".
OH! my dear friend, why are you abfent at this intereiiing period, when your Emily So greatly requires your prefence.
Sir Edward has difcovered that fata! attachment— difcovered it too before Lady Daire, who is So irritated against me--Our feparation is become ne-
celfary— one of us must leave Claremont, and can I deprive Lady Fortefcue of a fon, whom Ihe fo tenderly values ? Yet to leave this enchanting fpot—to
bid adieu to friends fo dear, fo valuable-but it
must be fo.
I have written to Lady Frances Merton, to inform her of my intention of pasting fome time with her at the hall.
The family have long wistied for my company. I do not expedt to be happy there—my heart has lost all relisti for thofe pleafures which Lady Frances purfues with fuch avidity ; but what could I do ?
The alylum is fafe, it is honourable.-How stn-
cerely does Lady Fortefcue lament our feparation ! As to Sir Edward—but his distrefs is beyond def-cription.
My gloomy mind fometimes prefages the ra.pst dreadful confequences fiom the fatal indifcretipn of Sir Edward. Colonel Stanley is proud, impatient, and tenderly attached to his stster ; that artful woman-----wLat may not her malicious reprefentalions
dfeU; !--but I forget that you are Stiil ignorant of
lier late condudt—the particulars of it are too deeply engraved upon my memory ,to be east y erafed.
I was fitting alone in the parlour this morning, (Lady Fortefcue being gone with another Lady to pay a vistt, and Sir Ed ward having .’•ode out) when Lady Daire’s chariot drove up to the door-
She
214	LETTERS,
She paid her compliments to me with an unufual referve, but I was too well acquainted with the caufe to be Surprised, or even offended by her behaviour'
I endeavoured to lead the conversation to indifferent Subjeds, but fhe would mention her brother.— She enlarged upon what he had Suffered, from my late cruelty (as Slie termed it) and exprelfed her wonder at my condudl. “ Colonel Stanley, MiSs Lefley, Said flie, the colour rifing as fhe Spoke, is not to bedeSpISed. His Samily, his fortune, entitle him, I think, to the honour he Sued for- But I am come to petition for him, and to endeavour to Soften that obdurate heart ofyour’s,”
“ Your Ladyfhip must excuSe me, returned I, if I confeSs, that I am not a little SurpriSed at this vifit, after my having tvoice refufed Colonel Stanley’s ad-dreffes. Had there been the leaf! probability of my ever changing my Sentiments, believe me, Madam,
I had Spoke leSs peremptorily--but that is out of
the question.’’ “ And why So., MiSs, exclaimed her Ladyfliip haughtily i let me tell you, you giveyour-felf great airs upon this occafion, and receive as an affront, what you ought to confider as an obligation.”
Your Ladyfhip muff forgive me, returned I
rifing, if I stay no longer to beinfulted.-Did the
Colonel know, continued I, how tenderly you petition for him, he would indeed wonder that my heart could be obdurate enough to reSist fuch eloquence.” “ Stay, MiSs, stay, replied She hastily, placing her-felf before me—neither the Colonel, nor myfelS, are ignorant of the caufe of your rejeding him, and I must acknowledge that Sir Edward is much obliged to you, for having made fuch a facrihce to oblige hinn”
I don’t understand you, returned I hastily—“ O, no doubt, you are totally unacquainted with his
pastion ; his Sighs-his astiduities-have all eS-
caped you.-----Ah MiSs Lefley, MiSs Lefley, this
diflimulation 1—I abhor itr exclaimed I ; innocence requires it not—if Sir Edward really Seels for me,
that
LETTERS.	215
that regard you fuSpea, he has been prudent enough
not to divulge it.’’-1 was proceeding when the
door opened, and Sir Edward entered the room :— what an appearance !—Lady Daire’s face was crini-foned over with paffion, mine bedewed with tears.—• He eagerly inquired the caufe—I was filent—Lady Daire foon informed him—fooliili woman j how mean did refentment make her]—Sheaccufed him of having been the occafion—what did Site not fay ?—■
her farcafms irritated him--they produced a dif-
covery of that regard which, but for her unkindnefs, would never, he faid, have efcaped his lips. She departed in a rage.
“ Alas ! Sir Edward, faid I, as foon as ihe was
gone, we must; part--every thing requires it-
—our peace—our reputation—yes, I will leaveClare-
mont----1 ought to do fo !” “How, MifsLestey,
exclaimed he hastily, part, did you fay ? can that be necestary ? Tolofe, perhaps for ever, all that is dear and valuable—to be forgotten, or remembered only with indifference.”—“ No, no. Sir Edward, returned 1 weeping, you Ihall ever poffefs my tenderest
esteem ;■--you will be still my friend, my brother,
and when you have conquered that unfortunate paf-fion”—“ Ah ! hope it not, exclaimed he hastily, it is too deeply engraven on my foul—it is become even a part of my existence—what then remains but defpair and wretchednefs!” Here he stopt—and the entrance of Lady Fortefcue prevented my an-fwering him. Surprife was painted on her countd*-nance. She had met I .ady Daire, and stopt the chariot, in order to Speak to her ; but that haughty woman had forgot, in her refentment against me, that refpeft woich was due to Lady Fortefcue. ■ -What could flae think. ? The appearance of Sir Edward, and my distrefs, added to her apprehenfions.
1 related wiiat had pasted during her abfence—
It tenderly affeded ner-She is convinced of the
neceliity of our feparation-and endeavours to
reconcile Sir Edward to an event, which is become unavoidable.
I am
216	LETTERS.
I am Interrupted by a nielTage from Lady For-tefcue.
Adieu ! my dear ; my next letter wdll be dated from Lord Merton’s.
I remain your’s,
Emily Lesley-
LETTER CLV.
Sir Edward Fortescue to Mr- Beauchamp.
Be fatisfied, my dear friend----1 Ihall leave
Claremont to-morrow. But do not hope any thing from this refolution.—No, no, Beauchamp, I iliall never recover at Paris that peace of mind you promife me there ;—but,am I then really going thither ? Is it true, that I am juft Setting out ! Good heavens !--ExpeU to be witnefs of a thoufand ab-
surdities, regrets, caprices ; do not however upbraid me for them, in making yourfelf mafter of a Secret, which I would fain have concealed from you- You have contracted an obligation, to bear with all my follies
My mother and MIfs Lefley are ignorant of the
defign 1 have foimed—-they (hall remain fo-the
efforts of generofity, and the Solicitudes of maternal tendernefs, would too powerfully affedl me.
They imagine that I am going to Lord Arundel’s, for a few days.
Mifs Lefley intends leaving Claremont next week, and going to Lord Merton’s till the return of her fiiend, Mrs. Elvin.
My journey, however, will render this step unne-ceffary. Emily (hall (till remain here, in the bofom of Security and friendflrip.
Lord Townly, the nephew of Lord Merton, is lately returned from abroad, and at prefent at the hall i what might not Mifs Lefley have to fear from a man, who is devoid of every Sentiment of honour ?
'Tis
LETTERS,	217
*	*	*	*	m %
’Tis over, Beauchamp —I have taken a last: fare-wel of what is dearer to me than life--1 am going to leave her---------------------perhaps for ever-—The thought
is madnefs ! ye stoics, who deride that tenderncfs ye never felt, give me your indiiference, and teach me to be happy.
Emily was furprifed at the violence of thofe emotions, which agitated my foul, when I took leave of her this evening; I Seized her hand, and preffed it to
my boSom.---1 could not Speak-—fhe blulhed—my
mother regarded me with tender anxiety—could they have forefeen—a last adieu ! -—But if fome more fortunate man stiould, in my abfence, obtain that
heart, for which I fo vainly figh-1 would fly
from the farthest corner of the earth—yet what right have I to interpofe, miferable w'retch that I am ?
I am interrupted—William enters my apartment,
he waits for my orders about the journey^-alas;
I have none to give him-he regards me with asto-
nifliment-^--my defpair, my inattention---Eare-
wel 1 your wiflies will fliortly be gratified ; I am hastening to your friendly arms.—Oh ! that I could recover there that tranquillity w’hich has long forfa-ken my wretched mind !
Adieu.
VoL. II.	E	LET-
2i8	letter S.
LETTER	CL VI.
Mifs Lesley to Mrs. Elvin.
Good heavens! my dear friend, what a step has Sir Edward taken !—That vifit to Lord Arundel’s was only a pretence—alas ! he is by this time arrived at Paris.
It is I who arn the caufe of his wretchednefs; for my fake he is become a wanderer.
He could not Support the thoughts of my leaving Claremont;—my departure would, he fays, have been attended with inconveniencies from which his is exempt.
My prefence will confole Lady Fortefcue for his abfence ; flie would only have been witnefs of his diftrefs, without having it in her power to relieve it. . To the miserable all places are alike ; happinefs is to
be found every where, or no where.-He conjures
hermot to think of his return. Since it is the only point in which he cannot obey her.
He concludes his letter with the most: affecting addrefs to your Emily.—He begs for my efteem— my compaffion—dear and amiable Fortefcue 1 thefe fighs'—thefe perturbations.—You, my beloved Cla-riffa, w'ho know the fenfibllity of my Sou’, may judge what effeds Such hcpelefs tendernefs, fuch generofity—must; produce in my mind.
Thefe Scenes have recalled to my view, that fatal time—when my too fufceptible heart was finking under the woes of hopelefs love ; when I experienced that defpair—that regret — which now agitate his bofom—I must: lay afide my pen.
******
My journey to the hall is now become unneceffary. I have written to Lady Frances to apologize for my abfence.
Adieu !
LETTERS.	219
Adieu! my dear Clarifla ; may your happinefs meet with no interruptions,
Emily Lesley.
LETTER CLVII.
Mifs Sydney to Mifs Free love.
I AM truly concerned to hear mv uncle is indifpofed with the gout; but you must excufe my adding, that I cannot think your Situation So pitiable, as you reprefent it ; furely, the confciouSnefs of having done your duty will be a Sufficient reward, for any inconveniencies that can attend it.
The time may come, when you will require thofe attentions, which are now due from you to others.
Did we but allow ourfelves to look into futurity, we fliould better perform the obligations of the pre-fent moment.— May you, Charlotte, never feel the pangs of repentance, for duties unfulfilled, when no atonement can be offered ; rather, much rather Sacrifice all thofe pleafures, which are dear to a youthful heart.—A truce with your refleftions, dear Harriet, methinks you fay ; I wanted confolation, and you give me only ad-vice—forgive my impertinence, and I will change the fubjedt.
O ! who do you think I met last; week at Mr. Yorke’s ^No other than MlfsLefley—the lovely, the amiable Emily Lefley, whofe charaUer has fo charmed me-
Lady C----is dangeroufly ill ; Lady Fortefcue
(who is a distant relation of her’s) was Sent for immediately ; her Ladyfliip did not chufe to leave Mifs Lefley alone at Claremont ; flie therefore brought her to town, and configned her to the care of her niece, Mrs Yorke.
Mr. Beverly dined with us yesterday ; he fre-quentiy calls in upon us, and his company is always agreeable-——I think he is no favourite of your’s, E 2	Charlotte
320	LETTERS.
Charlotte-^--1 wonder what you cian fee in him to
diflike—for my part—what’s here ? A letter—and from Lady Oflbry.
Sir Charles and Lady Royfton are this moment arrived, and I must: fly to welcome them to town. Adieu!
Harriet Sydney.
LETTER CLVIII.
Mifs Lesley to Mrs. Elvin. -
I Have been in London this fortnight, and am uncertain when I fliall return to Claremont.
Lady C-----’s diforder terminated in the gout,
with which flie is confined to her bed ; Lady For-tefcue Seldom leaves her, but Mrs. Yorke is fo obliging to me, that my time is Spent very agreeably.
She has already carried me to Some of the public places 5 to-night I am to attend her to the play, as Garrick is to perform. I will not write any further till my return ; I may then have Some entertaining SubjeUs for my pen; adieu, therefore, for the present.
* * * * *
My dear Clarifla, what a SurpriSe have I this evening fuftained !—a rencounter lb unexpected—I have
Seen Sir Charles-Saw him at the play with Lady
Royfton.
What a number of painful ideas did his first: appearance excite in my mind! never did he look So
handSome-----happineSs, my dear friend, is the best:
cofmetic; it gives a brilliancy to the eyes, and a freedom to the whole deportm.ent, that rendeis it doubly engaging.
The houSe was So extremely full, that w'e could only get places in the back feat of one of the fide boxes, and as I had a hat on, there was little pro-babilitv of Sir Charles’s discovering me.
He
LETTERS. 221
He was indeed too much engaged with Lady Royston, to attend to any thing elfe; with what tendcrnefs did he addrefs her!-"She attraUed uni-
versal admiration. The elegance of her form, the thoufand graces—ah ! my dear, what prefumption in your Emily, to think of rivalling fuch a woman ! But all is now over—their prefent felicity is too great to admit of any painful retrofpeUions. Amiable pair! well do you deferve that happinefs you now enjoy; may it meet with no interruptions !
Adieu, my dearest; friend! it is late, and Mrs. Yorke is entering my apartment ; I must; therefore bid you hastily farewel.
Emily Lesley-
LETTER CLTX.
Mifs Sydney to Mifs Freelove-
I Am glad to find, by the raillery which is inter-fperled throughout your last letter, that you have recovered your Spirits ; and hope it is a Sign of my uncle’s amendment
You may be mistaken, Charlotte, in your Suppositions refpedting Mr. Beverly.
I acknowledge that I think him very agreeable—• but what then ? Must it necestarily follow, that I am in love with him ? uncertain too as I am of his
fentiments. Love, they fay, produces love-if it
Should come to that—but enough upon this fubjeft, whilst there are any ifs in the cafe.
Lady Ostbry has been brought to-bed this week of a fon ; and, (as the phrafe is on thcfe occafions,) as well as can be expedled.
S'r Charles is obliged to go into * ^ next week ; Lord Ostbry will accompany him——Lady Royston remains with Lady Ostbry.
My grandmother writes to my uncle. I have E 3	therefore
22Z	LETTERS.
therefore nothing more to add, than the asturance of my being,
Your’s stncerdy,
Harriet Sydney.
LETTER CLX.
Lady Ossory to Lord Ossory.
I Must, and will write—am I not as well as ever } thefe foolish women—the nurfes I mean, think it a privilege of their office to be impertinent. Has not my Offbiy been abfent more than a week, and will he not be detained Some time longer ?—have I not received one, two, three letters from him, and Shall they remain unanfwered ? No, no, it muft not be.
I am writing clofe to the bedfide, where our dear Charles lies fast: afleep : fweet little innocent ! how balmy, how tranquil thy (lumbers! no cares interrupt thy repofe ; in thy bofom all is peace-ah !
may it ever be So! may goodneSs ever inhabit there, and mayell: thou, with the dear name of OITory, inherit all thy father’s virtues !
* * * #
Lady Royfton is juft returned from Lady Sydney’s : She found Mr. Beverly alone with Harriet, the old Lady being abfent.
They feemed earnest: in difcourfe—perhaps he was making a difcovery of that pastion, with which, I am certain. She has infpired him—what an aukward sttuation ! How did you feel at that interesting period ? Very fooliSh, timid, &c. did you not ? Ah, OfTory, where is that timidity gone to, I pray you ?
A tap at the door—it is Harriet—come in, child —now for it,
I was
letters. 223
I was mistaken, I believe-for though I men-
tioned Mr. Beverly, and came with my roundabouts, and my fuppofitions, nothing efcaped her ; belides, stie looked thoughtful ,• ah, Beverly! but most modest men (as they are called) are fools in thefe matters.
* * * *
T uefday.
Every doubt is Satisfied—Beverly has declared his paffion, and is accepted ; — well, after all, there is Something joyous in thefe matters,
I am already attacking Harriet with Hudibiastics-
My brother—--but Charles Summons me to the bed-
fide, and will Scarcely Suffer me to add, that I am ever,
, Your and Sir Charles’s affedtionate, &c,
Henrietta Ossory.
E 4	t E T-
2^4 BETTERS.
letter clxi.
Mifs Lesley to Mrs. Elvin,
What interesting Scenes have I been engaged in, stnce I wrote to you last ! adventures the
most Singular—the most unexpeUed !--the recital
will give you pleafure. I hasten to it, therefore, without any further preface.
About three weeks ago, Mrs. Yorke propofed eur going to Richmond, to Spend a few days with her aunt, Mrs. Sedley.
The defign was executed, almost as Soon as formed. We were received by the old Lady, in the most obliging manner, and I rejoiced at my removal from thofe Scenes of tumult and diffipation I had lately partaken of.
The next morning we took an airing to * *, and returned to dinner. Upon coming home, we found that Some company had arrived during our abfence, by a genteel equipage, which drove away from the door just as we entered the coach-yard.
Mrs. Sedley, upon feeing it, exclaimed eagerly, I find Lady Royston has not forgot her promife of Spending a day or two with me, during Sir Charles’s abfence, and I am particularly glad, that She is come at this time, as I stiall now have an opportunity of introducing my dear niece to the acquaintance of that amiable woman.” judge, my beloved Clarista, what I felt at that moment—to be thus unexpectedly hurried into the prefence of one, whom I had never thought of without anxiety—but was it impof-fible to contrive Some apology for not feeing her—
how could I a£l—a thoufand Schemes--but I had
not power to refolve upon any—in the mean time the coach stopt—the ladies alighted, and I followed, irrefolute and trembling.
Mrs.
L E, T V E R	225
Mrs. Sedley hastily entered the parlour, where Lady Royston was—they embraced—r—Mrs- Yorke advanced towards them—I know not what pasted— and iny confufion increafed, when Mrs. Sedley presented me to Lady Roy^on. At the n^me of Lestey,
file started----—How, Madam !’^ exclaimed stiie
c'agerlj, ‘^'^Mi'st Lestey, did you fay ?:--^What an
unexpected happineSs!” So tender a reception abated my fears, and I was going to return the endearments iUe had lavilli.ed upon me, when the arrival of com-p^any put a stop'to this interesting Scene-
I Soon after'tq my qwu apartment, where fhe i'n a few minutes joined tup. flow noble, how affeftidnate was her behaviour ! Her goodneSs overcame every prejudice, as the dew ineltetn before the Sun, and I embraced her with a tenderneSs which I was unable to expreSs-
She returned with us to Lor^oq jj we became inseparable ; and f looh forward wuth apprehenston, to Sir.fiiiraj,ksi's,return,.,vy'hkh W'p.yld depriye me of the cotppapy. of my ip.ya){|3.ble friend. She regretted qnr,feparaUc;nT7r.y,ef delicacy prevented . our mentioning to each other the Situation of our hearts.
. T|ie dreri/fed sirnp afriyed—I Saw not Lady Royston for Some days, and I found that her pieSence was become estential to my happineSs.
Laccofiipa-fiied Mrs. Yorke to an audtion------and
we had Scarcely entered the room, when Lady Royston appeared, leaning upon Sir Charles’s arm. I coloured—fhe perceived me, and Seemed irreSolute how to a£l. Her tenderneSs, and my diffidence, kept Us at a distance from each other, till Mrs. Yorke advancing towards her, put an end to this restraint.
Sir Charles bowed to me with a reSpedtful tenderneSs ; I returned the compliment ; the reServe inSen-stbly vaniiLed ; and I grew colieUed enough to give Mrs. Yorke my opinion of Some things stie went to purchafe.
As Soon as w^e returned home, 1 retired to my own apartment to ruminate upon what had pasted.
E 5	The
2z6	LETTERS.
The period I had fo long dreaded was over--1
had Seen—I had fpoke to Sir Charles—and the trial had not been fo Severe asriny apprehenfions had represented it.	,	V
PleaSed to find that I had, conquered ?ih attachment, which had fo long disturbed the repoSe of my
life---that I had Subdued every felfifh'wifli—every
irregular defire—in my bofom all was Serenity and peace.
The duties of this life are difficult only to thbfe who are unwilling to exert thernfelyes in the -caufe of virtue. “ Sloth and folly Shiver ^nd lhrink at the light of toil and hazard, and make the impoffistility they fear.”
* * * •
We are going to Spend the day at Lady C----’s ;
She is better, but still confined to her room.
Lady Fortefcue is uneafy at not having heard- from Sir Edward lately: heaven preferve the life of that excellent man, and restore to him that happinefs he fo well deferves!
Adieu, my dear Mrs. Elvin 1 when may I expedl to embrace you ?
Emily Lesley.
■	.	f . • .
■ I ■ . ■	,	■ ;	;
A
C	■ :	,
■■ if :A- : r	L E
LETTERS.	227
LETTER CLXII.
Sir Edward Fortescue to Lady FoRtescue.
I Have this moment received a letter from Lord Merton ; one part of it has greatly furprifed me —He writes thus :—“ I am just returned from the play, where I Saw my favourite Mifs Lefley, who came with Sir Charles and Lady Royston ; Ilie looked more beautiful than ever.”
What intelligence is this ! Mifs Lefley in company with Sir Charles ! him She loved So tenderly !—ah,
does She not love him still ?-^^What imprudence 1
----how ridiculous to Seek that danger She might fo
eafily have avoided ! Dear Madam, convince her of the impropriety of the connexion ; your advice will be Sufficient to put a stop to it—alas, why did ,you not interpofe before ?
You complain of my fllence—It was occafioned. by the marriage of Mifs Beauchamp, who is at last united to the amiable Mr. Lefevre-
The wedding was celebrated with the utmost
magnificence--what tranfport appeared in every
look and aftion of the happy bridegroom ! vvhat modesty and tender fweetnefs in the lovely .bride ! Ah ! how exquifite are the delights of virtuous love ! Ye tender fenfations, ye will ever be a stranger to
my heart--^which is doomed to feel wlflaes, which
can never be gratified—to defpife where it ought to love, and to love without hope.
« « * *
Mr. Beauchamp defires to be refpectfully remembered to you.
I am, dearest Madam, with the utmost astedlion, gratitude, and duty,
Y our’s,
Edward Fortescue.
LET-
22S L E T 'F E R S,
LET T E R CLXIil.
Lady Fortescue to Sir Edward Forte scue*
Your fears are unneceflary, my dear Sir Edward-----------Emily’s Situation does not require
them. It is true, that (he has been frequently in company v/ith Sir Charles Royfton. I have narrowly watched her during thefe interviews—Emily is no hypocrite—the Serenity which appears in her countenance, is derived from her heart. She esteems Sir Charles, greatly esteems him, but Lady Royston is, 1 am convinced, still dearer to her; nothing can be conceived more tender than the friendship which unites them.
Mifs Lestey has been introduced to Lord and Lady Offory ; file is charmed wdth tliem both. The dear creature has regained all her former chearfulnefs ; Satisfied with her own concluU, and beloved by all around her, every past regret is forgotten.
I am going to Lady Sydney’s this morning ; her jiieCe w^as married yelterday to Mr. Beverly, and I am' impatient to pay my refpefts to them.
Mrs. Yorke and Emily are to accompany me ; — I
iiear‘Mifs Lestey’s voice--Adieu, my dear Son:
amidst all thefe Scenes of gaiety, your abfence-
but I must quit the fubjeUv.
Lady C—is better, and will stiortly attend tteftO'Dlareuiont, Once more adieu.
M. Fortescue-
-ii i :
L E T-
-'st .1
LETTERS.	229
LETTER CLXIV.
^	Lord Townly to Sir George Melton.
I Should have regretted my leaving Merloii-haU, before your arrival, had I not been convinced that the company of Lady Frances would amply confole you for my abfence.
Confefs, my dear Sir George, that our coufin has her "attraUions, and that love, as well aa friend diip, detains you at the hall.
I left Lord Merton rather abruptly, upon his re-fufing to lend me a fum of money, which I wanted to discharge a debt of honour.
He propofed conditions, which no man of Spirit
would Submit to--1 refented his behaviour, and
vowed never to fee him more-
Fortune has not favoured me lately ; the jade generally forSakes us, at the time we most: want her
astiftance-I must: think of Some Scheme-Sup-
poSe I marry, George.? “ It is the eaSieft method,
' you Say, of repairing a Blattered fortune.”—I doubt you are mistaken however, and that the remedy
would be worfe than the difeaSe-the pill is bitter
—---but if it be vrell gilded-who cares .?
I have renewed my acquaintance with Lady Bab Dormer; not that I have any defigns upon her Ladystiip, (thefe widows are generally too cunning for us) but for the fake of her friend, Charlotte Freeiove-
The girl came to town wdth her uncle, in order to be prefent at Mils Sydney’s marriage, and is gone with the bride and bridegroom into Estex.
Lady Dormer had a letter from her last week. I happened to be prefent with her Ladystiip, when stie received it, and accidentally Saw my name mentioned in the postscript—my curiofity was excited^—I tried
Several
230	LETTERS.
Several Schemes to get a fight of the letter'-and at
last (I will not tell you by what means) Succeeded in my attempts.
She tells Lady Dormer, that She fears their Separation will be for a much longer period than they expected,-as her uncle (who has been Some time in-diSpoSed) is now very ill; and the phyficians think him in danger.
If the old don Sliould tip olF—1 think I need not deSpair of Succeeding with the girl, as her letter to Lady Bab plainly Shews that I am not indifSerent to her.
Farewel : prefent my compliments to Lady Frances, and believe me,
Your’s,
T 0 WNI.Y.
L E r-
LETTERS.	231
LETTER CLXV.
MifsFaEELOVE to Lady Dorme r.
Do you then really believe, that Lord Townly does not behold your Charlotte with indifference ? His rank—but away with theSe Suggestions
----at this time they furely ought not to intrude.
My uncle, my dear, is very bad; the phyficians think it impoffible he fliould live through the night. Oh, Deathj how dreadful are thy approaches ! yet,-
in a few years, we alfo fhall fall a Sacrifice-■!
gaSp at the thought--an icy coldnefs runs through
my veins----forgive me for thus communicating the
fad refleUions that have taken poffestion of my foul. ■	■’ f r - J ^ . h
--,, / y f J	..
* * ■ # # #
*	4	■
Three o’clock.
' - r- •	_	,	,
My uncle has jiist now breathed his last. Harriet and. 'my grandmother are vyeeping. ' i Mr- Beverly with’tender fenfibility comforting both : for my part, I have not yet ihed a tear. L Farewel.
oi	; ;i:.OLa t	-	, b
■r.il. irt:: ! :! ijDo.i tCharlotte Freelove.
‘	..	-.ill .	■	•. !	,	:	•
- ' ■ :	' 1 - I.i
LET-
532 LETTERS.
letter CLXVL
Lady FoHTE^qpE to Sir Eov/arp, Fortescue.
IAhS juft returned from paystg a vistt to Mr^ and Mrs. Elvin, who arrived in London two days ago._
Adifs Leiley is with them, and has confented to remain with her dear friend this winter.
I am going to Claremont in, a few days ; Lady;
C-:-.—Htteuds 1116 } wc pfopofe returning again to town before Christmas, as the eo,nntry at that feafon is rather difagreeable. •
Mrs. Yorke, w'ho was to have accompanied ns to the old manfion-houfe (which fire h^s not yifited iince her infancy) has given us the (lip, and fel
yesterday with Lord and Lady Vv'—--, for
Bath.	*	*	*
» * * *
Vfe have had a great deal of company to-day at
Lady C----Y. Lord and-Lady Odory, Sir Charles
Royston and his as^inble wife, Mf. and Mrs...I’ilvin,?
&C. &e.-' Never were hours- fpant more agreeably yet how often did my wilhes' for yjour prefejacev-iTT^
My dear Edward, thy affedlionate mother longs to enrsbrace thee s and mtist stie still be denied that plea-fure.?
Adieu, my beloved fon. Lady C-- has fent
for me to play a game at picquet with her, and I must therefore leave you abruptly.
M Fortescue.
LET-'
LETTERS.	233
LETTER CLXVil.
From the Same-
I Have this moment received the inclofed letter
from Mr- Freeman. Unhappy Lady Lucy !--
at Such a time every emotion is loll in pity.
Fly, my dear Edward, I conjure you, to her af-fiftance—your forgivenefs will render the approaching trial more Supportable.
I cm add no more, than that I am your mod affedlionate,
M. F.
LETTER CLXVIII.
Mr. Freeman to Lady Fortescue, Inclofed In the preceding Letter-
IT 7 ERE I not well convinced of the goodnefs of VV yoiir Ladyfhip’s difpofuion, I fhould not have taken the liberty of addreffing you, in behalf of an unfortunate woman, whofe past: life has hitherto rendered her undeferving your attention.
But, alas! Madam, the (Ituatlon of the wretched Lucy calls for compaffion, no refentment!—a violent fever will fliortly terminate her existence, and your anger extends not to the grave.
Cculd
234	LETTERS.
Could jour Ladydiip behold this unhappy creature, emaciated by licknefs, diftraUed with remorfe, in every interval of recolltflion, calling , for her “ injured hufband,” wifhing “ to implore a last
forgivenefs”--and will Sir Edward--may we
dare to hope that he will listen to our intreaties ? to the prayers of his dying wife ?
Would you, Madam, kindly intercede----but
it is injustice to Sir Edward to Suppofe him capable of a refufal!
I will, therefore, beg the favour of you to for-w^ard this letter immediately, as I know not where to diredl to him.
I remain your Ladylliip’s
Obedient Servant,
J. Freeman.
LET-
LETTERS.	233
LETTER CLXIX.
Sir Edward Fortescue to Lady Fortescue.
London.
Yes, madam, I hive Seen the unhappy Lucy, and the interview has cost: me many tears ! Good heavens, how unneceflary were her apprehen-fions! was it poffible to behold her unmoved }
She knew me not when I first; entered her apartment, yet Surveyed me with attention ; I took her hand, clay cold hand—her fenSes returned-—Ihe re-colledled me, and Ihrinking under the bed cloaths,
exclaimed faintly, “ It is Sir Edward !-it is, it is
my hulband ! hide me, hide me from him, cover me up—for ever.” “ It is indeed your hufband, returned I, whom you behold—but he comes to declare his companion, his forgivenefs.’’—“ Impostible, rejoined (he, I cannot, darenot expeU it—my crimes are too great—too numerous—yet I go to atone for all.” —here iKe fainted, and it was Some moments before file recovered her fenSes. I withdrew Soon after, finding that my preSence added to her agitations : I have promised to See her again in the afternoon.
» * ♦ *
I found Lucy more compoSed this evening, though much weaker, and her breath greatly affetfed.
Mr. Freeman w'ithdrew Soon after I entered the chamber, and left us together; Sire then, in the moll earnest: terras, implored my forgivenefs of her past; mifcondudl, which I as fincerely granted, but Said, —“ remember, Lucy, that there is a Being, whoSe forgivenefs is far more necestary than mine.” “ Ah, Sir Edward, exclaimed stie hastily, stiall I dare to cast my guilty eyes to heaven with hopes of mercy .? I, who have difobeyed its most Sacred laws, and have knowm virtue only to deSpiSe it} No, no, I cannot look forward—I have nothing to hope for— annihilation would be heaven to a wretch like me 1”
“ That
236	LETTERS,
“ That your offences have been great, I confefs> returned J, but defpair is no lefs finful, than pre-fuinption. Heaven is won by patience ; the Deity will not defpife a contrite heart.” “ Alas ! rejoined ihe, can a few hours of Sorrow atone for years of guilt!—No—it would be mockery !” “ If the penitence is fincere, interrupted I, and your protraUed life v/ould have been devoted to the performance of thofe duties, the negleU of which you Seem to k-JDent ; the Deity, we humbly trust, will accept the
pious intention.^'-“ Ah 1 may I dare to hope fo,
exclaimed She hastily •, father of mercies,” clafping her hands together, and llftiag up her eyes to heaT ven—the emotion was too powerful fox her delicate frame to Sustain—and stie fainted on my bofoin.
* * » *
Mr. Freem.vn In continuation.
Wednesday.
Sir Edward being rather indifpofed with his late fatigues, I have prevailed upon him to try to get a few hours rest.
Lady Lucy is much worfe this morning. She cannot fpeak ; but her dying eyes are frequently cast up to heaven with fervor—her lips move—stte Seems to pray for forgivenefs—may her prayers be effedtual !
I am called—stie is gone for ever—^that figh was the last struggle of expiring nature. Unhappy m’O-man ! thus in the bloom of life—my tears force me to ccnclude.
Sir Edward destres me to prefent his affeUionate refpeUs.
I remain your Lordststp’s
Obedient Servant,
J. F R E E M A K .
L E T-
LETTERS.	237
LETTER CLXX.
Mifs Freelove to Lady Dop.mer.
WELL, my dear Lady Bab, I am preparing to attend you in town, notwithstanding the grave remonstrances of Lady Sydney, and the faucy rebukes of the philofophical Harriet.
----Difficulty, they fay, endears conquest.---
Such harangues! I will give you one of them, which pasted yesterday, between my coustn and your Charlotte—She begins, “ I am forty to find that you are determined to leave Estex. After the asteding lofs you have fo recently Sustained, I Should have imagined that this place would have been more agreeable to you than London ; but you feem to have forgot-—Lord, my dear, would you have me waste the bloom of life, in fruitlefs tears I It is both inconfist-ent with Christianity and good fenfe, as I thought you must know, to grieve for an irremediable misfortune. The caufe removed, the effed ceafes. Be-fides it is time to think of inyfelf—miltrefs of a large and independent fortune—Do not boast of a circumstance, Charlotte, which, 1 greatly fear, you will
one day have caufe to lament!--1 thank you, my
dear, with a low curtfey, for your goor/opinion of me—but 1 defire, child, that you would not be too
apprehenfive upon my account.--You are only to
be anfwerable for your own faults, you know.”--
I’his concluded the debate, and we parted with mutual distatisfadion.
Mr. Beverly will efcort me to London--he
is to remain there Some days ;-how can Har-
riet ever Support this Separation!—■■■• “ They
W'ill
ajS	LETTERS.
will count the tedious moments as they pafs.'’ -———Soft fouls, how I defpife both them- and their enjoyments!
Adieu, dear Lady Bab!-T am impatient for
the arrival of that time, which will allow me to afliire you perfonally how much I am ever
Your’s, &c.
Charlotte Freelove.
LET-
#
LETTERS.- 239
LETTER CLXXI.
Lord TowNLY to Sir Ge org e Me rto w.
MISS Freelove has been in town this week, and I am her constant attendant ; stie Seems pleaf-ed with my astiduities, but this circuriistance does not flatter my vanity, Since I am convinced, that to
my rank alone I owe the distin6tion------“ and
is Such a heart as her'’s, you will Say, worth obtaining ?” Pstiaw ! it is htx fortune I want—nor do I value the one, only as it will Serve to put me in pofTeS-Sion of the other. You whining enamoratos, think there is nothing to be done in thefe caSes, without Such a profuflon of love-—but girls of Spirit defpife your tame, fubmiflive, dying fwains, whilst an eafy degagee, carelefs fellow—like your Townly.—has in their eyes a thouSand attradtions.
MiSs Freelove and lady Dormer dined with me
yesterday in-----Square : my houfe is finiflied
—Such encomiums were pasted upon it ; My lord,
you have really the most exquistte taste-thefe
pidlures—and then thofe decorations are inimitable ! ---if I am fo happy as to gain Mifs Freelove’s approbation !”- —Then followed a tender flgh, and a look which Spoke more than words could have done. Oh woman, woman, how. ealily art thou deceived ! A propos, how go you on with lady Fiances ? Must I intercede for thee, or is thy own eloquence Sufficient ?
Adieu!
T OWNLY.
^	-LET.
340 LETTERS.
LETTER CLXXII.
Sir Edward Fortescue to Mr. Beauchamp.
T Left London a few daye ago after the interment X of the unhappy lady Lucy. Mifs Lefley is gone for fome weeks, with her friend Mrs. Elvin, to Sir
John Eflex’s feat in W-fhire, fo that I had no
inducement to remain any longer abfent from Claremont. Yet this Spot, once fo delightful to me, does not now Satisfy my wilBes—my prefent fufpenfe—-but might not certainty be more infupportable ? have I any reafon to think Mifs Lefley will receive my ad-.dreflis ---disappointed in her first: attachment
an attachment fo tender, fo ardent—how often has fhe declared against: enteiing into a Second engagement ? I am impatient to know my fate; yet I must: restrain thefe impatient wiflies ; my prefent fituation will not fufiFer me to adt as love diredts. Emily is delicacy itfelf, and might not eafily forgive a breach of decorum, though my regard for her was the oc-cafion of it.
Lady Fortefcue wrote to Mifs Lefley yesterday, and fhe allowed me to add a few lines to her letter. I could not be eafy till I had informed her, how eagerly I longed for the arrival of that time, which would allow me to declare the tender Sentiments of a heart that is wholly her’s,
I Set off on Monday for my estate in G — ■	,
where I intend Spending a few weeks; my prefence has long been wanted there, as my mother is now free from every engagement, flie has kindly confent-ed to accompany me.
Prefent my best refpedts to your amiable family, and believe me your’s,
Edward Fortescue.
■	L E T-
LETTERS.	24.1
letter CLXXIII.
Lord TowNLY to Sir George Merton.
I Have declared my patllon to Mifs Freelove, and have no reafon to defpair of fuccefs—but my diffidence—a new qualification this in thy friend.--
Could I not aflume the appearance of virtue, when It Suited my purpofe, I fliould not have made the havock I have done amongst thefe girls. But to return from this digreffion—the manner in which Mifs Freelove received the avowal of my paflion, convinced me, that it was' neither unexpeded, nor un-defired. She regarded me with a tendernefs of which I believed her incapable, while I poured forth all the Soft—nonfenfe that is generally ufed by us lovers, upon Such an occafion.—When Suddenly, afluming an air of dejeftion, I let go the hand which I had hitherto held in mine—She was furprifed, and eagerly inquired the caufe of that melancholy which was imprinted on my countenance. “ Ah 1 Mifs Freelove, returned I, with a deep Sigh, have I not reafon to be miserable, when I recolleft the obstacles that may arife to prevent the gratification of my willies.?
“ Your relations are Incenfed against me ; my youthful follies are not unknown to them ; and tho’ So fincerely repented of, yet alas ! they will never be forgotten! their advice—their intreaties will prevail, and notwithstanding my rank and fortune, I stiall be rejefted and unhappy.”
“ I will not deny, replied (he, that your fufpicl-ons, in regard tp the Sentiments of my friends, are
but too well founded--but you may be mistaken
in the conciufion you Seem to draw from thence--
. 1 am^ at liberty to a£l as choice direUs, and stiall determine accordingly.”
There’s a girl of Spirit for you, George! It Is a fortunate circumstance forme before matrimony, but afterwards I may not find it So convenient. Let us, however, enjoy the prefent, and leave futurity to take care VoL. II. •	F	of
342 letters.
of itfelf—fufficient unto the day is the evil thereof—> you fee I can quote fcripture when it Suits my pur-pofe.—I cannot fay however that this is frequently the cafe. Adieu-
LETTER CLXXIV.
Mrs. Beverly to Mifs Freelove-
IS it poffible, Charlotte, that you can encourage the addreffes of Lord Townly } What imprudence!—“ Repent of his paft mifconduU, you fay f’ Ah, my dear, truft not to his profeflions ; had his errors been the effedls of youthful levity, or inconfi-derate raShnefs, there would have been Some hop es of his reformation ; but how difficult—how impoffible, I might almost; fay, to reclaim a heart, which has long gloried in Such premeditated crimes!
From whence arifes the amendment of which he hoafts ---O! it is love, it Seems, which has pro-
duced the mighty change—believe it not, Charlotte, he is incapable of fo exalted a pastion,—Love can only take root in virtuous minds.-It is your for-
tune, which alone makes you defirable in his eyes j it is his rank, which renders him refpeUable in
yours'----—but know, Charlotte, that nobility,
when unaccompanied by virtue, only Serves to render its pofTestbr more detestable.
Return then, my dear coufin, to your real friends .? nor precipitately enter into engagements which are indistbluble-
If grandeur is necestary to your happinefs, you postefs the means of acquiring it.
Your fortune, your accomplilhments, intitle you to expedl a rank as elevated as that Lord Townly would raife you to-
Adieu, my dear Charlotte ! my grandmother has read my letter, and defir es me to tell you that her
Sentiments
E T T E R S.	243
fentlments coincide with thofe of your ever affectionate
Harriet Beverly.
L E T T E R CLXXV.
From the Same.
*‘ O N E to Bath with Lady Dormer, and it
Vj" is uncertain when you return”----------Lord
Townly without doubt of the party-------inconfide-
rate Charlotte 1 but remonffrances are vain.
I have not Shewn yout letter to Lady Sydney, as
it would only have increafed her difpleafure.-------
How could you, Charlotte, beftow two whole fides upon matters fo uninteresting, and yet devote only one Solitary line to the fubjeCl which alone deferved your attention ?
You are no ftranger to Lord Townly’s behaviour
in regard to Mrs. Wilmot------Is it poffible that any
remains of honour can dwell in fuch a heart I
I expect to hear from you foon, and in a different ftile.
Harriet Beverly.
F 2	L E T-
;i
244	LETTERS;.
.letter CLXXVI.
Lady T owNLY to Mrs. Beverly.
YOU reafon well, Harriet, I allow ; but love,
all-conquering love-—in Short,, my dear,
your letter came toolate——I had confented to give my hand to Lord Townly, and this very morning we were---married.
A hasty step, you will fay, and fo indeed it was ; but his Lordstiip was fo impatient ! Lady Dormer has undertaken to fend to town for patterns, &c. &c. —Thefe widows dearly love to be bufied in fuch matters ; . She is become fo important ! I verily believe it was the chief reafon of her being fo defirous of my marriage,..—but am I really commenced wife, and is the conneUion indistbluble Good heavens ! my dear, if I Should, as you fay, repent—I hope
you will not be a true prophetefs, Harriet:—So-
what’s the matter, Jenny ?—the girl looks as demure
as if She had been , married this morning-“ My
Lord, Madam, begs the favour of your company.” I corne, J come.
Adieu, child ! you must forgive me, and intercede for me with Lady Sydney. Compliments to your good man.
Charlotte Townly.
LET-
LETTERS.	245
LETTER CLXXVIl,
Sir Edward Fortescue to Mr. Beauchamp.
TH E important time will foon arrive, that is to determine the fate of your friend ! Mifs Lefley is returned from Sir John ElTex’s ; I Aiall consequently fet off for London one day this week. Lady Fortefcue will foon follow me to town, as Claremont is nofagreeable toherat this feafonof the year.
Oh, Beauchamp ! how great are my agitations at this interesting period ! Hope, and fear, alternately take postestion of my foul. If Emily Should refufe my offered love,—•! tremble at the idea, yet, alas ! is it not too probable ? Surely, however, the per-fuafions of Mrs. Elvin, (who is my friend as well as her’s) and the tender remonstrances of my excellent parent, cannot prove ineffeSual—but I will not owe my happinefs entirely to their interceffions.
Adieu, my dear Beauchamp ! and believe me (as much as I can poflibly be at fuch a jundlure)
Your’s^
Ed WARD FoRTeSCUE.
F 3	L E T-
L..,_
246	LETTERS.
LETTER CLXXVIII.
Mrs. Elvin to Lady Essex.
Your Ladylhlp feemed to have conceived Such a friendSliip for Mils Lefley, during our late happy vifit at Rofe Park, that I am certain you would like to be acquainted with every circumllance which relates to that amiable girl.
This morning as we were fitting at breakfast, the fervant entered with a letter for Mffs Lefiey, Emily blufhed upon feeing that it came from Sir Edward Fortefcue. She perufed it with the utmost attention ; an air of melancholy took posteffion of her fweet features.——.” Ah! my dear friend, exclaimed stie at last, holding the letter towards me, what does
Sir Edward fay ?-----His future happinefs or mi-
fery intirely depending upon me-1 determine his
fate! Good Heavens!”'----—Why thefe agita-
tions, my dear ? interrupted I ; is the love of fo amiable a man fuch a misfortune ?’’	“ Not if I
could return it,” rejoined stre hastily. “ And why
can you not do fo ?------Ah ! Emily, I fear the
remembrance of your former attachment is still too dear to your heart.” ” You are mistaken, returned ihe, in the fentiments I entertain of Sir Charles ; they are not more tender than thofe I feel for Sir Edyvard. I esteem them, greatly esteem them both
-----they are both truly amiable ;—but my heart
has bid a final adieu to love j friendstiip wholly en-grostes it, and fatisfies all my wiflies.” ” I do not defire you to be lefs fufceptible of friendship, rejoined I, marriage has made no alteration in my regard towards you, why then (hould it leffen yours ?
-----Love your friends, my dear Emily ; love
them as tenderly as ever ; but not to the exclufion of every other attachment.”
” But
LETTERS.-	247
“ But as I am happy in my prefcnt fituation, returned jlie, why iliould I think of altering it, fince I cannot hope to gain any thing by the exchange ?” “ Would it be nothing to confer felicity upon Such
a man as, Sir Edward ?--to be able to gratify the
tender wifhes of Lady Fortefcue ? I rejoice in your prefent happinefs, but I would have it more Secure ! life, in my fituation, is doubly uncertain—nay, do not weep, my beloved Emily, we are looking forward to an event, which may not happen,—yet as it may, is it not prudent to guard against it ?—Should we be Separated, where would my Emily find an aSylum ?—In cafe you rejefted Sir Edward, it could not be with Lady ForieScue—with Lady Royston it would be still more improper. The world will judge by appearances ; your refuSai of Sir Edward will be imputed to your love of Sir Charles ; and, notwithstanding your innocence, you ought not to disregard its cenSures.—On the other hand, confider the advantages that would attend ypur union with Sir Edward—the astidulties of an amiable hufband— the maternal tenderneSs of Lady Fortefcue ; rank, fortune, all conSpire to complete your felicity.’’ “ The rank and fortune of Sir Ed ward, returned She, are reafons why I ought not to accept his addrestes ; if he is generous enough to overlook my inferiority in thoSe reSpeUs, I ought not to forget it.” “ Away with this difinterestedneSs, exclaimed I, it Is here unnecestary.—Tell me, child, are not riches valuable, only as they bestow upon us the means of acquiring happinefs.? You know Sir Edward’s Sentiments------do you draw the conclufion.” “ But
you would not have me conSent to receive Sir Edward as a lover, before I know whether It is postible for me to return his affeUlon .?’’	“ J will
anSwer for the poffibility of it, nay probability of it ; the heart Soon afilmilates itSelf to every fituation. You have hitherto beheld Sir Edward as a friend ; but his tenderncSs will Soon inSpIre you with Senti-F 4	ments
248	LETTERS.
ments of a different nature. I will only mention one argument more. Since the death of your excellent parent, it has been your study to aft in every circumstance, as you imagined he, if living, would have approved. You know how greatly he esteemed Sir Edward ; and we can both of us eafily determine, I believe, what his wifhes in this cafe would
have been--She was Softened—a gentle figh,-—■
I am interrupted—Lady Fortefcue is this moment arrived, and 1 hasten to attend her.
*	m	*	*	*
Wednesday.
The preSence of this amiable woman has been attended with the most defirable effeU. MiSs Lefley could not reSist her tender eloquence ; fhe confented to fee Sir Edward ; and he had n.o reaSon to be dif-fatisfied with his vifit. I told him at parting, that I jhould expeft to fee him again to-morrow ; he bowed compliance.
Adieu, my dear Sister. Prefent my best compliments tQ Sir John, and believe me
Your’s,
Clarissa Elvin.
LET-
LETTERS.	249
letter CLXXIX.
Mrs. Beverley to LadyTowNLY.
YOUR letter affliUed, more than it Surprized me.
1 was too well acquainted with your Sentiments, and the artifices of Lord Townly, to imagine, that you would adl conformably to my willies. I fear, Charlotte, you will one day be convinced, that even grandeur may be purchafed at too high a price. But alas! what would your repentance avail, now the deed is irrevocably done ? It would only Serve to render you negligent of thofe duties, which you havefo Solemnly vowed to perform.'
You have entered into engagements the most (a-cred, contrary to the united defires of your friends. You have defpifed their advice, and disregarded their intreaties. Should the event, therefore, be anfwerable to their fears, you can have no right to expedl their compaffion, though you may ftill entitle yourfelf to their esteem.
You are now in a fituation wherein every step becomes of importance. Study thedifpofition ofyour huf-band—Sacrifice every thing to the pleafure of obliging him, when his wifhes do not interfere with your Superior duties. If this conduU stiould not be attended with the defired esteU, you will still have the fa-tisfaUion of reflefting, that you have fought for happinefs only in the paths of virtue.
Lady Sydney bids me tell you, that you can only hope to regain her favour by the propriety of your future behaviour ; on that you must alfo depend for the continuance of my friendstiip.
Harriet Beverly.
.	F 5	LET-
2^0 LETTERS.
I
LETTER CLXXX.
Lord TownLY to Sir GeORG E Merton.
WHAT a romantic piUure have you drawn of matrimonial happinefs ! If Such are your notions, I wonder not at your refleUions upon my condudt. But what fays my fair coufin to your fcheme } Or have you been wife enough not to divulge them? Lady Frances is a girl of Spirit; (lie loves pleafure, and hates restraint—my notions ex-aUly, and happily Lady Townly’s.
We pafs whole days without even feeing each other. We meet without emotion, and Separate without regret. She interferes not with my purfuits, and I am equally inattentive to hers. Politenefs Supplies the place of tenderneSs, and we enjoy that happi-neSs afunder which we could never have experienced in the company of each other. Lady Towmly, without being a beauty, has a vivacity, a.je nefcaiquoi in her manner, which generally pleafes our Sex, and has gained her many admirers. Sir Harry S inclay, and Lord Darnley are the most astiduous. “ My dear Townly, Said the latter yesterday at White’s,
you are the happiest fellow !--Lady Townly
is an inchanting creature ! Such wit. Such beauty !’’ Pardon me, my Lord, returned I, bowing—your
encomiums--but does your Lordfhip really think
her handfome ? For my part——but, for Heaven’s fake, (yawning) let us change the Subjedl: I make it a rule never to think of my wife when I am abSent from her.”
Lady Dormer is still at Bath. She is in love with a young officer, (who doublleSs finds great attraUions in her Ladyfhip’s jointure) and has written to Lady To wnly to know how fhe Sliall a£t in the affair. A good Sign that for the lover j theSe women Seldom afk for advice until they are determined to follow their own inclinations. 1 wifli I was near Captain
Percy,
LETTERS.	251
Percy, to give him a hint or two upon the occafion ; he could not fail of fuccefs, if under the diredions of thy
T OWNLY.
LETTER CLXXXI.
Lady Townly to Lady Dormer.
NO, no, I do not exped to fee your LadyiBip in town whilst: Captain Percy remains at Batii —but is he really fo handfome, fo engaging ? What a pity it is, that fortune stiould have been lefs liberal to him than nature 1 But your Ladyfhip is become indifferent to thofe advantages you once fo highly esteemed. This love is a horrid paffion. I thank my stars, that I never experienced its influence ; had I done fo, instead of the gay, the fafhionable Lady Townly, I might have been-only the obfcure wife of Some country Parfon, or rustic ’Squire. Aprnpos ; I Saw Mr. and Mrs. Elvin at the play last night. Your Charlotte vyas bl,a'/dng, with jewels, and fur-rounded by her titled'^ adorers ; yet the infenflble creatures beheld my exaltation without emotion, and Adrs. Elvin feemed to enjoy more happinefs in the company of her hulband, than i received from the adulation of my numberlefs admirers. Lord Darnley was in our box, and I obferved that his eyes were fixed upon Mifs Lefley, who accompanied her friend ; but Emily was too much engaged with Sir Edward Fortefcue, who fatnext her, to attend to his Lordfliip.
Lord Darnly has fent up his name-he enters
the room—the impertinent creature was fcarcely Seated, before he began talking about Mifs Lefley— he a(ks me a thoufand questions concerning her— “ positively my Lord, I fhall continue writing, un-lefs you will chufe Some more agreeable fubjeU.’’— He bows—and I throw afide my pen. Adieu,
C. Townly. L E T-
252	LETTER S.
LETTER CLXXXII.
Mrs. Elvin to Lady Essex,
My late filence has been occafioned by an indiS-pohtion, which being now happily removed, I withpleafure continue a correspondence, that con-ftitutes one of the greatest pleafures of my life.
We have had few vifitors fince my confinement, except Lady Fortefcue and Sir Edward. Every day, by difcovering new perfedions in that amiable man, renders him still dearer to the gentle heart of my beloved Emily.
The death of a distant relation, to whom Sir Edward is left executor, has obliged him to leave us for a few days. I with pleafure perceived the change, which his abfence made in my friend, stie became penfive and unfettled ; yet Seemed infenfible of the caufe of this Sudden alteration. But we generally chufe to afiign Some reafon for ourdejedion, when we find it is obferved by others. “ This weather, faid She to me, (yawning) is intolerable ; it really affedts my Spirits ; I don’t believe the fun has Shone’’ >—-ever fince Sir Edward’s abfence, interrupted I, with a fmile,—were he here, the Iky would lour, the feafons change in vain,
“ Not even dull December fad,
“ If he stood Smiling by.”
Emily has been with Lady Fortefcue thefe two days, and is to remain there until the return of Sir Edward, when the day is to be fixed which will render him the happiest of mankind-
I forgot to tell you that Sir Charles Royston, and Sir Edward, had met frequently lately in Berkley Square, and feemed highly pleafed with each other, i I was prefent at their first interview, which fortunately happened to be when Emily was gone to pay a morning vifit at Lady Ofibry’s.
Upon
LETTERS.	253
Upon Mr. Elvin’s introducing Sir Charles to hiin, Sir Edward involuntarily started back, and it was Some moments before he could pay his compliments to him. Soon, however, did Sir Charles, by his winning addrefs, and amiable conduU, overcome every unfavourable imprestion. Sir Edward faw, he admired his virtues, and loved him the more, for his having, still then, withheld from him that esteem, of which he found he had ever been fo deferving. *****
I have this moment received a letter from lady Fortefcue. Sir Edward arrived last night in Grof-venor-fquare, and on Friday fe’nnight my beloved Emily is to be united to that amiable man. I fly to congratulate them upon this pleafing event.
Adieu, adieu t
Clarissa Elvin.
L E T’
254	LETTERS.
LETTER CLXXXIII.
Lady Townly to Lady Dormer.
SIR Harry Sinclay, and Lord Darnley, have juft left me.—^—We have been rallying his Lordifhip most; unmercifully. Mifs Lestey, the “ enchanting Mil's Lestey,” was married last: week to Sir Edward Fortefcue. The Peer had entertained hopesof fup-planting him—no improbable conjedure that, let me tell you, had the girl been as ambitious as thy Charlotte.
eif	»	»	#	*
Pasting by Mr. Beverly’s houfe in Bruton-ftreet, one morning last: week, I faw my coustn Harriet standing near the window—1 pulled the string—the coach stopped—John rapped with authority at the door—and my ladystiip entered the parlour, where Mrs. Beverly was, but, thank Heaven, no lady Sydney, the old dowager not being yet arrived in town. Harriet was in full drefs, and never looked to greater advantage. She was going to fpend the day at Mr. Elvin’s, to meet Sir Edward Fortefcue and his bride. Sir Charles, and Lady Royston, &c. and, her chariot driving to the door, stie agreed to call upon me the next morning. Lord Townly being gone into Sustex.
I went in the evening to Lady R-;-’s rout,
loft an immenfity, and returned at three o’clock, fatigued and out of humour — and having vented my fpleen upon my maid, retired to bed. Harriet
was at-----Square by twelve the next morning.
She waited near an hour, but no Lady Townly appeared. At two, however, I awoke, recolledled the appointment, rung for Jenny, and having hurried on my cloaths, hastened to attend her in the drawing room. “ I hope. Lady Townly, faid She, as Soon as I entered, that this is not your ufual time
of lifing--Good heavens, my dear, continued stie,
how
1
LETTERS. 25s
how pale you look ! That bloom, which once gave
fuch animation to your features, is entirely fled.-
Let me prevail upon you, Charlotte”-“ You
country ladies, interrupted I, peevifhly, imagine that the whole of beauty conSifts in that rustic bloom, of which you boast fo highly ; whereas it is utterly exploded the beau monde, the most unfafliionable thing in nature. Why, child, that colour in your cheeks, which you, I fuppofe, esteem your greatest attraction, would utterly ruin me for a fine lady.’’—■ “ Is it polite, returned fhe Smiling, to decry thofe qualifications we do not poITefs—but I must own, if the appellation of a fine lady is to be bought at fo dear a price, I fliall never be tempted to become a purchafer.”
Adieu, my dear Lady Bab! Compliments to Captain Percy, from your
Charlotte TownLy.
V
LET-
256	LETTERS.
LETTER CLXXXIV.
Sir Edward Fortescue to Mr. Beaucham?.
My dear Beauchamp, I am indeed the happiest of men. My Emily—but no words can defcribe her perfeUions, or my love. The gentlenefs of her manners, the delicacy of her Sentiments, and the foftnefs which beams forth from her lovely eyes, whenever I addrefs her—and am I then the obje6l of this lovely tendernefs! yes, my friend, every look, every adionof Lady Fortefcue, confirm the delightful thought.
My mother is with us in Grofvenor-Square, and her prefence completes our happinefs. My acquaintance with Sir Charles Royston is now ripened into the most tender friendlhip ; we are become infeparable. Lady Royston can only be equalled by my Emily.--How perfed is the amity which unites them ! Lord Ostbry and his amiable Henrietta frequently grace our little circle. You would be charmed with Lady Of-fory, my dear friend. Since in her the vivacity of the Parifian ladies is agreeably blended with the Soft delicacy of my countrywomen.-Emily just now en-
tered ray apartment with an unufual glow of plea-fure on her lovely face. Mrs. Elvin W'as this morning brought to bed of a daughter, and Ihe is hastening to Berkley-fquare, to exprefs her joy upon this interestingoccafion. I will accompany her, and pay my congratulatory compliments to Mr. Elvin. This moment, my dear Emily, I attend you. Adieu !
E. F.
Lc Li ,	LET-
^	LETTERS.	257
LETTER CLXXXV.
Mrs. Elvin to Lady Essex.
T.
AMONGST the numerous congratulations which I have received upon my late recovery, thofe from my dear Lady Eflex are by far the most: pleafing.
The interest you take in my welfare, and in that of my little Emily, fills my heart with gratitude and affection. How fincerely, then, do I rejoice in your expected arrival in London, when I (hall be allowed to return my perfonal acknowledgments to you !
We—that is to fay, my good man, his faucy wife. Sir Edward and Lady Fortefcue, have been a week at a most delightful little retreat, which Sir Edward has lately purchafed in Kent. Lady Fortefcue is enchanted with it, and I already forefee that we Shall frequently lofe her from Grofvenor-fquare. I have laid an interdidlion upon Sir Edward—he promifes—* but, alas! in this refpedl he is not to be trusted.
Our little Emily Is with us-noihappineSs with-
out her, you know. I have found in her a great refen»blance to Lady Fortefcue, and the Similarity renders her still dearer to me. Nay, do not fmile at
my folly-----Sir Edward is of the fame opinion,
and, I believe, he has already given her many a tender carefs upon that account.
It
Lady
20	L E T-.Dfh^ S.
Lady Fortefcue Smiles at the . fuppoSition; fhe rakes the pen, but will not deny the probability of it.
V	Adieu,
Our beloved Mrs, Elvin has given your Ladyllilp the bed proof imaginable of her returning health, by the vivacity of her letter. Were fhe not clofe at my elbow, I would tell you that fire is more lovely
and faucy than ever-----Our god-child is a most
engaging little creature.
How highly am I indebted to your Ladyfhip, for the obliging fhare you take in my happinefs! Sir Edward is the mod amiable of mankind. The felicity of your Emily is complete.
O, my dear Lady ElTex, how often does the disappointment of our wifhes prove a real blefling to us!
Could your friend have ever experienced that felicity from a connexion with Sir Charles, which
Ihe now enjoys in her union with Sir Edward !---
impoflible ! Didrud and anxiety had clouded her days with Sorrow, and her tendernefs would only have rendered the misfortune more Severe,.
Let not then the children of affliftion prefume to murmur at the decrees of Providence, but Submit, with pious refignation, to the will of Heaven, convinced that the bleffings they implore are withheld, either becaufe they ought not to be granted, or in order to bedow upon therh feme greater good.
Edward
L .E T T E R S.	259
Edward enters the dreiTing-room------he reads my
letter----he preffes me with rapture to his bofom.
O, Madam, what a delightful moment ! Hasten, hasten, I conjure you, to be a partaker oS our felicity.
’ Emily Fortescue.
r.
F I N • I S.
-
r-^r-	/'	3 yr -T V icl	^
, '. . , ■ A
.: y friw'd ot	-.fl;.! a-, j&n. <»'|isro.	. ,,„■
^n: iulir*, i?'jb r	,Vli/;bfT^ ,0 ■
•	rf i! o k)' ' J; '1.:^ 5- tii Ci *’,;jj(;rc)> 1	. *%i
•'CCd
a.;3T#.al . U'.l	: . ■
■"'''	' 'y ' ''...Sy'	;	'■
•	- ‘	■
■	- 'I v:	1	1
V.;- iuT'	-	•;: -
•• c •	•	.	^	.	.. . -^
■*''>•..• 'A-
t»?-	■■ •;. ’■	-i-’’'-	V-'T ' '	;,■
' V ■*	.'.• ^' i ^	iT -■! 'Kf
■ I-	•	^	.	.	■	.	-,
• - • ■ ■ ■, ' ■ ; ■ .''■
.	■:*•	'•■•n Vkr|.-^.
vtiM	■	i' ^	y
v'r.'	I	- _ .	.	^	■	1 ■'.
■'	^ ,	•	'	-v,;'
-	.	•	' 't
' ■ *	•	• f
U. of Pa. ■
_	■	•	r ■	■	/ ;i------
\	. C
y	,	,
- N . .. I •	i
'	- { .'N	/ ,	‘ ' '	;	' -
' . ■ -	■ ■ j '	- ' ^	' I
"-N	:
i	'	*
.	' ' i	’ y. .	■	■	,	‘
I	’ ,
' ‘	t	,
.	^ ■	I
' :v--:
:n >	. .. ■•	- 'CcNtefT;.'. -
, ^ ^ • - ■' ‘
. . . , ■. ■ ' ' ' ■ ' ■ ■ fj ■	-	" f V. ■ .D	^	,
-	»	'.'--.It'
■ A	■	"	-	. . '
-	.	t	.	*	*	.
■ c ■ ■ './	.	'	■ ■ '
* \*
P. ' ‘ ‘	.	.	■ - ■ ■
■ ' ■ ■
. . ■ ■' & ■ • . .
I
4	.
'	^	■'	^ i
.	.	'	.	f
'	•	N'.	* '. -.
'	■	,	' ^	.	■<d. bV^W-Af
C ', >;' '' . '■	'	,	, ( ■■
t '* —
^	I ' ■	~	* / •
■ ■ ■ ’ '
i ' ■■	' ■; --^	; '■
fr	.	.
I	■	. ■ '■' ■-. .
%■ ■ . ■ ■"
I ,	'	■ . .	.	^
I	■	-	^	_	•	C .	■ ' ■	‘
l.A ■	. '	.	'
%■ ' .
IV. .	.	■	.	'
r'	-	1
^	.• . ■’ '
aV‘ ■ ' ■'■
VSff
nyg	. . •
, i *■	"	----------------------- ^
,	^ n	/ .
■ * • ■ ‘ - ^ ^ ^
■■■	^ V ^	^	'.	■.	■	■-■ ■ A '
. V .
■ i '	-
i '	. ^'	■ . ■•
.	'	'	■ .	.'.	'	■ ,	i
I	"	'	- -i‘
^^EMK :M^MV ^d-d.
f'"'
isiv^d ■,
.—.^1	iiui-r:	\
• j|	"- Vl f
iDisrm j /
N' -• V- j;1	■
Slo t h i -h...- l“
.,. t.***-	^
^ "	L	__
1	' ; jv ^
■ f I-
. •*, ■( T
,F ',(\l
fL LcTi'®*
P':::rf
b j - ^	!
■ 4 ~	A ■ - d
; - 'te
I I
' c I
i -■•'■■ I
.'	.	■	^ ^ j
.	.	• •	• t-	•.•■••
■^R^'fKc^4	•' ■
‘c‘C'	''In
jte /' i; '
hv:C'''i;:;;S	N ■	j- i . .	■
'S'^V^S'-'S-y;'/.	-.-i'
Call/M
IOiM i B	”''°'''‘
“SIS % ^1____ Pages'
, ljp2 I ■□ I
=rlii!i ■"
i fill I ■	^°"‘^'*
■SjI'
ii SgJB
l■|«s^“■
=H^ ^ I
-i^H---!H	Notes/
||H»^ 2 I	tn3023
