THE
DISTRESSED LOVERS:
OR, THE
HISTORY
OF
EDWARD and ELIZA. 
In a SERIES of LETTERS. 

IN TWO VOLUMES.
VOL I.

DUBLIN:
Printed for S. Watson, and W. Colles, 
Book-Sellers in Dame-Street:
MDCCLXVIII. 

r ■ '	■■;
it	' i * V
I	.D . ■	■
.V '' ] 7r. V .	■ " rf ■■
- I if h. ■	V ■ ';} ■ * ■'
"A[d AF :l2 ']■'■ stCiSrC £: ;■ '
I' ■	^ '
p	■	C Nt. V^. - ,	,,\	^
■ ■ ' ';■,
: :■: 'I J L ■■■; a
,S	At [	■.	. ./V ' .L'	^	' 1
}j£l\«r-■; .V	---- ,-i -	.'f* ' .
‘
-«-•	■ ■	•	I’; ' ■/ V	-	■	___
CO (O ^
CV3 0
dDR
^ at * * * * **	*******m *,^
*************** *'t^
LETTERS
BETWEEN
EDWARD and ELIZA.
LETTER I.
Edward to Eliza.
, V
iU
TS EpRIVED of my dear Eliza’s Si	conversation, I receive no Small
a
^ comfort from her letters. They aU
ways afford me the highest entertainment,
^ during the intervals of leifure from the •0
bufy Scenes I am by necessity engaged in ;
I	and without them I should enjoy no happi-I S VoL. I.	B	neSs
a>
oC
cr
tr\ao»
2	LETTERS BETWEEN
nefs in her abfence.—Yes, Eliza, your letters give me all the pleafure I enjoy ,—^ they reconcile me to a situation which would otherwise be inSupportable.—How often do I exclaim with Romeo,
Fathers have flinty hearts Children must ne’er be bleft.
Yet still, I hope that time may turn the hearts of thofe who now treat us with So ■ much Severity.—Did I not keep up my Spirits by forming Schemes of future felicity, I flxould certainly degenerate into a misanthropist. — I meet with fo many things every day to four my temper, from my connexions with people in whofe faces I am forced to fmile, at the fame time that I defpife them in my heart, that I frequently retire to my lodgings quite out of humour with Society ;—a mere Cynic.
To be out of humour with the world in general, becaufe we are difgusted with a few, is certainly wrong, and I will try
to
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 3
to corredl my disposition ; but as our tempers are very apt to be affefted by the company we keep, I am afraid, I shall not be able to bear the “ infolence of office” with the compofure of a philoSopher.—Comfort mcj Eliza, v/ith one of your chear-ful letters; for I want confolation.—t feel every day more and more the lofs of your company ; and all conversation but ^your’s. So peevish am I grown, is hateful /.o the ear of
Edward.
LETTER II.
ILLIZA to Edward.
J Am forty you give way to gloomy ideas.
Can Edward be a Diogenes ? the last man in the world whom I should fufpedt of adopting the manners of Cynic.-—But B 2	your
4	LE-TTLRS between
your last letter is written in So vapourish and fretful a style, that I am afraid fome-thing uncommonly difagreeable has happened, to extort Such strictures against Society.—Consider, my dear Edward, that, if we expedt to receive pleafure from the world, we must be willing to give it; Otherwife, we are not upon equal terms.— You are not, I know, naturally inclined to view things in a dark light.—I hope I shall make you fmile, by coupling thoSe words fo clofely together; and therefore am the more furprifed at the peevish paragraphs i^ your letter.—I am glad, however, that you unbofom yourfelf with fo much unreServedneSs, for I dearly love the language of the heart ; and you may be Sure, that the language of yours is particularly interesting to
Eliza.
LET-
EDWARD AND ELIZA 5
LETTER III.
Edward to Eliza.
A Letter from Eliza is the best cordial for low-fpirits 1 know of. — What strange creatures we are ! But how should we be otherwife in fuch a changeable climate ?-You fee 1 am a true
Englishman, by quarrelling with the weather.—Without joking, however, I believe That has no fmall effedl on the bodies, and consequently the minds of my foggy countrymen.—T am in a mood fo different from that in which I wrotfe my last letter, that I could, in the language of Lee, “ fnuff the moon fuch a turn has your last letter given to my de-ears, as Slipstop calls them. I am quite elevated, and have nothing to do with your dark lights.—But, hold thy pen a little, Ed-B 3	ward
6 LETTERS between
■ward or elfe Eliza will think that thou has quitted thy tub for a tavern —To be Serious therefore---
Your letter.found me at our amiable
friend’s Mrs. C-----, who is, you know,
a very Sensible woman ; and I had the pleafure of drinking tea with half a dozen people of both Sexes, as Sensible as her-, Self; and yet believe me', Eliza, I never Spent a duller afternoon in my life.—’Tis true, the company were mixed ; and to that I attribute the emptinefs of the tattle ; for on thofe cccaSions there is hardly any conversation. The dearnefs of provisions, the degeneracy of the age, and the uncertainty of the weather, with a few news-paper paragraphs, furnish a great deal of insignificant chat; but no fubjefls interesting or amusing were diS-cuffed ; fo that you will not wonder that I went home in a very muzzy humour; but that muzzinefs Soon went off, —
thanks
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 7
thanks to your friendly hand, as friendly as it is fair.
Edward.
00 O O0&Q0O000OO0 L E T T E R IV.
Eliza to Edward.	^
WHAT would I give to enjoy Such a muzzy afternoon with my friends in London ?—Locked up from the world in this mournful manSion-houfe, I feel all the mifery, without enjoying any of the comforts, of a monastic life.—I have privacy, but I have no peace.—My vigilant aunt watches me with fuch cruel aS-siduity, that it is with the utmost difficulty I contrive to forward my little diS-patches to you.—’Tis a horrible thing to be So watched ;—and yet I make myfelf tolerably eafy under my confinement, be-B 4	caufe
8	LETTERS between
caufe I hope that Providence will rgward our constancy and truth ; and becaufe I am determined that nothing shall make me falfe to thee. Armed with this resolution, I shall, I trust, rife Superior to all the efforts of parental tyranny.—Plow unluckily fortunate, for me, was my father, when he received So considerable an addition to his patrimony : So unex-pedled an acquisition has converted the
most indulgent parent into--—----- a
charadter which a good daughter is unwilling to defcribe and yet, notwithstanding all his Severity, Such is my opinion of the redlitude of his heart, that I am inclined to believe, be intended to make us happy in the completion of our wishes, before he was dazz,led with the Splendor of w^ealth.—Why elfe did he So warmly encourage the intimacy between us, and with So much ardor exprefs his Satisfaction at our approaching union ? — But I will not indulge this melancholy fubjedl.
—It
I
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 9
—It is mote prudent, and certainly' more pleastng, to look forward with hope, than to look back with difcontent.—You will fay I am very philoSophical :—I endeavour to be So, as much as the infirmities of human nature will permit me. To bear the disappointments we meet with, without murmuring at the decrees of Providence, is our duty ; but we give no proofs of our understanding, when we pretend to be void of fenfibility.
I AM, unawares, stiding into a very fo-lemn stile ; but I hope my letter will not fill you with any melancholy thoughts.— I am, you know, naturally given to make reflediions; fometimes very ferious ones ; but I would not have you, at any time, alarmed about them, and imagine, that I am in a state of defpondence, when I croud my page with them :—-I am rarely very merry, but was never more chear-ful.~How should I be merry within thefe
walls ?
ro LETTERS between
walls? — Write Soon; — write much;— you cannot write too much to your
Eliza.
P. S. Many thanks for the book you Sent me.—The author must Surely be a most agreeable companion.
LETTER V.
Edward to Eliza.
/^Hariviing moralist!—Thou art an ornament to thy Sex !—
O ! were they all like thee, men would adore them.
And all the bufinefs of their lives be loving.
ExcuSe the raptures you have raiSed your Self; and believe me when I tell you,
that
EDWARD AND ELIZA. n
that your last letter has very much in-cieafed the high opinion I ever had of your understanding and your heart. —> With that part I am uncommonly pleafed,
! where you Speak with fo much tendernefs of your father, and difcover fo much un-willingnefs to think hardly of him.— Such filial affefUon is rare ; but Surely, it will be rewarded.—I will try to think of him with as much candor; but, can he who makes my Eliza unhappy, deferve it ?—I must change the fubjeQ:, for fear I should exprefs myfelf with too much acrimony.—I would not offend Thy ears for the world.—I am very glad to find, though not in the least furprifed, that you admire the book I Sent you ; but, if, you fuppofe that the author of it is an agreeable companion, you are much mistaken.
.—As a writer, he is excellent ; as a companion, execrable.—He has fo strong a paffion for shining in conversation, that he never pleafes : and difplays his academical accomplishments with fuch a pedantic
12	LETTERS BETWEEN
dantic parade, that his arrogance and felf-conceit are not to be endured.—I desire never to fee him but in print.—How-few are happily diSpofed to give pleafure in conversation I I Say diSpofed ; becaufe,
, in general, the mere disposition to give pleafure wdll make us agreeable ; and without it we can never expedt to receive it.—The efforts we make to entertain, often excite diSgust ; but by discovering a desire to be entertained, we pay a compliment to thoSe we converfe with; which produces the most agreeable conSequences. —For, by always listening to others with \ patience, we shall always be listened to, when we Speak ourfelves, with attention.
—So rnuch lor conversation ; on which, if I go on, I shall be a downright drowfy effay-writer, and a very dull correspondent.—■ I must lay down my pen awhile, for I hear your lively cousin Sophy upon the stairs : her vivacity will give a new turn to my thoughts ; and ’tis most probable that the remainder of my letter,—
I	’	—.
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 13	.
when I have time to finish it,—will give a turn alfo to your’s ; for, entre nous, we begin, I think, both of us, to grow rather grave charadters.
'Lhe lively girl is gone, and has, indeed, given a new turn to my thoughts.— Such a turn, Eliza!—What think you was her intelligence?—Your father fet
out this morning for--------, with old
Sir Luke, whom, by your coufin’s account and I fear her information is not to be doubted, — he has admitted, for the fake of his title and his estate, contiguous to his own, as a lover to -----
Have I not reafon to be alarmed ?—Can Edward be compofed when Eliza is on the brink of being Sacrificed to old age,
uglineSs, and-------riches ?------Ay—
there’s the rust—If I write wildly, you cannot wonder ; for when the mind is struggling between hope and fear, the disturbance of all its ideas — Interrupted again !—There is an anxious eagerneSs
in
14 LETTERS between
in John’s looks which distract me I —
0	1 Eliza, — now, indeed, I want con-folation more than ever ; — the best of mothers is Seized by the hand of death, and I am Suddenly Sent for to take a .last farewel. — Pity# — I am lure you will pity the distressed situation of your deep-ly-affli6led
Edward.
P. S. Before I Set out, I Snatch this moment to inform you, that, by a Second messenger, I find the dear woman is recovered from the stroke ; but lies in fo dreadful a condition, that the physicians cannot pronounce her out of danger_______
1	fly to give her all the relief in my power.
-—How little, — how very shtle,________ is
all human greatnefs in the hour of dissb-lution ?
LET-
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 15
c soooosooseooocooooo®oceo
LETTER VI.
Eliza to kowARD,
W ELL Said, rapturous Edward, —
“ Very fine, very pretty indeed !”
By the alTistance of Mr. Rowe, you have paid me a very high herolcal compliment. — I will study to deferve it —> I am very glad any thing I Said in my last letter has increafed your good opinion of me; and that I hope, whatever be my lot, I shall never lofe.—You did right to check your acrimony ; for you would greatly offend my ears by sharp expressions against him, whole past indulgences are ever to be remembered with gratitude.—
All
ts Letters betwei:n
I	*
All the time I was reading Mr. D—’s., ingenious book, I pleaSed mySelf with thinking what an agreeable companion he would Sometimes be to my Edward, in his hours of relaxation; but your account of him has given me Such a difgust to the man, that I shall not take half So much pleafure in his writings, as I did before this information: and the next time I meet with an ingenious book, I shall carefully avoid all enquiries about the author, for fear I should be again disappointed and difgusted.—
Sophia’s information was true.—My father arrived here last night, with Sir
Luke.—■
How you have alarmed me about your ‘ dear mother! Such blows, at her time of life, are indeed to be dreaded; but as , she has, I find by your postfcript, recovered from this stroke, heaven will, I hope, preferve her life for the happineSs
of
kb WARD AND ELIZA.
of her Edward: and, of coiifequence, for the felicity bf
Eliza.
P, S. Sir Liike is your rival.
. LETTER Vll.
Edward to Eliza,
*13 A C K S and tortures 1 —■ Sir Luke my rival!
Forbid it, heav’n ? and forbid it, love !”
There are passages in your lass letter fo mystical and alarming, that I am in a state of mind little short of distraflion ;
■—when you mention my good opinion, “ That (you fay) I hope, whatever be my lot, I Ihall never lofe 1”—Whatever be my lot!—I have revolved theSe words over and over, and the more I VoL. I.	C	revolve
18 LETTERS between
revolve them, the more they torment me. —The cool manner too in which you barely confirm your coufin’s intelligence, is So different from your ufual strain of writing to me, that I am at a lofs how to account for it : — the more at a loSs, becaufe it is the first time ; and till I receive a more fatisfadtory letter from you, I shall have no peace. — On the receipt of this, therefore, keep me no longer in ignorance, but let me know the worst.
—Any thing is better than fufpence__I
hardly know what I write. So unquiet is my mind, and So confufed its ideas :— restlefs, disturbed.—Yet I will hope;— ^ for Sure Eliza, after all her protestations, after all the proofs she has given me of [ her Sincere affedtion, can never forget thofe protestations, nor afit in opposition to thofe proofs. — Your father, — I will not shock your filial ears,—but, may I not call him cruel ?—Yes, Eliza, he is cruel, to make duty and affedfion incompatible. — But I waste the time. — Sir
Luke,
!	EDWARD AND ELI2iA. 19
l/uke !— title,— estate!— let me hot think on that ‘‘ That way madneSs lies.’C-
Edward.
P. S. My mother^ thank God, grows better every day; but I dare not tell her what I feel on your account.
LETTER VIII.
Eliza to Edward,
T) .0 O R Edward ! and So you are re-
^ ally alarmed about Sir Luke ——. .
But pray make yourfelf quite eafy on his account, for, I assure you, he is by no means a formidable rival. I am a little angry with you, however, for making yourfelf unhappy about fo contemptible a creature; and for entertaining any doubts concerning my fidelity or my love : but C 2	I forgive
LETTERS eetweew
i forgive you.—The disturbance of your ftiind is an additional proof of the strength of your affeQiion. — Sir Luke is the most horrid obje<st I ever faw on two legs.—^ Rather than encourage his addreffes, I would Submit to the greatest inconveniences. He is odious to the last degree ; doubly odious by the ridiculous efforts he makes to render himfelf agreeable in my
eyes__You need be under no terrifying
apprehensions about a man fo frightful in his perfon, and fo forbidding in his addrefs.
I AM very glad to hear that your mother is in So fair a way, and hope that you will, by communicating the contents of this letter, contribute to her recovery; for I know she is very much interested in our affairs.—I, once, had a mother !— would she were now alive !
Sophy is come to stay a week with us ; fo that I expeft by the fprightlinefs of her conveifation^ to catch fome of her
vivacity.
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 21
vivacity, and by that means become a more lively correspondent.—She is a most en-tertaing girl, has Such a fine flow of Spirits, and Such a fund of good-nature, that I shall be Sorry whenever, she leaves us:— she is very sincerely your friend ; and fays So many handfome things of you, that if I was the least inclined to jealoufy, I should feel rather queer when she runs oh in your praife :—but, instead of being jealous, I enjoy her panegyrics.—
I TAKE an opportunity to fend this letter by Harry H—---, from whom I have
received many civilities here.—He is as good-natured a young fellow as ever lived ; and every body in this neighbourhood is fond of his company, becaufe he has the happy art of making all thofe with whom he converfes, pleafed with them-felves. He is the Wimble of W—shire, and in every part of the county leaves the most agreeable traces of the goodnefs of his heart, and laborious inactivity, if I C 3	may
22 LETTERS BETWEEN
may ufe the expression ; for Harry is always doing a thoufand little kindnesses which require no fatigue, but which endear him to all his acquaintance. To the Service of our Sex he devotes a great deal of his time ; and if he fees by our Smiles, that we are pleafed with his endeavours to give us pleaSure, he thinks himfelf with thoSe Smiles Sufficiently rewarded. He works a fkreen, and knits a pair of mittens to a miracle; and you may therefore
recommend him to mifs ----, as a very
ufeful hand : but I fay nothing of his head. — Adieu. — Forget Sir Luke, and rernemher
Eliza,
t
t ; p	'
.	^	LET-
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 23
LETTER IX.
Edward to Eliza.
^ .
“ Avaunt, my fears! Edward’s himfelf again.”
HANKS, many thanks, dear Eliza, for the glad tidings conveyed to me in your last letter,—Nothing could equal the impatience with which I opened it, but the pleafure with which I read it.—I shall love Harry for bringing it, as long as I live.—I am quite a new creature. How could I be fo egregious a fool as to give way to fuch — But they are all vanished. —lam ready to —— By the entrance of an intruder I must lay down my pen.
”	—Old D— 1 you know him well; and
therefore will compaffionate my situation.—
C 4	Thank
24 LETTERS b E TWEEN Thank heaven! the dull drone is de-' parted : the walking book-caSe has taken himfelf away, after having made more than a visit,— a visitation.—- When I
compare him with Harry---------, notwith-
standins?: the Superiority of his intelledls, he Suffers, in my opinion, by the comparison ; for Harry, with all His affiduity to pleafe, is never impertinent; but this bookful blockhead is, with his learned lumber, the most troublefome fellow I ever met with. He has read a prodigious number of books withoiit the least taste, without any distinction ; and therefore, though he has Something to Say on every Subject, he is on every SubjeCl trifling and unimportant. If the knowledge which he has acquired by perpetual reading was well digested, and under the direction of good fenfe, he would be a very entertaining and instructive companion ; but, as he has only just fenfe enough to think himfelf wifer than every body with whom he con-verfes, he talks away, immoderately loquacious.
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 25
quacious, with all the vanity of a fool, and the arrogance of a coxcomb.
I AM very glad to hear that Sophy is
at S-----, and beg you would thank
her for faying So many she is a gobd
girl, and, I am Sure, means well_^You
I will find your time steal away very agreeably in her company_________I could Say many
handSome things of her too, but fupprefs them, becaufe I wonld not make her vain ; for you will, I know, read this letter to her.
I SHALL certainly recommend Harry |:o Mifs ——, for she doats on new charaflers ; and Harry is, in his way, a curiosity.—You defcribe his chara6Ier with fo much Spirit, that, I hope, when you meet with any perSonages in the country equally curious, you will put them down upon paper.—I shall be glad to hear how Sir Luke goes on.—I am perfe€l]y eafy about him j—but I should
be
I
f
26 LETTERS BETWEEN
be pleafed to hear how he condudts himfelf, and how your father behaves upon your vilible disapprobation of his choice ; for visible, lam Sure, it is.—You have too honest a countenance to conceal it.
My mother mends every day.—I shortly intend to communicate the passages in your letter, which you rightly imagine will contribute to her recovery.
Your’s for ever,
Edward.
1
LE.D
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 27
LETTER X,
Eliza to Edward.
NOtwithstanping you fay you are “ perfe6lly eaSy about him^’* I find you are still harping upon Sir
Luke. ----— Sophy fays, if stie was in
my place, she would certainly give you caufe to be jealous_She has no pati-
ence with you, for being So anxiousty inquisitive about an objedf So every way
beneath your attention.-Indeed, my
dear Edward, many women, in my situation, would plague you heartily, for being So strangely alarmed about trifles ; but I know you too well to be furprifed at the quicknefs of your Sensibility, and love you too much to put that fenSibility to the rack.—Be as perfedlly eafy, therefore, as you fay you are ; for Sir Luke decamped
this
28 LETTERS between
this morning, as he found he had no chance by all his own afllduities, added to thofe of my father, to make me Lady —, except by parental compulsion ; and of that he had too much honour and humanity to avail himfelf.'--Setting aside
his age and uglineSs, Sir Luke is a good fort of a man; and though I never could receive him as a lover, I shall always stand up for his behaviour as a man and fo 1 hope you will ; for if he had been as mercenary as my father, I tremble to think of the confequences.—
My father frets and fumes like a madman at his difappointnaent, having flattered himlelf with the hopes of my not being able to resist fo advantageous a piatch j thinking, to be Sure, in the true Spirit of i avarice, that money is the foundation of felicity in this world ; and that for the fake of being My Ladied, about the town, I should not hesitate a moment.
My aunt fays and does all in her power to pacify him ; for I have been fo happy
as
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 29
as to bring her over to my interest :
but in vain. ------ He is deaf to all
the reaSons which she urges against fo preposterous an union ; and I am much ' afraid, that if another money - match should offer, disinheritance would follow a non - compliance with his lucrative views, if my lover is prompted by the fame motives to make his addresses to me. —However, I am So well fatissied with having had Such an efcape,—that I am grateful to Providence for delivering me from a marriage of mifery; and should think myfelf highly to blame, did I, like you, ingenioussy torment myfelf with the horrors of imagination.—Think as I do on this occasion, Edward, and let me hear no more of your horrors.
I am diverted with your calling old
D  —- a walking book-cafe.—What
a strange animal! — I did compassionate your Situation, while you was worried by his loquacity. I don’t wonder that Harry
appear?
JO LETTERS BETWEEN
appears to advantage by the compariSortf By the hint I gave of his Head, you must not Set him down for a fool.—Harry by no means is entitled to that appellation : I rather think he may be pronounced a wife man ; for he never attempts to talk orf any topic of which he has not a thorough knowledge.—His topics indeed are often trifling, but by his manner of treating them they agreeably amuSe; and how much more tolerable is fuch a man, thafl the bookful blockhead, who Superficially fkims the Surface of every fubjedl which is started, but never dives to the bottom of it ?—
You guested right.-i-I certainly com= municated your compliiiient to Sophy, and she Simpered over it with no Small Sa-tisfadion. — She is, indeed, a good girl, in the stridest Senfe of the word ; arid were it not for her company, I should
lead a moping life.-----She has always
Something Sprightly to fay; and, whcn“-^
ever
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 31
eyer I am in the least inclined to the vapours, I find her conversation of infinite
Service.---She is as fond of a garden as
I am ; and you would Smile to fee how bufy we are about our flowers, of which we are both particularly fond.—As I receive great delight from my fenSe of Smelling, which is very acute, I am never So happy as when I am Snuffing up the aromatic fragrance of a carnation, or the rich odours of a rofe.—Our garden is in all its beauty, and I enjoy it.—How I run on with my raptures ! But thofe. Surely, which are inSpired by a Survey of the beauties of nature ought not to be ridiculed ?— They are rational and they are innocent.—When you are in a humour to consider this Subjed, I wifh you would commit your thoughts to paper, and fend them to
I
Eliza.
LET-
32 LETTERS betweeii	^
LETTER XL
Edward to Eliza.
SI R Luke decamped !-----—Then all
my doubts are fled.
Sophy is a Saucy girl.—I wifh she was heartily in love : I should then have an opportunity to triumph in my turn; for, take my word for it, she will be horribly
----------let hei make out the rest of
my meaning.---
Was I alarmed at trifles?—I was.—
I fee myfelf in a very ridiculous light, and blush at my behaviour. — And yet^ Eliza, as ridiculous as I appear to myfelf on theSe occasions, I would not, on [any account, give up fensibility for indifference.
That
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 35
That heart can ne’er a tranfport kncJW;
Which never felt a pain ‘
and the tranfports I feel in one moment of felicity over-balance the pangs 5 endure in whole hours of inquietude.
I envy not the frigid philofopher who laughs at love, its pleafures and its pains ; and vainly attributes that apathy to the strength of his understanding, which is entirely owing to the coldnefs of his constitution.
I admire the old knight for his honour^ and could hug him for his humanity.
I am glad — may I not be glad ? — that your father frets and fumes fo much ; and only hope, that whenever he intends to make us unhappy, his intentions may in this manner be defeated. Disappointment in every Scheme projected against his daughter’s peace, is all the harm I VoL* I.	D	wish
34 LETTERS between
wish him; and I think, by wishing him no more, I am very moderate in my re-fentment. When avarice petrifies the heart, how strangely it prejudices the head ?
By bringing over your aunt to your interest, you have struck a blow of confe-quence; and I congratulate you on the event. So powerful an ally is at this time a capital acquisition, and in a future attack may be of ‘the utmost utility.
' I AM as'grateful as you can be to Providence, for delivering you from a marriage fo devoutly to be dreaded ; and pray with great fervour, that you may always in a similar situation, meet with | a 'similar deliverance.--.You have cured nie of hiy ho'frors, and I think as you would have me.
Harry
S
EDWARD A;NfD ELIZA.	35
Harr-y Is a wiSe.iiian# old	=—
is^ Soq!.*—
Yo u make me wild to be with you during this flowery feafon, and to enjoy
at ----your raptures and your, rpfes.-----
No Dutchman can be 'fonder of flowers than I am, — on this side idolatry, to which,fonxe;rnrn.&ntlc flpfists ,stave crrried their admiration.-—As I am doomed to be pent up in a populous city, I cannot take So wide a. Survey of the beauties of nature asj -.wQuld;; stnt whenever they come in my way, I am never tired.—As my excursions are con-fined within a few miles-of London, my views cannot be very extensive.
I AM delighted with the thoughts of your receiving fo‘much amufement TroQi Sophy’s -converfation,'to which ^I,-in a great'meafure, tmpute'an agreeable * aifi-nefs in the stile ^f your^last letter, *^by which it isTdistinguifhed^from-the‘'forego-
D 2	ing
36 LETTERS BETWEEN
ing ones. But even that, unlefs your mind had been eafed of the load of anxiety, would not, I know, have given fuch vivacity to your manner. — That Eliza may never more have the tranquility of her mind disturbed, is the sincere wish, and the perpetual prayer, of her
Ever-fond, and ever-faithful
Edward,
LETTER XIL
Eliza to Edward.
*1^ O R the tranquility of Edward’s mind Eliza prays with equal sincerity and equal fervour. — Now you are all I wish you to be, but	. Fill up
this blank with your own hand.^
Will
EDWARD AND ELIZA, 37
Will you believe me when I tell you that Billy is grown a mighty [hunter ?— He is absolutely a Nimrod.—Five-barred gates, which uSed to be So formidable, are now nothing in his way. Who would have expected Such an alteration in a man of his flight make and Softnefs of manners ? — He Spent an hour with us this morning, and during the courfe of the converfation, which you may be Sure turned upon his (prefent) favourite topic ; I told him that I wondered how one of his delicate constitution could go through the fatigues of the field with Such alacrity. “ Madam (faid he, with his ufual fententioufnefs), ** hunting is the ‘‘ only amufement which is a relief from ‘‘ bufinefs ; the only relaxation without foftnefs; the only diversion which ** gives a lively pleafure without languor, alloy, or fatiety.’^ To thefe assertions I could not give my assent, and was therefore silent; for Billy is the last man with whom I would difpute, efpecially on D 3	hunting?
3® Letters
' huiitihg, since on* that fubjecst- I should Certainly fee fh^crwn ouK But I should not be furprized-to hear that, Whilfe he is re-lievirfg hirriSelS from businefs, and relaxing his mind in the purfoit of a< fox, he finishes his lively pleafures with a broken-neck.—This anecdote of Billy will divert you> I dare fay ; — as you are acquainted with the animal, and all his inconsistencies.—This stroke in his character will, however, fie quite new.
Eli*za.
LET-
!
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 39
LETTER XIII.
Edward to Eliza.
The transition from a frible to a fox-hunter is strange ;—’tis	pasting
strange!”—I wonder, as Billy is always, Proteus-like, shifting his shape, what will be his next metamorphosis. I never knew a more inconsistent animal, as yoa justly call him. I wish you would drefs up a little story, on his appearing in fo many different and distinQ: characters; for, from the (ketches I have feen of your poetical abilities, I am fure it would be prettily Ovidian.
I CAME homedast night very much vapoured, from a very agreeable visit.--
D 4	Yes,
4® LETTERS between
Yes, Eliza, I repeat it, vapoured. I Spent the afternoon with the amiable * * * * s, who, though they have been married five years, are totally strangers to that taedium of which thouSands joined together in matrimony, heavily complain within the twelve-month. — The conjugal felicity of this uncommon pair is rather strengthened than weakened by time ; and from their constant afllduities to endear themfelves to each other, there is no reafon to doubt of its duration to the end of their lives.—Fanny was making a frock for a very pretty miniature of her-felf, and my friend was enjoying the playful simplicity of a little cherub-faced boy, his own reprefentative in a larger size, who by his inarticulate prattle gave his father a pleasing opportunity to interpret his meaning; while Fanny took equal pleafure to make the lifpings of her daughter intelligible.— A more agreeable family-pieee I never beheld 1—Such views of domestic life always sill me with delight.
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 41
light, but at the fame time stir up a paf-Sion in my breast which robs it of its tranquility. — Envy, — Eliza, envy, is the pastion which wounds my peace, when I Survey a Scene of domestic felicity ; — but my envy is free from malignity, for I never desire to disturb it.---When shall we be united ?—Is there no hope, no prof-pe£t of SucceSs ? — I do not sink under the frowns of Fortune,—but I rnuji sigh for her Smiles. Sighs are involuntary, and will not be Suppressed. — I will not shock the ears of Eliza with fruitlefs exclamations, but I muji sigh.—Did I not thus anxiousty wish for the completion of my desires, I should not deServe your love; for I should not Set a proper value on it.—The infpired only in love or poetry, feel the passion : and thofc will expreSs it with a warmth peculiar to themSelves.— You have infpired me with the first ; and all my Sallies of Sensibility are proofs of your power over my heart.—
What
^2	LETTERS BETWEEN
What a different piflure of matrimony from, that above painted is exhibited by
Tom W-------and his wife!—Tom eats,
drinks, and steeps, but never thinks. — He is all body. He has a pair of large wall-eyes without any expreffion in them, and a couple of fat, flabby cheeks that would put a trumpeter to the blush. You expeft no Sagacity in fuch a face, and you are not difappointed, There is not a fyllable in it.—He looks nothing. A dog has as many ideas, and an elephant compared with him is a Nouiton.
Mrs. W------, his amiable moiedyi is
tout au contmire, both without and within.—She has a sharp, fenstble face, and feems to look through every body she looks at ; is never happy but when she is reading ; thanks God a thoufand times in a day that she is born with a foul Superior to the common herd of women ; talks perpetually of the dignity of human nature ; and treats Tom with a most cordial contempt
EDWARD AND ELBZA. 43
tempt for the paucity of his ideas, and the depravity of his fcaste.:—Tom; loves to
t
enjoy his friends, and indulge his genius, over a'bottle ; his intelleOhial wife hates t-G do the honours of a table ; and if she is engaged on a favourite Subject:, you might I as well move the Monument as draw her from her drefling-room,—With fuch opposite tempers and different purfuits, how Should they be happy ?
You tell me I am all you wish me to be,
but ------ I have silled up the blank.
■— What pleafure you give me by thus wishing with that hut, for a removal of the obstacles which prevent our union !
Another alarm’——A paragraph in this morning’s paper has just struck my eye :—“ We are credibly informed that a treaty of marriage is on foot, and will “ fpeedily be confummated, between Sir “ Charles T ——- and — ” Let me not blot this sheet with the Sequel.—I
have
44 LETTERS between
have torn the paper in a thoufand pieces.
Oh Eliza ! pity my perplexity, — dif- j perfe my doubts, — and relieve me from the agony of fuSpence.—Thorns will be planted in my pillow till I hear from you. -^There lives not on earth a man more comfortlefs at this moment, than
Edward.
LETTER XIV.
Eliza to Edward.
ORE horrors!
O fye, Edward, fye, Edward, fye !
You deServe the perplexity you feel for your credulity and precipitation ; — for your hastinefs in believing every thing
which is deft ruflive of your repofe.-—
Till you correQ; that felf-tormenting propensity
EDWARD AND LLVZk 45
penSity in your disposition, you will never be happy: for even the completion of your wishes would not be the conclufioti of your cares.—You know what wishes and what cares I mean.—Pay a proper regard to this advice, and tear no more news-papers.
Never were two matrimonial pictures better contrasted,—Sophy and I enjoyed them both ; for a marriage of happineSs and a marriage of infelicity are exhibited by your defcriptive pencil with equal ex-preffion.— How worthy of imitation are the « * * * s ! how unenviable are the
------s ! Tom and his wife are fuch
laughable objedis, that they would make admirable figures in a farce.
I have more than once viewed the amiable groupe, and always dwell on them with delight. I very much interested myfelf in bringing my agreeable friends together; and it is therefore with a
particular
^6 LETTERS -RETwRiint ■particular pleafure that J hear of their ■mutual love and growing affedlion.—No people ever entered into .the marriage-state with better dispositions, and more flattering proSpedls; and from the few but strong marks which you have given „o,f their domestic charadlers, I am very much inclined to believe, that their happinefs ' will be as'permanent as'it-is »pure. How rarely now Such ;pairs -in wedlock meet] —Whenever we fo meet, I hope we shall meet like them -and shy ‘following their example, deferve• their- felicity.
Re ading the fifth book of The Para-dife Lost, the other :day, )I was shocked with the following passage :
Evil into the mind of God or man Maycome and.go— ■ ..and leave No Spot oir bbme behind
shook V,'ver.u 17.
. h
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 47
Is not this a strange passage 4n a divine poem ?—-I would read.
Evil into the mind of a good man May come and go —-------&c.
By this flight alteration, the abSurdity of attributing evil to an all-good Being b totally removed.
Am I not a bold woman thus to attack your favourite bard with all the peremptory pomp of a professed critic ? However, I Submit my alteration to your fuperior judgment — make much of this compliment — and should be glad to know if we think alike upon this critical occasion.—
By Supposing that I can drefs up an Ovidian story with Ovidian prettinefs, you over-rate my poetical abilities.
Sir
4S LETTERS betweeist
Sir Charles'-----arrived yesterday at
his Place In this neighbourhood. He is just returned from his travels, and is a very pretty gentleman, with out having the least dash of the coxcomb in him.—’Tis whispered that he. is going to make his addresses to a Lady of your acquaintance, who, you may be Sure, is excessively envied by all \\QV dear friends on that account: but as I have a great regard for her, I wish she may fix his fluttering heart.
, Eliza. LET-
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 49
LETTER XV.
Edward to Eliza,
‘j Stand corrected for my impetuosity, and will endeavour to check it for the future
Can a mortal do more ?
The demolition of a news-paper was, I confefs, a puerile revenge ; but will you not alSo own that the paragraph which occasioned it, was very provoking to a man of my fufceptihility P — Excellent Eliza ! —You have rallied me into a reafona-ble way of thinking; and I hope I shall improve by the admonitions of fo sincere an instruftrefs.—How happy should I be with your equal disposition ; and from how VoL. L ,	E	many
LETTERS between many anxious hours should I be relieved by it I
^ I MUST correfl: you a little. - The > cares which So often interrupt my repofe, would certainly be removed by the completion of my desires.—
You are fly, Eliza. By the studied obscurity at the conclusion of your letter, you intended, no doubt, to try whether I should again expofe myfelf to your raillery.—I should, I believe, have given you an opportunity to laugh at me, had I not accidentally heard of Sir Charles’s intentions, before the receipt of it. I wish, as well as you, that the lady may fix his heart; and have no distike to him for a cousin, though I could not think of him, with patience, as a competitor.
Sir Charles, for I can now launch out with pleafure in his praife* is, as you fay, a very pretty gentleman.—He has not, by
making
EDWARD AND ELI.^A. 51
making the four of Europe, travelled him-Self into a contempt for his own country, but is as staunch an Englishman as ever. —How different from the young fellows of the age, of his figure and fortune, but without his learning and elegant accomplishments, who, fmit with the love ojfee* ing foreign parts, hurry over to the continent, like filly School-boys, and throwaway their money, and So make them-felves more extensively ridiculous ?—The man of taste and understanding receives from travel considerable advantages ; he improves the first, and enlarges the last; but he who Sets out a fool, always returns a coxcomb
With regard to the passage which you pointed out from the Paradife Lost, I am quite of your opinion. Supposing that the author meant by the word God, the Creator of the world, the abfurdity is then obvious. But on looking into Dr. Newton’s edition I found the following note, E 2	by
52 LETTERS between
by which I think the Seeming abfurdity is ingenioufly removed.
“ God here must signify Angel, as it frequently does in this poem. For God cannot be tempted with evilV as St, James fays (Chap. i. v. 13.) of the Supreme Being. And Milton had just be- ^ fore (as Mr. Thyer alfo obferves) ufed the term God in the fame meaning ; verfe
59-
Deigns none to eafe thy load and taste thy Sweet,
1
Nor God,, nor man ?
t
Again, verfe 70,
■■-■■■iYet able to make Gods of men.
You have proved yourfelf, however, an accurate reader ; and you will give me great pleafure by transmitting to me every remark you make on every book which comes in your way.
I WENT
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 53
I WENT last night, with our very agreeable friends, Mr. and Mrs. D---, to
the Provoked Hulband, and was highly entertained with that admirable comedy.— Though I have Seen it often, I am never tired with it. As the charaflers are accurately copied from real life, they will always exist, and consequently always pleafe the lovers of nature. Provoked hushands are every day to be met with, and wrong-headed journies to London are every day undertaken. The play was very well performed upon the whole.— Yates entered into the Spirit of Sir Francis with his ufual fidelity. He stridlly adheres to the charadter he assumes, and never departs from it to introduce himfelP To make an audience laugh, is within the abilities of every buffoon who can twist his face into a thoufand fantastic shapes, and throw out a thoufand impertinent tones ; but to make them laugh in the right place, in the only place where they PQuJd laugh, without contortion of coun-E	tenance»
54 LETTERS between
tenance, and a ridiculous flexibility of voice, is in the power only of him who has thoroughly studied his charafter^ and Pels it.
In my boyish days, I remember, I was wonderfully delighted with tragedies ; the deeper the better. The old Roman 4reITes charmed me, and the pompous perriwigs of the then strutting heroes made them appear to me prodigious.— While drapery struck my eyes, and declamation thundered my ears, I stared, I listened, and I was happy. My attention was too much attached to fcenery and Sound, to pay any regard to fenti-ment.—The most affecting situation only made me yawn. — But now, the cafe ;s altered.—The distressful Scenes I have beheld in real life, have rendered me unable to bear the representation of them upon the stage.—The eye is melted, when the heart is moved.-i>-For tragedies therefore I have lost all relish, and from the exhibition
EDWARD ANp ELIZA. 55
hibition only of the comic pieces receive all my theatrical entertainment.
Tom W--------and his wife are, as you
obferve, excellent figures for a farce. I wissi they were Sufficiently known, and of fuffi-cient confequence, for the stage. If they were in high life, Foote would certainly start them wsth high humour in the Hay-Market.
I SHALL be very glad (o hear what pro-grefs Sir Charles makes in his addresses; for I am now in thofe addresses agreeably interested.—If Sophy stands not in her own light, she may be Lady T------, and hap-
pily fettled, if she has no pre-engagement to embarrafs her.—Nothing but that can, I think, oppofe her happinefs ; for she is mistrefs of her fortune, and has np relations to influence or controul her. She
has no father___That word calls up a
train of thoughts which —« Oh ! Eliza, E 4	—when
56	LETTERS BETWEEN
—when will there be an end to the anxieties of
Edward,
LETTER XVI.
Eliza to Edward.
O U did right to check yourSelf at the word father. — In Spite of his •	unkind behaviour to me, he is still my fa-
ther ; and though he undefignedly takes pains to weaken my filial affection, my filial duty'shall be ever irreproachable.— To his care pf my education I am indebted for the little knowledge I ash miS-trefs of, and the few accomplishments I poffefs. But more particularly am I in-i debted to his paternal care for instilling into my mind the purest precepts of morality and religion, and for animating me to the praffice of them, by his own example. Thefe are obligations never to
be
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 57
be forgotten ; thefe are debts, Edward, never to be discharged.
I AGREE with you entirely with regard to the Provoked Hufband, and could write sheets of paper iu its praife.—It frequently affords me great entertainment in the clofet ; but from what I have heard of the original performers, I am afraid I shall never fee it done justice to throughout in the representation. Lord Town-ly, in particular, is a charadler "which gives fo few opportunities for the mere player to shew his theatrical powers, that, ejccepting in the last a6t, very few have appeared in it to any advantage. The man who hopes to perform the part of Lord Townly with propriety, must derive his accomplishments both from nature and art. If he is not happy in having a good figure, and has not, by keeping the best company, acquired a genteel carriage and a graceful addrefs, he will make a contemptible appearance in thofe Scenes in
which
§8 LETTERS between
which he has little to fay and little to do. —In short, the adtor should be lost in
the gentleman.-----Of this cast is Sir
Charles Eafy, a charafler which I have not yet Seen performed with eafe ; and I believe you will be puzzled to point out a man fit to undertake it.^—In another leU ter, I may, perhaps, fend you my Sentiments on other stage-charaSers ; but at prefent my head is running on real ones.
Sophy will not, I dare fay, stand In her owm light ; but there is an obstacle which stands between her and Sir Charles, and which may perhaps prevent the union of two people who Seem to be made for each other’s happineSs. This obstacle is a rich unmarried uncle, from whom Sir Charles has very flattering expedlations.—, Family-pride is the ruling passion of this old gentleman, and he oppofes his nephew’s intended alliance with all the obstinacy peculiar to thofe who are infa-tqated with that passion. Sophy has beau-
EDWARD ANp ELIZA. ^9 ty, merit, and fortune ; but as her birth is not brilliant, she is not thought confe-quential enough for the Lady of Sir Charles T—. Is not this fame family-pride very ridiculous ? I mean only when there is a ridiculous .strefs laid upon it.-—I am quite out of humour with the abfuj"d old fellow,
and wish heartily that Sophy-------- The
agreeable girl is just come into the roort? out of breath, and has therefore, I am Sure, fomething of importance to utter: r—.1 mujl stop to hear what she fays.—->
O Lizzy !— Sir Charles is a charm-“ ing man ; •— the best creature in the ‘f world.—Read this letter, and you will S* not wonder that I am So flurried ; I was ‘5 never in Such a way in my life.”
To Mifs Sophia ——. Madam, .
“ I AM just come from my uncle, after a long and Serious conference with him, in which l endeavoured by all the rea-
Son
6o LETTERS between
Son and rhetoric in my power, to re-concile him to the choice I have made, “ and to receive his assent to an alliance from which I promife myfelf the highest felicity: but his ruling passion grew stronger by opposition, and his preju-dices were too deep-rooted to be re-
“ moved.-----—I should have been glad of
his confent on this occasion, becaufe I “ have had on every other his approba-
tion.------As I cannot procure that, I
will indulge my own ruling-pashon, and enjoy my own prejudices, the first of which is as strong, and the last as
immoveable as he can be.<----As he is
very rich, I naturally formed pleasing ^	“ expefitations; but thefe expectations
“ are all at an end; for he declared with vehemence, when I took leave of him, that he would distribute every thingshe was postessed of among hofpitals and alms-houfes, if I purfued my in-tentions to degrade my family.—Poor . man! — he thought not how much
« ht
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 6i
“ he degraded himSelf by that peevish “ Speech. — My own happineSs is now ‘‘ the only point I have in view ; to fa-** cilitate my progrefs to which point yon only have the power, and I hope, there-“ fore, your inclination will not be want-“ ing. — I wait with impatience to call you mine for ever.—
Charles T—
Was not Sophy right to fay that Sir Charles was a charming man ? and can
you wonder at her flurries ?-There is;
but one man in the world who would, I think, have adled the fame part in a similar situation.—As my dear cousin’s affairs are now in fo good a train, I hope in a fliort time to congratulate her on her appearance in a new chara^er on the stage of life, to perform which with propriety and Spirit she has many natural and ac^ quired advantages.
I VASTLY
6 2	LETTERS bet wee it
I VASTLY like the description you giv6 of your feelings in youf boyissi days at tragic representations. The deScriptioii is So lively, that I can fee you staring away and listening with the most eager attention to the declamatory Speeches of perriwig-pated heroes, who depended chiefly on their lungs and their robes, their truncheons and their plumes, for the applaufe of the audience.
I Have just read Johnfon’s RaIfelas there are beauties in almost every page : but they appear to me like fo many shining excrefcences, and would make a better figure, I think, if they were drawn together in a body, than they now do, strag-' gling without connedtion in Several parts. The descriptions are rich, and the Sentiments strongly expressed ; but as all the cbaradters are disappointed in their Searches after happinefs, I rofe dissatisfied from the perufal ; and the more fo, as the author
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 6^3
thor has finished his book without a conclusion.
You desired me, in a former letter, to fend my remarks on every thing I read to you; and you shall always find me ready to comply with your request.
You have brought off your favourite bard with hying colours ; but perhaps you may not defend him So ingeniousty from my next attack.
Eliza.
LET-
64 l.DTTERS BETwsEN
LETTER XVIL
Edward to Eliza.
IT gives me great pleafure to hear that Sophy’s affairs are in So fine a way ; and I Sincerely wissi that she /Uiay always find the felicity Ike deferVes.—I admire the behaviour of Sir Charles, and esteem him more than ever for it;—I hope there are many men who would have a£led the fame part in the fame situation, notwithstanding your partial compliment.
Jack H — is grown quite a Buck; —you would hardly know him ; he has lost all that Sobriety of afpedf, modesty of manners, and decency of drefs, for which you So mvch regarded him.—He Spends his days in distipation, and his nights in
debau-
EDWARD AND ELl^A. %
debauchery, and is never happy but when he is revilling with the choice Spirits of the age, who tell you with an air of triumph, that they make the most of life, at the fame time that they are Tapping the foundations of it. The Sober part of mankind, however, are not in the least convinced of the cogency of their arguments by the' cohSequences of their conduft. If Hot and extravagance, with every Species of modern licentioUfnefs, ac^ tually tend to increafe the number of our days, and promote out terrestrial happi-nefs, the fellows of frolic and fire woUld Induce us to adopt their opinions, and to Follow their example. But as we fee daily fo many of them Snatched from their Scenes of pleafure, and blasted in their bloom ; they give us no encouragement to pstrfue their footsteps, lest we should meet their fate ; and like them prove by our pra£tice, that we are making the leajl of life, when we think we are making the nioji.—Thefe reflexions, occasioned by the transforma-
VoL. L	F	tion
66 LETTERS between
tion of our friend Jack, bring to ray mind a ballad which I struck off feme years ago, on reviewing a similar cha~ ra6l:er.—
Come, bring t’other stalk, ’tis a folly to flinch, While the moments are posting away ;
Since life is but stiort, FU enjoy ev’ry inch.
And will merrily moisten my clay.
Let the mortified Sages with faces as long As my arm, look likeif they will,*
I think, with their gloom, that they are all in the wrong ;
>	And of gladnefs will here take my stil.
Let the muz/y old dons, who for joy have no taste.
By themfelves stt, as studied as bricks ;
With fuch moping dull milk-fops my time 111 ne’er waste.
But with Mirth and his myrmidons mix.
We
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 67
■We will booze away care ; we will laugh away Sorrow,
And like Bucks, live as long as we can ; To-day is our own, but the fate of tO-morrow Was never imparted to man.
Let the flalk then go brilkly with Spirits around | Let us bury in bumpers all care ;
Let the night be with jest: and with jollity crown’d ;
Let us drink till like devils we flare.
By the grapes gen’rduS neflar grown heartily mellow,
. To his friends of the bottle and bowl,
A jolly, red-ietter’d face, frolickfome fellow Thus Sorrow defied-—like a fouh
Your remarks on Raffelas are judicious : I prefer more chearful compositions. —My own disappointments naturally incline me to be rather too gloomy ; 1 want not to make myfelf more So by poring over the disappointments of others.—-In Spite of all my efforts to drive away difquiet-F 2	ing
68 LETTERS between
ing thoughts, they •will return, and “ murder fleep.’^"-—Often, very often, are the hours which should be devoted to rest, wasted in vain wishes and fruitleSs complaints.—Are not you now and then, by the intruSion of similar thoughts, robbed of your repofe —1 am Sure you are, becaufe I am Sure your affedfion for me is sincere; as sincere as mine is for you :—our feelings therefore mxxikfometimes be very much alike.—You are, I grant,, of a more calm and compofed disposition (happy disposition 1) than I am, and bear your vexations with more fortitude.—But with all the ealmnefs, eompofure, and fortitude of a philofopher, you muji feel them like a •woman.
When r am in a dull defponding liui-mour,—too frequently am I in that humour,—I have recourfe to the wild pro-dudlions of uncommon geniuffes, which are full of extravagant flights, in order to dif-perfe my foggy reflfeftions, and generally
find
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 69
find the greatest relief from the most romantic compofitions. Sometimes the ridiculous conceits and grofs abfurdities even of a contemptible author have the desired «ffe£t, and by operating powerfully on my mufcles, remove aill melancholy ideas. —In the heroic poems of Blackmore I always find passages very happily calculated for the dispersion of the above-mentioned refledfions, and the promotion of risibility_
Is not the following comparifon, taken from Prince Arthur, curious ?— The author is describing whales Spouting ;—
Like Some prodigious water-engine, made To play on heav'n, if fire fhould heav’n invade.
Is it no:t evident, by the coldnefs of this couplet, that the poetic fire never invaded Sir Richard’s breast ?—However, greater poets than our knight, by abusing the hyperbole, are as justly liable to cenfure on F 3	that
70 LETTERS between
that account. Homer and Virgil afford instances of the ridiculous, as well as Blackmore and --------. The first, de-
scribing a storm in his Odyssey, tells us, in order to give strength to his description, that all the four winds together were concerned in it. If Homer had consulted a common Sailor before he finished his description, it would have been more agreeable to nature. — Unnatural, however, as this contention of blasts, in direfl opposition to each other, must appear to every accurate reader, the Servile author of the iEneid has not op.ly copied but exceeded the extravagance of his master on a similar occasion.—His winds not only blow all togethef, but
“ From its lowest bed upturn the foam.’^
In this manner, Eliza, the greatest poets, by attempting to be Superlatively Sublime, instead of raising our ideas, only excite our mirth.
I AM
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 71
I AM much pleafed with a paflage in Sir Charles’s letter. — ** Poor man I he thought not how much he degraded bimfelfhy that peevish Speech — and may perhaps throw together a few thoughts on family - pride in a future
epistle_It is now high time to conclude
thisi for I think I have wrote a monjirous And fo, adieu.
Edward.
P, S. Remember me to Sophy.—
LE.D
n	LETTERS BETWEEN
LETTER XVUI.
Eliz.v to Epwaro.
Your last mifcellaneous letter gave me a great deal of pleafure. It wa? of a comfortable length, and I hope you v/ill let me have more pf them. You can-* not make tstem too long.
Did I not know that you have more of the milk-fop than the Mohock in your composition, I should Set you down fpr a very formidable buck; you. have with So much Spirit marked that contemptible character in your Bacchanalian ballad, ■which Is extremely well calculated for the court of Comus, and which I read with double fatisfadlion, by reflefting that while you wrote it, you defpifed the objedt who occasioned it—
You
EDWARD AND ELI2:a. 73
You amaze me with the metamorphosis pf Jack — into a buck. — Who would have thought it ? I shall wonder at nothing for the future.-—The foberest creature I ever knew. But fuppofe his connections with---------and —--------have contributed to hb transformation.--How
many worthy and Sober young fellows are ruined by their copnedfions ? How careful, therefore, ought they to be in the choice of their companions ? Thofe who are of a focial, of a convivial turn, should be particularly cautious, becaufe they are most likely to be thrown off their guard in the moment of frolic and festivity.—
You, Edward, by chusing your companions with discretion, have had no reafon to repent of your connection with them.—But in this age of luxury and disiipation, a man of your taste and temper cannot expedl to form many agreeable intimacies with his own fex.—I am ^ forry to add, that the prefent licentioufnefs of behaviour in the female world prevents
LETTERS between
me from contraffcmg many agreeable ones with mine.—
My chief delight of the Social kind arifes from the conversation of a few Suitable, fenfible friends, and the free Interchange of Sentiments on improving as well as amusing fubjedls I never could bear the detached incoherent Small talk in a mixed assembly ; being Somewhat of the Irish-man’s opinion who Said, that talking Spoils conversation. Such talking certainly does; for when a dozen people are eagerly wasting their breath on a dozen different fubjefts, your ears are worried with a confusion of founds, and you return from your visit tired to death with the lively duUnefs of it. Donst find fault with the opposition of thofe winds for I assure you I have returned from a room full of very lively people, as dull as a post ; from people who, Separately, would have given me the highest entertainment by their company.
No
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 75
No longer ago than last night did I come home from Mr. T—s in this diS-mal condition ;—stupid to the last degree, and fit for nothing:—for to nothing could I fettle. So crowded was my head with a multitude of clalhing ideas, which entirely destroyed attention, and indeed for Several hours deprived me of rest ; for I could not, amidst a confufion of thoughts, clofe my eyes.—The conversation which pastes among a few feledl agreeable friends, one remembers distindlly ; and the remembrance is attended with pleasing reflections ; but from Such a visit as I endured —I cannot fay enjoyed — last night— Such a medley of mortals were never Surely huddled together !r—Mrs. T:—has the strangest turn of any wotpan I ever met with, for clumping people together, the most unsuitable to each other.—She has po notion of Sorting her acquaintance; if she can covet her carpet she is Satisfied, and is not over-nice with regard to their morals.—If they have fine deaths, they
are
y6 LETTERS bet week
are very good company.—Your old ac-rquaintance Lucy — was there, and is, I think, more given to loquacity than ever.— She always talked fluently; but I never heard
her talk So fast in my life.^--No fubjeft
comes amifs to her; fhe knows every thing and every body, and runs on from drefs to diversions, from the most ferious events to the most comic occurences, with fuch a rediculous rapidity — and you know what a hoarfe, coarfe voice she has—that her tongue still rattles in my ear. Ben John-Son, in his Silent Woman, defcribed fucb a charadler with tyue humour.
Oh I rid me of this torture quickly there.
My madam wdth the everlasting voice:
The bells in time of pestilence ne’er made Like noife, as were In that perpetual motion.
-------------------All my houfe [breath ;
But now steamed like a bath with her thick A lawyer could not have been heard, nor Scarce Another wom.an; fuch a hail of words She has let fall.—
At
EDWARD AND ELIZA 77
At the assembly last Wednefday, Mifs N— was the most striking figure.—She is a fine showy girl, and has a great deal of dignity in her prefence ; but dresses her head in So peculiar a style, and tosses that head about So many different ways, in order to distinguish herfelf, that she is called by Some the blowzy beauty, and by others the handfome hoyden.—Was she but contented with the beauties which nature has kindly bestowed on her, she would appear to the greatest advantage but by her acquired graces she very much weakens the force of her natural attractions.—She met with a shocking mortification, which occasions much mirth at all the tea-tables in the neighbourhood, and poor Charlotte has looked very filly ever Since. A very handfome young fellow, genteely dressed, who had all the appearance of a man of fashion, singled her out for his partner ; and thereby made her So happy for the evening, that she could not help discovering the high fatisfadion
she
V8 LETTERS SRTWEm
she felt, by looking with an infolent air of triumph on every other woman in the room.—Her triumph, however, was at an end foon after the conclusion of the Scene which occasioned it; for her charming partner, when he handed her to her coach, hopedy in the most fubmiffive manner, that he might have the honour to be—^^her mercer. Was not this a mortifying Speech ? —i Charlotte felt it Severely, and has been So laughed at about her difappointment that I question whether her pride will Suffer her to appear V again in a place in which she met with Such a disgrace ; a diSgrace which will, if she has the understanding I think she has, have a good effect on her, and make her more cautious in her conduct, and more difcreet in her carriage.—She does not want fenSe ; but a little more Solidity would be of infinite Service to her.—The love of admiration is evidently her ruling paffion ;■ and the air which she assumes in order tO be admired, “ beggars all description.’*
EDWARD AND ELIZA. fp
cription.” In short, by the very methods she takes to forward her deSigns, she, like a true coquet, defeats them: and as she by every movement she makes affefls the manners of a mistrefs, she feems to take great pains to render herfelf unfit for a wife.—I mean not a modern wife; for no woman would make a better figure in that charafler, in the fashionable world ; but according to our ideas of the conjugal state, no woman would make a worfe. There is not I believe a more undomestic creature breathing. So much for Charlotte,—on whom I have dwelt So long, that I trust you will be heartily glad to find a transition to another fub-
jedt_You will undoubtedly think that
I have borrowed Some of lively Lucy"s Spirits, not being able, otherwife, to account for the length of this epistle. It is indeed longer than ufual ; but when a woman’s pen, as well as her tongue, is once fet a-going—But I will have compassion
on
So LETTERS retwe£i^
on you, and put a stop to my rarrtbiing and reveries.
Eliza.
X XX xxymxxxxxxyscxxx.
LETTER XIX.
Edward to Eliza.
Many, many thanks, Eliza, fof the Sprightly contents of your last letter, with which I was truly comforted ; and to the pleaSure I received from it, the length of it not a little contributed.^ Pray proceed in charadter-drawing ; for you have a happy hand that way Lucy is the very woman you paint her, and from what I have heard of Charlotte, your picture of her is not over-charged.
Your quotation from the Silent Wo^ man is very lucky—You could not have pitched upon a more appofite passage.—^
I am
EDWARD AND ELIZA. $t
t am particularly pleafed with this line in it.	V
^Steam’d like a bath vvith hex thici breath.-^
I HAVE not Seen the lively Rattle a great while, and you give the no encouragement to wifh to come within the Sound of her “ everlasting voice.”—How happy am I, that niy -madam is So totally unlike her !~May I not call Eliza fo without offence?—You need never make apolo-ffies for being in Spirits; fori am Sure you will never give offence by a bail of -words i —Well laid. Old Ben !
1 SPENT, the evening a few nights ago with an old friend whom I have not Seen for Some years.—He is one df the most companionable men I ever conversed with. With a ‘large share of natural fenSe improved by a liberal education, and increased by a knowledge df the world, he has a most enviable memory, by which, as ' V o L. I.	Gr	he
82 LETTERS Between
he is a very diligent fearchef after anecdotes, he is always entertaining. — The following story, which he communicated, relating to Colonel----, who was kill-
ed during the war in Germany, is So extremely curious, that I committed it to witting as foon as he left me for your amufement. A more singular one, perhaps, you never read.—‘ The colonel,
*	it feems, when he was only an ensign, ‘ with a very Small fortune of his own,
‘ being quartered in Scotland, fell in love ‘ there with a young lady, who besides ‘ many perfonal charms and elegant ac-
*	coraplishments, had a considerable for-‘ tune in her own power; and had foon ‘ the happinefs to find himfelf distin-‘ guished from the numerous train of her ‘ admirers, with peculiar marks of po-‘ litenefs; of which he availed himfelf ‘ with fo much fucceSs, that in a short
*	time he distanced all his competitors,
« and appeared to be, evidently, the ob-‘ jedt of her affedtions.—As there was,
‘ however,
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 85
however, a very great disapprobation
*	between them in point of fortune, the
*	lady, being apprehensive that he only ‘ made his addresses to her for the fake ot ‘ her money, employed a stratagem, in
*	order to fee if thoSe apprehensions were
*	well founded. Accordingly, when the ‘ colonel made her a visit one morning, ‘ and entered her apartment with his ufu-‘ al gaiety and good-humour, he found ‘ her bathed in tears, and sighing as if ‘ her heart would burst.-—Struck at fo ‘ new a sight, he could Scarce believe his ‘ eyes.—He flew to her, and with all « the anxiety of a sincere lover, intreated* ‘ her to tell him the cauSe of her diSqui-‘ etude, which Seemed almost inSupporta-
<	ble.—She wept bitterly, and was very
<	loth to comply with his earnest intrea-‘ ties; but after many repeated impor-‘ tumties, frequent pauSes and hesitations,
<	she told him that she was^-----ruined:
‘ that by the failure of a merchant who ‘ had the greatest part of her fortune in his
G 2	‘ handsi
84 LETTERS EETWETit
‘ hands, she was reduced to a mortifying
*	Situation.— She delivered herfelf in fo ^ pathetic a manner, and Seemed to be So ‘ forcibly affedled with the loSs she had
*	Sustained, that the colonel had no doubt ‘ of the truth of her narrative; but af-
*	furing her that the alteration in her
*	fortune made no change in his affec-
*	tion, told her in a transport, (which I
*	am afraid few would have felt on a fi-^ milar occasion) that he thanked heaven^
for giving, him an opportunity to prove
*	the sincerity of hia^ heart; and with more
*	eagerrtefs than' ever, pressed her to eom-‘ plete his happinefs by contenting imme-
*	diately to the union of their hands.—■ « This generous behaviour in her lover ^ threw her into fuch a rapture of joy, ‘ that she dropped the mafk dire<5Uy.
Her counterfeited tears instantly difap-^ peared, and the little Lbves and Graces ‘ again played around her face.—** Now Sir, faid she> it is niy turn to be ge-« hefous, and to follow fp good an ex-
‘‘ ample.
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 85
ample. You have Sufficiently proved ** the sincerity of your attachment to me, and I should tax myfelf with ingrati-tude, as well as infensibility, did I keep you a moment longer in fufpence.— “ Know then, sir, that there is no al-“ teration in my fortune, for the fake of “ which I thought you might have made “ your addresses to me; and therefore was willing to O’y, by a little strata-gem whether you was urged to thofe “ addresses by real affedfion, or a mer-cenary passion.-—You have convinced me by the openneSs of your behaviour that you was prompted by the first, and not instigated by the last. All therefore that I have is too little for a man who has given fuch striking proofs of the “ sincerity of his passion, by the purity of his principles.—My hand, my heart, is yours.”—“ No, madam, replied he, “ with a eold, steady look, I can never “ have a good opinion of the heart of “ the woman who has deceived me ; and G 3	“ there-
86 LETTERS between
fore to Such a, woman will never give ‘‘ my hand.—I have ever, from my in-“ fancy^ paid Such a regard to truth, “ that the least divination from it more ‘‘ than excites difapprobation, it provokes
abhorrence.—-Farewell for ever.’^------
‘ This Severe reproof and final adieu had
*	So fatal an effeD on her, that She imme-‘ diately lost the ufe of her reafon, and
*	died foon afterwards in the agonies of
*	distraQiion.’ — Can he who oCcafioned thofe agonies be defended ? — Humanity Says no.—■
If I had met with this story in a modern book, I should have thought it fabulous ; but strange as it is, I believe it is no station;—for my friend was intimately acquainted with the colonel, and is not at all addidled to romantic narrations ; though his stories, I must own, fome-times stagger probability. Pray let me have your remarks on the above curious anecdote,
anq
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 87
and tell me too, what Sophy thinks of the colonel’s extreme delicacy.—r*
By your faying nothing of Sophy and her fwain, I fuppofe that matrimonial matters are drawing to a conclufion .• and I hope they will meet with no bar to their conjugal blifs. — Happy Sir Charles! thrice happy Sophy !—I envy not your approaching felicity ; but I cannot think of its approximation without lamenting my own lucklefs fate, and throwing out a few exclamations against — But what avails empty exclamations } — On this fubjedt, Eliza, if I exprefs mySdf with too much warmth, blame me not for it.—— I should not deferve your love, if while 1 bore the interruptions to my happinefs like a philoSopher, I did not alfo feel thofe interruptions like a man.—-
I frequently shift the Scene to prevent gloomy thoughts from preying upon my mind, and thereby endangering my G 4	health ;
■U LETTERS betwsen
health; and the chearful eonverfatlon of my friends for a while exclude them: but when I retire to rest, they return with double force, “ making night hideous.” .—I am in a miferable mqzT,, and mull therefore lay down my pen.
I HAVE been looking over fome of your letters, and have read myfelf iiito good Spirits again. I fee things in a more chearful light, and the flatterer Hope again takes full poffeflion of me.—By your father’s not molesting you with his importunities, I pleafe myfelf with thinking • that time may make a change in his disposition favourable for us; and that we shall, with his confent, be happy iri each other. — Whenever that joyful day arrives, the recolleflion of past disappointments will increafe its festivity. — What strange mortals we lovers are I Always iri the vapours, or forming visionary Scenes. —But there is a pleafure in castle-building, which none but castle^builders know;
and
EDWARD AND ELIZA. S9
and notwithstanding the ridicule thrown on us viSionaries by your Solemn fellows who laugh at the pleaSures of imagination, I receive So much amufement from my airy fabricks that as fast as they fall, I raife up others instantly in their room.—Were it not for imagination, Eliza, I should in your abfence be the most unhappy being upon earth.—Do I not write as if I was in love ? have I not all the. charaQieristip
marks of that passion ?---Hope, fear,
doubt, defpair, elevate, deprefs, perplex, and harrow me by turns, and agitate my heart ten thoufand ways.—As I write in all humours, you fee my heart in all its various Situations, for I cannot conceal them if I would.—^Adien.
Edward, , LET-
90	LETTERS between
LETTER XX.
Eliza to Edward.	j
A Curious story, indeed!—A more singular anecdote never came in my , ,	way:—but neither Sophy nor I can bear
the colonel’s Delicacy^ do you call it ?
How is that word abufcd !—No, Edward, if he had been a man of true delicacy, he would have adled in a very different manner.—In short, your story Seems to me So unnatural, that I cannot give credit to it.—I have the highest regard for thofe who have a refpefl for truth ; but the deviation from it, In the lady’s cafe, was, I think, a venial crime.—She had all the reafon in the world, from his outward appearance, notwithstanding the order of his profeffions, to imagine that her fortune was the Jirji objefl of his attention ;
and	I
EDWARD AND EEIZA. 91
and therefore made ufe of an innocent ' stratagem to try how far, with thoSe pro-festions, his a£fions would correfponcl.— When both parties were So well Satisfied of each other-s sincerity, who would have expected fo fatal a catastrophe?—You fay that your friend’s stories frequently stagger probability;—and this is, certainly, one of his staggering stories.—
Your fuppofition with regard to So- ^ phy and her Swain, is perfedtly right : their interviews are frequent; and from every interview they part more and more pleafed with each other; fo that they have a very flattering profpedt of conjugal felicity before them, from the enjoyment of which they are at prefent cruelly detained-—(I am fure I should think fo, in tsteir situation) — by their lingering lawyers.—How apt we are to wish to accelerate or retard the flight of time, as the object we expedt is agreeable or difgust-ing!-.
You
92 LETTERS between
You may as well Spare, you exclamations, and make yourSelf eaSy ; for—— Oh Edward !-r-I have news to communicate, which will make you read this
letter with rapture_I have told you a
thoufand times never to difpair.—Well, but the news,— I am impatient—let me not burst with fufpence,”—The news then is, that my father’s behaviour to me has of late been fo much altered, that, from the alteration in it, I flatter myfelf we shall have both reafon to rejoice at it. —All his fondnefs for me Seems to be returned; and if he continues in his pre-fent disposition, I shall be tempted to re^ new the only fubjed on which we ever differed.—To what to afcribe the happy change in my father’s temper, I am at a lofs; but that my dear aunt has had a considerable share in it, I am very ready '	to believe ; for she has, I'know, taken a
great deal of pains to obviate all his ob-jeftions to our union;—she has, indeed, been extremely kind on the occasion, and
exerted
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 93
exerted herSelf with unufual vehemence (for she is naturally of a mild, indolent turn) in my behalf. — To her aSiivity, therefore, and zeal I attribute the alteration I fee; and whether it will be attended with the confequences I wish, for and expeQ:, the regard I always had for my aunt will be doubled and trebled; and I ftall always with gratitude remember her affe0;ionate assiduities on wy, and I will add your, account: for you are a fovourite of her’s, I assure you; and were I to repeat all the handfome things she has Said of you,! I should make you intolerably vain, and therefore I keep them to myfelf.—— Be contented with knowing that she did fay handfome things of you ; and read this long account of a new event if you can, without capering about the room, in the excessive flutter of your Spirits; for you defponding people are generally diSpofed, upon any fudden gleam of joy, to expreSs that joy by the most fantastic gesticulations :—Such gesticulations therefore I ex-
peft
94	‘ LETTERS betwebn
pe6l: from a man who is as much addicted to deSpondence as a mortified Methodist. —Pray excuSe my vivacity—(you may perhaps call it levity)—at your expence ; but really I cannot check it.—Heigh-ho I—What do you think that heigh-ho means ?—Something you may be Sure; for we women never make ufe of any expressions without a meaning__I am in
monstrous Spirits to-day.—My heart is as light as a feather ; peradventure you may fay my head is So too.—If / thought that
you thought I was ------ Whither am I
running with my pen ?—If you read all this fcrawl with patience, you will outdo Epidetus all to nothing.—But come, Tis time to put a stop to this tedious trifling, and fo, (you knovj who is nobody without her “ and fo^^J I jump to a conclusion.—
Your’s, &c.
Eliza.
P. S.
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 95
P. S. I hope this letter will drive away all your hideous night thoughts.—Whenever yoii are in a muz,z. you cannot do better than mix with ehearful corripa-nions; and by their conversation shake off the fogs of Spleen.—If ehearful companions ; are not always ready when you want their enlivening allistance, books fit for thofe purpofes are always at hand.—I am rarely very much overpowered with vapours ; but, under the pressure of them, nobody relieves me fo quickly as Signor Ariosto.—There is a charming hurry in the ideas of this fpirited Italian, and his extravagancies are fo glorious, that I hardly know, when I am reading hisfurioui poem, whether I am on the earth or in the moon.-
LET-
96 LETTERS BfiTWEEri LETTER XXL
EnvVARD to ElIZA.	j
A ND fa you and Sophy have passed fentence on the colonel, and bring him in guilty of great unkindneSs at least, if not barbarity.-^I am of your opinion entirely^ that he was too rash in his resolutions ; and that the lady’s plot deferved a very different catastrophe.—'
I HOPE to hear foon of the celebration of thofe nuptials which have been So long delayed, and shall be very glad to congratulate the amiable parties on the occa- I sion.-^	'
Your “ Oh Edward!” gave me a great deal of. pleafufe,—and the intelligence
you
i
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 97
you communicated had the effedt upon me that you imagined it would.—If a stran^ ger, unacquainted with my way of expressing excessive joy, had broken into my apartment during my faltaiionsy he would have thought I had lived upon goat’s
milk----(you rember the caprioling
gentleman in the Spedlator). — Happy, happy change I—long may it continue; and may nothing arife to destroy the good dispositions your father is at prefent poffeff-ed of.—I shall always love your aunt for interesting herfelf fo warmly for us, and hope her endeavours will be as fuccefsful as they are sincere :—fuch kindnefs ought to be remmembered with gratitude, whatever be the confequence of it.—Pray	^
thank her heartily, from me, for the hand-fome things she has Said of me ; and tell her I will do all in ray power to merit her panegyricks.—Why do you apologize for your vivacity?—You are never, believe me, too livelyI doat on your Spirits, and wish I had fuch a flow.—However, I VoL. I.	H	am
9& LETTERS between
am far lefs apt to sink into the horrors than I uSed to be, and attribute the chearful turn of my temper to your animating epistles: to make excufes, therefore, for
fuch epistles, k absolutely neediest.--—
No more of them, Eliza,— if you love me: — and that you do love me, have I not received the most convincing jiroost!
'—When you are in your monjirom Spirits, you run on with your pen with fuch an agreeable rapidity, that I read what you write with a tumultuous fatisfaflion ; and often, throwing up my eyes to heaven, cry out, “ Charming creature I’"—
You have in a few words happily struck off the charafler of Aristo.—I like your calling his Orlando a furiout poem : for fuch it certainly is.—One would think our fpirited poet was mounted on his Ippogrijof So expeditiousty does he transport you from one region to another, and fo rapidly fkip from incident to incident.— By this expedition and rapidity, and the
multitude
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 99
multitude of tales related almost in the fame instant, the reader’s imagination is mjily embarrassed, and his attention pro-digioufly distradted. As you read him in the original, you have a pleafure which thofe who are not intimately acquainted with the Italian language can never receive; for j)0 transsator has been able to tranfplant the wild and luxuriant graces of our poet into his own. We have two English versions of the Orlando FurioSo.—Sir James Harrington’s is very ssat frigid, and tirefome : — Mr. H—s’s is below criticifm. Tha first has more of the Spirit of his author, but the latter is a more faithful interpreter ; and though you cannot read his transsation with any delight to your ear, it is a very Ufeful book for young beginners^ as a Dictionary, for its clofenefs.—
As I was tumbling the news-papers over this morning at the coffee houfe, a few thoughts darted into my head on thofe fugitive pieces with which we are So plenti-H 2	fully
100 LETTERS between
fully Supplied for the amuSement of idle people, and the instruftion of thofe who read nothing elfe: for much instruct tion, if Itnowledge may be called So, is to be acquired by thefe chronicles of the times.
An English news paper is a curiosity which no other nation under the fun produces. The papers of intelligence which we receive from abroad are generally silled ^	with Such dull, dry articles, that a staunch
^Idnunc would starve upon them, without the daily compositions of his knowing countrymen, which are kindly calculated for all capacities, from the highest to the lowest ; and from the perufal of them all men, from the minister to the mumper, may receive ufeful hints.—Nay, we are fo liberal of our advice that we give it as freely to *** ^*** himfelf, as t/h —— ----.
In short, for wit and humour, good fenfe and nonfenfe, Scurrility and Scandal,
wild
< *
EDWARD AND ELIZA. loi
wild proje6ls and ufeful discoveries, bold truths, bankruptcies, and bloody murders, we beat the foreign gazettes all to nothing.—
When I returned from the coffee-houSe, I found an invitation to dine with Sir
Thomas --------, who entertains his friends
in fo very polite a style, that I never find any thing at his table that I can eat.-— However, I accepted of his invitation, for the fake of his company, to which I never had any objeftion —I am a shocking fellow at an elegant entertainment, and generally starve in the midst of a modern feast. I have been fo long accustomed to a few dishes, and a simple diet, that a table covered in the modern taste, though Set off to the most luxurious advantage, gives me difgust instead of fatisfaftion.— My eye is puzzled in its choice, and my olfadlory nerves perplexed by the variety of odours Spreading around the room. I am not in the least fond of the apparatus for a H 3	fashion-
XG:? LETTERS between
fashionable feast, but rnther chufe to sit down to a temperate repast than to an entertainment executed to the last degree of
culinary perfe£iion.-----High-feafoned
dishes, like high-fcented flowers, afford a rich regale for a short time j but the fumes of the one, and the fragrance of the other, if long continued, blunt the edge of appetite, and deaden all the powers of fenfa-tion. — The coarfe food earned by labour has a flavour which thofe are not acquainted with whofe palates are palled by meats Sauced by the hand of Luxury ; and it has a peculiar recommendation, for it never cloys by repetition.—The Simple diet never cloys us with Satiety ; but the •villainous compounds in the kitchens of the great, often introduce SickneSs with a Surfeit.—
Poor D---------, by the narrowneSs of
his circumstances, is obliged to Subsist on his poetical talents, which you know are
not
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 103
not very bright; but he makes a shift just to keep himSelf from abfolute want, by the exertion of them. As he has had a liberal education, he cannot condefcend to undertake, nor indeed is he fit for, the common employments of life ; and his abilities are not of confequence enough to enable him to make a figure in higher occupations. — He is therefore become an author by profestlon ; and by dabbling a little in all branches of literature, procures a Scanty Subsistence.—
Haplefs the poet, who, before he’s fed,
MuA‘Write, and prostitute his pen for bread-. Doom’d to obey a publistier’s decrees..
And vapid verfes impotently Squeeze.
Far, far more happy is the toiling fwain.
Who ‘works, without the labour of the brain ; Who never knows the griefs which poets feel.
Hawking about—Parnajffus-----for a meal-
But Soundly steeps upon a flinty bed.
Without or cares or couplets in his head.—
By verSe few men have been to riches rais’d. And for their numbers, paid, as well as prais’d : H 4	Pope
104 LETTERS between
Pope stands alone on the poetic list.
Who the plain road of plodding profe ne’er mist;
But like a bookfeller his bargains made.
And laughed at all the Lintots of the trade.-—
What a medly have I written? Eliza, his my turn npw to petition for a patient perufal.—Pray take your revenge the next time you write, apd fend me as crouded a sheet. You cannot be too copious.—i
Edward.
. . P, S. I beg you would inform Mrs. B—, that Mr. Oakley’s boarding School, at Bow, is the only place for the education of young ladles ; for “ methods are ufed there to dignify their Sentiments without feverity.”---
LE.D
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 105
LETTER XXII,
Eliza to Edward.
J_JEart1ly am I glad that my lively letters give you So much pleafure. I have been lately in Such extraordinary Spirits, that I was afraid I should overpower you with them ; but you encourage me to lay no restraint upon them : you tell me that you wish you had Such a Jiow.—By your last letter you Seem to be in no want of vivacity j and I hope nothing will happen to damp it.—My aunt is quite delighted with you, and hears all the passages I read to her with the utmost fatisfaftion.—Oh ! she is an excellent woman: —you don’t know half her worth.—Very few are acquainted with her real value; for she is contented with doing good without osten-tasion. She make no shining figure in
the
io5 LETTERS BETWEEisr
the world, but she is truly illustrious notwithstanding.-—
WE agree, I find, very will about the mad Italian poet; and your charadler of him is a good Supplement to my little Iketch.— Harrington’s transtation is, as you Say, very tirefome.—I never could go through it.
!—Mr. H—s’s I have never Seen ; nor, from your account, dp I defire to peruSe it.
Your observations on English newspapers made me Smile; and when I came to your bundle of B’s, I laughed out.—-You will fay I am very minute in my remarks ; but it is a way I have Sometimes: —pray excufe it. — I have just been reading the work of a very circumstantial author, who, being a favourite, has in-Se6l;ed me, I believe ; for I find in myfelf a wonderful tendency to take notice of little particulars, which, at another time, I should in all probability pafs over.—
When
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 107
When I read of your invitation to Sir Thomas’s table, “ Poor Edward, Said I, what a day dist thou pafs ?” and could not help recolledling thofe beautiful lines in ‘ one of Pope’s moral epistles, occasioned by a situation not much unlike yours ; for he complains of being complaifantly helped
to all he hated.----As you have Pope’s
Works, I need not crowd my letter with a long quotation, but beg you ■u^ould turn to the defcrlption he gives of
his entertainment at Cannons,-----unleSs
you remember it fo thoroughly as not to forget a line of it; for the whole is charmingly worked up.------That word Can-
nons/—— how powerful, Edward, is a single word ?—It strikes me in a particular manner, and calls up a train of re-steftions on the emptinefs and instability pf all human grandeur.—Who can Survey the Spot where once triumphant stood that fuperb edifice, at once recollecting its rife and its destruction, without fuch reflections ?—They will instanteniousty force
them-
io8 LETTERS between
themfelves upon the mind of the contem-platish—
A POOR poet is certainly a very pitiable objeft; and you have justly represented the ploughman as a happier being.-Scribbling,— especially rhyming,---feems to
be a malignant diforder in the literary world ; and the minor poets of the age are very bufy in Spreading the infection.— - -Never was bad poetry, or profe run mad, which you will, circulated with more fury.
I---1 heartily pity the Monthly Reviewers,
who are obliged to drudge thro’ So many pages of inanity, in order to give their opinions of them ; and wonder not that they treat the majority of authors with all the feverity of criticiSm. If men without abilities will thrust themfelves into the rank of literature, they can expeft no quarter; nor do they defer ve it.—
Charles and his wife are the happiest people in the world—every where but at
home;
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 109
home; and are the most agreeable people in the world to every body—but to each other. They have So exquisite an aversion to matrimony that whenever they meet a very Spirited conversation enSues in the most acrimonious style, but perfe6lly po^ site.—As they have both good capacities, and have both received a liberal education, they reproach each other with great elegance of expression; and in all their dialogues of altercation, their language is always classically Satirical.
Now I am upon matrimony, I must tell you that old H — makes himfelf more and more ridiculous every day, by the manner in which he treats his young wife; who, I think, deferves the mortifications (he meets with, for throwing herfelf away upon Such a wretch. He is the most ab-furd fellow I ever knew.—He takes great pleafure in feeing her dressed in the height of the fashion, and even grudges no expence for Splendid ornaments :—but v/hen
she
iio Letters between
Ihe is tricked out fit to appear in a dtaw= ing-room, he locks her up in her own room, that no body may fee her but him-felf.—This room of hers is crowded with pidbures of all his mistresses, to which he frequently makes her attend, and infuhs her with their fuperior beauty.—Would Such an oddity as this be tolerated upon the stage ?—No Surely ;—it would be art affront to the audience to bring Such a charadter before them —^
Sophy’s marriage is now mostdifagree-ably delayed.—The dear girl was taken Suddenly ill this morning; and, from certain Symptoms, we are afraid of the fmall-pox ; the more afraid are we of that shocking distemper, becaufe the apprehension of it is So dreadful to herSelf—Adieu,;
Eliza.
LET-
EDWARD AND ELIZA m
LETTER XXIII.
Edward to Eliza.
T)OOR Sophy !— I wissi you may be alarmed without reaSon; for if what you fear should come to pafs, you will have too much reafon to dread the confe-quences.—I am impatient to know farther about her, at this critical junQ;ure, and hope you have been deceived in the fymp-toms.—•
You justly complain of the fcribblersof the prefent age.—Pope found the writers of his time very troublefome, when he wrote this couplet:
For thole who cannot write, and thole who can. All rhyme and Icrawl, and Scribble to a man.
112 LETTERS BEtwEEi?
A SINGLE word, as you rightly obferve, is very powerful, and I wonder not that Cannons furnished food for contemplation. —To think, after having read the animated description of Lord Fimonh villa, full of falfe magnificence, without either fenfe or taste, that
Deep harvests bury all his pride had plann’d ; and that
——laughing Ceres re-astumes the land;
must indeed give one a very mean opinion of the Timons of the age, who build their fame on as falfe a foundation ; who forget, amidst their works of magnificence, this plain precept,
’Tis ufe alone that fandijies expence.—
You have with a few, strokes given a' very lively defcription of a miferable couple: I should like, methinks, to overhear
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 113
hear a few dialogues of theirs, when they are in the fiery mood, high feafoned with Attic fait: a pair of claflical fcolds must make charming converfation between them,—
You justly obferve, that the Ihtroduciioh of fuch a character as old H—upon the stage. Would be ail affront to the audience. To a modern audience it would; but our ancestors were not So foon affronted at their theatrical representations.—-We are ever complaining of the want of new characters, and yet give n,o encouragement to an author to bring them forward to our view. To the caprice therefore of taste, not the want of original characters, or of authors pof-feffed of talents to groupe thofe characters together, is the prefent decline of humour in comedy to be attributed.—The drama-* tic reputation of Shakefpear and JohnSon is So well established, that their groffest absurdities are tolerated; but a poet of this age, cramped with the shackles of criticifm, V o L. I.	I	if
114 letters between?
if he boldly deviates from the common track, meets with no quarter; his motto must be, “ Correctly dull.”—
Sophy runs in my head.—I can’t help being uneafy on her account: I feel for you, Eliza, becaufe I know your friend-Ihip for her is too great to let you be indifferent either to her pleafures or her pains.—Your Sensibility is equally alive ; but I am afraid, from that tendernefs of disposition, your enjoyments bear no proportion to your fufferings. But from that disposition, you are fo amiable in my eyes, that I would not wish to have you divested of it: for tendernefs does honour to human nature; and he whofe stony heart is void of that.
Is fit for treafons, stratagems and fpoils—>
Let no fuch man be trusted.—
Shakespear levels this caution against the man who is not pleafed with the concord
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 115
cord of Sweet founds ; and furely the fame Caution may be urged against him who is totally devoid of tender fenfations.— That Shakefpear himfelf was moved with Such founds, and melted with fuch fenfa-tionSjthemany harmonious and humane paf-fages in his writings fufficiently convince us.
You don’t know how much I am entertained with your remarks on the books you read, and the charadlers which come in your way. To thoSe who, like us, are not contented with a Superficial Survey of the first or the last, every book and every charadler we meet with affords matter for fpeculation: and your Speculative people
I	never want employmenti—Objedts which
are unnoticed by common eyes; engage theirs \ and from Incidents disregarded by the bulk of mankind, they extradt a great deal of food for the bufy mind.—That Speculative people are inclined to be a-mufed with trifles, is indeed a truth not to be contested ; but if thoSe trifles lead to no I 2	ferious
ii6 LETTERS between
ferious Gonfequences, the fpeculatist has no reafon to be ashamed of his ruling paS> Sion, notwithstanding the Severe farcafms ^ which the very aflive Spirits of the age throw out against him;—restlefs Spirits, who cannot bear their own thoughts, and are therefore never happy but when they are disturbing the peace of foeiety with their adlivities.
I HAVE just looked over what I have written, and wonder at myfelf for running on with fo much puerility and prolixity. —I am absolutely tired with reading my own trite resteflions, unimportant conjectures, and irregular digreffions: for the first and Second, I ought to make Some apology; but the last are allowable in eompofitions of this kind; wherein the writer may fly from fubjeCt to fubjeCt, according to the various humours he iis in while he is engaged in them, with the desultory rapidity of a Sterne;—the most defultory; rapid writer of the prefent age,
abounding
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 117
abounding with immethodical authors. Yet thofe authors have their admirers, and their works circulate : rare encouragement for mCi Eliza, if ever I should be feized with a pashon for publication, and long to fee myfelf introduced into the literary world.—
You maybe fure, by all this trifling, that my mind is perfectly at eafe;—>it is
as eafy as it can be in your abfence.-
But though I am deprived of the companion, I receive great delight from the correspondent.
Your’s, &c.
Edward;
T ^	r T7
irS LETTERS between
LETTER XXIV.
Eliza to Edward.
/^F all your letters, the last is not least in my esteem; by filling your stieet So full, you greatly lessen that te-dioufnefs which I always feel in the dull in-^ tervals while our letters are upon the road.
----On the contents of the lajl letter I
feast till another arrives, and read every passage in it over and over with new delight, unlefs there is any thing in it to occasion a different fenfation.— Your digressive manner of writing is exceedingly agreeable to me ; and as I am Sure ypu will never Soar into the regions of rhapfo-dy, you cannot be too rapid and immetho-dical:—but you pay no compliment to me taste of the age, when you fay it a-
bounds
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 119
bounds with immethodical authors.—In familiar epistles a loofe, rambling way of writing is more than pardonable; it is pleaSing; but there is no excuSe for thofe who hurry their half-digested thoughts to the preSs, and from an excefs of vanity, glory in their imperfectionsI fay glory ; for a man must have an uncommon share of felf-Satisfa£tion, before he can think himSelf of confequence enough to attraCl public attention, and to merit public admiration, with the crudities of his brain. But of thefe felf-fatisfied authors there is a plentiful crop in your crowded ^ metropolis; and you, who are in the midst of them, are, I doubt not, much diverted with their feeble efforts to render themfelves immortal by their writings.— Every vain man is a laughable creature ; but certainly a vain author is doubly ridiculous ;—becaufe more extensively fo.— Don’t you think me very pert and prefuming, thus to “ exalt myfelf in the chair of criticifm,” as a certain pompous I 4	writer
120 LETTERS between
writer fays, and deliver my opinion In So peremptory a style ?—What a parcel of y>’s have I packed together ? and I did not intend to huddle them So clofe to each other,not beingwb/(?;2//yforsiof alliteration ; but they would come together, and I hope they won’t tire your tongue to pronounce them.—You often tell me how much you are pleafed with my vivacity;—and I believe you Speak from your heart, becaufe you never deceived me: but I wilh this letter of mine may not make you think me extravagantly alert with my pen ; for I feel a strange deSire to run on with prodigious celerity and fpeed^; two words for the fame thing ; but we women are very fond of Synonymous terms. Am I not provokingly in Spirits to-day, Edward ? Come, confefs the truth ; I won’t be angry with you;—can I? Whatafliort quere? and therefore foost anfwered. Swift was often heard to fay, When I sit down to write “ a letter, I never lean upon my elbow, “ till I have finished it.”—In this particular
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 121
jCular I follow the Dean’s example. Perhaps you will tell me, that if I leaned that way more, my letters would be more cor-redl. Granted; but are they not, as I study for no particular phrafes, or polilhed paragraphs, the truer representations of my mind ?—And do you not prefer one line from the heart, to a thoufand from the head ?—I know you do.—
Are you not furprifed that I have not yet mentioned Sophy, concerning whofe health I was fo much alarmed in my last letter? She the fmall-pox, but info very favourable a manner, that I believe her constitution will not be Spoiled, nor her charms impaired by that frightful distemper, fo often fatal to the features and complexion.— Sir Charles behaves like an angel upon the occasion, and plainly proves by the whole courfe of his behaviour, that it is not the tindlure of a fkin alone that fie admires,—He is not one of thofe
Who
122 LETTERS BETWEEN
Who only prize the beauteous Shell,
But flight the inward geiji.
I HOPE, however, in a short time to tell you that Sophy is very near as handfome as she was before the attack upon her beauty; for, in fpite of all our Speeches about the gem within, we cannot but wish to have that gem well-fet,
I AM very glad that the remarks I make on the books I read, and the charaflers I meet with, afford you fo much amufe-ment. By having fo strong a turn for observation, I am never idle ? the time never hangs heavy on my hands, but when I am waiting for your anfwers : if the post man happens to stay a minute beyond his ufual hour, I am too much in the fidgets to attend to any thing. Like all other impatient people, I make no allowance for unavoidable delays; and Sometimes during the commotion of my ideas, tax my Edward with forgetfulnefs. — I am very
ready,
EDWARD AND ELIZA- 123 ready, you fee, to unbofom myfelf.-^Yes, Edward, you know each emotion of my h^art ; I tell you freely all my feelings, and receive great pleafure from the communication of them, becaufe I firmly believe that the emotions of your heart are communicated with equal freedom. After this declaration, then, can you be furprifed that I am anxious for your letters ; or be angry with me for accusing you of tardi-neSs in the diSpatch of themAnxiety is inseparable from affeftion ; to that therefore impute all my little uneasinesses, and let that make the difclofure of them pardonable.—As much as I love to correspond with you, I heartily wish our correspondence was at an end ; for I have a thoufand things to Say to you, which I can’t commit to paper ; and very probable it is that I should talk a great deal of non-fenSe but chough a certain poet fays, that * '■ nonfenfe itfelf is eloquence in love,” he undoubtedly meant that kind of nonfenfe
which
J24 LETTERS EETwEEisr
which is never to be written.—Now> to fit down and write nonfenfe will never do.— There is no living without a little of it in conversation ; but if it is genuine^ the least particle of it will lofe its fpirii by repetition. Second-hand nonfenfe is the Saddest stuff in the world.—And foy for fear I should run into the very folly I am railing against, farewel.
Eliza.
P. S. lam glad your mind is So perfedl-ly eaSy, and hope nothing will destroy its tranquility again. — With regard to our Separation, we have, I think, partly by necessity and partly by philofophy, .reaSoned ourfelves into refignation to our lot; and I am strongly inclined to believe, that by patience and perfeverance, we shall Surmount all the difficulties which retard the completion of our deSires ; becaufe thoSe desires are bounded by discretion.—Were we
unreaSon-
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 125
unreasonable in our wishes, we should not deferve to have them gratified.—I hope our wishes are reafonable ; but, in short, we are Such poor short-sighted mortals, and know So little what we want, that I am almost afraid to wish for any thing. The vanity of human wishes is a fine fubjecl for a moralist to enlarge upon ; but I doubt it is an incurable vanity, for our wishes end not but with our lives,-^
X
LE.D
ia5 LETTERS estwe6n
LETTER XXV.
EDWARd to Eliza.
WELL done, rhy lovely, lively cor» respondent i run away as rapidly as you will with your nimble fingers, you cannot run too fast.—The faster you run with your pen, the more pleafure you give me: for without Such readinefsof thought, and facility of exprestion, letters are languid things, and time is but thrown away in writing them.—I am glad you don’t lean on your elbow, for I have (with Pope) a mortal aversion to what they call a fine letter.—I always fufpedl that the writers' of fuch letters have thebefore them, and pleafe themfelves with thinking how pretty this period, and that reflefition,' would appear in print.-^Now thofe who
pleafe
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 127
pleafe themfelves in this way, Eliza, miijl write with restraint, and check the effusions of the heart, while they are hunting after choice words to drefs their thoughts in ; refembling thofe painters who lay more strefs on colouring than expreJIim.
I AM truly rejoiced to hear that Sophy has the fmall-pox in fo favourable a manner, and admire the behaviour of Sir Charles upon the occasion ; I did indeed expe6t fuch behaviour from fo deferving a man, who will, I am fure, always prize the gem beyond the Jhell.—By the way, that is a very agreeable ballad from which you extrafted your couplet: I recolleded it immediately, and dipped into the third volume of Dodstey’s Poems, where I read the whole with new pleafure; for I had forgot it.
I AM glad the time never hangs heavy on your hands; you certainly take the best methods to prevent its ever being irk-
fome.
128 LETTERS bet we is h
fome.—With the taste you have fof reading, and your turn for observation,' you have few opportunities to complain of the tedioufnefs of time. — As to youf fidgets, when the postman is not So quick as you wisti him to be, I can eaSily account for them ; being often in the fame way myfelf, while I fret at the lingering of a letter-carrier.—All true lovers, I believe, in our situation, have pretty nearly the fame feelings, the Same fidgets.---Anxiety, as you justly obferve, is inseparable from affeffion; and they give the strongest proofs of the last, who difcover the strongest Symptoms of the first—We have reafoned ourfelvs, you Say, into resignation to our lot ; w^e have So, but we cannot reafon ourfelves put of fensibilityj-—The Stoics, with all their boasting, and affedled apathy, felt the force of past Sions which they were ashamed to own, and which they could not, with all their opposition to nature, extinguish. — What a ridiculous attempt I—
Not-
LDWARD AND mJZA^ 129
Notwithstanding what yDu fay about the vanity of human wisties, I heartily wish that I could hear from your lips Some of thofe nonfenSical things which you will not convey to me in a letter: for I doubt not but our nonSenfe' would agree very well together. — It would not perhaps be entertaining to a third perfonj becaufe a third perfon, by not being interested in it, would think it quite insipid, if not unintelligible.—^
i AM going to make you state.'—MrSd G— is grown a violent carder; nothing . but shuffle and cut —Would yon believe I it ? Evert Jhe has routes ; by which she Very justly expofes herfelf to the ridicule of thofe dear friends who crowd to her little lodging, ort purpofe to enjoy a hearty laugh when they go home.—When people with Scanty incomes attempt to put themfelves on a footing with their Superiors in fortune, they deferve all the contempt they meet with. — Mrs. G— VoL I.	K	starves
130 LETTERS BETWEEN
starves herfelfat home, in order to make a pitiful figure abroad ; for with all her efforts to appear of confequence, the shabby gentility of her whole appearance discovers at first fight the narrowneSs of her circumstances; and the accompaniment of airs and graces, of which you know she has a plentiful stock, marks her a proper objedl “ for the hand of fcorn to “ point his flow and moving finger at.” —She lodges at prefent at a barber’s; with only one maid, she has two rooms, —if rooms they may be called,—on the first floor, with a dark clofet, into which she crams herfelf every night, in order to keep her apartments for company.—She had an immenfe route the other night; and who do you think enabJed ths part of a footman?^—Only one of the dirty boys out of the shop. I fay an immenfe route, for there were two tables; one in each room; and I do afliire you it was Mrs. G—s crowded night; for she had a dozen
dear
EDWARD AND ELIZA, 131 dedr friends who came to shuffle away the evening with her.—
There is no keeping the hejl company iii town without playing at cards;—for which feafon, as I am nobody at that diverfion,
I find it difficult to meet with coiripambns of my own complexion. — The love of play is now the univerfal paffion, not the love of fame, from the highest to the lowest.—In every houfe in town, especially in polite families, the manners of the parlour are clofely copied in the kitchen ; the fame follies repeated, and the fame vices indulged. — A friend of mine hu-morousty enough calls a kitchen-card-party a Subterraneous route : and very often in the fame houfe the Similitude of man- ’ tiers is fo great, that while the well-dressed ^ company above are exhibiting all the infernal passions to which human nature is too prone, their faithful representatives in the lower regions are playing the devil K a	with
132 LETTERS between	'	>
with as much fpirit zndpolitenefs,—I often think of an old comedy, entitled and called,
A Mad World, my Mastersand often mutter to myfelf thofe emphatical words, when I review the manners of the prefent age, which abounds with fcenes and characters for the entertainment of the laughing philofopher.-«»Adieu.
Edward.
LET-
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 133
LETTER XXVI.
Eliza to Edward.
IT is very plain, I think, that I write without having the prefs before my eyes: and that I have no ambition to appear in print. — I take the first words that occur to exprefs my thoughts, when I fit down to communicate thoSe thoughts to you ; but were I to fend a letter to fome very accurate people, who would start at an unclaffical expreffion, I should certainly lean upon my elbow more than once before I finished it.
Sophy mends every day.—Sir Charles is every thing she can wish him.-—
K 3	Mrs.
234 LETTERS between
Mrs. G— a carder ?—You make me stare, indeed ! — Well, I never thought stie would have rendered herfelf fo extremely ridiculous, by Sacrificing the little Substance she has to the shrine of Fashion. *—Her income, though Scanty, is fufficient for the decencies of life ; but if she will ever abridge herfelf of thofe to make a falfe figure in the world, she must: undoubtedly appear in a most laughable light, and furnish out curious Scenes for the merriment of her friends. With what strange charafters does every corner of
the world abound ! and how—----But it is
to no purpofe to pour out a heap of re-flefifions on the follies and vices of mankind.— Every little Scribbler now-a-days has a stroke at them ; and the most eminent writers are neither able by railing or reafon to remove them.—“ To mend the « world’s a vast deSign,” fays the ingenious author of the Spleen.—-A vast design truly : but, perhaps, both the follies and the vices' of which we complain, would
grow
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 135
grow more enormous, if they were not now and then Smartly lashed by the rod of fatire.—I look upon a fatirist, therefore, as a very uSeful member of Society, provided he is not too perSonal in the application of his correftives.—To return to Mrs G—: I was vastly diverted with your ' manner of displaying her shifts to make a show, and shall often think of the dark clofet and the barber’s boy.—^I once had a good opinion of her understanding; but from the Sudden alteration in her domestic manceuvres, the poor woman’s intellects are certainly deranged. However, let her intellefts be ever So much disordered, she will find people enough in your mad metropolis to keep her in countenance.— Adieu.'
Eliza.
K 4	LET-
136 LETTERS between
«
LETTER XXVIL
Edward to Eliza.
THAVE no complaints to make against.
the contents of your last letter, except the brevity of it.—I cannot help notifying my disappointment.—You Seemed to be in So fine a humour for writing, that I expedted a very long epistle; but you damped my expeflations with your adtieu^ half an hour before I wanted to fee that pious conclusion. Pious do you fay ? Yes, Eliza; Split the word, and you will not think my epithet improper.—I hope you will make me amends in your next.——~
Coming home last night about dufk,
! tumbled,over a bundle of papers; which,
by
EDWARD AND ELIZA 137
by the glimmering of a lamp near me, appeared to be of the literary kind; and every thing in that way always rivets my attention.—I hurried them therefore into my pocket, in hopes of being amufed with the perufal of them; and very much amufed I have been with them, though the colledlion only consisted of hints, fketches and fragments, on various fub-je£ls, in verfe and profe.—The following extratSls will, I believe, afford you fome entertainment ; and if they do, I will now and then tranfcriste a few pieces from the fame hand.—
MISCELLANEOUS THOUGHTS.
The abfurdity of celebrating Lord Mayor’s Day at the dullest, darkest, part of the year, is obvious to every “ body; and hundreds have reafon to re-“ member it afterwards, by the diforders they contract while they are gazing, ex-
pofed
138 LETTERS BETWEEN
pofed to foul air, at the tawdry caval-cade.—One would think that the first Lord Mayor had been an apothe-cary.”—
“ Dark authors will foon be forgotten .* for oblivion is the natural confequence of obfcurity.—He who writes not to the understanding, will make no im- , “ prestlon on the memory ; for how can the mind retain that which it cannot comprehend ?’*
“ When I fee half a dozen paviours in a cold morning, tosting about their “ flints with vigour, and tosting down their	with alacrity; and when I
** fee at the fame time their idle master, who stands freezing and fretting to make them mind what they are about,
I look on the former as very enviable
fellows.
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 139
fellows, and on the latter as a' pitiabje objedi.”—
‘f Dry DEN, in his dedication press x-ed to his Virgil, complains of the Jiately “ fujlian, and lofty childijhnefs, in Some of “ the pompous tragedies written by his “ cotemporaries. Nothing fays he, but nature can give a sincere pleafure. I ** am sincerely of his opinion ; but what “ Severe strokes are thefe against his own “ plays, particularly thofe heroical com-‘‘ positions, full of heroical nonfenSes and the falfe Sublime, which are justly ridiculed in the Reheaisial ? Dryden was famous for fuch farcafms against him-Self His prefaces and dedications ‘‘ abound with abfurdities, inconsistencies, and contradictions; dogmatical aster-‘‘ ticns and boyish conceit?, intermixed at the fame time with pertinent reflec-tions, uncommon observations. Solid learning, and found criticifm. There
never
140 LETTERS BETWEEN
“ never was perhaps a more unequal “ writer—But his inequality must ra-“ ther be imputed to w'ant of time than want of talents:—if he had been in
“ affluent circumstances he would not, I “ trust, have permitted So many crudities ‘‘ to be published.’*
We take wonderous pains to conceal “ our failings and our faults, but are “ very little inclined to corredl them. ** We often, indeed, by thofe pains make them more apparent, as men in liquor render themfelves doubly ridiculous by “ the efforts they make to convince us “ of their fobriety,—When we attempt to deceive others, we often give them an “ advantage over us, with they would not have had without our alarming their fufpicion.*^
If
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 141
‘‘ If men stated their wants by their
reaSon, they would be happy: but while “ their wilhes are meafured by their fan-“ cy, how can felicity be their lot ?”-
Of Such detached pieces, Eliza, does my colle6fion confist; and if you like what I have transcribed, a Second part, when I am not in a humour for composttion, shall wait on you.—The perufal of the above thoughts may perhaps furnish you with Several additional hints on the fub-je£ls the author has touched upon ; and I should be very glad to fee bis out-lines filled up by your hand.—>
Being in a poetical, or rather rhyming mood this morning, I fcratched off a brace of epigrams, which will perhaps amufe you, as you are partial to all my little performances of this kind.
On
142 LETTERS between
On the Works of Addison.
On evTy fubjeft, mirthful or fubllme.
In num’rous profe, blank verSe, or flowing rhjme.
In Copious Add ISON we always meet Senfe join’d with found, the ufeful and the fiveet.
From him the Fatter may be taught the way To charm bright circles of the young and gay ; Spedator oi the world in all its Shapes,
No part his wide Surveying eyes efcapes j
By him the Lo’ver may with happy art#
Find a quick paffage to the female heart j And the fair •ward in him will ever find A friend impartiast and a Guardian kind.
His chaste corredted works at once impart Food to the mind, and phyfic to the heart:
And they who keep his polifh’d page in view, hnprove their manners and their morals too.—‘
On
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 143 On the Genius of Swift.
i
In Swift we humour, wit, and Satire, find,
With eafe and vigour happily combin’d :
Like a bright day in winter, Shines the Dean,
As clear, as bright, as cutting and as keen ; Pleafureand pain at once he does impart j And with his Splendor charms us while we Smart.-—
I HAVE crowded my sheet So full, in order to Set you a good example,—don’t forget to follow it—that I have left my-felf but just room enough to finish with the ufual concluSion of
Your’s, &rc.
Edward,
End of the First Volume.
' '■ ‘''^ ■'	W'-'" "./r^hr:' -' •	• ■7,'i.Si ■	■:- j
...	^ _	;,.^l
•	:■	■^•^:-	i ■	■'	• ' V -':v('>-. c,
• •■	7;:. ’■■ !.	' •”* ‘i’.'i*	<?■•*■»•--' d' .	. . ^ :.?■	'-i
..:' ■ "L , . vr - - .''	,	' Ct '4
K •.’.	. -	; :/JifcM-'O ■ vjV-.f :.Hr..v,-' v	.- ■- '*’ '■' i
S . ■• ‘	: ,;a C: ■r./.hLC,: :./'.i	.. •'I S
ri 'A rr ,,7.-t O Jov.li. 'v=:	<	t
V ■''>	" •	■'	- . ,	r. ^
r'	. T.:-i’•..* _vl-ri.i,i:5 i.,),,. > T	jot'j
\	•;. S„r 5y: -f I •.: w-vstcst oMt'.'	.
i-.-	i K r)y.A' ci i! 'Mii't teWvv! Jib) r v'7»-•	■'
^ri :	.	■■ ■•“'C:' ■ V . '	i
f^' " ' *A :	-r '■	■■ A- ■ d ■	■ * '
-V	d v ^	^
If.. ■
THE
DISTRESSED LOVERS:
O R, T H E
HISTORY
O P
EDWARD and ELIZA. In a SERIES of LETTERS.
IN TWO VOLUMES. _______VOL. IT.____
DUBLIN:
Printed for S. Watson, and W. Colles, Book*Seli-ers in Dame-Street. MDCCLXVIII,
■ ... -	-	i‘ : A r '
'	: 'I ■	C '
■f. I	-	.
k' '.'	.	■ .	' ‘	‘ ■	'	'
K . ■
S',’	■ , , .	. , t, ,.i„,' - ■ '
b
■ ■ ■ ■ ■
‘V	- .	• ‘	• nt	.
;-y' ' ■	^
■ ., .^ . : C;	/ i'
******	*^****^(f#	**	*-^
( ■ :
LET T E R S
BETWEEN
EDWARD and ELIZA.'
LETTTER XXVIII. Eliza to Edward.
"T7V O R the Mifcellaneous Lhotights, and the two Epigrams, in your jast letter, I am equally obliged to yourfelf and to Mr. Anonymous. — No tricks upon travellers, Edward. — I am too well acquainted with your manner to be de-Vo l. II.	B	celved.
2 LETTERS BETWEEN
ceived. ■—However, it was a humorous device of yours to throw a little variety into your epistolary compositions; and I shall be very glad to read a Second col-leffion of thoughts by the fame hand, from which all hints, (ketches, and fragments, will be very agreeable acquisitions.—
1 SIT down at this prefent time, with a full determination to make amends for the brevity of my last letter ; and if I should run into the other extreme, you must thank yourfelf for provoking me to prolixity.—It is as hard for a woman to stop her pen as her tongue, and I pretend not to be free from the failings of my Sex; though I hope I shall nevCr be quite So loquacious as Lucy -----, who ab-
solutely talks down every body who falls in her way.—How I trifle ! But I know you will forgive me.—You pfeSs me to follow your example by fending you a crowded sheet; but if you expefl at the
fame
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 3
fame time a clever one, you are too unreasonable : CopioufneSs and chmerity (a very Smart lady ufed this word the other day) are rarely very clofely allied.
What you fay of Dryden, is totally to my taste;—As he happened to be in the Scribbling vein, he was either inimitable or intolerable. — No man who could write So well, ever wrote So ill.— The works of Blackmore do not furnish more instances of the bathos than the writings of Dryden.—If Sir Richard was alive, I would defy him to produce a line more truly ridiculous, than that which Mr. Walpole quotes from one of his heroical plays ; by the expofure of which, with another equally abfurd. Spoken extempore, the witty Duke of Buckingham prevented that play from being reprefented a Second time.—Prince Voltiger’s painted vest was nothing to it. — However, with all his errors and B 2	abfur-
4 LETTERS between
absurdities, indelicaGies, and Inequalities, I admire the old bard extremely. —So much of Dryden.—
In return for your lively Epigrams, I will prefent you with a few impromptus by a facetious gentleman in this neighbourhood, who is very ready at thefe little extemporaneous pieces, and affords a good deal of amuSement to his friends, by the facility with which he throws his thoughts together.—
I:
To the name of the first town in Ireland; attend.
And you’ll find it most truly Hibernian j— Ringfend.
II.
The girls of this age while they’re fcheming a marriage.
Think too much of their coach, not enough of their carriage;
-As
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 5
As it therefore is plain that their heads run on wheels.
Where’s the wonder to find them So Swift with their heels ?
III.
When mothers exhibit theirdaughters about, From Soho to the city, at ev’ry gay route; And foolishly flatter them only with hope, Themfelves they may thank, if thofe daughters elope.
IV.
Our Secret thoughts on men and things. Can ne’er be Safely Spoken ;
Had each a window in his breast.
How Soon would it be broken !
V.
The Saying is as true as trite.
That men should think before they ‘write ; But by the wond’rous waste of ink,
®Tis plain men ‘write before they think.
B 3	In
6 LETTERS between
In Spite of Critical Reviews,
His pajpon ev’ry dunce purfues; Forgetting that in verfe or profe.
When fools exhibit, they expofe.
Those who are extremely civil (fays an ingenious author) are Seldom “ Sociable.”—I am not of this writer’s opinion ; for people of a civil are na-'	turally of a communicative difposition,
which strongly impels them to herd with their fellow-creatures. A furly fellow flies company, but a civil creature is certainly a Sociable one.—Nor can I fubfcribe to the reafon which the above aythor gives for this assertion ; Recaufe (continues he) “ they receive more trouble than enter-tainment from company.-—The man of civility is never fo happy as when he is in company, and always receives entertainment, becaufe he always thinks he gives it.
!So
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 7
So much for Sentiment: I Avill now enter upon a narrative founded on faB ;—I don’t joke.—The facetious author of the above-mentioned	furnishes me
with the materials.—He, a few days ago, signalized his courage by shooting a highwayman. He had taken his place in the ——— stage, and posted his Servant in the bashet ; but upon finding his pif-tols gave ofFence to the ladies in the coach,—for he always travels with them— gave up his place, with their confent, to John, and removed into the conveniency in the rear. This removal proved fortunate. The coach was Soon attacked by a single highwayman, who, on prefenting his piece, received a brace of bullets, which
killed him on the Spot. Mr. —---, by
lying concealed, obferved his progrefs un-fufpefted, and therefore fired at him to the greatest advantage. —He faw the event with great compofure, and only Said,
B 4	« Well,
S ' LETTERS between
Well, Ladies, I hope you won’t be afraid of pistols again.—If I had not let off my popper, you would have been in a pitiful plight by this time.” —The tone v/ith which he Spoke thefe words was fo comic, that they could hardly fuppreSs their mirth, though a murder was committed before their eyes. — I mention this humorous circumstance, as it marks the man, who is indeed the best natured, benevolent, odd mortal, I ever knew.
I SEE our friend L—— is promoted to a good living, and am very glad his merit is rewarded. On many accounts I am glad of his promotion:—He will now have it in his power to increafe his domestic felicity, by the removal of fe-veral little difficulties which obstrufled it before.—We may boast as much as we will about philosophy and resignation to
our
EDWARD AND ELIZA. ,	9
' our lot in life ; but if we are embarrassed by the narrownefs of owr circumstances, we cannot help wistiing for an enlarge-I	ment of them.—Exempted, by the in-
dulgence of heaven, from thofe embarrassments myfelf, I feel for all thofe who are oppreffed by them. I often indeed feel too much for other people ; for many, I believe, who deferve not my compassion ; but it is in vain to ressst the impulses of nature : — And though I often meet with ungrateful objedts, I cannot check the desire I have to relieve thofe who are struggling with distrefs.—■ I am Aiding again into the Sentimental strain, to which I have a natural propensity, but which I should not indulge too much.—Yet why should I not indulge it ? By you, I am Sure, I shall not be thought tedious.—
Well,
10 LETTERS between
Well, you cannot, I think, now accufe me of brevity. — Only look back.— What a medley have I mustered up for you!
^Criticisms, impromptus. .....— I wisti
you may be entertained with Such a mixture, and not charge me with prolixity ; a failing our fex are very apt to be guilty of—-r-	,
Sophy recovers So fast, that I dare fay you will hear of Some very Spirited doings in this part of the country very foon. Great preparations are making for the jocund occasion.-r-We shall all make a very gay figure, I assure you : I wish you was among us, in the light you wish to be; for I am Satisfied that you would be very happy, by enjoying the felicity of your friends. Sir Charles often mentions you with great regard ; and from Some hints which he lately dropped, I have reafon to believe that
he
EDWARD AND ALIZA u
he will be able to Serve you in a manner you little expefl.—I have complied with your request fo pun6lually, that I have but just room to tell you that I remain inflexibly firm, and immutably sincere, your own
Eliza.
LET-
12 LETTERS between
LETTER XXIX.
Edward to Eliza,
“ Tnflexibly firm, and immutably fincere, your own Eliza.”— Plow often have I repeated thofe heart-chearing words, with a fatisfadlion which I cannot defcribe I Of your firmnefs and sincerity, I have had the most convincing proofs ; and I flatter myfelf that I have given you no reafon to doubt the strength or the constancy of my aifedtion. —You fay nothing but the truth, when you tell me I fhould be happy in partaking of the felicity of my friends ;—I do indeed wish to be with you in a particular
light.
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 13
light.—To Sir Charles I am much ob- • liged for the regard he expresses for me, but am at a lofs to know in what manner he can be of fervice to me. That hint of yours wants explanation ; there is at prefent an oracular obfcurity in it, which puzzles me extremely.—By this perplexity, however, I am not any way a-larmed.—I have not troubled you a great while with my apprehensions, and I hope you will not think I have any doubtsy though I am too dull to unriddle your meaning—Well, I must have re-courfe to my old friend on thofe occasions, Patience. — Time will fhow, as the news-writers fay.—For my part, I am weary of conjedtures.*--———
You was very good to leave So little
blank paper in your last sheet, -----
Your .facetious friend’s epigrams are droll, and have all the marks of extempore produdions. — The balket anecdote
14 LETTERS bbtweem
dote is curious and comic, — I should like to be acquainted with the odd mortal ; for he is certainly a diverting cha-rafter. — I have made Several people Smile at his popper.—If every man who travels had his refolution, the BagJIeots and Macheaths would be tired of their hazardous employments.
I AM heartily rejoiced at our friend
>	L-----s promotion.—No man by merit is
more entitled to the favours of Fortune ;
, but every day’s experience convinces us, that her favours are as often bestowed on the worthiest as the deferving. — That L— has great merit, every body who knows him as intimately as We do, will acknowledge ; but I believe he is not obliged to his virtue, biit his vote, for the happy change in his affairs.— When I fay his vote, I mean not to detradl from his virtue; for in his situation, if he had voted otherwise, I should have branded
him
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 15
him with ingratitude, though my principles make me lean to a different par-ty.~
The family in — street grow more ridiculous every day. — the imprudence of the hushand can be exceeded by nothing but the indiscretion of the wife.—. By their dissipated way of living they must certainly run a-ground in a few years ; for they live up to the extent of a precarious income, and make not the least provision for a couple of fine children, with whom they feem to be very much embarrassed. — Such carelefs undomestic people should never think of entering into the marriage state ; for they can never perform the duties of that state as they ought.—The last time I called on this precious pair — they are still in the fame Small houfe — I was fur—— priSed with a new stroke of their folly.— Would you believe it, Eliza, this little
family
i6 LETTERS between
family, in their little houfe, are Summoned together every day to dainty dishes, by a dinner-bell f—What affesita-tion is this ! Yes, to dainty dishes, I assure you ; for nice eating is their ruling passion. — They have every thing as Soon as it is in Seafon, at an extravagant price, or elSe they could not touch it, —When it becomes reafonable, it becomes in their eyes contemptible. — So that by their falfe taste, they often throw away upon a single meal a Sum which would fet out a table decently with good management for a week.—. This is what luxurious people call good-• living: to me, it is just the reverfe ;—I think it is bad living; for Setting aside the expensivenefs of Such a taste, it is certainly the foundation of half the diS-tempers as well as distresses in town.—I pity from my foul the amiable children of the above wrong-headed couple, though they are too young to know that they are
objects
EDWARD Airn ELIZA. 17
dbjefls of companion; for there is no care taken of their education.—Thclr foolish parents think only of gratifying their own appetites.*—The boy is five years old, and the girl a year older; the prettiest little creatures I ever Saw.—Bat the pity I feel for their situation, always damps the pleafure I receive from their innocent prattle.—Is not the behaviour of their parents more than ridiculous ; is it not criminal?—I did not think, when I mentioned thefe people, to /dwell So long on them ; but their follies run fo much in my head, that I cannot get rid of them.—But I will make an effort; for Surely you are vreary of Such triffling intelligence.—^Such kind of intelligence will only do among friends, in familiar letters; and yet I have Seen volumes of printed letters containing matters of as little confequence to the public, as thefe Anecdotes would be; for she publication of which unimpprtant books there is but VoL. II.	C	one
ig LETTERS BETWEEN
one apology to be made, and that is, the strong, the ardent desire in mankind to fee Something new.—Novelty, no matter what it is, has an irresistible charm. —The writers of the preSent age avail themfelves of this univerfal passion, and often treat their readers with the most friviloUs produQ;ions..—The more frivolous they are, the quicker and more exr tensive is their circulation.
©LD D— breakfasted with me this morning, and was really entertaining company. He told feveral diverting stories, and Said Some good things.— When the converfation turned upon the late duel,—of which you have doubtlefs Seen a full account in-tHe papers,—he told me, tho’ he was .'v8ry much shocked with the behaviour* of ——, he was not at all furprifcd at it.—** Where is “ the wonder. Said he, that a bully is a ** coward; and that he who is afraid to
“ face
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 19
face his enemy in the field, should kill “ his antagonist unfairly in a duel ? Of his boasting and want of Spirit, I can give you many instances ; but he is not worth our attention.—Only I must tell you how finely I Saw him “ corre0:ed Some years ago, for the in-
Science of his carriage at G----;s
Coffee-Houfe.—He came Swaggering in with a great deal of Self-importance, and laying his Sword upon the table, ‘‘ with a formidable look and fierce ac-“ cent, ordered the Waiter to fee that no body dared to remove it. With, this imperious command he strutted to “ the back-door. When he was out f ‘‘of the room, an old Soldier, in whofe “ campaign-countenance the strongest “ marks of courage*^ were imprinted, “ took up the fword with the greatest “ compofure, and thrust it into the fire. “ When the young Swaggerer returned, “ and faw his fword in fo ynexpedled a C 2	“ situation.
20 LETTERS betweei^
“ situation, he Swore with great energy “ at the waiter, and enquired with great vociferation what Scoundrel had pre-“ fumed to affront him. Who put “ my Sword into the fire, you rafcal ? ** Said he.—To this brilk interrogation, the old gentleman very coolly anfwered,
, a --------’Twas I, sir.-......You, sir!
“ replied the other, foaming with indig-“ nation ; you, sir 1 and pray, sir, what was your fancy to put it there, of all
places !---—Only to lower the met-
“ tie of it, faid he with equal Serenity.
—This anfwer fo much difconcerted “ the young bouncer, that he was glad to fneak out of the room with bis dif-« graced weapon, as he faw', by their looks, that the whole company en-joyed his confusion, and highly ap-proved of thq corredion he had re* “ ceivedf?
I THANKEEt
EDWARD AND ELIZA. ^
1 THANKED old D—heartily for this story; it diverted me very much: never was a bully better reprimanded !—'
I THOUGHT of your Popping Anecdote last night; for a riotous buck Sallied, half-Seas over, into the front-boxes, and not a little terrified the ladies within his reach, by firing off ChineSe crackers at them. On being dissuaded from his gunpowder amufement, which grew very offensive, and by fome gentlemen near him', who told him he would certainly hurt the ladies ; “ O never fear, never ■ “ fear, replied he ; I love the dear crea-“ tures too well to hurt them,—but I must have t’other pop at them —and, in short, he popp’d away with Such a ridiculous vivacity, that the box-keeper was under a necessity of removing him by force from a Situation in which he was too troubleSome to be endured. With C 3	equal
^ LETTERS between
equal firmnefs and equal sincerity, as inflexible, and' as irnmutable as your-felf, I remain
Your own.
Your fond, your faithful,
Edward,
LET-
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 23
LETTER XXX.
Eliza to Edward.
I
T Always thought the family in — street wrong-headed ; but the new stroke of their folly is fo immenfely high, that I can attribute it to nothing but a derangement of their intellefls.—How ex-cestively abfurd I—I pity the poor children from my heart ; and, with you, think that the behaviour of their parents is not only ridiculous but criminal. Happily ignorant the pretty creatures are of their Situation at prefent, and little think they of the misfortunes they must, in all human probability, struggle with, C 4	, through
24 LETTERS between
through the barbarous imprudence---1
cannot give it a Softer epithet—of thefe parents. — When children are bred up in -luxurious idlenefs, and left pennilefs to the wide world, how pitiable is their condition ! but if I dwell on this fub-]e£t, 1 shall be infenSibly led into a train of gloomy refleftions ; and therefore I %vill encourage the admission pf more chearful ideas.
There was fo curious an objeQ; of the femimne gender at our last assembly, that I dare fay I shall, by taking her off upon paper, throw your mufcles into a merry Situation. She was a fat, fair, laughing, good-humoured woman ; but had evidently no buSinefs there; for she disturbed every body in the room by attempting to engage their attention : — and every-body’s attention was, indeed, thoroughly engaged ; for I believe nobody ever beheld a figure more truly farcical.
The
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 25
The clumfinefs of her whole appearance was increased by the abfurdity of her drefs.—Only think of a female Falstaff in white fattin ! To make her still more ridiculous, she would dance, though So asthmatical, that she Mowed through a minute like a broken-winded horfe. Can I make her yet more ridiculous ?—Yes.
—By two or three uncouth movements, at first Setting off, she convinced us all that she knew not what steps she was taking.----- She feeraed, however, ex-
tremely happy with her own labours, and looked as if she gave univerfa] fatisfadfion,
—O vanity ! vanity! what fools dost thou mak^ of us!—But I should not exclaim against this passion with too much acrimony ; for I don’t know whether we are not greatly obliged to it for half the happinef§ we enjoy.
You are puzzled, you Say, to know in what manner Sir Charlefs can be of Service	'
0.6 LETTERS between
vice to you; but you must remain a little longer In perplexity, becauSe I am not permitted to make clearer communications to you.—Of his abilities to be of Service to us both, I am well assured; and of his inclination to promote our fe-. licity, I have no doubts. Be patient, therefore, and leave the Solution of thefe riddles to time.
Mr.  -----"s dinner-bell rings in my
ears.---The woman is certainly be-
witched !—A dainty couple, indeed !— But there is no Scarcity of fuch simple pairs. I am almost as weary of hearing of them, as you are of your conjedlures.— However, their follies amufe one in an idle hour ; and therefore pray don’t deny me that amufement, when you meet with abfurd charaQ:ers straggling about single, or clubbing their follies together for the honour of matrimony.
Old
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 27
Old D-------’s story diverted me ex-
tremely.—I always told you, notwithstanding his gossiping difposition, that he was upon the whole, an entertaining man.—And, indeed, how should he be otherwise ? For he mixes with a great deal of genteel company, converfes with the most eminent people in the literary world, and has a very good memory.— Now a man who keeps good company, hears good things, and has strong retentive powers, must be a good companion.
«—I know you will fay, that Old D-----
remembers a great many things which are very trifling, and that he is too circumstantially tedious in his narrations,.—He is
So ; but for all hifs tedioufnefs and trifling, I think his company is much oftener agreeable than difpleasing. Garrulity is the charafteristic of age, and I can bear it with patience ; but a young chatterer is infufferable.—But to return to the story :—I admire the ferenity with
which
e8 LETTERS between
which the veteran correfled-’s petulance and prefumption.----There was
certainly not only want of fenfe, but want of decency in his behaviour ; and I was glad to find that the looks of the whole room doubled his difgrace.—Such infolence should always be fo expofed.
Jack ....— has a strong dash of the
bullying coxcomb in him ; and I intend, when I am next in his company, to relate this story, in order to make him look
silly before-----and--------, in whoSe
eyes he thinks he is a very clever fellow ; but if I am not mistaken in my man, I shall make him feel rather queer. Am I not a mlfchievous girl ?—But can I be fo upon a better occasion ?
Don’t chide me for brevity :—I must hurry to a concluSion.—My thoughts are all distipated.—my ideas difconcerted.— Sophy has just received a note which has
alarmed
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 29
alarmed us all.—Sir Charles is Suddenly feized with a fever, and from his youth and constitution every thing is to be feared, upon Such an attack—Adieu !— Pray excuSe this abruptnefs in
Your own.
Your Sond, your faithful
Eliza.
LET-
36 LETTERS BETWEEN LETTER XXXI.
\
Edward to Eliza*
‘13 O O R Sophy ! poor Sir Charles!
—I pray for the peace of the one, and the recovery of the other.—I pity both.—What a fudden event ? —Thefe events, Eliza, naturally make one Serious, and throw us into reflections on the uncertainty of all fublunary affairs. —But I wi!! not sink into the moralist. —Of all people in the world, you want not to be reminded of the ‘‘ shocks that flesh is heir to.’*—You think, you feet enough.—I have no occasion to awake thoughts of more fenfbility.—Let me intreat you, however, not to indulge the
melancholy
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 51
melancholy mood, and fill yourfelf with frightful apprehensions. — Sir Charles is young, — was never intemperate ;— don’t be cast down ;—hope the best.— I wonder not that you are alarmed ; but 1 beg you would, by thinking how very much I am interested in your health, have a particular regard to it ; for I have great reafon to fear, from the ten-dernefs of your nature, that you will endanger it.—You have quite unhinged me;—I hardly know what I write. So great is my anxiety for our dear friend in general, and for your Safety in particular.—How impatient am I for another letter ! and how restlefs fhall I be till I receive it ! — You know me too well to fuppofe that I can be otherwise than in a
state of fuSpence_Prolixity is trifling ;
but I find writing an eaSe to my mind.— When we are full of uneasineSs, it is no Small relief to vent it to another. —To whom should I vent it, but to
her
32 LETTERS BETWEEisf
her on whom my heart is unalterably fixed ?—Don’t I write like one bending beneath the weight of Sorrow ?—I am, indeed, oppressed.—I am no hypocrite : —I cannot fay I will not feel what I do feel. — The stoics, who boasted that they were above the weaknesses of humanity, wer6 not philofophers, but ideots.—They bullied and lied in a breath ; ~and by the ridiculous efforts they made to appear unmoved by the anguish of pain, by thofe very efforts that anguish was increafed.—But I am throwing away my time on thefe haughty pretenders to philofophy, and will drop them. — Write immediately, Eliza, on the receipt of this; for you cannot imagine — yes, I believe you viay imagine, with what inquietude I expe6t the return of the post.—According to my prefent method of calculation, every minute will be an hour, till I hear from you.—I write like a man in confusion ;
and
EDWARD AND ELIZA. . 33
and I try not to hide it.-—I am not ashamed of being affeded, where the health and the happinefs of thofe whom I love, honour, and esteem, receive any interruption. — Remember my last request.—With sincere hopes that I shall have reafon to be rejoiced, not more deprefled, with your next dear letter,
I remain,
Inviolably attached topu alonCj Edward.
Vot, IE	D	LET*
/
34 LETTERS between
LETTER XXXIL
Eliza to Edward.
SU C H a letter at fuch a time I expected from you. I am fure you wrote it from the heart;—it was full of the language of nature. — I wish I was just at this instant at your elbow, to put you out of your pain for your friends and me.—By the powerful prescriptions of a very (kilful and humane physician. Sir ' Charles is, thank God, out of danger ; but fo weakened is he, by the resistance which his constitution made to his disorder, that it will, I doubt, be a long while before he is infensible of its effeCls.—You
would
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 35
would be Surprised to fee him: from a ruddy, robust man, reduced to a Ihadow !
What havoc does a fever make, when it meets with a vigorous opposition ! How many people delicately made, and always complaining, live to a good old age ; while a thoufand stronger than themfelves are every day falling around them, who feem to be built with the most lasting materials.—But fuch is the
s,
unceitainty of life I—ThoSe who appear the most healthy are often the Soonest Swept away, while others, of whofe dif-folution you expe£t to hear every hour, linger upon the stage; and merely for want of moisture, drop into the arms of death. — TheSe ate gloomy thoughts, you will tell me.—They are So. — But fuch thoughts should now. and then en~ gage, though they ought not to engrofs our attention. —— There is nO occasion to dive into the depths of melancholy with , when we rcfledl on the
D 2	uncer-
I
^6 LETTERS between
uncertainty of human life : but a Serious . consideration of it is very proper to check us, when we are too follicitous about its
♦
pleafures, and to comfort us .w'hen we are too anxious about its cares.—How I philofophtze !—Can you bear a Plato in petticoats ? — !tou can, I know : — but half the men in the world have a poor opinion of a woman’s understanding, and treat her who makes any pretensions to literary merit, with a cordial contempt ; and even thofe who allow us to make a free ufe of our intelleDual faculties, are often fo abfurd, as to turn us into ridicule when we exert them.—.Wo ,are often in a mixed company oddly Situated. — If we give our opinions of books, we are deemed pedantic ; if we confine our converfation to caps and ruffles, egregious triflers. —- Is there not, therefore, a great deal of addrefs required to make our deportment inoffensive: vo feeure us from the shafts of Satire, and
the
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 37
the arrows of detraflion ? — From our own Sex we receive no quarter, if we pretend to more knowledge than lies within the columns of a news-paper, but are branded with the names of w/V/, learned ladies^ and affedled creatures.—^If we write, the laugh grows louder against us; and if we print, our vanity is insupportable.—“ How hard is the con-dition of our Sex !” Though I must confefs that a Scribbling woman, if she is not very clever indeed, is rather a nui-fance in the literary world. — Carters, Cockburns, and Macaulays, appear but once in an age.
You promifed to fend me your thoughts on the folly of family pride : pray think of that promise, and let me have thoSe thoughts in your next.—
/
Adieu !
P 3	Eliza.
LETTERS between
LETTER :?CXXIII.
Edward to Eliza.
T Chide yoii not for theshortnefs ofyour ■*■ last letter, becaufe I make allowances for the sitnation of your mind.—In compliance with youf request, 1 now Send you the thoughts I promifed forne time ago.—They are loofe and uncon-nefted ; but I hope they will amufe you.
FROM mere ancestry no merit “ can certainly be derived ; but the pride of ancestry has been the ruling paf-Sion in all nations. * The ancients, in-deed, carried it fomctimes to an ex-traordinary pitch! They were not fa-
tisfied
I	EDWARD AND ELIZA. 39
i	‘‘ tisfied with being defcended from a
I	“ line of kings; they would have Gods
I ‘‘ for their grandfathers. Alexander was flattered into the fon of Jupiter, and the Romans plumed themfelves on having Mars for their founder. Au-‘‘ gustus himfelf was strongly tainted “ with this illustrious foible, or Virgil, the “ courtly Virgil, would not have with fuch refined adulation strained So hard to draw the origin of his hero from the Goddefs of Beauty. To this “ foible, Juvenal with his ufual Spirit « evidently alludes, in the beginning of ‘‘ his eighth Satire.’*
Long galleries of ancestors and all The follies which ill grace a country hall. Challenge no wonder or esteem from me ;
Virtue alone is true nobility.
D 4	Convince
40 LETTERS BETWEEN
Convince the world that you’re devout and true,
Be juft ,in all you Say, and all you do : Whatever be your birth, you’re fure to j;)©
A peer of the firft magnitude to me.
To a man only erninent for his fol-lies or his vices, the greatnefs of his “ family is an additional difgrace. If thofe who boast of their ancestors, en-deavoured to make themfelves confpi-cuous by the imitation of their virtues, their vanity would be pardonable ; nay more, it would be meritorious. But “ when fools and cowards boast of the wilidora and the courage of thofe from whom they are defeended, the folly of the first and the cowardice of the last are doubly conspicuous, and therefore doubly contemptible. From the perfor-
‘‘ mance
EDWARD AN© ELIZA. 41
mance of our parts on the stage of life, arifes our honour or our shame. If we behave well, and execute the parts allotted to us with propriety, we shall ever be esteemed by the wife and the “ good ; and their esteem is of more value than the pedigree of a Cadwallader.^^—
SikcE I wrote my last letter I have drawn up a few thoughts on the frequency of public executions, occastoned by feeing a cart full of poor wretches dragged to death.—I make no apology for adding them to thofe I promifed to fend you before, becaufe I know you are partial to all the little productions of my pen.
‘‘ It hurts me when I obferve with “ what a greedy curiosity the majority of ** mankind hurry to attend a public ex-ecution : and with what improper le-
“ vity
42 LETTERS between
vity they behave'on the mournful oc-“ casion. 'That the lowest orders of people of both Sexes fhould crowd “ about the death-doomed convicts, “ with stupid eyes and unfeeling hearts, I wonder not ; but am always fur-“ prized to fee many perfons of under-‘‘ standing and fenSibility, aflively-curious with the meanest of the vul-gar.-—
The ufe of punishment, and its principal intent, is not to gratify the “ injured, but by exemplary correftion “ to procure a benefit for the commu-‘‘ nity. We ought in all kinds of pu-“ nishments to have a regard to the fu-“ ture good, without entertaining any thoughts of a retrofpe61; to the aggreS-“ fion v/hich is past : we are otherwise «« not guided by justice, hut reSentrnent.
“ From
r
EDWARD AND ELI^A. 43
“ From a multitude of executions, death becomes familiar ; and the har-“ dened delinquent, instead of leaving the world with reluclance, launches “ into eternity with triumph. To make executions frequent, is to remove the horror they should excite ; and to in-“ fliO; the feme punishment on the petty thief who steals a handkerchief, and on the ruffian who commits the most cruel murder, is to encourage the first to fol-low the footsteps of the last ; for by the	,
“ Sentence pronounced on both, there is no distin6tion made with regard to their guilt. But he who can think of the lofs of a fellow-creature and a piece of Silk in the fame light, has Surely a strange idea of distributive justice.
“ Goods may be restored ; but when life “ is destroyed, restitution is impoffible.
“ The frequency of public executions is rendered still lefs efficacious, for
want
44	LETTERS BETWEEN
“ want pf being conducted with more ** ferioufnefs and decorum. There is no “ Solemn preparation to strike an awe “ into thofe who are most likely, from the lowpeSs of their birth, and the li-“ centioufnefs of their education, to break through all laws, human and ‘‘ divine. The day of execution is an «« holiday to the vulgar. It is a day of wanton curiosity, on which perhaps “ three-fourths of the unfeeling gazers behold objects (except the fufferers are punished for murder) lefs guilty, though more unfortunate^ than themfelves. While death is therefore rendered So “ familiar by the frequency of public exe-“ cutions, and while thofe executions are fo improperly conducted, I wonder “ not at the increafe of robberies and murders. The timid thief Soon ripena « into the daring villain ; and when he ‘‘ knows he can but be hanged at last, let him be ever fo wicked, what will
« deter
EDWARD and ELI2^A. 4^
deter him from committing the most “ horrid crimes ?”
^	i
To make you Smile after all theSe grave refledlions, what think you of
Matrimony made EaSy” by a bishop of the church of England ?—I am not in jest ; — fuch a pamphlet is advertifed ; and if the bishop can make his words good, in the fenfe they will, at first fight, be generally understood, there is an end of conjugal infelicity for who will bear the disquietudes of domestic life, when they can be made eafy at fo reafonable a rate ?
—To make matrimony eafy, is doubt-lefs a very public-fpirited employment, and not inconsistent with the epifcopal cbaradler; but I am afraid the Right Reverend author of the above pamphlet promises more than he can perform.—
Domestic evils are not to be charmed away by words: he who feels them at his heart,
may
46 LETTERS BETWEEit may read his eyes out before he is able to remove them.
Apropos,—I have a piece of news
for you ; P---has taken orders.—Only
think of that. — There is not, perhaps>
• a man in the three kingdoms more disqualified by nature for the pulpit ; he would make a much better figure at the tail of a plough.—But it requires little penetration to guefs at his call to the church. —When I Saw him a few Sundays ago, making a burlefque of the charadier he assumed, by the natural impediment in his Speech, and the acquired affectation of his manner; the discordant tones of his voice, and the uncouthneSs of his whole deportment; a couplet of Pope’s darted into my head, and almost Spoiled my devotion.—I could not help repeating to my-felf, in a kind of parody,
« The
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 47
** The thing we know is neither rich nor rare,
“ But wonder how the devil he got there.”
With this couplet I conclude, having at prefent nothing more material to communicate.—
Your’s, &c.
Edward.
P. S. Pray tell me what progreSs Sir Charles makes in his recovery ; I should be very Sorry to hear of a relapfe.
LET.
48 LETTERS BETwitN
LETTER XXXIV.
Eliza to Edward.
O IR Charles recovers apace, to the ^ great joy of lis all; and as I know you will partake of that, I begin with the communication of it.—
I AM much obliged to you for So readily complying with my request, in fending me your Thoughts on Ancestry, and for the additional Refledtions on Public Executions.
The
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 49
The droll turn you give to the bishop’s title-page diverts me not a little.—« Happy, indeed, would it be for all married pairs who complain of their lot, if they could fie cured of their conjugal cares for a shilling !—
Your intelligence concerning P-i-^—— Surprizes me, I own ; though I have faid a hundred times, that I wonder at nothing.—‘What can induce a man with So rnany disadvantages, to take orders; shy doing which he only makes a more extensive publication of his imperfeffions ? Much Sagacity, you think, is not required to guefs at shis call to the church.—^ That she has lucrative views, I doubt not ; but I very much doubt whether thofe views will be gratified.—He is the last man I should think of to make liis fortune by the Sacred fundfion.—He is vain enough, I am Sure, to expeft lawnsheeves ; but he might, I believe, VoL. II.	E	with
^o letters between
with equal reafon expert the robes of royalty. — What rational hopes can a man entertain, who has no powerful patrons to Support him I If he preached like an angel, preaching alone will not do.— I have known him long enough to know, that there is a Something in his difpoSition which will prevent him from being distinguished by thoSe honours which are fo ffattering to his imagination.
Our friend------is grown fo miserable
since his late acquisitions, that he is quite another creature. — You would hardly know him ; he is fo much altered. ----He has lost all his vivacity,
and thinks of nothing but making the most of his money, with which he Seems to be hourly tormented.—I faw him t'other day. — I looked at him with com-paffion.—A miSer is the most unenviable charaSier in the world. —■ The disquietude of his mind, harrowed up with
care.
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 51
care, has altered the turn of his features ; his outward as well as his inward man has been dianged by the revolution in his circumstances.—How insufficient are riches to maks us happy ! The cares they create^ are far more numerous than the pleasures they procure. If thofe who abound in wealth would own thq truth, they would, perhaps, confefs, that their felicity is not increafed by their fortune---However, notwithstanding thefe
Satirical strokes, it is certain that the: advantages of riches, when well-dire6led, are infinite : they only difgrace the owner of them, and exclude him from content-* ment, when they are abuled.
Having nothing, as you fay, more rha-terial to communicate ; for till Sir Charles is recovered,we shall sit very much at home, and consequently must be Sometimes dull; I will fill up the remainder of my sheets with a few obfervations of my own, for E 2	which.
52 'LETTERS between
which, like you, I make no apology, and j for the fame reaSon. Among usy apologies would be as ridiculous as they are unnecessary.—.
"'To communicate our griefs where " we know they will not be heard with " compassion, is impertinent ; to im-" part them where we are fore they will " be pitied, cruel. Thofe who are un-" connefted with us cannot feel them,
« and our friends ought not to be pained.
" — Thefe are the diOiates of reafon ;
“ but when we are under the pressure " of afflidfion, reafon and nature are “ generally at variance, and, pull differ-" ent ways.’’—
" When we are drooping under our “ Sorrows, the true friend will endea-" vour, with the most artful addrefs, to " Soothe us,into -a cummyniGation of
" them.;
EDWARD A^D ELIZA. 53
them ; for that to a hearf over-whelmed with grief, is like Suppuration to a “ wound, by which its cure is at once “ prognosticated and promoted.”
A WELL-cultivated mind is no “ apology for a corrupted heart; for as “ the defers of a perfon deformed are rendered more confpicuous by the rich-“ nefs of his coat. So is the bafenefs of a man’s heart more expofed by the “ brightness of his understancKng.”
The man of true cunning con-ceals it. Thofe who appear to be the Ihrewdest people i.n the world, are the “ least So ; for they alarm fufpicion, and ** thereby counterwork their own de-signs. The thorough-paced knave always wears the ma(k qf a fool, well-E 3	“ knowing
54 LETTERS between
“ knowing that his owt face wTuld |bc-tray him.”
That no man is Supremely hap-py, every man will readily allow ; for every man thinks his station in life might be improved by a little more wealth, a little more power, and a few more opportunities to gratify his leading passions. Such a conclufion, “ therefore, will be always readily ac-knowledged, becaufe the admission ‘‘ of it at once strengthens opinion, and gives a colour to complaint.”
‘‘ We are taught by experience, that '	‘‘ thofe objedls which promife immedi-
ate advantages, operate most power-fully on our hopes ; and that thofe which threaten immediate corredlion, most forcibly alarm our fears. — The
wWd-
A
EDWARD AND ELIZA 55
whipping-post and the pillory, the gib-bet and the jail, contribute more to make men honest, than all the allure-** ments to virtue by the promife of fu-ture rewards, or all the diffuaCves from vice, by the assurance of future “ punishments, from the pulpit or the “ prefs.”
It is not in the least furprising that riches are followed by pride, and that “ he who feels the confequence of a heavy purfe, should difcover his importance “ by the arrogance of his behaviour. By the general regard which is paid to wealth, pride and prefumption are “ greatly encouraged. When a man “ high-favoured by fortune fees with ‘‘ what Servility of Submission, with what fupplenefs of carriage, he is Saluted «« by his inferiors, he will naturally, if “ he has not a very uncommon under-E 4	“ standing.
!
56 LETTERS
“ standing, in profiortion to thet? abafe-rnent, feel'the SorCe of his own exal-tation.”
‘‘ Minds strugglinj^ with astliffion, fare as bodies eniployed in laborious occupations. In proportion to the ‘‘ strength they exert, is the injury they i receive.”
The Humourist is a chara^er not to be envied ; for the Humourist is a stran-ger to felicity. As he advances in life, his difgust to mankind increafes. He grows fatigued with the perpetual round of the fame follies and vices,
*• retires to his clofet full of contempt ‘‘ for his fellow-creatures, and lives like a Savage in the midst of Society.
“ With a temper thoroughly Soured,
‘‘ he gives himfelf up to peevishneSs and
mifan-.
EDWARD' A^irn' ELEZA. 57
“ mifanthropj, and drags out the re-“ mains of a miferable life in a state of “ hostility against the whok world.”~
Have I not tired your patience?—I have tired my own fingers, and therefore.
Adieu, &c.
'	Eliza.
LET:
53 LETTERS between
LETTER XXXV.
Edward to Eliza.
OUR charaQier of---- in his
“*■ prefent condition, makes one not at all anxious after the poffeffion of riches, on which your refleftions are judicious ; and you as justh obferve, that on the right ufe or the abufe of them, the advantages or the disadvantages of them depend.— What blessings are they to thofe who know how to employ them ; and what curfes to thofe who, from a felfissineSs of disposition, delight merely in the poffef-Sion of them, — and have never Spirit enough, for fear of being reduced to
want.
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 59
want, to do one generous deed!—UnSo-cial, unenviable wretches 1—
I THOUGHT you would be diverted with ray placing the bishop’s title-page in a comic light.—It struck me at the first peruSal of it, and I could not fuppreSs my deSire to be droll upon the occasion.
Though I heartily wish Sir Charles was quite recovered, that you might fee more company abroad, yet you employ yourfelf So very rationally at home, that I can fee no proofs of your dulneSs in the letter^ you Send me during your domestic captivity —- I read over your Mifcellaneous Thoughts with a great deal of pleafure ; but shall take Some opportunity to consider them more clofely; for there are here and there Sentiments to which I cannot Immediately Subscribe. — Elowever, I must take notice of your first assertion, with regard to
the
(
6o LETTERS between
the conimunication of griefs.—-I readily agree with you, that the communication of them to thofe who we know will not compassionate them, is impertinent ; but I cannot think that we are cruel by imparting them to our friends ; that is, to thofe who we are fure will pity them.— ReaSon and nature, as you fay, often pull different ways ; but with regard to the fubjedt in question, we give no proofs of the first by resisting the impulfes of the last.—
I Have often heard you fay, that you admire pastoraf poetry, when it is truly So ; and with great justhefs' find fault with the generality of pastoral poets, for drawing pictures of rural life which bear no refemblanCe to their originals. — I have, with you, a very hearty contempt for the Damons and Delias of the age; and flatter myfelf that I shall give you a great deal of pleafure, by transcribing a few
extracts
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 6i
extracts from the eclogues of an .obScure poet who lived in the last century. The author I mean is one Phineas Fletcher, a divine, and, like yourfelf, remarkably-fond of angling. You will, I dare fay, agree with me, that the bent of his mind is elegantly moral ; and will, doubtlefs, value him the more, when I inform you that he was Milton’s favourite companion in .his juvenile days ; who has in his Lycijias eredted a lasting monument to his memory.
In the first wifh of our poet, there is So agreeable a pidlure of a mind calm and undisturbed, that you will .be charmed with it.
But ah ! let me under Some Kentisti hill,
Near .rolling Medway, ’mong my fellow peers.
With feaxlefs merry-make and piping still*
For ever pafs my few, and flow-pac’d years;
The
62 LETTERS BETWEEN
The beach (hall yield a Safe, cool canopy,
While down I (it, and fing to th’ echoing wood;
Ah 1 (inging might I live, and (inging die. So, by fair Thames or Medway's lilver flood,
The dying fwan, when years his temples pierce,
In mufick’s (trains breathes out his life and verfe,
And chanting his own dirge tides on his watry hear(e.
Wh at a pleasing piQiure, drawn frora the life, has our author exhibited in the following lines !
His certain life, which never can deceive him.
Is full of thoafand Sweets, and rich content,, The fmooth-leav’d beeches in the field receive him.
With cooled (hades till noon-tide’s heat is Spent;
His
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 63
His life is neither tost: in boisterous feas
Of the vexatious world, or lost in ilothfal eafe ; ‘
Pleas’d and full blest he lives, when he his God can pleafe.—
His bed, more fafe than Soft, yields quiet steeps ;
While by his fide his faithful Ipoufe has place.
His little (bn into his bofom creeps.
The lively picture of his father’s face ;
Never his humble roof nor state torment him,
Lefs he could like, if lefs his fate had lent him ;
And when he dies, green turfs with gralTy tomb content him.
The last of thefe stanzas is particularly beautiful: it contains strokes of nature which touch the foul.-—
Through all the writings of Fletcher, we meet with the fame propriety of Sentiment,
si4 LETTERS between
timent, and force of expre^pn. As a defcriptive poet he appears .tp great advantage, as well as a rural painter. He had the happy art of communicating what he Saw anid felt, in a manner at once forcible and familiar.
The difpersion of a fog by the rays of the fun, is happily expressed in the following lines:
As when from fenny moors the lumpijh cloMdsy With rifing fleams, damp the bright morning’s face.
At length the piercing fun hl5.,brow unfhrouds. And with his lhafts the idle fog doth chace.
The broken mift lies melted all in tears—
You may, .perhaps,- pot ,shproughly relish the v^rd lumpijh ; bpt ^I think, it is well-chofen ; and if you knew as much ofOToorr as I do, you would find a striking propriety in It.
Were
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 65
Were I to take notice of all the beauties of this forgotten poet, I fhould write a pamphlet Instead of a letter. I shall therefore conclude my extradls with a paffage from his Purple ifland, an allegorical poem, wherein the eulogium on Spenfer is stridlly applicable to him-felf.
Thy strains to hear, old Camus from his cell Comes guarded with an hundred nymphs around ;
An hundred nymphs that in his rivers dwell About him stock, with water-liilies crown’d ; For thee, the Mufes leave their Silver well.
And marvel where thou all their art hast found;
There fitting they admire thy dainty strains.
And while thy foothing accent fweetly plains.
Feel shoufand trembling joys thrill thro’ their melting veins.—
VoL. II.	F	You
66 LETTERS between	j
You will not, I believe, think I have Said too much in favour of a poet, who, though buried in oblivion, is fortunate in this reSped, that when he lived he. was' celebrated by a Cowley, and that when he died he was lamented by a Mil-ton. If the above passages afford you the entertainment which you will, I think, receive, from the proofs I have had of your poetical taste, I will endeavour to procure others by the fame
hand.------From you, I hope, I shall
hear very foon, and- remain ray dear Eliza’s
Lver faithful,
Ever-affe^fionate,
Edward.
P. S..
EDWARD AND ELIIZA. 6i
P. S. I afn still in. the dark concerning the affair of which you dropped Some hints in a late letter.'-----You recom-
mended me indeed to patience. I will try to be patient ; but pray remember, that Sufpence is the life of a Spider.—>
F 2	LET-
68 ' LETTERS between
LETTER XXXVI.
Eliza to Edward.
Many shanks, dear Edward, for your extrafls from the Pastorals of Fletcher; there is a, rural simplicity in them which delights me, and I should be very glad to fee the volume from which thofe extrafts are felefled; fo desirous am I to be farther acquainted with she favourite of Milton.—I have never Seen more pleasing pi£lures of rural life than are drawn by his hand. His parental strokes are particularly affeding. —The creeping of a little fon. into his father’s bofom, is a beautiful circumstance; and
I think
EDWARD AND ELI2:A. 69
I think a painter might from our author’s outlines make a very pretty family-piece of the pastoral kind. The fubjedt you will fay is hackneyed—It is fo ; but an ingenious artist may, notwithstanding, exhibit it in a new light—You quote a passage from the Purple Ijland, from which passage I have no mean opinion of the poem itfelf; but should be glad to have an explanation of the Title.—■
You are very kind to fay So many civil things about my few observations ;— and very candid too, for I doubt Some of them are not a little worthy of reprehension : however, they will Serve to put you upon deteffing my absurdities, and controverting my opinions, when you have nothing of more conSequence to merit your attention ; and I am Sure that your remarks on my remarks will always be agreeable ; for I am not vain enough,
with -------, to fuppofe that ray fay-
F 3	ings
70 LETTERS between
ings are fo wife as to bid defiance to cri-ticifiri.
How often have 1 told you to wait with patience for the oevelopement of your perplexities; and how often must I recommend perfeverance to you— ------------
Really, Edward, you are the most Impatient creature I ever knew.—I could fay Something which would elevate your Spirits, and make you extremely alert; but—I chufe to stay, in order to fur-prize you.—I must cure you of your impatience, if I can.—All thefe trials are for your good.—The longer you are in your fpider-state, the more exquisite will
be your joy when you are out of it.--------
And fo, befeeching you to be as quiet as you can, I will trouble you with no farther admonitions or reproofs, birt gently Aide into another fubjedl with as much ferenity aud compofure as if I had never
mentioned
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 71
mentioned a word about-----you know
what.—
Apro p o s,—You need not trouble your-felf to explain the Purple Ifland^ for by digginginto Warton’s Obfervations on the Faery ^eeuy which I found in Sir Charles’s library, I have Satisfied my curiosity.— One of that gentleman’s notes has done thebufinefs ; for fuch an allegorical poem I have not the least desire to peruSe : but if you should meet with passages from it which you should think worth tranfcrib-iug, I beg the favour of you to tranfmit them.
I TAKE your stroke at me for my ang-ling-paffion. You wonder, I know, how ' I can have patience to Saunter by the side of a river whole hours with the calmneSs of a philofopher. Not being gifted with the above pacific virtue yourfelf, you wonder that others are fo happily posselT-F 4	ed
7a	LETTERS between
ed of it.—You are no philofopher, Edward, that is plain ;—at least, not one of the followers of Epi£letus. However, let me give you a word of advice :—Reduce fome of his excellent rules to practice; and you will find the advantage of Such a condudt. Be patient, and you will perhaps be happy:—I fay perhaps, for it is too great prefumption to fay that patience will certainly procure felicity.
-------You will, undoubtedly, tell me in
your next letter, that I am grown a mere turner of words, and twister of Syllables ; and that I play upon them both with a most infantine levitj'.—’Tis true, I am in a playful humour with my pen, and cannot be Serious if you would hang me.-— One is Sometimes in Such a mood : and when that is the cafe, to reSist the promptings of nature, is to undertake an impoffi-bility. — No, no : hooman nature, as —•
fays, is not to be trifled with.--Pitch-
Forks are nothing in her way :—Horace
Supports
EDWARD AND ELIZA.	73
Supports me in that assertion.-- —You
fee how well I remember your lessons.-— Tht“re is no tutor like love another af-fertion, the truth of which is confirmed
by every day’s experience.-------When
shall I ceafe to trifle ? Not yet,—becaufe 1 have a great deal more to fay.-rWas I not right to preach up patience to you, and to recommend to your imitation thp charadler of Epustetus ?--—^—Indeed, Edward, I know not what’s the matter with me to-night, but I find no kind of inclination to part with the	feathered
“ interpreter of my thoughts.”—Would not this pompous defcription of a p(^ make a good figure in a modern tragedy ? —Pray repeat it : — “ Feathered inter-‘‘ preter of my thoughts.”—Yes, ’tis perfedUy heroic; and I beg you would tell our friend —, that if he likes it, I will give him leave to adopt it.—I don’t love to keep my good things to my-felf, when I think I can give any body
plcafure
74 LETTERS between
pleafure by the communication of them. Am I not a benevolent creature?—Well,
-#to be Sure I am Seized with the --
(I can’t write the word, becaufe it introduces brimstone to my memory ; and with brimstone come a train of images not to be endured) — of writing.—But you have an exquisite nofe, and will foon Snuff me out, or iniff me out ; chuSe which word you will: — any word but ***** for that, aye, that ********* in the nof-trils.
To your great comfort, I am drawing to a conclusion; I have but little paper left, but that little shall be silled up, becaufe I don’t know when I shall be again in the Scribbling mood.—As my Spirits are now up, I am willing to exert them for the amuferaent of my friends, among whom you have a corner of my heart; and i never reckon the time tedious or mifemployed while I think I am entertaining
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 75
taining them.—I may be mistaken when I think I entertain them, indeed ; but I am Sure I mean to make myfelf agreeable to them :
All this who know me know, who love me tell.
Courage, Edward 1 I am almost at the bottom of my sheet ; I shall Soon releafe your eyes from the fatigue they have fufr fered by poring ever my wretched Scrawl; for I cannot have patience—there I own
I want philofophy-----to cut my letters
with the corre£lnefs of a writing-master. —"Welb now I will be very kind, and
finish_A few words more will give your '
eyes their wished repofe.— I had a thing to Say—but another time. — The plot thickens.—F are wel.
Eliza.
LET-
y6 LETTERS between
LETTER XXXVII.
,	Edward to Eliza.
T T is impoffible to tell you, Eliza, with what a variety of fenfations I per-ufed the mifcellaneous contents of your last letter. Your vivacity charms me ; but the obfcurity in fome of your ex-preffipns checks me in the midst of my raptures ; and my poor brain is puzzled to find out the drift of your dark hints. You could f,tll me Something, you fay, which would elevate my Spirits.” —Is it kind in you to fupprefs fuch intelligence ? and you eonclude with faying, that “ the plot thickens.” -I
know
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 77
know not what to make of this conclusion, being far too thick to comprehend your meaning. I must, therefore, wait for the difcovery of it; but if you think I can wait with patience, you are mistaken; for you have quite demolished me for a philofopher. — What would I give for your aequanimity ! Pray explain the obfcure passages ; for till they are elucidated, I can fettle my thoughts to nothing. I long for an anfwer: — I never longed So much for an anfwer, since you first made an impression on the heart of
Edward.
A
LET-
^8 LETTERS gETwsEN
LETTER XXXVIir.
Eliza to Edward.
WHY, what a strange impatient creature thou art grown 1 You really make me laugh by your very Serious confession of your embarrassment.—
You might, I think, have reafonably injagined, by the whole strain of my letter, that the plot I hinted at was not against your peace. — Can you fuppofe that I should have written with So much alacrity, if I had not (omeprefentiment of our future felicity I—-Yes, Edward, I have lately had stroi%reafons to believe that the anxieties we have Suffered during our Separation, are in a fair way to be removed.
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 79
moved, and that our correspondence is drawing to a conclufion?
To convince you that I have fome foundation for my hopes, it is necessary to inform you that Sir Charles, (whofe nuptials will be foon celebrated, if nothing unexpeSled intervenes) being extremely well with the Great Man, has recommended you to his patronage in So earnest a manner, that you will, I dare fay, hear of advantageous propofals from that quarter. He has been indefatigable in your fecvice, and is alfo fo happy as ' to have no fmall influence over ray father ; fo that from his assiduities in our favour, we may flatter ourfelves with the most agreeable profpefts.—
Have I not, By explaining the obfcure passages, given you Safisfafliion ?—If you have any doubts, now, you deferve all the uneafinefs which arife from them.
Saturday
So LETTERS between
Saturday next is the day fixed upon for the wedding, which I am Sure would be Spent more agreeably by the parties themfelves, if your company was added on the occasion. But as Sir Charles and Sophy pleafe themfelves with thinking that we shall ere long follow their footsteps, they fay the leSs about your abfence.
Won’t you tax me with being too forward, if J fay that I wish our day was as near? or rather, shall I not give you pleafure by my franknefs ? You know I can hide nothing from you; and indeed, between us there should be no referve ; for referve and friendship are incompatible.
True friends the Secrets of their hearts reveal, The joys, the Sorrows, which by turns they / feel,	r
And from each other not a thought conceal. -I
This
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 8i
This is bat a heavy triplet \ confefs : and I ought to make an apology for tacking three lines So lamely together.———. Were I not writing to a true friend, I JJjould apologi2.e for the heavinefs and the lamenefsof them.—
According to Rider—not the historian —- we are in a fpring-month ; but according to my own fenfations, we are in a winter-one. Instead of airs, vernal airs, whispering whence they stole their balmy Sweets, my ears are stunned with bleak and bluStering blasts ;
'—And my singers would not enable me to write, did I not now-and-then refresh them at a sire which would make no bad figure in a frost.
Yours 5rc.
Eliza.
VoL. II.	G	LET-
i
82 LETTERS BETWEEN
I. E T T E R XXXIX.
Edward to Eliza.
H E obfcure passages are So clearly explained, and So much to my fatisfafsion, that my doubts are all dif-Sipated, and my heart is at eaSe.—What strange creatures we are, to be So agitated by hopes and fears, according to the quicker or flower motion of the animal Spirits.
From the friendship of Sir Charles I have great expectations, becaufe I know he is very intimately connected with the Great Man ; and you may be assured,
thoSe
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 83
thoSe expeflations are not lessened by your acquainting me of his influence on your father. Thefe circumstances are very flattering, and I begin to See an end to the difficulties and discouragements with which we have struggled So long.—
I PRAY fervently that the Sun may shine on the happy pair on Saturday next, and that every Succeeding day may be as happy as the first.
The amiable couple are very obliging to be So desirous of having my company upon the joyous occasion ; arid I should with the greatest pleaSure be prefent at the ceremony, could I with propriety in-creaSe the number of their friends in the temple of Hymen.
I please myfelf with thinking how bufy you are all in preparing for the
nuptial exhibition:--* In short, I can
G 2	writeCj
84	LETTERS BETWEEN
write of nothing elSe.—You have filled my head with So many agreeable ideas, that I am quite a new creature, and hope nothing will happen to diflodge them.
I HAVE just been reading over your last letter but one, to which I could not give an immediate anfwer, till thofe fame obscurities were explained ; but now I am in a humour to take notice of thoSe parts which I could not attend to, on the first perufal of them. — What choice Spirits you were in, when you wrote that letter I — Enviable Spirits I--charming viva-
city !—Could I but hear the music of thy voice, I should be blest, indeed I— W ho knows how near I am to that transporting moment!
“ O RARE Edward! you will fay ; “ what, you must either be in the dumps “ or the clouds ? either in the vapours or
« in
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 85
in raptures ? — It is very true ; you fay right; I am very apt to be in extremes ; but as you obferved yourSelS, nature will not be thwarted.—As for my' raptures now, I think you can neither wonder at them, nor blame them.—To be tame amidfi; So many flattering circumstances, is not in the power of a man of my complexion.*—I
I CAN make just the fame complaints of the weather as you do ; it cannot be
more bleak at —---than it is at London.
—My rest has for Several nights past been very much interrupted by the blasts of Boreas, and till they are Succeeded by gentler breezes, I shall have but little comfort; for I have a mortal aversion to thole fame blasts.—What a pack of lying fellows the poets in general are in their vernal descriptions I — many of which, if the truth were known, they penned by a good sire:—for if they had
3	wrote ,
86 LETTERS between* wrote them fub Dio, that is, in the open air, I believe they would have produced very different pi61ures of an Englijh Spring. — However, notwithstanding my complaints of the weather, there is Something So animating at this SeaSon of the year, that both my eyes and nostrils receive great entertainment ; and I with I coiild enjoy it thoroughly with you in the country; for we ‘‘ in populous city “ pent,” See not half the beauties of nature.—As I am deprived of the pleafure of making excursions far from the capital, I content myfelf with rambling about the environs, and from my rural walks and rural rides make shift to keep myfelf in health and Spirits.—
Our good and agreeable friends the
T------^^s, are removed to a very pleafant
houfe at-------, to whom I often pay my
compliments ; and with them Spend, in your absence, the chearfullest hours of
my
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 87
my life. — You are frequently the fub-jeO; of our conversation ; and as ' they greatly interest themfelves in our affairs; you don’t know how much pleafure they expreffed when I communicated Some hints relating to them You are too well acquainted with their worth and their Sincerity, I am Sure, to be angry with me for the confidence I repofe in them.— What is life without friendship ? but how rarely is friendship to be found ? When it is found, can it be prized too much ?—^
^	Adieu!
Edward.
G 4	LET-
S8	LETTERS between
L E T T E R XL.
Eliza to Edward.
^ O P H Y has lost her-------name.
^ The long-wished-for ceremony is over, and the new-married pair are the happiest people in the world. That their happineSs may be durable I sincerely wisti, and of its duration have no doubts ; for there never was a couple with better dispositions : if every couple who entered into the marriage-state had the fame, we Should not meet with So many peevish pairs, disgusted with each other, and murmuring at their lot.—^Without mutual affedlion
there
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 89
there can be no matrimonial happinefs, —But I waste time in reflefiions—
We made, I affure you, a very pitto-^ refque appearance in our hymeneal pro-cestion.—It was quite a rural wedding.
I shall not v/ith the prolixity of a----
defcribe minutely the number of our carriages, nor the order in which they were
ranged.-------The village-girls fcattercd
flov/ers before us as we walked to church, and the Sweetest Set of bells I ever heard ■ rung us back to Sir Charles’s hofpitable hall, where all his tenants with their families were ready to receive us v/ith Smiling faces, and many other demonstrations of the Sincerest joy.— Their joy,
I can venture to fay, was sincere; for Sir Charles has been a father to the parish, and is revered as well as beloved by all his neighbours.— Flis beneficence is equal to his benevolence, and his hand is as open as his heart.—He loves to See every
body
90 LETTERS betv/een
body happy about him ; and they who are not So in his company, must have Something very wrong in their tempers, and are not capable of tasting the heart-ennobling pleasures of philanthropy.—
Harry--------, of whoSe good-nature
we have both received fo many agreeable proofs, was at the wedding ; and by his chearful assiduities to pleafe, and constant disposition to be pleafed, made his company extremely acceptable.—
Sir Charles and my father had a long conference yesterday ; and by the behaviour of the latter to me since, I have great reafon to believe that it ended very much in your favour, and that you by this time have received Some interesting intelligence from the former*—I am in Such an agitation of Spirits at prefent, that I cannot compofe my thoughts, and consequently am quite unfit to write
letters
EDWARD AND ELIZA 91
letters of the ufual length to you.— When matters of fuch moment are upon the carpet—to talk like a politician—in which we are ourfelves fo much concerned, you will not wonder at my rest-leflhefs nor my brevity.—
Adieu !
/	'	Eliza.
f
LE.D
92 LETTERS between
LETTER XL!.
Edward to Eliza.
'\T O U (aid in a former letter that you believed our correspondence was drawing to a conclusion ; and I believe, indeed, that it is ; for by shortening your letters every post, you will reduce them to mere notes. — However, I am not in the least furprized at the brevity of your last, considering the flutter you must have been in, and the anxiety you must certainly have endured, while matters of So much confequence to us are in agitation.—
Y OUR
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 93
Your letter was accompanied with a very kind one from Sir Charles, acquainting me that he had recommended me in the most pov/erful manner to the
------- of-------, and that he did not
doubt of my being taken notice of when an opportunity offered.—
This instant a meffenger is arrived
from the aforefaid •	---, desiring me
to be with him early to-morrow morning
before he goes to-----. Now, indeed,
Eliza, I begin to feel myfelf in an odd kind of a stutter; and I believe many people more philofophical than myfelf,
would be in as unquiet a situation.-—«
According to she hints I have lately received from you, and the assurance Sir Charles has communicated to me, I cannot help encouraging the most flattering expectations:—but when I think of the difappointments I have met with, and the uncertainty of great men’s promifes, I
am
\
94 LETTERS between
am almost afraid to flatter myfelf with the fiightest hopes.—I am ready to cry out with the Brutus of Shakefpeare,
0	that a man might know To-morrow’s great eve^t before it comes:
But it fuffices that the day will come.
1	don’t expefl: to have any rest to
night; for no School-boy, at hreaking-ust, can be more tumnltuoufly agitated than I am at this instant.—This agitation will Sufficiently plead for my brevity.—If I thought any farther apology v/as necessary, I stiould have a poor opinion of the perfon to whom I am now opening my heart.----
Adieu !
Edward.
LET-
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 95
4
LETTER XLIl.
Eliza to Edward.
H E agreeable contents of your last letter, dear Edward, made ample amends for its fhortnefs ;—and I hope you are now out of your fluttering state, and as happy as you deferve to be after your visit to ———. You cannot imagine how much I wiflt to be at your elbow at this instant, and to read your looks instead of your letters.—The nearer we think we approach to a pleasing point of view, the more eagerly we desire to arrive at it; though, perhaps, the plea-fure we receive during our approximation
to
96	LETTERS BETWEEN
to it, is more exquifite than the joy we feel when that point is gained.—ObjeQis at a distance from our eyes often appear to greater advantage than when we are near enough to examine them with mi-nutenefs.—You See I am got into my old fentimental way.—Habits, habits, are obstinate things, and are not easily removed.—■
Considering the natural curiosity of my temper, and my impatience to know every thing relating to my Edward, I
think I behave with tolerable decorum_
Many.women in my situation would not be able to write a line, fo great would be their inquietude.—I don’t pretend to extraordinary gifts, but Surely you will own that my patience on this occasion is commendable:—you will probably fay, that I write not as if I was under any apprehensions of hearing difagreeable news from a certain quarter ; and you
will
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 97
will fay right.—I was never of a Sanguine disposition, but am strangely inclined to believe that our affairs are in a prosperous train ; and as strongly impelled to imagine, that your next letter will be the most fatisfa6;ory one you ever wrote to me.—You cannot wonder, that in this state of expe8:ation my attention is wholly engrossed by the objefls which attraQ: it—I am, indeed, fo taken up in forming future fchems, that I am afraid you would think me fit to be ranked among the visionary projefilors of the age, were I to communicate all my ramblings and reveries.—In short, I can attend to nothing, while fancy is fo busily employed ; and therefore, for fear I should have my intellefls fufpefled, I will lay down my pen till my rational powers can exert themfelves more Soberly,
Adieu t
Eliza.
VoL. II.	H	LET-
9$ LETTERS between
LETTER XLIII.
Edward to Eliza.
HERE is no Such thing as pure, * unmixed pleafure in this world.— The force of this assertion I feel most strongly at this instant.—Your agreeable letter found me in a Situation which I
cannot defcribe. — My visit to --was
happy beyond my expedaiions; I stall take possession next week, Eliza, of a very genteel and lucrative employment. —But how is my pleafure damped by acquainting you, at the Same time, with the death of my excellent mother, who was fnatched away Suddenly from this world, a few hours after I had communicated the above agreeable news to her I—
'	Perhaps
EDWARD AND ELI^A. gg
Perhaps the extreme joy she felt at my good fortune shook her nerves with too much violerice, and. hastened her dissolution ; for she was to all outward .appearance in high health before she received it.—-Do you not, therefore, pity me sincerely in my prefent situation ; and
do you not think it a trying one ?-1
cannot, as I Said before, defcribe what I feel.—Such opposite events in So short a time occasion Such a number of dissimilar ideas, that the mind is in the utmost confusion.—I hardly know what I write ; and yet by writing I relieve my mind, that is, by writing to you, who are So much interested in all its movements.— To nobody elfe can I with any compo-fure :■—when I can, my first letter will be to Sir Charles — for his having kindly exerted himfelf in my favour, to whoSe friendly applications I in a great meafure attribute the fuccefs 1 have met with. In the mean time, I beg you would make n 3	my
100 LETTERS betweri^
my sincere acknowledgments to him.— When he hears of my situation, I am Sure he will readily excufe my silence.— My dear mother’s image again occurs to me !—When the last duties are performed —what melancholy duties ! — I shall have more leifure to attend to thofe of another kind, the performance of which is equally neceffary ; for while we live in this world, we cannot be unconneflcd with it. What a helplefs creature would man be, excluded from fociety ?—-Without the assistance of his fellow-creatures he would be a Savage.—TheSe resseflions make the deeper impression on me now, becaufe I never felt the want of your chearful converfation more than at this mournful moment.—
I am
Dear Ellzai Yours, and Only yours,
Edward.
EDWARD AND ELIZA. loi
LETTER XLIV.
Eliza to Edward.
Your situation is, indeed, particularly embarrassing, and I feel for you very sincerely. Though I agree with you that there is no fuch thing as unmixed pleafure in this world, yet give me leave to add, that there is not a great deal of unmixed forrov/ in it.—If we are often damped in the midst of our highest joys, we are alfo frequently comforted in the midst of our most poignant griefs.’ The duties you are going to perform are truly of the melancholy kind ; but I hope you will not let them affeft you too much, and render you unfit for the H 3	execution
102 LETTERS between
execution of your other duties.———? Were I not myfelf under very great concern for the loSs you have Sustained, I should with the warmest expressions tell you how much pleafure I receive by your promotion.—But while mournful images are before your eyes, the mixture of gay ones is highly improper.—I shall be more impatient than ever to hear from you: for every day grows more and more interesting: — fail not, therefore, to write as Soon as you can.— Say only that you are well, arid I shall be Satisfied,—
Adieu !
t ■	’
Yours, &c.
‘	Eliza.
... . - ?	.	... .	LET.
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 103
mmmemmMmMmmM
LETTER XLV.
Edward to Eliza.
H E last, the melancholy duties to the dead have been performed, and I am now under a necestlty of turning my attention to the living, among whom you at prefent most employ my thoughts. —As Soon as decency will permit, I shall not Scruple to urge your ather’s confent, as I flatter myfelf that I am now in a Situation not to be rejeQied by him.—My mother’s jointure is considerable, my new employment will be very lucrative ; and to a man of your father’s mercenary—-* (must I recall the word, or may it stand ?) ‘ H 4	—tern-
'	E04 LETTERS BETWEEN '
—temper, J shall, I doubt not, appear in a new light.—How much uneaSmeSs has that temper of his given us! But I hope the clouds of opposition are breaking away, and that the brightest proSpefts are opening to our view.—Without any metaphorical flourishes, I hope we shall very Soon be very happy.
I NEVER had Such a multitude of opposite, thwarting ideas running about in my head at the fame time, since I knew the meaning of, that word. — I can with difficulty turn my thoughts to one fub-jeft, on Such a variety of fubjedls are they divided. You cannot wonder at Such dissipation at this particular juncture ; you will rather wonder, perhaps, that I am not more embarraffed ; and, indeed, I am myfelf Surprised, that from the restleffneSs of my disposition my complaints are not more numerous.*—.—O I
Eliza^ when will this agitation of the
mind
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 105
mind be at an end ?—When shall I ceaSe to be alternately deluded by hope, and distracted by fear ?—Slow I long to put my intended projeCt in execution with regard to your father !—But there is now another rub in my way.—He is gone into the North on very urgent buSinefs; and till he returns, I cannot negociate with him ;—for there are feveral things to be mentioned at an interview, which I chufe not to expofe to the infpeCtion of the clerks of the Post-office.—’Till he returns, therefore, I shall be not a little impatient.—I am very apt to be impatient :—but is not impatience in the present Situation of ray affairs a most pardonable failing ! — How I run on ! — how I trifle !—But I know I am writing to one who is too much interested in the fubjeCl of my letter, to consider too clofely tha wording of it. — Yoa have always my thoughts on every fubjeCl, just as they
arife
io6 LETTERS between
arife In my mind, without any decorations of style and ornamental flourishes, as if they were intended to be made public.—-When I write to you, I think, I know, I am writing to another Self, and therefore write freely.-—- When we are conversing with thoSe we love, honour, and esteem, whether in a tete^dAte or in this paper way, how infenSibly the time steals away f —I did not imagine it was So late by an hour, and am consequently obliged to finish much Sooner than 1 intended.——— The post-man’s bell rings me to a conclusion, and I must obey his noiSy fum-mons, otherwife I shall keep you another night in a state of fufpence ;----
a state of all others to me the most irkfome and difagreeable ; and I am Sure, notwithstanding your philofophical turn, that you will thoroughly agree with me with
regard to its irkfomenefs.----1 am loth,
very loth to clofe my sheet:—but time
presses.
EDWARD AND ELIZA. loy
presses.—I have a thoufand things to fay :—I always bave]\i^ when I have no opportunity to mention them ;—and never finished a letter with fo much reluctance in my life.—Adieu, dearest Eliza.
Your own.
Your faithful,
Edward.
' -1
, o' ■* *	1 <	;	•
' r'
‘	.c, Vl. I let-
loS LETTERS between
L E T T E XLVI.
Eliza to Edward.
T AM glad, by having performed the last duties to the dead, that you are under a necessity of attending to duties of a more chearful kind.—When we have dqne all in our power to preferve our friends with us, we must, when we are So unhappy as to lofe them, endeavour to Supply their places ; and not gloomily dwell on the most melancholy Scenes in human life. Your new employment will luckily engage your attention, and dif-fipate thofe refleffions which will, I know, frequently intrude upon a man of your
con-
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 109 contemplative cast, and exquisite Sensibility.
You don’t know what a flutter you have thrown me in, by mentioning your intended interview with my father.—I am agitated beyond exprestion, and have, I can’t tell why, more anxieties about it, than I have felt since the first commencement of our’acquaintance. — There is a tumult in my thoughts which I cannot describe ;—and as the execution of your Scheme must neceffarily be long delayed by the abSence of my father, I shall be in a strange way till you have an opportunity to make your propofals in form, and attack him in his own Smithfield style. —^If I allow him on this occasion to be mercenary, I must alfo do him the justice to fay, that I believe he has sincerely my interest at heart; and really imagines that the better bargain he makes for me, the more happinefs I shall enjoy in the marriage
no LETTERS between
riage state.—It Is natural for thofe whofe ruling passion is the love of money, to fuppofe that fortune and felicity are fynonimous terms. — It is natural, but Surely his highly abfurd.—Nobody but a mifer would think of making the latter depend upon the former ; and I am afraid my good father’s Mammon-ideas will not easily be removed for others of a more
liberal kind.--Avarice generally in-
oreafes with age, and is indeed the only passion which remains vigorous to the last stage of life. — How unlucky is this journey to the North ! I fay unlucky, becaufe it prevents you from pressing him home with your propofals.—I hope you will not attribute my impatience to indelicacy, but I really should be very glad to hear that all matters were amicably fettled between you: —- for though I am very much inclined to believe that you will now be a ‘‘ thriving wooer,” I know alSo that all the addrefs you are master
of
EDWARD AND ELIZA. iii
of must be exerted in order to talk him to your purpoSe. — All your eloquence will be necessary, I assure you.—But I need not tell you in what manner to make your attack; you are too well acquainted with the world to want any information, especially from me, on this head.—I cannot, however, help dwelling upon it, becaufe I am So deeply interested in your fucccSs.—I shall think the time horribly tedious, till you have an opportunity to do what I am Satisfied you are as anxious about as myfelf.—If my father mckts with no proposals before he corses to Town, which he thinks too advantageous to be rejected, I flatter myfelf that you wiU stand a good chance.—But if he fltould return with a rival,—I tremble to think wshat will become of me!—-A/y situation will then be truly perplexing. How ingenious w^e are to torment ourfelves I— I will not encourage reflections So dark and disagreeable.
Sir
112 LETTERS BETWEEN
Sir Charles and Lady T-------both
chide me extremely, whenever they fee me in a difconSolate way,—a way I am too apt to be in—and very kindly tell me that every thing will end well, and according to my wishes.—They are good creatures; and without their comforting conversation, I should, I am afraid, frequently indulge the melancholy mood, to the prejudice of my health, as well as the
destruction of my peace.------Amiable
pair !—You would be charmed with their behaviour to each other-they are always together, and I never met with two people who thought more alike ; indeed^ it is by thinking So much alike, and by aCling with fo much propriety, that they are loved, honoured, and esteemed, by all who are acquainted with them: by the poor they are almost adored,—Such characters are rare ; but how worthy are they of imitation !■—I could write upon their virtues until my fingers would no
longer
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 113
longer wag; but though my fingers are not tired, my eyes are So heavy, that 1 can hardly keep the lids from cloSing.— < I was So much disturbed last night by the high wind, (which has made grfeat havoc among our trees and tiles) that I am drowfy to-night much Sooner than ufual. -— But drowfy as I am, I can with my accustomed Spirit assure you, that nothing stiall eraze the image of Edward from the heart of his
Eliza.
VoL. II.	I	LET-
ii4 LETTERS between
LETTER XLVII.
Edward to Eliza.
/ j
The eyes of Edward are never So highly pleafed, as when they are
looking at the letters of Eliza.--Yes,
Eliza, your letters always give me the highest entertainment.—The letters of a true friend are invaluable treafures, and the colledlion which you have furnished me with, I would not exchange for any
“ manuscripts in the British mufeum.-
But I would not have you shew this paragraph to — -.-, for he would certainly
brand it with the name of an extravaganza, a flight, becaufe he himfelf thinks no ma-nufcripts out of that repository worth
reading.
iiDWARD ANt) ELIZA.
reading.----Is not this whim of his, how-
ever, very reprehensible ?■—Now I mention the Mufeum,—how oddly ideas are
associated !---1 cannot help recolledling
Some of the conversations which passed between lis in our favourite walk—the Ptady one.—Thofe days in which we could ' enjoy our perfonal interviews uninterrupted, were Supremely happy.——How imperceptibly the hours stole away, while we stowly Sauntered side by side; and how did we lingering quit our garden-views, when the moment of departure arrived !
—It is with the utmost delight that I remember the many pleasing and interesting cotiverfations we there enjoyed i yet that delight is Sometimes dastied by the recolle6:ion of thofe occurrences whicst put an end to them. But on thofe Occurrences I will not encourage my thoughts
to ramble ;----they are but too ready to
dwell upon difagreeable things. In fpite of all my efforts to turn them into another I 2	channel.
ii6 Letters between
channel.^--1 often think, while I am
writing to you, that I crowd too many refleQions into my letters ; I check my-felf frequently in the ’^midddle of a meditation ; and stop my pen, for fear I should grow a mere moralist ; a pedantic prater. At this moment 1 feel the refleBor bufy at my elbow ; but I will shake him from me, as I would the impertinent Jack —, who, you know', is distinguished among his friends by the name of the Intruder : a charader which was always extremely contemptible in my eyes ; for there is nothing fo hateful to me as the insignificant tattling of a coxcomb who breaks in upon you at all hours, without any regard to propriety, and draws off your attention from buSinefs of conSe-quence to his empty Small-talk.—Lady
T-------justly calls Such a fellow a queer
being. Queer enough, indeed ; and I am fo unlucky as to meet with many of thofe beings every day.—You are in po place,
nor
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 117
nor at any time Safe from their viSits,
nor Secure from their impertinence." -.—
They pester you at church as well as the play. — Horace and Boileau have with exquisite strength and humour exhibited theSe animals in their proper colours ; and in a Satire of Donne’s modernized by Pope, you have alfo the fame charaQ:er painted in a masterly manner.—
0	HOW I wish for the return of your father from his journey !—
1	HAVE this moment heard that fome-thing unexpedled has occasioned a more Speedy return than he intended, and that he will, if no accident happen, be in town on P'riday next.—You may believe I shall gladly and eagerly feize the first
opportunity to wait on him.-------Now,
Eliza, our affairs, I think, are aftualiy drawing to a conclusion. Friday will be an interesting day, and I hope a fuccefsful one. —I never looked forward with fo much
I 3	impatience.
ji8 LETTERS between
impatience, with Such a mixture of hope and fear ;—in short, with all the various fenfations that can polSibly agitate a lov-
I
er’s breast, and with which your tender bofom will probably be agitated at the pe-rufalof this paragraph.—
I HARDLY know wliat l am writing. So great is the flutter of my Spirits ; and yet I am impelled to write on by I know not what irresistible power.—I Seem to write mechanically :—I move my singers almost
without feeling my pen.-----But I must
make an effort and check myfelf, while I have just fenfe enough to know that I am grow'ing very nanfensical. — A poet remarkable for his gallantry tells us, that
NonfenSe itfelf is eloquence in love :
But I doubt there is more gallantry than truth in this line.—
Adieu!
And think on
Edward,
EDW?(RD and ELIZA. 119
LETTER XLVIIL
Eliza to Edward.
H IN K on Edward ! Aye, that I do:—he is never out of my thoughts; for waking or steeping, his image pre--fents itfelf to my mind’s eye.—
Don’t imagine, my dear Edward, that I dream when I write thus : — I am perfedtly in my fenfes, and without the least tendency to a delirium.—I do, indeed, perpetually think of you and your intentions, and heartily pray for your fucceSs on the important day, which you hope will be decisive in our favour.—I did nb»t I 4	believe
120 LETTERS between
believe my father would return So fpeedi-ly :—but as you exprefs So much joy at
the news, I am truly glad of it.-----In
his last letter to me, he faid, that the
businefs which carried him to ---would
keep him, he was afraid, a great while.— He wrote as if the j ourney was not agreeable ; and therefore I dare fay he is glad to be countermanded.—
My flutterings come on So very fast, that I have not fpirits to write any longer. —I will not fay I have not strength to hold my pen ; I hate affeflation too much , to give myfelf fuch abfurd airs ; but I really cannot with any compofure go on; —and fo.
My dear Edwarsh Pray believe.
That you are never forgotten by Your
^ Eliza.
. EDWARD AND ELIZA. i2|
P. S. Lady T—, to whom I have read your letter, has heard what you have with regard to my father’s return ;—So that I look forward with you to Friday, in a Situation of mind the most anxious to be imagined. If I don’t exprefs my-felf fo clearly as I ought, you rnust to that Situation impute the confusion of my ideas,
•	.DET.
122 LETTERS BETWEEN
LETTER XLIX.
Edward to Eliza.
Your father, my dear Eliza, arrived on Thursday night, but late ; I therefore thought it better to let him refresh himSelf with a night’s rest, before I made him a visit of fuch confe-quence.—Yesterday morning I waited on
him,—and----but I won’t keep you
in fufpence:—Every thing is Settled between us to my utmost wish. — He con-fents to make us happy, and has made concestions in my favour which I never expected, but for which I shall always love, honour and esteem him.—I fend this short epistle by exprefs to put an end to all your flutter and anxieties, but am
too
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 123
too much dissipated with joy to write all the particulars which occurred at our interview :—a detail of thoSe would take up too much time.--Now I am com-
pletely happy, for now I fhall no longer be deprived of my dear Eliza’s conversation, for which I have So long sighed in a kind of banishment from her prefence.— On the receipt of this, I hope you will employ yourSelf in making preparations for cur wedding-day, the nomination of which I leave to yourfelfonly consider the natural impatience of my temper, and be not long in fixing it.
Yours for ever,
Edward.
LET-
124 LETTERS between
L E T T E R L.
Eliza to Edward.
T Cannot expreSs by words the joy -S- which I fflt at the receipt of your dear letter. — What charming contents I I flew with it direfUy to Sir Charles and Lady T—, who both enjoyed sincerely the happy conclusion of our anxieties.
This minute I have received a letter from my father—the kindest imaginable.— He loves you, I am Sure, by what he fays of you, and is forry he has been fo long blind to your merit.—Lady T— is as eager to have the wedding-day over as
you
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 125
you can be, and tells me she will gladly assist me in making preparations. — As for fixing the day, I think, as my father has behaved in So generous a manner, he ought to be confulted about it : and I am willing to believe that you, on Second thoughts, will fee the propriety of this propofal.—But in this point, you shall yourfelf determine. — A Servant of Sir Charles waits for this letter, otherwife I would write more :—But I hope we shall Soon have no occasion to converfe with each other through the post-office.—
Adieu!
Eliza.
LE.D
126 LELTERS between
LETTER LI.
Edward to Eliza,
^Tp\ H E propriety of your propofal ^ struck me immediately, arid I communicated the filial part of your letter to your father, who was highly pleafed with it.—Your father’s prefent behaviour cancels all his former from my memory, and makes me the happiest man in the world. —He has pitched upon the first of May for our nuptials, becaufe he was himfelf married on that day, and becaufe his own marriage was uncommonly fortunate.— He has a flight touch of fuperstition on this occasionbut it is very excufable.
—I
EDWARD AND ELIZA. lay
.—I fully intend to be with you on Friday next :—Friday was a lucky day.—I am a little Superstitious now, you will tell me, and with reaSon ;— however. Superstition apart, I shall always reflect on that particular day with the highest Satis-faOiion, becauSe it was produdlive of the highest happineSs to me. — Can it therefore be remembered with too much pleafure ?—How I long to fee you !— how I wish for Friday !
Adieu !
Edward.
i
LET-
128 LETTERS between
LETTER LII.
Eliza to Edward^
Tj'RIDAY is arrived, but not with ^ Friday is Edward arrived! — What means this delay at this time ?— What new obstructions to our mutual felicity ? Have I not reafon to be alarmed ? If you could not come yourfelf on the day you appointed, could you not have wrote to me ? O Edward, I know not what to think of this delay ;—and I am the more alarmed, becauSe I know you are remarkable for punctuality, except prevented by illnefs, which I Sincerely hope is not now the caufe either of youi abfence
or
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 129
or your silence.—But I have a thoufand fears for your Safety, at the fame time that
I chide you for your negleft---------You
know my heart; you know how tenderly I love you ; and therefore cannot wonder that I am thus disturbed in the midst of
fo many fortunate occurrences.-------1 am
not the only perfon disturbed on this occasion, though you may be Sure the most
deeply affedted.----Sir Charles and Lady
T-------- are equally Surprized at your
not coming yourfelf, or fending a line of .
information.----For God’s fake, Edward,
when this comes to your hands, difpatch the messenger who brought it with the reafon of your delay, without staying to write about it : a verbal message will be fussicient, for I shall not have a moment’s peace till he returns.—--.The poetical rav-
ings of distrafted lovers are nothing to the pangs which at this instant tear the tortured heart of your
Eliza.
VoL. II.	K	To
130 LETTERS BETWEEK
TO this letter no anfwer was returned; no anfwer could be returned; for Edward, foon after he bad Sent his diS-patches to the Post-office, was Seized with a fever in his head, which in a few hours put an end to all his proSpefks in
this world.----A messenger was fent off
by the editor of thefe sheets (who was with his friend when he was attacked, and performed the last duties) to Eliza, to acquaint her with the unhappy situation of her lover, and to inform her, that she must lofe no time, if she ex-
pe£led to fee him alive.-----Eliza came;
but she came too late to hear him articulate.----He expired in her arms, a
few moments after her arrival; and thofe whole hearts are not void of Sensibility, will imagine the situation of Eliza at that
juncture.
EDWARD AND ELIZA. 131
jstn0:ure, without the assistance of any rhetorical flourishes to heighten their compaffion. To the feeling reader, few words are forcible; on the unfeeling one, the strongest will have no effe6t.
FINIS.
* ■ ■ ^ ‘ -
' '■ '■	,i-	■ ' '■	■) ■	'	;	•	..
j
■;■ ■ .?
• • ■ ',1
•■( .	- • ■ "d
j
. ' ;	' ■ i
* \ ■ ' '.D'-' ... t • ",•.•■
r. ::iV~	'	'
'	U- of Pa.
■ "' A. • ^	- ■ "	'	■.- s ;	,-■■■ '■ ■ , ■■
.I ' ' ■ ri d.<- ‘
- ■■ . V - - • - . \
M
f A -	-.S' V \
c.	■	i--	■'	.	■	;	. .	, • '.s; ' D
''N	'
f ' ' '" ' -■ '• .	■'. ' ,V ■*'
- ' ' ■ -'	/ -S--	' VfAM^
'.f'. 'C'	b-- -1
■ .D - ' ■'■ ... ■;: ,
\ ;/ '■'C;,■■■ ■	, ;	■ i-,	■ v
' ' ■	V ■ ■; ’	-, v! r ;	■	. S'
' ' ^	' L, _-S■; V •. ' •
c: ■'( ," ■' . „r ■	' -'H
' O ^ - ^	’ ' ■.'N ^s -	' '
'C
v'■ ■':' U
c ‘o' ■	■ ,	'S ■	' - '	’	■	^
'b-'	■	■ s V X	-V.	-	'-S
f	,	'	.	-''V •	.	,	■	.
' S N	■' -'■ '	' '.;Sj
. . -
^'V	■ ‘	"	\	,	.	,-’ ' '*■■ ]	'-■	■ '	'
'	'	■ T	'■	,	-	"	: _	;.
- ri ''r	■	'	■	■'	i,	■ r -
.	’	■ '	/ NN'- -•	-" ■'	. . N _
^	‘	,	■ .V>
' ;;T . ^	. ■ .	■' 'S '	/ .	; '
^	\	.. ,<r	.'''	-*
\	^	^	^ i	■■	■ .	/
1
.	^	_	I
i	'	.	>
' , "	■■''■•"	",	- AffL:
1#
1, V '■	'	'	'
' /
■	■■ W'	'' '■ .	. ■
'■	■	••	1 .	>	« s '
■	.	j-	V.''’-
f	.	'	'	.	■	>	-	■ '
. , ■ ' ' ' ■ , / ' . ' ■ : .
■ ' ' ■ ii	■ ■'	•.	.	' N	i
'	■	\	i'	A
■ - ' 1 ■ ■ , \
T	*	'	.	■	■	^ O ■ . f
■Ad. d.	. .	'	''N
.::	s-	■ ,d
■ V	^	^ V ' .	- c
C .	\ -T-	-	"* -s	•■
'	' te .	■ ' '■ - ■ '	. '	■ P
- ' ■	■ . V , ^ ■	' -'	N,-
v.D	■-,.	' i .	■■	- • '■ cd '[-]
..': ■	■ ■	■	• "t- ■	s ' .	■	, '	’ ■■	. -
' ' '■ ^ '■
. ’ V.	- FF/ ■	■
Airr.r-S -	"	■•	"	-	'■
v.v ',	.	^	. ..	. '	f t/"	.	■	, j
‘ ■ ’ ■■ ’%■'.	■ ■ ■ '■.	. ■	- '-vS'.^' ' ' N--
' ■:> ', J
:■" '■	’	■ ■	, -	^ -' :*i
'■■: ■ ^ ■ '■ ■■■ . ■ . ■■ ■■ ^
‘	);■	. ■■;S:1‘
■ ' -■ ' ■-- ■ ■- '■
■	' V ..	.	i '■	'• \
'V ' -■'/■	-'	k-
'	\	'	- \	‘	.	-v: ■' ■
. ■' ' '	^	^ ■ - • ' ■	■ .' • . ■ '.-i V,;
' V - ^	^	.	N
.'	'Si
■ '■ C	♦
■ c
• " • ' V ' ;■• •■
'	' '	.	'	'	-Wte ^ ■
V ■'■.■ ,J-'- ■	.,1® *5is,‘;
- ■	'L'	■:	■	. ..,■ ' .	^ r “.,
• '■	■if
-.	'	' II-’ " ■
!-l_J^_ I ^riirir,ri:-[
/f '■'^^^^SmmSSmmmmi^ [£'	- :	I'S
■ f ■ .N":	•V"'|^'
f ' , ! - AlA ^	:- ' ■' ■
1' ■ ■'■	■ i
n'?*~»-ww»^2L-LL J '■- —-
', j L 'i '■ :, :
' h --hte-Lll' -^''
