 


THE 
GODFREY F. SINGER MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY 
MR. AND MRS. JACOB SINGER 
4* 4 
/■; 





2 

r ■; : 
. '''. ' t • i. 


•o' ijiy.l 
l.i C Aa O’S.* 
: A 
, - dri ■• 

'•raat^ 
EMMA: 
O R, 
The CHILD of SORROW. 
NOVEL. 
In TWO VOLUMES. 
VOLUME I. 
LONDON, ' 
Printed for T. Lowndes, No 77, in fleet-street. MDCCLXXVI. 
rl£ .yro^5?o^ v5 a r■ s 
rioul dliwl/ ' 
yrn Sl/ii f e^onlirshe ym shiv bojnoinoo noiiooste lodio yxie Hoi lovon ueo 3uori onj ni; -; rn5t tjvo liiw uoy jtib. orb .nssh .raoosio .Arn ibhrst iifoy flolnr/ riitvbojtlo ■• • oti.'boooiq tsqotqrni ojtioi yd 
lib od:; to eo' f on; pvr.dnr.d ooy no\c'd e'ofrf vr^rlt lonoj moy doidw oini alotj 19v3 Tioy oyo lomiiio" noy 
E s)of!r!rioc? “' .ytflim o^’iso/li cn om s5s[dol fiid?iv/ A yjnib'i yhiitfo to noinoq tuo ryi~tfauj(i^n^d.io <h.rqmoy f*»ij j£iil atiuj; L; r L : rrri^w 0'.riiri. fhlll 
: iu 
onrrpt ..rjoy 
i s ■ 
on teuadf od? 
II Ti; ion oci bddo;. : o -> ‘0‘ktt *4^ .»; )ri 
'od tud fcist^r ooq: lr: yr otosi uvio^ -• : 
ij j t: : j C >'^', '..oo:;,, i. t .jy 
t, Ti trv -- ' ■ : : O'. i : d: .-:; 
uoii...e2ayj, vidl4c.i i,.. L,, a ^ac^bsi 
boriihq (rn moti /(stugm. io dlo^.oiu bnos i tod ^cvl ' .3itoh.?.sil sis! 'iirrii ££■ ^molod jso'jio oiit. ..oot rnffd ocnol boihlti^> oveii i.y: fyy n?sio o(t; n; jni!h£ul. u'^ioiv o kd do : ■* prb; hd fl’tii'. otctry O .nd atvxti: .> 1 arlictq tgsts^tb.iud .oiit/s ‘idi ntjcoq l 'to ovtst arli ocl/iovori (fiw I, toy lovon ovlrl I Jhojdo gnivtobbrid - ni 
oqcni yjoiooful. T ^ uoy ni boviodob diood jimstdcrf qd ol; .pd prybshjo? L yn'i oaivmni io irljgibb cuili; : p; coat tri 
■uioosio SN ■?/!• Il "•■ oty 
.irjit fi'' I S.. 
w 
M 6 > 
cc|jj 
€ t"s"‘t ^ 
EMMA. 
y 
O R, 
The CHILD of SORROW. 
LETTER I. 
Lo Lady Cleveland. 
stretton lloufe. 
H! what avails It to be young and fair, 
^ 4 dress with negligence, or dance 
^ All these brilliant accomplishments are lost, or their purposes wholly destroyed, by the whimsical, (I was going to Say,) but the partial Will of my Father. To t be parcelled out and consigned over, like =-; Vol, L B a bale 
^ E M M A ^ or, 
a bale of goods, to a man, of whose person I have not the remotest idea, is a circumstance of all others the most disa greeable: Yet, my dear Lady Cleveland., I am in this hopeful, or rather hopeless situation. Which way Shall I turn me, how Shall I decide? Oh! take the man, by all means, says Prudence. It certainly will be the most prudent method of acting, I allow; I wish I was as certain of its being likewise as happy. — But why do I talk of deciding? I am not a free agent; therefore nothing jdepends on my own will: My Father has deprived me of the right of election. Perhaps lie has Saved me trouble. I have nothing in the world to do, but to give my hand to Lord Stretton as Soon as he chuses to let me know he is ready to accept it; — or, indeed, I might refuse, if I prefer beggary to him. There is, in my cafe, no alternative. 
I am sick to death whenever I think of my intricate and unpleasing affairs, and never fail to drive them out of my head as fast as possible, with — no matter what. The time will shortly come, when my Cousin and destined Husband will arrive. If he should prove agreeable, my pleasure will be greatly enhanced, by having at present So little idea of that circumstance happening. Should he, on the contrary, jbe displeasing — Why should I rob myself 
Oi 
northeast Child Sorrow. ^ 
of the few weeks I can call my own, by anticipating an evil I cannot prevent? So be gone from my thoughts thou busy intruder; if I cannot think to please myself, ni bid adieu to refiedtion. Did you think I had been So much of the philosopher? 
My journey hither was as agreeable as the cafe would admit of. I own I cannot bear a sola party: A very fortunate circumstance in favour of Loxdi Strettott. — Pshaw — why must he pop in upon eveiy occasion— — to Heaven it was with him as it is with many, out of sight out of wind. Mrs. Middleton was lb kind as to meet me at strettonaoufe., and asfures me, she will not leave me, till the most important event'of my life is Settled. I am infinitely obliged to her, as perhaps there never was any young woman So totally friendless as myselst No Mother, Aunt, bister, or even Adviser; though the last is unnecessary to one, whose path through life is already chalked out for her. I have a Friend,. and a tenderly esteemed one, in my dear Lady Cleveland. But I want Such an one continually with me. My amiable Mrs. Middleton will be of great comfort to me. Fler conversation, while it amuses, will instrud me. I wish you to know her, I am Sure you will be charmed with her. I have often wondered how it should hap b 2 jien. 
4 E M M A; r, 
pen, that with all her natural and acquired .accomplishments, she should be of that class called Old Maids. What blindness in the men! There might, however, be strong reasons. I wish to know Something of her history. I once hinted Such a thing; but Somehow or other she waved it — I have hardly thought of making an effort towards it Since, as the pleasure of the present moment in her company prevents any necessity of recurring to what has past. 
And now, my dear Lady Cleveland, permit me to thank you for the pleasure I have reaped in your Society, and for which I shall ever retain the most grateful remembrance. My obligations to my Lord must not be forgot. Do me the honour to write to me Soon, and believe me you shall find me stridlly faithful to you in every circumstance. I shall not fail, if you permit me, to acquaint you with everything concerning me, which my opinion of your friendship will make me judge interesting to you. kiss my little Coz for me. 
I am your ever devoted Friend, 
Lou I S A S T R E T T o N, 
L E .D 
"Lhe Child of Sorrow. J 
LETTER II 
. To Lady Louisa S t r e t t o n. 
Cleveland place. 
I DOUBT, my Louisa, you will not experience much pleasure in my correspondence, as I have no Subject to write upon; and after I have told you how much I esteem you, and how' very very much I regret your absence, all the rest of my letter will be but ringing the Same changes. 
But why then, will you Say, did you take up your pen, when you was prepos seffed with the idea of your being stupid? 
, Another day you might have been brighter. No, my Dear, Tis the same with me today, tomorrow, and for ever. 
Perhaps I may infect you with my melancholy, — a melancholy which the return of this day rather augments; — but no more of that. 
I cannot think myself in titled to your gratitude for much pleasure while you was with us, but I am Sure those four months were to me the happiest I have known for Some years. Your Sprightly, yet tender conversation, restored a calm to my mind, B 3 which 
6 E M M A i cr, 
which I have not possessed a long time. But you have left us, and I again sink into my former state. Would to Heaven I could rouse myself out of it! Yet all my efforts are vain, and long habit has engrafted it 6n my nature. 
What charming Spirits you have! How lightly do you Speak of an event, the most momentous of your life — your Marriage I iind that too with a man, of whose person, even you have not the remotest idea. I tremble for you, my dear Girl, and your fancied security adds to my fears on your account. 
I doubt there is little chance of being tolerably happy in the married State, if it is entered upon wsith indifference only; if there is a prepossession against the party, 1 think unhappiness will certainly ensue; but if a partiality for another is joined to this, ah! what tongue can express what the heart then feels! Oh I my Friend, may you for ever remain infensible to the agonies which at this moment rend the hearts of too many in that hapless situation! You will not, however, my Dear, have this lafc and greatest of human evils to encounter, as I have often heard you say, you never felt a partiality iri favour of any man. Taught, as you have been, to look on Lord Sir St tonne as your future Flushand, you have 
never 
L'he Child of S or row. 7 
never allowed yourself to think too much on one object; you were likewise Secured from the importunities of the men, from the determination of your Father being So well known: Nothing less could have Secured you from their addresses; and the charming Sensibility I have experienced from you, in the friendship you have shown me, during our acquaintance, convinces me of your having a very fusceptible heart, therefore it is. most likely there might have been Some one who would have gained your affections had they been unrestrained. 
Heaven Send Lord Stretton may prove agreeable in his person and manner! I think he cannot help loving you; and if he behaves to you with delicacy and tender ness, he will create in your breast a degree of gratitude, which will make your union more felicitous than you perhaps imagine. Thus, though you are not in love with your Husband, his behaviour, and your good fense and virtue, will prevent your looking up to any other man for your happiness. 
I flatter myself you will find him pleasing, or Surely your Father could never be fo violently attached to him, as to deprive you of your birthright, unless you became his Wife. I hope everything will turn out for the best, and that you will be as happy as I wish you, I shall borrow a part of it, B 4 in 
8 E M M A; 
in the Sincere interest I take in all your 
affairs. 
I think Lord Cleveland did not adl right in permitting you to go home; as being a relation, he ought, in my mind, to have afforded you his protection. I was Sensibly mortified at his conduct. I really believe he was afraid of the trouble of it. You know him to be strangely indolent, unlcss he thinks it necessary on his own particular account to exert himself; he then can be indefatigable. You are not destitute, however; Mrs. Middleton will answer every purpose; yet it certainly would have been most proper to have had Lord Stretton first introdudlion at Cleveland place. It was undoubtedly inconsiderate in Lord Cleveland if I place it in the most favourable light, a point in which I strive to See all my hushand’s actions; but we cannot always Succeed as we would. 
I wish to be acquainted with your Friend; that title is Sufficient to make me anxious to See her. There may be Something very interesting in her history, yet not merely from her being an Old Maid. Do you think it impossible to be So from choice? May not her life have been a Smooth gliding stream, unwarped by pas sion and unruffied by the storms of affliction? 
Sthe Child o' Sorrow. 9 
tion } Her maiden state may have contributed to her having passed a life of ease. Cares she certainly has avoided, and pleasures are ever precarious. Ah! how happy should I once have thought myself, had I been allowed to remain one of that class, So much despised, So much contemned! But why do I Speak of myself ^ Plough natural it is, on every occasion, to revert to one’s Self. It is a disagreeable Subject; I am for ever tearing myself from it, yet still return. However, I will not at present tyre you with it, therefore must bid you adieu. 
I am for ever yours, 
Emma Cleveland. 
LETTER' III 
La Lady Cleveland. 
Receive my; thanks, my ever dear Lady cle’velandy for your welcome Epistle. Will you forgive me for making Mrs. Middleton the Confidant of part of it? I mean to return the obligation, by, relating to you the' passages of her life, which the perusal of the latter part of B 5 your 
1 O' EM Mi A ory 
your Letter has induced her to give me. You ashed me, if I thought it impossible to be an Old Maid from choice? — S repeated to her ail you Said on that topic. “Ah! my dear Louisa, (Said she, with the tears gathering in her eyes,) my life has not been that smooth gliditig fireamy un~ warped hy pajfion and unruffled hythe Jiorms cf affldfhon., that Lady Cleveland Seems to suppose: On the contrary, keen anguish has harrowed up my Soul, and still the wounds bleed on the painful recollection.’* 
“I am Sorry, (cried I,) I should have mentioned anything which recalls to your mind former griefs; yet I must own, my curiosity is exceedingly excited: Could you gratify it without encreasing your distress, I should esteem it a very singular favour; if odierwise, I will fuppress my desires, and Speak my wishes into silence.” My Dear, (replied the amiable woman,) I know I may confide in your discretion; I will not, therefore, conceal from you any part of my life. The circumstances of it have been productive of infinite Sorrow to me; but a length of years, with a pious resignation to the indisputable will of pro dence, has, at last, worked a calm in my troubled breast. It is a long time since my misfortunes, or the authors of them, had any existence, except in my remembrance. 
The Child Sorrow, II 
brance. Attend then, my dear Lady Louisa., to the History of an Old Maid; a History w'iiich may excite in your tender bosoiii Some affecting sensations. 
“My Father was a Physician of very great eminence at Brifiol Hot wells: By iiis profeshon he had acquired a considerable fortune, which I was likely to be the Sole inheritor of. When I was about Eighteen, my Father brought home to our houle, a young Gentleman, who had been Some time at Brijlof for the recovery of his health. The deepest dejedlion of Spirits Seemed to overpower him. He was not able to mix with the gay and healthy part of the company, and it was wholly unfit for him to associate with the invalids, as their condition would only augment his disorder. He was continually our guest. If I was to describe his person to you, you would not wonder it made an impression on me. But his manner was far more engagirig. Ah 1 good God.! how amiable he was! My Father perfeduy idolised him: He won the hearts of all who Saw him, by the gentleness of his manners; our Society Seemed to recover him, more than the medicines he took. By degrees his extreme melancholy left him, and only the most engaging pensiveness remained. 
B 6 One 
12 EMMA; or, 
“One day, on my Speaking of the length of time he had been indisposed, I ashed him what had first occasioned his disorder? My question brought tears into his eyes, and his breast heaved with sighs; I in treated his pardon, and was going to leave the room, as not caring to be witness of his distress; a distress I felt too Sensibly to enable me to conceal my emotions. He begged me to stay. Saying, there was no Secret in his History; at least he wished not to have one from me; that he had been singularly unfortunate, though, he thanked Heaven, he hoped he might say undeservedly So. 1 will relate to you all he Said in his own vrords : — “At the desire of my Father, when I was about Twenty years of age, I paid my addresses to a young Lady of fortune in our neighbourhood. Though the proposal first came from my Father, yet I found, on a nearer acquaintance, I should put no force on my inclinations in marrying her. She was handsome, and accomplished. In a short time her company became very dear to me, and I loved her in preference to any woman I had ever Seen. She returned my. passion in Such a manner as convinced me, she had no objestion to my addresses, and a few months united us. We lived upon extreme good terms, though, I own, I 
was 
iaje Child Sorrow, 
was Sorry to See an unbounded passion for Public Places and High Life in my Wife; the more So as my taste vas rather domestic. My remonstrances, Itowever, were not well received, and I forbore them, as my fortune would allow of her living the life she liked. 
“Among other places, we visited Bath; there we became acquainted with a Gentleman whose disposition Seemed Suited to our inclinations; in short, we contradled a strict intimacy with him.. According to a promise we had engaged from him, he came to pay us a visit at my Seat in the country.. While he was with us I was Seized with a disorder which confined me along time. During my illness, my Wife •and I had Separate apartments. She left me that we had before occupied, and vent to one on that side the house which was reserved for company. One night I was awaked with a violent Smell of burning, which, on my sitting up in bed, increased So much as to leave no doubt that the house was on sire. I instantly started up, and ran into the passage; how was I shocked at feeing the flames burst forth from my wife’s room! I rushed towards the door in a state of despair, and the, moment I opened it, the whole floor Sunk in. seif prefervation urged my flight; 
with 
i ^ E M M A ^ or,, 
the utmost cfishculty I escaped with my life. My Wife, my Friend, and a Maidservant perished in this horrid con fiagration. My grief knew no bounds; I was reduced to the most deplorable state; I loathed life, and eeased not to wish earnestly for death.. 
“My Friends usedevery possible method to restore calm to my distradted mind; but their efforts Seemed lost upon me. My Father, at last, took upon him to tell me, that although the death of my Wife had been So dreadful, yet she merited not the Severe affliction I showed for her loss. He told me, he had good authority for what he advanced: She had but ill re paid my tenderness to her, by a shameful attachment to my treacherous Bath -- acquaintance; that their illegal intimacy had been very apparent during my illness, and that her miserable end was no more than a righteous judgement for her infidelity. This news contributed not to the ease of my grief; nay, I think, at first, it rather encreased than mitigated it. A love fo ill repayed, a friendship fo basely returned, preyed still more upon my spirits, my strength declined, and a long and painful illness ensued. For many weeks my recovery remained doubtful; at length, however, I grew more reconciled to my 
fate,. 
iihe Child of Sorrow, ij^ 
fate, and time abated the poignancy of my Sorrow. The indications of a decline induced me to come hither; and from your Society I have received more consolation, and more advantages, than from anything beside. 
“The confidence which this most amiable of Men placed in me by his recital, engaged my warmest gratitude. Tender and mutually friendly offices on either side. Soon created in us a reciprocal affection. He owned his partiality; I could not, nor did I wish to conceal mine. My Father loved us both too well to op pose an union on which our happiness depended. Preparations were made for our wedding. I was introduced, to and kindly received by his Family. The most felicitous prospedts opened to our vievr: Nothing Seemed to impede our wishes. Ah! how vain is the hope of human de pendance I — In one fatal moment our long promised Scheme of happiness was overturned; our hopes perifiied, and we were left to deplore our irremediable misfortunes! — The eve of the day, from whence we thought to date the commencement of our happiness, and from whence we began the measure of our woes, was' now arrived. Peace and harmony dwelled sh our minds, and mingled in our conversation. 
i6 E M M A; ort 
station. We were fondly projedling Schemes of future felicity, thinking ourselves Secure of the present moment, when our little party was broke up by a message to my destined Husband. He left the room, but on his remaining Some time absent; we began to grow uneasy. On inquiry, we found he had left the house, and had repaired to an inn, where he had been directed do go by the Messenger, on Some very important concern. Anxiety took possession of me, though I could not imagine any harm could happen, much less could I imagine what had really happened. — Ah! how dreadful vas the cause! 
“My Father hastened to him — Judge what he felt when he beheld his dear intended Son fenseless, in the arms of people wholly unknown to him. He eagerly flew to him, and as hastily inquired, what could reduce his Friend to Such a state His attention was called from my beloved Edmund to an object of horror, which presented itself to him; a Woman, meanly ■ appareled, and of a most ghastly countenance, was kneeling at his feet, wringing her hands in the strongest agonies imaginable. The dear Edmund began to show Some returning fense. My Father thanked Heaven for his recovery, and, casting his 
arms 
he Child Sorrow. 17 
arms around him, sought to learn from him the cause of this appearance. 
‘‘oh! my Father! my Friend! (exclaimed he, as Soon as Speech was lent shim,) lead me. Oh! lead me from this fatal — He was interrupted by the fpedtre at his feet. “Ah! leave me not (cried she, hardly able to articulate her sentence for sobs,) ah! leave me not, till you have pronounced my forgiveness; and yet can I hope for it? No; base, infamoufiy base, as I have been, can I dare to expect such 
godlike mercy 1 
Unhappy Woman, 
(said he,) foie cause of all my woe, thou hast undone me for ever — Yet, I do pardon thee; but never, never, let me behold thee more.” My Father, desirous of taking him from an object that had wrought in him So much distress, with the assistance of some of the Waiters, got him to our house. 
“Half dead with terror at their long stay, I stew into the room to the two people in the world the dearest to me. The agony of poor edmunds mind cannot be expressed. Sure never distress equalled mine! Too soon 1 learned the fatal truth — this wretched object was his Wife! In order to have an unlimitted intercourse with her infamous Paramour, they had been lb atro ciousty wicked as to Set sire to the house. 
Regard 
i8 
EMMA; cr. 
Regardless what became of the wretched Husband, they had the cruelty to leave him to his destiny. The Maidservant accompanied them in their flight: They retired to a town in the Netherlands where, for Some time, they lived as happily as their guilty consciences could allow. Soon, however, the wretch, for whom she had abandoned her Husband, became desirous of returning to England., V hich she opposed very much, but, after a Series of cruel treatment from him, he privately departed, leaving her totally unprovided with money. She had still, enfiaved by her passion for him, followed him, with unwearied assiduity, from place to place. At length She found he had crossed the Seas to his native country. She had for Some time Subsisted upon charity, and was indebted to the benevolence of Some people who were coming over, for her passage hither. 
“She could hear no tidings of her partner in guilt. Reduced to the last extremity, she took the resolution of inquiring after her injured Husband. She was informed he was going to be married; the news struck to her heart; but when she was likewise told of the deep asslidlion he had undergone for her fupposed death, she was resolved to rifle everything, rather than Suffer him to commit a crime, by marrying 
while 
l^he Child of Sorrow, 19 
while she was living. She travelled to Brijiol on foot, and had arrived only a few hours before she Sent to her unhappy hus band. What words can paint his horror at feeing her! Alas, what agonies Seized him! What did I not Suffer! His life was de spaired of many weeks. Almost reduced to the same deplorable condition, yet I never left him. As Soon as his health mended, it was necessary for us to part. I will not attempt to describe to you the Scene of our Separation; words are too weak to express what Surpasses all conception. 
“Life was for many years a burden to me, which I never failed to pray to be relieved from. All Society was irksome. I retired to a Small house my Father took for me farther in the country, nor for a long time associated with any human creature. How strange it is that I should thus be reduced to the utmost despair, when there might be a hope of our Seeing an end to our misfortunes. The life of this wretched woman was very precarious, but I could not look forward to the remotest comfort. All before me was a dreary, dark Scene. Ten years had I dragged through life in this deplorable state, when I received a letter which revived all my hopes, and bade me look up to happiness. A malignant 
fever 
20 EMMA; or, 
fever had broken the bands of Marriage, and left my ever dear Edmund once more at liberty; his wretched Wife breathed her last in his presence. My Edmund entreated to See me; he conjured me to hasten to him. Ah! how tender was his dear epis tle I how welcome to a heart which had Suffered too intensely the sharp arrow of Adversity! I hastily departed; every moment Seemed an age till I beheld him. Ah! with what eagerness did I rush to misery! My Edmund, dear and ever beloved, had taken the infectious disorder from a Wife doomed to be his destrudtion, and had yielded up his soul to his Maker the day before!, arrived. I rushed into the room'; I clasped his putrid corpse in my arms; ah! it was all that was left me of the most amiable of men! Fits of the most alarming nature Seized me; Heaven, however, in pity to my venerable Parent, permitted me to live; or, as I for many years thought, as a punishment for my resistance to its Divine Will. 
“Thus, my dear Lady Louisa., you have before you the History of an Old Maid; but whether fo from fate, or choice, is not determined. 1 have had offers both before and since my misfortunes. Till I knew my ill-fated Edmund., I was insen sible to the passion of Love,, and all my 
tender 
TA’ Child of Sorrow. 21 
tender affections were buried in the silent tomb with him. How, then, could I bestow my hand on any one? I looked on myself as wedded to his misfortunes, and Sole heir to his griefs.” 
Here ended, not without many tears shed on both sides, the melancholy detail of poor Mrs. Middleton. Ah! I will never deride a Single Woman again. How. do 1 know but keen anguish may have rent their hearts! Fell shsappointment may have torn their blossoms ere yet matured. But neither is the married life free from dif quitudes. I doubt, then, permanent hap piness is a phantom which is equally courted and equally deceives all mankind. Are we, then, born only to feel the iron hand of distress? But I am not qualified for a reasoner, and shall Soon wade out of my depth. 
Indeed, my dear Lady Cleveland I am uneasy on your account. don’t think me impertinent; but I am Sure you are very many degrees removed from happi ness. That truth I too plainly Saw while with you; your Letter, howevery confirms my fears; you Seem Sometimes as if you were just going to unbosom your griefs, then tear yourself away from the subject I wish you to enlarge upon. Good God! my amiable Emma if (you will permit me 
to 
2 2 E M M Aj o r, 
to call you by that familiar name,) why do I See you unhappy? What were the circumstances of that day on which you wrote to me, the return of which, never fails to make you more than ordinarily melancholy? Though I have been an inmate in your house for four months, and am likewise related to your i.ord, I am as totally a stranger to your story as if I had never Seen you. Pardon me, my dearest Friend, for the liberties I take. If it can give the Smallest relief to your heart to lay before me any of its anxieties, believe me faithful to your interests; my bosom shall be the Sacred repository of your Secrets : But do not Suffer my wishes to influence you. Bid me not ash, and the finger of Silence shall Seal my lips. 
Adieu! my ever dear and amiable Friend, Louisa Stretton. 
LETTER IV 
t0 Lady Louisa Stretton. 
Y dearest Louisa., I shed floods of tears over your Letter; both, Town, on Mrs. mudletovd^ account, and that of your Friend, your Emma, But pardon me, 
my 
Lhe Child Sorrow. 2jf 
my Love; another time, perhaps, but now 1 cannot relate to you what has caused the bosom of the hapless Writer of this, to heave with the sighs of anguish. Even at the request oi my Louisa I cannot, I dare not tear opem those wounds which are not yet healed — > The repetition would harrow up my most tender feelings, and awaken Sensations that would deprive me of my peace for ever. Ah! then, urge me not, I beseech you — Sulpend your opinion of me, if possible — Do not think hardly of me — Too much have I Suffered — And do I not still Suffer, from the idea of being hardly thought of, though undeservedly? — All this is an scnigma, not yet to be revealed. Believe me, I would, if possible, lay before you every action, every anxiety of my heart; but I cannot bear to render myself unworthy of your friendship, your esteem; which I certainly should do, as the relating past events would revive in my soul Sentiments, which inexorable Fate has long since consigned to oblivion, and which 1 should be now criminal to indulge. I hope, my Dear, you will be Satisfied with my reasons; circumstanced as I am, 1 cannot al otherwise. 
L am amazed you have had no intelligence yet of Lord Stretton; riikewise wonder he lias not endeavoured to draw you into a correspondence. ' Were I in his situation, I 
itv 
24 EMMA; of, 
think I should have contrived Some method of that Sort; but he knows best. 
Will you excuse this very short epistle I know you will, for one reason of it, — my poor little Girl is much indisposed — I am extremely uneasy on her account; I hope, however, the fears of a tender Mother exaggerate the danger. Adieu, my dear Louisa. Pardon the inconsistencies of your Friend, 
Emma Cleveland, 
LETTER V 
Lo Lady Cleveland. 
I HAVE met with an adventure, occasioned by an accident, of which I mean to make my dear Emma acquainted. But first let me inquire after my Sweet little playfellow; I long much to know how she is; and that 1 may have the earlier intelligence, 1 shall Send this off express to Cleveland place, Now for the adventure. 
Yesterday, accompanied by Mrs. Middleton.) I rambled into the Park. In deep conversation we had roved a considerable way, and had just got beyond the limits of my — or rather Lord strettoes domains, when our ears were Saluted by a great outcry, and we Saw a post-chaise iv^st over. C turned. 
he Child of Sorrow. 25 
turned, and broke almost to pieces. Fortunately Fhomas was with us; he stew to the alsistance of the distressed Travellers. Nay, we all stew to give what help was in our power. In the crushed vehicle were two Gentlemen, one of whom received very little hurt, but the other Soon found he had broken one of his legs. I was almost terrified to death; but Mrs. Middleton., who is possessed of great presence of mind, vas the only person of use upon the occasion. She ordered Lhomas to take a gate off the hinges, and, by stripping the men of their coats made a Sort of beci to convey the unfortunate Stranger to the house. 
The Gentleman who vas least hurt, Seemed most frighted; by which remark I do not mean to insinuate the Smallest degree of cowardice or weakness in him; I mean his apprehensions for his Companion; who, however, bore his accident with the greatest fortitude imaginable. 
We helped to make the cavalcade to my house, where the wounded Man was put immediately to bed. He made a thousand apologies for the trouble he vras giving; but the anxiety of his Friend was too great to allow him to be So ceremonious. I bid him not Say a word about So trifling an affair as the assistance we were So happy to afford him, as I should think him very inhuman if he vol. I. C would 
26 
EM M Ai 
or. 
would not have bestowed the same on me, in the Same exigencies. — He paid me a polite compliment, and we left them, to send a Melfenger in all haste for a Surgeon. 
By the appearance they make, and by their deportment, I am Sure they must be Gentlemen. I hope they will let me know Something about them; they have a Servant, ^ who is a Swijs. Our poor Patient is extremely genteel, and what Some people would style handsome — But his Companion — I think I never beheld So engaging a figure. There is a Solemnity in his manner tcmne very touching. Their names, I find, are Neville and Conway: The first is the unfortunate Hero of the piece. Mr. Denton., the Surgeon, Says, the fradlure is of the most favourable kind; they have nothing to dread but a fever, of which they must be cautious. I have deputed Charlton head nurse — I know her to be very carefuh I don’t know whether I should style her head nurse neither, for Mr. Conway seems to take that task upon himself; he has hardly left his Friend, except to dine with us this day. If I gain any intelligence who or what my Guests are, I will not fail to inform you of it. Mean time, forgive the inquisitiveness of my last, which .shall never again Seek to revive in you ideas you wish forgotten. Yours faithfully, 
.Louisa S t r e t t o .isr ... 
he Child Sorrow. 27^ 
LETTER VI 
ST(? Charles Bevill, at Paris. 
An accident, my dear bevili has done that for your Friend, which all the boasted wisdom of human natsire could not have atchieved in a better'manner; Some few exceptions, however, are to be made, as you shall hear anon. 
You remember the conversation I held with you at Paris. My Sentiments you treated as outre — and you joined with Edward to dissuade me from a Scheme on which I assured you my whole happiness depended, but which you both thought too romantic ever to Succeed. 
You could not, however. See my fitua tipn in the light I did. I certainly have more refinement than you, aye, and delicacy too — But I did not expect less in Conway than in myself. I agree with you, that I am not a whit happier for the finc ness of my feelings; but thrown out of common track of life as I am, were 1 to aft in the common way I must undoubtedly be wretched. 
Can it be called a very reasonable wish for a Man to form, to desire to be acquainted with what kind of Partner he is ' ' C 2 to 
2 8 E M M Aj orto 
pass his life? saith, I think not — Now that is a knowledge which I could never gain by being introduced into the presence of Lady Lcuifa Stretton., as the Man des tined to be her Husband. The awkward iiess and embarraffmcnt of my situation would throw a reserve over her actions, and perhaps I should be the only peribn in the world who would be the greatest Stranger to her reatsentiments: For these reasons, then, I wished, by Some method, to get into her cbmpany, without her being apprized of my return to England. I fell upon various Schemes; Some, which I tiiought tolerably feasible, you absolutely overthrew : Others, on mature consideration, I myself rejected. Conway would not unite with me in one I had planned, and thought the most likely to Succeed of any. My last resolution ended thus; To go down to my old Friend, Lord bel ford., and finally to abide by his advice and counsel. Accordingly I Sat off with my Friend Conway., who, by the way, has again fallen into the same dejeflion of Spirits we began to think he had overcome — But more of that another time. 
1 thought it advifeable, in cafe of accidents, which Sometimes attend the Great, to leave Lord Stretton at Dover, and only bring the n^me of Neville with me. St. Pierre 
had 
The Child c/'sorrow. 29 
had a padlock clapped on his lips, by the fears of my eternal displeasure should he discover me. Thus Secured, we Sat off, as I .before said. A wild goose hunting, you would call it. But proceed we to the Sequel of our expedition, and the commencement of, my adventures v/itk the Heroine of Stretton Cajile. As the Devil would have it, or perhaps a more friendly Agent, our chaiss broke down, and as Nobility must always have the precedence, my Vforship fell. first, with the. whole weight of poor Conway., and his misfortunes, upon my left leg, which, like the sturdy oak, chose rather to break than bend.. I really believe Conway would have gladly lost ■ his life to have stived mine from sustaining any injury; but that, .as ste says, would be paying a poor compliment, to part with what he has no use for, and is heartily tired of. As for my own particui lar, I thought myself amply repaid when ' I received assistance, bestowed in the most polite and humane manner, from Some Strangers, whom Heaven Sent for that purpose— — certainly would have compounded for a much worse accident, to gain admittance into the house of Lady Loiiifa Stretton. Yes, as Sure as you are alive, I am now propped up in a bed bet longing to my intended Wife — And if C 3 her 
30 
,, E M M A; (5r, 
her internal merit answers the external appearance, I fancy I shall have very little to complain of. Conway has been teasing me this hour to leave off writing, to consider how improper and prejudicial it may be to one in my circumstances. — I find my ielf rather fatigued — You will then ex cuse the brevity of this ■ — Consider, I am tied by the leg, but am as well as can be expected for one in my condition. My accident happened abolit a fortnight ago. I cannot proceed for the importunities of my I richti. 
Adieu, dear bevill Stretton, alias Neville. 
LETTER VII 
^0 r C H A R L E S B E V I L L Paris. 
I Have been honoured with a visit from the Lady of the Mansion. Surely Fortune favoured me highly. I find myself exceedingly attached to her; but likewise find I Shall be mifeiable, if I do not possess her heart as well as her hand. What do 1 Say? Isier hand 1 will never receive, unless I am convinced she loves me. I am more delicate than ever, since I have Seen her. Conway 
he Child Sorrow. 31 
way wishes to have me reveal myself to ' her, but I am determined as yet I will not, since fortune has given me the opportunity of concealing from her knowledge who I am. However, what I am determined on in future is still a Secret to my own heart. Things .must, for the present, take their own course. Edward has generally Spent Some time every day with Lady Louisa., which I have absolutely forced him to do. With his goodwill he would never quit my room, 
I furnished him with a fable to amuse the Ladies, concerning who we were, c?r., I have repeatedly asked his opinion of her: He Speaks in her commendation, but yet Says, he is So poor a judge with respedl tc» the qualities of women, that he wishes to be Silent. “But (cried I) I want you to de velope her heart and Sentiments.” — “’tig impossible, (he replied); no one can discover the Secret meanders of a woman’s heart. I have been deceived myself, and I might deceive you.” — He then sighs, and tears fill his eyes — then adds, “1 wish to Pleaven you would fall on Some method to discover yourself — Already you have been here above three weeks — What can you propose to yourself.?” — I have, I doubt, got myself into a hobble, but I cannot help it now. I must trust to chance to bring me honourably off. 
C 4 If 
32 E M M A i or. 
If I am ascertained os the possession of Louifd.%' heart, I shall be very happy that her Father has united her fate to mine, And yet — do nor, Bevilf laugh at me — So whimsical, So inconsistent is the heart of man, and particularly mine, that! know not whether I should be Satisfied, or not, even with that certainty. I hardly know what I would wish. Should I, as I am, touch her heart, and kindle Soft Sentiments within it — Should this Suggestion arise, that she ought not to Suffer the pafficn of Love to enter her bofom.for any but Lord Stretton — I doubt I could not bear to be a rival to myself. 1 know you will blame me; I do myself, hut I cannot conquer prejudices. 1 admire her Conversation — Her person is as hancl some as I wish it to be — Fler Servants, in particular her housckeeper, who has been the Superintendant of my Chamber, Speak of her with the highest respedf, and relate instances of her ogodness, which, though it increases my admiration, increases my ap prehensions likewise. 
1 ashed Mrs. Charleton., the other day, “how it happened, that with her lady’s per son, fortune, and accomplishments, she was not yet disposed of in marriage? ” She answercd, “No doubt her i.adyship might have married, but that she was under engagements to a Gentleman abroad.” — 
. “May 
Lhe Child c/sorrow. 33 
“May I presume to ask who that happy man is ?” — “He is a relation os my lady’s, (she answered,) to whom she is bequeathed, as I may Say, by the Will of my late Lord.” — “Perhaps, then, the heart of the young Lady is not in the match?” — ■ “Indeed, Sir, I do not know.” — “You are discreet, I See, Mrs. charletonp — ''^ My Lady, Sir, never has made me Confidant of her Secrets, and if she had, I am Sure you are too much of the Gentleman to wissi I should betray them.” — “I am charmed with you prudence : But it is not from idle curiossty 1 ventured to ash you. ' I am interested in it. My gratitude for the civilities I have received, and the manner of them, have attached me extremely to your Lady. Her peision has created in me Sentiments, to which I was a Stranger when I entered this house. You Say site is bequeathed, by the Will of her Father, to this Relation — Can.' not she then rejedf him if her heart disapproves, or if Some other should gain her affections?” ?” — “would lose the prin 
noc 
cipal part of her fortune should sh comply with the Will.” “So tiien, tins Relation is likely to be very happy with a Wife, who must accept him, or be a beggar. What Siind of a man is he?” — “I never Saw him. He has Spent most part of his life abroad. My old Lord Stretton was a C 5 very 
34 EMMA, ' or, very proud man, and could not bear to have the title unsupported : A union he thought between the present Lord and his Daughter would answer that purpose, therefore lest her her fortune on this condition; if she re fuses him the estate goes unconditionally to him.” — Is not this circumstance a great mortification to ladydmyh.?” — “As I Said before. Sir, I am not in my lady’s confidence. I doubt not she will adl with propriety in this case, as in all others, and Heaven Send her happy 1 ” 
Is not this a mark of her prudence? Too many, in her Situation, would lay open their hearts, that their Servants might read its Sentiments. I hope, however, she has Some Friend, to whom she communicates all the Soft effusions of her Souk I should have no opinion of her, should I find her bosom locked up with cold Suspicion, and hoarding all its griefs and joys within its own confines. Friendship opens and expands the heart. A Sincere and worthy Friend is in the place of a Second conscience. There is a Lady here, who perhaps possesses all the Secrets of this prudent girl. I ought to think myself happy that she has chosen Such a companion. She is a person in years, and has met with Some heavy misfortunes. Louijd.% attachment to her, and the deference 
The Child ^soi^row. 35 
rence she pays her, makes her character more estimable in my eyes. 
I wish I could anticipate time, and bring things to a conclusion. I beg you, my dear Bevilf to forward to me those papers which, by the careleffness of St, Pierres wtre left at my lodgings in Paris: I want to have them much. I will take Some opportunity of delivering them into the hands of Lady Louisa, I doubt she has but a Sad opinion of me; that is, not of this me, as Sofia Says, but of t’other me, whom she thinks still abroad. Here her Father has been dead almost six months, and she has received no news from this haughty fellow, who is destined to be the maker of her fate. This is all against me. 
You know me well estough to be convinced, that her fortune will not bias me; and I shall make no Scruple of Setting my .uncle’s Will aside without the help of the Chancellor; a good fire will do that at any time. I look on myself as bound by the stridlest ties to marry her: But if there is any constraint on her part, I am undone for ever. 
You will hardly find out what I would be at; and truly I am as much at a loss myself. I am consistent in nothing but my attachment to you, to V hom I must ever be the 
faithful o' 
5 T R E T T o NC 
6 

36 EMMA; d’r, 
LETTER VIII 
Lo Lady Cleveland. 
I don’t know that I have it in my power to tell you much more concerning my guests than when I wrote lash I have only once been in company with the sick man, which was this day; - the other I have Seen every day, but can learn but little from him; he Seems Taciturnity itself; yet has his silence Something more prevalent in it than the oratory os many men would have. Mr. Neville., I find, is going to take the possession of an estate left him by a distant Relation; they, lately came from Paris \ I wished to ask if they were acquainted with Lord Stretton. Is it not Surprising, this conduct of his? What strange neglect! Surely I am not worth his Smallest consideration. He knows beggary must be my portion should I resuse him; but let me tell him, he knows me not, if he thinks I can tamely put up with insult; beggary would be an enviable state to that, or even, I think, to what I feel at this momenti 
thank you, my dear Lady Cleveland for the relief you gave my heart concerning my little Harriet. Sweet Girl, how much I love her! 
I find Mr. Neville has been making Some inquiries about me, of Charleton; I wonder 
much 
L'he Child i?/'sorrow, gy 
much what should induce him. Charkton begged my pardon for mentioning my Engagement to Lord Strethon\ they certainly do not know that formidable man; his idea haunts me for ever; I dread every hour that goes by, that brings the time nearer vvdten 1 ocpecl to See him. I wonder what kind of a man he is, whether he is like either of these men; not that 1 think there is any comparison between them. But why do I talk of comparing men? What have I to do with any man, him excepted to whom my hand is devoted \ and he is perhaps the only man who would treat me with indifference and neglect. Well, be it So; I have no remedy; I am his .Sole property, and mu St bar wish everything he pleases to instid:. I am peevish, my dear Emma beyond expression. Hang the man! would to Heaven I could drive him out of my head! But I will tease you no longer. Adieu. 
Louisa Stretton. 
LETTER IX 
Lo Lord Stretton. 
HAT, in the name of everything reasonable, are you about, Stretton F You will refine and Spin awayyour' 
happiness, 
38 EMMA; or, 
happiness, take my word for it. The maddest Scheme, Sure, that ever mad headed Peer engaged in I What the Devil do you propose to yourself, to be So long in the house of your mistress thus in disguise? Can any good come of it ^ Believe me, I fear nor. Conway would have acted with three times your prudence. Whatever you may think of your lucky accident, and Such romantic stuff, I shall not be Surprised if you think it, one day or other, the worst accident in the world. Would to Heaven your crazy machine had lasted to Lord belford.s\ he might, by his counsels, have helped out the crazy Master. 
I shall Send your papers herewith; God knows what you intend doing with them! Your Sublime Ideas have not yet thought fit to communicate their intentions to your Judgement, I suppose. I wish you happiness, and all success in your affairs, but I think you ought to employ Some one in them who is blessed with common-sense, that being an article which, I own, I think your Lordship not a little deficient in. You will blame my freedom, perhaps; I cannot help it if I differ from you in this instance; but this I know, the world, the world, my dear Friend, will be of my side. 
supposenovv, for argument sake, that the capricious Deity, who is for ever falling 
'soul 
The Child Sorrow. 39 
soul on Some one’s property, should inspire you Dulcinea with disenchant for Edward? No impossible Supposition, that Why the Devil, if somebody’s bones must be broke, in order to get a Seat in the house, why could you not contrive to tumble on him Then, you know, he would have been tied by the leg, and you would have all those opportunities of ingratiating yourself with la Dame du Place that he now has, if he avails himself of them; but for you to break your limbs, in order to limp into your mistrcss’s affections, certainly is one of the most outre pieces of politics that ever moonstruck Wight attempted to achieve. I am afraid you will make a lame businefs of it. Pardon me for being jocular. 
Adieu, my dear Lord. Let me know how you proceed in your operations. a pro pos.i suppose I come over and persqnate Lord Stretton? You will want him most confoundedly by and by, and how the .Devil you will come by him I know not, unless I help you out. Serioussy, if I can be of any Service, command me, since you know I am never happier than when I can oblige my Friends, among whom you have the precedence in the affections of, your devoted 
Charles Bevill. 
present my tenderest regards to Conway. 
LET 
40 
EMMA; er. 
LETTER X 
To Sir Charles B e V i L L 
jh, Bevilll you have opened new veins of torture in my Soul. I am convinced — I owt Louisa— — as truly, as Surely, she loves Conway. What then is lest for me? Nothing, but to resign all pretensions to her fortune, unite their hands, and retire to the bosom of my friends. 
I have not yet Spoke to Conway about ft; I only am to blame; his sosr, his tender manner has stole upon her heart, and I have been the cause of all. 
When you write again, don’t be too Severe upon me; I cannot bear your raillery; 1 am cut to the Soul; I cannot write. I have requested the favour of her company this asternoon. If I am capable, I will make the important discovery on which must depend my happiness or rnisery. But why do I admit it as a doubt f I would not accept her hand, though all the riches and honours of the world accompanied it. 
IS I can recall my Scattered Senses, I will relate to you the Sum of a conversation, that passed the other day in my dressing-room, i have every day since my last, been honoured with a visit from the Ladies; the 
day 
L'he Child o/'sorrow. 41 
day besofe yesterday Lady Louisa Said she understood we had lately been in Paris; and, with Some hesitation, desired to know if we had there been acquainted with, or heard of, a Lord Stretton. I own 1 was not prepared for the question; but 1 took upon me to be spokesman, and ansvvered her, I had no acquaintance with Such a person. “That was very odd, (Sne Said;) I should have thought a man of his lordship’s quality must have been known.” — “Is he related to your Ladyship ?” I ashed. “Yes, (Sne answered)) distant one.” — “I think, (Said Conwayf) I have heard of Such a Nobleman, and that he was to have taken passage for England when we did.” — “But he did 
o 
not, Sir ?” ashed she eagerly. “No, that he did not, ” I answered in as a great hurry, for fear Conway should discover more than I wished him. After this, Lady Louisa bore very little share in the conversation for Some time. I stniled, and Said, “Your Ladyship is very thoughtful; may I be allowed to guess your reason for being So.? 1 fancy Lord Stretton is the Subject of your meditations.” — “You are very right, \dix.nevhle\ Lord engages a part of my thoughts, 
I own.” — “He is a happy man, I am Sure.” — “That you know, (replied she, Sweetly Smiling,) depends wholly on the nature of my thoughts. But .Since my 
tluniting 
42 E ‘M M A 5 or, 
thinking of him made me grave, let us at present banish him from our conversation, as, I dare Say, he is’ not now thinking of me.” — “I dare Say he is, (Said I, looking tenderly at her,) 1 should fancy he can think of nothing else; I am Sure he can find no Suit jed; So delightful.” — You are very polite, ” was her answer. Much, you will Say, could not be gathered from this; you will think, too, I have not cause to be jealous of Conway. But hear alf andjhen let jujlice hold the scale. I can just hobble about in my crutches. This morning I had a mind to walk about the gallery to view the pictures 
; I was 'standing. 
and admiring a very 
fine piece of Litian'^., when I heard the Ladies enter a room near me. Lady Louisa Said to Mrs,. Middleton., her Companion, “Have I not reason, my dear Madam, to be dissatisfied with Lord Strettan? Does he use me with that politeness which might engage a tender return on my side.? Why does he leave me thus exposed to dangers ?” — “I own, my Dear, (returned Mrs, Middleton.,) Lord Stretton does not act in the most tender manner by you; but most likely he supposes you fixed with Some of your Relations. I Smile wshen you Say you are exposed to dangers.” — “Ah! Mrs. Middleton, is it then impossible that one’s heart may not be in danger.?” — “I understand 
iihe Child c/'sorrow. 43 
stand you, my dear Louisa; he is very amiable.” — “Who is amiable, Mrs. middleton— — ^ ‘‘ Mr. Neville., is he not V— — “! you frighted me to death; I vow, I did not know what you were going to Say.” — “Oh! (Said Mrs. Middleton, laughing,) then I have found you out: The pensive Canway has sighed himself into your favour.” — “Would to Heaven! (Said Louisa)) Stretton was just Such a man; then I should find no difficulty in fulfilling my father’s Will. But my penchant is only transient. My duty will always be stronger than my inclination.” 
Here you will allow there is proof enough for a jealous man to build a Castle of Torture on. Ah! Louisa., I cannot trust to duty alone. I shall never be happy while my uncle’s Will remains in force; yoii plainly See she is prepoffeffed'against me; and I think I may add, it is as plain she is prejudiced in favour of Conway. Well, be it So; — It is much better I should know her Sentiments now, than that I should learn them too late. Thus you See I do not altogether yet condemn myself. Let me Seek comfort Somewhere, for heaven’s Sake 
if I am wrong. 
“The flattering error cease to prove. Ah 1 let me be deceiv’d.” 
Ido 
44 E M M A j or, 
I do not think you can be of any Service to me here; — I shall want your company next winter at Naples as I have a presentiment that I shall return thither. Indeed, that will be the most prudent step, as my fortune is too Small to Support my title with any degree of dignsty here; while there, I shall shine with an eclat. 
Adieu! my dear Amis you knew all I felt, you would not be So very satyri cai on your friend, 
St R E T T 0n. 
L E T T E R XL 
To Lady cuevelandi 
I Have hardly power left to lay before my dear Emma, the adventures of this day. Good Heaven! what a shock have I received! But let me lead to it with Some degree of method.. 
1 was paying my daily visit to the Gentlemen, my guests, immediately after dinner. Mr. Neville looked more melancholy than 1 had ever observed even Mr. Conway to be.. After Some conversation of no consequence in life, Mr, am Said, “Will you pardon me, Madam, for having deceived you the other day, when I Said, I did not know 
Lord 
Child Sorrow. 45 
Lord Stretton? Alas! I know him but too well.” Judge, my Dear, at my astonishment. “For god’s Sake! Sir, ( Said I, greatly perturbated,) what is it you mean Why, if you knew my Lord, should you have denied it? I cannot See what purpose it can have answered.” — “Nor I neither, (Said he, sighing.) But before I explain mysels more Sully, let me thus, and thus, destroy every vestige of an authority, unjustly given, to one unworthy, as well as unwilling to receive it.” While he was Speaking, he was tearing in pieces Several papers; 
And now, (continued he, with a mournful air) dear and amiable Louisa., you are at liberty to make that election your heart approves of, without any apprehensions from an unfortunate man, who is Sufficiently wretched in having caused you the least tinea siness.” 
i entreated him, with the greatest ear nestness, to Solve this strange mnigma. [ knew not what to think; I was half dis tratsted. “Ah! (said he,) is it then neces fary for me to declare to you, that I am that Sirettm.^ whose appearance.you So much dreaded; that man whorn your Father, from a too great partiality, gave an unjust right over his Child; but who was incapable of reaping So base an advantage” Amazement Sealed my lips, I continued silent a 
long 
46 E M M A; or, 
long time. At last I Said, “Good God! why did not your Lordship apprise me before, who you was “Would to Heaven, (cried he,) i could have concealed it now; I have been too precipitate; I intended to have left your house before I had discovered myself; but my impatience to make you free, hurried me on to the dis closure I have now made. I wisned to resign all pretensions to your fortune, since your heart alone could make it a desirable object; to me; that heart which is not, cannot be mine. No, Madam, the man who cannot form your happiness, shall never impede it. And witness for me Heaven, that while I love with an honest and ardent passion as ever rendered the human heart wretched, I would not for the universe receive your hand.” He could not proceed; his voice was choked with sighs. 
I hardly know what became of myself; I trembled like an aspin ieaf, and Sunk down, just fainting, into my chair. Mrs. Middleton Said something, what I Scarcely heard. At length, a stood of tears Seasonably gushed from my eyes. “Ah! Madam, (Said Lord Stretdonf) what am I to think of these tears Has my method of rendering you free from the least restraint offended you f Behold me, ready to do all in my povrer to make you happy. No Sacrifice, I have 
plainly 
The Child Sorrow. 47 
plainly proved, is too great for me to offer; and believe me, the only happiness that now can result to me, will be to bestow your hand on that man who will make you as blessed as I shall never cease to wish you.’* When I could articulate a Sentence, I Said, “I am infinitely obliged to your Lordship for the goodness of your intentions, but you have failed in the means; 1 will not force a hand on your acceptance which you have So peremptorily rejected; but, let me affure you, you know not the value of the heart you have thus given away.” — “Ah! Lady Louisa., ’twas from the conviction of that heart not being mine.” — That, my Lord, (Said 1, rising)) a point that must be argued hereafter. 1 am nor, at present. Sufficiently myself to hold a farther conversation. You have taken a most extraordinary step, indeed. You must give me leave to retire, and endeavour to recover from the greatest shock I ever Sustained.” 
I hurried to my room; tears still continued to relieve me; I shut myself in; I could not bear the sight of any one. 
Good God! what am I to do! He Says I am free; no, he has deprived me of that little freedom I ssattered myself I once had. He has resigned his fortune to me; can I keep it? Is it not incumbent on me to give k to him again But he will not accept it. 
1 shall 
48 EMMA; or, 
I shall never, never Sorget these words, Twculd noti for the uniterfe, receive your hand Ah! good God! what have I done, what acl of imprudence committed, that he is So violently bent against Sulfilling the Will of my Father? Ah! he may pretend, but he cannot know what Love is. Why did he undertake So strange, So wild a Scheme? And yet is there not generosity in it? But would a generous man wound a heart, by heaping Such obligations cn it? Again, how can he tell 1 do not prefer him, or at least shall not, in time? Kow can he take upon him to assert my heart is not, never ■ can be his? Am I then rejected, Scorned, by the man who wasbcund, by the strongest ' ties, to protect me? 1 thought my Father cruel and unjust, is not Lord Stretton more jb? I am totally at a loss, my dear Lady Cleveland., in what manner to act, or to whom to apply to for advice. As you Say', Lord, Cleveland w’ould not care for taking • the trouble upon himself; but what could he do if he was kind enough to undertake my cause?? could not oblige Lord 
ssretto?i to 
full 
engagements which were 
never meant to bind him. He was always free to accept or rejetst; he has chosen the latter; will not that be fuss dent in the 9f the world, too apt to take things upon trust, and judge from appearances, to condemn 
he Child Sorrow. 49 
demn me? Will it not be Said, that the rejection was caused by Some imprudence on my side? My charafler will be called in question, and he will be extolled as the most generous and noble minded of men; and the Sagacious multitude will shake their heads, and hint, and wink away my reputation. 
Lord Stretten might entitle himself to my warmest gratitude; he might, in time, do more; but he has overthrown everything. He has a mean opinion of me. Good God! what levity has he discovered in my behaviour, to justify him in the idea of the impossibility of my heart ever being his? Does he suppose I object to him merely became the Will of my Father bestowed me on him? Is it to be treated thus that I have been So cautious, So circum spcd: in my conduct— — apprehensive lest I should be too Sensible of the merit of Some other Man, that I have kept my eyes from wandering, determining in myself that my heart should accompany my hand? — Have I not endeavoured to esteem him during a six months neglect?? he may to the world appear generous — to me he is not So. At best he is a capricious Man, and studies to make himself and every one else uneasy. Moii: effectually he has suc vol. I. D ceeded 
EMMA; ot, 
needed with me; for I think till now, I never knew what uneasiness meant. Adieu, 
Most truly yours, 
Louisa S t r e t t o n. 
LETTER XII 
0 Lady .Cleveland. 
HAT a strange man is this Lord Stretton i The agitation of his mind has thrown him into a fever. Mr. Conway is almost distrafted. I never Saw a human Creature more distressed. What a violent dispofition this Cousin of mine has. I know not what to do with him. Do you know, if Lshould take him at his word, I should not leave him a thousand a year, that being atll he has, except my father’s estate? And she gives all this up, rather than marry me. It may be genero shty; but, all things considered, it is not prudent in him, nor just to me. As I Said before, the World will judge, and you may be Sure its censures will fall on your Friend. It is plain. Lord Stretton is of a very jealous disposition — But of whom can he entertain suspicion? Of Mr. Conway? I m Sure I do not know that my eyes ever 
fixed 
'Lhe Child of Sorrow. 51 
fixed on him in Lord strettod.s presence. 
I own to you, as I have before, that Mr. Conway is the most engaging figure I ever beheld; but that is no argument I love him. Heaven forbid I should! But if Lord Stretton will never believe he is beloved till he is thought to be handsomer than Mr. Conway., I fear he will ever remain in doubt. Are only Beauties to be beloved? If So, I have but little chance. He has but a poor opinion of his mental part, if he places his Sole dependance on his outside. I declare I thought Mr, Neville agreeable — But Lord Stretton has taken great pains to lose ground. 
But still, though I am angry with him, I pity him, for he is really very ill. Had not that been the case, I presume he would have taken his leave, even if he had been forced to be conveyed in a litter. I have not Seen him since the discovery — But have been very pundlual in my inquiries after his welfare. 
I intend prevailing on Mrs. Middleton to talk with him, when he is able to bear conversation. She may, perhaps, induce him to think better of me. He must have heard Something to my prejudice; though what, as I am totally ignorant of having done anything to excite the malevolence of the world, I am equally at a loss to re d 2 suit; 
52 E M M A j cr, 
suit: He ought to let me know what he sees amiss in my conduct,, what he may have heard to my disadvantage. 
I do not think it is worth while to Send this Scrap of paper, 1 will therefore, leave it open — Something may transpire by and by. 
Mrs. Middleton has been admitted to the presence of Lord Stretton. She used every argumient in nature to prove to him that my heart has ever been free from the Slightest attachment to any Man. ' She enlarged, with her accustomed'tenderness, on the whole tenor of my conduct; and Said So many things in my praise, as made me blush when she repeated them, and which would be utterly imposhble for me to tell you. 
All she could get from him, was the deep fense of his own demerit, and the fatal prejudice, which I must necessarily have taken against a man, who had been made the Sole arbiter of my fortune — He blamed himself for ever introducing Mr. Conway to my acquaintance; it certainly could net be imputed a fault in me, if I discovered those perfedions in him, which endeared his character to all that knew him. His only wish was now to See me happy, which if she (Mrs. Middletonf) 
thought 
The Child of Sorrow, 
thought could be effected by an union with Mr. Conway his earnest endeavours should not be wanting. 
Mrs. Middleton freely owned she had heard, me say, I thought Mr. Conway the handsomest man I had ever Seen; nay, once she believed I went So far as to Say, I wished Lord Stretton ]u Such a one; but that was no argument I was in love with him, but rather proved my resoliition of fulfilling my engagements with his Lordship at all hazards. 
A common mind, (he Said,) might be content with those assurances, and the good opinion which I deserved; but imfortu aately he had too nice a way of thinking j 
r.p wish'^rl fa aaftpst: mv onrl 
aaia.tr *, ^ W ^xlj axv'vtfa W x.a.’v/v' vaxav 4 ^ t 
tyre. — “And I will venture to affure your Lordship, (interrupted Mrs., Middietonf) that no man, besides yourself, ever will. She will always think herself bound to be your Wife, and therefore will never permit her heart to feel an improper partiality for any other. I doubt, my Lord, you are one of those who refine too much, to taste that portion of felicity which this world affords us; which is certainly wrong, as it affects ourselves only, but it is ungrateful to that Providence which deals out those bleshngs to us, with a Scanty hand, perhaps, as we may thinlc, and imperfect; but be d 3 cause 
54 EMMA; or, 
cause it is not given to ns to be as happy as Angels, yttt are not to reject what will place us in the class of happy Mortals.” This, and a great deal more, she urged, for a long timie, in vain; at last he Said, he would not have me look on myself as bound to him, since he had released me from every engagement; it was unjust in my Father to deprive me of the natural right of choice; that, as for him, he would bind himself to marry no other woman; and that, should I hereafter feel for him those Sentiments he should be happy to inspire, it would be the highest felicity to him to be assured of it; but that he would restore to me that free agency I ought to poffess; and I did not do him justice, if I thought he meant to lay an undue claim to my gratitude, by destroying those Papers; he had no sinister view in his proceedings; it had ever been his fixed determination not to keep them, but he had been precipitated into an impolite manner of acting: He entreated her to obtain my pardon for the uneasiness he had given me, which he never meant to do : He likewise Said, he loved Mr. Conway So much, that he could not feel any resentment against him; he should highly condemn himself if he were capable of dissiking anyperson I should honour with my affection. 
Mrs.. 
lihe Child of S o R row. ff 
Mrs. Middleton assured him he labouredf’ under an error. No allegation of my being attached to Mr. Conway could be charged, - any more than .my Saying, I thought him handsome and amiable. His Lordship was a man of too good sense, to admit the impossibility of a man not being beloved, because we see, or have owned we have Seen, a handsomer man. But, (continued she,) I will leave you to your re stedlions, my Lord; and v/hemyou consider how hardly the world will judge of Lady Louisa on your account, I think you will be Sorry for having, nearly, left her to its censures. 
This afternoon a most respedlful Message was brought me from Lord Strettorfy to request my company; I was determined he should not have my negligence to complain of. So returned an answer in the same terms. I approached the door, which was a jar; I pushed it gently open, and just heard Mr. Conway Say, “There is nothing, my dearest Lord, I would not do to give you pleasure; with joy would I lay down my life for you, but that, as I have often Said, is of no estimation with me; embitter it not still more, by further urging the request you have made. I never, never can comply, even if it was as you have Said. 
D 4 No, 
56 E M M A; 
No, every Sentiment of passion is totally extinct, all my stock of love exhausted on an Ingrate, whose perfidy hashendered my existence a curse.” — He Seemed unable to proceed, from the agitation of his heart. I would not give Lord Stretton time to reply, but made Some little noise at the door, to apprise him of my entrance. 
A few days illness has altered him exceedingly. Upon my word, my heart Smote me, when I Saw the ravages it had made in his countenance; yet is it not all owing to his caprice ^ 
I hardly know how matters are Settled between us; there were Some tears shed on all sides. My Spirits were very low on the occasion. I begged him to do all in his power to recover his health; I believe he promised he would. As I Say, I Scarcely know to what determination we are come, but I hope I made him Sensible that I would never consent my father’s Will should be So much opposed, as to permit the Estate to go from the Title. If, on a third offer of myself, I am again rejected, my plan is fixed, to enter into a compromise with him: I will take the personal part, and leave the real estate for him; I shall then have about thirty thousand pounds, and he will have twelve thousand a year. 
My 
l’he Child Sorrow. ^7 
My curiosity, I doubt, is an illaudable one, but I long to know who this Ingrate is, that has made this poor fellow’s life a curse. Perhaps ■ too I wish the more, because it is likely I never shall, for I cannot tell him I overheard this conversation. I think it is plain Lord Stretton had been endeavouring to persuade him to make me an offer, on the Supposition of my entertaining a partiality for him; I am better pleased, however, that his refusal proceeded not from an avowed dissike to me, but more from the impossibility of his ever loving any other than her who has wrought him Such distress. But, on examination, is not that being more pleased at having a negative compliment, than I ought to be I do not then feel for his misfortunes as Christian Charity demands. Well, well, we must settle that point another time. 
, I am, my dear Lady Cleveland., eternally yours, 
Louisa Stretton. 
LETTER XIII 
VI Lady Louisa Stretton. 
Your accounts have amazed me very much; I really think Lord Stretton., though he has actecl rather in a romantic D man 
58 E M M A 5 or, 
manner, is still much to be pitied. His part, as well as my dear louifd.s,., is a delicate one. Consider well of it; he had an unlimited power over your person and Fortune. Can you blame him for wishing to obtain your heart? Ah! what intercourse is pleasing without the heart bearing a share in ithe Scprns, you see, to avail himself of the authority given him. He has made you your own Mistress;; neither would I, nor, by his proceedings, would he, have you Sacrifice your happiness to your Gratitude. Be certain, my Love, that you have no latent partiality for this man, whom you style So amiable, and whom you See unfortunate. Ah! Spare yourself; Spare the generous Stretton the anguish which must mutually Seize you, when too late, if you Suffer your own opinion of Rectitude to urge you to the acceptance of his Hand, while the fate of your Heart is undetermined. You might think to conceal the fatal attachment in your own breast; from common eyes you might, but Lord strettops would pierce through the folds of your heart; and the discovery that all he possesses is Gratitude and Duty, will plant endless torments in his bosom; you will both be wretched. Take time, therefore, my Dear, ere your last determination is made. I wish you happy; would 
to 
i^he Child of Sorrow. 59 
to Heaven I could point out to you the means! I am Sorry to Say, Lord Cleveland leaves you Solely to your own guidance. I do not Speak this as thinking his. interposition necessary, or that it would be useful, but his indifference pains me. Ah! why does he strive to place his character in a worse point of view than I wish to See it! Surely it is highly impolitic in him. But I am exceeding the bounds Ishave prescribed myself. Adieu. 
Yours faithfully, 
Emma Clevelano. 
LETTER XIV 
fa Lady Cleveland. 
A Letter, which Lord Stretton has received from abroad. Seems to have fettled our matters more than anything besides. He has almost got the better of his indisposition; and as his Spirits are mended, I find him more agreeable thami at first thought him. Heaven knows how it will end I In a Marriage, I suppose, as usual. 
You must give me leave to talk, or, to express myself with more precision, to write a little, about Mr. Conway.. Good God! 
D 6 whac 
6o EMMA; or, 
what must that woman be who could use himiw^ So amiable. So gentle. So worthy of being beloved! — Let me say this to you — you know Lord Stretton will never see what I write. 
This morning Lord Stretton took up a Spefiator.^ and opened it at that Paper, where a Letter is written by a Man, who dreamed his mistress had a window in her breast. We all agreed how many heart aches we might escape, were it common to be So furnished. A great many Sensible and pretty things were Said on the occasion by my Lord. I Said, “I thought Such a circumstance would destroy that pleasure we feel in relying on those we love; since there would be no need of placing a confidence.” Mr. Conway took it up : “And is it not better to lose that pleasure, which is at best but a shadow, than to experience the real ill by being cruelly deceived ?” — “You are a prejudiced man, (Said I, Smiling;) you have an ill opinion, I find, of the Sex, and are an enemy to the Pashon.” — ' “Am I an enemy to the Passion Have I not reason? 1 have been an Enthusiast, and, like other Enthusiasts, have fallen a Martyr to the cause. Oh! Lady Louisa! you know not what I have Sustered. If to determine never again to be the Slave of capricious Love be to be an Enemy, I am 
one; 
The Child of Sorrow. 6r 
one; an open, an avowed one — As Such I will live, as Such I will die. Good God! is it then nothing to be delucled with hopes, cheated with expectations. Soothed by artful flattery, enchained by false assurances, lulled by Soft endearments, and then dashed in one instant from all my gay prospects? Pardon me. Madam, but I must complain of your Sex. Let those be loud in their praise, let them found their panegyric, who have received blessings from them; but let me still complain, still call them false, cruel, and ungrateful; at least I have found them So. And yet I cannot tear her from my heart. ^ Still does her image Swim before my sight. I see her, as I once fondly thought her, all fair without, an Angel all within. Why does not my imagination present her to me as she really is? Why do 1 not see the hateful vices which art before concealed? Why do I not behold her in the act of Sacrificing every holy vow, every tender tie, at the Altar of Ambition? The Poet has in one line given her character, 
“she’d wed a coffin, were the hinges gold.” 
“Ah! how happy I once was! How many months of tender confidence I passed with her! Oh! and is all forgot? Like our first Parent, I left her but for one short 
hour, 
62 
EMMA; cr. 
hour, and in that hour I lost her. An in sidious enemy, lurking for my ruin, attacked her; the heart which I thought filled alone with Love, was not proof against a Title. She Sacrificed the most tender, the most faithful of men to Ambition.” 
He Seemed So much affected, that he Scarcely knew any one was in the room.. His rhapsody affected me. I again repeat,. What must that woman be? Surely there are not many Such. How should I contemn, how delpise her. What baseness to desert So amiable a man! Can her breast ever know the Soft calm of content can her nightly siumbers be undisturbedah! no; Surely her imagination must hourly present him to her, loudly proclaiming his wrongs. 
Adieu, my dearest Lady Cleveland; I have dwelled on the wrongs of poor Conway, So much, and my indignation against his false one is So keen, that I can write on no other Subject at present. 
Yours faithfully, 
Louisa Stretton. 
LET 
sthe Child of Sorrow.. 
LETTER XV 
Lo Lady Cleveland. 
Good God of Heaven! I had rather have parted with every shilling I am worth in the world, have been reduced to abject ssavery, and lived on sordid Scraps from rich mens doors, than have known what I now know. Is it possible?. How much have I been deceived! Oh! Lady Cleveland I little thought, when I last wrote — Poor Conway! no wonder thou wert deceived, blinded by the Passion of Love, when the cool eye of Friendship could not discaver a fault. 
Would to Heaven this incident had not happened; that I had still remained in ignorance— — So it was. Lord Stretton, this morning, as he and I were talking at the window — Lord Stretton, I say, (I hardly know what I write,) was mentioning Something of the attachment he thought I had iox Conway: “You own, (Said he,) you think him very handsome, and. beauty is very engaging.” — “Why, (Said I, laughr ing,) Isis show you a picture, which I expect you will think much handsomer than I am, but I shall not be jealous if you Say So.” On y/hich I took your ladyship’s Picture 
out 
64 EMMA; cr, 
out of my pocket. I put it into his hand. He looked on it, saying“ “God! this is an Angel, Sure! Why here is Beauty enough to make even Folly pleasing.” — “And I assure you, my Lord, there is in the Original, sense and goodness enough to make Beauty needless.” — “Then she is a treasure, indeed, ” replied he; and calling to Conway., “Come hither, Edward, and see if this Picture does not furpass all that youthful Poets fancy when they love S The instant the unfortunate Conway fixed his eyes upon it, a deathlike paleness Seized him, his lips trembled, and with the utmost difficulty he pronounced, “Ah! what magic is this? Why is this fatal resemblance conjured up to rip open my still bleeding wounds? Ah! false, faithless Emma! why hast thou the power still to tear my breast with never dying anguish ?” Ah I Lady Cleveland., think what became of me! Is it you, then, who have planted stings in the breast of th.q Edward s' Is it the 
Friend of my bosom who has done all this? I have not had a dry eye since. No one can tell what I feel. Excuse me; no wonder you are not happy; no wonder you So carefully concealed your griefs *, you knew too well, that the revealing them must lay you open to censure. 
I find 
Lloe Child Sorrow. 65 
I find this unhappy young man has encountered many evils. His real name, I need not tell you, is not Conway., but Courtenay. I hardly know what I have written, I have been under Such agitation of Spirits. Perhaps I have taken undue ■liberties; if So, I entreat your pardon. I doubt you have been Sufficiently punished for your infidelity. Again I beg you to forgive me. Dear Lady Cleveland, if you can justify yourself, do So immediately; as no tongue can tell what I feel, while I think you not So deserving as I used to do of the love of all the world, and more particularly 
louisastretton. 
LETTER XVI 
Lo Lady Louisa Stretton. 
Ye S, my Louisa., (if yet the most wretched and forlorn of human beings may still presume to address you with that once allowed familiarity,) yes, I will a tale unfold which shall freeze thy blood. 
Ah! good God! are not the Severest ills that mortal can endure enough, but that the hand of Friendship should be armed against my peace, and tear open afresh my rankling woundsbut I Submit. Crush 
me 
66 EMMA; r, 
me with thy cruel upbraidings. Ah! 
that 
each word had been a dagger transfixed in my wretched bosom I 
Is it I who Sacrificed the most tender and faithful of men at the Altar of Ambition.? — Ah! I did more, I Sacrificed my own Peace of Mind. 
My tears, the Tears of Anguish, not of Contrition or Guilt, will not at present allow me to proceed. 
Yet why do I attempt to justify myself.? Ah! is it not better the ill-fated Courtenay should think I deserve the epithets of false, cruel, and ungrateful.? Ah! for his Peace of Mind it is better she should. Tell him, then, my Lottifa., that I am unworthy his least regard; that he ought to tear my image from his breast — Tell him— — I know not what — But do not tell him of my distress. Conceal from him every circumstance I am going to relate to you. Yet, can I bear the thoughthave I vices concealed by art? Louisa! I am disi tradled — I cannot Support the idea of being delpifed by Edward. Fatal Picsture! why did I ever give it you.? If I can corn pole my mind, I will inform you of every particular of my unfortunate History; at present the agony of it is not to be expressed. Oh! my God! that it were nos 
impious. 
lihe Child of Sorrow. 67 
impious, how freely would I lay down my life this moment. — I would but wish to justify myself to the only person in the world — What am I saying?? — him forget me. I cannot now think of him without a crime. 
Yet, my Louisa, do not, unheard, condemn me. suspend your belief till you have all the Sad account before you; then judge foryourself. I sind myself too much disordered to attempt, at present, my story of woe. Another time you shall have it. 
Adieu! dearest of Friends, adieu! 
Emma Cleveland. 
LETTER XVII 
Lady Louisa Stretton, 
The agitation of my Spirits cannot be expressed. My enfeebled body nearly Sunk under it; I have been extremely ill. I do not mention it to excite your compassion; if my hapless Story has not that effect, all things else must fail. You have Said, though I was married to a Relation of yours, yet you were ignorant of my family and connedtions; I must, therefore. 
68 E M M A; r, 
fore, give you the particulars far bade. I then lay before you, 
txfhi STORY emma WOODVILLE. 
THAT no partiality may blind the perusers of this, I will lay before them, without any Preface, the events which compose my Story. The years of my childhood I will pais over, till I arrived at the age of Seventeen; it was then all the most affecting Scenes of my life commenced. The circumstances of one day tindured all my future ones. 
A young Lady of our neighbourhood and myself were one day taking a ride on jiorseback, attended only by a Servant. 
n 
n rvnf' 
ixiy ixvyijiv/ aiicxiiicv^ 
to drink; it was what I had often permitted him to do; but whether the warmth of the weather induced him, or from what cause I know not, as Soon as ever he got into the pond, without the least warning, he laid down. He was on the point of rolling, which terrified me So much, that I was ready to saint. At that instant a young Gentleman, who Saw the accident. Sprung from a phaeton, and plunged into the water to my relief; he brought me in his arms to the shore. I Sustained no other damage than fright, and wet petticoats. He, with great politeness, insisted on having 
the 
iihe Child of Sorrow. 69 
the honour of driving me home, which, fortunately, was not far off. My gratitude was conformable to the Service I had received. My Father was from home, but my Mother welcomed the Stranger, and entreated he would stay to Satisfy himself I had recovered after a little rest. I was put to bed, and took Some weak whey, in order to prevent aisy ill consequences; however, towards evening I came down, - and had it in my power to thank my brave deliverer. I had then an opportunity of observing his figure, which before I was too much agitated to do. His person was Such as the most lively imagination can hardly form; Such animation Sparkling in his eyes, the full blown roses on his cheeks, fiis noble air; — Ah! could they fail to make an impression on my young heart, naturally tender, and of a romantic cast! Such was the charming Edward Courtenay., when I first beheld hiin. Yes, Louisa., it was he, who now styles me cruel and ungrateful. Ah! why did he preserve a life doomed to make him wretched? But if I Suffer myself to fall into tender expostulations, I shall never be able to proceed. 
After tea, Mr. Courtenay took his leave; not, however, till he had obtained permission of my Mother to call once more to know how I dicl When he was gone, my Mother 
Seemed 
70 
EMMA; cr. 
Seemed never tired of reciting his praise. Her tenderness for me made her grateful to him. But why do I Seek to rob him of his due; can any praise be too much? 
I thought the time long till I again Saw my Hero; a title, which my companion, miss Flemming., used to give him, when he was the Subject of our conversation; a sub je6t which, indeed, made the whole of our conversation. Again I had the pleasure of his company; his agreeable manner still won more and more on my esteem. As I Said, I was of a romantic cast; my Spirits were timid and tender; I was not of a constitution to engage in any violent exer cises; my turn of mind rather led me to calm Society, or books; I had imbibed a great deal of Sensibility from my choice of reading; all this concurred to make me See this action of Mr. Courtenay in the •strongest light. I thought I owed him everything; and as I thought my heart the best recompense I could bestow, gratitude would not permit me to with hold it. 
His family was equal to ours, his fortune likewise Suitable. Everything might have concurred to make us happy; ah! everything conspired to make us wretched! The Mother of Mr. Courtenay had, by a Second marriage, become our neighbour; that is, she lived within ten miles of us; 
■which. 
he Child Sorrow. ji 
which, in the country, you know, we reckon as nothing. The young Gentleman was paying her a visit from Oxford where he was a Student. 
He continued to call upon us now and then. After mj Father was returned with my Sister, who had been for Some months with an Aunt of ours in der.ljyjhire.^ our family consisted of my Father and Mother, one Brother, a Sister two years older than myself, and another five years younger. 
miss Flemming one day invited me to see her, where I found feverakof my friends and acquaintance, amon whom was Mr. Courtenay. I received great pleasure in his company, the more So .as it was unexpected, miss Flemming would not apprise me of her intentions, because she would enjoy a little embarrassment, which his prelence always excited. 
A Gentleman, after dinner, was Specking of the difficulty of obtaining an opportunity, which he had long wanted, to dis clofe an attachment to a partkular Lady. He could not, he Said, assume courage to tell her, what an effecl her charms had iupon him, and he wished to do it by letter. 
Jenny Flemming laughed at his bashful ness, and offered to assist him; “Come, (Said she,) we will each of us take a sheet of paper, and compose a tender epistle 
you 
72 EMMA; 
you shall have your choice of the whole colledlion.” We joined in the frolic, and every one sat down to a table, to form a proper letter on the occasion. They were all to be read aloud. Some were wrote in the most despairing strains; others with a ray of hope; but all, except mine, abounded with the most lavish compliments and high flown expressions. 
miss Flemming objedled to mine, as too cool and Sentimental. Every one else, however, was of a different opinion. I defended it by Saying, “I supposed it written to a woman of fenfc'^ who did not wish to deprive her Lover of his. And that should I ever receive a love letter, I would not desire more compliments, or more show of sincerity.’’' 
yird Hartleyt the Gentleman in whose cause we had engaged, Said he would Skim the cream of each, and let us know his success. Tea called us into another room, and we forgot our bundle of nonsenfe, which was left behind on the table. 
The next day my Maid put a letter into my hand. Not knowing the handwriting, I hastily opened it. I found the letter! had written enclosed in another, which was Signed by Mr. Courtenay, It began thus: 
“Pardon me, my ever dear miss Woodville that I use your own words to 
convince 
he Child ^ S orr o w. 73 
^nvince you of the greatest truth in the world. I needed not to have had recourse to this means to Speak the genuine Sentiments of my heart; but I wish to avoid offending you. You cannot be So with your own produdlion. Be not So then, my "ever lovely Emma, because I have signed it with the name of the faithful 
Edward Courtenay 
If you think I was not charmed with his stratagem, you know not my heart. Ah! I was more than charmed — My senses were overpowered with delight. I read over my own letter a thousand times — Never, had my pen produced anything So pleasing to me. Yet how to act I knew not, nor what step to take. My determination, however, was to let things remain as they were. I did not think it incumbent to take notice of it, if he did not; but to adl in Such a manner, when I next Saw him, as to prove I was not offended, even if he only meant it as a jest; not that I thought that to be the cafe, nor should I have been very easy under Such a surmise. I found myself strongly attached to him, and nothing can equal the felicity I experienced when J told myself I was dear to him. 
When I Saw him again I was walking with my Brother and Sisters; he had no vol. I, E oppor ^ 
74 ‘ EMMA; ori 
opportunity of hinting to me anything concerning his declamtion. I Suffered Some perturbation on our first meeting: But as Clara my eldest Sister, talked a good deal to him, I had time to recover myself. He looked, I thought. Somewhat embarrassed on the occasion. However, nothing transpired on either side — I certainly had no reasonfor it, and yet I never pasted So uneasy a night. I had no one to impart my anxieties to; Clara used to keep me at a great distance, and my dear little Fanny was too young to be my Confidant. Some days intervened before my eyes were again blessed with the sight of him, who, alone, made all my joys, hopes, and fears. At length I Saw him — Still we were not alone. — He .asked me, with great trepidation, “Whether I thought Mr. Hartley would Succeed in his endeavours V I blushed So much as to prevent my answering immediately. “Do you think, (continued he,) she is offended at his presumption ?” — “Perhaps (I answered,) she only looked on it as the continuation of a frolic, and as Such has thought no more of it.” — “Then, (cried he, eagerly,) she knows not the Sentiments of the Man who adores her: If she can doubt his Sincerity, she knows not what Love is; at least, (and he sighed,) she is insensible to .his pains.” — “That may not 
be 
he Child Sorrow. 75 
be the cafe neither, (I replied. Still more. confused, and not daring to list up my eyes:) How would you have the Lady at under Such circumstances ?” — “I would wish, (Said he, a little more assured in his manner,) to read in my Fair one’s eyes, that my passion was not displeasing to her — One glance would reveal the tender Secret, and then, if I was he, I should discover whether it would be agreeable to her to make my honourable proposals to her Parents.’* Ah 1 condemn me not Louisa! I could not help it. I stole a look at him, while my cheeks were'crirhsoned 'with blushes, and my heart beat what language cannot tell. His joy was conspicuous enough to me to fill my mind with the most, pleasing re fiedlions. We obtained a moment’s private conversation together. Never had I known delight till then. 
In a few days Mr. Courtenay took an opportunity of declaring himself openly to my Father., He ingenuoussy acquainted him, he had revealed the Secret of his heart to me; and fluttered himself, if he was So happy as to obtain his (my father’s) consent, that no opposition v/oiild present itself pn ray side. My Father made no objections to the proposai, no more than Saying, he thought me too young; he had much rather dispose of my eldest; Sister E 2 first; 
76 EMMA; er, 
first; it was full, time enough for Such a Child to think of .marrying; that, however, he had nothing to say against it. He should be always glad to See Mr. Courtenay a Friend; and in a year or two, would gladly receiive him as a son-in-law; but that he should talk to his Son, who was now from home, as he did not chuse to give a final answer till his Sentiments were 'known. 
Thus this negative kind of consent was all Mr. Courtenay could obtain. However, he still continued to visit as a Friend, The whole place gave him to me as a Lover. I vas too happy in his Society to think of the distance of time. I was Satisfied of the integrity of his heart. 
My Sister was dissatisfied at my gaining S. conquest over the heart of So handsome and accomplished a Man as Mr. Courtenay; not that I believe she would have loved him; but that she could not Support the idea of her younger Sister having the preference shown her. She had, unhappily, a little tincture of envy in her disposition. She could but ill bear a Competitor, and I .unfortunately had Some attradions which were not Seen or allowed in her. — My Brother possessed a great haughtiness of Soul — I never experienced any brotherly atrevtion from him — Though I could 
not 
northeast Chi LI ^'sorraw. 77' 
not resist my partiality for him, I loved him as much as I dared; but I ever feared him still more — I dreaded lest he should form any objection to Mr. Court -- nay, to whom he had always behaved with a forced politenels; my Sister had toa much the Same Sentinients with him. They were shsepafable Coisipariions; it was very Seldom they would permit me to be of their parties, and if they did, it was a thousand chances to one they made me repent of it, by saying or doing Some ill natured or un fraternal thing. 
My Mother was very kind to me, and with her and my dear Fanny, with now and then Seeing my tender Edward. I passed my life very happily. insensibly his. visits lost the appearance of friendly ones only — They became more frequent, and we were allowed the free interchange of our fosils. Ah! how blisfful then were our Scenes I How free from all inquietude! My fathes permitted him to make preparations for our union. The time was drawing near; he thought it necessary to Settle his affairs at Oxford, he took leave of us for that purpose, From Oxford he; was .to go to his own Seat, to put everything isi Order for my reception. — Ah! how my heart ached when my eyes looked their last! — Suffufed with tears, I could scarcely behold him— — E 3 kissed 
78 E MM A or, 
kissed off the trickling drop which stole down my glowing cheek — “Dearest loveliest of Women, (Said he,) be not too ' much affected at a Separation, which, precedes our happy meeting — Think, when, next I See you, we meet to part no more. That dear hope vfiil console me. I shall bless each moment that goes by, as it will bring me So much the nearer to my only comfort.” I could not Speak, I was too imich alfedled; besides, my Father,, of whom I ever stood in the greatest awe, was present. 
I had only power to clasp my hands toge,, — My lips essayed to offer a prayer for his Speedy return, but it returned into my own breast. Sure my distress was portentous of pur misfortunes. Louisa.) I never more beheld him; never more were my eyes permitted to bend their beams on his, (Oh I let me Say, his still adored image! and that they never may is now my only wish. Ah! what floods of tenderness pour in upon my soul. Dear fatal ideas, I must not indulge ye 1 
“.Of all afflidlions taught a lov(?r yet, 
’tis fare, the hardest Science to forget!’' 
As poor Eloifa Says, 
“Unequal talk! a passion to resign. 
For hearts So touch’d. So pierc’d. So lost as mine I Fre Such a soul regains its peaceful state. 
How often must it love, how often hate! 
How often hope, despair, resent, regret. Conceal, disdaiii, — dp all things, but forget/’ 
The Child Sorrow. 79^ 
Oh! my Louifal. from this fatal separation I date all my length of woes. The painful recolledlion of all that followed, is too powerful 
Ambition, - as the poor deluded Edward Says, was my ruin. Still let him think So — Still let him believe me falie, lest pity, when he hears the fatal truth, should add fiiarper .stings to his afstisted breast than he has already felt. Ambition, however, was not the cause alone — other feii pa lions arose to countermine cur plan of siappi ness. My heart vas too full of his dear image, to admit any other Sentiment; — no other ever has gained admittance than the most poignant grief and despair. 
I cannot goon; my Spirits sink under the weight of affliction, which this Tccital occasiohs. You shall Soon hear again more of the unhappy 
Emma Cleveland. 
LETTER XVIII 
To Lady Louisa Stretton. 
TH E day after my Separation from mr. Courtenay., a young Nobleman arrived at our house, to whom my Father had been Guardian. I am constrafined now, T 4 niy 
So 
EMMA; fff, 
my dear Lady. today before you Some 
family Secrets; which, for their honour, I wish could be concealed. My Father had, through ambitious views, been induced to put up for the County; he made an opposition partly out of pique to the old Member, and partly for the honour of presiding in the Senate, v^jaich cost him an immense Sum of money. * The loss of his Election had greatly Soured his temper, naturally none of the Sweetest — But the true cause we knew not; as he never made my Mother the Confidant of his intentions. My Brother, I believe, knew all his Secrets. 
Though I have been cruelly used, and though the Sacrifices I have made for my family have reduced me to the utmost mi sery, yet it pains me to the Soul to discover the faults of my Parent He had, my Lcuifa, (ah! to what fatal lengths an ambitious man will run!) he had taken an illegal advantage of his ward’s nonage, and embezzled a very large Sum of money belonging to him : From this cause flowed all the distress which ensued to me. 
My Brother, just at this period, became violently in love with a young Lady of high birth and expectations. The little probability he had of Succeeding with her family, as he was by no means an adequate match, as it threw him into very great perplexity. 
lihe Child Sorrow. 8i 
plexity, made his dilpofition ten times worse than ever. 
Lord Cleveland was come, with a full resolution of having all this money accounted' for. You must judge of the situation of my Father and Brother. So far from receiving So much more from my Father, as might enable him to make a Suitable Settlement on Lady Bell Hajlings^ he had great reason to think he should be deprived of his estate. As I Say, things were in this situation when i..ord Cleveland arrived. You know your Cousin;; will not Say what impression he could make on a heart filled with the idea of Courtenay. I had not Seen him for Some years; as I was quite a child when he had last been at woodville hali he knew me not. Fatally, however, for me, he found perfections in my person that I wished none to be sensible of but my Edward. In short, I became dearer to him than the bii smess he came about. He talked of me to my Brother, who informed him I was engaged to a Mr. Courtenay. He had been formerly acquainted with Edward being of the Same College, and, as I have since learned, once had a very great regard for him, which, however, had been interrupted by a quarrel. Lord Cleveland., with another Gentleman commoner, had, by a false pretence, decoyed a young girl into a bad honse; 
E 5 they 
Sa E M M A ■ orp. 
they attempted to use her very ill; Mr.' Courtenay fortunately was going by, and heard her Screams. He with much difficulty rescued her from these wretches. A challenge afterwards passed, and they met \ Mr. Courtenay received Lord Cleveland fire, but refused to follow his lead. inter pofing friends adjusted the difference, but Lord Cleveland never forgave him, cherishing in his bosom deadly hatred, and hopes of revenge. An opportunity, the most cruel and bale, now presented itself. Oh! Louisa, could you think thus of your Cousin The loss of ten thousand pounds, for the recovery of which, the day before, he would have gone any lengths, and reduced a family to shame and poverty. Seemed now trivial to him, when Set in competition with Love and Revenge. Ah! was it then given to me, who had inspired So noble a fiame in the bosom of my generous Edward to create a passion in the heart of Such a man But the Same flower Supplies the bee with honey, and the Spider with poison. 
He laid before my Brother his intentions. Eager to catch at any means to enrich himself, and likewise give him hopes of possessing Lady Belf he Swore to join with Lord Cleveland. How could a Brother, whole heart was Sensible of the joys and inquietudes of Seek the ruin of a Sister, incapable 

he Child Sorrow. 83 
capable of wishing him ill, join in So cruel a Scheme of destroying all her hopes of happiness } 
agreed to make the proposal known to my Father. Happy to find a method of extricating himself from the difficulties he had been plunged into, he Said he woul d consider of it. Loxdi Cleveland gave him’ to understand, that on no other terms would he release him; if he used his authority with me, he would withdraw his prosecution, and likewise make over to James, my Brother, Four Hundred a year, to increase his Settlement, and ensure him, at the next General Election, a Seat in the house. these, then, were the terms, which my Father thought the eternal welfare of his Child too trifling a consideration to induce him to rreglect. 
When my Mother was made acquainted with these particulars, she burst into tears, and entreated my Father not to consent to my miscry, which she well foresaw must ensue, not only from the Separasion of two hearts tenderly united, but from my marriage with a man actuated by Such illaudable views. “I did not, (replied my Father with more than usual haughriness, 1 ak you for your advice, or mean to be prevailed on by your nonsense; your tash is, to prepare E 6 the 
84 E M M A; cr, 
the Girl for the reception of Lord Ckvelandy as a Lover she must and shall accept. 
Too well my Mother knew it would be in vain to say any more, So she wiped her eyes, and Sought me out. I was sitting in a little dressing-room adjoining to my chamber, and had just finished reading a letter from the most amiable of men. 
I Saw the traces of tears on my mother’s cheek. “What is the matter. Mama, (alked I,) you have been weeping.?” — “Nothing, my Dear, (she answered)) have you been employed about this morning, Emma “Oh! (Said I, Smiling,) I have been a Sad idle Girl; I have been as long reading this letter, as if I had Spelled every word.” — - “Who is it from ?” (Said my Mother.) “Ah! Mama, canst you guess from whom Mr. Courtenay Sets off this day for his own house; he tells me he shall be anxious till the alterations are made that he mentioned to you and me. He proposes building the root house you Spoke of. Ah! how happy shall we all be! You know, Mama, you promised to go down with us.” My Mother immediately Said, with a grave countenance, “Emma, my Dear, you are too Sanguine; should anything happen to reverie your prospedls, you would be less able to Support the disappointment.” — “My dear Madam, (Said I,) what can happen.? Have 
I not 
Lhe Child cs o r r o w, 8^ 
I not the strongest reason for relying on the fidelity of Mr. Courtenay? Nothing but death can divide us, and as that stroke is inevitable, we must Submit.” — “I don^’c think your Father is So well pleased with Mr. Courtenay as he used to be.” — “Good God! Madam, what has Mr. Courtenay done!” (cried I, in the utmost terror.) — “I know not, ” she answered, but burst into So strong a stood of tears as left her unabib to proceed, and nearly reduced me to dif tradhon. I threw my arms wildly round her neck. “Tell me, (cried 1,) tell me all. I can bear anything, everything, rather than the mournsul presages of my own thoughts. Tell me, is he dead? What misfortune has happened to him? Tell me, my dearest Mother, the whole Sad story at once, nor kill me thus by degrees; I am prepared to hear the worst, and God give me patience and resignation to Support it.” 
“Be composed, my lovely Child; my dearest Emma, compose yourself; it is not fo bad, perhaps, as you think; Mr. Courtenay is well, for aught I know to the contrary; but prepare yourself, my dearest Love, to meet a disappointment which I am constrained to acquaint you with.” 
I fell on my knees, and lifting up my hands and eyes to Heaven, “I implore thee, O merciful Father, (cried I,) to 
strengthen 
86 
EMMA; 
or. 
strengthen me to Support the ills I am going to be made acquainted with; do thou. Oh! God, have compassion on ^ rny bursting heart, and teach me a divine resignation to thy Decrees. My Courtenay the beloved of my Soul, is well; — if he can have falsified his vows, — - Oh! he cannot! I will not har sholir So unjust a surmise.” 
At that period of time my Father entered the room, and feeing me weeping at my mother’s feet, judged I had been acquainted with my misfortunes. “Emma., (Said he,) why do I See you in that posture?” ?” — “is this posture alone which Suits best one who is waitino the disciosure 
AD 
of Same heavy afstidlion.” — “Have you not told the Girl, then, of my Will ?” (ashed my Father, in a harsh accent.) — “Oh! (cried my Mother,) the distress of my Child Subdues me.” — “Then you are not lit to be with her, (Said he.) Her head is full of romantic ideas, imbibed from the cufsed books you have Suffered her to peruse; she will, by and by, fancy herself the persecuted Heroine of Some Novel; a Cla tilfa., or Some Such fantastical or fiditious Character Three words will inform her of my pleasure, which, if she is a Child of mine, she shall conform to.” All the while I remained kneeling, with my head bowed on my mother’s lap, and my arms folded 
round 
57; ^’child Sorrow. 87 
round her waist; but when I thought my Mother would leave me to my Father, I withdrew my arms, and clasping my hands together, “Oh! (Scried I,) if I must receive this Severe blow, let me receive it from the hand of my Mother; her tender ness will Soften the cruel stroke.” 
“Yoiir Father, then, (Said he, with an angry tone,) is a Tyrant, I suppose, in your opinion! Little as you Seem to deserve it, 
I will tell you, Emma, you may easily entitle yourself to my utmost tenderness; but beware, I caution you, beware of my wrathful indignation; that of impending Fate is not more certain.” 
“I make no doubt, (Said my Mother, with her usual condescending sweetness,) I make no doubt, Mr. Woodville, that our Child will comply with your wishes; do but, my dearest Love, allow her a little time.” 
“You are wrong, you are wrong, Mrs jv€od.viue, but you have ever been So with regard to that Girl. Inform her Speedily of my intentions, and prepare her to appear at dinner, in the temper I wish to See, or let me never behold her again.” 
Sensible as I was of Something dreadful to be revealed, I know not how it vasi had no idea what k could be. My Father terrified me So. much with his manner and; 
menaces.,. 
88 
E M M A j or 9 
menaces, as almost to deprive me of my senses. I still continued my position — I Seemed rooted to the floor. 1 no longer petitioned my Mother to inform me of the fatal news, but waited my destiny with a calm stupidity. My Mother hung over me Some time, weeping and speechless as myself. At last, “My Emma! child of my tenderest care and affeaions, (Said she, in the Softest Soothing voice,) rise, my beloved, and listen to thy Sorrowing Mother, Think how her heart bleeds at every vein for the distress she must be the unwilling relatcr of; yet she has taken that tash, that her participating of your griefs may help you to Support their weight; she will drop tear for tear, and echo all your sighs. But change your situation, my Darling, it wounds my Soul to see you in this attitude.” 
I rose, hardly knowing what I was about, and Seated myself by her. “Now, Madam, Saidi, with great calmness,) let me know what it is my Father expects from me.” — “Everything, my Emma., that an heroic, a virtuous, a dutiful Child can perform. It is expected, my Love, that you will, without visible repugnance, make, what may appear to you, one of the greatest Sacrifices — Think what that is, and judge what is to be done. I need not tell you, your father’s determinations are irreversible: I have found 
them 
he Child of Sorrow. 89 
them So ever since my connexions with him. I cannot, I fear, hope he will be more indulgent to a Child than a wise, whose only study has been his pleasure. I would wish my Child should guess the import of my meaning, and Spare me the cruel tash of explaining myself more fully.” 
“Ah! Madam, you need not. I See Mi sery open like a gulf before me, ready to overwhelm me in its abyss. But what, (continued I, holding up my folded hands,) what have I — what has the most amiable, most loved of men done, that our final Separation is determined? — for too well my boding heart insorms me, that is the will of my harsh, my cruel Father. But never, never can I forsake him; never shall my heart relinquish his faithful image. The greatest Tyrant cannot force the Will. — Ever shall he be the delight of my Soul, and my dearest affections evermore shall be his.” “Oh! my much loved, much to be pitied Child, little will these resolutions avail you. You must, believe me, you must for ever relinquish your attachment to the unfortunate Courtenay — Nay, that is not all, (Seeing I was going to interrupt her,) you must likewise endeavour to transfer your affections on another — Lord Cleveland 
I could hold no longer — “Never, never, (I exclaimed in an agony,) So prosper rae 
Heaven t 
EMMA 

Heaven! May the worst os ills betide me if I, even in thought, consent to So impious a proposition! The worst of fortune I will defy, the Severest of hardships Submit to; but while I have life or sense remaining, the world shall not bribe me with its gifts, nor terrify me with its frowns, to force me ' to comply. All intercessions, prayers, threats; or menaces shall never take effect on my steadfast Soul ” 
Emma I (cried my Mother,) I expected less violence from you; you do not treat me well. My tender concern and indulgent affection should not meet this return. You would not have dared to use these expressions before your Father — Am 1 lessintitled to your consideration for having ever been the fondest of Mothers, and having taken on myself this employment, rather than Suffering your Father to do it Oh 1 my Emma I do not give me reason to think that Terror can Sooner obtain a compliance than Love"' 
“.Forgive me! Sorgive your unhappy Child! (cried I, throwing myself again at her Sect, and bathing her hands with my tears, tears that Spoke the agony of my Soul) — Think, that the cruel tale you have unfolded has almost deprived me of sense; wonder not, then, at the effect of my phn^nzy. Oh 1 my Mother, add not the 
weight 
nt’ Child ^"’sorrow. 91 
weight of your anger to the oppressions of grief that are heaped on me. Think of my sufferings! think of what is expected,, me! Pity a forlorn undone wretch, who has. not in the wide world one Friend besides yourself. See at your feet a Child, whom, on your entering this room, you found laying out Schemes of future happiness; — Schemes, she had been authorised by her Father to indulge; — think, in one short moment they have been all overthrown, and forgive me the agonising effusions of a broken heart.” 
“Ah! my Child! (cried my tender Sympathising Mother,) Seek not thus to Subdue me. Emma., you know the interest you have ever had in my bosom, and your power over me; but all my affection cannot alter your situation. This Sacrifice must be made; your objections will not avail. Hear me, my Child, hear, from, the lips of your Mother, the reasons which have induced your Father to adl in this Seemingly harsh manner. It is not from any difiike to Mr. Courtenay, but from another more forcible cause“ 
“my Father retraifl his vrord Did he, not allow me to bestow my heart, and its every £bft emotion, on Mr. Courtenay? Did he refuse his, consent?? then can. 
92 E M M Aj ofr 
he form the remotest idea of my ever transferring that affection to another ’* 
“Will you ask these questions of your Father, Emma? Let your own answer be mine.” 
“Again, my ever honoured Mother, I entreat forgiveness. I Submit to the Severe decree. Behold me, like the devoted offering, waiting the final stroke.” 
“Oh! my Beloved, why do you Soften me thusthe time which your Father has allotted me to prepare you in, will be wasted in fruitless lamentings and expostulations. Hear me, then, my Ernma., and believe thy Mother would freely lay down her life to Save her Child from this heavy trial. Your poor Father, Emma he is to be 
pitied,,) has brought himself into great dissl cuities on account of the Election. He had money in his hands belonging to his Ward, Lord Cleveland; Sanguine in his expedtationsr of gaining his point, he appropriated this Sum to the favourite purpose of his heart. He Sustained a disappointment, and his affairs since have been too much embarrassed to replace the money So employed; or, as the world would call it, embezzled. Should this transadtion be made public, the reputation of your Father is for ever lost— — payment of this Sum will be his ruin; since I believe you might have gathered from 
Some 
he Child of Sorrow. 9^ 
Some hints which I have occasionally thrown out, that your Father has lived beyond his income. Your Brother James has not a little contributed to the derangement. He has been too apt to consider himself only; your Father has given him all he could Spare, to make him a match for Lady Bell — An union equally coveted by Father and Son. Lord Cleveland Sole errand here was to constrain your Father to make restitution for his errors. — I would Soften the failings of my Husband, if possible. Your charms, my Sweet Girl, have triumphed over the angry and cruel purposes of Lord develand. He Swears to befriend our Family; he has made noble proposals — And, Oh! that my Child could restore ease and comfort to her affliffed Parents! — Oh that my tender Emma could make this one Sacrifice, to establish the fortunes and felicity of her house! Your Father, my dearest Love, would command, with a father’s authority. — Your Mother lays aside all hers; and condescends to expostulate, to petition, to implore on her knees, her darling Child to Save her, her children, her family, from perdition.” 
Great God! Do I live to repeat it? My venerable, my beloved Mother, Sunk on her knees by me, folding her arms round my waist, and Sobbing on my bosom. 
Ahl 
94 EMMA; oty 
“Ah! Spare me! Spare me! (cried I, clasping my arms round her neck,) Spare me this torture! Oh! What is there, 1 would not rather do, than. See you thus! Eternal, misery; nay, the perdition you urge me to deliver you from, cannot equal the excess of my anguish, when I see my Mother, my ever adored Mother, on her aged knees before me. rise, rise, for eleaven’s Sake, or I expire in your arms, my Mother! ” The horror I felt cannot be expressed — can never be equalled — I hung gasping round her neck. — My eyesight forsook me; my encircling arms loosed themselves, and I was Sinking, fainting to the floor. My tender, indulgent Mother Supported me, wdth much difficulty got me up into a chair, and. Sitting down by nie. Suffered me to rest my head on her ssioulder; she had thrown one arm round me, and with the other held Some Eau de luce., which she obliged me to Smell to. As Soon as I a little recoveied myself, “I have hopes, (Said she,) that, for the Sake of her Mother, my Emma will comply with her Fa ther’s \vill. Your tenderness for me, my dearest Love, excites those hopes. If you cannot Support the posture I but now afr fumed, how could your gentle heart bear to See all your family ruined, and knew At remained in your breast to raise them to affluence 
The Child of Sorrow. 9^ 
fiuence and honour ^ How could ray Emma resist a whole family pleading for her to be its Saviour Could she behold her Father, ' who has ever born a respedable ciiaradler, branded with infamy, and know her voice could clear his fame, and yet with hold it? Oh! my lovely Child! canyon not Sacrifice your pashon for tltese advantages, and Save your Parents from descending to their graves with Sorrow, and endless shame? ’* 
“Was the life of your Child, your Emma., the only Sacrifice expected, ah! with what joy, could she resign it! How freely would she extend her arms to meet the blow, which should for ever wipe from her remembrance the events of this day! But my death will not be accepted as a peace offering — More, ah, how much more than the most cruel of all deaths is exadled from me! — Not only, to be bid to resign all my long indulged, long authorised hopes, but to give my hand to a man already armed against my Family, and who has once lifted up his impious hand against the life of the most honoured of Men. It cannot, cannot be!” « 
“Ah! is then the love of Courtenay So much to be prized above all other considerations? — Has your affection for him turned all your filial, your sisterly love into deadly hatred? Has it rendered you insensible to 
the 
^6 EMMA; or, 
the tender calls of Compashon} Can yd ib far prefer your own happiness, before the glory, the welfare of your Family, asto consign it 4: o infamy without concern? Are the Supplications of your Sorrowing Mother of no account? Ah, Emma! what is there, that I request of you, which I would not freely Suffer to procure your happiness? But the Child of my tenderest love, will not Sacrifice her chance of happi ness to me — No; she can unmoved behold the wreck, though destrudlion of her house, and Smile o’er its ruins, while she exults in the heartfelt Satisfadlion of doing all this, to prove her inviolable attachment to her Lover. Ah! Emma you love me not.” 
“witness these tears! — witness this agonising Sorrow, how unjustly I am ac cused, by my once tender Mother, of want of affection“ 
“tears, your Sorrow is not Sufficient to convince me — Your actions must Speak for you. You take advantage of my tenderness, you wound my soul by your distresses; but I have no inssuence on you.” 
“You have, you have, (Sobbed I.) If I shall be forced to comply, it shall be Solely owing to my tenderness for you. I could resist all else — Even I think I could combat with my father’s menacing threats — 
but 
he Child of Sorrow. 97 
But you, my dear Mother, shall have the merit of it. It shall be your fiat which shall consign your Child to endless misery, if her death, her Speedy death, disappoints not Lord Cleveland of his destined prey. Yet is it in Nature to Support these ills? Ah I no, I feel I shall fink under them. Yes, Death will Soon come to my relief, and heal the wounded breast of the wretched emmap 
“My dear romantic Girl! (cried my Mother,) I must leave you if you talk thus. You know not what anguish I endure each moment for you. I must leave you, my Emma, I am too much affected by your Sorrows.” Almost at that instant Clara entered the room. “Dinner, waits, (Said she;) Emtm, my Papa will not be pleased to See you thus. Do not, for god’s sttke, rish his anger. Madam, (to my Mother,) my Father is impatient.” “I come, I come, my Clara, instantly. — (then turning and kilsing my cheek,) Suffer me, my Sweet One, to lead you down — Dry up those precious tears, and allow thy Mother the Satisfaction of Seeing thee Supply thy usual place at table.” ■ — “Oh! do not, do not ask me — Oh! Mama, I cannot, I cannot go down.” — “What will your Papa Say to this perverseness, Emma? For god’s Sake dry your eyes; here is your handkerchief.” I caught her hand, and, pressing it vol. I. F to 
^8 EMMA; cr, 
to' my bosom, burst into a fresh stood of tears, V : Qh! cdri2, rc/^fn / (cried I,) you know not what I have Suffered. — Entreat my Mother not to insist on my going downstairs. Death would be infinitely less dreadful to me than the sight of Lord Cleveland“ “you then Support the face of an enraged Parent.?” she Said. — “Ah! will you, my dearest Sister, my Sweet Clara., will you be my Mediator there? — I know iny h’ather will grant this Small request to •your prayer — And I shall owe this indulgence to the interceshons of my Sister.” 
“That will not avail you much; however, I will tell my Father you had rather be excused dining below.” Tell him, (cried 1,) I implore this indulgence from him on my knees; ” saying which I Sunk •tipon them, and lifted up my hands to my Sister, to bespeak her favour. 
My poor Mother had stid out of the .room to make herself fit to appear below. — Clara left me. Saying, “Your Sublime ideas have weakened your head; but that will not excuse you from your duty.” 
I rose and threw myself into a chair, and, laying my head over a table, gave a •fresh loose to my tears. I remained Some time in this posture, when the door opened, and, my little Fanny came in with a mournful air — “Oh! my Emma., (Said the dear Girl)) do I grieve to See you thus: Yes, 
my 
tihe Child Sorrow. 99 
my dearest Sister, my heart bleeds for you. How shall I then tell you how angry my Papa is on your account? My poor Mama — He is in a passion with her. He Says, she has Spoiled you, by her absurd indulgence; that by her foolish flattery she has raised in you So high an opinion of your excellencies, that you Set yourself above his authority, or any other consideration. He was coming up to you himseif — I started up, and catching hold of his hand, “Let me go, Papa, ” Said I. I thought I should have died when I found he intended coming up — ■ “I will go if you permit me. Papa, and inform my s'kiqv Emma., that you chuse she should appear.” While he Seemed deliberating, I took the opportunity of whispering Lord Cleveland: “For god’s sake, my Lord, do not Suffer my Father to insist on my poor sister’s coming down; you See the distress of my Mama; Ermna must be unfit to appear.” — Lord Cleveland ' Said, “Mr. jvoodville., you must excuse your lovely Daughter today— — will make her my Enemy, instead of joining with me to conciliate her good opinion. Consider, my whole happiness is centred in the hope of her being mine; do not increase the difficulty.” — “And she shall be yours, my Lord, though the final destruction of the universe should follow your union. For once the perverse Girl shall be indulged — F 2 'i'hcse 
100 EMMA; or, 
these Beauties must not be treated in a com inon Aethodi Her vanity has been too niticff fed lately. Sunny, I give you leave to go up to her — - Tell her to name Some dish whereof she will partake — And charge her, if she values my bleshng, or dreads my bitterest vengeance, to prepare herself to meet this Assembly in the drawing-room at five o’clock, with a heart and mind devoted to my will.” — “Such, my beloved Sister, is the mandate of our Father. He has, however, been kind in allowing me to dine with you here.” She then named Such dishes as composed the dinner. You will believe I had no appetite to eat, but that I might not farther enrage my Father, I bid her chuse what she pleased. She rang the bell to give her orders, and Such was the delicacy and consideration of this dear Child, that she would not Suffer the Servant to enter, but took everything from him at the door. 
She strove, by a thousand engaging ways, to ekcite me to eat, and when she found she could not Succeed — “You will not eut with my Emmd. then'.; I will 'yiixh you V 
she then gavea loose^o her gri^f,. which she had long endeavouredto restrain arid! laying her cheek to mine, and > throwing her aims round my neck, a most affecting Scene followed for Some time. While wq were thus employed, the house clock struck four. 
..She 
L'he Child of soiui.o^.’^ioi 
She started from my arms,; *nalij myi Emma! my poor dear Sister, ^: th^r^, is hut one hour more for yoil to prepare in. You are almost blind with weeping. For heaven’s sake endeavour to compose youtself; you know you must appear.” She tenderly assisted me in maldng myself ready, I knew not how I intended to qomport myself, my grief had certainly reduced me to. a state of the utmost stupidity. My dear Fanny helped to Support me down the stairs. I entered the room trembling, ^ tottering, and pale as the lifeless marble. My Mother and Sister were Seated there“ “is kind, (Said my Mother, and held out her hand to me;) I thank you, my Love, for this compliance. Sit down by me, my Emma; sit by your Mother, my Sweetest Child.” Without being able to open my lips, or articulate a Sentericcj I toot a chair, drawing it rather behind lily Mot ther’s — At that moment what became of me? I Saw my Father, Brother, and the more dreaded Lord Cleveland enter.; I involuntarily clapped my hands to my eyes, and bent my head over the chair whereon my Mother sat, “rise, my best Love, (Said my Mother, in a low whispejr,) rise to Lord Cleveland With the utmost difficulty I stood up, but was forced to lean on the chair to Support my trembling limbs. Lord approached, and, taking my 
F 3 hand 
10 2 EMMA; or, 
hand, in his, (the very touch of which made me Suddenly shrink back, and shudder as "w’'e do when we have, by accident, trod on Some noisome reptile,) “I hope (Said he) the sight of me has not torn thosc lovely roses from your cheek that this morning revelled there Say, why, my adorable Maid, this sadness on your brow? Behold your Cleveland, wretched unless you deign to bless him.” He might have gone on questioning me thus for hours, without the .least interruption on my part. But not So my Father. — “My Lord, my Lord, you will Spoil that Girl. She knows my will, she knows she must comply, therefore it is her part to conform. She must think herself highly honoured by the distindtion you pay her; but if you approach her as if she ■was a Divinity, she will adopt the Sentiment, and really fancy she is formed to be adored, and give laws to her family and all the world.” 
I could make no other answer than heaving a heartfelt sigh, and raising my eyes to Heaven. My Lord Seemed whiling enough to take my father’s advice, and bowing, took his seat by me. I still edged nearer to my Mother, who did not dare even to bestow a glance of pity on her wretched Daughter. 
Lord Cleveland had the insensibility to enter into a trifling conversation with my 
Brother 
L'he Ghitd Sorrow. 
Brother on the merits of their respedive hunters; but could I expect more huma -- nity from him than from my own relations? My Father, too, with as little concern, ^, joined with them. Sometimes, indeed, (most unwelcome were those instances to me,) his Lordship would address Some tender Speech — Once he attempted to take, my hand; I hastily withdrew it,, not knowing that my father’s eye was on me. — “Emma! (cried he, in a voice that made me tremble,) it thus you receive the honours Lord 
13 
Cleveland bestows on you? Can a Daughter be So insensible of the favours done her Family, to behave with fucst ingratitude to its Benefactor?” ?” — is it thus, whisper ed I to myself,) a Father can consign his Child to endless misfortune and misery? 
“Be not too precipitate, Mr. jvoodville, (Said Lord. Cleveland.,) I make no doubt my beautiful Emma will Soon behold me with less rigour.” — “Or she shall not beliold the light of the Sun, ” Said my Father, with a peremptory accent. 
“Mrs. ivoodville has too tender a nature, (he added; j she has done more harm than goodbye her interposition in this affair: But, for the future, I shall be my own Messenger, and shall find out the most likely method of furthering my intentions. But we have had too much of discord. Son James., lead your Sister Clara to the harpsi f 4 chord 
104 E M M A; or, 
chord, and: accompany her in a piece of music.” 'Lhere was a: Specie cff tyrannical barbarity in this proposad .that cut me to the heart — I am Sorry to exprcss myself thus, when Speaking of a father, whom, by the laws of God and Nature, * I am bound to revere. He knew that Lord Cleveland would have the cruelty, to alk me to play, and he was resolved to make me feel every mortis fication he could inflid, even more than the human mind could Support. He even named a Sonata which was a favourite piece of Mr. Courtenay's; my Sister and Brother performed it. Clara had the insensibility to observe, that she had heard it So much better performed, that she vas unwilling to play it. She then was ashed for a Song, as if they had all combined to overthrow what little resolution and fortitude I had remaining. She likewise Sung a Song out of a book Mr, Courtenay had presented to me; it was one of jackfopsy and taken from an Elegy of Hammond's. The words are these;; 
I say, thou dear poffefltor of my breast. where’s now my wonted liberty and rest! Where the gay moments which I once have known, 
0 where that heart I fondly thought my own! 
1 scorn the beauties common eyes adore. 
The more I view them — feel thy worth the 
more; 
tnmov’d I hear them speak— — see them fair, And only think on thee — who art not there.’’’ 
While 
lihe Child of Sorrow. 105 
While she Sung, each note vibrated on my ears, as I had So lately listened to the harmonious cadence of my i^oox Courtenayt Oh! these, these are his Sentiments, (cried Lto myself,) they breathe his very soul; and must I forsake him? Must 1 plunge him in despair? and return the Sincerest of all passions with perfidy and inconstancy? Must I give that hand to another, he justly deems his right? Ah! is he not, at this moment, ornamenting his dwelling, and fondly exulting in the hope of Seeing she Smile my thanks; and must I forsake him I must I wed his deadly foe ^ — Think Whht I felt during this mental Soliloquy. ‘ M anguish got the better of my prudence; forgot there were any witnesses of my distress. I started up, and clasped my hands together, “Oh! Save me. Heaven, (cried 
I,) since nothing less can Save me!’ 
Is 
the Girl gone mad?” (Said rny Father; > and certainly, for the time, I was So; for what could indicate it more than my extravagant behaviour? My father’s voice brought me back to the full use of my senses, and I sunk down into my chair, trembling and abashed. “coniey(faid ray Brother,) as you have foitnd the tile of your Speech, perhaps, efuma^ you may be able to add your voice; you used to be very fond of singing.” — “And you, James., (answered I,) used to behave rather in a F 5 more 
10.6 E m M A;. Off 
more brotherly manner; it is doubly cruel in you to insult the distress which you yourself have created.” — “Most wonderfully Sublime! most enchanting! Miss Emma jeoodviue V (drawled he out, with the most aggravating Sneer.) — “You are Severe, james.f (cried my Mother;) I do not take it well of you. Lord Cleveland, (she added,) you ought to prevent the poor Child from receiving these mortisications.” My Mother destroyed the effect her tenderness would otherwise have had on my, heart, by making it a point with Lord Cleveland to become my Champion. He thought it necessary to make a parade of. his attachment, and taking my hand, he protested,! should never receive any on his account; that his love should protedb me. — “And, Mr. Woodville, (he added to my Brother,) I must insist on your not desiring your lovely Sister to do anything she does not approve of.” — “I am Sure, (returned my unbrotherly Brother,) that if she is not all gratitude to you for your condescension and goodness, I shall think more hardly of her than I am permitted to fay.” 
As I leaned over my mother’s chair, I whispered her, if I might not retire? “I wish, my love, (she returned, in the Same manner,) it was in my power to permit you that, or anything else you desire.” Her words brought tears into my eyes; I 
could 
i!he Child Sorrow. 107 
could not prevent their trickling down. 
‘‘ Leave your mother’s chair, Emmd. (Said my Father,) come hither, and sit down by me; the time has been, when you have not been So backward. Come hither, I Say, undutiful and obstinate Girl.” I rose, and tottered across the room to him. He caught hold of my hand, and giving me a pull which! was too weak to resist, I fell down on my knees. I really did not intend to take that position, as I certainly could form no idea that my attitude would affect him more than my distress, which was So apparent in my looks. “Oh! these ready knees, ” Said my Brother James to my Sister Clara. Lord Cleveland, siew across the room to raisome; my poor Mother Sat transfixed, as pale as ashes; and my dear Fanny with her heart almost bursting. My Mother, I believe, thought I was going to implore the pity off my inexorable Father. Whatever had been my intentions, his Speech prevented them. ‘‘kneel not to Emma \ I 'am not to be won upon by .the. tears anri arts bf women; So, pray, rise, and let us have none of your tragedy attitudes, and rants.” With the assistance of Lord Cleveland., I arose. “Indeed,; Sir, (cried I, with a., feeble and tremulous voice,) I disclaini. all arts — neither am I So vain, or weak, to imagine my. posture, or tears, could pene. trate your bosom in my favour.. It was F 6 bodily 
jos E M M A; cr, 
bodily weakness, joined to your hastity Snatching my hand, which brought me on. my knees before you.” — Then you are too proud, too lofty, to kneel to me, are you? Your Father does not merit Such Submissions.” — “Oh! Sir! (cried I, throwi ing myself again on my knees,), call me not proud and lofty — I would grow to'the earth at your feet, could I but indulge the dear hope of regaining a place in your affection. You know my situation, you know the full extent of my Sorrows; you too well know.” — “Silence, on your obedience, ” Said he, sternly; though I thou^hti 1 perceived Some marks of tender concern in his eyes. “1 will hear no more. Ydu' are a little Syren, Emma; but, like uiyjfesy I will, I must deafen my ears to your Soothing softness.” — “Ah! do not, (cried I,) do not, my dearest Father,, harden' your heart against a kneeling Child.” “Thisn is too much, (exclaimed my Mother.:)! Oh! Mr. woodviue! Oh! Lord qle^elandb can you See my Child, mj Emma kneeling at your feet; ” for I had just turned myc uplifted hands to him. Can you behold and not pity, not redress her griefs:? ” 4 ^,, “Foolish woman! (Said my Father,) you? will undo all our work — It is you who harden her heart against her duty. Fool that I was, why did I Suffer you to preach your nonsense to her. Etnma^ get to 
thy 
tihe Child of Sorrow. 109 
thy chamber; there meditate on your duty, ^ to me. I am grieved, my Lord, to the soul, that a Child of mine should be So insensible of the honour you intend her. But why do I say a Child of mine? I renounce her to all' eternity; and may the heaviest curse’* — ‘‘ Oh! stop! (I cried, in an agony.) My Father!' — Will no one step ■ in between, and Save me from my father’s curse?? your victim, (cried I, almost frantic; rising, and throwing my arms round his neck.) Now let my Father curse me! Ah! did ever Father curse his Child, while in his.arms!” 
“Take her away, (cried my Father,) take her from me. I cannot bear this.” James Woodville was too ready to obey his Father. He tore me from him, and even, held me forcibly. Lord Cleveland was. likewise moved; he hid his face with his handkerchief. My Mother! who shall Speak her agonies! My Father threw himself into a chair almost breathless. My dear Mother approached him with the utmost tendefness. “My Love! (Said she,) can. you wonder at my being Subdued by this, unhappy Child, when you are So much affected? — Oh! persuasion! ” 
“I cannot help being moved, I allow,, (returned my Father, a little recovered,), but nothing can alter the purpose of my 
soul. 
who can resist her meltings 
lu o EMMA;, or, 
soul. Go,. Clara, lead your Sister to her chamber..: I will not trust your Mother with her. They will, by their mutual V hinings, harden each other’s heart, and make my tassi. a more difficult one. No intercessions: I will be obeyed.” 
My Sister took my arm under her’s. I attempted to Speak; but my rising sobs prevented me. I curtsey’d, and left the room. So weak and debilitated as to be Scarcely able to move up the stain. 
When! regained my room, .I threwmy self on a. Seat, and again gave a loose to my over charged heart. Clara bid me be comforted. “Think, Luma, (Said she,) that to this trial you must Submit, and bear it with that fortitude which my Mama has ever Said yotv possessed. Wherein will you show your excellence over the rest of the wcrld, if you. cannot make this sacrifice to the honour of your family I cannot 
argue with you, Clara my distresses are too keen. Ah! would to Heaven Lord Cleveland had distinguished you.” — If he had, (Said she,) I should not give my Papa So much trouble as you have done.” — “My Sister, then, (cried I,) would .be happy with him: Lord Cleveland Would be happy too; with me he never can. What perstcstion is there in me, which does. not shine in my Clara twofold : Her partiality, too, would make her beauties more conspicuous.” 
The Child of Sorrow, ni n 
Giious.” — “My partiality, miss Emma K And do you. fuppose me So very poor in sentiment as to accept a rejected Lover of. my younger Sister? No, Madam, thougte I cannot boast your personal attradlions, though the rose and lily are not So happilyi blended in cheek, though.thediamond outshines my eyes, I am not yet So fallen, ', proud Beauty, as to take up with your leavings.” — “Unjust Clara I unjust both to yourself and me. Have Lever boasted of personal attrastions? Have I ever ascrib ed merit to myself on that account? No my Sister; on the contrary, would to God this envied beauty was a lump of deformity hideous to the beholders; So little is beauty estimated by me, and So little Satisfadlion do I expect from it.” — “Yes, it is by those arts you Seduce all mankind, by your ate fedled humility; but I have long Seen Brother Sees through sees you in your proper colours. Siren as you are! Your Mama, indeed, is still your dupe,, but from that you will reap little advantage.” — “Oh! Sister Sister (Said I,) Sorry, 
am I to See through you too; Sorry am .1 to See you bursting with envy towards one who stands in need of your pity and compassion.” — “Envy! envy! (she repeated,) Aifi I to be insulted thus? It is a sine time of day indeed, to be insulted by a younger 
Sister — 
through you; my Papa 
you; your 
ii2r E M M Af or. 
Sister — But my Papa shall know your ■usage of me, he shall, Miss eynmap Saying which, and bursting into tears, she flew downstairs. 
My own troubles were too great to Suffer me to reflect on the ill offices which my enraged Sister might do me. I Scarcely know what were my reflections on that head, or indeed any other; my senses Seemed exceedingly eonfused;, a train of melancholy ideas hurried through my brain; I was by turns giddy. Sick, and violently hot and cold; yet still my thoughts were bent on Courtenayand what he would Suffer when he knew the excess of affliction I had undergone for his sake. I repeated his name a thoiisand times; I called on him to protect and rescue me from the impending danger which threatened to overwhelm me. But should I recount all I thought and did, I fliali never make an end. Oh! Lady Lcuifay does not my justification begin to appear? Does not your heart melt lor the cruel, and, let me Say, unmerited Sufferings of your Friend You shall fooni have the rest of my unhappy story: In tha mean time think favourably of your 
E M M A C L E V E L A N D, 
L E .D 
Child ^ Sorrow. 113 
LETTER XIX 
Sr Lad; ^ Louisa Stretton. 
unmindful of the state of mind in which my Sister had left me, as you remember, i Sat ruminating on my Sad des tiny. About ten o’clock I prepared to go to bed, — to rest, you will readily believe, was impossible. While I was undressing, my Fanny siid into the room. “I have stolen hither, (Said she Softly,) just for one, moment; Mama sends you her Blessing by me, and an affecdonate kiss; she grieves that she dares not sold you in her maternal arms, but my Father has absolutely forbidden her to See you.” — “And you too my fanny.y I doubt, (Said I.) Oh! 
they rob me of every comfort, and expect I should be patient under my Ioffes.” — • “What, my dear Emma could you do to * Clara., to make her fo angry She came crying into the parlour; she has irritated my Papa very much against you.” — “I cannot help it, (Said I;) I am fo miserable to offend everybody thus; would to Heaven I was laid low in my grave!” — “Say not So, my Beloved, fsaid the dear little Girl,) make not So impious a wish. We must bear these evils. Ah I would to God I could bear a part of them, as I do. 
ith 
114 EMMA; or, 
in them! It is very hard, but James has been very angry with me for crying; and Surely that is the least we can do for So good and So Sweet a Sister — At least I think it little enough. I, alas! can do nothing else. But he vas very angry, indeed; he shook me by the shoulders So hard, that it pained me a long time after. Papa and Mama were in the room too. don’t you think it was very disrespeftful in him to his Parents “Oh! I, clasping her to my Suffered all this for my It is because you are fond of me, they are piqued against you. Go, 
use me So my Love, bosom,) sake that 
before (cried and you 
then, my Sweet Girl; do not stay to run the risst of having your other shoulder shaken. Inhuman Brother [ (added I, melting into tears,) do you thus envy me the pity of this little Angel “He may beat me to pieces, and threaten as much as he pleases, but I cannot help crying; if I had not then, I should have been choked; but no matter; he w'oujd not care if all the family were dead. So he was but happy with his fine Lady Belli“ 
“dear Faytny.^ (Said.!,) I am afraid my Brother will know you have been in my apartment; they certainly, meant to exclude you, from the. Same principle that I am denied the sight of my dear Mama. Your presence is as likely to harden my 
heart,, 
lihe Child Sorrow. 115 
heart, as my Father Says, as hers; but as hard as it is, I believe they will break it amongst them. If you are admitted into my mother’s room, whiiper in her ear how much I thank her for all her indulgences, and that I receive her Blessing as one of the greatest comforts I can taste. Good night! Good night! my beloved Fanny, You will not wish me pleasant dreams, and bid me think of your playfellow, as you did last night. Oh! Fanny,, what a difference! I may Say with Forrifmond. 
The world contains not So forlorn a Wretch! Let never man believe he can be happy! 
For when I thought my fortune most secure.. fatal moment tears me from my joys And when two hearts were join’d by mutual Love, The sword of Tyranny cuts upon the knot, 
And severs them for ever.” 
My voice faltered; poor 'Jenny gave me a Silent kiss, and bedewed my cheek with a friendly tear, and then withdrew Softly from my room. 
Ah! what a melancholy night I passed'.! Sleep a stranger to my eyes, and all comfort driven from my heart. Each moment my tortured fancy presented to my view my faithful, injured couuenay, I Saw hfs distradiion, I heard his exclamations, his vows of revenge. I beheld him in a thousand different situations, each more dreadful than the other. The darkness could 
not. 
Ii EMMA; or, 
not shut him out; still his image returnecf, and floated before my sight. The night before he had engrossed most of my thoughts but they were pleasing ones; I fell asseep while his idea was present to my memory, and in Soft dreams again rejoiced in his Society. Ah! what were now my waking visions? All horrid! all dreadful! and yet all unequal to my real state. 
I rose next morning more fatigued than I had lain down; my head more disordered, and my whole frame shattered. My griefs returned with the day; my soul sickened at the light of the Sun; I would have closed my eyes in Death, but that friendly visitor avoided me. 
I Sat with my eyes fixed on the floor, motionless, and every sense absorbed; I believe I was, at that time, incapable of the adt of thinkinm A little noise roused me 
O j 
from my reverie and I Saw a paper pushed under my door. “lam not quite forsaken, then, ” (exclaimed I, )Saying which, I hastily took it up, and found it to be a letter directed to Emma Woodville, The idea of my Mother being at the other fide of my door, and not daring to enter, and mingle her griefs with mine, or rather share mine alone; that idea, I say, struck me So forcibly, that for a time I could reflect: on nothing else, and was incapable of opening her dear Letter. I wept as if I had not till 
then 
northeast Child of Sorrow. 117 
then had cause to shed a tear. Ah! my dearest Mother, sobbed I, aloud, am I for ever deprived of your loved company; must! not again behold you, again cast myself at your honoured feet Surely this harsh, this cruel treatment, will harden my heart; more than my tender Mother participating in the affiidlions of that heart. 
I at length opened the Letter. I will copy it for you; the dear original I can never part with. 
To Emma Woodville. 
‘‘my dearest Child! to tell you my heart bleeds for the distress I cannot relieve, will, I doubt, only add to those distrcs fes I would die to remove; but it is in vain. I am not even allowed the Sad privilege of shedding my Sorrows in the bosom of my Emma. 
“I am Sorry to find your Sister Clara has So much infiuence over your Papa; she is enraged against my poor Child; though, as she herselr tells the Story, I think it rather against her. But I am accused of partiality in your favour; Surely they need not deny me my partiality ^ala&j I can only ashst you with my impotent wishes;; ^. 
“I would strengthen your mind, my Beloved, to enable you to bear a stroke' inevitable. How can I listen to your arguments against it, when on your compliance 

ii EMMA; or, 
pliance depends the welfare and honour of our house? Freely would I embrace Poverty, and all its concomitant evils, but I know not how to Support Infamy. — Consider, 1 am wounded in the tenderest part, through the sides of my Husband. Lord clevdand.s attachment to you Supersedes all other concerns. He dies for you; I hope his‘ gratitude will induce him to pay all that fond attention, which may Soften your destiny, and make you less dissatisfied with your portion in this life. Your consolation is, my Beloved, that with this life your troubles will cease. 
“You may imagine, that it is impossible to be happy with any other man than him whom your heart has chosen; you may likewise think that with him you must unquestionably be So. — Ah! my Etnma! I thought So too; but I have found it other v/ise. Men appear in very different lights in the day of courtship. All compliance to our little caprices, all siveetness, all love and tenderness; but when the intimacy of marriage renders them familiar, too often they cast off all these pleasing agretnent, and become totally the reverse. We may vainly flatter ourselves while in our maiden state, that we can put up with, anything in the man we love; but a heart that truly loves cannot fo easily bear those flights and neglects which are too frequently 
offered; 
l’he Child ^ Sorrow. 119 
offered; we sigh in Secret, and pine in anguish. 
“It is a certain truth, that the attachments of women encrease from the time that the men’s lessen. The reason is this. Gratitude is the main principle in the. breast of a woman *, it is the foundation and preserver of love in our hearts. We look up to the. men for protection, they afford it us; they do more; they flatter us for distinguishing them; they raise our opinion of ourselves; we are charmed with their condescension, in preferring our conversation, trifling as it is held to be, to the Society of all others; our Gratitude is painful till we can make a Suitable return; we repay them with our tenderest Affection. Would I could Say we are never deceived in them! But we must bear it as well as we are able, and make our own breasts our Confidantes and secret keepers. 
“Were it allowed me, my greatest joy would be to forward the union you So ardently wish for; but as I know this marriage with Lord Cleveland must take place, I would endeavour to arm you against the time. 
“His impetuosity, and the excels of his passion, make him impatient of the cold ness which appears on your side. You will not allow him the least merit, I doubt, from Such instances of his affection. Love, 
however. 
120 E M M A or, 
however, shows itielf differently sia different persons; nay. Sometimes wears a contrary appearance in the Same bosom. I hope he loves you; if he does sincerely, his behaviour, I pray God, may induce you to re sped him. Your happiness, my ever dear Emma is dearer to me than my own. I would forfeit all my hopes in this world to Secure yours. But think, my Love, what obligations you will confer on all your family; think, that we are all bound to do you obedience, as the Brothers of Joseph paid to him; you Save us from more than famine, you preserve our honour. 
“You are not insensible of the heartfelt Satisfaction of conferring benefits. You have all your life praftised it. Hov/ often have you relinquished pleasure to gratify your Brother or Sisters; yourself was always the last person thought of. Could my Emma then, but forget herself in this instance; could she but cheerfully approach the Altar, how great a weight of woe would she take off her mother’s heart? To see Smiles restored to her father’s brow, and peace to his bosom; to hear him breathe out his acknowledgments as he pressed her to his breast; ah 1 would not this be a recompense? Oh I my Emma, can you be inexorable? Can you be deaf to our entreaties??; my Child will consent; she will make this one, this only Sacrifice, 
and 
Child Sorrow. 121 
and restore that calm to a mother’s mind, which this event has driven thence. Adieu, my lovely Child 1 I write this while your Father is steeping. I dare not proceed farther, lest he should awake, and discover my employment — Yet if he should See it, would he think I was endeavouring to harden your heart? Surely not. 1 strive to reconcile you to a destiny as fixed and irrevocable • as death or Sat. Again, my Beloved, my Darling, adieu. My arms achto strain you £0 the tender bosom of. 
Your ever affedlionate Mother, 
C Woo D VIL L E.” 
My mother’s tender letter overwhelmed my Soul with grief; I looked for consoia •tion, but found only despair. My Mother pointed out my miscry; but, alas! the remedy was nowhere to be discovered. My heart (hard as my Father thought it was) was not proof against the distresses of my Family. The Severest torture that the ingenuity of a spanijid Inquisitor could invent, my firm heart should have endured to have preserved my fidelity unshaken. But here were cords to pull it e’en to bursting. No sijbterfuge Seemed lest for me, but one, and that my piety, my religion forbade; like Arpajiai I resolved to live and dare to be unhappy. 
Vol. I. G i took 
12j2 E M M As 
I took my pen to write to my Mother; my tears obliterated each line. Two hours had elapsed, yet still I was incapable of •tracing the purposes of my soul. Alas! I hardly knew myself what they were. A Servant came to acquaint me breakfast waited — I started at the Sound: Unwilling to discover myself before a Domestic, I •concealed my distress — “I will come, (answered I;) but if possible contrive to Send Fanny to me.” — The dear Girl tripped lightly up the stairs. She ssew into my .arms, “Come down, my dear Emma., (Said she,) my Papa will not take notice of your fracas with Clara; he will not receive you wish anger.” — “To what is this .change owing, my fannyp"" — “To the interposition of Lord Cleveland, he has insisted on your being permitted to attend or tetire from the Company when you please, and that you are treated wish less rigour.” — “I am much obliged to him for his confi ■<leration, when it is owing to him alone I am not the happiest Creature in the world. But let them have nothing on our part to condemn. Let us, my Love, go down, though, I suppose, we must not go down together.” - — “Alas, my dear Sister, (Said Fannyf) you do not Seem as if you were able to Set one Soot besore the other; you are as : pale as ashes — Oh, Emma, Emma! how has few hours grief altered you. But I must 
not 
he Child Sorrow. 123 
not stay to indulge my concern. Come down, my Sweet Sister, as Soon as you can, ” As Fanny Said, I was hardly able to creep down the stairs. Supporting myself by the bannisters all the way; I trembled to So great a degree, through excess of grief and weakness, that I had like to have fallen when I made a curt’sy at entering the room. I dared not trust myself to look at my Mother, who Sat at the tea table. No one Spoke to me on my coming in but Lord Cleveland; he paid me the compliment of the morning. I bowed my head, but could not raise a word. I Supported myself by the backs of the chairs till I had reached my Seat. My Mother gently stole her hand under the table, and pressed mine as it lay in my lap. Her attention to me affected me very much. When she put the tea cup into my hand, it shook So much I thought it would drop out of my hand. “Put it down, my Love, (Said my Mother,) Set it down, my Dear, and compose yourself.” — I cast my eyes round the table, to examine the different countenances of the Company : In my father’s there was a steady contradlion of the muscles, and an uneasy anxious observance of Lord Cleveland and me. In my mother’s there were the strongest marks of grief, chastised by fear. In my sister’s brow sat peevish Envy and exulting Triumph, at Seeing proud Beauty humbled G 2 in 
S 24 F M M A 5 cran 
the dust. janied.s mouth was drawn up into a haughty Sneer, not deigning to cast, a strait glance on the Company. The muscies of my dear Fanny face were working; she looked as if she had the greatest difficulty to restrain her tears, stealing a look now and then at me; Sometimes, when she dared, at James or Claras then at Lord Cleveland, ^ as her Sweet eyes could venture. Lord Cleve iand I had but one slight look at. He Seemed dissatisfied, yet more attentive and civil than the day before. I felt a gleam ofcom. fort arise in my breast on the occasion : I thought, could I address him by himseff, I might prevail on him to release my Father from the proseclition, without constraining me to be the Sacrifice. 1 intended to bind myself never to marry Mr. Courtenay., or any .other Man, without his consent. I judged ■that my faithful Edward would feel jess afflistion infinitely, at losing all hopes of marrying me, if no other received those vows stue to him alone *, and to Save him pain was all my joy and all my hope. If (Said I to myseff,) Lord Cleveland's, passion is not .astuateel by the basest of all principles, he ecan never receive pleasure from an union with one whose heart is devoted to another. He may have generosity; at least I will make the effort — The civility of his beha .yiour inspired these hopes. I revolved them in my mind; I anticipated the happiness I 
sheuia 
northeast Child of Sorrow. 
should enjoy; my flattering wishes gave brightness to my countenance; I felt my cheeks mantle with the blush of expectation. 
When breakfast was ended, I found my Mother and Sisters were preparing to quit the room — I rose — “Stay, Emma., (Said my Father,) Lord Cleveland is, desirous of having Some conversation with you.” I retook my Seat. My Brother next walked out, and then my Father; now, thought I, an opportunity presents itself, I will, if possible, as sume courage to Speak to his Lordship, and heaven prosper me! 
Lord Cleveland began a long Speech, ' of unmeaning professions, and unwelcome compliments, on my charms, ci cur him short, by Saying, “I wished not to hear Such encomiums on my person; that I should never cease to think myself unfortunate, in creating a passion in his lordship’s breast, since I could make no return, wherein the heart had any concern, as that had been unalterably fixed before I had the least notion of his intentions in my favour.” — I was proceeding, when my Father entered with an angry countenance: “perverse Girl! (Said he,) will you for ever abuse my indulgence? — Do not, my Lord, attend ta her flimsy and romantic Scruples; her head is absolutely turned by the cursed nonsense she has read in Novels. To these fine Sentimental geniuffes every trifling occurrence in G 3 life 
126 EMMA; or, 
lise is an adventure. Their high flown imaginations are shocked at the ordinary addresses of men — Would but your Lordship Scale my garden wall, kill my miastiff, and assist her in jumping out of a window, and breaking the hearts os her Parents, all would go very right; no objedlions would then arise: But these plain doings, these rent roll and parchment weddings, are quite out of the way with these modern heroines.” 
Ah 1 my Louisa! how was I to bear these Scornful reproaches? Yet I dared not Say one word, could I have had power to articulate a Sentence. But terror and disappointment Sealed my lips. My Father would no longer give me the chance of winning over Lord Cleveland — My God! and what chance had I of Succeeding with himi have Said my Father was ambitious to a great degree; he would not have been So Satisfied, even if his former wishes had been successful; that is, had Lord Cleveland released him in an honourable manner, and fixed my brother’s Settlement, he would not, I Say, have felt himself So Satisfied as in the prospedl: of having an Earl for his son-in-law; therefore, you See, an objection would have remained on his fide, even if I could have obviated all others. Little chance, indeed, should I have had with his Lordship, for his love was become So violent, that my Father ventured to tell him, he would not accept of his bounty 
imlels 
libe Child Sorrow. 127 
unless he married his Daughter. I cari' hardly think it possible a Father could So cruelly condemn his Daughter to certain misery, unless he had been strongly wrought on. My inhuman Brother was certainly at the bottom of this, equally on account of his dissike to Mr. Courtenay to whom he could form no reason, but that he was dear to me, and likewise to forward his own ambitious Schemes with Lady Bell hajlingsy who, it may be presumed, would have less reluflance to come into our family, after an Earl had allied himsclf to it; therefore, you see, it was necessary a vidiim should be offered, and I was judged fittest to be that victim. I was constrained to Seem to listen' to the tender discourfes of Lord Cleveland; however, I lent him a patient ear. There was no occasion for my answering questions, which were as much applied to my Father as me. In this miserable state I was kept two hours, and then was permitted to retire. 
I am rather premature in acquainting you with my father’s resolution, on the conviction of the extent of Lord Cleveland's passion for me, since I knew it not ’till Some days after; if I had, I might have Spared myself the pains of making the application. However Sanguine in the hope of Success, I wrote a Letter to Lord Cleveland which at night I conveyed, by the hand of my good little Fam^^ into his room. It ran thus: 
G 4 “My 
128 
E M M A; t?r. 
“My Lord, 
“Awed by the presence of my Father, I was prevented laying besore you the true state of my heart. What misery that heart has endured since your declaration in my favour, the extreme alteration of my features but too truly indicate. 
“My Lord, when you arrived here, the Sun shone not on a more happy young woman; happy in her fiimily’s affection;; in her prospedls of future felicity. Alas! novr how changed is the Scene! Can your Lordship really love me If So, how different does that passion adluate different minds. 1 love, my Lord; I have the courage to avow it; nor am I too bold in my avowal; since but a week ago my attachment was authorised by my Father, and in a few weeks hence would have been Sandified by marriage. Yet, my Lord, I would not Seek the disadvantage of the man I profess to esteem above alsothers; I would not take advantage of a distressed family, to plunge the object of my affection in endless misery; I would not do all this, and a thousand other things, to prove my love — But thus you do. Oh! Lord Cleveland what happiness dp you pro mise yourself from this fatal marriage? Union I will not call it, for there can be none between us. — If you still persist in your cruel purpose, I know of no remedy, I must become your wretched wife. L remains then in your 
own 
Child c Sorrow. 129 
own breast to raise me to endless happiness, or sink me to eternal misery. 
“If compassion should touch your breast for one of the most forlorn of her Sex, I wru ' bind myself, by the strongest vows, never to become the Wife of any Man. With joy will I live in eternal celibacy — Nay, wjh' Seclude myself for ever from all Society; any, the most rigorous laws you can impose' I will cheerfully Submit to, rather than take a false oath in the presence of God. Oh! ’ my Lord! Spare me the wounds my conscience would receive, if at the Altar I am constrained to vow love and honour to you,, while my Soul, and all its astedtions, are devoted to another. — In pity to me, in pity to yourself, relinquish the cruel purpose of forcing me to become your wife. Never shall L cease lifting up my Soul in prayer for your happiness, if you grant my petition. I ash but to pass a single life; I can forego happiness;, but, oh! 1 cannot embrace misery. Pardon me, my Lord, I entreat you, if 1 have expressed myself with an undue warmth — but think what I have at stake, my eternal my everlasting happiness. 
“In the blessed hope that your Lordship will be convinced that a marriage with me will be produdlive of endless disquiet to yourself, and that! shall receive no more per * secutions on your account, I subscribe myself, My Lord, your lordship’s ever grateful, Emma Woodville.’®" 
130 E M M A; or. 
That night I enjoyed a little repose, from the ease I had giveri my heart, by the step I had pursued. But the next morning too fatally convinced me, of the fallacy of my hopes, of touching the heart of Lord clena land with compassion. He made a most barbarous use of my Letter. Permit me, Louisa,, he is your relation, to call his conduct barbarous in the highest degree. 
At breakfast he told my Father, “It was in vain for him any longer to amuse himself with the hope of gaining my heart, for that I was resolutely bent on running any rilk rather than become his Wife.” My heart beat So violently I thought it would have burst; yet I knew not whether I should attribute it to joy or fear. My Father Soon made that no longer a matter of doubt.. 
My Lord, (Said he) I cannot answer for the perversity of a woman’s heart, therefore cannot venture to assure you, that you may possess that of the most obstinate and headstrong girl in the world; but as to her hand, I here bind myself, by the most Solemn oath, (which, my Dear, is too shocking for me to repeat,) that her hand shall be yours; by all the power and authority that God and Man has given me over her, I will drag her to the Altar.” 
Think, Louisa, what were my feelings at that horrid moment! *' Hear me, thou un dutiful wretch, (cried my Father) hear me, 
thou, 
The Child Sorrow. 131 
thou, who canst bear to see thy family sinking in ruin, and yet refusest thy voice to Save it — Mark my words, and tremble at their purpose.’* 
The violence of his expressions, his looks and threats, were too much for feeble nature to Support, A faint sickishness came over me, and I Sunk into a state of total insenfi bility. I remained a long time in this envied forgetfulness of the world, and all its troubles. When I came to myself, I found I was laid on my bed, and a Servant of my mother’s in my room. I lay a considerable time before I recovered the full use of my fenses, stupidly looking about, but without ^ After a while I Spoke to the maid, and asked for my mother. She Said she was in her chamber. I then recollected I must not See her; and fetching a deep sigh, I bid her draw the curtains, and leave me to myself. It is impossible to tell you the anguish I endured, the bitter ressedions I made on my cruel destiny, and the many tears I shed. ** witness for me! (cried I aloud, and starting from the bed, lifting up my wretched hands to Heaven,) witness Sor me, thou who Seest all hearts, what agonies I have endured to preserve my fidelity to my Edward! Impute not, O Lord! to me the evil that may ensue from the violent measures which are used to Sever two faithful hearts. Strengthen, I beseeeh thee, the heart of my G 6 Courtenay; 
132 E M MA j cr, 
Courteney; teach him to bear my loss with fortitude; and, oh! may he never know what anguish now rends my soul; he them may recover that peace of mind which I have lost for ever. To Save a Sinking family, I offer myself a victim at thy Altar, and, oh! may thy mercy strike me dead when I have given my hand.’* My strength failed me, 1 Sunken my knees by the bed side;, I leaned over it, and poured forth my Soul in prayer for Some time; I rose, strengthened both in mind and body. I no longer made an opposition in my own mind to the op^ pressions that were heaped on me. I became calm — in short, the agitation of my Spirits had deprived me of the power of sense — weakness alone had blunted the arrow of Adversity. It was not So much a state of calmness as stupidity. I rang, my hell — my Fanny came. “Thank God! thank God! (cried she, clasping her hands, and then running to me, and throwing her arms round my neck,) thank God! my Sister is recovered! Oh! my Emma what have I not Suffered on your account!” “I thank you, my Love, (Said I, returning her embrace) I thank you for all your Sufferings, but it is unjust you should endure any more for one who has left off Sorrowing,, on her own account. lam now resigned, my dear Fanny; I can meet the stroke without shrinking back. While my Soul could flatter 
itself, 
Lhe Child Sorrow, 
ksels, I indulged a Secret hope, but that is' over. despair has now possessed the place of all the more delicate sensations, and I no longer struggle against the stern, the harsh, decrees of a h’ather.” Fanny fixed her eyes steadfastly on me for Some minutes without Speaking, then turning her head aside, her labouring heart gushed out in tears. “Why do you weep my Fanny? (asked I, with tender concern,) my tears are all exhausted, and in the frame of mind I now am, I think I could See the wreck of the world, and alh ks inhabitants perishing without a tear or Sigh.’* 
“’tis that, kis that, (Sobbed Fanny) that makes we weep; oh! Emma., that mournful settled look of yours distradls me. Oh! that your eyes could run over like mine, to wash away that fell despair which Seems to have taken hold of you. Conssder, my dearest Ernmny we must bear the evils of life — I tremble for you.” 
“I am but too well convinced that we must bear the evils which are inssifled on us: I am determined to Support my part,, dreadful as it is. And now, Fanny I will, depute you to go to my Father, and tell him, I no longer Seek to oppose his will; he may dispose of me as he pleases; the world, and all its concerns,, are now indifferent to me. I have looked round on every fide foi comfort, I have found none: I have looked 
forward 
B3i4 EMMA;, eff forward for hope, but in the wide prospedb before me I can See nothing but despair;, I no longer war against my destiny: It is inevitable, and I Submit. Go then, my Fanny and make known this alteration in my Sentiments.” 
“I dare not leave you alone (Said she;) the mournful cast of your countenance, and the deep Solemnity of your words, terrify me beyond all human conception, excnse me, 1 cannot leave you, unless you will permit me to ring the bell for your Maid.” 
“And can you think I am So wholly forsaken of God as to fear I should rush into his presence unsummoned? No, my. Fannytho’ I So calmly consign my mortal part to endless misery, I have a regard to my Soul. Heaven will not impute to me the sin of taking a false oath in its presence. it knows how I am constrained. There will then be no hazard in leaving me. Think not I would deceive you. I promise you most faithfully, that my life, deplorable as its state must be,! will endeavour to preserve.” Thus assured, she left me. She presently returned, with the request of my Father, that I would come down into the Parlour if I was able, or else the family would meet me in my mother’s dressing-room. I chose the latter. With difficulty I reached it. My Mother was not there. I had indulged the hope of Seeing her first. 
My 
tihe Child of Sorrow. I 
My Father approached me, and asscesh me, “Whether I had commishoned my Sister Fanny to Speak the truth? Do not : deceive me, (continued he,) did you mean; what you Said?” I bowed, but was too ‘ weak to Speak. “Then you are again my Child, (cried he, and clasped me to his bosom, and kissing my cheek,) then, do I again embrace my emmav This Sudden change was almost more than my harraffed shul could Support. I thought I should again have fainted. “My Lord Cleveland: (Said my Father,) take the hand of your destined Wife. Receive her, she is yours.’* What, but a total privation of fense, could Support me through this Scene } I neither Sighed, nor shed one tear; Nature Seemed to be exhausted by the constid, and I only breathed to evince my existencb. Lord Cleveland took my passive hand from my Father, and lifted it to his lips. I received the thanks of my Brother and Sister; they jointly begged that a mutual amnesty should pass between us. I promised them I would, cease to remember what had passed. I then, in a voice hardly articulate, alked to see my Mother. “Can you Support her tenderness ?” (Said my Father.) “Yes; Sir, (I answered)) can affect me.” My Mother folded me in her arms,, “Oh! my Child! my Emma! am I then permitted to embrace thee ?” I returned her 
caresses. 
136 EMMA; or, 
caresses. She seemed hardly able to give credit to her eyes and ears. “Is it pos sible V she exclaimed many times. “Can this be real! To what blessed change is this owing?” 
“Examine not too dole, my dear Madam, (Said I;) you See me calm; but probe not my Soul with questions, lest you agaim raise emotions which now Seem Subsided. I cannot answer for what further changes may ensue.” My Mother sighed, and wiped" away a tear. 
“You have now, in our presence, given your hand to Lord Cleveland. (Said my Father,) by which is implied your Solemn promise to be his. You meant So Emmaf* — “I did, ” cried I, faintly. “Then you can have no objection to this business being forwarded as fast as poshble: ” 
“I can only answer for the present moment, (I replied;) since there is no way left me to avoid my fate,. I would gladly have it over.” 
“Say then, my lovely Charmer, (cried Lord Cleveland, preshng my hand,) Say then, when you will pronounce me happy ?” 
■ — “If the possession of that hand alone, can make you happy, let it be Soon; that is all the favour I beg; tonight— — — give me not time for restedlion.” My Lord left the room instantly, and dis patched an express for a licence. My family 
lihe Child ^^sorrcrw. 137* 
•mily all hung about me, expressing their obligations to me for restoring peace to their hearts, and affluence to their house. 
I know not in what manner I received or answered their acknowledgements. I certainly was not clear in my head. And who can wonder at the mind being weakened which had received Such shocks. That night my careful Mother never left me. She made me take a composing draught to lull my Sorrows, and compose my head. The next morning there was a wimness in my looks, and a hurrying way of Speaking, which alarmed her very much. I Suffered myself to be dressed for the ceremony without the least opposition on my part. Alas 1 what did it Signify? I uttered not a complaint; Silence sat on my lips; but there was a tempest within that baffles all der Scrip tion. 
I was conveyed into the coach, more dead than alive, I had not power to stand without Support. During the fatal Ceremony, (which bound me to misery, and for ever, in this world. Separated me from what alone could make life desirable,) I was Scarcely Sensible. A whirl of thoughts ran through my head, and the confusion of it can never be expressed. Ah! what are the terrors of death, if they exceed what I then felt? It is impossible death can ever give greater pains: 
“For 
i3 B EMMA; or“ 
“if it be 
sthe pangs, the throes, the agonising struggle When soul and body part. Sure I have felt it. And there’s no more to fear.” 
But what became of me when Lord Cleveland threw his arm round me, and Saluted me as his Wife! My Soul sickened at the sound, and fainted within me. A Series of Swoonings Succeeded; I know not how I was got home. I found myself on a Sofa, my Mother supporting me in her arms. The first thing which struck my view, was the Ring, emblem of my misfortunes! 
“What have I done! what have I done! (I cried in a frantic accent, and wringing my hands;) I have parted with my peace for ever! Oh! I am wretched for ever !*' — - “Peace, my Child, (Said my Mother,) your duty now calls on you to suppress all the emotions which the business of the day has rendered unlawful. You have vowed before the Lord, in his Temple, and shall not that Vow be heard Already is it enrolled in the volumes of Fate. You are nov the Wife of Lord Cleveland., and you well know that state urges you to Obedience and Love. You must now forget everything which interferes with your duty. It is in your power alone to make your Marriage happy, or otherwise. Your virtue, piy Love, must Secure you from all improper affedtioas; and may the merciful ' Fathi^ 
tihe Child Sorrow. 139 
Father of Heaven make you happy in the lot you have been constrained to draw !”. 
My mind was too much disturbed to attend to the conversation of my Mother. All Society was painful; I begged her to leave me. When I was alone, I gave a free indulgence to all my Sad thoughts. • — And have I, then, left you for ever? (cried I, bursting into tears.) Have I really given you up, and wedded another? Ah! then, what a wretch am iwhat will be your Sufferings Yet, if I can, let me mitigate them. Should he think me false, through my sex’s pronenest to change, he will no longer esteem me; he will, in time, cease to love me. Ah! to what a pitiable state am I reduced, that I fnould wish to be no longer loved by him, for whom I would freely die! 
My Mother came to me; I informed her of my intention to write to him. — “Never, for god’s Sake, (Said she,) never let him know; never use his name, — you will render yourself criminal by pronouncing it. Let him think you was inconstant, and dazzled with the splendour of a Title; let him imagine you unworthy of his love; let him forget you; and may the Almighty grant you may forget him, since the thinking of him is incompatible with your duty 1” — “Fear not, my dear mad^n; your datighter’s ill fortune and 
dis 
140 E M M A; cr, 
distresses shall never call a blush on your cheek; the Law of God shall ever be the rule of my conscience, and my conscience shall ever be a check on the actions of my life. I am unhappy, I fear I must ever be So; but I will have this consolation, a heart free from ill doing. My Virtue and Religion shall Support me, and enable me tc> bear an existence painful to me! On me,, you Say, depends my happiness or misery; alas! it now depends on another. Lord Cleveland knows too well, my heart has been long devoted to another; he will be jealous, be suspicious; but do you, my dear Mother, take Some opportunity of assuring him, that my Virtue may be myr Security; that I am as truly his, as if my heart had never known another attachment; and that it shall be my constant endeavour to make him forget I ever was. averse to being his Wife.” 
Perhaps, my Dear, you will think I had not yet recovered the use of my reason; but it was too late to struggle; I was become a wise. It was my duty, my interest, to bear my hard lot without comsplaining. I knew the sight of the man, I had given up for ever, would render me miserable; therefore I ardently wished never to See him. I never have; and Heaven grant I never may! I have, never since my total Separation from him, pronounced his name, nor ever, till 
this. 
he Child of Sorrow. 141 
nhis recital of my misfortunes, mentioned or traced his name with my pen. But, ah! it is written in indelible characters in my heart, and I have oft striven in vain to drive it from my remembrance. You are the first from whom I have received intelligence concerning him. — Oh! Louisa! what has not this fatal attachment cost me! But I run into refiedions instead of reciting fads. 
I believe my Mother made a faithful relation to Lord Cleveland of what I had Said. There was a tenderness in his manner which he never assumed before. I remarked it — my Mother pointed it out to me. — But, ah! my Louisa., his love — ohl hovi shall I express to you how ungrateful to my Soul were the instances'of his love. 
I entreated him to carry me to Cleveland place. I could not bear to be in a place which had been the Scene of the greatest happiness and misery which the human heart can experience. On the Second day we Set off for this house. Here have I worn three years away unblessing and unblest. Lord Cleveland's temper is not formed to conciliate the heart; you have Seen Some proofs that it is not. I have strove, I daily strive, to See him in the most favourable light, more particularly since I have become a Mother by him. I wish to feel for him,, a part of that affection I feel for his Child. Why will he, by a thousand little nameless 
foibles 
142 EMMA; or, 
foibles and imperfections, render my task impradlicable ^ My Soul is gentle, and, though it is utterly impossible it ever should love another object, yet it might have been So far won over to his side, to have looked up to him with gratitude. I might have es teemed him as a friend in whom I could trust. But there is Such a dishmilarity of Sentiment between us, that a mutual pashon is not in nature to expect. I have, however, I can with the stridlest truth assert, I have ever paid him the most inviolable attention, I have been studious to please him, yet I do not Succeed. He knew the state of my heart, yet, he Says, he is convinced of its, rectitude and virtue. He says he places an unlimited confidence in me, and I never will abuse it. 
But to return to my Family: — My Brother Soon became the Husband of Lady Bell iiajlings. — His ambition was gratified, but not his happiness Secured. Her temper is too Similar to his own to admit of felicity in their union. We have very little intercourse with them. — My Sister Clara is married, I doubt very unhappily; — yet her’s was a match of love. Her Husband is an Officer in the Guards, but of very Small fortune, and still more indifferent morals and character. My dear little Fanny lives at home with my Father and Mother, and will be a lasting honour and comfort to them. You 
northeast Child c/*.sorrow. 143 
You have now before you, my dear Lady Louifay an Apology, I may say, for my conduct— — you have gone along with me in the recital, I doubt not you have felt Some Sorrow. I do not wish — ah! why do I ex press myself thus languid ^ — I beg, I entreat you not to allow your unfortunate guest to peruse this. More tenderness appears in it, than the Wife of Lord Cleveland should ex press for one, who is not, never can be anything to her. In pity to me, in pity to your friend, do not difclose this Sad story to him. Ah! Louisa! my wounds bleed asresh. Would to Heaven I had never heard of him I Time and my unwearied efforts had a little blunted the poignancy of my griefs, this recital has sharpened every sting, and I feel his Sufferings again. Oh, Louisa! according to the common course of nature, how many years of anguish may I not endure — old as I am in affliction, I am yet very young in age — I am not yet twenty-one — and but three wretched years have yet worn themselves away. 
My dear, I depend on your discretion; 1 have laid my heart before you; I could •not bear to be hardly thought of by you, but now beg that you treasure up my story in your own bosom, and Sometimes remember your unhappy 
Emma Cleveland. 
L E 
x44' EMMA; orf 
LETTER XX 
To Lady Cleveland. 
Remember thee! Yes, Iwill remember thee, ni wipe from my memory all fond records else, and thou alone shalt sill my soul. Oh! my excd lestt Lady Cleveland., can you forgive my expressionsyet, if you can, how shall I forgive myself? But pity for the distress of the most amiable man in the world urged me to condemn you. How apt are we to judge from the outward face of things. Your hapless story will teach me another lesson. I shall be cautious for the future how I pass a rash censure. 
But I have another petition to make to you, I trust to your goodness for forgive ness. I could not bear any one should think you deserved the cruel epithets of false ind ungrateful, nay, the tears I shed over your melancholy story too plainly told the cause. It was known I had received Letters from Cleveland place, My distress was visible. Mr. Courtenay begged to know the Source of my concern; I owned it was ■caused from your Letters. “You have ■been deceived, (Said I,) Lady Cleveland is much to be pitied.*’ — “Is she So? (he asked eagerly;) and will you not, my dear Lady Louisa tell me why ^ ' I know I am 
wrong 
sphe Child Sorrow. 145 
wrong to indulge myself with any circunv stances that increase my misfortune, yet I cannot avoid the inquiries, which the certainty of your, knowing Something of that once loved woman’s history, excites in me, I own I wish her not to be below my esteem; one’s self-love is wounded by the refledlion, that thofewhom we cannot cease to love are unworthy our Smallest estimation, ” — “But will not the perfect knowledge of her Sufferings pierce your heart with keen anguish V — “It may, it may; but yet my curiosity supersedes all other considerations. I cannot be sunk lower in misery than I am already plunged. My grief may take a new turn: I may receive consolation in finding her less faulty than appearances represent her.” — “Then take these Papers.. Retire to your own room; witnesses, I doubt, would distress you. The heart, though wholly unacquainted with the lovely Writer, which is unmoved at her Sad story, must be a Savage one.” 
You will blame me, my dear Lady land. but I could not refuse him. Oh! how my heart Swells at the condu6t of Lord Cleveland. I disclaim all kindred with him. How could he resist your Letter? i fe knows not what Love means. His passion was irnpiovis to the highest degree. And must Such a man render my Friend miserable for ever? How hard is Fate. I cease vol. L " It ' not 
E M M A; 
Sot from thp begshning to be arigry at your j. calshim so^that James 
ii^p, odvhuy with, Ms fim ila4y Beilin as the efmya2i, yyou must bring me ac <^uainted with that dear Girl; I long to embrace her, and thank her for her tenderness to you. 
Lord stneturi has risen highly in niy esteem, on occasion of the interest: he has; taken in your Story. We mingled our tears together. I have not Seen our poor Friend since I gave him your Papers, which was last night. I Sent to him this morning, he begged our excuse of his attendance at breakfast. Ah 1 what will he fed while his heart bleeds in every line.? Will not all his griefs be renewed.? Alas! I fear this recital will prey on your mind too much — It must awaken those emotions, which time had lulled, not destroyed. oji! good God! what evils, what endless evils .are produced from Love! Why are we anitious to fall into its Snares.? Am I not mprally certain of a more felicitous chance in marrying a man I esteem,, than if I felt all that .fervency of attachment, which is fo.often the Source of “exquisite pain?’* Ever, ever may my breast be a stranger to its joys. Since its anxieties and disquiets So; pver balance them! 
I own I did begin to experience Some f its, alarms; I found myself insensibly 
growing 
"i!he Child Soil row. 
growing partial to Conway but for the ilk fated Courtenay I feeloihly pitv.. Rh'jdgl^ I know f the passiost to lard shy for the future, i became b^nsive, ans oftentimes melancholy. When the idea of Lordobtruded itself, I could not drive' it away, as 1 formerly boasted, witfi any trifle; no, it returned, after 'every effort, liiore painful. I dreaded the time of his arrival. I pidured him in my niinci disagreeable, haughty, and of a disposition not to'be loved: In short, I fancied I should find him the reverse of Conway and that thought contributed to my inquietude. Thank Heaven, Lord Stretton made himself known just in time to Save me from plunging myself in endless misery; for Such I should have been involved in, had not my partiality received' this Suddeii check. My uneasihefy, however, would not have been So great, but for the self condemnation'1 loaded myself with.' I even upbraided myself of a breach of cohtract. I had engaged, jn my own mind, (the fashe with she'as' if I hast had a thou Sand witnesses,,) that shy heart should accoshpapy shy hand sh shy 'lliiiori viisth my Father’^ choice, nd ihdped soit ought, otherwise my being, annexed to the estate was rather hanging a dead weight upon it, as that was to be his whether I consented or not. 
H 2! 
I left 
'E M M A 5 cf", 
r ■ _______________- ■ 
left my Letter open, in hopes I might : have found Something to communicate to ■yoiir jyad3dhip worth your notice. I am lorry that I must tell you poor Courtenay is mtich indisposed. No wonder! Lprd Stretton I revere shim more and more) pays the stridest attentiori to him. He Slept ijk)t last isight; • however, I hope his afflic tibn will Subfide. There is a happy facility interwoven in the human frame, that we in time Submit patiently to evils for which .there is no remedy. Time is the Paraclete which affords us consolation, or rather blunts the edge of Sorrow. Oh! may Sorne Such friendly hand interpose to heal the wounds of disunited hearts. I cosild fit and form wishes, but I had better not; they would .only Soften yo; U too.much. Yet I will hazard one: I wish I could have concealed your affesting Story from Courtenay. I doubt I have contributed to sill his breast with anguish, and rpb shis nights of Soft ^•epose. 
^elje, ye.nip.> my ever dear Emma 
Yours most faithfully, il>ouisa Stretton;, 
LETHE 
G HIL n c/’ S o R R o w, 14, ^ 
L E T T E R XXL 
Lcidy Louisa S t r e t t o ns 
LAS! my Louisa! and is he mstcte indisposed? I tremble, I die with expedlation of hearing of him. ease my heart, for heaven’s sake! ease my heart, did I sayno, Louisa - it can never know. It melts at the distress of Courtenay, more than ever it melts at those of your Emma. Why did I indulge my pen with the fatal recital I Why did I renew both his griefs and my own? And could she still love me, though he thought me false and tmgrateful? — Your Letter lies before mei peruse it a thousand and a thousand times. 
In your next Letter, too, you write his name — Ash! what emotion I then felt. It was the first time I had Seen it written since my woes commenced. • / 
“Oh! name forever, for ever dear,.. Still breath’d in Sighs, still usher’d with a tear.” 
Write to me, I beg, I entreat you; tell me all; let me know the worst. What is there in nature to expect worse than I have experienced? Torn, divided from myself, lost to all the Social joys of life, buried in the early part of my life, and doomed to endless inquietude. Yet bear thy Seif up, my heart, Sustain the discomsorts which are H 3 laid 
I j; o E M M A; or 
laid on thee with an iron hand, and receive tssis. conshiauoii,, that thysgrie^ are mortal w.lsise. thy reward wjls be permanent and eterrial 
Oh! my Louifd I how happy should I be today my head down on my pillow, and forget all my Sorrows in the p; raye!, A imotlter’s affeaion at this moment Speaks within me; .shall 1 then leave shy Child, my Harriet f A h! no, let me, for her sake, bear the ills of life. My heart has been So long a prey to anguish, that, as d have Said before, an habitual melancholy has, taken posseshon of me; wonder not, then, that I give way to the most gloonfy presages : I anticipate time; I See my lovely Harriet in the Same forlorn Situation as her poor mother. The extreme meekness of, her disposition, the awe she Seems to stand in of her Father, though I have done everything to make her love him with love vjhjch cajieth off fear but still a harsh word makes her tremble. Good God'! what will become of me, if I should see my Child as wretched as her Parent. Merciful Heaven! avert the cruel decree.' ' / 
Has not my bosom 'ehotigh of its own Sorrows, but I must Search into futiirity ‘how weak I am; but I' will strive to conquer this fatal propensity of borrowing from distant times a portion of evil, since to me fufficknt it) the day is theavil thereof.: 
Am 
l’he Ch I L d S ar r o’w, i 51 
Am i not indulging an iniproper curiosity, in wishing to know the drcutiistancea of our unfortunate Frienff s life during the last thrj^e, y; e2.rs f Ah! I need not ash you that question — The blush oh my cheek, and the,, disorder of whole frame, tell me I am wrong. Am I less prudent than I was ‘three years ago ^ I would riot then make the least inquiry. I strove to forget him.; I used the harshest endeavours to drive him from my heart. — What am I now doing.? Is it not as criminal as formerly? It is, it is. Oh! Louisa f write not. Speak not of him. Dear as he is to me, I mush I must tear his image from; my heart; more than ever must I struggle against this fatal attachment. — Alas! more difficult than ever is my tash. Assist me then, my Friend; strengthen in me every' good resolution, to drive him, if possible, from the recesses of my soul. Do not indulge me, if I appear ever So importunate, in the least intelligence concerning that unfortunate man. Enough shall I have, to encounter from my own rebel heart. Ah I 1 feel the eonffid; will be great; but I must conquer or die. Oppose, then, with the utmost rigour, all the soft emotions of my soul, which fate and circumstances have combined to make criminal in me to foster. No, dear, long indulged, but fatal and H 4 guilty 
15 2 E M M A i 
guilty ideas sty, sty far away. Fly, for ever sty from the unhappy 
Emma Cleveland. 
LETTER XXII 
t0 Lady Cleveland. 
^ O not, my ever amiable Emma, torture your gentle bosom with vain fears. In a breast where Virtue has fo long resided, there can be no danger; why then should you deprive yourseif of the mourn i'ul Satisfadlion of partaking of the distresses of our Friend Why should you charge me to be for ever Silent on that head? Is it then possible you should charm yourself to forgetfulness ^ No; you Say of all Sciences, is the hardest. A free communication of your grief is the most likely method of attainlhg that calm, which a mind, totally ‘dc’v'oid of guilt, ought to feel. It will be rlo impeachment of your Vow to receive from me the recital of our friend’s Story. Do you think a Vow, paid to a human Being, is as Sacred as that paid to God? And did not Eloifa corre ^ond with Abelard, after they had Separately devoted themselves to a religious life? Aheodofms 2rciaconfiantia too, poured out their Sandbfied loves in epistles. these 
are 
The Child Sorrow. 15j 
are not fictitious characters, but really lived, and were, like my dear Friends, unfortunate. 
No, my Love, you must not refuse to hear ^ not a word will there be in the whole Narrative, which can offend the ear of a Vestal, His pashon is not less pure, than it is constant. He has the Same delicate Sentiments on your Situation, that yourself entertain. Ah I he is your exact counterpart. Why were Such kindred minds Southeast paratest? 
You may blame me for acting contrary to yourlastsinstructionsj shut Hind it wholly impossible to comply. Speak not., write »«?/, you Say. My heart is full of the Subi ject; I cannot restrain my pen; it hurries me away; my hand involuntarily, too catches the Soft contagion; therefore, if 1 write at all, he must, now and then, she my shbject: Either you must; lose my correspondence, or Submit Sometimes to hear of the most amiable,, the: most. unfortunate of men. 
but.yet 1 will endeavour to turn to another topic, after I have told you our Friendi is better in health. He Says, “the affur -- ance of his being still deaf to you; that hc was not Sacrificed to Ambition and Grandeur, are balsams to his wounded peace; his esteem is now justified; he shall no? longer strive to tear your image from his; 
II 5 heart; - 
154 EMMA; or, 
heart; on the contrary, he shall now indulge his Sentiments as the most laudable affections of his Soul; he shall cherish the fond remembrance of happier times; he shall, indeed, look on you as for ever dead to him, but he shall not cease to look forward to that time when ye shall again be. united, in indissoluble bonds, in Heaven.’* Thus, you See, your painful recital has afforded him a kind of negative happiness.. Can you then be So cruel as to wish he had never known your sufferingsbut you could not foresee the pleasing consequences. 
Will you forgive me for parting with', your picture i It was his right. He told me it was at his request you sat, for it. The tear you shed when you gave it me, and the sighs which agitated your bosom, convince me it is the same. Nay, you Said,, “Take it, my dear Louisa; I cannot bear to look on it; it brings to my recolledliom a most painful circumstance, which I wish to banish from my memory.” Ah! then, I have restored it to the right owner. I could not deny him. If you have learned that difficult lesson,, I am yet a stranger to it. I have not been nursed in the School of Disappointment and self-denial So long as you have been; therefore I was Subdued by his importunities. He Says it will be the constant Source of consolation to him, in 
“That 
he Child of Sorrow. 155 
** That Sacred hour, when stealing from the noise Of Care and Envy, sweet Remembrance fooths With virtue’s kindest looks his aching breast. And turns his tears to rapture.” 
It must be an ungentle, an almost Savage virtue, which could refuse him this. The most rigid prudence cannot condemn it. 
May not you, my beloved Friend, in time, feel the Same consolations from the same causes? I think you may. Adopt his method; consider him as one whom death has divided from you. Visit, in imagination, the cold urn which contains his honoured remains; you will find, in time, a pleasing employment in paying the mournful tribute of your tears. 
I am certain no ill consequences can arise fromi th is innocent indulgence. The greatest tyrant cannot force the will; nor can Ke expect to govern that free principle. Your duty, your vows remain immaculate; and your breast may experience more contentment than you have felt for these three years past. 
Mr. Courtenay (forgive me for writing his name,) and Lord Stretton have left me this day; they are gone to meet a Friend, who has arrived, under Some disagreeable circumstances, from Paris. They have both promised to write to me. In our friend’s Letter I expect a little History.; which, if I am not peremptorily forbid h 6 den, - 
156 E M M A; m 
den., shall accompany my next to Cleveland Place. 
You must not, my dear Lady Cleveland give way to Such gloomy presages as make a part of your Letter. Indeed you do very wrong. Good God! what Use is there in tormenting yourself with the most linlikely things in nature to happen. If you must entertain fallacious ideas, let them be Such as are pleasing; indulge them, with all my heart; they may Serve to amuse, but can never weaken your Virtue. May it, for a glorious incitement to others, be rewarded in this life! Adieu! my Moved Friend t Yours, for ever and ever, 
Louisa S tret ton.’ 
LETTER XXIII 
To Ihady Cleveland. 
AS I have not yet received a positive denial, I have presumed, my dear Lady Cleveland, to enelose Some papers in this, which if you do not chuse to read, may either be consigned to the flames, or returned to the hapless Writer, 
Yesterday I received the packet; the outer sheet only you will find is addressed ta me; the rest — I know not who will claim, 
I will 
he Chilu of Sorrow. 157 
I will make no comment upon them y. indeed the text has almost overcome me. I have likewise received a letter from Lord stretun — I will send it to you together with another I am promised from the same handi hythe first opportunity. But I think IHAVE found you employment enough atr present, therefore will not keep you longer from beginning your tash. 
Farewell, my dearest Lady Ckvehndy Your faithful, 
Louisa strettokf<i 
LETTER XXIV 
Lady lou i s a S t r e t t o n[ 
[ in the foregoing. 
Dear Madam, 
TO give expreshons to feelings which language has not provided, is a difficult tash; but as you have urged me to the recital of nyy painful History, from the generous motive of procuring ease to my long tortured heart, I will do violence to my griefs, and again open the wounds which disappointed Love has made. And did not the most amiable, the most lovely of women, ex press a wish to know how I passed these three wretched years? Surely she 
did. 
158 EMM Ay orr did, or I am greatly deceived. Ah! how wretched has that time been ta me! My soul never tasted comfort, till you honoured me with the perusal of her dear, valuable Papers.. I had ent|ttaincd a false opinion of her.. What balm to my heart, to know she is still more worthy than ever of my love, my adoration! Yet what anguish do I feel for her distresses, penned in her own charming characters“ 
“after line, my gushing eyes a’erflovr, 
Led through a Sad variety of woe.” 
Ah! dear and ever - beloved / 
what have thy Sufferings been for me! Cursed Ambition! thy happiness and mine have been Sacrificed at its impious shrine. Oh! that the breast of that angelic woman may at length have comfort restored to it! 
And can that wretch, her Husband, be insensible of her worth! Oh! stis not in Nature that he can do justice to it! Lhged by the balest motives, he stole, like a thief in the night, on my little hoard of treasure, and tore it from my hopes. He could not love; — his dark soul is incapable of the Soft sensations of Love; generous, disinterested Love! Mine w'as founded on the most perfect' esteem; every virtue, every grace, was combined in the dear object of it. You, my dear Lady lguifay have Seen her; but,. ah I you can have no conception of what she was, wshen 
the 
iaoe Child of Sorrow. 
she lovely portrait, which now lies before me, was only an imperfect refiedlion of her: brighter charmsw And have I for ever lost Such transporting, excellence? Is every: prospecst, indeed, closed on me for ever f They are, they are; all the powers of Heaven are against me.. 
Yet am I still comparatively happy,, to what I was some weeks ago. I no longer condemn myself for wasting endless sighs on an ingrate.. I no longer call my never-failing passion a weakness; no, it is my glory. ssie is,, she is the mistress of my heart. Sole guider of all its Soft emotions. I am wedded to her memory; that, and the dear resemblance of my Beloved, shall ever adluate each purpose of my soul; to her its every faculty is devoted; the wealth and honours of the world shall never, for. one moment. Seduce me to forego my fen -- timents for her. She is mine; her immortal part is mine;, all she can bestow is mine; the most valuable then is my lot. 
My tenderness for my amiable Emma will blunt the edge of my Sword. — But for the excels and purity of my passion, her brutal Husband should feel my vengeance in return for his treachery; but that title Sandlifies him. No action of my life shall lower me in the esteem of that best of women, nor will I avow a Sentiment which 
shall 
io EMMA i or, 
shall ever call the blush of apprehension on her cheek. 
Enough, (as she piercingly shys,) have been her trialsr. Ah! how much, was I beloved, when I thought myself contemned and forsaken; without a sigh! — But I shall tyre you, my best friend, with the sameness of niy Letter, for, though all coiripofed of Love and Tenderness, you see I want Gallantry.. I am So impolitic, when Writing to one lovely woman, to fill my paper with the excels of my attachment to another. You, my dearest Lady Louisa, will pirdoh my error, if Such it can be called. But I am convinced, flattery from me would not be pleasing to you. Accuse me not of it, ■when 1 say, you are the Second only in my heart. I am very bold; I would aspire to be Seated as high in yours. Methinks I I hear you Say, that is the place of my Emma. Ah! Madam, we are one; Emmu and I, in your gentle heart, must be the Same; let our union there be made per teft, since our cruel destiny has rendered it impossible in another Situation. 
Lord Stretton is erhploying himself in; the Same manner as I have the honour of doing; differently, however, I hope, .as to mode, and yet virtually, the same, since both are for the accomplishment of the wish next our heart. May we each Succeed! he, in inspiring in your valuable bosom a tender 
and. 
tihe Child hf Sorrow. ii 
and reciprocal passion. Such as he merits to excite; and I, in filling your gentle breast with Pity and Friendship; Pity, to induce you to lay before the ever loved Emma the inclosed; and Friendship, to Secure your pardon for the trouble and pain I have given you. 
Believe me, dear Madam, to be, with the most perfect esteem. 
Your ever devoted Servant, 
Edward Courtenav, 
LETTER XXV 
Sto Lady Cleveland. 
And may I flatter myself these lines, didtated by the most constant heart, will meet the eye of the most fondly beloved of womenyet pardon me, dear Excellence, I will not offend thy purity; your own soul is not less free from impious thoughts, than is the pashon you have inspired in my breast; which, as it never can decay. So can it never harbour a Sentiment derogatory from th object that first gave rise to it. Fear me not then, most angelic Emmuy I only write to implore your forgiveness for the harsh thoughts I have entertained of you these three years past. But I knew not your Sufferings — I knew not the strength of 
your 
i62 E m m A; or, 
your attachment — ^1 knew not that it was in the power of; wpman to.experience So Solid, '-. So constant a fiame^ And was I the ol^dt of it I What a reward for all my Sorrows !- : Ah! dearest of wc^ten!, You Say I am still dear to you — You pity my misfortunes — Oh 1 may I never lose that Sweet remembrance. — Let it ever live in my heart, and may that thbiight Smooth the pillow of Death; may k Soften the gloomy terrors of the Grave, and may it heighten the joys of Heaven; and. 
When my soul is plung’d iti long oblivion. Spare this one thought, let me remember this. And So deceiv’d, think all my life was blessed.” 
Do not imagine I shall presumc on the conseshon you have made in my favour. — No, I would forfeit all my hopes of happiness hereafter, ere an action, a thought of mine should fully your bright fame. No, my ever beloved Emma, my passion is too pure: Founded on your merit, and increased by the further knowledge of your virtues, I would as soon cherish the impioua^ crime of blasphemy, as leek to injure your purity in the smallest instance. Though unworthy of becoming So,. Lord Cleveland is your Husband; for your sake that title shall be refpe<3; able in my eyes. 
But what am I doing? I meant only to relate some simple fads, but my tender feelings have run away with my more prudential 

he Child ^ Sorrow. i6j 
dential intentions. I only meant to tell you, that yout exqiiifite teridemess, which has afforded you So' many ■ heartfelt disquiets, was not Thrown away on an ingrate; that my Soul is full of ^ your image; and that even death cannot obliterate your idea from my mind. But I will tear myself from the dangerous Subject. Prudence and virtue shall be the principles of all my actions, that I may render myself worthy of being esteemed by yoti. 
I am, with all truth. 
Your faithful, 
Edward Courtenay', 
The passages of my unfortunate life are So entirely devoid of incident, that I doubt whether the peruser will receive much entertainment from the employ. But it is written for the inspeftion of those who know how to feel, and whom mutual afflictions have rendered partial. 
I will date it, like the ever esteemed Emna, from a Separation, whiclvfate has made eternal. The happy prospedt which at that time opened before me, enabled me, to siipport a Scene,, more affeddn^ than I had ever 'known, with slime degree of com posure. My Emmas gentlobosom. hfeaved with sighs, and the trickling tears coursed each other down her lovely cheek;; a fatal presentiment of what was to follow. > - * 
I Settled 
164. E M M A; cri 
fettled my affairs at Oxford in two days 5 oh the fourth I arrived at Ceurtenay lodgey where I eagerly wished to be, to make preparations for the reception of its destined mistress. I had,, in the tender, the happy hours we Spent together, drawn Several sketches of the house and its environs; I made myself master of my etnmd.s taste; I, without appearing to do So, gathered, by the fond arts of Lovers, what would be most agreeable to her in the method of laying out my garden; There was a walk at woodviue hall of which she was particularly fond; - I was resolved to copy that; 
I thought it would be a grateful compliment to my adored Maid,, and. would Serve to convince her of my fondhels for her, iiv an attention to these trifxes. I gathered pleasure from the idea she was now in her accustomed walk, (where we had So happily strayed,) with her Soul filled with the image of tier Edward. There was an en thusiasin in the thoughts that would then engross my Senses.. Her lovely form floated before the vision of sight;, I Saw her in every flower, in every tree; inanimate nature presented her to my.viewt I talked to her, I gathered those flowers I knew she liked, I pressed, them to my bosom : A thousand extravagancies of this sort I was guilty of. Ah! to what excels I loved, I doted. I do not enumerate these instances 

The Child of. Sorrow. 165 
stances but to prove, if words can prove, what I must havife felty whtni all this fond Scene, So near being realite^, was blasted at once. 
After a night which the Sweetest dreams of my beloved had rendered delightful, I was busy in meditating fchenies. of future felicity, and had just laid the plan of a beautiful little retreat in my garden, where I fondly pleased myself with passing many biissful hours with my Emma; in this Situation, a Letter, which came express from my Mother, found me. The contents, though far from explaining the dreadful cause, were Sufficiently alarming. Torn with anxious doubts and fears, impatient to have them confirmed, yet dreading to be told what they were, I threw myself into a chaise, nor stopped or took refreshment till I reached woopjiue hall. Thither my eagerness hurried me. I arrived three days after all my hopes of happiness had been wrested from me! Oh! that my Emma could but have opposed her father’s harsh commands a little longer, or had she but gained a few days before her Sacrifice, with what joy would I have Set her Father free, and made that Settlement her avaricious and ambitious Brother wanted. My fortune would have been Sufficient for thole purposes, and the little we should have had left, with care lul industry, might have rendered us at 
his 
j 66 
E M M A; cir, 
this moinent rich in e^cfi others arms! But our angry jj^ate prevented all this — It was decreed;, and we are .the hapless victims. 
In a state of frenzy almost, from want of rest, food, and fatigue of body and mind, I eagerly demanded what had happened. The family of woodvill were all absent— — a few of the lower Servants left; one of them told me the fatal heartbreaking news, of Mils Emma Woodville being married, three days before, to the Earl of Cleveland. I w'ould.not give credit to the assertion. It was impossible! it cannot be! I was breathless, and fainting. One of them, at last, recolledted they had a note for me. It was written by Mrs. Woodville. I hastily tore it open;, in it were tstese memorable words : 
I am Sorry to acquaint my dear Mr. Courtenay., that, for family reasons, of the most cogent nature, we were obliged to wave our jcngagement with him, and unite burr Daughter Emma Woodville to Lord devddnd. I Sincerely hope Mr. Courtenay will behave : qn this disappointment with his accustomed prudence and gbod sense • and never take any illicit measures t6 see Lady clfd.e\and., or relent the unavoidable conduct bf herielf and family. He must consider she is ' now the Wife bf an other man, to whoni her vows are Sacred. 
the child Sorrow. i6y 
It would answer no purpose in the world for m y. coitrunay to attempt an interriip tion of the happirtess which' ia wished her by her Mother, who likewise adds a prayer to Heaven, to enable her much esteemed Mr. Courtenay to bear his ill fortune like a Man of Honour and Religion. 
'I remain, dear Sir, 
Your ever obliged Friend, 
G. WOODVILLE.’* 
I never can express my feelings on this occasion. Indeed I was for Some time wholly insenfible of my misfortunes. A happy insensibility I thought it. When I recovered, they had the goodness to ashst me home, whither the chaise conveyed me. The sight of my Mother roused me from the intense reverie into which I had been plunged; she put ine to bed, from whence I never rose till after six weeks; I stand indebted to her care for this my Second life; but till within these few weeks I could not thank her for prolonging an existence doomed to mtseiy. I could not gain any intelligence from her; as the Woodville family had ever, been remarkably close in their transacstions, insomuch that the Servants knew not of the Severe Sufferings of their young Lady; though, perhaps, my Mother would not have informed me of all the particulars, lest I should have been induced 
168 
EMM AF or. 
duced to take a fatal revenge of Some of my emmd.s persecutors. However that may be, I could obtain no light in the affair.. I mended very stowly, in my health; the vicinity to the, place where I had been happy, only augmented my misery. I could not bear to, remain at my father’s in law. To return to a place that bore the evident marks of preparation for my bliss, would have been an hell to me. 
My ill state of health furnished me with a pretext for going abroad, from whence I took the Secret resolution never to return. 
I took leave of my Mother, not without many tears on both sides; the painful re colledlion of the fatal cause which hurried me from my native land, pierced my heart. The deepest melancholy fixed on my mind. And during my voyage and journey I opened not my lips, but to breathe forth sighs. I arrived at Montpellier., determining to make that my residence; Soon, however, 
I grew tired, and dissatisfied; I shifted the Icene; still the same weariness, the Same dejedtion followed me. Alas! I could not fiy from royselfj I carried the barbed shaft in my bosom; and nothing brought relief. However, still anxious to change, 
I crossed the Alps., and fixed at Naples. 
My situation there vas as retired as pos sible; for although I lived in a place full of company and diversions, I found it no 
difficult 
Hhe Child of Sorrow. 169 
difficult matter to Seclude myself from each, as much as Suited the gloomy temper of my soul. 
I had continued there more than a year, when one night, as I was returning from a Solitary walk among Some venerable ruins a little distance from the city, I Saw a young Gentleman holding an unequal combat with two others. Justice made me espouse the weaker side. We had the good fortune to overcome our opponents, who, when they discovered which way victory would decide, made a running fight of it. When we were entirely clear of our troublelbme companions, the Gentleman Avhom I had assisted made me more acknowledgments than the cafe merited; he was profuse in his gratitude, and insisted on carrying his preserver home to his own house, that he might receive the thanks of his family. I made Some resistance to his entreaties, as I did not wish to make acquaintance, neither was I pleased at being introduced under Such a fiattering title, what I had done being no more than bare diity incited me to do; however, I wa obliged to Submit. After iiich an introduction, you may believe I was a welcome guest. He was the Son of an illustrious house; there vrere two more Sons, and three daughters. I was overpowered with compliments on all sides. They made the vol. I, I Son 
lyo. EMM a.j or 
Ign, repeat, .ove; r and, oyer again, the whole of Sthe contest; they, were never tired bf reciting ity praise. The hour, grew late, but they could not part with me; the way was dangerous; they should know no rest, unless I would that night take up my lodging in their Palace. 
The next day I found it as difficult to get from them, which I could not do till I jpromised to make their house my home. Signor Molini called on me the mqrnirig following; he would take no denial; I must .attend a Concert to be given at their house. Music is the soul of Love; I wished not to be present at an amusemcnt, Once the delight of my heart, but now the faurce of endless pain. Harmony awakens all the Softer sensations of the mind, rendering it more susceptible to the calamities of human nature. The Opera of Ariadna was performed; the music was touching; every nerve vibrated to the notes; the complaint of the forsaken Ariadne struck on my heiart; I gave myself up to the deepest affiidlion. The tears of tender Sympathy rolled down my cheek, I Sat absorbed in painful cogitation. In my own mind I had retired from all the world; I Seemed alone in a desert; I took no notice of the objc(ffs around me. Unhappily all objects were not So indifferent about me as J was. I had the misforturie to attract: the 
attention 
Child of Sorrow, ri 
attention of the youngest daughter of the mouni, I have Said, Harmony awakests the Softest fensations of the.mind’; it does more, it also creates tender Sentiments. Softened by the Seducing Sounds, her heart attuned to the tenderest feelings. Julia Molini cast her moistened eye on me; she Saw the traces of grief in my countenance; a similarity, a Sympathy, which she thought she' observed between us, gave rise to a. passion nearly fatal to us both. Alas! poor juliai It was not the anguish of Anadne that called tears from my eyes, and sighs from my bo -. fom; it was the painful recoileelion of happier times; it was the sense of my own unparalleled misfortune that caused these. emotions. She Saw I had a tender heart, and, judging from her own feelings, knew how apt Such hearts are to receive an’ im preshon from a beautiful object. I have • this consolation, I never flattered her into the belief of my poffeshng the least favourable thought of her, I was So ignorant of the havoc I had made in her gentle bo some, that the idea never would have entered my imagination, much less should I have been induced to attempt the conquest of her inexperienced heart. When the human heart is wholly Subdued by Love and Misfortune, it. casts a foftness over the frame of body. The languor which Julia discovered in my voice and look, she fatally I 2 mis 
1^2 E M M A; or, 
mistook, for, a partiality for her; she attrir biited to the Sentiments’, she believed I post feffed for her, all the air of melancholy which marked my character. With these felf delusions she employed all the hours she passed without feeing me... 
Though totally uncc^scious of the feet ings I had inspired, yet I wished to be less at the house of mouni, as the compariy anci Society Suited not my disposition, which ra r there led me to Solitude and painful con ternplation. By degrees I absented myself; they Saw the alteration of my conduct, and fancied they had discovered the cause. One day the young Molini called at my lodgings; he expostulated with me for Some time, with great friendliness, on the absence they had taken notice of with concern; and then proceeded to inform me, that my motives were very clear to them; that they, honoured me for them; but that nothing was too much to be done for the prer. Server os his {molinfs) life. 1 remained all, astonished at his preface, and begged he •^uld explain himself. He answered, his family had, for a long time, taken notice, a particular, attachment, against which, it, was evident, I had made all the resistance in shy power; that the exceshve alteration in his Sister Julia, since my absenting my sdf, had confirmed their suspicions of our, astbddnn being mutual. He owned they 
had 
The Child ^ sorrdw. r/j 
had entertained itigher views but that her happiness, a; nd the; obligation their house owed would induce them to wave every other objection ■ 
Madam, of my surprise and grief! I however debated not ohe' moment what should be my answer. I assured mouni of my high sense of the honour his family intended in thcir Splendid offer, biit that they laboured under an error, in Supposing an habitual melancitoly the indication of liich a presumptuous attachment. No one could have a more exalted opinion of Signora Julia than I had,, but that unfortunately, my heart was doomed to be the stave of an unfaithful mistress in ettglani; that however ill repaid its sincerity had' been, nothing ever could eradicate the first impression it had received; that I hoped, from my soul, they were equally mistaken in the conjedlures of la Signora being attached to me, any more than by the laws of Civility and Friendship.” 
“Do you then refiise the Daughter of the: illustrious house; of, ' the Molini f I was hshed iri' a lofty stilife.' ^ 
‘‘' My heart (I feturiieid)' refuses all’ other attachmehts, - Save that .it must ever feeil for ast Ingrate., I shosird ’ be unworthy your favour shoiild I., ' basely take advantage of the kindness df yotif fashily, Sapd fob it of one of its brighteshjewd^j bnngihg only J 5 cold 
iy4 F M M A t or, 
■cold Esteem, in the place of ardent Love, No, no, my Friend, I could not be So base.” “Friend! — I disclaim the title. Thbugh you in all probability Saved my life, you have more Sorely wounded me in my honour, in refusing an alliance with our House. I little thought an objedion would have laid with you, when we too had conquered our prejudices. The hcuse of Molini is, not to be affronted with impunity. i laboured to convince him, I never intended an afifont; my concessions made him more ' haughty and violent; he vowed revenge for the contempt I had shown their offer; he challenged me to meet him in an hour., I told him, I would meet him anywhere; 
'but that I wished he vrould take time to xefied on the injury he meditated to bring either on me, or through me, to his house; But I preached to the roaring Ocean, I then Said, I would never lift up my hand against the life of a' man for whom I had S'reely ventured my owm.” — “Do you reproach me with your Services? I do not ■thank you for them; yoiu only preserved my life to make me sensible of the feverest diigrace.’’ However, I at last 'gained So much on him, as to prevail on him to ■ put off our rencounter till the morrow evening.. In the evening of the same day, 2ivalet brought me a note from Molini.^ requesting me to meet him in another place than 
where 
'The Child of So r R o w. 175 
where he had at first appointed, hikd two hours earlier than the time' before, meii tioned. /. 
I found him disguifed and massced'; 1 ashed him the reason? He Said,. because, as he was determined one should fall, and that it was as likely to be me as himself, he should with more Security make diis escape. I thought that an illiberal Sentiment, and freely told him So. — - He. answered, “Then; I might easily prevent his taking advantage of it, by killing him.” 
“That (Said I,) I will never do; it never shall be Said I preserved your life from assassinators to become one myself, ” — He answered, “You must fight.” — ‘‘ I will not; I will not draw my Sword, but to defend my life.” — “Thou cowardly, base wretch, will no words urge you ?' Then take this blow as a reward for thy; paltry Services :. Saying which, he struck me wnth great force on my cheek; and instantly drawing his Sword, before I could recover myseff, made a lunge at me. I thought he used his Sword but awkwardly,. wjiich I attributed to his indiscreet passion.. I immediately had myisword out, with which I parried his Second pass; the, first I put by with my hand. From the irregular method of his attack, I judged he knew very little of the Science, or that he meant to make my knowledge of it useless by his 1 4. making 
iy6 
EMMA; 
or, 
vl could have dis 
makirig, false parries, armed him twice; but thought it would enrage him to madness to be obliged to beg his life. self-preservation is a natural principle, and. I found it necessary to take care of myself, as murder Seemed to be his inrenfion‘; I, therefore, determined to take fl e firstsbpportunity of woundirtg him in the ffv^ord arrsiv as the, only mieans of Securing liiyself; ' he laid himself So open, that I could have been through him many Times. I had prepared myself for this last lunge, when, by an unhappy turn of his body, before I could recover my weapon, it glanced by his arm, and ran him through a little below his right breast. Instantly the unhappy creature fell to the ground, exclaiming, “I die, but I die by your hand; let me have your pity, and I die contented.’’ — Ah! Madam, who can express my agony, when on loosening tste mass I beheld the dnfortunate Julia f I threwmyself down by the bleeding body and clasped'it in, my arms. I used every method to staunch .the bipod. - She fpebly, uttered,. ‘‘ Convey me fibrne; if you can. do fo' with. Safety tp ydurfelf., I have; deft an accounp at hopie of rny intention of seeking a releffe frbha inj forr.pws in death; that will entirely clear you; take care of yourself. I doubt I shall expose you to the rage of niy family; ye, if. rny, dying 
■ words • 
Lhe C H I L‘ n 0^ S O R R O W' ' 
words have any influence, they will not offer you any further injury.” By thittime Some people, who had, at a distance Seen our engagement, cronded round us. The anguish of my mind threw me into a state of insensibility; Some friends, who knew me, took care of me home, while Some others conveyed the wretched to her father’s Palace. 
The wound the unhappy girl received! most fortunately did not prove mortal; she at length recovered, and the first time she left her father’s house she threw herself into a Convent remarkable for its Severity. But to return. ^ 
The news of this wretched duel wa Soon blazed about. It was talked of everywhere. The generous Julia exculpated me; which, however, had she not lived todo, a paper she had written and Sealed, would have answered that purpose, wherein she Said, “on hearing her brother’s report of our conversation, she had taken a resolution of meeting me instead of him. That she could not endure So good a Brother should run Such a hazard in her cause, much less that he should lift up his hand against a man, - who had preseryed. his life at the fish of his own. She vas determined not to live, but fly dared not employ her own hand in destroying her being.* She had formed a plan to circumvent her.bro i ^ there. 
ije M M A'; or, 
there, in which, 'should she filcceed, before this paper would be read, she should receive her death by the hand of a man, 'who had refused to make her life happy. She paid me Some great complinients ori my sincerity and honour, but that she was fully resolved not to outlive the disgrace of being rejected. She then Tecommended me, in the most affecting terms, to her family, entreating them to harbour no ill opinion, of me, as I was wholly innocent of ever' giving her the least just reason to believe I entertained a partiality for her; but that she could not avoid her destiny, 'which had. decreed her to love and be unfortunate.” 
As I Said, she Sought a repose in the bo sorn of a Convent, where I Sincerely hope she may find it. The pride of thtmouni,. however, had been offended, and that is > an \k]\\rj that Italians never forgive. When, they are, implacable revenge is the a6ting principle of their Soul; and they Seldom have more than one method of gratifying it— — a stilletto and a dark passage. I y/as returning one evening from the house of an English Gentleman, when I received a stab in the back. I hastily faced and drew my Sword, when another person from behind tripped up my heels, and they both stabbed me in Several parts of my body. 1 have not a doubt, but they would 
have entirely killed me, had 
they not been 
L'he Child Sorrow. 179 
been interrupted by Some Gentlemen, who ran up to us. I was taken up for dead, but on proper applications was restored to my fenses Sufficient to Speak the name of the street where I lodged. The Gentlemen kindly attended me during itiy confinement. It was to Lord S tret tonne and Sir Charles Bevilk I am indebted for my life: Their kindness claimed my gratitude, and the virtues I discovered in them in ipired my friendship; from that time we never Separated. When I was quite recovered, on my account my noble friends Naples. We continued Some time together at Rome, and crossing the Alps, travelled to Paris. 
My, friendship for Lord Stretton has increased in proportion to his excellencies. Lady Louisa possesses an invaluable jewel in his heart; I hope she will be Sensible of it. I could relate a thousand instances of the amiable qualities of his mind. | 
Can my ever ?ivkidh\q Emma be offended at my making her a participator of all my troubles and inquietudes,? Wifi .she like ■^jse pardori my freedom; in .stiling.sier my' Emma ti cannot bring myfeff to call her Lady. Cleveland,. without the utmost force to my feelings. But be not alarmed, I will keep that circumstance'in my mind,, though the title appears not, by my pen...! 
how can I forget. it!: I can... nc; ver. forget; I I 6 have 
rso E M M hi or, 
shave been happy; cani then forget I now stfii wretched? - '■ '■ ■ 
Adieu, 
Edward Courtenay. 
LETTER XXVI 
^0 Lady L O U I S A S T R E t T O N. 
I Will not Say I wept over the Letters you Sent me — I Shed rivers of tears. Oh! Louifal think what I felt on perusing those tender lines, where he So earnestly laments my want of resolution — Fatal precipitancy! I rushed into the danger to avoid the resieclion of it. Yet, should we have Succeeded? Alas! I fear not. But let us not dwell on Such vain surmises. As he Said, Fate has for ever severed us, and we must Submit. Yes, Louisa., and I will Submit; with the Same uncomplaining.patience I have still born my ill fortune. Our lot, in this life, has not been cast on a very fair ground; but we are not the fformer of our own fortunes: Heaven dif poses of us as it seemeth best. - < * 
i I ought not to regret our friend’s being made acquainted with my story, since fit has procured him Some ease of mind. Heaven increase his comforts on earth! The most rigid virtue, I think, cannot condemn me for uttering that prayer. - 
Make 
iihe Chi L p (Sorrow, i 8 y 
Make him, however, ray dearest no longer the Cotifident our mutiial cor? respondence. 1 bejieve it is needless to give you this caution; I think. 1 may depend on your prudence; but you know it would be higtilvblameable in. us, to run the hazard of encreasing an unfortunate attachment, which adverse destiny has rendered criminal; in mc to indulge. No, let him remain Satisfied with this assertion, (which, perhaps, .married as I am to another, I ought not even to breath in Secret,) that had I been free to chuse, He, of all the world, should have been the master of my fate. But, as I am irrevocably bound to another, shat Other has a right to all I can bestow.. My duty, ray religion, and the vows I paidjtho* I own constrained ones, still they are his,. 'He has not perhaps strictly observed all his .duties towards me, yet I can excuse him; *, and the .little failures on his side cannot ex. culpate me in any error of my side. Do not relate any of these circumstances to your friend; it. would look as if I made a merit of barely doing my duty.; I mean to at right, and I hope my .Husband cannot, even sin thought, charge me with breach: of duty; yet I cannot help V ishing that duty and in clinatibn did not pull contrary ways. 
. transsent pashon, a desire of revenge, were the first motives of Lord Cleveland addresses. But what am. I doing I am • his 
liste E M. M Kv ■ cbr,,. 
his Wife. Why then do I Seek to develop his imperfedlions? Pardon me, my Dear, he i likewise your Cousin. He is more — » he is the Father of my little Smiling Harriet. But L am unfit to proceed,. Adieu— — mealways^ and Sometimes pity your Friend, -, 
Emm Acl EVE LAND. 
L E T T E R. XXVIL 
LO C L E V E L A N D. 
OMETIMES pity you! my dearest _ Lzdy develand; yes, Ido pity you, indeed; but am not blind to the faults of my Cousin, who is haughty and over bearing, as if he had done you too much honour in making you wretched. I disclaim all kid, but claim you as the friend of my Soul, and the chosen of my heart. 
Mrs. Middleton goi^^g tc leave me for: Some little time, and I shall be wholly destitute of a companion. My two Beaux are still absent with their friend Beville. t believe. I shall ■ accompany Mrs. Middleton part of her journey. I have a plan in rny head to come round by D —, and think I shall stop at Mrs. bentops. Are you not amazed?. yin.^pentods^, is within ten miles Qi.lleveland place. .Due,, it is So; but tkat; tea miles would, carry me farther out 
of 
l’he Ckitb Sorrow. 
of my way, wherdassit will be but a little, airing for you to call there to see your Friend. I arn rather piqued at the negledb; of your Lord; 1. will not, therefore, come to Cleveland, without a formal invitation, i shall only stop a few hours at D— — .' day will be next ssme/day, and the hour twelve at noon. Do not disappoint me, I conjure you. Till then believe me your faithful 
Louisa Stretton 
LETTER XXVIII 
^0 Lady Louisa St ret to n. 
Am Sorry you are going to lose your companion — but really to leave yourself wholly destitute, is more the effect of choice, than necessity; since, were you less proud ■ and ceremonious, you might find an asylum here. The sojecism in Lord Cleveland's politeness I am certain proceeds Solely froth his indolence, and want of thought— — I may add Something more in excuse for him, he does not know that you will be entirely left alone at Stretton hcufe. In trtuh; he knows very little of your tran fatstions there. In Some measure that may be owing to his never making inquiry about it. Your Letters have lately been of, Such a nature as prevented my talking of them; 
but 
184 EMMA; or, 
but when I have mentioned my receiving news of you, he has heard me with So much chilling inattention, that I have had very little encouragement to make him my Confident as to the Subject. 
We have got a guest, not of my inviting though; she is not So formal as you are, to require a certificate, signed by each of us, that we should be happy to See you at Cleveland place. It is Mrs. Hotham who is our present Visitor. I believe you know Something of her; she is not an immense favourite of mine; but that is of little consequence as times go. My Lord is amazingly attached to her; and, would you believe it, staid one day from, partridge shoot inguo play with brat Billiards. There is politeness for you. I shall leave them to follow their own fancies on Luefday..^ as. I do not think her presence will be necessary to render our meeting happy at D —. I shall hope to prevail on you to return with me. We shall Spend our time very much to our own fatisfadlions, while Mrs. Hotham is coquetting with ray Husband. I am not jealous though, jjjtiija^ I promise you; but she is to me a strange artful flirting creature.. 
You promised me once a sight of Lord strettovs Letter, or Letters I suppose I may Say. I want to know what kind of Love tetters my dear friend gives rise to in the breast of a Sensible man; Send them to me 
on 
i^he Child of ^ o RR o w. 185 
on the receipt of this; they will strve to, amuse me till much wished for 
On looking back, I think you will hardly know your Correspondent by the style of this, 
So different from Some Letters which have preceded it. But do you not applaud me? Fash Sure you must. I shall entreat you to do more; that is to imitate me. I have Severely condemned myself for my falling into expressions entirely unbecoming my present Situation; I have imposed laws on my pen; Surely if I cannot govern that, I must be weak indeed. Follow my example, ^ my dear Louisa and never for the future write a line which we might not lay before the whole world. I must beg you Iikewife> not to hold Lord cleveland.s picture up to my eyes, in the most unfavourable lighc,, Such as he is I must pass my life with him, ^; Adverting to former Scenes will only Serve ^ to render the present less pleasing, and mpre^ painful to Support, it is my duty to wipe ■ all fond remembrances away, which m^ys* interfere with the vows I have paid, and ever’^ will fulfil to the utmost. Wherein I have failed may heaven forgive!, \ 
Adieu! my dear Louisa! join hot yoiif f force against the weakness of your friend, ' 
Emma Cleveland., .‘i 
LET < 
186 E M M A 
or. 
LETTER XXIX 
To Lady Cleveland. 
H ATEVER be the motives or caush,. I congratulate my beloved Friend on the peace which Seems returning to her amiable and virtuous breast. I ssatter myself that I am one cause. The free participation of your sentiments has effected in Some measure this happy change. lose not your confidence, you can never err; an Angel aa well might fall, by any temptation' I could place in its way, as you. 
I do not like your guest. I think I do know Something of her. Take care of her y she is artful to a degree. If you are not jealous by and bye, I shall think your Security lies only in your indifference. I do not depend on the faith of the Lord, or the virtue of the Lady, I give you my word. Pray do the laws of the land admit of a divorce in Such a cafe.? I doubt not. The men, who are the lawmakers, I suppose have' .taken more care of themselves 
Adieu !' lam ever yours,. 
Louisa Stretton. 
LET 
child ^ Sorrow. 18: 7 
LETTER XXX 
To Lady Louisa Strettoh. Enclosed in the foregoing.'] 
Remember a French Lover who wished" himself absent from his mistress, that: he might have more freedom to pour forth his Soul before her by letter. I find myself as much at a loss now there are So many miles betwixt us as when I was admitted an inmate of your house. But I cannot avail myself of absence. Tn effect: you are not So. I still have your image before my eyes, and the pleasing Sound of your voice still vibrates on my ear. May 1 dare hope I am remembered by you With any degree of tenderness?. Ah! Lady Louisa! does not my too presumptuous heart deceive itself? Ought I to listen to its Soft persuasions in my favour? I am inssnitely too apprehensive to love without anxiety. Yet Ought I mot to be Satisfied with the permission you shave allowed me, to write to you? But then that Something, which is ever intruding'itfelf to rob me of perfect felicity, tells me your condescension proceeded less from the inclination to hear from me, than from a wish to be informed of the fate of my, Friend Sir Charles. How industrious am I' in rendering myself wretched Alas! I' cannot help it. 'I deserve your pity, my 
dearest: 
is T 'M. M Ate' or, 
dearest / absurd iind' inconsistent as I am, ' I yet deserve your pity, ^ I have the highest, the justest opinion of your redlititde. Perhaps I have too humble aii idea of myscll Ah! raise me then in my own estimation, bjr convincirig me, that shch as I am, VI have had the power of touching your heatt* ^ tfiht' I shall owe all my future happistess to you alone. 
i’evv men have appeared under the Same disadvantages as I have been constrained to labour through; few men have had the difficulties I have had; but I will give place to no man for truth and love; for the ardency and Sincerity of my professions towards you. 
But I have not yet obeyed a principal command of your ladyship’s. You bade me be particular respedting my Friend. ^ Beville has drawn himself into a very awkward Situation, from whence I know not how he is to be extricated: He has beerr extremely imprudent, - and the consequences are likely to be of a Serious nature. I doubt I can be of very little assistance to him in this, perplexing affair; notwithstanding, ^'! shall chearfutly undertake his eause. — He ' informed me, on my arrivafi that he had • stole a treasure from France. \ dtbrtd. him to explain his meaning.; ' He theri proceeded to tdl me, hei had been fortunate' enoughito abtaiii the eidargemetit of a Nuir i 
of 
Lhe Chilj? ^ Sorrow. 189 
of Quality, from, one' qf the Goa vents;, reu markable for its rigour. Xhat he hashen countered many difficulties in the entert^ prize; but that his reward had been glorious. 
In short, Madam; I find he has achieved an illegal advantage, by means that love itseif cannot (or at least ought not to) justify. caur/enay and myself were admitted to the presence of the Lady. She is exquisitely beautiful. Her charms might indeed tempt the most cowardly to hazard all dangers, and defy all the world: But yet, cool reason must condemn my Friend. The manner of her escape is So romantic in the relation, that one can hardly believe it could be effected. The dangers to which she exposed herself, for his Sake, prove how very strong her love of him and liberty has been. I am, however, very Sorry to find they have not yet taken the only advantage they had left of rendering their situation ' Secure— — mean by marriage. I Sounded my Friend on that head. He rather evaded my question; but, at lash Said, there were Some things which necessarily must be Settled first. I told him, ter his and the lady’s ’ honour,.. I thought; that ought to have been * the first business isectledvn He answdred, it was her desire to remain unengaged till she knew how her flight was, received at Parts. • I took the liberty of blaming them both, particularly ■ .Seemed a^wanr 
. of 
igo EMMA; of,. 
of delicacy in his proceeding. I pressed them to inform me in what I could be Serviceable to them. Sir Charles Said, he wished I would go to Paris., and try to accommodate matters with the Relations of the Lady. I Sreely promised I would make the voyage, provided they would allow me to do them the most essential piece of Service first, namely, to bestow her hand on him before I Set out. Both Courtenay and I were obliged to use many arguments to prevail, which at last we accomplished : And I had the honour of being Father to the fair Adventurer. God knows whether the business of the day will be produdiye of happiness to my Friend, biit I am Sure it ’ is a step which he ought to have taken immediately on his arrival in a Safe place. Thus, Madam, shall I be torn from you by an aa of Friendship; but I am certain you would blame me if I neglected my Friend in this exigency. I hope the busi ness will be compromised happily for all the parties. However, I own. my heart misgives me on the occasion. My Courier ray accompanies me to Paris.. I shall have tste^shonour of kiising your shapd before! goy ^sxr Charles will allow me to Spend two or three; days with, her, who has the free power over, all my days, and the circumstances of them. — I find Mr. Courtenay. has written to your Ladyship. — May, I 
hope 
The Child Sorrow. 191 
hope to be favoured with a, line by the return of the Messenger?? shall straw tlip most flattering concfufiona from your goots ness. Adieu! my ever adored lomfai Your faithful 
5 T RETT ON.' 
LETTER XXXI 
To Lord S T R E T T O N. 
DO you know, my Lord, I thought your Letter rather in the hum driirii style. Is the man mad What, in the name of Common-sense, would you have me do, which I have not done? What shall I say, to drive out from your imagination that troublesome something., to which, as you can give no name, neither should you give encouragement. I vow I shall be afraid to venture through life wish you, if you are subject to these megrims. I know not whether I should have written, if you had not promised to draw flattering conclusions from my writing at all. Now, if you do not, I have stone with you Seriouliy, my dear'lord, I have, with the utmost sincerity and candour, laid before you my whole heart, with all its Secrets, and purposes; I have freely oy/ned, that, Last I given it encouragemestt, I might, in' 
■ ' time 
192 EMMA; or, 
time, have entangled myself in a partiality for your Friend. But, on the instant I perceived my thoughts turned that way, I took mysclf to talk; I was ever fully determined my heart should accompany my hand. If I had any concealments to make, should I be thus ingenuous? Do not then harbour fuspicions So injurious both to yourself and me. Believe me, there is no one on earth Sor whom I have a Sincerer regard than your Lordship; think not of Courtenay. I shall never feel more for him than your Friendship for him will authorise your Wife to feel. I look on him as wedded in mind to my beloved Emma. — • Their union is Sandlifiecl in Heaven, though they are for ever Separated on earth. 
Certainly nothing in the world but my esteem for you, and a perseverance natural to women, can induce me thus to lay aside my Sex's charter of being Solicited, and turn Solicitor. Do you not think my pride receives a mortification in being thus humbled? You ought to Spare me a talk to which I am wholly unequal. 1 Vice have I' held out my hand towards you; and I doubt this looks very like a third tender of myself. Am I to be still rejected, or will you at last take compassion on the poor damsel, who is S: > wofully apprehensive of dying a Maid? — “Ah! don’t let she die a Maid; take me for pity.” 
I know 
he Child c/sorrow. 19-; 
Lknow not what to make of your Friend bevilvs affair; it Seems’ a very intricate business. I am a little vexed that you should be constrained to quit England for Some time upon the occasion, as I cannot perceive what end it is to answer. I am not wonderfully taken with your account of the Lady, notwithstanding the warmth of your description. I think Sir Charks should not have trusted her to the view of two men possessed of the finest Sensibility. However, I will not follow your lordship’s example, and suppose, that the heart must be captivated 'with every beautiful face it sees. I have more confidence in you than you place in me; but when you know my heart better, you will find its chief excellence to be Sincerity. Think more favourably of your own merit, and that will teach you a better opinion of your 
. Louisa Stretton. 
LETTER xxxri. 
Sfo Miss Vf O O D V I L L E. 
H! my dearest Fanny I I write to you now as the only remaining Friend I have in the world. Yes, those whom I fondly held too near my heart have proved Nol. I. X mv 
194 E. M M Ai efi 
my greatefl^^nemks, Ah! should they me ditacgdip. 4cstry§io^ .pfi her,. whose soul rested on their frienelship! "et this, my .beloved Sister, is, ^ Tjddle to, you. You aj e astonished; you. are a, stranger to my meaning; let me then explain myself. f I acquainted you wtith the partipuiars of my hearing of the welfare of, am. unfortunate man, to whom I have ever been too partial. I likewise informed you of my making a relation of Some of the past events of my life, to justify myself in his opinion, and how Severely I condemned myself for Jpeing prevailed on to go So far, since I found, too fatally found. So far from giving ease, either to his bosom, or my own, I had but increased a partiality, whose indulgence Fate forbids. But still I sought to Smother my unhappy passion, nor Suffer it to gain a greater force. I gave laws to my lips; I never Sussered my pen to trace his name in my letters to l eay Louifa1 jglanced not on the Subject; I forbade her mentioning him to me. She obeyed, and claimed a merit from her observance. But how shall I tell my Vann^ she has, by listening to his Sophistry, been Seduced to fall into a plan, which has involved me in the greatest distress. My friendship for her has drawn me into the most perplexing difficulties, lu advised Louisa!! have I 
not 
lih Child Sorrow. 195 
not to fear from a friend So weak, against the persuasions of a man So improperly attached I 
I received a letter from her the other day, wherein she engaged me to meet her at Mrs. benton"s. Her reason for not coming on to Ckveland. place., was on account of the neglect; my Lord had shown towards her on the affair of hef engagements with Lord Stretton. Charmed with any opportunity of meeting my friend, I Sat off yes terday morning for D— —, you know, is no more than ten miles from us. I ex cused myself from taking Mrs. Hotham with me, as I chose to be alone. I wondered she should prbpose going, as it was the first time she had made Such an offer— — impute this to my Lord being absent at the time. 
With what eage'rriest I prosecuted my little journey! How long, how tedioiis Seemed the way. So earnest was I to embrace my friend! As the chaise drove up to the door, I perceived Louisa at the window. My heart bounded to meet her! A Servant, as I thought, flew out of the house, to assist me in getting out of the chaise. My haste hardly permitted me to touch the step; my foot missed it, and I was in danger of failing to the ground, had not the servant, wsith more zeal than prudence, or K 2, respectp 
tgs E M M A; or, 
^eljjedl:, as I then thought, caught mesin his arms. I rriight .Shave overlooked that cir^ curastance, had si/not felt ipyself closely pressed ito his bosom, which beat with the utmost violence,. Surprise and indignation •made me instantly turn my head, when, in .Spite of Some artificial disguises, I disco ivered — Oh. \ Vamy, a\ovf shall I describe what I Suffered, when si discovered this pretended Servant to be no other than the man in the world whom I wished never more to shehold! Yes, Fanny, dear as I fear I still must own he has ever been to me, yet still I; ardently .wished never to behold him more. Oh! why then did my friend, my Louisa, who So .well knew my Sentiments, why did she expose me to So Severe a trial.? 
I made Some exclamation at the first knowledge of this unfortunate man. I was too confused to remember what I Said. I ■heard his voice, but the agitation he was in prevented him from distinftly articulating any connected fenteace. I know not how I got into the house; my extreme desire to .conceal the.cause of my ..perturbation from my Servants, I believe was the Sole Support of my Spirits. Loutfa met me at the door; I stew into, her arms, as if for protection.; there all my fortitude forsook me. A thjousand conffiding passions rushed at once, on my im.aginatjon the. attack was too 
powerful, 
be Ch I L b of % orr b w. f97 
powerful, and I sunk undes it. Ah!' good God! why could I not sheet him With Loshe degree of calmness? Why should shy ush happy partiality thus expose itself? Why could I not behold him with a proper Serenity of nsih'd? Ah! unhappy Emma I how hast thou .betshyed' the inward feelings of thy mind! ' I was not So totally inleiisible as not to discern the ashidtion of thofeaboiit '"she. Pdor coufteday had the prudent precaution to keep out of the room. whent had a little recovered myself, I thought it ' the most discreet method to attribute my fainting to the pain I found in my ankle, and likewise my joy On meeting Lady Lotiifa. I affected to laugh at my extreme weak ness, both of body and mind. This gri m.ace, however, lasted' no longer than while Mrs. Benton remained present; - as Soon as she quitted the room, I cduld ho longer restrain my emotions. * - 
My tears, for Some time, obstrucled the passage of my voice; I could not form a Sentence even to chide Lady Louisa for her imprudence; she, however, read her indiscretion in the distress 'she favr me labour under, and, throwing her arms round my neck, “You must, you must forgive me, ” (she cried;) I could not resist this opportunity; you must likewise forgive my friencl. Ahi has he not Suffered enough K 3 already! 
198 E M M A; or, 
already 1. compose yourself, then,. my beloved. and allow me to call the most 
amiable of men” — 
“What are you about to do? (cried I, catching her hand.) Why do' you Seek to drive me to distraftion? No, rather let me, this moment, quit this fatal place.: expose me not again to the sight of one, who has once already deprived me of my senses. Cruel and injurious Louisa!! continued, redoubling my tears, | why have you conspired to make me wretched 
“Hear me, my dearest Emma., only hear me.” — “Alas! why should I listen to .your Sophistry You cannot extenuate the fault of being accessary to my meeting with the man, of all others, I ought to shun 
Pot'll frkndssiip s 
I 
vn: : 
your attachment to me has undone me.’ 
“Talk not So, my dear Lady Clevelandr, wound not my Soul with Such cruel reflections. I would die to render you happy, I would indeed. What injury do you Sustain in having, by accident. Seen a. man who is deservedly. dear to you? lje will never Seek an improper advantage from XEF& remiontm; he knows you were entirely ignorant of my intention; he Saw the letter I ■ wrote to you to engage you hither; he is going to leave Englandy he Says, perhaps neyer to return; could I then deny him this one reqnell, 
urged 
GHII.D of sbrrow. 19^ 
urged too on his knees? Ah! Lady Clever land, you know not the strength of my friendship, if you think I could refuse Such a man only the bare sight of you I” 
Should you then,, my dear Louisa ex pose your friend, who owns she has more struggles in her wretched bosom than Friendship can give? Should you thers expose her to a trial So Severe that Friendship could not resist? Ah! then, let me sty far from Such a man, who could Subdue you to undertake So wild. So improper a Scheme. If the cool bosom of Friendship melts, oh f what has not the heart, aching with Assertion, to dread! Let me then fiy from the danger, while yet this consola -- tory thought is left me, that I have not wittingly fallen into the Snare laid for me, by one on whom my Soul reposed its most unlimited confidence.’* 
“Go, then, cruel and inhuman Lady Cleveland. (Said Louisa., while tears plentifully bedewed her face;) go, then, and leave an unhappy man to his fate. Your once loved Loutfa too. Suffer not the voice of Friendship to plead in her favour. Your stoical Soul Scorns the tender feelings, rejedls all those amiable Softnesses which humanise the mind; but talk no more of the danger of beholding the man whom you K 4 Scorn. 
aoo E M M A; or, 
(corn. Alas! your heart knows nor Love norpity.!’’ 
■ N Ah! Louisa! (cried I, throwing my arms round her neck,) is it thus you comfort and Sustain me Ah! what will become of me, if she who governs the principles of my soul thus. gives it up to the guidance of its passions You ought to be tste guardian of my honour, and the honour of my Lord. Should you then be the contriver of a plot to overturn my rigid Scruples? When the danger is great ought I not to be cautious? But with the despo trsrn of ate you impel me to act contrary to the diclaies of my own soul, which, however it has been tome by consiicling passions, never till it listened to thy Syren voice has it turned a deaf ear to the mandates of reason. Every way you seek to overpower the little fortitude I have remaining; 
if I have - strength to resist yoiir shothing Battery, you then terrify me with menaces. Ah! iluifa! what is there I can refule you No, though my judgement tells me, I am wrong, 1 resign, myself to you.' Bev: are, lest you one. day repent the step yoiu, have now tajeen., I depend n, ofv.fole^y on ymu.’’,, ■ V 
‘ctetay Heaven forsake me!, fexclaimed Lady dropping ori her knees, mud 
lifting up her hands to. the Heaven she at.... 
...., }. 
iihe Child Sorrow. 201. 
tested;) may I be the most wretched of all beings here, and never know rest or happi ness hereafter, if from this moment I become not the Guardian of your honour: Though I urged you (continued she, rising, } to admit Courtenay your presence, S meant to be the eye and ear witness of all your conversation, not from the most latent thought of ill in the intention of either, but to j Listify you to yourselves. Though I do not, or ever can respefl Lord Cleveland., yet I respect your Situation as being his Wife, Nor should the wealth and honours ofsthe universe bribe me to urge you to the commission of an adt which should cause the siightest feeling of remorse, or even call up the faintest bkishmn your cheek. On the contrary, did I perceive the least inclination in either of you to take an improper advantage of your meeting now, and plan others ^ hereafter, I would, with all my power. Seek to prevent it. Judge then, my beloved Emma., what you have to apprehend from me. Where is the danger? do I not place the highest degree of confidence in you both? ^ Ah! my dear do you not condemn me! Oh! do I not severely reprehend myself! L ought not to have allowed Louisa' to introduce Edward to me— — ought to have opposed her — ■ Did I then give her permission? Alas, if'i K 5 did 
202 E. MM ARI or, 
did not, my refiisiils grew So faint, she heard them not, or fancied she should not offend me by a noncompliance with my request. In an instant he was at my feet — The Man! — Oh! Fanny! All that had ever passed since our long, long Separation — the pains, the agonies I had endured, all, all crowded in one Sad moment over my Soul; I wept, I wrung my hands; I would have implored his pardon; I knew not what I would have done. His distress was not inferior to mine — He begged me to be composed, to endeavour to be happy, to forget him for ever, if that circumstance could restore peace to my bosom. — Alas! how can I ever forget him? How can I form the wish to remember his love and truth no longer.? We Spent about half an hour together, making fruitless lamentations on our hard destiny. Lady Louisa wept as much as ourselves. I really believe she would think no Sacrifice too great to restore us to happiness — But ah! who can overtake occafionpafi, and.iring about again the days, the months, the years that saw us happy! 
Let me do justice to the purity of this unfortunate man’s passion — Not a word or action escaped him, which could call for a rebuke from the most rigid Prude. The most respedful awe Seemed to govern both. 
Child Sorrow. 203 
He told me, He had long been dead to thc'world in his own idea, and that I must allow him the fond indulgence of thinking me sio likewise; that my marriage was the grave which contained my person, but that my Soul, enlarged from its earthly fetters, was permitted this friendly visit to his — “And believe me, (he added,) when ■ we are united above in the heavenly regions, a pashon more pure, more unmixed, cannot engross my Soul, than it feels this moment.” The propriety of his conduct: gave a calm to my mind while I Saw him; I thought I never had felt So great a remove from inquietude since my misfortunes, but this elysium lasted only while I Saw him; for when I took leave of my Friends, which I Soon did, not permitting either of them to attend me to mychaise, lest by Some involuntary emotion I might betray myself to my Servants; I Say, as Soon as I was by myself, I found the tide of affiidion pour into my soul with tenfold impetuosity. Ah! ■how different was my journey home from that to D —. Then my seff condemnation began; oh! Fanfiy., When vdll it end? I was, indeed, betrayed at ifirst, but should i have listened to the Betrayer, and permitted her still to add to the deceit -- -- Nay, have I not joinedsin it ?Ah !- friendship is dangerous— — mist' K 6 ' her — 
294 hi M. M A 5 cr, 
hei— — ^ meant my happiness, but site has deprived me of that she can never restore, the conicious rectitude of my own mind. My heart will never cease, to condemn itself. I think I am more wtetched Than ever — Alas, was that necessary? Adieu, my beloved Fanny; may you ever be a stranger to the pangs which thy unhappy Sister ever feels. 
Emma Cleveland. 
LETTER XXXIIL 
Lo Lady C L e V e land. 
AH! my dearest Sister, is it from me you Seek consolation? Is it to me you apply as the only remaining friend you have in the worldl Alas! your distress wounds me So deeply, as to leave me in r capable of affording you any comfort. Save that alone of weeping with you; of that I can allow you a copious share. But you ought to forgive Lady Louisa— — meant well. I love her tenderly for her exceshve affection for the Sister of my heart. Ah I my beloved Emma! why do I See you and my amiable playfellow unhappy! How does your former Sufferings return to my memory! Never, never shall I forget the anguish you expressed, when: you gave free 
vent 
lihe Ghibi^ 0^'sd)?rr©w. c 
vent to the affliction which overwhelmed, you, and poured forth your griefs into the faithful bosom of your Fanny. How could my Papa be So cruel as to force you into So hateful a. marriage? Young as I then was,, I could plainly See Lord. cleveland ikid not love youi wsth poor Edward's, love. — How different were their behaviour — Lord clevelandstomqd.2is, if he was doing you an honour, in. condescending to rob you of all your happiness, while the Sole joy and im tention of my favourite was to form your felicity and. share it with you. 
Being called away by Sonte company coming, I was obliged to break off. On my return, I, cast my eye over what I had written: I am totally, diffatissied with the whole of it. I shall only add to your dis tress of mind instead of alleviating it. But my fancy ran away with my judgement; a thing easy enough, Seeing how Small a share I possess of the latter.. But you, my dear Sister, will readily excuse all the little irregularity of the head, when you know how truly the heart is devoted to you; and that, believe me, it is, and ever shall be. Would to Heaven you had possessed as large a proportion in the hearts of my Brother and Sister; you might then have been as happy as I have ever washed yom - ■; ■ 
The 
2to6 EMMA; oftt 
“The evil mindtaii.: neverknow peace This’adage is fully verified in the xase of my Brother and Sister.: - They are neither of them happy. Lady Bell has brought consequence to her Husband, but not felicity. She is orie of the worst tempers irt the world. I Spent a few weeks, with them lately; you can never imagine how disagreeable the whole time was to me; their continual disputes made me think every day too long; glad was I when my Papa came to fetch me home. Lady beu Seems wholly to forget, that the part of the woman is obedience. I think she should come and take a lesson from my Mama, who is Patience and Forbearance itself. Clara is not in the least happier than James. Captain Brereton is quite the modern fius band, and I much fear she will prove as much the modern Wife.. He is a strange inconsistent man; for though his neglea: of her, and attachment to other women,, are equally notorious, he is jealous of her to a degree. Clara begged i#y Mama to let me pass a winter with her in town; but,, thank Heaven, she did not gain permishon: islay. Captain Drtold me, he should not ask me, as he thought the company of his Wife was Sufficient to Spoil me, and would effedlually prevent any man in his senses from making me an offer. Judge 
liow 
The C H I B D ^ S ORR o w. 207* 
how happy he must be with a woman of whom he has So unfavourable an opirsion. 
I am certain, was an impartial and unprejudiced person to become, at Separate times, inmates at the \\o\d.k%(ajames.^clara.i and yours, not knowing anything of the private history of either, they would never judge, from the appearance of things, that the two first marriages were the result of choice, and the last of compulsive force.. 
I have not communicated any part of your Letter to my Mama. I fancy you do not wish I should, as you have not signified Such a desire throughout the whole. I cannot think that circumstance an omission: from over sight, but rather that you intended to Save her venerable bosom from the anguish of knowing your unhappy situation, without the capacity of affording relief to the Child of her Love. If I have erred, my dearest Sister will inform me ins her next. Adieu! may Heaven Support, you! 
I aift, most affeduonately, 
Yours for ever, 
F. WOODVILLE. 
LET 
SOS' E M M A; or, LETTER XXXIV 
To Lady Louisa Stretton. 
The more I reflect on my conduct, under the Severe trial to which you exposed me, the more am I dissatisfied with myself; every day encreases my anguish. Good God! how weak, how almost despicable am I in my own eyes! Oh! Loiiifa! how could you thus lessen your Friend in her ov: n opinion? 
Yes, my Dear, I do forgive, you; your tender pleadings have Succeeded *. Alas! how powerless am I to oppose you! The weakest of all human beings is potent to me. Yet let me expostulate; Was it, my dear Louisa.) prudent to expose me to the view and.converlation of a man, whom it is my duty to avoid? If I had been foolish enough to wish Such a rencont'er, ought you not to have used every argument to dissuade me from Such a hazardous enterprise ^ you could not foresee I should 2lsk. Vy'ith Such glaring impropriety. What will bethink of me? To weep, to wring my hands, like one distradled. Oh! Louisa!' !' he must despise me; I cannot Support the idea of being despised by him. 
I might have testified my regard for him; 
f Lady lout/ds Letter is omitted, 
I might 
lihe Child ^ Sorrow. 2017 
I might have lamented our evil destiny; and there might have been Some degree of dignity and sense in my procedure. But, good God! what childishness, what folly, showed itself in my behaviour! Will he not thank Heaven, that has prevented his union with a woman Scarce removed from idiotism? My only prayer is now, never to see or hear his name; I could not Support the sight of him; the consciousnefs of my extreme folly would sink me to the earth. Ah! Heaven! what has been the state of my mind Since that fatal day! I feel every moment as if I had acted wrong. 
I can no longer Say to myseli, on any little inquietude, that the behaviour of Lord Cleveland excites — Well, if I am unhappy, still I have this consolation, I have neither brought it on myself, or by my conduct merited it; but that time is now over. I vowed to myself never to See the man • whose image my strongest efforts could not wrest from my Soul; I have Suffered myself to be prevailed on to break that resolution, and for the" vow breakers, what peace remains on earth } 
Let Lord Cleveland, now use me ever So : ill, I cannot complain; I dare not; lam myself too culpable to dare to arraign his conduct. Small as my proportion of ease ', has fora longtime been, Surely it was cruel 
im 
210 E M M A’, or, 
in my Friend to rob me of any part; indeed, I think I have lost the whole. I find no relief now but in my tears, and when they stow from remorse and contrition, they wear deeper furrows in a heart already overcharged with woe. They lose their healing quality, and turn all corrosive; may they have power to wash away all memory of former pain! Adieu! 
Emma Cleveland. 
LETTER XXXV 
i’o Lady Cleveland. 
OT ILL mufl: my dearest Emma devote 
o herself to remorse and anguish. I was in hopes my last Letter had restored you to a proper opinion of yourself. I must blame you exceedingly; one would think, by your self condemnation, that you had been guilty of the most atrocious crimes; Surely you should Suffer your own reason to ad, and that would inform you, you have no real cause for Such Severe reprehension. Besides, I thinks there is a Species of cruelty in your upbraidings .* Why should you wish to deprive an unfortunate man of the Small consolation of knowing himself beloved, by one who strives to tear his image 
fronl 
The Child Sorrow. 211 
from her breastyou ought to be Satisfied, since the most rigid virtue cannot accuse you; you ought to be Satisfied, that it has ' been in your power, consistent with your marriage vow, to give a Small portion of ease to his mind. You likewise torment yourself with fancying he despises you; he has reason to complain of your harsh ness, but that will never raise contempt in his bosom. 
But I will Say no more on this head; I will leave it to abler persons. 
Yesterday my Friends left stretton haufe. 
I own their departure has made me melancholy. I find Lord Stretton has his share in the sighs which escape me; this is, in a great measure, owing to the teicildly partictpation he has had in the Sufferings of my dearest Friends. He does not see my late behaviour in the blameable light you do; and yet his notions are extremely .delicate. Indeed, I am not altogether pleased with you; I do not’ think you have thoroughly forgiven me; but I .'Said I would not dwell longer on this: subject, I will have done with it. 
: jt his journey which my Lord undertake Seems a very wild goosc Sort of a chase.; he is ito endeavour to reconcile the Relations of Lady to the step she has'’taken in 
itiarrying, without their consent. Can any CL i one 
212 E M M Ad. OF, 
one in their senses supppse hertather and Mother will ' be violently eiiraged at the promotion of a Daughter they meant to Sacrifice to a monastic life? Nil their intention Seems to be, to dispose of her wish out money; she has assisted their measurcs, since she has united herseif to a in an of good fortune, without robbing her family of any part of theirs. Thus far the tasss: of Lord Stretton appears a very easy one y and yet Sir Charles paints it as an Hercukm labour. It appears to my as an intricatie business; I do not pretend to the gift of divination, or I should be very apt to ima: gine there is some Secret cause for their apprehension.. Then her objection to having the ceremony performed till my Lord had been in Frmice. He was rather backward too; certainly neither had any re; guard to appearances at least; but the French, you know, are iiot. quite fo Scrupulous as the Ettglifi in general are. 
Lord Stretton told me, as Sir Charhs bevhifs. house was not quite ready to receive them, hedsiould. take it as a favour, if I would offer them mine. I readily as sured him, that, without a compliment, I looked on him as Master of it, therefore begged him to invite them to stay as long as it might be agreeable to them. Accordingly" a Messenger is dispatched to the 
new 
aihe Child of Sorrow. 213 
new married Pair, for whose arrival I shall wait very patiently, as I have no violent presentiment that I shall' be exceedingly attached to La Belle Francois. 
She is amazingly handsome, I am inforn> ed by both the Gentlemen, though I do not find she is much to the taste of either. 'Mr. Courtenay says, she wants that melting softness wshich can alone touch the heart; and Lord Stretton thinks her void of Sensibility. With these deficiencies, one should be apt to wonder by what charm Sir Charles was Subdued. My Lord Says, his Friend has a romantic cast, and that perhaps the difficulties he found in gaining her had a greater share in the conquest than even her beauty. However it may be, I have no great idea of their being very happy in the mansied state. ■ 
I doubt I shall feel a. little embarrassed on the reception I am to give these folks, as you know I am rather at a loss on these occasions. The recluse life my Father made me lead, left me unacquainted with the forms of ceremony. I must manage in the best manner I can. If I find her a greeable to me, I shall Soon recover my ease; on the contrary (which I most think will be the case,) if I do not like her, .1 shall be So formal, and So awkward, as will make me absurd. My greatest consolation 
is. 
214 EMMA; or, 
is, that Mrs. Middleton has promised to come to me next week; her company will be a great comfort: We shall be just able to make a party at quadrille or whist, and then we shall all she on an equality. 
Adieu! Yours most affedlionafely, 
Louisa Stretton, 
LETTER XXXVI 
To Lady Cleveland. 
Dear and precious as those blessed moments were which I Spent with the best of women, yet I almost regret them, since I find, by our Friend Louifay they have added more anguish to your gentle bosom. Ah! Madam, can you still remember me with the least affection, or even pity, and yet have the cruelty to grudge me the fatisfaduon of feeing you for a few transitory minutes? Had I urged you to any measures which could have raised the fiightest apprehension of my want of delicacy, and purity in my Sentiments for you, I will then allow you might have wished we had never met; but in this case, Surely you are too Severe both to yourself and me. 
I would 
he Child ^ sorrow. 215; 
I would not have presumed to write to you, but that my Soul longed to ask you a few short questions, which our mutual distress prevented. Good God?! what emotions filled my breast when I first beheld you from your chaise! What agitation Seized my whole frame when I touched your hand! When the accident of your nipping your foot from the step gave me the opportunity of catching you in my arms, to prevent your falling, what words can express my fensations! Oh! Emma! dearest and most amiable of women! have I lost all prospedt of happiness with her who can give Such transports to my Soul? Pardon me, dear Excellence! I meant not to Say what I have here written. — I check my pen. — Indeed, I am not at present Sufficient master of myself to proceed. 
I Said, my intent was to have asked you a few short questions. You have Sometimes hinted to Lady Louisa., that Lord Cleveland behaviour to 3: 011 has not been of that kind, to conciliate the affedion or esteem of a woman unhappily prepossessed. Good God! can he be Such a monster as to use you ill? Yet, I know he mush — • Such unexampled meekness and patience as mark your character would not, unless cause had been given, have vented itself, 
even 
1216 
EMMA; : cr, 
even to the bosom of friendship: Too Surely, then. Love had the least share in his marriage with you. His temper, I have had many proofs, is bad, but you could never have given him cause to wreak his ill nature on you. Merciful Heaven! what an aggravation it must be to your dis tress, in being for ever torn from the Man who adores you; to be united to one whose ill qualities must for ever prevent your tasting the least degree of peace with. What have not your Father and Brother to answer for ^ 
I hope you will not think I have presumed too much in writing on this Subject, or, indeed, in writing at all; but refiedl, this melancholy privilege is all I can boast. Believe me while I Swear, never to abuse your goodness, if you will now and then indulge me, by letting my hear, by your own hand, of your welfare, and likewise permitting me Sometimes the happiness I now enjoy. Were you to deny me this favour, I shall think you have united with Fate to make me still more wretched than I have already been. I am assured our dear Louisa will be So kind and generous as to take charge of any Epistle you may have the goodness to pen for me. 
For heaven’s Sake let me know how you are in health; I am but too certain the 
shock 
Lhe Child of Sorrow. 217 
shock you received must have caused the indisposition Lady Louisa informs me you complained of. I sincerely petition 1 leaven that you may Soon recover your health ■ — • and may peace of mind be yours, Such peace as the good and virtuous like you ought to enjoy. 
(hur Friend still freely forgiven her 
doubts ou have not the little plot ssie engaged in — Consider, that ssie was morally certain you would never have come to the Farm, had you known who you was to 'meet; that circumstance must excuse the manner — But the forming, of it? — You will Say, tvas that right? Ah! I know not by what rule we must try that. Pity for me was her Sole inducement. — Let me not find that Sentiment more prevalent in her bosom than in yours. Perhaps I Saw you then for the last time. I have at present very little views cf ever returning, and my Seeing you at D — was no muore than the longing., longing look, which tve cast behind us tvhen we are quitting the world for ever. 
Flowever distant my body may be from you, my soul will still hover about the spot which contains all it esteems below; this privilege 1 think the greatest tyrant would not disallow. The intercourse of soul cannot afford any uneasiness to your Husband, vol. I. L who 
21 8 
EMMA j or. 
who thought it Sufficient to possess your person without your mind. Lovely as you are in person, and dear to my eyes as your charms render you, yet to possess no more of you than he does, I cannot envy him. No; the lovely portrait which I am .this moment gazing on, with the assurance that your heart has ever been mine, conveys more rapture, to my soul than Lord Cleveland could ever enjoy. There / triumph, and grant, gracious Heaven, I ever may! May no adl of mine ever lessen me in her eyes; may I be still pitied, and still loved as much as is consistent with her virtue and honour. With the hope that Heaven will grant this prayer, I Subscribe myself Your faithful, 
Edward Courtenav. 
LETTER XXXVIL 
Lo Edward courtenay, Lfq:, 
TRI MBLING with the consciousnefs of acting improperly, I take up my pen to disclose the dictates of a heart too fatally engaged in an illaudable passion. — Alas! where are my reason and prudence? How has one imprudent step involved me I A literary correfpo.nden.ee with any Man is 
certainly 
The Child Sorrow. 219 
certainly (my Situation considered andih propriety; but with the Man I ought no longer to think of; whom I shotild for ever drive from my heart; to engage in a correspondence with him. ahi \vhere’and by whom shall I stand excnshd? Will it to the misjudging and partial world be an extenuation, that I knew not tvhom I should meet at D —? Even if it should be admitted in that one instance, will my subsec|uent conduct escape its cenfiares? Alas! I fear not. Will it not condemn me as one guilty as to intention, thou; h innocent as to adt? Into this fatal difficulty has the friendship of my Louisa thrown me. Yet my for giveness, the reality of which she doubts, is freely her’s. In Some measure I own my lenity is owing to the exalted idea your behaviour has raised in me of your worth. On the retrospedl of your whole conduct I revere you for the respect and consideration you showed me. Your actions, your words were such as I wished to be witness of in the Man who professes the Sentiments, of me, you have So long cherished. Your behaviour I cannot blame; bsit mine - — Ah! let me not retrace the Scene. — I will, if possible, forget it all — Indeed I oiiglu to drive the circumstances of that day from my memory, if it is in nature to do fo. ’ I hope, and thhik I may rely on your pru l 2 dence 
EMMA; or, 
dence and real affection for me, never again to attempt a step of the same Sort. ' Could I believe you would hereafter abuse the lenity I have shown, and ever take any measure to See me, fie assured my lasting displeasure would ensue. I would for ever drive you from my esteem, as one unworthy of the least mgard on my fide; but I trust I shall not be deceived in you, nor shall cold sstspicion find harbour in my bosom. 
I would wish to give ease to your heart, by making Such answers to your inquiries as might have that effect;; alas! it would be doing the greatest violence to truth, to Say I was either well jn health, or nearer that peace of mind you compliment me with laying, all like me ought to poffess. I doubt, my Friend, both, you and I must content ourselves with deserving, as much asi possible, the happiness of this world, butpatiently wait to receive it in the next. 
I knovr not whether I a, m justified in saying, Lord Cleveland is a bad Husband;; world, perhaps, V old think otherwise. He does not apparently deny me anything, i have affluence, and am mistress of my ov/n time and actions, I might live in the Grande Monde if I chose it — I may have what company I please — Of what, then, should a Woman complain? Of nothing. 
What can 
there be wanting ?’ 
as my Sister 
The chisd Sorrow, iit 
j^ister Clara answered to the many tender and anxious inquiries my dear Mother made of her, after her reiturii from Spending Some time at Cleveland place. “Good God! what can she possibly want? Haa she not a coach and six to wait her pleasure; a princely allowance ro dispose of just as she pleases;; noble house, rich furniture, and everything a reasonable Woman can desire. If she is not happy it is her own fault. This to be Sure might make Some reasonable Women happy; but if clara’s reasonable Woman has a heart, and the least degree of Sensibility, I doubt there would still be Something wanting. My coach and six cannot drive me from myself; my refiedtions on my Situation, however enviable they may be to her, occasion a gloom', if is not in the power of riches or empty futile pleasure to dj'ssipate. 
The mind of Lord Cleveland is certainly not congenial with mine; there is rto relation between them. His pleasures centre in the chase or the bottle; of the latter, I think, he makes infinitely too free for the strength of his constitution; but my remonstrances on that head have been So extremely ill received, that I am silent on that head. There are people who attribute other failings to him, but it is not my interest to be too clearrsighted. Though I L 3 could 
2 22 
EM M At 
or 
cgtild tipfcjdovcj 1 have ever, wished to ^ •honoi|rlshiliii» Mdcl chn truly acquit my ielf with rffispedl; :, to' uiy obedience, to him. 
I erideavour, a: svmugh as possible, to excuse him to myfdf; I confider him, as well as entirely throvrn out of our i'wr, our n^tiur'al path; in life. He might have made - B very different Jlushand to a, woman whose heart he had gained; his little fcibles would have Sunk under her eye, and a conformity of disposition might have rendered both him and her happy. But then he was not constrained to become my husbancl; he cannot Say I deceived him. myxetter to hin Sufficiently explained the mate of my heart. He ought not then to complain; and yet, vas he to know my prefcit employment, I fear he would, and, lome things considered, would have too much cause. 
Lady Lsuifa has had some opportunities of reading the disposition of her Cousin, which I sincerely wish had not offered. Her Friendship for you has made her draw comparisons to the disadvantage of my Lord j from thenqe ypu may have gathered niore hnowledge of tny situation, than. horri any hints I have occasionally given. 
Though what I have said may not be altogether fo shtisfadlory as ray Friend rnight wish or expect, ye, t, certainly, I 
have 
lihe Child of Sorrow. 2^3 
have Said as much as I ought; I will thankfully accept of your Friendship, and will not be displeafed at (Sometimes) receiving all proper instances of it. I know not whether to rejoice, or be Sorry for your intention of remaining abroad. Heaven direct you to take those steps most conducive to your honour and happiness. It would be the highest felicity’ to me, to be assured you Were in the way to be happy.. Let what would be the means, I thinl I should rejoice. 
Adieu! my good Friend; ' let us endeavour to think of each other with pleasme, unallayed by the anxiety which has So long rendered us miserable. 
Emma Clevelatt d .■ 
LETTER XXXVIII 
To Lady Louisa Stretton. 
I Have just this moment concluded one of the most laborious talks in the world; from feeing the enclosed you will guess my meaning is writing to our ' absent Friend. How many hours 1 Spent before sts completion! My God! how often have I checked my pen! Apprehensive lest I should appear too warm, perhaps he will L 4 think 
2 24 E M M A; 
think my style too cold. I hope he will not take notice of the blisters my frequent tears have made on the paper. Ah! my heart hied in each line! 
For heaven’s Sake, my dearest Louisa I do nor let him know the instances you have Seen of Lord Cleveland behaviour to 
me. 
Vou will see L have glanced it over; 
I would not, for the world, have him know the many caprices you have been a witness of. Let not your friendship for this amiable man make you totally regardless of me. Consider, I shall be very much rest died on for complaining of my Husband; for Such he is, and his honour consequently is mine. It is my duty, not only to think as favourably of him as I can myself, but to do ail in my power to make his character respedtable abroad. Your zeal, my Love, transports you to too great lengths; curb it for my Sake, and for the sake of thole dearer to me than myself. 
Adieu I 
Emma Cleveland. 
LETTER XXXIX 
v0 Miss W O O D V I L L E. 
OUR Letter, my dearest Fannyy afforded me a very fensible pleasure, as it conveyed to me the tender assurances of 
your 
Child Sorrow. -225 
your love. You was extremely prudent to conceal from my dear Mother the, cirv Gumstances of my late distress. I would carefully conceal from her honoured bosom the least knowledge of my being really as unhappy as I am. 
Mr. C has left England', he says most likely he shall never return; in all human probability I have looked on him for the last time; it is better it should be foi 
believe I did not tell you Mrs. Hothain is here. I find she is to be our guest Sox Some time. 1 cannot Say her company affords much pleasure; but that circumstance is rendered quite easy to her; as she considers my Lord and me as one, therefore if she pleases him, of course I must come in for a share. I wonder Lord Cleveland should think her a proper companion for his Wife, but I believe he is too indifferent about me to concern himself whether she is or not. Her character was but doubtful while her Husband lived, and 1 fancy her conduct, during her widowhood, has not contributed greatly to raise it. hov/ever, my Lord will do as he pleases, let me Say or think as lchuse about it. 
My principal reason for bringing the de ledlable Widow into my Letter is this : Etill Sore against my inclinations, I am told L 5 we. 
226 M; Aj or 
we are to spend good, part of this winter in London. You. will think all places must be the Same to me; they are virtually So; but here I live a domestic. Solitary life; if I go, tp tovvn, I must give into Some of its.dk yefsions; Mrs. hotd.am must ekhibit her delts^d^ iomi at the reigning public places, and I know I shall be expected to attend her. My dissike to a life of dissipation, and more, the party, will signify no more than the fornur dijukes I have shown. I shall be constrained to go, and sit a silent Spedlator to the modish flirtation of the buxom Widow and his. Lordship. Though; I am not jealous, yet I am Sorry my Lord should So wholly forget his part of the marriage ceremony; but I think it is too apparent, even to me, that their intimacy is pretty notorious. 
You will think I have as little regard to your morals, as my Lord Seems to have for mine, should I talk of introducing you to this Lady; yet this is an event I shall labour to bring about with the utmost celerity. A winter in town will do you no harm; andji?a only can judge how happy your Society will make me. I shall Scarce feel my sels wretched, when my Sweet Fanny is my companion. We will endeavour to procure a Chaperon for Mrs. Hothamy when we chuse to be alone. I shall tell my Lord, I 
insist 
2^/6^ Child Sorrow. 227 
insist on his sending you Such an invitation’ as shall induce my Father to permit us to fetch you; to inftft^ will be using a language altogether new on my side, but the novelty, to a man fond of variety, may perhaps be pleasing. I have absolutely wrote myself into Spirits, from the bare idea of the felicity I shall feel in embracing my beloved Sister. I have mentioned fetching you;. alas! my dear Fanny can I then bear to view the place where I have been Superlatively happy, and as eminently miserable? Can 1, without a tear, behold the Scenes of past delight? Again visit those walks where I have been accompanied by the most amiable of men? Ah! can I, without horror, recall to my bleeding memory all my former Sufferings? Ah! ye conscious Scenes, will ye not again tear my heartstrings ^ Yet, yet to procure my Fanny Society, I will run all these hazards; yes, I will visit each tree, each shrub, that has been remarked by him; the barks of Some have been the record of Love; I will frequent his favourite walk, 
“Perhaps where vfxth. hini I have stray’d,. 
I may wander with pleasure alone.” 
I Scarcely expect to know your person, unless the Sweet emotion of my heart should instindlively point you out to me. I doubt L 6 you 
2 2 0 E M M A cr, 
you will find a stni greater alteration in me. Three years, my .Dear, Spent sojoylessas my time has been, makes a visible havoc in the outward frame., 
“The roses will bloom when there is peace in the breast, ” but when corroding care is Seated there, the pallid cheek and languid eye, all too plainly evince its inmate. ‘HV pensive anguish pining at the heart, ” destroys the vivid glow of youth. However, melancholy Scenes alone shall not make up the bufiness of our life; I shall bring you a little playfellow, of whom I expect you to be very fond, — no other than my Sweet little Girl. She is now just two years old, and, if you will take a mother’s word, a perfect Angel in miniature. I have taught her to lisp your name; she will be able to greet you when we meet. I need not tell you she is my only comfort, and every hour I do not pass unpleasantly, must be placed to the account of my Harriet. 
Expect a Letter Soon frorii Lord cleve land, in form, to my Father. I am determined it Shall be So; on no other will I go to town, if I can help it', however, I dare Say my Lord will oblige me. Adieu, my dearest Fanny. 
I am ever yours, 
Emma Cleveland. 
LET 
'l/je Child of Sorrow. 2-29^ 
LETTER' XL 
fh Lady Lou i s a St r e t t o n. 
ivoodville hall. Am now writing to my dearest Louisa ^ 
__ that very Spot from whence I have 
lo much cause to date all my infelicity. Yes, my Louisa! I am Seated in that identical room in which my poor Mother once found me So happy, and left me So truly, wretched.. But be gone from my aching memory ye former Scenes! 
I cannot describe to you my sensationson finding myself once more clasped in the arms of my dearest.mother, in a place where I had received So many convincing proofs of her tenderness. 
My Sister Fanny is grown quite, a woman. I suppose there is no period in life in which three years can make So great a difference as from thirteen to Sixteen, the age she attained the day after our arrival. She is rather taller than I am, and is, I think, exceeding handsome, though by no means a regular Beauty. My Mother thinks she has more of clard.s person than of mine, but she has ten thousand times more Sweetness in her Manner. I shall be very happy in my companion, I make no doubt. 
My 
or. 
■ 'R. M' M" A;; 
Lord — or rather, 1 believe, Mrs, 
2t3q. 
■ My 
Eotham, is in Such a hurry to get to town,, that our stay at tvoodville hall W\W be extremely short. My Brother knew we were expected here, but he has not been to See us. I fancy my Lord will not go twenty miles out of his way to call on him; therefore there is little probability of our meeting, I cannot be Such an hypocrite as to Say 1 shall be exceedingly disappointed in not Seeing him': No one can suppose my partiality for him can be very violent. Captain Breretm has brought my Sister to give us the meeting. What do you think was his reason for coming? because he had been told I was the direct contrary kind of woman to his Wife, therefore, he Swore, I must be worth' coming to See. After this short Specimen, I need not tell you he is a droll character Fanny is a great favourite with him. He Says, it is plaguy hard that he should have married the only one, out of three Sisters,, who is not likely to be the favourite of any man. these Speeches, you may believe, do not much contribute to the relaxing my sister’s features, or to encrease the desire of pleassng her Husband. A circumstance, I dare Say, she has never kept in view, since what is generally called the honeymoon. Not but that the noble Captain has his failings, and of the capital Sort too; yet, 
there 
la36 C HIL D (5/' Sorrow, 23x 
there is a pleasant freedom in his manner,, that is very agreeable to indifferent people. 
He has been ready to devour my little girl this morning. I told him he would extremely rise in my esteem if he was fond' of children; he answered, it was wholly impossible not to be charmed with that' beautiful epitome of myself. I laughed at his compliment, and Said I was still convinced that he would be equally fond of all children. ** Faith, So I am, (he replied) I should be extravagantly fond of one I have — but her Mother has taken So much pains to Spoil her, and to make her hate me, that I never see her without refiedling, with a heavy heart, that she will a few • years hence be the torment of Some honest fellow like myself, ” 
Mrs. Brereton, 1 plainly See, had much rather not have paid me the compliment of coming hither, as there is Such a thing observed as preeminence. She still remembers she is the eldest Sister, and is not a little chagrined that 1 am treated with more deference than she. Ah! how vain, and silly her pride. What is the idle pomp of titles and rank? Are they not too often trappings to conceal the most painful feelings 4 
I doubt I am inexcusable, yet I cannot help expressing my wish to hear Something of our Parijian friends. I am Sometimes 
apprehensive 
2^^ jyj;; ^j[‘ 
apprehensive lest my Letter should have been thought too indifferent — like one penned by a heart wholly incapable of sensibility and Sentiment. Alas! he knows not the: struggles I had with myself,. v^rhile I strove for the Sandtion of friendship,, to express a less Serene pashon. 
I know, my dearest Louisa I am above measure culpable. I ought not to indulge myself thus. But, alas! who can expect propriety and consistency from Such a frail weak wretch as I am. However, I will not make you participator of my folly. I will lay down my pen since I seem to have lost the proper use of it, and it has got above my command. I will hold it no longer than to express a Sentiment, to which the most rigid virtue need not prescribe limits — I mean my esteem for you. In that, I shall never know a change, nor will my sighing heart chide itself for Savins; So. Adieu! 
Em maclevilan d. 
LET T E R XLI 
^0 Lady Cleveland. 
I Am Sensibly pleased on finding you an inhabitant of the Grande Monde. You may, my dear. Emma think as you will 
about 
Lhe Child of Sorrow. 235 
about being the same in all places, but you must allow, from general and received opinion, that Solitude is the nursery of Melancholy. In the gay Scenes, in which yuu cannot avoid Sometimes mixing, you have not time for deep refiedtion; and you well know, that an idea may be drove about, till it in a great measure loses its Seat and inssuence. Tho’ it may be Sweet to cherish your favourite ideas, yet in a mind So virtuous as yours, the resiedtion is accompanied with the utmost pain. You know, 
I used to Say, better not think at all, than to have one’s thoughts a torment. The practical part is rather difficult, I confess : 
“But the more danger, the more glory, my Dear, ” as the widow Brady Says. 
But to proceed to business. 1 have received Letters Srom my Lord; they are not very Satisfadtory with respedl to the affair he went upon. Sir Charles had Letters at the Same time. Lady Seville has exchanged the vivacity of a Fretichwoman^ for the formal gravity of an English Quaker, whom the Spirit has not operated upon. I am ccci vinced Lord Stretton has not communicated; the whole of the business to me. 
I supposc, one time or other, I may become acquainted with the circumstances of their history, but it must be in his own; way, and wficd, he pleases., I am not vesy 
anxioua. 
234 EMMA; or, 
anxious on the occasion; ’ they are not persons for whom I feel much interest; in short, I do not like them, the Lady particularly. Should my Lord and I become bone of one bone, I shall not be violently intimate with these folks, I can assure you. I should be apprehensive of their corrupting the morals of my Caro Spofo. I think his Lordship a little out in his knowledge of physiognomy in this cafe, or he would not have requested me to invite them hither. However, as they are my guests, I must treat them with politeness and attention. 
As you eonjedure, I have had other. Letters from Park, enclosed in mine is one, — may I write the rest } I believe I need not; a certain little palpitation of the heart will teach you to finish the Sentence. He knows pot but that you are still at clevejand place. 1 shall make no apology for sending the epistle with this; my letter will then, I am Sure, be a welcome one; not that I entertain the least surmise that were mine unaccompanied it would not be received with plea 1 should be insensible and ungrateful doubt your friendship and esteem;. but, respeding the other, the pleasure must be heightened where the Sentiment is more tender than friendship can express. 
Inform me how your Widow proceeds iin the world; does she enter into its follies 
withi 
Sure, to 
Lhe Child of Sorrow. 235 
with spirithow does the Sweet Fanny ivooiville like the hurry and confusion of the town } a life she has been a total stranger to. Let me hear all the news.; stuff your Letter with the Anecdotes which at present reign; but, above all, tell me how you yourself bear the fatigue and impertinence which, h.; people of your rank must undergo; LI myf hopful Cptiftn mtnds in his disposition; how you pass your time; if the town air agrees with the dear little Harriet; what are your employments, your amusements, and refiedtions? What an Interrogatist you will think me — But I must have answers to all these questions, and that Speedily. 
The news of the town and its anecdotes, 
I shall communicate to my visitors it will afford us Some conversation in these winter evenings. I hope to find Some comfort in hearing you are more at ease than you were Some time since; this you will believe is^^my chief reason for being So importunate. You know my earnest wishes for your felicity to be as boundless as your merit. 
Your faithful 
Louisa Stretto?!. 
LET 
236 
E M 
A; ar 
LETTER 
Lo Lady CL e V e L an. d. 
[Intlofe'd 'in the 'precedmg.'\ 
SHALL I venture to declare to my amiable Friend, that her Letter disap pointed me— — while I do So, let me likewise acknowledge the’ favour I think yoiir pity has induced you to show me. You have acted with the greatest propriety r Would to Heaven I could give laws to my Sentiments and feelings as you do. — But what right have I to be petulant? Pardon me, dear Excellence; I ought to revere your virtue and prudence, not to reproach your coldness. Alas! and is it to pity alone I am indebted for your valuable correspondence f Am I not too affurning in wishing for Something more. Some infinitely tenderer motive? I know, to Solicit a return to my pashon is extremely improper on my side; but gonsider our situations, think of our former Sufferings, think our Souls are wedded to each other; think, that. I do not urge you to anything base or unworthy, only to preserve those Sentiments for me, which once your Father allowed you to express, and' which it has, and ever shall be, my only feufiness.to deserve. Oh! thou loveliest and 
bess 
"The Child ^ Sorrow. 237 
best of women! can the austerest virtue frown a denial to Such a request? Why then have you filled your paper without one tender assurance, that you will for ever be mine in thought. You tell me, that you ought to drive me from your memory and heart: Ah! if you can even wish to strive, the talk cannot be a hard one. You will too. Soon Succeed, and then what will become of the wretched exile? — Every vein of torture will again be opened in my bleeding bosom — You vil! be commended as a pattern of virtue, who could thus eassly Subdue an ill-fated passion; and / shall sink into oblivion, or only be thought of as a weak wtetch, whose pashons were stronger than bis reason. 
I will strive not to offend you with my passion, but then, my ever adored Angel, you must lil?ewise promise, never any more to tell me you take measures to drive me from your heart. I live, I breathe but in your esteem — Do not, ah 1 do not rob me of the only comfort I am capable of tasting. I will remain for ever at this distance from you, if you will indulge m, e Sometimes with your welcome letters. Do not fear that I shall intrude myself on your retirement — I will never attempt to do fo.. Some people might accuse me of coldness, to acquiefee fo eassly 
in 
238 EM M A; or, 
ih being robbed of all my happiness; but I Submit, since I am well assured my chance of being still beloved, rests on my conducting myself in all my a<5hons within the line of virtue. I am infinitely more calm than I was Some hours ago. I have again perused your Letter. My emotions, when I first opened it, can only be known by those who love like me. I have Said I was disappointed. — You begin with condemning your seif — Ah! must the purest, the most constant, passion sill your boscm with Such end less regrets! How has one imprudent jiep in volved me! you exclaim. — Ah! my Emma I can your possessing the most exalted idea of my .redtitu^e console me, for calling your accidentally Seeing me an imprudent Jiep? Why should you wish to forget your own condud i Do you then grudge me the involuntary proofs you gave of your tenderness??! the remembrance of them constitutes every Scheme of my happiness. Think, they were no more than virtue might authorise. 
No, dearest and most angelic of Women; no, you shall never be deceived in me; my heart is in your own hand, dispose of it as you please; only be not too harsh, too Severe, lest it sinks into despair. 
The portrait you draw of Lord C convinces me, however you may have strove to 
varnish 
The Child of Sorrow. 239 
varnish it over, I had before but too true an idea of his character. How could a Father coiffign Daughter to fucha. Husband! That thought I must not indulge; 1 feel my emotions too violent. Let me turn to the latter part of your dear Epistle; let me, if possible, receive consolation for my af fiidlions in your assurances of friendship. Oh! may my fond heart teach itself to be Satisfied with that cold Sentiment! May Heaven and you direct all its movements! With Such guides, -1 cannot miss the way to Honour and Virtue; but to Felicity, unless Heaven, in pity to our Sufferings, allows you to dispense it to me, that is a road I can never travel. However, I will endeavour to enjoy the share which is allotted me, your Friendship. How strangely inconsistent you will think me 1 Indeed, the many evils I have encountered, have weakened me every way. I am no longer what I was, but in my constant and steady attachment to you, there I can never alter; but while life and sense inform, this wretched being shall ever remain 
Your faithful and devoted 
Courtenay. 
LET 
'24^ 
E MA; 
or. 
LETTER XLIII 
^0 Edward court^nav, Eff 
HAT shall I say to the most amiable of men How express myself to Speak quiet to his mind, and not transgress those rules I am. constrained to prescribe to my penare you not, my dear Friend, too unreasonable? Think of my situation; remember I am the Wife of another. Oh! Courtenay! cfiide me not for being cold and indifferent towards you. Alas! does the anguish wshich at this moment rends my heartstrings, does that evince my coldness?? pity on me, my Friend, and Spare me again those bitter and unjust reproaches. My own heart accuses me of other sentiments; What virtue and my situation can allow, ' I will freely grant you. Indeed, I cannot withhold that privilege; but you must not even wish for more; the limits of my attachment to you depends, on yourself in tirely. at as I would have you, and here Lfwear, never to strive to tear your image from my heart; but think not I will indulge myself in illicit wisties, or that I will life such tender expressions in my Letters as happier times might have authorised. ‘ Fate, which has for ever Severed 
us. 
iihe Child Sorrow. 241 
us, likewise makes Such allowances lawless. Be contented with my assurances, that my heart can never feel any other affection than the first. You will ever remain the object of it, unless you forfeit my esteeru by Some improper procedure. 
Even you can have no idea of the dis tress into which your Letter'threw me; you cannot love me, if you ever again Subject me to the like misery. Confined as our portion of earthly felicity is, within the compass of Friendship, let us not make ^ it less. Better we had never met, than that the meeting should have rendered us thus wretched. Do not, I bescech you, repine So much; let us Submit to our destiny. 
Let me hear from you Soon again, but be more composed, more yoiirself. Let it be Such a Letter, as may draw the tender tear of heightened friendship from my eyes, not rend the gush of anguish from my pained bosom, as your last has done. Not but I have extradled Some balm too. The effects of a violent ^ attachment too often insu res its pardon. Judge then of the excess of mine, but do not presume. I can die, but I will never be the fiwe of a passion for an undeserving object. I have never yet been deceived in you; I Sincerely hope I never shall. I could not bear to be robbed of the exquisite delight of knowing my vol. I. M esteem 
242 E M M AI or, 
esteem is fixed on the most amiable and worthy of men. Continue to be Such, and 1 will never regret the habitual tenderness of my Soul. Though my heart has ever been the Same in its feelings for you, and while it beats can never know a change, yet I would not tell you So but to dissipate that gloom which Seems to Seize you. Do not, therefore, hereafter blanic me if you find my future Letters less warm than this. I mean that they should be So. It is highly proper, on ail accounts, that, however tender our affections may be, the expressions of our lips and pens should be chastened by prudence. Vflten you refiedl: Serioussy, I am Sure you will coincide with 
Your true and faithful Friend, 
Emma Cleveland. 
L E T T E R XLIV 
To Charles Cleveland, Efa\ 
S U R ELY of all men you are the most unaccountable and unreasonable. What in the name of consistency would you have do } Am I not here in the situation 
me 
you have So often wished. So often laboured to place me? In short, my dear Charles, ami not a person Solely de voted to your 
interest? 
l’he Child of. Sorrow. ti 
interest? Can you dpu.bt this affertionj^ when I. have So fully demonstrated to you tltatmy own is So very nearly connetffed to yours? And yet, to pretend to be jealous of youi: Cousin, too! Upon my word, ctey<? land. I must indulge my sex’s vivacity, and laugh a little. don’t be angry, my dear Lad; 1 can do your business and my own tqo with a siniling face, as well as, if I wore the gloomy aspedt of Cajfius or Zanga. 
So! you really imagine that I take an infinite pleasure in flirting about at public places; and that to partake of its amusements is my Sole. purpose for persuadiiig Lord Cleveland to bring his family up. to town this winter. You have but an in disterent idea of my Scheming talents it you think you have divined my real motives. You ought, from what has pasted between us, to have a more exalted oph nion of my faculties that way. 
Have you forgot your original plan? Was it not to make a lasting breach between Lord and Lady Cleveland., to prevent all poshbility of their having an heir to jockey you out of the estate and title? Recollect yourself. Is this breach fo likely to be effected while they remain together in the country? How in nature sholild it? She is all compliance to his wayward humours, and would as Soon think M 2 of 
244 EMMA; or, 
of turning the current of the mill stream, as to oppose his will. Even if it were possible for a man to have a worse temper than his Lordship possesses, I do not think it possible that he could find cause in her to excite his anger. But it does not become me to write her panegyric, at the time I am meditating mischief against her; So let us cast a veil over her virtues, and, if we cannot develop her faults, let us strive to make Some for her. 
But now to let you into my motives for contriving the London expedition. No woman in the world is So likely to gain admirers in the heau monde t as a beautiful one, neglected by her Husband. That is a position I believe you will not deny. Every one who knows anything of this Family, knows Lady Cleveland was Sacrificed, from ambitious motives, to your Cousin; they must See, however circumspeft her behaviour is, that she cannot love him. Many men will be striving to gain that place in her affections, which her Husband can never obtain. Do you begin to conceive me yet? Will not the assiduity of thcse men make Lord Cleveland jealous? I fancy now you begin to have a tolerable notion of my Scheme. 
i am a wonderful favourite of my lord’s; I find I can manage him as I ■ - please; 
Lhe Child of Sorrow. 245 
please; let me alone to make my advantage of it. Be assured, every nerve shall be stiiained in your Service, and that of all men you are the dearest to me. But then, my Charles., you must consent to be guided Solely by me. Rest all your affairs implicitly in my hands. You ought not to doubt me; Surely I have been tried and known. 
I will not finish my Letter till tomorrow. 
My reason for not closing my Paper was, that we were going to the Soho Assembly. I am not fond of dancing, but I pretended 1 was, which obliged Lord Cleveland to osfer me his hand. Fanny Woodville had been engaged before I discovered my inclination, otherwise I dare Say she would have given up her amusement, rather than her Sister should sit without a companion. I had observed Lord Belford ogling Lady Cleveland Some time through his opera glafs^ and 1 gave him this opportunity of addressing himself to her. He Seemed willing to improve the occasion; in a few minutes I had the Satisfaction of feeing his Lordship Seated by her Ladyship. He, is as likely a man to try to gain a married woman’s heart, as any I know, especially since 
his affair last winter with Lady -- -- -;, which 
has given him a prodigious eclat with the 
Females. 
24^ E M M A j 
Females. I am Sure his character is unknown to Lady Cleveland, and it shall be my business to keep.her in ignorance on. that head. Was she like the generality of the Women of Quality, I need not be So cautious,, for she would like him the better for having been engaged in So many amours; but she is quite oittre. 
I made Lord Cleveland, as if by accident, observe their situation, but he was. too much engrossed himself to discover, any impropriety, nor indeed is it possible he should, for what harm could there be. in a man Speaking to a woman in a public assembly? 
By his manner and gestures, I imagined' Lord Belforcl to be on his old sub jedl; I therefore edged up to them, to get within car shot of their conversation. He had that moment taken her.hand: — “Suffer nie, (said he,) to lead you to die Set; you Surely can have no objeflion to join a company of which your Lord makes one. Why vrill you be So cruel as to refuse me, ” (added he, looking tenderly at her, and again taking her hand, which she had withdrawn.) She Smiling, answered, “I have told your Lordship I am no dancer, I wilh to be excused.” - — “Cruel creature! (sighed he,) you deny me every favour I ash.” I wish 1 had been witness to all he had said 
preced 
slhe Child of Sorrow. 247 
preceding this last Speech, as I should have been glad to know what favours she had rtfused him, or he, on So Short an acquaintance, could have the assurance to ash. 
I think I may venture to pronounce his Lordship is a man for my purpose; if I do not make Something of him, never pay any regard to my promises more. 
You must not entertain a thought of our meeting yet, and renewing, as you say, our former endearments; we have other work of Superior consequence first to be adjusted; our pleasures must give way to business; not but I should be infinitely happy to See my dear Charles, were Such an indulgence consistent with my views, and I sincerely hope the time will come when we shall meet, to part no more; but I do not think your Cousin will be very glad of our company. It behoves us to be cautious to the last degree that he remains in total ignorance of our intimacy, or even acquaintance; on that circumstance depends more than you at present think of. 
Be contented vrith the knowledge that our interests are as much one, as if we were that strange compound Man and Wife. 
Farewell! my dearest Charles I I am totally yours, 
Eliza Hotham. 
end of the FI R st vol UM E, 
'^3* 
A 
L: 
f.; IA 
■ IR 
•■■5b' T 
/; j { 
: vte ^ 


V, ''|,, '- 
.'; I • ‘ o '*r 
it 
im^, vfi 
'i 
L : ya'f;, .r ' 
t ^ [jll ... — ■ 
w 
'An'. 
ssc. - 
rir i 
m 

T -- -- S’'"' 
: C 
O?: -* ia ■^ ■ 

?R 
.»*: 's<ii*’ 
V i 


T' •' 






GODFREY F. SINGER MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY 
MR. AND MRS. JACOB SINGER 


C K y. ■ ^ -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 
'A AA a'i ifr. 
. I? Frf 
''T t 



’I 
K - 
. ^ >' 
EMMA; 
O R, 
The CHILD of SORROW. 
NOVEL. 
In TWO VOLUMES. 
VOLUME II 
LONDON, 
Printed for T. Lowndes, No. 77, in fleet-street. MDCCLXXVI. 

A M i - vli 
a 
y/OH5J08 % dniho srlt 
I*. 
Jr. 
.j' a ■ V ■ © M 
Jti A N Tj j tj b cnw T ill 
^ d. V I T f 
/■ • 
A * • *ari'\ u; < 
‘it, : r' ' 
fm *'■■ «■ ■; 
AAA 
i till il f: : ' ■='/ 
■ -- O €i ''i{i^ O -- fl ill e5i\/vvl' jsaa^'vrckl 'Pv 
cav’ax; i OQU M 
'r i' it 
odlu 
s&.w2'ts>.' §& % 

EMMA, 
O R, 
The CHILD os SORROW. 
LETTER XLV 
To Lady Louisa Stretton. 
; $: )3?!.!^i‘^. H E Interrogatories of my dearest T -0 lguifa should have been answered ^ ^ 0f0'^ Sooner, but I had an infinitely harder ' task to pursue — Perhaps you will ^ guess, I mean writing to an exiled Friend. 
Oh 1 Lcmfa., the Letter which accompanied; yours almost broke my heart. 1 think he T was a little unjust — And yet how can I ^ blamie him } — His love and his distress So d violent! I hope, sincerely hope, I have given peace to his bosom — Yet what has it not cost me? .1 have owned more than I 
- VOL. II 
B 
ought 
iz E M M A; r, 
•ought even to him — I shall enclose my answer to him, for your perusal. Tell me if I am not too tender. Alasl T know I am. But I must tear myselsfrom this too prevailing Subject; 1 dare not longer indulge my sdf on the tender theme. 
How amazingly have the manners of our Neighbours, the French improved; or rather, as I am more inclined to Say, corrupted the morals and conduct of our present Nobility. With what infinite ease and facility they introduce themselves into our dreffing tqoms; one’s bedchamber is Scarcely held Sacred from the attacks of these Men of true Breeding. I really wonder how other vfo men find it; burr, with the utmost seriousness that I can assume, I cannot keep Some of them from treating me with a familiarity, that absolutely almost becomes rude. If iht Beau Mondeoh! Send me back to the peaceful retreat of cleveland flace, Did you think, my Loiiifa.^ I should ever wish to be Settled there? Yet I certainly do. I hate London and all its ways. 
Upon the strength of meeting me two or three times at public places, one Lord xllfordh?^^ taken on himself the office of my Ctafveo. He has called here once or twice. T his morning, as I was at work in my dressing-room alone, [my .Sister and Mrs. 
Hotham 
Lhe Child Sorrow. 3 
Hotham were gone to See the Tower., I having a cold could not be of their party, ] who should be announced but his Lordship. I told him I was extremely Sorry Lord ckve land was not at home to receive the honour of his lordship’s visit. — But he aitured me, in pretty plain terms, his devoir was meant to me; “that he had heard me Speak osthe Mourning Bride as a favourite Play, and as it was to be performed the next evening, Sor the benefit of the lying if Hoffitaf he had taken the liberty of bringing me Some tickets, which it would be conferring the highest honour on him to accept.” Pie likewise added, “he was certain I could not refuse, since fo amiable a virtue as Charity V as the motive. — I replied, “I was extremely willing to contribute any assistance to So laudable a Scheme, and drawing out my purse, took out five, guineas, which I begged his Lordship would take the trouble of Sending to the itoufe; but that I could not think of accepting the tickets, as it was entirely out of my power to Say whether I should be able to lise them, my Lord being from home.” Lie paid me a profuse number of compliments on my being So bountisuj, and at the Same time So duteous a Wife, to refuse participating of the return which the Public made. — I answered to this, “That my lord’s generoficy put it in my power to gra b 2 tify 
4- 
EMMA; or, 
tjly my wish of Succouring the distressed; but that i by no means thought I was entitled to dispose of my time without his knowledge or permission; therefore must continue to wave his lordship’s polite offer.” He Swore by Heaven I was as much an Angel in mind as person. — “Oh! (continued he,) what an inestimable blessing does the happy ■cleveland possess in Such a Wife! And yet hers blind to more than mortal perfection.” 
I thought it did not become me to listen to Such encomiums from any Man, and likewise hear my Husband condemned, therefore Said, “You do not do my Lord justice; whatever Small share of merit I have, I am convinced is as conspicuous in his eyes as it can be to any Man; as a proof, his distinguishing from the rest of my Sex, showed he was not attached, as most Men are, to the glare of riches, or the dazzling charms of greatness. I am indebted Solely to him for the rank 1 hold.” 
“Can any rank (Said he) be So elevated to which you would not do the highest honour? — Oh! Lady Cleveland, how happy would the Man before you be, were he an Vaftern Emperor, might he have been per mitted .to have shared his Throne with you.” I wished to have resented his impertinence., but knew not how. — - “Upon my word, .my .Lord, (Said 1, laughing,) I need not 
wish 
The .Call. Tt of Sor ko\w. 5 
wish to go to a Tragedy; I think! have ti capital Performer here, in the ranting hypef ^ bolical strain — But come, in return for tlih fine Speeches you have made, I willintrodiice one to you who is aiming at making Speeches likewise; ” — Saying which, I rose and rang the bell, ordering the nurse and Lady Harriet to attend — I thought this would be the best method of turning a conversation I was heartily disgusted with. He Seemed vastly pleased with the Child, and I made Some pretence for keeping the nurse iri the room while he stayed. After Some time, - I told his Lordship, “I must take the liberty of informing him, that my hour for 'drfc'c sing was arrived, and that I dared to say ny Lord Cleveland would be happy to See him another day.” — I Saw he was piqued at my sending him away without his errand; however I did not mind that, as I rather wished he should See I was displeased with the impertinence of his behaviour. He had the asturance to Say, “he would attend me to my toilet.” — I replied, “That was a privilege to which my Husband was yet a stranger.” — “Oh! what tramontane notions! My charming Lady Cleveland, ^ positively you must take a few lessons on Propriety from some of our Circle.” — “Excuse me, my Lord, my lessons of Propriety I take from the first source, my own B 3 aeon 
E M M A 
07" 
conscience; that will always instriidl me vvhat to grant, what to deny; but you must now permit me to wish your Lordship a good morning.” 
Thus by main force almost I got rid of my troublesome Guest; indeed this is not the only time I have thought him So in a great degree. He V as extremely importunate with me to dance the other night at Soho. Good’god! dance. I could have told him my heart has been too heavy ever since my marriage to join So joyous a group. Though my Lord married me for love, as Some would Say, I am certainly at present as much neglected by him as any Woman of Quality need be — My face is fresh in the Mended and my figure not bad; So that I may look on myself just in a proper situation to be insuited by every Fop and Rake about the Court. Everyman will dare to think himself justified in endeavouring to gain a heart which a Husband rejects. How cautious, then, should a Vvoman, So totally left to her own guidance, be os her conduct! 1 do not mean that I am in danger — My attachment Secures my heart, and I hope my mind will remain untainted by the base Sophistry of these artful wretches. — But, my dear Louisa., I am pained at the extreme indifference of my Lord, an indisterence which has been gradually increasing since Mrs, 
Hotham 
Lhe Child c/'sorrow. 7 
liotham has been our Guest, but which makes infinitely larger strides Since our ai< rival in this nursery os evil and intrigue. 
At dinner 1 was Speaking of Lord bel forcbs meffiige to my Lord. He ashed me, “What I had done wfith the tickets I answered, “I had not taken them, as I did not know whether he (Lord Clevdaml) would have approved of my accepting them’; besides, (added I,) I did' not want to make a meric with Lord Belfords 1 think him a bold dihigreeable Man, who doesmot want the Sense of conferring favours to make him more assuming and impertinent.'” ' I own I Said thus much, to See whether my i^ord would take notice, that I had Some cause for being displeased with Lord belforls behaviour — But no, he remained playing with adeserc Spoon, with the utmost composure. 
Harriet was brought into the room. I found in her hand a very elegant rooth pick cafe. “From whence came this r” I alked of the nurse. She answered, “Lord ford had given it to her Ladyship.” — “Did Lord belford^\diyvt\fa Lady Harriet ashed Mrs. Hotham. — ■ “1 was obliged to Send for her, (I answered, Smjling,) to amuse his lordship;; would otherwise have attended me to my dressing-room, Sol lest Harriet to divert him. However, we B 4 must 
8 
E M M. A; or. 
must take care of this, and return it to the right owner.” 
“Your Ladyship, I believe, is the right ovmer, Said the nurse; I heard my Lord Say, that Lady Harriet must give it to you.” 
“This is a new way of presenting a Lady with a tooth pick case, certainly, ” Said Mrs. Uotham., laughing. “Here is Some mistake, (Said I,) but I shall certainly Send it back. I do not thinl i it So prudent to receive presents from Such designing men. I am Sure there was not a word passed about tooth picks. Will you be So good, my Lord, to Send a message about the Tickets; v^e may find Some other time to go to the Play.” — “It Seems your concern, not mine, ” he answered. “Your concern and mine are pretty closely connected, (replied I, Smiling,) but Serionfiy, my Lord, you would not like I should be obliged to this strange man.'” “1 don’t like affectation, ” (answered he sternly.) “I do not know what your Lordship means, ” Said I, with Some Surprise. “Then you may amuse yourself with Solving the riddle, Lady Cleveland if you pleasci” It was a pretty tash to be Sure; but as his Lordship is incomprehensible Sometimes, I suppose him to be So now, and will theresore lay his riddle aside. He immediately challenged Mrs. Hotham to a party at back gammon. 
But 
The Child Sorrow. 9 
But Lord Belford is not the only stuttering Fop whom I am to complain of; Lord Oswald is another obsequious stave of the Fair. However, I think him, although not So troublesome, a man of much deeper design than the first mentioned. He pays great attention to Fanny outwardly, and takes great pains to convince me that he is fatally enstaved by my charms. But, Surely, 
I have Said enough to make you Sensible how infinitely disagreeable my Situation is amongst them all; I sincerely wish myself back again. Yet here I must continue, till the pleasure of those who brought me hither is Satisfied, and chuse to carry me into the peaceful country again. 1 hate the hurry and consufion in which I am perpetually involved. I have hardly a moment to myself. Both Fanny and I should be happy to stay at home Sometimes, but we are not allowed to do So. At breakfast, every morning, Some Scheme is planned, and I am not permitted to put a negative. 
You may have an idea of my losing Some part of my attachment, by leading a life devoid of thought; butyou are mistaken. The comparisons I am daily and hourly enabled to make between the outward and inward objects of restedbon, must ever contribute to strengthen rather than diminish the force of former habits. Ah! my Lcuifal 
B. 5 whar. 
5 0 E M M A; or, 
what a difference indeed 1 One would hardly think the Same Sorming hand had created him and them. But he has improved nature’s work, they have debased her. I will not Say a wmrd more about them. Adieu !■ my dear Friend! 
Yours, 
Emma Cleveland. 
LETTER XLVI 
Lo Lady Louisa S t r e t t o n.. 
My dcareji Louisa,. 
Have received a Letter from my Mother,. ^1, V hich has distressed me very much, as you will readily believe, when I acquaint you with the particulars of it. In my last I mentioned the name of Lord Oswald, and that he paid great assiduity to Fanny. ' She has taken notice of this in her Letters to my Mother, and, I fancy, has mentioned him with Some degree of partiality, which is hardly to be wondered at, as he has an insinuating manner joined to a very good person. These circumstances I gather from my mother’s Letter to me, which I shall copy for your perusal, that I may receive your opinion on it, 
"imy 
The Child Sorrow, i i 
My dearefi Child, 
“I cannot help feeling the uneasiness incident to a tender Mother, when the apprehension of her Children being not happy Seizes her. Some Letters which I have had from your Sister Fanny have given rise to the pain I am going to express. Though I was overjoyed, both for your Sake and her’s, that you were to be companions this winter, yet I Sustained Some allay, on finding your whole time was to be Spent in tov/n. Every Post brings me an account of this or that place of public amusement. 1 am Sorry to find So much time worse than thrown away,; but that is not all; I am afraid the young and inexperienced heart of my dear Fanny will become the victim of Some of the men whom novelty may make hover about her, and leave lier .hereafter a prey to a hopeless passion. I have some reason for my fears. I find both her and yourself left Solely to your ov/ii guidance. I think I may depend on the prudence and virtue of my beloved fm7na\_ but consider, my Love, how weak a barrier is the prudence of a Girl of Sixteen, when opposed against the rhetoric of a pleasing man, who is taking all opportunities of Seducing; her heart. Her virtue will be no Security against the attacks of Love, because her .virtue cannot be alarmed by the honour b 6 able 
12 E M M A;. cr, 
rable professions of her Lover. She knows not deceit herself, nor can she ever believe, till too late, that any man can be base enough to Seek to gain her heart without any other motive than merely to encrease his conquests, and render an innocent young creature miserable; yet this is done every day. 
“In a Letter which lies before me, and over which I have been shedding the tender tear of apprehension, the dear Fanny informs me, she has been three times to the Pantheon and each night danced with Lord Oswald. In short, I find he is ever of your parties. She is eloquent in his praise, and merrily Says, “You cannot think. Mama, how much.your tall Girl is admired. I have a thousand fine Speeches made me every day, by a thousand fine men; but I laugh at them ail. Since I hear them Say the Same things to every woman they meet. I look on them as I do on my parrot, who' has got Some pretty Sentences by rote, but which make no impression on the mind of the hearers. But I must not place my Beau, Lord Oswald in this unmeaning group; he is really as much their Superior as you can imagine. He is a man, whose behaviour I should esteem, let his person be as plain as everybody must allow it to be agreeable; but what is his greatest charm with me is 
the 
The Child Sorrow. 
the high opinion he has of my dear Sister. he sees, as indeed every one must See, that Lord Cleveland does not deserve Such an angel as she is. Oh! Mama, you know not half her excellence. But, as I Said, Lord Ofivahfs opinion of my Emma has heightened him in mine. He shows Such an exquisite Sensibility when he Speaks of her. He does not flatter my person as the rest of the men do, which I think ah argument of his good sense, and of the sincerity of the professions he makes.” — I need not, my Dear, transcribe any more from your sister’s. Letter, to prove that her heart is in danger; 
I am Sure you will be convinced it is. You know best whether she may Safely give herself up to the indulgence of her favourable opinion of this Lord Oswald.. Notwithstanding the partiality of a Mother,, I know her person must be pleasing to every one, and then the artleffness of her age, and the goodness of her mind, must make her appear amiable. Ah! Heaven avert that she should become the dupe of a pretended passion! Be you her Guardian,, •I am sure she will conceal nothing from you. Instrudl her to Secure her heart if possible, if not yet too late for the caution. Should he really be in earnest in his professions, inform yourself what are his morals. Prevent her being too much entangled, 
before 
1-4 EMMA; or, 
before you know he is deserving of her heart. His title and fortune will give.him no value in my eyes; teach her not to be dazzled with them, or his exterior qualities, tinless his real virtues stamp a merit on them. Think how unfortunate a. Parent I Shall be if not one of my Children are happy in their connedlions. Two are not So, from their own faults, in making an improper choice; the third dear Child — but I will not recall past. Scenes. Your good sense and virtue will Secure your lasting, happiness in that world where they neither marry, nor are given in marriage. Oh! my Love, protecc this my last and darling Child from falling into misery. If you Succeed, I shall be bound to bless you with more than a mother’s bleffmg; if you fail, endleist Sorrow will be the portion of her who Subscribes herself your ever tender and anxious Mother, 
C WOODVILLE.’* 
Now, my Louisa how am I to adt? You know L am not, vain, therefore you will believe I am but too well convinced of what I am going to say. It is to me very evident, notwithstanding the natural charms of Fanny., that the afsiduity which this man shows her, is a Screen to his views on me. What Superior beauties can he 
discover: 
Child of Sorrow. 15 
discover in me, which he does not find in her.? What other motive can he have for giving me the preference, except that diai bolical one of wishing to seduce the wife of another? I doubt Fanny has Suffered her heart to be entangled. I have been uneasy Some time at his being of our party So much; but my voice goes for nothing. I mentioned to my Lord more than once; that I did not think it right for Fanny always to dance with Lord Oswald; but he has ever treated my caution with the most apparent indifference. I told him once I thought he ought to provide her another Partner. His answer was, “He had had trouble enough with the family already, he should give himself no further concern about them.” Thus, you see, he throws the talk Solely upon me, and how 1 •am to conduct myself in it 1 know not. I know Fanny to be of the most generous disposition, yet can I be certain she will receive, with a proper Spirit, the account, that the man she has reason to think her Lover, only makes her the dupe to his baser pur poses on her Sister? How much like vanity will it appear in me to Say, “My dear. Fanny., Lord Oswald is not an Admirer of. you; his only motive for appearing Such, is to have the opportunity of striving to gain my heart.” I am more and more distressed 
i6 
EMMA; cr. 
tressed on the occasion. I know not what gourse to take to preserve her from falling a Sacrifice to a hopeless and unreturned passion, or to dash all her blooming pros peds at once, by telling her what she has to expect. You See how urgent my Mother is 'with me. counsel me, my dear Louisa if you can. I will delay writing to my Mother till I have your answer; be pundlual by the return of the Posh 
With what art do these mert proceed wheri they Set about doing an ill action!! engages her esteem and confidence by tenderly pitying my situation. 
Famiy takes every opportunity of being by me at these odious public places, by which means Lord Oswald is at my side continually; So fond is she of her unhappy Sister, that Fanny does not take notice, that when we three are together he hardly addresses himself to her; So true is the observation of the blindness of Love. If I should take courage to inform him, I am uneasy at the attention he shows my Sister; I am but too apprehensive he would draw very favourable conclusions from' thence of my partiality for him, and think my Solicitude for her welfare had its foundation in that Source. At any rate, she shall not be made the dupe of his artifice. My own Condu61: shall Serve to undeceive him, should 
he 
lihe Child of Sorrow. 17 
he be So arrogant as to form any presump tuous hope on my bringing affairs to an eclaircijfement. I have hitherto prevented him from ever making downright love to me, and have pretty well kept up the appearance of not understanding him, therefore I shall have the better pretence for insisting to know what are his views with regard to Fanny. Should I be So happy (of which, however, there can be no doubt) to find I am mistaken, and that he does not poffess any undue warmth on my account, and that he really loves Famiy., even then I doubt he will not make her a good Husband; his morals are too reprehensible. Would to Heaven I had not brought her hither. I am disappointed in all my views; but that is nothing new. 
Adieu, my ever dear Louisa t 
Emma Cleveland. 
LETTER XLVII 
To Lady Louisa Stretton. 
I Can no longer pretend ignorance of Lord ofwald.s design — The motive of his frequent visits is now too obvious. But let me observe Some degree of method irt my disagreeable relation. 
Yesterday 
i8 
EMMA; t?r. 
Yesterday morning he waited on us to beg we would accompany him to the maf querade in the Haymarket to morrovr. Had I been Mistrest of my own inclinations it would certainly have been the last place I would have gone to, and he the last man I would have chosen for my Chaperon; but as it was, I had a very good plea to make, by saying a masquerade was riot a favourite amusement of my lord’s, and, as Such was the case, I was Sure he would not consent to our going. — “It is not possible (Said he) that he could refuse you anything you would wish. Good God 1 could I refule Such an Angel! condescend, then, my dear Lady Cleveland, to ask where you might command.” — “Indeed, (Said I, Smiling,) I cannot run the hazard of a refusal on any account in Such a matter as this; you know not how little power I have.” He immediately took my hand, and gently preshng it between his, with his eyes tenderly fixed on my face, he sung, in a voice of tlte Softest melody, this little Air of Handeirs.^, 
“sio much beauty Sweetly blooming Shall thy Conforms soul enslave; 
In thy lovely powh presuming, 
Asti him all thy heart can crave.” 
I Savr my poor Fanny change colour, indeed, from his manner, it was impossible 
for 
The Child Sorrow. 19 
for her any longer to be deceived in him. 
I felt myself exceedingly perplexed by his behaviour, and the effect it had on my Sister. I must ov/n too, that his harmonious voice. So like my amiable banished Friend, contributed much to the agitation with which I was Seized. I very aukv/ardly complimented him on his vocal qualifications, a Specimen of which I had never before heard; he told me, in a whisper, accompanied with a sigh, “that my charms had inspired him, and that if the effects of my Beauty could render him agreeable to me, he would asse no other boon of Heaven.” I had by this time recovered myself; and if the look I gave him had the least correspondence with my heart, it was full of the contempt and indignation I had conceived against him. The alteration of his features, iiowever, leaves me not in doubt of his understanding the meaning of my eyes. He turned pale, and his lips quivered. I believe Fannfs thoughts wtre too much taken up to know what had passed since the conclusion of the Song. I coldly said to Lord Oswald. that I would not have him lose time in fixing his party, as it would not be our inclination,, even had we the power to attend him to the Mash; that, abstracted, from our dissike to the diversion .vre had 'several engagements on 
cur. 
20 EMMA; or, 
our hands, which would deprive us of visiting many public places during our short stay in town. That we were engaged out to dinner, and were every moment in ex pedlation of our hair dreffers.” His cha -- grin^qx. the better of his effronterie on this occasion, and only stammering out Something about his disappointment, he in a very mortified manner took his leave. 
Heartily glad was I, that, at any rate, we had got rid of him. I was at a loss to know how to proceed with regard to Fanny.. I had never Seemed to observe the partiality, (alas! too visible,) which she had shown him, therefore thought it still better to appear ignorant of the true state of her heart.. I sat myself down by her, and, taking her hand, “See, my Dear, (said I,) to what impertinence, and, it may be danger, a woman is exposed who is known not to be happy with her Husband; had Lord Cleveland discovered for me the tenderness of Affection, or even given himself the trouble to wear the appearance of it. Lord Oswald would not have presumed to make the declaration he has done this morning. But if the conduct of my Lord thus leaves me defenceless, I must be more careful on my own account; my doors shall no more be open to that daring wretch. I own I have been deceived in him I thought 
better 
he Child of Sorrow, 2i 
better of him than of Lord Belford but they are all alike.” During my Speech, Fanny Sat pale as ashes'; when I ended, she turned her eyes on me; they were Surcharged with tears; she essayed to Speak, but her voice faltered. Overcome by her Sstent eloquence, I threw my arms round her; she Sobbed on my bosom. We continued to mingle our tears for a considerable time. She was unable to Speak, and I thought it better to give her Sorrow this vent, before I urged her. After a considerable Space thus Spent, she lifted up her dear face. “What, (cried she,) will my dear Sister think of me? Though she sio well knows the excess of my love for her, will she attribute all this concern to that alone ?” — “Does my Fanny wish I should I will not Suffer my thoughts to wander further than you would have them. I have received fo many tender proofs of your affection, that even this may be placed to the account.” — “No, no, my dearest Sister, you must no longer be deceived. these tears, this agony has a less laudable Source; but do not despise me; it requires an acquaintance with Dissimulation to be out of the reach of Deceit; my own imdesigning heart has helped to destroy my peace of mind.” 
« It 
, ^2 E M M A; 
“It wounds my soul, my dearest Fanny to See you thus distressed; but rake courage, my Beloved, Suffer not your peace of mind to be destroyed by a wretch unworthy your regard; you have a noble Spirit, fanny.i exert it on this occasion. My indignation rises against him for being So base and mean, as to attempt to make you his dupe; but you are too clear sighted to be imposed on by the low artifice. You and I, my Dear, are unfortunate in having been left at too early an age a prey to the tenderness of our own hearts; yet of the two you have had the hardest tassc assigned you, to be reduced to weep for the injuries you have received from the very hand you would have chosen to wipe away your tears had they stowed from any other Source, is a Species of misery Superior to any I have felt.” — “But, (cried the heroic Girl,) these tears are the last which shall ever stow on So worthless an occaston. Yes, my Sister, I will show you I have the resolution of at least Setting about the entire conquest of myself; and yet, added she, in a Softer tone, it was not So much his person or his manner that Subdued me, as the tender Solicitude he expressed for the beloved Sister f my heart.” — “But rested, Fanny., on the motive of his Solicitude.” — “I do, 
my 
The Child of Sorrow. 23 
my dear Emma., I do. I see him nov in his own real character, and could almost despise myself for ever harbouring the Smallest partiality for him. Indeed, I am more to blame than you think I am; I might have collected from his manner, had I not been blinded by self-love, that his devotions were always yours. But I am Sufficiently punished for my vanity; and I hope the experience, which has cost me So much, will be guard strong enough for the future, to preserve me from the Same delusions.” Are you not charmed and edified, my dear Louisa, with this Sweet Girl? What resolution at her tender age! I have just received your Letter; and am happy to find you coincide with my opinion; I have adopted your measures by intuition, but I think I know enough of your heart to judge of its Sentiments. 
I have shown Fanny my mother’s Letter; she shed tears over it; but I am convinced it was the anxiety expressed in it, rather than the cause which made them flow. She has the strongest mind I ever yet Saw in a female. Good God! how weak am 1 in the balance with her! How .do I repine, how do I sink under the weight of woe! She is all heroism, all fortitude. Ever So long acquaintance with disappointment leaves me still defenceksss to the next. 
Every 
24 EMMA; of, 
Every blast, every wave, deluges, my poor little tempest - tossed bark, while, like the towering rock, Fanny stands and braves the" boisterous deep; yet her Sensibility is very accute. What a noble composition! Wonder not at my love for her. 
As a proof of my weakness, I must ass, have you heard lately from Paris? Alas! I almost fear I am forgotten. That idea overwhelms me in distress. I know not what I would, or ought to do, but I know no thought torments me equal to that of 
being 
no longer remembered with tenderness 
and esteem; yet if his expressions are too tender, I am made miserable bfi that account. Alas! I am miserable every way. 
I Sometimes blame myself for the indolent acquiescence, (if I may use the expression,) I have shown to the intrigues of my Lord, and Mrs. Hotham; not that I believe any extraordinary exertion of myself would have prevented measures going So far as I have all the reason in the world to think they have proceeded; but yet I certainly have been too prodigal of the opportunities I have given them. My motive, too, I doubt, was altogether illaudable; his attentions were taken up by her from me; I found a relief by that circumstance; but I ought to have considered, I was conniving at a ftn, in order to avoid an inconvenience. 
I have 
Child Sorrow. 25 
t have Several times proposed our going into the country, more particularly, I own, on the account of Fanny but I believe both my Lord and his iady find more op portun ities, and less hazard of discovery in this place, than they expect; to meet in the retirement and silence of Cleveland; not that I by any means think her pashon for his Lordship the ruling one of her soul; she is fond of the gay bustle of high life; she has a Secret triumph likewise in Seeing a woman, who is admired by Sonre folks of taste, neglected for her. Her vanity must be easily gratified, that can receive pleasure from So precarious a Spring. Let me not, however, waste my time and yours on So contemptible a Subject;; is infinitely below my thoughts or resentment. 
You would not give me credit, my Lomfa.) were I to Say your last Letter was the most pleasing I ever read; but the hurry in which you wrote, carries the ex cuse with it; however, I could not expect intelligence where there was none to relate. You understand me; I am very industrious in the refined art of self tormentins:. 
Yours for ever, 
Emma Cleveland. 
vol. IL 
L E .D 
26 
EMMA; cr, 
LETTER XLVIII 
Sto Charles Cleveland, Esq (HERE is a strange particularity in 
__ your condud, my dear Charles., 
which, notwithstanding I have known you So long, still Surprises me. As to what you have heard of an intimacy with Lord cleve land. I look on that as a chef d.ceuvre on my side. I wish, in order to bring my Schemes to bear, to make his Wife jealous. how many women, of the stridlest virtue, have I known commit a real injury against their Husbands and themselvesi, merely to be revenged for a supposed one. When a beautiful woman, conscious of her charms, feels herself neglected by her Husband, and has a few outward temptations. Such as importunate Lovers, and a favourable opportunity given her, it is next to a miracle if she cscapes. But wdiile I am thus labouring for you, you ought not to be disconcerted. i cannot make Lady Cleveland believe I am upon .extreme ^ood terms with her Husband, without, to be Sure, giving Some others sutpicions; but you ought to be Satisfied with the assurances I have repeatedly given you of mi being wholly yours. I will be explicit and candid with you. — I believe my Lord has a little penchant for me; leave me to make the best of it; he 
will 
Child Sorrow. 27 
will more readily give credit to what I stiall hereafter advance against his Wife. I have provided her with two Lovers; one I mentioned to you before; the other, Lord cf 'waldf as being more specious, is, I believe, the man fittest for my turn. Not that I intend they should proceed to extremities; it would not be your interest to have a Divorce take place, as then my Lord might marry again; a final Separation will strit your purpose best, and that is what we must labour to effect. If I find, her virtue proof against jealousy, I must take another method, which I have ready in my brain. T have no doubt of deceiving Lord Oswald and gaining him to my party, and then a few fiiborned witnesses will do the rest; fo at all events you may be Satisfied of the truth of my former assertions, that I will not relax in the affair till everything is fettled to my mind. Do not therefore be Surprised at anything you hear; wait patiently for the solution of anything which may appear mysterious to you; be assured, when I have brought things into a right train, you shall have them fully cleared up to you, and, if you are not fully satisfied, I cannot help it — You know me well enough, I should think, not to be deceived in me. 
Adieu, for the present; and conclude me born for your advantage. 
Eliza Hot ham. 

E M M A 
or. 
LETTER XLIX 
^0 isady Louisa S t r e t t o n. 
.DAVENS! my dear Louisa, what a 
shock I have Sustained! Why did 
you not apprise me of his being in england?? perhaps you knew it not. I hardly know what 1 write; my nei'ves have not yet recovered the agitation into which the sight of him has thrown me; I tremble still. 
Fanny and I went out this morning to pay a visit. We were obliged to ajk Mrs. Ilotham to accompany us; she accepted she invitation. As vre were returning, sire had a desire to step into chrijhps, Saleroom;; would not have gone, but she insisted on jt. Lord! I am telling you in a strange, confused way; I can observe no method, no order. I complained of being tired, and proppsed leaving it; she at lash complied with my desire, and as we were coming down the stairs, an object, at once the most lovely, the most desired, and the most dreaded? presented itself before me. Our eyes instantly caught each other. My own confusion was too great to make me Sensible of his. Fortunately, Mrs. ho dham's^ attention was called off by Somebody Speaking to her. My amiable Cour ^ ’ tmay -- ^ 
he Child £/' S o r r o w. tof 
tenay — (Oh! Louisa, I must still call him So,) my Courtemy instantljr took the advantage of her turning her back, and came close up to me. The crowd was too great to render us observable, at least I hope So. 
This is a Suprize, indeed, (Said I to him, in a low voice,) I expected not Such a contrep ^ — ‘® This is no time for explanation, (Said he, with a Iblemnity in his mane ner, which would have chilled my heart,, and filled it with unutterable horror, had" not the tenderness of his looks conveyed Some comfort to it.) I could not,, however, prevent the tear of Apprehension, of Joy, and Surprise, from gathering to my eye; his Seemed moistened. He pressed my hand; — “We are observed, f cried he,) give me your address, i — you shall hear further from me.” Luckily I had taken Some tickets out of my pocket to give to Christie on account of my making a pur chase, and had one remaining in my hand. I conveyed it to him, unperceived by any one. He mixed with the throng, and I trembled, and tottered down the stairs, ready to fall at each step. The agitation of my mind was visible in my countenance. Mrs. Hotham ashed me, what had occasioned the alteration in my looks? I complained of the heat of the room, and the air of the staircase. My dear Fanny would C ^ nol 
30 EMMA; or, 
not distress me by her looks; we Soon got home. She immediately retired,, under the pretence of dressing, but I am Sure it was from the most delicate motive. I will not conceal a thought from her; she shall know every inquietude of a heart So tenderly attached to her from principle and affection. I think I may venture to take her advice in everything. I do not mean to depreciate your merit, my dear Louisa; but Fanny has not that impetuosity in her friendship which you have, and which you yourself have allowed Sometimes to have thrown you and your friends into perplexing circumstances. 
Thank Heaven, though no more than a week has elapscd since the discovery of Lord ofivald.s insincerity, Fanny Seems ■quite to have recovered herself; her fortitude has Subdued her tenderness for him; oh! may it never forsake her I 
When I had written thus far, I went to my sister’s apartment: I found her with a book in her hand, — “My Love, (Said I,) ■you do not tell me whether you congratulate me, or otherwise, on the adventure of 'this morning; Speak, my Fanny, for my Spirits are still too much hurried to Settle whether I should be glad or Sorry. Did you recognise your old Playfellow.?” — “I 
did 
^lfoe Cmile> of Sorrow. 3^^ 
did instantly, (Said she); but I do not think he Seemed to remember me — I am much altered since those days of peace and innocence. But, my dear Emma, as you say, f do not know whether I should be glad or lorry on this occasion.” — Affure yourself, my beloved Fanny, (Said' I, pressing her hand,) affure yourself, my .Dove, that although he is in London, I will never take any Method, directly or indireduy, to See him again. I am well convinced our'meet jng vas equally as accidental on his part at n mine. I own ail my weakness to you I wish to know how he came to England, and likewise why he wore So pensive a look. 1 cannot Support the idea of feeing him miserable, and" not breadie a wish to have k removed; but I will go no farther. He is the ohjedt of my tenderest esteem; he deserves to be So — If he should cease to be worthy, I could emulate my Fannfs ex' ample, and tear him from my heart without a sigh. It is my pride to consider myself an object likewise of his esteem and confidence, to know that he need not blush at his preference for me; that preference, which makes the only comfort of my life, 
I could not preserve, if I did not adt with redhitude and virtue. I may boast I have done So on Some trying occasions, and I feel too much satisfaction in the genuine C 4 purity 

EMMA; or 
purity of my heart, to forfeit it on any consideration whatever.” — ‘‘if I Spoke with doubt, my dear Sister, Fanny replied,) it was because you had not explained your ielf. You Seemed dubious, I was therefore willing to hear what you thought, and till I did hear, I certainly could not judge whether I ought to be glad or Sorry, as the occasion of either So immediately depended on your own thoughts concerning it. If you can receive pleasure, unallayed by anxiety, in this adventure, I Sincerely rejoice that it has been So easily and innocently purchased; but if still greater difficulties and troubles should arise to cloud the face of my beloved Emma and fill her, breast with sighs, I shall not cease to lament our going to Chrijiid.5 as a most unfortunate as well as unforeseen incident.” 
To have any concealment from this prudent girl would be a degree of ungenerous reserve; I therefore told her I had given Mr. C my address, and that I hoped to hear from him. I viewed her the Letters I had received from him, and laid my heart as clearly before her as it is to the face of Heaven. 
I am impatient till I have a Letter from you : You are much in my debt; do not constrain me to dun you often. Be assured, 
my 
northeast Child Sorrow. 33 
itiy dear Louisa of my perfect esteem, which can never cease but with my life. 
Yours, c. 
Emma Cleveland. 
LETTER L 
t0 Lady Louisa Stretton. 
This morning the inclosed Letter was brought to me; judge, when you have read it, what I must have felt on the occasion, and blame me, if you can, for instantly returning an answer. I - will make no more preface. 
Lady Cleveland. 
“Your Surprise, mytever aniiable D;; ^/; ?^?, • must have been great on meeting me yesterday, unknowing as you were of my return to England. My absence, however, Jliould not have been So long, had I been informed of your leaving the country. Why, shy beloved Friend, did you not apprise me of that eventi would have hastened to you, and watched 1 over your steps like yoiir Guardian Angel. Your Letters gave not the least intimation of the change in your situation: Perhaps you thought the circumstance too trivial to find a place in C 5 them. 
34 F M M A; er, 
them. Every trifling circumstance, however, becomes of consequence when those WT love are concerned. 
But now to the cause of my quitting Paris So precipitately. — I by accident became acquainted with a young Nobleman; we were on very intimate terms; on Some occasion he showed me part of a Letter from a Friend of his in England,, I was looking over it, my eye fixed on the words, charming Lady Cleveland. Good God, I exclaimed! Lady Cleveland name f how Should that be mentioned here “Why there is a little anecdote concerning that Lady, in which I think my Friend very much to blame.” You may believe 1 now became extremely urgent with him to give me an explanation of words So alarming. He found how exceedingly I felt myself interested, and very kindly let me know as much as he did himself. He showed me a former Letter, wherein Lord Oswald, the writer, is lavish in the praises of a beautiful young creature, whose name he does not mention; but whole charms, (he Says,) have made an entire conquest of his heart. In this he was more explicit; he owns she is married, by what he can learn, and by what he sees, very unhappily — he Las formed a plan to gain her heart by ibme very Subtle artifices, and then, (he 
(Says,) 
northeast Child of Sorrow. 35 
says,) everything, he makes no doubt, will follow of course. He likewise acknowledges he is constrained to adt the Lover to another, to gain admittance to the charming Lady Cleveland. Oh! Emma! you, who know my heart, can only judge of the tortures I endured on this occasion. 
I know not which passion was most predominant. I blamed you for pradlising reserve to your constant Friendi Ahd my Beloved, was it kind was it considerate? To what dangers have you been exposed and I, your faithful Courtenay., a stranger to them. Why did you exchange the calm and peaceable retreat of the country for the noise and hurry of London? where not one moment can be called your own; where, if the tenderness of your heart should incline you to the Soft recollection of your absent Friend, Some frivolous amusementj. Some impertinent visitor shall drive him out; and a giddy round of insipid pleasures entirely obliterate me from your remembrance. I instantly became a prey to the most gloomy presages— — abandons me; she leaves me the most accursed of wretches. — I stew to Lord Stretton., and hastily told him I had not a moment to lose, I could not stay to explain myself. I was going the next instant for England., from wiience he should hear from me. I threw myself C 6 ' into 
36 EMMA; or, 
into a chaise, and made expedition to Calais. I had but just left the chaise, which brought me from Dover, when you Saw me; I came by accident through pall mally in my way from the White Horse in Piccadilly. I saw a train of coaches at the au6hon room, a Sudden presentiment struck me, that yours might be among them. I fancied I knew your liveries, I was acquainted with your arms. I was proceeding, almost dead with perturbation and anxiety, up the stairs, when your angelic form struck my sight. I saw you Some moments before you discovered me. Ah I what agitation I underwent! It was Some consolation to me, that no Lord Oswald. was near you; it was plain he had not been of your party. 
That circumstance was the first glean of Satisfaction I had tasted since my perusal of Lord danveps Letter. The tenderness which beamed in your lovely eyes almost made me forget my errand. Oh! my. adorable Emma, am I still beloved by you? Am I as dear to you as ever I Has no cruel invader of my peace robbed me of that envied share you once allowed me in your thoughts? Dearest, loveliest of Women, deprive me not of your friendship; you know on that depends the only portion of happiness allotted me. Think what I 
“shall 
The Child of Sorrow. 37 
shall endure is I again lose you — Again,, do I Say, How infinitely Superior will be my distress now to what it was before? — ^ Your heart, my Emma if 1 lose that, I losc every comfort on earth. Tfie most wretched' of mortals whll then be your 
c0urtenay.’* “' 
My dear Loidfay do not I owe Something; to the kind Writer of the above? Gould I refuse to give him all the eonsoiation in my power to give? He demands no more thanj Virtue and Honour will fanflify and allow.. I have feturned him this answer.. 
“It will be Some satisfadhon to my amiable frie«td to know that the artful designs of Lord Oswald. (which must, however, have proved abortive,) were discovered before the notice you So kindly gave me. How much am I indebted to your tendernessl But judge not So hardly of me; I would not for a thousand worlds forego the dear, the innocent delight of dwelling for ever ins thought on thy virtues, thy constancy, and; truth. It is those refiedlions alone Support me through a Sea of troubles. Forgive me, my most esteemed Friend, for not apprizing you of my leaving the country — When! write to you, my whole soul is taken up with the idea of my correspondent: I am 
lifted 
38 E M M A; Oft 
lifted above the clouds, nor can anything Sublunary have a place in my mind. The coming to town, however, was not a pleasing circumstance to me; though in all places I am the Same, .yet there is Something Soothing in the calm retirement of the country; but, believe me, the burst of tempests, or even the wreck of nature could never for a moment drive you from my remembrance — Lhere you are Seated,, there fixed, never to be removed. Rest Satisfied then, thou chosea Friend of my Soul, nor let vain fears, for vain they must be, ever disturb thee more. 
You take no notice of the young Lady with me — Ah! my Friend, have you forgot those times when little Fanny was your playfellow, when she used to gather you flowers, with which you would fondly dress her then happy Sister? No, those days of felicity are indelibly fixed in my cour ienayh mind. The Lady, on wshose arm I leaned, and who Sweetly and considerately turned away her head, was no other than that dear Fanny that amiable Girl. Could you think it, chough perhaps your Emma then engrossed all your attention, and you could not bestow time to view her personal charms; but if you were to know her, you would hardly be able to think any Man could be So cruel and So blind as to attempt to gain her innocent and valuable heart, 
only 
Child of Sorrow. 39 
only to have an opportunity of ingratiating: himself with me — And yet my angelic Fanny is the person he means, when he saysj, he was constrained to adli the Lover to another, to gain admittance to me. My doors have been shut to him theseten days, and shall ever remain So. How I detest the Wretch who could Sora moment give my' Courtenay room to think his Emma abandoned him. .No, my generous, my amiable Friend, while virtue and honour guide thy t.\\y Emma, thy saithsur&^^f?, will never forsake, never one moment cease to remember thee with affedlionate esteem * susped her not; injure not the purity of, her tenderness with the idea that she can ever change while you remain the Same It is my glory, my pleasure, then to think, I never shall change — For you, you, my Friend, I know will never change. Thy honour, thy virtue, thy truth, and affection.. immutable, and that certainty shall ever convey pure unmixed delight to the bosonii of thy Emma Cleveland. 
Need the most amiable of Men harbour any doubts, that the senseless. tribe I am daily tormented with, can Sora moment obliterate him from my mind No, each moment I turn my disgusted eye from the hateful group, and view his spotless image 
more 
4^ 
E M M A; ijr. 
more refined, more and more worthy my esteem, from the comparisons I am able to make.. Ah! my Leuip.., neversheart loved: like mine. It is nature, habitualnature in me, and the Creator of all things could as easily change his benign disposition to the baleful malevolence of the arch Fiend, as ever Emma could falsify her vows and affection. 
r congratulate myself on having So Soon discovered the base design of Lord Qfwald, without putting my dear Fannyh Sensibility to the blush; he has had no cause to triumph over the amiable weakness of that inestimable Girl. 
I suppose you will Soon have Lord Stretton m England. He has paid a Sufficient compliment to his Friend; that Seems an inexplicable affair; I wonder much how it is to turn out. 
We have not been in any public place fbr Some time, .chiefly owing to an indisposition of Mrs. Hotham — L am heartily glad cf it, as it has given Fanny time to recoiled! herself, and prevented us the mortification of meeting a disagreeable Mani 
am in daily expedsation of a letter frorn your Ladyship — Yet your not doing your diity is no example for me, as you find, for ileep Scribbling on. Your faithful, 
Emma Cleveland. 
L E IL 
"Lhe Child of Sorrow. 4$ 
LETTER LI 
Lady Louisa Sxrettok. 
Another day and still no news from my Lomfa — Is all well? i’hey Say no news is always good, Heaven grant this may! But 1 wish much to hear from you. 
At dinner yesterday there was a motion made to go to the Opera, Mrs. Hothanfs I think. As she Seemed desirous, my Lord immediately Seconded it. To the Opera we went; who should we unfortunately meet but Lord Ofwdd, During the performance he was at the opposite fide of the house. You know it is the tan to have little chatting Parties after the Opera in the conversation rooms. Our fate led us into the room where this odious Man was: My Lord took him by the hand, “My dear Lord Oswald, where in the world have you been You are a perfect stranger. The Ladies have been constrained to stay at home for want of a cicejheov — “The Ladies do me great honour, (he answered,) they know I should be but too happy in that office.’* — “Then recommence tomorrow, (cried my evil Genius Mrs. Hotham I mean,) I want of all things to go 
t 
42 EMMA j ory 
to bacps, Concert, and my Lord C levehfd. has refused me.” I hardly knov/ what answer he made to this very free challenge y, I was too much provoked to attend to it. To be driven about just as she pleases, and, above all, to be reduced to accept of the civilities of a man who had lb palpably offended both Fanny and me, and at the same time to awaken apprehension in the breast of the most worthy of his Sex, were difficulties I could not, nor would I Submit to. 
I therefore Said very coolly to Mrs. Hotham 
I am Sorry, Madam, to break in on your pleasures, but it is not in my power or inclination to go tomorrow to bacps; however, I dare Say you can fix on Some one who will be happy to attend you.’* — ‘^why pray what other engagement have you. Lady Cleveland ashed my Lord. “Oh I do you expect me to tell you all my engagements ?” (I ashed, in my turn, with a Smile;) “I cannot tell you now, but I have a very particular one, that will prevent me.” I Saw mortification and disap pointrnent very strongly marked in the features of Lord Oswald; he even turned pale at my refusal; Mrs. hotham t on the contrary, reddoned. So unusual was it to hear me make any objection to a proposal of hers. Lord Oswald Said“ “would constitute his highest happiness to be ever. 
near 
i!he Child Sorrow, 
near us, but that he had an indispensable obligation to go out of town tomorrow, which would detain him for Some days.” The air and manner with which he Spake this, convinced me, if his eyes had not expressed it, that his engagement was only in compliment to my resolution. Perhaps I am obliged to him for his excusing himscif; I certainly got off easier by it; but nothing should have prevailed on me to have given the ssightest encouragement to him, after what had passed. Mrs. Hotham appeared exceshvely uneasy on the occasion, but there was no resource for her, as Lord Cleveland really was engaged, So at last, with a very ill grace, the Lady was forced to give it up. She pouted the whole evening after it. I suppose there will be Some difficulty for my Lord to make her amends for her disappointment; however, let them manage it as they please; I will neither meddle or make in their affairs. 
How much do I long for the time, when we shall bid adieu to the gay and destructive Scenes of this Metropolis; but when that event will take place I know not. I wonder Mrs. Hotham is not tired of running the Same round. What variety do we find in hunting all the public places? None. The Same faces, the Same conversation, the Same insipidity everywhere. 
Ah! 
44 E M M A; crab 
! I am heartily sick of it. I am., do I say } I have been So from the beginning.. Not that I condemn the whole; I think, one may receive great pleasure from a good Play; but then who attends to the Play, whethef good or bad? The time is taken up either in Sacrificing the characters and reputations of our acquaintance, or else in forming intrigues to the ruin of our own. This is the pursuit and end of a polite life. Ah! Heaven, shield me from its impertinences and dangers, and send me Safely into the peaceful country again \ 
I am not entirely easy on courtenay*s account. I am apprehensive lest an unchecked inclination to see me, as it were by chance, may induce him to visit Some of these receptacles of vice and folly. Should that be the cafe, his person is well known to Lord Cleveland. I tremble but to think what the fatal consequence may be. I wish him to quit London., and I certainly will hint my desires to him. 
Adieu, my dearest Louisa.. 
Yours, 
Emma CL EVE LAN Dv 
L E .D 
The Child of Sorrow, 
4s 
LETTER LII 
To Charles Cleveland, Efqy 
IF my former Letters have not been So Satisfadory as you have wished, I hope this will make you Some amends. The jcelerity with which I undertake your cause .and mine, I think now will not admit of a Scruple on your side. — Yes, my dear Charles I think I have made a grand discovery— — Cleveland has a Lover; and in town too; but not of my choosing — She has one more Suited to her taste. 1 wondered that neither Lord Belford nor Lord Oswald could Succeed; but there was an obstacle I dreamed not of — a former attachment. I find she was Sacrificed by an avaricious old wretch of a Father to your Cousin, while her heart was firmly devoted to another: That other is now in town; she has Seen him, and I have Seen him: It shall not be your Friend eliza^s fault if she does not see him again — Aye, and my Lord shall see him too. But now I must tell you how I made the discovery. I found Lord Oswald remitted his visits all at once; I sus peded Something, and took an opportunity of Sounding him — He told me he had made Something like a declaration — From 
the 
46 EMMA; ovt 
the manner of his repulse I had no great notion he would over do — I therefore pitied his Lordship, and coolly left him to his destiny. 
Some time since I dragged her, (for you must know it is all force, these delicate Ladies can do nothing of themselves)) — dragged her, then, one morning, to a Sale at Chriftifs. Coming down the stairs I observed her countenance change, and likewise Saw a manifest confusion in the features of a very handsome young fellow who was coming up, I pretended to be engaged in discourse with Somebody near me, to give me an opportunity of observing what passed. He came up to her, and Spoke with a low voice. I could find their Surprise and joy was equal. I Saw her drop Something, for which he stooped immediately, and thrust his hand into his boscm. She trembled So as to be Scarcely able to reach the coach. I took not the least notice, you may be Sure, but I was thoroughly convinced this was no common acquaintance. After dinner I began to Sound my Lord concerning his marriage. 1 chid him for his indifference to So beautiful and virtuous a woman. He Said, he allowed her to be virtuous, and, at the time he married her, he thought her beautiful; but that time, which had rendered her beauty 
familiar. 
Child Sorrow. 47 
familiar, likewise made him indifferent about it. I gave him a hint, that many women had created great uneasiness to their Husbands, from the Single article of having their beauty neglected;; I am determined, (Said he,) not to be made uneasy.” — “You are very Secure, or very philosophical, my Lord, ” I replied. “I have. confidence in the virtue of ray Wife; in that alone lies my Security.” — “Then you are a happy man, my Lord; but do you think the most rigid virtue may not be fbaken, especially is the heart is not attached to the Husband“ “as to the heart of Lady Cleveland. (Said he,) I am too' well convinced I never possessed it; but I adored her person, and gained it. I might perhaps have been happier, had I been the man of her choice; yet, I am firmly persuaded, her virtue is impregnable.” — Heaven forbid any one should Seek to convince you of the contrary; but what has occasioned this firm persuasion in favour of her Ladyship ?” — “Her perfect resignation to my will, and her never having Seen the man to whom she was attached.” — “Was he a handsome man ?” — “Men are not judges of beauty in their own Sex.” — “Nor more willing to allow it than the women, I believe, my dear Lord; but indulge 
4$ EMMA; or, 
clulge the woman in me. So far as to describe theperson of this favoured man.” 
He is rather above the middle size; fine light Hair, and very intelligent Eyes; remarkable white Teeth, and exceedingly well made; an air of Nobility, and, in short, I believe I must allow him to be handibme.” I was now Convinced. “My lear Lord, (Said I,) excuse me, but your Lady has Seen him since her marriage; and this day she Saw him; I make no doubt but it was mere accident, at least I hope So; though I remember a little circumstance too.” — “For god’s Sake, what V he exclaimed, rather alarmed. — “Nay, nothing, nothing, indeed, my Lord, except her being rather unwilling I shoukl accompany her.” In short, my dear Charles I had the pleasure to find I had awakened a little jealousy in the breast of Lord Cleveland; who, though he has a fashionable indifference for his Wife, yet will be eager enough to defend his own honour. He has therefore begged of me TO watch her. You may be Sure I Snail execute my tassc with Scrutiny. I hope, in a little time, to bring things to a favourable crisis. In Such a cafe as this, v/e must not be either Scrupulous or conscientious; our affairs demand more enlarged principles: To be Squeamish might now lose every 
advantage 
The Child Sorrow. 49 
advantage for which we have been labouring. 
I deferred writing till now, in hopes I might have informed you I had caught her Ladyship tripping; but either her hulband’s confidence in her virtue is well placed, or she is uncommonly prudent; but let it be as it will, I think I shall be an over match for her; So let us have no Scruples raised on your side, I beseech you. If you interfere, I will throw up the cards, and leave you to extricate yourself the best way you can. But I think I may venture to say, you have a pretty commodious conscience, as well as myself; Something like a French glove, which will stretch or contract to the size of the wearer. Trust to me, and be Secure all goes well. 
Adieu! Yours, 
Eliza Hotham." 
LETTER LIU. 
To Lady Cleveland. 
OU complain of my long silence, my dearest Emma; I have various reasons to assign. I have been' much indisposed; which account will Serve to show your maxim of “no news, good news, ^’ to be like 
vol. II 
D 
all 
B M M A 5 or, 
nil other general rifies, not without an exception, Not that i have been very ill:; only a violent cold, attended by a little fever, which confined me Some days to my room. 
At last my Lord is arrived. He paid a Sufficient compliment to his Friends to leave his destined. Wife for three months: But I jeadily .excuse him; nor do I think he .has lost any ground by his absence. His Letters: were extreshely Battering to me; and I hope the reception I gave him, bore Some indication of the pleasure his presence occasioned in me. ^ There was no, need of breaks fng another fimb to gain admittance now to the Lady of stxetton ilmfe — Indeed, he wis a welcome visitor. Had not youncci^r tenay been in Such an outrageous hurry, he might have had his old travelling companion;; Lord Strettcn sat out the next week. I told my Lord he was very discreet riot to divulge the resust of his embassy to me. He very gallantly afsured me, he meant: not to keep this or any other affair a Secret from me; but that while he was writing to me, he was too well employed in the hope of pleasing me, bypoiiring out the Soft effusions of his heart, to lose time in relating the concerns of others; but that now he would fully explain to me whatever might appear mystetiosts in this bnsiness. 
I must 
iihe Child of S o r r 6 w. 51 
I must tell you. Lady showed very 
great perturbation when she heard my Lord was expected, and begged, before he had an opportunity of Speaking to Sir that she might have the favour of an audience in her dreshng room. This conduct, and Some hints which my Lord had thrown out in his Letters to Sir gave him 
Some frejentiment what would fbll6w. He Seemdl greatly agitated, and walked about the room in a very disordered way. I really pitied him, though I knew not what he had to fear, a stranger as I was to the truth of the matter. I thought He might be dis pleased if I had taken any notice of his emi barraffment, therefore took an opportunity of quitting the room. As I passed the gallery, 1 heard Lady bevilvs voice rather higher than usual: 1 could not help hearing Some words which Surprised me. In answer, I heard my Lord. Say, “You are Senssble you have acted a very blameable part. I do hot accuse you of inhumanity in making me run the rilk I did in undertaking So infamous a cause; but I shall ever condemn you for drawing in my Friend to So shameful a connexion, and having So mean an opinion of me, as to believe I would, for a moment, consent to his being further deceived.” 
D 2 
Then 
52 B M M A; or 
Then I am a wretch! (she exclaimed.) • — What but ruin and eternal infamy must she my portion! But you ought to recollect, my Lord, you yourself was instrumental to my precipitate marriage with Sir Charles; I was willing to have stayed till your return.” “It was caution for your reputation, (he replied)i knew not then, that reputation was of no price. You must excuse me for Speaking So plain.” 
Ah! that. your words were daggers, every one of thern, (she Said.) Oh! thatl were this moment dead; do not, for gods Sake, my Lord, sho not leave me; I cannot shear the thought of feeing Sir charlesp What more passed at that time I knew not, for I was apprehensive my Lord nsight come out, therefore I left the Gallery, and went down into the Saloon. After staying Some little time there, I went into the par kair wherein I had left beviue; I found him laying on one of the fophas, with the iame countenance he wore before. I then jspoke to him; I begged him to tell me, if he was well. “Ah! Madam! (Said he,) you see, before you an unhappy man, who dreads to hear his fate, and yet, is anxious to be put out of suspense. To what can this long conference be owing? Why should I not be entrusted with all that epneerns my Wife? Lord streuon seems 
myste 
The C H I L D ^ S o R R O W. 5 3 
Hiysterious to me, while he freely communicates to her the whole of the affair; I know not what to think.’’ — And I ant Sure I know not what council to give you, as you know I am a perfect' stranger to your manner of becoming acquainted wsith this Lady, or the motives and design’of my lord’s undertaking a' journey to risp ■ — “God knows! (shm' he, ^' 'but perhaps it would have been better, had the' acquaintance never been made; but I Will, as well as I can, inform your Ladyship of the contmencement of this attachment. — One day I was visiting the grate: of the Nunnery''st. Clomd. a little distance from Parts. I frequently had done’so; affile time I am Speaking of, I Saw a very elegant sigiire of a Nun take a Letter Srom the portress, and was retiring; I gazed at her; she perceived she had attra^ed my notice,, and turning back, removed her veil, which gave me the opportunity Of viewing her face; I thought I had never seen anything So beautiful; I made a motion to entreat her to stay; she sighed, and threw down her eyes, then, gently raising them, she cast Such a glance on me, as shot through my soul, and immediately turning them on the Portrefs, retired into the Convent. I perfeduy understood her meaning, and failed not to endeavour to D 3 gain 
54 EMMA; oti 
gain, the confidence of the portress by" a irai'd.micmrs^ which even those Vestak are not proof against; I gained from her, in return, Sense information of the Lady who had. captivated me; she told me she was the Daughter of a man of rank, who had been placed there, because she had refused to marry to please him, and was likewise suspected of having an intention of forming a connexion beneath her. Her person and situation made me very desirous of gaining the one, by rescuing her from the other; accordingly I was determined not to rest till I had effected my Scheme. I found an opportunity the next day to converse with my beautiful Nun; I was more and more charmed with her; she appeared not infensible to my addresses, but informed me, that the indulgence now allowed, of conversing through the grate,, would Soon be denied her, as she was in a few weeks to be professed. On my begging her to tell me if her heart consented to So unnatural a Seclusion from the world, she burst into tears, which, for Some time, prevented her answering. W hat a sight for a man already 
far gone in the most tender attachment, to see the object of his Love inffuch distress, and to be debarred the Supreme delight of wiping from her beauteous face all traces of Sorrow! When she could find words, 
she 
stbe Child of S o r r o w. 5'^ 
she alked me. If I cbuld possibly think Sa young a creature as heisielf could bid adieit to all the Social enjoyments of life without the greatest repugnance?. S But nothing could be done, she must Submit, and be lost for ever to all happiness. Can nothing be done I I demanded; in my turn.,! Gan yoti; not refuse your assent when M the foot of the ■ altar i Can you not give • a riegativo to' ■ the interrogation whether - you freely, consent or not? ” — “Alas! (she repliedj) and what would that avail me? I mists still continue here. No, there is no resource — urdess — but — that is impossible” -- ^! pijeffed her to. ex plain herseif; I begged her. to be? lievcil would rish my life in her service;; ■ I adored her, and if it was possible, by any human means, to, extricate her from her prison, I would devote myself and fortune to her; that I was single, and clif engaged' till I became acquainted withher; but that her charms and distress had fixed; me for ever hers. My birth and fortune would justify her in any favour she might' be induced to allow me. In short, I urged everything a man could, wsho was .as much in earnest as mysei; f: : told, her I had been shformed,, stiiat a's motive of Saving her fortune: had' been; 000 inducement to her parents taking fo cruel. a resolution;; that 1 would freely take her D 4 from 
^6 EMMA; or, 
from their hands as she was at this moment; I entreated her permission to ad drcss myself to her family, and doubted not but my rank in life would engage them to pay Some respeft to my Suit She answered, “She knew her parents too well, to hope Such an alteration in them in her favour; that she had no alternative beside taking the veil, or marrying the most hated of all mortals; that it had been al ledged against her, and as a means of extenuating their cruelty, that she had thoughts of engaging herself beneath the rank her family bore; but this was a falsity propagated by them, to destroy her in the good opinion of those who had become her Advocates, and wanted to adv as Mediators between herself and family; she very emphatically lamented her destiny; and, amidst her confusion and grief, afforded me Sufficient reason to believe, that the thought of for ever being separated from me, would be no Small augmentation to the misery allotted her. 
In this state of despair she left me. I cannot describe to your Ladyship the anxiety I Selt, till the next day renewed our conference; I then Swore to Set her free if the power of man could perform the talk. She told me, there were many things which might be fixed on, if 1 had an unshaken 
resoiu 
svh€ Child off Sorrow. 57 
resolution. Of that, 1 assured her, 1 was possessed. I have, (Said she) formecia little plan in my own mind — Can you not procure me a dose that may make me exceedingly sick, but without impairing my health only for the time? — 1 will feign myself ill, nay, 
I will Say I have taken Something to rid me from the persecutions of my parents, and prevent my being buried alive in this cloister. You must by Some means get acquainted with Father Jerome who is Confessor to our nunsj (she informed me of his Order, and described his person to me;) procure his Habit, and copy his Manner; I know he will be Sent for to receive my Confession, and to give me the extreme Undion — you must perform that office. When you are once within these walls, and have provided yourself with a dress, the counter part of V hat you wear, and which I can disguish myself in, leave the rest to me; fear no danger. Elate with the prosped of Seeing a happy issue to this business, I left her to' provide for what we wanted. I entrusted my Secret to two or three of my English Friends; who readily joined with me. By their advice I procured a dose of ipecacuana for my adventurous Nun, and then we went to visit Father Jerome. Our business was to take his advice on a case of Conscience. We found him very ready to listen to us, ' D 5. especially 
S, EM, M A; er, 
elptciituy^s we brought .Some excellent wine; ' with tis; ?’ Wsth rhis we plied him pretty fast, and, that we might be more Secure im hkidnabjsity, we topk care to convey into a bumper Several drops of a composing, nature. In short,; before the Summons arrived..from the Convent, -, we, hadith.esatisfa<stion of feeing him entirely, voyefc6me, Larsd totally speechless;; and trundled him into his Dormitory. I immediately put on his dress, which I rather chose to, wear than the: one I, brought. I fixed on a beard I provided for. the purpose, and sin a few ptinutes.a whole conventicle of Nuns could not; have distinguished me from the real Jerome.. By the time everything was fetr tied, a lay Sister came from St. Chud in the greatest haste, to beg Father Jerome would instantly repair to comfort the soul of a departing finner. I readily obeyed the fiimmons. 1 found my Penitent sick and fainting, surrounded by the Lady Abhefsy and Several os the profesied Nuns. I under* went a very visible agitation at this dangerous crisis — I imputed this tremor to the effect: of my zeal; and my sorrow on feeing one of my flock So Sallen, through the instigation of the devil. I played my part So well no one could See the imposture. I told the good Mother I must discourse with my Penitent alone, as she might have Some 
things 
iihe Child ^ Sorrow. 59 
things to divulge, fit only for my private ear. She obeyed me, and I had the satis faftion of finding myself alone with my Beloved. There is no time to be lost. Said she, rising from the bed; give me my dress. 
I helped to put it on; she laid her head clothes in Such a manner as to give the appearance of her stilmaying down. When she was dressed, I begged she would firsh go out, as I was more apprehensive for her than myself. 1 had desired the whole Sisterhood to repair to their Offertories to pr ay for the departing Soul of my Penitent, and L knew they paid too implicit a deference to the will of their Spiritual Father, not to. perform his injundtionsi My charming Nun passed thro’ the Cloister without encountering any one, till she Saw. the portress“ “this moment, (sttidshe,) to the Lady Abhefs,. she wants you. 1 have forgot Something, give me the keys; and make no delay.” I heard the portress pass the cell where I vas; that was a Signal for me to come out; my Beloved had left the gate open; I passed it, and then locked them all Safely in. I hasted thro’ the Square, and reached it almost as Soon as my deaf little Adventurer. A coach stood ready for US; the Coachman was one of my trusty friends, the Footman was another — the third was at Some little distance off,. with ad 
6 post 
6o 
E M ’M h y or, 
ready for vs to proceed to We drew the blinds of the coach 
and changed our clothes; the nun’s and Friarsshabita we bundled up, and threw into, a ditch a little way out of the road. In the coach I found a peruke, with, a man’s hat and shoes, and a large French gvtsit coat,, which descended to the ankles of my fair companion, and concealed her petticoat. Thus equipped, we travelled on to Calais, •without molestation; from thence we arrived in England. I was of opinion that this, affair might be Settled amicably, between the lady’s relations and me, provided I had an advocate of credit, I therefore entreated Lord Stretton to be the mediator. In the light in which I Saw it, I thought it would be looked on rather as a youthful frolic, and that after Some time it would be forgiven. 
Lady Beville was extremely averse to lord strettqffs going abroad, but I own I was resoiute he should, go, if he would be fo kind as to undertake our cause. I thought there was no necessity for a man of my fortune and rank in my own country to be fearful of addressing a French Count, X esteem it as an honour done his family. He could not have expected a better match for his daughter; I would have claimed her had she pemiitted. me, You must have 
seen. 
L'he Qmtjd of sor ro w. 6i 
Seen, my dear Lady that Lady 5^* 
w7/e’s temper is not So amiable as I at first thought it; but, indeed, I was a perfect: stranger to thatj and everything else,. relative to her. She has lost all her vivacity lately, and as the time approached for my lord’s arrival, she has grown more and more pensive and capricious in her temper. It is. cowardly to complain, as well as uselefs, when there is no remedy; but if I had had time to have made myself master of her disposition, I begin to think I should never have become her Husband. What hurts me more than all the rest, is the silence of Lord Strettm\ perhaps he has Some ill news to relate, and thinks I have not firmness to Support it. Does he think Lady Beville more philosophicalthan lam .?” ■ — “I make no doubt, Sir charus (Said I) but my Lord will adt with his usual propriety. I fear there may be some disagreeable relations to be made; but; however, you may be assured you will have the whole account from my Lord.” While I was yet speaking my Lord entered; I was quitting the room, toi give him art opportunity of opening his mind to Sir Charles. “Where are you going, my dearest louifa^**a^id my Lord, taking my hand. “You may stay. Madam, ” (Said Sir Charlesf) I do not wish to have a Secret from my best friends.’y y You 
may 

E M M A; at. 
rrtay stay, my dear cousin, (Said my Lord iflybu are willing to hear the infamous story of the disgrace of your Sex.” I started. Sir Charles turned pale, and threw himself into a. chair. “My dearest (Said Lord 
Stretton, going up to him, and pressing him to his bosom,) you must be composed V you have been to blame to enter'into Such hascy engagements — but — you have no Wife.” — “No Wise!! exclaimed,) tell me, tell me, my Lord, what you mean ?” “don’t you remember, beviue, I once ashed you, in my Letter, if you had never heard the name of De la Conti mentioned by ladys bevillev' “You did, and desired I would alk her that question, and observe what she Said on it. 1 acted as you bid me; she underwent Some agitation of countenance. I demanded who he was? she answered, the foundation of all her distress; he was the man on whose account she was put into the Nunnery. I conjedlured, nay, persuaded myself, La Conti was the man her Parents would shave forced, her to marry.” “She Spoke truth in Saying he was the foundation of all her misery. He was z Valet to tv .jgather; she was Sufpeded of an intimacy with shim; he was discharged, and she was Sent to a relation in the country; they contrived to carry on a correspondence,, and Sne eloped from her relation; they were dis. > covered 
Sthe C HIL S 0 Rti o w. 63s 
covered and Separated; she was conveyedr to, the Nunnery from whence you released' her; ' and he was confined, but found means, of escaping. She has an independent fortune, which he had the assurance to Sue them for; boldly Saying, had it not been for that he would never have married her, as he had: been Surfeited with her person, and unbounded, shndness before. You; ought ta rejoice, my dear. Charles., that you are not legally contradled to So infamous a creature : : Her Family are respedlable worthy people; had you given yourielf the Smallest time to have made inquiries aboivt them, you would have heard Sufficient to have^detarded your precipitate adventure, and not have made a mock at everything Sacred to compass ends So fatal in their consequence.’* 
Poor Beville really was an objede of pity; he knew not how to - renounce her; though; as he allowed, and, as I before have Said, her disposition was far from amiable, I doshcr sieve he still, loves her; but my Lord has made it the bond of future friendship between them, .that he Sees her no more. Lord Stretton hasvsettled a plan, for, her future Sub -- sistance, but it is not to she in englandy mi^ there is Sir Charles what becomes of 
her. He has sheen yery ill for some days, and is still too weak to leave his room. My Lord takes part in his sul&rings; jhe has 
too. 
en 
64 EMMA; 
too much impetuosity in his temper, like Somebody else of your acquaintance; but this adventure, I think, will damp him. He has many good qualities; I hope he will Soon recover, and when he has time to look about him, will find Some more worthy object: to fix his affections on. So I will here conclude the history of the young widbwer bewitched. 
I think you came off nobly with respedlsto your Enamarato, Lord Qfwald; upon my word you have the method of repulsing, them nicely. Why don’t you get rid of that Mrs, Hotham? I dread her intriguing Spirit; she is a devil, take my word for it; that is a pretty term to give a Lady, to be Sure, but I believe it expresses her character; in one word. I am glad she did not See Courtenay. Her penetrating genius would; have discovered the emotions in your countenance, and judging, a little by herself, she would have suspedted a great deal, and probably reported still more. I am in love with your Sweet Fanny. ^ Dear noble Girl, present my kindest wishres to her.. 
Remember me to courtenay i if you should • again write to him; you are exemplary Lovers. your reward must be in Heaven, since, I think, nothing less can repay you. both for what you have Suffered in this 
world,. 
L'he Child of soi^row. 65 
world. His reshaining in town will be of no Service, as I am certain neither he nor you, will think it prudent to rilk a Second meeting. If you write to him son, tell him his Friends here want much to Sec him. Poor Seville stands in need of a tender Sympathising Confidant. My Lord is now too busy to afford him much of his conipany; our dear then must come to us. 
A little excursion about the country may dispe!. the melancholy of the Baronet. I would not for theuniverse urge a Separation between you and our amiable Friend, but that I know you would be easier to be rid of the apprehension of Seeing him.; It is wholly impossible for ejther of you to meet without betraying the emotions which the sight of persons So dear will naturally give birth to; you may be observed, and the baleful eye of suspicion magnifies all objects. My excellent Cousin may enlarge his precious qualities, by adding jealousy to the list; your situation would then be Such as; all your friends must deplore. I sincerely hope his indolence and indifference will Secure him from Such a dangerous passion. Could he view your heart, he would be Satisfied of its purity; but penetration is not among his accomplishments, and if he draws., his knowledge from his own ideas, I doubt you would not be acquitted in his mind.. 
Heavenh, 
S. E M M A cr. 
Heaven preserve you, my beloved Friend, and conduayou to happiness! Adieu! 
Lo U I S A IS t R E, TT o N, 
L E T T E R LIV 
To C H A R L E S C L E V E L A N T), Efqt, 
Prize, apprise, my'dear ofer/rr; I have procured a letter^v wbkha^?!.!! be of the most infinite Service to us in our enterprizer When people embark in Schemes of Such a nature as ours, they must not be ever Scrupulous about the means of accomplioiing'' the ends proposed. My conscience then absolved me easy enough, but 1 could no ■find any method which bore the face of probable success — Chance, or, perhaps. Some more powerful Agent, yesterday put her. Ladyship in my power, and if I do not use i, t to my advantage, disown me for ever for a Sister of intrigue. yesterday then, (luckyi be the day!) i Saw one of Lord Cleveland, Footmen, with a packet in his hand. — “For whom is that jamesi ashed. — “For my Lady, Madam; it is a Letter.” — ^ “Give it to me, 1 am going to your Lady,, and .'will deliver it; ” 1 took it. from the fellow, .and proceeded to my own room, where, docking inyself in, Ibegan to examine my pfite; I found I must have re 
The above. 
course 
Lhe Child of Sorrow. 67 
course to an old Subterfuge, which I have formerly been obliged to prafuse with Some of my Letters, when I have had 
any suspicion of his receiving intelligence concerning you; in short, I have an admirable knack of drawing the Seal, So as not to be discovered. Here 1 found a long account about an unfortunate Baronet, to which you may believe I did not pay much attention, only shimming it over, to come to the part which most concerned myself — Yes, my Seif, I repeat — I am prettily handled, I affure you, by that impertinent Minx, Lady lquifa Stretton. Why dopt you get rid of that Mrs. Hotham? She dreads my in trigurng spirit; fe is a devh., take my vjord for it. She allows this to be a harsh term, but meant to give my character in one word. She rejoices that I did not See Courtenay., as judging by myself I should have suspecled a great deal, and reported more. Take care, vny predous Louija., this devid. be Sure, will be too much for you, and your truly virtuota and amiable Friend. Why this Lcuifa .is absolutely an intriguer; too. She Seems to have a pretty notion of things. She desires to be Temerabered tq, on the presumption 
of Lady clemundh writing to himi What can the delicate, the virtuous,, the noble minded Lady Cleveland hold a corres spondence with a man 1 Astonishing! If 
shc' 
68 E M M Ai or, 
she can write, would she not rrieet him if she 'tbuld? 'ijndoubtedly. Let itie alofie to plan their meeting; yes, they Shall meet, and that very Soon; for the cautious Lorn fa v/astts her Friend to persuade our dear Edward io leave town, as she knows purity LI their amiable hearts too well, fibt to be affared they wotild never think of sheeting by desigh; but at public places, or clsewhere, should they unfortunately have Such a rencontre, their emotions might discover them. ' They are ddfcovered, my dear prudent Spinster, already. I am overjoyed that I am mistress of this intelligence; it will be the niatch by which I shall Spring the mine. This will be an incentive; this will hasten measures, lest he should follow his deary’s advice, and leave town before our Scheme is brought to bear. Let him then leave town, and follow his destiny elsewhere; when my. turn is Served, I care not what becomes of him. — When I had made what use I could of this precioiis fnorfeau, I conveyed it to the unsuspedling. hands of her Ladyship. ' ’ 
‘1 told you before, I had'found there was a Spark, of jealousy in the composition of Lord Cleveland. I have 'given a 'few more hints, just to feed the ssame, without making it bla?e; it would be too Soon yet, and we might be involved in the general conflagration. 
he Child of Sorrow. 69 
‘gration. In the evening yesterday, I gave my Lord reason to believe that her Ladyship had been talking Some time at the Play with a Gentleman very like Such a person as he had described Mr. Courtenay to be. It pleases me to See with what avidity he Swallows the poisonolis draughts I pour out to him. He readily believes each word I advance, and fancies my tenderness for him, that is to Say, my natural tenderness of heart, makes me conceal more from him than I inform him of. Matters will Soon be brought to a crisis; we shall all Soon be Satisfied; your doubts and Scruples, my dear qhatrk.s t will Soon be removed, and then you will know me for what I am, Adieu. 
Eliza Hotham. 
LETTER LV 
fto Charles Cleveland, DJ; 
ON E Letter more, to inform you the decisive blow is struck. This rs the copy of a billet-doux., which, as Lady Cleveland neither wrote, nor indited, she may. think she has no obligation to me for; but I look not for thanks from her, my views are much more exalted; kind Fortune Secure but these views to me, give me this triumph, and, Fate, I defy. thee. 
l^my 
'O 
EMMA j or. 
My dear Mr. q ovskteiiay.,.) 
“I am desired, by our Friend Louifit, to request you to go x.o stretton [d.otiff\ they want you much there, to comfort your old Companion, Sir Charles Beville\ but, before I proceed farther, I think it very necessary to inform you, ' that I have disabled myself from writing, by having Sprained my wrist very much, therefore my Sister Fanny is So kind as to be my Secretary. If I had not explained this, you would be at a loss to judge why my handwriting should be changed. 
“I think, with Lady Lcuifa, that it is dangerous for you to continue in town, as your person, you well know, is no stranger to my Lord. I am eternally forced, by the inclinations of Mrs. Hotham, to go to’ public places, and should I happen to See you there, or anywhere else, I could not be able to conceal the emotions which your presence ever excites; and yet, dare I own it to you, I cannot tell how to bid you quit a place, wherein L am constrained, for the present, to be. Why has cruel Fate forbid our Spending our' days together? What advantage, however, is it to complain? I cannot shake off the least particle of misery by it. You know not how unhappy I am. Louisa will give you 
the 
'Lbe Child of Sorrow, yi 
the character of Mrs. Hotham better than I can. It is to her I owe the unhappiness I atpresent lament, but which I cannot communicate by letter. I know the purity of your heart, or I would not venture to make a request, which, to any other than you, would be highly imprudent. My amiable Courtenay., I must fe; o yov^br fine quarter of an hour before you leave town. The day after tomorrow I know both my Lord and Mrs. Hotham will be engaged. 1 have a Servant in whom I may confide; she will introduce you, at five in the afternoon, into my dreffing room; wait there a little. I mention that hour, because we fiiall all then he in the dining parlour, which will give ■you an opportunity of coming in unobserved. I have Some very affecting circumstances to relate. I shall expect you to mingle your tears with those of your 
Emma Clevelano, 
P. S. If you find this letter different from my former ones, attribute it to the dis trefs I am under at present, and the inability of my hand. One cannot indite for another. So well as one does for pite’$ Self. Adieu.,, '., \ - 
Well, Charles., don’t you think this will bring the dear Ldimrd? \ Sure it cannot 
fail. 
1^: asr^n ' 
sail. I am hardly able to breathe for eager expeftati^^ [ I st^vist rf(|fe t|m#i td throw away, or I would amply revenge jpyself on my pidtuffeiiffaivh? u ifi^’*rihilst be Suffi 
^z^fdev^land^^ only 
; fur. ^. proceedjip 
we Charles novt do, my, 
^'eart beat kigh against my Side, when I think ’ what * will be the result of all this! When all our toils are So nony rewarded, all hsir nightly watchings thu; 5, jtepa^ L I. ckeh carry my roving thought ihuf suppose the enraged hushari4j ihpiib,, sie Lord L —, draw his Sword, should his an.., tagonist’s arm prove viftoriosia, e then would you step irito ihe .di^e/'^pd Estate.? Are you not fifed/y t|c Ycm ste' how. deep I refie^ tage'. Adieu, ' my dear. Anpj sh^j 
delcfibe ouf nexsmteeting> f 
Yours, as rnuch as ppstiblei^rijotc 'A', 
•S 
vff ' in mod ’imv 
qo mpit mi 
10 cicv 
. .f „ 

V 
L he Child of surrowi 7 3 
LETTER LVL 
Q Lady Cleveland. 
OH! my Emma! my unfortunate undone Child, what an account ha your Father just received from Lord cle^jl land! To what fatality has it been owing, that you should ever have renewed an acquaintance, it was So much your duty to avoid? What becomes of me, when I refiecl that my Child, the darling and Support of my life, is accused of injuring the honour of her Husband! Oh! this is too, too much for the anxious bosom of a Mother to bear; I will not, no, Emma., I will not think you So guilty as you are styled. But what extenuation can you make? Could your intentions be virtuous in introducing into your dressing-room the man of all others you should never have Seen Oh! that you never had Seen him, what anguish would you have Saved your wretched Mother — wretched in having given birth to a Child who is charged with disgracing her family! How has virtucf forsaken your bofoni? By what means have you kept up a correspondence with the companion of yout shame? So good. So amiable as, you once wasl still, still I cannot think you guiltyi But you have vol. II E been 
74 
EM M A 

been imprudent, Emma.. It is not alwaysi 
I 
the 
re: 
: ad^vvhich constitutes the guilt jhtention is .equally culpable., cth! member you once Said, “Fear me hot, my dear Mother, though the ^filstreiles of your Daughter has drawn tears from ypur Eyes, and, the 5igh of. Anguish from youti bolqm, her cofidua thrppgh fife shall neyec call a bluih on your cheeh^^ thceawiq| God shall .eyer be the rsile of my conscience and my conscience shall ever be a check off the adfcipns of my life.*’ Ah 1 my Child, how ha? your present., proeeedings con tradidled the Sweet consolatiori; you; the, n |?pured. into the bosom of your Sorrbvying Mother; but I never knew, distress tils this day, Ohi that it had pleased. the Almighty to have closed the painful page my life yesterday! I cannot describei yosir unhappy father’s behaviour you Imow show nice his notions of female honour are. •good God'! to have our Child stigmatiled, branded with infamy, it is too'much, too much for parents to Support. 
I know not what 1 have written; perhaps with too much Severity Have I charged my Chilst with insamy I Oh! forgive me, my youj cannot be guilty; 
Oh! what, a wq.rd, is that! your Father, with .a fatal precipitancy, judges, I hope, mu, ch much worse .than the case .really is; 
but 
northeast C H I L D 0; ^ S O R R O W. 7 ^ 
blithe forms his reasbhs from your Lores s' Letter. I Will copy it, that' j^oit '^itiay' knpwmreallehrinierits.^ " ' ".. .i L 
‘‘ St r,; 
“I feel all the Sorrow which an injured Hiishastd Can experience, in being forcecl to complaia of a; Wise, ^ phce tencjer'l^ Ipved tshff esteemed. Nes", Sir, I asti that, injured Hstshand. I too well knew, when I entered into my fatal ehgageisients With yostr Faniily, that the heart of your Daughter was pre dispofed of, yet I hoped her Virtste and Hohour would Secure mine, and that 'm time I might gain her heart. ‘I have tlliy day received convincing proof of her dishoc ndiirable behaviour; she has followed the gk ample of too many of her infamovis Sex; 1 must be obliged to take measures accordingly. She has kept up a correspondence xmhcouht'enay;, who is the'man that has defiled rny bed. I ani going to lodge a pevn 
tion against her m wt I 
tamely sit down a contented cuckolds Pardon: the indonsisten'cies of thjs Tetten You must have an idea that i’hrn Very niish agitated from this discdvbry!'' ' 
“I think it will she adviihiste'^ 'fbf'ybwm send for miss vvoodvilh; it will ini'dre 
reputation to continue in This house ■\vitil her Sister, whofcinfarhy 'is ffa^raiin 
, L T ' to 
7<6, R .m; : M A 4 Air, 
to l^dy Cleveland, I shall Send her down to a relatjan J Jirv^. iathe xoirntrys, on the border 6f till I have obtained a .Divorce in due forcie* • 
, Jl remain. Sir, your obedient,. 
i’’ A' ' ■ „ ■_ 
- ovlfi 
sidbirnu luoyoo iojh£ij3<!o sd; nj<r; vj ■: 
si T tp i the Tetter 
i^fore, /»!?•;.;; senses are. bewildered. Lor tlenven^s rfake, : rite to me! You nevef, yw>»therearliest years, deviated from ..the stri^est truth, 1 will then implicitly befieye xwhat you ihals relate,. ^ .qhl[^y^|tat 41^ chikl may be able to clear herj^/rpm, these fatal asperfions L On my tot ffer imy petition to the Throne of Mercy, .that I may be So comforted.; .I sh^yedn ?treatedmy Son ^rereian m F pare^of your Sister Pant; 'hutt will notj 
Oh I; does not thi^, h^prpen^ 
^pyorst9w with a, 5.r$till 
yott myohild, : a, |ure«ninift.; !p9!p4^>ii?sh 
\ cfui flo H, vxtii iiiw ji tjoy 
bailifiid.ob atw i v’ f 
•ifiodw toi, *!ed to; oil) .i‘»w yst{n: C A mod orb 3a odiil yen vv, ol 
r. H 
he ■ HIL n S 01r RED vr. f 
A ■ LL za bia, Hn: i bi 07 
Ll £ ■fe.''i ri 
V Lady' L o u I s avs hf''^>ftwo i^. 10^ 
TH E shpst forlbrn'qf tsi4fi thkes this" opporturiity of ^htcqtiaihting you,. that tl^ vilisst inachinations have taken 
nor isiytesp^^ iiiytehdimdst'^foi''sh 
firei^ht stnd^ testrmsi iny ^ffi 
pbllibfe.^'': ^ o: clc. ^ •y t V i 
■ f trch^shite off shy Havlf% hieff tie fb^ieft pff#pfrien, - by charice; '>jit is§ri0d.^^pv and' th’e 
|lftiyer fhoiimr d fi^cfefshl(sabffletj^ttipint^'i^*ha?id^^^ e wriu^^ d #hs f^iihd 
jf Was di&ted" thdstcon^ 
tents exditeii'bdth isiy etlribsity Rri#^ fe^x* f{mr: cotirteha’y sinflaffeliliw^w^ih Mrs. hothamyi?^k^l/.^'my^iir.d^d^d^?i!^39^ you seo ' it was 
written;. at? af 1 hazards I was determined to comply with the request of her, for whom .1 vrould lay down my life. At the hour £3 ap 
y 8, E ■ M M A j r, 
, I repaired to the house of Lord ''0£.veland: .-, A servant maid condudled me, hwit]), trembling; - limbs and heating .heart, into her '.dady’s dreshng room. Here. I continued alone near a quarter of an hour. 
at, perturbation seized me when I heard, the, door., open] put, who can defcribetny „,, eipqpons, .i, 'wheff jthe. iadorable 
iherxelf, iwsore?... Judge : ppmy 
astonishment,, when she uttered a shriek on Seeing me., Wstat do I See! (she ex c]aimed).r how have you rashly ventured to; break your promise to me! apxomise, qn which J So truly relied, ” To exculpate inylelf from the imputation of doing the most trifling thing which might offend her, I produced the Note. — “Think, most revered of women, that your mandate alone could induce me to approach your presence — On no other consideration would I have obtruded, on it — But, thus, urged? 
, where is the danger I would not freely embrace ?” She cast her eyes oyer the note, und, bursting into tears, “Oh! Conrjenayh. (Said she,) Tve are undone; Some invidious, jbeti'ayer ihas wrought our rum.;., X see it, all. i t, Xbis isj a.i^afe Jqfgery; .but 
, dhe" consequences .wilj, .^yqfv&lm uss’ — .1' begged her., to(compose herfdf; 1 thrqw iishysdf dp rpy knees, before her, and hyore vj^puld uhshhd^ her? withmiy life; .'that it 
.umsd'"''' " ............. 
"fbe Child Sorrow, 
was impossible thetnbst diabolical malic could fik'a stain on .her charader, which hm evesbeen So piire.” — She was too mlich agitated to attend to me — “Leave mb, leave ihe, (she sobbed,) while yet you ca^i^ quit this fatal place with Safety; each moment I dread the meditated tenipest to fall.'” I pressed her almost lifeiefe hand' to' rny lips, still bn my knees. While I was thus employed, the door'again opened, knd instantly the infernal Mrs. the woman 
who let me in, and another female Servant, appeared in the room“ “beg ‘yotir pardon. Madam, (Said the devil tlg' tham., with a Sneer,) I knew not you had Such good company. Indeed, my Lord has rfiany obligations to you.” I arose On their entrance. “Your plot, vile woman, (cried I,) you see, has taken in part; but beware, I may yet find a time to revenge myself, and that, most virtuous and itjost injured of women.” — “Sir, (she relied with great coolness,) I come not here to argue, or to listen to yoiir invedlives; shy businefs is accomplished— — am Satisfied in what I vranted to know. You, (continued she, tuitiing to the Servants,) you will be ready, when called ftpon, to attest what you have fshn.” The poor injured sat like a statue transfixed with the dshpest woe. Vile wrctehes f (I exclaimed,) I. E 4 cannot 
cannot ou" but, that yop ire Suborned 6151 f?m3?ilp^icr ^'jf^tn^o aifwer nie; 
; ' be 
when you give your testimqilki^, '' lest truth should: visi&ki^dp dhlei^r^ri^ and tremble; 
that I will pursue you to the utmost boun 
ioiir 
forlqjsi^2^; »%).ilgaye arv iiuf’ol trtnste Wretch cq hfnfat|^v that; jt v^ill 
iw5^to19i*bp% '8?46(f.i 
%t£r, 0f, ®wrif5fw, i, ital^ftn9 rftov, 
itiethpds. y. if T jiaye ipy jm^nce. ypu^,. 
let me, ion shyikaeesi lieseeph rp resh Qur; cause in the stands ", of tste ^ip^igstty,, and not, by anyb^d ofj, vk>kuce, draw on 
tff 'nfesy ^ste \efid, bh tste, ^ that I, 
vtosildlnstahtly leayq, the stouse. - L obeyed,, after stivihgaffured Her, Syrpiilcl take Lord svettcvd.^^ykltnn eyerytstjng I should dm. The infanibiis \y‘retches made..nappposition, to shyi quitting jtsteife Hiit, L can have no doiibt they stave already framed.a story for the ear of .Lord Ckvtland. if ste is not even' ohe bf tstp plotters. Ahf that my arnv wasjnbt tied I that 1 cbufd ipake him,. 
The Child ca Soringw. 8i 
m part, feel, the tngmsh,, ” ^ ashiftiph that at^^is, niomenjt, ren4^i|§st bpfomipf yoyf ^ ‘ ..N j - v^hw 
sidwvard covatfil^atist 
i'^u 
'ij 
rsh 
n: 
'A T: e 'iv^‘lvlil^'' L - 
'd'.rij : : u i ■ -.. Jri, > 
QBA rt ers glrvexvt^tb 
Short Letter just to tell you I have Succeeded to my utmost wishes. 1 tciofc 'care to Surprise the Loyers' togethcrs lhm Witheiies too, but t^ou my life' Kii oath or two must hot choke tfeern'. They' may, indeed. Safely Swear they saw theiiv both in a foom; "but as t' any circiini stastce to build fatsts on, I must be indebted to the fertility of my own brain; fof hey '. Ladyship and her own Daughter could hot bi^ stiofe'* shnocent. However, ILIAD the' addl^ to make the critical appearance ' wkile'i'yec the hurry and astonishment of thsir itieeting had eaufed a perturbafion iri j th^r^iboks • and words. I" think, .shayhs 
pl^^t; trey "hrfe de^<^d'% dficshm many 
ovsn_ prii idi/oc. On 
■‘now, Wfe; fsh41s"tji 
acdix4.nf£li 
witli'te 'tiave"” 
o been • 
82 .E M M A; or, 
been closetted with our Witnesses. Your Cousin, th9ugh he, has bqen taught to ex pe£t this'lbshe time, wall nevertheless greatly affected. There is a perversity in human nature which will not be Satisfied with ' letting any one enjoy a bleffmg,, iiotwjth sttindihg we are ourselves tired pit.: in d<!ed: he feeim So little to relish the, idea of *. beeoitiihg one of the branched herd, that, 
'as 'sirp^n Says, T fear he will not cut his horns kindly, he will certainly die 
- ih the breeding. But to more weighty business. r can hardly tell how we are to proceed. The Lady is under close con 
• in her own apartment at present, ■but I believe we shall Send her down to Netir old Aunt Elizahth, in Wales. A 
- Sweet situation we have found for her, have ' we not? 
j She Seems to bear her misfortune with ■•'•great resignation. I do believe confcipus •innocence'is a firmer Support in the day of assiiclion than I had any notion of. But ■ her Severest trial is not yet come: I mean her'leparation from her Child; 1 think that stvill effedually humble her. .Dshaw, I am 
• rtstining from my Subject strangely; my i ■ Ipirits are not yet Subsided. You shall Soon 
again hear from your 
• • ■ - ', elia Hotham. 
LET 
chsld sor RO w, 83 
LETTER LIX 
Lady Louisa. 
EHOL.D the victim of the basest 
__ treachery'and blackest forgery, once 
itiore going to fill the mournful page with ifie'rcciral of her Ssifferings. 1 can hardly doubt but that ybli are.already insormed of the storm which has overwhelmed me, by one who has been drawn in to feel a full share of my rnisfortunes. .Dh! my Louisa think what is my distress,, after the, rnany hard trials T Have experienced, to have my' Lime torn in pieces by the malevolent world, do' be by its cruel and decisive word consigned, to ignominy, and ranked with the lowest and vilest of wretches! 
Early in life driven from, the remotest hope of ever tasting felicity, my only con solmoh rested on the assurance of passing through my destined state of existence wish the approbation and praise of all wdio knew me; blit thisconsolation, though the only one, was' too exquifice a fatisfatstion for the ' lhiliof borrow. My enem iesenvlest me the Small comfort I had, and, iabo.ur€d to Tob me of the last remains of happiness — *, Iiov/ they have succeeded the Sad event too sa tally testifies. Yes, my Lonifa, as to this sublunary world I am undone for ever. 
E 6 The 
, V 'E; : Ml M" A: s■ or, -, ■ 
'^fefmvca'ld; my Dear is too frequentlyi misttakeihjiifeih:; who "cast appeal from itsri; 'decrees? ^?onq r jit m e; i 
* stranger, as I before haveffaid, .to every prospe^ jof joy, I: thought. to have; glided thrslugh. life unobseryei and Surely on; emficd: /hbutcye£: L postelsibldfings wbldi theji caak never, tneven'd^rive me of, e^xom^ fcieodsi void of lli doing .Dh !S naercisul Godjcin all my hardships and trials preserve ihy integrity,, and I v/illshow my neck be Death .thy chastisements, and bless the hand which afflidls me. q.s^sv acv _ 
will perhiaps, my Dear, wonder at: my resignation,, believe me it is not the work.of a moment; no, a length of tirrie has been necessary, joined to the utmost of human methods, to calm the tumult in. my soul, .and hush it into Some degree of peaces ‘but, my Louisa, I have another cause. ui; feel within myself a. moral certainty' thatd shall not live much longer, either to excite the malice of my bitter enemies, or encounter the ills their cruelty has brought on me, 
; What my persecutors mean to do with me clram a stranger to — At present I ammnder econfincmenc Yes, Louisa!! as that shunds, lam stridtly confined; and though L am allowed the use of my pen, I know not that what I write willever reach your hands. However that may bei trust that I shall 
still 
Beg H tirt) ^ S d R R H w. 
still: i'hqidiitha'iifame innyoshi 
bosom sh rcoeen qcu^ difilec? 
me entreat you to inform my poor Mother" Gsiiersiry life; ishr^hisr oc^ri. 
peaeeii^vna^nd^ toyexculpate myt 
bcl»vetifl^n|)r; III sj^iiistilwistip sher to Jbje feasible 7io£§flqaj^lc!rii©llcqealme0t.?u?myhtears^^ si0wed, ^iadqm5?{ii^dxc3fckist: : ov¥r her fash; Itidbcr^ I! d^duld^raresb aiisvi^eshity but. at tjmb'ttaine atsyi xsistrefej naab texqsiisite, : nor 
couldoliprocur^v ki sheet o; paper,., unless I hadteonfiescs5f^dttqbeg.»^q£i the infamous' Hothamy Qt bribed a, Servaaat; to?procurcv mejfijneai.w yni jf'.q li.i:; =■ 
odd jeaertotadoubt btititthatnyoo know ^11 that pa®d|fwhile yourmahappy Friend was ID thisiatashosase, asishpgged he wouldbe guided.by; Lord Sinttonny \ shall then past, oyer; hat; q0^rrence; : toninform you of the jconcjiasiomsjr.: the scene At that period; of .timaimyiidear sister.was absent, by a Scheme whfeh'likewrfe had bten/concerted, and. into whidi She fell. She. returned, however;, Soon after,.. and hekrd, a .confused account .off the hstair below., for these agents of iniquity .had taken careito publish the transiidtioii, 
: withimahy. additipus.! theklcar girhlew.into shy .arms,, and Sougiit V f: pdur the .balm .of : comfortiinto'the wounded: Soul, of her. idr rowing Sister.. ..While! she was hanging over .ms my: Woman enrer.ed ths;., Toom, and 
begged 
S: EMMA; cr, 
begged I would give her the keys of my bureau.. Overwhelmed with distress, and, hardly knowing what I did, I drew them Srorh rny pocket. Fanny observed me, and hastily taking them from me, What are you about to dof (asked she,) who dares demand these keys I have orders, 
Madarri, from my Superiors, to request theni of her Ladyfiiip. *' — Let your fit -- periorsihtvimmiquity do their own messages, they shall not be delivered to you, nor any oneelse, while I have life to keep them.” 
, Alas! my Love, Said I, how impotent, how ^ vain are your struggles against the power of the mighty! We must not cgntend with them.” — “No one, my beloved Sister, (she replied) can have a right to pry’ ihto your concerns but Lord clevehnd.\ i' shall not detain them from him, but to him alone will I deliver them.” — jvilfon left' the room. • In a few moments in came the base promulgator of all this mifchkst with the utmost ferocity of countenance. “So, Miss Woodville you will not give up the keys', I find'™well, 'Well child, we ' have' other methods V — here, Gcnrinned she, speaking to a Man whom she called in. Wrench open she desh.” I think the revolution of ages will never obliterate what followed. Fanny flew from my side, and shatching up a poker, which was heated by having been in the 
sire. 
Lhe; C III of S OR ROW. 87 
V fire, hastily ran to, the bureau, X where ilean 
'hig over it with: her left hand on the lock,, file brandifiicd her newly acquired weapon in her right, “Now let me see, (cried she, her eyes Sparkling with rage,) now let me See who will dare approach this place. I sv*?ea]f, by she eternal Creator of the world, to lay any oned.ead: at my feet that shall presume to violate this fandliuary.” No one dared to molest her, as I believe she would have put her threats in execution if they had proceeded to violent measiires.. “It is not (Said file) that I am fearfulof anything here transpiring to the prejudice of my injured Sister, but that I am resolved. all her papers shall remain Safe, - either in her own possession, or in that of my Lord. But thou, thou wretch, (continued she, darting a furious look, at Mrs. hotha^n^) thou, ■fiialt never have them, since I know, thou wouldst destroy those Sacred witnesses of my sister’s virtue.” I had hitherto Sat a mournful Spedator of the tumultuous Scene before me; I now essayed to Speak. — “My dearest fanny(cried I,) Iteel inyfelf for ever indebted to you for your goodness but your zeal, my Love, transports, you; to too great lengths. you will further.; irritate my enemies against me., I can, never believe these people al, without the, Sanction of my Lord; they : could, not dare t o 
treat 
m 
E ivi 

treat me wish these’iji^^lt^, u ril^ shy his ^ auihority. theysh^an td crsish''h; ^eitndei: : their feet; feyxiystfliucqefedb ready lived tod Yolrr isheesh •' 
ness (Said Vann^ has * given' these infernal 1 wretches this power dver yois. ' Gh! that you possessed. Sdiste di^ee off my Spirit f' their dastardly souls ' woiiid Mve shrunk from the danger they(wduld Mve dmadhla in my verigeance. ' But I will be "your champion, your Second Self. Yet, my Suffering Sister I will be guided by you • I will, if you please, deliver up these papers to Lord “Ihave not a wite 
(said 1) to conceal them front hitrs; ' he rnay^ do what he pleases both with therit and ihe,. If he can be base ehough to join the vilest of women to work my ruin, I have nothing to hope from his mercy or justice.’* 
~^*tou, allow me, then; to give uphjh the 'papers, without examination, td your lioydfmost freely.*’ — “Hear this,., yeshbettors of. falsehood, : hear ithis, and re ^ c|?s<^lt gs The strongest proof of injured' ifflcfcefiiieyvffe~ gives up the costteshs shf thfi^saiswiiere ate shefft all the 
hei’tssi^fhhrttrjesiy. which 
st?^std^vli^h^y#fjteifi rerpockef, and tin ’ 
was' approach 
ms iim 
northeast Ch I L d osso It R o w. 89, 
pcc^hing; “Keep of, (cried eann^d.i tir. nat, .Xor yourmifed" ‘ She shattered, P.. ssiouid find a time for'revenge.” took out all the Letters She cosild find, .astd putting them into her apron, again, lockecl* the bureau, and broughtcine ihe,,, keys... “them;, my loycv ulhshy t^yi^'n go to rddiver them, inip. x or(^ poffession r “be.xashim.y fcti 
my Sake.” —. “Fear she not,., shy, ^, i dshrelt.j lirnma y I will ever, keep youciw eisarctfii, view.” When she left .me, au eornfori seemed gone with her. *, I threw, myseifintp^ a chair, and leaning my'shead, hon -- h; -, x^b^^ gave a, free vent, to my over burtl'ieneci ^ heart. After Some time,, my dear again returned to me; she satsherselffsoviv; opposite to me, in the. deepest Silence. ‘ I. fixed my eyes on her, and Saw So. great ari. alteration in her countenance, as almost terrified irx to death, and totally deprivei, mei 5 of utterance. At last,, in. a tremulovis] tone of voice, I ashed the cause of .thc^, mournful presage before me? tier effottj towards Speech, was. too much; a fiood.ofi tears poured from, her' eyes“ “Spirit (Said she, when she could speak.).) spirits.... longer Support me •, they are novftn!^/i dued; they will tear me from you.. dev eland has dispatched a courier .to shjt/» father’s; he will, .no longer svsher rne 
^ " remaim 
90 
E MM A; QA) 
remain with you, than till he is informed by my Parents where to Send me.' He has done more; he took the. papers ffrom me;, and, without looking over them, ‘ consigned them to the care of the Devil ho tham. “I have Sufficient evidence of her guilt, (Said he,) without applying to these proofs..” — “On. imy life and soulfsaid I,) from these you will only receive proofs, of her real innocence.” — “Yes, and of yours too, I Suppose, (Said he, with a Sneer, } but my measures are taken. I expect, by The return of the Messenger,, to be informed how L am to proceed on your account; I shall not allow her to have an agent of her •ill practises So near her; it will be better for you to be under the protection of your Father and Mother. Would to God I had never Seen or known any of you! You may Spend the little time you have to stay, together, but I will have no plotting. I in sift on. having your sister’s keys, as well as your own, delivered to Mrs. liothmn i, she is now mistress of this house. I expebt compliance, or I shall not stay for directions teom .jour Father, but shall send you down hittmediatelyffhus jotrfee, : my dearest ■sisterv'fiadded'she,) show; I am circumstanced.; : mj fpiiitv; which show out for your; !^ke; (isifbrjiour sake now entirely broken igave up my keys vritliout uttering a word; 
. i you 
he Child of Sorrow. 91 
you must likewise resign yours.” I Saw it was in vain to contend. I rang my bell:; and putting the keys into; the harid of a Servant, “bid him carry them to his .Dady.” The man stared; “To Mrs. Iiotham., (continued I,) she is now your .Dady.” — “I; am' heartily Sorry for it, ” Said : he, yath a deep. Sigh, .and I thought I iavy atear glistening; in ihk eyev ^ 5‘ They Seek to break my hearty 1 find, cried I. What shall I’ do when I oit my a'’anny? .But how shall I Support the idea of your being harshly treated by my Father? There, oh there, they tear my foulindeed 1^’ 
.; We passed the remainder, of the night in mutual distress. Next moxkmf ^ivilfm told me, a Gentleman of the Law, by order of my. Lord, was to wait on me. “J am not in a condition, (Said I,) to make, the least opposition to the orders of his Lordship, or I should certainly have had /ome other Servant to deliver this mef sage; but no matter; I Submit. Introduce the Gentleman.”, Ah 1 my dear 
it was.: Doistor, — from the cmn mods /. He iliad too often been, emplo yed in oa ufesl pf: this nature, where there had. been; real guist, land, .void of xlciicacy; ibr .humanity,; shev.entered abruptly on tliei bu xipel he'c‘aibg: about I cut him ■short, !by, 
, ashing,. hhwivit., was:, the purport, .of the L Papers, 
U'tvr Kt rii 
ip'ioviv..l L .■ F...; 
woiua tiot exr^ -- -- -- -- -- -- 
to S 
re the ^ ^ j,,,,. 
Goncernjng., i.the, jdifcoyery; ol.r|puf Lady? ship’s, inc, qbtinence.” r f jpray,, ir,, they, 
^whyj 
^ ^jnbt; tia tpi she 
throat working; 'file Seemed all agitaiiop,;;. I fearm, lest she might express herseif le yerely, therefore, I took sher shandsist miiie^ anjd kiffiqg 1tev‘s.compose yourse}^^ jshy^ Lpytej say|riot. 6ne’ word on tins 
returned the 
and 
m 
her eyes, heaved a sigh, but opened.not 
*inc'i i.. 

; 6fetery, ed;. by, rt 
m bbojftf %rg “^rfu 
', 1* 
*^feari of dtmdtariit plprged with Incontinence; to Be by them observed,, until' the Said William., 
“jffari 
he C H 11, D ff S o R R OW. 9^ 
Lari oitlevaandy c^n obtain a Divorce 'stbsh thebjd to the ast, 
f^lh'shch'cdftst^, ' 
each Letter 
iti (fid ivwitif a btsikeri voice,) 
let'mesia^ve m]^ibbnd^mnatiori from your lip. 'TH dedf .Did iu^ftiihgly Sbete rhe; ' 
staff through the firstbefore her voice fiifed her; fit was choakefi with sobs ^n’d sighs. “I Caststot go bh/” (Said she.) Do hot, then, atterfipt it, tny Love. I l^all be able to gsiess the purj)6rt the treatshertt Which vils follow. I only beg; tb 'b informed briefly by you. Sir, jwhetj there there is any article where ' guilt is', implied on my side; as, if there is,. I, wils; not sign it,; I know my own reistitudei nd d Will not Set my name to .a false accu^^ stiofi ag^n'st myseff.” He afluredj1& 
.as not. I then took the .pen ke brobasi'’ and signed my name. He wantetip^^ rhe Several qiiestiops; but I stbfib^; fiimii •by tehing hishi stis questiohs were un s tsehwtn^^d I not ahsi^ef kstcmf L 
as/lf n 
c®m?d; witst "thbbfdei^' ^ nty or .siiiilg^tlte«clesi'^^ C hlc. 
EA: ' ^ OO.L ill; * ■ 7/ haj^ti 
bis) s.ti uititf, b)tuidz mac 
! i tel 
94 F M M A y or, 
The day after this my mother’s Letter was brought nie; I shall enclose it for yosi; it will be an iilciternentto, you, to let her 'know all that relates to her iinfortunate' Daughter. Mr. affures me, that 
he will fave Fanny from rhy father’s resentment. T wonder my jaileress would’ permit nie to ffee hiin. ' fawny entreated him not to hivolve himself in any dijfagree ^ able fracas on her account.' I Said like^ise, ^ I shotild be inexpressibly wretched, if I should be the cause of more uhhappirlcss to my family; that I only wished to sink peac’eably to my grave, and to' have all these distresses forgotten. “You are a •good creature, '(Said Mrd; trite, ^,) sop; your Sake, I arn glad you have the consci ousness of innocence to Support you; but for the wretch, your Husband, I wish, from nhy Soul, he was Ten times the cuckold he fancies hiioleifi” I cannot repeat what he, ' Said of the vile Mrs Hotham; you ni'ay giiess, he is not very delicate in the choice of his expressions, but I am Sure he iyiny’ friend.. He blahied me for signing thdle articles'; Says they ‘iiave no right, to confine afid'cosistfaih she to Set shy hand to whaf they shduks pie afe tbdray/' returned to 
this,. mavi was’fully resolyed .they should’ have Trothing to allege against me; • that I would shake fib bppbfitiojr to th^wjilof my 
P' ' 
sphe Child Sorrow. 9 5 
Lord; that. X had stridlly adhered to my duty, except in that of giving him my heart,. which, he well was preengaged, 
and which, he thought too trifling, an object ever to attempt to attain, I had nothing to acciise myself of. relative to my cpndudl. I lamented more than anything not beingallowed. ppri. and ink.. Mr, 
\ Shotildshave. the allowance of pen, or her would, fete, the cafe to the Lord Chancellor. He left me to go to my Lordand returned with a choir of paper, and my own standish. 
; The first ufc X made of my pen was to "vyrite a Letter of thanks to my Lord, for thb indulgence, .which Letter I stciired my Brother Brereton to deliver to him. It was couched pretty much in these terms : — X first thanked him for restoring my pen and ink; and then begged he would not draw on my Sister the resentment of. her family; I could support my own misfortunes with a degree of fortitude; and con, eluded by saying, I ashed no mercy, since! I was sure they who would deny me justice, would never be inclined to grant me the other. I then in as pathetic a manner as X could find words to, express, recommended my poor Child to his tendered feelings as; a Parent. I besought, him, pn tny l^oees,, to. cherish: the poo vhttlpinfant,, .whsh^ 
hoped 
96 EMMA; cr, 
iioped he would not deprive me the Society" of. In short, I hardly know what I Said on this head; niiy expressions, however, came from my heart; a heart overwhelmed with anguish and anxiety. Captain brere to7t wept plentifully over the lines I penned, “This must Soften him, imlest he has a more than Savage heart, (cried he,) he Cannot withstand this moving eloquence.” But I doubt he has a Savage heart, my Louisa! He Seemed very little moved at reading my Letter; he indeed promised never to accuse Fatmy to my Parents, but he is cruel to me in a very Sensible im ilance; I am not allowed the company of my little Harriet, the dear Angel only comes in once a day, and then stays with me no longer than half an hour, and I am in constant apprehension that this privilege will Soon be denied me. Ah! have I .not reason to complain? But what avail complaints? I must bear the ills that are hourly heaped upon me. Let me have your prayers, my dearest Louisa i 
^ Yours lyhik I have fense or life, 
Emma cr eveland, 
L E 1c 
f ir i 
he Ghix4& ^ s^($rrow, 
A' 1 *' ' ■ ■ i '■ ■■' '' ■'• '■■■ 
h3: ': R" i' ' 
Laiy tl5y f js A $ T R E T T O N" 
■" ' ^ 
^olas'cmy Dear, they are striving, ^ by everyunethfod, to firivw me to Some •aft of'vddspei^tion but; I trust In Heaven they' wim mot fucceedi' No Servant waite ofi rncbut fvilfon — She is bste of the chief ants in this black affair. How Sensibly (was i shocked this morning, when a Letter was put into my hand bflvilf&n; I eagerly tore: it..operr, hoping it came from yoisi ^udge of the Surprise and indigiiafisin which seized me, when I found it was sigiled f ^ ofwaup Yes, my dear Louisa So fallest’ is your poor Friend, that the wretch Oj® Wald offers her his proteistion. I feel ho very much I am Sunk in the'eyes of ' world;, I thought 1 could bear its Calumt nies, but j cannot Support its insults; Alh^ rage I tore the ‘ Letter: ^t^iege meakl; ^i^jj stamped it under my feet.' F havejwmt^ Several times, to my; ^lo^d#l; u: eitj^r my Letters never reach him, or he has totally hardened hh heart against me. Would to Heaven I was laid low in my grave. They want me dead. I am kept in ignorance of everything about me. I think I cannot long undergo these Severities. Mr. Brere vo L II F 'ten 
. R M M Ay.. Oti ' 
tm: promised to call on me, cither he has foisiaken your ^ wretched Friend, or they iwonst admjt him. 'What confident (Sireature, Wilfonyi^y^^ order tg detain, my 
Letters — For a trial I wish, my Love, you would wrste a few lines imniediately on the receipt of this. I wilf mot fail tq act knowledge ypui; favour the instant it conaes to hand; that will convince me my fttua^ tion is not So calamitous as I now think, itis. 
Heaven knows to. what I am reserved, but Some Scheme is on foot, though I am unable to inform you what it is. Wilson has been packing up my clothes — Perhaps they mean to decoy me away — Good God! I have heard of people being So atror ciousiy wicked as to put their relations into mad houses. Oh! Louisa, I am already half distraded. Such a proceeding would rob me of the few Scattered fenses which remain. I asked for my child at the appointed hour — I was told she was sseeping — I am Sure it was a falsehood. I have not yet Seen her. Lord help me! What is it they would have me do? — I am more distressed than ever. 
It is certainly intended I should quit this place, but I am fixed, in my resolution never to leave the house until 1 have it 
under 
northeast Child c/'so rr6w. gi) 
under my lord’s hand, whither I ash to be carried, I will enclose the diredibn to you, and if on inquiry I am not found there, let me entreat you to endeavour to gain intelligence where I am confined; for of this be assured, unless I am stridly confined, I will write to you. I have the most dreadful forebodings — • Perhaps they mean to destroy she — I know not their intentions, but my own fears and anxiety rend my soul in pieces. 
I have ashed jvilfon what these preparations are for? She Said, “She was told I was to be removed into the country.” — “What country, (I hastily demanded,) to Cleveland— — “(she answered,) that was thought to be too near town.” So an hundred and twenty miles is too near town — ■ they might have added, it was too near stretton houfe with more propriety, which I do fuppose is the reason that is not to be my prison; for who is there in town that can make it being within a hundred and twenty miles a dangerous situation? ‘‘ If not to Cleveland., then V — “Indeed she could not tell, ” — “Then you may tell your Employers, that I will never leave this house till I am informed where I am to be conveyed. I have reasosh to apprehend dangerous conspiracies against my ■' F 2 life. 
loo T ivl M A; or, 
life, or perhaps injuries still worse; but! will assert my freedom, and make ye all tremble.” 
. My resolute Spirit has afforded me Some little advantage. I have this moment received this Billet from Lord Cleveland — I will preserve the curious original. 
“Lady Cleveland need not suspech any sinister behaviour will be used against her; hut it is the request of her injured hus band, and made one of the Articles she signed, that she would reside in the country, till the laws of the land give him the liberty of making a more eligible choice than he unfortunately has done in her. An exception was made in the before mentioned Articles against any of her lord’s seats — She will be properly taken care of by a relation of Lord clevdand’s, who lives, jn South Wales, whither she is desired to prepare herself to go tomorrow morning. Her future .conduct: in life must be the guide of herhushand’s action .towards her., bhe has nothing to fear, since justice alone ways the breast of 
Xr, L JE V T L A N n.” " 
I now remember there was Something 4hentioned about Wales in the enclosed Letter my Mother Sent me, but the extreme 
MM A; or, 
Child ^ S or r o w. Sox 
treme agitation I was under prevented Kff attending to it. I think I have heard shy Lord mention this Relation, though ^ ltd Seldom talked of family affairs. He once Said he had a queer old Aunt, vrho lived in 
desolate castle, and whom disippoint ments and illness shad Soured into a misan rhrope. This is perhaps the Relation wist) is to talce care or me.. Wdl, ’ shrely if I bear all this, my most crtrel enemies must allow I have one virtue, namely, ■ tience. 
Heaven alone knows, my dearest Lotdfa^ whether we shall ever meet again.' The human heart will Sustain a great deal; infinitely more than I could have formed idea of. If I should outlive my si, iffering?5.! we may yet embrace on this side eternity •: if I should fall a martyr to them, let me live in your remembrance — And, Oh! let me entreat you to pay back to my Child Some part of the affection her unhappy Mother feels for you. My Lord has as fured me, by Wilson., that he will be tender of my Child, and that I shall fqon See it. Adieu! my dear, ever dear Louisa., Pleaven preserve you and yours; may you meet every felicity in your union with Lord Shrettonl may, all your paths be strewed with flowers that never grew in mine! .It would be cruel not to mention one more; 
F 3 you 
102 E M M Aj or, 
you know who I mean; recommend me to him; he has been a great Sufferer for my fake: Heaven preserve him I 
I am yours for ever! 
cntvel AND' ' 

SSXI. 
sto Laiy L o u i s a St r r t t o n. 
Arn at this moment writing from the most gloomy and deishlated, placeoth^t despair can paint, or that Envy could flcq a persecuted being in. 1 look on myseif as buried alive, as I know not when 1 shall emerge from this dreary Solitude; : I, have already been here a week. My journey deserves not a description; it was suchfa^s you may naturally figure to yourself,, wji^n dertaken by one almost become inefiffereht SS; t9. Vvhat might happen to her,, and accompanied by a bale instrument of her rnisforuines. Ah! good. God J. yet when I thqughp pf, my,,. Child, I became, almost Srantic,.; I haff ftiflj, would quit 
yet the'pang, s on leaving 
hpr btbincl, were ypfinitely more than my philosophy, my. reason, or strength of body could bear;, 1 fainted Several times. At.;; length 
Child of so'rrdw. lo f' 
length my Lord Sent me a Solemn affutainc^ that my Child should be taken to rny Moi there; that he had written to her. to begsher to receive it; and that it should Sometimes be my visitor. ' This assrurartcel calmed me; 
I am Sure my dear liondured Mother will be kind to my Harriet. 
As the^spring advances; perhaptthis'piace may wear a less dreary aspedt. All around at present is deiblatioh iri its rfibst frightful form. Pigure to yourself art old ruinated castle, over which time has triumphed, moated ass around, with a horrid dr a brid^ey I hear no Sounds but theiscrearninl^ of rodks, '^ahd yshistling of the winds;; all ehearful Sounds are wholly banished, ' Th inssde of this tremendous' castle pfefeiits misery in another point os view; the ftirnu ture old and crazy; the hangings orice rich; torn and defaced. The mistress of the mam lion, Lady Elixaheth Cleveland a represtn'c tadon almost of Qtwaf ^ Witch, though rather more decently apparelled. Harsh and Severe in her manner, unaccustomed to Society, and perhaps prejudiced against niei You will readily believe my reception was not very flattering to a persoh in my pfej dicament. The looks of the bid lady were not very likely to conciliate one’s esteeshy or even veneration, at first; sentiments, Whidfi age generally excites iri my bos6sh; ' but F 4 then 
104 .EMMA; or, 
then the austerity which accompanies her looks, and the frigid tone of voice, rather filled me vfith terror than complacency; besides, I looked on her as my Governance, and one that would make me feel all the Severity of bondage. This outward prospect,,. to the tumult within, rendered my st; ate still more deplorable; I passed whole days in tears, without tasting the least food. My distress Seemed a little to relax the Severity of Lady elizahetfs features. She yefierday took my hand, “You do wrong, (Said she,) not to endeavour to preserve your life.; you must excuse me, but there Seems more of obstinacy than penitence in your lamientations.” I found, as I thought, the good Lady had been prejudiced against me. What barbarity! They even would not give me a chance of being pitied in my misfortunes; they grudge me the Smallest comforts, I told her, “.she knew not my. Sufferings, or she would think those who had instided the punishment stood more in need of penitence than me; that she had been much deceived, as she would allow, was she to hear the whole of my unhappy story.’* She begged to. be informed of those parts I C host ho communicate; my confidence has • vjon the old lady’s heart. “I must vyeep, my Child, i.must weep for your great as fsicuons ^ I stave not wept lstese forty years. 
for: 
The Child ^ So R R o w. 105 
for my own, but your distress brings tears again into my eyes. I thought to‘ 
have Wept, again. I judged the; whole world unworthy my concern, but you bring me back again to it, and I find one individual worthy of my regard; come, thou' Child of Sorrow, to rny bosoni; to a bo some which has been racked with anguish': too; yet ■ you have a consdlation I never experienced; you have found your Sriends^ faithful; you only Suffered from your ene -- mies; while my breast has been pierceeh through and thi qiigh by the hands of those on whom I relied for comfort and Support; those, on whose bosom I would have wept; were the cause of my tears; those who; should have dried my tears, drew them from; me; the hands which should have supported me, bent me down; and those who should' have formed my happiness, meditated and contrived my ruin.” The good old Lady. Seemed too much affected to proceed, and; yet was unwilling to discover her ernotions. her former griefs Seemed renewed; she' walked hastily backwards and Sorwards in the. room, without taking the least notice of me. Lwould not disturb her reverie., theresore stole out of the room, feeling a respedt for her Sorrows. I Saw her Ladyfnip no rnoro that day. this morning 1 heard her tra S versing the gallery;. 1 went thither to pay F 5_ her 
io 
E M M A; €sr. 
her the proper compliments; I found v/itn a visible, melanchply Seated on h'pr visage • I made no observation, shut talked ' on indifferent subjects. She began the topic heisielf, by Saying, The conversation, rny Dear, which I held with you yesterday, rendered my night a fieepless one. 
I thought I had out lived all my Sensibility, that Ishad got the better of rny feelings; because the natural calamities of life no longer afflicted me, I flattered myself I was proof against the representations of distress; but I find my faculties only have lain dormant through a ibffg Series of years, and re not destroyed; yb'ur story yesterday awakened all the Softer feelings of my soul, and again made me Sensible, that the misfortunes of humanity will cause a Sympathy in the human breast. 1 will not, however, place the whole of my sleepless night to your account. What I Said yesterday, relative to myself, will convince you, that your recital awakened likewise the remembrance of my former Sufferings. I was younger than you are wherii I first became an inliabitant of this Castle: I was then confined here. Till the death of my Father I led the life of a prisoner.' for Several years I was not permitted to cross the bridge. So long a Seclusion from the world made me indifferent as to its 
concerns. 
The Child of Sorrow. 107', 
cbricerns. Custom reconciled me to rny.‘ prifbn, nay, even made it pleasing to me;;, and time, which blunted the. poignancy of my grief, endearedi the place to me. I would hot now quit it on any score. to,; enter again into a world full of treachery and deceit.” I sold her, if it would not: - 
affe(s: sher too ihuch, I .should wiili to .boi made acquainted with the cause. of her ri i gorous treatment.” I was the more desirous, as there Seemed Some degree of si mi, larity in our lives. It was remarkable, .that two of the Same family should be madef prisoners, through the arbitrary proceediiigsi of the fafne family, at an early age, and equally without hope of a release from confinement— — “to my part, .(Said she,) I never wish to quit this retirement; it is' become habitual to me. Five and forty; years Seclusion from the world has rendered me an entire stranger to its ways; but I hope you will Soon return to meet its joys.” " I returned her my thanks, but Said, ‘‘ I had very little probability of again entering oh the stage of life, as it was certainly ixiy lord’s intent to keep me here till hj? could obtain a Divorce, which, sihlefs, the wit nestes were guilty of the blackest j^fjur.y* could never take place.” She tenderly arid fervently prayed to Heaven that my innocence mio; hf Be manifested' id all the wo 
F 6 You 
VJ: 
sole 
M ' M '- A j 
or. 
You may now, my Dear,, indulge me' with your kind Letters. I am anxious to be informed how ray amiable Fanny was received at home;. whether my dear Child is under the protection of my good Mother: In short, every thing’. Your Letters may afford Some Small share of felicity to 
Your faithful 
Emma Cleveland. 
LET E R LXII 
Fo Lady Cleveland. ', 
Cannot postpone writing a moment. 
__ longer,, now I know my hfloytdi Emma. 
is at liberty to hear from her faithful Friend. Alas I my Dear,, how infinite have been your misfortunes and trials! How has my heart bled, and my eyes flowed over your: melancholy recitals! You judged right; I was made acquainted wsith the mournful particulars when your first Letter reached, me. Oh! that infernal iiotham; can she by no means be brought to condign punish inent.? Oh! that I were Judge and Executioner in one. But I am indstlging myself in unavailing expletives, when I might afford you better consolation. Your Sweet little Girl is quite well, and looks like an T. Angel, 
TA’ C HIL D of S o R R o vr. rogj 
Angel.. have been to. Woodville hall., Do you not wonder to hear I have paid a visit there? Lord Ktretton. advised me to take that Step, thinking.it would be. for. your advantage, as well as contributing tov your satisfaction. I will not. expatiate om the behaviour of your Mother: I. have, restored a considerable share of comfort to her heart. She is confirmed in her opinion of your innocence — Your Father is convinced that you have been iiyuriousty, treated; but what I think will give you pleasure, your Sweet Fanny is my guest. I'here is news for you. Dear, amiable Girl, how much I love her. ■ Indeed, it ia impoffible I Snould not, prepared as I have, been by the character you have drawn. 
Lord Clenjeland is a dupe to this infamous Woman. Oh! that your virtue and innocence may be Speedily .manifested.. You, mush I am Sure, you will Soon be cleared. these Wretches always clo Something: to blow themselves up. What a Support is integrity of heart! — How has that con sciousness born you up through all your, difficulties !' Lord Stretton and .Sir Charles‘s Beville never cease talking, of you. I had ever a bad opinion, oi Hotham. Do you know the Wretch has given it out, that: as Soon as a divoi ce. takes place, she is to be Lady ■cuvela'nd*.^ Is: he not mad.? He 
must 
i 10 E M M A; or, 
ibufcknow her to be an infamous Woman — r I told you long since I had heard her character was rather dubious while her huf band lived: I find, by maing her our subject, that her name is not unknown to Sir Charles Beville — He says, she was sus 
|)efted of having’ ah 
intrigue 
with a Mr. 
cievbldhd., a Cbusin of yosir lord’s; So. thb Wretch has a paitiality fob the Family.' This Mr. Cleveland is the next heir to the title and estate — Who knows, he may be One of the engineers in this infernal pldt i I hinted as much to Sir Charles he thinks it not at all Unlikely, and is determiried i; b find him out, and endeavour to develbpe the truth of this affair. He says, Cleveland fortune is a very desperate one, and he has not the highest Opinion of his honour. May not this lead to Something in our favour? Hope should never forsake the Virtuous and Innocent. 
Your amiable fellow Sufferer does not Want a Comforter; my good Lord Stretton affords him all he can bestow. He has Spent Some days with him. His greatest grief is the thoughts of What your delicacy must endtirb frbiti^ the cerifttres of an igno rarttvshrid’ Butthif i's a' siibjeift I will ript enlai ge"'iipbh'; sihdeed, ' it 'is a’theriie with which I never could trust myself; I' neker poffeffed your prudence and philosophy. 
Had 
The Child of orr o w. 111 
Had I been in your Situation, I hope, and) dare believe, I should have been virtuous, but I know I should have been very, very imprudent; our trials, however, are pro i portioned to our strength. — “The Lord tempers the wind to the shorn lamb.’* 
I guess you will be Surprised at my having your Fanny for a Visitor; but your Father had compashon on the poor Gstl; she was really very much indisposed. Her affection for you had much affected her mind; we all interceded for change of air and objects, and were So fortunate as to prevail. And I do not know if her presence here will not excite a little disturbance to Some folks. I have a kind of; presentiment that Beville will Soon be induced to forget his make believe Wise, and I should hope that his bright black eyes and white teeth vrill wipe from her remembrance the insolent, worthiest of wald. But, however, these are surmises merely of my own, not that I Ibould be Sorry if Such an affair should hereafter come on the tap; for, notwithstanding his juvenile flights, Beville is a very amiable young Man, and one So thoroughly beloyed by Lord Stretton and his other Self, that that circumstance bespeaks him worthy of any Womanst love, 
'. / .... Tpu 
2u' s. E M M' AI or. 
You have raised my curiosity with your; account of the Lady of the Castle, where you are passing your Spring months, I have a confused notion of hearing Somewhat about her — I have an idea that she, committed Some trifling faute 'pas in the, days of her youth, and So was Sent to do penance on the Mountains of vvales r but I may have been wrong informed. If ever ssie should make you her Confidant,, let me be a partaker of her history. 
Your Sister writes by this post to you. Let me hear from you by every opportunity; consider now it is the only intercourse. Heaven Send we may Soon mtet.. 
Adieu! Yours for ever, 
Louisa Stretton".. 
LETTER lxni. 
Po Mrs. Hot HAM. 
Again J write, though I may agaiir incur your displeasure; but how is it possible I fnould be silent while lam tortured on the rack of doubt and fear.? What am I to think of the inconsistency of your conduct?' ?' I to give no credit to; the reports which are daily circulating,?. My'ears are hourly curled with hearing 
you. 
northeast Child Sorrow. 113: 
you are to be Lady Cleveland. What have I have been doing Have I been helping you to destroy the happiness of an amiable Woman, to veap no advantage myself? The more I study your character, the more I am perplexed. Oh! Eliza what am I to think! — > Youshnow I still love you to dis tradlion; that to gaiuj and keep you mine, 
I have acted the part of a villain — Where is the reward you have So often promised me Vf hy do you still continue absent 
from me, and, what is still worse, why are you in the house with my rival? Such he certainly is; I can but too plainly gather that fatal truth from your Letters. You Said it was necessary to make the world believe Lord Cleveland loved you, in order to give his Wife a sanction for bestowing her person 'where she could not with hold her heart: But where is the neceshty now of keeping up (I still hope) So unnecessary an, appearance? You have done all you wanted todo; they are effedlually parted’; she is more likely to live than he; So, of course, he will never marry again : I shall, therefore, inherit his estate and title, which ybu,. and. you alone, .shall share.. Why. should) you endeavour to drive, matters further?. We do not want a Divorce, and yet your last Letter, which to me, appears incompre. hensible, : Seems tosharp o.n.nothing elsethan 
the' 
te M M A; or, 
the evidence yoin^all be able tp procure. Good God! what can you mean ^ Surely you have not drawn me in to be a villain for nothing? My conscience Sometimes accuses me sot joining in So horrid a treachery, Lady Clevdand.% character, though painted by you, is So truly amiable. Her Sufferings, even if she was as guilty as yoii have made her Husband believe, areimieh more than adequate to her failings. Oh! Eliza., vre have much to answer for *, burr, as we have gone So far, let us rrot tunr back. Do you unite your fate to mine, > and let tis bid defiance to the worst. 
This moment I have been told you are certainly to be married Speedily to Cleveland that he is labouring, with the utmost celerity, to have the Bill of Divorce pass the house. What is the meaning of this? ease my doubts Soon, or by Heaven I will come up to town, and assert my right over you. Would to Heaven I had made that right a legal one, before I Suffered you to enter his house! I cannot long Support the constant anxiety I labour under. If you have any regard for me, you will, by acting freely, and without reserve, contribute all iri your power to make him happy, who is So much yours, as to be whatever you wish 
him.. Adieu!, ^. 
Glevelano. ■ 
LET 
“the Child ef Sorrow. 115 
L E T T E R LXIV, 
- :. ■■ i'' '' \ .A ' 
Lady Lo U I S A 5t R E T TO 
H A T felicity, after So long and painful an interval, again to be blessed with tetter .from'my dearest Louifaf Oh! my lqv|^'what mixed fenfatsh^ you excite jst"; iuy. careworn shosorn! I cannot give a name to the tumultuous feelings; I was almost overpowered by them; filial, maternal, and sisterly affection at once conssiding. Sometimes raised my drooping heart, at other times overwhelmed me in deep distress. 
The hurry of Spirits into which the rapidity of events had thrown me, had a little Subsided when your Letter was brought me : That hurry, though it could not com pose my mind I believe rendered me less sensible of the poignancy of the asslidions which oppressed it; 1 had had hardly time to collect my Scattered senses; a quick Succession of evil had destroyed my reasoning faculties. Think, my Lcuifa., what it is to be blackened with the basest calumnies! To be acclised of defiling the honour of my Husband!! be ranked among the infamous herd, whom Virtue sickens but to think of! To be kept a close prisoner, Secluded from all the enjoyments of life! To 
be 
ii EMMA; cr, 
be torn, from my lovely, helpless Child f What must the heart be composed of that can Support these ills, without a murmur or complaint conscious innocence is Scarce enough to bear up my enfeebled body. What has my life been, but one continued Iburce of misfortune? Oh! would to Heaven I had never gone to London! That I had still continiied in the peaceful, though not to me happy shades, of clevehnd vlacet 1 might then have escaped the censures of' the world. I never wished to figure in the gay Scenes of life; I courted Solitude; all my hope was, to bear my distrefses without' murmuring in a silent retreat. 
“In life’s low vale remote, have pin’d alone, Then dropp’d into the grave, - unpity’d, and unknown.” 
But I was born to have every wish of my heart frustrated. You compliment me, my Love, on my Prudence and philosophy; I doubt, if you recolleist all the past passages of my life, you will disallow that I poffess the firstsin any eminent degree; and I am Sure, were you witness of the ravages dis tress has made in my person and manner, yoit would not be induced to grant me the latter. Oh! my Louisa., 1 can tax myself with muchimprudenceconcerningthisaffair. Had I not wrote in a reprehensible manner, my e namks could never have had an opportunity 
of 
iihe Child Sorrow. 117 
of triumphing over me; Mrs. Hotham could never have framed her story So as to gain credit. Can I blame the world for considering me guilty, when So many charges, in appearance well grounded, are dodged against me? I am unhappy, but I feel that in part I deserve Some mortifications; I have, in Some measure, been the carver of my own misfortunes. As to the purport and contents of the Letters, I both wrote and received, I would Submit them to the eye of the public. I am convinced we should both be acquitted of the least de fediions from Virtue; but our situations considered, we were wrong. I do most heartily implore the forgiveness of Heaven for the only step of my life I think faulty; my punishment, I hope, will be an atonement. 
I am more happy to find my beloved Fanny is with you. Tell that dear Girl, I wept over and kissed her dear Letter inces santly. I cannot write to her by this opportunity; as she is your intimate, writing to you is the Same thing. She insormed me of the intelligence she had received from ivood. ^ille hau., and of the welfare of my Child. Ah! Iifow my heart beats to press the Smiling Cherub in a mother’s arms! 
You 
E M MA; 
You encourage me to hope for a conclusion of my troubles; ah! my Dear, do you not, as usual, give way to the sanguineness of your disposition? 
L am not Surprised at your intelligence of Mrs. Hetham being to be rewarded with the hand of Lord Cleveland; I did suppose that was the primary motive of her con ducst; yet I think that event never can take place, unless they give me a composing draught to cure all my affliflions. 
The compassion, and even esteem and friendship, which my stifferings have excited in the breast of Lady Elizabeth have brought us on a more, agreeable footing. I have examined the picture which she tells me was drawn for her in early life. My eyes expressed my astonishment, when I perceived in it a strong resemblance of your figure. “Yes, (Said she,) Such I was when I first became an inmate of this dreary place.’* There is not the least vestige remaining, i cannot, with the minutest Scrutiny, trace the Smallest resemblance. It is true, the bloom of Youth, and the furrows of Age, Seldom accord; yet, in general, there is Some stroke. Some outline, to assist the memory, but here is not the least. Such depredations have misfortunes, ill health, and a total neglect ■ to ipake in her exterior. To be Sure, I rather went too far, 
when 
Tibe C HIX D of Sorrow, j i 9 
when 1 drewc^ateo mparison between her and o/w^y’s Witch, jihe prejudices she had conceived of le, Served to luake her rridre forrriidable in her appearance, bcit use has fe conciled me more to her figure, and, I doubt hot, a farther knowledge of her will endear her to my heart. 
S he has tasted the bitter Csip of afstidhon in a' great htt Story 
has for foirsc' own 
from my ’ shembfy, hp ij'ither, 1 ‘ wept for both in one. I wtii ehclbse her History, for your perusal; return it to me when you have read it, as I believe the good Lady will wish to have it again in her poffeshon. 
Adieu! my t^ver dear Louisa! remember I love you always. 
Emma Cleveland. 
Lhe history of Lady Elizabeth Cleveland. 
AM going, my Dear, to make you a melancholy detail, which will convince you, that to be unfortunate is not singular; and although you are at this moment bewailing your own unhappy destiny, there is one at least as wretched as yourself. — A Small con solafion this to a benevolent mind. Bsic without further preface, I will make you acquainted with the most calamitous parts of my life, of those incidents, which occasioned 
me. 
120 EMMA; or, 
me, early in life, to be kept a close prisoner here. 
From the rigorous treatment I have received, you will be able to judge, that my Parents were very Severe; they were both So in a very eminent degree. It was my ill fortune, as it proved, to attradl the notice of a young Baronet in our neighbourhood in the country. Flis person was strikingly handsome, his address insinuating; 1 was young and tenderhearted;; wonder, then, his Seducing manners should Soften and gain my affections. My Father and Mother, to do them justice, behaved, on their first acquaintance with him, with the utmost poljteness; and if he afterwards found any abatement in their civilities, he must place it to his own account. He was careleis of his conduct after he had entirely Subdued my affections— — did not pay them the deference they required. I was pained to death at his behaviour. I used to remonstrate to him, that people of their rank and age merited more attention, and that it was his interest to pay it to them. His pride was piqued at their arrogance, as he styled it. — He thought an ancient Baronet better than an upstart Earl. these Sentiments he was weak enough to broach in ail companies. No one could wonder that my Father should refuse me to him. My heart 
died 
Hhe Child Sorrow. 121 
died within me when I found how absolutely ’ my family were against the match taking place. I flattered myself I should be able to work a reformation in him. His behaviour to me was tender to the last degree. He used to Say, “My dear Elizabeth., your gentle manners can Soften me to anything; but the boisterous tempers of your family only Serve as oil to make me blaze.’’' I then would entreat him to behave with more moderation for; ny Sake; he would lay all the blame on them; and, as the stories I heard to his prejudice were told me by them, I used Sometimes to think they might exaggerate. 
While things were in this state, a Gentleman of great fortune, but disagreeable in his person, made my Father an offer on my account. He, desirous of Seeing me Settled out of the reach of Sir Sfhomas Freeland readily closed with the measures of this man. kx'efhomas., on hearing this affair, became outrageous — He stormed like a madman, and, coming to our house, abused my Father in the grossest terms. I almost wept myself blind when I heard of the extravagance of his behaviour. I got a young Lady, whom 1 loved very much, to go to him, and tell him, he had for ever forfeited my good opinion. 
He thr her, and VOL. II 
: w himself on his knees before 
begged 
she would G 
intercede with 
me 
iz2. 'E' M M A; or 
rbe in his behalf; that his fears for me had made him raving shad, and he could not answer for the consequences; that however he would for the future bear everything my family might inssid on him, if I would be induced to forgive him. I believe you will not wonder, though you may blame me, for Soon affording him pardon for what the excess of his pashon excited; besides, I was strongly urged by my Friend; she used to bring me Letters, and contrive fifty methods for our meeting, unknown to any one. 
You who know what it is to have had your inclination forced, will judge of my feelings, when this other, Mr. Bently, was proposed to me. — I begged my Father not to lay So cruel a tax on my duty; that I would never marry without his full consent; but that it would be worse than death to constrain me to give my hand to Mr. Bently^ who was my aversion;; short, I fuppose I used every argument, V hich a Girl in my situation could, and to little purpose. My Father urged the impossibility of Securing me from Sir Lhomas — I readily promised to resign him for ever — to bind my ielf by the strongest ties never to marry. This, I believe, might have had weight with my Father, but that very evening news was received of there being a duel between Sir Thomas Freeland and i Mr. 
The Child ^ Sorrow. 123 
Mr, Bently. This proceeding exasperated my Family still more against one, who Seemed studious to do everything in his power to create fresh disturbances. This event was, however. Softened to me by my before - rnentioned Friend. She Said, Sir Thomas had been told, I had actually given my consent to marry Mr. Bently^ and that despair had urged him to take these violent, measures. My Father now became every day more resolute to bring about an union between his favourite and me; but, ab stradled from the difagreeableness of his perfbn, there Seemed nor the least passion on his side. He never used any means to gain my heart. Indeed, before my Parents, he would Sometimes behave a little particular, but as Soon as they left the room, he would quit his Seat, if it happened to be near me, and go to the window, and amuse himself with looking in the garden, or turning over Ibme books. If I Spoke to him, he would generally not answer, or elsecontradid whatever I Said. Sometimes he would take notice of my dress, or manner, only to find fault wsith them. I used to tell him, he did not take the method to gain my hearti jhis answer would be, “What, I shppole your Ladyship wants me to play with you, and kiss you; well, come, if you are for a romping party, have at you.” He then G 2 would 
124 F M M A; or, would attempt to be familiar. I could shot Support Such insplence, theresore our interviews commonly ended in my retiring in tears to my own apartment. This, joined to the constant revilings against a man I could not cease to love, made my life very wretched. As I Said before, I promised to relinquish Freeland, if my Father would release me from the persecutions of the other; but he was So well convinced that there only wanted an opportunity to go off with Sir Thomas., that all I could Say went for nothing. Wherever he went, he was repeatedly told, that .Sir Thomas Set him and his authority at defiance, and that he Scrupled not to Swear he would have me, in despite of all my Friends. This boldness only Served to irritate my Father more, both against him and me; it is impossible to recount to you all the hardships I Suffered on his account; I was treated with the greatest inhumanity by my Family, and the conducsi: of Bently was as absurd as theirs was cruel. To induce me, to give my consent to this hated Match, J was shut up in my own room, and kept without food till I was almost starved; my clothes were taken from me, and I was con stpiined to walk about bare foot, lest I should run away, though, confined as I was, there were rio human means of getting out of the iiquse, uoloss I had crept up the chimney, 
for 
northeast Child Sorrow. 125 
for the windows were barred and nailed down. Freeland still continued his menaces loudly, and was continually doing Something or other to affront and annoy the Family, insomuchthatthey were obliged to keep withindoors, and were almost as much prisoners as myself. This outrageous behaviour of this violent man, as it was imputed to me, So it was revenged upon mei never Saw any os my Family but to bear the most cruel reprcxiches, and hardest ustige. 
Had Mr. Bently been anything less disagreeable to me, I believe I should have given him my hand, rather than have longhr Supported the cruel treatment I daily was' forced to endure, but I could not think of Wim without the greatest horror, which did not So much arise from the plainness of his person, as his brutal manner, and Savage behaviour to me. I have been kept whole' days and nights without food, or Seeing the ' light. The hard and barbarous usage of my Family turned my heart against them, ■ and I was fully resolved to die, rather than eonfent to their desires. 
While I was in this Situation, one evening, ruminating on my hard destiny, Something' fell down the chimney; the noise roused from my reveney and I found it to be a stone, wrapped up in; a sheet of paper. I opened it, and, to my great joy, perceived it G 3 to 
126 
to be lavish 
EMMA; or, 
a Letter from Freeland, Ah! how 
eyas he of his tender professions! How fuisof love did every Sentence appear! Think what a treasure Such lively assurances of his unabating passion was to me in my present exigency! He told me he would furnish me with implements for writing, and begged I would let him know the true State of niy heart, for if it inclined to make him happy, he V old fose no time in effedt ing my escape, as he was morally certain, that, in a few days, I should be dragged to the Altar, wsiere, let my repugnance be ever So great, I should unavoidably become the Wife of Bemly, He then proceeded to paint that wretch: in the most odious colours; he represented that my life would be one continued leries of shifcry, L z of fojealous a disposition; in short, he drew Such a picture of my vrretchednefs, as threw me into So violent a fit of trembling, I thought I had had an ague, from which I turned exceed icigly sick at my stomach, and continued fo bad the whole night as to think I should die. The next morning i was much better; to my finding a packet hanging to a do’vyn the'chimney contributed not a I returned such an answer to my as you vv'ould suppose on the occa 
vchich strin<y little. ■ Lover 
sion; expressed my doubts, and at the same time urged my wishes of enlargement. Another 
i!he Child of Sorrow. 127 
other Letter insormed me, I must Seem to. consent to the will of my Father, by which means I might be permitted to leave that chamber for another, from whence stheis was a greater probability of escaping. I observed his advice,, and everything Succeeded accordingly. I was allowed to steep in a room where the windows had no more than ordinary fastenings. I continued there but one night, for the next, by help of a ladder, I got out of the window. At the bottom I vnti Eredandhe joyfully accompanied me over Some fields, running*all the. way, till we carne to the highroad, where a chariot and six was waiting for us. I knew not where we vere going, but 1 know I felt as happy as any mortal could do. I never restedted on those I left behind, nor the rilk I ran by thus throwing myself into the power of a man, who might use that power to my disadvantage. Alas! I knevy not the perfidy of the world; I was totally a stranger to the depravity of its ways. — Thus I gave myself up to. the seducer, withr. out the leasc suspicion. Perhaps I was very blameable, and might merit my future pur nishment; but when those v>/ho cast censures fo freely on my condikst. refiect on what I had already suffered from the cruelty of my Parents, could they suppose a young Girl, a stranger to the. wickedness of the 
G 4 
work: 
125 
E 
M M A; or. 
vmrld, should hesitate between the certain ruin which opened before her, and the pros pe6t of happiness which she had a right to ssatter herseif with, in an union with a man who had So often sworn he lived but for her: Such cool dull reasoners may fancy what they please, but they can know nothing of Love. It had been far happier for me had the Sime apathy existed in my bosom; but f own I had passions of a tender nature; and I believe any young woman, with the same warmth and inexperience, might have a£ted as i did, and been deceived by the Specious pretences of an artful and designing man. We are not suspicious by nature; it is a long and painful knowledge of the fallacy of the world makes us So. No child could be more ignorant of its ways than myself. I premise thus much in my own justification, for could I have had the least idea of the dangers I was hurrying into, and which, with Such difficulty, I avoided, I certainly would have run any hazard at home before I would have exposed myself to them. 
But to return. We travelled all that day, making short baits, and at night arrived at an Inn, though on what road I was ignorant. 1 had not the least reason to be dis pleased with my Companion, except when he Spoke of my Family, then 1 could Scarcely 
keep 
Lhe Child of Sorrow. 129 
keep him within bounds : He Swore, notwithstanding their title, they were a Set of despicable wretches, and no circumstance in life would give him So much pleastire as mortifying them in the most Sensible manner. 
The next day, while we were prosecuting our journey, he Said the Same things.. I then told him, “I thought he did not pay me a compliment. in Speaking with Such Severity of my family; that I hoped he would consider it would more behove him to endeavour by an union, to conciliate their favour, than to leek to widen the breach by. open insult.” — He replied, “My dearest Angel, is it not on account of the ill usage*you have Suffered that I am thus 
inveterate against them? 
Can I forgive 
them that r No, if I do may I live a Wretch and die a Beggar. It is my love for you that gives rise to my invectives; they are wholly unworthy the treasure they possessed in you.” these Speeches silenced, though they did not Satisfy me; I thought he ought to be contented with the mortification he had already given them by stealing me away, and fruiteating thqr intentions. Town he star tied mb oh fayi. Nc 
would fiever forgive their reiecstion of liipn; But now, (added he,) iny tshicy is cpine -- -' It Will he their turn ho\v tf> ibiicit.” 1 did '. G C not 
130 E M M A; cr, 
not thoroughly comprehend his meaning; it appeared strange to me he should ever think they would Solicit to be taken into favour by a Man who had run away with their Daughter. I Said, “1 hoped he would consider, that in the eye of the world he had not only been the aggressor, but the person who had all through wronged them; as all Parents had an undoubted right to restrain the hands of their Children.” — He ashed me, “If I could be mean enough to solicit forgiveness from Such barbarous Wretches?” — I answered, “I thought my Subsequent conduct in eloping from them had entirely cancelled their former ill usage; therefore, it would tmdoubtedly lie with me to make the first overtures towards a reconciliation.” — He Swore, if he could suppose me in earnest he should despise my poorness of Spirit. 
I was shocked, but had gone too far to recede. I vas likewise very much chagrined on his not saying one word about our being to be Speedily married. I could not complain of his want of tenderness, for though the Speeches which I have recited may appear harfn, yet he Softened them So much that they lost a great deal of their Severity., His love was conspicuous enough, but I own I should have been better pleased ■to have heard him express an impatience to 
have 
Lhe Child ^ Sorrow. 13i 
have our union made indissoluble, because I was fearful of being overtaken, and, likewise I knew So much of the world as to' judge it imprudent to be long in the company of a Man, unless we have the Sanction of duty to justify our preference. 
The Second night we reached a house, which he Said belonged to a Friend of his, who had lent it for his accommodation. We vere received by an old.dentlewoman, with great civility. The preparations vere genteel and convenient, my apartment neat and pleasant. On my returning into the parlour again, he rose, and, taking my hand, presented me as his Wife, Saying, “Mrs. Finch., give me leave to introduce my Wife to you.” I coloured at this declaration; butjudge my farther confusion, when he proceeded : — “She is at present indisposed from excessive fatigue therefore I must be constrained to desire you to show me a Separate apartment tonight.” I was So confounded as to be rendered incapable of uttering a Syllable, much more of contradidling his bold assertion; 
I had not likewise the opportunity, for Finch immediately left us to ourselves; When I found myself alone with him, For heaven’s Sake, (cried I,) how could you make So false a declaration to Mrs. Finch? What am I to think of a Man who: can' G 6 thus 
132 EMMA; or, 
thus avow an untruth? ” — ■ “My dear Creature, (Said he,) it is better both for you and me to endeavour to make her believe we are married; old Women are apt to be censorious.” — He Said So many things on the Subject, and behaved with So much tenderness, that I was at last prevailed on to join in the deceit. He took a ring from his pocket, and put it on my finger, and then embracing me, called me his dear dear Wife. I ought, no doubt, to have made opposition to his desire of passing, me off to strangei's as his Wife, but remember I still loved him too much not to comply with his wishes, and that I really believed a few days would make me Such; and add to this, I now found myself entirely in his power. 
The hurry of my Spirits prevented my steeping much that night. In the morning he received me with rapture; but in a manner as occasioned in my bosom Some painful fensations, as his expressions were, if possible, warmer than ever, infinitely more than they ought to be, unless sandli fied by marriage. Although Mrs. Finch was in the room, he pulled me into his lap, and, kissing me, used some other freedoms, which, knowing my own situation, shocked me to the greatest degree. I started from him, and, with great emotion, declared, I would not Submit to Such unbounded Ih 
berties. 
L'jje Child cs o r r o w. 133 
berties. He laughed, and again catching hold of me. My dear little Prude, you should not mind Mrs. Finch being in the room, you was not So coy just, now, but I will Soon repay myself for this pretty affected air. I suppose Mrs. Finch thought we should be better pleased to have her out of the room.; she, therefore, as Soon as breakfast was ended, arose and left us. 
Shocked to the greatest degree at his insinuation of my being less reserved to him, when alone, I burst into a stood of tears, and threw myself in a chair. As Soon as I could find words, I told him, I thought he took an ungenerous advantage of my situation, which I had every moment less cause to be Satisfied with; Surely, if he meant me fair, he would, without further delay, give himself a title to my most unlimited affection;; while he thus only pretended we were married, to justify his freedoms in the eyes of others, I must, and should, for my own Sake, preserve the greatest distance in my behaviour to him, if I did not even give way to every hard thought of him. He endeavoured to palliate his conduct, but my heart was too much oppressed to be soon soothed to rest. He Swore he considered me as his Wife, his true and lawful Wife; that I should be So. both in the eyes of God and Man, as fooii 
as 
1^4 EMMA; or, 
as ever it could be effected;; that I must still consent to appear Such, as he had very particular reasons for acting as he did. 
I had already Submitted to authorise his false assertions, therefore I had now no resource; I was still obliged to carry on, the deceit. Alas! to what a fatal dilemma 1 had brought miyself; I was not in a situation now to make conditions. I, indeed, remonstrated, and told him, he Seemed entirely to have forgot my rank in life; and that my misfortunes, which originated from himself, had made me lose all consequence with him. This wounded his pride and self-love; he Said he despised the dirty consideration, of an adventitious advantage; that his famdly was far Superior to mine; they had long ssourished in affluence before mine was thought of, though it hady in consequence of Some paltry Services, been dignified with a title; but that Virtue was true Nobility, and he should not think the better of me, for Supposing he should pay any extraordinary deference on that account; that he had received indignities enough from the family, Such as it was, but, that, if they had refused him one of the Kitchen Wenches, and he had been convinced that his running away with her would have planted daggers in their hearts he would never have rested till he had ac 
com 
Wt Child of Sorrow. 135 
complished his design. God knows how Severe were my feelings and remorse for having thrown myself out of the protection of my real friends, though they used me cruelly, into the power of Such a man. 
He then proceeded to tell me I vras an Angel, and he should ever adore me, and made me a .profusion of tender' Speeches. I Said, I should be better pleased if he was less Severe on my family, as 1 could not Support the idea his violence gave rise to in my own mind. Indeed I was terrified to death almost with his manner, and yet' from the freedoms, which I could not prevent his taking with me when Mrs. Finch was by, I was not more easy in her presence than when alone. 
After Supper, that night, he endeavoured to put me into good-humour, by the gen dencss of his behaviour; I had never observed him So tender. There was Something pathetic in his manner, I quite forgot the inquietude of the day; he talked of having our wedding speedily performed; in short, I gave myfeif up to the tender Sentiments he laboured to inspire me with. While we were yet discoursing in the most pleasing way to me that I had ever known, the clock Struck tv/eive; I observed the lateness of the hour, and was going to rise; he stopped me, and, assuming the most 
Ian 
136 E M M A; or, 
languishing air, vowed he could not part with me. I urged its being So late. “Are you not my Wife ?” asked he. “Not yet, (I replied,) but be assured I will raise no obstacles against my being So whenever you please.” — “Then tomorrow” ” he. “That is short notice, (I returned,) but I will not dispute your desires.” He threw his arms round me, and kissed me Several times. I strove to disengage myself from his embraces, though 1 confess I felt an uncommon pleasure in his caresses. I flattered myself he really meant to fulfil his engagements with me. What we wish we too easily believe. I could not however get away from him; he still continued to press me close to his bosom, which Seemed to beat with the utmost tumult; his breath vas quick and short, and his eyes looked all on fire. Though wholly unconscious of his meaning, I jound myself disordered and alarmed. I entreated him to let me go : He Swore he would, if I would but consent to bless him. I asked what he meant by blessing him? He whispered in my ear, to admit him to all the fond privileges of an Husband that night. I started, and de nianded, how he could have the insoience to make Such a proposal? He endeavoured by his old methods of palliating his offence; and concluded, I had proniised to 
be 
The Child of Sorrow. 137 
be really his Wife tomorrow, where then was the harm of anticipating our happiness a few hours? — tomorrow! I repeated: No,. I will not tomorrow, nor any time, become the Wife of a Man, who can form So base an opinion of me. How, cried I, bursting again into tears, how have I deserved this treatment from you? You, who ought, who had Sworn to be my protector?? I now See through you; your arts and designs are laid open to me. Heaven preserve me, and deliver me out of the hands of a cruel wretch who meditates my destrudlion. 
He Said all that man could Say to re compose my mind, but .the violent agitation I had undergone rendered his talk more difficult than perhaps he imagined. At last, to make me easy, he left the room. My fears had now taught me to be fuspi cious. When I went into my chamber I carefully examined every place, and took care to make my door very Secure. I vrent to bed, but the perturbation of my Spirits would not permit me to.close my eyes; I therefore rose and dressed myself, Spending the remaining part of the night in a,, chrfir,, ruminating on the Sad prospefi;, before me, even if Sir Thomas. Freeland should really mean honourably by me. these ressedlions caused rivers of tears to sail from my eyes : 
I now. 
138’ EMMA; Off 
I now, too late. Saw the principal incentive of freeland.s passion and perseverance was a desire of revenge. Ah! how cruel I thought him to wreak his vengeance on the only part of the family who never injured him, but, on the contrary, who would lay down her life for his Service. 
I knew not how to comport myself the next morning, and in what manner I should appear before him; whether I Should make a Confidant of Mrs. Finch., and declare to her I was not married, or whether I should still pay Some regard to his future promises. So much vras 1 unhappily in his powder, that I was fearful of exasperating him, having but too much reason to apprehend that he would not be Scrupulous about the means of revenging himself on me. Oh, good God! to what a fatal and deplorable state had my too free and implicit confidence in him brought me into! 
While I was thus deliberating in which method to proceed, Mrs. Finch came up with Sir Fhomaf& love, and begged I would come down to breakfast. To deliberate now was useless, I therefore instantly followed her dotvn; God knows with what infinite reluctance. I no longer looked on him as my, Support and stay : I now considered him in the light of an insidious enemy, of whom it became me to be continually on 
the 
iihe Child of Sorrow. 13^ 
the watch against, Idst, by his artifices, he might betray me to my undoing. 
I fancy he did not suppose I should obey the first Summons, as he was not ready to receive me, being writing. He hastily put up the paper into a f>orte fmilled which he locked, and returned the key into his waisccoat pocket. 1 could not devise why he should thus employ himsdf; but his whole conduct now appeared to me an inexplicable riddle; or if I could Solve it, the Solution made me miserable. 
My heartfelt too little ease for my countenance to vv^ear the traces of content; I laboured, but in vain, to repress the struggling sigh; the unbidden tear would steal in Silence down my cheek; he could not but make the observation : however, while Mrs. Finch remained in the room, he took not the least notice of my melancholy looks, or the extreme taciturnity of my tongue. When we were alone, (he Said,) “he was extremely Sorry to find So much. resentment in my manner for So trifling an offence; he most humbly besought me to pardon him, promising to be more cautious for the future.” - — I answered, “I could not help feeling my defenceless situation,, which thus laid me open to receive the most humiliating insults from a iman, who, as he had withdrawn me from ail other 
protec 
140 
E M M A j cr. 
protection, had a fiouble call to protefb me himself.” — “He beggedme,, for god’s Sake, and his more immediate Sake, not to behave to him with Such a repelling indifference; that my harshnest would drive him to distradlion, and he might be temptecs by his despair to commit an adt for which he should ever condemn himself. What (continued he,) will Mrs. Finch think? She already begins to have Scruples; but I assured her Solemnly we were married, on the Supposition■ that you would still be kind enough to join with me in this pott fraiidp — I replied, “Would to Heaven I had not put it out of my power - to refuse any longer my participation of your falsehood — It is now too late, but it vfill be a warning to me for the future never to eom ^ mit an illaudable addon, that good may result from it — I will never as long I live again deviate from the stridlest truth in the minutest instance. I am Sure I am Sufficiently punisned for stepping out of the right path.” 
“It is very true, (Said he,) I doubt we have fallen into a greater inconvenience to avoid tite less; but, however, your mind ssiall, at £tll events; be made easy: : will this morning, to convince you of my sincere and honourable intention, take a ride to Bpy and there procure a licence, that 
every 
l’he Child Sorrow. 141 
everything may be performed in due order. Will that, my dear Girl, content you?” — I answered, “I certainly wished to have my doubts removed, as at that time I was more miserable then I could find words to express.” He than,, as an earnest that I forgave him, and believed him Sincere, in treated me to look cheer fully, and behave to him as I used to do. 
By accident a button came off his waistcoat. He Said, he could not wear it. Mrs. Finch brought him another. Just before he went out (Mrs. Finch being in the room,) he came up to me and kissed me, and bid me amuse myself in his absence; “You have not been accust^tued to part with your Husband, (Said he,) I will Soon return to you.” — I replied only by wishing him a pleasant ride. 
The waiistcoat he pulled ■■ off laid on a chair. I was going to take it up, that a Servant might carry it upstairs, when, by one of the greatest ads of Providence, the key of theporte feuiuettw out of the pocket. Instantly the thought darted into my brain, of his hastily putting up Some papers. I believe, circumstanced as I was, and dubious of his real intentions, few people wjll blame me for feeling a strong intlination'to know the purport bf those papers, and now I had it in my power of gratifying a curip 
iky. 
142 EMMA; or, 
fity, in which I was So nearly interested. Whatever censures I might incur appeared trivial to me; I, therefore, locked the door to prevent a Surprise, and, with trembling hands and aching heart, began to explore .my destiny; I felt as if I was just going to unfold the inevitable volume of Fate; and yet a Secret hope whispered Some degree of comfort to my soul. But, oh! how shall I ever find words to express the horror with which I was Seized when the blackest and basest treachery opened itself to my view!. I found a Letter nearly finished; judge of my astonishment on reading the three first words. It began. My dear Bently! — I rubbed my eyes, doubting their vishal faculty; still the same fatal words presented themselves;; how did my distress increase as I perused what followed; I can never forget the contents. Ah! the indelible wound they made on my heart can never be healed; still it rankles, still it pains me on recollection. It ran thus : 
“My dear B e n t L y! 
“I am infinitely indebted to you for the Services you have done me, in furthering my revenge on the haughty Clevelands, I did them too much honour ever to Sol ikk their consent, I have my Charmer 
now 
L'he Child Sorrow. 143 
now entirely in my power; I see she is mortified at my not fulfilling the promises I made her; she is impatient to have the knot tied; I am even more impatient than she to have my wishes completed. Oh! how the proud wretches will rave when they find this rejected man has triumphed over the virtue of their house!! an addition to my raptures with my lovely Elizaheih., to glut my Soul with vengeance on them I I think I See them all foiiciting in their turn, that I would condescend to repair the honour of their family, by marrying their fair Daughter; I believe I shall not be hard hearted; I shall certainly relent, after I have convinced them of my Superiority. Yes, repugnant as I have hitherto been to the thoughts of matrimony, when I have wrung all their hearts I shall be induced to do them the favour of re eeiving their Daughter from their hands; but I will first make them Sensible I am doing them a favour. As to my fair Charge, though she has pouted pretty much on' Some little freedoms, by way of prelude, which I have taken with her, I dare say I shall not have much trouble. Indeed I should have a better chance of Succeeding, did I not apprehend Some little opposition from the conscientious Mrs. Finch; I wish you had placed Somebody 
dse 
s44 F M M A; or, 
else here in her stead, with a more fiexible and commodious way of thinking; how ‘ ever, I have given her to understand, that although 1 have not shared Lady Elizabeths, bed here, that every part of the ceremony has passed. So that I have paved the way as easy as the case will allow for myself, when I become more jrjesolute in my attacks. 
“Though I have Said So before, I must repeat again, I am astonished how you could So well go through your part; how you could preserve your heart; for she certainly is a most lovely creature; but I really must continue of the same opinion that you are a coward at the bottom, and trembled at the idea of my resentment. However that may be, I am still obliged to you, as I could never have brought my matters to So fair an issue without your assistance. I have a Scheme in petto, which my Charmer, with all her penetration, has not the least idea of.” — 
Here the fatal and infernal fcrowl ended. While I was reading it, I felt - the same kind of sickishness come over me which I before described, but now I quite lost my eyesight. After Some time I recovered myself, but found I was laying on the floor, from which, I conjedured, I had been in a fainting fit. I Still found myself much in 
dis 
northeast Child Sorrow. 145 
difposed; a stood of tears came to my relief, and Some water, which I met with in the room, recovered me Sufficiently to enable me to finish this diabolical Letter. 1 knew not what course to take, but I had fixed in my mind never more to behold the face of Freelandy if possible; nor should the Severest tortures the invention of an Inquisitor could furnish, have induced me to give my hand to Such a wretch, even if he had in earnest Solicited it. I endeavoured to com pose my mind, and, by an extraordinary exertion of my Spirits, effected my purpose. I desired Mrs. Finch to accompany me into the garden. I there asked her, if she knew a person by the name of Bently? and whether he and Sir Thomas Freeland were intimate? She answered, they were particularly intimate;. that Sir Thomas used frequently to visit him here, and that she was Housekeeper to him. I then made her describe his person, which left me no room to doubt he was the identical person who had pretended to be my Lover. I then carelessly ashed her about the neighbourhood, and what were the towns which were nearest, and many questions of that Sort. I took notice, there was a gate in the garden, whicfi led into the road; I begged she would be So good as togo into the next town, which was only a mile off, to pro vo L II H cure 
146 EMMA; cr, 
cure me Some silks for embroidery. As she had stridl orders to obey me in everything, she made not the least opposition to • rny desire, but immediately sat off. I then told one of the Maids, I foimd myself a good deal indisposed, and should go and lay down on the bed; desired her to keep the hotise quiet, and, if siy Lhomas return to beg he would not disturb me. I went upstairs, and, filling my pockets with what little matters I had brought off with me, I locked my chamber door, and, stealing down again, hastily traversed the garden, and let myself out of the gate. Fear lent wings to my feet -; I walked three hours as fast as I could without stopping; I by that time came in sight of a Small town; 1 entered a house at the beginning of it, and begged the mistress to let me have a little milk, for I was almost famished and parched with thirst. She very humanely Supplied my wants. Fatigue now came on me very fast, yet I again Sat off. I had not proceeded far before I Saw a stagecoach; I called to the .Driver to stop and take me in; I was accommodated with a place. It was indifferent to me where they were going, as long as I was Safe out of the reach of the base Freeland. I Suppressed my feelings, lest my emotions might excite the curiosity of my fellow-travellers, but they 
Seemed 
he Child of Sorrow. 147 
Seemed plain, honest folks, too attentive to their own concerns to interest themselves with the business of others. 
I got a lodging at the Inn where the coach rested. I had designed to prosecute my journey the next day, by the Same method, - but the fatigues both of body and mind, which I had undergone, threw me into a fever. I had the good fortune to fall into the hands of honest people; yet still my illness, and the expenses attendant on it, reduced my whole stock of money to a few shillings. Good God! what was now my Situation! I, who had been used to affluence and grandeur, now to be reduced •by illness, laying at an Inn, on a wretched bed, without friends or money, at above seventy miles from my own home, and doubtful if I should'find ah asylum there, if they had known my distress. The re fiedtionis which my forlorn condition excited, rather retarded than forwarded my recovery. As Soon, however, as I had strength, I wrote a Letter to the friend I mentioned in the beginning of my Narrative; in her’s I enclosed one to my Father, penned in the most dutiful and pathetic manner that one in my state could be fup posed to write. “I represented, in the Strongest' terms, my wretched fortune, and urged him, on my knees, to restore me to H 2 ^ my 
14^ E M M A; 
my home, or place me anywhere he should think proper. I begged my friend to intercede for me with Jtny relations, as my distress demanded pity from the most ob diirate heart; that unless they Speedily lent me Sdifie Succour, I must fall a prey to wretchedness, as; I was constrained to part with my watch; and a few rings, iri order to discharge my l)o<stor’s bill. No words can express my anxiety till I received an answer; at length, when my patience and fortitude were nearly exhausted, the much wished for, much dreaded Letter arrived. my impatience to peruse the contents, and apprehensions what the contents might prove, almost made me incapable of breaking the leal. Itcame from the young Lady. Good God! how harsh were the expressions which my Parents used in Speaking of me! Nothing I had Suffered, or could have Suffered, was too bad for Such a wretch as they styled me. My late friend, I dare Say, clid not Soften them at all. 1 could plainly perceive, by her manner, that she believed me infamous, and the Scanty portion of pity she allowed me, was So min ^gled with contempt and reproaches, as to make it still more corrosive to my heart. I found i must riot expert to receive the least credit from rhy assertions of innocence, and that J had (indeed So had the whole 
lihe Child of Sorrow. 149' 
family’,) been a dupe to the joint artifices of two base, designing meui. The story, as my Correspondent Said, wore not The face of probability. For my Sake, she hoped my family would adt as if they believed it, shut it was doing the greatest viq dence to sense and ileason to allow ip toshe true:; she likewise hoped I had, jefcaped with my honour Unstained but that no one would ever believe I could be near a week in a house with fo designing 2^. man, as I described him, without Supposing he had made every advantage of it he had it in his power to do; that perhaps he had givest me art excuse for yielding to his piirposes; for, situated as I was, how could I have acted otherwise It was a pity I could not have held out till I had prevailed on him to marry me; that my Father would Send Some person to fetch me away, but, she was sorry to say, she was not empowered to tell me I should be received at home; she knew not what were my lord’s designs for me; she hoped I would not endeavour to hold a correspondence with her, as she, was concerned to inform rne,, her family would insiston all connexions ceasing between; usv* This was the substance of her Letter. Though from the well-known disposition of my Father and mqthe|:, .as, well as from the offences I had been guilty of towards, H 3 them,, 
150 E M M A; or. 
I <; old not with any reason expect to lib fbrgiveii, yet I had Somehow buoyed mylhif up with Some kind of hope. I knew I had been cruelly treated to incite me to take the steps I had; I knew my Sufferings were infinite in consequence of my disobedience, and my penitence was proportionable; ’ and now, y?hen I found every delusive hope entirely cut off, and read the bitter taiints and Severe contemptuous pity of a once loved Friend, I own all comfort for sook me. I Sunk into the deepest despair, and thouo; ht of nothino; but to find the means of ending my wretched existence. The desire, however, of living to have my wounded same cleared from the censures of the rash young, and the ill natured old, joined to the natural dread of dissolution, induced me to wait patiently till my change came. 
But barely recovered from my illness, this additional stroke caused a relapse, and by the time the person arrived, wdio was my mother’s Woman, I vas at the point of death. A long time my life was doubtful; but a natural good constitution baffled, both my disorder and misfortunes, and carried me thro’ them., to Sustain still greater. 
This Woman told me, “I was not to entertain the least hope of being restored to the favour of my Family: That they could 
not 
he Child of Sorrow. 151 
not bear to see me abandoned to poverty and misery, but that they must still look on me as dead to them and all the world 
I replied, “I would Support, without murmuring, any hardship Heaven and my Parents thought fit to infiidt: That I only hoped to have Some asylum, where I might wear out my wretched days in penitence and tears.” That asylum (she Said) should be granted me as Soon as ever my health was established; till that was restored, I was to remain in a lodging fne would take for me in the town where she found me, and from thence I was to be conveyed to Bellman Cajile, in ivaksy where I was to reside.” I made not the least: opposition to these measures. Indeed, I did nop think I should live long, therefore was indifferent where that portion of life should be Spent. 
One day before we left the lodgings, my companion came running into the room, with all the wildness of despair and horror in. her countenance. Instantly I caught the alarm; my bosom foreboded Some fatal news! I hastily interrogated her what had happened? She fell a vreeping, and wringing her hands in the greatest agony. “Oh! he is dead! he is dead!” was all I could for Some time get out of her. “Wretched, unhappy Lady Elizabeth I you were born H 4 for 
152 E M M A; 
for the destrutstion of your Family.’^ — “For pity’s Sake, (cried I, in all the agitation of grieq. ibr pity’s Sake let me know whajt you mean— — Brother!' your Brother 1 he is. dead! Oh 1 that I Should live to See him basely murdered! Hcj' whom I Sbndly .nuisied! ” After Some time, Ae showed me a Letter, .which she had received. froin Some ^ of the Domestics of our Family, with the fatal heartbreaking new of my eldest brother’s being killed in a duel by the villainous Freeland— — ’ cruel circumstances were these. My dear unfortunate Brother, who I really be iieye possessed. more tenderness for me than'., any one beside, Swore he would never rest, till he had called the base betrayer of his wretched Sister to account, for her fe diklion. He found him out, and upbraiding him with his perfidy, .bid him defencl his life. They fought with inveteracy on both sides; Freeland fell to the; ground. My dear Brother, at the Saiste tiine, was mortally wounded; he desired his Second to bear him to his antagonist; he was Supported on his knees, by the side of Freeland \ Death, .was already making hasty strides towards both; my poor Brother Said to the dying wretch, “Efeeland., you are going to give an account of all your misdeeds; I shall not long 
Slirvive 
Be Child Sorrow. 1^3 
Survive you, I feel myself dying; as Some atonement for your crimes, give my departing soul this one assurance, have 1 drawn my Sword in defence of an infamous strumpet? Am I Sacrificed to a base prostitute, or have I bravely lost my life in the defence of a once tenderly loted sister’s honour? Has her virtue triumphed over' your artifices? Speak truth, say but yes, and I die not in vain.” — Still, (cried the barbarous inhuman wretch,) still linger in doubt, and die dissatisfied, ” — “Villain! (exclaimed my dying Brother,) thou canst not Speak tirtifh, or that would clear her fame.” — “If life was lent me, (cried the other,) 
I would wring your heart with the recital; but remember, though I die, I have triumphed over the haughty cleveliandv His impious soul fled with these words. Oh! that 1 had been present, Surely I might have convinced my dear unhappy Brother of his miserable sister’s innocence; I might have Softened the horrors of death. He breathed his last, as they were conveying him from the field of blood and death. 
The bitteis curses of my Parents wtre'. cast'on me for depriving thetn of their, sirff ' born Child, who was the honour and des light of his family— — tin aggravatiph, of their distress to lose him, fighting in ' revenge of the injuries a v/orthless Daughter H 5 drew 
154 E M M Ar or 
drevy upon hersejf. How was all my grief redoubled by this Severe blow I I loathed the light; I called hourly on death to relieve me from my unheard of and unpitied distress. 
I was hurried away to this seat of deso latiom with no comparsion but the sense and painful memory of my misfortunes. 
I was not permitted to pafs out of the Castle gates; the drawbridge was kept up. Alas! how vain were these precautions; where should I go My miseries clave to my heart — I could not divest myself of recollection. As my Sorrows Subsided, my confinement became more irk some. I Sometimes languished for Society, and “the busy haunts of men.” In compassion to my Sufferings, and to afshrd me a Small share of comfort, I was allowed Sohie books; but they were of a nature to excite melancholy ideas rather than confo iation, a balm I stood much in need of. From a fense at last of my heavy punishment for faults unwittingly committed, I began to grow fretful and morose; I hated the world which had thus shut its face against me. To be thus immured from the age of nineteen, appeared to me a Species of the utmost barbarity; but my regrets only Served to render my captivity less Supportable. Time, however, at last reconciled 
Child of Sorrow. 1^5 
- ciled me to my destiny, and I have for So many years ceased to repine, that I should be unwilling again to enter into life. 
This History, my dear Louisa., will Satisfy your curiosity at the expense of your Sensibility. I expect to hear you have shed a tear over the' venerable prisoner’s mournful story. I have not time to add more at present. Let me hear Soon from you; remember to be particular. 
Adieu. Love me always, as you are tenderly loved by your 
Emma Cleveland. 
LETTER lxy. 
v0 Lady Cleveland. 
I Have, indeed, shed many tears over the recital you vras So good as to send me. I heartily Sympathise in the distressful situation of my unfortunate Kinswoman. But I hope 1 Snail not cut Such a queer figure at sixty five as you describe her’s to be — • You think her portrait like me — - I really tremble for Lord Stretton: Hov/ will he like Such an old Hag? But you know he must take me for better and for worse, and make the best of a bad market. Pv»iy clear. ' H 6 Emna. 
^^6 ■. E MM A; cr, ’ 
Vmfnpt^, I would be cheacful, and try tu play with my pen, but it will not do. You have desired me to be particular; reluctantly I obey your commands; I say reluctantly in this instance, because my news is of a kind to make you uneasy : Your poorpriend is very ill, .My.dord and Pir Qharhs Beville are both with him. It is their peculiar province to comfort and Support each other. I Sincerely, hope he will Soon recover; but he has been drooping ever since this unhappy affair. Oh 1 how my blood boils, when I think of the accursed Authors of this evil! I am not acquainted with the nature of his disorderj but, by the account of my Lord, 1 apprehend it to be a decline,, brought on by the repeated trials and afflictions he has undergone. You may be assured,, dear Creature, everything will be done that can be of Service to him, therefore make your self as easy as you possibly can. Let us hope his youth and constitution will struggle through this disorder. I am in hourly expectation of a Letter from my Lord. 
Sir Charles Beville went to our Friend ifqmilartky~lodge, that residence of Mr. ckveland \ what the result of the visit is I do not yet know; I will give you the earliest intelligence of that business. Your, dear Vmny sits by me, and Sends, her tenderest 

be Child of S o r ROW". i^y 
derest loves Heaven. send good. • new^i’ here is a Letter arrived. : ■ >; stc 
Not So favourable as I wished; his symptoms rather increase. • L alrhost wish i had not beguil my Letter to you — Yet; I be meve 'you had better hear the ‘vvorsh — My fears ■and^^aste^ion p nlagnify 
the danger. Come, come, we must not, by anticipation; augment our present distress; I hope my lord’s apprehensions are groundless. What am I Saying.? I shall alarm you more than there is any occasion for. I shall write as Soon'as I gain any intellir gence. Adieu! Heaven preserve you, and. proportion your strength to the heavy trials assigned you in this life. Thus prays 
Your faithful, 
Louisa Stretton. 
LETTER LXVI 
Lo Lady Louisa Strettoit. 
ZOU IS A! my dearest Louisa! let she know the worst — My bodingsheart already tells me the most amiable, the most: loved of Men, is no more. What do I Say? Is he then lost to the world, and me? 
Conceal 
158 EMMA; or. 
Conceal not, I adjure you, conceal not the fatal truth, from me — and God give me strength to bear the inevitable stroke; or, if not impious, be merciful, righteous Heaven, and Suffer me to sink under it, and find that rest in the peaceful grave, which Malice and Envy have deprived me of here! Oh, Louisa., again I entreat you, hide not from your wretched Friend the least circumstance. Good God! am I never to see an end to my misery! Like the rolling billows still must my distreffes follow one another! — Oh! it is too much — Yet, great God, thy will be done. Teach me resignation to thy unfathomable decrees. My heart, my poor heart sinks within me. Speak comfort, if possible, to your unhappy 
Emma Cleveland. 
LETTER LXVII 
Lo Lady Cleveland. 
PEAK comfort to thee I thou dear af _ siifted Mourner; — Ah! th?lt x\vf Louisa could pour into thy torn bosom the balm of consolation; that she could fuppress the torrent of woe, which is this moment gushing from her eyes, to enliven thine with 
one 
iihe Child of Sorrow. 159 
one cheering ray of hope. — Hope, alas! where art thou; fled? Oh! my Emma., it is intombed with the Clay cold. — — I cannot proceed. Let your own sore boding heart Speak the rest. All that was amiable, all that was tender and lovely, is now no more. Heaven grant you strength of mind to Support this blow with fortitude. I cannot Speak comfort to thee. Gh I that 1 was with you to mingle my grief with yours. — Merciful God! shall a Hath am, anel a Cleveland riot in all the pleasures of, life.^‘ — And must he, the most deserving, of Mortals, in the bloom of his age, fall a martyr to infamy! Is it just! — Oh! God forgive me! I think it is too Severe. 
I ought to console you, but, alas, I am incapable; I feel too much to attempt to mitigate your distress. I believe Some people are destined to be unhappy. You were ordained to be the Child [of Sorrow. My mind is too agitated to descend to particulars; Sometime hence, perhaps, I may. 
Adieu! and think, except yourself, none can be more ashidted than 
Louisa strettorir. 
L E TE 
M M A; an 
LETTER LXVIII 
jt(? Lady Louisa S tret tonne.. 
Ye S, Louisa! I am doomed to drink: the bitter cup of affliction, pure, and unmixed. Why should I repine.? Why porir forth' my wretched Soul in fruitless complainings? Heaven, inexorable Heaven, is deaf to my anguish, and has marked me out for the Child of Sorrow. Heap, then, heap distresses on me, till I can bear no more, till my insatiable enemies cry out, “Enough! now let the poor wretch depart in peace !’’ And whither shall the poor wretch sty for consolation? Gh! all, all consolation is shut against her! Ah! let no one undertake my cause. 1 Seek not now to be vindicated; 1 have lost all that made life desirable; my better part has fallen a Martyr; why, why does not my heart break?.?. 
my lovafa., what a blank must the remaining portion of my Sad existence prove!. How have 1 cheated myself! I fancied him already dead, and that my affections were Such I should have paid to a departed Saint; a vperation! Oh! I find there was Something, earthly in my regard, or why should I So Severely regret his loss.? He dead to me before, and yet the anguish 
which 
The Child sorrow. ii 
which now cleaves to my heart, when Iani told the cold grave has, got him, gives me but too much cause tb suspefs I still loved improperly, 
“Nor wish’d an Angel whom I lov’d a Man.” Yes, it must be So, and Heaven punishes me accordingly. 
Let me have all the Sad particulars. T in treat you; you need not be apprehensive’ of the consequences; even perhaps I may Sooner be restored to a more composed state from a knowledge of the whole. Retail to me the minutest circumstance; let my poor bosom be wounded in every vein with the melancholy recital i: Am I not a Child of Sor -- row? Do not then deny me my allotted portion. 
It may be to answer Some infinitely wise purpose, that I am thus delivered over to; misfortune; perhaps to make Parents cau: rious how they rend the hearts of their hapless Children. Oh! that 1 may be the last ' Sacrifice! then shall I not have Suffered in ' vain! But why have tny distresses drawn down the wrath of Heaven on the dear in,, viffim that now lies dead? • Aht I' recall the word; Heaven has taken him to ‘ itself, to bestow on him that felicity ti^hrcli could not be obtained in this world. I have been., and still the victim devoted to be; for ever miserable., ’ 
What: ’ 
16 2 EMMA; r 
What must that wretch be, who has outlived her last and only hope I am that despairing wretch. How much, how very much to be pitied, is your 
Emma Cleveland. 
LETTER LXIX 
Lo Lady Cleveland, 
My deareji Emma, 
I Ought, perhaps, to suppress the melancholy circumstances relative to our dear eriend’s djffalution, lest I should be tearing open your wounds, instead of pouring into them the balm of consolation; yet Sometimes the indulgence of our Sorrows effects a cure, as the rapid stream which stows without obstruction.. wastes iisels^^ 
With this latent hope I will proceed to give you all the information in my power. — My Lord found him in a very dangerous state, but stattered himself that the care and advice he meant to procure for him, together with his friendly participation of his Sorrows, might in time restore him; but, alas! the blow was struck; the cold hand of Death had ialready Sealed his doom; and he Seemed waiting, with a mournful patience, i tee inevitable Summons, 
You 
northeast Child of Sorrow. 163 
You may judge how extremely Lord Stretton was affected, on Seeing the melancholy alteration in his friend’s features, a too plain indication of a broken heart! He Suppressed his emotions, though exquisitely painful. “Come, courage, my dear cour tenay, (cried he, preshng his hand,) what is become of your fortitude }. Let not those cuisied wretches thus triumph in your defeat. Your virtue should be your Support in this day of trial.” — “Alas! my dear Stretton (Said the unhappy man, shaldng his head,) my fortitude is entirely overcome; I sink beneath my misfortunes, and those I have, unhappily and undefignedly, as Heaven can attest, brought on the most amiable and most loved of mortals. Oh I there, stis there I am wounded unto death! I could have wished to have dragged through a painful life, to have Seen the vindication asserted of that Angelic Sufferer. But I feel my approaching dissolution;; feel the inward indications of death; they may not be visible to you; 
*‘for, ah! afhidion steals with trackless flight. Silent the stroke She gives, but not less keen; And bleak Misfortune, like an Eastern blight. Sheds black destrudion, though' it flies unseen, ’’ 
My Lord begged him not to indulge Such melancholy ideas, but rather endeavour to give way to hope. “I have, (cried 
he,) 
164 E M M A; Off 
he,) deluded myself with the phantom Hope, till I can be cheated no longer; yet all the ills of life I could have born but this; to lee the woman my Soul fondly; eternally doted on, — to See her doon 'd to' wretehedness, — and now, by the basest per' lidy, consigried tounsamy y and Jj tostbd made the accursed instrwfnent. Oh f itqf' more than mortal can endtire. Ohh thar I had never Seen the light; that mountains had overwhelmed and buried me, rather thast to have been the cause of grief to the best of her Sex! I Said, I could have wished to Jive to ste her vindicated; yet I think the testimony of a dying man may have Some weight with the world. Since that idea has Suggested itself, I have been impatient for death. I shall request of you, my dear and valued Friend, to take this Paper, and deliver it yoarself to Lord Cleveland. He thinks I have injured him, surely he will give some credit to the assertions I make in my last moments. I call all the Host of Heaven to witness to the truth; and may that Heaven never receive my wretched Soul' if I have signed a falsehood. He now grew extremely languid. My Lord prevailed omhihi tolky down; he Soon fell into a kind of doze, i but very disturbed. The next day he was - apparently worse, his speech faul tered, and lie had many convulsive catch 
ings„ 
mgs 
he Child of Sorrow. 165 
which, though but ssight, were a too 
sure prognostic of his approaching death. 
About noon Sir Charles bevule arrived' He flew to his dying Friend, on the Summons Lord Stretton dispatched to him; he indulged the hope that the news he had to inipart would be a restoring cordial to the unfortunate; but though iticould 
not restore, jt cefiigirilyjsmoothets the bed of death. A gleam ot joy animated his Sunken eyes; he essayed to utter a prayer of thanksgiving to Heaven, but the wordi died on his lips, which could Scarcely move; lie fainted, and continued a long time insen sible. The first efiedl; which sivcharles'’s information had on the dying man, inspired. the two Friends with the hope of his recovering by degrees; but Lord Stretton Said, that bright emanation which Sparkled in his ey es and features was merely momentary; it fled, and never more returned, : Towards the evening the faintings and convulsive patchings returned quicker, yet the intervals were clearer; in them he was perfe(stl5r Sensible; he blessed them in the most pathetic and tender manner. He took both their hands, and pressing them between his, now almost death cold, c^led on uhern Loth, by all the endearing ties of friendship, to undertake your caiise, to labour to establish your fame, to endeavour to restore you 
, 1 to. 
i66 
E M M A; or. 
to peace and happiness, to deliver to you his earnest wishes for your welfare; to tell you, he hoped to be constituted your Guardian Angel in the next world, to point out to you the flowery paths of happiness, and shield you from future distress. He implored Heaven to comfort and Support you; and, as he believed this would be to you a great stroke of affii{51; ion, most heartily prayed it might be the last you should ever know. He hoped his memory would not be painful to you, that you would receive consolation in this happy issue of his Sorrows, and that you would rejoice that he had at last Seen an end to his miseries.” 
Neither of his Friends lest him that night, and before morning dawned they performed •the melancholy talk of closing his eyes for ever. 
Thus, my beloved Friend, you have before you an account which has filled all hearts with Sorrow'. I wonder not at yours; but may it Soon be mellowed into a Soft, and not unpieasing melancholy I - 
I will inclose a copy of the written paper which our dear Friend gave in charge to my Lord. He intends waiting on Lord Cleveland in town, together with Sir Charles beviue. The treachery of the infamous Hotham will, I hope, be Soon discovered. 
Adieu j 
the^cuifd of Sorrow. 167 
Adieu! my dearest, my amiable Friend, may Heaven comfort you and restore you Xo happiness! 
Yours, for ever! 
Louisa Stretton.. 
i The enclosed 
Cleveland. 
My Lord, 
“WHEN the iron hand of Death has almost Sealed the eyelids of man, and Dissolution approaches with hasty strides, all animosities between him and his fellow creatures should cease; that is a period of Time, when the most hardened and most abandoned have not been able any longer to suppress the dictates of Truth. 
“The prospecc of death, as it removes the veil of prejudice. So does it lessen the bias of interest; the greatest criminal is then induced to make all the reparation in his power to those whom he has injured. If those, to whom Truth has been a stranger, may in the hour of death expect to be ■believed, has not he an indisputable right to be credited, who never on any pretence uttered a falsity? As I shall no longer be reckoned among mankind when your lord ship peruses this, I may be allowed to make that assertion in my own favour. 
. I 
r E M M A:;, or“ 
“beseech you then, on the word of a dying man, and one who would, in the day of health and prosperity, have Scorned to receive the most glaring advantage at the expense of his veracity, I beseech and conjure you to pay a regard to my asseverations. 
“You have been most basely and cruelly deceived by the wicked and abandoned woman, who conspired against the same of your injured Wife. The purity of Angels is not more clearly demonstrative than her’s. You know I loved her; but you could have no idea how fervently, how innocently I loved her; I mean not to deceive you; I mean to convince you, that, although my love for her Surpassed that of all the world, I would not, had it been possible she could have offered it, I would not have received a favour which should have lessened her in my esteem. I loved her Soul, and hoped, that as our union here had been frustrated, it would have been made perfect in Heaven. 
I have ever kept that point in view; she has done the Same. 
I Would only wish you to Suffer yourself to be convinced;; with your own eyes, and hear with your own ears, and do not receive everything through that false medium you have too long been the dupe of. 
Dear, injured Excellence! how great must have been her Sufferings! The anguish the 
ressedtion 
Child c" Sorrow. 169 
ressefhon causes in my breast, has corroded in my vitals, till the cords of lise are eateit through. Yes, my Lord, I die a Mart>t to, the distress I have innocently brought on the best of Women. You never knew her worth. It may be expected I should urge my former wrongs; how you basely stole in upon my little hoard of treasure, the wealth of the world to me, and cruelly robbed me of it; but I am Silent; a.dying man Snould forget his resentments; it is now for your unhappy, ill-treated Wife I plead; nay, his your own cause I plead it is, that you will assert your own honour, and establish it, by removing the cloud of calumny which at present obscures it. Be not deaf, then, to your own advantage. 
“I Send herewith all the i^etters 1 ever received from that most excellent of women. You would not Suffer yourself to read her Papers; I cannot have a doubt but they are destroyed, because, did they appear, they would be So many testimonials of her innocence and virtue. My noble Friend, Lord Stretton who will bear this to you, and who knows every passage of my life, will ffe better able to Satisfy your doubts thaa Lat .present am. This talk is too much; already I am hurrying to the silent tomb j few days, and I shall cease to be at all. Let my last words have weight; let them induce you 
vol. II I to 
i.ja 
T • M At tor, 
to. examine minutely the examination will be productive of happiness in future to your 
stlfi - : ......, : : • ■ 
Edward courtenay. 
LETTER LXX 
isa Lady Cleveland 
Let me entreat you, my ever dear Emma to indulge a prospect of an happy issue to the business? which induced Lord Stretton to go To London, I have very fiatering hopes, nay, certain ones. When my Lord arrived in town, he waited' on Lord Cleveland but found him absent on a little tour with his infamous companion. Lord Stretton left a message, with strict orders to the Porter to be pundlual in the delivery of it, importing, she had, done himself the pleasure of calling on him upon Some very urgent and particular bu finess, and would renew his visit as Soon as his Lordship should do him the honour of apprizing shim of his return. He waited, but received no Summons, which Surprised him the more, as he had certain intelligence of Lord Cleveland being in town : He therefore resolved within himself not to let the affair Suffer any delay on his side, but 
the 
Child Sorrow. 17f 
to call again. Lord clevdd.nd At 
When would he be at hbm‘e^« — ’the Pbrtef could not say. — Then you must give liie^ leave to Wait for him. Ndeordingly Lord Stretton was shown into a room. presently lie heard the rustling otsilk, and iff'caifie a Lady, whom my Lord immediately conjectured to be the Fiend‘‘my Lord Stretton.) \ think, ” (with a 'formal curt’sey). — “My name is Stretton., ma dani, ” (asideling bbw bn Isis side;) I ha'tm business with Lord Gieheland. and aim Wait: ihg in ejepeftation of isiis coming in. i’shall acquaint his Lordship of the remiffness of his Fortef: I' left a message here ten dais finee, wmch r apprehend has never been delivered to Kim's’ — Indeed, my Lord, I cannot tell; but if your Lordship will fa vdstr me with any message, I wall take cafe to apprise my Lord Cleveland of it.” -^ “'My business is of a nature which concerns Lord Ckv'eland Ao be informed of phf fonally; I shall wait till his return.” To be Sure, my Lord was Seemingly deficient in good rrianners; but he Said he did shot consider her as a Woman, only as sh She; Devil V therefore his' hehayioitf wakshava lier to the last degree. ' She, hdwa^h ossi cioussy put m^ny qsiestidfttd ihiishf, ''%ick he ansvvered mostly by mbiiosylllmes^ to show she was polite, whatestershe fnight I 2 be. 
lyz ■ E M M A; or, 
be, she asked, “Would not his Lordship diufev/to talce .Some chocolate — Not anything, (he replied,) but if k was agrees ableto her, he would be glad: to be left alone till the return, of Lord cle^elanl, and he should likewise be obliged to her if she would let notice be given to his Sen » yants, thaththey might go home and do as fie had •drdered; the I : believe he gave this diiedidn in a mysterious kind of wayv on purpose to puzzle and perplex her. She Seemed ready to burst with passion, yet was fearful of giving it vent. What he meant to order his Servants to do was, to go to Sir' Charles Seville, and request his attend ance to give the information he had ^ re eeived it Hartley lodge. But to proceed in rather a more methodical manner, I be sieve I had better here relate that circumstance. 
Sir Charles Seville informed Mr. cleve tand he was making the tour of the western part of -£; D; (Z, ^, recolledting his old j^riend, had come about twenty miles out of his way to see him. Mr. Cleveland testified the pleasure this civility gave him. They Soon: : discoursing on family, concerns.;, sliv' Charles, with the freedom which. )tintimacy between gay young men .allp^v's/ asked what was become of the Lady .he iused to be So muck attached to, and lu.... ■, 
u > 1 
The Ch I L d of sor R o w., i’/j 
whether the connexion lasted; and then'pre=3 tended to forget' her, nanie. ■" Glevdand 'said.. vas as much attached to her ias^eveh but that lately he had had Some reasons to doubt her constancy; Her nakne (Said he). w Hotham liotham i (repeated Sir Citutlfsf). Hothamd.. whyiithat ■ isndie maitte os v; ^! Woman your Cousin Lord Lle'mfknd..^^ has had an affair with, and is fool enough to intend to marry, if he can get a Divorce ftom his Wife, who, I am told, is one of the most lovely, as well as most injuivd Women in the world.you Surely mis takc', {cntd^eleveland., in confusion; ): I cannot believe Lord Cleveland ever had any connedlion with her, though she has been in the house with him.” — “And is at this moment; at least with him, if not at his house. ru tell you. — About a fortnight ago, since I have been on this excursion, we chanced to stop at the Same Inn; I was told they were Lord and Lady cleve land. I had Seen the picture of her Ladyship, and was desirous of a personal interview. I obtained it; but was much disappointed, though she is a good sine Woman. Now I will Swear to their, steeping together, bee ause their bedroom was next to mine. I ashed the Landlord the next morning, 'as I could not think .this Lady was her whose portrait I had Seen, but rather fancied, as I 3 is 
iy4 E M M A 5 oryf \ 
sj^jv.ery common, she orily a tp^vclling Wise, He acqu ajnted me with iier i^amcj as he Shad picked up from Mrs. her 
waiting woman, who proved to be a near Relation of mine host’s. So now I think I, shave; let; ypu into the Secret of thi§ hti 
,; ilnels.” .: .srl, y 
; “My dear Keville^ : (ftidt ^lewiand ^) ' I shave no reafpn in the world to doubt, your intelligence; when I combine Some circumstances I am but too weil convinced, that artful woman has made me a most consummate dupe; and not only So, buti I fear a viliainf’, 
He then proceeded to lay before Sir Pharies the whole Series of her artifices to draw him in to engage in a Scheme, which might render you and your Lord irrecon ciieabie enemies, to prevent the possibility of your having a Son, as, in that cafe,; the .estate would, on Lord c/r<uc/ig: w’s death, .devolve on him. — He plainly ssie.weei it would not have been his interest to make a .divorce, as then my Lord had it. in dsis power to marry .again. — That in. order to ^stedl this more Securely, they together had forined a planto jinake.; hr an inmate of Lord clevehnaa family..: — But that he had toimdshornvch ambigtstty in her Letters, and stich inconststcncies in her behaviour, as had grade him Yery paeafy 5 for to his r i plainest 
The cvlil T of Sorrow.: 
interrogatories he never' doultl. obtain an explicit answer. Sir Charfes begged to be permitted to peruse her Letters. “You will, I doubt, condemn me, (Said Clevelandf) but refieft I have great reason to hate Lord Cleveland; hh behaviour to me will justify any injury 1 do him; but I fear I have been drawn in to destroy the happiness of an amiable woman to Serve an infarinous one.” — “That Lady Clevelatid is amiable, every tongue must allow, (returned Charles 'f) if you have been instrumiental to her distress you ought to be hanged.” Beville then, in brief, related what he knew concerning you. Cleveland Seemed very much affected, and Snewed. great contrition. — He Swore he would make all the atonement in his power, as well to, repair the wrongs he had been induced to ast, as to be revenged on Mrs. Hotham for her perfidy to him. Six Charles was i too well pleased with the effect to examine the motive too nicely: He perilled the Letters, and after expatiating on'them, astd, niving; : the Writer to the Devil, he ashed Cleveland whether he was in earnest as to his good intentions. — He fwoire he would blow that infernal wretch up^ thoujgh His own destrudlion was the cohsequehcc.' ir Charles applauded his resolution, and pro mifed him his Safety should be Isteiired. 
I 4 He 
176 emmaj cr. 
He then, in order to go on Sure grounds, adyised Cleveland to write in a peremptory style to the Intriguer, and insist on a positive answer., Immediately Cleveland penned a Letter, silled with reproaches of her infamous desertion of his cause, and turning his weapons on himself, and a great deal more to the same purpose: This he Sent by a Special Messenger. In her answer she throws off the mash; So well is she convinced that she shall bring about a Divorce; and she Says Lord Cleveland is bound, under the forfeiture of an immense, Sum, to'marry her. Enraged to miadness at her avowed baseness, Cleveland gave all her Letters to Sir Charles., who instantly posted up to London with his prize. He hasted to Speak comfort to his Friend. — But I will not repeat what must harrow up your bosom. Let me return. 
Lord Cleveland at last arrived. Lord Stretton took care he should not have an opportunity of Ipeaking with Mrs. Hotham first. He went into the hail to meet him. He introduced himself without ceremony to your Lord, and began by opening his business directly. I doubt not Lord Strettmi was eloquent on the occasion. — He Said, your Lord Seemed distressed even at the beginning, and fearful lest the vile wretch Hotham should hear. Lord Strettoriy 
above 
lihe, Child ^ Sor r o Ww i77 
above all disguifes,, bade him not apprehend danger or interruption from her, as he had it in his power to Silence her effectually. He then, in the most pathetic manner, related the death of our poor Priend, which he placed to its proper account. Lord Cleveland was struck. he then proceeded to show him all the Papers relative to this affair, from the beginning. 
I had given Lord Stretton all your Letters, and likewise that you wrote to your Sister Fantfy., On your rencontre with the unfortunate Edward, at D —. Lord Cleveland read the whole, and shed tears over them: He confessed he had had no idea of your Sufferings, and blamed himself very much for his conduct;; added, “he had never entertained the least suspicion of your inss delity, till his mind had been poisoned by the insinuations of the artful Hotham ', that she had entangled him with her wiles, ’’ and lured him on till she could w’ ork him to. anything.” — Lord Stretton told him,, “He ought to make you every reparatiofi now in his powtr; he could not restpre the dead, but that your fame was fu'ffe'riiig’ in 'the opinion of ari’lll iud^g..’ ‘'wbrltiy’"^ and that if he had the’leashlense of hbnchrfy or justice reitiaining, heteust knovv it highly incumbent on him ptiblickiy to repair the injuries his suspicions had occa i r.. Stoned 

E M M A; on 
0'' 
Tpstcd .you. At thisvjundure Charles Revilk made Ms appearance; he had it So amply in his power to convince Lord Cleveland., that it was impossible a doubt should remain; though, irdeed, your Lord Said, “He wanted no, other testimonials than those he had already received, and he Sincerely wished he had perused the Papers which miss Woodville had put into his hands, as then he should have been earlier convinced of your innocence and worth, and then, as your Sufferings had not been So great, he might shave entertained hopes of being forgiven.” — Lord Stretton observed, “That there were reasonable grounds for hopes, as you possessed fo amiable and gentle a turn of mind.” — “No, my Lord, no, (cried he;) it is impossible that she can forget I have been the cursed cause of Courtenay'?, death, and while she regrets him, she must hate and detest me; besides, I never deserved her love. I am confident I never acted by her as I ought to have done — My. marrying her, or rather joining with her relations, to Sacrifice her to., my bale views, was culpable in the highest degree.” — He told both the Gentlemen, he considered himself greatly indebted to them for the pains they had taken to show him what a Snake he had been fostering sh Ms bosom; but freely ^ " confessed. 
The Cm ijy of Sorrow. lyp 
confessed, he knfew' nbt how to exjric^e himself from the difficulties, his cbn ■ nedlion with her had, and he was fearfiil would further involve; him, as she had prevailed on him, in cafe the .dabrce could not be obtaiiied, to make shbr avery large Settleiffcnt, vshicstvvould be to the prejiidice of his Family to accede. to. — “My dear Friends, (continued he,) if you can overcome this point, and teach me a tvay of avoiding granting this Devil a revrard for her infamous pradlices, I shall be ever hound to do you service.” Lord sfrhttof Said, He could foresee no difficulty at all in this busmefs, as they would only give her this alternative, to resign the bond, or stand a prosecution for a forgery and perjuring herself, which, from her own Letters, could be lb fully proved. This grand point obviated, was a great consolation to Lord Cleveland; and with the assistance of his two able counsellors he affumbd courage enough to desire Mrs. Hothdni to make her appearance. She entered with (a degree of confidence which struck theip with astonishment. Lbrel k 
decisive tone of Voice, as is he 'expected obedience, asked her for the lettershlie had received from Mr. Cleveland cbnccrh ing the treacherous ponfpiracy^they likes beeri carrying'oil. 'This 'W^L steili'rtg k •' • • ' ' '' 16 march 
io 
E M; M A;, : cr. 
rriarch on her Ladyship She cwa? not preipared for the attack ~ f‘ Come, come. Madam, (Said Sir charksano hesitation or evasion; I have just left Mr. Cleveland. and have all your Letters to shim in riiy possession: : up the Bonds you have inveigled from this Nobleman, to the injury of his fortune and most virtuous Wife, and you shall shave your precious Letters returned to you.” — After she has signed another Bond, ” Said Lord Strettonr — “And pray wsho are you that thus command mef And is it you, base Man, who useme thusst” “If you are are not Satisfied with being commanded by us, you shall have the authority of the Civil Magistrate to convince you we go on Sure grounds.” — When she found blustering would not do, she began to melt, but nothing could mollify the hearts of her Judges. Lord Strettpn, - by the concurrence of Lord Cleveland, drew up a Paper, which they ordered her to sign. She pretended to be in violent hysterics all the time, till Lord Stretton Said, “If she was not able to hold her pen, he himself wrould guide her. sh^nd. She then, quite enragcdj Snatched the pen from Lord strettan.i and signed her name. When this was done, my Lord, who Seemed to have the entire management of this affair, told the Lady she might retire to her own apartment. 
Child Sorrow. if 
tnent, ' shut - that Lord‘ ck^elam’s j^ost ^ chaise would be ready, at five the' hbkt morning, to convey her and her Friestd Mrs. jfalfon to her own country house, where, according as she behaved. So should she be treated. She bounced out df the wm, shesto\dng'execratidsts dfi thesti/allc' 'Your ' Lord redoubled his acknowledgments' to his guardian Angels, as he styled them, and begged they would not leave him while this Fiend should remain in the house, imagining, as he Said, she would play the Devil with him, when she fbund him unprotefted. He complimented Lord Stretton: 'ox his address throughout this'bu siness. Sir Charles Smiled and Said, “His Lordship was particularly clever in things of this nature, and he thought he deserved a Patpit for getting rid of troublesome Wo' 
'— Flis Protectors staid with him till they had delivered the house from the blin dle of Iniquity, and then took leave of his Lordship, who proposed setting out for Cleveland place the next day; from whence. his intention is to wtitd to your Ladyship, L ord Stretton k\v Charles Ee 
■ mlle as far 2LS>: Holyhedd. in his way to laund., whither he is going to look at an estate. This vasa Sudden thought, as they mentioned not the proposed journey while they yrere here. From iiolyhead my Lord came 
across 
■ M ' M A; ofi 
acfpf$. thb. qountryao styetton iioufis Ouir meeting, you: may be Sure, 'was a melancholy one — The resiedlion on our loss, and the assiidlion that. loss would occasion you, damped every joy his return would otherwise' have afforded.me t^.but I' .will hot dwell on iwhat is past never to be .recalled; 
By lordltrehtbp.s accdimt. Lord cleve land Seems in a very bad way; he hardly ate either at dinner or Supper; on their remarking his little iappetite, he Said, “He had not for many weeks ate .more.” But .they both observed he drank a great deal. He called for a glass of brandy while at dinner; ' and instead of tea in the afternoon had a pint glass of rum and water, which my. Lord Says vas half Spiritj besides a const. derable quantity of wine. ', 
I ashed my Lord a thousand questions, whether Lord Cleveland really was penitent, ibr his ill usage of you. He answered, “he certainly was, as far as one could expect from a man posiested of very little Sensibility. That he Said Several times. Poor dear Creature! what a rascal I have. been !” and Such expressions. Then he Swbre he did not believe there ever was a woman of more exemplary goodness and virtue.; that he had ever implicitly believed you to be So.; but that since his connexion with Mrs. liathmn., (which, vo ttaim'3 however. 
The Gil I L D cf S O R R 0 w. .183 
Iiowever, had not been criminal till they came to town, j he was So besotted with her arts, that he considered nothing else than forming Schemes to please her. He likewise Said, though she would admit him to a thousand little familiarities ion purpose to infiame him;.; yet shu; Would not grant him the entire poffessioit of her per Son till she had made him sign a paper, promising, if ever he should be at liberty, to marry her; but that lately they had had many dilutes, which would have made him aversc to the fulfilling his engagemdnts had he. had 'an 'Opportunity.” 
, Now, my dearest Ernrna, I think I mdy congratulate you on the prospect of Seeing the ignominy you have been loaded with entirely removed from you. I hope Soon to See you restored to your former station; in life; and when that circumstance is accomplished, I believe I must then lend art ear to my Swain, who begins to be importunate about finishing a certain business which has been long in hand. I wish, however,; to stay till I See you tolerably - happy. The knowledge dipped you are not So * lesien mine.: Accept "the temdbrest wishes from my. Lord and, our dear fotthe 
perfect restoration of your; health and felicity,. Time, my Love, must be your radetej adkua .j’tm me. it oid ■ '.j.i Louisa stretton. 
184 E M M A; or, 
LETTER LXL 
^0 Lady Louisa Stretton. 
The loss oi my Lomfa, 
fat: very heavy on my mind'; it Seemed as if it would tincture all rny days with meiancholy. But what is Fame An empty bubble, which every breath, however mean, may blow away, and utterly destroy. My virtue was as pure, in the day of dis grace, as at this moment, when I am justi; lied to the world. Ail I lost then was a shadow. But I have lost more. Yes, Lou' ' 1 feel that loss can Tever be repaired. Felicity! can I taste Felicity } Alas! no. All prosped of it lies buried deep, deep in the grave. I forgive my Lord, I wish him happy; but I will never again be an inmate of the house from whence I have been driven with infamy and Scorn. No, let me remain here; I wish not again to mix in a world in which I have found no resting place. - I dedicate my soul to sorrow, and this place Suits its melancholy resolves. Lady Elizahth Sooths my griefs, she indulges. me in the “fad luxury to vulgar minds unknown.’* I : open not my lips for hours. She is very good, she does not weary me with importunities; she leaves me to myfdf. I contemplate on the various ills 
which 
Lhe Child of Sorrow. 185 
which have oppressed she even from my youth up; I See myself marked out as a butt to recfeive the arrows of affiklion. I no longer, repine; 1 sit in silence, waitingfor the consummation of all things; but wonder not that. I am determined against en cciuntering: afresh a world .filled with dil'asters and vanity... • 
hot; how’evety my dearest Louisa do not delay the completion of your happiness. Let me, by entreating you to consent to Lord strettops felicity, in Some measure repay to that generous man a little part of my debt, to him. He has done all in his power to make me happy; he could not arrest the hand of Death. It would be a strange folly in you to protradl the time of your union any longer; let me then hear, in your next,, that at least the time is fixed, if not over and may that God, who can alone bless his: creatures, make you both happy I May your: lives be long and honourable!. May you never know distress but by the name!. and: suffer not the remenshrance of me to vifiit' you in the hour of festivity: and triumph.? Think me lost and dead to the world; .it kin o W m y on I y w i sh., g1 go m y \ D espair. h a ngs: heavy at my heart, and my shattered cxftvj st.itution apprizes me I shall soon see an; end to my mileriee, for those are mortal. oh.l: 
that' 
r86 EMMA; cr,. 
that my predidlions may be Soon, very son verified! 
Adieu! 
E M M A C L E V E L A N n. 
.D L E T T E R LXXII 
To Lady Cleveland. 
AVE, then, the gloomy mansions of despair entirely obliterated, in the breast of my Ernma^ all the fond names of Mother, Child, and Friend ^ Does she not wish to be again united to her lovely Infant, whose loss she So pathetically lamented? Have the Sufferings of her venerable Mother, on her account, made her unsollicitons to wipe from her furrowed cheek the briny tear? And will she shut her arms against her Louisa., her Fann)\ and her well wisher, Sirctton., the much loved Friend of her departed Edward? Is her heart grown callous to all feeling, her ears deaf to their united entreaties, and her eyes blind to their tears } Does she prefer brooding over her misfortunes, dcsolate, and albncj to the tender par ticipation 'of Friends: to whom she is So dear? And is it rny gentle who is So inexorable? 
Surely not. Oh! my Friend, guard against the Demon of .despair! 
Heaven, 
Child ^ Sorrow. 187 
Heaven, offended at. Such impiety, may yet withhold the blessings it may still have in store for you. Your Child, demands your attention and protection;; mother’s infirm state of health makes it probable that the. dear little Infant will Soon be left desti, tute. You know how happy 1 should be to Supply,, aa mu<ih as in my power, a mother’s care; but rtiost. likely your eldest Sister, as being nearer related, may insist on having the tuition of her. Is then your regard for the dead to contract your heart, and turn it against the welfare of your Child? Rested: ^ the dear Saint wished to be assigned a perpetual guardianship over you. Would his gentle, his virtuous Soul, receive pleasure in your cloistering yourself in a ruinous Castle, with a woman weanedy from the world by misfortunes, and deli ?vering yourself up to mournful Solitude, .when there are Such calls on you to return to the world ?' Consider, Lady Elizabeth Atzs ■constrained to pass the Summer of her days in that Sequestered place; she afterwards made it: her residence from choice; but why? Old Age was coming on; she stood single and alone in the world'v she had" no connedlionsj no parental, no filial ties to fulfil or Supply; retirement then was the vdsesh the only step she could take. Remember 'that true Virtue is aifiive; a mere absence 
from 
i88_ E, MM,, A;. ■ 
fimrn ^ipe ^ not siussicient to attain praise or. reward; .you haye Social duties' to .observe;; for heaven’s Sake relinquish your Scheme of retirement;. bestow proper reflection on it, and you will be induced to forego. 
it. V.. ■ ' ■. 
Charity, iiiight whifpgr. another ■ claim^v You Say, you Sorgi ve Lord clernmnd^ buix; you. ie<ave .him reason to doubt thel realityvv; Indeed he is very penitent; I should suppose his Letter convinced you he was So; but in yours to him, Lord Stretton Says, “Though, you Say you pardon, yet your resolves plainly Imply you do it by halves.” If you ever mean to show the world and him you freely pardon him, you must do Something to show the world and him you intend to be reconciled alib; and I believe 1 may add, it will be necessary to do So Speedily, if at all. I don’t know whether I am commishoned to Say thus much, but his lordship’s health declines So fast, that it is the opinion of everybody he will not live many months. Should he die, you may hereaster blame youtself for not ascertaining the world of the reality of your forgiver^ess, whiph you Say is sincere; 
; my dearest had the con 
currence os. youf. Mother: and ray Lord on 
* Neither Lurd better, jior her Answer, 
’a|)p'e2r, 
'the 
L'he Child Sorrow. 
the fubjecs I have written on; iny .wishes are the Same with Theirs j that you would Sacrifice a' i’ittle to Appearances.' Lord sffh tonne Says, more advantage may accrue to yosi; than you at preseiit can entertain the least idea of. 
Do not, my Love, continue inflexible. I will Set you an example. I mean Tp^obey your coisirfiands; and, ' as' a ptoost^ next Tuesday I give my hand to Lord Stretton. I will not accept your congratstlations, un less I hear them Srom your own lips. Weigh well what I have written, and believe me, none can love you more than yoyr 
Louisa Stretton. 
LETTER LXXIII 
Lo Lady Stretton, 
JO Y! joy! to my dearest Yes, 
though you Say you will not receive my written congratulations, I will, I must rerepeat them. Oh! my Friend, how did your Letter wring my heart. .Dvery line pierced it through and through. ■thefatrie post brought me .De'tters Srom rhjr dear, Mother, and shy Ibrd; What can T Must I relinquish my favourite Scheme? 
I must. My ghud1"' Oh coiiid st kb^ndory i 
'thee 
I go E M M A; of f 
thee? fbrget my dear Louisa? Blot from your meshory my cruel' resolves - against my Child; in m y - griefs I had forgot I was a Parent. 
But let me be indulged in my mode of returning; let me have the happiness of ehtbracing both you and your Lord here; cbrhe and'fetch she, ' and briri^ shy ashiablb' Faiirfff if she is with you;; yoti' will'hot deny she this'. Your presence will give a Sandlion to shy initiation again into a world, fi’om whence I was So lately driven with disgracci 
I find both by my mother’s' Letter, and from feme hints in Lord that his 
health is really very indifferent; poor man! Lbope he will use this time of probation to recollect himself properly; he has ever been too careless of himself in every particular. 
My dearest / I must be indulged 
in shy way os living when 1 return to Cleveland. Plaefs I cannot consent to be on the fcoting I have formerly been V ith his lordship; but you and I will talk that over when we meet. It is a delicate point, buttnust be adjusted to my satisfaclion. 
i have shed rivers of tears over your Letter. .Indeed I never have been more dis treffed' shah I was ' oh the examination of my own heart. I believe shy missor tune stad impaired my understanding, but ^ ' I am 
slhe cnilid Sorrow. 191 
1 am noyv resigned to the will osprovidence, 
I vyill no longer murnnur; yet I still carry the barlped sh^t in my heart; it will remain for ever. My heart is the monument of my departed Friend, my Guardian Angel! Look doy/n then, blessed Spirit, while 1 lift my eyes to thee, and Swear ever to bear shy t: ha ste and constant lo ve ' in striifi: rernernbrance; never fo suffer the world, into which I am per force obliged to enter, to obliterate thy virtue or Sufferings one moment from my heart; but ever to live Such a life as may entitle me to hope to be united to. thee in those mansions of bliss, where thou art now receiving the fulness of joy, in reward for thy ill fortune here, where neither sighs, nor tears, nor lamentations are to be found; nor where insidious enemies can destroy thy peace! vouchsafe then to lead me through the devious paths of life tillsthe Almighty inclines his mercy towards me, and gracioussy pleases to take me to himself! 
Adieu! my Louisa!! communion with my departed Friend has conveyed a gleam, of comfort to my Soul. May you be happy!; 
Yours ever,. :.; 
Fmm'a Cl'evelan 
'i ■ ■ ■ -■ i... y'ri 
L'ET' 
192 EMMA; c>r. 
LETTER LXXIV 
Lo Lady Stretton. 
Cleveland Place. 
H! my dear Louisa,, can never Sufficiently acknovdedge my gratitude to you for forcing me from my retirement. I am convinced I should Soon have lost every valuable Sentiment of the heart; what transports. Such as a Mother only can feel, did I experience when my Child, my Harriotwas presented to me! The dear little creature ran to me with The utmost joy. I was almost overcome by the sensa tions which poffesled me; and had not a stood of tears kindly relieved me, 1 believe I should have fsinted while I prested her to my bosom. 1 think her much improved by being in the country; the nasty town air had begun to rob her Sweet cheeks of their native bloom; I could not take my eyes from her; and then my Mother' too; I wonder my Spirits have Supported themselves through So many agitating constiisis; when Will they subside, and sink into their original calm state? 
My Father Seems to regard me with a tenderness I never observed in him, even in my most infant years; he wept very much as he pressed me in his arms. 
He 
sche Child of Sorrow. 193 
He Said, in a whisper, as is he would not have me hear his involuntary self accusa tion, “Good God! how could I devote this angelic creature to misery? Oh! that I could recall time!” Think how I was affected with his apostrophe; yet I sup preffed my emotions, lest I should give him more pain. Indeed I was unable to Speak. When the stutter, which at first Seized me on the recognition of So many and So dear objects, had a little Subfided, and it was in my power to give utterance to my feelings, I ashed where my i^ord was. My Mother took my hand, “Can you, my Love, 'behold your Husband vvithaut Such emotions as may induce him to chink you have not forgiven him his cruel treatment of you ?’• I was, preparing to answer her, when my Father prevented me, by saying to my Mother, “mi’s, Woodville can you doubt cur daughter’s forgiveness of her Htishand, when you have Seen Such proofs of her inestimable goodness; has she not freely forgiven me; me, who was the acetirfed and sirst cause of all her sufferings??! my dear Sir, (cried I, pressing his hand to rny lips,) let me entreat you not to say one word more on this affecting sut^eci; t expected to have been welcomed home by Lord Cleveland; believe me, I feel not the least reiencment against him for What has vol.il. K' 
w f M M Aj: or,. 
eappe.ned; hq wa deceived; I shall deserv® tse .highest censure should I have entered his dvors withpiit erasing from my heart the remembrance of former injuries. No, unless I could have freely forgiven him, no power should have brought me hither.’* 
1 doubt not, my dearest, childjl i(sai(j.my Mother,) but that ypstrxord to See you.’’ — ‘‘.vyhy^^h then f’* 
— ‘‘ Alas! my ter, he is very ill, much worse than 1 cared to tell you. I hope your return, and the kindness which I am Sure you will show him, may be Salutary to him, and forward his recovery; he has not taken the least care of himself; I fear his disorder has entirely undermined his constitution.” I knew my mother’s tenderness of heart, and therefore judged she might, through the medium of her fears, have Seen Lord Cleveland state of health in the most alarming point of view; I delayed not, however, to go to his apartment instantly, my good Mother first apprizing him of my intention. My Father led me into his room; his appearance struck me exceedingly; he was Seated in an armchair, but So pale. So lean, and Squalid, that I believe, had I Seen him by chance, I should hardly have been able.to oall him sto my remembrance. My Father preserrted me to him. Saying, Flere, my Lord, .receive this Angel once 
more 
northeast Child c/*sorrow. 195 
more from my hand; oh! that you may be as Sensible of her worth, and revere her for it as I do.” — “I am, I am, (fobbedlord cle’veland,) I am Sensible, truly Sensible of her worth. Oh! Support me, that I may kneel and implore her forgiveness.” tfb really essayed to get off the Seat; I' prevent him, though I could hardly Speak for weeping. “I have already fosgot every disagreeable circumstance, (Said I,) do hoc then Suffer the reshembrance to retard your recovery.” He could not utter a word, but held out his arms, as if he wished to embrace me; his penitence, his tears, his almost dying looks, and the natural effect which an object in distress has on my heart, all united, were too strong to be re fisted; I threw my arms round his neck, “Oh I my Lord! my Husband!! I in an agorly) — I cannot Support this! — Do not thus wound my Soul! Am I forgiven? and is not my sight hateful to you It was with much difficulty he could utter these broken Sentences. I kissed his cheek, which was wet with the tears of both, and again begged him to believe me as to the first, and my care and attendance on him should affure him he did me injustice in harbouring a Suspicion of the lash I Sat by him fr more than two hours — I Several times took his hand in mine, and gave him' shahy K 2 little 
196 EMMA; or, 
little things which L thought would be of Service, to him. He received them as instances of my affectionate attention of him, and frequently would break oii't in these expressions: “How have I been blinded! What a Wretch have I been! Oh! that fife may be lent nie to repay your goodhess. How is it possible ever to reward yoy ?’* i used my endeavours to silence him, but the more I ashdlioussy strove to suppress the effusions of his gratitude, the more he was inclined to make acknowledgments. My Mother told me, he had had very little rest for Some time, therefore I begged him to Jay down and try to get Some steep; I even told him, I would sit by him. He Said, he would be guided by me in everything; but if I staid by him, he could never close his eyes, as their only business now was to look on me, while yet the sense of Seeing remained. .He consented to rest bn the bed; I assisted the nurse in covering him. He pressed my hand to his lips, and thanked me, in the most tender manner, for my care. I then retired to my own room. 'I'he many constidling pashons which had at pnee leiyed me, joined to the efforts I was obliged to inake to bear me up with the appearance of tolerable fortitude, all combining, rushed together on my recollection. \ threw myself into a chair, and for a long * time 
isbe Child Sorrow, 
time gave myself up to a violence;. I coidti 
not suppress, The floods of tears I in Some measure dispelled the weight that before had pressed down my heart; I felt myself relieved. 
My Lord will, I hope, be a new creature in every sense of the word; Sicknels makes more reformations than the Preacher. If he still continues to use me kindly I will look forward, and not trust myself with looking back. The retroljped would cause too great an anguish, and again tear open the wounds, which time and the efforts only can heal. 
present my tenderest love to my fannf; give your Lord my assurances of lasting esteem; and tell yourself none can love you better than 
Emma Cleveland, ’* 
P. S. Tell Fanny I am impatient to have her with me. 
strongest 
LETTER LXXV 
Fo Lady S t r e t t o n. 
My deah Lady S t r e t t o n,. 
rou must accept me for a corresppnr dent, in the room of rny Sister, for the My Lord is now fb ill, that all K 3 hopes 
19s E M M A; 
hopes of his recovery are entirely over. I doubt my dear Emma refiedls on herself for not at first complying with our united entreaties in returning hither Sooner; for Somebody has, with more oshciousness than prudence, told her that he drank, during that fortnight, Such an immense quantity of brandy, as certainly has burnt up and destroyed the principles of life. But it is needless to torment herself; he always drank great deal; and that wicked wretch, Mrs. hiotham^ used to encourage him, as I sup pose she could easier effect any purpose she, had in view when he was inebriated,. • 
He yesterday made his Will, and Settled all his affairs entirely. Certainly he has made all the reparation now in his power for his former ill treatment of my shster, and if money could purchase felicity, she would stand a fair chance of being as happy as I wish her. Riches, indeed, may put it in the power of the possessor to make others happy. One may, with Wealth, 
“Spread Content and Cheerfulness around, And banquet on the Blelsings of the Poor 
And this godlike power mustteonvey a store of blist to a benevolent mind. 
When my Lord had finished with the Lawyers, he begged to see my Sister. — “■ My dearest Emma (said he, in a feeble 
voice,) 
Sthe Child ^ Sorrow, r, 9! 
voice,) I feel within myself that I shall noci long be a burden to the earth. Take thefe b Papers; you will find I have done all that" remained in my power to reward you.'' Would to Heaven that Death had not Snatched from you all probability of your being happy with one whose merit deserved a better fate than that he met with! My own death would have then given nhe pleasure in its near approach, as my dissolution would have removed the only impediment' to an union of persons, where the hearts had been So long united. But should you hereafter See any one who you think can insiire your felicity, you will, by the ample fortune I leave you, have it in your power to consult your own choice, and be happy in your own way. Would to Heaven that natural privilege had never been violated !’* You must suppose this Speech, delivered too not without great emotion, by a man visibly on his deathbed, would affect every one. My poor Sister, I thought she would have fainted; it brought back to her aching memory the whole Source of her former misfortunes. She clasped her hands together,; :, and exhibited a picture of the deep^ls, tress. By the interposition of Lady Cleve -- land, my Lord has been induced to loave Some part of the estate to go with the title.' My Sister Said, it must be Soj to save Sir' K 4 Charles 
200 E M M A; cr, 
€harks bevilvs credit, for.he had promiscd. Nlr. Cleveland tilt he should not be a Sufferer. ' Worthless man as he is, I think he ihpuld. be pbliged'to fulfil his infamous en gageipents with hiscollegue. Can we find a more adequate pstnishm.ent than a marriage between tstose two, wretches, like. sampfops ■y foxes, united by firebrands? Emma cqpid noh however, prevail for more than two thousand a year. He is So extravagant a wretch, that he will starve on this pittance, as he must Support the dignity of his title; however, should he behave well, my Sister will have it in her power to augment hii fortune. Little Harriet has twenty thousand pounds, and my Sister has more than eight thousand a year, three of which she may give away for ever. 
1 stippose, by this time, your guest Srom Ireland is arrived. I do not believe one word you have told me concerning him, therefore do not attempt at deceiving me, for you will never succeed;; remember I have not an invincible distike to him, only that lam certain he has never thought of me in the manner you have declared, and I have some little dear bought experience to Secure ' me from again falling into the Snare of self delusion. 
Luejday 
The Child Sorrow. 201 
Luefday Noon, 
“Before this reaches you, I believe Lord Cleveland will be no more. He has not Spoke since morning, and my Mama Says she does not think him siensible. My poor Sister Seems a Statue of Woe. Indeed I wonder these repeated trials are not too much for her. I feel a great Sorrow on this poor man’s account. He Seems So truly penitent and Sensible of his unworthy neglect of my Sister, that I really believe, had he lived, he would have been, in future, an affectionate Husband. I hope his good intentions will Seal his pardon in the next world.” 
Wednesday. 
My dear Lady Siretton, if is all over. Lord Cleveland breathed his last, while rest ing on my sister’s arm, this morning, about six o’clock. God receive him! Death is a terrible thing; it is a circumstance I have been unused to. The house is dreadful; everything So quiet and silent as death it i seif. The Servants, creep about, as if their poor Master would be disturbed by their foot steps. 
“I have been in my sifter’s room, but she waved her hand to me; she chuies, to be alone. I will not break in upon her Sorrows. Adieu, my dearest Lady S tret tonne; remember me to your .Lord. It" you can, K 5 for 
202 R M ■; 
for heaven’s sake pay us a visit in this Holife of Mbstrning. Your company will be necessliry to all, more particularly to your 
Frances Woooville, 
LETTER LXXVI 
ST Lady S t r e t t o n. 
.DW I have again lost you, my dear __ Louisa.) 1 shall feel melancholy, but will strive against it; for if we cannot in tirely conquer Corroding Care, yet we may keep it within Some bounds. 
Notwithstanding what Lord Stretton Says, 1 am morally certain I shall never again eater into engagements. There are many (indeed i Suppose every Widow in the first three months of her Widowhood would declare as much, if only for the sake of decency) who make strong resolutions never to marry again, and may have been induced TO forego their resolves; but I am totally out of the question; my Marriage, from the commencement, has been a constant Source of woe; begun, continued, and ended in tears. Lord Stretton may laugh as much as he pleases at the determinations of a Widow of three a; id twenty, while in her weeds, 
'who 
The Child of Sorrow. 203 
who deterhiines never to alter her widowed state; but when a retrospeistive eye is cast ori. the momentous transaftions that have occurred to me, he must not rank me with' the class of common Widows. I am Sure he meant to make me Srnile, He wioted to See me cheerful — To ‘wipe from my remembrance the griefs I have endured. 
And, Oh! how precious is that timely Friend, 
Who checks Affliffion in her dread career! Who knows distress, well knows that he .may lend 
One hour of life, who stops the rismg tear. 
My obligations then to your Lord are very great; he has been my Paraclete, How often has he dwelled on the praises of our Friend. — He talks of him as if absent, not dead, only as gone a journey, whither I shall Soon follow. 
I could not help smiling when your Lord Said, I should forget my Vows of Celibacy when I should See his Friend from Ireland. Pray is Sir Charles very handsome? I wish to know, on d^iz^y’s account. I ashed her the other day; she protested she could not tell. She thought him agreeable, bun that she had been So cautious since her first trip, that she hardly allowed herself to look.atja man. As he is So great a favourite of Lord I should not be.sorry. jf 
your conjectures are true; and I think if he K 6 poifeffed 
204 E M M Aj cr, 
poffejssbd all the qualities of an Angel, Fanny would deserve him. He shall not receive her without a fortune — I have taken care of her; but that is at present a Secret between ourselves; she has not the least Suspicion.. 
Adieu! roibtmber me always. 
Emma c levelan d.’’ 
\fl'he situation of things remaining the fame., a series of Letters is omitted. It appears by the following, that a Marriage took place between Sir Charles Beville and Miss Woodville.] 
LETTER LXXVII 
f0 Lady Beville. 
My deareji F a n n y, 
Cleveland place. 
isuppose 1 shall make you vain, but I exceedingly regret your absence. You may believe your Sister is not more pleased at it than myself; but ^ you are married, you know yoii must follow your Caro Spofo; and Lady Cleveland is rooted to this place; she cannot bear the thoughts of quitting it, and it would be cruel to leave her quite alone. She frequently steals away from us 
to 
‘lhe Child Sorrow. 205 
to that Solitary walk, Which she So often traversed while you was here: It is there she colledls her whole soul, and dedicates it to her - departed Courtenayi Do you know, I think my Lord very wrong for indulging her visionary Schemes : He inay talk what he will of Soothing, but I do Say her malady ought not to be fed and nourished. She Said the other day, she Saw him every hour, his image was continually stqating before her eyes, I strive to laugh her out of these whims, but my Lord treats it as, afferious affair. 
I wish you would finish your excursion and return hither, you and Sir Charles. would strengthen my party — I am nothing against my Husband and emm a. I hope, however; in a few years. Lady Cleveland will think it necessary, for the sake of her Daughter, to mix a little in the world; at present she is as much a recluse as if she lived, or was - rather buried in bellman\ cajhe. But it is only from the gay world she secludes herself; all who have any claim to distfess find her acceshble. 
Give all - our loves to Caro Carlino, and accept the same 'yourself from all im the name of - ■ - - - - - 
St ret tonne. 
LET 
2t)6 
E M M A; or. 
LETTER LXXVIII 
ISO Lady Seville. 
Prepare to hear the most miraculous and unexpected' piece of news' that ever reached'your ear; and yet it itiay; be fatal. Oh! Heaven avert the realising of my fears! I know not how to begin, or, when I have begun, how I shall be able to proceed with any degree of method. 
This morning my Lord had taken a ride — I was reading, and your Sister was in her shvourite walk, indulging her favourite comtations. All on a Sudden I was 
O ^ 
alarmed by an outcry of one of the female Servants; I hastily ran to know what wa the matter; the first idea Suggesting Some accident to the Child. An object, that shocked me exceedingly, presented itself — > It was your Sister, insensible, in the arms of two cf the Menservants. Terrified at her situation, I instantly demanded the cause? Jawes Ward., who was one of them. Said, ‘‘he Saw his Lady laying on the ground' in a fainting fit; that he stew to her assistance, astd "made what haste he could, with her into the house to procure Some remedies.” In a little time we recovered her, and got her upstairs to Bed; but before she could relate the catise ct dier faintingv' another fit 
Succeed 
Sthc Child of Sorrow. 207 
Succeeded. I cannot express to you the anxiety 1 wis under — Mylord absent, and my dear and beloved Friend in this deplorable state. When she could Speak, she begged to be left alone with me. “Oh, Louisa I (she exclaimed, clasping her hands,) I have Seen him!. I have Seen him!’’ — ‘‘ Whom have you Seen, my Emma— — “have Seen my dear lamented Courtettay. He has visited me to warn me hence — I shall die, and then I shall be united to him.” - — “You must not, my Love, (cried I,) give yourself up to Solitude; your melancholy steals Upon you more and more every day, and you think of him till you absolutely, through the warmth of your imagination, fancy you have his image before your.” 
. ‘ “Ah! Louisa., this was not imagination, his apparition really appeared to me — If I ever Saw him I this day beheld him — Was it only the illusion of my brain? Whyshave I not fancied So before I was not more melancholy today than iisual — No, no, it was not an illusion.” I really began to terrify myself with apprehensions of ker head being hurt, but stie Spoke very reasonably. I ashed her the particulars; she described him accurately; she Said, she was sitting in rather a thoughtful mood, but far. from gloqmistess; ihe wsjs looking bcr 
tween 
2o8 
EMMA; or. 
tween the trees, and Saw him pass through ifhe walk at the end of the lawn; that he turned his eyes towards her, but Seemed not to take notice of her; whether he instantly Vanished she knew not, for her eyesight forsook her, and she entirely lost her fenses, nor knew where she was,, till she found herself with me in the Saloon. She still persisted in the Same story. What to think 1 could not tell; I could not fuppose that God would really permit him again to visit the earth; yet it was more likely she should have imagined she Saw him in the meridian of her grief, than now, when it Seeined to Subside. The more I gave it re fiedlion the more I was perplexed. I wished impatiently for the return of my Lord. I endeavoured to re compose her mind, but my utmost efforts lost their effedr. She continued to repeat, “I shall Soon leave you; his blessed Spirit has beckoned me away.” — Her pulse grew quick, and I thought I perceived indications of a fever coming on. I have heard the power the imagination has over the body, wshich increased my fears, lest she should fail a victim to her’s. At last wearied Nature gave way, and she Sunk into siumbers, but infinitely disturbed. Sometimes starting, and 
uttering cries in ner heep. 
My 
The Child of Sorrow. 209 
My Lord returned just before dinner. He had heard of Lady Cleveland fainting : - “My dear Louijd. (Said he,) what is the cause of this dstbrcler in our Friend V — ^ “The most strange event in the world, (Said I;) the poor unhappy Creature has taken it into her mind that the shade of Courtenay has appeared to her — Indeed, my Lord, you have been instrumental in indulging her melancholy and visionary ideas — Certainly it can only be Some one that bore a resemwance to him; but it is dreadful to See what an effect it has had on her imagination; she is extremely ill, having fainted Several times. She Says, his appearance is to warn her from the world. I have Said all I could to convince her it was Some person whose exterior, beingsomie thing like him, an heated imagination has formed the rest Jtidge how I was Surprised to hear Lord Stretton Say, “I own I am of opinion she has really Seen him.” — “Good God! (Said I,) you do not believe in these super natural appearances, Surely — What purpose can they answer “Believe me, my dear Creature, Lady Cleveland has really and truly beheld edroard court nay. I. doubt not you will be greatly amazed to hear me aver Such a thing;. but I have all along concealed a Secret froin you, which I find I am now at liberty to # divulge: 
^210 EMMA; cry 
divulge: Know then, my Love, that Courtenay is living.” — “Living! (I exclaimed,) why was tjiis circumstance kept a Secret “For reasons very obvious; the account of his death,, and particularly falling a Sacrifice to calumny, opened and prepared the heart of Lord Cleveland for convicstion, which the other testimony alone could not have essfedied. I ought to demand your pardon for making this concealment from you; but I knew your tenderness for the dear Emma would never have permitted you to see her tears falling for his death, without making a discovery that might prove fatal — I could not fore see the approaching end of Lord Cleveland “Oh! my Lord, (Said I, sighing,) I much fear the discovery still will prove sh tal. You should, indeed you should have been more circumspedl, and not have Suffered her to have Seen him in Such a manner.” 
“That has been the consequence of an accident; however, I hope she will Soon recover, when she finds the man she has So long lamented is still living, and that every bar to their happiness is removed. I received a Letter .from him the other day, wherein he tells me, he thinks he has Sacrificed Sufficiently to punclilio, as a year has elapsed in widowhood; that he is impatient 
to 
The Child Sorrow. li 
to be permitted to repay the most lovely and amiable of women, for the many tears she has shed on his account. I expected him here this evening, and not Sooner, and meant to, take the opportunity, after dinner, of breaking the whole affair to her. Fie has resided in Ireland under a feigned name and character, on Sir Charles Beville’^ estate. 
“We must, as Soon as possible. Said I, endeavour to break this extraordinary event to her, lest her disorder should gain an alarming height; and yet I fear the effects of Such an interesting discovery on her weak frame of body. Oh! what a misfortune, thjit he should have strayed this way I” 
“It is, indeed, Said my Lord; but I imagine his extreme impatience made him reach this place Some hours before he expected. I had promised to meet him at the bowling green hpuse at L —, and then conduct him hither. Not finding me there, he strolled towards a place which contained all he ever loved. You Icnow this place is choir strange to him, therefore he might not sup pose he was So hear observation, or his ten derness for Lady cleveland‘s, welfare would have prevented him. But I will Set off inir mediately to the Seat of r.endezvq~us^ and do you, my dear Creature, do all in your power to compose emmd.s, Spirits, and Suffer her to give way to the most stactering hopes. ■ 
Without 
212 EMMA; or. 
Without staying to eat his dinner he iat off. You may believe 1 had no appetite. So I left the Service on the table, and went up to your Sister. She started on my coming into the room, and awaked. She looked wildly about. 1 took her hand in mine, and Sou net it burning hot. I Spoke to her, and for Some time she made me no answer. On my repeating my questions, I found, to my utter grief, by the incoherence of her expressions, that she was delirious. Good God f how infinitely I was shocked! She called on Courtefiay Several times, and then would shriek as if she Saw him. By this time Mr. Benjon came. Happy was I to See him! He bled her, and ordered a blister to her back, and gave her Some composing draughts. these remedies, I flatter myself, will prove Salutary, if they should not be effedlual. But I will not anticipate an event which would forever make me miserable; indeed, wshich I hardly think I could Support. 
I have Seen Courtenay. Heavens! what a flutter I experienced! It was really like a resurredtion, to find him living, after So long mourning his death. The joy we should have tasted, met with an allay, from the situatioh of our dear Emma. Poor Courtenay is; Cursing his stars, and Severely blaming himself; but, as he lays, he had no idea that he fliouid be Seen; likewise he ima - 
The Child Sorrow. 213: 
gined the important discovery had already been made to Lady Cleveland. Lord stret tonne observed, that he was fearful of disclosing So important a piece of intelligence, till he was certain as to the precise time of Mr. Courtenay arrival, as he judged Lady Clevelatid would have been So anxious, and likewise apprehensive. “Oh I my dear stredtonv (said Courtenadf) I have a thousand obligations to you; I am convinced you acsied for the best; Heaven restore my Emma Speedily, - for I find I am less able to bear disappointment than ever. Misfortune has rather Softened my heart, than rendered it callous to distress, ” 
Thank God, this evening our beloved Dnma ktms imxmqd to rest; her mind is more composed; if she continues as Vvicll tomorrow, we shall begin to hint her happi ness to her. I have left her in a fine doze. Oh! merciful Heaven, grant her to our prayers! How many hearts would break, should she do otherv^ise than well! I shall Send off this Letter early tomorrow, and will continue to write often, if but one line, just to tell you how we go on. 
Would to God it was all over! I shall dread the breaking it to her. I do not know, in her weak state, who can, get to da it. Adieu! Yours fincemly, 
Louisa stretto^t. 
214 EMMA; or, LETTER LXXIX 
ISO Lady B E VI L L e. 
I Have been So extremely hurried all this day, that I have not been able to perform my promise So pundlually as I wished to have done. The important discovery is made; but whether the consequences will be happy or unfortunate, I am yet doubtful. At present we have much to fear; everything throughout the whole of this affair has been managed badly; it is to little purpose to lay the miscarriage on this or that person, there Seems a fatality attending every circumstance relative to your poor Sister; whoever undertakes anything for her advantage, though they labour with the utmost celerity in her cause, Some envious d^mon overturns and frustrates all their Schemes, or by Subverting their intention, produces misfortune where they strove for happiness. 
This morning Mr. Moreton came hither; as I knew the regard your Sister had for him, and likewise considering his calling in lise, and the Sandity of his character, I thought him a proper person to strengthen the dear creature’s mind, and, by degrees, inform her of the great event; both Lord Stretton and yix. Courtenay coincided with my opinibn. Comdenay was rather apprehensive 
he Child o Sorrow. 215 
hensive that her illness had yet left her too weak to hazard the perturbation Such a discovery would occasion; but I told him, “I thought it absolutely necessary to give her the important information, as she Seemed So confident in herself, that she should die very Soon; for when I Spoke to her this niorning, she Said, in alow voice, “I am, yet living, my dear but nevertheless, I feel 
within myself. that the principles of life are decaying; I have received many repeated attacks, but yesterday the final blow was struck. Why should the Almighty allow the shade of that departed Saint again to visit these paths of desoiation but to inform me I should Soon be restored to him? ” I was at that time prevented Saying anything to her, as hernurse came into the room, only thus far, “Do not despair, my dearest Emma Heaven will, in its own time, reveal everything to you; but, for god’s Sake, endeavour to rouse yourself; do but recover, and you yet may be happier than you at present can form the least idea of.” She answered only by shaking her head, and heaving a sigh. 
My arguments had weight with Mr. courtenayysin^i he then became altogether impatient to have the opportunity of presenting himself before his beloved Emma.,, We delayed not to give yix.moreton a Sumssiary 
account 
2i6 
E Pvl 
A; or. 
account of things, to enable him to make the So much wished'yet dreaded explanation. 
There was a large Screen in Lady Cleveland room, behind which, while she was steeping, Lord Stretton Kexdi isar. Courtenay Seated themselves, as the latter was desirous of not losing a minute when hi's Emma was told he was yet living, and more attached to her than ever. I took my usual post by the bed side. Soon she opened her eyes, and, I thought. Spoke with more strength tian before. Think what were Edward emotions on finding himself So near the ote jedt of his tenderness, his hopes, and fears! to hear the accents of her tongue, and yet to be restrained from falling at her feet, and pouring forth his faithful heart before her! 
1 told her, in a whisper, that Mr. Moretcn had called; ■ that as 1 knew he was a Favourite of hers, I had,. in part, informed him of the cause of her present disorder, judging it might be in his power to dissipate the gloomy ideas which had Seized her, and likewise to raise her Spirits to happier expectations“ “then, (Slid she,) you still think this event Some illusion of the brain. Why may 1 not indulge myself with the hope that I am not entirely de serted by Heaven? — that it has, in its mercy, blessed me with a foretaste of happiness.’^ 
“But 
northeast Child Sorrow. 217 
“But consider your situation, my dearest Creature: Would you wish to die and leave your Harriet to a stranger’s care ?” 
“Oh! my dear loua! what advantage will the life of Such a wretch be to my Child You see how I am debilitated, and shattered. I will not leave my precious Infant to the hands of strangers — I consign her to your protection and Lord Stretton's so tenderly as you have loved her unfortunate Mother, can I object to leaving her under Such care? She, dear, lovely, and tenderly beloved Child, will reap the benefit. I am rendered, by a continued course of afflictions, unfit for the offices of life. I never, no, never, can mix in a world fromi whence I have ever received mortifications. She will Soon discover my weaknesses, and perhaps I may lose my conse quence with her. You will teach her to revere the memory of her truly distressed Parent.” 
Her Speech moved me So much, as to give me reason to believe poor Courtenay must be greatly affected; I therefore interrupted her, by beggingdeave to introduce Mr. Moreton. She acquiesced to my prq posal. She expressed a great Satisfaction in Seeing her old pious Friend. “I am glad to See you. Sir, (Said she, holding out her hand.) You find me a poor weak creature. Vox.. II L but 
2ib E M M A; 
but relying on the hope of being Soon re kased from all my troubles.” — I hope you will, my dear Lady, (he Said,) I sincerely hope you will, but not at present in the manner you intimate; there are in store for you many happy days on this side Heaven, which you must endeavour, by recovering your health as fast as possible, 10 enjoy with thankfulness.” 
“No, Mr. Moreion, no; 1 feel I shall not live long, and that affu ranee gives me comfort. I fuppose you have heard that I have been indulged with the view of a dear departed Friend, whose death I have long deplored p” — “Yes, Madam, I have been told So, but I do not believe it.” — “How, Sir, not believe my assertion !” — “I do not believe in Supernatural appearances. You may, and certainly have, taken an unfortunate idea into your mind; but I can give you very Substantial proofs why it is impossible. Consider, my dear Lady, of what consequence can Such Beings as we are be to the Almighty? Can he not, if he pleases, xesume a worm of his own creating, without breaking up the mansions of the dead to give us warning? And why should he for a moment interrupt the happiness of a blessed Spirit, to oblige him again to visit the Scene of his former misery? Would it ipot be unmerciful, eyen unjust and contrary 
northeast Child Sorrow. 219 
trary to our notions of an Almighty God? 
I am, in my own mind, convinced, that it is not in the Will of God, or in the Power of the Devil, to permit the appearance of the Dead. We have indeed in the Bible an instance, but perhaps it was necessary, in the early times of revealed Religion, to admit of Miracles, to give strength to the weak faith of its Professors, and when the fate of great part of the world depended on it.” 
I was vexed with Mr, Moreton. What signified these orthodox opinions. He Seemed to have forgot the subject he came upon. I Said, “Here are more Substantial reasons against harbouring Such ideas. Lady Cleveland will Soon be convinced that she has entertained a wrong opinion.” I sat in Such a manner, that I could See Courtenay; his eyes were fixed on me. I gave him a nod, with a look. Signifying that I meant a hint to Mr. Moreton. He unfortunately mistook my intention, and thought I wanted to Speak to him; he therefore came a little forward, which gave Lady Cleveland a faint view of him. This neither he nor I had the least idea of, till we heard her utter a yiolent exclamation — “Ah! see. See! there he is! there he is! and instantly fell back in her bed in a fit. Good God! 1 cannot describe either my own or Courtenaf ^ agony, L 2 on 
220 EMMA; or, 
on this unfortunate issue to our flattering hopes. She recovered but to fall into another. They continued successively for more than three hours, during which time our poor Courtenay was in a state of distraction. these paroxysms reduced her to the most deplorable state of weakness you can imagine; she lay without motion for Several hours. Seemingly unable to vent a groan or even a sigh. 
This evening, after having taken Some composing and cordial draughts, she Seemed a little restored. When I thought she .could bear a little conversation, I knelt by her bedside, and taking her hand in mine I •told her, “I could not Support the sight of her distress, and not take every imaginable means of preventing it: That I had a very important discovery to make; and fearful as I was of the consequences her extraordinary emotions might excite, yet I was resolved to hazard everything, rather than she should still remain a prey to melancholy.” 
“What, my Louisa, does this preface portend? Surely I am prepared for everything.” 
“Will you promise me, my Love, to .expect a most wonderful discovery, and to fujpport it with sirmness? You have been deceived as to the most astli^ing dreum 
stane 
lihe C H I !> D ^ S 0 R It O W. 22 S' 
stance you ever experienced — I myself wasr a stranger till yesterday to what I am going to unfold. You thought you Saw the Shade of Courtenay — Ah! my beloved Emmd. that Shade was himself; for political mo lives Lord Stretton reported his death.”. 
“Almighty God! (she exclaimed, clasp ing her hands together, and lifting up her eyes,) what do I hear P Is he living t Oh! mo, no, - it cannot be; do not cheat me;, would he have left me thus long a prey to iassiiftion and Sorrow? Oh! Louisa! you think my distress and illness have weakened? my head; I am not mad, indeed I am not; do not therefore attempt to deceive me; too Sensibly do I feel my misfortunes : Ah! Spare me the mortification of thinking my Friend Seeks to deceive me.” 
Dear Creature, while she Spoke, the tears ran in torrents down her cheeks. I threw my arms round her neck, while my eyes flowed with tenderness. “My dearest,, best beloved Emma., (Said I,) do not harbour an idea injurious to my friendship.. Think not I would deceive you. No, not for worlds. I Speak nothing but the truth, which nothing but your want of strength prevents from being clearly proved to you. Your Courtenay lives, and is in the house at this moment. He had particular reasons for concealing himself, all which, at a pro l I per 
'222 E M M A i or 
per time, shall be explained to you. You shall, if you please, see him this moment.’* 
“That he lives, (cried she,) merciful Heaven receive my sincerest thanks! He, too, will be a Friend to my Child. Oh! lguifa! but it is too late — I die, my Friend, but I die with less regret. He, the man I ever loved, may yet be happy in this life.’* “You must live, my Dear, to constitute his happiness, otherwise he had better indeed be dead; but you must now endeavour with all your strength to recover.’* 
■ “Ah! Louisa! I feel it will not be; but if he lives. Oh! let my eyes be blessed with his sight before they close in endless night; let them take a long and last farewell of ail they ever esteemed and loved.” 
I entreated her to compose herself, and strive to get a little steep, as I thought rest entirely necessary to enable her to Support the tender interview. As Soon as I was asfured she could bear his sight, I would lead him to her; but at present I doubted whether bis presence might not rather retard than forward a recovery So much wished for by us all. 
“tjien it is as 1 thought, cruel Louisa t (cried she, bursting into a fresh flood of tears;) but do not think to cheat me into life. No, the means you take, hurry on 
the 
Sthe Child Sorrow. 22j 
the few moments of existence.” She thert turned from me and sobbed audibly. 
, I could not Support the anguish I Saw her undergo; I therefore begged her to believe I Spoke the truth when I assured her of Courtenafs existence; that if she would endeavour to compose her mind, I would instantly bring him to her. “If you do really and indeed Speak truth, (Said she,) delay not any longer presenting that long lamented and unfortunate man to me; I make no doubt, that that God, who has Supported me through a Sea of troubles, will enable me to bear this intervievr.” I left her, and sought the Gentlemen. When I related to them my conversation with Lady Cleveland I ashed if they thought her Sufficiently prepared Mr. Courtenay was So eager to See her, that he entreated me to conduct him in that moment. I begged my Lord might enter the room first. He did So; v/e were close behind him “Permit me to congratulate my dear Lady Cleveland (Said he;) here is a person who will forward yolir recovery; shall he come in ?’* The extreme agitation of her mind prevented her Speeclx. Courtenay made but one step from the door to the bedside. “Oh! my Emma / (cried he,) do we then meet again?” He threw his arms round her waist. “It is, it is mf Courtenay V she ex l 4 claimed; 
224 EMMA; or, 
claimed; a dying paleness Succeeded to a faint blush which had overspread her cheeks on his entrance, her eyes closed, and she Sunk senseless into his arms. “Ah! 
wretch that 1 am, (he cried,) my precipitancy has undone my Emma! Oh! look up, my Angel! turn thy lovely eyes on thy adoring Courtenay; he dies, my Emma un ids he Sees thee Speedily recover.” We liaiiily applied proper remedies, while Courtenay., with a face as pale as her own, hung over her, his hands clasped together. In a little time she revived, though it was near half an hour before she becamie Sensible that he was really living. I cannot repeat to you, my dear Fanny, a tenth part of their conversation, chiefly made tip of broken Sentences and tender inquiries. I was the first to propose a Separation, as I V as excessively apprehensive that the hurry and fatigue would be too much for the weakened frame of Emma. Courtenay at last prevailed on himself to bid his beloved Lady Cleveland adieu. I was too Soon lensible how necessary Such a step was, for. her fever increased very much, her delirium returned, and my fears and apprehensions grew to an alarming height; } (11 Suppressed them, in order to conceal from Mr. Courtenay the ill consequences 
of 
Sthe Child o Sorrow. 
of his appearance. She is at this present hour in a doze; but steep, fb disturbed, is not likely to refresh her, or restore her strength. 
I pray to Heaven every hour for her Speedy recovery; yet Sometimes I feel my Spirits So deeply depressed, that I cannot repel the most gloomy ideas. 1 think she must be already worn out with repeated misfortunes. When we take a retrosped: of all she has endured, we must be utterly ashonished, that the human frame, fb fearfully and fo wonderfully made should have had strength to bear up against these sings and arrows of outrageous fortune. As the dear Creature says, may the God who afflicted her Support her in this prol pe£t of felicity! In that hope i'will conclude. 
I am, my dear Fanny 
For ever, your faithfuf. 
L O U ISA S T R E T T O N. ^ 
I N 
i: ICT 
2 26 EMMA; or, 
LETTER LXXX 
To Lady Be V I L L E. 
Saturday. 
Alas! my Dear, how fleeting and unstable are our prospeds of happiness in this world, while how certain and how permanent are our disappointments! Our dear Emma has been, for these three days, in the most imminent danger. I can hardly expresstoyoumy own feelings on this distressful occasion, much less give you an idea of poor Courtenaf% situation; he wishes he had "never discovered himself. We all wish, but there is a fatality attends our endeavours; everything turns out contrary to our wishes. I know not what to think. Sometimes I am willing to indulge hopes, then again I am reduced to despair. As 1 have Said before, her constitution has been torn to pieces by So many repeated strokes of Adversity, and naturally delicate, that my fears increase every hour. I can hardly bear to be alone; my anxiety overwhelms me; I dare not give way to thought. 
Courtenay, the utmost piaure of Woe; never quits her bedside; he presses her hand, and drops the sharp tear of Anguish on it, while she asses him for himself. It is but Seldom she knows him, and as Soon as 
she 
Lhe Child of Sorrow. 227 
she recognises him, the joy she expresses at feeing him alive, throws her into Saintings, from whence, when she returns to life, she falls into a delirium. Can we then justly entertain hopes And yet, how can we endure the thought of her dying, after all the distresses she has undergone? Is it then impossible for earthly felicity to reward her in this lise? Must the whole os her recom pence be in Heaven? Surely her virtues and Sufferings might entitle her to Some share of happiness here, and to immortal happiness hereafter. But God knows best. No doubt, “whatever is, is right.” I w” ill therefore endeavour to emulate the deat creature’s examiple, and kiss the rod in silent Submission. 
Monday. 
I would not Send this off yesterday, as 1 hoped to have added Some lines of cornfort, and represented things in a less gloomy aspedt than the fate of my Emma then portended. She Seemed much better on Saturday night, had no return of her delirium, and fiept Several hours. Yesterday she continued composed, had no fever, but Spoke very little. This morning I congratulated her on the promising approach of her recovery; she shook her head; “My dear Louisa., (Said she,) do not flatter yourself, or nourish the hopes oid^ooi' couaeray^ that L 6 my 
228 EM M A; or, 
my recovery is at all nearer now than it was Some time since. I feel I cannot, nor do I wish to live.” 
“Not wish to live, my Emma ^ when now the prospect of happiness is before you, when you have only to extend your arm to reach it ?” 
“Alas! Louisa, you err when you think the prospedl of happiness is within my reach, or even view. Should Heaven, to protract my misery, prolong my life, would it not be an increaie of distress, to be constrained to refuse the only man I ever loved the request it is most natural he would make ' And how could I, with the appearance of honour and delicacy to the world, give my hand to a man with whom I have been publicly accused of the most horrid crimes? Oh! Lonifa, my dqzr Louisa, revolve, this in your mind, and join with your unhappy Friend, in wishing a Speedy end to her existence, which is doomed for ever to be wretched VI urged everything my tenderness could Suggest, to reconcile her to the thought of giving her hand to Courtenay; repeated her lord’s wish, that he could join their hands. Oh! Fanny, I never Saw any one So steady. I could not prevail on her; she still advanced So many pleas on the impropriety of Such a circumstance, but begged me to conceal her resolutions from Cmrtmay, “as the 
knowr 
Sthe Child of Sorruw. 229 
knowledge os them might make him wretched, and the sight of his distress would render her Small remains of life more painful.” 
I left her, in hopes she would revolve our conference in her own mind, and think less rigidly on the steps we all ardently wished her to pursue. On my return, I was alarmed at Seeing a visible alteration in her appearance; though she was weak and languid before, yet now she looked infinitely more So. Her Docftor was Surprised; till this day, he had entertained hopes of her Speedy recovery, but now he Saw she had been losing, ground Some time. His fears amounted almost to a confirmation with me. 1 fixed my eyes on him, to penetrate, if possible;, into the deepest recesses of his heart. Alas! my dear Fanny., my Searching eyes brought no return of comfort to my Soul; I was Sunk in dull despair. In this situation, the most forlorn of men, (for So I think we may truly poor Courtenay, should our fears be realised,) in this situation he discovered me. The phantom Hope, which, though it So often deceives, still deludes us on, had yet a little footing in his breast. “Why that melancholy look, my Friend, (Said he, pressing my hand:) Is Emma wovfei And yet, do not tell me, I cannot stipport the information.” — ** I told him we had had Some conversation concerning him, that perhaps she, 
had 
EMMA; or, 
had talked rather too much, and was now, in consequence of her exertion, not quite So well. “My dearest Louisa, (Said he,) we must be cautious; consider, the gentle frame of the dear creature has been torn by the rough hand of Anguish; the fierce billows of Affliction have long beat on her tender bark; let us then avoid every circumstance which may retard her recovery; for, oh! my Friend, I could not now Support an adverse stroke of Fortune. No, my whole soul looks forward to her for happiness; and Snould, which Heaven avert! keen Disappointment, with her leaden wing, shadow o’er my rising hopes, she would sind me more defenceless to her blast than I ever yet have been. I could not, I would not wish to Survive my expedlations.” His Sanguine expectations gave me the most extreme anxiety. Alas! what will he feel when he finds the resolution she has taken, even if she should much longer be an inhabitant of this vale of tears. But I much apprehend her dissolution is at no very distant period. Ah! who shall enable me to Sustain So heavy a blow? Who shall Speak comfort to the despairing Courtenay t How has his, and his Emmd.% life been signalised with Affliction, We may Say, With Grey, that 
Melancholy mark’d for her own.” 
Oh! 
he Child of Sorrow. ^31 
Oh! what a lesson does their story afford to Parents! May these unfortunate Lovers be the last Sacrifice at the cursed shrine of Ambition! 
Oh! what a Scene have I beheld; and yet is it not the prelude to one more Solemnly affecting?? Fanny., our dear, our gentle, our ever afflicted Emma, will, too Soon, be for ever torn from us; I cannot weep; the Spring of my tears is stopped. Alas! why should 1 weep, and weary Heaven with my prayers; I cannot change its immutable decree? The word of the Almighty is passed; the Persecutor was Sent forth, and Emma, the once blooming Emma, was given up to him, to show the world how much Virtue could bear; the joys ot Heaven alone can recompense her match less Sufferings. 
The fatal resolution she had taken preyed on her delicate frame; after the unparalleled misfortunes which have So long shr rounded her, she at last falls a victim to the opinion of the world; she deserved not, nor can she Support its censures. She would, in tenderness to her beloved Courtenay, have concealed her intention of for ever remaining Single, partly frorh her dread of adding anguish to a breast already Surcharged wsith woe, and partly from her inward conviction 

232 EMMA; or, 
vidlion of Soon resting her griefs in the Silent grave; but he urged her in So strong a manner to justify his long indulged hopes, that she could no longer join in deceiving him. Never will her words be worn from my memory. With what force and energy she Spoke on the subject! I cannot do justice to her expreshons, I feel, but cannot convey them to you. Deep as our disappointment is, we must yet allovv the propriety of her reasons. “Oh! Courtenay, (Said she,) at the latter part, I can never, never be yours; but since you receive not my living hand, accept my dying vows; I die, my Courtenay to convince you of my truth. Still cherish my memory as I did yours; we yet may meet in Heaven; remember that was our wish; we thought not of an union on earth. I have disposed of my fortune between you and my Child; be a Parent to her, love her, for the Sake of her who dies to prove the excess of her affecstion, but who could not live to have that affection condemned by a cruel and partial world. Think how my pe^ce has already been stabbed by its cea sures: And shall I, by my own conduct, arm its vengeful hand again to pierce my careworn breast! No, let me sink into the quiet tomb, and only live in the swtet remembrance of my Friends; there I shall be blelfed for evermore. Comfort my poor 
Mother,. 
libe Child of Sorrow. 233 
Mother, and teach her a thankfulness to Heaven, that her Child never deviated from the path of Virtue, though sts way was planted with thorns, and choked with briers. My Fanny too! — Oh I strengthen her young heart to bear the loss of a beloved and, unfortunate Sister; tell her 1 bless her and her worthy Beville; may they live long and happy; and may the tears they shed over my urn be the last which Grief draws from their eyes! And now, my beloved Friends, I beg you to withdraw a little Space. I wish to be alone before I rake my final leave of you; I thank Heaven, which grants me the full use of my reason in this awful hour, and that time has been given me to Subdue every little resentment, which undeserved calurhnies and injuries might have created.” In obedience to the wishes of the dying Saint, we left her apartments, and retired to our respedive rooms. Our hearts being too full for communication; I only judge of Coiirtenay\ situation by my own; if his grief, his anguish is more — Oh! how exquisite it must be I 
Adieu! my dearest where shall 
we look for comfort } Alas! this vain world is silled with inquietudes. 
Your most: distressed Friend, 
Louisa Stretton. 
L E T. 
234 EMMA; or. 
LETTER LXXXI 
sco C H A R L E S beville. 
T mmst be your tash, my dear Seville to insorm your Wife of the conclusion of her unfortunate sister’s Sorrows; her spotless Soul winged its way to Heaven last night. Yes! my Friend, all that now remains of that lovely creature, matchless in her virtue and Sufferings, is a pale corse. This event, though for Some time expected, overwhelms us all with grief; my own heart is deeply oppressed, and yet I am constrained to Smother my affliction, and endeavour to afford consolation to m'j Louisa and my poor Courtenay. The former, I hope, will find relief from her tears; the latter sits a Monument of Woe; I tremble for him; Heaven, grant him strength of mind to Support this heavy trial! You must form to yourself an idea of our distress; my pen is unequal to the tash. 
Adieu! 
Stretton, 
LET 
The Child of Sorrow. 235 
LETTER LXXXII 
To Sir C H A R L E S B E V I L L E. 
R lef cannot kill, ” Said Louisa to me this morning. “If grief was mortal, fiiould I be here lamenting the death of my angelic Emma? Oh, no 1 my soul would accompany my darling Friend.” I strove to pour the balm of comfort into the breast of my afflicted Wife; but my tears flov/ed faster than my Speech could find utterance. A participation of Sorrow is more Soothing and consolatory than the most Subtle reaishn ing or phiiosophy; we each found ourselves relieved by the very excess our Sorrow occasioned. In a little time we were able to form the resolution of becoming ]oint Comforters, of the forlorn Courtenay. We Sought, and found him in the room of Death. Fie was standing, by the bed iide, with his eyes intensely fixed on the breath less clay; a deathlike paleness overspread his face, and his whole countenance wore the Semblance of haggard despair. He removed not his posture, nor answered to the voice of my Louisa. I vrent up to him, and taking his hand, attempted to draw ^ him 
23^ E M M A; cr, 
him from the melancholy object of his love and Sorrow, and to rouse him from the torpid state into which his grief had Sunk him — “My Courtenay., (Said I,) Suffer me to lead you from this Scene of desolation.” — “Whither would you lead me? (cried he, mournfully;) Oh! Stretton whither would you lead me, from the dear remains of my foul’s treasure Ah I Seek not to Separate us — One fate unites us in indissoluble bands. In vain you attempt to divide me from that angel form. She is mine! she is mine! (he exclaimed, clasping his hands together in an agony of woe,) and I will never leave her.” Terrified, lest his distress should urge him to Some desperate deed, I threw my arms round him; “My dearest Lourtenay., (Said I,) I acknowledge I feel your Sorrows; but for the love of Heaven and your eternal welfare endeavour to Support your misfortunes like a man; emulate the example of that divine Sufferer; think with what fortitude she bore up ■ against the tide of aissidlion.” — “Stretton., (he replied,) fear me not; believe me, my Jife, hateful as it is, shall be preserved. — All my hopes have a long time been to be united to that lovely Creature, who lies there a vidbim of wretchedness. If I brave the st'engeance of the Almighty can I expect 

l^he Child Sorrow. 237 
peel that union? No, Stretton., unless I imitate her, how can I hope to be hereafter admitted to those heavenly Mansions, where her innocent soul is receiving at this moment the fulness of joy? Had I not the strongest faith that with her my hap piness will be made perfed, think not I would have breathed one hour of existence beyond her. No, my own arm should have Set me free from the inquietudes of a disastrous life r one grave, at one moment, should have enclosed our bodies and misfortunes. But all the days of my appointed time I will patiently wait till my change come. Yet think not to divert my thoughts, •or even divide my person from these dear remains, till she is laid in the silent tomb. Here I will ever stay, here pay my evening Sacrifice, and in the morning renew my earliest vows. Think what I have Suffered, think of my loss, and refuse me this comfort if you can. I am Sure you will not — ■ Your tear swollen eye, and the labouring Sigh which at this instant rends your friendly bosom, tell me you will indulge a lover’s Sorrow.” — I believe he is in the right method; an indulgence of Sorrow is the most likely way of overcoming it — Not that I would, for the world, lose the impression this Sad evept has made on my mind; no, 
i ever 
238 EMMA; or, 
I ever wish to feel that nameless Sensibility which attends the refie(51; ion of her virtues and misfortunes — Still would I breathe her name with sighs, and drop the tear of friendship on her tomb. 
Courtenay intends to build a mausoleum to her ashes; he will indulge himself with all the voluptuousness of shrrow; he will daily visit the receptacle of all his soul holds dear, and count the tedious hours which divide him from her. Often too shall I steal from the busy haunts of Men, perhaps accompanied by my Louisa, and feast on the remembrance of our lovely Friend. 
But why should we repine at the conclusion of her ill-fated life? Ought we not rather to rejoice that she now is happy? An union in this world never could have taken place, as she Said, with propriety; she had been stigmatised with Courtenay; and though the Angels of Heaven were not more pure, yet a malevolent world might have cast its reproaches on her. Let us then submit to the Decree of Providence, and check our murmurings; let us, if poshble, believe that all is contrived and ordered for the best; and though circumstances may appear misfortunes to us, yet they may be to fulfil Some wise purpose, we blind Mortals 
cannot 
lihe Child Sorrow, 239^ 
cannot foresee. May our misfortunes be proportioned to our strength. 
. Adieu, my dear Beville ^ come and mingle your tears with ours. 
Str ettoh» 

V. 
i, ■ 7?''' ' 
FINIS. 

I ..T 
E 
ii? 

L 4(^ 
J - - 
, Ifr ■■ 
FR. 



iv 
i 
NF; 
^ \- \ K >- •' - C -'• ■ ^ i 
■ ■ ‘ ', Sit 

A 





k'r>w!kl»»« 
