LETTERS
BETWEEN
An ENGLISH LADY
Her FRIEND at PARIS.
In which are contained
Thi MEMOIRS
Mrs. WILLIAMS.

LETTERS
BETWEEN
An ENGLISH LADY
AND
Her FRIEND at PARIS.
In which are contained
The MEMOIRS
OF
Mrs. WILLIAMS.

By a LADY.
In TWO VOLUMES.
VOL. I. 

DUBLIN:
Printed for J. Williams, J. Porter, 
R. Moncrieffe, and T. Walker. 
MDCCLXX.

PREFACE.
I am conscious that, amongst all my Sex,
I am the least calculated to shine in the
Novel stile; which, however, seems of
late to be their sphere. It is a species of 
writing I never could draw any amusement from; 
and, therefore, am very little acquainted with; and 
though I firmly believe the following Memoirs to 
be true, yet they bear io strong a resemblance to 
many others, which have owed their birth only to 
the imagination of their Authors, that I fear they 
will not be esteemed so, but by the few, who may 
have had some knowlege of the facts related in 
them.

The desire of relieving a fellow creature in dis-
stress, engaged me to undertake a talk, which is 
every way analogous both to my genius and taste.

How I have succeeded in the translation of this 
work, no one will ever be able to judge; as I can 
positively assert, that the original will never appear 
in its native dress.

(ii)
The fear of being known, has prevented my 
either reading, or even mentioning, the following 
sheets to any of my friends, or acquaintance, whose 
superior judgments might have directed mine, and 
would, consequently, have rendered this book less 
incorrect. Thus circumstanced, I give it to the 
world, with all its faults about it, declaring, that 
I shall not be flattered by their praise, because that 
can only be due to the Author, nor humiliated by 
their censure, for the same reason. As to the part 
I have had in it, it is much at their service, to treat 
as they shall think proper. I know it is easier to ri-
dicule, than to commend; a very little understand-
ing serves for the first, but it requires a great deal 
of judgment, to do the latter properly. I acknow-
ledge myself totally unqualified for being an Au-
thor; and the only apology I can make for ap-
pearing in print, is, the motive which induced me 
to it.

The following anecdote is not an invention, but 
a plain truth, which I shall relate literally as it hap-
pened.

A French woman of some birth, by a strange 
concatenation of uncommon incidents, found her-
self in distress at London; when recollecting, that 
she had formerly had some little acquaintance with 
me, she enquired if I was in town, and being an-

(iii)
swered in the affirmative, wrote me a note, intreat-
ing me to come to her: I did so immediately, and 
found her in the hands of her merciless creditors, 
who were upon the point of dragging her to prison. 
Shocked at the horror of her situation, I wished 
to rescue her from it, but could not afford to give 
the money, which it was necessary to advance for 
her relief. She read my thoughts in my eyes, and 
said, "My dear Madam, I have a Manuscript, in 
French, which, if it was translated, would, I dare 
say, produce money enough to pay you, and carry 
me home: Take it, (continued she;) it fell into 
my possession by chance, and, unfortunately, it is 
all the security I can give you at present." Her 
distress was irresistible; I, therefore, took the book, 
and paid the money, which purchased her liberty, 
and conveyed her to her native land.

On my return home, I instantly began to exa-
mine the Manuscript, and was agreeably surprized 
to find it contained the Memoirs of an English La-
dy, with whom I had been many years intimately 
acquainted. Several of the circumstances, related 
in her story, I knew to be matters of fact, since I 
myself had been a witness of them; the whole of 
it seems to me, to be wrote with such an air of 
ease, and candour, as convinces me, that it is real-
ly a faithful narration of the principal events of her 
life, flung upon paper as they occurred.

(iv)
She is now dead; and, therefore, the publication 
of her Memoirs can give her no pain; and will, I 
apprehend, be no dishonour to her posterity. I 
wish they may be favourably received by the 
Public; and that the world may ever remain ig-
norant of the name of the Transtator.



letters
BETWEEN
An English Lady and her F RIEND.
LETTER I.
.To Mademoifelle D’Angeville R. E there words in any language to ؛5؛؟)O(؟؛? exprefs, what the heart feels in the )؛(٠)؛،؟ moment of Separation from a beloved £؛?	^
nd ·■? If there are, O teach me؟؛'f٠ them, my dear Adelaide ! for I can find none to deScribe what I felt yesterday, when I tore my-Self from your arms at Calais, and immediately embarked tor England. I arrived here about an hour ago. I tremble when I think that the Sea divides us, and that every step your horfes ,Vol. I. B	take

2	LETTER I.
take, increaSes the distance wlaich feparates US from each otlaer. This country (tiro’ fertile؟) appears to me a defert ؛ there is a vacuum in my fOul for want of you, which nothing can fup-ply. I have often heard, that Nature has im-^idnted in the breasts of all lier creature؛, a love for their native country: It may be fo in gene-ral, but I am an exception to this rute; mine has ufed me too'ill, andl have fuffered too much in it, ever to look upon it witlaout pain, and (I fear I might add) without fome degree of de-testation.
I fet out for London to-morrow, where pro-hably I shall not meet a face I know. A new race is fprungup since I left it, and Itave push٢ ed their parents (who were my acquaintance) off the stage :-No matter, pleafure was not tire motive which Jed me here; it was businefs, as you know, which I shall difpat؟h as ؟uick as possible, in order to rejoin my dear Adelaide, dnd to breathe a׳ purer air than that which lalows in this inclement istand. My - what shall I fay to the Marquis d)Aifei yo٧r Brother ? Compliments, are too coldj and love, is too much ذ sb fay what you will for me. Adieu, my ever-valUed friend ز my heart is too full to toUch ttpon the pathetic, when you are its ob-ject, sb till time bas rendered me more reafona-ble, I can only be
Yours faithfully,
c w.
Dover, May
■ I'i	LET.
( 3 )
LETTER II.
٠ To Mrs. Williams.
I Rejoice, my dearest friend, to find that you are Safe arrived at Dover. It was kind of you to write the moment you fat your feet on shore. I followed your vessel with my coporeal eye, till it was out of sight, but in my mental one I fee it yet; full of this image I returned to the inn, and, with a heart overcharged with Sorrow, flung mySelf into a great chair, till the coach (which I had ordered the Servants to put the horSes to) was ready. Thus I remained Sor Some time, almost stupified by grief, when I was roufed by a deep groan, which issued from the other end of the room: My eye instantly followed the Sound, when I perceived my brother laid all along upon three chairs, and looking as pale as death ; mv every faculty had been So totally abSorbed in the thoughts of having lost you, that I had Sorgot him, till the loud sigh above-mentioned called my attention, and was just going to Say, Lord, brother, what is the matter! Are you not well ! when he prevented my enquiries by starting up; Saying with an air of impatience, " ThoSe fellows have been already four hours in getting the coach ready ; I wish, for their punishment, they were only to feel the half of what they infl.61, by forcing me to stay So long in this confounded inn, where perhaps T have Seen the lovely Charlotte for the last time.” So Saying he ran down stairs, and in leSs than five minutes my woman came to inform me, that the coach waited, and shat B 2	the
4	LET T١ E R II.
the Marquis was already in it. I confefs to yois,f my Dear, that the difcovery I had just made, was of singular Service to me, as it obliged me to exert my Spirits in order to divert my brother’s melancholy ؛ besides, it led me into a new train of thinking; for tho’ I always knew the high esteem, veneration, and refpect my brother had for you, (in common with all who have the happinefs of knowing you,) yet till this moment I never fufpected him of being in love with you : Your penetrating eye, Charlotte, (which nothing efcapes) has, no doubt, read his Soul long ago ; and he, from a perfect knowledge of your character, which is So much above the weaknefs of your Sex, has not dared to reveal his passion ؛ this I take to be the true state of the cafe ; 1 shall wait, however, with Some impatience, your anSwer ; and in the mean time I endeavour to comfort him, by talking of your Speedy return.
The coach rolled on, and brought us Safe that night to Dunkirk , the next morning early we proceeded on our journey, and the third aay we arrived at ***. My aunt, with whom you know we intend to make a short stay, received us with an air of the most cordial friendship: She observed, that the Marquis was uncommonly grave ; he attributed it tohis being much fatigued, and made that his excufe for retiring early to his chamber j the next morning brought me your dear letter ؛ I anfwered it in the moment ; my brother is now reading it, and with a look expressive of love, fear, hope, and inexpressible tendernefs, afks what it is you fend him ? Since it is I who am to make the compliment : I anSwered, Your friendship and esteem
I knew
letter III.	؟
ikncw were his; more I could not offer hirn؛١
l٥ISi
fl°i must drefs for dinner, So adieu. In my next I will tell you how I like this town. You are well acquainted both with it, and . its principal inhabitants, So perhaps, my opinion of them may afford you Some amufemenL ٤ ^؛١ jure you, and make haste and return to your difconfolate, but ever affectionate
D’Angeville.
letter III.
To Mademoiselle D’An geville.
AL L you tell me, my dear Adelaide, of your brother’s behaviour, on my departure from Calais, rather grieves than Surprizes me; for I cannot deny the having perceived, that his Sentiments for me were of a warmer nature than thofe which generally slow from simple friendship, unmixt with love. I Say I thought I perceived it; Sor his tongue never Spoke in any other language than that of friendship, and l\\ his professions of esteem might, with equal propriety, have been addressed to you as well as to me \ but then his looks and every ،٤£lion feemed to tell me the fecret of his ٠	B 3	heart.
€>	L E T T E R m .
heart. When I first made this observation, F hoped I was deceived ; X reflected, that neither he, nor I, were any longer of that age when passion holds the reins of reafon, and when judgment is the slave of fenfation ; T flattered my-felf, therefore, that on a farther knowledge of me, the Marquis would find he had made a ve-ry injudicious choice, and consequently easily withdraw his affections from me.
Dead as Tam to every idea of love, judge of ٠ my grief to find, from your letter, that I *had infpired the brother of my friend with an ardent, but hopelefs passion. Alas 1 he little knows the heart which he afpires to the possession of, or he would never attempt its conquest : it is no longer worthy of him j incapable of receiving any tender impression, hardened by uninterrupted disappointment and misfortune, it is now reduced to a state of apathy, from which nothing can recall it; it has felt,, till it can feel no more. Try to convince him of this, and guide his choice to a more deferving object, who can repay his love with tendernefs. Friend-strip, and the highest esteem, are tributes which my reafon cannot reSuSe to his merit ; inexorable Fate has left me nothing more to give. Had I known him Some years ago, I might never have experienced misfortune؛ and he would (I believe) have been happy ؛ but at the preSent period of my life, an attachment with any of Lis Sex is absolutely impossible Sor me ever to think of. I have now, my dear Adelaide, opened my heart to you, and I beg, in coniequence of my sincerity, that you will never more mention the Subject to me. You are not unacquainted with the fteadineSs of my character,
and
LETTER IV.	7
and know how very unapt Iamtochange a fyi-tem I have once adopted.
This affair being decided, I shall now inform you. that I arrived, on TueSday evening, at my numberlefs objects, which recalled former Scenes to my ideas: In short, I went to bed in the vapours ; luckily, the agitation of my Spirits, joined to the jumbling of the post-chaife, had together tired me enough to procure me a good night’s rest. I slept late, and as Soon as I got up, Sent for my lawyer, and then wrote cards to the few acquaintance I have in London, Sor fear lest !should looSe the ufe of my tongue for want of Somebody to talk to ؛ tho I fancy I shall make a ridiculous figure when I attempt to Speak my native language ; I shall certainly think in French, and translate into English, and the latter, you must own, will be much improved, when dressed up in the iditf.n of the former—No matter, I shall be laughed at, and called affected, that is the worst which can happen to me. I long to hear from you ; my friendship to your brother, compliments to your aunt and tenderest love to yourlelf, my dear Adelaide y	C. W.
p. S. I expect my brother and sister in town every moment.
letter IV.
To Mrs. Williams.
INDEED, my dear Charlotte, I shall not tell roy brother one word of what you have fa؛d 7	B 4	in
ة	LETTER IV.
in-your last concerning him. I perfuade him t־׳٥ ceafe to Jove you 1 No, indeed, I never attemp־،־ impossibilities ؛ So shall leave the poor man his. ho.pes—if he has any-—and you may sbrtle tlreir value when he and you meet. I' own,־ I think-you were formed for each other, and! never will deSpair of Seeing you united.
I hate and detest	its foggy and glco؛¡
^y climate feen'is already to have rOhded yOu of that gaiety, which was the charm of Socidty ؛ I. h٩ve often heard you sigh, my dear Charlotte،. when any one liaS mentioned ؛our native Court try j and by ؛evyral hints, which you have giv-en on the Subject, I cou.ld learn, that you had been unhappy in the- married state. You may re^em؛er that one day, on my pressing you, with arstor, to tell me the story of y.ur liSe, yoU anSwered me with a sigla, " Alas, Adelaide ;; wlrat do. you ash of me ? I should pierc¿
!! your tender hearr with the narration Of my ؛ ٠٠.rows, and open in my own, -wounds, which
Ihave, for yedrs, laeen courting the hand of :: Philolo۶hy t؟ heal ؛ and_wbich, tho’ JIO Jong-" er acutely painful, yet, I-fear, will again bleed ءء upon bein.g probed. No, my Lear, I cannot " comply with your request now j laut if ever I',
" go to England again I will therecollect Some pa-.
“ pers, whichformakind of journalof thetranf-" actions of the prior part of my life j and what ءء lias liappened to me fince I came to France. I..
“ have put down in my common^place-book. So “ when I have pieced the two parts together־, I ;; promrife to Satisfy your curiosity j and the " more readily, as I اوط not be prelent whilst ‘ء you read it.”
And
ا
10	LETTER IV. '
her good humour, polite addreSs, and elegant choice of her company. When I first fawner I took her to be an exotic, but for the honor of Flanders, she was bred and born in it.
I here See a race of beings I never was acquainted with before, I mean a number of Subaltern French Officers, who are admitted into the houfes of the Governor, Commandant, &c. as beng of the garrifon, a favor, you know which never is allowed them in Paris, unlefi they are of a very distinguished birth. I have often heard it obServed, that a French Officer of forty, isr in general, what may be called good company ؛ and that, when Some years younger, they are the worst in the world. I fee the force of this observation now, tho’ I never understood it before. I do not know amongst what Species of beings thefe animals on two legs rank themfelves ;. they are ignorant״ vain affected, and noify beyond all conception ؛ in short,, the pictures So frequently drawn by your countrymen of ours, have ever, till my arrival here, appeared to me both falfe and injurious to the nation ؛ but now I frankly own, the fines are not too strong, nor are the paintings earicatura’s. You know them, So I fear 1 have already tired you with my description of them ؛ but remember, Charlotte, that if one was forbid writing on any Subjects but Such as you were a stranger to, pen and ink would be ٠f no farther ufe to me ; and you, in all probability, would not have a correspondent left, or at least very few, amongst whom I most assuredly should not be one.
How vast are the advantages you have over me, for the contrary reafon, and h.w inexbauf-
table
!؛111
and affectionate D’An.geville. and appetite.
٠؛
ثئجج;¡
card)؛ 7 haveا!ا!لأث:?١ء7ا؟٠١٠لا٠يئ ا٠ة١" جاً0لثهلئ
lllll
ةثة'؟:عبةجء
StippoSed ta^fierOfihe ز؛ا ٠،״؛٠;״٠״ Countwas
ققئئ٠يعع
can ح؛;;آا؛t^!y entertaining thأ:ئءn؛ ار::ر;ذ:لاbe٠
h.ufe.of'this old gen. ئ؛ئ؛ذ ءئ؟ائ ”أ٠تأإتا ;t١e
he dined very frequently, waj. ؛vvhere ٣as far from pofSessing
־؟ual to his Birth ; he therefore court؛ ؛؛ ة؛آ؛ his آ؛ htlinefS؛rri؛ an, and, by the؛! l؛،٥l he؛ ٥: conversation, rendered himfe.li' fO agr'eeal^e to he had تم؛ him, .that he grew as fond of frim ad
.been hisown fon
ere alone,؟ the Count and he ت:ث١: ء؛(ئل ءأل٢ ٠ :the old gentleman, after a silence of Some mo
ة״ع״ج٠٠؟٠ةء٠ئحةة؛
10؛ y daughter haj(؛ ؛fha ’ئا״ ٥; }:5؛, !h* !؛child
might ل ۴ءدب٠ءا؛؟لا؛ه٩ثأ؟ a ٣؛ لإء(ءم؛ ٠٤ 1. ؛
I ' ؛؛¡estatC ; Wth this intent هءأ ذآ left ؟ha ؛v؛heiresij and re.si رز؛؛لآ؛لاة؛ ™ade z eldest : genteel competency only ت ثءةثللا:;7 r /-the ail nay Schemes 'are disappointed, frori a cl: ٤؟؛ t ffe can never have any children by؛؛^ rY; t
ج؛.لل ٤٠١ly£¿ hfiir ٠قع theSe sbn or fiSty e
or ¿fty y^ars. Ah, Co^nt f /wish ؛thefe fOrt I had
13	.LETTER V
.! an I did؛t ؛I had known you Some time Soone ou might then have been my Son-in-law ; how-؛ father.؛.ever,- continued he, you may still'be.'tite re can agree upon؛ nd؛ dfon, if you؛of my gra it., and I fancy you won’t find»; very averfe i؛to tfie proposition, as I think I. have obferve that the has already more than a common regard for you.. Thus yOu fee, my dear a unt you have it in your power to make me ha^py, by
لء٢ r;I٥٢ ئء;ا اةلا٢ء giving me ■an heir. It is ״؛ €أآإإ ؛زأ e of failure؛a؛ r, in؛0 hersist؛ turns all pro-؛ ,her; but then she is So young, that. I 'ل:ل!rr״: ٢ءlive to fee h ؛eve؟ bably st!؛Coudt’s anSwer may easily be guessed, as we m he had too much gratitude to Ins؛uppofe tha؛ and benefaTor? to refufe him ajavor of ؛؛؛fri Its the question out؛؟ des, what؛is kind;; be؛؛ ofalidtSpute, is, that fhe was both young and ti^؛laOdSome. A Sew menths after this converf and, at the^uSua) ,؛on the lady proved with chil ount؟ time, brouglrt into the we^ld the preSent re.) the image؟de A—} who is, (as Shave Said bef of Iris Saiher. Not long after this period the huiband of the lady died; the then Count dg continued his intimacy ا-ةءى now Duke ا-ز years after the event ؛؟in the family : \Vhen, So I have related above, the youngest daughter of his friend came hotne frdm the Convent, the ,؛he ,؟,Duke, who liad till that moment never See was wounded at first sight, in lhort he fell deS-؟r؟؛and tli_ere ,؛you know he ؛ perately in love ،e staoujd pay th٩؛ Will not be Surprised that mucli و homage to' her charms at fjfteen, wlaicla when^.she W^S' ؛greater man than he hag done ٩٥rt, he .do lenger in the blooqa of youth ; in ؛irned her, and by sb doing reverfed the orde
14	L E T T E R V.
of thing؟, by disinheriting his ligitimate children, in favor of his bastard ؟ for had not the eldest sister had a Son, his children by the younger must have heired all their grandfather’s fortune. This anecdote may justly be thought too long for a letter, but as you are well acquainted with all the actors in the piece, I hoped it might amufe you; it is a curious one; I had it from an old and intimate friend of the family, and tho’ it is a real truth, yet it would appear fabulous in my country. A father, who procures a gallant Sor his daughter, would be here looked upon as a monster, and probably be as difficult to find (at least in high life) as thePba-nix. We are near neighbours, my Dear j but in fome things our manners différas much as if we inhabited the two Poles. It is certain we are of stricter morals than you French ; what I have frequently heard mentioned in Paris as an affair of gallantry only, would have been looked upon as an atrocious crime, by us flegmatic Islanders.
I remember a circumstance, which happened to me once at Parir, that will do to justify the truth of my assertion.
I was one day at Lady ٠SV٠’s, when, amongst a great deal of good company (with which her houfe was always crouded) there was a lively pretty-looking young man, whom 1 afterwards found out to be the Marquis de P—, So famous for his fuccefs amongst the Ladies, and particularly with a great Princefs ؛ the conversation turned upon the Sorce and duration of an attachment formed in extreme youth, in preference to thofe contracted in riper years : The Marquis, with a vivacity which is peculiar to him, laid, that the first intrigue he had ever had, was
١vitk
L E T T E R V.	15
with his own mother ٠, that he came from College very young, and uSed Srequently to sit by her bed-side, in short, he thought her the hand-Somest woman he had ever Seen ; and she (who was probably worn out with vice) found the charms of novelty in his youth and innocence. He did not tell this story So decently as I do. How shall I deScribe to you, nay friend, the horror and amazement which Seized my SenSes at this astonishing recital ? I felt my face burn with shame and indignation ٠, when recovering a little from my confusion, I perceived that the story had affected nobody but myfelf; the compa. ny Seemed to be no ways moved at it; only Lady — Said, *٠ Fye, Marquis, let me counSel you never to tell that anecdote oS yourSelf and mother again ; it ought to be buried in oblivion.” But I perceive that, without intending it, TaminSensibly writing a Satire upon a nation, which I both love and honor ؛ however, give me leave to think, that your people in high life have relaxed their moral fystem rather too much.
I cannot, indeed, with justice, make an eulo-gium on the manners of our great folks؛ yet it must be allowed, that, however irregular their conduct in private may be, at least they wear an exterior of decency,, and have (Sometimes) modesty enough to conceal, what they have not always virtue to refrain from the practice of: Whether hypocrify, in this cafe, be a virtue or a vice, I leave to your Sorbonne to determine.
I admire the defeription you give me of your *** acquaintance ; they are what are called, mighty good Sort of people, and like most of thofe, whom the ill-judging part of the world honor with that epithet, very unentertaining j
they
16	LETTER VI.
they Seem to me, to be of that Species of beings, to whom Providence has given Souls by way of Salt, to keep them from stinking ; the thought is (if I remember, Cicero’?, and can never be better applied,,than on this occasion. lam Sorry to find, Adelaide, that you remember the promiSe I So unguardedly made you, of shewing you the journal of my life, for it would be doing it tod much honor to call it a historv ; however, I will not recede from my word, but will indubitably fend it you, by the first Safe conveyance that offers, it being too large a packet to go by the post. I am ashamed of the length of this letter ; it is the confequence of having nothing to do. My Sister’s children were taken ill of the Small-pox, theday she was to have Set out for London., , fo l am left to finish my bufi-nefs here, which, when done, I shall go down to their Seat in the country. Adieu, dear friend,, continue to love me, and write Soon to your faithful	G. W.
I am very Sorry to hear of your Brother’s in-difposition ؛ my best compliments to him, and Say, I have not forgot the commission he favoured me with.
LETTER VI.
To Mrs. Williams.
My ،!ear Charlotte,
IF I did not know you to be a Cofmopolite,
I should fufpect your having imbibed Some of the prejudrces of your countrymen, who are
fain:
Said to hold all nations in contempt but their own, and particularly us their neighbours: I he two instances you, my Lear, have given, to prove the immorality of the French, are strong; but I hope you will allow them to be very uncommon. The story of the Count،!	am
much obliged to you for ; I have heard Some part of it before, but never understood it clearly till now ; it is a curious anecdote to tho.e who know the parties. As to the Marquis of
p___ neither he, or any other man, could ever
have been drawn into the commission of fo horrid a crime, as that which he had the audacity to mention at Lady S—’؟,·· by the means of any other woman* than the Marchionefs his mother who was (as you must have heard) the Mejjalina of her time.. We may, therefore, with confidence hope, that there is not Such another instance to be found either in ours, or any other Christian country ; and if there were no appa. rent marks of furprize in the faces of thole who were prefent at fo horrid a recital, it must have been, becaufe they, being Pariftenes, had frequently heard the circumstance, which is known to the whole world, at least in France ؛ and he too, might mention it with that Seeming eafe, as Supposing every body preSent to be acquainted with it. I have myfelf heard it above a hundred times, but never told without horror and detestation by the narrator. The world is, perhaps, not So very bad as it Seems to be the prevailing fashion to think it : Virtue and Vice are blended in most characters. I am of your famous Pope\ opinion,, when he fays,
Virtuous
*8	LETTER VL
Virtuous and vicious every man must be,
Few in the extreme, but all in the degree,
The rogue and fool, by turns is fair and wife,
And even the best, by fits, what theydefpife.
I am obliged for the translation to our Abbe die Re/nal. Yet where vice preponderates in the Scale, I think we may pronounce the character a bad one, and, as being Such, it should be shunned by all thoSe who profeSs themfelves her enemy.
Was this maxim put rigidly in practice, without favouring the perfons of the Great, Vice would Soon be out of countenance, and her votaries condemned to live in Solitude, a situation which Virtue alone can render agreeable, and consequently must be infupportable to Vice ;
٠ oblige a libertine to live, for one week only, by himSelf and I am perfuaded he will, from conviction, confefs, that he is the worst of company. It is a strange thing that mankind, who in general are partial to their own opinion m all other cafes*, should in this prefer the approbation of the world to their own, by acting in a manner-they know to be wrong, and then taking all the pains imaginable to conceal their bad con،· duct from their acquaintance ; not considering how injuriously they are treating themfelves, whilst they are trying to deceive others: ׳] hus it frequently happens, that they who have done premeditated ill actions without remorfe, have died of the wound given to their vanity, by the just contempt they have met with from the world on being discovered j this could never happen if we Set a proper value on our approbation of our. Selves. I am led to this reflection from being, a Sew days ago, in company with Mrs. D—, a
Sensible
letter VI.	*'9
Sensible Irish woman, who ran away from the der the title of a new convert, which you know there is a foundation for at Paris, and by proper Sook her faith ׳, and is now, in confequence of not liking her husband (who is poor, being re-٠ ducedtoS half-pay,) and the difapprobation of and a bigot ; they are generally fynontmous. He is what I have heard you call, a ml hot Papist, and would (I fuppofe) burn you Protei-tarns without the least remorfe, for the love of God and the Ho١y Inquisition. Such is the irresistable force of Superstition, which eradi. cates from the breast every benevolent principle of humanity, and, like a forcerefs, having en-chanted the optics of reafon, converts cruelty, and every monstrous phantom of a distempered brain, into the inviting forms of the most Sacred duty. Such as I have painted him she Sees him, and^feeling that she is libelled by her choice, cannot Survive the thought. How might me have Spared her heart all the pangs it now fuf-fers, by following the laws of God and Nature, in honouring and obeying her parents؟ Let; the ties of blood alone, it is an ungenerous and an inhuman act to wound the hearts of 1؛ך10؛»
٥٠. LETTER vir.
whole tender care has raifed our infancy, and־' whole friendly hand is ever ready to Support and direct our riper years. Bull find I am imper. ceptibly writing a Sermon; excufe me, my dear Charlotte, in favour of the candour with which I have Spoke on the Subject of the. religion I* protefs, and which, divested of bigotry and Superstition, '1 reverence and honor ؛ since it does not forbid me to love and admire virtue, though L should find her in Jew,. Turk, or Gentile Adieu, my dear Charlotte, your abfence is a real: misfortune to me, and flings a gloom overall my ideas; return, then, and restore to gaity and comfort the heart of your ever affectionate
D’Angeville..
I. S. My Brother has forgot what, commission he gave you, but it is no wonder ،.·. poor man, he appears to me not to have a quarter of a fenfe left. I wish you would Send him a Small parcel of them back, as I: am convinced that they are all in your pof. Session. We let out for Paris next week.
LETTER VII.
To Mademoiselle D’Angeville.
My dear Adelaide,
YOU are quite a mo-ral Philofopher; I had half a mind to have put your letter into one of our Library Journals, for the good of the public. Nothing can be more judicious than are your remarks on the character of Mrs
K— j.
ا
22	LETTER VII.
be allowed the expression, the tenderest friendship ; but no more on this Subject, I beg.־—
I must now tell you that I have gained my caufe, and am peaceably put into possession of the estate my uncle left me, without even having my lawyer’s bill to pay, since the plaintiff is cast with costs of Suit. So having now nothing to do in town, I shall Set out, in a few days, for Sir Charles’sfeat in the country, as I long to See both him and his Lady. My eldest brother has been in town with me for Some time؛ my father is confined in the country with the gout, So cannot be moved. I have Seen the worthy Mr. Smith ؛ but you know nothing of him yet; when you do, I expect you to be in love with him ؛ he and I were very near dying with joy at the sight of each other; his age could not bear Such a torrent of tendernefs and pleafure,, as the sight of me raifed in him ; on my part, the lively Sensibility I had of his more than parental goodnefs to me, my love and veneration of his character, joined to the warm gratitude, with which my heart glowed, on the remembrance of all the benefits I had received from him, overcame me, and, on approaching him, I fainted away in his arms; his years, and tendernefs for me, rendered him incapable of Supporting me, So that had not a Servant been present, I do not know what would have become of either of us. When I recovered, I condemned my indiScretion and want of fortitude, in thus giving way to fenfation ; but I was unguarded against pfeafure, from being unufed to experience its effects. I begged my friend and benefactor to pardon the vivacity of my joy on Seeing him again ؛ he had been much alarmed
during
LETTER VIII.	23
ing him pretty well compofed at night.—■You ■will Say, why, what is Mr. Smith to me .	٠
1׳ anfwer a great deal, when you have read my {lory which! shall Send you shortly. Pray,
״L؟ri׳M7f״،il؟;\^heeM״%٥ir٥tU/nf־ta٠r
he is ill, by not having heard from you lately. Adieu, difpel my apprehensions by a line to your fchhful	C٠ W٠.
LETTER VIII.
To Mrs. Williams.
YOU will no longer be Surprized at my silence, when I inform you, that my brother has been, for Some time, in an ill state of health ; indeed he has never been well since we parted with you, my dear Charlotte, at Calais.
I perceived/ with ixexpressible concern, that he١nourished in his breast a passion for you, which destroyed his constitution. I propofed going into the country, to See what change of ·fir would do ؛ but perceiving him reach of medicine, as he apprehended it to proceed from an affection of the mind, not a diS-eaSe of the body, though the latter was always D'Angwillc·
g	the
24	LETTER VIII.
the confequence of the former; he added, that if I knew the caufe of my Brother’s melancholy, I ought to endeavour, by reafon and argument, to lessen its force, and to convince him of its pernicious confequences, as well as of its inutility. This diScourfe made me think that I ought to probe the wound ; and that, perhaps., when he was thoroughly convinced of the impossibility of attaining his desires, he might exert himfelf, and in time get the better of a .׳-hopelefs passion ; with this thought, after having one day talked much of you, and the singular turn of your character, I ventured to af-Sert, that you was rro longer Sufceptible of the tender passions; and, in order to Support my opinion, I drew out of my pocket the first letter you wrote me after your arrival in England. But oh, Charlotte s how shall I be able to describe to you the Sequel of this dreadful Scene ? Into what an abyfs of myfery has my indiscretion plunged me ! He heard the letter read with great attention, when, looking at me with all the marks of ineffable grief painted in his face, he Said, ٠٤ I thank you, Sister, Sor deciding my fate; Hope is now no more; I shall die content, since the stroke is given by the too amiable Charlotte.’' He turned pale on pronouncing thefe words, and fell back in his chair .٠ I flew to his assistance, and found his head and hands burning hot: We put him to bed immediately ; his fever increaSed; the Physicians Seem to think him in danger ; he obstinately refuSes to take any of the medicines prescribed by his Doctors.
I read him to day, a paragraph in your last letter, where you Say, " That you are Sorry to have been the innocent cauSe of inquietude to a
man,
e highest esteem;”؛man, f۶r whom you have t l'f I may be permitted the expref- ءء) ,add add sion) the tenderest friendship.”
;He raiSed his languid head, and looking at me
filiend— ٢ق٦ل 7لأ ات٢لا٠?٦٠ئ ١y؛finit؛I ami ٠٤ ,laid
nor can l أ pjres at myre؛؛ ؛ear؛ b۶t n?y و ship livi, unlefs by a miracle I could infpire he^ wsth t for me than that ofesteemj״ntime؛tende٢e٢f؛ be : an. ؛ve؟n t ca٩؛but, alas, (atlded he) th
تء؛;£ج ؛لليأ״لث «	Sofayi^g! with a
pillow. Write tO him, my dear Clear- ؟n hi؛؟u kite·, on ray knees I beg you to fa۴ his life;
إد٠آ بإم؛زأ؛ ;his recojery ؛0 ؛mine depend cannot love at least ؛my dear ; and if^o اح1ذ؛ e؛0؛ ind fu n to،::؛0. Co؛ do not tell him he will exert his utmost power to obey you, by in ljiort, restore my ؛؛taking proper remydie
س,ساسا٠ئئسسا ٥)״h٠)bi٥ D’Angeville.
letter IX,
To Mademoifella D’Angeville.
قءي٠:ا״ل l taik have you ءع٦ا׳ئ١ ’AH) itelmel
my heart, by the account you give me of the Grief, Pity, Friend. آ Marquis’s Orefent situation ship, all combine to make me wretched! I would Sacrifice my life, with pleafure, 0 re. store him again to Irealth and peace ; but Love, iS it ita our power ? Or, if it .were, could !,* vet again to admit it into my breast?؟ ,ought I Yol. I. c Ihsse
2 6	L E T T E R X.
I here inclofe a letter toyohr Brother, in compliance with your request ; I wish it may contribute to his recovery ; I have Sard, all that friendship can expect from me in it, and more perhaps, than prudence will approve ; I have expofed my heart to his view, without the least reServe : Let him read it, and if he can there find any ground for hope, I shall be glad of it, a> I most sincerely wish him both peace and hap-pinefs; but cannot give them to him at the expence of my veracity. Adieu, Adelaide, my ipirits are deprest, I shall not know a moment’s eafe till I hear from you again.
Yours, as ever, C. W.
My Brother and Sister are much yours. I Sent the promifed Memoirs, by one of the King’s Messengers, before I left town; I fuppofe our ambassador has Sent it you before now. I have employed a man ever since you requested to See them, and I think he has been very expeditious in transcribing them ; it is true, he has worked every day, and all the day, at them. LETTER X.
To the Marquis D ’ A I S £.
Dear Sir,
IT is impossible forme to defcribe the uneafi.
nefs which a letter I received yesterday, from MademoiSelle D’Angeville, has given me. Toknowyouaredangerously ill, and to be told that I am the unhappy cauSe of your indisposition, is
not
L E T T E R X.	27
not lefs Surprizing than painful to me: If. in reality you have that affection for me, which your sister assures me of, you will Spare my heart the wound of having deprived my dearest friend of a beloved Brother. Be certain, that, should this be the cafe, peace must for ever be a stranger to my breast. You must live, Sir, or my future existence will be imbittered by the fight of that very sister, who has.for So many years,been the delight and comfort of it. How wil١ She ever bare to look upon the wretch who robbed her of you ? Alas, the thought chills my blood with horror! Is this a return to make her for her constant and tender attachment to me > And could she, from an effort of generous pity, forgive my invo.untary crime ; yet what would confole me for the lofs of a friend, I So highly esteemed and valued asyourfelf ? I therefore beg of you, dear Sir, for my Sake, to uSe all possible methods for your recovery ; remember, my peace depends on your compliance with this request. I have Sent your Sister the Story of my Life ; I beg she would read it to you ؟ and when you have heard it, if you should think it possible for my heart to be again fufeep-tible of a tenderer Sentiment than that of friendship, ufe your endeavours to infpire me with it. You have already my sincerest regard, and Sensibility of your worth ; but my heart is, I Sear, dead to love ؛ obtain that, and I promiSc you she hand of your ever faithful and affectionate friend	C. W.
C 2	P. s.
28	LET T E R x.
P. S. I shall not be long before I return to Paris : I therefore insist that you do not anfwer this, and I expect to be obeyed.*
* I thought proper to incert the Memoirs here, ·as the reft ٠f the Letters were apparently wrote after Mademoifella D'An-¿evtlk had read them, and to which they frequently allude.
(	29	)
MEMOIRS
Mrs. WILLIAMS*.
MY father was a Gentleman of an ancient
٠h٠ W٠٥
toa Peerage, but could never be prevailed upon to take up the title, becaule the estate, which belonged to it, had been left from him.
I was the first fruit of their union, about nine months after their marriage. Never, Sure, were two people of more different characters united, than my father and mother were: He was in theory, a philofppher, loved reading, had*a liberal education, was born with strong natural Senfe, Some wit, and violent passions؛ his understanding, which was remarkably fine, he had cultivated by travelling, and a most extensive knowledge of books, he read mankind with two critical an eye, which naturally led him to dislike them ؛ the confequence of which
* I have changed the real names into fictitious one،, in order to avoid giving offence.
C 3	was,
3٥ The MEMOIRS of was, that he was fatyrical and morofe: Whether this turn of mind in reality proceeded from the reafon I have just given, or was occasioned by Some disappointments he had met with in his youth, I know not ; or. whether it might not, as I have Sometimes SuSpected, have proceeded from his being connected with my mother, who was, in every reSpect, the least calculated of any woman living to make him happy. She was gay, g؛ddy, illiterate, good-natured, and vain to an excefs ؛ she had just that share of understanding, which Nature Seems to have diSpoSed of, in equal, but Small parcels, amongst my Sex ؛ she presided with grace at her table, dressed well, (I mean, in that happy medium which is just in the fashion, without ever approaching the extremes,) in short, like what she was.—a Gentlewoman. She could keep up a conversation, for a day together, with life and Spirit, without Saying any thing ; and was, what the world calls, a very agreeable woman ; but what my father thought a very trifling one. She was, however, a good breeder, for in the courfe of Seven years she had brought my father as many children. The education of the boys was easily decided, as it was left entirely to my father’s direction ; but that of the girls (of which we were two) occasioned violent debates between our parents. My father afferted, that women were rendered foolish and ridiculous by their education, and that, if their minds were properly cultivated, they might be made rational beings as well as the men. My mother, on the contrary, insisted, that they were, without education, more rational than their masters ; ،id that learning (as she termed it) only Served to
render
s
|׳تغبيججئ
У с 4	gence.
32 The MEMOIRS OF gence, ٩0ا1إ naost of r٧y Sex do at a much riper ag؟. Hedid not confide my studies to Reading and the Gl.obes alone; I had .aflers to teach ة١أء French) Y٢rit؛ng٠ Arithmetic, Drawing, and Lancing 5 Music, he Said, was Such an en-؟h^tresi, that is I had a taste for it, I should dedicate too much of my time to it, and if־ I had none, I should never m3ke any proficiency in the art ؛ أnd that it would always be in my pow-er,. in a shcrt t؛n>e, to learn ،0 Sing a ballad, and thrum tire guitarre, after I had learned W'hat.he .thought much naore essential, and which ؛e called the ؟cience of thinking and acting witla judgment and {iropriety.
٠ Young as 1 was, 1 Soon found the utility of his lesions on thele two important Subjects. J'hg '؟art I had to pl؛y, in my fitly SpherC, was by no means an eafy one j for I couid not avoid perceiving, that as I roSe in the esteem of'shy Sasher, I fell in that of my mother, whofe dif-like of me Lad now almOst increased into an. aversion. I remember that, one day, on my entering the room where Sophia and ؛’he werC ؛Itting together, she Said to me, " So, Madam how comes it tlrat your wisdom condesbends to hold c؟n^ciSe with mine, and your sisters igno. ranc؟ ? I fup۶ofe you me:٥n tO criticise eYery .word we Speak, by way of amusing yourSeh at o۶r expense ؛ but we will not give you that pleafu؛e, for we win go opt, and leave you to your learned reveries,.” So Saying, she roSe from her chair. I affured her, with great hu-mihty, that her company was Cver both instruc-tive and pleasing to rUe, and begged her, almost w؛th tears, not to deprive me Of it thed. But she gave me a look fUll of anger and contempt,
and
Mr؟، WILLIAMS.	33
and flounced out of the room. Sophia followed her, betaufe she durst not do otherwife. In this manner she generally treated me, whenever I prefented myfelf before her, my father not being with me ؛ So that, at last, I avoided her almost as much as she did me : And thofe hours which were not fpent with my father. I pafs’d in my own room by mySelf, or with my masters. At dinner, however, we always met, when it past with great refpect on my side, and a cold civility on her’s. Sophia was a good-natured girl, and ufed frequently, when she came into my room, to beg of me, with tears in her eyes, not to impute to her my mother’s ill treatment of me; She professed, in the warmest terms, her love and value for me, and begged the continuation of my friendship for her ؛ which I readily promifed, as she was no way anfwerable for the caprices of my mother. I Saw however, with infinite concern, that ٤ was a theme of perpetual contention between my parents ؛ and one day, being alone with my father, I ״!treated him, with the utmost energy, to ceafe Shewing any partiality to me ? I requested him to give me my lessons privately, and that I would study them in my own room by myfelf؛ I begged of him, not to require my prefence So frequently in his library, as I perceived that my depriving my mother of So much of his company, was diSpleasing to her, and drew upon me her refentment. He anfwer. ed me, with Some warmth, " That he was maS-ter of own time, and should difpofe of it as he pleafed ; and that he should not alter, nor Suffer me to change, either the manner or nature of my studies, on any consideration whatfce-7 .	C 5	٢er.”
34 The MEMOIRS of ver.” Thus I was condemned to Suffer what I could not avoid , however, the affliction I Selt on being the caufe (though an innocent one) of the daily distentions, and increaSe of coolnefs between my parents, wrought at last upon my constitution, and I became thin, pale, and languid ; and, instead of that slow of fpirits which was natural to me, I grew pensive, inactive, and melancholy. My father was the first who perceived the declining state of my health, and aiked me, one day, with great tendernefs, What was my complaint ? and whether I was really ill or no ? I anfwered him, thatlwas certainly far from being well, but that I did not know what was the matter with me. He replied, with vivacity, ‘٠ But I do 1 it is your mother’s ill treatment of you that breaks your heart ؛ she would be glad of it, but I shall take care to prevent her having that fatisfaction, by removing you out of the reach of her malice.״ So Saying, he left me. I judged, from his words, that I was destined to leave home Soon, tor Some time, and I was not Sorry for it. That day, at dinner, my father looking at me with an air of more familiar good humour than ufual, laid, " Charlotte, my Dear, should you like to tee London?’’ I anfwered, Yes, Sir; there are manv things in it which I often wished to See, and if you was to go with me, I think I should be delighted with Such a journey. " I don’tan-٤wer Sor that, replied he, but I promiSe you that you shall go there, if it is agreeable to you I will write to-morrow to my sister, to inform her of my intention, of letting you paSs the v.׳inter with her : She has often afked you of me, but, till now, I thought you too young:
Indeed,
■
my mother accompany him ihither ^٥١١^^ ٥L when his children were grown up, he would take a houle in not till then.	Ab٠ut
3<5	The MEMOIRS of
About a month after my father hack declared his intention of Sending me from home, I was ordered to pack up my cloaths, and informed, that I was to Set out the next day, with mv father, for my aunt’s country feat, which was about thirty miles distance from our houfe. I took an affectionate leave of my dear Sophia, who shed floods of unfeigned tears on parting with me; when embracing me with the utmost tendernefs, she Said, she was ashamed of her want of generosity, in thus preferring her own happinefs to mine.
During our journey my father endeavoured to give me Some idea of the characters I was going to live with. He told me, with a Smile, " That his sister was a great fool, and consequently thought herSetf extremely w ife ; for (added he,) it belongs only to the happy few, who are really fo, to doubt of their own capacities. She was an old maid when she married, an epithet ,which she had (in common with the rest of her Sex) an aversion to : In order, therefore, to get rid of it, slie married the first man who aiked her the question ؛ your prefent uncle was the perfon ; So, without holding it the ¡east necessary to enquire into his character, disposition, &c. she only informed herfelf of his income؛ and that being found Sufficient to keep her in the rank of life in which she had always lived, they were married. The joy she felt, on having rubbed off the odium which is So generally ׳(though, I think, very unjustly) Bung upon old maids, made her not attend, at least lor Some days, to the character of her husband, which, however, she was obliged to do in the cotirfe ol Some weeks. He is one of thole men, who,
٥Q٤
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	37
not being able to make themfelves of any con-fequence abroad, are Czars in their own houfes. His tyranny puts her out of humour, and then she vents her Spleen on the Servants, and probably will Sometimes upon you, my dear. How. gyg־١. you must follow this unerring rule, which is, to act right, and laugh at the rest; but not fo as to offend any one ٠. What I mean by laughing, is, not to make yourfelf uneafy, becaufe fools a61 abfurdly. Let her Sollies be a lesson to you, to avoid practising what you contemn in her.” As he came to this period of his dif-courfe, we arrived at my uncle's. My aunt prefented herfelf to us in the hall, and at her heels my uncle. She received my father with an air of real joy, and me with a little ton of protection, which mortified my vanity. " Is that Charlotte ? Said she: Come here, my pretty Dear: she’s a Sweet child; I shall be amazingly fond of her, I perceive ,٠” then patted me on .the cheek, and chucked me under the chin. My uncle kissed me, faying, I was a fine young lady, and should make many a pretty fellow’s heart ach : To which my Sather anSwered, I hope not ; I would not have her Ltyrized by the addresses of the fops and puppies of the prefent ^But not to dwell too long upon trifles, I shall hasten on with my Story. My father, then, having stayed a week at my uncle’s, ·took his leave in order to return home. This was the first time I was ever Separated from him, except when he made his short excursions to London \ and I really believe, that the disuniting of the Soul from the body could not have been more painful to me. He Seemed touched with my P	Sensibility,
38 The MEMOIRS of
Sensib’lity, but chid me, Saying, Take care, child, lest what you may think an effect of ten-dernefs, does not deviate (by its excefs) into either passion or weaknefs; Subdue, Charlotte as much as possible, the too lively fufceptibility of your heart ؛ it will otherwise run away with you, and then you will find it a Source of eternal affliction. Adieu, my dear girl, I shall See you Some part of the winter in town.” So Saying, he stepped into his chariot, and drove off.
We stayed about a month in the country after my father had left us, when we fat out for London. Nothing happened to us worth relating on the road ; my uncle and aunt slept most part of the way; I was employed in cathcing the former’s hat, which frequently fell off, as he nodded, and the coach jolted; this, with the objects I met with on the road, (all of which were new to me,) made the journey not appear lone, though we were three days in going the Same ground, which we might now travel in one, with eaSe, So much are the roads improved since that time. I was extremely delighted at the fight of London ; it appeared like a little world to me, from the number of its houfes, and the multitude of people I Saw in the streets. My uncle’s houSe was a very good one, and looked into the Park. The morning after our arrival, when I came down to breakfast. I found a young gentleman in my aunt’s dressing-room, whom she immediately prefented to me, as the nephew and heir of my uncle. I took very little notice of him, excepting that I thought he was a good pretty figure. He paid me many compliments, wnich I hardly attended to enough to appear civil j however, I thanked him, upon his offering
to
39	.Mrs. WILLIAMS
؛دءدر؛؛٤٤ةه؛٢’؛؛٤؛أ ,e^.o theplay؟ to attend ,tl¿ heart Sighed after؛Sights' were what my li
* ־	حع؛ءاآأح؛ :هلء:٢ا;:لة::!ئ.لء٢ه٦? ؛زلاذ
ncipal״^ gentleman^ will be a ج؟ا0إآ؛؛إ As¡:
e٦e of my life, I ¿ust ¿eg؛f؟h)ehr؛ actor in
؛|؛؛lan؛؟؟leave to introduce him to your acq He w^s ahout twenty years of age, rather tall, ؛اأااا’تء ؛ ,well ™ade :׳(than short, remarkabi
genteel ; his complexion was Sai^; he bad light
٠ئه n لا?لئة[يء٢؛لختيا،رت؛غ:إ:1ء؟يء ٧e؛b ي ذ٢_اعج
ad, indeed, an m-؛ good-nature than ienfe; he former, nor was he m ؛؛Shaushble fund of t ٠ ,n the latter: ye was lively؛ the least deficient جإ;٠ءء٢ءم had fome humour, and I could Soon :ت[ا؛ اا: ءإا? ت me ؛it؛ ؛e in lov؛؛t a l؛was n
jhat he was ١ءر"ء؛إ ^r, an؛th؛dients tog؛ngr؛
ii
!in sh٥or٠ ::؛؛٠<٠!؛; هة: ;لا؛ب٠ااءلا;لا»هء ,who
؛*le to me: In she؛؛agr^e ؛s؛el١؛^e؛!aaking؛ ؛؛؛؛؛؛n؛¿ha١e؛erSuaded that I slaoul؛ ؛I an
قئ٤ئ؛ئئي ألأ:كثلث had not my uncle ثأائ١ with
s ( which was our union) by؛؛؟rp؛their own p all rny ل؛0 cenSor ؛pyoYe¿ an؛ making ssim^he
؟|لهءل كءأ؛؟لا:ل::ء٦ل ق: words and actions. ' I
؛na؛to any public place unaccompanied by h
hey؛and Wien they s^w any thing in me which WiShed to reprove, they requested him to shew he gentlest, and poUtestj t٢ms؛ in ١؛r؟me^ny err since؛؛as I hay) ;f١a١ ذزذ possibie. With regret head him declare,) he obeyed their oders ۴unc٠ h patience؛w ؟ways listened to hi،؛ tually. I
؛؛ and.mustlconfefs. that :٢ع٠ Ood؛ ؛an ه ث from لءإسء!اة3 could render even, advice y״؟:٠.and wCuld tell me ؛manner of giving it
4٥ The MEMOIRS of faults, without mortifying mon amour propre. Thus, whilst I listened and admired the Mentor, and friend, by what fatality I know not, the lover vanished; I esteemed him, I valued him, I would have trusted him with my life; but whenever I thought of him as a husband, a universal chillnefs feized my whole frame, and I found that, in this point of view, he was become my aversion. I was extremely shocked at this diScovery, which I could no way account for, and was even ashamed to find, that my heart could Febel against the object, which my reafon and judgment approved, and which had once (as I apprehended) been that of my choice. I hoped time would restore me to reafon ؛ and, in order to bring mySelf the Sooner to it, 1 made a list of his virtues, dissected his perfon, (which, was really agreeable) and, in short, almost fell in love with the picture I had drawn of him upon paper, whilst the original could not touch my heart. Sometimes, when I was left alone with him, he would talk of books, and other things, with So much good SenSe, perfpicuity, and livelineSs, that I have looked at him, and thought within mySelf, he is amiable, and I do like him. When, upon his turning the conversation Srom general topics to his love of me, and perhaps approaching to take my hand, I have instantly been Seized with the Same shivering, and have involuntarily shrunk from his touch, as I should have done from that of a viper. He often tenderly complained of my apparent aversion to him; this thought, I perceived, preyed upon his Spirits j my uncle and aunt frequently reproached me with my want of Sensibility j in short, when they were remonstrating to me on
the
41	.Mrs. WILLIAMS
accomplishments of my lover, ؛the virtues an addon heal'furdity of n٦y behaviour to him, I ;)، :؛wa.soLcn tempted .to leg of the Into a marriage v illi him, (whir h might ذذ by which means (؛have been done at that time orced to liave acted.right,־، ihOuld have been ؛ onour, would, to-؛ and rdy duty, and a fe-nfe of gether, ha١e contributed to have made me pur. But my extreme ا: ۶ue the San.e road to the end youtll and modesty stopped ,my tongue, unhap. د ·. ·p٢٠ve اا؛م ٩s theevent ,pily for rue In short, the winter past between him) and ؛p I went every where, ؛ me in tie lame inanner nay father came lometimes, ؛ faw ever thing
0 recommend to me not to ne-؛ 0٠t؟or؛d never؛a
glect my studies totally : I gave ^smuch of nay cOuld to my masters, bUt, i must cOn- ؛ime as؛ light to have done. :״ fefi, not sb natich as I ־my nn ؛an ,؛o؛My aunt was often- very c d she genially, quarrelled’ twice every؛cle a day. .which vvas at.dinner and Supper. The the ؛0 ؛de, -complaint؛ Subjects 'were, on her his. ب 0 her؛ fervants, or his want of attention were of the naeat’! not being well-dreffedj Or of herfelf being very ill dressed. I.t is true that ue-؛uttidg on her cloaths was t؛ her manner of t١o ؛e؛and he u ,؛Jy in the stile of an old mai e would؟ ,affOnt her extremely, by telling her maoy ־ad been fo(؛ never rub off tlae ruff she i!;״yCars contracting; to which she would ani manner which sbmetimes tirade me imagine ذ in that tlae conversation might laecome ratlaer in-delicate, sb I uSed generally to retire .into my om as sbon as the table-clothwas remov-؟own r e؛ed, where I stayed till I_was infortned that t coffee Waited for me. On my rerurn into the ,room
42 The MEMOIRS of
room, I always found my uncle fast asleep ; and my aunt ufed to take that opportunity to obferve that she was convinced no two people could be happy in the married state, unlefs they had children ؛ to which observation I could make no reply, as I really knew nothing of the matter at that time ; but I have lived to See many exceptions to this rule, and many instances of children being the Source of dissension, rather than union, between their parents : And in either of thefe cafes I am of opinion, that the cauSe of their disagreement lies in their own breasts, and does not proceed either from their having or not having children, since if they really loved, valued, and esteemed each other their reciprocal friendship would render them invulnerable to the attacks of caprice and i١l-humour. I have often reflected, with grief and furprize, at the levity with which young peopJe enter into the state of wedlock: We frequently See, that if a Lady comes to visit MiSs’s Mamma, and aiks the favour of the young Lady’s company in the country for a month, the Mamma confenting, Mifs will be very inquisitive and anxious to know the temper and disposition of the Lady she is to be So long a time with as four weeks, and will expreSs great apprehensions, that their humours may not Suit, &c. but let her fee an agreeable, handSome young Gentleman, whoSe figure pleaSes her eye, and she will immediately engage with him for life, without any of thofe fears or enquiries, which she thought fo necef. fary in a cafe of fo much ٠eSs importance ٠, not considering, that on the choice of a husband depends (in all human probability) her future happinefs or mifery. Let me here beg leave to
give
43	.Mrs. WILLIAMS
: آ؛؛ give a word of advice to my own قع:ء٦االم ience, and anextenfive knowledge of؛ have taught me, that whenever a٧y wo^man eS ate, on؟ tabhsbes her happinefs in the marriage
؛س|؛ع:سقة
friindsbipXishai: غ?"״1’ةؤ٠1:لة1أ״"?اهج?لا
؛s,friendship will a؟proy؛out, but WhCre reafona th؛s be the confequence. Hold a man of w۶؛Wa and I will الم״ه٣ he؛ he you Sure not to be in anSwer for his sbon bCing in the right, though ؛l؛he may perhaps at first not entirely agee w ؛rtan؛imp ؟w؛ Se؛definition oS th ؟٦ةلماا ٧؛y oints. If yoU have been deceived. and have؛ married a libertine, he win. at leaft, fo far ref-wear a maik btfore you. ٤٥ pea your .virtues, 2.5 or؛) and perhaps ؛unlefs he be a monfter indeed I hilve Seen Such instances) he may admire vir-rue in you, till be catches the emanation.— treSpaSs upon ,؛But I, digrefs too far, and, I fea د .٧rn to rny st.ry؛ your patience. To It was now the SeaSon when every body wish-n؟streets of London for gre ־'(es to leave the dlist accordingly, my uncle ؛fields and a purer air ind his family. Iris nephew gir Charles Stanly, and myfelf. Set out for——shire, where we ar. rived in much hetter health than temper, for the way. ؛my uncle and aont had quarrelled al Sndf had Sat next my lover, during the whole ؟a circumstance which was no way t و journey ءا ٩t.pam, as؟his advantage, and gave me gr convinced me, that my dislike of him was now increafedinto a confirrhed antipathy of his per-T'his proceeded, I believe, fior? his hav- ؛ Son ^ing entertained me all the way with the strong
44 TheMEMOIRSof
-eil assurances .of the force of his passion, a Sub h, I have already obferved, always؟whi ل٤ج!ل ¿؛us to me. I was delight؟d him odi؛der؛e؛ ^when I found myfelf releafed from this Codve by our arnval at -——;Where after ل”٠؛ءئ] ays, I went to my father’s: i؛ ؟staying Som was received by him witla rapture, with civili-ar؛l، ؛y n١؛ al joy؛ ty by m.y mother, and with
h؛ri؛month’s visit, w ؛ ٠f ٥٧r٢e؛ ء؛ا ٦ء ةاغئهو ٠
my father, he took frequent occash...؟made t ء o,ns of telling me, how rejoiced hC was to find that .1 was destined to be the Wife of Sir Charles ntinued my father) every؟؛) He is ;٠ !Stanly y.h٠٠r، could wish the man to be, whom؟. , jhmg I would have chofe for your husband ; he haSa -؛pe ؛i can hav^e no objection to hi؛fne e٢state,y0 -on, for that is Itandfome, and liis understand؛ g IS un Vcrfally allowed to be uncommonly cul.؛؛ r-״es, he ispe؛؛e؛ ’ ج;ءلااًئ لا٠اي٢:ء fectl-d fectly gopd-natured and well-bled, and I think you peculiarly f.ortunate to be the choice of So accomplished a Gentleman., Yoir, mv Lear, l am perSuaded, are fentibfe of your: own hap! pine(s, and will. I make no doubt, deferve the continuance of.It, by exerting yoUr utmost en-,deavours towards making a go^.d wife, mother ٥nd mistrefs. Here he panted, and looked nlake no reply : The I dur٩ :؛steadfastly atm ^awe in which I ,stood of my father, the defe aid to'h.is judgment, in short, thecOn-؟ ence I؛ fcioufnefs that all he had Said' Was tiuth, except -is difc۶٧rsb whicla concerded my؛ shat part of fe con^derations tied my tonguC:؛٩11 th ؛If؟ And thus, by my silence, I conhrrUtd him in. the.belief, that I had no objection to the mar-rying Sir Charles. No time, however was yet fixed
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	45
fixed Sor our nuptials, as I was thought to be much too young to take upon me the care of a family. In this dilemma I ufed Sometimes to flatter mySelf with the hope, that time, perhaps, would cure me of a caprice I could no way account for, and which my reafon invariably condemned. I wished to love Sir Charles Stanly, with as much ardor as ever a forSaken maid did to forget the object which had betrayed and undone her, and with equal fuccefs ؛ that is to Say, without any. In this difagreeable situation of mind I continued for near two years, which I fpent with my uncle and aunt; during which time nothing material happened to me. Every body knew I was engaged, consequently no body made any propoSals of marriage to me ; So that I Spent my life in one continued insipid monotony ; till a Lady, an intimate acquaintance of my aunt’s happened to come and Spend a few weeks with her in the country. She was a lively, agreeable, well-bred, Sensible woman; and took Such a liking to me, that she would hardly Suffer me to be a moment out of her sight; and when the time came that she was to return to her own feat, which was in the North, she begged So ardently of my aunt to Spare me for a couple of months during the fummer, that she, who had heen attached to her from infancy, (as they had been educated at the Same School together) could not refuSe her, though she Seemed to confent reluctantly; and made me promiSe not to exceed the time, as she positively declared, she could Spare me no longer than for two months. I assured her of my obedience to her will, and in a few days afterwards the Lady and I fat out, in her chariot, for the 7	North.
The MEMOIRS of North. The journey delighted me ٠, Sor now, for the first time of my life, I felt the charms of liberty; I Seemed to breath a purer air ؛ my little heart beat with tranSport, on the reflection that I was mistreSs of my own words and actions. I never fufpected that I could err, whilst I followed the dictates of innocence and nature; and imagined that o١d folks were good for nothing, but to torment young ones; and that all the lessons of prudence, with which they eternally stunned one’s ears, were only calculated to keep one continually by their side, in order either to entertain them, or elfe to prevent their ever being left alone. I never apprehended, that experience, and a knowledge of life, were necef-fary ingredients to guide us with Safety through it; nor cou١d I conceive, that it required any art to conduct one’s Self well in the world, since I fuppofed that to mean wel١, and to act So, were Synonymous terms. In this deposition I arrived at Lady Betty Russel's Seat: It was an ancient, but noble mansion, and not far from the county town, where, she told me, the races would begin in a few days ٠, and added, that she propofed taking a lodging there for the week, as she fancied the balls, concerts, &c. which there would be every night during the race week, might afford me Some amuSement. I was infinitely pleafed with the propoSal, and thanked her Ladyship for her obliging attention ; assuring her, at the Same lime, that all places must be agreeable to me where she was. A few days after my arrival at Lady Betty’s, I received a letter from Sir Charles, filled with the tenderest professions of his inviolable love for mej he begged, in the most pathetic manner.
that
M R s. WILLIAMS.	47
that I would steel my heart against the attacks it would inevitably meet with, in a part of the world where, probably, every one would be ignorant of my engagement to him; he conjured me to consider, that his life depended on my fidelity, &c. I did weigh and consider all thefe things very maturely, during the few days which
preceded our going to----. I had, however,
in that short time, Seen many genteel as well as rustic beaus, who came to pay their reSpects to Lady Betty; but hitherto no one of their Sex had taught me to know, that I had a heart capable of loving; I had, indeed, often wished to love, but then it was only for the Sake of another that I did So ; I never had propofed any pleaSure to mySelf from it. In this state of total indifference, then, I Sat out for -- races.
The first day we went upon the courfe, where the horSes ran, I was prodigiously Surprized at the number and magnificence of the equipages I Saw there ·, I had never before Seen Such a concourSe of genteel people, excepting in Lon-don ؛ the novelty of the Sport, the fineneSs of the weather, in short, all contributed to amuSe and delight me. We returned from the field in the evening, drank tea, and then prepared to go to the assembly· I had never taken any pleasure at my toilette : for though I was always well-dressed, (which means with propriety) yet it was my maid’s taste rather than my own, that had the merit of it. However, on this day, for the first time in my life, I named the gown I would wear, chofe mySelf the ribbands, &.C. which I thought would Suit it best؛ in short, I directed the toilette. Fanny, my maid, Smiled, on obServiugme, and Said, ** I fancy, Madam,
you
4؟؟ T h e MEMOIRS of you have Some conquest in view to-night, by the attention you shew to your dreSs; I never Saw you give yourSelf any concern about it before.” I was struck at the justnefs of the girl’s remark, and immediately afked mySelf the reafon, without being able to find it out. Had I known the human heart then, as well as I do now, the problem would not have been difficult to Solve; in short, my destined husband was not near me, and in that moment I did not recollect that l was engaged. I had hardly finished dressing, when a Servant came to inform me, that his Lady and the coach waited for me : 1' made my apologies for not being ready Sooner. Lady Betty Smiled, and told me, " That my time had been well employed, since my cloaths were put on with the utmost taste. She then faid, she.had a favour to aik of me, which was, That I would give her leave to direct my choice of a partner ٠ fo tar as that if any one afked me to dance, I would anfwer. I was en* gaged, unlefs she gave me a jog, either with her foot or elbow ٠ becauie, faid she, tn all thefe public places there are gamesters and pick-pockets, who assume the habit and appearance of Gentlemen; therefore I would wish you to dance with Some body that l either know by name, or by sight.” I promised to comply with her request. On our arrival at the rooms, I was charmed and Surprized at the beauty of the building ؛ the company was numerous and brilliant. After the Women of Quality haddanced minutes, I was taken out by a noble Lord, whom I had known in London. The dance done» he afked me, *c Who he should fend me ?” (which is the phraie.) I anfwered, <( I knew
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	49
no body, and therefore begged his Lordship would chufe for me;” he bowed, and left me; when, in an instant, I perceived a young Gentleman, dressed in white and silver, advance towards me. I thought him the most agreeable figure I had ever Seen. When we had finished the minuet, he handed me to my feat, and Said, <، Madam, if you are not engaged for country dances, I beg to have the honor of being your partner.” I curt’Sey’d assent ؛ and he took out a young Lady, who Sat next to rne, to dance the Second minuet with. My eyes Sollowed him; I thought he danced better than any body in the room ؛ and my good friend, Lady Betty, had afked me, ten times, who he was, before I had caught the Sound Sufficiently to anSwer her, which I did, however, at last, with Some confusion, faying, ،، I did not know, but I Sup-pofed hi «،،*to be a Gentleman, since Lord C—^ had Sent him to me.” She replied, " As to that, my Dear, his figure and manner will be his Security on that head. I found he was fo much the favourite of the Ladies, that he danced four minuets to any other perfon’s two, and was at last obliged to quit the room, to avoid being called upon a..y more. As Soon as the company stood up to country dances, he slew to me, took me by the hand, and placed me
next to Lady Diana H---, who, I perceived,
was an acquaintance of his. After the first dance, which was fatiguing, as the weather wg.s excessively hot, and we were more than thirty couple, he propofed fitting down : I know not why, but I dreaded his conversation, and therefore (though tired to death) desired to stand up the next dance : He obligingly complied : How-Vol. I.	D	ever,
eo The М Е М О I.R S от ever, that finished, my legs refufed their office and I was necessitated to own mySelf fatigued.
I went to Seek Lady Betty, hoping that her presence would prevent the conversation between my partner and me. from becoming interesting,! but, unSortunately for me, !'found her engaged in a party at whist, Surrounded by a crowd bf people, So that I could not approach her; therefore, with a palpitation at my heart, which I could not very well account for, I was obliged to Seat mySelS upon a'bench, when, as you may SuppoSe, my partner placed himfelf next me. I began the conversation by observing, that the weather was very hot, the room very full,
I much fatigued؟ and a pack of stuff of that fort. When he replied, ،، That he never danced but for the fake of having an agreeable partner, eSpecially in hot weather, as he thought the exercife much too violent ؛ adding, that if he had been So unhappy as to have found me en״a٠ed that night, he should, most certainly, not have .danced at all.” I bowed to this compliment. He continued the conversation, by observing the effects of Sympathy, which he proved from the being forcibly struck at the first sight of one amiable object more than another: He faid, " That the heart decided its choice en tyrant, and that Sometimes So defpoticly, as to Subdue both reafon and prudence in the pur-fuit: How happy, then, (continued he) must that perSon be, whoSe judgment and reafon both approve of the choice, which his heart, from an irresistible impulfe, had been compelled to make.” Here he paufed, as Seeming to wa١t my reply. I Said, " That a passion, Such as he had been describing, founded only on the
Senfes.
M r s. W ILLIAMS.	51
-־fenfes, could not, I apprehended, be of any dangerous confequence, as it would probably be of very short duration.” So Saying, I roSe from my Seat, telling him, that Somebody had just called up a Savourite dance of mine, which I begged he would not refufe going down with me: He complied with reluctance, but I insisted, as I dreaded the continuance of a conversation, which had already very much embarrassed me. As Soon as Lady Betty had finished her partv, she came to us, from which time I danced no more, as she now made a third in the conversation. She Seemed much pleaSed with my partner, who payed her alt imaginable reSpect and attention 5 he handed us to our coach, wished us a good night, and took his leave. I had learnt his name at the tea-table, where he Seemed to be known to every body but me; I need not tell it you, since it is that I now bear. In the coach, as we went home, Lady Betty afked me, ٠* How I liked Mr. Williams ?’’ I replied, ٠٤ Very well ٠, and added, I think he is a well-bred agreeable young Gentleman.1*’ " He is, I find (Said Lady Betty) the only Son of an old acquaintance of mine; his father, I am told, is immenfely rich ; the means by which he became So he must anSwer Sor himfelf: As to the mother of the young Gentleman, !have known her from my infancy, and she is a Sensible, worthy woman as lives ؛ her father was a Gentleman of an ancient family in this county, and lived in my neighbourhood ؛ the young man is very like his mother in perfon ; I hope he has her mind too, and in that cafe, he has nothing left to wish for.” I listened to this difcourfe of iLady Betty’s with great attention, and found D 2	mySelf
5 2 The MEMOIR Soy sth؛،h.s f ؛earing tlia؛ myfelf mortified, on character was equivocal, especially upon So howe إ : probity ؛s that o؛ portant a point immediately checketl nay Sensibility on this f ؛؛s father w؛ect; by aiking mySelf, What h؛ 1׳	.And instantl); changed thediScourfe إ me
next morning Mr. Williams waited upon us) enquire after.our healthy with -the ulual C( piiment, of hoping we had got no coldahef ceding evening ; when, not waiting f۶r an SWer, he faid j" You go again٥to-night to : إل:،ل?ت rooms, !;adies, I iuppoSe ?: i }لءل!ا ;:علاءا! ,intended going.; ;; Then would laonor me with your hand 0٧ز i heg an^es¿ you cannot؛ eveOdg in the co٧ntry
ال!ائ״،٠ح؛״٠٠لةلئ٠؛٠٠ءاعقة
us Soon, ir!Lability.) and, Indeed, I came t٤ my ?::: ؛der, if possib e, to Secure y٩u fo efore؛nd the؛ ,I.coulcl not fay I was engaged hat ni؛. ^fwered, that I would dance with hi but not the following one, becaufe .it, was uSuai Sor a young L٢dy to da^ce t.hree ni fame Gentleman, ؛confecutiveiy with the g partic؛؛b.e ؛that I wiflaed always to avoi ut that he sh؛ ,He Said, custom was a tyrant ow١؛ hoped ٩;ver chfpute my will ; l؛n
Ight would not admit.{.؛ that the fourth fame objection: T١o .which I made no ant o^y, then, I Saw hin; e؛ To shorten my any( ؛that my attachment to him was o
’ت^عؤ'٠اه٠ قل:! ةي'تا , natureshadThatof ذب ذ ؛agreeable, chearful companion quently observed, that Persians become more■
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	53
mately acquainted with one another in Seven days, at any of thefe public meetings, than one should probably be in as many years Srom only visiting them in London■. Thus 1, having past
most part of my time, during our stay at ---
races, in company with Mr. Williams, by which means we became So intimate, that I looked upon him as an old acquaintance, and even ventured, with all the׳ confidence of fifteen, to decide him to be a modest, well-bred, worthy, Sensible,· voung Gentleman. Having thus drawn his picture, in my mind’s eye, (as Shakefpear fays} his perfonal charms did not fail to heighten the colouring, and you will easily agree with me, that Such a picture, placed in a heart, on which no prior impression had been made, must naturally produce a powerSul effect. It did So; for I found, with no Small shame and terror, that the being Separated Sr٥;,m him would be painful to me ؛ however, I flattered mySelf with the hopes, that I should conquer my weaknefs, by abfence from the٠objectof it: Accordingly, 1 had virtue and strength enough left, to preis
Lady Betty to leave ------, Saying, " I was
fatigued to death with noife, and bustle, and ٠ longed to enjoy the peaceful fcene which the country affqrded.” She willingly complied with
my request, and we left------the eighth day
from our arrival in it. On the morning of our departure, Mr. Williams handed us into the coach, and, with a look full of inexpressible ten-dernefs, Seized my hand, Saying, ‘٤ May you, dear Madam, enjoy in your Solitude, that peace, of which, I fear, you have for ever robbed rny breast.” To this harangue I made no anfwer, but by a blush. He then addressed Lady Betty, D 3	telling
54	Ti٩E MEMOIRS OF
telling her. That he purpofed Spending ٠a few weekS with a friend of his, who lived in her Ladyship’s neighbourhood, when he h.ped she would give hith leave, to liave thy h؟no٧r of paying his refpects 0إ her, and Nlifs Bwtlarrrf, {which was me.) She bowed, and, wit؛ t؛e hiost gracious air. assured him. That she should be extremely glad to See him, .for his own fa؛e, as ׳״ell as for that of laer old friend’s, his amia-ble nrotlaer i and added, that she shOiild esteem it as a favotjr, if lie would come and Spend a few dayswitlr her at her Seat ؤ Saying, tha؛ she would do every tiling in her opwer to render it agreeable to him. hi٢٠ Williams t)־ranked h؟r !ladyship for the honor־ she did him, and t۶ld her, that he accepted oS laer obliging inyitation with the greatest pleaSqre, as well ٩s wjth thg laighest SenSe of the favour she did him. I trCmbled at the thought, laut tried, however. by every means, to hide from them the cofu-Sion thiS conversation had flung me into. Dur-ing our short journey, my good friend. Lady Betty, entertained me, ail t؛e way, with the prailes she best.owed on Mr. Willaims, ؟x۶r؟ss-rng her fatisfaction in the thoughts of seeing hi^ at her own houfe. Unhappily for me. Lady Betty was perfectly confine؛؛, tha؛ my affecti-onS Were fixed 0٧ز٧ Sir Charles'Stanly, and, like a virtuous wohian, slre judged it impossible that I shottld engage my hand to one naan, ■and lofe my heart to another ٠ fo took it for. grant-ا|اح th؛t they were both diSpofed of, ؟nd,. con-'te؛uently, she looked upon me as faeing invul-neiable tO all foreign attacks. She reafoned right, had her hypotliefis been So; but having ؛.rred, in the m.inner of stating the proposition,
ج she
Mies. W I L TIAMS..	5$
she blundered on, till, inadvertently, she was in Some meafure, the means of my becoming one of the most unhappy of women. I now endeavoured, by every argument that reafon could fuggest, to steel my heart against the arrival of Mr. Williams", but, alas! how weak is reafon, when oppoftd to SenSation, at the age of fifteen ! T was often tempted to open my heart fo I> ad у Betty, and to beg her to aid me with her prudence, and experience, to Subdue mySelf ؛ but modesty instantly Suppressed the thought؛׳ for a girl of my age to confefs herSelf to be in love ! and that at a time too, when her parents had directed her choice to another object, must· have been construed as the height of imprudence,· and difobedience ؛ I therefore determined to inform Mr. Williams of my engagement to Sir Charles, if ever he came to an open declaration of his passion; and by So doing, I took it Sor granted, I should put a total end to all his farther pretensions on that head. Thus fortified, I Stlt mySelf strong, and my fear of Seeing him was infinitely decreafed. Let me here remark, that reafon is never So near a precipice as when it rests iecure on its own strength: A diffidence of our own judgment, and fortitude, is the Safest guide through life: Had I followed this maxim, at the period I am now writing of, I should have immediately returned to my uncle Boldbfs, and by that means have avoided an act, which fifteen years of Severe punishment has not yet expiated. The world will Sometimes Sorgiveusour follies, but the delicate, Sensible mind, can never either forgive or forget its own faults, efpecially when they are of a nature which religion must contemn, and D 4	prudence
$6 Th2 MEMOIRS or prudence d؛Sapprove. I write under the impuJSe of thole feelings, which I here endeavour to־ dcfcribe. But to my story.
On my arrival at Lady Betty’s Seat, I found letters from my father, my aunt, and Sir Charles Stanly ؛ the two first were tending to the Same purpoSe, viz. desiring me to return, with١־ out fail, at the expiration of my two months leave of abfence, becauSe my father and mother were to accompany my uncle, aunt, and Self,, to London, in order to assist at the celebration of my nuptials v.ith Sir Claries, which they had fixed for an early month in the approaching winter; and, for that reafon,. should leave the country Sooner than uSual, that I might have time to equip mySelf properly for the ceremony My lover’s letter was that of a man of Senfe, elevated with the hope of shortly possessing the woman he loved ; his stile was passionate, but delicate. I was Seized with a univerSal tremor on perusing theSe letters; my blood retired to my heart; and I Selt mySelf in a state of terror and defpondency, which I can neither defcribe nor account for. In this situation of mind I had slung mvfelf into a great chair, which was in my room, where I might, probably, have remained Some time, had not my reveries been interrupted by the entrance of a Servant, who Said, " Madam, Mr Williams is below, and my Lady begs you would be So obliging as to go down to him, as she is at preSent engaged with Some of her tenants about businefs; she desires. Madam, that you would make her apologies to the Gentleman, and assure him, that she will wait on him as Soon as possible.” I started up at the name of Mr. Williams j and, from having
M r s. W ILLIAMS.	5؟
mg been as cold as death, felt the blood ,glow in my cheeks, and circulate with rapidity through all nyy veins. It was with difficulty I collected mySelf Sufficiently to tell the Servant, that I would obey his Lady’s commands immediately. As Soon as the man was gone, I endeavoured to calm my Spirits, and to assume an air of com-pofure, which the palpitation of my heart stronely oppofed: However, I called to mind the resolution I had formed, of ending Mr. Williams’5 pretensions, by an honest avowal of my being contracted to another : This thought again gave me courage, and by the timel arriv-at the parlour door, I fancied my heart invulnerable to everv attack which might be made upon it. I entered, and accosted Mr. Williams with Lady Betty’s compliments, and apologies for not waiting upon him immediately. He looked at me, and, in a pathetic tone of voice, Said " You cannot be ignorant, Madam, that though I made Lady Betty RuJJel the pretence, yet my visit was to you,· and therefore I can easily excuSe her abfence.” I anlwered, T hat 1 was much obliged to him ؛ but that I thought my friend deServed her shareof the compliment, from the real regard which she professed having fpr himSelf and family ; whereas Lam, (Said I,) almost a perfect stranger to them both.” " You can be none to my heart, (he replied,) Madam, since it has been in your possession ever since the first moment I had the p؛eafure (or perhaps the misfortune) of Seeing you.” Just as he had finished thefe words, the parlour door opened, and the Lady of the houfe entered the room ; fortunately, she was too much occupied with the joy of Seeing Mr. Williams, to obierve my ٠١ 7	S D 5	confusion,
58 The MEMOIRS of confusion, which was, indeed, very great. She pressed him to stay dinner, which, with great politenefs, he declined, Saying, " That he had given his word to return to his friend’s IrouSe, in order to meet a Select company, u ho were invited to dine there, intirely upon his account. Lady Betty then reminded him of the promiSe
he had made her at -------, of Spending two or
three days with her; he bowed, and she insisted upon his fixing the t؛me j which, after Some compliments of thanks, he did for the Thurf-day following. On naming the day, he fixed his eyes upon me, as if he defired to read in my face, whether I should be pleafcd or diSpltaSed at having him in the houfe with me. My eyes met his, and I felt my.elf blush. What, lie attributed this emotion to, I then knew not, nor, indeed, could I mySelf, at that time, decide, whether it proceeded from pleafure or pain, or, perhaps, from neither : In short, at fifteen we are very bad Metaphysicians; content with the ccnfequence, we never look up to the caufe ; it is an age in which feniation is the primum mobile of all our actions, and therefore (bating the cenfequences of erFor) the happiest part of our lives; every object around us has the charm of novelty, the exterior pleafes, and we never attempt to look behind the curtain, till experience, disappointment, and apathy, dissipate the illusion, and we begin to See through a truer medium ; at which period we become undoubtedly wiSer, but do we become happier ? The Many, I fear, do not; the Few, I know, do. Thofe who purfue wifdom, and attain her, are the only human beings who may justly be stiled happy, becaufe it is not in incident to make them otherwise ؛
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	59
wife, their hitppinefs is concentred in them. Selves: it is built upon a perfect resignation to the diSpenSations of an all-wife. Providence,, and a thorough knowledge of the instability of human events, as well as a perfect conv.ction of the insignificancy of either pain, or pleaSute, on So slight a tenure, and fo short a duration,
as that of our existence here.-	٠
Excufe this chgreilion.--The interval be.
tween Mr. Williams's visit, and the time appointed for his return, was five days, duiing which period I had a continual dread upon my Spirits. I sincerely wished for the power of avoiding him, by leaving the houfe of Lady Betty , but this could not be done, without avowing my weaknefs for him ; a humiliation, which my vanity would not confent to, though my reafon strongly urged the necessity of iuch a confession : In short, in this, as in most other instances of the hke nature, my judgment was silenced by 1'amour propre. I wrote, however, to Sir Charles Stanly, in a more obliging sttle thanufual, vainly imagining that I fortified mySelf a٠ainst my weaknefs, by binding thofe chains still stronger, which both duty and reafon called upon to regard as indissoluble. Thus Satisfied at having obtained (as I thought) a kind of victory over myfelf, ־؟ repoSed under my laurels, determining not to make any farther enquiries into the situation of my mind with regard to Mr؛ Williams, as I was perfectly refolved to obey my parents. In this state of Security I Saw him arrive on Thurfday, without any Sensible emotion in my heart ؛ I was even chearful. ler than ufual in his company, for which reafon he was more Serious; I rail lied him upon his
gravity,
6o The MEMOIRS of gravity, he complimented me upon my extreme gaiety ؟ upon which Lady Betty Said, with a Smile, " Mils Rutland is in the right to laugh as long as she can ; for (continued she) though I am perSuaded she will be happy in her choice, yet matrimony is apt to make one grow Serious in time.” Mr. Williams took what Lady Betty had Said as a general reflection, which might have, with equal propriety, been addressed to any other young Lady, as well as to me ؛ for which reafon he replied, with vivacity, " That he apprehended the marriage state, when two hearts were united, to be the only lource of happinefs on earth ؛” adding, " he had long been perSuaded, that without that tender union of hands and hearts, life would not be worth tire purchafe.” Lady Betty, looking at me, faid, <، Yon See, my dear, that young people can praife matrimony as well as we old ones, who have experienced it, and who, you. frequently Say, only Speak well of it, to draw others into the Same Snare ؛ but we shall find you become one of its most zealous advocates١ before many months are past, or I am much mistaken in my conjectures. I looked down,, and made no anfwer.. When Mr. Williams, in a knv faultering voice, afked, " Is the young., Lady So near being matried, Madam ?״ addressing himSelf to Lady Betty. " Yes, Sir, (she replied,) it is no Secret that MiSs Rutland has been S٠m<؛ time engaged to Sir Charles Stanly ؛. and I learn Srom her Sriends, that the wedding its shortly to be chnSnmhhated.” Here a Silence of Some risinute-s enSuttl ؛ when perceiving ths palenest and dejection, which had Spread them. Selves over Mr. Williains*s Sace, I rofe, and Said
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	6r.
to Lady Betty, " Do, Madam,, favour us with a tune upon the harpsichord, and I will accompany you with my guitarre.” " Not fo, (she replied,) but if you will sing, I will play, with all my heart.״ I could not rcfufe, becaufe my design, in interrupting the diicourSe, was to draw Lady Betty’s attention from Mr .Williams', whoSe countenance had fuffered fo visible an alteration, that I feared she might have perceived it. Her Ladyship pitched unfortunately upon *Arne’s Cantata, called Lydia؛ I objected to it, declaring 1־ could not sing it ؛ but she knowing I could, anfwered, rather peevishly, " Well, if you won’t sing, I won’t play.” I felt the cruelty of singing this long to Mr. Williams,١ but it was unavoidable ؛ he stood behind my chair, and !could hear him.sigh frequently, as if his heart was breaking. I would have given the world to have ceafed tormenting him, but it was not my businefs to SuppoSe that I gave him any uneasineSs.
You know the Song, Adelaide٠ as, at your request, I transtated it for you. The Cantata, finished, we quitted the harpsichord 5 and, during the rest of the evening, l carefully avoided looking at him, since 1 found pity was nearly allied to love., neither he, nor I, were very lively, but we both strove to appear fo, till the ،;lofck struck twelve, when we took, leave of each other, and retired into our apartments. As Soon as I found myfelf alone, I recollected the conversation which had pasted that aSternoon, and ٠ The name of thte Cantata is torn out of the fnan٥f،ript؛ I fuppl'.ed it with that of Lydia, as thinking it a-prcpo?, tboueh it certaihly was n١ot publitbed at that period of time which the Lady write؛ of.
was
62 The MEMOIRS of was pleafed that Lady Betty had told Mr. Williams that I was going to be married. I hoped that this information, joined to the refolution I had formed, of avoiding ever being left alone with him, would Secure me Srom any Sarther purSuits oS his, on the topic oS love. My heart Seemed to exult, in thus thinking itSelf free from danger ; and yet I found an unufual weight upon my fpirits: I fighed involuntarily, and felt that I was unhappy, without being able to account for the reafon of my being So; (for I had perfuaded myfelf that I only liked Mr. Williams, but did not love him ;) the next morning, however, let me into the Secret. 1 had Some partridges, which I was very fond of, and which I kept at the end of the garden, in a room which had been formerly a Summer-houfe, sitdated fo as to have a view, on one fide, of a dead wall, and, on the other oS a stable-yard; Such, I have Srequently obServed, was the taste of our ancestors ; it had been, by the preSent MistreSs of the manfion, converted into a tool rocm for the Gardener, till I put the partridges into it. I was Set, with a pensive air, upon the only chair in the place, feeding my birds, when, all of a fudden, I perceived Mr. Williams at my feet ; a univerfal tremor Seized my nerves,, when, starting from my Seat, 1 exclaimed, " Good God, Sir, how came you here ? What do you mean ?” He held me Sast by the hand, and Sor-cibly re-Seated me in the chair, Saying, *־٠ Pardon me, charming MiSs Rutland, if my deSpair offends you y I came only to obtain your pity, or to expire at your Seet.” I interrupted him with Some vivacity, telling him. " That he knew my hand was engaged to another, and
thereSore
65	.Mrs. WILLIAMS
؛therefore I looked upon this declaration, of hi ؛roe, as an iniult done to my honor ; an آ0 love -that if he expected me to have any farther ef
؛جتإء اي;اءا:اللاء ةق;ع٦{ ل١؛اغتث slavered ل ;: ;أ؛
-٥nd ho ل،لال of bo[J: my ؛؛ed؛ I had too Ihgjia
غكقجءجق״ق
;ااًل؛ة£:ل ة ة٧ي ئ:ء0 ي١0ع;اا ت7ئأ؛١٧ So faymg.y -ano ٥؛٥؛fnga*g ةب١١:your٥h!nd ذ؛١ا،ا know ة؛إجأ
I	ds١ ل0 w ءةا: this moaenL I ; as ؛but, til ٣٠ع;إء
III
ii
زئ.؛زق؛؛؛ةة؛؛؛؛؛اة؛ذا٠طذل؛ةة 0ءسلا:£٠:؛׳ل؛?اج״1.ث״ثء,1ؤ٠״لأ.فسقء"ة; -
64 T h £ MEMOIRS of did not love Mr. Williams. I knew I pitied him, and that I was sincerely Sorry that I distik-ed the man I was going to marry؟ but I had never once dared to afk mySelf, whether or no I did not wish that he had been destined for my hushand instead of Sir Charles ? This question, fairly stated, and honestly anfwered, would have inevitably let me into the nature of my difeafe. An incident, which happened a day or two after, unveiled the mystery, and shewed me clearly, the real situation of my heart.—But to.return to my story. As foon, then, as my fpirits became a little calm, I tried to regulate and examine into the multitude of ideas, which had rushed impetuousty upon my imagination during the fcene in the garden. I ashed myfelf cooly, if the having infpired an agreeable young Gentleman with a passion for me, was in itfelf any thing very new, or extraordinary, and what evil could acrue to me from it, since I was contracted to another, and had totally put an end to all farther importunities from Mr. Williams, by the conversation which occasioned my prefent uneasinefs ? I had no Sooner pronounced in my mind (iS I may be allowed the expression) the word end. than J Selt a pang at my heart, which in Spite of the desire I had to believe the contrary, proved to me where the wound lay, and from whence it proceeded : I was shocked at the difcovery ; So shocked, that, like a child as I was, I determined to leave the event to chance, as I could form no plan for my future behaviour, which did not either clash with my duty or inclination. Thus delivered up to incident, and the little share of reafon I had, silenced, Srom a belief that it was only capable of-
vexing.
Mrs. WILLIAM S.	65
m؛؛out'؟?mynpeT?\«S,^ found myfelf much more at my eafe than I had been forfome time:
In confequence of which, I went down to din-
5^a؛.؛iS؛a5؛.؛U׳؛ra
must have indicated to him, that the Scene which past between us, in the morning, had not offended me So highly, as I had endeavoured fo make him believe it did, when I quitted the Summer-houSe. However, though I had turned off the only pilot which could have Saved me from shipwreck, yet the natural modesty and pride of my fex, made me behave ١vnh great had by no means determined to act wrong, although the one is the natural confequence of the othef; but I. did not See So far as that, at the period I am writing of. We had company dined with us that day, which made the cool re. ferve, with which I treated Mr. Williams, pafs unobfetved by Lady Betty. In the afternoon, as 1 was making tea, Mr. Williams came to the table, and afked me for a lump of fugar, which as I was giving him, he artfully shd a׳ paper, folded in the form of a letter, into the fugar dish and went instantly back to his chair ; the next dish of tea I lent him, I put the letter into the fame place, and fetting it upon the tea-board, fent it him back again. I law his eyes fparkle with vexation on its being thus returned; however, I was pleafed to fee him take it, concluding from thence, that I should receive no more billet-doux from him ; but, to nay great Surprize, as Soon as the tea things were remov-
66 Thb MEMOIRS of ed, he arofe, and, advancing towards the fire״״ dropped, or rather threw,، the letter into the middle of the floor, near where T fat. Lady Betty Said, " Mr .Williams, you have Jet a letter fall out of your pocket, I believe.” To which he anfwered, with the most perfest indifference, " No, Madam, it is none of mine.” In that instant, the fear of Lady Betty’s reading, its contents, got the better of every othercon-fideration ؛ I therefore stooped down, and picked up the letter, which lay almost at my feet, faying (though not without great confusion,)> " That I believed it to be mine.” I carefully avoided leaving the room all tire rest of the evening, lest Mr. Williams should imagine that I had retired td read it Wre played at cards till Supper time, when the company left us, all but our guest, who chatted away with Lady Betty till bed-time ; when upon going up stairs, her Ladyship turned into rr.y room, instead of her own ; then, with a nod, diSmiSsing my maid, she Said, ،eating herfelf in a chair, " Pray, my Dear, what was the history of that paper which fell out of Mr. Williams’s pocket ? tor I cannot think it belonged to you, though you fo readily owned it.” ٠٠ Your Ladyship judged very right, (I replied ;) the paper did really belong to Mr. Williams ؛ it contained a copy of verfes, wrote in praiie of my (pretended) beauty ؛ I fancy the Gentleman was affronted that I had returned them to him, anil therefore stung them upon the floor, where I did not chule they should continue to be, lest one of the company might pick them up, and read then, to the rest; to prevent which,. I owned th^ paper, and, the first opportunity 1 could find
condemned
Mrs. W ILLIAMS.	6)
condemned it to the flames.” Lady Betty faid,
،، T hank you, my Dear, for clearing this affair to me ؛ but give me leave to tell you that if you quarrel with every body who tells you that they think you handfome, I am afraid you must declare war against all the male fex. I bowed to this compliment. She then afked me " If I had any fufpicions of Mr. Williams being in love with me ?” I anfwered, " No, indeed Madam, how can that be ? since he knows I am almost married to Sir Charles Stanly.״ She killed me, and, wishing me a good night, went into her own appartment.
I cannot help obferving here, the velocity with which we tread the paths of vice, how all her paths are linked, and ho -v imperceptibly we glide on from one step to another, in that pernicious road. It was not twelve houts since I had abandoned ReaSon, as an insufficient guide, and delivered myfelf up to Incident, and Sen-Sation; and in that short Space of time, I had injured the truth twice, and had deceived my friend ؛ and all this with an air of confidence, which furprized myfelsi
Thus far embarked in error, I proceeded to look at the letter, with an intention, however, of fending it back to him unopened ؛ but, when I came to examine it, I found it without a Seal, tempted by this circumstance, which rendered it impossible for Mr. Williams to be certain whether I did, or did not. read.it, I thought that, fupposing I should resist my curiosity of looking at its contents, no advantages would accrue to me from fuch an act of prudence ; as he might fuppofe the contrary, if hechofe it, ana most probably would do io, for many obvious
reafons.
68 The MEMOIRS of
reafons. This decided, I read the letter; it began by ashing pardon for having Surprized me, that morning, in the Summer.houfe, attributing his intrusion to the violence of his passion, and begging me to give him a quarter of an hour’s audience in the fame place, either the next, or the Sollowing day, at twelve at noon ; assuring me, that if, after having fully explained himfelf, I should still continue inflexible, he gave me his word of honor, that he never more would mention the fubject to me ؛ though the keeping his promife would probably cost him his life. After having read this eloquent epistle, I concluded, without any hesitation, that it would be better to meet him, in order to put an end to his hopes, than, by avoiding him, leave him to form what conjectures he pleafed upon my fentiments, with regard to what had paffed betwixt us. I therefore re Solved to go to the rendezvous the next morning.
Thus, with much feeming eafe, I had determined todifcard, forever, the man I loved., I deceived myfelf ؛ tho’, I dare fay, I don’t you, my dear Adelaide. The thought of feeing hirrr again at my feet, and of hearing him vow an everlasting love, were the latent motives for my acquiefcenee with his request; though they were veiled under the pretext, of taking the earliest opportunity of putting an end to an affair, which, with honor, l could no longer fuf-fer the continuance of. Being now perfectly fatisfied with my own conduct, I flept quietly, and rofe the fame. I have frequently obferved, that when two opposite ideas, equally interesting, are imprest upon the mind at the fame time, it rests, as it were, lufpended betwixt them,
and
Mrs. W ILLIAMS.	69
and confequently feels neither, forcibly ؛ whereas, either of them Separately, might, perhaps, be capable of causing the most violent agitation ; this, I apprehend, (having been my situation,) was the caufe of the extreme compofure with which I walked towards the fummer-houfe, to meet Mr. Williams ; where I found him waiting for me. He appeared more calm than he had done the day before, and much more dejected. He began, by expressing his Sensibility of my condeScension, in thus having complied with his request؛ he then deScanted much upon the impossibility oS a delicate mind’s finding its felicity in a union oS hands, to which the heart SubScribed with reluctance : He Said he looked upon matrimony to be a very Solemn, Sacred ceremony, and that he was much Surprized how any dared to Swear everlasting love to another, when, at the Same time, they knew, in their confcienc.es, that the utmost in their power to give, was Sriendship and esteem :	" But (con-
tinued he) how barbarous ! how unjust ! nay, how void oS Sentiment must that perSon be, who, in return Sor the warmest, the tenderest passion, should uSe deceit, and bring to their enraptured lover’s arms nothing but a Small portion of esteem, and an invincible lund oS cool indifference.” Here he pauSed, and looked full upon me. I knew the picture, and trembled when I threw my eyes over it ; I sighed, and anSwered, " By what means, Sir, you have read my Secret thoughts, I know not: I will not pretend to difavow the invincible coolneSs of my heart towards Sir Charles Stanly; I confeSs I could never teach it to Jove him ; but it honors, values, and esteems him above all his Sex ;
and
7o T h e M E M O I R S o f and I hope that duty, reafon, and time, will infpire the rest: I am convinced, that any woman must find her felicity in being united to So valuable a character as his is. My inSenfibility of his perSonal merit, is a Satality which I can noway account Sor, and which I would laydown my life to conquer. Thus, Sir, I have made my confession to you ; but must, at the Same time, honestly declare, that though I cannot force my heart to be in love with the object my reaSon admires, yet I really never Saw the man. whom I thought worthy to be his rival.” Here I ceaSed. Mr. Williams Seized my hand, Saying, " Well, lovely Charlotte, I must do juS-tice to Sir Charles's merit, by acknowledging, that I know no man who is more worthy of you than he; and, though I am doomed to be wretched for life, I most sincerely wish you happy in each other ٠, but forgive me if I doubt of that’s being the cafe. His excefs of fondnefs, will ever be a reproach to you for your coldnefs, whilst that coldnefs will be a perpetual dagger to his heart. Believe me, my dear Mifs Rutland, Love feldom takes its birth from esteem i it is too reafoned, too cold a Sentiment, for it ever to Spring from ; even Hate is a more favourable foil; and it has been fometimes known to have produced its contrary. You may fup-pofe that I argue thus from an interested motive, shut I give you my word of honor, that I prefer ٠ .your happinefs to my own, and if i really thought that you would be happy in marrying Sir Charles, I should sindfo.ne confolation from your felicity ؛ but I fee you falling a facrisice to Sentiments, which, though noble, are yet fallacious, and to which you will infallibly die a
martvr.
Mrs. W I L L I AMS.	71
·martyr. Your heart was formed to love with vivacity ؛ its delicate Sensibility will Surnish an eternal fource of miferv, unleSs you are united to the man you love, with tenderneSs, and are -beloved by, with rapture." Here he sighed, and I perceived a tear steal from his eye. I was moved. He continued: ٠٠ MiSs Rutland, as your felicity is the ardent wish of nay heart, I take the liberty of talking to you as a Sriend ؛ it is a title I aSpire to beyond any earthly one, excepting that of your husband ٠, I beg, therefore, on my knees, that you would honor me with your friendship ؛ command my life, my fortune, they are both yours, and rest aSSured, that I will never more trouble you with a hopelefs passion. My visit to Lady Betty has been of a Sufficient length, I thereforepurpofe leaving this place tomorrow, and returning to my friend*s houfe. I Shall not quit the country till you do, So sbal، hope Sor the pleaSure of Seeing you frequently in that Space of time : In town we sbal. meet, perhaps, Sometimes ! and if any unforeSeen accident sbould happen to break off your intended nuptials, may I hope, divine Charlotte, that you will then Suffer me to make my addreffes to you?” I replied, " You do me honor, Sir, but you talk of impossibilities.” I then oblerv-ed, " That our conversation had already been of a considerable length, and, Sor that reaSon, ، propoSed our returning to the houSe.” He Said, “ I obey; but dear, lovely girl, Say that you accept oS me as a Sriend, and as Such, promiSe to confide in me.” I anSwered, precipitately, ،< I٥o—Twill”—He kiffed my hand, and we Separated. The next day he took his leave of us.
Nothing
72 The MEMOIRS of
Nothing very material happened during the rest of the time which I past with Lady Betty, excepting that at two or three balls, given by the neighbouring Gentry, I generally danced with Mr. Williamswhofe attentive, affectionate behaviour increafed my love of him, almost every hour. He never mentioned his pastion to me, but his every look, and action, Spoke the exceSs of it. I grew thoughtful and melancholy, and the more So, as the time approached when Lady Betty was to carry me home. It came, and we arrived, without any accident, at my uncle's, where I found Sir Charles. He appeared in raptures at the sight of me. I did all I could in order to Seem glad to See them j but I fear I acted my part very aukwardly. My heart heaved with inward anguish, and tinctured all my looks and actions with an air of melancholy. They, however, attributed this to the concern I Self, on being Separated from Lady Betty Ruf-fel, who stayed with us but three days, and then returned to her own Seat in the country. I did, indeed, part with her with regret, as she was a most amiable, Sensible, worthy woman, and had shewn a fondneSs and tenderneSs for me, which claimed my utmost gratitude and reSpect; We wept reciprocally on parting, and she made Sir Charles promife, that the Summer following he and I should Spend Some months with her. Soon aSter she was gone, I went to my Sather’s, as did my uncle, aunt, and Sir Charles: During our stay there, the time was Spent in every one’s bufying themSelves with, and talking of, my approaching wedding. My father and mother increaSed the torment this topick gave me, by the first eternally giving me lectures upon the
duties
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	73
duties of a wife, a mother, a friend, and a mif-treSs; and the latter, by teazing me to death about the choice of my cloaths, and the rest of my finery. Sir Charles, it it true, behaved with the utmost tendernefs and refpect to me ; but I fancied I faw an air of triumph and protection, in his countenance, which rendered him detestable to me, and at the fame time, harrowed up my heart. Thus I was wretched, but they were all too bufy to take any notice of it. When they perceived that I was graver than ufual, they attributed it to a decent reServe, which was becoming in my preSent filiation ; and mistook Sor Modesty, what was, indeed, Delpair. Sophie, my dear Sophie alone, read my heart ; she was now grown a great girl ; but as my griefs were oS a nature not to admit of relief, I had never made any one my confident. Sophie guested that I did not love Sir Charles, but her conjectures went no Sarther. One night, aslwasgo-ing to-bed, and she was fitting by me, she Said, in a pathetic tone of voice, " My dear Sister, I am much deceived if your heart don’t Suffer extremely ; I See you strive to hide it, but the eye of friendship is penetrating : I am perSuaded that you don’t love Sir Charles Stanly, and Srom thence Springs all your uneafineSs. Alas! (continued she, with a deep Sigh,) how capricious is .fortune ! Why don’t you See him with my eyes? and then you would both be happy.” I looked at her, and Saw her face covered with blushes, and the tear failing on her cheek. I instafttly guested that she was in love with him herSelf, but did not think it prudent to let her See I had made iuch a diScovery. I therefore anSwered, " Indeed, my dear Sophie, I would marry no V 0 l, I.	E	man
74	The MEMOIRS of
man whom I had not the highest regard and ef-teem for ; and as to love, it is a lentiment which girls of our age should never boast of; I am |rave, my Dear, becaufe matrimony is a very Serious Subject, but I am not melancholy.״ So Saying, I pretended to be steepy ; she washed ment, on what I had just heard and Seen ; a multitude of new ideas crouded upon my ؛؛،)agination all of which contributed to perplex and pain me. I afked mySelf if I was not fuffic.ently wretched, by being obliged to marry a man I did not love, but that, by facr.sicing myielf, I must plunge a dagger into the breast of my fweet Sophie ?	" Good God, I exclaimed, change
Sir Charles's heart! Turn his affections on my Sister ; let them be happy, no matter what becomes of me!” Thus I tormented myfelf till, overcome by grief and vexation, I dropped to steep. The next day I obferved Sophie more narrowly than I had hitherto ever done؛ I could now easily perceive the feasibility of her heart painted in her eyes, whenever she looked a،t Sir Charles; her attention to all his words and actions: In short, her love of him was fo visible that I wondered how I came not to have Seen it before., the reafon was, however, obvious, as my inattention to every thing, but my perfonal diflike of him, blinded me to the et fects his merit might have upon another. I had without reflection, concluded, that as I did not
admire him, nobody elfe could.
As the time approached for our going to London, Sophie became melancholy ; she lost her appetite, and grew thin: My heart bled for
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	75
her, and I fometimes refolved to break off the match, though I should difoblige my parents and all my family by it, rather than render myfelf and sister miserable for life, by obeying their commands j but I had not courage enough to undertake, alone, So arduous a taik. I wished Sor Mr. Williams to counSel me in this delemma he was, indeed, a most improper perSon, but then he was the only one who knew the real situation of my heart.
I must have tired you, my dear Adelaide, by the prolix, circumstantial manner, in which I have narrated the various Springs, and incident؟, which led me to that period oS my life, from whence I date all the Suture misfortunes oS it. Remember, that I am not writing a novel, but, on the contrary, truth guides my pen, and commands me to lay my boforn bare to the eyes of my friend, who wishes to know, from myfelf, the story oS my life. It will prefently want your partial indulgence, in order to apologize for the abSurdity and indisiretion of a rash action, which, I Sear, admits of. no excuSe. But, not to interrupt the thread of my history any longer, I must tell you, that the month of Odtober was already arrived, and my uncle Boldbyieem-ed very desirous of going to London, i need not inform you, I preiume, that his nenhcw’s impatience to be there, was his motive tor being in Such a hurry. In confequence, therefore, of his intreaties for the fpeedv conclusion of our marriage, my father fixed the week following for our departure from—■(¡sire. He had hired a ready Surnished houSe Sor himSelf and family, in Wejlminjler. It was agreed, that I should be at my uncle’s, as uSual till I was married. On the L 2	-	d a y
76 The MEMOIRS of day appointed we fat out, Mr. and Mrs. Boldly, Sir Charles, and myfelf, in their coach ; my father, mother, Sophie, and my mother's maid, in my father’s coach and my aunt’s and mine, with two other Semale Servants, in Sir Charles's. On our arrival at London we parted for that night; my father went to Wejiminjler, and we to Mr. Boldby's. The next morning I roSe early, and went to my father’s, in order to enquire how they all did after their journey; when in crossing the Park, it was my ill fate to meet with Mr. Williams: he was walking a stow pace, with his arms folded, and his eyes fixed on the ground ; he did not perceive me till I was clofe to him ؛ when, raising his eyes, he Seemed to be vastly Surprized, as well pleaSed, at meeting me thus unexpedfedly. I was astonished to iee him fo altered ; he looked pale, thin, and dejected ؛ I could not help telling him, that I thought he was much changed, and I afked him " If he had not been well ?” He replied, " That he had never known either peace or health since. I lest Lady Betty’s; and added, with a sigh, that he thanked God, his Sorrows would probably Soon be at an end, as he was Sensible that his health declined daily, and, consequently, would Soon lead him to peace in the grave.” I was Sensibly affected, both by his ؛figure and conversation ; and anSwered him, " That I hoped he was a Salfe Prophet ؛ adding that I begged he would live for my Sake, as he was the only Sriend I had, in whom I could confide, and that I had much to Say to him, and wanted his advice.” Without waiting for his anfwer, I told him where I was going, and that I should return through the Park, in leSs than an hour, where, if he would stay Sor me,
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	77
I would rejoin him, and renew our conversation. He bowed assent, and I went on to my fathers. On my return from my parents, whom I found well, and in high Spirits, especially my mother, who was delighted to be in London, I met Mr. Williams on the very Spot I had leSt him. I immediately began to relate to him every thing which had passed since our Separation. I expoi-ed the real situation of my heart with regard to Sir Charles, and then begged him to adviSe me, as a friend, how to adt. He listened tome with great attention, and then Said, " He was perfectly convinced, that it would be impossible for' me ever to be happy if I married Sir Charles, and that there was no way of avoiding it, but by making another choice ; that iuch a step would undoubtedly make a great noife at the first, but that upon reflection, and a thorough information of all the particulars, (which had led me to the taking of it) he was perSuaded, that it would be impossible that any reaSonable being should contemn me ; nay, that Sir Charles himSeif as being a man of fenfe, would, in time, be brought to own, that it would have been more ungenerous in me to have given my hand, unaccompanied by my heart, than to deprive him of them both, in order to make mySelf happy, as well as to prevent his being miferable.” He then told me, " That he was heir to five thoufand pounds a year ؛ that he was an only child ; he confessed that his father was covetous؛ yet, when the thing is done, I am perSuaded he will Soon be reconciled ·, and as to my mother, she will be happy, I know, in Seeing me So. Come then, my beloved Charlotte, take your reiolution, I am ready to run ail riSques with you, and if you E 3	have
78 The MEMOIRS of have the fmallest fpark of affection for me, ; will not hefitate to follow my example. C Sent, my amiable girl, to make me the happ of my Sex, and it shall be the study of my ture life, to make you the contentedest of youi I started at this propofaJ, and replied, " I ne can refolve to run away from my parents, thoi I forefee that it is the only remedy for the e which threaten me ؛ if I could get their con!. I would give my hand to you, Sooner than any other man in the univerSe ؛ but that can ver be, nor durst I even afk it of them ; So c< to prefs me upon a Subject, to which I can ne tonfent.” He continued, however, toufeev argument his imagination could Suggest, in 01 to fl'iew me the necessity there was tor fo٠؛ov١ his advice, till, in short, it was high time for to return home. I took his direction dowi my pocket-book, and promifed him, that should hear Srom me on any emergency, replied, " I hope the first letter you honor with, will contain a permission to lead you May-fairI shock my head, and bid 1 adieu.
On my return to my uncle’s, I Sound h and Sir Charles, in the parlour, with two I yers ; on sight of them, I was going to rei when Mr. Boldby called me back, Say؛ " You, my Dear, are So principal ٠a party the affairs now before us, that your prefenc even neceffary ; fo sit down, ؛؛nd hear your n riage Settlements read.” 1 was obliged to ob but, good God! what a jargon is that wf the lawyers uSe ؟ how indelicate ! how tedio I was ready to expire with confusion and em before they had read them half through.
y	S foo
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	79
fooner was this Scene over, than 1 was told, there was a jeweller come to receive my orders, how I would have Sir Charles's late mother’s jewels fet ؛ he had likewife brought Some very hand-Some ones, which my lover had beSpcke of him, and which he now, with an an of ؛nestable ten־ deinefs, prefented me with. 1 was obliged to accept them, though I did So with the most visible reluctance. He perceived it, and Said, " My angel, I am iensible that your beauty will receive no addition from thefe ornaments ٩ they will borrow their lustre from it ؛ but we must, you know, conform to custom; and 1 sincerely wish, they were more worthy of you؛ acceptance.” 1 replied, " They are vast!) more fo, Sir Charles, than I either desire, oi deferve ٠ and ؛ am infinitely obliged to you foi them.” Ah ! Charlottehe exclaimed," ho« coldly was that Said l I should think the world iS I was master of it, too lit tie to lay at you Seet; the possession of you, is above all price But 1 own to you, Charlotte, that, lovely an.، beloved as you are, yet I should be the most mi Serabie wretch on earth, though your bushand if I did nor, with your hand, receive that in valuable treafure, your heart.” Here ray aun approached us, and interrupted our converSa tion, which, however, Sunk deep into my mine I Saw by it, that, even in charity to SuCbarle٥ as well as to mySelf, I ought not to marry hin׳ This reflection confirmed me in the necessit there was tor running away with Mr. Williams I had much rather not have been married, ؛ that time, to either of them ; but I wanted protector, to Stand between me, and my enrag ed relations. This point fettled, the next thin £4	w؛
8o The־. MEMOIRS of' was, to consider of the means how to get a\ unobferved. My father was to buy my wedc garments, So I determined to stay till they w made, that, at least, I might not be obliged my husband for cloathing me.. I found, th; should never be able to execute this import Scheme, without a confidant and assistant ; this purpofe, none were So proper as either sister, or my own maid ؛ I choSe the forn and, in So doing, I judged wifely ؛ for of weaknesses, there is none greater than tha putting one’s Self into the power of a ferva¡ the narrownefs of their education confines tl minds, and that of their circumstances corn their manners; Sor which reaSons, the morr they are trusted, they never fail of becon־ our tyrants, and most commonly betray nay, always, if it is their interest So to do.
I took an opportunity, one evening, w Sophie and I were alone, to inveigh bitt. against the cruelty of my fate, which comp ed me to marry a man whom I could not lc and for whom I had even an aversion as a 1 band. “ Indeed, Sophie, faid I, I am foi times tempted to run away,, rather than to ] cipitate mySelf into certain mifery, by marr] Sir Charles■’’ She anfwered me, with the t streaming down her cheeks, " My dear siste would lay down my life to Serve you, but I no means of extricating yourfelf out of ) prefent difficulties, the affair is too tar adv! ed; unleSs, indeed, you was to run away, that is'a dreadful expedient: However, c mand me ؛ if I can contribute to your re nothing is impossilleto my friendship.” I herin my arms, and thanked her with an e<
M r s. W I L L I A M S.	8؛■
cy of gratitude: I then laid open to tier tire Scheme I had formed, of quitting my uncle’s houfe : I begged she would confent to go along with me, at least for a few days. She started at this proposition ; but, after a short paufe, she Said, " Yes', Charlotte, I will share your fate with you, be it what it may ; but how shall we get our cloaths out of the houfes ? and where to?” " I air، not at a lofs,” I replied, ،، for a place to convey them to ; but how to get their, from hence, I own puzzles me.” Sophie Said, ٠٤ We must trust the mantua maker, who is·, going continually backwards and forwards with bundles, and therefore will not be SuSpected.”
I begged of her to go to the woman the next day, and to Sound her a little, and See if she might be bribed ؛ she did So, and found her willing. Sophie and I now began Seriously to Settle our plan of operation. Sophie afked me, ،، Where we were to go to ?” I told her, " That I would inform her on that head in time ; but begged her to rest assured, that I would do nothing which might either injure her reputation, or my own.” She replied, "That she was perfectly convinced of it, and therefore should trouble me with no more questions.” That night, I wrote a letter to Mr. Williams, informing him, " that I desired he would take a lodging for us ؛ and alfo, that he would Send his Servant to Mrs. Shapes, the mantua-maker. for Some bundles, which she would deliver to ·, him, and which I would have immediately conveyed to our destined lodgings: I added, that unlefs Some unforeSeen accident happened to prevent me, I purpoSed, on that day Se’nnight, being, at ten o’clock in the morning, in the E 5	Park,
82־ The MEMOIRS of Park, near Buckingham-boufe, where I should expect to meet him, and desired a coach might be ready to carry us immediately to May-fair ؛ and that he would engage Some Sriend of his, in whom he could confide, to be of the party, in order to give me away, as well as to be a wit-nefsof our marriage. This extraordinary letter my lover was prepared for receiving, by many preceding ones, which had passed between us, since our meeting in the Park١ as well as from Some short conversations which we had contrived to have together, at different times. After having fent the above letter to the post, I Set about packing up my cloaths in Small parcels, which were conveyed away by degrees, with eafe enough, as the mantua-maker found many pretences for Sending her girls fo me, and for frequently coming herSelf ؛ the Servants were So accustomed to See them pafs backwa.ds and forwards, that they never took notice of them ; and my uncle and aunt’s dressing-rooms looked into the Park, So they knew nothing of what was doing in the front of the houfe. Sophie got her. things away pretty much in the tame manner. I must, however, desire you to remark, that 1 left the jewels, trinkets, &־c. which Sir Charles had given me, Sealed up, and directed to him, in a drawer in my room.
On the day appointed for our ؛flight, Sophie, as had been agreed betwixt us, came early in the morning to my uncle’s, and laid, on entering my room, " I am come, Charlotte, to fetch you to Spend the day at my father’s : You pro-miftd us one day before vou married, and we have fixed upon this.” .1 anfwered, " It was very well, I confented with all my heartThen
turning
83	.WTLLrAM s .־■Mr s
Fanny, do you ؛٤ ,turning to my rpaid, I Said make my reSpectful compliments to my udcle aunt, tell them where I a in gone, 3nd beg ey won’t expect me till aSter Supper j and if؛t gir Charles afks forme, tell him, I reqUest that e would not follow me. Sophie had told my؛ r and mother, that slae was coming to Spend؟th؛f the day witlr meat my uncle’s, and begged they would npt come to interrupt us. They promised to comply with her request the more readily, as would, probably, bC the last day that we ٤؛ slaould Spend togetlrer, before I was metamor-phofed into my Lady Stanly. Thtis the old lks Seemed pretty Secure from SuSpecting our؟f 11 evening. Every thing now be-؟ elopement ing intirely fettjed, with an aching hdart anel an unsteady fte^, I 'eantupon Sophie’s arm, and Set As my lather’s houfe was	.؛،out for the Bar
jenghtof a llreet of my uncle’s, my ؟within th ؛Ister and I Seldom took a Servant with US, udlef؛ he even.ing, wlaich made our going out alone؛ ؟؛ extraordinary. ־aorning appear no way" :l١a٤ w،?en we arrived in theBar^, we fOund Mr.
.rus, as alfoa young Gentle؟Williams waitingf cl an agreeable appearance, whom I did not ءااهل٣ئ ever Saw joy and Satisfadfionfo strong-؛ know. I ly, painted in a c۶untenance as they were in that he fe۶med lost in tranSport, and ؛ ?! my lover s ried us into a coach, whiclr؛in a moment, hu or us, and away we drove to May-fairy؛ ل!اذة:
؛!here, tremulous, pale, and dejected, i pro
,which binds US for life ل;?ل اةءةك ;٤I;a ٥٠٠٠٠٠٥
arriage, signed Dy״ ت٠اءسةء٠؛ة٠اا
the parties, and then the coach Was ordered «٥ h^ ?re genteely:؛٠sis?gs ٠(؛ ;si ع];:،؛ and pleaSantly situated. Sophie’s astonishmenf cannot
84 The MEMOIRS of
cannot be defcribed, when she found that I was going to be married to a man she had never either Seen or heard mentioned $ she pulled me by the sleeve, as the ParSon was going to begin the ceremony, and whiSpered in my ear, " dear sister, has he a fortune to maintain you ? Do you know him well ?” I anfwered, " My good girl, Set your heart at eaSe, I know what I am about. ’ Alas, I thought I did ! But how wide was I Srom the mark ! We breakfasted at our lodgings, after which Mr. Williams propofed our going to dine at Richmond, and returning in the evening : This I found had been a Scheme concerted between him and his friend ; for upon looking out of the window, I Saw a handfome coach and six at the door, with two livery Servants on horfeback. Mr. Williams told me, " T hat it was his friend’s equipage, who had been So obliging as to offer me the ufe of it till I got one of my own.” I bowed, and expressed my thanks to the Gentleman for his civility. We then all got into the coach : Our beaus tried every means to make this little excursion agreeable to us, by the most lively and entertaining conversation ; they had really, both of them, a great share of wit and humour ؛ Sophie often laughed heartily ; but my Spirits were too much agitated to Suffer me to partake of their mirth. The attentive manner in which Mr. Williams carefully avoided faying any thing which, even in the most distant manner, could wound my delicacy, endeared him to me. I think I never Saw any body So handSome as he appeared to me to be that day ؛ it will not be mal-a-propos if I here beg leave to introduce his perfon to your acquaintance.
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	8؟
He was five feet ten inches high, perfectly well made, and exquisitely genteel, (as I believe I have already Said ؛) his eyes were large andal-most black; his hair and eye-brows of the darkest shade in brown, the latter arched, as if drawn by a pencil ؛ his nofe well made, and a littleaqui-line ; his mouth remarkably handfome, with the finestfet of teeth I ever Saw ; his complexion was clear brown, with a florid colour in his cheeks ؛ the shape of his face was oval ; his Smile was inexpressibly Sweet; but when he laughed heartily, I always thought he looked silly.
Before we left Richmond I c،،l؛ed tor pen, ink, and p?per, thinking it necesthry to write a line to my uncle and aunt, in order to prevent their imagining that Some terrible accident had happened to us, upon my not returning home in the evening : I begged my sister would do the Same to my father: In which letters we only desired them not to be uneaSy on our account, assuring them that we were both well and Safe ; adding, that the next day they should hear farther from us, when they should be informed of the rea-Sons which had induced us to abfent ourfelves from them. T heSe notes, on our return to town, we Sent by two common porters, hired by a Servant, a mile from our lodgings, who could give no account from whom, or whence, he brought them. The next morning, I Sat mySelf Seriously down to make my apology, and to plead my cauSe, to my father, mother, uncle, aunt, and poor Sir Charles, for whom my heart bled : To my parents I only Said, " That as in the marriage they had propoSed for me, I prefumed they could only have in view my hap. pineSs, it was now compleat, from my having
married
86 The MEMOIRS of married the only man on earth who could have made me So ؛ that an invincible aversion to Sir Charles Stanly, as a husband, had compelled me to take this irregular step ؛ that nothing leSs than the certainty of being miferable for life, could have made me difobey them ؛ that I would have flung myfelf at their feet, to have implored their pity ; but that, from a thorough knowledge of my father's steadinefs, in whatever he had once projected, as well as Srom a conversation I had had with him upon the Subject, I judged him implacable on that head ؛ and, therefore against my inclination, I had been forced toiling mySelf into the arms of Mr. Williams, who had long loved me, and who was a Gentleman of worth and fortune : I assured them, that Sophie was in no manner accessary to my marriage, which I proved, by narrating faithfully all that had passed between her and me, before our elopement: I then implored their forgivenefs, and humbly intreated their permission, for my husband and .elf ،٠ throw ourfelves at their feet, to receive their blessing.” This letter was, directed to my father, but addressed to all the family.
My next taik was, to write to Sir Charles. I related to him faithfully the struggles 1 had had with myfelf on his account. I told him, ،، that, in friendship, nay, injustice to his merit, I could not give him my hand without mv heart, as he had declared, that, by So doing, 1 should make him the most miserable Of men : I Said every thing that esteem, and the highest Sensibility of his worth, could dictate: I implored his forgiveneSs, and even ventured to afk his friendship and pity : I intreated him rather to try to alleviate, than irretate, my relations anger
against
Mrs. WILLIAMS. gy against me. I then hinted, that the violent paS-sion a friend of mine had conceived for him, had greatly contributed to my taking the refolution of running away. I ended, with the strongest assurances of my everlasting esteem, and admiration of his virtues.”
This difficult talk over, I Sent the letters by my Servant, with orders to inform them, if afked, where we lived. I expected, that the first mark they would give me of their difpleaSure, would be the taking Sophie from me; and So they did, the next day, to my inexpressible grief.
Mv husband, I Sound, had.heen writing to his parents, but I did not fee his letters: ٦ his hurry over, I looked at Mr. Williams, and, in that moment, a thoufa.id dreadful ideas rushed into my mind, which had never prefented them-Selves to my imagination before, and I burst into a flood of tears; he flew to me, and, with the utmost tendernefs, pressing me to his bofom, Said, " My dear, my lovely wife, from whence can slow thefe tears? Have I been So wretched as to have cauled them, by inadvertently offending you ?” ٠٠ No, no, my dear Mr. Williams, I replied, you are every thing my heart can wish, but I Sear we have ruined one another j if our friends are not reconciled, what is to become of us ?”	" My angel, (laid he,) why
forel'ee misfortunes which may never happen ? I will anSwer for my parents؛ they have but to fee my Charlotte, and they must own, she was irresistable. Come take courage, my dear girl, your fears are imaginary ٠, I know my father, and I am Sure he will, after a few formalities, be reconciled,” 'This assurance calmed my fears a little, yet, still, my heart heaved with terror
and
88	The MEMOIRS of
and doubt. The next morning brought an absolute order for Sophie to return home immediately, and a defence to me, ever to approach my parents more, as they disclaimed any kindred with So infamous a girl. Thefe were their words, wrote upon a card, by my father. My aunt’s was a letter, and couched in civiler terms, though much to the fame effect, only she added, that׳ my punishment, she was afraid, would, in the end, be even more than adequate to my crime ؛ for she knew the man I had married, and that he was a libertine, and vastly in debt; but his fine figure, and artful tongue, had, (she fuppofed) turned my brain ٠, she pitied me ; but Said,،، I had made my own bed, and must now lay in it with as much eaSe as I could; that, for her part, she was refolved never to See me more.” T hus abandoned by all my friends, my husband was the only Support I had now in life, and he, my aunt Said, was a libertine. " Good God ! I exclaimed, (in my own mind) if that’s true, what a wretch am I 1” He read thefe letters, and, when he came to that part of my aunt’s, which Spoke So diSreSpectfully of himfelS, he Smiled, and, taking hold of my hand, Said, " My dear Charlotte, I fancy Mrs. Boldby has forgot the old adage, That a reformed rake makes the beft husband ; and, as to my debts, (if I have any) they are my father’s affair, not mine j he is my steward, and, by that means, Saves me the trouble of paying my bills mySelf.” The light manner with which Mr. Williams treated theSe two important charges laid against him, both Surprized and grieved me. I was abSorbed in a chain of the most disagreeable reflections, when a Servant brought me a letter, which I knew,
Sroun
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	89
قة؟؟حجءاء
جج;تءحءئغب;٠ا t£؛inm Jith merit}uffic
s؛؛؛ auctions: He affured me, “ shat rny happ ;that ؛t wish of his heart, an؛e؛ar ؟a^tnemo؛ n my union with Mr.؛ ,fo٧nd it زإا؛ةزد؛؛ؤ؛
؛س؛ء7٢ ل:أأثاأهقل;؛تيج'تإ ،٠٠٠٠٠ e؛ ,Williams ;جألإإ؛لإ7"ل be ٥؛ ؟know ؛the lofsof me, h زنا؛ ئت:يلا a حتا٤١ت7 futute life ؛؛ and,;therefore
time, and a thorough ؟fro ,؛he hopes, hoWve
he fEity it his ״ ق’ة\;ءملميبأ:ء!ه"1ها0٧هأ
heCOtUe daore reconciled to the Severity of his تلا:ا: a ; ،: ٤؛ e (hall؛ t؛؛e adds, tl؛ ; fate h؛٣,through Europe, in¡: few days \ and e^ds tO ^y’comm^iids^ wait, upon ؛؛en؛b^d؛shasli;in o
:؛! ة٦٢للالئ؛؛ء ^٧tm٠ ie his؛ my .friends, and W0۶jd ؛ sbr^mhappy as not to fuccecd, he begs
ئئ2بء1ة،؛5ه:ة!״ئء;?ب؛״؟؛ل٠ء٠م^.ت٤املا١ل
yer, ior ^y future happtnels, he bids me؛pr nerous؟I was prodigioufjy affected at the g
tr؛ ؛؛win ؛¡ manner my deceit and ؛؛he upbraided me w ؛Sion ., ha -Should not have been Sen ؛ ve؛؛l؛ingratitude i b but she calin, nobje ؛ lble to his reproaches؛ na^e؛,dignity, With Which his letter was wrote
ج دجlyfeif"ال ت £ دف him rhe
and I never remember having Seen rnylelf in a لاً;ا و:ء;ل أ an؛؛ ,umstiating pomt of view؛! more on drawing a parallel between him and myie f. ;It ؛Ire rea ؛I gave Mr. Williams tlie letter
thenj	ة
9. The MEMOIRS of then, throwing it careiesly upon the table, faid *٤ Sir Charles is.a noble fellow, and I wish him a good journey, with all my heart.”
The hurry of a Scene So new, and So embarrassing as that which I had been in ever Since my marriage, had lcarcely left me a moment for reflection : but the first time Mr. Williams took his hat, and Said he would go to the Costee-houSe for half an hour, gave me to myfelf. What a chaos of remorfe, trouble, and vexation, preiented itfelf to my view ؛ I trembled at the profpect, and, once more, called Reafon to my aid ; she came, but to upbraid me for having discarded her at Lady Betty Ruf-fel’s, Srom which fatal moment, She convinced me, that I had gone Straight on, in the paths of Error, which lead infallibly to Misfortune. T'he hint my aunt had given me, of my hushand’s character, made me careSully examine his every word and action. I Soon Sound his education to have been that of a modern sine Gentleman, differing, however, from most of them in this, that he really was a good Scholar, and had many accomplishments; he drew remarkably well, and played upon the harpsichord as well as any one could do, whodid not make it the occupation of their lives j he Spoke Italian and French fluently, and was, in every reSpect, what the world calls, an accomplished Gentleman: He would undoubtedly have been a١So a valuable member of Society, had he not been Spoiled by the faiSe maxims of the company he kept. Youngas I was, 1 had been taught early to think as I have already shewn, in the former part of my story ؛ I therefore Soon perceived the danger ot being united to a man, who had no fixed
principle؛؛,
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	9١
mmsm
called upon Soto do, without examining et
^ ״٥״?.^״^ rh^ch״.־^ Vaf^؟;؛؟sLTr١
as any man there, and boasted,
He nee٧enr f٠؛؛il ״ c.napty °by.>£¿.«77« ،٤٠ called it) though he did not love drinking; or I was absorbed, in thus defining my Jaushand s character, alervant opened my dressing-room
“»־־־״ ٠.I
her up.” He d؛d So; and, to my great Surpnze, introduced to me a tall, ill-looking woman, whom, in my life. I had never Seen had good cloathson, but, as I thought^ ؛؟٥٥^. ly fancied, and as oddly put. on. I ٥»٥٥ her٠ " If she had any businefs with me ?”٠ She anfwered, feating herfelf, « Yes, Mtfs, I ״،־، come to talk with you upon an affair of confequence.״ The word Mifs, did not shock my ear in the least, as I had fo lately cast it ost, that I hardly perceived the impropriety of u. She continued, " You are to know, M.siyhat before Mr. Williams took you, he kept Fanny Fetch, but I fuppofe, you know that ■well enough.) Now, you arc. to know, that he ha؛ left this poor creature, without paying her lo g-ings, or giving her a farthing ; all her cloat؛^
92 The MEMOIRS of are in pawn, and she must go into limbo, if he does not relieve her. Now, to be Sure, MiSs, you are not obliged to do any thing for her> but I would have you consider, that it may be your own caSe, in a short time ־, for, I must tell you, that your Spark is not famous for his constancy ; and, though you are prettv, yet I have recommended Some girls, as pretty as yourSelf, to him, and poor things I do not know what is become of them.” During this converfation, the blood had Several times alternately flown from my face to myheart ؛ and the perturbation of my mind was fo great, that it was with the utmost difficulty I collected my fpirits to anfwer the woman; which I did, however at last, in the following words: " I do not think, Madam, that you mean to infult me, but will fuppoie that your prefent treatment of me, proceeds from your ignorance of my being Mr. Williams’s wife.” She interrupted me, fmiling, " Yes, yes, my Dear, (fays she) I dare fay you are ; as all young Ladies call themfelves the wives of their first keeper.” This anSwer sired me, and brought a blush of indignation into my cheeks I replied, ٤٠ Unhappy woman, you have lived abforbed in vice So long, that you even don’t know virtue, though she stands before your eyes; I will, however, condeScend to undeceive you, by informing you, that I am the daughter of Mr. Rutland, Member of Parliament for the county of — , and that I was married last week to Mr. Williams, at May-fair Chapel, where you may, if you chufe it, find the marriage registered, In the mean tint., I pity, from my heart, the unfortunate girl whom you recommend to my charity ؛ give me her direction,
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	93
tion, (then drawing my purfe out 0؛ my pocket, I Said.) and here, give her thefe ten guineas؛ they are all lean Spare at prefent ؛ but when I am reconciled to my friends, which (I added with a sigh) I hope will be Soon, if she deferves it, from her future good conduct, I will Secure her from want the rest oS her days.״ Here I ended, and a tear involuntarily dropped from my eye. The woman was by this time convinced of her mistake, and began to make Some aukward excuSes for her ifl behaviour. I affur-ed her, there was no occasion for them, and that I was not in the least affronted. She expreffed a high fenfe of my goodneSs and benevolence, and, with much more refpect than she had entered it, left the room. A few minutes after she was gone. Mr. Williams came home, and brought with him a Gentleman whom I did not know. On presenting him to me, he Said, " This Gentleman, my Dear, is an intimate acquaintance of my father’s ؛ he has the good-neis to offer himielf as a mediator betwixt him and me,” Mr. Smith, for that was his name, advanced towards me, and wished me joy. I expreffed to him the Sensibility I had oS his be-1 nevoience, and my gratitude Sor his kind intention to Serve us, and, with a forced Smile, (for my heart was ready to burst) I added, " By fo good an act, Sir, you will infure to yourftlf the kingdom of Heaven, for you know it is pro-mifed to the peace-makers.” He anfwered me very politely, " That he desired no greater reward than that of contributing to my happinefs: But indeed, Madam, (continued he) I apprehend that I shall have very little merit in this affair, for I forefee that the old folks, instead of
being
94 The MEMOIRS of being angry at their fon’s choice, will think it the wifest action of his life, when they come to know you.” I bowed to this compliment, and he went on. ،، But, Madam, is there no means of bringing your friends to a right way of thinking ? I apprehend there lays the hardest taik.
I know your uncle Boldby intimately well ؛ and when I have done with your old Gentry, (faid he looking at my hushand) I will, with that Lady’s permifflon, attack him.” I replied, " That words were but weak interpreters of a feeling heart, and that I could find none to expreSs my Sensibility of his extreme goodneSs ٠' Mr Smith changed the diScourSe, and Mr. Williams observed, " That I was graver than ufual.” I told him, ،، The preceding conversation had made me thoughtful, but that I would endeavour to be more chearful.” He replied, t( I beg you would, Charlotte, for the least gloom on that lovely face of your’s makes me miserable.” After dinner the two Gentlemen got into a lerious confultation upon the manner in which they were to bring old Mr. Williams to lee us ؛ I took thisoppertunity of leaving them and retired into my dressing room, in order to determine with myfelf, how I should act, with regard to the Scene which bad past between me, and that strange woman, in the morning ; I thought it would be indelicate to mention it to my hushand, as well as injudicious, becauie we Seldom Sorgive, and never love a perSon, who shews us ourSclves in a disadvantageous light. I, desire Adelaide, you would take notice, that this obfervation was made at the period of time I am now writing of; experience has sincetaught me, that though it may be Sound just in many
instances,
Mrs. WILLIAMS. 95 instances, yet it is by no means always fo; there are minds who are virtuous enough to bear re-prooof, and magnanimous enough, not only to own their errors, but to love the perfon, whofe friendly zeal ventures to hold the mirror of truth up to their mind, at the rifque of being hated for their officiouSnefs; fuch exalted virtue as this, was not to be found, at that time, in my own breast, and, consequently, I concluded, that it did not exist ; I therefore could only rea-Son Srom what I felt, and what I knew.— Pardon this digression׳.——After a long debate with myfelf, how I ought to act in this affair, I determined not to mention a word of it to Mr. Williams, in the hopes of makmg him become vir-tuous, by perfuadin؟ him. that I was convinced he was already So ; this decided, I returned to the Gentlemen.
The next morning, I received a letter from Sophie, brought to me by my maid Fanny, who I had desired, might be Sent to me. My sister tells me, " That my mother irritates my father excessively, bySaying, that my ill conduct was the natural conSequence of the falSe education he had given me; that he had bred me up like a boy, rather than a girl; and, that she always forefaw what all my learning would come to. In this manner she torments my father (lays Sophie) So much, that I do not think it impossible, but, Srom a Spirit of opposition, he may, at last, take your side of the question; and, if that should happen, he will probably argue in your favour, till he convinces himfelf that you are not quite fo much to blame, as he at first thought you. Sir Charles was with my father two or three days ago j he pleaded your
caufe
6و The MEMOIRS OF cauSe like a Cicero ؛ but his tears, and the deep forrow which apparently had taken poffestion of him. argued more powerfully against you, than all his fOrced eloquence could do in yotrr favour؛ he is fet out for Italy؛ the parting of him, and my father, was truly pathetic ־1 ؛ am glad, for yOur fake, that you did not fee it : I long to tee لأ0ز, which I shall most certainly do, the first hioment that I can stip away, without the old folks Sufpecting where I am going ؛ till when, ١ت١جا’ةلآ ctc.
This letter caufed me to turn my eyes sbvere-ly on myfelf, who had rendered miserable sb many ١Grthy people, in order to gratify my own inclinations ؛ I was forry, truly ־forry, to .have given tlrem pain ؛ laut I loved my hushand 'with too mucla passion, to l)e a sincere penitent i I therefore conloled mySelf with that common-place argument, that the evil was done ־؛or wliiyh ؛here w3s now no remedy, and, consequently, it was a Solly to grieve at what could not be re^ called. Satisfied with this sine reasbning, I went down to dinner 5 I Sound, in the parlotrr, Ylr. Smith with Mr. Williams ؛ the Sormer in-formed nae, that he was just come from my fa. ther-؛n٠law’s٠— I ashed, with sbme impatience, “ Well, Sir, will the father forg'ive the fon’s marrying without his conlent ?״ Mr. Smith re-plied, " I hope he will. Madam ; but,he laegan, hy being very violent, talked of strange thipgs أ and did not draw a very flattering likenefs of you, young Gentleman, (addressing himfelf to Mr. Williams ؛) lie faid, " You ouglat to have mar-ried a woman with twenty thoufand pouttds to her fortune, and that would have been too little, to shpply your extravagancies.” I told him,
ppyy ؛“ جou
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	57
" You had married a Lady worth a great deal more than the Sum he had mentioned, it she was lobe valued either by her beauty, or merit; and that I was fure he would be of my opinion, if he would give me leave to prefent her to him.” He made me no anfwer to this propofal, which I thought a good sign ; when, after a few minutes silence, he faid, ؛٠ Is she a good cecono-mist ? Will she take care of her houfe ? And has she charms Sufficient to keep him at home ? If fo, she may prove a fortune to him, in the end.” Here I interrupted Mr. Smith, by Saving, " That I would venture to anSwer for my-ielf, with regard to the two first articles of my father’s enquiries j and that, as to the third, I could on'y fay, that it should be the study of mv life, to render home agreeable to my hushand ; and that, therefore, if I did not fucceed, it would be my misfortune, but not my fault.” Mr. Williams laid fome handfome and polite things, upon the occasion; and Mr. Smith went on informing me, " That he had obtained leave to prefent me to she old folks, on Sunday next, if I would confent to go j but, that till they had feen me, they would not fee their fon : The old Lady, he ،"aid, was much easier to perfuade, than her hushand, which he attributed, in part, to her having conceived a very favourable opinion of me, fiom hearing that I was a great favourite of Lady Betty Rujfel’s, to whom she had wrote, to aslc her ientiments of me, and expected an anfwer every day. " Alas, Mr. Smith, (faid I) I deceived that, worthy woman, and, therefore, I Sear she will Say no good of. me.”—" Deceit in love and war, Madam, (re-Vo l. I.	F	plied
p8 The MEMOIRS of plied Mr. Smith) are always allowed of, therefore if that is your only crime, you will, I am perSuaded, find no one to condemn you : But (continued he) shall I have the honor of conducting you to your father-in-law’s on Sunday, for I must return an anfwer. I looked at my hushand, and Said, " You, Sir, must decide that for me ; I shall obey your commands.” He replied, " No, my Dear, I never will command you whilst I live, but I will request it of you to go with Mr. Smith, according to appointment, that is, if you can, with eaSe, condeS-cend to do them that honor ; for they ought to have waited on you first, as being a bride ; but they are a queer couple, and will have their way; Sor my part, whilst you are there, 1 will go and dine with Tom Shirley, whom I have not Seen since our wedding-day j he has been out of town, and returns to-morrow ؛ he is Member for
our county, and a very honest fellow.”----------
،، And a very great rake, (replied Mr. Smiths Indeed, George, you must leave off that fett of acquaintance, now you have ־got So amiable, So reSpectable a companion as that Lady.” ،، Indeed, Sir, (faid Mr. Williams) but I shall not ٠, I am Sure my wife will never desire me to turn off my old friends, becaufe they are, perhaps, not faints; but give me leave to tell you, that they have more honor in them, than all the formal puritanic old prig'gs in the univerfe put together ” Mr. Smith told him, " That he would not dilpute that point with him now.” An؛؛ I allured Mr. Williams, " That I would never object to any company he chofe to keep, as I was thorougliiv perfuaded it could not be
bad
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	99
bad, Since, as the French proverb Says, * Di rnoi qui tu bantes, et je te dirai que tu eS.
On Sunday noon Mr. Smith came, in my father Williams’s coach, to fetch me. In handing me down stairs, he perceived that I trembled So much as to be hardly able to keep upon my feet ; when we got into the coach, he took notice of the trepidation I was in, and Said, ٠، My dear young Lady, you are to blame thus to frighten yourSelf about Seeing the old folks j I am Sure they will behave very civilly to you ؛
. they must be monsters to do otherwiSe. especially as you go by their invitation ; besides (added he) I am with you, and I shall not sit patiently by to See you ill treated.” I thanked him, and the coach stopped at their door. Mr. Smith handed me out, and a Servant desired us to walk up stairs ; we did So, and were introduced into a dining-room, where Sat a good looking, elderly Lady, with her feet almost within the fender. She turned her head towards us, on the opening of the door, and, as if she had not Seen me, Said, with the most provoking indifference, ،i Your Servant IVIr. Smith, is that George’s wife?״ " Yes, Madam, (replied my friend) and she is worthy to be the wife of an Emperor.” " Come hither young woman,” fays she. I advanced. She stared at me for forne minutes, and then laid, " Yes, l can forgive George for marrying you, becaufe you are very pretty ؛ if you had been leSs So than you. are, I never would have Seen him whilst I had lived ; but I like you So well (continued she) that I believe, had 1 been him, I should have
* A man is known by his company.
F 2	done
too The M E M O I R S of done the fame thing : But pray (faid she) you can live upon love, child, I fuppofe, can’t you ? It is thin diet I have heard, but I don’t find you are likely to have any other; your husband, I can tell you, has nothing at prefent but what his ١ father allows him, and whether he will continue that allowance now he has difobliged him, by marrying a beggar, I don’t know.”
Then taking a Second Survey of me Srom head to foot, sbe Said," You are very fine, child ؛ but I think you would have been as well drest, if your gown had been without any silver in it ; I fuppofe all that trumpery is not paid for yet; hey ?”—I anfwered, " Yes, indeed, Madam, they are.” W٢hich was the first word I had articulated since I entered the room. My mind had undergone various revolutions in that sbort Space of time. I began, by refpecting her as the parent of my husband, as well as on account oS her age and figure, the latter of which had much of the Gentlewoman in it, and sbe still was handfome. Her keeping her feat on my entering the room, and her cavalier manner of accosting me, had given fuch a shock to my Spirits, or, if you pleafe, my pride, that I was ready to sink into the earth ; till, from the continuation of this abfurd and indelicate behaviour, I ceafed to refpect her, and she then appeared to me in fo ridiculous a light, that it was no longer in her power to wound me: On the contrary, I felt my own fuperiority fo forcibly, that, from a state of the most violent agitation, I became as calm as death, and as infensible ؛ I looked at her not without Some degree of contempt, but without feeling the least particle of humiliation from any thing she faid. So true it is, that
the
Mrs. WILLIAMS	ioi
the Sensible mind can be hurt only by thoSe whom they esteem.
Mr. Smith, who had Sat all this time like ٠ perSon stupisied with astonishment, now looking, at me, met my eyes ؛ I Smiled, and he Seemed to recover himSelf a little, upon perceiving me to be So much at my eafe. My mother interrupted this silent conversation of onr١؟ by Saying ٠٠ Talk, child; I want to know if your mind corresponds with your figure ; but I fuppofe not: for I am fure you acted like a great fooMn marrying George.” I anfwered, " That if she thought that a proof of my folly, I was afraid I should stand condemned in her opininion for an ideot, becaufe I was fo far from thinking that my judgment erred in the choice I had made of her fon, that, if I could possibly be unmarried again, I would again give him my hand at the altar.” She was going to reply, when my father-in-law entered the room : he fixed his eyes iledfastly upon me; and then afked his Lady, If I was his fon’s wife? " Yes, it is Mrs. Williams״ she replied. He instantly advanced, and faluted me, faying, '٠ I am glad to fee you, daughter then turning to Mr. Smith, he added, ؛٠ You did not do her justice, Sir, when you defcribed her perSon to me ؛ she is the prettiest girl, I think, that I ever Saw ؛ and I don’t in the least wonder, th at she XurnedGeorge’s head.״
This old Gentleman was handfome, and wore upon his countenance an uninterrupted Smile ; he Spoke with a fcftnefs of voice which was engaging ; he poffeffed, to a degree, that fort of attentive politenels, which must ever pleaie, as it puts us in good humour with ourfel٢es, and generally gives us a high opinion of the perfon F 3	who
!02 The MEMOIRS of who has thus played upon our vanity. I have made it an obfervation, through life, that few people frnile always, unlefs it be in order to hide fome strong affection of the mind, which they are afraid the world should read in their faces; it is a kind of a maik which they put on, to conceal fome known defect of the heart; and it frequently fucceeds j becaufe the world, in general, judge from exteriors alone. But to return to my narration.
A fervant came and told us, that dinner was ferved ؛ my father-in-law gave me his hand, and led me down stairs: The converfation, whilst ve were at table, was chearful enough ; Mr. Smith told us the news of the day, and the Master and Mistrefs of the houfe talked on various indifferent topics. I found by her difcourfe that the old Lady had read a vast deal, but without any clue; History, Novel, Romance, Metaphysics, Physics, &c. were all jumbled together; not to omit Theology, which teemed to have been a favourite branch of her studies : She was a rigid Church of England woman, (of the High Church, I mean) and, con. fequently, loved the Stuart family with enthu-fiafm, as, indeed, they must always be beloved or not at all ؛ for, in my opinion, one must begin by being mad, before one can arrive at fuch a pitch of folly, as to chufe ¡or one’s hero’s the Charles’ sand the James’s. Had the quantity of furniture, which was in the good Lady’s head, been arranged, and Suit ed to the apartments, there was enough to have furnished the most capacious head, and not inelegantly neither ؛ but, unfortunately, they were all stuffed in, one upon another, in fuch a manner, that it was hardly possible to come at what one wanted,
without
1.3	.Mrs. WILLIAMS
without the utmost difficulty. Baker's Chroni-٢e, I؟Sirach, however, w تم٠ cle, 3nd the San believe,placed pretty near the door, for st)efeem-ed tocoiUe at them very readily ;and, consequent-rons.	She had؛ly, quoted them upon all occa
od deal؟strong natural SenSC, but having lived a g out oS 'the world, and with people of' leSs read-lug than herSelf, the bad conceived all the world r؛١he to be Sools, and rode triumphant upon birth; ־'then stae had a high idea oS he و ruins and called every body, indiscriminately, who a title, trumpery people. .In tire midst ־had not Of theSe few mistaken notions (which proceed-ed rathei- from a fault in her education than her understanding) the had an open, generous, be-part,؟ and, put her prejudices ؛ nevolent healt nGbody judged ¡aore accurately than she did on
عإئع١ي ٥٢٤٥ وكءكلاء\لء d؟ihe was g٠ ؛any fabjca
d،cu'e, vvhich shewed the؛manner of Seizing r ؟Such as I hav	.؟Vivacity oS her ihaaginatio
r؛n؟here pointed her, in lpite of the rough ma n Which she had treated me, I could not help؛ er, be-؛ SeehngSomething like an affection for bferved,؟ fore tlie day was over. It must be however, that she had intirely altered her be-w؟haviour to rase after the first half hoyr; she n tender ؛0 feemed to look upon me wit la a fort id nae،؛! ؛t, an؛a؟regard, which touched my h 0؛؛^ed؛٠re1ap Had she	lity٠؛5؛again open t٠0 lenS
؟her former stile, she would pCbably again hav ad؛ cloled my heart, becaufe the impression she made on it was recent 5 but I had nothing far-tlaer to tear on that head.
-BefOre I took my leave of my father .and mo I ashed, in the most pathetic terms,	־
their permistion for my hushand to wait Up0۶ ,p F 4	them
!.4 The MEMOIRS of them. The old Lady replied, " Yes, yes, my Dear, Georgs may come, whenever he pleafes. His father faid, " Daughter, if his marrying of you had been his first offence, I could verv easily have pardoned him ؛ but, indeed, I am forry to Say it, he is a worthleSs young fellow ; and if I do See him, it will be for your Sake, Madam, and not Sor his own.*' I Seized his hand, and kissed it with tears of thanks. My mother obligingly fate me down at my own door in her coach j I could not prevail with her to walk up stairs ؛ shedenred I would Send her Son the next morning. So See her and his father.
I found my husband at home, and almost asteep in an elbow-chair ; he started from his Scat on my entering the room, and advancing to me, Said, Well, my Angel, how did they receive you ? Well, I hope .٠ If otherwile, by G—d I will never See that old raScal, my father, more.” " Fye, Mr. Williams, (I replied,) I beg that your regard for me, may not make you forget the refpect you owe to your parents؛ you injure them, if you fuppofe that they behaved ill to me ; on the contrary, they treated me with more kindnefsand civility than I had any right to expect from them ; and they desire to See you to-morrow morning. Mr. Smith came in before he could make an anfwer. I made a sign to that worthy man, not to mention a word of Mrs. Williams’s behaviour, on my introduction to her ؛ he took the hint, and all w ent well.
The next day, at noon, my husband went to dine at his father’s ؛ he did not return till evening, when I thought he looked much out of humour. I afked him, with an anxious concern, " If any thing had past between him and his
parents
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	105
parents which had either difpltafed or vexed him?” He angered, " Yes, my Dear, that covetous old fellow, my father, was born to plague me 1 ؛ can get him to do nothing more for us than he did for me before I was married, and even that only at pleaSure ; for he declares, he will make no Settlement, faying, All will be mine at his death, and till then he won't put the staff (as he calls it) out of his own hand ؟ however, I am to give him a lift of my debts, and he has promifed to pay them. D— him, why could not he have lumped them, and give me the Sum total, without plaguing me with recollecting, and Setting them down upon paper ; an old mechanical hunks, he wants tocri-ticiSe every ariicle, and fo collect matter enough to fcold upon for the rest of his life.” I did not attempt to interrupt the courSe of his ill humour, judging it better to let it have its full vent j So, after he had thoroughly tired himfelf and me, with abusing his Sather, he reaffum-ed his good nature, and, Smiling, Said, " Well, Charlotte, never mind, he cannot live always; So. patience. I will go to-morrow (continued he) and look out fora houSe; I don’t like lodg. ings. W hereabouts would you chufe to live, my Dear?" I anfwered, ״’Wherever it was most agreeable to him ؛ (adding) that I had no choice, since a deSart would be delightful to me, So he was but prefent.” He thanked me for the compliment I paid him, with vivacity, and faid every thing which a well-bred man may be fuppof. ed to have faid upon the occasion. 1 ventured, however, to oblerve, ״ That, though a houle was certainly preferable to a lodging, yet it could be of no ule to us, unlels we had the means of F 5	furnishing
106 The MEMOIRS of furnishing it,” He started, and replied, " Faith I never thought of that ; but no matter, I will take up the goods, and my father may pay
for them.----But, my Dear, (continued he) I
have a houfe already ; it is, indeed, in a part of the town which you won’t like, nor can live in; but, perhaps, you may find Some of the Surni-ture not unufeful, and we can Sell the rest ; l protest I had forgot every thing about it, iS you had not luckily put it into my head ; I will go myfelf to-morrow morning, and examine it.״ I easily understood, that this had been a houSe in which he had kept his favourite Ladies, therefore I avoided making any enquiries, which could, in the least, embarrafs him. I Said,
Perhaps, my Dear, all the furniture may do for us, and, if there is enough of it, I fee no neceflity there will be for our buying any new ; fupposing it only to be commonly decent, it will content me." I then afked him, " How many rooms he had in his chambers.” This I faid, to make him believe that I judged, from his faying, that the situation of the houfe was not a proper one tor me, that he had lived in the Temple. I faw he Seized this hint with plea-fure, and anfwered me, ‘٠ I had a double Sett of chambers, my Dear,”—" If So (I replied) I. dare Say we need be at no expence Sor Surnish-ing a Small houfe, which is very lucky for us.
The next morning Mr..Williams went out, as he Said, to look for a houSe, and my mother-in-law came to make me a visit : She talked to me in the most friendly and affectionate manner, told me, " That my hushand was imprudent and raSh, that he had treated his Sather the day beSore with inSolence, when he ought rather to
have
Mrs. WILLIAM S.	107
have Soothed him, by an appearance of contrition and humility ; (she added) George always defeats his own purpoies, by givrr.g way to the heat of his temper ؛ I wish, my Dear, that you would endeavour to curb his extravagances.
' She then proceeded to recommend oeconomy strongly to me, and faid. " That if any thing could reclaim a libertine, it would be the being attached to a virtuous, amiable woman like me; but continued she, (with a sigh,) habitual vice, my Dear, is hard to conquer ; George has a good heart, but he has unfortunately adopted a Sett of wrong principles, which, till he is con vinced they are fo, will, I fear, be a fotirce of pain to you both.” She then afked me, " If we did not intend going to houfe.keep’.ng. I anfwered, " Yes؛ but that we were a little puzzled about the means of doing it, for want of money.” She replied, ،، Well, I will fee if I cannot help you a little upon that head.” She then desired, " That I would give her leave to introduce me to my hushand’s relations.” She named the next day for our beginning the round of visits which she thought it neceffary that I should make,, and faid, " She would take me up in her coach, and bring me home again.” I thanked her, as I ought, tor her goodnefsto me. She then told me, " That she had received an anfwer from Lady Betty Russel, who had been lavish in my praife, and, with her compliments on my marriage, wished me every blessing tnis world could bestow.” I was Sensibly touched at thefe marks of Lady Betty’s good nature and benevolence. My mother stayed with me till almost dinner time, and then took her leave.
A few
io8 The M E M O I R S of A few days alter I had been prefented to my new relations, and very politely received by them, as I was sitting alone one morning, my footman brought me a letter, which he faid came by the penny-posh As on looking on the fuperfcription, I did not know the hand, I opened it with fome fear, lest it should be anonymous, to tell me anecdotes of my hushand, which I did not chufe to hear; it contained a bank bill of five hundred pounds, with thefe words:
" Madam, I have Sent vou the incIoSed bill, becaufe I apprehend you may want money, your hushand being too prudent to keep much by him at a time ; take it without hesitation, as it comes from a relation of your own, and may you be as happy as my wishes would make you, did it depend on me.”
In a postscript were theSe words:
٠٠ Keep this money yourSelf ؛ be adviSed, don’t give it your hushand ؛ you may one day want it more than you do now.”
I could not decide, after the most maturecon-hderution, whether this acceptable preSent came from my father, or my uncle Boldby, but I was certain that I owed it to one of them ; a tear of gratitude and contrition fell Srom my eye, on recollecting the worth of thofe friends rny ill conduct had robbed me of. Oh conScience 1 how keen are thy reproaches to a mind warped tromViitue, but not Sunk in Vice ? I could not however, bring myfelf to comply with the admonition given me in .he letter: I thought it wrong to conceal any thing from my hushand, and bafely ungenerous to share his fortune, and not to tua-ke him partaker of	on the con-
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	109
trary, my heart exulted in the though؛, of having it in my ptrwer to mpke Ilim fo welcome a prefent. This day was one of the few lucky ohes which Fortune, had, with a mifer’s hand, allottedtomysharc؛ for, whilst I was enjoying the thought Of agreeably Surprizing my hushand, with my treafure, Sophie, my dear Sophie, en^ tered the room, and, in a moment, ١vas rcund my neck. We neither oS 11؛ Spoke lor fom؟ SeConds: floods of tears ctioaked the paffage of otir words ؛ when, at last, she fell on Iier knees 'holding one of my hands between her’s, w؛ich, kissing with ardor, she faid, ‘٤ Charlotte) I am come to pafs the day with you i my fathe؛ has given me leave to Order tire .coach at e1e؟'١n o’clock.״-—" Good God 1 I exclaimed, ca^ he be sb kind, sb forgiving, to his unworthy child؛” I could fay no more ; gratitude, ؛lial tender-nefs, and consbious demerit, all rushed sb pre-cipitately upon my fenfes, tliat I ؛ainte؛ a؛vay٠ Sophie slew to my aid, and, with the help ؟f my maid, brought ihe to myfelf. A torrent of te؛rs which fucceCded, calmed my' fpirits enough for me to tell my sister (as far as words could do} ؛he joy I felt, oh feeing 'her again. I. str۶ined her to my breast, and gazed at her .with the utmost delight : She looked at me, witli eyes full of the tenderest pity and affection ; and endeavo٧r-ed to draw my attention to indifferent objects, wishing to fuhdue fensibility, in favour of chea؛-fulnefs and gaiety. She futceeded but aukward-ly in her attempt, till Mr. Williams car٧ehome. When his vivacity and humour dissipated 0٧r ten״ der melancholy. He was obliged to lee Sophie. She told us, " That my friends were pleafyd to hear, that his were reconciled to us.״ I aik-
ed
no	The MEMOIRS OF
ed Sophie, " If she knew any thing of my father or uncle's having wrote to me ?” She Said " No ؛ and she dared to fay, that they had not.” I put this question to her when Mr. Williams was gone out of the room : She stayed with me till eleven. When the coach came for her, I desired her to give my reSpectful duty to my parents ؛ she promiSed that I should Soon See her again, and then wished me a good night..
The next day, I went to See a houfe in--
Square ٠, I liked it much. Mr. Williams took a leaSe of it for Seven years, and then ordered his furniture to be removed into it, which, when done, I went to examine, I found it rich, but much Soiled ؛ the silk damaik I ordered to be cleaned ؛ the chairs, beds., &c. were good؛ there was no kitchen furniture, nor any linen. He told me, that he had a good quantity of the latter, and he fancied he could get it again ; I never afked by what means ؛ and, in about a weeks time, a porter brought to our lodgings a large bundle of dirty houshould linen, which, upon examination, was new, but had been very ill ufed; no part of it had ever been hem’d, and it was cut and stained in many places ؛ however, with proper management, I hoped to make it both good and ufeful. 1 easily guested, that thefe things had been fetched out of p.،vvn, and So, it feems, they were ؛ for my hushand told me fo, on his return home, but did not tell me who had difpofed of them in that manner, nor did 1 enquire. Mr. Willi amBs mother made us a prefent of fome ufeful china, and his father gave us as much plate as was necessary for our fmall family ; thus we found ourielves
let، led
Mrs. WILLIAMS. in fettled in our houfe, almost without any actual expence on our parr. I obferved, with infinite concern, that my husband, and his father, were not upon good terms ؛ they always bickered in company ؛ and I found Mr. Williams very unwilling to attend me, when I went to visit the old folks. I expostulated with him, in the gentlest terms, upon the impropriety of fuch a conduct, but was always anfwered, ؛٠ Indeed, my Dear, you do not know that old fellow ؛ an angtl from Heaven could not keep his temper with him : I know he is all imiles with you but he is the Devil with me.” He added, " I would rather, a thoufand times, go to a goal, (if it was not for your Sake) than be obliged to him for paying what I owe.” I found there the sboe pinched.
One day, when I was ■alone with my father-in-law, he began abusing his fon in the most indecent manner, called him an extravagant, debauched villain ؛ he then told me how often he had paid his debts, and to what amount, they were, indeed, by his account, very considerable : He added, " and now though I offer once more to clear him with the world, he will not give me in a fair list of his debts ; he has two reafons for this ref ufai, (continued the old Gentleman ;) the one is, becaufe he is asbamed of the nature of them ؛ and the next is, that he wants me to give him the fum total of what he owes, that he may put the money in his pocket and not pay one of his creditors a fai thing out of it; he has Served me So before, Says he, So I shall take care how I trust him for the Suture.” Here he pauSed. I could make no anfwer to this cruel harangue, but by a sigh ! He looked at me, and Seeing forrow painted in my countenance,
112 Thf. MEMOIRS of nance, he faid, " Yes, child, you have reafon enough to sigh, Sor having slung yourSelS awav־, in Spite of your parents care of you, upon Such a worthleSs fellow as George is ; and, you may depend upon it, that, whenever he grows tired of you, (which he would do, in a short time, of Venus herfelf) he.will infallibly leave you to ١ beggary and mifery, whilst be purSues new pleasures.” At this prophecy (for it really was one) I could restrain my tears no longer ؛ I begged oS him to Spare my Senslbility, and to think more favourably of his Son : But he silenced me, by Saying, " Daughter, I know him much better than you do j and have thought proper to let you a little into his real character, out of pity to your youth and inexperience.”
Thus this cruel old man, under a pretence of compassion and benevolence, had, in a great meaiure, robbed my breast of peace, and silled my mind with SuSpicion and terror. From Isis study I went into his wife’s dressing-room: On my entrance she afked me, with concern, " If I was not well ?” I told her, " That I was just come from having a conversation with my Sather-in-law, which had given me unutterable pain ؛” I then narrated it to her. She coloured, and, with great heat, replied, " Mr. Williams is a Sool, child, to talk to you in that manner, and Sol shall teli him; besides, he lies, (theSe were her words;) for George has been a rake, it is true ؛ but lean tell him, that he is a very honest Sellow, as well as a very pretty Gentleman ; and as he loves you to distraction, which I perceive he does, it is in your power not only to refotm him; but to make what you will oS him, So all his future conduct, whether good or ill, I shall
Mrs. W I L LI A M S.	113
lay to your charge ٠, for I am convinced that you can lead him, with a fine thread, which way vou pleafe." I trembled at this positiveaffer-tion, as I knew the character of my mother inlaw was, that whenever she adopted an opinion, however abturd or unjust it might be, she never departed from it. I astured her, ״ That though I did not think my power to be So abfolute as she Seemed to think it, yet I would ufe all the aScen-dano׳ I had over him, toengage him to act prudently, and this both for my own fake, as well as for the refpect and love I bore to h:rn and his
parents.”----" Make him, then, (she replied)
bring in an honest list of his debts to his father, no matter of what nature they are, and then all will go well ” I promifed to ufe my endeavours to that effect, and fo we parted.
On my return home, Mr. Williams afked me *٠ what converfation I had had at my father’s ?״ I repeated to him what his mother had faid, but fuppreffed the abusive part of his lather’s dif-courle. He started from his chair, and, with an air of passion,· faid, " Well, my Dear, for your fake, and not to oblige them, I will give an account of what I owe \ but it is fuch a trifle that it would make a man mad, to fee what a bustle they make about it j the whole don’t amount to three thoufarld pounds.” I was fur-prized at the largenefs of the fum, efpecially when I considered his youth, and that his father had already paid his debts twice. However, at last, the affair was fettled amicably enough between them, but not before the old man had made his Ion Swear iolemniy, that the account he had given in, was a just one ٠, that he had made no
reierve,
x 14 The MEM OI RS of referve, nor Secreted the Smallest article from his knowledge. He repeatedly Said, " George, you Swear, that when I have paid this money for you, you are clear of the world, and don’t owe any one in it So much as a farthing ?” He anfwered, " I do Swear to it, Sir.” It would have been happy for us all, had he been sincere when he made this affeveration ; but, unfortunately for himfelf, as well as for me, he was not fo. This important affair over, as I thought, I requested Mr. Smith, for whom I had conceived a real friendship, to find out for me the unfortunate g؛rl, who had lent to me; he did So, and brought me word, that she was in very good keeping ; fo I thought I hud nothing more to do with her.
I now turned all my attention towards the attaining domestic happinefs ; we faw a great deal of company ; I fometimes went into public, but rarely. Mr. Williams was always gay, well-bred, and good-humoured ؛ he was, however, a good deal from home, and very often stayed out extremely late. I never enquired where he had been, and always welcomed him with a fmile of complacency ؛ as I was well convinced, that reproaches and four looks will never keep a man at home,, when chearfulnefs and good na١ tore cannot do it. A perfeverance in the latter conduct has, I believe, reclaimed fome libertines ١ but I never knew a practice of the former productive of any good. T he man who comes home, only becaufe he is afraid of being icolded when he stays out, is no companion for a fentimental mind. I think, when the love of peace is the only motive for my hufband’s giving me his company, I would of the two rather be
ةلل	.M ft s. WILLIAMS
In general, let a woman make a man s horn!
،؛ agreeable to him, and he will, in time, prefer his؛ 0؛ there are exceptions ؛ to all other places as well as to all other rules, but I have Seldom Seen the instance. The great error, .which my t they Suppoie the؛Sex Srequently Sail into, is, th lover and the hushand to be the Same individual, the. hushand may ؛ a palpable mistake ؛؛ which love as well as the lover, but his paffion will character. It ig the want ؛eren؟ar a di؛b Of this knOwledge which makes ?oung married Ladies very troublesbme to their husbands, *ronr c neglected if a naan؛a Supposition, that they a ١t.l١ey are ;r two؟ siglrt lor an hour ־is oUt of theil astonistaed how he can be capable of taking, any حءلالأ٤اء١؛ع and ؛pleafure when abfem frotn then the want of that assiduous attention, which p٢e_ ceded their marriage, to ditgust, or a ,cold in" difference : when, in truth, it is nothing more hat,׳؟ than the natural cOnfequence of poffe^ng with ardor, we afpired to attain : W hilst .we ٤a٠؛e of ag؛purfue, tlie mind is in a contin۶al sta but ؛ 11 tlie SenSes؛ tion, which gives activity to ^.hen once adrived at the gaol, we are not lels re calm!؟happy, perhaps, hut we are always m ل٦ل:ا ,؛t؛ ,expletive ;ة:اةا ئ׳داأ;٠لا٩_ئ٠ء ;,and
nqirilliiy (if I may be .allowe.d؛-״ statC of tender rt٠؛t0 furyey the p؛m؟the phrafe) tlaat a than be on,؛ner of his fortunes througla the optic of re۶ unobstructed by the vapours of pa٢r٥n ; .and it is at this period that the woman should endea^our^ by tlie ifrictest attention to her e.very word and adioH, to six on her husband’s mind a thorough Confidence in her virtue, an approbation of her or her character؛ Conduct, and a reflected esteem In general; thefe Sentiments will naturally pro-g duce
116 The MEMOIRS &c. duce friendship, which, when built on fo noble a ba۶s, can never fail of ,lasting as long as the naerit which gave birth to it, exists.—LCn’t be angry, Adelaide, I will return to my story this minute.
From the character of extravagancy, which my father and mother-in-law had־ given me of their fpn, I fiad determined, contrary to my first relolution, to follow tire advice of' the perfon who had fe.nt me the Bank bill i judging, that my hushand might probably want mOne^ here-after, tnorc than he did nOw, and that, in any emergency of that nature, he־ would be agreea-hly Surprized at meeting with So unexpeؤed a reSource.
E N D بمج V o L. I.
LETTERS
BETWEEN
An ENGLISH LADY
AND
Her FRIEND at PARIS.
In which are contained
The M E M O I R S
٠F ١
Mrs. .WILLIAMS.
By a L A D Y.
V o l. II. DUBLIN:
Printed for J. Williams, J. Porter, R. Moncrieffe and T. Walker. MDCCLXX.
MEMOIRS
Mrs. WILLIAMS.
¡؟؛؛)iO٢" ؟؟)؛welve٠month had now past since our 2؛( a )؛١( marriage pretty peaceably, during ؟؛؛^ ^٠ which time I was brought to bed of a boy, to the great joy of the Williams tanaiiy. My uncle wrote me a letter upon the occasion, in which he desired he might be a god-fatherto my child. I begged Mr .Williams would wait upon him with our sincere thanks, for this his genteel and friendly offer; and at the Same time to try, if he could engage him to Hand for his Son in perSon, as he was to be christened at home ؛ he did So, and Succeeded. My aunt called one morning to aik me how I did. Thefe events gave me great pleaSure, as I had long Suffered from the idea, that I was an alien on earth, and belonged to nobody,being abandoned by all my own relations, excepting poor Sophie. My aun teven promiSed me to ufe her endeavours to bring my father to See me, when I should be able to go out, and added, that, in caSe he con-
. Sen ted
120 The MEMOIRS of fented which she was pretty fure he would, she desired she might introduce me to him, and would callon me, in her coach, for that purpoSe, at the time appointed. Thus thefe good folks, like the rest of the world, Seeing me well established, as they thought, and judging that I should never want any thing of them, were ready to be reconciled to me; but had wifely waited to See how affairs would turn out, before they shewed me any countenance, having previoully determined, that, if I had made a bad match I might take the confequences of it, and starve for my punishment. This is one of thofe Sen-timents which is frequently found in the breasts of parents, and which, I confels, I have never been able to account for. ׳When a girl marries against the confent and approbation of her parents, I should think the crime lay in the act of d'Sobedience, and was neither to be aggravated or mitigated by the confequences it produces, which have, in nay apprehension, nothing to do with the motive for our anger; they may indeed, affect us with an increale of Sorrow, or an alleviation of it, as the girl is made either happy, .or miferable, by her choice j but, her being the latter, ought, in my opinion, to divest the heart of all refentment, and lay it open to the tenderer SenSations of pity and "Sorgivenc-fs ; since, to the truly benevolent, and gencrotts mind, the unhappy -cannot be in the wrong.
T he world in general, however, as I have aheady obferved, act upon principles diametrically oppolrte to thefe. and fo did my parents ؛ Sor I was received on my aunt’s preienting me to my father, if not with pieafnre, at least with great good humour and civility. Mv mother
Mrs. WILLIAMS. 121 eyed me, with a look, as I thought, of tender concern; and faid, (with Seemingly a mother’s Seelings) " My dear Charlotte, you look Sadly ؛ do have a dish of chocolate, or a glaSs of wine.” I thanked her for this kind attention tomy health ؛ and, indeed, I believe, that since I had ceafed being a competitor with Sophie in my father’s favour, she began to consider me as her child. My father's penetrating eyes Seemed to pierce my breast, and every time mine met them, I thought he was reading my hushand’s Sailings in the book of my heart. This idea pained me; he perceived it, and Said, " Don’t be uneaSy, my poor girl; I am no conjuror, nor will I endeavour to See into your thoughts Sarther than you chufe I should.” I anSwered, " That I hoped I should never have any, Sor the Suture, which could merit his disapprobation.” He replied, with a sigh, " What is past, child, cannot be recalled ؛ there is no remedy, now,for the error you have committed ؛ and, in the prefent weak state of your health, it would be as cruel as ufeleSs to upbraid you with it ؛ you have, therefore, continued he, nothing to fear from me on that fubject, either now, or hereafter؛ let the confequences of the falSe step be what they may.” TheSe last words were fpoken with a tone of indifference, which pierced me to the foul. I loved my father with the utmost tendernefs, and was wounded to death to und myfelf treated by him with much moreuvility than affection. I knew his inexorable temper and therefore concluded, that, though he kept up appearances, yet I had forfeited his love and esteem for ever. They gave me leave, how. Vol. II.	B	ever
122 The MRMOIRS OF e next؛؛ m؟Cver, to prefent my husband to th d to me,؛natured1yla־d؟day/and my mother go ،، You maytake your fister home with you, i.f h, Sophie and I took؛؛you evill.” Upod wh returned home, where ناء ,ur dves of thCn؛ We found Mr. Williams talking .to an odd looking th a؛man, in tlie parlour. 1-Ie accosted me w nste, faying; " My Lear, I have been buying؛־¡ a little estate in tlie Country, of that man, you ng1y؛1 replied', with a Seet٧ ״.Saw With me Claeartuiair, .،، I am glad to hear it, my Bear. Since I SuppoSe you haYe had fome revelation of a hidden treafure, with which you intend to ,rave at this anfvver؟ pay for it.” He looked t for me, thinkin¿؛ Ought؛ faid, " Hehad ق;؛ e؟؛v؛tlie country wotiltl be of fe ־that the air of 0 mvfelf and cluld.” I thanked him cordially؛ and added, أ care of oirr healtlis ־Gr his tendei؛ a٠t؛،، But Mr. Williams, excufe me if I Say,.t is ؛no air can b.e found Salubrious, wlrere the min and, lhossid you involve yo۶rfelf ؛ not at peace difficulties for nay Sake, you would cleSeat اً؛إ be either ve٢؟tor I can n ؛ your own purpoSes aly.” He replied,؟ppy, or well, if you are un^؛ eme;”and؛ef0؛؛،، Tiratl always lOoked t0t١far -ينر ؟observed, " 1'bat nobody could en.joy th To ״.sent, who was So anxious for the ^htwre tiiS reprooS I ma.de no anfwer.־
ThC next morning, he desired I would. G ؛ with him to look at the houfe he had purchaSed as it was only Sourteen miles. Srom ؛ I consented town, it was a morning’s ride thither, and back again. As we caraae dear the place, Mr. Wil-is the ؛Itams Said, “ There, my Lear, tha ذ؟0د؛ ,It is very old " (؛it־houSe,” (pointing to
Mrs. WILLIAMS. 123 tinued he,) but I intend to re-build it ; it is a Sweet situation.” Upon getting out of the chariot, I was lurprizcd at the ruinous condition it, and. every thing around it Seemed to he in ; it looked as if it had been uninhabited for sixty years؛ and, in fact, that was the cafe ; as there had been a long Chancery Suit to decide whom it belonged to; and, in the mean lim؟. nobody would repair it, lest they should be laying out money on another perSon’s property. Mr. Williams sloe wed me the beauty of the proS-pects on all sides of the houfe, and Seemed enchanted with his new acquisition : I cannot Say I was; but I concealed my Sentiments, Saying only, " That if he liked it, I was convinced that I should.” He then expatiated on the alterations he pur poled to make in the garden, out.houSes, Sec. and laid a plan, which, to execute, must have cost him, at least, fifteen hundred pounds. I durst not make an estimate oS the expence to him, becauSe oS the reproof I had drawn upon myfelf the day before. On our return home, Mr. Williams Said to me, in acareleSs eaiy manner, " Charlotte, I must insist, that if my father and mother should blame me Sor having bought a houfe in the country, that you inform them, that I purchaSed it to oblige you ; for (continued he,) their being angry with you, can be oS no ١ manner oS signification ; but their quarrelling with me, would probably be the ruin of us botli.” I replied " That I should ever be both ready and willing to Sacrifice mySelf in order to Save him: and therefore, would coni'ent to let his parents Sup.
B 2	poSe
!24 The MEMOIRS of pofe that he had purchafed this estate at my request ; but that I must beg to be excufed from afferting a palpable falshood ; and, therefore, could only promife not to contradict him, in cafe he should find it abfolutely neceffary to fling the blame on me. He did not Seem much pleaSed with the tendernefs of my confidence ; however that might be, he amufed himielf daily in the country amongst h'.s workmen, and wascon-Sequently, very Seldom at home but in the evenings. ITe had a passion for building, and laying out of ground, and had a pretty taste in both, as well as fome judgment. Thefe his trequent excursions Soon informed his parents of what he was about ٠, they took the alarm, and Sent Sor him one morning, to come to them immediately : What pasted at this interview, I know not ؛ but the next time l waited upon them, I was received with great coolnefs, and had a lecture read to me upon ceconomy, and ieveral hints thrown out, " That they who were worth nothing, were generally the most liberal of other people s money.” I felt this reproach Severely,, though I was conScious that I did not merit it. I could make no defence, my tongue was tied ; fo they attributed my silence either to obstinacy, or to an acknowledgment of my mdifcretion : 1 his reflection silled my heart with grief and humiliation. I found myfelf fallen in the esteem of thofe whom it was both my interest:, as well as inclination, to oblige, and on the good opinion of whom, my hushand’s future behaviour tome would, I apprehended, greatly depend. I faw. with inexpressible concern, that their friendship
Mrs. W I L L I A MS. 125 wa3 irretrievably lost to me, since I was destined to adopt all my husband’s errors.
Thus he went on, involving himfelf more and more in debt. His parents daily remonstrated to him the evil confequences which must accrue from Such an inconsiderate conduct ؛ never failing to add, that he must not hope for any Sarther assistancPfrom them. T hey repeatedly told me, " That it would not be long before Isbould have reafon to repent the having drawn my husband in fuch Schemes of extravagancy and expence.” With an unfeeling air, fie would often stand by, and hear me reprimanded for fiis faults. 'Isb do him justice I really believe that the inStnsibility he sbewed upon theSe occasions,' proceeded more from the thorough contempt he had of ids parents, than from a want of good-nature in him ؛ he conceived their anger, or approbation, to be equally insignificant in themfelves, ٢؛؛.d only of consequence, as they could either hurt or advance his interest. In this perplexed Slate of affairs, I comSorted mySeiS wish lire hopes of keeping my husband within bounds, with regard to hrs building in tire country. I had already prevailed with him to pull down but one front of the houfe, declaring my attachment to that which looked into the garden : I now sbewed a great impatience Sor its being finisbed j pleaded the necessity ot our child’s going into the country; in sbort, Srom continually teuzing him, by my enquiries when it would be ready Sor us to go into, I curtailed his plan So considerably, that he one day told me, that the whole expence he had been at, would not amount to more than B .3	four
126 T he ME M OI R S op four hundred pounds, or a trine over. T his information ؟ave me much plcafure, as I now found it in my power to pay ail ؟us workmen, and to make him a prefent of the houfe;׳ my heart exulted in the thought; and I enjoyed in idea the pieafure and furg£!ze it would be to my husband, when j p٢efented٠J؛־im with the five hundred pound fi٠،t.e. ; ^٠ .
Full of the؟* j^asirtg relictions, '! was one night sitting alone^xpecting my husband home every ؛y٤n١؛٠t،c ٠	I h٠ear<؛i rap ،؛٤ t،١c door..
and naturally co^Rdet؛ it \٩fe$ him ؛ but, to my great furprize, a Gentleman, whom 1 did not know, entered the room ؛ he bowed, and made fo٠i١؟e handfome apologies for intruding upon me at fuch.an uideafoaable hour, but a!!edged, in • his excufe, that he had an affair of confequence to communicate to me, and begged the feryant might retire, I did not chtaie to be left, alone, at that time of night, with a stranger; hut, upon his giving me a letter from my husband, I ordered the Servant to leave the room ; and then, with a trembling hand, I broke the Seal, Saying, at the fame time, " Pray, Sir, has any accident happened to Mr. WilliamsHe anSwered, ،، That the letter would inform me.” I then attempted to read it, but in vain؛ I found a mist before my eyes, my heart palpitated, and I funk Hielefs from my chair: The Gentleman ١ instantly rung the bell for assistance; after tome minutes I recovered, and again ordered the ler-vants toquit the room; upon which the stranger faid to me, " I am much concerned, Madam, to fee you thus ajarmed ؛ I vvisb I had told you the affair at once, which is not near fo bad, I
can
Mrs. WILLIAMS	127
can affure you, as you Seem to be apprehensive of ؛ your husband is very well, as you would have found, could you have read his letter: The cafe is this: as I was coming from a tavern tonight, where I had Supped with Some friends, I Saw a crowd in the Strand ؛ being curious to know what was the matter, 1 went up to it, and found there a German strivi.g to refciie him-Self from two B.uTiffs, who had hold of him ٠, upon coming nearer him, I perceived it to be youn.־ Mr. Williams·, upon, which I accosted him,.and advifed sign to Sub.it, and to go with the men to a Spung١ng־houSe. where, he might flay 'till to-morrow, and then get bail, it being now too late. With much difficulty I got him to conSent to what they would have forced him
to without it : I accompanied him to-
where, al ter having wrote that letter, he begged me to convey it to you, Mad111؛ ؛, and to defire yon, from him, rrot to make yomfelf uneaSy up-ln his account, as he would certainly dine with you to-merrow. I then ashed the Gentleman, at whole Suit he had been a. rested ? He anSwer-ed me, that he was totally ignorant as to that particular, as well as of the Sum Sor which he Las arrested ; I then enquired much if he was in a good room, and well taken care of ؛ he aS-furedmehe was; and then, taking his leave of me faid, " He should, with my permission, take the liberty of waiting upon me the next day, in order to enquire after my health, and to offer me his further fervices, if l would honor him with my commands.” 1 thanked him very sincerely, and. wished him a good night. I leave you to judge what fort of one I past· y	g B 4	The؛
128 The MEMOIRS of The next morning I determined to go mySelf to the place of Mr. Williams’s confinement, in order to pay the debt. I now reproached mySelf for not having faved my hushand this dishonour by giving him the bank note Sooner, as I concluded, that fome of the work people, who were employed in repairing the houfe in the country, had grown impatieftt for their money, and fo had cauied him to be arrested. This was a very natural idea, as I firmly believed, that he had no other debts but fuch as were contracted upon that account. As foon, therefore, as I thought it a decent hour to go out, (tor I had impatiently counted every clock since the Gentleman had left me, fuch was my eagernefs to fee my hushand,) I got into a hackney chair,and ordered it to the place where Mr. Williams was confined. On my arrival at the door of the houfe, I afked an ill-loooking man, who stood there, if I could fee the Gentleman who was brought there late last night, not clausing to mention his name ; he replied, " Yes, Mil's, I will let the Gentleman know you are here, it you will tell me your name, for he has got company with him already؛ and perhaps he may not chuie to have two wenches at a time.” I annexed no idea to what the man faid, at that time; fo, putting half a crown into his hand, he immediately led me up stairs, and opened the door of the chamber where Mr. Williams was. But how shall I paint to you my astonishment ! on finding him sit with his arm round a pretty young woman’s neck, who was feated on his lap. The hurry of fpirits I had undergone, ever since the night before; the novelty of the
icene
Mrs. WI L L I A M S.	129
fcene which now prefented itfelf before me, joined to the quick transition it occasioned in me, from the joy I had conceived of being his liberator, to the Surprize, Sorrow, and mortification, of findinghimin Such company, and in Such an attitude, all together overcame me So intirely that I could not Speak ; my legs tottered under me ؛ I Seized hold of the first chair I came near and then let mySelf fall, Silent and pale, into it. I did not, however, lofe my SenSes, though I did my Speech ؛ I had of them just enough left to perceive my husband’s confufion 5 his Fair One Seemed much leSs diSconcerted than he. He begged her, in a low voice, to leave the room; to which sbe anfwered, Speaking very loud, " that sbe would not ؛ that I should know her wrongs, and that sbe would be paid. Mr. Williams then advanced to me with a timid step, and an eye confessing.sbame ; he took my hand, and. putting it to.kfis mouth, Said, " Loveliest, beft oS women, hear me before you condemn me ” I made no anfwer, neither did I withdraw my* hand Srom his; he continued, " That worthleSs girl you See there, my Dear, was kept by me, before I married you ؛ and, in the enthufiaSm of a brutal passion, sbe had the ad-dreSs to inveigle me to give her a promiSSory note for a Sum of money, to be paid her in cafe I ever turned her off : and it is lor the payment of this note, that sbe has now arrested me ؛ and this is not all, for sbe has the impudence to tell me, that I gave her credit to many shop-keepers, where she has taken up goods in my name and shall Send them all to me to be paid.” I anSwered B 5	with
130	The MEMOIRS OF
with afaint voice,ءء It isbut just that you should fulfil tlie obligations which you voluntarily laid. yourSelf under to that young woman.” " Thank لا0ز, Madatn,” faid the girl: ءء I wanted (con-tinned she,) to have carri.ed in ill! my demands upon him, to his father, when he paid his debts but Mr. Williams would not let me, faying he .would pay me himfelf very shortly, yet I never could get a Sarthing Srom him, Srona that time to tliis ؛ and Just no'.v, when you came in, he ١vas coaxing me to givehdm another years ere-ditj but I Won’t do any Such thing.'؛ To end ؛ill disputes between them, I ashed her, is she would lake my word Sor the payment of she note ? which I then desired to See j she sbewed it me ; I told her, that if she would call trpon me any time that day, I gave her my honour, that I would pay her the money ؛ and, in the mean time, I faid, do you! discharged Mr. Wil-Hauls. She looked at me steadily for fome mo-ments, and then replied, " Ye٠, Madan?, I will trirst to your hohor ؛ at what hour shall I wait on yOu ?״ I anfwered, ءء In hais an liour aSter Mr. Williams ؛s at liberty, is you pleaSe.” All tliis past without any interrup-tion on the part of my husband, who continue؛ sitting iia liiS chair silent and pensive, and, as I thouglrt, looking ratlrer foolisb than otherwise. Mifs Fanny Fetch (for it was her,) ran down stairs, in oider to perform her part oS the agree-ment ; which, after Mr. Wrlliamr had paid the Sees, and Someotlier exorbitant demands, was thoroughly effected ؛ and he returned home with rne in a hackney coach, where, as Soon as
we
ء3اً	.Mrs. WILLIAMS
we were Seated Ire took my Iiand and Said,
bye ء؟بء٤:لإ٠;ء hat a׳^ ,،، iviy Amiable wife
at this moment, make in your eyes! Can ,١ rUust
,ءة؛ئءءءه;״ا؛:׳لالا٢0 ء؛ة؛؛آ؛ة؛؛؛؛؛'״٠؛؛٠؛
rhaps,؛u may p؟Hear, l am not fo criminal as y
»٠״:؛״؛ اأ؛اا؛ج،٠أ٠آ؛أ ؛ iniagme me to. be
girHroni any love I had for he[.; but merely for
1 hoped to have paid׳ little mole time, 'and then m٠n.g to your؟her, without the affair's ever c the intenti- ؛I anfwered, " Tha ״.knowledge tl thought the means؛t th؟bC good, b؛٦igh؛on i ؛لا٠تج؛ل٠!very حهقإ؛ I ” ^؛؛rather٩ndeh ؛way honie, lest I should betray, the refentmen iy bofotUj on his .having deceivetl؟؛ which filled ; ؛his father and me, in So atrocious a manne though; he ٤ ,and, in the humour I was then in therefore relolved ل ;:ها did not aeiervc my for the future, to do my dtity, in every refpect ؛as a wife, but never more to entertain m m breast airy tenderer Sentiments for him than e CO ::be d. that I ؤب ·nend fhjp ؛ iliofe of I ؛e convinced tha؛don’t doubt but you a
٥
؛״few, and respectable Philofophers, who, fro
:٠: ئ<٤ ؛)h٥d acquire ء8ج;اعك٦الغ٦إء a ftudy of
¡1ءج
ق۶جةحئغ
ة3ل TheMEMOIRSo؟ that love cotrld not exist, where we ceasbd to esteem. - But to my story.
On our arrival at. home, I Sent the Bank bill of five lrundred pounds, to be changed into fmal-ler ones, and, when Mifsctiycame, I paid her one hundred pounds, which was the' fu־m pro-mifed her by the note. .1 then ashed her, " Wliat were the bills which she had faid she expected Mr. Williams to pry ?״ She anfwered, «؛ Why, Madam, you are to know, that when your hufd band took me into keeping, I was bUt a poor girl, and h؛d but a few cloaths ؛ sb as he pro-mifed that I should, for the future, never Want money, and that I lhoultl always go as fine as a Queen, he \؛-ent with me to Several shops, and gave me credit in them, by Setting his n^me, or writing fomething at the bottom of a lalank leaf in their books, to be filled up with the articles I chofe to buy.”—" Pi ay, faid I, can you gueSs what the Sums amount to, which yoU fay he owesonyouraccount ?״ She replied, " I don’t know jirstly. Madam ؛ but, if' you desire it, I will enquire, and let you know״;׳ I anfwered carelefsly, " No, you need not give yourfelf that trouble, as it is not in my porvtr to pay them, and .1 know his father won’t ؛ sb th3t I much question whether the people will evei. get their money or not, at least as long as tire Old Oentleman lives.” She faid, " I־t was all one to her ؛” hut I faw she did- not fpe؛.k truth, which was what I wanted to know j for I fufpecled that she and the trades-people understood one another. I ؛old her, " It would be neceffary to prove the delivery of־ tire goods, and that stle mdst fwear to the having received them, or elle, I appre-
hended.
Mrs. W I L L I A M S. 133 hended, their demands would never be looked upon as just debts؛ but I leave that to their confidences and your own, faid I, for I have nothing to do in the affair.”. The girl took this occasion of thanking me for the ten guineas I had Sent her in her ditlrefs, as she Said ; then, after having wished me health and happineSs, she went away. I went into the parlour to my hushand, with his note, which ·I had just dif-charged, in my hand ٠, I gave it to him, desiring he would burn it. He Said to me, " Pray, my Dear, may I be permitted to enquire, how you came by the money you have just now So generousty paid for me?” I replied, " Yes, Surely, Sir ؛ you have a right to aSk the question ؛ and it is both my duty and inclination to ٠ anSwer it:” I then preSented the letter to him, in which the bill had been inclofed, Saying, at the fame time, " I always intended to give it to you, Mr. Williams, but waited an occasion, when, from your wanting of ready cash, it might have been rendered more acceptable to you; I will, however, confefs, that Self-interest was, in fome meafure, the motive for my having thus Secreted my riches from you : I had pleafed myfelf with the thoughts of paying off
all your workmen at--------, by which means I
should have procured to mySelf (in a manner) the Satisfaction of making you a prefent of the houfe ؛ but things have t؛q;r؛ned out otherwise; there, Sir, is the remaining four hundred pounds, diSpoSe of it as you'shall judge proper؛ it is your own ; and I give you my honor, that I never intended to appropriate one farthing of it to my own ufe j but I flatter mySelf, that I
have
I 34	The M E M O I RS of
have no occasion to uSe many arguments, in order to convince you of the truth of this affer-tion, as I am perSuaded you will readily acquit me of harbouring: fo mean a thought ؛ the money was of no estimation in my eyes, but as it might be the means of giving you pleafure.” Here I paufed. He looked at me with Seeming admiration, and Said, ،، I was a generous, noble girl, thanked me with ecstacy, and took the money.”
Yet, in the midst of this his apparent approbation of my conduct, I could plainly fee that he was difappointed in finding I gave lo good an account how I came to be fo rich. He had afked me, " where I got the money,” with an air of confidence, not unmixed with farcafm, which' did not efcape my observation ; from whence I fufpected, that he wished to have found me a little in the wrong, in order to have put us more upon a level. This difcovery, from a perversity, I SuppoSe, in my nature, determined me to persist obstinately in being in the right ; for which purpofe, as far as my youth and inexperience would admit, I weighed every word I fpoke, and tenaciousiy examined every action of my life ; fo that when I erred. I may with truth aver, that it was the fault of my judgment, ancl never an act of my will.
I now feldom Saw either my father or mother-in-law ; they looked upon me as an extravagant, unthinking girl, who would be the ruin of their Son ؛ they had heard he was arrested, but not at whoSe Suit : So, their minds having already taken that bent, without any farther enquiries into the matter, they Set it down as a fact,. that
I had
ا
*36	The MEMOIRS of
fchool from his infancy ؛ he killed me tende and appeared to be delighted at Seeing me ؛ was two years younger than myfelf, and, c Sequently, still a boy ؛ I thought him a pre figure, but my mind was, at that time, much agitated to take much notice ot him. ] mother took a tender leave oS me, and Sop. cried ready to break her heart on bidding adieu ; they were to return into the country next day.
From my father’s I went to my uncle’s. I aunt had taken the ton of the SamiJy, confeque Jy was very referved; but my uncle told n with an airoS great cordiality, that he was ٦ ry glad to See me ; be Said, " He had he؛ Srom his nephew, Sir Charles, who desired refpectful compliments tome, and had enquir much after my health, and welfare: W1 shall I tell him, my dear ? (continued he.) Sh .1 fay you are happy ? Well, I cannot, for y look dreadfully ؛ but you are breeding, Ifuppol shall I fay So ?” I anSwered, ٠٠ Indeed I a not; and I beg, Sir, that you would be obliging as to make my compliments to Sir Cha les Stanly, and to Say, that I am infinitely Se sible oS his kind enquiries aSter me.” Here roSe to take my leave, alledging, as an excu for the short stay !made with them, the mult plicity of visits I had to make. My uncle wisl ed me my health, &c. and my aunt was rr most humble iervant.
From thence I went to my father-in-law’ where I was received with a Smile of affability b the old Gentleman, and with a frown oS ane< by the old Lady. The former after having tall
Mrs. W I L L I A M S. 137 ed of the news of the day, left the room ; when my mother-in-law faid to me, ٠" You look Sadly, Mrs. Williams ; I am afraid your too great purfuit of pleafure will ruin your constitution, as well as your pocket.” " My purfuit after pleafure!” I replied. "Sure, Madam I mistake your SenSe of the word : If you mean by it diversions, or dissipation of any fort, I am certain, no one can purfue them lefs than I do ; since in the Space of two years that I have been married, I have not been ten times in public ; nor am I fond of company ; for which reafon I Spend most of my time at home : Do me juf-tice, dear Madam, to believe that 1 Speak the truth.” Here the thoughts of the falfe ideas she had conceived of my character, drew a tear from my eye. She faid, " Plow can that be, child ٠؛ When your hushand is already over head and ears in debt, you must be guilty of creat extravagancy to make him fo.” " Alas Madam,” I anfwered, " indeed I am not.” "Nay don’t tell me fo,” faid she 5 " Who made him ·build and involve himfelf in difficulties without end ? becaufe you took a fancy to a certain Spot of ground, and would have a houfe on it.” I was struck dumb at this charge, which I durst not deny, becauie I fuppofed my hushand to have been her ؛nformer : my silence confirmed her in the belief of my indiferetion, and she went on : " Besides, has he not been arrested for your debts to tradefmen ? Fye upon it, can you justify fo bad a condudf ؛” I affured her on my honor, ،٠ That my hushand had never paid a debt for me Since we were married ؛ nor did I owe one in the world.” She Said, " No ! why for what ? and for whom, then, was he arrested ?”
138 The M EM O I R S of e٠? ٥’ I anfwered, ،، T'hit, I don't know, Aladam, but it was I who paid the money ; ،hough I am ignorant for what ; tire Sum was one hundred pounds, but the hill was of a date prior to my marriage with your fon.” Sire teemed Surprized at what I Said, when, laying her hand upon my arm, " For God’s Sake,” fays she, ،، my hear Mrs. Williams, don’t undeceive his father in this afF.iir ؛ if he knew that George had not given him a faithful account of u'hat he owed, Iknowhe would never forgive him ؛nav, I am perfuaded he would disinherit him. 1 always feared this would be the cafe, (continued Sue j) he never could be brought to act openly, and sincerely, with his father,” Sne then ashed me, "If that hundred pound was tne only debt which he had fecreted from their knowledge ?” I replied, " That J apprehended not, but that I was not positively Sure.” She again intreated me to take the blame upon mySelf. I told her, " That, hard as it was to Jofe the esteem of thofe, from whom I afpired to merit it, yet I would Sacrifice every Seeling of my heart, to my duty؛ and affured her, that she nught depend upon my implicit obedience to her commands.” “ But, (Says she,) my dear, you should talk to George, and make him Sensible of his errors. I know you can do what you will with him. WitneSs that devilish houfe, which he built to pleafe you, So much against his own inclination.” Here I sighed, and, in. need, J almost lost my patience, to hear mySelf thus abufed, for crimes, the most foreign from my heart. I disliked the situation of the houfe j the expence it had occasioned, was a continual
Source
Mrs. \V I L L I A M c. i39 Source of grief to me ; and the many mortifications it had brought on me, ail together made it the object of my aversion. The old Lady having thus vented her fpleen, and obferving that I looked melancholy, humanely changed the difcourfe, bv ashing me, " How her grand-ton did r” I told her he was cutting his teeth, snd far from well she then put a twenty pound bank note into my hands, desiring I would accept of it for her grandfon, expresting great concern at hearing he was not well. She then faid, " She hoped her ion and I would come and Spend a month, or two, in the country with her and Mr. Williams this Summer, and begged I would brin؟؛ thechild with me.” I aslured her, " That I would wait on her with the greatest pleafure, but that I was not my own nmstreis.
I begged she would mention it to her Son. She replied, Smiling, " Very well, my Dear, ١ I will: but I am certain that if you fay yes, ne won't Say no.” Thus we parted. I had had a fat ¡؛ruing day of it, I fancy you v.׳i؛l allow, Adelaide. but it was not yet over.
.On my return home, I narrated to my huf-band the convtrfiition which had piifTed between his mother and me ; at the end of which," Why did you undeceive her, (Said he,) about the hundred pounds ؛؟ It would have been much better lor her to have thought you to blame, than to Suffer her to torment me, as she now will do, to know who I owed it to, snd for what. I replied, “ That I did not t hink I merited his reproaches upon that head،”. He immediately reasiumed his good nature, and anfwered, "No more do you, indeed, my Dear, and I acknow-}	ledge
140 The MEMOIRS of ledge myfelf in the wrong ; but I hate that old woman’s implacable curiosity. I go and fpend two months with them in the country ! I would go to the devil as foon : To dream half the day over dirty cards, and a farthing candle, at penny quadrille, or elfe fay your prayers and hear the old man read homilies, or perhaps a fermon ; no, d—n me if Ido !״ I obferved, " That it wasfometimes neceffary to Sacrifice our inclinations to our duty, and that, I apprehended, a refuSal of complying with this their obliging invitation. might occasion a quarrel; and that, in that cafe, the world in general would certainly be on the side of the old people.” He replied, ؛٠ He did not care a pinch of Snuff Sor the world, or its cenSure.” I told him, " He would think otherwise when he was in a better temper, (and, with a Smile, added,) you cannot be r.roSs, my Dear, but you are now only negatively good humoured.”
The next day we went into the country: I found the houSe quite finished and elegantly furnished, the ground about it was a little in difor-der, but from the arrangement of that was to proceed Mr. Williams's amuSement during the Summer. Here we pasted many agreeable hours ; he diverted himfelf all day with his work-people, and I with my books and child; in the evenings we met with pleaSure, and pasted them in mutual good humour and chearfulneSs. My huS-band, as I have already obServed, did not want understanding, nor was that understanding unimproved, but it was unfortunately mifapplied. It uas impossible to fix him, even for a moment, on any topic, which was relative either
Mrs.WILLIAMS.	14.1
to Iris conduct or interest i on all others no body reasbned better, or would listen with tnore at. tention, to the arguments of others.
In the enjoyment of this delightful Scene of domestic felicity l fpent two montlis, the hap-piest of my life ؛ when, one morning I receive؛ a card, with Sir William and Lady Beauford٠ aird tlie MiSs Beaufords compliments to Mr. Williams and mySelf, and, if we were not en-gaged, they woUld wait upon ؛JS the n۶x؛ day. The anfwer was, that we ihould be glad of ؛heir company. Upon enquiry I found tb؛y lived bu؛ half a mile dirfant from our houfe. I had heard tlieir names often, and was acquainted with fome of their connections in town, but I had never feen tliem. I was extremely sbrry to find nay Scheme oS retirement thtrs interrupted, by peo-pie I knew notlring of, and who, from tlieir VI-Cinity to irs, might, and probably would, p٢oye very troubleSome neighbours أ howev؟r, in thi؛, as well as in most circumstances in life, happi-neis was to give way to good breeding. T^t.e next day, in the afternoon, they came.؛ Sir William ׳Seemed to he a good natured, well be-haved man, his-wife an old coqirette, who was fighting againfl nature, in order to appear y^ung and IrandSome, the Sormer oS whicfi she had cer. tainly once been, hut the latter never ; her eld-est daughter (Sor there were two 0؛ then؟ was a fine ،11ة girl, with a large pair oS.langu.ista.ing hlue eyes, and a complexion like white Sattin ٤ her h^ir Was ١vhat is generally called red, but I think might, with more propriety, be termed yellow, since it was exactly she colou؛ oS a.n Orange ; she had large bones, and was fullcneil-
ed 5
142 The MEMOIRS of ed ؛ her voice was .So Soft and low, that it was with difficulty one heard what she Said ; and, in short, her whole behaviour beSpoke the most tender and romantic turn of mind. Her younger sister was quite the reverie of her, both in figure and manners. I found that both the young Ladies played upon the harpsichord., which, as there was luckily ode in the room, I kept them as constantly to as I could, during the afternoon, in order to fupply the want of con. verfation : My Lady was Sufficiently occupied in adjusting her own graces, and in admiring the talents of her daughters. To my inexpressible joy, the evening came at last, and they took their leaves, Saying, " They hoped we should be good neighbours.” Mil's Beauford afked me, *٠ If I loved walking?” I told her, " Not much:” " But you do, Mr. Williams?7’ Said. she to him ؛ he anfwered, " Yes, it was one of his principal amufements in the country.” " I am glad of it, she replied, for 1 doa-t upon strolling about the fields •١ and I can shew you the Sweetest Solitary woods and lanes about us, that you ever Saw. Do, call upon me one morning, Says she, and I will carry you to them.” Mr. Williams bowed his thanks Sor her obliging offer, and away they went. 1 had Sorgot therm almost before they drove out of the court-yard, had n٥i my hushand called them back toaiy idea, by Saying, " What a sine Subject that eldest Mifs Beauford is, (if a man thought it worth his while) to make a fool of. Tfie girl’s ؛read is turned with Novels and Romances, which have So Softened her mind, and enervated her understanding, that she would fall into the first man’s
arms
Mrs. WILLIAMS. 143 arms who would open them to receive her.”
" It would be a great pity she should, I replied, for she really is a fine girl, and may make fome worthy man happy in a wife, when she has lived long enough in the world to judge, from her own oblcrvation of men and manners, how fallacious, as well as pernicious, thole ientiments are, which she ha؛ imbibed from authors, who Seem only to write, in order to pervert and debauch, the youthful mind; whilst, under the ٠١. mafic of the most refined, and delicate Sentiments, they insinuate the IooSest morals.”
‘׳٠ Hold, my Dear, cried Mr. Williams, you are abfolutelv preaching a Sermon upon the occasion ؛ the young fellows of this age, let me tell you, would be extremely forry that you should . put your thoughts into print, since the modern Novel writers have indifputabiy been of more fervice to them, than all the Procureffes in the kingdom ever w,ere.” I anfwered, " That they had nothing to fear from me, but that I wished an abler pen than mine would undertake the talk.”
My hushand ufed Sometimes to ride out on horSe-back in a morning. One day, on his return from one oS thefe little excursions, he told me, " That he had called upon Sir William Beauford, and that Mifs Beauford would dine with me the next day.” I Said. “ Did you invite her, my Dear?” He anlwered, " Not I, faith ; she invited herfelf.” " I am Sorry for it, I replied, becauSe my turn of mind is So.very unlike؛ tier’s, that I am afraid she will not fpend the dav agreeably with me.” " O ! Said he, site loves walking, and running about the garden,
144 T h e MEMOIRS of den So I will take care that she shall not be very troubiefome to you ٠٠
My poor little boy continued to be very puny ؛ the pain of his teeth brought on allow fever which no medicine had hitherto removed ؛ I trembled daily for his life. Mr. Williams feemed, by fits, to be much touched at the child’s situation. I was now breeding, and.con-fequently, not very well, and my fpirits were much depressied by the sicknefs of my poor little infant. When Mlifs Beauford arrived, according to appointment, she was shewn up into my dressing-room, where, after the ufual compliments, she exclaimed, ،، What a happy woman you are, IVIrs. Williams٠ to poffefs fo delightful a retreat as this is, with the amiable partner of your heart ! and, continued she, turning herfelf about, you have got a library, too, I fee ! Good God ! you would lofe by exchanging your earthly Paradife for a heavenly one!” I anfwered, " That she deceived herfelf if she thought that there was any fuch thing to be found on earth as perfect felicity, and that she would ceafe to envy me, when she knew what were a mother’s feelings on the approaching lois of her only child. Just as I Spoke, nurle entered the room, with little George in her arms, uTiofe pale countenance, and emaciated figure, too well explained the meaning of what I had been faying. She looked at the boy with concern ؛ and faid, " Indeed, I am very forry to fee Master look fo ill.” !Mr. Williams now joined us, and, with his ufual iprightlmds, foon dissipated the gloom which the poor child’s indifposition had flung over our converfation ؛
he
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	r45
he talked agreeable nonfenfe for fome time, and then propofed a walk to the young Lady, who readily accepted the offer ؟ they went together into the garden. I did not fee them again till dinner was on the table; when I thought Mifs looked a good deal fluttered, and her cloaths Seemed to shew that she had been at romps. I !־allied her on the diSorder of her cap, and handkerchief; she faid, " Mr. Williams was a provoking creature, for he had rolled her upon the graSs, and plagued her to death.” I anSwered, Smiling, " It is your own Sault, MiSs Beauford, ؛ for no man romps with a young Lady. unlcSs he is first convinced that she likes it.” She drank tea with us, and then walked home; Mr. Williams attended her thither.
On his return from conducting her to her father’s, I told him, that I thought he should be very cautious how he behaved to ^Asss Beauford, as he had bimSelt obServed how SuSceptible to the tender passions the romantic turn of her mind had made her. I Said, it would be cruelty in him to play upon her weaknefs ؛ and added, " I know too well how irresistible you are, my Dear, when you try to pleaSe, not to feel Sor MiSs Beauford : I am, however, thoroughly perSuaded, that you are incapable of fo bale a thought as that of dishonouring her ؛ and I hope you are equally fo of engaging her young and inexperienced mind into a hopelefs, not to fav an unjustifiable passion, which must rob her of peace, and be a fource of perpetual remorfe to yourfelf.״ He replied, " My pretty preacher, 1 would not, intentionally, do an-injury to any perfon living ؛ but when a sine girl shews me Vol. IL	C	shat
146 The MEMOIRS of that she chufes to be kiffed, I must kifs her.”--This was his manner of arguing, upon all Sub. jects which regarded his conduct. I, therefore, changed the conversation, by ashing him,
« Tf he had not heard lately Srom his parents ? and when he intended that we should go to their houSe for a month, or two, according to pro-miSe ?” He replied, carleSsly, ٠* O, yes, ٤٠٦٤١٥ a letter Srom my mother a fortnight ago .٠ did not I shew it you ? wherein she preffes us much to come to her ٠. I anSwered her a few days ago, alluring her, that we would have ^٠£؟ ١ ٠n my father, and her, with the utmo picture, but that you was with child, and that not being very well, I did not think it SaSe for you to take be^nToapprehencTthaTl shall fink under the weight o. them ؛ they have already, I fear, in. and١ssi^n^the^nd,، ^n dtstsh a b 1 y sink me in that of the rest of my friends and acquaintance^ and when all the world forfakes me, will you George (Said I pathetically,) continue^ l٠v٠٠™e ٥^؛ j
٥؛myow؛٠.’’ha111^'״ l٠٥vf y٥u ؛. (heya״fwer-
ed, with vivacity, catching me in his arms,)jes, I do, I evef must love you : you are the God-deSs of my idolatry ؛٠ but٤ what؛ si "٠،؟؛؛ what leave us th	y ٠٥٠١؛ ٠
Mrs. WILLIAMS. 147 can make them of sb much importance, as to care a farthing what their opinion of you is.٠٠ I faid, " Tlaat I thought it my duty to reSpect his parents, and that tlae meriting their este'em, and approbation oS my conduct, had been one oS the most ardent wistaes oS my heart; and I mustconSeSs, that !relinquished theSemy pre-tenfions to their Sriendship, with the most inex-prefflble reluctancy, and regret... " My Dear, (he replied,) you don’t know the old Solks', there-Sore it is in vain to combat your prejudices i sb Saying, he Sat himSelS down to the harpsichord, and began playing oS a jig.
A Sew ،lays aSter this, my eldest brother came from Oxford, to Spend a month with us. Mr.. Williams, under the pretext that I had now got sbme laody to bear me company, was perpetual־ ly Srom home. I perceived it with the most Sen-sible grieS, and h3d sbme SttSpicions tlaat MiSs Beauford was the thieS, who had stole him Srom me أ this thought alarmed both my love and vanity. However, I did my endeavours to Strb-due tfre latter, as well as to moderate the ex-ceSs oS the former : I thereSore determined to naake no enquiries into the courSe oS his peregri-nations, 'lest by So doing, I should increafe my lufpicions؛ and, in the mean time, I resblved to hope the laest. -In this state oS mind, I, one evening:, propoSed to my brother, a little ride Out in tlie chariot, which, as .it was very fine weather, -he readily accepted. As I was get-, ting into the carriage, the. Sootman ashed she, ٠٠ Where I would pleaSe to goto?״ Itold him, ٠* That 'the coachman might carry US where he would, sb he choSe a pleaSant ride Sor c؛z	us;
8 The MEMOIRS OFبلت
|؛ج'ذءق
ויי
ill
ا
؛؛ؤلا؛اذ* y«٥ ،٠!٠ ٥;؛ ٥‘؛ rep،، c d r; L ad y I
Mrs. WILLIAMS. 149 aunt; and she will be vastly forry, I am Sure, not to have been at home, when you honored us with a call.” I Said, " That I should certainly have been very glad to have Seen her, but that I had been out on an airing, and only just stopped at her Ladyship.؛ door, to afk how they all did, for that I could net stay a moment.” So Saying, I took my leave,, perfectly confirmed in my SuSnicions, that my hushand and MiSs Beauford were the identical perSons I had Seen go into the farm-houfe together. My brother and I then returned home : He was thoughtful, and So was I ؛ but I endeavoured to hide my uneasineSs from him as much as pofflble j and Said to him with careleffneSs, " Charles my Dear, don’t tell your brother Williams that yon thought you Saw him in our walk, this afternoon, becaufe I am Sure it was not him.” He replied, " I will not mention it, I affure you, sister; nor had I any intention of So doing.” Between nine and ten my libertine came home, lively, good-humoured, and agreeable, as uSual: He aiked my brother and I, what we had been doing all day ? which we told him; and, in return, he gave us an account how he had Spent his time, in running after people he could not meet with ; and ended with complaining of the stink and dust of London, where, however, I was well convinced he had never been that day.
You must remember, my dear Adelaide, the wife resolution I had taken, of ceasing to love my hushand, upon the fcene which had pasied at the fpunging-houfe : I must therefore beg you to remark, that I had never once attempted to put this stoical maxim into practice irom that C 3	time
jeo	The MEMOIRS of
time to this I am now fpeaking of, when the fame idea prefented itfelf to my imagination, as fpringing from the fame cauSe, with Some aggravations, however, in the circumstances. I loved my hushand with the utmost tendernefs, and could not bear the lofs of his affection. My heart was torn by thofe two cruel fiends, Grief and Jealoufy ; however, I cautiously concealed them in my own breast, being perfectly per-fuaded, that all remonstrances on my part would never stem the torrent of unruly passion in him, but. on the contrary, perhaps increafe it j as difficulties being thrown in the way, have prolonged many an attachment, which would inevitably have died of fatiety, had it been left to uninterrupted enjoyment. I found, upon an examination of myfelf, that I could fubmit to partake the perSon of my hushand with Mifs Beauford, but not his heart; My fear of lofing that made me exaggerate her merit, whilst it depreciated my own, and drove me almost into a state of defpair. I did not remain long, however, in this cruel fituation. before the difeafe itfelf produced a remedy ؛ tor the first time my rival came to fee me (after I was confirmed in my conjectures of the irregularity of her conduct) she did not appear to me half fo formidable as my disordered imagination had painted her: She was funk in my esteem, and therefore leffened in my eyes. I felt that Superiority which virtue ever has over vice, and I looked down upon my hushand, and her, with pity, not unmixed with contempt : The aukward manner in which they endeavoured to hide their intimacy, by wearing an exterior of affected re-7 y S	Serve.
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	151
Serve, made them appear ridiculous to me; she many Soft looks which I perceived her steal at hirn, and the air of insistent negligence with which his replied, gave eafe to my heart, Since I judged Srom thence of the nature of his connexion with her, and consequently Sorelaw, that it would not be of a long duration. I was determined to shorten it, by giving them every opportunity they could wish for of being together ؛ and my plan had the desired fuccefs. For fome time before we returned to town for the winter, my hushand was almost always at home, nor did Mifs Beauford ever come to our houfe unaccompanied by her mother or sister, and then Mr. Williams always contrived to be out of the way.
A few days before I left the country, Lady Beauford and her two daughters came to. take leave of me, as they did not intend being in London that winter : I was furprized at the alteration I perceived in the eldest girl; she was pale and thin, and wore an air of melancholy and dejection on her countenance, which too plainly indicated the diforder of her mind. I could not help obServing to her, that I thought she looked ill; she faid, " She apprehended that she was in a confirmed confumption, and she was very willing to die when it pleafed God.” Her mother and lisler feenred much concerned at her indifpositicn : I adviSed them to carry her to the South of France ؛ which my Lady faid she intended doing early in the Spring. Whilst I Surveyed the wreck before me of a sine girl in the bloom of youth, I was Sof tened to ccnipaS-sion, and in that moment l Scrgot all she had C 4	made
152 The MEMOIRS of made me fustier, and my heart bled for her : She read my fentiments in my eyes, when-catching one of my hands, and presling it affec-
٥to her breast, she faid, in a foft voice, e tear dropped from her eye, " You are too good, too amiable, my dear Mrs. Williams ! thus to feel for me, and to pity me.” When they were gone, I obferved to Mr. Williams how dreadfully Mifs Beauford looked ·r and added, ،، how extremely Sorry I was to See her So ill.” He replied, “ She is a Soolish girl j and as there are So many of that Sort in, the world, she will not be miffed amongst the croud if she should die.” I was hurt at this anSwer, asit indicated anobduracyand inhumanity which shocked me ; and I Said, with Some quickneSs, ٠٤ Fye, my Dear, if I did not believe .hat your tongue now injures the Sentiments of your heart, I should judge you totally divested of all fenfibility, and consequently should have a very bad opinion of you ; but I added, I am periuad-ed you do not think as you !peak.” To this reprimand he made no reply, but changed the difeonrfe.
In a few days we went to London. My poor child continued drooping every day, a stow fever confumed his little frame, and in lefs than a fortnight after our arrival in town, he died on my lap, in a convulsion fit. I was now fix months gone with child, when the shock of losing my lhtle George flung me into labour. I was brought to bed of a girl, who lived only a few hours, and it was apprehended, by all thofe who attended me, that I should not longfurvive her : But it pleafed Providence to referve me P	for
Mrs. williams. 153
for greater misfortunes than any I ha؛ yet ؟xpe״ rienced, in order, I prefume, to teach my heart the fa1l3cy and danger of all earthly attachments, and to pl3ce my affections, and hopes, on him who cahnot deCeive.
During my illneSs, which was lo^gi I ؛re-quently alked, if my father or mother-in-law had feht to enquire after me, and w؟s ٩١way's -anfwered in the negative ; I was furpr؛ze؛ at it, and enquired of Ml. Williams, jf he copl؛ guefs at the Teafon for this their׳ apparent neglect of me. He told me, ءء That; on their.,arrival in town, they had־ wrote him a lin؟, requesting to fee him, declaring, at the Same time, ؛hat they would never See me more.(’؛ ؛ tie Saidj " He had waited upon them, concluding that I did not care a Sartlaing whether they:w٢؟e angry or pleafed at me.” I affured him- ؛؟. the con-trary ; but he only؛! ׳ughed, a؟d;:faid, " He knew I had a bette؛ taste than to like fuch com. pany; and, as to the rest, it was all anfwered, hy his keeping on good term؛ with t؛em; that one oS us, hCobServed, must be in the wrong, and, therCSore, it wasSaSest Sor me to he the perfGn, as their thinking him to be fo, mig؛t be of fatal conSequence to us both.” I was ۶bl؛g-ed to Submit, to what I could not remedy أ It gave me, however, infinite concern, to be the Object oS detestation to his pa؛ents.
I have already remarked, that my hufhand's income depended upon the will of his f'a؛lae׳r, who had only promifed the c؟ntinua־nce of it, .as long as he faoUld behave well, and be thought deferving of it ; and this was the reafon why I could neYer exculpate myfelf of the many heavy c 5	and-
!54 The MEMOIRS of and unjust charges laid against me, for fear, lest by regaining their good opinion, I might Jofe my bread, and, what was ten thoufand times worfe, I should have deprived my hushand of his.
One day as I was sitting alone in my dressing-room, ruminating on the Seventy of my fate, a Servant came and told me, " That two ill-looking men were below, and afked for his master ; that on his telling them that he was not at home, they desired to See me.” I bid him shew them into the parlour, and Say, that I would be with them in a minute. My heart fluttered, I did not know why; however, 1 went immediately down stairs. On my entering the room, one of the Sellows advanced towards me; "Madam, Said he, I have an execution against Mr. Williams.״ The air and manner of the man frightened me؛ and I anfwered, trembling, " An execution؛ pray, Sir, what is that?”—" It is only a power to Seize your goods and lurniture, he replied, for the ufe of the creditor, unleis you find out Some other means of fatisfying him” —" And who is the creditor ?” I demanded. " He is a man who keeps a livery.stable,” replied the fellow. " Do you know what is the Sum for which you have this execution ?١' Said I " It is Something above two hundred pounds,״ he replied. I then afked, " What was to be done?” He faid, “ Nothing, Madam؛ only that we must live in this houfe till the money is paid ; that is all.
I leave you, Adelaide, to judge what must have.been my situation of m;nd, at this period of time. I had no more Bank bills to extricate
nay
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	»55
my hushand with, nor any friend, to whom I could apply for relief in this emergency. I therefore desired the men to sit down in the parlour, and ordered the Servant to tell his master, when he came home, that I desired to Speak to him, in my dressing-room, about particular bu-sineis, and not to mention to him the fellows being in the houSe. TheSe orders given, I retired into my own appartment. in a perturbation of mind which would be difficult to defcribe,
In leSs than half an hour, Mr. Williams entered my room ; and, being ignorant of what had pa fifed, appeared with his natural eaSe and chearfulneSs: He started, however, and Seemed Surprized and concerned, on perceiving the visible marks of uneasineSs, which were painted in my face ; and, with a tender eager nesi؛, he alked me the cauSe oS it. I replied, by afking him, " If lie had not Some debt؟, which he . was apprehensive might bring him into difficulties,, if not immediately discharged ?” He anfwered, " Yes, he had debts, as who was without ? but none that were not easily paid.”
I then told him, " That, as that was the cafe,
I begged he would go into the parlour, and discharge two men, who had taken possession of the houfe, on the Suit of a fellow who keeps a livery-stable, for the Sum of two hundred pounds, and upwards.” He stared at me. and Seemed diSconcerted a good deal at this piece oS intelligence ; but recovering himSelS instantly, he Said,
؛٠ The Sellow is a raScal; it is not a week ago, since he promiSed not to trouble me Sor the money then, walking backwards and forwards , in the room, he struck his hand upon his Sorehead
!5. The MEMOIRSof head, and stamping with one foot, he exclaimed, " This is d—mn’d unlucky, tor I have not a farthing in my pocket, nor shall have, till my father pays me a quarter, which is not due this month yet. The old villain will be the ruin of me, from his diabolical attachment to his money ; there will be no fuch tiring as gettings farthing out of him, I know, he is fo curfeuly covetous.״ To this Soliloquy I made no anfwer j. when, turning to me, he Said, " The Scoundrels did not Frighten you, my Dear, I hope.” I replied, " Not much ; but that I begged he would find a means oS making them quit the houSe as Soon as possible.”	" O 1 yes, yes,
that I will do, he anfwered, with an embarrassed air ; but we will dine first, if you pleafe, tor I am hungry ؛ and, apropos, whilst the footman lays the cloth, I will go and talk to them a little ” So faying, he ٦vent out of the room.
I could not help lamenting־, upon this occasion, the fatal confequences which flow from a modern education ؛ in which ،economy, and a strict fenfe of probity, in paying the industrious tradefman, are looked upon as Plebeian virtues, unbecoming a Gentleman to put in practice. From this amazingly abfurd, and dangerous prejudice, proceeded all the inextricable difficulties, into which my hushand precipitated himfelS and me ؛ and, in the end, drove him to that last, and dreadful refource, the gaming-table, in hopes there, of procuring the means toSupport his extravagancy. But to my story.
Mr. Williams returned to me, with a Serene countenance, Saying, " That he had wrote to his father, requestrng him to advance the next
quarter
Mrs. W I L L IA M S. 157 quarter, upon his receipt ; for, (added he,) I know the old hunks will lend me the money on no other condition.” I remarked, that in that cafe it would be neceffary Sor us to lessen our expences, Sor half a year at least, in order to repair the breach which this affair had made in our income. ‘٤ Indeed, my dear, I Said, I will do every thing on my part for this purpofe, as I find myfelf utterly incapable of fustaining repeated shocks of this nature; for, believe me I would rather want the neceffaries of life, than injure any one, or lay mySelf open to the infuhs of Such wretches as thefe myrmidons of the law are.” I entreated him to pity nay fc-nsibility, carefully to avoid, for the future, the involving me in difficulties, which my ill state of health, and extreme tenderneSs Sor him, rendered me unable to Support. He kindly promiied, that this should be the last affair of the kind I should ever meet with. After dinner, lie was called out of the room, when he received the money from his father, on which the debt was paid, and the men fentaway.
During the courie of this winter, I obferved that many odd locking people came frequently to enquire for Mr. Williams, and Sometimes, when he was at home, he would chide the fer. vant for faying he was fo. Thefe circumstances alarmed me; I feared thofe people carre for the payment of their refpective bills, and I one day ventured to aik him, if I conjedtured right? He made me an evasive anfwer, which confirmed my fufpicions. He now began to lofe hw ufual gaiety; he grew tenacious and moroSe ; home dstpleaSed him; he could not bear it unleis
with
8ؤل The MEMOIRSof with company i he sbemed to st^un my eyes, and carefully Avoided being alone with me, as much as was ؛olsible ؛ he usbd to c؟me Jio^e 1۶ng a؛-ter I was in bed, and, consequently, be roS؟ Jong after I was up in the morning. When I tenderly enquired into the caufe of his ill hum؟ur, and Seedling discontent, adding my apprehension, lest Ishould have been Sounfortunate, as,through inadvertency, to have given h؛m offe؟ce: He would anlWer, peevishly, " Pray, Madam, don’t teaze me. Cannot a man be graye, but he ntust be out of humour ? Thus silenced, 1 had no conldlation left on eartlr, but the com-pany of my ؛ear Sophie ; she. ؛fed frequently tocOme and Spend tlie day wit؛ m؛ ؟ and, no dubt. sheob'ferved that my hushand was never St home, though stae never enquired after h؛m, farther than by ashing how he did : This reSejve proceeded, I imagined, from my neve؛ having Communicated to her any part of thofe griefs which inwardly corroded and preyed upo؟ my breast ;1 kneW she could administer no relief to jny diieaSejWhy then wound her gentle boSom With the recital Os my afflictions ? Besides, there was another consideration which tied my tongue،: this was, the dread that my relations faould ؛e-come acquainted wit؛ the wh١؟e of Mr. Wil-liams) ill conduct. I was confcious that I had no body to blame but myfelf, for all my prefent misfortunes؛ I. therefore determined to bear them in silence, with fortitude, and resignation؛ the world attributed my dejection of ־fpirits, and' love of retirement, to the ill state of my health which had never been perfectly re-established since my last lying-in, and־ the lofsof my little laoy.
I now
Mrs. WILLIAMS. 159 I now very rarely faw my father; he never came to See me , and when I went to vifit him, he received me So coldly, as almost broke my heart. He condemned my conduct, with regard to my hushand’s parents; who were never tired of publishing, how ill I behaved, in not going to See them in the country ؛ adding, that I even would not let their Son See them, but when it was not in my power to hinder him. This, joined to the many instances they gave of my extravagancy, made my father have a very bad opinion of my difcretion, and, no doubt, alarmed his Sears, 0؛ my being returned again upon his hands. I had, as I have already laid, no anl'wer to make to tbeSe unjust accuSations laid to ray charge, unleSs I openly quarelled with my hushand ؛ So, by Silence, I tacitly acknowledged mySelf guilty i and, 1 believe, almost every body thought me fo. Thus, unfupported by any thing but Self approbation, andconScious innocence, 1 struggled at once against disappointed love, rebated tenderneSs, neglected friendship, with all their train of woes, not to mention a broken fortune, and want of health.
The Summer now advanced, and I hoped to find more eaSe in retirement, than I could do in the noife and bustle oS London, where Mr. Williams continually crowded his houSe with people, to whom I was obliged to be civil, though they were, justly, the objects of my detestation, as to their Society I chiefly owed the irregular conduct of my hushand.
Before I left town, I went to take leave of my uncle Boldly ; (my aunt was gone to Scarborough ;) he received me with a look expressive
i.o The MEMOIRS of of uncommon tendernefs, which I fancy I owed to his compastion, on looking at my emaciated figure ؛ for in truth, grief had almost worn me ٠ to the bone. Finding him thus foftened, by pity, towards me, I took that opportunity of expressing the ardent desire I had, of taking my sister with me into the country, there to fpend the fummer ; but, at the fame time, I told him, ،، That I durst not aik fuch a favour of my father؛ and, therefore, ventured to beg, that he would be fo kind as to obtain it for me.” He very obligingly replied, " That he would ufe his best endeavours for that purpofe ; “ adding, " I don’t think your father will be So cruel, my Dear, as to refuSe vour request ؛ especially when I tell him, that you look as if you had already one shot in the grave.” Here the good Gentleman put his handkerchief to his eyes, in order to hide the falling tear; mine flowed plent.Sully, in gratitude Sor his fenfibility. We parted ؛ and, two days after, Sophie wrote me word, that my uncle had prevailed, and that she was ready to accompany me to---------, whenever I pleaSed.
The next week Mr. Williams went to Newmarket.٠ and from thence he was logo elfewhere. Sophie and I went into the country the day he Set out, where we Spent most part of the Summer alone. On Mr. Williams’s return home, he behaved extremely politely to me, but without the Smallest .park of aSFedtion. Let any one, who truly loves, place themfelves, in idea, in the predicament I now was, and then let them tell me, if there is a torture on earth equal to deSpiSed love. My husband was very Seldom at home, though he had lost his fair neighbour,
MiSs
Mrs. WILLIAMS. 161
MiSs Beauford, who was gone, with all the family, into the South of France. Sophie and I Spent the Summer between our books and our work; Sometimes we took a walk, but not often, as I had hardly strength to stand upon my ٠ legs. Thus my time would have past tolerably, had I not cherished a vulture in my breast, worfe than the Promethean one. which incessantly gnawed my heart, and banished peace Srom thence.
The winter now approached, and on our uSual time of going to town, I afked Mr. Williams *٠ When he intended that we should Set out for that place ?” He anfwered, *٠ Are you in a hurry, my Dear to go \o London ? I thought you preSerred the country.” I told him, ٠* So I did. and that I had only ashed the question in order to prepare Sor our removal, and not Srom any defire I had to return to town.”—٠٠ Well, then, (Says he, with a good nature¿ Smile) l will indulge you with fix weeks more of the country, and I wish (continued he, in a tenderer accent,) that I could procure to my Charlotte every wish oS her heart, as eafily as I can do this, and then she should be without a want.״
I looked at him attentively as he Spoke ; his air was affectionate : both his words, and the manner in which he uttered tliem, penetrated my heart with furprize and tendernefs. The transition was too fudden Sor reflection, l therefore gave way to SenSation, and, bursting into a flood of tears, I exclaimed, ٠٠ Cruel man 1 why do you thus fport with my broken heart ?٠٠ He took me in his arms and prefling me to his bofom, wiped off my tears, faying, ٠، Compofe P	7	yourfelf,
i62 TheMEMOIRSof yourfelf, my dearest Charlotte ؛ believe me,־ your too great Sensibility is the ruin of your constitution.” Thus a kind word and look from my hushand, levelled to the ground, in one ٠ moment, all the fortifications I had been raising by the ׳help of philofophy, for a year or more, between him and my affections. I had vainly flattered myfelf, that the evident indifference he had shewn for n١y perSon, together with his total neglect oS concealing any part of irs effects from me, had in fome meaSure, abated the ardour of my passion for him : Alas, how had I deceived mySelf I I now Sound the Suli conviction of my own weakneSs, in experiencing the extent of his power. His behaviour was not only attentive, but kind, during the six weeks destined for our residence in the country ; when that time being expired within a day or two, he and I walking alone in the garden, he preffed my hand gently, and looking at me with eyes full of grief, shame, and contrition, he Said, " My lovely girl, I have been much to blame in my conduct through life, and eSpecially with regard to you ; you deferved, Charlotte, a much better hushand than 1 have been to you ; you are, indeed, the best oS women, and I fear I am the worst of men : You do not know half my faults, (continued he ؛) but if you really still love me, as I flatter myfelf you do, you will accept of my repentance, and, from an exceSs of guodneSs, perhaps, pardon the past errors of my life. Know, then, (continued he) that you have no longer a houfe in London to which you can possibly go ؛ I lost my money at Newmarket, and was obliged to fell the furniture
Mrs. WILLIAMS. 163
ture of it to pay my debts of honor, (they, you know, admit of no delay :) This is not all, for 1 am fo much involved, that I must shortly quit this houfe too, and go over to France, or elle I Shall run a rilque of waiting lor my father’s ٠ death in a gaol." Here he pauSed and looked stedlastly at me—I was Silent tor fome moments ; astonishment had struck me dumb; but recollecting mySe4f as well as I could, I told him,
״ That as I had centered all my hopes of earthly happinefs in the possession of his love and friendship, whilst I preferved them, my felicity was out of fortune’s reach. That as to my leaving my native country, all places must be rendered agreeable to me, fo he was but the companion of my travels. I added, with a Sigh, that as I brought him no fortune, I had no right to direct him in the difpofal of his; I assured him that he should always find me the chearful companion of his misfortunes, and that I only regretted being the innocent caufe of his prefent difficulties, as he might, probably, have married a woman, whofe fortune would have Secured him an income independent of his father, and, pefhaps, have proved adequate to his wants.” Here he interrupted me, by flinging his arras about my neck, and, pressing me with ardor to his bofom, he called me his noble girl, his generous friend, Sic. In short, from this time his whole behaviour was fo Sober, tender, and affectionate, that I was Srequently tempted to rejoice at our ruin, which had given birth to Such an alteration in his Sentiments, as well as conduct.	■
i٥4 The MEMOIRS or
In confequence of the informat'on Mr. Williams had given me of the deplorable state of his finances, he, in a short time, brought down a man with him from London, who appraifed all the furniture, plate, lmenr &c. which was in the houfe, and I Sancy they were then Sold to him at his own estimation of them : this was done, I prefume, to Secure the money from his creditors, who might otherwifehave feized upon them as part of payment. I was now very bu-Sy in packing up, and fending to a friend’s houSe,, my own and hushand’s cloaths, (as we were very Soon to Set out for France,) when one evening., oS a day that Mr. Williams had gone to town in the morning, Sophie and I were Sitting over the fire, conjecturing various caufes Sor his making it So late before he returned home. How-١ ever, as the night advanced, I grew exeeflively uneaSy at not feeing him. My Sister was endeavouring, by every argument her imagination could invent, to calm my Sears, when we heard Somebody ring at the great gate ; I started from my chair, and cried out, " There he is, at last !” and out I flew into the court-yard to meet him; but judge of my Surprize, when, instead of my hushand, I Saw Mr. Smith get out of his chariot. I must here desire you to remark, that this good man was infinitely distiked by Mr. Williams, which, as he took no pains to conceal his Sentiments, Mr. Smith was no stranger to, for which reafon he very Seldom came to our houSe, and when he did, it was always at an hour when he apprehended he should find me alone, as he frequently declared, that his visits were intended alone to me, for whom he pro-
SeSSed
Mrs. W I L L I A M S.	16S
·feffed to have a sincere regard ؛ judge then of my Surprize, to See him at that time of night.
'1 immediately concluded, that Some misfortune had befallen my hushand ؛ I therefore exclaimed, in a voice of terror, " Good God, Sir,
what could have brought you to------, at eleven
o’clock at night ؛ Tell me the truth ؛ Is my husband dead ! Don’t Spare me ! I am inured to misfortunes, but Sufpence is worSe than death." Here Mr. Smith took hold of me, and Supporting my tottering frame, with the help of Sophie conducted me into the parlour, where he feated me and himSelf, and faid, ״ No, my dear good Lady, your husband is not dead; he is very Sale and well, but not at liberty to wait upon you to night; don’t frighten yourfelf, he is in a good room, and has a warm bed to lay on, which is really, I think, more that he deierves ؛ in sbort, the cafe is this: He was arrested by his taylor this morning, who had, I find, got Some information of his intending to go abroad ; not content with this, the fellow has taken fome pains to inform his other creditors of his fufpicions, in confequence of which, there are twenty, other writs come out against him, and may, by to-morrow, be forty more, for any thing I know to the contrary. The young Gentleman, finding himfelf thus involved, without any means of redemption, Sent for me, begging me to go to his father, and fee what I could do for him : I did fo, but found old Mr. Williams very little inclined to releafe his fon ؛ he recapitulated all his former faults, and then flew out into a rage of invectives against you, Madam; nay, he did not hesitate to accufe you
as
166 T h e M E M O I R S o f as being the author of all your hushand's extravagancies, and fwore he would never do any thing more for him, till he parted with that woman, as he called you, Saying, it was to no purpoSe, for that the King’s revenue would not keep him out of debt, whilst you lived with him. I tried to justify you, Madam, by Sacts from my own knowledge, but I Sound his prejudices much stronger than my arguments ; mathematical demonstration is no prooS to a man in a passion ٠. In short, after a vast deal oS intreaties on my part, and abufe on his, he faid to me, Well, Mr. Smith, I will now tell you my final resolution : Let George give his wife an allowance, and be feparate Srom her, and on thefe conditions I will once more pay his debts. I here represented to him the injustice, not to Say iniquity, of Such a propofal; I desired him to reflect, how Sacred the ties oS matrimony were, and faid, that by being the cauSe .of feparating man and wife, he would act against the laws of Christianity, as well as thofe of humanity :■
He interrupted me, faying. You know my terms, and you may affure yourfelf, that I shall never be brought to recede from them. Upon this we parted. Now, Madam, I must inform you, that the confequence of this converlation is, that there is a raical of a Lawyer, who is ordered to wait upon you to-morrow morning, with a letter from your hushand, in which he will request you to feign giving your confent to the drawing up of articles of Separation, in order to procure his liberty, and, at the fame time, to affure you, that he only means to deceive his father by this stratagem ; and, as a proof of his sincerity, he will, no doubt, be lavish in his professions of everlasting Jove and attachment to
167	.Mrs. WILLIAMS
Now, Madam, it is this circumstance ءء-re ft tjus unfeaSonable؛؛ ^hich broUght me
his .؟ت؟٢هئت؟ت؛اعةئ hour, inorderto guard you he ٠لحئ لااه: ٢ءحأثك a رم لاهتد amcome lo counfel
he؟ Child, to intreat, (nay, if I may be allowed hat you enter in-؛ ion,) to insist upon it؟expre .rmn٢e٥ ؛agreement ; if you do, b ؛؟ااً t۶ no .:!.؛؛nd ygu are rill؛ ,that it will be goodin law -iion t let the Affection you have for your hul
ةئهل:!"1{ه:؟!ء;!ء1لأ٠اً؛ئ״؛٠7؟ةئت;ءاء]هلا؟؛
؛reproaches. Ian ؛0 by his threats ؛ed eithe copyinced, from my own observation, both of ؛؛are t ؛01؛ ؛ha؛ ,your disposition amfcondf very reverfe of what, you haye been represented to be, by Some malicious perSon, to your father^ bfci y0urfetf,;دح! 1 ع ithout your׳: ,in-law ;}nd plainly perceive that you have Sacrificed yourSelf,
in order to exculpate your huiband, in which I
y, but cannot commend؛admire your geneneroSr
لسيس؛لآهعهءج
'١ 5y اا1٢ ou ءق;ل ; ،٢لا،ال!ع,اعأ! my ؛0 ز؛0 ؛٠
chinations can never 1'iurt you ; .if you will only -be a friend to yourSelf, all yxaminatr ־csotc to of, or enquiries into, your conduct, can on- اآ0 tly ex-؛؛r, and conlequ؟Jy rCdoUnd t۶ your hon /ofe themfelves j your hUshand knows this, and -rCver attempt to procure afepara أ1د herefoie؛ for?» she؛:!tli٠ ؛,you hav ؛ on against your- will؛؛ bring ؛0 do possibility ־re is؟؛؛ er۴s, he؛ rng you into a compliance with his ^’.wfllgivehim his liberty dponyour own During	ح
!68 The MEMOIRS of During this long difcourfe, I had had time to recover from the furprize into which Mr. Smith’s arrival had thrown me ; but then the fub-ject of his converlation had kept my fpirits in a continual agitation. I, however, affumed strength enough to thank my generous friend, for his truly parental care of me. I tried, by every expression I was mistrefs of, to prove the fenSe I had of his goodnefs; but. alas ! how inadequate was all I faid, to the vivacity of thofe Sentiments of gratitude which glowed in my heart towards my friend and protector ! I told Mr. Smith, " That I was certain, nothing but the being drove to the greatest distrels, could have induced my hushand to give his confent to part with me. though it was in appearance only; adding, that I hoped he did not think fo ill of Mr. Williams, as to SuppoSe him capable of laving a Snare for me, in order to deceive me.” He anfwered, " Your opinion, ؛>nd mine, Madam, of Mr. Williams, are very different, therefore I beg to be excufed. if I decline anfwering the question; it is fufficient that you don’t put it in his power to deceive you, and is all that is neceffary at prefent.” Air. Smith then observed, that it was late, and begged leave to retire to his chamber, Saying, " Good night, my dear young Lady ؛ you are like to have a trou-bleSome guest of me ; for I shall not leave this houfe, till I See you extricated out of your present difficulties ” I was So struck at the benevolence of this good man, that I could only Say. in broken accents, " Good night; and may the Almighty ever blefs you, for your goodnefs to me! ٠٠	Sophie,
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	169
Sophie, who had been drowned in tears during the whole time of Mr. Smith’s difcourfe, now came to me, and, throwing her arms round my neck, fobbed out, " O ! my dear, dearest Sister, how my heart bleeds Sor you ! Why can’t I bear your Sorrows?” I kindly thanked her Sor her Sensibility of my misfortunes, but begged her not to enervate me, by her immoderate grief; affuring her, at the fame time, that I was doubly wounded, by being the Subject of her affliction. I then begged her to compofe herSelS ؛ obServing, " That I hoped all would end well ؛ and that, should it happen otherwiSe, I trusted that I should resign tnyfelS to the diS-penSations of Providence, who knew my strength much better than I did, and who was too merciful to Suffer the burthen to be too heavy Sor the back.” I obferved, " That grief was lessened, by being fubmittest to with patience and humility, whilst all the opposition brought, too frequently, by felf-will, against inevitable misfortune, only ferved to increafe the torment, and, consequently, to tear the constitution to pieces, whilst it rendered us ridiculous in the eyes of our friends, and reprehensible in thofe of our Maker.”
Sophie looked at me with a countenance, in which were strongly marked admiration and pity: Thefe two Sentiments, at least the first of them, proceeded from her being a stranger to misfortune, or its effects. I now wished her a good night, and she went to bed. I flung myfelf, with
my cloaths on, upon mine.-Here, my dear
Adelaide, I must desire you to fupply, what I cannot defcribe, I mean, the situation of my Vol. II.	D	mind,
170 The MEMOIRS of mind, when.I was left alone, to revolve on all ٠ that had pasted that evening. I now perceived, or'thought 1 did So, that I was inevitably ruined, whether I obeyed my hushand, or followed the advice of my friend ; in complying with the former, I Saw plainly that I should loSe him Sor ever, and, at the Same time, dishonor mySelf; if, on the contrary, I purSued the counlel of the latter, I should, probably, diSobiige Mr. Williams So Sar, as to make him withdraw that affection for me, the lofs of which had already been So afflicting to me, and on which I let a value, which can only be estimated by thoSe who have loved like me ٠, then I reflected, that, by refustng to comply with his father’s conditions, and his request, I might, perhaps, be the caufe of his being immediately thrown into pri-Son. Torn to pieces by this cruel conflict, the day appeared before I had cloSed my eyes. I aroSe, and changed my linen, and then went down stairs, where I met Mr. Smith, and my sister. I perceived they obferved, with concern, that I had paffed a cruel night.
Mr. Smith, after breakfast, renewed the conversation of the L'st evening; he endeavoured, by every argument which friendship and reafon could Suggest, to prove to me the necestity there Was, of my giving a positive denial to every propofa! which could be made me, in regard to articles of Separation between me and Mr. Williams .٠ He remarked, that as I had no marriage Settlement, they would offer no more than a bare maintenance, which was, in fact, all I cbuld demand ؛ arid that by that means I should renounce a sine estate, which must come to the Son at the father’s death ؛ and that then, if he
left
ل7ل	.Mrs. williams
lawful caufe why he ي Shewing ؛left me, wsthou ؛did fo, Ihad a riglit to claim a Separate mainte nance, proportionable to Iris incoiue, and not to . wlaereas, if I accepted of ١٠ im؛ what I brought now, I co'jld have no Sarther pretensions or ؟on is e^ate, let it become ¿ver sb large؛ aim on!؛ hereaSter." To this I anSwered, " That the y would never balance my؟n؟m ؛0 consideration hoice, in the sinallestdegree, as to vyhich party؛ he fear of losing my؛ it was ،؛I Should take ; th erhaps my honor, in tire e)Cs Of؟ and ؛husband which were the two great motives ؛e world؛t that would induce rne to deny m.v cOnfent to sign-ing the articles. I affured Mr Smith, that I Set very little value upon what the world called for-tune, since I was convinced, that happinefs did not consift in luxury.or fplendor j that if it was o where to be־not feated in the mind, it was n otrnd. I faid, my wants were few, my dtsires؛ tion was a strangCr to my؛th٥t amb ؛ewer, an؛ breast.”—Here I was interrupted by theentrame of a fervant, who told me, tliat there was a That’s ءء .Gentleman destred to fpeak with me now, Midam, ر؛ the Lawyer (cried Mr. smith fays he, be yourfelf; act witlr relclution and by which means you will triumph و propriety -add) ,,.־ir enemies, and at the fame tin؛r yo؛٥ye -plea ؛،d he, striking his bofomj give peace an؟
I made no rCpIy, ״.uretothisheartof mine؛ but hastened into the next room, where I found a pale-faced, simpering man, whofe want of education appeared through all his bows, and poli٤enefs; He instantly ؟n of extern؟affe۶ati ,^prefented me with a letter from Mr. William hich was couched itr the tenderest terms, de-'٩ -the violence he did himfelf, in pro ؛) clarimg
2 posing داً
■f 2 ״	The MEMOIRS of
posing an expedient to me, which shocked his affection even to name : He then narrates all the circumstances, which I had already been informed of by Mr. Smith, and then proceeds to shew me, the necessity there is for my joining in the deceit—He tells me, nay, fwears, that he will return me the articles the moment his father has feen them ؛ and then he purpofes felting out immediately for Calais, where he hopes 1 will follow him as quick as possible, there to meet, that we may part no more. He appeals to my knowledge of his passion for me, as a proof of the impossibility there would be of his living without me ; and ends with accusing hWn-felf of doing injustice to my fentiments, in using perfuasion, when he ought to be convinced, that 1 would not hesitate one moment to give him liberty, when, by fo doing, I should recall him to my arms, with a heart overflowing with love, and gratitude.”
This letter (as you may fee) was calculated to Seduce me ; I faw it was, and therefore it failed of its intended effect. I fat down, after having perufed it, and drew fome paper near me, which lay upon the table, (we being in Mr. Williams’s study,) and taking up a pen, I was going to write an anfwer, when the Lawyer faid, " Madam, I beg your pardon, but had you not better sign thefe papers before you write, as I. am really much preffed for time, and have a perion to fee in this neighbourhood before I leave it; and, therefore, I can call for your letter, on my return from thence, and in the mean time. I will (if you pleafe) difpatch my Clerk to town with thefe writings immediately ; only do you sign them, Madam, (here he laid them before
Mrs. W I L L I a M s. 173 fore me, and put a pen into my hand,) for con. tinued he, podr Mr־. Williams is very impatient Jo be at libCrty, in order to fee you, Matlam ; he laments hiS abfence from you, Madar٧, upon my foul, as if you was his mistr؛fs." I cast a ١٥Gk of iovereiCn contempt on tire fellow, and anfwered, " T'١he affair Mr. Williams here pro-pofes to rue, is of too much im؟ort؛nce to be decided in a moment ؛ I shall, therefore, con-Suit witli my, relations upon it, and th؟n give my final anfwer.” Here t؛e man almost stun-ned me with his volubility, in order to prove the abfolute neceslity there was of the papers bei۶g signed directly ؛ he expatrated mere؛ on t؛e pain my refufal oS coiyiplynag with my ؛ushan؛ s request would be tp him.لا interrupted him, by Saying, coldly, " Sir, Mr .Williams laas an a؛l-vocate in my breast, which plead؟ bis caufe, with more eloquence than you could do؛ tiro you had tlie t؟ngu؟ of a Cicero ٠, but my honor JS cotrcerned in ־this cafe, and confequently his alfo; therefore I shall be advifed by my friends, before I act in an affair ot fuch high importance as this is, both to hinilelt and me." " Is tins your determination. Madam ?״ (faid she Law'-yer, witli an air of di؛content.) I anfwer؛d, ؛، Yes, Sir, it is!”—"· If that is the cafe, (he replied, turning short u؟on h،s he؛؛؟) I have nothing more to do here.” I begged he. would call ag^in for my letter, (as he liad hirnfelf pro. poSed doing ؛) bitt fie shuffled, and faid, " It ^as fit Mr. Williams lhould know my anfwer directly ؛ adding, tlaat I might. Send a Servant with the letter to town ؛” fo faying, lie took ' Iris leave, and I returned to Mr. Smith a٩d n١y fifter. The former, on leeing me, faid, " Well, 1) 3	Madam,
?0 4	The MEMOIRS׳7ا
Madam, by my net being called upon, and your short stay with the Lawyer, I venture to pre^ fume, that you have follOwed my counSel.” I anfwered, " that I had ; and then narrated to him all the conversation which pasted between itl,?״١¿..adding, but Mr ؛ me and the Lawyer nay heart heaves witli forrow, when I think how I have vexed 'and difappointed poor Mr. fVil-ؤ by my non-compliance with his request يHams Mentor, I elo not ׳(indeed. Said I, my worth think I shall ever ihuster up fortitirde enough to be ؟Suffer him t ؟resist his anger, much lefs t rifon: No, nOj Sir, (continued I,.)؛ dragged to nt oS ۴y cou-؟I have gone to the uttnost ext rge j Cne word of complaint from him, wilj trie, I ؟s t؛ Sor, dear as he ؛inCvitably undome had rather lofe him Sor ever, than SorSeit his esteem for one moment. I then entreated Mr. Smith to go to my hufband, and try, if possible, to foften my difohedience to his commands, by to it. I ؛exposing the reafons which induce ؟been th ؛t ha؛begged him to inform me. wh cJes ?؛0 tbe artحا1 consequence of my refusing to and, in order to edgage him thy more readrly to him, ؛coinply with this my request, I promile ,to act, directly ؛upon my word of honor, no indirectly, in the affair, till I should tee him زه 0.11 ng agreed upon؛؟again. This convention b ־؛his part, the good man ordered his chariot d promil- ءrectly, and foGn after let off lor London .ing tO return as Soon as po۶fjle o answer؛ proper ؟1 no’.v thought it would b־ ng؛!n, by tc؛my husband’s letter, which I beg That I could See no uSe in his pretending ،، n٠؛hi unlefs he did/, in reality, ؛for ؛ rt with me؛to p d be an eternal Source of contention be-؛it w٥u tween
Mrs. WILLIAM.. !75 tween him, and his father : I told him, that his insincerity had been the caufe of most, (if not all,) the quarrels he had had with his parents ؛
I Said, it was the Saying of a great Philofopher.
٠ That deceit might fometimes be convenient, but could never be a necessity, since its becoming So, would make Providence the Author of it.’ I affured him, that I could live with him in a goal, without a murmur, or that I would beg, or starve with him ؛ but that I could never bring my hand to resign him, whilst my heart told me, that I could not furvive his lofs. I then hinted, that he had been the caufe of h؛s parents daring to make fuch odious propositions, by fuffering me to be traduced tn their opinions, whilst he knew how far I wasirom meriting the humiliating Scene he had now brought upon me ; I represented to him, how eaSy it would be for me to exculpate myfelf of all the crimes laid to my charge, and begged of him not to force me to do it, by insisting on my compliance with his request ؛ I added, that if I was to be abandoned, I would, at least, have the fatisfaction of proving my innocence ; and, by that means, I should, perhaps, draw pity even from thofe, who now machinated my ruin : I ended, with assurances, in all other refpects, of my obedience to his commands.”
Before I had difpatchtd the Servant with this letter, I received another from my hushand ; which, as it was written in a stile of reproach, threats, and 11؛ humour, l did not think proper to anfwer, efpecially as Mr. Smith was not with me : I therefore bid the fefvant go immediately to town with my letter, without taking any notice of that which I bad that momept received.
D 4	Ail
ا76ل The MEMOIRS OP All that day, and the greatest part of the next I heard nothing from London*, during which time, my fpirits were in a continual agitation, my imagination formed a thoufand monsters, which my reafon was infussicient tocombiit with. I really think, that lUSpenfe is tire painSirllest fen-Sation of the human breast ؛ at least, I have .١1ر-ways found it So. I tried to read, but could not, my doubts and fears distracted me, and at that naoment I would Iiave pref'erred the certainty of the greatest misfortune which could have be-fallen me, in preference to that state of incerti-iude my mind then laboured under. On the evening of the lecond day, a Space oS time which to me had appeared an eternity, Mr. ¿'mit¿ arrived, and, with a l'miling countenance. Said to me. " My good child, I give you joy i your hushand is at liberty 1 We have had a Sad piece of work of it (continued he) to bring the old man to any reafonable terms, but, however at last, on condition that his sbn would give Ilim a bond for the money, he agreed to pay all the debts whicfi strould appear against him.. Thefe have, upon being called in, proved pretty confiderable, I affure you. Upon looking over theSe papers, I took occasion to remark to the old Gentleman, that, amongst all his Son's debts there wasnot tobefoundonearticlc of your con-tracting. T o which he anfwered abruptly. No, I See there is not ؛ but if his wite Spends all her husband’s ready money, how Should he sind any to defray his neceffary expence؟, or to pay liis trades people ? To this I made no reply, Ma-dam, as I had your orders not to justify you to him.״—Here I interrupted the good old man, by a Iking him, in a faultering voice. When
I should
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	ill
I should See Mr. Williams ? " Not today, Madam, he replied, nor perhaps to-morrow, Sor he has a good deal of businefs upon his hands at prefent ؛ he must first execute the bond I mentioned to you, and then Satisfy his creditors ؛ he is now only at liberty upon his fathers having bailed him, together with mySelf." Mr. Smith went on : " I Sound your hushand (Says he) violently piqued at the report the Lawyer had made, of your anfwer to the propofal he Sent you ؛ on Seeing me. he began to complain of your ingratitude in the bitterest terms, and then inveighed, with great eloquence, against the perfidy of all your Sex. When he had pretty well vented his Spleen, I begged to be heard in my turn ; he was silent, when I represented to him, that you had acted entirely by my advice j at which he Seemed Surprized. I then endeavoured to shew him, how ungenerousiy he had treated you, and how unlike a Gentleman, and a Man of Honor it was, to take advantage of your love and tenderneSs for him, in order to make you fubScribe to your own undoing ؛ he looked rather out oS countenance, I thought, when I was going on, but a Servant entered with your letter : He read it with Some emotion, and then Said, I have been prodigiousty deceived in my wife’s character, Mr. Smith ؛ I always thought she had more tenderneSs than fortitude in her difposition ; but I now find, that, when rcufed, she can be both steady and reSolute. Here he oaufed Sor a moment, and then Said, Weil, I don’t absolutely blame her for Sollowing your advice; and I must look out for Some other means of extricating mySelf, that’s all. I told him, that I was going to his father ; he D 5	Said,
i?8 The MEMOIRS of faid, if fo, the Lawyer should meet me there with your letter. He begged I would plead for him. I anfwered, that J would for you, which was pretty much the fame thing, with this difference only, that your fufferings, on his confinement, were infinitely greater than his. He Smiled, we parted, and I went fo the old Gentleman ; you know thefcst, Madam, only this, that your husband Sent me a card, requesting me to inform you, that he would See you as Soon as it was in his power, tho’he could not fix the time, as it depended a good deal on his father, who was Seldom in a hurry to pay his money.”
I easily discovered, Srom Mr. SmitFs account of my husband’s behaviour, that he was interiorly angry with me, but that he had Suppressed his reSentment, in consideration oS that Gentleman’s having declared himSelf to have been the director of my conduct in the whole affair ؛ perhaps, too, the menaces contained in my letter, might, in Some meaSure, have tied his tongue, for a. that jundlure, had I undeceived his father, it is probable he would not have assisted him, and in that cafe, he would have Sound himfelf in a dreadful dilemma. I communicated my thoughts to my Sriend ؛ he agreed with me in my opinion, and added, " Your husband’s character is, my dear child, as the French Say, So inconfequent, that there is nothing to be dreaded Srom his rci'enfment, nor indeed any thing to be relied upon, thro’ the whole tenor of his con-tiuct ؛ he is determined to action, by the im-pulle of the prefent moment; nor has he, that I can obServe, one fixed principle j he has, indeed, adopted fome abiurd prejudices, to which he obstinately adheres, becaufe they flatter his
passions j
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	179
passions ؛ but, unfortunately, brobit.y is a virtue he is unacquainted with. Excufe me, dear Madam, (continued Mr. Smiths) if I fpeak thus freely on io tender a Subject, as this I know is to you, but I would prepare you Sor a stroke, which I forefee will fall on you : Mr. Williams s character and your’s are totally different, faid the good man ; vice may, and must, admire virtue, but never can either love or affociate long with it ؛ virtue is a glafs, in which it fees its own deformity, and therefore will ever avoid it as much as possible. Mr. Williams don’t want fenfe, (continued Mr Smiths and tho’ you never Seem to fee h؛s faults, be affured, that he is not the dupe; he knows they cannot be unobserved by you, and your generous forgiveneCs of them, in Spite of his vanity, leffens, him in his own eyes ؛ thus, from a strange perversity in his nature, thofe virtues in you, which ought to endear you to him, have diametrically a contrary effect ; and, as Dean Swift f٥J׳s,
،٤ Your altitude offends the eyes
“ Of thofe who want the power to rife/’
In short, (continued Mr. Smith,) in eontradU tion to all general rules, a conduct which would, in all human probability, have reformed any other rhan, has contributed only to confirm him in his errors, and to make him purfue, with more avidity, what he calls plealure, and which, ،٧ my opinion, would be better named debauchery : Go on, however, Madam, (Said my good friend,) continue to make truth and virtue your guides, and let fortune do her worst ؛ she can ?ob us of every thing but the Self approved hour, and that alone will be fussicient to raife us above her frowns, and is, in truth, of infinitely rnpre
value,
i8o The MEMOIRS of. value, than all the favours which she has in her power to bestow. You have virtue, and a friend, Madam, (continued the good man, fmiling;) go, confult the PhiloSophers you are So Sond of, and fee if their most Sanguine wishes ever aSpired to the poffession of more.” I looked at Mr. Smith, ١when he had ceaSed to Speak, with admiration ; my heart avowed the truths he had uttered ; I thanked him sincerely for his kind admonition, and then endeavoured to make him think leSs injuriously of my husband, but I Sound him inflexible on that head. The rest of the evening was Spent in moralizing on the evils of life, when we both agreed with La Bruyere, * " sUsnc la pluspart des bommes employent la premiere par-tie de leur vie a rendre ?autre miferable
The next morning Mr. Smith returned to London, after having enjoined me to call upon him ؛n any difficulty that might occur, either in myownor husband’s affairs; for, Said he, " My dear child, I beg you would rest allured, that both my counfel and fortune are at your command ; So 1 beg you would aik for the former, and diSpoSe oS the latter, whenever you may have occasion Sor either oS them.” I thanked him with the most lively SenSe oS his generosity, and friendsbip, and then bid him adieu.
A Sew davs after Mr. Smith’s departure, Mr. Williams came home; he met me with an air of great good breeding, and Said the civile ft: things, upon his having occasioned me So much uneasineSs: but, alas! his face Spoke truth, and I could read there, that his heart disavowed the ٠ Which may be thus tranflated, viz.That the greateft part of mankind make it the bufmefs of their youth to lay up miferv for their age.
language
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	iSi
language of־ his tongue. He ashed m؟, when I had Seen that old meddling fool. Smith و I Said, I thought mySelf infinitely obliged to that Gen-tleman, and that I had Seen him a Sew days ago. " Not perhaps fo much as you SuppoSe, Ma-dam, he replied ؛ Sor, however Spacious his ar-guments may have appeared to you, he was shost certainly not your Sriend, in counselling you to reSuSe the proposition I made you; Sor, Irad he not interfered in what did not concern him. I shotrld not have been torced to give a bond to my Sather Sor the money he lent me, and which now, iS I should die, lie will undubitably conae upon my effects Sor, and by that means strip you tO youf shiSt: No, no, contintred he, believe me, my Dear, when I affure you, that, under the pre'tence oS laeing your Sriend, he was the agent your enemy.”
I co.uld not bear- to hear my protector’s cha-racter thus cruelly afperSed, which made me an-Swer Mr. Williams with tbme warmth, ءء That how Sar Mr. Smith's judgment might have err-ed in tlie affair, I stiould not pretend to decide), but that I was perSectly convinced, that the ad-vice he gave me was sincere, and Such as he would liave given to his own child, in tire Same situation ؛ SOr indeed, my Dear, continued I, I look upon Mr. Smith to be a truly honeff man, endued with a good understanding, and the most benevolent heart ؛ poffeffed oS theSe virtues, I think he is an honor to humanity.” " He is as romantic in his notions as yotrrSelS, (interrupted Mr. Williams,) and tlrereSore I don’t wonder that you are sb Sond oS him.” Here tlie diScourSe dropped, as I did not care to enter into a dis-quisition oS what thoSe notions were, which he Called romantic.	The
82 The MEMOIRSof! aid to me, with؛ The next day my husbapd تأ;؛الالا$!ء٢ق	: ,a Sprightly air
i! accompany him .;he٢i٧e٢ ־eatly to؛ j was me timerepeasing my affur-؛ t the؛ ,plea.ied e؛؛۴l_؛ye؛t؛th١t I should be happy in. wh ,؛ance
;٥: ٢لاًه٠؛٦ل؛ائءم٠لت؛أهاةلاا٥؛ ا٠ا e؛e Carried n؛
ة׳؛:ئةع
would, if I chOse it, take a. lodging in town د ح؛؛٠لم٠۶دوء٦؛ or a fortnight, that I might؛ k٠؛pa ؛؟ fiends, and ب y of taking leave of؛؛n
״:؛؛ اقال,ئل) ٤٥٢٠ ؛ ing up my.7h.ngs at my l.eifure
س٠مة٢ا؛״للثية;ة?هذيقب؛״ئلغ؛ءؤ
؛m, an؛with h ؛s bu؛0 I w؛ ,he contept ذ(لإاا3١ ئا؛ء:ع: s؛h؛ bim happ^” Soon after دع] Own. My father and mother were not to be؛ to fee ءاًاؤةin London that winter; fo, not being hem, 1 wrote to bid them adieu: ]hey an-؛ :;;;ئ’ةعحيقا لآلاا٢م fwered me. wishingus .r
would leave S;pbie ؛ ؛d desiring th؛؛ ,journey
٠؛ ؛Which, n ofaedtenc ;ةييذا٠ة e؛nc؛my ؛a
myist r begg d I wo Id fuf! ٠غ:مم£ءءئ؟١٢1ايلاح
j،،w٣r٧hitth¡ لل;جعئأ ؛؟٤؛ vv e her to CO to h frl ؛٥؛st؛٧u؟r ةمءآلآئ١ا ;::لئ| ٢ع{ء£ her eyes for nay
her fpir^its.” In compliance with her request, I carried her to Mr. B.ld^’s, wlrere she then in-::لج:إا؛ئهلء ٢لالا ل sifted upon taking leave of me ccompLiedlby ^ds o? tears on both sides.، ؛In her I lost an affectionate sister, and a tpnde ^edd j nay, indeed, the paincipal ccnSolation؛;؛
Mr s. W I L L I A M S. 183 my life. On her part, as she had been prefent at many Scenes which had alarmed her tender-nefsforme, She now dreaded my being Separated from ail my friends, and left totally in the power of a man, whom she had conceived a very bad opinion of ؛ she therefore, in a tranfnort of grief, recommended me to the care of‘ the Almighty, and then flinging her arms round my neck, almost drowned me with her tears: I preffed her to my bofom with unutterable fond-neSs. My uncle and aunt were prefent at this affecting Scene, and both of them Seemed moved at our reciprocal tenderneSs and love of each other; nay, even my aunt’s eyes watered. She took leave of me, with a foftneSs in her manner towards me, which I had never perceived her to have since my marriage. My uncle took me in his arms, faying, ‘٠ Adieu, my dear girl ! IS you should want a friend, whilst abroad, remember me, and be Sure let us hear often from you.” I could not anfwer him, So hastened out of the room, almost fuffocated with too much fensi-bility.
I ordered the chariot to drive to Mr. Smith’s ٠ I found him at home. On my entrance, he perceived that my heart was full, and my eyes red : I told him from whence I came : this worthy man faid every thing that friendship and good fenfe could dictate, both for my instruction and confolation ٠, after which, he told me, that he had now two favours toafkof me, and which he begged I would not refufe him. I anfwered him, whilst pleafure fparkled in my eyes, " Ah, Sir, can I be fo happy as to have it in my power to oblige you ?” " Yes, Madam, (he replied,) and eflentially too ; but first you must give me
184	The MEMOIRS of
your honor, to grant my requests,١ before I tell you what they are :” “ Thefe conditions would be hard, Sir, I replied, from any body but yourSelf, whofe character is fo well known to me, that I am fure you would not engage me to do any thing which I ought to refufe , I therefore do most readily promife to obey your commands, be they what they will.” " Why then> Madam, (faid Mr. Smiths the first is, that, on no pretext whatfoever, you go into the interior of a convent during the life of your hushand ; becaufe if vou do. I am well convinced that you will never come out again :The Second is that you will make me your banker. ١ ou are going, my Dear, (Said this worthy man,) into a country, where you have neither Sriends nor connexions of any fort, with a hushand who will inevitably run into debt, in every town he goes through ; you may, and probably will, find yourSelf Sometimes without either money or credit, (l don’t mean, however to Support Mr. Williams's extravagancies,) but I cannot bear the thought, that you, my dear, good young Lady, should be brought into any distreSs : I am an old man, Madam, who has neither child nor relation, but you, who are So worthily the child of my adoption ; therefor, Madam, you will only make uSe of what is already your own, by drawing upon me.” Неге I interrupted this wonderful man, being unable to bear any longer the violence of thofe SenSations which his diScourSehad raiStd in me ; !flung mySelf опту knees beside him ; in a rapture of gratitude, I kisted his hand, called him Sather, and, in short, stammered out a Sett of incoherent words, which expreffed my Sensibility of his truly parental care oS me, more pathetically, perhaps, than the P	У P P	most
Mr s. W I L L I A M S. 185 most studied piece of eloquence could have done. T he good man raifed me from the ground, dropped a tear, and then begged leave to hand me to my chariot, faying, " Your feelings, Madam, are too fine tor Icenes like thoSe which have just palled between us, and I own, that the being obliged to part with you, is almost too much for my age ; but, I flatter myfelf, (continued he,) that I shall frequently hear from you.” I preffed his hand, as an assurance that he should, and in Silent forrow bid him adieu with my eves؛ words were not made to exprtfs Senfaiions like thoSe I then felt.
On my return home, I found my husband in high Spirits and good humour; change of Scene, and variety in all its modes, was one of hisdar.. ling passions; he perceived that I had been crying when he raillied me agreeably upon my weaknefs, as he called it. I did not attempt to justify myfelf, but promifed that I would grow chear-ful again as fast as I could. A fervan، now came to acquaint him, that his Taylor was below ; he turned to me, and faid, " Will, you give him leave, my Dear, to try my cloaths on here ?״ I bowed affent, and up came the man, followed by and her, both loaded with bundles ؛ they tried him on four Suits of cloaths, all of them either embroidered, or richly laced, befides a frock and laced waistcoat. He then afked me, “ How I liked his taste ?” I anfwered, " That I thought them both rich and elegant.” When the man was gone, I faid to him, " I am Surprized, my Dear, that you sbould make up So many cloaths in England, when you are going into a country where you may buy them much cheaper, and have them made in the French iasbion ; besides,
i86 The MEMOIRS of I apprehend, that you will not be able to wear thoSe which are made here, with any propriety, in France" O, I beg your pardon for that, (Says he,) I shall wear them there, I aS-Sure you; besides, I am now following your Savourite plan oeconomy, (continued he,) as I don’t intend paying for thefe cloaths, (at least till my father is dead,) and thereSore, you know, it is fo much gained ; and, apropos, I would ad. viSe vou, my dear, added he, to follow my example, by taking up what you want, before we go; we run no rifqueof being stopped, as I have published, that I don’t intend going this month yet, tho’ I purpofe fetting off on Tuejday next, about midnight ; So, before any body can miS-trust our flight, we shall be on the other side of the water.”
I was So astonished at this harangue, that it had deprived me almost of the power oS Speech, nor do I believe I should have articulated, of Some time at least, if Mr. Williams had not rouf-ed me, by Saying, in a pretty loud tone of voice, ٠* Well, my Dear, what do you think of my plan ?״	" It is So new to me, Sir, and fo fo-
reign from my ideas of the rules oS rectitude. (I replied,) that I really am aSraid to give my opinion of' it ; but you, my Dear, are the mai-terof your own actions, and thereSore the proper judge of them; for my part, (I continued,) your Scheme being intirely incompatible with my ScnSe of honor and probity, I must beg leave, in this instance, not to take you for a precedent.” At this he looked out of humour, and Said, “ That my stoical virtue, I should find, would neither Seed nor cloath me.” I replied, " Perhaps not j but then it would teach me to bear,
with
Mrs. WILLI AMS.	187
with fortitude and resignation, the want of both ;״ and fo Saying, I went out of the room, in order to put an end to the converfation.
On the Tuefday following, at midnight, we fat out for Dover in two different post-chaifes, for the conveniency of carrying our baggage, as Mr Williams told me, upon my obferving that one would have been Sufficient for us both. We took no English Servants with us, as we had been allured by many people, who had travelled with them, that they were of no uSe in a foreign country, but, on the contrary, generally extremely troublelome ؛ this I found So just an observation, that in the courSe of many years residence abroad, I never Saw an exception to it. We found, on our arrival at Dover, a veffel ready to fail, and in Sour hours Srom our going on board of her, were Safely landed at Calais, from which place we Sat out almost immediately on our road to Paris. The journey, the change of air, and the novelty of every thing I faw. all togethei contributed to give me Spirits, of which I had naturally a great share, but they had fora long time been weighed down by the iron hand of misfortune.
I don’t know whether there is not Something in the air of your country, my dear Adelaide, which inSpires one with gaiety ; but certain it is, that I was never chearfuller, nor in better health, than at the period lam now writing 0،. My hushand, who was well acquainted with the country, appeared to be delighted at feeing it again ؛ he was all attention and good-humour on the road. He shewed me Cbantilli, and whatever elle was worthy observation on our way؛ and when ١٠e arrived at Paris, Said he
would
188 The M EM O I R S of would just let me See every thing that was curious in that famous city, and then proceed to the South of France, where he purpofed fettling. I had no will of my own, and knowing no part of the country I was going to, all places were equal to me. I shall not tire you, my ,.dear girl, with a defcription of a town in which you was born, and bred, nor tell you the raptures I was in at the Paintings, &c. which I faw at the Palais Royal. <١؛rc. You know, I feel the Arts, tho’ I am mistrefs of none of them : We have lived together at Paris, and you cannot have forgot my enthusiafm for painting and Sculpture ; your plays, too, delighted me, and I was both astonished and charmed, at the amazing Superiority of your Actreffes to ours. I had letters of recommendation to Lady ،S', thro’ whoSe means, I was introduced into good company ؛ I therefore Saw Versailles, &x. with propriety and eafe, and Spent my time very agree-Mr. Williams was, apparently, the happiest man I ever Saw; pleafure So intirely occupied his every moment, that he had not time to think. We Seldom met, but in the evening, at our hotel ; when, after I had related the adventures of the preceding day, he Several times had launched out into raptures, on the agreeable manner in which he had Spent his time, at a houSe he frequented, in the Bois de Boulogne. At last, I ventured to afk him the name of the family which he vifited there. He Smiled, and Said, ٠i 'I he Lady’s name was Paris, who owned the houfe, but that the young Ladies who boarded with her, were, he believed, no way related to her; (adding,) they are divine, creatures! Such
figures I
Mrs. WILLIAMS. 189
؛gures 1 Suyh talents! and fuch vivacity 1 In short, my Dear, they are Angels,” I looked־ grave, and Said, " Mr. Williams, is the houfe you Seem fo enraptured with, be a bad one, yott o٧ght to hyv؟ had delicacy enougla to have Spar-e؛l my sbnsibility the knoWledgeGS it.” He re-plied, " Upon my sbul, my Dear, I affure you, notlaing paffes there, the idast tending to inde-cency؛ it is a houfe, where most of the men of fashion Sup, Sor a gttinea a-piece, merely Sor the pleafure of conversing with the girls, add hear-ing them play upon fOme instrument', and that’s all, upon my honor.” I Saiil, I hopCd he Spoke ؛e؛ truth, but observed, at tlie Same time, ءء That it appeared tome ratlier irtcredible, that virtuous girls stiould board at a houSe oS public reception, where they were exposbd to the con-yerfation of every man, who thought it wortln his while to pay a guinea Star the plCaSure oS their company.” But as I had a mind to finish the difcourSe, I ended it, by Saying, " T'hat I was ؛otally a str۶nger to the manner of tire country I was now in, and tlaat therefore, perhaps, what would b؛ ؟egarded as a great imprOpriety id Bag-land, might nht be any here.” To wiaich 0-ة ؛erection Mr. William؛ whitlled out, "Aye, to ؛e Sure ؛ ”؛hen complained lae was steep؛, and
f؛) wen، to bed. p	٥ py. ٥
We Irad now stayed six weeks at Paris, when my ؛ushand ؟ro۶ofed our Setting out Sor Lyonsy whi؛h ac؟ordingly we did, in ذ few days, in a her sin and six, in which were Mr. Williams٠ myfelf, and my mai؛. Ourjourney was agreed able, the roads good, and thd weather retUark-؛٥>ly fine. When we arrived at Lyons, Mr. Williams appeared mightily pleafed with the
٠
ا
Mrs. WILLI AMS. 191
even imagined, that I perceived him look at his mistrefs with an air of intelligence arid familiarity, very inconsistent with the character he was in. The old Lady, tho' not very clear sighted took notice of the attentive manner in which I had Surveyed this footman, and, when the cloth was removed, she Said to me, " Don’t you think, Mrs. Williams, that the Seilow you Seemed to obServe So much, is a very unfit Servant Sor a young Lady to have about her ? He has (continued she) an audacious, impudent look ; besides, he is good for nothing, and does no one thing, that I know of, but study his glaSs, and adorn his pretty perSon ; I cannot imagine what my niece keeps him for, unleSs it he to look at.״ Here the old Lady ceaSed ؛ and I anfwered, ٠٤ That I thought he was by much the genteel-est Servant I had ever Sec-n ; (adding,) that it' he had not worn a livery, I should have taken him for a man of fashion.” Mademoifelle DelaG. Said, " She did not think the Seilow either So bad as her aunt had represented him, nor could she agree with me, in thinking him So very genteel a figure ؛ that he was well enough ; and tho’ she had no Sort of attachment to him, yet fne could not bring herSel¿؛ sb turn him away, till she Sound him in a fault.” Here the conversation dropped, and I thought no more of it. till one day Mr. Williams told me, whilst we were at dinner, " That that morning there had been a great riot at the tennis-court, about Ma-demoiSelle De la G.’s footman, who, (Says Mr. Williams,) it feems, plays remarkably well a٤ tennis. He was this morning amusing himSelS at that exerciSe, when Some Gentlemen came in to play a match, upon which one of them bid
٠...
2	The MEMOIRS OFول
I۶W h.e־־I ءء ,him leave the place, and aslced him lS؛dare to be So impertinent, as to intrude himS e؛To which t ١١? company ؛into Gentlemen Seilow made an infolent reply ; upon wlaich the Gentleman ordered the master oS the tenssis-sperated the؟court to turia him out: Tlais ex rc١an sb much, that he gave the Gentleman a hiow with the racket which he held in his hand. t ressinted؟Instantly, all the Gentlemen oreSe the affront done to a member of their Society, when five آ and were going to cane the Seilow or six stout Servants in livery rustted into the room, and reScued their comrade, as we then iSpered., that؛e w؟t is sin؛ but ؛thought him f-؛r m؛hey only did their duty, in defending the؛ hoWever this may be, it is certain, tlaat the ؛ rer Went immediately to the Governor,, who, n؟m؟l؛in a Short time after, fent for the Gen i ؛that Suppofed themfelves to have bee.n infulte he disi ,lj٢؟at؛When, having cloSeted them ffpa ome؟ .miffed them, and the affair is liushed u.p the ؛c ؟ok notic؟Ruffle, t ؟hody prefent at th -؟iiieiy the fellows had on, who rgScued Mad moifelle De la G.'s footman, and ashed the^, in e B.؟ rqus؛e M؛niy hearing, if their master, t n they return^؟uesti؛ was at Lyons? To which ed no anfwer. Now I cadnot help thinking, was the ؛rs,I but that i״٥؛٠Wili .(Continued Mr
is؛Marquis himfClf in difguffe, who made .all t j for wheO he gave the .Merchant the؛bustl fu. ٥٤ n air؛ hloW, lie looked at hinl with fuch 11؛ آ؛ mpt, as was obferved؟periority and cont ere١٩p"؟in a١ ,؛the company; and on being bi ٢oon> 1 faw him clap tory tone, to leave the ؛؛؛Sword. it is certainly lie, (faid my husha
٥٠!	.Mrs. william s
and lie has r^etamorphoSed himfelf thus, to be Mr. IViUiamt conjectured ״.s؛nearer hi, mistre ght. as appeared in about a month after thiS af-٠s aunt ٩IademoiSelle D’ la G Sair happened, when :؛.٠ died, and immediately the Marquis affirmed liis nf,.lf openly tlie؛tie and equipage, deciding hi lover of ،h٤t young lyady. who was noW in poV: r aunt's fortune, which the' gave,؟of all h ؟Seffto 0 the Marl؛ ,togetlier with herSelf, in a short time to spend the morJdv, ׳neyv 38 well hoc؛ φ\%) who as any man in Prance. '' ٠m the time of his flinging off his liverv, he؛F ؛m'y htrsband and h ؛was frequently at our houfe another’s emmpany, ؟f on؟ extremely fond ?r٢ ;؛from an analdgy in their characters.	OnC da
u upon his knight errantly؛illyinghi؛٢as r hen J؛ in purfuit of his mistrefs, hefaid, sOul^ng, ،،You ٢a)s) know half my adventures. I don’t Jove ،٥٥٥٠ ذذوhe} to boast of the Savours received Srom the you, which my ؟bdver, I will relate one t. ٠،״؛ ؛true : Her 3unt’s cOokmaid wa ؛wife knows to b ؛extrer٩ely ugly, and far from young j stie, how in older to give وؤو ,h me؛fell in love w ,٢!!! ا3٧ز٢ me effe۶tial proofs of her affection, ufed to he؛ my pockets with cold meat, and whatever elfe
Η favours ^Siid:؛;٢ν٠ ت /٢ء”;لئب٦أئ :م ا:لات hej I
ther؛; he,) I durst not refute, for tear the should
ءذ for, as I was ؛ diSguiSe ! ;ه «ال؛٠؛أئأةئ
;;.board-wages, stie thought ihedid me a great kin dav stie ع١؟ز)	.s, by tfrus cheating her mistrefs؛e؟
:اذ٠.ا:٠:ياا3ا1 d tome, taking me tenderly by tlie؛a؛ ؛)I have a great friendship tGr you: lam Wort .money, Louis, and if you can Irke me, I will mar, groat،: 1 thanked her ٠١ have not لاث;ل< الاي دح 7 ,She intended me ٥٢”٥٠ 111 :!ا:سهب b ذ that I had made ,؛at (he f٥٠me time lamented ءلالأ ؛h^n i la ׳.١٨	.r to marrv؛vowto St. Anthony, nev
اإ٠	׳	VOL. IS. t
ioA The MEMOIRS of ill of a violent fever, and my life was defpaired of.
,she shook her head, and faid, " It was a rash vow١ and a great pity, that I should have made it. ■Finding herfelf thus difappoited in her hopes of marrying me, she turned her thoughts another (faid the Marquis, addressing himfelf to my hu<· .؛٠،؛؟٠؟٥؛band,) how execrably ugly she must haVec I was fo, however, by »ffurmg ؛ circumstances her, with as much feeming concern as Icou.dpo(-
؛«״■؛،׳.؛a.tisit.i
to force me to decline the happinefs which she ■1. ־J٠n .»١٠ ;؛؟1.".؛־T ٠٠ ٠٥؟
195	.Mrs. williams
tably have done, had her sbnles been the least but fortunately for vs ؛؟quicker than they wer
very deaf, and’almost blmd, v^hich pre-’ ال?!!ة
d.her from obfervingany of the monkey tricks؟r!nt Such as pinchipg my fingers ٠ءلأا play ٤٥ لغاًلا!؛؛
ة،ذاة a ٠٢ اا!قل:ا I ;ء؛? fr ع؛ اذح؛ئ١
ne, fo Jaard, that I have Several timeS been؛r ،٠ and when any Gentleman ؛cream out؛ .ready to ؛؛؛ of my aunt’s acquaintance, if ,؛ined with u؛ eyhad any pretensions upon me, he ne-؛t ؛though hem Some udlucky triCk Or؛ ver Sailed playing other. In short (Said the MarchioneSs,) Hived in and on ؛a continual dread Os his laeing Sound out h۶aring of .the shuffle which happened at she ten" ^nis-court, I took it for granted, that the whOle ai air would .be laid befOre the public, and that I؛ ؛th my Sortune, and reputation, by hi؟Should ioSe b
indiscretion.”
the ؛ar Adelaide wit؟d؛¡:lb*¡] t٤ed you ^y length of this anCcdote, it is becauSe I Sound itii -ecolledting, that you was ac؛ when ؛my journal and AdarchloneSs De P ؛١arqu^^h، ؛ed wit؛٩٧ain I thought you miglit probably like tG hear thiS ؛is not, you naa ؛heir juvenile adventures، ؛؟،؛؛؟ pais it over, and go on to my story. y Ux; Williams now began to grow tired of stay-;؛ing fo long in the fame place, and therefore dete
a ٠٥ It ت 7اة٢؛لءء٢هج;ءئ tv ها fi ٤٠ ::t
Lyons, and its inhabitants, thrCe months aSer we ؛٩ot without regret) I assUr but ,؛i ؛tere؟had e ad forced a very agreelble focieiy id؛ fori ؛٧״؛(
M received the utmost اً!\"? !0١^؛؛لئل]׳.٦!ثلةة؛ لذتااة ؛Nay, I had even contracted ٠٠ 7ا!ل؛^ء!;تلكق e٢f״afor
.of them, f هبء ٠ !؟٠ ;ءء: ا<؛ا״؛ا:٢ءل٢ك٠, ؛٢1٠;;لة؛
7.3 really forry to leave the place. We ع ،عثا :؛howeven anci arrived, without any arc ٠ءل ،*ff ,dent, at Aix. On approaching it, I perceived
2 . thatة
6	ΤιΐΕ Μ ־Ε׳Μ Ο TR S ■ο׳ΐ
ا
Mrs. W 1' L L I A" M 3.	197
endeavours to recall his affections were totally׳ fruitJeis ؛ variety was his goddels ٠, and he Served her with a zeal, equal to that of an Indian Fakir for his idol. 1׳ thereSore sighed in Secret, and was obliged to love him upon his own terms, since I could not bring him to mine.
We were now visited by all the English residing at Aix ·, Sir Charles Stanly., with an air of conScious worth, told me, he was very glad to fee me in France ؛ Said many obliging things on the improvement he perceived in־ my perSon, since he left England؛ and enquired much after every individual of my family. Mr. Williams received him with great cordiality, and gave hirp a general invitation to his houfe ; he frequently came to See us, and one day, when he and I were alone, he Said, ؛٠ If it was not indifereer, he begged I would tell him, who the perSon was. that I hinted at, in the fatal letter, in which I had informed him of my marriage with Mr. Williams, whole love of him had been a motive, which induced me to re-fufe him my hand.” I pauled a moment, as I was not prepared for the question ; and then an-iwered, candidly, " Sir Charles, as Some years are past since that event, and as the· perSon in question was then a child, I think i mav without injuring her modesty, tell you, that it was my sifter Sophie who had conceived a violent passion for you, and had, with tears and blushes, diicovered it to me, without, however, intending to make me her confident.” He interrupted me, by ashing, with Some emotion, " If I thought she still retained the fame Sentiments for him ?” I Said, " I could not possibly anSwer that question, as I had always carefu ly avoided mentioning his name to her, Since he left England; but rhar, 10 my knowledge, she had rehitcd teveral good offers,
8 TheMEMOIRSofول though preffed very much by laer friends to accept she was detei': ,؛of ode Of them; alledging, tha single; vvhich refolution I h٠a٥ ؛o liv؛ mined ؛ways attributed to her attachment for him, s me for the confidence I had p!ac۶d poke؛ in him, and looking at me with, eyes which
قلا٠كل٠ل:٠ «id to me؛ both grief and tendernels, he
٠٥ly woiTiaf I ever loved, and ־s the؛sada۶۶w ydurlofs fr.rnitsfeventy linaagined, h.adsteeL
ع «٠ ed my heart iCr ever against any of your fex 0ئ r,fad hejcleternained to continue‘؛howev؛,m؛
؛sistfr and friend;؛٠y0٠u perfon of ؛in Ua ة0؛love
٤٥ ٢ء;أءإ .y g ءلكح٤١ا٢لم اا؛:ت ؛ your beloved Sophie
:¡{«{¿ل¡¡ 7England, and offer her my hand; She -لاه continued he,) and since I cannot be your)
¡ءعء¡
ءئ٠ ءل:لءل؛ء٦ء؛ thehappiest ئ٠ءاله ق؛، ،؛look upon
manner contnbuud ،0 the زره had in لثم؛ ,life ; were Obliged tO put an end to our converfation*
للع ٠.	.by company coming ill to interrupt US
ا
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	!<#
were once fixed in a place, I flattered mySelf, might be brought into a narrower compafs. We had, by the means of a correipondent at Mar-failles, taken a good houfe there, and I was much pleafed, on my arrival, with the singularity, as well as novelty of that town; the staves, galleys. &rc. were all new to me, and at first sight marie me fancy myfelf in the Levant. I found its inhabitants, like all thofe of your nation, very polite and hofpitable to strangers. I was acquainted here with many very agreeable, well-bred, Sensible people, in whoSe Society I could willingly have pasted mv liSe. Mr. Williams appeared delighted with Marfeilles ؛ the multitude of different amufe. roents it afforded, were a continual Source of entertainment to him : He was, indeed, Seldomer at home than I could have wished him to be, hat then he was always chearful and good-humoured when with me, nor did I know of any particular attachment he had at that time. Thus I continued, for five or six months, to live, iS not happy, at least tolerably content, and So I might have probably continued Sor Some time longer, had it not been Sor an event, which, at the time it happened, robbed me of all my boasted fortitude, and, after having worked me up almost to frenzy, funk me into the deepest defpair. An event, which a leries of upwards of ten years has not been able to reconcile me to the remembrance of, without piercing my breast with the most ineffable grief; as a proof of which, my nerves tremble., and my heart aches, whilst I am going to narrate it to you. It was as follows:
Being going out one morning, I bad stopped at the street door of our heufe tor fome moments, till my maid ran back for my fnust-box, which I had forgot to put in my pocket. She hau no Sooner
2٥o The MEMOIRS of entered the houfe, than an ill-looking, shabbv boy afked me, " If Mr. Williams was at home ?’r I anfwered, " No and then afked him what he wanted with that Gentleman ? He faid, " He had a letter Sor him, which he was charged to deliver into no hands but his own.” I found mySelf instantly Seized with a Spirit of curiofity, which was very uncommon in me on fuch an occasion, and which I can, therefore, no way account for, un٠ lefs I was excited to it Srom the figure of the boy, and the oddity oS the letter, which was Solded in the aukwardest manner, and directed in a hand that was hardly legible. Whatever might be my motive, it is certain, that I was determined both to know its contents, anci Srom whom it came : I therefore took it out of the boy’s hand, Saying. " Child, you may depend upon it, that I will take care of the letter, and give it into my master’s own hand, when he comes home at which the boy looked rather Surprized, but teeing that I was in poffession of it, he only made me a bow, and went away. The letter, I Sound, was Sealed with a wafer, which was not quite dry, I thereSore opened itwitheaSe, when, returning into the houSe, 1 hastened to read it. Its contents were to this purnoSe, viz " That the ptrfun Srom whom it came, affured Mr. Williams, that had she followed her own inclinations, she would have flown on the wings oS love to his arm؛, on the first Summons she had received from him ; but that, notwithstanding she had shewn mother Paris all his letters in which he had made her fuch great offers, yet she could neither by her tears, nor intreaties, prevail on the old woman to conSent to part with her, and that without her per mission she durst not attempt to leave her, as she knew well enough, Srom Sevtial instances of the kind which had happened,
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	201
that slae would have found out a means of making her repent it, either fooner or later ؛ but, at Lst, it pleaSed God, (she Lys,) to releafe her, by con^ ve؛ting the he^rt of Mrs. Paris, v.'jio was tia^ned Janletiifl, and had left off tratle. She, thereto؛e, hnding herfelf free, went immediately to .his Banker, ١v؛th the draught he had lent her, which was infiantly paid, and stre Set out directly fo.r Marfeilles, where she way■ that moment arrive؟, at fuch an inn, in fuch a street, and there y aited, with the utmost impatience, for the joy of cla.fp-ing him with rapturd to her bolom 0؛ which she added sbme expressions, that were ratb؟rmor۶ teniler than decent, and ends with signing herlelf,
" his ever affectionate, PatimeP
I laeg you, Adelaide, to judge of tire ؛tuiition I was in,-after having peruSed tins letter : l ire know-, ledge that, he was going to keep a rnisttefs in forni) that it was a preiw. ditated thing, and that that mif-treSs was.a pupil of motlrer Paris’s, we؛e ؟ircum-stances of the most alarming nature. I torefaw-that the c.nfequence of this conraexlon would in-fallibly be the rdinboth of himfelf and me أ I was fensicle'of the expensivenefs of thy acquisition he had made.andknew very well what must be the end of it ; at tlie fame time that it wasout ol my power to bring any remedy to tbeevils winch thre؛ter.e،l me ; fGr I was but too well convinced, that should 1-have attempted.،, have complained to Mr. w/l٠ Hams of his ill treatment of me, or ventured to re-monstrate,. thougli in the gentlest terms, on tlie in-delicacy of his conduct, he- would with plea؛ur؟. have Seized that, opportunity of throwing, off all! difguife, and most probably would have Lit rue to cohfole myfelf under my afflictions as 1 though؛ proper. In this dreadful dilemma, I remained E؛;	Some
202 The MEMOIRS of fome time abSorbed in thought; when, recollect.-؛ng that I might be Surprized by my hushand in that situation, l roufed myfelf, and re-fealed the letter, then put it into my pocket, determining not to let him know I had read it, at least at that time. As Soon as he came home, I prefented it to him, Saying, " That a little d؛rty boy had brought it:” On his breaking the wafer, I Saw him look consisted, though I don’t believe he knew the hand at first, or he would have turned his back, and not have opened it before me : As he perceived who it was from, he stepped, by stow degrees, from me, till he arrived at the window, where, having recovered himSelf a little from the furprize the having received fuch a note from my hand had given him, he laid tome, " This ■letter, my Dear, is about bufinefs of conScquence; !must, therefore, go to the perfons with whom it is to be trnnSacted, ant! sh.il؛ probably not be able to re١ urn to ؛firmer :״ So Saying, he put on his hat, made me a low bow, and, with a Smile, went cut.
I was now left alone to ruminate, at leifure, ©n the horrors of my fate. I had hitherto vainly hoped, that time, and an invariable adherence to a conduct, ’Ahicb, with regaid to my husband, I conceived ؟to be without a fault, would, in the end, have restored him to reafon. and, by that means, have reconciled him-to virtue ؛ but now that he was connected with a girl, whole every taste, probably, corresponded with his own, and whofe interest it would be to annihilate in his heart any the least [park of affection, which might be found there, towards his wife ؛ nay, excited by Ker caresses or threat؟, I did not doubt but that he would be Soon brought to brave, what thofe kind of women call prejudice, by throwing off the ma.Sk,. ahd publicly avowing their infamy : Efnecialiy as
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	203
we were (unfortunately for me) in a country, wher؟ Such an irregular conduct, is only termed gallantry, and is, indeed, generally looked upon at being almost a neceffary ingredient in the formation of that inchanting creature called a Fine Gentleman. I trembled at the profpect which lay before me; I Saw the labyrinth I had got into, but could nomfind the clue which could lead me out of it. " Ah ! cried I, in! an agony of grief, Where is now my good friend, Mr. Smith, to fup-port me under the weight of my afflidtions !״ Afterhaving, for fome time, given way to my Sorrow, I found it neceffary to SuppreSs it for the present, for which reafon I ordered the Servants to Serve the dinner when ready, as their master would not dine at home : I therefore fat down to it by mySelf; 1 even strove to eat, but that was out of my power. I pasted the afternoon in a state difficult to be defcribed. The evening came, but no Mr. Williams ؛ eleven, twelve, one o’clock struck, yet I heard no news of him ؛ at last I rung׳ the bell, and told my maid that I would go to bed, and So might all the Servants, as their master was gone into ·the country, and had Said, that if he did not come home early, he should not return till the next day. When the girl had undreffed me, I bid her leave the room ؛ Saying, that I would put out the candle mySelf. She accordingly retired, and I Sat up till three, still hoping that my husband would reSpect me enough to Save appearances, and not expoSe himSelf to the Servants. I deceived mySelf, however, for 1،did not See him till the next day at noon ; when, with his fine hair disbevekd, his eyes Swelled out of his head, and his ruffles all stained with claret, he entered my dressing-room, faying, " My dear 1 beg your pardon, but I have been amongst a Sett of mad fellows, who have
204 The MEMOIRS of kept me up all night a drinking, which I hate.” faid he, gaping and stretching himielsi The figure he then made excited my pity ؛ and the litt e arts his vices reduced him to the necessity of making ufe of, almost railed my contempt ؛ yet I was plea fed toJind, that he had still delicacy enough left to wish to conceal his faults from me ; I therefore accepted the exeufe, and, with a half fmile,, told him, ٠٠ That I could not be So cruel as to upbraid him, since his crime, I perceived, had brought its punishment along with it ٠ Sor I thought he looked very ill.” He replied, " T hat he was So in reality, and would therefore go and lay down upon the bed for an hour or two, ٠n hopes that a little sleep would compoSe his head,, and do him good.”
From this period, during a Series of Some months, I never Saw him but he was either in l!quorr cr in inch a state of low Spirits and ill humour, as rendered it impossible for me, either to do or fay any thing to pleafe him ; nay, I often thought that the very sigh، of me irritated his bile, and made him crofs; and perhaps that might be the reaSon why he was So much from me; for he very Seldom lay at home, and, unleSs Sometimes by chance,! hardly ever Spent a quarter of an hour in his company. At my desire we had long slept in Separate apart, ments: Tod؛SguiSe the real reafon for my making this request, 1 alledged, " That the late hours he kept disturbed me; and that when he was a little heated with wine, it was much more eligible to Sleep alone, than to be tumbled into my bed by two footmen, which had been Several times the caSc ” To thefe arguments he brought no manner of opposition, but, on the contrary, acknowledged them just, and readily agreed to my prepo-
٥	Sal،
Mrs. W ILHAMS.	20$
fal. I believe he thought I never reafoned better in my life, than I did at that moment.
I found myftlf now as much dilengaged, and nay time as much my own, as if I had not been married; a situation which, to fome of my Sex would, I make no doubt, have had its charmsy but it had none Sor me ; I was too wretched to relish public places, cards 1 disiiked, and visits ofce-remony had ever been my aversion ; thus disqualified for entering into the gay world, I Spent most ٥S my time with my books at home, as I Seldom went out, un.eSs it was to ice ore or two of my nearest neighbour؛؛» amongst whom there was a widow lady, of about forty years of age, a fenfi * ble, uell.breel woman; her name was Madam Bertram \ she had !pent her youth between Paris and Versailles ; her hushand was a lieutenant-general, and, on his death, she had retired to the place of her birth, which was Marseilles, This lady had conceived a friendship for me, and ufed frequently, by her lively and agreeable conversation, to dissipate, at least in Some meafure, the chagrin which devoured me : She would often, good-humouredly, chide me Sor being Such a reclufe, but never enquired into the realons which induced me to be fo ; this prudent reierve of her’s endeared her to me; Sor, as 1 never could have brought mySelf to reveal my hushand’؟ iaults, ue must nrobablv have quarrelled, had she been more in-quifitive: However, 1 believe she had too much penetration not to gutSs at the caufe of my melancholy.
One day, when our conversion had taken a moral turn, she Said, " Thar, according to her ap-prehenfion of things, she thought that the falfe prejudices we imbibed in our infancy, hke Original Sin. were the true tauSesof our luture mifery ;
206	The MEMOIRS of
for, (continued she) we are always hearing that fuch a road leads to happinefs 5 that if we do fo and fo, we shall be as happy as the day is long. Thus happinefs is always pointed out to us as a gaol to which numbers daily arrive, when, tn fact, there is no Such thing to be found on earth ؛ nor in my fnteiXit as^an appendage 0؟ his creature, Man ؛ but on the contrary, has made this world a state of probation, in which he is, from his Sufferings and fortitude in bearing them, to merit a better existence hereafter. Now, (continued she) were we to begin life with this idea, the truth of which experience will infallibly teach us, I am of opinion that we should revolt lefs against misfortune when they befel us, and rejoice more heartily at any agreeable event which might arrive, than we do af prefent, whilst we think happinefs attainable, and that we are injured if it does not fall to our lot. Another great error of the human mind, (faid she,) is, that we fuppofe our nature to be Lore perfect than it is, and confequently wonder that any one should ufe us ill; that they should, under themaafk of friendship and benevolence, betray and injure us, is matter of astonishment to our fenfesj when just entered upon the stage of hfe;٠، ؛ avoid which, 1 think La Bruyere’s,or,rather, The-ophrajlus's maxim, should be early taught young 8^؛themfeWes^aVd tlifVegard of Jhers’؛ they were
8’.1.؛v١١״ ·؟
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	207
made fo؛ it is their nature; one might as welt be angry at the stone for falling, or the sire SoraScend-ing.״I easily perceived the drift of my friend’، diS-courfe, and told her, I jaegged leave to obferve, " That La Bruyer’s characters were fometimes painted too strong, and alu ays traced by the hand of miSanthropy.”· She replied, " That perhaps the colouring might Sometimes be too high, but that thecanvas was always truth.”
About this time there arrived at Marfeilles, on his road to Italy, a young English Nobleman, of an agreeable figure and genteel addreis: I had known him a boy in England ؛ he claimed acquaintance with me, and, in conSequence, paid me a visit, which Mr. Williams returned, and allured his Lordship, that both himfelf and wife would always be glad of the honor of his company ؛ accordingly he came very of ten to our houfe. both by invitation and without. I obferved, that Mr. Williams affected to leave his Lordship and me together as much as possible, and would even frequently find an excuSe Sor being from home, when he had invited this young Nobleman to dinner, and I knew nothing of it, till I Saw him enter the room. A repetition of this Sort oS behaviour began to struck me, as I thought I Saw by it, that my hushand wisbed me to have an intrigue, or at least the reputation of having one, with this young Gentleman. Alarmed by this SuSpicion, I determined to be upon my guard ; in order to which, I gave orders, the next day, that I would never he at home to Lord-----, but when Mr. Wil-
liams was at home. By this means, his Lordsbip had been Srequently retuSed the door; when one day my husband Said to me, " I am just come Srom
Lord ------, who complains much that you are
always out. ] told his Lordsbip, hemustbemiS-
2oS The M E M o I R s o f taken, for I really believed there was not a woman־ in France who stayed half So much at' home asyou did:” Then looking at me, he added, " How happens-t'his־. Madam ?" I replied, اء It is very eahly accounted Sor, Sir ; fince your being always out, makes me careStrl of the vifitors I receive at' home ;, and I have therefore determined to admit none but thofe wlao are of my own Sex, when you are abfent, that I may, at least, not draw upon mySelf the cenfufe of the world.” " My God, what a prude you are grown 1 (exclaimed he.1 Why, one would think you had laeen educated in Spain 1” a Tlrere was a time (I anfwered, with ؛(sigh) when fuch a rtferved conduct w^uld have bech (if not ridiculous), at least unneceffary.; but· when a woman has the misfortune to be neglected by the object of her affections, the worl؛ is apt to fUppofe, that she will feckeither her. confolation or revCnge in forming another attachnient ; now as this manner of shewing my fcnsibility of tlie in^ jury is both foreign to my principles and heart, I ،hall ufe all the precautions In my power to prevent its being attrilauted to me.״ Here I pauffcd ؛, he, whistling, faid,." You are your own mistrefs, Ma-dam, and tlierefore may do what you pleafe ؛ I. irave no notion of restraining any body’s inclinati-ons, not ״أل and fo faying,, he went out of the room. A few days aSter tlris, Mr. Williams told me, tlrat Lord - would Sup with us that, evening ٠٠ و And, in order not to woynd your Su-nerlative delicacy, Madapi, (Says he,) I will most. Certainly be at home.” 1 replied, " It was very well j” adding, " tlrat I thought his Lordship a very agreeable, entertaining companion, and sho١؟d be always glad to See him., when I could do it with propriety.” In the aSternoon Lord :: came, dccOrding to appointment, and 1־.ة r. IVilliams was
Mrs. WILLIAM S.	209
at home to receive him. The former part of the evening past agreeably enough, till, unfortunately,
I happened to have the head ach, and foolishly faid, laying my hand upon my forehead, " Good God, I wish my head w as cfi, it athes fo, that it makes me quite slupid !”‘,·Cod forbid, (exclaimed Lord
----,) I would not have it hurt for a thoufand
pounds ؛ there are very few to be found So well constructed as it is.” 1 fmilingly replied," Your Lordship is very obliging, to iet So great a value upon it; but I, who am better acquainted with it than you are, and know its deSects, think it of very little confequence whether it is off, or on.” Mr. Williams obftrved, ٠٠ That he did not believe any woman’s head could be worth five pounds; and that their whole perfon could never amount to the value cf the Sum his Lordship had Set upon my head only.” This he Said, laughing. My Lord replied, in the Same tone,<، Why, Mr. Williams, I am Sure you would not be willing to part with, your Lady Sor a thouSand pounds, though you would Seem to hold her in So little estimation.״ " Indeed, my Lord, but I would, (anfwered Mr. Williams,) and that with all my heart j as I, at j refent, want money, much more than I do my wife.” The manner in which rr؛y hushand Spoke thefe words piqued me to the foul ؛ and I felt my c !seeks glow with rcfentmcnt 2nd indignation : I laid nothing, however > but, arising from my feat, went to the window. " You would be very forte to be taken at your word,” (faid Lord —..
to Mr. Williams, continuing the conversation.) " Not in the least, (replied the latter,) and, as a proof that 1 am in earnest, 1 will, this moment, ring Sor per, ink, and paper, and confirm, under my hand, the exchange 1 offered you.” He then rang the bell : Lord ---looked iurprized, yet
٠2io	The MEMOIRS of
still (I believe) thought him in joke. When the fervant brought the paper,·&c. Mr. Williams faid, (t Well, nay Lord, do you diaw upon your Banker for a thoufand pounds, and l will give you a formal renunciation of all my right and title to the perSon of my wife, in your favour, to w hich I will fet mv hand and Seal ״؛ which accordingly he did ;
and Lord ------ prefented him with the draught
for the money. I fat all this while stupvsied with astonishment at this extraordinary Scene, and once interrupted them hy Saying," That Mi. Williams's having renounced all right and title to me, could not make me become the property of another, but only left me mistrefs of mySelf. ’ T his I Said between anger and jest, not being able to conceive my hushand could possibly be ierious in Such an affair; I, therefore, expected every moment to See the papers flung into the fire, and the farce finish ; but how was I amazed, when I Saw Mr. Williams put the note into his pocket, and, advancing towards me, take my hand, which he immediately attempted to put into Lord — s, Saying, " There, Madam, I resign you to that Gentleman, hoping that he will make you a better hushand than I have done.” I drew my hand, with precipitation, Srom him, and, looking in his face with an air of anger and contempt, Said, ،٠ BaSe, and inhuman man؛ you have, indeed ruined both my peace and fortune, but my honor s my own, and whilst I pr.eferve it unfulbed, I flatter myfelf that it will raife me above your insistent ufage of me, as well as the bufe machinations, you have, and may hereafter make ufe of, in order to level me with yourSelf, and your dirty connections.” " As to you, my Lord, (I faid, turning to him,) 1 ana Sensible, that as a man of gallantry, you could not refuie a Lady, when she was offered
211	.Mrs. WILLIAMS
to you i I therefore have no repro۶ches to make yoU upon the f'ubject, especially as I have a right was ٣ to hope, that your Lordihip’s opinion of of a nature, not to admit of a thought injurious you looked ؛I therefore Suppofe, tha ؛ to my honOr past,.as ؟upon the ridiculous fcene, which has ju 1 did,, comme unjeu d’enfansjl shall m۶st certain-money ؟ly take care, tliat your draught for th shall be returned to you to-morrow morning., Rnd
{٢ءبهلاالص will oblige me, by ؟؛بآ؛ل٠٢مإ beg٠y٠t)r إ
؛0ا,ing any part of tlais foolish, .unguarded action Mr. miliums, to tranSpire.” He gave me his and.then. With أ ord oS honor that he woirld not׳١١ ؛’prelented me with my hushand ,־a reSpCctful bow ؟p ; at th؛sLordsh؛deed of conveyance of me to h r؟fame time protesting to me, " That a right 0V my persbn, without having an Interest in my heart, was art honor to which he had never aipired; he ؛0 assure me, shat he h١؛ thereforebegged leave which could ؛never preSumed to have a though give the Smallest wound to my delicacy; add-hat he hoped I would ha٢e the good-؛ " ,ing ؛؛e؛on flis having been the inno؛a١؛ 0؛ ١s؛ne I replied, ؛cauSe oS giving me pain. To whic " Lhat I did not think his Lordship in the o had, no،־least to blame.” Mr. Williams, wl s؛doubt, listened to tliis conversation, when It w eaSe ؛0 ' to appear with his uSualair r؛and gaiety, birt I cCuld perceiye, that the )latt rded him much en-؟part of the fcene had not aff ١ve،! as me, : ءءا :٤;־tertainment. Lord n and therefore very prudently went away, altnost as
Soon as Supper was over.
When h‘e was gone, I Sat mySelS down in an hushand, whom I ashed in a ؛elbow chair, opposite m .* Childrens play
212 The 1لآ E M o I R s of'
Calm, but firm voice, ‘.'How he would haveactcss was he in'my place, and had just been treated itr the ignominious manner׳ I had been ?'٠ He looked Surprized at the question, and then anfwered, care-leSsly, " Why 1'should have gone with-Lord-.” ل replied, ٠٠ I dare tay yeu whiild.” I then told him, that 1؛ must insist on his giving me the note־ Sor thethoufand pounds, inorder that I might Send' itback early in the morning to his Lordship: He reSuSed it Saying, " That lie wanted the money now, and would, pay it at his leifure.״' I endea-voured to shew him both the meanneSs and impro-priety ofSiach a proceeding: He anfwered,ءء That Necessity had no Law ; and that Ire must eitlaer have that money, or go to prifon.” 1-Lid, flook¿ ing at him, and shaking my head) ٠٠ Unhappy,-mistaken, man ! thefe are thedifficulties into which vice plunges all her votaries. Do you think, (con-tinued I) that the companions of y.our riots־, SoF whoSe fakes you have Sacrificed your health, repu. tation, and fortune, ١vi11 either assist or consble you in the hour of adversity' and affliction ?No, believe me, Mr. Williams, a vicious heart is equally inca-pable of pity, as of generosity ؤ anil friendship is the offspring oS virtue alone : Lon’t, therefore, flatter yourSelf that you'have any friend to apply to in your prefent distrefsi the wortfiy. part of your acquaintance will think- it unpardonable to Support' you in the purluit oS your debaucheries؛ and the. others will fly Srom the man, cvfio can no longer gratify their appetites ؛ even your Fatima's love of you, IS not, I fancy, of that refined nature, as to stand the test of poverty and a prifon. There was a time, Mr. Williams) when to me the det'erts of Libya, or the most loathfomejail, would have been, divested of their terrors, by the charms of your Society ... but a long '!'cries- of Offerings, and ill
Mrs. WILLIAM,2.3	.؟
؛.־eatmcnt, have at last, restored me, in fome mea-fure, to reafon ٠, or rather, perhaps, I am obliged to defpair Sor Some part of my cure .٠ For whilst I had the least 'remaining hope of reclaiming you by my patience and tenderneSs, I Suffered Srom every neglect, or unkind look of your’s, pangs which vour unfeeling heart can never know ; but as Soon as I was convinced, to demonstration. that vou had renounced every virtue which adorns hurmnitv, and adopted every vice which dishonours it, 1 ceafed attempting to stem the torrent; ar.H, turning my eyes inward, fought peace in my own breast, Since I tound it denied me every where elfe. I never meant to upbraid you Mr. Williams, nor should do it now, only to justify the step lam going to take, which is that of ieparating myfelf from you ; your contemptuous neglect of me, would never have induced me to have left you but lam now convinced, that my honor is not Safe in your hands; therefore the duty I owe both to mySelf and family, obliges me to leave your roof, and to Seek an afylum in the arms of my relations and triends in England.״
Here I ended this long harangue, to which he made no kind of anfwer, either by Sign or word, but fat silent, looking attentively at the sire؛ So finding he did not chufe to talk, I took one of his hands, and putting it to my mouth, I kiffed it, laying, with a sigh, which rent my bofom, ٠٠ Good night, my once dear George.״ I then hastened out of the room as quick as I could, for fear he should perceive, i١y my falling tears, how talfely 1 had boasted of an infensibility, my heart was, in reality, a stranger to, with regard to him. I now went to bed. but not to steep., I revolved in my mind all that had pasted that evening, and was wea؛c
enough
2t4 The MEMOIRS of enough to upbraid myfelf for having Spoke to my husband, in terms, which, I feared, might have given him pain ; it is true, I had determined to leave him, but then, bySodoing, I was thoroughly perSuaded, that I sbould caufe him no uneasineSs; for which reafon, I was at ·a loSs to find out to what I ought to attribute his obstinate Silence, during the whole time that I was telling him of hisSaults; in sbort, I was apprehensive that I had both offended and vexed him, and that thought kept me upon the rack till morning, when I Sent me Jove to him, and desired to know how he did ? My maid returning Said, " Madam, my master has not been in bed last night, nor has he ever quitted the parlour since you left him in it, and I think he looks like death,” continued the girl. “ Good God, (I replied.) is it possible I What can be the matter with him ? How does he do? What did he fay ?” All thefe questions I afked in a breath ؛ to which my maid anfwered, " Madam, my master fends his love to you, thanks you for your obliging enquiries after his health, and fays he is as well as he ever wisbes to be, and bid me give you this paper, desiring you to difpofe of it as you sball think proper.” On looking at it, I found it was Lord
٠----'s draught for the thoufand pounds, which I
immediately Sealed up, with a compliment, and Sent to his Lordsbip. I then wentto visit my huf-band : I found him writing ; upon which I hesitated a moment at the door, being doubtful whether I ought to interrupt him or rot ; when, perceiving me, he (aid in a faint voice, " Come in, Madam, I have now no fecrets u hich I would wisb to conceal from you.” He got up and reached me a chair ؛ when we were both feated, " Mrs. Williams., (fays he,) I was writing to my father, giving him an account of the reafons and cauSes oS this
ةل2	.Mrs. WILLIAMS
-eg, M٩؛ our fatal Separation from eacli otlier. I. dam, that you will be fo obliging as to deliver it yourSelf into my father’s own hand, as it will en-pi-؟ s ؛uothe؛ iirely exculpate you, in la is and my which they ؛0 ,n my conduct־nion, of an)' errOrs i this is now tire ؛ may have tllought you the autlror 0 make؛ uy power؛ mains in؟-. only reparation that for all the injuries'I have, done you Charlotte٠ ,؛yoi ؛.and which are much more numerous tlran yotr ”؛ hem to be؛ uppoSe؛ generous nature ever could s,؟0 his ey؛ fo Saying, lie put his handkerchief he ؛ which, I could perceive,' very Sull of water d been writ-؛h ؟then preSented to me tlie letter h ime. to؛ ing to his father, desiring me, ۶t the Sa،me redd it : I did iG : It coOtained a minute detail of all tire falsities which lie had told him, and flis mo-being the sble au. ؛0 ther, of me, accusing himfelf thor of all the indiscretions which he had committ-lie then shoas tlrem ho.v ؛ ed since his marriage ntreaties؛ contraryjo my opinion, nay, even to.my our ؟.een sine؛ s conduct had؛the greatest part of h .enc٠؛unio.n ; he proceeds to praife my pyudence, ۶a c. and thCn flies out into invectives against his¿ father, upbraiding him with being the original cauSe of Iris ruin! Irom Iris penury, by always straitening him in his circumstances in the first ؛ar؟ place, and in the Second, by engaging him to w'ith Inis wiSe, who was the.most perfect model oS ־.?.human perfection 5 he tells him, that now the me Iris Sollies, as well as his calamities, are ־Sure of Sull i that liSe is no longer Supportable, .since, he lias lofl dl which rendered it desirable, his belov-ed Charlotte j he begs he would obServe, that he now renounces all tiCs oS blood Sor tlie Suture, with a' man wlao has brought all his misfortunes upon him. as well as all Sorts oS connexion whatSoeyer, -or any oShis family j he then re ־,r with him؛t،i؛e
216 The MEMOIRS of commends me strongly to his care and protection and ends, by bidding him farewell for ever.
I cannot paint to you, my dear Adelaide٠ my af-tonishment, on having perufed this extraordinary composition, which, as Soon as I had read, Mr. Williams Sealed and delivered to me, with a look of ineffable tenderneSs and contrition. I was at a loSs what to think of this fcene; I knew my hu٢-band to have a great Heal of art. and l did not think this luddcn change of Sentiment and conduct very natural, as I was thoroughly convinced, that he had long ceafed ٠o love me. I took the letter, however, faying, " l found myfelf much edified at Iris candour and generosity, but that I begged he would beheve me to be incapable oS making uSe of them to his difadvantage ؛ (adding,) that the approbation of my own heart, I hoped, would be Sound fussicient to Support me thro’ the painful conflict I must Suffer, in parting with him, as well ٠ as the conSequences it might be attended with. I Said, I could never think of raising my own fame on the ruins of his, and therefore should make no uSe of the letter he had just given me.” I now begged of him to go to bed: He looked wildly at me, and anfwered, " Yon are too good, Charlotte: Why do you concern yourSelf about Such a lost wretch as I am ?” I affured him, that on his health and welSare, depended, in a great meaSure all my Suture peace j 1 therefore intreated In n, for my fake, to take care of himSelf., and to let roe conduct him into his room ; Sor, in truth, he looked as if he was hardly able to stand, grief and want of sleep had So Satigued him. At last he complied and I led him up stairs, where, after having aided him to pull off his coat, he got into bed. 1 then drew the curtains round him, and Sit mvlclt down on a chair by his bedside, as I really thought him
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	27ل
ااا. Hefeemed much agitated, and could not get fo sleep. I took hold of his hand feveral times, and SoUnd it hot ؛ I now grew apprehensive that he was going to have a violent fever, I therefore Sent immediately Sor a Physician, who, on sbeing him, ordered he should be bled directly. Saying, u He Sound his pulfe very irregular and feverish.’* Draughts, dec. were presbribed. I never quitted Mr. Williams all that day, or the Sollowing night؛ he raved a good deal about Fatime, called her all Sorts oS names, the most injurious he -could think of fometimes, and then he would fancy her with him, and talk to her in terms of the tenderest kind; in short, he continued light-headed with the violence of the fever, till the fourth day af--ter his laeing taken ill; when, towards the morn-ing, he steptquietly for two liours, and thenawak-ed, feemingly much calmer and cooler tlaan he had been since the beginning of his illnefs.
During all this interval of time, my mshd was a perfect chaos : Grief, pity, refentment, love, reafon, and passion, were all at war in my breast. I had no friend to confulti none to whom I could unbosbm the sbrrows wliich oppreffed me, and from whofe Salutary counfel I might have hoped to have Sound conSolation. I therefore looked up to Heaven, begging his aid, who is tlie never fail-ing comSort of his afflicted creatures, when they addreSs him with a heart Sree from guilt. Suclr was mine. Mr. Williams now grew visibly better. 1 must not forget to tell you, that during the coursb of his indisposition. Several letters laad been Sent to him by his mistrefs, which, now he was reco-vering, I ventured to give him ؛ and, in order that he might read them with the more conveniency. I ׳retired to tlie other end of the room. After hav-ing peruSed, them, ،ae called me to him : I went ذ
2،8 The MLMOIRS OF He took my hand, and, grafping it tenderly, she faid, witlr a voice of defpair, " I fee I am undone., past recovery, since you can give me thefe letters without any emotion. To what a degree of con--tempt and indifference must :1 be fallen in youropi-nion, when you can be thus infensible on Such an occasion ?״ I replied, " That uSe reconciled one to the greatest misfortunes ؛ (adding,)-that since I had lofl his heart, it was ..very .immaterial to me who poffeffed it.״ " Crue.1, inhuman Charlotte, (continued he,) you injure me ! -I never ceasbd one moment to love you ؛ but an unpardonable levity in my nature, wlrich has beeia strengthened by the prejudices of a falfe education, laave, together, con-tributed to.lead nay Senfes into eirors my heart has ever been a stranger to. No, no, my lovely, my ever dear girl, (continued he, pulling me irpon the bed to him,) lay all that Saints liold facrcd, you are, and ever was, tlie only and Sole mitlrefS of my heart.’' I struggled to difengage myfelf from his arms, which, witia sbme difficulty, I accom-plished, and releated myfelf on a-chair by his bed-fide. He now began, in the most patlietic terms, to implore nay forgivenefs of all the wrongs I had Suffered ؛ when, to shew me the thorough contri-lion lie had, Sor liaving fo cruelly inflicted them on me, he confeffed all the errors of his past life i amongst wliich, as lie hatl before well obferved, there were many which I should never have fuf-pected him to have been guilty of : His intrigue with Mils Beauford was not omitted, nor were thofe witli twenty otlier Miffes, wlioSe names .1 have forgot ؛ and I am glad of it, fince it is not my intention loexpofe tliem. When he had ended his confession, which was long, and charged with the most ridiculous events, I told him what I knew of his intimacy with Mtfs Beauford; at wliich he
Mrs. WILLIAMS. 219 appeared Surprized, as he had never Sufpected my having any Sufpicion of it. He now made the warmest encomiums on my discretion and goodneSs, at the Same time accusing himfelf of being the un٠ worthiest oS mankind ; he faid he was a reptile, not deServing the honor of crawling at my feet ; he begged me to crush him at once, by denying him pardon, and So put an end to all his tor·، ments, as he neither could, nor would, live without me. He Swore he was absolutely determined, that very day, to Send Fatime back to Paris, protesting, that he should never more be able to bear either her sight or name, since she had. at least in a great meafure, been the caufe of his losing his dearest wife; he Jamented his past crimes, declared his abhorrence of them, and vowed a future amendment. In short, there was not an art he left uneffayed, in order to move my tenderneSs, companion, and humanity; he knelt, wept, Swore, intreated, menaced his own life, and, in a word, wrought upon my affections So forcibly, that I Sunk into his arms, forgave him all his past Saults, and, Srom a motive of generosity, burnt his letter tohis father, as well as the deed of gift he had
made of me to Lord--------، in order that there
should be no vestiges remaining, which were in my power to destroy, of his former ill conduct. From this period, he became the fondest, tender-est, Soberest of hushands ; he Sent away his mit-trefs as he had promiied, with an intention, as I firmly believed, never to fee her more, and without having taken leave of her, as he allured me.
I have been fo totally *abSorbed in the narration ©f this interesting part of my history, Adelaide, as to have Sorgot informing you, that, not long after our arrival at MarfeHles, I had received a letter from Sir Charles Stanly, to acquaint me, that So-
220 The MEMOIRS o f phie and he were one. My Sister, too, wrote upon the occasion. She tells me, that her preSent happineSs is So gieat, that she can hardly perfuade herSelf oS its reality, Amidst all my Sorrows this event gave me pleaSure.
I now return to that part of my story Srom whence I broke off. It was six weeks or two months, since Mr. Williams's reformation, when one evening, that he and I were alone, (which now frequently happened, at his own desire,) I obferved to him, that I thought he was graver than ufual؛ he replied, with a sigh, ٠* I was reflecting on the enormity, as well as abfurdity, of my past conduct, my Dear.” I was going to reply, when he continued, faying, " but I am fufficientiy punished for my faults, by the feverity with which I now feel the confequences of them.” Here I mterupted him, by afking, with trepidation, ؛٤٠ If any misfortune had befallen him ?”	" None, but fuch as I have
drawn upon myfelf, (fays he ؛) since, in order to Support my follies and extravagancies, I am involved under fuch a load of debt, as will be impossible for me to extricate myfelf from, unlefs I go over to England, and fo remit the money from thence; and even this I cannot do, unlefs my creditors will take my promissory notes for their fecurity, till I can pay the money, and that I am ■afraid they will never be brought to confent to ; as, when once I am out of the kingdom, they have nothing to rely on but my honor, for the payment of their bills ; there is, however, (continued he,) nothing left for it, but to try them ؛ if they come into the propo. fal, why well; if not, apitiol must decide the bust neSs: for I neither can, nor will, ever iubmit to be crammed into a French jail, by fuch rafcals,” ٠٠ Alas! (cried I, turning my eyes up to Heaven) am I then never to know peace! How can you
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	221
talk in fuch a manner, Mr. Williams ? You frighten me almost out of my fenfes J" Here he took hold of my hand, Saying, ״ The Sorrows my indiscretions have brought upon you, my good girl, are infinitely more afflicting to me, than any of my own؛ there, there, (Said he,) is the wound,” (striking his breast with his hand, in a Seeming agony.) I now uSed every argument in my power toconSole him ; I begged he would immediately endeavour to get leave of his creditors, to go over to England, promifing them proper Security for their money in a limited time after his arrival there. He told me. that he would call them together the next day. and offer the propoSal to them. I then begged of him to make his mind as eafy as he could, affuring him, t( That my happinefs was centred in the pol-Seffion of his love and Sriendship, and that whilst I enjoyed them, I was invulnerable to all the attacks of adverSe fortune..' He replied, " 1 hat I was in every thing the delight and conSolation of his life.”
Two days aSter this conversation Mr. Williams acquainted me, " That he had now an opportunity of fettling his affairs with the people he owed money to, but (added he) it is upon a condition of io cruel a nature, that I do not know whether I had not rather go to prifon than comply with it ٠, nay, I have a great mind, (taid he, starting up from the chair he was sitting on,) to go to them this moment and tell them, that they may do their worst; when letting himfelf fall gently into his Seat again, he Said, (in a Soft, plaintive voice,) they shall not oblige me to give up what is dearer to me than life, or liberty, I mean your company my dear Charlotte ٠* My company, (I replied,) Mr. Williams ! what can my company have to do with your creditors?” ..." Why, my love, (faid he) the fellows I have
222 The MEMOIRS of to deal with, are a pack of mechanical Scoundrels*, who have no notion of taking a Gentleman’s word؛ for which reafon, they yesterday, at a meeting we had, unanimousty agreed, that, unlefs I left you, nay Angel, behind me, as a pledge Sor my return, they would never conSent to my quitting the town, much leSs the kingdom ; but, I am absolutely determined never to comply with this, their unreasonable propoSal, (faid my hushand.) and So I know what I have to expect.״ Here he ceaSc-d Speaking, .and looked at me, as if he wisbed me to give my Sentiments upon the Subject. I did So, by telling him. " That I was but too Senfible how cruel the Separation Srom him would be to me ; I obServed*. that the being left alone in a foreign country, So many hundred leagues Srom all my friends and relations, wasa painful consideration ;. but in the dreadSul alternative which now prefented itfelf to my view I added, I could not hesitate in the choice, since I most certainly prefered the being miserable mySelf, to the torture of Seeing him So ؛ I thereSore begged of him to go immediately to England, and leave me as a hostage for his honor, since a jail must be the inevitable conSequence of his non-compliance with this article of the convention made with his creditors.” When I had done ،peaking, he caught me in his arms, prefftd me to his bolom, and faid all that Gratitude, Sensibility, and Love could dictate ; admired my generosity, piaifed my fortitude and thanked me at least a thoufand times, Sor the confidence 1 had So nobly placed in him; in sbort, the next day he packed up what was just neceffary tor his journey, and, with only one iervant to attend him, Set off for Paris, from whence he was to go directly to Calais, and So on to London.
1 took leave of Mr. Williams wnh an unuSuaJ depression of Spirits; I fellas iS my Soul was, at
■223 Mbs. WILLI AM Si If gazed ي t, (eyarated from my body؛mome ؛sha ٠i)rr٥I<؛On iim^with unCtterable tenderneSs and f
ئ:¡
.deplorable sTtuo ::؟:و؛ ها٢ع،	,welfare
si س٢ئ٧ج^ «:،nr يحا :٦ء::ع؛ ع · ;؛״؛
إ .credit ٩حإ and with very iittle money, and Hake care؛، ,١cge me؛conjured him to continue to٥ ؛0 of htmieis; and then, holding him fast by. one ٠ةةء’اء":٢ prefied between bf ت his hands,; which
Xt :ةع;؛قج
ةه٠س״اء؛؛؛؟،:؛؟ ية؛ةج;اة:״
٠يئء: :ج٦؛\ل كا٢ع : ؛ ;r؟thepowerof affection, y ٠ءخاه;بtap at my breasl randjt ؛ve۶a feebl؛g
ءذد¡
ذآةع؛۶۶لا?-أأةة ؛ me into ؛reformation had throw vewayto؛ratherfu^gt. S ٠ةي؟؛،؛:ه٦أالء٢2ء؛؛ ؛
pleasing, ؛an ilusiOni which, whilst it lasted, wa than to sUffer prudence to create doubts m my d the pre-؛mind, which mUst infallibly have d,'imp not considering, (as I ought,to ؛ Sent Enjoyment
ةةيقشت:ت
he Who tumbles off a precipice. I have Sound this reflection, however, of- singular Service to me, on iUany occasions sine؟. But to my stery·
As sOon as my hushand was gone, 1 drew my־؟؟ pedces idto as narrow a compals as 1 possibly could.؛ but, as he had left n١e٠ only ten guineas in cash, h؛ tduld not expect it to ث١أ very long., horvever,, as I had ten of my own و which 1 bad iaved, rather ؛h٤n purChaSe a gownewish it (Sor which purpoSe
224 The MEMOIRS of Mr. Williams had given it me,) I flattered myfelf» that, with good oeconomy, I might make this Sum hold out till his return, which he had promifed, and Swore, should be in six weeks at farthest. I was now left at Jeiiure, to revolve over, in my memory, all the occurrences oS my past life, which, in order to do with the more precision, I put them down upon paper; and, it is from thefe papers, that I now collect (in a great meaSure at least) the Sacts which I here narrate to you. Upon examining the tranfactions oS a few months past, I could not avoid condemning, in my own opinion, my too great eafinefsof temper, as well as disinterestedness, on Several occasions. I SoreSaw, with terror, the conSequences which might reSult Srom Such a conduct ; yet I wished to think well of the man I loved, though I could not drfguife to my reafon, that I had acted imprudently, in having placed sb unreferved a confidence in Mr. Williams.
The first letter I received from him was dated Paris; he tells me in it, " That he has only just stopped there to change horfes, Such is his impatience to arrive in England, in order that he may finish his affairs the quicker, and, consequently, return the Sooner to me ؛ Says he is in a violent hurry, and concludes, yours, G. W.”—I thought his stile cool and laconic, but attributed it to his being fatigued, and perhaps preffed Sor time. The next I had from him was dated London ; in it he tells me, " That he finds a great deal of difficulty in raising the money ; that his father is much out of humour with him upon the old fubjedt; and that, in short, he is almost mad, not knowing what in the world to do ; he adds, however, that he is determined to bring the old man to terms by one means or other : Nay, (fays he,) I will !wear that 1 11 fire through my head, if he don’t relieve me:־
M r s. W I L L I A M S.	225
This threat, I fancy, will frighten him out of his money, and then I shall instantly sly to my dear girl, on the wings of affection, as her abfence is the greatest of all evils: He then intreats of me to keep up my fpirits, and promifes not to exceed the fix weeks leave of abfence (as he calls it).” This letter quieted, in Some meafure, my Sears, and a Second, third, and Sourth, of the Same nature, lulled me into perfect tranquillity. The people, to whom he owed money, vifited me frequently, always enquiring when I expected Mr. Williams home ? I read them ieveral paragraphs in his letters, which Seemed to keep them intolerable good humour, and by my treating them always with candour and civility, thev contracted a kind oS ef-teem Sor me, which turned out to be of. Singular Service.
I had now pasted a fortnight without having received a line from my hushand ; when one day, that I was fitting alone, my Sootman came into the room, and preSented me with a packet of letters from England. I immediately Sought for Mr. Williams’s hand, and, having Sound it, Selected it from the rest, my heart palpitating with the hope, that, as his time of abfence was elapfed within a day or two, he would there mention the day he purpofed to return. I broke the Seal with precipitation, and read as follows:
*٠ Madam, I beg, for your own peace, you would Sorget that I am your hushand, as I have forgot tha. you are my wife ; I have done my endeavours to engage your father to take you home to his houfe, but found him abfolutely averSe to any propofal of this kind, nay, indeed, he positively Said he would have nothing to do with you. Now, Madam, as I know you have a great share of stoical philofophy, I sincerely wish it may be of fer.
226 T It E MEMOIRS OF on.. If؛vice to yOu in your prefent critical situa your under ft.?.nding, ؛0 you wili make a proper ufe you may, for aught I know', be much happier than you are ؛ d؛you have ever been since we were un!t theTe qua- ؛)؛٦ agreeable j ا٦ء١؛ ٢١g١؛handfome, y and I أ Jities, yotr cannot fail of finding friends don't counfel you to practife virtues which I my-Self cannot attain to. I am. Madam, your friend,
.and obedient Servant, G. w 0t remit؟Pofijcript. I have no Money, So can ٠٠ ho ;*ever, you may ;;Kvaysde- ١؛ irefent)؛any attt٦ f f؛؛ pend on sharing my fortune with you; .he let its augmentation be ever fo ,؟’it Shall be your -؛s morning; It is no.ma؛٠h^»٤I٥״grear. I leave B
!ج:;ا؛٠ل مق:;٢ث قا:٤ئءا any ١ dtr ^here 1 am gomg
to honor me witb. Will find rne, hy befngdiret-. in the ] cmjle i I ؛ ed to me at — —Eiq foint de tragique, Mail, ·four 1'anr.ur ¿e Dieu١ ٠ د . ma Chere?) j n I imagined؛-oner read this letter, th؟ ad no؛ I he؛ roke crt.fs؛ thatfomebody gave me a violent .״ثلإتء؛ع؛ا ed E؛؟:؟ ten.ng؟؛؟ Lsh of؛؛؛ ,sl;?؛br
ء l i.'nfelefs upon the floor؛l f٠e ؛Ofs my eyes, an؛؛ from this time) till feveral days afterwards,Iknew
naorn- ؛en on؛nothing which happened to me. w١
1 لئ٢ b ״٢؛ ؛،٠٠ ة يءذج؛ة ءؤ؛;ائ.;٠؛اء٠لمing 1 perce
1 .darkifh room, and in bed ق :ي:غا ,fenfe and vvasansivered, by ”? ؛؛Who was the "	ب٠؛)ج
My dear MrS; rnuiams l ٠٠ ,a^ft’femalevoice
ةة؛ةس¡؛
ii¡؛
pleafure, take every imaginable careof you. The
.Bat for Gvdsf.ke, don't be tragfcaf, my Dear ٠
Mrs. WIL L IA M S. 227 confusion of my ideas, joined to the weaknefs of my body, rendered me, at that time, incapable of understanding what my guardian angel Lid to me ٠, I therefore made no reply, (as I have since been tt١1d,١ for then I knew nothing of the matter ؛ the violence of the fever had feized my head, fo that, happily, I felt no idea forcibly enough to give me uneasinefs، I was, during the greatest part of my illnesi, almost continually »steep ; from this state of negative happinefs they cruelly roufed me, by the force of medicine, accompanied with tlie most assiduous and tender care of me: As my health returned, my fenfes, by degrees, recovered their vigour alfo and by that means plunged me again into the deepest defpair. An old Physician of merit, who attended me during my illnefs, told me one day, *٠ He perceived, with infinite concern, that rry difeasi؛ at prefent lay in the mind, and for that reafon, it was out of the reach of his art to cure ; he begged I would-be ray own Doctor, since ؛t was in my power to do myfelf more good in one day, than all the Faculty together, could do in a twelvemonth.״.
I now knew my charitable, kind nurfe, to be my neighbour, Madam Bertram, and, on feeing her stand at the foot of my bed, I afked her, “ How she came there?” She told me. with a fmile, ٠، That she had never quitted my room for a moment, since the day on which I was taken ill, and that she even flept in it, as I might fee if I opened my curtain, as her bed was placed dole to mine.” I then begged of her to narrate to me, what had happened since the moment that 1 had lost my Sen-fes. She told me, " That my maid, going into the parlour, about ten minutes after the footman had delivered the letters tome, found me (as she then thought,) dead upon the floor. The poor
228 The MEMOIRS of girl shrieked out, which brought the other iervanfs؛ to her alsistance؛ they immediately laid you upon a bed, and Sent for a Surgeon, at the fame time that your maid came to me, wringing her hands, and crying out, that she had lost her dear, good mistrefs! The girl frighted me excessively, as you may SuppoSe, (Said Madame Bertram ) I afked her what she meant ? She replied, ٠، Come and See, Madam ; pray come and See my Lady dead״؛ I Sollowed the girl home, where I Sound you, Madam, in the Surgeon’s hands, Seemingly Fife-lefs: He was opening a vein, which bled a little ; he then ordered you to be put to bed, and desired a Physician might immediately be Sent for. He was So. I afked him, " What he thought of you ?’*' He shook his head, and anfwered, " He would tell me more of his mind the next day.” The violence of your fever, together with the delirium. which attended it, alarmed us all, for Several days, eSpeciaily as the Doctors declared you in a very dangerous state. You know the rest, Said my friend, excepting the joy which we all feel on your recovery, which, as we are unable to deScribe, you will ever be ignorant oh”
I had no words which could exprefswhat I felt upon this occasion ; So, having looked at her, I hid my face in the pillow, without Speaking a word. You, my dear Adelaide, are well acquainted with this worthy woman’s name and character, since you have frequently heard me expreis the lively lenfe I still and ever shall, retain of her mater ra؛ care of me. You have alfo often Seen me deplore her loSs with tears. She died, as you have heard me Say, in my arms, of an inflammation in her bowels, six months after she bad Saved my life, by her assiduous attendance on me.
As
Mrs. WILLIAMS. 229
As foon as I was able, I desired I might have thofe letters given to me, which were probably found on the floor, when I fell off my chair, in the fit which had been the caufe of my late indisposition. Madam Bertram faid, " She desired to be excuSed from giving me that, which had, she apprehended, been the author of my illnefs ؛ and I won’t fays she, give you any of the others, if, upon looking on the Superfcriptions, you don’t affure me, that they are not from the fame perSon.” I replied, with a sigh, ‘٠ Ah ! no, no, Madam, there is no danger of my receiving any more letters from that quarter.” On this affurance she gave them to me. There was one from my father, another from Lady Stanly, and a third from my inestimable friend, Mr. Smith. I read the two last but the weak state my nerves were then in, made me afraid to open the first. I expected to find consolation from my friend, and sister; and reproaches mixed with invectives, Srom my father.
Mr. Smith begins his letter, by obierving, " That now, what he had always forefeen would happen, was come to paSs ; my hushand had flung off the maik, and stood confeSs’d the villain.” He informs me, " That Mr. Williams has, by fome well-placed shruggs, hints, and inuendoes, (without. however, accusing me of any thing,) given the world caufe to think, that he had his rea. fons why he could not live with me any longer, consistently with bis nice fenfe oj honourThe good man goes on, informing me, " That Mr. Williams wrote a letter to my father, much in the fame stile as his converiation ; in it he recommends me strongly to his care, and begs that he would take me home to his houfe ؛ insinuating, at the fame time, that it would be the only step which could now b؟ taken, in order to fave me from in-
230 The MEMOIRS of evitable ruin. He then desires, that my father would meet him, on Such a day, at Such an hour, at his Lawyer’schambers, in the Temple, when he would make a Settlement upon me, which should at least Secure me from want. Your father, (continues Mr. Smiths went to the rendezvous, according .0 appointment, when, to his great Surprize, the Lawyer told him, that young Mr. Williams had Set out Sor Holland two days beSore, which was the very day on which he wrote your Sather the letter. Now I beg you, my dear Madam, (Says Mr. Smiths to remark the villainy of Such a proceeding, asalSo to draw this conSequence Srom it, which is, that you will never hear any more from him, nor ever receive a six-pence of him.” He tells me, ‘٠ That, being desirous to■ pry a little into my hushand's conduct, he had employed Some people of intelligence to watch him j and that by this means he Soon came to the knowledge, that Mr Williams had brought over with-him a French girl, whoSe name was Fatime\ that she had been brought to bed whilst they were irv London, and were now gone together, child, nurSer and all, to Holland ״؛ he adds, " that he Saw Mr. Williams whilst he was in England, and had even a long and sharp conversation with him, wherein he nreffed him to declare openly, what he had to alledge against me, in justification of his ill treatment oS me ؛ but he could get no other anSwer from him, than that he wished me well, and had too much generosity to oppreSs thofe who were already wretched enough ; for he Said, he was very much afraid that I should not Suivive his loSs; but that the plain matter oS fact was this, that he could no longer, with honor, live under the Same roof with me.” My good Sriend then inSorms me, ‘٠ That he has inclofed an order on a Banker at Marseilles٠
M r s. W I L L I A M S.	23r
for one hundred pounds sterling, to be paid at fight ;١١ adding, ٠٠ that he desires I would draw upon him for whatever Sums I think p.oper, as he now claims the promiSe I made him before I left England.” He then proceeds to congratulate me on having eScaped out of the bands of Such a١mon-ster, as he calls Mr. Williams—My dear Sophie laments the cruelty of my fate, offers me every confolation in her own, and hushand’؛ power؛ but adds, " that Mr. Smith’s zeal and generosity leaves them bankrupts ؛ however, they petition me not totally to neglect them, but give them Some opportunity of rendering me fervice.”
I now clearly law׳ the abyfs into which my too great credulity had precipitated me. I revo،ved, in my distracted mind, all the arts which had been practifed, in order to make me contribute to my own undoing, which 1 was very Sensible could never have been effectuated, without nay assistance ; I was astonished how I could have been deceived by Such flagrant falshoods, as thoSe which had been put in practice against n)t j I could not account Sor my imbecillity, in thus luffering myfelf to be played upon ; I was ashamed cf having been made the dupe to their shallow artifices; and to have fallen a martyr to the machinations of two fuch worthiest beings, as my hushand and his girl, Sunk me. in my own opinion, even almost beneath contempt: I now regretted my folly, in having burnt Mr. Williams’s letter to his father, as well as the other papers, as they would effectually have convinced his father of my innocence, and his Son's guilt. In this state of humiliation and Sorrow, I remained for fome months; grief had, during that time, fo totally abforbed all my faculties, that I was become infensible to all exterior objects ; I never pulled off my cloaths, but to change my linen ؛
232 The MEMOIRS of and when I slept, it was generally upon the carpet, or in a great chair; life was a burden to me, which I every day wished to be releafed from, and which I had a right to think I should shortly be, as my health declined visibly every hour.
Mr. Williams's creditors waited upon me in a body, and generoufly allured me, that they would never come upon me for the money; which, by the laws oS France, they might have done, as I was liable to have been arrested for my hushand’s debts; and this my Barbarian knew, when he went over to England. I expreffed my SenSe of their humanity and gopdnefs, in the warmest terms I was mistrefsof. They desired I would give them a direction to old Mr. Williams, as one of them intended going over to England, in order to try to get their money ؛ they begged I would make myfeJf perfectly eafy about them, nay, they even offered me their fervices ؛ my figure, I believe, (which was now much altered by my fufferings,) contributed to move their compassion, for I perceived tears stand in the eyes of Several of them, whilst they were talking to me. About this time I was rouSed from my lethargy of woe, by my Sriend Madame Bertram’s being taken ill. I instantly flew to her aid, quitted my own houfe, and established mySeif in her room, Srom whence I never stirred till she died. This stroke, which they who are not thoroughly acquainted with the human heart will naturally SuppoSe to have been a coap de grace for me, that is to fay, a finishing stroke to all my mifery, had a quite contrary effect.
The friendship this valuable woman had for me, her tender compassion of my afflictions, her attentive care of my health, the fensib.lity with which she shared my griefs, and the gentle manner in which she poured the balm of conlolaticn into mv
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	233
wounded breast, had frequently relieved the afpe-rityof my misfortunes, and kept my heart from breaking : I had leant upon her, and she had Saved me from sinking ؛ fuch was the friend I had just Seen expire in my arms ؛ in that moment, in which I lost her for ever, terror feized my fenfes 1 ؛ looked round, and Saw myfelf alone in the univerfej I had noshing now to rely upon, no friendly twig to catch hold of to fave myfelf; Frenzy feemed to advance towards me with hasty strides, accompanied by that fiend, Defpair ; I dreaded their approach, and being unable to find any exterior defence against them, I, in this moment of horror, turned my eyes inward, in order to Seek it there ؛ Fortitude and Refignation appeared at my call ؛ I returned to the bed-fide of my departed friend, kiffed her cheek, and went home, where I instantly undressed myfelf, and got to bed, and (what may astonish you, perhaps my dear Adelaide) step، found till the next morning.
You wil، probably be Surprized that I should have been more affected at Madame de Bertram’s death, than I was even at the loSs of my hushand. fortune, fame, &c. To which I anfwer, that if I was fo, which I am notfure of, I can attribute it to nothing but the fame caufe, which made a King of Lydia, or fome other country, who was taken prifoner, look with a dry eye on the ignominy, poverty, and Slavery, to which himfelf, wife, Son. and daughter, were reduced ; yet burst into a flood oS tears, on Seeing an old Servant of his, carrying a weight too heavy Sor his age and strength. On being afked the reaSon of this (as they thought) miS-placed Sensibility, he anSwered, " T hat the misfortunes into which he ،aw himfelf and family plunged, had filled the cup of his calamities, and that the event, which had just happened, had made it run over.”	But
234' The M . E M O I ׳R S o f But to my story : As Soon as I roSe in the morn.־ ing, I began to fix upon the only plan on which I could hope to find peace, which was this, that,, fince I could not alter the nature of my misfortunes, I would try to change my ideas of them;
I therefore refolved to follow Lord Bojingbroke's System, who fays, " Dissipation of mind,, and a length of time, are the remedies to which the greatest part of mankind trust in their afflictions ؛ but tlie first of thefe works a temporarv, the fecond, a slow effect, and both are unworthy of a wife man. Are we to fly from، ourfelves, that we may sly from our misfortunes; ·٥nd fondly imagine that the dif. eaSe is cured, becaufe we find means to get fome minutes refpite from pain? Or, shall we expect from Time, the phylrcian of brutes, a lingering and uncertain deliverance? Shall we wait to be happy, till we can forget that we are miferable ? and owe to the weaknefs of our faculties, a tranquility which ought to be the effect of their strength ? Far otherwife; let us fet all our past and prefent afflictions at once before our eyes; let us refolve to overcome them, instead of flying from them, or wearing out the fenfe of them by a long and ignominious patience ؛ instead of palliating remedies, let us ufe the incifion knife and the caustic, fearch the wound to the bottom, and work an immediate and radical cure.”
My misrortunes, and the fenfe I had of them, were equally great ; I u as not hardened, either by the،r number, or the frequency of their attacks, but, on the contra!y, I gathered Strength from my own weaknefs ٠, for, as a wretch who is drowning, from instinct, will catch at any twig he fees, in hopes of faving himfeit, though, perhaps, in hrs cooler mi ments of reafon, he did not estimate the
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	235
Value of his life at a farthing; sb I, when I faw ^ladnefs attempting to feize my brain, (from the fame instinct which impells us all to the preferva-tion of ourSclves,) cairght hold of Philofophy t؟ Save me from the horrOrs of Dittraction ;-sbe did sb, sbe taught me to fubdue my own will, and to estimate things at theii oroper value ؛ by doing she first, I perceived that I had no right to complain of my fate, fince, liowever fevere I might look upon it to be, yet history furnifhes US with many exam pies, of the worthiest characters being oppreffed by Misfortunes, to a degree beyond any l had yet eXperienced : I reflected that I had brought all my sbrrows upon myfelf, by my disbbedience to my parents, as well as from a confidence in my own judgment, which I ought to have known. (becaUfe 1 had frequently been told fo,) was the Worst of guides at the age of fifteen. I now look-ed upon my misfortunes as the natural confequen. ces of my ־indlfcretion, and, as shch, received them with sisbrniffion. I ventured to ash myfelf, what right I had to be happy, when I could not, from the most partial examination of myfelf, find I had any ? I tlren considered what happinefs was; when, after the most metaphysical diffection of it, I agreed witla Mr־. Pope, " That it consisted in Health, Beace, and Competence,” and theSe were in my power؛ since, in all probability. Health would be the concomitant oS Peace j and the mere neceffa-ries of־ life {which I apprehend to be Competence) I had very little reafon to think I sbould ever know tire want of ؛ Peace 1 hopeel to be able to acquire, by a constant adherence to Virtue, and a thorough Submission to the Dlfpenfationsot Providence.
I was not to learn, that to be a PhiloSopher in theory only, was as eaSy, as the being sb, in prac-
236 TheMEMOTRSof tice, was difficult; but I thought it a noble purfuit, and I thereSore determined to uSe every possible means oS attaining it. I had, as you may have obServed in the courSe of this narrative, Adelaide, frequently reiolved to act upon pretty near the Same plan as this I am now (peaking of, but Some intervening accident had always happened to overturn my System : I now Set out under more Savourable auSpices j I was no longer a child, and I had gained experience from my former errors; yet I must conSeSs, that, notwithstanding thefe circumstances in my favour, I found, that I had undertaken an arduous talk, as well as one, which required a length of time to accomplish : Nature, or the Passions, (which you will,) frequently undid, in one moment, the labour of months : However, I did not Suffer mySelS to be diScouraged by the opposition I met with Srom them, but repaired, with diligence, the breaches they had made: My industry and perSeverance have been crowned with SucceSs; Sor though I still (at the moment I am now writing) preServe a tender remembrance of my hushand, yet it is, and has long been, fo unaccompanied either by reSentment or grief ؛ a pleasing melancholy will Sometimes steal on me, when I recollect past Scenes ؛ but my passions are, I hope, silenced for ever. It was wifely Said of the Emperor Marcus Aurelius, or whoever Said it, (though 1 think it was him,) " That, certainly, there is no other account to be made of this ridiculous world, than to reSolve, that the change of fortune, on the great theatre, is but as the change of gar-. ments on the left; for, feeing death, in the end of the play, takes from all, whatfoever fortune or force take from anyone, it were a foolish madnefs, in the shipwreck of wordly things, where all sinks but farrow١ to Save it.’’	Pardon
Mrs. WILLIAMS.	237
Pardon this digression, Adelaide, I could not help it,, but اإ؛'ب١ now hasten to־, put an end to my story, which, if it tires you but half as much in the read-ing, as itdid me in the writing of it, I most hear-tily pity you.
I had now lost the only friend I had in France) for which reasbn I determined to return to my na^ tive country و and immediately wrote to my fister, and Mr. Smith, in order to inform them ot' this my intention. ٠ In their anSwers, I was infinitely fur-prized to find tlaem averfe to my project. They ؟ounfel me not to think of coming to England fo Soon ؛ affuring me, that the alaule and perfecution ׳of all sbrts, which I should raaeet with, from the family of my hufhand, would be very difagreeable to me ؛ they therefore give it as therr opinion, that Jt wiHhe much more eligible for me to flay in France -fome time longer, at least till Mr. Wlliamz’s infa-mous conduct was more generally known in hisown country, or till his future behaviour had lost him totally in the eyes of the world ؛ which, they faid, could not fail of being the cafe, in a short time, at the rate he was going on.
I bylieve I have ؛hot told you, my Dear, that, sineel w؛s abr.؟ad٠ ! had freqUently received man^ very kind and friendly letters from my uncle Bold٠ by, and he generoustyinfisted on joining, with Mr. Smith, in fecuring me from want, by fettling, be. ؛wee? them a pension upon me, during my huf. band’s life־, or for as long as I should receive no-tlaing frona him. Sophie laments tlrat she is with child, otherwife, she fays, that she, and Sir Charles. i؟tended themfelves the pleafure 0؛ fpending fome time with me in France ؛ but she gives hie her word, that, as foon as she is able, she will fly ٤٠ me* I had wrote frequently to Mr. Williams,
238 The MEMOIRS of since he left me ؛ fometimes begging him to relieve my necessities, by fending me Some money ٠١ and, at other times, desiring he would let me know how he did ? To all which, I never recived any anSwer.
As foon as my mind was a little calmed, after the death of my ever.valued friend Madame Bertram, I determined to leave Marseilles j and, had I followed the dictates of my own inclination, I should now have shut myfelf up in a convent; but the Solemn promife I had made Mr. Smith, never to enter one, during؛ my huiband’s life, rendered it impossible : However, as my heart sighed for retirement, I took a little cottage, by the means of an acquaintance of mine, who was going thither, in the environs of Avignon, not far off the Samous river Vaucleufe, fo celebrated by the immortal Petrarch. There, with my books, and one or two agree،ab١e neighbours, I pasted my time, ifnot in gaiety, at least in peace. It was here that I employed the greatest part of my leiSure tn the study of my own heart: I found it, on examination, to be fo very defective, that I was almost difcouraged from the attempt, to regulate its feelings by the Laws of Philofophy. I found that it always rebelled against realon, every time that my hushand prefent-ed himfelf to my imagination ٠, nay, it obstinately persisted in loving him. ،Such is the invincible tyranny of a first impression, on a youthful and a virtuous mind, that I don’t believe it can ever be totally eradicated, either by time, or ill treatment ؛ I mean in our Jex: Don’t miSunderstand me to much, my dea Adelaide, as to fuppole that I ac-cufe the men of being capable oS So much weak. neSs: their whole Sex give evident proofs of the contrary daily. In order ،0 divest my heart, as
much
9وج	.Mrs. WILLIAMS
قج؛جج؛ج
ad betrayed and؛.؛؛ ؛ ا؛ئإ ا٢أ ;abandone :r added: a nice fiivey of ]; أإياي 0، :ذ ء٠سئ
:لا٢لاؤ: ءؤاء:ل٦٠٢تئ-ب elty : AM٢thef ircumilancM -elty : All thefe circumstances did not Sail of con
hat I ought botlr to؛ تة^'ابل:!؟أءي?لا;/; علآ1ةذللة
en׳bUi my weak heart, e١ ؛ and deSpife him اء،ع ؛ ac- بذ3 ؛،he moment of this, conviction, fighed ءآ؛ح؛ آ؛إ؟ ذجإ؛ ج "؛defTfelr! tt
hou, who experience has not taught,، ةئ״٠.٠؟؟ت٠ه
:ا;ا3ة is not ،؛(¿BS’Xokk) Which nefs to pofleSs.” pp -had now paffed two years in this enchanting re ؛ ,reatj and was grown much tire wifer for confers؛ ,frequently with myfelf. I'll affure you ٠‘ ,؛؟؛
٥۴ Titri came t۶ Avignon in قاً!;:ل1لأتح ء٧ء ١fhen
hat؛ he.r .way to Paris1 she knew that I evas in she ؛ neighbourhood, and istantjy came to fee me been intimately acquainted, both at Pa- ؛and I ha ris and Lyons. She met me with the liveliest de. jnonstrations of joy at feeing, and sbrrow at find-she preffed me, with ar- ؛ -ing me sb much altered any her to Avignon, alledging, that؟om؛c؛ to i٥ur٠ stay.there but a Sew days, and ^ie insist-؛ she should I ־.ed on my spending tfrat short tilUe with her jleaded r٧y wantof health and Spirits; she vowed -denial; So With a kind of gen هخلا:ء[؛؛ ' ce, she put me into her coach, ordering؛vitrle ءا y maid to pack I١p Hshat was neceffary, and td؛؛؛ ؛¿me. The next day, the CounteSs display ;°أ؛٧؛ all tlie powers oS rhetoric, in order to convince on : :!.ongplan: She af- ة?أءق ء:: ؛ ،لأ٦ء5 .r That whillt I vainly imagined, that I ءء ,ferted was conquering my misfortunes, by dint of re-
flp/Cfinn
24. The MEMOIRS OF y؟ flection, and reasbn, I was, in fact,.destroying ء۶ ,constitution, by Soothing-grief; which would averred, foo'n grow habitual to me, and by t'hat means effectually incapacitate me for any future en. er Sprightly؛And (Says she, in٠ ؛JOyment in life will, my Dear, لا0ر (,you know؛ manner, which e.'.؛a^egetab ؟ed int؛ietamorpho؛ very shOrtly, be ؟That a stat ءء ,I Smiled at her- idea, and replied and ,؛pinef؟Of vegetation was a state of hegative ha r in؟I Seardd that was all we had a right to hope f his wretched world.” " Indeed, my dear Mrs.؛ -؛'Williams, (Said the Countefs,) a doSe of diffrpat od,؟re g؟On, 'and change oS sbene, will do you n٠a in One week, than all your old musty PhiloSophers have done in years: You must consider, child. (Says she,) that the body and Soul are strangely conj nected together, and that when one is invigorated its weakneSs : إ0 and ’languid, she other participates by exer- ,؟health, therefor ؟Restore yoUr body t he؛ or؛ place, and I will anfwer ؛0 GiSe and Change recovery of your mind..’ I sailed at her paving thus reverfed my lystem, and she went on : Come, ten ؛0 .(fays she,) I am gomg t۶ Paris, for a week ؛١av؛days, and from thence I shall go to spa \ y_ou ؛Mrs. Will)ams, So le ؛here, my dea لا؛ nGhing^to I will ; ؟ng with m؟me prevail on you to go a١ b٢ng you back to Avignon, if you desire it, or six i?. ءلءع?] you in any other fpot you fhall choofe to 1 intended to have At my return from Germany٠ f you will؛ but اstayed here but two or the¿ days GCOfent to accompany me on my purpofed tour, I Will wait your li^e. Only make wlr^t haste yo٧can, becaufe the Count De Vitri waits Sor me at Paris, here.”؛ and will be impatient till I arrive You know, Adelaide, how amiable, how Seduc^ she thereSore ptevailed. I ء ing the CounteSs is
could	ء	ج
ل4ل	.Mrs. Win 1/1 a ms
٠؛! ؛ ؛h? vivacily of ijerfolicitafion، »؛״'٠٠ :׳
-readi تت ئ؛aciemoth;;; لل״أ؛;:ل Uoacco ؛ز؛؛ةهءآ
::¡ئ
ا
Wc ا٠شه ١اI ا.1	:اه :I^S ; !؛ءإ0:٢ !;!
ل٠سء:لئ?يل?جطلع ئ
ueek ؛ Pari! ihrce months, inftead of ٠ل جه؛
-ne file in· ناه؛ ازة ؟״ء1.,'؛1.؟,؟1؛' له tendctitlid
س؛٠د׳ج'؛ثةءلإء٠ةة“هثةةت
;أئة.ثج
;عصقج،حق
׳,،؛,	The MEMO I Kb of
iil#.¡
Sir Charles and herlelf will come to -	׳» if٠٤
will confent to meet them there : You may eali-Jy fuppofe, how readily I confented to this proposal ־ and the next post brought me a letter from .1״، Charles١ in which was incloied^one of rccommen-
٠
from that time, till my coming into England. ^
ؤب2	.Mrs. williams
f my؟ vents؟ have before you alj the لا٠بل :هجم٠ا except that of thejcash of my hushand, the ذء؛د .I wasinFlanden ؛[٦hi which I received م0ع ة;حلآ
;؛؛!) in Italy, fisrrounded. with bastards by e٥ ٥ ج
ييس;״جحاةتئ
i
٠
.Sii
alUhe errors in my conduct.
LETTER X.
To Mrs. Williams.
■
LETTER XI.	245
night reading the history of your life. What shall I Say to you, my admirable friend ? In what words shall I thank you, Sor the confidence you have placed in me ? The gift isjnestimable, and I have no expression which will be any way adequate to my Sensibility of the obligation My heart has been torn to pieces alternately, by pity of your misfortunes,, veneration of your virtue, and astonishment at vour fortitude : You have, indeed, reafon, my amiable friend, to dread a Second attachment ؛ but there never, Sure, was a monster in the world like Mr. Williams. How cruel, then, it was, that he should fall to your lot ! My Brother calls Sor me to read to him. Adieu. Vour’s in haste, but always with the tenderest affection, and friendship,	D’Angeville.
P. S. How could you So peremptorily forbid the Marquis aniwering your Letter ? Take care of yourSelf, Sor, ill as he is, he has laid a Scheme to be revenged of you.
LET T E R XI.
To Mademoiselle D’An geville.
IRfjoice, my dear Adelaide, to hear that he Marquis is better ؛ but how I tremble for the confequences of a letter, wrote under the impulSe of terror, and compassion. Does your Brother know me, well enough, to be certain, that I have none of thofe little arts, attributed to our fex, on. similar occasions ? May he not fuppofe, that, thro’ a fenfe of modesty, I have concealed a part of rnf Sentiments from him ؛ if fo, into what a labyrinth will that error lead him. Try, then, to convince
D	1١ ٦ t١׳٩
24<5	L E T TER XT.
him, my dear giil, that I rather heightened the colouring, in deScribing the nature of my attachment to him, than Softened it, not to luffer his׳ hopes to be too Sanguine. I dread the effects of a disappointment, to a mind io fufceptibie as his is. Read my heart, my Dear, in your own ؛ remember, that having been attached to a man of merit, when you was extremely young, and he dying almost on the day destined for your nuptials, you have ever since been deaf to all follicitations, and intreaties, on the Subject of matrimony, and constantly declared yourfelf vowed to celibacy. How often have you told me, that love, like death, strikes but once ؛ and all elfe (faid you) was vice, and for that reafon, your heart was incapable of receiving a Second impression. Why cannot you SuppoSe mine to be made of the fame metal, and my ideas to be the Same? I think, nay, I believe them to be So. For what, then, can the Marquis hope ? But let me drop the Subject ٠, it pains me, and can give you no pleaSure.
I arrived here, a week ago, that is,, at Sir Charles Stanly’s; and found hir٠, and my lister, delighted on feeing me, after So long an abfence. We gazed reciprocally on each other, with ineffable pleafure. The happineSs they enjoy in one another, furnishes me with a continual Source of Satisfaction. Happy, happy, Sophie ! whofe very passions contribute to her felicity. Such are the effects of a well directed choice in a partner for life. How was my heart formed for the enjoyment of fuch a virtuous union ! And how has inexorable fate denied it to my wishes. But, alas! I forfeited all right to happinefs, when I forgot my duty to the authors ot my being.
7	I found
LETTER XL	247
I found this happy pair, Surrounded by a little Samily, of two boys, and two girls, ! ·caught thefe pretty children in’my arms, by turn؟, and preffed them to my bofom. I felt that I loved them, with a maternal affection ; they called to my remembrance, my poor little George, and the silent tear stole down my cheek.
I had yesterday a letter from my father, in which he gives me a very preSting invitation, to come and Spend Some time with him. This is the first notice he has ever taken of me, since the abusive, cruel letter, he wrote to me at Marseilles, upon my husband’s having left me. But I am now rich, and, as it is not very probable that I should ever marry again, perhaps he thinks my friendship may be worth cultivating; however this maybe, J shall not pry into the motive, So have anfwered his letter in the civilest terms, promising to comply with his obliging request of Seeing me at ־־٠——. In his letter, my mother, and Some brothers, ar>d sisters, which״ I have no recollection of fend their love. How true it is, that poverty is a great difgrace, and that there is no pity for the unlucky: The Unfortunate, like the Abfent, are always in the wrong.
I must tell you, Adelaide, that the master and mistrefs of this ho١ife, have almost brought me to forgive Cecrops ؛ who, they tell us, was the first institutor of matrimony. I think, if you was here, and Saw my brother Charles, that you would be tempted to break your vow in his favour. It I am not partial¿ as a Shier, he is one of the most amiable young men. both in figure, and character, that ever I Saw. Your picture, which is in my bracelet, he is become fo enamoured with, that he
l.vpor. ٠٦p will rpfurn v،/i٠}i mp fn Prnr.re i r١ nr>t٠r
248	1/ E T T E R XI.
to behold the bright original. He has already afked my leave, twenty times to carry a lettre de cachet as he calls it from me to fetch you over; upon which I am obliged to affure him, that he would never be able to bring you over alive, Such are the terrors you have of the fea ; otherwife, I tell him. you would never have luffered me to come over from France alone.
I must inform you, that١I find ؛hey have laid deep Schemes for keeping me here ; but they will not do; for I am rcSolved to return to you, my dear Adelaide, and to end my days in a country which I love above all others, where I hope to die in your arms, my friend, as you are a few years younger than I am. Charles tells me that he was acquainted with the MarquisD'Aife, when he was at Paris, fome years ago. My never having mentioned the name of my family, either to you, or your brother, is the reafon I fuppoSe. why I was ignorant of this circumstance. Charles begs his reSuectful compliments to that Gentleman ؛ give my love to him. and tell him, that 1 expect to hear that he has obeyed my commands, and consequently, that he is perlectly restored to health and fpirits, My Brother, and I, go to my father’s to-morrow, where I purpoSe Spending a week or ten days when I shall return here again. T his visit, my Dear, sits heavy on my heart \ it will recall So many cruel ideas to my memory, that I almost wish I might be excuSed going there. How did I once doat upon my father 1 Nay, how I love him still ! But then it will be impossible for me, ever to convince his mifantrophy, that one can love and.yet difobey; beside, I cannot bear the theme ; it is Such a difagreeable recapitulation of all my afflictions; fuch a humiliating Subject. No, no, let
him
LETTER XII.	249
him think of me as he pleafes j I will however, if attacked, defend myfelf with no other arms, than that of pleading my Sorrows, which have I apprehend, been Sufficiently Severe to expiate my cri me. Adieu, my dear Sriend, I tire you, and mySelf, with fuch long letters. It is to shake amends for my not writing oftner ; but, indeed, Adelaide, I have not time. God bleSs you, prays your ever faithful,
C. Williams.
LETTER XII.
T٥ Mrs. Williams.
INdeed, my dear Charlotte, I tremble at feeing you thus Surrounded by your friends and my enemies. I dread the influence they must naturally have over you So much, that if I was unacquainted with the steadinefs of your character, and the inviolable adherence you have to your word, I should deSpair of ever having the happineSs of feeing you in France again; but I fortify my Spirits, Srom the affurances you repeatedly give me, in your letters, of the contrary.
My Brother mends every day. We are in the country, at a little village near Paris, for his health. He walks, rides, reads your Memoirs, and then talks of you the rest oS the day. So we Spend our time, Sor I am his shadow.
I must tell you, my Dear, that he is no way dif-couraged, from the picture you have drawn of your own heart, or of its fufferings: He fays you was f ormed for Love ؛ that your heart is timid, but far from being obdurate; nay, he has the affurance
250	L L I I I1. R AIL
to aver, that you can never be truly happy, till you are united to a man, who, knowing your worth, can love you with as ardent, and as refined a passion, as he does. He frequently laments, that his having been Ambaffador to Spain, should have deprived him of fo many years pleafure, which he should otherwise have enjoyed in your company. Whilst you, Adelaide, Says he, was indulging in that felicity, which vour frequent letters were full of the liveliest defcription of ؛ you praifed your friend fo warmly, and painted her fo amiable, that I was half enamoured with her idea, before I faw her ; it was not, therefore, furprizing, that I should lofe my liberty very foon after my arrival at home. But, to my unfpeakable disappointment, I found nothing in your friend which could give the least encouragement to my hopes: on the contrary, an air of melancholy, which con stantly overfpread her. fine features, and a fort of steady philofophy, which I found to be the character of.her mind, made me endeavour, to conquer, what I feared uou q be a honelefs passion. I enjoyed the charms·of her fo٢ eiety, however. The eafy, open friendship she honoured me with, as being your brother, was fo flattering to my hear،, , that 1 dreaded losing it, by declaring my Sentiments to be of a tenderer nature, than thofe of simple friendship. I hoped time, and fome lucky incident, might prove propitious to my desire؟, when businels called her to England, and shewed me how impossible it was to live without her.
Thus you lee, Charlotte, that it is Le sort de mon fang, de s'enflamer pour vous, since my Brother, as well as myfelf, was caught at first sight.
I thank you, my Dear, for offeung me your Brother. I am perfuaded that he is very amiable : But you will agree with me, that one cannot be in
love
LETTER XII.	251
love with two people at once; and T am still too much So with my deceafed friend, ever to have a heart to difpofe of to another. Ycur cafe, and mine Charlotte, will admit of no comparison 5 they are totally different ؛ the object of your passion was very unworthy of being So ·, you cannot esteem his memory, nor, with reafon, lament his loSs. I can, I must do both, for my departed Lover. I Swore, on his dying lips, that I would never be another’s ; and Providence, approving the vow, has steeled my heart against his whole Sex. I have a kind of romantic connexion with the Spirit of my dead Sriend, which keeps him ever prefent to my imagination. Don’t laugh at me, when I tell you, that I fancy mySelf married to him, and that he is ab-Sent on a journey ; I therefore give him an account of all my actions; I confult his opinion in every tranfaction of my life, by afking mySelf how be would wish me to act m Such a cafe TheSe chi-msera’s, (for Such I allow them to be,) fill mv heart, and make me Support life with chearfulneSs,
“ Till pitying Nature iigns the last releaSe,
" And bids afflicted worth retire to peace.”
And then, I take it Sor granted, that my Heaven will be the rejoining him. This is a fine System of Metaphysics, you’ll Say ! you, who are So deeply read in them. No matter, it is more confolatory than many of their hypothefes ؛ and, Sor any thing that either you, or I, know to the contrary, may be just as true.
My Brother, who, you know, is an excellent Roman Catholic, Seeing a croud about a little cottage in the village this morning, enquired what was the cauSe of it ? when one of the peaSants told him, that a poor old Soldier was dying in that houfe, and that the Priest had just carried the Sacrament to him. Compassion made the Martinis go and
252	SETTER XII.
visit one of his fellow Soldiers in distrefs ؛ when, on entering the room, he perceived a fat Capuchkn Friar sitting by the bed-side of the sick man, and holding to him a Crucifix, endeavouring, at the fame time, to put it into his hand, faying, " Friend, {peak to your Lord, and Redeemer !” The poor fellow made no anfwer. The Friar again exhorting him to fay fomething to his Saviour ! At last, the dying man raifed his eyes, and, looking on the Crucifix for fome moments, exclaimed, in a faint voice, Ah! man Dieu, que vous etes maigre *! This ridiculous naivete of the old Soldier made the Marquis and me laugh heartily. You must remember, Charlotte, that Chrijl is always sigutred on the Crofs as being fo thin, that his bones appear almost to pierce through the Skin. 'This story must appear pleafant to you English, who are all professed Iconodasies, since it did So to me, who am, as you fay, a Worshiper of Idols.
What a prating humour 1 am in. For God’s fake, Charlotte, return foon. The length of your abfence grows infupportable to me. Let me know exactly when you purpofe being at Calais, that I may meet you at least as far as St. Denis. Adieu ! Love me as well as you can, and that will never be half as well as I do you.	D'Angi؛.ville.
P, S. Give my best compliments to Sir Charles Stanly and h؛s Lady. I am in love with the former. Ah ! my Dear, what a difference between him and Mr. Williams! How capricious is Love 1 ؛ beg to be mentioned to Mr. Smith, as an admirer of his virtues : But I won’t talk to you of your Memoirs, till we ٠ Oh, my God, how thin you are !
25	.LETTER XIII
meet: They have laeen the delight, and ·fCr ٠my life, whilst I was reading them. row, of My Brother has, no doubt, by this time, got ؛reads thCm all day long ؟rt, as h؛h?m by be؛ ئجة(3ل7ع11 .Iay» rhey steep with hinr, too؛ thouSand things at this moment) wliich I thall aufe they aie unworthy؛e؛ ell )'ou ; not؛ ء١٠ئ ؛۶f yon, hut becaufe lam not Obliged to mak Love for him. Adieu.
LETT L R XIII.
Cfo Mademoifelle D ’ A NG E V I I, E.
-your long let ٢م؛ THanks, my amiable Girl It was a great confolation to me at my ء;٠ءءإإ was ١ ^.ce I returned ytslerday؟hfr’s, from whe؛!! ir of؛ attention, and an
־distinction, which obliged me to Supprefs all de -٥erneSs, which glow^ff افلاه ء:١ئا::fmVهذ״ ng-؟ghtof my parents. I؛ he' ١ءلاح؛ء؛ا؛لة ٦ل؛ كء yd .to strain thym to my breast, and to bathe them
؛״very we ؛h؛ lit؛ :on؛e٠a!; الاا؛؛ءلاك ١؛الاء٢ع؟ءل;لأ
ch they accosted forced؛;؛read manner in w^ n Order؛ ,'me to endeavour to conceal my feelings
؛؟r>	Th؛^٤h to■’الا؟؛!;!١إءلء ء::للاء:ا:;:ع fai
on Ony arrival; told ي؛ئ:؛;عق
them tO exprefs the ؛h^.w !™possible it was fo ء؟.
cerdy״ .٠\n٥i؛ :؟d ١؛. ل٠ء:ةءاك ٤thev;لة beliive
؛؟then pi ل٠ة؛ةتاء!ي:؟ءي؛جا. ?ftTntidto
0 me fome fweet chijdren, whom they toWء لء؛!خ
itiffed sbem ي:ئ?ا؛ا"ع :with unc m EL٠٢if
؛nihility؛ d؛a ؛٠r״٠d״of f٠ ״־::٠: ل״ا׳ئ *؛؛ ٤أتيءثل ٠٢ذل ٧ءمة٧;1تق cU£rged! be!5 fl؛ove
of its direction, fell ؛;¡overcharged, being flun ״!.natural
254 LETTER XIII.
naturally upon them. During my stay at my father's, his conversation was So infinitely amusing, as well as improving, that I listened to him with delight, for whole days together; and when, by accident, he touched upon the topic of my diiobe-dience, it was with a gentlenefs, and delicacy, which endeared him to my heart; notwithstanding it. taught me, (what I had ever.apprehended,).that no time could obliterate it from my memory.
He told me, that old Mr. Williams had, upon the news of his Ton’s deceaSe, Seized upon all his effects in England, in order, as he faid, to pay himfeff, as far as it would go, the money which he had lent my hushand upon a bond. On hearing this, faid my father, I waited upon h+rn, and reprefented, in the strongest manner l could, the injustice otfucha proceeding. 1 told him, that I thought he ought, in honor, to make fome provision for you, Child. To which he replied, that the Law could not oblige him to do it ; and that he was very certain his inclination would never lead him to Support a woman, for whom he had neither esteem, nor friendship, and indeed distiked extremely, for very obvious and good reafons.
I anfwered my father, that the old Gentleman,
I imagined, thought he had reafon to have the aver، sion for me which he had expreffed ؛ and that, on my part, I should now take no pains to undeceive
My mother was very good natured, and cheerful. She and my father both preffed me much to ،ay aside my intention of returning to France, and to reside, for the future, in my native Land. But I told them, that my refolution was fixed on that head. I obferved, that France had afforded me an afylum, when England refuied it me ; adding, that
255	.LETTER XIII
I had found hoth friends, and consblation there, when my relations even difowned me here. I Said.. re strongly imprest on my؟ances w؛thefe; circtim -memory, and had, in fome meafure, made me diS ike my own country. Here my fatlrer shook his؛ head, and replied,. I:a.m of opinion, Mrs. Williams. your ־lie real reafoir of؛ from US־ that you conceal .attachment for France: However, continued he gain, yOu Will probably؟ do marry ؟yo ؛nailing, i؛ be much happier in your fCcond, than you Was in ؛for I have made it an obfervati ؛ your first choice ought two peo-־!hat a violent paffioo never h؛ ١مه pie together, but it made one of them mifer^ble. You, Madam, have experienced the trutli Of this and adversity has- taught you, I dard ؛ hfervation؟ if, indeed^ ؛.our paffrCns؛ ay? .he art of regulating؛ e, interrupting hitUsest, you have any left to؛ Said Sor tobferve^wisb pain, that the length, ؛ ؛regulat آ0٧م ns have tinctured؟and violence oS your.afflicti iSposition w.ith a Soft melanoholy, which nevCT؛
؛f not Soon re؛ ,fails to enevervate the mind, and moved, will infastiblydegenerate intoapathy. I affur-ather, laughing, that I was not quite sb؛ ed rny the vegetable as Ire feemed to fuppofe me to ؛muc one, that he was very؛ be : He re.plied, in the fame glad to hear it. In short, Adelaide: had I fouiid that warmth of affection in my father towards me. which I felt fo powerfully in my bosbm for him! he would nevef Irave fufpected me of want of feeL eliciou^y؛ d I foould ha^e past my time؟ng ; a؛ here i birt that want hasimbittered the fcene,and my heart Sjghed involuntarily e.very time I lo.oked he Said every ؛ ١ve had met,at liim. We parted, as ؛t too much, to fay an!؟was kind i I f ؛ing tha؛؟ د y mother filed a tear, as she bid؛¿ .^thin begging me, however, to Say a thouSand ل adieu
ء
؟íe'o"u ء1ه7:ء ٠ء,״١:ب;هء|״:مءا:״:ا؛"ءهئا״ئ ί ٥
٠
اه
fore I fe، off.
LETTER XIV.	257
To Madetnoifelle D’Angevili. e.
GOOD God! Adelaide, how shall I ex prefs to you, the fur prize which an event, the most unlooked for by me, though premeditated, you threw me into ? It happened thus: Yesterday in the evening, as rry sister, family, and Self, were sitting in the parlour together, my footman, (the French one,) opened the door, faying to me, " Madam, there is a Gentleman desires to Speak with you.” With me, I anSwered : Who is he ?” " I have Sorgot his name, (replied the fellow, archly») but I have Seen him with you, Madam, I think m Paris.’’ " Shew the Gentleman in here,” Says my sister. ٠٠ Madam, (anSwered my fervanr,) he don’t chooSe to walk in, but desires to Speak to my mistreSs alone.” " Wei), (Says I,) if that is the cafe, I don’t know who he can be ; however,
١ shew him into the back parlour, and Say I am com. ing.” I followed my fervant, revolving in my mind who this could be that I had known at Paris. when, on entering the room where the stranger was, before I could have had time to Survey his figure, I found the Marquis DeAife at my feet. I ft reamed out with furprize. Your Brother had the imprudence to hold me in his arms for a minute at least, belore I had recollection enough to difen-gage myfelf from him. My fervant, on heating me shriek out, had brought my sister to my assistance, who found us in the prettiest situation imaginable, the Marquis still holding one of my hands, and, I believe, kissing it. He now feat-ed me in a chair, and then began making a great many handfome apologies for having alarmed us fo much, by the fuddenntfs, as well as unexpected-
28؟	LETTER XIV.
nefs, of his appearance ؛ all this was Greek to Sophie־, who stood staring at us, till I prefented the Marquis to her, Saying, he was the Brother of my friend. Charles came into the room at this moment, and slew into the Marquis’s arms¿ who recollected him instantly. Sir Charles received his. guest with the most cordial-affection ؛ my sister ex-prest the most immoderate joy ; and, for my part, after my fright was over, I was.· not forry to fee him ؛ in short my Dear, he has established himfelf fo well in this houfe, that I do not really believe, that it would be in my power to turn him out of it, even if I hada mind to do it ; and the worst part of the story is, that he knows this very well, I affure you. Now you know, he must fee every thing that is to be feen in London, which will take up fome time, and confequently detain me much longer here than I intended staying, What do you fay to that, Adelaide? But you deferve to be punished, for having kept the fecret fo well. The whole houfe here rejoice at your Brother’s arrival, becaufe they foreSee that it will be a means of keeping me for׳ fome time in England. I fee plainly now, Madam, how Sar I may rely upon your friendship ; when this brother of yours is put into competition with me, my fcale, I fancy, would prove very light. I have half a mind to be angry with you, Adelaide; think only what I should have done, if my Brother had not confented to accompany me to Paris? Did you intend that the Marquis, and I, should have travslled, tête a tête, together ? How has your Jove of him blinded your friendship for. ..me ! But I won’t write any more, tor fear I should ،cold؛, let me, however, tell you, that he is very well, and looks So ; and that l am, in Spite of your ill-treatment of me, yours affectionately,
C. Williams.
L É T T E R XV.	2S0.
f fhail now write to you no more. I resign my pen to the Marquis, who has promifed to continue the correspondence.
LETTER XV.
7־. Mrs. W I L L I A M S.
SO. you are really angry with me, Charlotte, becaufe I did not tell you of my Brother’s intention of Setching you Srom England, in order that you might, with a toneof authority, have forbid his coming, on pain of incurring your diSplea-Sure. No, no, my Dear, we both knew you too well for that ؛ besides, did I not tell you that he meditated revenge, ever since you laid your commands upon him not to write to you ? I am Sorry, though, that he Surprized you So much ; and did he, indeed, hold you in his arms Sor a minute ? How I pity you 1 But you did Scream, and that was as much as could be expected of you، 1׳ knevr you would behave with propriety. Though Ido long to See y ou, Charlotte, y st I am generous enough to prefer the Marquis’s happineSs to my own ؛ So keep him in London, till he has thoroughly Satisfied his curiofity. He cannot be better than where he now is. Had I Sorgot my Iriendship for you, when I propoSed your travelling, tite-a-tete. with my Brother? If it was not consistent with the r etpe.ct due to appearances, to go a journey with a single Gentleman, why then you might very easily have obviated that objection, by converting him into a married one. Come, come, Charlotte this must be the cafe, one of thoSe days; therefore, why should you loie time ? I am certain, that, on
2,6o	L F. T T E R XV.
his being united to you, depends h.s life ; and־ you are Sensible, that it would be impossible for me ever to furvive his lofs, should you (which God forbid !) condemn him to death, by retusing him the honor of your hand. Consider, my Dear, we־ have always lived together ؛ and what material difference can it make, in converting the name of Friend, into that of Hushand? ’Tisonly Suffering him to steep in your room, instead of his own, and all things elfe will go on just as they ufed to do. But should you be fo cruel, Charlotte, as to deny us the happinefs and honor of your alliance^ what a houfe of Sorrow will our’s be ? And how will you upbraid yourSelf, for being the author of our miSery ! No ; you are too generous, too just, to wound two hearts, which are devoted to you. My friend, my Sifter, I conjure you to make my Brother happy ! He deServes you ؛ you know he does; he dies for you. You are now in a country, where Settlements, &٠c. will be better made for your Security, than here ; I mean, with regard to your Sortune ; his may be fettled as you like, on your return to Paris. You may marry in your own church, and afterwards (for form s Sake) in our Ambastador’s chapel. Sophie will, a fecond time, attend you to church, under happier anfpi-c«s٠ In short, n١y dearest friend, let me, when we meet again, have the extatic pleafure of Saluting you by the tender name ot S؛sler ؛ let me See joy Sparkle in the eyes of my beloved Brother; and, to heighten the blifs, let us owe our felicity to you. Make my best compliments acceptable, if you pleafe, to all your family. Confult my peace, and your own happinefs, my dear Charlotte ؛ and prove to me, that you have a real friendship for vour truly affectionate,	D’Angkville.
L.ETTB.R XIV.	a5i
؟’shall write to my brother by this post. Why do you threaten to drop my correfpofi-dence ? I cannot confent to it; however, do but act right, and you may do what elfe you pleafe. I shall hear how you do. and what you fay, by the Marquis, whole letters are full of you.
L E T T E R XVI.
To M^demoifelle D’A :١ c tvi lie.
I Said I would not write to you any more, nor did I intend it, efpecially in anlwer to the last letter I received from you, which is now of upwards of a month’s date.؛ in it you put the knife to my throat, Adelaide ؛ it feems as if all my friends had combined together, in order to perfe-cute and distrefs me, and you more violently than any of the rest. Cruel friend ! how have I de-ferved thus to be threatened with becoming the murdrefsof thofe, whofe lives I would readily fa-crisice my own to fave ? The Marquis has pleaded his caufe fo effectually with my family, that I shave not a friend left in it: nay, even Sir Charles has joined with mv enemies, and does not hesitate to tell me, " That your Brother is worthy of my hand, and that I ought to inlure my future felicity, by uniting myfelf to him.” He adds, " That he. never faw the man yet, till he was acquainted with the Marquis, who, as he thought, had delicacy of i.entiment enough to deferveme.” Your Brother has read to them, the letter I wrote to him, when he wasfo ill; indeed he teazed me, till I gave him leave fo to do. They all agree that 1 do love him,
262	LETTER XVI.
-only that I don’t know it, and that I shall not find it out, till I am married to him. What nonfenfe is all this ? and how can he wish to take me upon luch a precarious tenure ? Thus they unite to tear nay heart to pieces. If I could perfuade myfelf, that I had a fentiment Sor the Marquis of a tenderer nature than that of esteem, I would not hesitate a moment, but instantly conSent to marry him ; but my heart appears to me to be perfectly silent upon the Subject. I prefer him to all his Sex ;
I could even be his wife without reluctance, but not with pleaSure ; every mark which, he shews, of the violence of his passion for me, gives me pain ؛ I pity him, and blame my own inSensibility; yet I Sometimes think, that I should be Sorry if he loved me leSs. Sir Charles told me, the other ni،٣ht, " That I was not a proper judge of my own feelings, becaufe I compared the violent agitations I had experienced in nay first attachment, with the calmer Sensibility of a riper judgment, and that, on the comparison, not finding the l ime Symptoms, though proceeding iron! a paiallel cauSe, I rashly concluded, that I was not in love with the Marquis, when it was visible (he faid) to every one elSe how dear he was to me!” Is this true, Adelaide ? I cannot think So. Adieu, my mind is upon the rack. Ah, how difficult to attain is a thorough knowledge of our own hearts ؛ If I know mine, it is only alive to friendship, and dead totally to every tenderer Senfation. Your Brother drags me with him to every public place, till I am Sa٠ tigued to death : He will gomo where without me. Every body aSks, " Who he is ?” And my f٠٠iends (as they call themfelves) always take care to an-iwer, (in my hearing, too,) ‘٠ It is the Marquis D'Aife, a French man oS quality, who is come
؟26	.letter XVII
(?y Mrs. Williams؛r؛r to m؛d؛0 ٠٦¡ ا؛״ملم۶؛ هء ٢ة'؛ه YGur ز not tins inconceivably odd behaviour لل
ججغئء؛ح“؛ت
e־the King Spoke to him for fome minutes. Onc ro.re your Servant : I am crofS, anti tired, but ou its w'ell as rS I was better tertrpered.ز love
Y٠ur٥٠
writes you all the news. So don’t el· ؛The Marqui pect to hear from me again this age,
L R T T E R XVII.
־	To Mademoiselle
,Brother is perfectly ۴el١ ٢:!	A f f Is A lD
؛, e cornpofed؛ fo ؛.it ؛0 you riiy honor جاإ(ا؛ ؛ و ; ell you the reafon why this letter beginS! ا!٠ ״ ل س -؛if؛ 0 strong an affurance of his health and־ز with though I do not think I ؛The affaif was this the matter, Sor.!.:؛؛:! a very clear :;اج ألا;م ;؛؛■״I really am Irartlfy yet recovered Trom the. fn occahoned me. TTsterday we event a pa^^t'O ءل l in my owii SCdan chair, bCcaufe I ؛ the Opera ذ can’t bear the jolting of the streets of London id ch, tlie rest of the company- in their own equi-،־c٧ ؛pages.. After the Opera was over, your Broshe -ne out, and, as he u;as juft putting me in؛ handed tile ؛ 0 my cliair, a coach drove furiousty up tC it؛ tie ؛.with the hilt of his fword, beat bat ,؛qui؛^la ؛-heads of she horfes, for fear they should advanc too far, and overturn my chair: Upon whicil one r legs, and gave؟٠on his lhnd؟them reared u־،؟ your Brother a blow, wliich struck' him to 'the
264 LETTER XVil. ground; I Screamed, and fainted away ; what happened afterwards, I know not., only that I found myfelf alone with the Marquis, in his coach, fup-portin٥· me in his arms, and holding a bottle of Salts to my noSe. Having recovered my fenfes a little, I looked wildly round me, and aiked, with terror, if he was not hurt ? He affured me he was not ؛ I could not believe him, and thereSore repeated the question ؛ he then affeverated that he had received no injury, but a flight Scratch from the stroke of the horfe. I enquired how I came to be in his coach ? He replied, that our company were all gone into their feparate equipages, and were ignorant of the accident which had befallen us; and that not thinking it fafe for me, in the situation I then was, to go home in a chair, he had therefore taken the liberty of putting me into his coach, in order to have the greater-care of me. I looked at him with astonishment, when 1 considered how near he was being killed a few moments before; this thought brought the tears into my eyes ; indeed they slowed down my cheeks; he peiceived they did fo ؛ when Seizing one of mv hands, he preffcd it clofc to his bofom, Saying:, " My dear Charlotte, to what am I to af* cribe'dTie great Sensibility you So obligingly shew on this occosion? Ana I, indeed, dear to you? Speak, and make me the happiest of mankind.” I shall not tell you my anfwer, Adelaide, nor the rest of our converfation, till we arrived at my Brother’s: Let it Suffice for yf>u to know, that the imminent danger in which I had just feen the Marquis, taught me, that he was dearer to me than I had imagined him to be j in short, on our arrival at home, the accident was related, with all the confequences it had produced ؛ upon which my caufe was tried before all the company, and I be-
٠ LETTER XVIIt.	265
ing found guilty of loving your Brother, the jury unanimousty, without quitting the room., condemned me to marry him before we left London, I pleaded, but could not be heard : upon which I was obliged to Submit to the Sentence, and even gave my word for the execution of it. I tremble at the thought, but rest affured, that I shall not recede from my word. The Marquis is out of his lenSes ؛ he cannot write, he Says, and fo 1 took the pen, in order, to give you this information, knowing how delighted you would be at the news. If I should not be happy now, what have you and the rest of my Sriends to anfwer for I I "dare not think of it. Good b’ye, my dear; my next will probably be signed, your affedlionate sister as well as sincere Sriend,
C Williams.
I don't think I shall write to you any more till ׳ I am married, becauSe I shall have a vast deal to do, and more to think of, and the Adarquis tells me he writes to you constantly. LETTER XVIII.
From the Marquis D’Ai^E, to Mademoifelle D ,A Nr MDELAIDE,	Rarest Sister, rejoice..at^־-׳
٠٠. the felicity q١f^׳B٠other, who loves yj،u with friend vowed herSelf mine for hie at the altar, in the prefence of her parents, brothers, sisters, good Mr. Smith, and mySelf; we were married twice over, as yon must know. Tlie renewal of a cere-
266	LETTER XVIII.
mony, the confequences of which had formerly sheen fo fatel to her peace, threw an air of timid fensibility into my Charlotte’s face, which rendered her, if possible, more interesting; she went through both the ceremonies with more re Solution־ than we expected from her; and, when all was over, she turned to me, and, with a simile of the. most ineffable, good nature, faid, ‘٠ Ah, why is not my Adelaide here, to sill up the rweafure of my contentment !״ I thanked her in your name, as well as my own, for this obliging wish. In short Sister, her whole behaviour, during the day, was .attentive to the company, and kind to me ; Site was Serene, though not gay ؛ she was thoughtful, but not melancholy ; she was modest, but not prudish ; in a word, she was, and is, divinely amiable : Her father, who is worthy of being So, both Srom his polite addreSs, and sine understanding,
. shewed So thorough a latisfaction at our union, as, I Saw, gave infinite Satisfaction to my Charlotte. Her mother, who is a most agreeable woman, was all gaiety and good humour ; and the worthy Mr. Smith cried for joy, to See his dear child, as he calls her, " in the poflession oS an honest man thefe are his own words. Sir Charles Stanly slyook me by the hand, and laid, looking at me pathetically, " Marquis, you are now the happiest oS mankind ؛ and, (continued he,) I really believe you deServe mv Sister, iS any man can be Said to be worthy of So inestimable a treaSure as she is.” We dined in the country, and the day pasted with the utmost good humour anc^cheartulnefs. My adorable wife stands at my elbow whilst I am writing ; all my ideas are concentred in her ؛ she is my existence. I can Say no more ٠, for how vain would it be for me to attempt to defcribe my prefent hap-
LETTER XIX.	267
plriefs ! Receive, my dear Sister, our ■joint loves. We are one, Adelaide, and yours, by the tender* est ties of friendship٠and affection,
The Marquis and Marchionefs D’Aise. P. S. Meet us at Calais ; we will let you know the day, which is not yet fixt. Had not your unaccountable Sear of the water oppofed our wishes, you might now have been a partaker oS our felicity. All the family here fend a million of compliments to you. Adieu.
LETTER XIX.
My dear Adelaide,
THIS day fortnight your Brother, mySelf, and my Brother Rutland, propofe being at Calais, but we must depend upon the wind, for the cer- ٠ tainty of meeting you there precisely on that day. We shall,, however, do our part, not to dil'ap-point you.
The Marquis is So much delighted with England, that he has promiSed to return to it next year, with Sir Charles and his Lady, who, you know, are to pay us a visit at Paris ; nay my good friend and Second father, Mr. Smith, declares, he will imniedirtely fettle his affairs here, and endhisdays with us in France. He made his ،..׳ill the other day, in which he has generously made me his heir to ten thouSand pounds, which, after paying Some Sew legacies, is pretty near all he is worth. He read it to the Marquis, who insisted, that the money should be left in Such a manner, as that I might poffefs it for my foie and Separate ufe : protesting, at the Same time,, that he would not even have it m
r. 1 e
2 6*	LETTER XIX.
his power, either to receive, or difpofe. of a farthing of it. T oppofed this his request with vehemence, but was over-powered by numbers, every body prefent declaring, that it was just it should be So. I must confeSs to you, Adelaide, that your Brother’s behaviour upon this, as well as every o-ther occasion, is So nobly great,, and generous, that it raifes my admiration of, whilst it augments my esteem for, his· character. On the other hand his exceSs of love, and tenderneSs Sor me, melts my heart to a degree of Sensibility, which L am almost ashamed of; I attempt still to keep up my dignify, but Г fear my actions too frequently betray my weaknefs. The Marquis tells me, twenty times a day, that he is Sure I love him . And this thought feems to make him fo extaticaly happy, that I cannot, be fo cruel, as to contradict h'T'am loaded with prefents for you, my Dear,
from feveral individuals of my family ؛ your Bro- ٠
ther, too, has exerted the utmost powers of his imagination, in the choice of fome trifles, which he thinks may be acceptable to you, as being the produce of this country : My little offering will accompany the rest. I long to fee you, my dear Adelaide, though I shall feel a pang at parting irom my friends, and relations, here. Adieu, my fweet girl till we meet, when I shall endeavour, by fvery action of my life, to prove to you, how truly I am, my dearest lister, your ever affectionate and faithful friend, ٢٥٠؟ Marcbionefs D’Aise.
My husband fends his love, in which we all join.
finis.
؛ i ;٠ ٠٠ r إ؛ا؛؛ ؛ ־Л; ;;٠أ;. ;ا!
*اشب ٠ا:٠ب:تبةب::!بث؛;1ا|
٠^. . ,. ٠ ; ; ' ؛؛٠^ ٠ ؛ ١٠ ٠ ٠ ٠ ; ؛ ؛ ؛
ll:i :
\. :;Ί
ייי : * :	: . ־^؛ ٠. : ؛ ' .إ^' ? : ؛ ־'؛ و· ... : ٠أ؛:
"	١٠ ■£■٠.٠■; ν.::■'" '١'\/4י; ·■;
; ٠آإآ بب;::٠;!^ئ|;;ا:ا:
