THE 
FATAL EFFECTS 
OF
DECEPTION. 
A NOVEL. 

IN THREE VOLUMES. 
VOL. I. 

LONDON:
PRINTED FOR T. JONES, 
AT HIS CIRCULATING LIBRARY, IN THE STRAND, 
OPPOSITE HUNGERFORD STREET, 
MDCCLXXIII. 

ADVERTISEMENT. 
In the present novel writing age, 'tis difficult 
to hit upon a subject that has not been already 
exhausted, or in the conduct of it, to avoid the 
charge of plagiarism, from a casual resemblance 
to some other performance. How far the follow-
ing trifle comes under this predicament, is referred 
to the reader’s candour. 

Pieces of this sort, being so frequently ob-
truded upon the public, as “Not being originally 
intended for their inspection." - "Undertaken
at the request of a most intimate friend.” -
“For private amusement.” &c. &c. - The author 
is determined not to account, whether vanity, 
want of employment, or want of a dinner, was 
the motive which induced him to assume the
character. 

Conscious many inaccuracies, and grammatical 
errors, may have escaped his observation, he in-
treats indulgence, and pleads no merit, but an 
intention of inculcating the practice of virtue, and 
abhorrence of vice; a design, which he flatters 
himself may secure a first attempt, from the too 
severe lash of criticism. 


Speedily will be published. 
THE 
DELICATE PRINCESS. 
A 
FAIRY TALE. 



THE 
FATAL DECEPTION, ' 
Mrs. B R U C Ej at Lisbon, 
Mr. COOPER, at Hartley Point, Devonshire. 
Bear Sir, 
Feel very Severely the shock I am reduced to give to a friendship which has So long Subsisted, betwixt you and my brother Lambert; — the only thing that I believe could have Severed it, has alas, unfortunately happened. — We have lost an inestimable friend; his B orphans 
2 The Fatal deceptioisr. 
orphans the best of father’s; — Incapable of Supporting the weight of this calamity myself, with a proper degree of resignation; I yet would wish to recommend it to you. vvt were to have quitted Lilbon the beginning of March, by which time Mr. Lambert hoped he would be able to have finally adjusted his affairs, in this country; — his great assiduity, and unwearied attention to this point, .added strength to his illness; the rapid progress of which, in three days, bafred every effort we could make for his recovery. — He expired about ten days since, with entire Submission to the divine will; conscious from the integrity of his heart, and the redbitude of his actions, that his change was from a life of uncertainty, trouble and disappointment, to a state of endless felicity. — • 
Death 
The Fatal Deception. 
Death Seemed to distress him on no other account, than its unavoidably Separating him from his children, and (as he styled you) the friend of his youth; he con soled himself in the hopes of rejoining a beloved wife, blessed his absent Son, recommended him and his daughter to the protedhon of the Almighty, requested you would unite with me in the care of them, and by endeavouring to make, them good, to make them happy. — ap prehensive of his danger from the moment he was siezed, he immediately gave the clearest directions; and from his great regularity his affairs were very Speedily Settled. — His affiided daughter sinking under the loss of fo indulgent a father was obliged to be torn from his arms Some moments before he expired, in a state of insensibility, from the ex cess of her affection for So valued a pa b 2 rent 
4, The Fatal Deception. 
rent, and the extreme tenderness of her disposition, I fear it will be long before file recovers her former tranquillity. — In my present situation you cannot suppose me capable of communicating to you So clearly as I could wish, a State of Mr. lamshert’s affairs;; as he has appoint ed you joint executor with me, it is absolutely necessary I should acquaint you (in general terms) that as the last proof of his regard, he has lest your two younger children three thousand pounds each, to me ten thousand, at my death to divolve to my niece; to whom he has given the Same Sum payable at his decease; the resrclue of his fortune (exclusive of a few Small legacies to his acquaintance and domestics) he has bequeathed to his Son, comprehending his estate in Buckinghamshire, that you' lately purchased for him, together with all his Securities 
The Fatal Deception. 
curities in the English funds, which he Said were to a large amount, — For particular reasons, Mr. Lambert requested you to keep his Son as ignorant as possible of the largeness of his fortune. — I must desire you to continue him So Some time longer; — at a proper opportunity I Will fully account to you for the precaution. — The great' desire I have to See my nephew (to whom, at your discretion deliver the inclosed) will make me hasten my departure from hence : — a hope that the sight of her brother will lessen the grief of my poor Lucy,. is another motive equally strong; her present Situation is truly pitiable! — His however possible the season of the year may retard me, and I will on no account Set out until I receive letters, from England, which I shall impatiently expect— — rely on your prudignce to break the B 3 ' late 
6 
The Fatal Deception. 
late event to my nephew in a proper manner, and on your friendship, and that of your family to con Sole him; to all which worthy family, Lucy joins in Sincerest good wishes, with dear. Sir ^ 
most obedient Servant 
Margaret Bruce. 
Mrs. 
The Fatal Deception. 
Mrs. BRUCE, at L i s a o n, 
T O 
JAMES LAMBERT, esq; 
IT T L E did I think that my last letter to you, my dear James, would So Soon have been Succeeded by another, the Subject of which must be So painful to us both. — I presume Mr. Cooper will have already acquainted you with the melancholy event which has happened; all I can do, is to recommend you to the great friendship cf that family, for an alleviation of your con -- B. 4 cern. 
The Fatal Deception. 
. — IS your affection for your sister and my be as great as we hope it is, you Vv'ill endeavour to mitigate your own grief, that, you may be better enabled to lessen ours. — Your Sister, poor girl, (I need not Say) always of a grave turn, ' is sunk into extreme dejedlion : — - her brother, her affedlionate brother, she is continually calling upon; I do all ia my power to restrain the impetuosity of her Sorrow, ' but while we remain here, I fear it wshl not avail; for which rea son, I will hasten our departure as much as possible, I shall however be obliged to continue here, until I receive dispatches from Mr. Cooper and you, probably fbmething longer, as there are a few trifling affairs not yet adjusted, your father’s illness did not permir him to recol ie6b, 'and which my ignorance will make me the.longer in bringing to a conclusion. 
But 

The Fatal drceptiott. ^ 
But as the season is at present bad, we, ought the less to regret the necessity of our stay. — Mr Cooper was your father’s friend, is your Sriend and guardian; respect him my dear James, and adhere implicitly to his advice. — Let us hear from you, and assure us of your affedlioh, that will ever be our greatest pleasure; Lucy loves you, and I am my dear James, with the greatest truth, 
ypur affedlicnate aunt,. Mar CARE Bruce. 
B $ 
Mr. 
20’ The Fatal d eception. 
Mir Ed. COOPER, Hartley Point 
T o 
Mrs. BRUCE, at Lisbon, 
Dear Madam, 
The death of my much valued friend is indeed a most affecting stroke! rendered still more distreffing to me by the disappointment of my dearest hope; Slow did I encourage the pleasing prospedl of his happy return to England, what Schemes did I not fondly propose, in order to cement still more strongly the friendship that unked us, by a continual and strict intimacy betwixt our 
fa 
The Fatal decerrio.v. ir 
families. — How vain, how ft tile 1 a e the most, flattering piojecus, vvhilil: cur lives are held upon a tenure. So unstable and precarious : — A religious Submission ta the will of providence will alone prevent cur arraigning a wisdom that (by means too intricate for. our clouded comprehensions) conducts everything for the best. The legacy left by Mr. Lambert to my two younger children conveys the most pleasing proof of his sincere friendship; — He well knew my estate was not very considerable, and the unjust, aversion my father had to bring me up to any profession, must, of course render those younger children the pro perest objects of his generosity, and esteem for their father. — At the same time judging of my heart, by the delicacy of his own, his appointing me Guardian to his Son and Daughter,, kindly puts.. 
B 6 > it 
12 ’ The Fatal Deception, 
in my power to make the worthiest return, by my attention to the trust. — Everything relative to the estate in Buckinghamlhire is entirely fixed. — The writings of which, together with Mr. lambert’s Securities in the different funds, are in my pos leshon; the latter, as he justly insormed you, are to a large amount; particulars of which I will reserve till our meeting.. The very great reason my ever honoured friend had to be grateful for your uncommon attention to his Children, and himself, required a noble recompense; In his distribution to you, he has not exceeded my wishes., or your desert— — will be the highest Satisfaction of my Suture life, to unite with you, in our endeavours to form the minds of our amiable charge, after the example of their parents ’ — as you have not mentioned anything with respect to the 
in: eiment 
The Fatal Deception. 
*3 
interment of our friend, I presume he must have altered his former intentions communicated to me; viz. that in cafe of his decease in Portugal, his body, together with that of Mrs. Lambert, should be brought to England, and privately deposited in one vault; — to that end I had his diredlions to have one built at Stretton Green, as Soon as the writings of that estate were executed; ■ — In your next I expect the necessary information, but I shall not be Sorry if he determined otherwise; as it would be a most melancholy office to you, and cannot fail of being doubly distressing to his already too affiidted daughter. — ‘ I have the pleasure to assure you, my dear madam, your nephew .wants not the considerable fortune he will poffess, to acquire universal esteem he will, I flatter myself, be all you wish His 
prin 

14 
The Fatal Deception. 
principles are noble, the generosity and frankness of his heart excessive; almost, to a fault; — these, experience, and re fiestion, will not fail to correst; what in his disposition I think most censurable IS a too great hastiness of disposition; to which if you add the natural love of pleasure and gaity, inseparable from. a mung man, you have without partiality, the exact outlines of Mr. lambert’s 
character: : -- are his good qualities.. 
Flis failings (if they can be deemed So) fezv, and more justly ought to be esteem_d 
the Superfiukies of a great mind. -- -- -- -- 
I have wrote for him, and my Son to come into Devonshire, where I purpose; to acquaint him with the loss he has sustained; — As his passions are Strong,, his affliction will be in proportion,, which it shall be the study of myself and family to moderate. — Hasten my. 
dear 
The Fatal deceptioin. 

dear madam your departure as much as possible; and in place of a father, irretreivably wrested from us, give him an aunt and sister whose tenderness may repair his loss. With respecft to the Secrecy you enjoin me, though I cannot apprehend the necessity of it, I will inviolably observe your injunction. — My very best regards attend miss Lambert and you, and that yoiir voyage may be prosperous and agreeable, is the united wish of this family and in particular of dear Madam, 
your most obedient humble Servant, 
E. COOFEIL 
Mr. 
3 6 The Fatal Deception. 
Mr. E D W A R D C O O P E R, 
T O 
WILLIAM COOPER at Oxford, 
My Dear Will. 
N Receipt of this I request that Mr. lambersand you will immediately quit Oxford, and repair to Hartley Point: — IHAVE received Some disagreeable accounts from lisoon, concerning Mr. lambert’s ill state of health. He is'represented to be in iminent danger, and should the event verify our fears, I would chuse to have our young friend with us, that by partaking, we 
may 
The Fatal Deceptiojt. 
*7 
may contibiite to lessen his affliction. Exert, every effort to keep up his Spirits, without inspiring him with falsq hopes your Sister Nell declares if you do not acquit yourself well, in a commission of Such consequence, she cannot receive ymu with that affe<5lion she ^ notwithstanding prepares to do; I apprehend from her confidence that you will deserve our thanks, instead of reproaches. — Leave your affairs at Oxford in Such a train, that should your absence from thence be long, or rather should you not retura again, it may be attended with no inconvenience. — Your friend and fellow collegian Lord Wilton, has been of late pretty much at Hartley Point, he proseffes the most Sincere regard for you, and I believe him to be a young nobleman, of worth and honour, he has engaged to procure you a cornetcy of 
light 
i8 The Fatal Deception. 
light horse, ('if the, army has still the preference in your opinion :) My estate you know, will not allow me the Satisfaction of Supporting you as I could wish, during my life, without Some profession; If you determine to fix upon that of a Soldier, — I shall approve your choice notwithstanding I may lament the necessity of your embracing a state that will of course occasion frequent, and long Separations from me! It is however necessary, and by that means when you Succeed to my estate, your notions will be enlarged, your experience improved, and your principles of honour perfedted. Your father and Sisters esteem and love you. 
EDWARD COOPER. 
WI L 
The Fatal Deception. 
^9 
WILLIAM COOPER, Hartley Point, 
T O 
JACK FEATHERSTONE, Oxford. 
can Scarce forgive 
Dear Jack, 
Though i 
lambert for the trick he has played me, I must applaud his motives, and pity his distress — had he not, (by his natural hastinefs of disposition) So Suddenly carried his resolution into execution, what a multiplicity of chagrin and anxiety would he have Saved himself! — Old Mr. Lambert is dead — my father whiling to break the news to him by degrees, 

20 The Fatal dreeptioig'.. 
grees, only informed us he was danger oufiy ill; — I indeed suspeded the, what were lambert’s real Sentiments I am ignorant — I should rather apprehend he 
had not been of my opinion -- -- We prosecuted 
our journey with all imaginable expedition, — Much fatigued however, we agreed to stop at Axminster for the night, proposing to reach Hartley Point the next day — I endeavoured to amuse him upon the road, but could not remove the melancholy that had taken possession of him, until we reached our stage, when he appeared to be more cheerful — I rejoiced at the change, little suspedting the cause — we parted early to our Several rooms, and in the morning I received the following billet: 
“My dear William must forgive a y Seeming want of confidence in his 
friend 
The Fatal Deception. 
21 
t r, 
friendsliip — my present design, is the only one I ever with held from his knowledge; — the communication of which, might perhaps, have frustrated my purpose I am informed the packet Sails to morrov/ from Falmouth, I hope to reach that place in time for a passage, and ssy to receive a father’s blessing; though from the tenor of Mr. cooper’s letter, I dare Scarce hope to meet with him alive; your father will, I flatter myself, pardon my precipitance, when he ressecsss upon the occasion; should I arrive too late to close my father’s eyes, I attend a revered aunt, and a Sister I tenderly love; their situation demand my utmost attention and Solicitude, I shall give a draught from Falmouth, for what I may have occasion, ‘of which do me the favour to apprise Mi*' ‘‘ Cooper. 
, 22 The Fatal Deception“ 
“Adieu, continue me in your “friendship and esteem, and believe me, “the amiable family at Hartley Point, “will ever retain my sincerest regard and “affection, while I am yours, 
JAMES LAMBERT. 
On inquiry, I found he had Settled his plan the preceding evening — ordered a post chaise and four to be got ready with the greatest privacy— — to me- -- — and quitted Axminster the moment I went to my apartment — As Soon as I could poshbly apprise my father of it, he instantly dispatched an ex press to Falmouth, to stop, and acquaint him with the real state of affairs at Lishon; — But lambert’s diligence and the authenticity of his intelligence, rendered our good intentions useless— — - packet was Sailed about three 
hours 
The Fatal .DECEPTION. 
hours before the messenger arrived; — my father declares, deceit, (though for the most laudable purposes) is ever the occasion of inconvenience, if not 
of calamity to those who use it -- -- -- -- 
He very heartily condemns his precaution, and I believe, never more would be templed to disguise a fact, was the prosperity of himself, or family to depend upon it. — v/e ressedl, however, with much satisfadion, that his presence in Portugal, at this juncture, will be highly pleasing to hlrs. Bruce and his sister; and his protection during their voyage from thence, 
most desirable. -- -- You shall hear from 
me again in a little time, and ever regard me, as your truly astedlionate, 
'W. COOPER. 
From 
24 
The Fatal Deception. 
Hartley Point. 
From the Same to the Same. 
Dear Jack, 
TH E vrorthiest of fathers sinks the austerity of that character in the amiable tenderness of a friend — where vice is not apparent, he is more ready to make allowances for the foibles and inexpe ence of youth, than the most volatile ■disposition can possibly be tempted to offend — engaged in the company of Such a parent, and a couple of worthy, good-natured sisters— — cannot wonder if I 
have 
The Fatal Deception. 
25 
Imve rather exceeded the time I promised to write to you again. — We are every hour now expecting the return of a packet from Lishon, our anxiety is the greater, as there has been a continuance of stormy weather ever since Lambert Sailed; — He is adored in this family I and though we hope the best, yet I assure you we are not free from apprehensions about his Safety. 
You may now congratulate me, my friend, on my entrance into the army — through my Lord wilton’s interest I have obtained a lieutenancy in a marching regiment; (though contrary to the usual method of first carrying a pair of colours) his lordship would have procured me a commission in the light horse or dragoons, but I preferred the infantry, as a less confined Service, and where there is a greater chance of promotion. — Shall I give you another vcl. I. C reason.? 
26 The Fatal Deception. 
reason? cavalry Seldom leave the kingdom — I am of a rambling disposition, and as I could riot have the prolpe<5t of indulging it, but at the expense of my father’s convenience, I have hitherto done all in my power to restrain my desire of travelling within the bounds of prudence — I shall now have an opportunity of Satisfying my natural propensity, partly at the expense of his majesty — and though the routs we may be ordered to proceed upon, will possibly be attended with Some inconveniences^unknown on the grand tour — there can be no country where a rational man may not receive improvement, or an honefi one be happy. The only allay to my fatisfadbion, is the unavoidable Separation I must Submit to from my family and friends. — The natural chearfulness of my father’s temper, has ever made his acquaintance desirable t in 
The Fatal Deception. 27 
in our neighbourhood — here are many worthy and opulent families near us, engaged in the closest intimacy — by which means we have parties every day. — The residence of Lord wilton’s family is a very considerable acquisition to our Society; it is the first of my lord’s stay at Wilton Place, for any length of time; and his lordship has given directions for building two capital rooms, intending to be frequently there— — I hint to you, what in addition to the beauty of the country, and the agreeable disposition of its inhabitants, is the principle cause of his present attachment! — I have a sister Ellen, who has Some merit, a good per son and the worthiest principles; — miy lord makes no Secret of his regard for her, and you may be Sure he does not want advocates — his accomplishments, his large fortune, and the goodness of C 2 his 
2 8 
'Isle Fatal Deception. 
his heart, are ingredients in a miatch, my sister could have no reason to expect— — shall I own sincerely to you, the prospedt of her establishment, does not give me that Satisfadlion it might appear to do : — My Lord, with all his great qualities, has a weakness, which is often the Source of every ill; I mean his extreme avidity for play! -- excuse me Jack, without that I cannot condemn his lord ship, tacitly censuring you He Says he is. totally disgusted with it, but a passion of that Sort (when once firmly rooted in the inclination,) is I fear Seldom totally eradicated. — I am likewise apprehensive my Sister has not a heart to give; this is a Suspicion however, that I have never yet hinted to any one, and I beg it may be a Secret lodged with you alone; -- Lambert, without intending it, has, I 
have 
The Fatal Deception. 
29 
have long iniagined, made an impres fion which I very sincerely wish may be entirely defased; as she can have no real objection to the match which offers, and I am clear, that Lambert feels nothing on her account, but the regard and affection of a friend I will endeavour to draw him in to discover the disin^aged state of his heart to me, that she without communicating her Sentiments even to my father, may observe the improbility of a union with him; — If possible I will not give her cause to apprehend I am acquainted with her Secret myself; — As I think her good sense will assist her to conquer a passion, where she can hope no return; — And she by that means will be Spared the mortification of a detedlion. — I wish the affair may be effectually carried into execution, be c 3 fore 
20 
The Fatal Deception'. 
A, 
fore Lambert returns, or I leave the country. — Lord Wilton has three sisters, all amiable. and accomplished women! One of whom (tis Said) is in a manner engaged to Sir William Morden, whom you may propably recolle(5t a year or two since of Christ Church though it is also .reported Lady louisa is averse to the match; -- But Jack! private attachments must often, in families of rank, give place to interest, and connexions : — IHAVE too good an opinion of Lord Wilton, to sup pose he would force his sister to a marriage, against her inclination, and yet. Sir W'iliiam, do him justice, has nothing, exclusive of his estate and power, in this country to recommend him, she is a charming woman, and 
was.. I convinced she was absolutely 
averse 
The Fatal Deception, 
3^ 
ayerse to Harden, I should be more truly concerned for her than in mj fjuation I have a right to be. — Be assured of my regard and affection. 
W. COOPER. 
C 4 
JAMES 
32. 
The Fatal Deceptiobt, 
I AMES LAMBERT, atlissok. 
T 0 
W. COOPER at Hartley potnt. 
I Have shed tears! and paid the honest tribute of Smcere affiiflion, over the ashes of a beloved father; — lost as he is. now to us. — His admonitions, — his parental care, shall never be defaced in my recollection;; — stridl observance of his tenets, is the strongest proof I can give of my respecl and affection— — gloomy train of thoughts, has taken place of that burst of grief, with which I vras 
over the 
Fatal Deception. 
33 
overwhelmed upon my arrival; — reflection however assists me, I have not the mortification to reproach myself with ever offending him; and my attention to the situation of my aunt, and sister, obliges me to hide as much as possible, a melancholy that would not (in my present disposition of mind) be unpleasing. — One awful adl of duty over, and my Sole care will be to dry up the tears of a Sister. — How amiable is even Sorrow in a mind So unaffedled; — time, Scarce appears to have abated the concern for our irreparable loss; — but the tenderness of her disposition, which she has lately So much indulged. Seems to have added strength to her reverence for my aunt, and affefiion to me - she deserves my sincerest love, — I have just attended the bodies of my father and mother, on board a Small vessel; — the captain of » C 5 elicit 
34 The Fatal Deception, 
which Vvas under obligations of friendship to our family; in Spite of the natural roughness of his profession, he has a heart full of Sensibility; — he undertakes the melancholy office by choice, as a last instance of his regard to the deceased, and resped' for the Surviving family. — Captain whlson has not hitherto been fortunate, be it my care hereafter to brighten his prospects. — You will do me the justice to suppose, necessity alone, induced me me to confide to him, the care of our parents remains wear assured of his fidelity. — Our stay we apprehend will be protracted longer than we expected— — aunt on my duty and affection in joined me. not to quit my sister and her, and it was absolutely necessary, as well in obedience to my father’s express directions, as attention to lucy’s present state of mind, lo lose no time in performing 
So 
Tyre ipatal Deception' 
ib necessary, though affecting a duty. — wilson sails immediately : — he has di redlions to land as near your father’s as possible; who, (we trust) will take upon liimself the mournful office of their inter mentat strettongreen, agreeable to myfa ther’s request. — thepresent subject makes me unable to add more, than to affure you William of my perpetual esteem. 
JAMES LAMBERT. 
C 6 
From 
3^ 
The Fatal Deception. 
From the Same, to the Same. 
My Dear Will, 
Lisbon.. 
Y last was wrote, sh circumstan i t JL ces which prevented me, even thinking of anything but our affecting loss; — I will in this, endeavour as much as I can to banish my gloomy ideas. — You will more naturally conceive, than I describe, the situation of my mind, after I left you at Axminster : — my teel ings were a Succeshon of friendship, Sorrow, hope and fear. -- Our passage, though violent. Scarce affected me, and I was lost in concern, and anxiety. — My arrival 
The Fatal Deception. 
37 
rival at my father’s, freed me indeed. from the latter, as it confirmed my loss; — Severe affliction was the conse quence, refiedlion relieved, me, and a sense of the resped due to the dead, has converted my grief into a tender remembrance; — The duty I owe the living, into a lively concern for their happiness. — My attention to remove part of my sister’s extreme Sensibility, has been successful; Since Willbn Sailed,, her Spirits are much mended; — I make her frequently take little excursions into the country. Sometimes with our aunt, and Sometimes with a young portuguese lady; — of that family from whence my father had the honour to' receive his first wife : — Clara is young, livefy, and handsome; with great nobleness of heart, but tinctured with the Fierte., fa common in houses in any distinction,,, 

38 
The Fatal Deception'. 
in Portugal. — Her regard however for Lucy, I take to be very Sincere, and her gaiety of disposition (at this time is particularly valuable. — Was I inclined to vanity, I should have Some Small reason, to place many of the civilities shown my sister to my own account; at least she Seems to wish, I would do So; — but my hour is not come, and I think I can Safely Say, miy heart is yet imirely free. — clara’s brother (if I read him right,) has few of his sisters good qualities, but possesses a degree of pride, beyond what I ever Saw; — cannot be deceived in thinking he regards my sister with ten derness, yet the haughtiness of his disposition will not let him avow it Why? — her father was a merchant. — He does, I am assured despise, ansi would perhaps affront cld not my affinity with Lucy, prevent him; — his father, 
Don, 
The Fatal Deception 
39 
Don Antoine D’almade, is a Portuguese, of all I have Seen, the worthiest: of esteem. — He, I am well assured, would not object to his son’s alliance with my Sister; — but was the young gentleman, to get the better of his pride, and condescend to address her, religion is an insuperable objection, another no less considerable,, on my part, my sister loves him not.. — I wisti we were Safe on your side the water, free, from the inconveniences, (I cannot help foreseeing,) this passionate madman, will plunge us into. — But on lucy’s account, we are advised by the physicians, not on any consideration to quit Lishon, till near midsummer. — Write to me my dear William, the news of Devonshire. — IHAVE a considerable favour to beg of my friend Miss Cooper; will you join in my request? it is to oblige my Lucy with a 
ca« 
40 
The Fatal Deception. 
correspondence, as an inducement, I have prevailed over her natural timidity, and inclose a letter from her, to your sister. — Your father I esteem as my own. He can exact no duty which I shall not ever cheerfully pay. — Assure him, and all your amiable family, of my entire respedt and affection, wshile 
JAMES LAMBERT. 
LUCY 
The Fatal Deception. 41 
LUCY LAMBERT, at Lisbon. 
T 0 
Mist COOPER, at H A R T L E y Point. 
Dear Madam, 
IT is not reludantly that I comply with the request of a brother I adore, in commencing a correspondence with a lady, he So entirely esteems; and to the friendship of whose family, we owe So much;. — Your father’s kind care of my brother, without any other consideration 
42 
The Fatal Deception. 
sideration, will ever demand my lasting" gratitude. — Educated abroad. So entirely ignorant of the world, and the customs cf my own country, (Such I shall ever esteem England.) Will you condescend to give your friendship, to one who wishes to deserve, as much as she fears she cannot merit it; — my dear James, that brother who has relieved me from despair! who is attentive to anticipate my every desire; insists upon it, I take no notice of the Subject; which he apprehends is still too near my heart; — sea not my brother, the heart of your Lucy, can prompt her but to oblige you. — Assist me then, my dear miss Cooper, (however unnatural the request may appear,) to forget my Sorrows, and their cause. — My health, my Spirits are much better, yet we are directed to remain here, until May or June, they Say for my 
Safety; 
The Fatal Deception. 
43 
Safety tristing reason! — Can you forgive us, detaining our beloved James So long a time from a family he reveres? 
I most ardently wish to embrace you! and am convinced, the sincere attachment of friends like those at Hartley Point, would more quickley restore me, than the mild air of Lishon, or the prescriptions of its physicians. — I have a friend here, a friend I exceedingly esteem; from whom I shall not part, without the greatest regret .- — But I early give you an instance of my considance, when I as fure you, that I find a Speedy Separation from her, will be necessary, both on my account and my brother’s. — clara’s brother disturbs me with a profession of his regard; his Sister has been very lately a warm advocate for him, though he himself condescended to address me but a v/eek since, .ste is importunate, and most disagreeable 
to 
44 
The Fatal Decfftion". 
to me. — I honour, I love Claray which the more distresses me, since I cannot but detest her brother; — I have been too free in declaring my disapprobation of him, ancm dread everything from his pride and revenge. — My dear James endeavours to laugh me out of my fears, but lean observe (though he does alhin his power to hide it) he is not without uneafiness on the Subject himself — My aunt’s apprehensions for our Safety are alarmed, which I hope will hasten our departure. — Clara has not been So free with mej as usual, since the avowal of nty Sentiments; — and though I am, thank heaven, not of a suspicious turn of mind, I cannot account for the Seeming good terms on which clara’s woman, and a Servant of my brothers, have been for Some days past; — there may possibly nothing happen 
The Fatal Deception 
45 
pen to verify my fears, but I expect neither happiness or tranquillity in this country. — Favour me with your friendship, and indulgence, and allow me to Subscribe myself, though personally unknown, the respeder of your family, and dear madam, 
your affectionate, humble Servant, 
LUCY LAMBERT. 
W I L 
/ ■ 
/.. 

The Fatal Dzceptioit. 
WILIAM COOPER, Hartley Point, 
T o 
|ACK FE ATHERSTONE, Oxford. 
Dear Jack, 
T H Y have I not heard from you in an answer to my last? — Has a fresh intrigue, or any late extraordinary matches upon the turf deprived your friend of a pleasure, your correspondence never stiils to give him My fortune 
having 
The Patal Deception. 
47 
having been much confined, by my apprehensions of inconveniencing the father I love; — I have avoided many parties, which (perhaps for the timej might have given me pleasurebut I have also avoided habits, and inclinations that, I yet never discovered, gave any real and lasting Satisfaction— — are Jack, with a great share of good Sense, a dupe to fashion, and an assured victim of the designing— — divesting yourself of conscience, you would be thought a man ofpleasure; and without feeling anything but compundion, when fortune enables you to strip your friend; you are fre >quently engaged for Sums, that even your large independent fortune, docs not enable you to discharge with convenience. — Quit, I entreat you every connexion, that draws you into disagreeable scrapes and remember your real friends 
require 
48 
The Fatal Deception. 
require Soihe Small share of your attention. > we have heard from Lambert and his Sister! — they are expected in England about June, if no ill accident prevent it: — They Seem to be engaged with a Portuguese family in circumstances, that does not promise much good to them, or Satisfadlion to their friendsbut my apprehensions shall not allow me to prognosticate evils, that I hope will never happen. — The time draws near, when I must deprive myself of the happiness I at present enjoy, in the paternal friendship of my father, the company of my Sisters, and (shall I be honest Jack) the amiable condescending goodness of Lady louisa Wilton — her sisters are most deserving women, but there cannot be more than one louisa in a family: - — I envy Morden, I most since rely pity her, — for I know them both! — It is 
high 
The Fatat Deceptiont. 
49 
high time for me to join my regiment, though without the care of mind I have hitherto enjoyed, I yet take vfith me .principles uncorrupted, and a conscience free from reproach; under a dependance of your honour I disclosc to you my real sientiments : -- to be intimate with Lady louisa, and to adore her, is the Same thing : I, who have been taught (through •a mediocrity of circumstances) to be ever more upon my guard, have been the dupe of my temerity— — love her! but in those circufnstances cannot, ought not to expect a return. — Yet from the natural Sensibility of her disposition, was there no other impediment; — I should almost dare to hope it might be possible. — Mylord Wilton is absolutely engaged (by Sacred promise) for his interest in Mordens favour, I am bound by the strongest ties to avoid irrterfering for my vol. I. D Self! 
50 
The Fatal Deception. 
Self! — my heart Suffers much on my own account but bleeds for the distress of louisa. — Were happiness always the reward of merit, how justly would it be hers; yet that can never happen, if she marries Morden, and there does not appear anything wshich can prevent it. — My sister the next week gives her hand to Lord Wilton, — He has intrea ted Lady louisa, to make Sir William Morden happy at the Same time; this she declined with Some warmth, and my Lord requested ellen’s interest with his sister, which ssie exerted to the utmost, but without success; — Her Ladyship absolutely persisting, that she will enter into no engagement this year — Did I dare to be vain, or ssattered with her' good opinion of me — what might I not infer from this delay; but she is above my hopes! and if I know my heart, I 
rejoice 
The Fatal Deception. 

Tejoice at her present respite from Sir William, Solely from a refiedtion, that she has avoided (at leasts a year of misery— — Sister will, I doubt not, make Lord Wilton happy — I hope she will not be unhappy herself, for she is dear to me, as light. — Adieu, you find me a better correspondent, than your negligence de' ' 
WILLIAM COOPER. 
V .i 
D 2 
JOHN 
52 
The Fatal Deception 
J, FEATHERSTONE at Oxford, 
T O 
WILLIAM COOPER at Hartley Point. 
My Dear Cooper, 
YO did not Seem to expect an answer 
to your first letter, — your Second and third, reached me at the Same time. — To be candid, I was with my Lord morson upon a party, and, (as you very rightly judge) pleasure the pursuit! 
The Fatal Deception.’ 
53 
a thing much followed but Seldom attained— — least I can assure you it was not then our fortune. — I have once in my life you know been guilty of fedudtion, and have Severely Smarted for it ever since; — through that very pusillanimous conscience, you Seem So well acquainted with — The unfortunate object of my attention, that crowned my wishes,, is still dear to me, and still deserving : — My connexion with Patty, preserves me from any other, but the contrition she perpetually shows, and her generous forgiveness of me, gives me painful sensations that I cannot well bear; I am determined the first opportunity, to establish her in some situation of life, independent of me, and by that means, induce her to rested npon the commencement of our acquaintance,, w: ith more satisfaction and composure— — 3, My 

54 The Fatal Deception. 
My Lord morson has not the feelings which you are pleased to allow in me; and I am very sincerely glad, that the girl of his fancy escaped the lure— — mean Soon to quit the University, it will be no great compliment to Say, the absence of you.and Lambert has in a great measure produced that resolutiom. • — I am more in a state of dissipation than usual, or than I wish;. and though I have yet preserved pretty good principles, I will not Say how. long I may poffess them amongst my rakehelly companions. — Tell Lambert, I will come and stay, with him Sometime, when he resides, at Stretton Green, il alone, I am not fond of aunts. — I admire your theory, but am in great doubt your resolutions will fail in practice;; Seem however to have hit upon the only method — absence! quit Lady louisa, or 
your 
The Fatal drception^. 
55- 
your resolutions of gratitude, honour, c will dissolve like Snow, before the Sum ■ — I consess I think you are too strait laced; but as a Sentimental man, your Sentiment must be your guide, and take care it does not betray you! — A young beautiful girl, perfeflly accomplished,., who does not distike you, and witll whom ycu are passionately in love; — You live upon the utmost intimacy with, yet pretend you would not interfere with Lord wtlton’s views, in favour of Morden, or wish to Secure her affection to yourself! — trust me Will, I am a plain down right fellow, and neither unsterstind or believe you :; — But I tell you what I should do — I would take no indiredt methods, to injure Morden in her esteem, I would: not designedly Scheme for her heart! 
D 4 ■ — But 
si The Fatal Deception.'. 
- — But is she did me the honour favour me with her good opinion, and: thought proper to convince me of it! — Standfast Sir William, for on my Ibul, neither a false humility with, rerpecsi; to my own merit, or an undue attention to Lord Wilton, .should prevent me from convincing So noble a girl, of my gratitude and. affection.... — as you please, but like every adviser, be assured, 1 think my advice best. — Pray let me know if any inducement for banks’s interest, would prevail upoa your father to part with a friend he 
So much, esteems? — Your letter will 
find me at queen’s, — — as I, shall not hastily engage in any more excursions,. — Adieu, and believe me yours, c. 
JOHN FEATHERSTONE. 
“Lher Fatal Deception. 57 
LOUISA WILTON 
T O 
Slifs E G E R T O Nr W r L ro n P L a C s. 
My Dearest; Eliza, 
YOU know my brother’s fatal attacii*r mentto Sir William Morden! you are acquainted with his warm intercession with me in his favour! — But you know not, and I only fuspedl, what I dare not in honour communicate tol 5 
5s 
Tyre Fatal Deception. 
you, is Lord wilton’s motive; — Be not offended at my apparent want of confidence, that I Say I dare not, I ought rather to have Said, I any not yet convinced and wish to be mistaken. — Slow unhappy my dear, frequently are girls of quality! to be a Sacrifice to vanity, capiice or necessity, of a father or brother, that find it their interest to dispose of us, and. Scarce esteem themselves obliged by our ac quiestence : ~to the honour of Lord Wilton, he is not yet one of that number — He has received my excuses without much displeasure, nd granted me a res pite for a year. — He may then perhaps lesume it with more earnestness, but I trust to the changes that time may produce in him, or Sir William Morden; — In me, no change in favour of the latter can ever take place. — I disesteem the man; and hate his principles, or to Speak more 
pro 
The Fatal Deception. 
'59 
properly, his want of them. — louisa Wilton will never live to be louisa Mordem. — ]^y brother yesterday was made happy in the possession of a deserving young lady, a Mils Cooper, of a very old and res pedlable family, in our neighbourhood; • old Mr. Cooper is the worthiest of men and fathers his children are what must naturally be expe6ted, from his mode of education; polite, affable,, generous, and free from affectation— — have the utmost reason to hope, I shall be entirely happy in a sister-in-law, — Her temper is mild, tho’ lively, her manners noble, her education liberal. — You will thank me for the letter which I design to Send by Lady Wilton, in order to introduce you to her acquaintance, and regard. — They purpose being in grosvenor street in a few days, my sisters and I continue here Some time longer; — But my D 6 dear 
6o 
The Fatal Decefttcm. 
dear Eliza, excuse me giving you a friendly caution, with Lady Wilton, will come her brother, lately introduced by Lord wilton’s interest into the army : need I add he is every way Lady wilton’s brother, let my fair friend be upon her guard, against his attraclions. — You will not think it strange when I say, we look forward to the time of my brother’s departure with regret. — He is (though' sometimes unaccountable in his attach^ ments) a generous, and tender friend— — my Eliza, — Remember you let not €ven Lady Wilton sink me in your esteem! - — My fisters'salute you, and I am truly yours. 
LOUISA WILTON. 
Lieutenant' 
The Fatal Deception. 

Lieutenant COOPER, 
T o 
JAMES LAMBERT, Esq; at Lisbon. 
My Dear James, 
ENCLOSED is a letter from Lady Wilton to miss Lambert. — Be not Surprised your old friend Ellen, should be changed into her Ladyship, at the earnest request of my Lord; who, not content with providing for her, has introduced me into the army; — and if you 
will 

The Fatal deceptioir. 
will return, and gcneroussy condescenst to carry off Nancy, : my father may be at liberty to take a trip with me as a volunteer. — It will be a great mortification to me if you do not return to England, before my departure, and we every day expect orders to go abroad; — it will be doubly kind — if this consideration should expedite your leaving Lishon, as it will be the greatest alleviation to my father’s chagrin, - upon the loss of one half of his family. — He is at present confined by the gout, vshich disables him from writing;, but he directs me to entreat, that Mrs. Bruce, and miss Lambert, will think of no other home but his, at least for Some time; — Nancy will be quite happy in Showing eyery attention in her power,, and (I hdpe) you know my sather’s sincerity too well, to doubt, that their refusal will most infinitely distress 

The Fatal dzceptioir. 

tress him; — besides, the company of Mrs. Bruce and your Sister on a visit at 
Strctton Green may do well but I would on no account advise you, to 
think of their being resident, there; — > you as a young man, will naturally have a numerous acquaintance, and I think prudence will urge you, to wish an establishment for your Sister more Secure, than she possibly could enjoy under your roof in Such circumstances — Where my dear Lambert, can they be fixed with more propriety than with my father? who wishes most ardently to esteem them of his family. As an additional inducement, Lord Wilton has three accomplished Sisters, who will generally live at Wilton Place; and be happy in cultivating miss lambert’s friendship — I wish to See you on more accounts than one. Banks is a worthy and deserving man; 
64 
The Fatai. Deception. 
my father respeds him; — I am Sure yoir value his paternal care os each of us and Jack Featherstone (in a letter I lately received from him‘j has questioned me about him, as if he intended to do Something for him; — Featherstone has two or three good livings in his gift, and I think banks’s friendship and gratitude, v/ili Sufficiently repay him, for a presentation for one of them. — There is an affair nearest my heart, that I would wistr to communicate to you, and I much want your advice; — but as I am conscious it would be regulated by what shall ever direct my actions— — stridb adherence to honour: — I will pursue the dictates of that, though my future hap piness be destroyed by it. — Lord Wilton has a sister, that is too amiable and ac eomplisned, to be miserable. — We have a ball at my lord’s this evening, a 
kind. 
The Fatal Deception. 

kind of concluding entertainment upoir their quitting the country; and we Set out in two days for London. — Our regiment is at present in Kent; esteemed by military men,, the door to North America, or the .West-indies — No climate can alter the warmth of my heart to you, my. dear James, being ever your 
most affedhonate WILLIAM COOPER. 
Mils 
66 The Fatal Deception.. 
LADY WILTON, 
T O 
miss; LAMBERT. 
My dear Miss Lamhert, 
I T H D R A W not the friend strip from Lord wilton’s wish,., you So generoiisty proposed to bestow upon Ellen Cooper; — she is more than ever disposed to be grateful, for the obligation of Such charming confidence. — Your merit and accomplishments, my. 
dear 
The Fatal Deception. 
ef: 
dear Mist Lambert, can never fail to Secure you Sriends; but none will ever be more zealous, more sincerely attached to you than myseff, — Your good sense and judgement will Soon convince you, (when a little more acquainted with us,) what little reason, you have to be diffident. — How I honour your brother, for his attention to Mrs, Bruce and you; — how justly my dear, permit me early the freedom of a friend, does your Sensibility deserve his tenderness. — Fear nothing under the protection of So worthy a guardian as your aunt, and Such a brother as Mr. Lambert. — 'May your apprehensions from the Portuguese family be founded without a cause; — But though L have heard of Some very noble, deserving people amongst them,,! have been assured that in general they were to the last degree jealous, imperious, and revengefuk 
Avert 
fig 
The Fatal Deception. 
Mils EGERTON, 
T O 
eajy LOUISA VIL T O N. 
E are informed, a treaty of ‘‘ marriage will Speedily be concluded “between J. Featherstone esq; a “gentleman of large fortune in “the North of England, and Miss Egerton, of grosvenor Square, Sole heiress to'the late honourable Ben“ 
“
The Fatal Deception. 
69 
‘‘ net Egerton, a young lady of great “beauty and accomplishments, clave 
you Seen Such a paragraph in the papers, louisa? — “Ami to expect it Eliza ?” — Be not Surpriled my dear, if in the course of a few days, those impertinent pratlers, the advertisers, should afford you that piece of entertainment. 
Yesterday, while I was moping over a pair of men’s ruffles, I have, lately taken into my head to work; — “Mr. Featherstone ma’am, ” (Says John) I broke my needle — “your Ser“ “Sir — where is Mr. Lambert 
CC 
“I have not Seen him, since we Spent So agreeable an evening .in y grosvenor square; but I Hatter my“ 
“
The Fatal Deception. 
: mifs E G E R T O N, 
T O 
Lady LOUIS A W I L T O N. 
My dear Loulfa, 
I Give you joy of your reprieve; -^ Sir William Morden shall never (with my consent) be the husband of I .ouisa; I have often been surprised myfeif, and have observed it wondered at in others, whence could Spring my Lord wilton’s attachment to him; — they are, at least 
in 
Tlte Fatal Deception. 
71 
inrappearance, very different men. — My Lord never was esteemed a debauchee, or drunkard; — Sir William is justly inti tled to the charader of both; -- It certainly 
must be Some former gaming obligation, which Moisten is mean enough 
to rake the advantage of : -- -- ^proceed 
from what cause it will, I hope it will terminate without discredit to his i ordship, or misery to his friend. — So my Lady Wilton has .a brother! thank you my good louisa for your friendly caution; — but tell merruly (on pain of future correction, for your want of confidence in me;) is the caution meant for my Sake or your own? — louisa Wilton will never live to be louisa Morden! — very tragical indeed; — what thinks my louisa, will she ever Submit to live to 
be louisa Cooper I -- -- -1 am prepared to 
love Lady Wilton - dare answer for 
it 
72 
The Fatal Deceptioiv. 
at all the Cooper family are accomplished, and I cannot possibly be surprised when So good a Sister as you are, looks forward with regret to the time of her affectionate brother’s departure. — — You was determined when you began your letter to be exceedingly cautious, and remain the mistress of your Secret; but my dear louisa, had she taken ever Such pains, coiild not have So effedlually .let me into the true state of her heart, as when she attempted a reserve to her friend repent my good lass, confess your fault, and depend upon me as your counsellor, faithful anddiscreet; — give me a true briefrepose the direction of your eause tome; and i’ll answer for its 
success- -- your next letter is the 
letter I expect and demand; if I find it candid and sincere, as till now has been customary with the friend of my heart. 
Be 
The Fatal Deception. 
73 
Be assured Lady Wilton, nor Lady wilton’s brother, shall ever sink you in my esteem; — let not any apprehensions of want of friendship, injure in 
yours. 
ELIZA EGERTON. 
VOL. I. 
E 
Lady 
74 
The Fatal Deception. 
3hady LOUISA WILTON 
Miss 
E G E R T O N. 
UNKIND Eliza! was my weak ness So very apparent, yet could not entitle me to your compassion; — alas my friend, I am indeed beyond hopes of cure; — yet do me the justice to believe, I did not at the time 1 wrote to you, esteem my cafe sodesperate; — your counsel is unavailing, — your louisa 
IS 
The Fatal Deception 
75 
is lost in a passion, that has every appearance of ensuing misfortune; should it even be reciprocal, which I declare I yet know not; — It destroys cooper’s prospedts in life, with the friendship of my brother; — Lord wilton’s fatal agreement with Morden, hangs over me like an impending storm, ready to sink me into despair. — A disappointment to my brother occasioned by Mr. Cooper, may affect the peace of Lady Wilton : — I am distressed for my sister-in-law, for myself, and the fatal, (though deserving) object of my regard : — receive [on the terms you promise me, a sincere confess. Sion of my entanglement; — Cooper is accomplished, I Saw him repeatedly without apprehending the danger; indeed I never found that he was dear to me, until too late to retreat; — his good sense, generosity, filial affection to his father, E 2 ^ and 

The Fatal Deception. 
and the most endearing behaviour to his sisters, engaged my friendship and esteem; free from vanity, and affectation, though few have more personal accomplishments, was it possible (with your louisa’s Sensibility) to withold her heart — Scarce conscious of my situation, I not only attempted to deceive others, but myself; and would foolishly have supposed the preference I gave him, proceeded merely from esteem; I am to my cost undeceived: however, I yet have not entirely betrayed my Secret to him; and for Some days past have studioussy avoided a possibility of meeting him alone; but am concerned to find my behaviour has distressed him 1 — I did not mean to withold my Sentiments from his knowledge, except for his own Sake; — but as we must Soon part, (perhaps for ever) I will not have to reproach myself, 

The Fatal Deception. 
77 
Self, with assuming an appearance of displeasure, the propriety of his conduct 
never deserved- -- ball my brother 
gives tonight to a good part of the neighbourhood, may produce an ecclair ciffment betwixt us; — he with apparent apprehension, requested the favour of my hand; — need I tell my Eliza,, I did not refuse him. — I shall very possibly by this means, difeover more of the state of his mind, by which I will endeavour to regulate my conduct— — be assured of a sincere account of everything, that concerns the happiness, or mi sery of 
your, 
LOUISA WILTON. 
E 3 
From 
78 
The Fatal Deception., 
From the Same, to the Same.. 
My Dear Eliza, 
The die is thrown! “— the com* pany assembled early, with the most apparent attention to dress; — Cooper was elegance itself;; ■ studied, finery of others, was a conuastnotin his disfavour: — the gravity of his behaviour, Suited the negligence of his habit; we danced, he accused hjmself for being So little able to entertairi me as he wished, or my condescention and goodness deserved— — he was upon the eve of quitting, a father and sisters, who deserved 

The Fatal Deception 
79 
Served his most grateful attention; friends (bowing to me) whose merit, and accomplishments, would be ever deeply imprinted upon his memory; I would have Spoke, but could not; — I thought he did not Seem to disregard, or be Sorry for my embarraffmestt: — he continued to dance Some time longer, at length the company complaining of heat, my Lord proposed a Saunter in the garden till Supper; — Cooper sindustriouoy Singled me out from a Set of stragling couples near us, and I honestly declare I did not avoid it. 
“Your Ladyship will forgive a man, “whose present Situation is highly irk“ “to him, if he requests to know, “in what respect he can possibly have “offended excellence like yours.” 
e4 
Offen 
8o The Fatal Deception'. 
“Offended me Mr. Cooper, far from “it; — I ever esteemed you as much for “your own merit and prudence, as on “account of the connexion which has “taken place betwixt our families.” 
“My family has been highly honour“ “madam.” (a little pride there Eliza) “but I have too good an opinion “of the propriety of your ladyship’s “conduct, to fuppose without Some “degree of fault on my part, (however “unintentional,) I could not have been “distressed by a coolness and reserve“ “I have lately had the misfor “tune to experience from your lady ship.’^ 
“Mr. Cooper, upon my honour, you “never offended me, I esteem you y very highly; — I confider you as my 
friend 
The Fatal Deception. 
81 
CC 
friend— — So pressed, I will not “Scruple to affure you, that my pre ‘‘ Sent Situation is not So happy as it “may appear to the world; — in Such “circumstances, I perhaps have Seem“ “to treat you, with an inatten “tion my heart did not didtate.’* 
“It is far from compliment, when I Say Lady louisa’s distresses can never be indifferent to me; — but I quit you Soon madam 1 — and heaven only knows the time of my return; — I would not wish to leave you in doubt of my most perfect esteem, respedt, and adoration I request nothing from you in return, but compassion, and your good opinion.” ' 
E 5: 
Be 
82 
The Fatal Deception, 
“Be assured sir, you possess my “good opinion in the highest degree; beyond what prudence perhaps might 
prescnbe in olir situations !” -- -- -- - 
“Generous Lady louisa.” -- -- -- -- Could 
I help his kissing my hand, though with a warmth that alarmed, that affected me! — discretion urged me to put an end. to the conference. 
‘‘ Mr. Cooper, company -- -- -- - 
we must join the 
-- -- - “One word, but 
one word, my dear Lady louisa., Sir William Morden.” — “Sir William Morden, Sir, nor any other, shall ever be. but indifferent to louisa Whiten, while she is Sensible of worthier 
attachments.” -- -- -- On his knee; — 
Accept my gratitude, dearest louisa,. and my Solemn declaration, nothing shall ever blot this blessed moment 
from 
The Fatal Deception. 
83 
from my remembrance.” -- -- -- -1 broke 
from him, not without the most painful, yet pleasing fensations, but just in time to prevent fuspicion : — he loves me ‘ Eliza, and whatever happens, I cannot be unhappy, — adieu,.. 
LOUISA WILTON. 
E 6 
Lady 
84 
The Fatal Deception. 
LOUISA WILTON 
T O 
Miss.. EGERTON., 
Ueareft Eliza, 
ROM the conclusion of my last. 
you will perceive that Cooper and I perfectly understood each other; — ■ The remainder of the evening. Softened: as I had been by his tenderness, and the recolle(stion of our approaching Southeast 
para ^ 
The Fatal Deception.. 
SI 
paration; my eyes did not condemn him for the temerity of his behaviour: On his side, he could not hide from me, the evident Satisfaction he enjoyed in my favourable opinion. I fear indeed we ricither of us had the power, to be Sufficiently upon our guard: — I have rea son to believe, my Sisters have Some Suspicion of my Sentiments; — But they are my friends, and too delicate to question me about anything, that would distress me to answer. — The inclosed will convince my Eliza, I have nothing to apprehend, from the principles, or honour, of a man like Cooper : I also Send you a copy of my answer... 
To Lady Louisa w’ilton.. 
“That I may. not give my dear Lady louisa reason for a moment y to Suppose me capable of encroaching 
y upon 
The Fatal drceptrom, 
upon her amiable condescention, let her be assured, the present liberty I take will not be repeated without her express permission: I have dared to love your ladyship! — I have (contrary to my Sentiments, and the rule I had laid down for my conduff, } dared to declare myself; — Far am I from intending, to take any advantage of the generosity of your disposition, or the favourable Sentiments your sincerity will not allow me to doubt, I have had the good fortune to inspire you with : — My felicity would be unbounded, did not ressedtion convince me, I have been wrong (in my present confined circumstances) to disciose to your Ladyship the Sentiments of my soul. — I leave you Madam, perhaps for a considerable time, and 
which distresses my soul, entangled 
by 
The Fatal Degeption.. 87 
by family agreements, with a man,, it is not treating Severely to Say, is totally unworthy of you. — Abstradled from every Self interested motive, I wish to strengthen the repugnance you feel against a match with Sir William Morden, as I am convinced' the consequences would be your as sured unhappiness! -- Sorry am I that in this respedl, conscience and sincere regard for you, oblige me to al in. opposition, to the inclination of my Lord W'llton; for whom; as the brother of your Ladyship, and the friend of my family, I have the truest. respect— — certain my amiable louisa the man who has had the hardiness to address you, who has had the hap piness not to be ill received, can never know another love! never will your beauty and merit, be injured or affronted. 
The Fatal Deception. 
CC 
a 
CL 
CC 
CC 
ct 
CC 
cc 
CC 
ted, by my inconstancy! but let me request of your Ladyship, that if Lord Wilton Sacrifices his extraordinary attachment to Sir William morden’s interest, if he ever efpouses that of. a man of Worth and honour, if mr Louisa thinks she can be happy, let her on no consideration v/ithold her consent! let not her Sensibility of heart or pity for the distrels it will in fiifl upon a single individual, restrain her from obliging her family I — I can never be completely wretched, except I know Louisa is unhappy, I have a friend. Lady louisal that friend has a worthy aunt; and a sister, amiable as her brother is deserving,, v/e hope they will consenr, to take up their residence at my father’s; may I flatter myself, your Ladyship will unite with my sisters, in 
giving 
The Fatal Deception. 
2g 
ec 
giving them your friendship? not an “hour in my life, charming louisa,. that the idea of your goodness, merit, and accomiplishments, will fail to be the most pleasing refiedlions, of dear“ “madam, your ladyship’s ever farth“ “ever devoted humble Servant, 
(( 

W. COOPER. 
Lady 
90 The Fatal Deception. 
Lady LOUISA WILTON 
T O 
Mr COOPER. 
F Mr. Cooper is sincere in his good opinion of louisa wilton’s understanding, he ought to be Satisfied! — ■ Lady louisa where she bestows, where she has acknowledged a preference, cannot easily be induced, (through the 
most 
The Fatal Deception. 
91 
most alluring considerations) to retradt that opinion, or change the object— — delicacy of Mr. cooper’s conduct, and his short continuance in Devonshire, occasions her to be more explicit: Let her unlimited confidence be Sacred! — Mr. Cooper (in the highest degree) possesses louisa wilton’s regard : need he then be in suspence about her reception of his friends. — As gratitude and love forbid him now to esteem himself a single individual, let him be careful to preserve, the Sentiments he has professed, to his unchangable louisa Wilton., 
— What think you my dear Eliza f — I am astonished at my intrepidity! but ’tis over; he is gone, and left me only the pleasing remembrance, that I have been sincere: If I have Sacrificed any female finesse and artifice, ’ — ’tis to a man of honour, who deserves 

92 
The Fatal Deception'. 
Serves more, than I have the power to bestow. — I wish, yet 'fear, to receive a reply; — Be as indulgent as you can, to your sincerely affectionate 
LOUISA. WILTON. 
Miss 
The Fatal Drception.’^ 03 
Miss E G E R T O N, 
T O 
nouisia WILTON. 
London 
]r Have received your letters ' i have L Seen your Swain, and I forgive; — Forgive! — I applaud you. it’s well indeed for myself, that I forced your Secret from you: Sir William Morden, brute! — pray my dear, I have heard Lord Wilton esteemed a Sensible raan, -- - 
in 
94 
The Fatal Deception. 
in confidence now to your friend, (you ought to know him best) is he really a man of Sound judgement and understanding? — Surely I think not, or could he be So blind, to trust you to run about at bo peep with Will Cooper, and wish you at the Same time to bless, (as he calls it) that Sweet fellow, Morden! Reconcile contradictions if you can, — I honestly confess it is not in my power— — the by, what is it makes your man So fond of me? Is he already beginning to show the proneness to inconstancy, So usual in his Sex or does he find anything in my inquisitive archness, which makes him fuppoie I am in your Secret? Whatever it be, he is more at my mother’s than Lord wilton’s, is almost perpetually at my elbow, and to tell you the truth, louisa, 1 make great use of him; — use of him Eliza.? — Yes, 
louisa, 
The Fatal Deception. 
95 
louisa, — the best use to a Sensible woman in the world : — I divert myself, and dis turb a crowd of coxcombs, who are offended at my civility to him truly, because they pretend to consider them selves my admirers : they are my plagues I for the man of my heart has not yet made his appearance on the Stage of my affeflions; — You never Saw Lambert, — now I think were our pretty adventures to be tortured into a novel, he would be established, the god of my idolatry; — Why does he not come over? Cooper extoils him to the shies; Says indeed he used to be a little wild, -- So much the better louisa, — the more credit in taming him : Now you are run away with Cooper, I am exceedingly distressed about my sister Lucy, — ^ i pos sitively will have Lambert you See; It would be cruel to punish her with Morden; 

g 
The Fatal Deception,, 
denwell, I suppose fiie is a good girl, and as she is yet very young, may wait a little, without injury to her complexion. Your sister in law is the most agreeable woman I ever Saw; I assure you I feel myself awkward in her presence;; like, I wanted to play off Some of my town airs, but her Superior excellence and good sense, makes her never at a loss. Lord Wilton may be happy if he pleases; but should he turn out a fashionable husband to Such a woman, — Heaven have pity upon me. Cooper, hear and tremble louisa! your Cooper, is this evening to escort me to Renalagh; nothing can preserve him to you, but my friendship; yet that you must not doubt, as I am truly your affectionate 
ELIZA EGERTON. 
From 
The Fatal Deception gy 
Mr." C OOPER, at Hart lay Poikt, 
T O 
His SON, in L o n d o N. 
Dear Will, 
HAT heaven frequently astlidls us with misfortune and disappointment, for good and laudable pur poses, is a tenet, for my greater ease in the journey through life, I will northeast vol. I. F ner 
^8 
The Fatal Deception. 
ver lose sight of. The inclosed letter from Mrs. Bruce, dated kinsale instead of Idshon, will not fail to alarni you, as it did me, even before I examined the contents. Great must have been the distress os the ladies, in their fears for our friend. 
That villainous portug uefe 1 how justly founded were your apprehensions; however, should Providence kindly preserve Mr. lambert’s life;; I shall not be Sorry for an accident that must effestually quench eveiy regard for a country where pride and revenue meet with So much toleration 
O 
and indulgence. 
Let mes take this opportunity, my dear Son, to convey to you a caution, 
that 
The Fatal Deception. 
99 
that you give not the least way to irregular passions, the indulgence of which Seldom fail to be attended with horror, contrition and deljaair. 
You will observe a request in Mrs. bruce’s letter, ' that I fear will not be in your power to comply with; but if your regiment is not going abroad immediately, I dare Say Lord, Wilton will make application to the, Secretary at war; and should you obtain leave of absence, repair, by the first ship from Bristol, to offer every assistance within your power to your wounded friend; and fail not to write 'by every opportunity, and relieve our anxiety. 
The absence of Lord Wilton, Ellen, and yourself. Seems to be Sm f 2 V cerele 
loo The Fatal Deception.. 
cerely regretted by our neighbours; and I confess, I am myself more concerned upon the temporary loss of two deserving children, than I care, as a man of Some ressedlion, to discover; not that the pain we feel upon a Separation with worthy objects, can justly be condemned, but it is inutile. If we confine it to •ourselves, it is doubly distressing; if we disturb our less interested friends, their attention is frequently considered as a disagreeable penance complaisance inssidls upon them.. 
Men of your profession, of all others, should not encourage that milkiness of disposition which would lay you under .a perpetual repetition of Sorrow .and concern. 
Distin 
The Fatal Deception. 
io»l 
Distinguish, my dear William, arrd thoroughly understand my meaning; Far be it from my wish, that you should divest yourself of a proper degree of tenderness, and lensibility of heart; I mean to caution you not to suffer tenderness to sink into weakness. 
Be * not Surprised that the gout makes me a philosopher; and as I am not the most impatient of invalids, it has inspired your Sister Nancy (by virtue of her attendance upon me) with an additional degree of resignation; the breaking of a china cup now Scarce induces her to turn her head, and the demolition of a Set, I believe would not make her Scold : — she is a good girl, woithy the F 3 affection 
102 The Fatal Deception". 
affection of her brother and Sister, and of her father’s indulgence. 
The Ladies af Wilton Place, are with us almost every day; they are amiable, and honour Nancy with their affection, your father with their eff teem; Lady louisa has been much disappointed in her hopes of feeing miss Lambert; there is a tender ness about that Lady, Will, impossible to describe! 
I am not fbrry you are removed from Hartley Point, as I was not without apprehensions, the merit of some of those Sisters, might have inspired you with a passion, the consequences of which must have been disagreeable; let me rejoice that you have escaped the peril: 
my 
The Fatal Deception. 
IQ 
my knowledge of mur uncommon prudence, honour, and discretion, alone prevented me from wishing you (when with us) to be less frequent in your visits there. Nancy 
Salutes you, -- -- -- adieu my Son, you 
are the happiness of your father 
E. COOPER. 
F 4 
Mrs, 
104 ' "Lhe Fatal Deception:, 
Mrs. BRUCE, at iw i. n § a t it 
0 
Mr. Ed, C O 0 FE R, H A RT L E y P o j N T ' 
IJST my letters to you my good Mr. Cooper ever be the cause of disr tress to a heart So susceptible as yours? ■ Mr., Lambert is dangerousty wounded, by the hands of villains! men without principle or humanity. 
The 
The Fatal Deception. ic. 
The recovery of my nephew is doubtful, where is your William? Spare him to us my good sir, Spare him to the wishes of a valuable young man, in a most deplorable Situation; and to the earnest entreaties of two unfortunate women, whose hope is wrapped up in the efficacy of your Sons friendship to restore him to us— — Sorrows flow from a portuguese family; the headstrong passion of a young nobleman for my poor Lucy, is the Source of our distress : we were not without our fears,, and purposed to have left Lishon privately; our intentions were discovered, we had barely time to take care of my niece, to embark myself and her, with my poor James, (tho’ in a state of insensibility) on board a Small vessel, hired purposely for our retreat, before 
f 5 
wt 
io 
The Fatal Deception. 
we were pursued by Some miscreants,, friends to the wretch, that would have overwhelmed us with distress: their infamous design was thank our good fortune frustrated; we Soon lost sight of them, but as our fears from them Subsided, our apprehensions on my nephew’s account increased; he was dangerousty wounded, through the breast, and in his thigh and arm; nothing could have possibly Saved 
him, but the resolution and presence. of mind of his Servant Thomas, wiio without suspicion csi the consequences had been the innocent cause of his missortune.. 
‘ A perscn who asted as, a kind of' Surgeon on board the vessel, recovered him by stow degrees indeed, to his. ftnfcs. — He dressed his wounds, as well 
as. 
The Fatal Deception.. 
107 
as well as the extent of his abilities would allow; but did not pretend to So much Sagacity, as to determine our hopes or fears of the consequences. a violent fever Succeeded, and for many days we dispaired entirely of his recovery. 
We landed here yesterday, and have got the assistance of the ablest physician, and Surgeons: they give hope, but will not answer for his Safety; - — mention time and a good constitution as the only means of entirely reestablishing his health.. 
Allow us your Son sir? by yonr friendship for his father, refuse him not to our most ardent wishes! — Lucy is never from his bedside, and will not, I am convinced, be able to F 6 Support 
io 
The Fatal diceptiom 
Support herself, should she lose her brother. 
We are most humanely treated,, at the house of a Mr. traverse in this place, whose goodness of heart, does credit to the general charadte ristic of his countrymen,, for compas iion and generosity. — Your prayers cannot be more charitably directed.. for the restoration of health to. ©ur distressed children, on which depends the happiness of dear sir, 
, your most obedient Servant 
MARGARET BRUCE. 
Miss 
The Fatal Deception. 
Mise G E R T O N, 
LADY LOUISA WILT O N 
My dear Louisa, 
ILL Cooper has acquainted me with the misfortune lately happened to Mr. Lambert! the warmth of his friendship, does him the highest honour. Surely my dear girl, you must be happy in possessing without 
no The Fatal Deception, 
a rival, the heart' of a man. So amiable in disposition, and noble in principle - — Lord Wilton has obtained permission for him to go to Ireland, he has taken leave of me, and Sets out this evening for Bristol. — I never Saw a creature So apparently shocked. So affected, and distressed; yet from what he Said to me, which I transmit you as near as I recollect, you will find louisa Wilton administers no sin all addition to his concern. 
He Seized a few minutes ^ while my mother vas out of the room, (the old lady you must know began to shspedt Some reason on my account, for the captain’s frequent visits to grosvenor s^uare; I Satisfied her, without entirely' Sacrificing your secretj 
“My 
The Fatal Deception. iir 
“My dear Mlfs Egerton I leave “you, — I quit England! — youramia ‘‘ ble friend! — I am most cruelycircum ced, but inform her, no time, dif “tance, or event, can ever make the“ “alteration in my attachment “or erase that impression she has cn ‘‘ graved on my heart. — 
“I have dared miss Egerton, to love louisa Vvilton, the extremity of that love, hurried me into a declaration of it, .contrary to my Sentiments, or principle. — The noble sincerity of that charming woman, would not permit her to dis emble her good opinion, how happy did that confession make me! what pleasiire in the recolledlion 1' yet how strange must I appear to you miss Egerton, when I tell you, 
re 
II 
The Fatal Deception. 
ressedlion Sometimes makes me almost regret my louisa’s condescention— — am torn by a variety of passions! a; knowledge of her regard, alone Supports me,, when refieftions of the inequality of our situations, my gratitude due to Lord Wilton, and his lordship’s en p; ao; ements with Morden, strike me with "confusion, and despair.i — My father my dear miss Egerton, congratulated me in his letter, on the preservation of my indifference, amidst So mnich beauty and merit, as I was exposed to at v/ilton place; and fails not to hint to me the inconveniences that naturally would have attended Such an attachment :. 
Alas 
The Fatal Deception. 113 
CC 
C 
CC 
C 
tt 
It 
t( 
it 
ti 
a 
it 
C 
(( 
(.( 
tt 
tt 
tt 
tt 
tt 
tt 
“Alas my dear madam, how truly may his fears of the consequences be realised! — I will never give up my love, however hopeless; - — butlouisa must not be made unhappy on my account; — I have conjured her at all events, never to listen to any applications, that may be made in Mordents favour; — He is a worthless fellow and of most abandoned principles! — But should a man of honour, and worth,, ever receive the Sanflion of her brother, advise her my good miss Egerton, to put me out of the Scale : The happy husband who shall |x)ffess louisa Wilton, Surely cannot but endeavour to merit, and must in the end acquire her esteem. — I have already told your friend, I cannot be Superlatively miserable, if I know that she is not unhappy. 
“What, 
114 The Fatal Deceptioit. 
“What a talk my kind Mils eger tonne, does honour and gratitude, in fiidl upon me! — I promised Lady louisa, I would not without her permishon, take the liberty of writing to her; let me entreat you my dear madam, to convey to her the Sentiments of my soul; to the hour of my death, shall I adore your friend, with a passion the most fervent and disinterested; — present, good Mifi Egerton, my dearest wishes to louisa and accept my sincere prayers for the happiness of you both.” 
I think your lover louisa, rather too delicate in his Sentiments; and I would have told him So, had he not left me abruptly, notwithstanding I cannot but pity him, and have allowed permission for him to write to 
me. 
The Fatal Deception'. ir 
me, when the violence of his passion gets the better of his discretion, to prevent him making a less prudent choice of a confident : If you should find yourself inclined at any time to indulge him with a billet, I will at all risques undertake to inclose it. — 
Am I not une amie Men commode? you may Some time or other do me the like office, and verify the old proverb, one good turn c. the thought brings poor Ivambert to my mind, good god what he must Suffer I the vile wretches! But I hope the company of Cooper, may contribute to his recovery. — He must be cured, and I will have him I am resolved; I vas half afraid of that Clara but I think it’s now over with her. — Lady Wilton is distressed beyond description at 
tills 
ti 
The Fatal Deception. 
this event, James was a kind of favourite with her I fancy louisa I am a tolerable good lass, I hope I may Say without vanity, yeti begin to fear that I Scarce deserve the possession of a man, who has interested everybody So much in, his favour; Lord Wilton himseif can Scarce console her ladyship, or expel her fears for her old acquaintance, adieu! if my letter had been entirely silled with my own nonjence, you might have been weary, but Louila as you know that is not the cafe; I make no doubt you will greatly acknowledge my friendship, and believe me that I am. yours in the usual style. 
Grosvenor 
square. 
ELIZA EGERTON. 
WILL. 
Tjhe Fatal Deception, iiy 
WILLIAM COOPER, 
T O 
Mr. C OOP E R, at Hartley Point, 
My Dear Sir, 
E have great reason to hope our friend will be restored to our wishes; — many of the dangerous Symptoms which threatened him are vanished, and the Surgeon pronounces a perfect, though tedious recovery— — 

iis The fatl Deception'. 
When he is Sufficiently able to bear the fatigue of a voyage to England, it is proposed for him to go to Bath. 
The happy prospedt of my friend’s recovery, joined to the pleasure I receive in the company .of Mrs. Bruce and her niece, and the worthy hospita ble attention of Mr. Travel fe, makes my residence here extremely agreeable; the unaffedted good nature of our host, and the great civility of a Set of gentlemen I have been introduced to, gives me the most favourable impres fion of this country; — an impression V hich I think will not easily be eradicated. 
As I know you must be exceedingly anxious, to hear the particulars of Mr. lambert’s affair in Portugal; — 
receive 
The Fatal Deception. 
11< 
receive dear Sir, a brief account of whatl have been able to collect, from Mrs. Bruce, miss Lambert, and Thomas; who has washed away the indis cretion, which occasioned his master’s danger, by the exertion of his courage in his preservation. 
We are directed by the Surgeon not to Speak to Lambert, upon the Subject till his health is more confirmed, and there are many circumstances that he only can explain. 
Don johnd’almade after receiving io unfavourable a return, to the declaration he made miss Lambert, Seems from that instant to have given himself up to a determined revenge; — theobjedls of which, were Lucy, and her brother she latter, it is apparent to us, he purposed 
120 
The Fatal Deception. 
posed to destroy; — the former to carry off!: — What would have been her usage, had not his villainous design miscarried, cannot be known! but there would have been everything to fear from the violence of his passion, and the brutal savageness of his disposition. 
In order more effectually to shcceed in his design, he disembled his chagrin and by tampering with Donna clara’s maid, (who had commenced an amour with Thomas) he gained information of Mr. lambert’s design, to quit Lishon much Sooner than had first been proposed. 
This it appears, D’almade must have communicated to his sister, as well as his intention of carrying off 
miss 
The Fatal Diception., 121 
Miss Lambert: — what could have induced her to consent to So villainous a' Scheme being pradifed upon her friend, cannot be guessed at; but it is apparent, she was a stranger to the design upon Mr. lambert’s life, until a very little time before its execution. 
clara’s maid by her profession of tenderness for Thomas, artfully drew from him, that his master had hired a veffei to transport them to England, that everything was in great readiness, and their intended embarkation would be in a few days; — this she failed not to communicate. 
A most pressing invitation from the d’alraade’s, to a ball, which he proposed to give to Some of his most intimate friends, was the immediate vol. I. G con 
122 The Fatal Deception. 
consequence : — Mrs. Bruce and her niece, not only declared absolutely against going themselves, but earnestly entreated my friend to decline it, apprehensive of Some fatal consequence; he could not be persuaded to suspedl, any dishonourable treatment from a family esteemed one of the best in Portugal. — How nearly has he esca ped from falling a Sacrifice to a depen dance upon the honour of a man, whose whole Soul was possessed, with the prospedl of a most Sanguine re venae. 
An hour after Mr. Lambert left the Ladies, Thomas returned, horror and consternation in his^countenance; told them they had not a moment to lose, and if they valued their own preservation, or regarded his master 

The Fatal Deception 1^3 ter, to follow him instantly: -- -- -- -- he 
conveyed them on board a ship, and taking the Surgeon with him, arrived barely in time to preserve his mas ter from certain death, and convey his body, lifeless to all appearance, to his disconsolate relations. — D’AL made he believes fell a Sacrifice to his unworthy attempt, as he • Saw his master run him through the body the instant before he dropped himself; overpowered by the wounds he received from D’almade, and his abandoned associates; — these, the Surgeon and Thomas obliged to retire, and gained Sufficient time to take proper measures for their own preservation. 
Lambert had told Thomas, that a design was formed against his life, G 2 and 
124 ’i'he Fatal Deception. 
and the honour of his sister, that the information was indisputable, as he received it from Donna Clara : -- or dered him to lose no time, in conveying his aunt and his sister on board a ship, and to return with what Speed he could to his assistance. 
This is all we are able to learn, but there Seems to be an inconsist ancy in Donna clara^’s behaviour, 
which time alone must unravel. -- -- -- -- -- 
please my dear Sir to communicate the contents of this to my Sisters, Lord Wilton, and the family at’ Wilton Place, to whom my sincerest re spedls; — it is not possible for any man to be insensible to the accomplishments of the ladies, you cautioned ijie about; — but whatever may be my 
fejiti 
The Fatal Deception.' 125 
Sentiments, I hope you will never have occasion to censure my conduct. 
Mrs. Bruce is a most accomplished and beneficent woman: — miss Lambert a compound of everything lovely! — her tenderness, and regard for her brother, not to be paralleled. — Adieu my beloved father, honour with your good opinion and esteem, 
your most affectionate, and dutiful Son, 
W. COOPER. 
g3 
WILL 
326 The Fatai. Deception: ^ 
WILLIAM COOPER, 
T O 
Mifi EGERTON,. Wi LTO n pi ag*. 
My Dear Madam, 
^ I N C E the information I Sent my father, of the Situation I found: Lambert in, on my arrival at Kinfale,, fwhich^ accounts I requested him to transmit to my Lord wilton’s family) my friend recovers Surprisingly,, and as. 
the 
The Fatal Deception. 127 
the Surgeon pronounces him now ins tirely out of danger, I have at the direction of Mrs. Bruce, prevailed upon miss Lambert to continue a correspondence, already begun betwixt her and my sister Lady Wilton; — nothing could with more prudence have been proposed by that attentive aunt; — as miss lambert’s fears for her brother’s life, together with her close attendance upon him, have not only Sunk her Spirits, but impaired her constitution. 
She is in person lovely beyond description, - — in manners most amiable, — her Sensibility of heart extreme which I apprehend has been heightened very considerably, by the recluse method of her living in Portugal. — The late death of her father, and the recent shock she has Sustained, in her G 4 fears 
128 The Fatal deceptigen. 
fears for the life of a brother, she is distradtedly fond of, has given her an appearance of dejedtion, which I hope Mr. lambert’s cure and the company she will necessarily be introduced to, will very Soon disperse. 
To a man distngaged, I know not a more dangerous object than miss Laipbert, when our admiration, our pity is So greatly engaged, love is a natural,, and easy transition : — I cannot avo 14 doing justice to the accpm complifhments and merit o my friend’s Sister, though the warmth with which that very friendship makes me describe her, might give suspicion that my heart had not escaped with impunity; — But am I not the lover of Lady louisa Wilton? am I not addressing that amiable woman’s most 
inth 
The Fatal i>eception. 
129 
intimate, and beloved friend? might not Lady louisa’s beauty, and accomplishments, with Safety put the most abandoned inconstancy to the trial? — and am I hot too well acquainted with the generous dispositions of you, and your lovely friend, to be apprehensive of your forming unjust conjectures, of the justice 1 do to a young Lady, of Such extraordinary merit. 
Mr. Lambert will very Soon, I flatter myself, be able to bear the fatigue’ of a voyage to England; — Mrs. Bruce and his sister, are anxious to try the effects of the Bath, from which they have been promised So msuch benefit. 
I shall continue Sometime longer iu this country, as Lord Wilton has G 5; recom 
io The Fatal dnceptron. 
recommended rrie to the Lord Lieutenant, and I have received his excellency’s orders to attend him at Dublin, as Soon as my friend’s health will permit me to quit him. - 
The obligations my Lord continues to heap upon me, fills me with the most unhappy refieclions; and ■ there are Some passages in his lord ship’s letter that distra(5t me! — Ingratitude I detest. Dissimulation I abhor,, yet find myself unavoidably hurried: on by a virtuous, and worthy attachment, to the commission of both; — unable in my present disorder of mind, to assume the appearance of tranquillity, my friends anxiety has drawn from me an avowal of my sentiments for Lady louisa; — his friendship and regard, makes him think of me in too 
con 
The Fatal Deceptiont. 131 
considerable, and deserving a light, and has prompted him to give me those hopes, which a due sense of my situation, will not permit me to encou 
I love louisa more than life !^ — but a dishonourable attainment of my wishes, would for ever embitter the 
felicity of possession. -- -- The most 
flattering presages of hope, can Scarce preserve me from extreme dispondence; r 
So entirely. So sincerely devoted to your friend, your humanity will I hope Suggest to you, that nothing can give me more heartfelt satisfaction, then to hear she is well and happy; — let it be to my dear Miss fgerton’s friendship that 1 am indebted for that pleasing information. 
G 6 
132 
The Fatal De C eptloft. 
My most respedtful compliments, and good wishes attend Mrs.. Egerton,, and yourself; — I remain dear madam, your Sincerely affectionate, and 
most obedient humble Servant 
'W. COOPER. 
Msh 
The Fatal Deception. 

Miss .LAMBERT, 
T O 
1l A n Y W I L T O N. 
vlcinfiilc. 
W. 
ITH what eagerness, my dear Lady Wilton, does my grateful heart long to thank your worthy family, for the recovery of a brother I So truly love. — Restored to us under heaven by the attentive affcdlion and. friend 
^34 
The Fatal Deception. 
The Severe appre felt on my dear 
ship of yours. -- -- 
hensions I have james’s account, has given strength to the disorder upon my Spirits, which I indeed, endeavour to conceal from him and Mrs. Bruce, as I revere and regard them too much, to give them, unnecessary concern. 
England, and happier prolpedls, will I hope restore me; — Mr. Cooper presses me So strongly, to renew a correspondence. which does me honour, that I cannot help complying with his request; — though the consciousness of my want of experience, does not fail to convince me how unequal I am to the talk, and how much my simple epistles, must Suffer upon the comparison.. ' 
But 
The Fatal deceptior't 

But stis Mr., Cooper, stis my brother’s preserver, that requests it; — It is to Lady Wilton I write, who will generoufiy make every allowance for my inability. 
How rejoiced shall I be my dear Lady when we arrive in England; — my brother’s strength increases So much,. that we hope we shall be able to embark, by the beginning of next montst for Bristok 
Mr. Cooper has already wrote, for your father and sister to receive us there; — how I anticipate the pleasure of meeting with a family So worthy, and to whom we are So much obliged; — but Mr. Cooper mortifies us with the information, that his affairs will not admit him to accompany us; — he 
pur 
136 The Fatal Deception, 
purposes to Set out for Dublin,, the moment we quit Kinfale; — he has Ishnd informed your father of most of the circumstances, of my brother’s inten ed assassination. 
It is a subject I tremble to think of, but as heaven has been gracioussy pleased to avert its execution, I will endeavour to make you acquainted with the whole; — to which end, I in close a letter from my unfortunate friend Clara, in answer to one I could not avoid writing Soon after our arrival at this place, reproaching her with the cruelty of her brother’s behaviour, and the misery we have by that means Suffered. 
Your ladyship’s humanity will be interested on her account, and I doubt 
not 
The Fatal Deception. 
^37 
not you will preserve a Secret, in your family, which she deposits with So much confidence; — particularly as a disclosure of it is entirely unnecessary : d’almade’s fatal passion for me, is Sufficient to account for his villainous conduct to my brother, and I am af sured his delicacy would not allow him to expose the regard of a Lady, whose love for him, (though it might contribute to his misfortune,) has'fixed her irretreivably miserable. 
I have returned Such an answer as will I hope be a means of mitigating her distress; — I have offered her, if she pleases to accept of it, a continuance of my friendship and correspondence, though after what has happened, I wish she may decline it. 
My 
is The Fatal Deception. 
My aunt and brother join me in most sincere good wishes and respedt full compliments, to your ladyship. Lord Wilton and the family. — I am very particularly, my dear madarct your ladyship’s ever 
obedient and obliged, humble Servant, 
LUCY LAMBERT. 
CLARA 
The Fatal Deception. 139 
CLARA DSALMADE, 
T O 
L U C V L A M B E R T. 
Lisbon, 
OUR letter, my Justly offen ed Lucy, though filled with reproaches Severe as your gentle nature was capable of writing me, raised me at the instant from a situation of the mpst dreadful despair, to a condition 
140 The Fatal Deception 
tion (comparatively Speaking) little short of happiness, when by it I was insormed, that your too amiable brother had escaped affassination; — an attempt that deprived me of mine, who however unworthy, was still my brother. 
Lambert lives you say, may he be happy; — though he has for ever ruined my repose. — I loved your brother, shy dearest Lucy, with the most violent passion! — I had determined to explain myself before you quitted Lishon, and from the flattering compliments I have had paid to my per son and understanding, I was not without hopes of engaging a Suitable return: — my family you know is noble! my fortune considerable! — and I 
fool 
The Fatal Deception, 
141 
foolishly imagined, the offer of my hand not unworthy his acceptance. 
By the address of my woman, Don John was acquainted with your preparations for privately quitting Portugal; — “how shall I describe his rage, or my astonishment when v/e heard it! — a momentary resentment took place in my breast, of the most tender and disinterested affection— — often did I curse the fatal dbje<5l: of my wishes, myself! — the whole world! — torn with despair, and raging like a tygress deprived of her young !• — indifferent to the wrath of a brother, jealous of his honour, which he unreasonably supposed injured by my grovelling attachment, as he called it, for a private man : — the agitation of my mind, made me Superior to fear, I avowed 
my 
142 The Fatal Deception. 
my love! and dared Don john’s utmost vengeance. 
will you forgive me, my beloved Lucy, will you obtain forgiveness of your brother when I am reduced to acknowledge, that overcome by the violence of my passion, and my brother’s imprecations, I agreed to his proposal. 
We gave you an invitation to a ball, which we hoped would have been accepted: — my brother told me, if I could prevail upon Lambert to oblige you to become his wife, he would with pleasure agree to my union with him; that he would give me a Sufficient time to explain myself to him, but if he obstinately persisted in refusing to concur with our designs; — 
he 
The Fatal Deception. 143 
he should be forced on board a vessel and landed in England. 
Mrs. Bruce and you were to be carried off to an estate of his in the country, when, by force or entreaty he would prevail upon you to be his. 
As your brother came alone, and it required an entire change of measures, he left us to consult with the friends of his rashness and temerity, the Surest way to effect his design. 
In Spite of the natural timidity of our Sex! in Spite of the pride of family and fortune! I declared my regard for your brother, in the most affecting terms; — my sighs — my tears Lucy, were unavailing 1 the barbarian 
144 
The Fatal Deception. 
nan would only afford me his friendship and esteem! no doubt my anger would have made me take Some horrid resolution, had not my woman at that moment called me aside, and informed me of my cruel brother’s real intentions, which she had fortunately overheard; remorse for the part she had acted, made her communicate them to me. 
You, my dear Lucy, was not to have had the honour of D’almade for a husband;; brother was to be assassinated! my love for Mr. Lambert, my. friendship for you, took place of every other passion: I apprized your brother of his danger, and conjured him to take immediate measures for your flight, and his own Safety he left me, 
Lucy 
The Fatal Deception. 145 
Lucy, the most unhappy and dis traded of my Sex. 
My brother’s body was very Soon after brought home, pierced through the heart, by the man who had before deprived me of mine. Your brother I was also informed was dead, or at least mortally wounded. 
What have I not Suffered since that fatal night! — Don john’s vile associates (who it Seems attempted to overtake the vessel you escaped in) have been obliged to ssy; my distressed father declaring that he will look upon them as his shn’s mur .derers, who were the encouragers of his riots and licentioufness. Your brother, my dear Lucy, has killed mine; he has fixed an inseparable vol. I, H bar 
14^ 
The Fatal Deception. 
bar betwixt us, and there is nothing I can think worth the living for 1 a convent or a grave closes the Sad Scene, upon your wretched unfortunate friend; an early victim to a too susceptible heart! 
I acquit your brother of any dishonourable attempt to engage it, I freely forgive him the blood he was (in his own defence) obliged to Spill; and it is my earnest prayer, that in return, you both will forgive the inconveniences our unhappy paf sions have occasioned you. 
I have inclosed a ring, which as the last favour 1 shall perhaps ever request, I entreat your brother to wear, that it may Sometimes remind him of my love and my misfortunes. 
My 
The Fatal Deception.' 147 
My father’s misery, though great, is not comparable to that, of dear, worthy Lucy, your truly affedlionate, but most unhappy 
CLARA D’ALMADE. 
Hi ' 
JACK 
t48 The Fatal deceptibn. 
JACK FEATHERSTONE, 
T O 
WILLIAM COOPER. 
Temple, 
Y Lord Wilton I have been informed of lambert’s late danger, and the present prospedl of his recovery! — I think myself exceedingly happy not to have been acquainted with the affair, till I am assured of his Safety: — 
The Fatal Deception. 149 
ty; — 'I will most certainly give him the meeting at Bath, and Shall expect an intimation from you or him, when he purposes to quit Ireland. — 
You ought not to be furprised at ray leaving (eens, or fixing my headquarters at the Temple; as in one of my last I hinted to you — I was weary of a college life; fo being perfectly undetermined as to my future conduct, I have purchased a Set of chambers, by which means, I shall be at liberty to pursue my own inclinations \yithout restraint, or incon yeiiience; do riot fuppole I mean the indulgence of vicious ones! I have lately had a Severe lesson against it, which has made a greater impression upon me, then all the advice your friendship could have dictated— — 
3 You 
150 The Fatal Deception. 
You have frequently asserted, the rascally Set I hcd ^ot into, occasionally levied heavy contributions upon my purse; shame made me usually evade the charge, — But as the highroad to repentance, is confession and contrition, I now candidly declare to you, thatthose contributions have really amounted to five thousand pounds, within these last three years 1 censure me not, my own conscience tortures me Sufficiently: 
How long I might have been the dupe to a dishonourable confederacy, that took every opportunity to rob me, I know not; had not the discovery of a piece of villainy, which touched me nearer than the loss of money, made me acquainted with my own folly, and their infamy : Patty, 
that 
The Fatal Deception'. 

that very deserving girl, for whom I have the most sincere regard, was near falling a victim to their brutality 1 
Lord Morfon wis acquainted with the place of her residence, not a stranger to the worthiness of her principles, or the regard I had for, her; while his passions were in pursuit of another object, she was left undisturbed. 
After his disappointment, Patty received many overtures from him, Some personally, others by his Scandalous companions; — she prudently rejected them all, but her opposition So increased his flame, that he ('neither being restrained by honour, compas fion, or apprehension of my rdent ment,) attempted to offer violence! 
H 4 her 
152 
The Fatal Deceptioal 
her strength and resolution, with the interposition of an honest fellow, at work in the fields, near them, prevented the completion of his design 
I demanded satissadtion of him, and his lordship’s courage, not being upon a par with the baseness of his heart, or the warmth of his constitution. Submitted to make the most mortifying concessions, ^ well convinced that my purse had enabled him to execute many vile Schemes, I insisted upon it that he instantly lodged five hundred pounds in my hands, for the use of Patty; as the only means of preventing a prosecution for the assault: 
I have enjoined the whole Set, never under peril of being exposed to 
the 
The Fatal Deception, 15^ 
the world, ever to pretend the least intimacy, or acquaintance with me in future. 
The money is lodged in patty’s name, at a banker’s who has Sent her the Securities; -- IHAVE also Settled upon her an annuity of one hundred per annum, while single, at my pleasure to continue, or be reduced to fifty if she should choose to marry. 
This clause however I dare Swear I shall never take an advantage of! her mother having been in the early part of life conversant in business, and as Patty was with a milliner two years before pur acquaintance commenced, they have determined to open a millinary warehouse in a principal town in the north of Lngland, where H 5 they 
154 The Fatal decernoni they are assured of certain success. — 
My liberality as she styles it, has reconciled the mother, to the situation her daughter has lived in with me, — But I am afraid it will never have the Same effect upon Patty. 
Our parting was truly affecting 1 The poor girl loves me, and I ami much concerned to sindsthough I have fettled upon her what she calls too lavish a provision, it will not establish happiness and peace of mind! — she has promised to consuit me upon e very extraordinary occasion, and most richly deseryes my perpetual friendship and regard, — though entirely at her own request cur parting, for reasons indeed which does her the highest honour, I feel sensations 
upon 
The Fatal Deception. 155 
upon losing her, which it is not in my power to describe, — ‘if I do not till Icve her, stis Something exceeding like it! — Adieu, you shall hear from me again Soon 
JOHN FEATHERSTONE. 
H 6 
Mrsr 
j The Fatal dsceptionii 
Mr. cooperj 
t o 
1. FEATHERSTONE. 
Kinfale, 
O' 
'IJ R friends intend failing in a few days for Bristol, I sincerely wish their passage may be short, as a tedious, or Severe one, i^m afraid Lam jbert is not entirely able to bear— — 

The Fatal Deception. 157 
As Lord Wilton has communicated to you the Portuguese affairs, a recapitulation is unnecessary; — miss Lambert, if you have eyes, Sensibility, or Sentiment, will very loon make you feel for poor Patty, nothing but compassion and friendship. 
Your conduct to her does you credit, and bespeaks the goodness of your heart; your behaviour to Lord morson was Spirited and just: how vile indeed must be that man, that can dare to commit infamous adbions, and afterwards Submit to ignomihious concessions I a villain excites our horror! but to a cowardly villain, we justly add our contempt. — Lambert rejoices your friendship will induce you to meet him at Bath; may thing happen to prevent it. — • C 
I lately 
15-8 
The Fatal Deceptioi^. 
I lately received a letter from Lord Wilton, to whom I am everlastingly obliged, — am I not then a villain, little inferior to Moision, that can receive a continual Succession of benefits, and know m}ffelf the bar to what he Seems to have most at heart Sir William morden’s alliance with Lady louisa? 
I am obliged, Scruel necessity) to dissemble with his Lordship, and deceive my father, 'apprehensions of what Lady louisa might Suffer, from an avowal of my Sentiments to Lord Wilton, alone prevents me; were myself only concerned, it would not admit a moment’s hesitafion; Lord Wilton should know me for the paf sionate admirer of his Sister, — he would in all probability withdraw his interest 
The Fatal Deception. 159 
terest from me, but he could not then have reason to style me a traitor to his confidence and friendship. — advise! direct me! I who used to take upon me occasionally to condemn your conduct— — Severely do I censure my own. 
Lord Wilton has told me he is most unhappy to find Lady louisa entirely averse to Morden, that not only his honour is pledged to him, but that his own interest, my sister’s, and his whole family, depends upon Lady louisa’s consent. 
I am distraded! — Lord Wilton also informs me he purposes to take Lady Wilton to Bath, and has wrote to my father, to request he will allow the ladies at Wilton Place to 
accom 
io The Fatal Deception. 
accompany him, and my sister Nancy to the Same place; when they meet Lambert. 
Oh Jack, you can have nojdeaof what I feel! — Morden is certainly intended to be there, and though Lady. louisa was promised a year free from persecution, I See Lord wilton’s mind, is intent upon obtaining a more Speedy concurrence to his wishes for morden’s success. 
From the expreshons he makes use of, I fear he is III morden’s power, who presses the performance of Some horrid agreement; — hastens to Bath. 
-- -- -1 am Secure in your friendship 
and lambert’s. 
Find out if possible Lord wilton’s strange infatuation to that wretch; — 
and 
The Fatal Deception.' ii 
and endeavour by all just means, to prevent a Sacrifice of one of the most amiable, most deserving women upon earth; — deliver the inclosed to miss Egerton in grosvenor square : — she is my louisa’s bosom friend, need I Say more! — Direct to lucas’s, Dublin, for 
your affectionate 
WILLIAM COOPERJ 
V 
W 11^4 
id: 
The Fatal dfceptron. 
WILLIAM COOPER, 
T O 
misi. EGERTON. 
Dear Madam, 
Take the liberty of introducing to your acquaintance Mr. feather stone, who I have charged with a delivery of this; he is the friend of Mr. Lambert and myself; a gentleman of fortune and honour. 
How’’ 
f 
The Fatal Deception. 
163 
How shall I describc, my dear miss Egerton, what I Suffer? — The Ladies from Wilton Place meet Lord Wilton at Bath; My fears tell me Morden will be there : His lord ship appears more anxious to complete this dreadful engagement than ever; Lady louisa will be made unhappy by her brother’s entreaties, for which I fear he has more Substantial reasons, than mere casual attachment. 
Ought I not to explain my most Secret Sentiments to Lady lonisa, whose confidence in me has been unlimited ^ 
Lord Wilton lias distressed me beyond measure, by confidentially acquainting me with the great desire 
he 
isi4 
The fat^il Deception. 
he has to bring affairs to a Speedy conclusion, betwixt her Ladyship and Morden, I love Lady louisa beyond expreshon! — would Sacrifice to that love the most Splendid pros pedls! — but I have too just ari opinion of her to fuppose she would permit me to continue a condinfl, that will in the end cover me with disgrace! — I must give up louisa; Be to Lord Wilton a false const' dant, or, by an avowal of my regard to her Ladyship, relinquish his lordship’s frienciship and esteem for ever: — Cruel alternatives! — The first I will never fio but with life; the Second, is to a degree dishonourable, and the last may Subject the object of my dearest wishes to distresses, the very apprehensions of which dis tradt me. consult your friend, — with 
her 
The Fatal drcepfioir. 
165 
her I dare Safely repose my honour and my love. 
How much reason have I to apologise, my dear madam, for the trouble I am under the neceshty of giving you : — How sincere are my acknowledgements for your uncommon friendship. 
I am most respe6lfully, Dear madam. 
Yours, ’ 
W. COOPEIL 
Mils 
166 The Fatal Deception. 
Mlfs EGERTON, 
T O 
Lady LOUISA WILTON. Enclosing the Preceding. 
My dear Louisa, 
OUR own judgement and good fense, must determine you how to at upon the perusal of the inclosed; — in a cafe of So much consequence, it is dangerous advising; — if Cooper could for a while evade the disclosure 
of 
The Fatal Deception. 
167 
of his, and your Sentiments, I should suppose it would be best; — but as his honour is Such a stumbling block, you must direct him yourself. 
I do from my heart believe the man to be very far gone indeed, else he would observe that there has not yet happened any great alteration in your affairs, since his honour did not prevent him making a declaration of his regard, or receiving yours in return. 
But he is unfortunately made Lord wilton’s confidant in his designs about Morden! — Well, Cooper has always avered, (he Says without any Selfish view,) that Morden is a bad man; — does not his being consulted by my Lord, put it in his power, 
with 
168 
The Fatal Deception. 
without any impeachment of his honour, to give Lord Wilton his genuine Sentiments of Morden; — will not that naturally produce from his Lordship, an explanation of the reasons, which induced him to promote So abominable a connedlion; — it will then be time enough to take Such measures as may be thought advisable. 
You may Send your opinion about it to me, or which perhaps you will think better, transmit it to him yourself— — So you must direct to him at lucas’s coffeehouse, Dublin. 
An amour without Some difficulties loses half its charms. Such I Sear if ever I am honoured with a lover, will be my cafe, as my worthy mother I dare say will have few objc(5lions to 
my 
The Fatal Deception.’ 
169 
my choice, provided he is a gentleman; — you observe Cooper Says sea therstone is one, and a man of honour, I like everything about him very well except his name • — I am not fond of three Syllable, one reason why I wish to change my own. So Monsieur Feathsirstone stands but a Small chance. 
I assure you the chap complimented me not a little upon my person, understanding, accomplishments, and friendship; — the last you know is a copious Subject. 
I take it he is to Cooper, wshat my Ladyship is to you, at all events then, we can be but Secondary characters.. I likewise dissike; — his eyes are lively and good-natured, those I do not dissike; — his conversation sensible vol. I, I and 
lyo The Fatal Deception. 
and Spirited, that I don’t dissike; — to be honest, there are many things else about him I don’t dissike; — and I really believe I should be a little mortified, if I thought he dissiked me, - 
fjo Hen, Vive ramour, ah, le Pauvre, Lambert, 
adieu, my dear. 
ELIZA' EGERTON. 
J. LAM 
The Fatal Deception. 171 
JAMES LAMBERT, at Bath, 
T O 
WILIAM COOPER, Dublin. 
Mv Deaf Will. 
F T E R a short and agreeable passage, we arrived Safe at Bristol on Sunday last, and the next day proceeded to this place; — I find myself not So much worse from the fatigue, and inconveniences of the voyage, as I ap ^i 2 pre, 
1^2 The Fatal Deception’. 
prehended, and have the pleasure to inform you, my dear Lucy received great benefit by it; — I could Scarce have dared to hope. So great an alteration in her health for the better; — it cannot fail to have a good effect upon me: — her anxiety and care of me, while confined at Mr. traverse’s, has creased my tenderness for her, to a degree I thought impossible. 
We had the pleasure to meet your father, Nancy, and the Lady wilton’s upon our arrival: — Lady louisa is worthy all your tenderness, I certainly give her the preference, though the other ladies are truly amiable. 
There is a tenderness about Lady louisa, that engaged my attention; — will you not call me an extraordinary 
bro 

thepatal Deception. lyj 
brother, when I say a resemblance in her manner to that of my dear Lucy, exalts her very considerably in my opinion. 
Lord and Lady Wilton are still detained in town; — Sois Fe. therstone, wsho I fear is not well, otherwise being an idle fellow, he could have little elfe to do; — I really am much disappointed, for being still weak and not in good Spirits, I make a very indifferent gallant to So many Ladies; — his company at this time would have been invaluable 
Lucy being a little indisposed last night, declined going to the rooms; 
• — my good aunt, Banks, and your father, attended Nancy and the Lady wilton’s; — our absence it Seems was I 3 » 
h4 
The Fatal Deceptiobt. 
a great disappointment; — as thanks to tom’s vanity, our adventures are pretty well Spread about Bath; — with as muchexaorperations, as attended the story of the black crows. 
1 tvas exceedingly angry with the teliov/, till I recollecsted him the pre ierver of jny life, and curled my impetuosity! — I shall be much distressed on lucy’s account when we appear, as she is timidity itself : — we must however bear the brunt of curiosity for a night or two, till Something new starts up to cxcit? the public attention 
Our old friend Banks is at present with your father, how rejoiced was I to See them both !Mr. Cooper received my sister and me, with the most 
endearing fondness. 
‘‘ My 
The Fatal Deceptioi^, 
175 
“My children, ” Says he, folding us both in his arms, ' “how happy “am I in embracing the valuable re“ “of my dearest friend.” 
alass! a flood of Sorrow at this re colledlion unmantst him ' -- You are our father now Said Lucy, dropping on her knee, and bathing his venerable hand with tears; Supply that place to us, and receive our tenderest affection. 
He retired precipitantly out of the room to compose himself, and at his return endeavoured by his chearfulness to dispel the gloom, our agitation had 
necessarily occasioned. -- -- -- the Scene 
was affecting I — Lady v/ilton’s were not indifferent Spetators. 
I 4 Mr. 

The Fatal Deception. 
Mr. cooper’s address to, Mrs. Bruce, was equally tender and Solemn; — “I “prepared my dear madam, ” Said he, to love, to revere, — the sister, the “friend of my friend! — favour me “in return with your esteem. 
featherstone I find has given Banks a very good living, and Mr. Cooper agrees to resign his company, fas Soon as ever he is resident upon his estate,) for ninemonths in the year, the other three to be at Hartley Point. 
I never loved Featherstone So much, ~cr liad_fq great an opinion of his judgement, as in this instance of his regard for Banks. 
Farewell, I have been many hours in writing of this — as my head 
and 
The Fatal deceptiofr. 177 
and arm are very weak; -- -- -- -- 1 have 
been occasionally obliged to quit my pen; — I am 
most affedlionately 
Yours, 
JAMES LAMBERT. 
N. B. Lady Louisa blushingly desired me to. Send the incloseci 
I 5 
Lady 
lys The Fatal Deception. 
LADY LOUISA WILTON, 
T O 
WILLIAM COOPER. 
Am, my dear Mr, Cooper, above disguise, and can very ill Submit to prevail upon you to pradlise, any measures disagreeable in themselves, or in your opinion dishonourable. 
You 
The Fatal Deception. 
179 
Yost make me tremble at the letter you Sent miss Egerton! not on my own account, but yours and my brother's : If he cruelly persists in his design, of Sacrificing me to any imprudent, or unworthy engagement, I shall certainly pity the distress or inconvenience, my resufal may occasion him; but at the risque of everything dear to me, Morden shall never receive my hand : my refusal will undoubtedly occasion an explanation of my Sentiments for you; and will pos fibly deprive you of my lord’s friendship. 
I confess my exceeding regard for you, with pleasure confess it! as I esteem you desei'ving my tenderest affection— — leave to your own prudence to afl as you think right; — If, I 6 without 
iso 
The Fatal Deceptiom. 
without hurting the delicacy of your Sentiments, you can avoid (for a while) explaining yourself to my brother, it perhaps may be for the best; but if that is not your opinion, if you cannot do it without lowering yourself in your own eyes, you have my free consent to acknowledge your attachment to me, and to declare your seif possessed of my entire affection. 
My refusal of’sir William would have been steady, from my assurance f his worthleffness, had I never Seen you; my constancy will be inviolable, where I have bestowed my heart. 
In your letter to me, you Said you would never address me again in that way, without my express permishon; 1 now give you that permission un 
Solici 
The Fatal Deception. 
ii 
Solicited, from an assurance you will not make an ungenerous use of it. — 
I was rather awkward, when obliged to beg Mr. Lambert to inclose this to you, though it was not till after he had (with the utmost delicacy) hinted, he was no stranger to the preference I have given you. 
Your friends did not need your warm recommendations, the brother and Sister are universally, and justly admired; — I never Saw So much insensibility of her own accomplishments, as in Lucy Lambert. 
You may be convinced I esteem your love in no very trifling light, as it makes me vain of my own qualifications 5 on that account I may, 
I think? 
i82 The Fatal Deception. 
I think, venture to Say, if I vas not louisa Wilton, I would wish to be Lucy Lambert. I am with Sincere re? guard, dear sir your affedlionate. 
LOUISA WILTON. 
LOUISA 
The Fatal Deception. 
183 
LOUISA WILTON, 
Miss E G E R T O N. 
Bath 
W 
H Y do I not hear from my friend? — have you shut up your Iwain in one of the parlours in grosvenor square, and denied him the use of ink and paper, that we neither See or hear from him? — It is ungenerous to 
detain 
i84 The Fatal Deception. 
detain him from Mr. Lambert in his present Situation; release him then my dear girl, or if not in your custody let him account for an absence that distresses a man entirely worthy his attention, and regard. 
I have wrote to Cooper, and left the determination of the matter to his own discretion, whether or not, or when he may think himself most prudent to declare himself to my brother. 
Lord and Lady Wilton are expected in a day or two I find! — my heart sinks. Sure Morden cannot be of the party.? — but I will leave to the morrow, the evils thereof, perfectly determined with respeft to my future conduct, and convinced of it’s propriety. Let 
The Fatal Deception. 
i 
Let me now give you Some account of our new friends, and the occurrences that have happened since our arrival at Bath. 
The first night, we went to the rooms attended only by Mr. Cooper and Mr. Banks, Lucy being not well, declined going, and her brother would not leave her alone: this was an unexpected mortification to the company, as their curiosity had been strongly excited on Mr. lambert’s affair in Portugal, which, through the simplicity of his Servant, has been the topic of conversation in the town, ever since their arrival; — as the man really behaved with great courage, he was not disposed to Suffer either his own prow ess, or that of his master (for whom he has the greatest love) to be buried 
186 
The Fatal Deception. 
ed in oblivion : whether he vas the author of any embellishments, to the story I know not, but the accounts are now varioufiy related, and sh strangely distorted, that Lambert would Scarce suppose himself a party concerned in the matter, did not the effcd of his vrounds, convince him of having been the principal. 
Last night our whole party made their appearance, and though we went early, the rooms were full, Lambert, who is extr^iely well made, tall and handsome, did not appear in the eyes of the ladies, to any disacivantage; though So weak and pale. — his arm being in a Scarf, was a Sushcient excuse for his not dancing. 

Lucy 
The Fatal Deception. 1s7 
Imcy was universally admired, she danced two minutes, one with the 
Earl of P — -- -- -, the other with Sir. 
John Thornhill; but declined joining in the country dances: her dress was Something betwixt the portugesc and English; but to a degree becoming. 
I am very much mistaken if Lucy will be much beloved by the women, as she attradled the attention and applause of the gentlemen, who likewise showed the greatest civilities to Mr Lambert, I suppose, not a little upon his lovely sister’s account. _ 
My brother, and sister, are this moment arrived; how happy could 1 be, in So agreeable a Society as our present one, did not my heart regret 
the 
isst The Fatal drceptioft. 
the absence of a man I regard; and was it not oppressed with dread and apprehensions, of another I despise. adieu my Eliza, pity my Situation! and believe me ever your affe^ion ate,. 
LOUISA WILTON. 
From 
The Fatal Deception. 
189 
From the Same to the Same. 
My Dear Eliza, 
M. 
ORDEN is not yet come, though, I have too much reason to fear, very Soon expected! My brother, has once or twice mentioned him to me, and with the utmost address, endeavoured to convince me, of the improbability of his ever being able to recede from his engagements. — My charming sister-in-law has, I find, received her lesson too, though I can 
easily 
190 
The Fatal Deception. 
easily perceive it distresses her; I very candidly, this morning, assured her of iny great dioike to Sir William, 
— that I loved and revered my brother, but never would con Sent to So detestable a match as was proposed, should my refusal have the most fatal consequences. She shook her head, her eyes Swimming in tears, but had not power to Say a Syllable, in a cause, I am Sure she disproves as much as I do. 
— My brother is exceedingly fond of Lambert, who is no stranger to my partiality for his friend; I have reason to expect his good offices will prevent Lord Wilton from precipitating matters; - — and I am .willing to put off as long as I am able, an avowal of rny Sentiments and resolutions; which will inevitably disturb the present happi ness of our friends. 
Lord 
The Fatal Deception. 
191 
Lord Wilton gave a breakfast at the rooms on Wednesday, and Mr. Lambert this morning : he is vrith justice much admired; his good fense and manly address, makes his conversation desired by the men, — the sostness of his manners (when with the ladies) may probably cost Some of them dear : the Scars he is still obliged to wear, I have a notion contributes not a little, to the admiration with which he is beheld; as Something out of the common way, is requisite to touch the hearts of these rambling attendants upon watering places! Slaves to fashion. Scandal, and dissipation : their eyes’ frequently chide him for his apparent indifference, — he cannot be totally So. My Sister Wilton Says, he is not So much altered in person from the effect of his wounds, as he is in 
temper. 
19- 
The Fatal Deception. 
temper. He has at present, no appearance of impetuosity in his disposition, which formerly was his characteristic. 
I might be deceived, but I think Lady Wilton cannot, who has been So long acquainted with him : he however declares himself in a state of absolute indifference! His sister has the greatest share of his company, and attention; indeed, vrere she not his Sister, I should not Scruple to declare her the mistress of his affeilions. 
My good little sister Charlotte, I must endeavour to prevent giving way to an attachment, which I readily perceive, a very little encouragement would render violent : the object is worthy, amiable, but indifferent! lambert’s 
The Fatal Deception. 
193 
bert’s continuance near her might be of bad consequence, but our stay will not be long; during which, I will guard her with the precaution of a mother, and the attention of a beloved Sister. 
Old Mr. Cooper, — how much do I esteem and revere that good man! Independent of those reasons, your ssy ness may suppose my good opinion proceeds from, he mingles instruction and amusement, So pleasingly in conversation, you are insensibly edified, and find his tenets. and prin ples, more strongly fixed in your mind, than by the Severe and morose lectures many of our modern orators asset to deliver. 
VOL. I. 
IC 
Mr. 
194 The Fatal Deception. 
Mr. Banks, the worthy friend of this agreeable man, is by the similia rity of his manners, deserving the connexion : he is everything cheerful, pious and entertaining. 
Mrs. Bruce has had her natural gaity and sprightliness, early in life, correxed by misfortunes; and is at present the most amiable woman of her age. 
Once more let me Say, Were it not for disagreeable refiexions, — how happy in Such company, would be your ever faithful 
LOUISA WILTON. 
The Fatal Deception. 195 
miss E G E R T O N. 
T O 
hady LOUISA WILTON. 
M 
, Y Swain, as you are pleased to call him, cannot with propriety be deemed a deserter, not being lawfully attested: I assure my suspicious louisa, he is not shut up in grosvenor square; my mother and I would have been K 2 glad. 
’.1^6 The Fatal Deception. 
Had, could we have informed Mr. sea therstone, • hpw■; necessary his appearance is at. bath, ‘ butoitefeesh's/ her is vipon anodiey route! Some new Oxfordshire intrigue I Suppose, or the consequences of an old one : He clid not even favour us with a farewell visit, but in a card very distant, very formal, presented his relpeflful compliments; an unexpected business— — of mind — distant journey — Return uncertain — would write to Lambert — and was ours, 'cc. — I would alk your opinion, but Such a shuttle cock is not worth a thought. 
these Scarfs, as you Say, are attracting things! Take care of Charlotte — 1 confess it would rejoice my mischievous heart, were he to do any execution upon the more experienced 
dames. 
The Fatal Deception. 197 
dames, as he seems. to be in. no danger himself; and the passions of our present race of coquettes, are So well regulated they Seldom feel the arrows of Cupid above shin deep. But what can this man be composed of? — insensible, say you! can he be inlensible to my louifa’s charms? My charlotte’s amiable softness?? harriet’s fprightli ness? Impossible! So entirely attentive to his Sister! Strange. — My life for it he cannot be totally indifferent? and you will allow me to be a greater adept in the Science of love, than your ladyship, wlio is fo very, verd far gone! A stander by always sees more of the game, than he who plays; and if we cannot judge fo well even of our own game, what knowledge can we be supposed to have, of one played at another table. The hmile is a K 3 ' stupid 
198 The Fatal Deception. 
stupid one, but I think you will comprehend me : In a word, you sup pose Lambert indifferent, I am much deceived if he is So; but I dare Say a little time will discover, which way the needle will point. I once had Some thoughts of taking him myself — ■ but, I think I am not inclined to be So fond of him as I was; Can you divine the rcason of my inconstancy? no, dull girl! then you shall have the pleasure of guessing... — - 
Old Mr. Cooper, do you know louisa, I have a great mind to Set my cap at him! What a charming mother in law shall I make you 1 The thought delights me — methinks I See the dear, gouty old man, hobbling by my side along the terrace, pointing out to me the beauties of the prospedls! 
The 
The Fatal Deception. 199 
The melody of the groves! The m chanting murmur of the brooks! The luxurious verdure of the meadows! Such I presume are Some of the sub jeds, by which you find yourselves So insensibly amused. Shall I go a little farther, and suppose my charming antique, in a state of domestic relaxation, wantonly rolling upon the grass, with a latter brood of dear little Sweet representatives, (that of coursc you may imagine I shall present him with,) playing with his crutches! Ha, ha, ha — How do you like the painting, louisa? “Not at all! mad creature 1 How can you ridicule So worthy. So good a man !” Truce, my good Sententious friend — you know my disposition will not Suffer me to be grave upon any ■ Subject: — I esteem old Mr. cooper’s character highly; and the rather, as 
he 
200 The Fatal Deception, 
fie is the father of your — what shall I call him louisa? your Captain. 
When you hear of Featherstone, you may give a hint, what part of the globe he has rambled to? I should not be a woman if devoid of curiosity : No other motive, indeed, louisa! He has Slipped himself out of my good graces I assure him — But I cannot get my mother to think he has behaved impolitely; she declares she esteems him, and wishes him happy. Heigh ho! well then — when you hear about the culprit, you may if you please by letting us know, very much oblige my mother. 
Tell Lambert, that killing as his Scarf is, I hope he will not be coxcomb 
The Fatal Deception. 201 
i 
comb enough to continue it longer then necessary. 
I love Lucy, and will forgive her out shining every beauty in Bath, but my dear louisa, and her charming Sisters.. 
ELIZA EGERTON. 
Lady 
202 The Fatal Deception. 
Lady LOUISA WILTON 
T 0 
Miss E G E R T 0 N, 
T HAT I may lost no time in Satisfying the great anxiety of your mama, — I have the pleasure to inform you, Featherstone arrived at Bath last night, from a north country journey; which he was obliged to undertake at a 
very. 
The Fatal Deception. 
203 
very short notice, and upon the most 
urgent business. 
This ought Sufficiently to apologise to my dear Eliza, for any Seeming distance or formality in his message 
to grosvenor square. -- -- -- If the most 
respedlful, suppose I call them tender inquiries after Mrs. Egerton and you, can reconcile him to your good graces, let me affure you he deserves them. 
We are greatly concerned about poor Lambert! though almost cured of his wounds, their effects have left him under a dejection of Spirits, that is justly alarming! — his aunt is distressed to the last degree; — miss Lambert inconsolable;; physicians have recommended a change of air, gentle exercise, and lively company. mr. Cooper, worthy 
204 The Fatal Deception.' 
thy man, proposed a general party to Stretton Green, (an estate of lambert’s which he has not yet Seen) the faculty disaproved it and rather wished a friend or two only might accompany him; — as from the smallness of the party he would be induced to associate with the gentlemen in his neighbourhood, who being strangers, Mr. Lambert might be more tempted to exert himself; and from which exertion they had everything to expect. 
Mr. Featherstone most readily undertook to accompany his friend, and stay a few days with him, till a captain will fon joins them; — who Mr. Lambert has appointed his steward; — Mrs. Bruce, and Lucy, would gladly have attended him, but they were overruled 
The Fatal Deception.' 
205 
ruled and continue with us till the gentlemens return. 
Mr, Cooper endeavours to Smother his concern, but he is too sincerely interested in that young man’s happi ness, to do it effedlually; I imagine he purposes joining them at Stretton Green in a few days. 
Was I not So thoroughly acquainted with the uncommon Sallies of your imagination, and well convinced of the goodness of your heart; — your vivacity should not escape with impunity. 
Mr. Cooper, believe me my Eliza, ' is not a proper object of ridicule; — > he is Sensible and learned without pedantry, or austerity; — generous with vol. i. L out. 
2o5 The Fatal Deception. 
out riches; — humane from principle, and religious without hypocrisy;; — I then to be ashamed of re venerating So estimable a man? — who I am proud to Say, is the father of my William, 
Amidst the disagreeable resseistions I am Subject to on the critical situation of my own affairs, and the concern that friendship and humanity makes me feel for the distress'of the lambert’s, my dear Sister Charlotte gives me a large addition of Sorrow; — she droops insensibly, and I am at no loss for the 
cause. -- -- Lucy was yesterday playing 
upon her mandolin. Some new music Lambert had lately procured for her, (she plays and sings ravishingly) we 
were 
The Fatal Decertioi; /' 
207 
were all in the deepest attention, when she Sunk down, upon tjie couch, and fainted away; — by the time we observed her Situation, her brother had Sprung cross the room, and Supported her in his arms. — I never Saw Such a glow of Satisfaction, infiamed him upon her recovery. 
“My Lucy! — my dearest Lucy! ‘‘ how happy, how rejoiced am I to “See you better! — forgive me Ladies,. 
the effects of a tenderness I wish It. not to conceal.” 
No man had ever So deserving a no Sister, So affectionate a brother : — he respedlfully took her hand, kissed it, and led her cross the room to her aunt, ' -- — bless and preserve - - my 
2o8 The Fatal Deception.’ 
my dear Lucy, (Said Mrs. Bruce,) and embraced her with motherly affection. 
The accident disordered us all; — but looking at Charlotte I found her ready to follow lucy’s example; I instantly Supported her into the air, and was happy to prevent, the ill conse quence I feared; — she came to herself; a flood of tears relieved her, and she had recolledlion enough, upon our return to the company, to ascribe her emotions to Surprise, and her fears for miss Lambert. 
My judgement misleads me if I could not have ashgned a juster cause: : • — if she is really struck with lambert’s person, (and to a girl romantically inclined, his present indisposition 
does 
The Fatal Deception. 
209 
does not make it the more improbable, it is necessary she should be separated;; am resolved she shall not continue here after his return. 
That unfortunate Clara! — I fear a fatality attending all who fix their affections upon him : — the misery of a hopeless passion, I will to the utmost of my power, endeavour to prevent my deserving Sister, from falling a victim to. 
Through lambert’s means I have heard from Ireland; — - Cooper Sub scribes to my opinion, for a few days delay in the discovery of our engagement; till it may be effected without fubjeding me to Severity, or ilt usage from my brother.. 
As 
210 The Tatal deceptioiti 
As Soon as ever it can be declared with Safety to me; ~he intreats I will not lose a minute’s consideration about him, but give him up to the consequences. 
I am convinced cooper’s respect for my brother, and regard for me, would make him use every honourable means to avoid coming to extremities But I should be Sorry to expose him, to any unjust, or unworthy invedliveswhich it is possible Lord wilton’s impetuosity may excite him < to ufen ^ 
I hope I shall have a proper opportunity to avow our connexion, while the Irish channel is betwixt 
them 
The Fatal Deception. 21 i 
them; -- -- in that cafe explanations 
may be more cooly attended to, and the fatal effects of rashness prevented. 
TOUISA WILTON; 
End of the First Volume; 
jv; N ust’r. 
, .N 

o *. .1 .i ', : .: : i 
■ 5 lci.i •; ■ 1' : ■ 
: vn w 
fmr 
rit' '-' 

',. r j ( i ir i. 
10: C ^1 
A.: 
?IP 
: 
ff ■■■ 
, sk ^ i 

C 
Si 

SU I 
f S • 
itl i 
Singer *EC75.A100.773f.v.l UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LIBRARIES 
RARE BOOK COLLECTION 
9 April 1934 

im 



^ P. N U G E N t’s I 
Circulating Library, | 
In Bridge jlreet^ Chejier. k 
All new Novels, Histories, Voyages and ^ Travels, that are esteemed to be the ^ most entertaining, lent out to read, at eighteen y Shillings per Year; five Shillings per Quarter, » or threepence the Single Volume, returning X each Volume back in three Days. 5 
All new Publications of Merit, Magazines, X c. got down from London, as Soon as pub V fished; also Plays and Entertainments. a 
-- -- --. 6 
He also Sells (Wholdale and Retail) on the X 
lowest Terms, the following Articles : K 
Elegant Prints, colour’d and V 
UBLES and Common prayers oi all Sizes Schoolbooks, he. Writing paper of all Sizes gilt and plain Pens and Quills Wafers of all Kinds Dutch Wax, Rea and Black Black and Red Lead pencils Bonnet Paftebo ri '^lates 
Glass and Leather Ink Stands Red and Black Letter Cales Ladies £tv\ee caies abes Skin Memuranduni books 
plain Maps, Charts, c. 
Crayons Pencil Brushes Indian Ink Drawing books Playing and meltagc cards ward’s Medicines Beaume de Vie norton’s Drops hooper’s Female Pills daffy’s Elixer Dr james’s Powders And mod of the beft attefted M "'’vines now extant. 
BOOKS bound in the I est and most durable Method; gentlemen’s Libraries repaired and fitted up in the neatest Manner, and all Orders executed with the utmost Regularity and Dispatch, on the most reasonable Terms. Also Libraries and Parcels of Books bought, K sold, or exchanged. A 
THE 
GODFREY F. SINGER MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY 
MR. AND MRS. JACOB SINGER 
I 
Ui 
THE 
FATAL EFFECTS 
O F 
DECEPTION. 
A NOVEL 
IN THREE VOLUMES, 
V O L ir. 
LONDON! 
PRINTED FOR T. JONES, 
AT HIS CIRCULATING LIBRARY IN THE STRANP, OPPOSITE HUNGERFORD STREET, 
MDCCLXXIII. 
■ • F A ' d Am 
■■ •? ' • 'ri; 
; : 1. t 

;, its£ 't 
y' 
'fs'' ''. 
k 
p 
fid. A; F A ^ T 
.„> ' .'7^' 
tl 

P : ?i d ^ A -- im 

> '.'i: 
.. ASA'' 


^^^^0900uooo..o«>00000000^.|^^00<10000»m9000«0«>0»^, ^^ 
THE 
FATAL DECEPTION, 
J. FEATHERSTONE. at Bath. 
T O 
W. COOPER, at Dublin. 
> 
y 
I 
r 
< 
tp 
-§ 
I 
✓> 
V 
la 
<£ 
r 
HAVE lately been obliged to make an unforeseen journey into the North, which prevented my reaching this place before yesterday; — I lose no time in acquainting you with the occasion of my jaunt, and its consequences. 
vol.ii. B A 
2 
The Fatal Deception. 
A letter from Patty hurried me down, her mother died Suddenly, and and her imprudent condudi; before death, (I may without injuring her memory say wickedness)) involved the poor girl in Some disagreeable persecutions,, from which she wanted my advice to extricate her; — in short, her mother had been base enough, to enter into treaty with a diffolufte man of fortune in the neighbourhood, to obtain her daughter’s acquiescence, with Some proposals he had made her, and which she had con temptuoufiy rejected. 
I have been lucky enough to dif sipate her fears, and fixed her much to her inclination, as a boarder in the family of a respedtable clergyman : — he lives a Sufficient distance to Secure 
her 
The Fatal Deception. 3 
her from the resentment, or future in iblence of a fellow, who (presuming upon an affluent fortune,) is neither restrained in his pursuits, by decency or humanity; — patty’s behaviour has been most exemplary, yet however prudent her conduct— — hand some strangers, cannot escape envy and malevolence. 
She thinks no more of continuinp; a shop, a Scheme that I from the first disapproved; but she "was determined upon it from the worthiest motive theprofpedt of supporting herself, in a little time, without making use of the Settlement 1 had made her, which she could not help receiving with regret, as it appeared to her, the wages of iniquity and imprudence. 
B 2 
You 
4 The Fatal Deception. 
You will condemn me I am Sure that not converted by the justness of her Sentiments, and actuated by a revived affection; I dared to propose her return to me! used all the rhetoric I was master of, and offered her unlh noted conditions, but in vain! what was her answer? 
“Mr. Featherstone, you cannot “doubt my love, since to that fa“ “passion, I Sacrificed everything 
a woman ought to hold dear; — “did I love ou less, I should per“ “rested; with less Severity, upon “myself; but our connexion is at “an end. — 
“Leave mei conjure you, in the “hopes of attaining the peace of “mind, I have So long lost, — be 
compassion 
The Fatal Deception. 5 
“compassionate, and tempt me not “to the repetition of an offence, “which will embitter every hour of my “life. 
‘‘ Young, inexperienced, and fond of you to distraftion, I listened, and in a fatal, weak moment. Surrendered myself to your arms, — I was more fortunate than my prudence deserved— — found you tender, and 
generous -- -- while your passion 
was yet violent, — at a time when my whole Soul could admit of no other object than yourself, — prompted by virtue and reason, I urged a Separation, — what, notwithstanding the justness of my motives has not that Separation cost me! — renew not my dear Mr. sea therstone, confiidls in my bosom, 
B 
which 
6 The Fatal Deception, 
“which I can ill Support, — I revere “virtue > though I have been unfor “tunately tempted, to Swerve from “it’s rules.” 
What could I answer? — overcome ^ by the powerfulness of her reasons,, desisted, and promised never to offend her, by any future Solicitations t"g her dishonour. — "slit I will tels you all my weakness— — by the nobleness of her principles, — her tenderness for me, the author of her disquiet 1 I entreated her to yield me her hand, and receive me as her husband— — was at first Surprised, and confounded : but in an instant recollected herself, and absolutely refused me.. — 
I will 
The Fatal .deceptiotr.. 
(( 
({ 
C 
(i 
C 
(6 
C(( 
(( 
“will not deny Said she, that your generosity transports me! I have the utmost satisfadsion, in hear ing your proposal as it confirms me of your good opinion, — had you deceived me with the ptomise of making me your wife; I would not hesitate a moment in accepting it now as you would then have been the party blamable, — but I was in love, I thought of no terms, and weakly, imprudently Submitted to our mutual passion— — 
, few years hence, you will re fiedt upon your present offer, very “differently; and thank me for re“ “you a wife, whose conduct ^ been So reproachable” 
B 4 I was 
8 The Fatal Deception. 
I was obliged to Submit to her determination. — she Seemed however nappier, from the strong instance I had given her, of my regard and esteem : and parted with more com posure then I could have expected; but a composure that I am assured she was inspired with, from refiedions on the justness of her conduct. 
I am this minute Setting out with Lambert, upon an excursion into Berkshire; from which place, you may a gain expect to hear, from your sincere 
I 
j. featherstone; 
From 
The Fatal Deception, ' 9 
From the Same, to the Sa northeast. 
Stretton Green; 
OUR louisa is most worthy your regard. — doubt not her constancy or resolution. — Morden shall not be allowed to divide your mutual affection— — Wilton may appear unaccountable, but he does not want discernment, — Lambert and I are sincerely devoted to you, and expect everything from time, and our ectr B 5 dea 
lo The Fatae dreeptrom 
deavours to Serve you, — Stretton green? with proper management, might be made a terestrial paradise. — indeed nature has already done So much, there is little occasion for brown’s capability — I am not very great at the descriptive, but as there is at present no better painter, you must be Satisfied with my ficetch of it. 
The house is large, the rooms, (though' sot modern,) Spacious, and magnificent! — the offices remarkably convenient, consisting of two wings, joined; by colonades to the body of the building : — If any fault can be found with it, ’tis being upon too large a Scale for the estate; tho’ I find that is about three thousand a year! nothing can exceed its situation, or the beauty of the country round it: — it stands higher 
The F AT At' 0 e C E p T ibff.' 

11 
er then one would expect from the approach, which is by a very lossg,,, but Scarce per cep table ascent. 
There is every way an extensive prospech, except on the northeast: side; from, whence it is sheltered by a large hill, consisting of near two hundred cres of wood land; well grown with excellent timber, fit for the axe — which by the bye, I hope our friend will not be under the northeast eessity of applying, these many years; except V here age makes it proper, there has been walks cut's in many parts of it,, but long disused,. and novr very much grown up, — but lain bert is pleased with the gloominess of the place, and purposes ho have them again put in order, and fresh: ones construdled; So as to make the whole more convenient. 
B 6 He 
♦ 
12 The Fatal deceptio^j. 
He has already plan’d Temples, and hermitages; and means to furnish them, with a proper collection of statues, busts, inscriptions c— — has fixed upon a particular Spot, where he means to dedicate a temple to Solitude — another to friendship : 
The Situations he has pitched upon are admirably adapted to the design, — but I confess myself more plea sed, with the convenience of his stables and dog kennels, the fpaciousness of his park and gardens, the coolness of the cellar, and plenty of his larder; these are essentials, whatever the con noiseurs may pretend, that cannot be dispenced with: a well furnished kitch in, is as necessary for the Support of the body, as a well stored library for the instruistion of the mind. 
* Lam 
The Fatal Deception. 13 
Lambert when his attention is not employed in business, is for ever wrapped sin thought; often shuns my company and retires to his favourite Scheme in the wood, — at night, when of necessity he cannot well avoid me, I start Subjects to engage him in conversation, which he takes the first opportunity to drop; 
In short, I never Saw So great an alteration, in any human being; — to what can it be owing, I frequently put the question > his answer is “nothing; “your presen tinclination prompts you to company and Society, mine to refiedtion and contemplation !”. — I Sometimes tell him he is in • love, he shakes his head, — “He has Suffered “too much already, by the effects of ‘‘ that passion in others; not to dread 
the 
14 The Fatal Deception. 
the consequence in himself— — declines all advances from the gentlemen in the neighbourhood, though I have not been wanting on my part to Second their Solicitations; — I must run away from him myself, lest I be infected with the,, disease 1 
After remonsttating with him today, on the unkindness of his behaviour to me; I have prevailed upon him at length, to Submit I should Send cards of invitation, to the gentlemen to dine with us tomorrow. 
His wounds are now near well,, — his constitution much mended, and could I persuade him to take field exercise; I am Sure it would confirm his health, and mend his Spirits. 
wilson 
The Fatal. Deception. 15 
wilson is expected here from town every day; -- -- -- Lambert having altered 
his former intentions, now pur poses to make him his agent and companion; and .to give a Salary of 
three hundred a year, -- *' -- 1 wish he 
was come, as he is attached to Lambert, and I am told has a great stow os, Spirits, Some humour and much; benevolence. 
Strange, that a. man wits lambert’s prospedts in life, beloved by his friends and revered by his dependants, will not be happy; — that he is not So,, is 
manifest to me. -- -- But if we have 
not all a share of real, we usually contrive to Substitute a Sufficient quantity of imaginary evils; the difference of which. is immaterial. 
How 
i6 The Fatal Deception.’ 
However I think it a duty we owe to a kind providence, and to our own quiet, to attend as much as possible to the brightside of our condition; and those evils which cannot be avoided. Submitted to with resignation. 
If your rattling friend continues long here, expect to find him an absolute stoic : — I wish wilson come, that I may be at liberty to peep at the metropolis; — I cannot quit liam bert under his present ' dejedtion, and if I am not Speedily relieved, I shall be quite moped. 
tomorrow’s dinner I hope will give a brisker circulation to his blood, and make him a livelier companion, to dear William, 
your most affedlionate JOHN FEATHERSTONE. 
miss 
The Fatal Deception. 17 
mifs EGERTON, 
T O 
tady L O U IS A W IL TONNE. 
Y. 
OU have made featherstone’s peace and I am Satisfied; — shall I be Sincere louisa, I feared Some amour. — “Is it So Eliza? — Very true louisa, I told you in a former letter I did not distike him; and did you ever know 
me 
i8 
The Fatal Deception. 
insincere I — do not howtver suppose I am distradledly in love; — no, no, only a trifling penchant., which his tender inquiries (Mrs. Saucebox gives him Some Small right to expect. 
Love my dear louisa, in hearts like mine or featherstone’s, never makes Such a bustle, as^it has done in one that I have the honour to be a little acquainted with; mine, my dear, is a laughing, not a melancholy cupid. — I do not indeed expeist Such very Sublime, happiness, as I sincerely hope will await my louisa in possessing the man of her heart. 
The more extreme our fensibility, I allow, the more exquisite is the felir city, upon the attainment of our wishes, but though my feelings may be less 
sus 
The Fatal Deception 
19 
fusceptible of tender impressions, it is no cause why happiness deduced from reason, should not be equally permanent. 
happiness Sometimes too my dear Eliza, by extremity of Sentiment, dwindles into anxiety and disquiet; — • 'Sentiment likewise may be too fine drawn; — let not that be the case with my louisa. 
My mother repeats every hour, her wishes that I may be addressed by a man of featherstone’s character;; — Says he is personable, good-natured, lively and has a good estate. — Well, 
I do not contradidl; her, but what avails it I am perhaps as indifferent to him, as he shall be to mein two months, if my mother should be mistaken in her conjectures— — insists 
upon 


20 The Fatal Deception. 
upon it there is nothing but a little time wanting, to bring him to my feet. 
How will he wear his chains louisa? like a gentle, tender. Submissive stave think you? — I rather fancy he will be troublesome in bonds, and require my utmost address to bring him under command; — like an angler I must humour his waywardness, till he is fairly resigned to my will; then, like a generous conqueror, if a church door should stand invitingly open, and an obliging. Smirking, personage, with a black gown, and Smooth band, desire us to walk in, I may perhaps be induced to drop him one of my best curtsies, and tie myself to my obedience, for the rest of my life. 
Sea 
The Fatal Deception. 
2i 
Featherstone thus my husband he not ill-bred, or ill natured; — • 
your friend no vixen. -- -- 1 dare Swear 
Swithout being unfashionably fond, or fashionably vicious,) we should jogg on in the old dog trott way, of our great great grandfather’s and grandmother’s, very comfortably — > he will pursue his country amusements without commencing brute; — I, now and then, engage in the diversions of the town, without making him a beast. « -- You See I am not unreasonable! — the numerous miscarriages of the beau 'monde oftentimes proceed from ex pe6ling too much. 
Keep my Secret louisa, least I am disappointed of my man; under which misfortune, if my angry stars decree it So; I will endeavour to comport 
my 
22 The Fatal Deceptioit. 
myself, fan ugly old maidish word that) with all imaginable courage and discretion; — ye powers never let me have occasion to style myself, my dearest louisa’s slighted 
ELIZA EGERTON. 
J. SEA 
The Fatal Deception. 23 
JACK FEATHERSTONE, Stretton 
G R E E N, 
T O 
W. COOPER, at D u B L I N. 
o 
UR dinner the other day has had an admirable effedb! Lambert was more cheerful than I could have hoped for. The company, indeed, were So strange a composition of characters, it was impossible not to be diverted; 
they 
The Fatal Deception. 24 
they are, with two or three exceptions, absolutely beyond description! Materials for punch are not more different than they to each other; yet being well mixed, with an addition of a good dinner, and excellent claret; we made a pleasant composition. lambert’s aunt, or Sister, not being here prevented us the pleasure of Seeing any ladies. A Beaumont, a Williams, and an ambrose, are three gentlemen of moderate fortunes in the neighbourhood; Sociable, Sensible, and well-bred. — The two first married; the latter a bachelor. A physician, one doctor fortescne, reputed very able in his profession — It may be So! but he Jis an abominable companion! as peevish as poor S — #■, and as difficult to be pleased. The rector of the parish, what we too frequently find a redoc.! 
Super 
The Fatal Deception. 25 
Supercilious to his inferiors, assuming to his equals, and a mean parasite to those whose affluent fortunes or con neclions, are capable of Serving his ambition. When he first Saw me, considering me, I suppose, as lambert’s humble friend and dependant; he did me the honour of a slight inclination of the head, with a contemptuous Survey of my person! But after whispering the dodbor, whole curiosity, I apprehend, had enabled him to give the information, that I did not exist upon charity, he was more than commonly attentive and ceremonious to me the remainder of the day. — Bad qualities in a clergyman, like faults in a capital picture, appear more conspicuoussy glaring. 
vol. II 
A hop 
26 The Fatal Deception. 
IL 
A hop fadlor from the Borough, retired upon what he calls a Sufficiency; (fifty thousand pounds,) has laid out twenty of it, in a via about six miles from hence. Happy it is not nearer — I am told it is well worth a visit! He has been at a most immoderate ex pence, in building stupendous ruins without judgement; a Superb grotto where a dairy would have beeli admirable; and a chinese pavilion, decked with the most tinsel ornaments, instead of a hermitage : In short, he has con strudtcd everything, fo contrary to the plain dictates of common-sense; (though one pities,) it is impossible to avoid laughing ' at the poor fellow’s stupidity. 
To put a finishing stroke to the elegance of his designs; he has a'park 
round 
The Fatal Deception’, 
27 
round his house, of large extent, and most admirable Situatiohs, yet he has contrasted (what he calls) his pleasure ground, where these gew gaws are erected, into So sinall a Space; not a single desedl can be hid from the least curious observer : And, to his misfortune, they are Sushciently numerous. 
Will Whlliams, the Wimble of this country, a nephew of Mr. beaumont’s, and a brace of young bacchanalian Squires, completed the group. 
Have I not v.taried you with the account? Lambert acquitted himself pretty well, and as I had hinted to the company the indisposition which hung upon him, his little absences were not attended to — The two family gentlemen went away early, and Seemingly, C 2 well 
28 
The Fatal Deceptici^. 
well Satisfied with their new neighbour. Doctor fortescue growled till he had Swallowed his allowance of wine : The parson’s grey pad came for him at Seven — Lambert left us at ten; and I concluded the evening with the remainder of our company; who did not leave me till three the next morning, happy as ebriety could make them — I had promises of pointer puppies of the very best breed in the kingdom, from honest Wimble — A dissertation upon trade, and the culture of hops, from my friend of the Borough, who has reconciled me to him (notwithstanding his absurditiesj by his great good nature, and keeping; his tongue from evil Speaking! Qualities with me, which hide a multitude of faults. — The Squires were delighted that I loved hunting, repeated pedigrees of 
horses, 
The Fatal deceptio.v. 
29 
horses, long as a Sermon; — offered wagers — proposed matches! made me fix the time for a day’s hunt! Swore I was a jolly fellow, and shook me heartily by the hand — Ordered their horses, 
■ — made the whole mansion echo; hoix tally hoe; — cracking of whips! c— — at last, kindly left me to seek reposts which vras disturbed all night, with dreams of hop grounds, grottoes, horses, and puppy dogs. 
Why do I not hear from you? this is the third, or fourth letter I have wrote without a Syllable of reply! No accounts of Louisa, if you do not 
write Soon -- -- Lambert Says, he is in 
expectation of hearing from you very Speedily : He bids me tell you, though his temper may. be altered, his friend fiiip for you is warm as ever. — He fa c 3 yours 
30 The Fatal Deception., 
yours me with the Second place in his esteem, with which, and your regard,, I am. perfectly Satisfied; being 
very faithfully, 
and affedionately,, 
I 
Yours, 
I FEATHERSTONE, 
WILLIAM 
The Fatal Deception. 31 
WILLIAM COOPER, Dublin. 
T O 
JAMES LAMBERT. 
My dear Lambert, 
U G H T I not to esteem myself singularly fortunate in possessing the friendship of you and Featherstone, and of enjoying, to an unlimited degree, the affections of lo deserving. So heavenly a woman as i.ady louisa — I C 4 am 
3^ 
The Fatal Deceptions 
am not unthankful to Providence for such essential blessings, and in gratitude endeavour to prepare myself to bear with becoming fortitude less fa tourable dispensations — My opinion of Lady louisa’s regard, and the constancy of your friendship, will not admit the Smallest doubt of a dimunition in either — But have I not cause to be alarmed in my fears for her, upon her brother’s discovery of our mutual passion— — I not reason to dread the grief it may occasion my father and sister : And how Severely are my fears increased by the accounts I have received of your unaccountable depression of Spirits — The faculty have'mistaken your cafe; it is a disorder of the mind — Some racking passion, at your heart v/hich you cannot prevail upon yourself to discover; unbosom yourself, 
my 
The Fatal dlceptiq n. 
33 
my dear James, to Featherstone, make him the confidant of your Soul — When cases appear desperate,. the consolation of friendship pours a balm into the Soul — Should you think Featherstone too volatile — If you look upon me not unv: orthy your esteem, instrustrne with / thecause of yourdisquiet^ — Accounts Say you are recovered of your wounds — Why then this dreadful melancholy which oppresses you — Can my Services — can any proof of my friendship relieve you — You know you may command it to the utmost extent — I am every hour in expeffation of things being carried to extremities Vv'ith Lady Louisa— — cannot bear to expose her to the violence 'of Lord wilton’s anger — No behaviour of his shall sofar provoke me as to forget his friendship and my obligations — But I am by no laws of C 5 frendship 
34 The Fatal Deception’.. 
friendship or gratitude with held from’ chastising the infamy of Morden — who through the strange infatuation of a brother, would by violence pof sess a woman who detests him — It is impossible to resolve on any future measures — Lady louisa I know would gonsent to unite her fate with mine — But can I Support her as Lord wilton’s daughter Shall I poorly poffess myself of her paternal fortune, to push my way in the army, and fubje(5t her to the inconveniences of a campaign life — Impossible! If necessary, exert yourself in the cause of friendship,, beauty and innocence, and Suffer not merit like louisa’s to become the prey of brutality -- -- the Sacrifice of oppression 
!: — You villi am Sure, be obliged by So strong an inllance of my confidence and regard -- -- - 
Feather 
The Fatal Deception. 35 
Featherstone has wrote me a long account of his late interview with Patty! Would not a just refieftion of what that very worthy deserv ine woman Suffers, make the most har dened Seducer tremble, who through delicacy, and a sense of her former imprudence, is obligedto relinquish the man it is evident stie dotes upon : She merits a better fate! and compassion would tempt me to regret featherstone’s entreaties to marry him should have failed, did not prudence whisper me, they could never have been perfectly happy! She, at least, from the quick Sensibility of her feelings, certainly would not. — The just consciousnefs she has of her weakness, in resigning herself fo> easily to his attradlions, without being: # deceived by villainous promises, dr other detestable adls of seduduon, would northeast c 6 ver 
3^ 
The Fatal Deception. 
ver have been absent from her recof leftion : She might have made a very deserving wife to our friend, — but I am convinced from her own reason ings, she would have been an unhappy one. -- -- Poor Patty is So far happy, 
in a provision which Secures her from contempt or indigence; and .she can experience where she is now sirua' ted, no malicious insinuations— — reproaches, from the rigid censurers of her own Sex : Unfeeling prudes! who are virtuous from cir cumfcances, or negletst, — not from principle; Patty will have nothing to diseompose her but her own reflections, which ought not to be Severe : As in my opiiiion, her redlitude of conduct since, has amply atoned for every past indiscretion., 
I have 
The Fatal Deception. 
n 
I have often thought, Lambert, that amongst thousands of unhappy girls, (victims to the irretrievable passion of abandoned libertines;) how many might be found, possessed of virtues that would adorn the worthiest of the Sex; — How many (could we Search into the recesses of their heart;) should we find in possession of those real principles of chastity, V e should in vain expect to meet with in the pre tendedly virtuous; from the harshness of whose manners, and the inhumanity of whose remonstrances, these unsor tunates are obliged to. 'shelter them selves, in the arms of vice and dissipation. The Severity of women to each, other, confirm unthinking girls in their indiscretion, more than the enticing allurements of pleasure. 
May 
3§ 
The Fatal Deceptigtc. 
May those fair unfortunates — discarded and Spurned by their own Sex,, and exposed to the brutality of ours \ receive the indulgence of a beneficent being, who judges without prejudice: May their present vrretchedness, atone for their miscondudl; and may my worthy Lambert and I,, never have to reproach ourselves with dishonouring the fairest work of the creation. Let not Featherstone see these remarks,, as he may Suppose I censure his affair with' poor Patty as a crime which (as he was circumstanced) I only consider his misfortune. You are in poffessiori; of my warmest regard, 
W. COOPER. 
J. F E A 
The Fatal degeptroir. 

}. F E A T H E R S T O N E, S t r e x t o N Green, 
T O 
Mr. COOPER, Sen. at B a t h. 
Dear Sir, 
JL N pursuance of miy promise, f sit down to give you,, and our worthy friends at Bath, Some account of Mr. Lambert; — his health is abundantly mended; — exercise and air, will I doubt not very Soon make a great al 
teratiort. 
40 
The Fatal Deceptioit. 
teration in his Spirits for the better; ■ — I with great difficulty prevailed upon him, a few days since, to meet the hounds; st the gentlemen of the hunt, were very attentive to him, and he returned to dinner, better pleased with. the company and diversion than I expected. 
The alteration he is giving direflions about, employ his mind, and keeps him tolerably cheerful; — he however now and then gives way to his strange depression of Spirits, and all my endeavours to entertain or amuse him,, are unavailing.. 
wilson is come, — he. Surely must have a good heart; ■ — I never Saw creature So Surprised, — So concerned; as when he was apprised of cur friend’s 
Situa 
The Fatal Deception. 
41 
situation; it must not be Suffered to grow habitual, if the exertion of every endeavour of ours can prevent it. 
wilson is a favourite, and I dare say a very deserving one of lambert’s, he pays great regard to his advice, and his natural chearfulness of heart, the honest remonstrances, he does not fear giving him, may do great things for 
“Vfhat am I think now, ” says he, addressing himself to Lambert, “I looked upon you, as a man of ho“ “and above a breach of pro mise to any man, ” ’ ' 
Sir, ' — Says our friencs Surpriistd! the sujden chanpe, didmot to bring 
O’ o 
him out of a reverie, that aisiidled us. 
I 
42 The Fatal Deception“ 
“say Sir, ” continues wilson, you have broke yoiir word with me; — you have (I grant it) provided for me nobly, much beyond my desert;. — but you promised also to make me happy you do not So, if I continue to see you uneasy, and in the prime of life giving yourself up. to a melancholy, as unaccountable as it appears to be violent. — The misfortunes I have Suffered, when compared with any you can have felt, would be as a drop of water to the ocean, — — Has not my depend ance upon the goodness of providence, been amply justified? — from whence can your disorder proceed? if merely, from your late illness, you ought to use every effort to dispel it. 
If 
The Fatal dzceptron. 
43 
/ 
“If any circumstance in life, gives you cause of unhappiness, cannot your friends assist you ^ may not their advice at least, relieve you? but if the nature of your despon dence, is owing to causes, that even our attachments will not induce you to acquaint us with; — sink not unworthily under afflictions, but exert your courage, and rise Superior to misfortunes. 
“There is a field before you, will always administer plcasure, even in' your keenest anguish. — you have a noble estate; — let your attention be employed, in relieving the distressed— — are always too great a number of worthy objcdls, to be: found; and to a generous mind, the power of promoting the felicity 
of 
44 
The Fatal Deceptiok. 
of others, will, in a very great de“ 
“contribute to its own. 
“Give me your hand wilson, your “Sentiments are just my distress, “let it proceed from what cause it “may, shall in future, give less dif “quiet to my friends.” 
“.Dis as it should be, ' (replies Will“ “— but a Icffon from life will “make a deeper impression V’ — And he condiidled us to the park, gate; — where four very old men, and as many women, ((Lbourers and cottagers in the acljacent village,) were assembled, and hobling to a tune played by a blind Scraper as old as themselves; — ■ they had lost sight csi their hardships and infirmities; — and in cans of strong beer, were blessing their landlord, 
a 
The Fatal Deception. 
45 
and thanking providence for the few comforts they enjoyed. 
Lambert gave them money, ashed them many questions, and Sent them away in a state of happiness, which only the contented mind can enjoy. — 
“Your lesson my dear Wilson, (Says Lambert,) wants no illustra“ 
“-- -- -1 need not I fancy tell 
you Sir, it was a device hit upon by this worthy fellow, (whose company I am absolutely in love with) in order .to contrast the resignation of the poor wretches, to their Scanty pittance, and themiseries of old age with his affluent condition, and want of resolution. I am Sure it will have all the effect we can wish for; — it has already made the most Surprising alteration. 
Will 
45 
The Fatal Deception. 
wilson will not let him rest a moment, if the weather admits our going abroad he hurries him about his grounds, -- arnongst his workmen or tenants, c- -- -- plans for 
improvements; ■ — regulations in his family; -- -- rewards for the industrious, 
c. 
If the weather confines us within, Wilson very deliberately fills his 
pipe, and introduces the backgammon 
tables. -- -- -- -- -- He Speaks of you 
Sir with the greatest pleasure, and is charmed to find you intend being here So Soon. 
By way of varying the Scene, I have propofeda jaunt to town, for a few days, to which Lambert has ■but we shall certainly return 
agreed : 
The Fatal Deception. 
47 
turn, before we can possibly expe<51: your company at the green. 
Mr. Lambert requests I will deliver his affedlionate love to Mrs. Bruce and his sister; his very best regards to you. Lord Wilton, and the ladies in which he is most respedlfully joined, by dear Sir, 
your obedient, and 
very humble Servant, 
J. FEATHERSTONE, 
W I L '- 
48 The Fatal Deception. 
WILLIAM COOPER, at Dublin, 
His FATHER at BATH. 
^ A M overcome with gratitude and affection, when I refiecl how much I am obliged to the dearest of fathers, for his tender care of my youth, — The precepts which he So affiduousty inculcated in 
my 
The Fatal Deception. 
49 
in my memory, and the principles of virtue, honour and humanity, which by example. So carefully planted in my breast. — How many evils have I avoided, how many inconveniences escaped by my attention to his advice. — the judicious caution you recommended, in the choice of my friendship; how much it has benefited me! « ' 
I have two friends, whom I sincerely value! many acquaintance, that are not unworthy, and with whom I occasionally can be happy in company : — the former will, I am assured, ever deserve' the continuance of'my regard, and should a change happen in my opinion, of any of the latter, I can give them up, without being considerably mortified. 
vol. II D The 
Within the limited bounds, of my Small experience, how many have I Seen striking upon the rocks 3^011 have taught me to shun! men of sense too, who with the assistance of your pilotage, would have been equally capable os avoiding the danger. 
1 
50 The Fatal Deception. 
The first enjoy my unlimited confidence; the last esteem me, as I make no distindlion amongst them, and treat them with civility and res peft. 
Example here, as in other places, is too prevalent! and libertinism So disregarded, that I am only Surprised to meet with So many people, of both Sexes, who have still retained worthy principles, and are ornaments of Society. 
The 
The Fatal Deception. 51 
The Irish, are naturally hospitable, generous, and good-natured! generally found of jollity, and play; and as there are few amongst them, devoid of Spirit; it is Sometimes the occasion of rencounters. 
This passion for tilting, is however, much abated throughout the kingdom! men of sense very justly condemn it, though it must be regretted, they are now and then under the necessity themselves, of drawing their Swords, when ever an illiterate bravo, through insolence or caprice, shall take it into his head to affront them. 
The tendency to a custom So disgraceful, So troublesome to community, cannot be wondered at, when we rested, that people even of the D 2 lowest 
52 The Fatal Deception, 
lowest class,) never neglect this part of education in their children, though unable to afford them any other : well versed in the noble Science, full of ignorance, and Spirit 1 their youth launch 'into the world, eager for an opportunity of dilplaying their talents and magnaminity. 
♦ 
A man of worth. Sometimes falls a victim to their superior address: but as people of this stamp, when once known, are usually avoided, it does not happen very frequently. 
The gentlemen of Ireland are polite, well-bred, lively, and truly brave, without being illiberaiy prejudiced against other countries, they are fond of their own, but not unjustly partial to it.: 
Here 
The Fatal Deception. 5^ 
Here are more Patriots from principle, then on your side the water, in proportion as the distressed inhabitants are more Severely oppressed, though I appertain to the Castle, I may venture to Say to my father, how inhuman it is in the ministry, to burden the industrious! discourage their manufadures! strip the poor, and load this unhappy country, with taxes they are unable to pay! — to pamper the venal appetitesof a Set of needy, worthless, unprincipled dependants. 
While I commifferate the condition of the Irish in general, I cannot but sincerely pity the feelings of our viceroys, — (Such of them I mean, who have feelings) when they find themselves obliged to promote unpopular r unseasonable ads. 
D 3, His 
54 
The Fatal Deception. 
His present excellency, is with great justice beloved; whenever he is obliged to execute anything, contrary to the interest of the kingdom, it is not without the greatest compundion; and he is truly rejoiced when he has the power of Serving them, by a reduction of taxes, or any encouragement of their manufadures or commerce. 
In general, the Lord lieutenant’s have their hands tied, and can with justice be applauded or condemned, as they, with more or less Spirit, remonstrate against illegal and oppreshve measures. 
these I confess are Sentiments, if I was called upon to publish, which would not be a means of pushing my preferment; but as prudence on 
the 
The Fatal Deception. 55 
the one hand, will prevent me from making any Such unnecessary publication; — on the other, I should have but a very Siender opinion, of the Service I am engaged in; — was I obliged to losc sight of my rights as an Englishman, or not permitted to be affected by the distreff s of my countrymen! Such I consider all his majesty’s Subjects without restridlion: and I will ever be as averse to any share in the destruflion of their liberties, as I am at ail times ready to Sacrifice my life in the Service of my King and country, against the enemies of either. 
Let me not mistead you, my dear Sir, into a wrong opinion of my principles; — I hold the false bellowings of pretended patriotism, and the mean D 4 Servility 
5^ 
The Fatal Deception. 
Servility of a court Sycophant in equal contempt. 
Let me change the Subject, and inform my father, a person who has not visited Ireland, can have no conception of the difference there is, between the gaity of our Court, and that of London. 
The parade with which the viceroy attends parliament, is as much Superior to his majesty’s, on the Same occasion, as the Splendour and magnificence of the Mogul, exceeds our European monarchs. 
The entertainments at the Castle are princely! — the Irish ladies handsome, and accomplished 1 though there is no danger of your receiving a '' daughter 
The Fatal Deception. 57 
daughter in law, from amongst them, had I the vanity to luppose I might make a choice. 
\ 
I must not omit to inform you, that I have had an opportunity, of doing a Signal piece of Service to Mr. traverse; who So justly deserved our thanks for his civility, and attention to Lambert while at kinsale; by warmly recommending him to his excellency, — I have given the government a worthy officer, — he is appointed colledlor of customs at that port. 
I rejoice to find, your health continues good, long may I have that sa tisfadlion' and may you never have the least occasibn to regret giving life D 5 to 
58 
The Fatal d£c£ption. 
to a Son, whose utmost endeavour will be to deserve, the continuance of your affcdlion. 
My sister’s, Sir, — how do they ^ I love them for their goodness sincerely; — the amiableness of their conduct makes me esteem them. 
In a letter from my friend Mr. Featherstone, I am informed of Lord wilton’s family being still with you at Bath, and of his jaunt with Lambert to Stretton green; I heartily hope change of place and exercise, will do him great benefit. ' 
I must, give you the trouble to present my refpedfful compliments to Lord and Lad Wilton, the young ladies, 
Mrs. 
The Fatal Deception. 
59 
Mrs.'bruce, and miss Lambert; his one of my greatest pleasures, when I rested: how very truly I am, my dear sir, your ever affectionate Son, 
WILLIAM COOPER. 
D e 
j. sea: 
6o The Fatal Deception.' 
J. F E A T H E R S T O N E, 
T O 
WILLIAM COOPER, ' 
Londoii. 
I L S O N has done more for Lambert in a few days, than he could have expected, from the prescriptions of half a Score of the faculty — which convinces me his disorder is of the mind, not any bodily 
infirmity. 
The Fatal Deception, 
6i 
infirmity. — I hope as he is now entirely under my care, he will not relapse; being at present a Sociable companion. 
Should he grow worse upon my hands, I will instantly convey him to the Green again, that he may benefit by the chearfulness and friendly admonitions of his agent and monitor. 
You will admire wilson, as well for his own merit and worthiness of principle, as his being So essentially Serviceable to our friend. 
We have been but a few days in town, and are Eternally engaged in the fashionable round of amusements! — ^ the Egerton family, pay every attention 
to 
62 
The Fatal Deception. 
to Mr. Lambert, and are not uncivil to me.' 
You gave me my introdudlory letter into grosvenor square, and ought to be answerable for the consequences — it may be a very dangerous connexion to me. 
miss Egerton is blooming. 

chatty and unaffededly good-humoured! but why do I attempt to describe her, to a man who is So well acquainted with her — and who cannot, perhaps, recolle: there is more than one 
woman in the world? -- -- -- You must 
know I was prepossessed very strongly in her favour when last in town; — Why then, (you will Say) make So 
prepos 
The Fatal Deception. 63 
preposterous a proposal to pattyi' should detest myself, could I have been capable of making Such an offer, and at the Same time wished to decline it; — it was her merit and good ness of heart, that induced me to propose, what I thought her conduct So justly deserved; had she accepted it, miss Egerton would have been recollected by me, merely as a valuable woman, and an agreeable acquaintance — I do not pretend to Say I would prefer Patty to miss Egerton, upon cool and mature resseftion; but the one I am almost a stranger to, the attachment and disposition of the other I am well acquainted with; and you know a homely proverb, which says, “The proof of, c. &c/’ -- Patty has 
refused 
64- 
The Fatal Deception. 
refused me; and if I ever fix upon any other, (in the mind I am in) positively it must be Eliza Egerton, conditionally, that Sne will accept me — for meaning to be a true penitent,, I shall without evasion, or reservation, make a Sull confession; a thing much more proper before than after marriage. I will not put it in the power of an intriguing coxcomb, to whisper in the' ears of my wife, the past frailties of: her husband. 
Lambert, to whom I have hinted’ my Sentiments, highly approves them,, and he is now So Solid and lentimen al; I would as Soon take his advice,, as my grandfathers. What is'your opinion of it? I think in one of your letters, 
you 
The Fatal Dlception, ’ 6^ 
you complimented me, with having too good principles, for a man of pleasure! are they not like wise too good, for a state, when in the present days they Seem to be So little valued or expected? — Your answer to this important quere! 
Last night, in the gaite de cccur., and elevated with the Smiles of my Syren; after we left the Square,, I dragged Lambert to the St. Albans — a bottle or two of shergold’s champaign, putting me almost out of my Senses, and raising him a few pegs higher, than I have Seen him since his illness; ~I took him — where think you? — Even to ***** court — where Circe holds her midnight revels! — reproach 
66 
The Fatal Deception. 
proach me not — wrapped up in my integrity, and shielded by the Superior charms of my angel— — nymphs (for me) might as well have been alabaster — I returned an absolute joseph though I left not my cloak. 
I cannot Say I am displeased with myself, for the introdudion I have given Lambert — the mansion of the enchantress is fashionable — he will meet lively company, and a little dissipation will do him material Service. 
My estate lies So confoundedly northward, 1 have not yet had resolution, since I Saw you, to pay it a visit, Though I am strongly importuned. 
The Fatal Deception. 
67 
tuned, and have really affairs of Con sequence to Settle. I must get Banks to go down with me, if your father will Spare him to me; — but I cannot, will not, quit London, till— — I have been a little more particular in gros venor square, and find what I have to trust to. 
Vf ish me Succels — and (if Such fate is alotted me) that I may wear my horns with a good grace — I shall at least be fashionable, and notwithstanding my antlers, 
my dear cooper’s, ever sincere, 
and affect ionte, 
J. FEATHERSTONE. 
miss 
VI The Fatal Deception. 
Mils egepvton, 
T O 
Lady LOUISA WILTON, 
ft 
C 
C 
C 
E are informed, a treaty of marriage will Speedily be concluded between J. Featherstone esq; a gentleman of large fortune in the North of England, and miss Egerton, of grosvenor Square, Sole heiress to'the late honourable Ben“ 
“
The Fatal Deception. 
69 
net Egerton, a young lady of great “beauty and accomplishments, clave 
you Seen Such a paragraph in the papers, louisa? — “Am I to ex pe6t it Eliza ?” — Be not Surpriled my dear, if in the course of a few days, those impertinent pratlers, the advertisers, should afford you that piece of entertainment. 
Yesterday, while I was moping over a pair of men’s ruffles, I have, lately taken into my head to work - “Mr. Featherstone ma’am, ” (Says John) I broke my needle — ‘‘ your Ser“ “Sir — where is Mr. Lambert 
“I have not Seen him, since we “Spent So agreeable an evening .in “grosvenor square; but I Hatter my“ 
“
yo The Fatal Deception“ 
“from a knowledge of your good“ “though I wait upon Mrs. and “miss Egerton singly, I shall not be “worse received on that account.” 
“I thank you Sir, for my share of “.the compliment, and am Sorry my “mother should not be at home to be “grateful for her part of it.” 
How happy, my dear miss Eger “tonne, will'be that man, ” and the forward creature Sat down by me, who “shall be So fortunate to acquire your 
“good opinion.” -- -- -- - “Thank you 
“again Sir, but pray for which “of my good qualities do I ap“ “to be favoured with yours.” — “Le toute enjemuep — Short and pithy louisa. 
“Take 
The Fatal Deception. 71 
“Take care Mr. Featherstone, and be not blinded by appearances; — woman’s a riddle, and, like a witches “prayer, and must be understood by V contraries.” 
“How elegant, my dear madam, “the design of these ruffles, may I ‘‘ aste— — he hesitated. — “What ‘ ‘ would you alk Sir V — “You have “no brother; — unde; r what obliga tions must he be, for whom you “take So much trouble.” 
The question was artful, and not being expected, threw me into a little confusion;; I Soon recollected myself, and was determined to mortify him for it— — “person they may “be intended for, possibly will not be “‘of your opinion; or if he was, as 
it 
72 The Fatal Deceptioi?. 
it will be long before they are finisht, edi shall perhaps have reason to “believe he may not deserve them.’* 
-- -- - “Surely Miss Egerton cannot 
“justly have occasion, to think So ill “of mankind.” 
“To be honest, Mr. Featherstone, experimentally, I have not; but I am determined, not to have too good an opinion, least I should to my cost, be disagreeably deceived. In the present instance however the person, to whose Service I havededicated Some of my leiliire time, will not, I dare Say, be unthankful; can Mr. Featherstone suspecl Will Cooper of ingratitude? he cleared up instantly, — “how happy you have made me, my charming miss Egerton, by this declaration; — I feared you were 
“inte 
The Fatal Deception. 
73 
interested by more tender motives than mere friendship. 
A great deal more Softness past, till encouraged by a Smile or two of approbation, which the candour of his behaviour extorted from me; — he made a formal declaration of his passion;; — took perhaps the oddest method, of recommending himself to his mistress you ever heard of, viz. By praising a former one - — one, he had been fond of, and who he Scruples not to Say, hc' still regards one, who indiscreetly yielded to his wishes, yet one who (though most sincerely fond of him,) had from the most laudable, the most disinterested motives, utterly reje6led the offer, of being his wife. 
VOL. II 
Strange 
74 Lhe Fatal Deception. 
Strange as it may appear, I do not believe he could by any other app.i cation, have addressed me So succeff fully; — there was a Sincerity in his declaration, a frankness and nobleness of principle in his confession, that deserved my approbation and esteem. 
With these Sentiments, could I withhold from him my permission, to apply to my worthy mother — Ah louisa! I know her answer; — the liberty of your friend, is near a conclusion; ^ — and for what am I bartering it? — uncertain happiness, or asslired disquiet. 
I hear my good mama: — stis even So louisa! the dear Lady is in raptures; — Says we were made for each other, that the worthiness of his heart, can only be equalled by.the honesty of mine; 
— bethe 
Fatal Deception. 
75 
— begins to talk of lawyers, jewels, appearance, c. God bless her good heart, I fear she will want to precipitate matters, even more eagerly than himself. 
Well, my heart and tongue, have already engaged me too far to recant, and I musc take the consequence; — but ahlouisa! I dread. — Pshaw, hang fears; — in Spite of prudery, a worthy engagement is what we all desire. — I will combat my apprehensions, with the burden of an old Song, — “My “mother did ‘ To before me. See. &c.’* 
As my affair is nearly terminated, I shall be more at liberty to attend to my friend. — Indeed I am ashamed to have been So much engaged, on So 
simple an occasion. -- -- Let me have 
a Speedy answer from Bath; you know E 2 I can 
The Fatal Deception. 
I cannot be completely happy myself, if I, have any apprehensions of the misery of my friend. 
How extreme would be my felicity, was my dearest louisa at liberty, to give her shand to Mr. Cooper, at the time, when I may be induced to do the same honour to his friend 
But as I cannot expect So much good fortune, let my dear girl comfort herself with the refiedtion, that however earnest Lord wilton^s application may be in favour of Morden; — however unkind on the occasion; — she is still, (thanks to providence) independent of his Lordship; — she Is entirely beloved by the man of her heart, and that man is most worthy her regard; 
she 
The Fatal deceptio.v. 

she has a friend, who will ever love her, with unbounded affection;; friend, lives in grosvenor fquare, and her nameat present is, 
ELIZA EGERTON, 
E 3 
Lady 
78 
The Fatal Deception. 
Lady LOUISA WILTON. 
T O 
mise G E LI T O N, 
HY should I cloud the agreeable prospedts of my dearest Eliza, by a recapitulation of events, that can only distress my friend, without giving any relief to myself, — Ah, my dear Egerton! fail not to be thankfiil 
to 
The Fatal deceptio^i. 
79 
to*^providence, who has denied you the means of being made unhappy, by the capriciousness of a brother, or of feeling the mortifications I do, when obliged to think ill of him; nature and affection prompts me but to revere. 
Last week. Lord Wilton — unkind Lord Wilton; abruptly introduced the hated Morden. — I fiiould have fainted, had not the kind attention of Lady Wilton recovered me! — my brother too, that once affectionate brother, Seemed much distressed; — but Soon as I was come to myself, having made signs for my Sister wilton, Harriot and Charlotte, to leave the rcx)m; 
E 4 
My 
lo 
The Fatal Deception. 
(( 
CC 
ic 
6( 
(( 
(( 
C 
(( 
CC 
“My Sister louisa, has ever fiat tered me with her affection, let her now rejoice me, by a proof of it, jst the attention she pays the man, I entreat she will look upon, as her future husband— — promise has been long since given to Sir William, that promise, I will, to the utmost exertion of my power, inviolably observe — and never will be reconciled to that person, who shall endeavour to prepoffess you in the disfavour of a gentleman, on whom I have fixed my unalterable choice. 
The tyranny of Lord Wilton, and the indelicacy of Morden; who could See me So distressed, yet did not attempt Saying anything, to procure me 
a mo 
The fatais Deception. 
81 
a momentary relief;, gave me a degree of confidence, I never expedtcd. — Is it for him, Lord Wilton So ungene rousiy pleads. Said I, who can tamely See me persecuted, by an application in his favour, without attempting to avert the resentment, which, too plainly may be Seen, has possessed the man, I yet hope to find my brother. 
‘‘ Be assured you have no longer a 
brother, louisa, if you refuse your “consent to Sir William morden’s “addresses.” 
“Dear then as you have been to me, “from infancy, I have no longer a bro there 11 cannot be the sister you wish.’* He instantly darted out of the room I E 5 despair. 
82 
he Fatal Deception. 
despair, vexation, and resentment in 
his countenance......to Morden, I 
turned, agitated to a degree that startled him. — “What part of my con“ “Sir William, merits this perse“ “?” 
“Why does my presence, dear Lady Louisa, distress you — and the monster pretended to look tender. 
Your brother, my dear madam, “may be too partial to me — but do “not suppose I wish to see you dis “tressed— — gave both Lord Wilton “and myself, hopes, your repug “nance to our wishes, would have “been at an end, when you requested “a temporary cessation of my ad ‘‘ dresses. Wstat ought I to expedh, 
“but 
The Fatal Deception. 
83: 
“but that you will, (without reluc tance) crown my wishes; when the “time you Solicited shall be past.”. 
■ > 
‘‘ Vvshy then am I disturbed before “that time? — why is my happiness “broke in upon, before the expiration “of the respite I was indulged with ?” 
“respite, Lady louisa !” — and he olowed with vexation — “I would 
O 
“not be vain, but I flatter myself, “my addresses -- -- -- 
“Your addresses. Sir William, have “made me wretched — have deprived me 
“ofa dear brother’s regard — will involve “a family, you pretend a friendship 
“for, in confusion and unhappiness! 
E 6 “In 
H 
The Fatal Deception. 
“In a word. Sir, your perseverance “may make me, to the last degree “miserable; but can never be pro“ “of success to yourself.” 
“Be generous Sir William, con“ “to me again the affections of a “brother which you have alienated, “and by relinquishing me, put it in “my powder, at least, to esteem you.” 
“I See my lady, too plainly, the “reason of your disiike to me — Yoii “have an attachment in Some other “place, where you are less Severe — - “but have a care madam, I am not “to be affronted with impunity; and “if you continue to irritate me, by “the contemj^e you think proper at 
‘‘ present 
The Fatal Deception. 
85 
‘‘ present to treat me with; you may “perhaps (on your brother’s account, though not on mine) too late re“ “the obstinacy of your refusal. 
“I cannot but tremble for my “brother, if he is in the power ot a “man, who I fear, will not Scruple “taking every ungenerous advantage. 
— But Lord Wilton was never au“ “by my parents, to force “me into a marriage, contrary to mw “Sentiments and inclinations.” 
“Do me at least this favour. Lady “louisa, that I may be able to ac“ “to your brother, for your be“ “to me. — Am I unfortunate ‘‘ ly disapproved of, from any disagreeable 
86 
The Fatal Deception. 
"grceable qualities in my person, or “disposition — or does it proceed from “, ’your prepossession in favour of any “other? 
C 
(( 
C 
IC 
cc 

C 
(.f. 
“these are questions, I am under no necessity to answer — but your threatenings, my brother’s unkind ness, and my regard to truth, oblige me to declare myself explicitly. — I ever difiiked your morals and conduct — your character has not contributed to place you in a more favourable light — and I will not disguise it to you, that my heart is in the possession of a gentleman, whose great worth, will prevent any disgrace being thrown 
upon 
The Fatal Deception. 
^7 
upon you, by his having the pre“ “in my esteem.” 
This was too Severe I confess, it was not prudent, but So oppressed. So injurioussy entreated; what could I Say how, 'could I adt. 
Sir William bit his lips — frowned — stamped Several times cross the room in the most violent rage, and muttering Some threats which I could not understand retired. 
My passion, — my Ipirits, which till then had Supported me. Subsided, and I Sunk upon a Sopha disolved in tears! — lost in apprehensions for the Safety of Lord Wilton, and the happiness of myself. 
n 
The Fatal Deception. 
If my brother can So far forgive my refusal of Morden as to favour me with a conference; I am determined to avow my attachment to Cooper. 
I have told all the affair to his sister. Lady Wilton, who Seems still more unhappy, now she knows my abhorrence of this hated match, has been confirmed by my love for her brother.' 
Time alone can discover to, us, which way the precipice lies, that we So much dread; and I have a presen timent it is near at hand. — There can Scarce more unhappiness slow, from a certainty of misfortune; than I experience, from the dreadful suspence I am involved in. 
Adieu, 
The Fatal Deception, s9 
Adieu, my worthy my best Eliza, put up your most fervent prayers for your friend; from So good So virtuous a heart, they Surely cannot be unavailing, may your happiness only terminate with life, - 
LOUISA WILTON, 
Front 
90 The Fatal Deception. 
From the Same to the Same 
O W kind my friends attention! Lambert arrived last night, — and I flatter myself with his most essential Services, in bringing about a reconciliation with Lord Wilton. 
I have not yet Seen my brother, having never been out of my room, since the eclairciffement withmorden; 
no 
The f^tal Deception. pi 
ho wonder I am indisposed— — am not only unhappy myself, but find myself the innocent occasion, of dis tress to others. 
Lady Wilton is not less at ease than I am, has not fewer apprehensions yet we vainly endeavour, to hide the knowledge of it from each other. 
miss Lambert has never left me Since my illness, and by the generous effusion of her Sorrow, convinces me more and more of the goodness of her heart and the delicacy of her fensibility. 
Poor Nancy Cooper, Seems little less concerned, and my Sisters dare not’ appear to interest themselves too deeply in my distress, lest Lord Wilton 
should 
92 
The Fatal Decepticin. 
should suspedl they countenance my disobedience as he calls it. 
Mr. Lambert after he had Seen my brother, (who gave him a most af sedionate reception,) desired leave to attend his sister, he had been before made acquainted by Charlotte, that she was constantly with me. — That girl distradts me: she is lost in a path, whose entrance is strewed with roses, too thick for her yet, to feel the thorns concealed under them. 
After Lambert had most affeflion 
ately embraced his Sister, -- - “I come 
“my lady, to tender you every as“ “in my power, I come at “the request of your friend, and in “the Service of mine. — Lord Wilton “is at pre sent difpleased, but I dare 
Say 
'The Fatal Deception. 93 
“Say he will not always be unrea “Sonable, or irreconcilable : and I have not much doubt, that I shall be “the happy instrument, of making “my friend happy, and of relieving “your ladyship, from unworthy per“ “— I bowed. 
My best brother! Said Lucy, (throwing her arm cross his neck) how proud I am of my brother! — I forgot to mention to you before, that old Mr. Cooper and Mrs Bruce have been gone Some days past to Stretton green, his sister (at our request) remaining with us — Lambert is much mended in appearance, and his cheeks were vermilion itself, upon his Sisters praises; he sighed and Said, “I can never “come nearer liappinets, then when “I am endeavouring to procure it 
94 
The Fatal Deception. 
‘‘ for my friends” — he Seemed discom posed, and turned from us to the wineiow! recovering himsels, — “Lady “louisa, how do you intend to adl, “if Lord Wilton wishes to See you, “do you intend to make him acquaint“ “with your preposition in favour “of my friend? 
Certainly Sir! I had long since prevented every appearance of duplicity in my conduct, had my fears not been alarmed, for Mr. Cooper and my Sister Wilton. 
Nobly resolved Lady louisa! “far am I from disapproving So lau “dable a measure; what I would only “presume to advise is, that we may “endeavour to take advantage of y the most favourable opportunity” 
'Lady 
The Fatal Dlce ption. 
95 
i.ady Wilton Seems more assured of a happy issue to the affair, since lambert’s arrival; — he is at present gone with my Lord to the rooms, and returns to Sup at our hotel; — his melancholy Seems less violent, though I cannot help thinking it, more firmly established. 
I know not why I should have Such a foreboding, but I think that young man (worthy as he is, affluent in circumstances, and adored by his friends,) is nevertheless, 'not marked out by providence for happiness; — would to God my conjedlures may prove false, 
Whatever way my own difficul culties terminate let me have the satis fadion of knowing you are happy, — Your mother’s good opinion of Mr. 
Sea 
t 
The Fatal Deception. 
Featherstone, is confirmed by the attachment of his friends, and the general tenor of his conduct;; — candid avowal of his past indiscretions, ought I think to give you the strongest assurances he will avoid them for the future. 
Gallantry in youth, according to circumstances, is more, or less culpable; — a good heart may be hurried into the commdssion, of an unwarrantable action, yet will feel the recollection of it with contrition, and endeavour to 
atone for the offence; -- -- -- -- but I 
would as Soon take a distressed high wayunan to my husband, as a proses sed libertine; — and I really think the former the worthier man. 
Let not a thought of your louisa, occasion Mr, Featherstone an additional 
The Fatal Deception. 
97 
tional sigh; — your mother is anxious in his favour, and if you will take my advice, when in your power, you cannot too Soon make an honest man happy. 
your ever affedlionate 
LOUISA' WILTON. 
vol. II 
JAMES 
98 
The Fatal Deception. 
JAMES LAMBERT. 
T O 
J. F E A T H E R S T O N E. 
C 
Bath, 
ONFORMABLE to the request of my friend, I lost no time in repairing to Bath, and exerted myself more zealoufiy indeed, from a refiecstion of the warmth and Sincerity, of miss egerton’s friendship for Lady louisa; 
while 
The Fatal Deception 
99 
while I consider you well advanced In the road of happiness, from that very 
deserving 
girl’s Sentiments of you, 
it gives me abundant pleasure, to hope our friend Cooper may be effestually Served, by the exertion of my influence in his favour, without any interruption to your addresses. 
Upon my arrival at Bath, I found the Wilton family, (as we expected) in much confusion; — I had an interview with Lady louisa, and Said everything I could think of, to relieve her mind, and flatter her wishes; — though I fear more from Lord wilton’s obstinacy, and his connexion with Morden, than I think proper to 
confess. -- -- She is determined, the 
very first favourable opportunity which offers, to declare to her brother, the F 2 attach 

loo The Fatal Deception. 
attachment she has long felt for our friend William, a measure, which I apprehend will irritate my Lord to a great degree; — but however disa greeable the expedient, it now becomes absolutely necessary. 
i.ord Wilton does me the honour, to assure me of his friendship and re regard; — I Snail endeavour to Soften his resentment against Cooper; and may perhaps be a means of preventing any improper treatment being offered to Lady Louisa. 
Will, is much better cross the channel, his presence at this conjundlure, would only be inssamm.atory; — her ladyship has'communicated to me her desion of shelterino; herself at Mrs. egerton’s, should my Lord be implacable; 
The Fatal Dzceptionl 
jot 
cable; — 1 wish it was well over vritli all my heart. 
Partial as I am, and fond of my Sister to an extreme; — I cannot without much concern, observe her tender ness and Sensibility So strongly engaged, on Lady liouisa’s account; — Sne has Scarce had Sufficient strength of constitution, to bear up against the late alarms and apprehensions, which sne has Suffered heistelf. 
I am Sorry Mrs. Bruce is gone to the Green, though the absence of Mr. Cooper (who accompanied her) ought not to be regretted he perhaps, through a peculiar delicacy, might be more offended than even Lord Wilton, with his Son. 

Expect 
102 The Iatal deceptiort. 
Expect accounts when the mine is Sprung, and of its eonsequences; ■ — I have wrote to Ireland, and made a point, that Cooper depends upon my friendship, and continues where he is, till his presence shall be more necessary;; — this is also strongly in forced by Lady louisa,, I have no fear of his daring to at in opposition to her request, were he inclined to pay but little attention to mine. 
The Ladies have not been in public since the declared fracas with morden— — Lord dragged me to the rooms last night, in a Situation of mind little capable of being amused. 
That wretch Morden, though he behaved with coolness to Lord Wilton, was ofiicioufiy civil to me, paid me 
Some 
The Fatal Deception. 
103 
Some impertinent compliments on my sister’s beauty and accomplishments, and very assiduoussy Solicited my acquaintance. 
Not inclined to dissemble, I very candidly told him, that till I was confident he had generousty withdrawn his pretensions,, from a very deserving Lady, who had given him her definitive answer,) and was a good deal persecuted on his account), he could have no reason to expect it. 
His answer was, he could be glad of my acquaintance, but if I knew myself the bar, to his success with Lady louisa, his overtures were indeed improper,, and by wishing him to resign his claim to her Ladyship, ' he could not but admire the modesty F 4. o 
1©4 The Fatal Diceptign^, 
of my proposal, which was of courih as. advantageous to my Safety, as my love. 
C 
It 
tt 
(( 
c(( 
(( 

tt 
tt 
tt 
tt 
(( 
“The impertinence. Sir William, of your insinuation, deserves no answer— — let not your resentment against that Lady, for declining your addresses, induce you to da her any injustice; — ascribe her want of esteem for you, to its true cause, to your own want, of merit to attract it; — and though 1 disclaim the honour, of poffeshng more than Lady louisa’s friendship, you. Sir William, will never find any apprehensions of my personal Safety, prevent my exerting every effort in my power, in Support of persecutcd innocence.” 
Lord 
The Fatal Deception --. lo 
Lord Wilton did not Seem well pleased with my defending his sister, -- So warmly against Morden.; — but went to him, and after a short conference; Morden came to me. Said,. “he hoped “I did not suppose he had the Smal> 
“lest intention to affront me; — that we were perhaps both too warm; he “was Sorry if heat of temper, had “hurried him, into any unguarded “expression; but the man could not “be Supposed to be very much at “ease, who was in dano er of losing “Lady louisa Wilton.” 
No more passed, and I have not Seen him sincehe was a long time with Lord Wilton this morning, and they afterwards went out together; I sind he did not even desire to see louisa. 
F 5 Since 
io The Fatal Deception. 
Since Lord wilton’s return, he appears in exceeding bad temper with every one round him : — even the natural complaisance, and good good nature of Lady Wilton can Scarce procure a civil expression. 
This worthy Family shall be relieved, from the unhappiness they ar present labour under; (I fear, by the weakneff of one party, and; the villainy ^ of another if there is the Smallest: clew to develop the mystery. 
I have a commission for you to execute, which I beg you will lose no time in doing; — your desigrt of introducing me to ***** Court, 1 dare say was to amuse, for the time perhaps it might, but the Source of my discontent, lies too deep to be effectually 
The Fatal Deception. 107 
tually relieved, by Such an applica cation. 
pleasure and dissipation, where the mind does not enjoy them. Serve but to make our ressedlions more Severe; I leu my snuffbox, my sister’s portrait is inclosed in it, - it is unneces sary to mention to you, the impropriety of its continuance in that place. 
-- -- May every happiness,, attend 
miss Egerton and yourselfi. 
When am I to Salute Mrs. feather stone? — she is above disguise,, and will not,, I dare Say, torture you with ridiculous delays.r — My compliments 
attend the good old Lady— — 
till tomorrow; I remain one of the stncerest of you friends, 
JAMES LAMBERT. 
'F 6 From 
los The Fatal Dtceptio: ^. 
From the Same to the Stme. 
Dear Featherflone, 
S these troublesome people of the faculty will prescribe, however ignorant they may be of the disorder; I am pestered to death! — one of their simplest prescriptions, I have since my arrival, condcscended to follow, viz, riding out every day; - mylord Sent me word this morning, he would, if I pleased, accompany me; — ’his lordsnip continued for Some time very 
gloomy. 
The Fatal Deception 
109 
gloomy, but at length introduced the Subject, which I doubt not procured me the honour of his company; — The conversation terminated but with the ride; — and I am in hopes, things will begin to wear a more favourable appearance. 
He was at first to the greatest degree incensed, by Lady louisa’s opposition to his inclination,, and very artfully, (though with an apparent frankness) questioned me about the inducement I could possibly have, to interest myself So warmly in favour of his lister, having heard me declare the other night, that friendship was my 
only motive. -- -- -- “He had the great“ 
“opinion of my honour, and the “regard I had shown for himself and y family; or he should have Supposed 
no The Fatal Deception. 
posed himself indispensably bound ^ to have requested an explanation 
at the instant”. 
Morden has I find acquainted him,, that louisa avowed her partiality for another! he begged me, if by any means I knew, or even suspeded who was the object of her regard, I would discover it to him; that he might take proper measures, to prevent his family being dishonoured, by an improper alliance : I took advantage of this last expreshom, and demanded in my turn, if, free from partiality, he could from his Soul deem Sir William mor den’s alliance with: his Sister, an. honourable one. 
Sir William might have lived a’ Iktle too free; but he was a man of 
family,. 
The Fatal dcceptionr in 
family, considerable fortune, and great connexions, was the reply. — I represented the very different charaxer he bore in the world, Az. that he not only had lived free, but continued at the present hour, one' of the most vicious men of the age! — by mudr the more dangerous, as he had generally address to disguise his passions; the gratification of which Solely depended upon Such a management. 
With refpex to His large fortune, it was universally known he was a notorious gamester, and the combination of a Set of men like himself, or a few nights bad run, might reduce him to beggary. — As to hi s connexions,, they were the consequent appendage of his estate; and that if his dependants were not more axuated by fear 
than. 
112 The Fatal Deception. 
than regard to his person, he would not be able to produce ten votes for a county representative. 
I had a Sister (1 continued,) whom I dearly loved, and rather than dispose of her to one like Morden, I would countenance the man of her choice, though she took him from the plough,, if his principles were uncorrupted. 
He demanded, if uport my honour I did, or did not know his sister’s attachment? I answered in the affirmative, but I was not at liberty to discover it to him, that it was a choice worthy Lady louisa’s prudence, and good sense! a choice, that promised a countenance of real felicity, and was no discredit to her rank and fa? Hilly. 
‘‘ Damn 
The Fatal Deception. 
II 
“Damn that Will. Cooper! mor den’s conjecture was right: — I am confirmed in it by the cagerneis “with which ycu defend the object“ “my sister’s infatuation, and my re“ “. 
suppose it was Cooper my Lord! “what could be your objection, ex“ “in fortune — is there a king“ “that would disdain his alliance? “his sister Lady Wilton, (valuable. “as she is,) is not more deserving “your lordship’s tenderness, than “her brother is worthy Lady louisa’s “good opinion !” 
“The warmth of your friendship, Mr. Lambert, does you credit; but in a point of this consequence, I must be Suffered to judge for my“ 
“
114 The Fatal deceptk)?r. 
Self: — If Mr. Cooper has engaged my sister’s affections, he has behaved to me with ingratitude, — I boast not of having Served him, or of my intentions to have continued to do So; but he could not be ignorant of the present narrow ness of his own circumstances, or of my engagement with Sir William, and I will (in confidence to you, Lambert,) acquaint you, that if my sister obstinately persists in her refusal of Morden, my inevitable ruin is the immediate consequence : on Lady wilton’s account, let not your friend, now no longer mine, ever See me”. 
I requested, as he had favoured’me with sh much of his confidence, he would give me a hint of the nature 
and 
The Fatal Deception. 1z5 
and extent of his engagement to Sir William, that my friendship for Cooper was unlimited, and I was glad of the opportunity to assure his lord ship, if the means of Serving him, lay within the compass of my fortune, it should not be my fault if he was not happy, in the recovery of his lordship’s friendship, and the possession of Lady louisa. 
I endeavoured to point out the impropriety of his persisting in the design of Sacrificing his sister to morden— — Severely his conducft would be condemned, by the rational part of the world;; what reason he would ever have to consider himselfi as the destroyer of Lady louisa’s hap piness. 
I added. 
ii The fa tal Deception. 
I added, I was extremely concerned for the Sake of the whole family, that he had been rash enough to enter into obligations, where his filter’s happiness was So materially concerned, and where (by her father’s wsill) I understood her consent, was So essentially necessary, that from her l.ady siiip’s generosity, humanity, and love for his Lordship, it was to be sup posed, she would Submit to a dimunition in her fortune, if that could contribute to accommodate matters, betwixt him and Morden : but it was to the last degree unreashnable, to desire her to fulfil any engagement of his lordship’s, at the expense of her eternal quiet. 
My Lord paid me many compliments upon the uncommon, the exalted 
The Fatal Deception. 117 
alted instance, (as fic was pleased to call it) of shy regard to Cooper: — “he “wished it was in his power to re“ “his conduct, agreeable to “my Sentiments, and the tenderness “he really felt for his Sister: — but “it was impossible! nothing could “extricate him from the difficulties, “in which he had involved himself, “but her acquieffence.” 
I obtained his promise that he would not attempt any violent measures, and would allow Lady louisa Some days yet, previous to her final determination. 
The active part I am obliged to take in this disagreeable business, which makes So many of the family unhappy, does shot give me time to shdulge 
myself, 
ii The Fatal Deception. 
myself, in the retirement I So much wish for. 
Contentment is the only objetst I have in view, yet how difficult must be the attainment of that, when happiness is cut off from my hopes. 
yours, 
JAMES LAMBERT. 
Miss 
The Fatal Deception. 119 
Miss E G E R T O N, 
T O 
Ihady LOUISA WILTON, 
« np 
HE day! my beloved daugh 
« ter*’ -- The day! my enchanting 
“Miss Egerton” — echoed from one 
to the other -- - “Not before the 
“day of judgement shall it be, if I am « to be thus disturbed” — My mother 
120 The Fatal Deception. 
there started !■ turned pale — 
Poor Featherstone 
« Why does my mother thus perse“ “me? why am I thus hurried “Sir ?” — “Persecute my Eliza! un “kind girl — have you not consented, (I fondly hoped) without the Small“ “repugnance to become his wife ?” stis even So louisa! — • “And can my “daughter call her mother’s anxious “wishes for her happiness, perfecu ‘‘ tion ?” -- Oh, Spare me dear madam! “I cannot bear your frown — to what “am I reduced? Featherstone, plead “for me. Solicit my forgivenels from the best of parents; and i’ll pro“ “to be good — very good — but “let me not be teizedd’ — “My 
“charming 
The Fatal Deception. 
II 
“charming Eliza, I can have no will " but yours! — You must madam for“ “So Sweet an offender, since you “See she obliges me to take part, “even against myself— — her gene“ “let us rest our hopes.” — Thank you friend, thought I, it may be better for you — but the dear lady was not to be put off So — could you have supposed that she was really angry, louisa? absolutely So“ “not, Mr. Featherstone, (Says “she, drawing up her mouth) on the “generossty of a girl, who can for a ment forget the affection, the ma ternal marks of indulgence she has “received from a fond parent! I ever “esteemed her ingenuous, incapable of disguise, and above being child vol. IL ' G ishly 
122 The Fatal Deception, 
“ishly petulant — how Itave I been “deceived?” 
Ah madam! (throwing myself at “her feet) be not So cruel in your ex“ “— I am not — I will not be “petulant! forgive your child! I “would die rather than offend you -- - “here is my hand — dispose of it when “and to whom you please. 
‘‘ bless my Eliza, (Says my mother) and next thursday, let me petition heaven’s protection for my daugh ter Featherstone. 
I did not recover miy Surprile, (at being tricked into So early a time) before the good woman left my lord and 
master 
The Fatal deceptiox. 
I2J 
master elect at liberty, to entertain me with his raptures and gratitude, while she retired, I dare shy, to put up ejaculations for Mrs. Featherstone. 
The writings have been finished two or three days, and you See they were determined to lose no time; though I perceive from featherstone’s uncommon sati.sfadion, that I have drawn myself into the Scrape, by ridiculoufiy vexing my mother, and then Simply purchasing her forgiveness So extravagantly. — I might certainly have pro tradted it (by proper management) for Some time, and yet have contrived, to have kept them both in humour. 
Well raffair ejl fait — zndi now my louisa, consider this as the last letter G 2 you 
124 The Fatal Deception. 
you will ever receive from your Eliza Egerton, Spinster! and prepare to expect occasionally, my matronly advice for the future regulation of your conduct- -- will, at least, reap an advantage from my bondage. — There is no comparison between the abilities of a wife, and a simple virgin in the management of an amour— — know you may commiand my best Services. 
Serioufiy, I am not displeased, the grand affair is fixed. — The ipore I know of Featherstone, the more I esteem him — he recommends himself more to me, by the notice, the attention he pays to the friends I regard, than by any fulsome, ridiculous compliments or addresses to myself ^ he 
did 
> The Fatal Deception. 
1 2 C 
did not displease me by a request, '^ that I would in his name make to you, fiiould your Situation grow more un casy, by Lord "wilton’s horrid con neilion with Morden. 
He has taken an elegant furnished houlft, in St. james’s Square, to which we go on Friday, the day after this dreaded thursday — and he earnestly hopes you will favour his dearly beloved with your company— — is his first request to you, and I shall insist upon it that you do not deny him. You see I have been able to refuse him nothing, - — If instead of louisa Wilton, you could contrive for Will. Cooper to bring his wife with him — dearly as i love the Wiltons, I should give G 3 ^ louisa 
126 The Fatal Deception. 
louisa Cooper the preference. Where is that fellow, is he afieep? that he has So little to do in a drama, where he ought to be the hero of the piece. 
Let a billet from you fetch him fromtreland — throw yoursels into his ‘ arms! away to friendly North britain, where “Love stricken maidens, sigh “no longer in vain’* and leave Lord Wilton to finish his engagement with Morden, the best way he can — You ought by all the rules of novel and romance, to add one more couple to the scot’s register. 
As my good man has made no Scruple of communicating to me, the connexion which Subsisted, between 
him. 
The Fatal Deception. 
127 
him, and a very deserving young woman, who I mentioned to you in a former letter— — have taken the liberty 
Oif writing to her. -- Mr. Featherstcne 
had allowed her a Settlement paid aiinually — ■ a mode that 1 disapproved of, as it subjeded her to many inconveniences in the receipt of it. 
I take no merit to myselt, m requesting Mr, featherstone to revoke the Settlement, and transfer two thousand pounds (Bank stock) to her, to dispoie of as she pleases — from the instances I have heard of her conduct, I doubt not her future prudence. 
The real value of her former allowance, (as it was only for lise) was not G 4 more,, 
iis The Fatal deceptiofr. 
more, Mr. Feaiherstone says, than one thousand pounds value ~the additional Sum, will enable her to live more at ease; and perhaps be the means of procuring her Some valuable and worthy connedlion. 
I would not wish to enter into a state, which I hope will prove a happy one, with the refiedlion that a woman, who perhaps was, (except one unguarded moment) as unimpeachable as myself; ' yet should be miserable from the Same cause, that constituted my felicity. 
I will Some time or other, show you her answer, which I expect in a few days. — And my louisa, I am Sure 
believes 
The Fatal Deception. 
t29^ 
believes me, when I Say, it will give me the utmost pleasure, if the poor girl will put it into my power, to be of further Service to her.. 
Once more, my dear louisa, and for the last time, I conclude myself, 

Yours, 
ELIZA .DGERTON. 

Lady 
io The Fatal deceptioisr, 
Lady LOUISA WILTON, 
T O 
Mlfs E G E R T O N. 
jvlk. LAMBERT, to whom 1 
am most particularly obliged, has wrote to Mr. Cooper, to entreat his Icontinuance in Ireland, till this storm is over blown — I wrote Some time since, to the same effed' but we are 
astonished 
The Fatal Deception. 131 
astonished to have received no answer. lilness I hope in God, is not the occasion of it! — inconstancy I dread not! 
■ — Mr. Lambert and my brotl e have had a very long conversation — As my lord suspedled poor Cooper, ^ Mr. Lambert thought it most proper to discover the Secret, and it has Saved me a. great deal of confusion and distress,. 
My lord, : he Said, received the account of it more patiently than he could have expected— — he gave him very little hopes of his ever receding from this terrible engagement. 
Morden has never been here since | wrote; and my brother repeated to i.ambert, he no longer esteemed me a G 6 sister, 
132 The Fatal Deception. 
sister, than while I continued to aft, as he would wish and recommend to me. He is very unkind, my dear, and I southeast rioufiy think of accepting the asylum So friendly offered, by Mr, feather stone and you. 
Lady Wilton is very unhappy — my Sisters — miss Lambert — all my friends are So; they are too susceptible, not to partake the distress I feel, at my lord’s inhuman behaviour to me — I am still more concerned, as my Lady wilton’s present situation requires she should be kept free from disturbance and 'inquietude. 
Old Mr. Cooper and Mrs. Bruce, have come back from Stretton Green, 
finding 
The Fatal Deception 13^ 
finding Mr. Lambert returned to Bath. They purpose in a few days, I believe, to Set out for Devonshire; and my lord it Seems, did not even give the Slightest intimation that he desired their farther continuance— — I fancy goes with them, though Mr. Lambert desired Mrs. Bruce and her to accompany him into Berkshire. 
charlotte’s urshappy partiality for Lambert, gains ground every day — she has declared to me,, she never can love any man but him — he has lately treated her with more than usual attention, I fear because he is no longer ignorant of her attachment to him; and humanity obliges him to pity the effects of an unfortunate passion, it is 
134 The Fatal decepticm 
not in his power to return -- would to heaven it were possible! but I despair. of it.. 
Some unknown objedf, certainly' engrosses all his tenderness. i — The kindness of his behaviour to her, proceeds merely from compassion — a few days now will, divide them,, and absence, I hope, restore her usual peace of mind; the nearer pur Separation approaches, I can perceive her dil tress increases. 
I Surprised her a while since in her room, in the most affecting Situation — She did not attempt to suppress her emotion,, but threw her arms round me, reclined her head on my bosom, 
and 
The Fatal Deception. 135 
and with tears streaming from her lovely eyes, cried, “Pity me, my “dearest Sister 1 excuse my weakness, “and enable me to bear with resig “nation a Separation from” -- -- 
Grief choked her utterance! — My dearest Charlotte! consider my beloved sister; the impropriety of giving way to a pashon, when you have not the Smallest reason to expert a return — Mr. Lambert cs teems you, my dear, but accustom yourself to believe he loves another — that I am convinced is the case! how indecent then, how imprudent, my dear Charlotte, is your con 
dust ?’* 
She 
ij6 The Fatal Deception 
She promiffd, she would endeavour to follow my dire: ions,, and if possible try to forget him. How much easier,, my dear Eliza, the promise than the performance — where there is a reciprocal affection, it is Seldom free from aneasiness — but a hopeless passion!! be misery indeed. 
Sir John Thornhill, who I mentioned to you slime time since, has applied to Lambert and his aunt, for liberty to pay his addresses to Lucy — Mrs. Bruce gave him a favourable reception Mr. Lambert I thought a very indifferent one; which I am Surprised at, as it would be every way an unexceptionable match— — is a man f character, an agreeable man, and 
possessed 
The Fatal Deception. 
h7 
possessed of an affluent fortune — Mr. Lambert told him, he could have no objection to his alliance; but his sister had lately gone through much distress — was very far from being in health — and that he would not venture even to hint to her, any application of Such a nature — least her love and regard for him, as a biother (which he had reason to suppose was very great) might prompt her to return an answer, without Sufficiently consulting her own inclination. 
Sir John however, .obtained his permission to visit in the family, and endeavour to render himsclf worthy of her good opinion. — What will be lucy’s Sentiments about it, I cannot 
yet 
H 
The Fatal Deception. 
yet guess— — appears reserved in her disposition, though of the most enchanting manners, and sweetness of temper. 
My Sister Wilton Seems to poffds the most of her confidence yet she shows that preference So agreeably,. we cannot be offended -- indeed v/e love our sister too sincerely, to repine at anything, otherwise we should consider lucy’s partiality, in no very trifling estimatioru. 
Nancy Cooper is the only person in our family entirely herself. — Old Mr. Cooper is uneasy, that Mr. Lambert is So little inclined to give him his company — though whenever they are together, he behaves to him with the greatest resped and affection;; 
except 
I'he Fatal Dlceptio: :. 139 
except when he is with his sister, or civility requires him to pay any little attention' to us, he is generally alone. I rack my invention continually, to penetrate into the occasion of his unaccountable inclination for Solitude — but in vain — it cannot however, shade his agreeable qualities, and Seems rather an incentive to the natural generosity of his dispotion. 
He has lately made a present of Some very elegant, and expensive toys to all the ladies of our party, which he appropriated with great judgement to our different tastes and inclinations. 
But we wereyesterdayby mere accident acquainted wdth a circumstance that de' 
'
140 The Fatal Deception. 
Servesthehighestcncomiums. — In one of his Iblitary rambles, he had taken notice of a well looking elderly man, at work upon the public roads : there appeared to be a dejedion in his countenance we Seldom observe in poor people of that class: Lambert observed, he endeavoured to Select himself, from his fellow labourers, with a view, it is probable, to ruminate without disturbance upon his misfortunes. 
Lambert, whose melancholy turn of mind, makes him more fuscepti ble of feeling for the least appearance of distress, accosted him, and after a few questions to which he got very civil, but unsatisfadory answers, he demanded if he had always been accustomed to labourj as he appeared 
to 
The Fatal Deception. 141 
to be too infirm, to undergo the hardship of the business, he was then about the 
poor creature wiping away a starting tear, which he endeavoured to conceal I Said, “to be Sure he was “not yet inured to labour, but “custom would make it easier to “him, that he trusted in the mercy “of the Divine Power, for Sufficient health to enable him to provide that pittance the wants of a numerous and “unhappy family required from him. 
Plenty and ease were not allotted “to all, and it was a great, com fort to the distressed, when they “had not to attribute their missor tunes to their own guilt or imprudence;; — could patiently re y sign themselves, to the judgments 
of 
0 
14-2 The Fatal drceptiort. 
of the almighty, and endeavour, to “the best of their abilities, to fulfil “those duty’s nature demanded from “them he had bread to procure for “an unfortunate vise, and five chil “dren; and blessed God he was still “able to keep them from absolute 
“starvino; ”. 
O 
I need not attempt to describe how Lambert was affessted, nor do I think I have occasion to tell you, what was the consequence. — He obtained the poor man’s name, and a direction to his house, (hovel I should have Said,) for as Lambert has since described it, even that name is better than it deserved : upon, inquiry, he found he had been a reputable farmer in the neighbourhood, where he had for many years Supported a most worthy character— — many Ioffes 
and 
The Fatal Deception. 143 
and miisortunes in his busines^'', together with possessing a heart too open to the wants os the indigent, had brought him to very low circumstances. 
He had however Such credit, that he could have continued his farm, but his landlord, (a wretch of the most obdurate - principles, and whom Heaven had cursed with wealth and power, to be a Scourge to mankind;) had Seized upon his stock, — • Sold his goods even to his very bed, and turned him and his family adrift to beggary and ruin. 
Lambert amply relieved their dis strefs: — Sent them every ‘necessary, clothes, money, and provision : — has wrote to Mr. wilson, to six him in 
the 
144 Fatal Deception. 
the first farm, vacant, upon his estate. — And until Such a vacancy may happen, he purposes to send, this now happy family, to Stretton green, with diredlions to wilson, to let them want for nothing. 
I will only beg your patience to insorm you, how we came by the knowledge of this affair.': — A beautiful girl, about Sixteen rushed into the room while we were at breakfast this morning, and falling down upon her knees before Lambert, her hands lifted up, imploring bleshngs upon his head! begged permission for her mother, and the rest of their family, which he had Saved from despair, to be permitted to pay their gratitude and duty. 
He retired into the next room, not very well pleased I believe, at 
being: 
The Fatal Deception. 145 
Deing discovered: though in So laudable an action, where the Scene was (he has acknowledged,) affecting beyond description. 
How great a blessing is it my dear Eliza, to have the power of indulging our benevolence in favour of deserving objects— — one of the greatest pleasures, I should conceive the rich might enjoy : — but alas, how few in this age ever heard of the word cr conceived its meaning, — you are never forgot by your most Sincerely affectionate, 
LOUISA WILTON., 
vol. IL 
H 

146 The Fatal Deception. 
JAMES LAMBERT, 
T O 
Mr. WI LSON, Stretton Green. 
T HIS will be delivered to you by a very worthy, though a very poor man; — I have had the good fortune to meet with him, and am thankful thaf my Situation enables me, to repair his misfortunes. 
He 
The Fatal Deception. 
h7 
He was a farmer in somertset fiiire, much respedted for his abilities in the profession, more for his innate goodness and humanity. — You know experimentally, he is not the first who has Suffered, too freely for a charitable disposition. 
This however, which a narrow minded, Selfish churl, would call imprudence : — will not be his Smallest recommendation to you : — the great liberality of a generous mind, may by proper management, be reduced within the bounds of discretion; — to find a covetous man, capable of doing a good affion, (without Some prospedl of benefit, arising tohimself) is impossible. 
benfon’s family consists of his wife, himself, three Sons, and two daughters; 
H 2 the 
14^ The Fatal Deception. 
the four youngest', accompany the father and mother; — upon their arrival I have only to wish you to indulge your own natural Sensibility of heart, in the care of them. 
There may be conveniences miadc in the mansion, for their accommodation for a little rhyme, without any inconvenience to us. -- The sirst farm vacant 
in the manor, on wshich he can decently Support himself and family, 
let him be fixed, and as I have lived 
1 
much within my fortune, since the death of my father made me the unwished for master of it; — I desire his sarin may be completely stocked at my expense. 
If he behaves well, which from his character at present, I cannot doubt; 
let 
The Fatal Deception. 
149 
let the first years rent, be returned to him; — until Such vacancy happen, I dare Say, you will find him a useful assistant, by inspefung the workmen, labourers, ci 
believe you have too good an opinion of me to suppose, the Smallest degree of ostentation prompted me to be Solicitous, in Savour of these distressed unfortunates. — I purposed to have communicated my designs to none but you, from whom indeed it was impossible to hide it. 
The hear 'eltsatisfaflion I have enjoyed, has most amply repaid me, and honest benson owes me nothing. — My intentions in favour of this now happy family, was (contrary to my wishes) discovered by the extremity of their 3 gra 
150 The Fatal deception. 
gratitude; — ■ I receive praises that ly distress me, and pay a very indifferent compliment to the rest of mankind, if the little I have done can be esteemed So Singular. 
It has indeed had one good ef feff; if the indulgence of pity and benevolence, is So'very extraordinary; it is highly probable the world may. be led to judge uncharitably of my motives. — I Seek not applause, but would not wish to have my good intentions, misconstrued. 
The uncommon beauty of the eldest daughter, (a girl of about fifteen or sixteen) may Subject both myself and her to unworthy Suppositions; — to avoid wshich, I have requested the Ladies, will ipme of them take her 
under 
The Fatal Deception. 
151 
under their protection;; — did not apply to Mrs. Bruce or my sister, for the obvious reason, of our necessarily being So frequently together; — they are all anxious to oblige me, but I yet know not to whom she will be alllotted. 
I am very unwillingly confined here by the calls of friendship : — the Wilton family are likely to be engaged in much confusion;; — happiness of Will. Cooper is also materially concerned; — and the advanced state of lady wilton’s pregnancy, contributes to encrease our apprehensions of the event. 
Old Mr. Cooper, miss Nancy and Mr. Banks, purpose to Set our in a day or two for Devonshire; — Mrs. 
H 4 Bruce 
152 The Fatal D: eception. 
Bruce and my Sister, will either accompany them or accept of my escort, as Soon as these very disagreeable affairs, now in agitation shall be terminated. 
fcatherstone’s marriage with a very worthy young lady, (a miss Egerton) is I suppose by this time concluded. — You told me, — “my own mind, however distressed, would be re“ “by the refieftion of contribu “ting to the happiness of my friends, and the assistance of the unfortu “nare.’* — I have ever found it So: but am nevertheless unhappy. 
Let my dependants, my dear Will son, have reason to love me; — let the dcserving meet with every indulgence 
The Fatal Deception. 153 
gence, and encouragement, and Suffer not even the unworthy to feel 
Severity or oppression. -- -- -- Believe that 
I am, with the sincerest regard, 
your affe<stionate friend. 
JAMES LAMBERT. 
Si 5 
i^adv 
154 The Fatal Deception. 
LADY LOUISA WILTON, 
T O 
Miss E G E rnt O N, 
My Dearest Elizaj 
WAS a good deal surprised today, when Lambert begged I would indulge him, with a quarter of an hours conversation this evening alone; — though I thought his request a little extrcorclinary, I promised him I wmuh, 
and 
The Fatal Deception. 155 
and knowing my brother was engaged out, I proposed a walk, if he would call upon me about eight andescort me. 
He was pundual to the appointment, and managed So well', that our. eoing out together was neat taken notice of. — We vciy Soon, and by the most private streets, got out of town. 
He continued to hurry me on very fast, and I began to be greatly alarmed, notwithstanding my good opinion os Lambert, when I perceived he di resled his steps to a little retired cottage, far from the road, or any other house. — I believe he Saw my fears, as he instantly stopped, and taking hold of my hand, desired me to place that confidence in him, his very high H 6 opinion 
156 The Fatal deceptio^j. 
opinion of me in Some measure de delerved. 
‘‘ Be not alarmed, (Said he) in “that cottage, ” which we were then very near, “I flatter myself, you “will be convinced of the probity “of mv intentions.” 
Still more astonished, but no longer hesitating; I Suffered him to conduct me into a little parlour, where, leaving me for a moment, in a state of anx iety« not to be expressed, guess my astonishment, when I found at my feet, the man for whom I have been So much distressed; the worthiest of men, my Eliza! my William; — I know not at that instant what I felt love, friendship, apprehension, agitated me by turns; — and it was Some 
time 
The Fatal D eception. 157 
time before I could either answer his tender inquiries, or find words to express the happiness, his presence gave me. 
We at length recollected the friend, to whom, we mutually were So much indebted, and his presence brought us to reason and ourselves. 
Convinced of my cooper’s principles and delicacy, and of my own attachment to decency and virtue; — or how dangerous the indulgence, my dear Eliza, of receiving caresses from the man we love. — By the greatest accident, he had received an account that my marriage with Morden, was determined, if not celebrated.~he directly obtained leave of absence, took the first opportunity of a ship to bristol. 
158 The Fatal Deception. 
tol, and arrived at Bath two days since; — he was So disguised that nothing but the prying eye of love could have discovered him. 
At first, he Says, he was determined to have appeared in public, trusting to the alteration in his dress; — but how happy am I he changed that resolution; I must have found him our, and a discovery of that Sort in public might have been fatal. 
He is very comfortably Settled with a vvidow woman, in a Situation where it is next to impossible he can be sus pefled: — he was anxious we would Suffer him to avow his passion to Lord Wilton; — but we have prevailed upon him to avoid it for a few days, and with difficulty made him promise, 
not 
The Fatal Deception. 159 
not to Seek a meeting with Morden. — Lambert is to see him every day; — and I was obliged to assure him, if things are not Soon brought to extremities; I will again give him the meeting. 
I have dire<5led this to my friend, Eliza Egerton; — but is Mrs. eger tonne has lost that affectionate daughter, she will I hope forward my billet to a Mrs. Featherstone, who will in future I trust Supply the loss to me. 
I rejoice, my dear girl, at your happy prospedls, and will endeavour to reconcile myself to your new appellation; — though I shall never recollect without pleasure, it was Eliza Egerton with whom many years I have been 
closely 
io The Fatal Deception. 
closely and sincerely united by a friendship that will never diminish, but will be transferred with additional affection to Eliza Featherstone, 
by her assured. 
and most affcdtionate. 
LOUISA WILTON. 
Mrs. 
The Fatal Deception. ii 
Mrt. FEATHERSTONE, 
T O 
Lady LOUISA WILTON 
My dear Louisa, 
Y adventures are effcdbually finished, dwindled into that household piece of furniture, a wife; and what is more extraordinary, determined to be an unfashionable one; — I shall now be quite at liberty, and more experimentally 
162 The Fatal Deception. 
mentally qualified to assist you in your distreffes. 
I wdll not attempt to entertain you, with the stupid account of our procession to church; — the raptures or delicate behaviour of my, what shall I call him louisa— — Splendour of my clothes, jewels, ci refer you to the first novel you lay your hands upon, for the description! — only let me premise; that being neither ashamed of myself, or my husband, fthere’s for you, my dear.) I acquitted myself, my rncther Says, with becoming prudence, and discretion : — I have been two days married and have not yet repented giving my hand, (I really bel ’eve) to a very honest fellow. 
Let 
The Fatal Deception. i6j 
Let me not forget to acquaint you, with an instance of my confidence in him, for which I exped to receive, at least I deserve his thanks. 
You remember, I suppose, that formal troublesome cat. Lady Lamb, she came, three or four days since, to Grofvenor square, in the miost violent hurry, to give me a piece of intelligence about my John, which she Said," she hoped would be Sufficiently early, to prevent me Sacrificing myself to a man of intrigue. — I stared you may be Sure, and begged, to know what she meant; — but well convinced she was a peevish, malevolent gossip; I determined not to give the least credit to her tale. — “Sir Jacob, her Sagacious, pru “dent, virtuous Sir Jacob, had Seen 
“the 
164 The Fatal Deception. “th 
“bad fame.” 
“the odious man go into a house of 
I told her Ladyship, that Mr. sea therstone was master of his own actions; but possibly Sir Jacob might be deceived, if it was not So, I Said people might be induced upon particular occasions, to go to bad places, on laudable purposes; that let it be as it would, I was Sorr}% on her ladyship’s account, to find Sir Jacob So well acquainted with them. 
Enraged to find I paid no regard to her information, and offended with my insinuation, about her baronet, she could no longer hold her temper, but downright abused me; — she Said I was a giddy, foolish girl; and should Soon find to my cost the conscquence 
of 
The Fatal Deception. 
is 
of slighting her friendly intelligence, I very cooly reminded her, that propriety would not admit, of her ladyship’s playing the fool, anywhere but in her own house, and ringing the bell, left her to her own comfortable re fiedlions, 
Above suspedling Featherstone of weakness or deceit, and persecuy as sured of his honour! I married him the next morning. — So much for Lady Lamb. — 
Featherstone proposes with my approbation, to reconnoitre his estate in Yorkshire, where it Seems he is much wanted, bring Cooper in your hand with you to town, and go with us, we shall form Such a charming par tie qiiarre,! I shall be enchanted. 
We 
Isisi The Fatal Deception. 
We have a new post coach building for the purpose, if you can’t per suade your man to bring you off. — • Put yourself under the protection of mine, who I wdll dispatch to you for that purpose, 'upon the ssightest intimation of your concurrence. 
My good man promises me, that your affairs will very Soon take a favourable turn, but will not oblige me by communicating his reasons. — 1 shall not find it difficult, to forgive his reserve upon the occasion, if his opinion is well founded. 
Your meeting with Cooper was a little romantic, I love Lambert for his good offices to you both, he is certainly very convenient, and it would be a pity, if busmess of his own was 
to 
The Fatal Deception. 
1 si 
to prevent him employing Such use full talents, in favour of his friends. 
It •was fortunate for you that he made the third person, at your interview with Cooper! I began to tremble at the accounts of your love, friendship, and apprehension, to which add opportunity. — His tender inquiries, mdght have been too powerful, for my friends prudence or recollection, and I was very happy to find lambert’s presence, had brought you to reason, and yourselves, how much Soever you may be convinced of his delicacy, and principles, if you object to our Yorkshire Scheme, can’t you get Banks to help you. 
. Parliament it Seems are going to repeal that odious marriage ad, and 
and 
is The Fatal Deception. 
and he may perhaps be permitted to say grace to you, wsthout fear of transportation, — forgive my trifling, it is merely to keep up your Spirits. 
When I cease to be anxious for my friend, may I no longer live! — The felicity of your Eliza, very ma terialy depends upon yours, but I will not give way to imaginary fears, and am strongly possessed with hopes, you will be as completely happy, as I should now be, was it not in the share I take, in everything that affects my Louisa, this ought to convince you, that even Miss Egerton did not love you more finceiely than, 
ELIZA FEATHERSTONE. 
Mr. 
The Fatal Deceptioit. 
169 
imr. LAMBERT, 
T O 
Mr. F E A T HJE R S T O N E. 
E have been in the greatest confusion! — Lord Wilton received letters from Ireland, that gave an account, of cooper’s return to England : incensed at this intelligence, he communicated it to old Mr. Cooper; 
vol. II I with 
i; o thef ATAL deceptioiv. 
with his reasons, for Supposing it to be on his Sister Lady louilvs account. 
I cannot forgive his Lordshiphs distressing that worthy old man, about an affair, where his interference I am 
convinced, will have no effect 1 -- -- -- 
It has made him very unhappy, and will urge him perhaps to treat his Son, with a Severity he is far from descrving. 
No one is blamable in my opinion but his Lordship, who, I do not Scruple to declare has acted tyranically and unjustly. 
This moment a letter was brought me from old Mr. Cooper, enclosing one for his Son! which I am to forward to him, as Soon as I am informed 
The Fatal Deception. 
II 
med where he is. — Mr. Cooper I believe, supposes me to be in the Secret but very judiciousiy does not Seem to do So, he is not violent in his expressions, about our friend wifi’s conduct, but declares to me, he is Severely offended, and will never be reconciled to him, till he has recovered Lord wilton’s former friendship, and good opinion, a matter not a little difficult. 
He intends to Set out to morrow morning, with his daughter Nancy, for Hartley point, and desires as Soon as agreeable to us, that Mrs Bruce, my Sister and, I will follow him. — I am just going to see Cooper, and whll sinish this upon my return, affairs now draw nigh upon a con i 2 elusion, 
jy2 The Fatal Deceptiojst. 
elusion, and one way or other, must Speedily terminate. 
Cooper was much affected, upon receipt of his father’s letter; — “he Said, allowing for the misrepresentation of “his apparent imprudence, it was more “affectionate, than he could have ex“ “but was from that very cir “cumstance, more distressing”. 
He resolved to See Lord Wilton and his father, and I found it impossible to disuade him. — He alleged, it was highly dishonourable to Lady louisa, and his own character, to remain inconcealment : all I could prevail upon him, was to Suffer me to give his father notice of his design. 
The 
The Fatal Deceptiont. 173 
The old gentleman received him, with a mixture of affection, and displeasure on his countenance !-^- “I had a Son” Said he, the pride of my life, do I now See him Such as I wish is he “come to atone, for the unhappiness his imprudence has occasioned, in a family to whom we owe So many obligations.” 
Cooper replied, his passion for Lady louisa, was involuntary, and too deeply fixed, ever to be erased! he entreated him to recollect,, great merit of of Lady louisa, that her Ladyshiip^ was independent, and had condescended to aeknowlege a reciprocal regard. — 
“I Set out tomorrow morning, continued old’ Mr. Cooper, to de vonshire, let your promise, to relin l 3 ‘‘ quissi 
174 The Fatal Deception 
quish all thoughts of Lady louisa “and an immediate return to Ireland, “reestablish you in my affection— — 
revere, I love my father. Says Cooper, let him not cruelly expect impossibilities?? — “am not then to expect: you will oblige me?” — I can never relinquish Lady louisa, but with life. — farewell Mr. Lambert, replied his father, and was quitting the room, when Lady louisa opened the door, and fell at his feet. — “Why does good “Mr. Cooper wish to destroy me, “by an unjust Severity to his Son, he is possessed of my tenderest affection, which he acquired with“ “Solicitation.” - — attribute my attachment, to the effect of his merit alone, and blame yourself, for producing a Son, lo amiable and worthy to be loved. 
cease 
The Fatal Deception. 175 
cease then, my dear Sir, to act in opposition to reason, and paternal affection, forgive your Son, and kindly join in endeavouring to procure my lord’s concurrence. 
The old man was melted by this unexpected address, Cooper and her Ladyship Seized his hands, which kneeling they repeatedly kissed! — why my children do you require a thing from me too flattering to refuse, was I not well con vinced, of Lord wilton’s absolute disinclination; — I joined very warmly in Solicitating him to forgive Cooper, and at least to remain neuter, if he would not be prevailed upon to assist us, in an application to Lord Wilton. 
We were just then, interrupted by his Lordship! who Starting at the sight la of 
ij6 The Fatal Deception. 
of Cooper, exclaimed! I requested your friend Sir, would prevail upon you to avoid me. — “Concious, my “Lord, no action has made me des“ “I cannot Submit to avoid 
any man: ” — You have used me ill Cooper, you have Seduced the affections, of a a foolish romantic girl, and interfered with all my prospefts for her interest, and my own convenience, a charge you cannot deny, and for which, I expect most ample satis fa<stion. 
I 
Ah! criiel brother Said louisa! and instantly fainted. — Lord Wilton was alarmed! it was long before she came toherself : when she showed Some signs of recovery, old Mr. Cooper insisted upon it Will, should withdraw. 
This 
The Fatal Dcception.’ 
177 
This at last he very reluctantly consented to. — Lord Wilton told him,, lie should expecl him to account for. his conduct, the first opportunity, and? he wished for his father and Sister, and their former friendship, that he might effectually exculpate himself. 
Cooper bowed,, and Said he Sliould’ at all times be ready to convince him, of the very sincere regard, he ever had entertained,, for his Lordship and fa -- mily.. 
Lady louisa looked round for Cooper, and, missing him, I was afraid of her relapsing into another fit, the tears streaming from her lovely eyes. Can my brother, can Lord Wilton, she Said, inhumanly destroy his wife and sister,, by taking I 5, the 

The Fatal Deception. 
the life of a brother, and lover, justly esteemed, or by the Sacrifice of his own? — that! it is probable. Said my Lord, will not be the case, matters may very likely be accommodated, without coming to extremities : — but you have a certain means in your own power! give your hand to Sir William Morden, and I am cooper’s friend : — “Leadme dear Mr. Cooper, ” giving her hand to him, “from the presence “of a man, void of justice or humanity.” — 
I had not patience, with the obduracy of his disposition! — Mr. Cooper has consented to postpone his intended journey for a Sew days : and I have promised Lady louisa, to be constantly with Will. Cooper, that I may, (if possible) prevent a meeting, between 
my 
The Fatal Deception. 
h9 
my Lord and him: which ssie Seems, with some degree of reason, to be apprehensive of. 
.How many deserving people, may" probable be made wretched by i.ord wilton’s cursed connedlion with morden!! that (without doubt) has Sprung from deep indiscretion.. 
You are married. Lady louisa tells ^ me!. why am I to receive that intelligence,, from any but yourstlf? — It accounts however, for your neglecting a piece of business, I Some time since requested you to do for me. — 
My snuffbox, it may appear trifling, but ro me is of Serious consequence. — Neglect it no longer, if you value me I the recollection of the place, were I I 6 lest 
I So The Fatal Deception. 
left it, reproaches me Severely for my folly. — The partner you wished me to engage with that evening, I suppose has preserved it : — she appeared tender and Sensible, I was not ungenteel 
to her, and dare Swear she will re 
\ 
it, without repugnance: - — I esteem it valuable. — May thehappiness denied to me, be doubly experienced by my friend! I congratulate Mrs. feather stone and you, very sincerely, and wish you may never know Sorrow, but my name. 
yours 
most assuredly, 
J. LAMBERT. 
Mr. 
The Fatal Deception. ii 
Mr. F E A T H E R S T O N E. 
T O 
J A M E 3 L A M B E R T, Esq; 
London. 
JL H E happiness I experience in the posseshon of a valuable wife, you are reasonable enough to think, a tolerable apology, for not writing Sooner, nothing is wanting to make my felicity complete, but a knowledge that my friends are equally fortunate. 
., You 
i82 The Fatal deceptioifl’,. 
You may have suppposed, the commission you entrusted me with, easily executed; if So, you was eg region ssy mistaken; — a new married man, can find few opportunities to leave his bride, for the transaction of Secret business;; — you will admit, the place where you required me to go, demand. ed on my own account, much circumr ipedion. 
The most fortunate events, frequently arise, from Simple and tristing circumstances; — Such I hope, the Search of the box, will prove to pooper. 
I demanded a private audience of your nymph, and after the usual compliments, begged her to restore the box you had left behind you,, if in her possession; or if not, ^ that she would 
emy loy 
The Fatal Deception. 183 
employ her address, to recover it for you, being a family one, containing the portrait of a very near relation, and that she might rest assured, you would amply recompense her for the trouble. 
After Some hesitation, she acknovr ledged to have, found the box, but declared it was nof then in her possession; — she Said she had taken no notice to the family of her having it, ex, peding you to call for it, and, m.ean ing to preserve it for you; — but observing the. Secret Spring, she discovered the picture, the beauty of which dilpleased her, and she determined to Secret it.. 
She declared, the generosity of your disposition, had influenced her strongly 
in 
184^ The Fatal Deception. 
in your favour,, that she was struck with your great Sensibility, and confessed she wished most fervently, to have made an.impression,, upon your heart. 
You are a dangerous fellow Lambert, you See, when even in your" gloomy Situation of mind, you could; inspire a courtesan 'with love; — Sensible of the difficulties I should have, if I Suffered her to continue in an. error, 
I told her, the object ought, not to have given her uneasiness, as it. was your sister,. 
“Pray, Sir,, is the lady at.bath — she is : — “an acquaintance of Lord “wilton’s ?” — exactly— — “I cannot at present restore the picture, y I may possibly do Some Service to 
your 
The Fatal Deception. 185 
“your friend.” -- -- -1 am all attention 
madam, explain yourself; —; if in your power to Serve Mr. Lambert; be certain he is incapable of ingratitude. 
“A gentleman. Sir, a Mr. Wallace, who visits in this house, has, contrary to my wish, attached himself to mehe by Some means, got the box into his hand, and my curiosity being excited, I showed him the picture, as he has a general acquaintance, wishing to be informed, what happy woman it represented, but I have not since been able to prevail upon him, either to give me the information I desired, or return me the box, — -- Endeavouring yesterday to get it from him, (in struggling I suppose) he dropped this letter, which I afterwards found : — from what 
you 
186 The Fatal Deception". 
you have told me, it appears of the “greatest consequence to your friend, “and I shall think myself happy in “contributing everything in my “power, to the Safety or Service, of “him and his connexions.” 
Opening the letter, I found it a compound of villainy from Morden to Wallace; — pray, madam, may I ash, what situation Mr. Wallace is in, and if you know of any intimacy, between him and Sir William Morden ^ 
“Mr. Wallace, Sir, usually lives “expensively, and I believe is depen “dant upon Sir William, as I have “heard the latter, very angry at his 
“extravagance.” -- -- -- - “Be So kind, 
“madam., as to give me a direction 
to 
The Fatal Deception. 
187 
“to Mr. Wallace, and take no no“ “of what has passed betwixt us. 
No time was lost, I found the gentleman at his chambers; and introduced myself by telling him, I waited upon him, for a certain snuffbox of yours, which he had got into his pos session, (I presumed with an intention to restore to the proper owmer) he had the box, was his answer, but did not think himself authorised to part with it, till he was assured I had a right to demand it. 
I only Said, I could not be surprised to find him So Scrupulous in restoring what he had obtained, in So very extraordinary a manner. — “Who are “you, that take upon you to treat “me, with So little ceremony ?’* 
A 
188' The Fatal Deceptioj:, 
A Friend, Sir, to the virtuous distressed, an enemy to villainy, a detester of unworthy dependants, and their still more obnoxious principal; — in a word. Sir,, I am Mr. lambert’s friend, a despiser of Sir, William Morden, consequently not much inclined to have a better opinion of you, than your condufl deserves.. 
You must first convince me. Sir, “before I make any reply to Such “impertinent insinuations, by what “authority you take upon you, to y life me So disrespedlfully.” ^’ 
Return me the box, you carried off from court, if you wish 
to avoid a prosecution for felony.’* “From what part of my condufl, do 

you. 
The Fatal Deception. 189 
“you dare to make use of So illebcral “an expression ?** 
“The confident of Sir William Mordcn, Said I, who can be ac“ “with his villainy, and “Scruple to assist in bringing him “to justice, and exposing him to “the world, deserves doth contempt “and punishment; — do you know this hand writing, Sir? not giving “him time to recover himsels, the “contents you are no stranger to; — Sir William Morden knows you, “Sir; did you justly deserve the name “of gentleman? durst he, profligate “as he is, communicate with So much “freedom, the infamy of his past con“ “and the villainy of his future “intentions? 
You 

100 The Fatal Decjeftion. 
“You appear a man of honour, 
'Sir, (Said Wallace) the dependance 1 am obliged to Submit to, from Sir William Morden, necessarily obliges me to be privy to many of his designs, which, though I may' not approve, I nevertheless cannot prevent; — this ought I think to preserve me from being treated with So much Severity.” 
The man who with a good edu “cation, and any knowledge of the world, can prefer a vile abject state of dependance, even to poverty, “with an irreproachable character, de“ “neither our assistance or com“ “
“I am unfortunate, Sir, but not ^ a villain.” — The man who is villainy’s 
The Fatal Deception. 
191 
lainy’s abettor will Seldom recieve “a Softer appellation; — I shall be 
glad to be deceived in my opinion, “but if your principles are not in“ “corrupted, by your communi“ “with Sir William, the future “detestation of your past connec “tion, will best prove your Sincerity. 
He returned me the box, and begged I would permit him to wait upon me tomorrow, when, he Said, he hoped to convince me, he was not So very culpable, as I supposed him— — has promised most fervently not to take any measures in favour of mor den, but communicate to me every direction he receives from him. 
I inclose you the letter, a letter, wterth a million, as it fortunately explains 
igi The Fatal Deception. 
plains enough to convince Lord Wilton, of Sir william’s baseness, which, together with the discoveries I expect to make from Wallace, will, I hope, preserve you all from the bad effects of his Scandalous intentions, extricate my Lord, from this wretche’s power, and enable him to do justice to the worth of our friend, and the tenderness of Lady louisa. 
My wife! I never Supposed myself of half the consequence till now, — gives me So many caresses, for the Service I have done our mutual friends, I require no 'acknowledgement from you or Cooper, the reward I receive from 
my Eliza, is all I wish. -- When lean 
think of anything but her; — You See you have no reason to complain of my forgetfulness, 
I have 
The Fatal Deception. 193 
I have wrote you a very long letter, and it is now her right, to expect Some of my attention. — I fly to her, my friend, to the Source of my felicity; — get a wife, Lambert, if you hope to be happy. — I am yours most truly, 
J. FEATHERSTONE, 
VOL. II 
K 
Sir 
194 The Fatal Deception. 
Sir WILLIAM M O R D E N, 
TO 
Mr. WALLACE, (Enclosed hi the Preceding.) 
Sir, 
J Am glad to find it is possible, to o et the better of your ridiculous fcru pies — though at a greater price than I chuse in future to indulge you with. I can Scarce be brought to conceive you were pretendedly So — in order to 
extract 
The Fatal Deception. 195 
extract that assistance from me, my friendship never hitherto refused you — but I will not Submit to thesc Srequent fits of pusillanimous contrition. 
I know you, hlr. Wallace 1 you are acquainted with me — as I have always indulged mysdf in the gratification of my passions — I have, you must allow, ever Supported you in the extravagance of yours, when they did not clash with my own. — What I demand in return, and on which must depend your future expectations from me, is a ready concurrence with my designs; and an active assistance, when my affairs make it necessary to require it. In the mean time, trouble me with no more of your fermons, and at k 2 tempt 
1^6 The Fatal Deception, 
tempt not to offer advice, which you know I cannot approve, and must be convinced I will never follow. 
The enclosed note will keep you in temper for a while, and enable you to continue Some time longer, your profuse distribution of it, upon that inanimate being, to whom I am convinced you are the greatest dupe. 
You are Surpfifed, you tell me, at my having proceeded Such lengths with Wilton, and when I have So nearly accomplished my purpose, agree to an unaccountable delay — louisa was, it is true, my principal object— — was handsome, and pleased me — her fortune, not despicable — But I will candidly 
The Fatal Deception. 197' 
didly acquaint you— — more than love determined me to exert every means, lawful or otherwise to obtain her — she treated me with inattention, is not disrespecft — this roused my resentment — and as the only means to complete my purpose, was getting Lord Wilton into my power — I re solved to proceed upon that plan. — i You are no stranger to the means by which I effected it, or the consequence, if in Such a time. Lord Wilton does not procure his sister’s consent to marry me. 
I depended much upon her brother’s influence, and I believe she might, by this time, have been entitled to a sepe rate maintenance out of my estate; 
K 3 (well 
ist The fatal deceptron,. 
(well convinced I should have been tired of her in a., fortnight) if an attachment the tender creature had taken to Lady wilton’s brother, had not in ipired her which intrepidity to oppose tiie vv iil of her brother, with steadinest and perseverance. 
I am now going to discover to you, the motive which at present ^dtuates me, and which will account to you, for my apparent negligence in an affair that I have taken Such considerable pains, and tiled Such dangerous methods to accomplish. — A puny girl from Portugal, has robbed the fair louisa of ail my tendcrness -- consequently lowered my resentment. I would be content to accept the half 
forfeit: 
The Fatal Deception. 199 
forfeit of wilton’s engagement, and give her a general discharge, could I be assured of Succeeding with miss Lambert — but she appears to have no passions — and her brother, haughty fid reserved — has expreffecf his disapprobation of me personally, and in terms most provoking. 
■ I have a great and daring game to play, in which it is likely, I may assign you a capital part — So let me hear of no more qualms of conscience. — You and I are too far advanced in libertin ism, to cut a figure in the world, in any other charaffer. — You See I make free with myself, therefore shall make no apology to you. 
K 4 
Lam 
2 03 The Fatal deceptioisr.. 
1 
Lambert may forget the freedom of his Sentiments — Lord wilton’s estate shall make me forget the indignities I have Suffered from his haughty Sister; and Lucy shall, by force or intrcaty, gratify my pleasure and revenge — till 1 can effeftually strike the blow, I me elitate, I avoid fuspicion by appearing satisfied and inoffensive. Be ready at a moment’s warning, to follow my di reduons; of which I will.apprife you in time. ' 
I need not Say be faithful, your prudence and discretion, will necessarily put you in mind, you have been too deeply concerned in. bad affairs of mine already, as well as your own, to recant with impunity. 
W. MORDEN. 
Sic 
The Fatal Deception. 201 
From the Same to the Same. 
HIS will be delivered to you', when you have leisure to reflect upon your foolish stupidity and unparalleled ingratitude to your best benefactor. 
I received your letter with astonishment and contempt -- -- -- -- despise your 
meanness, and will Severely punish you for a failure in that friendship, I have K 5 givem 
202 The Fatal D eceptjo fc. 
given myself too much trouble to establish. 

If 
Your jesuitical insinuation, that you: dropped my letter,, through inadvertancc, I give no more credit to„ than to your pretended resolutions, of avoiding in future, the irregularities, the vices (as you are pleased to call them) I have led you into. — Your assumed pretenc sion to candour, in giving me information,. of your haying made a Solemn. promiseg to communicate to lambert’s friends all I write, and wishing me to decline all future correspondence with you, is a Subterfuge too. ridiculous, to answer any other end,, than making' the parties you are now emissary for,. despife you,, as much as I do. I would 
have 
The f^tal Deception. 203 
have allowed you Some degree of merit, if by making yourself a complete villain, you had effedlually betrayed me, as you might have done, by hypocrisy;; it is, the discovery from the measures I have taken, will be no great obstrudtion to my designs; but will make you Smart Severely for your villainy.. 
The bond I fortunately obtained of you sometime since, for five hundred pounds; obtained of you, for the very purpose I now use it, will not be sh cheerfully discharged by your present employers, as I should have canceled’ it, had you not betrayed me! had yotr not forgot all obligations to me! im short, had you not been a cowardly Scoundrel — your pretended repentance K 6 pro 
204 The Fatal deceptiojt.i 
proceeds from fear, and you will appear to be honest, no longer than you dare be otherwise. — In prison your genius will be cramped; and if it is pos sible you can be Sorry for any part of your conduct, it is the place in the world most, likely to make you So— — as the last proof of my regard, I have established you, and where,! dare Say, you will not fail, to repent your folly, and the basenefs of your: behaviour, to 
W. MORDEN. 
Mr. 
*4 
The Fatal Deceptioi®. 205 
Mr. LAMBERT, 
T O 
Mr., F E A r H E R S T O N 
I 
Coshmunicated to Lord Wilton,, the contents of morden’s letter to Wallace : — the discovery was providential, and I forget my folly, in. going to that place of intrigue, since it will be productive of happiness, to. Cooper and Lady louisa. 
You 
2o6 The Fatal Deception, 
You will readily conceive all that has happened, when I tell you Lord Wilton is gone abroad, and Morden has received the just reward of his villainy; — he is yet alive, but not expelled to recover.. 
The morning after Lord Wilton was apprised of morden’s infamy, he brought me Securities upon his estate,, for twenty thousand pounds, the a mount of which, he begged I would assist him with, to discharge the bond morden had’ against him; — the money I have in the stocks, at the instant put it in ray power to Serve him. 
He told me, (under the stron ^est injundtion not to divulge it, till after the meeting) that convinced of mor den’s consummate villainy, he could 
no. 
The Fatal Deception. 
207 
no longer bear to think of his ownr folly and injustice,, in So warmly interesting hiraself in favour of his alliance, - with ladylouisa: — he declared, though ^ her concurrence would still fulfil the condition of his bond, and consequently Save the forfeiture of the Sura I lent him, he would not on any consideration Submit to the terms — that he never vrould have encouraged the thought, if he hhd not till then, had a tolerable opinion of his disposition and principles. — But it was now plain, he had Scandaluoussy im posed upon him, for which he should kverelv account.. 
I find the debt was incurred at play, and Morden, my Lord told me,, pro posed to accept his bond for the money conditionally, if he was not able to 
pre 
os The Fatal Deception?. 
prevail upon his Sister, to marry him within the term of two years. 
There was certainly much appearance of candour and generosity in this proceeding, and we cannot altogether condemn Lord wilton’s being interested in his favour; though it is scarce possible to fuppose, (if we may judge from the tenor of his letter, j that he meant fairly. 
I have, contrary to my inclination, been drawn into an active part of the affair: — not finding it possible to decline the warm Solicitation of Lord Wilton, to attend him as his Second. 
I avow myself an advocate against the general practice of duelling, where from trifling pundilios, friends are under 
tjie Fatal Deceptioi^. 209 
der the neceshty of engaging friends, where misrepresentation, and a salse sense of honour, frequently exclude, that just concession which conicience, would otherwise prompt the blamable party to offer; — and by that more honourable method, preserve a worthy individual to Society, in his own per son, or Save him from the dreadful ressedbion, of first unthinkingly offending, and then as unjustly destroying, the life of the man he valuecl 
Clearly understand me Featherstone, my disapprobation of duelling, is confined principally to the unhappy misunderstanding betwixt friends, where pride will not listen to a reasonable accommodation. — But there are cases happen, 
’ where a rencountre becomes indispenfv bly necceffary. 
Suclx 
210 The Fatal Deception. 
Such is the light in which I ste the affair, between Lord Wilton and mor den, who under his hand, has acknowledged his contemptible and unworthy opinion of his Lordship and family, the Substance of his letter, implies his having fraudulently imposed upon him, and declares the strongest intentions of future mischief. — Speedy and effectual measures were certainly required, to counteracst So dangerous a villain. 
I have Said I was unwillingly prevailed upon, to attend Lord Wilton as Second. Between men of honour, when the cafe unhappily admits not of accommodation, none are required, but but where foul play, or misrepresentation may reasonably be apprehended, 
it 
The Fatal Deception. iit 
it then becomes essential; — though disagreeable to myself, on this account alone, I took the field with Wilton. 
Remember that I have already, ia few words, at the beginning of rhy letter, informed you the eonsequences of our meeting; — eonsequences, which I hope, will turn out happily for our friends; — therefore accuse me not of an unseafonable dissertation, which the nature of the Subjedh drew from me; without further comment, receive the particulars. 
In my lords name I waited upon 
Morden, paid him the money; -- -- -- - 
and received a Sufficient discharge. — To do the wretch justice, he wanted not courage, but assured me, he would be ready to. meet my Lord, 
and. 
212 The Fatal Deception. 
and decide the quarrel, when, and how he pleased. — He knew, he Said, the occasion of my lord’s resentment was from an intercepted letter, that his confidence in a rascal had induced him to write. — He was above dis guise, and avowed the letter contaiiv ing his genuine Sentiments. 
I told him for the present, I should wave the insult he had given me in it; being in Lord wilton’s name, to insist upon a meeting, at six that evening, a little out of town, upon the Bristol road. — The choice of weapons depended on himself; — Swords he Said should decide it ’ — upo n pointing out the difficulty of conveying them out of Bath, (where none are permitted to be worn without giving Suspicion; — he judicioufiy proposed his Second, or my lord’s, should carry them to the 
ground 
The Fatal Deception. 
213 
ground in a post chaise, under pretence of going tobristol, -- preliminaries being thus Settled, we met agreeable to appointment. — Mordens Second, one Mr. Macnamara, (who appeared to deservea worthierfriend)attending with the chaise at the place. — He humanely begged to know, if no accommodation could be effected, and Seemed concerned, when my Lord Said impossible. 
It was agreed upon, Mr. Macnamara and I should retire and not interfere till one of them fell — The Survivor was instantly to make use of the carriage, for his Safety, and the Seconds were jointly to offer, every assistance to the kss fortunate. Justice prevailed! after Some few passes on each side, Morden exerting himself to the utmost, made a des perate lunge, which ssightly wounded my Lord, but not being able to recover 
2 14 The Fatal Deception. 
cover himself, received his lordship’s shlade through his body; — he could ■utter no more, than I forgive, and I am a dead man. 
My Lord instantly drove off, and we conveyed the wounded Mordentotown, where he has the best Surgeons to attend him, they brought him to himself, but think hecannot possibly Survive it. — My Lord gave me two letters, previous to the meeting, directed for Lady Wilton, properly marked, that I might know which to deliver as the event should turn out, the other I vasto destroy, he most affeteionately recommended Lady Wilton, and his sisters, to my good offices, and as the strongest inducement, declared he had no longer any objection, to the alliance of our common friend, with his sister Louisa. 
You 
The Fatal Deception. 
21:; 
You will wonder I have Said nothing of Cooper, — by my lord’s directions, he was entirely ignorant of what was going forward, I told him my Lord would be from home that evening, and he by that means might attend the Ladies! which I requested him not to neglectconscious, if my Lord had fallen, his fraternal assistance to her Ladyship, would be most efficacious. Lady whlton’s present Situation, required the greatest caution to be used; — We have been So fortunate to explain matters to her, without any great alarm;; — is Satisfied my Lord is well and Safe : — I did not think it necef sary to acquaint her, with the wound in his arm, which my Lord as he left me. Said was a mere Scratch. 
A note of two lines received by ex press fi-om him, informs us he is on 
board 
216 The Fatal Deception. 
board a vessel, in which he purposes ta to go to Milford Haven, where he will connnut incog, under the name of Fenton, till he receives advice from us. 
The compassion of the i^adies, is naturally engaged, for the unhappy, yet unworthy Morden: — but a prospedt of the future happiness of Cooper and Lady louisa, to which there are now no obstacles, will administer every consolation for morden’s death, and my lord’s temporary absence, a dan -- gerous prosecution not being apprehended. — Need I tell you Cooper is out of his wits. — Morden has just Sent to desire to See me, in my next you you shall know on what account, with best compliments to your amiable wife, I am dear Featherllone, ever yours, J. LAMBERT. 
End of the Second Volume. 


V’ '■ 
^ • ■? ' '• -, ^ -- k dja 
": •' NY, 

'’L >r v: 
rc yjiv.' ■ y I sin •. V • '-.■■• •^. '■■ V. "V; ■;... • 





Me 
/bvibstu 
PA 
Vi 
fus 

urnivtkbliy OF PENNSYLVANIA LIBRARIES 
RARE BOOK COLLECTION 
9 April 1934 
j. 
. 'k ^ 
9 T 
iib 
LV 

., i 



I P. N U G E N t’s 
I Circulating Library, 
X In bri^ge jireei^ Chejier^ 
LL new Novels, Histories, Voyages and Travels, that are esteemed to be the 
most 
entertaining, lent out to read, at eighteen X Shillings per Year; five Shillings per Quarter, X or threepence the Single Volume, returning each Volume back in three Days. 
X All new Publications of Merit, Magazines, ^ c. got down from London, as Soon as pub x lishcd; also Plays and. Entertainments. 
^ He also Sells (wholesale and Retail) on the lowest Terms, the following Articles : 
Elegant Prints, colour’d and plain 
'Maps, Charts, c. 
Crayons Pencil Brulhes Indian Ink Drawing books Playing and Message cards ward’s Medicines Beaume de Vie norton’s Drops hooper’s Female Pills daffy’s Elixer Dr james’s Powders And moult of the beft attessed Medicines now extant. 
Bibles and Common prayers of all Sizes Schoolbooks, x’c. Writing paper of all Sizes gilt and plain < 
Pens and Quills Wafers of all Kinds Dutch Wax, Rea and Black black and Red Lead pencils Bonnet Paftebo rd lates 
Glass and Leather Ink Stands Red and Black Letter c>lcs L adies Eiwee cales Asses Skin Memorandum books 
BOOKS bound in the est and most durable Method; gentlemen’s Libraries repaired and fitted up in the neaiess Manner, and all Orders executed with the utmost Regularity and Dispatch, on the most reasonable Terms. Also Libraries and Parcels of Books bought, X sold, or exchanged. 0 
f 
': ia4^a 
THE 
GODFREY F. SINGER 
MEMORIAL 
PRESENTED BY Cf 
MR. AND MRS. JACOB SINGER 
-,; C s: g 
'% ‘d 
r 
"'•’; 1 f p^srr I ^ - 
& ' T; 
m y 
1 h 
iliy.i.l jj il tirtj 


C 
F 
A 

: A. .<; r‘ 

THE 
FATAL EFFECTS 
O F 
DECEPTION. 
A NOVEL. 
IN THREE VOLUMES. 
VOL. HI. 
LONDON; 
PRINTED FOR T. JONES, 
AT HIS CIRCULATING LIBRARY IN THE STRANSS^ OPPOSITE HUNOERFORD stret. 
MDCC LSXUL 
'A 

t ■ ' * ' 
f n V O' C V 
; ^ ■ ■ -, '• '. 
: N '; '. " -- -^ 
■ i ‘ '. .: : t •- •- 


- • •*. V - j 
; i T : 
C ■ 
■.4bl 
WT 
'
S'”. V ' ■ 
V 

■A fl'i 
g) ^, ^^oooooooowwaoooooooo^^^^ OOOOOOO0MOCO 
THE 
FATAL DECEPTION, 
WILLIAM Cooper, 
T O 
Mr. F E A T H E R S T ONE. 
co 
ri 

'§ 
4. 
S" 
s: 
O S T in suspence my dear Jack, ’ bordering upon despair, did I leave Ireland! conceive my having everything at stake, my Soul held dear, — informed my amiable louisa was upon the point of giving her hand to another, through the vol. III B arbitrary 

r 
2 The Fatal Deception. 
arbitrary commands of a brother. — Put yourself in ray circumstances for a moment, and blame me if you can, for not observing a more regular correspondence, reduced to the necessity of disguising myself, (a measure disagreeable to my Sentiments) that I might, without Suspicion, makemyselsacquainted withmydear lou isa’s real Situation: — that, if not too late, I might be ready at all events to reassure and protect her; — or if her tender Spirits had not been able to withstand the violence of Solicitation, I might undiscovered have consigned myself to that misery; — nothing but a proper idea of louisa’s merit can give you a conception of my Suffering, had she given me up. 
Dreading the displeasure of my father, the reproaches of Lord Wilton 1 — the distrds of those dear friends, those amia 

The Fatal Deception. 3 
miable relations; — I might perhaps involve in my misfortunes, I arrived at Bath! — what do I not owe, to the interposition of providence, that has relieved me from the depth of distress, and raised me to a profpebl of happiness; great beyond my most Sanguine expectations! — what do I not owe to }’our good wishes, and assistance my dearsriend, what, to the active, the extraordinary marks, of lambert’s friendship. 
To find my father, my sisters, — Lord Wilton, my friends! all approving my attachment to a most deserving object, to find So worthy, and accomplished a woman, fo steadily my own, equally proof to the threats, and endearments of a revered brother, fills me with e motions impossible to describe, and pleasure I am Scarce able to bear.. — How B 2 much 
4 The Fatal deceptiom 
much easier, I am now convinced it is to Submit to ill fortune with a proper degree of magnanimity, than to bear prosperity with moderation. 
Let me however exert myself, and for a few minutes change afubjed, on which I could dwell for ever. 
At lambert’s request, I am to continue from the conclusion of his last letter, the occurrences which have since happened, into what risques, what ssiame and horror, does not vice plunge her votaries? would you suppose, I am going to inform you of morden’s repentance, yet strange as it may Seem nothing is more true. — Dissolute, irreligious, while health and fortun eenabled him to pursue the full career of libertinism; yet danger, extreme weakness, and a near prof 
pe6l 
The Fatal Deception, 5 
ped of the grave, have instilled new thoughts, and I hope nevr principles. 
- — I Say I hope, as the Surgeons now declare there is a glimmering prosped of his Surviving a wound, which they had ail agreed, was beyond recovery. 
When he became perfectly Sensible of his melancholy condition, his conscience did not fail to sting him with the most horrid refiedions! shame, enabled him to struggle a long time, against the conviction of his reason, but was at last obliged to Submit. 
Fie Sent for Lambert, and with' the utmost contrition, declared his intention of making all the reparation in his power, for the injuries he had done. — He confessed his haviiig defrauded Lord Wilton,; out of that Sum at play by loaded B 3, dice,, 
6 The Fatal Deception'. 
dice, which has been the occasion of sh much distress to us, and the present means os his own miserable situation. — He de possted in lambert’s hands, the twenty rhousand pounds, which he begged of him to give Lord Vfilton. — Money he Said, infamoussy obtained, but justly restored. — 
He continued, that he was happy heaven had prevented him from committing, the atrocious offences he had planned, and should with pleasure yield up his life, if it could be accepted as an a tonement for them. — Lambert recommended Banks to him, as a divine that instead os harshly wounding hiin, by exaggerating his misconduft, would with the mildness of a brother, pour every possible consolation into his bosom. 
He 
The Fatal Deception:. 7 
He was impatient to See him, and i.ambert being desired by the Surgeons to quit the unfortunate rnan, who could not bear the agitation of Spirits, Such a Scene necessarily occasioned; he left him to prepare Banks for the visirarion. 
He has desired Lambert to get writings drawn up for him to sign; — cie elaring the innocence of Lord Wilton, the injury and offence he had given him, and the impossibility his Lordship had to avoid defending himself; — he insisted upon its being worded in that manner, that whatever might happen, my Lord may be exculpated. 
If by a miracle, he should recover, may not he turn out a valuable member of Society? — he is a brave man, and certainly not intimidated with the fear of B 4 death 
8 71ie I'atal Deception. 
death alone; as he behaves with great decency and resolution, and has not; him stls, had the most distant hope given, him. of a recovery; — I am almost asslired he is, and if restored to health, will continue a real convert. 
As Soon as Morden has Signed the paper, that will effedlually Secure his lxird ship from the apprehension of any pro cess, on account of his death, should k So happen — I shall immediately proceed to Milford, the glad, messenger to my Lord, of the Safety with which he may return. 
You have got the start of me in hap piness Jack, how sincerely, my dear friend, do I rejoice at your good fortune, Mrs. Featherstone and you were calculated for each other; So says my louisa,, 
and 
The Fatal deceptton. 
9 
and her opinion is my oracle. — In the midst of my own good fortune, I must repine; — I must unwillingly throw a cloud upon yours, in the mention of our friend.; — ever attentive to Serve Jiis friends; ever humane, charitable and benevolent; — he is the • prey to melan chol)^, that is Sapping his constitution;, — not all my rhetoric can prevail upon him to unbosom himself. 
He tells me, he is interested Solely iu the good fortune and happiness of his sister, and friends, that is all he has left to wish for : — So far he has assured me, if ever the Sexret which he labours under, is revealed at all, or if ever his revealing it, can give him any relief, he will confide it to me; — till when, he has insisted that I wul never reiterate my request. 
. B. 5 Tc 
10 
The Fatal Deception;. 
To what can we ascribe it? — I tremble for the consequence; — it makes my father unhappy, Mrs. Bruce indeed, always grave and reserved, shows it very little by her behaviour, but she must be inwardly distressed; — The women, who justly esteem him, are alarmed; one of whom, (an amiable one too) enters still more deeply into his distress if a sigh ' escapes him, she is the perpetual echo.. 
Lady louisa suspedbingl haddiscovered it, in confidence, confirmed my opinion,, by acquainting me with the violent pafc sion, poor Lady Charlotte has unfortunately imbibed for our friend; — young, beautiful and accomplisned, would to God we could prevail upon him to be happy. 
Where could he have So fair a prospefl as with the virtuous Charlotte? — if it is 
in 
The Fatal deceptioft. 
II 
in the power of friendship, I will (though contrary to his present desire) endeavour to promote a conneflion betwixt them; if his unhappiness proceeds from an attachment So far above him, that he can not aspire to the object of his regard, or from the unworthiness or conduct of the person,. he is ashamed to acknowledge : — in either case, what So eligible to relieve his mind, and reestablish his happiness, as the possession of a worthy woman, whose very life Seems to be wrapped up in his.. 
Believe, that I love you, in my name Salute your Eliza most affedionately; — receive both of you, the regards of my i>ouisa, my inestimable Louisa;; be assured of my perpetual friendship and esteem,, while 
WILLIAM COOPER. 
B 6 Mrs. 
12 The Fatal dectepi©pi: 
Mrs. FEATHER STONE, 
T O 
Lady LOUISA WILT O n. 
O y to my dearest girl f jo}r to my louisa, may your happiness daily increase my love, to its extreme height, there let it rest for ever. — Flas not matrimony improved my genius? — what Says my girl, was not that fiight romantically pleasing ?' romantically indeed, for expect not my 
Sweet 
The Fatal Deception. 
^3 
Sweet friend, even in matrimony, hap pinest without alloy.. 
I 
/ 
These hushamls are presuming, audacious wretches; — would you conceive m my dear? — So Submissive, So gentle, fa harmless before; — Such protestations of love, constancy;. — foh; — and So Soon — • ah, teach me to bear it louisa. 
“To bear what Eliza? you are ut“ “incomprehensible.’* — Am I So simpleton, I will endeavour than to. make myself understood : — to your Cost loulsa, you shall have my Secret, and as you are likely,. (lam told) to enter into bonds with your red coat, who I suppose can profess too: — I will give you a gentle hint, what these professions mean, and how much they are to be relied upon. 
Lady 
H 
The Fatal Deception. 
Lady Lamb, my dear, do you understand me; — tremble at your own approaching danger, it is too late to be anxious for your friend; — Lady lamb’s intelligence was true, and my bushand, can I live and name it, was really Seen coming out of a notorious house of ill fame. — Her Ladyship piqued at my good opinion of my bargain, and incensed to the last degree, at 'my refiedtion upon Sir Jacob, actually had Sent her worthy knight, to make discoveries at the very place, where I am Sure she would not have Suffered him to. go within a hundred yards, had not resentment got the better of her jealousy. 
The intehigence from an unknown well wisher, you may be Sure I did not fail to receive,, by the penny post; — too late, my dear, to Save your Eliza; — 
what 
The Fatal deceptro?r. 

what then, you know, could a poor wife do, but reconcile herself to her misfortunes, as well as she could. 
“Could you bear sh heinous an off “fence, my Eliza? Inch an affront ta “your charms, to your virtue, good “heaven, I should never have Sur 
vivcd it.” -- Yes you would, my dear, and I have that opinion osyour prudence,, you would have acted just as I have done, and would have been equally rewarded, for your forbearance and good conduct.. 
Not to carry on the Farce any longer, I will relieve a mind too delicate and tender, to be long trifled with; to be Serious,, circumstances have been just as I represented them;. but the affectionate husband of your friend, and the Sincere friend of your lover, is not to be condemned 
j6 
The Fatal Deception.. 
demned. — I consess I was alarmed for a Sew days after that incendiary’s letter — till my honest man, thought proper to communicate to me, the occasion that carried him there. 
A box it Seems was lost, to whicit tended his inquiries — lost, my dear,, before he came under my jurisdidion — the box however, was not his own — he recovered it — and stumbled upon a discovery,. to which you, I hope, will stand indebted, for the success of your wishes. — He reestablished my confidence in him, by the frankness and Sincerity of his. behaviour. — But hov: shall I describe his raptures, his gratitude, when I told him of the warning I had received of his haunts before marriage, and of the ano 
nimous 
The Fatal Deception. 17 
nimous letter Stnce, which he certainly would never have heard of,, had it not first come from himself. 
“My amiable Eliza! my charming f my” — Oh, I donst know what! he run on, half an hour together; fo love like and foolish, about my prudence, my discretion — I could Scarce persuade myself, he had been a husband near a month— — delighted me with a mischievous Supposition, that it was very probable — though (he was pleased to say) my charms rendered him invulnerable, to the attractions of any other woman — it might not be the cafe with Sir Jacob Lamb — that there was beauty enough in the house to contrast her ladyship’s, and he fiioukl neither 
i8 
The Fatal Deception. 
there be surprised or Sorry if she fell a victim to her ossicioufnefs and malevolence. 
Let the denouement of this affair, my louisa, be an example to each of us — you See I treat you already as a matron. Confidence and good opinion, are the most staple Security of wedded felicit)'' — those, once lost! adieu, ye pleasing, delusive, fantastic hopes of happiness! — they vanish like a cloud, and leave the prospedl of a drear, ^ tedious and inhospi table journey before us. 
Mr. Featherfcone has communicated to me, Mr. cooper’s letter to him— — truly we rejoice in your good fortune — I need not, I think, give myself much trouble to convince you of. 
Poor 
The Fatal Deception. 
-9 
Poor Morden! to what a wretched plight has the unlimited pursuit of his pleasures brought him? Well, if he Sincerely repents, he cannot go at a better time — its bad trusting to the reformation of a libertine — if he recovers, I hope he will pursue the good intentions he professes but was he to behave faultless as an angel, I can never esteem the man, who has occasioned my friends So much disquiet. 
What will become of Lambert? how his Situation disturbs me !- — Featherstone and I think it necessary to drive away, (as much as possible) melancholy ideas 1 But we have hearts, too susceptible to the distresses of our friends — Charlotte too,, unfortunate girl! — be propitious, heaven 
to 
20 The Fatal Deception, 
to the intentions of your Cooper -- -- -- 
IS Lambert is involved in an unfortunate passion— — unsurmountable obstacles prevent his happiness, with the woman of his choice — thouo; h an enoaoied heart, be a desperate trial— — if he could So far get the better of his infatuation, as to offer his hand — if my gentle Charlotte would condescend to accept him, knowing his situation, I should have great hopes — her sweetness of mind and beauty of person, would very Soon Secure him all her own. — But I fear lambert’s obstinacy and charlotte’s delicacy, will ‘baffle all attempts of our friends for their happiness— — they say are made in heaven — to that, v/e must leave it; if they are registered there, it will 
certainly 
The Fatal Deception. 
21 
certainly take place; and if not, our endeavours are fruitless. 
Let us, my dear girl, be as good as we can, that we may make the best return for our present happiness; and draw ■down future blessings; which if we should not be lucky enough to expe 
I 
rience, we have the heartfelt satisfaction, of knowing we do our duty. — As she loves you — love your 
E. FEATHERSTONE. 
Lady 
22 The Fatal Deception. 
Lady LOUISA WILTON, 
r o 
Mrs. FEATHERSTONE. 
OW my dearest friend alarmed me for her happiness 1 — why did you So long, and So Scrioussy attempt to make me believe, Mr. Fcatherstone unworthy the possession of my Eliza when he is blameable, if ever he should, give real 
cause 
The Fatal Deception. 
25 
cause of offence, to So much worth as yours — remember, my dear, how essentially Serviceable he has been to Cooper and me.; and let your displeasure be Softened; tis as impossible he can be inconstant, as you undeserving— — may with Safety then, banish fear. 
How changed my profpedbs Eliza! how much have I to be thankful for, to a beneficent providence! I am permitted by my brother, to look upon my William as a future husband!! sisters share in my Satisfaction;; — good old Mr. Cooper, presses my hand, while the tear steals down his venerable cheek. 
Shall I then, am I permitted to con“ “the deserving, the amiable Lady 
louisa, 

The Fatal Deception. 
\ ct 
louisa, as my daughter,! yes no less dear (folding me in his arms) than my own worthy children — how did honour, did pride my dear lady make me Suffer; when I was reduced to check my Son for his attachment to you. So jiist ly, and So deeply implanted -- Worthy 
as you are, Will, would never have received my consent to an alliance with any family where it had not been generally approved of. — How rejoiced am I, that my lord is So happily relieved from his disagreeable enthralments; and at liberty to show his ten derness to So lovely a sister.^’ 
Sir William Morden, the man who has caused me to Suffer — could I have supposed anything would have induced 
me 
The Fatal de cert3on, 
^5 
me to afford him my compassion— — cannot vyithold it from him, Eliza — he has been my persecutor — he has meant unworthily to my family — but he has Suffered, still Suffers, and repents! — he has made ever compensation in his power, Mr. Lambert Says, to atone for his mis condudt; and it would be ungenerous, inhuman and unchristianly, to refuse him our pity and forgiveness -- he is particularly entitled to mine, as from his mis fortune, every obstacle to a union with the man I esteem is removed — It gives all of us the most Sensible fatisfacstion to‘ hear the hopes that are entertained of his recovery. 
Mr. Banks is now permitted to be with him an hour or two every day — his fever is not violent, and they doubt not a cure, if his constitution can bear vol. III C the 
26 
The Fatal Deception. 
the vast discharge they expect from his wound. 
My William is gone to Milford to meet my brother, and accompany him upon his return — their meeting will, I hope, be more propitious than the former one, I So much dreaded. 
What shall I Say about my poor sister Charlotte! — the other day observing Mr. cooper’s attention to her, when the unfortunate girl, had been taking too much notice of Mr. Lambert. 
“My dear louisa, ” says she, when we were alone, “I fear Captain Cooper Sees “the weakness of your poor sister — He does my dear — it is too apparent! “but he is generous, and will not expose it. — “Ah louisa! what an un 
“happy 
The Fatal Deception, 
27 
happy creature I am — hide me from the world — hide me from myself! let me not, to the mortification of a hopc less passion, know myself the Subject 
of ridicule -- -- -- Send me to Wilton 
Place — anywhere, that I may be free from observation — free fi-om the «en sure os the malignant, and at liberty to indulge my Sorrows, to their full extent unfortunate Clara I unhappy Charlotte! how similar the misery o your fate — how bitter the anguish oi despair 1” 
I fear to acquaint my brother, yet he must very Soon observe her unlucky attachment -- -! am at a loss how to aft, and am distressed to death for her — my, love and apprehension, equally engaged. 
C 2 I imagine 
28 
The Fatal drceptictn'. 
I imagine we shall quit Bath upon the arrival of Lord Wilton and Mr. Cooper; Lambert told us today, all our difficulties blown over, his company might be dispensed with, and his business required his presence at Stretton Green — Lucy looked grave — my Sister sighed — ‘‘ Will ** not you accompany us to Devonshire, " my dear James ?’* Said Mrs. Bruce, “you will very much csisappoint us if you do not — Mr. Cooper is disturbed“ “See.” 
** Mr. Cooper, madam, (replied Lambert) possesses my unlimited reverence ^ and esteem — but he is too reasonable ** to wish my attendance at present, as I really have affairs of consequence to y settle — the fiattering instances of your 
“good 
The Fatal Deception. 
29 
good opinion ladies, will make me study to deserve the continuance of it — Does my sister (and he took lucy’s hand) accompany our friends, or will she and Mrs, Bruce stay a while with me in Berkshire V — “You know my dear brother, I have no will but yours. — As you will have business to employ ymur mind, ’* says Mrs. Bruce, “Lucy and I will accompany Mr. Cooper to Hartley Point, and as Soon as you are at liberty, we shall expect you to join 
us. 
With what Satisfaction shall I quit a place, which has So many charms for the gay and dishpated — I shall at Wilton Place, again experience a brother’s tenderness— — the company of my be c 3 loved 
3^ 
The Fatal Deceptionl 
loved William without restraint, and Lady Wilton we hope, will Soon give in erease to our happiness, by an addition to my brother’s family. 
My felicity wouldbe perfefl, could I forget my poor charlotte’s distress. — Pray when do you propose your northern launt? Cooper and I, you find, are otherwise engaged — that the dispensations of providence be continually in your favour, and that you may ever continue a stranger to discontent, is the sincere wish, of 
my dearest eliza’s, most affedlionate,. and now happy, LOUISA WILTON. 
Mr. 
The Fatal Deception. 
3* 
Mr. LAMBERT, 
T O 
Mr. FEATHERSTONE. 
w 
E Separate tomorrow. Lord and Lady Wilton, and Lady Harriet, go for London; — Will. Cooper has the pleasure to escort Mrs. Bruce, my Sister, Nancy Cooper, and the lady’s louisa and Charlotte, into Devonshire; — old C 4 Mr. 
32 
The Fatal Deceistio 
N. 
Mr. Cooper, insisted upon accompanying me to Stretton, where I purpose to continue Some time, in a retirement, the active part I stave been obliged to take in the affairs of my friends, has long prevented me from indulging. 
Lord Wilton, to atone for the chagrin he has given Cooper and his sister, is determined upon their marriage, the moment Lady Wikon is able (after her re" covery) to join them at Wilton Place. 
Morden is weak, consequently still in a dangerous way; — his brother, a very amiable young fellow, who has been for many years strangely neglected by Sir William, is now with him at his owit particular desire : ■ — — this young man, (though, he has Suffered much from his: 
bro 
The Fatal Deceptioi?. 
33 
brother’s unkindness,) behaves with the greatest tenderness and delicacy. 
If Sir William recovers Sufficient strength, he intends going to the South of France, with his brother; — not So much, (he Says) to acquire his health, as by his example to amend his disposition, and confirm his good resolutions. 
He has given diredlions for his q^uon dam friend, Wallace, to be released, and his bond cancelled; — he believes him, (he Says) more capable of being a friend to a good, than a difiblute man; — ort V hich account lie has strongly recommended him to his brother, in case of death, and declares, if ke Survives his wounds, he will Settle a: very comfortable provision upon him, to deface a rec ^ 
34 
The Fatal Deception.. 
membrance, of the former Severity of his behaviour, 
I think, as Cooper has been successful, by an accident which occasioned Wallace distress and confinement, he should use his interest with Lord Wilton, and endeavour to procure him a commission, or a genteel place in one of the public offices, which, with the addition he receives from Morden, will enable him to Support himself like a gentleman; — if he does not pay too many visits to the temple of Venus; — no one, in my opinion, who has in the most distant degree contributed to my friends happiness, ou; ht to be neglected. 
O O 
The kind girl, who has done me the honour to confess a prepoffession in my Savour, should not be forgotcooper 
must 
The Ratal Deception. 
35 
must contrive to make her a Suitable return, for the benefit he has received by her means; — she appears very little inclined to a state of profligacy and prostitution, and I must confess, I should, rejoice, if she would accept of a Sufficient Settlement out of my fortune, to free her from the necessity of continuing in So abandoned a situation; — I can make no other return for her good opinion of me, my mind being totally engrossed by a Single object, which can never give place to another, or will again permit me to try the experiment of an idle temporary attachment. 
Cooper unkindly endeavours to probe my wound, too deeply; thchigh he must See, I cannot Suffer it without the greatest misery; — he has been unusualy pressing, silice his return with Lord Wilton; that C 6 I would 
3^ 
The Fatal decettion?. 
I would fix upon Some virtuous, worthjr objet, to whom he would have, me give my hand; Such a one, he says, he should be happy if I would permit him to point out; — he Speaks of family, fortune accomplishments, tenderness, and a partiality in my favour; -- -- -- what can he 
mean? — I have been little intimate but with the Lady wilton’s, and I' should be exceedingly distressed, were either of those deserving young Ladies, to entertain any Sentiments in my favour, to which it is absolutely out of my power, to make a Suitable return. 
I can bear the waywardness of my own fortune with Some moderation; but it makes me accnse the malignancy of ' my fate, when I know myself th? innocent cause of unhappiness to others. — How Severely did the accompiistr^d 
i 
The Fatal Deception, 
37 
Clara, pay for the unfortunate preference she gave me? — how cruel will be my destiny, if I again should be the involuntary cause, of distress to the deserving. 
Detestable are the principles of those male coquettes, who take pleasure in knowing, themsdves the objects of a deserving woman’s regard, merely that they may expose her weakness to the world; and how unfortunate it is for many individuals, whose natural suscep tibility of heart, betrays them into, a partiality for wretches of this Sort, where a fair and agreeable outside, but ill covers the vanity, affedlation and uni worthinesii within. 
My sister has given an absolute re fusal to Sir John Thornhill; though. agree 
38 
The Fatal Deception. 
agreeable to the generosity of her disposition, in the gentlest terms; she has declared she prefers him to all the men, who have honoured her with addresses; but that she can never have any other Sentiments for him than friendship; — he has at length agreed to continue his acquaintance upon thole terms. 
Lucy wishes (she tells me) to continue with me, to Sooth my anxiety, and partake of my affiidiion; — how agreeable would be her company, did I not feel the necessity, of inducing her to dispose of herself, to the first worthy man who can make an interest in her heart, and had I not other powerful reasons against keeping her with me.. 
wilson writes me word, I shall Scarce' knov; Stretton Green, since the alterations 
The Fatal Deception. 
39 
tions made there; — he is delighted with 'the family I Sent him, and Says the old man, (upon an estate not yet intlrely regulated) is a treasure: he thanks me for the companion I have given him, being a Sensible, understanding man, withouc Self sufficiency, modest without timidity, and grateful without the repetition of dif gusting acknowledgements. 
His daughter, he says, is beautiful. Sprightly and affable; deservedly the admired belle of the village, and v.dll do my estate, as much Service as her father by the emulation she has excited amongst the young farmers, who already look forward to her, as the most valuable reward of their industry; — and on which, v/il son has given them to understandj vfijl depend them fuccest. 
Mrs. 
40 The Fatal Deceptiont. 
Mrs. Featherstone and you purpose a tour to the North; — when do you Set out? — if you could contrive to slip down to the Green, for a few days before you go, it would give me a great pleasure; — old Mr. Cooper and wilson wtll keep you in good-humour, and it will be doing them a singular favour, to procure them the company and conversation of lo lively a friend. 
Perhaps Mrs, Egerton and her daughter, might be prevailed upon to come with you; — we would endeavour to make the Ladies every convenient accommodation, and you could not then tipbraid me, that your attachment to me, had deprived you of your wife’s company. 
Your friends, the Fox hunters, v’ould be happy to See yon, and I am not envious. 
The Fatal Deception. 41 
vious, when I delate my opinion, ^ that ir would be much more agreeable to them, if Stretton Green owned you for its Lord, instead of, dear Jack, 
your unfeignedly 
affedlionate. 
JAMES LAMBERT. 
Mrs. 
42 The Fatal decepti©n. 
Mrs. FEATHERSTONE, 
T O 
Lady LOUISA WILTON. 
Scarborough, 
ROM information my John has 
received in a letter from Mr. Lambert, I adventure a direchon to.you at Wilton Place, where I hope you have Safely arrived, Some days since, Mr. Lambert obligingly invited us down to Stretton, 
previous 
Tyre Fatal Dzcjption. 
^3 
previous to our journey, but his sumr mon’s came too late, we were upon the road and his letter has been Sent after us to this place. 
My good mama, could not be prevailed upon to accompany us, upon So distant an excursion, though my Saucy companion entreated, for the Safety of his future representative, that she would be of the party, to restrain, as he was pleased to Say, the extraordinary exertion of my Spirits. — The creature will Scarce Suffer me to take even necessary exercise; and riding, which you know I am fond of, he intreats me to give up for the present, lest an accident should endanger me, and destroy the fondest of his hopes. — An unreasonable wretch? because we poor women are by nature assigned the painful office of presenting 
44 Fatal Deception, 
Sensing our Lords with heirs to their estates, we must therefore Seclude ourselves from every temporary amusement, — I plead the example of Indian Matrons, who almost to the critical hour, execute every domestic drudgery but he will not admit the plea, argues upon the delicacy of constitutions; — difference of place, custom, c— — I may be over ruled, but have a care my friend Featherstone, you will not again perhaps. So easily Seduce me into a state of confinement. 
At a loss for anything more entertaining, I give you a general detail of our expedition, what you find in it dull and trifling, (which I fear will be the greater part) ascribe to the unexpedled mortifications my Situation, and my hus band’s remonstrances oblige me to Submit 
The Fatal Deception, 45 mit to; — my inability; — or any thin 

but want of inclination to amuse you. 
After receiving my worthy mother’s prayers, cautions, and benedi<51: ions; — we left grosvenor square, and that tender parent, overcome with grief, at parting for the first time, with a daughter, who can never Sufficiently return So tender a Solicitude. 
A post chaise and four Soon conveyed ns to Barnet, my jack’s caresses and as fiduity, made every emotion Subside, but the grateful lensations his attention gave me.' — Three Servants that attended us on horseback, prevented any apprehension from the gentlemen of the road, in our passage cross Finchly Common. We stopped at Hatfield, in order to See the Earl of salishury’s seat there, which is 
generally 
46 
The Fatal Deception. 
generally esteemed beautiful and elegant: a monument in the parish church, of an Ancestor of that family, gave me 
oreat Satisfadlion. 
Changing horses at Stevenage, we proceededtobiggleswade; passingthrough Baldock, I could not resist an inclination, to inquire after the famous lass of the mill, distinguished in the ballad, you and I have been So hightly entertained, in hearing my mother’s susan Squall in the laundry, — of all creatures on the earth, a Poet, but particularly a poet in love, is not to be trusted! it was with, difficulty I could acquire any intelligence about this “Venus that rose “from the Sea and had the mortification to fih(ij the beauty and qualifications of the lady, existed only in the poet’s brain. 
At 
The Fatal Deception. 
47 
At biggleswade, Mr. Featherstone promised to show me a very handsome, and agreeable young landlady, he did not deceive me, I found Mrs H equal to the praises he had bestowed upon her. - — she is a very genteel agreeable woman, of most engaging address, and a modesty in her deportment, efsentially neces sary topreserve her from insolence, which beauty like hers, in a public way of life, would otherwise expose her to. 
I was obliged to curb my Spark, who once or twice in our conversation, introduced a ssy hint of the disparity between her age, and her hushand’s : she gave rhea look, that Sufficiently thanked me, for my interserence, and convinced me of the propriety of her conduct. 
At 
.8 
The Fatal Deception. 
At Bugden we were shown a Palace belonging to the Bishop of Lincoln, not of consequence to require a particular description. — We stayed all night at Stilton, a Small post town, which Cooper Thornhill, has made remarkable, by a stonishing instances of his horsemanship. — He kept the best Inn in the place, and by exciting the curiosity of the public. Secured to himsels considerable busincss, and acquired a handsome fortune— — Mere (a lake in the neighbourhood) abounds with fish: Some perch we had for Supper from thence, were excellent. 
Stamford, .situated upon the extremity of three counties, Lincoln, Rutland, and Northampton, is a very considerable town, much resorted to by people of fortune andfamily, in the neighbourhood of which, are many beautiful Seats of the nobility, 
Burleigh 
V 
The Fatal Deception. 49 
Burleigh one of the principal, belonging to the Earl of Exeter, is a charming place; — the house is magnificent, and filled with paintings esteemed invaluable. — The George, in Stamford, (except thecastle at Marlborough,) Mr. feather stone assiires me is the largest Inn in England, Mrs Currey is a very courteous Landlady, and her husband, (though exceeding civil) from hunting frequently with the duke of Rutland, the late Lord Granby, Lord Exeter, chas acquired a degree of pomposity, which is highly entertaining. 
At coltsworth, a few miles from Stamford, we, to my regret, quitted the great north road, our route being through Lincoln : I Say to my regret, as the roads, houses, and the civility of the people who keep them, are Superior to anything I vol. III D have 
50 
The Fatal Deception. 
have ever Seen before; — I also missed by this means, Grantham and Newark, two places by all accounts beautiful, well built, and agreeably situated. — From Coltsworth through Ancaster to Lincoln, is about thirty five mile, over the finest heath you can possibly conceive; and where the eye meets with no interuption, to the distant view of the Cathedrial at Lincoln, the extenfiveness of the pros pedl on every side, is only broken by a few villages, Scattered here and there, and a very high pillar, built by one of thcdashwood’s; (a Lincolnshire family) a direction to travellers, passing the Heath in dark nights, there being a light always kept in a lantern, at the top of the building, for that purpose : the public Spirit of the projedor, cannot be too much commended, as there certainly never was anything more neceffary. Lincoln, 
The Fatal Deceptio?:. 
5^ 
Lincoln, is a strange built place, on the declivity os a very steep hill, the minster, and part of the town, are situated upon the top of the hill, and command a prospedt grand beyond conception. — But the inconvenience of the place in general, for the purposes of trade, and Society, are by no means compensated, by the elevation of a few hou ses to a height, from whence they look down upon their fellow citizens, as people in another world, to have communication with whom, is attended with the oreatest trouble. 
leaving Lincoln we passed over a good deal more heath, though not So pleasing as on the other side the city', in our way to glandford brid^e, or brigg as it is usually called, a sifilll post tovrn of little consequence that did not tempt D 2 us 
52 The Iatal Deception 
ois to make any stay. — We therefore hastened to Barton, upon the river Humber, over which the ferry boats cross every tide. — We embarked in one of them, belonging to Hull, very commodious, and neatly fitted up. — 
We were over in about half an hour, though the distance is five miles, I was not affected by the motion, notwithstanding the water was very rough, and the wind high, nor afraid, though Lord anson it Seems, was, in crossing the Same ferry, and lamented the hardship ios his fate, to have Surrounded the globe, .and risque drov/ningatlast in a horse pond. 
* Hull, is a large well built town, remarkable for it’s great mercantile trade, and number of shipping. — It is Supposed to be the next in consequence to Bristol, 
The Fatal Deception.. 53 
tol, and Liverpool. — There is a garrl son Said to be very strong, but what is chiefly depended upon in a case of extremity, they can by means of flood gates, lay the country for three miles round, under water. 
Beverly, about eight or nine miles fronv Hull, is one of the neatest towns, I never Saw, yet a place of but little trade, or manufadlure. — The Minster, (a parish church So called) is the most beautiful and elegant one, I believe in the kingdom. 
■ — I found my honest man, was well acquainted in the place, having been Several years at School here, he introduced me to Some respedtable families, who showed me every ^ civility, 1 declare he almost fatigued me to death, by hurrying me about from place to place, pointing out. to me, with great energy, D 3,.. the 
54 
The Fatal Deception. 
the different Scenes of his puerile adventures : by a recollecton of past events, the man worked himself into a kind of enthusiasmf I just hinted to him, the remembrance of his former happiness ought not to make him forget the comfortableness of his present condition 1 this brought him instantly to his senses but the return he gave me, was a kiss in the public street alleging nothing could So effe<stuallyerase an agreeable impression, as the refiedlion of more Substantial felicity! J suppose I looked very silly, witness not being waning, to his felicity as he called it, and I did not forgive him, until I recovered mysdf Sufficiently to laugh at it. — 
frombeverly we proceeded to Driffield a little inconsiderable place, in the east riding of Yorkshire, only famous for a stream in it’s neighbourhood, that 
pro 
The Fatal Deception. 
produces the largest, and finest trout in Great Britain. 
betwi xt Beverley and Driffield, is a fe. markable place, called Watton Abbeys belonging to the Bethell family, very romantically situated, and it is impossible for a feeling observer, to approach it without a degree of'solemnity, it is in good preservation, the galleries, the Chapel and cells, in general remain, and though Some have been converted into habitable apartments; and since the fa^ mily have occasionally resided there, •some new rooms, have been added for their accommodation : yet the whole has 'a most gloomy and awful appearance. 
I ought not to forget to acquaint you, in the cellar is an entrance into a D 4 Cavern 
si The Fatal Deception. 
Cavern, leading down by a number of steps, it is Said to extend in distance, two miles, and terminates at a place where a monastery once stood, but of which very few traces remain, this Subterranean passage, must have afforded an agi'ee able communication, to the holy fraternity, and Sandified Sisterhood! — But the damps having been fatal to many who have attempted to go into it, the proprietors of the estate very prudently closed it up Some years since. — From Driffield, over high hills, black barren moors, and bad roads, we arrived Sash at Scarborough. 
You will doubtless be as much re joiced as I am, to come to an end of my travels; the relation having been more troublelome to me, then the journey 

The Fatal Deception,. 
57 
ney itself: — Such as it is, you are welcome to it my dear louisa!’ you may perhaps think it more valuable, when I assure you it is the first,, and will absolutely be the last time of my journalizing. — My husband. Salutes yom and I am always,, dear girl, your truly affectionate. 
ELIZA FEATFIERSTONE2 
5 
LUGT 
58 The Fatal Deception. 
LUCY LAMBERT, 
T O 

I AMES L A M B E R T, Estp 
IV i f i 
Hartley Poln^ 
ivjl Y brother deserves the most unlimited affeflion of his sister; — no brother was ever more revered, more sin 'cerely beloved, than you, my dear James, are by your Lucy; — tenderness and Sensibility, I have been told, are the characteristics 
The Fatal drceptioni 
59 
teristics of my temper; — my good aunt has frequently alarmed me for the inconveniences a disposition of this Sort may occasion me; — assuredly I am not Sorry to have a heart naturally benevolent for though it makes me a considerable partaker of the distresses of others, it enables me to feel the highest gratification a generous mind can possibly enjoy; — ■ that of sharing in the happiness os our friends, and rejoicing in the good fortune of the deservir.o;. 
I am taught to believe, I have a very susceptable heart, yet hitherto have experienced none of the ill effects my friends apprehend; —; has fraternal tenderness absorpt all my feelings? — certain it is, I must have Seen amiable, and deserving men, yet never Suffered a moment’s dil turbance. _ ' 
D 6 Esteemed 
6o 
thefatal De g e ft ion; 
Esteemed by the worthiest, the best, f brothers; — my heart Seems repugnant to every other Sentiment. — I will not suppose I shall always preserve the same indifference, but it must be a strong resemblance of yourself, my dear James,, that will ever triumph over it. 
You must be convinced from a knowledge of your Lucy, that I mean not a: complimient *, — your tender assiduity, - — that pleasing attention you ever paid me,, could not but make upon my mind, the deepest impression; — when you pracised. your sister, when you approved her colt ducst, with what gratitude my heartfelt, the obligation; — the uncommon regard I bear you is my pride; I love you to the utmost limit of Sisterly affection— — you not been my brother, I might 
per 
The Fatal Deception. 
6i 
perhaps have experienced the misfortunes my Sensibility Seems to threaten me witsh 
Your absence, my brother, is truly regretted by us all, by none more than your Lucy; — yet I am mistjiken if it is not equally distressing to one of our company! ours, she is with you, we have only her beautiful outside, her mind, her Soulj are at Stretton Green.. 
Ah, my brother how happy it is im jom power, ' to" make the engaging Lady Charlotte !^ — young and inexperienced as I am, forgive your Lucy for attempting to advise you in So consequential an affair, but if the most Seducing person, affability of manners, tenderness and generosity of disposition, can engage you to make a istiitable return; — Charlotte is the woman to make you happy, 
allow' 
l2 
The Fatal Deception'. 
•allow her attradlions their full power, she Will destroy the hidden cause of you r gloom and disquiet; — restore you to your friends, your sister and yourself: — was it not too much hacknied, I would •refer you for her portrait, to viola’s much admired description of a maid in love. 
cooper’s friendship I find has induced him to apply to you, upon the Same Subject; — may his application be successfiil; how happy would it make yourself the dear girl is absolutely ignorant of our application to you, and by the prudence of Lady louisa, not led to expect the least probability of a return : — it is easy however, to. See passion gains ground every hour, and she gives herself up to Solitude, Sorrow and despair. 
What the 
Fatal Dlceptions 

Whatever is the result of your determination, I hope you will allow the good wishes of your friends, to have Some weight with you : as I am Sure you will Suffer yourself to be much adluated by motives of generosity and compassion : — at any rate, forgive the anxious Solicitude of a sister, that wishes your hap piness even more fervently than her owhi 
An express is just arrived from Lord Wilton, with an account of the birth of a fon and heir; — her ladyship is in a fair way of doing wtu; my Lord writes in high Spirits, and bids his sister prepare, to give her hand to Mr. Cooper, as Soon as Lady wilton’s recovery will permit them to come down into.devonshire. 
By the Same messenger, you will be surpiised to hear, I have received letters 
from 
si 
The Fatal deceptron. 
from Lishon, that were left at my lord’s town house — I enclose you clara’s to me, which cannot now be unacceptable to you, being the wife of another, she can no longer offend you with a passion, for which you have Severely Suffered. 
Forget not to present my best wishes and compliments to good Mr. Cooper and Mr. wilsoa; — all the family here join in sincerest regards, with my dear James, your 
ever affectionate sister, 
LUCY LAMBERT. 
Donna. 
The Fatal Deception. 
68 
Donna CLARA d’pedrtlla, 
T a 
Miss LAMBERT. 
Lisbon, 
I L I. my Sweet friend forgive my attempting to revive a correspondence, which it was apparent she wished me totally to drop; 7 may I not be permitted to aslc after the welfare of those, my Soul will ever hold dear! ah! how 
dears 

The Fatal Deception. 
xiear? — let the anxieties,, the Sorrow, the illness, I have Suffered explain— — • truly and how frequently have I wished for death; — the Sure, the only friend of the unhappy; yet courted by the miserable, how coy. 
Ah Lucy > obdurate as was your broi there, he fied, and I pursued in vain. 
After your departure, my dear friend, for many months I remained in a state of languor and stupefaction, inattentive to everything around me, unaffedled with the miserable situation of my poor father, and almost insenssble of my own missortunes. ^ — A violent illness brought me to the verge of that grave, I So earnestly wished for; — my father’s distress, and the efficacy of his prayers, prevailed ove r my Sinful application for a release: : 
re 
The Fatal deceptio'^l 
67 
T recovered, but with returning health, found a quicker sense of my affiiciion. 
My father, ("worthy, generous parent; the Soother of my Sorrows;) — never quitted me! never Suffered reproach to reach me, though I had kinsmen, true Portuguese, who loudly condemned me, — ill judging world, where to be unfortunate, is to be guilty. 
To my father, I disclosed my love of your brother, disclofed my love and my despair;; — blamed me not, he pitied me, and refused to listen to the fangui onary proposals of my revengeful relations, who wished to finish, what the poignards of my ill-fated brother, and his associates had So irnperfefuy began. — How did the humanity, the justice of 
my 
si The Fatal Deceptions 
my father rejoice me; — how truly his behaviour demanded my gratitude. 
My health, (contrary to my wishes) again reestablished I was obliged to Submit to persecution, to the last degree dreadful to me. 
My father, that dear, that tender father, was not free from a weakness,. which very few in our country are with^j' out; — he Saw with regret his family near extindl! my brother’s dissolute life made him entertain but Small hopes of any worthy descendants, by his means, and his death freed him from apprehensions of grand children, that might be a dis grace to his name but he in treated, by the duty 1 owed him as a parent, by the affection his tenderness and compas sion demanded from me, that I would 
give 
The Fatal Deception. 
69 
; give up all thoughts of a convent, would endeavour for his Sake, to get the better of my unfortunate attachment, and dis pose myself with chearfulness to accept the husband he wished to recommend. 
In vain were my entreaties, in vain my remonstrances; — he would give me, he Said, my own time, would not precipitate matters; — I should make my choice of the many he was pleased to Say, courted my alliance; — shut if I expected his paternal blessing, or regarded his happiness, I must no longer object to a measure, on which alone it depended. 
Indifferent to all but one object— — agreed to Sacrifice myself to'my father’s inclination; — he more delicatethen could 
ever 
yo The .Fatal Deception.' 
ever have been expefled, insisted upon my deliberate choice. 
You are So well acquainted with the customs of Portugal, my dear Lucy, as to know, applications of this Sort, are most usually made to the parent: — I desired him to inform me of all that had done him that honour, and made no difficulty in preferring Don Luis de pe drilla; to whom I gave my hand Some few months since. 
Though the world may laugh, you will believe me Sincere when I affure you, his age instead of being an objection to me, was my strongest inducement; — he is a man of honour, of a generous disposition and agreeable temper I made a point' of informing him of my fenti inents, with resped to your brother,. 
per 
The Fatal Deception. 
71 
previous to our marriage; -- -- -- he very 
nobly Said, it could have no other effect upon him, then to excite his greater attention and respect.. — he might by * degrees efface an impreshon, it was So much his interest to endeavour to remove I must confess I felt less repugnance to Don Juan, on account of his age; — as your brother could not suppose I was, actuated by inclination in giving him the preference. 
But why should I remember that still too amiable man? — he despises me !- — did he not refuse the offer of my hand 
T — help me pride! he refused me. -- - — 
Horrid indignity: — ah, Lucy! what I felt at the moment — what I feel upon the recollection— — Lambert I no more Snail you triumph mver the weak ness of my heart; — your contempt has 
cured 
72 
The Fatal Deception.' 
cured me. — — A private Englishman! — a heretic! defend me, what an escape. My hushand’s condud, requires my utmost tenderness; — no more shall he be ■robbed of it, by an uncourteous stranger. 
Forgive me me, ah, deserving Lambert, forgive the tongue, that fain would belie the heartyet I will, how dear Soever it costs me; banish his fatal image from my breast : — virtue, conscience, religion and gratitude demand it. — A nevq charader, which providence Seems to require I should very Soon take upon me, will add strength to my resolutions, and pleasure to my duty; — the feelings of a mother will recover my strayed inclinations, and fix them on the proper object— — noble, generous, Don Juan, (the father of my infant) alone is wor 
. thy. 
The Fatal Deception. 
75 
thy, and shall in future possess my undivided affection. 
My husband, desires your acceptance of Some Sweetmeats from the Brazils, they are greatly esteemed hefe, and we hope, will be agreeable to our English friends; — he intends a more valuable present to your brother, who, he says, he is assured must be deserving, that had merit to engage my good opinion. — Ah Lucy, he was indeed defcrving. 
Lives he still single? is he as indifferent to your English beauties, as to the flattered attradions of your friend? — I should indeed be mortified to hear, he had made an unworthy choice. — Let the despiser of Clara D’almade, cotisider iiuriself of consequence, and not doubly vol. III E astlont 
74 
The Iatal Deception, 
affront her, by giving the preference to a person that deserves him not. 
Great inquiries have been made after Mrs. Bruce and your family, but by whom we know not. 
Adieu, my dearest Lucy, the beloved companion of my happier years, may your days be fortunate, and misery never reach you, is the fervent prayer, of your most Sincere, your truly 
affectionate friend, 
te CLARA D’PEDRILLA; 

The Fatal Deception. 
75 
Mr. LAMBERT, 
T O 
WILLIAM COOPER. 
w. 
HAT have I done, that my dearest friends should distress me by applications, which, was I to agree to, could neither give satisfaction to them, or happiness to myself — I take it the more unkindly from you, as I have already de e z dared 
yo The Fatal Deception. 
dared the malignancy of my fate, has thrown an insuperable bar betwixt felicity and me. Urge me no more, on So painful a subje(5b -- be thankful to providence, which permits you to look forward with rapture, to your approaching happinds — let your gratitude be boundless — how much has fortune been your friend, my dear Will, that gives you poflpssion of a woman, beautiful as day, with a mind Surpassing her person, and above all, the woman of your'heart; who repays your love by the most Seducing tenderness and constancy — “His hard to look into hap 
iic Ss through another man’s eyes; ” yet ‘ believe me. Cooper, when I Say, I sincerely rejoice at your Success 
\ 
Sister knows liow very truly I love her — I declare, nothing in the power of 
my 
The Fatal deceptio n. 
77 
my fortune, would I resuse, that she could wish for. — Rut, cruel, she requires a more arduous instance of my affedlion for her, and ioins in the Same distressing' application with you. 
I am not blind to the attractions of the very amiable and engaging Lady Charlotte, but how highly should I injure her, by an imprudent concession to an alliance, that would add to my own infelicity, and render her iitetrievably miserable. 
Two very worthy and estimable women have unmeritedly favoured me with their good opinion. The one, from very strong prudential reasons, I was obliged to refuse; you know the conse g^uence, how dearly that refusal cost me. 
E 3 Another 
y8 The Fatal Deceptiom., 
Another still charming, free from family, or religious obstacles, you affure me, entertains a partiality for me, that would do credit to a prince. — But how mortifying to me — who know the impossibility of my ever making a proper return. 
Let me conjure you by our friendship, to divert her ladyfiiip^s unlucky attachment, and if possible, direst it to Some object more worthy her regard, who has a heart to return, and has not a fatality about him, that like a deadly weed, blasts everything near it. 
I have wrote to that dear sister, who I am assured would not willingly contribute to an increase of my misery. — I think I have hit upon a method that will 
Satisfy 
The Fatal Deception. 
79 
Satisfy her of my implicit attention to her wishes— — will I hope, procure me a total Suspension from farther Solicitations, without giving you cause of offence, and it will convince Lady Charlotte, though I have not a heart to dispose of, she is nevertheless posfeffed of my unlimited, respedt and esteem. — I have constantly determined to keep my fatal Secret within my own breast— — circumstanced, as I unhappily am, I find myself under the neceshty of altering that resolution. 
By this post. Lady Charlotte will be acquainted with the cause that distracts me — she will then cease to love, though she perhaps may pity me — in her bosom, and for her Sole benefit I repose a confidence, that I hope.she will esteem Sacred. 
E 4 I have 
The fataldeception. 
I have even gone, So far as to affure her ladyship it depends on herself, and if file (after the discovery I have made) can still retain a single wifii towards a union with a wretch like me — she may dispose of me as she directs. — After this I must insist upon never having any other connexion proposed to me — indeed I will be So honest to declare, if 1 thoiight there was the Smallest probability of her ladyship’s accepting me, I should not have reen Sufficiently hardy, to have made the proposal — Featherstone has pressed me strongly to join him at Scarborough — he appears to have forgot my present indisposition of mind, and points out pleasure as an inducement to ajourney, that even friendship would not prompt me to undertake at this time, without great Self 
morti 
The Fat AT Deception; 
Si 
mortification — but it is very natural, in the midst of his own happiness, to lose sight for a moment of his friend’s distraction. 
I ain rejoiced to find by clara’s letter to my sister, she has been entirely Sensible of her error, in her partiality for an Englishman, that indeed honoured and esteemed her' — but who, from difference of country, rank, religion and manners, it was madness to think favourably of — She has, I find, made her father happy, by consenting to an alliance with a worthy man, who, I very sincercly hope \vill make her So. 
My ifnprovements at Stretton are ail amusement I would not forego for any E 5 earthly 
82 
The Fatal Deception. 
earthly consideration. — wilson becomes every day more essentially necessary to me — his cheerfulness of temper and natural benevolence of heart, which gains him universal esteem; at the Same time, establish his own happiness upon the firmest basis human nature will admit. 
Your father, from a Similarity of disposition, is exceedingly fond of my friend— — honours him more particularly for his philosophy, in having Supported an uncommon share of misfortunes with great dignity; yet with the most pious and becoming resignation. — But he has indeed been an extraordinary man — he was married very young, to a beautiful woman, but neither of fortune or family; by this match he disobliged his relations, on 
whom 
'jthe Fatal Deception. 
83 
whom he depended, and who utterly discarded him * he was then a lieutenant in the navy, and finding no prospedt of assistance from his friends, who continued inexorable, he determined to quit the navy, and obtained the command of a ship in the West-india trade, which enabled him to Support his wife in a more affluent situation than her conduct deserved— — to her marriage, she had bestowed her inclination, and there is every rea son to suppose her person also, upon a very worthless fellow, of low birth and vile abandoned principles. — To finish in as few words as possible,, an account of this infamous woman’s conduct, and poor wilson’s misfortunes, after having three or four times procured abortion during her hushand’s absence in order to pre e 6 vent 


The Fatal Deceptioit^ 
vent a detedtion of her shandalous amour. — After having involved him in considerable debts, and been the instrument of vitiating the principles and Seducing the person of his favourite sister (who afterwards in a fit of despair, put an end to her life and misery together) she conspired with her gallant, to murder the obstacle to their mutual attachment. — By mere accident he escaped the first attempt — the Second, her villainous paramour fell hiraself the victim, being shot through the head by wil&n; who, from too many Substantial reasons, had, to their confusion, been upon his guard. — His; wretched, wicked wife, unawed by shame, unreclaimed by lenience, continued for Some time afterwards,, a life of infamy and prostitution -- while her. unhappy 
The Fatal Deception. 
^5 
happy husband. self banished, was obliged to Seek employment in the Service of Portugal there my father got acquainted with him — Saw his worth — employed and Served him,. 
The death of his wish, who fell a Sacrifice to those laws she had So frequently offended with impunity,. Set him at liberty, and his industry, together with my father’s friendship, - enabled him to discharge every demand upon, him. — However, being still liable to the ceremony of a trial, - shr she death of that vile assassin, in cafe of an information being laid against him, he has,, very prudently, never communicated these circumstances to any, but your father and myself, and 
yom 
86 
The Fatal Deceptioit. 
you will readily perceive the necessity of joining with us in the greatest Secrecy. 
I have lately received a letter from young Morden, now with his brother Sir William, on their road to the South of France — I wish very sincerely his recovery, bumotwithstanding the favourable prognostics of the Surgeons I have little expectations of it. — Forget not to esteena 
your affedlionate, 
'\ and assured friend. 
JAMES LAMBERT, 
WILL 
The Fatal Deception. 
«7 
WILLIAM COOPER, 
T O 
Mr. FEATHERSTONE, 
Dear Jack, 
I 
Hartley Point. 
N Spite of the repugnance he alvrays expressed to marriage, how astonished must you be to hear, Lambert has made an offer of his hand to Lady Charlotte Wilton; — but when I tell you, his osier appears to have been made upon terms, he deemed impossible she should agree to; your Surprise will be increased to find 
him 
u 
Tile Fatal d'ecertion.i 
him mistaken; — her Ladyship (contrary, I fear, to his v/ishj, has declared her rcadiness to accept his proposal. — She has acquainted Lord Wilton with her determination, since which a letter from Lambert (of two lines) informs her he was that instant Setting out for London,, to wait upon her brother, and adjush every preliminary. 
Weir acquainted with the many excellent qualities of the amiable Lady Charlotte, I strongly recommended to our friend, an endeavour to efface every impression; which contributed to make him blind to her extraordinary merit; his ftster also very warmly made application to the same effeift. — In answer to mine,, he told me, to prevent in future any more overtures upon the Subject, he had So far coincided with the request of his 
sister 
The Fatal Deception 
s9 
Sister and me, as to make an offer of himself to her ladyship, if she chose to accept him, after he had candidly comu nicated to her, the reasons why he objected to any matrimonial engagement— — fear there is Some dreadful mystery concealed; — in that cafe how should I repent the part my friendship has induced me to take; and wish we had avoided a solicitation, which (contrary to our hopes) Seems to promise nothing but misfortune. 
Amidst the delicate Sensibility; — the pleasure, my dear louisa does not sqru ple to confess she experiences, upon the prospedt of our approaching union; — she has the most alarming apprehensions for her sister. 
At the time Lady Charlotte receit^ed lambert’s letter; — that letter! — from.. whence 

The Fatal Deception. 
whence is to Spring happiness, or misery to them both; — the Ladies were toge there great, I am told, was her confusion, when, she Saw from whom it came. Unkind Sisters! (she exclaimed,) you “have betrayed the unfortunate Char“ “you have ruined me, ini the opi “nion, lowered me in the esteem of 
“the man I -- -- -- ah!! me, is he not 
“acquainted with all my weakness — She was ready to sink, but recovering erself, instantly withdrew' into her own chamber; from whence neither remonstrances, prayers or entreaties, could draw her for Some hours; — three days, she estranged herself as much as possible, from all company, her Sisters not excepted; all they could prevail upon her to declare, was, that Mr. Lambert had made overtures of marriage; on conditions, however, which required her most 
Serious 
The Fatal Deception 
9* 
Serious consideration, that she was unhappily So circumstanced as to be debarred from receiving any advice, by which to regulate her determination. — A Secret im pulse, she Says, at length engaged her to accept him; — and two fetters she directly forwarded to Lord Wilton and Mr. Lambert, informed them of the resultof her deliberation. — Time alone must discover whither we ought to rejoice at, or regret our interference in a union, unsupported by reciprocal fove. 
I have described this country to you before, and am to a degree partial to it; - — but my father is revered in it, what can be a more pleasing refledlion to an affedlionate Son? — In this country, I first Saw my louisa, — here I received the first assurances of. her regard, and here I am in hopes of being put in possession 
of 
92 
The Fatal drceptioft. 
of all my Soul holds dear! — can I avoid then being an enthusiast to the neighbourhood of Flartley Point — Louisa could not help indulging me with the perusal of your amiable wife^s epistle. — How happy is she in heramazing flow of Spirits,, and how happy am I, my dear Jack, to congratulate you on the agreeable pros pcdt of an encrease to your felicity; — can anything exceed the pleasure os a father, who in his children hopes to find, the perfect resemblance of his worth and their mother’s beauty. 
Such are the charming prospedls of an engagement, where merit, discretion, health and love, founded upon csteem, are the attendants. — Not So the modern matched heir, to the right honourable the fafliioniible belle : — dream not ye of happiness, illustrious unfortunates, desire 

The Fatal Deception. 
93 
fire only insensibility -- early victims to an ambitious father and a reduced estate, equal sharers in the same misfortune, which So unnaturally and contrary to all divine laws, joins you together; where true regard is not even expeffed, let good nature and civility be adopted in its stead; and let prudence teach you to free your children, from the necessity, of being Sacrificed like yourselves. 
In this style should I apostrophise a con nedlion in the bon-ton, unjustly called marriage — But how ridiculous should I make myself, were I not to confine my Sentiments within a whisper to my friend — to those couples (rather to be pitied than condemned) may equipage, dress and dish pation, fully Satisfy their pride and ambition. 
94- 
The Fatal Deception, ' 
bition. — But let you and I, my dear sea therstone. Seek for happiness! where is that to befound, but in the arms of virtue?? 
nearer we approach to an expected felicity, the more tedious appears every trifling delay — let a letter from you, sill up, a Small chasm, in my present state of anxious expectation— — I can safely call the valuable houisa my own, I shall easier excuse your indolence in corresponding. 
I am at present however, disposeet to forgive everything, and everybody; therefore you may be assured, I shall not withold it from you, if your future attention atones for the past neglect, to dear Jack, your real and affectionate, 
WILLIAM cooper; 
Mr, 
The Fatal Deception. 95 
Mr. F E A T H E R S T O N E, 
T O 
WILLIAM COOPER. 
Dear Will, 
Pickering Forell, 
A 
T School I was rather inattentive than dull, at college more dissipated than studious, you know I did not profit So much as I might have done, during my residence at Queens, yet for a fellow commoner, not circumscribed in pocket, I quitted the university with tolerable eclat IHAVE memory and reading Sufficient ' to 
si 
The Fatal Deception. 
to make me now and then relish the beauties of a classic author, without repining at the little progress, I made in more ab struse studies, which usuallyperplex, without convi(stion. 
The only valuable acquisition I pique myself upon having made there, is the friendship of you and Lambert; — yet there never was So great a contrast in disposition. — Lambert, at that time, fiery and impetuous? you cool, and Sentimental, your friend, gay and thoughtless: yet I do not recoiled: we ever effentialy disagreed; — being indulged in my little ■whims, I never attempted to dispute, the Superiority of your knowledge, in books, men and manners: many a time indeed, for slighting your advice, I have kissed the rod, — yet at this present writing. 
, (How 
The Fatal Deception. 
97 
(How matrimony improves one) I think I can with propriety arraign your conduct, have you not pressed the matter too dole? and been a means of plunging our friend into a state he appa rantly enters with reluctance f I have no pretensions to great prescience, but for your Sake as well as lambert’s, may I be mistaken in my Sears for the consequence, glad should I be, if my wish or Services could in the Smallest degree promote his happiness. 
Of a humour cheerful and enjoue I endeavour to find mirth, and amuse ment, rather than the more'solid researches of a too contemplative mind : — my wife Suits me to a tittle, we can be iinxious for our friends, compassionate to the unfortunate, but laugh at the distresses of those objects, you (tragically vol. III F enough) 
98 
The Fatal Deception. 
enough) call victims to fortune and ambition. — Depend upon it Will, providence lays no more upon us than we are able to bear, and in general those unfortunate victims, would be much more unhappy with a Lady louisa, or one of your stamp. Cooper, then they are with each other, trained up from infancy, in a knowledge of the.polite world, devoid of principle, or Sensibility, and allured by pleasure, they Seldom hesitate to put the fimlnshg stroke, to a treaty, that promises liberty without control, preserve your pity ibr worthier objects, these are beneath contempt. 
I receive your congratulations Will, with thanks, my dame (the style of Yorkshire) is in a thriving way, and will in proper time 1 hope make me a happy father, as she has made me the happiest 

The Fatal Deception. 
99 
piest of husbands— — volatility of her disposition, the number of rattling, visiting acquaintance, we had got into at Scarborough, and the uneven and fatiguing Situation of the place, made me very happy, (for the Sake of my boy,) when I had prevailed upon her, to try the air of Pickering Forest, — my houle being a good deal out of repair, she was not at first over and above pleased with, the change, but at present is perfectly reconciled to it. — We purpose to continue 
here near two months, about which time 
\ - 
you may expect us in the South. — Mrs Egerton has disclaimed taking long journeys, and Mrs Featherstone desires to be with her mother upon a certain occasion. 
My grandfather, of blessed memory, choosing to live warm in this northern F 2 climate. 
100 The Fatal Deception. 
climate, built his mansion very near the bottom of a high hill, a very good Park round the house, had Some Deer in it, but those not being of the best kind, I thought proper last year to dire<^l: they should be destroyed. — We are amply recompensed, by our heather mutton, bred upon the moors, and fatted in the Park for the table. — Could we Send you a taste of it', you would pronounce it excellent! in a pecuniary way I have al so found great advantage from the regulation. 
We have a very healthy country round us, and a tolerable neighbourhood, good meat, good fish, good beer, and plenty of fewest — I regret our distance from London, and our friends, which will prevent our being here So much as we otherwise should, once in a couple ot 
years, 
The Fatal Deception. ioi 
years, I hope it will Suit us, to come down for a Sew months, then how happy my Eliza and me, if your louisa, and you would accompany us. 
Here are Some tolerable trout streams, near us, and I hope in a little time, to have our share of game, my late agent, amongst many other injuries he has done me, by tricks and misinanagement, was very Severe against an insringement of the at, and was So extremely attentive to this point, he has Scarce left a breed ofmoorgame, Partridge, or Hares upon my estate. — 'The most respedlable farmers near me, were entirely debarred taking any diversion, consequently had no advantage in their preservation. — I have taken off the embargo, issued leave (under certain restridlions) for the greater part of them, to shoot upon their F 3. ' own 
102 
The Fatal Deception’. 
own respedlive farms, and have given two gentlemen farmers under me, (who I think I can depend upon) a general deputation over the whole. — We fear no insormers herei have also Subscribed largely to a few couple of beagles, which are kept amongst them, that in the proper feason, when the business of their farms, does not more necessarily employ them, are to be taken out, once or twice a week — relaxation in every occupation, is absolutely necessary, and hunting is a chearfstl healthy exercise, I have directed what is killed, to be regularly distributed amongst them. So pleasure and profit will be united — and I think, if I am not mistaken, poaching will be in good measure destroyed, and my manors. Supply more game than my neighbours. 
What think you of my plan? it Seems already to have had Salutary effects, and 
I am 
The fatai Deception. 
103 
I am assured by the intelligent, it cannot possibly fail, — aster all, who can have Such pretentions to a share os the game, as those farmers whose property are it’s Support? — The very nature of the game aft, with all its alterations and emendations, is in my opinion, totally repugnant to the freedom and rights of an Englishman, and calculated Solely for the meridian of Poland, Germany, See. where many of the Noblefs by Such arestndion, find till at pi ovifionfor their families, which their fiender revenues, could not otherwise produce, — 
I cannot say I ever knew what true felicity was before; my present method of passing the time, is necher much diversified, or entirely uniform : I generally rise early, and either hunt, or overlook my workmen; (who before we F 4 '' leave 
104 
The Fatal Deception. 
leave the forest, will I hope convert an uncomfortable, inconvenient house, into a pleasant useful dwelling.) If I do not attend the hounds, my worthy bedsellow and I, take an airing in a whiffy, I have lately had made at York; Safe and easy, but adapted to the roads about this neighbourhood, — we Seldom are without visitors when we please, but if totally dis engaged; walking, fishing, a Serious game at piquet, or an idle game at romps, fills up the vacuum. — l cannot conclude without telling you, my wife has been this minute, intruding upon my privacy (as she Says,) to desire I will make her reproaches, to Lady louisa, for So long negledling, to answer her last letter, not being Satisfied with her excuse, for in terupting me, besides the contribution I have levied from her lips, she has given me leave to assure you, her music, dairy, 
books 
The Fatal Deception, rc5 
books and husband (mem. We have' neither parrot, monkey, or lapdog) Supply her with every pleasure and amuse ment, she has left to wish for, — ought I to add a Syllable rnore, except you will allow me to tell you, my eliza’s wishes,, are not less fervent and Sincere than mine, that our friends felicity, may be as perfect as ours. 
I am, dear Will, your ever affectionate, 
J. FEATHERSTONE. 
F5 
Lady 
io The Fatal deceptioif, 
Lady LOUISA C O O P E R, 
T O 
Mrs. F E A T H E R S T O N E. 
ES my dearest friend, I will acknowledge myself culpable, you have reason to reproach me; and I have been almost inexcusably negligent — a candid and open confession, from a generous mind, Seldonisiails to obtain the forgive ness it Solicits. 
Ah, 
The fatal.deception. 
107 
Ah, my worthy Eliza! great are the changes in.our family since my last, may they be productive of that happiness to the parties, the partiality of our friends think we deserve. — Last week united the hands of your louisa. and her William — my sister! why falls the involuntary tear? at the same time vowed obedience to. Lambert; while every person present, Seemed with real pleasure to congratulate Cooper and me — a Sympathetic gloom: obtruded in their compliments to my Sister — she has Sacrificed herself to a man, worthy indeed, but indifferent and unhappy; her Sensibility is excessive, her love extreme! -- what can possibly be the consequence? a resolution, (founded L tear, upon a romantic principle) has precipitated her into an engagement, with F 6 one,. 
io The Fatal Deception. 
one, who appears with equal imprudence to have agreed to' the connexion— — did he make a confidant of my poor Sister why dare to offer himself under any disadvantages, to the tender, the passionate Charlotte yet let me not injure her — she is purity itsself — the agitation ssie felt before her determination; the Severe intervals of distress since, plainly evince she has shut little hopes herself of felicity, and that her motives have been more for his sake than her own — everything relating to this untoward, this unpromising match, has been as extraordinarily concluded. — My brother came down with Lambert, who it Seems, was Scarce an hour converfible the whole way — he begged the ceremony might be immediately performed, as his affairs made it absolutely 
The Fatal 'Deception. 
109 
lutely necessary, my Sister should accompany him the next morning, on his return to Stretton.. Astonished at an intention So little obliging to any of us, you may be Sure it gave us the greatest uneasiness — Mrs. Bruce was alarmed to the highest degree — My Lord, flung out' of the room, I thought much offended; while William and his father fwho is now with us) joined his sister and mein the strongest Solicitations, that he would dedicate a few days at Wilton Place, to friendship and happinest — a sigh, and it: is impossible! was his answer— — still styprised us more, Charlotte Seemed glad he had determined to quit us, and was for the remainder of the evening in much better Spirits. — The conduct of Lambert, threw a damp, over our felicity, which since 
their 

The Fatal Deception. 
their departure has been more perfect - — good-humour of my Lord, the hap^ piness of my Sister Whlton, the joy we all participate with them in their lovely bo)v, added to the impassioned tenderness of my beloved Will, Seem to accuse me, for. the sighs I Send after my no less beloved, but more unhappy sister Lambert. Lucy is almost distrafted at the unkindncfs, as she calls it, of her brother; it was indeed astonishing, he did not propose to take her along with him and my sister — Mrs. Bruce thinks it better as it is,, that having no body but Charlotte, as a companion he must become more Sensible of her worth and good qualities — reasons of this sort may reconcile it more to us, but cannot account for the impropriety of his tehaviour. — She has promised to write tome 
The Fatal Deception'.’ 
Ill 
me often, and I endeavour to flatter myself, I shall find Some of my apprehensions on her account, groundless. 
Two months, your husband I find as sures mine, will terminate your stay in the north — with what pleasure shall I fiy to embrace my dearest Eliza! what satis fadtion, will not my good Mrs. Egerton feel, upon a meeting with her daughter after So long a Separation. 
I have the great pleasure (; o assure my dear Eliza, my lord’s behaviour to my husband, is kind to an extreme — he Scarce does anything without consulting him, and has determined to go up to town, about the time you are expected, principally I believe, from the great satis fadion he observes it will give to us — My sister Wilton glads my heart, by an 
asslirance 
II The fataldeception'c 
assurance that fiie, for the first time,. Since her union with my brother can pronounce herself truly happy — my lord’s past unhappy connexions, made him perpetually miserable — So distressed by ressexion, it is Scarce possible to suppose, he could behave with that tenderness and respex, the condcix of sh good a wife. So justly merited — he is now everything his friends and family can wish. 
I ought not to forget acquainting you, with a contest amongst us, which has lately been argued with Some warmth, — it has been determined we are to reside at Hartley Point in the country, and at his lordship’s house, when in London. — Where indeed (excepting your friendship) there will be little to tempt my William or me, to any long continuance. — But old Mr. Cooper insisted for Some time,, on 
resigning 
The Fatal Deception. 
1^3 
resigning the estate up to his Son, with the reservation of an annuity to himself, and fortunes for his other children -- my husband Spiritedly declared, he never would Submit to consider his father dependant upon him, and he had too great an opinion of my delicacy, to suppose I would ever come into Such a proposal -- that his commission, the interest of my fortune, and any little addition his father might conveniently be able to Spare, would be more than his wants, and above his wishes * how entirely, my dear Eliza, did his Sentiments agree with mine — my Lord entreated miss Lambert would accompany us to London — what could make Mrs. Bruce obje(fi: to it, I cannot conceive — but she would not be over ruled— — John Thornhill has ventured to pay a visit in Devonshire — Lucy received him worse than before, and I 
dare 
114 The Fatal Deception. 
dare Say he will Scarce adventure another address. 
She says, she can think of nothing: but her brother’s treatment os her, and will never rest, till she finds out the cause of his displeasure and her offence. — Dear, as my hushand’s love is to me, I feel a vacancy in my heart, which I still preserve for my Eliza, the continuance of your friendship with the Sole poffeshon of my william’s affection, (was my sis ter but happy) would leave me not a 
single wish unsatisfied; — but I will not 
dare to direct the judgement of an unsearchable power, just, as omnipotent r love your louisa, as truly as my Eliza is esteemed by her 
ever affectionate LOUISA COOPER. 
Mrs. 

A 
The Fatal Deception. it 
Mrs. FEATHERSTONE, 
T O 
Lady LOUISA COOPER. 
R R IV E D once more at this place of public entertainment, how can I find time, you perhaps may ash, to remember a friend in Devonshire. — Ah louisa, these tyrant men! — my wretch will Scarce Suffer me to stir the length of my foot without him, my situation forsooth, 
my Spirits too volatile; -- -- — his 
love, his apprehension alarmed and a 
thou 
Ji6 The Fatal Deception. 
thousand other Such simple reasons he gives for moping me up, with really less liberty than a state prisoner; — So wonder not, nor thank me for a remembrance of you, ascribe it to necessity, an endeavour to amuse myself, to anything you please; though indeed, to be a little Sincere with my louisa, 'you Rre indebted for this letter to the indulgence of an affe<5ted rcsent ment, do not be angry at me louisa, I must appear a little capricious now and then, in order to keep my friend within proper bounds; he is ready enough to grow insolent and troublesome, upon too gentle usage. — But PU transmit you an account, of a little matrimonial occurence, which has just happened, and leave you to judge of the propriety of my management: — and (now I recollecf,) it is impossible, my louisa, : I can find a time more afroposy to pay you my hearty 
con 
The Fatal Deception. 
117 
congratulations upon the change of your condition, (there’s a matronly phrase for you,) than accompanying my compliments upon the occasion, with a lesson from real life, for your government. 
Let me in the first place, premise to you, that my worthy bargain coaxed me }tsterday, with reasons, or Something So like them, that I gave up a design I had formed to go to the rooms at night, and cheerfully disposed myself to Spend a humdrum tete d tete evening with lovey at home; — the fellow really is entertaining, and we were both in the highest good-humour; — when before Supper was quite over, in bounced two or three blades of my gentleman’s acquaintance, in top Spirits, not indeed absolutely drunk, but in a very promising way; — they insisted upon carrying him along with them, to 
finish 
ii The Fatal Deception.’. 
finish the evening; — I was horridly out of humour, and gave my traitor a look, which I thought he might have understood, if he had been disposed to have got rid of them. — I rated them pretty handsomly, but they were too .much of the hon tonne to be put out of countenance or from their purpose, by a woman; — their behaviour reminded me of an observation, I have read Somewhere, “that “it is Scarce in fortune’s power, to make “a coxcomb unhappy, as his good opi “nion of himself, will in a great degree y Support him in all conditions.” 
A Severe reproach to philosophy, that vanity should almost answer the Same end; away they all went together and left me, not in thepleasantest humour in the world, you may readily guess; had it not been 
too 
The Fatal Deception. 
I K 
too late then for the rooms, I certainly ssiould have ordered the carriage; but as it was, there appeared no other remedy but patience. 
# 
Well; down I Sat and took up my tambour, that would not do; applied to my guittar, ah’! I was too much out of tune myself to find any harmony there, at length I went to bed, absolutely determined to banish him my apartment, at least for that night; — he returned about one, and on being told the request I had left with my Servant, very considerately left me undisturbed to my repose So much for the argument, now for the particulars. 
Seen 
120 The Fatal Deception'. 
Scene the hreakfajl Parlour. 
A view of the Sea. 
Lo my honejl man., with a hook'm his hand. 
Enter your friend, in the dumps. 
Your Servant Sir. 
My charming Eliza, (Said the confident wretch, and Seiled a kiss, my struggling could not prevent) how could you be So inhuman, to punish me So Severely, So undeservedly as you did last night? 
Undeservedly Mr. Featherstone, I am Sorry you think So. 
I must call it So, my Eliza, since you cannot but be assured, the intrusion of those mad wretches, was exceeding dis agreeable to me. 
if 
The Fatal Deception. ii 
If I am to j udge by the consequences, I think I may be authorised, in Supposing the contrary. 
Indeed, my dear, I was infinitely distressed to leave you, but I could not bear to put in the power of these hair brain’d fellows, to make us appear Singular or ridiculous; you know enough, my Eliza, to be convinced of the neceshty. Sometimes, of observing rneasures with people, we may even despise! — but forbear, my dear, any more looks of reproach, come Smooth that brow, and let me show my charming Bessy, the element that was also last night a little ruffled, is now restored to a delightful Serenity; be not more obdurate than the Sea — — 
I will not be treated like an infant, Mr. Featherstone. 
Vol. III G Give 
122 The Fatal Deception. 
Give me Some tea, my life, the penance you' infiidled upon me last night, has made my breakfast more necessary. 
What do you mean? 
r was not in bed, and have been walking on the Sands, ever since day break, a pretty topic for the tea tables, my dear, if my last night’s companions were apprised of the occasion. 
I was alarmed, and my affected resentment, for affected' I must Submit to con fess it was, totally forgot, — I will repeat no more of our dialogue, since upon an impartial retrospedlion, I find it makes So much against myself, let it be Sufficient to inform yon, I felt the force of his great good-humour and good sense;; — convinced and Sorry for my caprice, 
'' kissed 
The Fatal Deception. 
123 
kissed him, dropped him one of my best curtseys, muttered Something of being more considerate for the future, and we sat down to our tea, the best friends and the happiest couple on the earth : — he has just left me, but I really find myself let down a good deal, in'my own opinion, and fear I shall be the Same in yours; — yet my best John, has behaved So very cleverly on the occasion, I can Scarce be concerned at the resseftion of my own silly conduct, as by that means I have received. Such a proof of his worthy and amiable disposition; — will you forgive my taking up So much of your time, with the nonsensical bickerings, between a foolish old married couple! — but I have done, and can Scarce account, how I have been drawn into So tedious a narration; — I cannot however avoid relating to 'you the particulars of G 2 an 
124 The Fatal Deception. 
an extraordinary interview I have had, since we returned to Scarborough, I will endeavour to be as concise as possible, though you will Soon perceive it, of a very interesting nature. 
When Mr. Featherstone was rode out the other morning, a very genteel young woman, plainly, but neatly dressed, was shown up to my room; I rose to receive her, and observed her So exceedingly dis composed, I was afraid she was going to saint, her appearance prejudiced me greatly in her favour : — she had been, nay really was beautiful, though apparently in a deep consumption, I was inexpressibly interested for her, I can assure my dear louisa, and not less So, when I found it to be the lovely but unfortunate Patty; — she would have thrown hersclf at my feet, had I not prevented 
her 
The Fatal Deception. 
125 
her; — I led her to the Settee, and sitting by her, with the most affectionate Solicitude, endeavoured to Sooth her mind, and relieve the violent constidls of her bosom. — “Heaven has indulgently, my “dear madam, (Said the amiable girl) “though I Scarce durst hope So great a “Satisfaction, granted me the opportu “nity of expressing the gratitude I feel, “for your generosity, your uncommon “goodness, to a wretched unhappy girl, “depressed by ressedtions of her folly, “and sinking into the grave, a vidlini “of indiscretion.” 
I think I never was more thorougly affected, which when poor Patty observed and I suppose also perceiving your friends magnitude, she instantly resumed a more composed behaviour what did I not feel, for this noble Spirited, this worthy G 3 girl? 
h6 The Patal Deception.’ 
girl why! .why can she not be happy? Satisfied as she must be, (except in one weak moment) with the reistitude, with the very extraordinary proofs she has given, of the justness of her conduct; I declare I could love her as a sister, nay was poligamy in fashion, would be the first to desire my husband to do her that justice, the propriety of her behaviour, and the worthiness of her heart deserves; but she is gone beyond the power of medicine, and indeed declares, it is the blessing, in which all her prayers are 
centred. -- -- -1 will hasten to give you 
the heads of a conversation, that I shall never forget, the particulars of which distress me too much to enumerate; she was advised to come to Scarborough, and though she wished not for health, she esteemed it sinful not to use the remedies prescribed, in order to obtain it, she had. 
been 
The Fatal Deception. 127 
been two months there, and had left it a few days previous to our first arrival; — she thought her health mended, and was by Some of her friends where She resides, entreated to try it a few months longer, but since her return, has found a very material alteration for the worse, and purposes, while she is yet able to bear the fatigue of travelling, to hasten Her departure, that her eyes may be closed, by the worthy woman with whom she boarded, who I find has an affeffion for her little short of maternal. — she in treated a diredsion, that she might be enabled to acquaint me with Some circumstances she thought it her duty to ap prhfe me of; — with a languid blush, and checking the starting tear, she questioned me of Featherstone, desired nothing relating to her might be hinted to him, till the expected termination of her illness; 
G 4> she: 
: The Fatal deceptior^.' 
ssie added a thousand tender expreshons', that gave me poignant Sorrow; — the fear of being Surprised by my husband, at length obliged her to tear herself away, the remembrance of her last embrace, will never be effaced from my memory. 
Adieu, we Set out for London on Friday next, and I hope to Salute my mother and my dearest touisa in a few days after. — That your happiness may be of many years continuance, is the real and sincere wish, of my dear louisa’s 
most affectionate ELIZA FEATHERSTONE. 
Mr. 
The Fatal Deception. 
129 
Mr. FEATHTRSTONE, 
T O 
WILLIAM COOPER, 
M 
St. james’s Square. 
R. cooper’s gout, and Lady wilton’s indisposition, which prevented my bess, the pleasure of Lady louisa’s company, has been heartily regretted by us both. — In one respedt however, I am not Sorry her Ladyship was absent, as Mrs Featherstone had an exceeding dangerous time, and I apprehend the friendship be g 5 twixc 
130 The Fatal Deception. 
twixt our wives, would have certainly induced Lady louisa to have been present. — Heaven has been pleased to restore my Eliza to my wishes, which was a bld sing that for near two days, I was not encouraged to hope for : the infatita too is in high health and condition, for her age, and as one of Anna bullen’s attendants Said to Harry the VIIL “promises boys hereafter” — The worthy Mrs Egerton, has continued with us ever since the happy time, and simpers anti fidgets about, at a wonderful rate : — 1 question whether the birth of her own daughter, gave her more Satisfadlion: At least, her joy upon eliza’s recovery could only be equaled by her fears and distress, while in danger. — A boy now Will, for this wench of ours, would be quite the thing! I Seek a husband for her 
in 
The Fatal dec£ption. 
131 
in no other family except yours, or lam bei't’s : therefore'look to it! I am rfiready very tenacious for my gtrl, and would not have her ill matched; I certainly shall give the preference to the eldest, conceiving parity of years, a very material ingredient, in uiratrimonial felicity, I will be honest enough to tell you, it is gold to Silver in favour of Berkshire : — Lady Cliarlotte being already in a way, to provide for. mr little louisa. — From this hint you will naturally conclude I have been at Stretoon Green; even fo! of ©ur friends I have a good deal to fay: I arrived from thence but yesterday, after continuing with them near a week : I was drove out of my own house, by the bustle, customary, I suppose upon these occasions, but my little expedition, has given nte great satisfaction, I have in Lambert, provided a godfather for my G.6„. girl; 
132 
The Fatal Deception.' 
girl; he assiires me of his personal attendance at the christening, of which I am directed to inform you. Lady louisa Shall have timiely notice : Mrs feather stone will accept of no offer, in preference to her ladyship’s which she thankfully accepts: — our good mother will stand along With her, and declares, she shall have additional joy upon the occasion, by her company, you must Suffer neither gout, or indisposition, to prevent our Seeing you: that would be a mortification we should not be able to bear, and we are determined rather to postpone the ceremony, till our bantling is able to run to church, by itself. — So much for the nurserv. 
Our friends at Hartley, and Wilton place, will rejoice at the accounts, I have to transmit of Lambert: appearances 
The Fatal Deception. 
^33 
ces promise fair, to reestablish his cheer fullness and Spirits; he was livelier than I have Seen him, since his first unaccountable dejedtion. — Lady Charlotte is everything that is engaging! her tender attention, has acquired his confidence, esteem, and Solicitude: she deserves happiness I am Sure, who has ventured So fairly for it, and it is with pleasure I declare, there is now a flattering prospeft of it. — Many thanks to your father for Sparing Banks to me, particularly at this time of confinement, when his cornpany was So essentially desirable : it makes the obligation double, for which I shall ever consider myself indebted. — He went with me to Stretton, and contributed much to the general happiness, — honest wilson, makes himself highly necessary to Lambert, and is So deservedly esteemed and respeded, by all our friend’s dependants 
t34- Tfib Fatal Deception. 
dants at Stretton, that joy and Satisfaction may be Seen in every face. — He advises, and instruds the farmers, in the improvements, of their land, recommends friendship and unanimity in their faml -- iies, reconciles ‘ difieirenccs, when they happen, is the priistiple perfen consulted, in matdiing their Sons and dau^: lers, Sreqoently takes a friendly pipe with them, and constaatty presides at their vestry,, and parish meetings. — In short he is the orade, from whole decrees there are no difentients.. 
Lady charl'^tte’s attention to their, welfare, and comfort, is the .greatest a, mufemeht she ailows hersels, when Lambert is engaged, with company or business. — 'wilson informs me, her Ladyship regularly goes amongst the tenants, and by her affability and benevolence, 
diffuses 
The Fatal Deception." 
h5 
diffuscs a general happiness around her. The family, our friend transplanted from Somersetshire, and particularly recommended to wilson’s care, are fixed Superior to their desires: : have an exceeding good farm, well stocked at his expense, the eldest daughter, is married to a rich young farmer, who had found the way to make himself agreeable to her: and knowing them to be a family, immediately under the protection of their landlord, he very prudently has provided himself, with an agreeable bedfellow, and secured most favourable pro Spedts of interest, at the Same time. — I told Lambert, she would make an admirable handmaid for him,, during Lady charlotte’s confinement in the straw, but he did not seem to relish my proposal. 
He 
136 
The Fatal Deception. 
He has received accounts of Sir William morden’s death, from his brother now Sir Thomas: ' it was the opinion of all the physicians, that the effects of his wound, was not absolutely the cause of it, but a broken down constitution. 
• — How very considerate it was in Sir Thomas, to give this intimation, as it must be satisfactory to Lord wilton’s resseftions, who, (however worthless mor den might have been;) could not but have felt great contrition, to have considered himself, the essential instrument of his dissolution : my Lord is free from the guilt of blood. Sir William (while alive) endeavoured to make atonement for his former miscondudt. — His old af sociate Wallace is amply, though not extravagantly, provided for, and a very amiable young man. Succeeds to an an tient title, and good estate, -~ “What“ 
“
The Fatal Deception. 
h7 
“ever is, is best” — Mrs Featherstone has this moment acquainted me, with an accidental meeting she had, with my poor unfortunate deserving Patty! the account my wise gives of her, has wounded me to the Soul, and though that generous girl, has voluntarily charged herself with being equally to blame; can I, without the bitterest refledlions. See her the victim of our mutual indiscretion, going brokenhearted, to an untimely grave? Eliza, says, she hourly expe<5ts accounts of her death! - could the most abandoned libertine be but capable of ferioufiy considering, what Patty has Suffered for a venal, and involuntary offence, could he but conceive, a Small part of my dis tress, he would with horror quit a track, whose termination is anguish and despair, I am not able to Say more, than that I ever am your faithful, and affectionate friend, J. FEATHERSTONE. 
Lucy 
ijs The Fatal Deception., 
LUCY LA3^IBERT, 
T O 
JAMES LAMBERT, E 
Y. 
OUR ktter, my beloved brother, -, has given me pleallire, as it banishes my apprehensions of your want of affection for a Sister, whosc regard for you is without limit. — But what ambiguity do I not observe in your expressions? — what inconsistence in your condutst .N — forgive me, my dearest James, is it possible your lucy’s attachment can So far blind her, 
as 
The Fatal dzc^ptiott. 
as to reconcile Such contradichons! — ' how can you profess you love her more than ever brother loved a Sister, yet deprive her of feeing you? of contributing with Lady Charlotte, to your domestic felicity — by paying you that respedsul attention as a sister, she is by providence ^ unhappily deprived of showing, to A' parent. 
Ah, James! let the restedtion of what your Lucy Suffers in mind, recall every tender, awake every fraternal sensation. — Orphans, as we arc, to whom can I apply!’ in whom reposea confidence, if not with an only, a revered brother? I must be under the necessity of perhaps offending you with complaints, yet Icarce know where properly to fix them — but 
my 
140 The Fatal Deceptioi?. 
my situation is beyond measure irksome to me -- banished your presence, who (by affinity of blood) ought to be my guar r dian, adviser, and protector— — meet it is true, with every attention and civility, from good Mr. and miss Cooper, with the greatest' friendship from the Lady Wiltons — yet I am unhappy! — Mrs. Bruce too, that dear aunt, who used to Sooth my inquietude, is displealed with me, for peremptorily resusing the offer of Sir John Thornhill, a man whose merit and good charaister, I readily admit; but to whom I have a dissike as irremovable, as perhaps it is unreasonable — who can justly account for the Secret impulses of the heart? who dare condemn the hand that has engraven them there? — Ah, my brother! do not you 
join 
ithe Fatal Deception. 
141 
join in Solicitations against me -- let me benesit by the independent Situation, my good father left me in — let me continue single — let me not be made unhappy, by applications which I must refufe____in 
deed my dear, my beloved James, accustomed all my life to the gentlest treatment, I find it difficult to Support myself under a diminution of tenderness— — cannot forbear mentioning to you, that my aunt appears no longer, that even tempered, cheerful, affectionate relation we have Seen her. — She was formerly generous, and communicative — at prelenf, what an alteration! I am not the only person that has observed it — worthy Mr. Cooper has Spoke to her about it, and mentioned his apprehensions, least anything in his house had been disagreeable 
to 
t42 The Fatal Deception.’ 
to her — she w’^as disturbed at his question, and since then, her condu(5t has been (if possible) more extraordinary. — She writes shuch, and frequently receives large packets, the contents of which, she in dustfioussy makes a Secret of. — To what can we attribute the change of her disposition? — Mr. Cooper is unhappy about it, and you may be assured it is beyond description alarming to me. 
I find. Captain Cooper has at length yielded, to his father’s request; and with Lady louisa, are expelled every hour in Devonshire — Mr. Cooper Says, three or Sour months is too long a time, for a christening visit; and declares, Mr. sea therstone need expeist no more fponsors from Devonshire, if he knows not when 
to 
The Fatal Deception. 
h3 
to Suffer them to return. — Lady louisa has communicated to Lady Harriet the situation my sister is in. — How truly do I rejoice in everything that can give my brother pleasure — may I not be permitted to pay Lady Charlotte, my affec > donate Services. — Will you Susser me to attend you at Stretton Green? I flatter myself, it would not be disagreeable to her ladyship; but if it is, or there is any impropriety in my request, however Severe the disappointment, I will endeavour to Submit with patience to the mortification. 
Captain Cooper and her ladyship, are just arrived here — Lady louisa was always tenderly attached to me, in her friendship, and the affufances of my brother’s 
144 
The Fatal Deception. 
ther’s esteem, I will endeavour to banish my chagrin. — How pleasing are our friends accounts of you, my dear James — worthy Lady Charlotte! to her the restoration of your health, it Seems, is owing — how much am I in particular, obliged to her, for the agreeable sensa tions I feel — do you really enjoy that peace of mind and chearsulness of temper which you once possessed ?- Lady louisa says, and she would not deceive me; happy, now is your Lucy! — refuse not then to a Sister, the joy of personally congratulating you, upon So fortunate an event, and giving Lady Charlotte those grateful acknowledgments she So much deserves. — Amidst the general Satisfadlion, Mrs. bruce’s reservedness is Scarce attended to; I however, overlook the change 
m 
9 
The Fatal Deception. 
145 
in her temper, and cannot forget the obligations I owe, for her former care and tenderness. 
I am commissioned by all here, to convey to you and her ladyship their warmest compliments and good washes. — Receive also, my dear brother, the assurances of your sister’s inviolable, and 
affectionate regard, 
LUCY LAMBERT. 
vol. III 
H 
‘ Mr. 
i4si 
The Fatal Deceptions 
Mr. LAMBERT, 
Captain COOPER. 
My Dear Will. 
Stretton Green. 
JL H E excellent temper of my worthy Charlotte, will yet I fear, never perfectly restore your friend, his former ease and tranquillity — if I could entirely irradi' cate one single idea, and banish a presentiment of Something fatal impending over me, which in Spite of every exertion y/ill obtrude, I think I should be / happy; — argue not, my dear Cooper, 
the 
The Fatal Deception. 
147 
the folly of encouraging Such Solicitings of the mind, in vain I oppose reason and philosophy, against the baneful influence, a Secret, an irresistible power, hurries me away and makes resistance ineffecftual; — the high opinion I have of Lady charlotte’s amiable qualities, and a thorough sense of the obligations I owe her; — will (I Sometimes flatter myself with hopes) make me really feel that content, I at present (on her account alone) think necessary to feign .- — painful as a duplicity of conduct: is to me, I ov/c it to her ladyship’s health and' quiet; and was not Sorry to find the chearfulness I endeavoured to assume, had alish deceived you and my other friends. 
My wife’s present condition, particularly requires my tenderest assiduity, and obliges me more than ever to be upon H 2 my 
148 The Fatal Deception. 
my guard; — I revere Lady Charlotte, I admire her virtues; she poffcffes my confidence, and I have the most respefil full regard for her, in a word, she is my friend! but nothing more. — My unfortunate fate, has rendered my heart incapable of receiving from her any other impression. 
You will wonder, my dear Cooper, after having So clearly explained myself, that I should be capable of enjoying any satissadion, from the prosped I have of being a parent; whether from the novelty of the character, or from the powerful direction of nature, I will not attempt to consider, but certain it is, I feel very agreeable lensations from the re fiedtion i — what happiness must be the lot of him, who united by bonds of tender and reciprocal affection, with the woman 
The Fatal Deception. 149 
man of his choice, finds in his children an additional cement to that love, before supposcd incapable of increase. 
In a letter I received Somtime since, from my Sister, she has expressed a desire to come to Stretton Green; — I love my Lucy, William, most tenderly, but her present request much distresses me; — Lady Charlotte has hinted to me, more than once, she would willingly dispense with the attendance of any of our friends she has pressed it with unusual earnestness;; can I do? — though it Seems a little extraordinary, yet as I know my wife has Some reasons, which influence her; — she must, at all events be obliged. — I will write Soon to Lucy, and endeavour to convince her, that my declining sending the invitation, she Seems to expect, proceeds from nothing less, than a H 3 want 
150 The Fatal Deception, 
want of regard and affection what she siiys of our aunt Bruce astonishes me; never do I recollect being acquainted with a woman of more Solid sense, humanity and good nature. — It is true, I have frequently observed her, when in company lost in thought, and at particular times unaccountably Serious : — always reserved on particular Subjects, perhaps she has experienced, (and would it not be wonderful if she had not) Some disappointment or misfortunes in early life, which may occasion the present alteration, in her disposition and behaviour. — The mysterious part of her con dust, w ith respest to the Secret correspondence she is engaged in, without doubt arises from Some long past event; — she was never married, (that I ever heard of) yet chose to take the title of mistress at a time of life, few people care to lose 
that 
The Fatal Deception. 15i 
that of miss; — but why should anything, that entirely concerns Mrs. Bruce, affect my Sister — why any harshness in her behaviour to her? — I will not Suffer it; and I hope yc.ur and Lady louisa’s friendship, together with Mr. cooper’s interference, will prevent my lucy’s being Subjedted to any improper treatment, should it even be offered her by So near and respedlable a relation. — Mrs. Bruce is, and has ever been, (within the limits of my remembrance) her own mistress;; — Sister is and shall be independent; — though Sir John Thornhill, I believe to be a man of worth and honour, (a man of judgement, I will be vain enough to Say, he proves himself by his partiality for her) yet, if she thinks proper to reject his proposals, I cannot tamely Submit to See her teased or disturbed, though by the remonstrances of H 4. friend' 
152 
The Fatal Deception'. 
friendship; I am Sufficiently acquainted with the inconveniences, give it no other name, of a union, where a proper, and sincere love is not the basis. 
I called in upon Featherstone last week, in St. james’s square, andsurprised our friend in the very height of domestic felicity; — his wife on one knee, his little daughter on the other; never did I See a picture, that conveyed to my idea, To striking an appearance of rational happiness— — Featherstone was a little abashed, at being surprised in Such a situation, but Soon recovered her accustomed sprightliness, upon my complimenting her on not being a woman of fashion; — after what I had Seen, (she Said) it was in vain to pretend to the character, but declared her resolution, ' to make our friend fufier, for making her cut So Sim 
pie 
The Fatal Deception. 

simple a figure. — Little louisa is without exception, the Sweetest child I think I ever Saw; — the fond father could not help pointing out. Some striking resemblances of its arch mana, which got him two or three Smart raps over the knuckles; I should apologise for giving you this family piece, did not I know, that accounts of your friends happiness, cannot but be interesting; — that yours 
may be equally great, is the Sincere wish, of dear William, 
your affedlionate, ' 
JAMES LAMBERT. 

H 5 
Mrs. 
154 The Fatal Deception. 
Mrs. B E A T H ER STONE, 
Lady LOUISA COOPER. 
Londbir. 
HP 
J. H E accounts we lately have received from you, prepared us in Some degree, for your last letter; but our Surprise was notwithstanding exceeding great; — Mrs. Bruce gone to Lishon! parted you Say, without communicating to anybody, the occasion of Such a voyage; even Mr. Lambert, a stranger to her intentions : — well, time, which (it 
is 
The Fatal Deception. 
^55 
is Said) brings all things to light, must at his own gracious pleasure, discover this very wonderful step, perhaps the cid Lady may have formerly had Some tender connexion? — it certainly must be So! nothing but that blind urchin, that makes So much havocic, as well amongst the wise, as Simple, could have urged Mrs. Bruce to So strange a proceedure. — What you considentialy tell me, of Lambert and charlotte’s disapproving poor lucy’s intention, of attending h r upon her lying in, confining So amiable a girl in a distant province, when he could So much to his reputation, and her advantage, introduce and Settle her in the world; is a contradidlion to common-sense, and the liberality of his principles. They are 1 believe mighty good kind of people, altogether; — but you must al h 6 low, 
i5si The Fatal Deception. 
low, at the Same time, a family of un accountables. 
nurse tells me, your god daughter is the finest of all the fine children she ever Saw in her days; that I am the best mother in the world, for So young a one, and abundance more of Such pretty, little, tickling stuff, made use o S I sup pose to every matron, it has hitherto had no bad effect upon me, indeed I can with pleasure observe, it is neither blind or deformed, is healthy, and may (by the blessing of providence) live to make as good a V ife as its mother; — rich she will, be, that is certain, as I have warned my honest man, it is the last I will condescend to bear for him; — he Seems not to believe me, but I can assiire him (that is if I continue in the mind) I will be as good as my word, — my mother, indeed (good 
Soul) 
The Fatal Deception. 
157 
soul) assures me, to keep Such a resolution would be unnatural, and the highest offence to God Almighty; my deary plumes himself much upon his advocate; — but I cannot So Soon forget my Sufferings for our little gypsy, however if I should be So weak, I am not without a tolerable good excuse for my folly. 
What you tell me of your own felicity, and of Lord and Lady wilton’s happiness, you may be Sure gives me great pleasure— — perhaps you will not be very well pleased with your friend, when you are informed, I endeavoured from your letter, to strengthen my arguments against partaking my good man’s bed: — “You find, (Says I) how happy “our friends are, her ladyship, though “at present not in immediate hopes' of ‘‘ children, in how charming a way do 
« they 
ihs 
The Fatal Deception, 
“they live, every hour produces new 
“pleasures and fresh amusements.” -- -- 
What do you think was the wretche’s answer?? — friends Eliza, have taken as much pleasure in the endeavour to. attain them as we have, though fortune has not yet crowned them with success;; — could you have conceived it possible, for the audacious creature to add, that he was So well convinced of your ladyship’s good fense, and regard for your husband, you would heartily condemn my extravagant resolution, though a boy every year should be the consequence of its forfeiture. 
I am this moment interrupted with a message from Stretton Green; Mr. sea therstone insists upon my accompanying him there, as Lady Charlotte is taken ill and expected will.be brought to bed before 
The Fatal Deception. 
■59 
fore we can arrive, I must leave my baby too, and the confident I suppose imagines, having nothing at that place to draw my attention from him, he will be able to ^ bring me to his terms, and get the better of a determination I have So long Supported. — Ah louisa! 1 feel I shall not be able long to resist his importunities, for importunity and opportunity are too great a counterbalance, against the resolves of a weak woman, particularly when those resolves are contrary to her inclination. 
Heaven Send us a good journey, your Sister a happy time, and you, everything you may wish for. 
ELIZA FEATHERSTONE. 
From 
io The Fatal Deception. 
From the Same to the Same. 
My dear Louisa, 
St. james’s Square. 
^, 1 HE letters we wrote you from Stretton, being rather alarming from the account of Lady charlotte’s health, I am happy to acquaint you, that before our departure from thence, her ladyship recovered Surprisingly. — It was a jubilee in the parish, the whole time of our stay. The congratulations Lambert received, upon the birth of his Son and heir, could not but give him the highest pleasure, as he must be convinced, they proceeded from the honest effusion of hearts replete 
with 
The Fatal Deception. 
ir 
with gratitude and respect— — never was So much animated, nor I dare sasely aver, ever found himself of So much consequence. — My honest man has taken it into his head how abundantly clever it would be, if the ties of his friendship with Lambert, could be strengthened by an alliance, between this very young gentleman, and our little louisa — could you ever have conceived him possessed of So much simplicity he is indeed modest enough, not to propose it, till the young ones are able to judge for themselves, and then if it be agreeable to all parties — (it shall be entirely So to my girl, I affure him, before Such a business should be concluded) and a thousand other ifs equally visionary. — I laughed at him, upon his communicating 
r62: ' The Fatal Deception 
municating this hopeful Scheme to me, till he was half angry -- how ridiculous ‘these men can make themselves, when they Suffer a favourite whim to take pos feshon of them; upon our journey to town, being in a refuerie, and as he thought unusually grave, he questioned me of the reason, when I with great gomposure told him, I was debating within myself, about the properest colour for our louisa’s son’s first Suit of clothes • — I escaped better than I expected, and the affair was made up as usual; viz. kifs and friends — he certainly reveres Lambert, therefore his proposition is rather more excusable. I had the Satisfaction of finding my mother and our little one, as well as could be wished, and rc fiedling upon my own happiness, and the 
pleasing, 
, The Fatal Deception. 163 
pleasing prospe(fls of all around me, was filled with gratitude to the beneficent power, to whom I felt myseif So much indebted. 
The cheerful state of my mind was however exceedingly disturbed yesterday, and has since then been possessed by me lancholly and awful reflections. — Poor 'Patty is — an angel, in Heaven! — her soul, long impatient of lingering in this •working day world, is at length at peace! — how few defeend to the grave with her good qualities, or fewer offences! — With Mr. featherstone’s permission, I send you the dear girl’s last letter, which I beg you will return after you have perused it -’• “you may believe yourself very much in my hushand’s good graces, when he 
gives 
164 
The Fatal Deceptioiv. 
gives me leave to communicate a business So distressing to him, and what would perhaps, he says, acquire him your disesteem;; the original cause of poor patty’s misfortunes) did he not rely upon your justice and candour; and that you will recollect,, has constantly endeavoured to make her every atonement — indeed you know, my dear Louisa, he actually offered that kind of reparation, the world conceives adequate to the offence, which the noble minded girl most disinterestedly rejected— — is at present, in a Situation beyond description miserable — I feel for him, more than you can conceive! — a recolle; ion of her worth, her greatness of Soul, her Sufferings, demands a tear even from the most indifferent, — would 
force 
The Fatal Deception, 
165 
force it from the most insensible. — What must be his reflections then, my dear louisa, who considers himself a partner in that indiscretion, for which she has Suffered So much; who loved her passionately, nay, who it is impossible he could ever entirely have ceased to love — less miserable he is in one resped, that in his distress, though of a nature To delicate, he finds his wife the Soother of his Sorrows, the composer os his mind, and the partaker of his concern; I should despise Slim could he be capable of showing less Sensibility. — The letter was wrote, but a very few days before her death, and according to the good woman’s account, who enclosed it to me, she directed her not to send it me, until after every Service in this world, was rendered her — she give 
a melan 
s66 The Fatal Deception.' 
a melancholy and affecting detail, of her great resignation and patience. In the course of a most tedious, and painful illness : and concludes with lamenting her loss, in terms not indeed the. most elegant but does elegance Spring from the heart? there is a simplicity in her diction, which marks the sincerity of her Sorrow, Superior to form, and more expressive than language. j 
Mr. Featherstone has desired the worthy Mr. Banks, to go down to the place of her late residence, not barely to full fil what you willobserve, she desires may be done, but to bestow pecuniary benesits on all who loved or Served her, he is not to be restrained to the limits of the Sum, the deserving girl desired might be, presented, to that worthy old friend, 
who 
The Fatal Deception. 
isiy 
who did her the last kind offices, but at his discretion, to make it much more considerable. — In short, it is our request to him, that everything may be done which can show resped; to her memory — at her own particular desire the funeral was in the night, and as private as possible. — I have desired Mr. ‘ Banks to put up a monumicnt neat, but with the utmost simplicity; Such Fm Sure would have been her own choice. — The inscription, her name in initials only with the following lines, which I copied from the transsation, of a highland epitaph, perfectly applicable to her merit, 
and accomplishments. 
/ 
I 
“Low she lies here In the dud, and her memory “fills me with grief! 
“Silent is the tongue of melody, and the hand of elegance is now at reft.” 
The 
i68 
The Fatal Deception. 
The perusal of this posthumous letter has cost me many tears; it will dis tress my louisa’s tender Sensibility : but there is an enjoyment, even in grief, when the object from whence it proceeds. So justly deserves our pity and .esteeiru 
ELIZA FEATHERSTONE. 
miss 
The Fatal Deception. 
169 
Miss S M I T h; 
T O 
Mrs. SEAT HERS TONE. 
(inciosed in the Preceding.) 
My dear, and honoured Madam, 
T 
HE hand that holds the pen, for the last time; ought to be supposed incapable of deceit, or worldly attachments: the unexpedled continuance of my ill ness, (I have the comfort to Say) has at last given me that peace of mind, I So fervently prayed for, yet despaired to obtain. — When in health, before 1 had the prospeds I now possess; I endeavoured I to 
ryo The Fatal Deception, 
divest myself of a pashon, to which I was the Sacrifice; yet could not lose sight of its impropriety — when Mr, Featherstcne generoussy proposed, what I indeed had. never stipulated for, and forgetting the situation, in which we had dived together, offered marriage: — how battering to ipy heart? yetconsciousostheprobability that in Some future moments, he might condemn himself, I happily had resolution to resist his Solicitation. — Be not offended madam, if I Say, how much I loved at that moment; — I endeavoured in vain, to banish his idea from my breast. — He married : — I found it more than ever my duty, to erase an impression, which then became more sinful. — witness heaven, how Sincerely I strove to forget him: theconfiift was beyond my strength — and the all powerful, in mercy to my Sufferings, at length was gracioufiy pleased to 
inspire 
The p’atai Deception. 
171 
ihspire me, with new thoughts and other y/ishes, though obtained at the loss of health and life, how thankful I am to providence for the blessing. — I love Mr. Featherstone, with my dying breath I bless him, but love him without offence : as a being of another world, to which I am departing, and where it may be the happy province assigned me, to hover over and protect him, as his guardian angel — the pleasing thought will cheer me, in the hour of dissolution : — which to those, the best prepared, is not without its terrors : let me hasten to the more material part of this letter, least my weakness prevent me from explaining myself as I could wish; — I have endeavoured to make the best use in my power, of Mr. featherstone’s bounty a little 1 had saved out of my income, but assisting some wwthy objefls, who I 2 ' were 
172 
The Fatal Deception. 
were unfortunate, and without friends and the very great length of my illness has reduced my little bank So low, I fear there will be Scarce Sufficient left, to defray the last expenses, incurred on try 
account. -- -- Satisfied of my respedled 
friends generosity and goodness, I am notwithstanding entirely easy on that account, assured should there be found any little deficiencies, they will not be forgot. 
'The Securities for the principal (as the money was vested in my name,) I thought proper to direct, should be transmitted to you, together with my Will : which [ was informed was necessary, to make the restitution valid. — But as I am convinced you never wished for the restitution of a donation, made with So much delicacy, I have bequeathed it 
to 
The Fatal Deception. 173 
to the first of your children, for whom it is my earnest request, you will accept it, the value cannot be an object, but I most humbly offer if, as the last proof of my reverence for its parents. 
? — I have happily no refiedions, how com ’ for table that relation to my Soul, none who have a right to condemn my errors nor any that need my pecuniary remem • brance. 
Mr. Featherstone will find five hun pounds left to him, in trust, it was presented me by Lord morson for an attempt, I blush to recoiled, iny imprudent conduct was perhaps the occasion of. — I have lest the names of Some, few worthy people here, who have Supplied to me, the want of friends and relations; to tliose I have desired Some little memorandum of a brokenhearted girl I 3,, may 
174- 
The Fatal Deceptto?:. 
'may be presented, to the kind and, endearing woman, in whose house I have tound an asylum against ssander and reproach to whoseaffeftion I amindebtedfor a rhousand indulgent attentions, I wish Something more considerable, (not exceeding two hundred pound, for herself and family, at present in narrow circumstances.) stis, this good creature, will receive my last breath, and administer peace to my Soul, in the fearful moment. 
Assure Mr. Featherstone, that I die with a thorough contrition for my past indiscretions; — that my last prayers will be for him : but that if ever he esteemed me, or pays the least regard to my memory. — I entreat him to forget every trace of our 'unhappy connexion, So far as he may be generous enough to condemn 
himihf' 
The Fatal Deception. 
175 
hims. is, as the objeftfrom wheneb Sprunf^ my misconducl. — I was more culpable, than he, could he be blamed for bemg amiable, or that I could not help thinking him So? — one last request to you my dearest madam, will conclude all the worldly affairs, I have left to adjust, I have Sealed up a lock of my hair, direcced' to you his my wish, will you condescend to wear a ring in remembrance os one, whom fortune has been Severe to, who gladly resigns her existance, to him who gave it who dies full of gratitude for your uncommon goodness, and whoseprayers are direded, for your longcontinuedhappiness here, and an everlasting felicity hereafter. 
P. SMITH. 
I 4 
Mr. 
jyfi The Fatal Deception.. 
Mr. FEATHER STONE, 
WILLIAM COOEER, 
* London. 
^AMBERT lies dangeroussy ill at my house! If you wish to See our poor friend, lose not a moment’s expedition, the express I Send with this, will Scarce allow himself necessary refreshment till he meets you — the physicians pronounce his recovery Scarce possible, he may perhaps live till your arrival, let your friendship instruct you how to ad! poor unhappy Lady Charlotte is hourly expected, in her Situation, health Scarce reestablished — • 
The Fatal Deception. 
177 
ed — what will be the consequence? miss i.ambert too — but what does these complaints avail, come my dear Cooper, if it is but in compassion to me, who am half dillradted. — Patty is at relh, and I find my wife Sent the poor girl’s last letter, to Lady louisa, you will then judge from the circumstances there represented, what must be my Seelings! our house indeed may be Said to be, the house of mourning; a few days ago So happy — how frail are the enjoyments of life; a fatal deception has involved us all in this distress, but I have not time for explanations,, unhappy Mrs. Bruce ^ why, ah why! did shenot — but tis too late, hasten up my valued friend, to partake and alleviate, the Sorrows of your sincere, 
J. FEATHERSTONE. 
N. B. Come to Mrs. egerton’s house where you will receive directions. 
I 5 WILL[ 
[ The Fatal Deception. 
WILLIAM COOPER, 
T O 
EDWARD COOPER, Elq; 
My dear Father, 
London. 
ry^ 
H E heaviest tidings lose Something of their weight, when the knowledge ^ 
gives ease to painful anxiety; -- -- our * 
friend’s recovery is impossible, the dis traclion of everybody around me, general and violent; no longer able to continue Spedlator of the tragic Scene I have just quittedi am retired to communicate to you, as well as the oppressed state 
of 
Tke Fatal Deception. 179 
'of my mind will give me leave, the cause from whence our present misfortunes and the future unhappy prospcfts, have originated. — You may naturally conceive, how disjointed must be my account, when even in this private apartment, (featlierstone’s library) I am still within hearing of heart rending sighs, which break upon me, from every quarter of the house — ah Sir! how dearly we pay for the pleasures of friendship, when subje(5t to the distras, the melancholy ossice.s, of that duty impressuponus.. 
miss Lambert and I, arrived in gros venor square, wshiere agreeable to sea therstone directions, a Servant was in waiting, who instantly flew to give his' master notice; — my distressed compardon appeared Superior to fatigue, or the Support nature demanded, upon the road, a 16 glass 
io The Fatal drceptionr 
glass of wine and a piece of biscuir, at two different places, was the whole I could prevail upon her to taste, during our journey; — Featherstone Soon joined us, and instantly deprived us of every ray of hope, a certainty of ou r misfortune was too much for miss Lambert: — she fainted, and while every means was used to bring her to herself, by the kind Mrs. egerton; Featherstone gave me a short account of the cruel mistake, we have So lorig been Suffered to continue in; — it will sill you, with equal surprise and concern; — our friend is not the Son of the 
jr • 
late Mr. Lambert; but finds m Mrs. Bruce a mother, and owes his birth to a Mr. Allan, lately deceased at Lishon, Soon after his arrival, from a long residence in the East Indies. — Mrs. Egerton undertook to acquaint miss Lambert, 
of 
The Fatal Deception. 
rs^r 
os these circumstances, and feather stone and I proceeded to his house. 
Never shall I forget the horror of this interview, my friend, emaciated, pale, weak, and apparently at his last hour; — distressed Lady Charlotte, upon her knee by his bedside, her eyes'sometimes, Suppliantly addressed to heaven, her head then Sank by despair upon his pillow at my entrance, without showing any great attention to me, her eyes were turned to the door, as if expecting the entrance of another person : — poor Lambert, (Such while he still lives, must I call him) showed by a feeble Smile, the satisfa(5tion my presence gave him, and in. a voice Scarce articulate, thanked me for my last kind attention, to him; my resolution failed me, and I burst into^r tears y — he entreated me not to add to' 
his 
i82 
The Fatal Deception. 
his distresis, and addressing Lady char loee, “my revert'd wise, (laid he) may I “beg you will let Cooper and I, have a few moment’s private conversiition, it is for “your advantage, 'for the advantage of “our little boy.” — He alarmed me by his agitation, which I feared might hurry on the crisis we So much dreaded; — her ladyship, the picture of resignation and despondence, was led out by Feather hone; I Seated myself by his bedside. 
After Some little hesitation, he Said, I die, my dear Cooper, but I have the Satisfaction of recommending to the care of my friends, my poor unhappy Charlotte, and my dear help less infant; — be to the one a brother, to the other a friend, dire<5lor and guardian; — Support the Spirits of my wretched wife, under that confiid, 
“which 
The Fatal drceptioit, 
>83 
** which the unbounded affection she has “ever shown me, makes me Sear will be “violent. — My mother, (and he sighed) “See her when she arrives, your friend“ “will have an ample field, in the “relief you administer to the afflicted“ “my name, receive her blessing, tell “her, how truly I pity the distress shj^ “has Suffered; the Sorrow she must Seel, “when she hears the event of her unhap “py Secret, she has my dying prayers, “and if it does not Sound improper, “my forgiveness for that error, which “has embittered my whole life, and re“ “me to what you See.” — 'After Some pause he continued; — “when I “received the pacquet, my mother Sent “me, you may readily guess the agita“ “of my Spirits; fearful to alarm “Lady Charlotte, I endeavoured for a ‘‘ while, to keep her in ignorance of the 
‘‘ change 
is The 
Fatal Eeception'. 
t 
“change it made in my Situation, wlsh ing to do everything just to my wife,, “as well as to my beloved Lucy; — ah “Cooper! the apprehension of my feej “ing an incestuous passion, for that dear “girl, miust at once account for my past “extraordinary conduo:, but of that “by and by;. I immediately came to “town, took the advice of counsel, “laid open every circumstance, as le“ “in the pacquet, which I have “consigned to your care, and fortunate“ “got all my affairs legally Settled,. 
besore the disorder of my mind threw “me into my present illness; — I am pos“ “(my mother Says) of great “riches to your prudence, honour and “friendship, I repose the care of my “Son and 'his fortune; — I have joined “Featherstone and wilson in executo ship with you, that the office may be 
attend 
The. Fatal Deception. 1s5 
“attended with less trouble to, you all; “— if the fortune lest me by my late ‘‘ found parent, is So considerable, as “is expressed in my mother’s account, “I could wish an equivalent might be “given to the amiable Lucy, for the “Berkshire estate, if it is agreeable to ‘‘ her to part with it, on those terms: “as a part os it was fettled on my wife, and consequently will Save much trou“ “tenants have behaved with “a respedtsul affection to my family, “and I should be glad it might be con“ “in it, for their sakes; — but this“ “depend upon miss lambert’s. “direction; let my boy if he lives, take “upon him the name of Lambert, in“ “into his breast a confidence for “you and his other guardians, recom “mend humanity to his dependants, y and a tenderness to their wants, let him 
beware 
rsb 
Tdie Fatal Deception. 
beware of injustice, of distressing the, neceffitou.9, or being guilty of deception — if my fortune has that extent, I am to believe, there will be Sulficient to discharge the Sums, I have devised in my will; if it should be still more considerable, the Surplus I have left at my mother’s shle disposal; burr should it fall short, your prudence and justice must proportionate the loss equally amongst the legatees.” 
O G 
With many interruptions and much difficulty, he delivered the" above, when having looked at me with earnestness, and pressed my hand, which was weakly held in his, he added — “May I without “offence, without gisilt, inquire how “you left that dear girl, 'I have So often “fondly called my Lucy r” — ‘ She is “all affliction— — “then knows our 
“m is 
The Fatal Deception'. 
is; 
“misfortune” — She does” -- - “Deli “■ to her upon your return, the ten“ “wishes I am at liberty to present.” He appeared greatly flurried be com“ “my dear James, Mist Lam“ “is nearer than you imagine; if it “would not affect her, and Lady Char“ “too much; if mu could bear to “See her, if it would give you any Satis“ “I See not why you should be “refused an interview. — After many struggles within himself, he Said he believed it would be better avoided — “He could not See her, without giving “way to the effusions of a tenderness, it would be inhuman to make Lady “Charlotte a witness of.” — I was Sorry I “proposed it, as it So violently disturbed “his whole frame — I thought him visibly worse, and called in the rest of our friends Mrs. Featherstone in the mean ✓ time, 
ih8 The Fatal Deception. 
time, informed Lady Charlotte of Miss lambert’s being in town, and no Sooner was she apprized of our friend’s delicacy with respedt to the interview, than she insisted upon her being Sent for; their meeting was beyond measure afflicting! mutually ashing forgiveness, for what neither could be Said to be in blame. 
By the packet I Send, you will find Lambert studious to put an end to the Solicitations of his friends and Lady charlotte’s hopes, had desperately made her his confident, in the passion he thought he had criminally conceived for miss Lambert; her ladyship shocked with horror, at the knowledge of it, and not foreseeing the strangeness of the late dis covery, had as rashly, though generousty offered him her hand, as a means of conquering So fatal an attachment. 
By 
The Fatal Dzception. 
I $9 
By the copy of our friend’s letter, and her ladyship’s answer, which has been communicated to me, for your inspection — you will^erceive a clue to the extraordinary condu^''*6f this unfortunate couple, at and since their marriage, — I will not load Mrs. Bruce with reproaches, she will be Sufficiently to be pitied, though Surely she has been greatly wrono; -- -- 
I am called! — a shriek foretells me what I am to expect- -- -- fears are realised 
1- — I found Featherstone and his wife conveying Lady Charlotte and Lucy out of the apartment, with as few signs of life, in appearance, as our departed friend — he had just taken an affedlionate leave of his infant, and his death was So unexpedled (at that moment) that it was with difficulty the Smiling innocent, could be withdrawn from his arms. 
May 
190 
The Fatal Deception. 
May peace and happiness be his portion in future, if it be not an offence po. censure the decrees of providence, the hand of fiite has here been unjustly Severe to him. — I send off this letter by my own Servant, together with the packets, which will explain to you thx whole of tsiis unfortunate business. 
I pity what the fusceptible heart of my father will Suffer, at the intelligence I Send; and fly (vainly I fear) to offer that comfort I feel myself So little capable of bestowing. — Esteem me while I live, my best of fathers, 
ymur ever affectionate, and dutiful, 
WILLIAM COOPER. 
Mr. 
The f^tal Deception. ^ ii 
Mr. / L A M B E R T, 
TO 
Lady C H A R L O T T E WILTON, ^(luclofed in Mr. cooper’s Packet 
My Dear Madam, 
OU must necessarily be'furprised, upon receiving an address from me, and still more So, when I acquaint you with the occasion. Ceremony should be abolished, when plain dealing may possibly have a Salutary effect; I will not then attempt to apologise for the liberty I now take, as the dangerous confidence I am about to place in your ladyship, ought. V Suf 
192 ' The Fatal Deception.’ 
Sufficiently to convince you of my res pedlful esteem. 
Be not displeased with Some of your friends, if they have endeavoured to mislead me into the belief of your honouring me with a particular degree of partiality. 
What reason should I have to be vain! was there just cause for Such a fuspicion; and was I alas, in a Situation to benefit, by your favourable Sentiments — vanity, powerful as it generally is, will Scarce permit me to suppose there can be any real grounds, Sor the hints I have received; but least the Sensibility of your heart, may have made you conceive any trifling impression, from Some casual appearances of justice or generosity in mine; 
let 
The Fatal Deception.' 
m 
let me beg of you to deface every advantageous idea, and look upon me, a wretch as miserable in himself, as unworthy the Smallest degree of your attention — * though the Severest stroke of misfortune may have in appearance Softened my manners, I am by nature haughty, impetuous, and impatient of control — Should a disposition of this Sort be allied .to the gentleness and'sweetness of yours? — If you have ever been inclined to think better of me than I deserve, I conjure you drive me from your memory! my evil destiny must preponderate, and every connexion with me be fatal— — am lost as far as there can be perdition, and out of the power even of your excellence to Save. — Let me hasten to unfold the dreadful Secret I have to communicate — I do not tear it' from my breast, without the utmost pain; the greatness of its confe * vol, III K quence, 
IC 
The Fatal Deception’. 
quence, ought to render it inviolably sacred— — expose it to your knowledge, merely to prevent your unhappin^ss; and be assured, I no longer live, than you are just to the confidence I repose in you. 
No stranger to Some of the events of my life, your compassion possibly might have been excited, by the pain and inconveniences I Sustained, from the effects of my unfortunate affair at Lishon — had I then fallen, what misery had I avoided! and your gentle breast never been inter ested'in my favour. — How must I wound your delicacy by a recital of my unfortunate, my criminal — yes. Lady Charlotte! monstrous as it appears, my Lucy was too lovely, and her unhappy brother,. too susceptible; her attendance apd care, rescued me from the grave fatal attendance! from that time I cherished 
an 
The Fatal drceptiofr^ ^ 195 
an excess of tenderness for my Sister, which I foolishly supposed to proceed from gratitude, and fraternal love — time has long since convinced me, of the dreadful mistake -- .no longer able to ref pe6t her within the limits nature prescribes — I adore her, with the ardour and impetuosity of a lover!. I am consumed by a flame that destroys me; which I am not able to repel, and that will I hope, very Soon put a period to my life. — Victim to an unwarrantable passion, think me not more culpable than I am — I have studioussy endeavoured to avoid her, have tore myself from her company and endearments; though my heart bled at; the disquiet I Subjedted it to — no longer Safe to continue near her, I have determined to fly her sight for ever; but the execution of such a resolution will require time, and must be conducted with cau k 2 tion. 
igs The Fatal Deception. 
tisn, — So far I am free from censure, though convinced of her uncommon regard, and tenderness of disposition, I never attempted a disclosure of my Sentiments, notwithstanding the violence of my disorderly pashon Suggested, that nature might have acted as erroniotisiy in her breast as mine, and that she perhaps might have returned an affection, which however convinced of its impropriety, I have never yet been able to find my heart viewed any repugnance to. 
mistress of my Secret, you will not wonder I should dare to make an offer of my hand and person, if your ladyship, after reading my letter, should condescend to accept me. * — 1 have given my word to Cooper, to agree to that condition — how little have I to apprehend? — and Tave insisted upon it, never to have any other proposition made me. 
I am 
i’he Fatal Deception. 197 
I am far from insensible to your ladyship’s great beauty, goodness, and accomplishments; and should have been, I firmly believe, one of the happiest of niankind, had I been acquainted with your excellencies, prior to my unfortunate attachment. — Did I suppose you could think of me, after this candid confession, without horror, I would endeavour to find more arguments, to convince you of the necessity of a more worthy eledlicn. — At any rate, was it possible to divest myself of my criminal passion — would a divided heart become me to offer, or your ladyship to accept? that you may be happy, in as high a degree, as I am the contrary, is the earnest wish of'your ladyship’s, most respedtful, and obliged humble Servant, 
JAMES LAMBERT. 
K 
Her 
icis The Fatal Dsceptioj?. 

Her L A D Y S H I p’s A N S W E K, 
With the following Letter from Mrs. Bruce 
\ 
contained In the Packet. 
Sir, 
OP 
A H E contents of yours, did indeed Surprise, and confound me. — Gracious Heaven! to what are you reserved? if providence permits you to encourage an unwarrantable inclination, and though conscious of the criminality and impropriety, you can yet avow that your heart feels no repugnance. 
Your 
The Fatal Deceptiok. 
199 
'Your Secret shall be inviolate; but it will destroy my repose — why did any considerations for my happiness, induce you to disclose it to me? — ah, too inconsiderate friends! why did they expose my wtakness? you are generoiis, though unfortunate. — Why Lambert, did they give you the additional concern, of knowing yoursels the involuntary cause of charlotte’s distress— — Sir, those friends Saw my partiality for you, long before my inexperienced heart was acquainted wdth it; your amiable qualifications, not your person, was the object of my admiration — love, followed esteem, by Such gentle gradations, that I had insensibly advanced far in the first, without conceiving it any more, than a considerable degree of the latter — but you are not blameable; you never gave the (lightest encouragement ta my folly; you never deceived me by K 4. afieaed 
200 
The Patal Deception. 
affe<fi: ed tenderness or regard; to myself only, infatuated girl! can 1 attribute my unhappiness. 
I shudder at what you have made me acquainted with! from my Soul, I pity your distress, and tremble for your future destiny. Since the receipt of your fatal letter, I have avoided all company — my Sisters, who have been acquainted by Cooper, that you have made me an offer of your hand, (on condition I choose to accept it) expect with impatience, to hear my determination — how am I to adl? So Situated, I can receive no advice from those, whose greater knowledge and abilities, might in other matters assist me — I will take another day to refie^st, and entreat the beneficent power, to inspire my heart with judgement, and bless my resolution 
with good fortune. 
Instead 
The Fatal deceptio^t. cri 
Instead of a continuance of your esteem, 1 dread procuring your detestation; 1 fear the censure of the world, for a determination, which has a distant prospeft of Satisfadlion and peace of mind to you without the Smallest expectation of hap piness resulting to mysels; — the communication of your situation, entitles me to advice I the offer you have made admits trie to accept or decline; — if you regard your honour, character or future happiness; — if you value the reputation of your too engaging sister; exert your utmost efforts to banish every guilty idea; — sty her presence, and conscious of the rectitude of ycur intentions, providence may in time restore that tranquillity you despair of obtaining; — we are told, calamity and distress, are frequently in flited upon us, by an omnisdent agent, in order to give us a real blessing, result 
K 5 
mg 
202 The Fatal Deception.’ 
ing from the pleasing refiedlion that we have done our duty, and suffered evil with becoming fortitude and resignation. 
You might very naturally conceive,; by painting your temper and disposition in the worst colours, and communicating to me a Secret, which could not but fill me with confusion, you took the certain; method of obtaining my absolute refusal; — but you did not know the extent of my regard or resoiution; — conscious of the purity of my affection for you, and impressed with the strongest idea of your' good qualities; — conscious allb, both from my own and my Sisters observations, that you had no heart to bestow; — the world (before your last dreadful intelligence) should not have tempted me to an alliance; — as affairs at present are circumstanced, upon the most mature defi 
beration 
The Fatal Deceptions 203- 
beration, however much to your astonishment, I here Solemly tender you my hand; — I destinemyself a Sacrifice, to the chance of restoring you to yourself, — with any other, object I would not attempt to gain poffeshon of a divided heart, — in the present case, I think the endeavour to do it meritoriousmy good intentions may fail of having the desired effect, but if I am never able to acquire your love, from your justice; my conduct.. enforce esteem. 
I have acquainted my Sisters and Mr. Cooper, and have wrote an account of it to Lord Wilton, he will be proud of your alliance; — I have received the congratulations of my friends, but they are tindured with a degree of Solemnity, (from the observations, which have been maeie of my embaraffment and distress) K 6' which 
204 The Fatal Deception 
which makes my heart throb with apprehension. — Your aunt. Seems not to approve my determination; but it is now too late to retradt, and in hopes of a happier event, than my fears will give me leave to expedb; I am resigned and prepared for the worst. Sensible of the rectitude of my intentions, I refer the issue to that providence, whose pity I emplore, whose assistance I entreat. — Could I but be the means of your tranquillity, how happy would be your, till then distressed. 
CHARLOTTE WILTON. 
Mrsi 
The Fatal Deception. 
205 
Bfrs. B R U C E, at L i s b o nt 
O 
Mr, LAMBERT, Stretton Gbeen^, 
A 
T length, my dearest James, X am permitted to indulge parental’feelings, and for the first time, call you my Son; ray beloved, ray now acknowledged Son! — an engagement I imprudently entered into, and a Sacred obligation which I more imprudently agreed to take, to preserve an inviolable Secrecy, has hitherto wrapped up your fate in mystery and mistake j 
ao6 
The Fatal deceptiorr; 
take; — how happy would it have made me, had it been in my power to have communicated this to you before your marriage with Cady Charlotte; I fondly wished to See you united with your cousin, my dearest Lucy, it is now too late and I ought to be Satisfied, you have obtained So deserving a wife; — but let me no longer protradt the explanation, you; must ardently desire to hear. 
Your revered,, and hitherto reputed father, Mr. Lambert, after the death of his first wife in Portugal,, returned to England for a few months, in the course of which time, he became acquainted with my sister and me. — Mr. Lambert being agreeable to my sister, an alliance was the conseqlienee; during his stay in England, he renewed acquaintance with, our worthy friend Mr. Cooper; and a 
Soon 
The Fatal Deception. 
207' 
Soon as his limited time was expired, embarked for Portugal, where I accompanied them. 
About this time I commenced acquaintance with Mr. Allen, who, ^, however culpable he may have been in condikst, was your father and fny husband;; — Allen was personable and engaging, I young and unthinking, he had art toi,, the licentiousness of his principles, and address to make himself in my eyes, appear a perfcdt and valuable character, 
. — Mr. Lambert and old Allen, had been connected in business, but upon Some unjust dealings of allen’s, Mr. Lambert was disgusted, and an open and avowed quarrel was carried on with the greatest inveteracy, on the part of your grand father; — this fuspended, but could not destroy the connexion, betwixt your father 

2o8- 
The Fatal Deception 
there and myself; — I Sincerely loved’ him, i, heat that time was fond of me, and' being under no conscientious restraints determined at all events to marry me, which prejudiced in his favour as I was, he did not find much difficulty to persuade 
me to, -- -- -- His father was rich 
and avaricious, we could not hope for his consent, or that even Mr. Lambert would approve of it; — instigated by these considerations, deceived in his character, and blinded by my affeffion, I agreed to a private marriage; — how dearly have I Suffered for my imprudence : at thehouse of one of his friends, (wshere I went disguifed) I gave my hand to your father, in the presence only of his own Servant, and the clergyman of the factory who married us; a man, I had afterwards the misfortune to hear, was divested of principle, and zealoufiy devoted 
The Fatal deceptiorr. 
'.ocf 
voted to Mr. Allen. -- -- As my fortune 
was in Mr. lambert’s hands, and could not be withdrawn, without a discovery of our engagement, which he did not choose to do, he appeared Satisfied with the possession of my person and afiedion, in order to prevent his Schemes being frustrated, he'persuaded me, as a mark of my regard, if I wished to make him happy, to enter in a most Solemn obligation, that I would not disclose my marriage without his consent; — this, for Some I'pecious reasons he advanced; my tenderness also induced me to agree to, from this Source may I attribute all my distress, and anxiety; this it was, thatr has So long obliged me, to avoid discovering myself to you, laid me under the necessity of breaking my word with my Sister, and letting Mr. Lambert die in ignorance of the deceit that was imposed 

210 The fj^tal deceptiojt. 
posed upon him, may tvhat I have suf* fered be considered a Sufficient atonement for a deception, I was unwillingly obliged to carry on; — andmay you, my dear James, ' never feel any inconvenience, in conse quence of your father’s faults, or your mother’s indiscretion, 
A few months cooled the ardour of his love, and he Soon asterwards agreed to a proposal your grandfather had made, to go in a very advantageous situation to India; — this his inhumanity Suffered him to determine upon, without acquainting me with his intentions; he left me, to Sorrow and despair, taking with him his friend the chaplain, and his Servant, the only vitness of my imprudent connexion— — that, had I been inclined to break my oath, every possibility off evidence to Secure my reputation, was 
wrested 
The Fatal Deception. 
2 I i 
wrested from me. — The knowledge of his cruelty, gave me inconceivable dif tress, Scarce I thought to be equalled; — • but when I afterwards found myself pregnant, it was too great to bear: — a Severe fit of illness was the consequence, during which an affair happened, that gave me Some hopes of avoiding the shame and inconveniences, my situation threatened me with. 
Mr. Lambert had great transaftions at the brazil’s, and Some very particular affairs, in that country, required his particular attendance. — He was obliged to tear himself from the arms of my dear Sister, for many months; after he was sailed, I communicated to her,, the condition I was in, and begged her assistance, and protection: : generousty believed, what I chose to assure her, without 
212 The Fatal deceptiorr.. 
out preshng me to a breach of my dreadful engagement — after many Schemes had been proposed, it was determined, my sister, who had once before Suffered a miscarriage,, should again feign herself with child; — my attendance would then be natural, and her pretended ill health, was a Sufficient reason to account for her confinement at home, which my recovery from delivery, but a period to, and re leased us from the constraint we a(5led under — a faithful servant, was the only one we entrusted with the secret— — her death a little time afterwards, freed us from fear of detedtion; — Mr. Lambert,, upon his return, received you as the choicest gift of providence, his joy was beyond expression, and if I have neglected executing the dying request of a beloved Sister, Mr. lambert has avoided the mortification, of knowing himself deceived t 
Tiie Fatal Deception. 
213 
ceived; — a mortification, which I am convinced would have had the most violent effects— — year aster Mr. lambert’s return, my Sister gave birth to Lucy, remorse for the part she had taken in the deception, and apprehensions for the consequence, which she now feared might injure her own child, preyed continually upon her Spirits, and brought her to the grave, a \si6tim to the effects of my indiscretion, and my hushand’s barbarity. — On her deathbed she conjured me, to declare every circumstance to her hnshand, as Soon as possible after her death, and implore his forgiveness; — she recommended, her dear Lucy to my care, and kissing you, my dear James, pardoned with an embrace, the innocent cause of her misfortunes; — she died in Mr. lambert’s arms, whose grief upon So trying an occasion, as the loss of a wife tenderly 
beloved. 
214 The Fatal Dec£ption. 
beloved, is not to be described, at length time and the caresses of your lovely cousin and you, wore of by degrees, the Severity of his affliction— — delayed from time to rhyme, the information my Sister had desired, deterred by the considerations of my oath, as well as shame for my indiscretion, until Mr. lambert’s affection for you, had arrived to that pitch, I did not then dare to risque a discovery, where he would So Severely feel the disappointment. 
Highly Sensible, how Imprudent, (not to call it by a worse name,) my conduct has been, the tenderness I have ever, shown to my dear Lucy, is the only, thing that can be considered, an extenuation of my offence — I knew your generosity and justnels of Sentiment, whenever I was empowered to make the discovery. 
The Fatal Deception. 
215 
covery, would induce you to relinquish a fortune, to which you had no right; — I wished to encourage the tenderness you and your cousin. Seemed to have for each other, and hoped, I fondly con fess, to have brought about a happy union betwixt you; — your melancholy (which alarmed every one else) gave me pleasure; as I believed it to proceed from an attempt to hide a love, which you thought criminal 
Your very Sudden resolntion, of marrying into Lord Wiltons family, infinitely distressed me, and to my grief, I must confess, I avoided, what in Spite of the Solemn obsigations, rashly entered into, I ought to have done, viz. making a disclosure os the fatal necessity, which had induced me to impose upon your reputed father. Suffering you unjustly to 
poffess 
2i6 The Fatal Deceptions 
poffess your cousin’s estate, and uniteyour sels to a woman, who in point of birth and fortune was your Superior. 
miserably fiudluating betwixt the measures I should pursue, I Suffered your marriage to take place; — the anxiety and distress of mind I have Suffered since, is not in my power to describe; — I heard with pleasure, mingled with regret the Situation of Lady Charlotte, which promised an encrease of family; — I could not butforesee the distress,! should plunge you into by a discovery, and the addi 'tional guilt I should incurr, by still keeping the fatal Secret! — what would have been the result of my deliberations, I will not. Say, had not providence most happily drawn me out of my embarrassrnent. — Some intellegence I received from Portugal, induced me to repair immediately 
to 
The Fatal Deception. 217 
to Lishon, I can easily guess what must have been the surprise of our friends, and particularly of you, my dear James, and our Lucy, wdien you heard of my being gone, and when the letters I left, were found to contain no Satisfadlory accounts of the reason of my voyage; — I durst not hazard taking a persoiial leave, least I might have been distressed to answer many questions, that very naturally w'ouid have been asked me. -- -- -- It 
remains for me now, to account for the motives of my voyage, and why, I make a disclosure of an imprudence, that has So long remained an impenetrable Secret. 
Rejoice with me that your father did not die in the principles, he too long for his own happiness and ours, had encouraged; — weight of years and infirmity, inspired him with ressedions more wor vol. III L thy 
is The Fatal Deception, 
thy a Christian, he recolledled with horror his inhumanity to me, and resolved to do me every justice in his power, the clergyman, (his confidant) licentious and abandoned in his lifetime, at his last moments endeavoured to atone for the mischiefs he had done, by advising my husband to persist in his intention, of offering me reparation for the injuries I had Suffered; — He took the most vigour ous means, to Secure the extensive fortune he had amassed, with which, he was determined to embark for Portugal the first Safe opportunity, but finding his health and constitution entirely destroyed, and afraid his good intentions might be frustrated, if he did not Survive the voyage, he had our marriage publicly declared, and the certificate of it, most effedlualfy authenticated. 
these 
The Fatal Deception. 
2 19 
these measures pursued, hedispatched his domestic, (the person I mentioned, who had been present at our union) in a vessel that was expefled to arrive Some time before the ship, in which he had taken a passage for himself; — he gave directions to this trusty Servant, to make the most diligent inquiries for me, but not to discover his intentions, to any one but myself; — in case of his death, he had consigned his fortune (in trust for me) to two very worthy men, merchants of great probity and honour; — his Servant found out by Donna clara’s family, that I was in England, and through that channel, got intelligence where to direct to me; — the packets I received was from him, who prudently recollecting the precarious state of his master’s health; — took upon him, to give me the strongest hints, that my immediate presence at L 2. Lishon 
220 The Fatal Deception. 
Lishon was necessary; — in consequence of this intimation, distraded with my ov/n unhappy refieftions, I determined to repair thither, and arrived about a fortnight before my poor unhappy hus band, his health considerably impaired, but entirely confirmed in his principlesj our meeting was affecting, his behaviour delicate, tender and full of contrition : need I tell my dear Son, I had no longer any resentment, or remembrance of my 
former grievances — how -- -- -- -- anxioussy 
he wished for a sight of you! — but jtistly Sensible he approached the hour of dissolution, he e; xerted himself to the last moment, and fixed his fortune, (encreased by his father’s, lately dead) beyond the possibility of any one’s disputing your Succession to the whole. — You have it now in your power to do ample justice to your amiable cousin, which I am Sure 
you 
The Fatal Deception. 
221 
you will not neglect a moment, after the intelligence I'send you; — if riches can contribute to your happiness, you must be effectually So, as your fortune will be more than doubled; — I have no occasion to desire my darling Son to make a proper use of it. 
An account of your father’s deac^ must close my melancholy story pay a tributary tear, my dear James, to the memory of an unfortunate parent, who has So greatly Suffered for his jiast indiscretions;; who thought it his Severest punissiment that he could not embrace a Son, possessed of So worthy 
a character- -- -- -- is gone, my dearest 
James, but has left us the consolation that he atoned as much as possible, for every past miscondikst. 
Donna 
22 2 The Fatal Deception'. 
Donna Clara, her husband and father, have shown me uncommon civilities and friendship; -*-! have letters to you and Lucy, which I hope to deliver very Soon, as I purpolc to embark in the next paequet. -- -- -- Receive my affectionate 
love and blessing, the Same is due to my dear Lucy; — deliver my regards to all our other friends, they, I hope, will join with you, in forgiving any inconveniences, the extraordinary circumstances I have been engaged in, may have occasioned. 
MARGARET ALLEN. 
Mr. 
The Fatac Deception, 
223 
Mr. EDWARD COOPER. 
T O 
His S O N. 
My beloved William 
Hartley Point. 
G 
RENT indeed was my Surprise, abundant my concern, on the perusal of your pacquet: I Scarce know where my pity is most due, or what part of the unfortunate intelligence, has given me the highest distress; — but, let not my son’s friendship, though bestowed upon a most worthy young man; — let not concern for * L 4 his 

2«4 The Fatal Deception. 
his loss inspirc him with Sentiments acrimonious, or unjust. — If candour obliges us to condemn — in the present cafe it ought to be strongly mingled with our compassion; consider Mrs. Bruce as a woman, however culpable, still more unhappy, she has already Suffered much inward anxiety, by refiedling on past indiscretions, — to what an extremity of Sorrow will she be lifted, by a knowledge of.iihe consequences — yet has she not been the only imprudent; — - his true, had she been more communicative, possibly Mt. lambert’s marriage might not have taken place, and consequently this unhappy catastrophe avoided; — but your unhappy friend, was undoubtedly indilcreet, to rest the affair upon Lady charlotte’s decision, however unlikely its taking a turn. So contrary to his Sentiments. — Her Ladyship, not less reprehensible 
The Fatal Deception. 
2zi 
henfible, in her romantic acceptance of his hand, under the influence of Such a passion for another, and each os them wrong, in the precipitancy with which they Suffered it to be concluded; — my partiality will not let me exculpate even you from blame, who, I perceive, (though no doubt from worthy motives) warmly recommended the measure, — nature in her operations, cannot bear violence, but left to herself. Seldom mistakes the bias. 
If I Seem harsh, in my censures upon those I fo much love, and So sincerely commiserate, it is only with design to excite, the general compassion, for the unfortunate lady that appears most culpable; there are expressions in your letters, which glance too Severely upon Mrs. Bruce, with the remonstrance of a friend,. 
not 
22 5 The Fatal Dcceptiopt.' 
not the austerity of a father; — I wish you to recolledi:, we are at best, imperfect beings, prone to error, subject to mistake, and by the frailty of our nature, reciprocally the objects of for giveness; Mrs. Btuce Seems to have erred without intention, the consequence has Subjedled her to the most acute af fiidion, and ought to make her respeft able, in misfortune. 
I must with more Solemnity, censure that expression, which arraigns the wisdom and justice, os an inscrutable power. — r It is permitted us to bewail, but not to condemn its dispensations, a re fiedtion on the instability of Sublunary enjoyments, is the most cheering application, under disappointments. — The voyage of life, is gone through with various success, but stis not always the 
calm 
The Fatal Deception. 
227 
calm and unruffled one, is most profitable; the boisterous, though alarming and Severe, excites our attention, demands our application, and Secures us from that destruction, in which flattering appearances too frequently involve the heedless and unwary; — adversity and misfortune, are the storms we have to dread, in our passage through mortality; and by being upon our guard, are prepared for their attack, and enabled to encounter them to advantage. 
Let the affection for our depaited friend, be transferred to his family and dependants; our good offices employed in administering consolation; and let the misfortune we deplore, give added force to our compassion for those, who, with a valued relation, loose perhaps, the very 
means 
22 § The Fatal Deceptiont.* 
means of Subfistance — 'in short, let us withr out repining. Submit to the dispensations of an all wise providence! who, under the appearance of Severity, administers benefit. 
Is it improbable, had your worthy" friend survived his illness, that the violence of his passions, would have involvi ed his family and friends in still greater concern, than that now felt for his death? — relieved from the dreadful apprehension of an incestuous passion;; the Simple obligation of marriage, in this libertine age, have restrained him, from attempting to gain the affections of miss Lambert upon his own terms; when obstrudted by a rash engagement, from Seeking it on any other — her heart Softened by an accustomed tenderness for a man she thought lier brother — would she 
have 
The Fatal Dlception.' 229 
have been able to have resisted the pcr suasive eloquence of him she loved, though employed in a bad cause? her affections might have Been gained, though her principles remained unseduced — in either cafe, unhappiness and disorder must have followed. 
I know not a greater incentive, to our patient acquiescence under calamity, than the concluding lines of my favourite author; which I give you without apology. 
And see! 
’tis come, the glorious morn! the second birth Of heaven and earth! awakening nature hears The new creating word, and starts to life. 
In every height’ned form, from pain and death Tor ever free. The great eternal scheme, Involving all, and in a perfect whole Uniting, as the prospect wider spreads 
Te 
230 The Fatal Deception. 
To reafon’s eye refined, clears up apate. 
Ye vainly wise! ye blind presumptuous!! Confounded in the dust, adore that power. 
And wisdom oft arraign’d — see now the cause, Why unastiiining worth in secret liv’d, 
And died negleiled; why the good man’s stiare In life, was gall and bitterness of foul: 
Why the lone widow, and her orphans pin’d In starving solitude, while luxury In palaces, lay straining her low thought. 
To form unreal wants : why heaven born truth. And moderation fair, wore the red marks Of fuperstition’s scourge: : licens’d pain, 
That cruel spoiler, that embofom’d foe, 
imbitter’d all our bliss. Ye good distrefs’d! 
Ye noble few! who here unbending stand. 
Beneath life’s presture, yet bear up a while; 
And what your bounded view, which only favv A little part, deem’d evil, is no more. 
The storms of wint’ry time will quickly pafs. 
And one unbounded spring encircle all. 
thompson’s Seasons. 
Let justice, humanity, and benevolence, my dear William, be the invariable 
The fi^tai Deception. 231 
'He rule of your conduct, and patiently concur with the decrees of heaven. Accept the blessing of 
your affectionate father. 
RDWARD COOPER. 
F J N I S, 
BOOKS Printed for THOMAS JONES, at his Circulating Library in the Strand, opposite Hungerford Market. 
.DTSEY; or. The Caprices of Fortune, 
3 vol. on a fine writing paper, price 7s. 6d. sewed. 
IL Fatal Compliance, or Miss Constantia Pembroke, i vol. on a ■writing paper, price 5s. sewed. 
III fatareffecis of Deception. 3 vol. price 7s. 6d. sewed. 
IV .Involuntary Inconstant, or Miss Franefort. z vol. price 5s. 
V Impartial Obfeiwations on the Reigns of the .Kings of Grent Britain, of the illustrious House of .Hanover. By the late Charles Brent. Price 6d. 
VI Love at Firll: Sight; or. The History of Miss Caroline Stanhope, 3 vol. price 7s. 6d. fewicd. 
VII Memoirs of Mr. Walcor, a Gentleman of Yorkshire, and his Family. 2 vol. price 5s. sewed. 
VIII Precipitate Choice; or. The History of Lord oltoiy and Miss Rivers. 2 vol. price 5s. sewed. 
IX Succinff Account of a Machine for the Preternatural Curvature of the Spine. By D. Merande, M. D. Price 6d. 
X Transmigrations D’hermes Roman Philofophique, par L’auteur D’abaffai, The Vizirs, c. Price 3s. sewed. 
XI Vicissitudes of Fortune; or. The History of Miss Sedley. 2 vol. price 5s, sewed. 
XII Voyages and Adventures of the Chevalier Dupont. 4 vol. price I os. sewed. 
XIII Wander (Jack) his Adventures. Price 2s. sewed. 
Where may be had. Price 5d. 
A Catalogue of the Library, containing all the New public.ltions, which are Lent to Read, by the Year, Quarter, or Single Book. 
Stationary Wares, children’s Books, and all Sorts of Plays. 
All Orders for New Books, punctually executed, on the (horteft Notice, and at the lowell Prices. 
1a. 

„js T ■’- 
V “^ 
- 
AK 
S 
Pa 
ni 
Pi I p2 
yc. 
f: ‘- 
Singer ♦.d75valsjo‘.'773^. V 3 
UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LIBRARIES 
RARE BOOK COLLECTION 
9 Aprisi 1934___________________________ 
V 


30220 
