trackingid: 
'"'0 
.ih 

8396ii' 

% 
>11 
indition Notes 
dtes/lnstructions: 
fn 'x\p5a 
ox $ 


BOOK COLLECTION 
LIBRARY 
UNIVERSITY' 
pennsylwvnia 
THE 
GODFREY F. SINGER MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY 
MR. AND MRS. JACOB SINGER 


\. 
CSC 
: '/1 ■ 


f 
■;; 

- - ^ r 
, - L ■ 
'; 
V r. ■ 
1 - ■' 
■• ' Vr - 
A.. 
viiadaa: 
-/.' - A: 
V: ■-:! 
ttvv: 
'i s'^" vv 
-, ^1 ■ - 
A:. ■itcr Ai - 

1 ■ ■' TN 
r 


', .i 
\ '.- - 
•- r,, - 
^ _; ( 
■ ': ' ', C ■ 
tl'l'i® 
'S ■- ' 

; J 
/ ■; ' Lr.; 
^ _ J.. - .'i 
- _ _ ...u - y -- .r 
■ ' ■. 

I 
NSN vs’^ i nv'" LV^; ^ vc 
"C ■'’ ' 
'CCS 
.......*....‘...‘ ■■-■'■, 
..■; ■. 
T H E 
FAVOURITES 
o F 
FELICITY. 
A 
N O V E L 
IN A SERIES OF LETTERS. 
By JOHN potter, M. B. Author os the Curate of Coventry, The Virtuous Villagers, cc. 
■quod verum atque decens euro et rogo, ct omnis in hoc sum. Horace 
what’s true and decent has employed my care, To please the fancy, and instruct the fair. 
IN THREE VOLUMES. 
VOL. I. 
Printed for W, Cass, lamb’s Conduit Street, Holborn; T. Secret, pall mall; and meltrs, Baldwin, Robinson, and Bew, pater nofler row. 
M DCC LXXXV 
.. - ’ ■ “r 

\ '■ - -- ’ 
T ' T ■ 
T' o 
L i 
_-... .^ : ■: J s 

^ - i; 
f' ' 
of Pa, Library 
m 
T O 
The F a I R - S E X 
O F 
GREAT BRITAIN. 
Ladies, 
‘tjch of your entertainment, of late years, has been derived from a Species of literary composition called Novels; but though the works of Fields ing, richard/on, Smolletf Goldsmith, and a few others, in this line of writing, deserve to be held in everlasting remembrance, for their tendency to promote innocent amusement, and to inspire every noble Sentiment and heroic virtue, it must e acknowledged that an incredible number 


VI 
DEDICATION. 
ber of trivial and vicious produffions, usurping the name of Novels, have lately poisoned the Springs of information; corrupted the heart; and left the mind un enriched in virtuous knowledge. 
In the following work, offered to your attention and patronage, I have ventured to depart from the common beaten track, and have endeavoured to remove the prejudices justly entertained against works of this nature, by attempting to refine your delicacy, to discriminate real and pretended virtues, and to direst your penetration to those desirable Sources of permanent felicity, which arisc from domestic pleasures, moral improvementj^ and immortal truth. 
Though I have thought it proper, for the interests of virtue and humanity, to 
address 
DEDICATION. 
Vll 
address mysels “more to the judgement than to the fancy, and to the feelings of the heart, rather than to the eagerness of curiosity, ” I would not have the vivacious part of the fair Sex suppose I do not Sometimes invite them to sit by silvery streams, to tread on enchanted ground, and to gather the beauteoug flowers of the imagination; for there is no danger in delineating the gayest features of the Soul under every emotion, when the heart is influenced by the genius of discretion. 
“The passions gently footh’daway. Sink to divine repose, and love and joy Alone are waking; love and joy, serene As airs that fan the fuminer. O! attend, who e’er thou art whom these delights can touch, Whose candid bosom the refining love 
Of 
VIII 
DEDICA ION. 
Of nature warms, O! listen to my song; 
And 1 will guide thee to her fav’rite walks, And teach thy solitude her voice to hear, 
And point her loveliest features to thy view, ” * 
^ Ahnjide. 
John Potter. 
THE 
THE 
FAVOURITES 
O F 
FELICITY. 
fi 
LETTER I. 
Doctor Belcour to Mr. Somerset. 
perdvahcqfile.^ May i, 1784. 
Bear Sir, 
HEN I Said I would die a bachelor, I did not think I should live till I were married But the omnipotent God of love has made me his captive, and I am bound for life 
* Shakespeare. 
vol. L B in 
2 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITIN 
in the Fetters of felicity. Like ancient Lroy, I have Sustained a ten years Siege, and am Subdued at last by the irresistible artillery of beauty and mental accomplishments. Not to keep you in suspence, I have the pleasure to inform you, I was married last week to that amiable woman your cousin Olivia, who is an ornament to her Sex, and an honour to human nature— — Sparkles in her eyes; on her countenance dwells inviting innocence; and her heart is the treasury of Social affe£lion. 
O! Somerset, how could I be insensible So long to the influence of the first, and most divine passion of the Soul I But, perhaps, it is for the best that it has been So. We are now at a period of life, when reason stidom fails to restrain and regulate the luxuriant Sallies of fancy and 
passion;; 
favourites of felicity. ^ 
passion; when sensibility is arrived at the criterion of maturity, and judgement prescribes the boundaries of enjoyment. Our love is now chaste and mutual: it is the wish of our hearts to give, as well as to receive delight | reciprocal complacency governs us in the conduff of all our actions; and every moment of intercourse exalting our opinion of each other, we rejoice at our union, and number ourselves among the favourites of Felic ty. 
“While life shall last, ehch moment we'll improve 
In equal gratitude, and mutual love.” * 
How imprudent are resolutions of celibacy! How inconsistent with the decree of Providence, the natural claim of the Sexes, and the universal interest of Society! They are founded either on false 
Mendez. 
B 2 ideas 
4 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
ideas of delicacy; an illiberality of principle; or a depravity of disposition. these produce a revolution in Sentiment and manners, which, if it does not lead the different Sexes to be regardless of each other, generally tends to the destruction of female instuence over the hearts of men. 
But is there found a wretch, fo base of mind, That woman’s pow’rful beauty dares condemn, Exaftell work of Heaven?” * 
What a divine being is an amiable woman! — She possesses a gentleness of Spirit, an elegant Simplicity of mind, and a delicate Sensibility of heart, which give lustre to every other qualification; dif fuse ineffable grace over the charm of beauty, and inspire those Softer feelings which give rise to mutual affe£fion, and excite us to the laudable and Supreme de 
* 
lights 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELTCITY. 5 
lights os hymeneal happiness — Of Such a woman we may justly Say with Milton, 
“Grace is in all her steps, Heaven in her eye, 
In every gellure dignity and love.’* 
Though libertinism and licentiousness, with their wonted and assumed gaiety, frequently display their rallery against the importance and happiness of matrimony, it only finds reception among the vulgar, and with men of vicious dispositions; for virtuous minds will hold it in abhorrence and detestation; it being known to them, that marriage is the most honourable obligation we can engage in, and that without it the true felicity of mankind is never enjoyed. 
Sir William has insisted on our staying a month at Fdrdval cajile^ after which we shall retire to belcour hau. I have resolved to resign my town praffice, as I B 3 detest 
6 THE FAVOURITES OF felicltv. 
detest the present Sarce of physic, it being neither consistent with benevolence or honour; for the most eminent physician cannot fticceecl, if he refuses to indulge the inlatiable avarice of those Subalterns the Apothecaries. these necessary evils are of more importance to him than real abilities; for if he chuses to Secure their friendship, by promoting their interest at the expense of his integrity, all will be well; otherwise, were Hippocrates now existing, he might be Set aside by the most illiterate medicaster. 
I am now in the possession of a good fortune; and, as I have learned the riches of frugality, my expenses shall never exceed my revenue. Thus circumstanced, it shall be my future endeavour to glide unnoticed through the crowd of life, in the indulgence of the Soft feelings 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 7 
ings of humanity, the Sympathies of friendship, and the pleasures of Social af feffion: “To give a cheerfulness to those hours, which Splendour cannot gild, and acclamation cannot exhilarate; those Soft intervals of unbended amusement, in which a man shrinks to his natural dimensions, and throws aside the ornaments or disguises, which he feels in privacy to be useless encumbrances, and to lose au effefi; when they become familiar.” 
But do not imagine, from what I have Said, that I mean to devote myself wholly to the Sweet vicissitudes of joy and love; to unite with indolence and luxury; to Spend my days in drunken revels, and in loose disorder; or to be inattentive to the obligations I owe to that Being, by whom kings reign, and empires rise and fall! No, Sir, I will prescribe boundaries to my B 4 enjoy 
t THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
enjoyments,, and keep moderation al ways in view,. 
Whom the wise God of Nature gave, 
Mad mortals from themselves tofave.” ’^ 
As I do not wish to live for myself alone, I will extend beneficence to w'or thy objefis to the utmost limits of my capacity; and, by a continual pursuit of virtue, endeavour to render myself acceptable in the sight of the Lord and Father of all; “the Supreme interest of created and dependent beings.” 
I have experienced Such affability and’ friendship from Sir Williatn, in his unremitting attention to accelerate my union' with his Sister, as will establish an unalterable attachment to him while I exist. He iis a truly amiable man; beloved by his equals, and adored by his inferiors 
^ 
e.yer.y 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 9 
Every affion of his life is marked with honour, and the inclinations of his heart have their foundation in virtue. His illustrious qualities display the excellence of human nature with Such amazing resplendency, that I am led to consider man a more exalted being, than he generally appears in the ordinary occurrences and conduct of lisc. 
Lady is singularly eminent for 
her prudence and love of virtue. Witte her, the pride of consequence gives place to affability, and the Sashionable follies of the great are restrained by domestic diligence. Her beauty and foftnest are irresistibly delighting, and her excellent' qualifications want not the ornament of Superficial attrastions. She is abundant in good-humour; an endowment So truly valuable, that the learned author of the b 5 Rambler 
10 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
Rambler styles it the balm of beings the quality to which alt that adorns or elevates mankind must owe its power of pleasing.’' 
Sir William., his lady, and their amiable progeny, are the darlings of all to whom they are known; and, what is still more important, they are praised by their Servants; which, as has been well observed, is ‘‘ the highest panegyriek that private virtue can receive.^’ 
All the eminent graces that display the excellence of human nature reside in this habitation j and Fercival cafle may be justly styled the region of contentment and felicity, 
I remain, 
most truly, your’s, 
Charles Belcour. 
LET 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELJCITY, II 
LETTER II 
Mr, Somerset to Doctor Belcour. 
London May 6, 1784. 
Your most obedient, humble Servant, Mr, Benedick the married man. Ha, ha, ha; So the old fox is taken at last, and Secured for life in the Gordian knot? Take this with you, my good Doctor, it is a noose you cannot untie, and you will not find it an easy task to meet with an Alexander to cut if. Ha, ha, ha, 
A fo 
* The union of marriage is frequently called the Gordian knot, from one Gordius a Phrygian husbandman; who being raised from the plough to the throne, by the Oracle of Apollo, hung up his implements of husbandry in the temple, tied together in fo intricate a manner, that the empire B 6 of 
TZ THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITT; 
“A sober man like thee to change his life V 
What fury would polfefs thee with a wife ?” 
But, pray door - what office have you insured against adultery? and who is to be your counsel in the cafe os Cmz, Con,? Perhaps, you have provided your self with one os Rabbi Abrahanfs cuii; ous magnets, for preserving the connubial compafi; from ysolation t ^ — Without one of these, as you have embarked’ in the dangerous ocean of matrimony,, you may be driven into cuckold.s havea, A divorce is a very expenstve business j and frequently a more tedious one, than the cure of a consumption, the gout, or the stone; for you will find the professors 
of the world was offered to him that could untie it, Alexander the Great made fevei al Jf uitlefs attempts,, and finding k impradicable, he ait it with his sword 
* i Juvenal.. 
■I See Johnjbds Ramblerf N? 19; 9* 
of 
THE FAVOURITES OF frlicl ty. 
S the college in d oflors Commons as greedy aster Sees, and as much given to procrastination, as those of the College of Physicians in Warwick Lane, Burr, as you are an Old Robin, 1 am inclined to believe, you did not venture on matrimony, without being in posheshon of a Secret nojlrum for the prevention of Southeast male incontinence, and extirpation of cuckoldora. Should this be the case, I advise you to resume your practice, Sok the odds is greatly in your favour, that you will have more patients within the bills of mortality (to Say nothing of the other parts of the kingdom), than the rest of the faculty of physic, including quacks of all denominations. So great, 
I am persuaded, wijl yoursuccess be,, that your riches may exceed the wealth of Crafus; and as your appear to fet no value upon money, and are a true patriot. 
14 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
triot, you cannot do an al more likely to immortalise the name of Belcouny than to pay off the national debt; which, by this means, I will venture to say, you may accomplish in a short time with ease and pleasure. If you do this, you will have a just right to be styled the man of the people. 
I received much entertainment from' the perusal of your extraordinary letter, and I admire your liberal praise of the fair sex. The luxuriant Sallies of your fancy and passion show the ravishment of your Senses; and, I assure you, 1 shall preserve the epistle with great Secrecy, lest Some of your relations, who look up to your fortune, should entertain unfavourable ideas respe£ling the true state of your mind, and take out a commishon of lunacy against you, by which means, instead 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 15 
stead of your enjoying the pleasures of rural retirement, you may be forced to make a certain mansion in Moorfiels your place of abode. 
But pray, dolor, be So obliging as to inform me, what chemical vivifier you have invented, thus to exhilarate the usual iangour of your Spirits, and to animate your constitutional frigidity, to the Soft delights of conjugal affe^iion? Tell me, I conjure you, by what magic art, the torpid powers of an old bachelor, thirty-five years of age, may be fired with the sprightliness and ardour of youth? I never yet found that the whole Materia Medica would produce Such effeffs; and I am unable to conjecture what chemical process is capable of accomplishing So wondersul a renovation! 
You 
l6 THE FAVOURITES OF felicltr. 
You will pardon my jocularity, In making So Sree with the contents os your letter, which, I assure you, have given me the highest pleasure; for it has frequently been the Subjeff of wonder and concern, that a man of your refined ideas, and Sensibility of heart, in love with a beautiful and amiable woman, whose as festion you had gained, could remain Single So long. I rejoice, exceedingly, that the union is consummated at last; and may that happincss, you appear to enjoy, continue till life’s latest breath !' There is little doubt but it will, for if ever woman possessed the qualifications requisite to render the marriage state truly eligible, I think my cousin Olivia does. And let me tell you, my good friend, you have obtained an inestimable treasure, for Milton Speaking of women, makes Samfin Say, 
favour’d 
THE TAVOURITES OR FELICITY. ry 
favour’d of heav’tr is he who finds one true; 
How rarely found! — his way to peace is smooth ^ 
Milton was not happy in one of his matrimonial engagements, and, hence, he may be considered as a prejudiced man; and part of the observation is wide of reality. This leads me to remark that we frequently meet with instances, where the bad condufl of an individual gives rise to general censure. In nothing has this been more strongly verified, than re fpeffing the frailty of the fair fex, which has ever been a fubjest for wit and ridicule to display their artillery upon, particularly in the writings of the poets: but wit and Satire are not always founded in truth, and poets are Sometimes neither the best reasoners, nor the most virtuous men. The obscenity of many of the Greek and Latin writers will fusticiently 
^ Samjtn agotilkes. 
mash tain 
i8 THE fatotjrites OF felrcltt^ 
maintain this last assertion; and I have ever admired the following observation on this Subjecft. “For the frigid vin lainy of studious lewdness, for the calm malignity of laboured impiety, what apology can be invented? what punishment can be adequate to the crime of him who retires to Solitudes for the refinement of debauchery; who tortures his fancy, and ransacks his niemory, only that he may leave the world less virtuous than he found it; that he may intercept the hopes of the rising generation; and Spread sn..res for the Soul with more dexterity V“ 
“golden statue st: ch a wit might claim. 
Had God and virtue rais’d the noble flame 5 But ah! how lewd a subject has he sung. 
What vile obscenity profanes Ists tongue !” — 
To Speak of women in general, as they merit, requires an abler pen than mine 
* Johnfiris Rambler. 
and 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. i9 
and to defend them from common prejudices, frequently as ridiculous as they are ill-founded, is a tash too important for the abilities of So feeble an advocate as I am; I therefore shall only remark, that their most capital errors originate. Solely, from their intimacy with the other Sex. How despicable, then, must men appear in the eyes of humanity, when they censure those foibles and indiscretions in women, which they have given rise to! 
It is natural for an innocent, and a fond woman, to adopt the Sentiments and inclinations she discovers in the object of her affeffion; to copy the manners of that man, whom love has taught her to esteem and adore; and whom, perhaps, she views in the mirror of deception. Who will be bold enough to Say, if she 
errs. 
20 THE TAVOURITES OF FELICITY 
errs in her conduff after this, that her mistakes have been voluntary ^ But, I would not have the Sair sex imitate the manners of men. There should only be a distant resemblance, if any; for, I am fully persuaded, the influence of women over the hearts of the other Sex would be greater than it is, if they resembled them less than they generally do. 
Do the follies and indiscretions of women exceed those of men; or is there one error, or one fault in them, that men have not I To these queries I answer, No; positively No! Are not the errors and vices of men of a deeper dye, and a more immoral tendency, than anything we can attribute to women uncontarainated by men? To this I answer, Yes; positively Yes 1 How few are the articles in the catalogue of female errors! Examine the 
list 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 2t 
list of vices belonging to those lords of the creation, the men, and they will be found without number 1 
I give you credit for all you Say of the family at Ferdval cajile, They have affability without meaness; elegance without formality; and dignity without ostentation. Their virtue is So conspicuous, and their liberality So extensive, that “they curb the proud, and Set the help less free.’^ 
Adieu, 
Dear Charles, 
I am, 
most sincerely, your’s, 
Francis Somerset. 
LET 
ga THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
LETTER Hi. 
Mr. Pierpoint to Percival 
London may1784. 
My dear Cornelia, 
Ever since I was favoured with your last, generous epistle, hope predominates over every Solicitude, and my bofonfs lord Jits lightly on his throne I — * Surely, nothing can more powerfully enliven and exalt the Soul, than the pleasure of being beloved by the objefl of our affeffion? It exhilarates the heart; gives the dance of fpirlts; and gladdens every sensation! 
2 Having 
the favourites of felicity 
Having recovered from the first raptures with which the confusion of pleasure for a time entranced me, on the perusal of your generous approbation of my love, ray thoughts are kept in motion by a Succession of the most delicate and agreeable sensations; created by the prodigality of fancy, and the estervescence of astedlion. those pleasures, by which my ideas till now have been dissipated, lose their power of delighting, and I view them as empty shadows of true fe licit)^ for you are the perpetual Source of transport to my mind. 
Brisk tides of joy rulh through my throbbing veins. 
And my heart dances to unusual strains 
I have disclofed the happy situation of my mind to my father, who is one of the 
^ seymour'*s Abelard to Eloifa, 
best 
£4 the favourites of felicity. 
best of parents. I need not tell you he approves of my choice, for the lasting amity between our families renders it impossible to be otherwise. But were it not So, he is too liberal to attempt restraining my inclinations in So important and honourable a connexion: he is the father of his children, and not the tyrant of his family. 
Oh! my dearest Cornelia how blessed are w’e, that there is no impediment to that delightful union, which, I flatter myself, we both ardently desire! Our amiable parents are possessed of generous principles, and have the highest reverence for that great law of Social beings, by which “every individual is commanded to consult the happiness of others.’* 
Confirmed in mutual affestion, do not let us procrastinate our intended felicity. 
Love 
THE FAVOURITES 0? relicity. 25 
Love feel for love; and my Soul is impatient till I meet you in that union, which consummates the Supreme of all my wishes. 
I have the honour to be, with unalterable integrity for ever your’s, Frederick Pierpoint. 
L E T T E R IV 
Doctor Belcour to Mr. Somerset. 
Perdval cajiky May 10, 1784. Dear Somerset, 
IT gives me pleasure to know that my last letter afforded you Some entertainment; and as my heart is interested vol. I. C in 
26 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
in your welfare, you shall have my free consent to divert yourself at my expense whenever you please. cheerfulness has a natural tendency to invigorate the mind, and consequently it contributes to the health of the body. Take what liberties with me you choose, they will never give me offence; for I have long since determined to laugh with every why and yield to every disputer. 
I am, undoubtedly, Secured for life in the Gordian Knot; but as I do not wish to have it untied, not all the mad Alexanders in the univcrse shall Sever it. I shall never employ the professors of the College in Doctors Commonsy for of all quacks, I detest ecclesiastical ones most; and must acquaint you, that I have a more certain preservative of the connubial compact from violation, than the 3 best 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 27 
best magnet of Rabbi Abraham This is my wife’s fidelity; for, be assured, whatever libertines may think, or malice Suggest, the mind of a truly virtuous woman will never permit her to Suffer contamination. 
Might my country be Served by any undertaking of mine consistently with honour, I would pursue it with unremitting ardour. The national debt is a Colojfean Calamity to this kingdom; yet, though I wish it could be greatly reduced, it is my opinion, that the entire discharge of it would not be compatible with [the general interest of the state. An enlarged opulence would give too extensive powers to luxury, the Source of every evil; and whenever this hap |>ens, every Species of extravagance and irregularity must Succeed; and Great C 2 Britain 
■28 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
Britain will experience the fate os ancient Greece and Rome. Besides, I have ever considered our funded debt, as one os the principal bulwarks of the country; for, however unwilling we may be to protest our monarch, from the invidious designs of the common enemy, it cannot fail to stimulate our courage in the defence of ourselves. 
That the entire discharge of the national debt, would not be compatible with the universal Interest of the state, is. an axiom So remote from general opinion, that one may reasonably fear to expose it to public notice, however ablf it could be Supported; for, like Sli Thomas mords Scheme for invigorating the laws by relaxation, and extirpating wickedness by lenity, *’ it would be 2 
* This stibjeft is admirably discussed in tb 114th number of johid.mf Rambler, 
ihrcuum 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 29, 
Herculean labour to illustrate it to common understandings. 
You ask what chemical vivifier I have invented, to exhilarate my Spirits, and animate a man, thirty-five years os age, to the Soft delights of conjugal affeffion? To this I answer, that the viviher I use for the preservation of my constitution is no Secret, and it may be easily procured. It is composed of the following ingredients; ‘viz. moderation, temperance, contentment, cheerfulness, gentle exercise, and a quantum fufficit of undisturbed rest. these blended, secundum arteniy Seldom fail to produce rosy health, jocund Spirits, and durability of the pris tine functions, vital, natural, and animal. Thus you See, my friend, I have looked up to what the poet Says, in 11 Moderate. 
“Sweet temperance in thy right hand bear. With her let rosy health appear, 
C 3 anji 
30 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
And in the left contentment true, 
Whom headlong passion never knew; 
Frugality by bounty’s fide. Fall friends, though oft as foes belym j Chaste love by reafbn made secure, 
With joys serene, and pleasures pure j Happy life from heav’n descending, 
Crowds of smiling hours attending, ” 
My union with your cousin Olivia, cannot fail to produce permanent hap pinessj since caprice and selsishness had no part in it; and she sills every expectation I had formed of a wise. Modesty and diffidence, affability and meekness, are her appropriate and charafferistic graces. She possesses that peculiar quality of delighting, which is not to be acquired, but is alone conserred by nature; and, while she shines with genuine effulgence and resistless dignity, her love is blended with reverence, and by every a£lion she verifies the observation of the i>oet^ 
He 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. gl 
“He rul’d because fly would obey, and fly 
In So obeying, rul’d as well as he.” 
How different is this disposiiion from that of Some women, who are either So weak, or So imprudent, as to think they have a right to an ascendency over their husbands, though they use no endeavours to deserve it! But a little experience will convince them of the folly of this expectation, unless they pursue the arts necessary to merit it. 
Your remarks, respeciing the licentious writings of Some of the poets, are stri<t ly just, and do the highest credit to your understanding and humanity. It has been nobly observed of loose and profane authors that, “they have been at once profligate in their lives, and licentious in their compositions; have not only forsaken the paths of virtue, but at c 4 tempted. 
52 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY, 
tempted to allure others from them. They have Smoothed the road to perdition, covered with flowers the thorns of guilt, and taught temptation Sweetet notes. Softer blandishments, and stronger allurements.’* 
You are a pleasing advocate for the fair sex, and I admire you for it. They, doubtless, are not all exempt Srom foibles and indiscretions; but their errors generably Suffer microscopic extention. Men are apt to be too censorious in their remarks on women, and too illiberal in their Suspicions respefiing their fidelity, without observing, that their distrust arrses Srom a consciousnefs of their own guilt. 
But, after all, however we may be dis posed to stand forth in defence of the 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 3.3 
falr sex in general, I have met with Some instances in the conclud of particular individuals, which were extremely reprehensible, And though I defpise the opinion of thed/rn, ‘hhat women have no Souls, ” and of Swifts ‘‘ that they are only a higher Species of monkeys, ” yeti am afraid it must be allowed, respecling the unhappiness of Some marisiages, that,, Uiacos intra muros peccatur^ et extra, faults lay on either side, the Trojan towers. 
r am charmed’with the delightful situair tion of this place. it’s retirement renders it the nurse of contemplation,, and' gives the mind an opportunity of extending itself to those important considerations, which, discover man unadorned,, and undisguised; enable us to exalt our. reason; and direcs our views towards ifeeuring an interest in eternal felicity. It 
G 5.; 
34 the favourites of femcitv* 
as impossible to lose the happiness of in* nocence at this more than terrestrial pa radise, for virtue condusts every action of jt^s inhabitants. 
All here join with me in respeft and love to you, and our cousin somerset, and I remain. 
Host truly, y©ur*s, 
Ch arles Bel corr. 
/ 

L E T 
T?TE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 35 
LETTER V 
Miss Pergival to Mr. Pierpoint>. 
pcrci^val cajlley May ir y 17 
pea r Frederick.. 
IT IS not agreeable to custom, for women to be ingenuous in their declarations of affe^iion for the other Sexr, > either before, or after marriage; So polite and delicate an age do we live in I 
Love, that Soft invader of the heart, is' said to be capable of rouzing the most languid sensibility, and of overpowering the firmest resolution not to be fubdued. i fuppose it may have had Some Such effest with me. resped renders us. 
C 6 timoeous^j, 
3^ THE, FAVOURITES OF felicltr. 
timorous j and hence I can only Say, that Something, (but I must not give it a name) has, in my opinion,, placed you in the most favourable point of view. Gratitude obliges me to acknowledge, that your unshaken perseverance to engage ray affeffion, has been as singular, as it has been ardent. This, probably, has fixed my regard for yon; and I will not hesitate fn declaring, that I preste you to all other men; that the Summit of all my wishes, is to pass the remainder of my life with you; and that,, as it will ever be the objest of my mind’s attention to improve your happiness, I look up to you as the Source of my future felicity, believshg you to be exempt, by Some nol: )le prerogative of nature, from every ungenerous artifice, and dishonourable principle. In the possession of these ideas, I congratulate inyfelf on having 
been; 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 37 
been seleded out by you, from others whose attractions aiid virtues greatly sur pass mine.. 
Whatever the transports of my heart may be, on my father’s consenting to our union, I hope you will pardon me that I do not attempt to describe them; neither will I presume to six the day of our inseparable coniiecfion, and entrance into happiness: let this be determined by my friends and you.. 
with ilpimidem and Iran quilla^ in the Ratnbler., “that as there are advantages to be enjoyed by marriage, there are inconveniences to be eui dnredf’ I have not filled my mind with improbable expectations, or too siatter'i ing hopes. Cur intimacy is not of a Short dateand I think we have both, had 
sufficienl 
g: S TJKE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY, 
Sufficient time to colleff materials for the Support of our felieity* 
Whether I have Said too little, or confessed too much, I cannot tell; but if I have erred on either Side, you must generously ascribe it to those singular feelings, which, I am persuaded, every woman must experience, circumstanced as I am this moment. 
Doffor Bekeitr and his lady are still with us. They appear to be So truly happy, it is a pleasure to behold them. 
0 r my dear Prederkk^ I must not tell you how impatient I am till I See you again; for that will be declaring more than perhaps I ought to do. Yet why should I conceal the truth } Your ho eour is pledged; and my heart tells me 
1 must now consider you as 
A fiiendy, 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 39 
*■* A friend, with whom I mutually may share 
Gladness and anguifti, by kind intercourse 
Of fpeeeh and offices 
But I think it is generally Said, that the more women consess, the less men believe; for which reason I will check the freedom of my pen, and only Say Adieu, adieu, my dear fellow,, 
I amy 
truly yours, Cornelia Percivae; 
P. S. dolour Belcour Says Pier point is' an elegant name. Now, Frederick, do you think 1 can be of his opinion? I be ^ sieve I must, for it would be prefumptiom in me to differ fromi So Sensible a man. 
* Phili^s'o 
JL E TAO 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
LETTER VI 
Mr, Somerset to Doctor Belgour^"] 
Fonddriy May 12, 1784. 
D EAR D OCTOR, 
Your last Savour is now best re me. It gives me infinite Satisfaction to know of your happiness, and that my cousin ohvia is amiable in your opinion. 
I agree with yon, that a truly good woman is not easily led astray Srom the path, of virtue for the education of women is usually less licentious than that of the other Sex; and hence they are less liable to be hurried away by the vio 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 4i 
knee of guilty inclinations. Though, I believe, if we go further and trace this matter to its primary Source, it will be found, that Creative wisdora gave to the Seinale Sex, finer mateisials, and cast them in a purer mould, than the rest of mankind; and designing them as models of human perfeflion, formed their minds susceptible only of the most delicate and refined imagination, and incapable of knowing, from themselves, the corrupted impressions of loose desire. But, from observation, I think it appears, that this peculiar attention of Nature to its brightest progeny, Sometimes renders them unable to guard against the artful designs of those who, being lost to every virtuous principle, place their Sovereign, delight in the Seduffion of innocence. 
The unjust insinuations and censures of licentious writers respecting women, 
merit 
42 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
merit as you observe, the contempt arid indignation of all good men. And I have ever highly esteemed the Sentiments of a most ingenious Essayist, who, in Speaking on this Subjest, Says, “notwithstanding all that wit, or malice, or pride, or prudence, will be able to Suggest, men and women must at last pass their lives together. I have never therefore thought those writers friends to human happiness, who endeavour to excite in, either sex a general contempt or Suspicion of the other. To persuade them who are entering into the world, and looking abroad for a Suitable associate, that all are equally vicious, or equally ridiculous; that they who trust are certainly betrayed, and they who esteem are always disappointed; is not to awaken judgement, but to inflame temerity. Without hope there can be no caution. 
those 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 43 
those who are convinced, that no reason for preference can be Sound, will never harrass their thoughts with doubt and deliberation; they will resolve, Since they are doomed to misery, that no need less anxiety shall disturb their quiet; they whll plunge at hazard into the crowd, and Snatch the first hand that shall be held toward them.’* 
Your axiom respetsting the national debt, is, indeed, very remote from general opinion, as to the public at large, yet it will be admitted by all those that are acquainted with state policy. And I entirely Subscribe to the celebrated Sir Lhomas Morels Scheme for invigorating the laws by relaxation; Sor the frequent execution of criminals is an evident proof that capital punishments are not exemplary, and, consequently, not conducive 
44 the favourites of felicity 
ducive to the end proposed I have read Dofior Johnforfs inimitable effiy on this Subjefi, and think it does the highest ere dit to literature and humanity. 
I am pleased with your liberal disclo sure of the method of preserving health, and maintaining the pristine Sunffions, to a late period of life. Your recipe merits a place in all our medical distionaries, and ought to be inserted in the dispen fatory of the College. But I suppose you reserve it for the friendship of private praffice; for without irregularity and intemperance, nine-tenths of the faculty wouldbe out of employ, and most of our charioteer doffors must walk oa foot. 
While temperance is our guide, we Seldom want any assistance from the physical 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 45 
steal art. This is evident siora the universal appearance os health among the lower ranks of mankind, who Seldom experience the calamities of sickness, un less they wantonly give into the debaucheries of their Superiors. I have ever been pleased with the observation, that, “it is the great privilege of poverty to be happy unenvied, to be healthful without physic, and Secure without a guard; to obtain from the bounty of nature, what the great arid wealthy are compelled to procure by the help of artists and attendants, of flatterers and Spies.” 
That health is necessary to the duties and pleasures of life, and the exaltation of happiness, and that the want of it is attended with the most mortifying and injurious disadvantages, is, I think, too obvious to be disputed; and yet, how 
frequently 
si THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY, 
frequently do we See it hazarded and destroyed by folly, imprudence, and wickedness?? habits of life, should, undoubtedly, be avoided, and ease and indulgence be blended with exercise and labour, for “he that too long observes nice punstualities, condemns himself to voluntary imbecility, and will not long escape the miseries of difease.’’ The happiness to be gained, and the misery to be avoided by exercise, is evident from the struffure of the human frame, and the constant pursuit of all ranlts of mankind after active recreations. 
I am not reconciled to your resolution of retiring from your praflice and the great affairs of the world. I prefer a mingled life of businefs and amufementi and think a too early retreat is like going to rest in the forenoon. I acknowledge 
retirement 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 47 
retirement to be the nurse of contemplation, for it gives great opportunity of indulging Serious reflections, and of direx ing our thoughts toward those fubjexs that are of the highest importance to present and future felicity, and which are too generally with held from our attention by the hurry of businefs and bustle of life. But I do not approve of too minute an examination into the worst side of things, wshich is frequently the case when we resign ourselves wholly to Speculation; for we Seldom find the background of a pixure equally pleasing with the objexs in the front exhibited for our admiration. 
I think the decorations and ornaments of life illuminate it, and throw a ncces sary veil over its impotence and imper fexions. Some art and deception are 
often 
4s THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
often expedient to grid the opprobriums of life; but these should be confined to accidental or irremediable evils, for I Would strip vanity of her robes; wrest the sceptre from the hands of imposition; and withdraw the malk from the face of hypocrisy. In short, if we enter too far. behind the Scene in the drama of life, there is danger that it may alienate our hearts from that mutual endearment and tenderness for others, which flow with the milk of human kindness, and are important ingredients in the cordial cup of felicity. 
To contemplate the inexhaustible variety and beauties of nature which the country only affords, is one of the exalted gratifications of the human mind; for, “they exhibit evidences of infinite wisdom bear their testimony to the Supreme 
THE FAVOURITES O? FELICITY. 49 
preme reason, and excite in the mind new raptures of gratitude, and new incentives to piety.” 
You have precipitately fixed your hap piness in private and domestic pleasures at too early a stage osiife, and propose to Sequester yourfels in the country, where, I am afraid, languor and weariness will invade you, when the novelty os ycur situation ceases to gladden the heart. You will then be displeased with retirement, and regret the loss of that heartfelt rapture you enjoyed from the association and respest of friends, and the honours of that popularity which, as a man and a physician, you have justly merited. For my own part, I have no relish for the fodety of solitude, notwithstanding all that many celebrated writers have Said in favour of rural privacy; vol I. D for. 
50 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
for, to me, it is lonely wisdom and ftlent dignity, I enjoy the bujy hum of men and think the time for retreat is on the decline of lise, when we find ourselves incapable of Sustaining the prestiire of business, and when the rewards of honest industry will enable us to indulge that ease, convenience, and relaxation, which nature, harraffed by the laudable pursuits of honour, may require. 
Rural pleasures, and the delights of connubial happiness, are now to compose the Sum of your Felicity; I, therefore, expeff to See your future letters filled with exaggerated descriptions of my cousin 0livid.s person and mind, written in the true style of an uxorious fondle wife; and also endless rhapsodies on — The mcllifiuous breath of rosy morn — Charm of earliest birds, fitted to tune 
the 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY, 5i 
the melting Soul of love — Fields ini pearled with morning dew — Verdant meadows — persumed flowers — Painted rallies — Bleating flocks — Lowing herds — Sporting zephyrs — Wanton winds — 
Tinkling rills — Winding streams — Bubbling fountains — Rosy beds — Woodbine bowers — Days of ease — and Nights of pleasure, cc. Ha, ha, ha, your delusive dreams of Felicity move my merriment; but when you have fully pursiied this frolic of your mind, I hope your good sense will recall you to the general condition of mankind. 
Sir William informed me, in his last letter, that a marriage is finally agreed upon, between our cousin Cornelia and Sir Lionel Fierpoint's Son. This will be a fortunate and happy event; for he is a truly amiable young gentleman, hav d z ing 
52 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
ing ever observed the natural and civil duties of life with the striffest regard. He is beautiful in t^rson, easy in address. Simple in manners, and pleasing in conversation. His education has been universally liberal, yet he entertains a modest distrust of himself. cheerfuiness, innocence, and integrity, appear to be his distinguishing charafferistics; and he pof seffes a soul capable of relishing all the finer enjoyments of Sublime, virtuous, and elegant Spirits. 
I now think it is full time for me to put an end to this letter; So beg leave to Subscribe myself, 
your’s sincerely, Francis Somerset 
LET 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 53 
LETTER VII 
Mr. Pierpoint to Miss Percival. 
London May 16, 1784. 
HAT gratitude, and what encomium, is not due to my dearest and beloved Cornelia, iox the liberality of her proseffions of friendship and love for her Suppliant Frederick? 
“May in iny mind Indelible a grateful sense remain Of favours undeferv’d*.” 
O! generous woman! How nobly have you departed from the unkind usage of 
* Philips, 
D 
your 
54 the FAV0URITX3 OF FELICITY. 
your Sex, and, in defiance os custom, witii laudable dignity and becoming grace, displayed the integrity of your heart! And fines love is not a crime, why should ihe fair sex ever attempt to conceal it' from the objetsts of their ast’effion } Was this the practice when Innocence and love were in their prime? It certainly was not; and I am of opinion, that this odious corruption of original purity, this modern Ipecies of female hypocrisy, had its first foundation from the falsehood of the other Sex, or So ungenerous a principle would never have met with reception in the breasts of the most refined and exalted part of the creation; for sincerity ever gains admission to those hearts that are not fortified against it with the lawless artillery of dissimulation“ 
“things on earth, proud man mult own, 
Falsehood belongs to man alone.” 
fennur^u 
Mv 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY, 55 
My Sather most cheersully accepts Sir Willianis invitation to isercival cajlle^ and means to accompany me, in order to be present at the celebration of our nuptials; but it unluckily happens that he cannot leave London till next week, which short Space os time I shall consider a tedious age, for now the distance between me and Felicity lessens daily, the torment of expestation increases; but our Solicitude respesting what we desire with impatience, must always be proportionable to the happiness expested from poiseffing it.” 
O! my dearest Cornelia! in you I discover that prodigality of excellence, which the daedal hand of nature bestows only on her peculiar favourites, wrought n her choicest mould modelled for universal admiration; and ray soul is enraptured D 4 when 
5^ THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
when I contemplate in you those illustrious and exemplary virtues, those attrafiive and captivating graces, which constitute the ultimate boundaries of female pctfeclion, and human great ness! 
I am Sensible it is an extremely delicate point for the fair sex to disclose their attachment to the objefis of their affection; for Setting custom, and even phi losophy, aside, there is a peculiar modesty in nature which leads them to conceal it. This is So true, that I have heard of instances, where women of refined Sentiments have had infinite strug -- gle, s with themseves, before they ventured to avow their affeffion even to their own hearts. these interesting soli citudes of nature are evidences of the most exalted Sensibility and virtue. Deliberation 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 57 
liberation is the road to Security. And if the first impulse of inclination is in indulged, there is a chance os mistaking the path that leads to honour and hap piness; Sor the libertinism and treachery of Some men have rendered it necessary for the fair Sex to be more reserved in their intercourse with them, than either nature or reason would determine, in opposition to that genuine and noble liberality, which is one of the most illus trious charaderistics of ferainine great ness. 
Consistent with honour and truth, my dearest Cornelia you have neither Said too little, or confessed too much, though your generosity has extended itself beyond my merit. This has exalted you more highly in my esteem, and I view you shining with greater resplendency than the bright D 5 €st 
5ss THE FAVOURITES OF felicltv. 
est star in the firmament of Heaven. But, beloved creature, rest alfured of my integrity and unalterable love. You are ever present in Tny imagination as the Supreme delight os my Soul! and 1 fatter mysels I am not far distant from the Summit os that true Felicity, which, as has been Said of liberty, 
-- -- Makes all nature lock more gay, 
And lovely life with pleafiire steal away 
I shall now be wirji you Soon, but till I am, 1 Say with Jatlnmo in Cymbeline, O time! lime! time !'’ I have the honour to be, 
Dearejl Cornelia, most truly, 
and affe£fionateiy, your’s, 
Frederick Pierpoiht, 
uordu 
LET 
the favourites of FELICITY. 59 
LETTER VIII 
Doctor Belcour to Mr. Somerset. 
Perdval cajlley May i8, 1784, 
Dear Frank, 
I MOST Sincerely thank you. for the Savour of your last letter, every part of which I have noticed with the stristest attention. 
I hope neither you nor any of my friends will experience Solicitude, be cause I have resolved to alter my mode of life, and enjoy the felicities of retirement and innocence. While I constantly D 6 pursued 
6o THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
pursued the track of business only, I felt in myself the want of Some power to create and diversify amusement; and I entered into matrimony, being tired of straggling single about the world, unhappy for want of an associate possessed of a kindred mind, with whom I might unite in confidence and friendship. It is true, I was captivated by the charms of your cousin olivid.s person; but they would not have induced me to an union with her, if I had not known she possessed qualities that will make her amiable when the bloom of beauty is past. 
I do not mean to Seclude myself from the world, for perpetual Solitude would deprive me of those advantages that are to be obtained toward virtue and happiness, from the example and opinions of others. The world is So Sumptuous a 
banquet, 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 6t 
banquet, that when we are Satiated with one course, others present themselves to quicken the appetite for new gratifications. 
^ Do not suppose I shall be lost to the obligations I owe to Society, or that I shall give inyself up to the luxuries of Sancy, because I am pleased with rural amuse ments, and the delights of domestic ease; for I well know that, “it is unworthy of a reasonable being to Spend any os the little time allotted us, without Some tendency, either direff or oblique, to the end os our existence.” Yet, as the great Locke observes, whoever hopes to employ any part of his time with efficacy and vigour, must allow Some of it to pass in trifles.” And Horace favours this opinion, Duke eji defipere in loco; wif dora at proper times is well forgot. 
It 
62 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
It is not my destgn to confine mysels in a Hermitage, or to bring on an imbe ciility of body and mind through the Want of exercise, or the Sociability of conversation. A moderate use of the former will prescrve the constitution from the evils of indolence, and an indulgence in the latter, in the company of a few well chosen friends, will help to sustain the mental faculties in full vigour to a late period of life. 
With respect to Solitude, there are few minds endowed with the requisite qualifications to enjoy its felicities; but, Surely, the pleasures and advantages of the country, especially in the Summer season, are too obvious to render illustration necessary, for they must give delight and happiness to every admirer of the works of nature. 
6 ' “Bkft 
THE FAV0URITE9 OF FELICITY. 
• -- - “Bled scenes, where constant pleasure 
reigns, 
And heists, and bleating flocks, adorn the plains; 
Where the soft season all its blessings flveds 5 
Refrefliing rivers, and enamell’d meads 
I am charmed with your chara£ier of Alr.fierpoint; and it gives me great Satisfaction, that Sir William has Secured So fortunate a match for his beautiful and amiable daughter who is worthy of Such a husband. 
The more I see of Sir William, the more I admire and esteem him. His education is learned, and there is a liberal elegance and easiness of manners about him, not very common with men of profound erudition. 
■* Mendezt 
His 
64 the favourites of felicitt. 
His attention to the instruction of his children is Singularly ardent, and Sensible. 
“He generous thoughts instils Of true nobility, their country’s love, 
(Chief end of life) and forms their dudfile minds To human virtues 
His eldest Son, who is just returned from Oxford, is a young gentleman of whom I have formed the highest expectations. His learning is almost universal, and he has been studiousty curious in observing the powtr and elegancy of the language; circumstances that are not always attended to by our first-rate Scholars. 
This accomplished youth is remarka able for the simplicity of his manners, and uncommon delicacy of his genius. 
F Kdipli 
lie 
THE favourites OF FELICITY. 

He is reserved and Silent among strangers, yet familiar and easy with his friends. The first is iheeffectof modesty, and the caution of a good understanding; and the latter of his affability and cheerful innocence. He discovers a readiness to communicate whatever he knows, without the ostentation of pedantry, and to receive instrustion whenever it is offered, without the vanity of felf conceit; but as the pleasure of a liberal mind is to dis play a free and unreserved discovery of it’s own ideas, So it cannot expenence greater advantage than in the correffion it meets with from the judgement of others. 
Sir Willianfs Second daughter, Selima, was born a beauty, and is truly elegant in her person, and accomplishments; but fire is too volatile, and has more fire, and 
luxuriance 
66 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
luxuriance of imagination, than 1 ever wish to See in the fair Sex. She is gay. Sparkling, and vivacious, without a due proportion of her sister’s delicate softness and refinement of Sensibility. In short, there is that Je northeast fcai quoy about her which must “Transfix the Soul, and kindle amorous flames.” Whenever I see a young lady of her completion of mind. So prone to gaiety, and So excursive in fancy, I am always afraid lest the majesty of virtue should prove insufficient to withstand the arts of adulation, gallantry, and Sedution; that prudence may be laid asseep, and the Security of innocence be taken off it’s guard. 
Being desirous of Sending you all the entertaining intelligence I can, I must now acquaint you, that Sir William has introduced me to a Hermitj who resides 
in 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 67 
in a Secluded Situation about two miles distant from Percival Cajile, This per son came into the country a short time since, purchased a Small piece of land, and ereffed a Singular building upon it, which is called the Hermitage because he is particular in Kis dress, and very rarely permits any one to visit him but those who Supply him with provisions. 
This Hermitage stands in a pleasant valley, which is beautifully ornamented with a clear, winding stream, oak crowned hills, and variegated, fertile fields. The house is a circular edifice, built with stone in the form of a castle, with Smaller circular towers at equal distances round the centre building, and rising from the basis with it. The whole consists but of two stories, and is finished with a glazed dome,, not Solely for ornament, 
but 
68 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
but principally Sor the purpose os rendering the upper room sit for making as tronomical observations. 
The entrance to the apartments on the groimd sioor is from a portico in the front of the building, extremely Simple, yet elegant in it’s construction and the windows to the lower large room are in the compartments between the three towers. One of these towers is a staircase leading t the upper story; and the other two contain rooms on each sioor large enough for bed chambers, a study, and other purposes, and have one window in each. The doors of these Small apartments are from the great rooms, So that in each of these latter there are three doors and three windows, which have a regular and pleasing effeff. 
The 
TH?. FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 69 
The Surniiure, throughout, is simple, neat, and designedly adapted to the con struffion os the rooms. In the observa tory stands a sine toned organ with a variety os pleasing stops, built by that ingenious artist Grey of London, On this the Hertnit appears to play in a masterly manner, and he is particularly attached to the compositions of the ancients. 
In one of the Small rooms I observed Some chemical apparatus, and in another a large assortment of medicines disposed with the regularity of an apothecary’s shop. There is a beautiful garden round the house, admirably laid out for pleasure and convenience, which is inclosed with a high, circular wall. The entrance to the garden is through a close gate opposite the portico to the house, 
over 
yo THE FAVOURITES OF felicity. 
over which the following passage from Milton is carved on a stone; 
“Hence vain deluding joys, 
Dwell in some idle brain, 
And fancies fond of gaudy shapes poltefs, 
As thick and numberless As the gay motes that people the sunbeams. Or likefl hovering dreams, 
The fickle pensioners of Morpheus’ train.” 
On the front of the portico, within, are these words, “The Lord is my Jirengtb and my song; he is become my jalvationp And on the top stands an exquisite figure os Time with emblems, holding in his right hand, a Scroll containing these lines from Horace, with an English transsation. 
Truditur dies die, 
Novseque pergunt interire lunae; 
Tu fecanda marmora Eocas fub ipsum funus, et fepulchri 
Immemor, siruis domes, 
Day 
THE FAVOURITES OF FEMCITY. yt 
Day prefles on the heels of day, 
And moons increase to their decay; 
But you with thoughtless pride elate, Unconscious of impending fate, 
Coir mand the pillar’d dome to rise. 
When lo! thy tomb forgotten lies. 
Behind the housc, in the garden, there is a beautisul stone Sepulchre, in which the Hermit intends to be buried. On the front of this ate engraved the following words. 
‘‘ Spectator, whoever thou art, learn from this final end of man, that here, all that gives motion to the adlivfe, and elevation to the eminent, all that Sparkles in the eye of hope, and pants in the bosom of suspicion, at once becomes dust in the balance, without weight and without regard. Riches, authority, and praise, lose all their influence 
72 THE FAVOURITES OF TELICITV. 
cnce when they are considered as riches which tomorrow shall be bestowed upon another, authonty which shall this night expire Sor ever, and praise which, however merited, or however Sincere, shall, aster a few moments, be heard no more.’’ 
At about the distance os a mile from the Sront os this terrestrial paradise, there is a sine vista across the valley, between two ridges of hills, which terminates in a beautisul prospest os the open Sea. The Scene is truly piffuresque; and to this place the Hermit walks every, morning and evening, if the weather permits, to bathe, and Sometimes to catch fish, for which purpose he keeps a boat and proper implements, in a little creek that runs from the Sea into the land between the hills. By Such methods as these he ^ relaxes 
THE FAVOURITES Of FELICITY. 73 
relaxes from his studies, diversifies amusement, and promotes health. 
Since Sir William first became acquainted with this person, he has often visited him, yet never could learn the history of his life; but we are to Spend the day with him tomorrow, when he has promised to entertain us with a circumstantial account of himself. I own, my curiosity is greatly excited j for the Singular taste he has displayed about the hermitage, and the purity and politeness of his manners, lead me to expe<51: much entertainment from his narrative, the particulars of which i will transmit to you in my next letter. 
I remain as usiial, most sincerely, your’s, 
Charles Belcour« vol. I. E L E .D 
74 the favourites of felicity. 
LETTER IX 
Miss. Sflima Percival to Mr. pier point. 
Pcrcival cajile, May 19, 1784. 
Dear Mr. Pierpoint, 
AS you are to make us a visit in a few days, in order to marry my Sister, I promise myself much pleasure on the occasson; for having shown yourself a man of constancy and perseverance during a very long courtship, I hope you will exhibit Some degree of spirit on the accomplishment of your wishes, by treating us with a Jubilee, a Ridotto, a Bal Pare, or a Fete Champetre. Or what do you 
think 
The favourites of felicity. 75 
think of a little Snug masquerade? You can hire a wagon load of dresses for a trifle at this season of the year, and may transport them to Fercival cajlle at a small expense in an Air balloon. This will be the very thing, by jingo; and Till secure a jovial party capable os Supporting a world of fun and festivity. By all means engage the ingenious Barthelemon. to compose a Sew Madrigals and Motettos, Sonnets and Serenades, Ballads and Ballets, on the occasion; for his inventive genius is abundantly prolific in musical frolic and freak. 
Endeavour to bring down half a dozen pretty fellows of your acquaintance, to join in the mazey dance, and diffuse a little Spirit of the Lon among us primitive puritans j Sor, believe me, we want a prodigious deal of winding and Screw 
E 2 
mg 
j THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY, 
ing up at present. Be Sure you let us have a regiment of pipers and fiddlers, that we' may jig it about like a jocund band of fairy elves. Sporting by moonlight on the dry ftnooth jhaven green, 0! Mirth and music, you dear dissipaters of fadness and Sorrow, how I delight in you! And for a dance — a kingdom for a dance. 
But what the duce prompts you, m dear brother-in-law as is to be, to bring old Squaretoes, your father, with you? Be assured, we have drones enough here already, So you had better shuffle him of, if you can; for he may arause himselfat the parliament house, or the Lyceum, i or coach makers hall, or at some of those' disputing Societies I have heard of, where! the Sprigs of oratory Spring up like rnufi' rooms from a hot bed, and the affairs of 
the 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 77 
the nation, and politics of the day, are buffetted about Srom a to b, and from C to D, like a shuttle cock between two battledores. I hate a mixture of old and young folks on days of festivity, for the views and inclinations of the different parties are as opposite in the extreme, as light and darkness, or Summer and winter. 
But to return to the business in hand. One evening, then, we’ll have a masque rade in the house, and all the rooms shall be opened and Splendidly illuminated. we’ll intrigue till twelve, then go to Supper, and afterwards dance till daylight. This, I think, will do very well for the beginning. The next evening shall be ushered in with a Fete Champetre on the lawn; the following night we’ll have a Bal Pare in the paddock; then a E 3 Riddotto 
78 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
, Riddotto a! fresco in the great garden; and then— — then — you and I will settle the rest privately when you come down, for the more Secret we are in our plans, the better we shall be able to elevate and Surprise, which is the life and Soul of entertainments, of this nature. 
Mind the masquerade dresses, the air balloon, the pipers and fiddlers, dear little Barthelemon^ and the Six pretty fellows, or a dozen if you can engage So many; and don’t fail in any one particular, for, if you do, 1 shall wish, should you have any children, that your girls may all Squint, and the boys have pug nofes. Look tossed, we’ll do’t. Bless me! I had almost forgot a matter of the utmost Con sequence. Do pray Send to the Golden Lion in Lavijiock Street, and buy me an elegant air balloon cap, quite in the 
and 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 79 
and be Sure to leave old square toes at home is you can. suppose you get your Apothecary to persuade him it will endanger his life, or give him a sit of the gout, to undertake So long a journey, 
For fixty three’s no age for dancing, 
Old men, old men should not be prancing.” 
Now, my dear Frederick, bustle about, and get everything necessary with the utmost expedition, and when you come down you shall find me as full of gig as an egg’s full of meat. Adieu — you’ll be a charming Sellow is you do as 1 bid you. 
your’s, 
Selima Percival. 
P. S. I shall begin, in a Sew days, to watch Sor the arrival of the air balloon with the masquerade dresses; and I think E 4 it 
80 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY 
it will be best to Send my cap by the Same conveyance, as I then shall have time to adjust it properly before the Six pretty fellows make their appearance. 
LETTER X 
Doctor Belcour to Mr. Somerset. 
Perdval caflki May 20, 1784. 
Dear Sir, 
IE Wmiarif Mr. percivai^nd myself, Spent the greatest part of yesterday tvith the Hermiti who entertained us with a neat cold collation for dinner. When the cloth was removed, he addressed him sdf to us in the following words: 
Gentle 
tilt tavostrites OF FELICITY. 81 
Gentlemen — “It was my intention, when I Settled myself in this retreat, to conceal the history of niy life from every one; but Sir William has So frequently expressed a desire to be made acquainted with it, that it is impossible for me to refuse complying with his Wishes. I theresore shall persorm the talk with pleasure, however it may discover the'' folly and imprudence of Some part of my conduff, for I will not conceal my Saults, or give a false colouring to my imperseftions; all I Sear is, that my narrative will not afford the entertainment expefied from it. 
I was born in London the latter end of the year 1734. My father, at that lime, followed the profession in which he had been brought up \ but in the latter part of his life, dissiking the precarious E 5 situation 
§2 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
Situation of trade, he declined it, and was established in Several valuable steward ships, through the recommendation of Some illustrious friends, to whose notice he had raised himself by his learning, philanthropy, and moral reffitude. The principal of these V ere, the Earloi mac tlesjield, the ever memorable Doctor Benjamin Hoadley Bishop of Winchester, the Honourable Arthur Onflow, the venerable and revered Speaker of the uoup of commonsyznd the late Sir Peter themp fon. 
My father’s ancestors were originally of Wakefield in Torkjhirey Some of whom were wealthy, and Some more humbly circumstanced; yet all of them were esteemed by the world for their integrity and virtue. One of the family rof: to the highest dignity in the church, being 7 Metro 
THE FAVOURITES OF PEL ICITY. 83 
Metropolitan and primate of all England. He was a profound Scholar, but avaricious even to meanness; a fault extremely reprehensible in any man. exalted to Such a Situation. By this we may See, that learning does not always inculcate the Social affections, or sosteii the heart to the tender feelings of humanity. 
My father despised the parsimony of his relation, who might have been Serviceable to him, but was not, and contented himself which private dignity, which he Supported through life with the highest honour; vvas universally esteemed by all to whom he was known; and lamented by every friend to virtue at his death. 
his able defence of Dvflor hoadley’s principles (written at an early age) in what was called the Bangorean Contro -- (wherein that great prelate boldly E 6 stood 
s4 the favottrites OF fellcltrrf 
stood forth in Support of the rights and privileges of mankind, in opposition to the whole body of the High.dhurch Clergy, or Tory party, predominant at that period), exclusive of his other writings, and mathematical works, will transmit his name to posterity with honour. 
While the Archbishop lived, my father designed me for the Church; but, as he died when I was very young, that plan was dropped, the certainty of preferment being at an end; I was initiated in the sitidies of the Mathematics, Physic, and Music. 
In the year 1756, I was prevailed on to settle in Devonshire, and was led to sup pose, by a friend of my sather’s, that it would prove an advantageous Situation, but found it otherwise. 
I en 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. E 
I entered the world Sull of juvenile ambition; unalarmed by fraud; and with a mind too powerfully dispofed to universal benevolence, for one in my circumstances. 
I fell into bad hands, who nursed my folly for the purposes of self-interest, and was perpetually embarrassed through the insignificancy of my income, and the arts of imposition pra£lised upon me. The constant uneasiness of ray mind led me to be regaistlefs of myself 3 to negleff all my studies but that of physic (which, from my great attachment to it, I Sometimes pursued); and to Submit to the tyranny of every desire which fancy Suggested : however, I never Suffered the ssightest breach in my morality. 
I concealed the disagreeable part of my Situation Srom my father for a time, 
but 
86 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
but at length discovered it, in conse quence of which I received a transmk tance os money Sufficient to discharge all my obligations, with an injunffion to return to the capital, which I did in the Spring of the year 1762. 
From this time I renewed my studies with unremitting ardour, and recommended myself to public notice in opposition to interested rivals.. 
I was Soon established in a desirable situation, in which I continued upwards of Sourteen years, and, as 1 statter rnyfels, with no Small degree of honour; but was obliged to quit it, not being qualified to wink at the machinations of interested villainy; and though this was an injurious circumstance to me, I have always had the gratulations of ray own heart for acting as 1 did.. 
My 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 87 
My resignation, indeed, was voluntary. So that I might have remained, had' it been my choice; but this would not have been consistent with my honour, un less I had proceeded to a public exposition os those who had rendered my situation uneasy to me, from a confciousness that I had long discovered their guilty Gonduff. It is dangerous to aecuse, even when the charge can. be maintained by the clearest proof, and as it could only have been Supported by my own' evidence, perhaps my authority might either have been doubted, or considered as founded on interested or malicious views: hence, I thought it best not to provoke irritation, or multiply my enemies, there being less danger in timid compliance and peaceful resignation. As it was, I retired with dignity to mjtself; whereas, had I remained and sought the 
battle. 
s8 THE FAVOURITES OP FELICITY. 
battle, the viffory might have escaped me. 
The principals under whom I had asted in this situation, were persons of strist honour, and had ever shown me the greatest respedt and Sriendship; but, in the moment os my resignation, they were imprudently incensed, not knowing the true motive of my conduct, for it had been falsely represented by the mis* creant Subalterns, whose infamy I had deteffed. 
With respeff to the principals, I had always Served them faithfully, to the utmost stretch of my abilities and power, and I am persuaded they knew that I had done So. Con Scions of ray own integrity, I thought myself entitled to more respcff at parting than the heat of their 
mistaken 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 89 
mistaken anger permitted them lo grant. This I have long Since exciised, and they have ever had my most zealous good wishes for their prosperity and happi ness. Obstinacy and pride had, doubt less, Some share in my resignation, but it will ever be the case, in instances of this nature, with every man of Spirit tenacious of his honour. If the treacherous conduct of those who were the cause of my abdication does not torture them in their last moments, they must be lost to every fense of virtue, and of shame. 
Some years before I quitted this situation, I had embarked in an undertaking that promised a lucrative event, but my own capital was insufficient to carry it oh without borrowed money. A wish to Support and extend this plan led me into innumerable large expenses, which I 
hoped 
90 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
hoped to retrieve by success, My in stuence with the world was established on the credit of my integrity, and moral character. My views were extensive, I enjoyed the general Smile os mankind, and was industrious to preserve it by compliance and officiousness.” I bad followers, and flatterers, of whom I entertained no illiberal opinion, though prosperity brought them to my acquaintance; but, it is well remarked, that no one exerts the power of difcernraent with much vigour when self-love favours the deceit.” 
I extended my cares beyond myself, and injured ray circumstance for the benefit of others, for my benevolence drew me into numberless difficulties, that those less humane would have escapcd. But, here, I must censure my conduff, for I 
ought 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 9i 
ought to have been just, besore I had been generous. 
Many of the Schemes from whence I hoped to reap advantage ended in un successful iffaes. I lent my money, and I lost my Sriends; I purchased Savour at too dear a price; I unfortunately placed confidence in persons whom I afterwards Sound to be destitute of integrity and honour; I too frequently indulged the present moment, without regard to Suture consequences; I was robbed by ray Servants, and Suffered imposition in many of iny contrafis; I met with disappointments, and experienced Ioffes; I found mysels in a Sinking state, and gave into the imprudent folly of hoping for relief from fortuitous events. When these failed, I Solicited assistance of a friend in order to Support my credit, who was 
generoiissy 
92 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
generousty disposed to Serve me, but the means of doing it were not immediately in his power. Thus circumstanced, I was reduced to the necessity of giving a particular Security to a principal and pressing creditor, in order to gain time till my friend could assist me. This prh vate transa£lion was betrayed through the treachery of a person under infinite obligations to me, and though the prim ciple on which it originated was striffly honourable, and would, in the end, have proved beneficial to my creditors in general, it was considered as giving a partial preference to one person only, though in faff it was not. This drew the resentment of other principal creditors upon me, who precipitately made me a bankrupt, in order to invalidate the step I had taken; but had the particulars of my conduff in this affair been deliberately 
and 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 93 
and impartially considered, no Such measure would have been necessary. Thus closed the fatal account of ruin! 
The Situation of my affairs were, now, unavoidably made public, and calumny propagated a thousand misrepresentations of faffs. Many malicious and false ch'irges were brought against me, yet my heart never accused me of the radical guilt of intentional dishonesty. The foundation of my catastrophe was the common error of many men; a too eager desire of accumulating wealth, and a too ardent and precipitate execution of my designs. This verifies the observation that, “there are few minds Sufficiently firm to be trusted in the hands os chance. Whoever finds himself inclined to anticipate futurity, and exalt possibility to certainty, should avoid every kind of ca 6 fual 
94 the favourites of felk^itv* 
Sual adventure, since his grief must always be proportionate to his hope.” 
The whole of my property was Sold; but from chance os circumstance, and injudicious management, it did not produce one third of the original value. This 
N. 
occasioned So considerable a deficiency in my accounts, that the murmurs of ray creditors were too important for me to attempt reconciliation; and as I knew it would be a distressful, if not an endless undertaking, to struggle against falsehood, malice, treachery, and the exaspe ration and revenge of those who had been injured by my miscarriage, I prudently declined it. 
■ Thus circumstanced, I was no longer /r^ih as the vernal rose, or Jirong as the cedar of the mountain; and I Said, 
“God 
the favourites of felicity. 95 
God of our fathers, what is man, 
So proud, fo vain, fo great in story? 
His fame, a blast, his life a span;; 
bubble at the height of glory; 
Oft he that’s most exalted high 
Unseemly falls in human eye 
I bore my change of fortune with Silent Sorrow, yet Suffered no pusillani mity of dejeffion; neither did I sink greatly in my own esteem, for though appearances were much against me in the opinion os the world, I was conscious of the refutude os my original intentions. 
The only person 1 had particular reason to look up to as a real friend, was one I had Served most eminently on his introduction into life, and to whom I had shown a Singular partiality, as a creditor, a short time before my failure. I applied 
Oratorio of Samson' 
'
96 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
to him for ashstance, during the time I remained in an undetermined state of mind what step I should take in future. He vouchsafed to Send me a trifling Sum, but waved all further beneficence by a reproachful comparison between my former and present condition. I considered this little better than a covert infuu, and never Solicited a Second favour, being resolved not to accept of pain from a quarter, from whence I had a kind of natural right to hope for pleasure. I therefore treated his illiberality with silent contempt, recollcffing that, “whatever be the motive of insult, it is always best to overlook it, for folly Scarcely can deserve resentment, and malice is punished by neglect.” 
It almost generally may be Seen through life, that they who receive most favours 
from 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 97 
Trom mankind, are most inflexible and Severe respesling the wants of others. They are not easily Softened by Submission, melted by complaint, or conquered by stipplication; but Srom a consciousness of their own obligations, which pride and ingratitude will not Suffer them to acknowledge, lose the disposition to ten derness and Sympathy. Beings of this stamp change the limit of their kinjness according to their hopes and fears, their opinions and profpefis, without respest to the claims of Social affeffion: but fidelity and justice are not to be expeffed from those who only live to gratify their own senses and interests. 
The illiberal conduff of the person I have just mentioned, and the ingratitude of Some others to whom I had granted favours, merited the Severity of resent vol. I. F ment. 
98 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
tnent, but soul disdained a mean rt vengey and the experience of life forbid me to praffise it, since there is no maa whose kindness we may not Sometime want, or by whose malice we may not Sometime Suffer.’* 
Many whose minds are more exalted than mine would have Sunk under my calamity, or have given way to supple ness and humility, which too frequently crush the endeavours of industry and hope. I had patrons among the great, but thought it wisest not to trouble them, lest my time should be wasted in fruitiest attendance and Solicitation; and, though 1 had promises of future assistance from Some of my friends, did not think it prudent to depend upon them; for the arrogance of the rich, and the venality and corruption of the lower ranks of men, 7 should 
THE FAVOURITES OF ffilicity. 99 
should ever be dreaded by the children gs adversity. 
The feason of calamity is the only proper time to discriminate real Srom imaginary friends. Out of the extensive number of those who had feasted and fattened at my table, on the luxuriant indulgencies of prosperity, and of others whom my interest and property had liberally assisted, only three of them made voluntary offers of friendship. These were among the number of my creditors; yet their feeling hearts were struck with honest Solicitude for my misfortune and future welfare, and they did not Suffer their kindness to languish by delay. Their liberality was conferred with that graceful benevolence, and dignity of generous comp ssaon, which is only known to the most lenned and exalted minds. Peace F 2 to 
loo THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY.. 
to the shades of these worthies, Sor they are levelled with the dust! Yet though their mortal parts are enveloped in the shades os death, their virtues, consecrated to fame, wdll be known through Successive generations, and the names of ho’ward, llandall, and Jones, be traustnitted to the remotest ages; and when time ssiatl be no more, and even eternity be lost in the self existence of the Lord and Father of all, may their exalted Spirits remain immarcestible, and enjoy the Savour of Him who gave the means, and inspired the inclination to beneficence! 
I now contemplated myself and my situation, and found my courage unshaken, and my constancy immovable, therefore determined that a life, begun in celebrity and honour, should not end in neglect and indolence, or be Suffered to languish 
away 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. loi 
away in the gloom os anxiety; whence I resolved to raise myself by a vigilant improvement of time, in opposition to every obstacle which external circumstances could place in my way, and to receive no interruption from the indulgence of mean passions, or vicious inclinations. 
After remaining a short time in retirement, till I had procured Some letters of recommendation, and bills of credit, I Set out for the Continent, with a view to acquire a new stock of ideas, resurae the physical studies of my former life, free ray self from the condolement of my friends, and the malice of my enemies. 
I left England wsithout much regret, contemplated the weakness and fragility of man, and resolved to liushand the bounty of my friends with the stridlest F 3 economy. 
1c2 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
Geconomy, in order to preserve myself from that destitution, which the learned author of the laws of Ecckjiajiical Polity declares to be “Such an impediment to virtue as, till it be removed, Suffereth not the mind of man to admit of any other care.*’ 
I recolleffed the diligence of the great erafmusf who composed that celebrated work Lhe Praise of Folly during his journey to Italy lest the hours which he was obliged to Spend on horseback, should be tattled away without regard to literature, ’* as he informs us; northeast totum 
The biograghers of Erafmm poffitively assert, that he wrote this work at Sir lihomas Mords while he was in England though the contrary may be seen in the preface to it, written by way of epistle dedicatory to his friend Sir l~homas More. Even Mond. Bail has given into this common error, in h Critical and tiijiorical dihionarj. 
illud 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. log 
illud tempus quo equo full infidendum^ illi teraiis fabulis tereretur. In imitation of his illustrious example, though my prudence generally led me to walk on foot, I either wrote or read throughout the whole os my peregrinations. 
A minute description of the places through which I pasted will, I apprehend, be tedious, if not uninteresting; I therefore shall omit Such things in my narrative, and only notice those places I have never Seen well deferibed, and confine myself to particulars not generally known, the history of men of letters, and the state of arts and Sciences; for, indeed, I have it in contemplation to publish an account of whatever I met with worthy observation, and interesting to mankind, having kept a copious and ex ast journal for this purpose, and which F 4 will 
104 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY.. 
will discover how trifling, inaccurate, and fallacious, the accounts of many wtiters are; Sew, if any, of whom can have Seen what they have related, but mufi have contented themselves with things upon ilic credit of others, and consequently could not make a just and necessary dis tinffion between genuine intelligence and what was not So, of which many of our English geographical publications are notorious and shameful evidences. 
I first visited Holland, landing at hel vgctjjuys, a port town on the island of Voorn, of no note except for its excellent harbour, in which Some of the Dutch Ships of war are laid up in time of peace,, and being the place where the packet boats go to from Harwich. From thence i wtnt to Brief the capital of the island,, from Helvoetfaiys about six Eng 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. IO 
lijb miles, where, not meeting with anything worthy notice, except a sine view of the river Maefe, which, at this place, is about a mile and a half wide, I made no stay, but embraced an opportunity that offered os being conveyed by w^ater carriage up the river to Rotterdam, instead os croshng the Maefe Srom Brieh to maejlandjjuys, as is generally done shy tliose who are Solely bound for The Hague. The distance of Rotterdam from bpiel is about twelve miles. It stands on the north Side os the Maefe, in East Longitude, 4. 20. North Latitude, 52. o. 
, The Sorm of this opulent and populous city is nearly triangular, and, next to Amjierdam and Leyden, it is the most, important place in that province of the Hatch United States, calf d Holland, It is situated where the Maefe sonly about F 5, a quarter 
lo THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
a quarter of a mile in breadth, and fifteen miles distant from the Briiijh seay or German Ocean. The streets are very Spacious, and adorned with noble canal which run through most pai'ts of the city, and are Sufficiently wide and deep to admit ships of considerable burden up to the houses of the merchants. The buildings are principally of hewn stone, and these, with the groves of trees on the borders of the canals, have a pleasing and picturesque appearance. So different from what a stranger has Seen in other countries, that they must excite his admiration. 
This place has a good exchange of modern construffion, a large dockyard for building and refitting ships of war, and a most excellent quay on the bank of the Maefe, about half a mile in length, * 
at 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY, loy 
at each end of which, called the old and new head, the river enters into the city, and Supplies the canals with water, which, notwithstanding the distance Srom the Sea, is brackish. This quay (for there is another called the gelders quay\ is ornamented with a range of beautiful houses, the residence of persons of dis« tinfiion, and many of the principal merchants; before which stands a delightful grove of trees, from whence there is a prospe£l of the shipping riding at anchor,, and the adjacent country. This is called the boom quay, and is So Spacious, that,, exclusive of the foot and coach way, the grove is fushciently extensive to form a good mall for the city. Ihe house. once belonging to the memorable Lord North and Grey, of England,, stands here, which he obtained by marrying a Dutch, lady; and, not very distant from it, there: 
F d is. 
i08 THE FAVOURITES OF felicityo. 
is a Small house once inhabited by Monjf Baste ^ as honorary proseffor of philosophy, was complimented by the city with an annual pension of six hundred florins; but it was most illiberally withdrawn from him long before his death (which happened in the year 1707)5-through the bigotry and mistaken zeal of the consistory of the French church,, headed by Mons. Jurieu^ who represented his ■writings as Subversive of the fundamental principles of morality and the christian virtues. Thus was the author of the celebrated Critical and Hijloricaf Dictionary degraded, and reduced, in his o’d age, to a dependance on the labours of literature for a Support,. 
That his religious tenets were nob strifily orthodox, I am afraid, must be admstted; yet he lived the life of a philosopher, 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. i09, 
losopher, and a good man; Sor he was free of all the vicious passions, labori ousty attached to study, grave and Sententious in discourse, easy of access, and, willing to communicate, as I was informed at Rotterdam by Several gentlemen of the first credit, who, though: they had not lived in his time, had con veisted with persons of the strictest veracity well known to him, and from whom they received the account of him: they communicated to me. 
That freedom of Sentiment which he poshsted, and which is Seldom Separable from an enlightened mind, induced ignorance and Superstitious bigotry to brand him as a favourer of Atheistical principles; burr, Surely, a mind capable S embracing the whole circle cf icience, and of contemplating the works of nature 
IJO THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITT. 
ture and human art, could never doubt the existence of 
“That universal Spirit which informs, 
Pervades, and actuates the wondrous whole 
His genius and universal knowledge merited a better Sat than he experienced; but religious hatred ia the worst of all hatred, and the most pernicious in it’s effetsts. 
This city is justly famous for being the birthplace of that illustrious ornament to literature Erasmus, who was born in an obscure house near the great church dedicated to St. Lawrence, offo ber 2.8, 1467, which houle has been re* built; but the following inscription in Latin, 'and Several other languages, is still preserved over the door, 
^.distus 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. Ill 
“^dibiis bi ortus mundum decoravit Erafmuiy Artibus ingenuis, religion, fide, ” 
Erajmus^ who adorned the world with arts and Sciences, religion and virtue, wat born here.. 
Not far from this house, in the marketplace on the great bridge, there is a tolerable statue of him in brass, const derably larger than life, which is stxed. on a marble pillar inclosed with iron rails. He is represented in the habit of a doctor, with a book in one hand, and the other upon it in the aff of turning over the. leaf. The pedestal of the pillar contains a laiin inscription in praise of him. He died at Great bajil.^ in Switzerland July 12, 1536, in the house of one Fro -- beriius, Son of the learned and eminent printer of that name, and not at Friburgb in alface^z.% Some accounts of him assert. 
The 
I 12 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
The house where he was born, like that os Shakespeare at Stratford upon Avon, is generally visited by travellers; and it is asserted, that Philip the Second King of Spam, with his whole court, visited Potter dam, for the Sole purpose of Seeing the house: whether this is a faff, or not, I cannot take upon me to determine, but am inclined to believe, from the con duff of that monarch afterwards, respeff ing this country, that his visit was planned on more important views. 
The honour done to the memory of Erofmus in this city, and at Basil, and the estimation his writings, and amiable eharacier, are held in, shy every learned and polite nation, is what he justly merited, being not only at the head of learning in his rhyme, but an ornament ioshu eianity, as the conduct: of his life, and 
the 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. IT 3; 
the benevolent donations in his will. Sufficiently testisy. 
Rotterdam is one of the most important staples the engujh have upon the continent of Europe \ and it is commo dioussy Situated for trading to foreign, countries, because it’s communication with the German Ocean is short, and easy, by means of the river maej'e. It is much frequented by foreigners, and the English in particular. A peculiar neatness marks the houses, streets, and churches, of which latter there are four belonging to the Dutch, one to the English, and one to the Scotch, for the ex ercise ofuheir particular per Suasions, and likewise an elegant jewijlo Synagogue. 
The great church is a very noble structure, adorned with a lofty steeple 
and 
114 the favourites of felicity. 
and ornamented on the inside with a magnificent Organ, and Several fine monuments of illustrious persons, particularly one os Admiral De Witt. 
From this place I went to Delft, the capital of what is called Delft land. 
This little city, for So it is styled, is beautifully situated in the midst of fertile meadows, arid ia Surrounded by a wall and trenches. it’s vicinity to The Hague renders it more important than it otherwise would be, for it consists principally of two streets, each about a mile in length,, through which riin Spacious canals adorned with groves of trees and Some handsome stone bridges. There is a good quiy, to which ships of burden can come up from the fvet'e Maefe through ■hav£n^ a channel running from 
that 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. II 
that river into the canal between Rotterdam and this place, but it is Seldom resorted to by shipping, except by the colliers from the north os Englandi who go there Sor the purpose of Supplying this city. The Hague, and Leyden with coals; for Help carries on no trade but a brewery, and a manufafiure of earthenware, in imitation of China, known throughout most parts of Europe by the name of delftware \ however, this has been much injured by the large importation of real china ware by the Dutch Eaji india Company; and more So of late years since the English have made improvements in works of this nature. 
Delft is the station to which the Yatches belonging to the different Provinces bring the Deputies of the Al Semblies at the time of the general meeting 
l j6 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY,. 
ing of the representatives of the States. They all land there, and proceed in; coaches to Lhe Hague these yatchs are very beautiful and Superb vessels, from thirty to fifty tonnes burden, and are richly ornamented, for it is the pride of the differerent States to vie with each other in the grandeur of their Yatchs; and they generally make a showy appearance when they arrive at Delft, being decorated with gaudy stags, and have a band of music with each. 
The city is not very populous, but it is the residence of a number of eminent merchants who have retired from trade, and live in great Splendour. It has a chamber in the eajilndia Comfanj, and a rank in the assembly of the States. The principal buildings are remarkably neat and elegant; but the palace of 
ivilliani 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. II 
William the Diy?, Prince os Orange, the stadt house, and the repository of the magazine and armoury of the province, are very old strustures. 
The marketplace is a Spacious Square, adorned on two Sides with the most important houses in the city, and with the finest church and the stadt house on the other two. The churches are lofiy piles of building, terminating with sine constructed steeples. 
The new church, which is by far the more grand of the two, is famous for its extensive Set of bells for chimes, and is much visited by strangers on account of a noble mausoleum, erected at the expense of the republic in honour of 
that 
* The author of the lives of the Princes of Orange, published in London in the year 1734, 
says, 
1 is THE eavcurites of felicity. 
that great man William the Firji of naf fau, who was treacherously murdered in his palace, July lo, 1584, in the ist year of his age, by an emissary of Philip the Second, King of Spain, (who dreaded his wisdom and valour), in revenge for his having humbled the lawless pride and power of that tyrannic prince; as serted the liberty of his country; established a national church; and founded a glorious commonwealth. 
He was shot with a pistol, loaded with three balls, by one Balthazer de ghe rard, who was taken immediately after 
says, it was bisllt by his fon Count Maurice i bilt this is a mistake, for the infcriptioii expressly declares, The Ufiitrd Provinces of the Dutch Netherlands have eretsted this monument, to perpetuate the memory of this truly pious, wise, and invincible hero, che 

THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. II 
he had committed the faff, and Suffered the extreme os dutch crmlty at the time os his execution. It is no less Singular than true, that though this miscreant declared ^ the time of his death, that he gloried in the deed, the Romish clergy thought fit to enrol him among the number of their pious Saints and martyrs I 
The Suneral of the Prince was truly magnificent, and it was honoured by the attendance of most of the nobility, and principal persons in the United Provinces, and an incredible number of the populace, who, all together, are Said to have exhibited a Scene of lamentation and unfeigned Sorrow, not to be described. His Son, Prince Maurices attended the corpse, and was Supported by the Arcbhijhop and Ekfior of Cologne and Count Bolac^ 
The 
120 THE favourites OF FELICITY,, 
The monument is truly Superb, and the Latin inscription upon it, in praise os the Prince, does as much honour to the gratitude os the Republic, as it can do to the illustrious hero it is intended to commemorate. He was truly styled William the Great, for he Spent his lise in the study of politics and war, in both which he was a great proficient; and he was as singularly eminent for his private virtues. 
In the other church, there are two good monuments in memory os Van Tromp and Van Heine, two famous Dutch Admirals, ereffed at the expense of the States. The heroic affions of the sor mer, who was defeated and killed in the Second engagement he had with the btv tijh Sleet in the year 1653, are known in the annals of the history of 2 England; 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. II 
England; and the latter rendered himself memorable by taking a rich fleet Srom the Spaniards. 
Delft is justly honoured for being the birthplace os Henry Frederick Prince of Orange, Son to William the Firji, and third Stadiholder of the United Provinces, who was born in 1584, and also of the learned and ingenious Hugo Grotius, the celebrated author of that immortal work De jure belli et pads, which with his Sacred commentaries, criticisms, and poems, place him at the head of learning, and render him, not only an ornament to his country, but to the world. 
He descended from an illustrious family, was born the loth of April, 1583, and died at Rojlock, a town of Germany Situated on a bay of the Baltic Sea, the vol I. G 28th 
122 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
28th os August, 1645, on his return from Stockholm in Sweden, after having obtained permission to retire Srom the Service of that celebrated queen chrijuna, to whom he had been counsellor, and her ambassador to the court of France. His body was brought from Rojiock to this place, and interred with his ancestors. 
Some of his poems arc beautiful compositions; and his commentaries, and De jure belli, have ever been held in the highest estimation by the learned of all nations; and yet this latter wwk was Sentenced at Rome, in the year 1627, to obscurity with other prohibited books. The history of his writings, persecutions, and the numerous public employments to which his learning and abilities railed him, would be worthy notice, only I 
am 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 123 
am asraid it would be tedious, should I enter into it at this time. 
In my way from Delft to The Haguey I visited the village of Ryswick, in order to view the palace where the famous treaty of peace, between the confederate powers of Europe and Danced was Signed in the year 1697; extremely 
mortified when I arrived there, on being informed, that though the palace still belonged to the Prince of Orange, it was occupied by a private family, on which account I could not obtain a sight of the inside of it. 
It is built with freestone, and is a magnificent strufftire of great extent in the front; but its elevation is not equally proportionable, and it is So overloaded with trees, exclusive of having the Ocean G 2 near 
124 the favourites of felicity. 
near it on the West, aqd the great canal between Delft and The Hague on the East, that it must be a very unhealthy Situation. 
The Hague (which is ridiculousty styled a village, because it is not walled round,) is, upon the whole, one of the most beau tisul towns in Europe. It is situated on a dry Soil, rather higher than the adjacent country; but this elevation does not check the course of the waters to render the canals leading to it unnaviga ble. It stands in the centre cs many sine towns and villages. Surrounded by a pleasant country, and has a purer air than most other places in the United Provinces. The roads round about it, for many miles, are extremely good, Some of which are on the banks of the canals under groves of trees, and others 
embellillied 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 12^ 
embellished with country seats belonging to persons os chstinflion, which excite observation on every point of view, and render The Hague one of the most captivating places, perhaps, in Europe. 
The town is Surrounded by a fine canal, which is bordered with trees on one side throughout, and in most places on both; and over the canal there are Several excellent drawbridges. The number of houses are computed to be upwards of five thousand, and the inhabitants fifty thousand. 
Noneof thepublic buildingshave either grandeur or elegance, nor do they equal' the houses belonging to private persons, for many of these are magnificent structures, and constitute principal ornaments of the streets and Squares, - The palace,. 
G 3 called 
126 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
called The Courts is a miserable, irregular building, moated on three sides, and washed by the Vy'ger on the other, So' that the entrances to it arc over drawbridges. The Stadtholders used to reside there wshen at The Hague, but of late the Prince has not done So. 
The assemblies of the states-general, the States of the Provinces, the council of the nobility, and the Supreme courts of justice, are all held in this old palace.. 
The Chamber, as it is called, where the States assemble, would be a very mean room but for it’s being ornamented with whole length portraits of the siadt holders, which are finely executed. Over the chimney-piece, at the upper end of the room, there is a pisture of Prudence, and at the other end one of Fortitude, 
but 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. i27' 
but they did not strike me as capital performances. 
The Chamber of the Truces, another room belonging to the States, is the only one worthy notice in the whole palace. It is remarkable for the number of it’s grand windows, which add greatly to it’s beauty, and a fine picture of jvilliamxhq Third, who was Siadtholder, and King of England, The person that showed me the palace, told me, in an ostentatious manner, that it was the finest portrait of that prince ever painted.” I was of a different opinion, but thought it prudent not to declare it. There is a good piffure of Liberty over the door of this' room, and the carpet on which the State 
* called, because the Truce between the States and the Spaniards, which lasted twelve years, was concluded in this room, in the year 1609. 
G 4 chair 
128 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
chair is placed is very beautiful, but not “the finest in the world, ”, as my guide informed me, Sori have Seen many in England much Superior to it; however, I did not Say So then, being willing that national vanity should be pleased with it’s own imaginations. In this Chamber the foreign ministers have their audience and conferences with the States. 
There is another. Smaller chamber, used for private conferences, which is only remarkable for having Seme fine pi£lures in it, painted by that celebrated artist Hans Holbein, a native of Baftl, in Switzerland, contemporary with Erasmus, and who lived in the habits of friendship with him. 
The entrance to the chambers of the States is through a Gothic hall, where 
the 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 12p 
the lotteries are drawn, the walls of which are decorated with stags, and other trophies of viffory taken from the enemies os the Republic, in particular battles, which are mentioned under each respedlively. The outer and inner courts are where the horse and soot guards are drawn up. The former only attend during the time the assemblies of the States are Sitting, in order to prote the members, and to dragoon the populace in case of insurrecfiion; but the foot guards are constantly on duty, and are drawn up and relieved every Sorenoon, in the adjoining grove called Het Fleyne. Near the outer court is the prison, where those unfortunate brothers the De Witts fell a Sacrifice to an enraged and armed mob, in opposition to the Sriendly intentions of the magistrates, and in defiance of three G 5 troops 
130 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
troops of horse guards, ordered on duty to disperse the rioters. 
Adjoining to this old palace, there is another, built in the year 1650, by Prince Maurice, on his return to Holland from his government of Brazil, which is still called by his name. It was originally ornamented with a curious collection of foreign rarities, which, with the inssde of the palace, were destroyed by fire in the year 1707. It was then in the hands of private persons, who repaired the building; since which it is generally appropriated to public uses. It is finely situated on the Vyver, and the outside still retains it’s original form, which, considering the date of it’s erefiion, is a good piece of architeffure, not preposter oufly loaded with ornaments, like the generality 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 131- 
nerality of the public buildings through*’ out Holland. 
It was in this palace that the States’ entertained King Charles the Secotid, his brothers, and their nstmerous retinue, in the year 1660, a Sew days before thdr^ return to England from exile, in a manner So truly magnificent, as was Scarcely ever known in the courts os the greatest monarchs; and though the expense of of this liberal aff, and of the presents made to the King and his whole Suite, ‘ was immense, they nobly concealed it, that the particulars might not be known, ' which threw a greater lustre on their unbounded generosity. The King promised to entertain the strifiest friendship for the States in consequence of this noble mark of their esteem for him; however, • 
* This is noted by Claremhru 
G 6 
he 
132 THE FAVOURITES OF FELTCITV. 
he did not keep his word, for. Soon after this, hq involved the Republic in a most unjust war: but insincerity was the cha rafferistic of the Stuart race. 
The Hof, or palace of fviejiand, which stands on the old Voorhout, or Mall, is now in a state of ruin, and consequently, though it belongs to the fpmce of Orange,, he never resides there. 
The palace called the Old Court, which in it’s outward appearance is a noble building with two wings, is miserably finished within side, and as wretchedly furnished. It has a good railing of iron gilt before it, which incloses the courtyard Srom the street in which it stands, called by the Dutch Noord Eynde. This palace belonged to King William the Third; and the arms of Great britain ‘ and 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 153^ 
and Najfau are still remaining over the centre gate. I was told it now belongs to the King of prujjia^ whose family were heirs to Kirig jvilliam as Prince os Orange’^ and it is generally the residence of the, priijjian minister. 
The stait houfe is a disgraceful buih ing Sor Such an important place as Lhe Hague, though a modern Struffure, and but for the Latin motto upon k, would be taken Sora private house. 
Some of the houses, or Hotels as they are styled, belonging to the Soreign mk liisters and other grandees, are stately buildings, particularly the magnificent mansion of the late Count Beniinck, and that belonging to the King of Spain for the use of his ambalsador, which has the arms of Spain in the front.. 
The 
134 the favourites of felicity. 
The public charities, though not numerous, are important. The house for the reception of ancient and decayed widows, founded by a private individual, is a noble institution; and the asylum for the daughters of persons of rank, whose fortunes are not equal to their birth, does the highest honour to the memory of teen Mary, consort of William wtlfnrd^ who founded this charity when Frincefe of Orange 
There are no public hospitals at Lhe Hague, the Sick poor being attended at their own houses by Physicians and Surgeons, who are appointed to particular distriffs, and are paid by the magistrates. And though there is no university, there are two Medical profefsor ships, one for Botany, and one for Anatomy, Midwifery, and Surgery; and a 
Medical 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
Medical Society, Sor collefiing meteorological observations, and the history of Epidemics. 
The churches are far from being magnificent structures. The cloister church, once a convent, is a mean edifice. That called the New Church, which is a kind of octagon building, is a good piece of architecture, but it is rendered dismally gloomy by a large group of trees that Surround it. The great Church has nothing remarkable in ids appearance. It terminates with a high steeple, and has a very large organ in it, which I was told was much Superior to that in the great church at Rotterdam; but, as I heard it very indifferently played on, and wretchedly out of tune, was not tempted to make a comparison. There are a number of monuments in this church belonging 

1^6 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
ing to persons of distinffion, and, among the rest, a pompous one, erected at the expense of the States, to perpetuate the memory of that famous Dutch Admiral uopdam, whose gallant adfions in the Service of the Republic highly merited the honours done to his memory by a grand, public funeral, and a magnificent monument; but the Dutch are celebrated for paying posthumous honours to those that have exerted themselves in their Service. 
The established religion of the United States is Presbyterian, or calvinisra; but all perfuasions are tolerated, except the Roman Catholic, which is confined to the chapels of the Ambassadors of that profession, by a Severe restridtion of the States. The French Lutherans have a 
church. 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. i37 
church there *; the Jews two elegant Synagogues; and there is an englijjy and German church, which is alternately used by both. 
The finest streets, and most pleasant parts os the Hague are the Prince Grafty and the Princess Graft; the Noord Eynde, the plaatsf the Vyverhergy the Het pleyny the Spuy^ and the old Voorhout and nev Voorhout* 
The old Voorhout is a fine open place, ' with a walk, or mall in the middle, the trees of which are Said to have been planted by the celebrated Etnperor of Germany and King of Spains Charles the fifthy in the year 1536. It is a Spacious 
* In this church those great ornaments to literature, oratory, and religion, Bajhage and Saurin used to preach. 
walk, 
t38 the favourites of felicity. 
walk, and is railed on both Sides, without which there are roads for carriages, and a row os Superb houscs on each Side. The Prince Graft s the finest street at' Lhe Haguey and, upon the whole, perhaps little inserior to any street in Luropet It is very Spacious, near a mile in length, perseffly straight, and the beaurisul canal that runs through it is ornamented with Several bridges of hewn stone with railing; The rest of the streets and places I have enumerated are all adorned with good buildings; but there is a great want of uniformity, except in one or two of them. 
The canals in the streets with the drawbridges over them, and the groves of trees on their banks, have a pidturesque appearance; but the plantations are too numerous; and many of the streets would 
be 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. I 39 
be infinitely more beautiful, were the borders os the canals Saced with stone and railed, instead of the trees. This would render them' more Spacious, and likewise more healthful. The streets throughout this place are very neatly paved with wdiat we call Dutch Clinkers, which are So curiously laid, as to Tender it very pleasant walking, and the footways in general are kept remarkably, clean. 
The Flaats is the place where criminals are executed. Capital offences are punished with death throughout the United Provinces; but, when the crimes are atrocious, the Dutch inflict cruel tortures before the offenders are finally dispatched. 
The markets, abound with a plenty of all kinds of provisions j and that where 
the 
1, 40 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY, 
the fish is Sold is worthy notice, Sor it is all brought alive from the Sea and the canals, and kept in troughs of water, and the variety of Sorts is prodigious. The Dutch, in general, dress fish admirably well; and the landlords of the inns, or houses of entertainment, charge strangers most extravagantly for it when the easy purchasc of it is considered; to say nothing of a Species of imposition commonly praffised, which is that of bringing a traveller more than he orders, and obliging him to pay for it in defiance of all remonstrance. 
There are many good inns in different parts of Phe Hague, capable of affording proper accommodations to all ranks if travellers, and the expenses are nearly equal with our inns in England, though, in the general article.a of convenience, 
the 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 14! 
the englijjj greatly excel the Dutch. There are public ordinaries at Several of these inns, where a stranger may dine if he wishes Sor company, and the tables are generally well furnished; but to lodge and board in a private house is the most frugal mode of living, and then, I was informed, it is as expensive as in London. Properly Speaking, there are no taverns at The Haguef nor, indeed, throughout the Provinces, So that wine is only drank by the inhabitants at their own houses, but they purchase it for half the price we do in London. 
As Lhe Hague has long been reputed the emporium of politics and pleasure, I expeffed I should meet with a : Teat variety of public diversions; but in this I was greatly disappointed. I heard a very indisterent public concert, and Sava ^ French 
142 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
French comedy, performed in a theatre Galled the opera houfe (an inelegant place) by a Set of actors inferior to many ■of our strolling companies. Italian operas Lave been exhibited at this house;; they were dropped, for want of encouragement; and I understood that the comedians have no regular establishment, but depend principally on the Subscriptions of the foreign ambassadors. There is another theatre where Dutch plays are Sometimes represented, but it was not open while I was there. these, as I was informed by an English gentleman, are generally most wretched exhibitions. I heard of Assemblies, but believe they are confined to the houses of the grandees, in the manner of our English routes. 
A short distance Srom The Hague, on the road to Serghuliet, the countryseat 4 of 
the favourites of felicity. 143 
of the late Count Beniinckj famous for it’s fine gardens (formerly called Portland gardens), there is a place of entertainment, in the Summer sieason, called vaux hae in imitation of Vauxhall Gardens near London; but this, like all the imitations of that terrestrial paradise, is a very humble one. 
When.i expressed my Surprise at the barrenness of public diversions to a Butch gentleman, he told me, with Some degree of warmth and importance, that they amused themselves in fine weather in walking and riding to Schevelingi a town about two miles distant, where they bathed, and went to eat fish as Soon as it was caught; and that, in the winter Sea son, all ranks of the people diverted themselves with Seating upon the canals and meadows, or being drawn in Sledges 
This 
THE favourites OF FELICITY. 
This time of the year, he observed, was the gayest season with the hollandeys^ for booths were erefled upon the ice, and they held a kind of universal jubilee; as, indeed, I was afterwards a v/itness of during my stay at Leyden. I looked upon this account of public diversions as tristing, and unworthy of Such a place as The Hague, where no trade is carried on, where the Court is kept, the Seat of government, and the residence of foreign ministers, the nobility, and other persons of distinffion of almost all nations However, I must observe, that they take great delight in their gardens, which are very beautiful, and they Sometimes give into enormous expenses in the article of flowers. The month of May, as I was informed, is particularly celebrated at Ihe Hague, and most other places in they the Provinces, for they then hold a capital 7 Lir, 
THE FAVOURITES O? FELICITY. i45 
fair, called a Kermis continues a week, during which time the inhabitants, and those brought thither on the occasion, relax from all their cares, and give into mirth and festivity. It is a kind of Dutch Carnival, for the courts of the palace, and all the apartments of the States, are adorned with may poles and garlands of flowers with ingenious devices, and they are likewise ereffed before the houses of the magistrates and principal officers of the state. Formerly the Grandees used to parade the streets in masquerade, but that custom has been Suppressed of late years, on account of Some irregularities which it produced. 
The Booksellers shops, and Some of the coffeehouses, are the Seats of politics, but the latter are also garaing houses; for gaming of every description vol. I. H prevails 
i4si THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
prevails at The Hague both in public and private. 
The public walks are very pleasant, and the roads near the town are guarded by Small parties of the military; though this is rather a matter of state than necessity, for robbery, or any kind of molestation whatever, is almost unknown throughout the roads of this republic; but pick pockets infest the streets, and the populace pay very little respect to strangers. 
With respeift to pompous carriages, and Splendour of dress, The Hague is a gay place; for the foreign ministers and other grandees appear to vie with each other in these articles. The polite part of the inhabitants give into the follies and fopperies of more modish countries, 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. laf 
tries, much more than in any other p.tc of Holland. An abundance of Frenchified dutch men may be Seen in every street, and Some of them appear extremely awkward through the embarrassment of arts, not natural to the genius of a clumsy and uncouth generation of mankind. However, a considerable number of policq and elegant people reside there, who observe every Species of civility and hospi tality to strangers, if they are properly recommended, but not else; for Lhe Hague is too much visited by foreigners for this to become general. This place abounds with a considerable number of Jews, many of wdiom are very opulent, live in the greatest Splendour, and are remarkable for taking the most notice of foreigners. 
II 2 
Though 
148 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
Though one of our English poets, Speaking of Holland, remarks of the female Sex, 
“Not once ye taught me love’s or friendfliip’s flame, 
Aild where is he that ever taught it you * ?” 
there are houses of accommodation at The Hague, where ladies of easy virtue may be found, of all nations; but those from among the natives appear the most rude and abandoned of the rest. 
The wood on the north side of the town is a great ornament to The Hague, being very extensive, with Several roads through it, and it has a fine mall about half a mile in length, which must have been cut through the wood with confi derable labour and expense. This is a pleasant retreat for the inhabitants in hot 
* Aktnjide* 
seasons, 
THE FAVOURITE? OF FELICITY. i49 
seasons, who may enjoy it either in carriages or on Soot. In this wood, at the distance of a mile from the town, stands the celebrated palace built by the Princess Amelia de Sohiies^ relict of Prince Frede^ riclhenry, the third Stadtholder, as a place of lamentation for the loss of her confort, according to an inscription in the gallery of the palace. Upon the whole, it is a beautiful struffure, and has the arms of najfattdrange quartered with those of Etigland over the gate, in compliment to the marriage of pkmce Williamson of Frederick and Amelia with the Princess Mary, eldest daughter of Charles the jirii of England, and mother pf King William the Thirds It is generally styled the palace in the Wood; and, indeed, it is striflly So, Sor notwithstanding it’s situation in the wmod before mentioned, there is a large grove of trees 
H 
cut 
150 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
cut into walks within side the moat that Surrounds it, So that this stately building, which otherwise would be a fine objed at a distance, cannot be Seen till it is nearly approached, which is an unpardonable fault. The entrance to the palace is from a noble flight of stairs which extends to the whole front of the centre part, within the wings added to it by Prince William on his marriage. It is embellished with Some exquisite pieces of Sculpture; particularly statues William the Firji, his two Sons Maurice and Frederick, and William the Second, all of white marble. But the principal ornament of this palace is the ostagon Saloon, which is truly magnificent, adorned with a cupola, with a gallery round it’s base, and Some inimitable paintings, executed by the celebrated Rubens and other capital Flemish masters; the most important 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 151 
tant of which are, the military exploits os Prince Frederick and the Shop of Vulcan. There is a picture os the Princess Amelia in mourning in the centre os the deling; and, perhaps, the most admirable bamboo Surniture to be Seen in Europe is in this palace. 
The walk from Lhe Hague to the village os Scheveling is extremely pleasant, being cut through hills of Sand, and planted on each side with rows of lime and yew trees; Soon after entering which, the steeple of Scheveling church is Seen at the distance of about fvro miles. The village is now only a little fishing town, but from thence there is a beautiful pro spest of the Sea, and when the tide is out there are fine rides over the Sands. 
H 4 
Scheveling 
152 the favourites of felicity, 
Kcheveling is noted in history for two remarkable inundations; the Dutch miracle of the tide’s changing it’s course and stopping Several hours, when the combined fleets of France and England were preparing to make a descent upon the coast in the year 1672; the two embarkations of Charles the Second of England, in 1650, and 1660; and for a famous sailing chariot made by stevinust ihe.great mathematician, Prince Maurice, which is mentioned by Bifoop will hm, Walchius, Grotius, and others, concerning the swifcness of which the Dutch relate Such extraordinary stories to ira' vellers as are not to be credited 
She Hague has been the Seat of government for the United Provinces ever Since the year 1250, when it was removed from grave/and, a town of Delft 
land 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. i53 
hnd near the mouth of the river Maefet but it Sends no Deputies to the State. The title of the Stadtholder is that of Captain-general and Admiral of the forces of the States; but his power is very limited, for he has neither a Seat, or a voice in the Assemblies, nor are they obliged to communicate their deliberations or resolutions to him, Sor they represent the sovereignty, and the stadt holder the dignify of the States only; So that they can alter or abridge his prerogatives just as they Sec sit. The stadt holderjbip was not hereditary till it was Settled So in the person of the present, Vince, and, upon failure of his issue, on that of his Sister, the pkmcefs Caroline. Hch as the power of pardoning condemned criminals, but not the absolute dispo sal of the military commands under him, nor any appointments whatever in the H 5 civil 
i54 THE favottrites OF FEETCITY, 
civil lists; and the States not only nominate their own Ambassadors, but reserve to themselves the Sole right os having the Secret affairs of other nations communicated to them by the foreign ministers. these assfumptions, with the trifling revenue * of the Stadtholderjhip, would almost level him upon the footing of a private gentleman, were it not for his great patrimonial income. And here I cannot avoid remarking, that the late civil commotions, the behaviour of the States to the Duke of Brunswick, who was Field marstial, and Captain of the regiment of Dutch Foot guards, and their lately entering into an alliance of the strifiest nature with the French, their ancient and hereditary enemies, appear to favour too much of Dutch perfidy, and 
9500/. Sterling, 
forebode 
TI FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. I 
forebode no good to the interest or sta" bility of the stadtholde'^'jld.p. However, it is to be hoped, the estimation in which the Prince is held by the Army in general, the friendshiptef the King of Prussia, and the hostile intentions of the feror of Germany towards the Republic, may, altogether, operate in crushing the influence of a Sadtion unjustly railed against him. 
I have been rather more circumstantial in this account of Phe Hague, than 1 shall be in Speaking of the other places through which I paised in my travels, not because most of the cities and towns in the United Provinces are constitutionally the Same, but because Some of our Geographical book makers in England have either greatly exceeded truth iu their accounts of this place, or else H 6 have 
J THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITT. 
have jumbled things together in the gross, while others tells us, it is the Seat of gaiety and pleasure, and the finest place in the known world, c. kc. c. 
There are many things, I confess, to attract the notice of a stranger at The Hague; but, when his curiosity has led him to take an accurate Survey of the whole, he will, I believe, think his time well bestowed, but not wish to live there, in preference to many other places, even in Holland, which, though less Spoken of, are far more desirable. 
When I quitted The Hague, I went to Leyden, having letters of recommendation, from Several persons of importance in England, to two of the proseffors at the University. On my delivering these I was treated with the greatest civility and 
respest; 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 157 
respeff; and as Soon as I had an opportunity os relating my history, and of explaining my reascns Sor resuming the study of physic, I received the most friendly and disinterested offers of every possible assistance the University could bestow upon me : and to the honour of humanity, and the credit of that noble Seminary of learning, I afterward found performance kept pace with profession. 
My arrival at Lay then just about the time the medical professors were to begin their courses of lefiures determined me to make Some stay there, in order to attend them. The next objefis of my curiosity were the hospitals, in which the professors liberally communicated the information 1 desired; and I obtain 
* begin in September, and read till mid fiimmer. 
ed 
I5B THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITF. 
CD permishon to visit the library on the days it was opened for the students, which is twice every week, an indulgence Seldom granted to any persons not members of the University. Thus, during a stay os six months, I employed every hour of my time to Some advantage, according to the maxim of p/invf which Says that, “all time is lost that is not bestowed on study.” 
This celebrated University is the most ancient of the five belonging to the United Provinces, being founded by the Republic in 1575, as a retvard to the inhabitants of the city, for their courage and Sufferings, in Sustaining an important siege of almost six months the year before, against the Spaniards, during which they were reduced to every dreadful iieceffity, and at last were driven to the 
desperate 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 159 
desperate expedient os cutting the banks of the adjoining rivers, to lay the coun^ try round them under water, by which, part of the Sfamjh army was drowned, and Count Lezvis, brother to the Prince of Orange coming very opportunely ta their Succour, the rest of the Spaniards retired, and the city was preserved. 
As it would be almost endless to enumerate every particular relative to this university, I shall confine myself to the most important. 
The buildings, of which it is composed, are neither elegant or grand, yet they are Superior to the other Universities of the United Provinces, as I was informed. The Schools are compafi and well built, and on the jattic story of these the celebrated Ehevir had his printing housc. 3 The 
lo THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
The botanic garden, and the anatomical theatre, are very important, and have long been famous throughout Europe, The former owes much of ids excellence to the labours of the late learned and ingenious Boerhaave, of whom I shall Speak hereafter. Nor can I with justice omit the name of the late Andrian Van Royen, the plants being arranged according to his System; and great praise is due to the present botanic professor, David Van Royeny for having followed the steps of his illustrious predecessors. The col ledlion of foreign plants, in particular, is prodigious, most of which were originally brought from the Cape of Good hope.t the ea/i lndies, and other places, by the Dutch company’s ships. 
The Anatomical Theatre contains a numerous colleffion of fine Ikeletons, and 
valuable 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY, ifil 
valuable preparations; but whether they excel those at Padm^ or in our Surgeons Hall in London as the Ijeyden professors assert, I will not take upon me to determine. There is a museura containing an infinite number of euriosities,. artificial and natural, and a few antiquities, among which are two Egypian mummies. One of these is Said to be that of a king of Egypt about two thousand years old, but on what authority I was not informed► There is,, likewise, a large Orrery, adapted to the Copemican System, which moves by clockwork. 
The Library Is amazingly extenssve In respefl to the number of printed books, but it is in the greatest esteem for the large colleflion of ancient and valuable manuscisiprs (upwards of two thousand), among which are an incredible number 
of 
l6z THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
of oriental ones; and the original copy of a treatise on the smallpox by Rhazes, Written about the latter end of the ninth, or the beginning of the tenth century, which, at Leyden, is Said to be the first public treatise on that disease; but this, as I have found since, is a mistake, for Rhazes himself informs us, that Aaron, : an Alexandrian physician wrote on that Subject So early as the year 622. However, be this as it may, the first account of the Variolte generally known, was thia written by Rhazes, whose description of it is very accurate; and what is worthy observation, he recommended the cool method of treatment now followed in modern practice. The University honoured the late Doffor Mead, and, after him, Mr, Chamfmg, by lending them this celebrated raanuscript: an instance of liberality which did the highest credit 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 165 
to learning and learned men, by displaying that freedom of communicating, knowledge which learning should ever promote. 
This library is particularly indebted, in the article of raanuscrips, to Joseph Scaliger, ivardner, and Goliusy and the University has lately much enlarged it, by the acquisition of a valuable collection of books which belonged io ivepfer, the learned author of that celebrated Work entitled Hijioria apoplefhcorum, 
All the Sciences are taught at Leyden with extraordinary care, and the strifiest attention is paid to the promotion of Solid learning; there evidently appearing an emulation among the proseffors which, shall most excel; not that a preference is given to any one Science in particuiar., 
And 
164 THR FAVOURITES OF fellcixy. 
And, to the honour of this University, learning, and the principles of good morals, are So judiciouify disseminated, that there is less dishpation and wanton irregularity among the students, than at any other public Seminary, perhaps, in the known world. This is partly owing to the constant assiduity of the professors in the pursuit of knowledge, their frugality, composed behaviour, readiness to admit the students to private conferences when, they wish to have difficulties explained, and the number of public lectures. So that their pupils are influenced' by the force of example to regularity and diligence; for they are under fewer restraints than at many other universities, where they are obliged to reside at the Colleges; the students at Leyden being too numerous to dwell in the University, as there are but two colleges, and therefore. 
TH FAVOURITES OF FFLICITY. 165 
fore., except a few established on a foundation, they all live at private houses, in what parts of the city they please. 
As no oaths are imposed on the students when they are entered at this University, nor any objeffion made to particular religious persuasions, it’s popularity is greatly promoted by these means, and ilie pupils consist of persons of all nations, and all religions. They wear no academical habits, but dress as they please; though morning gowns are much used, which I think a vile custom for youth, for these cannot be considered as a drels, yet they very rarely appear in anything elfe, and are So ssovenly as to attend the leffures in them; but the ridiculous fashion of wearing Swords is now almost abolished. Even the professors are not distinguished by any particular 4 habit. 
l66 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
habit, but when they read their lectures, and at public disputations, Sor they Seem to despise the external pomp kept up at other Universities. 
Once in fifty years, a jubilee is celebrated, to commemorate the first institution of this university; at which the Stadtholder, the foreign ministers at The iiagu6y the nobility, and most of the principal personsin Holland, generally attend, when the proseffors and students assemble in the great church, and degrees are conferred in the Several faculties ex mere majorum. The fourth and last jubilee was held in the year 1775. 
The Physic school of Leyden, in particular, is justly esteemed equal to any in Europe And here I cannot resist the impulse I feel within me, to say Something 
the favourites of felicity. 167 
thing of the illustrious Boerhaave who once presided at the head of it; and am the more desirous of doing this, being willing to refute a vulgar error generally adopted. 
He was born at the village of voor hout^ distant about two miles from the iiaerletn gate of Leyden, on the 31st of December, 1668, his father being at that time minister of the parish. After receiving a good grammatical education under his father, he went to the Schools of Leyden in 1682, and was admitted into the University in 1684. In 1689, he delivered a public academic oration, the Subjest of which was, to prove that the doflrine of Epicurus, concerning the chief good, was known, and well understood by Cicero. This was fo well received, that he was honoured with the 
thanks 
l68 THE TAVOUR ites OF FELICITT. 
thanks of the whole University, and presented with one of their gold medals. 
The next year, he took a degree in philosophy, and, as his patrimony was but Small, he taught the mathematics, in order to defray the expense of prosecu ting further studies. His father had designed him for the church; but, giving into the study of physic as a relaxation from that of divinity, he afterwards re solved to make it his profession, for which purpose he studied Anatomy, Chemistry, and Botany. 
From Leyden he went to the University of Haderwiek in Gelderland, where, in 1693, he took the degree of Doffor in Physic, but returned to in 1701, 
when he Succeeded Drelincourt as lecturer on the institutes of Physic. In 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. l6g 
1703, the university os Sensi. 
ble of his great merit, offered him a vacant profefforship, which he refused; whereupon, that of Leyden issued a decree to advance his Salary, and Settle the reversion of the first medical profeffbr ship that might become vacant. In 1709, he Succeeded Dofior Hatton as Professor of Medicine and Botany; and in 1714, was honoured with the Reflorjldpy the highest dignity the university could bestow upon him. Soon after this, he was constituted Professor of the praflice of physic, in the room of Bidloo, and in 1718, he Succeeded Le Mort as profes for of chemistry. 
The rc&orjhip expired in 1725, but in this year, the Royal Academy of Sciences at Paris presented him with a diploma, as correspondent in natural philosophy; 
vol. I. I and 
lyo THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
and in 1728 defied him a member in the room of Count Marftgli. In 1729, his bad health obliged him to resign the profefforships of Botany and Chemistry; and the next year the Royal Society in Jjtndori unanimousiy chose him one of their fellows, which was a very uncommon circumstance, for unanimity Seldom happens in their eleflions. 
In 1751, he resigned being Restor the Second time. He manned at the age of forty-two, and died the 23d of September 1738, leaving a widow and one daughter. He left his Adverfana, or commonplace book, an invaluable treasure, to his nephews Herman and Abra -- ham kaauf both physicians; and to the latter, his anatomical and chemical preparations. 
He 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY, 17i 
He acquired greater wealth by his practice, rhdn any physician os his country ever did; Sor notwithstanding an unbounded generosity to his distrelsed friends, and to men of merit in indigent circumstances, which vas always done privately to avoid ostentation, he is reputed to have died worth near one hundred thousand pounds sterling; which has been falsely attributed to an avaricious disposition, instead of the real causes, viz. his lucrative employments, stisist economy, an extensive practice, and large fees, which he frequently received from his opulent patients as grateful tokens of their obligations to his abilities as a physician. 
It is mentioned in his funeral oration, wdiich at his own request was pronounced by Schultens, then professor of the I 2 Hebrew 
172. THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
Hebrew and Oriental languages, that among others os high distinffion, the Grand Duke of Tuscany had consulted him, and that Peter the Greats Czar of Muscovy, when at Leyden, ^ lay all night in his pleasure barge closeto his house for the opportunity of having Some conversation with him in the morning before college hours. His knowledge appears to have been almost universal; and it is well known that besides his own, he well understood the Chaldean, Hebrew, Greek, Latin, Spanish, French, and English languages, most of which he Spoke with the utmost accuracy and saci lity. 
I ie was accused of want of generosity to the university where he So long presided, and received every mark os esteem 
* It was situated on the bank of sifji^t'/. canal, 
and 
THE FAVOURITES OF fellctty. i75 
and honour, in not leaving his valuable library to it at his death, but this, perhaps, was a circumstance which might never occur to him. It was hinted to his widow and daughter, that Such a presentation would be acceptable, but, notwithstanding the immense Sortune he had lest them, they meanly resused it; and the greatest part of it was Sold very indifferently, by publicauftion, in the month os June 1739. 
It has been asserted, and generally understood, that in his last illness, he mistook his own case, but this is a vulgar error, as Several of the Leyden professors, and other persons I conversed with there, assured me from the highest authority. Besides which, I must observe, that he stated his case very accurately, first in a letter to Baron Bajfand, and asterwards, in 13 another 
174 the favourites of felicity, 
another letter, to idoelor Mornfon then Secretary to our Royal-society, which were both printed. His complaint was an impostumation of the lungs, with polypous concretions between them and the heart; an interruption, or stoppage, of respiration on falling asleep;; lastly, a dropsy in the abdomen and all the parts below it; complaints of which the diagnostic and pathognomonic signs are generally too obvious to be mistaken by praffitioners of much less physical knowledge than the immortal Boerhaave, who, as a physician, was no less Successful in praffice, than learned in theory, and from hence was justly styled the Batavian Hippocrates, 
Leyden is a Spacious and beautiful city, tolerably well fortified with a strong 
rampart, and a broad fosse j and it has a 
very 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
very large garrison; but, except in not having So many canals as the rest os the towns in Holland, it is So like the other places I have already described, in the general face of things, that it will be uninteresting, should I say much about it. The buildings are respeffable, and the principal Streets are long and Spacious, particularly those called the ra ^enburg, that between the Hague and Utrecht gates, and Haerlem jireet; and those that have canals are ornamented with iiandsome bridges, upon Some of which the markets are kept. 
The great church, dedicated to St, Peter, is a good building, and So is the hall where the cloth is examined and Sealed; Sor there is a pretty large manufacture of broad and narrow woollen cloth. Serges andcambiets; but it has decreased ‘6 So 
17^ the favourites of FELICITY. 
So much oslate years, that it does not employ more than half the hands it sor merly did. 
The Stadthoufe., as a public building, would be unworthy notice, but for containing an inimitable painting representing the last judgement, by a celebrated artist born in this city, and commonly called Luke os Leyden. The hospitals are well condudled, and the attention paid to them by the magistrates, and likewise by the medical and chirurgical professors, does them the highest credit. 
This city gave birth to that obstinate and crack brained Sanatic John of Leyden as he was called, a taylor by trade, whose history and death are well known; but 1 think the magistrates are wrong, not to suppress the custom os showing the table I or 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 177 
or shop board, on which this desperate enthusiast used to work, the thing, in it sels, being truly ridiculous, and the memory os a madman being better forgotten than handed down to posterity. 
In the middle of the city, in an angle formed by the old and new channels of the river Rhine, stands an ancient castle. Said to have been built by Hengiji the Saxon, in honour of his conquest of England, but the learned are divided on this point, Some being of opinion, that it was ereffed by the Romans, as a station for one of their legions. The top of this castle commands a very extensive prospest, but of what? 
Of marshy levels lank and bare, 
Sacred from furrows, hills, or trees.’* * 
Akenjlde, 
lys THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
The rivers that pass through this city having formed a number of islands, have made many bridges necesfary, of which there are upwards of ninety, and Some of them are good structures, and give an air of novelty to the place; but it’s communication with the Sea, though only about four miles from it, is not Sufficient for the flux and reflux of the tides to keep the canals from stagnation, on which account the water is very bad, and the situation extremely unhealthy, particularly in wet seasons; and the croaking of the frogs on the approach of evening, which Doffer Akenfide styled the muftc of the shady is beyond description insufferable. 
The gardeners in and near this city are famous for cultivating flowers, and 
all 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 179 
all kinds of culinary vegetables in quick Succession, great persedlion, and Such excessive abundance, that, notwithstanding their distance Srom Amjierdatn, they principally Supply it’s markets as well as those os Leyden; and the land for cultivation round this city bears a much higher price, than in any other part of Europe. 
I now perceive, gentlemen, Said the Hermity that the day draws in apace must theresore defer the account of the rest of my travels till you honour me with another visit; against which, I will endeavour to recolleff whatever I met with worthy to be related. 
We returned him thanks for the trouble he had given himself to entertain us, 
and 
lo THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
and aster promising to make another visit Soon, took leave of him, and returned to percival Cajile. 
I remain, as usual, your’s, 
Most truly, Charles Belcour. 
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME. 
U. of P Library 

n 

■1. 
s. 




'■ \. ■ s' ' ' \ -- ■€-" 

r 

POTTER 

RARE BOOK COLLECTION 
LIBRARY 
UNIVERSITY 
PENNSYLVANIA 
THE 
GODFREY F. SINGER MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY 
MR. AND MRS. JACOB SINGER 

r. 
: VV' 



THE 
A V O U R I T E 
O F 
F E L I C I T Y. 
A 
N O V E L 
IN A SERI ES OF LETTERS. 
By J O H N P O T T E R, M. B. Author of the Curate of Coventry, The Virtuous Villagers, cc. 
Quod verum atqne decens euro et rogo, et omnis in hoc sum.. Horace, 
what’s true and decent has employed ray care. To please the fancy, and inflrudt the fair. 
IN THREE VOLUME S... 
VOL. in 
Printed for W. Cass, lamb’s Conduit Street, Ho'born; T. becket, pall mall} and mefltrs.. Baldwin, Robinson, and Bew, pater nofter row. 
M DCC LXXXV 
• ^ V 
C SV. 
ii^’ 

m. 
A' ■' ■• 

.' C 
- Si.. -. 
-'■>' ■ 
'■ r fr • 
WK 


'I 


# 
st. .of P,, 
Library 
THE 
FAVOURITES 
O F 
FELICITY. 
LETTER XI 
Doctor Belcoor to Mr. Somerset. 
perd<val cajiu^ Mq^ 26, 1784* 
SIR Lionel Pierpoint and his amiable Son are now at Percival cajile, and the marriage between the latter and the beautiful Cornelia is to be consummated bextmonday, Such cheerfulnefsand plea vol. II B Surable 

THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
furable satissaffion sit on every countenance, as can only arise from the Source of conscious virtue. When I Survey the different characters here, it creates the most agreeable sensations. The happy parents view their lovely progeny with that heartfelt delight, which thought may image, but no words can paint; the lovers appear every moment to rise in the esteem of [each other, and the rest of the family, even the Servants not excepted, express their approbation of the approaching union, by every token of generous resped, and a studious assiduity to contribute to the happiness [of this event. 
There is Something inexpressibly beautiful in beholding the’emotions of human nature, and the graceful charms of un contamicated innocence, under appearances 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 3 
ances like these. It gives rise to a new. train of pleasing and Sublime ideas, which invigorate the mind, correfi: the mistakes of the heart, lead us to be delighted with ourselves and everything around us, and to admire the wisdom of that Being, who, withinsinitegoodness, created us capable of receiving happiness, and of contributing to the felicity of others. 
How thoughtless must the generality of mankind be, to overlook the captivating graces of innocence, and Suffer the depravity of vicious indulgences to rob them of the Supernal enjoyments of virtue; or to be led astray by the contagion of example, the arts of Sedufiion, or the force of passion, from those Sweet, irreproachable pleasures which gladden the heart after fruition, by admitting of recolleflion without either pain or unea b 2 siness 1 
4 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
siness! In the abodes of innocence dwell contentment and peace; but with the wicked, thorns are strewed upon the pu lows of repose. 
Whence comes it, that the beauty and importance of virtue is So frequently injured by the power of interest, and the influence of Sensuality > it arise from those evils that are connected with the blessings of life, or do men find higher enjoyment in an indulgence of sensual than mental pleasures? I am afraid it is a taste beyond the reach of my philosophy to answer these queries Satisfactorily, therefore shall content rayself with observing, that, as Providence has been graciously pleased to distinguish us Srom brute animals by faculties and fensations which ennoble us to a rank above the rest of created beings, it is the S highest 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 5 
highest folly and imprudence to disregard these peculiar prerogatives of our nature; stnce, from want of due attention to them, we frequently level ourselves with the brutes, and pursue an indulgence of appetites and passions repugnant to the laws of general humanity Virtue and vice have very opposite tendencies : those of the former promote the exaltation of reason, and Security of happiness; while the latter undermine the foundations of human felicity, and become the constant Sources of misery and ruin. 
Do not suppose, from what I have Said, that I am preparing to turn a puritanical field preacher. Few have a better opinion of mankind in general than myself, notwithstanding the dilsipation and profligacy of the times is So hackneyed B 3 a topic 
6 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITT. 
a topic with illiterate politicians, and drivelling moralists. I deny the axiom of Bias os Friene, that the majority are wicked. We live in a learned, and an enlightened age, circumstances that have contributed greatly to the refinement of manners; and though luxury and dissipation have got footing among us, I believe it would be found on examination, that the greater part of mankind are not So abandoned as is generally imagined. Our public virtue is conspicu ous; and even among those, where private vices reign, I have frequently ob" Served, that the high sense they entertained of moral order, led them to assume a virtue though they had it not which proves that the principles and importance of moral rectitude are known and acknowledged, though they are not always obeyed. And I am strongly of 
opinion. 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. y 
opinion, that the great Spread of wicked ness would not be So extensive, if it met with less censure and opposition, for the inconveniences and evils vice brings upon her votaries, would frequently induce them to return to virtue, could they do it unnoticed. The experience of past ages will teach us, that opposition generally injures the cause it means to Support; for there is a perverfeness in human nature not easily forced into sub jestion; and we often persist in the commission of wrong affions, because the admonition and reproof of others, as sume a Superiority over us our pride is unwilling we should acknowledge: mo nitoribus asper is the motto of most libertines. But no more on this Subjeff, for as virtue produceth it’s own reward, a vicious condust carries it’s punishment along with it. 
B 4 Though 
8' THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
Though ever Since I came to this happy mansion, my time has been Spent in the most agreeable manner, (abstraffed from the Superlative happiness resulting from my marriage), the arrival of Sir Uonel and his Son has given a new turn to the face of things. All is gaiety and gladness, and there is a general exchange of mutual complacency and good-humour. If any are on the reserve, it is. the young lovers, who appear So perfefily blessed with each other, that I am of opinion,., they are restrained by the documents of innate modesty from displaying the felicity they experience. Their joy is too important for the powers of oral expression, and has quitted the tongue to fix it’s residence in the heart. When love is the objeff of love, (without which it cannot beperseff,) it exceeds every idea that can he, formed of it. 1, know you, 
Wl\q> 
THE FAVOURITES' OF' FELICITY. 9 
who are a wit, will Say, that a couple of Sond lovers always appear' either ridiculous or insensible beings in company. It may be So, iny Sriend; but however they may Seem absent to others, they, are not lost’ to themselves, as may be dis covered by innumerable involuntary actions, and Sallies of fondness, which they cannot conceal. Love is the grand southeast cond.^rinciple of life, granted to mankind as the necessary Spring to put nature into' motion. It is the primary passion of the heart, the Source of every generous affion, and the chief fountain of terrestrial felicity. Without it, what is man? Little more than an inanimate being; and hence it has been well remarked, as an observation founded on experience, that, “all per Sons are doomed to be in love once in their lives.*’ 
B S 
What 
lo THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
What consideration can there be in this life, equal to an union with a bcautisul, and virtuous woman, formed by nature for domestic felicity? 
Is fly not more than painting can express, 
Or youthful 'poets fancy when they love? 
Does file not come, like wisdom, or good fortune, 
Replete with blessings, giving wealth and honour? 
The dowry which fly brings, is peace and pleasure. 
And everlasting joys are in her arms *.’* 
And when Providence is graciously pleased to lengthen the lives of a fond, happy pair, till age has abated the love transports of juvenility, 
** They know a passion thats more deeply charming, 
* Rtrwu 
Than 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. It 
Than fiivour’d youth e’er felt j and that is love, 
By long experience mellow’d into friendship.” 
You, perhaps, will ridicule my Sentiments on these points, but I shall disregard it if you do; for the sublimity of pure love, and the transports of connubial felicity, are Subjeffs upon which I shall ever dwell with delight. The happiness of the young lovers is alone Sufficient to make one fond of life. What can be more truly pleasing to a heart capable of enjoying the Sensibilities of human nature, than to view the amiable couple, about to enter into union, feasting their minds in the contemplation of 
^ tihow/on, 
B 6 
each 
12 THE FAVOURITES OF felidtv#, 
each other, and enjoying. those Sublime endearments which have their foundation’ in reciprocal 'passion To See his eyes Sparkle with the ecstatic fire of genuine love, and his countenance display all the commanding forcibility of youthful ardour, while her blushing cheek of innate modestj^, first glows with Sympathetic sensibility, and then gives way to the Soft enchanting Smile of heartfelt Satisfaction, is' what neither poets nor painters can describe; it must be Seen from the Spontaneous emotions of nature and not from the imitations of art.. 
Sir William has declared against making the marriage of his daughter a public one; and in this he is joined by Sir lionei the, young folks, and indeed every, one but mad cap Selima; however, the 
fathers: 
THE FAVOURITES • OF FELICITY;; 
both agree, that there is greatr indelicacy in the parade os public weddings. For my own part, I have always disapproved of them, because they place the bride and bridegroom in a disagree -- able situation; for, on these occasions, the idea of the wedding night, generally renders the wedding day a Scene of ludte crous joke and ribaldry, at the expense of the bride’s modesty in particular, and if the bridegroom happens to be unhackneyed 'in the ways of men, he Seldom receives any improvement In his morals, being generally made the butt against' which the shots of' obscene wit are di reffed. In short, the common ceremonies and conversation at public weddings, frequently put decency out of countenance, and disgrace human understanding. In this Species of depravity both Sexes are too apt to join; nay, I have Sometimes 
14 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
times known the women take the lead In it. But, Surely, this condust in either is highly reprehensible, for when Such things are encouraged by parents and Superiors, there is great danger that they may precipitate a young couple into mistaken irregularity, or a fatal vehemence. 
Mr. Fierpont is a prodigy, if a graceful person, a lively imagination, an elegant address, and untainted principles, can render a young man So. these are qualifications infinitely Superior to his birth and fortune; for though the latter entitle him to notice, the former merit the highest respect. 1 think he fully answers the character you gave of him in your last letter. 
I have already observed, that Selima Vas born a beauty 5 yet, upon the whole, 4 corndid.s 
the favourites of felicity, 
cornelid.s person is Superior to her sister’s.' She has more of the true woman in her composition; and her refined Sensibility, and Solidity of understanding, are qualities far beyond that volatile and vivacious disposition which So strongly marks selimd.s charaffer. 
All here join with me in respects and love to you and Mrs, Somerset, I shall not write to you again till after the marriage. 
I am, most truly, your’s, 
Charles Belcour^ 
LET. 
l6 THE FAVOUR1TES.OF felicltv. 
L E T T E R XIL 
Mr. Somerset to Doctor Belcoue*. 
London., June ti 

Dear Doctor, 
YOU are the oracle of intelligence, “and amusement j for I astiire you with : sincerity and gratitude, that your three last letters have afforded me much entertainment, and you have my warmest thanks for the trouble you have, taken to ghe me pleasure. 
I am 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY, if 
L am pleased with the good opinion you entertain os Sir William for through life I have met with very few men equal to him. He formedshis manners on the principles of virtue, and their Solid basis has ever Supported him with the utmost stability. The happiness of himself and others has been the study of his life, and he now enjoys the rewards of bis goodness, in the Secret gratulations of his own heart, and the universal esteem of mankind; 
The charafler you give his Son charms me, for the amiable endeavours of a father, to promote goodness in a Son, are not always crowned with success. He was a youth of great expedlation when he went to Oxford \ but I ever dreaded his being emancipated from the restraint of his father, at the early time 
of; 
l8 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
of lise he was Sent to the University; for notwithstanding the regulations which must be observed there, the attention and care of a preceptor, is very different Srom the affectionate ardour and assiduity of a parent for the welfare of his beloved offspring. And though I do not mean to throw a general resteffion on that noble 
Seminary of learning, the U -- -- -- — of 
O -- -- -, am Sorry to Say, Srom my own 
knowledge, that the morals of the students are not So well attended to as they might be, or as they ought to be. I do not allude to the public opportunities there are of indulging vice and folly, but to private and unpardonable irregularities, countenanced by Some of the guardians of discretion and good order themselves. I could illustrate this by innumerable instances notorioufiy culpable, but, as I am stout, I will be merciful, 
and 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. i9 
and confine myself to one only, is of a reverend V — P -- -- -- -- -- 
This who 
Seldom concerns himself much how his pupils advance in their studies, provided they permit him to gorge his rotunded paunch to its utmost extension, and drink wine, without limitation, at their expense. 
Till nought prevails but riotous excess, 
The noisy maddening laugh, and jest obscene, The B — ~’s loud roar, and drunken midnight brawl. * 
1 am not prone to censure, yet think the indignation of mankind ought to rise with vengeance against an offender of this description, because the example of a public preceptor has great influence 5 
* Altered from the Oratorio of Beljhazzar* 
and 
ssro THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY; 
and it is much to be Seared, that more of Such a man’s pupils will be corrupted by his praffice, than improved by his precepts. ‘‘ Surely, ” Says an amiable writer, “none can think without horror on that man’s condition, who has been wicked in proportion as he has had more means of excelling in virtue, and used the light im -- parted from heaven only to embellish folly, and shed lustre, upon crimes.” ’ 
The eager’ curiosity and ardent inclinations of youth, too generally lead them to rush into afiion of themselves, without a siambeau to light them through the labyrinth of vice and folly; and the opinions of young minds, respeciing their interest, or felicity, are So Srequently founded on romantic ideas, that their views and wishes are Seldom confined witlsin just and rational limits, after they 
have.' 
THE FAVOURITES OP FELICITY. 21 
shave learned to rejefi: the precepts of ancient experience, and lose their refpe^ for the authority of Superiors. 
rl would not be thought So rigid a moralist, as not to allow Some indulgence to the innocent inclinations of youth, for I well know that the labour of industry, and the pains and perils of human life, require Some counterpoise of relaxation and pleasure. There must be light as well as shade in a painting, or it will have very few admirers. The main actions of the drama necestarily require relief from the intervention of trifling incidents and occurrences, for these render the whole more interesting and pleasing,; and when we are careful that they arc Suitable concomitants to the principal design of directing the plot to a moral end, it is laudable to admit and encourage 
22 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY.' 
rage them. Thus the amusements and recreations of life should be used as Sweeteners in the cup of care, but in Such proportion only as not to injure the efficacy of the other ingredients. 
Novelty is Said to be “an eminent Source of pleasing gratification which axiom I admit; but. Surely, it must be allowed, that it is also the common origin of most human errors? We are too Soon Satiated with uniformity, more especially in the early part of life, and hence it is that we loose the rein of that propensity of the mind toward viciffitstde. This prompts us to reject what has pleased, and might continue to do So, till we enter into an unwearied and endless pursuit of new gratifications. ‘‘ The cruel something unpojfejfedf* prevents the renewel of past enjoyments, though we 
have 
the favourites of felicity. 23 
have experienced their importance and delight. I would not have it supposed here, that I have a wish to restrain those desires that stimulate the mind to the acquisition of useful knowledge, and the enlargement of our views of nature. 
** For Such the bounteous providence of heav’n, In every breast implanting this desire Of objeists new and strange, to urge us on With unremitted labour to puisiue Those sacred stores that wait the ripening soul, 
In truth’s exhaustlefs bosom ^ 
could enlarge greatly upon this fub je£l:, if time would permit, but at present 
shall only remark, that I am one of those who are willing to make every liberal 
* Akenjlde* 
allowance 
24 the favourites of feltcityc 
•^allowance for the Sollies and mistakes of tmankindjbeing convinced itisadifficulttalk to Sail through the ocean of lise, without Some errors in our reckoning, Some mis carriages in our steerage, and other deficiencies in the true principles .of navigation. 
Some carry too much Sail, and others too little. Some, defying every danger, steer right before the wind to the whirlpool of vice; and, like incautious mariners standing too near that dreadful vortex the Maleftrom *, are inevitably lost. Some, either too daring or too timid, neglesting the helm, or keeping a bad lookout, strike upon the bankrupt’s rock, from which, though they 
A dangerous whirl pool, or seawortexj on the western coast of Norwaj^ 
Some 
THR FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 2^ 
Sometimes get clear, their nautical skill is doubtful ever after. Some labour through life without making one Successful voyage, and at last fink in the gulf of disappointment, or stoat without a rudder in the lake of adversity. Some, imprudently anxious to be hastily rich, and unwilling to wait the stow reward of honest industry, venture on illicit commerce; but these, being Smugglers, or pirates, generally close their race of adventure in a prison, or on a gibbet. A few cautious and experienced navigators contrive to steer with the gales of prosperity;; voyage is crowned with Success, and they anchor at last in the harbour of Security, with the calm of ease, and sunshine of fortune. The ocean of life, like that great collection of waters which Surrounds the terrestrial world, is beset with visible and invisible 
vol. II 
C 
dangers 
l6 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
dangers; and though various charts Sor human conduct have been laid down; yet, as in the arts of navigation, the difference between theory and practice is So great, that few are equally Ikilled in both. 
I was shocked when I read your remarks on our cousin Selima^ because they correspond with an opinion I had Sormed of her the last time I was in the country. And I then greatly distiked Some familiarities I observed between her and her music masterwho is a Smart personable coxcomb, and appeared to have more in his bead than crotchets and quavers, for his eyes were as aisiive as his singers; and, in my ophiion, much more expreshve in fire and Sensibility. I wish he may not instruct her in the art of love as well as the art of music. If any plan of this 
nature 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. ^7 
nature should be in contemplation be tween this young Sellow and our volatile cousin, depend upon it, the marriage of her sister will bring it to a Speedy conclusion. I tremble at the idea; for, should she disgrace herself with this person, or even enter into connexion with him by a a clandestine marriage, it will distress her family beyond description; and though Sir William is one of the most benevolent men, and best of parents, he is So rigidly averse to every z6t of disobedience to moral and Social obligation, that I am persuaded his resentment will be Singularly Severe. 
I have always remarked through life, that young women of excursive imaginations, and romantic ideas, Seldom ast with that conformity to the rule of right, which is observed by others less affive C 2 and 
2, 8 THE favourites OF FELICITY 
and volatic. Selima appears entirely inattentive to the common interests of her condition; for the Srolics of Sancy, and the dreams of delusion, Seem to engross every idea. When I attempted to con verse with her, she was as volatile as a vapour, and her whole thoughts were devoted to the erratic pleasures of the imaginatiom 
To give too great a loose to the reins of fancy, and to indulge in the delights of romantic ideas, is to “place ourselves, at will, in varied situations of happiness, and ssumber away our days in voluntary visions.” This has been finely styled the “invisible riot of the mind, the Secret prodigality of being ” but, like all other Species of riot and prodigality, it is injurious to the universal interests of Society; for when the necessities 
vthe FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 29' 
sities of nature oblige these idle dreamers to join in the ordinary affairs of life, they Seldom relish their Situations as they ought, or as 'they would have done, had their minds never Suffered the corruptions of delusive fancy. 
Kow different are imaginary pleasures from those that are real? The former delight only the present moment, but the latter become congenial with our nature, and frequently accompany us through every vicissitude, and in Some form or other Soften the cares uf life. 
I am aware you will remark, what is generally understood, that the pleasures of the imagination exceed those that are real, because the mind can extend it’s powers beyond the boundaisie? of reality. I grant this, especially respesting the inc;; 
30 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
fluence of the imagination over the pas sions; but, Surely, wisdjin should restrain the indulgence of whatever may lead ns to look with indifference on those things that are fixed by the unalterable decree of nature, or are circumscribed by the customs of the country in which we live. 
It has been asserted that “the imagination direffs almost all the passions, and mixes with almost every circumstance of affion or pleasure V hence it is of the utmost importance to regulate it’s images“ “the standard of nature and the general good; otherwise the imagination, by h eightening Some objefls beyond their excellence and beauty, or by reprefent inp; others in a more odious or terrible 
O 
shape than they deserve, may of couise 
engage 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
engage us in pursuits utterly inconststent with the laws of moral order.” 
“For fmce the coiiitc Of things external afts in different ways On human apprehenfiona, as the hand Of nature temper’d to a different frame Peculiar minds; fo haply where the pow’rs Of fancy neither lessen nor enlarge The images of things, but paint, in all Their genuine hues, the features which they wore 
In nature; there opinion will be true. 
And action right. For action treads the path In which opinion says he follows good. 
Or fitee from evil; and opinion gives Report of good or evil, as the scene Was drawn by fancy, lovely or deform’d : 
Thus her report can never there be true. 
Where fancy cheats the intelletstual eye. 
With glaring colours and distorted lines * ylkenjide. 
C 4 I have 
32 the favourites of FELICITY. 
I have often observed persons of a romantic turn of mind entire strano; crs to those ideas of prudence and circum speffion which are necessary even to the wisest of the human race; and they are also less disposed than others to participate in the misery, or enjoy the bap' piness, that happens to any but them selves. In short, the pleasures of the imagination generally lead weakness and ignorance into perplexities and distresses, on which account, though they are Sometimes most delicious banquets to the senses, I wish they could be restrained, not to operate in withdrawing our attention from the grand interests of life j for, however beautiful they may appear, yet, like the choicest flowers whose wondrous diversity of hues are So transitory, as Scarcely to out live the sunshine of a day, their consequence is Soon forgotten 
when 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 33 
when compared with real pleasures, which, like the durability os evergreens, last throughout the year, and Seldom lose their importance. 
I thank you for the description of the Hermitage, for when I was last at per aval Cajik I think it was not finished, and I only heard it Spoken of. There is a liberality and manliness in the hermit’s account of himself, as far as he has gone, for he has not concealed his Errors; and, though he Speaks of others whth a proper Spirit, it is divested of that malignity common to perlbns circumstanced as he has been, and which sre quently Sacrifices friendship and truth to it’s weakness. Having made a tour through Holland., it pleased me to find many things revived in my memory I had almost forgotten, and others de c 5 Scribed, 
34 the favourites of felicity. 
Scribed, which, through my impatience as a traveller, had escaped me. His account appears to be circumstantial and accurate; and I hope you will favour me with the continuation of his narrative, whenever you are in possession of it. 
I think your last letter out does your usual out doings. Upon my word, dor toty that sire which has So long laid in afiive, is at last gathered into a flame. The transports of love and marriage have brightened your genius So amazingly, and you poffess Such an abundance of the pathos and pathetic, that you appear to have the affeffions and passions at command. Your tropes and figures are So prettily displayed, and your style is So animated, that I think you might give us a more Spirited trjinllation of callip<e 
diai 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 35 
da or the art of getting pretty children, than we now have, illustrated with practical notes for the benefit of the present and rising generation. Though, as the old beaten path has been So constantly followed from the days of Adam to this period, I think it will be highly meritorious for a genius of your animation and cmpaffioned sire, to attempt a work of Such public utility upon a more improved plan, for it will not only be a pleasing, but an extremely interesting Subjeff to the world at large, and must immortalise your name while that continues, which, I am persuaded, will exist till chaos comes again. Your genius is capable of Soaring far above Claude billet or even the miraculous Doflor Grahame 
6 
Tour 
36 THE favourites OF FELICITY. 
Your good sense will ‘pardon my jocularity, because you must know I do not mean to offend. 
I remain, most truly, your’s, 
Francis Somerset. 
LETTER XIII 
Miss Selima Percival to Mrs. Somerset. 
Percival cajik., June 5', 1784. 
i Dear Cousin. 
HAVE had a dismal time of it since I last wrote to you, for our house has been in a bustle for more than two I months; 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 37 
months; and, I affure you, it has contributed very little to my amstseraent or happiness. 
First, we had a tedious piece of work with my aunt Olivia and her Sweet amo roso, Doflor Eelcour; and. Secondly, with Mr. Fierpoint and my sister. Mercy on me! I am sick of Such formal courtships, and melancholy weddings! And now the mighty busmess is all over, about which they have perplexed themselves for years past, it is full as unpleasant as it was before, for the Doflor and my aunt are as complete a couple of doting drones as ever you met with; and, to Speak the truth, Fierpoint and Cornelia are 
-- -- -- -- “Like lifeless statues Seeming, 
Ever mustng, mopingj dreaming 
*■ Mdtou, 
Now 
38 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
Now you must know, Cousin, I always thought courtships and matrimony were joyful matters, but, Srom the Samples I have had, find myself mistaken. Pray tell me whether this Solemn Sobriety is platonic love, about which I have read a deal os trumpery stuff? Or perhaps it is love in high lise? but is So, I should wish to copy the Specimens I have Seen among ihose in more humble situations, for there the Senfibilities of human nature appear in their true colours, without the sineffe os art. 
As the Dofior and my aunt were rather advanced in years, I did not expert much entertainment on their wedding day; but thought we should have enjoyed a little festivity when ray sister was married; however, I found m) Self deceived, for Miss Melancholy ruled 
through the 
FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 39 
throughout the day, and all was as flat as a Suneral. I wrote to Mr. Pierpoint a few days before he Set out from London, and requested he would Send down Some dresses for a masquerade, Some fiddlers for a dance, and Some pretty fellows to join in the party; but when he and Sir Lionel arrived, nothing was produced but a turbot and Soles, with Some lobsters for Sauce, all fresh from Billingsgate. They were all brought into the hall, and out ran the wdiole company to have a sight of these rarities. “It is an amazing fine turbot!” Said the Doflor. “Where are the masquerade dresses, Frederick Said I, Softly pulling him by the sleeve. Not a word, “They are delightful foies, ” cry’d my Mamma. “Are the fiddlers coming in the stagecoach r” Said I. Not a word. “They are beautiful lobsters indeedsaid my sister, 
“Will 
40 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
Will the pretty fellows be here in time?” Said I. Not a word — not a Syllable — not a nod — not a wink; and I Soon found that all my Schemes os pleasure were to be Set aside. However, towards the evening os the wedding day, I ventured to make a motion Sor an humble dance, being unwilling to give everything up; and received Sor answer, that “dancing was vulgar, and improper on Such Solemn occasions;; my papa would rather Seast fifty paupers" every day, than expend a guinea for a' pipe and tabor. 
When I marry, which I hope I shall Soon; for, to let you into the Secret, cousin, 1 have a lover in my mind’s eye, and at the bottom of my heart too, HI have a merry wedding. The celebration of marriage ought to be a festival, 
and 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 4t 
and lam resolved to make mine a joyful one, 
“With pomp, and feast, and revehy. 
With mask, and antique pageantry, 
Such sights as youthful poets dream. 
On Summer “eves by haunted stream 
O, I am in raptures at the thought of it 1 The very idea Sets me on tiptoe. They shall not fob me off with family formality, and a Silent meeting on my, wedding day, Sor i’ll invite all the young folks in the parish to attend me to church with white gloves and favours, and at night Till give a ball. 
Then the merry bells ring round; 
And let the jocund rebecks sound, 
* Milton. 
To 
42 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
To many a youth and many a maid,, 
Dancing in the chequer’d Iliade.” 
O, Miltons Milton / thou, wast asine old Grecian that’s pos. “But to return to the punch, ” as King Said in the prologue. I assure you, my dear cousin, there never was a more curious colleffion of oddities than our house contains at present; for even my papa and mamma appear different from what they ever were till lately. I used to laugh and be merry from morning till night, but now it is a crime to venture on a smile;; I do break out now and then, and how can I help it, to behold So much primitive purity as I do every day I 
The mornings are generally tolerable, bccause the different parties are either 
dispersed 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 43 
dispersed by walking out, or engaged in their own apartments; but at dinner we all assemble, and as Soon as the cloth is removed, and a few toasts are drank, the company retire to different stations round the great parlour till tea time. My papa and mamma commonly Seat themselves on one of the Sofas; the Potior and my aunt on the other. Fierpoint and my Sijier in one corner; and Sir Lionel and my Brother form a fourth party in another. My papa and mamma, you may be certain, as master and mistress of the house, call up their best looks, to ex press their Satisfaffion on having Such good company; while the first cvduple of amourists, the Potior and his Deareey Seldom pay any attention to the other parties, but sit ogling and cooing in a mighty foolish manner. Fierpoint and my sijler play with their fingers, pat 
each 
44 the favourites of FELIGITT^ 
each other on the cheek, and commit a rhousand ridiculous Sooleries; and the Baronet and my Brother are usualiy engaged in disputation respeding the merits os ancient writers. Sometimes there is a profound silence, or dead calm, when ray mamma generally desires me to play and Sing her favourite Song in Alette andefs Feajl. 1 am forced to be obedient, and after composing my face as well as I can, begin. 
The Prince unable to conceal his pain, gaz’d on the fair. 
Who caus’d his care; 
And figh’d and look’d, figh’d and look’d. sigh’d and look’d, and ligh’d again.” 
This Song So animates the matrimonial parties, that they Srequently make them selves more ridiculous than they were before. 
THE favourites OF FELICITY. 45 
sore. I burst info a horselaugh, and am obliged to stop besore I ran finish it. 
What is the matter with the girl SCRIES my papa. “bless me child, how can you be So rude V Says my mamma. Cornelia shakes her head; the doftor Spouts Some of his Latin, which I don’t understand; my brother nods and Srowns, which puts the primness of his univer sity sace out of order; and Sir Lionel Smiles and becomes an advocate for me, by wishing for my Spirits. Sometimes I am obliged to return to the harpsichord, where it is fifty to one but I play the Same game over again; for how is it poshble to avoid laughing at Such a group of disrral dolefuls? I would as Soon mortify myself by reading the kil grim’s Progre/sf as be obliged to keep them company. O, if Hogarth could start from the grave, he here might fur" 
"
40 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
nish himself with Subjests for a print, Superior to anything he ever exhibited. 
Is it not strange, that people in high lise should be Such drones What is the use of education and opulence? Why the one should lead us to enjoy, and the other Support the pleasures of lise. I hate insipidity. Half the courtship between Fierpoint and Cornelia was carried on by letters, and they did not See each other for two months before the marriage. I protest, I should have despised Such a lover An epistolary courtship is a kind of dumb show businefs, and can neither display the true ardour of love, or the Spirit of romance. How trifling is the distance between this place and the capital? Only one hundred and twenty miles j but a few hours expedition, 
to 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 47 
to a man born on the wings of love; and yet the delicate Mr. Fierpoint chose to do most of his business with pen, ink, and paper, instead of travelling post twice or thrice a week for a delicious tete a fete. Was this to Save expenses, think you, or for want of the true m fyrojis of love, as our neighbour Sir iaonard Lexicon., who deals in hard words, once styled the impatient ardour of an affeffionate lover \ 
Well, give me the man that will wade through all difficulties and dangers to See his mistr^ss Who will ride all night in wind and rain, or Scale a garden wall, to come at her, in defiance of spring guns, steel traps, or a loaded blunderbuss. A man of true courage, glowing with the ardour of love, will not regard a wet jacket, a fall from a horse, or a broken 
neck, 
40 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
neck, or a Sew swan shots in his sides, if he is resolved to carry his point. This is the Spirit of knight erranty, and makes a figure in history; but the rest is as tame and insipid as Pamela in high Life, or the tale of Lhe Children in the Wood. I love a little of the marvellous adventure, or I would not give a doit for an amour. An elopement, now, is a mighty pretty business. To. sty down a rope ladder from a chamber window, into a lovely young fellow^s arms, and to drive post to Scotland, in the dead of night, over hill and dale, is a piece of hero ism big with romance. Ha, ha, ha; methinks I See your gravity start at all this. But it must be So, cousin, when parents obstinately resuse to make us happy, or endeavour to control our inclinations. 
Fathers 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY, 49 
** Fathers have flinty hearts, no tears can melt them. 
Nature pleads in vain, children must be Wretched, ” 
By the by, old daddy Shakespeare was rather a little out in his politics here, for I See no necessity for the word muji* I say, according to my love creed, children wont be wretched, for they are fools if they submit to be So. If a girss mind is fixed, and her lover a man of Spirit, how idle is all opposition! A good post-chaise, four astive houses, two jehu postillions, and a Scotch parson, are infallible preventives against this Species of wretchedness : and, by jingo, there is So much fun in all this business, that I should like it mightily, though I believe I shall not be put to the trial, for my friends can have no objeffion to the vol, II D person 
THE FAVOURITES OR FELICITY 
person I have chose for a husband, as he is a gentleman, aye, and the most accomplished man in the universe. You may believe me, when I tell you, he is the paragon of everything that is beautiful, charming, delicious, elegant, faithful, manly, noble, pleasing, ravishing, — and — and — and I cannot tell what besides. 
Now, dear cousin, mind and be Secret, for mum’s the word at present. You are the only confident I shall venture to make, for few are to be trusted in Such delicate and perilous matters. 
I remain, dear madam, your’s, 
most affe6lionateiy, Selima Percival, 
LET 
THE FAVOURITES OF fellcitr. 5! 
LETTER XIV 
Mrs. Somerset to Miss Selima Percival, 
London Lnue 8, 1784, 
My DEAR Selima. 
Your extraordinary and romantic letter has shocked me beyond all expression. Surely, my dear, you was delirbus when you wrote it, or you never would have degraded your understanding, or departed from delicacy. So much as to have given way to those ideas your epistle contains. Was you just returned from a trip to the clouds in an air balloon, or had you been reading the Ad d z ventures 
52 THE TAVOURITES OF FELICITY, 
ventures of the renowned D(?; i Euixotie de la Mancha, that your head was So Sull of romance? 
You have greatly mistaken the conduct: of your uncle and aunt Belcour, as well as that of Mr. Pierpoint and your Sijier, Would you have had persons of their refined Sentiments, and virtuous principles, descend to the ridiculous, and, perhaps, indecent customs of the vulgar? Public weddings are exploded by people of delicate ideas; for as matrimony is a Solemn «ngagement, the more private the felicities of a wedding day are kept, the more it is consistent with that propriety of manners which virtuous minds will always endeavour to Support, 
Oh, 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICTTY. 55 
Oh, my dear girl, if I am not much deceived, you are in the highroad to misery and ruin. consider your youth, and who you are;, consider, ahb, that one salse step will undo a woman for ever. Ressesi: Serionfiy; and if you have resolved on any rasn step, do not carry it into execution, for, should you afterwards discover your error,, it will be too late for you to recede. excuse the warmth of a friendly heart, zealousty anxious for your, honour and happi ness. You are not acquainted with the deceptions of the world, having hitherto lived in the sunshine of parental favour and friendship; but, believe me, if you wantonly quit your present blessed Situation, you may launch into the ocean of difficulty and distress. 
D 3 
I ima; ine 
CD 
54 the favourites of felicity. 
I imagine you intend to do right, or, however, to Secure your own happiness; but, in cases of this nature, it requires more than a bare intention to avoid doing wrong. Innocence is unsuspicious, and consequently without a guard to defend it from the designs of those that are governed either by passion or interest. While you prove obedient to your amiable parents, it will be next to an impossibility you can ever want that protection your inexperience of life must require. But you appear to think obedience to parents unnecessary, and that you have a right to pursue your own inclinations without control; Surely, gratitude and honour, exclusive of other considerations, must point out a contrary condust; and, remember, that So long as you continue dutiful, you may always look up to them as your real and 
steadfast 
THE TAVOURITES Of fellclty. 55 
stedsast friends, let your situation in life be whatever it may, Sor they wilt then be bound to you by the strongest of all obligations, in that love and unalterable ssncerity, which passion cannot shake nor interest impair. 
don’t be offended, I take the liberty to remark, that I think you are rather too young to marry. But if love has invaded your bosom, and you find your self unable to resist it’s influence, why do you conceal it, from your dear parents, the best counsellors you can apply to for advice and assistance ^ If the objeff of your affeffion is a gentleman, as you Say, what objeffion can you have to disclossng the affair to your father? this will be obedient and honourable, and go a great way toward obtaining the ac d 4 cokl 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
complishment of your wishes, with So indulgent a parent as Sir William, 
As to your romantic idea of a trip to Scotland, it is founded on a principle I forbear to name. For heaven’s Sake, think no more of it, Since it is pregnant with every kind of evil. I know it is a nice point to advise in affairs of this nature, for young people are apt to resolve first, and ash for advice afterward. Be wise in time, and render repentance unnecelsary. 
I am, most truly, your’s affectionately, 
Cecilia Somerset. 
LET 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 57 
L E T T E R XV 
Miss Selima Percival to Mrs. Somerset. 
percival cajile.) June 12, 1784. 
I ALMOST hate you Sor your antediluvian notions. Where did you find Such a raess of morality; in one os the Sunday Monitors, or the praftice of Piety? Pray, my good eousin, are not you troubled with a short memory? don’t you forget you was once a young woman, and that you married my cousin Somerset just about my age \ Can ycu convince me, that human nature is altered since that D 5 period ^ 
st THE FAVOURITES Op FELTCITT. 
period If it is not, have not I as great a right to'm^rry novv, as you had then? I am much obliged to you for your abundant good wishes Sor my honour and happiness, but must be So Sree as to tell you, that, like many in the world, now your own turn is Served, you care but little lor others. However, I have resolved to care Sor mysels; to please niy sels; and to consult no person but myself. In doing this I shall avoid obliga uon and, oppofitioriy two of the word words in the English Dictionary. 
I have not been making a trip to the clouds, Sori have never Seen an air balloon, but hope I shall in a short time, aj I am told they are mmnstrous clever things; and I should mightily like to take a voyage to the clouds, if my Sweet fellow would accompany me. Nay, I 
should 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
59 
should have no dissike to visit the moon, and the man that lives in the moon, according to the old Song, provided he was with me; for, when he is by, all is gaiety and gladness; but, without him, Sadness and Sorrow, O iqve! almighty love! what transporting pleasures you bestow, and even the pains you instist are very endurable; a little sharp, or So, now and then, but no matter Sor that, it will all be over when Hymeny with Kxs saffron robe and tapety clear lights the nuptial torch, joins hands, and — ani — and So, cousin Somerfety you think a trip to Scotland a hazardous businefs I Why, blcss your morality face, my dear Cous, the matter happens So frequently that it is no novelty. However, there is much of the Lon in it, and you must allow an elopement makes a good figure in a news paper; besides which, it is food for the gossips D 6 " of 
6o 'THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
of the neighbourhood. “So, ” Says one, “Miss Selima Percival is married.” “Indeed !” Says another, “bless me, I wonder I did not hear of it. But who has she married “O, to Mr„ Mr. What d.ji call hinii the — the — the — you know whom I mean.” “Yes, yes, I know whom you mean, well enough, but I never thought a match would take place there. He is a handsome man; nay, I think he’s more than handsome, he^s really beautiful. Where were they married pray ‘‘ 0, it was a stolen match, only a trip to scou land.' “O, ho! was it So? Well, I always thought her a young lady of Spirit, and I commend her for it, if^fhe could not have him any other way. Is Sir William reconciled V “O, no, and Some people think he never will be.” “that’s always the cry at first on these 
occafioas 
Th favourites of felicity. 6l 
occasions, you know; but the interposition os Sriends, and a few penitential letters, bring about an interview; then follow a Sew harsh reproofs, which the young couple bear with the utmost Submission; next a few tears, while they fall on their knees, and Sue to be forgiven. This humiliating posture So; ftens the obduracy of the old folks; affefiion is recalled to the bosom, which conquers family pride; they are raised from the ground, embraced like the prodigal Son, and all animosity is amicably Settled.” 
Thus you See, my dear cousin, an elopement is not So terrible a matter as you imagine; but your primitive purity leads you to make a mountain of a molehill. Well, having got over the clan i destine 
62 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY, 
destine marriage, let us hear what Scandal has to Say. 
“His a mighty good match for Mr, What d’ye call him; don’t you think So says one. “Undoubtedly it is, ” Says another, “for Sir wiluatti gave his eldest daughter thirty thousand pounds.” Aye, that’s all talk, I Sancy. If he gave half the money, it is a good round Sum; but do you think he’ll give Mr, What Lye call him the Same fortune, as it was a stolen match ?” “To be Sure he will, Sor it would be unjust to make any difference.” “Why this last match was a Sudden affair.” “Perhaps it might be necessary it should be So.” “Ha! ha! like enough, like enough, I understand you. Let me See, ay, ay, there were a few hints thrown out a little time ago, but I did not exactly understand what 
was 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
Was meant. Well, well, time will discover all things; they are both gay ones, let me tell you.” “He is, I asture you, or he is wrongfully accused.” Why, indeed, I fancy he is true game, as the Saying is.^’ You need not Saucy it only, you may make yoorself Sure of it; though, now he has married the baronet’s daughter, one must be cautious in Speaking; but, between you and I, they Say, three girls os our parish went lo london on his account last year.” Three! the deose is in him !” “Ay, well, he has met with his match at last, Miss Selima is no chicken, you understand me.” 
Ha, ha, ha! Methinks, Cousin, I See what a sorrowsul face you put on while you read this. And I Sancy I hear you lay, “Mercy on me! what a Sad girl seuma is! She is quite abandoned! She 
15 
si the favourites of fellcity, 
is ruined past all redemption S’ Not fa, neither, my good Cous, for though I love frolic and fun, shall be cautious how I carry the jest too far. Come, let us be Serious. I love Mr. What dye call Mm; an odd name, you will Say; but, to be plain with you, what his real name is I will not tell, fori have Seen the folly of expelling others to keep a secret we cannot keep ourselves. But, to go on. I am in love with a pretty fellow, and I am fully persuaded the pretty fellow is in love with me. He has offered to marry rne, and I have no objection to it, finding I cannot be happy without him. But now comes the rub, and the deuse of a rub it is. suppose my papa and mamma should not approve of the match, am I to be miserable, or must I hang myself in my garters, or drown myself in one of our fish ponds.^ You will Say, in 
Such 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. ©5’ 
Such a case, that I must give the pretty fellow up. But I can’t give him up; and, theresore, good counsellor Somerset what have you to advance further on the case in point? 
Have not I a right to be in love agreeably to the law of nature, and to marry according to the law of the nation? Your answer to this is, that I must be obedient to the will of parents, they having an authority over me, which it is the highest wisdora never to dispute. Well, all this is granted; but can they control passion and inclination, or, if they could, will you Say they ought to do it? I did not form myself, theresore how can I rejefi: what is natural to me? I love, honour, and adore my parents; I shudder at the thought of giving them either offence or uneasiness; yet I really think 1 have a right to consult my own happiness. 

66 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
piness without the charge of disobedr ence. However, be assured, I will take no step to accomplish my wishes, till they are first insormed how I am dr cumstanced. Should I negleff to do this, it would not only be violating the 
laws of obedience, but the forms of decency. 

My papa has frequently Said, that the happiness of his family is his Supreme delight; and the conduct: of all his actions proves it to be So. Can you Suppose, then, my dear Cous, that in cafe the choice I have made should not meet with his approbation, he will extinguish the feelings of humanity, and resolve to make me miserable?? no! it is impossible a man of his Sensibility can be guilty of oppression and cruelty; for, according to a great writer, to 
have 
THE favourites OF FELICITY. 67 
have voluntarily become to any being the occasion of its existence, produces an obligation to make that existence happy.” 
I flatter myself you will now perceive, that your gay and romantic cousin is not lost to the sense os honour and filial duty; Sor, though fly is resolved to aft’ with justxe to herself, she does not mean to lose sight of the obligations fly stands in to her parents. She has not yet banqueted So luxuriously on the pleasures of the fancy, as to be incapable of listening to the propriety of remonstrance, the friendship of good advice, or the importance of reason; and she will be cautious of hazarding her inheritance through obstinacy. 
I expected 
68 THE FAVOURITES 0? FELICITY 
I expeffed the Doffor and my Aunt would have Set off Sor Belcour Hall immediately after my sister’s marriage; but ray papa and mamma appear So unwilling to part with them, that I See no probability of their going; nor do I know when Cornelia and her spousee mean 10 go to London. 
I much wish to leave these fond happy folks to themselves, for the state, of my mind, respeffing myself, will not let me participate in their enjoyments, and I judge it unadvisable to disclose my situation to my papa till the house is clear of it’s present company. Therefore, dear madam, be fo kind as to invite me to Spend a month with you, which will make mu' very happy; and 1 think I shall not be refused Such an 
iadui 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 69 
indulgence, is you will be So obliging as to dk Sor it. 
I am, 
most sincerely, your’s. 
Selima Percival. 
LETTER XVI 
Mr. Percival to Mr. Somerset. 
perdvat cq/iky June 14, 1784, 
Dear Sir, 
I HAVE been greatly wanting in po liteness and gratitude, not to write * to you immediately on my return from Oxford i and I should endeavour to apologise 
70 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
logize Sor my shameful negleff, were I not persuaded the liberality of your mind has anticipated my intention of doing it. 
dobor belcour^s correspondence with you has rendered it unnecessary Sor me to particularise my engagements. We have Spent our time in the most agreeable maitner I think rational beings are capable of enjoying, happy in ourselves, and happy with each other. 
Oh, sir, though I am young in years, I fancy I have lived long enough to discover, that the Supreme happiness of mankind centres in connubial felicity. Ail other pleasures arc either visionary or fleeting; but this, under the dominion of innocence, must be endless, for it partakes So much of celestial beatitude, 
that 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 71 
that I think I may venture to Say, with the poet. 
Divine abodes shall own it’s pow’r When time and death shall be no more 
My father has given mepoffeffion of the estate my uncle left me; and, with his wonted liberality, has declared, that, whenever I turn my thoughts on marriage and six on a Suitable objeff, he will enlarge my fortune, without Suffering me to wait till his death for it; O generous man, and best of parents! 
It was an agreeable proposition, I assure you, cousin, for matrimony is every day presented to me in So pleasing a point of view, that I am irresistibly led to di 
* 1 
ref 
72 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
reel my steps toward it. I here behold, in the most striking colours, that innate love between the Sexes, which I imagine human nature enjoyed in it’s primitive simplicity besore depravity attempted the contamination of innocence. And the observations I have unavoidably made lately confirm me in an opinion I always entertained, that the powerful instuence of genuine love excites every generous and noble pashon, and contributes to accelerate the Springs os human astion. 
As I am only just of age, you, perhaps, will think I am too young to marry, and may wish I would enter largely into the great business os the world. But for what purpose should I do this, as I neither want to increase my fortune or importance ^ Let the indigent and ambitious engage in enterprise and 
hazard, 
THE FAVOURITES OF fellcltr. 73 
hazard, for wealth and public honour; 5 have no wants, nor any ambition to gratify, and therefore have fixed my 'delight in the Sublime study of philoso phy and religion, and have no relish Soi: the tumults of war, the pomp of a court, the policy of commerce, or the ices and extravagancies of the capital. 
** How charming is divine philosophy! 
Not harsh and crabbed as dull fools suppose, But musical as is Apollds lute, 
And a perpetual feast of neftar’d Sweets, 
Where no crude Surfeit reigns 
You prefer London to the country; which I wonder at, for being a man of" virtue, you do not give into the follies 
miuod*s co/fius. 
Vou II E 
and 

THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
and vices of the town. Perhaps you admire the popularity of the capital, and. the variety of it’s heterogeneous amusements? Yet, Surely, innocence and a rural situation are most agreeable to human nature, becaiise we are born with a love for a country life. For “nature, ” as has been well remarked, always pleases us more than art, not only as it is prior to it in point of time, but as the works of the Almighty are more perfeff; and more various than those of men: nay, art itself is most pleasing when it represents nature.” And 1 must further remark, that even those who, from accident or interest, make a town life their choice Seldom lose their natural affection for the country, as may be Seen by the number of rural villas round every capital city, to which men of business frequently retire for relaxation. In short, 
my 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 75 
my dear sir, the vernal softness and Salubrity os the country air, the verdure of the fields, the transparency and murmurs of meandering rivers, the variegated beauties of painted lawns, and the melodious warblings of the feathered musicians, all together, form entertainment more truly pleasing and rational than all the glittering gaieties of your capital. 
Thus the men 
Whom nature’s works can charm, with God himself 
Hold converse;; familiar, day by day, With his conceptions; aeft upon his plan; 
And form to his, the relish of their souls 
I have already informed you I have my father’s permission to marry j and I 
Ahnfidt% 
E s 
'must 
THE favourites of felicity. 
must now acquaint you, that the daughter of Sir Leonard Lexicon, our neighbour, has engaged much os my attention lately, but whether she has entertained a Similar partiality for me, time must discover; however, I shall Soon be Satisfied on this head, if I can obtain sf Leonard's permission to address the young lady as a lover. They are to dine with us tomorrow, when my father, at my request, will disclofe my washes to the baronet. You must remember this gentleman Sor his great Singularity as an Archreologiji, or dealer in obsolete words and dreshng up his conversation with bombastic phraseology. In other re speffs he is a man of a good understanding, amiable in his disposition, steady in his friendship, but positive in his opinions. He possesses one of the bch landed estates in the county, and though 
he 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 77 
he lives in a very Splendid manner, he has ever nomist. 
has ever been considered as a good osco 
His daughter, who is about my age, k his only child, and, doubtless, will inherit his fortune. The powers of my pen are, I am afraid, incapable of giving a true description of this young lady; however, Sulsice it to stiy, that her face and person are models of perfection; she is full of grace and softness; the image of her Soul is painted in her vi siige; and the excellence of her disposition displays itself in every look and ailion. She is mistress of the truly female accompli fhents; much of her attention appears to have been bestowed upon her mind; and nature has furnished her with a good understanding. 
E 
If 
)8 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
If I should be succcssful in this overture, my plan of life will be permanently fixed, and I will devote the whole of my time to study, and the calm pleasures of rural and domestic felicities, This will be copying the bright example of my amiable father, who, though born at the capital, did not Spend his youth like most men of fortune, by sharing in the common indiscretions of the world, because his good sense and observation led him to See, that an unrestrained indulgence of appetites and pashons was anticipating the pleasures of life, and Would deprive his latter days of their share; or, in the words of an elegant essayist, “condemn the maturer and more experienced part of life, to the chamber or the couch he therefore married early, and retired into the country, where he has lived a life, of virtue, 
without 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 79 
without Suffering either age or knowledge to Sour his disposition, or withdraw his attention Sroin rational enjoyments, for they still appear to give him infinite pleasure; but this may partly arise from his having brought his mind into the happy state os being easily Satisfied. 
I think, Coussn, he stands distinguished from the generality of mankind by his extraordinary virtues; his affs of magnanimity and public Spirit; and his uni versal philanthropy and beneficence. The distressed petitioner never Sues in vain, if his wants merit relief; nor is the wearied or benighted traveller ever denied a friendly reception, for, 
“No surly porter stands, in guilty state, 
To spurn imploring famine from the gate 
* Deserted Village. 
E 4 Perhaps, 
So TH FAVOURITES Of FELICITY'. 
Perhaps, Sir, you will think filias piety has led me into exaggeration; yet, 1 cannot persuade mysels that I have touched the picture with too great a. force of colouring, for I am strongly of opinion, roy father’s virtues have attained that point of eminence, to which Succeeding times shall look hack with gratitude and admiration 
Of my mother I shall only obfervs that she does the highest credit to her Sex, and to human nature. Though born to gaiety and grandeur, she confines, her views within the Sphere of domestic assiduity, and studies to render my father and her children happy,. Her own delight appears to increase in proportion to the pleasure she is capable of giving to others; and the general tenor os her cpndufl, and chearfulnels os temper? 
evince^ 
tits’"fevburttes'of FELICITY. 8l 
evinces that she loves all the world, and imagines all the world love her 
Sir Liotiely Mr Fierpointi and my Siflery propose to leave us shortly; and when they go we shall lose the Doflor and my aunt. We shall part with them with the highest regret, for they have contributed to a Scene of Selicity, very rarely exhibited in the drama of human life. 
I shave the honour to Subscribe myseif* Dear Sir, 
your’s, 
most truly, 
e e>mund Per CIV al* 
liet 
02 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
L E T T E R xvn. 
Mrs Somerset to Miss Selima KM. Pergival.. 
jloptdokf yune 17^4* 
Bear Cousin. 
Your last letter has given me the highesi uneasiness, and I am shocked at the levity of your disposition. Perhaps you have only loosed the reins of jocularity, and given Scope to the frolic of romance, merely to try my temper? If you mean to jest, I am ready to join with you in merriment, but if you are Serious, I wish you to consult that understanding which, difstated Some part 
S 
The favourites of felscity. 85; 
of your letter, before you form any positive resolution.. 
I know what influence The first im preshons of love have over the mind for I once experienced how forcibly they dissipate every idea and sensation not immediately conneffed with them. And though the poet has styled love, “a gen isle, gemrotis pajjionv I must beg leave CO observe, that it often rules with tyrannic Sway, and is too Selfish to consult the interests of the other passions, on which account every effort of the understanding should be employed to combat the invasion of the tyrant, lest he should obtain a complete conquest, and absolute dominion.. By this I mean, that though it would, be folly to attempt the extirpation of the passion, it is the high e si esh 
^4 the favourites of felicity. 
cst wisdom to, check ids infltience an' endeavour to restrain it. 
You mention my early marriage as a precedent Sor. you, without considering, how widely different I was then, circumstanced from what you now are. Your, Cousin Somerset was a man, of family, fortune, and known integrity; and he was the, objeff of my, parents choice, as well as. my own. IS that had not been, I should have shuddered at the, idea of enterings into a clandestine engagement with him;, for though the views and opinions of youth and age are generally dissimilar, I am well persiiaded the conduct of parents refpe^ling the marriage of. their children,, is almost invariably founded on the wif -- dom of experience in life, and the interesting affcdiions of friendship,, 
Yoa. 
THE EAVOO rites OF FILICITY. 
You ask me if I think human nature; is altered Since the time of my marriage,., and whether you have not the Same rights to marry I! had H believe human nature with respest to the inclinations and? passions is what it ever was; but I think, that pride, luxury, dissipation, and folly,. have produced changes in the morals off mankind, ' highly injurious to the interests of virtue and happiness, since the time I was of your age; andj am of' opinion, that, unless you obtain the consent of your parents, you have not the.: Same right to marry, that 1 had •, besides ~ which, must observe, that the present " circumstances of human affairs, respefiing ^ the grand business of life, require differ * ent means, of Support from those of for -- raer times; and which, I apprehend, :, will be most permanently Secured to you against the vicissitudes of fortune, by 
resolving ^ 
86 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
resolving to enter into no matrimonial engagement without the Sanffion of par rental authority. 
You wrong me by fupposing I cate for no one but mysels, for my heart ever participated in the pains, as well as the pleasures of others; and I assure you I experience great anxiety on account of your present situation, beeause I am afraid you. stand upon a dangerous precipice; your mind being embarrassed between the influence of love, and the claims os filial piety. 
Amidst the sprightliness and levity of your disposition, I am pleased to find much good understanding, and a liberal fense of honour; and 1 most Sincerely hope these will influence you to rejea every inclination inconsistent with the 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY, tj 
dignity of your family, or the Security of your future interest and happiness. 
It is disticult to attempt restraining those inclinations which, under proper regulation, contribute to the felicities of life; but the wanton Sallies of juvenile pashons generally require the interposition of resolute caution, and the deliberate counsels of reason. 
1 flatter myfels, my dear girl, you will call prudence to your aid, and determine in Savour of your own dignity and honour.. 
You distress me greatly by the request you have made because I am of opinioi^ there would be the highest impropriety in my complying with it. I hope you will pardon my refusal; but,, while your mind’ 
remain.. 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY, 
remains in it's present unsettled state,, your father’s house is the most eligible ' Situation you can be in.. 
Believe me to be,. most truly, your’s. 
Cecilia Somerset 
L E T T E R XVIIL 
Miss. Selima Percival to Mrs Somerset. 
Fircival cqfid. Jum zoy 1784#^ 
UPON < my word, Cousin somerset, ' as you grow old, you grow ill natured; and I shall be So. free to tell 
5- yo’sh 
THE FAVOURITES OJ FELICITY. Bg 
you, I hate you for your unkind refusal os giving me an invitation to your house. Go, you naughty thing, - I, can’t abide you. 
Avarice is said to be the vice of old age, and I am Sorry it has Seized you So Soon as I find it has; for notwithstanding the jesuitical ejtcuse you have made, L suppose you thought I should lead you into expense if I came to town, as po liteness: would oblige you to take me to, every place of public diversion. However, thristy madam, I should not have troubled you on that account, I affure you, Sor Mr. Prejio, my music master, is shortly to be in London where he always goes at this season os the year, to purchase new music and improve his taste, and he would have taken all trouble and c^tpence off your hands respeding me, 
having,; 
po THE FAVOURITES OF fpilicitvi 
having promised, if I went to town, to take me to the play, sadleps Wells, aju lay's Amphitheatre, the Royal Circus, Vawt^ hall Gardens, and I cannot tell where beside. 
O! how I long to See the laughter loving Edwin, the tumblers, posture masters, and wire dancers, the wonderful horses, and Seats of horse man ship, and, above all, that delightful place Vauxhall, which I have heard So much of, where the beautiful rural walks, variety of paintings, blaze of illumination, and enchanting music, combine to render it a terrestrial paradise. You must remember what the old Song Says, 
The finest of all the gay sights, 
Is the place with the number of lights, Where they warble and fing. 
Like the birds in the Spring, 
And harmony pleasure invites. 
Ths 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 91 
■the lamps are all Iluck in the trees. 
And the folks buz about like the bees, While down in the Ihade, 
The mill and cafeade. 
Are finely imagin’d to please, c. ice. * Bravo, braviffimo, encore, encore, Vauxhall for ever. 
Well, if I should get to London TU take a full Swing of pleasure, and See the royal palaces, the parks, kensingten Gardens, the Routes, Drums, Assemblies, masquerades, Festinos, Conjurors, the — the — the — everything Mr. Frejio has in his power to show me; and that’s a great deal I assure you, Cous, for he’s a gentleman of the first taste, and a tiptop connoisseur. — O! London! thou Seat of fashion, thou emporium of gaiety and pleasure, thou repository of frolic and fun, and, in short, of all that’s delicious 
Ralph's ramble to London a Ballad. 
and 
512 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY 
and enchanting! — Our neighbour, Sir iaonard Lexicotij calls it the pritnutn mo bikf by which I suppose he means the first place in the world, and, by jing9,. when once I get there, i’ll be the prh nium mobile of the priinutn mobile. 
After having Seen everything worthy notice in and about the capital, next comes a jaunt to those modish watering •pl^czsibrighthelmjlone and Margate % and' from thence, over the water to France. and a trip to Pane, 
Voire trh humble ferviteuny Madame' says an elegant Frenchman bowing, as I pass the Potii neuf on my first walk after ray arrival. “Tonne be one ENGLISH LADY.” — Yes, Monjteuny Says I, tipping him one of ray best courtesies. — “Mon Dieu! la joue femme quelle eft! La 
“ftiur 
•THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 9| 
sieur ANGLETERRE !” — You are the quintessence of politeness, Monsieur“ “me Madame 'four beauty commands admiration., What an jngeu” ~~~‘ What a gallant Cavalier. — “Tou have “the air of Hebe, and the Majejly of “venusv — You rate me too highly iaonfuur, — “O no, madamep — O yes, Monsieur— — “be imfojfible for me to do “datv — You overpower me with, civi ility. — “Toufafdnate me with your bright “eyes, you divine creature— — was born to compliment with the best, grace of any man in the universei — ‘‘ 0 Ma“ “vous me faites trap daonneurv — Indeed I donst, Monsieur— — ‘‘ you “permit me do escort you to the Opera — You are too obliging, Monsieur— — “is impojftble I can be foto fo fine a ladyp — O admirable Frenchman. — “Tou will see notre grand Monarch, the greateji 
“prince 
94 the favourites of felicity. 
“prince in chrijiendomp — Indeed! — Sans doutev — We adore our foverdgns in FRANCES — We don’t trouble our heads about kings in England unless it is to abuse them. — Mon Dieul** — We adore liberty; that’s our idol. — Sucre “dieuv* — Liberty, liberty, monsieur— — — Old England for ever. — At this the Frenchman turns pale — I fall a laughing — he is ready to Saint — I still giggle — he draws on his gloves — hands me into a coach, and away we drive jehu to the Opera. O the Lon, the Lon, the Lon! Dear, Sweet Fans! — 
Well — Into the Opera I bounce among the Beau Monde, Up get the company, and I am handed forward to a front Seat, being a stranger. So much for French politeness— — is this Englifi lady?’* Says fifty of a group round me, all in a 3 breath. 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 95 
breath. Where did she come from? What is her name? — The countess of Perciva/, says I, flirting my fan, in a whisper to my gallant, who Soon Spreads it about; — and So much for French impertinence. 
From the Opera I am escortcd home, where I detain my Spark to Supper. He is full of extravagant compliments, and I of fun and gig. We have a delicious tete a tetci during which he Says a thousand civil things, that would never enter 
into the head of an Englishman- -- 
“do myself the honour to make you a vijit “in the momingp Says he, at parting. — With all my heart, Monfteur^ Says I. — — III pay my devoirs at nine.” — Olud! I slant be stirring till ten. — 0, Ma“ “it is thefajhion in francej for gentlemen to visit ladies in their bed’ 
“chambers 
^^■6 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
Chambers— — it So! — 0 qp oid. 
Madame, diji le tonp — O, well, if its the Lon, you may come, if you like ist — 
Vous me fkites trof d'honneur, Madame * — O, not at all, not at all, Monsieur, i’m not afraid of a Frenchman. — “Votre ires ‘‘ humble serviteur, Madame. Bon Join, ** Bonfoir\ — Adieu, adieup — exitfrench man. — Good night, good night, thou compound of insignificance, perfume, powder, and paint, Says I, as Soon as the door is shut; I would not give up my Sweet Sirephon for a thousand Such fribbles. So much for a trip to Baris; and now to other matters. 
And So, Cous, you give me up That is, you won’t let me make a jaunt to visit you. Perhaps I may See London without your assistance. If I should, I won’t come near you, for you’re aright, and I willi 
wilh 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 97 
I wish, is you were not married, that you might die an old maid, and that, 1 fancy, is a terrible thing. However, I hope Soon to be out of the line of that danger; and shall be heartily glad of it, for now my Sister is married, I find mysels grow tired of being a Solissdian. 
I stand bnt a poor chance to be taken to London by my Sister when she goes, for in a conversation yesterday, wherein I expressed a warm wish to See the capital, she observed with great seriousness, that it was a very improper place Sor young folks to know too Soon. This was what they call tit for tati suppose; Ihe took my hint, and returned it. But she need not fright herself about my being troublesome to her, for if ever I do take a trip to London, I hope I shall be engaged with more agreeable company. vol. II F The 
9§ THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
The tyranny os elder Sisters is insuffer able, and their important formality, when they get married besore their juniors, is truly ridiculous. O lord! I am obliged to put an end to my letter, for Mr. Prtp is just come to give me a lesson, and I must not make him wait a moment. So, bye bye, naughty Cous, you shall not hear from me again for a long time, I affure you, unless I should write to you from Margate, Paris, or Scotland. O the t’w, the on, the Lon. 
your’s, Selima Pjercivai 
let 
TKE FAVOURITE's OF FELICITY. 99 
LETTER XIX 
Doctor Belcour to Mr. Somerset. 
pcrcival cajlkj June 21, 1784, 
Dear Sir, 
MV long silence has been occasioned through a variety of visits I have been obliged to make with the family here to the neighbouring friends of Sir William, in consequence of his daughter’s marriage. As this apology is; ^ounded on truth, hope it will prove a Sat; i^&^ory one. 
I thank you for the favour of your last epistle, which contains much philo f 2 fophical 
100 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
fophical observation, and elaborate criticism. Among other interesting particulars, I agree with you, that Some relaxation and amusement is necessary to Sweeten the cup of care, more especially among the industrious orders of mankind. But I am not one of those who think it expedient to diversisy life with endless entertainment, by engaging in a constant pursuit after novelty, the charms of which are transitory, however they may delight us while in our poffeshon. Satiety will, doubtless, be obviated by constant vicissitudes, and novelty tends to display the wisdom and goodness of the author of nature *, yet I have my doubts, whether it unites the moral excellencies of life in the same point of view with the objefls of it’s admiration. The love of novelty is Said to destroy the influence of Such objeffs as at first were pleasing, and, indeed, this 
is 
THE FAVOURITES OP fellcity. lolls 
too generally true to be controverted“ “the instance os habit is opposed to this observation, Sor there, objefis at first distasteful are in time rendered entirely agreeable by repeated attention.’* 
An impatience Sor novelty appears strongly to charafferize the nature of man, and to discriminate him Srom the rest of animal creation. Providence has wisely implanted this disposition in the mind, as the grand incentive to that activity which is necessary to the preservation and happiness of the Species; but this peculiar prerogative of the human soul, is ever most beneficially employed, when it is confined to the contemplation of the works of the Almighty; for in them we may find Sufficient matter to excite our curiosity, engage our attention, afford pleasure and instrustion, mul f 3 tiply 
102 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
tiply the inlets to happiness, and altist the flight of time. And the common impatience of mankind after novelties, only because they are yet unenjoyed, might easily be restrained if we were to consider, that from the shortness and uncertainty of life, after pursuiug the means of existence, there is little worth Seeking with Solicitude, or desiring with cagerness. “And though, ’^ as has been well remarked, “every moment cannot be laid out on the formal and regular improvement of our knowledge, or the stated pratstice of a moral or religious duty, yet none should be So Spent as to exclude wisdom or virtue, or pafs without possibility of qualifying us more or less for the better employment of those wshich are to come.” I shall dismifs this fubjest with observing, that an unrestrained passion for novelty, and that 
desirc 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 103 
desire So common to mankind os prying into the Secrets of futurity, are Somewhat analogous in their principles, and both are frequently trifling, unprofitable, and Sometimes immoral. 
I join with you in opinion, that it is dangerous to indulge the excuisions and amusemenrs of the imagination too far, it being a Species of foil)’, and, perhaps, of vice, “Secure from detection, and Searkis of reproachand yet there is but little hope of prescribing boundaries to these erratic delusions, because they have not their Soundation in reality; and hence it is, that with those who give themselves up to the luxury os fancy, more is planned than the ordinary conditions os lise will permit them to execute; while others, uninfluenced by aerial Speculations, but guided by the prudence os reason, and F 4 the 
1®4 the favourites of felicity. 
the common affairs os the world, Seldom engage in any undertaking they are not able to perform. 
From the enchanted cup vv^hch fancy holds to all, th’ unwary third Of youth oft swallows a Circsean draught, That Iheds a baleful tincture o’er the eye of reason, till no longer he discerns, 
And only guides to err.” * 
However, there are Some minds in which the frolics of fancy Sport with but little effect, and perhaps it is fortunate where they only do So; for in this cafe, like the effulgence of the fun displayed upon an adamantine rock, they will contribute a warmth, but have not the power of kindling an injurious flame. 
I thank you for your jocular remarks on the chearsulness of my present dispo 
'* Aktnjidt. 
fition, 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. IO 
Sition, which you are pleased to style the effusions of genius. Your compliment is unmerited; and I think myself unequal to the talk of throwing any new lights on the busmess of that Species of hyme nteal intimacy you allude to. But I should be Superlatively happy if, by the labour of my whole life, I could establish a plan to Secure the union of marriage from those infelicites it frequently experiences, and particularly from that lawless invader Infidelity. This is a consummation devoutly to be wijloedy for the interests of civil Society cannot be founded on a more Solid basis than that of marriage. 
Among the different invitations we have received fi om Sir William's friends, one was from Sir Philip ouoy with whom we dined a few days since; and as there is not, perhaps, a more remarkable cha f 5 raster 
x06 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY, 
rafler in the universe than this gentleman, shall give you a short account of him, and his mode of living. 
He received a liberal education in hh youth, but his father dying just as he became of age, he gave up the advantages wdiich might have been obtained from a continuance in the pursuit of knowledge, and being left in the full polseshon of a capital fortune, considered everything unimportant that interfered with a resolution he Soon Sormed, of giving into the Sollies and vices of the gay world. Thus he began life without experience, and has been prevented through dissipation from ever gaining it in his intercourse with mankind; for to this very time, though fifty years of age, he mistakes pride for greatness, insolence for importance, and extravagance for liberality. 
Having 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. IO 
Having understood that making the tour of Europe was a necessary article in the qualifications of a gentleman, he Set out and performed a post haste expedition through France Italy, Germany, and Holland, of which the only account he gives is, that at Paris they excel the whole wwld in making fricaffees, ragouts, and olios, and establish the fashions of chess for the rest of Europe; that in Italy they have the best method of cooking macaroni; that in Germany the old hock is higher flavoured than it is after exportation to other countries; and that the Dutch are epicures in fish, which they dress as Soon as it is caught, wish a variety of excellent fauces. 
After his return to England, Satiety of the common Sollies and vices of she capital led him to retire to his Seat in the F 6 country, 
>iio8 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
country where he concluded he might lord over those around him, whose sor tunes could not be placed in competition with his own; and having studied all the niceties os dress, and the arts of gluttony, and voiuptiiousness, he displayed them with all the prodigality of ostentation. 
He holds three public days every week, when his doors are thrown open, and his tables Spread with luxurious dainties, Sor the entertainment os a Set of men, whom he styles his friends, though, in fasta Set of Sawning Sycophants, who, according to the remark of Diogenes think that wine the best which is drunk at the cost of others, ” and at the expense of their health and Sincerity become votaries to luxury, and praise the elegance of their patron’s taste, because, 
at 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. IO 
at an unlimited expense, he ransacks the most distant parts os the globe, and by the unceasing labours of art anticipate!? the different productions of the feasons, to Surfeit them with perpetual and unexhausted variety. ^ 
As a proof of his Skill in the Science of gluttony, he lays it down as the criterion of excellence, that Bees should be marbled with fat, Veal have a pearly hue. Mutton produce a brown coloured gravy. Lamb be loose in it’s texture, and Pork cut as white as a chicken. He reveres the old maxim, that a pig and a pigeon should never be cold, and thinks there is propriety in the observation, that fish should Swim three times, in water, butter, and wine. More provisions are consumed in his kitchen in one day, for the article of Sauce, than would Support a large family 6 a 
no THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
a whole week. His viffuals is either dressed after the French or Italian method, for which purpose he keeps Several foreign cooks, who So disguise everything they Send to his table, that it is difficult to know what you eat; and it is dangerous to inquire, because it would discover ignorance in points of fashion and taste, for whichyoumuststand the ridicule of the host, who delights in this kind of triumphs; for, like Gulofulus, he “has So impressed on his imagination the dignity of feasting, that he ha? no other topic of talk, or fubje£i of meditation. His calendar is a bill of fare; he measures the year by Successive dainties. The only common places of his memory are hit meals; and if you alk him at what time an event happened, he considers whether he heard it aster a dinner of turbot, or venison.” 
With 
the favourites of FEEICITV. Ill 
with respest to his dress, it is extremely foppish and outre. The Sashion os his clothes is generally altered every month at least, and he considers his neighbours as Goths and Vandals who do not follow his example. He can describe the particulars os the French fashions, long before they make their appearance in England; and has turned off five tay lors in six months, because he has not had the first Suit of every new mode. Sometimes he is fresh dressed three times a day; and, in common, is So perfumed from head to foot, that he poisons every room he goes into for a fortnight after. His livery Servants are dressed in a similar style of foppery, and are obliged to wear bags, laced rustles, white gloves, and silk stockings, to Support which they are allowed extra wages. He hires no male Servants unless they are remarkably 4 hand 
112 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY 
handsome and well made in their persons, and six Sect in stature, to ascertain which last particular they are measured, and engaged or rejeffed, without resped to merit or demerit, as they answer this standard, or deviate from it but the eighth of an inch over or under. 
On his public days, he sits at the head of his table, with half a dozen footmen behind his chair who pay him the abject fubmishon of the staves of an eastern monarch; and even his guests are obliged to acknowledge their obligation and dependence by reiterated adulation, acquiescence to his opinions, accommodation to his caprice, and a studious attention to the arts of giving pleasure. By these means they find the way to his heart, and Seldom leave him without a fresh invitation 
to 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
to partake of Some newfinvented dainties on a future day. 
He has So long indulged his passion for flattery, as to be lost to every other consideration, except those of dress and gluttony. His appetite for eating is in part destroyed by the debauchery of high living, but he drinks to excess; and, on his public days, estimates the merit of his companions by the quantity of wine they consume;; he that can Support himself longest from falling under the table, will be Sure to receive the first invitation for the next day’s debauch. What an irrational vice is drunkenness! “lhirjii^ Says an ingenious writer, ‘‘ teaches all ariimals to drtnkf btu drunl tmefs belongs only to manp 
When 
114 the favourites of felicity. 
When we dined with Sir Fhilipy there was no other company. Our entertainment was truly elegant, but not So extravagantly prosuse as his treats on public days, for he knew that Sir William prefers plainness and simplicity to the extravagance of variety. But now comes the business, the important business, on which our invitation was founded. This emaciated voluptuary, whose limbs are distorted with the gout, and who half his time is either Swaddled in flannel, or tottering on crutches, took an opportunity of acquainting Sir William t that he had at last resolved to enter into the marriage station, and had placed his affestion on the beautisul Selima, What Sir William Said to this unexpe61ed and preposterous declaration, I cannot say, for it was made privately, however, I am persuaded it met with an unfavourable reception, for when they returned 
to 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. II 
to the company, dilsatisfaffion Sat on both their countenances, but most con spicuoussy on that os Sir Philip; and, as this circumstance evidently prevented a renewal of the agreeable good-humour and pleasantry we had enjoyed besore it happened, we retired Sooner than I apprehend we otherwise should have done. 
On our return home Sir William related what had passed, and though ’u, appeared he despised the proposal, he endeavoured to try selimps temper, by persuading her to the match, and jokingly declaring it met with his hearty concurrence. We all took the hint, and joined So forcibly in our approbation, that Selima was unable to bear with it, and fainted away. This threw us into Some confusion, till she revived; when we joined Sir William in assuring her, 
that 
Il THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
that the whole was meant as a joke oti our parts, and every one execrated the folly and presumption of Sir Philip. but all this would not do: we had touched Selima on a tender point, and her Spirits were So extremely agitated, that she repeatedly relapsed into fits of fainting, till at length, recovering from one of these, she stew’ to her father, and falling on her knees, declared, before us all, that her heart had long been prepossessed in favour of another, that the happiness of her existence depended on her being united with him, and in the tenderest and most assessing manner, implored his forgiveness, while she Solicited him to comply with her wishes of being made immediately happy with the objest of her affestion. 
This 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. I 17 
This extraordinary declaration Surprised us all, and the expressive and moving manner in which it was made greatly affecsted us; but, perhaps, no one So sensibly as Sir William, who with the melting tears of parental love stowing down his cheeks, railed her up, and after an affeffionate embrace, in the gentlest terras desired to know who the per Son was she had alluded to? The question Seemed to em barrass and distress her. We were all eyes and all ears, through impatience for her answer. She paused for Some time; — then attempted to Speak; — then pauff ed again; — then looked at her father; — next at every one in the room; — and, at last, wringing her hands, and bursting into tears. Said, O sir! — O dear father forgive me; — forgive me; I know I have done wrong; but if pity is allied to love, show Some compassion to your 
unhappy 
Il THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
unhappy daughter, when she tells you, with heart wounding contrition, that the objeff of her soul’s approval is — is — Mr. Frejto 1 — Here she fell into a Swoon, which threw ns all into a Second confusion: 
It was long before she recovered, notwithstanding the endeavours uscd to restore her to her senses were of the mod powerful nature; however, after a tinne, she became composed and Serene, and looked around at every one with So placid and pleasing a countenance, yet fo strongly impressed with the Sensibility of delicate Sorrow, as may perhaps be imagined, but cannot be described. 
Here the generous feelings of human nature displayed themselves in Such pleasing colours and representations, as 
proved 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. i19 
proved them to be the balm of being, the fountains from whence all that is sublime and beautiful, respesting the Sen sations of mankind, have their primary Source. I allude to the tender solicitar tions and friendly interposition of every one present, to cheer our disconfolate cousin, and restore her mind to it’s wonted vivacity. 
This was a trying Scene to poor selk ma who, I confess, conduced herself with great dignity, and, I believe, from the liberal manner in which she was treated by every one, she beheld her friends in a more favourable light than she had ever done before. 
We all sat down cheerfully to Supper, and endeavoured to vie with each other who should most promote the Spirit of 
festivity j 
120 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
festivity; and we So far Succeeded, as to restore the bloom of selinid.s countenance, and inspire the Smile ot gaiety. 
After Supper, Sir William changed his Seat, and went and Sat next to her. For a time he iised every endeavour to remove the restraint her late situation had thrown her into; and when he thought he had, in a great measure, cheered her mind, he took her by the hand, and in the tenderest manner addressed himself to her in the following words. 
My dear girl, the disclofure of youf mind you have now made, has both Surprised and shocked me, because it was not only new to me, but very distant from any idea I ever could suppose you 
would 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. II 
Would form rcspefling marisiage. Do not mistake me, my dear child; I am neither Surprised, or angry, to know that your heart has been susceptible of the most noble of all human passions; no, my dear girl, it was what, as a father, I had a right to expect, and if you had fixed your affection on an obje(st whose charaffer and conduct in life proved him a man of virtue, you would have found me ready, even young as you are, to have made you happy by consummating your wishes. I shall Say little of the person you have mentioned, further, than that though he may linc great merit in his profession, I am no stranger to Some errors in his moral con dust, of So vicious a stamp, that, were he in other respedts eligible, they would operate So powerfully with me, I should think ray Self bound in duty to reject him Vqu II G a 
122 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
as a husband to a daughter os mine. You hav e been captivated by his person, which I allow to be beautiful in the extreme, and your error, at your time of life, admits of every extenuation. But, eter hold it in remembrance, that beauty of person is of little estimation, when the mind conneffed with it wants the ornamental graces of virtue. He had everything to hope if he could have fixed you in a marriage contrast! and, believe me you would have had everything to fear; for the fidelity of a vicious man is not to be Secured by those obligations that bind men of virtuous principles, because vice overthrows hat confidence, and that integrity, wshich constitute the happiness of civil Society. He has artfully concealed from you what is known to me, otherwise you must have beheld him in too ' 2 " odious 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
odious a light, to have entertained favourable Sentiments of him as a lover. I am Sensible the effests of love in young minds make very deep and lasting im prefficns; and therefore I think great caution should be used, wherever it is found necessary to oppose those natural distates of the heart. Consider your own dignity, and the honour of your family; and, when you find yourself capable of regulating your mind tocou' pofure and tranquillity, pay Some attention to the Sweet voice of reason, for Ihe will correst: the mistakes of juvenile indiscretion, and guide you to the abodes of virtue and happiness. I did not intend you ssiould See London till we all made a visit to Mr. and Mrs. Per aval, in the autumn, though they had privately Solicited me to let you go with them; but as I know that the best anti g 2 dote 
124 FAVOURITES OF FELICITY, 
dote against anxiety and uneafiness, is to divert the thoughts with a new train of ideas, I think a change of Scene, and the multifarious amusements of the capital, will acccomplish everything I wish: therefore, desire you will prepare to Set out with them tomorrow; and, as this will be the first expedition you have ever made So far from home, as well as to convince you that I fully pardon what has happened, I will stock your purse with one hundred guineas, that you may indulge your fancy in purchasing a little London finery. Come, my dear girl, give me a kiss, in token os perfeff for giveiiess and love, and then retire and begin to pack yr things for the journey.’* 
As Soon as Sir William left off Speaking, Sslima and her Sister withdrew, and 
every 
THE FAVOURITES OF fellcity. i25 
everything wore the face of composure till they Set off this morning, when she took a cheerful leave of us, and entered the coach with Sir Lionel, and Mr. and Mrs. Percival, in perfe(5t high Spirits. 
Sir William Sent Sor Prejio as Soon as the travellers Set out, and paid him for what lessons were then due; and without noticing his conduff, or acquainting him with what had passed the night before, told him he had no further ccca fion for his attendance, as his daughter Was gone to London wdth her Sister. Prejio exprested his Surprise at sier Sudden departure So artlessly, that I am pcvfuaded Selima had not •’sent him any intelligence of the discovery she had made last night; he therefore considered his being paid off as a matter in conse quence of her jaunt to the capital, and G 3 took 
126 THE FAVOURITES OF feucltyi 
took his leave with his usual cheerfulness and affability. 
Though I do not apprehend you have “looked into the seeds of timsf yet you have proved yourself a true prophet, for this matter has turned out just as you fufj iefied it would. But I hope this timely discovery of it. Sir William's. gentle admonition, liberal behaviour and Selinufs removal Srom the chance of feeing Presto will put a final stop to ail further intimacy with this coxcomb, who I find is a fellow of libertine principles, and would not have been admitted into the house, only he is an excellent performer on the harpsichord, and there is no other teacher in this part of the country. 
As 
THE FAVOURITES OF felicixy. 127 
As you will See the new married couple, and your cousin Selima on their arrival in town, I shall lay nothing more refpe<51ing this place I shall return to Bekoiir'hall in a few days, So write no more to me here. 
I am, 
most truly, your’s. 
Charles Belcour 
©4. 
LET. 
lis tht FAVOURITES OF fellcitr'* 
X E T T E R XX 
Mr. Percival to Mr. Somerset 
Pcrchal cajd. Jms i i 
Bear Sir, 
T should have written to you Sooner, only we have been much engaged in receiving and paying visits, before Mr, and Mrs, Fierpoint Sat out for London. 
Sir jaonard Lexicon and his lovely daughter, dined with us the day after I wrote last to you, and a happy day it was to me, I alture you. My Sather took an opportunity, after dinner, of 
walking 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 129 
walking into the garden with Sir Leonard only, as was agreed on, and there dii closed my wishes to him, respedling his daughter, which he received with the highest transports of joy, as a matter persefuy agreeable to him, for he declared, the young lady was not pre engaged, and he did not wish for an alliance with a more respestable family. After Some further conversation, he desired my father would return to the house, and Send me to him, which took place. 
on’my approaching him, he addressed me in the following manner. 
“So, young gentleman, your father has informed me, that you have expressed a wish to adcorporate with my daughter in wedlock. You are a Scholar I G 5 under 
1^0 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
understand; an Analefies; a Chryfojlom for eloquence. I love a Scholar, and everything that is acroamaticau It is a good sign when young men are concitated to matrimony, for concubinage is immoral. My daughter and you are co ordi natcy both being baronets children,, therefore you cannot quarrel about preeminence. It is impossible to be cardiog 7wjlicy - but i think you will have no concurrent to combat with, on which account I See nothing to hinder your being. colligated; Sor, as you are a young man of cor.digtiitjy I shall be confentient to your union; So lose no time, but enter into cdloeution with her upon the Subjefi,.. as Soon as you can, and then you’ll know her mine!. If she refuses to receive your addresses, let me know it, and I will be adjuvant. Zounds, if I approve of } oil, she must, or 1 shall proceed to co 
ad tony 
the favourites of felicity. 131 
abioriy and that will Soon dcurate her. So there’s an end of the business, and let us return to the company.” 
You will laugh, I am pcrsuaded, at this cacofyntheton, which, doubtless, is Singular, even to ridiculousness; but his virtues abundantly over balance this peculiarity, and I think you must join with me in praise of his affability and politeness. 
I have visited Miss Lexicon every day since, but, as yet, find her much upon' the reserve, notwithstanding the repeated encouragement her father gives us of coming to an ecclaircistement. However, 1 attribute this to that innate modesty which most conspicuousty characterises this amiable young lady; and will be content to wait till time leads her to G 6 behold 
1^2 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITT, 
behold me in that light her Sensibility and penetration may require. If her reserve is founded on caution, I Surely must commend it as a proof of her good understanding, though it embarraffes the warm emotions of my affefiion; for my heart is already So firmly devoted to her, that I am lost to every other consideration, and I Say with the poet, 
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- - — -- -- - — .** Adieu for her. 
The dull engagements of the bustling world! Adieu the sick impertinence of praise!! 
hope, and action!! with her alone. 
By streams and shades, to steal the sighing' hours, 
la all I ask, and all that fate can give. 
O! Cousin, how delightful are those fensations of thd'mind, that love is capable of creating ^ how Superior are they 
to 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 133 
to every other perception enjoyed by human Sensibility Surely, these peculiar prerogatives, granted only to mankind, ought to excite our admiration of that Being, whose infinite wisdom and good ness has placed us in the first rank of creation, posseffed of faculties and powers nearly allied to. the divine; and ira prefs our hearts with a grateful sense of our own dignity, the beauty of virtue and the obligations of religion } 
The passion of love, in it’s original purity, enlivens, polishes, and extends the mind; enssames it with ideas of everything good, great, and worthy admiration i discovers the true attra^iions of virtue and honour; gives birth to accidental pleasures, and heightens the effe£l of those already known j elevates the 
genius 
'THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
genius to explore the inmost recesses of the Soul; carries it beyond the boundaries it could ever pass without ids influence; direffs the a£lions and pashons in general and though it excites the imagination to it’s own peculiar purposes, yet,, without contamination, it never exceeds the prescriptions of regularity and temperance; but guards with discretion,, the native weight and energy of things. 
1 shall take the liberty of letting you know, from time to time, how I go on in my intimacy with Miss Lexicon \ for, at present, I know of no pleasure equal to that of disclosing the situation of one’s mind, under any circumstance what -- ever, to a tried and approved fisiend. 
Doffer Belcour informed you, in a letter yesterday, of what has happened 
refpeffing 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
respesting my sister Selima^ and as you will see her and the pierpoint izmixy as Soon as they get to London, it is not necessary for me to Say anything about them, but that I should most sensibly regret their departure, were not my thoughts wholly engrossed by an object worthy of every attention L am capable of bestowing upon it. 
I remain, 
Dear Sir, 
your’s, ' Edmund Percival, 
LET 
r THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITT. 
LETTER XXL Mr. Somerset to Mr. Percival; 
London June 26, 1785. 
Dear Cousin. 
Your first letter gave me infinite pleasure, because I was Satisfied it contained the genuine Sentiments os your mind, and they do great credit to your understanding, and your virtue. If your plan of life is not formed on extensive views, it is highly calculated to produce that undisturbed, and Serene felicity, which ambitious minds very rarely experience. 
The 
favourites of felicitt, 
The world is a Spacious theatre, and it is necessary for the Support of its mul«* tifarous representations, that it should have a<51ors of every description. It is fortunate for the good os the whole, that Some, like you, prefer the peaceful, pas toral line, for top many mistake the road to fame and honour, by Setting up for kings and heroes, as if all were to govern, and none perform the Subordinate eharaffers. I do not wish to have So much Salt in my Satire, as to Say with Juvenaf Natio comoedia est the nation is a comedy., because I am afraid, too many of the Scenes of life, more properly belong to the line of tragedy; and, therefore, to Speak generally, totus mundus agit histrionem, the whole u'orld afi the player, is more justly applicable, to the universal affions of mankind. Fortune seas enabled you to chuse what part you 
will 
238 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
will aff, but this is the lot of a Sew and, indeed, it appears as if providence designed it should be So, that the neces* fities of the greater part, should stimulate them to employments which might prove beneficial to Society in general. You. must remember the observation of Perjius, 
Magiller artis, ingenique largitor Vente r -- -- -- -- -- 
Want prompts the 'wit andfirjl gave birth to arts. 
This has been truly verified, for the' world owes many of it’s important improvements, and advantages, to the invention and labour of necessity. And while it is agreed that, “there are qualities in the produffions of nature yet un discovered, and combinations in the powers of art yet untried, ” it may be remarked,, that there is little to be hoped from the endeavours of the opulent i for though their. 
curiosity: 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. i39 
curiostty may be excited, that supineness which affluence generally creates, will always check their progress to affion 5 but the hope of reward Seldom Sails to rouse the indigent to application and adi venture; and, hence, according to the Pythagorean maxim, Power is never far from 7i£ce(fttyy Nil mortalihus arduum ejiy there is nothing which human courage will not undertake, and, as has been well observed, “little that human patience will not endure.” 
You remark, that I prefer a town life to the country, which I certainly do. I was born in the capital, and theresure like you, to whom the country gave birth,, may plead prescription for my choice. I know that nature and the country are nearest allied, Sor populous cities partake most of art, invention, and refinement; 
ye 
i40 THE FAVOURITES OF fellcltl^^ 
yet am Inclined to think, that these greatly contribute to the Selicities of life, particularly during the gloom of Winter. For what can the country afford at that awful, and unchearing season, to a man who delights not in the active and hazardous Sports of the field, or the calm Serenity of Solitary meditation } He may, indeed, indulge in indolence and ease, till his faculties and powers are congealed by the frigidity of Srost, like the water, and vegetable world around him, and he becomes little more than a lise less statue. But in town, the vacuities of the mind may be filled by a dirersity of amusements which the country cannot bestow, and which, in general, are equally innocent with the simple recreations of rural retirement, to Say nothing of their tendency to instrudfion. 
tour 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. II 
Your mind is stored with the pleasing representations os rural happiness, as described in the works of the poets. But I must observe, that though these beautiful piffures of nature may delight for a time, they will lose their importance, either when they become familiar, or as we find it necessary to withdraw our attention from them to the immediate employments of life; and this proves that they are but trifling ingredients in th cup of human felicity. 
You have been bred in affluence, which has enabled you to direst your own choice, therefore you have Seen the world only on one fide; but if necessity had obliged you to enter more largely into the drama of life, you would have met with Scenes equally interesting with the limited 
pleasures 
142 the favourites of felicity 
pleasures of the country, and, perhaps, much more So. 
In the Spring and Summer seasons, the pleasures and adventures of a rural situation, may vie with, or even surpass, those that the town affords; and then, I con -- fess, like Horaces citizen, I am desirous ■of relaxing from the talk of duty at my countryseat. But after all, it is neither particular situations, or modes of life, that alone constitute happiness, for it depends more on the fancy, or a disposition,, the mind toward it, than on accidental circumstances, because either Seldom fail to put the heart upon a level with it’s condition. 
As you have turned your thoughts on imarriage, 1 am happy to know there is a chance of your entering into an union 
with 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 143 
with So desirable an objefi: as Miss Lexicon I dined with her and her father the last time I was at Percival cajiley when I admired her person nnd affability, and was much entertained with Sir Leonards ar chteologisms, which are rather laughable, than deserving censure. His address to you in the garden put me in mind of Some of the expressions Shakespeare has given to his charaffer of ancient pijfol 
If you continue in the resolution, to copy the example of your amiable father in your condust through life, you will merit the praise of all good men, for he is everything that virtue can expeff, and therefore while I admire your filial piety, I affure you I do not think your portrait of him is exaggerated, for exclusive of his other perfeffions, he is an illustrious example of the mild majejly of private life. 
Your 
144 the favourites of felicity. 
Your mother is one of the greatest ornaments of her Sex I ever met with, and her domestic assiduity does her the highest honour. Of Such women, it has been remarked, that “they are much more Serviceable in life than petticoated philosophers, blustering heroines, or virago queens/* 
Your opinion of Miss Lexicons rescrv cd behaviour may be justly founded, for virgin modesty is timid, and stow to yield compliance; but when this reservation is the Sole effect of genuine delicacy of mind, it is truly beautiful, and, perhaps, is implanted in the System by the wise author of nature, to stimulate the affection of the opposite Sex. However, it is a pleasing talk to encounter with this captivating Sensibility, and you must endeavour. 
6 ' « With 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. i45 
“With fondest gesture and a suppliant’s tongue. To win her coy regard, ” ^ — — 
though Some assert that fuccess in love is most easily obtained by indirefi: approaches, because the fallacies of artifice, and the designs of lawless passion, have succeeded under the appearance of opcn nefs and Serenity; So that Some women of llrist caution are long ere they induce themselves to trust their lovers, though they have no private reasons to Suipecl: that they would betray them. Indifference removes suspicion; but though this is a doffisine founded on policy, it does little credit to human nature. 
I entirely coincide with you, respeffing the passion of love in it’s original purity, and the peculiar effects of it on the mind. The influence of a first passion, appears to alter the fystein of the human faculties vol. II H and 
146 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
and sensations, if I may be allowed the idea; Scr it Srequently animates torpid stupidity to sprightliness and ardour, and awakens extraordinary powers which before were never perceived; and Sometimes it over powers the acutest sensib; ity. 
“Love never falls to master what he finds, But works a different way in different minds, The fool enlightens, and the wife he blinds 
Though the principle, on which the pashon of love between the different Sexes is Sounded, requires no elucidation, yet how it first operates is not well, if at all understood; for the power of stealing upon the mind, and of disposing the heart to fondness and affeffion, is one of the occult mysteries of nature. Beauty of 
^ Drydeu, 
person 
favcvrrtes OF feltcltv. I 
person in both objeffs, appears to be the most probable cause of Setting the paffioa into aflion; yet how often do we See it exist between objests entirely uncorre fpondent respe<sting external appearance? However, where beauty is out of the question, for it is granted but to a Small purtion of the human race, love must have it’s origin Srom other oauses; and ihcse may be similar virtues, desires and aversions, uniformity of opinions. Superficial accomplishments, mutual complacency, or accidental endearments. Some of which may excite the heart first to tenderness, and afterwards to that reciprocal Sympathy and aptitude of desire between the Sexes which v/e call love. 
1 was not at all Surprised when I read doff or Belcoufs account of your sister Southeast lima, for I have long suspested an intimacy H a between 
148 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
between her and that presuming coxcomb Prejioy in consequence of Some remarks I made when I was last at Percival Cajlk, She has lately written Several letters to my wife, in which she displays a dissipated and romantic disposition in very glaring colours. Mrs somerfet^s answers will, I hope, check her a little, and bring her to reason. The gentle admonitions of friendship frequently do more Service on these occasions, than positive opposition. I admire the conduff of Sir will Ham on seumd.s declaration of her passion for Prejie, and think he judged right to send her to London with her sister, as the jaunt, and the amuseraents of the capital, may give a new turn to her ideas, and put an end to this disagreeable buli nefs; and after the lenient behaviour of her father, if she still pursues her own inclinations, she is incorrigible. 
northeast 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 149 
The travellers arrived Safe in town last night. We have not Seen them, buse have received a card of invitation to dine with them tomorrow. 
You do me great honour in making me your confident; and you may assure yourself, I shall receive any account of the progress of your amour with the highest delight, for while I esteem you as a relation, I admire you as a man of virtue. 
I remain, 
most sincerely, your’s, 
fraijcis Somerset. 
H 
LET, 
, TIE FAVOURITES O? FBL 1CITT». 
LETTER XXII 
Miss Lexico: ^ to Mr Percivau 
lexicothfiactj 'dum 30, 
Sir, 
Though the opulence of my shtlier has produced me numberless Suitors,, I consels, with persecl sincerity, I never have been honoured before with the notice of So accomplished a gentleman as yourself. My Satster has received you as. a lover worthy of his daughter, and I admire you as a man of Splendid abilities, and illustrious virtues, yet it is without a thought os nearer approaches; for,, though I tremble while I write, I think. 
myself 
THE FAVOURITES OF pelfcity. i51 
myself bound by'honour to declare, that my heart has long been engaged with an object,, less desirable, and less eligible than you. I experience the highest Solicitude that I have been obliged to conceal this circumstance from niy Sather^ because it has led him into an error with regard to you,, and you into a mistake respefiing me. For when this affair first took place about three years since, it did not meet with his approbation, and I was forbid to give any further encouragement to it; but, alas, 1 found it out of ray power to obey the injunfiion, and have carried on a private correspondence. Thus, I hope. Sir, though ray heart denies yon it’s affection, the early and generous confession I hav e made will induce you to cornmiserate my critical Situation, and extend that l^iendship toward me, ■ which is in your FI 4 power 
152 THE FAVOURITBS OF FELICITY. 
power to grant, and which I shall immediately stand in need of. It is my misfortune, and not my crime, that I was not honoured with your acquaintance Sooner, and therefore though my fidelity to another obliges me to reject you as a lover, I flatter royself I have Some pretension lot your sorgiveness and liberality. 
Should I difclose myself to my father at this time, the violence of his temper may produce effects of the worst consequence;; I find it impossible to dissemble with the feasibility of that affeffion I have indulged for the object of all my felicity. Therefore, Sir, as you naturally Will decline your addresses, now yen know the impossibility of my complying with your wishes, the favour I Solicit is, that you will conceal the real cause, and preserve my Secret inviolate, 
for 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
for a discovery will involve me in misery and ruin. 
I feel, with the extremity of compunction and Sorrow, the error of my conduff, in concealing from my father the favourable Sentiments I still entertain of my lover, and of indulging his addresses; without having the Sanction of parental authority; and thus one error has given rise to more, for I have resigned myself to duplicity and artifice, as the necessary expedients to stifle that disobedience I have dreaded to discover; I see my mistake with all it’s terrific attendants, and hope the early age when it first began, and my having had, from situation, but little acquaintance with the world, will contribute to lighten the weight of the balance against me. O! Mr, fercivau O! generous young man 1 since I am H 5 well 
t54'the favourites of felicity.., 
well .persuaded, your heart is open to all the Senstbilities os human nature, participate in my distress; and while you Seek Spy happiness yourcelf, be not regardjefs of the Selicity of others. I merit your pity, not your contempt. Contrive Some method of withdrawing yoursels from me, consistent with your honour, and my embarrassed situation. If you comply with my request, I will pray for your happiness, let fate, do what it,, will with mc 
shall wait with anxious impatience rill I know your resolution. 
I am, 
with great respeff", your’f, 
Julia lexico^t. 

THE favottrites OF femoityi i55, 
L E T T E R XXIII 
Mr. Percival to Miss Lexicon. 
psrctv.al c'a/ue, Jime 31, 1784* 
My DEAREST Miss Lexicon,, 
.DUR letter has rendered me truly; miserable, for it has excluded me from those desirable Scenes of felicity, I fondly flattered rnysels'i fltould very shortly enjoy. O gracious heaven! what, do I not suffer, and what have I yet not to endure for in hearts like mine, it is notin the power of medicine to heal the wounds of love. 

156 the favourites of fellclty. 
O! generous young lady! though ifortune has denied you to me, it does not lessen my esteem for your virtues; and though I am forbid to love, I will not be wanting in doing you every friendly office in my power. Your Secret shall rest with me as long as you wish to have it concealed; and I will take the reproach and shame to mysels, which must Sollow from declining further intercourse with you as a lover, while the true cause remains unknown 
I have been an innocent Instrument in giving you uneasiness, and therefore you must grant me an honourable acquittal in your owm heart. My distressos mind is So ereat that the tears of Sorrow flow while 1 write; but the recolle61ion of my own Sufferings shall Ue obliterated by my un 2 ceasing 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY i57 
ceasing endeavours to relieve your present Solicitude, and preserve you blamc less; for, I will be your mind’s physician, and administer the cordial cup of consolation and tranquillity. We have both to undergo the examination, and, perhaps, the reproof of our friends; however, regard not me; be careful to hold out with magnanimity yourself, and the wheel of Felicity may turn in your favour. And, believe me, I tell you with the striffest truth, though the chance of circumstance has consigned you to another, it will ever be the Supreme wish of my heart that he will merit your af feffion, and that your union may be crowned with uninterrupted happiness. 
But, alas! how frail and uncertain is the felicity of life! and how deceitful, or transitory, are all human pleasures! 
You, 
15^- THE favourites OF fexlcitt. ■ 
You, my dearest Julidy were the first’ objest'.of my Sousts admiration; and'i never knew it was in the nature of man,., to experience Such delightsul sensations as I found you capable of bestowing. O, what Schemes of pleasure had I plan -- iied whenever a union took, place between us! “• I would have led you forth,. with enchanting step, -, through many mazy wild; or beneath Some shady bower, impervious to the noontide Sun,, have Set you down, and gazed with rapture on that transcendent beauty which first engaged my wishes; orelse,. anxious to give your Soul delight, I; viould have striven to have gained your> attention, while I related Some, tender,, pleashig: tale of love. But these imaginary felicities can never now be realised! therefore.i will fink my mind to a level, 
with. 
THE ■ i^avouir it.eof fel icity* ltj; 9n 
with my condition, and only endeavour to 
“Tndiilge that charming.fenf^ of woe. Which none but friends and lovers know.’* 
Farewein Farewell! that happistefs may attend you, .will ever be the eour stant wish of 
Your 
unfortunate admirery and sincere Sriend, ed.ivicnd Percival... 

lo THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
LETTER XXIV 
Mr. Somerset to Mr. Percival. 
London Augujl 3, 1784. 
Dear Edmund, 
“E are in a state of confusion, both at my house, and at Mr. Pier poinfsi Sor your sister Selima has made an elopement, of which I thought it proper to acquaint you, that you may disclose the matter to your father and mother, as your judgement shall direst you. 
The particulars of this distressful affair are as follow. We all made a party 
to 
tise FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. ll 
to go to Vamhall gardens last night; and just before we proposed to Set out, Selima was taken ill, or, as I am now asraid, pretended to be So, and therefore declined going with us. As her complaint appeared to be only a slight indispofition, and we were all dressed for the purpose of going to the gardens, we went and left her at home. About an hour after our departure she Set off, but told one of the Servants she should return in two hours time; however, when we came back at twelve o’clock, to our great astonishment, we found her absent, which occasioned various inquiries and Suspicions; and more especialiy, on our being informed by one of the Servants, that a porter had brought a letter for Selima the day before, who requested that it; might be delivered to her privately. 
This 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
Thisled us to imagine that Frejlo had pursued her to London in order to accomplish a clandestine marriage; and my wife strongly enforced this idea, be cause, in one of selimd.s letters to her, she Said he generally came to town at this feason of the year, and if she was in London at the Same time, he had promised to accompany her to the places pf public diversion; on which account she pressed Mrs Somerset to give her an invitation to come to our house, which she: verj prudently declined doing.. 
She had passed Some jokes refpe<fiiug a trip to Scotlandy which led us to Sear she now had realised them, * and Mr Fderpoint was impatient to Set out immediately under an idea that he might over lake the runaway; however, considering the late hour of the night, and finding on 
examination ■ 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY, 
examination that she had neither taken any of the clothes, or money she brought with her, we came to the resolution of waiting till the morning, in order to an tempt finding Prejlo out if in town; for I own I was not much inclined to think, if she really was gone to him, that they were Set off for the North, because it was reasonable to siippose she would have taken Some of her things, or her money at least on Such an expedition. This consideration perplexed us greatly yet we could not suppose that any accident had happened to her, which could prevent her Sending notice of it, dcatli excepted. 
We w' aited for the morning with great impatience, wshen Mr. Fkrpoint and.i Set out on an inquiry aster Prejlo at Some afithe. music shops, where we concluded 
WG. 
164 THE FAVOURITES OF fellcltv. 
we should get intelligenceof him if in town. At one of these we were informed, that he had been in London two days, and, as they understood, was to Set out for the country early that morning. No intelligence could be gained as to where he had lodged, nor was his name in any of the books belonging, to the stage coaches that had gone' off that day; therefore Mr. Pierpoint resolved on a route to Scotland with all possible Speed, accompanied by two Servants. 
This is the state of the matter; and I affure you your sister Cornelia is in a distressed situation, on account of Selimd'$ imprudence, and for the Safety of Mr. Pierpoint on So long a journey. I must do him the justice to Say, that his concern for Selima, and willingness to undertake the pursuitof her, do him singular credit. 
Oa 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. leon 
the receipt os this, you will do well to inquire whether Frejio is returned home, for, if he is not, I am afraid our Suspicions are too justly founded. Though indeed, if he should be returned, it is almost impossible that her elopement can be placed to the account of any one but him, for she has not been long enough in town to form any connexion, or even make a common acquaintance, from whom she could receive a letter in the manner that was brought which I have mentioned. Let me hear from you as Soon as possible, for I am impatient till I know whether you can make any discovery refpe£ling frejlo, for, if you can, it may produce Some intelligence of Selima, tour’s 
in haste, 
Francis Somerset. 
L E .D 
i THE .FAVOURITES OF felloity* 
I. E T T E R XXV 
jmiss Lexicon to Mr. Perciyal, 
Lexicon plactf Augufi 5, 4784, 
Sir, 
Your generous answer to my letter demands my most gratesul acknowledgements; Sor though the state \ds my case might excite pity, I do not think the general tenor of my epistle, was entitled to that liberal condescension you have shown me j but the manner in which exalted minds confer an obligation is always equally important with the favour 
bestowed, -’ 
HE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 16^ 
bestowed. Your praise does me the highest honour; and your confession, that I have been the objest of your .esteem, would raise me to the pinnacle £>{ human felicity, did not recolleffion irj« form me I am destined toshujmbler jieflations, 
You have nobly kept your promise,, not taking the advantage my father’s authority gave you, of pursuing a solicitation my integrity to another would oblige me to rejesh ut the storm is beginning to gather around me, and I know of but one ekpedient to prevent it’s falling upon my devoted head. It is ^ dreadful alternative, yet jn desperate pases, I have always understood, it js jadvifable to make use of desperate 
inedies. 
l68 THE FAVOURITES OF FELISITF, 
medles, after those that are moderate have failed. 
To Speak in plain terms, I must inform you, that my father suspeds I have used Some means to make you decline your addresses, and his rage at your absence increases daily. He Says a union with your family is what he had long thought of, and, as it is the wish of you and your friends, he is resolved it shall take place immediately. He will visit you tomorrow, in order to propose the fortune he means to give me as a marriage portion, and consult your father and you refpefling the plan of a Settlement. You know my situation, and I am fully persuaded you will add consistently with my engagement, and your own dignity. 
Adieu, 
rke favotmites OP felicitt. l 
Adieu, thou generous and amiable young man; my heart tells melt is a misfortune 1 cannot accept of your love. If truth and honour had not bound me to another, I would give you the prefer cnee of all the world. Farewell, and be assured you are esteemed by. 
The unfortunate 
Lexicon 
VOL. II 
LET. 
170 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
letter XXVI 
Mr. Percival to Mr. Somerset. 
terdval ccd.llet Auguji 8, 1784. 
Dear Sir, 
IT is impossible that words can describe my astonishment and Sorrow when I read your last letter. O God! that I should have a sister So lost to virtue, and filial gratitude! but human nature appears to delight in pursuing that which is forbidden, for 
« 
The 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. II 
The mind of mortals, in perverseness strong, Imbibes with dire docility the wrong.” 
And, as Cicero finely remarks, Max'mas •virtutes jacere omnes necejfe eji voluptate dominantey when pleasure gets the upper hand, all the greatest virtues necefsarily fall. ^ \ j 
I judged it best not to conceal selimd.s rash imprudence from my father and mother, therefore difclosed it. They were both greatly shocked. My father appears to suppress his mind’s uneafiness; but my mother’s usual magnanimity has forsaken her on this occasion, and all our endeavours to dissipate the recollection of ray sister’s disobedience have proved ineffe£lual. Dofior B etc our and ray Aunt were to have Set off this morning, but, on account of this unfortunate I 2 affair. 
i72 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY, 
affair, they have generoussy resolved not to leave us yet, which is a great conso lation to us. 
Prejlo returned from London the night before last, So that I am inclined to think he did not leave town the morning after Selitna lest Mr. pierpqinfs, We have Seen him; but he positively.denies having had any concern in her elopement. My father pressed the matter very closely and warmly, after having explained his reasons for it, but all without any effect though I am inclined to doubt the truth of his affirmation, partly because h discovered great confusion when we went to him, and because he treated u with a degree of insolence which I think innocence would not have diffated. However, if he is guilty, it is evident a trip to Scotland was not his plan, and I think 
he 
The favaurltes OF FELICITY, lyg 
Ke cannot Have Seduced’ her away for baser purposes, becausc it would be impossible for him to conceal her long in the country, therefore the matter is become more mysterious than it was, and we are left in a dreadful state of suspense, and Solicitude. Mr, Fierpoinfs jaunt to Scotland, is another distressful circumstance, now we know it will be ineffectual in finding the gracelefe fugitive. 
My father thinks it prudent to keep the affair as quiet and secret as possible, So that even our own Servants are no; acquainted ot it. If she should not be returned when you receive this, or you should not have procured any imellh gence rcspeding her, my father dessres she may be advertised very defcripiivjy, omitting the name, with an ample reward for any account of her vvhaiever. We 1 3 hope 
174 the favourites of felicity. 
hope you will not hesitate about pursuing any Surther step you may judge proper, Sor we knovr your knowledge of the world qualifies you to aff without dire£iion. I would come to town could I be of use; but, as 1 fear I cannot, it will be better Sor me to remain here, and assist in endeavouring to cheer my disconsolate mother. 
Thus much at present respesting one unsortunate event; and now Sora Second, full as distreffing as the first. 
I have inclosed two letters Sent to me by Miss Lexicon and my answer to the first of them, Srom which you will perceive all my Sond hopes of entering into a happy union with that young lady are frustated. hpwtver, that you may clearly understand this matter, 1 shall re. 
.. 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. i75 
late what has happened Subsequent to the receipt os the letters. 
On my absenting mysels Srom lexicon place in consequence of the information I received, Sir Leonard came to our house the day before yesterday, and insisted on my assigning a reason why 1 had abruptly relinquished a plan of my own proposing, and with which he had most readily acqiiiesced? It was, doubtless, a fair question, and I ought to have given a direct and unequivocal answer; but the letters will lead you to imagine how much I was embarrassed. I begged he would not press for an explanation, as I had very particular leasons for wishing to decline it. I expeffed his irascible disposition would have led him into violence, but it was quite olherwise. He shook his head, and told me I was too honest 14 to 
jy6 THE FAVOURITES OF reiacity.. 
to assert a falsehood, and too liberal to, a graceless girl, whose obstinate attachment to one of her own choice had led her,, in defiance of his commands to the contrary, and in open disobedience, .to rejest. Hie. He, was Sure I could not deny that lome. Such thing had happened, but if I did not chuse to make a voluntary confession, he should not ptess me to it. However, if I would marry his.daughter, he was determined she should comply. Here I observed, that though it had been my warmest, wish to enter into an al mance with him by marrying his daughter, yet I should.never think of Such an engagement, without it was the mutual wish of all parties. That though a match, had been proposed, yet it did, not poss tively follow, that it ifiould take placej, for, on these occassons, sthere' were. frequently impediments which could not be, 
foreseen: : 
FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. i77 
foreseen;; that admitting his daughter might have objections, I might be allowed Some objediions also, yet, on both sides, it might be most consistent with delicacy, and, perhaps, reason to conceal them. And, lastly, I remarked, that unless he had other reasons to the contrary, any difference between Mtfs Lexicon and me, was no proof of her carrying on a correspondence with any other person contrary to his wishes or commands. All this w’ould not do; he was positive his daughter had refused me in favour of another person, whom he Said she never should marry with his consent, and if she did it without he would disinherit her. He appeared greatly dissatisfied with me, that I would not agree to marry her by force; Said Fwas a Jesuit;; Sullenly without cere, money; and went home and quarrelled with his daughter. 
1.5 tjte 
lys THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY, 
The particulars os Miss Lexicons connexion, which were unknown to me hill yesterday, are as Sollow. 
About three years ago, an officer belonging to one of our regiments os foot came into the country on a recruiting party. The person, address, and polite conduds, of this young gentleman were So remarkable, that it was osten jocosely Said, he might more easily raise female recruits, than those of the other Sex. — He was much noticed by the gentry,, and particularly by Sir Leonard, who gave him a general invitation to his house. This produced an intimacy between Miss Lexicon and the officer, which the father never thought of checking till he had engaged her affexion, and made a proposal of marriage. This roused the baronet from his inattention, 
and 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
179 
and, entering into a contrary extreme, he locked up his daughter for daring to be in love with a fine young Sellow, drove the officer Sroiii his house, and by his interest in town, had him removed to a distant part os the kingdom. Inconsequence of this Separation, an epistolary correspondence commenced, which was Soon detested, and forbid under very strist injunstions; however, though it ■was stopped Sora time, it has been renewed lately, and carried on with Such privacy, as to evade Sir leonard’s vigilance; not but he has suspested her still entertaining an affestion Sor this gentleman, which led him to accept of my offer with the readiness he did. 
You will perceive by this short account of the affair, that, in the first instance. Sir Leonardj instead of his daughter, was 
to 
isb THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
to blame; for he ought to have known the hazard of introducing a gay, vivacious officer to a young lady of her years, for the military are generally men of gallantry; So that he threw temptation .in her .way; and, as it were; pointed out the path of love and now is angry she pursued it. 
r know not how it is,, but there k Something in the dress of the army uniform, which operates very powerfully with the fair Sex; and this brings to recollection what the officer Says in Lh^ trfivelleps Return, 
**''^where e’er we come the females fall, before us, 
iried coats have charms, and all the girls adore us! 
Sih 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITT. l8r 
Sir Leonard is one of those who think love and riches must be associated to constitute happiness in marriage; besides which, he values himself on the dignity and antiquity of his family, and therefore will not' let his daughter marry any one not poffeffed’of similar qualifications, however worthy in other respeffs. And it very unfortunately happens, that the gentleman who is the object of Mifi Lexicod.% affe£ligh, is neither' a man of fortune, or distinguished family; So that there is little hope she can ever accomplish her wishes with her father’s consent, for he is obstinate and arbitrary in the extreme, and Suffers the influence of caprice and pride to extinguish the tender feelings of humanity, and to exercise a Species of wanton cruelty under the venerable Sanffion of parental authority 
152 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
thority; “the power, ’^ says a great writer, ‘‘ which we are taught to honour from the first moments os reason; which is guarded from insult and violation by all that can impress an awe upon the mind of man; and which, therefore, may wanton in cruelty without control, and trample the bounds of right with innumerable tranfgrestions before duty and piety will dare to Seek rcdress, or think themselves at liberty to recur to any other means of deliverance than Supplications by which insolence is elated, and tears by which cruelty is gratified.” 
For my own part, I Suffer great concern for the disagreeable Situation of Miss levtcon, not because my heart had entertained the most Sensible impreshons 
in 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 183 
in her Savour, but because she has fallen into an error, if I may call it So, not intentionally, but accidentally; an error which parental affection ought at least to commiserate with all the powers of generous tenderness, instead of punishing it with malignity, or displaying the intoxication of dominion; for pursuing the latter conduff, is disregarding the great law of Social beings, forcing the constitution into violent changes, and opposing the natural dictates of the heart. 
Miss Lexicon is a very amiable young lady, and being now at an age when wisdom generally encourages fortitude, I should not be Surprised to hear that her father’s brutality prompts her to Some ad of indiscretion. 
O, 
THE favourites OF FELICITY, 
O, Cousin! how altered is the state of my mind since I last wrote to you !* How short-lived have been my hopes of felicity through an union with a beautiful and virtuous.^woman !'Not blighted’ in the blossom.. destroyed even in the very bud!’ However, I will not sink under disappointment, but comfort myself with the observation that, Human life is everywhere a state in which much is to be endured, and little to be enjoyed.” - — I will indulge the pleasing expectations to.be derived from hope; for though she. Sometimes deceives, her promises alone frequently contribute to the happiness of mankind. 
Good God!, while I' was wtiting the above, news arrived, that after Sir Lee mrd. returned from our house, he confined 
THE FAVOURITES OF peliclthf. 1s5 
fined his daughter in a room on the top of the shouse, from which she found means to escape last night, and went away only attended by a maid servanf, Her father, as we hear, is outrageous, and is dispatching persons in pursuit of her in every direflion. It is a rash a£hon, bntj.as^ do not know the whole of her •provocation, am'willing to persuade my -- Self her fense of honour would not have buffered her to have pursued it, if it had .notbeen necestary. May the providence of the Almighty shield her from all dan^er^, and bring her at last to peace apd happiness.! 
'I do not know that I am qualified t form a proper judgement refpe£fing Mif^ Lexicons flying from her father; for after all, I cannot yet drive from my 
heart 
l85 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
heart those pleasing sensations her image has placed there. And whatever opinion her father, or the world, may entertain of her conduff, 1 think she will still prove heisielf a woman of virtue. To live in a state of perpetual persecution on account of any circumstance which is not in our power to prevent, is a situation that will awaken the sense of injustice; and no one is ill-treated without Some degree of resentment, for, howxver gratitude and obedience, especially to parents, ought to bind us, who can live easy without enjoying Some of the Sweets of human kindness the rational expefiation of one being from another. 
I shall wait with the utmost impatience till I hear from you again, for it is impossible that anything can exceed my 
Solicitude 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 187 
Solicitude respeffing my Sister, and the present distress of my family. 
I remain, 
Dear Cousin, your’s, most truly, 
Edmund Percival, 
2ND OF THE SECOND VOLUME. 
ERRATUM. 
Page 97, line 7, for Solifidian read Solltudinanan% 
u. of 
libr^i’y I 



'€ d VV .A r'".rd' 
^7{_l V 'N, __., _ _.... - 
C r' - C 
r ^ : /- V 
ten'‘ ‘V n4 - - 
^ 
K: :; ^ 
J ' r ‘ 1^. - \-' 
^ ', j: J 
“/ ^ 
J 



it — - 
/ 
kiz 



: FAVOURITES 
FELICITY 
POTTER 

RARE BOOK COLLECTION 
LIBRARY 
unlversityy' 
PENNSYLVANIA 
THE 
GODFREY F. SINGER MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY 
MR. AND MRS. JACOB SINGER 



V i: 

THE 
FAVOURITES 
O F 
F E L I C I T 
A 
NOV E L 
IN A SERIES OF LETTERS. 
By JOHN POTTER, M. B. Author of the Curate of Coventry, The Virtuous Villagers, cc. 
Quod verum atque decens euro et rogo, et oiunisinhoc sum. Horace, 
what’s true and decent has employ’d my care. To pleafethe fancy, and inftru^l the fair. 
■IN THREE VOLUMES. 
V O L III 
pridted for W. Cass, lamb’s Conduit Street, Holborn j T. Becket, pall mall; and Meffis. Baldwin, Roe IN SON, and Bew, pater nofter row. yi Dec LXXXV 
•: AM ■ 
': 
’ •r 'f C ■. 
fvlmi 
Cf > 
TV 
V 
ri' ' 

f - 

■ - •; - - 
NS i cv: : 

^clv 
: T; c: rn *■■ -- •'•■, 
■ - ' ■-■ ■ ■ i. .■■■.•■7 >7, 
■« » ■, ■, : 'V ■, -7 
'^ ' ^ ■ S'’C; 'CC: : 
N, -, ....; ..S NA 
< j «= 
: ir ' 
f, 
, : 'W., 7.7, -77 V 


U. of Pa, ] Library 
jr n > 

Dp 
THE 
FAVOURITES 
O F 
FELICITY 
V 
0 
d 
h 
i 
< 
i 
ip 
■a 
LETTER XXVIL 
'Mr. Somerset to Doctor Belcour. 
London Angujt 14, 1784. 
Dear Sir, 
Finding by Mr. perpwavs last letter, that you have generously waved leaving your friends So Soon a you intended, on account of their dis tress respe£i: ing sslimd.s elopement, I shall vol. IIL B Gontiaue 

1 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
continue to address my letters to you as usual, till I receive notice of your return to belcour uall 
We have used every method we could devise, to find out the runaway, but, as yet, have been unsuccesssul, and as we find that Frejio is returned home, we are lost in perplexity as to the fate of our imprudent cousin. Mr. Pierpoini is returned Safe from his fruitless journey to Scotland, and now joins with me in making an unceasing inquiry after the fugitive. For my own part, I think Prejio must know Something of her, notwithstanding his assertion to the contrary; and, perhaps, he has only hastened home to remove fuspicion, till time will give him an opportunity of accomplishing a clandestine marriage. There is a mys tery in the affair which time only can 
discover 
THE FAVOURITES 0? FELICITY. 3 
discover; however, if it should turn out as I suspeds it will, that Frejio and southeast lima are only playing off a game of artifice, till they can Secure their point, though I wish not to promote cruelty, I hope Sir William will not Suffer the feelings of parental affeffion to predominate over that resentment which is due to every breach of friendly confidence, and lawless disobedience; Sor they who dare to be ungrateful, deserve to be reformed by punishment. 
What an obstinate young creature southeast lima is! “Sex to the lafif* Is this owing to the force of love, or the Spirit of contradidlion ^ Let the principle of her conduct be whatever it may, it is horrible to reste£lion, that a girl not eighteen years of age, nursed in the School of virtue, and cherished with the generous B 2 Smile 
4 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
Smile of kindness, should be So lost to gratitude and filial piety, as to reje<si the advice os disinterested friendship, Spurn at the render Seelings of parental anxiety, and renounce “Lhe offices of na -- sure, bond of childhoods Good God I 
“How (harper than a ferpent’s tooth it is. 
To have a thanklcfs child !” * 
Whenever I meet with Such a flagrant instance of filial ingratitude as the con duff of our wilful Cousin, I am almost led to wish, that the wisdom of the legislature could invent and establish Some coercive measure, to Secure the obedience of children to parents. I grant respeffing the inclination between the Sexes, that it should be restrained with the utmost caution; and nothing can justify parents in opposing the marriage 
Sbekefpeare. 
of 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 5 
os their children, but a too early age, and those circumstances that prudence and honour point out as iusuperable objections. thesc often happen, and when that is the cafe, parents show their duty, as well as their affection, in giving that advice which the inexperience of youth requires, and children must be lost to every generous Sentiment when they remain inflexible aster receiving it. The passion of love, more frequently than the other passions, leads the incautious into irretrievable errors, and hence great cir cumspntion is necessary in both Sexes at that period of life when love usually“ “an awive progress through the mindv For though it has been asserted, that “the faults of love by love are jujli^ fiedf yet this, like other general rules, is not without an exception. 
B 
I feel 
6 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
I Seel most sensibly for Sir pvilliam and his lady on account of their present un easiness, as the Solicitude of parents for the welfare and happiness of their children, is a Species of anxiety which greatly exceeds the measure of common ■vexations; and by penetrating more deeply into the heart, checks the Spring of that relief which results from the ordinary diffipaters of care. This idea, I apprehend, was entertained by that great phiiofopher Francis., Lord Bacon, for he remarks that, “the joys of parents are Secret, and So are their griefs and fears.” 
Our cousm Edmund stands in need of friendly consolation, for his mind must experience a double distress on the loss of his Sister, and his lover. I pity him greatly on account of the latter, because she has long been the objefl of his wishes; 
and 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 7 
and the alsurance he received from Sir Leonard, that she was not pte engaged, must give birth to hopes and impressions that may not eaiily be removed, for 
-- -- -- -- -- -- love’s pow’r, we see. 
Is natui’e’s sanction, and her first decree.” * 
I think the conduct of the father extremely blamable, * and 1 shall ever admire the generous behaviour of Miss Lexicon to Mr. Percival, in her early dis closure of the Situation of her mind, at the hazard of it’s coming to the knowledge of her father, from whom it is evident she wished to conceal it. Sir leo nard appears to have but little knowledge of human nature; for oppostdon generally excites opposition, and brutality will always awaken the sense of danger, and direff us to Seek for sasety. 
^ Dryden. 
B 4 This 
8 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
This gentleman, I understand, plumes himself on his title, and the antiquity of his fiimily; and therefore he has resolved, that his daughter shall not marry beneath her rank, as he styles it, which is truly vain, and ridiculous, for 
— I... ...- ■ “Nobility of blood 
Is bat a glitt’ring and fallacious good 
I know it is remarked by Livy the historian, that the descendants os Some of the noblest Romans retained a strong resemblance of their ancestors, not only in their pershns, but likewise in the features of their iriinds; yet howeter this might be, I can never persuade myself that we owe any of our virtues to inheritance. I think the dissolute manners of the greater part of the present race of our own nobility are notorious proofs Dryden.. 
to 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 9 
to the contrary. Aud I am also inclined to believe, that they who estimate them selves on the importance of ancestry, do not think it necessary to be attentive to the acquisition of new dignities; by which they are deprived of the pleasure of owing anything to therafelves, and rob Society of the benefits ansing from the best use of time, in those affive and laudable pursuits which exalt human nature, and would render them dear to their own generation. It is more honourable to found, than to continue a family, ’’ Says an ingenious writer, and to gain dignity, than to transmit it.” 
If the objeff of Miss Lexicons affection is a man of virtue, hers worthy of her, though his rank and fortune may not be equally important with her’s; for I shall always be of opinion, that the 
B S 
greatest 
lo THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
greatest blessing a wealthy Sather can bestow upon a daughter, is a 'virtuous hus band. When 1 was’ last at Fercival cajlle, which is nov; about three years since, I Saw the officer who is the cause os all the late bustle at Sir Leonards, The baronet was then very Sond of him, but the circumstance of his making a matrimonial tender to the young lady had not happened then, and when it did, I apprehend it was kept a Secret, Sor Mr. per croal appears to have been a stranger to it when the proposal of a match was made to Sir Leonard. The officer’s name, I remember, was Herbert. He was tali, graceful, and had a most beautiful countenance; but, from his appearance, he had not then arrived at that age, in which manhood is Said to be complete, for the Soft down on his chin looked to be 
“Guilt 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. II 
** Guiltless of steel, and from the razor free.” 
What could Sir Leonard expest Sroin introducing Such an Adonis to his daughter, nearly of her own age, but that intimacy would give birth to affestion? for she must have been as insensible as pygmalion’s statue before it was animated, not to have felt the emotions of love on beholding So captivating an objest, who, notwithstanding his youth, Seemed practised to persuade. From hence, 1 think, Dohtor, you will join with me in opinion, that if the daughter is Said to have erred! by indulging a passion for the captain, the baronet led her into it by throwing temptation in her way; and however he may attempt to vindicate his condust, in endeavouring to restrain the inclin uions of her first passion, I am persuaded, nothing can justify his resolution of forcing B 6 ' her 
12 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
her into a marriage with Mr, Percivaly Were he disposed to accept of her on Such terms. The hope of bringing her to compliance by confinement was Suggested by ignorance and brutality, and' since she was Savoured with the means,! rejoice that she wanted not the resolution to make an escape. 
“The love of liberty with life is giv’fi.” 
The violence of her father’s temper,, and his threats, have driven her to the step she has taken, and if she sties to the captain for protection, and throws herself into his arms under the sanction of marriage,. I think she will stand blameless in the opinion of honoiirandvirtue. bhepoffeffes a good understanding, and a noble soul,, and therefore she will not disgrace her dignity by wantonly hazarding her reputation. Depend upon it, the next news we hear of her will be that she is married 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 

ried to the captain. The condu£l: of mis Lexicon is founded on that justice, which human nature has a right to claim under every Species of oppression;; selitnd.s behaviour must be considered as lawless obstinacy, unsupported by provocation, unless, with the poet, we make it 
Natural rebellion done, in the blaze of youth; 
When oil and fire, too strong for reafon’s force 
o’erbares it and burns on.” * 
I have the honour to be, as, usual. Most sincerely,, your’s, 
Francis Somerset 
Shakejftarfi 
LET 
14 I'HE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY 
LETTER XXVIIL 
Mr. Percival to Mr. Somerset. 
Perdval cajile., Aug, i8, 1784, 
Dear Sir, 
F I may be allowed to judge of mankind from mysels, I think there is a peculiar disposition in human nature, of desiring those things that chance or circumstances have placed beyond the reach os our power to obtain. I feel the loss of Mijs Lexicon more Sensibly every day, for she was 
“My better part, 
My more than iniflrefs; of my heart, the heart ^ 3>ydi‘n, 
3 Think, 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
Think, then, what I Suffer Sor her absence, though I know she never would be mine. Believe me, it is not in philosophy to console the distresses of a lovesick mind, or to make ‘‘ apijh at chance and jufferancep My Spirits droop; the sunshine ofpleasing expetation is enveloped in. a cloud; my golden dreams af felicity have proved unsubstantial, and ‘‘ are melted into air V lise appears less important than it was wont to be, and I lose and neglefi the creeping hours of umev I know it is the height os imprudence to wish Sor Impossibilities, and 1 hope I shall be able to corresi: my present Srailty. Though I know she has stead from me because her heart is devoted to another, I think it would be Some consolation Sor the loss of her, if I was certain she was happy by a completion of her wishes; for the love I bore her was Sounded in Such sincerity, S 
I think 
l6 TITE favoltritei; OF FELICITY. 
I think it would be too illiberal to repine at her happiness, though she enjoyed it in the arms of a rival. That is a hard rub, though, cousin; but the truest love generally meets with the worst of disappointments, 
— — “For aught that ever I could read, Gould ever hear by tale or history, 
The course of true love never did run. Smooth;. But either it was different in blood j. 
Or elfe mifgrafted in respect of years j Or elfe it stood upon the choice of friends Or if there were a Sympathy in choice, 
War, death, or stcknefs did lay liege to it, Making it momentary,, as a sound, 
Swift as a shadow, stiort as any dream 
I must drop this Subjeff, for it cannot be pleasing to you, but I am almost in sensibly led to dwell upon it. 
My father has employed a vigilant Spy to watch the motions of Prejo., with the 
* shah/peare. 
hope 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. ly 
hope of making Some discovery respe£l: ‘ ing Selima, for general Suspicion rises every day in the idea that he knows where she is. My dear mother is more and more distressed, as every new attempt to find my sister out proves unsuccessful, ‘‘ and in her eyes the tears are ever newp We were all greatly entertained with the Sentiments in your last letter to Doflor Belcour, because they perfeffly correspond with our own. Sir Leonard feels the error of his violent conduff respedfing his daughter most Sensibly, and becomes every day more inconsolable, especially as he has not been able to procure any tidings of her. Captain Herbert is now in London; but he assured Sir Leonardos butler, who went post in Search of him as Soon as Miss Lexicotfs elopement was discovered, that he knew nothing of her.. Sir Leonard doubts the truth of this, and 
expeffs 
I 8 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
expects every hour he shall receive news of their being married; which, however contrary to his wishes, I apprehend he will pardon, as his doubts respeffing his dauo; hter’s uncertain situation and safe ty would then be at an end, as the rarer action is III virtue than in vengeance.*’ I must not envy the happiness of my rival; yet. Surely, I may be allowed to lament the loss of that which I most loved : a form and mind excelling all the rest of human race.” 
Pray, Cousin, let me hear from you often, for I know your friendship is constant; and you may rest assured, ‘‘I ever hold you in my best esteem.” tour’s, 
most truly, Edmund Percival. 
LET 
THE FAVOURITES OF feliclty. I 9 
LETTER XXIX 
Mr. Somerset to Mr. Percfval. 
London.) Aug, 20, 17s4. Dfar Cousin Edmund, 
Yesterday i was visited by a 
lady, who, aster apologising for her boldness, as she styled it, in the politest terras, with an apparent blush of modest confusion, told me her name was Lexicon, While she was Speaking, I perfectly recollefled her face, having Seen her some years since at percivau cajue, The deep concern imprinted on her countenance, strongly indicated a troubled state of mind. 
“I never 
20 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY.. 
“I never saw a vessel of liks sorrow So fill’d and fo becoming 
This, however, appeared to receive Some mitigation from the Sriendly reception she found she met with; yet her heart evidently laboured to disclose ids distressed Situation, and at last, after Several fruitless attempts, prefaced it’s dishurden ment with a flood of tears, So violent and profuse, one might have thought all the miseries of human life centred with her this generous relief of nature Soon rendered her more composed, and I Seized the opportunity to Spare her the pain of telling me what I foresaw she would think necessary to mention, by informing her, I was no stranger to the situation she had lately been in; and added, that if her visit to me was to request any asi; of kind ness, or assistance, it was only for her to * sihah/feareo 
name: 
the favourites of felicity. 21 
name it, and she might conclude it would be immediately complied with. The force of her gratitude embarrassed the power os Speech for Some time, but, at last, bursting into tears again, she Said, Oh! Sir, your kindness overcomes me; I have made too Sree with you; I am truly wretched; yet in the midst of my indiscretion I have preserved my honour. This is now the only Source of comfort I have left; and this, I trust, will establish you my friend, till I can dispose of myself as I ought. I fled from the oppression of a father, as I thought, unjustly merited, and have Sailed of proteffion where I falsely imagined I had a right to find it. This disappointment, this fatal blow to my credit and happiness, exposed me to the hazards of falling into improper con neisions in this great city, where I had Eeither friend, or acquaintance. This 
2. conssdera 
22 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
consideration Surrounded me with horror, till I forced mysels into a resolution of presuming, on the slight knowledge I had of you, to Solicit your proteflion; and, O! generous Mr. Somerset you have poured balm into my deeply Wounded heart, in nobly anticipating my Solicitation for your kindness by liberal offers of friendship.’* 
I now found, though the agitation of her Spirits was greatly moderated, that her mind was too distrelsed to dwell any longer on the Subjefi: of it’s woe, and therefore endeavoured to turn the conversation into another channel, which I effected till after dinner, when she appeared desirous of informing me of every particular relative to her elopement, and her going to Captain Herbert; the Substance of which is as follows. 
As 
the favourites of felicity. 23 
As Soon as you discontinued your visits to her, in consequenee of the generous letter she Sent to you, her Sather suspeft ed what was the real state of the case; and. on his return home after the conversation he had with you, he became violent even to a degree of madness, and insisted on a promise that she would comply with his wishes and marry you. She endeavoured by expostulation and entreaty to move his compassion, and divert him from his purpose, but without effeff; and when he found he could not extort a promise from her, she was carried by force to the top of the house, and confined in the turret room, from whence she made her escape, through the fidelity of her waiting maid, who accompanied her in her flight. 
Fearing 
24 the favourites of felicity 
Fearing an immediate pursuit, she did not take the nearest route to Londoriy but concealed herself at the house of a friend, not very distant from home, for a few days, and then Set off for the capital by adverse roads. As she knew where the Captain was to be found, she flew to him with the utmost impatience, and resolved to make herself his wife at once, in order to be Secure from the effeffs of her father’s rage, which she had now the highest reason to dread. 
When she arrived at his lodgings, she was informed he was not stirring. At any other time, and on any other occasion, delicacy would have restrained her from approaching his bedchamber;; now, the dissipation of her Spirits, and an eagerness to arrive at the goal of all her happiness, rendered her infensible of 
every 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY, 
every other consideration, and she forced hersels into his room, in defiance of fomc opposition that was made by the mistress of the house, where she beheld the object of all her delight fast asleep in the arms of a common woman. The shock her senses received on this unexpefled sight over powered her, and she fell on the floor like a iifelcfs image robbed of it’s Support. How long she remained in this insensible state, she is not able to recol lest; but, when she recovered her senses, the lady had decamped. 
During her delirium, he had inquired the reason of her coming to town without giving him notice, from her Servant, who had accompanied her to his lodgings; whereupon, without making any apology for his conduff, discovering any shame, or showing any tenderness for the vol III C distress 
26 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
distress he had occasioned, he told her, with an air os indifference, and consummate impudence, that matrimony was very distant from his thoughts at that time, but as she had lest her father on his account, he should have no objection to marry her is she could give him pos scffion os her own private Sortune immediately, for he apprehended old square toes would not give him a doit till his death, as he should marry her without his consent; and, is a man Sacrificed the pleasure of variety, and confined himself to a Single object, he thought he deserved to be well paid Sor it, for domestic felicity, in his opinion, was but a dull, humdrum busmess. 
Though till this fatal morning her cheeks would glow with the flush of transport, and her eyes Sparkle with tears 4 of 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 27 
of delight, on the bare mention of his name; and the influence he had acquired over her was So unfimited, that even her passions were controlled by an awe which his presence always impressed; a virtuous indignation for his libertine behaviour blew her love away at a breath; Sne read the villain in his countenance; and, as Shakespeare most beautifully remarks, “fpiprts are not jinei, j ouched but to fine ijfuesfi So she, sensible of tnc noble tribute she had made to the deceptions of salse virtue, confessed the error to her own heart, and resolved to resign him to the perturbations of his guilty mind, and the accusations of consciencc. She left his apartment wkhout uttering a word, got into a coach, and drove back to the inn where she first went on her arrival in town. There she remained in private till the next morning, and then resolved C 2 to 
is THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY 
to apply to me for advice and : protection. 
Her determination is resolutely fixed, never to See Herbert again; and though the pain of overcoming that affeffion sho once entertained for him must be a Severe and distressing trial, I am Satisfied the 2; reatness of her Soul will enable her to conquer it, for she has too much understanding, as well as virtue, to be deceived a Second time by salse appearances. 
What a wretch is Herbert '! In how short a time has he fallen from innocence and honour, to iniquity and baseness:! Within three years, he was the pride of f nature, both in his per Ion and mind, for a more captivating figure I never beheld,;, and the good understanding he 
possessed 
The favourites of felicity, 2^ 
poflelsed was embellished with elegance, and rendered beautifully pleasing by anno dest diffidence which marked his address, conversation, and manners. But, now, according to Miss Lexicon s account os him, the bloom os health, and vigour os : in early age, have given place to disease and imbecility and that mind, which was wont to delijjht itself with the uncor rupting pleasures of innocence, has been wholly overthrown, by the influence of bad example, and a reiterated indulgenoe of vicious passions and appetites: but these never fail to disencumber the mind from the cautions of prudence, and that re speffful awe for moral reffitude, on which depends our present and future felicity. In this ungenerous and abandoned young man we may behold, how easy it is to descend from right to wrong; Sor, as the poet remarks, 
C? “111 
3© THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY, 
\ 
“111. habits gather by iinfeen degrees, As brooks make rivers, rivers run to seas 
I think herbert^s conduct to Miss Lexicon is a circumstance Savourable to your wishes, if, like Some mortals, you do not hold that cheap which is within your reach. But I entertain a more exalted opinion of you. She reje<5ted your addresses, because her heart was firmly attached to another, which you could not disapprove os; and the noble resolution she instantly formed, when she found her affe£lion had been placed on an unworthy object, does her the highest honour. I therefore think you can have no objection to renewing your addrelses, * and, if So, I most Sincerely hope she will receive you favourably, for I entertain very high Sentiments of the nobleness of her mind, 
Dryden 
and 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 3i 
and purity of her principles. As to any opinion the world may have entertained respefiing her elopement, it is unworthy your notice who are acquainted with the integrity os her motives. I have ventured to touch stightly on this Subjefi to her, but I found I had done wrong, for it threvv her into a stood of tears, and she Said, “O! Sir, pray forbear to mention Such a thing to me! I have Suffered too much already, and must not indulge a Second error. I will never give encouragement to Such an idea, I must have fallen in the estimation of the world, and him, but not more than I anl sunk in ray own esteem. Mr. Fercival did me too great an honour, while he was a stranger to my indiscretion, but now I am more than ever below his notice. My heart is steeled against any Sensibility of this nature in future, and C 4 especially. 
32 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
especially respefiing Mr. Fercivaf for, believe me, should I be So thoughtlessly indiscreet and vain, 
*' It were all one, 
That I fiiould love a bright, particular star. And think to wed it; he is sofar above me 
He merits my warmest esteem, Sor his generous conduff, and secresy, when I informed him of my unfortunate attachment to another, in not taking an advantage of my father’s partiality Sor him. While 1 live I will gratefully acknowledge my obligation; and ere the cold hand of death withdraws me from this Scene of earthly Solicitude, I will perpetuate his praise 
“With pens of adamant, on plates of brals.’^ 
You must make Some allowance, Cousin, for the present distressed state of her mind; 
^ shahejjearct 
and 
THERE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 33 
and your own delicate feelings will inform you, that a disappointment like that she has experienced is not easily overcome. I think she has shown no inconsiderable degree of philosophy, in conducting herself with that prudence and fortitude she has done. You, undoubtedly, have her esteem; and, if your mind is still constant to it’s first ideas and inclination, time may Soften her esteem into love. Bat now to other business. 
She is desirous of concealing from her father everything relative to the conduct of Herberty and in this I think she is isight; but it is her wish he should know, that nothing but his Severe treatment forced her from him. And as she is Sensible the precipitate step she took was an acl of disobedience, for which she stands self condemned, she is ready to re c 5 turn 
34 the favourites of felicity. 
turn home if he will pardon her indiscretion, and once more receive her into his favour; after which, he may rest as sured, she will never think of indulging a wish contrary to his inclinations. She Solicits that Sir William will be pleased to break the matter to him, as she thinks no other person is So likely to moderate his anger, and influence reason. But till his temper and disposition is Satisfafioisily known to be pacific, site is of opinion, it will be advisable to conceal where she is, and through what channel the intelligence was received. Sir William, I know, will execute thisbusincss with the greatest cheerfulness, and we shall wait with the utmost impatience Sor the success of his embassy. 
O! my dear Edmund, this young lady poffeffcs one os the best of hearts; her 
under the 
FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
35 
understanding does the highest credit to her Sex; and her judicious and honourable conduff respeffing this affair, Srom first to last, is free from the shadow os an intention to err. She appears to be as good as she is fair; and I think I may Say with truth, that take her for all in all, she is ‘‘ The majierjhip of heaven in face and minds It is impoisible to See her, and to converse with her, .and not be charmed. If you ever loved her, you must love her still, for she has done nothing to forfeit your afsefiion. 
We have been unfuccessful in every attempt to gain intelligence of Selinia, and therefore I still retain my opinion that Prejio has concealed her. We all join in respests and love to you, and the fa ■; and I remain, 
yonr’s, 
Francis Somerset. C 6 LET 
si THE FAVOVRITES OF FELTCITV. 
LETTER XXX 
Mr. Percival to Mr. Somerset. 
Perdval cid.ile^ Au, t 1784.^ O! Dear Cousin, 
I ^ H E perusal of your last favour has cheered my drooping Spirits, and given delight to my Soul. The news of Miss Lexicons Safety was a transporting piece of intelligence, for there is no consideration in life capable of giving me half So much pleasure, as that of hearing of her welfare. She ever was the objest of my soul’s adoration; and, hast sate consigned her to another, my good 
wishes 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 57 
wishes Sor her happiness would ever have been near her. O God! how I feel Sor the distress of mind she must have experienced, from the conduct of thatmis creant wretch Herbert, Let his name be blotted from the catalogue of the Sons of men, and his memory be stamped with the eternal Seal of Oblivion! ** So ttiucb for Buckingham 
My father communicated that part of your letter, only, which you pointed out, to Sir Leonard who wept for joy at the news of his daughter’s Safety. He ge neroussy owned he had carried matters too far, and asted with a too rigid Severity. ‘‘ If, ” Said he, “Julia has any private reason for giving Herbert up, I shall rejoice, and be happy; but if she has not, and her happiness depends on an union with him, I will resign my mind to 
it. 
38 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
it, for I cannot be happy myself if my girl is miserable.” Give me your hand, Sir, ” Said my father, with rapture, you have Spoke nobly, and I hope you will ever perscvere in this Sentiment.” You may depend on my honour. Sir jrviluani, ^*' replied the baronet. “Well, then. Sir, ” Said my father, “on this assurance, it wouldbe cruel to keep you one moment in suspense. Your daughter has renounced the Captain for ever, with the highest honour to herself. She has behaved with great dignity. Sir Leonard and merits every kindness you can bestow upon her. She is a good girl; and I hope you will ever have So much command of your temper, not to reproach her at any time, respefiing wdiat is past And he promised he never would. My father then told him the particulars of the affair would be better explained hereafter, 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 39 
aster, and therefore he should only inform him she was at his Cousin Semerfifs^ ready to return at his pleasure. It is impossible to describe the satissaffion Sir Leonard exprelsed on the occasion, or to repeat the tender things he Said repefi ing his daughter. “Now’^ Said he, addressing himsels to me, “I think you stand a chance, if your inclination still leads you that way; but remember, young gentleman, I tell you, once for all, I have Seen my error in attempting to direst my girl’s affe£lion, therefore if you and she can agree. So be it, but henceforth her choice shall be free : you have my good wishes; and there I leave you.” As he showed an impatience to have Miss Lexicon return home immediately, I offered to Set off post to London in order to accompany her; but my father and Sir Leonard very judiciousty observed, 
that, 
40 THE favottriteis OF FELICITT. 
that, aster what had happened, it was a step that might not be perseffly agreeable to the young lady, under her present state of mind, and therefore Sir leo nard has determined to Set out for the capital himself tomorrow morning, and will be at your house Soon aster you receive this letter. 
Your remarks on the Sudden profligacy of Captain Herbert please me much, because they appear to be founded on an attentive observation of men and things. The rapid progress this once amiable young man has madesrom virtue to vice will show how carefully we should mark the first step towards evil, because “vice is a gradual and easy defcenr, where it first deviates from the level of innocence; but the declivity at every pace becomes more steep, and those who descend, descend 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 4i 
fcend every moment with greater rapidity.^’ The popularity and opulence of the capital offer more temptations to lawless pleasures, than are to be met with in rural retirement; and this peneral Spread of indiscittion and probigacy requires fewer arts of Secrecy there than are necessary among the inhabitants of the country, where every man is known, and where every afiion of our lives is babble to come immediately before the observation of others. To Combat against the influence of the passions, where pleasures exhibit themselves in a variety of attraffive forms, and to resist “the huge army of the worlds deftresf is a task of Such infinite labour, that few, however well disposed, have Sufficient courage to persevere; but where virtuous resolli tions become inflexible, they will be amply recompensed, by the gratulations of 
our 
^2 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
our own hearts, the applause of mankind, and the approbation of him, who will hold the righteous in everlajhng remembrance, but will Suffer the name of the wicked to rot. 
The firm attachment Mss Lexicon maintained for that perjured wretch her hert never lessened my esteem for her, but heightened it; and therefore I now flatter myself with the hope of being able to gain her affection, when her present Sorrow has expended itself; unless she should be influenced against it by that Sensibility which finds ids way into Some female hearts, and renders them lost to the idea of a Second impression. But where this happens, however it may be considered as a point of delicacy, I am of opinion, that it is founded on a 
principle 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 45 
principle incompatible with the interests of human nature. 
The humility of her mind respeffing herself may arise from an idea, that the conduff of Herbert toward her will lessen her in the esteem of the world.. This kind of fear, though falsely imagined, is natural to the feelings of a wounded heart, or a mind habituated to modest diffidence; and, 
“It is the witness still of excellency, 
To put a strange face on his own perfection, ’*'-*! 
I am greatly obliged to you for your friendly intention toward me, in what you Said to Miss Lexicon in my favour; but I think it was rather too Soon to touch upon So delicate a Subjefi:; for, as you have remarked, disappointments like 
shatc/pcarc. 
hers 
44 THE favourites of felicity. 
her’s wound too deeply to be quickly healed. I am well persuaded, your praise of her is justly Sounded, Sor 
-- -- -- - “All that life can rate 
Worth name of Life in her hath estimate,. Youth, beauty, wisdom * -- -- -- -- -- - 
her mind will ever again hs. free to let her listen to the voice of love, love alone must determine; but I will endeavour to merit her affeffion : “Hope is the lovepsjiaff v and whatever may be the length of time I give up to'patient expeffation, -1 shall think it abundantly rewarded if, at last, I accomplish the acquisition of So inestimable a jewel. 
We have to return you and Mr. fier pointy our warmest thanks, for the extraordinary trouble you have given your 
^ 
Selves 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 45 
Selves respeffing my sister Selima, though it has been unsnccesssul. What her situation is time must discover; but, at present, the more we conjeffure, the more we are perplexed. Frejlo has never quilted his situation Since his return from London which inclines us to believe, that, if he knows where she is, he does not ■visit her. 
I remain, as usual, 
Dear Cousin, your’s, most truly, 
Edmund Percival 
LET 
46 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
LETTER XXXI 
Mr. Percival to Mr. Somerset. 
Percival cafile, Aug. 31, 1784. 
Dear Sir, 
YO U will excuse the frequency of my letters when I declare, that it is oiie of my best pleasures to unbosom myself to you, because I well know the liberality of your mind leads you to participate in the happiness, or misery of others, and instruffs your heart in the knowledge of Sympathetic Sensibility. 
Sir Leonard returned Srora London with his daughter yesterday; and we immediately received an invitation to dine 
with 
the favourites of felicity. 47 
with them this day, which we did. O! dear Coufm, Mif Lexicon arpears more beautiful than she used to be! I enjoyed Such a day of felicity in m y 'vvlioie life. She came out to receive us when we entered the lawn before the house, with that easiness of address, and natwral complacency, which are Some of the Sweet civilities of life. We all Saluted her on our approach; but it is impossible words can describe my sensations on the occasion! diand.s ftp is not more smooth and rubious !’* I was So entr need, I took it for a fairy 'vision. Surely, nothing can raise the mind of man to ecstasy like a beautiful woman, sostened by the graces of innate modesty, and perfect innocence > for where these unite, they raise the female Sex far, very far, above the rest of creation; and, In these, to nature jhe^s immediate heirp 
Now, 
40 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY., 
Now, don’t laugh at me, and be Satirical, Cous, because I lay my heart open to you. Remember you was once in love yourself, and theresore you must not display your wit, should it be So with me, which, perhaps, is the case; for, in truth, Since I came home i^omlexicon flacem^tx mysels different from what I ever was before. Fancy Sports with me as she pleases, and is playing off her delightful gambols before my mind’s eye. What it all means I will not pretend to determine; but I suppose it is love, or Something very like it, for all my common ideas are vanished, and 
In their rooms, 
Come thronging soft and delicate desires, 
All prompting me how fair young ya « * 
To be in love, they Say, is to be made all of Sighs and tears then'i am but 
* sbah/pearct 
I half 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 49 
half in love; for though I often sigh, it is not yet come to weeping. “It is to be made all of faith and Servicehere I think I have gone further than halfway, for I have been constant in my af fe^iion, and offered my service though it was not accepted. Let us try it again. “It is to be all made offantafiehere 
am 
far 
gone. 
And 
again. 
All 
made of passion, and all made of wishes; *’ worse and worse. Once more. “All adoration, duty, and observance — very little variation here. And lastly; ‘‘ All humbleness, all patience, and impatience; ” — here I am caught at all points; and if to be thus, is to be in love, I am afraid, Cousin, I am too far gone to make a jest of it. That wanton rogue Dan Cupid, is a Sure marksmao, though he takes aim unseen. Yes, yes, I have it, and deeply too. I suppose you will yol. HI. D laugh 
50 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
laugh at me for playing with the poet’s descriptions of love, and Say that all this is foolish — perhaps, it may be So to those not immediately under the influence of the pashon, yet to them that are, it is delightful foolery, and, “pretty though a plaguep 
“But Sure, a general doom on man is pafi, 
And all are fools and lovers, first or last 
Sir Leonard was uncommonly cheerful all the day, and appeared to be completely happy on the return of his daughter, on whom he often Smiled with looks expressive of heartfelt fatisfaffion, and a confciousness of his own unkind ness to her. And though her gaiety might, in part, be assumed, out of re fpe<st to the company (for she had mo 
^ 
ments 
the favourites of felicity. 51 
ments of serioufness), yet I think, her father’'s affeffionate behaviour has greatly dissipated her minds uneasiness; and whenever he was particularly attentive to her, I perceived her cheek glow with the flush of joy and triumph. In short, he is amazingly altered. The coramant ing frown of tyranny, which, till lately, used to Sit upon his brow is removed, and his iitpatience of contradiction II changed to affability, and good-humour. 
Just before we withdrew in the evening, Sir Leonard addressed himself to my father, in the following words. ‘‘ Sir, this has been a joyful day to me. 1 am perfeffly pleased and Satisfied with my daughter, and I view her in a more amiable light than I ever did. I plainly See from what has lately happened, that pride, obstinacy, and passion, keep o5 D 2 the 
^2 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
the embraces of kindness and humanity, and frequently rob us of the bliss of being. But I will not dwell on a subject which points at my own errors, and may renew thoughts in my dear girl’s mind she may wish to fuppress. You have been the principal instrument of producing my present felicity, for I knew, it was in your nature to do good, and therefore I paid that attention to youi friendly counsel, which I should not hate' done, had it come from any other perfoo. We are near neighbours, and I beg we may be better friends, if it is possible that we can be So goodnight, goodnight, goodnight, and rest assiired ofmj esteem.” ' 
As we pasted over the lawn to our car' 'iriage, he took me aside, and Said, “ray! dear young gentleman, 1 told you lately, | 
TEE FAVOURITES, or FELICITY. 5^ 
that however I might wish for an union between you and my daughter, I had resolved to leave her to her free choice. 1 still hold in that resolution; but I think I can perceive, already, that the behaviour of Herbert and the high opinion she entertains of your, merit, will Soon operate powerfully in your Savour, and, in the end, fulfil your wishes. The days your own, depend on’t.’^ Heaven Send him a true prophet! Say I, cousm; or I shall Soon be food for worms. Adieu. 
your’s, 
most Sincerely, 
Edmund percival 
D 
LE T 
54 the favourites of felicity. 
LETTER XXXII 
.DOCTOR Belcour to Mr. Somerset. 
ptrdval'cajikf Sept, 1784. 
.DEAR Sir, 
E lately had the pleasure of Spending another day with the Hermit, who entertained Sir fvilim, Mr. perchaj, and myself, with an interesting account of that part df his life he left unfinished when we last visited him, and which I now transmit to you, accord ipg to my promise. 
You 
THS favourites of FE Lie I tv. 5'5 
**' You must remember, Gentlemen, ’’ Said the Hermit, “that at our last meeting I left off after I had deferibed the city and university of Leyden, I hare before assigned a reason why I was particularly circumstantial respefiing the places already described, and I also hinted my intention of publistiing an accurate account of my whole tour; for which reasons, I shall not enter into an enlarged description of the other places through which I pasted, lest it should render my narrative tedious, and deprive me of the opportunity, I wish to embrace, of mentioning things more important and entertaining. I shall therefore cease to be descriptive, and confine myself Solely to Such particulars as have not been properly noticed by other travellers and journalists. 
D 4 
During 
56 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
During a stay os six months at lay den^ I occasionally visited Some of the acl. jacent places of importance; particularly Haerlem and Amjierdam. The first of these is a large, beautiful, and populous city, justly memorable for the important siege it Sustained against the Spaniards in the year 1573, when the women behaved as heroically as the men, and defended the place till they were reduced to extremities too dreadful to relate; and, at length, after being obliged to Surrender to the viffors, upwards of two thousand of these brave inhabitants were cruelly put to death, contrary to the terms of capitulation. 
There are many things in this city worthy the notice of travellers, for there are innumerable memorials of the history of the country, and the wisdom and 
bravery 
tjie favourites of FELICITY. 
bravery of the people. The manusac tures of this place are considerable, par u ticularly those os tapes, threads, silk stuffs, damasks, Satins, velvets, and the bleacheries os fine linens, in which last they are Said to excel the rest of Europe. 
The invention of printing has been ascribed to one Lawrence Cojlor, a native of this city, but fallely, Sor he only cut types in wood, in the manner of those our printers call wood cuts. In the Stadthoufe is kept, as a great curiosity, a book of his printing, preserved in a silver case, for which, as I was informed, he was suspefied of being a conjurer, and obliged to sty from Haerlem into Germany; but here, more than in any place in Holland., they deal in fabulous stories. The Stadthoufe is a respectable building, but particularly remarkable for D 5 Some 
THE FAVOURITES OF felrcitv. 
Some inimitable paintings in it, by that celebrated artist Francis Hals 
The great Church is one of the best stru£lures throughout the United Provinces. In the walls are still to be Seen Some of the cannonballs fired by the Spaniards when they besieged the place. The great organ is one of the largest instruments in Europe, Mr, Handel, once passing through Hollandy played upon this organ j and the Organist of the place coming into the church, not knowing who was playing, after listening Some time. Said, in a rapture, that it must be Handel or the deviu' There are Some good monuments in this church; and the models of three ships, hung up as memorials of the valour of the inha bitan ts^in the holy wars, who Sent three yessfels to Teluftumy now bamiat&y where 
they 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 59 
they took poffestion of the castle in which the Earl of Holland was a prisoner, and brought him away with them. The bells in this church, appropriated for the chimes, are upon an extensive Seal, and finely toned; and the clock is a curious piece of mechanism, 
Haerlem gave birth to Cornelius a celebrated painter. Some of whose works are still to be Seen in a palace near the city, built by Count Florence the fifth; which palace is worthy the notice of travellers, as it contains Some fine paintings by Hewjkirky and louzius^ and ihe ■ portraits of all the counts of Holland. Haerlem stands about twelve English miles N. by E. of Leyden, having the German Ocean within four miles on the West, and Amjierdam at the distance of twelve miles on the East. If is likewise bound .d 6 ed 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
CD on the East by the great lake to which it. gives the name os Haerlem mere, This lake is about fourteen miles in length, and about ten in the widest part, but in Some places it is very narrow, and though, in general, it is not, more than Seven Sect deep, it is Subjeff to violent storms, owing principally to it’s vicinity to the great German Ocean It abounds with fish os various kinds, and is of great importance to the trade of this part of the province, for the merchandizes of the neighbouring towns arc carried upon it in boats from place to place; and even when it is frozen over in hard winters, the people travel upon it either with Scares, or in hedges. At Hoerlem has lately been instituted, a Society for the improvement of the Sciences, the members of which have 7 published 
THE EAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 6k 
published Several volumes of their transactions in the Dutch language. 
To Speak of Amjlertiam as it merits, and to enter into a circumstantial account of it’s public buildings, and other important ornaments, would So greatly exceed the plan of my prescnt narrative, that I must in part decline it, and only observe that, take it for all in all, it is one of the most beautiful, opulent, and populous cities in Europe. 
It is Said to cover one thousand acres of ground; is built upon piles in the form of a crescent, and encompassed with a wall and shrtisications, round about three fourths of it, and by the river Wye, an arm of the Zuyder sea^ on the other. It has eight gates, fifteen churches of the reformed religion, beside two 
French, 
THE FAVOURITES OP ftllcityr 
French one High duich, and one Eng? lijht os the Presbyterian persuasions, which are the only places of worship where bells are allowed. The Roman Catholic chapels are about thirty in number, but they are considered as private conventicles,., only permitted during the pleasure os the magistrates. beside these, the Jews, who are prodigiousiy numerous, have two Synagogues, one of which is Said to be the largest in Europe The number of other places of worship belonging to different Sects is incredible, all religions being tolerated" in this Spacious city,, the Emporium of trade, not only of the Province of Holland, but of all the other six Provinces. The. churches of the established religion are neat, but neither elegant nor grand struftures, the principal of which is remarkable for a most magnificent Organ, a finely carved 
pulpit. 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 6j 
pulpit, with a Superb canopy, and a beautiful brass Screen, or balluster, which is kept amazingly bright j indeed most of the churches have organs, curious brass Screens, and are adorned with many noble monuments. 
There are twelve hospitals of different descriptions, beside many public charities of less note, but no university: however, there is a Schola lllujlrisy in which there are six professors in the Several faculties j an excellent Botanic and Physic Garden, open to public inspe^lion; a good theatre for anatomical and chirurgical lectures, well endowed; and a chirurgical Society lately instituted. The only charity that can properly be called an hospital, however, for the relief of the sick and wounded, is that called the Gajt huys, which consists but of four wards, and will contain about six hundred patients. 
The 
^4 the favourites of felicitt. 
The Stadthoufe, which Sronrs a square in the centre os the city, is a most magnificent, and stupendous structure, Scarcely to be equalled, perhaps, in the known world. It is built of Sreestone, and nearly in the Sorm of a quadrangle, the front being 282 feet, and the depth 232 feet. The ornaments are of the Corinthian order, and it has pavilions at each angle, with a most noble pediment in the centre of the front. it’s outward appearance is, undoubtedly, very grand and striking, as a large building, but, upon the whole, it is a heavy structure, and the seven gates, or porticos, in compliment to the number of the United Provinces, disgrace the rest of the edifice. It terminates with a cupola, without which the body of the building is i feet in height. This wonderful structure stands upon 13, 659 fir piles, driven 
into 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY 6$ 
into the ground for a foundation, at the expense of 100, 000/.; and the whole is Said to have cost 3, 000, 000/. which is twice the expense of building St paul’s church in London Perhaps this estimation may be exaggerated, yet the ornaments of the different apartments, courts, bank, cc. of which the whole is, composed, as to marble, ' carvings, bass: relief, Sculptures, statues, painted cici ings, piffures, and furniture, all executed,, in the most exquisite style, must have cosh an incredible Sum. In short, a description of every particular in this amazing pile of building, would sill a volume, ^, and, after all, give the reader but a faint idea of the expense and wonderful art displayed there. 
The Exchange, which stands near the Stadthoufe, is greatly inferior to the 
ro^ak 
66 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
■ Royad.exchange of London, and yet it is a good building. But one of the most pi easing‘ ^struifiures in this city, is the bridge over the river Amjiel, which is extremely neat, extensive, and affords the passengers a beautiful prospeff. The Dutch compare this bridge to Font royal at Paris, but it does not merit a comparison. The extensive the 
Admiralty, and the Eaji india company*s Magazine are particularly worthy notice. 
Perhaps the streets of Amsterdam arc the finest of any city in the world, for length, breadth, and straitness; many of the best houses are noble structures; and the canals in the centres of the streets are better ornamented than in most other places in Holland. The neatness of the pavement, cleanliness of the streets and 
well the 
PAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 67 
well established police, in this city, must strike every stranger with astonishment. Indeed the latter is effentially^^iieceirary, for the rudeness, insolenco; and brutality, of Some of the lower ranks of the people, is unparalled, more especially when they are intoxicated, .or incensed, and as femble in mobs. 
The public diversions are by no means equal to the opulence, popularity, and importance of Such a capital for they consist principally of Some very indifferent concerts, and a Dutch theatre;, where comedies, and historical jumbles, called plays, are usually asted, for they Lave no tragic poets, nor tragic alors. 
There is no good water to be had at Amfierdam, and the air of the city is very unwholesome, except about the 
which 
68 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY, 
which is a beautisul grove consisting of Several extensive public walks, planted with trees at the sides, and is a sine rural retreat for the citizens. 
When I quitted Leyden it was recommended to me to visit Utrecht not only on account of the University, but as being the most beautiful city in the Seven Provinces. The passage between Leyden and this place, on the canal, is delightfully ornamented with villages, and coun try seats of the opulent, and is about 30 miles in length, for which a passenger pays less than two shillings En'pii money. 
This city is the capital of the province of Utrecht and stands on the ancient channel of the great river Rhine. It is a larger place thanti6^ Hague, and, next 
to 
the favoxtrites of felicity. 69 
to it, the gayest and politest city in the United Provinces; carrying on very little trade, and being inhabited principally by persons of title and fortune, who have retired there on account os the pureness os the air, the delightful Senility and pleasantness of the country, and the cheapness of all kinds of provisions, and accommodations. 
Utrecht is a fortified city, and the shady walks round the ramparts are pitsturefque and pleasing, to Say nothing of it’s situation in the centre of upwards of fifty important cities, and towns, all within a day’s journey of it. The two principal streets run through the city, and have Spacious canals in them, adorned with groves of trees and bridges, the waters of which are kept .purer than those of Lay den f by the constant flux and reflux 
of 
70 THE FAVOURITES OF FILICITT^ 
of the tides from the German Ocean. On of these canals is generally filled with vessels and boats, from different parts of the other provinces. The street called the Niewe Gragt is adorned with many Superb houses, inhabited by the nobility and gentry. The Sovereign courts of the province are kept there, and it’s university, which is next to that of Leyden was founded in the year 1636, being before that period only a Schola Illujiris* It is subject to the jurisdiffion of the magistrates of the city, and hence has not all the privileges of the other univerfi ries. The number of students is generally upwards of Seven hundred, who ail lodge and board at private houses, as those at Leyden do; but, as Utrecht is a gayer place, they are less ssovenly and attend more to drcss. They have a good botanic garden, an observatory on the 4 ramparts. 
the favourites of felicity. 7t 
ramparts, and several capital printing houses. 
This city has not any public buildings of importance, the fine steeple of the cathedral excepted, but the body of the church is in ruins. The grove near St John's Church is truly pittrurcsque, and the houses in this part are magnificent. The walks round the city are delightful, and particularly that called the mal, which is near three quarters of a mile in length, with other walks on each fide of it, ail adorned with trees, and kept in excellent order. 
The foundation of the union of the Seven Provinces was planned in this city, in the year 1579; peace between 
the French and the Allies was concluded there in 1713; a peace, neither to the 
advantage 
v2 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
advantage or credit of Great Britain, It is remarkable, that the first Bishop of Utrecht was a native of England, of the name of Willebrod, and that this was the birthplace of Pope Adrian VI eminent for his great learning, piety, and humh lity; of the latter of these he has given evident proof in his epitaph, written by himself, wherein it is declared, “he thought if the greatest misfortune of his life, that he reigned.’* 
As my plan, when I left Leyden, was to make no great stay at any place out of curiosity, or pleasure, but to hasten to Louvain in the aujiktan Netherlands, in order to take a degree in physic at that university, for which I had letters of recommendation from England to the medical professors there, I only remained four days at Utrecht, and then Sest off 
for 
THE FAVOURITES OF feliclty. 75 
for Rotterdam in order to take the paf sage boat Srom that place to Antwerp but I was obliged to wait three days for a fair wind, and then, after a pleasant voyage of twenty-six hours, arrived at Antwerp which city, about two centuries ago, was 'the Emporium of trade and commerce Sor all Europe. 
As I have now entirely quitted the Butch Provinces, continued the Hermit 1 shall beg leave to make a Sew general observations relpefting them. 
The situation and air of the Dutch United Provinces, that of Utrecht excepted, are by no means Suited to the, constitutions of foreigners. The general face of the country is level, Sandy, and boggy, and So interfered with rivers and canals, that it is extremely unhealthy. vol. HI. E Even 
"O' 
74 the favourites of felicity. 
Even the natives, who are inured to; the climate from their birth, do not experience that longevity known to the inhabitants of other countries. ' 
With respefi to the commerce of th Provinces, it is extended to almost everj part of the known world; and what with the multifarious importations frooi| other places, the numerous manufasturesj the cheapness of labour, and the com i modious situation of the whole counttjj for trade, it may be considered as oneoi! the most important repositories in L rope. 
The higher ranks of the Dutch art not Such boors as they are generally iina, gined by those that have not visited theii country, for their houses are palacesi adorned with costly furniture; they IW 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 75 
in great Splendour; and, of late years, many of them have began to copy the manners of politer nations. And the lower ranks, through greater industry, and greater frugality. Seldom experience the miseries known to the poor of other countries. 
Gain appears to be the God of a putchmaps idolatry. Artifice, cunning, industry, and pride, are the charadleris tics of the Hollanders; to which I may add an unenlarged habit of thinking peculiar to mean Souls, which their gloomy and malignant minds extend to an unpardonable length with all but their own countrymen, nor are they always exempted. If an Englishman ventures to Speak in praise of a Bacon, a Newton, or a Sydenham, they put on an important air of national confe^uence; 
E 2 and 
y6 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
and tell him that Erafinus^ Grotiusy and Boerhaave, were the greatest men the world ever produced. 
This country abounds with innumerable works of real use and public emolument, which exhibit ingenuity, application, and virtue. Their dikes, and ssuices, Sor public sasety and preservation, are unequalled Specimens of art and grandeur. In short, the Dutch are universally emulous in contributing toward the welfare of the Republic, which, as has been well observed, is the ultimate end of true patriotism. 
The modes of travelling through this country, both by land and water, are extremely cheap, but not So commodious as in England. The ircckfmitiy or boats of palsage, which are .towed by 
horses, 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 77 
horscs, arc not very expeditious; however, upon Some of the canals, between the cities and' great towns, the traveller’s impatience will unavoidably be diverted by the sight os innumerable pleasant villages and country seats os the opulent on their banks, the latter of which are generally adorned with temples, statues, and beautiful gardens. 
Pedantry appears to be the characteristic of most of the men of learning of this country; but I found those professors of the university of Leyden, to whom I had letters of recommendation, courteous, friendly, polite, and intelligent, for which they deserve my warmest praise. 
On my arrival at Antwerp, I took a hasty view of that once populous, opu e 3 lent, 
ys THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
lent, and magnificent city. It is situated on the eastern shore of the river Efcaut^ commonly called the Schelde; and is built in the form of a crescent upon the river, where it’s depth and width will admit ships of great burden to come up to the quay, or lay at anchor at any distance from it; and the canals, that are cut from the river into the principal streets of the city, were capable of receiving vessels up to the very doors of the merchants. 
The walls round this place are remarkable for strength and beauty; for beside being very high, and no feet in breadth, they are faced with stone. There are eight formidable shulwarks; and the citadel, which stands on the South Side of the town, is very strong, 
and 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 79 
and can command the whole city, and the adjacent country. 
Notwithstanding this place was twice Sacked during the memorable wars in Flandersi and the injury it Sustained by part of it being burnt, it is still a beautiful city; but. the growing strength and policy of the Dutch have, long Since, ruined the trade, and almost depopulated it. The public buildings are magnificent; particularly the Exchangey on the plan of which our Royal exehange in London is built; the Cathedral; and the yefuits Church. The ornaments of these churches are truly beautiful and Superb. As an instance of the ancient importance of this city, it’s bank used to lend money to Some of our kings of England, to answer particular exigencies. ant werp. is the See of a bishop, under the L 4 jurisdiction 
80 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
jurisdistion of the archbishop of Mechlin and it is Subjefi to the hoiise of Jujfriai If the Emperor of Germany should succeed in his present contest with the Dutch, the importance of this city may be revived, but the channels of trade are too extensively opened and established, in other places, for iticver to flourish as‘ it once did. 
From Antwerp I‘ took the pafage boat to Brujfels, the capital city of the Frovince of Brabant, and of the Aujlrlan Netherlands. 
Brujfels is Situated in a pleasant country, and is watered by the Senne, and other rivers. It is Surrounded by a high wall and large ditches, and is a place of great extent. Vienna, the capital of the Circle, of Aujiriai and of the whole German 
THE FAVOURITES OF felicity'i I 
man Empires being far within the country, the Emperor holds his court at Bruf pels by means of a Viceroyy who is governor os the Netherlands by virtue of his office. His palace, which is Seated on “a hill, .within the city, is a magnfficent shtafture, and has beautiful gardens, grottoes, and walks, about it, .Dhe Senates house is a fine building, rand the convents and public charities, which are nii merous, are noble edifices, and well en dowesh' When this city was bombarded by the French, in the" year 1695 the greatest part of it was blown up and destroyed, aster which it was rebuilt in a more elegant manner than before. So. that the principal streets m^ke a fine ap -- pearance, and are adorned'"with many capital hoiifes belonging to the nobility, private citizens, and opulent Soreigners of'all nations, which, with it’s being the E ' resideiice' 
82 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
residence os foreign Ambassadors, all together render it populous, gay, and Splendid. There are a variety of public amusements, and indulgence is given to every Species of vice and dissipation; So that extravagance of every description reigns there. Some os our English geographical books tell us, it is a cheap place to live at, and that a traveller may dine on Six or eight dishes for a shilling but whoever visits Brujfels will Soon experience the falsity of these assertions, for I found it otherwise during the time I staid there; yet I apprehend, from the ' plenty of the markets, that it may be a cheaper place than London to live in, to those that dwell there constantly. The number of the churches, gates, principal streets, magistrates, and public fountains, is Seven of each. This city was once the residence of the great Dukes of Burgundy; 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 83 
gundy; and the Burgundian, or imperial library, as it is called, is still preservedin excellent order, under the direffion of the Abbe Chevalier, who is librarian. 
Brujfels has a royal college os physicians, which was Sounded, in the year 1540, by the celebrated Emperor Charles the Fifth; a corporation of Surgeons; and an imperial and royal academy of Sciences and belles letters instituted in 1773, the members of which have published three volumes of their transafiions in quartoi 
After taking a Survey of this Splendid city, I forwarded my baggage by the Brujfels stage to Louvain, and Set off on foot for that city, it being only four leagues, or about fifteen English miles, to the East of Brujfels. 
E 6 ■ When 
S. THE FAVOURITES OF f elicity,, 
When I arrived,! waited on the pro feffors of the unlversity, to whom I had letters os recommendation, whose reception of me was polite and Sriendiy '; and when I related my history, and future plan of life, I found that generous humanity was not confined to my own country. Here I restded four months, during which time I studied elosely, attended ail' the public lestures, and was. honoured, with the degree of Bachelor in Phyfitr. 
This respestable university is the only; one in the Low' Countries. It was en.. by John, Duke of Brabant, in the year (426,, before vshich, fQr550Q years back, it was only Schola Illujiris, It, (Otuains 43 colleges, ansi the number of, students is generally about 5000. 
The city of l&uvaln is situated on the riyer Deal, or DV, in a pleasant.. tef, 
THE favourites OF FELICITY. 
fed, and healthy country. It is Surrounded by a wall, upwards of six miles in cir cumserence> whichshas ^53 towers upon it, a large ditch, 16 drawbridges, and i i gates; shut ihe fortifications are not of much importance, neither is the ground within the wall wholly • built upon, part of it being laid out in gardens, orchards and vineyards. It was formerly a very populous place, and carried on a considerable manufaffure cs sine linen, which isi now So greatly decreased, that the number of the students belonging to the university is the principal Support os the city. 
During my residence at Louvainy I became acquainted with a French gentle«^ man of title, and belonging to one of the first families in the kingdom, who had entered into.some. political disquisitions.; 
rather. 
86 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
rather too freely, on account of which he had given offence to the court of France, and, finding himsels in danger of being taken into custody, had fled from Paris to this city for Safety. As I was an Englijhtmn, the political interests of our countries was the usual topic of our ''conversation. His mind was heated with prejudice to his own nation, and, in my opinion, on good grounds,, which led him to be more communicative than he otherwise might have been. Unmerited injury generally excites resentment. It proved So in the present instance; Sor he disclosed Some Secrets to me, and pointed out a mode of obtaining and conveying intelligence, of the utmost importance to the welfare of England, I was indefatigable till I made myself master of all he had to communicate, and then went to brujfelsi and offered my Service to my 
country 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 87 
country to the engujh ambassador there, provided I could be Supported in it. His excellency treated me and my proposal with the greatest attention and respeff, and So entirely acquiesced in the importance of my plan, that he thought it imprudent to lose time, and hence resolved, that I should proceed on the business, without waiting till he could receive an answer from the British court. I therefore only remained at Brussels till I had written an explanation of my intended mode of conveying intelligence, in order that it might be decyphered readily when it got to England, which he transmitted home; and aster getting letters of credit on the first banking house at Paris, I Set off for that city in the Brujfeh Diligence, with an assurance of having ample Supplies os money Sent to me from London, to Support the expenses of prosecuting 4 niy 
8'8 THE FAVOURITES OF felicrtt. 
my plan, while the hope of improving my Suture fortune, and of rendering myself important to the interests of my native country, removed the Scruples of my mind respeffing the new character I had assumed, and 1 Said with virgii 
-- -- Tentaoda via eft; qijame qqoquepoftim 
Tollere hunno, vi6lorque virum volitare per ora. 
Oa venstrous wing in quest of fame I go, ^ 
And leave the gaaing multitude below. 
I had left without difclosihg 
my intentions to my French Sriend, neither did I judge it Safe to mention his name to any one when I got to Paris. Soon after my arrival, I received a large trans mittance .of money from England, \y\th. an unlimited order to draw for more, as' I rnight want it, and a profusion of promises of bdng rewarded if my plan Succeeded. 
I now>^ 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
I now found it necessary to make a Splendid appearance, and Support the character of a lord Anglois^ Sor which' pur pole I lent for a French taylor, and a sriseur, in order to decorate my person alamode dc Paris, I hired magnificent lodgings, a French valet, and an elegant chariot, that I might render my sels noticed, and obtain an easy admit * tance among the beau mmde, I was Soon as complete a man of the as any in paris, and was So cautious in my conversation, and inquiries, that I was only considered as a man of pleasure and dissipation; for Lhad not been many days in that capital, besore L discovered, that not only the town, but the country also, was vigilantly watched by the engines of government, and that, throughout France 
the fields are full of eyes, and woods 
have earsi 
50 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
For a time, I Succeeded beyond niy Warmest hopes, and was Sortunate in transmitting Some important intelligence to England which I procured by throwing mysels into those channels that had been marked out by my acquaintance at Louvain. But in the midst of my career, my banker insormed me one day, that he had been interrogated respeffing me, from whence he had discovered, that the letters containing the bills transmitted to me from time to time had been examined, and the importance of the Sums, with other circumstances, had occasioned my being suspe£led, and closely watched. He added, that as I knew best, whether I held any correspondence with the Eng ujh government, or not, I might condust myself accordingly, and, if I had done So, it would be Safest for me to withdraw my money out of his hands, and 
decamp. 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 9i 
decamp, before suspicion led to confirmation. With an affiimed gaiety, I ridiculed his intelligence, and assured him I only came to France as a man of pleasure, and, therefore, though I was obliged to him for his friendly hint, and good wishes for my Safety, I had nothing to fear, and should not think of quitting Paris till I had enjoyed more of it’s amusements and pleasures. I Said this So confidently, that he appeared to think me innocent, and declared he would make a favourable report of me. Had I discovered fear, and instantly taken my money from his house, I might have fallen into a trap that might have been laid for me; though I think the banker was sincere, and would have been my friend as far as he could, had I disclosed myself; but it would have been madness to have trusted him. 
When 
gi THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY 
When I first engaged in this business,, if was agreed that I should have no connexion, or hold any communication, with our Ambassador at as that might 
have created a suspicion tespexing me, at the Same time that it would have been ihconsisteiit with the honour of his statiom Yet, now, Lthought it iiecdtary to consult him respexihg my own Safety. Hs was of opinion, that it would be moss' prudent for me to leave Paris as soon as I could do it undiscovered; to change mydress; and not to proceed immediate^ ]y to .any port town upon the coast, for the purpose of embarking for England, lest the. knowledge of my absence should occasion ray being pursued, and stopped, before I could quit the French territories. He, therefore, advlfed my going into the interior part os the kingdom, to the northeast os Paris, in order, to, reach the 
Aujlfian. 
tste FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 93 
Aujlrian Netherlands as Soon as I possibly could. 
This consultation was held in the evening of the day 1 had received the hint ‘from my banker. I returned from the ambalsador to my lodgings, and acquainted ray valet, I had received letters from England, respcdling the death of a near relation, which obliged me xo qmt France immediately; and after engaging him to go to England in iny Service, a thing he was desirous of doing, I gave him money to discharge my stodging, and Settle all my other affairs, but not till I had left Paris one day at least, after which he was to proceed with ray baggage to Calais, and wait there till he received a letter from me, directing him at what place he was to meet me, I observcd the fellow was striifily attentive to the 
directions 
94 the favourites of felicity. 
direchons I gave him, and, with the appearance of great fidelity, he promised to be pundtual in obeying my orders. I Sent him to bed, though I did not retire to rest myself, for I Spent the night in examining my trunks, and destroying all those letters, and papers, that would have had any tendency to criminate me, in cafe 1 should have been taken into custody besore I could quit the kingdom. In the morning I told my valet, I should not leave Paris that day, or, however, not till the evening, having Some bufiness to settle, and then lest my lodging, and posted to my banker’s, in order to draw my money out of the house before he came from his countryseat, to which I knew he went the night before. In this I Succeeded, and then walked a few miles out of the town to a place where I was not known, and where I knew I could have 
post 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 95 
post horses. Thus I left parisy after a stay of five months, and, what was still more mortifying, two large trunks full of valuables, to the chance of circumstance, or the mercy of a French valet, whose integrity, however, I had no rea son to doubt, further than my having left an important temptation to dishonesty in his possession. I procured post horfes, and an experienced guide, and bent ray course toward the celebrated city of Rheimsy in the province of Champagne, situated upwards of eighty miles from Paris, where, after much hard riding and fatigue, owing to the frequent change of horses, and the badness of them, I arrived about midnight; but was refused admittance at that late hour, which, however, after Some parley, I obtained at the price of a Louis dor, and, on my getting fresh horses and a guide, 1 was obliged 
to 
p6 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
to, pay the Same bribe to be let out of the city. Though I was of opinion, that •the route I had taken was unobserved by any one, yet I thought, if the banker, on Lis return home, and finding I had taken all my money from hishouse, should interfere, an immediate pursuit after me might take place; and, therefore, as the intelligence the valet would naturally give might be suspeisted by French policy, and a general pursuit take place, I did not think it Safe to loiter on the road, but, after a short refreshment. Set forward for the Aujirian Netherlands 
After labouring with fatigue for four hours, and almost unable to Support myself upon the horse, I arrived at rethei commonly called Mazarin a town of Lhampaignei about i6 miles to the northeast of Rheims, I now found it ira 
possible 
THE FAVOURITES OP FELICITY. 97 
possible for me to proceed Surther on horseback, and therefore inquired if I could have a carriage, in order to pio ceed for mauheugcy and Srom thence ro Mons Brujfels \ but the landlord of the inn assured me, the whole town could not produce a carriage at that time; which information I considered as Salle, and only calculated to detain me at his house. I therefore showed a willingnels to stay, and thought it politic to detain my guide, that he might not return in the usual time to Rheitns. To accomplish this design, I plied him well with liquor, till I found he would be incapable o returning for many hours; when I told my host, I would rest contented for that day, and regale myself. Honest Boniface who by the bye was a great rogue, appeared highly pleased, and paid me many coni', pliments on the wisdom of my resolution, vol. III F My, 
9s THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
My, now drunken, guide from Rheitm^ was fallen into a profound steep, and I left the inn, under pretence of taking a view of the town before breakfast. In my perambulation, 1 inquired at Several places for a carriage, but without suc cess; and turning to a pocket map of Francey I found I had but one stage to mezieresy a town of Champagne, Situated on the river Maefe, where I imagined I could get a water conveyance to Namury in the Aujirian Netherlands. 
At an inn in a remote part of the town, I hired fresh horses, and a guide, and Set off for Mezieres about Seven o’clock in the morning, leaving my host, and the drunken guide, to wait in ignorance for my return. The idea of accomplishing my own Safety raised my Spirits, and Supported my vigour to en 2 counter 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 99 
counter with fatigue. I reached Mezieres about noon, and aster plying my guide plentifully with liquor, as I had done the other at Mazariny I partook os Some re frelliment; told my new host I should lay with him a few days, and then walked out in order to procure a passage boar. 
In ail the French towns, Situated imon navigable riveis, the occupiers of boats of accommodation, signify their profes* fion by a painted board over the doors of their houses. I found out one of ihese barge masters, as they style themselves, who, observing my impatience to q ut mezieresj modestly demanded ten Louis d’ors, to convey me to Civet, only, a town in the Bishopric of Liege, near 30 miles short of Namur. Huwev r, as I found if I reached this place I should F 2 be 
loo THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
be out of the territory of France, I closed a bargain, and did not think it prudent to remonstrate against imposition. The boat was Soon ready, and I entered into it with a mind Sully Satisfied w^h the idea of Security; for, as we had the streani in our favour, I knew we should arrive at Ghet in the course of five or Six hours. With this pleasing hope, I laid down on Some of the boatmen’s clothes, and forgot all my cares for four hours, 
“As fall; lock’d up in sleep, as guiltless labour 
When it lies starkly in the traveller’s bones.” j 
Agreeable to my calculation, wear rived at Givet about six o’clock in th evening, where, after paying for the boat, I walked to one of the best inns in th #- town, procured Some refreshment, hired a boat for the next morning to convey me to Dinant, and then retired to ret, 
after 
THE farourites OF FELICITY. lai 
after the fatigue of having Sat up the night before I left Paris, and of travelling 125 miles on horseback, and 35 miles by water in about 30 hours, without any repose but the four hours steep which I had in the boat after I left Mezierei* 
In the morning, I left Givet^ and arrived at Idinant after a pleasant passage of three hours, where I trade an early dinner, and then took the common boat to Namur, which reached that city about Seven o’clock in the evening. I was now only 35 miles distant horn Brujels; burr, had I Set off for that - place as Soon as I got to Namur, I must have travelled in the night, and theresore I resolved to stay till the morning, and then hired a carriage, in which I arrived Safe at Bralfels in the course of the day, truly F 3 happy 
102 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
happy with the success os my expeds tion. 
I waited on the Englifrj ambassador, and acquainted him witii my reasons for quitting Tans as I had, which he approved, and warmly congratulated me on the Service I had done my country while I wais there, and pn the Sortunate escape I had made. 
I now wrote a letter to the person in whose house I had lived during my stay at Parisy requesting to know whether my valet had di'charged my obligations; to him and others, and had proceeded with my trunks to Calais agreeable to ray direfiions; because, in the last case, I should write to him to follow me to Brujfels* In a Sew days I received a very polite an swer j in which he informed me, that 
when 
THE favottritrs OF FELICITY. IO 
when it was found I did not return on the night os the Sorenoon I went away, my Servant made my orders known to him, and aster paying all my debts, would have Set out for Calaismy effects; but he had refused to let him'do So, because he produced no written authority trom me for that purpose. That the man had been under great concern, on being prevented from fulfilling my commands, and had insisted on staying where iiiy property was till he heard from me, which was agreed tole further added, that the next morning after my retreat, the banker came to inquire after me, and finding I had left Parish told him he was glad of it, for he was Satisfied from Some inquiries that had just been made respecling me, of which he came to give me the earliest notice. Something was in the wind, and he was asraid I should be F 4 taken 
104 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
taken into custody, under the suspicion of my being a Spy in the Service of the British court. That, in the evening of the Same day, the officers of the police came in Search after me at my lodgings, broke open my trunks, and examined the contents; but finding no papers, they neither took anything away, or left any prohibition against their being removed. He also added, that ray valet was taken into custody, but Set at liberty after an examination, when, as he understood, expresses were Sent in pursuit of me, to all the ports upon the Northwest coast of the kingdom, between2iiid.cape la Hogue. That a report prevailed, I was Seen on the road from Paris to Meam (the route I took for Rheims'), early in the day I Set off; whereupon other expresses had pursued me through the province of champaignci on a suppofitiont 
bad 
THE FAVOURITES'OF FELICITY. 105^ 
had bent my course Sor aujiri an Flanders j and that hearing of me at Rheims, they, pursued me to Rethef and afterwards to mezieresy where they arrived about two hours after the time I took the boat for Givet; at which place the landlord as sured them I was in the town. In consequence of this, a general Search took place, and it was not discovered fill the next day that I had left the town by means of a w'ater coiiveyance, by which time I was on my way from Givet to Linant. Thus you See, gentlemen, continued the herniu, the importance of my bribery at pjeeims, and of the steps I pursued d^trethel and Mezieres.^ notwithstanding which I narrowly estaped being taken; and if I had difctosed my intention, at the last of these places, of pursuing my route by water, 1 shoul have been followed, and most probably been F 5 taken 
j05 THE FAVOURITES OF FEEICITT» 
taken long before I could have reached Civet. The vigilance of the French, re fpeffing intelligence, and whatever elfe concerns the police and general interest of the state, is not equalled by any other nation in Europe. 
In eonsequence of this information, I returned an order to Paris, for my landlord to deliver the trunks to my valet, and for him to proceed with them to Brussels;; in about a week, ray faithful Servant arrived in the Diligence with a letter only, in which I was informed, that my things could not be forwarded to me at that time, nor at any future period, without permission from the court of France. I own, I was inclined to think this intelligence a trick of my landlord, to Secure my property to himself, (the value of which was upwards of three 
hundred 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. loj 
hundred pounds sterling,) knowing I could never venture to return to Faris; but my Suspicion was unjustly founded, for about two months aster, I received a letter at bruffelsi acquainting me, that no prohibition having been made by government against my things being removed, he had, in conjunffion with my banker, forwarded them to Liege, direffed in my valet’s name, to avoid all Suspicion respeffing me, or of their interesting themselves in my favour. On Sending my faithful le fevre to Liege, be brought them sase to brujjels, and I found, on examination, that not a Single article had been purloined. Thus much for the integrity and honour of two worthy Frenchmen. 
I was now happy in having Secured my person and property; and being in the post'estion of a considerable part of F 6 the 
108 THE favourites OF FETICITY.. 
the money that had been transmitted tome at Paris, which I did not consider rayself accountable Sor, and which I had pureliaseff at the hazard of my life,. I determined to return to England, and apply mysels to the study and praffice os physic. Thus resolved, I disposed of all my ji at e apparel at Bnvjfels, and aol could have no occasion Sora French valet in my own.country, I rewarded his fidelity to me with a hand Some presenr, and prevailed on our ambassador, to engage him in his Service, which he very generousty did; a circumstance that gave me heartfelt pleasure, Sor more saithsul being never entered into the Service of any mani So much Sor honest Leferore, whose mind was levelled to his condition, and whose heart delighted in. it’s own integrity. 
Befors 
the favourites of f ellcit.y. j09' 
Before I left Briijjeh to come to eng land, I made a Second visit to louvd.mvm order to take a final leave os my Sriends at the university, and of ray French acquaintance,, to whose intelligence I owed • the good Sortune resulting from my trip to Paris He rejoiced exceedingly when he Saw me, for he had received an account of my expedition, undertaking, and. the escape I had made; and added, in addition to the circumstances I have already related, that the French court was exas perated, I had displayed So much dexterity, in tracing out Some cs their intended Schemes, against the interest of Great. Britain and at the success of my conveying intelligence home,, and Safe retreat Srom the kingdom.. He assured me I must have been taken if I had not Succeeded in pashng through Rheims in the night, as I did, by means of bribery 
and 
iro THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
and that the parties concerned were taken into custody, and would Suffer Severely for their condust. He Surther added, that it was reported, the French court had Sent emissaries to Brujfels to watch my motions, on which account, he ad vised me never to be out of the city after it was dark, and to take Holland in my way to England, instead of going by the way of Ghent, Bruges, and oilend y where, he Said, though belonging to the German dominions, I might be entrapped through the treachery of Some of the Romifi clergy, who were ever ready to do anything for interest. And as he knew I had a considerable Sum of money, which I had taken from the Baris bankers, the day I left that city, he recommended that I should not take it with me, but get bids of credit, and transmit them to a correspondent in eng lana before I lelt Brujfels. 
As 
TJHE FAVOURITES' OF feiilcity, ilti 
As I had the highest reason to believe that this gentleraaffs intelligence was authentic, and that his advice was Sound -- ed on the most liberal and friendly mo fives, I resolved to avail myself of both,, and accordingly, on my return to Brujfels after a stay of four days at Louvairiy I procured bills of credit which I forwarded to England., and then pursued my' route from Brujfels to Rotterdam, by the Sime methods I had followed when I first came from holumd into Aujlrian Flanders From llotterdam I took the passage boat to Briel, and from thence went to hek voetflays, where I embarked in the English packet, and arrived Safe at Harwich after an abscnce of twenty months; during which time I had Seen miuch, heard much, learned mjach, improved my circumstances, and laid a foundation for an increase of Sortune in Suture. 
On 
IT 2 THE FAVOURITES OP PELICTTYV* 
On my return to London I took a private lodging, lived Sparingly, and enlisted in the Service of the minister, to whom I had immediate access on account of the employment I had been engaged in at Paris. However, 1 Soon found attendance and dependance irksome and insupportable; and therefore declined So arduous an undertaking,, and applied inysels to the praffice of physic, in which. success and fame would have attended, had I been free from the power of my former creditors, but that not being the cafe, I found rayself under the necestity of retiring, from the capital, to a private Situation, and Solicited government for a further reward for my public Services which, on their being properly represented to a gracious monarch, I obtained,, by having an annual pension granted for. my life.. 

the favourites of felicity. 113 
As Soon as I accomplished this acquisition, I resolved to resign myself to Solitude; and came into this country, pur chased a Spot of land, and built this cottage upon it, and here mean to Spend the remainder of my days. 
Had I parted with the money I brought from France to my creditors, it would have been insufficient to satissy all ray obligations to the world, at the Same time that the doing So, would have left me destitute for a time, and I thought it would be unjust to show a partiality t particular individuals; whereupon, I placed my money out to produce interest, and have no doubt but it’s accumulation, and what I can Save out of my pension, and the emoluments of my literary labours, will, in time, enable me to discharge all my debts in the fullest and 
most. 
114 the favourites of felicity.. 
most honourable manner, without depriving me of a comfort shle and certam )up port in old age. This plan is th.r constant objefi: of my attention; my whole’ conducst is regulated by it; and I shall never think rayself truly happy tili it is accomplished. Though justice is due to’ my creditors, when ability gives me power to execute it. Some regard is likewise due to myself; and it would be cruel if, after theiaeristce ihayc made, They expected me, at this time, to give up that which Secures, me from fatigue, dependence, or the uncertainty of any gainful occupation. I could live otherwise than I do upon my present income, but the integrity of my future intentions, leads me to be contenr with a situation which frees me Srom the allurements of ambition, or the venality of indigence... 
I have 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. II; 
I have outlived many of my worthy intimates, and most of my real Sriends, So that except one generous Samily, and one more generous friend, 1 am not now known to any one whose interest, or gratitude, can unite them to my welfare and happiness. The first of those, from the noblest motives, have Sought me out with unwearied attention, anxious to promote my felicity; and the latter, has attached himself to my happiness by an unremitting constancy, Scarcely to be equalled in the history of human nature 
I was in hopes, till lately, that I had Secured what I may properly term a domestic gratification for my latter days, but I have the highest reasons for Supposing that death,, or Some fatal accident,, has deprived me of it. I allude to my having a Son in the early part of my life,. 
Il THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
on whom I bestowed a liberal education, and then established him in a respeclable situation in the Eaji~indies; but it is now ten years since I received any account of him, and, therefore, living,, or dead, he is equally lost to me. He was a youth of great expeciation, and left England with a good understanding, and a virtuous mind, on which account his loss is to be lamented.. 
I have before remarked, that I employ ray time in study, economy, and exer dse; and I have the fatisfaffion of knowing, that as the delights of fense begin to weaken, the pleasures of my mind improve. When I write, I design it for the entertainment and instru£sion of mankind. Though I have lived but half a century, I have experienced various \icistitudes, and therefore, I think I may ^ be 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. II 
be capable of offering Some observations worthy the notice of young minds at least. “The laws of Social benevolence require, that every man should endeavour to assist others by his experience/’ Says an amiable writer. “He that has at last escaped into port from the fludlua tions of chance, and the gusts of opposition, ought to make Some improvements in the chart of life, by marking the rocks on which he has been dashed, and the shallows where he has been stranded.” I know that the infirmities of decrepitude are hastening upon me, and, therefore, I employ my faculties before they lose their vigour; and if providence should be pleased to continue my life, till I have discharged my obligations to the world, as becomes a man of honour, I shall neither think wealth or fame of much consideration; but endeavour to elevate 
myself 
ils THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
myself above the mists of mortality, and pass through the things os this world, as of little influence or regard, when compared with the importance of divine favour, and the blessings of futurity. 
O Thou whose pow’r okr moving worlds presides, 
Whose voice created, and whose wisdom guides, On darkling man in pure effulgence shine, 
And cheer the clouded mind with light divine ’tis THINE alone to calm the pious breast, 
With fxlent confidence and holy rest; 
From THEE, greatgod, wefpring, to t hee we teiid, Path, motive, guide, original, and end.” 
With this poetical ejaculation, the Hermit concluded his narrative, which I hope will afford you the same entertainment it did to me. 
lam Sorry to acquaint you, th?! Lady Pmival is become almost inconsolable 
Sor 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 119 
for the loss of her daughter Selima. Her elopement is a mysterious affair, for I am inclined to think Presto does not know where she is, as there has been Sufficient time for them to have effecsted a marriage, had that been their plan; and if it was not, upon what principle could she leave her sister’s house?? am bewildered when 1 think of this distressing occurrence, and therefore I will not dwell upon it. 
1 remain, most truly, your’s, 
Charles Belcour. 
LET 
IZO THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
LETTER XXXIII 
Mr. Percival to Mr. Somerset. 
Pirdval cajlky Sept. 7, 1784. 
Dear Sir, 
LEONARD is indesatigable in his endeavours to reconcile his daughter to her disappointment respeffing Captain Herbert; nd enforces the importance, and happy prospeff, of her encouraging an affection for me, So continually, that 1 entertain hopes of Succeeding at last. I See her every day, and I think her cheersul ness improves; but, now and then, a 3 painful 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 121 
painful sigh steals from her lovely bosom, which leads me to apprehend, she has not yet banished the impressions made there by the faithless object of her wishes. Her conduct, indeed, has Sufficiently proved, that though she loved under the auspices of virtue, her partiality was not to be influenced when its dignity was invaded by vicious profligacy; still, I can readily believe, her heart may not easily relinquish what her judgement condemns; for, if I may be allowed to compare her feelings with ray own, the power of a first love imprelses itself too forcibly on the Senses to be hastily removed; 
Love looks not with the eyes but with the mind and hence it is, that the Sensibilities and endearments it creates, interest the heart to Secret partialities, that are not to be removed but with the utmost difficulty, 
vol III G 
121 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
Oh! coiasin, I feel rnyself awkwardly Situated; for a state of suspcnse is very unpleasant. I am divided between hope and fear. Sometimes I am raised to the pinnacle of expeffation;. and then lowered to the abyss of doubt and uncertainty. In short my mind is kept in continual fiufluatioii, 
Now up, now down, as buckets in a well; ” 
but this, I apprehend, is the cafe with every one in love to the heart’s core, as I am. The wound is deep, I assure you, Cous; but my beloved Julia might heal it with a Smile, Sor she is everything to me, and I Say with the poet. 
What light is light, if yulia be not Seen? What joy is joy, if Julia be not by i Unless it be to think that fly is by. 
And feed Upon the shadow of perfection. Except I be with Julia in the night, 
• There is no inuhc in the nightingale; 
Unless 
the FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 12^ 
Unless I look on ^ulia in the day, 
There is no day for me to look upon' 
Thus I apprehend it always is with true love; and thus, I conclude, the wisdom of the great Author of nature designed it should be, that the human mind might be forcibly impressed with those tender obligations between the Sexes, which tend to promote the ends of creation, and the social interests of the Species; and hence it is 
“A lelton too hard for living clay, 
From love in course of nature to refrain.” f j 
Well, you See I am fairly in Sor it; and perhaps you wish me fairly out of it. lhave no Such wish; for though my Solicitude respeding the event of this af 
Shakespeare. 
t 
G 2 
fair 
124 the favourites of felicity. 
fair is Somewhat painful, I have intervals of pleasure that over balance all my Sufferings; and, when these happen, I improve and heighten them, by the anticipation of those I may enjoy in Suture, should I Succeed in my adventure. 
However, as Miss Lexicon voluntarily gave Captain Herbert up, there is every reason to suppose she will not indulge 2 renewal of her passion; because that which we do freely, of ourselves, promises greater stability, than that we do on compulsion. But, then, though she has renounced one lover, it does not follow that she must give encouragement to another; or, however, So Soon as I wist her to do it. The salsehood of the soil object of her affe£fion may lead her to I look upon the Sex with indifference; to despise them; or to renounce them for 
ever. 
the favourites of felicity. 125 
ever. And if she does not do this, I may not be the Savourite of her choice. O, dear cousin, refleffion is intolerable; the further I proceed, the worsc I find it. Alas! what bufiness had “that blind, rascally boy, that abuses every one’s eyes, because his own are out, ’* to make me a corporal of his file, and wear his colours? 
Since I wrote the above, I have Seen Mss Lexicon, for Sir Leonard, very un expestedly, brought her to dine with us today. She looked infinitely more lovely than I ever Saw her before. I could say a thousand pretty things in compliment to her beauty, but it “needs not the painted flourish of my praise.” Their stay was short, or I thought it So; but while they did stay, i enjoyed the most delicious, golden moments. She ap g 3 peared 
: i26 the favourites of felicity. 
peared cheersul and happy; nay llic Smiled upon me! What think you of that, Cousin, was it not a favourable omen? When they lest us, I ventured to Salute her! O transport inexpressible! “My true lip has virgin’d it e’er Since; ” and if my fond hopes do not deceive me, at thatmoment of blisssulconta^l, she breath ed the breath of warm affeffion; for Ihe heaved a tender sigh, and there was a Silent love of eyes. Perhaps my ecstasy led me to view things in a too flattering mirror: still 1 think, 
— “Though our passion wanted Speech, Yet mutual looks interpreted for each.” 
But to proceed. Courage may be northeast. ceffary in love, as well as in war. I am harraffed by delay, and, therefore, have resolved to push on to vistory, or mil carriage. A wife, or no wise that is the question, 
7 In 
THE FAVOURITES OE FELICITY. i27 
In pursuance of this plan, and made bold by the favourable appearances just related, I have written a letter to Mis Lexicon, which 1 shall Send tomorrow, and in the language os truth, honour, and love, have declared my passion, and wishes for a Speedy union by marriage. I have avoided touching on the affair of Herbert; and have considered her mind as free Srom any prior impreshon; on which, and the approbation of her father, I have grounded my Solicitation for her hand and heart. I have done this with honest Simplicity, preferring that language, and tbose Sentiments, which the power of love alone didhated, un affisted by the arts of disingenuous adulation. What the event of this will be time only can discover. I wdll wait for it with patience; and, if it ends in an unfavourable ilsue, bear it as becomes a G 4 maa 
128 THE FAVOURITES OF FEIICITY. 
jnan of philosophy and Sortitude. I have addressed myself to her understanding, and the feelings of her heart. I will give her time to think, and them time to operate, and not make too early a visit, lest I should put virgin modesty to the blush for an ansvver, before deliberation has enabled her to give it consistently with dignity and honour. If love has made a Second impression on her tender bosom, and in my favour, she will find it a difficult matter to conceal it, however she may he prompted to do it from motives of delicacy; for 
Th’ inventive God, who never fails his part, Inspires the wit, wlien once he warms the heart.” ’'*' 
1 forbear to Say much on the distress 'ful state of my dear mothers mind, respecting 


THE FAVOURITES OP FELICITY. 129 
fpeffing my sister’s elopement, becaiise I knqw you participate in our uneasiness, but we are lost in doubt, and tired with conjeffure. Permit me to afliare you, shat 1 
Ever, most sincerely, your’s, 
Edmund Per CIV au. 
G 5 
LET. 
t30 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
LETTER XXXIV 
Miss Lexicon to Mr. Percivae.’ 
^ Lexicon flacey Sept, II 1784. 
Sir, 
YO U ihen are' teasing creatures, and think, as Lords of the crea tion, every request you make must be complied with immediately by the other Sex, whom you are pleased to style the weaker vessel?, subservient to your caprices, wishes, and commands. But, believe me, my good Sir, it is not So, or, however, will not long continue So; for the Ladies os the Creation begin to think as highly of themselves as the lordsi and are ofopinion they ought to have the ascendency, 

THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. II 
dency, and take the lead. Petticoated philosophers, politicians, and warriors? have made no inconsiderable figure in ancient history, and might shine in modern times, is they would resolve to throw off the yoke of bondage which you men have unjustly imposed upon them. male independence may Succeed as well as American independence. O lord! I am charmed with the idea of it! and, I as sure you, the Ladies are ripe fur rebellion. We shall Soon assemble in con grefs, and commence hostilities, when your Lordjhips may expert a little tarring and feathering at least. 
But, O bless me, I had almost forgot | yon have written a letter to me, containing Something about love — constancy — truth— — — marriage — happiness — felicity — and I hardly know what be g 6 sides. 
132 THE FATOHRITES OF FEEICITV* 
sides. You desire an answer to all ihefc flowery Speeches, and Solicitations; but how is it possible I can go through Such an Herculean labour I 
What gentle, humble, and Supplicating creatures you men are, when you want to get us women in your power f How Soft and fair; how condescending and submissive t “All meekness and gentle ness, your worship, ’^ as Ursula says in the Padlock But, ray good Sir, I have had a ihousand Such pretty things Said to me before, and, by Sorrowful experience found they meant nothing real and Substantial. Men are April when they woo, December when they wed You say much, promise much,, and vow much; but can you find Sureties for the faithful performance of your obligations? if you can, I will venture to bet a thousand to 3 €mq 
the favourites or FELICITY. i33 
one that you forfeit your recognisance. But remember, 
“When lovers swear trntb, the lilstning angelu Stand on the golden battlements of heaven. 
And waft their vows to the eternal throne.” • 
I really must consess that I am at a loss to acgount for your eondttst. You know that I have very lately eseaped from one Snare, and yet you want to entice me into another. Do I ever ought to trust man again.? answer this question if you can, without hesitation or meu' tal reservation. You Say you are in love j, but that is rather a doubtsul matter, for k does not appear by the usual outward and visible signs. ‘‘ A lean cheek, which you have not; a blue eye and sunkedj, which you have not; ” and a variety of other Signs, which you have not. ‘‘ They your hose should be ungartered, your * Theobald 
134 FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
sleeve unbuttoned, your shoe untied, and everything about you demonstrating a careless desolation; but you are no Such man.’’ To be Sure, you had a Solemn, Simple face, the last time I Saw you; and you looked a little foolish, or So. These are all good signs, I consess. You come of a respeclable Samily; thacs well; my father likes you; very well that. You once was very kind to me, and did as I desired you; better than well that; would you do So again, if I was to marry you? I am asraid you will Say, Yes, but mean No. I will leave this point doubtful; however, if you Say, Yes, I shall expest you to keep your word. But what should I marry you for, having a good fortune; and as that is the case with you, why should you wish to marry me Well, it’s a strange business, and I am at a loss to guesa what it is that jnakes^ people So 
fond 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
fond of matrimony, I suppose you know, though you have been Silent on the sub jefi. Is it like a lottery if So, i’ll have nothing to do with it, for, unless I can Secure Something worth having, let those venture that will, Sor me; i’m for a capital prize, or none at all. You promisc much, like the lottery offices; and, if I do venture, I shall expefi: you see it all persprraed. You shall Swear by the 
Regent of love rhimes, lord of folded arms;, Th’ anointed sovereign of sighs and groans, ’* 
never to Spoil your manly face with a frown; or strain the melody of your Sweet voice by Scolding; or injure your gentler temper through the Spirit of contradiction; or, or, or a thousand other things I have not time to mention. O, and i’ll not be kissed but when I like stand ai know nothing about it at present, I 
will 
136 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY 
will defer fettling the articles respeesting this matter, till Some future opportunity. Thus I think I have given you a few hints, how you are to conduff yourself, in cafe lever should resolve to marry you. But, really, I don’t know what to do with a husband, if I had one. Then why should I marry } But my father is desirous I should; and he has been So very kind, and tender to me lately, that he may do what he pleases with me; yet that is more than I shall allow you. So much for jocularity. 
Well, now I suppose you eapefl: I should answer your last epistle, Sentence by Sentence; point by point; and word by word; with all the formalities and punctilios with which you wrote it. I will not attempt to do any Such thing, lest I betray myself into a weakness, or 
indiscre 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 13^ 
indiscretion, I may blussi for hereafter. Honesty and truth want not the ornaments of diflion. A Sew words will ex press any fubjeff, where the matter is clear, and the intention just. Know then, I esteemed you for the integrity of your condust toward me when my affection was placed on another; and as my heart is now free of ids former obligations, 1 shall most readily transfer ids af festion to you, as the only person on whom I ought to bestow it. My father wisties me to do So, and I hope, by complying with his request, I shall make atonement for my late transgreshon. Consider I am a woman, and Spare my blushes. I ought to esteem you, because you Say you love me. I have been thus explicit. Since you declare your peace oi mind depends on my being So. Thus, with Miratida^ I say, 
“I am 
138 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
** I am your wife, if you will marry me : 
If not, i’ll die your maid : to be your fellow You may deny me : but i’ll be your Servant Whether you will or no.” 
Well, are you Satisfied have I fully answered your wishes? or will you change your mind now your Suit is granted, Setting no value on that which is in your power I entertain more noble Sentiments of you. If you too are false, I can only Say, it is a pity falsehood should Wear So fair a form. Adieu, adieu. Remember, you’ro always to do as I bid you, and never to kiss me but when I please to let you. Farewell, my dear, faithful fellow. I am wholly, 
your’s, ^ 
Julia Lexicon' 
fi^ahffcaris temp ejt, 
L E T 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. i39 
LETTER XXXV 
Mr. Percival to Miss Lexicon. 
percival cajue, Sept. 12, 1784. 
O GENEROUS creature! O, my dearest Julia! you have rendered me the happiest of mortal beings, by complying with the ultimate os my wishes! You have long been the mistress of my 'heart; the treasury of all my delight; the object of my Sours adoration; my waking bliss by day, and steepy charm at night I for 
“Ere nature’s genial fire warm’d my unripen’d bosom to desire” ” 

140 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY 
your beauteous Sorm imprinted a lasting image on my heart, and silled my mind with fond, romantic joy, the firstborn transport of an insant flame. Think, then, what I Suffered, when riper years prompted me to declare my long concealed affefiion, on being informed your heart Was engaged to another, and in the moment of blissful expeffation to receive your request of giving countenance to views uninteresting to my wishes. The shock my mind experienced on this occasion wuuld have been insupportable had not my deep rooted attachment to you absorbed my own astlifiion, in it’s endeavours to dissipate your’s* But let my past Solicitude be enveloped in oblivion, that I may enjoy the meridian Sunshine of my present felicity free from the clouds of care. 
Do 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. II 
lo not snppose, my beloved Julia that marriage will rob you os independence. True love delights in the happiness os it’s idol, and there is no delight without liberty. If you cannot guess “what it is that makes people fond of matrimony, ’* I am Sure I am not able to tell you; but I apprehend we shall not remain long in ignorance. I hope you entertain no unfavourable opinion of my integrity. Of a faithful lover it has been Said, that 
“His words are bonds, his oaths are oracles. 
His love sincere, his thoughts immaculate; 
His tears pure messengers sent from his heart. 
His heart as far from fraud, as heav’n from earth, ” * 
all which you shall find stri(stly verified in me. 
You Say, you will not allow me to do what I please with you j however, you * Shakejfeart* 
cannot 
142 THE favourites OF felicitv. 
cannot give me greater delight than to do as you will with me. And though you stipulate, that I am not to kiss you, but when you like it, 1 hope you will have no objeffion to kiss me when I desire you to do So. Believe me, my dear girl, it is impossible we can Sorra any true idea of what we shall, or shall not, do. We will, therefore, become pupils to the universal tutoress osmankind, and if we obey her instruffions, 1 am of opinion we shall pursue the right road to mutual felicity, 
“And neither please too little, or too much, ” 
while we indulge the ecstasies of affeffion, and the exalted delights of friendship, wshich every day will increase, by new reciprocations of kindness, more tried fidelity, and implicit confidence. 
I am 
the favourites of FELICITY. I4J 
I am all impatience till I See you again, that I may Seal the bond os my affe£hon and every kind intention toward you with a kifs; which, as Security Sor the faithful performance of my obligations, I 
flatter mysels you will not refuse to accept. 
“And sweet aspersions shall the heavens let fall 
To make this contract grow.” * 
Then, O my dearest Julia let not our resolutions Suffer by delay; neither condemn the ardency os my affeffion, for, were it less, I must be inanimate. If it is a fault, ascribe it to the power of your beauty, and the force of that gratitude my heart feels, for your generous attention to it’s Sufferings, while I thought you lost to rae 
* 
Pity 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
“Pity is heaven’s and yours; nor can (he find A throne b lost as in a woman’s mind.” 
Adieu, adieu, adieu, 
my dear, dear girl, 
I am for ever, 
your’s, 
eumuijd Percival. 
LET 
the favourites of felicity. 145 
LETTER XXXVI 
The Hermit to Sir William Percival. 

Hei'mitagey Sept, 14, 1784. 
Most Respected Sir, 
op H E general occurrences os life have Sufficiently illustrated, that the evils we fear, are more distressing to the mind than those that really exist. For Some years past, the greatest calamity of my life has been the Supposed loss of my amiable Son, who, I fondly hoped, would be the Source of felicity to me during ray defeent to the vale of old age, and jour vol. III H ney 
146 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
ney to the habitation os the dead. O! Sir, how gracious, beneficent, and glorious, are all the ways and wonders of Providence! Yesterday, during a Sufferance of mind, respedting what might have been the fate of my beloved boy, behold — he knocked at the. door of my dwelling, loaded with riches and honours, on his return from India You, who are a father, can more easily piffure to your imagination what my feelings were at that moment than I can descisibe them. Such a Scene, Supported by Such an incident, is not to be delineated. sorrowsul joy, one of the Sweetest Sensibilities of being, was prevalent in the extreme. Our speech was dumhnefsj and our language gejlure* 
I am happy to find, that my boy’s commerce with mankind has not corrupted his morals. The force of learning, and 
extent 
the favourites of FELICITY. i47 
extent of his knowledge of lise, have rendered him Sober and Sedate. His imagination, upon every occasion, is lively and beautisu!; and in his conversation and history of himself, he exhibits uncommon strokes of nature and passion; yet never extends to the romantic, the wonderful, or the wild, but appears to have brought his fancy and Sensibilities under the dominion of reason, in order to diminish the evils, and increase the blessings of life. He is graceful in his person, vigorous in his constitution, and competent in his understanding; and having laboured with industry and content, he has received his reward with gratitude, and possesses it with unostentatious cheerfulness. 
- Forgive, my dear Sir, the partiality of a fend parent, who could dwell on the H 2 praise 
148 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
praise "os his beloved offspring, till life’s latest breath expended itself, 
“Soft as expiring notes at distance die, And gentle as the murmur of a sigh * 
adds to iny present felicity on the return os my Son, is his having brought with him a beauteous and amiable wife, to whom he appears attached by all those fond endearments that give lustre to the prerogatives of human beings. I know of nothing that more strongly displays the amiability of a man’s mind, the purity of his heart, and the virtue of his principles, than an attentive and generous attachment to an affec* tionate and obedient wife. 
The lovely creature I have just mentioned merits every favour that can pof 
New Epistle of ahlardxo Eloifa, 
fiblj 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. i49 
sibly be shown her, Sor her mind is as transcendent as her person;; of the latter I may observe, that she is 
“Beauteous and (lately as the eye traiii’d bird; 
As glorious as the morning wafli’d wdth dew, 
Within whose eyes (lie takes the dawning beams, 
And golden summer sleeps upon her cheeks.’l; ^ 
The transport of my mind, on this fortunate revolution respeding my happi ness, is So great, that I am unwilling to play a Selfish part and enjoy it alone; and, theresore, it is my earnest request that you, your Samily, and the Sisiends at your house, will honour me with a visit at my cottage, that we may enjoy one happy day together, to celebrate the return of my long lost and dutiful Son. It may be 
shajafpeare. 
H 
the 
iso THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
the means os diverting Lady Percivafs mind under her present uneasiness; and I hope Dr. belcoups lady will accompany her, as you have never yet Savoured me with a Sight of the female part of your family. I leave it for you to fix the day, for, now my mind enjoys the Smile of felicity, all days will be alike to me. 
I remain, with the highest respe^l, worthy Sir, your 
obedient Servant, The Hermit. 
LET 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. II 
LETTER XXXVII 
Mr. Percival to Mr. Pierpoint. 
percival cq/ik^ Sept, 16, 1784. 
Dear Frederick, 
AS I know you are regularly made acquainted with the contents of my letters to our cousin Somerset I consider my writing to him as a kind of general correspondence. When I wrote last to him, I mentioned the state of my opinion respeffing Miss Lexicon, That you may know the particulars of what has happened since, and in order to proceed in the bufiness with progressive regularity, I have inclosed Miss Lexicon's LI 4 generous 
152 THE FAVOURITBS OF FELICITY. 
generous answer to the letter I mentioned to Mr. Somerfety and a copy os one I Sent to her on the receipt of it. 
Sir Leonard is charmed with his daughter’s compliance with our wishes, and has joined me in pressing Sor an early day to consummate the union. The angelic creature has complied. 01 my dear Fredericky the day, the great, the important day, big with the fate of Fercival and love, is fixed for Friday se’nnighr. Would it were tomorrow, aye, today, for this short week will prove a tedious year. Impatience begets impatience, and every moment is a lagging hour. 
The baronet has generousty promised to give me thirty thousand pounds with his daughter, without a Settlement; and ^ observed 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 153 
observed to niy father, he only meant that for us to begin the world with, as he should hereafter increase my fortune during his life, and make a Settlement on his daughter, and her children, if (lie had any, himself. The union of his family with mine, he Said, had long been his hobbyhorse;; as he knew my own private fortune was considerable, and my father disposed to be liberal, he was resolved not to be outdone in generosity. 
The Hermit has given ns all an Invitation to Spend a day with him, on account of his son’s return from India, whom he supposed dead. He and his wife came down from London on Monday, and are now at the Hermitage, The good old man is in the highest fpu'its on this happy event, and having, H 5 heard 
t54 FAVOURITES OF felicltt. 
heard that a match is concluded shetween me and Miss Lexicon, he has politely invited Sit Leonard and his daughter, in order that the Sestivity of the day may be more happy to me. My Sather has fixed on tomorrow; and I suppose we shall hold a kind of Jubilee at the mitage, Sor my mother and aunt Belcour are to be of the party, having yet never Seen that beautiful place. 
It is whispered, that my aunt is in the road to be a joyful mother; on which, I alsure you, the Doffor is not a little proud. I hope, young man, you can give as good an account of my Sister, for if you cannot the Doflor will triumph. Let me See, I am to be married on the 24th instant. So I hope to be daddy Percival by next midsummer>day. A Benedifl Says, “the world tnuji he peopled: ’ 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. I 5^5 
pkdv Farewell, my dear brother; commend me to all friends. I am. 
Sincerely, your’s, 
Edmund Percival. 
LETTER xxxvin. 
Mr. Percival to Mr. Somerset. 
percl’val cajuey Sept, 18, 1784. Dear Cousin, 
AS you will know from Pierpoint, 
before this comes to hand, that our whole Saraily, with Sir Leonard, and my beloved Julia, wtre to Spend H 6 this 
15^ the favourites of felicity. 
this day with the Hermit and on what occasion, I lake the liberty of giving, you a circumstantial account os what pasted during our being at the Hermitage. 
Soon aster our arrival,, the Hermit introduced his Son, who is a polite, elegant, and Sensible young man, about five and twenty years of age, and So truly accomplished, that he Sully answers one of Shakeffearfi beautiful descriptions : 
“His )'ears but young, but his experience old; His head unmemow’d, but his judgeiuent ripe; And, in a.word (for far behind his worth Come all the praises that I can bestow), 
He is complete in feature and in mind. 
With all good grace to grace a gentleman.” 
.Mr. Melmoth (for that is his name)) 'Welcomed us all to the Hermitage; and after paying a particular attention to the 
ladies. 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 1 
ladies, be made the most liberal acknowledgments to my father, Sor the friendly intimacy he had kept up with his father. During which time, the Hermit gazed upon him, and watched his every look and motion, with a silent and pidiurefque admiration, as Singularly striking as it was beautiful, till the big tear of heartfelt satisfacuon stole gently down his venerable cheek, and left a finished grace beyond the touch of art. The observation of Such interesting situations as this delights the heart, melts the Soul into sostness, and displays the latent powers, of human fensibilityu 
Now, my dear boy, ” Said the her mit^ to his Son, “complete the measure of my felicity, by introducing your beloved wife to this goodly company.’* Whereupon Mr.mdmoth withdrew, and 
in 
158 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
in a Sew minutes led in a most elegantly dressed young lady, whose features were partly concealed as she entered the room by a handkerchief which she held up to her face. Instead of taking any notice of the company, she turned toward her husband, and throwing herself into his arms, as it were, instantaneously fainted away. Our' surprise Was So great on this Sudden circumstance, that none but myself had power to run to Mr. mel motps assistance, when, to my astonishment, I discovered — my long, lost Sister, whose embarrassment of dress, and manner of entrance, had So perfeflly eclipsed her person, that she was not known to any one. 
Judge what a Scene of confusion this discovery occasioned. The attention of my aunt, t>r. beuour^ and my father, 
was 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 15^ 
was engaged with my mother who had fainted. Mr, Melmoth was agitated to a degree of distraftion, not knowing the cause of what had happened, and was incapable of giving any assistance to Selima, whose Swoon was Succeeded by a strong convulsive sit, So that, but Sor the interposition of Sir Leonard and Miss Lexicon, it would have been impossible for me to have held her in my arms, for the Hermit stood motionless with Surprise. 
My mother Soon recovered, and Hying to my sister, cried out, “My child, my child, my child, my dear lost Selima L Whether my mother’s voice had any ef feff, I cannot Say; but she now began to revive, and, in a short time, raised herself up. My father now approached her, and taking her by the hand, Said, S in 
l60 THE FAVOURITES OF feltctty. 
in a most tender and affeslionate manner, “Selima, you are now among your friends, and therefore endeavour to raise your Spirits, that you may be able to explain a mystery, which, at presenr, appears incomprehensible. I pity you, and shall wave all reproach, till I know the measure of your transgreshon.’* 
Mr. Mehnoth displayed uncommon attention and tenderness to her, and, when he found her Spirits tolerably restored, threw his arms round her neck, and with impassioned fondness requested she would corapose her mind, and defer the explanation of what her friends desired to know, till she was better able to engage in So arduous and interesting an undertaking. I See nothing, my dear lise, ’* Said he, but the Saee of friendship around youyet, should it not be 
sh 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. ll 
So, you are united to me by the most endearing of all obligations, and I will protest you with my fortune and my life.” 
O Gracious Heaven, ” cried the Hermitf recovering from his amazement, “I Sear my promised day of joy, will be exchanged into a day of Sorrow. O Son, ’* continued he, “I hope you have not been guilty of a dishonourable astion.” Then, turning to my father, he Said, “Indeed, Sir Williatn, I am a stranger to that you wish to know. I hope my Son is innocent, for, if not, I had rather he had been lost than Sound. I knew not that his wife was your daughter; for, though I heard you had daughters, I never Saw either of them till this lady, now my son’s wise, arrived here with him a few days since, ” 
seum^ 
j62 the favourites of fellcity« 
Selitna Saw the necessity os explaining the mystery that perplexed us all, and, therefore. Summoning up all the courage she could, Said, “O! my dear parents, brother, and friends, pardon my every indiscretion. I will be just in ray relation, as I would were I to be giving my account before the throne of the Almighty God grant you may do So, ** replied the Hermit, clasping his hands, and looking at her with great tenderness. 
Whether you will believe me, or not, my dear father, ’* resumed seuma, your affeflionate and nobly generous behaviour to me, on the night I discovered my unfortunate attachment to Mr. Prejlo, determined me to obey your injunction and give the matter up. I Set Oiit for London fully resolved to write to 
him 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 163 
him — to this effest; but besore I had an opportunity os doing it, I received a letter from him at Mr. Pierpoinfs, in which he acquainted me he was in town, ’ and, as he judged it improper to come where I was, desired I would meet him at a place he appointed. I was So imprudent as to comply with his request, and did So in the absence of my brother and Sister, but with no other intent than that of making him acquainted with your disapprobation, and my refolutioii to break off the intimacy. 
When he heard my determination, he strongly pressed me to a clandestine marriage, and proposed an immediate flight to Scotland, in order to effect it. This I positively declined, and was preparing to leave him and return home, when he (te • fired he might accompany me part of the 
way. 
164 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
Way. As I Saw no harm in this, I complied. After passing through Several streets, he stopped at a house, and pretending to have Some business with the owner of it, he begged me to walk in with him for a few moments. I innocently did So, but Soon found my error. I perceived he was known at the house, Sor we were instantly shown into a good room. Here the villain Soon displayed his base intentions, from which I would have flown, but found it impradficable, notwithstanding the many attempts I made for that purpose. I now considered rayself Shut out from proteffion, and Sacrificed to ruin; for when the wretch found I was not to be Seduced to infamy by artful and profligate insinuation, he proceeded to accomplish his lawless intention by violence. My cries Soon brought Several persons in the house to my assistance, as I imagined, 
but 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 165 
but I Sound it otherwise, for when their appearance freed me Srom Prejioy and I attempted to effe<st an escape, they not only opposed it, but ridiculed the Solly os resistance, and endeavoured to Seduce me to his purpose by arguments and in language too indelicate for me to relate. 
The apprehension of the critical and dangerous situation I was in inspired courage, and while I became inflexible to the jests of ribaldry, and the insolence of terrific intimations, in which the mis tress of the house took the lead, I boldly demanded my liberty. It was positively refused. And I perceived, from Some whispers that past between Prejio and the mistress of the house, which did not escape me, that he dreaded my liberation on account of the iawless length he had gone without fuccess; and, therefore, 
was 
l66 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
was willing to resign me up, on condition I was detained till time led me to comply with Such measures, as probably might deter me from ever making application to my friends. This point was Soon Settled with great cheerfulness on the part of the woman, who Said I should be a dainty bit for a Jew tnerchant of her acquaintance in the city j whereupon Prejio withdrew without taking the least notice of me, or ever returning again; and I was confined in a room at a distant part of the house, where it was impossible my cries could call any one to my assistance, and which was too firmly Secured Sor me to attempt an escape, had it otherwise been praflicable. I now supposed I was consigned to inevitable infamy; resseffed on my own imprudence in going toprejio, though virtuoussy intended; Suffered the extreme of distress for the Solicitude of 
my 
the favourites of felicity. 167 
my friends on account of my absence; and, at last, gave way to despair. 
My abandoned jailor kept me a closh prisoner, yet made me innumerable offers f kindness and Sriendllsip, and used eyery Subtle art she was mistress of, to gain my favour, and restore me to cheerfulness. Though I was well dressed when I went there, I was offered much richer clothes, or, however, more gaudy in appearance with which I was requested to decorate my person, for the market of prostitution. I rejefi; ed every offer of civility that was made me with contempt and abhorrence, and resoived to persevere to the last extremity against the violation of my honour.” 
Glorious, glorious resolution” ” the Hermit in ecstasy, bursting into a stood of tears.” 
The 
l68 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY 
‘‘ The arts praised to allure me to feduffion would employ hours in the enumeration, and therefore I shall not descend to particulars. Suffice it to Say, that I withstood them all, and bid defiance to menace and intimidation. 
I was visited many times in a day by the miscreant wretch who hoped to enrich hersels on the Spoils of my innocence. She endeavoured to awaken vanity by exaggerated praise, and to inspire lewdness by impious representations of human felicity. She was Skilled in the Science of persuasion; knew the arts of veiling iniquity; could decorate vice in the gilded ornaments ofj attraffion; and, being mistress of the powers of allurement, sought her way to the fortress of innocence by stratagem and stealth. 
A day 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 169 
A day was fixed for ray being exhibited to Sale, and Sacrificed to the best bidder. I shuddered at the idea, and. prayed to the Almighty to preserve rae from destrudlion. I knew that, to remonstrate with premeditated and interested villainy would be lost labour, and to oppose violence, desencelefs as I was, ineffe<stual; and therefore I put my trust in the Lord, and rested my protection and deliverance on divine mercyw 
I was frequently waited on by a young fellow, who had been brought up in this School of iniquity from his childhood, and was then one of the principal panders to the mistress of the house.! had remarked that he frequently viewed me with a look of compassion, and that, once or twice, he reprobated the conduct of his employer respefling me; but Sup vol, III I posldg 
lyo THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
posmg it impossible that sincerity could reside in the bosom of any inhabitant of that place, I never paid attention to what he Said. However, as the fatal day was at hand, in which I apprehended my ruin would be completed, I resolved to try if I could interest this young fellow in my favour. I supposed a mind, capable os one aff of bastness, might easily be Seduced by bribery to many more; and that a heart steeled against virtue would not long resist Solicitation to commit a breach of trust. 
I entered into conversation with him, and, by relaxing of my former reserve, encouraged him to Speak of his mistress with more freedom than he had done, and hence understood, that he was the stave of her abandoned tyranny. I commisc' rated and Soothed his complaints; awakened 

THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. lyt 
wakened hopes of better fortune; and gavb him one guinea in earnest of it, with a promise of two more (all the money I had about me), if he would contrive means to condu<st me out of the house that evening, and complete my escape by putting me into a coach. It is Said, there is honour among thieves. I was afraid I should have found the observa tian verified in this young fellow; for he started at the proposal, talked of his regard for his mistress, and his own honour; and expressed great apprehension of iosing his bread, as he called it, in cafe it should be known I escaped by his means. Bliti Soon Sound he had only raised difficulties to extort more money if I had it, for on my alsuring him I had no more, he readily undertook the business, though with no intention to let me really escape, as will appear presently. He press dose i 2 IV 
172 the favourites of felicity. 
ly for the other two guineas beforehand, but I was too cautious to part with them till he had performed the undertaking, which he agreed to do as Soon as it was dark, when, he Said, his mistress generally took a nap, and he should have an opportunity of conveying me out of the house unobserved. When the time fixed arrived, he came and released me from confinement, and conduced me into the street, which circumstance almost overpowered my fenses. He now demanded the two guineas, which, in my flurry, I gave him, though he had not called a coach. I begged he would do So, on which he Swore an oath, and ffid me Seek one myself. I was alarmed at this behaviour, and gladly left him, to take my chance for a coach, or, if I met with none, to inquire my way to Mr. pier joint's* I had not proceeded many yards, 
before 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 173 
before I heard a cry os, Stop thies, which I did not understand, till the very fellow who had Set me at liberty Seized me by the arm, and attempted to drag me back again, having only let me out of the house to obtain the money.” 
** matchless villain !” cried the Hermit, “I could stab Such a wretch to the heart without reluctance;; proceed, my dear madam.” 
** I Screamed out, and made all the resistance I could, ” continued Selimay “which instantly drew a crowd about us; when the fellow accused me of hav 
f 
ing robbed his mistress, and was proceeding to haul me away notwithstanding my cries, when my more than guardian angel, Mr. Mdmothy stepped up to my assistance, and Supposing me innocent from I 3 my 
174 the favourites of felicity. 
my appearance, knocked the Sellow down, and rescuing me Srom the gathering crowd, conveyed me into a shop. The alsufance of Safety overpowered my Semfes, and it was long ere 1 recovered; but vdien I did, I found myself in the hands of the master and mistress of the honse, and still atieudsd by my generous', protect'>fd'' 
O i God, ” Said Hermit, in a: transport of joy, “my boy is innocent, he has afied like a man t” 
It was now got late, and I was in no condition to quit the house, for my Spirits were too powerfully agitated to be easily composed; and I repeatedly relapsed into fainting fits. In one of the intervals of sense, the mistress of the house politely offered ms, a bed for, that night, but? 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY i75 
very naturally inquired the place of my abode, in order to Send a Servant home to acquaint my friends of my situation. Had I been capable of going in a coach by mysels, I undoubtedly should have gone immediately to Mr. Pierfoinfs, as I at first intended; but the thought of having a mdsage Sent home respefiing my Situation terrified me, as I knew it would be the means of discovering not only who I was, but, perhaps, every other ■circumstance, to strangers. Pride and shame here got the better of prudence and duty, and I begged to continue there that night without lending home to my friends. The gentlewoman started at this, and observed, that, if I had an objection of this Sort, all could not be right with me, and therefore she wished to decline letting me stay. Mr. Melmoih io belted for me, and offered any Sum oi 4. money 
iy6 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
money Sor me to remain there, but the good lady became inflexible, observed she was afraid I was a naughty girl, and, if So, 1 should not remain in her house. True it is, the disorder of my clothes, as well as other circumstances. Sufficiently warranted the suspicion, and therefore I have ever commended, instead of condemned, the propriety of the lady’s objection. 
resolving not to discover who I was, I addressed myself to Mr. Melmoth; as sared him I was a person of credit, and beii'g'^d he would intercede for me with the lady that 1 might steep there that night. After Some altercation, in which the master of the house took the favourable Side of the question, the lady complied; and my generous proteffor withdrew, but not without promising to visit 
me 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 177 
me in the morning. I retired to rest with a heart overflowing with gratitude, for the favour I had received from Mr. mcu moth and the family where I was, and enjoyed a happier state of mind than I had done from the time I left Mr. fier ponfs to this night. 
Mr. Melmoth came in the morning, and found me much composed, and greatly revived. The tenderness of his behaviour, and the liberality of his offers to prote6f and Serve me, whatever my situation or embarrassment might be, exhilarated my Spirits, and strongly prompted me to relate my story to him. I did So, in the presence of the master andmistress of the house, concealing nothing but my name; and concluded all with expressing, my Sear of obtainmg a persedt reconciliation with my iiiends, in cast they should doubt the truth ol my story.” 
1 5 “Be 
lys THE FAVOURIT es OF fetigittlv 
Be under no apprehension on that head, my dear young lady, ” replied Mr. Melmsthi: “L am charmed with your per son and Sensibility, and, if your heart can •divest. itself of the favourable iraprestions it has entertained Sor the wretch who has. been the cause of all your Suffering, and you can bring your mind to approve of me Sora husband.. will marry, you sirstj and reconcile you to your friends aster -- ward. I am a man os Sortune, and, as L hope, .of striff honour, just returned frorni the Eaji Indies, with a mind at ease, and a heart ready to interest itself in yout favour.” 
I was shocked and pleased with the srankness of this offer, and the apparent warmth and sincerity with which it was made; and though I had known him but, a few hours. Something, inexpressible, 
most 
THE’ FAVOUR ITE S OE F E Ll city. I yp 
most Sorcibly excitedyme to Surrender ray hand and heart to him, without hestta tlon, or first performing that indispenli ble duty of ashing my parents consent. But, to confess the truth, I considered; rayself So fallen in my friends esteem, by having indulged a partiality for an unworthy objeff, that I thought it prudent to accept Mr. mehnotps offer first, and disclose myself to my friends asterward, though the delay might occasion an un -- easiness b ought to have prevented. Iti, th is I stand' self condemned, and hope for pardon from the best of parents, since I erred from circumstance, and not with intention. 
After I resolved to comply with Mr. mehnotps wishes, it was: agreed I should remain where I was till my wedding doaths were prepared, and the marriage I 6- took 
1^0 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
took place, without discovering myself tp any one, before we made a visit to his father, who he Sound, on his return from Indian had retired from London to a distant part of the kingdom. Before the marriage took place, Mr. Bentley, the worthy man at whose house I was, found out Mr, melmotps connexions, and, after a strix inquiry respexing his circumstances and charaxer, found he was the man he represented himself to be. This strengthened my first resolution, and led me to hope that my marriage would meet with the approbation of my friends, and incline them to overlook my past indiscretion. We Spent our wedding day at Mr, Bentleys, and Set out the next morning; but though I Sound Mr. melmotps father lived in the Same county as my own friends, 
I did. not know, till we arrived in the neighbourhood, that I was going to the 
Hermitage; 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. ll 
Hermitage; a place I had heard my father Speak highly of, though I had never Seen the inside os it, or it’s venerable owner but once, and then at a great distance, So that I was entirely unknown to him on my arrival; and as I found my whole family were to be invited, on the occasion osour coming here, I concealed from both father and Son that I was So near the place of my birth, in order to make one general discovery respe£fing myself, and the history of my late unfortunate and fortunate adventures. I have married Without the consent of my dear parents, it is true, but Surely it will be acknowledged, that I could not have bestowed my heart more worthily than to him who So disinterestedly rescued me from the hands of a russian, by which means my honour, and perhaps my life, has been preserved; and it is but just for me to 
add. 
1'2z' THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY'. 
add, that the 'peculiar tenderness, and' unremitting affeffion, he has Snown to me Since my marriage, discover the irte — grity os his heart, and virtue os his principles; on which account I am bound to him by the strongest ties of gratitude, honour, and love.’* 
Here she finished her narrative and then running to my Sather and mother, who Sat together at the opposite side of the room, knelt at their feet, and, in a moving and expressive manner, begged their forgiveness, and blessing;. which, ymu may be certain, was instantly granted. We all embraced her with joy and love; and in a moment a more happy Set of' beings was never assembled together. My father was warra in his caresses of Mr.. Melmoth, and told him he was completely happy in having So worthy a son-in-law; 
that the 
FAVOURITES OF' feliclty. 1 
that he would give his wife the Same sor tunc he gave his other daughter; and should place him near his heart with the rest of his children.. The Hermit was transported beyond measure, and rejoiced that his Son had a<sied as became a man; of honour, a. circumstance, he Said, more, pleasing to him than any other considera* tion this world could shestow. 
The conversation now turned upon the villainous conduff of Frejio, who wa: execrated by every one;, and my Sathci said he would immediately make him a i public example., 
We now Sat down to a more elegant dinner than the Hermit usually gives, but he had launched into profusion oil; this occasion. We Spent the afternoon 
111 
184 the favourites of felicity 
in true festivity. Mr Melmoth is a most agreeable and entertaining companion. 
“A merrier man. 
Within the limit of becoming mirth, 
I never spent an hour’s talk withal. 
His eye begets occasion for his wit. 
For every object that the one doth catch, The other turns to a mirth moving jest;; his fair tongue (conceit’s expolitor) Delivers in liich apt and gracious words. That aged ears play truant at his tales j And younger hearings are quite ravished;; sweet and voluble is his discourse * 
received infinite plcasure on observing the fond and unceasing attention Selima paid to her hushand’s conversation and merriment. Her eyes were constantly fixed upon him; and, while her heart overflowed with delight, her Soul appeared dissolved in admiration. I never 
• Shahfpeare* 
3 
beheld 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 185 
beheld Such abundant and quick Sensibility as she possesses, and which Seems to arise from the transitions' of joy, love, and adoration. melmoies graceful per son, address, affability, cheerfulness, Sound understanding, and ready wit, must command attention, I confess; and none of his perfections are lost upon Selima, I affure you. She appears truly Sensible of her error, in listening to the Seductions of that villain Prefio\ and her happy escape from ruin, her fortunate connexion with Mr. Melmothy and the generous affection of her parents and friends, have all together awakened the powers of that good understanding, which, till lately, was obscured by the delusions of an erratic imagination. 
I shall not write to you again, till after my marriage, for you must fuppose, I 
have 
ls6 THE favourtte? OF FELICITY. 
have little time to Spare, my whole attention being engaged with that adorable Creature, who is to strow the path of my Suture lise with fiowers^ gladden my days with cheersuiness and complacency, and Sweeten my nights with that Supernal de -- light, which is the balm of bdng, and ultimate of seiieujt 
Be pleased to communicate the contents os this letter to Mr. and Mrs, pier polntj as Soon as you possibly can, that their uneasiness respeding Selima may be instantly removed:; and, iikewise, be So kind as to insorm them, that they will contribute much to my happiness, by joining us on my wedding day; and it is particularly wished by my father and mother, who are desirous os having their whole family together on the joysul occasion, Prevail oiti Mrs. Somerset to come 
with 
rut' favouritlis OF FELICITY. isj 
with them if you can; but as to yoursdf, I knov/ you cannot quit the capital at this season of the year, and theresore it would be a compliment meaning nothing;, were 1 to press you to it. 
1 remalfl, 
your’s, 
edmtfup psrcivaii.. 
L ET' 
l88 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
LETTER XXXIX 
Doctor Belcour to Mr. Somerset. 
Percivat cajiky Sept, 25, 1784. Dear Frank, 
The Vierpoint family, with your good lady, arrived here Safe on Thursday, and Mr. fercivavs marriage with Miss Lexicon was consummated yes terday. The wedding was held at the Castle, instead of Lexicon place, as was at first intended, and, all together, we were a jovial company, for even the Hermit left his cottage for the day, and joined with us in the general joy. It was a day of true felicity, I assure you *, 
and 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
and it would have delighted your heart to have Seen the happy satissaffion, and transport of mind, enjoyed by the amiable bride and bridegroom, and their fond, affectionate parents. And indeed, respeffing Miss Lexicon and Selima, it is a pleasing circumstance, that the midwife Time has Safely delivered them from the labour of miscarriage, and brought their pains and perils to a favourable and fortunate issue. The former of these young ladies condudled herself with the highest dignity; and the latter has displayed a generous heart, and a good understanding 
The abandoned behaviour of Captain Herberty and the villainous conduct of Prejio, would, if known, be a noble lesson to the young, the thoughilefs, and the inexperienced part of the female Sex, and guard them against precipitation in the 
affair? 
t90 the favourites of feltcity.. 
affairs of love. It would teach them the necessity of Scrupulous caution, the dangers of Seduffion, and the mi Series attendant upon open prostitution. We have just heard, that Herberfs extravagance and debaucheries have reduced him to beggary, and he is now languishing with the most loathsome disease, under confinement for debt. And Prejio, on the news of seutnd.s return and marriage, has quitted his lucrative situation, and fied from the country to avoid that pro secutio'n he So justly merits. Tyre lawless conduct; of the people, at the house of ill fame where he carried Sefima^ deserves the Severest punishment; but her ignorance of the town, and want of knowledge of their names, prevented Mr, Mdnmth Srom tra cing them out, and bringing them to justice. There is no doubt but the most atrocious proceedings 5 are 
THE FAVOURITES F FELICITY. i91 
are carried on in many of these houses about the metropolis; and it is the wish of humanity, that they were Subject to general and frequent inspeffion, and more immediately under the jurisdi^iioa of the public magistrate than they are.; for what can be more dreadful to the imagination, after innocence has Suffered contamination, and from chance, or circumstance, is driven to public prostitution, than the raiseries to which it is exposed, through the wanton tyranny and oppression of those miscreanrs, to whom it is forced to ssee for shelter, in order to jelieve ids distresses, and conceal its shame. “If, says a noble writer, those who pafs their days in plenty and security could visit for an hour the dismal receptacles to wshich the prostitute retires from her ncffurnal excursions, and see the wretches that lie crowded together, 
mad 
192 THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 
mad with intemperance, ghastly with famine, nauseous with filth, and noisome with disease; it would not be easy for any degree of abhorrence to harden them against compassion, or to repress the desire which they must immediately feel to rescuc Such numbers of human beings from a state So dreadful 
The Hermit proposes, that Mr. and Mrs. Melmoth shall reside with him, till a house can be purchased, or built for them in the neighbourhood, wishing to keep them near him while he lives; which his affeistionate Son willingly complies with. 
Sir Leonard means to retire to a little seat he has about three miles distant, and to present Mr. Perchal with that sine villa Lexicon place; So that Sir William will have two of his children near him, 
which 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. i93 
which must be a pleasing circumstance. The happy return of Selima has diffii.iatcd Lady Percivafs painful Solicitude, and restored her wonted ease and cheerfulness. The 'family are obliged to be 
in town in a Sew days, So that you will shortly have Mrs. Somerset home. As Soon as they go, I propose to return to belcour hall, having now been absent from it upwards of six months, I find no remission in my happiness with your Cousin Olivia; our enjoyments have not produced Satiety, having learned the art of heightening our present pleasures by the anticipation of future felicity, and of regulating the conduff of all our actions on those laudable principles, that encourage the hope of participating in that state, in which the Spirits os the Ju: ^: shall be made perfest.” 
vol III 
K 
Our 
194 the favourites of felicity. 
Our amiable relation, Sir William, has now lived to See his children brought up in the path of virtue, and happily dif posed in matrimonial connexion; considerations that must give his heart and mind the highest satissaffion. It is to be hoped they will continue virtuous, that they may enjoy the gratulations of their own hearts, and pass their length of days in tranquillity and honour, amidst the immense variety of nature, the vicishtudes of fortune, and the mighty heap of human calamity, which the greater part of those around them are doomed to experience. They have youth, health, beauty, and riches, and all their connexions' are independent of them, by enjoying the gifts of fortune as well as themselves. Thus I think I can venture to assert, that the families of Fercival, Somerset, Pier > point, Lexicon, Belcour, and Melmoth, 
may 
THE FAVOURITES OF FELICITY. 1^5 
may be truly styled. The Favourites OF Felicttv. 
I remain, as usud, 
most sincerely, 
yours, 
Charles Belcour, 
FINIS. 
The following favourite Novels are to be had of W. Cass, lamb’s Conduit Street, Holborn; and all the Book sellers in Town and Country. 
I. 
amilla; or the Correspondence of a deceased Friend, in 3 vols. 7s, 6d. 
sew’d. 
“Absent or dead, still let a friend be dear; 
“A Sigh the absent claim, the dead a tear.’ 
Pope. 
2. the 'virtuous Villagers; in a a Series of Letters, by John Potter, Author of the Curate of Coventry, c. cc. 2 vols. 5s. sew’d. 
To mend the heart, to raise the mind, our view, Ye modest fair, this book is writ for you. 
3. Laura and Augustus : an authentic Story, in a Series of Letters, by a Young Lady, 3 vols. 7s. 6d., few’d. 
-- -- “A whole.hoii:, a war of foes, 
“May Sooner be Subdued than love.” 
Phillips. 
4. The Errors of Nature; or the Flistory of Charles. Manley, in a Series of Letters, .by Mr. Walwyn, 3 vols. 7s. 6d. sew’d. 
U. 0^ 
Ubraf/ 
N.. 

■ A 
V) 




