FEMALE FRIENDSHIP:
OR THE 
INNOCENT SUFFERER. 
A 
MORAL NOVEL. 

VOLUME THE FIRST. 

"Virtue alone is happiness below,
And our best knowledge is, ourselves to know.”

DUBLIN:
Printed for J. Williams, J. Porter, 
and T. Walker. MDCCLXX. 


INTRODUCTION.
Mr. Pope’s maxim, that 
The proper study of mankind, is man,

BEING fully and generally admitted, it ne-
cessarily follows, that well drawn character-
istic pictures of life, though fabulous, are a com-
mendable and profitable branch of literary com-
position; as they prepare an attentive, intelligent 
reader for scenes of real action;and if the super-
structure be raised from a moral foundation;
without which, however beautiful the component 
parts, it must fall before the breath of ra-
tional criticism; then, while it delights the ima-
gination, it improves both the head and heart: 
a large majority, especially of the fair sex, have 
not time nor talents for the investigation of ab-
stract principles in moral and focial life; where-
fore a lighter kind of study is essential: and even 
the greatest proselytes of profound speculation, 
may unbend their minds, by perusal of a well 
pen’d novel, both with pleasure and advantage; 
several of this tendency might be pointed out, 
were they not already generally known and ac-
knowledged. It is true, the Spanish novellists 
still remain unrivalled, for delicacy of sentiment, 
and strength of character; but their pictures be-
ing, in general, romantic caricaturas; our ligh-
ter and fainter drafts have more original reality 
to recommend them; though it is to be feared, 

(iv)
that many authors, through necessity or avarice,
exercise their pens for gain; and though we 
have too many instances, of wretches ready to 
propagate vice, for pecuniary advantage; yet, to 
the honour of the present age, it may be said, that 
no licentious piece, beyond a half-penny ballad 
meets encouragement: wherefore the worst charge 
that can be brought against productions of this 
nature, at prefent being trifling; so that there is 
little danger of prejudice, should there even be 
small hopes of improvement to the mind.

Notwithstanding professed critics launch their 
mortal darts at every production that issues from 
the press, and generally attack the most helpless 
most unmercifully; the author of what follows,
hopes, as he does not lay in any peculiar claim 
to striking merit; as he professes himself a young 
inexperienced adventurer, warmly attached to 
moral rectitude, and more difpofed to be grave 
in the caisse of virtue, than ludicrous at her ex-
pence; he hopes to gain protection from the 
ladies, and indulgence from those who examine 
the piece with a more critical eye: possessed of 
this flattering idea, he submits himself to public 
candor, without multiplying prefatory apologies, 
further than to premife, that he has not adhered 
to a strict dramatic catastrophe, which, if a de-
ficiency, he hopes, among others, will be excused, as he previoufly confesses, that feme of his cha-
racters are introduced merely as foils to others, 
without any design of disposing them according to 
she rules of poetical justice.

FEMALE
FEMALE FRIENDSHIP:
O R T H E
INNOCENT SUFFERER.
CHAP. I.
Know then this Truth, (enough for Man to know) Virtue alone is Happiness below.
Pope’s Estay on Man.
.؟€XX$؟ IR Henry Summers was a man X ٠ X by nature formed Sensible, open,
' i؛¿ an٥compafll٠nate ،0 t١ie ١/،"٥:re٤٢es
A¿ of his fellow creatures, which he never looked on without pitying, nor was pity all he bestowed ; be too well knew the pain which that passion muss give a feeling mind (when unaccompanied by assistance) ever to refufe his, to merit in distress. By art his natural fenfe was refined into wifdom. and his own A 3	generosity
6 A MORAL NOVEL, generosity of Sentiment gave him a humane po-litenefs of behaviour which gained him univerfal refpect. By fortune he was blessed with an ample fufficiency to indulge every benevolent wish of his expanded mind : luxurious or whimsscal fuperfiuity never rendered him incapable of affif-ting unhoufed poverty. In short, he only regarded his riches as they gave him an opportunity of contributing to the fupport of deferving or necessitous objects.
While his character was refpected even by thofe who were not perfonally acquainted with him, his behaviour created admiration and affection in all who were. In friendship he was fin-cere, conssant in danger, and patient in adverssty which he more than once had felt. To theSe qualifications he had joined the excellent addrefs of living (which is most hard to do) without reproach. Yet, notwithstanding he was thus endowed with every virtue that can truly form the amiable,.generous, honest man ; he had, in common witsi all human kind, his particularities; but they were fitch as rather to be the objects of applaufe than cenfure : His praifes were too constant in the mouth of every one not to reach his own ear, and being well convinced of the Solidity oS his judgment, he expected a due deSerence to be paid thereto by all who had the least dependance on, or connexion with him; he had a pleasing dignity oS countenance, which rendered him at once the object oS esteem and reverence ؛
there
A MORAL NOVEL. 7 there was a little tincture of warmth and felf-fufficiency in his difposition, which made him rather impatient of controul: yet, after what I have faid of this gentleman, there requires no great fagacity to difcover, that what all allowed to be his virtues, far outweighed what fome chofe to call his faults.
Sir Harry, fo early as eighteen, had contracted an acquaintance with a young lady of fortune, which, in a short time, grew into the most disinterested love; and being a man of too much Sensibility ever to think of her on any other than honourable terms, he consist ted her father, who cruelly rejected his propofals, not from any dif-like to his perfon, family, or fortune, which were all unexceptionable, but on account of his youth ; partially imagining, that he could not be endowed with <٠ much Solidity, as to fix the volatile, wandering affections of So early a period of life, upon one object, however valuable; therefore considered his paffion but as a flight of inconsiderate youth, which, in a short time after the accomplishment oS his wishes, would naturally wear off: thus, through an over-refined degree of caution, the anxious father oppofed the only step which could infure his daughter’s happinefs. Thus it often happens in life, that by earnestly endeavouring to avoid one error, we inevitably fall into its opposite,	.
This
A 4
H A MORAL NOVEL.
This refufal, of courfe, put a stop to the frequent interviews with which the young couple had before found means to indulge themfelves ; yet, notwithstanding it deprived them of the few fweet minutes perfonal conferences afforded, they, lover-l؛ke, industrioussy found means to hear constantly from each other ; two of which letters I here prefent to my readers. The first, which is from Sir Harry, was wrote the day after he received the refufal from her father.
CHAP. II.
——--------Thither write, my love,
And with my eyes I’ll drink the words you fend, Tho’ Ink be made of gall.
Cymbeline.
Sir Harry Sommers to MiSs Amelia.
w
’HAT words, most dear Amelia, can expreSs my Seelings at this juncture; Why should I inSorm you oS what (I Sear) you must already have heard—the reception I yesterday met with Srom your Sather ? He ordered me to forget you. Oh I my Aimily, think what a perSon, who loves like me, must Seel at Such a fen-tence : but (thank heaven) I have still one gleam oS comfort to Support my drooping Spirits ؛ I cannot think you ever will be induced to join in Such
cruelty.
A MORAL NOVEL. 9 cruelty. In that fond hope alone I live. After the repeated assurances of regard I have received from my dearest .¿Emmy, I should be unworthy the fmallest glimmering of refpect, were I to fup-pofe that a Separation like this, can alter her generous, tender way oS thinking. Yet, though I am Sullv conScious oS your flattering Sentiments, allow me to Seel.—Your own delicate mind will do me the justice to Suggest, how far a thought oS lossng you must affect me : let me avoid it, lest I fink beneath a painSul weight oS apprehension.—Yet, can I be thus divided Srom you, and loSe the thought of what I should Seel from an eternal Separation ?—Forgive me, iS I cannot force it from my mind : admit my fears as a proof of my regard :—־but I wrong you to think you’ll look upon them in any other light than as، the unavoidable palpitation of a heart which loves-you to dissraction.—Alas! why did I ever experience the happy moments we’ve fpent together., since they now only ferve to make my mifery the more Severe ?—May you not feel this paftin، as I do !—Whatever is my lot, may you for ever tasse felicity !-—I once indeed flattered myfelf, that I should have been in forne meafure conducive thereto; that by my attention to your: wants, and constant assiduity to pleafe, 1׳ should have made myfelf worthy of the heart which I hoped would have given me your hand, and thereby rendered your happiness complete.—Oh ! what a delightful situation, when we have the pleasing consideration, that every action of our lives adds to
10 A MORAL NOVEL, the felicity of thofe we love !—From this thought there arifesan unwearied reciprocal desire to pleafe, which turns even the common occurrences of life, into proofs of a sincere and permanent regard. How much more delight do we then feel, than thofe whpfe breasts are not fufceptible of fo delicate a refinement ? This, my iEmily is a situation I once hoped to have reached ؛ but alas! why do I still think thereof, since it can now afford but a momentary Satisfaction, and only Serve to make me return to the proSpect before me with more reluctant regret—a profpect that I cannot think or look on without shuddering ?— Forgive me Sor faying that under theSe circumstances ; you will, by still alluring me oS your regard, add new life to
The afflicted
H. SUMMERS.
To Sir Harry Summers S I R,
According to a maxim of the kindest mother, [for Such I was once bleffed with] acknowledging a generous, disinterested paffion for a de-ferving object, is most minutely consistent with delicate modesty ; where 1 shall make no Scruple of conSeffing, that your letter has raiSed very contrary Seelings. Your professions of love are flattering, but your doubts rather otherwise. The concessions ycur tender felicitations drew
Srom
A MORAL NOVEL. it from me before our prefent disagreeable Separation I shall ever adhere to, even though a father’s unreasonable difpleafure should be the confe-quence. Let this undifguifed effusion of an artless؛ heart quiet thofe uneafy fenfations which too plainly appear in your letter. Once more rest assured of sincerity on my side, as a return for your obliging wishes and inclinations to promote and Secure my happinefs. I could dwell much longer on the pleasing theme of mutual regard and sincerity, but that a parent’s harsh commands intrude, and hurry me to a conclusion, with this assurance, that I am, with inviolable attachment, &c. &c.
.¿EMILIA.
CHAP. III..
Soft Pity is the fairest flow’r	-
Heaven e’er planted in the mind ;
The queen of virtues, whoSe Soft pow’r ٠ Gan e’en to Godhead raiSe mankind.
Opera of Tom Jones..
MANY more letters passed between Sir Harry and his ,Emily, but as most of them only contained the fame assurances of regard in other words, and as love letters, no more than love-Scenes, are amusing to any buf she parties ١
T2 A MORAL NOVEL, ties concerned, I shall riot trouble my readers with any more than thefe two, which may ferve as a fpecimen of the stile and contents of all the others. Let it Suffice to Say, that Sir Harry, having made another application to her Sather, and having received the Same refuSalj our lovers determined to make a stolen match ; which being effected, Sir Harry would have thrown himfelf at his wife’s father’s feet, but the old gentleman abfolutely refufed to fee either of them, and taking this imprudent step too nearly to heart, it in a short time finished his days ; nor could he ever be prevailed upon to fee his daughter, but obstinately carried his refentment to the grave, as a proof of which, he bequeathed all he was worth to a distant relation of his wife’s. This accident happening when Lady Summers was pregnant, a mifcarriage was the confequence, followed by a violent fever, which in a few days put an end to her life : and thus was Sir Harry left a widower at the age of twenty-two, as a mourning monument of the fatal effects oS filial diSobedience.
So quick and So impreffinga Series of misfortunes cast a gloom upon his countenance, which it v׳as not in the power of time to remove, any more than the fettled refolution he made, on his wife’s death, of neverentering again into that state, wherein he had been So unlucky in his first attempt. He therefore lived, as I before faid, the object of every one’s admiration and esteem,
striving
A MORAL NOVEL. 13 striving to do all the good in his power. He partook of all the pleafures of life, without running into any of the abfurdities ; and although he was more delighted with the amufements which he met with at his feat in Yorkshire, as being the more rational, yet when in town, as he constantly was half the year, he frequented every public place of diversion, to avoid the character of mifanthrope, which, from his fettled melancholy, Some few officious people had chofe to honour him with. He was about the age of forty, when the following affair happened.
Early one morning in February, when on his return from Carliste-honfe, he was furprized by feeing a croud of watchmen round his door, occasioned, as he difcovered on enquiry, by a bafket just then picked up, which, to his great astonishment, was found to contain a female child, of (Seemingly) about a month old. On his ؛nearer approach, he obServed a paper pinned to its breast, on which were wrote, in a neat Italian hand, theSe words:
“ Stranger, whofoe'er thou art, that find'fl this lucklefs babe, Jhut not your ears again/7 the tender cries of youthful innocence, but pity, eherifh, and receive her ; in return for which Jhe will far o'er pay your generous care by her׳ endearing prattled’
This
i4 A MORAL NOVEL.
This was fo forcible an application to the humanity of Sir Harry, (than whom no man had a greater share) that he could not withstand the natural impulfe of his heart, but ordered the child to be conveyed into his houfe, and to have all immediate care taken of it.—Thus to a heart fo fufceptible of tendernefs, thefe few words pleaded the caufe of this helplefs infant, in full as effectual a manner, and perhaps with more fuccefs, than whole volumes on the fubject, from the ablest hands, could have done.
So singular an adventure employed Sir Harry’s thoughts great part of that time which he would otherwife have appropriated to rest ; but this circumstance, the more he considered it, the more it bewildered his ideas : in short, it was an endlefs maze of perplexities. He could not believe thofe lines to be the produce of any common hand, either from the stile or writing, nor did he know any one on whom to six his fufpici-ons : however, after fome hesitation, he yielded fully to the humane dictates of hi& heart, by reiolving to furnish the child with every necessary, and, as she turned out, to six her in the world. This refolution afforded him the tacit: praife of what he had determined ; nor was he a little strengthened in his design by the affecting Smiles which Sat upon the infant’s countenance. when he went to enquire aSter it, and give orders Sor her nurSery. He was just Sat down to breakfast, when Mr. Modish entered
A MORAL NOVEL, 15
the room, to inquire after the company he had feen at Carliste-houfe the preceding evening.
CHAP. IV.
R. Modish was a young gentleman of fortune, by nature endowed with a good understanding, but unhappily much over-run with the weed of inattention. He was a distant relation of Sir Harry’s, who having a real regard for him, with pain obferved the ridiculous circumstances of his behaviour, which he always, like a true friend, endeavoured to amend by admonishment, wherever he faw occasion. Sir Harry’s mind was fo full of the last night’s adventure, that the first compliments were fcarce pasted, when he told the whole affair to Modish, who having heard bim to the end with great attention, taking bis hand with a triumphant laugh, replied:—״ Sir Harry, I give you joy. ’Egad, “ I’m glad to. fee any honest fellow, who has “ fpirit enough to acknowledge his gallantry.—· ״ I really began to fear, we were all reverting to “ the antideluvian state, when an amour was ״ looked upon as a crime. You know, I in par-״ ticular was never fond of tbofe primaeval no-״ irons, and always thought you rather too “much addicted to them.—Well! and pray— “ Now, what happy girl has had the honour of “ converting you to my way of thinking ?— ،٠ What—it is a fecret, I fuppofe.—She b:d you “ not kifs and tell, ha ؛ Sir Harry ?—,Gad ! 1'
״ began
!6 A MORAL NOVEL.
״ began to give you up for an obstinate heretic, “ in whom it was impoffible to work a reforma-“ tion. Well—I fuppofe it is to be fent to nurfe “ in the country to a tenant’s wife, who was for-“ merly your houfe-keeper; and when he ؛s a“ bout twelve years old, brought to town as the ״ fon of a poor clergyman, for whom you have ٠* a great regard; then a few years fchooling, ،، and a cornetcy in the guards, finishes the whole “ affair.—׳Weil, upon my foul! you are a hap. ״ py fellow, who have no check upon your pleasures from a deficiency in your purfe.”-
This gentleman’s volubility of tongue was fo great, that Sir Harry was obliged to let him run on thus far, before he could convince him of his mistake with regard to the fex of the child, and which he had before forgot to inform him ef; but when he heard it was a girl, after near a minute’s paufe, he cried, “ A girl!—that’s un-״ lucky : however, we must make the best of a “ bad bargain.—Why, she must, of courfe, be “ nurfed in the country ; and, let me fee—-oh ! ״ brine: her to London as your ward, the only ״ daughter of a particular friend who died in ״ in the West Indies :—ay, ay. that will do: ״ —and then a couple of thoufand pounds, or “ fo, may make her the wife of Some honest ci* ״ tizen, who has more money than wit.”——In vain did he protest the child was not his own; Modish could not believe, that any man would thus adopt a perfect stranger to him : however, on Sir Harry’s firm protestations, he began
to
A MORAL NOVEL. 1؟ to have rather a different opinion:—-٠٠ Well, “ (fays he) if the child is not your’s, I think you “ did wrong to take any notice.of her.—For my ٠“ own part, it is a fettled rule with me, to pro-״ vide for no man’s offspring but my own, and “ not even them at all times.”---“ For shame, “ for shame ! (cried Sir Harry, not a little net-،٠ tied at his relation’s dissolute fentiments) I am ״ forry to fee a man, to whom nature has been ״ bountiful both in understanding and fortune, “ make fo bad an ufe of either, as to he direct. ٠٠ ed, in the performance of the moral duties of “ life, by that fashionable folly, that plea, ״ for the commiffion of every crime, Cujlom. “ Charles, you know I’m your friend, and ’tis my ״ friendship tells you, that however you may “ have been taught to believe otherwise by the “ company you have kept, yet be assured, upon “ the word of a man who has Seen and knows “ the world, that chastity is as noble a qualisica-“ tion in our Sex as in the Semale, though, to “ our shame be it Spoken, in the preSent age it “ Seems totally excluded Srom the catalogue of “ male virtues: nor indeed can I hardly blame “ our youths for a breach thereof, not only be“ caufe they have never been taught to consider ٠* it in the light of a crime, but becaufe they “ have no incitement thereto from the only part ״ of the creation they naturally expect it from, ״ I mean, that clafs of females distinguished by ״ the appellation of modest women; a tender ■ ( union with whom, in fome part pr other of
“ our
8؛ AMORAL NOVEL.
״ our lives, we all esteem as our neflus ultra; ״ and want of chastity being no impediment to ״ fiich an alliance, we confequently are not fo “ Solicitous about poffeffing this virtue as we o-״ therwife should be: for let a man commit e. ״ very folly, every vice, which youth, intem-״ perance, or his impassioned inclinations prompt ״ him to, and he will never feel the confequen-״ ces from thofe who, by the coolness of their ״ behaviour, ought to exprefs their dissike of “ fuch proceedings. On the contrary, amours ״ with variety of women give a man an air of “ greater confequence, and more probability of ״ fuccefs with the rest of the fex. Can any “ thing be a stronger proof of the truth of this “ astertion, than that proverbial expression which ״ we So constantly hear come Srom the mouths “ oS females oS every rank, and of the truth of ״ which they Seem all to be fo well convinced, ״ viz. That a reformed rake makes the best “ hushand. In short, young gentleman, what-“ ever fashion or depraved appetites may dictate, ״ Spirit with prudence, and love with virtuous ״ constancy, are the sheet anchors of moral and ״ focial happinefs.”——— Bravo ! (cried Mo-״ dish, after a short silence) pray, proceed:— “ upon my word, Sir Harry, you have ha“ rangued with the gravity of a bishop: fo you “ mean, by this fine, grave, Sentimental orati-״ tion, to make me believe, that this girl is not ״ your own. But pray, my dear Summers, “ joking apart, do you really look upon keep“ mg
A MORAL NOVEL. 19
״ ing a mistrefs in the light of a crime ?”--
״ Sir,” (faid Sir Harry, frowning, much amazed at the question, after what he had just been Saying) ״ I am obliged to go out at preSent, on “ fome particular busineSs; if you will Savour ״ me with your company to dinner, by Sour, at ״ the Thatch’d HouSe, I may perhaps tell you ״ Some more oS my thoughts on this Subject.” ——“ Agreed, (Said he) though, upon my Soul! ״ I am engaged to meet Lord, Squander, Billy “ Rattle, and Some others, to dinner, at the ״ ShakeSpeare, Srom thence to proceed, in bat“ tie array, to affist at the damnation of a new ״ comedy; but you are Such a holy witch, (as “ the poet Says) that you enchant Society to you, ״ and I have really now kept your company fo “ long, that I begin to find more Solid pleaSure ״ in hearing your rational diScourSe, than in the ״ noiSy mirth oS my bottle companions : I will ״ therefore wait upon you, though, by So doing, “ I shall diSobhge Some of the honest fellows
״ (except yourSelf) in the umverSe.”-“ For
״ which (replied Sir Harry) I shall not be Sorry. ״ But pray, have you read this new play, which ״ you thus intended to have strangled in the
״ birth?”----“ Not I, upon my Soul! (Said
״ he.) I don't even know the author.”—.—. “ And how could you, (rejoined his Sriend) be “ cruel enough, for the Sake of a few minutes ״ diversion, perhaps to ruin a man, whoSe only “ proSpects may depend on the SucceSs oS this ״ night’s piece; even before you can know, wbe-
“ ther
20 A MORAL NOVEL.
״ ther it is deferring oS your cenSure or ap-٠٠ plauSe ?”-■	—■׳“ Nay, that (replied Modish)
“ is considering it in too Serious a light. I never ״ troubled my head about its merit; but it ״ would be making a riot, which is my delight. “ But adieu till Sour.”—And thus they parted ; Sir Harry, to go about the busineSs he had mentioned, and Modish, to take his uSual turn in the Mall; aSter which, he met his Sriend, according to appointment, and had the pleaSure of hearing his Sarther thoughts 'on the Subject they had that morning siarted ; but as the particulars of their conversation never came to my knowledge, and were, 1 preSume. similar to thoSe already mentioned, let it Suffice to Say, that Sir Harry, in conSequence oS the conversation, was more confirmed in the principles oS humanity and protection to his ward or rather adopted daughter. He went home, his mind replete with thoSe pleasing SenSations, oS which no one can be a competent judge, whoSe Soul is not equally expanded, equally Sufceptible of delicate ideas.
CHAP.
A MORAL NOVEL. 2،
CHAP. V.
—---------She is young, wife, fair ؛
In thefe to Nature she’s immediate heir;
And thefe breed honour. That is honour’s fcorn. Which challenges itfelf, as honours born,
And is not like the Sire. Honours best thrive, When rather from our acts we them derive,
Than our forefathers.
All’s well that ends well.
THE confequence of the converfation which Sir Harry had with Modish, as related in the last chapter, was an immediate application of his time to the preparation of every thing which might conduce to the eafe and happiness of his adopted child, whom he now determined to educate in London, that he might not feem to pay any attention to the many ill-natured insin-nuations which he constantly heard, and still expected to hear, about fo extraordinary an affair, from the major part of the world. However٠ equally regardlefs of their cenfure or their pra؛fe٠ he still nobly perfevered in the execution' of his first design, with regard to the education of that child, whom (in memory of his once dear partner) he had christened by the name of AEimily, and whofe benignant fmiles, whenever ؛he approached, he considered as fo many grateful returns for his humanity, in the prefervation of her life.
As
22 A MORAL NOVEL.
As Soon as her tender mind was adjudged capable of retaining any impressions, he prepared masters to instruct her in every thing Suit¡ng her age and Sex, which she took fast as 'twas miniSter’d; and he had Soon the Satisfaction of hearing her, in unaffected strains, expreSs her thanks for the many favours he daily bestowed on her, and which never faiاed to put him in mind of thoSe remarkabاe words, which the reader may remember were found upon her breast. He was in Some doubt whether to acquaint her with this circumstances	but judging that
a discovery of that nature might, from the gene., rosity and laudable pride of her mind, when she considered herSelf as an object of charity, occasion a reServe in her behaviour, which would deprive him of the pleaSure of her open and ingenuous conversation, he choSe, rather than run this hazard, to impoSe upon her by an information that she was his niece; and as he always made a distinction between a falsity, contrived with a premeditated design to do an injury, and one with an innocent intention, he had on this occasion no other feelings, than thoSe which conscious virtue always experiences on the performance of any good action. However, that she might not always remain a stranger to what So nearly concerned her, he wrore an account thereofj which, with the paper above-mentioned, being incloSed in his will, were committed into the hands of his attorney.
Æmily
AMOR A L NOVEL. 23 AEmily was now endowed with a perSon far from contemptible; but having aff’airs of much more conSequence to take notice of, I shall no، detain my readers with a minute account of thoSe qualifications which can reflect no honour on her nobler parts, being qualifications, (if they deServe that name) which every woman is equally liable to posseSs in as eminent a degree as herSelf ; but to her honour be it Spoken, that, added to agreeable external endowments, she had a mind replete with every amiable virtue.
Sir Harry, now considering her in every reSpect as his niece, accompanied her to all places of public entertainment; but she was far too Sensible, to receive any Solid Satisfaction from the enjoyment of any of the preSent modish diversions, except the Theatre, which she considered as not only proper for refining our Sentiments and ideas, but as the most luxurious treat the human understanding is capable of enjoying. No wonder then, that she was an almost constant attendant there, especially when performances of an edifying cast were exhibited.
The residence of her unc١e (that being the light in which she now considered Sir Harry) in Yorkshire, during the Summer SeaSon, to which place she always accompanied him, gave her a full opportunity of purSuing her' favourite amuSements, reading and walking; in the lattef ٠f
which
24 a MORAL NOVEL, which she found an additional pleafure, being generally accompanied by a neighbouring young lady, for whom she had the sincerest affection that a similarity of fentirhent could promote j nor was her generous friendship placed on an undeferving object; she had the happinefs of having if returned with additional ardor. To this young lady, who was the daughter of Sir Thomas Hartry, .،؛Emily opened her whole heart, on every occasion, with all the ingenuity of disinterested regard. She had just attained her twentieth year, when an affair, which the reader will foon become acquainted with! gave rife to the following letters from /Emily to her friend.
CHAP. VI.
The fupremest blifs in life.
Is the kind> the virtuous Wife :
Love’s a fpark of heav’nly flamej Lent to warm the human frame.
Air in the Opera of Tom Jones. jEmhv to Maria.
Albermarle Street.
NO T HIN G but a thorough conviction of my dear friend’s good-nature, and too great knowledge of the mutability of our fex,
to
A MORAL NOV EL. 25 tt> rally me upon my fudden change, could have induced me to trouble her with this letter.—Oh !
. my Maria! must I confefs to you, that with all my boasted indifference, I at length am caught ? at least I think fo; and fo will you, when I acknowledge, that I am afraid to aik my heart the question,—·However fecure of your friendly counfel in this untried fcene, I will venture to communicate the circumstances as they happened.
The appearance of Garrick in tragedy, forrte time ago, induced my uncle at my request, to take places for that evening ; and although he was indifpofed all the morning with a violent head-ach, in fpite of my remonstrances insisted on performing his promife, by attending me to the play in the evening ; fo far does this good man, in every thing, prefer my happinefs to his own eafe. As it Was a crouded night, we agreed not to stay the farce, and ordered the carriage accordingly. We had not been long feated in the box, before Mifs Martin, with whom I have a flight acquaintance, feated her-felf behind us, being attended by her brother, a young gentleman of fmall private fortune, who has this winter been called to the bar, where he promifes to make a figure ٠. hut although no one applies more clofely to his profession, when out of it, he is quite the gentleman, which character very few know, how fo well to unite with the man of bussnefs. Finding I was no strang-Vol. I.	B	er
26 A MORAL NOVEL.
er to his sister, from his first entrance, he directed his converfation particularly to me ; but being the only woman in company, except her, (and sisters, you know, are nobody) I only thought it what every man would have done in the fame cafe, and therefore, at that time, considered it in no other light than as common civility. Our difcourfe naturally turning upon the exhibition before us, the justice of his remarks added to the apparent diffidence with which they were uttered, gave me as high an opinion of his judgment as I before had of his addrefs and perfonal behaviour. Added to thefe, he is furnished with a mind fufceptible of the most delicate feelings ; for, would you think it. my dear ? he was even unfashionable enough to weep at the imaginary reprefentation of dif-trefs : as if ashamed of his weaknefs, he for fome time endeavoured to conceal the emotions of his foul ; but in vain .٠ nature got the better of art, and shewed the unaffected goodnefs of his heart in its true colours. I do not know whither it was from Sympathy, but I never was more affected at a tragedy in my life : he perceived it, and I had the fatisfaction of being complimented by him on the tendernefs of my paffions. Surely this man knows my very thoughts, for he did not once feem to pay the least attention to my perfon : if he has any design upon my affections, this ؛s his only way. Your Emmy would hold that man unworthy a place in her heart, who could be captivated by her
perfon
A MORAL NOVEL. 27 perfon only; fuch love can have no stability: every day will shew new beauties to his eyes, each of whom will blof the remembrance of the former from his heart ؛ and thus, admiring all, he really regards none. But a man, who prefers us for lbme fuperior excellence of mind, will, when in possession of our perfons, have daily opportunities of feeing the improvement of the former ; and thus, with love and reafon both combined, we fpread a toil too dear for him to break. How cautious, then, how very cautious. should we bej not to fix our affections on a man, who probably may abufe the confidence we place in him. When the indissoluable knot is tied, we are no longer preferved under the fostering wing of an indulgent parent; friends and relati-onsj all give up the joint care they have had of our happinefsj and center it alone in the will of a hushand : to him we must on all occafions fly for affistancej which if he refufesj we indeed are miferable.
And yet, my Maria, what hazard, what rifque do we not run, in the choice of that man, who is to preside over every future action of our lives ? for there are a fort of men, who think women made but for their pleafure, as a domef-tic convenience, to rife at their fmiles, or sink at their rebuke ; and then, after fuch behaviour, are amazed to find the delights of matrimony do not anfwer the expectations they have been taught to conceive thereof, and begin to treat B 2	every
28 A MORAL NOVEL, every idea of connubial love as merely chimerical, no where existing but in the luxuriant fancy of youth, ingenuous to create imaginary pleafures ; thus ridiculing the height of human felicity, only becaufe it is a refinement of which their coarfer ideas are not fufceptible. From fuch, kind heaven defend my friend and me!
Although I am not guided by a blind mistaken partiality for my own fex, yet I acknowledge myfelf to have fo good an opinion of the generality thereof, as to venture to fay, that if their hushands would treat them with a tendernefs becoming the delicacy of their connexion, and not convert the indulgence of an obliging companion, into the rigid commands of an austere master, or the cold contempt of negligent indifference, they would find in their wives all their fond hearts could wish, obedient helpmates, faithful friends, and agreeable companions.
Do not, from what I have above Said, imagine that I am mad enough to think there is nothing required of us in this arduous state ; fo far from it, I am convinced that, were we to fpend our whole lives in the confideration of what is proper to be done, there would still be fomething wanting in our conduct, to fupply every duty incumbent on a good wife; and this very circumstance Seems defigned by providence, to augment our felicity ; for if there were no faults, we should lofe all that heart-felt Satisfaction arifing from a reciprocal forgivement thereof. But above all let
A MORAL NOVEL. 29
us remember, that we should retain the Lover after we become the Wife, and not, when we commence tbe one, entirely divest ourSelves of the other; for if we do, how wide ,will be the difference !—where that tender ioftnefs?—where that amiable, engaging compliance, we made ufe of to appear agreeable before marriage ? and as we did it then only perhaps to Satisfy a girlish vanity, how much more studiously aught we to ufe our most careful assiduity to pleafe, when all our domestic happinefs depends on the firm pof. Seffion of our hushand’s affections. Let us therefore, by our wishes, strive to intercept his will: ٠nd, according to the maxim in the Song,
״ While each with tender passion burns,
“ AScend the throne of rule by turns ;
“ And place (to love, to virtue just)
“ Security in mutual trust.”
The Padlock. But my zeal for the happinefs of the rest of my Sex, has almost made me forget to proceed in my story.
At the conclusion of the play, my uncle went out to enquire after the carriage, promising to return immediately; but after having waited Some time, you may imagine how amazed I was to See nothing of him, nor could I help expressing my astonishment thereat to Mifs Martin, who, 2؛ well a؛ her brother, strove with all the tender B 3	concern
3٥ A MORAL NOVEL, concern they could to quiet my fears ; but in vain. During the whole time of the entertainment, I was agitated with the most dreadful apprehensions, infomuch that the curtain had drop، Some time before I discovered it.----In this dil-
emma, Mr. Martin insisted on Setting me down, which, in Such a situation, I could not refuSe ; he therefore handed me into the passage, where the croud was too great for us to proceed, and his eagernefs to extricate us from this difficulty led him fo far, that, by Some accident, a chairman, in shifting one of his poles, let it fall upon his head, from whence the blood immediately gushed in a great quantity. You may more easily imagine, than I can defcribe, the consternation this threw both his sister and me into, our fears interpreting the danger to be greater than it really was, which, he assured us, was very trifling, and notwithstanding our most earnest entreaties, could not be prevailed on to accept of any assistance till he got home; but turning to his sister, desired she would lend him her handkerchief, fomebody in the croud having been civil enough to borrow his; but I being the quicker of the two, (and, I am afraid, almost as much concerned for his fafety) before she could find her’s, had offered him mine, which he politely accepted; and having bound it round his head, with fome difficulty feated us in the coach.
On our arrival at Albemarle-street, I enquired after my uncle, and had the fatisfaction of
hearing
A MORAL NOVEL. 31 hearing that he had been taken ill, on the fudden change from fo intenSe heat to cold ; but that, to my heart-felt eafe, he was again recovered, and had arrived just before me.· On hearing this, Mr. Martin begged leave to enquire aster his health, the next day ; which I could not refuSe, but desired that he would not, out oS com-plaifance to enquire after the fafety of others, endanger his own, by coming out too Soon ; and intreated he would let me know how be did in the morning ; which having promiSed they took their leaves, ar.d left me at liberty to visit my uncle, who, I found, had no remains of his disorder but a violent head-ach.	'
Mercy on me ! to what an unconScionable length have I extended this Subject ! but we are apt to dwell on pleasing themes, without considering the leiSure or patience of a correspondent. However I think it is now high time for me to conclude, with an assurance of your Soon hearing from me again ; and that however I may be employed in the delightful tafk of duty and of love, there will always be room left for my Maria, in the heart of her sincerest friend,
AEMiLY Summer؟.
CHAP.
B
32 A MORAL NOVEL. CHAP. VII.
To be obliged to compound with my duty ! asham’d to look my uncle in the face ! to blush at his confidence, and be humbled by his k؛nd-nefs ! to feel the irkfomenefs of receiving praife, which I am confcious I do not merit! What a state for an ingenuous mind !
The School for Rakes. .Emily to Maria.
Albemarle Street.
Agreeable to my promise, i again
take up my pen, to proceed in what your vivacity will call a romantic adventure. After parting with Mr. Martin, I went to bed, but without inclination to sleep. The compofure I had always hitherto felt, on repairing to rest, was gone, and in its room had left ten thoufand doubts and fears.—According to my custom, upon a strict examination into my actions of the day, I found in my heart fenfations which I dared not give way to, nor could totally fupprefs: in short, I found my happinefs depended on the actions of a man, who as yet had never, and (what was worfe) who perhaps never intended to Speak to me, on any other footing than that of a common acquaintance. Shall I confefs to you, that this thought affected me fo far as to hinder me
from
A MORAL NOVEL. 3y from taking my natural rest ? I therefore rofe in the morning, pale and unrefreihed, my ufual Sprightlinefs Supplanted by a melancholy dejection, almost too much for me to bear. My uncle immediately percived it, and, with a paternal kindnefs, tenderly enquired the caufe. To ac-knbwledge the real one was impossible : the fictitious confession of having been troubled with the tooth-ach all night, delivered me from that confusion which his question had thrown me into ; but you may imagine that I did not feel much easier, when, after a moment’s recollection, my confcience dictated to me, to what the entertainment of an imprudent passion had reduced your friend ; the wilful deception of a man So kind, So generous, that hitherto he had always strove to intercept my wishes, that I might never know what it was to ash a favour.—Oh ! my Maria !—to what does this love Subject us! how far does it debafe the generosity of our minds beneath its glorious Sphere !—At our births, by nature we are open, ingenuous, and sincere ; our youthful hearts can entertain no thought, no wish, which we desire to exclude the breast of any one acquaintance.
1 was meditating on the fallacious influence of unauthorized concealed love, when, according to my expectation, the Servant announced Mr. Martin’s approach. This Sound at once rouSed me from my reveries, and gave me Spirits to receive him in as difengaged a man-B 5	ne؟
34 A MORAL NOVEL.
ner as the nature of our acquaintance would admit of. I was Sorry to obServe, that his drefs (considering the time of day) was studiously elegant. I am afraid he has either too much of the coxcomb in him, or a worfe opinion of my understanding than I could wish ; as his appearance Seemed to indicate, that he thinks me capable of receiving an impression from his exterior parts. From your thorough knowledge of my heart, you best can tell how much he is mistaken : and here, methinks, you will call me a whimsical girl, for troubling my head So much about a man, whom as yet I had never Seen but once.—Why, that indeed is very true ; but in that once, his eyes as plainly Spoke the language of his foul, as if he had told me that he loved ; for, in his whole behaviour, there was a delicate attention to my every word, which was more perfuasive eloquence than any he could ufe.
Some few compliments had passed between us, when my uncle entered the room, to whom I introduced Mr. Martin, as the gentleman to whom I was fo much obliged Sor his assistance the preceding evening. With his ufual politeneSs, he made him many acknowledgments for his behaviour, and, in a short time, infensibly fell into a conversation, which Seemed to promiie an intimacy ; nor was I mistaken in my conjectures; a general invitation to Albemarle-street was the confequenee, at which,. I wiJl.confeSs, I was not
a little
A MORAL NOVEL. 35
a little pleafed ; and, in order to strengthen this growing connexion, I Sent by him a message to his sister, intimating that I should be proud of a stricter acquaintance with her: after which he took his leave, not without first having made % very significant bow to me ؛—at least my vanity construed it as fuch.
You may imagine he did not neglect the invitation he had received : few days passed in which we did not fee him ; and my uncle in a short time conceived fo cordial a fondnefs for|him, that he Scarcely ever Seemed to have enough of his company; he was one in all Our parties at home, and attended us to every public place ; and though he did not pay me the common Compliments which most of his Sex ufe to our’s, still there was. a certain delicacy in every word, which too plainly assured me, that he regarded me with other eyes than thoSe of a mere acquaintance ؛ and I will acknowledge, that I daily expected a declaration of his passion, nay, that I even wish’d it, though I was not without my fears, lest my uncle,, on account of the fmallnefs of his fortune, should oppofe his inclinations, and thereby deprive me of his company, which I now enjoyed with unlimited pleafure.—Oh ! my Maria!— what did-1 not Suffer from this apprehenfion !٠٠٠٠ and. as he grew every day more particular, every time I Saw him increafed my uneasiness, till at length, what I fo long expected, arrived : but I sun Summoned, to my toilet, and therefore must
make
36 A MORAL NOVEL, make this the fubject of another letter. Adieu ! —on whomever I may bestow my affections, you still shall have your share in the heart of Your’s, most sincerely,
.AEMII.Y Summers.
CHAP. VIII.
Conceit, more rich in matter than in words, Brags of his Substance, not of ornament;
They are but beggars that can count their worth: But my true love is grown to fuch exceSs,
I cannot Sum up one halS of my wealth.
Romeo and Juliet. AEMiLY to Maria.
Albemarle Street.
HEN once affection is rooted in the breast, hard is the tafk to conceal the movements of our hearts from the dear object. I thus (my amiable friend) begin with a Sentiment, becaufe I think the Sequel of my story will pretty clearly exemplify it: I will therefore now refume the thread of my difcourfe, and endeavour to be a little more consistent than in my last ؛ but a؟ I was at that time in an unufual
flutter
A MORAL NOVEL. 37 flutter of Spirits, I am Sure you will pardon me.
The morning preceding to my writing it, I was lolling negligently on a Settee, perusing your letter, when Mr. Martin, entering the room Suddenly, unheard and unexpected, threw me into Some little confusion, and in my hurry I dropt your epistle on the floor, which, if you remember, was directed by your father: he immediately picked it up, and perceived the fuper-fcription to be a man’s hand ; after a short Silence, during which various passions by turns appeared in his face, “ How happy, Madam, (faid he) “ must that gentleman be, who can fo far have ״ acquired your esteem, as to be permitted to “correspond with you!”—Having So Said, he held it in his hand, as if waiting for an anfwer ; but as I perceived a taint of jealoufy in his words and mode of expression, I endeavoured to evade the circumstance, by enquiring when I might hope to congratulate him upon a perfect recovery from the accident he met at the theatre, which still clouded his countenance with a patch ? Seeing through my artifice, he anfwered as follows: “ You Seem, MiSs Summers, to be extremely ״ cautions of faying any thing Surther on the “ letter ؛”—and, with a kind oS forced irony, added, ״ I am Sure MiSs Summers’s principles “ would never Suffer her to hold a correSpon-״ dence with any one oS whom she need be ״ ashamed.”—Notwithstanding the Satisfaction
38 A MORAL NOVEL.
I at that moment felt, for having awakened th* refentment of that love I wished to cultivate, to fupport the farce, I could not avoid replying, with an air of negligence, “ I do not think my-« Self obliged to confult all my acquaintances on ٠، the choice of my correspondents; and, pro-٠، v'ided I have none with whom my uncle is dif-٠، pleafed, I do not fee that any other perSon has ״ any concern in the affair.”؛—Poor Soul ! how engagingly Simple he looked !—he hung his head, and, with a timid hesitating inferiority, Said, ،٠ To be fuse, Madam—as you fay—I have no ٠، right—I once, indeed, (added he with a sigh) ٠٠ flattered myfelf—but, fool that I was,—what ٠٠ reafon had I to. expect——” (then with a low bow continued) “ but as I acknowledge my tranf-٠، gression, and sincerely beg your pardon, I hope “ MiSs Summers will for once excuSe So imperti-،، nent a curiosity ; eSpecially as in palliation ٠، thereof, I can with· truth assure her, that I
٠٠ had fome reafon for my Seeming enquiry.”׳-
٠■، Well, (Said I) since you confefs your fault, I. “ will now convince you, that your fufpicions « were groundlefs ;—but obServe—I do this to “ justify myfelf, not to Satisfy you.”■—So Saying, I produced the letter, and relating to him the real truth, shewed him your name at the bottom; at the sight of which, his countenance immediately brightened׳ up ; and I will own to you, that I felt an unfpeakable pleafure, when I Saw him, under a pretence of a clofer examination of the direction, pr-efs my name to his lips with the
greatest
A M O R A L N O V E L. 39 greatest eagernefs; after which he returned me the letter, with as much compofure as if he was convinced I had not taken notice of his last action.
The converfation now dropp’d; but this being far from my intention (I am afraid out of a Secret desire of urging him to a declaration), immediately took an opportunity of faying, “ I think “ Sir you told me, that you had a realbn for your “ Seeming enquiry concerning the letter; shall I “ not come under the predicament of unreafon-“ able curiosity by desiring to know what it was ?” —“ By no means, replied he,؛ as you are the “ only perfon interested in it, you have an unr ٠٠ doubted right to be acquainted therewith ; par-״ don me then, dear M؛Ss Summers, but my “ own happineSs was at stake.”—“ Nay, now ״ (Said I) I don't understand you.”—“ Say ra“ ther (reply’d he, with Some emotion) you “ won’t understand me ; and indeed I don’t “ know whether I should wish you, nor would “ I ever have informed you of it, but that I find, “ notwithstanding all my endeavours, it will be “ impossible long to conceal it from you ; in juf-“ tification therefore of my own behaviour, “ (which I am Sensible must have appear’d very “ extraordinary) I am under an abfolute necessity ،t oS declaring, that Srom the first moment which “ I Saw, I lov’d you.”—Oh, my Maria !—what contradictory creatures are we women, ?—altho' this declaration was my ultimate wish, and. tho’
it
40 AMORAL NOVEL, it was what I had So long expected, would you believe, that when the wish’d Sor moment was arrived, I could Scarce Support mySelf Srom fainting. Perceiving therefore that I hesitated for an anftver (for indeed I knew not what to fay), he took one of my hands, and with Some warmth cry’d, ״ May I not, dearest MiSs Summers, ٠٠ hope that by my earnest endeavours to pleaSe, ״ I may at length render mySelf not totally diS“ agreeable to you.”—And much more he then Said than I can now remember : it is impossible to deScribe the dilemma I was in ; and, to confeSs the truth, the moment was not a little critical.—A fine young Sellow at my Seet, using all the rhetoric he was master of, to perfuade me to what before I had no Small inclination, (I mean the avowal oS my passion) was a dangerous situation :—Tell me, my Maria, was this a time for hesitation ?—Trust me—No—And I really think that I had great prudence in avoiding a prefent return of his proSeisions; which I did by Saying, ״ It has always been my constant rule, and always ״ shall be, Sir, never to listen to any one on this ״ Subject, till I have my uncle’s Sanction for So “ doing ; it is to him therefore you must apply.”— ״ By your referring me to Sir Harry, Madam (re-״ plied he) I flatter myfelf that if I have his per-״ mission for the attempt, I may one day ipSpire ״ you with Sentiments oS tendernefs.”—Was not
that pretty forward my dear ?-However I was
determined to punish him for his prefumption ; therefore with all the conSequence I could then
assume.
A MORAL NOVEL. 41 assume, I replied, “ You have drawn, Sir, a ״ conclusion in your own favour which might as ״ easily be turn’d to your disadvantage ; I mean, “ that you might take my reference of you to my “ uncle for an abfolute denial; as I think, you “ may be pretty well convinced, that he will “ never be induced to give you his confenl.”— “ I understand you, Madam, Said he, the dif-“ ference of our fortunes and expectations ؛ but “ I have too good an opinion of your generosity “ to think that alone could influer.ee you, what-״ ever it might Sir Harry ; for which reafon I “ rather choSe to apply to you first, being con-“ vinced that were I to meet with encourage-״ ment from you, he would never withhold his, “ in a point where your happineSs was So nearly “ concerned.” My anSwer to this came of courfe, “ Your only way, Sir, to gain mine is, to fay “ no more on this Subject, till after your appli-״ cation to him; however of this you may be “ assured, that as I am almost convinced he will “ never interpofe in an affair of this kind, So ״ have I too much honour to give any perfon a “ double trouble where one will Suffice.” Was this Saying too much ?—However, whether it was or not, he understood my meaning well; for kissing my hand with the greatest tendernefs, “ My kindest .AEmily,” burst fpantaneously from bis lips ; and So he left me to follow my instructions with regard to my uncle.— And now my friend, I ash your advice how to act, in cafe he should' oppofe my wishes ; as be shat as it may,
I am
42 A MORAL NOVEL.
I am Sure it will be impossible to hide the movements of my heart from him, who has gained So entire possession of it; but in your counSel talk not of impossibilities ; and if you have never felt the influence of a tender impartiality, consider the difficulty of erasing one when it is firmly rooted in the heart.—Adieu, strain every power to assist with your advice,
Your dearest friend,
AE. Summers.
AE m i l y to Maria.
Albemarle Street.
O H ! my Maria, give me joy ; I am happy, happy beyond expression ; he is mine, fast as the powers of love and promife can enfure him;— oh, the extatic minute when; after long restraint the hearts of lovers congenial Spring to meet each other 1—Sir Harry yesterday informed, me that he had received propoSals Srom Mr. Martin, “ of what nature (added he with a fmile) I be“ lieve you are not ignorant; I therefore desire “ to know of you what anfwer I am to give him .”־ ٠—، Your prudence, Sir, (Said I) will always di٠ “ rect you to what is best.”׳—“ That’s not the ٠٠ cafe, (replied he) put prudence out of the “ question, then tel! me, could you love him a! “ a wife ?—if you can, he is yours; and tho٠ “ your fortunes will not be large enough to fup-“ ply the luxurious Superfluities of life, it shall P "	P	״ be
A MORAL NOVEL. 43
“ be made Sufficient to render two worthy people ״ happy ; and you still may have Something to “ Spare Sor the necessities of a deServing friend, ״ or a pitiable object ; and in this life what more ״ can be desired ?” In short, in the afternoon I received a visit from Mr. Martin, and my uncle joining our hands, expressed his approbation of the union ; at the fame time, with a benignant Smile, imploring Heaven to shower down prosperity upon our heads.—I was thus, you See, obliged to promiSe, that in due time I would, by completing Mr. Martin’s happineSs, render my own So too.—Would you were here to share in my felicity!—for at prefent my joy is almost too great to bear with moderation. Adieu; a tumultuous heart 11؛ can furnish matter for a long epistle ; excufe therefore any more from
Your overjoy’d AE. Summers.
... Though thefe letters are thus placed in immediate Succession, that the thread of the narrative might not be interrupted, the reader will no doubt obferve, that Some time intervened between the writing of each.
CHAP.
44 A MORAL NOVEL.
CHAP. IX.
Mighty Pan! with tender care View this fwain and virgin fair;
May they ever thus impart Just return of heart for heart!
May the pledges of their blifs Climb their knees to share the kifs!
May their steady blooming youth,
While they tread the paths of truth,
Virtues catch from either side,
From the bridegroom and the bride !
Lloyd’s Arcadia, a Dramatic Pastoral. Maria to AE mily.
INDEED, indeed, my dearest AEmily, theres s no bearing this: you are positively a horrid provoking girl: one minute you ash my my advice, and the next comes a letter, informing me that you have followed your own inclina-naiions, without waiting for my counfel: thus are all the fine things, which I had treafured up to perfuade you to conquer your passion, thrown away, and rendered ufelefs, by your precipitate conduct. Being determined to give you Some assistance, as I cannot addrefs myielf to you after the manner I at first intended, I will endeavour
،»
A MORAL NOVEL. 45
to lay you down Some rules for the married state, which I hope will not be totally ufelefs.
. Seriously then, as my AEmily has always hitherto dignified me with the name of Friend, I should 11؛ deferve that title, were I to be silent at ٠ time when all her acquaintances will foon be pouring in their congratulations, on what may justly be called, the mofl important event of her life. At a time like this, when your heart ؛s replete with joy, I am afraid you will fcarce have lelfure to attend a tedious homily of grave Sentiments. Sincerity is the truest test of Sriend-ship, and, though uncourtly, when well meant claims a Savourable reception: the physician who administers medicines which may be disagreeable, and the Surgeon who probes a wound, as they act upon Salutary principles, ought rather to be thanked than blamed, for the essential pain their endeavours occasion.
First then, let me intreat you to consider Se-rioufly the Solemn nature oS the engagement into which you are going to enter; and as you have oSten, to feed a Soolish vanity, Spent whole days in tbe choice oS a new gown, or a Set oS ribbands; how much more attentively should you consider that general conduct, which is to enSure your happineSs, or miSery !
But as a preacher in petticoats is rather intolerable, though my papa Says there are many old
women
4st A MORAL NOVEL.
women mount pulpits, I shall not endeavour to prejudice you against the matrimonial voyage you are about to take, by picturing the many hazards and perils which often attend it.—Be neat in apparel, cordial in behaviour, flow to find, and ready to forgive, faults; cautious of hearing that dangerous flattery beauty like your’s may produce; follow fashion, without worshipping fo vain an idol; indulge agreeable, harmlefs fociety; preferve natural charms by a regular life, without paltry aids of art; fupport fpirit according to your income, with that commendable oeconomy which casts at distance parsimonious penury: in short, my dear .¿Emily, strive to make home agreeable, and, with the accomplishments you are mistrefs of, if your hushand wanders, he must be the most ungrateful, infen-sible, or vicious wretch living.
That I may not interrupt that pleasing flow of ideas, and that lovely profpect of expectation, may they prove real and permanent, which now brighten your mind! Allow me to hasten a conclusion, and to wish that fome remembrance of me may ever find fome corner in my dear Emmy’s delicate affection.
Your’s, in all degrees of
sincere cordiality, Maria Hartry.
Maria
A MORAL NOVEL. 47
Maria to /Emily.
Oak-hall.
YOU cannot imagine, my dearest /Emily, how much your last letter ٠ has furprized me ; nor are you fo explicit as I could wish: you only tell me, that an unexpected busittefs requires your uncle’s immediate attendance in Ireland, and that he has desired you to postpone your marriage till after his return; thus leaving me to guefs at all the other circumstances: however, I hope that his business, (whatever it be) will not detain him long; and if fo, I will fairly confess, that I am not forry for ؛t, for two reafons; first, becaufe to learn howto fet a just value on prosperity, we should Seel the Srown* oS disappointment; So this flight misSortune will inure you to the patient toleration of greater, _ should they ever arrive : the other cauSe oS my joy at this event is, that it will give me the pleasure oS your company, as I must insist on having you at Oak-hall during your uncle’s abSence: bring Mr. Martin with you, and let us make a partie quarree ; who the Sourth perSon is to be,
I will inSorm you when I can do it in perSon.—
Oh ! my .،؟Emily, I have much to Say to you, more than I can poffibly croud into the limits of this letter : I will therefore make no other apology for leaving you in fome doubt, than my
eager
٠ Tliis letter does not appear.
4» A MORAL NOVEL, eager desire of Seeing you with all convenient Speed. Come Soon, I request, and glad the heart of
Your’s, most affectionately,
Maria Hartry.
CHAP. X.
IN confequence of the foregoing Letter.
AEmily Soon fet out for Oak-hall; though not without fome Small regret, as Mr. Martin’s attendance at Westminster necessarily prevented him from accompanying her ; but as Maria will now begin to make no Small figure in this history, it may be right to give my readers Some Surther account oS this young lady, as well as oS her parents: in order to do which properly, I must begin at an earlier period than that to which I have reduced my story.	'
Sir Thomas Hartry was a baronet possessed of a large estate in the country where he resided ; which he inherited from a long train of ancestors, who were all rendered remarkable by their extreme avarice: and though he did not possefs this shocking contraction of heart in fo great a degree, still he did not totally degenerate from the maxim of his illustrious forefathers. “ Get “ money,” was his favourite principle ; and indeed this Seemed to be the aim of all his actions ;
A MORAL NOVEL. 49 tions; notwithstanding which, he was by no means totally callous to the feelings of humanity ; for, what was most extraordinary, he could feel for the distresses of others ؛ though he Seemed deaf to almost the common calls of necestity for himSelf. Ever constant to his favourite notions, he married ١ady Hartry for two reaSons ; the one, becauSe she had ten thouSand pounds ; the other, in hopes of having an heir to his estate : and as this was almost his ultimate wish, one would imagine he must be completely happy, to find himSelf indulged with Such a blessing, about a year after his marriage ; and Such a one, who as he grew up, became the admiration of the whole country, for his SenSe and good nature : in short, he Seemed entirely clear'd from his father's faults, and to inherit the virtues only of both his parents: yet, Such is the unaccountable caprice of human nature, that though he was So deServing a Son, as almost to exceed description, he never was a favourite with his father; who, notwithstanding, could assign no reaSon for his dislike. Charles (that was his name), beheld it with concern, and endeavoured to gain h؛s affections by his affiduity; but this, instead of being taken in the favourable light, Served only to heighten his father,s diSgust: in short, nOthing could pleaSe him, and he at last drove him, by a courSe of ill uSage, at the age of eighteen, to Seek that happineSs among strangers, which he could not find among his nearest relations. But behold the amazing caprice of mankind ! who never know how to Set a just ׳ Vol. I.	C	value
5. A MORAL NOVEL, value on a jewel till ’tis gone; that we cannot know how much we love, or what it is to want a friend, till we have lost him, was never more strongly verified than in this instance of Sir Thomas Hartry ; who, ■till this moment, never was aware of the real affection which he had for his fon ; his virtues now appeared with double force to the afflicted father, who in vain ufed all possible means to recover him; and when he found that he was gone for ever, all the tender parent rising into his eyes, quite abforb’d the man ; and he for fome time gave way to that SoSt Sorrow, which overpowered his breast, and which he could not fupprefs.
So Severe a blow had nearly been too much Sor Lady Hartry, who almost doated on her Ion, regarding him with thofe innate Seelings which mothers only can be truly judges of. Time, however, that great restorer of all things, in fome meaSure alleviated the grief of both Sir Thomas and his lady; the former of whom, with the lofs of his fon, Seemed totally to have abandoned his passion for money, and determined to make up in kindneSs what the Son had wanted, to his daughter Maria, who being about ten years old when the above affair happened, could not, of courfe, be fuppofed to feel much affliction for the lofs of her brother: ٠־—all that she could, she did.—As she might now be reckoned an only child, no trouble, no expence, was Spared in the education of this
darling
A MO R A L NOVEL. 51 darling of the family: and her fond parents were overjoyed to find their trouble and attention So well repaid, as to behold her, at the age of eighteen, possessed of every natural as well as acquired perfection, necessary to complete the accomplished lady: her perfon was handfome to excefs, rather short than otherwise; her carriage was eaSy and genteel without affectation ;
“ Her breath diSclos’d the Sweets of Spring ;
“ And if for Summer you would Seek,
٠، 'Twas painted in her eye, her cheek.”
The goodneSs of her understanding has been made Sufficiently apparent to the reader by her letter, before inSerted, to AEmily, on the Subject oS her marriage. So happy in natural and acquired perfections, no wonder she was the delight of her parents, and the admiration of all who knew her.
£
CHAP. XI.
■ ■n But come what Sorrow can,
It cannot countervail th’ exchange of joy That one short minute gives me, in her sight.
Romeo and Juliet.
MARIA Hartry was propofed as a just pattern for all the young ladies in the C 2	country.
52 A MORAL NOVEL, country. No young man could fee her without loving; nor was there any father but what courted, and would have been proud of, her alliance. Yet, amidst the many admirers that she gained, the many compliments which were paid her, and though Surrounded by the whole artillery of love; no gallant could ye( boast of having received more encouragement from her than was becoming an acquaintance, for as Such only did she regard all who had offered her their Services: notwithstanding which, as I profeSs mySelf to be a faithful historian, I must con-fefs, that she could not call her heart her own, it having long since, in her private determination, been bestowed on a neighbouring gentle-tleman, whofe name was Melvil!; though be was ignorant of his good fortune in the possession of fo inestimable a treafure ; not that he was blind to the united charms of perfon and understanding, which So apparently shone forth in Maria, but becaufe his diffidence prevented him -from assuring himfelf of that fuccefs, which only ■ depended on his alking her the question.
I will not pay fo bad a compliment to that young gentleman’s understanding as to Say, he was the handfomest man nature ever formed; let it Suffice to assure my readers, that she had been far from deficient in adorning him with perfonal qualifications, to which his politeneSs gave an additional lustre ; his father dying whilst he was yet young, left him heir to a very large }	estate ;
A MORAL NOVEL. 53 estate ; on this provifo, that he should not come into the possession thereof, till he attained the age of twenty-five years: a right, which though not allowed of, either by nature or justice, many parents thus assume, by prolonging the minority of their children. As he lived with his guardian, in the neighbourhood of Sir Thomas Hartry, he of courfe was intimate with that gentleman, and from his frequent visits at Oak-hall, had drank deep of the delicious poifon of love before he knew by what name to stile h؛s regard ; recollection of the pleafure which he ■always found in Maria’s company, too Soon, alas! convinced him of the true reafon, and he Several times determined to inform her thereof; but Such is the modesty attendant on unfeigned love, that, notwithstanding the various opportunities he had, his fear overcame his regard, and prevented his beginning the only Subject on which he wish’d to talk ; but 'tis not the tongue alone, that can declare our passion ; no, our eyes pronounce it, and every action Speaks ;׳ what though he never told her that he lov’d ; his whole behaviour shew’dit; it was apparent to every eye ; nor could Maria any longer be blind, to what she So earnestly wish’d to be true.
She Saw it with pleaSure ; and thus Melvill had a more powerful advocate in her breast, than he even dared to hope : thus Situated, she ׳ daily expected a declaration, and as often was C 3	diSap-
54. A MORAL NOVEL, disappointed; for tho’ her behaviour gave him every encouragement the nature of their connection would admit of, he could not fo far overcome the natural timid refpect of his shul. Under thefe. almo'st infupportable torments, his be-alth. from inward grief. Sensibly declined.; his liSe became burthenSome and tedious ; he never was eaSy one minute when out of her prefcnce, and, at the fame.time, was racked-with the most tormenting fears of losing her for' ever: In this unhapp.y state did lie for Sometime live, till no longer able to endure it, he determined to acqu.aint her with his inviolable attachment, and hope the best. When we have form’d any fav’rite fcheme, it is an eafy matter to find an opportunity of putting' it into execution; thus as Melvill ha.d formed a design, on the fuccefs of which, all the happinefs of his firture life depended, he burnt with the most' eager impatience to be delivered from fo painful an uncertainty ; and as very few days passed in . which he was not at Oak-hall, he foon found' the sh much wished for opportunity.
One very warm day, aft'er having dined there, Maria propoSed a walk in the grove, which he.r parents immediately assented to. Saying that they would follow her; thus luckily leaving our young couple together, at which Maria was not a little pleafed, Melvill having previoussy informed her, that when a proper time offered, he could wish to have fome converfation with her:
therefore
A M O R A L N O V E L. 55 therefore joyfully leaving her parents to follow them, she Set out with Melvill, almost dying with curiosity to know what he had to communicate.
She wished it might be what she fufpected; though at the fame time she was not totally devoid of fear lest it should, not being provided with a Suitable anSwer thereto : from thefe considerations the reSore, her mind was Sar from being the most tranquil. Confcious of his intentions, Melvill was not in a very enviable situation, and trembled fo violently, that had she not been as much agitated, it could never have eScaped her notice : however, by both being equally concerned, they neither of them perceived it in the other, and thus walked without uttering a Syllable, til! they arrived at a bench in the grove, where they Sat down, both still preServing the exactest Silence ; many attempts, indeed, to Speak, were made on both sides, but nothing more than—Sir—and Madam——7 beg your pardon----------1 thought you
fpoke■	and Such incoherent Sentences passed,
till, after Some hesitation, Maria took courage enough to afk, what businefs Mr. Melvill cotild have with her ?־—to which he returned no anSwer, and put her to the painful necessity of repeating the question ; when no longer able to restrain his passion, he dropt on one knee, and Seizing her hand, cried, ״ Can you, lovely
Maria, even appear to be ignorant of what C 4	“I have
56 A MORAL N O V E L.
“ I have to fay? — Who can be permitted to ،، converSe with you, without involuntarily lov-“ ing you ? — Can you be mistreSs of thofe “ charms, and wonder at my paffion ?—Yes, “ dearest angel, I love you with the most ardent “ affection; but could I have divin’d, that a “ declaration thereof would have fo far offended ״ you, (as by your countenance I See you now “ are) my lips for ever should have been cloSed, “ and I would have carried the Secret to my “ early grave. What vanity could induce me “ to hope your kind notice, with So Small a share ״ of attraction and merit to recommend me ?— “ But do not, dear Maria, do not hate me ; “ though you cannot love, do not defpife me.”
----“ Defpife you !—no, Mr. Melvill, heaven
״ forbid I should defpife any one 1—But pray, ״ Sir, riSe :—you distrefs me—indeed you do.”
٠،-----“ I did not mean it, (replied he :) I would
“ Sooner die, than give you one moment’s un٠ “ easineSs ؛—but will you then thus reject me “ for ever ?—Oh 1 do not look with fuch chil-״ ling indifference ؛ allow me to hope, without “ treSpaffing the bounds of delicacy, one favour-
״ able expression.”---—״ What would you
“ have me fay ?”—“ Only that I am not quite “ indifferent to you, not hateful.”־——“ You ״ are indeed, Sir, (replied she, sighing) far
؛٤ from it.”---“ And is it possible, (returned
“ Melvill) that Maria can think tenderly of
“me?”-------“Soft, no more:—here are my
“ father and mother.”----“ But may I then be
“ permitted
A MORAL NOVE L. 57 ؛٠، permitted (Says the impatient lover) to impart
« my further fentiments by letter --------“ Any
״ thing, if you will now be Silent ؛ another time. ״ I’ll hear you, or from you.”
The arrival of Sir Thomas and Lady Hartry put an end to the conversation Sor this time. The diScourSe turned on indifferent topics, and our young couple parted much better pleaSed with each other than when they met; Maria, to find that she had not placed her affections on a SenSeleSs and unworthy object ؛ and Melvill, that he had gained a kind of permission to write to her, which he determined to do immediately on his return home.
CHAP. XII.
To mourn a mifchief that is past and gone,
Is the next way to draw new mifchief on ;
The robb’d that Smiles, steals Something Srom the thief;
He robs himfelf, that Spends a bootlefs grief.
Othello.
BEFORE I proceed any farther, I must beg leave to introduce to my readers, fome new acquaintances, I mean the family of Mr. Howard, Melvill’s guardian ; which indeed was not large, as it consisted only of himfelf, his C 5	daughter
58 A MORAL NOVEL.
daughter Charlotte, and his ward. This gentleman had formerly been ؛n a capital businefs in London ; during which time, he had contracted an intimacy with Melvill’s father ; who, from his candour and just dealing, conceived fo good an opinion of him, as at his death to appoint him foie guardian to his fon.
On the lofs of his wife, he retired with his daughter, who was then an infant, to the Small estate where he now resided, to׳ enjoy the downhill of his life, far from the noify bustling of that world, the major part- of which he was convinced, made fraud their only study, and money their almost Sole purSuit: although his rank in life was not equal to that of Sir Thomas Hartry, nevertheless a great intimacy Subsisted between the two families ; and Charles Hartry and Charlotte being play-fellows when young, conceived for each other a cordial and unfeigned friendship, which as they grew up, ripening into mutual love, in their inadvertent youth they readily gave way to it; but when the pleaf-ing fondneSs in Some meafure was Subsided into a fettled paffion, and reafon had recovered her lost Sway, Charles began Seriously to consider, that On account of their inequality of fortunes, it would be impossible ever to make his father agree to the match ; and, as he had too much real love for poor Charlotte to think of involving her in certain distrefs, by a clandestine marriage, lie had no other reSourse left, than the aforementioned
A MORAL NOVEL. 59 mentioned manner of leaving Oak-hall; flattering himfelf, that abfence would efface the remembrance of what he dared not cherish in his breast ; nor would he venture to take leave of this darling of his heart, lest her prefence and arguments should shake the firm refolve which he had made. After his departure, and not till then, would he inform her of his reafons for this step, which he did by letter; and although she Saw the justneSs and propriety thereof, in their full force, his abfence could not fail of being a heavy caufe of grief to her; however, as resignation was the only medicine which could restore her peace, she patiently Submitted to her misfortunes ; though being destitute of a friend, to whom she might relate the story of her woe, she could not. forbear Sometimes in private, paying to his memory the tribute of a tear; till as Maria grew up, they form’d an intimacy, which, from a similarity of Sentiments, was foon converted into friendship ; and Charlotte had the fatisfaction of unburthening her heart of the load under which it laboured, to that perfon from whom she was Sure to meet the generous return of compaffion : nor was her confidence mifplac-ed ! Maria Saw, and pitied her misfortunes; and by being frequently with her, kindly endeavoured to difpel that gloom which hung upon her countenance, whilst alone. Melvill therefore knowing the friendly connection which Subsisted between them, determined, thro’ Charlotte’s means, to get a letter conveyed to Maria; and accord-
6o A MORAL NOVEL,, ingly, on his return to Mr. Howard's, informed her of what, from his behaviour, she must have been blind not to have perceived before ; at the fame time desiring her assistance therein, knowing what it was to love, and pitying the pangs of barr’d affections, she promifed him ail the help In her power ; and as an earnest of future Services, to convey a letter the next morning to Oak hall, upon which he immediately wrote as follows :
To MiSs Hartry.
Dear Madam,
In what words shall I exprefs my forrow, for the pain that my yesterday’s behaviour gave you? IS I then Said any thing to incur your diSpleaSure, or really offend you, I hope you will have goodneSs enough to attribute it to the violence oS a paffion, which no time can alter or abate : and consider, that I declared it to you, beSore I could have an opportunity to weigh the conSequences oS Such behaviour, that my mind was So replete with the idea of your perfections, I was not master of mySelf; that the time, the place, the opportunity, all confpired to hurry me on to that act, by which I have incurred your dif-pleafure. If you will generously recollect all thefe, I flatter mySelf your goodneSs. of heart is fuch, that you will readily forgive me: for be assured, that could I have Sorefeen any diSpleaSure, or painSul anxiety, on your side, nothing
׳ should
A MORAL NOVEL. 6! should have forced the painful Secret from me.
٠ However, since I have once had the prefumption to entertain a thought of you, give me leave again to throw myfelf at your feet, and declare, what I hope you will believe me sincere in, that I love you almost to distraction.—Oh ! dearest Maria, if you cannot regard me with a favourable eye, at least pity the Sufferings of Your devoted admirer,
Henry Melvill.
The above letter Charlotte difpatched under a cover to her friend, and Melvill waited the return of the messenger with the greatest anxiety ; however, thinking him unufually tedious, (for lovers ever run before the clock) in order to amufe himfelf, he took up his Savourite author ٠, when the following lines imqiediately caught his eye, which he thought fo applicable to himfelS, that he could not Sorbear repeating them two or three times aloud :
Blest be the man, his memory at least,
Who found the art thus to unfold his breast ; And taught Succeeding times an eaSy way, Their Secret thoughts by letters to convey;
To baffle abSence, and Secure delight,
Which, till that time, was limited to fight:
The
٠ The Guaxdi an.
6a A MORAL.NOVEL.
The parting farewel Spoke the last adieu ;
The leSs’ning distance past, then loSs of view ;
The friend was gone, which Some kind moments gave,
And abSence Separated, like the grave.
When Sor a wife the youthful patriarch fent,
The camels, jewels, and the steward, went;
The wealthy equipage, tho’ grave and slow;
But not a line, which might the lover shew.
The rings and bracelets woo’d her hands and arms ;
But, had she known of melting words, the charms
That under Secret Seals ؛n ambush lie,
To catch the Soul when drawn into the eye ;
The fair Assyrian had not took his guide,
Nor her Soft heart ؛n chains of pearl been ty’d.

CHAP.
A MORAL NOVEL.	6 3
CHAP. XIII.
■	־.. — If I were now to die,
'Twere now to be most happy ; for I fear,
My foul hath her content So abSolute,
That not another comfort, like to this,
Succeeds in unknown fate.
Othello.
MELVILL was amusing himfelf after she manner mentioned at the conclusion of my last chapter, when Charlotte entered the room with a letter, which having given him, she, fmilling, retired : but the joy that he had conceived, at the receipt of an epistle from Maria, was quickly converted into the most poignant grief, when, on opening it, he read only the following words :
“ Sir,'
“ Since I last Saw you, an affair has happen“ ed, of which I cannot conveniently inform you ״ by letter. If you have the regard which you “ profefs for me, you will find fome immediate ٠، opportunity of feeing
“ The afflicted
״ Ma١iia Hartry.”
On
64 A MORAL NOVEL,
On reading this extraordinary note, our hero was little better than one mad : his mind was agitated with the most perplexing doubts and fears ; and in this agony did he Set out for Oak-hall, without giving any anfwer to the repeated questions of MiSs Howard, who had no Small reaSon to be Surprized at his behaviour ; nor indeed could she form any conjecture of the caufe, ,till, just as he was Setting out, throwing her Maria’s note, he cried, ،، Madam, read that; “ -—then wonder, if you can, that I am distract-“ ed.
On his arrival at S؛r Thomas Hartry’s he found that both he and my lady were out, but that Maria had walked into the grove ; thither he hastened with all the impetuosity of a lover, and found ber on the Same bench, where, but the preceding day he had diScloSed his love ; he Sound her, 'tis true;-—but, oh heart-piercing sight! with one hand she was Supporting her head, and with the other, she wiped away the tears, which fell in torrents from her lovely eyes. —She was So loft in thought, that he got pretty near beSore she perceived him ; but when the rustling oS the leaves drew her attention that way, starting up, with eager traniports, she cry’d, “ Oh! Mr. Melvill, is it you ?—،، I am glad ״ you are come.”-—Then Smiling through her tears, she added “ Have I not overstepp’d the ״ bounds of modesty, in thus desiring to See you?” —“ Tell me, my dear Maria, (Said he) tell me,
“ what
A MORAL NOVEL. 95 “ what is it that effects you, inform me, I befeech “ you ; what can be the caufe of that uneasinefs “ which I See So strongly printed on your coun-״ tenance ?”— “You were no Sooner (anfwered ״ she) departed yesterday, than my father in-״ form’d me, that he was just come from Sir To-״ by Clunch, who had been to make a propofal “ for an alliance of the two families, by his fon's ״ marriage with me ; and, to my forrow, he ״ was fo thoroughly reSolved upon it, that it ״ was in vain I pleaded my dislike to Mr. “ Clunch ; he who has hitherto been So indul-“ gent a parent, nor ever offered to force my in“ clinations in an affair of this nature, has infist“ ed on my receiving this gentleman as one who ״ is to be my hushand ; and I am ordered this
״ afternoon to prepare Sor an interview.”-----
،، And can you ! can my Maria (Said Melvill) “ thus cruelly reSolve to abandon me for ever, “ just when I had refolution to declare my love ?” ،، —،، You know (Said she) it is my father’s “ order ; and you must likewife know what ״ will be the inevitable confequence of difobedi-״ ence from a man oS his violent temper.” ״ And “ was this your busineSs with me, Madam ?— “ but I will not complain ; for since I am indif-“ ferent to MiSs Hartry, it matters not what ״ becomes of me :—that you may for ever be “ happy,” was all that he could anfwer ; and was just going to quit the place, when Maria recalled him, by Saying, with a tone of voice, that astonished him, ״ Although Mr. Melvill
<؛ may
66 A MORAL NOVEL.
“ may hereafter deSpiSe me, for my ingenuity, ״ in So readily acknowledging my passion ; ne-״ vertheleSs I can on no consideration, be hypo-״ crite enough to dssguife the real feelings of my “ heart; what that dictates my mouth must " utter, nor can I to gain the world, be guilty “ of the least deceit; no, Sir, be assured that I “ will never give my hand to any one but you, “ even at the alter should they drag me there ;— “ I will there assert my right of nature as a free“ born Christian, nor give my hand to any one, “ when my heart is already diSpos’d of to ano-“ ther.”—-On bearing this Melvill stood like one thunderstruck or petrified ; at last taking her hand with a look oS inexpressible tenderneSs, he Said, ״ DeSpiSe you !---no my dear Maria ; I “ honour, I revere you Sor your ingenuous gene-״ rosity of Sentiment :—amiable girl ! that could “ at once throw aside the veil of dissimulation, “ her Sex fo often affect, and thus openly confefs “ her regard ;—oh, my dear angel you are too “ good, I can never deferve it.”—-״ Indeed you “ do (interrupted she) and much more ; but at ״ prefent let us consider of the most probable “ means to extricate ourfelves from this dilem-״ ma ; which tbe precipitate unkindnefs of a po“ sitive parent, has thrown us into.”-—
After fome conversation on the Subject, it was agreed, that she should inform Mr. Clunch of her dislike to him ; and if that would not do, even of her prepossession in favour of another ;
A MORAL NOVEL. 67 to perfuade him to discontinue his visits; and, having exchanged vows oS mutual fidelity, they parted ; she, to prepare for the reception of a man whom she detested, and he to relate all that had passed to Charlotte, which he did immediately on his return home .٠ but before I proceed, it may not be improper to give my readers fome Sketch of Mr. Clunch’s family and character.
.'0ft؟٥0٠0٥0<^0٠٠<^٠0٥080٥0٥0٥0^i0<^٥0fi0^
CHAP. XIV,
- ■ --------------1 am much forry, Sir,
You put me to forget a lady’s manners	.
By being fo verbal: and learn now for all That I who know my heart, do here pronounce By the very truth of it, I care not for you :
And am fo near the lack of charity
T’accufe myfelf, I hate you : which I had rather
You felt, than make my boast.
Cymbeline.
MR. Clunch was the foie heir of Sir Toby Clunch, who having lost his wife in childbed of this Son, grew fo immoderately fond of him as never to Suffer him out of his sight; So that we may reasonable SuppoSe the education that he gave him was not the most refined ; indeed his only concern was, to make him master of hunting, shooting, and other Such rustic,
qualifications ;
68 A MORAL NOVEL.
qualifications; in which he Succeeded So happily, as to have him reckoned at the age of twenty-five, (the time of this propofal) the completest SportSman in the county; that is, he would fight a main of cocks, drive a Set of horSes, ride a fox chace, drink his bottle, or shoot flying, with any man in the three kingdoms for five hundred guineas, play or pay ; and in thefe five things consisted all his excellence ; Sweet recommendations ! to a girl of Maria’s delicate feelings: his father had likewife not forgot to instil Some of his favourite principles into him ; Such as,
״ Children have not, or ought not to have, any “ will of their own ؛—— that all their acti-“ ons tend to one great end,—obedience,” and many others equally arbitrary and ridiculous. · —When Sir Toby therefore mentioned this match to him, all the anSwer he made to it was,
—،، Why, ay, I’ll marry her, if you think it ״ proper ; otherwise, I am very well as I am,—
״ howfomever I’m glad you’ve appointed this ״ afternoon for the meeting, becaufe I am en-״ gag’d to hunt to-morrow with neighbour “ Trottall■”------
Such was the gentleman who arriv’d at Oak-hall to pay his addresses to the lovliest of her Sex; and to whoSe beauty her anxiety and concern gave an additional lustre : After a little general conversation, the young couple were left alone, and Some time elaps’d beSore one word was Spoke on -either side, Mr. Clunch being very buSy in ty-
mg
A MORAL NOVEL. 69 ing Some knots in the lash of his whip ; however, recollecting himfelf, he approach’d nearer to Marla, and made the following elegant Speech.
״ I fuppofe, MiSs, you know my busineSs here ; “ my father has ordered me to wait on you ; for, “ as he fays, we are to be married, he thinks ״ it proper, we should be a little acquainted be“ forehand ; though, for my own part, ss don’t “ See the necessity for it ; .but it Seems it is the ״ way of your great folk ; and since I am here, “ I'll tell you a piece of my mind,—look ye, ״ MiSs, I am a man of few words,—I don't love “ your high-flown Speeches, becaufe I don’t un-״ derstand them ; if you can like me Sor a huS-“ band,—I’m your man :—but what do I Say ،، ...jf- ?—for your Sather Says you must, and
״ that’s enough.’.---- A great deal more of the
fame Sortd؛d Maria Suffer him to run on, before she interrupted him ; which she at length did, though in the gentlest terms possible, lest he should fly into a passion, and thereby roufe her father, whom she knew to be not far off; with the most perfuasive eloquence ״ she begg’d him not to im“ portune her any longer on the fubject, for that “ she could never think of him for an hushand, ״ that she should always be proud to refpect him ״ as an acquaintance ; but found herSelf unequal ٠، to the talk, of :loving -him ١yith the tenderneSs ״ of a wife.”
Rough
7o ٠ A MORAL NOVEL.
Rough as the furrounding woods, all the an. fwer this unfeeling brute returned to her remonstrances, was, “ Why for the matter of that, I “ can’t help it :—I believe there will be but “ little love lost between us; nor should I ever “ have troubled my head about loving you, but “ that my father has expresly Said, I shall marry
“ you ; and yours Says the Same.”-“ I am
“ Sure he could not So far Sorget himSelf,” (replied Maria.)----“ Nay, but he did, (an-
״ Swered the ’Squire) and marry me you must ; ״ unleSs you have a mind to be a diSobedient girl: “ —but as I am obliged to be out early to-״ morrow, I will take my leave of you ; fo, “ MiSs, I wish you a good night :—I shall ac-“ quaint Sir Thomas with your behaviour, I af-“ Sure you:—your Servant—your Servant.”—So faying, he Sallied out in quest of her father, to whom he related all that had passed, not without Some favourable additions on his own side.
When Maria found herfelf alone, bursting into tears, with uplifted hands, she exclaimed, “—And is it poffible, my father can Seriously “ think of marrying me to Such a wretch ?—a ״ brute, devoid of every fenfe of feeling!-—Tear. “ father fays you shall marry me, thofe were “ his words ؛-—Sure no Such unjust reSolve ever ״ could eScape his lips.—Would he, who hither-״ to has let my inclinations be as free as air, for “ the fake of a little pelf, tie me to a wretch “ whom my foul detests, on whom I can never
،٠ look
A MORAL NOVEL. 71 “ look but with abhorrence ?—Shall marry me !—Oh! that parents would enforce their “ commands in gentler, more rational terms 1— “ Surely, if the sin of disobedience admits of ״;palliation, it is where parents cruelly ufurp an “ authority, by endeavouring to force the hearts ״ of their children ; and which no situation in ״ life, however elevated or debafed, can give ״ them a just!right to.—Oh ! Melvill, you have “ my heart, and on you.alone will I bestow my ״ hand,”
Thus was the lovely Maria bewailing her misfortunes, when the door opened and prefented her father, with a much more angry look than she had ever Seen him wear before :——״ Lit. “ tie did I think, Maria, (Said he, on entering) ״ that I should ever have fo much occasion to be “ dissatisfied with you, what is the reafon that “ you do not behave even with common civility “ to the man whom I have fixed upon for your ״ hushand “ I did indeed, Sir (Said she) be“ have refpectfully to him ; Oh, Sir !—on my “ knees, let me intreat you, by all the tender “ ties of nature, to remember, that equality and “ Sympathy of feelings in marriage, is the only ״ probable method to enfure felicity ;-—do not ״ make your only child unhappy, by dooming ״ her to receive the churlish addresses of that ״ odious man.—Man, do I call him ?—he is “ not worthy the name ; a. brute, that,”—This “ to my face (interrupted Sir Thomas) take care,
take
72 A MORAL NOVEL.
“ take care what you fay ;—I have always been “ a kind, indulgent father to you, can forgive “ any thing but obstinate difobedience. Make “ you unhappy !—why, have not I provided an ״hushand for you? a rich man !—don't I do “ all in my power to make you happy ?—and ״ now, forfooth, you fay, you don't like him ; “ what I SuppoSe you want a fine frenchified ״ beau, full of flattery and fashion, a thing ״ made by taylors and barbers; go, go, you’re a ״ silly girl, and don't know what you like ; “ besides, what right have you to like ?—׳it is ״ I must like.—Look ye, Maria, if you don't ״ alter your behaviour to Mr. Clunch, I’ll, I’ll, “ —but I’m in a passion, and won't make any “ refolution ; however, don’t provoke me, be“ ware the conSequences, that is all,—beware
״ the conSequences.”---So Saying he flung
her Srom him, with all the heat oS paffion, on the ground, where she lay hardly Sensible, and prefented a Spectacle Sufficient to have touch'd the most obdurate heart: Sir Thomas was leaving her in this condition, when lady Hartry entered the room, brought thither by the elevation of her hushand’s voice ; as Soon as Maria Saw her Mother, immediately rising up, she desired her to intercede for her with Sir Thomas, whom she Said, she had very unwillingly difob-liged, by expressing her reluctance at receiving the visits of Mr. Clunch, as of one who was to be her hushand, and earnestly begg’d her to dif-fuade him from the odious match on which he .	had
A MORAL NOVEL. 73
had fet his heart.—As nothing out of the common courfe of nature can be of any long continuance ; fo Sir Thomas’s passion Soon began to Subside, and give way to the powerful conduc-trefs of all our actions, Reafon ; nor was he long able to withssand the well timed arguments of a fensible wife, joined ،0 the more powerful Solicitations of an amiable daughter, but kissing Maria, told her he had been too hassy, and faw his error, bid her be a good girl, and endeavour to like Mr. Clunch ; and concluded with an af٠ furance of doing every thing in his power to make her happy.—Thus this quarrel ended, and in an hour not only feemed but really was forgot, by all the parties, except the heroine of the piece, whofe rest that night was not a little disturbed, by the concern she felt for her father’s obstinacy, in thus perfisting in a match, which she never could or would agree to.
CHAP. XV.
What torments exceeding, what joys are above, The pains and the pleafures, that wait upon love ?
AS none of the family at Oak-hall were acquainted with Melvill’s passion, he continued his visits there as ufual, and in a few days had the happinefs of being an hour with his Vol. I.	٠	Maria,
4؟ A MORAL NOVEL. Maria, who informed him of all the particulars of the fcene related in the last chapter. But, as the converfation of lovers is chiefly made up of repetitions, uninteresting to all but the parties concerned, and as I am a perfon of too nice honour to difcover the fecrets of others; I shall trouble my readers with no more of this than to fay, the refult of their conference was, that Maria should difcover the history of their passion to her mother, and beg her kind assistance, in endeavouring to perfuade Sir Thomas to agree to their marriage ; accordingly she foon found an opportunity oS relating the affair to lady Hartry, which she did with the most candid ingenuity, without concealing a ssngle circumstance ; at the jime time intreating her, as she valued her happineSs and peace oS mind, to perSuade Sir Thomas not to attempt to force her inclinations, and lay her under the Severe talk of diSobedience to a parent's commands. This good woman was So well pleafed at her daughter’s sincerity, that she wanted but little perSuasion to do what she was desired, and promiSed, that the first opportunity she had, she would uSe all the rhetoric she was mistreSs of, to perSuade her hushand to relinquish all thoughts of Mr. Clunch.
The next time they were alone, he luckily open’d the Subject, by Saying, “ l can't imagine ״ what reaion that girl can have, Sor So strongly “ objecting to marrying the perSon whom my “ prudence has Selected, as one fit to be her huS-
״ band ;
A MORAL NOVEL. 75 ״ band ; a young man of perfon, family and for-״ tune who demands no money till after my death ״too; a plaguing, provoking little jade ; when ״ I have found a fuitable match for her, in all ״ refpects, she forfooth, must object to it, by “ faying, She cannot love him, but she shall have “ him I’m determin’d, or I’ll never give her a “ farthing.”—As lady Hartry had pre-refolved not to mention a word of Melvill, lest he should imagine, (as he fometimes would) that she was joined in a plot against him ; she only interrupted him, by gently faying, ״ Nay, now my dear, ״ you are indeed too violent; consider, that we “ can never account for natural antipathies of “ our own, to particular people, much lefs for ״ thofe of others; she is young and shay J،ere-״ after know better : but let me ¡ntreat you, as “ she ؛s fo strongly refolved against the match, ״ to think no more of it. Don't, Sir Thomas, “ make your girl unhappy.”—But all this signified nothing ; he had formed a refolution, and ؛t was not in the power of words to make him alter it; he was refolutely determined not to give up the point, therefore ending where he began, “ that “ if she would not marry Clunch, he would dif-״ inherit her,” he left the room.
Maria had been waiting to be informed of her doom from her mother, and though when she faw Sir Thomas, she thought she could too plainly read it in h؛s countenance ; still as؛ uncertainty, (even in mifery) is painful, she was D 2	willing
6؟ A MORAL NOVEL, willing to be convinced of her wretchednefs; and accordingly hastened to lady Hartry, whom she found in tears, and who, after having endeavoured ؛n fome meaSure to comfort her, inform’d her circumstantially of all that had passed ; she, for fome time, heard her with great Seeming patience, and finding she had done Speaking, claSping her hand, immediately exclaimed with great energy,—“ and does he still thus cruelly “ persist ؛n his reSolve ? then am I doom’d for *؛ ever to be miferable, as no power on earth “ shall ever force me to agree to it.”—Lady Hartry endeavoured all in her power to argue Maria into temperature ; and, as eloquence is to reafon down the Sever of the blood, and footh with words the tumult of the foul, So it never was better applied than at prefent; for she in a short time coolly listen’d to her mother’s advice, which was, to inform Melvill of what had passed and give him leave to make open propofals to her father, “ who, (added she) when he finds ٠، your affections fixed on another object, may ،، perhaps give his confent to that, which it will ״ not be in his power to prevent.”——Maria accordingly, the next morning, wrote a letter to Melvill, informing him of what the reader has before heard, and concluded it in thefe words, “ Since my father has thought proper to throw “ off the indulgence which ought to accompany ״ that name, you have my free confent, to make “ whatever propoSals to him your love dictates.” His regard for her, must indeed have been very
trifling,
A MORAL NOVEL. 77 trifling, not to have understood her meaning, which he did in its full force, and accordingly waited on Sir Thomas that very day ; and, after the first civilities were over, opened to him the occasion of his visit; who as it was quite unexpected,' did not attempt to interrupt him in his difcourfe; but when he had finished, made the
following reply.---“ 1 shall always esteem Mr.
“ Melvill, as a friend and as a neighbour ؛ but “ can never think of him for a Son-in-law:—I ״ have passed my word to another gentleman ; “ had I not, I could never listen to your propo-“ Sals.—Consider, Sir, that by your late father’s “ will, you are not of age, nor will be thefe ״ three years; you can therefore make no “ Settlement on Maria, except her own fortune, “ which a beggar can equally do ; and would “ you have me give my only daughter to a beg. “ gar? for fuch in fact it would be : and as for “ trusting to your love for her three years hence, ״ it is nothing at all, possession Soon cloys ; for “ what man riSes Srom a Seast with that keen ap-״ petite with which he first Sat down ?”
“ I am Sorry, very Sorry, Sir, (Said Melvill) to ״ find you have So bad an opinion of me ; but “ even allowing my love for your daughter should ״ abate, I fay, Sir, allowing your cruel, unjust “ fufpicion to prove true, love for myfelf would ״ engage me to fulfill my promifes,—my honour, “ Sir.”—״ Honour (cried Sir Thomas) is not “ what it was; I remember when, as it ought, ״ it was as facred as a man’s bond, and I should
٥ 3	״ have
7
A MORAL NOVEL.
؛٠ have thought myfelf as Secure from the one as ״ the other; but that time is past, and I very t، much fear, never to be recalled.—Honour is ״ the offspring of fair truth and honesty, yet to ״ what bafe, what Scandalous uSes, do we not “ See it perverted ?—Does a man want to Seduce ״ an innocent girl, honour’s his cry, his honour ״ will oblige him to marry her ;—and thus, ،، while he proSesses a most noble, glorious virtue, “ does he not commit the most abandoned acts “ of wickednefs 1—It is now So shameSully cor“ rupted, that it Serves but for a gilded bait to “ catch unwary fools ;lam forry to fay it, but ״ who trusts to the bare profpect of a man’s ho-״ nour, trusts too often to a broken staff: but ״ Sar be it from me to arraign your’s.—No Sir, I “ believe you may have a strict fenfe of it, I hope ״ you have ; if fo, I am glad of it, but still I can-״ not think of you for my daughter, don't let ״ me hear any more of it; I beg you’ll not rob ״ me of an agreeable acquaintance, by laying me ״ under the necessity of forbidding you my houfe.”
----Melvill found the truth of all he Said So
strong, that he could make no anSwer to it; and Sir Thomas was leaving the room, when he caught him by the hand, crying, in the most Supplicating tone, ״ Do not, dear Sir. make ،، your amiable daughter unhappy by a refuSal.” “ Unhappy! (re-echoed Sir Thomas) why you
“ have not Sure ?--You cannot So far have
״ prevail’d upon her. that she has agreed to this ״ propoSal; but I’ll hear it Srom her own mouth.”
——So
A MORAL NOVEL. 9؟ — So faying, he Sallied out in quest of the unfortunate Maria, who luckily was not to be found, and he returned rather cooler than he went, to tell Melvill, that after what had passed, he must desire him to discontinue his visits.·— This was a painful Sentence to our־ almost distracted lover; who, however, bore his misfortune with firmnefs, and departed from■: Oak-hall, without gaining one sight of his amiahle afflicted.
CHAP. XVI.
I’m giddy, expectation whirls me round,
Th’ imaginary relish is fo Sweet,
That it inchants my SenSe ; what will it be When that the wat'ty palate tastes indeed Love’s thrice reputed nectar׳?
Teoilos and Cressioa.
SIR Thomas began now Seriously to consider, that gentle means would be the most probable, to make his daughter conquer her dislike to one lover, and obliterate her regard Sor the other; in the evening, therefore, he gently tax’d her with her passion for Melvill, and as she had heard of his visit, of which too well gueffing the caufe, she knew it would be to no porpoSe to deny it; and therefore acknowledg’d his SuSpicions to be D 4	just ;
So A MORAL NOVEL, just ; at the fame time, begging his pardon, and promising, never to make him unhappy by a clandestine marriage :—in anSwer to which, he inform’d her; that, if she should ever be guilty of fuch an imprudent step, from that day she must forfeit all pretensions to his favour; which to enfure, he still insisted on her receiving Clunch’s visits, whom he inform’d her, was the next day to be at Oak-hall:—she begg'd, she ؛ntreated, she would promife any thing, provided be would give up that point.—But ber prayers and tears, alas, were ail too ineffectual ; his whole heart was fet upon it; nor could any argument, however strong and forcible, change the fettled purpoSe of his foul.
Her time, therefore, now passed wretchedly, being bound to tbe irkfome company of a man, whom she detested ; or in hearing the terrifying threats of her father : Sometimes indeed, she gain’d a short reSpite, by being left alone with her mother, who pitied her situation, and tenderly endeavoured to alleviate the torments of her breast, with all the foft feelings of an indulgent parent ; and whenever Sir Thomas was from home, as she knew that all her felicity was center’d in Melvill’s company, Sent for him to Oak-hall, who, with joy, obey’d the glad fum-mons, fo that his moments would have passed far from difagreeable, had it not been for the melancholy reflection of what his dear Maria must Suffer at other times ; but as he Saw there
wa*
A MORAL NOVEL. 81 was no likelihood of his ever gaining her father’s confent to their union, after fome struggles of reflection, he ventur’d to mention a Secret marriage to her ; but she would not listen to it, and silenc’d him by Saying,—that tho’ her father had thus thrown off the kindnefs of a parent, still she would Support the duty oS an obedient daughter, as she did not think any unkindneSs oS his fide, could authorize Such an act of indifcretion in her :·——Happy would it be, were every young lady of this way of thinking ; how many miferable hours would it then Save themfelves, and others.——
Various and many were the Schemes which Melvill thought of, whereby to gain Sir Thomas’s confent; but still they could afford him but the momentary pleaSure of imagination, as he for fome time could hit on none likely to effect it: however, after long patience and perfeverance, his invention fram’d one, which appear’d to him fo likely to Succeed, that be determin’d to mention it the next time he went to Oak-hall. The wish’d-for moment Soon arriv’d, and the above thought gave him fo unufual a flow of Spirits, that Maria could not avoid ashing him the reaSon : taking her· hand with inexpressible tenderneSs, he reply’d,— “ I have, my dearest life, at last, thought of “ Something which may make us both happy ; “ but as Some deceit is necessary on your side, “ I did not chooSe to mention it, being well con-٠ 5	“ vinc’d,
82 A MORAL NOVEL.
“ vinc’d, that your SenSe of truth is fo strict, you “ would Scruple a Salshood, even in thought.”— Having thank’d him in a genteel manner for his compliment, she desir’d to know what it was, Saying,---that if she thought there was any pro-
bability of its SucceSs, she would venture a great deal, to be freed from the mlfery in which she then liv’d ; but (added she) here comes my mother, let her hear it; and if she approves thereof, that alone will be reafon Sufficient for me to put it into execution.
Lady Hartry having join’d the company, Melvill told them the fcheme from which he entertain’d fuch flattering hopes, in the following words ;—“ It is (Said he) that Maria shall feign ״ an implicit obedience to her father’s commands, “ in receiving the addresses oS Mr. Clunch ; that “ she shall even carry her Seeming duty So Sar, as “ to go to church with him, and then publickly ״ refufe him at the altar : this, of courSe will ״ convince Sir Thomas of her firm reSolve, never “ to marry the man whom he has fix’d upon ; ״ which will alSo be So public an affront to my ״ rival, as to shake off his diSagreeable Solicita-״ tions: I will take care to be preSent, and make ״ uSe of all my rhetoric, to perSuade him to con-״ Sent to our union ; if he is cruel enough to en-״ tertain a doubt of my making a Settlement on “ Maria, when I come oS age, I will even agree ،٥ to have cur marriage postpon'd to that period, ״ sad at the Same, to put a private one out of
״ our
A MORAL NOV EL. 83 “our power, will confent to reside, abroad, du-״ ring all the intervening time ;,٠ and r.otwith-“ standing his late behaviour, I-am So well con-״ vinc’d of his natural goodnefs of heart, that, « added thereto my perfuasion, the Solemnity of “ of the place, and his furprife at So Sudden and “ unexpected an affair, will, altogether, be too '“ much for him ·to resist ; and then, my dearest ״ girl, we shall with pleafure look back on all “ thefe obstacles as- stronger incitements to us, to “ love each other hereafter, with increasing ar-؛٠، dour; for as the poet Says ;
״ Love in Security but faintly burns,
“ But after doubts and fears, more bright returns.” Altho’ this was certainly the most; unaccountable thought that ever enter’d into a madman’s head ; still, as a lover, we must not wander at his adopting it; and Maria coming under the Same predicament, we must not be Surpriz’d, at his finding fo little difficulty in perSuading her to agree to any thing which carried with it the least probability of infuring her happinefs ; tho’ she often repeated, that the hypocriSy would be very painSul: but what shall we Say to lady Hartry ? in whom, to uSe Hamlet’s words, “ The heigh-day in ״ her blood was tame, was humble, and waited on ״ the judgment;” yet Such is the frailty of human nature, that tho’she made the most Scruples, Melvill’s perSuasions, join’d to her wishes ·, for Maria’s happineSs, Soon overcame her Scruples -
§4 A MORAL NOVEL, pies of deceit; and it was therefore agreed, that this Scheme should be immediately carried into execution; and as Maria was the principal ac. treSs, we may be Sure she determined to hasten it as much as possible.
CHAP. XVTI.
And yet methinks duty cannot demand th٠ Sacrifice of my own happinefs! Surely neither heaven or nature require me, in obedience to a parent, to marry a man with whom I must be for ever miserable.
The Opera of Tom Jones.
OUR lovers, thus happy in the anticipation of future joys, had been fome time alone ; when they were Suddenly Surpriz’d by the unexpected return of Sir Thomas, who immediately burst into the room where they were fitting; happy was it for lady Hartry that she had left them, being thereby render’d unfuSpected of having had any hand in the meeting ; although the bare finding the young couple together, would have been Sufficient grounds for Sir Thomas to have reprimanded Melvill ; yet to add to the misfortune, he had interrupted them in a minute, Sacred alone to love and privacy ; in short, be
had
A MORAL NOVEL. 5؟ had found his daughter clafp’d in the arms of him she fondly lov’d : to defcribe the furprize painted on each of their countenances at this minute, would require the pen of a Fielding, or the pencil of a Hogarth ; there was but one part for Maria to take; and therefore, with an assum’d anger, pushing Melvill from her, she utter’d fome few inarticulate words in a kind of reproof. —١■—Sir Thomas now began, by telling him, that after what had pafs’d, he was much Surpriz’d at feeing him there, andinsisted he would not for the future trouble Oak-hall with his company, for if he did, as a gentleman, he should be obliged to call him to an account for his behaviour. Melvill, willing to improve on the hint he had receiv’d from Maria, begg’d his pardon in the most humble manner ; adding, that he need no longer be under any apprehensions concerning his visits at Oak-hall, as he had been fusticiently tutor’d on that Subject by his daughter, whoSe anger he had already incurred, by his unpardonable preSumption ; fo faying, he took his leave, inwardly pleas’d at having left Maria fo fair an opening towards the profecution of their Scheme ; nor was she at all behindhand with him in contrivance : for when her father began to reprimand her for feeing Melvill, contrary to his expreSs commands, she interrupted him by faying, that, according to his orders, she had endeavour’d all in her power to forget him, in which she was fo happy as to have Succeeded, but that, if she bad any little esteem for him left,
he
86 AMORAL N O V E L. he had now forfeited it, by this last act of imprudence ; as a proof of which, she was willing to receive favourably Mr. Clunch’s visits, and ready to enter into an alliance with that family, as foon as was agreeable to her father.
Sir Thomas kifs’d her, call’d her his good, b؛s dutiful child ; and, in his fondnefs, was as ridiculously foolish as in his anger : he had formerly been imprudently passionate ; and tho’ Maria, out of a pretended coynefs, objected to fo early a time, he insisted on that day Sev’n-night being fixed Sor the wedding, and that all necessary preparations should be immediately begun ; to which our heroine, with great Seeming reluctance, at length conSented,, promising to obey her Sather in every thing, who instantly ran to communicate this good news to his wife.
It was on the evening of this happy day, before Sir Thomas had Scarce recover’d from the tranfports which the first knowledge of his daughter’s obedience had thrown him into, when the happinefs of this family was not a little increas’d, by the arrival of AEmily Summers, tho’ the felicity of most of them Sprung Srorn different cauSes:—as this young lady was no stranger at Oak-hall, her prefence did not in least restrain the lively Sallies of the Baronet’s joy; nor had'she been long arriv’d, before she was given to understand the reafon.—Nothing could equal her astonishment at this news, as
she
A MORAL NOVEL. S? she thought, from their long and sincere friend. ship, Maria had not behaved with her ufual generosity, in concealing it from her, which she had intirely done, except giving her the hint, which the reader may remember, in her last letter, and which could refer to nothing eife ; nor was this thought confin’d to her own breast, she foon found an opportunity of taxing her friend with unkindnefs, who immediately related to her, all that the reader has before heard ; as likewise, her intended Scheme.—AEmily knew it would be to no purpoSe to dissuade her from it; and as Maria had put fo much confidence in her, by trusting her with a Secret of this nature, she could not, in honour, divulge it to Sir Thomas, of which, at first, she had fome design ; she therefore, though without the least hopes of its fuccefs, Seem’d to acquiefce therein, and promis’d to do all in her power towards the execution of it.—Charlotte Howard was the next day made acquainted with the arrival of their mutual friend AEmily, and at the earnest request of both, added one more to this happy circle, for tho’ Sir Thomas had dropp’d all acquaintance with Melvill, still this did not alter his behaviour to, or diminish his regard for the rest of Mr. Howard’s family.
CHAP.
A MORAL NOVEL.
CHAP. XVIII.
--------------Understand more clear
What’s past and what’s to come, is flrew’d with hufks
And formlefs ruin of oblivion.
Trolius and Cressida.
TH £ necessary preparations for Maria’s wedding were immediately begun, and Clunch Spent as much oS his time as he could Spare from his rustic amufements, at Oak-hall with his intended bride, who received his visits with great feeming complacence, confcious that that they could be of no long continuance. When she was not thus employed, she had the felicity oS enjoying the company 'of her two friends, without controu!; and indeed the affection which thefe young ladies had mutually for each other, made their time to pafs with the greatest Social harmony; every day brought with it fome new pleafure ; and, as the Surest means of augmenting their festivity, each of them Seem’d more assiduous to promote the bliSs of the other two than her own.. A sigh, indeed, would Sometimes unwarily eScape from poor Maria; who, as the destin'd day drew nigh, Seemed every moment to loSe Some of her resolution ; to- add to which, her friend Charlotte (on the day before the intended marriage) for reafons very apparent, made an excufe to return
home ;
.A MOARL NOVEL. 89
home; by that means avoiding being prefent at the propoSed nuptials.
During this young lady’s stay at Oak-hall, poor Melvill’s time had passed but heavily ; however, to compenSate for all his torments, she brought him a letter from Maria, containing fresh assurances of regard ؛ which when he received, in an involuntary extafy, he exclaimed ;
Sweet love ! fweet lines! Sweet life !
Here is her hand, the agent of her heart,
Here is her oath for love, her honour’s pawn, Oh, that her father would approve our loves, To feal our happinefs with his conSent!
Oh, heavenly Maria 1
As it was agreed on, that Melvill should leave England, as Soon as he had gained a promiSe from Sir Thomas to confent to their marriage when he came of age : he had taken care to prepare every thing necessary for his voyage : nor indeed was he diSpleafed at thus having a plea to Satisfy his eager curiosity, by visiting foreign countries, tbo’ at the price of being fe-parated from Maria. And when the destined morn arriv’d, he hastened to the church, where the other company were already assembled ; consisting of the intended bride and bridegroom, AEmily Summers, Sir Thomas and Lady Hartry, and Sir Toby Clunch: Maria trembled with apprehension; but that only Serv'd to cast an
unuSual
90 AMO R A L N O V E L. '
unnfual glow upon her countenance, and made her look uncommonly beautiful; nor was her concern on Such an occasion taken notice of, as a modest diffidence is uSual.
Although Melvill stood a great way behind the rest of the company, he could not avoid the eyes of Sir Thomas, who thought it not a little extraordinary for him to be there; however, still keeping his post, he stood agitated by violent hopes and fears. Maria went through the former part of the ceremony tolerably well, till tbe critical minute arrived ؛ and here I fain would conceal the weaknefs of my heroine; but truth obliges me to maintain my character, and inform my readers of every particular, without Suppressing any. Judge then, if you possibly can, kind reader, what were poor Melvill’s fenSations, when, on her being aiked the important question, after near a minute’s silence, he heard her feebly pronounce, I will ; his astonishment and rage for fome time, were both So great, that he stood motionleSs; at last, casting at her a look of distraction, he hurried out of the church, and throwing himfelf into a post cbaife, which had been ordered to wait for bim, proceeded to Mr. Howard’s, to whom in a few minutes he related what bad happened, and Set out the next day for Dover, but with a far different opinion of the female Sex, than what he flattered himSelS he should have begun his travels with : thought؟ of himfelf alone had for Some
time
A MORAL N O V E Ii. 91 time occupied his mind ; but anger against Maria now took its place, which he vented as follows, ״Yes, I have long been blinded by ״ passion, but that at last is over, my natural “ reafon has regain’d her power ; and I can now ״ See, nay Seel, wbat an abject wretch he must “ be, who trusts bis happinefs in a woman’s ״ power; Smiling miSchieSs all, that crocodile-״ like, flatter but to betray : thus then I dif-״ claim all thoughts of a Serious connection with ״ any of the fex ; but why do I still talk of, or ״ trouble myfelf about her, she is not worth a ״ thought ; and I hope I shall get quite clear of “ her idea before I reach Dover ;” — on the Road to which place we must leave him, and return to fee what happened at the church after his departure.
CHAP. XIX.
Why tell you me of moderation ?
The grief is fine, full, perfect that I taste,
And in its fenfe is no lefs strong, than that Which caufeth it. How can I moderate it ?
Troilus and Cressid-a.
I Don't doubt but my young female readers (if any Such I am honoured with) will all be apt to condemn and defpife poor Maria for want of fidelity, or rather of refolution ; but let them
consider
92 A MORAL NOVEL, consider one minute, and make her cafe their own, and I am Sure their contempt will be converted into generosity. A young lady, educated with So strict a SenSe of honour and truth as she was, could not be guilty of Such premeditated deceit ; the Solemnity of the place, the awful grandeur of the ceremony, all, all forbad it; passion had before obScur’d her reafon, but it now justly appeared to her, like going to church with a design to utter a premeditated falsehood in the sight of God : yet notwithstanding all this, she Suffered the most painful conflict, before she could fo far let her virtue overcome her love; but when she had thus nobly gain’d an afcendancy over her passions, she felt that innate Satisfaction which confcious virtue always does, on the performance of any good action ; but that Satisfaction was but of a very short duration, and instantly vanished, when, on turning her head round, she obferved in Melvill’s face, the distraction of his heart, and immediately after Saw him leave the church ; it was then the thoughts of having deceived him, and lost him for ever, rush’d upon her mind in their full force; nay, even with aggravated circumstances: this was far too much for her tender nature to Support; she immediately fainted away, before the material parts of the ceremony were performed, and threw the whole church into confusion : she was carried home fenfelefs; but by being put to bed, and the application of proper remedies, foon came to herfelf.
Almost
A MORAL NOVEL. 93 Almost every one then prefent, put different constructions on this accident: No one except lady Hartry and AEmily were acquainted with the true caufe : they had as well as Maria observed Melvill, and, on his leaving the church in So extraordinary a manner, had too well guessed what were his intentions : to thefe, when alone, our afflicted heroine unburthened her full heart; and having made all the excufes she could think of, to palliate her infidelity, conjur’d her mother, as a proof of her Sympathetic feelings, to Send to know what was become oS Melvill : lady Hartry, with true maternal SondneSs, was ready to admit of any plea that her daughter could make, and joined with AEmily in assuring her, that she thought her . more worthy of pity than cenSure; after which she mentioned her SuSpicions of Melvill’s being gone abroad, the better to prepare her for Such a stroke, in caSe it should piove true, and promised to fatisSy her curiosity, by fending to Mr. Howard’s immediately, which she accordingly did; and in return to her message, had the mortification oS hearing Srom Charlotte, that Melvill was by that time at Calais, having previous to his departure, inSormed Mr. Howard of that part of the affair, which was left untold by her, only becaufe she was not acquainted with the issue of their Scheme ; that his intention was to endeavour, by a variety of objects, to drive from his mind, a woman, whom he no longer held worthy of a place in it ؛ and lastly, that he
had
94 A M O R A L N O V E L. had promis’d to write when he arrived at Paris. —It was on this promife only, that lady Hartry ventur’d to inform her daughter of what she had heard, which she at length did, though with the greatest caution and tendernefs ; gently breaking it to her, by almost imperceptible degrees, till she had made her acquainted with the whole.
Altho’ poor Marla was very well prepar’d for this blow, and though it was no more than what she might reafonably expect, still she had flattered herfelf with the old proverb, That while there's life, there's hope; she had flatter’d herfelf, that when Melvill’s anger began to fubssde, he would ssay and fee the end of fo extraordinary an affair ; that he would defer his journey, till he was thoroughly convinced of her infidelity :—he thought very jussly, that nothing could be a ssronger proof thereof, than thus giving herfelf to another before his face ; his passion obfcur’d thofe reafons which arofe fo powerfully in her mind to countenance the act ; thofe reafons lassed but fo long, as while she remain’d in that uncertainty of doubt and fear, but when the anfwcr to her mother’s note arriv’d, she insisted on feeing it, which lady Hartry at first refus’d, as (thinking one part thereof, not fo proper for her perufai; but as it is impossible long to maintain a denial of any thing to thofe we love, Maria foon got the better, and by her victory was made completely miferable;
for
A MORAL NOVEL. 95 for tho' her mother bad before inform’d her of every part thereof, still she bad done it in a manner which gave her fome fmall gleam of hopes, and which, by the sight of it, she was convinc’d she had no reafon to indulge ; for a long time after reading it, her mind was torn by the contrary passions of contempt, love and pity ; fometimes she would rail at him for not waiting to fee the event cf an affair, which it fo nearly concern’d him to be acquainted with ; at others, she would exprefs her commendations of him for thus behaving to a perfon who had ufed him fo fcanbaloufiy, and then would vent the most bitter invectives against herfelf؛ but as according to the natural order of things, the human constitution cannot long thus exist upon the stretch, in a short time the agony of her mind affected the body, and threw her into a violent fever, in which she quickly became delirious, and was continually calling on Melvill; fometimes she would talk to him as if he were prefent, at others, she would fall into the most violent sits of passionate rage, and in this manner rave, till nature being almost exhausted, a flood of tears came feafonably to her relief.
Confcious, that from her fo often mentioning Melvill’s name, Sir Thomas must imagine there was fometbing more at the bottom of this affair than he was acquainted with, lady Hartry, by the advice of iEmily, (who bebav-’d with more than coprmon prudence, in fuch a feene of complicated
96 A MORAL NOVEL, plicated distress) related to him all she knew of the affair, kindly endeavouring to exempt poor Maria from as much blame as she possibly could: —To her great joy, this news was received in a far different manner from what she expected ; for as foon as Sir Thomas knew the caufe of his daughter’s illnefs, he us’d every means in his power, to hassen her recovery ; at her first interval of reafon, with the most assiduous tender-nefs, he dessr’d her to compofe her Spirits, acknowledging, that he was convinc’d of the folly of his conduct, and determin’d no longer to oppofe her happinefs; she thank’d him for the kindnefs of his intention, adding, ״ how happy ،، would this goodnefs once have made me! now ״ ’tis an aggravation of my forrow, and comes ״ like a reprieve when execution’s pass.”
With all the affection of friendship, and, at the fame time, with the unlimited extent of parental love, he us’d every argument he could think of, to palliate her grief ; and as a proof of the fincerity of his wishes for her happinefs, instantly wrote a letter to Melvill, (which he directed to the post houfe at Calais) acquainting him with the ■alteration of his Sentiments, and kindly re-inviting him to Oak-hall.
CHAP.
A MORAL NOVEL. 97
CHAP. XX.
■	.............Nature craves
All dues be render’d to their owners! now What nearer debt in all humanity,
Than daughter to the mother ?
Troilus and Cressida.
AS Maria had now gain’d her father’s, content to an union, which, she flatter’d herfelf. would one day take place; notwithstanding the fears she had, lest Melvill should meet abroad with fome lady, whofe beauty, join’d to her ill ufage, might eassiy efface all remembrance of her former kindnefs; the tranquillity of her mind was foon in fome degree restored, which, added to her youth and natural strength, began to re-establish her health ; the rofes that fo long had left her cheeks, began now to recover their accustom’d bloom ; and, as after a tedious gloomy winter, all nature gladdens at the approach of fpring, fo there was no one in the houfe, or neighbourhood, who did not really rejoice at Maria’s recovery, which was in a short time totally completed :—and thus the family at Oak-hall, (of which ¿Emily still made one) all but Maria, regain’d their former Serenity and peace.
When Mr. Clunch found that Sir Thomas was no longer an advocate for him with Maria, Vot. I.	E	he
9s A MORAL N O V E L he was easily induc’d to retract his claim, and in a few weeks after, married the daughter of one of his father’s tenants, with whom he probably found more real happinefs, than ever he could have done with a perfon, whofe fentiments and purfuits were fo widely different from his own.
As Sir Henry Summers had now been abfent much longer than he at first intended, ./Emily began to be not a little furprized thereat, as well as puzzled, to find out what businefs he could have there to detain him fo long ; nor could she avoid obferving, thathe had never made mention of it in any one of his letters; however, as he wrote constantly to inform her of his welfare, and as Mr. Martin had in his last letter given her a hint of an intended visit, she was easily prevail’d upon by Maria to remain at Oak-hall ؛ where, by their mutual desire, Charlotte Howard now was.
Nothing therefore was wanting to complete the felicity of this family, but Melvill׳,s return, which Maria had waited for, fome time, with the greatest resignation and patience ; but when the period was elapfed, whereat she had flattered her. Self with the pleassng expectation of beholding him, and in which she was most grievously difap-pointed, her former uneafinefs began to return, and from the natural inclination which, she ha.d. for folitude, foon fettled into a melancholy defpon-
dencc.
A MORAL NOVEL. 99 dence, when, as if adverfe fate had not already fufficiently tormented her, Mr. Howard received a letter from Melvill, wherein he inform’d him, —“ That ؛he had just recovered from a violent sit of illnefs, and was preparing to leave Paris (where he then was) in order to visit Madrid; that it still remained his firm refolve to endeavour, by a quick fucceffion of new objects, to recall his heart from Oak-hall; that-as he should be continually upon the move, it would be impossible for him to hear from England; his design in which was, to avoid feeing the very name of Hartry, that nothing might retard the cure he hoped in a short time to work in his mifplaced affections.”
It was very apparent from this, that he had never received the letter Sir Thomas fent after him to Calais; and altho’ the news pierc’d poor Maria to the heart, yet still, to oblige her parents, she endeavoured to assume the placid fmiles ١of cool indifference : Ob, what a painful taste to wear a chearful countenance with a gloomy heart !—.Out of duty and complaifance to them she entered into company, though at the fame time she longed tohe alonej to indulge her melancholy reflections on. this unfortunate affair! which was the more fo to her, as she could blame no one for it but herfelf: her two bofom friends, /Emily and Charlotte, endeavoured all in their power to comfort her, the latter of whofe company she was remarkably fond of, as she E %	knew
too A MORAL NOVEL.
knew by fatal experience the torments of divided love, and would fometimes humour her affliction, by talking of Melvill, in return for which Maria would fympathize with her in her grief, for the long, long lost Charles Hartry : in this manner, by each having a friend to share in their afflictions, the burthen lay the lighter upon either :.—But as thefe reflections will not deliver poor Maria from her msserable sstuation ; and, as I at prefent fee no probable means of doing it, I must be contented to leave her as she is, and take fome further notice of /Emily’s affairs.
It was now in the delightful month of May, about fix in the evening, while our female friends were fitting in a natural alcove, form’d by furrounding jeffamies and woodbines, their attention abforb’d, in listening to a natural concert of the feather’d choisters around, fuperior far to any which the rigid rules of art can dictate, when they were fuddenly Surprized by the appearance of a gentleman, whom, on his nearer approach, ./Emily discovered to be no other than Mr. Martin ; who, to add to her joy, inSorm’d her, that her uncle would be there the enSuing morning : the first Salutations were Scarce over, before Charlotte and Maria took an opportunity of leaving their Sriend to enjoy, without reServe, the company oS that man, Sor whom alone she Seem’d to wish to live: AEmily Saw, or at least fancied she Saw, an unfual SeriouSneSs painted on his countenance, nor could she forbear aiking
him
A MORAL NOVE L. ioi him the reafon ; but he evaded an explanation, by the weak excuSe oS being fatigued by his journey ; though this was not the real cauSe, as the reader will preSently be convinced.—The next morning, agreeable to what Mr. Martin had told her, .،2Emily had the SatisSaction oS embracing her uncle; who, in a short time aSter his arrival, not a little astonish’d her by the Sollowing diScourSe-
״ It may not now (my dear /Emily) be impro-*٠ per to acquaint you with the cauSe oS my So “ Sudden expedition, at which I don't doubt you “ were very much Surprised ; but I am Sure you “ will be much more So, when, previous to what ״ I have to Say, I must assure you, that you are ״ not my niece ; nor did I, till within this short ״ time, know any relation you had in the world.” —·ASmily’s Surprize at hearing this piece oS news, may be much better imagined than deScribed ; however, as no words could convey a proper idea oS her astonishment, she Sat silent, and Suffered Sir Harry to proceed without interruption. ٠—He had informed Martin (who was then prefent) of this affair before ; and indeed this was the caufe of that inquietude which /Emily had taken notice of the preceding evening ; Sor when he Sound there were no ties of kindred between Sir Harry and his ward, and still heard the warm manner in which he Spoke of her, he began to be under Some apprehensions, lest in his old age he should play the Sool, by singing amorous dities to the bloom oS nineteen ; So ready are we E 3	·	to
102
A MORAL N О V E L. to furmife whatever our fear dictates.—Sir Harry now related to .؟؛Emily all the circumstances relative to his finding her,, that the reader has before heard in the former part of this history ؛ , arid then proceeded as follows.
“ Soon after, this extraordinary affair happened,. ״ I was telling it to,a circle of gentlemen, none “ of whom.chofe to believe me, but all persisted. “ in attributing to me a larger share thereof than ،، I had any right to.—And altho’ I then, and: “ ever Since have ufed all possible means to dif.
“ cover your parents, it has been to no purpofe;
13 till a short time ago an intimate: acquaintance,
“ one of thofe to whom I had mentioned thecir-“ cumstance, and now residing in Ireland, Sent me “ word, that he bad discovered the parent-of ״ my AEmily ؛ and if I wish’d to be fully fatisfi-“ ed thereof, defired my immediate attendance “ at Dublin.—You may easily imagine that I “ did not heiitate onemonent what step to take ; “ the hurry of my departure will fufficiently “ evince to you, the eagernefs of my..curiosity....٠١ ״ ■ On my arrivalin Dublin, my friend, at whofe “ desire I had made the journey, informed me,. “ that he had met with the lady, concerning ״ whom he wrote to me, after the follow-،؛ ؛ng manner ; by the accidental misfortune of ״ her foot’s flipping, she had fallen down in the “ street, had he not, by the greatest good luck, ٤٠ been behind her, and offering his arm, imme-«· ؛stately led her into an adjoining shop: when.
“ she
A MORAL NOVEL. ioj “ she was a little recovered from the fright “ which this accident had thrown her into, she “ found that she had happily received no other ״ hurt,than a flight Scratch on the hand by a post؛ ״ on which she had endeavoured to fave herfelf ؛٠ from falling ; when on taking out her pocket' “ book, to fearch for a bit of sticking plaister to ٠* apply to the wound, an open paper fell out,؛ f، which he picked up and gave her, though he ״ could not avoid first reading it as-he held it in “ his hand, having feen fome words he recollect-“ ed elfewhere ; and was amazed to find it con-*٠ tained the fame words, as that which I difco-“ vered pinn’d upon your breast, and which I “ had frequently shewn him.—So extraordinary “ a circumstance awakened his cutiofity ;, and in “ she way to her lodgings, where common ci״ vilify oblig’d him to attend her, with many׳ “ apologies for the question, he begg’d to know “ on what occafion thofe words were wrote, “ and; as he assured her„ that he had other ״ motives than curiosity for this inquiry, she fea-“ dily fatissied him ; at the fame time, giving him؛ “ the history of heriife, from which he was con-״ vinced it could be no other than your mother. ״ —At my desire he immediately introduced me “ to her ; and having before informed her, what “ share Ihadin the businefs, she was as eager to “ relate, as I was to hear, the story of her woe ; “ though both our desires Sprung from different ״ motives; mine, from the hopes of making a ״ worthy woman happy (for fuch, from my E 4־،؛، ؛friend's
!04 AMORAL NOVEL.
״ friend’s account, I was fure she must be) by “ delivering to her arms a daughter whom a mo* ״ narch might boast of; and hers, from the ex-٤' pectation of becoming a joyful mother, at a ״ time when she had So little reaSon to look Sor ״ Such a bleffing She therefore Satisfied my curiosity, as follow؛..
C H A P. XXI.
■—Virtue tho’ of winds and waves the Sport.
By paffions shaken, and by dangers crost,
On life’s great fea, is never wholly lost ;
Some power divine conducts her fwelling fails. And, of her due reward, she feldom fails.
The School for Rakes*
BORN and bred¡ in retirement and eafe, at more than a hundred miles distance from the capital of England, my youthful days were past’d in one continued round of innocent amufe-ments ; educated under the fostering wing of indulgent parents, whofe utmost wishes were their childrens happinefs : my inclinations never learnt to stray, but where my duty led them ; the Smiles of benignity fat upon my youthful countenance, every circumstance of life confpir’d to make me blefs’d :—I had a brother whom I lov’d dearly as myfelf ; as our ages were nearly
equal
A M O R A L N O V E L. 105 equal, our study and purfuits were made fo too, under that man, who was at once our tutor and our parent:—I read the Classics and learnt French with him, and in return, he was fometimes permitted to take a lesson on the guittar with me; but as we were only fuffer’d to ufe theSe as amuSements at our leiSure hours, by thus being taught to conssder in the light of indulgences, what were really edifying and ufeful ssudies, we of courfe made much more progrefs therein than if we had look’d upon them as inflicted talks, which we were obliged to perform.
As my father’s essate was not fufficient to enable him to bring up my brother independent of the world, he gave him leave to chufe his profession, when pitching on the army, he immediately bought him a commission in the first regiment of guards, and fent him to London, to perform the duty which he ow’d his king and and country, not without many tears on both sides* at his departure.—You may easily imagine, how much I felt for the lofs of a brother, whom I lov’d with fuch tenderness; but as he promis’d, to write to me frequently, by the alternate affif-tance of my books and my guittar, I made a shift at least to fupport the appearance of tolerable fpirits; tho١ I will own, I felt this blow more feverely than I dar’d then confefs;—but as the All-wife Being never■ does any thing without proposing fome end thereby, fo this had one E 5,	great
vo6. A MORAL NOVEL.
great good attending it־-; for as I have since found by fatal experience, that I was born to undergo many misfortunes,—this, fo early ؛n life, ferv’d to inure me to what I since have fuffer’d;, and what, was then the cauSe of fo much affliction to me, on a cool retrospection, appears to be nothing,, in comparifon of what I since, have felt :—for thus we always fwell our prefent pain, tillssome feverer grief arrives, which shews what’s past, without extenuation orincreafe, in! its true light.
I thus give you the history of my family, be-caufe in my brother’s, my own is included.—٠ About a year after his departure, he inform’d us by letter, of,an intended visit, having obtain'd leave of abfencefor three months; and that he should bring a particular acquaintance, who was a brother officer, with him:—accordingly, in a few days he arriv’d, attended by his friend,, wh.fe name, was Modish : this gentleman, who was a lieutenant as well as my brother, feem’d؛ by nature form’d to pleafe the women; had I faid foF their destruction, my own circumstances-would too fatally justify the expreffion, as I can with truth affirm, that I have never felt the influence of joy, since first I knew him; but still I don't repent of my acquaintance ; for wherefo-«ver he is, may heav’n protect him !—.he had not been long at my father’s, before his behaviour too plainly convinc'd me of his fentiments; k short be Soon found an opportunity of declar-
«٤
A MORAL N O V E L؛؟©!	,־
ing his paffion for me, in the warmest terms ; nor will I pretend to play the hypocrite, by faying I was difpleas’d at it: and though prudence (as he had no fortune, but the income of his commiffion) would not fuffer me to receive his addresses openly, as it would have been madnefs in me, to have imagin’d that my father ever would agree to the match, yet in private I gave him all the encouragement that modesty would allow of, or his generoslty have.afk’d..
I was now one-and.twenty and had just receiv’d a thoufand pounds left me by an uncle, and which was all the fortune I had independent of my father ; and, in short, Sir; my affection for him was fo deeply rooted, that he too easlly prevail’d upon me to fly from the best of parents, and receive him as a hushand-:—he then wrote to my brother, acquainting him there-־ with,. and deslring him to break the affair to my father, and intreat his forgivenefs ; after which ١ we proceeded to London, where we waited for feme time, in daily expectation of an anfwer, but were amaz’d to find ourfelves difappointed١ ,؛ efpecially as Mr. Modish had-the■ precaution to defire my brother to direct to- h؛m at a certain coffee-houfe ; thither he· went every day, but every day had the mortification of a difappoint-ment ؛—and. although my hushand’s regard for me, feem’d every moment toincreafe ; in fuch : a fituation, I v.׳as -far from being happy :—the confideration. of being, neglectfully deferted by
my
io8 AMORAL NOVEL, my parents, and all that my foul held dear in the world, except the partner of my heart, was too tormenting a thought for me not to be fensibly afflicted with.—We had been in town about two months, when the following misfortune happen’d to deprive me even of the pleafure which my hushand’s company afforded.
He was returning home one night from the coffee-houfe, about twelve o’clock, elevated in liquor, when a perfon from behind, gave him a slap on the shoulder.—Imagining he was befet by foot-pads, turning fuddenly round, he sired one of the pislols which he always carried about him, and instantly faw the perfon who had thus attack’d him, fall to the ground.—A croud of watchmen immediately affembled, drawn thither by the report of his pistol,—rbut—good heavens ! —what was his consternation, when he found the perfon he had shot, to be no other than my brother, and whofe flap on the shoulder, which was a mark of familiarity and affection, had been thus fatally mifconstrued.—Concluding that he had certainly kill’d him,, under a pretence of fetching a furgeon he ran home, and informing me of this melancholy accident, took half my fortune, which luckily was in the houfe, and tenderly embracing me, hurried away to preferve himfelf.
As he fufpected, fo it happen’d, for my brother died in lefs than an hour, and rewards were
immediately
A MORAL NOVEL >o?
immediately advertis’d for the apprehension of his murderer :—oh, Sir ! think what a situation this was;—in one fad hour depriv’d of all my future profpects of feiicify,—׳■my dearest brother dead ;—my hushand flown I knew not where, and stigmatiz’d as his destroyer ;—hourly branded with the name of villain, for as no one knew the truth of this affair, every time it was told,, added to his difcredit, and it at last reach’d my father’s ears ; maim’d and viilanousty wrested every way to uit the purpofes of avaricious relations ; fo that all he heard was, that my hufband was she murderer of his fon.”
According to the cruel expectation of the malicious propagators of this report, he foon died —nor did my mother long furvive, both their ends being not a little hastened by this misfortune. Thus, Sir, was almost the whole family at once annihiliated, by an accidental error ; into which the best of men might easily have fah len.
In this accumulated distrefs, I had no friend to comfort or affist me, and though Mr. Modish had promis’d to inform me of his fate, I still remain’d entirely ignorant thereof, having never once heard from him since his departure ; when, to crown all my mifery, I found myfelf with child :—although I had a pretty large fum of money left, it was daily diminishing, and as I had no profpect of getting more, I even then
began
no A MORAL NOVEL, began to anticipate the tortures of poverty.—At the ufual time, I was brought to bed of a daughter ; and, about six weeks after my delivery, had-the luck of meeting with a lady, who had generosity enough to believe my story, and humanity enough to promife to assist me ; nor did she fail , to keep her word : in a few days after, she told me that a widow lady, to whom she had mention’d my misfortunes, had kindly offer’d to١ take me with her to Ireland as a companion, bur: that my having a child was an unSurmountable : obstacle,—and now, Sir, shall I not SorSeit your good opinion? by owning, that by the melancholy proSpect before me, I was drove to make u-Se oS she following stratagem :—having Sre-quently heard your character Sor humanity ex— toll’d, I convey’d my little darling to a place where- 1 Sanded you were Sure of Seeing her, . with a paper pinned upon her breast, on which
I wrote theSe words.---Unknown Jlranger, who-
foe'er thou art that find'fl ibis iucklefs babe, flout not your ears againfl the tender cries of youthful innocence, but pity, cherifh, and receive her ; in return for which, fhe will Jar o'erpay your generous care, by her endearing prattle.·—Having heard, that according to my expectations, you had taken her into! your houfe, I was much pleas’d at the SucceSs oS my Scheme, , and with joy Set out Sor Ireland, though it was not a little allay’d, by my never having heard from Mr. Modish, who had now been gone near a year:.— in short, ٠Sir, ،not to trouble you with any unnecessary
A" MORAL NOVEL. m
necessary particulars, I remain’d here with my, patronefs, till her death, which happen’d about half a year ago, when in return for my fervices, , she left me her whole fortune, amounting t٥ near ten thoufand pounds; and being thereby put into a station· of, life, fuperior to my utmost wishes, Lwas preparing to fet out for England, to make enquiries after my daughter, when 1؛ ■"learnt accidentally from this gentleman, what was her fituation in the world : and now, Sir,„ there is nothing wanting to complete my felicity, but fome tidings of Mr. Modish, of whofe fate I am entirely ignorant, though he has-been abfent near twenty years..
CHAP. XXII..
The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power,
And all that honours, ail that wealth e’er gave.. . Await alike the inevitable hour ;
The paths of glory lead but t. the grave.
G ra r’s E l eg v.
TH U S, continued Sir Harry, did Mrs¿ Modish fully fatisfy. me, with regard to her being the real parent of my adopted .¿Emily ; I therefore brought her with me to Lqndon, where she.now is, >nd. whither 1 don't doubt you-
wiR
114 A MORAL NOVEL.
will joyfully accompany me to-morrow, to pay your duty to a woman who ¡s every way deferv-ing the title of your mother.—And altho’, my AEmily, you are not my niece, nevertheless we are related, as. I find your Sather was brother to, my cousin M'odish, whom you have oSten Seen and' with whom (iS the reader will revert to the׳ fourth chapter) he will find Sir H'arry had a d؛s-courfe on the Subject ofhis behaviour to Æmا؛y when he. endeavoured to dissuade him Srom the-noble and humane reshlution that he had jnade. —How little did he then know he was arguing against his own niece 1-1 have alSo (added-Sir Harry) since my return, on enquiring of my cousin concerning the fate of his brother, heard that he was lost in his passage to 1'taly ; for which place he had embarked' to avoid the officers of justice.—As his marriage was an, intire fecret, he-never had an opportunity of communicating it to. his brother, who was then abroad ; and who, till my information,, never had the least fufpieion thereof.-
On obferving that .AEmily could not refrain from, tears, at hearing the fate of that man to, whom she owed her birth ; he faid,־“ Indeed,. ״ my dear, this shrrow is unnecessary, as you “ never kne.w the perfon whofe lofs. you are la-‘ء menting; an.d, as heaven has. been kind enough ״ to restore to you a parent, who, I am lure,
״ will, perform every duty, and amply shpply the ا؛ place of both.father and mother.—This, my
“ AEmily,؛
A M O R A L N O V E L. 113
“ rEmily, was the only reafon why I desired ״ you to defer your marriage till after my re. “ turn ; for, as you have now a parent to apply “ to, mine is but an affirmed authority ; though “ I am convinced, she will readily give her con-״ fent to every thing which may contribute to ״ your happinefs.”——
As Mr. Martin was now entirely delivered from thofe apprehensions, which we hinted at above, he foon recovered his ufual flow of fpirits ; and congratulated .¿Emily on her new acquisition, in terms of the greatest tendernefs; as did the rest of the family at Oak-hall; who were immediately made acquainted with this happy revolution.—-Even poor Maria feem’d to forget the caufe of her affliction, and share in the general joy.—The next morning Sir Harry fet out for London, attended by Martin and iEmily, though not without being first made to promife, that they would return with Mrs. Modish, and there celebrate the nuptials of her daughter.
To defcribe the meeting between .¿Emily and her mother, would require the efforts of a stronger pen, than my poor inexperience is master of; let it fuffice to fay, that each was highly pleafed with the acquisition of fo deferring a relation ; and that this lady readily confented to her daughter’s marriage with Mr. Martin, whom she from tha.t moment considered as her fon.——Sir Henry having generously prefented hi، adopted child
with
٠״· A MORAL NOVEL, with ten thoufand pounds, thefe happy people, accompanied by Mrs. Modish, returned to Sir Thomas Hartry’s·, where, in a short time, Martin’s happinefs was completed, by being put in. posseffion of the truly amiable iEmily.
Although Maria, out of regard for her friend* could not refufe being prefent at the wedding, the reader may imagine how much this renew’d her grief; the thoughts of having lately beer. to. the fame church, on fo different an occasion, and the melancholy circumssances attending it; all ferv’d to revive that forrow, the sirss tumults of which were as yet fcarcely fubssded ; and though her breast at this juncture, was truly the feat of mourning and. affliction;, on her Sace she wore apparent marks of joy: thus then, all were, or
at least feemed happy.----Sincerity and affection
here went hand in hand, and cordially embrac’d each other:—but mark the mutability of all human affairs,—oh, vain man l ؟١ho can con-troul his fate ? or dare to fay,—,To-morrow it my own f—■The joy that this family might truly boast,—and the happinefs which Sate Seemed to have provided Sor them, Sor many· years to come, were at once cruelly destroyed, by an accident as unforeseen, as unprovided for-.
The day aSter their marriage,.. Airnily proposed a ride, which the unS.rtunate Martin too readily acquieSced in ; and؛they were Scarce got ؛،,hundred yards Shorn the houSe. before her horSe
took
A MORAL NOVEL. it* took fright at fome linen hanging on a hedge ;
. when, not being the most expert horfe-woman, she lost her feat, and was thrown with the most violent force, with her head against the foot of a tree, from thence she was taken up, and carried home fpeechlefs:—On an examination of the wound by a furgeon, he declared it to be mor-tab—Would to heav’n his report had been fallacious !—but as he foretold, in a few hours, the fairest flower which earth ever Saw, or heav’n ever destroyed, departed from a place where her felicity was but just begun !׳— Oh Providence t how unfearchable are all thy ways, when the very means that we contrive for our amufements», are thus conducive to our destruction ?—for, to. add to the poignancy of this misfortune, Martin was the first who, in order toamufe AEmily. hash insisted on her learning to ride.—How little did he then imagine the fatal confequences, which, were one day doom’d to attend it l·—Common griefs admit of common palliative conSolations ;٠״ but alas, poor; Martin ! who shall Speak comfort to affliction great as thine ?—in one fad hour depriv’d of wife,— bride,—mistrefs.--------؛-Let the
Stoic, pamper’d with delicacies, from his bed of down, defpife the pinching gripes attendant upon poverty ;·—then let him Smile at misfortunes, and deSy their point ؛—■but shew me the man who, when the preffing hand of stern adversity is on him, will talk thus; who, when his heart¡؟ sick with grief, and his.eyes dim with tears,, can still.
prefers.©.
6״ A MORAL NO.V EL. preferve his reshlution, and I will worship him like a defcended angel.
CHAP. XXIII.
Can storied urn, or animated bust.
Back to its mansion call the ss.eeting breath ?
Can honour’s voice provoke the silent dust ?'
Or flatt’ry shoth the dull cold ear of death ?
Gray’s Elegy.
Su RE n؛٥er yct wa;f״٥nj عث١ئلاك tr f
complicated woe as we here meet־ with at Oak-hall !-at once dash’d from the heighth of profperity and happinefs, to the lowest step of mifery, that even premeditated malice could have contrived.—Poor Mrs. Modistr !־no fooner to he fcnsible of the shul-taught feelings of parental love, blit thus to be obliged to feel the pangs of an eternal feparation l—See this, ye vain ones of the world, and learn how little value you should fet upon your prefent happinefs, when you are thus liable every minute to be deprived thereof.— But to proceed.
The affli^on of the company at Sir Thomas Hartry’s on l־his occasion, beggars all defcription. —When their first strock was a httle over. Sir Hsnry removed Mrs. Modisti from a place, where ,	every
A M O R A L N O V E L. 117
every object ferved but to renew her grief, by reminding her of her departed /Emily ; but Martin insisted on staying there, to mingle his tears with thofe of the whole neighbourhood, till after her interment.—As this was too extraordinary an affair long to remain fecret; the whole country were foon in tears, for the fate of the most deserving woman of her early age.—This blow, added, to thofe shocks she had lately receivedj had nearly been the occasion of Maria’s relapfe ; but, by the friendly converfation’ of Charlotte, her mind was diverted from the continual contemplation of thofe things which occasion’d her grief.
T؛me١ that allievates most forrowsj feefn.d to increafe that of Martin, who now determin’d to re-visit London, a month having elaps'd since the burial of his .،؛Emily ; during which time he had never fail’d daily watering her grave with his tears.—The evening before his departure, he went there alone ; and, having fpent fome time in the contemplation of that fpot, which contained all that his ravish’d foul had once held dear, the following words burst fpontaneousty from his sips : ״ Hush’d be each breeze !—ye ״ warblers stop your throats,׳—for—she is gone 1 “ —the fairest flower of the creation is destroyed ! « .	■ ■Death, like an untimely frost, has nipp’d
״ thofe beauties, which lately shone with Such
“ distinguish’d excellence !--1 never more shall
“ hear the music of that voice,—that Sorm no
״ more
t!8 A MORAL NOVEL.
«، more shall blefs my longing eyes !*—Lay light
“ upon her breast,־—ye turf,-happier there-
“ in than I :—all nature’s joyful fave myfelf alone. «—I wander infensible to all the fweets around ٠، me; unknowing, and unknown, like our first ٠، parents when drove out of Eden ; all that is “ past appears but like a dream, and all before “ me, dreary folitude.■■׳■ »■——Yet let me not ٠، complain ; O Heav’n ! thy ways are ju ft ؛٠ ٠، thou gavest and thou takest away.”—So faying, he returned to the houfe; and according to his design, the next day fet out for London.—■ I will therefore now take my leave of fo melancholy a profpect, and follow Mr. Melvill, ־whom I left in a post-chaife, on the road to Dover.
CHAP. XXIV.
That passion whichharrows the foul.
By reafon we strive to remove ;
But reafoii’s too weak to controul ׳׳
A passion fo powerful as love.
The O p ix a of Tom }on is,
ALTHOU GH Melvill (ashas been before related) had thus with the most noble refolu-fion,hurried from the sightof that perfon by whom hefanciod binjfelf fo much, injured:; yet like the>
famous
A MORAL NOVEL. u.
'famous Greek of old, he bore the fatal arrow ؛n his heart, and in an almost distracted state, arriv’d at Dover just as the packet was fetting fall for Calais, on which he embarked, and in a few hours ■reaching the end of his voyage, from thence proceeded v،׳ith the utmost rapidity to ؛Paris, where he had not long heen, before the fatigue of travelling, to. which he was fo unaccustom’d, join’d t.his uneasiness, of mind about Maria, whom (however he might flatter himfelf). ■he could· not fo Soon forget ; threw him ׳(as the reader has before heard.) into a violent fever.
This was a most shocking situation for fo young a traveller, confin’d to his hed in a strange place, without an acquaintance to fpeak to, or a friend to give him any assistance : he had just learnt French enough (while a boy) to afk for what he -wanted, but not to bold any conversation in the language; fo that (if I may be allow’d the expression) all the intercourse he could have, was with his own thoughts, and indeed he there found full employment;—he repeatedly curs’d the day of his nativity, and oftner that of his first acquaintance with Maria, as all the kindneSs she had hitherto shewn him, ferv’d but to make her infidelity appear the stronger, and in more detestable colours ; of which, he fometimes determin’d, on his recovery to return and accufe her; but then he recollected, this would rather Serve to increaSe, than heal his woun<5؛> Sor as he
؛w؛u
120 A MO-RAL NOVEL.
was confcious, that she had still the firm pof-feffion of his heart, the thought of feeing her the wife of another, was more than he could bear.
During his illnefs, as h؛s only amufement, he had recourfe fo reading, but not understanding French fufficiently to read in that language, and as the English books he there met with, were very indifferent, his studies gave him but little fatisfaction :—he by chance met with the following ode, with which he was highly delighted, as being fo conformable to himfelf.
ODE

A MORAL NOVEL.
٠ ODE to DEATH.
Oh death, thou gentle end of human pain,
Why is thy stroke fo long delay’d ?
Why, to a wretch who breathes but to complain, Dost thou refufe thy welcome aid ?
Still wilt thou fly the plaintive voice of woe ?
And where thou'tt dreaded, only aim the blow.
II.
Oh leave, fantastick tyrant, leave
The young, the gay, the happy, and the free,
On them bestow a short reprieve,
And bend thy fatal shaft at me ;
The beauteous bride, or blooming heir,
Let thy resistlefs arrow fpare,
And aim at this grief-wounded heart,
That Springs haiS-way to meet the welcome dart.
III.
Still must I view, with streaming eyes,
Another and another morn arife,
Are my days lengthen’d, to prolong my pain?
Enough of life’s distrefs I’ve Seen,
A finish’d wretch in youth’s first bloom.
By early forrovv, ripen’d for the tomb.
٠ The author does not prefent this ode ،٠ the pub-. lick as his own. production, but as one of the mod beautiful pieces of detach’d poetry, he ever remembers to have met with.
Vol. I.
In
F
122 A MORAL NOVEL.
In this manner did he amufe himfelf during his illnefs, which happily was of no long duration, for being confcious that nature is her own physician, and, by having Sair play, Sooner or later will effect a cure, he Suffer’d her to take her regular courSe; and in a few days got well enough to Satisfy his curiosity, by Seeing every thing in Paris worthy the attention of a traveller: —he was a constant attendant at the comedy, the opera, and all publick places, in hopes by a diversity oS entertainments, to forget Maria, and for the minute ¡n which his mind was engaged by other objects, he Succeeded; but the instant be was alone, his thoughts, as if by instinct, were at Oak-halt, and painted her to him, laughing at his Sufferings.
In this manner did he live Sor Some time, daily undergoing the most excruciating torments, till tir’d with the Same rotundity oS amuSements, which however pleasing, by repetition will at last grow insipid, he refolved to visit Spain, and immediately made the neceffary preparations Sor his journey; but before I remove my reader from Paris, I cannot help hnentioning an affair which, happened to our hero during his stay there.
Having occasion to hire a Servant, he desired the master oS his hotel to recommend him one, and he accordingly the next morning introduc’d to him an Englishman, who being afk’d by Mel-
vi!i
A MORAL NOVEL. 123 vill feveral questions concerning his reafons for thus leaving England, gave the following whimsical relation of his own life ; which, as he had a peculiar facetious manner of relating it, probably afforded more entertainment at the time, than my reader may now find in it.
CHAP. XXV.
To this one standard, make your just appeal, Here lies the golden fecret, learn to feel;
Or fool, or monarch, happy, or distrest,
No actor pleafes, who is not possess.
Lloyd’s Actor¡
AS you cannot possibly. Sir, difprove or contradict any thing a stranger shall fay of himfelf, it were as eafy for me to make you believe I am the fon of a judge as not, and indeed fo I am ; of as just and excellent a one, as any in the three kingdoms :■—of horfes,—I mean ؛ for as I acknowledge that old-fashion’d virtue ״ sincerity,” to be my characteristic, I must confefs, that my father was ostler at a large inn on the north road, and my mother, chamber-maid in the fame houfe, both excellent in their re-fpective stations, I assure you ;—they no fooner met, than they conceiv’d for each other a violent affection, the confequence of which was, that she prov’d with child; but my father foon mak.
F 2	itig
I24 A MORAL NOVEL, ing her an honest, virtuous woman, this character she has maintain’d ever since, though I was born within two months after their marriage. —I was fent to learn to read and write at a neighbouring charity-fchool, in which accomplishments, I made a fur-prising progrefs; and having finish’d my education, began to affist my father in his businefs ; but this way of life, not at all fuiting my romantic indications, for, as I knew myfelf (from hearing others fay fo) to be a lad of parts, I could not bear to be obfcurely buried in a stable ; but afpir’d to much higher things: and, as a natural genius will never lie dormant, I gave very early proofs of mine, and proceeded with fuch rapidity and fuc-cefs, that at the age of fifteen, I was cast for tranfportation, for robbing a hen-roost ; but the judge taking pity of my youth, revers’d the Sentence, and order’d ,me to be whipp’d ; aSter which correction, I was remanded to my old employment of -—“ a quarter or half a peck,”—“ eight-pence ״ half-penny,”—and—“ 1 hope you’ll remember ٠٠ the ostler, Sir,”—In which way of liSe, I continu’d Sor Some time, and being tir’d with bootlefs prayers to my father, that he would Suffer me to visit London, now determin’d to wait no longer Sor his permission, which he ssill obstinately refus’d. .	.
This I was urg’d to, not only Srom a natural defire to fee the world, but from having follow’d his example; in short, a girl in the town was,
AM.OARLNOVEL. 125
or at least faid she was, with child by me, and as I had no reafon to doubt the truth of her affertion, I thought flight the best method to efcape the officers of justice, for whom I had conceiv’d a particular aversion, ever since the age of fifteen.
I had no fooner projected this glorious Scheme, than I- put it into execution, and with a fmall stock of cloaths, and lefs money, fet out early one morning, without taking leave of any one except my Dulclnea, who, with tears in her eyes, (poor girl) begg/d me to desist from my intention ; but in vain.—I was adamant-—steel— the glorious purpofe of my mind was fix’d, nor was I to be diverted from it, by the prayers and intreaties of a silly girl.
My violent Inclination to fee the world.: made me with eafe fupport the fatigue of my first day’s journey ; but, in fpite of ev'ty thing, nature will have her courfe : ar.d I was very near sinking beneath my burthen on the fecond. My situation was truly critical; I longed to return, but my courage forbad it; to proceed was dangerous ; but, as abfolute necessity, obliged me to six on fomething, I was forced to put on the face of intrepidity, and proceed with all the ssrength and fpetd I was masser of: tho’, notwithstanding my utmost endeavours, I could not reach the place I had destin’d for my that night’s residence; but falling short of it, at fome miles distance in F 3	the
26ل A MORAL NOVEL.
the shirts of a large town, just made shift to crawl to a neighbouring barn; on entering which, I was almost struck dumb with astonishment at what I faw before me. In a corner, on one poor melanclioly trust of straw, fat a tall, genteelish woman; in her hands site held an old starlet coat, lin’d with blue, of which stte had turn’d tire inside out ; and was industriousty trimming it rvith white paper, in sh artful a manner, as ؛ngenuousty to conceal all the patches, which, from length of time, and constant wear, were pretty numerous: near Iter was anotlrer woman, more inclining to the girl, in whofe face were strongly pictur’d all the marks of vanity: nor did her actions contradict my siifpici-ons; as stte was wastting about ten or a dozen pieces of old lace, and shme other ornamental trifles, which she afterwards very curiousty joined together, and made into a most fuperb head-drefs, fplendldly decorated with bits of Bristol-stone, لة؟ه\أ k. thinly Jcatierrd to make up الالا0٠لأله to pleafc that part of the world, whofe foie ambition is to feast their ssght. Not fa'r from them, on the ground, lay two men, fast lock’d in stumber, forgetting mifery ; and, at a little dif-tance, fat a man and a Woman; who, by the difmal light of a ssngle folitary candle, were reading out of the fame book: at the other end of the barn, was a perfon very bufy in ornamenting and sitting up, what I afterwards found to be the stage, where kings and princes march’d in all theatric pomp j though at that time ؛t was
occupied
A MORAL NOVEL. 127 occupied on one side, by a cow and a calf, and on the other, by two jack-asses. Notwithstanding I had feen fo very little of the world, I did not want to be informed, that thefe were a company of strolling comedians, preparing for their next night’s talk. In a Supplicating tone, I told them shy story, and begg’d leave to take up my lodging there for one night; they very humanely granted my request ; and having reSreshed me in a Sparing manner on bread and cheeSe, directed me to a vacant corner of the barn, where I lay down ; and, overcome with my excessive fatigue, Soon Sell asseep; ٥؛ which happy state I had been Some hours, when I was awaked by a perSon crying in a hoarSe voice, Why, this it well,—this is blow■ for blow.-—Where ! where f interrupted I, ristng in a fright, imagining that Some-body was fighting, and that this perSon was thus expressing his approbation of it; but they Soon convinced me oSrny error, by informing me, that Mr. Rantum was only rehearssng the part of Zanga in the Revenge ؛ which play was to be performed that evening (as the written bills Specified) by a company oS performers from the theatres royal.
As I was naturally oS a volatile diSpofition, the drollery and variety oS theSe people’s lives pleas’d me So much that I longed to become one of them; and therefore informed them; that I should be glad to be engaged as a perSon,. willing to do every thing in bis power; and having 4 ؟	in
128 A MORAL NOVEL, in a short time agreed on the terms, I was inrolled one of the company, with all the ufual forms. Agreeable to their design, the Revenge was that evening perform’d, with univerfal applaufe : the characters were, in general, what they call, well fupported ; but Zanga ؛n particular, which Mr. Rantum play’d, to the administration of thofe who feem’d to understand him, and the utter astonishment of thofe who did not: he had formerly been at London, in Drury Lane Theatre, where he was employed in the characters of Sootmen, guards, &c. and I am even credibly informed, that he once play’d the part oS a bear in a pantomime ; but, be that as it may, it is certain that he still retained So high an opini־-. on of the London actors, that he copied one of them very minutely in the character oS Zanga, as Some critics Said, and roar’d So very loud, that he did not thoroughly recover the uSe oS his Speech for three days afterwards.
There now open’d to me fresh Scenes every day, of which I had not before (as indeed how should I) the least idea.—To recount to you the various intrigues that now preSented themfelves, especially the amorous advances oS Mrs. Faint-well, who took pains to inSorm me, that every young man who had a mind to Succeed, should form a connection with Some lady of merit in the company ; it would perhaps appear the effect of vanity ; though most certainly Mrs. Faintwell, who was old enough to be my mother, and who h،3d poffested eight real or nominal hushands,
abfolutely
A MORAL NOVEL. 129■ abfolutely propofed going by my name, that we might live and taste the fweets, without‘ the inconvenience of matrimony :—to tell alfo the various shifts we were obliged to make, in the performance of our pieces, would appear romance ; however,.we gain’d considerable applaufe wherever we went׳: I fay, -we, becaufe I belonged to the company ; though hitherto I had done nothing more than fweep the stage, fnuff the candles, fwell’d the train of a theatric prince, and walked in a white sheet in Juliet’s funeral procef-sion. I pin’d with envy, at feeing the applaufe and fuccefs others met with, while I with my shining talents remain’d in difmal obfcurity. However, confcious of my own abilities, I began، to think of־appearing in fome more elevated station ; and accordingly confulted Mr. Rantum : of whom, before I proceed, it may be proper to fay fometbing ; the property of fome daubed canvafs, and tarnished tinfel cloaths, fo much increafed the natural pride of this important perSon, that he considered and ufed the members of his company as staves ; thieves to the men, and expressions equally groSs, to the women, were common with him ; and a very flight degree of contradiction could roufe him to real knockdown arguments with his fist ; fupposing him-felf the best actor upon earth, he could not bear the least appearance of a flight; which occash oned him once, in the character of Alexander, to depriveHephestion of a tooth, for fupposing he laughed at him ; he was as Selfish as proud, and F ؟	took:
هول A M.ORAL NOVEL.
took care, even when there was tolerable fuccefs. to glean fo much, under pretence of stock-debt, that the company were very little above begging; which occasioned them to be very comical in tragedy, and fad in comedy.
Upon, application to our manager! he readily granted my request ; desiring to know what I chofe to come out in. Being naturally of an af-piring difposition, and not in the least douhting my tragical powersj -I had pre-refolved, like the Sun Srom behind an obscuring cloudj to break forth more glorious, for having been thus concealed; and therefore pitch’d upon Jachimo, for my first attempt: Mr. Rantum faid, that I knew Cymbeline to .be a play for which t'hey were not at all prepared; and which would inevitably put them to great inconveniencies in the performance ; but that having conceived a regard for me, he would oblige me, by having it reprefented ; and as an additional proof he would -play Leonatus Posthumus.——The parts therefore were accordingly cast, arid Mr. Rantum very kindly gave me fome instructions, relative to. my attitudes, voice, k.
I'n lefs than a fortnight we were all ready fortherehearfal: and the bills gave notice Of ״ Cymbeline to be perform’d, the part of Ja" chinto by a young gentleman, being liis first ‘ء appearance on any stage.”
Thi،
A MORAL NOVEL. 131
This ofcourfe filled the theatre, alias the barn with all the neighbouring families : and as the fatal hour drew nigh, when all my future fame was to be laid at stake, I felt myfelf in a situation not to be defcribed.—The warning bell at length ringing,—I appear’d,—and the houfe re-echoed with applaufe: I went through the first act as well as could be expected ; but when I stole an inestimable bracelet of black riband from Imogen’s arm, who was repofed on a white sheet, laid over the ikelleton box ufed in pantomime: the fuccefs I met with, was inexpressible, beyond my most fanguine expectations : her bed chamber indeed, did not exactly anfwer that inimitable defcription given of it, by the immortal Shakefpeare; the hangings were not silver’d silk, proud Cleopatra when she met her Roman, but the patch work of the wainfcoat was concealed from enquiring eyes, by an old piece of tapestry, beautifully describing the history of Saint George and the Dragon; thus you See, we endeavoured to come as near the original as possible : and our audience being kind enough, to take the will Sor the deed, the whole went off with an uncommon eclat.
And give me leave to obServe, that till within theSe two years, when the managers oS Covent Garden, have very judicioussy had one painted on purpofe; I have Srequently known a Scene exhibited in this excellent play, which had no more reSemblance to the description given of it,
in
32 A MORAL NOVEL.
؛n the fubiequent act, than that which our itinerant company was obliged to make ufe of: necessity indeed was plea fuflicient for them ; but furely at the theatres royal, it is fo great an ab-furdity, and fo glaring an affront offered to the understanding of the publick, as fcarcely to be overlooked, or forgiven by any audience : for when we hear thefe beautiful lines,
-----—...... ...—.......- It was hang’d
With tapestry of silver’d silk ; the story 3'toud Cleopatra, when she met her Roman,
And Cyndus fwell’d above the banks, or for The prefs of boats, or pride, a piece of work So bravely done, fo rich, that it did strive,
In workmanship and value ; which I wonder’d Could be So rarely, and exactly wrought,
Since the true liSe.on't was——
Cymbeline.,
I Say Sir, when we hear this, glorious and animated description, we naturally refer our ideas,, to the Scene of ;which it ؛s Spoken ;. but which upon recollection,,, we shall find, was Something, ridiculously trifling, and Soreign to the purpcfe but to proceed,—in the battle Scene, I likewise gain'd great honour, when ssruck with the horrors of a guilty conscience ; my nerveleSs arm reSus’d its office, and obliged me to yield to Posshumus, his Romish weeds difguis’d by a carter’s Srock : but at the conclufion, I will not fay I deferv’d, but I will venture toaffureyou,
that
A MORAL NOVEL. *33
that I was loaded with vast applaufe ; the men approv’d, and the women fa؛d I was quite a charming creature : which to do Mr. Rantum justice, I must attribute to his teaching me the full ufe of my lungs, which were naturally strong, difmifs’d me with their «echoing hands.
Thus you fee on what trifling, insignificant points, depends the fame of an actor, whofe profession is of all others, the most arduous and؛ uncertain.
As I fucceeded fo happily in my first attempt ؛ you may be fure I did not stop there ; and' thinking (no doubt) that my comic powers, were equally good with my tragic : 1' determin’d my next appearance should be in comedy ; when-fixing on Sir Harry Beagle, in the Jealous Wife, for my coup d'effai, came off as well as I had done in Jachimo; though to do my audience justice, I must own, that here for once hr their lives, they were pleas’d with, and gave due praife to simple nature ; for having been bred in a stable the greatest part of my life,, the fmack of my whip, (which alone gain’d me great applaufe,) had׳ from constant custom, become So habitual, that very little art was requir’d to fup-port the character in a forcible manner.
Not to take up too much of your time, I appeared in a variety of characters, and by an attention to fuch trifling particularities, gained all
the
134 A MORAL NOVEL, the applaufe I wish’d for and much more than I really deferved ; however entering into a quarrel to fupport the confequence of my old lady, who at the age of fifty-six, with a most corpulent figure, wanted to play Juliet, and other girlish parts; Mr. Rantum and I decided the matter by a bruising match, in؛ which I came of victorious, but the vanquished manager took his revenge by discharging me,, and being histed out of every company I afterwards attempted, it became neceffary to accept the place of valet de chambre to a gentleman who was coming over to Paris ; and where I had no؛ doubt of finding employment; but being dif-charged by my master for attending the comedy instead of him ; to my great mortification I am! now convinc’d, that the French encourage no، poor but their own ; which has obliged me thus to offer my fervices to you, Sir, and by a pretty thorough knowledge of that great city, I hope to prove myfelf very ufeful.
End of the first Volume,.
FEMALE FRIENDSHIP¿
O R T H E
INNOCENT SUFFERER.
A
MORAL NOVEL.
VOLUME THE SECOND.
٠٠ Virtue alone is happinefs below,
٠٠ And our best knowledge is, ourfelves to know.”
DUBLIN:
Printed for J. Williams, J. Porter, and T. Walker. Mdcclxx.
ئ
FEMALE FRIENDSHIP ٠-
R THE ؛O
INNOCENT SUFFERER.
CHAP. XXVI.

Shew me the man
That can administer to minds difeas’d,
Pluck from the memory a rooted forrow,
Raze out the written troubles of the brain ;
And with Some Sweet oblivious antidote,
CleanSe the Sull boSom oS that perilous stuff Which weighs upon the heart.
Macbeth.
UR burleSque theatric hero, having finished his narrative ; Mel-vilt engaged him as a kind oS guide. During his stay at Paris, which was about three weeks, but prudently considering him as one oS thoSe who know too much oS low life to be trusted, dismissed him Vol. II.	on
138 A. MORAL NOVEL.
on fetting out for the capital of Spain ; on his arrival at Madrid, our difcontented traveller hired lodgings in one of the most capital streets, and by frequenting all public places foon contracted a larger fphere of acquaintance than Spanish referve. efpecially to foreigners, feemed to admit; however he avoided any particular intimacy except with Don Carlos, who was the only ion·of a grandee and of one of the most refpecta. ble families in that kingdom. This young gentleman was about two and twenty years of age, handfome in perfon, elegant in appearance, modest in behaviour, and undaunted in danger, constant in friendship, fensible, charitable and generous; : No wonder that with thefe qualifications Melvill and he contracted a fympathetic and mutual esteem for each other, which in a short time grew into the most disinterested friendship.
Don Pelajo, (the name of Don Carlos’s father) had formerly been in the wars, where he had distinguished himfelf much for his bravery ; he was judicious, brave, and prudent : polite and affable to thofe who were acquainted with him, but to strangers appeared to have the national haughtinefs stamped upon his deportment; yet even then he rather created refpect than difgust, he married when very young, but inheriting rather too much of the Spanish jealoufy, his wife led not the happiest life, and left him at the age of twenty nine, a widower with two children, (viz.) a fon and a daughter, what the former was
the
A MORAL NOVEL. 139
the reader has already heard, I will now as near as I am able, draw the picture of his daughter Juliana; who when Melvill first faw her, was . about eighteen years of age. Her size of a delicate medium, her complexion fo beautiful that had it not been the fame from her youth, malicious fcandalj would have fa؛d it was artificialj her perfon was genteel, her hair and eye-brows of a beautiful brown, the former curling in ringlets, over her ivory neck, feemed like a gorgeous net, to entrap the heart of all beholders, the latter formed two exact bows over her large blue eyes, which very few ever dared to look on twice, and her teeth (to borrow an expreffion from a favourite author) were like polished ivory fet in a coral bed. Thefe perfonal accomplishments joined to a good natural understanding, much improved by art, made the lovely Juliana, the most accomplished young lady in MadridSuch were the father and daughter, to whom Don Carlos introduced Melvill as one of his most particular friends, fuch was the family by which our hero was much careffed, and in whofe acquaintance he thought himfelf extremely happy.
Don Pelajo gave him a general invitation to his houfe, which to rid himfelf of thofe difagree-able thoughts concerning Maria, that he knew would intrude upon foiitude, he cordially accepted and made almost constant ufe of: Don Carlos and he were Scarce ever afunder, as instead
؛of
٠4٥ A MORAL NOVEL.
of calling each other, every time they met, gave an additional Satisfaction to both, always finding that reciprocal fatisfaction when together, which Sensible men must meet with in conversing with perfons of equal knowledge and delicacy.
Though in all their intercourfes Melvill thought himfelf happy, still there was a certain Jc nefcais quoi in his countenance, that plainly shewed he was not lo ; Don Carlos could not avoid obferving this uneafinefs; the real caufe of which the reader knows ; and' with all the tenderness of affection, insisted on being acquainted therewith ; Melvill could refufe nothing to fo dear a friend, and therefore informing him of the whole affair concluded with his determined refolution to forget her, in which he has not a. little strengthened by tbe Salutary advice of his Second Self, Sor So he Srequently called Don Carlos.
Juliana, though young, had received Severar offers Srom men of leading Sarnily and fortune, but conScious that her own estate must one day be very considerable, she thought herSelS thereby endowed with an undoubted right, to pleaSe herSelf in So momentous a choice ; at least Such were the argument which her own mind furnished. her with, to paliate what many deemed imprudence though the real truth was no other, than that her time was not yet come, she as vet never Seen any one for whom she Selt a tender
A MORAL NOVEL. 141 der partiality, but alas ! of how short a duration was her enjoyment of this pleasing indifference ; for on her first introduction to Melvill, she was . feized with a fenfation her heart had hitherto been an entire stranger to, her Spirits were fo fluttered and her whole frame fo difordered, that it was with difficulty she made any return to the many compliments which he paid her, and although when he took his leave, her head was fo disturbed, with the thoughts of this English stranger, as totally to destroy her nights rest, still young and unfkil'led in all the arts of love, she could assign no reafon for the unufual palpi-,tation of her heart; though her eyes always Sparkled with an additional fatisfaction when in his company, and as very few days pasted in which she had not this pleafure; love had made a great progrefs in her affections, before she knew . it by any other name, than that of ״ regard for ״ fo dear a friend of her brother’s.”
Admiring ؛and admired, our hero would have been completely happy, had not that felicity (as I before Said) been destroyed by the thoughts of the feemingly perfidious Maria, who in Spite of him-felf. wa-s always the Subject of his private meditations, and although to all outward appearance, he feemed perfectly eaSy and compoled, still he pined inwardly, and would frequently exclaim, ״ Wretch that I am, why wa61 ever fool enough ،‘ to declare my passion for a worthiest woman, ·،، who must now laugh at and defpife me for my
“ folly ?
i4* A MORAL NOVEL,
“ folly ? Dissembling hypocrite ! thus cruelly at “ one blow to blast my happinefs for ever, just ״ too when I had figured to myfelf profpects of “ felicity for many years to come ; as an additi-״ onal mifery must I still be doomed to doat up“ on a woman, who in open violation of all the ״ rules of truth and honour, has after the most ٠٠ folemn promifes, devoted herfelf to another. “No! Since she has thus forfeited all right of “ pretenfion to my esteem, I can or must endea. *٠ vour to banish her from my thoughts.”
CHAP. XXVIL
Hence, bashful cunning,
I am your wife, if you will marry me ;
If not I’ll die your maid ; to be your fellow You may deny me; but I’ll be your fervant Whether you will or no.
The Tempest.
WHILE he was thus one day railing against the unfortunate Maria, Don Carlos, who through a flight partition had heard allhefaid, unexpectedly, entered the room, and taking his hand in the most affectionate manner, “ Indeed (faid he) my dear friend, this must not be, you promifed to drive this English beauty from your mind, and from your feeming tranquillity
A MORAL NOVEL. i4j
l؛ty and compofure, I flattered myfelf you had fucceeded, remember Harry, thofe wounds heal ill, which men do give themfelves.
“ Oh Don Carlos ! (interrupted he) I had as ״ you fay refolved to forget her, and firmly “ meant to keep my refolution, but alas! I find “ that I am unequal to the talk, that I have im٠ “ pofed upon myfelf,——must I confefs to you, “ that I am not master of my own intents—that “ once amiable girl has fuch an aiceodancy over “ me; that one thought of her destroys the no“ blest purpofes of my foul.— I cannot live with-״ out her٠ and as fate has cruelly thus placed ■״ her beyond my reach■ ! ■my final infelicity ״ is fealed.”	٠
״ For shame, for shame! (cried Don Car“ Jos) have you no fenfe of honour or refentment “ of fo deep an injury.—What when a woman ״ has ufed you fo shamefully—still to entertain a “ passion for her—roufe yourfelf and be in reali-“ ty the man you feem; consider, if the falfe “ ungrateful idol of your heart by her ill ufage “ cannot provoke you to a retalliation, yet con-״ sider I befeech you how criminal it is both in « religion and honour to cherish a passion for ״ another man’s wife.—Think but ferioussy of this ״ and from my thorough knowledge of your heart, ״ I am convinced you will manfully endeavour ״ to forget her.—Promife me, that you will “ do all in your power towards it, and do not
٠٠ thu.
!44 A MORAL NOVEL.
“ thus tamely, fuffer your paffions, to over.
“ come your reaforu”
“Yes (cried Melvill) I am convinced—I fee “ the justneSs of your arguments, and am re-״ folved, henceforth to abandon every conside-“ ration of Oak-hall.—Allans, let us attend your “ father, who by this time waits for us.”
“ No (anfwered Don Carlos) I must first beg ״ your ear for a few minutes, to Something I “ have to Say-”
H؛s Sriend having bowed assent, he proceeded as Sollows:
٠، I little apprehended, when first I commenc-“ ed an acquaintance with you that I should ever ٠، have So much occasion to repent thereoS, nay ״ do not imagine that it ¡s on my own account, ״ (Seeing him look astonished) on the contrary I ״know no man, Sor whom I have a more sin-״ cere regard nay affection, nor can any one ״ have more intrinsic merit, but I am Sorry, ״ very Sorry, Sor one perSon in this Samily, that ״ you ever visited Madrid, as I have great “ reaSon to Sear, that she is thereby rendered “ unhappy for life ; you cannot aSter what I “ have Said, be ignorant that I mean, the poor ״ captivated Juliana; I must deem her unSor-״ tunate though by no means culpable, as I do “ not at all wonder at an inexperienced. Sensible,.
“ ingenious
A MORAL NOVEL. 145
״ ingenious girl, fixing her affections though ״ hastily on lo deferving an object; from the ״ first moment of your arrival, she admired you, ״ and from her frequent interviews, loved, before ״ she fcarcely knew by what name to title her “ regard ; from her behaviour, you furely must “ have fufpected it; I did, and by the following “ accident, difcovered that my fufpicions were “ not groundlefs.—٠
You must have taken notice, that she is perfectly acquainted with the English language, nor is she a bad proficient, either in the practical or compositive parts of music, and the other day I was assured of her regard for you, by overhearing her singing the following little fonnet, to her guittar, both the music and poetry of which, are I find of her own composition.
When Henry first my eyes admir’d,
I madly thought myfelf his friend ;
Too foon I found ’twas love infpir’d Thofe hopes on which my joys depend. II.
Ah ! may my Henry grateful prove And make me gen’rous, kind returns; So may that friendshipj turn to love, Which in his genial bofom burns 5
III. Ju.
G
Vol. II.
146 A MORAL NOVEL.
III.
Juliana then, fupremely blest ;
Shall by fweet experience prove,
(Of ev’ry earthly charm possefs’d)
Th’ angelic blifs of faithful love,
On hearing this, I1 taxed her with her weak-nefs (if it may fo be called.) By nature formed open and candid she difdains a falshood of the stightest kind ; therefore generousty confessed that she preferred Mr. Melvill to every man in the world, — and making me her confident; though she Said it must call a blush into a maiden’s cheek, to own her love ; desired me to inform you thereof.
Here they were interrupted and Don Carlos was obliged abruptly to break the thread of his difcourfe.
CHAP،
A MORAL NOVEL. 147
CHAP. XXVIII.
—— The worm of peace is furety,
Surety fecure ; but modest doubt is call’d The beacon of the wife ; the tent that fearches To th’ bottom of the wound.—
Troilus and Cressida.
THE next time our two friends were alone.
Don Carlos refumed his difcourfe from the former chapter.
Confcious (Said he) that your affections, were already pre-engaged, though on an undeferving object, I endeavoured to perfuade my sister to think no more of you, and to encourage her thereto, have (for which I hope you will pardon me) broken the facred bond of friendship; by informing her of your unhappy attachment to Maria, though but in part, as I did not mention any thing of her being already married, only alluring her. that your whole heart was fixed on a young lady in England.
Like you, my Henry, she was too much in love to hear reafon, and it was in vain, that I urged a favourite fentiment of her own to induce her to forget you——they never knew to love who knew to change. —I in vain afked her what she should think of you, were you thus dishonourable to transfer your affections from G 2	one
،4؟ A MORAL NOVEL.
one to the other ; it all signified nothing. But as you must from fatal experience, know the difficulty of overcoming a mifplaced affection, better than I can pretend to inform you ; I will
fay no more upon the fubject.—---·In short,
she insisted on my declaring it to you, which (as she had been candid enough to confefs it) I could not refufe ; nor could I break my word with her, without adding thereto, the more flagrant crime of premeditated falshood. I have alio (as I thought it my duty) informed my father of this affair, who would most joyfully accept of you for a fon in law ; I need not Surely add, what I hope you are already convinced oS, that I should be highly pleaSed to join the more endearing name oS brother, to that oS Sriend— but I Sear it will never be—all that I can now add, is, that I am Sorry poor Juliana’s happineSs depends upon your anSwer, as I think, I too plainly read it, in your Sace.
While Don Carlos was thus Speaking, Mel-vill stood in the greatest perplexity, undetermined what to reply, but finding his Sriend was waiting Sor an anSwer, as the only reSource, he begged Some time to consider oS So friendly a propoSal and promiSed to inform him oS his resolution, in writing, the enSuing day, aSter which, they hurried to their uSual gay companions, whoSe vivacity however was not able to efface the gloom, which she above conversation had Spread upon Melvill's countenance ;
and
A MORAL NOVEL. 149 and when he retired to his bed, it was without the least inclination to steep.
He lay ruminating the greatest part of the night on the businefs of the fubfequent day, fo delightful a profpect was not easily renounced ■ —■ A beautiful virtuous young lady with an immenfe fortune, were strong temptations lor a man in his circumstances, fo very ill ufed too by that woman where he had garnered up his heart. — All thefe were great incitements to him to refoive to abandon Maria for ever and marry Juliana ; but then the thought of entering into fuch an engagement, when he was convinced how firmly his affections were otherwife fixed ; wounded his confcience as a man of honour and integrity, far too fensibly to fuffer him to commit fo bafe an action.
After a long and violent conflict; he determined to make this facrisice to Maria ; in which he was not a little strengthened, by the first gleam of hope that he had entertained since his departure, and which shot acrofs his mind pre-fenting her to his view in her original simplicity and virtue.
Oh the extatic thought! but alas f it was but the glimmering of a transient ray, which even the most wretched will fometimes entertain ; and which like the burning taper’s light, G 3	will
150 A׳ MORAL NOVEL.
will be the most apparent, where our darknefs and defpair are in the extreme.
A drowning man will catch at every straw. However be that as it may, it fixed him firmly in her favour, and he had the fatisfactory con-fcioufnefs of having acted right, and in confe-quence thereof wrote the next morning as follows.
Dear Carlos,
THE honour you intend me, by an alliance to your Samily, calls Sor my warmest and most grateful acknowledgments; permit me, there- ׳ fore, to assure you, that I shall always regard it, as a pleasing testimony oS your friendship and esteem ; though, at the Same time, I must intreat you to excuSe me. if. for feveral reafons,
I beg leave to decline your friendly offer; for, altho’ I know no family, of whofe affinity I should be more proud, having a great value for Don Pelajo and yourfelf; and a most sincere regard for the lovely Juliana ; still, as a great deal beyond esteem is necessary to render the marriage state happy ; and, as by my affections being otherwife unfortunately placed, your Sister will be deprived of that love which every man ought to have for his wife; I cannot be bafe enough, from the paltry confideration of money, or the fuppofed Spirit of revenge, to make a
worthy
A MORAL NOVE L..	151
worthy woman unhappy, by giving her my hand without my heart.
I must therefore wish the generous Juliana, all the felicity this world can afford, with fome more deferving man: — but, lest my prefence should be fuel to her unhappy paffion, I will in a few days remove from Madrid, that abfence may help to effect her cure.
Believe me to be, dear Carlos, much shocked at a reparation from fuch estimable Society; allow me to have a due' fenfe of the honour and happinefs intended me; and view me as one, who will always be proud to shbfcribe himfelf. Your very affectionate friend,
Henrt Melvill.
On receipt of the above, Don Carlos hastened to his friend, to thank him for his kind and prudent intentions, with regard to quitting Madrid; and, at the fame time, insisted on his giving up all thoughts thereof: ״ as (added he) “ it can anfwer no end, Juliana being in a few “ days going to fpend fome months with a re“ lation in the country; you must therefore ״ abfent yourfetf from my father’s till then; ״ and, in the mean time, I’ll inform her of your ״ anfwer,”—which he accordingly did.
This
4
52؟ A MORAL NOVEL.
This truly amiable girl bore the difappoint-ment of her hopes and wishes heroically ; and only replied, “ Aitho’ fo painful to me, I cannot “ but applaud his fidelity to fome more happy ״ woman :—may she be deferving of him ! and ٠٠ tho’ I can never be happy, I may perhaps learn “ contentment.”
The time had flipp’d away fo agreeably, during our hero’s stay at Madrid, that he had already been there much longer than he at first intended ; and, at the earnest request of his Spanish friends, now wrote to Mr. Howard, to inform him of his intention of refiding there fome weeks longer; but that, as it would not be long enough for him to hear from England, he should not fubjoin his addrefs. Tho’ this was mere matter o.f opinion (as it was morally impossible, that he could give any tolerably exact guefs at the duration of his stay there) he did it on purpofe that he might hear nothing of Maria, whom he now flatter’d himfelf, he was in a fair way of forgetting.—
Vain man! when once affection’s rooted in the breass, ’tis not the dictates of reafon. the im٠ menssty of distance, or the grave remarks of frigid prudence, which can remove it !—.Had he not taken this unaccountable whim into his head, his felicity might in a few months have been completed, by having the still unmarried Maria in his arms :—but Mr. Howard being thus excluded
A MORAL NOVEL. iSj eluded from any possibility of writing to h'tmy happiness؛ and he Seemed as widely distant, as on ،he first day of his departure from England ; to which place I must beg to tranfport my reader, and leave Metvill with his friends at Madrid, endeavouring to forget a woman who still doated on him-
CHAP. XXIX،
1Tis fweet and commendable in your nature.
To give thefe mourning duties to your father t But you must know, your father lost a father, That father his, and the furvivor bound In filial obligation, for fome term To do obiequious Sorrow.
Ham l et.
HAPPY info faithful a friend as Charlotte Howard! to fympathize with her in all her afflictions, after the first tumults of the grief؛؛ which .¿Emily’s death had occasioned, were» in fome degree fubfidedj Maria began again to indulge thofe melancholy reflections that Melvill't departure had occafion’d.—With the heart-felt, tortures of an unaffected forrow, she lamented his abfence :—she griev’d for him. 'tis true;—but then that grief was allay’d, by Sometimes hearing of his welfare from Mr. Howard ٠؛—by she con.
G 5	folatory
i54 A MORAL NOVEL.
folatory reflections, that he must one day return; that when he found his error, his former love would revive, with an additional ardour, for having been thus fuppressed ; and, by the consideration that they might then be happy, in an union that was no longer oppofed by the harsh commands of an austere parent ؛ on the contrary. Sir Thomas endeavoured all he could to make her forget his former ill ufage ;—he was continually inventing new pleafures, to divert her from that melancholy, which the quick fucceffion of two fuch unfortunate accidents had given her a turn to : nor was his endeavours wholly unfuc-cefsful; her former ferenity of mind and countenance began, in fome meafure, to return, to the unfpeakable joy of her now over-fond parents ;—she again began to be the fprightly Maria Hartry ;—dutiful to her parents;' Obligingly good natured to all who knew her;—beloved by the whole country;—and, from the above considerations, possessed a tolerable degree of happinefs, when another unforefeen accident happened to deprive her of it: which,-although it is what every one must meet with, fome time or other, was neverthelei's very unexpected at that period ; being no other than the death of Sir
Thomas, after a few days illnefs.-
Maria felt this lofs the more Severely, as her father’s fondnefs for her Seemed every day to in-creafe; having (as it were) had her restored to his arms, from the mouth of the all-devouring
grave ؛
A MORAL NOVEL. 155 grave: we may therefore reafonably conclude, that, with a heart possessed of extreme fenssbility, her grief for the loSs of So good a parent, would be almost immoderate ; but being a natural affliction, no one attempted to restrain it.
Lady Hartry was much too good a woman, not to be Senssbly concern’d for the IoSs oS a man. who had been united to her by the tender ties of wedlock ; neither could she be SuppoSed to See! the Same degree of Sorrow Sor him, as ؛S their lives had been one continued round of harmonious concord, which no one can imagine to be the caSe ; as her’s was rather a match oS obedience to the inclinations oS others, than Srora any choice of her own : but
So Venus wills, whofe power controuls The fond affections of our fouls ;
"With fportive cruelty she binds Unequal forms, unequal minds.
FR A N C I s’s Ho R ACI;
On the death of Sir Thomas, Mr. Howard and Charlotte remov’d to Oak-hall; that by their company and converfation, they might fupport the drooping Spirits of the widow and her daughter.—On opening the will of the deceas’d, they found that he had left his whole estate to his only fon Charles, then Sir Charles Hartry, in cafe he should ever return to claim it; out of which he was to pay the under-mention’d legacies٠
to
!5 6 AMORAL NOVEL.
to his mother, lady Hartry, during her life, the fum of one thouiand pounds annually; to his sister twenty thoufand pounds on demand ; to Charlotte and Melvill, each one thoufand pounds ؛ leaving it, as his last desire, that the latter, on his return, should marry Maria; and to Mr. Howard, whom he appointed his executor, for his trouble therein, two thoufand pounds; but,— in cafe his fon should not return, he bequeath’d his estate to his wife, on the fame conditions; and after her death, to his daughter Maria; who now finding herfelf in posteffion of an ample independency, determined to offer it to Melvill, on his return ; for which, having waited for Some months, with great patience, and no sign thereof appearing, she again began to relapfe into her former melancholy ; which Mr. Howard perceiving, propoSed to lady Hartry, in order to diversiSy the Scene, a journey to Bath ; Saying, that h؛mSelS and Charlotte would accompany them.
In hopes of re-establishing her daughter’s health, that was visibly declining, she readily agreed to this propoSal ; and they, in a Sew days, accordingly Set out on their journey. Maria was pleafed at leaving a place, where every object Serv’d but to remind her of the many happy days she had Sormerly Spent there ; nor was her joy a little increas’d, by the heart-Selt SatisSaction oS being accompanied by her dear Charlotte :— however, not to be treubleSomely minute, I shall
paSs
A MORAL NOVEL. 157
pafs over the particulars of their journey, and proceed to that time when they were fafely lodged on the parade at Bath.
As pleafure was their foie purfuit, their chief care was to fpend their time with the greatest fatisfaction to themfelves; and as this ١؛ by most people fuppofed to consist in being in a continued round of sompany ; they were the next day waited on by a number of peoplej Who all with addrefs and civility camej And feem’d vastly proud of fubfcribing their name.
New Bath Guide.
Bath was now in its greatest fplendor; that is to fay, was fo very full, that a lodging could fcarcely be had for love or money :—they met with many families of their acquaintance٠ who foon introduc’d them to a larger circle, and to all the publick places. A few nights after the arrival, they went to the rooms, when, as is ufual on the appearance of any new faces, a buzzing whifper ran round the company ; fuch as,— Who are they ?—when did they come ?—where do they lodge ?—the youngefl in mourning is amazingly handfome ;—and many other remarks, equally curious and impertinent, which all people think custom has given them an undoubted right to make, on the appearance of strangers.—Maria indeed look’d uncommonly beautiful ؛ the gfoomi-
nefs
s5$ A MORAL NOVEL.
nefs of her habit was well Suited to her countenance, ־which had a pleasing mark oS Sorrow diffuSed over it, occasioned by her late loSs .٠; affliction had touched her looks with Something that was Scarce earthly, still she was feminine.
CHAP. XXX.
Came there a certain lord, neat, trimly drefs’d, Fresh as a bridegroom, and his chin new reap’d, Shav’d like a stubble.land at harvest home;
He was perfumed like a milliner;
And ,twixi his singer and his thumb he held A pouncet box; which ever and anon He gave his noSe, and took’t away again.
The first part oS King Henry IV.
CHARLOTTE being an unuSually Smart girl, Soon engag’d a partner Sor the evening ؛ and Maria had not been long Seated, beSore lord Dapper wit advancing in a minuet step, with a pert, though genteel air, begg’d the honour of her hand, which she as politely reSuSed; adding, that she did not intend dancing that evening.
With any other man but lord Dappervvit, here the conversation would of courfe have dropped ;
but
AMORAL NOVEL. وقل
hut he with a polite effrontery replied, that he had c-ome to the rooms with the fame intention ؤ but on feeing fo amiable a lady, could not deny himfelfthe fatisfaction of ashing her hand ; but since she was not inclined to do him that favour, hegg’d he might have the honour of sitting by her: she nodded assentj and my lord took his place accordingly.—Before I proceed, it may not be improper to give fome further account of this nobleman, who being posseffed of a very large ef. tate, thought himfelf thereby qualified to do whatever he pleafed ; which pleafure his lordship once carried fo far, as very n-arrowly to efcape being run through the body, for pleasing to be inshlently rude to a lady, whofe caufe a gentleman in company chofe to efpoufe, and called his lordship to a pretty fevere 'account for. his behaviour ; nor was this the only fcrape he got into, by the invariable difposition of doing whatever he had a mind to, becaufe he 'had money ; but he looked upon them all as actions worthy a buck, in wh ch ؛deal cliaracter it was the height of his ambition to strine.	,	-	.
Being of eourfe ׳a pattern of pertnefs 'and affectation, this entirely obfeured his natural parts, which were, in themfelves, far from contempti-hie; and, in proper hands, .might have been made ufe of to the establishment of a commendable character : he likewsse thought himfelf very witty, always endeavouring to appear fo, by abusing every body he Saw,- whether he knew -	them
i6٠ A MORAL NOVEL, them or not, in what he call’d, a pleafant vein of humour ; which only ferv’d to render him in the eyes of all fensible people more thoroughly ridiculous: for it was, as Churchill fays.
■—■“ Aiming at witj tho’ levell’d in the dark.”
Hearing himfeif talk, right or wrong, was the height of his ambition ; he was, in short, what is generally understood ״ by a polite man of ** quality that is to fay, he was a mean sharper at Arthur’s,— a frantick buck at the Thatch’d Houfe,—a numfcull poiitican at the Cocoa Tree, —and a coxcomb every where ;—and though no one was more exactly constant in running the rapid and tedious circle of polite pleafures ; yet, aslf؛s love for gaming was by far his most predominant passion, he contrived to allot the greatest part of his time to the indulgence of that paffion : and as Bath is perfectly calculated to profecute fuch a Scheme, he generally attended there every feafon, to impofe on the ignorant, with fome of thofe tricks, which his companions in town, from being as wife as himfeif, could not be taken in .؛ by: and indeed’ this was his businefs in the rooms at that time ; but Maria unluckily happening to strike his view, he determin’d to all؛: her to. dance, which he did1 in the urgent manner above related.
He was no fooner feated, than he began to aik feveral familiar questions ؛ as,—how long she had been at Bath ?—how she lik’d it ?—how long she
propofed
A M O R A L N O V E L. 161
propofed staying ?.with many others, equally trifling and inssgnisicant: to all which Maria . anfwered with the greatest complacence and good nature.
The converfation had for fome time dropp’d, when she unhappily at once gave him an opportunity of refuming it, and displaying his Satirical talents, by inadvertently afking, if he knew who the gentleman was, that was then dancing a minuet ?
“ O ! that madam (Said he) is, enire nous, as “ errant a rafcal as ever liv’d ; I never heard his ״ name; but am perfectly acquainted with his ״ character, which is all I dessre to know of him; ״ for he is a fellow whom no-body chufes to be “ feen with.—He is worth money, which he ־ “ gets in London by stockjobbing, and comes “ down to Bath every year to fpend it, by fetting “ up for a beau ؛.-but you fee madam, he has “ not the true natural air,—it is all studied,—·all ٠* affected;—he moves as aukwardly, as if he “ never had a lac’d coat on before;—a perfect ٠، puppet upon wires;—like the print of grown “ gentlemen taught to dance,—ha 1 ha l ha 1”
״ Do you fee that lady in the mazarine blue ،، and silver fack ?—she, madam, was no more “ than a milliner’s apprentice in Tavistock.street, “ when Sir Henry Rattle took her into his good ؛، graces.”«—Thus was this poppinjay running
on.
162 A M 0 R A L N 0 V E L.
abusing people, without one word of truth, and many whom he had never before feen, as an amufement for a young lady of Senfe, above Randal ; thinking that, as with most others of his acquaintance, he could thus chatter himfelf into her good graces.
With what justice may the rigid moralists of the age exclaim against fo shocking 3 prostitution, both of time and words! and yet is it not amazing, that though every-body Seems convinced of the truth thereof, they should all be encouragers of theSe modern Foppingtons. by regarding their Solly as a fit object for ridicule and laughter, rather than contempt or neglect.
CHAP. XXXI.
Blame not the belles, since modern times can shew That ape of female foppery, call’d a beau.
The Connoisseur.
LORD Dapperwit having fora long while thus fat wearying his hearer, with all the insignificance of folly, tho’ at the fame time with the most fuperficial infolence of pride, at length grew fo troublefome, that poor Maria
could
A MORAL NOVEL. 163 could no longer bear him with any degree of pati. ence; she therefore (thinking to get rid ofhiml haf-ten’d to another part of the room ; but our modern Lotharia, was not to be fo easily shaken off: for, immediately following, he again feated him-felf clofe at her elbow; in short, she feveral times shifted her station, and he as often purfued her, all the while making attempts to find out where she lodg’d, which she had pre-determin’d not to let him know, justly imagining, that if she did, he would be a continual torment to her.
His lordship not at all difcourag’d by the evasive anfwers he receiv’d, still ؛kept with her, continuing to prattle an infinity of Small talk, or rather nothing ; in return 'to which, she Scarcely Spoke ten words the whole evening ; So that though they were together, he could hardly be Said to enjoy her company.
Quite harraSs’d with this coxcomb’s importunity, as her only reSource, (tho. it was then early) she determin’d to leave the rooms ; which reSo, lution she communicated to her mother, who was engag’d at cards; at the Same time informing her oS the reaSon, as she likewiSe did her friend Charlotte: when my lord, Srom over-hearing a few words, guessing what was her dessgn, insisted on attending her home ؛ and she as strongly insisted that he should not; however, he was much too well-bred a man. to take any denial, and all her remonstrances would have signified but little,
i64 A MORAL NOVEL.
had not an intimate of my lord’s, fuch an٠١■ her as himfelf, luckily at that instant, laid hold of his button, to tell him fome important gambling event; during which lucky interm. Maria made her efcape, inwardly pleas’d (as foe then thought) thus to have got rid of fo troublefome a puppy ; but alas ! it prov’d far otherwise ; for when my lord perceiv’d that she was gone, without his having been able to find out her place of residence, he began abusing the perfon who had thus stopped him.
״ I wish Mellifont, (faid he) with all my heart, ٠' you had been at the devil, ere I’d met you ; ٠٠ for I have been in company the whole evening “ with the fweetest girl upon earth, and now
٠٠ your d---’d unlucky face has prevented me
״ from finding out where she lodges;—she has ״ given me the Slip as I live.—Egad she is a deli-٠٠ cate morfel, and I would not lofe her for five “ hundred pounds.”
“ Oh, is that all, (anfwer’d his friend) don’t ،٠ let fuch a trifle give you any uneasinefs, for, ٠٠ in the common courfe of things, no girl in “ Bath can be conceal’d from me many days;—٠ ٠، but here, I can at once put you into a fure ٠، method of difcovering her :—she feems inti— ٠٠ mate with the lady (meaning Charlotte) that is ٠٠ dancing with Sir Thomas Atwell, who will ٠، most assuredly wait on his partner to morrow ; ٠، it wist therefore be the easiest thing in life, by
only
A MORAL NOVEL. 165
״ on،y fpeaking to him, to gain fome further “ particulars concerning her.”
״ You have nick’d it, my dear boy. (replies “ his lordship) and then, my buck,”—
״ And .then, what! (interrupted Mellifont)
“ why, furely you can have no design to meta-‘٠ morphofe yourfelf, from the gay lord Dapper-״ wit, into a fober, fedate hushand.”—
״ Hushand! (re-ecchoed his lordship) pardonnez moy,—no fuch intentions, on the word “ of a gentleman,—the farthest thing in the “ world from my thoughts ;—ch the bourgeois/ “ Matrimony indeed!—no, no, I have other ״ fchemes in agitation :—I fuppofe the girl has ״ little or no fortune, and I think, she can’t ؛٠ have many objections to being houfe-keeper ״ to the right honourable lord Dapperwit,—you ״ understand me, — ha, Mellifont, — but as I ״ shall most likely want your affi stance, call on “ me to-morrow evening, when we will talk ״ further on the fubject:—don't fail me:—till “ then, adieu, — and in the interim, — ·vive “ ¡,amour;”—and thus the two friends parted.
The reader must by this time perceive what were this nobleman’s intentions, with regard to Maria ; he made no doubt, but that it would be an eafy matter for a perfon of his figure and confequence, to do whatever he pleas’d with a
!66 A MORAL NOVEL, silly credulous girl, for with him every girl was fuch ; he therefore made it his business to wait on Charlotte’s partner the next day, and from him learnt all that he desired to know concerning Maria; and tho’ he was not a little pleafed at this difcovery, yet at the fame time he began to consider, that as she was a girl of fortune and knowledge, he should meet with more difficulty in the execution of his fcheme, than he was at first aware of; qnd as he faw no probability of ever bringing it to perfection, was on the point of refolving to give up all farther thoughts thereof, when Mellifont, according to appointment, entered the room; but as this gentleman ■willj in all likelihood, cut no fmall figure in this part of the history, I must beg leave to make my readers better acquainted with him, that when they know his character, they may not be furpriz’d at any of his deeds j for ’tis the actions which proclaim the man.
.£؛
CHAP.
A MORAL NOVEL. 167
CHAP. XXXII.
To be obliged to minister to another man’s vices for a wretched fubsistence, is to degrade human nature below the brutes.
,	School for Rakes.
MR. Mellifont was the youngest fonofa gentleman in Shropshire, and therefore of courfe, could not be fuppos’d to have fortune fufficient to enable him to live independent of the world .٠ this being the cafe, he was placed out in the capacity of a clerk, in one of the most capital mercantile houfes in London, the regularity of which life, did not fuit the gaiety of the young gentleman’s difposition ; who finding the air of the city too heavy for his constitution, made frequent excursions to the other end of the town, and was fometimes abfent from his businefs a week together, for which, on his return, he was always feverely reprimanded by -/־ his master; but thefe reprimands, instead of producing any amendment, ferved only to heighten his distike to the counting-houfe ; he was therefore rarely feen in it, but commencing at once the petit maitre and sine gentleman, (characters, which too many young men are ambitious of attaining) took lodgings near Covent Garden, and wasted his time in a continual round of what is commonly called plcafure, or
168	A MORAL NOVEL,
in other words, of noify debauchery, and profligate excefs.
As it was very well known, that on the death of his father, he must come into four thoufand pounds, which had been fettled on him by his grandmother, he found people enough ready to advance him money, at an exorbitant interest.
In this manner did he live, contracting debts on the strength of his future fortune, never once considering, that he was fpending it, without the enjoyment, or even possession thereof:— buried in vices and obfcenity, the recollection of which, in his cooler moments, filled him with inexpressible anguish ; (for every man must fometimes think) ruining his constitutionj and vitiating his principles, to fay nothing of his continual fears lest he should be arrested by fome of thofe people whom he had difappointed, in promifing them payment; but as he never gave himSelf time or trouble to think feriousty, for any continuance, thefe things could make but a momentary impression on him.
He continued in this courfe of life for near four years, during which time, he contracted a numerous acquaintance among people of the fame stamp with himfelf, on all of whom he past’d himfelf for a man of fortune; and, under this character, gained Something from most of them, that is to fay, he learnt connivance from
pick-
A M O R A L N O V E L. 169 pick-pockets and sharpers, cringing from pimps, audacity from bullies, and the noble art of con. trivance from prostitutes: under which five heads, w׳e shall conclude the whole circle of his acquaintance : he was now in continual expectation of his father’s death, which at length happened ; not a little hasten’d by his favourite fon’s behaviour, to whom he had frequently repreferted the unavoidable confequences of fuch proceedings, but in vain ; pleafure was the object of his purfuit, nor did he care at how dear a rate he purchafed it, though it were by the death of an indulgent parent.
This happy time once arrived, he came immediately into the poffeffion of his long expected fortune, and notwithstanding he had been pre. , acquainted with the exact Sum, was amazed to find himielf much poorer than he was aware of; for, after having paid the money he had borrowed, with the interest thereon, his taylor. hosier, &c. out of the four thoufand he had received, he found himfelf in actual poffeffion of but five hundred, a good stock of cloaths, and fome little dear-bought experience.
He now, for once in his life, began to think Seriously; he considered, that at the rate he then went on, he should Soon See the end of his five hundred pounds ؛ and, as neceffity is the motherof invention, began to look out for Some method whereby he might increaSe it; when Vol. II.	H	only
*7. A MORAL NOVEL.
only two presenting themfelves to his fancy, (namely) either to buy a share in fome shop with the mon־ey he then 'had, or elfe to continue in the state of a sine gent'leman, and, by .perfuading fome rich widow or heirefs, shr once ¡n tbeir lives, to step into a hired carriage, thereby be enabled to ride ؛n his own, .for the rest of his lie was not long in determining upon the latter, which was far the most agreeable to his inc.1¡-nations ; and from his great shill in the art of imposition, had fo far brought his Scheme to bear, as to be on the point oS running away with a young heireSs, on whom he had paltned him-feis fOr a nobleman oS distinction, when the prying IciouSneSs oS bis intended lady’s cham-feermaid, discovered that his title was borrowed, and that all h؛s estat.e, and of'COttrSe his gentility, consisted in a laced coat, and a large stock of impudence, the latter, of which qualifications he stood greatly ؛n need of, t-0 extricate hlmfelf from the a'ffalr.
, TbUs, by an unexpected blast, were all the profpects of his future felicity destroyed,.just when lie liad brought them to the fummit of perfection ; and as he now fcund it would be impoffibie to put his fcheme into execution in London,.., he hurried down to Bath on tlie fame errand»' where he became perfonally acquainted with lord Dapperwit, who was before by no means ignorant of h؛s name or profession, tho١ for reafons best knorvn to bimfelf, he had chofe
to
A MORAL NOVEL. 171 to conceal them from Maria; for indeed this was the gentleman whom he had reprefented to her as a stock-jobber.
One would imagine, that this nobleman must receive a peculiar pleafure in thus considering people in characters which they had no right to, as it was his constant practice, and, which (as he valued himfelf very much upon it) he fome-times facetiousty, and not improperly termed, a mafquerade in the mind’s eye.
But to return from this digression: lord Dap-perwit thinking Mellifont would be a ufeful man in the execution of any Scheme of villany, made him an offer of living with him as a companion, and occassonal upper fervant, or in other words, as a fervile parasste, on whom he might tauntingly eXercife all his cruelty, without any danger of refentment, which was joyfully accepted; and furely, this very circumstance of agreeing to live with any nobleman on fuch terms, must, to every delicate mind, fufficiently shew the man in his true colours; for what perfon who has the least degree of principle or honest pride, would, while he is enabled to provide for himfelf, stoop and conform to all the humours of a debauched nobleman for a fubsistence, which (notwithstanding he may live in all the fplendour and expence of pomp) is still shamefully Scandalous and mean;—must not any man feel a greater degree of innate fatisfaction, H 2	when
،4٢2 a MORAL NOVEL.
when sitting down to a plain, homely meal, which he knows to be the the fruits of honest industry, than to be pampered w؛th delicacies for feme well-executed act of wickednefs, by a
rafeal of a lord ?--but nature has fashioned
strange creatures in her time, and one of thefe was MelhfoRt.
CHAP. XXXIII.
One woe doth tread upon another’s heels,
So fast they follow.
’	Hamlet.
THE gentleman, whofe history I related in my last chapter, entered the room, just as my lord had determined to give over all farther purfuit of Maria ; crying with his ufual impudent vivacity;—“ Well, my lord, may I give ״ you joy ?—have you found out who this fair ״ incognita is ?—this terrestrial angel
״ Yes, (replied his master, with a fullen “ difeontentsdnefs)—I have,—her name is Har“ try,—she has twenty thoufand pounds at her “ own difpofal, and as it will therefore be im-״ poffibte to put my fchemes into execution, I ، have refolved to think no more, of her.”--
״ Impossible!
A MORAL NOVEL. 175
״ Impoffible ! there’s nothing ؛mpoffible to ״ your lordship’s parts, titles, and fortune, (re-״ joined Mellifont)—I thought you had been a ״ man of more intrepidity, than to give up a ٠٠ girl, becaufe she has money; that will indeed ‘·‘ prevent your making the intended propofals. ״ but it can be no impediment to the accom-“ plishment of your wishes.”—
٠٠ How, how, (demanded my lord eagerly.”) “ Why, (replyed he) it will be an eafy mat“ ter to watch her fome night from the rooms, ٠٠ put her into a wrong chair,—have a carriage “ waiting,—force her into it,—whirl her down ״ to your houfe in Wales, where it will be “ impossible for. her friends to find her; and then “ you know, force and fear may induce her to ' ٠، what her inclinations perhaps would resist.”
٠·٠ Bravo (replied my lord) E’gad that ,will do; ٠٠ ,twill make a noife in the world, and give a ״ double relish to delight; thou shalt be my “ oracle and direct all; I must now drefs, and ٠٠ hope before morning, to nick Sir John Soft-״ head out of a thoufand : call on me to-morrow ״ forenoon, and we’ll fettle the glorious plan of ٠، amorous operations.”
Thus were thefe two villains planning fchemes for the ruin of an innocent girl, while she was unknowingly giving them an opportunity of H3	putting
!74 A MORAL NOVEL.·
putting them ؛n execution, by going to the rooms a few evenings after the above conference.
On her entrance, the first object that struck her eyes was Mellifont ; who having already prepar’d every thing neceffary, hasten’d to inform my lord of this lucky circumstance; who thought proper not to make h؛s appearance, till it was time to execute their project.
Unhappily for poor Maria, the night feemed to favour their design, being very rainy, accompanied with a great deal of thunder and lightening.
On her wanting to go home, to her great fur-prize, her fervant was not to be found: and she, of courfe, prevented from getting to her chair: while she was standing in this situation, my lord (who had taken care to have her fervant made drunk at a neighbouring ale-houfe) appeared ;and finding what was the caufe of her dilemma, made her an offer of his fedan, which was just by, and which, after fome little apology, she was too easily prevail’d on to accept.
While they were standing together in the courfe of converfation, he had aik’d her, whether she was afraid of the lightening ? of which having expressed great apprehensions, when he put her into the chair, he made that a plea for
advising
A MORAL NOVEL. 75؛ advising her to draw the curtains clofe ; which she accordingly did. My lord, elate with joy at his fuccefs, now walked as fast as he could before the chairmen, to shew them the way ; and whom the reward of a couple of guineas, made proceed at an unufual rate.
They had already got upon the turnpike road, ؛ when our heroine, thinking they were very long in carrying her home, opened the curtains, to fee where she was ؛—but, good heavens! what was her astonishment, when she found herfelf 11؟ an open country, near a mite from Bath, and lord. Dapperwit, whom, by the moon being just rifen she could easily distinguish walking before, at a Small distance.
When she had So far recovered, Srom the first violent effects oSher amazement, as to be able to Speak, she begg’d the chairmen to stop, and inform her, whither they were carrying her ; to which she received no other anfwer, than being desired to sit still—but, added one of them, ،، I ״ believe your journey with us is almost at an ״ end ; as I think I fee the carriage before “ us.”.———
She then too plainly faw into my lord’s villany; and, with tears in her eyes, intreated the chairmen to return:—in vain did she endeavour to perfuade them ;—in vain d؛d she pro-mife any reward ;—it was all to no purpofe :—
had
!7 6 A MORAL NOVEL. h٥،؛ it been their inclination, it was .impossible ; her feducer was just before, and had his eyes constantly fixed upon the chair.
As her only reSource therefore, she was obliged to call in patience to her assistance, and hopb the best.
The chair having now Stopped, my lord banded her into a post coach ; at the Same time, telling her, that it would be to no purpoSe to make any ressstance; which she was too well convinc’d oS before ; and considering that, as it was impossible Sor her to eScape, she should fare the better, if she gave them no occasson to ufe her roughly, quietly feated herfelf in. the carriage next to her betrayer :—Mellifont, who had been waiting for them, having previoufly plac’d himfelf on the other fide, and in this Situation, they drove away at an immenfe pace, a profound Silence for forne time being obferved by all the parties.
CHAP.
A MORAL NOVEL. 177 CHAP. XXXIV.
Can the poor feaman’s humble prayer^
When high their heads the billows bear,.
To silence hush the flood ?
Can the lamb’s feeble cries restrain,
The midnight horrors of the plain,
When lions roar for food ?
II.
So weak is reafon to controul,
Or footh the tempest of the foul.,
When pastions tear the breast ؛
Tho’ earnest th’ expiring groan,
Tho١ moving as the plaintive moan Of innocence distrest.
Holland’s Poems.
DURING the first ten miles of their journey, poor Marla was dissolved in tears, and her fwell’d heart beat, as ؛f it would have burst its tender prifon ;. in which state of melancholy infensibility, like an ox going to the slaughter, or a lamb dumb before its shearers, did she remain for fome time ; till recollecting that her■ tears would do but little towards her enlargement, she at last took courage to Speak t٥ her Seducer.——
In
!.78 A M O R A L N O V E L.
In the most pathetic manner, she intreated him not to make her miferable for life, by thus dividing her Srom all that she valued upon earth : —ihe made uSe oS every argument in her power to perSuade him to restore her to her Sriends: but alas ! she Sound they were in vain.—Had she been endowed with the perSuasion oS a Cicero, or a Demosthenes, they would all have been ineffectual ; he was thereSore Surely not to be worked upon, by what he deemed, the Supplications oS an unfchooled girl: he was pleaSed to the highest degree, at the SucceSs of his Scheme ; and only anSwered to all that she Said with SullenneSs, or by a cutting, miSplaced raillery.
They had travelled in this manner, about three hours, when they stopped to change horSes; which, as Maria knew they must do, she had flattered herfelf with the expectation oS then finding Some means Sor her efcape ; but cur determin’d Lothario (thanks to the Schools oS vice, in which he bad been educated) was not So bad a master of his trade ;—he had taken care to have proper relays of horfes on the road, and therefore, without being delay’d any material time, they travelled in this expeditious manner, till about ten o’clock, when be afked Maria, if she cbofe any breakfast ? which being refufed, he gave fresh orders to his fervants to proceed ; faying, that he should. not stop till the afternoon. And as be now thought himfelf too far from Bath to fear being overtaken, he endeavoured to enter
A MORAL NOVEL. 179 ter Into converfation with her, by aiking a long string of impertinent questions ; to all which she anfwered with the utmost civility and com-plaifance, thinking it best fo to do ; but her attention was too much engaged, by the melancholy profpect before her, to fuffer any one to share it but׳ Melvill: of him indeed she fecretly thought, and for his fake determined to part with her life, fooner than, what was to her, and should be to every woman, dearer than life,-— her honour*.
About four o’clock they alighted to dinner, at alone farm-houfe, from whence there was no poffibility of her eScaping, nor any perSon to compaffionate her situation ; So that the hopes with which she had hitherto buoy’d herSelS upJ־ were now entirely destroyed :—and, not to trouble my readers with all the particulars oS a difa-greeable journey, I shall content mySelS with Saying, that after having proceeded at a most furious rate, Sor a night and a day, she Sound herSelS in an old ruinated mansion, without any other houfe in sight; in what part of the world she could not tell ; but,. Srorn the immenSe mountains behind,, she judged ؛t to be (as it really was) on the borders oSWales; on her arrival at this mansion of vice, as it; was then late, she was conducted into a bed-chamber, by a perfon who, from her appearance, she took to be the houSe-keeper.
Having:
١8i A MORAL NOVEL.
Having no inclination to sleep (for indeed her misfortunes touched her too nearly, to fuffer her to take any resl) she threw herfelf upon the bed, without undreffing; and, having fpent fome hours in fruitlefs endeavours, to gain a short respite Srom her miSery, by slumber, the following lamentations broke from her lips:
٠٠ Wretch that I am! where will my calami“ ties end ? am I for ever doom’d to be the fport * of fortune ?—alas! why was I not permitted to ״ die whilst an infant, and by that means to have ״ efcaped the many miferies I was born to fuffer ?
—but let me not arraign the All-wife, for “ through his gcodnefs, I may still be happy; “ although the path, to my weak fight,, appears “ Inextricable.”
״ Oh Melvill! were you but acquainted ٠٠ with my fufferings, and knew how much I ״ sland in need of your assistance,—I’m fure you ״ would joyfully bestow ؛t;—but why do I still ״ think of him ?—or, to what purpoSe do I own ״ my love ?—he quits his native land to sly from ١٠ me ؛—but my poor mother!—what tortures now “must she endure ؛—alas! how must her dear ״ heart bleed Sor her afflicted daughter ?”—In this manner did she Spend greatest part of the night, while he that was the cauSe oS her misSortunes slept as Serenely, as if, blest with native innocence ؛ but, as miSery cannot endure Sor ever, the tender nature of Maria, being almost worn
out,
A MORAL NOVEL. 181
out. at length gave way to peaceful stumber, that balm of hurt minds, chief nourisher in life’s great feast ; and she had, for fome time, lost her fen-fes in a delusive dream, when the entrance of a Servant (who came to bring her fresh cloaths) awakened her, to recollect she poignant situation she was in.
As foon as she was dressed, she was conducted to my lord; who after breakfast, began to take fome unjustifiable liberties with her ; upon which she again implored him on her knees, not to detain her longer against her will; and attempted to reprefent to him, the sinfulnefs of his inhofpitable treatment ; but as (to ufe his own expression) he was not then in a humour for moralizing : he left her, faying, that he would give her two days for consideration thereon ; but that if, at the end of that time, she still obstinately resisted to gratify his wishes,—force should prevail.
This was a terrible declaration for the afflicted Maria; who fixing her lovely eyes stedfastly on the ground, feem’d for fome time stupisied by thought ; at length rising triumphantly, she exclaimed,—״ Yes,—it shall be fo,—I am deter-“ mined,— firmly fixed,-—that if before the end ״ of two days, no apparent means for my efcape ״ are found,—-I will at once put an end to all my ״ heart-rending miferies,—by—by--what ?—.oh “ distracting thought !—by fuicide.”—Then
again
1:82 A MORAL NOVEL, again dropping on her knees, and clafping her hands, she cried, “ I know the heinoufnefs of the ״ crime, I have refolved to commit,— I fee it in ״ its full force,—terrible to think of, and shock-״ ing to human nature ;---but still I hope for “ mercy ;—I hope that the abfolute neceffity for ״ the action,—٠my prefering death, and that by ״ my own hand too, to the lofs of my honour, “ will, in fome meafurej؛palliate and atone for the ״ attrocioufnefs of the deed ; and that the all-wife ״ Being will in another world, pardon the wicked-״ nefs of a crime, which mifery and defpair has “ drove me to in this:—a crime, which even un“ der thefe cirumstances, makes my nature shud-“ der, and almost abhor her own refolves.”

CHAP. XXXV.
There is fome foul of goodnefs in things evil, Would men obfervingly distill it out.
Henry V.

HEN our heroine had made the dreadful refolution, with which I concluded [ my last chapter, she feemed much more calm and [eaSy than before; and in order to amufe herfelf, took up her favourite author Shakefpeare, which Jay on a table by her; when, on opening it, the ' first words on which she cast her eyes were.
Against
A MORAL NOVEL. 1S3
——---------Against felf-staughter
There is a prohibition fo divine,
That cravens my weak hand.
Cymbeine.. On reading this fentence, it was with the greatest difficulty, that she could fupport herfelf». after the impious determination she had just madeJ٠ she could not look upon it as intirely accidental, but, on the contrary, rather consider’d it as a: rebuke from above, for the ssnfulnefs of her intensions and as a warning against executing them ; in vain did she attempt to argue with herfelf,-that it was merely fortuitous that she pitch’d upon that particular fentiment,—she could not be perfuaded of it, and if that was the cafe, she determined to prosit thereby ;—in short, the firmnefs and intrepidity she had just boasted,.— were vanish’d—the light in which she had before consider’d the deed, to make it justifiable, was chang’d :—thrice happy would it be, were every one thus to reap advantage from an accident, I do not mean in the like cafe, as it is to be hop’d, that no one (however unhappy) will ever be thus induc’d to forget the fupreme duty which he owes to his Creator and himfelf ; neither would I be understood to fignify, that every one is blest with fo timely and forcible a warning ; all that I would wish to inculcate by thefe reflections, is, to advife the children of adverfity, when they have made a refolution, however trifling or
mo.
i84 AMO.RALNO-VE L,
momentous, previous to the execution thereof; feriousty to ash their own consciences, whether, what they are about to do is justifiable, ""either in the sight of God or man ? and I am thoroughly convinced, they will need no other monitor to advife them what courfe to take.
But to return to poor Maria, the above affair made fo deep an impreffion on her mind, that she could no more recover her tranquillity, but almost distracted by the equal counterpoife of doubt and fear, pasted the day in the most painful uncertainty which way to act ; and after a restlefs night, rofe in the morning, regarding ! herfelf as a victim, destin’d for a faerifice, to the bafe purpofes of infamous nobility : and although she had now laid aside all thoughts of revenging herfelf, still she refolved to part with life, in preference to her honour, well knowing,, that the former is a debt which all must pay, and that nothing ever can justify a deprivation of the latter; however, before she attempted to repel force by force, she determined again to uSe all her rhetorick, to perfuade, him to reliquish his designs; and as she knew he had no love for her, exclusive of grofs gratifications, which dif-٢grace the character of a man; she flattered herfelf, that when he should fee the crime in its true light, that feme fpark of that goodnefs nature has planted in every breast,, would check the violence of his passions:—but we are all too apt ٠ to judge of others by ourfelves,*--this was her
own؛

A MORAL NOVEL. 185
own way of thinking, and therefore she vainly thought, ¡t must be his likewife.—
Happy indeed, would ¡t have been for her, had her opinion been founded on just grounds, as he would then never have violated the laws of humanity, by thus bafely violating her inclinations and peace of mind; however, luckily she had no occasion to make ufe of her elocution, had it depended' on that only, it would indeed have gone hard with her ; but while she was sitting at breakfast, Mellifont (whom she had not before feen since her arrival) entered the room, and having enquired after her health, Ac. told her the occasion of his visit, as follows.
״ I have (Said he) Madam, much against my ״ inclinations, been concerned in bringing you ״ here, but it was not in my power to avoid it ;—٠ ״ I am a dependant on lord Dapperwit, and must ״ obey his commands :—he knew it,—he knew ״ that I dared not act contrary to his will, .and “ and therefore ungenerously ufed his power, “ by making me a party in this affair ; from “ the beginning of which, I slncerely pitied you. “ though I dared not openly express it, but am “ now come to convince you thereof ; my lord ״ is gone out, and will not return till the even-״ ing, if you pleafe, I’ll conduct you to your ٠، friends ؛—but. as by fo doing, I must inevi-
״ tably
186 A MORAL.NOVEL.
،، tably lofe my fubsistence; I shall expect a ״ handfome gratuity for running this riSque.”
As our heroine was not in a condition to hesitate, she readily promised him a thouSand pounds, as Scon as he should deliver her to Mr. Howard,, and thanked her preServer in the most expressive terms, Sor his goodneSs ; after which, they Set out together on foot, and having walk’d about two miles, arrived at an inn, Srom whence they took a post-chaiSe, and proceeded with all Speed towards Bath.
CHAP. XXXVI,
Adversity with poignant dart,
By wounding, purifies the heart,
Expels each baleSul weed ;
She prunes each wild luxuriant shoot,
Her Scion bears the noble Sruit
Of virtue’s heav’nly Seed.
The Exemplary Mother.
WHEN Mar’ta had got So far Srom the houSe of her betrayer, as no longer to be under any apprehensions oS a purSuit, she again took an opportunity oS thanking her deliverer, in the most grateSul terms; though he was by no means deServ'mg thereof, as it was not
١	honour.
A MORAL NOVEL. 187
honour, but avarice, which actuated him in this affair ; and, to fay the truth, he was in it playing the double villain, having just before, received a large fum from lord Dapperwit, for his ·assistance in bringing away Maria ; and was now injuring that nobleman, by aiding and being privy to her efcape; indeed he made no fcruple of the latter, as it was performing a good action ; had ¡t not, it would have been the fame ; for friendship, gratitude, and every other virtue, would have given way to that demon,—felf-interest.
When within about fifty miles of Bath, Maria had the happiness of meeting Mr. Howard, who was then going in fearch of her. Great was the joy on both fides, at this unexpected rencounter after the expression of which, our heroine took an opportunity of informing Mr. Howard of all that had happened to her, fince their reparation; aslikewife of her promife to Melfifont ; to whom,, after having made proper acknowledgments for his behaviour, he gave a draught on his banker, payable at fight, for the agreed on fum, with a cordial invitation into · - —- — shire ; and having dined together, they then parted, Mellifont for London, to receive his thoufand pounds, and Mr. Howard, with his charge for Bath: on their road to which place, he gave the following anfwer to her questions, concerning the reafon why they had fo long delayed fending in quest of her.
i8٠ A MORAL NOVEL ״ Indeed, my dear (faidhe), you totally mistake ״ the affair, as I can assure you, that we pro. “ ceeded with all poffible expedition, in our en“ deavours to recover you ; when, after waiting “ a tedious length of time,، we found you did “ not return from the rooms;, you may easlly « imagine the consternation we were ؛nr and؛ « with what painful anxiety we fpent the rest of “ the night:—in the morning I made strict in“ quiry after you all over the town, but to no “ purpofe ; nor could we tell what to think of “ fo extraordinary an affair ;־—we had no fufpi-“ cion of lord Dapperwit, r.or indeed of any one ״ elfe ;—and should have been totally at a lofs ״ what courfe to have taken, had it not been for ״ an anonymous letter, I that day received in“ forming me, you were carried to London، “ This, as I have slnce difcovered, was fent by “ my lord’s own orders, to put us into a wrong ״ track; however, in confequence thereof, I “ immediately fet out for town, making inquiries “ after you at every ؛nn on the road, tho’, as you “ may imagine to no purpofe. I now began to ٠، fufpect the trick which had been played me;. “ when, remembering that lord Dapperwit was ،، miffed from Bath, at the fame■ time with your. “ Self, without any one being acquainted with ٠٠ his deslgn ; and llkewife recollecting, that he “ had a houfe in Caermartbenshire, I thought ؛t “ most likely that, were he your feducer, he ״ had carried you thither, and therefore reSolved
«· upon
A 'MORAL NOVEL, tg
upon paying him a visit ; on my road to which « place I was, when my joyful meeting with you, “ happily prevented me from purfising my jour“ ney: and I hope we shall foon distribute hap-“ pinefs to a miferable family by our arrival at “ Bath.”
Maria then made tender inquiries after her mother and Charlotte, whom he informed her were well ,when he left them.; but that he was . under great apprehensions, lest the grief which lady Hartry must inevitably feel, for not hearing of her daughter, would be too much shr her constitution, which was already not a little im-paired, by the repeated fltocks she had lately undergone : nor were his fufplcions groundless; as on t.heir arrival they found her ill in bed, and Charlotte .in a situation almost similar.
To -defcribe the meeting between thefe friends, requires the efforts of an abler pen than mine; I stiall therefore, by dropping a curtain over fo pathetic a fcene, 1-eave every one to figure to themfelves, what I cannot find terms to give them an adequate idea of, and content myfelf with ob-shrving, that there was never a stronger proof of the verity of the old remarkj ءء That ·usefind ءا mure joy in tbs company ءاا٠ ره tba؛ is regained, أ than twenty 0ل1لد״ batte ncuer been lojl ٠١١١ rkv'm this instance.	,־	' .
As lady Hartry’s peace of mind was now re-' stored, she daily grew better, and, in a short
time.
0ول A MORAL NOVEL.
time., had no other remains of her dishrder left, than an unufual languor of fpirits; when judg. ing it most expedient 'to leave Bath as foon as poffible, they determ.ined to fpend the ensifing winter in London, >at which place they arrived without any material accident, and were shon comforta'bly fettled in 'a ready-furnished housh ؛n Fall-Mall, where, as neither o'f the young la-'dies had ever been before, they found fufficient employment for all their leifure hours.
Having thus .brought them to So fafe a place, I strall now quit them., and once more beg my reader’s company, to visit an old acquaintance at Madrid ; though before I take my entire leave of London, I cannot forbear communicating to him a piece of news, at whic'h, I don’t doubt, he will be full as much furprized, as were the newly arrived family ; who, at their first interview with Sir Henry Summers, had the mortification of hearing siom him, that Mr. Martin, who for the first three months after poor'Emily’s death, shemed Inconshlable for her lost, and to have vowed a׳ state of perpetual celibacy ; was on the point of marriage with a yoU'ng lady of immenfe fortune.—
Since fuch is the unaccountable caprice of an inconstancy of human, .nature ; who will place any confidence in the reshlves of man ? whi'ch too often, like characters graven upon fand, are ״-able So be effaced by every adventitious blast.
CHAP.
A MORAL NOVEL.
CHAP. XXXVIi.
— ■ ׳ ■—She never told her love But let concealment, like a wormi'th bud,
Feed on her damafk cheek.: she pin’d in thought, And fat like patience, on a monument, fmiling at grief.
Shakespeare,
WHILE Maria was involved in thofe distrefsful circumstances, Melville remained (if not happy, at least tranquil) with his friends at Madrid, whofe company he found fo agreeable, that he Seemed to have renounc’d all inclinations for returning to F.ngland ؛ and altho’ he was eonicious, that his prefence there, would in a few months be neceffary, on account of his coming of age; still it is very uncertain, when he would have prevailed upon himfelf to make the voyage, had it not been for the death of poor Juliana ; who, however her outward behaviour, might ·indicate a total annihilation of her unhappy paffion, still inwardly retain’d the fame؛ ardent affection for our hero as ever, which notwithstanding their Separation, instead of abating, feem’d every day to increafe ؛ but having once refufed her hand, she had too much commendable pride, to endeavour to gain by folicitation, the affection of a man, who could not love her from inclination, and though she was confcious of the impropriety of her conduct, had not resolution to abandon him from her mind, but inwardly
92؟ A MORAL NOVEL, wardly lamenting her unhappy fate, she pin’d in thought; and in the blooming vigour of her life, became a martyr to a misplac’d paffion.—־ Death alone, could give a refpite to thofc tortures, from which, during her woe-fraught life, she knew no eafe.——
To you, ye virgins, who by nature are endowed with an uncommon share of (endernefs and fensibility, this story is addressed; whole minds, like the fair furface of an unfunned show, are fufceptible of every impression, which the rude foot-steps of the passing traveller, may chance to make :—In every age, —in every clime,——all fages have agreed, that — examples strike, when precepts fail ٠ ؛— in lovely Juliana’s lot, behold, the fad effects of difappointed love: from her examplej learn never to fix your heart upon a stranger, until you know whether he is deferving of, or has it in his power to receive the gift: — fusser not your eyes to gaze on his admir’d perfections, lest when you exprefs your approbation, you should imbibe the poifon of a hopelefs love, and thereby finish your existence ; — leave not your parents, — sister, —٠ brother, — friend, to mourn for their departed child, or friend: — let this poor maiden’s courfe, ferve as a buoy for you, to shun the rock which she has fplit on; fo shall the living by the dead be taught: — but a truce with grave reflections;
׳— she is gone: — peace attend her fpirit, — for impotently vain is every lamentation for her
lofs;
A M O R A L N O V E L. 193 lofs; or in short, any lofs of a temporal nature.
The whole family imagined Juliana’s diforder to be a confumption, but with her latest breath, and never till then did she confefs the miferable caufe of her indifposition :—a broken heart.
Nobody that was acquainted with her perfections, when living, could help pitying her fate, when dead ; as did Melvill, perhaps more sincerely than any other; but finding that although involuntarily, he neverthelefs was considered as the foie author of her death ; and that instead of a hearty welcome from Don Pe٠ lajo, he met with nothing but a cold reception, and far-fetch’d compliments •١ he determin’d once more to visit his native foil, though he dreaded to fee a place, where he had once experienced fuch uninterrupted felicity, and much more to fee her, who was the caufe of all his uneasinefs; but for the above reafbn, finding it abfolutely necessary, he made no long hesitation on the fubject, and taking a tender farewel of Don Carlos, (who still retain’d his former friendship for him) in a few days fet out for Paris, which place, he had promifed Some acquaintances there to make in his return home ; and thinking a furpriz* would be far the most agreeable : he deferr’d writing to Mr. Howard, till he could with certainty, inform him of the day of his arrival.
HAP.
Sol. II.
!94 A MORAL NOVEL. CHAP. XXXVIII.
If this be true, the gods do mean to strike me dead with mortal joy.
Cymb eline.
ON our hero’s arrival at Paris, he was easily prevail’d upon (by fome English gentlemen, who were there on a party of pleafure) to make that the place of h؛s residence for a month, about half of which time had elapfed ; when having occasion for fome stockings, he went to a hosiers in the rue de St. Germain ; on his entrance of the shop, he obferved beh؛nd the counter, a young man in half mourning, of whofe face he had fome confus’d remembrance, but no particular idea ; his addrefs was eafy and genteel, without pertnefs, and in his whole behaviour, there was a politenefs fuperior to what we generally meet with, in people in that rank of life ؛ at which Melvill was not a little fur-pr'iz’d, especially as by his converfafion he found, that he was not a native of France, and that therefore his gentility was far different from that officious politeffe, fo naturally the inherent qualification of every Frenchman ; and it still running in his head strongly, that he had feen him fomewhere before; he could not forbear ashing him the question.
״ Very likely, (replied the young man) as I “ perceive we are countrymen.”—
Mel.
A MORAL NOVEL. 195 Melvill finding from this laconic anfwer, that he did not feem desirable of entering into particulars ; from his unwillingnefs to give any man unnecessary pain, dropped the fubject :—Some general conversation concerning England, then passed, and Melvill having bought what he wanted, was leaving the shop ; when, by Some accident, a ring dropped Srom the hosier’s singer, which, being the nimbler oS the two, our hero picked up, and was returning to its owner; when casting his eyes on it, he Saw under the chrystal, on a piece oS white Sattin, curiousty work’d with hair; the letters,
.	H
cc
over them was tied, a true-lover’s knot, the ends oS which, were held by two turtle-doves, that were flying different ways; and on a label annexed, was the following F reach motto; le plus loin, le plus llee *
Having examined this ring very attentively for Some time, he exclaimed,—“ No, it is im-٠، possible ; it can never be ;” and returning it to the hosier, with a low bow, Said,—“ Will “ you not, Sir, deem me very impertinent, if I “ desire you to Savour me with an account how “ you came by this ring ?” “ By no means, (re“ plied his countryman) it was given me Some “ years ago by a young lady, to whom I then “ had, and still have a most inviolable attach* The greater the distance, the tighter ،he knot is tied.
“ ment,.
2
196 A hi O R A L NOVEL.
״ ment; she worked it as you fee, with her own “ hair; and when she put it on, made me fwear “ never to part with it; which vow I mean “ faithfully and Solemnly to obServe: the device ״ I need not explain to you,—the letters are ״ equally the initials oS either oS our names, “ which I once flatter’d mySelS, would Some “ time or other be the Same ; but adverSe Sate ״ ordain’d it otherwise : nor do I, at this inssant, ״ know whether she is living or dead.”—While he was thus Speaking, Melvill't countenance underwent Several changes; and observing that he had finished, with great energy exclaiming, ״ Yes, Sir, she lives; and you may both be “ happy.”
He ¡nssantly flew into his arms, crying. ״ Good ״ God ! that ever I should recognize my long ״ lost Sriend, Charles Hartry, in the perSon of ״ a hosier at Paris!”—Charles (for it was really him) beginning now to recollect his friend and play-fellow, returned the embrace with equal ardor; and they mutually congratulated each other on fo unexpected a meeting. When their first tranfports were in fome degree fubfided (Sir Charles, for fuch the reader must know he was, though neither Melvil!, or himfelf did) made tender inquiries after his own, and Mr. Howard’s family ; of both which Meivill gave him all the account he could : nor did he forget to inform him oS the happy change in Sir Thomas?s affections.—He likewise related to him every cir.
cum.
A MORAL NOVEL. 197
cumstance of his sister’s behaviour towards him ; as alfo ail his adventures since that fatal day ; and concluded, by inSorming him oS his intended journey to England, to which place, he now hoped, he would accompany him.
Sir Charles having no longer the Same reaSons for absenting himSelf as heretofore, readily coincided with his propoSal: but Some time being necessary, Sor him to get rid oS his busineSs, our hero was detained longer at Paris, than he at first intended; which however, being on So agreeable an occasion, gave him very little concern.—During their journey, he gave Melvill the following account of his adventures, since his departure from Oak-hall, which he had purpofely referved as an amufement for that time.
CHAP,
i 3
A MORAL NOVEL.
CHAP. XXXIX.
Oh happinefs! thou pleasing distant thought ؛٠ Thro’ what variety of untr؟؛d abfence,
Thro’ what new fcenes of anguish must I pafs ? The wide uncertain profpect lies before me, While clouds and Sunshine gain by turns upon it.
Anonym, u s.
IT is Surely unnecessary Sor me to inSorm my dear Melvill, of the reaSons Sor my abrupt departure Srom Oak-hall; he must, during my stay there, have too oSten Seen the unhappy caufe.
In my younger days, he must have obServed, that unjust taunts, and meprision were the only returns I received Sor duty and humility ; but being once arrived at a diScretionary age, when divested oS every juvenile prejudice, I could See things in their true light; and, finding it was not in my power to pleaSe my Sather, by the most careSul assiduity, I thought his behaviour justified me, in reSolving at once to rid him oS an object, which was So diSagreeable (thrice happy ! that I am no longer So) and mySelf oS a life that I was most heartly tired of, by endavour-ing to find that tranquillity among strangers, which the unaccountable caprice of a parent
de٠
A MORAL NOVEL. و9ل deprived me of at home. As ؛t was in all probability, the last time 1 should ever trouble him,
I made no fcruple of taking away fifty pounds, which he had given me to pay to Some tradesmen, and packing up a Sew cloaths in my portmanteau, I Set cut early one morning on my own horsh (as you must have heard) without communicating to any one what were my ؛nten-tions; nor do I stop to take one farewel of my most amiable Charlotte ; though I now declare to you, that could I have had the lea.st id'ea of what I afterwards fuffered, only from the const-deration of the excruciating tortures, which my behaviour must necessarily g؛ve her, she never strould have had sh melancholy a caush for her affliction.	١
As London was a place which I had a most earnest desire to fee, I determined to go thither immediately ; and by getting employment, as a clerk,' in fome merchant’s compting-houfe (for which, by my education, I was very well qua-l'ified) at once make mySelf independent of him ; whom, by all the laws of nature, and paternal؛ tendernefs, 1' had a right to expect affistance from. .
Accordingly arriving at the place of my destination, witlrout any adventure worth troubling you with, I the next day difpofed of my horfe for twenty-five pounds : and thus finding myfelf master of near fourfcore guineas, determined to I 4	re-
SCO A MORAL NOVEL.
remain fome time out of employment, that I might have an opportunity of fatisfying my eager curiosity, by feeing every thing worth notice in London; and having expended near a fourth part of my capital, in fome unnecessary fuperfluities, commenced the man of taste: I frequented a genteel cossee-houfe, was constant at the theatres, and all other public places of diversion; which of courfe drew me into a numerous acquaintance; most of whom, by my appearance, mistaking me for fome newly fledged heir of quality, paid me their constant court, in hopes of having their share of my fpoils.. And London had opened to me fuch a fcene of falfe pleafure, that I had not been there many days, before I found my money reduced to fome-thing under thirty pounds: I now considered that at the extravagant rate I went on, the remainder could not last long; and therefore began feriousty to think of getting into fome employment; in order for which, I constantly read all the advertifementSj in hopes of there meeting with fomething to my purpofe; but to my great forrow, had every day the mortification of a difappointment.
I had now been in London a fortnight, and found myfeif no nearer the gaining of my point, than on the first night of my arrival; however, having still twenty pounds left, I thought, with .frugality, it was a provision for.fome months: and indeed, happy it was, that I proceeded with PPX	fuch
A MORAL NOVEL. 201 Such prudence, as I should otherwife have lost the fweetest fenfations that I ever enjoyed ; having in a short time after this,, an opportunity of employing almost my whole possessions in an act of charity : you stare at hearing a man talk thus, in an age when many, whofe riches are immenfe, would refufe a shilling to affist a starving fellow-creature ; but fupprefs your astonishment, till you have heard the particulars. Having one evening been prevailed upon to fup at a tavern, where I had foolishly thrown away a couple of guineas, at the billiard table; I was walking home, condemning myfelf for my folly, when my attention was awakened in a very extraordinary manner.
It was between twelve and one o’clock in the morning; when, pasting by a genteel houfe, I heard the most violent Screams, which gave me reaSon to SuSpect that Some injury was committing, on a perSon who, by the voice I knew to be a. woman; and preSently aSter I Saw the door opened, andfomething white thrown with the greatest force into the middle of the street: but, gracious heaven! what was my astonishment, when, on my nearer approach, I found it to be a woman almost naked. By the affistance of the watch I helped her up, and having, with the greatest’ difficulty brought her to herfelf, she begg’d me, in the most fupplicating manner; “ to take pity “ on a wretch, whofe only abode, without my “ generous assistance, must’be in the street, at· I 5	״ once.
202 A MORAL NOVEL.
״ once expofed to the inclemency of the “ weather, and all the domineering info. “ lence of office.” I found by her manner of expression, that she once had known happier days. What her perfon was, it was impossible to difcern ;—her hair was dishevelled, and hung loofe upon her neck, which, with her eyes and face, was beat in a most terrible manner; however there was fomething altogether, which loudly called for my compassion ; and not being proof against her tears, I called a coach, and putting her into it, drove to my lodgings.
During our little journey, her tears feemed totally to impede all her powers of fpeech ; nor were they at all abated, by the difficulty, which (on our arrival) I found in getting her admitted : my landlady objected strongly against it, for the honour of her houfe ; and indeed, every circumstance considered, there' was nothing very unrea-fonable in her objections; undoubtedly taking an unknown female, at that time, to a single man’s lodgings, carried far from a good afpect with it: however, as I stood pretty high in her good graces, by dint of perfuasion I at last gained my point; and having resigned my bed to the stranger for that night, went to lie with another lodger in the houfe : but my mind was too full of this adventure, to fuffer me to get any rest. Rising very early, I ran to give a fuccinct account thereof to my landlady ; who being a good kind of woman (I do not mean according to the general
implication
A MORAL NOVEL. 203 implication of that term) I fancy, sincerely believ’d all I fa؛d, and, at my instigation, help’d this miferable unfortunate to fome cloaths ; to whom as foon as she was drefs’d, I fent my compliments, desiring her company to breakfast ; and having returned a Suitable anfwer to my meS-fage ; she, in a few minutes, enter’d the room, where I was waiting for her.
She was a tall, genteel, well-made woman, and notwithstanding her eyes, and the other parts of her face, bore apparent marks of the bruifes she had received; I could still distinguish that she was handfome :—her teeth were remarkably fine, and as her drefs now in fome meafure, corresponded with the dignity oS her figure ؛ she had an undoubted right to the title of a fine woman.
On her entrance, I Saw that she wanted to Say Something to me, but could not; I Saw the gratitude oS her heart hanging upon her lips, and pressing Sor utterance ; conScious, that she felt more than she had the power to expreSs : I aroSe, and endeavoured to relieve her, by enquiring aSter her health ; I then led her to a chair, where she was no Sooner Seated, than the SenSe oS the obligations she had to me, overcame her, and bursting into tears; she cried, ״ Oh Sir ! what shall “ 1 Say to you ?—how ?،—in what manner shall ״ I thank you ?—but words are insufficient, Sar, ٠، far too feint, to expreSs the feelings of my Soul,
״ at
204 a MORAL NOVEL.
״ at this interesting, minute; and although I ״ am convinced, that a man who could have the ״ heart to do fuch an act, must judge what my “ fenfations are ; still I shall never be able to re-״ turn you fufficient thanks, for your goodnefs ״ to a poor wretch, who, without your affist-״ ance, by this time, would have been no ٠٠ more.”—
٠٠ Oh Sir,—you may now enjoy the moral, ״ focial fatisfaction of having Snatch’d from per“ dition, a perfon, in the complicated distrestes “ of nakedness,—and want; and what is still ״ much worfe, loaded with a felf-reproaching ״ confcience.”—
I never in my whole life, had more occasion for words, than at this instant, and never made a worfe ufe of them, I wish’d to fay fomething to Sooth her feelings ; but Sor a long time, was at a loSs:—the dignity oS her appearance, join’d to the penetrating SoftneSs oS her tears, quite overcame me; and it was not, till aSter a long silence, that I recollected mySelS So far, as to beg she would not distrefs me, by Saying any more on a Subject equally painSul to us both ;—٠ to allure her, that I had done nothing, but what I hop’d every man would have done in the Same situation : from which (as it was but my duty) I could claim no merit; and that, if I really had any, I was Sufficiently over-paid, by the conSciouSneSs oS having acted right:—that as I was
a man.
A MORAL NOVEL. 205 a man, I could not fee the distresses of my fellow-creatures, and divest myfelf of tender feelings ;—nor indeed would I have parted with them, at that moment, for the wealth of the Indies.
She now Seem’d Something compos’d, and I had the Satisfaction of feeing her eat fome breakfast; after which, she again thank’d me in the politest manner, and in terms, .which at once shew’d her gratitude and good fenfe; though at the fame time she loaded herfelf with reproaches, as the caufe of all her misfortunes, and feem’d but little short of a state of abfolute defpera-t؛on٠—
I endeavour’d to folace her afflictions, by begging that she would look upon me, as a perfon, inclin’d to do every thing in his power to ferve her; and then represented to her the sinfulnefs. of not placing a just hope in providential protection ; she thank’d me for my friendly intentions, and added, “ that were I acquainted with־ ״ her history, I should not only blame and def-“ pife, as much as I was now inclined to ferve-״ her.”—
My reply was natural, and'came of courfe,—-״ I could not think fo, and that if a recital, of ״ her story would not give her too much pain, ״ by the recollection of past misfortunes, she “ could not oblige me more, than by favouring
״ m.
20(5 AMORAL-NOVEL.
“ me with it:”—she reply’d, ،* that my behavi-“ our gave me an undoubted right to know it, and؛ “ notwithstanding it would unavoidably recall to “ her mind, things she could wish ever to forget: ״ and though she must run the hazard of for. ״ feiting my good opinion, by laying open to ״ my view, the catalogue of follies, or rather ״ vices, she had been guilty of; nevertheless؛,, “ she could refufe nothing to a perfon to whom “ she had fo powerful an obligation, and ac-*٠ cordingly instantly related it;”—to which, as it may ferve for a good leffon to all young people of the female fex; and will not be totally ufelefs to ours: I shall make no fcruple of begging your attention, I give it in her own words, which were as you will find in the following chapter.
CHAP. XL.
٠■	...Better I were distract,
So should my thoughts be fever’d from my griefs And woes, by wrong imaginations lofe,
The knowledge of themfelves.
King Lear.
IN order to infpire you with a just idea of my own misfortunes, I must first give you fome account of my family, as from one unworthy part thereof, all my unhappinefs has proceeded:
my
A MORAL NOVEL. 207
my father (whofe name was Barton) was a gentleman of good estate in Gloucestershire; when I fay good, I would be understood to mean, that it was amply fufficient to purchafe every real neceilary of life, though not large enough to furnish the ridiculous and prejudicial Superfluities, which his openneSs of heart wished to commandj and which he was imprudently determin’d, at any rate to procure; you will excuSe me, Sir, Sor thus touching upon the frailties of a parent; but as you have an undoubted right to my most candid ingenuity, I must acknowledge, that extravagance was his Soible, and has been my ruin.
He married my mother (with whom he had a Sortune oS five thouSand pounds) while he was very young, and Srom the uniform propriety of her conduct, had never any occafion to repent of his choice ; about a year after which, she was brought to bed of a daughter, who (being the first tender pledge of mutual love) call’d for all the attention of her parents, which they, in their fondnefs readily bestow’d ; nor while a child, was her innocent prattle ever tirefome, rather ever new ؛ and in the extatic moments of parental joy, they too vainly thought their happinefs complete ; but alas! how was that felicity damp’d, to have the mortification of obferving, (when j their daughter was arriv’d at that period of life, where the disposition being no longer hid by the ٠ inadvertent Sallies oS a Sprightly youthSulneSs, j
begins
20$ A MORAL NOVEL, begins to shew itfelf in its true colours;) that she was ill-temper’d to excefs, peevish, difcontented, and to crown all, possessed of a heighth of malevolent pride, that must necessarily render her odious to every beholder ; in short, she was totally destitute of that affability and complaifance,-. which alone can make every young lady agreeable.
No wonder, that her parents did not feel the fame cordiality of affection for her, that they would have done, for one of whom they had lefs reafon to complain; but as all ،he powers of nature, stirring within, still informed them ،hat she-was their child.——No circumstance in their׳ behaviour, ever indicated the least want of a true parental regard !—her wishes were her will nor would it have been poffible for her to observe the alteration in. their hearts, had. they not found another object on whom to bestow their· tendernefs,—I mean myfelf.; who was born when: my sister was about fifteen years old.
It is easier for you to imagine, than me to defcribe, the joy (as I have since been informed), which my father felt upon this occasion ;—I quickly became a favourite with the whole family, except my sister, by whom I. was fecretly as much detested, as I was admired by my parents ; which in their abfence she always took care to exprefs, by the most cruel treatment; not׳ that: it arofe from conieioufnefs of having loss
a place.
A MORAL NOVEL. 209 a place in their hearts; but her pride could ill brook fo powerful a rival therein as myfelf; and out of a falfe Spirit of refentment, at the age of two-and-twenty, she went off with a neighbouring baronet, for she had external charms to attract a man of gallantry; with whom, after a long fearch, her parents heard she lived in a most Scandalous manner, in open defiance of every law of modesty or honour.
Her afflicted father, imagining that an alienation of his affections was the caufe of this imprudent step, wrote to her, in the most Soothing and affectionate terms, earnestly intreating her to return, and promising to receive her with open arms;—freely to forget and forgive all her past behaviour : when, would you you think ? that equally infensible to the just-nefs of his remonstrances, and the tender kind-nefs of his felicitations, she had the cruelty to return for anfwer, ״ that she would never con-״ form to all the capricious whims of a younger “ brat, while she had the means of existence ia “ her own hands; and could live without the ٠٠ assistance of thofe, whom the world called ٠، her friends.”
Oh, Sir, think what my poor father must feel at this instant! to fee his own daughter in the down-hill road towards perdition; lost t٠> every fenfe of duty to. her parents, or her God..
I was.
210 A MORAL NOVEL.
I was too young to experience any degree of affliction; but, being completely bleffed in the intire affections of my parents, whofe love for their darling feemed every moment to increafe.
My juvenile years pasted in the most pleasing and harmonious manner. — Thus happy,.— inattentive did I live; nor ever knew what it was. to feel the pangs of agonizing forrow, till my dear mother’s death, which happened when I was about sixteen years old.-
With her I might justly fay, departed all my joy:—thrice happy had I been, if heaven, in commiferation of my youth and inexperience, had kindly fuffered one grave to have contained, us both;—but fate referved me for fuperior woe :—fure I was born beneath the influence of an unlucky planet, which on the thread of my exissence, stamped the party-coloured doom of mifery.
The poignancy-of that affliction, which, from the tender fenfibisity of my father’s nature, he must of courfe be fuppofed to have felt, for the lofs of fo good, fo loved a wife, gave rife to a diforder, in which, after having lingered for near, a twelvemonth, his physicians affured him to be in the last stage of a confirmed confump-tion : and the fatigue which I underwent in attending him, through every gradation of this flattering malady, joined to my grief for the
approaching
A MOARL NOVEL. 211
approaching death of the tenderest, best of parents, foon rendered me much more sit to lull ؛n foft repofe, than to experience the heartfelt toil of nightly watching by a sick father’s, bed.
In short, Sir, not to trouble you with any unnecessary particulars, his distemper feemed every moment to increafe; and finding the fatal moment of his dissolution nigh, he called me to him, when gently pressing my hand, his feeble eyes, half drowned in briny tears, he pronounced words, which made fo deep an impression on my young mind, as never to be erafed, but by the all-fubduing hand of time.
״ Oh, my dear child (cried he) how shall I
״ I dare to look up to you for forgivenefs ?-׳
“ In what words shall I intreat you to pardon “ me, for the most attrocious crime that parent ״ e’er was guilty of?——
١	“ Oh my Betfy, I have cruelly deceived
“ you;—nay, I have deceived myfelf and all ״ the world :—my unbounded love for you, has “ made me inattentive to my own concerns ;—I “ have lived too fast, and have now the agonizing “ reflection, that 1 must quickly leave you, ״ liable to every infult, which unguarded virtue ״ meets with, without having it in my power to. ״ provide for your fubfistence; at a time too, “ when, from your age, you have most need
212 A MORAL NOVEL.
״ of Some experienced hand, to guide your ״ unwary youth, through this wide, precarious, ״ and turbulent world :—my whole estate is “ mortgaged for more than its rea! worth;—׳ ״ a falfe mistaken pride, with an unguarded, “ therefore ill-applied, generosity, have been ״ my ruin:—my only care has been, to appear “ insignificantly grand, in the eyes of that ״ world (who must hereafter inevitably defpife « me) at a time, when all my attention should “ have been fixed upon your future establish. ״ ment and felicity.—When my poor eyes are ״ clofed in endlefs night, what will you alone *٠ —helplefs, and innocent do ? — no friendly ״ counfellor to adviSe ;—no hand to lead your ״ young Seet, thro’ the broad path oS vice, “ which opens Such a Scene of tempting, dan“ gerous pleafure to inexperienced youth, that “ they perforce must yield to it, and for a fingle “ moment of fenfe-deluding gratification,—un٠ “ dergo a life, perhaps an eternity of future ״ woe.——But my child, arm yourfelf with “ refolution, and when I am no longer prefent ״ to affist you,—remember the last precepts of
“ a dying parent.--Confide in the all-wife
״ Being;—■do not distrust him,—and he will “ never for fake you ; nor let the flowery, eye“ catching paths of SenSual enjoyment, tempt “ you to depart front the thorny difficult one ؛٠ ٠* virtue.”
White ٠،
A MORAL NOVEL. 213 ״ While you are virtuous, my child, you “ may be happy in yourfelf, and defpife the ״ vanities of a mistaken world ;—do thus while ״ young ;—and when the stealing steps of age ״ draw on, — you will be delivered from the “ tortures of a Self-condemnation, and the in-״ fiuence of shame, remorfe, or terrorem-“ brace religion with fervent cordiality, and be ״ happy; for all her ■ways are pleafantnefs, “ and all her paths are peace.”—Then clafping his hands, with uplifted eyes, he added, “ still ״ may the omniprefent Providence look down ״ with pity on your youth, and by his power ״ conduct you guiltlefs, through that intricate ״ maze of wickednefs in which you are placed ؛ “ —foj when fupported by the fweet influence “ of a balmy hope, you will never lofe the ،٠ innocen e of heart of which you are now
״ possessed ; nor, when bowing under compli-<، cated distresses, fink under the gloom defpair.”
Here his voice failed him ; and in a few moments he funk into eternity, leaving me an orphan, destitute of every necessary of life.
Forgive Sir, (faid she, bursting into tears) forgive this tribute, which nature requires me to pay to the memory of a poor, fond, though indifcreet father; on whom I can never think, but with a reverential awe.—Having indulged her commendable filial grief, for a few moments, she proceeded as follows.
CHAP.
214 A MORAL NOVEL.
CHAP. XLI.
Oh what avails, how once appear’d the fair, When from gay equipagej she falls obfcure,
In vain she lifts her livid lips in pray’r,
What man fo mean, to recollect the poor !
From place to place by unfee’d bailiffs drove As fainting fawns, from thirsty blood-hounds fly, See the fad repanants of unhallow’d love!
In prifons perish, or on dunghills die.
Anonymous.
I Found all that he had faid, with regard to his affairs, but too strictly true ; for as foon as his death was known, his creditors instantly feized upon his effects, which they fold to pay themfelves as far as they would go.
Thus sltuated, you can but imperfectly imagine the distrefs 1 was in.—The houfe and estate were the property of a gentleman, to whom they were mortgaged; and who politely gave me leave to remain there, till I had an opportunity of providing for myfelf elfewhere.
Not to dwell too long on fo melancholy a fubject, my father had been dead about a week, when I was Surprized by a vislt Srom a lady, oS whom I had no knowledge.—I had indeed, Some conSuSed idea oS her face ؛ but no particular remembrance of it; however, not Suffering me
to
A MORAL NOVEL. 215 ·to remain long in this uncertainty, she made herfelf known to me, in the perfon of my eldest sister ; and addreffing me in the most affectionate manner,—with marks of a real penitence, confessed the crimes she had been guilty of; and added, ״ that time having brought her to a “ just fenfe thereof, she had perfuaded Sir ״ Henry Rakish (the baronet with whom she “ went off) to marry her; but that heaven did “ not permit them long to enjoy their happy ״ union, her hushand having died about two ״ years before, leaving her mistrefs of a hand-■“ fome fortune.”—She added, ״ that after her ״ behaviour, she thought it to no purpofe, to “ attempt a reconciliation, during her father’s •٠٠ life-time ; but hearing of his death, and the’ ״ circumstances ؛of his affairs, she could not ،، bear, that fo near and deferving a relation “ should want, while it was in her power to ״ affist her;” and concluded, by insisting on my going to live with her.-——As I had before heard of the death of the above-mentioned baronet, I made no fcruple of believing all she faid to be true ; which were welcome tidings to a perfon in my distressed situation: we therefore, the next morning, fet out for London, at which place we arrived without any material accident.
I had now no reafon to complain of my lot, -as my sister behaved to me with -the greatest tendernefs and affection.
For
2׳i 6 A M O R A L N O V E L.
For three weeks I thought myfelf, and really was, completely happy. She went but very little abroad, tho’ there was no day passed, in which she was not visited by a number of gentlemen, most of whom took particular notice of me; but as I thought it no more than they would have done of any other young perfon, not totally destitute of beauty, I looked upon all the compliments which were made me, as things of courfe, and therefore paid no further attention to them.
There was one gentleman in particular, whofe name was Hartop, who always behaved with an uncommon degree of politenefs and warm civility; and as he was really an agreeable man, I will confefs that I was very much pleafed with his converfation.
I was frequently alone with him, when he never behaved in any manner, that was not consistent with the strictest referve and delicacy ؛ nor had I the least fufpicion of the villany of his intentions, till one particular day, when having dined with us, my sister left us alone, faying, that she had fome businefs which would not detain her long, and begged me to entertain Mr. Hartop till her return.
We had not been together many minutes, before he began to take fome unjustifiable liberties with me ؛ whereat I was (as you may imagine)
A MORAL NOVEL. 217 gine) exceedingly astonished, and desired to know what he had ever feen in my behaviour, to authorize fuch proceedings ? but he only laughed, at what he called my airs ; and beginning to be intolerably rude, caught me in his arms, and having infulted me with language, too grofs for me to repeat, avowed the bafenefs of his intentions.
On my crying out, he begged me to be silent; to induce me to which, he added, that my noife would be but little regarded in an houfe of that kind.
.¡!engaging myfelf, I desir’d to know what he meant by casting reflections on my ssster’s habitation?—but he would not enter into any altercation ; and catching me again in his arms, notwithstanding my utmost struggles, would foon have overcome me, had it not been for a great cry of fire, which made him leave me, in order to take care of himfelf; but luckily, the alarm was occassoned by nothing more, than a chimney at the next houfe.
On running up stairs in my fright, I there found my good sister, whom I had imagined to be out, which added to what Hartop had faid, raifed in my breast fome thoughts, not much to her honour or humanity, however, I thought proper to keep them to myfelf for the prefent.
Vol. II.	K	only
atss A MORAL NOVEL.
·only determining to be more circumfpect for the future.
After expreffing my astonishment at finding her there, I inform’d her of Hartop’s behaviour, and defired that she would never again leave me alone with him ; in reply to which, she told me,
״ that she was just returned home, and had as ״ well as myfelf, on the cry of fire, run up ،، stairs,” and then stew out in the most bitter terms against Hartop, Saying, “ that she was “ amazed at his inSoience, in daring to offer “ any rudeneSs to a perSon beneath her rooS,—
״ and vowed she would never Speak to him ״ again ;—for that as I was under her protection,
“ she should look upon it as an affront offered “ to herSelS, and would let him know it.”—
In purSuance of this determination, she instantly wrote a note, wherein she acquainted him with her resolution, though (as I have Since been inSormed) she took care that he should never receive it.
Thus by׳ this well-counterSeited anger, did ' she ؛ntirely hush my former Sufpicions, and 1 really believed, that she had no concern in the plot; though I anr now convinced, it was a premeditated contrivance oS her own to ruin me ; but the affectionate cordiality of her behaviour, would not then Suffer me to entertain any thoughts injurious to her honour ; and I was
again
A MORAL NOVEL. 219 again giving myfelf up to the enjoyment of that golden dream of happiness, which my luxurious fancy had painted, when my eternal peace of mind, was at once destroyed, by the cruel artifices, of that bafe, designing woman, under whofe protection I had placed myfelf, and whom natural affection, should have made a fecond parent.
She one night, out of a pretended indulgence (as she faid) to difpel that gloom from my countenance, which my father’s death had occasioned, and which was not yet worn off; carried me to the play, which being a diversion I had never before been a partaker of, I was not a little pleafed with my evening’s entertainment.
When we came out of the theatre, to my great furprize, the fervant who had been ordered to meet us, was not to be found; and having looked for him fome time in vain, least I should catch cold, by coming immediately from fo in-tenfe heat, into the night air; my officious sister, insisted on my stepping into an adjoining tavern, till a coach could be called, which I was too easily induced to agree to : and thus, under the hypocritical mark of friendship, and an affected concern for my welfare, did she feduce me to my ruin.
To my inutterable astonishment, I found that she was extremely well known at the houfe, K 2	and
220 A MORAL N O V E L.
and being at her desire, conducted into a room, fome wine was brought, of which I unluckily drank a glafs or two, but do not remember any thing farther which past’d that night.
I only know, that when I awak’d in the morning, I found myfelf in a situation, not to be described,—in a strange room, depriv’d in one fatal night, of all, my foul held dear ;—my virtue !—and my fame;—when, to add to my misfortune, I faw in my undoer, the villain Iiartop.—
Educated as I had been, with the strictest fenfe
of female chastity;---think Sir, — oh think,
what must be my fenfations, at that dread moment,—grief, defpair, and anger, by turns pof-feffed my foul :—I rav’d,—I tore my hair,—I beat my breast,־—and was for fome time, quite frantic.—
Exhausted passion at length gave way to the more moderated grief of reafon, and I began ferioussy to consider, that it was to no purpofe, to attempt; to fevenge myfeif :—my honour 'was gone, nor 'was ؛t in any human power to restore its fpotlefs, purity.
I might then, with strict propriety, repeat tbe line؟ .of our mellifluous Waller :
O that
A MORAL NOVEL. 221
O that I had my innocence again !
My untouch’d honour! but I wish in vain ;
The fleece, that by the dyer, once was stash’d,. Never again, its native whitenefs gain’d.
Although I was now thoroughly perfuaded, that this was a mercenary fcheme of my vile sistfr’s ; nevertheless, as she was the only perSon whom I knew in town, I weakly determin’d to apply to her, and flatter’d myfelf, that when she began candidly to reflect upon her actions, she might take pity on my helpleSs, injur’d youth and innocence ; and thereSore - immediately proceeded to her houSe, but was inSorm’d by the Servant, that ״ she was out,”—
“ Out,” (re־ecchoed I, knowing it to be impossible.)—but the wretchednefs of my Situation, at that instant, striking on my mind in its Sull force ; turning away with tears trembling in my Swollen eyes; I had only the power to exclaim, —“ good heav’n !”—my affliction, touch’d the heart oS the Servant, who, re-calling me, ؛n-Sorm’d me that .my Sister had order’d herSelf to be deny’d,.—that she had been instrumental to my ruin, by having pre-concerted the Scheme which had been made ufe oS;—and that I was r.ot the only innocent perSon by many, whoSe happineSs she had destroyed in the like manner..—
I thank’d׳
K 3
222 A MORAL NOVEL.
I thank’d him for an information of what, I but too strongly fufpected before, nor could I help lamenting to him, that any perfon, whofe heart (like his) was foftened with the least drop of gentle pity, should find his habitation there.
Then bursting into tears, “ infamous woman, ٠ ״ (cry’d I) who devoid of every particle of hu-״ man tendernefs, or relative affection, is not “ content with having totally destroyed her own ״ peace of mind, but like an infernal fiend,
״ would plunge me in ; and for a pecuniary “ recompence, destroy the happinefs of an only “ sister.”
Without virtue !—without friends to advife or protect, I was half distracted, and walked along, not knowing whither I was going.—٠
I bad luckily in my pocket, a twenty pound bank note, which my father had given me previous to his death ; and having tired myfelf with wandering to no purpofe, hired a lodging Suitable to the poverty of my Situation.
CHAP.
A MORAL NOVEL. 223
CHAP.- XLIL
Expofe thyfelf to feel, what wretches-feel,.
That thou may’st shake tire fuperssux to them, 'And strew the heav’ns. more just.
'	׳	King Lear..
HAV^N؟ atte^t٠؛؛y re^l٢d in my mind; gain a reputable livelihood, which would furnish me, if not with happinefs, at least, with tern-porary eafe; I at length fixed trpon the only plausible one that prefented itfelf; (videlicet,) that of going to fervice ; which refolution, I communicated to my landlady, who generousty believed my story, and promifed me her friendly affistance, 'in getting a place.	.
In the mean time, I wrote to feveral people, who had formerly been friends of my father’s; fetfing forth my distrefs, and Supplicating their relief,—from Some I received no anSwer,— Srom others. Scorn and reviling ;-in short; shoe-kery, contempt־, and neglect, were the only re. turns 1 received for meekneSs 'and humility.
By the recommendation oS my landlady, with' whom I Soon became a great Savourite,) by shew-¡ng an industrious disposition ; I went aSter Several؛ K 4,	places,־
224 A MORAL NOVEL.
places, but my having no one to give me a fuffi-cient character, was a material and just objection, with every body.
I was thus therefore obliged to sit down conten. ted with the mifery of my situation, without any profpect of comfort, for the prefent, or provision for the future; when to add to my wretched-nefs, I found myfi؛lf with child ; my money was near gone, and I now began to experience, all the torments of approaching penury and want;
׳—my landlady was my only friend, and she (poor woman) had it not in her power to affist me far, —all that she could, she did, being amply pof-feffed of humane feelings, thofe riches of the mind, tho’ poor in worldly poffeffions.
V/hen my time drew near, I grew more poignantly wretched,—my cloaths went piece by piece, for a prefent fubsistence; and I was at last delivered of a dead child, being void of common neceffaries,—with Scarcely bread to eat, or garments to cover me,—I have often since, wonder’d how it was poffible to, fupport myfelf, through fo fevere a trial, as I might have exclaimed with Jaffier.	■
There’s not a wretch, that lives on common charity, But’s happier than I am ; for I’ve known The luxurious fweets of plenty, ev’ry night, Have stept with foft content about my head,
And never w؛،k’d, but to a joyful morning:
Yet
A htl ORAL NOVEL. 225 Yet now must fall, like a full ear of corn,
VShofe bloffomS fcap’d, yet’s wither’d in the ripening,	.
But not to trefpafs on your time and patience, in this day of heavy affliction ; I strould certainly have perished, had ¡t not been for the goodness of shy charitable hostefs, who affisted me, even to an injury of herSelf; and without her generous interposition, I should once have been turn'd naked, and pennylefs into the street, by a perfon to whom she owed fome money, wlro Said, that it was becaufe she kept lodgers, who could not pay, that he was fo long depriv'd of his due, and was therefore coming up to execute his cruelty, and at the fame time to reproach me with my crime ; when this good woman interpos’d ؛n my behalf,, faying,—that, ifl was innocent, it was inexcuf. ble barbarifm in him ;—if guiltj׳, I had load, enouglt to bear, without the Severity oS liis reflections :-which welbapply’d truth, had the dessr’d effect,. and Sav’d me Srom immediate, ruin.—
Amidss'. theSe. accumulated misfortunes, I still־ had the Satisfaction oS knowing, they were not the conSequences of my. own wickednefs, and therefore, without any. reproaches of conscience had still thoSe balmy inexpreffible feelings, atten-. dant on oppreSs’d virtue.—
Though.
K 5
225 A MORAL NOVEL.
Though I was unhappy, I was not yet culpable ;—O that I could now fay fo, with the fame truth ; and that I had never experienced the many miferies, which for ever wait upon once lost purity :—notwithstanding all my fufferings, heaven endowed me with fuperior constitution, and I at last recover’d strength ; but what was the confequence ?—to become a fcandal to my fex, and odious to myfelf :—without money, without friends,׳—and yet with fome remains of beauty left;—what could I do ?—I had no hopes from my unnatural sister,—to procure a fervicfc (I found) was impracticable,—my character was gone ; nor did I know any one, who would be responsible Sor my honesty.—
In thefe distreSsSul circumstances, must I con-fefs to you, wbat courSe I took ?—no,—you must but too easily gueSs it,—and Save me’the painSul repetition oS my guilt,—with reaSon may you shudder,—I do mySelf; at the horrid recollection ;—yes, Sir,—prostitution, shameSul prostitution, was the lot of that perSon, who once had lived in all the Splendour and expence of flattering indulgence; in which detessable, fcandalous manner, I have existed for thefe two last years: but to recount all the various vicissitudes of fortune, that I have experienced within that short fpace of time, would be tedious, and perhaps offenssve.—
Upon
A MORAL·. NOVEL, 227
Upon a general review, you would find me fometimes wallowing in all the affluence and diffi-pation, which luxurious fancy could invent j— at others, bowing beneath the complicated frii-SCries of want, infamy, and sicknefs,—obliged؛ for a prefent fubsistence, to g؛ve up all thoughts, of my eternal welfare,—by sinking myfelf a degree below the brutes,—occasionally to flatter, and carefs a man my foul abhorred ;—if I looked round, I faw none, but wretches like or worfe than myfelf, who, dead to every nicer fenfe of shame, or honour, would prossitute their very fouls for hire■■oaths, blafphemi.es, and imprications, were their constant difcourSe ; — all which, and. much more, than it is in the power of words to defcribe, I was obliged to undergo : how justly does Rowe, in defcribing the lives of thefe outcasts of fociety, fay,,
To know no thought of rest, to have the mind! Still minist’ring fresh plagues, as in a circle. Where one dishonour, treads upon another, What know the fiends beyond it Oh heaven ! did women but feriousty consider, the gulph of wretchednefs, into which they plunge themfelves, when once they adopt vicious ١ nieafures, how earnestly would they endeavour to preferve their virtue,—even though it were but in appearance ;—yet all this I could bear with patience,—if I may be allowed the expression j, my bodily fufferingsj were ؛he lightest part of
-	my׳؛
328 A MORAL NOVEL, my woe,— they were trifling, in comparlfon of the reproaching stings of tyrant confluence, which one minuet’s recollection, never failed to bring : —if ever I thought feriousty,—it near turn’d me mad,—I could not bear it;—and, give me leave to obferve to you, that it is for this reafon we fee fo many of thefe unhappy women, in hopes of obtaining fome refpite from their tortures, as their only refource, flying to that odious vice of drinking,—which, being what I could never be prevailed on to practice ; 1 perhaps felt my misfortunes more feverely than any other; for every moment informed me, how fatally repugnant, my prefent courSe of life was, to all hopes of eternal blessednefs, though at the fame time, I had it not ؛n my power to take any ssep, towards procuring my pardon.—
For how could I attempt to ope my lips in prayer to that God, in violation of whofe most facred laws, I was daily living.—
This thought (from which, notwithstanding my utmost efforts, my attention was fcarcely ever divided,) harrowed up my foul, and strewed continual thorns acrofs my path.—	'
Many, many Um,es have I pray’d for death, to hide me and my shame, from the obferving world;—for where on earth, was comfort to be met with for a wretch like me.
have
A MORAL NOVEL. 229
I have fometimes, in hopes of finding it, excluded myfelf from all fociety ; but, though I could fly far from the fcene of guilty pleafures, still I could not shun myfelf,—to have forgot my own wickednefs; I must have resigned or violently stopped all the powers of fenfation: the former I could not do, and the latter I had grace enough to avoid.
I have endeavoured to drown recollection, in a continual round of noife and dissipation ;—but nature cannot always live upon the ssretch ; and if one Serious paufe interven’d, then׳— (cried she, clapping her hand upon her breass)—I found my judgment here ;—here I felt more than can be expressed.
The only amufement that endowed me with the least transsent degree of tranquillity, was reading ; and that, tho’ it mollified my forrows for the prefent, could not effectually divert my thoughts, from the only fubject I detested : I too painfully found, that study and pensive retirement, though they may footh for a time, in the main give additional force to natural or acquired melancholy.
After I have told you the heart-rending troubles, which we poor wretches are doom’d to fuf-fer, and many others, that it is impossible for me to give you the least idea of! will you not
be
230 A M ORAL N O V E L. be very much furprized, when I assure you that,, out of the number of unhappy prostitutes, which! infest this town, very few are to be met with,, who do not deferve the title of feasible ?.
Impossible you’ll fay, that fensible women would lay tbemfelves open to the many miferies which, in fuch a state they must necessarily meet with ;—I agree with you, that nothing can be a. stronger proof of their imprudence, ؛ho’ not of weak understanding : and forry I am to add, that by far the greatest part of them may, with juft-ice attribute their afflictions to the perfidious hypocriSy of your fex ; nay, parents themfelves are frequently in a great meafure accessary thereto: for, if a girl who has no other fault than her attachment to a worthiest object of affection, has (as is commonly the cafe) in any unguarded hour, been drawn in, under the most' facred promifes of marriage, to commit a treS. paSs on virtue, she may for ever repent of;— the doors of her parents, and the whole world, are instantly shut against■ her.
Without friends,—without virtue ; she must: be an amazing instance of laudable prudence, not to revenge herfelf upon herSelf, by falling into a courSe of infamy :—and by thus making that vice, which before was but inattention, ruin herfelf for ever.
Here
A MORAL NOVEL, 231
Fiere I cannot help obferving, that the in. justice of the world is no where more apparent, than in the distinction made, in the cenfures passed upon the frailties of the two fexes : is it not hard, Sir, that man, a lawlefs libertine, may roam,—commit at large every folly,— every vice which youth, intemperance, or his vicious inclinations prompt him to, and he shall not fusser in the eyes of the world ?—when, if woman, poor, weak woman (who being most liable to fall, should have greater allowances made).—if she deviates ever fo little from the narrow path of virtue, immediate ruin is the inevitable confequence.
The generality of the world cruelly imagine, that when a woman has lost one virtue, she can never recover that goodnefs of principles, she has fo imprudently thrown away ; but I stand a fatal example, to the injustice of fuch an assertion :—however time immemorial, having render’d it, an almost thoroughly received opinion, every attempt to abolish it must be vain, and fall of itfelsi ■ ■■ ■Therefore to turn to my story.
Being thoroughly fatiated and harrassed, with the infamy attendant on this deplorable courSe of life, I once determined (by learning feme trade, whereby I should be enabled to get my livelihood in an honest manner) to draw myfelf out of
it;
232 A MORAL MOVE L. it; for which purpofe I faved all the money I could, and learn’d the millinery business.
Having the good luck to fucceed therein, I had almost recovered my peace of mind, when another of the trade, envious of my fuccefs, found means to steal a quantity of fine lace, belonging to a lady of quality,, which was then in my possession.
There was no one but what believ’d me guilty of the theft or fraud ;—in vain did I assert my innocence ;—as I had not money to replace the goods, I lost my custom, and thought myfelf happy, in not being profecuted for a robbery.
I now found myfelf in the fame deplorable sstu-ation as before ; at last was taken into keeping, by a ssngle gentleman, which sheer necessity forced me to accept..
With him I lived much happier than heretofore ; being no longer fubject to the pinching gripes of unhous’d poverty ; and flatter’d myfelf, that by my behaviour, I should be able to retain his affections, till I had faved money enough to re-establish me in my bufinefs, in feme obfeure corner of the kingdom, where my unhappy story, was not know :—but alas! I still was doom’d to be the fport of fortune ; for the gentleman with whom I lived, coming home one day in liquor, found me talking to a tradefman, of whom I
was
A MORAL NOVEL. 233 was ordering fome goods ; and though he did not mention any thing at the time, on his return in the evening, he stripp’d me, and having beat me in a most cruel manner, reproached me with a crime I never had been guilty of,—inconstancy to him;—and, as a proof thereof, named the tradefman he had feen in the morning.
In vain did I protest my innocence ;—he turned me naked into the street, as you faw ; where I should certainly have perished, had it not been for your unmerited, unexampled klndnefs.
This Sir, is my history, without difguife or palliation; and if I have been guilty of great faults, I hope you will think them rather the confe-quence of irresistible necessity, than cultivated vice ; and that I am therefore more deferving of your pity than contempt.
·CHAP.
234 A MORAL NOVEL.
CHAP. XLIII.
The quality of mercy is not strain’d.
It droppeth like a gentle rain from heav’n Upon the place beneath ; it is twice blefs’d,
It blesseth him that gives and her that takes.
Merchant of Venice.
THUS (continued Sir Charles) did Mtls-Barton finish her painful history; throughout which there appeared fuch an air of unaffected ingenuity and perfect contrition, that I could not dishelieve her.
There is a certain charm in probity, which strikes upon the mind, like light upon our eyes; —conviction attends it ؛ and if what she had told me was really true (as indeed I had no reaSon to fufpect the contrary) I thought her much to be pitied; nay own, I felt myfelf deeply interested in her future welfare; therefore made her an offer of my lodging, which, with a great many apologies, for the trouble she had already given; me,—out of a principle of delicacy, she modestly declined, and would have instantly departed ; but confdous that she had no other friend to apply to, and that neglect must renew her wretched fcenes of life again, I would not fuffer it:—■I could not bear, that a perfon, whofe temporal,, and perhaps fpiritual welfare I had fo much already;
A MORAL NOVEL. 235 ready contributed to, should again throw herSelf away, from a punctilio of civility; and therefore insisted on her remaining where she was, till I could find her feme employment in the millinery businefs, which I determined immediately to look out for ; and, to my great fatisfaction, in a few days had the luck of meeting with a perfon, whofe health obliging her to retire from London, she was willing to yield up her shop, on the condition of being paid half the profits thereof, during her life-time :—and, on the recommendation of my landladyj who procured fecurity, I had in a short time the pleafure of conducting Mifs Barton to her new habitation.
I never heard fuch expressions of sincere gratitude, as this generous, Sensible, though abufed creature made me ;—(expressions were the only way she had of shewing it) and, on my presenting her with ten pounds for immediate ufe, I had the inexpressible pleafure of hearing that she thought herfelf completely happy :—and though I considerably distressed myfelf by assisting her, I must own, that an innate fatisfaction, preferable to all the riches of this world, shed a pleasing balm upon my delighted heart.
I now found my cash reduced to a very low ebb, and therefore grew every day more foil. citous about getting fome employment; and as heaven will never fusser any one to experience
the
236 A MORAL NOVEL, the least inconveniency for having performed a good action ؛ I, in a short time was recommended to a young gentleman, who was going to Antigua, to take posteffion of a large estate, and wanted a perfon to attend him as a companion de Voyage. Although it was not my intention to leave England, neverthelefs, as the terms offered me were very good, and as I was naturally of a volatile disposition, I made no Scruple oS determining to accompany Mr. Morton to Antigua ; and accordingly in a Sew weeks Set Sail for that place.
Knowing that nothing was more likely to render dependance tolerable, than to acquire my patron’s esteem ; I determined to find out his Soibles (؛S he had any) that I might play my cards in the most Suitable manner, without degrading my own nature.
By a little circumSpection, I Soon discovered that he was Sar Srom Sensible ;—consequently exceeding vain oS his perSonal qualifications,— and not a little addicted to the Sashionable Sollies oS the age : but to give you, in two words, a just idea oS his character,—he m؟ght, with the strictest propriety, be stiled a mere petit maitre.
Thus circumstanced, I had nothing to do, but to uSe his own weapons against himSelf; and was therefore constantly approving the elegance
A MORAL NOVEL. 237
gar.ce of his figure,-—the neatnefs of his leg, &c. By which means I ingratiated myfelf fo far in his favour, that before we arrived at the end of our voyage, my will was his; yet I never meant to make any bad ufe of my influence.
He was vastly Sond of hearing himSelS talk ; but being unluckily endowed with no great powers oS eloquence,—he was obliged to Supply this deficiency by art ؛—and Some trifling reading, joined to a tolerable memory, Surnissred him with Scope Sor Superficial conversation ; which consisted mostly of quotations, and commonly— the Same over and over again. .
It was his greatest glory, that he wanted nothing but a title (which he designed to purchafe, on his return to England) to render him a complete sine gentleman.
Such was Mr. Morton, Srom whom I daily received distinguished marks oS Savour and esteem; and as a Seafaring life was an entire novelty, I was not a little delighted with my voyage ; which was completed in the uSual time, oS Sa؛r weather and Savourable winds.
My patron finished his busineSs in about two months; ar.d a Sew days before the time fixed on for our return to England, made me his confidant, in an affair, of which I had not before the !east SuSpicion.
He
238 A MORAL NOVEL.
He informed me, that having danced, about a month before, with the daughter of an eminent planter, he had from that instant been deSpe. rately in love with her; and had accordingly made propofals to her father, which he refufed, becaufe if she married an.Englishman, he must, by that means, lofe the pleafure of her company ; which, from his age and infirmities, he stood not a little in need of, to fupport his drooping fpirits; but however, that the young lady, not having the fame objections to visiting England, which influenced her father, had kindly agreed to elope with him, the night before his intended voyage; and he therefore begged my affiftance towards the execution of his project.
I was not very fond of the affair, and attempted to remonstrate to him the dangers of a difcovery ; but he was too much in love, to listen to any thing, but what the violence of his paffion prompted: and feeing him thus firmly refolved upon it, gratitude would not fuffer me to withhold my aid.
Having therefore previousty prepared every thing necessary for the appointed night, Mr. Morton, myfelf, and a Servant, repaired to the destined place ; where we waited a Sull hour beyond the time, whereat we expected the young lady to have appeared; and (considering
that
A MORAL NOVEL. 239
that lovers ever run before the clock) our furprize encreafed not a little.
At length my two amorous patron, beginning to grow very impatient, h؛s beauteous dulcinea called to him from a wdndow, and had only just time to inform us, that their fcheme was discovered by the treachery of a fervant: and therefore exhorted us to provide for our fafety. So faying she retired ; and we were about to do the fame, when, to our great mortification, we found ourfelves furrounded by six men ; whofe number however did not difcourage us; and we, for feme time, fought very obstinately, till Mr. Morton unluckily receiving a violent blow on the head from a cutlafs, the perfon who had struck h؛m, feeing him fall, instantly took to his heels, as did all his companions, leaving me and the Servant who had accompanied us, to carry my unSortunate patron home, without any farther interruption.
But alas ! the mifehief he had received was irretrievable ; as the furgeon whom we fent for to examine his wounds, ingenuousty declared, that he could not live till morning ; and therefore advssed him to fettle his affairs; which having done, he called me to him, and desiring, that aSter his death, I would ccnvey his will to England,—put a purSe into my hand, containing notes and cash to the value oS five hundred pounds ؛ after which he received the Sacrament:
and.
24. A MORAL NOVEL
and, as the furgeon had foretold, at six in the morning died, in the flower of his age.
A man whofe every word and action was dictated by the paffion of vanity. ,
CHAP. XLIV.
■————— I fee men’s judgments are A parcel of their fortunes, and things outward Do draw the inward quality after them To fuffer all alike.
Anthony and Cleopatra.
AS fortune now feemed to sinile upon me, I flattered myfelf with the pleasing prof-pect of entering into fome way of businefs on my arrival in England; for which place (according to Mr. Morton’s last desire) I fet out ؛n the first ship that failed ; and as I had fome fellow-passengers, who juslly deferved the epithet of agreeable, the beautiful ferenity of the weather, joined to my tranquillity of mind, rendered that by far the happiest period of my life: and elate witlrjoy, at the fucceSs of my expedition ; we judged ourfelves to be within about six days fail of the British channel, when we difcovered two large ships to the leeward, which proved to be Algerine men of war: whereupon
we
A MORAL NOVEL. 241 we immediately crowded all the Sail we could, but to no purpofe, the Turks came up with us the next day; and as it was in vain for a merchantman to oppofe two fuch large ships; they boarded our vessel, and having made the whole crew prifoners, loaded us with irons, and conducted us captives into Algiers, the place of their destination.
As foon as we landed, we were carried to the Bashaw’s palace, who claims every tenth man, as his share of the staves; and as I did not happen to fall to his lot, I was carried with the rest of my countrymen, into the public marketplace ; where, as there were but twenty of us, a Targereen (a title of refpect given to the better fort of inhabitants at Algiers) came to bargain for us all ; but feeing me of a puny make, and not robust enough for his work, he refufed to have me ; and I was afterwards fold at a low price, to a perfon who rather looked like an overfeer for fome body esse, than one who had bought me for himfelf: nor was I mistaken in my conjectures, he carried me to my owner, who was a woman of Seemingly about fifty years of age, and of a very forbidding
afpect.-----1 was now put to my work, which
was to cultivate a Small piece of ground, that fupplied all necessaries for the family ; which indeed was not large, as it consisted only of my mistrefs, a negro maid-fervant, and myfess.
Vol; II.	L	Thus
242 a MORAL NOVEL.
Thus situated, I had formed a much worst؛ opinion of slavery, than it deServed ; or perhaps I was more lucky, in getting into this family, than many others, who had met with the Same
misfortune;----indeed, I could not accuSe my
mistreSs oS the least Severity,-she frequently
eyed me when at work, with the greatest attention, and, as I fancied, took a peculiar pleasure in thus looking at me.”
I had not been there long, before by the following accident, I discovered that she was not a native of Algiers: while I was one day at work, in order to amuSe myfelf, I began singing a French Song, which chancing to overhear, in an affable obliging manner, she ashed me iS I understood. French, and On my anfwering in the affirmative, began a conversation with me in that language, wherein she aiked me Several questions relative to my country, family, and So Sorth, and Srom that naivete in her expressions, which no strangers can ever attain ; I was convinced, that she could have been born in ho other country.	' .	:
A short time aSter this, she removed me from the garden to the hcufe, where I Served her in quality oSfootmrn, and had now much lets reaSon to complain of my lot, than before,—and without any pr'ofpect or expectations in the world,— had not the mere word of slavery difgusled me, I should not have been at all anxious about
changing
A MORAL NOVEL. 243 changing my situation ; but as every Englishman has an instinctive veneration and desire for liberty, fo I was determined to endeavour to procure mine, for which I had like to have fuffered most feverely.
As my mistrefs treated me rather with the familiarity of a friend, than the austerity of a fuperior, I was not (like other staves) under the least restriction or confinement; wherefore rising one morning before the rest of the family, I hurried down to the fea-side, hoping there to find fome vessel, wherein to make my efcape ; but my eagernefs leading me beyond the limits allotted to thofe in bondage, I was difeovered by a fpy, whofe businefs it was to watch the conduct of the staves, and carried before the viceroy, who fentenced me to the battoon, for you must obferve, that tho١ individuals may treat their staves with what lenity they pleafe; ne-verthelefs there are fome general rules, which we were all obliged to conform to ; but to proceed, the battoon is a punishment inflicted by a strong staff about fix feet long, in the middle whereof, are bored two holes, through which a cord is put and fastened on the other fide, by large knots; by this means, the cord forms a loop, and both the feet of the offender being put therein, two men, one at each end of the stick, lifting it up ؛n their arms, twist it, fill they are fast pinched by the cord, and raising them, the L 2	foies
244 A MORAL NOVEL, foies upwards, the fufferer’s head hanging upon the ground in this posture, he receives as many strokes thereon, as the council shall appoint; I was fentenced to have two hundred, but my mistrefs’s mediation, faved me from the torture ; with whom I every day became a greater favourite, and as she had long laid aside all that haughtinefs and referve, with which the people at Algiers, generally treat their staves ; I began to think, that she entertained thoughts of me, not much to her honour, and as the Sequel will shew, I was not totally mistaken in my Suspicions, though she had other motives Sor her behaviour, than what I at first imagined.
CHAP.
A M O R A L N O V E L. 245
CHAP. XLV.
Whilst the Smooth stream of pleafure glides, Whilst life rolls on in rapid tides;
Hope gilds each rising morn.
Whilst every zephyr, breathes perfumes,
"Whilst every path, with rofes blooms;
We fear no latent thorn.
Exemplary Mother.
MADAM la Bijoux (fo was my m'istrefs call’d) frequently at my leifure hours, employed me in reading fome French author to her, and l had lived in this situation about four months, when being one day thus busied, she not a little furprized me, by the. following d؛f-courfe.—“ After my behaviour, (Said she) Mr. “ Hartry, (Sor I had informed her of my name) “ —It would be ridiculous in me, to pretend to ״ diSguife my Sentiments any longer ;—I do not ״ mean it,—nor am I ashamed of them,—yes ״ Sir,—I will freely confefs my love for you.” ٠—“ Love for me, Madam?’? (Interrupted!)—٠ “ Yes,. Sir, (continued she) for you ;—but hear ״ what I have to fay,—before you attempt to ״ reply :—I have faid, that I love you, and as a ״ proof thereof, will now place fome confidence ״ in you :—l am a French widow, and possessed ״ of a fortune large enough to render two people “ of moderate desires, completely happy. It is L 3	“ not
246 A Pel ORAL NOVEL.
“ not (as you may imagine) from inclination, ״ that I make this the place of my residence; “ the reafon is as follows.
״ About four )'ears ago, (which was a twelve-“ month after my late hushand’s death)—a gen-״ tleman, one day in private, attempted to take ״ fome liberties which were not consistent with ״ his honour, or my virtue ; when in tbe height ״ of my refentment, I fnatched his own fword ؛٠ that hung near me, and> without giving my-“ Self time to consider the confequences, un“ happily stabbed him.—>	'
״ It was impoffible for fuch an affair, to re“ main long Secret ؛—and as I knew justice must ؛٠ inevitably take her courfe, I had no other way ٠٠ of Saving mySelf, but by flight :·٠—therefore “ packing up what money and jewels I had by ٠، me, I eScaped to this place; where I have “ lived ever since, though it is Sar Srom my iji-“ tention, to end my days here.—
״ I have lately heard, that the proSecution ٠، against me is now dropped, which enables me ״ to return to Paris with Safety,—I shall in a *٠ few days fet out for that place, and having “ expressed my regard for you; shall now con. ״ vince you of it, by other ways than words, “ and here make you an offer of my hand and “ fortune.”
It
A MORAL NOVEL. 247
It ؛s impossible for me to give you a just idea of my astonishment at hearing her talk thus, nor was my terror much inferior to my furprize ■; for however ardent my defire might be to regain my liberty, I could not think of purchasing it at fueh a price; though at the fame time, as I knew her to be a woman of violent paffions, I did not know how much a refufal might wound her pride, nor to what lengths it might carry her; for which reafons, I determined to act with the greatest caution, least by exciting her reSentment against me, she should be drove to any extremities, nor can I anfwer how far this apprehension would have operated on me, had it not been fuppressed by the recollection of poor Charlotte, for whom my affection was still most lively, however, my manner of leaving her, might indicate otherwise.
As abfence had only Served to increafe my love, this joined to the improbability of Madam׳ ia Bijoux’s story, (which 1 did not entirely credit) made me hesitate a great while, before I attempted to make any anfwer to her propofal, which she perceiving, left the room, faying she should return in an hour for my anfwer, according to which, I might expect her favour, or renounce all pretensions thereto.—
Confcious that it would be to no purpofe to argue upon mutual affection with a woman of L 4	j؛er
248 A MORAL NOVEL.
her violent passions, as my only refource, I determined to adopt a fraud, which under fuch circumssances, I thought excufable; and therefore on her return, thanked her in the politest terms that I was master of, for the honour she intended me ; but added, that it was impossible for me to accept of ¡t, as my hand was already unluckily dlfpofed of in England, and affined her, that I Snould always conssder her regard, as the greatest honour which could be conferred on me.
Then concluded, by lamenting the perverfe-nefs of my fate, in thus putting it out of my power to accept her offer : while I was thus informing her of my refolution, I obferved, that she eyed me with great attention, and as I knew I was uttering a falshood, I believe I fpoke with a very bad grace.—
Having waited fome time in expectation of her anfwer, she at last cried in a prefumptuous tone:—״٠ Very well, Sir,—this is a good— a ״ very plaussble excufe, and had you thought of ״ it fooner, I might have been made a dupe to ״ your mean fubterfuge,—but I can now fee “ through fo poor,—fo shallow an artifice;— “ I fee that I am difagreeable to you,—but fine¿ ״ you have had the audacity to provoke my ״ refentment; —٠ beware the confequences,— “ dread the anger ٥f a flighted woman :—good
~	“ heaven!
A MORAL NOVEL. 249
״ heaven !—that I should ever fubject myfelf to ״ a refufal from my own stave.”
Hereupon I attempted feveral times to appeafe her rage, but in vain, she was fo hurried away by her paffion, when once her pride was alarmed, that she would hear nothing, and left me in no very enviable situation, as I knew I had every thing to fear from the violence of her temper. ؛ ׳



\
CHAP.
L $
250 A MORAL NOVEL. CHAP. XL VI.
Hope ؟Springs eternal in the hurnan breast,
Man never is but always to be'blest.
P1.1. e־’؛s Essay on Mi؛u.
IT has been often remark’d that there are no lengths to ٦vhiCh ؛fhe anger of an offended woman, will not carry her, when like the troubled Sea, and raging wind, contending ¡n a fit of lawleSs ire, which is the mightier ;—both wild and ungovernable, they Suffer themSelves to be hurried away by the rapid stream oS paffion, and will not Suffer the noble pilot oS our actions,—rea. Son, to have the Smallest power.
We indeed daily See instances hereof, though at the Same time, we cannot be blind to the many acceptions which may be made to it; Sor Some women there are, whom nature has Sashioned in So meek and mild a mould, that they will rather Subject themSelves to a Second injury, than attempt to revenge the first.—
TheSe, ye youths, are jewels worthy of your prefervation ; and when in a female you find-goodnefs and beauty join’d, regard her as the immediate welfare of your fouls.

Such

A MORAL NOVEL. 551
Such were the reflections Madam la Bijoux’s behaviour occassoned, and in which I was bussed, when I was interrupted by the maid-fervant, whom I before mentioned, and who came to inform me (instigated, as she faid, by her regard) of Something that nearly concerned my Safety ; videlicet, that she had over-heard her mistrefs tampering with two negroes to murder me, in the evening, on my road to a place, where she had promifed to fend me.
I ssncerely thanked the honest girl for her intelligence ; and as the only method to efcape the intended blow, hastened to la Bijoux, of whom having, on my knees, begg’d pardon for my behaviour, l assigned the following reafon as the caufe. That I imagined, she had only made fo kind an offer, to fee how far my prefumption would carry me ; but that having now found my ·error, I was willing to accept of her generous propofal, and should ־think myfelf ever happy in the union : I believe she fufpected my being acquainted with her intention, by the besstation she made ; but as her passion was now fubsided, and having (as you will presently bear) very good reafons for her clemency, she was not long in refolving -what courfe to take; and in a few days we Set fail for France : on cur arrival there we -were immediately married, and then proceeded -to Paris.-
Judge,
252 A MORAL NOVEL.
Judge, if you possibly can, what was my fur-prize, to find mysself, before I had been twenty hours in the place, arrested at different shits, for upwards of five thoufand pounds; being debts my wife had contracted fome time before.—In the most violent agitation of mind, 1־ was hurried to prifon, and now began to fee the infamous traitrefs ؛n her true colours ; efpecially as I was in a short time informed by the master of the hotel, where I had stopped on my arrival, that she hadleft hishoufe immediately after my feizure, without communicating to any one what were her ؛ntenssons.
This affair (٩s you may fuppofe) made a great noife in the town, the major part of which was foon convinced of my innocence ; and as fome of the principal inhabitants were kind enough to interest themfelves in my behalf: I was foon releafed, and Sound mySelf in poffeffion of five hundred pourds, which the Due de Choifeul had, on hearing my story, been generous enough to collect for me.	- ٠
As foon as I was at liberty, my first businefs was to enquire after my wife ؛ nor was it long before I had the mortification of hearing, that, she was very well known at Paris, having long exercifed a fcandalous profession in that place ; during which time she had contracted thefe debts, which not being able to pay, she had cheated her creditors, by efcaping to Algiers.
You
A MORAL NOVEL. 253 You may judge of the situation of my mind, on considering of my near alliance to fuch a woman ; and furely I shall not be thought destitute either of tendernefs or Christianity, for faying, that my grief was alleviated, by hearing in a few days, that she was found drowned in a pond, near the fuburbs ; occasioned (as I fuppofe) by her apprehensions of being brought to publick justice.
As a Christian, I sincerely lamented her unhappy fate, though without any of the tender folicitudes of a hushand.
Finding myfelf now in possession of five hundred pounds, and furely I may fay, of fome little experience, having been, ؛none week, a batchelor, hushand, and a widower ;־ I bought a share in the shop where I first met you, and the other proprietor dying foon after, the whole bu-sinefs (which was pretty considerable) devolv’d upon me : and in this situation I might have enjoy’d an uninterrupted felicity, had it not been destroyed by the continual expectation of happier days. And give me leave to obferve, that the contentment of three fourths of mankind is hinder’d by the fame method. Men lofe their pre-fent pleafure, by looking for what is to come : and though many people are thoroughly con-winced of this ; neverthelefs there is fuch a powerful charm in hope, that we cannot help cherishing
254 AMORALNOVEL,
rishing it, and thus—foolishly Sacrifice all our prefent felicity, .to the emptinefs of vain expectations.
But I beg your pardon (faid Sir Charles) I am troubling you with reflections, occassoned by my own adventures ; which can be no .amufement or information to you, as they only tend to shew, that, notwithstanding all make happinefs the wish’d for goal, we never find one who arriyes art his destin’d point.

CHAP.
A MORAL NOVEL. 255 CHAP. XL VII.
«——You have many goodly days to fee,
The liquid drops of tears, that you have shed Shall come again, transform’d to orient pearl, Advantaging their loan with Interest,
Of ten times double gain of happinefs.
K. Richard III.
IN this manner did.>our friends amufe them-felves during their journey ; and Sir ؛Charles, notwithstanding what he faid, could not help enjoying the future in the prefent: he was innately happy, to think the time was near, when he was to be restored to the arms of his fond, expecting parent, and to meet all his foul held dear-in the perfon of his Charlotte.
In the mean lime, poor Melvill was distracted by the painful, fufpended alternative of ،doubt ؛andfear, weavering in his ؛breast.
He could not bear the thoughts of feeing that ’woman the wife of .anotherj whoie felicity he hoped to have been the chief instrument ofand ■thus was the unhappy Maria condemned as guilty, ·by.a man ■on whom She doated with themoft extravagant fondnefs.
Oaf
56״ A M O R A L N O V E L.
Our travellers at length landed at Dover, in the dufk of the evening, and were proceeding to the town, when their assistance was called for, by a young man, whom two others were forcing into a boat, against his inclination ; and who, having made all the refistance in his power, was nearly yielding to Superior strength, when our two Sriends appeared in view, whoSe aid he begg’d with great earnestneSs : which as they never reSus’d to innocence oppressed, they Soon made the two ruffians quit their hold, and conducted the perfon they had reScued to an inn in the town ; where as Soon as lights were brought, fixing his eyes stedSassly on Melvill, he had only the power to cry, Good God!—and Sainted away.
Our travellers had obServed the emotions in his face, and were ready to catch him as he Sell ; and having, by the help of drops, &c. brought him to himSelS ; the colour no Sooner began to come into his cheeks,—-than Melvill, with the like exclamation, Sainted away likewiSe.—
Sir Charles stood between them both, in the greatest perplexity, not knowing what to imagine Srom So extraordinary an accident :—however, he did not remain long in this uncertainty ; for when Melvill came to himSelS—starting up, he cried, — “ It is— it is Maria and was running to catch the stranger in bis arms,—when woe-Sraught recollection, stinging him like an
adder,
A M O R A L N O V E L. 257 adder,—■he retreated, and fixing h!s eyes in frightful stillnefs,—exclaimed,--“ Yes, you are ״ indeed Maria ;-·-but “ — what ?—־not Maria “ Hartry,—-no, odious, detested Clunch.”— So faying, he fell back in strong convulsions, into the arms of his friend ; who now began to fee a little more clearly into this mysterious affair. ——.Maria (for it was really her) stood trembling, and ready to assert her innocence ; ■ - ■	-
and forgetful of Melvill’s prefent infensibility, in a feeble voice interrupted with tears, cried,--“ No,—־poor mistaken Melvill ;—I am not the “ abject thing you think me ؛—but I cannot ،، blame you, appearances were strong against “ me ;—yet I am still Marla ;—the fame fond “ maid you left me, and in that thought my hap-
״ pinefs is complete.”------Then catching her
“ brother (though unknown to be fuch) by the ״ hand, added, in a most moving accent,—“ Oh., “ Sir,—did you but know my history,—I am ״ fure you would drop a tender tear, ¡n p؛ty of my ״ woes :—־but do, dear Sir, perfuade him of my ״ innocence;——— for innocent I am,—you “ may believe me.”
“ I do (replied Sir Charles)—I will believe ״ you, what I know you are,— a miserable, “ guiltleSs maid,—I know your history, and “ know you both unfortunate ;-־٠ but better “ times will come, and Soon :-־-for still he loves, “ and oSt to me has Spoke cS you, in paffionate ״ and tender terms,”
Melvill
25B A MORAL NOVEL.
Melvill being now fomevvhat compos’d, our heroine difcflos’d to him every circumstance, which the reader has before heard ; though it was not till after a long while, that he could be perfuaded of the truth of what he heard.
When he began to talk and think a little more collectedly, and was convinced of the reality of his blifs,—he caught the now happy Maria in his arms, and a most tender and affecting feene enfued,-—too tender, too affecting for my poor pen, even to attempt a defeription of.
When they had indulged their mingled tran-fports of grief, Surprize, and joy, for Some time, and an interval of moderation gave them leave to think oS Something elfe besides their love; new wonders waited for them all to hear and See. —Maria to find a friend, and long lost brother, for whom she had cSten sigh’d in vain ; but by whoSe prefence all her past cares were Sar overbalanced ;—־and with whom she at once congratulated, and condoled :—congratulated, on his acceffion to a title and Sortune ;--condol’d wth him, Sor the loSs oS a tender and affectionate father.־—..—TheSe indeed appeared almost as miracles to both our heroes; yet notwithstanding, the meaSure of their joy .was now completely full, Sir Charles could not refrain Srom dropping a tear, as a tribute due to the memory oS his fa-ter : nor did Melvill Sorget to Sympathize with two Such Sriends for their loSs. When their mutual
AMORAL NOVEL. 259 tual amazement was in fome degree fubsided, ■ Melvill tenderly enquired of his Maria, by what strange accident, she had come into the situation, from which they had fo happily delivered her.
“ By the villanous artifices of a man (Said she) ״ from whofe shares, I hope, I shall now be ״ entirely free.”—She then related to them circumstantially, what the reader has before heard concerning lord Dapperwit; and—proceeded as
follows___“ We were no fooner fettled in Lon-
״ don, happy in the thought of my having fo ״ well efcap’d him, than he came there likewife ; ״and finding out where we lived, by the trea-״ chery of a fervant, got introduc’d one evening, ״ while the family were all at the play ; and again ״ carried me away by force.-—That I might be “ the lefs likely to be refcu’d, he brought me ״ thefe cloaths, in which he ordered me to drefs ״ myfelf;—I dar’d not but to obey, and thus “ equipp’d, he hurried me down to this place, ״ intending I fuppofe, to carry me abroad, had “ not Providence thus mercifully Sent you to my “ assistance.”
Thus were theSe Seeming difficulties all cleared up ; and they Spent So much time in mutual congratulations, that it was very late beSore they parted. The next morning Maria having purchased Some cloaths of the landlord’s daughter,
26o A MORAL NOVEL, fet out for London, with our two heroes ; at which place they arrived that evening.
Imagining a Surprize oS So tender a nature, might be too much Sor lady Hartry’s Spirits, it was judg’d proper that Maria should go home alone, and having broke the affair to her mother, should Send Sor the gentlemen, which she accordingly did ; and notwithstanding this lady was pre-acqua؛nted with her approaching happiness: —all the Spontaneous Seehngs oS maternal tenderneSs, rush’d into her heart, and render’d the joy almost too great to bear with moderation.
Another Scene now paSs’d like that at Dover, —Charlotte Sainted through exceSs oS bliSs at Seeing Sir Charles, and Mr. Howard no longer with-held his content. from making this worthy pair happy.
From what has been Said, the readers will naturally expect two marriages ; — nor will they be disappointed.	٠
In about a Sortnight, Sir Charles led his Charlotte, and Melvill his Maria to the altar, and the Same day Saw thefe two happy couple, united by indissoluble ties..
Sure never vtere found a happier fet of people! if our heroines were handfome, when their huf. bands first knew them, they were now more ex-
quisstely
A MORAL NOVEL. 261
qu'isiteiy fo, as time had brought to perfection thoSe beauties, which were then but in the blossom. !
Having thus dispos’d of my principal perfon-ages, I must (after the example of my betters) likewiSe give Some Small account -oS the other characters mentioned in this trifling work.
Don Carlos, married an agreeable lady in his own country, with whom he finds all the happineSs that So worthy a man deServes, and still correfponds with Melvill as a Sriend.
When m٠y lord Dapperwit was convinc’d that he must give up ail farther thoughts of Maria, he hastened over to Ireland, to avoid being called to an account at the Old Bailey Sorhis behaviour; however, he received the just punishment oS his wickedneSs there, Sor continuing his old trick, oS doing what he had a mind to ; he was run through the body Sor his impertinence, by a hotheaded West-Indian.
When Sir Charles Hartry (according to promise,) call’d upon MiSs Barton, he was agreeably Surpriz’d at finding her in possession oS an ample fortune, as being heir at law, to her infamous sister, who was justly kill’d by a Sail from her horfe, and died without a will.
Mellifont
2ةج A MORAL NOVEL.
Mellifont with his thoufand pounds, went down to Southampton, hoping that by the eclat, he was thereby enabled to make ; he stiould pick up fome girl of fortune, and thought he had fuc-ceeded even beyond his most: Sanguine expectations 5 hut unluckily, the biter was bit :-h؛s wish proving to be a milliner, who was there on the Same shheme with himSelS; they now therefore mutually endeavour to plague eacli other, in which they Succeed pretty well, having very lit-tie to live on, and even that little, earned by the most Servile means.	'
The grief which Mrs. Modish felt for the lost of her truly amiable Æmا؛y, j'oin’d to the still feverer affliction., that stte underwent, to find how shghtly grounded Mr. Martin’s affection had been for her, gave rife to a diforder th3t too quickly put an end to her days.
Sir Henry Summers is still poffeffed of that charitable benevolence of difpofifion, which forms fo confpicuous a part of his character, though Mrs. Martin’s death has occafioned in him, a . thoughtlefs inattention, which no time can ever efface.	-
Melvill Soon after h؛s marriage, bought an estate near Mr. Howard's wherein Maria, him-felf, and lady Hartry live.	׳'
r؛s
A MORAL NOVEL. 263
Sir Charles and Charlotte, live with Mr. Howard, and thus do tbefe two families, happy in themfelves, find faithful friends, and agreeable neighbours in each other, being happy examples ; that they will best fucceed, who still confide in virtuous inclinations: they each couple,. are blest with one lender pledge of mutual love ; and to fee the joy they have in them, is inexpressible ;—at leass for me ; I must therefore in the words of an ingenious writer, fay ;
I. Who
2si4 A MORAL NOVEL.
. I.
Who can deScribe a joy like this,
The filial fmile, the parent’s kifs,
The tendernefs innate,
Pathetic cares, that footh, that melt. The thrilling heart, unknown, unfelt, But in the nuptial state.
II.
Hail virtuous state, coelestial plan, Heaven’s first, kind institute to man, Infcr’ib’d on Sacred rolls;
The mystic knot, death only parts, Endearing tye, union oS hearts,
And partnership of Souls.
III.
Hail wedded love, nor longer Sear The courtier’s raillery, she Sneer OS rakes, or buffoon’s jest. Manners like garments, have their fun, When delicacy mounts the throne,
Wit can't be loofely dresh
FINI

s
