THE 
FRIENDS; 
OR
ORIGINAL LETTERS.
VOL. I.

THE 
FRIENDS; 
OR
ORIGINAL LETTERS
OF A 
PERSON DECEASED. 

NOW FIRST PUBLISHED, 
FROM THE MANUSCRIPTS 
IN HIS CORRESPONDENT'S HANDS. 

"How preferable are the natural Dictates of the 
Heart, to the most elaborate Inditings of the 
Head!"
Letter ix. Par. 2. of this Collection .m

IN TWO VOLUMES
VOL. L. 

LONDON. 
Printed for J. BELL, near Exeter-Exchange, in the 
STRAND; and C. ETHERINGTON, at YORK. 
MDCCLXXIII.


ERRATA.
Page 42, line 2, first Comma, a Semicolon. 
P. 44, line 6, a Period after rightly.
P. 46, l. 4, for it, read they. 
P. 73, Second Stanza, last line, add (5); and Note (4) read 
Maiden Vow.
P. 78, In the Latin Line, for tam, read tamen. 
P. 103, l. II after yet, read we.
P. 110, l. last but one, read justly. 
P. 119, l. 14, read hation.
P. 121, l. 7, read ments.
P. 137, l. last, for him, read it.
P. 185, l. 3, read perspec-
P. 189, l. 9, read litigation.
P. 207, l. 9, for is read are.  
P.210, l. 6, dele 2d Comma.
P. 255, l. 12, add and at the end. 
P. 257, l. 5, after husband, change the Period to a Comma. 
P. 265,  the Latin Line, read desipere. 

 
THE EDITOR 
TO THE READER. 

THE following Collection of Letters 
were written, a good while ago, by 
a Gentleman unknown to the learned 
World, not many Years dead, at broken and 
long suspended Intervals; during a 
Correspondence which subsisted a consi-
derable Time, with a particular and dear 
Friend, and with whom I have the Ho-
nour to be acquainted. 

I had happened occasionally to have 
been shwwn many of these Manuscripts

(ii)
at the Times they were received; and 
thought them so well worthy of being 
presented to the Public, that soon after 
the Demise of the Writer, I solicited my 
Friend for permission to introduce them 
into the World; which after some Hesita-
tion and Revision, I have, at length, hap-
pily obtained, on the Restriction of keep-
ing the Names of both the Correspondents 
concealed. 

These Letters contain a good deal of 
private History, of several anonymous or 
misnomened Persons; and one Article, 
in particular, relative to an unfortunate 
Passion of the Deceased, which, however, 
is but just hinted at, in some Places, and 
then dies away again, as the too dear 
Object of it literally did, Sorrietime after. 

(iii) 
She fell a Victim to an unequal Match, 
imposed on her by her - Foes -, and a 
Martyr to the Duty she owed to her own 
Person and Character, only; every other
Obligation in her most wretched State, be-
ing cancelled long; and the unhappy 
Lover survived her no longer than a bro-
ken Heart was capable of subsisting. 

There happens to be no Mention made 
of her Death, or of the Circumstances of 
it, (which were particular) in these Let-
ters, as it was audden and unexpected, 
and that the Author flew off to his Friend, 
immediately on that Event, and remained 
with him, for near a Twelvemonth; till 
a reduced State of Health, a total Inca-
pacity for Society, and the Exigency 
of his domestic Concerns, had determined 

(iv) 
his return home, again. Letter cix was 
the first he wrote, after that Separation; 
and he died, in a few Days after the last 
one printed in this Collection. 

From the Time of her Death, he em-
ployed himself constantly in framing Ele-
gies on her, till his own Death had made 
the last of them; who when the dear 
Substance was ravished from his Hopes, 
dwelt still with fondness on the Shadow, 
and eked her Life with Same.

Post Mortem nobilitari. 

These Poetical Pieces are extremely 
beautiful and affecting, and I entreated 
the Copy, from my Friend, to add to these 
Volumes; but he refused it, for the pre- 

(v)
tent, as he says he has Poems enough of 
that gentleman’s, in his Possession, to 
make a Separate Publication of, by them-
selves, some other Time.

I have had another Disappointment, 
too, upon this Occasion; for I meant 
to have published the whole of this Corre-
spondence, on both sides, by inserting 
the Letters of my Friend, in due Order 
and Course, and for which, I had obtained
his Permission; but upon applying to 
the Executor of the deceased, who was 
his Nephew, and bred an Attorney, we 
had the Mortification to find that he had 
thrown all his Uncle’s Papers into the 
Fire, reserving only the Parchments.

I had a purpose, when I sat dowm to
this address, to have said Something, in 

(vi)
Recommendaticn of this Species of per-
Post Writing: but happening, luckily for 
the reader, to recoiled a Passage, in these 
Volumes, where the Author has expressed 
himself so much better on the Subject, 
than I could pretend to do, I shall wave 
that Topic, here, and refer him to Let-
ter xxxii in the following Collection.

I have added the Denomination of the 
Friends of the Title of thcit Writings,
as there is a very remarkable Strain of that 
ancient, most noble, but now obsolete 
Character, to be met with, throughout 
the Letters; which must endear the Par-
ties to us more strongly, than all the 
Merits of their Wit, or other Virtues.

I have used the Privilege of leaving 
out some Passages, and several entire 

(vii) 
Epistles, here and there, which related 
either to private Business, or to some cer-
tain Histories, which I was directed to 
pass by: the First could not entertain, 
and the Latter would have been but re-
viving Scandal, or republishing Reproach.
The Several Anecdotes which are suffered 
to stand, are confined to the Knowledge of Such Small Circles, that it was not thought worth while to guard them from appearing in Print. 

I have also ventured to add a few Notes, 
at Bottom, by Way of explaining, or refer-
ring to. Some of the Hints and Allusions, 
in the Letters: which are meant only to 
save the Readers the Trouble of recol-
lecting for themselves, or of being left at 
a loss, about some of the Articles in them. 

(viii) 
What had ibeen written with ease, I would 
be glad to have read so. 

And these, Reader, are, bona fide, the 
only Liberties that have been taken with 
the original manuscripts, throughout 
these Sheets, 

by your most obedient Servant, 
THE EDITOR. 


ORIGINAL letters. 
^ \ i ho j lo.; A. 0 fr 
ori 
■ •] 
L E 1' T E R I. 
Friend, _ Bath. 
Affection for you has rendered me Quaker. What Epithet or ad dition could I possibly, join to That Word, which can strengthen or enrich it? A Friend is a Divinity : Deus, Pens illcy Menalca / and all Adjedives are weak, or B Super 
.2 ORIGINAL LETTERS. Superfluous, that would define it. Thus far the Spirit hath moved me — Now to the Flestu 
Mrs. L — is still here, and remains the same inexplicable Character as ever. She has a Number of Lovers., without one Admirer. The most fanatic of her Devotees are not Enthusiasts enough to compliment her with the Attributes of either Wit or Beauty. She certainly is endowed with neither, and yet rivals them both. 
There is Some occult magnetism or other in her Composition, that attradls the amorous Particles of men’s Constitutions more nervously to her than other Women are capable of. I confess my in fim; I like her myself, a little, without 
knowing 
ORIGINAL LETTERS ^ 
knowing why; and only knowing that I ought not Is this Infidelity i?. 
There is no describing it, with Decency. A Lover must be canton., in her praise. In the Days of Witches she would have been charged with the Practice of Spells, from So unaccountable an Effect. Perhaps this may be what French philosophy means, by the Je northeast Jfais quod, in mis treffes. 
Thirdly, to bufiness. I have discharged all your Bills, before my own. Debts of Honour you know, Charles, have always Precedence, to those of Law. I wait your Remittances, therefore, and Mrs. L — ’s 
• His affedions were elscwhere engaged. 
B 2 Removd 
4 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Removal from hence, before I shall be able to join you in London. 
Fourthly, and lastly. Adieu. 
LETTER II 
J Have Seen the Person you mention : I met him at Mr. Strodd.% yesterday. I by no means like him, as a Companion; but as a Pedagogue, perhaps, he may be Self sufficient. LX quovis Ligno non jit? He is a Pedant; but of that illiberal Race of Men that Some Author Says are horn Schoolmajiers* Montaigne compares them to “Birds, who forage for Grain to feed 
^ i think it is Lt Sagtf in GH Bias, 
their 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. $ “their young, without Swallowing it “themselves; they keep it ready, at their “tongue’s End, only to Spit it out again “to their callow Brood.” 
He is, therefore, most luckily Suited with a Pupil; for our poor friend’s Son, I think, will never disgrace him' as I fear he is one of those Noddles, or Noodles, that may be taught but not infirufbea. Learning to a fooi is like speflacles.^ to the Lund. Who Says So? of' is it my own image I 
The Oversight of Parents! Were he apprenticed to Some Mechanic Trade, he might perhaps grow rich, as a Mill gathers Grist, without any Intdligence of its own. But his Father, mistaking Stupidity B 3 for 
6 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
for Sobriety, means to make him a parson. Now, in my Faith of the Matter, the lad would get more by baking his daily Bread:, than ever he will by praying for it. 
V Mr. H— — not at Home, So I Sent your Letters frankless to the Post. You Said that, one of them was upon business, and not knowing how to csistinguifii,. I dispatched them both together. 
I purposecuto have wrote more to you when I Sat down; but we drank too much, yesterday : Or was it the Punch or the Pedagogue that has; leaden halkd my Head, all this Day? 
Good Night. ' 
LETTER 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
LETTER HI. ■ ' 
'jphe last Post has brought me an Account that my Cause has been given against nte. This distresses, but not Surprises me. However, it has rendered me wise, too late : Such is the Nature of Wisdom! I depended on the Opinion of my Lawyers'; my Adverfaiy did the Sanie. Could'there ever be a stitt, if Council did not differ? 
Whether through Error or Knavery, this ever has, and ever will be the case.^ as there is no Remedy, and that stis the common Lot of Life, complaining is but B 4 vain 4 
? ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
vain; and to the Vanity adds a Vexation of Spirit too. 
I have^anotter c^use, ymu know, to the good or bad, still, fuh Judice, or rather Judicihus’', for it has already Subsisted .above Seventy Years, and has fairly bu •riedj^pt^tired, Seventeen Chancellors, out of their Lives..,,, ' 
■ This is a Suit, indeed, of very material ^corisequence to me; but I do not appre shend .that i.shall ever receive the Mortification I did from my late one, for the reason above Specified. “Never ending, still beginning.’* - 
, So that t Snail, perhaps, like a miscr, die rich, after having lived pc or all my 
Life : 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 9 
Life : Or lose the Game, for want off a. Point, with a Pique in my Hand.. 
Poor Somers s 'm the highest Difficulty.. He was bound, it stems, for His Relation winter tonne., whose Name you may now read in the Gazette He has been obliged to abscond on the Occasion, and has taken refuge with me.: Welcome on his. own account, as my Friend, but doubly So for his Friendship to others. 
I think that his should be made a common cause, with all the generous and hur mane; but as all ilich probably may to generally be labouring under the same Predicament, themselves, suppose we: 
Among the. List of Bankrupts., 
B 5 were: 
10 ORIGINAL LETTERS, were to muldb the felfissi and unfeeling for him, and make them pay, as Jenny Diver Says, for what they canh do. Old Bachelors used formerly to pay a double poll tax,, as no otherwise contributing to the Support of the State. Two Heads were not better than one, in that cafe. 
Mean is the Soul which its own Good can sill, A prosperous world alone can feast my Will. How poor, at best, who other’s Misery fees. Wanting the wish’d for Power to give them Ease!! 
only he whose Sway being unconsin’d. Can with unbounded Inftuence bless Mankind, A Glory this unreach’d but on a Throne. 
All were enough, but kfs than all were none. 
I repeat these anonyma imperfectly, from Memory. The Lines are had, because indifferent. Medmrihus esse Poetis, chut 

ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
but the Idea is noble, and has a beautiful Extravagance in it, that charms me. “But less than all were none.” 
Thus, you see, instead of brooding over my own Distresses, I turn aside, to lament those of others. I find this relieves, rather than aggravates, my Sufferings — according to that Sweet Line in' Spenser - 
of his own, who heyds an otsterv Care. ' 
Somers siilutes you" ". ■ 

.a ' il r 
B (5 
LETTER 
ra ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
LETTER IV 
': 11 * iirf -- d - 
spent a pleasant Week of it here, during the Races. I never went into the Field. I hate Nolle, Hurry, and Strife. The ajions^ ^flhot.^ Strode, and the Dean, were with me, most of the Time. Was not this Group finely contrasted “The sharp melts the Sweet, and the mild Sooths the strong.” We all wished Sincerely fos your ‘ Company, which I mention just to show you that I am no news monger. 
Our Divine, still labouring in his Vocation, was at me, as usual, on the Sub.. 
... i 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 13 
jedl of Matrimony; and brought dowrt old Genefts against me, to prove that Man is imperfect, till he has replaced his Rib. 
I played him off again, by Saying,, that the Hebrew Word So construed in our English Transsation, is rendered ra in the Greek, by the inspired LXX or LXXII rather : So that a Wife may be deemed a pleuretic Stitch Said I, ever since; and haret lateri the true poesy for a vvedding ring. With Such kind of impertinent Jem de Mots I got rid of tl^ Argument. 
The good well-meaning Man knows nothing of the Peculiarity of my Situation. Indeed you are my only Confident, ia that difficult Affair. Alas! tis not 
owii^ 
14 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
owing to any Aversion, but to the pro fpedt of the highest bliss in that State,, that I hare remained So long an Individual of Society. 
Reverend and honourable Matrimony! 
Mother of lawful Sweets, unshamed Mornings, Dangerlefs pleasures. Thou that mak’st the Bed 
Both pleasant and legitimately fruitful. Without thee the World were but foiled Bastardy. 
Lhou art the chief eft and the goodlieji Form Float pttfji a Difference between our defiresy .And the ungovem’d Appetites of Beajis. 
There is an Expression I have shme where met with, that pleased me. “those “who have never loved, may be laid co live, as the Sot drmks; they fwalkm “Life, without tajhng it, ’* 
If 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 15 
If the great Event should happen, during his Life, the Doctor shall enjoy the Triumph of thinking that he has made a Convert of me. 
Adieu! For you know, that whenever I touch on this Subject, it takes Such an entire Poffeshon of my Mind, that I can Speak, write, or think, upon no other. 
LETTER 
36 ORIGINAL LETTER'S. 
LETTER V 
J Am charmed with this new Scheme for' your Preferment, as 1 think that it ■w’ould be completely winding up the Novel of your truly romantic Life. ’tis for this Reashn, perhaps,, that I happen to be more Sanguine about it, than you Seem to be, by your Letter. But I am not. one of those cold Heads who are apt to, think everything imposhble,, merely be oause it i5 improbable. 
The Canons dost oppose you; All. they require, I think, is that the person received shto Holy Orders shall, be of un 
fpottedi 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 17 
Spotted Life and Manners; a regular frequenter and Partaker of the Christian Service and Communion, during a certain limited Lime., with an inward Call (the leafi jvhifper will do) of the Spirit. 
, college^were not founded, when Ordination was first introduced into the qlco nomy of the Church; therefore Degrees cannot be of the Orthodoxy. The gra^ dus ad Parnajfum is not necessary, Cte -- lum. Your Life and Writings Sufficiently show that you have already taken your .Degrees, in Morals and Religion, at leash 
The Objection, on. account of your Age, is Surely a weak one. His never too late to he zirtuous., and why should you think it So to he a Parson?? Laws deem a Man 
not 
i8 ORIGINAL LETTERS 
not to be of Sufficient Discretion to manage’ his temporal Affairs, ^ till twenty-one, and methinks it should require double that Term, or more, to ripen us to the Condudh of our, Spiritual Concerns. You are now happily arrived at the true Age of infallibility; for there never was a Pope sandli fied, I believe, before your Years. 
The only Difficulty that appears to stand against you,, is the general Usage,, Such Casts, which respccls a. Diploma. And where find the Bishop, who would, prefer a reason to a Rule? We must look for him, I fear, in Democritus ridens* But if your Patron will only offer him a 
* The Author there draws the chara<ster of a truly Christian Bishop;; then concludes with saying, that there never voas^ nor ever nvitl hcy such a. Man, 
ffurn 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. ig 
V 
Lurn in the Presentation, I dare answer for it that all Obstacles will instantly vanish, and this Single in ordine ad be deemed alone Sufficient, to entitle you to a Band and Cassock. 
success attend you : And to show you how well qualified I am to becoine your Clerk, 1 shall add Amen.!. 
P. S. The Image, in your Letter, of your reading your ■probation Sermon with Spedlacles on, made me Smile. 
LETTER 
20 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
LETTER VI 
Lon donmay 2^. J Am Sorry it is not in my Power to accept of your hospitasity, at this Time, as the Affair I was called up to Town about, is not yet finished, and I beg leave, for this once, to prefer my bufiiiess to my Pleasure. 
Though I should feel a strange Jumble in my Mind, with regard to this latter Article too, if I were at Liberty to indulge it; as the unnaturalness of the sea fon is So very uncomfortable, representing the Marriage of January and May with a 
yfitness, 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 21 witness, that it would be an irksome Thing to have the Town to regret, without rejoicing in the Country; which must certainly be the cafe, while this perseve ring Wind continues. 
Mr. G — is going, or rather staying, to be married; for he is making a Sort of patriarchal Courtship of it, without Considering how much both Time and Man have been curtailed, since that sera. 
And e’re he starts a thousand Steps are lost. 
there’s a noble Parody for you; to quote an Image of Speed, in Allusion to Delay. But lucky nonsense often passes for Wit. Why may not tihe fortuitous concourseof the Alphabet, form an Epopee, as well as Atoms make a World? 
I never 
22 ourginal LETTERS. 
I never See a Mother combing her child’s Head on the Bellows, but I think of Dame ^ Nature, under Epicurus’% Idea of her. You See first a Cloud of inert Matter, like the Chaos, falling down; and Soon after perceive a Parcel of little lively Particles frishing it, hefe and there, till the entire Mass becomes a Jig. 
But ’tis Time to put myself in Motion, •and Set about my Bufineff, that I may be at liberty to jig down to you; though the wind will box the compass round, I fear, before I shall be able to get my Attorney to prepare the leases. 
Yours. 
LETTER 
•ORIGINAL LETTERS. 23 
LETTER VII 
J Need not make you the least Apology, I fancy, for my kind Breach of pro mife, this Morning; for I really never meant to disturb you, though you desired, or rather ajked it, last Night. The Proposition shocked me, at the Time, by raising an Idea of the Day of Judgtnent : for nothing less than the laji Trumpet would be able to rouse you, So early. And as they will have a good deal of business on their Hands, that Term, the Court, I fuppose, will be sitting, betimes,, 
• The Morning, I muji inform you., was wet and windy; but exercise I have 
ever 
24 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
ever found to be a full Match for the worst Weather. It cleared up, about twelve or one, and the Country looked the more charming, from the Storm before. It resembled the Countenance of a beautiful person wlio had heard Some bad News contradided, which they shad been just lamenting. 
I shave Supped, am weary, and impatient for Bed, waiting only to finish this Letter *, which is Somxthing like making my Will; for I fancy and hope that my close of Life Vvill be like my present Sensations, tending to Sleep, and rejoicing in Rest — uti Conviva satur. 
Adieu. 
CODICIL. 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 2(5 
CODICIL. 
Love to our last Night Rakes; and for that they Seemed to like the Wine, give them another Stoop of it, at my Suit, the 17th of next Month, to memo -- randum my birthday. I shall pledge yc Somewhere or other on the Continesttr 
C 
LETTER 
26 ORIGINAL LETTERS., 
LETTER VIII 
-- -- -- -- -- -- But my particular Attention and Observation, during the few Days I staid, was mostly employed upon Mr. N —, who happened to be there. You know his Character, perhaps his Person;; I own that I had long wissi ed to become acquainted with one of the left Kind of Men in the World, 
I hope this is not true, for I don’t like his Stamp. — ’tis too weak to mark an Imprejfon. He is a gentle, easy, complacent, well tempered Man, with an humane. 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 27 
mane, a charitable, and a moral Nature. But this is no more Virtue, Virtus., than Water is Wine — It wants the Spirit. True Virtue is like Chivalry; it Seeks Occasions, without waiting till they present themselves. 
Now Mr. N — is no Knight errant. He could never have been a Lhefeus., or an hercules.y going about quelling Monsters, and relieving from Oppression; but might have made a good Sort of Solon or Lycurgus., enough; a Kind of civil Magistrate, for the Administration of justice— — Hazard or Labour. 
Such persons may only be Said to be well difpofed., but can never be pronounced virtuousand must be tranjlated to Hea > c2 ven. 
28 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
ven, like Enochs as not having Activity enough to Scramble thither of themselves. This is not the Rock to hew Martyrs out of. 
Vice is active, and Virtue that does not take the Field, can be no Match for it: For as the Evil Spirit is Said to go about. Seeking whom it may devour., the good one should be as industrious, to rescue the Victims from its Jaws. 
Vice could never have been permitted, in the ceconomy of the World, upon its own Account, as of an independent Nature; but as an exercise to Virtue : and those who do not hunt it down, neglect their Quarry; forgetting that the State of Christianity is a Church militant. 
You 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 29 
You may pick up Notes for your first Sermon, out of this Letter, So conjider of what has hem said and adieu. 
LETTER IX 
J Thank you extremely, for the Books you were So kind to Send me. Though is it fair to ask my Opinion, after your having made me a Present of, them? I don’t mean the Proverb against looking a gift Horse., chut that by this very Adt you had already stamped their Value; and I must commend them, for fear of judging wrong, by venturing to differ in any Opinion from you. 
C 3 
Bug 
30 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
But indeed this is a Point in which I cannot possibly mistake another’s Judgement for my own; because I feel the Merit of these Writings, without the critic’s Aid. How preferable are the natural Didlates of the Heart, to the most elaborate Inditings of the Head! Not but that both Heart and Hand Seem to have marched perfectly well together, in this charming Work; for there is a peculiar Warmth of Expression in it, which appears to be inspired by a Glow of Sentiment throughout. 
They need no muse, who can invoke their Heart. 
A Moral only moves., but a Sentiment iranfports me; ’tis the Enthusiasm of Ethics; and, like the Flights of Poetry, fis above Scholastic Rules. 
A Friend 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 31 
A Friend calls for my Assistance. Perhaps I can but ill afford it. Cicero says, Ea Liber dilate utamur., quee prodit Atnicis., mceat nemini; and according to ivoola jlon* if the Relief required, shoyld equally distress myself, Lruth^ as he styles it, directs me to refuse the Request. This may be true, in philosophy, but Sentiment cries aloud, with Prior, 
Beyond the fixed and fettled Rules, See, 
This may, possibly, be human Logic, but not humane syllogism. Sentiment is a divine Enthymeme, that hastens to the Conclusion, without ever waiting to regard 
Middle — or to express my Senfeof .the Matter by anequivoque — the mean Ternv 
^ In hia Religion of Nature. 
c4 
How 
32 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
How much more beautiful is Doctor iiut€hefofi\ Sentiment, upon this Subject“ “Good, or Virtue, says he, is a “prevailing (natural) Disposition to pro“ “happiness, in the greatefc possible “Degree; and, therefore, will frequent“ “determine the Agent to Suffer a cer “tain Degree of Pain or Distress, him“ “to produce a greater one of hap piness, to others. This Dilposition, “and those Actions, by which it is exer “cifed, are perceived and approved by “an internal Sense, which is therefore termed a moral one; and thus we ar rive at an intuitive Knowledge of vir tue, without any Dedudion of remote Consequences 
• on happiness and Virtue. 
The 
ORIGINAL letters: 33^ The Energy of Friendship maybe considered, in Some Sort, as one Proof of the Immortality of the Soul — of its Immateriality at least; as it is an Expansion of the Mind, which endeavours to enlarge itself beyond the narrow Bounds of its own Mansion. It has none of the Perturbations of Love, of Ambition, or Avarice,, in it, which have Southeast ultimately for theic' Objedb. 
Like Music pure the Joy, without Allay,, Whose very Rapture is tranquillity.. 
A steady Friendship too, affords a moral alsurance of the Virtue of both the. Parties, because no other League could: render the Union permanent. p/tnjy the. elder gives a beautiful Description of this.; Attachment, by reckoning up tlte Several; 
C 5. Quasi ties: 
^34- ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Qualities that are requisite to form it. The Quaintness of the Manner in which 'he chose to express his Sentiment, on this Occasion, does not invalidate the Justness of it., 
I can not Suffer this transporting sub je<st, of the soul’s independent Existence, to die away, with one Argument only. May not the still eager Desire of the Union of two Lovers, even after Fruition — a Longing for Something more than the groffness of Matter can admit of — Supply a further Hint, in this Way of reasoning.? 
And again. Whence is that Passion in Mankind, for Fame, for Glory, for a Name, when we shall be no more than 
that 
ORIGINAL LETTERS, 35 that ourselves, which we So ardently wish the Possession of, even beyond the Date of our Enjoyment This were an inexplicable Mystery, indeed, were we not to suppose Some natural instindl in the human Mind, referable to a future State of con fcious Identity. 
Eji Deus in mbts, agitante calefdmus ilto. 
Lhe Heavens declare the Glory of God.., and the Firmament Jheweth his Handy work. Yet what is all Such mechanism when compared to the Soul of Man! The first show his Greatness only, but the latter manifests his goodness also. Exultemus Domino. 
I cannot resist the Temptation of quoting a Passage from Doctor Toungy upon this Subject. 
C 6 
“Knowhst 
36 ORIGINAL LETTERS 
know’st thou the Importance of a Soul Immortal? 
Behold this Midnight Glory, Worlds ort Worlds! 
Amazing Pomp! Redouble this Amaze; 
Ten thousand add; add twice ten thousanj more; 
Then weigh the whoie -- One Soul outweighs them all. 
And calls the astonishing Magnificence 
Of unintelligent Creation, poor. 
But to return, I wish that Parshns would preach Friendship from their Pulpits, as one of the moral Duties of Life, among those of a Son, a Father, an huf band, c. Consult your Concordance for a Text, for the Subject— —; sti& best as it is. When once Love becomes an Obligation 
Adieu. 
LETTER 
ORIGINAL ETTERS 37 
LETTER X 
^’JJ^HE repeated Accounts the Papers give, of these almost universal Earthquakes, is very alarming.. One does not know whose prcximus ardet it may be next. A philosopher might very well have foretold the Destrudion of the World, by Fire,, long ago, without being a Prophet. This may happen, in a natural Way; the Deluge, you know, was a Miracle. 
I envy the People of South Americay where, though they have one Volcano that vomits Fire, have another, near it, 
which 
38 ORIGINAL LETTERS, which Spews out Water; preserving an algebraic Equation * between them. 
Not but that your Mtnas and vefu viufs are most lucky Circumstances, for those Countries. They are like Issues, which carry off the soul Humours of the Body. I wonder Nature did not think of Such an Expedient, when she was making little oeillet holes in us. Hwas a Shame for her to leave the Invention to Surgeons. 
I wish, therefore, that we had slime Such burning Mountains anywhere in England; for if ever we should happen to have an Earthquake, of our own., (the Jog we had, lately, being only a Touch 
* Where eqaal Quantities destroy each other. 
on 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 39 
on the Elbow from Some of our Neighbours) we shall be all Swallowed up alive. 
However, as to the Dissolution of the World, hinted at above, you may Set your Heart at rest about it. It is not So near, as has been So vainly imagined. I remember in 1750, a learned Bishop, * in irelanl proved it, as plain as arithmetic.y that we had but a lease of just two hundred and fifty Years, from the last March to run, before the Great Ejeflment would take Place. 
But to show how Doctors differ, even in the plaineji Cafes, a certain Vicar, in his lordship’s diocese, had the Impiety to engage in a Tenure, for nine hundred 
* Doctor Clayton, Bishop of Clogher, 
and 
40 ORIGINAL LETTERS and ninety n northeast Years, Soon after the Boole was published.. But this, I suppose, the cunning parson did, by way of Securing himself a Reversion, in the New jerufa lem., or Millenium. 1 advised the good Father in God to have the Fellow degraded.. Had it been in Portugal., the Infidel would have Suffered an Auto de FL 
I think the old Man, as he is styled in Scripture, has no Sort of Reason to complain, if the Kingdom of Sinners continues for six thousand Years,, and that of the Saints only for one. But to leave Such Sublime Mysteries to rest in their own metaphysical Regions, let me just explain to you what Sort of reasoning has happened to induce my heterodox. Opinion, in this Article, and tempted me 
to 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 41 
to differ So widely from St. John, in my Computation of the Matter. 
First, are you well read in Astronomy? but no Matter, an Argument is never the worse, for not being understood. 
Providence manifests a purpose, a Design, throughout all its Works. Nobody doubts its Power of compassing its Schemes. All the heavenly Bodies, those great Preachers of Lheology to us, perform Revolutions, in stated Periods; Some round their own Axes, others about different Centres. Even the most Eccentric of the Planets, the Comets, obey this Law. 
The 
42 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
The World has already Seen all these courses run, begun, continued and ended; Some in longer, others in shorter Times; accomplished all, and all renewed again; excepting one, only; namely the Revolution, or what is called the prece£ion.^ of the Equinoxes; the pro grefs of which Movement has been noted by Astronomers; and from a Calculation, made between the Anaftra 2a\diktellata.^ in a certain given Time, their Cycle will not be completed, in less than Twenty Seven Thousand, Nine Hundred and Twenty Years; which, allowing Fourscore, for Wear and Tear, in So long a Period, just quadruples St.johfs computation, with regard to the Subsistence of the material universe. 
So 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 43 
So that if we may be allowed to reason on this Subject, from the Analogy of all the other Works of Creation, the above Period, at least, must be rounded, before the Soul of Beauty, Harmony and Order, shall think fit to prefer a rude Chaos to elemented Matter, or the Author of Nature a smoking Dunghill to a vegeta ting 'Worlds 
Adieu. 
LETTER 
44 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
LETTER XI 
Poor Burton I The Widow Irwin is dead, and has left him encumbered with a thousand Pound Debt — He had borrowed it from her, I remember, when he % 
bought his little Office; but I could not get him to understand her rightly, his Security could have been only personal; and having no Land to mortgage, he might have pledged his living Earth to her; for like old Shylock., I think she would have preferred the Penalty, to the Bond. Ad menfuram Inguinis Heeres, 
But 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 45 
But this would not have been a Sine cure., like his late purchase, I could answer for it; and Charles., you know, always hated Bujtnefs. But perhaps stis better, now, as it is; for a disappointed Woman is always more enraged, than a non appointed one; and poor Limherham might have been Sent to Gaol, probably the Morning after their first Assignation. 
He has Surrendered the Income of his Employment, to old black acre' Executrix, who was her Daughter, till the Debt be discharged, and has retired from London — There is an old Proverb, that when Women go to Law, the Devil is full of Business, 
I have 
46 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
I have invited him to my house, as a so lamen mifejds to the unfortunate Somers, whose Affairs are not yet accommodated; but I have the pleasure to hear it will be Soon compromised, upon easier Terms than was at first imagined. 
They both lend their Love to you. 
■ Adieu. 
LETTER 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 47 
LETTER XII 
T HE answer you Sent me from Mr. 
P -- --, to my Letter, * though not 
Such a one as I had reason to have expected, is, however, no very great dilappoint ment to me. I am not naturally of a Sanguine Disposition — Though perhaps I may be — but one Passion, like the Rod of Aaron, Swallows up all the rest. 
He had applied to go abroad, with a Young Nobleman, who was then setting out on his Travels — But they are not such Men as he that are generally sent upon such Errands j and the nntravelled Wanderer returns accordingly, after a four or five Years Tour, 
In 
48 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
In Love my every Wish, h6pe, Ambition and Avarice are centred. 
Same, Wealth and Honours what are ye to Love? 
Love is to me Dominion, Riches and wisdom. ’tis the Enjoyment of myself, with the Possession of a more than World besides. “Of one entire and pcrfed; Chrysolite.” Had Love been added to the Option of Solomon, he would Surely have chosen, as Paris did, in the same Circumstance. 
An Endeavour to advance one’s Situation, or improve our Fortunes, is a very natural impulse; and the stridtest Philosophy can make no Objection to thij, 
where 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 49 where reason or Religion forbid it not. I have therefore made Several Such Attempts, in my Life, as the late one, to forward those Ends; but having once acquitted myself of the Duty, I acquiesce in thedisappointment, without Impatience. 
I have long continued to be beforehand with Fortune; for, in order to render my present State or Condition easy, I have raised my Hopes and Ambition to Such a Summit of happiness and Grandeur, in Idea, as is impossible for me ever to arrive at, in this World; So that the bearing those great Obje(sts still in View, has made all intermediate Situations equal or indifferent, to me. 
D 
If 
50 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
If Fortune ever had Malice enough to disappoint me, it should render me happy. Thank Heaven, the Joys of Friendship are not among her Gifts, or I might not have remained So long in Possession of yours. 
Adieu. 
LETTER 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 5v 
LETTER XIII 
J Have just returned from, and 
have left our Friend in a fair Way of Recovery; but his Brother not out of Danger, yet, His his own Fault, though — They were both Seized with the Same Disorder, at the Same Time, and with like Constitutions of Body — but different, very different, indeed, are their Tempers of Mind. 
Though equally sick and in Pain, the one appeared a Suffering Saint, while the other resembled a tortured Friend. In 
I 
visiting them, one after the other, I fand 2 cied 
52 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
cied myself, like .Aeneas, passing from the Seats of bliss, to those of misery. 
Hac Iter elysium nobis; at laeva malorum Exercet Paenas. — - 
What a Variety must there be among Mankind, at large, when there is So great a Contrast between two Brothers! 
Last Sunday I went to their Parish church, to hear Mr. Melville preach. He has a Character; and I thought acquitted himself, extremely well, upon his Text; which was the Parable of the Pen Virgins. But I did not much like the running his Sermon into a Satire, as he did, towards the Close of it. 
From 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 53 
From this Story, he took occasion to consider the Difference of the Times, between that Age and this — “The Proper“ “then. Said he, between the wife and “fooujh Virgins., was just half and half. “But, at present, I fear the Church would “be hardly able to collect its Tithe. Nor “have the Virgins of these Days, Pati“ “to wait till the Bridegroom comes; “but often step fonvard to meet him — ^ even before he is onev 
Now this was all very well, in itself; fed non erat his Locus. Though why sh, after all? Can too many Weapons be brandished, dgainst Vice? Is Wit unorthodox? South preached Sound Doctrine, in this Style — If your late Scheme should Succeed, your Sermons will have ajvast deal of this Turn, D 3 in 
54 ORIGINAL LETTERS in them. I really believe you could not make an extempore Prayer, without a Trope — But believe me that I use none, in declaring myself wholly yours, in everything through Life. 
Adieu. 
LETTER XIV 
J Quitted our Assizes, this Morning, early, and walked Home, just six Miles! you are, you must be. Surprised, astonished, at Such a March, in me. I shall actually take it ill, if you are not: when little Folks perform great Achievements, they are apt to resent it, if die World admires, or wonders not. 
But 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 55 
But not to assume more Chivalry to myself, than I am fairly entitled to, I must confess that it a forced March, only. I never had Magnanimity enough to have ifttempted Such an Exploit: but the Morning was fine, my chaise not ready — I hate Waiting — Set out before it, and was not ■ overtaken, till I got within a Quarter of a Mile of my house — I Scorned to mount, then; for what, between A6hon and pas sion, I had chased myself into a little Bit of an Hero. 
I stopped on the Summit of every little Eminence, and iccoked back, with a Sigh, in vain; I would have waited for my Carriage, at each mile’s End, but that I found it less Fatigue to move, than stand still; So on I trudged, till I had accomplished my Pilgrimage. 
D 4 Robert 
56 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Robert made his Apology to me, with Tears in his Eyes; telling me, with the utmost Naivete that he had staid behind, to take Leave of a clear Friend of his, who was yesterday condemned to be hanged, feir horse stealing. Should I continue him, any longer, as my Groom, after this? Yes, Sooner than as my Butler, perhaps: Specific Warnings are the best — besides the Connexion will be dissolved, tomorrow— — 
could not resist the affexion I have for writing to you, by this Opportunity of Sending you a Piece of venison, per Bearer, though 1 am covered all over with most heroic Sweat and Dust, Pattens Puheris., atque Solis., and must Set about refreshing myself, immediately. Adieu. 
LETTER. 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 57 
LETTER XV 
'‘J^HE most useful Arts and Sciences have been found out, more by Accident, than by Study. I have made most lucky discovery, lately,, by being, led in to walk home, from Chelmsford., the other Day, as mentioned in my last.. 
I was warm, tired, and covered with' Dust. I immediately washed myself,, and shifted my Garments, from Head to Foot, with a purpose of lolling on a Couch, for the rest of the Day. But the exercise had given Such a brisk Circulation to my Blood, that I could not D 5 possibly 
58 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
possibly sit still. I thought the Fatigue had been in my Feet and Legs, but found that it lay only in my Shoes and Stockings — and when they were refreshed, I became So too. 
I went into the Garden, but felt like one immured — the Height of the Walls Seemed to obstrudt my breathing. I then walke4 forth, through the Postern, and strolled about the Fields and Highways, till my Bell rung for Dinner; and returned home, regretting the being deprived of my ^uanf fuf. of Air and Exercise. 
May not this Circumstance, in Some Sort, resemble the Union of Mind and Body? I imagine that the Soul will feel 
itself 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 59 itself thus light and agile, when it shall exuviate, or cast off its filthy Slough, for ever. Depojitd Sarcind^ levior volahif ad ajira. 
My Mind became as alive as mjr Body — I walked about the Parlour, all the Evening, repeating Heroics, aloud V and could Sooner have composed an Epic Poem, than my own Spirits. Charming Delirium! I hope that madness affords a Taste of Somewhat like to this — Ah no! stis rather the Frenzy of drunken i ness, or the Ravings of a Fever. 
To the many other Solamens of Grief or misery, recommended by philosophers: and Divines, let me add this physipl one, of exercise. ’tis worth all the Stoic D S Ledfures 
6o ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Lectures that ever were preached, from the Pulpit or the Porch. All that phi lofophy or Religion can do for us, is to cast a Weight from off the Mind, but cannot prevent its falling on the Body., This will do both. 
What is it that makes Women So muck more hypochondriac, vapourish, and hysterical, than Men? Their Want of ex crcile, principally — those Fops, who live like them, are subject to the same Disorders. 
Throw but a Stone., the Giant dies, 
as Some Poet says, in a beautiful Ode on the Spleen. 
I had often heard the good Effecfls of exercise, insisted on, and particularly recommended 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 6i 
commended to myself, in vain.. But an Ounce of Experience is worth a Pound of Advice, at any Time. And, in truth, what other Rule have we Safely to rely on, when Some physicians,. and those of great Name too, deny Its Virtues; say it wears out the Machine, too Soon, by fri(stion or Attrition : that the reason why Trees are longer lived than Man, is because of their being rooteddo a Spot tec.* 
In the Same Way have Doctors dif sered, on the cause of the patriarchal Longevity; one College imputing it to their living, entirely on Vegetables and another to their eating nothing but raw Meat, 
paracel/usi and others 
Non 
62 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Non nojirum inter eos tantas componere lights; therefore our only Test is, to make Trial for ouifelves, and be our own Physicians — For the truest Explication of this Sentence, e^cperientia docet., is by tranfiat ing it, that Experience is the heji Poflor. 
This is, I think, the longest Letter I ever wrote. observe the Inconsistency of Man. I am sitting jiili in praise of Exercise But I shall release you, now, lest you fitould be provoked, to cry out, with Johfony in the Devil to Pajy “Has ‘‘ not the lames jvoel done working^yet 
Adieu. 
LETTER 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 63 
LETTER XVI 
J Elave received the Books, and other Parcels, Safe, but have tasted none of them, yet, except the Tea, which I think very good. Yes. I read the Preface, and was most highly entertained with the Writing. His not a mere Envelope I affure you, and promises fairly for the Work that is to follow. 
The People are all running most devoutly mad, hereabouts, since you left me. Whitfield has got among them, and terrified Some of my poor Neighbours, into Fits of despair — soused them, 
over 
64 ORIGINAL LETTERS). 
over Head and Ears,, into the very Lougk ef Pefpond^ 
For when Preachings exceed the Power of Practice, they do more Harm than Good. ’tis as if Religion was not 
made for Man;, or,, as Voltaire says, 
r 
that God can be Served, like the Great Turk, in. his Seraglio,, by Eunuchs only. Such righteous over much Divines,, who are not Satisfied with the Scriptures,, as they find them, and who would never have turned Water into Wine., nor Spared the Adultrefs.^ Seem to aft the Part, of cartaphilusy Pontius pilate’s Porter, in the old Legend, of the Wandering Jew; who, when Our Saviour was walking deliberately out of the judgement hali gave 
him 
• pilgrim’s Progress 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 65 
him a Push on the Back, and bid him mend his Pace. 
Burton and I went to his Tabernacle, yesterday Morning, out of Curiosity, to compare causes and Effects;; we were treated with a whole pulpit full of nonsense, which was most greedily Swallowed down by the greatest Part of his Congregation, I suppose, by their Seeming to be most Sadly affected with the Cholic, manifested by their Contortions and Groanings. 
Few People are Judges of sense and reason; but every one can see Grimace, and feel Enthusiasm. We are too apt to believe Pretenders sincere, upon bare Appearances; especially in Things wshere 
66 ORIGINAL LETTERS 
we would not dare to feign, ourselves; and Bowels filled with Wind, are true modern Inspiration. 
We amused ourselves, most of the Time, with our apostle’s Physiognomy; which was, indeed, rather diabolical, than divine. For whether from Some Obliquity of Nature, or the extasies of his Devotion, he had, along with a Group of other frightful Features, contradled a most horrid Squint. 
He would have made a good Fakir’*^ — Whenever they would view a celestial 
* An Indian Priest. The Numbers, self denials, Penances, Mortifications, Squalidity, and Rogueries, of this Seth, are almost incredible — They are reckoned, by some of the Eastern Writers, to amount to above Two Millions of Men. 
Vision, 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 67 
Vision, they turn both their Eyes toward ■ the End of their nose, Devotees Seldom look farther, and that is the reason they are generally led by it. 
Adieu. 
LETTER XVHL 
J Send you, enclosed, a little Poem, that I think must Surprise you. I have copied it from an old manuscript Book of my dear mother’s, who had a fine Taste for the beautiful Simplicity of the old English Poetry; and used to j^reserve all fugitive Pieces, of the Kind, that she happened to meet with, anywhere. All 
the 
68 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
the Ballads in that Colledlion, as she says, in a short Preface to it, had been picked up, here and there, from ancient ma nufcripts, or old Books out of Print, of anonymous Authors. 
Both the Title and the Story, you See, are the Same with the admired Ballad, given to the World by David Mallets as his own, but plainly copied from this one; with Some Alterations, manifestly for the worst; as 1 believe you’u think, if you take the Pains to collate the Lines; particularly noting the Passages I have marked in Italics and comparing them with the Quotations from the fecond hand one, given at bottom. 
Mr 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 69 
Mr. Mallet pretends to have taken the Hint, from a Stanza, quoted in a Play of Beaumont and Fletcher's., styled Lhe Knight of the Burning Pefile and which Seems to have been Part of this very Poem; and which being, I suppose, long out of Print, he thought he had a Right to pick up, as a Waft or Stray; claiming as Lord of the Manor of Par -- naffus, I presume. 
This Ballad is the only one of the Kind, that he ever published; and, indeed, is quite out of the Style of his other Writings; but as it was the first Thing that brought him into Notice, is it not pro 
* “all was wrapped in dark Midnight, 
“And all were fall asleep” ” 
bable 
70 ORIGINAL LETTERS, bable that he would have attempted more Such Imitations of the old English Lyre, had he been the genuine Author of this one It should Seem then, that he had not the good Fortune to have met with any more Orphan Pieces, or obsolcte Originals, in his Time 
Adieu. 
* The Author is right in his Remark, as far as this Circumstance might have come to his Knowledge, as he speaks upon Mr. Works, in 
three Volumes, published in his Life Time, But there has appeared, lately, a small porhunions Work of his, in which there is a Ballad, on the old Story of kd’witi and Emma,, that I think is equal, at least, to wiluatn and Margaret. 
But, with regard to this Latter, I own T agree with our Author, in my Opinion, about it, for this Reason. Had he been the Poet of what he called the original one above, why stould he have altered it for the Worse, in fo many Pastages? One must naturally suspect that there must have been Some Reason for varying, cr difguifuig the Text. 
WILLIAM 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 71 
WILLIAM and MARGARET: 
An Ancient Ballad. 
• I. 
E N Hope lay hujhed in fiunt Night, (i) And Woe was wrapped in Jleep, (2) 
In glided pale eyed (3) Ghost, 
And stood at william’s feet, 
II 
Her Face was like an April Sky, (4) 
di?nmed(5) by a scattering (6) Cloud, 
Her clay cold lily Hand, Knee high. 
Held up her sable Shroud. 
III 
So stiall the fairest Face appear, 
When youthful Tears (7) are flown i Such the last Robe that Kings must wear. When Death has rest their Crown! 
(1) ’twas at the filent solemn Hour, 
(2) When Night and Morning meet. 
(3) Grimly. (4) Morn, (5) Clad. (6) Wintery. 
7).youth and Years, 
IV Her 
7^ 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
IV 
Her Bloom was like the Morning (i) Flower, That Sips the Silver Dew, 
The Rose had) budded in her Cheek, 
Just opening to the View. 
V 
But Love had, like a Canker Worm, 
Consumed her prime, (3) 
The Rose V Beauty paled and pined, (4) And{<i) died before itt (6) Time 
VI 
Awake, she cried, thy True Love calls. Come from her Midnight Grave, 
Late (7) let thy Pity mourn a Wretch, (8) 
Thy Love refuted to Save. 
U) Springing. (2) Was. (3) Early Prime, Tauvriogy. 
(4) Grew pale, and left her Cheek, 
(5) She. (6) Her. (7( Now. (8) Hear the Maid. 
* Compare thisverfe with the Speech of Viola. 
** She let Concealment, like a Worm i’th Bud, 
** Prey on her Damask Cheek, ” Shakespeare. 
VII This 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 73 
VII 
This is the dark and fearful (i) Hour, 
When injured Ghosts complain. 
And Lovefs Tombs (2) give up their Dead, " To haunt the faithless Swain. 
VIII 
Bethink thee, William, of thy Fault, 
Thy Pledge of (3) broken Truth, 
See the Lesson thou hajl taught (4.) 
To unfufpediing Youth. 
IX 
'Why did you first o’erprize my Charms, Yet all those Charms forsake. 
Why Sighed you for my Virgin Heart 
Then left it thus to break? 
(i) Dumb and dreary. 
(a) Yawning Graves. 
(3) And. 
(4) And give me back mymaide 
(5) And give me back my Troth 
E 
X Why 
7> ORIGINAL BETTERS. 
X 
Why did you 'prefint pledge such Vozvs^ (i) And none In Ahfenee keep f (2} 
Why Said you that my Eyes were bright, Yet taught them first to weep? 
• XI 
why*did you prd.ife my bluffing Lips (3) Yet make their Scarlet pale? 
And why, alas, did I, fond Maid, 
Believe the flattering Tale? 
XII 
But now my Face no more is fair. 
My Lips retain no red. 
Fixed are my Eyes in deetfs Jlill glare, (4) ' And Love s vain Hope is jied, (5) 
U) Promise Love to me. 
(2) And not that Promise keep? 
(3) Say my Lip was fwett. 
(4) Dark are my Eyes now closed in Death. 
(5) And every Charm is fled. 
XIII The 
• ORIGINAL LETTERS. 75 
XIII 
The hungry Worm my Partner (i) is. 
This Winding Sheet my Dress, 
A long and weary Night mujl pass (2) 
Ere Heaven allows redrefsr['i) 
XIV 
But hark! Tis Day the Darkness fies., (4) Take one long last Adieu, 
Come See, falseman, how low she lies, 
Who died for pitying (5) you, 
XV 
The Birds Sang out, the Morning Smiled, And sir caked tyre Sky with Redj (6) 
Pale William shook in every Limb, 
And [iartedfrom (7) his Bed. 
U) The auufion to XVII 14. too quaittu 
(2) And cold and weary lasts our Night. 
(3) Till that last Morn appear. 
{4) The Cock hath warned me hence, (5) Love of. 
(6) With Beam of rosy red. (y) Raving, left. 
E 1 
XVI Weep. 
76' ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
XVI 
Weeping he sought (i) the fatal Place, 
Where margaret’s Body lay. 
And stretched him o’er the green Grass Turf, That veiled (2} her breathless Clay. 
XVII 
ihfice called unheard (3) on margaret’s Name, And t\\nct sore wept her Fate, (4) 
Then laid his Cheek on her cold Grave:, And died and loved too late. (6) 
(i) He hyed him to. (2) Wrapped. 
(3) And thrice he called. (4) He wept full sore. 
(5) To. (6) And Word spake never more. 
I have only just pointed to the most considerable of the different Readings, leaving it to your own Taste to criticise them; but cannot help remarking how poor and flat the last Line of the Copy ends the Ballad, in Comparison of the Original. The Moral is there left out, as wtu as in the Vlllth Stanza. 
LETTER 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
77 
LETTER xvm. 
Was it my Fault, I pray you? When Circumstances or Situations run counter, and happen untowardly, let the Occasion answer for itself, without Impeachment on the poor Culprit, wsho may have the Misfortune to have been bound. Hand and Foot, in the unlucky Adventure. We cannot command Events, and they have Seldom Patience enough to wait till his in our Power to obey them.. 
E 3 I could 
78 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
I could not poshbly, just then, relieve the Difficulty; but I gave the best current counsel I had about me. We arc all free enough of Advice — stis the only Liberality which does not impoverish the Donor. 
Dent licet ajftdue^ nil tarn Inde perlt. 
says Ovid in his De Art — though I do not, at present, recollect how he could well apply the Maxim, on that Subject. No matter, Poetical licenses are licentious. I may plead the Same Privilege, myself, ab this Moment: for 1 am _ prating away, without knowing what' I am Saying, merely to turn aside the thoughts of the Mortification I have laboured under, these .three .Day, .on the late Occasion. 

But 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 79 
But the endeavouring to divert an uneasy Idea, Serves often to imprint it the ' more strongly on the Mind. Therefore adieu. 
LETTER XIX 
Ireland. 
J Affure you that I am extremely pleafed with my Jaunt hither. The Country,, ^ in general, as far as I have yet Seen it, is sine, and the People very cheerful and agreeable. They both want a good deal of Educationr — perhaps Cultivation would be a fitter Term, as it might inore aptly apply to each... 
E 4 
The 
S ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
The Natives abound, or rather exceed, in Hospitality. His disagreeable, in Men, at leafi, to be pressed, even to what one might otherwise chuse of their own Accord. Their Manners,., which I did not expect, have a good deal of the French in them. They have the Same ease and Freedom, but want their politeness. 
Some Writer charaflerizes this People under the Description of Gens Rations furens, a Nation that has a Rage for Disputation. I have remarked this Turn of dilposition among them, myself; but am most highly delighted with their Method of determining a Controversy. Whenever their Arguments happen to be deficient, they immediately lay a Wager; and their Bet, upon Such Occasions, 
according 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 8i according to the Genius of the Country, is generally in Meat and Drink. A Rump and a Dozen is the usual one. Beef and Claret is the Word. And to this Sociable Syllogism the whole Company present, wsth the chosen Umpire, are invited. 
What pleases me more particularly in this Mode of Irifi) Logic., is that it has a natural Tendency to correct Obstinacy; as a Person will probably Soon eeafe to be vindictive, when he finds it to become expensive. A Man must have a good Fortune, who can afford to be often in the Wrong, in this Country. 
My Friend and I travel on to Duhlin,, the Beginning of the ensuing Term; and E 5 as 
82 ORIGINAL LETTERS. sis fbofl as he hastes: / in his Answer vtz^. shall • 1^; fcil for. oii England for evsr, 
- ' Adieu. 
LETTER XX 
Dublin. 
landed at Cork from brifioi I shad not Seen this Capital before,, and I confess it has Surprised me. ur hem quam dicunt Dublinium — I little expected to have met with Such Spacious. Streets, and princely Palaces, as are to be Seen throughout this Metropolis. There is not Such an Area, or Square, in lon ddhy not in Europe, as Stephen's Green. 
But 
ORIGINAL LETTERS'. 83 But the Suburbs, or what 'they style the out lets here, are the richest and' most beautiful Landscapes, most of thein sea fiapes.^ too, that ever I beheld. I was carried on a water party, into the Harbour, t’other day, to dine on board a Man of War stationed' there, at present,, and on looking back towards the City, the prospedl exceeded, in my Opinion, the Bay of Naples, which I had So lately Seen, and is reckoned the finest View in it aly. The Buildings round the latter 
make certainly a nobler Appearance as the Entrance into, the River here,, is thet. poorest Part of the City; : but. then the extensive Verdure, on all Sides, gives this the Advantage that Nature must; ever preserve over Art.. 
E 6) 
howeveic 
84 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
However, these were not So great Matters of Astoisishment to me, as to have had the good fortune to be introduced to the Acquaintance of Men whose Names I had never even heard of before, of as good sense, and Science, as any I had ever been acquainted with, in England. When you talk of Bcectia^ for the future, I insist on your leaving this Country out of your Geography. They would not have served Pindar here, as they did in his own Nation, * raise a Statue to a common ballad singer, and leave him unnoticed. His extremely useful to go abroad. Sometimes, to wear off Prejudices. 
This gave me Curiosity to inquire at a booksjler’s, for what Works had been 
written 
thtbesf the Capital os Bceotia. 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 85 
written here; and he presented me with a Catalogue, for a Library; tho’ most of them, indeed, published in London as there happens not to be much Encouragement for Literature, in this Kingdom. 
I have bought all the Books whose Subjects tempted me, but have only looked into one Set of them, entitled hiher tiicufs Letters; which are a Collection of weekly papers, that came out Some Years ago, and which may vie with the Spectators, for Morals, Erudition, philosophy, Wit and Humour. 
There are, indeed, here and there. Some peculiar Modes of Speech, or Idioms of this Country Dialect, in these Writings, 
which 
86 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
which like the Patavinite of Livy., are not in the correct English Style of Expression; Such as, at the long run, on the catch, suchlike, corrupted, for corrupt, chut these external Spots affect not the intrinsic Merit of the Thoughts and re fiedtions, which are both just and ingenious, throughout. 
In. two of his Papers, he attacks the Fable of the Bees, with more success, I think, than all the Moralists and Divines who had undertaken that Writer before,. Hehas shown the Vice, Folly, and' Ab sardity of that dangerous Piece,, in Such a Light, as may tempt Posterity to imagine that mandevu, was only a slick name' given to the Author, and derived from Old nick. 
Th. 
. LETTERS. 87 
The Compiler of these Trad: Syhasnot, however, been quite judicious;, in Some Parts of his couedlion; particularly in one Place; whero he publishes the Remains of a Clergyman, whom he does not name, but mentions as one whose Writings had been received with applausc.^ And these consist of two Poems, one om Our Saviour., and the other on Bacchus. The placinfg these two Titles together is the principal Objedtiom I have to the Passage, for there is a Sort of Moral in the latter,, which might have justified it separately 
In one of his Papers that I read this Morning, he tells the Story of Diogenes's Manner of ridiculing platps Definition 
of 
• Archdeacon farnelu 
88 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
of Man, by picking out the Feathers of a Cock — He acknowledges the Description to have been imperfect; but Says, that if Plata had added the Faculty of Speech, it would have left the Cynic no room for his Jest. True enough, I grant him, with regard to the Example of the Cock; but if Diogenes had deplumed a Parrot, it would Surely have beea an Improvement of the Banter. 
There is a precious Fragment preserved in these Volumes, that is not to be met with elsewhere, and has great Merit with those who admire the pathetic Simplicity in the Style of the old English Ballads; which every Person of a true natural Taste must do. Refinement loses its Name, when it debauches our Relish for Such artless Compositions. 
There 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 89 
There is Room enough left in this Sheet, to give you the Quotation, and I shall Send it to you here., 
How oft didst thou declare to me. 
The Heavens should turn to nought; 
The Sun should first obscured be, 
e’re thou should’st change thy Thought. 
Ye Heavens, dissolve, without Delay, 
Sun, show thy Face no more! 
Amyntaf Love is lost for ay; 
And woe is me, therefore. 
God knows it would not grieve me much, To lose my Life for thee; 
But oh I too near it doth me touch, 
Thou shouldst my Murderer be! 
With that her Hand, cold, wan and pale. Upon her Breast she lays; 
And feeling that her Breath did fail. 
She Sighs, and thus she says — 
Attiyntas — - 
90 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Amyntas -- -- 2ix\di with that, poor Maid, 
She Sighed again. So Sore, 
That after that she nothing Said, 
Nor Sighed, nor Spake, no more.’* 
I shall follow the unhappy girl’s Example, here, and conclude myself, ever yours. 
P. S, I have looked into the three Volumes of Ancient Poetry, lately published by Mr. Percy, to see if he had taken this Fragment into that Colledfion; but find it had escaped him. 
Either we must suppose that Otway had Seen it, 'or that this must be a strong Instance of the old Saying, Good jvits jump: for the following Passage, in his 
Orphan, 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 91 Orphan, Seems to be but a Copy, or pa raphrase, upon the two first Stanzas. 
■ > — -- -- -- Oh!! often has he sworn 
Nature should change, the Sun and Stars grow dark. 
Ere he would falsify bis vows'to me! 
Make haste, Confusion, then. Sun, lose thy Eighty 
And Stars drop down with sorrow‘to the Earth';, ^ 
For my Cajlalid% false.” • 
How much is the Sweet Simplicity of the Ballad, impaired in the Imitation. 
There is a Similar Passage in that Sweet Epistle of ovil from (Emm to Parisy. though the Image is not the Same — even as different as Fire and Water — 
Popule 
92 ORIGINAL LETTERS, 
Popule, vive, precor, quse consua margina ripse. 
Hoc in rugoso cortice carmen habes. 
“Cum Paris genone poterit fpirare reliila, 
“Ad fontem Xanthi versa recurret aqua.’* Xanthe, retro propera; versaeque recurrite lymphae j 
Sustinet cenonen deseruifle Paris. 
I shall take the Liberty of remarking here, upon the Epithet rugufo, or roughs in the Second Line, above, as applied to the Poplary whole Rind is Smooth; ill Englandy at least; whatever it might have been on the Banks of the Xanihus^ or Scamander 
LETTER 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
93 
LETTER XXL 
J Have just finished the Books I mentioned to you in my last, and am really charmed with them. His Surprising that they have not been carried mto Englandytx.. I shall bring them over to you; but, in the mean Time, cannot resist the impulse I feel to give you Some farther Foretaste of them, which I shall do by copying out two of the Papers for you. I have leisure, love writing to you, and am very Sure that nothing I can Say could entertain you, half So well, as the transcripts I shall immediately Set about, as Soon as I have bade my dear Friend adieu. 
The 
p4 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
The First of the Papers is only a Transsation from the French of an anonymous Author; but as it is a pretty just and admirably drawn Character, of the English Nation, and that you may not be able to meet the Piece elsewhere, I Send it to you. The other is Original, and Signed Hibernicus., who was the Compiler, and Writer, of far the greatest Number of these Essays. 
Number XC 
“It Seems to me to be the general Character of the English that they have either great Virtues., or great Vices; and very often a Mixture of both. For, notwithstanding they have Abundance of ^ood Sense, their is Something of Caprice 
that 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. .95 that always accompanies it. They have generally great Souls; and their Inequalities Set them as often above other Nations, as they make them fall short of them. The most Part of them have Imagination; but the Fire of it resem bles that of their Coals, in having more Warmth, than brightness. 
“They Speak but little, and almost everything they Say is Sentiment They make Refiedtions upon Things, and understand the real Worth of them the better from considering them with their own Eyes, and having the Courage to judge for themselves. 
^ I have not Seen the Original, and therefore am not everywhere sure of the Translation. I fancy the Word here Should be Sententious. 
“Content 
96 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
“Content with their Condition, if it be but tolerable, they Seldom make any great Struggles to render it better. Therefore few of them go abroad to Seek their Fortunes; but, for the Honour of those that do So, we may Say that there is hardly one of them who does not Succeed. 
“They enjoy what they have, and live agreeable to their own Inclinations, in which there is nothing blamable, except that their Tastes are not over elegant. In other Things they are reasonable enough in their Expenses, endeavouring less to appear happy, than to be So. And by this Means we may observe that in most Things they make it depend on themselves. 
“They 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 97 
They give themselves very little Trouble about what others think concerning them; and take as little Notice of what they do. They al boldly against any Customs, however well established, whenever they happen to disagree either with their Opinions or Inclinations. 
“They generally regard Add refs and Behaviour very little; but they cultivate their reason, and dare to make use of it in the business of Life, as well as in other Things. It is not unusual among them to retire from business and Employs, and prefer a private and obscure Life, to Honour and Grandeur. As they enjoy Life better than is done elsewhere. So we may Say that they are more easily Satisfied with it, and quit it wdth less Reluctance. 
F « This 
98 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
‘‘ This is the true Picture of an Englishman, an Englishman of Merit, and not engaged in any violent Pursuits. A cha radler made up of an happy Composition of good sense and Indolence. 
“There are, however, certain Occasions, wherein it appears that Indolence is his governing Passion. He hates Difficulties and Trouble, and is unhappy when he finds himself engaged in them. Long Pursuits dishearten him, and he would rather cut., than untie. 
In whatever does not relate to himself, he is apt to be credulous; and rather than be at the Trouble of inquiring into the Truth, gives easy Credit to whatever is told him. Hence it is, I apprehend. 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 99 
prehend, that there are So many Stories told in this Country, of Spirits and Apparitions. I shall, perhaps, hereafter, have occasion to give you Several Proofs of their native Indolence, as well as of their good sense. 
“Whenever they forsake this last, they forsake it altogether, and become the most unreasonable of Men; violent in their Desires, impatient under .Misfortunes, incapable of remedying them; and So transported in their Anger as to strike themselves in their Face with their Fists, which they also do upon very Small Occasions of Grief — For upon the greater ones they come Sometimes to more violent Resolutions. In one Word, the English appear to me always in Extremes, F 2 and 
100 ORIGINAL LETTERS, and run the greatest Lengths of Vice, or reach the highest Pitch of Virtue. 
As to Religion, one may venture to say, that every Englishman Seems re solved to have one without Faults, at least what he imagines to be So, or to have none, at all; and that this Country, contrary to all others, is without Hypocrites. But however that be, the Number of determined Libertines is much greater here, than elsewhere; which, however, ought not to refiedt any Dishonour on the Nation, since those only are Libertines here, who would behy pocrites there; and it is easy to determine which of these Sorts of People are the worst. 
“There 
ORIGINAL LETTERS, toi 
“There are also in this Country, an Abundance of Fanatics, or People So cab led; which is another strong Proof that the English are very ready to sail into Parties; and are zealous in their Attachments to them. Among these, there are Several who have formed the most extravagant Schemes of Religion, that can well be imagined. 
“On the other Hand, I believe there are in England a great Number of People of Solid and rational Piety, as appears by the Number of good Books of Devotion among them; which are, without Doubt, the Productions of virtuous and religious Men. The Simple and wholesome Morality they contain, ssiews; them to have been written by Men of ' • F 3 Learn 
ig2 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Learning; besides that there are Some of them universally applauded, whose Author has nevertheless thought fit to keep himself unknowm* — A Proof of his being railed far above those Views which the Learned generally propose to themselves by their Works. 
“The English bear greatness tolerably well, and appear very little puffed up with it. I believe you will Scarce ever hear it Said among them, A Man of my §^auty — A Person of my ranl Cfr. They also carry themselves very modestly, in their prosperity, which they make little Ostentation of, in their Expenses. 
■* The Author of the Whole Duty of Man, .and several other Works, may be the Person here intended — D multi alii Anonymi. 
“No 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 103 “No Englishman ever tired me with Speaking about his Coach, or his Equipage. They keep, indeed, always a good Table; and that is one of the first Things they establish. After this comes the Mijlrefs^ whom they entertain at an extraordinary Expense. And though all this were not a Sufficient Argument that Avarice is not the Vice of the English, but that they go more readily into the other Extreme, yet may See it very evidently in the prodigious Number of Physicians, Lawyers, and Astrologers who are in great Reputation among them, and turn their Affairs to very good Account. Add to this the Folly of their 
* This Description seems to hare been written a great While before the ra of the Translation, by this Expression. 
f4 
Fashions 
104 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Fashions, the sumptuousness of tlteir Monuments, and Funeral Sobmnides; by which Means great Sums of Money are consumed. 
“Among other Things, I have observed, at their Funerals, a Set of mournersy or People called by that Name, who Seem to fill their Place much better than those whom the Ancients used to employ for that Purpose, For as the English have Sometimes very little real Sorrow under their Mourning, which yet the Ceremony demands, it Seems but reasonable that they should be indulged in a counterfeit one. I only mean that they are a little insensible, unless when transported by Some extraordinary Passion; in which case they are often found to'' run into the other Extreme, 
“It 
ORIGINAL LETTERS, los 
“It is usually Said to be a Part of their Character, that they are exceeding changeable; and the Reason pretended for this is, the Variableness of the Air and Climate, in which they live.. For my Parr,. I am persuaded the only Reason why they appear more So than others, is because tliey will not bear the least Constraint, and. are always proud to Seem what they really' are; an Effect both of their Indolence and Courage. 
“As for what may. be alleged, with Respect; to the Inconstancy of their con du6t towards their Princes, it may, perhaps, be well enough accounted for, by their having bad. oneswho,, not liking, •she Limits Ser to. sheir Power, endeavoured to alter the Constitution,, and So F 5 objigesh 
io ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
obliged their Subjects to alter their Behaviour to them — a Proceeding which very often ought to be ascribed to their good Sense“ 
“is one strong Proof that the English are not So easily changed, as is commonly imagined; which is, that Advice never has any Influence on them, after they have once taken their Resolution, winch they do very Suddenly, and no less Suddenly put it into Execution. This is evident in the Numbers of People who destroy themselves * the many unequal Marriages made amiong them. 
* They do this as frequently in France,, Lys. foltalrcy but their News papers are under the in fpe£sion of the Police, which never licences any Article which refiefls on the Character of the Nation,. 
« This 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 107 
“This Brilknefs of Resolution is So much the Character of this People, that it is no rare Thing among them for young Women to make a Vow, to marry the first Man they meet with in the Streets which they afterwards actually perform. In ail this, however, there appears a Mixture of that Fierceness which is, indeed, at the Bottom of their antienr Character. 
“For the rest, they Seem to retain Something of every one of the different Nations by whom they have been conquered. They drink, like the Saxons; they love hunting, like the Danes'., the Normans have left among them their Chicanery 
* This is the first I ever heard of it, 
F 6 and 
io ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
and Knights of the Post; and they derive from the Romans their Fondness for Savage Spectacles and Contempt of Death — unless these two last are rather to be ascribed to their natural Temper. 
“They abound also, sh Characters which Seem very inconsistent; they are' charitable, and they are cruel; though they are lazy in their Actions, yet it is their usual Custom to walk fast; they are apt to despise Foreigners, too much, and yet as ready, at other Times,, blindly to admire them. One would be inclined to imagine them all either Libertines, or Devotees; and yet they will fall together by the Ears, on Account of the most trifling Ceremony in Worship, Such as neither religious People nor Libertines 
com 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 109 commonly think worthy of their Consideration C 
“Besides these, there are several other Contrarieties observable among them; yet Such as ought not to give us any Manner of surprise, in regard that they are no more than Infirmities or Inequalities frequently incident to Humam Nature, in'general.” 
So far the Frenchman goes;; and from the Spirit there appears to be in the Original, I do not think that the tranfia tion has done the Author Sufficient jus tice; I have therefore taken the Liberty to amend Some Expressions, en pajfant^ where the Fault Seemed obvious. 
I don’t 
no ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
I don’t think him perfectly philosophic in his imputing Fierceness to the English, as their peculiar native Char after: Human Nature is universally the same — ’tis Custom, Habit, ' or Education which Solely make the Difference of Nations, The Breath of Liberty naturally inspires' a boldness and Self sufficiency into our Minds, which if not Softened or polished by Manners or Breeding, will be apt to betray themselves in Such an outward Demeanour or Expression, as the Monsieur chuses to denominate Fierceness. 
The King of Prussian in a Letter to Voltaire., complimenting his Tragedy of Julius Ceefar^ Says, “His Sentiments “are So justy adapted to the Characters“ “that whoever reads the 
“Part 
ORIGINAL LETTERS, in 
“Part of Brutus, must immediately ac“ “him either for a Romm?, “or a britonp * 
In fine, stis the Constitution of Laws, not of Minds, that makes any remark abe Difference among Men, But Superficial Oblervers are not capable of distinguishing a natural, from a native Disposition, and always confound them together. I must here refer myself to your own Comprehension, for a proper southeast cernment of these Synanima, for the im perfedlion of Language cannot make out the Precision. 
* This was certainly a very honell: and a liberal Confession, from the Sovereign of a rival Nation } and Shows him to be an Hero, in everything. 
I am 
1)12 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
I am So much fatigued with copying out this Tract, that I must defer the, osher, till the next Post 
Adieu,. 
LETTER XXII 
^’^jphe following Paper I had prepared you to expert, in my last Letter,. So I shall make no other Preface to it,, but proceed diredly to the transcription., 
Number XCI 
Christ mas eve, 17 26. Animum t xcellentem mcderatum., omnia tanquam minora tranfeuntem^ quicquid time mus, cptamufque ridentem^ ccejejiis Potentia 
agitat. 
ORIGINAL LETTERS, uj 
agitat. Non poteji res tanta fine Adminiculo 
Numinis fare. 
Sen, 
“Finite Beings, be their Faculties ever So great, yet find this Imperfediion in them, that they cannot exert them all at once, but must exercise them gradually, according as objeds present themselves, which is always in a Train or Succession. The intellectual Scene is perpetually shifting, in an endless Variety of short and fugitive Representations. The Power of thinking is not exerted in one continued a61, but requires the frequent impulse of obje(5bs to keep it in exercise. 
“Nor is this exercise an entire uniform, either, but a Series of very many 
and 
114 ORIGINAL LETTERS, and very different Actions; in the coursc of which there is a constant Fluctuation from one Thought to another, by which means our Ideas are rendered So conmsed and defective, that we are obliged to have recourse to Abstradtions, and certain imaginary Species, which exist only in our Minds, to assist us in our Reasonings and Inquiries. We find, indeed, at present, a great Convenience in these artificial Forms of thinking; but that we stand in need of them, at all, is a plain Argument of the Imperfection of our Knowledge, and the weakness of our Faculties. 
This Observation extends to everything else in the human Mind, as well as the Understanding; and is, indeed the natural 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 115 
tural consequence of the Imperfection to which that Faculty is Subject. ourhap piness is regulated by the Same Laws; and all our Enjoyments come to us Single, and in Succession. It is equally impossible for us to feel a Variety of Pleasures, at once, as it is for the Understanding to perceive a Multitude of Objects, at the same Instant. 
“Nay, in many cases the Understanding Seems to have the Advantage of the Affections, in this Point; in regard the Objects of Love, Joy, or Admiration, do not lie So thick together as those of Knowledge and Refiedion. The Objects of thinking rise upon us, every Moment; but it is only at Some Times that we meet 
with 
ii ORIGINAL LETTERS, with those which are capable of producing in us joyful, pleasant, or delightful sensations. 
“In order, therefore, to remedy these Defeats, our merciful Creator has endowed the Mind of Man with certain Powers, which can revive the Ideas of past Pleasures, and give us a Foretaste of future Enjoyments; by which means we are enabled to crowd our Comforts together, and relieve ourselves from the Pressure of a great many Misfortunes, which might otherwise bear too heavy upon us. The Memory of past Enjoyments is oftentimes no Small Relief to a melancholy Heart; and I believe there are but few who have not experienced that Hope is the most efficacious of all other Remedies, 
against 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 117 
against the Calamities and Distresses we too generally meet with in Life. 
“Our actual Enjoyments are So few and fleeting, that were we deprived of this Power of anticipating our Felicity, and prepossessing ouisielves of imaginary Goods, it is highly probable we should find Life an insupportable Burden; since, with all these Advantages, it is found to she So already, to Multitudes of persons, who, in the Eye of the World, appear possessed of everything which can render it easy and comfortable. 
“From this Account of Human Nature, in its present Situation, we may observe how necessary it is to our happi ness, to look forward into Futurity, in ' order 
ii ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
order to make us fatissied vrith ourselves, for any Length of Time. No one Enjoyment in Life, nor any Single Action, however great or virtuous, can yield a perpetual Entertainment to Minds whose satisfadions are all Successive, and consequently inwtrnitting. There must be a Continuation of the same Enjoyments, and a Repetition of the same pleasing A6uons, to render our Felicity full and complete. And where these are wanting, as they often are with most Men, and indeed with all Men, one Time or other, there is nothing which can make us easy, but the Hopes of repeating Such Enjoyments, and engaging hereafter in the Same pursuit with success. Our virtuous Inclinations, like all others with which we 
are 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 119 
are endowed, are liable to Disappointments, and consequently alike capable of giving us Pain, upon our finding them defeated. 
“What is there, then, that shall Support Man under the Calamities of Life, and make him persist in a course of neglected, or unsuccessful Virtue? No one virtuous Action, we see, is its own Sufficient Reward, because our Minds require to haye the Entertainment continually renewed. Many of our Virtues, notwithstanding the pleasure of self appro tion which they afford us, yet frequently occasion great Pain and uneasiness. And, as Things commonly go in the World, we have but little rational Expedlation that our future Enterprizes, let them be 
ever 
120 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
ever So good and virtuous, shall be always Successful. So that, in Effect,, Virtue be indeed the direct; and natural Road to Happiness, yet it frequently fails of being really So, and for that reason stands in Need of Some Superior Power to aid and strengthen us in the constant Practice of it. 
“Many of the Heathen philosophers were So Sensible of this, that they found themselves obliged to make their virtuous Men have Recourse to the Supreme Being, for Assistance in all Cafes of Difficulty or Misfortune. They Saw Virtue exposed to So many disasters and Calamities, that they judged nothing less than an almighty Succour, necessary for its Relief. 
‘‘ They 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 121 
“They Anew well enough that Virtue was in its own Nature amiable, and adapted to promote the Good of the Human Species; or, in other Words, that the Good of Mankind consisted in a Course of virtuous Action and Enjoyment. Yet from a Consideration of the numerous Accidents and Misfortunes, to which good Men are liable, in this Life, they found it necessary to resolve our ultimate Felicity into a Dependence upon God, who being himself the Author and Fountain of all Good, is alone capable of Supporting us, in every thing.that is So; of feeding our Minds with Solid and well grounded Hopes, and of Satisfying every desire, which can possibly enter into the Heart of Man. 

This 
122 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
‘‘ This was certainly a very noble, an useful, and a Safe Principal, tending both to the happiness and the Perfection of Mankind. For Sure nothing can be more conducive to refine and exalt our Nature, than to Set always before us the most perfect Model of all Goodness and Beauty. One of the greatest Men of Antiquity is Said to have regulated all his Actions, on the Supposition of having Cato always present with him, as a spedta tor and a Monitor; and boasted, that by that Means he had preserved his Virtue against many Temptations. 
“How much more then must he be proof against any ill Suggestions, who lives in the conscious sense of having him for an inspedtor, both of his Thoughts 
and 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 123 and Actions, who is the Author of all the Wisdom and goodness in the universe; and the Rewarder of them too? And how nobly must that Mind be employed, which is fixed on the Contemplation of infinite Perfection, and endeavours to approve itself to its Creator! 
“The admirable xauthor of the Lheory ef the Earth, has a refieclion on this Subject, which it is impossible to read without Emotion. “For my Part, Says “he, I cannot be persuaded that any “Man of atheistical Notions can have a “great and generous Soul. For there “is nothing great in the World, if you “take God out of it. Therefore Such “a person can have no great Thoughts, “can have no great Aims, or expecta 
G 2 
“tions. 
124 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
“tions, or Designs : for all must be “comprised within the Compass of this “short Life, and of this dull Body. 
“Neither can he have any great in stinfts, or noble Passions; for, if he 
“had, they would naturally excite in “him greater Ideas, inspire him with “higher Notions, create in him a fonder “Hope, and transport his Mind with “more glorious prospedts, by laying open the Scenes of the intellectual World. 
“Lastly, He cannot have any sense “of Order, wisdom, goodness, Provi “dence, or any of the Divine Attributes “— and these are the greatest Things “that can possibly enter into the Heart “of Man to conceive, and that do most 
“enlarge 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 125 
“enlarge and ennoble his Mind. There“ “I Say again, that he who is na“ “inclined to Atheism being na“ “destitute of all these Concep “tions, must consequently have a little “and a narrow Soul.” ^ 
According to this Account, it is ealy to See that the greatest and best Part of ©ur happiness must be derived from the Same Source; that bearing always a Proportion to the Enlargement of our Minds. None can deny but that Creatures directed by reason have more and greater 
* The above Quotation has much improved upon the Original, in some paftages j but as F have never seen Hihernicus^ I cannot say whether the Alterations or Additions were made by him, or by the Author of this Colledlion; though I rather believe the latter, from thq .Liberty he profeltes to have taken with the former Paper. 
Ga 
Enjoy 
126 ORIGINAL LETTERS. Enjoyments, than Such as are only, guided by Instinct; and therefore, whatever opens and enlarges the intelledlual Scene, must certainly produce an Addition to our happiness. 
“Nor will it, I imagine, be denied, that the Knowledge of the Author of Nature, which is only to be acquired by contemplating him, is Such an Opening and Enlargement of our Minds; and consequently that this Contemplation must not only be worthy and becoming in us, but be the pleasantest and fittest Method of employing our Faculties. 
“besides, Since in a manner we live upon Hope, and since our most virtuous Dispositions need Such Support and 
Nourish 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 127 
nourisnment, where can we So reasonably look for happiness, as from him from whom we can hope for all Things : because he has all "ood Things in his Power, and has shown, through the whole ceconomy of Nature, how ready and liberal he is to distribute them? And as it is natural for Men to imitate thole they love, and to love those from whom they derive their happiness, we may conclude that we shall then be enabled to adt in the noblest and most virtuous Manner, when we are animated with the highest Degree of the Love of God, and make it the principal Motive of our Actions“ 
“far Men not only may, but actually have discovered, by the mere G 4 Force 
/' 
128 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Force of their natural reason and re fieestion. But God has been still more bountiful to us. ite has given us a positive Revelation of his Will, and ac 
• 
us that he is. both Sensible of the Good we do, and takes Delight in it; Such a Delight, that he intends to continue their Existence, and make them the Objects of his Favour, to Eternity, who persevere in So doing. 
“A Declaration that makes us happy, both here and hereafter, and is the best and Surest fortress to all human Virtue; because it enlarges the Circle, both of our Actions and Enjoyments, Sets us above Misfortune, gives us a just and rational Contempt of the World, ' and strengthens our Minds against all those 
Accidents 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 129 
Accidents in Life, which might possibly render the Paths of Goodness wearilbme,. or painful to us. 
“these Refiedlions are So shitable to the Solemn season upon which we are now entering, that it would be almost inexcusable to' make any Apology for them here : since I am consident there can be nothing more acceptable to my Readers, ^ than any Attempt, however weakly executed, to stir up their Love and Gratitude to that Divine Person, who has made the exercise of Goodness and Virtue their highest and truest Interest, by bringing Life and Immortality to lightv 
don’t you think that I might make good engrossing Clerk enough, from tliese G 5 twqr 
130 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
two Examples of my copying Look out for Some Office of that Kind,, for me, in London — I hate Idleness, and am fond of any business, that will Suffer me to sit still. jone is ashamed to indulge an Inclination that hurts them, therefore to have a Pretence for it, how pleasant! 
Adieu. 
LE T T E R 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 131 
LETTER XXIII 
Dublin. 
IE have done our businefs here, and are to Set Sail, the next Tide. We go by the Pacquet, for the Pleasure of the Journey through jvalesy which is a Country we neither of us have ever Seen.. We long to visit a Kingdom, the only one in the World; that has never been conquered, but preserves still a Prince of its own.. 
This was a rare Device in Polity, to Save the Credit of htr Nation. ’tis fqme thing like the Law (Quibble, of levying G 6 a Finiy 
t32 ORIGINAL letters. 
a Fine, and suffering a Recovery, by which a Tenant in Tail, becomes Tenant in Fee; only with the Difference that this gives a real, the other but a nominal. Possession. 
\ 
I may venture to say Such Things, Safely, on this Side the Water; but must preserve a stricter Guard over my Speech, when I get on the other Side; lest your Ap Gruffyths, Ap Shenkins, Ap Shonefs, or others of the hot leek Gentry, should teach hurpetter Manners, over the Pate. 
Now, while we are waiting for the boatfwain’s Whistle, and by way‘of taking Leave of Hihernicus, I shall Send you a little Poem out of him, that I think willplease you. His written upon solop^ Division of man’s Life into Septennial 
Por 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 133 
Portions, appropriating our different Passions and pursuits to each Stage. 
The Seven first Years os Life, man’s break of Day, 
Gleams of short Sense a Dawn of Thought display. 
When fourteen Springs have bloomed his downy Cheek, 
His soft and blushing Meanings learn to speak. From twenty-one proud Manhood takes its Date; 
Yet is not perfecsi Strength till twenty-eight. Thence to his thirty fifth. life’s genial Fire, Sparkles, burns loud, and flames with fierce Desire. 
At forty-two, his Eyes grave Wisdom wear. And the dark Future dims them o’er with Care, Onto the nine and fortieth Toils increase. 
And busy Hopes and Fears disturb bis Peace. At fifty six, cool Reason reigns entire. 
And Life burns steady, with a temperate Fire, But fixty three unbinds the body’s Strength,, Ere the unwearied Mind has run her Length; 
And 
1^4 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
And when from Seventy Age Surveys her Last, Tired she stops short, and wljhes all were paji. 
TV recollefi the Past I should rather say, if I were to take any Liberty with another person’s Lines. This Alteration presents a Thought, a Moral; and Such a Refiedlion, at that Stage of Life,, though never to be deferred So late, is both natural and proper: But the wijhing all were paji., gives an Hint of Impatience, only, and miakes the Poem end coldly; as cold as the very Age itself he is there describing.. 
Thus are the threescore Tears and ten, of thepfalmist, very fairly accounted for;. but then this relates only to the Men of Davtd'sy and of solops Days. I fear that 
in 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 135 
in these Times, we must make use of a qurntennial divisor, only. Con it over again, by the Rule of that measure. 
And Since our Vice and Luxury have curtailed our Lives,, by a Score of Years, we have by Play and Extravagance, contrived an ceconomy to shorten our Means also, in order to make both Ends meet, cxadlly. For So little Regard is there shown to. Posterity,, now a days„ that most persons whose Fortunes are not tied up., hut deserve to he fo, themselves, are obliged to purcstase poor Annuities with their last Stake; and those who are hand cuffed and hound over., sell them. So as to reduce themselves to the Same wretched Condition and Indigence with their fellow Madmen and Fools. 
Hie 
136 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
The Subjects of this Letter make me recoiled an excellent Motto I met with on a Sun dialy, in the County of Corkcy lately. 
Fenere non potesy Petes non perdere. 
Adieu. 
LETTER XXIV 
Derhy. 
have had a pleasant Passage of it over; the whole Tour was as much So, as anything, that refers only to myself, can be. We crossed the Country hither, and I have promised my Friend to stay with him a Week, or 
ten 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 137 ten Days, before I take myself to Home and Solitude again. 
I find my Seif in admirable Spirits, at present; indeed I have enjoyed them, from the first Moment I Set out. I recoiled; now that I wrote you a Letter formerly on the Subject; of exercise, * and every day’s Experience convinces me that stis by much the best Article, among the whole matfna metiica. 
I have got a Book in reading, since I came here, by Way of relieving virgii Horace., and my dear Tibullus., that entertains me much -- -- -- Lucretius. I 
never went regularly through him before. 
Letter XV 
but 
138 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
but generally admired all the Passages I had ever Seen quoted from it; and meeting with it here, I have taken it more critically under Consideration. 
He is certainly a great Poet, and a fine Writer; but a most stupid Philosopher, in his Principles; though I acknowledge that he argues admirably, upon assumed Premises. I should be tempted to quote Some Passages from him, but that I don’t know which to fix on, among Such a Number, and Such Variety. 
I am Surprised he ever troubled himself to give us any Gods, at all, since he won’t allow them to be of the least Manner of use to us. He neither admits them to be our Creators, or our preservers, but 
a Set 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 139 
a Sort of innocent Devils., only, doing us nor Good nor Harm. Nor does he even account for their own Generation, either. He leaves them, just where he found them, fast asieep in the Empyrean. 
But indeed his whole nonfense was thoroughly exhausted, in the Production of Man; whom he describes tumbling out into the Wterld, like a ripe Bean, from a bursted Pod; and nourished by Milk, stowing through the Pores of the Earth, during the first Ages of the Subsiding Atoms; but afterwards, in Length of Time, growing dry, like an old nurse, she left us trusting to our own Contrivances, reducing Mankind to the miserable Necessity of Begetting one another, 
after 
140 ORIGINAL LETTERS, after the mechanical Method now in vulgar 
use. 
But there is nothing in all his Work, I So much detest, as tiie meanness of his Mind, in expressing himself wdth So much Rapture, on a persuasion of the soul’s Mortality. See the first Lines of the third Book. For though one might pof sibiy think So, not thinking at ali yet Surely the Belief of Such a Proposition, must naturally render us dispirited, to the lowest Degree, and damp every Moral, every Virtue, every Ambition, every noble, generous, and disinterested Pursuit in' Life. 
For my own Part, were I but once convinced of fa melancholic a Truth, I 
would 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 141 
would never endure another toothache — For there are many Ways of dying, shorter and less painful. But my Notion upon this Subject, is one of the pleasantest Thoughts in Nature, wshich, taking the Liberty of quoting an Anti lucretius of my own, that you may perhaps one day see, I shall give you, in the following Distich. 
Man the chief Ohjedi of heaved.s wondrous Plan *, 
Lhe Universe a Stage., foie aaor Man. 
I am of Opinion with Plutarch; who Says, that the Belief of a Divine Providence., and the souvs Immortality., mufi fand or fall together 
^ the Quotation from Burnet, in the last Paper of Hihernicus. 
I can 
142 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
I cannot account for Cicero, who wrote So well himself de Natura Deorum, having taken the Pains of publishing a correct Edition of this Work. It could not have been for his Theology, or philosophy, either; he must have Seen the nonsense of them both, and I should not imagine he had any Taste for his Poetry, if one might judge from the Specimen he has left us of his own. 
tiowever I forgive Lucretius, in Some Sort, for having Supplied us with a Passage So express against the Doctrine of transub stantiation; where Speaking of Heraclitus, who affirmed Fire to be the only Principle of all Things, ■ he Says, 
Per deli rum 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 143 
— — Perdefirum ejfe videtur : 
Fbatn contra Sensus ab Senfibns ipse repugnat; 
Et labefadfat eos unde omma Credita pendent. 
Adieu. 
LETTER XXV 
I am in a most unhappy and dish cult Situation — avhat can I pojjibly., or rather probably ^ do? I might, indeed, go to the House, without suspicion; but then my Emotions would certainly betray 

144 ORIGINAL LETTERS 
tray me. It could not be in the phi losophy of Nature, to avoid showing more Interest, in her Health and Life, than Simple Friendship, or mere neighbourly Affection might admit of. 
I have wrote a Number of Cards of Compliment and Condolence, to the Party, this Morning, but threw them into the Fire, one after another. They were then only fit Emiblems of my Feelings. I have, at length, dispatched my Servant, with a Message only. I dare venture to Send but once a Day! 
No Man, Surely, was ever in Such Circumstances before! Never were paf fion and Principle So truly balanced. I feel as a Hufoand, without Possession 
or 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 145 
or Enjoyment; and as a Lover, without Hope, or even Desire. Her hap piness is my Sole Object, and were that but her possible Lot, in her present Circumstances, I could — No, I could not.live — but, by Heaven, I should die, contented. 
I shall not pressed you to come to she' — It were an Affront to your Friendship to bid you sty to the consolation of ours ever. 
Aliicu. 
H 
LETTER 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
LETTER xxvr. 
J_JER Disorder is pronounced to be the Smallpox. Heaven Spare her Life, though it should take her Beauty! ' An happy comipromise this, for me! 
I could then appear her Friend, before, others, without Scandal, and prove the Sincerity of my Affections to herself, •without Equivocation. 
But why do I pray ^ Am I Sure that either my Mind or my Wishes are in Such a State of Resignation and Purity, as to merit Concessions from Heaven! How impious to propose Terms to Providence 
! 
ORIGINAL' LETTERS. 147; 
vidence! Hope and Submission are our Sole Resources; happiness or misery the Distributions of a Being accountable to itself alone. Misfortunes are great Moralizers, you may see. 
I write only to relieve the fullness of my Heart; for I am certain that your Appearance will prevent my Sending this i^etter to the Post, before the Hour. 
A dieu. 
H 2 
LETTER 
148 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
LETTER XXVII 
J Find myself at a loss to describe the Way I felt, on your leaving me • — and yet I could not press you to stay longer. Your Visit had fully ansvrered the kindness of the Intention. The Spirit of it was Spent. 
Have you not Sometimes had the bed c|oaths pulled off you, in a Morning, when you still wished a little more folding of the Arms to Sleep: and yet you could not think of dragging them on again, when it was Time to rise. This was Something like my Situation, on your Departure. 
When 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 149 
When Physicians quit a Patient, the Sign may be doubtful, whether the Cure is perfect, or hopeless; but when a Friend retires, one may be certaiiithat he leaves all Safe and found behind him. I find Ways, you See, to reconcile myself to every Circumstance in Life, even your Departure. 
I have paid my happy Visit of Congratulation, and have once more beheld the dear Object of my anxious Care, my ardent Prayer. She is not altered. 
-- -- -- - Enitefdt 
Puhhrior mvdto. '* 
The Occasion forced this Expression from me — I meant no Allusion, Surely; and yet. 
* Horace L II Od, VIII 
h3 
I hate 
150 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
I hate myself, even for quoting the paf siige, on So chaste a Subject as this. 
I cannot give you a higher Description f my present State of Mind, than to Say that Lfeel mysdf happy, even without you. 
Farewell. 
- LETTER XXVIIL 
J Received your kind Letter, and wem mcant Exhortation. I acknowledge that everything you have Said on the Subject, is perfectly right, in itself, but indeed 1 do not See how they apply to my case, at all. 
Otir 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 15'f 
Our Affections are not in our Power,, stis our Actions only that we are accountable for; and I can Safely justify my own, throughout the whole of this nice Affair. The enemy’s own conduct Sufficiently anftvers to Save my Morals, in this particular. If the Contrast of my Manners may have produced any kind of Effect, in my Favour, is the Fault his, or mine? 
My whole Scheme of happiness is planned in Reversion; and I hope there is no Crime to enjoy a prospect, when one does nothing to forward the Possession. In fine, to defire'no Success, but what may arise from Succession I hope you’ll think to be Sufficient to obviate the Hints 
of your friendly Remonstrance. 
Yours ever. h4 LETTER. 
j52 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
LETTER XXIX 
'jjphe Party rides out, every Day, now, to take the Air. I met her, by Chance, yesterday Morning, and would have joined her, but she forbade it. I importuned, till she kindly Softened the Interdidl, by Saying, that she denied me, heceuff it gavt hey Pain to do fo. 
Fled from her Wish, c. 
If there be not an higher Heaven, for Such Women, than for all the Men in the World, they Surely are most unequally dealt with. Not but that I think I have Some Pretence to be whilked off 
in 
ORIGINAL LETTERS 153 in the Train, at least, of Such rare Comets, myself, from the psire State of Celibacy I live in, at present.. For, like a Romish Priest, my Vow forbids my marrying, and Love has So refined my Sentiments, that, as Montaigne Says admirably, and with a delicate Wit, Venus, without Cupid is too gross form. Towhicli I may also add the Expression of Sir tvil liam Pavenant., that Love is iiealth^ hut %ufi a Fever.. 
I know no person in the World Ib much to be pitied, as myself,, perhaps, the dear Partner in my Affliction. But the conscious Virtue of preserving her Duty, under the Severe Provocations of Age, Infirmity, and Perverfe h 5 ness„ 
HS4 ORIGINAL LETTERS. ness, may afford her an heroic consolation, which I have not the Relief of.. 
I am tmhappy,. therefore, without A --, batement, and 1 do. pity, myself most Sincerely. His an Instance of Humanir ty,, they say, to Sympathise with another’s distress, and why not feel, for our own? That Charity begins at home i has never yet been rightly construed. His an um generous Maxim, as commonly intro: ^ duced — The Meaning must be, that by. feeling for ourselves we should beuaught. the more readily to compassionate, others., 
Non ignara mall. 
Adieu, 
LETTER 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 15i' 
LETTER XXX 
J Have received your Remarks upon my. 
last Letter,, which I acknowledge to be very just; though they give me the Mortification of finding that another Person is still more to be pitied than myself; and I should wish ever to be Superior in misery, upon the present Comparison. 
What - you have Said, upon - this sub jed, has occasioned Some: Rcfiedions fo arise in my Mind,, on the Difference between a man’s Love, and that of a Woman; which, I shall gtee you here, j ust as they; occur to me, on the Instant. 
H 6. her’s 
ns ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
her’s is a Mixture of fondness, a deference to Authority, and a Confidence of Protefbion. His is more liberal, generous, and disinterested — .Dis gom pofed of Tenderness, condescension, and Politeness. They stand, in Regard to’ one another, in the Relation of Patron and Client. She is. Sensible of Somewhat like the respedt which a Child is impressed with toward a Parent. He feels Something of that Endearment, which Parents are affected with for a Child. 
But what makes her Passion the stronger, is, that, in Love, the Man is the foh Objeffy the Woman only the principal one. For the Subjeftc would not be worth, treating of, without considering it as a first Attachment of the Heart, and though 
it 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 157- 
it may be his jirft paifion^ ’tis more than probable that it is not his jirjl Amour.. A vast Difference this, both in their Sentiments and Feelings, upon Such a Crisis. 
I have expressed myself too extemporally, on this Topic, and have not Sufficiently digested my Idea of it.. I meant more than I have written. So that you are to accept these unconnedled Sentences as Notes only, for a fuller Essay on this charming Thesis. But I am writing to you, and this always Saves me the Trouble of explaining an Hint.. 
Adieu;. 
HETTEK 
158 ORIGINAL let.derff,. 
LETTER XXXL 
"YOUR Prophecy, about Lady,, 
been fully verified, lately. I own I was not So quick sighted, and should ■ have been Surprised at the Event, if your Prediction had not rendered it probable, ^ at least., 
She bestowed her Hand, and handfui' 
last Week', on Mr. -- -- --, who received 
them without the least Encumbrance, as both: his Hands, you knov/, have been quite empty, for Some Years past. So that her Ladyship has relieved two Ob 
jesls 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 159 
•j'eifls of Compassion, at once; both herself and him.. 
Her Friends and Relations exp refs great resentment, upon the Occasion. thisdsathing of. course— — the Way of Lifer — Nature made us free, burr the World renders us Slaves. And we are prohibited the dnc^,, often, out_of Re? fpedt to tliq Decorum. 
Bert'she defends herself admirably, on: ' the Subject, as Mr. Strode x^\h me,;, who's was to visit her, this Morning. “those. * “who censurc my. Prudence,., in this ast,, ‘^ she. Seem to. take nothing but the. “Thing itself into Consideration. But „ “I could not help it. I, could not do it “cheaper; and to Satisfy a Curiosity,. 
and 
jo original letters. and take off a certain Reproach, for Life, I thought were well worth half “my Fortune.” 
Plato thou reafonefi well— — there was nothing very Platonic I fancy, in; sthis Matter. As much, however, I dare Say, as there generally is, wherever it is pretended So ends my Tale, and its moral too 
Adieu 
I..ETTER 
RIGINAL LETTERS. ii 
LETTER XXXII 
J Have received three Letters from you, within these ten Days, for all which I acknowledge myself your much obliged Debtor. I sat down to answer the first, but before I could get my Matter and my Materials together, the postboy brought me your Second — ditto per ditto a thirck 
Your Situation, exclusive of your Superiority in Talents, has great Advantages over mine, with Regard to our Correspondence. You are awake in the World, I but dream out of it. Incidents 
and 
i62 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
and Anecdotes every Day occur, to Sup -- ply your Pen with entertaining Subjects to communicate; while I, being So totally detached from all Society, can only Speak of Mankind in the Abstrad; which has more in it of Philosophy, than of Conversation; in which latter, only the true Spirit of the Epistolary consists. 
In order to place myself on a Level with you,, in this Article, I often attempt to descend to Particulars; but having no Topics of this Kind to treat of, except Books, or myself, my Letters must naturally run into Pedantry, or ego tifm; which equally displeasing my, I am obliged, therefore, to recur to general Subjects, again... 
1 honestly' 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 1&3 
I bonestly confess that this Difficulty has, in Some Sort, begun to taint my Morals, of late. I a<5lually long for a Fool or a Knave, in my Neighbourhood; and much fear that this Consideration may have given me So much of the Feelings or their reverse, rather, of a news writer, or an Undertaker, that it might, perhaps, be Some little Relief to my Humanity, should I happen to hear of a Death, a Robbery, or an Elopement, just as I was Sitting down to communicate my Intelligence to you. 
I have always thought that familiar Letters, truly genuine, are the pleasantest reading, - imaginable; as they partake of the ease, Freedom, and sociableness of 
Conver 
i64 original letters. 
Conversation, which forms the higest Relishes of Life. 
Such Letters as your’s, present us with the native Flavour of the Mind; resembling the Vin de Goute., or first Running of Vfine, which stows Ipontaneousiy from the ripeness of the unprested Grape. Like Oracles, inconfulti aheunt. While the more elaborate Works of Erudition and Study, may be compared to the Produce of the Squeezed Vat, where the bruised Seeds and Rind give an harshness to the Juice. One is Love, the other Matrimony. He was a Knave who Said that second thoughts are hest. The First are those of Nature the Second those of Art. 
1 return. 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 165 
I return you a Volume of Thanks, for the many and various entertaining Subjects of your Letters, and remain yours, solus, fed non cum sola!! 

LETTER XXXIII 
September 16. 
^'J^HE Uncertainty of the Weather has interrupted my present prudent Regimen of exercise, for Some Time past. This Month resembles April. there’s a reason for it; as being midway between two opposite Seasons. It wears two Faces under a Hood one of Grief, and the other of Joy. Alternate Showers and Sunshine. Spring and Autumn may be considered 
as 
i66 ORIGINAL .LETTERS, as the Campaigns between Summer and Winter, where each conquers in its Turn; and the Months of April and September are the neutral Fields, in which those hostile Powers contend for Empire. 
Has this Variety of the seasons been accommodated to the Mutability of man’s Nature? Or does our Inconstancy inversely proceed from the Influence of Climates I hold the former Position. For my phi losophy has ever prompted me to think that all the dispenfations of Providence, here below, have been contrived for the Sole Benefit of Man, * let the vain Loose Say what it wills 
* Letter XXII last Paragraph but one. 
•f While Man exclaims, “See all Things for my Use!” !” 
“Man for mine, ” replies a pamper’d Gcofe, pope’s Ethics. 
Our 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 167 
Our Friend Strode has been with me, these three Days. There is an even cheer fullness in his Manners, tltat is extremely 
X 
engaging. This (^ality makes more Friends, than either Wit, or Learning. “Tis the more Sociable Character; it stirs up no Jealousies. This is the Companion to pass through Life with. 
Always Secure to please, tho’ not Surprise, 
Cicero describes this Sort of Charaifler — Accedat hue Suavitas queedam oportet Ser -- monum., atque Morum., haudquaquam mediocre condimentum Amicitiee. 
I wish he lived nearer to me — I see him now but once or twice a Year, at most, because he cannot conveniently come, till he can Spare a Week together : but if he was my Neighbour, he might 
afford 
m ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
afford me a Day frequently, which I should like better. 
He gave me the pleasure to hear that old Valhoi is dead, at last — to the great Joy cf that 7iohle Family. Many Persons have been perverse., but he was per verfenefs itsclf. He was the very subjlan tiveothers but the Adjeflives derived from him. — Lalhotijb was the Synostima for it. 
Mr. Strode affures me that his Aversion and Cruelty to his Son, rose gradually, since his mixing with the World, in proportion as he found him loved and esteemed by all who knew him. He thought, perhaps, the Contrast shore strojigly marked, by the nearness of the 
Object, 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 169 objed, than it might have been, were the Vice and Virtue Set at a greater Distance asunder. Unhappy Man! I hope no longer So. 
Farewell. 
LETTER XXXIV 
^'J^HE Weather has been more certain; 
since my last, for it is now constantly bad. This takes part with my native and former Indolence, against my better reason; and I confess that I rejoice frequently, at a Pretext for living whole Days at home, in my little Library. Charming Situation! The only suc cedaneum to Love and Friendship — pe nc omni Negotio pulchrior. 
I My 
lyo ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
My Study, this Morning, has been the ^rcat Epic Triumvirate, Horner Virgil., and Milton; comparing the several parallel Passages together, which have been generally collated by the Critics, who are divided in their Opinions about them. 
1 endeavoured to consider nothing but the Images, or Descriptions themselves, abstracted from the Languages; in which latter Homer has confessedly the Advantage; but I found this imposhble. Ideas always come clothed in Words to the Mind, and it was too dishcult for me to Separate them; So that I have not yet been able to come to any Precision with myself in this Matter. 
But pray attend particularly to one Passage only, in Milton, Book VI beginning 
ORIGINAL LETTERS, lyi 
ginning at Line 202, and ending at 919^ observe the inimitable Beauties of the Battle of the Angels there. I need not point them out to you. Consider the cumati of the Duel between Satan and michaei Szo. c. and then not only challenge all the Epic Poems that ever were written, but defy also the Power of Language, or the Sublimity of Idea, to exceed, to equal, to come Second even, fine hng^ Intervallo to it. “Next to tltalmighty Arm, ” according to his own Expression. 
Unde nil mtijus 'gene^'atur hpfo; 
Nric viget quidquani ftm'ile out feeundum. 
He must be a very Stoical Critic, indeed, who can determine the poetical Merit, between Homer and Virgil, For I 2 my 
lyi ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
my Part, I admire the former, as being rhore orfginali/ but I love the latter, as being isiost humane. 
Tisa Pity that Lucan confined himself to the Truth of his Story, which has too much restrained his Talents, as a Pott, whose' Province is Fiction. The best History, turned into verse, could never make an Epic Poem. Lucan had certainly great Powers; his Metal was as rich, but not as well teihpered, as vir gif5. One writes like a young Man, the other like an old one. Dr. Garth to distinguish them in the same Way, by this Line : 
With Pirgifs Judgement and with Lucarf^ Fire. 
Sir 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 173 
Sir William Davenanty in the Preface to his Gondiherty says that • ‘f Homer is the great sea marl by which Sailors or rather coajiy Securely; but that thole, who have Spirit or Ambition enough for trying farther Voyages, or making new. Discoveries, should disregard it.” 
His Character of Virgif too, is admirable, and extremely full of Wit. Indeed, the whole Preface deserves the Same Compliment. The World has certainly had a very considerable loss, that he did not live to finish his very charming Poem; whether Epic, or no, not at all material, though he endeavours to bring it within that Pale; and I have no manner of Objection to it, myself; but the Critics I 3 think 
j74 ORIGINAL LETTERS, think it has too much Beauty in it, for the pignity of Sublimity of the epoj^k, One may Say the same too of a Simile in Virgil, 
Shut Aquce tremulum Lahrls uhi Lumen ahanis Sole refercuffum^ out radiantis Imagine Lunee, Omnia prrvolitat late Leca t ynmque fub Auras erigiiuti fummique ferit Laquearia tedu. 
fien. VIII L 22 — 25, 
N.. adieu.i 
LETTER 
ohiginral letters. i75^ 
LETTER XXXV 
'J^HE Weather continues una(stionable still,, So that I remain at Rest, at Home, as before. I begin to feel the ill Effects of this, already. I have very little Appetite left, and Suffer much, both in Body and Mind, from an alarming giddiness that has hung over me, these ten Days past. This Ailment has frequently affedsed me, of late Years, whenever I neglect using exercise, for any Time. But had not Swift the same Complaint? Should not this console me 
“Just So immortal Maro hung his Head, ” 
I 4 
In 
lysi griginx\l LETTERS. 
In Such a State of Pericranium, I dare not venture to read anything that requires much Study or Refiedlion, and therefore took up Shenjione., yesterday, with a Design of going regularly through him, which is what I should not have be 'stowed Leisure upon, at present, if my Head had not been a little out of re ■pair. I therefore treated it with a little Nier, but without Exercise. 
This Author pkases and perplexes me, at the Same Time. He stems to possess the very Soul of Catullus., with the Ob scurity of Perftus^ oftert: But as his Works were not published till after his Death, stis but fair to allow him the Honour of all his Merits, which were many, and charge the Faults upon his Editor only; 
.. who 
ORIGINAL LETTERS.. 177 
who stems to have regarded his own fro fit, as a bookfeller t more than the Same of his Friend, as a Writerin this Publw catiom - : n ■, 
But the Softness, Tenderness, and Humanity of his natural disposition, charm me infinitely more, than all the Beauties, of his Poetry; for as I ever preferred the Heart, to the Head', I, therefore, as I Said, in my last, of virgii more kvoy than admire him. 
For Sure he was the gentlest Breast, 
That ever Sung So well. 
As he says himself, of his Friend and Favourite, Lhompfon. Besides there is one' Particular in his Life, his unsuccesssul.t Passion, which gives me, perhaps, a fonder Sympathy with him, than all the rest. 
I 5 I am 
orlgtnalr lextelt^s'.. 
- I am.'the Soferier,,. therefore,, fot one attempt he has made oi Jbooting ulys* fesv Bomi according to the Proverb, as I think she has failed in his Imitation of the Original. Compare his eighteenth) 
Yes these are the sccnesi 5rc» 
with Boikatis Qde,, 
Kola Us Lleux iharmmtsy^ c. 
where,; by endeavouring to»make more cf the Thought,, the chaste Siimplicityy of the Trench. is destroyed.. 
’tis only those who are capable of do ing much,, that are able to do but a little, “without o’erssowing, full.” Thole who can only clo a little, always strive to 
make 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 179/ make the most of it, d.erflowings though' not full. I wish he had attempted a pure Tranfiation of it, merely.; for in that I think he would have Succeeded, » and the World would have been obliged > to him. I tried it, this Morning, myself, but in vain. The irregular measurc of the verse gave me the most Trouble. - 
Mr. Shenf; on6 \m also ventured to measure Or Lance, with another Writer too; but there happens to be~as much Odds between them, as betwixt Sword > and' Dagger. Compare his Judgement of Hercules., with the Choice of Hercules., by an' anonymous Author, in Podjley^ Collec -- tson... 
l6: 
I do 
iso .ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
I do not deny that Mr. Shenfione has very great Merit, in his Poem; but think it was indiscreet in him to enter the Lists, on Tuch' unequal Terms. Pope in my Opinion, had better have let his Ode to sv cecilia^ alone, after jdrydeps', - for tile same reason. Even success does not justify itself, in Such Instances; because the very Attempt is invidious. 
Bishop Atterhury remarks that even hb race failed, when he coped with virgii by imitating him; and gives the two fol idvwng Instances of it. 
_ I 
YIRGIH 
Tfu regere Tmperio Populos, Romane, memento 
Parcere fubjesfisy et dshtllare fuperbos. 
ien. VI 851. 
HORACE. 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. rbr 
HORACE. 
Imperet bellante prior., jacentem, 
Lenis in Hojfem. 
Carm. Seoul. 51. 
VIRGIL. 
Ipse fuas Aries., fua munera leetiis Apollo, auguriumylitharamque dabat^ celerefque Sagitias. 
ien, XII 39j. 
HORACE. 
Phcebus, acceptufque novem camanisy. 
ui falutari levat Art fejfos Corporis Artus. 
Gann. Secul. 62.. 
I see no Faults, in the Lines of Ho -- race, considered in themselves; but must Gonfefs that they appear to a disadvantage, on the Comparison. They Seem; to resemble the Halo of the Rainbow,, which refiedts the Same Colours, indeed,, but fisinter., 
1 must 
18^2’ ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
r must not take leave of Mr. Shenlionet till I have^^done him Honour due, for a truly Sublime Expression of his, that L am Sure Longinus would have quoted,. had he heard it. - Spealcing of the Deity,. he’addsj “whose Words are Works,, anda all whose Works are Wonders.’* ’ 
One of his most wondrous Works, the God of Poets, and the Soul of Nature, -, is just, coming abroad, and I shall stepj 
f 
forth to meet shim.. 
Adieu,. 
LET TT Rl 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. i 
LETTER XXXVE 
( 
a' delightful’. Scene am II placed in! eden^wos the Proto -- tyjie of it.. The learned have been long., in dispute, about the Topography of that: Garden,., but. it has happily b^n reservedi form, to cry ovlt^^eurekof.:, the. First.. 
V 
Nothing surprizes5.me, fd'much, .as thatt People should stillpersist to live in te>wns^^ or Cities,, at Such a Rate as they: doi. Bi the. first. State of things,, allow that circumvallations‘mightt have been i necessary to guard. against the Fury, o wild Beasts j. but since the Wolves. 
have. 
i84 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
have been destroyed in England wh^r immure ourselves still? But stis one of the many Things in Life, where the Rule is preserved, though the Reason of it has ceased; and Men continue still to pen themselves up, though the Sheep are no xon^tr pinfolded.. 
I have Mr. hornhy^s house now full in View from my Window, which appears to have been built rather by a Pro -- jeflor, than an Architefl^, as it Seems to be a Cajtle in the Air; and rises So high among the Clouds, that it might have been from thence Prometheus stole Fire from Heaven., one Night, when Epicurus’^ Gods were all Snoring. 
The 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 1^5 The only Thing I have to find Fault with, in this Country, is the Number of Windmills, with which it abounds. They are pretty Objects enough, in proipec tive, but they naturally raise two very disagreeable Ideas, in my Mind; of a Land without Water, and consequently without Fish, which you know I always prefer to Flesh. 
'But there was one View I met with, on my Journey, which charmed me more than all the Rest. ’tis a large Plantation, near Daventry, that was made by a Gentleman of that Country, in the Year 1740, the Autumn after the hard Frost; in Order to afford Bread to a Number of Poor, thereabouts, in that sadseason of Dearth and Poverty, This 
was 
i ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
was, indeed, an Improvement, both of a physical, and a moral Nature; and the very Idea of the Purpose, hallowed the Groves, in my Mind, and inspired every Oak, with an Hamadryad. 
The generous Heart pcjfejfes no Goods, but what it gives y nor can receive a Plea sure, but by communicating one. A Thought of this Kind has always given me an additional Satisfaction, in all the Beauties of Nature; by considering them as her Bounties also. Gratitude mixes with Admiration, and rises to the fu premest Delight. 
Now we are on the subjeffc of naturav Beauties I shall mention, by Way of Csimax, the Daughter of this house. 
She 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. isj She is really a very fine Girl, which is rara Avis, in the present world. The Race of and Girls become nearly cxtind; while Majim and Mijfes have usurped their Places, 
She has a perfect naivete, both in her Manners, and Appearance. Whenever she Speaks to you, she Seems to be but thinking aloud', her Eyes glisten, and a rosy Suffusion blushes o’er her Features, 
Her eloquent Bloodffoke in her modejl Cheek, 
She ducks, instead of curtfying, and looks altogether like a Cherub, that had never learned to Dance, 
Adieu, and love me, mightily; for I want Comfort, much — 1 am disappointed 
and 
i88 ORIGINAL LETTRRS. and unhappy elsewhere, and can never expect Such Angels as these will take Compassion on yours affedlionately. 
Cufui obtavum irepidavst Mttti Claudere lujirum* 
Adieu. 
LETTER XXXVII 
J Have Sent you thetapers you desired," by the Norwich Coach. I mean only the Copies I had made out for you; as these are all you need, at present, to have Opinions upon. When the cause comes to Trial, the Originals may be laid before the Court — by some of my Pojlerity — 
for 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 189 
for the Age of Man has long since ceased to be patriarchal. : t 
) j 
Williams told me a Story, lately, which he affirms he was an Eye witncss of. His Friend Norton had a Suit, formerly, for about three Acres of Ground; which was claimed by a Person whose Land happened to lie contiguous to his. The Limitation held on, for I don’t know how many Years, and was at length determined in his Favour. 
The Day after the Decree, he took a Whim into his Head; loaded a Cart with all the Ejeftments, Bills, answers, sub pcenas. Interrogatories, Replications, Rejoinders, Pleas, Demurrers, Briefs, Affidavits, c. then carried a Parcel of his 
Friends 
igo ORIGINAL LETTERS, Friends out with him, to the wellfoughi Fields and completely covered every Inch of the Ground in Dispute, with the Papers — Not by didd.s attorney trick, of cutting them into Shreds, to Surround it, but by fairly Spreading them out, like a Carpet. He then gathered them into an tleap together, and made a Bonfire of them. His Bill of Costs would have purchased the Ground, twice over. 
I have a Suit, myself, now depending, wshich was commenced seventy-three Years ago; above thirty before I was born; in thecourse of which, my Grandfather, Father, and Self, have had three Several Decrees, in our Favour. Yet it still continues in its full Vigour — nay stronger, I think, than at first, by the Coincidence 
of 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 191 
of Several adventitious Circumstances. For Lawsuits, like forest trees, strike deeper Root, te^^anding. O for the Frederic Code to cut off all these plaguy stap roots — 
In Tar tar a tend.t. 
- immoia tnanet, multofque per Annas Malta Virurn volvens durando Scecula vlncit. 
I don’t say these Things, to discourage you; but only to make you provide your self with an adequate Share of Pence and Patience, and to prevent your continuing So Sanguine, as you appear to be, in your last Letter. 
Farewell. 
* The present King of Prujfa has had all the Laws of his Nation comprised in one Volume; and made an edi£i, that all Suits in his Courts, Shall be determined within a Year. 
LETTER 
192 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
LETTER XXXVIII 
J Did not receive your Letter Time enough, to cnswer it by Return of the Post, which mortifies me. I had been in one of my mual Pains, or old Griefs as Cardinal ojfat * used to express himself and was deprived of Rest. I liad been ill-used, overnight, and was taking Gentlemarfs Sat: sfafhon for it., in the Morning. 
But I missed my Revenge, and only over watched myself,. both to your Disappointment, and my own. I felt, all Night, like a Pudding ih^ 
Goalsy 
* A French Premier; 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 193 
Coals, as Homer describes Ulysses., in the same Circumstance. Sleep is a wanton Slut, that will freely go to bed with any young Fellow that alks her the Question, but is coy to the Embraces of old ones. 
She, like a Wench, her ready Favour yields. Where Youth beguiles; the ancient she forsakes. Parody 
I hope the Delay of my Acceptance to your Bill, has been no Inconvenience to you. I shall Suffer for it myself, till I hear from you. Tell your Banker that I shall wave the Days of Grace, to make him Amends. I should not have Suffer 
* to fou»g*s Lines, on the lame Subject, 

‘‘ She, like the World, her ready Visit pays, Where Fortune finiles j the wretched (he forsakes.” 
K ed 
19+ ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
ed the least uneasinefs, if my wine merchant’s Draught had lain a Post or two unanswered, 
C ■ 

What Sort of Refinement is it that gives one Such very different Ideas, of a Debt and an Obligation? Is it Vanity, or Generosity? ibut lest you should impute it to the fiist, I think I had better drop the Argument. 
Adieu, done. 
LETTER 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 19s 
LETTER XXXIX 
J Have continued very ill, ever since my last Letter. I thought that 1 had Sustained every possible Pain, till I received an Account of yours; but then I found as the persian Youth Said of his Soul, * that I had two Bodies, upon hearing you complain. I have an Antipathy to Such Sympathies. 
Since we have both of us exhausted the Stores of physic, in vain, let us Seek our Resources of Health, for the Future, in the Charms of Friendship Solely. Jueundtz Comes in Via pro Vehiculo may, with 
K 2 a Turn 
• A Story in xmo^hotfs Cyrus 
196 ORIGINAL LETTERS, a Turn upon one Word, very fairly be construed, that an agreeable Friend is the best Vehicle for Medicine. 
We would each of us do more for the other, than for ourselves let us exert our Spirit, then, for the Sake of one another. I have known Resolution Succeed, in Some cases, where Prescription has failed. Cafar is Said to have conquered an epilepsy, like other Enemies, by dint of Bravery. It must have required thirty-three Wounds at least, to dispatch Such an Hero. 
I knew a Man once, myself, who was given over, in a desperate diseafe. When he was pronounced not to be able to hold out for half a Day, “Yes, ” Said he, 
“please 
ORIGINAL LETTERS, igy 
please God, 1 will live to See my Child.” He Sent off a Messenger to her, at an hundred Miles Distance, How are you, “my dear Father ?’* “I Should have 
“died a Week ago hut waiting to take my “Leave of you. God — ” but he expired in her Arms before he could finish the Blessing. 
Do not trouble yourself to look through your Catalogue of Heroes; for this man’s Name. He was but a common, say rather uncommon Shoemaker. A Crispin ultra Crepidamy Surely, if you’ll permit the Quibble, who went beyond hist Lajl. According to Horace's Rule, he must have been a good Artist too, in his Profeshon. Vir honusy Sutor honusy says her 
Adieu. 
K 3 
LETTER 
ORIGINAL LETTIRS, 
LETTER XL 
J Received your Cordial., as your kind Letter might well be deemed; for it truly strengthened my Heart. During 
my suspense about your Health, I felt what I Suppose is meant by one's Heart failing them. This must be the sensa tion of Cowardice, I Suppose, though I do not remember to have ever experienced it, in that Way. 
Not that I have not Sometimes been stared in the Face, by personal Hazard; but that my Mind, upon Such Occasions, was then So busy in colleding all my Forces 
ORIGINAL LETTERS 199 
ces together, both of Thought and Action, to resist the Danger, that! had not Leisure to attend to the Fear. 
My Disorder has, for Some Time, been a Sort of shifting Quicksand— — my Leg was fivelled, my Stbmach grew easy; and vice versa. I had a Mind, once, to have chopped off the Limb, when the diseafe was in it; as Fadlallah twisted off the Head of die Nightingale, when he had fixed the Life of his Enemy there 
But now, I fear, it is too late for Such an Experiment, as both of them are ill together, of late — So that the outward and 
* See the Story in the Speblator^ N 578. 
K 4 viftble 
200 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
visible Sign is no more to be depended on here, it stems, than it is in many other Cafes, 
Adieu, and believe me that the inmard and spiritual Grace of my Friendship for you, will last as long as my Distemper; which I have Reason to apprehend now, will remain for Life. 
Yours, 
LETTER 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 201 
LETTER XLI 
J Have been ill, this Fortnight past,. 
with a Return of my former disorder,. or you should have heard from me,, before. When I Sent you the venison I was not able to write, which I So Seldom neglect, that no News may always be taken for bad News,, from me, dum tacent^ cla^ manf Indeed our Correspondence has,, alas! long Since become my solepleasure in Life. 
Shenjione Says, that “'Whenever wc' ‘ “'are dull,, or low Spirited,, either from the atmosphere, or Distemper, the ^ 5 “best: 
to ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
“best Cordial is to read over all the “Letters of our Friends.” This Regimen I have pradtised, once or twice, with suc cess, since I rsiet with that Passage in him. 
I am not much better, at present, but am under the Neceshty of troubling both you and myself, to desire the Favour of you to hire me a Servant, in the Place of George who has lately afled a Lie; according to Wollaston hy using my Goods as if they were his own. In a Word, he has absconded, during my illness, with above twenty Pounds worth of my Effects,, Clothes, Linen, and Plate. 
Am I a Man to be used after siich a. Manner? Servants are as much Fools, 
• Religion of Nature. 

ORIGINAL LETTERS. 20% 
as Knaves, who deal with me thus. There is nothing within their Wants,, and my Power, that they might not obtain from me, on honester Terms. Complacency, Attention, and Fidelity would be a Sort of moral Thefts with me,, that might endanger my last Shilling.. 
’tis a difficult Thing to know how to? conduct oneself, with Regard to this class of Mankind. It is natural to applaud and encourage Mferit,, in the most foreign Instance; still more So when dor 
* " i ')J ‘ ' 
mestic — No one, SI think, could refraiii from’ marking their Approbation, in Such 
I ' 
a case, except the Man who lised to beat" his Wife, once a Day, lefi‘fhejade Should.' know how well he loved her. And yet Wre lies the Danger. .Dis ten to one K d but 
104 ORIGINTAL LETTERS 
but you Spoil a good Servant, by praise and Indulgence; and So do a double Evil, at once.; 
Then what an uncomfortable Refiedion 
i. ^ 
it must be, that there; is no Safe Method of treating Such Reptiles, but by considering them as Slaves,. If ever you should relax your Discipline,, or behave towards them', in a more liberal Way, they immediately emancipate themselves, and become dis honest, insolent, or ungrateful.. 
■. ■ '; 1 if ^ 
shall go to Landon., in a few Days, to consult a Physicianr — o no Purpose., Have a Bed aired,, and chuse a Servant. ftm* me. Indeed I am not well, and need Attendance. 
Adieu; 
LETTER 
ORIGINAL LETTERS 205. 
LETTER XLII 
J Received your Letter, and am both provoked and alarmed, at the inso lence of the public Papers you enclosed' me, against Government. I tremble for’ the Liberty of the press. We are not content with Spending the Interefi,, but are Squandering away the Pfindpaf too.. His one of the great Bulwarks of our Freedom; but. when a buttrcss leans one is as muctein Danger of beihg crushed by it, as by the Wall it was designed to defend us from., Vim dignam. Lege Regi. 
I happened' to be looking through a File of old News papers, lately, in Quest 
2g6 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
of Some particular Fact, and confess myself charmed with the polite tenderness which the Publishers formerly endeavoured to mark toward that unhappy class of Men, whom the Law styles Bankrupts. The Advertisements bore their Title thus. B — K — TS. The Names of the Persons, indeed, were given at full Length, because So the AD requires; ' but their Misfortune, or Delinquency, was as much fbftened as possible. Nay, in Some Papers the L was left out. So that the rest of the Letters might equivocate for Bankers,, instead of Bankrupts. But now both Kings, Lords and (Commons are publicly stigmatised, without Reserve, by their Names, and Titles, not only contrary to all Decency,, but even in Defiance 
0RICINAL LETTERS. 207 
fiance of the Laws against Defamation: and Scandal — Unpunijhed. 
When Liberty lises, I mean degen crater, into licentiousness, it becomes the worst kind of Slavery; for where every one is without Control,. nobody can be free. In the most arbitrary States a Nation may Subsist, because the Power is lodged in Some. Hands that is capable of doing good, and may have an Interest in preserving Order : but in Anarchy all Order is destroyed. Subordination ceaies, and; the Power is So minutely divii^, that no Person can have a Sufficient Interest in the public Welfare, to become a Patriot. 
While 
os ORIGINAL LETTERS; 
While Rivers are restrained within their Banks, they refresh and enrich a Cbum try; but when they overflow their Bounds, they impoverish the Soil, and wash away the landmarks. 
But with regard to the truly interesting Article of Liberty, I think one may too justly remark, that we Seem rather to be fiojfejfed with the Spritthan To enjoy the: suhjiance^ of it. Our Superstitious de votement to that. Idol, in Some very Serious Instances, but Serves to consecrate; Tyranny, according to Lam. 
No Farmer, for Example, can be obliged to part with his Corn, his Bees,, or Mutton, but at his own Time, and at his own. Price, too. Hence Monopoly: 
and: 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 209 and Extortion. Hence Dearth and Famine. If you kill a Man, indeed, you Suffer — though not always — But if you starve thousands to Death, they only are the Victims. 
Another Instance, also, which I am in Doubt whether I may pronounce to be a Severer one, or no, as the Penalty must be voluntarily incurred, is, that the Same Punishment is annexed to the stealing a Sheep, as to the killing a King. Our jealous Legislature, running into the Extreme from Barbarism, will not permit the most distant Idea of Slavery to obtain; while the Want of a just and equitable Distindion in Crimes, Seems to adopt the Laws of Draco., which were Said to have been written in Blood. 
I need 
210 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
I need not vindicate myself to you, by saying that I do not mean to Speak against the great and natural Bleshng of Liberty, from my Observations upon this Subject; but as the Same Power who endowed us with Freedom, has restridted, .it within the Bounds of Justice, I would ever have them march hand in hand, together. I would, therefore, abrogate every Liberty from Men, which may only enable them to become Tyrants — I would not have the People to poffels more Freedom than the King, whose Prerogative impowers him to do good, only, but restrains the Capacity of doing evil. 
I am weak in Health, and the perusing of these Papers has sunk my Spirits too 
low 
ORIGINAL LETTERS, an 
low to Suffer me to dwell longer on this Subject — ' 
Adieu. 
LETTER XLIII 
JAM equally glad and Sorry, at the 
Contents -- -- and should I not add 
the Discontents also, of your letter r« Ought I not to become totally indifferent, then, in the Matter, by the Rule of Algebraic Equation ?* No — — (^antities of pleasure and Pain, Grief and Joy, which may, perhaps, weigh equally, in the Scales of philosophy, are found generally to differ greatly, in the Balance of the Mind. 
• Where equal Quantities destroy each other. 
— The 
212 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
— The Evil usually preponderating the Good. 
And why, I pray? Is it that pleasure and Joy being light, are apt to kick the Beam? Or is it that being more natural, we are apt to be less Sensible of their Impressions, than of their Contraries, which counteract: our Feelings? sickness is always more noticed, than Health. ’tis for this latter reason, perhaps, that more People avoid Pain, than pursue pleasure. 
Upon the whole, then, I think that I ought rather to be Sorry, than glad; but I won’t, because I believe it might determine you to be So, too. Therefore please to accept this Simpathetic Lever, to discharge the Burden from your Mind, and 
Sing 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 213 sing 0 be joyful the Moment you lay down this Letter. 
Amen, says, your Clerk — Adieu, 
LETTER XLIV 
>''jpis So long since I have heard from you, that I do not know whether I am addressing this Letter to the Living, or the Dead; but as you know, or did know., my Way, in all doubtful Matters, is ever to hope the best, I shall continue to write to you, as if you still mderftood English. For I have been told, by a certain Friend of mine — you’ll guess him, ^who believes in Hutebinfotty Pike and 
other 
ai ORIGINAL LETTERS, other Such Cabalists, that Angels comprehend no Language, but Hebrew. 
Not that we are to suppose they articulate it, as Intuition must Save them that Trouble; but as Philologers pronounce that all Ideas come to the Mind clothed in Words, they may be Said to read one mother's thoughts., in Hebrew or Syriac for I will not be positive whicff; therefore persons who do not understand a little of those Languages, before they Set out, will be no more .able to keep the befi 
Company among them, than they can 1 
among us, without a Smattering of French and Italian. 
I have often thought, at Times when I have been Seripus, that it is a great De • 
ORIGINAL LETTERS, ais 
$ciency in the occult Science of Hieroglyphics that Angels are not always portrayed with Labels hanging out of their Breasts, sike the Phials in an Apothe. cary’s Shop. They certainly have as good a Right to them, as to Wings, let Mythologists Say what they will. 
I trouble you with the inclosed Billet. It relates to our Elecstion. I have no Concern in it, myself, but the World requires that we should take Some Part in its Interests, while we remain in it. You’h deliver it in person — The Secret will be kept, if you are alive; if not, then dead Men tell no Stales they say — So that either Way we’re safe. 
If 
2i6 ORIGTNAL letters. 
If I donst hear from you, by Return of the Post, I shall Surely put on mourn ing i if you should not Happen to be beforehand with me; which is the most likely. - ^ • 
'Adieu, 
LETTER XLV 
I have not looked into your French Books, yet. — I must be very much at Leisure, even to idleness, before I shall open them. I despise the Language So 
much, 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 217 
much, that I have no Pleasure in reading it. .Dis too much like the People themselves, It has too great a Compliancy with Circumstances and Occasions, As they want the honest sturdiness of the English, So this is deficient in the critical Inflexibility of the classic Tongues. 
I am too lazy to write Essays, but tis Sufficient, for a Letter, to observe upon one or two of the Monfteur Cringes I allude to. The Word Esprit is, you know, of the Masculine Gender, and aitejlfe of the Feminine; yet, as they both happen to begin with a Vowel, the ad jedtives are obliged, euphortire graiid. to cross over and figure in, with a bel efprit; and a son altejfe, to the utter Confusion of all Grammar and Precision. 
L Hhe 
3i8 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
The Contradidion in Terms, too, of the Expression Uen mal, cc. may be justly noted among the Imperfedions of thd.iv prate. The use of Speech is to communicate our Ideas; this Gabble Serves to confound them. 
The Licence of the Greek Figure of Rhetoric, above hinted at, never exceeded into Such a licentiousness as this. It neither perplexed Genders, changed Nouns into Adverbs of contrary Significations, nor Sacrificed' sense to Sound. It but occasionally lengthened or shortened a Syllable, to accommodate the Metre, or threw in a Single Letter of the Alphabet, here and there, in Words of Composition, to obviate an Hiatus., or So. 
I looked 
ORIGINAL letters.'2r9* 
I looked into the Dedication, by Way of judging of the writer’s Style, ’tis the most extravagant Thing I ever read. The Materials are rich, indeed, but the Workmanship very coarse. The Flattery too outre. However, I hope the poor Fellow was handsomely paid for it. When a needy Author, as they all are, So ge nerousiy Supplies the Wants of his Patron, I think that one good Lurn., c. If, indeed, it possibly might ever happen that the great Man should really be possessed of the imputed Merits, stis only a Pelt paid., and requires no acknow r, ledgment; but if not, as is more generally the Cafe, stis then a Present made, and ought to be as liberally returned. 
Adieu, 
F T T E R 
120 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
LETTER XLVI 
f 
w E have got another Vagabond Apostle, or Mountebank Preacher, among us, since you were here, I have not had Curiosity enough to go hear, or see him, i yet — Besides his Exhibitions are So crowded, that it would not be Safe to venture; and it is not under Such a Guide as this, that I should chuse to work ostt my Salvation, with Fear and trembling. 
And now I have merttioned that Text, I confess that I don’t much like it, as ’tis generally construed. What a Sneak 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 221 ing Notion Some Devouts give us of Religion 1 Virtue is active. Virtue is brave, and requires Courage and Resolution, rather. But parsons are all on the Side of pajpive Obedience and rarely preach up any Doctrine that might enable Men to resist the despotism either of Priests or Princes. 
Now my Notion of the" Matter, is, that the Temper of Mind whicfi' inclines to So much meekness, is not the Spint^ but the Ghojl., of Religion; and that we may be Said rather to be haunted than infplred, while we remain under Such Influence. 
I have received the Articles I troubled you about. Safe; but shall not thank 1 L 3 
222 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
you, because that would be giving you a further Trouble, and a needless one. Hoc ipsum Amantis eft, non onerare cum Laudikus. How pleasant it is to receive all one’s Services from a Person to whom we feel it no Manner of uneafiness to be obliged. 
1 have forwarded your other Parcel to the Dean; wh^ will thank you beyond measure, for is a most dvil Magistrate, you know. 
Yours, 
, UL / 
LETTER 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. ai 
LETTER XL VII 
Chelmsford. 
QVK Assizes are begun here, where, by my unlucky Station in the Coun -- try, I am condemned to attend, twice, every Year, upon Matters of Life and Death. I wish 1 was a pafson -- They and Butchers, but for opposite reasons, I hope, are excluded from Juries, 
There is a Trial, of an odious Nature, to come on, tomorrow. Cory don ardebat Alexin will be a Sufficient Hint to you — I am Surprised that Eclogue has not been expunged from the chaiie virgivs Works. 
L 4 'Tis 
224 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
’tis strange that Preceptors should have ever shffered it to be construed in Schools. hdluintilian does not mention this Passage, but forbids Some Parts of Horaee to be read there. 
This is the furefi Vice, imaginable; because it has not Nature for its excuse. A Passion is universal — this is not — I think that Montesquieu dates it from the Olympic Games. But the Old Testament mentions it much earlier — I shall conclude this vile Subject with a Turn upon a Line of Terence — Hm! Sir Viro quid 
praft at I \ 
Adieu, 
LETTER 
OTZGINAL LETTERS. 225 
LETTER xlvm. 
J AM returned home from our Ashzes, and feel the Comfort and Liberty of a general goal delivery, as much, perhaps, as most of the other Prisoners who have had their Bolts knocked off. My Sympathy is too strong with the Wretched. I could not help shaking Hands with Some of the released Culprits, as we walked out of the Court together. The Dean happened to observe my Emotion, and coming up to me. Said, with an arch Look, and a low Voice, “You Seem too fond of Freedom, I fear, ever to become 
“a Convert of mine.” * a... 
L 5 There 
* See Letter IV 2d Paragraphr 
2a6 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
There is a Widow come to lodge, lately, at the House where I usually reside, whenever business carries me to Chelmsford. She has a Son with her, a young Lad of about Seventeen, who was bowen deaf. They have, notwithstanding, contrived to have him taught to read and write, tolerably well; he has a remarkable quick hess in his Eye, and is capable both of receiving and communicating Notices, very readily, by Signs and Gestures. 
They have, however, never been able to teach him to Speak, for want of Ears to inodulate his Tones. The only Word he can utter distindtly, is Oh! upon being hurt or frightened. Which shows this to he a natural and general Exclamation, in distress or Danger, and therefore no 
more 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 447 
more to be considered as Part of Language, than a Sigh, or Groan. The Rest of his Sounds are a Kind of Savage Vociferation, inarticulate, and without any determinate Significations. 
This subje(5t afibrd^* me Matter for Ressedlion, as I was riding home, last Night. Perhaps, thought I, among the many Hints we daily receive from Providence, persons. born deaf or blind, may have been Sometimes Sent into the World, without the Faculties for apprehending the proper Objects of Sight or Hearing, in Order to manifest to us that there may be Powers in Spirit beyond our Comprehensions, as these are of theirs; and that therefore the deity may be possessed of what we should call L 6 a sixth 
-228 .ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
.a sixth Sense, which might render the Future as obvious to him as the Pre tent, and as certain as the Past. 
I know that your Philosophy will immediately fall to work on this Thesis, therefore I shall no farther interrupt you, than to say 
Adieu. 
LETTER 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 229 
LETTER XLIX 
J Thank you for your Account of Mr. 
-- -. One would imagine that Some 
People were born only for the Entertainment of others. If the many ridiculous Circumstances of that perfon’s Life were noted down, and So continued till his Death, they would make a most amusing and extraordinary Piece of Biography, Surely. 
I co uld not acknowledge your Letter fboner, as I have been for Some Days on a Visit to Mrs. -- -- -, by particular Invitation 
from her. She is in Distress, and 
therefore 
230 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
therefore Sent for me, as an old Friend; not that I could any way remedy her unhappiness, but she Thought that my Company and Conversation might, perhaps, relieve it a little. 
You have Seen her eldest Daughter, at my House, I remember, when she was but a Child, and Said she would grow up a fine Woman. She is now eighteen, and has fulfilled your Prophecy. You may fuppose she had Lovers, and she 
attached herself to one of them, Mr. -- -- - 
of Hampshire with a true Affection. He had declared a strong Passion for her, about a Year ago, but as he wanted about twice that Term to be of age, and that stie had not Fortune enough to bribe his Guardians into a cpnsent, they must 
Strephon 
ORIGINAL LETTERS, 
Strephon a, nd Phyllis it away, for a while, till they should be at Liberty of changing romantic Felicity for the real Cares of Life. 
• ■ 
All Inamoratas have Confidants; stis half the Pleasure of the Passion. A fond Girl without a Friend, is a knight errant without a Squire. She chose her Fidelia then; but this one happened to have an other Trustee, who had an other also; and So the eleflrical Chain of Goffipping extended itself, till the Shock was communicated to the Mother and Guardians of she Lover. 
They acsted the Part of true philofo phers. Passions are not to be opposed, but cqunteraded. They immediately 
contrived 
232 ORIGINAL LETTERS, contrived, without giving him the least Hint of their Purpose, to introduce him into the Company of a very handsome Girl, with a Fortune equivalent to his own; and having Settled the Point with her Friends, as Soon as they found the young Couple in perfe6l Harmony together, and that he had begun to mark a few little Attentions and Gallantries towards her, they proposed the Match to him, lately; offered him her Portion in Hand, to emancipate him from the Yoke of Nonage, and put him into the immediate Poffeshon of his Estate. 
A golden Hook is an alluring Bait.. He Swallowed it, and they were public ly married, about a Week ago. He wrote a Letter to my poor dear Girl, a 
few 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 233 
few Days before, in which he inveighed much against the Lyranny of Parents, Guardians, chut, as to Friendship, Esteem, che still was, and would ever remain, till Death, mojl constant and true, chut 
there was one Circumstance in this Matter, that was not only mortifying in itself, but betrayed a most insolent and ungenerous Turn of Mind, in the adverse Party. The Morning after the Marriage, a fine, flaunting, fringed Favour, was Sent to my unhappy Friend, in the Name of the Bride. 
It could not possibly have come from her; she is too young, and innocent, for Such a bafeness. The mean Exultation on 
So 
h34 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
i lb malicious a Triumph, must have been ^ all the Mother in law’s; justifying that ^ Maxim of Tacitus Proprium humani in genii odijfe quos l^ferit. 
I most cordially join in the Distress of this very amiable little Family; but. the peculiar Feelings of the fair Mourner cannot possibly be stronger, or better expressed, than in her own pathetic Words to me, this Morning. “Betrayed by my ** Friend, foiiaken by my Lover, and J insulted by my Rival !’* 
Adieu 
LETTER 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 2JS 
LETTER L 
Election is begun, and Mr. — stands his Ground still, in Defiance of the numberless pasquinades that have been published against him. If he has kept them all by him, he need no other Combustibles for his Bonfire, should he carry his Point — So all Boutefeus should - be Served. 
It has been an old Maxim, that nobody should ever Set up as Candidate for any public Office, who had the least Blot in his Scutcheon. They may be Sure of having every Kennel raked for Dirt to 
throw 
236 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
throw at them. Let the person be ever So unconscious of Demerit, in his own Character, the quick sighted World will be Sure to introduce him to a more intimate Acquaintance with himself, upon all Such Occasions. You may think, perhaps, that your Coat does not want brushing, but whisk it in the Sun and you’ll See a kin^s Ransom or fortuitous Concourse of Atoms stying out of it, at every Stroke, 
One of the Articles exhibited against him, is an Affair of Gallantry, you may remember he had. Some Years ago. Such a Story might, perhaps, have nonsuited his Grandfather; but bars not his Plea, at present. An Amour was formerly a 
Novel; 
* A Peck of 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 237 
Novel; but stis now become one of the common Occurrences of Life, and hardly ever mentioned, except in a Newspaper, among the ordinary Incidents of Births and Marriages, by way of filling up an Article or So. 
There has been a deal of false Coin uttered, in the Town, at this Time. I have taken Some of it myself, in change, through Inadvertence. Bedpimur Speds. They always make Wine and Money for the Currency of Such debauched Times. The griping Voters receive their Cash in the Dark and Scorn to look the gift Horse c— — stis Time to have done with a disgusting Subject. 
Have 
238 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Have I not been in tolerable Luck,, with regard to little Anecdotes, for these few latter Posts? You canst imagine with what an Air of consequence I strutted about the Room, after I had Sealed my last three Letters; J Saying, with cor regio, Ed io anche fon Pitiore, “And I also am a Painter.” 
Adieu. 
t See Letter XXXII 
I. R T T E R 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 239 
L E T T E R LI 
J Have not received a Line from you, this Month pash I have no Society here, nor any other Correspondent else where; all my amusement, therefore, must arise from my Refieftions, or my Studies. The sirst would be mere improving, but as the latter are more entertaining, I always read, much more than I think. 
I have employed myself, during this' heavy Interval, in perusing Some humble Memoirs, I have luckily met with, in old Books, containing the private Lives 
of 
240 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
of Persons whose Names are only recorded in the Annals of Literature, of Oppression, of Poverty, or distress; of which the first is too generally the omne tnajus. 
Such Sketches as these are the pleafant cst Avocations imaginable. plutarcps Lives delight me more than all the Greek and Roman Story. I have ever preferred the Biography of Heroes, to a Detail of their more epic Actions. I never follow the triumphal Car to the Forum or pry taneum., but wait to attend it Home again, to the Villa., or domejiic Manjion; where the popular Idol, laying aside his gorgeous palmata Robe, assumes the familiar Loga virilis, among his Family and Friends, and is restored to the natural State of Man, again. 
My 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 2^1 
My pleasure, in Such Representations, arises certainly from a Sort of Sympathy with theirs; as they must Surely feel happiest, in Such Situations; for I believe that none but a fox hunter.^ or a scolded hujl/andi ever enjoyed more Satisfaction, abroad, than at Home. One is a borrowed Life.) the other a Property. A vast Difference between meum and tuum! 
But I have gone too high with my Subject. It is not about Heroes that I am conversant, at present. My Study is not Biography, but only a Collection of Anecdotes, Opinions, and Expressions, of Persons in common Life; and which please me the better, therefore. 

How flattering to human Nature, to read of noble Sentiments and oenerous 
O 
M 
Actions, 
242 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Actions, in Men, who, as the World styles it, have no Name. His, in Some Sort, Setting little Folks on a Level with their Betters; which is another worldly phrase, too, as impertinent as the former. I am pleased with a Passage I have met with in Some late Writer, where he Says, ‘‘ I have known plebeian Peers, and sight honourable Tailors.” 
One of these anonymous Heroes, a fortunate Foundling., happening, through the Vicissitudes of Life, to die rich, endowed the hcspitai where he had been fostered, and gives this very humble, - but virtuous, Realbn for it, in his Will. 
A certain John a Nokes, who had 'the same Luck with the former, to emerge 
from 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 243 
from Poverty to Affluence, and dying chiidless, bequeathed his whole fortune to the Family of a Peribn who had accidentally picked him up, on the Highway, when he was a sick beggar boy% perishing under a Hedge, and took care of him, still he was wtii. He also gives this reason for his Bequest; adding, like the former, the Virtue of Humility, to that of Gratitude. Would you not rather have been either of these Brats, than Alettandcr, or Oerfar? True Ambition answers, fs, 
And another Peter Styles upon hearing that his only Child was dead, cried out, “I thank God that the Poor have nov no Rival, with me — I have lofi a sq71.) hut they have gained a Fathers m2 I could 
244 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
I could fill a Choir, with Such Tracts of noble Characters, as these; of a Spanish Soldier at the Siege of capeue., who feeing his Comrade and Friend shot dead rn the Trenches, by him, threw himself on the Body, and could not be parted from the Embrace, still lie himself expired with Grief, before the close of the Day. 
Of another — But I have already quoted enough, for my present purpose, which is to ash what could Such persons want, toward rising to the highest Pinnacle of Fame, without Blood and Slaughterbut more frequent Occasions of manifesting their Virtue? We prize the clashc Anecdotes, I doubt, too partially. 
A Thing 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 245 
A Thing has just struck me, that gives me the comfortable Notion of my being a Safe Member, of any commonwealth; which is, that in all my reading of History, Epic Poejns, or Romances, I never affected more than the Second Characters. Not the King, but the Minister; not the Knight, but the Squire. I would rather be the Friend and Confident, than the Sovereign, or the Hero. Though, methinks, the Race of Princes, as well as of cshevalier errants, has been long extinct; and yet we continue to go on kinging it, still, with as Serious Faces, as ever. 
I have, all my Life, preferred Ease and Peace, to Bustle and Glory. I would rather be a Representative, for a Borough, than a County. And, bating the M 3 Society 
246 ORIGINAL LETTERS. Society of a few Friends, could lit as contentedly in France., as in England. I don’t See, after all, what Liberty we have to boast of, over that Nation, except the Freedom of talking Treason, and abusing our Rulers, m punijhed. 
The King, you’h Say, cannot take our Money from us, without our Leave, as may be done, if that he true., in France. But our free Parliaments have run us deeper in Debt, than all the edids of the Bourbon Family, ever amounted to. And it is pretty equal, I think, whether we are plundered, by Tyrants, or trus tees; only that the latter would mortify me most. 
I only 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 24.7 
I only mention this Disposition of my Mind to you, in Confidence, as aphiend, for I fear the Rest of the World wouh despise me for it. Cecfar aiit nullus is the magnanimous Cry; and there are, I believe, many Peoyste who would be Heroes, who would not be anything less; who would give a Leg, or an Arm, to be Alexander., but not a Finger, or a Toe, to be hrephejhon. It was this heroic Vice that made Ceofaf sigh, on Seeing a Statue of “macedonia’s madmanp to think that he had done So much mischief in the World, at an Age before he himself had begun to 
Cry Havoc! and let loose the dogs of War, 
This Subiecst, with the Description of my natural Character, has made Some El 4 charm 
248 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
charming and philosophic Lines occur to me, in this Place.; though from whence I happen to recolleo; them now, I do not remember; but I shall here introduce them to your Acquaintance, with the following Motto. 
Hoc erat in Votis. 
Vitam si liceat mihi Formare Arbitriis meis. 
Non Fafees cupiam, nec Opens, 
Non clarus niveis Equis Captlva Agmina traxerim. 
In Solis habitem Locis, 
Hortos posiideam, atque Agros; 
Illic, ad Strepitus Aquas, 
Mufarum Studiis fruar, 
^ Sic cum Fata mihi ultima Pervenerit Lachesis mea. 
Non ulli gravis, aut malus, Tranquillus moriar Senex! 
’ Amen, to that Sweet Prayer! 
I shall 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 249 
I shall release you, now. Write to me Soon, or' I shall do nothing else but moralise; and if you won’t go into Orders, I will 
Adieu. 
L E T E T R LII 
Account of the Debate, entertained me extremely; but I wish that the Members could be brought sto conduct Such interesting Matters, with fbmewhat more Decency and Propriety, titan they generally do. What has private Invedive to do with public Con 
• to Letter V 
M 5 
cerns 
'250 • ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
ccrns? Such personal Altercation should be banished to biuingfgate; the Lhames is its proper Element; where Such wordy War is bandied from Boat to Barge, from Scullers to Oars; and those Orators, I think, should exchange the Title of statef men., for that of Steerfmen. Such Speeches are rather Impeachments., than lelihe rations. 
Were 1 in the cjoair, I should certainly call to Order, and endeavour to keep thent So: but if I found, as is too probable, that this did not operate, I would then strive to form a neutral Party in the plouse, to keep buzzing, or blowing their Noses, all the While of the pla rangue. Na put a Stop to Methodism, at Bath, during his Life; not by an Ex 
rtion 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 251. 
ertion of the Magistracy, but by Sending. Some Drummers to the Conventicles, to heat Lime with the Preachments. 
I am Sorry for the Account you Send' me of poor Robin Walked % Death, One does not care to lose anything they have been used to, though ever So insignificant,, that was inoffensive. This wa^ his Character. He was welcome everywhere, ^ but misted nowhere; and was equally free to come, to stay, or to go. Nobody ever asked why, or wherefore.. He had never any Scheme, purpose or Design, in his Head -, and thought as sittle about Life, as he did of Death. I send you an Epitaph that fits him exactly,. which I picked up Somewhere, and will pay the Expense of having it inscribed on his M 6. ■ Tomb 
252 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
tombstone, if you’h get it done, for me. 
j’al vecu Sans nul pensement, 
Me laiflant aller doucement, 
A la bonne Loi naturelle; 
Et je m’etonne Sort pourquoi La Mort daigna songer a moi, 
Qui northeast Songeai jamais a elle. 
Rest his Soul! a little will do, for he “was never active.. 

LETTER 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 253 
LETTER LIII 
J AM very Sorry for the Failure of 
Mr. N -- --, as it must affect: all 
those who had any Connexion with him; Some of whom are owr particular Friends. I have none, I would have none, but what are yours, also. 
Poor Mr. Jackson I fear, had too much Confidence in him. I had always the reverse, ' and endeavoured often to. inspire him with Caution; but by general Refiedions, only; not by directing his Attention to the present Bankrupt. I thought this would have been illiberal.. 
Suspicion 
2t54 ORIGINAL LETTERS 
suspicion is the Mark of a mean and dishonest Mind. I felt it strong in myself, however, but was ashamed to confess. the Vice to another. I am Sorry now,, for my Modesty. 
But my Scruple arose from my nor being in Poffeshon of any onefadl, which might justify me in hurting the Character' of any Man. My ill opinion of him,, I owm, vas owing to the great Air of Mystery, he usually affected, even in Matters which required no Screen,. He had a vast deal of Art, but not enough to hide it. He used to value himself, too much, upon certain shorthand Transactions of his, which I thought, bordered. a little too much upon leger de main.. 
He 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 255 
He boasted of Such Manoeuvres, I suppose, in order to recommend hte Services to others; and it might have had its Effeift, p^^hs p.s. i but in part, only. We might be tempted to employ him,, against others., but never for oiirfelves,. These Things gave me adifgust to him. Too muck Cunning generally outv/its itself. ’tis like Children crying Cook.,. when they have hid themselves. 
I wifii there was. but one Language,, among Mankind, both of the Tongue of the Heart. But we must wait for a State of Intuition., for Such a Blessing.. 
Adieu.. 
LET E R 
256 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
LETTER LIV 
jy^r. and Mrs. R, my Neighbours 
here, though they have never been very neighbourly with me, are going to part Neighbourhood, between themselves, I hear. Soon. And is it come to this? He married her, without a Shilling, you know; and she refused a Man of better Fortune, for him; and from the Same generous Principle, also. What a Policy might one have opened, in Change alley.^ upon their mutual happiness, for Life? 
The Scandal of this disjun(fi: ion, in the Country, does not throw the least 
aspersion 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 257 
aspersion on her charader; for the World censures nothing in a woman’s Conduct, but a Breach of chajuty. A Wife, it Seems, may play the Vengeance, with a Husband. before his Face, provided that site does not play the Devil, behind his Back. 
What a partial Idea has been conceived, of Domejiic Virtue! Othello., lamenting the Discovery of his wife’s supposed Insidelity, says, “I fiept the next Night well j” but a Man neither enjoys Peace, by Night or Day, who is neck yoked with a Shrew. 
This happens to be the ungentle bsfde mond.s Character. There is no Possibility of humouring her; because one cannot 
258 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
not accomodate any one System of Behaviour, to a Caprice So extravagant, and a Temper So variable. t’were as vain an Attempt, as to make a Petticoat for the Mooti^ that Should always sit her., according to a Story in plutarces Banquet of the Seven wise Mafiers, 
Upon Such a Representation as this, how happy must a Man feel, who happens not to be married; but how much more So must you do, who are? 1 wish 
you joy; and think you mscy throzv the Stocking., again, upon reading this Letter; for Such a Story must afford you the pleasure of a Second Wedding Nighty at least. 
Adieu. 
LF.DXER 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 25^ 
LETTER LV 
J HAVE read the Collection of English and Latin Poems you Sent me, but think them very indifihrent; and you know by the Statutes of Horace., that middling verse is treason, both against Gods and Men, Pillars and Pojis.* To tag poor prose with Rhyme, is like putting Sugar to vapid Fruit. 
The Number of tinkling Cymbals, that the World is dinned with, every Day, arises from the absurdity of Pedagogues. 
Mediocribiis efte Pcetis 
Noa Homines, won DU, noa conceitire Cdumna. Hor. 
Settings 
io ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Setting Boys Talks of verses, in the Schools; as if Genius was, like a Top, to be whipped up to its exercise. 
Tis this that makes the Press So often Swarm with Such mechanical Poetry; not the divine Mechanism, uhi Deus in terfit. There is no Succeeding, in anything of this Kind, invitd Minersd; for the Birch is no proper Stocky to engraft the Bays upon, 
I think that Such Haberdashers in Rhyme, would do better to turn Corn, or Coal Chandlers, who fell more by Measure, than by Weight; or bind them selves Apprentices to Linen drapers, as they may find their Account more in reckoning by Tards^ than Feet. ' 
’tis 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 261 
’tis the Scarcity of poet laureatjhipsy only, that need reduce them to Such Shifts for Subsistence. For the distinguishing Favour of the Great, has beckoned Rhi~ mers from the Lrowel and the Flail, * before now. 
Such Refiedtions as these, must absolutely put a Stop to my Work, f for the Future, ^ notwithstanding the favourable Opinion you had So partially expressed of it, when you were here last. 
I shall lend your present to my Friend, the Curate of this Parish, who borrows Books from me. Sometimes, in the long 
* Jones, a Bricklayt'r, and Duck, a Threflier. t Anti lucretius. See Letter XXIV 
winter’s 
262 ORIGINAL LETTERS. winter’s Nights. he’ll meet with Some good Lhings., in them, which may perhaps Serve a Turn for him, now and then, in his Vocation; as all the Poetry of it may be Said, in a Turn upon the Expression of Horace., to be Sermoni Propiora^ most verily and indeed. 
Adieu. 
LETTER LVI 
A Sort of tragicomedy has been acted in this Country, lately, which vexes me; because a Friend of ours makes but a ridiculous Figure in the Drama. I shall give you the Fable of it, in a few Words. 
That 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 263 
That good-humoured dissipated Fellow, the younger Afton., has kept a Girl, for Some Time, whom he was not only fond, but vain of: which latter weakness led him in to introduce her to the Acquaintance of a Friend of his, who also takino; a Fancy to her, carried her off, after a very few Interviews; Such Wenches, like weather cocks, being ever ready to turn on their Centres, ^ with every Wind that whistles. 
A fool’s madness is gentleman’s Satisfaction, you know. So a Challenge w’as Sent, accepted, and a Duel ensued; in which both the Combatants were wounded; but I have the Pleasure to hear not mortally. 
A Thin 
264 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
A Thing of this Sort, in a Friend may be Said to be a more ungenerous a61, than if the Alliance had been of a more formal Nature. In the latter Cafe, a Man has the Laws of the Land, besides those of Honour, on his Side; and may use both, or either, according to his Spirit, or Discretion. 
ut with Regard to this Commoner of Nature., he is left without redress, in either Instance. He can neither recover Damages., nor show resentment, without a certain Damage., to his own sense and Character, at least. 
A rare Moral, this, you’h Say. But you know my Way of arguing, on certain Subjects, Sometimes; and one of the pleasant 

ORIGINAL LETTERS. 265 Sant Privileges of Such a Correspondence as ours, is, always to write with the Same careless Freedom, as one would Speak over a Bottle. I Iport a Fancy, as I draw a Cork. One should not be always wise, among one’s Friends.o /d race is my Moralist, for Such a Latitude. 
Duke ej} dijltpere i c. 
However, not to carry' a jest too far, let me take our own Side of the Question, now, in Turn; by affirming that Marriage is not only a Matter of positive Institution, but of natural Instindt, and of moral Obligation, besides. And this I shall do, by the Means of a certain physical Peculiarity, which So happily and remarkably distinguishes Man from Brute. 
N I shall 
266 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
I shall take my Text from the beggar’s Opera, as you’h find it written in the Second Line of diand.s Song, ‘‘ In the Days of my Youth, ” This, you know, is not the Cafe of your irrational Females — “Once in a season” ” Cajlalio says, because I would class my Authorities. 
The Passion of Love too, is another Charadteristic of the human Species, which Brutes are not susceptible of. We choose our Objects, from Some particular Charm of Body or Mind: they mark no preference to Beauty, or even to Youth; which is still a more natural Distindion. 
This Affcdion forms not only the pleasantcst, but one of the strongest Attachments, of the human Breast; as Honour 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 267 nour Sanctifies what Sympathy, has bound; for as Infidelity, on either Part, must render the other unhappy, their mutual Constancy must certainly form one of the great Duties of Life. I should think the Firji, indeed, as the Engagement is of our own chusing; and that Scripture it felfshas Superseded the prior one. therefore floall a Man leave Father and Mother. 
All these Particulars do, in my Opinion, amount pretty nearly to a Proof, that Providence, in the great Scheme and ceconomy of the intellectual System, designed Men and Women for Pairs, only, and not to be 
Venerem Incertam rapientes y more Ferariim, While the Bull, the Buck, the Ram, arc permitted to range through the Herd, for N 2 cajialio^s 
268 ORIGINAL LETTERS. cajlaud.s Reason above hinted at. But Man labours under no Sort of natural Necessity for Change, Supposing jdiand.s Confession, or Mystery of the Bona Dea revealed, already quoted, to be true. 
I remember an old Aunt of mine, once, upbraiding her Husband, for one of these unnecessary Conneflions with her Maid, cried out in a Rage, “Can you have the Assurance now, Johnny Cramer., to Say to my Face, that sick or well I ever refused you ?” 
Farewell. 
LETTER 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 269 
LETTER LVL 
J Have not been able to write to you, since my last. The giddiness in my Head — where else should it be — that you have Sometimes heard me complain of, has taken up its old headquarters again, of late. I dared not venture to stoop down to a Pen and Ink, before, till this Day, and was forced to frame a Delk for my Book, that I was obliged to look up to. 
I should have read Astronomy, in shch a star gazing Position, if I had had my Study to chuse; but I was in a Course; 
N 3 and 
270 ORIGINAL LETTERS, and I hate shifting of Subjects— — retards the progress of Knowledge; and the Expression, of following., or pursuing our Studies Seems to hint at a steadiness, in this Point. 
My Vertigo arises from Some indiges tion in my Stomach, which is in Such a corrupt State, at present, that quodcunqut infundis ac&fch — For let the Head give itself ever So high Airs, tlte Stomach is man’s real Seat of Empire; from whence Salutary or injurious Juices are distributed to all Parts of the animal ceconomy. 
. ' p h. 'lv r 
And yet is not the Head, which, according to ^ Lriuculaf is Vjceroy.. over 
^ The Tcnipefl. 


that. 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 271 that, again, to blame, for most of thole Ails which happen to itself, or the Rest of the Members? Why did kind Providence place the Door of the Cupboardy there, and guard it So peculiarly with three of our quickest Senses, Sight, Taste, and Smell, but to rouse the Superintendency of the Mind, to an inspedtion into all the Provisions that the inconsiderate Hand, its Purveyor, provides for it? The Mouth is Situated just under the Eye, and the Smell and Taste stand as Sentinels, on each Side. 
But the garrison here, as well as in other besieged Tows, is too often bribed to betray the Citadel. The fairness of Fruit, the Flavour of Wines, and the Savour of Sauces, tempt them to revolt N 4 to. 
272 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
to the Enemy, and deliver us over Prisoners, bound Hand and Foot, with Gouts, Rheumatilins, cc. 
I found it impossible to stop, till I had proceeded thus far, as my Head had condemned my Hand to confess its Crime, and sign its own Condemnation. these Rcfiedlions I should encourage in myself, as I acknowledge my frequent Indiscretions, in this Particular, though without much excess in any Way: — But I sind Distemper growing upon me. So much, of late, that I am resolved to hold my Hand., for the Future, and never more presume to lift it up against my Head, again. AF que ut vivamusy vivere defmimus,. 
So 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 275 
So God bless us and our Meat, and adieu. 
LETTER lvm. 
J AM much concerned at the melancholy Representation you Send me of poor Mr. Hutchinfoffs Circumstances. I am pleased at the Part you have taken, in his distress; but shall not commend you, on that Account, as it was nothing more than what you owedy^? yourself., though you had long since So fully discharged your Debt to him. for all his former Services to you. Obligations rnay be repaid, but can neater be cariceltedv If this be an Excels of Sentiment, I shall still cry out with Horace 
N 5 Vellem 
a7, 4> ORIGINAIL LETTERS. 
ffelhm in arnteyitaac erraff mus. 
There can be no Excels, in Friendship, 
I insist on your eking out your own Assistance, with mine, too. In acts of Friendship, think always that you have four Hands to use and why should ou 
Suffer two of them to lie idle, when your 
■ ^ ■ w. n It. 
Friend needs the Aid of Briareus. 
But this I beg leave also to insist on, that my Name be not mentioned, on this Occasion. Join the inclosed Bill to your own Supply, ' and let the whole appear to be your Sole kindness. He will then have but one Favour to resent, without increasing his distcess by the Weight of an. additional Obligation. I give to, you, 1 give to myself, I hardly think of him. 
What 
ORIGINAL LETTERS, ayf 
What Thanks does he owe me then? For my Mite is too inconsiderable to claim Gratitude. 
0 
i " 
Speak on pleasanter Subjects, in your next; for I am low — very much So — Just getting a Return of my giddiness, this Moment., j 
Adieu. 

N 6 
letter 
276 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
f; ' f 
LETTER LIX 
J HAVE been forced to send for a Physician, at last, on Account of my Head and Stomach. I relpedt Surgery, but have no Opinion of the Faculty, with Regard to internal Disorders. How can they possibly know how to redlify diges tion, who know not even how it is performed? Let them try all their Hypothesis about the Matter; their lritura iions., menfiruums.y and Putrefaffions^ and see if they can produce either Chyk^ bjocd^ or Face. 
My 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 277' 
My Doctor Says that my lllness arises from too much Study, and want of Action. But I have read less, and exer cised more, since these disorders first attacked me, than ever I used to do, before. .Dis when I quit my Library, and mount my horse or my Legs, that 1 con tradh the Seeds of my Distemper — ’tis thought, not reflefhon.y that injures me. 
A Physician should be a Philosopher, too; for without taking in the Context of die Mind, he can never be able sush ciently to judge of the Body. If he cannot cure Anxiety, what Signifies his cor redling of Acidities? If he cannot “Medicine to Minds diseafed, ” to what Avail are all his Alkalis? 
To 
278 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
To what Avail then, is my employing him? you’u Say. To which I can only return this answer, that the Folly of human Nature is Sometimes too strong for the sense of it. One is too apt to do as the World does. I believe not a Word of Astrology, and yet were that Imposture now in Vogue, I am convinced that I should give a large Fee, to Some Cornelius Agrippa., ^ Some star gazer., or other, to know when Mr. -- -- will die. 
What Pity it is that the human Mind should have Effects upon the Body, which all the Rest of the animal Creation are free from. No Creature but Man, regrets the Past, is anxious about the Fu 
• Pretender to the occult Sciences. 
ture. 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 279 ture^ or is subjed to Dotage. In other Things too, we Seem to have miich the Disadvantage, also. One half of the human Species die, in Infancy, and vast Numbers of Women in Childbed. Not So with the Rest of the Creation. 
As we cannot Suppose Providence, to be partial, to Brutes, we must investigate the.cause within ourselves— — particular wrong ceconomy, of Reason., must certainly, in this Instance, at least, counteract the general one of N ature. Instiinfl is perfect.. reason only that needs a Guide — 
I am weary of conjesfure, 
O thou,. whose Power o’er moving Worlds presides, 
‘^iwhqse Voice created, and whole wisdom guides, 
“On 
280 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
“On darkling Man in pure Effulgence shine, “And clear the clouded Mind with li^ht 
divine !’" 
Adieu. 
LETTER LX 
J AM just returned from my Friend Mr. strode^s, where I went for a Week, rather to divert my disorder, than myself. It did not answer. is exui fe quoque fugit? I wish I could forget — Memory gives me more Pash than Pleasiire. A Man who had been often near Suffocating, by the Swelling of his Glands, had them cut out, and became cafy, for the Rest of his Life. How happy if we could perform a like Surgery, on the Mind! 
Besides 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 28.1 
Besides the Society there, was not Such as I generally like — We were all of an Age; which is not agreeable to Nature. A Family was the original Generation of Social Life; which consisted first of Parents and Children, then of Grandfathers and grandchildren. f The Advantages of Such a Mixture, both to the Young and Old, is too apparent, to need any farther Comment to you. But, even upon the best Terms, I have long thought that Society indulged too long, becomes Satiety, at last. There is not Diversity enough, in the jvorld. and it is necessary often to retire from it, and range through the Works of Nature, for Variety, 
Prima Societas in ipso conjugio eft, proxima in Liberis, c. Cic. 
How 
282 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
However this Family is beginning to form itself into the Sort of natural Society, I have been above recommending; for Mrs. Strode is near lying in. He ashed me to stand Godfather. I did not chuse it, as I am become too indolent to venture on multiplying my Duties in Life; but I could not refuse, as I think there is a Sort of political Justice, in making old Bachelors become sponsors. 
I am not well, but willi I was better, if it was only for your Sake. 
Adieu. 
LETTER 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 283 
LETTER LXI 
J Could think of nothing else, ever since. 
Did you See the Sky, last Tuesday Night But how could you? His too far from London. Twas Jupiter birth night, and the Firmament was a perfect: Galaxy of Jewels; for every Star shone out as bright, I dare say as he did himself, when he burned poor Semele to a Cinder.. 
To which beautiful View inay be added the most glorious Aurora boreaud. that ever I beheld. It commenced in the Zeniths with a central Globe of Fire, 
resem 
284 ORIGINAL LETTERS. resembling the Sun; from whence it is sued forth its undulating Beams, expanding on every side, and extending downwards still they reached the Horizon all around, vaulting the Earth with a concave Hemisphere of mild Effulgence; much like the Light refieded from the Moon; from whence were darted frequent vivid Rays, as beautiful as Lightning, but quite innocent of the Danger. 
How awful, how august, and how expanded an Idea, is the Contemplation of the Heavens? And how justly has Toung styled Devotion., the Daughter of astronomy;; pronounced an infidel ajira -- nomer to he mad. I should rather take him to be a Fool — The very Fool of David, \ 
I have 
f ivho said in his Heart, there is no God, 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 285 
I have Somewhere met with a fine Imagination, where the Writer, Speaking of the numberless Systems of Planets, each revolving round one or other of the fixed Stars, as their Sun and Centre, fupposes these to perform a like Revolution too, altogether, about Some other greater Centre; in which Statiori he places the sen forium of the Godhead; governing by his Wisdom, guiding by his Providence, and enlivening with his Spirit, the whole Creation of Matter and Intelledt, throughout the fineless universe. 
There is certainly Something truly noble, and Sublime, in Such a vast Hypothesis as this, which renders the empyreal, or starry system, as great and perfect, as 
the 
286 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
the human Mind is capable of framing a Conception. The Notion of a local Deity, which possibly might here occur, must certainly offend, at first Thought; but my Author, as well as I can now recolle(5t, was not So ignorant a Philosopher, as not to have been acquainted with that fine and just Definition of the godhead“ “Centre is everywhere, and Circumference nowhere.” He only fupposes this to be the Shechina or Focus, of his Energy, throughout the Infinity of Space; where he resides in a more Sensible Glory; and to be the Region, also, where the Heaven of the Good is placed. 
All this is most charming and ingenious guefs work — But it can never enter into 
the 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 287 
the Heart of Man, to conceive what, or how, the‘soul, the Origin of Nature, is. We are out at Sea,, when we would define, but on Lerra firma, when we adore. 
Adieu. 
End of the First Volume, ' 

LKV^ NV 
’ ' ' '■ ■ -■ .': i '-, ■:,, 
1 ' ■ y rri vw^.cis /r.'l ... '; ■; 
1... \ :, .’=■• -,, id IV i .i ’ At.'.. 
aat tiin V C: -: 
.villvx T -- “; dv.'. i '. : '; L 
>” • 
.. V 
S' 
, .'i.'iv'ic V T r 
v ■ ' 
^ -. ■■ ■ 
V A 



A' ' - ■ -. 




J.; 

'^": ■ ■' ■.' ' V vtx 




.''S; - V v, 
, ^ ^ - : ’ V 
'■' '■' 'k ■ 
h >■■'. ''' “■ ' - .-■ V ^ ■-' :, v,, 


. 



• ■ ■ 
, .miisi C N 
C 

'■ i 
c 
Pl 
■sa.9/ 
f( ( 


.A 


r' •' 

■^: 



"‘ V >«■ F!. ■»-■!. ' '' -'■ ■ > "%*, ■ * - 
S ■. • •*■ ■ ' 
'> b' Ar' ■-, ac 








THE 
GODFREY F. SINGER MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY 
MR. AND MRS. JACOB SINGER 
V. 




- ■ is' 

d: F t \ ’’ -4 ' ■ rai 



'
-, s 
st.. 
f' 


r A 



V. -. ■■ 
■' 
telt 
L ‘ 
i 
\ 


1 
'ji 
: n 

■■ A 

ri 


K Ada 


i, : 
h '■-. 
‘r ' 
? • 
Ty; 

A 
C : 
■. 

f ■ ='■-■- 
V -• • L V. WL. 
: V 
^ C a^v 

■ 'V 

^..., ' 
-- L -- 
^: t 

- ■ 



♦ i 
if 
'¥ 


VI 
THE 
FRIENDS; 
O R, 
ORIGINAL LETTERS, 
V O L IL 
: ia 
, !I O 
LI ■ ^ 

THE 
F R I E N D S; 
O R, 
ORIGINAL LETTERS 
O F A 
T.D R S OD DECEASED. 
NOW FIRST PUB L I S HEAD, 
FROM THE MANUSCRIPTS, 
IN HIS correspondents’s KANDS. 
“How preferable are the natural Distates of thc Heart, to the nioft elaborate Inditings of the Head!” ^ ' 
Letter IX Par, a. of this coliestioa 
IN TWO VOLUMES. 
VOL. II 
L O N D O N; 
Printed for J. BELL, near exritxa exchangs', in the Strand j and C.ETHERINGTON, at ydr^k. 
MDCCLXXIII., 
ERRATA. 
Page 66, put a Note of Reference, at the End of the first Parar graph. 
P. 71, at the end of the first Paragraph, a? 
P. 72, line last but four, deal lasts in Jems. 
P. 75, linelaft but one, a Comms at the end. 
P., 97, 1. i reaciybt'* ' j 
P. 98, I. 7, for there, read three. 
P. 131, 1. 10, fox this, read that, ^ 
P, 141, 1. vijihty. 
P. 201, 1. 2, deal 2d — and put a Comma,. 
P. 238, line 4, for, read me, 
P. 245, 1. 14, read crefcunt, 
P. 274, 1. 4, read titi. 
P. 253, 1. 3, deal lall the, 
P. 2, 54, 1. 5, .read thence,. 
P. 277, 1. II deal 
r) — - 
M 0" ^ 33 ti[ 
[ ] 
iini gi 

ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
LETTER LXII 
V 
0 
o 
6 
o 
<0 
w 
< 
r 
co 
My dear Friend, 
J WISH you, myself, and the World, Joy, on the late happy Event Your Preferment must Soon follow, from the Nature of your Connexions; which, indeed, is all the Hope you have to build 
*■ See Letter V vol. II 
B 
upon 
^ ORIGINAL LETTERS, upon: For it would be an Affront to your Merits, to say they are Such as would help you to rise, under the Patronage of modern Times. 
I could wish also, for the three Sakes, abovementioned, that this Matter had come to pass, many Years ago; both on account of the Advantages to yourself, as well as the Benefit of your Precept and Example to others. Not that these were ever wanting to the World; but that they have generally a better Effect, in your present Character; because it proves the Opinion of Religion, in those who are supposed to be best acquainted with it, to be sincere. 
Religion, 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. .3 
Religion, in its Purity, is too abstracted a Science, for the Bulk of Mankind. They must have Some Idol., Some outward and viftble Sign, to fix their Attention upon. Congregations are apt to believe, in their Pastors, and often become Infidels or Devotees, according as they observe the Respect or Disregard shown by the Lives and Manners of their Spiritual Guides, to their Doctrines 
# 
better late, than never, let us Say, with regard to your own immediate Concern in this Matter; whiciishdmely Proverb I might more classically have expressed, in the Words of Virgil, by only changing the first Word. - ■' 
r u.b 2 
.0 'Fctr -- 
4 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Fortuna — quae Sera, tamen refpexit i'nertem; Caudidior postquam tondenti Barba cadebat — ^refpexit tamen; & longo post Tempore venit. 
Iam, ‘itiy dear reverend — I wish I could sayfriend, yours, both in the Spirit, and the Flesh. 
Adieu. 
LETTER LXIII 
"YOU caiist imagine the Peculiarity of my sensations, ' ever since I had the pleasure of your last Letter. The ex 
V ' V 
changing your dj habit, for a clerical one, is Such a Type of the throwing off the corporeal, and assuming an setherial 
Body, 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 5 Body, that you in a Manner Seem to have gone to Heaven before me. 
don’t laugh at me, but I confess that this Idea has given me one half of the Sentiments, at least, which I should really experience upon that Occasion — I do not feel the Grief, indeed, but arn a(5tuaily Sensible of an increase of ten derness and respeft tow'?trdfi you, affeady; and I am very certain that I should obey the lightest Commands of yours, at present, with the Same Scrupulous Devotion, that I'should ast as Executor to your Will. ^ • 
There is Something most melancholy pleasant, in this Sort of Superstition; and I shall cultivate it, I love all 
B 3 
Thoughts 
6 ORIGINAL LETTERS. Thoughts which Serve to lift me above myself, and Set me, like un Mercure volant., a tiptoe on the Outside of the Globe, with one Foot already fioating in the Air. ^ 
Adieu, et ora pro nobis. 
LETTER LXIV 
J HAVE received your Letter, and as I look upon you now, as my Confessor and casuist both, let me here give you an Account of the Faith that is in with the natural Progress of it, (as in this great Article I was left to myself) from first to last; which may Serve by way of answer to your Inquiry. 
I heard 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 7. I heard Something about a God, when I was a Child; but received no Definition, or Description of him. I concluded we did not make ourselves, for I happened to be by, when my Sister was born. I therefore imputed the Power of Creation to Some Being above us; but remained 
still at a loss where to refer the Work. 
At first I suspe(51 ed Kings, for tins Manoeuvre; as they were the greatest Beings I could form any distinct Notion about. I had never known any of their divinity ships, myself, but had Seen their Titles in Eastern Tales; I had heard it Said that they had long Hands that their little Finger was weightier than the whole B 4 Body 
8 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Body of the Law, that the King's Name was a Lower of Strength, that they were Saluted by Heads in the Dust, crying out, O King, live for ever; and other Suchlike Apotheofes as these. 
I therefore most naturally concluded, them to be certain Superior Intelligences; Thrones, Dominions, Principalities and Powers', almighty, immortal; infallible in their Judgments, and So refined in their Appetites, that they fed, like Midas, upon nought but .pure Gold. 
'But when I happened to have heard that one of them had been poisoned, or died of a Surfeit, of mortal Food; that another was beheaded, or ssain in Battle; and others, unlike to God, endeavouring 
to 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 9 
to en stave and oppress their People, my Superstition began to fall to the Ground, with regard to these Sort of mock deities. I could not continue to think them the real Fathers of Mankind, though in political Metaphor they are usually styled and I became Soon informed, that though Kings ca create Lords they cannot make Men. 
Upon this Disappointment, I began to dired my Devotion toward the Fathers of the Church misted again by the Equivocation of a Word; but when I found these great Divines subject to the same Passions and jfraikics with ourselves, 'One — St. goiiig to Bed to amis 
trels' of sno w, to mock goncupiscence — Another — St. Origen — taking a more ef fe«stual Method, by Amputation of the B 5 Lusus 
lo ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Ltifm isfaturee — Another, and another, c. ‘see. I then found myself at a Loss, again, for the Hand that made me. 
From thence, by the mere Force of natural refiection, I rose through the Regions of Metaphysics, up to the Sublimest Heights of the primary pkilosophy; conceived, acknowledged, and adored the Monad. I fell a trembling first, and then assumed a Courage, that has ever since reriiained with me; and ever will, I trust.. 
Upon considering Religion, as far as stis involved in System, I thought then, and still do, that the Christian Scheme is the completest Code that had ever been yet conceived, both for Life and Death. 
Its 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. II 
Its Ethics are certainly the purest and Safest Rule of Practice, while we remain in the World, and I know of no Comfort, on a sickbed, without the Hopes and Promises of the Gospel. 
Which that we may all — I leave you to conclude the Prayer. 
Adieu, 
B 6 
LETTER 
12 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
LETTER LXV. 
J HAVE been extremely ill, since I wrote to you last; but after confession * know, one’s Mind grows easier about Such Matters. My lease is wearing apace; and I think it cannot be long, before I may expect to be ejedted out of this same copy houa of mine. Thank God, I have a better Inheritance, to trust to! 
My Stomach has been in a Sad Way, for Some Time. Everything disagrees 
* See the foregoing Letter. 
t Stlted in the Law hase Tenure \ as holding «nly at the Will of the Lord 
with 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 13 with it, and all equally. So that I am often obliged to sit like a famished Governor, in "a besieged Citadel — afraid to open the Gates for Provisions, lest the Enemy should enter along with them. Nay, stis with Fear and Trembling, almost, that I even venture to pray for ‘my daily 'Bread, of late. 
I beg you’h be So kind to call on Graham, and desire him to Send me down a Portion of ‘the Medicines he made up for me, from the Prescription of dolour Mead, when I was at your House last. They wefe but Anodynes, stis true; but when we cannot enjoy natural Rest, we must borrow the Aid of Opiates. 
Pray 
14 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Pray Send me down the new Work, advertised at miuad.s. I like the Isitle, and he generally buys good Copies. His Name therefore gives Credit to an Author. 
The enclosed Bill will answer these Articles, and pay off my wine merchant, too, who wrote to me, last Post; So pray let me have his Receipt in full. 
I can never make Apologies enough, and I hate to do things by halves. 
Adieu. 
LETTER 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 15 
LETTER LXVI 
J AM happy in having intercepted an Article of Intelligence for you, just as it was travelling up to London. You should not Sue me upon the Adt against regrating., or forejiailing., since I give it to you as cheap as I had it myself. 
The younger was married, yesterday, 
to a miss M —, of Huntingdonjhire \ a Lady of very ample Fortune. An Amour and a Duel, you know, were enough to win any woman’s Heart, in the World The Courtship was private. 
* See Letter Ivi. 
all 
i6 ORIOINAL LETTERS. 
all along, but the Marriage was Solemnised in Public. Mr. Lalbot was at the Wedding, and told me of it, this morn inm » 
I asked him what Sort of a Woman she is. handsome, he replied. That makes but little Difference, Said I, after the iioney moon is over — But as to her Understanding, Manners, and Character? To which he aniwered, after “his peculiar. Way, that he knew very little of her himself, but heard her say Antecedent., to Doctor Jdhnfon., once, that he happened to be in Company with them. 
This concise Method of drawing a cha rafter, lets one into an Acquaintance 
with 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 17 with it, better than all the descriptive Painting of Clarendon, ^ 
What Sort of Man is your Friend Charles Ford ^ Said Somebody ^ to Dean Swiftonce. PH tell you, he replied. We two were walking together, lately, in St. Jantes'*s -- Park', and I was felicitating the Inhabitants of London and jvefiminjier^ in having the Benefit of So much green Grass, and Gravel, So near the Town, to breathe, and stretch their Limbs in — there’s neither Gafs, nor Gavel, here. Said he, hastily. 
j 
This short Trait was enough to stamp the Chara6ier of a lisping perverse Kind of Man, who was capable of giving the Lye to his own senses, and contradicting the general Opinions of Mankind, merely 
to 
i8 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
to gratify a peevish or Splenetic Disposition of Mind. 
We have both of us met with pcrsons of this Description, in Life; and I am now thinking of two, in particular, who will occur to your own recolle(5l: ion, probably, while you are reading this Paragraph. 
I heard once of a litigious Man, one Dominic O’ Flaherty^ of Ireland who giving a retaining Fee to a Lawyer, and being asked, in what Cause?? him to enter it Versus Mankind, Perhaps many an Hypothesis in Science and philoso phy, may owe its rise to Such a Temper of Mind, as Mr. Ford abovementioned, 
an 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 19 
an Affectation of differing from the Rest of the World. 
Men who are not blessed with Faculties Sufficient to distinguish themselves, in the course of established Systems, would attempt it by starting new ones of their Own. Infidelity derives its Origin from hence, most certainly; and Surely Dominic. O Flaherty'’% Motto, abovementioned, could never be better applied, than to the Atheist. 
Adieu. 
LETTER 
20 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
LETTER LXVII 
J HAVE a Commission for you to execute for me, which my Mind has been much Set upon, for this Sometime past. I would exchange my Harpsichord, which you know to be a remarkable good one, for as good an Organ, * and will readily pay whatever Difference you shall be able to agree upon assist you. 
Get Signor Strozzi to 
My Passion for Music, encreases, with my Years, and I continue still to practice, Some Hours, every Day. ’tis one of the most jucunda chlivia Vita that can 
be 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 21 
be irnagined. I would but little value Ears, for hearing, if I had not one for Harmony also. Writing can give us the sense of Words, but Lingere Sonum baud facile efi.y it cannot convey the Sound of Notes. 
“When living Men shall die, and dead Men live. 
And Order is again to Cshaos hurl’d. 
Then heavenly Melody shall still Survive. 
And triumph o’er the Ruins of the World.” 
Some ingenious Writer Says, “that of all the Indulgences of sense, Music is the least sensual; ” and as a Taste for it betokens a refined, a delicate, and perhaps a good Mind, I honour the King of Pruffta., on Account of his Passion for this Science, more than for all his Victories. 
But 
22 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
But I am grown a good deal out of Conceit, lately, with my Instrument. I have unhappily contradled a graver, perhaps a more' gloomy Complexion of Mind, than formerly, and I confess that the jingling Sound of this Sort of tinkling Cymhaf is apt to tyre me Soon. Its Tones are not Solemn enough for me, now. The greatest Beauty of Music, the Swelling a Note, ’ds incapable of. I fear I shall Soon lose all Relish for every Instrument, which cannot express a Sigh 1 
There is a charming Simile, in fingai which this Subject brings to my Mind; where a Lover compares the Voice of his mistress, to the Sound of the Harpon the Gale of the Spring. 
As 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 23 
As for the Platonic Notion of the Music of the Spheres, ’ds truly Platonic, indeed; as it happens to be too piano ever to assess the Sense 
/ 
“wondering Man admires, but never hears.” 
I take that Error to have arisen from a Misinterpretation of one Word, in the t Greek philosopher. An Expression was construed literally, that was meant only metaphorically. Harmony is often used for Order, but, in this Place, has been mistaken for Melody. When Plato Speaks then, of the Harmony of the Spheres, we are certainly to understand the Order, course, and ceconomy, of the Solar syfiem, only. I shall never Suffer those 
great 
24 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
great Sages to Speak nonsense, whenever I can help it. 
Adieu. 
LETTER LXVIII 
J Believe that no person, who loved Mankind So much as I do, had ever So much satisfadion in an Hermitage, as I feel myself Sensible of, every Day, more and more. I used formerly to dedicate six or Seven of the twenty-four Hours, to Study and Retirement; but I live now, from Morning tonight, in my Library — 
“Which Served him for Kitchen, for Parlour, and hall” 
Not 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 25 
Not that 1 read So much, as formerly, but I think more — I walk a good deal about the Room, musing; by which I exercise both Body and Mind, at the Same Time. 
You know I have been, all my Life, a great reasoner, upon the Nature of the Soul; laying hold of every Argument, or Restedtion, that might Serve to strengthen and confirm the Belief of a Spirit di stindt from, and independent of, the Body This Turn of Mind increases with my 
I 
Years; which stis natural it should; as my Interest in the Truth of the Proposition, becomes greater, every Day. 
• See Letter LX towards the End, and latter Part of Letter XXIV 
vol. IL G Tis 
16 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
'’tis a transporting Thought, and never occurs to me, without bringing its' own Convidlibn along with it, from the inward Joy I am Sensible of, on the very Idea. Sentiment and sensation rush into each others Arms, and I feel as if my Heart and Soul were embracing one another, 
I was revolving this favourite Dogma, both of philosophy and Faith, in my Mind, this Morning; and having heretofore considered the Subject, by the old Light of the former, I chose now to view it, by the new Light of the latter. 
I shall begin with the very first Chapter of the Bible, where God said“ “us make Man in our Image, after our 
Like 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 27 
likeness; ” which Expression could never be meant to refer to the material. Substance, or personal Form of the Body — not to the outzvard and viftble Sign, certainly, but to the inward and spiritual Grace, of Man. To a certain pure es sense of the Mind, by the Special Favour of Omnipotence rendered capable of Rea ibn, self consciousness, of freewill, and perpetual Existence. 
i I shall then repeat the Sentiment of Solotnon, on this great Article, who Says, “That as the Body turns to Earth, of “which it was composed. So the Spirit “returns to God, from whom it had proceeded.” 
C 2 
I might 
28 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
I might also quote the Words of da niei who, in the twofold Character, both of a Philosopher and a Prophet, Says, “That those who Sleep in the Dust “of the Grave, sit all awake — Some to eternal Life, and others to eternal Cow fusion.” 
I shall then conclude this Species of' Argument, with the irrefragable Testimony of Our Saviour and his Apostles, to this Point; the Passages of which I need not take the Trouble of quoting to •you. 
Roujfeau Speaks very well, as a Metaphysician, on this Subjefb, if you remember, in the third Volume of his Emilius. Adieu. 
LETTER 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 29 
LETTER LXIX 
T was not Neglect,, Necessity, which prevented me from answering your two last Letters. My Cholic has been So belabouring me, this Week past, that I Sustered Prospero's curse on cauhan. 
“Tonight thou shalt have Cramps, “side stitches that ssiallpen thy Breath up.” 
And I felt like one who had out lived the Coup de Grace, as foon as it left me.' 
/ While I remained under the Agony, I could not lean forward to a Table, nor C 3 use 
30 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
use a Pen, but as one holds a Sword, at Arms length; and I could not think of accosting you, in Such an hostile Postui;;?. 
The Loss of a Heart is a metaphorical Expression, but I actually feel as if I had Suffered the literal Fact; as if that great Prop of the Body had been taken out, and that my Chest had tumbled in; like •the Roof of the Philistine Temple, when Sarnpfon had pulled away the Pillars; or like a isody, from whence the Sustaining Air had been exhausted, and felt the whole Weight of the atmosphere pressing it to Death. 
And is it not So? My Spirit is ssown! I begin to hang very heavy on my Hands, of late; and feel myself, now, as I have 
often 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 31 often done others, before, an Oppression on my Mind, which I would do almost anything to get fairly rid of. ' 
You may possibly think the Same Way of me, youriclf, in my present irksomc disposstion, therefore I shall relieve you, out of Charity, by Saying, 
T ^ r.. 
. r 
CV V - 
'i •• 
.i ■ 
0 
1. ■ j, 
T i i; ‘C: .: lo 
y^^inid II aal 
n.sj K; d 
. 't: 
c4 
LETTER 
32 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
L E T TER LXX 
J Received your tob fond Letter. I shall pursue your Advice — It has been my own Practice, for Some Years' past. I iised formerly to make reading my Food; I take it now, by Way of Medicine. 
The Pills to purge Melancholy I have appsied, these two Days, are the six Volumes of Lrijiram Shandy; the four last of which I had not read, before — I don’t know how it happened, but I suppose I had heard no chara(5ler of them, to encourage me. 
I confess 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 33 
I confess that I had been entertained with the two first Volumes, of this same loie cf a Pub. The Whim and odd ness of the Style and Manner, were new; • and that’s enough : but the latter Publications have disappointed me; for they Seem rather too much to answer the Title of an old Comedy, of Humour out of Breath. 
This Work, or Play, rather, ^ puts me in Mind of the Character which the ingenious Mr. Moil in his Tracts, gives of Swiss % of a Lubin these Words; “There is a good deal of wild Fancy in “it, which captivates, by its Extrava “gance and uncommonness; but I think “it, upon the whole, to be the pro“ “Piece of Ribaldry, that has ap c 5 “pearcd 
34 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
“pearcd in the World, since the Days “of Rabelais., that great Original of Ban“ “and Ridicule.” 
I am not Speaking as a Prude; for I can pardon anything, though ever So free, that has Wit in it. For Wit is not Refiedlion — stis a Sort of gifted Faculty, which, like Inspiration, forces its Way, without our own consciousness; and the Tongue or Pen are but the Organ or Instrument, of the Oracle. 
But there is not, in my Opinion, a Sufficient Seasoning of the Spice, to disguise the putrefafuon^ There may, there certainly are, Tastes, that might relish Such haut gotits; but as Horace Says, 

eri‘ 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 35 
Offenduntur enim qmbus eji Equus et Pater, et Res. 
However, to do the Author Justice, while he is alive, and I would Speak still more tenderly of him, were he dead; there are certain Strokes of Humanity, in these Writings, which do him Honour; and what Some Poet Says of Beaumont,. may be aptly enough applied to him, 
‘‘ At once thou mak’st us blush, rejoice, and weep.” 
And I hope, and believe too, that what' was Said of Sir John Suckling, may also be fairly quoted here, “that his Thoughts were not So loose as his Expreshons.” 
Farewell. 
C 6 
LETTER 
36 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
L E T E T R LXXI 
J Have been to pay a Visit to Mr. ajlon, on his Marriage I stayed there, two Days, which was Spent what is generally called Jovially; but in my Opinion it might rather be styled Jumntly — For the Lady Seems to assume too much of that Goddess, in her Manners and Deportment, She deals mostly in Sentences, and always peaks in Print. 
She appears to think that she has a Superior Understanding to her Husband;; I have this very Sufficient reason 
* southeast Letter sicvi. 
to 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. ^37 
to d6ny htt^that jhe affefls to Show If this was the case, above, I heartily forgive the poor hen pecked Jupiter his Relaxations with Europa, Semele To; and Such other good-natured Wenches. 
A ridiculous Circumstance happened to me, on my Return. The Day was wet, which obliged me to stop, on the Road; So that I did not reach Home, still it had passed dinner time. My Family, not expecting, had not prepared anything for my Reception. As I was very hungry, I was obliged to take up with whatever was ready in the Larder, which happened to be only a Small soused Trout. My Appetite perversely increased, at the Sight of it, as a Small Fire is apt to make one colder. 
The 
38 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
The reason for my mentioning So trifling a Circumstance to you, is, because it put me in Mind of a Particular that was told me once, of our old Friend Robin Walker which perhaps you might not have heard, before. You know that poor robin’s Ways and Means were very Scant; and whenever his Commons fell short, he used to dine with his spedla cles on, in order to make the morsel appear the larger. 
The person, from whom I had this curious Anecdote, Said that he was So struck with the Singularity of the Idea, that he improved upon it, by making him. a Present of a magnifying giass,. for the. 
purpose.. 
* See Letter Hi., 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 39 
Purpose. But I should have thought that a multiplying one would have ansv/ered better, as it might have Supplied him with a complete Cover., at once; and as the Sight of a great deal of Meat is apt to Surfeit the Appetite, this might have had its Effect; in this Way, at leash 
This was certainly the most whimsical Method of making the mofi of a littkj or filling one's Belly with moon fhine., that could have been well imagined; but as 1 had none of Such mechanical Helps for qualifying Hunger, at hand, I vas reduced to the vulgar housewifely Manner of robbing the hen roofi., for a Couple of Eggs; and So finished my Meal with Satisfaction. 
Farewell. 
LETTER 
4® ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
LETTER LXXII ' 
there has ever Subsisted a strong Sympathy between us, in all our Affections, pursuits, and Studies, I frequently, of late, look into Books which I had long since laid aside, merely because they have Relation to that Kind of Reading, which, indeed, has always been your own Election, but, in your present Vocation, is now become, I suppose, your Sole Province. 
ivollaftotfs, Religion of Nature is the Work I have now before me. ’tis an admirable treatise; and has infinite 
Merit, 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 41 
Merit, both in the Matter, and the Argument of it. This Author should first be carefully perused throughout, in Order to comprehend the whole Scope of his Design; and the re reading of him ought to commence, at the fifth Sedlion. It would be well worth the while of every Man' to get the Prayer there, by heart, .and often repeat it to himself, with Gratitude, Fervency and Devotion. 
There is one Passage in him, however, and but that one, only, where he Seems to betray a Small Inadvertence, in reasoning. He first denies dte^ Eternal, or self existence of Matter; and then proceeds to prove, that Motion, Attraflion, care not its ejfential Kbualities.^ but only Some of its Affefiions. But is not this 
more 
42 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
more than was necessary to his Proposition? For, if Matter be a Work of Creation, must not all its Properties have been So too ^ 
. ^ I don’t know, perhaps, but that this Slip may be an Advantage to the Work; for stis plain that the Author was not an •artful reasoner, by his Suffering So weak an Argument to have escaped him. 
Adieu, 
LETTER 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 43 
LETTER LXXIII 
Dear Host, 
Shall have the pleasure of breathing the thick Air of London, but the clear one of Friendship, with you, Sorne time the next Vfeek; as I am obliged to incur the Expense of filing a Bill of Revivot^ this Term, on.the Death of one of the numerous Parties to my immortal Suit. 
I look upon a cause in Chancery to be a Lease of livesy renewaue for ever; as I am forced to pay a Fine, in this Manner, upon every demise. But Sure 
it 
44 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
it is a hard Thing to forfeit Heriots.,"^ continually, without ever being in possession of tbi Farm. 
I don’t know how far Morals may have been benefited, by our Refinements on the Manners of our Gothic Ancestors; but I really think that abolishing the combat crdeaf in Suits of Law, has been a considerable Injury to us. It has only given' Knaves and Cowards the Advantage over honest Men and Brave; and but enabled the Rich and Powerful to oppress the Poor and Weak. 
Time, Speaking as Chorus, in the winter’s Tale, says, 
* Fees paid to a Landlord, on the Death of a Tenant. 
Ta 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 45 
Tis in my Power to o’tr throw Law. 
This might have been true, perhaps, of antieni Lime; but I am Sure the modern my has not Such a Seat to boast of. 
But to turn away my Thoughts from So irksome a Subject, let me rejoice in the Pleasure of Seeing you the oftener, from this Necessity, than I might otherwise do. Pray desire my Attorney to prepare the Bill, immediately; for stis a Matter of mere Form and course, and requires no Instrudlions. 
My affectionate Compliments to our most hospitable Landlady, and tell her I shall Send her up a Heriot before I go myself — Epicuri de Grege Porcam^ it shall 
be; 
46 ' ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
be; So let her adjust the ceconomy of her Household, accordingly. 
'• Adieu, 
LETTER LXXIV 
J FELT an additional Regret on leaving you, at this Time; on account of Love, as well as Friendship. I could with you indulge my Heart in Speaking more freely, on that dear Subject, than I dare venture to do by Letter. Accidents might possibly happen in the contingencies of Posts, that would render my Life miserable, through the only Medium of Misfortune that T can ever now be Sensible of. 
I shall 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 47 
I shall, therefore, strike this Topic out of all our future Correspondence, as an additional Instance of that Prudence and Virtue with which I have of late refrained from going near the house — That Temple of my Idolatry — 
“Whose Image steals between my God and me.” 
O, may this Sacrifice, this Penance So Severe, be accepted as Atonement for Such Impiety! I owe it to her, I owe it to myself— — is to my Hearty and to my Soul. 
Do not make any Reply to this Letter, as I now take Leave of the Subject, for Life; for if Muftc he the Food of Love what a Feast must there be in the harmonious Sound of herwery Name! 
Use 
48 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
use has powerful Operations upon us; I have not been able to recover my natural Rest, since I left Town. The Noises of London are still vibrating in. my Ears, and I want the Earthquake of Wagons and stage coaches, to rock me to steep 
'But I will not apply Wine, as a composing Draught — Tliofe who arc cheerful, need it not; and stis a dangerous Opiate, to those who are. They who drink, in order to drive Care away, do their business but by Halves, and only add Deliberation to Suicide. 
Write to me often, that I may rejoice in being awake, while I read, and answer your Letters, at least. 
My 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 49 
My Compliments to Mrs. Parson and 
Adieu. 
P. S. I am just Summoned to our Assizes. This business is always un pleasant to me, but doubly irksome at present, as coming So Soon after my having been from Home, and the having been with you. 
vol. II 
D 
LETTER 
50 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
LETTER LXXV 
JAM just returned from our Assizes at Chelmsford, where we had, thank God, no mortal Doings, this Time; only a few litigious Suits of Law, for less Sums than, I am very Sure, the Expenses, what with process, Latvyers, Attorneys, and Witnesses brought from far, cum multis, must have amounted to. 
But there was one very shameful Trial, 
there. A rich Farmer had indited a ✓ 
young Fellow, for the stealing a horse, and the Fact was fully proved against him; when his Mother appeared in Court, and 
Swore 
ORIGINAL letters. 51 
Swore the prisoner to be the natural Son of the prosecutor; who had never given him Trade. Education, or Subsistence.. 
This Circumstance Saved his Life, as it induced the Jury to recommend him for Transportation. The Father was justly rated by the Judge, for his inhuman Neglect of the Boy, and hooted out of Court, by the Populace. 
Men are often too apt to overlook an Obligation of this Kind, entirely. But, indeed, how little Attention is paid, in general, to Morals which have no legal Sandlion to enforce them! Men appear to be ashamed of this Sort of Connedlion, as if it was the child’s Fault, instead of .their own. 
b 2 ■ Let 
52 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
'Let us suppose a poor unfortunate natural Child to stand forth and Speak thus to his unnatural Parent. “Father, thou hast Sinned against Heaven, and am /, theresore, unworthy to be called thy Son r Would not the Reproof be just? Shall a Man boast of the Crime, and yet be ashamed of the Fruits of it? 
The good Dean was at Chelmsford. about Some Small business of Tithes, and heartily wished me Joy, on your Account. Tell our Friend, Said he, that I rejoice he is become one of us at last. 
The Weather was remarkably fine, during the Assizes; which I was Sorry for, as I was all the while obliged to attend on Juries. Confinement on a fair 
Day 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 53 Day makes one apt to feel as if they were in a Gaol. 
Adieu. 
LETTER LXXVI 
the Country is not quite So barren of Intelligence, as I once imagined If one has but their Eyes and Ears a little abroad, they may pick up an Anecdote, now and then, which might Supply a Paragraph for a News paper. 
1 am, however, extremely Sorry for the Article I am going to communicate to you, at present. I shall not mention any 
See Letter XXXII 

Names; 
54 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Names; because, in the first Place, the persons are not of your Acquaintance; and, in the next, for a still better rea fon; if they were, you would still feel an higher Concern in the Misfortune. 
An unhappy Affair has happened lately, in a very relpedtable Family of this Neighbourhood. A young Lady, of all Seeming Modesty and good Behaviour, has been detected in an illicit Amour, with a young Gentleman, her near Relation; her first Cousin, I hear; for I have no Intercourse with the Family, myself. 
As the Story has unluckily become 
t 
Public, through the still further Indiscretion of one of the Parties, stis too late, now, I fear, to repair the Damage — If 
you 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 55 
you close up a Wound, before the Air has got to it, the Surgeons Say it will Soon heal; but if Suffered to take Wind, stis apt to fester. 
I have always thought that Cousin germans were dangerous Connexions. They are apt to contrax all the fondness and Familiarity of Brothers and Sisters, but without the Restraint of Custom or Opinion. 
I am So offended at this Story, that 1 cannot help Saying, as Somebody does in a Play — Cousins / Devil take such Couftns. But I shall dwell no longer on the subjex, as I axually feel, while I am relating it, as if I was myself invent 
Farewell. 
D 4' LETTER 
ing the Scandal. 
56 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
LETTER LXXVII.. dear Friend, 
HAT you tell me, about Mr. 
-- -- -, docs not at all Surprise me, ' 
in Such Times as the present; that a Man should be able to cut a Figure, who is capable of cutting Throats, or purses, Gamblers may be fitly compared to the Lilies of the Field % they toil nod. neither do they spin; and yet often shine forth in solomons Array. 
I fear that we may likewdse borrow a Sentence from the Subsequent verse; which today is., and tomorrow is cafi into the 
Fire. 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 57 
Fire. Knaves may live, where honest Men would starve. There is a Theorem, in Geometry, that between a Circle and its Tangent, an Infinity of crooked Lines may pass, but not one firaight one. 
When persons are Seen to rise into Affluence, without the Means of Trade, Profession, Lottery, or Inheritance, it must be an extraordinary qeconomy, indeed which can keep itself clear of Imputation. Aude aliquid \% the Motto of this Age. 
When we See, which one has the Mortification too frequently to do. Such shame less Upstarts emblazorsing themselves to the World, I cannot but consider their rich side boards, as, gilded Brandsy and their rolling Chariots as moving piiloriesy D 5 ta 
58 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
to render their Infamy but the more general and conspicuous. 
When we See persons of base Origin lording it over their Superiors, while Men of Family or Merit languish in Oblivion, orpine in Secret Want, I fancy I am looking into a Brook, where the Trees on the Margin Seem to have their Roots in the Air, and their Heads upon the Ground. “I see the Master walk on Foot, and the Servants ride on horseback.” ^ 
If a Man happen to be poor, stis a Disadvantage to have been born or bred a Gentleman; because stis too likely that he may never be able to advance his For 
The Proverbs. 
tun. 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 59 
tunes. Mean persons have many Ways of raising themselves to Opulence; because they can fawn, will flatter, and use all Methods, however base or Servile, for theirs own purposes. Fruits must he planted; Mujhrooms spring of themselves. 
But the Night is growing late, and ’ds Time now to have done with all Reflections, which do not relate immediately to one’s Self. 
Adieu, done. 
D 6 
LETTER 
6o ORIGINAL LETTERS, 
LETTER LXXVIII 
J MUST amuse myself at Home, I have neither Incsination nor Neighbours to tempt me to stir abroad. I am become a perfect Robinson Crusoe of late; with a deal of Rested; ion, but little Action. I would exchange my whole Household, for his single Man, Friday — I should have more Comfort in my Family. His a Thing, they Say, to be an Exile, from one’s Country. I begin to think that stis worse to become one in it. 
My Entertainment, for these few Days past, has been the reading of a vast Collec* 
tioit 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 6i 
tion of thoughts on various Subjefls., which have been Scraped together, like the Gather ing in of Nations, from all the Books of the Kind, that had ever been published, I suppose, in every Language.. 
I could wish that the Compiler had been capable of digesting his Materials, Somewhat better than he has done; for he Seems to have been rather more industrious to sill his Pages, than to Store the Mind. 
. /■ 
Non mulus opus ejt, Sed ejfhcaiihus. 
I have met with Several good Things, among them, that I recollect to have Seen before'; but which I fancy he must have noted down from imperfect Memory; as 
they 
62 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
they were So cruelly massacred, that I could not distinguish them by their Features, and knew them only by Some Fragments of their Garments. 
I have ever had a particular Relish, for Writings of this Sort. those who have no other Faculty of the Intelledb perfe«fl, but Memory, should certainly read history;; they who are incapable of re fie<5tion, ought to Supply the Mind with Fads. But I have been always fonder of that Kind of Study, which may best Supply the Contemplation with Hints or Rules for the Conduct or ceconomy of common Life; which, let the Ambitious, or vainglorious Say what they please, will certainly answer to the best Account, upon the whole. 
Dif 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 63 
discourses are like planting a Lree; the thriving of which is weakly and precarious; but Adages resemble the owing a Seed, which strikes Surer and deeper Root. We are more apt to remiember a Sentence than a Sermon; and in Physic I prefer Essences to Drugs. 
Old Folks are generally proverbial; because the Experience of Age has afforded them leisure to verify the Sentences they had picked up in their Youth. And, in reality, this is the best Method of instructing young persons; who are naturally too volatile to attend to a Chain of moral reasoning; and should therefore have their Precepts given them, in Such strong marked Characters, that tho/e who run, may read. 
Among 
64 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Among this Farrago there are many Sayings of the antientphilcsophers, quoted with applause, which are rather hens motsy than reasons. I shall not waste either your Limey or my own Leisure., with repeating any of them here, except one in order to justify my Remark, and to. make many others of the Same Kind„ recur to your own Memory, as I dare Say they will. 
A person, lamenting the Death of his Child, was reproved by his Friend, “be causethat his Grief was incapable of retrieving the loss.” “'Lis for that very Rea -- fen., replied the Sage, that I grieve." But suppose, now, this Repartee to have been returned, by his Friend; for Pertness cannot be restrained, even in Friendship, “It 
should 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 65 
stiould Seem, then, that you would imme ^j diately cease to grieve, if you thought it would.” For this may be fairly enough deduced from the Reply — 
I have been most charmingly interrupted, this Moment, by a Letter from you. I most heartily congratulate you, * Such News as this. Supplies the Want of Society, to yours, ever. 
Adieu. 
* He had jud got a good Living. 
LETTER 
66 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
LETTER LXXIX 
^/fy Mind continued to run on the Subject of my last Letter, for a considerable Time after I had Sent it to the Post; which occasioned Some Thoughts to occur to me, in the Proverbial Style I Said I was So fond of; and I shall minute them down here, for your amuse ment, upon the allowed Privilege of thinking aloud. ’ 
Secreti loquimur — I am no Merchant venturer.^ in Wit, and never hazard, but 
f So Addifsn styles a Conversation between two Friend. 
among 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 67 
among Friends. And, in this particular Instance, perhaps, I may need the Indulgence of one; for among the Multiplicity of the Things I have read and thought, for Some Days past, how can I be Sure whether a Thought has come out of my own Head, or only siipt out of the Budget. 
Thoughts upon Various Subjects. 
We pay a purchase, for all the Goods in Life; either by the Labour to procure, the Anxiety to preserve, or the Regret at losing them. 
Old Folks would have young ones as 
wise as themselves; without considering 
they would be Fools if they were So. 
^ Men 
/ / __________________ 
/ 

68 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Men arc not conscious of their Vices, while they remain under the Delirium. A person must become Sober, before he acknowledge himseif to have been drunk. 
Foreboding 111 is Madness— — there not Misfortunes enough to be had, reatiy made, but we must hefpeak them? 
^ A little Thought Saves a great deal. The Same may be Said of Trouble. 
The Character of an Author has a Contradiction of Terms in it. For it gives Fame, without Credit. 
Some modern Writer styles necejjity a tenth muse; but he does her Injustice. She is rather the first, or indeed the Parent. 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 69 
rent., of them all, as being the Mother of Invention. 
Of all immodest Writers it may be justly Said, their muse was So poor, that she had not wherewithal to cover her naked.iefs. '. 
When we resent another person’s Pride, we justify it, by our own. c^asre? 
The Cross was the Lree of Life. 

Your holy day Chrifiians too often im pose themselves on the World, for Persons of Sandlity. His not by the sab lath., but the six Pays., that our Virtue and Religion are to be estimated. 
^0 
70 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
"Lo do one an Injury., and never forgive them, is a most shocking Description of a Character; and yet it might Serve to abate the disgust it creates, if we but attend a little to t.ke c ause of it. We Speak evil of tkofe, to whorh'we have done it, not from any additional Malice, but by way only of palliating our own Injustice, and preventing by Detraction the World from taking Part with the injured person. This is no more than acting in one’s own Defence; like a bravo’s repeating his Stroke, to put it out of his antagonist’s Power to revenge the Assault. So that ’tis the first at only, that we should resent, all the rest. Such is the Nature of Vice, fol 


A Con 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 71 
A Confidence in Mankind, is but a Confidence in their Maker. We trust a Watch with our Time, on the Same Credit; and why not a Friend with our Money. 
-- Tears were not given us, for ourselves. Philosophy forbids them, in our own case; they are a weakness, when Selfish; but become a Virtue, when shed for others. 
Nothing is So contrary to Good breeding, as Pundlilio. The truest Art of polite ness, is to be perfectly at ease, oneself, without disgusting or incommoding others. 
Virtue is a prafhcey not a Study. 
72 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Admiration is Said to be the Daughter of Ignorance; but this senhifeslff^gards only the Works of Ait, ^‘mvkh re ipedtto those of Nature, the Admiration, as well as the Adoration of the Philosopher, or Man of Science, must infinitely exceed that of the Vulgar. 
The Indians must be but bad Surgeons; for they cannot be versed in Anatomy, as their Religion forbids their touching, or breaking up a corpse. Such a supersti tion appears to resped the Dead, rather than the Living. Heathens seems to look upon the Body, as the Man; but christians consider it only as his old Coat. 
If mutual Wants, as philosophers Say, form the natural Cement of Society; 
Surely 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 73 
Surely mutual miseries must strengthen them. ' 
persons who are well born, should take care to preserve their Distindion, by being well-bred, also; in order to mark the Difference, properly, between them and the Nulgar; for dress, and Equipage, without Manners, Air, and Demeanour, are not Sufficient Criterions. One may be hired, or borrowed; the other not. 
■ happiness, to be permanent, must be Seated in the Mind. All foreign Satisfactions are precarious. ‘ The firfc only, are the Goods., the latter but the Movables, of Life., C 
Life is our exile; Death but our recall. 
vol. II E But 
^ AA 
74. ORIGJNAL LETTERS. 
But stis Time now, to recall my Mind home from wandering, for the rest of the Evening;, therefore, my dear Friend, 
Adieu. 
LETTER LXXX 
J Received a Letter, last Pacquet, from irelanl that has given me a good deal of pleasure and Satisfaction. How flattering a Thing it is to be remembered! I am impatient to send it to you; and, as if I thought the Post waited for rsie, I shall not detain you longer than just to inclose it, and to Say, 
Adieu. 
The 
ORIGINAL lpitterso 7$ 
The Letter. 
Dear Sir, Dublin College. 
I do not know whether ymu may pos sibly recollect me, after Such an Interval of Time, but as you Seemed, the few and short Spaces I had the Happiness to Spend in your Company within these Classic Walls, to mark an Approbation of Some Works of Genius you happened to have met with, among us, I here present you with a lively Piece of Satirical Wit, that was written, many Years ago, by Doctor Swift; at a Time when our Sectaries here made a Bustle to get the Left afi abolished in Parliament, and lay the Enclosures opeji as Common land. 
E 2 7 hesc 
; 6 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
these Lines were never published; for though the humourist Author amused himself with laughing at the Separatijls., he did not care to strengthen the legifia ture, which opposed them, and which he was equally averse to, with the Force of his Ridicule. • 
As Swift never gave a Copy of it, it has been only preserved in Memory, by a few Friends of his, ever since, to whom he had privately repeated it. From one of whom, Mr. Rochfort I, this Morning, received the oral Lraditiqn^ and had his Permission to minute it down for you. The very Style of it will be Sufficient to vouch its Genuineness. 
I am. 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 77 
I am, dear Sir, with an earnest Wish for a Revisit, your most humble and obedient Servant, 
F. A. 
On the Dav of Judgement. 
With undigested Thoughts oppressed, 
I Sunk from Reverie to Rest, 
An horrid vision Seized my Head j I Saw the Graves yawn up their Dead ^ 
ove armed with Terrors ope’d the Skies, 
The Thunder roars, and Lightning sties; While each pale Spedlre hangs’its Head, 
ove nodded, burst the Clouds, and Said; 
“You whom the various Sects have shammed, “And come to see each other damned, 
“As Priests have threatened; tho’ they knew “No more of my Decrees, than you; 
“The world’s vain businefs now being o’er, “Such Dogmas may prevail no more. 
“I ’gainst Such Blockheads Set my Wit I “I damn Such Fools! Go, go, you’re bit — 
e3 
LETTER 
78 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
LETTER LXXXI 
T H E Change of Ministers you Speak of, convinces me of what I have long observed, that it is never an Alteration of Measures, but only a Rotation of a certain Set of Men, who being too numerous to be gratified all at once, must take their Turns in Succession, to quiet caballing. 
The old Distindlions of fvhig and high church and low churchy are still kept alive, though the Principles which gave Rise to them, are forgotten, and the Spirit evaporated; So that the Denominations of Heydukes and Mama 
lukesy 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 79 
hikes., Mandarins and pctjjoaws, might Serve as well, as Swift Said, to arrange our Parties under, for any Good they do the mad Fools who stock to their Standards. 
Philosophers make So nice a Calculation, ^ as to venture to affirm that it is as ths ^ fifth Power of Infinite to Unity., exa<5tly, ^^ that in a fortuitous concourse a Prism Shall never enter into a prismatic Bore, * 
How much higher then, must the Odds rise, in Politics, where even Chance is not allowed fair Play for its Contingency; and that there Seems to be a regular De jign formed, to prevent a proper Adaption of Officers to Offices? 
• See huche/otty on Beauty, Harmony, atid Order. 
E 4 In, 
go ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
In short vre have Changes indeed, but no Chances., in this mortal Life, tlicse are melancholy Resieftions. Let us have done with them. 
Adieu. 
LETTER LXXXII 
J S H A L L Set out for Scarborough in a few Days, to try an Experiment on my disorder. Tis not by the Advice of any of the Faculty., but of the best Physician in the World; a person who has been cured of the Same Complaint, by thbse Waters. 
He is a very Sensible Man, and about my own Age.. He dined with me, Yc 
i 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 8i. 
sterday, being introduced to me, on this very Account, by Mr. afion ^benedick t the married Man — who came to return my Visit. The ox eyed Goddess * not with him; and if she was with Ixion,, in the Clouds, it would be no great Matter, by what I could gather from his Manner of mentioning her. When a Man Ipeaks of a Wife, with Refpeffy before the honeymoon has waned, his Fondness must be all over.,, 
Write often to me at Scarborough: L shall need your Society more abroad, than I do even at home. 
Adieu. 
^ So silled by Homer, See Letter LXXI 
E 5 
LETTER 
si ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
LETTER LXXXIII 
( ^ Scarborough 
jhave been here but a few Days — you cannot expect any promising Account of me yet. The Days of Spells are long since past. I wish that even Jlom and sure were the Motto of modern Physic. 
I think that Patients is a very proper Term, for Invalids; and that a good Parody may be made on that beautiful Description which Viola gives of an unhappy lovesick Maid, in the iswelfth Night. 
“Like Patience on a Monumenty Smiling at med.cinef* 
There 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 8^ 
There is a World of Company here; or I had better have used the Word Sea; as they Seem to pour in upon us like the wavesy but with this Difference, that there appears no Ebb yet, though the Seafbn. is a good deal advanced. 
Lord Granby is amon m. I never happened to have Seen him before — I own I longed much to view a real Heroc ^ having never Seen any of that Character, but what are generally mifreprefentedy on the Stage; where the Dramatis Per fond have no other Way of marking their gallant Spirits, but by Looks of fierceness, Pride or disdain. 
His Lordship frowns none of fuch aspe<sts upon us. He has a meekness, E 6 a Modesty,, 
84 ORIGINAL vletters. 
a Modesty, and a genuine Liberality, in his Looks and Demeanour. He has the jovialness'of Faljiaff., in his Countenance, with the Bravery'of Prince Hal in his Heart. There is no Bounds to his Charity and Benevolence, for it exceeds even his own large Income, and he may be truly compared to sampfops Lion., whole Bowels were filled, with Honey. 
This is my Hero, let intus Curtins say what he will of Alexander. Such a Man needs no Chaplain; or I would recommend you to'him. 
i - 

'LETTER 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 85 
LETTER LXXXIV 
Scarborough, 
J RECEIVED your obliging Letter, and thank you for the Several Articles of News in it, both foreign and domestic, public and private. They have enabled me to make a Figure among the. beau monde, at our coffeehouse, here. 
. I have regularly drank the Waters, and bathed every Day, for this Fortnight, but without any Sensible Effect yet; though I See others who have already be nesited of the same Regimen here, in the same Space of Time; but their Disorders, I suppose, had not struck Such deep Root. 
The 
36 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
The World is very gay at our Assemblies and Balls; and we have a Number of persons of Fashion, here, of both Sexes, who dress out in the highest Modes of French Fopperies. This is Surely a strange Infatuation. The Majiers of 
Europe are become but the petit maitres of a Province, at present! 
Tacitus., Speaking of the ancient Britons, adopting the Dress and Manners of the Romans, their Conquerors, which they looked upon as a Resinement, instead of Badges of their Subjection, says. Pars Servitutis erat 
The Tartars, when they conquered Chinny established their own Habits of Drels there; So that the rival Nations 
could 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. s7 
could not be distinguished from each other, by their outward Appearances; ■which prevented the Natives from being able to perceive their own Superiority of Numbers, and profiting of it. 
Might not this Subject Supply Some Matter of Ressedion to our Legissature? unless, by Suffering the Modes and Manners of the French So generally to obtain, in Britain they should mean to have their Policies also to follow them, and render the King of England un Grand monarque^t at lash Avert Such Ills, ye Britons! 
Adieu. 
LETTER 
88 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
L E T T E R. LXXXV 
Scarhoruiigb. 
J STILL continue my Regimen, and have now added an Article to it, though I was forbidden it, on Pain of Death., by a Physician here, whom I fee’d for his Opinion, on the very Point. 
I had heard that drinking the Seawater had been very medicinal, in many Cafes, and had a Mind to make the Experiment of it, in mine; but the do(51; or told me that if my disorder proceeded, as he apprehended it did, from Some unsoundness, in the Vifetra., Such a Potion must destroy me. 
You 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 89 You may as well argue with a Man in a Passion, as one in Pain. I was in Such Agony, at the Time, that I would have drank up Efif or eat a Crocodile., for Relief. I resolved, therefore, to venture. Kill or Cure Medicines are often permitted, in desperate Cafes. It is buta Sort of Moral Suicide, at most. I tried it; this is the fourth Day; and I have the Triumph to find that, not only my Stomach has got ease, but my Appetite is increaseti. 
This has given me vast Spirits; I went to the Play last Night, for the first Time; and perhaps may go to the Ball, this Evening — A cheerful Man cannot live alone. I am resolved never to be grave again. You must get a Soberer Correspondent, 
90 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Spondent, for the future. I shall continue to write still; but it shall be only to your Daughter, sto, whom I beg leave to Subscribe myself, my lovely Maid, and dear Fifteen, your admiring Slave, 
Renafeens* 
LETTER LXXXVI 
Scarborough, 
J Continue still well, and in Appetite and Spirits. I walk a great deal over these romantic Cliffs, contemplating the greatest and most wonderful Object in Nature; which thou h inanimate, Seems endowed with the Property of self motion. 
The 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
The Thoughts which poffess me, on these Occasions, lift me above their highest Hills, even to Olympm lop. When I hear of numerous Squadrons on the embattled Plain, I think of the Sea, and contemn their Forces. When they Speak of Kings with all their gorgeous Trains, I recoiled: a Star, and they quick start from their Spheres, and shoot themselves out of Sight, like nightly Meteors. 
When Such Ideas are once raised in the contemplative Mind, 
“How weary, stale, flat and unprofitable, 
“Seem to II all the Uses of this World 
And how must the Soul of Man exult, in his own littleness, from rejoicing, in the 
greatness 
92 ORIGINAL LETTERS. greatness of a Superior Being! How mean, in ourselves, but how noble, in our Creator! 
O, no! our Souls were never lent us, like Life, but for a Season. When we say the Lord hath given, the Lord hath taken away, and hlejfed he the Name of the Lord, we could never pray So, if we imagined this precious Article to be included among Such transitory Gifts. Religion would Sicken, at the Thought; Devotion stag its Pinions, droop, and die — 
If, as stis Said, the People of Israel had never received any farther promises than of the temporal Blessings of Life, this may, perhaps, account for the frequent Backssidings of the Jews. Their Piety 
could 
‘ORIGINAL LETTERS. 93 
could rise no higher than Allegiance, at best; Commands are not Sufficiently enforced, by human Sandlions, only. - 
/ 
/ 
I Said, in my last Letter, that I would never be grave again; but I hope you don’t think I have broke my Word, here; for you know, in your Heart., that Such Thoughts as these, are the pleasantest and most cheerful ones, that the Imagination can possibly frame; and.the Serious Cast of them fitter becomes the Day, which happens to be the Sahhath. 
Adieu.' 
LETTER 
, 4 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
LETTER. LXXXVII 
Scarhorougb, 
J HAVE performed all my Ablutions Sufficiently for the season, and shall quk this Place, in a few Days. I have received considerable Benefit from the Waters here, both fresh and Salt; though in the Midst of my Triumph I Sometimes feel a Monitor in my Breast, which, like the Roman Slave bids me remember my Mortality. 
I have gone to many Plays, here; mostly the Tragedies. Bad Actors do better, in Such Representations, than in 
Comedy. 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 95 
Comedy. The Sentiments, Didion, and distress in the former, divert the Attention'of the Audience, from th&drdmatis Perfonre., more than the latter is capable of doing. 
Quod acer Spiritus ac Vis, Nec Verbis, nec Rebus inest — 
But in general, I prefer Melpomene to i’halia, on the Stage. Mirth and Joy give but single and transitory Sensations; but Sorrow and Compassion are compounded of two. Sometimes more; of Pity for the distress, a generous Wish to relieve it, and, in Some cases, an honest Indignation, against the Author of it. these Sentiments sink deeper in our Hearts, and consequently dwell longer on 
our 
96 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
our Minds. At a Comedy we Swallow like a Heron; whose Digestion is too quick for Nourishment; but from a tra gedy, we bring away the Cud. ' - 
How admirably has kind Providence adapted our Natures to our State in Life, by rendering an Indulgence in Melancholy, pleasing! which like the plaintive Notes of Music, possesses us with the most voluptuous Sensibility! So ends my Epilogue, and 
adieu. 
LETTER 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 97 
LETTER LXXXVIII 
J SHALL Set out from Home tomorrow;; shall have the pleasure of travelling, most part of the way, with an agreeable Invalid I happened to become acquainted with, since I came here. 
We were Speaking, lately, on the sub jefl of the Warmth and Violence of Parties, which have risen to Such a Height among us, at present; and comparing them with Situations recorded in History — which was an easy Matter to do, as all Times of Commotion are generally like all other Times of Commotion — upon vol. II F which 
98 ORIGINAL LETTERS, which Occasion, he lent me a most admirable well written trad, which has been long out of Print, and contains the Substance of ifiany Volumes, in a few Pages, on the subjeds both of our Constitution and Parties; preferable, in my Opinion, to Clarendon's there Folios of parentheses;; which, by being referred to these Times, may be capable of producing more Salutary effeds on all impartial and dispassionate Readers, than the most elaborate treatise that could possibly be compcsed for the present iera. This political Writing relates to measures; most ntodern ones apply to Men. 
I have borrowed it to lend you, for ytur Entertainment; and if you think of it as both he and I do, you are at 
liberty 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 99 
liberty to throw it into any of the Magazines you chuse, as we would have it circulate. 
Adieu. 
Lord mojesworth’s Preface to hotoman’s Franco gallia tranjlated by him, and printed in 1705, in the Reign of Kfueen Anne. 
JANY Books and Papers have been published, since the late Revolution, * tending to justify the Proceedings ot the People of England, at that happy juncture;; Setting in a true Light our just Rights and Liberties, together wdth 
* In 1688. 
F 2 
the 
100 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
the Solid Foundation of our conjiiiuhon; which, in truth, is not our’s only, but that of almost all Europe, besides; So wisely restored and established, (if not introduced) by the Goths and Franks whose Descendants we are. 
these Books have as constantly had Some Things, called Answers written to them, by persons of different Sentiments; who certainly either never Seriousiy considered that they were thereby endeavouring to destroy their own happiness, and overthrow her majesty’s Title to the Crown; or, if they knew what they did, presumed upon the Lenity of that Government they decried; which, were there no better reason, ought to have recommended it to their Approbation, since it 
could 
oxtiginal LETTERS, loi 
could patiently hear with such as were doing all they could to undermine it 
Not to mention the Railing, Virulence, or personal fidse Refiedtions, in many of those answers, (which are always a Sign of a weak cause, or a feeble Champion) Some of them asserted the divine Right of an hereditary Motiarch, and the Impiety of Reftfiance., upon any Terms whatever, notwithstanding any Authorities to the contrary. 
* Apply this Reflection to the present Times, V Abbi le Blanc,, who lived sometime In this Country, writing to a Friend in France, says, upon this Subject“ “Licentiousness of the Saturnalia lasted only three Days, at Rome, but one would imagine there was not a Day in the Year, on which this Pagan Festival was not celebrated, in England. 
'I' 3 
Others 
102 ORKHNAL LETTERS. 
Others (and those the more judicious) denied positively that Sufficient Authorities could be produced to prove, that a free People have a juji Power to defend them selves, by opposing their Prince., who endeavours to oppress and enssave thern^; and alleged, that whatever was Said or done, tending that Way, proceeded from a Spirit of Rebellion., and antimonarchied Principles, 
To confute, or convince this last Sort of Arguers, (the first not being worthy to have Notice taken of them) I Set about tranfiating the Franco gallia of that most learned and judicious Civilian, Francis Hotoman, a grave, Sincere, and unexceptionable Author, even in the Opinion of his Adversaries. Ishis Book gives an 
Account 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 103 
Account of the antient/r^<? State of above three Parts out of four of Europe', and has of a long Time appeared to me So convincing and instrudtive in those important Points he handles, that I could not be idle whilst it remained unknown, in a Manner, to Englishmen;; of all People living, have the greatest reason and Need to be thoroughly instructed in what it contains; as having, on the one Hand, the most to lose, and, on the other, the least sense of their Right to that, which hitherto they Seem (at least in great measure) to have preserved. 
It will be obvious to every Reader, that I have taken no great Pains to write elegantly. What I endeavour at, is as plain a' Style as possible, which on this F 4 Occasion 
*04 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Occasion I take to be the best; for since the Instrudtion of Mankind ought to be the principal Drift of all Writers (of his tory especially) whoever writes to the Capacity of most Readers, in my Opinion, most fully answtrs the End. 
I am not ignorant, hovr tiresome and difficult a Piece of Work it is to tranjlate., nor liow little valued in the World, My Experience has convinced me, that it is more troublesome and teasing than to write and invent at once. The Idiom of the Language out of which one tranfiates, runs foin the Head, that it is next to impossible not to fall frequently into it. And the more bald and incorrect the Style of the Original is, the more shall that of the Transsation be So too. ^ Many of the 
Quota 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 105 
Quotations in this Book are drawn from Priests, Monks, Friars, and civil Lawyers, who minded more, in those barbarous Ages, the Substance than the Style of their Writings : and I hope these Considerations may atone for Several Faults, which might be found in my Share of the Work. 
But I desire not to be misunderstood, as if, whilst 1 am craving Favour for myself, I were making any Apology for Such a Number of mercenary Scribblers, Animadverters and Translators, as pester us in this Age; who generally Ipoil the good Books which fall into their Hands, and hinder others from obliging the Public, who would otherwise do it to greater Advantage, 
F 5 
I take 
io .ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
'I take this Author to be one of those few, that has had the good Luck to es cape them; and I make use of this Occasion to declare, that the chief Motive which induces me to Send abroad this Small treatise, is a sincere Desire of in strudting the only Possessors of true Liberty in the World, what Right and Title they have to that Liberty; of what a great Value it is; what misery follows the loss of it; how eassty, if Care be taken in Time, it may be preserved; and if this either opens the Eyes, or confirms the honourable Resolutions, of any of my worthy Countrymen, I have gained a glorious End: and done that in my Study, whsici) I should have ■ promoted any other Way, had I been called to it. 
I hope 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 107 
I hope to die wdth the Comfort of believing that old England will continue to be a free Country, and know itself to be such;; my Friends, Relations, and Children, with their Posterity, will inherit their'share of this inestimable bles fing, and that I have contributed my Part toward it. 
But there is one very great Discouragement under which both I, and all other Writers and Tranfiators of Books, tending to the acquiring or preserving the public Liberty, do lie; and that is, the heavy Calumny thrown upon us, that we are all commonwealips Men : Which, (in the ordinary Meaning of the Word) amounts to Haters of Kingly Governr ment; not without malicious insinua f 6 tionsj, 
lo ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
tions, that we are no great Friends to the present. 
Indeed were the Laity of our Nation (as too many of our Clergy unhappily are) to be guided by the sense of one of our Universities, * Solemnly and publicly declared by the burning of twenty-seven Propositions (Some of them deserving that censure, but others being the very Foundation of all our Civil Rights;) I, and many like me, would appear to be very much in the wrong. But since the Revolution., in eighty eight, that we stand upon another and better Bottom, thd. no other than our own old one., stis Time that our Notions should be Suited to our conjiitu tion. And truly, as Matters stand, I 
• 0)cferd» 
have 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 109 have often wondered, either how So many of our Gentlemen, educated under Such Prejudices, should retain any sense at all of Liberty; for, the hardeji Lejfon is to unlearn : Or how an Education So diametrically opposite to our Bill of Rights should be So long encouraged. 
Methinks a Civil Lejl might be contrived, and prove very convenient to distinguish those that own the Revolution Principles from Such as toils virihus oppose them; and at the Same Time do fatally propagate Doctrines, which lay too heavy a Load upon Chrijlianity itself, and make us prove our own Executioners. 
The Names of tvhig and Lory will, I am afraid, last as long among us, as those 
of 
no ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
of Guelf and Ghibelline did in Italy. I am Sorry for it: But to Some they become necessary, for Distindlion Sake; not So much for the Principles formerly adapted to each Name, as for particular and worse reasons. For there has been Such chopping and changing, both of Names 
and Principles, that v/e Scarce know who 
> 
is who. I think it therefore necessary, in order to appear in my own Colours, to make a public Profession of my political Faith; not doubting but it may agree, in Several Particulars, with that of many worthy persons, who are undefervedly aspersed as I am. 
My Notion of a Whig., * I mean of a real 
* The justest and moftcorapleat Description of this Charaiier, that ever was drawn, is given ia 
this excellent Trail:. 
wlg., 
ORIGINAL LETTERS, rii 
Whig., for the nominal are worse than any Sort of Men, is, “that he is one who is exaduy for keeping up to the strictness of the true old Gothic Conjiittition, under the three Estates, oiking (or ^leen) Lords and Commons; the Legijlature being Seated in all three together, the executive entrusted with the sirst, but accountable to the whole Body of the People, in Cafe of maladministration. 
A true Whig is of Opinion, that the executive Power has as just a Title to the Allegiance and Obedience of the Subject, according to the Rules of known Laws en afied by the legijlative.^ as the Subjefl has to Protefiion., Liberty and Property : And So. on the contrary. 
A true 
II ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
A true pvhigh not aftaid of the Name of a Cotnmonwealthfman, because So many foolish People, who know not what it means, run it down : The Anarchy and Confujion which these Nations fell into, near sixty Years ago, and which was faljly called a Commonwealth., frightening them out of the true Construflion of the Word. But Queen Elizabeth, and many other of our best Princes, were not Scrupulous of calling our Government a Commonwealth, even in their Solemn Speeches to Parliament. And indeed if it be not one, I cannot tell by what Name properly to call it : For where in the very Frame of the con(litution, the Good of the whole is taken Care of, by the whole (as in our case) the having a King or een at the Head of it, alters not the case; and the 
Softening 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 113 
Softening of it by calling it a limited Monarchy Seems a Kind of Contradiction, in Terms, invented to please Some weak and doubting persons. 
And because Some of our Princes., in this last Age, did their utmost Endeavour to destroy this Union and Harmony of the three ejiatesy and to be arbitrary or independent., they ought to be looked upon as the Aggrejfors upon our Constitution. 
This drove the other two Efiates (for the Sake of the public Preservation) into the fatal Necessity of providing for them selves, and when once the Wheel was Set a running, stwas not in the powtr of 
Man to Stop it, just where it ought to 
have 
II ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
have rested. This is So ordinary in all violent Motions, whether mechanic or political, that no Body can wonder at it. 
But no wise Men approved of the ill Effects of those violent Motions, either Way, could they have helped them. Yet it must be owned they have (as often as used, through an extraordinary Piece of good Fortune) brought us back to our old Constitution again, which else had been lost; for there are numberless Instances in History, of a Downfall from a State of Liberty to Tyranny but very few of a Recovery of Liberty from vy ranny.^ if this last have had any Length of Time to fix itsclf, and take Root. 
Let all Such, who cither through Interest or Ignorance, are Adorers of abfolutt 
Monarchs 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 115 
Monarchs., say what they please; an englijjo Whig can never be So unjust to his Country, and to right reason, as not to be of Opinion, that in all civil Commotions, which Side Soever is the wrongful Aggrejfor., is accountable for all the evil consequences : And through the course of his Reading (though my Lord Clarendon Books be thrown into the Heap) he will find it very difficult to observe, that ever the People of England took up Arms against their Prince., but when constrained to it by a necessary Care of their Liberties and the Confiitution. 
’isis certainly as much Treason and Rebellion against this Confiitution., and the known Laws, in a Prince to endeavour to 
break 
ii ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
break through them, as stis in the People to rise against him, whilst he keeps within their Bounds, and does Iiis Duty. Our Constitution is a Government of Laws not of Persons. Allegiance and protefuon are Obligations, that cannot Subsist Separately; when one fails, the other falls of course. The true Etymology of the Word loyalty.y * (which has been So strangely wrested in the late Reigns) is. an entire Obedience to the Prince, in all his Commands according to Law; that is, to the la%vs themfelvesy to which we owe both an active, and passive Obedience. 
By the old and true Maxim, that the King can do no wrongs no body is So foolish as to conclude, that he has no Strength 
* Derived from the French Word Law. 
to 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 117 to murder, to offer Violence to Women, or Power enough to dispossess a Man wrongfully of his Estate; or that whatever he does (how wicked Soever) is just: But the Meaning is, he has no lawful Power to do Such Things, and our Constitution considefs no Power as irrejiftible., but what is lawful. 
And since Religion is become a great and universal Concern, and drawn into our Government, as it affects every Single man’s Conscience; tho’ in my private Opinion, they ought not to be mingled, nor to have anything to do with each other; (I do not Speak of our Church Polity, which is Part of our State, and dependent upon it) Some Account must be given of that Matter, also. 
Whiggifm 
ii ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Whiggifm is not circumscribed and confined to any one or two of the Religions now professed in the World, but diffuses itself among all. We have known Lurks., nay Some Papists, 
(which I own to be a greater Rarity) very great Lovers of the Constitution and Liberty : And, were there rational Grounds to expect that any Numbers of them could be So, I should be against using Severities or Distinctions, upon Account of Religion. For, a Papist is not dangerous, nor ought to be ill-used by anybody, because he prays to Saints, believes Purgatory, or the real presence in the Eucharist, and pays divine Worship to an Image or Picture, (which are the common Topics of our Writers of Controversy against them;) but 
because 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 119 
because Popery Sets up a foreign jurif diftion.^ paramount to our Laws', 
So that a real Papist can neither be a true Governor of a Frotejlant Country, nor a true Suhjefi; and, besides, is the most prieji riddm Creature in the World: And, (when uppermost) can bear with no Body that differs from him in Opinion; little considering, that whosoever is against Liberty of Alind., is, in Effect, against Liberty of Body., too. And therefore all penal Afls of Parliament, for Opinions purely religious, which have no Influence on the State, are So many ■ Encroachments upon Liberty, whilst those which restrain Vice and Injustice, are against Licentiousness, 
I profess 
120 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
'I profess myself to have always been a Member of the Church .england, and am for Supporting it in all its Honours, Privileges, and Revenues; but as a Christian and a Whig, I must have Charity for those that differ from me in religious Opinions, whether Pagans, Lurks, Jews, Papijls, fakers, Socinians, prej hyterians, or others. I look upon Bigotry to have always been the very Bane of human Society, and the Offspring of Interest and Ignorance, which has occasioned most of' the great mischiefs that have afflicted Mankind. We ought no more expect to be all of one Opinion, as to the Worship of the iieity, than to be all of one Colour or Stature. To stretch or narrow any man’s conscience to the Standard 
ORIGIKAL L ETT E RS, mii 
dard of our own, - is no less a Piece'of* Cruelty than that of Prccufies the Tyrant of Attica., who used to‘fit. his guests to^ the Length of his own Iron Bedstead, either by cutting them shorter, or racking them longer. 
What just reason can I have to be angry with, to endeavour to curb die natural Liberty, or to retrench the civil > Advantages, of an honest Man, (who follows the golden Rule, of doing to others., as he would have others to do to him., and is willing and able to Serve the Public) only because he thinks his Way. to Heaven Surer, or shorter, than mine ^ Nobody can tell which of us is mistaken, till the Day of Judgement; or whether vol.ti. G any 
122 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
any of us be So (for there may be different Ways to the Same End, and I am not for circumscribing god almighty’s Mercy :) This I am Sure of, one shall meet with the Same pofitiveness in Opinion, in Some of the Priests of all these Sects;; Same Want of Charity, engrossing Heaven by Way of Monolopy to their own Corporation and managing it by a joint Stock, exclusive of all others, (as pernicious in Divinity as in Trade, and perhaps more,) the Same Pretences to Miracles., Martyrs., Inspirations., Merits., Mortifications., re velationsy Aujterity., Antiquity., cas all persons conversant with History, or that travel, know to be true) and this, cut bono? 
I think 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 1*3 
I think it the Honour of the reformed part of the Christian Profession, and the' Church of England., in particular, that it pretends to fewer of these unusual and extraordinary Things, than any other Religion we know of in the World; being convinced, that these are not the' distinguishing - Marks of the Truth of any Religion. (I mean, the assuming obstinate Pretences to them, are not;) and it were not amiss, if we farther enlarged our Charity, wdien vre can do if with Safety, or Advantage to the State, 
Let us but consider, how hard and how impolitic it is to condemn all People but Such as thisik of die Divinity just as we do. May not the Tables of Persecution be turned upon us? A Mahometan in G Lurky 
124 original letters. 
siurly i in the right, and I (if I carry my own Religion thither) am in the wrong. They will have it So. If Mahometan comes with me to Chrijlendom^ I am in the right, and he in the wrong; and we hate each other, heartily, for'differing in Speculations, which ought to have no Influence on moral Honesty. Nay, the Mahometan s more charitable, of the two, and does not pusti his Zeal So far; for the Christians have been more cruel and Severe in this Point, than all the World besides. Surely reprisals may be made upon us; as Calvin burnt Servetus at Geneva Queen Mary burnt Cranmer., at London. I am. Sorry I cannot readily find a more, exaifi: Parallel. The Sword cuts with both Edges., 
Why, 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 125 
Why, I pray you, may we not all be fellow Citizens of the World? And provided it be hot the Principle of one or more Religions to extirpate all others, and to turn Persecutors when they get Power; (for such are not to be endured‘fj 1 Say why should we offer “to hinder any Man from doin^ with his Own kmi what he thinks sitting ^ Why should hve not make use of his Body, Estate, arid Understanding, for the public Good? Let a man’s Life, Substarice, and Hiberty be under the protedion of the - Laws and I dare answer for him (Whilst 'his Stake Ts among us) he never will she III a differestt Interest, nor willing to quit this Protection, or to exchange it for poverty, Slavery and Misery. 
G 3 
The 
126 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
The thriving of any one single Perfin, by honest Means, is the thriving of the Commonwealthwherein he resides. And in what Place Soever of the World Such Encouragement is given, as that in it, one may Securely and peaceably enjoy Property and Libertjy both of Mind and body y stis impossible but that Place must flourish in Riches and in People, which are the truefi Riches of any Country. 
But as on the one Hand, a true Whig thinks that all Opinions purely Spiritual and notional, ought to be indulged; So on the other, he is for severely punishing all Immoralities., Breach of Laws., Violence and Injufiice. A minister’s Tithes are as much his Right, as any i.ayman’s Estate can be his, and no Pretence of Religion 
or 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 127 
or Conscience can warrant the substra6ling of them, whilst the Law is in being, which makes them payable : For a tvbig is far from the Opinion that they are due, by any other Title. It would make a man’s Ears tingle, to hear the divine Right insisted upon, for any hitman Injlitutions; and to find God Almighty brought in as a Principal there, where there is no Necessity for it. To affirm that Monarchy Episcopacy., Synods., Lythes, the hereditary Succejfion to the Crown, care Jure divino, is to cram them down a man’s Throat, and tell him, in plain Terms, that he must Submit to. all of them, under all Inconveniences, whether the Laws of his Country are for it, or against it. 
G 4 
Every 
1^ ORIGINAL LETTERS, •every Whig owns Suhmjfion to Government,, to be an Ordinance of God; fuhnit jourfelves to every Ordinance of Man, for the lords Sake, Says the Apostle. Where (by the Way) pray take Notice, he calls them Ordinances of Man; and So .gives' you the true Notion how far anything can be Said to be Jure divino: Which is far short of what your high •flown Affertoteof the Jus divinum, would carry it unto, and proves as strongly for a .kepujttlkan. Government, as a ‘monarchical.; though in Tmth it affects neither, whercrthervety .Dnds of Government are ’destroyed..’ 
A right Whig looks upon frequent Parliaments as Such a fundamental Part of the Constitution, that even no Parliament., ■ can 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 129 
part with this Right. high iahig^ifin is for Annual Parliaments, and loidi whig gifm for lrienniai with annual Meetings. I leave it to every man’s Judgement, which of these would be the truest Representative; would fo'onest ease the hoiise of that Number of Members that have Offices and Etiipioyments, or take Pensions from the Court; is least liable to Corruption; would prevent ejtorbitant Expellee, and Soonest destroy the’pernicious Practice of drinking and bribing for Eledlions; or is most conformable to an tient Custom. The Law that Ltely pall CD with So much Struggle, for Mettnial Parliaments, shall content file; till the Legijlative Snail think fit to make them annual. 
G 5 
But 
j30 ORIGINAL lel.dersi. 
But methinks, (and this I write with great Submission and Deference) that since the passing that at, it Seems inconsistent with the reason of the Thing, and preposterous, for the first Parliament after any prince’s accejjlon to the Crcwn., to give the public Revenue arijtng hy Laxes^ for a longer Time than that Parliaments own Duration. I cannot See why the Members of the first Parliament, should (as the case now stands) engross to themselves all the Power of giving, as well as all the Merit and Rewards, due to Such a Gift: And why Succeeding Parliaments should not, in their Turn, have it in their Power to oblige the Prince, or to streighten him, if they Saw Occasion;; pare his Nails, if they were convinced he made ill Use of Such a Revenue. 
1 am 
il 
ORIGINAL LETTERS, iji 
I am Sure we have Instances, of this Kind; and a wise Body of Senators ought always to provide against the worst that might happen. The honeymoon of Government is a dangerous season; the Rights and Liberties of the People run a greater Rissc, at that Time, through their own Representatives Compliments and Compliances, than they are ever likely to do during this Reign: and stis Safer to break that Practice, when we have the prospedl of a good and gracious Prince upon the Throne, than when we have an inflexible person, who thinks every Offer an Affront, which comes not up to the Height of wshat his Predecessor had, without considering whether it were well or ill done, at jirji. 
G 6 The 
132 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
The Revenues of our Kings, for many Ages, arose out of their crown Lands; Taxes on the Subjects were raised only for public Exigences. But since we have turned the Stream, and been So free of Revenues for Life, arising from Impojitions and taxesy we have given Occasion to our Princes to dilpose of their crown Landsy and depend for Maintenance of their Families, on Such a Sort of Income as is thought unjust and ungodly, in most Parts of the World, but in ‘chrijiendow, : for, many of the arbitrary eafiern mo narchs think So, and will not eat the Produce of Such a Revenue. 
Now, since Matters are brought to this pass, stis plain that our Princes must Subsist Suitable to their high State and 
* Condition, 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 133 
Condition, in the best Manner we are able to provide for them. And whilst the Calling and Duration of Parliaments was precarious, it might indeed be an Afl of Imprudence, though not of Injustice, for any one Parliament to settle Such a Sort of Revenue, for Life, on the Prince : but, at present, when all the World knows the utmoji Extent of a parliament’s pojfibk Duration, it Seems disagreeable to reason, and an Encroachment upon the Right offucceeding Parliaments, (for the future) for any one Parliament to do that, which another cannot undo, or has not Power to do, in its Turn. 
An old Whig is for choosing Such Sort of Representatives to Serve in Parliament, 
as 
134 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
as have ejiates in the Kingdom; and those not fleeting ones, which may be Sent beyond Sea by Bills of Exchange, by every Packet Boat, but fixed and permanent. To which end, every Merchant, Banker, or other moneyed Man, who is ambitious of Serving his Country as a Senator should have also a Competent visible Land ejiates as a Pledge to his Eledlors that he intends to abide by them, and has the Same Interest with theirs, in the public Taxes, Gains and Losses. I have heard and weighed the Arguments of those, who, in Opposition to this, urged the unfit ness of Such, whose Lands were engaged in Debts and Mortgages, to Serve in Parliament, in Comparison with the moneyed Man who had no Land: but those Arguments never convinced me. 
No 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 135 
No Man can he a ftncere Lover of Liberty that is not for increafmg and communicating that Blejfing to all People; and therefore the giving or restoring it not only to our Brethren of Scotland and Ireland., but even to Prance itself, (were it in our Power) is one of the principal Articles of whig gifm. The ease and Advantage which would be gained, by uniting our own three Kingdoms, upon equal Terms, (for upon unequal it would be no Union) is So visible, that if we had not the Example of those Masters of the World, the Romans., before our Eyes, one would wonder that our own Experience (in the Instance of uniting Wales to England) should not convince us, that although both Sides would incredibly gain by it, yet the rich and opulent Country, to 
wnicii 
136 ORIGINAL LETTERS, which Such an Addition is made, would be the greater Gainer. 
His So much more desirable and fecurcy to govern by Love and common Interefty than by Forced to expect Comfort and ajfifiance in Times of Danger, from our next Neighbours, than to find them at Such a Timie a heavy Clog upon the Wheels of our Government, and be in Dread lest they should take that Occasion to shake off an uneasy Yoke; or to have as much need of entertaining a jiand ing Army against our Brethreny as against our known and inveterate Enemies; that certainly whoever can oppose So public and apparent a Good, must be esteemed either ignorant to a strange Degree, or to have other Designs in View, which he 
would 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 137 
would not willingly have brought to Light. 
I look upon her majesty’s asserting the Liberties and Privileges of the free Cities in Germany to be an Action which will shine in History, as bright (at least) as her giving away her first Fruits and Tenths: to the Merit of which last. Some have assiimingly enough ascribed all the Successes she has shitherto been blessed with; as if one Set of Men were the peculiar Care of Providence, and all othera (even Kings and Princes) were no otherwise fit to be considered by God Almightyy or Posterity, than according to their Kindness to them. 
But 
238 ORIGINAL LETTERS. ^ 
But it has been generally representeli So, where Priests are the Historians. From the first Kings in the World, down to these Days, many Instances might be given, of very wicked Princes, who have been extravagantly commended; and many excellent ones, whose Memories lie overwhelmed with Loads of curses and Calumny, just as they proved Favourers or discountenancers of High Church., without regard to their other Virtues or Vices: for. High Church is to be found in all Religions and Sects, from the Pagan down to the Presbyterian;; is equally detrimental, in every one of them. 
A genuine Whig is for promoting a general Naturalisation, upon the firm 
Belief, 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 139 Belief, that whoever coiihes to be incorporated into us, feels his Share of all our 'Advantages and Disadvantages, and consequently can have no Interest but that of the Public; to which he will always be a Support, to the best of his Power, by his Person, Siibjimtce and Advice. And if it be a Truth, (which few will make a Doubt of) that we are not one third Part peopledj (though wear better So, in proportion, than any other Part of Europe., Holland excepted) and that our Stock of Men decreases daily, through our Wars, Plantations, and Sea Voyages; that the ordinary course os Propagation, even in Time of continued Peace and Plealth, could not in many Ages Supply us with the Numbers we want; that the Security of civil and religious Liberty, and of Property, 
140 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
pcrty, which through gods great Mercy •is firmly established among us, will invite new Comiers, as fast as we can entertain them; that most of the rest of the World groans under the Weight of Lyranny., vfk\ch. will cause all that have Substance, and a sense of Honour and Liberty, to sty to Places of Shelter; which consequently would thoroughly People us with useful and profitable Hands, in a few Years ^ what should hinder us from pashng an al of general Naturalisation? especially "when we consider, that no private Adis of that Kind, are refused; but the Ex -- pence is So great, that few attempt to procure them, and the Benefit which the Public receives thereby, is inconsiderable. 
Expe 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 141 
Experience has shown us the Folly and Falsity of those plausible Insinuations, that Such a Naturalisation would take the Bread out of Englijhmedhs Mouths. We are convinced, that the greater Number of Workmen of one Trade there is, in any Town; the more does that Town thrive; the greater will be the Demand of the Manufadlure, and the Vent to foreign Parts, and the quicker Circulatioti of the Coin. The Consumption of the Produce., both of Land and Indufiry., increases visible, in Towns full of People; nay, the more shall every particular industrious Person thrive, in Such a Place; though, indeed Drones and Idlers will not find their Account, who would fain Support their own, and their Families Superfluous Expenses, at their Neighbours 
Cost; 
142 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Cost; who make one or two Days Labour provide for four Days Extravagances. 
J 
And this is the common Calamity,, of most of our corporation Towns, whosc Inhabitants do all they can to discouragc Plenty, Industi y and Population; and. will not admit of Strangers, but upon too hard Terms, through the false Notion, that they themselves, their Chik^ dren and Apprentices, have the only right to Squander their town’s Revenue, and to get, at their own Rates, all that is to be gotten within their precincls, or in the Neighbourhood. And therefore. Such Towns (through the mischief arising by Combinations hid bylaws) are, at best, at a Stand; very few in a thriving Condition, (and tliose are where the bys laws 
are 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 143 are least rejiri^ive) but moji throughout England fall to visible Decay, whilst new Villages not incorporated, or more liberal of their Privileges, grow up in their stead; till in process of Time, the first Sort will become almost as desolate as old Sarum, and will as well deserve to lole their Right of Sending Representatives to Parliament. For certainly, a jvajie or a Desert has no Right to be represented, nor by our original Constitution was ever intended to be. Yet I would by no Means have those Deputies lost to the Commons, but transferred to wiser, more industrious, and better peopled Places, worthy (through their Numbers and Wealth) of being represented. 
A Whig 
144 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
A Whig is against the raising, or keep ing up a fianding Army., iatime of Peace: but, with this Distinction, that if, at any Time, an Army (though even in Time of Peace) should be necessary to the Support of this very Maxim, a Whig is not for being too hasty to destroy that, which is to be the Defender of his Liberty. I define to be well underjiood — sup pose then, that persons, whose known Principle and Practice it has been (during Attempts for arbitrary Government) to ’ plead for, and promote Such an Army in Time of Peace, as would be fubser vient to the Will of a Tyrant, and contribute towards the enssaving the Nation, should, under a legal Government (yet before the Ferment of the People was 
appeased) 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 145: appeased) cry down a Jlanding Army in, Time of Peace: I should shrewdly sus pedt that the Principles of Such persohs, are not changed, but that either they like not the Hands that Army is in, or the Cause which it espouses; and look upon it as an Obstrudlion to another Sort of Army, which they should like, even in Lime of Peace. I Say then, that although the Maxim, in general, be certainly true yet a ivhig (without the just Imputation of having deserted his Principles) may be for the keeping up Such a standing Army, even in Time of Peace, till the Nation has recovered its Wits again, and chuses Representatives vrho are against Lyranny.^ in any Hands whatsoever; till the Enemies of our Liberties want the Power of raising another Army of quite different vol. II H Senti 
14-6 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Ik 
Sentiments : for, till that Time, a whiggifrj Army is the Guardian of our Liberties and Secures to us the'pov/er of itself and prevents the raisiiig another, of a different compumon. 
As Soon as this is done, effedtially; by my consent, no Such Thing as a mercenary Soldier should Subsist in England; and therefore. 
The arming and training of all the Freeholders of England as is our undoubted ancient Constitution, and consequently our Right; So it is the Opinion of most Whigsthat it ought to be put in Practice. This would put us out of all Fear of Foreign invasions, or disappoint all Such, when attempted: this 
would 
ORIGINAL LETTERS 147 
would Soon take away the Necessity of md.mtd.ming Jlanding Armies of Mercenaries, in Time of Peace: this would render us an hundred Times more formidable to our Neighbours than we are; and Secure effectually our Liberties, against any King that should have a Mind to invade them, at Home; which perhaps was the reason why Some of our late Kings were So averse to it; and whereas, as the Cafe now stands, ten thousand disciplin’d Soldiers (once landed) might march without conftderahu Opposition, from one End of England, to the other, were our Militia well regulated, and Firearms Substituted in the Place .of Bills Bows, and Arrows, (the Weapons in use when our training'lazvs were in Vigour, and for which our Laws are yet in Force) H 2 we 
148' ORIGINAL LETTERS, we need not fear an hundred thousand Enemies, were it possible to land So many 
among us. 
At every mile’s End, at every River and pass, the Enemy would meet with fresh Armies, consisting of Men as well Ikilled in Military Discipline, as themselves; and more resolved to fight, because they do it for Property; and the farther Such an Enemy advanced into the Country, the stronger and more resolved' he would find us; as Hannibal did the Romans when he encamped under the Walls of Rome even after Such a Defeat as that of Canna. And why ^ because they were all trained Soldiers, they were all Freemen that sought, Aris et Focis; and Scorned to trust the Preservation of 
their 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 149 
their Lives and Fortunes, to Mercenaries or Slaves though never So able bodied: they thought Weapons became not the Hands of them that had nothing to lose, and upon that Account were unfit Defenders of their Masters Properties; Ib that they never tried the Experiment, but in the utmoji etaremity, 
That this is not only pra<5licable, but cafy, the modern Examples of the Swijfers and Swedesis an undeniable Indication. Englishmen have as much Courage., as great Strength of Body and Capacity of Mind. as any People in the universe: and if our late Monarchs had the enervating their free subjeds in view, that they might give a Reputation to Mercenaries who H 3 depended 
150 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
depended only on the Prince for their : Pay, (as stis plain they had) I know no reason why their Example should be followed, in the Days of Liberty, when there is no Such prospedt. The Preservation of the Game, is but a very fiender Pretence, for omitting it. 1 hope no wise Man will put a Hare ox a Partridge in the Balance with the Safety and Liberties of Englishmen; though, after all, stis well i known to Sportfmen, that Dogs, Snares, Nets, and Such silent Methods as are daily put in Praflice, destroy the Game, ten times more than shooting with Guns. 
If the restoring us to our old Constitution, in this Instance, were ever neces sary, stis more eminently So, at this Time, when our next Neighbours of Scotland, 
are 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 151 
are by Law armed just in the Manner we desire to be, and the Union between both Kingdoms not perfeded. For the Militia, upon the Foot it now stands, will be of little use to us : stis generally composed of Servants, and those not always the Sarne, consequently not well trained; rather Such as wink with both Eyes at thejr own firing a Musket, and Scarce know how to keep it clean, or to charge : k aright. It consists of People whose Reputation (especially the Officers) has been iiidustrioussy diminished, and their Persons, as well as their Employment, rendered contemptible, on purpose to enhance the Value of those that Serve for Pay; insomuch that few Gentlemen of Qiiality will, now a days, debase tliem h 4 Selves 
152 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Selves So much, as to accept of a Company, or a Regiment, in the Militia. •but for all this, I can never be persuaded tfiat a red Coat and thne Pence a Day, infuses more Courage into the ^oor fwag gerijig Idlerj than the having a Wife and Children, and an Estate, to fight for, 'with good wholsome Fare in his Kitchen, Would ir»to 2. freeborn Subject; provided rthe Freeman were as well trained as the Mercenary. < 
.1 would not have the Officers and 
Soldiers of our most brave and honest -■ )i, -, 
Army., to mistake me. I am not arguing 
against them; for I am convinced, as 
Ic.. » Jj, 
. long as there is Work to do abroad, stis they (and not our home dwtllmg free are most proper for it. Our ‘ * ■ War 
sc 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 153 
War must now be an offenjive one; and what I am pleading for, concerns only the bare defensive Part. Most of our present Generals and Officers are filled with the true Spirit of Liberty., (a most rare Thing!) which demonstrates the Felicity of her majesty’s Reign, and her standing upon a true Bottom, beyond any other Instance that can be given; insomuch, that considering how great and happy we have been, under the Government of (i^ieens, I have. Sometimes doubted, whether an anti falic Law would be to our Disadvantage. 
Most of these Officers do expe<5t, na]f (So true do 1 take them to be to their colinti*y’s Interest) do wish, whxenever it H 5 ........ 
154 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
shall please God to send us a Peace as may be relim on, both at home and abroad, to return to the State oipeaceable Citizens, again; but stis fit they should do So, with Such ample Rewards for their Blood and Labours, as shall entirely Satisfy them. And when they, or the Survivors of them, shall return, full of Honour and Scars, home to their Relations, after the Fatigues of So glorious a Service to their Country are ended, ’tis their country’s Duty to make them casy, without laying a Necessity upon them of striving for the Continuance of an Armyy to avoid fiarving. 
The Romans used to content them, by a Distribution of their Enemies Lands; and I think their Example So good, in everything, that we could hardly propose 

ORIGINAL LETTERS. 155 
pose a better. Oliver Cromwell did the like, in irelanl to which we owe that kingdom’s being a protejiant Kingdom, at this .Day, and in continuing Subject 
d 
to the Grown of England; but if, it be too late to think of this Method, now. Some other must he found out, by the wisdom of Parliament., which shall fully answer the End. 
these Officers and Soldiers, thus Settled and reduced to a dvil State, would, in a great measure, compose that invinci. ble Militia, I am now forecasting; and by reason of their Skill in Military Affairs, would deserve the principal Posts and Commands in their respedlfve Counties : with this advantageous Change of their 
H 6 
Condi 
Its ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Condition, that whereas formerly they jfought for their Country, only as Soldiers foi Fortune., now they should defend it, t^s wife and valiantas Proprietors of the Estates they fight for and this will gain them the entire Trust and Confidence of all the good People of England, who whenever they come to know their own Minds., do heartily hate Slavery. The Manner and Times of assembling, with Several other necessary Regulations, are only proper for the Legijlative to six and determine. 
A right Whig lays no stress upon the Illegitimacy of the pretended Prince of Wales; he goes upon another. Principle than they, who carry the Right of suc cejfton So far, as (upon that Score) to un - 
do 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 157 
do all Mankind. He thinks no Prince fit to govern, whose Principle it must be to rmn the Constitution, as Soon as he can acquire imjust Power So to do. He judges it nonsense for one to be the Head .of. a Church for Defender of a faithd .who thinks himself bound in Duty to overthrow it. He never endeavours to justify his taking the Oaths to this Government, or to qiiiet his conscience, by Supposing the young Gentleman at St. Germains unlawfully begotten; since stis certain, that, according to our Law, he cannot be looked upon as Such. He cannot Satisfy himself with any of the foolish Distindlions trumped up, of late Years, to reconcile, base Interest with a Show of Religion; but deals upon ttie Square, and plainly owns to the World,. 
that 
158 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
0 
that he is not inssuenced by any particular Spleen : But that the exercise of an ‘arbitrary., illegal Power., in' the Nation, So as to undermine the Constitution, would incapacitate either King James., King William., or any other, from being his King, whenever the Public has a Power to hinder it. 
As a necessary consequence of this Opinion, a Whig must be against punishing the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the iohildren, as we do (not only to the third and fourth Generation., but) for ever; since our gracious God has declared, that he will no more pursue Such Severe Methods, in his Justice, but that the Soul that fmneth, shall die. It is very unreasonable, that frail Man, who has So often 
Need 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 159 
Need of‘mercy himself, should pretend to exercise higher Severities upon his fellow creatures.^ than that Fountain of Justice does on his most wicked revolting Slaves. 
To corrupt the Blood of a whole Family., and Send all the Offspring a beg 'ging, after the father’s Head is taken off. Seems a strange Piece of Severity, fit to be redressed in parliament; especially when we come to consider for what Crime this has been commonly done. When Subjects take Arms against their Prince., if their Attempt Succeeds, stis a Revolution; if not, ’tis called a keheluon : It is Seldom considered, whether the first Motives be just, or unjust. Now is it 
not enough, in Such cases, for the prevailing 
io ORIGINAL LETTERS.' 
prevailing Party to hang or behead the Offenders., if they can catch them, without extending the Punishment to innocent Per fans., for all Generations to come? 
The Senie of this, made the late Bill of Lreafons., (though it reached not So far as many would have had it) a Favourite of the Old Whigs; they thought it a very desirable one, whenever it could be compassed; and, perhaps, if not at that very jundure, would not have been obtained at ass : .Dwas necessary for two different Sorts of People to unite in this, in order for a Majority whose Weight should be Sufficient to enforce it. And I think Some Whigs were very unjustly reproached by their Brethren., as if by voting for this Bill, they wilfully exposed the late king’s 
person 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. ir person to the wicked Designs of his Enemies. 

Lafily., the Supporting of parliamentary Credit, promoting of all public Buildings and high ways, the making all Rivers navigable that are capable of it, employing the poor.i Suppressing Idlers, restraining Monopolies upon Trade, maintaining the Liberty oj the Press, the just paying and encouraging Q all in the public Service, especially that best and usefullest Sort of People, the Seamen : these joined to a firm Opinion, that we ought not to hearken to any Terms of Peace with the French King, till it be quite out of his Power to hurt us, but rather to die in Defence of our own and the Liberties of Europe) are ail of them Articles of, my 
whiggijjo 
i62 ORIGINAL letters wuggijh Belief', and I hope none of them arc heterodox. 
Xnd if all these together amount to a Commonwealthfman, -1 shall never be ashamed of the Name, tho’ given with a Design of fixing a Reproach mpon me, and such as think as I do. / ’ - 
Many People complain of the Poverty of the Nation, and the Weight of the Taxes. Some do this without any ill Design; but Others shope thereby, to become popular; and at the Same Time to enforce a Peace with Prance, before that Kingdom be reduced to too low a Pitch; fearing lest that King should be difahled to accomplish their Scheme of bringing in the Pretender, and assisting him. 
Now 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 163 Now altho’ tis acknowledged, that the Taxes lye very heavy, and Money grows Scarce; yet let the Importance of our War be considered, together with the Oh Jlinacy., Perfidy, and Strength of our Enemy; can we possibly canyon Such a diffujive War, without Money in^propor. tion? Are the ^ueep% subje<5bs more burdened, to msaintain the public Liberty than the French king’s are, to confirm their own Slavery? Not So much, by three Parts in four, grod be praised : Besides, no true Engli/ioman va]! grudge to pay Taxes, whilst he has a penriy in his purse, as long as he Sees the public <mo ney well laid out for the great Ends - for which it is given. - 
And 
i64 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
And to the Honour of the een and her Ministers, it may be justly Said, that since Englaftd was a Nation, never was the public Money more frugally managed, or more fitly applied. This is a farther Mortification to those Gentlemen who have Dejtgns in View which they dare not own : For whatever may be the plaufthh and specious Reasons they give, in public, when they exclaim against the Ministry; the hidden and true one is, that through the present prudent Administration, their So hopefully laid Project is in Danger being quite blown up; and they begin to despair that they shall bring in King 'James the Third, ' by the Means of (seen annt i as I verily believe they once had the Vanity to imagine. 
LETTER 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 165 
LETTER LXXXIX 
SHAVE been at home, these Several Days, and the Silence and (^ietness of my present Enjoyments, are Heartfelt. I have Spent most of my Time in playing on my Organ, which has been fixed up while I was away, and Sounds Sweeter, methinks, here, than it did when I tried it in London. A clear Air is an Advantage to Pipes, as well as Lungs, perhaps. 
Solitude has its Pleasures, but wants its Satisfactions. Providence has formed all its Animals for Society; for this Affection 
IS 
i66 .ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
IS not peculiar to Man, as the old Adage suppcses, which Says that none hut a Bruit can live alone. * The horse will neigh, the Oxen low, and the Sheep bleat, if Separated from their Herds. Lock up a Dog, and he will howl; but leave another with him, and they will play together, till they both fall asseep. The Simile of a Horse in a Pound, would lose its justness, if applied to tivo — 
“Nature averse rejects divided Joys. 
And pleasures which centre in Self must be very few and confined — They can only be multiplied and extended, by transporting us, as it were, beyond our 
* Author has left out Part of this Sentence, from a singular, but commendable Delicacy, which my Friend informs me was his distin guifiiing Chaiaiteriflic. 
Selves, 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 167 
Selves, to foreign Objects, and enlarging tfie Circle of Social Affections. Our highest and most exquisite Joys arise from Love and Friendship; and what are these but the preferring others to ourselves, and dedicating our Lives and Interests, to theirs? 
. My Stomach has been disturbed, by the exercise of my Journey; the rocking of the Waves had but only given it a Lullaby and it is now become as tethy., again, as a Child wakened out of its Sleep — His in a bad Neighbourhood— — Heart will not Suffer it to rest! 
Adieu., 
LETTER 
i68’ ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
L E T T E R XC 
SHAVE been rendered very unhappy since I came home. — The poor old Curate of the Parish I live in, died, a few Days ago. I could well enough have Spared him. So that stis not upon this Account I grieve; but for a Widow and four Children, all Daughters too, to make the distress the greater. 
He died. Anno triginta duo., of his Curacy, and Served his Time to eleven Rectors in Succession; who most of them holding Pluralities, Seldom resided here, but left the whole Benefit of preaching, praying, and fajling too, to my poor, 
very 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 169 
very poor, Neighbour — The Lord have Mercy on the Soul of his Bishop I 
I shall give the Family whatever ASSISTANCE may be in my Power; but that is So very little, that it cannot much avail them — I am Sorry for it; but must comfort myself with this Hope, that Benevolence, resting in the Will alone, where the Acts are not within our Power, is inter ])reted in us, as complete Virtue, by the Christian Doctrine; for, if to look after a Woman, with Desire, be alnady to commit Adulierys why should not a Wish to do Good, be already to perform it, also? 
What adds to the distress, becausc it increases the Danger, is, that two of the vol. II I Girly 
syo ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Kjivh are really handsome. Stretch forth your Hand, and 
Adieu. 
TETTER XCI 
J RECEIVED your Letter, and thank you for the Contents of it, which I have communicated to the poor Family; but without humouring your Nicety, upon the Occasion. I told them the Truth; not indeed to purchase Praise or Prayer for you, but not to receive more of them, myself, than I am entitled to; as also to afford the Persons in dl stress the Comfort of thinking, that there arc more Persons of Charity, in tyre World, than open. 
You 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 171. 
You may possibly recollect Somewhat of rfils Method of reasoning, as it is, in Substance, at least, pretty much the Same, with what you used to me, bn a>former Similar Occasion. * I confess it appears stronger 10 me now, than it did then; but this must be owing only to our being more nice, generally, in our own case, * 
than WT are in that.of others; 
'A: • ' 
. This Subject affects me too mu^h; but if my Tears were Pearls, Fd gladly weep an almshouse full of them. •:; > * ■ 
• j: 1 Adieu. 
In Anstver to Letter LVIII referring tq the last Paragraph but one of it, ' 
I 2 
LETTER 
tfz ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
LETTER XCII 
M Y Disorder has returned to, its old Haunts again. It Seems only to have rested, a while, to renew its Strength • — Perhaps the roaring of the Sea might have kept it in Awe, while I was at Sear ifofough, and it may have plucked up a cowards Spirits which is always despe rate, on my Return to the stillness of this Champaign Country. 
How I amuse myself! And why" not? Though there are Fools, who would laugh me to Scorn for it. But I am not writing to the World, and you have always encouraged 

ORIGINAL LETTERS. 173 
eouraged me in. Such a Lahorum duke lenimen. So I shall proceed, withotic cither Fear or Wit. 
Not only ancient History, but the old Books of Physic, report Suprizing Cures performed, by the Power of Music, on the Body. well a a tbc prrinu. This Recipe is styled, in the Memoirs of Literature, Decant are Loca dolentia. The Word Loca^ here. Seems to denote the Application to have been topicaly which I should imagine to be impossible, unlcis the Pain happened to be ill the Ear 
1 have tried it, without Effect, in my own Cafe, by playing whole Hours on the Organ, in unabating Agony. But in this I only resemble the Swan, whose I 3 Moans 
174 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Moans are Music, but whose Melody cannot prcsefvg^ts Life. 
Were my disorder of the nervous Kind, perhaps the Symphonic Simpathy of a String Instrument, might be able to perform shis rniraculous Piece of quack cry; but a Wind one may possibly rather foment die Pains of a Cholic. 
• I beg the Faycrur of you to send me down Some new Music; I am tired of what I have — I am almost grown out of Conceit with Constancy, as I susped it to be no longer a Virtue because it is not attended with its own Reward — 
But 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 175 
But I have promised never to renew a certain Subject: between us, again; So, 
Adieu. 
LETTER xcm. 
SHAVE an unpleasant Piece of News to communicate to you; I would not therefore assiidt you with it, but that I consider Friends to resemble the Figure of Jams which tho’ it had two Faces had but cfie Pair of Eari.. 
The younger Afton and his Wife are going to Separate. He has fairly given lier the Probation of a Tear and a Bay., but I 4 findk 
ijt ORIGINAL LETTERS. • iinds she is not yet willing to conform to the Vow she has already taken 
Wedlock is a Contract for Life, they say; yet Surely Such an Instance, as the present, does not infringe the Spirit of it: For whenever a Wife renders a Husband weary of his, the Obligation should be dissolved, of course. 
jum IS styled the goddess of mamage; %^hich Fiece of Mythology, I fear, is but tod true; as there Seems to be an unlucky Moral, implied in the Fable, by there being sh few happy ones. The first Match she is recorded, by the Poets, 
• See Letter LXXI first Part, and Letter LXXXII 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 177 
Poets, to have made, was the one for 
jeolusy the God of Storms and 
There is Something singular in this c^fc — perhaps not — but the first Thing that made her take Notice of him, as he was much below her pretensions,. in Point of Fortune, was the Eclat of his Amour. ^ Hiis Circumstance has happened to pos sess her Mind wish a jealousy;, too hte; iand whenever he has been absent from her, for a Day, an Hour, she shrmifes, and remotijirates; ‘ which is, at best, but a civilised fcoliingf ' 
The very last Tliiitg a Wife does', is, 
io Jujpefl herself., j conseiqu's'., of f hqr.own 
•.... ■ ' d lo •yr yt' i 
* Virg. ni. V 77. 
t See Letter LXVI Par. 2* 
I s aion, 
, ORIGINAL LETTERS. Affection' and Integrity, she is apt to overrate her Love and Duty; and is not enough aware,, that without good Tem -- per, good Breeding, and Prudence, the 'very Manners, which even those charm -- ing Principles are capable of inspiring, may first create Offence, and afterwards, confirm disgust.. 
Women often imagine that Men are drawm out, by Attradions from abroad; when it may be the uneasmeffes they meet • .•with, at home, which drive them from 
* vt 
thence., Man is,, by Nature, a domestic Animal; and the Husband must be a Sad. Profligate or the Wife a very Termagant,, indeedi if his own fireside is not the Scene of his Choice and Happiness.. 
Serena 
ORSGINAL letters. 179 
Lerence says that Jealousies, Strifes, Quarrels, and Reconcilements, are natural to Lovers, and strengthen' their Affections; but he must be an unexperienced Philosopher, truly, who would recommend them, ima married Life.. 
Women behave to Men, as they do to 'one another; without ever considering that they are of different Natures. Squabbles, Piques,, and Altercations, may be a necessary Cement, for Gossips; who, like the Knights in Romances', ' are always up in Arms against each other, ’till they have tried one anothers Mettle’; - and then become Friends, for Life. But Wedlock is a State of. Peace, riot of War; of Love, and not of Fear,., 
1 6> 
Tou. 
lo ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
You may. perceive even from thesc few rcste<5bions, that I have considered this subjc(st, maturely, and prematurely also, 1 fear! But all I expect from it, is, tot have the old Proverb fiung at my Head, of bamops wivesy See.. — So Spare me, 
•-> ■. - t. Adieu. 
LETTER XCIV 
H E unhappy Circumstance I mentioned to you, in my last Letter,, was taken from the public Report of the Country, only; but it was too well confirmed to me, since, by. Mr.. ajlon, himself 5 who was with me, ’ Yesterday. He ikarae to desire me to be one of the Trustees, 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. if 
stees, in the Deed of Separation, which I could not refuse him. His a Tax upon idle Men, that having no busmess of their own, they should be employed in that of others. 
I endeavoured to mediate a Reconciliation between the Parties,, but found it ' imposhble. He assured me that lie would have parted from her, before they had been three Months married, on Account of her haughtiiiess and ill Temper, but from the Consideration of her being with Child; and therefore restrained his re fentment, till that interesting Event was over. 
He has a Girl b)r her, of about three Months old; and he affcistcd ie. greatly. 
tiz ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
by his weeping on. the mention of her — He Said had it been a Boy, it would have given him much ksis Concern; as Such a Crisis, as this, might be a Matter of little consequence to him, cither in Youth, or Manhood; but that it was a nice and tender Affair for a Girl, to be reared up and introduced into the World, by a Mother under Such; unhappy Circumstances,. 
He then comforted himself with the old Superstition of dejiiny’y laid it was his Fate to have got a Wife, with a Fortune beyond his Merits or Expeftadons, and it was his Fate also, to lose them both again — for he is resolved not to withold a Shilling of her Portion — But I told him that his Doctrine could be only the Faith of a Pagany which supposed Fate to 
overrule. 
. LETTERS. 1s3 
over rule the Gods; for that tho’ Marriages might be made, in Heaven, they certainly were unmade, in Hell.. 
He wiped his Eyes, forced a Smile,, took Leave, and departed; every one of which I do, myself, at present; So 
Eaiewel;. 
LETTER XCV 
J THANK you extremely for your charming Letter, upon the Subjects of my last. I thank you doubly, as it may possibly be of Service to another; In the Midst of the Second Page, I rang the Bell and ordered an express to be got 
ready, ' 
fg4 ORIGINAL Letters. 
ready, to Send it off incloscd to our poor Frierid,. ajion. 
It may have its Effect; stis stronger and places Things in a better Light, than any of the Arguments I was able to urge to hkn, myself, when he was here last; and he has ever marked a particular Deference towards your person and Opinions, even before you had assumed the respedtable Character you have lately taken upon you. 
What you lay, upon that Part of my Letter which mentions Mr. ajiod.s acquiescence under the Decrees of fatcy is both ingenious and conclusive, upon a Subjedk which is of infinite Consequence to Mankinck Such an Opinion must destroy 
ORIGINAL LETTERS, is 
stroy all Prudence, Industry, Forecast, Morality, and Resigon. Society could not Subsist, under Such an Error. 
Nothing can possibly be So absurd, as the Denial of free wili to Man; except it may be exceeded, by a Serious Attempt to prove a self-evident Proposition, which we have an innate confeiouf ness of, in our own Breasts. Does it require an Argument, to demonstrate our Existence? Man, we may affirrh to be more free than God himself. He may do wrong, as well as right — The Deity cannot. 
I am impatient to hear Mr. afiod^s Re solves, upon your Letter, but hope he will not frame them Suddenly; to prevent 
which, 
M ORIGINAL LETTERS, which, I ordered the Messenger to return the Moment he delivered the Letter, lest he might think himself pressed for an, answer; and as he is more interested in the Matter, the Arguments, perhaps, may not produce So ready an Assent from him, as they did from me. 
Farewell. 
LET TER XCVI 
have had the Vanity of Vanities performed in this Neighbourhood, Yesterday — a most Superb Funeral. It was at the burying of Mr. L —, who though he lived poorly, all his Life, was resolved, it Seems, to go out of the 
World, 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 187 
World, in State; for this shameful Article of Expense was intailed on his Executors, by his Will. 
He has died extremely rich, they Say, and has bequeathed the Sum of ten thousand Pounds, to different charitable Foundations; though he was never known to have given an Alms, in his Life. He is reported not to have made his Fortune in the fairest Way, as he had no obvious ‘means of doing it, but by public Vrufts^ and private Confidences, 
"This may account for the Prudence 
of not making any display of Affluence, during his Life; and his large Donations, at his Death, may, I fear, be considered 
i88 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Sidered but as Cempromifes., or Commuta pom. ishese are wretched Salvos! 
Men do with their Souls, as they do with their Bodies. They live in Luxury and Indolence, still they contradh Some dangerous disorder, and then apply them sdves to Medicine; So they continue in vicious Habits, all their Lives, and then bequeath Charities, to wipe off the Score,. 
But neither Health nor Heaven are to be purchased, like Land, by the Lump; and Abstinence and exercise are as requisite to the Second Enjoyment, as to the Possession of the first. His not the Charity, but the disposition which inclines to it, that is our Merit to Salvation; 
and 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 189 
and this is only to be obtained, by Habit and Practice. 
The Rabbis Seem to have a just Notion on this suhjed; as one of their Maxims is, that a thcufand Pounds given away at once has not half the Spirit of Charity in it., that there would le in proportioning it out in Alms of twenty Shil ungs, a Day. 
Wsho knows but I may go into Orders, myself, one of these Days? for I Seem to be pradising Sermons, now and then, in my Correspondence with you; ^ in the mean Time you are welcome to my Notes, as I am yours, truly, in everything. 
Adieu, 
LETTER 
igo ORIGINAL LETTERS, 
M 
LETTER XCVII 
R. Afon was with me, this Morning, and desires me to make his sincere acknowlcdgem.ents to you, for the friendly and Christian Part you have taken, in his difficult Affair. Pie is much obliged to you for the Letter, as it has afforded him the further Opportunity of acquitting himself to his own Honour, and of vindicating his Conduct to the rest of tke World; tho’ it has unliappily produced no other good consequcnce. 
He profited of your Advice, with Regard to his Behaviour towards his Wife; and even proceeded So far, as to lay your 
Letter 
ORIGINAL LETTERS, igt Letter before her, in order to show her the Opinion of a virtuous and impartial person, upon this subje(5l. 
But this had no other Effect, than to raise her resentment, even to Intemperance — She will not acknowledge herself to be in the least Manner of Fault; but lays the whole Blame of their present Situation, to the Account of his want of Love and Refpefl for her. 
In short, stis certain that she loves her Husband, and is not a Libertine; but Pride added to Passion is too Strong for either her Affection or Virtue — His a very melancholy case, and the Deeds of Separation are preparing. Adieu. 
LETTER 
192 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
LETTER XCVIII 
H E Articles of Intelligence you Sent me, last Post, have given me great Offence — Can there be Such Villains, in the World Yes, tlterearc — one hears So many Stories of the Kind, evei*)?^ Day, that it might appear to be an Afiedlation of In nocencc, to pretend to be ignorant of. them — 
But yet, I really feel myself Surprised, whenever I am told of Such Instances — Some Coward Says, in a Play, “Lord, now, if I don’t wonder what makes Man So stout.” And one may ask, Surely, 
without 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 193 without boasting of more than ordinary Virtue, what can make Men Such Knaves? 
The only Solution of which Difficulty, must be given, by ashing another Question. What occasions Some Wretches to be born Monsters? To which, I think, we may fairly answer, not the original •design pf their Formation, but Some accidental Warpings in their Conception, for which the Laws of Nature are not accountable. A Deformity of Mind may be as fortuitous, as one of the Body. 
But a thousand Such Stories of bad Men shall never tempt me to think ill of human Nature, in Honour of their Creator; besides I would not receive Such an Impression on my Mind, for the pos vol. II K Session 
194 ORIGINAL TETTERS, fession of all the World; because it could 
C ^ f 
.dv.'rin..: A. 
then yield me no Enjoyment; for of what Avail would Empire, Power, or Riches, beyond the common Requisites of Life, be to me, except to render Mankind happy? and^what Heart should I have to wish, or make them So, had I conceived an ill Opinion of them, in general? 
* This subjed is not pleasant to either of us. So I shall put an End to it, by 
bidding you most heartily 
■ ‘ Farewell. 
LETTER 
ORIGINAL LETTERS igps 
LET T E R XCIX 
J, AM just returned from Mr. ajiopa^ wltere I was Summoned, Yesterday, to 
. JV 
attend the signing and Sealing of .the Deed .of Separation. It was a most irksome Office. I think I should have carried iny self through, with more Spirit,, had i.been Second in a Duel. The Lady did not appear; the Witnesses carried the Writings up to her Apartment, and she per feded them there. 
Mr. ajiops Hand shook, when lie took up the Pen, and he dropped' tirs. On the Paper. I did not, inquire, or hear, ho.v site behaved on the Occasion — As Soon as K 2 the 
ig6 .ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
the Attorney retired, Mr. went up to take Leave of her; and she Set out, directly, for London, 
I staid with him, till this Morning, and Spent the Hours but dully — but I had Some Amends made me, ' on my Return, by receiving your Letter, dated from -- -- -- -- -- I wish you Joy of your having taken Possession of your Rectory; and am also charmed with the Description you give of your parsonage house, Glebe, and other Circumstances of Situation. ’tis exactly the hoc erat in Votis., of Horae; it Seems to be almost a literal tran ssation of that Passage. * And I dare say 
• Hoc erat in Votis; modus agri nonitamagnus, Hortus ubi, &: te<sto vicinus jugis aquae fons, 
Et paulum Silvae fuperhis foret -- - 
Sat. VI List II 
that 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 197 that you could repeat the rest of the Lines, both with a Safe, and Satisfied Conscience. 
I accept your Invitation, most readily, and shall partake of your Hospitality, as Soon as I can, after I have received a Visit from Mr. Pearson'' '' Scarborough'' ac quaintance and fellow traveller; whom I asked to Spend a few Days with me, when we were on the Road together, and cxped every Hour," 
La 
C c a ivic* ivj 
. Adieju — radieu, 
t; a.tn t; .: 'or.’? 
.r.. 

tilt i i 
II ■>>.; .'I n, ^ 
K 3 
LET TER, 
igs ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
LETTER C 
M R. Pearson has been with me, these ■ ■ - three Days, and the widowed 'aj^on is here too I Sent to him the mo inent the former arrived — I thought Company would amuse him; and it did 'So i foe he lias ^ been Seemingly cheerful, ever since he came; but not jn his former Style of Spirits; there was seriousnefs' enougli'niixe'd wish it, to prevent its rising to Mirth. 
I like this Manner in him; it has added an Esteem to my former Affection for him. To be Sensible of Misfortunes, ■^ts to bear them like Men. I pity those 
who 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 199 
who appear wholly conquered by thern; 
but I despise those who Seem to have re 
< ■ 
no Impression from them. They should ever be considered as. infifhonsy and ought therefore to be born with Humility. 
\ 
The first Moment he and I were alone 
i. .'T.. 
together, he began to Speak of'his Affair; but I put a Stop to the Subject, by entreating him never to mention it again, to any one; and that for this ve^ proper reason.? : > L - 
The canvassing a Matter of Offence, is apt to give us too unfair an Advantage, over the adverse Party; for we are Sure to defend ourselves, with vvarmth.^ and; to accuse. the. other, ' with Heat. This. 
K, 4 often. 
200 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
often leads us to think ourselves too much in the Right, and the other too much in the wrong. ■ In this Cafe our Passions, being under no Control, perform the Part of witncss, Judge and Jury, and hrmg in gull /v, of course, against the adversary. 
Frequent disquifitions, (which are generally Inquififionsf) of this Kind, are dangerous, anti imprudent; for by running Piques into Resentments, they naturally confirm disgust, and' render Enmity perpetual; which ought never to last, hut till the Offendee becomes calm, and the Offender — If one can distinguish 
'wshicli Is which; a Matter often disheuit. 
^ Mr. Pearson brought a Book in his Pocket, that is just published. ’tis a 
T ran station 
.ORIGINAL LETTERS. 201 
Transiation of the Pales of Marmontel. .Dis but a Sad Affair — Upon perusing it — I could not help recolledting Lord molef wortps Tract, which I Sent you lately, as to a Passage in it which Speaks of Such Attempts. None,, certainly, who are not capable’of writing well, themselves, can ever be able to make a good Transiation. Somebody Says, “that to copy a Piflure.^ ’US necessary one should know te. paintv,. 
Mr. Pearson goes Lome, tomorrow, and has engaged Mr. mt to return 
with him.. ’tis about twenty Miles on my Route to you; P Shall therefore take the Advantage of it, and pay my Visit from thence. I shals carry' jjlon on with me to you; I ashed him, just now,. 
^ Si ' as. 
202 ORIGINAL LETTERS 
“as I “Was sitting down'to write, and he has consented. 
•' yours, most affedlionately. 
LETTER CL 
HIS Mansion of Mr. pearfops is not a pleasant one. It had been an old Monastery, lies' low, and is choked up with Trees. It would therefore be a dismal Situation for those who Spend their 
>, ■- =: i; - g 
Time looking out of the Windows; but for those who would look ‘within.^ there is a Spacious Library, well stored, and where the sombre Cast of the Place rather assists Contemplation 
f. o 
There 
ORIGINAL. lettiilts. 203; 
There are Some dry Walks here^^bout, and all the Grounds are good; as^indijed the Abbey Lands generally ^rc, everywhere. Beggars were chufefsy in^forrner Times; for Priests were both, then... 
i'.. : i 
Our Landlord is am easy, rational, well informed Man, who has given himself up So much to. Study, that it has impaired his Health. This, he told us, he did riot do, till his Wife died, about Seven Years ago. He Said he hadi never been remarkably fond of reading,, 'before; blit this Severe, loss inspiredj hhn with a Seripus^turn of Mind y. he found a widowed Life ah Uncomfortable S tate, and So became .wedded ■f ta his Books,, ever.iince...,,, 
K e 
id 
He 
tj 
204 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
He has a large Fortune, and only one Child; a fine Boy of about ten Years old. Schooled at jvinchejter.^ but at home now, 
for a Tew Days. We have amused our 
* 
with making a Match between him and miss aiion.^ Some fifteen Years hence. So, I think, begins Some Novel, I have "read, long ago. 
Farewell. 
. LETTER Cir. 
11 yf R. Pearson has been curious in col lefbing and preserving every little fugitive Piece he has met with, of any Merit,, ever since he had, addicted himself to Letters; and Such persons arc off great Use often, ih Society. Many Writings. 

•ORIGINAL LETTERS. 205: 
tings may thus be rescued from Obsivion, which deserve to be So; for what has pleased of old,, may please anew,, if not Seen before; and a Piece is. as but just written, ^ to him by whom k is but justi read.. 
I met with a Thkig among his Collection, this Morning, which I had never Seen before, - nor do I believe it is any wihere else in Print,, at present, and I got little Pearjon to copy it out for you.. 
It is Sir William Pettfs Advice,, for die Advancement of Learning, whicte has great good Sense. im itself,. and is worthy of being added as a Supplement to bacon'i in^aufaiion of Sdem(s%. r ^ 
'W 
zo ORIGINAL LETTER’S;. 
If I sind any other Tract Here that may ^ entertain you, I shall send or bring you a. Copy of it — jjfon Salutes you. 
■ •. Adieu. 
P. S. It is not Said fo whom, nor upon what Occasion, tlte inclosed Piece was; written, nor why Sir William should begin, it with the plural Number of the Pronoun.. < 
recommend the Institution of an' Office of Common Address., whereby the Wants and Desires of all may be made known unto all; where' Men may know, what is already done, in the bufiness of Learning •, what is at present in doing,, and whatsis intended to be done : To the End that by Such a general Communication 
OIUGINAL LETTERS 207 
tion of Designs an<j ^y^ual alsistaitge, the Wits, and Endeavours of the World may no longer be as So many Scattered Coals or Firebrands whicji for Want of Union 4r€ Spon j: juenehed; whereas being, but laid together, they would have yielded a contfortable'light and Heat. For,, methinks the present Conditipn of Men is. sike a Field where a Battle hath been lately fought, where we may see many Legs and Arms lying here and there,, which for Want of a Union and a Soul to quick en and ensiven them, are good for nothing, but to feed Ravens, and infect the Air ' So we see many'wits, andingenuitieslying shattered up and down the World, where .of Some are now labouring to do, what is. 
'already done, and puzzling themshlves to iinvent, what is already invented : Others 
we 
g ORIGIN al LETTERS. 
we See stuck quite fast in Difficulties, sidr want of a few dire<5tions which some other Man (might he be met withal) botte could'and would most c^istly give him.. Again, one Man wants a Small Sum of ■ Money to carry on Some design;, that requires it; and there is perhaps another,, who has twice as much ready to bestow on the Same Design: But these two having, no Means to meet with each other, the good Work intended and desired by both. partiesj doth utterly perish and come to nought' ' 
“by this means of the Office,, procured Workmen, and whatever is necessary to the Work, then I advise to. labour how to find out Such Arts,, a are yet undiscovered;, .how to learn what is already 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 209 
ready known, by more compendious and easy Ways, and to apply it to more, and more noble uses; and how to work in Men a higher Esteem for Learning, So as to give Occasion, Encouragement, and Opportunity, to more persons to apply themselves to its Advancement. 
“The next Thing will be, first, to See what is well and Sushciently done already, exploding whatsoever is nice, contentious, and merely phantastical. This Survey may be made, by perusing all Books and taking Notice of all Mechanical Inventions. In this perusal all the real or experimental Learning may be sisted and col ledhedoutof the Said Volumes. There must be appointed able Readers of all Such Works, with certain and well limited, ' Diredlions 
210 ORIGINAL LETTERS. Directions what to collect out of them. 
V 
Every Book must be So read by two Several persons apart, to prevent, mi j stakes and Failings from the Said Directions. The Diredlions for Reading must be Such, as die Readers, observing them, may exactly agree in their Collections. Out of these Notes, one Book, or great ' Work may be made, though consisting of many Volumes. The most artificial in rdexes. Tables, or other Helps, for the •ready finding, remembering, and well' understanding all Things contained in ‘thefe Books, must be contrived and put in Practice. 
“Having thus taken the Height or Pitch whereunto all Arts and Sciences whatsoever are already come, and observed 
where. 
, ORIGINAL LETTERS. 211 
where they now stick, the ablest Men (at least two or three) in every respe<stive Faculty, must be Set apart to drive them on further. 
“And now we shall think of whetting our Tools, and preparing shai'p Instruments for this hard Work, by delivering our Thoughts concerning Education; ■which arc, 
“That there be instituted Literary wofkhouses, ' where Children may be taught as well to do foniething towards their living, as to read and write. 
■ > That the Business of Education be hot (as now)‘committed to the worst and unwoithiest of Men, shut that it be fe 
rioussy 
212 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
rioussy studied and pradised, by the best and abler persons. 
“That all Children, above seven Years old, may be presented to this Kind of Education, none being to be excluded by reason of the Poverty and Inability of their Parents; for hereby it hath come to pass, that many are now holding the Plough, which might have been made fit to steer the State. 
. " That Since few Children have Need 
of reading, before they know, or can be acquainted with, the Things they have read of; or of writing before their Thoughts are, worth the recording, or they are able to put them into Form, which we call inditing; our Opinion is, 
that 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 213 
that those Things being above their Capacity, be deferred a while, and others more needful for them. Such as are in the Order of Nature before those aforementioned, and are attainable by the Help of Memory, which is either most strong or unpreoccupied in Children, be studied before them; we wish therefore that the Educands be taught to observe and remember all sensibleobjefts and Actions, whether they be natural or artificial, which the Educators must upon all Occasions expound unto them, 
“That they use Such exercises, both at Work and Recreations, as tend to the Health, Agility, and Strength of their Bodies. 
That 
214 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
« That they be taught to read by much more compendious Means, than •are in common use. ' 
“That they be taught to write Swiftly, and in real Characters, and in due Proportion. 
“That in no case the Art of Drawing and Designing be omitted, to what course of' Life Soever thole Children are to be applied; Since the Use thereof, for' expressing the Conceptions of the Mind, Seems to be little inferior to that of writing, and in many cases performs what cannot be done by Words. 
“That the Elements of Arithmetic and Geometry, be by all studied, being 
not 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 215, 
not only of great use in all human Affairs, but also Sure Guides and Helps to 
^ • f 
reason, and especial Remedies for a volatile and unsteady Mind. 
# 
“That effeflual courses be taken to try the Agilities of the Bodies and Minds of Children, the Strength of their Memory, Inclination of their Affections, either to Vice or Virtue, and to which of them in particular, and to alter what is bad in them, and to improve what is good, applying all, whether good or bad, to the least Inconvenience, and most Advantage. 
“That Such as have any natural Ability and fitness to Music, be encouraged and instructed therein. 
“That 
2i6 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
“That all Children, though of the 
hicrhest Rank, be 'taught Some genteel 
°, d.. A / Manufacture, in their Minority; Such as 
are turning of curious Figures., 
“Making Mathematical Instruments, Dials, and how to use them in Astronomical Observations. 
“Making Watches, and other trochi lick Motions. 
“Isimning, and painting on glass, or in Oil Colours. 
“Graving, etching, carving, embos fing, and moulding in Sundry Matters. 
The 
'.ORIGINAL .detxters. 217 
. “The .Lapidaries' Art ^t)f> knowing, cutting, and Setting Jewels, l 1 
^ Grinding of Glasses, dioptric and catoptrical.. ‘ djo S tl 
*'■ Botanicks and Gardening. ' C 
Making musicaltststruments; * r 
r 
Vr. 1 I 
“Navarchy, and making Models for houses. ' ^ ^ 
“The Confedioners, Perfumers, or 
Dyers Arts. 
iraw.ji'vy vca A 
1 S' >> 
^ Chyinistry, refining Metals, and counterfeiting Jewels. 
VOL. II 
“Anatomy, 
2i8 original letters. 
“Anatomy, making Skeletons and cxcarnating Bowels. 
'“Making Mariners Compasses, Globes, and other magnetic Devices. 
“And all for these Reasons“ 
“shall be less Subjefl to be im posed on by Artificers. 
“They wfil become more industrious, in general. 
“They will certainly bring to pass most excellent Works, being, as Gentlemen, ambitious to excel ordinary Workmen. 
‘‘ They 
■ ORIGINAL LETTERS 219' 
“They being able to make Experiments themselves, may do it with less Charge and miorc Care, than others will do it for them. 
“It may engage them to be Mace nafes and Patrons of Arts. 
“It will keep them from worse Occasions of Spending their Time and Estates, 
“As it will be a great Ornament' in Prosperity, So it will be a great Refuge and Stay in Adversity, and common Cala mity.’* 
L 2 
L E T T E R 
220 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
• f 
LETTER cm. 
T SEND you two other extraordinary •** Papers, that Mr. Pearson jias given me Permission to get copied out for you, by my young Amanuensis, which I think will greatly entertain you. 
The first is the Character and Description of monsieur Voltaire Sent to England, many Years ago, by a Member of the Royal Academy of Arts and Sciences, at Berlin and imputed to the present King of Prujfia, 
The 
- ORIGINAL LETTERS. 221 
The Second was written, in conse quence of the first, by an anonymous person, and is the Character of his Majesty, in a Letter addressed to himself; but which was never published. 
i. I 
Both these Writings are So well able to Speak for themselves, that I need 'not take the Trouble of making any Comment on them, but shall bid you good Night; as stis late, and I am sseepy. 
‘adieu. 
Number L 
M. de Voltaire is below the Stature of tall Men, or, in other Words, a little above those of a middling Size; he sis extremely thin, and of an adust •temperament, hot and atrabilious.; his Vi l 3 • Sage 
222 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Sage is meagre, his aspe6l ardent and penetrating, and there is a malignant quickncss in his Eye: The Same Fire that animates his Works, appears in his Aflions, which arc lively, even to Absurdity : He is a Kind of Meteor, perpetually coming and going with a quick .Motion and a Sparkling Light, that dazzles our Eyes. 
A Man thus constituted, cannot avoid being a Valetudinarian; the Blade eats away the Scabbard: Gay by Complexion, grave by Regimen; open without frankness;; without Refinement; Sociable without Friends : He knows the World, and he forgets it: In the Morning he is. Ariflippus., and Diogenes at Night. He loves Grandeur, and de o ' spiscs 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. *23 
Ses the great : With his. Superiors, his Carriage is easy, but with his Equals, constrained : He is first polite, then cold, then disgusting. 
He loves the Court, yet grows weary of it : He has Sensibility, without con nedions, and is voluptuous without pas fion. He is attached to nothing by 
Choice, but to everything through Inconstancy. As he reasons without Principle, his Judgement has its Intervals, like the Folly of others. He has a clear Head, but a corrupt Heart. He thinks of everything, and treat's everything with Derision. 
He is a Libertine, without a Constitution for pleasure; and can moralise, with l 4 out 
224 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
but Morality. His Vanity is exceshve, but his Avarice still greater; he therefore writes lest Tor Same, than Money, for which he may be Said, both to hunger and thirst. He is in haste to work, that he may haste to live: : was made to enjoy, and determines pnly to hoard.. Such is the Man, and Such st the Author. 
There is no other Poet in the Woriid ..whose Veries, ’€ost him So iittle Labour; 
C ' i ^ ‘ • ■ ■ 
but this Facility of Composition, 'huijs. him, because he abutes it: As there is but _ little for Art to shpply, he is content that little should be wanting; therefore most of his Pieces are unfinished. But, tho’ he is an easy, ingenious and elegant Writer of Poetry, ‘ his principal Excellence. Wouldbe Flistory, if he made fewer 
Restedtions, 
ORTGINAL LETTER. 225 
Refiedlions, and drew no Parallels; • in both of which, however,, he has Sometimes been very happy. In his last Work, he has imitated the Manner of bttyv., of whom, even in his ccnsure of himj^ mi has exhibited a. Copy.. 
It has been long Said, that for an Historian to be without Prejudice, he must neither have Religion nor Country; : and in this respedt, M. Voltaire has madh great Advances toward Perfection. He' cannot be accused of being a partisan,. to his own Nation; he is rather like old Fellows, extolling the Times past, and abusing the present. He is dissatisfied wdth his own Country, and lavisn in his i praise of those that are a thousarid.leagues^ off: and as to Religion, he is in that also, L 5, evidently 
226 ORIGINAL LETTERS, evidently undetermined; and would certainly, be the neutral and impartial Per sonfo much desired, but for a little Leven of Anti janfenifm, which appears very plainly distinguished in his Works 
Vcltaire has much foreign, and much French Literature; nor is he deficient in that Sort of mixed Erudition, that is now fo much in Fashion. He is a Politician, a Naturalist, a Geometrician, or whatever elfe he pleases; but he is always Superficial, because he is not able to think deeply. 
* The allowing him no Charatler in Religion, but from his Oppolitlon to a particular is a fine Satirical Stroke. Butler,, in his Remains, which was published long since this Writing, says the same, in other Words, in his Chapter of the Anabapsift. “He is rather a Renegado to one ** keli^on, than a Convert to another. 
He 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 227 
He could not, however, flourish as he docs, upon these sul^edts, without great Ingenuity. 
His Taste is rather delicate, than just; he is a witty Satirist, a bad Critic, and a Dabbler in the abstraded Sciences; Imagination is his Element, and yet, strange as it is, he, has no Invention. He is reproached with continually passing from one Extreme to another; now a Philanthropist, then a Cynic; now an excessive Encomiast, than an outrageous Satirist. 
In a Word, Voltaire would fain be an extraordinary Man; and an extraordi man he most certainly is! 
L 6 
Num 
228 ORIGINAL LETTERS, 
N si M B E R II 
V ■ 
iys7‘ 
I met lately with a Paper, entitled The 
T, 
Description and chara(5ler of M. Voltaire by a great Prince, which I hear has been 'siniverfally attributed to your Majesty.. I never read anything, in any Language, which contained more true Wit, or finer Satire. Every' Sentence is sea fonedwith Attic Salt, iscompleat in itself, and, like the Divisions of Matter, compre ■ hends all the Properties of Wit, in Miniature. It has remarkable Strength, yet is distlife at the Same Time; for your majesty’s Genius, like the Sjpring of the Air,, gains Elasticity, by Expansion. 
Th: 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. iq The ancient Poets and Historians have left us Several strong marked Characters;; best of which fall extremely short of this of Voltaire. Horace's, Ligellius has but a slight Sketch of it; and the highest Charadleristic in Salliijfs Cataline., alieni appetent i fui profufus., does not come up to this Passage,. “Attached to nothing, by Choice,, - but to everything, through Inconstancy with many others., 
Your majesty’s own Character is certainly the greatest, of any in Europe either of this Age, or the last; as it com. prehends the King, the Soldier, and the Scholar. A Supersicial historian would be tempted here, to draw a Parallel be)) your Majesty, and dc ix’a the Tour, tcenth; because he was also, a Monarch,,, 
a war 
230 ORIGINAL LETTERS, a warlike Prince; and a Patron of Arts and Sciences. A King he was, indeed; he had a noble, generous, and a magnificent Soul! So far the Comparison holds, with equal Advantage to you both : But his Generals only sought, you are the General yourself; his Love of Letters, like his Faith, was implicit, yours, like your Religion, founded on Knowledge. 
The Parellel with Ctefar would answer in every Particular, except that he sought to ensiave his Country; you to keep yours free: that he to a single Province reduced the vast Roman Empire; while you have raised a Single Province to be the Arbiter of Europe, His Veni., Vidiy Vici has an affected quaintness in it, that dilgusts; Veniy Vieiy would have been better, even 
in 
ORIGINAL LETTERS 231 
in the laconic Style he aimed at; but Ceefar left this for your Motto; Vid^ alludes to his having reconnoitred the Enemy; which was one process more than your Majesty waited for, in your late Expedition, * who engaged without regard to Numbers — For the Die was cast. 
'Your majesty’s personal Bravery, with the Quickness of your resolves, and the brisknefs of your Execution, tempt me to a Comparison with the gallant Swede, for the military Part of your Character : but here, as in the former Instances, how high does your Majesty rise above the Parallel! You are, indeed, Charles the Twelfth; but you are Charles the Twelfth, 
* The first Action against the Saxon. 

232 ORIGINAL LETTERS.. 
in his senses. Charles sought for Fames, you for Glory : he for other Countries; you for your own : he for himself; you for your People: his heroism was according to ancient Precedent; yours creates a Precedent for future I'imes : • 
Charles was an Heathen Hero; you are • 
a Christian one; and under this Character, I hope Soon to see you at the Head f a^protestant League, in Germany; a. Second Godfrey:, oi Buloigne, and cham pion< for the civil and religious Liberties' of all Europe.. 
So far have I at!: i4npted your majesty’s. Character, from public Fame, as an. Historian; and I dare Say, that if I had the happiness of being acquainted with the private Anecdotes of your Life, I should. 
have 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 233 
have an Opportunity of expatiatir^ more fully, as a Biographer; for Naturalists observe, that the Spars which rise into Day., as the Miners express it, are certain Tokens of a rich Ore beneath. 
It is, .methinks,. a pecusiar luckiness to live in an heroic Age; and though I am not infeded with the patrtdoligc refis * of p’^oltaire., I cannot help feeling a kind of Rcn; ret that I had not the for tune of beshg born *^ur majesty’s Subject; which beingdpokeri'by an English 
■ arid Rving under ^ the Reign i of Georgf^ixt. Second, - is as high a Compli 
■ merfc as can possibly be paid to personal Merit.'' ‘ 
conten.ipf u£ f; itria, *. See Psgc 223, and lass 1st lies, 
But, 
234. ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
But though I have not the Honour of being your majesty’s subjesi, I shall attempt an higher Ambition, even that of making you mine: for I am busied in collecting Materials toward writing your majesty’s Life, with the conne<5led elis tory of your Times; and shall thus endeavour to shroud myself under the full Sails of your Fame, to waft my adjefhve Name down to latest Posterity. 
By the Calculations that have been made upon the prophetical Chronology of the Sacred Writings, we are taught to believe, that this World is only to Subsist about two Centuries; and the apoca lypse likewise declares, that there will be a gathering in of all Nations., So as to become of one Faith, Some considerable 
Time 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 235 
I'ime before the Dissolution of this earthly System, 
Whether the Divines have placed their Hope on you for laying the Foundation of this great Event, I cannot Say; but do affirm, that my Contemplation has been entirely fixed on your Majesty, for 'Some Months past, with regard to this extraordinary Crisis, in Religion; and perhaps I may have the Fortune of recording you as the last Hero of declining Empire, and the latest Champion of Subsiding Faith; till all Sublunary Power shall be superseded by the Kingdom of the Just, and Faith itself be Swallowed up in Conviction. 
Though the extreme Distance between your majesty’s^ Rank and mine, renders 
me 
236 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
me So inconsiderable, that I may venture to take greater Liberties, than a person of. higher consequence; for People are admitted to Freedoms, in proportion to their Insignificancy; or to Speak more liberally, though Literature, like the Grave, places all Conditions on a Level, I should not, however, use the presumption of So free an Air, if I considered you merely as a King; but yours is a Dignity of an highei: Nature, which rises, like the Divine, by condescension; where even the Rank of Sovereign is cast in Shade, by the bright Colouring of So many princely Virtues: Fortune makes a King, but Nature forms the Prince: yours is the true Dignity of Man, et nihil hu mam a te aliemim ptto; which has emboldened 
ORIGINAL LETTERS, 237 
boldened me to this address, and to Sub scribe myself, Sire, 
With the highest respecst, 
And lowest Submission, 
Your majesty’s 
'■ - Most humble, and 
Most obedient Servant. 
L E T T E R CIV 
vw E purposed to have quitted the 
Monafiery^ * this Day, but our • ^ 
kind Host pradtises Such hofpitahle Frauds upon us, that I apprehend our Departure will appear abrupt, whenever we liiay muster up resolution enough to leave him. One Neighbour comes, and pays a Com 
* Letter CL Par. i. 
'pliment 
238 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
pliment to Afton^ and another to me; these .Visits are to be returned, and Invitations ensue, of course. But I hereby engage ourselves, Mr. ajion^ and I, to dine with you, on Lhurfday next, in order to put it out of the Power of any further Solicitations to detain us longer. 
D 
We Spent Yesterday with a Mr. Harman., a Gentleman of most amiable Character and Manners, But I thought he carried the goodness of his Disposition and filial Piety, rather too far, by Suffering his Father, a doting old Man, to appear at Table. 
To rock the Cradle of dt cliiiing Age, ” 
as Pope expresses this Moral, is certainly a religious Duty,; but this Seemed to 
be 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 239 be no Manner of Indulgence, to the poor old Gentleman, himself, as he is Scarcely capable of distinguishing persons, either by Sight or Hearing; often mistaking one or other of the Company for his Son. In the meanwhile. Such an Object must be disgustful to the Guests; and a Memento Morior worse, def.pere., must naturally cast a Damp upon the Spirit of all Social converse and Enjoyment, 
Mr. Pearson., who is In a friendly Intimacy with Mr. Harmanf ’hinted these Things to him tenderly, after his Father had been carried up to his Apartment, and he acknowledged the justness of his Remark; but at the same Time most charmingly justified liimself, by Saying, 
that 
240 ORIGINAL LETTERS, that the old Man shad, now and then, ' Some Intervals ofrccolledlion and reasoii; and that if Such a Crisis should happen when he was left to dine alone, it might possibly affecft him with a Notion of his being neglected. 
This put me in Mind of the Manner of Some Eajlern Nations, I have Somewhere read of, who, from the Time of their Kings Deaths, to their Burials, Serve up a Collation, by the Side of their Couches, lest peradventure they might awaken, or revive, and should happen to be hungry — only with this beautiful Difference, that one was wild Superstition, this true Devotion. 
Dotage 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 241 
Dotage is usually styled second Childhood but this is paying too great a Compliment to it — Life is like the Running of Tea; though the first and last Decocstions lie equally weak, the one gives the Flavour of the Herb, the other but its Fasces— — ' 
View of the mouldered Ruins of 
“The cloud capt Towers, the gorgeous Palaces,, ................ 
“The solemn' Temples, ’* 
is incapable of impressing my Mind with Such an Awe, or possessing me"with Such moral, or mortal Refiedtions, as the Contemplation of a broken Intelledl, or shattered Understanding, arising either from Fhrenzy or Decay. ' '" 
vol. II M Surely, 
SZ ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Surely, Surely, this Scene does not close our Existence — We here perform •but' personated Charaisters; like Stage yidtims we only Seem to expire before the 'audience, and rise again to future Parts — Amen! 
Adieu. 
LETTER CV 
H E riding home from Mr. har ma?isy Yesterday Evening, with too much Vidluals and Wine in my Stomach, disturbed my peevish Inmate, and I had but a Night of it, with my restless Bidfellow^ 
Isle 
ORIGINAL letters: 243 
The lying awake is not the worst of it; a Want olsleep is the least of its Evils 5 but one feels more Subdued,, to therllls both of Body and Mind, in fucharsituai tion, than at any other Time. .This Circumstance gives me a good Notion of ^ ^ Diomede., who, when assailed by his Ene A 
■ ' • A J. 
pties, in the dark, cried out, not for Life, / 
hut Light, that he might 'fight thern fairly.,, ' - - 1 
On looking over rny friend’s literary Hoard, today, which is my amusement, 
every Morning, I met with a Manuscript, 
d ^ .i I. 
which happens to assort admirably with 
the short Allegory I had sketched out to 
, ■ f. / 
you, in the latter Part of my last Letter, 
M 2 
I send 
»44 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
I Send it to you, therefore, tho’ not for that Reason, only, but to entertain you with a cofnposition of true classical Elegance ^ in the Thoughts and Style, C., 
The Word Avus.. at the End of the 
i. 
ninth Line, I confess myself at a loss to account for, in that Place; but I have let it stand as I found it, not knowing well how to exchange it, preserving the Metre; unless, per Synecthochen, we could be justified in reading avers, for averfans. 
, h, 
, must walk out, for an Hour or two — My Disorder makes a pilgpun of me; to which if you add the Penance, I think I am in a hopeful Train of Popijh Salvation. 
Farewell. 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 245 
Qualis cum Spissi tolluntur vela Theatri, ’ Ingrediens parts Histrio juffus agit. 
Mox iibi descenduiit oppanfa aulsea recedit, Prodiit &jufsus, qui mode juffus abit. 
Talls perque Gradus, atquas aevi tsedia vitae. 
In scaenam prodit, ludit, & exit. Homo. Truditur exuteromifer Infans nudus inorbem, Nec feit inaffueto lumine ferre diem; 
Nox ubi Signat humum certo pede fustinet Avus, 
Orbilii plagas, militiamque Scholae. 
Nunc Venatorum Studiis, nunc ardet equorum, Ingemit aut claufas Phillidis ante sores; Jam vires animi creseunt, crescentibus annis, Maturumque videt proxima Scaena virum. Jam languet vitas quintum dilatus in Actum, Juflis anhelatum dum quatit aegra Senem; Volvitur in Seize fua per vestigia cunis. 
Infantes annos jam remeaste putes. 
Pro libitst imponunt peragendas numina parts, Tu pulchre peragas; caetera mitte Deo. 
Si recte tradles, laus est tradlare Secundas; Summa etiam parvis Gloria rebus inest. 
M 3 Explodam 
346 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Explodam, c»far, male fi mandata Loqueris, Atque idem plaudam, fi bene Davus agit. Et vitam Dubitamus adhuc cxtendere fa£fis! 
Tu mentis. Si non tempore, vive diu. 
Ni facinus dignum tarn longo admiseris aevo, Dicetur, Nestor, vel tua vita brevis, quandogunque exis, Sitcura exire decenter, Et plaufu exailum Turba coronet opus. 
LETTER CVI 
^^ffiny.goolfriend, .Mr. Pearfin,. which. 
he confesses himself, did not commence a Student, eqfly, his Library com sists mostly of Books picked up by Gltance, from Auftions, or the London Stalls; which answer his purpose, as well, perhaps better, than a more culkst Catalogue 
might 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 247, 
might do, as his reading is not' Systematical, but for his amuscment merely. 
This makes even their'title Pages an Entertainment in itself; where one meets with Books that are not to be had elsewhere, Some good. Some bad; like the rummaging a grandmother’s .Trunk, where Medals and Halfpence, jacobus’s and Farthings, Fragments of Silk and Linen Rags, Receipts and Love letters are thrown promiscuoufiy together. 
As many of the Volumes here have been long out of Print, they are become new again,, from their Antiquity — Some of: them Seem to have been stolen away, before the Piolemean Library'was Set in a; Blaze; So that, in effed, they have, af M 4 Length,, 
248 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Length, obtained the Value of private Manuscripts. 
This would be a rare Shop for a Plagiarist to trade at. I have dete(5ted a good many modern Thefts, since I came here, ' more particularly among your ser inonizers. The modern Sedtaries have stolen their Heresies out of old Books. 
The Ancients had more Wit, than the Moderns; I don’t mean the classical Gentlemen, but our own Progenitors. They certainly must have used Lahlets, more than we; for it is morally impossible that Such Groups of Imagery should ever naturally occur to any person, while writing upon one Subject only, as we often meet with in these worm eaten Volumes. Some Flowers, Some Weeds; Some fier 
ling 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 249 
ling., Some hase— — So we may Say, of the best of the Moderns, too. 
One of the Volumes I have looked Into, of the first Characfter, * is a colle<flion of Essays, by Sir Thomas Pope Blount., published in the Year eighty one, which I had never met with, or ever heard of, before. Here is Hit for Hit., and Dajh for Dajb, like Prince Prettyman and his' Taylor, from first to last; though with a deal of good sense, throughout. 
Another, older, than that again, by above fifty Years, is a Book, styled Epigrammata Sacra, by one published 
in the Reign of King Charles the First; which I had never Seen, neither, but remember to have read an high Enco m 5 mium 
* Of fl<rwers, and Sttrling, 
25d QRIGINAL LETTERS, tiiiunr on, ip Some modern Author, who recommends these. pieces as Patterns of ebajle Writing, ^ and natural thoughts. 
snow, 
, with' Submission to this Panegyrist, I think I never penised anything that less deserves this Character. They have neither the Justnest of chajte Wniingy nor the Simplicity of natural thoughts. Instead of which, they are mere puerile,, quibbling,, forced Italian comettis. 
I shall feled three of the best among the Colledlion, to afford you an Opportunity of judging for yourself and I believe ■ you’h think these Specimens 
enough., » V 
r Upon 
ORIGINAL letters. 25k 
Upon om Saviourh turning Water to Wine. 
Unde rubor vestris, & non fua purpura, lymphis? 
Quje rosa mirantes tarn nova mutat aquasp^l^ Numen, convivae, prasfens agnofeite Numen,, Nympha pudica dev.m.vidit^ Cf erubuit. 
The Thought, in this Epigram, to give a Spice of modern plagiarism,. both you. _ and I have heard imputed to a Wejtminjler Scholar of a late Date, who having this; Text imposed on him as a Theme, replied extemporally, Lhe Wafer saw the God and blujhed. 
■ d { 
And This I have Seen quoted, in Some ' periodical Paper, not long ago, as a Sentence more truly Sublime, than abv pas t sage cited by Longinus or to be extracstedi M € from 
252 ORIGINAL LETTERS, from ifaifh, Some People are apt to mistake the wonderfui for the sublime. But this Epigram is founded on a false Thought, and therefore no Expression can possibly raisc it into Beauty. 
The Privileges that Poetry has usurped upon philosophy, have not yet been carried into Such an Extravagance, as to ini ^ pute Intelligence, to inanimate Matter. For though Trees have been made to hold converse, a Rivulet to make Love to a Meadow, * c. yet a Sound Critic will know how to distinguish, between a poetical fifhon, and a Fifiion of the Poet, The Beauty, of Such Compositions, lying, I apprehend, in the Sentiment, Description, or Moral, conveyed by Such 
* Fonienelh, 
mute 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 253 
mute colloquy y and not in the Dramatis perfon^e. 
I know that in the Elegies of the absent liovers, the Brooks have ceased their Murmurs, the Trees have lost their Verdure, and Flowers both Colour and Flavour; but these Images owe their poetical Beauty to a Figure implied in the Fiction. Sentiments of Grief are not attributed to the Water, Wood, or Garden, but Crelief % Absence has destroyed poor strepheps Relish for those Pleasures, which he used to enjoy in Company with her. 
The admired Turns, in a celebrated Poem, upon Snow falling on a fair one’s Neck, proceed all from the same false 
and 
254- original letters. 
and over strained Fancy, with the above Epigram. 
“And'overcome with whitenest there,, 
“P'or Grief diltolved into a Tear; 
Then falling to her garment’s Hem,, 
“To deck her froze into a Gem.” 
The Thought here glitters, like the Snow itself; as bright and cold.. In both these Instances of the faux hrillants., a Sentiment is imputed to the Element, in a. literal sense, without the possible Intervention e>f: .^ Figure, to, Screeii th? Absurdity. 
The other two Epigrams are below a Criticism, as they are but a Couple of wretched Puns. However, as I promised them, you shall have them. 
On 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 25s On the irifant Martyrs, or the Murder of the Innocents. 
Fundite ridentes Animas, effundite Casio; Difcet ibi vestra, O quam bene, lingua loqui; 
Nec VOS Lac vestrum, & maternos quserite Fontes, 
Quae VOS expetstat, Labiea tota via eft. 
On Peter's, fearing to sink, when h was walking on the Water. 
Petre, eades, Q Si Dubitas — O Fide, nec ipfunt, j Petre, negat Fid is, aequor habere Fidem : Pandere 'prtsiz Suo Subsidunt caetera, solum, Petre, tuae Mergit te levitatls onus. 
What do you think of: th mlky wayx being made a Dairy farm^ and the hvelghk cff li^htnefs sinking a Man B 
I am 
250 ORIGINAL LETTERS 
I am tired, and So are you. 
Adieu, done. 
LETTER evil. 

Vfdnefday. hold our purpose, on the Day ^ and Hour already Specified, ^ to wait on you; tomorrow at four. 'But I write now, because you will receive this Certificate, early in the Morning, if the Posts keep Time as they ought to do. 
The first Visit should always be a Sort of Houfe warming; we shall therefore carry you a very handsome Dessert, from Mr. pearfod.s hot houfi, You have not had 
Time 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 257 Time to prune your own Vineyard, since you took Possession, I fancy. 
This would have been a lucky Occasion for Mr. Crajhawy to exercise his Genius upon. He would have touched off an Epigram, at once, to acquaint his Friend that he should receive the Fruits ‘ of his Travels. The Gardefi might range very well with the Dairy, I think. 
I have wrote oftener to you, during these ten Days that I have been here, than I ever did, I am Sure, in So many Months, before. I have no Sort of Avocations, in this Place, and therefore create Work for myself. If I walk above an Hour, I grow tired, and if I read above two, I grow sseepy — Writing rouses me again. 
Among 
258 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Among the Farrago Lihellorumy or Medley of Books, here, I met with Ati Account of Persons who died laughing, I opened it, with Fear and Trembling; but Soon found that my Life was my own again. I was much disappointed; there is no Mirth in it — His but an History of Chinks, histerical, or nervous cases; and treats rather of the Risus Sardonicus., than of the haha ha I ending in ol oh, oh! 
Another odd Book in this Library, is a Colledlion of Dedications, in a large Folio. Whether the Compiler intended them as Patterns, for the Use of Authors, or to expose the Folly and Extravagance of this Species of Writing, I cannot Say, as the Little page and Preface, if there was one, are torn out. 
As 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 259 As these Kind of Compliments are but a Sort of begging Petitions,, the best ad dress of this Nature, was by a Monjteur Maynard, to Cardinal Richelieu — He had been ari old Servant to Lewis the Thirteenth, but neglected under the Succeeding Reign. He made the Experiment of getting the following Lines prcsented to the Minister, and Succeeded. I have not the Original, and only remember the T ranssation. 
Sick of a Life posseftcd in vain, 
^ I Soon shall wait upon the Ghost Of our late Monarch, in whose Reign, i None who had Merit missed a Posh 
Then will I charm him with your Name, Tell all the Wonders you have done. 
The Power of France, the spaniard’s Shamfe^ The riling Honours of his Son! 
Grateful 
26o ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Grateful the royal Shade will Smile, 
And dwell delighted on the Theme, Fully appealed, his Griefs beguile. 
And drown old Losses in new Fame, 
But should he ask me in what Sphere, 
I did your wished Commands obey. Bid me my Services declare — 
fvhat would you please to bavt me say? 
Adieu. 
LETTER CVIII 
J HAVE been at home, these six Days, but could not write to you, for a reason that Seems to bear a Contradiction along with it — because I have been constantly thinking of you. The Situation I left you in, filled my Heart, my 
Mind, 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 261 Mind, ay, my Eyes too, with Joy, at the Refieclion on your happiness. This has brought all my Wishes within one of being accomplished. 
Do not start — I am not going to break my v/ord with you It would be a weakness — perhaps a Vice, to do So — but I can’t help Saying that I fed Something irksome creeping over my Shoulders, ever since I came home; affecting my Body Somewhat as if I vas putting on a damp Shirt, and my Mind as I remember, when I was a Child, and Sent on an Errand into a dark Room. 
And all this while too, the very sub jed which I will not mentions has been 
* See lett.r Ixxiv. 
con 
262 ORIGINAL Tetters. constantly recurring to my Thoughts, in the most unpleasant Way imaginable; without my Seeing anything,. hearing anything, or even imagining anything, to render it So. Are these what they call Forebodings? They must be So, ei j there of sickness or Misfortune. God grant the first, rather! 
Mr. Afion struck off from me, on the Road, to take the shortest Way to his own house; which I was Sorry for, when I reached Home, because I found a Letter for him that had followed him here, just after we had Set out together; and the Messenger not knowing, I Suppose, where to pursue him further, left it behind him. 
It was the Superscription that made me So anxious about it, as it was written 
in 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 263 
in a very pretty neat Italian Type,, and gives me hope that it may have come from Mrs. Aft on. She may, perhaps, be about casting her Olympian Sloughft and condescending to become a — no, not a ftmple [ Woman but a sensible one at length. 
I put it immediately into the Post, as the quickest Method of sending it to him, and if he communicates anything to ' me, on the Subject, I shall forward it to you. I neither hinted my Idea, nor expressed the least Curiosity about the Matter, when I enclosed the Letter. men’s private Concerns should be always held Sacred; and to alk a Question concerning them, is impertinent; nay even 
* Sec Letter Ixxi, Paragraph r ft. 
to 
264. ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
to guess a Secret, though one does not abuse it. Seems to me to be a Breach of Delicacy, however unavoidably it may Sometimes happen; as in this very Instance. 
My almost congenial disorder is an heavy Addition to the Feelings I Suffer under, as above described. Anxiety is its favourite Food. It prefers this morsel, to the most luxurious Viands. I have often escaped, after Excesses of the one, ’ but never from the Smallest Crum of the other. 
So that I may almost literally Say; in cffefb, at least, I may; that my Pain is seated in my Mind; and if I should but once lose all Resseflion, or, according to 
a vul 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 265 a vulgar Metaphor, cease to have any Guts in my Brain., I really think it would quite cure my Cholic., for the rest of my Life. If, as Horace Says, dulcia in bilem Vertc'nt, sweet meats hurt the Stomach, what Disturbance must Acids raise there? In the meantime, I shall attempt no other Medicine; for where they do no good, they always do harm. So as the poor worn cut King says, in aws jvell 
\ 
that ends Well., “Let Nature and sick ness debate it at their leisure.” His Time enough to die, wnhen Nature demands it; they wlio use physick, but assist sickness. 
A dieu, my ever dear Friend, Adieu. 
vol. II 
N 
AD 

C V 
bshow, fi Lddj. adiai., 1 LF >dtldi • 
Jv 'v C : dv iv., ^0 r Vd 
■ ■ * ■ ' ' ' ' cri- --;; - / ' 
r _,... ^.,. 
’■ '; '^. 'iisrii rrd.v^siic. 'A.‘ 
\ ■' -. t'j's: ■ S,; ohsti * %.?* 
■ ■ ■ r; - ^'. : h : ^’crjrnii^v ittv: -) 
, '■■•.'lr •■' ' -'■ '« ■ TT 
-., .• ■'..;, 
'■'irfv' 'ciw, ' r’v; 
■ d' ' ax!<r FJIA 'F ' ■. • -’ 
L • 
u - {tidl V ' ' ■ '.D '' ‘ 



ADVERTISEMENT. 
goon after the Date of the last extraordinary, and, as it almost now appears, prophetic, Letter, the unhappy Event came to pass, which has been already hinted at in the Preface, Paragraph fourth; and which interrupted this Correspondence, for about a Year, while she Author remained with his Friend, at the Rectory; and who, on his return Home, lived only to write him the few t rcttcrs, which follow in this Collection. 
. 
t ^ i 

C,, *; .■ ^ ' 
K 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 269 
LETTER CIX. 
.0 •. i. * 
chaise broke down, as Lwas returning from London. I * test like an Exile, on leaving you; and a dead Weight, you knovr, is always heavier than a live one — This might have occasioned the Accident, Metaphors are mighty apt to Snap Steel Springs, .you are to suppose. But, in more Serious sadness, these Visits do me more harm than good. Before I go to you, I feel myself only dull; but when I come from you, I am dismal. 
N 3 
Our 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
Our Situations in Life are So peculiarly circumstanced, that stis impossible we can any Way accommodate one another. Your Business in your Cure, cannot admit of your Sojourning with me, and mine here, obliged me to stay too much at home. As I draw my whole Resources from this Spot of Earth, 1 must cherish, husband, and abide by it. ’tis Said that “where a man’s treasure is, there will be his Heart, aiso; ” So where our whole Fortune lies, there must remain our Body, too. 
Not that I would have two Friends live always together. They are then too much the same; they think and acst for each other, more than themselves, which restrains 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 171 'strains their Faculties, and contra^^s their powtts. Separate, they are two Persons; together, but one. The Sphere > of their joint Action, is too simple and uniform, resembling a Circle.) vrhere they: make but one common Centre; asunder,. they may be compared to Ellipsis., of which they become the Foci.) and which comprises more various and useful pur poses.* 
I feel, however, as if I were buried’ here. My Spirit, indeed. Sometimes glides along the distant Plains, for a stated Time; till the cock crow.) which, by a Figure, may be construed pomejuc ceco -- 
* I can’t avoid taking Notice hepe, that this. Author is the firii, I, believe, that ever attempted, to III ike a Spark, out of the e/w/of. mathematic’s. 
N 4. nomy.^. 
272 ORIGINAL le.dfi.drs. 
notny., Summons me back to my Sepulchre again. ^ ‘b.. - o ■ 
Would to Heaven that the next chan ticlesr were to be my laji Lrumpet! My Hope in philosophy, and my Faith in Religion, have, thank God, prepared me for, that great Event; not, only in Resignation, but even, I Sear, in Wishes. 
O I fiiall meet her Spirit, then! Chaste Loves, though Sundered and obstructed here on Earth, must unite and coalesce in Heaven. God fitted kindred Souls for Union; and when human — O’ Say inhumane Bars are removed, the divine ceconomy will Surely then take Place. Amen! 
The 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 273 
The only Comfort I have left, and that, in my present Situation, is a Transport, is, that Jhe was nob frail I I would once have laid the Sceptre of the World,, at her Feet, to have obtained her Favour; but now would not even wish her alive; to gain it. Lhe Jingle Lhought that Jhe, died fpotlejs^ d.erbalances they surviving Wretchedness of my own Life.. ■. 
weep, and, I rejoice.. 
Adieu, -■« 
I could not refrain! from marking this.beau tilul Passage, by Italics 
N. 5 
LETTER 
974 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
LETTER CX 
J AM doubly Sorry I cannot answer youy tender Letter, in as kind a Way, by giving you Ibme good Account of my Health.. I continue in the Same Sad lit less State I was when I left you. exer cife and Air Seem to have lost their Effects on me; for neither the Journey, nor the Change of Situation, have done me the least Manner of Good. 
My Relishes are gone — I have as little Taste left, as Appetite, now; can distinguish between boiled and roast, but by the Sight; yimc. and Brandy have 
the 
ORIGINAL LETTERS; 275, die Same Flavour, and I should only know the Difference, by my feeling of more or less Heat. His a Sad Thing to. take Food but as a Medicine; or, indeed,, to do anything else,. merely for the Salce of Life., Vita., dum fuperejiy hens eji* is a Scoundrel Maxim.. 
Give me Some, rousing Pain, rather than this Lethargy through au my senses., Let me be sick, like a, Man; not puling and qu^rnish,, like a Woman., I dread Histerics, Soon,, and fear the curse, that Herodotus tells you old Ceres punished the Men of Some heathen Country with,., for having passed Some Affront, or other, on, her divinity ship. %antane animi, 
Said by Mtcanas.. 
'' N, 6, 
— The: 
276 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
— The Time Seems approaching which Swift prophesied about, when Men and Women shall mutually exchange the Pains of child hearing and Shaving. I bespeak you the Godfather of my first Child. 
You may see that I endeavour to follow your kind Advice — I amuse my unhap piness, by poor Conceits and wretched Fancies 7 in vain — In vain! 
Adieu. 
LETTER 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 277 
LETTER CXI 
'“JPHANK you, most heartily, for your Letter. It has restored me to my Sex again. At least I know now that I am not a Woman, by finding the Thermometer of my Vanity not to rise, upon the Warmth of your Praise. The certainty of your Friendship had already implied’ all Eulogy, and the more Solid Good still keeps the lighter one from mounting. The only Return I can make to the kindness of your Expression, must must be old Greene., the comedian’s Reply to all Compliments, Lu quoque. 
I wish 
27: 8 ORIGINAL LETTERS; 
V 
I wish I could flatter you, In return,, by telling you that I am better; but. effiigeta eji triumphus.; not to. be worsc' is Something gained,, in Such a Situation, of Mind, and Ague of Weather,, as I have had, ever Since my, coming down — indeed imay throw, in the whole Summer, under the Same Description,, too., 
Such a Clirnate as we too generally experience,, in this Ifiand,, is enough to, Set the strongest, natural Constitution, that ever was. framed, at nought.. To, lye down, at Night, on indid.s> Soil, and rise next Morning, on greenland.s Coast!' The Patriarchs never lived sh this cquu * try, for certash 
Tis; 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 279 
’tis this Sudden Transition of Latitude, from tyre Line to the Poles, which often happens in the Same Day, that hurts us more, than a Constancy, even of the worst Weather on the Globe. Keep a Block of Timber always in the Water, or always out of it, and it will last for Ages; but the alternate wetting and drying Soon perishes it. 
Farewell, and 
Believe me, till I die. 
Yours,, whether wet or dry. 
LETTER 
28o ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
LETTER EXIL 
JT may perhaps appear ungrateful in me to complain So often of a disordec that is So very indulgent to me; for it does not Supply Pain enough even to keep me awake, at present; and I fear I am falling into a Lethargy, of late., 
I have often Thought that we sseep too much, in Health; but it .certainly is an Advantage, in sickness — Children are Subject to it; and difease being a Second weakness, may require this Second nurse of Nature,. also. 
Unac 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. asi 
* ' tjnaccountable economy! Life how short! and yet Sloth is Suffered to curtail it — But Spirits, though immortal, never close their Eyes. I use this Expreshon figuratively, but sans equivoque., as every one knows, to a Certainty., that Angels have no Organs. 
“Nature, alas! why art thou So, “Obliged unto thy greatest Foe! “Sleep that is thy best Repast, 
“Yet of Death it bears a Taste 
“And both are the same Things 
1 
ysy at last.” J 
I cannot contrive any Method of keeping myself awake, for Sometime pash exercise inclines my to rest, before I am able to continue it long enough to do me the least Good. Reading dozes me, in the Second Page; and if I sit down to 
write 
282 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
write anything but one of these Letters, thinking, as the Alderman Said, in Some Play, composes me to steep, in the first Paragraph. 
In short, I begin now to wish, what I seemed to dread, in a late Letter, that I could change my Sex, for a while. Women can employ themselves, in knitting a Stocking, netting a pursc, or Sewing a Seam; but chiefly their favourite Occupation, of Gossipping, they never tyre of. • 
Though I need not shift Genders, for this latter Article, neither; as both you and I know, many Men, who generally mispend their Time, in this Way, as much as their Wives and Daughters; 
pre 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 283 
pretending to dignify their idleness, with styling it a Love of Society 
Nothing Sure has ever been So much mistaken, as this Expression — People often Seem to be fond of Company, merely to relieve themselves from a certain Vtedium Vitee^ which renders them miserable, at being left alone. I have known persons called unsociable, by thole wsho might more justly have exchanged cha radlers with them; for, in my Opinion, they are the fittest for Society, who can best live by tliemselves. It may not be unapplicable, here, to quote Lord. halli faxy in his Advice to a Daughtery where he Says that Men of sense, though with all the Affections of a Child, in their Natures, have generally Some Appearance 
284 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
ance of sullenness, in their Demeanour — For my Part, nobody loves Society, more than I do. Other men’s Thoughts, Observations, and Refieestions, are newer to me, and therefore please mc better, than my own. I flatter myself, also, in Turn, that mine may, for the Same reason, happen to be as welcome to them, too. But then ’ds Converfationt not Company that I prefer to Solitude. 
O Come live with irie, and be my Society. 
Adieu. 
LETTEK 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 285 
LETTER CXIII 
jn pursuic of your mental Regimen, I have delivered myself over entirely to Poetry, since your last; and as Soon as I have gone through the Foreign clas sics, I purpose to commence a regular .course of the domejiic ones; beginning with Chancer., and proceeding chronologically down to the'present fera. 
Tills Kind of Reading is what may be called taking the Air., in Literature; stis not Exercise;; the viewing' a Landscape, only, at one’s ease, and resting on the Superficies of Things. It is, it ought to 
be 
286 ORIGINAL LETTERS, be So — when it takes anything more upon it, it adls quite out of Character. Didadlic poesy is Hercules twirling a Distaff. 
I had always a Taste for Such ‘reading, 
and would have indulged it earlier in 
Life, but that I feared it might debauch 
my Mind, too much. philosophy was ✓ 
ever my Wife, but Ppetry my Mistresis. 
{, 
I think I told you, in Some late Letter that my Library was become my whole Mansion, at present; but it has become my Stable and riding house, also, since then; for I have a horse standing at Livery there, which I bought t’other Day from my uphcjjlerer.f 
* See Letter Ixv. 
f A chamltr horfe. 
The 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 287 The walking downstairs, drawing on my Boots, putting on my Surtout, Hat, Gloves, and strutting forth into the Courtyard, to mount a live horse, was too much Trouble and Apparatus, for my native Indolence. But now stis nothino 
o 
but itp and ride., with me, in a Jerk; and though it may not, probably, have all the good Effects of the former Course, yet as stis often repeated, and that I throw open the Windows, to add Air to exercise, possibly it may answer, upon the whole, as well. This is the best Way of travelling much at Home. 
It is So obvious a Thought to style my new Nag Pegasus., that I could not avoid _ ' it. And perhaps, as those who arc well read in the Mythology of the Ancients, have 
been 
288 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
been able to discover a deal of good sense lying hid under a Rubbish of nonsense, like the World rising out of Chaos, So this Poetical Fable may mean, thatexer^ cise, by giving Vigour to the Body, and Spirits to the Mind, enlivens the Fancy, adds warmth to the Imagination, and may therefore be properly enough entitled the hohhy horfe of the Mules. 
For my Part, L am resolved to confide my Health to this Regimen, and Abstinence, Solely; and shall banish the whole materia medica., out of my valetudinary System, for the future. 
— -- -- - “Better to bear those Ills we have, 
“Than fly toothers that we know not of.” 
I hate 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 289 I hate to consider myself as an Automaton., by living only a Sort of artificial Life. 
this‘is not Life, stis but the serving ones Lime to an Apothecary; and not to be out of ones Apprenticeship, till Death, besides; for Nature is a jealous Dame, and when Art takes upon it to perform her Fundlions, too long, she is apt to quit the subjed, in resentment, ' 
and leave all her Operations to be bun' 
'■ 
gled by her Rival, for the future, without further Assistance from her. 
Nature is generous, and those who place most Confidence in her, ’ ever fare the best. 
Just going to mount. So adieu. 
vol. II 
O 
LETTER 
290 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
LETTER CXIV 
J HAVE received the Books, you were So kind to Send me by the Coach. I have read them, and they amused me; which is all I have to Solicit, at this Time of Life, and State of Health. ’tis too late, now, to improve in wisdom, or study Science. They who have unhapr pily neglcdted to make a Sufficient Provision of the first treasure, before my Years, will probably continue Beggars, to the End of theirs; and what Signifies the laying in a Store of the latter Commodity, fo near the Time when we shall cither be buried together in Oblivion, or 
com 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 291 
commence Majlers of Arts, at once, without taking our Degrees in the Schools ^ 
Vain now are Books, the sage’s Wisdom vain! 
“What has the World to bribe our sense astray? 
“Ere Reason learns by studied Laws to reign, “The weakened Pastions, felf fubdu’d, obey.” 
Alas! What further wisdom can a Man attain, who already knows that he is a Creature, a Mortal, an accountable Being. That Virtue and Vice differ, like Light and darkness. That as Light is enlivened by Colours, and enriched by prospedl, So are there Circumstances which may aggravate the Gloom of darkness, “making Night hideous ?’* 
All this to know, and knowing to observe, completes the truest wisdom — at O 2 whole 
292 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
whose humble Shrine the proudest Science may become a Suppliant, and grow rich by an Exchange! • ’ ^ 
The Book of Learning is composed of many Volumes, but the book of pvifdom consists but of two Pages, which I shall allude to in a Line of Pope's; - ' 
“Wait the great Teacher Death, and God adore, ” 
Adieu. 
LETTER CXV 
■y^hat you Say upon the Subject of my late Letters, is perfectly in your own Character— — rational, 
and philosophic — but then those Passages 
which 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 293 
which gave you Occasion for Such re fiedlions, stow as naturally from the Situation of my present Circumstances; disappointed, disgusted, wretched, and valetudinary! 
This I acknowledge was not the original Complexion of my Mind. Far, indeed, very far from it! Let us suppose a Man So peculiarly blessed by Providence, as to receive Some good News, every Morning of his Life; and be presented with Some Gift, or Favour of Fortune, before the Day was ciosed. What must then have been his happiness! Such a Man once was I — my Health, my Spirits, my Sanguine Hopes, and cheerful refiedhons, produced the Same Effect. 
. ' ■ Blessed 
294 ORIGINAL LETTERS 
Blessed Madman! who can every Hour employ, In Something new to wish, or to enjoy. 
This Romance has long since flown! 
“Gone with the Years beyond the Flood.” But I remember the Blessing still, with Gratitude, and I acquiesce now in the Deprivation of it, without repining — I can no more — Virtue nor Regliion require but what is possible. Why will my Friend be more Severe? ' 
The Instances you mention, 1 may perhaps admit to be more unfortunate, than mine; but unless you can also prove the Sufferers to feel less unhappy, too, your Examples are but vainr If Such a one will Smile, and stroke his Beard, Cry Sorrow, wag! and hem, when he should groan; 
Patch Grief with Proverbs c 
* in Much ado about nothing. 
Besides, 
ORIGINAL LETTERS. 295 
Besides, they who would console me in Affliction, by exaggerating another’s mise ry, increase, rather than dirriinish, my Portion. 
“On every Tree, in every Plain, 
“I trace the jovial Spring in vain! 
“A Sickly Languor veils my Eyes, 
“And fast my waning Vigour flies, ” 
* Is this a State of Life to Solicit Employs, or be anxious about now useless Fortune? Nay, what are all Pomp, Same, Wealth, or Titles, when justly estimated? For, ’ds not the real Nature of Things, So much as the Notions we are too generally apt to frame about them, that gives them their consequence. How many Trifles and Insipidities are we obliged to dignify with the Names of pleasure, and of Science,. in order to fill up the wide chasm, and relieve the tedious irkfomeness of Life! 
Non 
296 ORIGINAL LETTERS. 
— — Kon e?, 
^uod vcs creditis ejfe.^ vita non eji. 
■ ' This, as I Said before, has not been always my Way of thinking; for though my. Philosophy has ever condemned the Vices and Follies of Life, it never contemned the Pleasures or Emoluments of it— — fny hvorld is dead! and since that evergreen Loss, Poffeshon itself has lost the Power of giving Enjoyment! 
I must leave off. Adieu. Adieu. 
FINIS. 
A '- C 

S. " 
r: l 


I 

.; 'i 
■ A: 
.■>-:, 
■ - X ^‘' 'A ‘ dv ■■ ’■■ F -: ' r.. <( 
■ * V C 

•. ‘0’: ^ 
T •■ '-■ ' ' ^ K V A •4 
,, A ' ■ ^ 
V - ■ * 
.'.., /; T - A -' 
■ - N i i C A>’" 
^ : i.. ». 
'• '■ i>^‘ ■-' 
. A -- 
AN ■ i. ■' 
•., ^- 
ds' ■ 
> ■' ■; ■■ 
: : ' V Aif; : - ’■ ^ 
-- .■ ' C ■ * yl^ ... 
_ '■ : ■ d, '•>% r’=k ‘ ' • L >_ V ^ r ‘V. ■ u ' 
i: ■-<: ' " ’■ ■ : ^‘SN - - A 
, L VN: t S' 
i |» ■ •■ro" r ■ b 

C ■>: 


'fl 


m: 
'W 
VI 


■''s^if; 
, r; }! 

..F ' J ■ 
4 




■) 
V 
Ta 
%xft. ■ ^ * h '.- 
u.. * 

L 


