||B|B^^H|^^^^^B ^,-r :SN>l
^n •»-L?rr2r^- rTVs^^K^KBs
Hi.
■g 0 4V^
H ji I' '
Ki.#
H|&i : jB^^^^^j^^HBSMMMwBHiMiw^^ji
■w j}

''~ty
A'Vrri' * * N A
> I fi’ ..'	-•■. ? fe.
■-■'.■■■■;■ ;vLT:: './^V	^
//	.	-.yb-ehri :-'.. ■. ;■■ .
<r // .-'y': .	, wv/-A'-.v-'.^';;:q	■;	^
.	; sel	/	'■';	^
/ .''•■.■/.■'-4 i ■■■'. ■ Y	'''-'■'	■ Aft
^-Oc ;,:?.	•	^ -vf_	"■
//'P.' .hsiT. '	■'	V	■
^''' '■• ' % "
/V,	c'‘ A. /	' ,
!-V . /	.	:-/'=v
./ '/nri .	■ ';>v
V ?v	''	4 '•:, s,;ir-'
* /Svi	'	'
' ■ / ^	'
',r>'	'	.
/ . .
A M'\	.
' -cf
s	■>	'•
A
-i /	.
^ sti .“
■ '	^ ' SseS le.; ,-" >;C- , _ ■■	-	■
■! '■• ' ..;' * ' '
■ > , ' * ”
• ■' ' ■■' '■ ^ ^
se 'i ■' ,,	• ■ S‘;;- '" :■ '	- ■	■ ' ■'
' '	! i.
*1 , . - ' %;
' N k
i
'	t ,	■
-■ . ^ - T l
I
^	,	I	.
/ • , '
' ( \ • \
■	'	"	■	' '	■ .	V '	■	"
Fruitlefs Repentance ;
O R, T H E
HISTORY
O F
Mifs KITTY LE FEVER.
In TWO VOLUMES.
VOL. I.
LONDON:
Printed for F. N e w b e r y, the Corner of St. Paul’s Church Yard.
M DCC LXIX.
,	■	C. :i 1	,
i	N ■■■ •	Ci
■/	■ '	' T	,	.^ ^
♦	»	'	‘	4	*■	-
-	-	- S'"-'	'	r--	‘	_	.	• ■	•-•■
N	r	"	^	-
\
i	T II E
HISTORY
'	OF
Mifs L E FEVER.
. ..	Letter I.
Lord Clerage to Si?” George Hendon.
SHE is found, George, the fweet, the blooming girl could not elude my vigilance.
You may remember you and I met by appointment at the Abbey; a long absence from our native country having endeared its curiosities.
R	To
2 The History of
To view the venerable, the magnifi-cent structure; to contemplate the fate oS Poets, Kings, and Warriors, induced us to spend Some time in the Sacred re-poSitory.
Having traverSed the iles, we natural-ly turned our eyes towards the choir: the prayers were just begun.
In that very moment a lovely figure shot by us into an adjacent pew; and exhibited a picture oS what we before had only a very faint idea---the beauty of holiness—down she knelt with the most becoming humility: her features, her deportment beSpoke the pious im-pulSe of her heart, and the incenfe of devotion aScended from her lips.
Struck with fo uncommon an object, we were unable to retire; yet a kind of reverence restrained us from inter-« rupting her by impertinent obfervation : we felt the awful conviction of the propriety of her adorations: and while we
admired
iVJISS T, T, r JL V JL K.	3
admired the fair, the finissied creature, bowled lowly to the wonderful Creator.
Never was fafcination fo grateful; but it could not last; the service concluded, we determined to follow her. She perceived, she blushed, she appeared em-barrasted at our defign, but to prevent the execution of it was not in her power.
The little faint deseended, however, to play the hypocrite; for having traced her into a shop, she for fome time amused us with the notion that she was housed : when, flipping out at a back door into a street that had a communication with the Park, most treacherousty and ungenerouf-ly threw us out of our chance.
How we raved, or rather I myfelf, George, for you was half domesticated even at that period, and your far-fetched refpect for your bride-eleft, alone confined you from the sallies of freedom.
Did I not vow revenge, and did I liot declare, that I could have pardoned any other the most flagrant offence; but B 2	t©
4	The History of
to charm m.e one instant by praying, at the next distract me by deceit, was nev to be forgii'en.
Somuchforyourknowledge of theaffa: I grant you your memory in general not very exceptionable ; you must, neve thelefs, excuse me, that in this particul instance I have prefumed to assist it. 1 judge a cause properly, it is neceffary i fliould be well acquainted with its eve merit: a shigle deficiency might ruin t whole: and as it was impostible for r to divine the articles in which your i lentive faculties might be most defectii I refolved both for your emolument aj my own, to present you a full and inti review of that ever-memorable adventu: and will now proceed to its marvelio investigation.
The enfuing morning conveyed y< from London, for a purpose, my frier that perhaps by this time, you are m( heartily weary of, and I commenced r literally wild-goose chase.
T
IVi 1 >> a	X X. V	IV	^
The Park, the Play-house, and the Church, divided my hours, but no light could be obtained, until the honest blundering Goddefs, whom others fo cruelly befpatter, threw the bleffing into ' ^ my very mouth, wshich, for a whole preceding fortnight, I had fo sticcefslefsiy fought after.
My humble, but worthy relation, Mrs. I.eefon, being a little indifpofed, sent to beg the indulgence, as she called it, of one short interview. You are sensible I bsc.r her tne highest efceern, therefore need not be told, that I waited upon hei immediately.
I Sound her with her Will lying beSore her ready witneffed, which she was desirous to lodge in my hands.
It cannot be extraordinary to you, my noble Friend, Said she, that at my time oS day, I should consider every indisposition, as a warning of my approaching diffolution. LiSe has most incontestably proved its uncertainty, by the dropping B 3	oliS
6	TheHistorvof
off of fome of the loveliest bloffoms of the age : but when it is wound up to seventy years, the case in question, what can be expected, but a fpeedy termination.
I have, refumed ssie, after a little pause, been taking a session of instruction tllis very morning. The moral page has for many weeks been fpread before me. A Lady sinking under misfortunes, and struggling with disease, is now in this house: ssie has not the means of procuring the requisites for her fupport, nor is ic m the power of an eminent Physician to relieve her fufferings. Yet piety, resignation, patience, and confidence in that Being, that is able to bring strength out of weaknefs, have never once forsaken her ; what is a common departure at th© fullnefs of age, to the misery ssie experiences. Your heart, my Lord, is not devoid of sensibility. Can you imagine any thing more beautifully affecting than a fond drooping parent reclining her
head
Miss LE FEVER. 7
head on the boSom of the tenderest and most endearing of children; who, forgetful of her own necessities, has not a view or wish beyond affording her help or conSolation. The pretty creature has left her but once this month, and then only went to afternoon prayers at the Abbey, and to breathe a mouthful of fresh air in the Park. I know not what would have become of them, had they fallen into leSs humane hands.
My Soul felt the alarm : it must be So : it was the petition of filial tender-neSs, that engaged all her faculties, and the conSciouSneSs of her poverty that incited her to fly from our inquisitive sight.
My countenance in fome degree betrayed the agitation I was thrown into, and good Mrs. Leefon, from mistaking the caufe, beheld me with apparent approbation ; breaking out into a panegyric on the beauties of humanity.
B 4	Imputed
Imputed merit wounds, but can never gratify the vanity of a rational being. Do you know any thing of their connections, Madam ? said I.
The story is too long, returned the worthy woman, to give you at this juncture : but heaven, my Lord, has be-stowed thofe good things upon you, which, for wise purposes, it has denied to
them; and from our abundance ------------
It was my wish, it was my intention, Madam, cried I, eagerly catching at the pleasing intimation, will you condescend to become my steward ? they would probably decline a favour from the young and gay; that your age, sex, and character would infallibly sanctify.
She received the gift, and extolled the giver : but ail impressions, Hendon, are not sterling: I, indeed, compassionate the unhappy, and would relieve the indigent, but to purchase the peace of such a sufferer, my life and fortune should be equally devoted.
I will
M ISS D K r D jL K. 9
I Vvtill, faid ssie, convey your benefaction by fuch methods, and in fuch proportions, as ssiall not only most elsentially anfwer theii; exigencies, but best secure them from the dead weight of an unre-turnable obligation.
I played my cards fo difcreetly, that the old Lady promises me I ssiall be an eye witnefs of the fweet effects of charity and beneficence, as foon as the tears of filial apprehension are wiped away.
You know I always visit Mrs. Ixescn as a private perfon, nor am I ever presented to any of her acquaintance, as “ my Lords or “ your Lordshipf
Every individual ought to be properly attentive to their character, and tenacious of their rank and privileges, to prevent degeneracy in the one, or neglect and inSringement oS the other.
But in the hour oS retirement, in the valuable intercOurSe of Sriendssiip, every bar ssiould be removed : nor have I ever B 5	tasted
tasted more true felicity, than in that honest familiarity this innocent deception has encouraged many worthy perfons to treat me with.
Let me receive your congratulations by the next post : or I ssiall begin to fufpect you capable of that mean, that groveling passion, Envy,—^Your purfuits, poor foul, have attained a sinal termination; the nuptial preparations are already compleated. But you furely cannot become fo furly a cur, as to deny your friend the pleafures you have fo fneakingly denied yourfelf. I ssiall impatiently expect your reply, as it will destroy or confirm my good opinion of you for ever.
I am most affectionately, See.
Clerage,
Iettsr
Miss UiLfnvihK. ii L E T T E R II.
Sir George Hendon to Lord Clerage.
Your Lordssiip’s vivacity will never forsake you : but allow me to remind you, that you was born for nobler purposes, than merely amusing yourfelf.
I recollect the circumstance you mention : fubferibe to every article of the Lady’s lovelinefs, but utterly condemn your purfuit of her. Stop, I conjure you, and listen to the dictates of honour and humanity.
It was evident from her whole appearance, that ssie was not only the daughter, but the lover of chastity.
I have not fo entirely forgot the principles by which I formerly governed myself, but I will acknowledge, that a young fellow is, in fome degree, excusable (tho’ by no means justifiable) when accepting the bold challenges, or foster invitations of the forward and the vain: but where neither B 6	tlie
the one nor the other is conSpicuous, it is not only. villainous to attempt, but daring and inhuman.
Look into the streets, my Lord, re-flect upon the stews. Does infamy want a reinforcement ? And is not wretched-neSs already Sufficiently multiplied ?
But I will preSent you with a still cloSer and more pathetic argument.
The innocent deServing creature you have now cast your eye upon, is So pe-culiarly circumstanced, that it is impossi-bse to deny her your tenderest compaS-sion. The iron-hand of poverty bears hard upon her. The tears of filial appre-hension, to uSe your own expressions, yet bedew her cheeks. She is the only Sup-port of her mother’s languissiment, the only Source of conSolation that^ remains for her on this stde the grave. Perhaps too, this worthy parent derives all her mifery from the unrelenting stroke of death; the hushand, father, the comfortable provision were fuddenly torn from her.
All
Miss L E FEVER. 13
All these evils, my Lord, may neverthelefs be shrmounted, unlefs you can be fuch a Barbarian, as to prove an impediment.
Virtue, the more it is afflicted, the more it is depreffed, at length breaks forth with redoubled lustre; but the rough blasts of vice ; the fatal stiafts of ignominy, can deprive even pleafure of its charm, and affluence of its various gratification.
You and I oitght now to begin to act the part of men ; the boy may be giddy, the youth idly, nay cruelly, gay; but the man ssiould be fuperior to both.
One principle operates pretty equally through the whole fpecies, self-preservation. Shall I destroy my neighbour’s peace, yet expect to secure my own ? Shall I rob him of his dearest poffessions, and no vengeful arm be stretched out to deprive me of mine ?
This morning’s fun was witnefs to my union with a woman I have long
loved:
loved : I already begin to feel the injuries I might fustain in the perfon of my wife; and tremble lest the punissiment of my profligacies ssiould fall upon the head of my unborn posterity.
There are but few women of fassiion that would not be propitious to your honourable addrestes ; fesect her, my Clerage, you think best merits your regard, and give yourself an honest claim to the bleffmgs of Society. But the preSent moment is all you have to depend upon : the prejudice oS education, the warmth ©S youth, and the witchcraSt oS vice, will prove too powerSul Sor you, iS once you behold her face again. She is an ornament to the creation ; an honour to her Sex. Spare her, therefore, as you wissi tranquility to your own Soul; Sor as Suck an aflion could alone be perpetrated by the most infernal of monsters, So nothing leSs than the most inSernal stings of GonSclence, would be the conSequence.
.1 must
I must conclude in your own words : I ssiall impatiently expect your anfwer to this serious epistle, as it will either destroy or confirm my good-opinion of you, for ever, and for ever.
I am ^conditionally only) yours, &c.
G. Hendoh.
Letter IH.
Lord Clerage to Arthur Johnson,
AT.
r> EAD the enclosed, Arthur, and tell me (for you are well acquainted with the occasion of it) whether the furly Seneca himself could have more severely handled a wandering difciple, than this Sir George Hendon, his harmlels, tho’ lively, friend.
One would actually think I had not only concerted, but communicated a
seheme
16	T H E History of
fcheme for carrying off the bewitching Girl in the first instance; but pardon me, Sir Knight, your ear is not properly constructed to receive fo dangerous a piece of intelligence.
You look a little too far into consequences, with your queer apprehenfions for the perfon of your wife, and your unborn posterity, to be the considant of my amours.
And yet the fellow would have been a very pretty fellow, undocumented by his sentimental father and mother, whom he perfectly idolized. Well: fince he lias now had tlie temerity to enter the matrimonial pale, it is tlie lefs to be regretteci that his vivacity was always in a kind of sanctified cloud,
I will rally him most handfomely, however, for this last stroke of wifdom and conseientioufnefs, and as he is, wtith refpect to our part in him totally defunct, 1 ssiall treat his all-instructive, his all-
admonishing
^ Miss nn rnvJLK. 17
admonissiing epistle, as coming from the Elyfian Fields.
I have fo much businefs on my hands at prefent, that you must be satisfied with these few lines : which let me tell you, confidering what they convey you from another quarter, will be no marvellous proof of your moderation.
You ssiall hear from me again fo foon as I have worked out my introduction to the fly devotee.
I am, &c.
Clerage,
Letter IV.
Mss Le Fever to Mifs Winter.
ILL news, my Polly, foon reaches the unwelcome ear.
You must, my dear, bid adieu to those x^ain, though natural, hopes, that reports Rave been exaggerated. I thank you for
your
1 H E ri I S T 0 R Y OF
your friendly wissies, your tender anxiety ; and I am grieved (for your sake) to tell you that they are equally unavailing.
It is now several days since I liave been reduced to my original circumstances. I am no longer the favourite companion, the idol of a woman of the first rank : but stripped of every unbefitting ornament, eveiy assumed grace, dwindled into the little fpmce houfe-wife, my mother’s limited fortune and retired life, require I ssiould become.
I do fulpect, notwithssanding all your good-sense, that I ssiall find you amongst the number of my condoling friends.
It is certainly a bitter calamity, say you, for a young woman in the meridian of her pride and vanity, to be tumbled from fo delightful an eminence. And must your Kitty Le Fever be exposed to thofe ssiocks and mortifications shat await the delicately bred, on a fad reverfe of fituation ? now that fuch a Viiriety of methods have been practised to
awaken
Miss LE FEVER. ig
awaken sensibilities, that can exist only to torment her ? Is it polsible ssie can ever reconcile herself to the cruel change ? Or rather will not her future portion be, the sighs of ambition, and the anguissi of disappointment ?
Suppose we just hear what the young woman has to fay upon the occaston.
Born to the happy inheritance of health and chearfulnefs, and tenderly cherissied by the best of parents, was not her infant state peculiarly bleffed. Perhaps it might have bccii no disadvantage to hef to have pasted her days in the silence of retreat: but where is the evil from whence good may not be extracted ?
Had ssie not breathed the however dangerous air of greatnefs, might ssie not have formed a false notiontof its influence ? might ssie not have imbibed that vulgar error, that greatnefs is alone the walk of happinefs ? and fatally quarrelling with the fubssance, have purfued the empty ssiade.
■ ^	Mrs.
20	1' II £ History of
Mrs. Le Fever’s relationssiip (tho’ I believe only in the fifth generation to I^a-dy Catherine Oldham) was the primitive cause of her Lady strip’s attachment to lier little name-fake.
She indeed thought proper to sty out fomewhat extravagantly on the matrimonial tranfgression of her cousin (though you yourself must acknowledge that to marry a poor officer, the deseendant of a refugee, 'w^as a tranfgrestion of the most flagrant nature) neverthelefs, upon due concessions, and the birsh of tlip. in question, ssie received the whole family once more into her gracious favour, and become doatingly fond of the last addition to it.
Kitty Le Fever was now about three years old, and in poffession of all those winning arts that steal upon the tenderly difposed, when her father’s regiment was ordered abroad.
Mrs.^ Le Fever (poor romantic foul, as Lady Catherine stiled her) was in the
bitterest
M I S s U JL r JL V JL K. R1
bitterest distrefs; her hushand, and her child dividing her heart.
To fuffer the man she loved to encounter dangers or dissiculties, ssie was unwilling to participate, was incompatible with her character; and to diffuade him from his duty, too unworthy an attempt for her to engage in. Yet her Kitty, what must become of her ? could ssie bear the fatigues of the sea, and the alarming effefls change of climate too frequently produce in the constitution, or with whom could she intrust fo preci- ' ous a charge, if she could even prevail upon herlelf and hushand to leave her behind.
I love to recollefl the siist impressions I received of parental attention. Her Ladyssiip would often relate the particulars of their departure as a winter’s-tale, and you must have patience with my repetition of it, as well as many other circumstances that now fuggest themselves in my prelent melancholy humour.
Lady
2 2 The History o f
Lady Catherine took this opportunity to evince that her friendssiip was not merely professional: ssie entertained the little Kitty during a seven years separation from those near and dear relations with the utmost kindnefs, nor had ssie ever the ssightest reafon to remember her lofs.
Mr. and Mrs Le Fever once more revi-fited their native country : but how shall I defcribe the raptures of their daughter’s heart, when she embraced them : love and gratitude she had long been exercised in, but filial tendernefs was an exertion of the foul beyond what ever she had experienced.
Lady Catherine grew jealous, and Kitty was obliged to diffemble what it was impossible for her to feel, a similar affection for her Ladyssiip, with that ssie bore her natural parents.
Her punissiment, however, followed hard upon her crime. The regiment was again removed into the North, and as
Lady
miss A JL X JtL V JL K. 23
Lady Catherine was unwilling to part with her favourite, ssie did not dare to propose leaving her: but languissied out^ many hours in forrow and mortisication, which ssie was fuppofed to employ in the greatest gaiety.
Another seven years elapsed, when poor Mr. Le Fever—can I write it — poor Mr. Le Fever—-in defending a fort, left his own family defencelefs — he died upon the fpot—and I furvived to tell it.
My mother (for I can now no longer fpeak in the second perfon, drooped and defponded. Lady Catherine pitied her — but pity alone was infussicient to alleviate her afflictions.
Thirty pounds a year is certainly a fmall pittance for two perfons to fubfist upon. I was neverthelefs fo unequal to beholding my mother’s declining state, without flying to her fupport; that I uttered fome diffatisfactory complaints against her Ladyssiip for wissiing to detain me.
Words
24 The History of
Words cannot paint her rage. She fetched down lier Will, read the contents aloud, and then burnt it before my face. The provision ssie had made for me was noble, was greatly generous, but could not have preserved my dear mother’s life, and I chearfully forego it, Befides violent as her difpofition is, might ssie not have acted the same part on any other provocation ? We will think no more of it.
I am now under a fweet maternal roof, two little rooms, indeed, are all we can boast at prefent; but I have health, I have ingenuity, and who knows not the happy effects of honest industry.
I ssiall at 'worst be sheltered from all unworthy reproaches of obligations, I never fought to incur, andean never repay : I shall be exempt from a repetition of the cruel treatment 1 have fo lately fustained : and though a coach and six, with every fuitable appendage is no longer within my reach, if I can but be instrumental to
the
he foftening my dear mother’s cares, and re-establissiing her health, I ssiall never regret the step I have taken.
I have now no friend left but yourfelf. How is the circle contracted ? But every Dther attachment was of her Ladyssiip s Forming, and will consequently peristi vith her departed favour,
Write foon my good Girl, and believe me to be with the warmest affection, Yours, See.
C. Le Lever.
Letter V.
Mss Winter to Mifs Le Fever,
My great and good Girl, do but persevere in your resignation and fortitude, and I ssiast be more proud of your :riendssiip in your humble, than most exited situation,
C	But
26 The History of
But I fear it will be impossible for you with all your prudence, your amiable sentiments, to avoid many inconveniences and mortifications. The world, my dear, will never permit fuch an object to glide on uninterruptedly : the men will admire, the women envy, and you must fuffer for both.
Besides, I am convinced you are the most unfit perfon on earth to struggle through life : you have too much gene-rostty, too great condeseenfion: and will be ever falling a prey to low, cunning, and little-minded deceit: thofe that cannot defcend to fufpicion, will ever be betrayed.
That you had but formed fome useful connexion, before this evil hour reached you: fo lovely, fo abundantly meritorious, it is astonissiing that you have not met with fome happy opportunity of fixing your fortune ; though believe me, I would much rather know you miserable in a single, than a married
situation;
fituation ; for the latter calamity extin-Tuissies even hope itfelf.
Were I a man—Well: we wtill not talk of impoffibilities—but I am verily of opinion, that was you to bestow yourfelf otherwise than to my approbation, I ssiould be tempted to renounce my petticoats, to punissi the wretch of wretches that could be capable of under-valuing fuch a woman.
How philofopbically you treat of that ne plus ultra (as my father calls it) of every other individual, yclepid riches. It is true, indeed, as Dr. Young observes,
We can neither dig peace nor virtue “ from the mine yet we can make but an ill ssiift, my friend, without a proper degree oS this Same pelS.
Had her Ladyssiip—her time was not come, however, and you have been permitted to Sail beSore her, to sill up the meaSure oS her cruelty.
I know not what I write: any thing to relieve the opprested mind,
C 2	You
2ss The History of
You ingenious ? who is more fo ? but must you be industrious in even the last the most mortifying sense of the word ? let no one then hereafter repine at the operations of fortune; once at the top, the rapid turn with enfue.
Come and live in the county ; money I have none; my father, poor gentleman, loves it a little too well to intrust it to my stippery singers : but then I abound in the good things of the earth, vegetables, poultry, nay, even joints of meat are in my power : I would engage to furnissi you a plentiful table, and for cloatlis, your mother’s noble pension must fupply them.
0	how do 1 honor the mad-brained fon of Philip, for his generous attention to the furviving relations of his brave Macedonians.
1	own it is not polsible to provide for the wives and children of every man that may be taken off in his majestyle service : but ’ivhen fo singular a character as Captain
T	9
J.VX XOOA-iJ-JX-L-lVJL-JJ.’V#
Le Fever’s falls under the public cognizance, whose approved valour, probity, and very many virtues, both martial and focial, together with tlie closing action of his existence, must have fo abundantly endeared to every heart; I cannot but wonder that from commonjustice and common policy, liis family are permitted to ssirink into poverty and obfeurity, when the most extenstve advantages might be derived from a contrary conduct.
That a Sovereign is (or ought to be) the father of his people, you yourself will not attempt to deny : but tell me, is it consistent with the paternal nature, to fuffer the tender, and most deserving branches of his posterity to wither and decay.
I could purfue the fubject much farther, but am sensible it would be to little purpose : for the patriotic fpirit you have' ever poffeffed, will not only incite you to acquit your father’s Royal Master of all blame, but to conlider what I have al-C 3	ready
go The History or
ready faid, as merely the enthusiafm of friendssiip. Take this, neverthelefs, from me, my fweet Girl, that had the Englisti Court, like the great Pharamond’s, a gate for the unhappy, and was fuch a favourite as Eucrate, next the Britissi throne, Captain Le Fever’s widovr ssiould not be compelled to hide her head in a mean lodging, nor be reduced to accept the donations of charity.
Our Squire is upon the whole a good decent being; there was a time though, when Rome was Rome, my Kitty, that I would not have matched Captain Le Fever’s most accomplissied daughter, with the best ’Squire of them all. But you must now over-look his want of refinement. He is honest, well-natured, and humane : a little too fond of rural fports ; hut you may, I doubt not, tame him to your will.
I am serious in what I mentioned with refpect to you coming into the country : do you think I would refiife fuch an
nffer
i.YJL 1^0 X.J .LA X SA V JLi AV*	^ JL
offer at your hands. Pride is in fome instances, I grant you, a virtue, but here it would be the most intolerable of vices.
Will you know famine, whilst I enjoy abundance ? do not make my plenty a curse, which it will prove without your participation.
I will not forego my request, my injunction : it ssiall be the test of our friendssiip, and we will be either wholly united, or wholly separated.
I fend this by a young gentleman you have not seen since you was three years old.
He has been bred to the church, which is certainly a misfortune, where great interest, or a handfome patrimony are out of the question.
Young Leceister’s case is, indeed, a singular one; his father notwithstanding he could not be ignorant of his own circumstances ; brought both him and a daughter up with the expectation of genteel provifion.
C 4	Mifs
A tl Xi 1 i U K T u r
Mifs Leceister is several years older than her brother, and was on the point of being married to a very worthy perfon in the neighbourhood, when her father’s death gave an unfortunate afpect to all their affairs.
The old gentleman propofed giving his daughter fourteen hundred pounds, upon the strength of which, and his own equivalent capital, the intended hushand was^ admitted into a very advantageous partnership, and the wedding was to have been celebrated the ensiling week.
Instead of which happy event, bestdes" the lofs of an indulgent father, they had the affliction to find upon a valuation of his effects, that after satisfying the creditors, there would not remain above five hundred pounds for each of the children.
The distrefs of the lovers, and in fact the whole family, is not to be defcribed. The generous brother, however, hit upon an expedient to anfwer all their wishes (his mother and sister’s happinefs
being
MISS u iL r JL V JL rv. 33
being dearer to him than his own, he mortgaged Mrs. Leceister’s jointure, or at least his reversion in it for a thoufand pounds, added the stipulated two hundred out of the miferable five, and paid it into the partner’s hands before any creature was even apprised of his intention. He then obliged his mother and sister (as cassi run very low with them) to accept an equal division of what remained : and having bestowed the one agreeable to her destres, and seen the other comfortably situated: with one hundred pounds in his pocket, and one of the best hearts in the kingdom in his bofom, he is coming to Lcrcton upon the recommendation of a friend or two to procure himfelf an humble curacy.
I am satisfied you will entertain him kindly, as well on his own, as my account. He has great merit, and an en-gaging perfon: but as his profpects are fo unfavourable, your approbation of him must be tempered with diseretion.
C 5	Adieu
Adieu my fweet Girl—You remember my refolution — ail—or nothing-— must I then be for ever renounced ?
I am, &c.
Winter.
I
#
Letter VI.
Mifs Le Fever to Mifs Winter.
My dear mother has been fo severel) afflicted for this fortnight past that it -was impostible for me to bestov a moments attention upon any other ob ject, however tenderly beloved.
Mrs. Stubbs, the good gentlewoman ir whofe houfe we are situated, under tool to fend you a few lines, to prevent yom mistaking the cause of my silence : I hopt they have anfv/ered the desired purpol'e.
I have had much both to learn and un learn at this trying period : the sine lady
anc
ivi I s s ju JL r X. V il. iv* 51,
and the useful member of fociety are very opposite characters.
My prayers have been graciousty accepted, my endeavours bleffed to the utmost, and my dear mother is restored to me from the very verge of the grave.
Some little fatigues, fome anxious watchings will ever attend the bed of SickneSs—but the weak, yet expressive preffure oS the Seeble hand —the gratefully intelligent langour of the upliSted eye— and the half articulate affurances that our vigilance is Soothing to the beloved SuS-ferer, is more than ample compensation. My mother lives, my Polly : lives to thank her child for the offices, the assiduities ssie had a rigl'it to command, and you, who are all Sensibility and tender-neSs, can alone judge oS my Seelings.
Slie is now in a Sweet flumber : peace and SoSt repoSe do not diSdain to visit the humble rooS. Lady Catharine, Lady Catharine, I hope they have not fled Srom ' you to us.
C 6	But
But this moment is my ov/n : my m ,, ther is happy; and I will be playfu move on, therefore, my pen, with unufu rapidity; for I have much to commur cate by thy means, to the heart of rr friend. I will, in the first place, hot ever, fpeak to the principal fubject of yoi letter.
V And is there no other alternative ? a< cept your proposal, or forfeit your attacl ment! Then thus we break hands ! an confign every remembrance of our Ion continued friendssiip to oblivion !
O Polly, Polly, how strangely are yo deceived in your prefent calculation ?
You fee the tremendous charactei above written, are no blacker than th rest ; nor ssiould they prove offensive t< your fight, would they be more dissi cult to erase ? but, be assured, that thol that are traced out in the foul, are of si different a nature, that though they ma^ be ^ainSullv retained, they are indelible
;	Friend
MISS L il. I K V -L K. 27
Friendssiip, like love, is not free from fome little exceffes and inconsistences. A most eligible fcheme, truly, have you plann’d : turn thief, for your friend, and reduce her to the criminal standard of a receiver of stolen goods.
I must have tlie fuperiority, I sind ; at prefent, if we let you tell tlie story, you are a mere pigmy to me in goodnefs: and was I capable of accepting your kindly intended (though, certainly, most romantic, offer) it is pretty evident on which side the balance v/ould incline.
I think I can affirm, that, as far as your actual property extended, I would not fcruple to be obliged ; but you must not over-reach yourself.
Befides we are not fo destitute of the jneans of fubststence, as you imagine : a twenty pound Bank-note was conveyed to us by the Penny-post, in the hour of our greatest need, but where to place the obligation, we are utterly ignorant.
I had
I had many noble friends ; but I con eluded that all was at an end betweei them and me, when I withdrew myself though on fo justifiable, nay fo indifpen fible an occafion, from my once tende benefactrefs. O had ssie but been eithe uniformly cruel, or uniformly kind, m] heart had been fpared the acutest pangs '	I intended to have laughed with yot
or rather at you, by placing your hone! generous proposal in a just point of view but ferioufnefs has seized the reign, am reflection will have its hour.
Once more I am yours.
I cannot enter upon the tender fubjet relative to that high claim, to conlidert tion you fo warmly impute to my me ther and me. It is, my dear, in moi refpects than one, a truly tender fubject.
But to fileiice you in an effential tic gree, turn your eyes to Lady Catherir Oldham. From her I might have ei pected a mitigation of the too commo fate of the field. She is not furrounded h
nun
ntimberlefs folicitations ; ssie is not liable ^ to be imposed upon by false reports : nor is ssie infenfible of the difqualifica-tion I have derived immediately from lier indulgence, to fustain the calamities, to which ssie lias both driven and abandoned me.
You must not, thus, my dear Polly, enervate the mind that is already too weak, by these heart-wounding fuggestions.
I am again unable to prosecute my design : and it is your fault, at this moment, that I experience the full recollection of all my misfortunes.
I must chide you for once fufpecting that a change of circumstances can have produced fo unworthy a change in my sentiments, as to prompt me to accept of a man (if he had an opportunity, and was inclined to offer himfelf} that you would ever have hesitated to propose to me.
Matrimony is an affair, that I have hitherto bestowed but little attention upon
on: the men, or at least the generality of all thofe I have ever yet been acquainted with, kindly furnissiing me with a strong antidote to approving them; for they have been pleased to sind me fo fair, that they have treated me like a fool.
I have, this day however, been cast a second time, in the way of a young gentleman, that vouchsafes to converfe with me in the stile of nature and common-sense. There is a polite ease, yet a pleasing rusticity, if 1 may fo exprefs myself, in his figure and deportment: and I own his addrefs is particularly agreeable to me. Perhaps it may not be difficult for you to guefs the man.
I thought you had been better acquainted w ith human-nature, than to expect diseretion in a girl of eighteen. You largely commend the bearer of your much valued letter, yet would preseribe the narrowest limits to my approbation of him.
.Dught
Miss -L.il, r n V n K. 41
Ought you not to have considered how unfit the feafon of forrow and foftnefs to resist tender impressions.
The first time Mr. Leceister came to our lodgings, he was ssiewn into the dining-room, before I was even appiifed of his arrival.
He told Mr. Stubbs’s servant that he brought a setter siom one Mifs Winter, which ssie had enjoined him to deliver into no one’s hands, but her friend Mifs Le Fever’s.
I would not pay fo ill a compliment to your injunctions, as not to comply with them ; but my features were difor-dered, and my ‘drefs exceptionable ; my mother’s alarming condition, had called forth many tears, and my heart was replete rvith unutterable a,ffliction.
I appeared before him: his countenance befpoke the humanity of his nature.
1 had no conception, Madam, faid he, that my vifit v/as fo ill-timed. I have loner been a near neighbour of Mifs Win-
ter’s
42 'She History of
ter’s and on my coming to London, st was fo kind as to intrust me with a le ter to procure me an introduction wil her second self.
The best of mother’s, Sir, returned in the best manner I was able, I a upon the point of being separated fro; the most valuable of mothers. You w excuse my reception of you : the prefe you bring me intitles you to every civi ty in my power. I have not been ah myself, to make my friend privy to n miserable apprehenfions : but she knoi them by this time from another han since you left the country, perhaps.
He faithfully promised to let me 1 him at fome other period; and left r with apparent commiseration.
I have been lately informed that n one day pasted without his applying the servant for intelligence concerning u and he no fooner learnt that my moth wa& out of danger, than he sent in 1 name, and best congratulations; and I
fc
IVi. i a & J-j -11. JL	V ^ XN-.
fore the end of the week made a perfonal presentation of them with great politenefs.
I believe he staid near two whole hours : his conversation was pleafing and judicious : no lightiiefs, no silly adulation ; upon my word I have not been sh agreeably entertained, since I conversed with yourself.
But lie is not rich, you fay, and, therefore, I am to keep diseretion for ever in view : and what have riches to do, I beseech you, with the perfon, difpolition, or understanding. He is a gentleman by his profession : and the fewer favours he can boast from fortune, the more fuitable acquaintance he is for me.
I own my education has rendered me fomewhat nice in the choice of my com-, pany. The gossip’s tale, rude mirth, or noify ignorance, would strike harssi upon my ear. But it cannot be neceffary for me to endure fuch violences. Women in a private sttuation have it always in their power, at least, to be alone : and
Some
44 TheHistorvof
fome fmall industry in conjunction wit the humble certainty we are poffeffed o may fupport us at once above want an meannefs.
We are extremely happy in one part cular. An old friend of Mrs, Stubb’s, Lady of family and fortune, has fc these eighteen years past occupied the sir , apartments in her houfe. You cannc imagine the kindnefs ssie has stiewn u She has frequently relieved my watchinj in the day time, and furnished us wil many comfortable articles : nor should have been able to devote even a sing half hour to Mr. Leceister, notwithstan( ing all his civility, if she hadnotcondeseen* ed to fupply my place as head nurse.
Two gentlemen have already pretendc that obtaining the favour of my hand w: their highest ambition. I must beware ( the third. The merits of your frien Polly, are almost irresistible.
The first was much older than mysel illiterate, yet vain of his own endowment
Tl
iVl i !S > Xu XU X X4 \ Xu
The second, as unexceptionable as the generality of his sex, but my heart would never incline towards him.
Lady Catherine very willingly admitted my objections to the one, nor once condemned my indifference for the other. But the truth was, ssie loved herself better than either of them, and did not wissi to part with me.
Should Mr. Leceister be difpofed to make the third, where rvould now be the impediment ? Would not his behaviour, as a child and brother, be an undeniable security for his behaviour as a hushand ; you need not, however, apprehend any danger from our connexion; I can dif-tinguish, I vrill approve his worth ; but my mind is too equal to experience the violence of any passion.
Take this memorandum along with you, Mrs. Mary, though, that you yourfelf have cast the share, and if I should happen to be unfortunately en-/	tangled,
46 The History of
tangled, )'ou could not refuse your tenderest compastion, to yours, &c.
C. Le Fever,
Letter VII.
Six- George Hendon to Lo?A Clerage
Whimsical unkind Clerage, to sene me fuch an epistle : * sensible a you are, how ill my friendssiip couk fupport the lofs of yours.
You are not, you cannot be a delibe rate villain : and mean to protect, wha I apprehended you meant to betray.
Our correfpondence ssiall not be inter rupted. George Hendon lives, in fpit of all your raillery : lives to demand hi wonted entertainment: the exertion c your lively humour.
Do I not recollect a thoufand instance of your greatnefs of foul, your humanit
This Letter does not appear.
------- „ -------
und generosity. I am not mistaken: you play off your vivacity merely to amuse yourself, and deserved an eulogium, instead of reprehension.
Go on, my noble friend, but remember how many eyes look up to you for an example, how many hearts beat high with the expectation of your not only inheriting, but practising the virtues of your ancestors, and then tell me if your actions and sentiments ought not to correfpond.
Never addrefs me again with fuch odious stiffnefs; leave Sir George Hendon to a formal flattering world : and do not forego your valuable familiarity. You are a very young, but I do believe, a very honest fellow: and as fuch yOu will hver sind me your warmest friend, &c.
G. Hendon.
Letter
L E' T T E R VIII.
Lord Clerage to Sir George Hendon
OHo! have I then lassied you intt repentance ? ’tis well: and yot ssiall sind I can be gracious : nor will fuffer my wrath to out-live your pro voking fpirit.
I begin to think that curiosity is no only born with us, but that it is th' last furviving paffion of our nature.
Levity, vanity, folly, the fmall por tion, I mean, George, that you poffeffe( of each of them, bled on your marriage altar.
You who a few months ago vras quit as ready as your friend, to head a froli (provided it had the reputation of bein, a harmlefs one) instantly upon your re conciling yourfelf to Hymen, wage you pen against every fpecies of gallantry yet are the inquisitive impulses of you foul apparently unfubdued.
Cor
miss u il r JL V JL IV. 49
Continue to entertain you, is your modest demand, with the exertion of my lively humour : or in other words, you. cannot fupprefs your defire of being informed of my flights and fancies, from a double motive; first, that you have naturally an itching ear after my wrong-headed, rattling concerns ; and, secondly, that it is the only means of your picking up fressi matter of condemnation, with refpect to my condu6I and principles. Is not this the fact ? and yet, as your extravagant demand happens to correfpond with my own inclination, it ssiall be complied with : for I must confefs, that my diseoveries (and I have made fuch as will, astonissi you, or you are not the fellow I take you for) are but half enjoyed when uncommunicated.
You have heard of Captain Le Fever, how bravely he fell, in defending a foit in the North. This sty deceiver, this all lovely Girl, this honour to her own sex (your epithet) and bane of ours (mine D	George,
George, every man in his way, you knot is no other than his unfortunate daug] ter. How many dissiculties did he n cope with ? but we will not disturb h worthy assies. A glorious death termiii ted a valuable life; and the best mom ment we can erect to his memory, is preserve his precious remains from periS ing.
I wissi you could fee my heart at tl moment, uiideformed by vicious hope and wholly intent upon restoring this falh samily to their proper condition,
I must have an interview with her. must be indulged, as good Mrs. Leefc phrases it, with one half hour’s converf tion. I may furely prefume to admi her (though I confefs I have no intentio at prefent, to make a sacrifice of n hberty) do not burst out upon me wi fuch viole'nce : is there no medium thei matrimony or seduction will necelsari be the conl’equence of our meeting : 1 it fo : for, whatever enfues, I will n
comp
J.,4.	4.	^	4-4	...	4.	^	^
compel myself to forego my flattering refolution.
I perceived there was fomething uncommonly genteel in her; the Simpleton, to conceive that a plain drefs, which is the best ornament of a beautiful woman, would in any degree conceal her perfections : but it is impostible for you to have any idea of the hard terms on which I am to obtain my introduction : nothing in nature was ever more unreafonable.
They have taken a lodging in the country, and I am required patiently to wait for their return to town, before I have the pleafure of becoming acquainted with them. “ Mrs. Le Fever’s fpirits are too weak to admit of the company of strangers, and a month or six weeks will foon pafs away.”
When people come to be married, George, or arrive at the ancient period Mrs. Leefon has attained, how sagely, how calmly do they judge of things ; but it is no eafy tash in the heyday of the D 2	blood
xiTXrf iiiox'j'ivi v_/r
blood to fubferibe to fuch mortifying sei timents: yet this is not only required i your friend, but he must alfo restra himfelf from every appearance of difati faction; lest the good old Lady ssiou take alarm, and for ever exclude him a dangerous perfon.
I remember to have seen the fweet Gi with that flinty hearted Lady Catherii before 1; went abroad, but ssie was a me child then.
What a violent and mvengeful difpol ttion her delicate Ladyssiip poffeffes! st is not to be intreated: She brought h up from her earliest infancy; fpared r expence in her education; careffed, ei couraged, protected her, until this ciitic juncture, hah! Hendon, when ssie h thrown her upon a wide, ungenerous, ui pitying world ; and under circumstanc too, that any man, besides myfelf, wou rejoice in.
But no, Mifs Le Fever, your fathei blood shall not be shed in vain ; it was:
n
Miss n ii. r iL V n K.
Ou
my defence he fought, it was my property he secured from the enemy’s grafp : he has procured me eafe and tranquility, and his darling child stiall sind a ssieltering roof.
Thus every member of the community ought to consider those who died to defeat the attempts of the invader; andthegreater the benefit, the greater the tye.
Had ssie been any other female, you / might have trembled for her safety, but poor, honest, brave Le Fever s daughter shall sind her security in her very name.
Farewell, thou clumfy advocate for virtue ; and know me hereafter for your friend, &c.
Clerage.
Letter IX.
Mfs Le Fever to Mifs Winter.
Times, my dear, are wonderfully altered, ihy mother s health in great D 3	. meafure
54	IHE ri I s T O R Y OF
meafure restored, and fmiling peace one more begins to dawn upon us.
We are now at Kensington for the ai: and I do affure you Mr. I^eceister is ou constant visitant; I really fufpect, to dej fairly by you, that he is fome few d( grees more friendly than I could wissi.
My mother expresses her good liking ( him, in the highest terms : “ fo model “ fo sincere : believe me, Kitty, he is r “ common chaiacter: and as thofe po “ sessions are lefs frequent, fo they ougl “ to be the more abundantly cultivate “ in a mafeuline breast.”
But do not conclude that I am abf lutely taken in : I indeed like him bet'ti than any other perfon I have yet m with for many reafons; though by i means in love with him, I do affure yot
Mrs. Leefon has done us the favour look in upon us many times ; ssie is charming woman : I hope there are mar fuch for the sake of other unfortuna families; for I am not of that numb who conceive themselves marked out si ■neniliar vensreance.	Affli
Afflictions and disappointments are the general lot of humanity : yet there are few that have not many things to be thankful for, tho’ they may have many to be disatisfied with : and thofe who complain fo loudly of an unequal distribution of good and evil, do not properly attend to the various changes, and wonderSul turns ' liSe affords.
IS Mr. Leceister should be So simple : but he can never intend Such a thing, his circumstances are almost as limitted as my own; and I have been too well-bred to be capable oS making a notable wiSe.
I will, however, hide nothing Srom you, he has, my dear, been very particular many times, and I have this aSternoon engaged mySelS to walk with him into the gardens.
Shall I trust mySelS? it is an enchanting Spot; a Second Arcadia; and may, too probably, contribute to harmonize our Souls. Love is the offspring oS SoSt delight; and I think I will not rashly D 4	tempt
5si T HE H I S T O R Y O F
tempt my fate : yet how strange to r< tract from my word.
He is come my Polly, and claims m promise, nor can I wissi to be excuse fulfilling it.
It was not vanity, my dear Girl, bi well-grounded apprehension that woul have restrained my giddy steps. Yet th declaration was neither engendered by thj incident, nor would have been muc longer fuppreffed, if that had been totall avoided.
I cannot look back to my own foolif behaviour, without mortification: no forward to the profpects that not break in upon me without difmay. Th loves, the graces, the little dimpling Cu pids have nothing to do with poverty and who but the abfurd or frantic eve lacrisice to a pennylefs Hymen.
I know not what I said, I was fo utter ly confounded, but I fancy my coun tenance was not very difcouraging.
Ther
iVi 1	X. j:. X X4 y	iv.
There cannot, however, be any harm in the acquaintance: for as to the bare mention of matrimony, it must be far enough distant.
There is a romantic generofity, an ex*-travagant portion of sensibility, as you once observed, in my composition, that will be my bane. But I could not bear to torture a worthy heart; nor could I ever accept a haughty hand.
The generality of mankind aie too narrow ih their sentiments for me to chufe to owe them an obligation : and though I am not for a hovel, yet a bare competence, and the man I love, would be my highest ambition. Mr. Leceister’s education is unexceptionable: my pride' is, in every refpect, gratified: his perfon is agreeable; his manner engaging; and I do fufpect we were born for each other, unlefs you can have the cruelty to forbid the banns.
I am yours, &c.
Le Fever. D 5	Letter
58 T h e History op
Letter X.
Clerage to 6'zr George Hendon
Fancy, shou sickle bufy Goddefs how irrestrainable thy power, and ex tensive thy influence upon the humai mind ? It is thou that accelerates or retard the moments as they pafs ; from thee th profpects derive their beauty or deformity and music itfelf is more or lefs delightful -as thou art pleased to convey it to the eai What a fpace, what an eternity ba one poor month appeared to your un happy friend ! the morning stowly bring on the unsatisfying day : the day is heavi ly fucceeded by the gloomy eveninc which at length gives place to the unre frestiing night. '
V/lith Mifs Le Fever I sind things ar quite otherwise; her mother’s returnin health, communicates gladnefs to ht heart; and, you may depend upon it, h - *	*	resistibj
ivi I s s u JL r n V iL K. 59
resistible vivacity to her eyes : but ssie is Le Fever’s daughter, George, and you have nothing to fear.
You cannot imagine what endearing terms good Mrs. Leefon and I are upon: on my word, ssie is no ineligible companion. I was always sensible that ssie was a woman of excellent understanding : but seventy, you must allow, was an aukward tete-a-tete for twenty-three.
“ That every young nobleman was “ but as fober and judicious: what “ stronger proof of an amiable difposition “ than being capable of fpending whole “ afternoons in rational conversation : no “ cards, no dice, no bottle, no idle jests : “ few would believe the report, was it to “ be publicly made.”
No, my worthy unfufpecting friend,
nor would you sind it fo extraordinary if you could once penetrate the real motive.
D 6	Well
6o The History of
Well might Pope observe that action do not always fpeak the man, for on ver many occasions we
———  -----------------Jind
“ Who does a kindnefs, is not therjore kind f
Unfortunate recollection: for does h not tell us, a line or two farther,
“ Who conquers bravely, is not ther fore brave! Ah Le Fever 1 Le Fever! what dange rous doctrine, were I capable of givin; into it I as the father’s merit is the daugh ter’s security.
But, George, if one was capable o forming designs upon fuch a Girl a Le Fever, there would be very little pro bability of fucceeding. What most pow erfully tempts other females, would be ne temptation there : ssie has been bred ir delicacies, has tasted all the delights thai affluence can bestow, and greatly seornj them all. Prithee, Clerage, who told yot she was fo egregious a blockhead ?
What, because her humanity was fupe-*ior to hei every other feeling; becaufe
Miss LE FEVER. 6i
when the last distrefs, the lofs of her mother seemed inevitable, ssie was not heard to sigh for a coach and six, you are fo abfurd as to conclude that ssie has not one fpark, either of vanity, or ambition in her whole compofition.
I want prodigiousty, my dear Mrs. Leefon, said I, one afternoon, to fee Mrs. Le Fever: she must be an amazing woman to fustain the shocks of adversity, and the anguish of disease in the manner she has done.
Indeed, Sir, returned the old Lady, there is no deseribing the m.erit of her character: I shall take great pleafure in introducing you the first opportunity, and as she will be ignorant of your rank, you will most certainly converfe with her to infinite advantage.
And her daughter, my dear Madam, rejoined I, fomewhat styly, we must not forget her: 1 fuppofe neither her perfonal norctntellectual perfections are yet in their full maturity : but she promises, I
think
fig The History of
think you say, not to be unworthy t fuch a mother.
You never, my Lord, returned ssie, b( held fo compleat a creature: I tremb for her future fate : extraordinary mei and extraordinary beauty are ever me unmercifully taxed by an envious worl Providence has, it is true, bestowed double portion of prudence upon hei but if ssie happily avoids the shares ( vicious and designing men, what can S cure her from the little malice of tho women she fo strikingly excels ? I kno not how she can difpose of herself; b we ought not to anticipate misfortune the hand that formed her what she can at all times protect her.
Why, Hendon, cannot you and I b come, what we must esteem. Chari and religion can be made to sit eve: shape. But I beg your pardon ; you a at this very writing, what I, (wretchi hypocrite, that I am) only preserve t] appearance of, and our rewards and p
nishmer
Miss LE FEVER. 63
nissiments will be proportioned to our deserts.
What can poffefs me to harrafs my miferable brain fo intolerably about a Girl I have no acquaintance with : for that very reafon, George, you understand the infatuation, and I need explain myfelf no farther.
It is the misfortune of us Lords to be too fuccefsful in our attacks : there, is magic in the very name, I believe, to every one but the party that bears it. Their little hearts do fo palpitate when his LorL Jhip vouchsafes to admire them, though his views are lefs worthy in general, and his appetites more grofs than his stable-keepers. '
A man of education is an unequal encounter for an illiterate Girl: a handfome figure is flattering, and a large fortune a powerful perfuafive : but the uninformed, the weak or mercenary husty, would not do for me.
Mifs
04 Ihe ri I s t o r y of
Mifs Le Fever would grace the tr umph of an emperor : May her guardia angelnever nod in a tete-a-tete with fofrai fo imperfect a mortal as George Hendoi Yours, &c.
Cleragj
Letter XI.
Mss Le Fever to Mifs Winter,
HOW can you, my dear Polly, he I furprized and mortified at the cor nection between Mr. Leceister and me Was he not the very man to fucceed wit a woman of my difposition ; can you de sire I ssiould attain a higher eminenc than happinefs ? and, believe me, if it i any where to be found, it is in the hum blest state of independence : just abov the frowns of poverty, and infinitely be neath the deceitful fmiles of fplendor an( affluence. But you intreat what yoi call the disagreeable particulars.
I in
iVl I S s L. JL r JL V ih K, og
1 informed you of our conversation in the Gardens : that is, I confeffed he had made a tender declaration of his affection, and you might guefs the rest : the language of lovers is pretty general. We returned home to tea; fupped together-; and, it feems, he did not go to London until the next morning.
For several fucceeding days he repeated liis visits with the utmost punctuality. My mother was not to be imposed upon : she examined me touching his professions, and I did not deceive her.
My dear child. Said she, it gives me great pleaSure to sind you So Srank and ingenuous : I can have no objection to the young gentleman, iS he is able to provide Sor you : but you have been too delicately bred to encounter the miSery of contracted circumstances. It is a formidable step, and requires deliberation. If you could even depend upon passing fome Sew years without a family, the hazard would be leSs alarming; but it is the natural
66 The H I S T O R Y OF
tural consequence of the state, and mul not be left out of the calculation. Hoi far, my love, continued ssie, would a cu racy go, in fupporting four or five pel sens, and how miserable would your rt flections be, when the evil was irremed able ? It is my duty to make you fenfibl of these particulars, but depend upon i your happinefs will always be the gran object of my attention; and your ow leelings and diseretion must point out t me, the most effectual means of promc ting it.
Dear Madam, cried I, greatly affecte by her tendernefs and goodnefs, you mu: not deliver up your child to the regula tion of her own weak fancy: you mu restrain, you must instruct her upon ev( ry trying occafion: and if errors are t be her portion, let them be the errors ( duty. I own I approve Mr. Leceister but, as to matrimony, neither him nc myself, can, at present, have any idea ( it: we are very young ; our acquaintanc
wit
Miss DD BDVDK. by
with each other, may not be in any degree disadvantageous, as I have not a wish to recommend myself to any other perSon. Nor is it impostible that this beginning Sriendship may, on his part, early decline: many things that delight us on a first view, loSe their estimation on being fiimiiiarized. He has had, as yet, but Sew opportunities of conversing with me ; I could, therefore, be glad if you would fo far indulge me, as not to appear sensible of our connection, unlefs it should be more strongly confirmed; as your not making yourself a party, would enable the. young gentleman to make a more decent retreat on any difgust, or sickle inclination. I am rather concerned than pleased at his election of me, though there is not, ner-. haps, a man living that would have been fo eligible to me, from many peculiarities in his taste and circumstances.
My mother, my dear Polly, kindly kiffed my cheek, wiped off a falling tear that efcaped me involuntarily, and blessing her
poor,
68 The History of
poor, her reduced girl, left her to recol sect herself without interruption.
And what do you think was the refult what is very uncommon, I believe, i: cafes of this nature. I wept to sind tha what I had expected, nay had been bol enough to hope for, was actually come t pals : but I do not know how it was; : seemed like tearing my dear mother fror my bofom, to make room for a foreigi guest. In ssiort, it was the folly of childish nefs, and the workings of simplicity. Tliu I, who a few weeks ago was free a air, had no wish beyond the restoration c rny mother’s health, nor view but the pro motion of her happinefs, have now give ‘ my heart to a stranger, and more tha half refolved in due time, to become dutiful wife.
This duty, however, must never intei fere with that I bear another darling ot ject : Mr. Leicester shall, at least, appea to entertain the same tender constderatio: for my mother, I have ever done : an
ou
)ur mutual endeavours fliall be exercised o foften her cares, and enhance her en-oyments. Nor will the lesson be hard o him, that has already given fuch ssrong ind amiable proofs of filial and fraternal egard. Ah Polly, if you would have se-:ured me from this interessing attachment, mu ssiould not have given me those re-iommendatory ftrokes : fuch characters, IS my mother jussly observes, are from heir searcenefs highly eStimable.
Disappointments and adverfity are ex-:ellent fchool-maSlers : with refpeft to all hose little grateful attentions, my dear mother stands in need of: it is fuffering stone, that teaches us to feel, except, indeed, in fome extraordinary compositions, where the whole foul is, as it were, har-nqiiized, and replete with the most gentle enstbilities.
Under fuch aufpices, what could we fear : that bug-bear poverty consecrated by the maternal benediSSion would lose its terrors; and we ssiould be convinced
by
yo The History OF
by the pleasing evidences of our ow senses,'bow moderate the demands of na ture, and in how fmall a compafs the ret neceffaries of life are comprehended. Perhaps you will call this mere heroifm Nor will I be too positive of the contrary but you must allow that, at least, distar dangers are not very alarming: he ht fome few friends to recommend and fu| port him; and, in all probability, long b( fore an union can seriousty be thought ( between us, he may be enabled to make fuitable provifion for me, to the humilit of my fortune, expectation, and wissies He is to leave London the day befoi we return to it, to give his relations th meeting at Birmingham upon fome bul nefs of consequence to tbeir affairs : an I flatter myfelf that I ssiall be comforti bly fettled in fome little employment b< fore he revisits us. Never start, my Gir it is the birth-right of the poor daughtei of the Church and Army : only joi with me in lamenting that their educt
tio
......----^	^	J 4.
tion is, in general, fo cruelly ill-judged.
I am, &c.
C.Le Fever.
Letter XII.
Lord Clerage to Sir George Hendon.
Am I not a clever fellow, George, to carry every point my heart is set
upon,
The morning arrived that was to com^ pleat my utmost desire, I could no longer restrain myfelf, but dropped in, as if from fudden recollection, upon Kirs. Leefon, who was fmirking with an inferior (though, perhaps, more worthyjjoy, from the fame cause, for ssie had long sighed
*	^	O O
for a re-union with her friends.
Suppose, Madam, laid I, as it is a very sine day, we were to take a little airing: Mrs. Le Fever cannot come to town without^ carriage, and her expences must
have
have run fo high during her illnefs, tlia it is too probable, it may not be ver convenient for her to procure fuch nece! fary accommodations ; ive might take then up in our way, and confer the trifling fa vour without wounding their nice senfibi lity.
I listen to you, my Lord, I behold yoi with admiration, exclaimed the good oL Lady : these delicate, tliefe generous atten tions to the feelings of tlie unfortunate are fweet and amiable emanations of be nevolence. It is not fussicient that w relieve the necessitous, but we ssiould fui our benefaction to the state, conditior and capacity of the object, lest while w assist their poverty, we deprefs their fouL Far be it from me to oppose the exe cution of your noble wissi : we will gc my young friend, and immediately if yoi please.
It was not for me, you know, to dil approve of whatever fo venerable a gen tlewoman condefcended to propose, i
coac
M I s s A Xu r XL V Pi. 73
coach was sent for; and "ssie retired for a few moments to her closet, to thank heaven, perhaps, that fo well-difposed a youth existed, as her cousin Clerage.
Well: we ought all of us to be as good as we can: and the best—it is a fearful reflection though, for fuch forry varlets as you and I, George : for if the best must remain a remove or two from perfection, what can be faid for—but I forget your late reformation of manners and principles, and that I am follow-ing your example with all polsible expedition.
My drefs was plain, and as my features can astume a decent cast upon oc-caston (did I ever give you a fpecimen ?)
I was not without hopes that Mifs Le Fever would be unable to detect me for the giddy fellow that traced her from the Abbey. Nor did my good genius fail me in fo effential a particular. Mr. Smith pasted current for a fober country gentle-E	man, ''
74 The History of
man, and I could perceive that Mrs. L( Fever eyed him with approbation.
The fly Girl was perfectly herself: my figure, my addrefs, they may not b< striking, Sir George, but you must allov’s me to fay, they are not the most excep tionable you ever met with. Mifs Le Fever, however, was no more affected b) either the one, or the other, than if I hac been a plough-boy.
She has been told, I fuppofe, that Ian-\ guissiment becomes her : ssie sighed onct or twice profoundly, her lovely face lof its vivacity, and never was tender for' row more pathetically expreffed.
But what can ssie now liave to disturl her ? is not her mother’s health restored i is she not returning to a houfe when every one is prepared to adore her : the cause, George, is fussiciently obvious : hei Strongest apprehenfions removed, ssie ha: iciSure to reflect upon her own miSerabh circumstances, and the pleaSures ssie en^ joyed in her day of Splendor.
Coin‘
IVll S O X. X. X X. V	XV.
Compofe, thou daughter of poor Le Fever, compofe thy every anxiety; Lord Clerage’s fortune is much fuperior to the haughty the revengeful Lady Catherine’s; whatever it is capable of purchasing, or whatever good offices its master can perform, you may and ssiall command.
Mrs. LeeSon ordered coffee to be brought from a proper houfe, the young Lady was called upon to prestde at the little ceremony, and I infisted upon being the only attendant.
Mrs. LeeSon had the honor to receive her cup from my hands, but who can defcribe my happinefs in receiving it from Mifs Le Fever’s. Her fingers are delicately turned, her nails tinged v/ith the foftest red : yet has ssie no idea of difplaying them to advantage, nor should I by any other than this accidental means have diseovered half their lovelinefs.
Never was knave more circumfpect than myfelf, lest the good Mrs. Leefon should find me tardy. Your elderly E 2	Ladies
yb The History op
Ladies, in general, are very ssirewd observers ; but I may thank the honesty of her own heart for securing me from fufpicion.
When once one accustoms oneself to an idle rattling way of writing, it is not ealily renounced : but let this, Mrs. Leefon, penetrate the inmost receffes of my foul, I can assijre you, Sir George Hendon, that even your own in its present reformed state, could not better fustain the close examination. Compassion, tender regard, and no other the most latent inclination, would be diseovered through all its foldings. But fuppofe we proceed to town. Our coffee difpatched, and oui carriage at the door, I offered my hand to Mrs. Leefon, as standing most in neec of my assistance. I am forry, Ladies says I, that I can serve but one of you ; they fmiled, curtefied, and followed us.
When we reached the coach however we made a kind of halt; ceremony i; odious, but little tokens of refpectful con sideration cannot be -difpensed with, efpe.
dally where from difparity of fortune they are liable to mifconstruflion. Mrs. Le Fever was too well-bred to be troublefome, and we foon drove off in high good humour.
Mifs Le Fever’s youth, and my sex, cast us upon the fame feat: attraction is not to be resisted : my heart strongly inclined, my eyes involuntarily turned towards this powerful object. I, neverthelefs, conducted myfelf with the prudence, the refolution of an anchorite.
With what different feelings, Said the good Girl, do I quit this place, to thole I experienced on my arrival at it, and the Salutary effect the air has had upon my mother’s constitution, will ever endear the name oS Kensington to my heart.
Happy Kensington, cried my too flippant tongue, to be So Sweetly commemorated : I, indeed, must Sorget mySelf, when I fail to remember that it was at Kensington that I attained the most interesting of my wissies; and its doiable E 3	merit,
7ss The History or
merit, ssiall have double weight in r estimation.
Luckily Mrs. Leefon and Mrs. Le. I ver were engaged upon an importa fubject, or the warmth of my accent, ] lefs than the expression of my count nance, must have betrayed me : for was the workings of nature, and the f culties, you know, will be obedient.
What are hours, days, years, in con pany with thofe we love : our little e; cur si on was terminated almost in the i stant of its commencement; Mount-Stret Berkley-Square is fo trifling a distant from Hyde-Park, as not to be worth me: tioning.
An humble repast was provided t Airs. Leefon about two o’clock, alias dinner: but would you believe it, th: little witch refused to participate it: st had two very long letters to write, an begged the indulgence of having a plai sent up to her own apartment.
Wh:
X O i}	44.	4.	4-4	,	^	y ^
" What can be the meaning, Hendon, that we fellows, instead of being difgusted by fuch whims, are rather doubly attached ? Was it instinct in this Chit, think you, in order to torture me, or was it simplicity ? it is as impossible for me to diseover tlie real motive, as to secure myself from being tormented by it. And fo far was I from repaying neglect with neglect, that I found myfelf more than ever defirous to cultivate her acquaintance, and recommend myself to her favor.
Have I not already fuffered a martyrdom for her fake, in tete-a-tetes with my elderly relation : but judge what a pretty figure I made this evening at whist, with a triumvirate of the same brilliant stamp.
Mrs. Le Fever, has, indeed, the remains of a very sine face: but affliction, sicknefs, and the revolutions of time have -left distinct tokens in each ravaged feature.
Mrs. Leefon’s countenance, though almost. double Mrs. Le Fever’s age, has.
E 4	many
§o The History of
many beauties, yet grief and a long she cession of periods, have made no incon siderable attempts to deprive her of eve ry charm; but an excellent constitution amazing strength of mind, a naturall] contented fpirit, and an eafy fortune have been powerful opponents; andfecurec that ever venerable, and pleasing afpef from even thofe devastations, the poor un happy Mrs. Le Fever’s has experienced.
But the third Lady is of a quite diffe rent fpecies. A dark complexion, stron| lines, and unpleasant brow, are the unfa vourable covering of a most valuabl mind; to esteem her, you must be ac quaintest with her difposition and charac ter, and those once known, it is impost] ble to withhold it.
Some change, however, will foon be come abfolutely neceffary, for if I v/a to continue this harmlefs inactive life, m; coffers would sill, and my perfon grot enormous. Do but think of me in m; day of probation, dipping into Baker
Chro
Chronicle, reading a weekly paper, or old, magazine, and closing the evening at brag with good Mrs. Leefon, and Mrs. Leefon’s good Landlady.
If the thing was once to get air, I ssiould be unable to ssiew my face in politer circles ; but I am weary of the beau-monde, and the gambling table never waS' my taste. Unfatigued by ceremony, undebauched with wine, unperplexed by cares, and unpalled with fuperfluities, what defire can be ungratisied, except the defire of obtaining Mifs Le Fever’s approbation ? She is now returned to town, George, yet is my penance unremitted : I will be patient, and by following my example, you will at length arrive at the conclusion of this intolerable long letter : only one word more—who can the charming girl have to write to, if male-correfpondents—don’t be alarmed Hendon, I only mean that I ssiould be tempted to enquire into the merit of their pretensions to fuch an indulgence : but how ssiall I procure E 5	fo
flg The Historv oA
fo important a piece of information ; tb seals, if they were to pafs through m hands, ssiould be sacred; I would onl glance my eye over the fuperfcription, an fure fo innocent a wissi might be indulgec Fortune may be both a whimfical an perverse jade, my friend, but I am pei shaded ssie will blefs me with fome happ opportunity when I least expect it, i which confidence I will to bed, and ssioul flattering vifions deign to vifit my pillov I will receive them as the precious re wards of the forbearance and self-denial have fo long practised. She never cam down the whole evening; I hope it wil not, however, be the last of our lives and if I do not bring her to another kin of behaviour, believe me no longer.
Yours, See.
Clerage. L E. T
Letter XIII.
From the Jame, to the fame.
A Gain at Mrs. Leefon’s, why truly George I may breathe, but I live only when under her roof.
It was about five in the afternoon when I ventured to renew my visit. The old lady was not to be found in any of her apartments.
I am fure, Sir, said Jenny, the good-natured girl you have seen there, my mistrefs was in the dining-room but this very instant; I fancy ssie must be stepped up to Mrs. Le Fever..
Jenny, returned I, you are a very good. young woman, I have often heard Mrs. Leefon mention you with approbation ; and for her sake, if, as in the course of years is most probable you ssiould be the furvivor, you ssiall never want a friend. You have been kind, I understand like-E.6	wife,.
64 The History of
wise, to the worthy but unfortunate Ladies, your mistreffes new acquaintance.
Oh, Sir, said Jenny, (fome pearly drops trembling in her not disagreeable eyes) who could refuse to be serviceable to fuch amiable perfons. Mrs. Le Fever had lodged fome time in this houfe before I ever saw the young lady, but one morning, I shall never forget it, she came in the greatest difcompofure, flew up to her mother’s apartment, and hanging about her neck, cried, it is over, my dear mother, forgive your child this first instance of undutifulnefs, and all my future actions shall be regulated by your will.
Methinks I hear them now, continued Jenny, it was fo moving. My dearest life, replied Mrs. Le Fevre, what have you done, forfeited your last your only friend, and in the moment of your greatest need. I should have fuffered but a short period, and then you would have been wholly Lady Catherine’s, but who
will
MissLLrLVLR. 05 will now protect and provide for you when I am no more.
Forbear, my dear mother, cried the young lady, forbear thofe killing expressions, heaven will be propitious to the prayers and endeavours of filial tendernefs. My difposition is better fuited to the calamities of virtue, than all the unsatisfactory pleafures that greatnefs can bestow. Could any thing compensate your lofs, lost perhaps by my neglect : let me at least have the confolation of knowing that I was in no degree accessary to the greatest evil that can beSal me ; then bleSs your poor child, bleSs and pardon her, and all may yet be well.
I hope, Sir, you will excuSe my prating So Sast, Said the worthy Jenny, blussiing and recollecting herSelS, but indeed I could talk oS them forever.
You have obliged me extremely, Jenny, Said I, and I ssiould be glad to hear Some farther particulars ; but Mrs. LeeSon might be SurpriSed to find you and I in
Such
fuch close conversation, unlefs ssie was acquainted with the fubject. Another time my good girl, you will not let me find you lefs communicative.
She curtefied, and looked a little confused : you will take the trouble, Jenny, added I, in the kindest accent, to let Mrs, Leefon know I am here.
Jenny tripped up stairs ; and as I was determined not to be disappointed of see-, ing Mifs Le Fever on fo fair an opportunity, I followed her steps with the utmoss confidence.
Your friends, madam, said Mrs. Le Fever, fo foon as Jenny had announced my arrival, must always be acceptable with us ; but as you are the best judge oi their rank and difpofition, I cannot prefume to invite them into my apartment without your sanction : the gentleman does not appear to want condeseenfion.
We ssiall very probably wait upon you, returned Mrs. Leefon, but I must just
fpeai
.iVA i O O A-i	A	V -t-J	C?y
fpeak one word to him before his shtro-ductioii.
That you cannot, my good madam, said I, presenting myfelf, Jenny knows I did not wissi to break up, but, if possible, augment an agreeable party. Leifure is-the parent of impertinence, but you have fo frequently tolerated me, that I cannot defpair upon this occasion.
Is it not extraordinary, Mrs. Le Fever, said the harmlefs Mrs. Leefon, that fa-young a gentleman, with many gay and valuable connections, can devote fo large a portion of his time to the company and' conversation of fo elderly a relation as I am : but during your absence he was my constant visitant (how charmingly it told George) and I dare say you will have no objection to assist me in fupporting my consequence with him.
Where the heart is fo well known as I flatter myfelf mine is, returned Mrs. Le Fever, professions are needlefs; I ssiall always, Sir, be glad of an opportunity of obliging you.	What
88 The History or
What we are deficient in, cried Mrs. Leefon, poor unfufpecting creature, Mifs Kitty ssiall accomplissi : we will have a fong after tea, and instead of the fuperan-nuated partner Mr. Smith has hitherto difpenfed with, I will recommend this blooming damsel, what fay you to the exchange my young friend ?
That Mrs. Leefon has the art, returned I, to render every fucceeding visit the most delightful, and the last enjoyed is always liked the best.
A good pretty stroke, George, but failed of its desired effect : the lovely insensible was apparently unmoved, nor even bestowed one inquisitive glance upon the moitified Clerage.
But great enterprises require great virtues, patience, application, judgment, and perseverance. I have it all compleatly planned, but must be wary in the execution, step by step advances the approved veteran.
Mifs Le Fever was called upon in due
feafon
Miss n Ji. r n V JL K. ^19
feafon for the promised fong: I will nOt overpower you with raptures, George, you know my partiality, and may guefs my sentiments. You beheld, you admired the mouth that was formed for my destruction, and may remember how peculiarly every feature was turned, to difplay and communicate the most exalted admiration. I will only add, that Mrs. Leefon fays, ssie never heard a more pleasing voice in her life.
Cards were now introduced : is there a more eligible feat on earth, than opposite a fair partner ? but Hendon ssie is fairest of the fair, nor did I fail to avail myself to the utmost of my happy situation ; her eyes could not always avoid meeting mine; cold complaisance was no addition to their natural lustre, tho’ I could not have wissied fo much evil to the. bitterest enemy I have in the world, as to have been compelled to fustain the dangerous encounter.
She plays admirably at quadrille ; hut
as
90 T HE History of
^as ssie observes, it is not the greatest ex cellence in the female character to mak a figure at the card-table ; and yet v/her it is purfued merely as an innocent amuse ment, it can be no reflection to difcarc with judgment, win with moderation, an; lose with temper. In ssiort, this on evening has fo intirely fubdued my whol foul, that was ssie any other creature (a I have already told you) than Mifs L Fever, you might tremble for her safety but there you ssiall ever sind me a mai of the strictest honour, and
Your sincere, &c.
Clerage.
I •-
Letter XIV.
From the Jame to the fame.
I Tell you, George, that a title in man] cafes is a very inconvenient poffession A ticket for the Magdalen, Mifs L Fevre had long wissied to visit that nobh
retrea
ivi J. o o	s-j X	\ X.J J.N..	yi
retreat for the wretched (no ill omen I hope, but Mrs. Leefon, Mrs. Le Fever, and Mrs. Stubbs, thought it too great a fatigue for shem to engage in.
Dare you trust the young lady to my care, madam, faid I, to Mrs. Le Fever, or rather will ssie trust herself, for ssie is abundantly the least propitious to me upon every occasion.
To convince you, sir, faid Mifs Le Fever, with a most enchanting fmile, how ill-grounded that notion is, I will gladly attend you.
The morning service was disapproved as not being the taste : this piece of folly I forget who fuggested it, cost me fome impatient hours, but the longest day has its termination.
.She was dreffed: well we will not enter upon fo fertile a fubject.
Jenny was fo exceedingly delighted, tliat Vifs Le Fever was going to be entertained, that I was in terrible panics
lest
92 The History of
lest ssie ssiould betray the consequence he amusement was of to me.
Behold us now in the coach, for I hai many reafons for not handing her a might have been expefted : her glove wa off, George, and we were furrounded b fpectators. I love to play a fure cart nnlefs when fome very great advantag may be gained by a flippery one.
You have not lived long in town, I pn fume, madam, faid I, in order to start conversation, or it would not have bee in my power to conduct you to any nei fcenes.
Your conjecture is very just, sir, n turned ssie, as to my general situation 1 never was fond of London, nor woul I now reside in it, if my inclination alon was to be confulted. I am furprise( cried I, to hear fo young a lady mak fuch a declaration. London is the cenU of all that is gay and delightful; fine ey( and fprightly hearts seldom doat upo inanimate profpects.
I own, sir, faid ssie, my taste is singular:
I have a kind of natural aversion to noise and confusion, which has been greatly increased by observing the errors many people of understanding commit in the choice of happinefs. To compel oneself to engage in unpleasing fcenes for any extraordinary advantage to either ourselves or fellow-creatures is one thing, and to voluntarily embrace the clamor and diforder of life another. I have seen my acquaintance return from what they have called diversion, worn down with languor and fatigue, with many other asto-nissiing and difgusting particulars.
Sure, madam, you have been accustomed to enjoy fairy fcenes, faid I, will you favour me with a curfory deseription of them to enable me to form a right judgment of your election and sentiments.
In the fober, rural walk, sir, within my late infpection, nothing can strike you but what is natural or pleasing.
The labourer, having finissied his work,
returns
-gq The History or
returns home to repair his waste c strength and fpirits with a chearful fuppe and a found repose. The day of gener; rest is considered by him as the greate of all human bleffmgs ; and having exei ciSed himSelS in acts of devotion an harmleSs recreations during that most r( fressiing period, he the next morning rt Sumes his weekly toil with redoubled ala crity. DiSeaSe and diScontent Seldom fini ihe way to his habitation ; and his wil Supplies the want oS delicacy and poliss in tendenieSs and uSefulneSs.
Such are tlie lower claSs oS mortals at distance Srom the metropolis; and blil and eaSe riSe by due gradations Srom th cottage to the man of competence, and f on until it reaches the assluent dome.
Where the circumstances are happy the mind and body enjoy unutterabL delight : to contemplate the all-animatin| Spring ; to behold the ripened beauties o the Summer; to study the moral, the in (Iructive page of autumn; and to hear
tht
the rough blasts of the hoary feafon, without inconvenience, vice, or difmay. Is it not to be peculiarly favoured ; and when you add the means of diffusing bleffmgs around you, of chearing the heart of age, and astisting the worthy wishes and elide Ivors of youth, do you not constitute a paradise on earth. Yet this is the never-failing prerogative of greatnefs; tho’ fo little exerted, or even remembered, where the contagion of courts, and th« fantastic pleafures of vanity prevail.
I observed, sir, continued she, what Hstlefnefs the great experience in the purfuit of what they call pleafure : but how shall I exprefs the misery and wretchednefs of the inferior inhabitants of this city. Guilt and disappointment are intolerable, tho'’ not similar burthens; and many a worthy heart is oppressed with •anguish, by the profpect of fufferings it is unable to relieve : be fide v/hat I have mentioned, tliere is another very severe evil; most ranks, of people outlive themselves ;
96 The History of
selves; they cannot resist the temptations by which they are furrounded ; and rather than pafs unnoticed, they expoft themselves to ridicule, cenfure, and dif esteem. The only art of living is to confine our wissies within the limits of oui circumstances, be they what they may, 01 judicioussy to resign the rein to every laudable inclination: common sense anc common cafe, as the poet tells us, are most unquestionably equal ; and if wt once adopt the one for our grand regulator, the other will be the infallible refult.
What think you now, Hendon, of Le Fever’s daughter, or do you not conceive that your friend is in the greatest danger r I cannot marry at this early period, and I will not betray her, unlefs I ssiould most unexpectedly diseover fome ugly feature in her character that tends towards hypocrify. If ssie is what ssie appears, how fweetly amiable; but ssiould ssie be a hypocrite, even the Magdalen-houfe would
be
be defiled by harbouring fo unparallelled a monster : but perhaps you may have no objection to visiting the penitents.
We reached the chapel in due time: I confefs that reflection, rather than conversation, had for fome part of the way been my choice. We got a good feat; the singing was very pretty, but my fair faint complained of the indevotion of the whole congregation.
There seems to be but two forts of people here, said ssie, the entertainers and the entertained: I own I do not find the fo-lemnity, the gratitude, the contrition, or pious satisfaction I hoped to have been witnefs to.
You have been there, George, and can judge of the propriety or impropriety of her observation: but ssie seeks for that purity of manners, that sensibility of foul, that is not to be found beyond her own breast. How came ssie to remain fo uncontaminated ; Lady Catherine Oldham fees much polite company; why did not a ray of ambition, a fpark of vanity, com-
n	mnrnr'af*:*
p8 The History of
municate itself to her lovely bofom ; bui it is adamant in every refpect, excep when virtue, benevolence, mercy and truth become the question.
Our aukward carriage obeyed my nod and I now ventured to astist her tende steps. She withdrew her handj however fomewhat pertly, confcious, I fuppofe, o a gentle pressure. The ice is broke thought I, these little fearful simple tons provoke the very treatment of whicl they are most apprehensive.
My dear Mifs Le Fever, said I, rathe familiarly, it can be no new thing to yoi to be admired ; but perhaps you neve met with one fo capable of sincere refpe^ as myfelf, but you must allow me a haif pinefs I have long wished for, but neve till tllis moment had a convenient oppO] tunity of foliciting. I did not wait for refusal, but with an air at once gay an polite, you observe Hendon, saluted or of tlie prettiest cheeks in the universe.
She started ; Mrs. Leefon’s relatioi faid she. I could not have, exnected —-
Am I not human, madam, cried I, interrupting her, and are not you —
— A poor distreffed girl, returned ssie, and a veiy unfit companion for fo lively a gentleman. I ought to have known the world better, efpecially the great world.
You are miserably severe; Mifs Le Fever, faid I, is greatnefs and goodnefs then •abfolutely incompatible in your opinion ?
Afk your own heart, my lord, replied ssie with the most significant emphasis, whether my severity, as you are pleased to call it, is not just with refpect to ninety-nine in a hundred of men of your rank.
Rank and title, repeated your friend, pray what pretensions have I ?
Do not attempt to abuse me, sir, whatever were your original motives for concealing your true character, they can now fubfist no longer. I know fome things of Lord Clerage that are not altogether fo much in his favor, as to reconcile me to his acquaintance, under my prefent circumstances : with perfons of distinction, indeed, his merit may be equal to the ge-
XT' «
too The History of
You astonissi me, madam, cried I, (am fo ssie actually did, George) both with re gard to your knowledge of my title, ant the intimations you have thrown out re fpecting my principles. Pray Mifs L Fever, for my worthy relation’s fake, in dulge me with your motives, at least fo; the latter.
At once, my Lord, to oblige you, ant convince you of the propriety of my refo lutions, a gentleman that fat behind me a the chapel, betrayed your name, and J fuppofe you cannot have forgot the poo; Innkeeper’s daughter.
What a thunderbolt! but now, George is it not hard that I ssiould fuffer for th( iniquity of my brethren ? I must, witl ssiame acknowledge, that I was of the hunting party : dined among the rest at th( inn, and heard many encomiums upor the fair Parthenope ; but I had not the minutest concern in her seduction, no; even knew the precise time when it hap pened. As well might the world accufi you of this angel’s fall, (if she was to fal
iVll&a X-iJLj XJUlVi-i i-.-.	4. ..,4
by any wicked practices of mine, which heaven avert) because you was privy to my purfuit of her, and half acknowledged intentions, as charge that creature’s ruin upon me. I am neverthelefs taken with the cranes, and in all probability, in this vestal’s rigid judgment, ssiall likewise fuffer with them.
I would have faid a vast deal to exculpate myfelf, but ssie cut me ssiort with,
I do not fuppofe your Lordship is fo poor a sinner, as not to have much to fay in your own defence. I wish it may avail you at the most awful of tribunals ; as to me, you may fpare yourfelf the trouble of laboring the point, as your utmost eloquence would be fruitlefs.
Provoked beyond all patience, I was fo unguarded as to curse my companions of that day’s exeurston.
I hear you, sir, said she, (her countenance correfponding with her ex preffions) with her ; and if I did not consider you as a seducer, you kindly convince me you are a very prophane gentleman, which F o	T
102 The History of
I must be fo bold as to fay, is but an ugl) Ipecimen of a valuable heart.
The coach was now whirling on at £ violent rate, and I greatly apprehended would reach Mrs. Leefon’s, before my conversion of the little infidel. I therefore put my head out of the window; you rafcal, exclaimed 1, with a vehemence 1 have bad leifure to repent of, did I not order you to drive flow. This is perhaps, continued I, as I refumed my seat, tlie only opportunity I may ever have ol expostulating with you, as you are fo strongly prejudiced in-my disfavor, and it ssiall not be curtailed I infist upon.
O, your Lordssiip is all goodnefs, said ssie, with a sheer, that she must have borrowed ; and if I am hereafter at a lofs in what manner to conduct myself, I should ill deserve the obligations you now confer upon me.
Mifs Le Fever, cried I, seizing both her hands, do not push matters to the last extremity : I adore your perfon, and honour your sentiments, but I cannot fuppori
the cruel contempt with which you treat me. I may have been a gay man, but I never yet was the seducer of innocence, nor ssiall you harbour that opinion of me.
You are very arbitrary, sir, returned ssie, but till you can make it appear that you have a right to controul my private opinion, I cannot be all obedience.
Your father, the honest, brave, valuable Captain Le Fever, cried I, would neither have dared, nor been inclined to treat me in this manner: he would at least have listened to my justification.
She lifted up her sine eyes to heaven ; the monster before her was not worthy of one glance. At length, my Lord, faid ssie, with an averted, face, if you knew the father, can you refrain from pitying the un-happy child. He has now no arm to defend me, no means of ssieltering my miferable head from the roughest blasts; nor can he die in revenging the injuries his daughter may fustain: he had but onr life, my Lord, and that was given toshi country.
F A
104 The History of
I beseech you, Mifs Le Fever, said I, relinquissiing my hold, (ssie has too much pathos, George) only hear me a few words, I mean not better to my own foul than I do to you. We must not part on unfriendly terms. Mrs. Leefon, Mrs. Le Fever, must not be informed either of your difeovery, or our disagreement. I will never offend you a second time, only grant me this request, and let my future treatment be fuited to my future deferv-ings.
Do not put it out of my power to oblige you, my Lord, by requesting what I ought not to grant. I abhor secrets; and ssiould I have any from fuch a friend and mother as you have mentioned, was I capable of fuch base injustice and ingratitude, what kind of impression would you not neceffarily receive of me. To convince you, however, that it is not merely to gratify a talking inclination, but from actual principle, that I am an enemy to reserve, I will not proclaim the conversation that has passed between us, if that
will be any satisfaction to you; and that, my Lord, is an indulgence you had little reafon to expect from me.
I v/as fo chagrined, that I pleaded an engagement, and having seen her safe into Mount-street, took an abrupt leave. I could not think of encountering my worthy friends at fo mortifying a period, and she must tell her story for once as she pleases.
But she shall hear of me again in a very short time, notwithstanding all her artifice ; and I begin to apprehend that I shall find it neceffary, in order to make her sensible of the vanity of human wifdom, to lead even her obstinate virtue astray.
I am, &c.
Clerage.
Letter XV..
Sir George Hendon to Lord Clerage.
I Cannot restrain myself, O unthinking Clerage, from once more repeating
io6 The History oA
my (however offensive) endeavors tc awaken you to a timely sense of the bafenefs that is maturing in your late generous heart.
Is it then possible that you can fo amazingly degenerate, as to take advantage of unmerited poverty, and add fresh stings to the cruellest of afflictions.
It can be only a false notion of honor, that prevents my apprising the worthy creature of her danger : yet I will forbear ; you cannot intend to make a disho> nourable attempt, where it is fo evideni (as even to strike you with conviction) tha: you would meet with a repulse. My ' Lord v:ill be no object of either admira tion or terror with her.
How can good Mrs. Leefon be fo infatuated as to become the actual pander tc your wishes, fenfible as She is of the barbarity of vice, and the greatnefs of tht temptation.
Can I, may I trust you ? or rathei ought you to trust yourself ? I do declare that fo diabolical an action would wholl)
estrange my affections, and you would find yourself a prey to the bitterest remorfe.
What folly, what madnefs, perfist purfuing what you cannot wissi to obtain : but the chief fpur it feems is the novelty ©f the chace ; you expect, you hope for difficulties; and to divert yourfelf, cast be fo cruel as to torture the innocent and unoffending.
But give me leave to alk you, where you intend to stop, and you prOfefs that marriage is intirely out of the queftion. What conflicts are you then preparing fot yourfelf; if after having fed a growing af-^ Section, until it is not only become trbu*^ bleSome, but unconquerable, you are to tear yourSelf Srom all your Soul holds dear, to prevent the world's arraigning your discretion.
Would the women but properly exert themSelves, they might be secure Srom the groffest of affronts, (except with pro-fefled villains) but it is a notorious, tho' very indelicate practice, for a lady ohe F 6	dav
io8 The History of
day to resent the daring proposal, and the next accept of the offender for her huf-\ band: whilst the vain-glory of having greatly fought, conceals the ignominy of having been attacked, from the conquerors observation.
I expected no lefs from your generous, your pathetic apostrophe, to the poor departed hero, than that you meant to transplant his blighted family into a happier foil. They are already allied to nobility, nor can I perceive any thing preposterous in whatever designs you may Sorm with jeSpect to the worthy Le Fevers daughter, except Such as are barbarous and unjustifiable.
As MiSs Le Fever is the preSent object of your purfuit, I have confined myself tc the enforcing her strong and irresistible claim to your honourable constderation; but I must, at the fame time, take leave to observe, that a finissied form, well-cultivated ^manners, and delicate principles will, wherever found, be an infassible sanction for generous approbation. Ti
ties may be purchased or inherited by the most unworthy of the fpecies; estates^ and immense poffessions acquired by the basest, nay the most illiterate of men ; but an elegant figure, and a beautiful foul, are fo immediately the work of heaven, that it is a kind of sacrilege to attempt to vitiate them; and both cruel and abfurd, in fuch circumstances as your Lordssiip’s, to deny them the highest digr nities.
My heat is rather fubstding, and I he^ gin once more to believe that my remonstrances are needlefs. It is all gaiety of heart, the amusement of an idle hour, or you would not have proceeded by Such flow gradations.
SuppoSe you was to recommend retire^ ment to them, the village, within One half mile of my houSe, is Sweetly rural. 1 could be a friend to them : my wife would take uncommon pleaSure in counr^ tenancing and chearing their depressed hearts. Mrs. Le Fever’s pension might shus be beat wide, and the blessings of
eafe
ease and competence by this means intrc duced to their humble ha,bitation.
I ssiould not be furprifed, if in you prefent humour, this proposal was to incu your cenfure and ridicule ;■ but the cor fcioufnefs of my own integrity will enabl me to laugh at your little malice.
Do not, however, desist writing, it is th only chance you have for deliverance i] your greatest extremity; for I may un expectedly save you from that worst ene my yourfelf, by an irresistible andjudi cioussy timed stroke of friendly admoni tion.
Shall we not fee you the whole fum mer ? that would be the severest punish ment you could inflict, for any offene you may have received from
Yours, See,
G,	Hendon,
Lsttsi
Letter XVI.
Lord Clerage to Arthur Johnson,-
NOW, Arthur, I am wholly yours ;
I will conquer my weaknefs for a lump of romantic mortality, that would sacrifice my everlasting peace to the most abfurd and far - fetched sentiments of honor.
Only read this second lecture from Sir George, and you will foon be convinced that 1 have bounded to the utmost verge : he will furely blow up ail my happy views and expectations, if I do not defcend to write him an epistle upon his own fober plan, by the very return of the post.
But pray observe what a compound of coiitradscbions and nonfensehe has sent: first he will awaken me, and then he is convinced I am not asteep : this moment I am clawed off most mercilefsly, and the next entreated to {pare the gentle victim. Then his provoking taunts of the impro-
babilitv
liability of my fucceeding with her, are they to be fupported ? but bis intimation of betraying the secrets of our correlpon-dence, ssiocked me to that degree, that 1 know not when I ssiall recover myfelf Your honest fellows are very useful or fome occasions, but dreadfully dangerous on others.
Even poor Mrs. Leefon does not eseape his virulence, but I can tell him his language is much too rough for fo elderly and relpectable a gentlewoman. How prettily he demands may he trust me i ought he to go from home for satisfactior hi that particular ? and-as for his ought J to trust myfelf, I acknowledge is doubtful; I have my infirmities, Arthur, and am noi a Sir George Hendon : but it were end^ lefs to attempt a dissection of his abfurdi ties ; I will only beg you to attend to hi; admirable set of reflections, beginning ir madnefs, and ending in torture, togethe] with his disingenuous purpose of inciting me to sacrifice my darling liberty, in ordei to purchase my freedom,
Bu
IVliSS -L- JL r JL V JL IV,	11^
But matrimony is too antiquated and battered a form to captivate your friend, except in the last exigence ; for ssie must be obtained, let the price be ever fo extravagant.
I am fo unshccefsful, Johnshn, that I cannot help believing there is. fome secret witchcraft, fome covered fraud, that counterworks all my endeavours : it ssiall be unravelled, set the consequence be what it may.
Death and destruction is it come to this ? to doat upon a miferable, proud, mean female; doat upon her in fpite of inclination, reascn, and conviction: it is indeed both torture and madnefs ; but ssie must, ssie ssiall be mine ; and the puppy that has fnivelled himself into her favor, ssiall either resign her to my prior claim, or I will deal very roughly by him.
But I always begin at the wrong end of a tale; the caufe, not the effect, ssiould be first communicated ; yet who can help raving ! no Anthony, no Alexander, was
half
iiq The History of
half fo weak or defperate. Had I ten thousand worlds,! would sacrifice them all. rather than be deprived of the moss finissied mortal that ever existed.
O, Johnfon, I now begin to feel whai I always conceived to be mere cant: for tune, titles, dignities, what do they avail their posseffors. A curate, the lowest anc most defpicable of curates, but I will explain myfelf more to your satisfaction.
Ihavenotfeen this, no name is either to< good or too bad for her as ssie has manage< it; enchantreffes let me call her ; these tw< whole days miserable enough, you ma be certain I have been, by what you knot of my impatient and troublefome difpoS tion; and it came into my head a fei hours ago, to stroll out and take a view o the houfe forfooth, that contains the pr< cious girl. I may perhaps fee Jenm thought I, and acquire fome intelligence what! fculk lie an eves-dropper, demar ded my pride, tO' be fpurned and di fpifed. Haughtiness was natural to forr people, and cringing to others; but wha
XVJ.10O	I. i:., \ JZ4 IX.	t I ^
ever degree of the former I might have in my composition, I was satisfied I did not possefs a fingle atom of the latter, nor would I fo egregioussy feed the vanity of any woman, let me fuffer what I would.
A gentler paffion then affuming the reins, I recollected that it was only fome conversation with Jenny, the honest humble Jenny, that I meant to seek after, and I might depend upon her best information : but if ssie ssiould betray me ? betray, what ? that I met her by accident, and listened to her prattle:—no, no, trust her for that; it was her own secret, not mine, and I might safely rely upon her.
I went, Arthur, and would you believe it, in the very instant that I reached Mrs. Leefon’s door, did Jenny come out with fome letters in her hand.
Mrs. Jenny, Mrs. Jenny, cried I, in a low voice, but away ssie whished.—The women are all bewitched, exclaimed I, in a rage, only look at them, and they conceive you are going to devour them. I did not, however, let her eseape me, but
having’
iifi The History of
having overtaken her in a convenient plat for my purpose, Mrs. Jenny, faid I, hat you forgot your old friend Mr. Smith ?
Blefs me, sir, my Lord I mean, returne the fluttered fool, (fo Le Fever kept h( word with me) I did not fee your Lore ship, I did not know your Lordship, was fo frightened.
Where are you going, my girl, d< manded I in the most friendly accent who do these letters (and I could fcan restrain my itching fingers) belong to.
Indeed, your Lordship, faid Jenn ought not to tamper with a poor fervar you are not to see them.
Not fee them ! cried I, in a kind < frenzy, (fnatching them in the fame m< ment out of her hands) no noise I befeet you, Mrs. Jenny, I mean no harm to yoi your mistrefs, nor your mistrefs’s friend but who told you I was not to fee fehem
No-body*, sir, faid the poor quiverir girl.
How durst you then trifle with me, r turned I, a little sternly; do you not kno
that passion and madnefs are the fame thing ; it is well I was not provoked to use you ill.
O, my Lord : Lord me no Lords, faid I, callme Smith, any thing but that mouthful of formality. Have I not always behaved kindly to you ? the last time we met, no perfon could be civiler or more chatty than yourfelf; but now you have Set that Lordfiip between us, I Suppose I have nothing to expect but Silence and reServe.
Indeed, sir, Mr. Smith, returned the poor terrified creature, I will Say what you pleaSe, I will do any thing to oblige you, only let me carry tlie letters Safe ; I promised Mifs Le Fever not even to lay them down out of my hands, for fear they ssiould be forgot.
No more of the letters, my good Jenny, faid I, I give you my honor I will deliver them myfelf at the post-house. You must tell me what all the family faid to Mifs Le Fever’s coming home alone on
Sunday,
1 i 8 The H I s t o r y o f
Sunday, and what constructions are put upon my absenting myself.
Oh, dear sir, pray sir, cried Jenny, don’t be angry with a poor girl for wishing to do her duty, only let me go to the post-office with you.
What a fool, said T, do you doubt my veracity ? can you fufpect I would deceive you ? you know who I am, and my character is at stake.
Do but mind her anfwer, Johnfon.
Ah, fir, a servant’s character is indeed of the utmost consequence, for if they w'ant a charaSler they must want bread : but people of fastiion, 1 believe, seldom talk of any fucli thing.
I love you for your simplicity, Jenny, faid I, but learn to know me better. Some perfons may be fo base as to difregard their words, but my word is every thing with me, as you ssiall be convinced. If you do not hear, my girl, that these letters arrive safe, agreeable to their several directions, then never more trust man, let
his
his protestations be ivshat they may. Will you accept of a pair of gloves ?
Indeed, indeed, sir, 1 will not accept of any thing but your good-will; it ssiall never be faid that I was bribed. Mifs Le Fever is all goodnefs to me; and to be paid on every hand, would be the vilest thing in nature. I have not lived fo long with Mrs. Leefon, but I know what goodnefs means, and would practice it too if I could. I ssiall cry all night about these letters.
Hold your tongue, huffy, faid I fmiling, and I will intrust you with a most im -portant secret:—I am in love with Mifs Le Fever.
Heaven forbid, sir, exclaimed the good girl : if you could ruin fuch a young lady, you can do any thing.
I abjure the thought: I love her better than I do myfelf, and would not injure her for ten thoufand worlds.
And will you many her, sir, demanded the pretty gipsey. O, dear sir, ssie will make the fweetest of ladies; fo humble,
ble, fo charitable, fo good ; and will you fpeak for me to live with her, if I ssiould have the misfortune to bury my prefent worthy mistrefs. I can work well with my needle, and wassi fmall linen, and—
Yes, yes, Jenny, said I, impatient to change the fubject, if I can but once perfuade her to have me, I can anfwer for the rest.
I am fo glad, repeated she, with an honest earnestnefs, then I can have done no harm in parting with the letters : but indeed, sir, you terrified me ; fure you will never be in fuch a passion with poor Mifs Le Fever, ssie is all gentlenefs, mild-nefs, and —
Never fear, Jenny, and now won’t you tell me all you know ?
La, sir, faid ssie, you have put every thing dear out of my head, I can think of nothing but Mifs Le Fever’s beincr a lady : I hope it will not run as glibly oil my tongue, as it does over my mind.
Take care, Jenny, that wmuld be tc ruin the perfon you most love.
Bui
But why, but why, sir, refumed the delighted creature, don’t you tell them all what you propose ? O dear, it would be Such joy to their hearts.
May be not, Jenny, I fufpect Mifs Le Fever has Another lover, and I could not bear to be refused. O falsehood, that •ever thou ssiouldst be fo prophetic !
Sure you cannot fufpect Mr. Leceister, returned Jenny, in a second tremor, he only brought a letter out of the country ; he is most certainly a very pretty young gentleman, and seems to admire (but who does not admire) Mifs Le Fever. I ne-ner saw any thing particular between them, except when he saluted her the morning ssie went to Kensington.
Saluted her! wretch, exclaimed Clerage, how dared he even to think of fo bold an action : what’s his name ? where does he live ?
Better be any thing, faid Jenny, and have the profpect of a little peace, than fo violent a gentleman, and be my lady.
And will you tell MiSs Le Fever as
O	iimirh.
122 The History of
much, Mrs. Jenny, demanded I, vehemently ?
O, Sir,—
Swear you will never mention me, continued I, taking hold of her hands, but with the highest commendation, or you ssiall never see her more.
Forgive me, sir, excuse me —
Swear then, cried I; I am satisfied, by your reluctance to take an oath, you tvould religiousty observe it ; fwear then this instant, and we will be as good friends as ever.
The trembling timid foul did at length venture to repeat a folemn promise after me ; but I could perceive her foolish heart was ready to burst with terror and obstinacy .
Come, come, my good girl, faid I, dry up your tears and compose yourfelf. To be lore the corner of this court is pretty retired, or what would people have thought of us ? could you _have been more agitated, if your very life had been in dano-er.
Life, sir, repeated ssie, rather saucily, I don’t know what you mean, sir, if folks honesty is not dearer to them than every other consideration, I think they are not very sit to live : but tho’ you have forced me to Swear never to Speak my worst thoughts of you to this poor young lady, I will never join to do her the Smallest injury ; you ssiall kill me first; and now I have told you all my mind I ssiall be much easier.
Well then, my dear Jenny, Said I, as we have wasted much time to little purpoSe, and the Samily may wonder what has detained you, only promiSe to meet me on the Same Spot at halS an hour aSter eight to-morrow evening, and I will immediately go and execute the commission wtith which you have intrusted me.
Remember, sir, replied Jenny, with a tragical oh in her countenance, that my whole happineSs is at stake ; and as you wissi peace to your own breast, do not make a bad uSe of the power you have gained over a simple, honest girl: ssiould G 2	the
X24 T H E H I S TO RY or
the letters misearry, I will run away let what will be the consequence; for I could never bear to be fufpected of a practice I most abhor, bribery and corruption. Good night: I am but a poor servant its true ; but if I might go with you to the post—
Be fatissied, Jenny, said I, you ssiall have no reafon to repent your involuntary tranfgression of Mifs Le Fever’s request. I will as safely depofite them as you yourself would have done (only gratifying my curiosity with refpect to their contents) ; you know tliere is fuch a thing as talking aside upon occasion.
My impatience to examine the prize I had obtained was fo great, that I turned into the first coffee-house I came to; and having seated myfelf in a private box, drew the precious epistles with great caution, tho’ much trepidation, out of my pocket.
The first I glanced my eye upon was of no concern to me, as I was well acquainted with both the characters, and
the country cori'efpondent to whom it was addreffed. The only friend, 1 believe, Mrs. Leefon claims besides myself.
The second was from the little traitorest to one Mifs Winter, her bofom friend and confidant I fuppose : but how ssiall I inform you of what almost blasted my sight in the instant of my beholding it. The third was directed to that very paltry curate I mentioned in the beginning of this letter. I tore open the seal too abruptly, confidering I must make it good, and had. the plecfmre to read as follows :
To Mr. Leceister.
Sir,
“ According to my promise arid best calculation, this letter will greet you immediately on your arrival at Birmingham; for, if I mistake not, you,said your businefs would detain you a whole week upon the road; and if my good wishes have been efficacious, neither fatigue nor diffatisfaction have been your portion.
Do	“ T
12 6 T si E H I s t o R y a F
“ I own I have particular pleafure in the profpect oS our correlpondence: I knoiv you lenSible, and I believe you lin-cere ; tliere is but one impediment that I can foreSee to my utmost wishes and expectations being anSwered.
“ Vdiy will you not perSuade yourSelf that my friendship is lixed as Sate ; that I have been rather Suddenly attached I must acknowledge, but approbation works quick upon the Soul, and can best be accounted Sor by ypur own Seelings. As it is not my constitution to be over-warm in any inclination, there is the stronger probabsa Iity of my permanence. What you call love, you must give me leave to know by the title of esteem : the one depends upon the Sancy, the other on the judgment; and you cannot be offended to have rea-Son concerned on So important an occasion,
“ I cannot help congratulating mySelf as well as you, that our acquaintance has commenced at the very period it has done. Our characters barely formed, our faculties still unfolding themselves, our minds
unhackneyed in the arts of life, and our difpofitions, I hope not, uncorrigible: what advantages may we not derive from it. I know the kind of perfon I could like to fpend my days with ; and by observing the several changes you are likely to be exercised in, of hope, fear, doubt, and perplexity, I ssiall not only be enabled to diseover, but to foften or invigorate the most predominant, the most irrestrain-able, and most worthy passions you are endued with.
“You seem at prefent difpofed to deliver yourself up to the delusions of fond credulity : I am the most extraordinary of mortals, and we must be happy.
I stiall not attempt to undeceive you, we insensibly recover our reafon when we least expect it: the brightest objects become at length familiar to our sight; and as the glare wears off, or rather as our eyes acquire strength, we are capable of examining those perfections minutely, we once took only in the grofs. Enjoy your enthufiafm then, my friend, fo long
128 The H I s t o r y o- r
as it lasts ; but the moment you perceive-it begin to wain, avail yourfelf of the lucid interval. Weigh well the merits and: demerits of your nevv^iy-created idol; and .should the former. aSSutilly over-balance the latter, you ought to fit down contented—for remember frailties as well as charms, are the portion of humanity.
“ Let us proceed upon a rational plan : your profperity will be ever grateful tp me, your happinefs essential to my own ; and tho’ you was to ceafe to be my lover, you ssiould continue to be my friend,. The language of sincerity must be pleasing, and the affection of sensibility at ass times acceptable : flattery is a meannefs in the undesigning, and the grand engine of the base and ungenerous; it cannot therefore have any place where truth and faith become the question. In one word, my friend, by ceasing to consider me as a goddefs, you would render me a very happy vroman.
I shall be glad to hear from you again whenever it is-convenient, and hope we
shall one day meet to our mutual satisfaction.
I am, sir, &c.,
Le Fever.”
Pistols, poniards, with every instrument of death, now'danced before my distracted imagination ; but recollefSing I might be observed, I constrained myself in the best manner I was able, and calling for; pen and ink, difcharged all that vengeance upon paper, I could ill contain within my own breast : then tearing it in pieces, as an evidence of my folly and extravagance, I once more endeavoured to read the dire confession of the most valuable of hearts.
Don’t you observe how prettily ssie affures him of her best wissies for his case and safety—had the bottomlefs pit—but I will be calm. Did you ever before know an instance of a creature’s renouncing its natural food, a girl of eighteen dilgusted with flattery : it is the very master stroke of affected humility ..
G t;	She
Igo The History of
She hopes to see the steek curate again to their mutual satisfaction : but I am no politician if they ever obtain another in^ terview. Plots, perils, every thing ssiall be undertaken, every thing ssiall be practised, to prevent fo barbarous an union-
How happy I am, Arthur, that your virtue is not fo rigid as my much-valued Hendon’s. What would become of me, all turbulent as my foul is at prefent, if I was denied the communication of its workings : but Sir George’s life has been as unblemissied as his nature is free from exceptions; he knows not therefore to tolerate infirmities, he has never experienced—whilst you from having erred, must compassionate and excuse the errors I am hurried into.
You ssiall have the particulars that are intended for the considant, by the next post ; I have taken faithful copies of each, but can transeribe no further at this period. My head, my heart achs : it is pride, it is the bitternefs of mortisication, the violence of love, that thus agitates and distracts me.
Hendon! Hendon! that my heart had but resembled thine in more refpects than warmth of friendssiip, as my days might then perhaps have been equally serene ; but it is cowardly to whine at remediable misfortunes; and I am, Johnfon,
Yours, as ulual,
Clerage.
Letter XVII.
From the fame to the fame.
NOW pray observe the lady, Arthur, in her unrestrained moments, and judge what an aggravation of my fufferings it must be, to find her at once fo amiable, and fo averse to every foft inclination, at least where I am concerned.
I have had another letter from Sir George, mine it seems was not fussiciently satisfactory. I must leave London, and sind confolation in the bofom of friendssiip. His expressions are fo many daggers to my heart; I feel their energy, but na	T
ig2 The History of
I cannot yield to them. What ssiall 1 fly the field in the hour of danger, leav( the lovely girl an eafy prey to the meanef of wretches, and abandon her to poverty and a whole train oS inSupportable evils It will not be, and it is a Solly to think o it.
Read her own language, and iS it is th picture oS her Soul, you must allow it is ; most beautiful one. What do I Say ? bu I ssiall be intjrely reSormed in Spite oS my SelS; Sor do I not love, do I not admir virtue Sor its intrinsic value only ? nor ca: I wonder at all the bustle that is mad about it, when it can wmrk So palpabl upon a heart that Suffers, nay that bleed from its existence.
I ssiall never come to the letter, unlel I throw it upon you abruptly. To ai tempt to introduce it with any kind c propriety, is the weakneSs of Srenzy, Sc does it not contain my irrecoverable cor demnation.
Ml
MifsLE Fever to Mifs Winter.
“ You must, my dear Polly, you ssiall be reconciled to my election, for am I not the best judge of my own happinefs.
“ Thofe that have never experienced the folly of greatnefs, cannot form a proper idea of what they defpise : but I have participated all the joys that vanity can bestow, the feasts of luxury, and the emp-tinefs of profusion, yet never did I derive any true felicity from them all. I tell you my difpofition is calculated for humble fcenes : the stenderly covered table, the neat but plain appearance has infinite charms for me. I know not- whether it is from humility or apprehension, but the condition that is least liable to change or interruption, is the only condition that I can approve. Are there any poffessions equal to peace and tranquility ? and are they not peculiar to tlie meek and lowly of heart ?
“ With Mr. Leicester my profpects are quite agreeable to my wissies; but you
are
134 The H i s t o r y o f
are well acquainted with my sentiments refpecting him, and I need not repeat them: his merit jusiisies my partiality; and you ssiall not withhold your approbation from neither the one nor the other.
“ I must inform you of an adventure I have lately met with.
“ You have frequently heard me exprefs how deeply both my friendssiip and gratitude are engaged to Mrs. Leefon ; never was there a kinder neighbour, or more valuable woman ; but ssie bas a relation, my dear ; you have heard of Lord Clerage,—he is the man, and a very troublefome and impertinent one I fear I ssiall sind him.
“ He would not be disagreeable in his perfon, if he was free from felf-fussiciency; nor unpleasing in his manners, if he would allow them to be natural ; but he has it seems been ruined by the indulgence of his relations, the flattery of his dependants, and the early poffession of a noble fortune.
“ He is miprhtv fond nf affiimincr a nri-
At
vate character ; and Mrs. Leefon, who lives but to oblige every perfon with whom ssie is connected, was eafily prevailed upon to tolerate him in what she believed to be an innocent and rational inclination ; but she is as much unacquainted with his gaieties, as unfufpicious of his artifice.
“ I have not the vanity to think that his whole motive for vifiting fo gcoi a woman was merely on my account; but wherever he first beheld mie, the novelty of my countenance struck his giddy fancy ; and finding me placed beneath h:s honourable conlideration, incited him to purfue me for the basest purposes. I am, however, furprifed at his want of judgment ; the girl that could voluntarily renounce all that fortune, could procure, in order to render herself serviceable to the best of mothers, must be fuperior to the common methods of seduction. .
“ What arts can he play off, that I am not prepared to detect and defpise; and what can he offer, what propose, that virtue and humility would not contemn. Nay, I
think
I'gfi The History of
think that, notwithstanding I must allow he has much merit, that had I never seen Mr. Leceister, I could not, on the ho-nestest terms, have approved him. He is fo confcious of his own advantages, or perhaps it is my prejudice that gives him,; that appearance in my eyes, for I must confefs that: his every word is fpecious,, his every action condefcension.
I am now at that very age that invites the cruelest attempts ; and my situation,, but it is the only inconvenience of it, con-fpires to encourage the bold designer ;: but what are the allurements of vice, that they can be fuppofed capable of undermining native purity, or what the gratifications of debauchery, that delicacy would not abhor ? is it tlie midnight revel, the lewd jest, the daring impertinence, or the ' barbarous infult, that proves the irresista-ble charm to evil ? Girls, in their state of innocence, can only form an idea of the misery of infamy, from the certainty of its being the very reverse to what they have ever experiencetsi
“ O may 1 always be defended from the horrors and infupportable intermption of a guilty commerce ; but it is preposterous-to mention it; ssiall my beloved father Stave breathed his last in a noble cauSe ? flrall he have So strongly, So fatally evinced,, how Superiorly he valued his honour tO; bis life, and his darling child ssirink at a little danger or dissiculty, to preServe hen perSon inviolate ? The daughter of the worthy Le Fever fubmit to prostitution!
I need not anfwer fo self-evident a demand.
“ Is not chastity, my dear Polly, the grand ornament of the female world ? all lovely, all-securing chastity ; for the woman that forfeits it, feels her whole foul, in a short time, contaminated, and ceases to shudder at the commission of the most flagrant: crimes : has not even murder been the consequence of breach of chastity ?' nay to the eternal reproach of the sex,, has not the fallen wretch become the diabolical instrument of trapanning the unwary, the artlefs, and the virtuous, tho’
they.
igS The History of
they have borne the outward resemblance of herself? For man to prey upon man, however ssiocking to humanity, where the name of ambition has been heard, may be accounted for: but the unnatural, the infernal practice in question, can be traced to no other fource than the abfolute fiend ; but I ought to tell you the reafon of all these reflections.
“ Perhaps you ash if Lord Clerage has prefumed to make dissionourable proposals to me ? can you doubt either the prefumption or villainy of a man, that could be engaged in fuch an affair as the destruction of the inn-keeper’s daughter ?
“But I must acknowledge the actual indignity has not yet been offered; yet am I satisfied, that want of opportunity, not inclination, has been the impediment.
“ Has he not made the most alarming advances; stole upon my acquaintance under a borrowed name ; deluded me to attend him to the Magdalen-houfe, (an impolitic expedition indeed) and in our return treated me very unworthilv ?
“ Mrs. Leefon, the only deception I believe ssie ever practiSed, gave him to us, on his first introduction, for a country gentleman.
“ His eafy addrefs, and insinuating politenefs, befpoke him of fuperior rank. I was sensible he v/as agreeable, but I was likewise fenfible he was confident; his vifit happened too to be rather mal-a-propos : my heart was a good deal depreffed by poor Leceister’s departure; and as I found his eyes rather bold and inquifitive, I refolved to encounter them as seldom as ' possible. How would it mortify his pride, if he knew that I beheld him as an excellent foil for my unaffuming lover ?
“ Very little pasted that day ; my pen employed me in my own apartment, whilst he condefcended to Jhuffle and cut with his graver friends.
“ Mrs. Leefon, whose commendation is an unquestionable sanction, mentioned him in fuch favorable terms, that I at length began to relax the severity of my behaviour; and as I found my reserve
had
tq-o The History o f
had hurt him, and conceived fome con-cessions were due to his valuable relation, I most readily accepted his offer of conducting me into the city.
“ Our conversation was ligbt and unmeaning : compliments on his part, and trite observations on mine, silling up the whole fpace between our houfe and the Magdalen-Chapel. We had not been, long seated, before a gentleman and lady at fome little distance, whifpered each other; it is him, it is Lord Clerage, I thought I could not be mistaken; that genteel air is perfectly his own.’^
“ The whole story of the inn-keeper's daughter instantly fuggested itfelf to my imagination. For what purposes, thought I, may I not have been conveyed to this' place. That poor injured girl was no more fufpicious of her approaching fate, when she was deluded from her home, than I of this man’s real name or character, when I quitted mine ; but I will con^ qeal the difeovery I have fo unexpectedly
made..
made, unless I sind the revealing it necese
7	O
fary to my own preservation.
“ We returned to our coach; my Lord took my hand vrith an appearance of the greatest refpect ; but judge of my furprife and apprehenfion, when I found him prefs it with very impertinent ardor. I hastily withdrew it: he looked politely confident, but fuddenly became fo bold as to kifs my cheek, with a foolissi empty fpeech that I really do not reruember.
My fathers fpirit was roused in my heart, and I warmly resented his audacious behaviour, when to my utter confusion he called to the coachman to abate his pace, and deseended to mutter curses and execrations.
“ He is, my dear, poffeffed of a fine turbulent difpofition. Can I ever be fuf-siciently thankful that the gentle Leceister, not his boisterous Lordssiip, is likely to. be master of my fate.
“ How guilt confounds even its strongest votaries : I stung him to the quick, by mentioning the Oxfordssiire tranfacttion.
He
142 The History of
He would have vindicated himfelf; but ' where is the villain that is willing to pafs for one. I, weak and inconsiderable as I am, awed him into silence, and setting me down, his pride or his passion, incited him to withdraw himfelf from my sight. I bleffed the effesit, whatever was the cause.
“ My mother and Mrs. Leefon were very piousty employed ; they enquired for my gallant,
“ Why really, madam, said I, addressing Mrs. Leefon, he has given me the flip : I discovered Srom the conversation oS Some perSons that Sat near us, that the gentleman has a claim to honors and dignities ; and I think he w'as diSgusted, mortified, and offended, at my treating him with due distinction.
“ I am Sorry, my dear MiSs Le Fever, Said Mrs. LeeSon, for the incident; it is his Lordssiip’s chieSest delight to converSe vrith his Sriends upon equal terms. Now will he return to all thoSe wild Sallies of vouth, Srom which he appeared to be So
abundantly weaned, by more fober connections : you must join with me in recalling him.
" O, madam, returned I, (by no means in love with her proposal) let his Lordssiip follow his own inclinations, lie will revilit you in a few days I will be an-fwerabie, and he cannot hurt himfelf much in that time. I wissi for yoursake it had been otherwise, but I really fufpect he has more gaiety in his compolition than you are aware of,
“ I love his company, said the good lady, but you perhaps behold him with Ids partiality than I do, nor could I be willing to lose it for a long period.
“ Two days have now pasted away, and no Lord Clerage, I therefore begin to hope vre ssiall never more be troubled with him. I could forgive him every thing but his hypocrify to this worthy woman.
“ 111 companions may perfuade ; a heated brain may be hurried into great extravagancies, and even the best principles
a44 The History or
ciples for once perverted : but to continue to play the hypocrite, to exult in the basest of impositions, that of fobriety and integrity, is above all things unpardonable; for to make good the pretensions to those virtues, a knowledge of their lovelinefs ond value, is highly effential; and to have obtained that knowledge, and not practice them for a better purpose than a vile cloak, the most conshmmate wicked-nefs.
“ Let us, my dear Polly, ever persevere in the fweet path that is set before us : let us abhor, let us detest vice in every form ; but at the same time let us never fail to pity and pray for even the most vicious, leaving judgment as well as punissiment to that unerring power that alone knows where they are justly due.
I am, &c.
C. Le Fever.”
Am I not an object of compassion, Arthur, and what advice' can you bestow upon me ? I am altogether hopelefs in
'my purfuit, yet dare not enter upon the confines of deSpair.
I must gain her approbation; the curate, how ssiall we diSpoSe oS him ; we are not at preSent, hovrever, reduced to the last exigence.
Come up to town, and let us Set our miserable heads to work ; your Sober, yOur penitential sit, has been of Sufficient continuance. Calling over your brother’s hounds can but have ill-agreed with that gay active Spirit nature has bestowed upon you, but empty pockets are apt to engender Spleen and diffatisSaction ; that vile compofitioti mopey went deep, tho’, as Sir George obServes, it was an ugly busineSs, and you may rejoice that ycur necks were reScued by any method from the impending load. His Sriendssiip too is irrevocably lost ; but be of good cheer, the little affair I would employ you in, is of a SaSer nature, and shall amply heal your shattered finances. Only keep your-SelS in readineSs, and be Secret, and you shall sind your account in it. I repeat H	she
iqfi The History or
ssie must he mine, tho’ fo sickle, fqueamish, and abfurd is my humour, that allraving as I am to have her in my power, perhaps that very circumstance would instantly restore me to my reafon.
To sty me is tortui'e; to consent, I tell you, Johnfon, it is all a kind of enchantment ; and should I be compelled to marry her in three days time, instead of a goddefs—but I will not be prophane. Mifs Le Fever is an exception to every rule ; and I will venture the dangerous experiment, if nothing lefs can deliver me from the misery I now endure.
I am, &c.
Clerage.
Letter XVHL From the fame to the fame.
This Hendon has been again at his old pranks : how has the caufe of t irtue fuffered in his defence of it, yet am I unable to convince him that plead-
ing is not his proper province ; nothing will content him, it seems, but my visiting his gloomy mansion.
Yet fo far from condemning me, Arthur, for refolving to bring all madam’s fine professions to the test, he furely ought to commend me. Sincerity cannot be called sincerity but upon proof, nor virtue virtue on any other terms, therefore by your leave, Sir George, I shall for once prefume to follow my own inventions.
You cannot have forgot my appointment with Jenny ; what a wretch would his knightship deem me if she was worthy to be made acquainted with that piece of fineffe ; but enough of him for the prefent.
Jenny and I met, my Johnfon, at the time and place appointed ; she all timidity and apprehenfion, I all gratitude and love.
How does my fweet Le Fever do, demanded I ? has she vouchsafed to mention me, tell me every thing you can re- “ collect ?
I have not seen her fmce, fir, returned H 2	the
s 4st The History o f
the provoking jade ; I cannot bear to even look her in the face, until ssie receives an anfwer to her letters.
You little fimpleton, cried I, are you not yet reconciled to tlie friendly steps you are taking in her interest ; I tell you ssie ssiall be mine, and you ssiall be her woman.
Lord help me, exclaimed ssie, in an honest rapture, that ever I should be born for fuch preferment. I shall be very far to seek at first, tho’ I do help both to drefs and undrefs my mistrefs.
Her Ladyship, you may depend upon it, will be as little troublefome as the worthy woman you have to deal tvith at present, returned I, to prevent a second catalogue of her performances, breaking in upon me like an inundation; nor will she be lefs condefcending, befides fo tight a lafs as you Jenny cannot fail to improve and recommend yourself more and more every day; but there is one very great dif-" siculty to be got-over.
I would not stick at any thing, sir,
quoth the gentle damsel, in an honest way.
Nor will I ever propose v/hat is dissio* nest, Jenny, returned your friend. You fee how much you are in my power in these private meetings ; nay, never tremble child, I am only mentioning what many men would be capable of, but you find your own father could not treat you with more decency or tendernefs, except when you put me in that violent passion, and even then I behaved no worfe than most parents do when they are greatly provoked. What I would have you understand, Jenny, is, that I am above base practises, only when I have set my heart fo intirely upon a businefs, I cannot help making use of fome little stratagem; you must, you must, my dear Jenny, alk leave to go out,on Friday.
V/hat will become of me, cried the silly novice, what would you have me do now ? you have a great deal of honour in your mouth, sir, but God only knows the heart; and if yours ssiould be a cor-H 3	runt
150 Tht History of
rupt one, I shall furely die with inifery and repentance.
Prithee, my good girl, said I, do no flounce before you are in danger of being caught, I have sent the letters honestly and truly, (and fo I have, Arthur, or my desired purpose could not have been compleated) but I must see the gentleman and lady’s anfwer. You need not be afraid of me, I am neither angry nor jealous, it is only a little natural curiosity.
And how, and how, sir, demanded the poor thing, quite out of breath with apprehension, would you contrive it. I think, for my part, that it is as bad a sin to rob people of their secrets as to pick their pockets, and fure a Noble——
Hold, cried I sternly, why will you run the hazard of provoking me a second time : the method I shall take is this ; I will send or go to the general post-house before the letters are delivered out, and enquire for fuch as are directed for your family, then will I have only one satisfactory peep, and convey them to you where-
ever you please to appoint, and you have but to say that you met the postman at tlie door in your return.
Well, sir, I think it is true, said tlie pert huffy, that the old gentleman—I beg your — sir, I beg pardon, but I really was going to say, assists thofe that follow his wicked ways. I could as foon have built a city, as have thought of fuch a fcheme ; consider what faith I have in your principles and goodnefs, if I do comply with fuch a proposah
If you do comply did you say Mrs. Jenny, repeated I a little haughtily, you cannot still forbear offending me. If I condefcended to beg that service as a favour, which you have bound yourfelf to render me, ought you to have esteemed it in that light. Might 1 not ruin you with all your friends, by reporting what has already pasted between us, and yet you fcruple to take the most simple step in nature, to promote my happinefs.
If you was a bad man, said this Mrs-. Simplicity, you would be a most merci-H A	lesa
152 The History of.
lefs one; but I am convinced (fear Arthur is the strongest of all convictions) jmu are a very opposite perfon, and will make no farther hesitation. I will be at my sister’s, Mrs. Dawfon, Peruke-maker, in Oxford Road; but you must use great caution, or she will fufpect—-
That I have designs upon her pretty sister, returned I; nay, never blush, my good girl, people are fo cenforious, they will think any thing ; and indeed there are very few men that can be trusted, but you. shall find I am not of that number.
This see-saw work between terror and approbation, is the best miethod of treat-, ing your raw intriguers, or the conSciouf-nefs of their own importance would incite them to become intolerably restive.
I shall be upon tenter-hooks until Friday ; tho’ what can I expect, only' the cruel amusement of reading the curate’s happy heart, and beholding myfelf miserably traduced by the friendly Mifs Winter.
Curiosity,
Curiosity, curiosity, is an imperious tyrant, and will be obeyed.
I am, &c.
Clerage.
Letter XIX.
From the fame to the fame.
Here we have it, Arthur, Mr. Curate’s bright epistle.; but I difdain to prepoffefs you in the disfavour of a fellow, whose prefumption must strike you in a proper degree. As for the lady’s anfwer, we will read it together if you please, and perhaps our opinion and feelings may be similar..
To Mifs L e. Fe v e r.
“ You r good wissies, my dear madam, could not fail of their efficacy ; nor have I any thing to complain of, but the distance that lies between us. To be deprived of your conversation is no light calamity. In company, even with my H 5	most
154 The History of
most approved friCnds, and tho’ the fub-jlect may be interesting or entertaining, your judicious, your tender, your all-en-liveuing observations are wanting to give it its proper zest. You ssiall not, my beloved Mifs Le Fever, preseribe to me ; I will, I must be rebellious, in the very first instance : reafon, prudence, you preach to winds and waves. It is impossible to restrain my feelings within fuch narrow limits ; not talk of your endowmentt, not contemplate your beauty ; you may call my sincerity in question if you please, but you will, at the fame time, impeach your own understanding,
“To bear your unequalled possessions meekly, is the finess stroke of amiable humility ; but to be insensible of their existence, a reflection upon your piety. Shall you be fo compleatly formed, yet forget to honour the author of fuch per^-fection ? and how can you duely honour him, but by allowing all the merit of his work ? Would you fuffer your mind to he fo, richly furrsished, and not present ths
choicest part for a thankfgiving offering ? but I know you better than you do yourself ; and am well convinced, that every gift is properly estimated.
Those blooming graces that infpire every other heart with rapture and admiration, are confidered.by you as merely fleeting and transitory. You have the temerity, my dear madam, to look forward to their decay ; and as decay they must, you are ever prepared to die with them, or greatly furvive them. It is only where immortality has set its mark, that you can rest your attention; you will persevere in the cultivation and improvement of every virtuous and noble inclination, until nature, no longer able to fustain the weight, the thin veil of mortality drops off, and* you aseend thofe bright mansions, for which you have fo industriousty fitted yourself.
“ My friends are furprifedsat the happy > alteration in my health and temper. I no longer droop with indifposition, nor am petulant on trifling contradictions:
H 6	fortune.
igS The History of
fortune, by its propitioufnefs on a late occasion, has made me ample amends for all thofe froward tricks that were wont to prey upon my fpirits ; and my seperation from you has rendered me incapable of being affected by petty evils.
“ Little did Mifs Winter imagine, when she was accustomed to entertain me with the enumeration of her friend's merits, that I should ever obtain a precious interest in them; nay, I fear it will prove but a disagreeable piece of information to her, for humble as she is in her own desires and wishes, there was nothing too great for her Le Fever to poffefs. You, my dear madam, can give a sanction ta your every action; and should that lady employ the fame eloquence to diffuade youfrom your attachment, she exercisedto prepare me for my fate, will you not ge-neroussy undertake my caufe, and teach her to behold me with fome degree of partiality ? It shall be the whole study of my life to prevent your repenting fuch great condeseenfion.
“ I cannot but apprehend that fome paffages in this letter wtill incur your difpleafure ; but let me intreat you to fubmit in fuch articles as you cannot understand. It is impostible for you to feel the-estimation you infpire : you cannot be a judge of that amiable light in which you appear to every beholder; consequently the profession of tlie one, and tlie admiration of tlie other, may strike you in the false sense of insincerity and adulation.
“You fay you, will not contend with me, where you know I am infatuated. I thank you for your kind toleration, but you must extend it to the permitting me to follow the genuine dictates of my heart.
“ I think only of you, fpeak of no other being, and if I am forbid introducing you into my epistles, my pen and ink would be intirely ufelefs : but you are much too good to require impossibilities.
“ You know nothing of this country; my friends are fo unfortunate as never to have seen you—what then could I fay to you? That the villageisdreary and unpleasant ;
158 The History of
fant; the fun clear and bright; and that all my acquaintance are dreiTed in Imiles ; yet that I, -—self you fee cannot be kept out, tho’ even that darling idol would have been untliought of, if your absence had not made me fenfible, that there can be no felicity without me.
“ Continue thofe valuable wissies to me, that have already proved fo beneficial on many occasions. They have infpired me with confidence, refolution, and patience; for the man that knows himself honoured with your friendship and approbation, and fails to acquit himfelf with fpirit in every honorable enterprize, must be unworthy of you; and whatever beauty there may be ill humility, or unbefittingnefs in vanity, I cannot but allow myself a large degree of merit, fo long as it is given me to fubferibe myfelf,
My dear madam, yours, &c.
P. Leceister.”
Let us turn our eyes from the pedant and the coxcomb, to my very good and ehattv friend Mifs Winter.
To Miss Lb Fever.
“ What do you tell me ? Lord Clerage mean you dissionourably ; it is im-poffible : no, no, my dear, he is only fetching a compafs, in order to recommend himself to your favor, and you shall be Lady Clerage.
“ I have enquired into the merits of that charge you bring against him. You do him the greatest injustice imaginable : all his acquaintance, the girl’s father, acquit him of being, in any degree, concerned in that wicked transaction.
“ I love modesty I hope as well as yourself; but I confefs I have net all thofe punctilios that are known only to the polite world. If his Lordship did salute you a little abruptly, he might not mean you all the incivility you seem to apprehend. I think you was wrong not to give him a hearing; or as I am weak enough to wish you had; I would fain condemn you.
y Yet you must be right; Lord Clerage
i6o The History of
cannot plead the privilege of a country gentleman ; he has been bred in the midst of decorum, and ought not to have committed a breach of it, efpecially with one fo critically fituated, and whofe prudence could not but be alarmed — tho’ to be Lady Clerage—and he is aliowed by every body to be a very pretty gentleman.
“ How unlucky I am to have cast Mr. Leceister in your way : why was you fo fudden, fo premature, in your attachment to him ? it is neverthelefs exceedingly ungenerous to reflefS upon him, for he wants nothing but an estate to render hima as eligible as any Lord Clerage in the kingdom.
O
“ I own I have no opinion of your love matches : difficulties and anxieties may stifle even the strongest flame ; and you fee many perfons that were to have lived and died for each other, fall into wrang-lings and distentions, on finding themselves reduced to the misery of contracted circumstances.
“ 1 will give you my sentiments more
ivj. 1	±-j Xu r ii. V ill XV.	iUi<
largely, wshen I am released from my prefent confinement. My father is much= indifpofed with his old complaint, but I hope the worst is happily over. I have,, on this account, been obliged to wntite at stolen periods. Pain and impatience are no uncommon companions; you must tlierefore excuse my concisenefs, and allow me to fay, that Lord Clerage would be my man, if Leceister was not yours : but as matters are, I can only pray that you may not be permitted to incur fo trying an evil as a thanklefs hushand, or ever become fo unfortunate as to experience, ■she wretchednefs of pove rty.
“ I am fo well' acquainted with your difposition, as to be satisfied, that if you could meet with a lord and master that poffeffed a bare competence, and admired and loved you as much as I do, you would be bleffed in a very tolerable degree, tho’ not quite equal to the wishes of my dear Kitty’s, Sep.
M. Winter.’’
A
i62 T H E H I s to ry of
A pert, knowing huffy : hah, Johnfon, and very rationally difpofed to plead the cause of love and fortune. She would have no objection to Vv^hirling up to town in her Laclyfiifs coach and six I fuppose: Ihe has, however, done me an effential piece of service, by exculpating me Srom that bale imputation, and I ssiall ever honour her Sor it.
Poverty you find, even by her account, is a very bitter calamity. O may her friend but feel its utmost weight by anticipation, Arthur, and sty into my ssielter-ing arms.
It is a very eaSy matter to talk heroK cally ; but to act agreeable to our professions, even my saucy mistrefs would be convinced a most difficult talk. My heart is devoted to her in fpite of all her loftinefs, and we must fpend our happy days together.
Don’t you admire the Prifl ? his stile is many degrees stiffer than arx'Eajier band: how will he tremble at fo formidable a rival ? but what said my imperti-
MISS JL tl. r JL V ih K. 153
iient ? “ I was a foil for her gentle youth.” Do I not owe her recompence: I am pretty punctual in general in my rewards and punissiments, and to be unjust to her, would be the highest fpecies of injustice, I must away, Arthur, Jenny will wait for me, and it would be cruel to make her fuffer for our indulgence.
Swill make Mrs. Leefon a visit to-morrow ; and by the reception I meet with, I must determine my future regulations.
I am, &c.
Clerage.
Letter XX.
,	From the Jame to the fame.
I Have made shy visit, Jenny let me in.
O, sir, said ssie, they all wonder they have not seen you for fo many days, that is my mistrefs and Mrs. Le Fever.
Nov; this is what you cast exalting a man, only to debase him. My heart bounded at the beginning, but heavily fubsided at the conclusion of her fpeech.
i6j	THE History o f
Never did I see age to fuch advantage. Pleafure can fmooth the most wrinkled brow, and benevolence grace even a toothlefs mouth. Mrs. Leefon’s reception of me was always obliging, but this time it was peculiarly fo.
I was afraid, my Lord, said ssie, that now you could no longer perfonate the private gentleman, you had intirely for--faken us ; but Mr. Smith had secured Lord; Clerage the most heartfelt approbation,
I hope your friends are well, madam. Said I, bowing to her compliment ; I had not the confidence to pronounce the name oS Le Fever.
You ssiall pay your perSonal honors to them, returned the worthy woman ; we will Spend this aSternoon with them, iS it is agreeable to your Lordssiip, to convince them that no incident can change our opinion or them.
1 had So much command of mySelf as not to betray my conSciouSneSs oS the little Satisfaction they would derive Srom my visit, and Jenny was diSpatched to inform
The girl is very unfit for her prefent employment; ssie returned perfectly dancing upon one leg, for joy that they would be glad to see us. Was Mrs. Leefon any other woman than the one ssie is, ssie would infallibly detect the whole intrigue : the fool does fo fidle, simper, and appear full of her own consequence, and her love for Mifs Le Fever; I must give her fome better instructions at our next meeting.
We went up stairs: Mrs. Le Fever received us with lier ufual complaisance, which had fo large a portion of gratitude in it, as to be fussicient for any rank; and fo little fawning or servility, as to be acceptable to every heart.
The young lady’s behaviour was agreeable to the good-sense ssie is mistrefs of; abundantiv too reserved to be encouraging, and infinitely too pleafing to be forbidding ; ssie would actually make a very pretty Countefs.
Nor do I fee where the impoffibility lies, Arthur. Lady Catherine certainly brought
i66 The History or
her up with an intention to bestow a good fortune upon her, and it strikes me that my honorable addreffes would reconcile all parties.
But the priest—well, what of him ? he is beneath my consideration, therefore can never excite my apprehenfions ; for depend upon it we ssiould know how to deal with him, when once I have refolved to make an abfolute facrisice of my beloved liberty.
Tho’ to confefs the truth, I am greatly afraid it will be neceffary to remove him for a time at least ; whilst he is upon the fpot, madam will be inaccestible. I would not injure him in any essential degree ; I feel myself but a puling half-fledged villain ; but as I cannot exist without Mifs Le Fever, self-preservation will incite me to make fome defperate push. Can you not assist me; have you no one device to deliver me from fo execrable a rival; exert your utmost abilities, and only fend me word my wissies are accomplissied, and you ssiall make your own terms.
XYJL S O O	.1.44 JL .1.,.^ V JuJ 4.^	/
But to return to my visit-------
I cast many tender, and as I intended penitential glances, upon the lovely girl, but ssie had the addrefs to appear wholly insensible to every thing but politenefs, and wissied me a good night with the same ease and refpect as if I had been her grandfather.
What different materials different females ate composed of: fome girls—but it is a folly to talk, Arthur, they are not Mifs Le Fever’s, and their forwardnefs is quite as difgusting, as her ssiynefs is irresistibly captivating.
I am glad I have hit upon fo happy an expedient for carrying my point; Lady Catherine will warmly promote my cause, and the dear Creature must yield.
Her seduction was an infernal plot: for if an inn-keeper’s resentment could rife fo high, Johnfon, on the ill-treatment of his child, might not the brave Le Fever be expected to break from his grave, to re-" venge his daughter’s violation ? but no, Le Fever, thy daughter’s heart, not her
i68 The History of
You are sensible you are not to stir a step without orders, nor even then hurt a single hair of the curate’s curling pate ; you ssiall take a tour together, and the moment I have effected my grand purpose, whirl home again in safety.
Hendon too will be reconciled to this unavoidable piece of difingenuity, when he fees how happy I make my Le Fever, and how well I will provide for her quondam favorite.
I am, See.
Clerage.
Letter XXL From the fame to the fame.
FOrever in luck, Arthur, fare the happiest of planets prefided at my nativity.
Passing negligently through Mount-street, (I have already expatiated on the power of attraction) I saw a hackney coach drawn un at Mrs. Leefon’s door, as
My heart—-well no matter for its palpitations—I refolved to keep assiarp look ‘out, and inform myfelf of the caufe, I therefore immediately flipped into a little glove-ssiop that commanded a view of the premises, and lay as fnug as possible.
It was not long before Mrs. Jenny appeared, leading her old mistrefs, who was no fooner seated, than Mrs. Le Fever and Mrs. Stubbs followed her into the carriage, and the fellow aseended the box.
The good old lady kindly drew up the blind between her and me, to defend herself, I fuppofe, from a little misty rain. I took advantage of her caution, and catch-ing Jenny’s eyes, made her understand ssie was not to retire until I had fpoke with her. The wretch of a coachman was fome time siggetting about, before he thought proper to draw off the enemy, a circumstance that exercised my patience not a little.
Every obstacle at length removed, I advanced, Jenny, child, cried I, no I	words,
lyo The History of
, words; but if Mifs Le Fever is at home, I will fee her.
She is indifpofed, sir, said the little huffy, in great confusion, ssie is buly ; the ladies are only gone to the Fleet, to 'procure the enlargement of a poor tradelman out of this neiglibourliood.
I will, Jenny, returned I, secure you from all blame : their charitable bufmefs will detain them at least fome hours. I stole up you may fay, whilst you exchanged a word or two with an acquaintance that passed by, or what else you please.
When I reached the landing-place of the second stair-case, would you credit it, Arthur, I was astoniflied at my own impudence : I paused, I helitated, but it would have been unmanly to retreat; and tapping gentle at the door, I received fuch foft encouragement, that I ventured to present myself.
Mifs Le Fever blustied : pride and haughty resentment mantled on her cheek, and fparkled in her eyes. To tell you I ' am furprifed, my Lord, said ssie, in a lofty
)b.vs. X a J	jL	V x—i xvi	X J X.
Give me leave, Mifs Le Fever, cried I, (who would not have interrupted her ?) to save you the trouble of saying uncivil things. To see me at this juncture, I •am very sensible is no agreeable circumstance with you ; but I die for fome conversation with you; my businefs is of the last importance, and you must indulge me.
She rang the bell; a dirty two-fisted 'wench made her appearance.
Susan, said ssie, (not in the fnappish manner in which she accosted me) do you wait in the next apartment until I call for you ; I have very particular reafons for what I desire.
And do you put yourfelf upon your guard, madam, said I, as the wench with-drew ?
You must excuse me, sir, returned fne, very tartly, you have already tranfgreffed file bounds of good-breeding, and I am justisied in every fufpicion.
It is well, madam, extraordinary leffons may be learnt from even excefs of deli-
lyg T H'.E .D.vl S T O R Y O'F
toacy, and over - strained caution. T should not have had one dishonourable fwish, one improper idea, if you yourfelf shad not fuggested them. (She gave me a heavenly glance) You know, continued I, you have treated me with great difre-fpect, charged me with the groffest practises. Indeed, Mifs Le Fever, I cannot sit down contented with unjust imputations.
You are a gentleman of very tender feelings, (that ever the prettiest mouth in the world should be capable of sheering)
. where self is concerned, but have the least consideration Sor the pain you may excite, of any perSon I ever met with. My mother is Srom home ; your visit had certainly been better timed, iS she could have participated it. I, however, must beg to know, what account I am to give of your proceedings when she does return.
O tell her, my dear madam, cried I, that I am young, bold, and enterprising; that I love her daughter to dissraction, and have Sought many occasions oS telliner
IVi I S s XL, r X’. V iM.	J j 5
her fo, but have always been thrown out by fome abfurd interruption or other.; and that seeing a whole coaehful of impediments removed, L rushed in, seized the happy opportunity, divulged the secret, and O, I fear, you may add, was seorn-fully repulsed.
I neither wissi, nor intend to attempt penetrating your Lordfliip’s designs, returned the fair heroine, it is fussicient for me to know I have no power over my heart or perfon ; you may be incredulous, {my looks will be signisieant, Arthur) but-are actually diSpoSed of.
Never tell me, MiSs Le Fever, So preposterous a tale; the puppy that is now in poffession of your approbation, bas not loved you half So long as 1 have—you : remember the Abbey.
Then it was to you, sir, Said the unmoved tyrant, and Some oS your gay companions, (a stroke Sor Hendon) that I was indebted Sor that day’s diScompoSure; upon my wmrd I am more obliged to yoti than I imagined..
O
174 THE History of
Take care, Mifs Le Fever, cried I, fcorn and contempt would rouse a Socrates : I am not naturally a madman, tho’ it is in your po\ver to render me one ; and if you are determined to drive me to extremities, I hope you are prepared to anlwer for the consequences.
Patience and resignation, my Lord, I believe, are virtues that you have but little acquaintance with ; and 1 ssiould be equally forry to sind myself engaged to prevent, as to anfwer for the extravagances you may be capable of committing ; but when I affure you that I am already difpofed of, given to a worthy young man of fuitable circumstances to my own, it is furely hard that I may not be allowed to Jiarve in peace, if I am fa singular as to make the election.
No, madam, exclaimed I, with great vehemence, I. will fpare no pains to dif-apcoint your romantic wissies : let the curate perform his drudgery, he will barely obtain fussicient to procure himself clean linen and a fcanty dinner.
iVi i > JLj Xj 1. Xj V Xj	'* / 0
Do but hear how unmercifully ssie wiped me down.
That reflection, my Lord, is imwoithy }Our character, humanity intirely out of the question: that one part of the clergy should be wrapt in lawn, and the other ejipoSed to the greatest hardships, is an error in ecclesiastic regulations that ought to be rectified. The dignity of that pro-feffion extends to its meanest members; and tho’ the curate may feel distrefs, he must not defcend to industry for relief. To preach one day, and labor the next, is denied him, notwithstanding he experiences miseries from the former, from which the latter' would intirely extricate him. If it was not too great condefeen-fion, your Lordship might very foon inform yourself, that the young fellow you have now though^; proper to deride, was not born to the contempt he must unhappily fustain. How noble, how generous would it have been, for a youth of quality to have lifted fuch a one from obfeurity, to have countenanced his merit, assisted
T .	.	i,:..
lyfi The History of
his necessities, and banissied every bitter remembrance of calamity from his heart.
A fcheme instantly fuggested itfelf, (down on your knees, Arthur, and pray for its fuccefs) in consequence of which I made this unexpected reply.
All this, Mifs Le Fever, I am ready t@ do on one concessicn, only let your connection with him be diffolved, and I will obtain a cure for him that ssiall exceed his , best expectations, nor will I fail, upon any occasion, to be his warmest friend.
How, sir, demanded ssie,- will your friendship difplay itfelf only in difuniting us ; can you not be kind without being cruel; but we will owe no obligations to fucli a heart.
And do you think he is. as heroic as yourfelf, madam, demanded I ? no, Mils Le Fever, lovely as you are, the charms of preferment would be too powerful for him to resist ; and he would forego his attachment to the one, to indde himself to the other.
rrvlpvprl • *Thf» nsi"!!-
IVi ISS J-J XL, . X" JZj V lli IX.	-‘77
tated; at length it may be fo, my Lord, . you are better shilled in the heart of man ^ ‘ than myfelf. If you can prevail upon ? him to admit the utmost gifts of fortune to come in competition with his love, I have done. I wissi him well; and if you will provide for him, he is deserving, and: ^ I will not prove an impediment.
There’s a girl for you !
Let us then, my dear madam, said I, wave all animosities- for the prefent,, and join our forces to bring this young gentleman’s (I got it out, Arthur, with fome difficulty) affection to the test ; will you, write, or ssiall I ?
It is a mortifying undertaking, returned ssie, with a tender sigh; for if I am not greatly deceived, I shall only occasion him much affliction; and if I am, but I will write, my Lord, and you yourfelf stiall be witnefs to the contents of my letter. . You will please, however, to understand,, that I do it for his sake, not yours, nor will I ever see you more when the businefs is compleated.
lyS The History of
We will talk of that another time, madam ; it is fussicient that we now carry the first part of your refolution into practice. She took a piece of paper, and with an unsteady hand, as well as a rebellioussy agitated heart, (against me, her adorer) wrote as follows:
To Mr, LeCE ISTER.
Sir,
“ A FRIEND of good Mrs. Leefon’s, having heard of your merit and misfortunes, proposes to reward the one, and wipe out the memory of the other, by becoming your patron. It certainly is sh his power to do great things for you, and it would be inconfistent with the friendssiip I bear you, not to promote your real interest.
“ But there is a condition that may perhaps rather startle you on a first view : >— all your expectations refpecting me must utterly terminate, if you accept of his offer. Yet furely that is a light evil in comparifon of many you now experi-
rri
------ ___	—	- J J
enee. Fortune is the key to every felicity ; and you may at fome future period rejoice in the diffolution of a connection, that would inevitably be productive of many inconveniences.
“ You must enquire no farther, but give me leave to affure you, my private approbation (no fmall fupport for your pride) will ever be yours: I have no other attachment in view : my heart is not quite fo pliant as to be capable of receiving every impreffion my friends might chuse to give it; nor will I judge fo lightly of yours, as to fuppofe you can forget me in an instant : it must be the work of time; and what is it that time cannot accomplissi.
“You can have no notion of the advantages you will derive from this great man’s favor; and the only disadvantage it v/ill expose you to, is the lofs of my correfpondence, for my best wissies will ever be yours.
I am, &c.
C. Li!' Fevir. i
T n	T
i8o The History of
I cannot say I am fatissied with what she has wrote : there is a tender ambiguity that runs through the whole, that will work upon the sensibility; but as she would not be perfuaded either to add or diminish one tittle, I was obliged to fubmit; and have only the generaT c/mcN fpirit, and the loud demands of poverty to rely upon.
She folded it up, on my returning it into her hands, sealed it, sighed a second time, and begged the favor of Jenny to convey it to the post. I could have wished to make fome additions and improvements, tho’, I fuppofe, the Levite Vfould have betrayed me ; befides, I had no opportunity to give Jenny an item, and she had not the grace to reserve it for my perusal.
We now-chatted of indifferent things ; and as my behaviour was, to the last degree, distant and civilized, she did not affume any airs. I could neverthelefs perceive that the curate run dreadfully in her head •. but I hone he has sense, and I
iVA i.^OX-iXuX.iDVJDi\.*
fliall know how to deal with her I will anfwer for it.
When MrSi Leefon returned, I begged to fpeak with her in private, having first a very plausible excuse for being found with the young lady.
Madam, said I, affecting the prettiest" confusion imaginable, 1 fuppofe you may have observed how greatly I admire Mifs Le Fever, and I have too much principle to form dissionourable designs; but I have ' reafon to apprehend that even my most justifiable addreffes would he rejected by her, A little parfon, you must know him, one Leceister, is the happy man, that is to bear away the prize ; but ssie was furely born for a very different situation than the wretched one he would re duce her to; ssie deserves the utmost gifts of fortune.
Are you serious, my Lord, returned Mrs. Leefon ? can you really determine to marry a worthy young woman without one pecuniary recommendation ?
Why not, my dear madam, cried I,
with a warmth that was apparently agreeable to her ? fome noblemen have fuffered themselves to become unmindful oS every consideration but perSon : that charge cannot, however, be brought against me in this instance ; Sor has not MiSs Le Fever the most exalted mind that ever woman poffeffed ? but you shall hear my plan. I will wait upon Lady Catherine Oldham, make her the compliment of confulting her, and perhaps she may, by this time, be ashamed of her conduct : and should she receive the worthy girl once more into her favor, many advantages might be derived from it.
It was very plain, Arthur, that Mrs. Leefon could have hugged me for my ingenuity ; she applauded, she promoted my design; and here am I at twelve o’clock at night, in my own apartment, with a positive refolution to wait upon her Ladyship to-morrow morning.
V/e shall foon see how matters will work : I stiall not think it a misfortune to do without }^our assistance ; I am gay,
I
I am enterprising, but I do not love premeditated bafenefs.
I fancy I have at last given the effectual stroke, and dug a pit for myfelf instead of the curate ; for this matrimonial fcheme has no other charms for me, but that it is my ultimate refource, liberty, liberty, O fweet liberty; tho’ I am not fo prophane as even to wissi to resist my destiny.
I am, &c.
Clerage,
'	Letter XXIL
Fro?n the fame to the fame, ,
Really, Arthur, tllis same Lady Catherine Oldham has proved herself to be a very reafonable, perfuadaSile being.
She received me with that politenefs I might expect from a wofnan of her rank, who was not unacquainted with my family ; and I amused her fome time upon common fubjects, from not knowing how ■to begin my most interesting one.
184 The History of?
At length, madam, said I, has not Mifs Le Fever the honour to be related to you?
My Lord, returned she, with a face as red as fcarlet, I little apprehended any incivility from you. I never can converfe with any perfon who can mention fo offensive a name to me ; and I must tell you, that if you are come to plead for fuch an ingrate, your undertaking will be attended with the fuccefs it deserves.
1 intreat your Ladyship —
—My Lord, I am not to be intreated :; I fuppofe her poverty has at last taught her a lesion I wished her to learn ; but she cast off my protection, it was not withdrawn,sir, and no arguments on earth shall ever retrieve it. If she is as wretched as guilt and penury can makC' her, my wrongs are but stightly atoned.
1 cherished her, I considered her as my own child ; she nobly requited mie, and there I must insist upon the matters rest- -ing fore\Tr.
In one word, Lady Catherine, said I,
IM ioo	X XsaVJLj IV^.	Jl
it is not for MifsLe Fever but my self.that I would obtain your interest; she is fuperior to misfortune, and tho’ she regrets-: the lofs of your favour —
■—Regrets, repeated the violent Lady.
That, madam, refumed I, is not the prefent question. You know my estate is not exceptionable: I cannot enjoy it without her participation, nor, would L, thrust myfelf into your family without your consent.
You have, charmed away my rage, my Lord, returned the Lady, with an intire uewset of features. I must, I shall be proud of your alliance, Kitty has many perfections, and one infirmity ought to be forgiven, tho’ it was a most flagrant one.
Your Ladyship must excuse my not inveighing against it for many reafons. It is a kind of proverb, that a good daughter ivill be a good wife ; and if that is true, Mifs Le Fever bids fair to. render me the , happiest of men.
I will not difpute with you, sir. Said ? her Ladyship, rather nettled, but what
i8fi The History of
settlements do you propose; you shall not boast that you have taken a pennylefs beauty to wife ; set'en thoufand pounds fhcdl be daid down by me on the day of marriage ; and perhaps I may bestow double the fum upon Lady Cserage at Uiy death.
You shall have the whole direction of tliefe matters, madam, returned I; I will order my lawyer to wait upon you tomorrow morning. But now give me leave to enquire wliether you will allow the Lady to pay her refpects to you in her present or future condition.
Your Lordship’s consideration is very grateful to me; I recollect I vowed never more to receive Kitty Le Fe\Tr into my houfe, but that, by no means, extends to Lady Clerage.
Will you then condefcend to write, madam ?
With all .my heart, said she ; but beginning-dear,—dear what ?—cried she— Kitty Le Fever:—no, my Lord, you «aust transact the wshole affair for me :
i.Vi X b 6 2—4 jd.4 X	V JL i•	1 O y
tell her with what pleafure I ssiall receive her in her new character, and as a token of my regard, let the lawyer read the deeds to her.
I left her Ladyship, after a little further conversation, in tlie highest fpirits, and hurried to town, in order to purfue a more difficult and'uncertain point, than even her wayward fancy.
I shall never fucceed, Arthur, with this romantic-headed girl, unlefs the fellow has more wifdom than I am afraid has fallen to his share. Should he prove an Antliony, L am a very wretch, and must sty the country.
1 am, &c.
C t E R A G E,
Letter XXIII.
From tlie fame to tlie fame.
IF you do not pity me, Arthur, you are an abfolute barbarian. The fellow has taken fire at the proposal, and
i8B' The History of^
will Nrn .up all my bright.sehemes in ana instant.
He was seated, I fiippose, in the aukward chimney corner of his ancestors, when Mifs Le Fever’s letter reached him. What rage», what turmoil, did it not occasion in his miiserable breast ? he orders . a, post-chaise immediately, tho’ perhaps with only fix-pence in his pocket, and the next evening sets him down at the door of his beloved.
What a meeting! O that he. had but ah: that instant sheen lodged in the arms of the grimest of tyrants. Mifs Le Fever fainted ; Mrs. Le Fever fqualled; Jenny:? wept bitterly, both at the period, and the relationof the.affecting seene. Poor Mrs, I.eefon was struck all of a heap, (out of regard to me, Arthur) and tlie.unpleaSing-neSs oS Mrs. Stubbs’s Sace, was redoubled by a grin of horror and disinay.
Mils Le Fever, cried young Pompqfo, explain, tliis« instant explain to me, the meaning oS your cruel letter. What are preSerments, patronage, or wealth, with-
out your favour. I will renounce you only with my latest breath, nor can you either with honour or justice require fo unnatural a sacrifice. Have you not taught me to rely upon your stability, nor shall you forfeit your pretensions to that valuable endowment, for any mff-taken advantages I might derive from a new connection.
Jenny coiild remember very little more ■than that Mrs. Le Fever attended Mrs. Deefon down stairs, in order to account for the pathetics she had been v/itneSs of, and the lovers were left to themselves without interruption.
So you sind, Arthur, I am at last become a pimp to the priest ; but he must - oblige me in turn, and accompany you in fome little expedition.
When seif is at the bottom, how induf-trious it renders us. Poor Jenny, Jenny, is beyond meafure afflicted, lest Mifs Le Fever will not marry my Lord, as her refusal w'ould cut her out of her flattering expectations of being iny Lady’s woman.
igo The Hist o r y o f
Mifs in the country pleaded for Lord Clerage, in order to give herself an opportunity of flying about with her Zasy-Jhip: but how ssiall we account for my fair mistrefs’s conduct, ssie will be a beggar in fpite of all I can fay, tho’ her best incitement to fo preposterous an election can be only the punissiing of me. She ssiall not, however, triumph long ; this calm ssiall be fucceeded by the most terrible of storms : fo let them enjoy their little hour, Johnfon, for you must difpose of him by fome means or other until ssie is Lady Clerage.
I waited upon Mrs. Leefon this morning, to acquaint her with the fuccefs of my visit to Lady Catherine.
It is whimsical enough, that your poor old withered matrons ssiould attempt to make profysites : fuch lips as Mifs Le Fever’s might perfuade me to any thing; but good Mrs. Leefon, with all her pathos and eloquence, is only good Mrs, Leefon, and a very elderly gentlewoman.
She shnnk hpr head nt rnv rpnnrt.
IVhat pity it is, said ssie, that fuch generous intentions should be frustrated ; but Mifs Le Fever has thought proper to huse for herself, ‘ nor can I blame her, a nore agreeable young fellow perhaps ne-/er existed.
He is as insinuating, at least, returned [ (fomewhat hurt you may be certain) but f we cannot work upon her constancy, ve must have a tryal of shill with him. [f lie has either honour or love, he will lot be the means of obseuring fuch iright profpects : you know, madam, he las nothing but wretchednefs in his Dower.
Mifs Le Fever, said the good old lady, i-ery composedly, is not that fort of perfon o be dazzled with —
But, madam, cried I, for I could not oiitain myself when she began to talk lonsenfe, she has fo much duty and tenser confideration for her mother, that it night greatly influence her to find she ifpoused ray interest. Shall I fend for
'	her
^192 The- History of
her down, and communicate the steps d -have taken.
Mrs. Le Fever foon made her appear-
-	ance.
I am certain, madam, said I, you have fo much goodnefs that you can pardon
-	the most extravagant conduct, when mierely dictated by affection for your ami-
■	able daughter.
I then set forth all I had said and done •at Lady Catherine’s, concluding with a declaration, that all my hopes of happinefs were hinged upon obtaining her -consent and approbation.
She was affected, ssie was distreffed. Alas ! sir, said ssie, it is unfortunate that you ssiould have fixed upon fucli humble
■	minds as ours : to gratitude we ssiall ever , be alive ; but there is no temptations tliat
can rouse us to ambition. My poor girl has already been fo great a fufferer by her connections with nobility, that tlie very name is hateful to lier ; and I do believe, one principal motive of her present attachment, was a similarity of fate and for-
une. I do not know how to act; I ap->rove Mr. Leceister, and honour your ixiidssiip, but I have been ever of opi-lion, that to promote my child’s happi-lefs is my duty, and to use my authority o interrupt or impede it a most unjustisi-ible step. I will mention what you fay o my daughter, but to promise to enforce t, my Lord, would be to deceive you ; he has acquired a right,, from her un-:ommon tendernefs to me, (her natural >ne out of the question) to follow her )wn inclinations.
But will you not advise her, madam, :ried I, will you not try to perfuade her ?
With a delicate mind, my Lord, re-ilied this affectionate mother, advice is iontroul, and perfuaston compulsion: you nust excuse me; I cannot run the hazard )f ruining my child’s peace. If Mrs, Leefon will undertake your caufe, I will vissi it all the fuccefs that is compatible vith my grand object, my poor girl’s fe-icity; but no farther will either my sin-K	cerity
ig4 The History of
cerity or tender regard for my Kitty permit me to go.
What a foolissi wrong-headed woman, did you or I ever conceive that any fuch existed. Title, fortune, equipage, all contemned ; nay, the declared impediments to the union. The miferable curate was not under the necessity offueing with half the servility I have done. There is now no longer time for hesitation; fpare no expence, no care of my execrable rival ——I am distracted, and there is no remedy. I leave every thing to your own management ; you must exempt me from all odious confultations, and bear mq witnefs that I have left no one means untried to have secured myfelf from villainy.
I am, &c.
ClER AQ E.
Lstter
IVI 1 5 s i-. n. r XL, V n. IV. 195
Letter XXIV.
Mifs Le Fever to Mifs Winter.
O Polly, it is impostible for you to conceive what I have endured since I last wrote to you. Lord Clerage, but he is calculated for fuch unworthy practices ; and if he cannot rob you of your inno-^ cence, will strike at your repofe.
Poor Mr. Leceister and I had only exchanged one or two tender epistles, before this formidable mercilefs man rose up to torment us. I had been compelled, as I informed you, to pafs one afternoon in his company,	hardly enough fuf-
tained, but I little fufpected he would have fo foon repeated his visit.
My mother, Mrs. Leefon, and Airs, Stubbs, having fome businefs to draw them from home, (for to astist the indigent and relieve the distreffed, they have all a peculiar turn) I intended to have devoted K 2	the
ig6 The H i s to ry of
the hours of their absence to poor Mr. Leceister : but before I could accommodate myfelf with proper materials for the only conversation we could then enjoy, who ssiould enter my apartment, after a flight familiar tap at tlie door, but the bold Lord Clerage.
Astonissied at the rencounter, I believe I accosted him with very little ceremony he fawned, I fretted; but as he insisted upon being heard a few -words, I ordered Mrs. Stubb’s servant to wait within call, as I have really too ill an opinion of him to trust myfelf one moment in his power : he raved at the indignity, but • was forced to fubmit.
You cannot imagine bow he treated me, made Mr. Leceisters circumstances his fport, and at the long run instnuated, that as fond as he appeared of me, set but a good living before him, and I ssiould foon sind which would be most charming in his estimation ; offering to do many extraordinary things for him, if once he was un-
MJSS UJL TiLVlLK. I97
I almost difpise myfelf for my folly ; for as fure as you are alive, I was fo weak as to be piqued to fuch a degree, as to begin to think it very possible that a profpect of advancement might have its allurements, and fuffered myfelf to be prevailed upon to propose the exchange to the greatly-injured young gentleman; for what can be a greater injury than entertaining unjust and ungenerous fufpicions of any one.
I wrote a most curious letter, my dear, tho’ it was daggers to my own heart; for to have been deserted by Mr. Leceister would have been the cruellest of all my misfortunes.
I was not insensible of his Lordssiip’s views for inciting me to fo strange a step; but was pre-determined, if I found poor Leceister frail, never more to behold the face of man with approbation.
The letter was difpatched : two sseeplefs nights and three anxious days did I experience. I concluded all was over; but K 3	would
198 The History of
would rather have died than betrayed my disappointment and affliction.
The third evening however, my dear Polly, brought me a bleffed evidence of my error; it brought me (it is the only exultation my heart ever felt) the amiable Leceister upon his knees before me to folicit an explanation of fuch bitter lines. To see him was new life; but to see him fo earnestly, fo tenderly affected, was too much for me to fupport, and for a few m oments deprived me of all sensibility.
I foon recovered, and Lord Clerage was a living proof how intirely the malicious defeat their ov/n purposes ; for never did I taste more flattering delight, than in the repeated affurances of Mr. Leceister s unalterable affection.
Nor will his ill-intended ossicioufnefs he productive only of that single advantage. Mr, Leceister will not be prevailed upon to revisit the country, and each returning day will renew my happinefs.
But do not fuppofe his Lordssiip has
done
•or
M iss L E F L V LK. 199
done with us ; lie is still working on, tho’ with as little fuccefs as heretofore.
How endearing is my mother’s tenderness ? ah, my good girl, depend upon it few children would fly from the protection of reafonable parents, but what will not persecution hurry us into. We ought not to difpose of ourselves without the concurrence of these most valuable relations ; yet furely no tie is fufficient to engage us to facrisice our perfons and inclinations, to gratify the humour or prejudice of any one.
This noble Lord has, it seems, been tampering with the great Lady Catherine, who is ready to join hands with him to deprive me of every real satisfaction, and tvould palm their imaginary ones upon me : but I am not to be fo eafily taken in. I have been behind the fcenes, my girl, have viewed the puppets in their natural state, and never was there more empty, unprofitable, unsatisfied beings under the fun. Seven thoufand pounds (methinks K 4	her
200 The History of
her Ladyssiip bids high) is ready to purchase me a coach and six, provided I am not fo simple as to hesitate about deceiving or breaking a worthy heart. Your poor folks are fo numerous and inconsiderable a body, that it is no matter how hastily or by what means they are difpatched; but you and I are of another opinion, aiid Ixceister shall be our man of men.
I should be forry to be precipitated info an abrupt marriage : but to put a final period to the fchemes of my worst enemy Lord Clerage, I could be almost willing to tiy the evils of that condition that is ever extremes, extremely happy or extremely miserable.
I am, See.
C, Le Fever.
Letter
Letter XXV.
Arthur Johnson, Ejq\ toLord Clerage.
The parfon will no longer impede Lord Glerage’s wissies; he is safely difpofed of, beyond all possibility of difeovery or eseape.
I shall leave London she moment I have difpatched this letter ; and can only now congratulate your Lordship upon the fuccefs of a rather defperate undertaking, and will hereafter avail myself of his generous promises to
His Lordship’s5 &c.
H.	Johnson.
Letter XXVI.
Lord Clerage to Sir George Hendoh.
MISS Le Fever is most unhappily deprived of her darling Leceister: K 5	he
202 The History of
he has. Sir George, unexpectedly absented himself, from what caufe or on what occasion who can divine. Should her fufpicions fall upon me, how ssiould I exculpate myfelf; that I loved her and hated him, is fussiciently notorious to furnissi her with a foundation.
Let me have your opinion, your advice, it is an unlucky accident; for I fuppofe if even time ssiould leffen the sense, without redressing the misfortune that now hangs fo heavy on this young lady’s heart, I ssiould never be permitted to make my appearance ; and all this because I was unable to enter into the notion of the people who had not bread to eat, bellowing for a painted baby : yet you will sind he can live without her, tho’ his honour (youi half-starved heroes are most laughable charafSers) would not allow him to say he renounced her.
The affair has, however, thrown me into great perplexity, and will perhaps deprive
IVI I S S L. iL r JL V XL. XV. iJUg
prive me of the privilege I have fo long enjoyed of fubseribing myfelf
Yours, See.
Clerage.
Letter XXVII.
Mifs Le Fever to Mifs Winter.
The whole day has passed and no Mr. Leceister : fure no misfortune has befallen him : he has but few acquaintance in town, and thofe of too little consequence to induce him to disappoint me of his company for their fakes.
I am born for every fpecies of misery: if I ssiould never fee him more-—but that is folly—yet if he comes safe, and cannot make a very fussicient excuse for his absence, how ssiall I reconcile my pride to the unexpefled neglect.
Now am I beginning to enter into the cares; and tho’ I have tasted only a few of the pleafures this flattering connection K6	is
204 The History of
is capable of, it is in vain, my dear, to re pine at the common lot of humanity, fo if we have not our mortifications of on kind, we have of another. Better be for saken, says fomebody, (I am not fo dear headed at prefent as to tell you who) thai never to have been loved ; but I will no i hold with that opinion : it was not, how ever, an affair of my own seeking, Provi dence seems to have cast me into it, anc therefore I will fubmit.
Morning, lodClock.
STILL no Mr. Leceister! what will become of me ! restrained as I am from al] complaint, no lefs by modesty than tendei regard for the best of mother’s.
He has certainly met with fome accident, and perhaps languissies amongst strangers, unable to acquaint them who he is. My dear mother is fo humane to every creature in distrefs, that I need not doubt her concurrence to affist him under any unhappy circumstances,
THE
THEmifery, my dear girl, is all revealed ; and what makes it beyond meafure infupportable is, that it cannot be alleviated. I never can contain myself, my reafon'or my heart will be fubdued : but I know the Land from whence this calamity is derived.—I will—-I will—but read and judge if you can of my unutterable affliction.
To Mifs L E Fever.
My dear madam,
“ I Am fallen they tell me into honourable hands ; and have been pennitted (as my apprehenfions for your fufferings on my account were strong and alarming) at length to inform you, that I ssiall be safely nay advantageouOy difpofed of, but must never fee you again. May that power that presides over innocence and virtue, forever protect and defend you. I must not tell you how much I am your’s,
P. Leceister.”
’ To
2o6 The History of
To have furvived him would have been a gentle stroke to this. Conveyed away, doomed perhaps to a miferable state of flavery, and all on my account: but I will not endure the bitter reflection ;,and yet my dearest mother what will become of you, when you behold your wretched child sinking into the grave.
Mrs. Leefon, the good the humane Mrs. Leefon, (that I could but forget her rela-tionssiip to that monster) is the best of women. She promises to be our never-failing friend—nay not even her death ssiall deprive us of a comfortable provision : but can ssie restore my peace ? can she ?
Something must be done : a bold and daring action : no matter ; whilst I now write it may be too late. Adieu-, adieu, pray for the fuccefs of my undertaking, my everlasting happinefs depend upon it. I am, See.
C. Le Fever.
Letter
Letter XXViH.
Lord Clerage to Sir George Hendon.
O Hendon, all covered as I am with guilt and affliction, in what language ssiall I addrefs you. A villain may assist, a villain may flatter, a villain inay execute ; but it is to fuch hearts as youi^s alone, that I can fly for pity and confolation.
1 doubt not but your difcernment has anticipated my confeflion : the marks were strong upon me; why am I thus unable to fupport either a just or base character with uniformity ? I am unquestionably the most unhappy an<l abfurd of all compositions.
That I have been the direct author of the calamity my fweet woman fo pathetically deplores, I need not fpeak in plainer terms. To save myfelf from the last wretchednefs I was fo mean as to enter into
bonds
2o8 The History of
bonds w ith the greatest of monsters, who has infinitely out-run my worst intention.
Take a defcriptioii, my friend, of the consequences, but allow me forever to be filent refpecting the particulars of the base transaction.
I wus this morning in my study, my foul in a very uneafy state, when a servant hastily informed me, that a young lady insisted upon fpeaking with me. She fays your Lordship knows her well, added he, and her name is Le Fever. We would not permit her to alight without orders, efpecially as she appears wild and dejected.
Where is she, exclaimed the guilty wretch : shew me to her; ’tis I alone that can fpeak peace to lier poor wounded heart.
I found by the fellow’s countenance that my expressions had furprifed him, and "was endeavouring to collect myfelf into fome kind of compofure, during which ssiort moment Mifs Le Fever had
pre-
prevailed upon my people to admit her into the houfe, and ssie was immediately before my mortified eyes.
My Lord, said ssie, on my knees, on my knees I conjure you to compassionate my misery. My reafon is certainly shook *—Mr. Leceister—release him from his prefent situation, or your sins will be fpread out on the face of the earth. My mother and Mr. Leceister, I would die to preserve them; and here I voluntarily offer (if you can accept my perfon under its grief and deformity) to comply with whatever terms you can propose to obtain his liberty. I will never fee him but once again, just to satisfy myself that he is not languishing out his existence for my tranf-greffions, and will then marry you, live with you, love and blest you.
Rife Mifs Le Fever, said I, that fuppli-cating attitude ill-besits you. Whatever ■ is in my power*---------
—O talk not of power, cried she, with the utmost earnestnefs, will you not save
roe
2 10 The History of '
me from destruction. Look on me, ray Lord, am I not the creature you fo lately professed to admire ? will not Lady Catherine bessow seven thousand pounds to recommend me to your favour, tho* ssie would not part with a ssiilling to relieve my dying mother ? Take me, take me then, I will be the moss obedient, the tenderest of wives, only deliver that innocent fufferer from bondage. I will not rife, repeated she, (I had made many attempts, George, to raise her from fo unworthy a situation) I will not quit this fpot, until you affure me Mr. Leceiller shall be restored to liberty and his friends.
Indeed, Mifs Le Fever, returned I, I am grieved to my foul to behold you in this condition, efpecially as I cannot relieve you from it. I could not confefs myself a villain, Hendon, but you can have no idea of my horror and remorfe.
My Lord, said she, rivetting her eyes ' upon me, do you believe there is a God ? do not now deceive me, as you hope for
.mercy
mercy at his hands ; for be affured, the caufe of injured innocence will not go unpunissied, nor tlie tears of wretchednefs fail to prevail against you. I fup-pose you have fo much humanity as to start at actual murder : your fword that would relieve me from the bitterest of pangs, you could not lift up against me without ssiuddering. Yet you can behold the anguish of my foul unmoved; can reflect upon the woes my widowed mo-thermust endure, with barbarous refolution ; and steel your heart against the miferable complaints of a being you have fo basely trepanned.
Your pride, my Lord, your false sense of honour are still alive ; they at this very moment flush your cheek, and dart upon me from your eye ; and shall your humanity steep ? my accuSation has called forth the one, oh let my misery rouse the other. Your compassion, your all-relieving compassion, let it. revive in your breast, and rectify the evils you have occasioned.
212 The History of
I will forever haunt you with my intreaties, until I have fubdued your stubborn nature, and you consent to give me back to tranquility and peace.
Only compose yourself, my dear Mifs Le Fever, said I, in the utmost distrefs, and I will endeavour—only compofe yourself, (for she was again flying out) and I will serve you. Permit me to feat you -—be foothed—be fatissied—you shall fee him again, and I will no longer persecute you. I w'ill promote your union ; provide handfomely for him, and you shall live to blefs the present object of your greatest detestation.
By degrees she lost the alarming sierce-nefs of her afpect : her language became eafy and intelligent; and I prevailed upon her to rest fatissied that I would exert my utmost abilities in her service.
And fo I will, Sir George ; I am seared with hobgoblins, and the most frightful of chimeras.
But
But ssiould the young fellow, as I much apprehend, be far beyond my reach, I wonder who will be the greatest wretch, the injurer or the injured.
My heart tells me we are all undone; my good inclinations, my honest refolutions, are come too late. Villain that I am, will heaven to chastise me, permit all these innocent people to be involved in one common ruin.
I know not where to sind the vile executioner of my vile purposes, nor have I the least clue to the finding out the young fellow. I know not how to proceed: but I sty, if polsible, to repair my crime : the attitude, the features, the wild, yet pathetic manner, of the distreffed, the distracted Le Fever, will never be out of my remembrance. Without doubt ssie loves this man, in the same degree I love her.—— Perdition — but ssie must, she must be saved; for I am not yet arrived at that
pitch
214 The History, See.
pitch of cruelty, to exult in her unmerited fufferings ; nor can you defpise me more than I do myself.
I am. See.
Clerage,
Erd of the Fi r s t Vol v-m s.
Fruitless Repentance;
OR, THE
HISTORY
OF
KITTY LE FEVER.
VOL. II.
LONDON;
Printed for F. Newbery, the Corner of (St. Paul’s Church Yard,
MDCCLXIX. .
: - ';;	; L
/“, ^..	riisbhriT :
- Z VI	O > ■ • \
A , y T. o '"F. ^ I. I!' ^
■-	' '■	-	'-.o^ w ■.
r H T-, 'i T| T -r ^ -V.
'A ■-
'shs^ihK- ■ ■ •
■	’ 'i ‘tl A ■ 7 ’ ‘
■ '' I#' ■■ .	' ^
■ m .
. - q	- ,	y	"	' '
_	’ i, ctV 'o ii -I o
'*	* '	■	y. '
\ . ■ .sS^tV W;n-oD sal ,v s » « v< :i /'	'livtLiv
■	, vtii’r; / 'jr-''	■ ’»■; L
nerof St. Paul’s Church-yard, Ludgate-street.
1.	'^HE Vicar of Wakefield. A Tale.
J.	SuppoSed to be written by himfelf. The third Edit. Price 6 s. bound.
II. An account of the life of Mr. Richard Savage, Son of the Earl Rivers, who was. Soon after he came into the world, baftardifed by an act of parliament, and deprived of the title and estate to which he was born; was committed by his mother, thecountefs of Macclesfield, to a poor woman, to be bred up as her own sen ; came to the knowledge of his real mother, now alive, but abandoned by her, persecuted, and condemn’d for murder, and, against all her endeavours, pardoned; made poet laureat to (^een Caroline, became very eminent for his writings, of which many are quoted in this work; particularly the Baf-tard, the Wanderer, Volunteer Laureate and Author to he let ; went into Wales, to be Supported by a Subfcription, but at last died in prh Son. Price 3 s.
HI. Novellas ESpanoIas : Seven moral and entertaining novels. Tranflated from the original Spanish by a lady. Never before published in English or French. Price 2J. bd.
IV.	Memoirs of a man of quality. Writ-
ten by himSelf, after his retirement from the world. In two vols.	Price 6s,
V.	The Academy of Play ; containing a full description of, and the Laws of Play, now pbferved in the Several Academies of Paris, relative to the following games, vi^. Piquet,
S^^drille,
BOOKS printed for F. N e w b e r y.
Quadrille, Ombre, Quintill, Piquemdrill, Imperial, the Reverfe, Papillion, L’Ambigu, Commerce, Tontine, Lottery, Ma Cotr.mere, La Mariee, Triomphe, Tue Beast, La Mouchc, Man D’Auvergne, the Farm, the game of Hoc, L’Emprunt, LePoque, Romeft. Sizette, Guin-guette, Le Sixte, Vingt C^uatre, La Belle, Gillet, Cul Bas. The Cuckoo, Brufquembille, the Comet, from the French of the Abbey Bellecour. Price 3.f. bound.
VI.	Memoirs of St. George the English patron ; and of the most noble order of the garter. Being an introduction to an intended hiStory of the antiquities of the castle and borough of Windfor, with the parts adjacent. By Thomas Dawforiy D. D. Price 3^.
VII.	The natural history of Mount Vefuvius, with the explanation of the various phenomena that uSually attend the eruptions of that celebrated Volcano. Tranflated from the original Jtalian, compoSed by the royal academy of Sciences at Naples, by order of the King of the Two Sicilies. Price 7s, stitch’d.
VIII.	The entire works of Y)t. Thomas Sydenham, newly made English from the originals ; wherein th.e history of acute and chronic dif-caSes, and the. safest and most effectual methods of treatiBg them, are faithfully, clearly and accurately delivered. Illustrated with explanatory and practical notes, from the best medicinal writers. To which is annexed, the author’s life, and a copious index. By fohn Swan, M.D. The fourth edition; Price bound
THE
HISTORY
OF
Mifs LE FEVER,
Letter I.
Sir George Hendon to Lord ClerageI’
I Am glad, my Lord, to find that your foul is not fo uniformly base, as I began to believe it was. Your love for Mifs Le Fever, your little arti-sices to recommend yourfelf to her fa vor, and your mortisication at your ill-fu'ccefs, were all natural to your youth, Vol. II,	B	and
i THiHiSTORyok
and the sanguine difposition you are pose Seffed of. But to overwhelm her with affliction, to hurry a young fellow into defpair, and. tranfgrefs the laws both b“f humanity and your country, cast never be pardoned by either your friend, or your own heart, but upon ample compensation.
To bring back the injured fugitive, is t. duty you owe yourfelf, to wipe out the remembrance of the hoiTdr and misery he must have endured, (by providing him a good living) effential to your future reputation with me: but in order to atone for jour glaring, your alfnost unequalled and actually capital offence, it is incumbent upon you to promote that union, you have hitherto laboured to retard. That Spark of benevolence that still Subsists in your breast will prove the bane of all your enjoyments, unleSs you Satisfy its Just demands by the Conduct I now prescribe.
I am astonished^ that any conSideratibn cjjuid prevail upon you^ to call in So notorious
torious and callosis-hearted a villain tb your astistaiice as Johnfon, had he not fussiciently eVihced the corruption and cruelty of his nature on a late black oc * casion.
1 hope yosir repentance is sincereS and will be found permanent-—^I would therefore fpare you as much as posiible^ but I must forget I am a man, before I can reflect upon fo-. atrocious an actiori with temper, and ceafe to be your friend, when I can forbear condemning and lamenting your ssiare in it. Was it for this purpose, my Lord, that heaven called you to the poffeffion of a plentiful fortune—can you conceive that your intesa iectual faculties were bestowed upon you:, only to enable you to demonstrate, that there is no monster like a human one ?
Do but once think upon the horroi% the anguish, you have prepared for yourfelf, if you have put it beyond your power, to fpeak peace where you alone have been the cruel fpoikr of it. To fee U 'if	f lei
4 The Historv ot
the object of your tenderest affection (whose principles might charm even devils into admiration) blasted at this blooming period by an unmerited calamity, which you are confcious was derived merely frotn yourself could it be endured do you imagine, as ssie strongly ashed you, that the cry of the widow will not prevail against you ; that your proceedings against the innocent will fail to call .down yen-gence upon your head ^
O ! sty to save yourfelf from fuch deep perdition, and plead the impetuofity of youth ; the fatal influence of power, and the dire effects of passion and immorality vyhen let loose but for a moment, if pof-fible to regain, and by degrees re-establish yourfelf in my late good opinion.
As to the hirelings the executioner of yQur unworthy wishes, he should mest af-liiredly fie given up to public justice, if your fate was not fo irrevocably connected. This is the’second time he has forfeited his neck—a fum of money re^
deemed
deemed it before—-but at what a price is he now secured—Lord Cleragfs tainted honour is his happy protection.
Indeed, I am obliged to labour hard for you upon this occasion. Rassinefs, inhumanity, and villainy, are a horrid compound—yet all these have predominated in a foul, that I believed replete with valuable inclinations; and dastied with the stightest tincture only of human frailty. I own, the education of young noblemen contributes largely to infpire them v/ith tyranny and prefumption; siattered for practices they ought to be assiamed of, and extolled for sentiments that are utterly unworthy of them, they at length conceive they are to bear all before them.' To be refused by an humble female, or rivaled fiy the man of limited expectations, is, perhaps, the last mortisication they can fustain: they will fubdue the poor creature, they fancy they love, to evince their arrogance, difdains all bounds, and ruin the being they affect to defpise B 3	to
6 The History op
to gratify their revenge: and having performed actions, for which a lefs noble villain would have fuffered the most ignominious punissiment, meanly hide behind their title, and by a judicious distribution of their fortune rest secure.
I ssiall be impatient to hear the fuccefs of what you promise to undertake, it is a nice and dangerous affair, and must not tranfpire — and ssiou’d you be enabled to ssiake off the weight of your iniquity by Leicester’s redemption, compleat the work, by feeing them happily united.
You have given me a right to be as fe-vere, or what is equally as unpleasant to you, as serious, as I please : and I will admonissi you, that there is an hour approaching, in v/hich you will sind more felicity in the bare recollection of having acted worthily, than all your idle purfuits could bestow, even in the instant of your greatest enjoyment.
I ssiall not now fpeak to many particulars that are yet unanfwered in your letter—.
ter—but if by accomplishing what I trust is the wish of your heart, you render yourfelf the instrument of returning happinefs to this deserving family ; I will make you fenfible of Such enormities in your intentions as well as actual practice, as shall make you lliudder at the retroSpect of your danger, and ineKpressibly rejoice in your great deliverance.
I am,
O Clerage, do I live to hesitate in Subscribing mySelf,
Your friend j
G. Hendon.
Letter II.
Lorti Clerage to Sir George Hendon.
Be fatissied. Sir George Hendon, my punishment, my Sufferings, will not be inadequate to my crimes, however
enormous in your sight.
B 4	Leicester
§	TheHisoryof
Leicester — the late formidable and happy Leicester—how ssiall I dare to tell it—but he is my worthy friend, far, far beyond all human relief, or rather has attained a most glorious deliverance from injuries and persecutions.
The instant I had difpatched my last letter, I stung myfelf into a chaise, and was,conveyed with all possible expedition to Johnfon’s brothers in Kent. He had called there that very morning, and left them with a refolution to take a trip to France.
Remorse affliction, in conjunction with this mortifying piece of information, quite Overcame me; and I could only intreat them to fend a messenger exprefs after him, to recall him on the most important of occasions.
He was found at an inn in Dover, from whence I received the unexpected and heart-wounding intelligence that the poor fellow is no more.
And
4...	.	.4	4...	^	----- ^
And is this the consequence of all my flattering fchemes—the injured Leicester has indeed most effectually efcaped the toils of villainy and injustice—but tell me George, if innocence and virtue are the peculiar care of heaven : why was my Le Fever permitted to incur this most trying of calamities ^
I can never beliold her more-—O, let not death be hereafter esteemed a misfortune ; fince it would prove the everlasting stielterer of the villain, as well as the mighty deliverer of the persecuted and opprested.—To blow out I'ny wretched brains would be an eafy, practicable, tho’ defperate action: but to fustain the complicated evils 1 have incurred—is the master-stroke of courage, and the fubli-mity of refolution.
Yet I will live—difficult as the taflc may be, I will encounter the tender forrow, the deep searching reproaches of the fweet ruined girl—I will fupport her worthy mother—and if my whole fortune B 5	could
10 TheHistorvof
could atone the error of my conduct, how gladly would I resign it all.
To attempt to give you an idea of what I fuffer would be the height of abfurdity—nor is your just resentment, your bitter condemnation, unfelt by the undone
Cleraoe.
Letter III.
From the Same to the Same.
JENNY has just left me in tears of disappointment and apprehension, tho* I have concealed the fatal news in part from her knowledge.
O, Sir, cried ssie, mifs Le Fever will “ never furvive his lofs! I could almost “ break my heart to fee her fo wretched.” Had there been a means of recovering him—1 would have given fuch proofs of my contrition and generofity, as must have silenced not only the most rigid tongue of justice,, but induced you unre-
luctantly
luctantly to have received me to my wonted place in your esteem of friendssiip— for I would have vanquissied—yes,Georg< —your arguments ssiould have had du< weight—I would have vanquished ever my own corrupt heart. Their unior should havto been the darling object of my attention—their comfortable proviston mj whole care, and, to compleat the affair, 1 would have bestowed the precious girl according to her wishes with my own hand—and a perpetual amity should have fubststed amongst us. But now, what is ir my power but unavailing sighs and end-lefs confusion!
Kestored to new life—Leicester is noi only in safe, but recoverable circnm-Slances—the wretch that transacted the infamous businefs, had the cruelty to impose the falsehood of his death updn me, in order to prevent my generous purpose of giving him back to liberty, and his Le Fever.
Hov: will you firudder, when you heat B 6	wherg
T2 The Historv of
where he has lodged him ? a receptacle for the insane, must be a dreadful fituation to a rational and human being—but he tells me there was no other remedy, and that, if I am fo extravagant as to procure his enlargement, I ssiall expose both him and myself to a seandalous prosecution. But shall I fuffer him to languish out his days in fuch inconceivable misery, fron-r fo paultry a consideration } no, if redrefs-ing the injury, cannot obliterate the sense of ill in his breast — I will welcome th^ ignominy I have incurred, as a bleffed exchange for guilt and anguish.—If he loved like me, could he once entertain the contemptible expectation, that self would be capable of fubduing every other feeling—what, should the tears of my l.e Fever continue to flow, to secure me from cenfure, in convenience or fuffering ?— should her foft bofom be for ever deprived of hope and confolation, to save a whole herd of villains from the severest torture?-^! scorn the thought, and therefore,^
Sic
Sir George, you must not be furprifed, if the world ssiould pick a lesson of instruction, and be furnissied with a tale of wretchednefs, at the expence of your once happy friend.
Yet I will proceed with the utmost caution, and, if it be possible, avoid every other condemnation than thofe of friendssiip and confcience.
How ssiall I get him conveyed from Hogfden ? I believe 1 i^nyfelf must ga down,—‘ I ssiould not wonder if defpair and ill treatment ssiould have rendered him as frantic, as the worst patient in the house.
Adieu, George, and allow me, in refpect of my repentance for this time, to add my ufual conclusion of,
Your’s, &c.
Clerage.
/
Letter
xiiJi raisTUKY Of
Letter IV Arthur Johnson to Lord Clerage,
SO, shy Lord, I sind that the very service I have rendered you, at the hazard of my neck, has excluded me from your favor: but however you may feel yourfelf difpofed towards me in your prefent penitential sit—let me conjure you to pay proper attention to yourfelf.
Was ever Inch romantic nonsense heard of—the Lady has offered herself to your acceptance, you say, (the very purpose for which you incited me to turn knave,,) and yet, like a whining fchool-boy, you will part with your fweet-meats to. patch up your reputation, and cry for them all the rest of your days.
Befides, v/hat opinion do you think the Lady must entertain of both your gallantry and love ? Refuse her—cast her off—force her upon another —and in the very moment too, when ssie has an opportunity
(and
Cand IS most sensibly difpofed to embrace it,) to become Lady Clerage—and secure her self from all blame,—It is to purchase his liberty that she now consents—not to gratify any little vanity, ambition, or sickle inclination, that will be bufy in the human heart.
Not to dwell, however, upon what you may call conjectural motives;, let return to your own feelings.
Remember, my Lord, before it is too late, that Sir George Hendon, with all his heroics, could but poorly fupport your languishment when she is irretrievably lost. Have you once considered, what it is to know the object of your dearest affections in the poffession of your rival, and fuch a rival.—O dignity, O refolu-lufion, where are ye fled I
Have 1 not frequently heard you prove, that your heroes, of every denomination, are but a tame kind of madmen.-----Ge-
nerosity, compassion, benevolence, are very pretty expressions, and without doubt
tickle
i6 The Historv of
tickle the ear, but how far would they go -towards healing a wounded heart.
You cannot upon this occasion fufpect me of interestednefs—what advantage ssiould I derive from your happinefs— taking me in my villainous, my tinfocial character: but how far foever I may have been drawn from the letter of integrity^— love, was my first seducer, (a passion whose influence you are no stranger to,) my second, friendssiip—and Lord Clerage, the object of it.
I do not meanly she for a reconciliation----it is for obliging, not offending,
that I am cast out—I can patiently endure.—But beware how you overcharge your own foul.
I am, tec.
H. j o h n s o u..
Letter
Letter V.
Lord Clerage to Arthur Johnson:,
Y' E S, Johnfon, yoi*. well know the way to my heart, and I take ssiame to myfelf, for having divided a fault with you, that was wholly my own. you have, my friend, awakened me to a due sense of that happinefs that now awaits my acceptance, and Sir George’s pen is exercised in vain.
A letter, I fuppofe of honest exhortation, lies at this moment on the table before me unopened.—I will not be warped from my purpose, I will not be deluded from the delightful path I have attained.— My Le Fever’s lips have pronounced the happy invitation, nor will I fail to make one more grand pussi, to accomplissi what I have fo long sighed for.
But, Arthur, you ought not to have t^'ken fuch cruel steps with refpect to poor
Leicester.
i8 The HfsTORy or-
Leicester. I will only call on my Le Fe^ ver, and inform her of all I have done for her fweet sake, or, in other words, com^ mimicate the fond hope of beholding her lover once again, before I restore him to. liberty.
My Le Fever, Arthur, for are you not my witnefs, that I have paid the stipulated price.
“ Deliver, Mr. Leicester, said ssie, from “ the miferable state to which he is now “ reducedand if yo-u can accept oS me,. (charming creature, my own foul is not a more valuable posteffion) “ I will marry “ you, live with you, love and blefs you.’*
That I was furprifed by an ugly concatenation of circumstances at that period, into fuch over-strained generosity, that I declined what I would almost die to obtain, I cannot deny; nay, I madly promised to promote, what I beyond meafure abhor.—But when I recollect how* defperate an appearance matters bore
when
Miss L D h L V L R, 15
when the rash vow escaped me, I ceafe tc wonder at it.
My amiable girl half distracted—the priest out of my reach, it was my interest to footh, to flatter, to confole her— but as the scene is fo happily changed, and the propofed terms fo perfectly conr plied with—it is impossible to adhere— in short, Arthur, we will talk no mort of it.
If this miferable thread of the line% •vejiment of Aztrn had never fallen ir my Le Fever’s way, I had now been ir posteffion of the highest blifs, and tht approved friend of Sir George Hendon Instead of which, I am involved in ar .ocean of mortisication and perplexity.
I am, &c.
C l. E R A o R.
L E TT E S
20 X H E IdL I S T O R y © F
Letter VI.
From the Same io the Same.
TA K E an account of my visit to my beloved Le Fever.
Muffed up in my great coat, 1 enquired for Mrs. Stubs, and was shewn into her apartment agreeable to my wishes.
Madam^ said I, to the forbiding countenanced (tho’ truly good-natured woman) I would fpeak with Mifs Le Fever in your parlor, if you will please to permit me— I have news for her that will be highly grateful, but muist be communicated in private.
It is not for me, my Lord, returned she, to comment either upon your present request, or late behaviour: my parlor, I do affure you, is much at your service, if the young Lady has no objection: to your proposal.
She will not—she cannot. Madam, cried I a little impatiently, if you only make herproperly acquainted with it—fufpicious
and
and officious fool, added I, when ssie had shut the door after her; what bright apprehension can now have seized there ?
The dear creature guested my bustnefs^ and stew down in an instant.
Have my prayers been heardj my Lord, cried she, the moment she beheld me^ is my most anxious wish accomplished ?
Mr. Leicester, Madam, returned I, is both safe and well (in these cafes, Arthur, it is not neceffary to keep strictly to the truth) and will be in town this very even-ing.
Her joy-^well Leicester, was the object of that you know. But I cannot fay her gratitude quite anfwered my expectations—she seemed to regard my conduct, as mere matter of atonetnent.
I said a vast deal, in order to convince her that I had no hand in his kidnapping-^ but in fpite of all my rhetoric, I could perceive strong traces of incredulity in her countenance. She was however lb gracious, as to yield to my intretaies, to
conceal
i2 TkEHlSTORYOf'
conceal the cruel fufpicions ssie was pleaf-ed to entertain of me from her favourite; tho’, i am afraid, there was much more consideration for him than your humble servant, even in that conceffion.
I was, you may be fure, very impatient to kriow what I had to depend upon— but to introduce the important fubject; 'required much addrefs and delicacy.
I think. Madam, said I, I have heard you say Mr. Leicester is unprovided for. 1 am forry, it is not at prefent in my power to evince the sincerity of my incli-^ station to serve him. A friend of mine indeed is lately dead; wsho poffeffed the perpetual advowfoii of a living, fomewhat about three hundereii pounds a year. I know the family have not yet intrusted the temporary poffessioh of it to any one, and that I could immediately procure it for your friend; but then it is not the certainty I Could wish, as there is a sen now almost eighteen, who will perhaps require the resignation, fb foon as he is duly qualisied—>
unlesc
iinlefs he ssiould be able to obtain (as I find he has a strong defire) fome other ■genteel provifion in the intermediate time,» you will take the trouble, however, to mention it to him, and let me know hiS sentiments.
I dare believe. Sir, said ssie with visible pleafure, that Mr. Leicester would be extremely gsad to accept of your Lord-strip’s patronage and protection : he hds both an honest, and a grateful heart—and is he will be ignorant of the quarter froni whence his injuries—
Hold, Mifs Le Fever, said I, eveil ad mittin^ that I was ever fo culpable—» wloen tJoe wicked rh'nn turns from his veickediiefs, to talk to you in your own -pious strain, does he hot sind favotir with the most Supreme of Beings 1 What then, may not one mortal hope from a-nother?—You shake a wide distinction, it is plain, between the hour of fupplica-tion, arid the attainment of your wishes— but toy memory is retentive, my expectations
24 TheHistorvof
rations high raised—I have performed the undertaking you incited me to, and doubt not, but the proposed gratification will be mine.
You have seen the fairest shy obfcured by dark heavy clouds—you have seen— but nothing can give you an idea of the change the fe words produced in the most lovely of features.
I acknowledge, my Lordj said ssie; you have the advantage of me—that I made you the extravagant offer of my hand and perfon I will not attempt to deny, nor, if,you can fubmit to demand them, shall they be withheld. It would be to very little purpose I am convinced, to remind you of your profeffions upon that shocking occasion—how you disclaimed the facrisice, the—but I have done, and will abide by-your determination-r-as I foresee it is the only means of securing that worthy, unfortunate, young gentleman, from farther violence—and henceforth—i her fweet mouth, Arthur was a little convulsed
\»ulSed from the stubborn nefs of her heart —I will be only yours.
1 kissed her hand, and played a thou, sand rapturous pranks wlsich I was unable to restrain : nor did I once resent (tho’ I sensibly felt the ungracious stroke) her bold acknowledgment, that it was for the parfon’s fake alone she consented to be mine.
One thing howeTer, my Lord, rcfum-ed she, I have to premise—I will not abruptly break off with my unhappy friend —he shall be settled in the country-weaned from me by degrees—and I will endeavour, in the mean time,todetatch my affections as much as posiible from him—■ to save myfelf from the moil horrid of perjuries.
What can she mean, Johnfon—are then all your convenient, your interested iinatches preceded by fo foul an action ?— Twill read the ceremony over to-morrowmorning, and make myself thoroughly acquainted with the nature of the engage-VoL. II.	C	ment—^
2 6	The Historv of
ment—but this, dear creature, has most singular notions of integrity and honour. And fo ssie had need, my friend, when I can refolve to marry her, even without her own consent—but I cannot help flattering myfelf, that fo violent a paffion, on my part, must meet with a decent return ; when once it becomes her duty, yoiV know—there can be no doubt about it.
Ishave obtained leave to repeat my visit fo foon as 1 please, and we are to concert the most plausible me^lfures for reconciling Leicester to our Suture views and intentions.
How much I am indebted to you, car? never be expreffed—you have given me more than life, consequently my warmest friendssiip v/ili be ever,
Yours,
Cleragr.
Letter
— . —---
Letter VII.
Mifs L E F E V E R to Mifs Winter,
DI D I not mention to you, my deaf Polly, on fome former occasion, that I was not of the number of thofe, who conceive themselves marked out by providence for peculiar wretchednefs—but alas ! that confidence has nearly forsaken me—I am not in any degree equal to the trials I am called to fustate, and, without fupernatural assistance, must fink under them.
I concluded my last letter in the frenzy of defpair: but it was not even then, at its utmost height ; for, would you believe it, all mild and timid as I am by nature—> I stew to the well known author of my misery, and offered to facrisice myfelf for Leicester’s redemption.
That villainy and humanity can exist in the fame bofom—but, however great the seeming contradiction, in Lord Clerage’s C 2	case.
The Historv of
cafe, at that period it was most incon-testibly evident. My appearance struck him with horror, and my language searched him into contrition.
He for feme time used his artful endeavours to confole me, without making the concession my heart was set upon-—but finding all he said only aggravated my shfferings, he was at last fo intirely oyer-come, that he gave me the strongest affu-rances, that my wishes should be accomplished, and has actually been indefati-cable in effecting this humane engagement.
But by relieving _m,e on the one stand, he has destroyed me on the other.
His goodnefs, his mercy, his benevolence, my Dear, are merely tranfient: and as he no longer beholds me in the deplorT able agonies that shook his daring refolution—-he already begins to deceive himfelf with the preposterous expectation, that jabfence will wear out the favourable inv
freffion^
4.4 4.	.	.4	.4	4.4	4^	^	^
preffions I have received of Mir. Leicester’s merit.
On this fatal prefumption, on this abfurd hope, or more properly from the ir-restrainablenefs 6f his own difposition, which he mifcalls love—he has had the meannefs, the cruelty, to wave his own generous professions, and demand the performance of mine—that were alone extorted by misery and anguissi.
But 1 will be resigned—-bitter and grievous as the compliance will prove to my foul, I am refolved to carry it into execution—-it is the only method, my dear Polly, (tho’ you must confefs a very delperate one,) to preserve the man I love from injustice and persecution. By this exalted stroke of female heroifm, (for fuch you must allow me to call it,) my poor mother’s circumstances will be rendered eafy, Lady Catherine’s fickle friendssiip restored—your Le Fever’s head adorned with jewels, her steps furrounded with magnificence—and whilst all these C 3	externals
3Q The History of
externals flatter her beholding friends— may they never have one sad idea of the wretchednefs that will corrode her miserable heart.
His want of delicacy, his breach of generofity, almost distracts me—is there in nature fuch horrid felfiSlmefs—can any human being exult in the possession of the mere covering of a broken and dejected fpirit.? Mr. Leicester-—how will he fupport the no lefs unexpected than unjustifiable treatment I shall fee him once more, however—and we will look no further at prefent—the profpect is abundantly too dreadful to be dwelt upon.
Neither my mother, nor Mrs. Leefon, have the most distantapprehenfion of his. Lordship’s villainy—nor durst I venture to give them any intimation of it, for fear of incurring the fufpicion of vanity and ingratitude, fo that he will at this day have the merit with them, of being his great and noble deliverer. And as things are likely to take the melancholy turn,
I have
a	.J	4...	4-.	4.	4.-4	,	4.^	.
1 have defcribed, it will be most pruden for me to remain for ever filent, relpect ing the whole transaction.
Is there no way of efcaping this last this greatest evil ?
I have just communicated the goo( news, this Lord has brought me with re gard to poor Mr. Leicester, to my bd friends. They congratulated me with th' utmost warmth—proftfTed to participat nly returning happinese, and I was obliger to sink my depression deep, to elude thei penetration. They perfectly defied thi strange man of quality for his humanity his disinterestednefs, his greatncfs of foul ~ for was it not a rival, an approved as fuc cefsful rival, that he had been the instru ment of restoring, to the utter exclusio] of himfelf and every ssiaddow of hope— but the felicity of the woman he loved was apparently much dearer to him thai his own.
Specious, barbarous, irrefolute mor tal—can 1 deliver myfelf up—yet what i C 4	th
TheHistorvof
the peace of a mere individual, to the convenience, the satisfaction of a multitude—my mother—the already too much injured Leicester, are deserving of the prodigious facrisice, and I will not complain.
I must, my dear girl, (even while I confefs that I believe you incapable of fuch cruel infult,) I must caution you never to mention the title, fortune, or other fatal acquifition I may obtain, with the fmallest degree of approbation—they will be only fo many stabs to my bleeding, Suffering, heart—from their proving continual mementos of that calm, that bleffed tranquillity, Leicester, and a bare competence would have given me.
I hope to See him to-morrow,—Adieu, my good girl—I fly the cruel recollection, that we are only to meet this once, to b» forever Separated.
I am, &c.
C. Le F^ver.
Letter
M I s s L E F E V E R. ;
Letter VIII.
Lord Clerage to Arthur Johnson.
N' O W, Johnfon-,' I fiimmons you i attend me to Hogfdon, to imc the infamous work you wrought there, i my service.
I did not leave town till the evenin drew in. Darknefs is more eligible tha light to thofe whofe deeds are eviU know not what kind of journey you had ( it, but, for my part, I never was ingage fo unpleasant a one in my whole life: fa ssiall I acknowledge it, I was fo litt minded, as to shrink at even the bare ide of appearing before a man, whofe wrong were fo clamorous against me: and fc the honour of virtue I mention it, it wa the confcioufnefs that I had the grace t redrefs them, that alone fupported m through the whole fad scene,
C 5	Neve
34 The Historv of
Never was highwayman more artfully dilguised; at least as far as the draw-up cape of my great coat and stouched hat would admit; for I elid not think it safe to strain any farther—fo much for my drefs—my conveyance was a hackney coach—and my attendances—the pleastng fuggestions of a guilty confcience.
When arrived, I foon made a Ipeech to the satisfaction of the keepers—silence and secrecy were my card—and the ufual perfuasives my naethod . of proceeding. It was not long before I was conducted to the difmal apartment. Attend the description of the deplorable condition, to which you and I wantonly reduced an un-Dssending fellow-creature; and if ever you undertake a friendly office again, have the humanity to fuffer the unhappy object of your difpleafure, to put a period to an existence, which, in the place I have fo recently vifited, is beyond expression a :urfe, if accompanied with common fenfibility.
fibility. Thus the best institutions may be perverted to the vilest purposes.
An ill-looking fellow, with a miserable taper, was my gentleman ussier to a room that had a gloomy appearance, which was unfpeakably heightened by the object it contained.
Pale, faint, and with every token ot the bitterest defpair, lay the poor fuffering Leicester—stretched out at his length on an old dirty mattrefs—his feet were fastened down with cords, and his hands strongly fettered.
His fixed features underwent not-the-least change on my approach—intirely hopelefs what was worth his observation.
Sir, said I, with all tlie tender pity that • was due to his condition, you must note be furprifed to sind a friend in your extremity I know your story, and have received authority on one concession to restore you to all you hold dear.
It is too late, replied he in a weak, law,' voice—my faculties are all exhausted—■
C 6	not
TheHistorvof
not even hope remains—therefore credulity is needlefs.
I am forty, Sir, said I, to find you fa insensible to what I conceived would have' been glad tidings—who in your situation would not eagerly extricate themselves; efpecially, if their safety and liberty were of the same importance to the most lovely woman on eartli
Ah 1 cried he wildly-—but the gloomy steadinesa instantly returning—it is im-poffible, added he—and yet paufing a few moments—you seem to mean me,
well---do you know any thing of mifs
Le Fever ? does ssie ?
It is by a friend of hers, said I, that I am sent; it. is by a friend of hers that I am employed.
He endeavoured to jump up at this information, but the cruel cords made him
foon repent his raptures-1 cut them in
pieces—and relieved him from that bondage that I ssiuddered.only to behold.
Compose
CompoSe yourfelf. Sir, said I, and encourage every happy expectation, mifs Le Fever will rejoice to fee you.
He darted his ghastly eyes upon me—I was obliged to repeat the flattering affu-rance, and as belief began to steal upon his heart, his features affumed a more placid cast.— But, Sir, refumed I, there is one condition that I am bound to propose.
Make your own terms, cried he, every thing but Mifs Le Fever, (what will become of me, Johnfon?) who is infinitely dearer to me than life itfelf, ssiall be yours.
It is not to be expected, returned I, that you ssiould not feel the utmost horror and resentment at the treatment you have fustained. But can you accept of the services I mean to render you as a full compensation : and whilst you blefs your deliverer, forbear to complain of your betrayer : 1 have reafons for this request.
You have most effectually secured him, said the too charitable fufferer, by your
humanity
►S The History of*
lumanity and goodnefs, from all accufa-ion: and I now bind myfelf, by the most acred tyes, never to divulge one circum-:ance of his unaccountable cruelty to a eing that never injured any one.
He is indeed, Arthur, an Ifraelite., and ppears to be free from all guile—nor ould my foul refuse acquaintance with im, if he was any other than the lover of ly Le Fever.
We returned to London. Our conver-Ltion on the road was fuch as might be spected—he is very happy in his ex-reffions, tho’, at prefent, a kind of hor»-d fpectacle to the fight. I set him down : the houfe I had prepared for his recep-on, and I have great reafon to believe e has too confused an idea of all that has appened to him, ever to be able to put together, if he was ever fo maliciousty ifpofed—-for he neither knows the part ' the town he was carried from, nor the le he was set down at this night-—fo let
the
Miss d d h d V d k. 39
the black transaction sink into total oblivion.
I ssiall pay my perfonal compliments to him in the morning, in the new character of Mrs. Leefon’s friend, and will do every thing but one to make him happy—if he has not actually lost his senses, can I have much to fear ? I ssiall steep better this night than many preceding ones, and let what will be the consequence, neither you nor I ought to regret the justice we have done the injured and unhappy.
I am, &c.
Clerage.
Letter IX.
From the Same to the Same.
My vifit j Mr. Johnfon, is paid, and I would advise you to prosecute your travelling fcheme: you and I are not fo well calculated, as we imagined,
for
40 The Historv of
for evetlasting friends. All is at an end with me, I am not fo accomplissied a devil as I even believed myfelf to be—I have made the sacrifice—the last conflict is over—and Hendon ssiall receive me to folitude—and, if polsible, tranquillity.
But that you may not conclude it was a fmall matter that fubdued me; nor have it in your power to complain, that I broke hands with you abruptly, I will give you the particulars of yesterday at large.
I found the young fellow very little improved in his looks■—wild and meagre, his very afpect terrified me, nor could I fupport the recollection of the feene I had been witnefs to the day before, without insinite confusion.
Are you. Sir, said he, Mrs. Leefon’s stiend, that I was taught to expect would :all upon me; and will you convey me :o my dear Mifs Le Fever ? Has ssie not Dcen affected by my absence, will not my •eturn be grateful to her?—My head is rasher
X J... T i-. XV.
ther weak—recollection is painful to me—but I ssiall recover by her conversation, and revive by her tendernefs.
You ssiall take a chair. Sir, said I, and I will go before and prepare Mifs Le Fever for your arrival. I accordingly hurried away to Mrs. Leefon’s, and begged to fpeak once more with the young Lady in private.
She appeared.
I informed her, Leicester was on his way to Mount-street, and befought her to conduct herself with her ufual refolution.
She trembled—she was greatly agitated. You will be present, Sir, saidshe^— I have given you a right to request what I thus voluntarily offer—our private meetings must now terminate for ever,
O 1 how was my foolish, fond, believing heart tranfported by this unexpected piece of condefeention—but before I could reply—Leicester was at the door.
It was torture, it was distraction—but could not be avoided—*.he retained her
hand
:2 The Historv Of
and after the most tender and affectiou-te embrace, all which I was a happy wit” efs to.
I am now completely fatissied, cried e, and let the memory of what is past erish for ever. The ruffians that be-•ayed me, managed very dexteroufly; )r if I was difpofed to proclaim my Tongs, (there is comfort for us culprits) ssiould be utterly unable to six them—■ ut it was the condition on vrhich I ob-Lined my deliverance, never to corn-lain ; and as I have, been fo short a time afent, and m) connexions in London fo mitced, it will be no difficult matter to Lish Up the whole affair.
I hope. Sir, said Mifs Le Fever, that aur fufferings are all at an end—that endeman has a proposal to make to you, lat cannot but be agreeable.
TIre living was then brought u pon tlie caret—he was perfectly tranfported.
O ! Sir, exclaimed he—what unhoped >r felicity have you conferred upon me—
You,
You, Madam, will not furely refuse to augment, to participate the blessing. If , you ever entertained a favourable opinion of me, if you ever intended to honour me with your hand, do not now with-hold it—help me. Sir, assist me with your generous eloquence to obtain this greatest, this most effential of points, and never was there a being more completely happy, than I ssiould be rendered.
This, you are sensible, must be a very delightful turn and request to me.
Mifs Le Fever’s countenance was instantly over-fpread with tlie deepest ati-guilh ; and she was seized with a strong and most alarming sit, I think they call it convulsive.
Leicester, the horrid looking, the ossi-eious Leicester, held her in his arms—I fetched in Mrs. Stubbs—Jenny happened very fortunately to be below—and we all at length, with great dissiculty, brought her to herself.
She
p The Historv or
She desired Leicester, fo foOn as ssie as fomewhat recovered, to go up to her other and Mrs. Leefon, as they wanted uch to fee him, promising to follow in short time; but charged him on no )nfideration to alarm them with the ention of her difordef.
The moment Leicester retired, she in-eated to fpeak with me alone.
My Lord, said she, I sind I have en-red into an engagement, I am unable > perform—you have beheld the dread-il effects of constraint upon my constitu-on, and I would die in silence, if I had Dt the tenderest of mothers to claim my mention. Let me beseech you. Sir, be-)re it is too late, to consider what mife-q what wretchednefs, you would be the Jthor of, by persisting in your prefent urpofe. My early death, (which would ifallibly be the cafe,) would be the least art of what you would have ro anfwer )r.—My mother, Mr. Leicester, would ot their unmerited fufferings be duly
punished.
punifiied. I behold you at prefent with horror and detestation; I cannot conquer them, nor ssiall the acknowledgment be any longer fuppreffed; but you have it in your power to intitle your self to my thanks, my gratitude, my best approbation. Only fpare my perfon, and your Lordssiip ssiall be master of my every action : I will never marry the poor unfortunate Mr. Leicester—! will never take one step without your sanction and direction—it is my own life, my dear mother’s—-and—I will not name him to offend you.—Will you not then be merciful ?— Can you, my Lord, resist your own natural humanity, and the earnest folicitations of a woman you prosefs to love.
Live, live, my beloved Mifs Le Fever, cried I, with the tenderest empha-fis, live and be happy. I now abfolve you from every hateful tie. The temporary living ssiall be Mr. Leicester’s—and do you fulfill (it stuck in my throat notwithstanding all my contrition,) his utmost
46 The History of
most desire—you ssiall never more receive any interruption from me. So saying, I ' hurried out of the house, lest I ssiould u-gain relapse into my odious extravagance.
And now, Mr. Jolinfon, I leave you to iudge, if all correfpondence between you md me must not terminate. I cannot arook raillery, and you are incapable of aeholding my conduct in any other than i ridiculous light.
The remittances I promised you ssiall ie duly made—it is from principle, not towardice, that I forbear to reproach you vith what is past—may we both live to :epent—that tho’, difunited here, we may neet each other, and my fweet, lovely
Fever in that futurity, where crimes nd criminals can have no place.
I fancy I have given you enough of the infortunate
Clerage.
•Litter
Letter X.
Lord Clerage to Sir George Hendon.
St. Albanj.
N''OW, now, my worthy Hendon, you may rely upon feeing me— every thing is as you could wissi—the conflict over, and London beyond my utmost view,
I have taken my leave, perhaps for ever, of every vain purfuit: I have bid adieu to the pleafures of gaiety, and the .delights of revelling: I have wassied my hands of iniquity : I have torn myfelf from the fpot I doated upon:—-1 have resigned Such hopes I have fore-gone Such ex-pectations-r—but what is it I have not leSt behind me, except the cuisie of confciouS-neSs, and the racks oS SenSibility. Well, well, am I not in the high road to Dim-stable, and ssiall I not proceed from thence to Sir George Hendon’s ?—Does not the most Sriendly reception—the most humane attention, and every rational amuSement,
await
I
await me ? Lady Hendon—but my wounds will bleed afressi when I behold lier—her sex, her perfections—the domestic happinefs ssie communicates, are very unsit encounters for a man in my circumstances. I must have an apartment, m.y friend, that will seclude me from every female—and you, and you only, will be my welcome visitant.
Yet I am determined if possible to tear her lovely image from my heart—I will enjoy the beauty, the innocence of your rural world *, and be the Damon and Cor-rydon of the village.
And can I then forget tlie Abbey ad» venturer—there, alas, is the rock on which my miserable peace will be perpetually fplitting. What a countenance—^ how justly and strongly was the foul depicted in each glowing feature. Yet what a contemptible wretch, to be whining for the only woman, perhaps, that would have difdained my addreffes. Am I not young Do I not poffefs uncommon advantages,
vantages, fortune, title, vivacity; and we will look about us, Hendon, and not only divert, but difpel this troublefome paf-sion. Has not the gentle Romeo fre-r quently excited our mirth ? the dying Va-zanees our ridicule ? and ssiall we not rally our modern Enamorato out of his languissiments ?
That there has been puppies in every century, is evident, no lefs from the lightest, than the foberest page. The witchcraft of love, was not at all times resistible, even with heroes, senators, and great philofophers—and yet I am very i"nuch inclined to believe, that none of your ladies, in ancient story, ever equalled my Le Fever.
And are all her incomparable perfections to be bestowed upon •
A distempered mind is a much worse disease, than a distempered brain—harSn and severe difcipliae will relieve the one, but enstames the other.
VoL. II.	D	How
X xuJi xJ.ioiC/K.y Ut
How ssiall we amuse ourselves—yout lady, I am told, is a rational being, and promotes her hushand’s pleafure, tho’ unconnected with her own. We will ramble to the utmiost verge of your e-state-—fmoke with the p^on, and drink with the hind.
I must, now I recollect myself, inform lady Catharine of our common misfortune—misfortune did I say—how abfurS the comparifon—she, George, has only lost the gratification of pride—whilst I—
I rejoice to think I am fo far on my . way to your happy mansion—the town, the town is become a howling wildernefs in my imagination—1 have flown—but to what purpole-—from the shaft of defpair, and the sting of undying love.
I have many things to tell you, that will astonish you—my tranfgressions have been great—but my repentance, my conquest-—
My chaise is at the door—we will read this wild epistle (for I fancy I shall reach
you
you pretty much at the fame time,) in one of your most gloomy shades—am incapable of remembering either what I ' ought to write, or have written, except that I am
&c.
Clerage.
Letter XI.
'	t
Mifs L E Fever io Mifs Winter.
a g I ^ HUS have 1 told you every par-JL ticular, my dear Polly, of the happy turn in my affairs. And I have only to add, that Mr. Leicester is now in actual posteffion of ■ his temporary cure— and has great reafon to hope it will be rendered a permanent one.
My Lord’s generofity has enabled him to be very importunate upon the fubject
* Mere repetition of letters, ibr which reafon it is fupprelTed.
Da	I hinted
I hinted to you; my mother and Mrs. Leefon are entirely in his interest, and what may be tlie consequence, is impof-sible for me to fay,
I own, I think it would have a lingular, if not an abfolute, encouraging appearance with refpect to Lord Clerage, if I was to decline an union, I have been sc) bold as to acknowledge, my heart and foul to be Set upon, when he himSelf has lb strongly recommended it. But it is an awSul change, and was very foreign to my preSent intention—Mr. Leicester has, however. Suffered So exceedingly upon my account, that I owe him every recompence—my mind is So agitated, that you must excuSe my Saying any more—except to caution you not to be SurpriSed, if the next news you receive, is, that I am no longer Kitty Le Fever, tho’ as perfectly gs ever
Your’s, &c.
C. L E Fever.
*•	Lettsr
XVJl 1 a 3 X.J	X	T
Letter XII.
From the Same to the Same.
Brickley.
Your congratulations, my dear girl, were highly grateful to me. My fpirits were fo diseompofed by the important change in my condition, that my mother kindly offered her service to make you acquainted with it
Our parting with the worthy Mrs. Leefon and Mrs. Stubbs, sat heavy upon rny heart for fome time,; but the fmiling satisfaction that ssione forth in my mother’s afpect, fo much fuperior to all I could have expe^ed, gradually harmonised my foul, and communicated the most flattering and delightful of hopes. She is defirous, I do affure you, of an opportunity of presenting her new and approved relation, to his old friend Mifs Winter; I therefore intreat you will let us fee you * Neither of which letters are inferted.
D 3	as
54 TheHistorvof
as foon as possible, and that in the mean time, you will be abundantly careful of yourfelf for-our fakes.
Your father’s diforder may continue for many months; to leave him, I own would be unnatural; but should any change take place, you furely would not think of livins; at fuch a cruel distance from us.
Our habitation is large and commodious—and its situation to the last degree unexceptionable. My mother is naturally chearful—my hufDarid’s difposition you are no stranger to; and when you add your sincere friend to the company, can you not conceive, that we tnight derive unfpeakable felicity from our union. I will not, however, enter into a de-feription of the conveniency and advantages v/e are poffeffed of, lest you should be tempted to call my veracity in question ; to exaggerate beauties, and aggravate deformities, is no uncommon practice, where interest or prejudice governs i	the
the pen; you ssiall visit us, my girl, and judge for yourfelf.
Sometimes, indeed, v/hen I look forward to the precarioufnefs of our present possessions, I am ssiocked and alarmed. But Mrs. Leefon affures us of our safety in fuch positive terms, that Mr. Leicester and my mother are entirely undoubting.
It is plain, my Polly, that this Lord Clerage is capable ofTiotli cruelry and injustice, yet we must neverthelefs acknowledge, that he is no stranger to generosity and humanity; great were the evils he brought upon us, but has he not made us all possible recompence.
I own, when I reflect upon Lady Catharine’s conduct, his Lordssiip’s loses a large portion of its enormity in my estimation. He had a gratification to obtain—her Ladyssiiple rigor and inflexibility—what could they proceed from ?
Did ssie not consign me to danger and fuffering," upon the Slightest offence—■ D 4	her
her sex alone might have taught her a more tender lesion. Had I renounced her protection for Mr. Leicester’s sake ; had I proved ungrateful, or prefuming upon her indulgence, I ssiould have acquitted her of all blame—but I only fought to relieve the misery of fo near and dear a relation, as not to have loved, compaffionated, and assisted, would have betrayed me, unworthy even of life itself, and devoid of all sensibility.
This was my tranfgression, and you are well acquainted with my punifhment: yet this very woman fo outrageous, fo mercilefs in her resentment, could, from pride, offer to bestow upon this highly offending object, seven thousand pounds to recommend her to nobility. Yes, seven thousand pounds were ready to intitle her to a fuperstuous settlement; but not one farthing to have preserved her from vice or penury.
It is all pash however, and ssiould be forgotten *, but the too retentive and feel-
ing
ing foul will not always rest—and there are hours, in which the cruel fccne of being driven out by her Ladyship, fug-gests itfelf fo strongly to my imagination, that 1 am unable to restrain ail those paf-sions, it first gave rife to.
What providence means to do with us, is an anxious, tho’ prefumptuous enquiry; I am fenfible every situation has its uncertainty, but the lofs of our provision is not only a very possible, but a very probable contingence. 1 know my own strength of mind, but have reafon to apprehend, that poor Mr. Leicester is not altogether fo well fuited to the exercise of adversity—and what pangs should I endure upon his, and my dear mother’s account.—O Polly come, and save me from these embitterino; reflections.
This is rather an uncommon stile fora bride—a happy bride, as I may most justly call myfelf; but there is fuch a mixture of good and evil, of joy and grief, D 5	in
in my destiny, that I know not which ought to be most predominant.
Lord Clerage left London, they tell me, in great difeontent, (these young gentlemen—how ill they broke the stightest disappointment,) and profeffes to fuffer much more for my sake, than I flatter myself is literally true. May he sind that felicity in his future connexions, he has had the justice to bestow on me.
Mrs. Leefon has made me a prefent of a handfome piece of plate, and promises to favour us with her company in the country, if ssie lives till next fummer—a very precarious dependance at her time of life—tho’ indeed, it is the cafe with refpect to all human dependances, except where the heart and affections are as strongly united, as are those of my dear Polly’s and her,
&c.
C. Leicester,
N. B. T his letter isTucceeded by an abridg* ment of a whole two years correfpon-
dence.
dence, as by the little variety and unin terestingnefs of the fubjects, the reade: v/ould have derived but fmall entertain ment from its publication.
Letter XIII.
Lord Clerage to Sir George Hendokt.
FOrgive me, my ever valuable George and you, my obliging Lady Hen don, that I have made fo unworthy j return for all your kindnefs, as to elop< from your indulgent and hofpitabie roof madly to launch a second time on tha great ocean, the world.
Had I followed the dictates either o right reafon, or your friendly advise, i am sensible I ssiould still have ssiunned tiu dangerous encounter; but let your ap prehensions, your tender concern for me wholly fubside, and be affured I am ut terly unworthy both of the one and tin other.
D si	"I wil
\
I will tear off the mash, for it is become beyond meafure intolerable, and difclofe fome blameable particulars which I have had the mean artifice, even in my hours of confession, to conceal from your knowledge.
You may remember, that when my disappointments drove me from London, I sent you word from St. Alban’s, that I intended to make your houfe my happy affyium.
At that period. Sir George, I rather deceived myself, than you: it was my intention, it w'as ,my refolution—but I had no fooner difpatched my unmeaning, incoherent letter, than all the fury I had fo long endeavoured to fupprefs, burst forth, and I became but one remove from an abfolute lunatic.
What have I done, cried I, abandoned my last, my dearest hopes—it cannot be—1 will indeed, never more call in a villain to my assistance—but I cannot leave her fo abruptly. I will difguife myself—I
will
will watch all their motions—ssiall I patiently endure the racks and tortures of a wounded fpirit, whilst they are revelling in the excefs of felicity. No, this head of hair (viewing myself in theglafs,) ssiall no longer distinguissi me from the most fober race of mortals—a wig will favour my wissies, consequently is a most destr-able acquisition.
I immediately fought out a miserable barber—underwent the operation—purchased a little demure bob—and without the least precaution to prevent my taking cold, returned in a few hours to London.
I wrote to you with diffembled compofure; in order to amuse you with a notion, that I had called at Clark’s, (our old fchool-fellow,y and told you, I would be with you within the fortnight.
I had formed a variety of fchemes, to introduce myself at Mrs. Leefon’s, nor do I know what mifchief I might have effected, if I had been permitted to carry any one of them into execution. But the
lofs
i rt ii XX	yj s
lofs of my hair gave me fo severe a cold, that 1 verily believed I ssiould have lost my eyes—it, however, foon ssiewed itfelf to be a St. Anthony’s sire, and settled on one side of my face.
When I found It neceffary to put riiy-felf under the care of fome experienced perfon, I sent for Dr. Broadwater, with whom I recollected your worthy and sedate countryman. Freeman, was then a pupil.
He gave me good attention, treated my diforder judicioussy, but the redness on my cheek did not wear off for fome time after I arrived at your seat—^I forget what false reafon I theft assigned for it.
I gave myself to the doctor for a decent private man, of fome little property ; and contrived to have frequent conversations on various fubjects with Freeman, in the course of which I diseovered, that he was poffeffed of every requisite for my purpose.
I, at
I, at length, took an opportunity of enquiring into his circumstances, and found them limited and unpromifmg to my heart’s content. For he had no view, beyond engaging himself as an assistant to fome one of the faculty in the army or navy. I cast about for many days, yet was unable to hit upon any plausible method of rendering him serviceable to me—when it struck my whimsical fancy, that to six him at Brickley, in his own profession of an apothecary, might be a lucky article.
I would gladly have given myself to him as a partner, and, let me tell you, many partnerssiips have been patched up on no better foundation—1 the money, he the shill, but was afraid of detection. Nor is there a more convenient character under the fun, for running in and out a houSe unquestioned,, than the physician, Surgeon, or apothecary. The first, I was most Sensible, was a stroke or two too high for Brickley, and the second no
Ids
lefs fuperior to the abilities I was master of; for to affume a consequential look, and set a broken bone, is not equally practicable.
The humble apothecary was a fphere,
I think, I ssiould have ventured to have moved in, if my knowledge of your country customs, had not convinced me of the neceffity of uniting the several branch- . es, when at a distance from the metropolis. I therefore wifely determined he ssiould embark alone, and that I would vifit him at fome future period, as a friend, boarder, or whatever would wear the best face of probability.
I accordingly observed to him one day, what a pity it was, he ssiould leave England ; and, as if by accident, defcrib-ed the many advantages that would accrue from his fettling in fome little town— and having mentioned two or three places, with the addrefs you know I am capable of, dwelt boldly upon Brickley, as the most eligible—offered to be his friend-—'
and
^ ~ — —----------------- ^
and sent him down at my own expcnce ^ to reconnoitre.
Every thing fucceeded to my wissi—a reputable perfon of the faculty v/as greatly wanted, as the man who at that period, from necessity was their every thing, was little better than a horse doctor.
I advanced him live hundred pounds upon his own bond—a house v/as taken— the modest furniture foon conveyed into their refpective places, and Freeman, with a most grateful and honest heart, strutting behind his counter.
As the fellow I have just mentioned, was the only apothecary v;ithin several miles of Brickley, he was pleased to add, to his other perfections, all that infolenr, low consequence, fuch a circumstance naturally communicates to your narrow fouls—fo that you sind our Freeman set off with a very favourable profpect—nor did I fcruple to pronounce, that if his foft addrefs, agreeable perfon, tender application, and indefatigable industry, failed
A. SI xm xjLioiv-ftcJC
ed to recommend and establissi him, (fupported, as I refolved he ssiould be by me, in that effential particular, money) he must be the most unfortunate of be-ings.
When this matter w^as perfectly accomplished, I arrived at your feat, where I must acknowledge, I have with dissi-ciilty detained myself, (notwithstanding the goodnefs of both Lady Hendon and yourself) for two whole years, during which time, Freeman and i have been constant correfpondents.
He informed me of repeated additions to Mrs. Leicester’s family, a boy and girl; that Mrs. Leefonhad stood in perfon to the former, (who it seems is my name-fake) to the latter by proxy only.
He has been fuccefsful even beyond my utrnost expectations ; for within these fix weeks, Mifs Winter, (the Lady whose letter I intercepted, and lent my base engine a copy of, at the breaking out of my disappointments, and who, upon the
death
death of an old crofs father, came to reside intirely with her friend, Mrs. Leicester,} has thought proper to bestow her hand upon him, with a fortune of nine thousand pounds.
The fmall fum I lent him, has been repaid with the utmost gratitude, and I have received repeated invitations, both from himself and wife, (by the name of Clayton, and the direction of the letter being left at your post-house till called for,) to favour them with my company— an invitation, I have had the grace, till within these few days, to decline.
But what is now become of all my refolution—and have I at last most fatally retracted my renunciation of this charming woman ? I have, George, heard fuch particulars, as mustjustify the flame that has been awakened in my foul, and plead my excuse for every future proceeding.
You must allow. Sir George Hendon, that ifMifsLe Fever was under no obligations
gations to me, I was not in any degree o-bliged to Mifs Le Fever; but what can be said for a wretch—who having received the most precious of gifts—can be unkind to the giver—and entertain the groffest fufpicions of lier, that is little inferior to the angels themselves, in purity and virtue.
Why, why would this reptile teach fuch a wife an evil lesion against himself—and will ssie not attend to it—'ssie indeed fpurned me, when 1 offered to raise her to the highest dignities—but may ssie not be roused by ill treatment, to make me the instrument of her revenge—it is at least worth the experiment, and ssiall be carried into execution.
Have patience with me, my friend, and do not compel me to feek a lesa^ worthy considant—I will write you every thought of my heart, however odious or reprov-able, and fubmit to your chastifement without complaint. Be fatissied that bafenefs,
nefs, that guilt dwells only on my pen, fo long as 1 continue to correfpond with you. Accept this as my sinal apology, and allow me to rattle on in the language of a knave, to secure me an honest man.
A beautiful dejection, as Freeman ex-preffes himself, is visible in her afpect, which his wdfe affures him is wholly owing to little unaccountable flights and mean infults, he is frequently prone to commit; tho’ he has the addrefs to con-sine them to their private hours, and ssie has too nice a Sense of duty to reveal-—was this poifon to he resisted—it run through my veins—and you have been witnefs to its effects in the first instance.
Upon this stight foundation alone, am I once more become a rambler, and in order the more effectually to conceal myself, I intend to stain that fide of my face that was affected by my distemper, and affume the humble bob wig in which I appeared, when Freeman was perfonally acquainted with me. These articles, together
gether with the heavy langour my eyes have contracted, my ssiarpened features and common absences of thought, cannot fail to give me the air of a man of close fpeculation, and I may bid defiance to detection.
I do fuppofe my fchemes will not meet with your approbation. Domesticated by an irresistible charm, and confirmed in every worthy principle, by being out of the reach of temptation, you look upon it as the easiest thing in life, to walk fo-berly and rigliteousty; but believe me, my happy friend, that had you been exercised in the disappointments that have fallen to my lot, you would have found your heart beyond meafure refractory.
Have you not the same degree of sire in your temper as myself.^ have you not an equal ssiare of vanity, and is not your ambition quite as unbounded—but you, indeed, direct your fpirit to innocent and profitable purfuits—you are vain only in maintaining due pov/er over your own
inclina-
inclinations, and ambitious where the caufe is virtue.
I feel, I acknowledge myself the frailest and most whimfical of beings, I can enter into all your rational, your benevolent gratifications; I esteem, nay wissi, to emulate your prudence, your moderation—but there is a restlefs fomething: which informs my breast, that is fuperior to the convictions of sense, and the admonitions of reafon—it will—it must be obeyed—mix pity, therefore, with condemnation ; and whilst you defpise the action, gently cenfure the man.
You mientioned fomething to me once concerning education—it has been the bane of many fuch wretches as myself. 1 never was taught the necessity of self-denial, nor heard the least mention of the advantages of patience and resignation. No one was fo gracious, as to prepare me to encounter mortification or difficulties, no more than if they had not had existence—yet you sind I have been called
to
i
to the practical knowledge of those most trying evils; and my difqualisication to fustain thense has occafioned all the errors and iniquities I have been guilty of.
May your life continue as serene as your conduct is justifiable; may your foft, your endearing companion be incapable of deviating from the excellent rules ssie has hitherto observed—and may neither of you ever know the misery and wild confusion (tho’ but for a moment,) that the lofs of a beloved object can produce, where there is strong fufceptibility.
I am, &c.
Clerage.
Letter XIV.
Sir George Hendon io Lord Clerage.
O! Clerage, Clerage, will you, in one unlucky hour, undo all that tv/o -whole years seemed to have accomplissi-
ed —
^d—will you again refume the trammel of vice, and fubmit your lately retrieved neck to the hateful yoke of base diffimu-lation» Return once more, my friend, to those fcenes of peace and innocence, which you have fo recently guided, sand we will redouble our endeavours, to ren* der them delightful to you—and reflect before the unavailing period reaches you-^ that the very tears of virtue,, are of far greater value than the broadest mirth, that vicious pleafure has in store.	: >
If I had never loved you, never had any other connexion with you, than during these last two ye^rs, your fudden departure, and unwarrantable purposes, would grieve and alarm me; judge then what I must now feel; when, after having had you restored to me, from the very ssiip-wreck of honour and integrity, to know you a second time plunged into the unfathomable deep.
My wife exceedingly lainente the de--ception you have practised both upon us
VoL, Ih	E	and
and yourfelf; and intreats me to omit no-one argument, to save you from yielding yourfelf a miserable stave, to the crimi* nal dictates of tlie most groveling of past sions*
Can you, my Lord, have fo much of the brute about you, as to become a mere senfualist} Where is your pride ?—What, have you no idea of the dignity the duties of a rational being?-—Your form is erect, your intellectual faculties unimpair-* ed: can you then defCend to herd with the beasts of the field, that are incapable of the gratifications, for which you are fo immediately calculated ?
But much offended animal's, I feel, I Confese, the injustice of the conaparifon— you uniformly purfue the walk assigned ye—the voice of instinct ought to be o-beyed—you have no appetites that are iiniawful, bo defires that are unjustifiable—yet when this thing, that calls himfelf your Lord, abuses the endowments he poffeffes, and becomes refolved to renounce
ftounce his glorious hopes of a happy immortality \ when the checks of conscience, and the stirlgs of reflection, ar6 infussicient to restrain him from the groffest of exceffes-«r-we thfen proclaim him brutal, when we should stile him inSer-» jnal.
You fancy that love for Mrs. Leicester incites you to throw yourSelf again in her way; but you are exceedingly deceived—^ it is revenge.
You was refuSed by her; when your purpose's were what yoii called honour-^ able, (tho’ she was even then engaged to her preSent hushand,) Srotn a humility^ an integrity that Sew females have equalled. You cannotj you have not, my Lord, digested the mortifying stroke.
But how comes it, that her choice riiight not be as voluntary as yours ?
Your designs were oS the baSest nature^ on your first acquaintance with her—her Virtue wa^ too pure Sor your Corrupt Sight-i^-it gave her too great Superiority E 2	over
over you—and her reduction to a Suitable standard, to your own, the grand point you had in view. You foon, howeverj diseovered the folly of your attempt; Captain Le Fever’s bravery was perpetuated in his daughter’s chastity, and you Was reduced to the necessity of assuming* at least, the face of that propriety stiefo evidently loved.
You still failed of fuccefs—ssie had met with a young fellow, that poffeffed the requisite qualifications to recommend himfelf to her approbation—and him she. accepted.
I will fpare you the recollection of an action, that repentance had almost obliterated.—She married him—^from too great fenfibility the much favoured husa band is betrayed into error—all exceffes are productive of mortification and un-easinefs-^and none more acute or hard to Sustain, than from exceSs oS love. But Mrs* Leicester has too much discernment
to
Miss LE FEVER. 77
to mistake the caufe, and too much candour not to excuse and pity the effect.
Her mother’s mild affection—her infant’s fmiling innocence will make her the utmost amends for the unfortunate tendernefs ot her hushand—and as every being must have difficulties to cope with, perhaps none would be more light or eligible to her, than what ssie is called tp encounter.
Yet you, my Lord, on another foundation, than hearing that her hushand is not (what no mortal ever* was, and you yourfelf, you must be fenfible, are very foreign to) perfection; you are setting out in order, if possible, to work that into misery and wretchednefs, that is at present only a trifling allay.
Forego the base, the cruel defign, and let good a second time refult from evil, by leaving, the worthy Freeman, to enjoy the felicity he has derived from your fchemes.
-	■ E 3	It
It is needlefs to trouble you to read, or my self to v^rite, any further diffua-^ sives; for if what I have already offered are infussicient to warn you of your dan-* ger, or induce you to make a timely retreat, you must take the consequence of your obduracy, and 1 must remain your unhappy.
Yours,
G. Hendon,
■-'r*-""'	■	■■■	■	■	■ ■■-■	■	^	-■
Litter XV.
Clerage to fir Georqe Hendon^
HOW can you, rpy worthy George, prevail upon yourfelf to write in fuch harsh and grating terms, to fp miserable a wretch, as you are sensible, Clerage has long been. Ami not fubdued by disappointment ? Does not the hand 9f mortification fussiciently deprefs me,
that
that you thus unite your endeavours to crussi me to the dust ?
My journey to Brickley v.till, in all probability, prove no other than an innocent amusement—I must fee her—-I must be an eye-witnefs of the treatment ssie fustains, but her peace ssiall not in any degree be interrupted, or her reputation ever fo stightly wounded.
1 believe, I fubferibe to the justice, the truth of all your arguments—but whatever doubts you may entertain of my principles, you can have none of hers—I am no ruffian myself, nor ssiall any consideration incite me to employ a second in my service, and for compliance—-was she not Mifs Le Fever. If indulging myself with a little conversation with her—> if beholding her lovely face, or breathing, the same air—can leffen the weight of what I endure,—O ! Hendon, v/hy would you prevent it ?
I have most faithfully painted her character, in the course of our correlpon-E 4	dence.
dence. Was ssie not immoveable in po^ verty, constant in love, and irresistibly pathetic in calamity I Did not the anguissi of her countenance, the energy of her language, warp me from my most determined purpose, even when I had a bad genius, to Ipirit me on to the final accomplissiment of it—What then may you not rely upon, when all my thoughts shall be communicated for correction—-every action fubrnitted to your cenfure,	,
I commenced villain, it is true, most daringly commenced it—but shew me the I'nan that would have fo foon retracted—I am evidently too much in her power for her ever to be in mine, and I only catch at the most extravagant and preposterous of hopes, to fnatcb htyfelf for a nioment from the depths of defpair; but shall I confefs the undifguifed truth to you. Sir George—I have a pride, an unfpeakable satisfaction in this woman’s virtue—and it will be for the honour of . V	her
MISS nth TJLVILK.
her sex, as well as the tranquility of my poor foul, that I ssiould be convinced ssie is equal to every trial. The bare insinuation, the half formed ssiadow of error or impropriety in that nature, that I have fo long perfuaded myself, is the purest that ever dwelt on earth—is beyond meafure infupportable—and I must have an opportunity of viewing her in every new light in which ssie may be placed. The fufpected wife, the mother—they afford a large field of observation and action, and I ssiall forget my own cares in my attention, my concern for hers. Weigh well what I have now wrote in the honest simplicity of my heart—and condemn me if you can.
Consent, therefore, to let me write to you—vouchsafe to be privy to my transactions, and if I do not acquit my self as much to your good liking on this as fome former occasions—then pour forth your most stabbing reproaches, and sinissi E 5	an
an existence, that under fuch circumstances would be odious, even to its proSessbr.
I could not Sorbear making Mrs. LeeSon a viSit; it would have been both cruel and ungrateful to have neglected her, when within my reach. Though it will not be in my power to contribute much (as ,my stay in London will be So Ihort,) to enliven, what age must have rendered tedious—the gloomy hours ; yet this worthy creature, just on the verge oS the grave, has a thouSand reSources in herSelf, that I ssiall never attain—true good-neSs of heart, my friend, is a Support that never Sails.
Our meeting was both tender and a-greeable. The faithSul Jenny, was ready to cry for joy at my return-—how many fond and tormenting ideas was revived In my breast—but as I was impatient to proceed to Brickley, I Soon took my leave, under pretence of urgent busineSs shat had called me through town, but would not permit me to continue in it,
Perhaps
Perhaps I may be fo much delighted with the joys of friendssiip, and the innocence of a country life in this my new expedition, as to be unwilling to renounce them. I shall affect great reserve-—my visits at the parfon’s must not be frequent, nor of long duration—but as a rich cordial, a fupporting, a reviving cordial, tasted with judgment and moderation.
The little boy—what, Leicester’s boy ? No, my Le Fever’s—had they called him Le Fever, my whole foul should have been devoted to him—but if he has his mother’s features, can my attachment be withheld ?
I forgot to mention, that Mrs. Lee-shn, in the few moments we were together, did not fail to recommend the interest of this family to my peculiar care and constderation, and that in fuch strong terms, that I refolved to have an immediate interview with young Wed-bore, refpecting the living. I found, on conversing with him, that he had a turn E 6	for
for a court chaise, rather than the church, and therefore introduced him to his grace, of—my particular friend, who has promised to provide for him agreeable to his wissies, and the living is to be Leicester’s for life.
I ssiall not, however, communicate the good news too abruptly, but examine both the hushand and wife’s conduct, before 1 set them at the height of their wishes—if he is a barbarous wretch, and she has anygratitude—never bounce, George, you cannot seriousty apprehend either the one, or the other.
I should have avoided all the iniquity and fufferings this fweet girl has occasioned me, if it had not been your fault-— you are furprifed—-but, thus I make it appear.
Invite a man down into the country, when you are convinced he is incapable of quitting London—was that the time,_. Hendon—no: you should have taken him
down
down with you, and then you would have been fure of him.
Did you not perceive the necessity there was for restraining my heedlefs steps, even before we left the Abbey ? Had I not drank deep of the intoxication of beauty ?—Did I not vow an indefatigable purfuit ? And did you once exert yourself as you ought to have done, in diffuading me from that my declared refolution.
But you was yourfelf in love at that period—to have engaged my company, would have been in fome degree, to interrupt your own happinefs—recollect this article, and blush—blussi, Sir George Hendon, at the double guilt of neglect and felsissinefs.
I ssiall leave London to-morrow morn-ing—it is but one day’s journey—and in the evening my eyes will behold—at least, the houfe.
You ssiall receive all the particulars-— and ssiould your curiostty at last be inferior to your honest rage, and you will
not
not deign to peruse them—it will be no affair of mine—and I ssiall rest perfectly satisfied in the confcioufnefs, that I am acting, agreeable to the character of
Your’s, &c. reformed
Clerage.
L E T T E r XVI.
Mrs. Freeman to Mifs Gibson.
H O W aukward an undertaking, to inform my dear Penelope, that I am at length become the wife of honest Freeman—the murder is, however, happily out— and as we have actually been married. these five weeks—we will let the wonder cease, and chat over the wedding with the same compofure, as if it had hap* p.ened months ago.
I had, without doubt, fussiciently ex^ plained myself upon the fubject, to pre-.
pare
pare you for the otherwise astonishing vent—but it is the very purpose, my dear, for which we all fo fmartly look a-boLit us, and the final end of our creation.
My history, I hope you will allow, was very foon wound up, by my accepting the very first man that ever feriousiy ashed me the question-—but we girls of a common stamp, must not expect to have it in our power to cut the flourissies your beauties can.
To be fure, upon the whole, I am a very decentissi figure—but it is not every male mortal, that might have made the difeovery, and Freeman is the best-na-tured, grateful, obliging foul you ever met with.
A country apothecary, worth nine thousand pounds, I grant you is rather unusal—‘ but then he has insisted upon securing fo large a portion of it to my own use, that I verily think he deserves the rest—tho’
he
he was even to lay it all out in sine painted gallipots.
No wife was ever more notable, than I intend to prove myself to be, (I have intirely left the sine Lady at the parfon’s,) knitting, fpinning, and every fpecies of industry, ssiall be carried on under my roof, as an example for my more idle and lefs fortunate neighbours. Your poorer order of gentry, who with the utmost straining and difficulty, can barely make both ends meet, as the phrase is, are a-ssiamed of many acts of oeconomy, as apprehending them to be tokens of mean-nefs, or indication of poverty—but it ssiall be my endeavour to render propriety fashionable—and to teach these mis-judging females, that nothing is dif-commendable that is consistent with reafon and probity; or a reflection upon the head, heart or circumstances, that is worthy to be performed..
It is astonishing to me, that the generality of the world should be fo weak, as
to
Miss LE FEVER. 89
to live rather in conformity to the humour of their acquaintance, than their own fortunes or inclinations. What would it be to me, if I was esteemed a degree or two lefs rich or valuable than 1 knew myself to be----ssiould I not have the happy testi-
mony of my own confcience—-would not my family equally rejoice in my good management or industry, and reap the same benefit from my example, as if my excellences and perfections were founded upon the house-top.
I could fay a vast deal more, quite as much to the purpose as vrhat I have now presented you; but I fuppofe news instead of reflections would be your choice— you are a very foolissi girl—and utterly unacquainted with your real advantage.
I have, however, a reckoning to adjust with you, Mrs. Penelope, therefore we will quit sentiment^ and defcend to wrangling.
I must beg leave to make you fenfible of the folly and abfurdity of your mounting*
ing the great horse, fome two months ago, on my informing you, that I had no objection to fixing myself for life, on the fame fpot with rny friend Mrs. Leicester. I thought you had understood, that that was the very purport of my visit—indeed I never once dreamt of the gentle Freeman—but might there not have been fome equally gentle Twain, to have an-fwered the intention, if he had been out of the question.
Need I tell you, that she was the ac-quaintance^ the friend of my infancy ; and that each revolving year added treble increase to our tender affection : nay, was it not from your listening with fo much patience to my conversation, when she was the fubject, the original recommendation to my favour and confidence. Your heart, I allow, is very prettily turned for every foft and generous sensation, but you must not, like Leicester, feel too strongly—I hate every jffiadow of felsishnefs.
Apropos
Apropos to Leicester, could you ever have conceived it possible, that he ssiould have contracted fuch ssiocking humours.
You know him well, modesty, politenefs, eafe and ingenuoufnefs, were wont to be the only vifible actuators of his conduct and conversation; but I perceived, the very hour I arrived, that he was greatly and alarmingly changed.
His eyes have a wild nefs and impatience, and he is to the last degree inquisitive and attentive, on the most trifling occasions—which was too plain an indication of the passion, to which fome constitutions are particularly liable, for me to be deceived ; to behold an object with too much partiality, is a misfortune—aa ■yve are mighty apt to meafure our neighbours feelings by our own : and conclude, that what we fo abundantly dread to lose, is fought to be obtained by all that approach it.
But notwithstanding I have been both an eye and an e^ar-witnefs of ipany malicious
^	xriA:»xjLJ.i9XV/i\x \j x
cioiis abfurdities^—the fubject is of too tender a nature for me to start to a wife, that apparently seeks to elude every opportunity of falling upon it—nor have I once fpoke my sentiments, except to my good man and yourself. What a bleffed thing it is, that he has nothing of the kind in his compofition. I consider it as a distemper or lunacy of the foul, and when once attacked, for ever incurable.
‘ Indeed, where a woman’s conduct is in any degree blameable, or when a notorious villain seeks too many occasions to entertain her, I think it far from unnatural, that a delicate and fond hushand should be disturbed : but when neither the one nor the other is the cafe, and he is wholly indiseriminate in his apprehensions, I defpise both him and them.
» Mrs. Leicester, as I have frequently tojd you, is That very wife every woman ought, but few or none are capable of becoming, she lives but to oblige him ; but how she- can difpenSe with his insir-•	-	mity,
mity, or childishnefs of temper, I shave not the least idea; there is one article ssie has had the addrefs to execute, that I think is a master-piece in more refpects than one—her hushand has no fufpicion of her having refused Lord Clerage, tho’ abfo-lutely for his own dear fake; shew me the female, my girl, befides herself, that would not loudly have boasted of her constancy, her disinterestednefs—and by over-parading the matter, have given him reafon to fufpect she repented her heroifm. But what is greater than all the rest, is, that MrSi Le Fever remains perfectly, satisfied with her fomin-law: nay, looks upon him as the most valuable of huf-bands. There is an amazing fubtilty in his conduct in this refpect, almost bordering upon the fubtilty of madnefs—« for I have seen him treat her with the highest refpect, even at the very period that he has been rendering her daughter the most miserable of women—^by a thou^ sand new invented arts of tormenting—
fuch
^	b xj. xaAWJXjt \J X
fuch as infulting her for forne chearfuh ftefs he has observed in her behavioiir, and to which he has himself incited her —fome civility she has shewn to those he I has called his friends-^or fortie expref-sions of approbation he has extorted from her for any new acquaitltartce~yet this sit once oveCj and never was man more tender or affectionate—^for my part, I could as foon fly as endure flich perplexed circumstances—ill-nature may be fupported, but these unreafonable tranfitionsj from diffatisfaction to dotage^ who could comply with them.
Tho’ it is, my Peftelope* a wayward unsteady sex at best : and perhaps Free-liian, all-insinuating as he now appearSj Would be tempted to exercise his power^ if he was but as fure of his fubject*
If he was to take it into his wife headj to make the experiment from conceivings that the favoured companion of fuch a woman as Mrs. Leicester, must necessai
rily
ivi 1 s s luxu i i:. V i:. iv.
rlly follow hler example, hovt would he find himfelf deceived.
Instead of tamely persisting in an appearance of ease and happinefs (as ssie fo fuccefsfully affumesj as almost to im* pose upon me in fpite of the evidences of my own senses^ 1 would proclaim my resentment far and near, all the town ssiould not only know when I was in the pouts, but I would cuff the cause over and over in whatever company I might happen to be cast in—what pity that, with fo fine a fpirit—there is So little proSpect, from the dlfpofition of my worthy fpoufe, of my having many opportunities of difplay-ing it.
But trlfier that T am~to neglect those neceffary preparations, for the reception of my hushand’s first friend, that I arr fenfible would be a greater reflection upon my breeding and understanding, thar the most servile fubmission to the rationa: injunctions of an honest good-naturee lord and master.
Mr
xriA xj.io xv/i:^x \j r
Mr. Clayton is hourly expected, my dear, and ssiould he anfwer the defcrip-tion I have received of him, I have a Scheme Sor adding your Ladyssiip to the happy Society of your friend, and youl friends friends at Brickley.
I am, &c.
M. Fr e e m a n.
Letter XVIL
Lord Clerage to Sir George Hendon
NO W, George, you are once mon shy friend, the healer of my peace and guardian of my honour; nor will ever abuse your generoiis, your humane toleratioii. ^
I reached this town of Brickley prett; early in the evening.
Freeman was from home, at the par Son’s truly—his wife and him almost liv there—happy Freeman—*—but bewar
yoiin|
young man—the dangerous connection, notwithstanding your union with an amiable woman, and most valuable principles, may cost you dear—Mrs. Leicester cannot be beheld with too much caution.
Freeman, the moment he heard I was arrived, hurried over to receive and congratulate me—and Leicester, from abundant civility, following close at his heels, insisted on my fupping with his family.
I pleaded fatigue, dishabille—but he would have no denial. No ceremony was to fubfist between us: his sire-fide knew not what it meant—and he had quitted it with a promise to introduce me there.
I had objections, f had palpitations, but what could I say-—there is ho resisting fome people’s pershasion—in a word, I fuffered rpyself to bi: conducted to a scene my hhart panted after, tho* it wa; very unsit to encounter it.
We entered the parlour.
On one side the chimney, in an eaf) chair (for I found she had been a littli VoL. II,	F	indil
The History of
indifpofed) sat the agreeable Mrs. Le Fever ; and opposite to her, on an humble seat, for the convenience of performing the nurse’s part, one of the fairest mothers in the creation.
A little cherub, the image of herself, fat fmiling on her knee ; telling her all those interesting fthough unintelligible) tales, peculiar to its tender and endearing age: whilst ssie beheld it with the . beautiful tranfports of maternal affection.
Freeman’s wife, with a lively and ingenuous afpect, was standing before her, increasing and participating her delight, by repeatedly calling forth the innocent raptures of the darling boy.
Leicester, with no ill grace, presented me to his mother and our new neighbour; Madam, said he, is, I hope, future friend —my dear, addressing Mrs. Leicester— Mr. Freeman’s much valued Mr. Clayton.
I bowed upon her hand, but did not venture to Salute her.
Mrs,
Mrs. Freeman is extremely agreeable, and said many obliging and fprightly things, to the visible satisfaction of her hushand, and all the company.
I stole a view, at every convenient period, at a face that I once—it is over, George, and cannot be recalled — the bloom is rather faded, and the vivacity lefs striking—but I flatter myself, it is merely owing to the nature of the offices she is at prefent engaged in—for it is impossible to be a rafcal to fuch a woman.
We had a genteel, though frugal flipper ; served up with a. propriety and decorum that furprized me-—but she v/as certainly intended for a perfon of quality—or rather was formed to adorn, what-tbever Iphere she might be cast in.
It is wonderful that pleafure can fo intoxicate us—I forgot my fatigue—I lost my sense of every forrow—except now and then that my eyes would unfortunately meet the happy Leicester’s, when F 2	—but
ICO X H £ n 1 5 T O K y o t
—but it is not in the power of language to fpeak my feelings.
We took our leave at eleven o’clock, and I was visited withfo flattering a dream, tliat I awaked with regret, and arose with mortification.
I am, See.
Clerage.
Letter XVIII.
From the Same to the Same.
O! Hendon, who can with fo much propriety exclaim, that they have two fouls, as your unhappy friend.
When the good one predominates, how do I abhor every unworthy attempt up-'’ on this angel of a woman : yet when the bad one gains the afcendency, my desires, my wissies, my refolutions, are altogether infernal.
'But
MISS 3^ XL r XL \ XL s\., lOl
But do not conceive, that I am a jot more culpable for beholding and converf-ing v/ith her—for if there is a remedy on earth for my distemper, it is to be alone derived from that very circumstance—
I might be deceived with false hopes, and false expectations, when at a distance— but to fee her, is to be convinced, how vain and injurious every idea of Mrs. Leicester’s, that is inconsistent v/ith Mrs. l.eicester’s honour or purity.
I am an amazing favourite with the whole family at the parfon’s.
Mrs. Le Fever sinds fomething in my conversation and sentiments, that is extremely agreeable to her.
Leicester, from thinking himfelf safe in my friendssiip, over-whelms me wtitli civilities—fo unsightly a figure I own has ito very dangerous or threatening an appearance—but he that judges from the outside alone will ever be liable to the groffest errors.
F 3	And
joz i. H L ra 1 s a o K y of
And the dear woman. Sir George, from being relieved, in her connexion with me, from all that mortifying restraint, the peculiarity of her hulband’s temper, generally lays her under, ac-knowledges that she is much pleaSed with my company. She leans upon my arm, when I conduct her home of an evening from her friends—prattles to me with fuch fweet, fuch enchanting familiarity, that I am afraid I Snail betray mySelf in a mo-r ment, when I least intend it, and that may prove the most unpropitious.
She has both a Son and a daughter; the little Philip is an engaging child—the other quite an infant. There would be no resisting the flattery of his being my name-Sake, if the priest himSelf could not boast the Same advantage—his tender caresses have nevertheless an unSpeakable charm for me—and when I tell you, that 1 frequently receive him from his mother’s arms—all warm, and glowing with her endearments—you cannot wonder,
that
that Leicester’s interest in him should be forgot'—and that I consider him as wholly herle.
Mrs. Freeman has an arch and penetrating pair of eyes—it may be only conscious guilt—she often terrifies me.
As her hushand’s friend, I stand high in her esteem—but should she once fufpect me of designs upon her beloved Mrs. Leicester, I should be instantly blown up.
I was at church yesterday-—in order to feast my fight, rather than to attend to the miserable pastor. Tho’ in all events I could not have avoided the ceremony, on the grand holiday of the week, as Mrs. Leicester calls it, without being deemed an abfolute heathen.
In London, Mrs. Le Fever took occasion to observe, nothing is fo frequent as thin congregations^—the inhabitants of that city, have a thouSand diSilpations unknown to our nymphs and Swains—for which reafon, continued she, they are un-si 4	able
able to divest themselves of the weak idea that praise and adoration is due to an all-preating, and all-preserving Being-—nor could they with-hold them without fear and trembling.
I was too callous to be much affected by this stroke—but shall I confefs to you, how wonderfully I was agitated by the amiable example of that fair idol, to whom alone I imagined all my devotion would have been directed.
1 fat in Leicester’s pew.
To hear that best of women confessing her sins—made me shudder at the conviction of my own unworthinefs.—To find her pouring out her pious foul in thankfgiving—Suggested the recollection of the blessings I had abuSed.—To See that fair creature humbly intreating protection, (that I could almost have been fo prophane as to imagine, was the peculiar care of fome bright Spirit,) gave me a shocking idea of the dangers I might incur. But when she audibly
— — _ — -----------
bly joined in the rsfponfes, and did not hesitate to beseech the Lord of life to deliver her from adultery, my heart reproached me, as if I had actually dared to entertain the base hope of reducing her to fuch circumstances, as must have infallibly closed her lips for ever upon that fubject, and with scorpion teeth have preyed upon her peace. 1 felt myself at that moment fo perfectly in love with religion and virtue, that I refolved to be-. come quite a new being—and by cherishing the piety 1 had reSpired from her breath, render my self as remarkable for the fobriety and integrity oJ^ my manners, as ever I had been for the other extream.
And could this really have proved the cafe, George, how should we have rejoiced in the execution of that very scheme, that fo lately appeared intirely ineligible ?
But, alas! alas! Error and inconsistency, will ever creep into the human F 5	heart»
lOb i HE History of
heart; and I can only affure you, am still your unfortunate
&c.
Clerage.
Letter XIX.
Mrs. Freeman to Mifs Gibson.
YO U shall have Clayton, my Penelope ; I have told him all your perfections, both perfonal and mental— therefore, pack up your trinkets 1 beseech you, and away.
If Freeman wastone of your jealous-' pated fellows, what a fine time I should have of it; left as I am, whole hours to my own inventions—or what is still worfe—to the company and conversation of Mr. Clayton. But he, good foul, has not only a very high opinion of me, but what is quite as essential, a very decent
one
one of himSelf——I shall hardly make you
comprehend me, tho’.----for never was
being farther from confidence, or nearer humility----but he has no idea of a wo-
man’s prefering him one day to all the world, and the next wandering after new connexions—if he had fussicient merit to engage, why not to retain their affections ?---In short, I believe he is almost
fo harmless, as to think no wife capable of becoming a worse prostitute, than any that walk the streets of London. They, poor wretches, persist in their profligacy, to procure themselves a bitter fubsif-tence——but what shall we say for the woman that degenerates into vice; when the Sacred ties of faith——the tenderest of connexions, the highest indulgence, and an eafy fortune, ought to teach her the most lively and heart-felt sentiments, of gratitude and thankfgiving.
Congratulate me, my girl, upon my uncommon felicity.
f\6	I fliall
Av/v
I shall never love this Leicester, there is fomething So mean and illiterate, in taking advantage of the Sweetnefs and Sensibility of his wife’s nature, that I cannot bear to think of it—she certainly is, tho* she will not acknowledge it, my dear, a very unhappy woman. If she was one of the weak complaining beings, I should not have half the apprehenfions for her —but the people, who, from generosity, a fenSe of duty, or worthy pride, take affliction to their breasts, and there make the most of it, are the very people that fall a Sacrifice to its pernicious operations.
And shall this lovely, this most unexceptionable of creatures, be fo cruelly destroyed^—there is no remedy—yet is resignation almost an impracticable virtue. The fond tyrant talks of going to London, to meet fome relations, for a week or ten days, but I deSpair of the happy period’s ever arriving.
Mr. Clayton has, however, introduced both life and joy amongst us, and Mrs.
Lei*
Miss l. h t d V d k. 109
Leicester is tolerated in the utmost approbation of him.
Freeman (but who could forbear loving the truly good-natured harmless mortal) is a very great favourite with his wife’s friend, for which reafon I have frequently Seen him coolly received by the narrow-fouled Leicester. Yet Clayton, whatever is the meaning of it, bears all befpre him, and we only want the addition of your company, to be as com-pleatly happy as we can reafonably expect to she—for has not every condition its allay.
We have received an invitation to dine with Hilton our ’fquire : I hope it will be fome entertainment to Mr. Clayton . but, for my part, as Leicester will not permit his wife to visit there, it will be very little pleafure to me.
I will neither send you an account of that day’s expedition, nor, upon recollection, make the least addition to the length of this letter-—for have I received any
anfwer
anfwer to my last—fettle that point, if you pleaSe, in a proper manner, or you will not find me as uSual
Yours, &c.
M. Freeman.
Letter XX.
Lord Clerage to Sir George Hendon.
FR E E M A Nle gratitude is unbounded—he perfectly makes a shew of me. When I walk out, I frequently over-hear the hinds fay—there goes the ^emmen that made Dr. Freeman’s fortune. I would have choSe to have been lefs popular, but his meaning is too good to be in any degree offensive.
I am to dine to-morrow at the ’Squire’s: Leicester neither visits him, nor Suffers him to visit at his houSe, from fufpecting,
as
Miss DD i'JthVtiK. lu
as I am informed, that he beholds bis wife with too favourable an eye.
He is a compleat fportfman I find— possesses a good estate, an uninformed heart, and a boisterous difpoSition — I cannot therefore promiSe mySelf any happinefs in the acquaintance—but it was not avoidable without too great particularity.
I can write no more at preSent, I am not in an eaSy vein : perhaps to-morrow entertainment may chase away the kind of Spleen that now hangs upon me.
Freeman, his wife, and your friend day ton, arrived at the ’Squire’s about two, and met with a warm tho’ rustic reception : dogs, horSes, and the glories of the chafe, filling up the whole preceding Space, to the Smoking and Substantial measi
The glaSs was afterwards pushed with much vigour and alacrity—Mrs. Freeman, and an elderly maiden, sister of the ’Squire’s, very prudently took the hint—
and
and retired from conversation that wa in danger of becoming too noify and ro bust for their participation.
When a variety of jovial fongs, am the frequent clearing away of empt] bottles, had proclaimed the good humou: and Sociability of the company, we wen called upon by the master of the feast foi our favourite toasts. ,
I mySelf, Said he, will Set you the eX' ample, none but friends and men of honour are prefent—come, bumpers all— here is the fairest woman in his Majesty’; dominions.
Sir, returned I, merely from judging ii necessary to fay Something, you must bt more explicit: every man naturally believes the epithet you have bestowed upon your mistreSs, to be due to his own— nor do 1 know, or any other gentleman at the table, whether it may not be mine that you have now toasted——we must therefore insist upon the name.
Aye,
Miss nn TnviLK. 113
Aye, aye, exclaimed all the ruffians in
a breath----no encroachments on your
neighbour’s territories--the name, the
name.
Never let it tranfpire then, said he, for the Lady’s fake ; Mrs. Leicester, you may depend upon it I was highly delighted.
You have an elegant taste. Sir, returned I, concealing my chagrin in the best manner 1 was able—nor is this the first time that I have heard her stiled the fairest of the fair.
Upon my foul. Sir, said he, I look upon her as the most lovely of creatures: and would give half my estate to enjoy the fame opportunities of entertaining her, that you are blessed with: but the paultry scoundrel of a parfon keeps me at bay, conscious, I fuppofe, that he has disqualified the lady, by his unkind treatment of her for standing a long siege.
Do you then imagine, Sir, cried I, that you should find her an eafy conquest?
What
I 14	IHEJUISTORYOR
What should hinder it, returned he, with boorish confidence, but that fellow’s watchfulneSs : if I could but once ingratiate myself into his favour—the Lady I believe would not be very inaccessible.
And dare you advance fo baSe an in-* sinuation, demanded I, provoked beyond all bounds.
Nay, Sir, returned he, calmly, restrain your warmth, I am no fighter—you Speak from experience, I preSume: what we have never attempted, we are apt to fancy may be eafily accomplished.
Judge of the resentment, George, by which I was agitated—to hear the purest and chastest of her Sex mentioned fo unworthily :—but my consideration for her reputation and repofe was Superior with me to every other—to have chastized the wretch, would have been only to have given a Sanction to his black inuendo: Scandal was never Suppressed by violence, nor vanity Subdued by the strongest convictions.
It
Miss Lb hLVLK. 115
It is my custom. Sir, said I, affecting to laugh (though without any visible incitement) to hold the virtue of my neighbour’s wife too sacred even for fufpicion. You apprehend yourself formidable with the gentleman, but is it either a just or natural inference, that you must therefore be irresistible with the lady—I con-fefs myself fo far from seeing the matter in the fame light you do, that I wish it was possible for me to introduce you to her acquaintance, to teach either you or mySelf a more just opinion of her than we Seem at preSent to entertain.
Sir, your humble Servant, cried he— but, however, I might be obliged to you on that occasion : your friend Leicester, would have but little to thank you for— one month, I would ash but one month to compleat the whole businefs. Was it not a dreadful circumstance to be restrained from closing fo prophane a mouth !
Unhappy injured charming creature-do I live to hear thee traduced by the
most
lifi The Historv of
most grovelling of his fpecies; but his prefnmption and arrogance shall cost him dear—he shall be convinced, that Mrs. Leicester is a woman without her sex— if breach of delicacy, faith, or virtue, can be fuppofed to be female characteristics.
The rest of the conversation was as brutal as the company, and I returned home fatigued, difgusted, and deeply wounded.
Upon my word, gallantry is a most noble profession, since every two legged animal can conceive himself qualisied for fuccefs in it; nor shall I ever regret, that my impudent, my enterprizing fpirit, has forsaken me. -
How shall I contrive to reconcile Leicester to his visits—they shall meet at Freeman’s, and we will wean him by degrees from his too just antipathy.
That a fellow should be capable of fo unnatural and preposterous a Supposition : that becauSe a hushand is curSed
with
IVllbS 1-i J-1. rJEiVIZi JV.	I 17
with abSurd fancies, the wife must run into his arms; yet I must with shame acknowledge, George, that he is infinitely more excuSable than your friend ; he has never exchanged one single fyllable with Mrs. Leicester; is utterly unacquainted with all her amiable principles; and as her eye fpealzs foftnefs and love, has to little refinement too discover that difcretion, with a fcepter, fits upon her hrow'y whilst I, notwithstanding all my experience, my convictions was half inclined to flatter myself, that the fufpi-cions of her hushand would render her a very wife—I disclaim—I henceforth disclaim all fuch vulgar errors, and will ever remain
Your’s, &c.
Clerage.
Letter
Letter XXL From the Same to the Same.
I Breakfasted with Leicester this morning, and have diverted him not a little, with a description of fuch part of the ’fquire’s humour, as was proper for him to be made acquainted with.
I am Surprised, Said I, in the courSe of our conversation, that you and him are not upon a good footing—he has his foibles, but is far from ill-natured, and professes himfelf well affected towards you and your family.
He made a very lame excuse for the ^ coolnefs he had practised; and consented to give him the meeting in a few days at Freeman’s—when the wretched rustic, will foon discover the folly, bafenefs, and injustice of his wife conjectures,
I have now been above two months in the country, lying in wait for fome encouraging moment, to furprife this longloved
ivj 1 s s i-j 124 r 124 y S2. SS..
loved woman into a private friendship-— never start, George—indiscretion is several removes from criminality—you had had a clue to my designs, and might have recalled me in due time to save us both.
But for your satisfaction, and my Security, 1 must tell you, that her behaviour is at all times So judicious. So perfectly conformable to the strictest and nicest rules of decorum and delicacy, that I find it impossible to commit the stightest breach of either the one or other, without being totally exploded.
Thus, my friend, it is most evident, that virtue can render itself refpectable and sacred, tho’ undefended by ill-manners, or austerity, (a mistake that fome ladies are too apt to fall into,) for, when once it is apparent from the whole tenor of a woman^s conduct, that her foul is pure, who can approach her without reverence.
Her chearfulnefs is the best indication of her mind’s health, her language the
emblem
lay X H is JTJi 1 a o K Y u t
emblem of her elegant conceptions, an her piety the strongest testimony of he divine origin^—the beauty, the lovelind of her perfon, may for a moment infpir fuch wishes, as incited me to visit Brick Jey*^but they must receive an infallibl check, or at least be reduced to tende regard, by the genuine difplay of sti Superior perfections.
I have fome distant hopes of renderin this bold wretch serviceable to my ow purposes. He shall have an opportunil of exercising his odious, clumfey arts, i allure her to his views—and, I, as by ai cident, will betray my knowledge of h proceedings—she will be terrified at tl effect they would have upon her hushand mind, if revealed to him—and I wou not only advise her to preServe them I cret, but offer my best assistance—she-but you must have an idea by this tim of the natural progression of a growir
intimacy-----and may without any sa
th
iviiss Tj r jl V il iv. iii
ther light, trace it out to its final termination.
It is very true. Sir George, your friend Clerage was an unSuccefsful fellow in most of his undertakings—the impetuosity, the impatience of his difpoSition ever defeating his own purposes.
But Clayton, with all that fire Clerage is possessed of, has a happy fedatenefs, a deep penetration, a quick apprehension, and an animated invention—you shall only hear what a pretty cats-paw he has made of his rustic acquaintance.
Leicester, his wife and mother, no Sooner saw the ’fquire’s coach stop at Freeman’s, than they hurried over, lest they should make them wait dinner.
Freeman introduced them to the overbearing wretch—which piece of strained civility, hurt poor Clayton not a little— Mrs. Leicester’s lips were never formed for Such barbarous Salutations.
The pastor was obliged to attend a funeral in the afternoon—it was a lucky
VoL. II. ^	G	inch
122 IHE Historv of
incident—nor did the ’fquire fail to av himfelf of it—and by pouring forth a v ley of stupid compliments, and behavi with the most aukward particularity, ( caSioned many Significant and diScoun ing changes, in the lady’s intelligent a lovely features.
Leicester, at length returning, the ’Squ became very tractable—but whiSpered i on his departure, (with an air of the hig est exultation,) that the game was n< happily started, and he had nothing to c but to run it down.
One meeting in the country, as nai rally begets another, as—but 1 will gi you the Simile, when 1 do not abound w Subject matter.
We were all invited to the ’Squire Mrs. Leicester laboured hard to be c cuSed going ; but her hushand (Support by my perSuasions,) for that very reafc exerted his utmost authority, and she v too dutiful to persist in her refuSal.
__ ^
LVl 1 s s Ti E. r XL V n IX. i ^ ^
As Clayton was helping her over a stile, at fome little distance from the rest of the company; I am Sorry, Madam, said he, that we cannot be happy, but at your expence ; what can occasion your aversion to this visit.
You must have too much discernment, Sir, returned she, to mistake the caufe. Mr. Stilton’s character is a most profile gate one; his manners and conversation, very far from unexceptiona Me. I do not mean to insinuate, that he has any other designs upon me, than he would entertain against any other female. But a married woman ought to be, beyond meafure, nice in her connexions. Had I been a man, I had been a Caesar, with rc-Specttomy wife;—nor would it have been Sufficient with me, that she was really virtuous, but she must have been thought So; and vrho can anSwer for the conSequence of giving into an improper acquaintance—his rude breath. Sir, might G 2	deStrov
124- The Historv of
destroy in one moment, more than a whi century could repair.
There’s for you—are we not comi to the very point my heart has been long set upon—yes, my fweet creatu you are yet destined to heal the wound have received! and tho’ wedded to ar ther, your tenderest affections shall at 1 be mine.
Mrs. Freeman, by her agreeable vh city, preSc:ved the harmony and go understanding, of the whole party—-a tve returned wtII satisfied, and well pie ed, both with ourSelves and each other,
Hitherto, my George, I have not tak one step to offend even your rigid virtue Mrs. Leicester has more than ever ] commended herSelf to my fondest appi bation—I must admire, 1 must doat up her—but will find my conSolation in kno ing mySelf her f, iend, and friend of r faithful Hendon.
I am, &c.
C L E R A G E.
Lett:
Miss D D t xl \ xl k. 125 Letter XXII.
•; V ,
From the Same to the Same.
Easter, Whitshntide, and Christmas, are the most convehient, as well as happiest periods in the whole rural round of life.
Stilton, from a fond and preposterous perSuasion, that his frequently repeated aukwardneSs and assiduity had obtained him Some degree of unwarrantable interest, in the chastest of human hearts, gave us all an invitation to his houfe, to celebrate the WhitSun-fcast.
Great preparations, we were informed by-the-by, had been for fome time carried on, in order to render the scene at once, marvellous and delightful, and as we were fenfible his gardens, in Lord Chalk-stone’s language, had very pretty capar bilitieSy our expectations were raiSed to a very decent pitch.
G 3	Never
i.x\}	X tl £. AAiaiUiCy U£
Never did my lovely woman appea to greater advantage, than upon this oc cafion, by Mrs. Freeman’s managemen and assistance—who insisted upon it, tha her fair friend should for once convinc Mr. Clayton, that she did not over-rat her perfonal perfections, in her deScriptio of them, when unobscured by her ma tronly arts.
Hershair was difpofed with the utmo: grace, by the judicious hand of this al fectionate Lady—her gown, by the sam election and authority, was a pale pin Sattin; her petticoat and shoes whit< ditto, and her linen fuch as she had woi in her day of elegance.
How, did this agtoeable and generoi Mrs. Freeman then exult in the charrr she had drawn fortli, utterly infenfible t the beautiful negiigence, pleafing vivt city, and lovely benevolence, fo apparer in herSdf.
The parSonage-houSe was in our wa to the hall. Freeman and I were to joi
compan
Miss LE FEVER. 127
with the priest and the ladies there.
Leicester offered his arm to Mrs. Le FevTr, whose eyes fparkled with maternal complacence; and communicated an increase of satisfaction to every heart. To your care, Mr. Clayton, said the deluded hushand, 1 commit my wife—Freeman will escort his—-and thus we shall be all comfortably paired.
How unaccountable is prejudice 1 Hovr erroneous credulity! Freeman, tho’ married to the object of his choice—tho’ his principles are pure, his conduct irreproachable, and his constitution free from every vice, is more formidable in Leicester’s sight, than an imposture—a fly insinuating villain—and the deepest of designers. But here lies the stumbling-block of his wife judgment—Freeman’s perSon is pleasing, and his disposition lively—whereas, famine and mortification Seem to have marked the miserable Clayton for their own.
G 4	We
We were ushered immediately on oui arrival at the ’fquire’s—into the gardens, A variety of objects seized our eyes.
Alcoves, Chinese temples, falls of water, fliady retreats, wide extended lawns, and flowery borders, proclaimed at once the taste and expence of their wrong-headed owner.
On the largest canal, in humble immi' tation of what you meet with at Rane-lagh, was a kind of pavilion, furnishec with a band of the best musicians that could be procured on a very short notice (for this Sublime stroke was not reSolvec upon, until the very preceding day to si; execution,) who Scraped here and then a bit of Alexander’s feast, to the inex preffible delight and entertainment o several of the principal farmers, thei wives and children, in the whole neigh bourhood.
Dinner was served up in a fpacious al cove; and liberal libations offered to th< goddesses of health and festivity.
Hiltoi
Miss LL h L V E K. 129
Hilton seldom or ever quitted Mrs. Leicester’s side, his admiration, his fenSi-bility of the improvement in her appearance, could not be concealed.
Her hushand seemed determined to rife Superior to himSelf for that day at least; and having repeated to me in a fort of carelefs jocose manner, as he passed us foon after dinner, that to my care he committed his wife, and at my hands he should require her, at the conclufion of the evening, left her entirely free from all interruption. 1 could not but obServe, however, that he frequently turned his head towards us—when perceiving I was true to my trust, he appeared content. I say appeared, George, for his heart could not be perfectly unagitated, from the nature of his tendernefs, and the invaluablenefs of the object—for was it not Mrs. Leicester ?
Some of the tenants daughters, in the habits of shepherds and shepherdesses, presented us with several rustic dances— and about ten o’clock at night an ill-con-G 5	ducted
ducted fire-works was played off, whicl was to be Succeeded by a ball, in a largt room istuminated for the purpoSe.
After this last piece of folly had beer exhibited, we v/ere directed to return tc the houSe. Gur numbers were greatly increased, and Some little diSorder aroSe in the procession, from Several of the gentlemen’s being much elevated.
I would have perfuaded Mrs. Leicef-ter to accept of my arm for her protection, but she politely declined it—and in the next instant, I had the mortification to find, she had been hurried away by the croud quite out of my sight.
It immediately occurred to me, that fome villainous artifice had been practiced—and I begun to accuSe mySelf as the indirect caufe of whatever misfortune might be the conSequence. I was to.o well acquainted with her hushand’3 disposition, however, to venture to communicate my apprehensions, except at the last extremity : I therefore, breaking thro’
the
the croud, refolved to-seize the first Servant I met, and compel him to discover his master’s diabolical schemes.
J had scarce reached the end of a fliort walk, before I perceived a fellow I foon recognized, parading before a little flat Summer-houSe, that was almost buried in roSe-bushes and liilies, as a Ipy or guard. I collared him without farther ceremony. Mrs. Leicester cried, I (half-choaked with rage and apprehension) where has Mrs. Leicester been conveyed to^—the guilt, the self-importance of your afpect convinces me, that you are the prime a-gent in the. baSe tranSaction.
He pointed to the fummer-houSe—my horror was inexpreffible—I dragged him to the entrance, and^ obliged him to add his strength to mine to force the well-Secured door.
The moment the Sweet creature beheld me, file flew to me for protection. I have been .groSsly inSuited, cried she— but let me leave the hateful Spot, and if G 6	poffiblg
possible forget the unprecedented breach of honour and hoSpitality.
The villain, all diScompofed in his drefs, .and finking with cowardly confusion, would have made the most abject concessions—but she hid her lovely face with her hands—and only repeated, let me leave the place, and if you have So much humanity, as not to aggravate the injury,' I will promise you shall never have an opportunity of repeating it—my hushand’s peace, next to preserving my perfon from violation, is my dearest consideration—■ but my good Mr. Clayton, added flie, do not delay the accomplishment of the blessed work you have began—remove me from this scene—and by silence and Secrecy,' respecting. the unhappy circumstances from which you have delivered me, Secure me from every otherwise consequential evil.
1 will wait upon you in the morning, Sir, Said I, with a menacing air, to the despicable culprit—the lady’s peace must ‘	be
Miss th v n v xl k. 13^
be our first, our only care. Trembling and terrified, 1 then conveyed her almost in my arms into the house.
Suppose you complain of illneSs, Madam, said I, I fear the complaint will but be too just —but it is necessary you should remain fome time in Mifs Stillton’s apartment, to recover yourself, and a reafon must be assigned to the company for the not joining them—I will Send your friend, Mrs. Freeman, to revive and chear you.
I have obligations. Sir, returned she— what indeed do I not owe you—but I apprehend I shall never have the courage to do you the justice to reveal them to any one—if my poor hushand was ever to hear—
Let it never be mentioned. Madam, —this moment, this blessed moment, cried I (pressing her closer in order to render myself more useful) shall consign the whole remembrance to oblivion. T have only assisted you in the fame degree I
would
Vi-
would any other injured fuffering perf —-and humanely receive, but can conJ no obligations.
I conducted her to a parlour—sent f Mifs Hilton, and Mrs. Freeman—bo^ ed and retired.
The ’fquire having rectified the d orders in his appearance, ventured to e ter the ball-room. He had not thetoo fidence, however, once to encounter n eyes. His expressions, when he was con pelled to fpeak, were wild and incoh rent, and his behaviour abfurd and incoi sistent: but as he had been observed i drink very freely, no one was Surprise either by the one or the other.
Leicester was not affected by the ii formation of his wife’s indifpoSition, as had apprehended he would^—^he onl Smiled, and Said, he hoped flie woul Soon be better. I could not refrain fror commenting upon his coolneSs to Free man, who foon gave me to understand that it proceeded from his knowledge c
th
iVliSS L, XL TtLVIiK. I35
the; circumstances she was then under, which fubjected her to frequent, tho’ not dangerous, interruptions of health.
This intimation had neverthelefs a very different effect upon me, to which it was intended to produce—should the consequence be fatal to her life—heaven, kind heaven, for once be propitious to a sinner’s prayer, and fpare this ornament of her sex (as you Hendon emphatically stiled her, in an epistle that was far from being duly honoured) a little longer, to enliven and instruct this lower world.
We had the brute’s coach to convey us home ; and I passed a steeplesa night, from revolving the scenes I had been engaged in.
Early next morning, according to appointment, I waited upon this black clumfey fcheemer (you fee, George, your miserable friend is not the only existing villainj and threw his little unworthy foul into fearful trepidations.
I
*	XJHjE.	UK
■ l acknowledge, said he, Mr. Clayton with shame and remorfe I acknowledg my error; Mrs. Leicester’s virtue is ir vincible; she is the fairest and the proud est woman I ever met with.
Wretch, cried I, and is that the best the nicest distinction, you are capable c making, between chastity, and its oppo site extreme. You, that was fo confi dent of SucceSs—that had started you game—but you shall be given up to th just reSentment of an injured and mol tenacious hushand.
For Mrs Leicester^ fake, returned he for Mrs. Leicester’s Sake, Sir, I beSeecl you to forego this deSperate reSolution— you cannot make me Suffer alone. Con sider her preSent condition, remembe the delicacy of her mind and body.
1 could have shook him to atoms.
Thou cloven-footed preacher, exclaim ed I—and can the mention of mercy fal from Such unmerciful lips—Wherein die you consider her Wherein did you Span
her
Miss Lb hLVLK. 137
her ? But you are fo abject a mortal, that to parley with you, is to give you too much eonSequence. I have, however, thought of a means of revenging this most atrocious attempt, without involving the amiable Mrs Leicester, in the fmallest inconvenience. You shall this very day enter into a bond for your good behaviour for seven years to come. No hunting—no one Scene of revelling or debauchery, shall you engage in during that whole period; the church is greatly out of repair; your hunters shall be diS-poSedof; your hounds turned a-drift; and your huntfman discharged; and the profits arising from the sale of the former, and the reduced expences of the latter, shall be equally appropriated to that uSe. You shall likev/ife bestow a new gown and coat, and an annual dinner upon every poor parishioner, to celebrate your happy escape from at best a just prosecution ; and above all the rest, you shall erect a temple, in the most confpicuous part of the village,
to
i3o i HE msTORy of
to that pure goddefs you have fo egrc-gioufly dared to prophane; and as you have given a proof of a pretty romantic turn in the improvements of your gardens, and your entertainments of the tenants—^you shall next year, instead of fireworks, institute little games for the younger part of the neighbourhood; with Songs and devices, in honour and promotion of that most lovely of virtue’s fair-eyed chastity ; and, finally, you fltall remove yourself from Brickley (having given proper directions for all that I hkve mentioned) until the grand anniversary, when you shall return to weave and preSent the first garland to the atoning shrine.
What think you now, George, have I not a very tolerable idea of poetical justice.
Brutality is ever in conjunction with cowardice—he gladly complied with the prescribed terms, to clear himfelf from Leicester’s wrath: and 1 shall by this method render him a future blessing, to
the
IVlT s s D li b h. V D K. 139
the country, where he has hitherto been an absolute pest.
I had the pleaSure to find, on calling in at Leicester’s, that my charming woman was much better than could have been expected ; and that her hushand and friends, were free from every fufpicion of the true cause of her diforder.
I told them of the ’Squire’s intended decampment; and could perceive, that Mrs. Leicester had both Sufficient generosity and understanding, to place it to the proper account—she thanked me with her eyes—I will fallow her fweet example with the nicest punctuality—nor unlefs she herSelf tells the tale before me, ever fuffer one fyllable of it to tranfpire— her hushand’s temper fo singular, can she be too -cautious.
I find by Mrs. Freeman, that the uncertainty respecting the living, fits heavy at that heart whoSe peace is So peculiarly dear to me-—but it shall be relieved from its anxiety in a post or two—-
the
X	X tl c, JLXiaiuMX u t
the mean, the scandalous, the villainous purpose, for which I reserved the diS-covery, exists no longer, and to make her happy shall be my first, my chiefest care.
I fuppofe you have heard of Arthur Johnfon’s misfortunes—shccefs in evil, proves at last our bane—he is shut up in the Bastile, in all probability for life— fome amour, either of his own, or that he warmly abetted, with a married Lady, has at length reduced him to the circumstances he has long since deserved.
I could almost become fuperstitious upon the occasion; and tremble for my own fate. But am I not punished far beyond whatever fetters or confinement could prove ?—Do I not behold the only woman I ever did or ever can love, in the possession of another.^—Do I not daily discover Some new and enchanting per-* Section in her Soul, to aggravate my mi-fery ? And have 1 the least proSpect of its being mitigated ? I may be calm>
George,
iVi I s s n. XL Ji V n. K. 141
George, I may be tolerably composed— but to know all my hopes and happinefs blasted in the very bloom of youth; to bear about the stings of remorfe, and to feel the conviction that my own vicious, narrow fpirit has been the occasion of all—is there any hell to exceed it ?—Had 1 made an honourable application on my firSt knowledge, that it was Le Fever’s daughter, that had infpired me with fuch uncommon approbation, and promoted her felicity in the promotion of my own ? How blessed should I now have been— Leicester would then have made his visit too late—but take notice, my friend, she never will be mine, (or Providence must deviate from every general rule,) we fee many men obtain their wishes, to convince them of their vanity and empti-nefs—many profper in the way of vice, to augment their curse—but to obtain Mrs. Leicester, would be to obtain the greatest of rewards, and how little pretensions
I4 i	X c. Ji J. 1 a 1 u K. y u t
tensions your Clerage has to every thing of that Sort, you are but too Sensible.
I am, &c.
Clerage.
Letter XXIII.
From the Same to the Same,
NO W, George, or never, is the time to. recommend mySelf; the Surly keeper has forSook his charge, and left her an eaSy prey.
Such provocations—were I to relate them, would infallibly justify both her and me, even with fo fqueamish a fellow as yourself.-^—She is to be with us every day; and who knows which may be most propitious.
I can, I do perceive, that she esteems me—does a woman esteem her gallant, George,?—Esteem and villainy, must be
incom-
IVJ i 5 S Ui JLL, X" II, V jl:. XV.	14J
incompatible—and he is the vilest of villains, fay you, that is capable, either of Seducing the innocent, or taking advantage of the mortified and depressed female,
I grant you, it is a horrible thing to betray the young and unwary—there can be no triumph, as I have frequently told you, where there is no victory—and the simple, uninformed heart, is ill qualified for the resistance, that can alone gratify the proud and fpirited lover. But with a woman of understanding, education, and experience, the cafe is quite otherwise—it is preference, it is choice, it is the most flattering of distinctions. What fay you, to be a partaker with the adul-trefs, the instrument of her withered revenge, and the caufe of entailing difgrace upon her tender, helplefs offspring?— You are perpetually starting abfurdities. Sir George—who is obliged to look fo far into consequences and contingences— the Lady likes me, I like the Lady—she
thinks
thinks her hushand ungrateful—I kno^ him to be churlish—and fo we conclud the bu si nefs.
. But, for once I have alarmed you witl out a cause; no vestal was ever held mor Sacred by the most Superstitious heather than Mrs. Leicester’s chastity by meant convinced it is invincible, and nc thing is So foreign to my heart, as an ir tendon to. attack it. I will tell you Her don, when a woman is cursed with fuc a hushand as Leicester; yet retain lit chearfulnefs, or makes him the fubje( of either her ridicule or contempt—thei is Sufficient encouragement—but whe every instance of unkindneSs apparentl sinks deep, and the lovely Sufferer Seel no other conSolation, than what piety an resignation can give, she is, as it wen defended by ten thousand shields, and w consider her as invulnerable.
I am at prefent So near happineSs, tht ifit wasnot for the evidences of Mr:
Leicester
IVlISS Li th J? Ih V th K.	145
Leicester’s uneaSmefs, I should never wish to change my situation.
What erroneous, what unworthy impressions do we receive of the women, by being acquainted with only the light, inconsiderate part of the sex. To ridicule, to stigmatize, to mif-reprefent them, has been the common-place wit of every petty author, and the practice of every age. But who can behold Mrs. Leicester, or Mrs. Freeman, and not venerate them— the practical virtues of the one, and the heart-felt ones of the other—are almost equally amiable—and hav^e at least been instrumental to maldng one honest fellow happy.
Freeman and his fair companion are most excellently stiited. He has the generosity, the capacity, to distinguish and approve, thoSe perfections his wife has the judgment, the dexterity to display. Her vivacity is exerciSed for his amuSe-ment, her conversation adapted to his taste, and his felicity, the Sole object of
VoL. II.	H	her
1	X tl X. XXldXV/KX \J t
her tender attention. With Mrs. L( cester, she is a foothing, with me an e tertaining friend, and with Mrs. Le F ver, a most diScreet and affectionate vi tant. Happy, unenvied Freeman, yoi prosperity has indeed been built on n destruction—or rather you have been pe mited to riSe up as an irresistible coi viction, that rewards and punishmen are Sometimes dealt out even in this life.
To tell you how comfortably we ha\ enjoyed ourselves during Leicester’s al fence,'’ is impossible—content has reigne in every heart—and friendship glowed i every countenance. What are the pie: fares, the purSuits of vice, to Sue a period—it was indeed too blessed to h of long continuance. Mrs. Leicester n ceived a letter this morning from or common disturber, acquainting her, tha she will fee him in the evening, if he i able to perform the journey—for that h has been seized with a fever, and find himSelf very indifferent.
II
Miss LL FE V E R. 147
He loves to alarm, George, and I have neither hopes nor fears upon the occasion.
Mrs. Freeman looks arch—he is mortal, Said she, when her friend was gone— tho’ over-bearing and tyrannical.
I shall wait his arrival, with the patience of a philofopher, and let whatever be the event, will act agreeable to the character you wish me to preServe.
But, O! my friend, how shall I con-fefs to you, that all the misery this most valuable of women has endured, with refpect to her hushand’s temper, has all been derived from me. The poor wretched, injured Leicester—Freeman has discovered, that he is actually flighty at times.
I have employed a perSon to examine into his family—and am affured, no tincture of it can^ be found—his brain was certainly shook by the distresses I heaped upon him—Save me, Hendon, O 1 Save me from this most inlupportable of reflections.
The Secret must be buried in our own breasts—Sor what an object of horror H 2	should
J40	xtiJi.
should 1 become to the wife—what a i to the children of fuch a cruelly-tn ' being; who was probably endowed every requisite qualification for ht nefs.—But, if I dwell upon the deSpi deed, or most fatal consequences, I myself, become frantic.
I am, &c.
Clerag
Letter XXIV.
From the Same to the Same.
POOR Leicester is indeed retur and greatly indifpoSed—a bur heat and strong pulse are fussicient t( form, even me, that a fever is worl upon him.
H is wife, notwithstanding all her vocations, has a tender and beautiful licitude in her countenance. Her vision is undoubtedly at stake—but ss
flips
Miss LE FEVER. 149
Superior to every Selfish consideration, and
feels for him alone.
Freeman has been with him, and says he has every fymptom of a malignant complaint, and that in all probability it will be fatal.
Two lovely children already in being, and a third not far distant—what must her apprehensions be—but was she not too high-minded to accept of the assistance of friendship ? Do you not know a per^ Son, that would rejoice in Snelteringi her from every inconvenience ? Mrs. Le Fever is terribly alarmed—what will become of her dear child —Hov/ will she Support her Separation from the best of hushands?—-it makes her recollect all she herSelf has endured, and hoped her last comfort would have been exempt from.
Ah! thou worthy deceived creature-— he is as little deferving of your regret as your daughter’s affection—but he is, alas, what I have rendered him.
H 3	If
150 IHE rilSTGRY OF
If he dies—she shall be mine—her c dren my children—her mother my i ther, and her afflictions—but she sho loSe her SenSe of them, in my tenderi and assiduity.
Would she yet persist, is her refuSal me, as Lord Clerage, think you ?—i’ fliall I best fucceed under my prefent her appearance ?—We will give the c sideration due weight at fome future riod.
h||s. Freeman has not left her frS since her hushand’s arrival—every ci ture in the place are interested in happinefs—for,‘has fne not long prorr ed theirs—she has been a blessing to neighbourhood—and shall hereafter b —even me.
So violent a distemper, must Soon minate one way or other—that is aha] circumstance—the tortures of SuSpenSe harcl to endure.
Freeman is pussing over—I must quire how matters go—if he sho
be better—well; would not that be a very comfortable piece of information— but he is not a kind hushand, George— cease villain, will you not stop one step Sliort of the grave—he is the father of a family—which family, if he is called a-way, shall be mine—nor shall they feel his lofs, tho’ but for a single moment.
He is much worSe ; and Mrs. Leicester begs to fpeak with me.
What can she want with me—I cannot restrain the progrefs of a raging distemper—my interest does not extend to the mansions of death—I am, however, predetermined to comply with her request, whatsoever it may be—can she demand any thing, I could refuSe to grant.
She was in her parlor, George, her eyes betrayed the too generous, and strong Sensibility of her heart.
I beg your pardon. Sir, Said she, rising on my entrance—but 1 am encouraged
H 4	hy
by your general character, no lefs thar my own private knowledge of your diS position, to entreat one great favour o you—my mother, she is my only com fort—-is very unfit for melancholy Scene: ►—will you. Sir, kindly perSuade her tc go to Mrs. Freeman’s houSe, until w< know the fate of the unhappy Sufferer— and exert your humanity to preServe tlii most valuable part of me.
I was strangely let down by the teno: of this request—for to render myself ii any degree serviceable to Mrs. Le Fever was obliging mySelf rather than her—an( 1 had flattered mySelf, quite the reverf would have been required of me.
You could not have ashed any thin! more agreeable to my inclination, Ma dam, returned I, than to fupport Mrs Le Fever—wshere shall I find her, to en gage her to favour me with her compa ny—but who will take care of you, an< lessen your fatigue.
I ar
Miss LE FEVER. 15:
I am not sensible to any at preSent, Sir said she—Mrs. Freeman will be with m( as much as possible, and I shall do verj well, when I once know my mother is hap pily Situated—here she comes—if yoi will employ your rhetoric in fo humane t caufe.
I found it no eafy tash to prevail upor her to quit her child at fo trying t period—but having remonstrated to her, that she had other children to demand hei care—it was at last fettled, that they and their nuisse should accompany her to out habitation. She had, it Seems, withstood the perSuasion of every other perfon, but my arguments were enforced with the complacence of a stranger, and the weight t)f disinterestednefs—which was what Mrs. Leicester depended upon in her application to me. This point got over, Ire-turned once more to Mrs. Leicester’s, in-order to Speak with Mrs. Freeman.
Consider, my dear Madam, Said I, the alarming circumstances your friend is un-H 5	der
134-	JLiiaiuKY or
der—do not permit her to undergo mo: fatigue than her strength can bear—ar if possible save her from every Suffering.
I shall do every thing in my powe Sir, replied the lady, but Mrs. Leicest upon theSe occasions changes her ver nature. She is no longer the gentle, pe Suadable creature, you and I have ev( known her—but obstinate and immow able~nor could you prevent her attenc ance upon her hushand, if even her ow life was in danger.
I know your affection for her, cried is equal to my own—yet I cannot hei conjuring you, (but recollecting how ur befiting my warmth,) I am certain, adde J, in a much lower key, you will be ver careful of her—for she is a most amiabl woman.
She beheld me with visible Surprist (we cannot be always upon our guard, especially on theSe trying occasions, whe all one’s happineSs is at stake.
P
Miss LE FEVER. j
Do you think she will ever be Lac Clerage.
I am, &c.
Clerage,
Letter XXV.
From the Same to the Same.
He is dead, George—it was a foil to trouble you with vain repetitior
of apprehensions and disturbances^-h
departed this very morning.
Mrs. Leicester never quitted his bed side, until he had breathed his last—bn bears the fliock and fatigue with amazing fortitude.
I wrote an account of his illneSs t( Mrs. LeeSon, who immediately Sent dov:i a preSent of fifty pounds, to defray ex tra expences, in case of the contingence that threatened, and has now taken place: id 6	witl
with the warmest assurances of friendship, in cafe Mrs. Leicester should become a widow.
Her close confinement, and watching, have altered her prodigiousty.
I would have perfuaded her to leave ' the house—but she fays, death has no terrors for her, nor will she fly from it. She fupported every turn of the unhappy fufferer’s temper without complaint, even to the cruel reproaches, that she would rejoice in her furvival, and foon bestow herself upon another.
Nor shall the prophecy be unfulfilled.
I have already applied to Lady Catharine, as from my proper self by letter, wherein I have informed her of Leicester’s death, and my unextinguished affection for his charming widow—I have likewise intreated her ladyship to consider, that it is impossible for me to offer, or her to accept, of any assistance of mine, under her prefent circumstances — but I have affured her, that the moment
decency
Miss LE FEVER. 157
decency will permit, I mean, to propose myself upon the fame terms, she (Lady Catharine) once fo much approved : I therefore must hope, I add, that she will not let her be reduced to the necessity (which must certainly otherwise be the cafe) of foliciting charity from any other quarter, by taking her under her protection—particularly as an expensive time is approaching, and she has even now two children that must be provided for.
Her anSwer cannot but be propitious; tho’ she defpifed and ridiculed me for re-linguishing my pretensions in favour of the deceased, and abhorred his very name —all animosity, all difesteem, ought now to terminate—Soft rest his dust, for he was my Le Fever’s hushand ; be all his faults forgotten, for he was the father of her lovely children.—No, no, George, it is only cowards that purfue beyond the grave—I am not one of thoSe curs, that
can
can delight in teazing a carcase, that dea has rendered sacred.
I can scarce forbear trusting the wort: hearted Mrs. Freeman with all myscheiTu But the furest method not to be cenfure is, to preserve unrevealed what might i cur it: I will therefore persist in my i crecy, until it can no longer avail me-and will then break out in my own lor neglected brightneSs, to captivate the fa Andromacha—she, in the anguiflt of h foul, weeps over her tender infants—bi the good time will come, when weepir shall be no more—and she shall receh incontestible proofs of my repentant and love.
I am, &c.
Clerage.
Letter XXVI.
Mrs. Freeman to Mifs Gibson.
POOR Leicester—well—all is at a end with him, as I told you, in few words, by the last postj and his wil
one
once more at liberty to make her fortune.
Lord Clerage may have his faults, Penelope ; but he has difplayed fuch goodnefs of heart, fuch delicacy towards our friend, that they ought never more to be remembered. Some perfon it Seems, in the neighbourhood, informed him of Mrs. Leicester’s circumstances.
He instantly applied to that unfeeling Lady Catharine, in her favour; and has obtained a hundred pounds a year for her, by way of annuity, fo long as she remains a v/idow.
Had he offered his whole estate to have Saved her from the last extremity, she would not have accepted a single shilling —but from the hands of Lady Catharine it cannot be refused ; and with the addition of her mother’s pittance, and Mrs. Leefon’s friendly compliments, she may now provide for herself and family very comfortably in the country.
But
i you	X jh Ji X a 1	1 K. y u r
But to shew you the shocking nature o that woman of quality, reproaches wouh intermix with benevolence. She broad! insinuates, what she might have been— and concludes with hoping, that she ha Smarted too Sensibly for her folly ever to re peat it—that fuch men as Lord Clerage are not every day to be met with, and in ge neral when once repulSed, their friendship is utterly lost—but that he had worked Sc strongly upon her tendernefs (Lady Catharine know any thing of tendernefs. my dear) by his renewed eloquence, as to make her recollect all the Soothing' the Soft perSuasion Kitty Le Fever was once mistreSs of—and in Spite of all her resolutions to the contrary, induced her So far to consider her, as to Save her from starving. She has a fine fortune—and for the poor children’s fake, must be tolerated in h^r infolence—esse who could endure it.
I fuppofe we shall hear more of his Lordship in due time; and if he had my
voice
Miss LE bEVLK. i6i
voice before, which you are fenfible he really had, it will now be doubled and redoubled in his interest.
Mrs. Leicesteriscertainly a most charming woman; but 1 would nor wish, my Lord, to behold her at prefent—she is not the Same creature, except in disposition, where flie will ever remain unchanged.
Nothing upon earth could have So effectually relieved her as this annuity ; I could idolize the first Suggestor of it; the parSonage-houSe must be quitted as Soon
as possible---they are to live with us,
at least for a year or fo—and we shall all be one family, as we have long been one heart.
I strongly fufpect there is a perSon, however, that must yet be unhappy, if my conjectures, reSpecting Lord Clerage’s intentions, are just—and that is the valuable Clayton. I am convinced he loves her, better perhaps than he himSelf may
have
.L XI J:. AJLiOlL/A-X %J r
have been aware of; and would foon be perking up his ears to folicit a return.
Well, furely Freeman and myself art patterns of conjugal felicity : nor can 1 wonder at Mr. Clayton’s wifliing to follow So happy an example. I do not remember that he has ever once attemptee to oppoSe my inclination, or contradid my vtill—I may, therefore, with greai propriety declare, I have never diSobey-ed him. I Sometimes examine my glaSs. and now and then look into my mind, tc discover, if possible, the charm that Sc afconishingly faScinates him—it lies nor, my friend, within my depth, I do affure you. I am neither old, ugly, nor an absolute drivelser—but certainly never merited the happy fate that has awaited me: nor could there be the least probability oi my fixing fo excellent a heart. I dare believe (nay he has told me fo himSelf, as Sir Harry Seycamore says) that he (poor foul) thinks me in every degree equal to the incomparable Mrs.' Leicester.
There
Miss LE FEVER. iff
' There is no accounting for it—but th very extraordinary people of each sex, ar in general the most unfortunate; hai Mrs. Leicester’s merit been of a cornmo size, she had perhaps avoided all the m: Sery she has experienced—but then sh would never have been Lady Clerage-there I am most effectually silenced—fc to be a Lady, who would not endure long Succession of grievances.
I am, &c.
M. Freeman.
Letter XXVII.
From the Same to the Same.
IA M So astonished, my Penelope-that I know' not when I shall recove mySelS; this worthy Mr. Clayton, m hushand’s great benefactor, the friend c every heart, and the extraordinary favot
rit
104	IHEniSTORyOF
rite of the poor deceived Leicester’s, i no other than that very Lord Clerag you have So frequently heard me mer tion : the manner I discovered it was this
Mrs. Leicester is So indiSpoSed, thi sire Seldom quits her chamber, thoug little more than the common conSequent of her prefent condition. Mrs. Le Fev( naturally fpends her whole time with h( child, and we only visit them occasion a ly. Freeman is obliged to be abSent mt ny hours in the'day with his patients-and Mr. Clayton, as he was called, gt nerally amuSed himfelf with reading c v/riting, when he could not have our con pany, I have often wondered at the pi culiarjty of his humour.
I had been up stairs with Mrs. Leice ter ; and finding her fpirits would not be; much conversation, I told Mr. Claytoi that if he pleased, we would drink oi tea that afternoon in my parlour.
He looked alarmed—is Mrs. Leicest worSe, Madam, demanded he ?
’N
Miss LE FEVER. 165
No, Sir, not as to her health I believe ; but she seems very low, and I fear our chat would be too much for her.
Just as you pleaSe, Madam, returned he (though with visible reluctance) and the tea was brought in.
Now, thought I, as the opportunity is fo fair, I will feel his pulse a little, for 1 had too much regard for him, not to be grieved at any profpect of affliction to his heart.
What an alteration. Said I, does a fev^ years produce in fome people—poor Mrs, Leicester—who, that knew Mifs Le Fever, would conceive it possible.
Who indeed, returned he, hastily, yet is file still lovely—but recollecting himSelf, he in fome degree moderated the warmth of his accent, and added, I heard she was a very fine young lady.
I looked at him, and could perceive; his countenance was much confuSed—imputing it, however, to a wrong caufe, 1 passed it over. She was indeed, Sir,
Sale
Said I, the most beautiful creature I evei beheld ; no wonder Lord Clerage was Sc captivated—he sighed, I fancy the impression is not yet totally obliterated.
Obliterated, cried he, a Second time, forgetting himSelf, impossible—I fancy Mrs. Freeman (again restraining his feelings) the man that once loved Mrs. Leicester could not easily Subdue his passion for her.
I have a great notion. Said I, his lord-ship will renew his application, fo foon as circumstances will permit—and I greatly hope she will be prevailed upon to accept of him.
Ten thousand blefs—exclaimed he, but checking himfelf, he did not finish the Sentence; it will be very good of you, Madam, refumed he, after a pauSe, to interest yourSelf in his behalf, as his constancy and perseverance evince the strength of his affection.
I believe he deserves her, said I, (still So stupid as to be in the dark, with refpect
to
Miss LE FEVER. 167
to the real occasion of his odd behaviour,) but you will excuse me. Sir, if I tell you that I have obServed fome things in you, that befpeak the tenderest consideration for her; and I would not promote an union that might wound your peace.
My peace. Madam, (not apprehending me,) my peace, my happineSs, replied he, all depend upon my SucceSs ; she must not, she flrall not, refuSe my renewed—
How, Sir, cried I, you deal in contradictions Surely—yet your language, your countenance, are too intelligent for me to be deceived—is it possible, that under this diSguiSe 1 behold Lord Clerage.
Speak low I beSeech you. Madam—you have detected me—you have furpriSed me into a discovery, I but yesterday reSolved against^—1 am, indeed, that unhappy Cler-age—you know all my iniquities, my Sufferings—but to pity the miserable is your every day’s practice—tho’ as little deServ-
ing
IDO IHE JtUISTORy OF
ing of your kindnefs as the wretch now before you.
I again repeat, cried I, it is impossible—to what end can you have proceeded in the manner you have done ; heaping favours upon a family, without their even fufpecting their benefactor was fo near— I can recall innumerable instances to my remembrance of your humanity, your delicacy and generosity, nor shall I ever fail to honour the merits of fo noble a difpo-fition.
Hold, Mrs. Freeman, said he, you are grofsly deceived in your opinion of me. It is true, I have acted agreeable to all you mention, but since you have found me out in one refpect, I will not " conceal myself in another. I came down to this place for the most unworthy, the basest of purpoSes—but Mrs. Leicester’s goodnefs and virtue awed me into repentance, and totally fubdued the infernal principles by which I was actuated. 1 always held it for a rule, that \yhen a man became
iealous
Miss LE FEVLR. 169
jealous without a caufe, a woman refolved to justify his luSpicions—and I hoped to have recommended mySelf to that kind-neSs I conceived the hushand had forfeited—and by degrees have reduced your all amiable friend, to the mean level of the worst of her sex. You, my good Ma-darh, have nevTrthelefs been an eye-wit^ nefs of my conduct, formed even upon fo detestable a plan. The bar to every honourable expectation is now removed ; and if you can perSuade yourSelf, that I am capable of making Mrs. Leicester happy, employ your voice in my favour, otherwise I will forego my purfuit, and never once interrupt her.
What a daring, and at the fame time, what a great foul this man mustpoffefs.
I affured him of my vote and utmost interest, begged him not to quit our family—and impatiently wished for my huf-' band’s return.
I am concerned, said he, to think how Freeman will be shocked at the diScove-VoL. II.	I	ry
ry—to lose his friend, and find an impostor in his houSe—-but I fuppofe it cannot be avoided.
Indeed, my Lord, replied si I will not profefs myself one of those wives, that can conceal much from their hushand’s; e-fpecially from fuch a hushand as I am blef-fed with—you can have nothing to fear from him—he knows human nature. Sir, and, however vain the observation, is no stranger to the power of love—and the extraordinary goodnefs and benevolence you have fo long practised, ought perfectly to erase every unpleafing remembrance.
Freeman returned, tho’ much fatigued with riding, with his ufual good humour. I broke the matter to him, in the most prepared manner I was capable of—but I could perceive the lofs of his friend, (as his Lordship foretold,) funk very deep.
Lord Clerage was all condescension, felf-accuSation and penitence—and who would not have forgiven fuch an offender.
It
Miss LL bhVLK. 171
It was now agreed, that he should mention an intention to leave Brickley—and withdraw himfelf without the knowledge of any one; and that Mrs. Leicester should never be made acquainted with the particulars of his conduct, until she had been fome time Lady Clerage.
His Lordship is either to build or purchase a house in our neighbourhood, and we shall all live, I hope, to blefs the fertility and whimsicalnefs of his invention.
I received a message from Mrs. Leicester during our conversation, requesting my company; which 1 instantly complied with, and endeavoured to compose my features into their ufual gravity.
But the thoughts of Lord and Lady Clerage, communicated fuch an irresistible degree of risibility to my whole afpect, that my friends challenged me for the good news the moment they beheld me, which I had bound myself to keep secret. I contrived, however, to amuse and trifle with them So dexteroufly, that they at I 2	length
172 IHE MISTORy OF
length lost their scent, and I came oss triumphant.
Be comforted, my girl, you shall not loSe a hushand by the bargain—Clayton was a serious foul—we will find you fomething hereafter, that shall better fuit your taste,
I am, &c.
M. Freeman.
Letter XXVIII.
Li?rJ Clerage to George Hendon.
NOW, my friendly George, am I once more become a candidate for happipefs in my own proper perfon.
Th^ phace, the satisfaction I have lo long enjoyed, in the friendship and approbation of these worthy people at Brickley, is put upon the hazard, in order to recommend mySelf in a character of still
greater
Miss LE FEVLR. 175
greater importance—in a word. Freeman and his wife know me for that wretched thing Clerage.
But I have as yet no great caufe for complaint; Mrs. Leicester lives, and is at liberty—and must yield herSelf to the united importunities of those perfons that condefcend to efpouSe my interest.
She has, its true, one alarming extremity to pafs through; but why should it be more fi-ital at this, than other preceding periods—only to render me more completely undone.
Mrs. Freeman has kindly touched upon Clerage’s merits, to the mother and daughter; intimating, that she heard it was his intention to offer himself a second time.
Mrs. Leicester appeared furpriSed, but not disagreeably ; his Lordship, Said she, must have too much delicacy, not to be Sensible of the impropriety of visiting me for Some months at least ; for could I So Soon forget what is due to the memory
I 3	of
174 The Historv of
of a hushand, it is impossible I should b come unmindful of my duty to my ch • dren—nay children yet unborn.
This restriction is unanfwerable, and will pay all proper honour to it. IV caufe shall be fubmited to the intire m nagement of Freeman and his wife; tin are friends to each party, and will do the justice.
My bob-wig shall be hung up as trophy of my victory ; for I could by r other means on earth have been fuccel ful; and 1 shall ever rejoice in the reco lection of my fober character.
I will tell you what I propose. I wi apply to Lady Catharine for the feve thousand pounds she once offered me, an make Lady Clerage a settlement fuitab! to her merit and my love; then imm( diately, by deed of gift, divide her fortur equally amongst the little children; fc they must not be exposed, George, t the precarious dependance on capriciot wills.
Ye
Miss LE FEVER. lyf
Yet fair and flattering as my preSem profpects are, I cannot be the gay fellow you once knew me; nor even the actual obtaining Mrs. Leicester’s hand car render me fo. That baSe, that cruel action against her hushand, with all its hor rid conSequences, perpetually haunts mj breast; he might now have been alive, and beyond description happy, if my villainy had been unperpetrated—that wa\ lies the most unfpeakable of horror—ah 1 Hendon, let us fly it for ever.
In my private connexions, I have learn ed what I greatly wanted—a proper idej of domestic felicity; there is nothing com-parable, my friend, to the union of twc fenfible and well cultivated hearts—it is indeed friendship—and it is fomething more—what are all the pleafures, the bustles I have been accustomed to, when put in competition with one evening’s Solid and Substantial Satisfaction.
I shall henceforth become a very singular man of quality. No forms will be ob-I 4	Served
served by me,.but fuch as tend to co firm or promote the joys of Society. N houSe shall ever be open to the worth (tho’ unfortunate) part of my Species, n< ihall the first peer in the realm meet wi a more welcome reception. They Sni have the privilege of enjoying all th affluence can give, without my exactir that Servile and too general price—tl Sacrifice of their Sincerity or veracity-they shall not, George, be obliged ■ laugh at my Lordjhifs jest, however bo or unmeaning. “ I will have no pi, stuck upon my fleeve.”—The honest, tl generous Sentiments they feel, shall 1 communicated with all due confidence nor shall they ever remember my Super ority in the articles of title or fortune but to reflect, how empty and contempt ble those possessions, unlefs in conjuni tion with a noble and enlarged heart.
What woman So capable of enteric into all my rational schemes, as Mr Leicester; she who was educated in a
th
Miss LE FEVER. 17
the fplendor, the folly of nobility ; expe rienced all the pride and haughty resent ment that informs the over-grovrn foul and has been fo severely disciplined in th school of adversity.
Happy Clerage, to have withstood th folicitations, the admonitions, of you friends; and not, in order to extirpate th Sense of disappointment, incurred the great est of misfortunes^—an indissoluble bond age.
How lifeleSs and unsatisfactory shoulc I have found the conversation of any othe woman—and by betraying the pre-en^ gagement of my affections, the evil wouk only have been the more abundantly aggravated.
I am, &c.
Clerage.
- I 5	Letter
/
Letter XXX.
Mrs. Freemant to Mifs Gibson.
I A M, my dear Penny, under the greai est apprehensions upon Mrs. Le: cester’s account ; she is, indeed, fafel delivered from her late unweildy state but a cough, that has for fome time him upon her, is in no degree abated, an Freeman seems to think, there is a stron, probability of its stealing upon her lung!
Lord Clerage has not the least idea c this alarming circumstance—he consider her as now released from every restrain! and looks forward with the utmost confi dence.
It would be a dreadful stroke to Mn Le Fever,' and an unfpeakable misfortun to the poor children—pretty orphans— three of them, my girl—but they shal never want a protecting roof—I wouh endeavour to Supply the loSs they wouh Sustain, Mrs. LeeSon will never forge
he
t	*
Miss LE FEVER. i
her godSon—and myXord shall give t last boy a claim to his consideration a kindnefs—by the only means, perhaps, his power.
He is to be christened privately, a Mr. Clayton will make his exit very fo afterwards.
The village and adjacent towns a apprised of his intention, and deeply t fected by it—Freeman had the care sheir healths, indeed; but his Lordshi ever since his arrival, has been alwa ready to relieve their hearts from fuffe ing, either by his interest, bounty, or ai vice.
I knownot which I ought to grieve me at—my friend’s death, or his Lordship disappointment; she would attain the fin period of all her hopes, fears, and miS ry—but his future days must be embitte; ed, by this Second deprivation of he: now, that by long acquaintance, and th most amiable conduct, she has fo infinite ly endeared herSelf to his affections. I 1 6	hi
his hour of gaiety, the lovelinefs of he figure, and the strength and improvemen of her understa.nding, were the only ob jects of his admiration ; but he has, dur ing his residence amongst us, had an op portunity of observing the various opera tions of her most excellent principles and the uniform Sweetnefs of her difposi tion.
The air may, however, do much foi her; and perhaps we may prevail upor her, to take a journey to Bristol.
She is eaSy in her provision, that is one grand fpecific, furrounded by her friends: and may continually amuse herself with the most innocent and engaging of companions, her children, for whom she has the tenderest feelings.
She has no violent affliction to contend with; from humanity, from a sense of her duty, and an inextinguishable fome-thing of regard, that we cannot divest ourselves of, for So near a relation as a hushand. Site left nothing undone, to prolong
Miss LE FEVER. i8;
long or render his existence comfortable but now the tryal is past; it must be im possible for her to wish the fond tyran restored ; nor does file affect any abfurdi ties. She will, hereafter, have no way ward humours to confult, no unneceffan mortifications to endure; but all will b« fo foothing and salutary, as (I flatter my self) will check the progreSs of this mof fatal distemper.
My Lord has not yet seen her, since she began to sit up; and will be agreeably, furpriSed when he does obtain thai indulgence, at the amendment in hei looks, notwithstanding all her weaknefs; her beauty triumphs over diSeafe, nay 1 believe death itSelf, in the first instance, will be incapable of Subduing it.
I wonder what she will say, when ssie finds his Lordship is determined to make her an early visit. Can she be free from all that female vanity, you and I are sc much alive to —O! how should I exult in the power of my charms, that could
not
not only have retained the attachment i a very fine young gentleman, for fo m; ny fuccessive years, but fo perfectly en dicated every tincture of impropriety froi his composition. Can any thing be moi flattering, than to behold a proselyte ( one’s own making—a proselyte to one irresistible merit—had fuch eclat awaite me, my whimsical brain would certain] have been overturned—and yet you wi find this equal-minded woman will h ment, and make fuch an affliction of th matter, that 1 question if it does not, fc fome time, retard the re-establishment c her health.
Freeman, as I have already told you makes a most valuable hushand ; I an not Such a wretch, as either to wish t< recall the confession, or refuse confirming it; he is a very decent figure—has ar entertaining turn, and tells a story witl Such good nature and drollery, that yoi would doat upon him: but when I reflect that it was only ash and have—nay. that I mySelf almost made the first advances,
Mis^s LE FEVER. iS^
vances, or his humility would have kept him till this blessed moment, for ought I know, at aweful distance—I could half regret yielding myself fo quietly, even to a situation, that 1 have JuJb sense enough to prefer, to whatever I have seen or known since the hour of my birth.
I should have played off a few airs at least ; or fuppofe, in order to have wound up the amour with fome fpirit, I had, in the last month of his probation, given him a booby 1 had heartily defpifed as a rival; when, having harraffed him fome time, and exposed him to the danger of a broken head (for your apothecaries are no fwords-men) I might have condescended to a reconciliation, laughed at his folly, and patched up the wedding in a trice; the man, poor foul, would then naturally have concluded, that all his Sufferings were at an end, eSpecially, as I, on the first Setting out, should have aS-fisted the pleafing deception, till I found him in that kind of Security, that would
render
render him most sensible of a disagreeable change—then rebelling all at once, 1 should have given him to understand, that fuch fupineneSs was never intended for him, I might have brought him to obey my nod, and fubferibe to my abfo-lute fovereignty.
Instead of which, we are the veriest turtles in nature ; my will undoubtedly is his law; but would you believe it, I am So mean,, as to Suit it to what I am convinced is his’private inclination: fo that when he conforms to it with a shew of obliging m.e, he is in reality only obliging himself.
But furely this levity is ill-timed, when my friends health is affected—yet to anticipate, is to fuffer a double, nay a treble portion of misery. I must preserve, I must exercise my fpirits, 'for her fake ; the time is now approaching, my Penelope, when I may with propriety call forth her Smiles, and re-animate a Spark of vivacity in her heart.
Leicester
Miss L h h L V D K. i b’5
Leicester has been .dead above six months ; and many a lady hat, in a much shorter period, not only been married to a second hushand, but fo heartily weary of him alSo, as to be equally impatient to rid herSelf of him, in an honest way.
I have only one piece of advice to give you, my dear, and Snail then conclude.
You can never be So foolifli as to fall in love with my idle flights; no, my good girl, if you can diScover one decent feature, in my real character, as a wife or friend, adopt it, if you pleaSe, for your rule of action—but never fuffer yourSelf to be misted, by the vanities of even Yours, &c.
M. Freeman.
Letter XXXI.
From the Same to the Same.
Lord clerage, as Mr. Clayton, my Penelope, has been admitted to visit his fair mistrefs. Freeman, and we all drank tea v;ith her.	A
A warm room, and the conversation o: friendship, will inSensibly communicate t glow both to the complexion and heart.
No face was ever fairer than Mrs Leicester’s, no eyes brighter. Softer, or mort intelligent. She appeared this afternoor to uncommon advantage ; a blush, mort lovely than any thing I ever Saw in nature, adorned her cheek—and her beautifully shading eye-lashes, could not be difregarded, her miouth, her teeth, her hair, are just Such as madam Diana li SuppoSed to be distinguished with; hei hand and arm (I always wear gloves when Seated near them, to prevent mine from being intirely out of countenance)—but my Lord shall one day deScribe them to you, with very many other striking graces both of perSon and mind.
But her ugly cough would frequently check our admiration, by awakening us to the alarming conScioufneSs, that even that finished creature was Subject to the common lot of mortality.
She
Miss LE FEVER. 1S7
She thanked us all in the fweeteS terms, for our tender care and obliginc assiduity towards her—obServing how * few years had branched out mine in particular, as she had no doubt but her children would reap the benefit ofmycxtra' ordinary partiality for their mother. Mrs Le Fever, she added, would be esteemed for her own sake—but her helpleSs innocents, could alone experience the of sices of benevolence, in pity to their tender age, or from an extension of that friendship, which had been fo liberal!) dealt out to their fond parent. To have them defended from the miseries of life, and the contagion of ambition and vanity, was her last and most earnest wish.
We endeavoured to divert her thought' from fuch serious confiderations—but she frequently recurred to them, as if to give them their desired impression upon our hearts.
She must be sensible of her declining state; tho’ she forbears the direct mention ^	of
of it; and fought in this moment to con vey fome distant preparation to us.
But how prompt we are to fear—when we fo abundantly love. She is visibl) better, will get abroad next week, ant muSt foon recover her uSual chearfulnefs.
Mrs. Le Fever was not much affectec by her conversation, by being accustomec to it, I SuppoSe—but, my Lord, Freemai and mySelf, were Searched to the quid by it—the afflicted lover, looked now oi me, and then upon Mrs. Leicester, as i he intreated me to give him that hope, h< could not find in his own breast.
We told^her, Mr. Clayton intended t< leave us the latter end of the next week.
She was much concerned at the news— professed her gratitude for the many fa vours he had conferred upon her, and bef wishes for his future happineSs.
I shall be glad when he is gone, Sinc( it is necessary we should be Separated fo Some little time, for I fufpect we shal have- fine work in the farewell Scene—i
Wi
Miss L L b L V L R, 189
we may ]udge from what his voice and countenance betrayed in the bare contemplation of it—but I shall advise him to flip away without any tender ceremony.
I do not fuppofe, that ever man had a truer affection for woman, and they must be happy.
The little fellow has been called Augustus, (these great men, have always half-a-dozen great names) after his Lord-fliip—tho’ Mrs. Leicester is far shorn conceiving the reafon—So Philip by accident, and Augustus by intention, will have e-qual recommendations to his favour.
We had fome difficulty to reconcile the humble mother to fo noble an appellation » the very nam.e, said she, will fill his infant mind with those lofty sentiments, from which I am fo anxious to secure him.
We rallied her upon the only wer.knefs we had ever discovered her capable of; and begged her to recollect, that both Cm-* fers and Alexanders followed the plough in her very neighbourhood; and she could
not
not furely wish the fate of Augustus to be inferior to theirs; besides, we added, it was Mr. Clayton’s request, who begged she would allow him to be one of the god-fathers, and could not be refused.
This last plea overcame her, and she can now boast a Philip, an Augustus, and a Mary (there have been queens of the name. Madam, though perhaps not in Ithaca) in her tender progeny.
^ * * * Lord Clerage has left us—left us in the utmost difconfolation.
Mrs. Le Fever had fo much esteem for him, that her regret is heart-felt; I wish It was convenient to let her into his secret hiStory—but to tell her, would be to tell her daughter (for they can keep nothing from each other but misfortunes) which would be bounding infinitely beyond what is consistent with our present views and designs.
We now begin once more to live. Mrs. Le hlever, and Mrs. Leicester, have filled
up
Miss LE FEVLR. 191
up every vacancy at our happy table (except one little place reserved for his lord-ship,) whom I expect to hear from every day on a new account, and cannot help being alarmed for the consequence. Yet it cannot Surely be a grievance, to have the proSpect of being a woman of quality; her nature is SuSceptible of every natural impression, and this can never be resisted if she is human.
Poor Freeman has but an uneaSy time of it; I am incessantly buzzing, either my hopes or my fears, in his honest ears, from the instant he enters the doors, till the moment he quits them: he fmilea most pleasingly at the one, and patheti- ' cally shakes his head at the other.
It is well you live at fome distance; for I am satisfied you would So approve him for his humanity, his good humour, and twenty other perfections, that, in the end, you would wish your friend fairly out of the way, to give yourSelf an opportunity
IHE ra IS TORY OF
portunity of setting your cap at fo mud merit.
But you simple girl you, do you con sider, that an attachment like ours, coulc not be dissolved without much bustle. The long-drawn face, the impending hat-band, how would you encounter them ^ to have days and weeks, and months pafs away, yet the remembrance of his Polly unobliterated ; could yon perSevere in fpread-ing the repeatedly fuccefslefs bait—no, no, believe me, fo much trouble would attend the attempt, that you had better pray for the continuance of Mrs. Freeman’s life, and direct all your allurements to fome other quarter.
I have ran my eye over what I have written, and sind fo little in it either to entertain or instruct, and you know I am passionately fond of both, that 1 will defer, fending it in till I can add an account of his Lordship’s proceedings; and lest they should require a large fpace of paper.
Miss J-« D T D V H K. 193
per, I will break off abruptly, and pur-Sue my avocations.
It is as I apprehended ; Mrs. Leicester is thrown into the greatest consternation, dilemma and affliction, imaginable, by Lord Clerage’s declaring, by a note, his intention to visit her.
I undertook his cauSe.—-
My dear Kitty, Said I, consider what is due to yourSelf and family; how precarious your dependence upon the haughty and capricious Lady Catharine ; and how much my Lord has already done for you ; you cannot, you ought not to persist in your refusal of him.
O my mother, O my children, exclaimed she, your interest and happineSs will ever be my leading Spring of action— but a Second marriage is contrary to all my resolutions, my principles; and especially with a man that once So outrage-oufly persecuted and tormented me.
Vol.il	K	You
You do not, my dear, returned I, act upon this occasion, agreeable to your cha racter—can you be fo unrelenting, as tc .accept of no humiliation ? No—
/ My much valued friend, cried fire, in terrupting me, you must not eSpouSe Sc improper a cauSe; when Lord Clerag( was pleaSed to honour me with his ad dresses, 1 was not the woman I now am Youth, and unimpaired health, were a least mine, and the interesting incum' brances of domestic life, not only fo reign to my possession, but strangers tc my heart. Yet at that very period, onl] newly reduced from affluence, and un practised in the inconveniences of pover ty; with much latent vanity, and an in finite portion of pride, I pronounced hin not the man I could make choice of ■ and shall I now betray myself into So unequal an union. Shall I endeavour tc strike out a Spark of ambition, where nc materials have been lodged; it is im' possible; he is still young and gay, hov
unsi
/
LViiss j_,n TnvnK. 195
infit a wife must I then be for him ; my' institution has received fome shocks, hat will expose me to an early old age, md my vivacity is wholly extinguished ; s there no w^ay of saving my children, DUt by sacrificing myself; of making my nother happy, but at the price of my )wn peace ; or of satisfying my friends, DUt by delivering up myself to what my rery foul abhors—yet I will Suffer him to aehold me, reSumed she, after a short
pause-----wan and drooping as I am, it
mist restore him to his reafon—he fliall /isit us, my Freeman, and if we cannot accomplish, we will fubdue his wishes.
I was obliged to let her enjoy this flattering hope; it has, my dear, intirely possessed her; and I could perceive, that she actually exulted in her faded charms, is she viewed herSelf tranfiently in the glaSs, from considering it as the only means of securing her, from what she is So extremely averSe to.
Kg	But
But I have been told, Mrs. Penelop that there is a wide difference betwee refusing an overture of this nature, i the first and second perfon—my Lor has rhetoric, my Lord has refolution and that he may prevail, is the earne wish of
Yours, &c.
M. Freeman.
Letter XXXII.
Lord Clerage to Sir George Hendon
HOW egregiousty ;we deceive oui selves, George ; my vivacity seem ed indeed to be totally fubdued, but single ray of complacence from that foi power that held it in bondage, has not called it forth to new life and vigour.
I arrived at Brickley about 12 o’clock and sent my,compliments to the family 0 families.
Freemai
Miss d sh T D \ n K. 197
Freeman immediately waited upon me, and with all the worthy rapture, fuch fouls as his are only capable of, welcomed me to the place I had So lately quitted.
I enquired after his wife Mrs. Le Fever, but above all, my Mrs. Leicester; he looked a little difcouraging ; I would not however imbibe the mortifying intimation, but determined to judge for myself by the reception I met with.
I found Mrs. Le Fever, Mrs. Freeman, Philip, Polly, and their beloved mother, all assembled in the well-known parlour.
Without doubt, flie had endeavoured to prepare herself for the ren-counter, but her countenance neverthelefs evinced, that her heart was not wholly unagitated.
Philip, tho’ little turned of three years old, foon learned to carefs me; and if the mother’s eyes were unpropitious to her lover, 'she beheld his love for her children, with visible approbation.
K 3	We
We dined together—she behaved v/it all that eaSe and dignity, I fo much ac mired on my first acquaintance with hei The afternoon declined, yet no proSpet of exchanging one interesting Syllable.
I gave Freeman an item—he commii nicated it to his wife, but not fo dexte rousiy, as to escape Mrs. Leicester’s ot fervation.
My Lord, Said she, the reServes tha are amiable at one age, are abSurd a another; this company and mySelf are we! apprized of your generous intention ; an 1 beg we may give the matter a fair di: cuffion in the circle of friendship.
So far from being under the least di: advantage, by complying with my re quest—your cauSe will be strengthened you have gained the v/hole party, b your unexampled constancy, and othe merits, which 1 will not now enter upor 1 only beg to be allowed to paint thing as they strike me, and if you can prov my objections to be frivolous or insic
nifican
Miss L L h L V L R. ipg
nificant, I will fubmit to the general decision.
We yeilded the point; tho’predetermined to be unconvinced.
It is now fome years, my Lord, refumed she, since you made me the lame noble offer you now condefcend to repeat. At that period, my youth, education, and the recent fufferings of my father, in the cauSe of his country, might in Some degree have excufed the warmth of your attachment, and reconciled the world to So unSuitable an union. I was then, however, not only pre engaged in my affections, but strongly prejudiced against Some part of your character. I refuSed you, my Lord™give me leave to awaken your pride, by re- ■ peating the indigent Kitty Le Fever, haughtily refuSed you, and married the man of her acknowledged preference. You Surely must recollect all the rage and indignation this treatment occasioned you to feel. That man is now no more, but notwithstanding his body is lodged in the' K 4	grave,
grave, his memory lives, and will evei continue to live in his wife’s heart-three children have furvived him, poor unportioned children ; at this moment dependant on the bounty of a woman that has stipulated to withdraw it, if their mother renounces her widowhood. You must re-menrber Kitty Le Fever’s perSon—Mrs. Leicester hardly bears any resemblance of her—her Spirits are depressed, her mind strongly, strongly disinclined to change her condition, and incapable of loving even your Lordship ; -ought you then to advance fuch a being to the participation of your rank and fortune. Nay, this is not all; flie has a mother, wshoSe happinefs is dearer to her than her own, from whom file is refolved never to be Separated—what a houseful of beggars, my Lord, might you boast, if you was to persist in your evidently not well-considered refolution. Difgusted by the cold behaviour of your wife, and distracted with the noiSe and confusion of her^ Leicester’s
children.
children, your home would become hateful to you ; and the ridicule of your friends would restrain you from going a-broad; thus would your life become a burthen, and you would hot fail to curSe the hour that had been witneSs to your obtaining fo preposterolis a wish, as uniting yourSelf to the inconveniences I have described—you Seem impatient, my Lord, to reply, but weigh well your determi-station, for your future happineSs absolutely depends upon it.
My dear Mrs. Leicester, cried I, have I not heard you to the utmost, without even attempting to interrupt you ? Only allow me the Same privilege, and I have little more to ash. My anSwer, indeed, will not long detain you; I have never tasted felicity since your refusal (words have no terrors for me, it was the deed that stabbed me to the heart,) of me, nor have I any other jiroSpect of being restored to it, than by your acceptance of me. I love Mrs. Le Fever, your children are K 5	dear
dear to me; my fortune is fussicient foi us all. Your Serious conversation wil delight me beyond all the giddy Sallies or earth, and I will never ceaSe my Solicitations, until you conSent to be mine.
Her features fell in that peculiar manner that denotes disappointment.
I cannot contend, my Lord, Said she; it is not for me to fight against my own interest. For my mother and childrens fake alone, I wish my days to be prolonged, and what is it that for their fakes I would not endure ^—But the concession is unworthy your acceptance, and 1 shall think meanly of you, if after what 1 have said, you can refolve to make the fortune of even my own dearest relations.—I will retire, and hope to hear you have renounced fo ignoble a purpose.
She left us, and you may gueSs the re-fult.
In about half an-hour’s time, she returned, unSent for, no affectation, no preSumption, I am grieved to perceive
what
what I cannot but admire, for is it not the strongest mark of cold indifference.
Freeman was disappointed, that I would not take up my residence under his roof, (it would not have been the first times George,) but fenfible of Mrs. Leicester’s delicate fancies, I had guarded against every diSgusting contingence, by borrowing a friend’s house at about four miles distance, during my continuance in the country.
I departed at eleven, and have thought of nothing but my approaching happi-neSs, until this very moment, that I am setting out to breakfast with my old approved friends. •
I am, &c.
Cler.4ge,
Letter XXXIII.
Mrs. Freeman to Mifs Gibsou.
The grand tryal, my Penelope, is over, and she has tacitly consented to favour Lord Clerage’s renewed Suit.
K 6	She
She insists upon it, that one year ant one month of her widowhood shall e lapse, before she is entertained on th< fubject of a second love. She kindly prO' miles to do all she can to join inclinatior to duty, and grows lefs and lefs averse tc the late formidable man.
But, my dear, even whilst she So agreeably amuses us, we cannot be inSenfiblethat she is stealing from us, and will too probably be Soon beyond our utmost reach. We consulted a physician yesterday, who is of opinion, that she is in a deep decay.
Two months are yet unexpired of the rime, she requires to be mistreSs of herSelf—but she can never be fo near her final dissolution; her frame, her complexion are fo delicate, that they deceive every beholder—and are more durable than we imagine, nor will her poor children be left destitute.
My Lord is with us every day. Not a word of love—but friendship, the most exalted friendship is his darling theme.
Mrs.
Mrs. Le Feveir blesses the day that her daughter became acquainted with him, and will more abundantly blefs the one that gives him to her for a sen.
Preparations are already carried on, (tho’ without Mrs. Leicester’s knowledge) Lady Catherine has already been applied to; and she declares herself not only in the fame mind with relpect to the seven thousand pounds, but offers to make it ten, and settlements are to be drawn accordingly. Death, all-tremendous death? forbear to interrupt sc noble a work.
Poor Freeman—shall I tell you how fond he is grown of a little quality hindingy my Lord, and your Lordship, is perpetually falling from his lips ; and I shrewdly fufpect, he enjoyed lefs satisfaction, (an ungrateful wretch) in the contemplation of his own great day, than he experiences in that of his Lordship’s.
1 wish he may not have reafon to repent the notions I fliall imbibe upon the occasion. To be So courted, who would not
be
be a widow? To be fo provided fc who would not be a second time difpost of?—Yet he may as well live—inferii and imperfect as he is, in comparison ( his great benefactor—for you know, P nelope, as I am not a Mrs. Leicester, might too probably sigh out the remaii der of my existence in folitary difeonten
My Lord proposes, if her l.adyshi (my heart dances at the found,) can ur dertake the journey, to carry her to tl German Spaw—the Bantlings and Mr Le Fever to remain at Brickley.
Her Ladyship must have a companic of her own sex, to render the expeditic pleasing—many a female would be gla of Such an opportunity of feeing the worst and but one, my dear, can be So happy j to enjoy it—can you not gueSs who th: one may be-—even honest Freeman’s wifi if he can prevail upon himself to fuppoi her absence for fo long a period. Bur h has always made a point of preferring h(
liappine:
happinefs to his own, she has therefore, nothing to fear from that quarter.
I could never have been convinced of the power of dreSs, but from ocular de-. monstration. Mr. Clayton had the utmost appearance of a fober, worthy gentleman—but Lord Clerage is quite the a-greeable man of quality—that ever my friend could refuse him and make choice of—there is no accounting for fancy, and I ought to be silent.
Mrs. Leicester has just left me, she is weak and low-fpirited; I felt the shock, and severely cenfured mySelf for the folly I had been practising ; and to add to my mortification. Sue expressed a desire to read what I had written.
You know my disposition. Said 1, I was all hope in the moment I exerciSed my pen, and my stile is consistent with its dictates. But your paleneSs and dejection have given Such a new turn to my thoughts, that I mySelf could not bear to run it o-
ver.
ver, judge then how unfit it must be foi your peruSal.
My dear Freeman, cried she, why will you fusser yourself fo be fo grossly ihissed by idle delusions; it is not my wedding, but my funeral, you will be called to attend. I feel myself die daily, tho’ I would Spare you as much as possible, if I did not fear the stroke would be the heavier by your being unprepared for it. I cannot have many weeks longer to continue with you; yet you leave me to perform the taste of resigning mySelf to the awful change alone and unassisted. You will behold death as an enemy, and fly the idea of him with horror; but there is a method to disarm him of his terrors, and teach us to welcome him as our tenderest friend. I will sit down with you, and fOr once fpeak all that is in my heart. You have been an eye-witnefs of the inconveniences, the fond affection of poor Leicester, frequently exposed me to; they could not always be concealed. You may
remember
remember how wifely I thought I had chosen—and how I hugged the dear deceitful expectation of a long fuccession of happinefs. You was likewise privy, in fome meafure, to my disappointment; Mr. Leicester was not proof against the only infirmity of his nature, jealoufy, and that was the fource of every error—he was taken away, however—and I am left to accomplish my last great work without interruption ; nor should I find it difficult, if you did not all confpire against me—you are affected—ah ! this is ever the cafe—and I must die in silence, and leave you comfortless.
Freeman came in at this juncture; his wife’s tears were too precious to be disregarded by him—but when he heard the cauSe he could have joined his own—and to avoid that strongest evidence of humane fenfibility, he hurried out of the apartment.
What will be the event of all theSe threatening appearances, heaven only
knows!
knows ! She does not grow better, and must be conscious of her own fufferings— but how shall I fupport—the thought, the thought alone is beyond meafure inSup-portable.
lam, &c.
M. Freeman.
Letter XXXIV.
From the Same to the Same,
WE can no longer resist the evidence of our own SenSes—Mrs. Leicester is unable to quit her room, and will foon be no more.
Lord Clerage—how would you compassionate him ? is utterly hopelefs—yet has he the refolution to preferve an out. ward compoSure; he Seldom indeed Speaks but with his eyes—and they are abundantly anxious and inquiSitive.
She
She is fubject to violent faintings, in one of which Freeman fuppofes she will-go olF.
And can I not only write, but behold fuch heart-wounding characters—I am callous, my dear, at present, but depend upon it the last stroke will not be unfelt.
I no longer wonder at all the elegiesj the beautiful complaints your poets,whoise fouls have been touched, have laid before us. I my Self could for ever dwell upon, the excellencies, the merits of my Sweet departing friend. But let me not rob her of one moment’s due attendance—I can: write to you, when she, alas ! is, beyond, my utmost care.
Yeti will give you the changes, the operations of this cruel undermining, in- ;.* curable diforder, as opportunity offers.
I have much to engage my tender attention. Lord Clerage, Mrs. Le Fever,, my hushand—but who shall footh my woes, or from whence can they derive the
stightest
fiightest mitigation—the power alone that inflicts them, can relieve them.
She is dying at this very period, in that stow peculiar manner of confumptions, tho’ not yet confined to her bed; nor will she be prevailed upon to deny herself the fight of her children.
She has had a severe fit this very morning—we all imagined it would have been her last—but she fell into a gentle steep, from which I hope she will awake refreshed.
She fends for me—I will not trefpafs an instant upon that patience, that is fuf-ficiently executed by fuffering.
Let me, let me. Penny, endeavour to describe fuch a scene to you, as fure no mortal was ever before a fpectator of.
1 entered Mrs. Leicester’s apartment trembling—perhaps, thought I, I am only called to behold her last agonies—but I found her seated in her eafy chair, with a chearfulnefs of aSpect, I could little have expected.
My
My Freeman, Said she, with a quick (and for her strong) voice, where is Lord Clerage; I must fee him this instant; tell him I intreat it as a particular favour, and I am certain he will oblige me.
I Soon brought him, agreeable to her desire.
My Lord, said site, I am perfuaded it was your intention to have made my life happy, you will not then, I hope, hesitate to render my death fo. It is not proper you should now folicit me—and the circumstances I am under, sets me above all form—I may Surprise you—but I now earnestly intreat you to accept that hand you have hitherto been refuSed. Was I not intirely convinced of your merit, even at this late hour, I would diSdain the union—but you deServe my thanks, you de-Serve my prayers. Tell me then, will you conSent to relieve rriy mind from its extremest anxiety—I See your Lordship’s distreSs, your tears. Freeman, greatly disturb me; nor shall I have the strength to
bestow
bestow my poor weak hand, if I am happily Succefsful in my application, unlefs you can refolve to assist and fupport me.
, My Lord took her hand as it was dropping upon the arm of the chair—kissed it eagerly; and I could perceive, shed fome tokens of affection upon it, that could not fail to be grateful.
It is too much, my Lord, too much my friend, said she—but you must be expeditious ; let the licence be procured, let the settlements be Signed; whoever expected 1 should quicken your Lordship in Such a cauSe—but we will not Spend that time in expectations, that ought to be employed to a much better purpoSe. The worthy Freeman shall give me away—my mother, all my friends shall be preSent— nor will the ceremony be long in performing, when once the necessary preparations are accomplished;
She hurried us away; me to inform Freeman, and Mrs. Le Fever of what
was to happen, and his Lordship to get the licence.
He pressed my hand as we went down stairs—we will Support it. Said he—bitter a,s the trial is, it shall be Sustained—I fancy I can guefs her motives—she is an angel—I have not deserved her—wretch that [ am—but I will not complain.
We returned ; she eagerly enquired if every thing was ready.
My most precious woman, said his Lordship, do Spare yourSelf this violent exertion of your Spirits—all is as you could wish—the parchments ready for Signing, and—he could not fpeak the rest.
There must be no delays. Said she, let them be duly executed, and we will then proceed to the other ceremony.
The lawyer was immediately introduced, and that busineSs being Speedily, tho’ Solemnly diSpatched—his Lordship produced a private bond or instrument, which he begged of me to witneSs, and the
gentle-
gentleman’s clerk was called in to do th< Same, but I am ignorant of the contents.
Mrs. Leicester desired fome drops— my treacherous Ijpirits, cried she, are beginning to forsake me ; they must bea ssish ed, or disappointment will at last be my portion.
In about ten minutes time she refumed , her former earnestnefs—the clergyman—we all assembled—but fuch a marriage was hardly ever performed before— every one but the bride was in the deepest distrefs—however, her refolution continued unshaken until all was over, and every form fubmitted to render the union valid.
My Lord kissed her hand again and again,- in the anguish of defpair—and her mother retired to give vent to her long restrained affliction.
She now dropped near to fainting; my hushand and his Lordship would have withdrawn—but she befought them to let
her
her finish her work, as she could not ex. pect to enjoy many more opportunities.
Your Lordship, Said she, when she had Somewhat recovered herSelf, cannot but penetrate my motives for the Extraordinary steps 1 have taken. Lady Catharine consented to buy me a title, but flie will purchaSe me the Sweetest of conSolations, The deception is not only innocent, but justssiable; I have conformed to her terms, and she cannot refuSe the reward. My mother, my children will never prefume to claim an alliahce, which you. Sir, will be too generous ever to forget; and by Securing Such a friend to them, I die perfectly Satisfied, and will thank you for your goodnefs and condeScension, even with my latest breath.
My lovely creature, cried his Lordship, you may Spare yourself all farther explication. Your design, your view, was too obvious to be mistaken—and it must be a satisfaction to you to find, that the man you have So greatly honoured, as to choose
VoL. II.	L	for
for the protector of your children, has pu it out of his power to abandon them ir what the world deems the most essential article—Mrs. Freeman, added he, be pleased to read the contents of this paper, (the one I had Signed, my dear,) and we will cloSe this most interesting Scene.
Freeman obeyed this command, and I had the pleafure to find, that his Lordship bestowed the ten thousand pounds, he was to receive from Lady Catharine, equally amongst the pretty orphans.
It is compleated, my Lord, cried the delighted Mrs. Leic.ester, (laying her feeble hand upon his in a grateful pref-Sure,) you have accomplished my every wish. Now all the difficulty is over—and another day or tv/o, and I shall be—but you will vouchsafe to write to her Ladyship, and I could be glad to know the money was safely deposited.
What a happinefs, that the writings had been prepared, (a circumstance which Mrs. Leicester drtw out of me only the
preceding
receding evening)—I cannot add one ling more—after what I have now writ-;n, it is impossible, except that
I am, &c.
M. Freemau,
Letter XXXV.
From the Same to the Same.
Four days have passed away, yet is this lovely, glimmering lamp un-sxtinguished. My Lord seldom quits her apartment in the day-time; he reads to her; he administers her medicines, and is to receive the sacrament with her, fo Soon as the messenger returns from Lady Catharine.
She expresses Some little impatience, now and then, at her Ladyship’s delay— she is, indeed, unacquainted with the anguish of her present condition, she knows notlsing of maternal anxiety—hut furely L 2	her
her politenefs to Lord Clerage, shoulc have induced her to be expeditious in hei congratulations—she cannot depart unti her anfwer is received.
The messenger is at last arrived, with a particular draught upon her Ladyship’t banker for the promised fum; and novy, as my friend expresses it, she has nothing tc do, but to die.
She has performed all that she intended—has taken leave of her children, and his I.ordship received every one from her as his own—she has charged me to remember her mo|:her-^but what will become of me, when I forget mySelf?
I am, &c. ■
M. F.r e e m a n.
/
Letter XXXVI.
Mr. Freeman to Mifs Gibson,
Madam.,
1A M enjoined, by my wife, to inform you of those particulars she is une qua! to,	Mfs,
Mrs. Leicester, or rather Lady Cler-age, has just breathed her last. She wa^ dying last night, tho’ perfectly in her senses ; and about six o’clock in the morning she expressed a desire to fee my Lord.
She intreated him to be comforted; and to endeavour to Support her dear mother under her affliction.
Mrs. Le Fever would have entered the room, as alSo my wife; but flie ordered the nurse to admit no other perSon than his Lordship and me.
My Lord, said she. In a very low voice, perhaps you never saw any one die; did you not expect the scene to be much more dreadful than you find it. You are still a very young gentleman, and may live to loSe the remembrance of what even now So strangely affects you—but I owe you— I owe you, reSumed she after fome moments struggling, a proper impression of tfiis inevitable change. ThoSe that forget they are to die, will never live as they ought to do—you will not only retain, L 3	but
but communicate the lesson to my poo children. Do not be difcouraged fron the practice of virtue, because all her vo^ taries are not fo happy as might be expected, I myself fell a victim in the first instance to filial affection—but does noi that very conscioufnefs at this momeni Smooth my bed of languishment, and cheei my poor drooping fpirits—would we have the joys of mortality, and the blessed rewards of eternity to be ours—prefumptu-ous, and unreafonable wretches ! I could never have been useful to you in life, added she, after another interval of fuffering, but reap all the benefit of my departure, and let both your heart and foul be reformed.	'
She lay for half an hour v/ithout fpeak-ing, and I prevailed upon his Lordship to retire, kst the fight of him should disturb her, if she did once more recover her fen-Sibility.
She did again lift up her eyes, my mo» ther, my children, my God, pronounced
ced site, very imperfectly—when falling into a Succession of her faintings, she was at length fubdued, never more to be restored to us.
You will kindly excuse my enlarging upon fo melancholy a fubject. Never was there a more afflicted family, or indeed I own, for she is universally lamented.
I am to acquaint his Lordship’s friend. Sir George Hendon, of his circumstances—he has for fome time been incapable of writing himself—but I hope his constitution will not yield to the violence of his grief.
Mrs. Leefon fends us word she will come down, attended by her faithful Jenny, and pafs the remainder of her days with us, and exercise her best endeavours to confole us all.
Can we, my dear. Madam, prove unmindful of fuch a memento—could prayers or tears, or friends or fortune have prevailed, Mrs. Leicester had obtained a
happy
happy reSpite from this awful Scene'—but we may learn this piece of home philoSo-phy, from her being torn So fatally from us—how infussicient and vain all human attempts, to avert the inevitable fate ^f all created beings.
I am, &c.
C, Freeman.
FINIS,
i ■'
:'	T	iA	.	'	■'-'
;	.	j	■•	,	•	i'-
'	‘'v ■	■. "	-A
Is .	^	'	■
I	'	.,
I V	' ■ ' ■ ■ ^
f •	D •	‘	.
,	. V ■	'
'v.5a^/
1	'	.	^	'	V
' . ' , ' . * ' '•	'	• ' V	■
/	Aj'
I
■	■	- ,	_ U •	,	■ ■
Sfi g,?g^
iTJij^^ iiS	c"‘ ]
*:L	''-A'	*4l
Sy^l^
A'1
-	A;'ill
'c'-'	^''' ',^^1
~' 'Vti
.; /' laKSpMt55^»IEalas^i§Hwfe^MBi^^'&. , " 'r /'
-	■FAttM
^E|».WS	;: vc-i*
%t.	S
,	..	.•■•^E- L'Heg^’^^-g^o^cT . 3t. ^ .*m
>.	*„	v'
r^-iiL.j.- ■_# I K‘:^
iii'' -t''
isil >-%. .■^i^feS^-^MMlBBI^^WjlMi
Bl2kelr-i^ S
HHwr"' V
! A -
,:	uh ^ iMtiw;
S ■• .I'T'fl.i.	Ofc*****'-
^	~i}v ii"~—™T~   r—
lip	S \
1	:f}^P ''
' . ^
:	'	'
. <C t	'S7<t«tVT:««« *nt«i r BOS	!
5	'	r—r1-—•.•r.^r.-j=3sJa«s.«i»*er5!	I
■ ■ '7m ,
*0^	I
I . ,<r.ciBt»«-c'‘'*«»t«««'»'’


\
i	T II E
HISTORY
'	OF
Mifs L E FEVER.
. ..	Letter I.
Lord Clerage to Sir George Hendon.
SHE is found, George, the fweet, the blooming girl could not elude my vigilance.
You may remember you and I met by appointment at the Abbey; a long absence from our native country having endeared its curiosities.
R	To