MEMOIRS
OF
Mr. Charles Guildford.
In a regular
SERIES of LETTERS,
Wrote by
HIMSELF to a FRIEND.
The whole founded on real Facts.
In TWO VOLUMES.
VOL. I.
---------------------------------
LONDON:
Printed for R. WITHY, at the DUNCIAD, in
Cornhill. M.DCC.LXI.

(iii)
THE
PREFACE.

CUSTOM may be complied 
with in any thing that is, in 
itself, just or reasonable. I am no 
enemy to it, when a compliance 
therewith is not contrary to reason.

According to custom, therefore, is 
this Preface given: yet that is not 
the only reason. I thought it was 
absolutely neccessary, by way of in-
troduction, to give some account of 
the following Letters.


[vi]	
As they were not at first designed 
to be published, but wrote by Mr. 
Guildford for my use, and the peru-
sal of a few friends that I should 
think proper to oblige with a fight 
of them, it is hoped the reader will 
excuse any errors he may find in them 
and remember, that they were wrote 
by one friend to another, and not to 
the public.

Had Mr. Guildford designed them 
for that use, I doubt not but he 
would have wrote them in a diffe-
rent stile, and not in so free a man-
ner; for the language feems to be 
varied throughout, according to the 
subject he is upon, and his pen might, 
perhaps, sometimes be influenced by 
the humour he was in at the time of 
writing.

(v)
Grave and sublime subjects he treats 
with dignity, and a language suitable 
thereto; Love subjects in a very dif-
ferent manner sometimes in drollery, 
often in ridicule. As to his regard 
for the Lady mentioned in the fol-
lowing letters, it was real, such as 
was worthy of the object, and which 
a man need not blush to own. As 
to his own behaviour, or what he, 
in some of his letters, writes on that 
passion called Love, the reader must 
look on it in a proper light. His in-
tent, in many places, being satire on 
the innumerable instances of folly, 
seen in those who pretend to be, or 
fancy themselves in love.

As to Mr. Guildford’s fortitude on 
many occasions, where the reader, 
in the course of the following letters 

(vi)
will find he had great reason to exert 
it; it was greater than what is there 
mentioned, yet he met with many 
severe trials which almost overcame it.

I must further observe, that had 
Mr. Guildford originally designed 
these letters for the perusal of the 
public, several things would have 
been omitted, as he himself informed 
me afterwards, when he came to 
peruse them, but which as they were 
wrote, must remain so.

He said it would be only esteem-
ed by the vulgar, as an incoherent, 
ill-digested medley, as it now stands.
I told him, I thought otherwise, and 
mentioned the works of several fa-
mous authors, and the success they 
met with among the judicious part 
of the world; and, I added, that

(vii)
any man of common sense, would, 
on perusing it, easily perceive the 
design of the whole.

His often descending so low, and 
then again rising (as emerging from 
a cloud) to his native language, which 
is free, simple, and eaSy, greatly 
pleased me, being Such as might rea-
sonably be supposed to pass between 
two friends, so closely connected, as
Mr. Guildford and myself.

He mentioned the satyrical cha-
racters he had given me, but I made, 
use of his own arguments, in his 
23d letter. Several other objections 
he raisedm but I answer them to the best
of my judgment. 

I hope the reader will not in the 
whole, think his time entirely lost

(viii)
in perusing this work, as it is chiefly 
designed to please and instruct, and 
that in a very extensive sense. There 
are many beautiful and just reflexions, 
and some found learning in it. Some 
agreeable adventures, and an account 
of many curiosities, &c. in France and 
Italy, which Mr. Guildford took from 
his own private memorandums, and 
mentioned chiefly for diversion, es-
pecially the Romish relicks.

The characters he has given are all 
English, one or two excepted. He 
thought it was needless to mention 
any others, Vice and Folly being the 
same in all parts of the world, and 
operating in the same manner, at 
least there is little material diffe-
rence. Those that consult Le Brun 
will find, that the passions operate 
alike in all mankind; those that read

(ix)
Locke will be convinced, that all 
mankind gain knowledge, whether 
of Good or Evil, in the same man-
ner. The effects must, therefore, 
be nearly the same in a Frenchman, 
an Italian, or a Turk, as in an Eng-
lishman. The characters are true, 
and will suit many in real life, not 
only in this island, but on the con-
tinent also. The effects, circum-
stances, &c. are all true, to Mr. Guild-
ford’s certain knowledge, some of 
them to mine. That the whole may 
appear in a proper manner, things 
and circumstances are mentioned as 
they happened, and you generally 
see the cause, before you know the 
effects.

There are also fome criticisms, which 
may not be displeasing to the curious 
or judicious reader. All that I can

(x)
farther add, is, "That it is design’d 
to divert the public, which, as 
Swift says, "perhaps the gentle, 
courteous, and candid reader, brim-
ful of that modern charity and ten-
derness, usually annexed to his of-
office, will be very hardly per-
suaded to believe.”



L E,T-	I
' '	' ■V-iVpi)! ■	i
/ / . ' -
g #	^ M *	^ r 4^ g
i85€5®§5-§^i§?i§5i§Ji^i§5i§i^i§J:?§5i§J5§}585(^i§5i§i§5^^^?§Jij^
MEMOIRS
O F
Mr. Charles Guildford.
LETTER I.
desire me to give you an 1®^ Y ^ account of my life, at least of k	the chief tranfactions of it. I
can deny nothing to fo tender a friend, but greatly fear the fmall pleafure you will receive in the perufal, will not in the least compenfate for your trouble of reading; but as you request it, I shall readily comply.
VoL. I.	B V	1 was
' i
2 M E M O I R S of
I was born at *	a country vil-
lage, about one hundred miles from London, where my father then resided, in a fmall yet genteel habitation. ’Twas situated in a pleaSant country, that was adorned with a native beauty far Surpassing the laboured art of man. In short, our habitation, and the country Surrounding us, was one of the most delightful fcenes I have ever feen ; that is, where nature alone, and not art, contributed to render it agreeable.
My father had a fmall estate adjoining, Sufficient to Support our Samily, (which consisted of him, my mother, a Sister, whofe name was Lucy, of the Same age with me, being both the fruits of one birth, mySelf, and three domestic Servants) in a moderate yet genteel manner.
My Sister, when she was arrived to an age capable of imbibing the first rudiments of education, was Sent to a neighbouring boarding-School of great reputation ; for our parents were reSolved to Ipare no costs as Sar as they were able, to give both Lucy and mySelS a genteel and liberal education.
At this School my sister, though young, contracted a very great friendship with
MiSs
Mr. Charles Guildford. 3
Mifs Charlotte Worthy, a young lady nearly of the fame age with herfelf, daughter to a gentleman of fortune, who resided near us.—Of their friendship I shall have occasion to take more particular notice hereafter.
As for me, my early years were fpent under the tuition of my father, who, as a careful and tender parent, would not trust the education of me to any but himSelf.
His chief aim and endeavours were to instil into my heart the most humane and generous principles.—To render me master of all the focial virtues, and give me as true and just an idea of religion as he possibly could ; to prevent my falling into the common errors and prejudices which we often imbibe in our infancy concerning mankind, the world, and all thoSe various objects that daily furround us in the buSy Scenes of life, and which prejudices fometimes are fo deeply rooted in us, that when we are grown up to manhood, they ar« fcarce ever eradicated but commonly appear in all our actions.—If they are at any time rooted out, it is with the greatest difficulty, and costs the fuffering patient many a painful moment.—To think justly of things, and B 2	to
4 M E M O I R S of
to distinguish and judge with the utmost accuracy of the merit and demerit of whatever offered itSelf to my view, was the conSequence he desired should enfue from my tollowing his excellent instructions. A ferious reflection on whatever I either faw, read, or heard, (if of fuffi-cient moment to engage my attention) was what he at all times earnestly recommended to me.
To confine the affections of my foul within due bounds, was another great article he strongly recommended, in order to prevent them from degenerating into unruly and vicious paffions.
No Sooner was I master of thofe things requisite for my entering upon the study of the liberal Sciences, than my father fupplied me with books, mathematical instruments, &c. and advifed me to pur-fue my studies therein with the greatest diligence, affuring me, that I must make mySelf master of fome art, (the choice of which he would leave entirely to myfelf) wheSewith I might gain a competent fub-sistance for life, as I had nothing to depend upon but his fmall patrimony, part of which must go to my sister; and if he should have any more children, they
must
Mr. Charles Guildford. 5
must in justice have their proportions; that therefore my situation in life wa-i very precarious, and I shad little dependance but on my own industry.
My father had given me a pretty competent knowledge of the dead languages, though we had not fpent much rime upon them, as 'Ue had taught me after a clifie-rent method from,what is generally uSed in the Schools.
French and Italian v/ere now mixed with my other studies, and I became in a short time a tolerable proficient therein.’
During the courSe of my studies, he often, for my future conduct in life, re-comntended to me not only the study of books, but of mankind themSelves, advising me to obServe the faults and failings of others with a curious eye; and whenever I should perceive any thing amiSs in them, to examine myfelf, fee if I was not guilty of the like ; and make ufe of their failings, as a mark to prevent my fplitting osi the fame (fometimes imperceptible) rocks.
He would often fpeak to me to this purport, “ My dear Charles, youth can-“ not fo easily perceive the follies of man-“ kind, and the ridiculous parts they act " B 3	“in
6 M E M O I R S of
“ in life, as old age ; but the hoary head “ that has gained wiSdom and knowledge “ from experience, often can, if not per-“ fectiy, at least much better than un-“ wary youth, who commonly view things “ through the wrong end of the per-“ Spectivc, and thoSe vices which to ex-“ perienced age are evident, and plainly “ visible, to youth Scarce appear legible. “ They only view the external of things, “ and carry not their Speculations So far “ as the internal.
“ As many advantages in life will ac-“ crue to you from studying mankind, . “ their morals, manners, passions, virtues “ and vices, be as perfect in that part as “ you possibly can, and let not any oppor-“ tunity paSs of acquiring wiSdom and “ knowledge in general; fuch, I mean, “ as will be really uSeful.
“ As for that curious knowledge in “ the Sciences, which many now So anx-“ ioussy Seek aSter, and which is really “ of little or no concern to any but the “ professors X of each refpective Science, “ being rather a trifling amufement, to “ avoid it; for the life of man is short “ enough, and ought not to be fpent in ‘‘ the purfuit of thofe things which do
“ not
Mr. Charles Guildford. 7
“ not in the least tend to the welfare and “ happineSs of an intelligent and rationa “ being.”
As my father was one of the most indulgent parents, and always behaved to me with the kindneSs of a friend, rather than the harsh feverity of a father : and as I entertained the highest esteem for him, and Sor thoSe excellent precepts he daily gave me, I therefore hearkened to him with the utmost attention, carefully obferving whatever he Said; and if I did not at any time rightly comprehend the whole of what he had endeavoured to inculcate, upon my desiring an explanation, he would with the greatest affability comply with my request, glad to See me So obServant, and So desirous of gaining uSeSul knowledge.
What he often particularly recommended to my constant practice in life, was the keeping every affair of moment a fecret in my own breast, without ever intrusting it to any one *, efpecially if there was a bare possibility that the difclosing it could be any ways prejudicial to me.
To keep my inclinations and predominant passions a fecret was another precept he taught me, by which means I , B 4	should
8 MEMOIRS of
should often frustrate the attempts of thoSe who should at any time strive to make me anxious and uneaSy. The pov/er mankind have of rendering life difagree-ble to each other, is by that means very much weakened. They know not how to work upon the passions of a man who thus conceals them, and therefore cannot fo easily draw him into many follies, and even vices, of which, perhaps, he would not otherwife be guilty.
Another rule was to consider well of past and preSent occurrences, and intervening circumstances, and from thence learn to form a pretty just idea, and a tolerable guefs of things in futuro.
In the fam.e neighbourhood with us resided one Mr. Brown, a gentleman of a moderate fortune, who was an intimate friend of my father’s, and had a very great regard for me.
H’e v/as a man of letters, and had taken a particular pleafure in instructing me in many uSeful branches of learning. It was by h’s advice I fpent fome part of my time in the study of botany and physic ; and with his assistance made many curious experiments, in assaying the virtues of herbs and plants, &c. not only thofe-of
the
Mr. Charles Guildford. 9
the natural product of our own foil, but alfo many of foreign growth.
Under his care, and my father’s, I became a tolerable linguist, a pretty good mathematician, a botanist, and knew fomething of philofophy, alfo of medicine, and master of feveral other things, which I afterwards found highly necef-fary, in the different fcenes of life through which I pasted.
Mr. Brown taught me many very valuable fecrets in physic, which he had himfelf found out, in the couisse of his studies, and which were afterwards of infinite fervice to me.
Having made a fufficient progreSs in tlioSe arts and Sciences I had particularly studied, and taken a curSory view of architecture and painting, I made choice of thofe for my future studies and profession.
I acquainted my father and Mr. Brown of the choice I had made, who both approved of it, efpecially Mr. Brown, who was very glad my choice happened to fall on thoSe arts in which he was more particularly verSed, than in any of the others, for he vras not only well acquainted with the theory, but alfo vrell veissed in the B 5	practical
\
10 M E M O I R S of
practical part of each; and he took a very great delight in giving me instructions ; always calling me by the name of his fellow-student, But ’tis now I think time to conclude this long epistle, therefore I fubfcribe myfelf
Yours sincerely, Charles Guildford.
LETTER
%
/
' Mr. Charles Guildford. ii
LETTER II.
IN my last I mentioned my studying of Architecture and Painring, under the care of my friend Mr. Brown; and with his assistance I made great improvement in thofe arts.
This was the happiest part of my life. Could I for ever have remained fo! But .no; ’twas impossible ! fate feemed to have otherwife determined!
My sister had often mentioned mifs Worthy to me, and greatly extolled her Beauty, her lively wit,, and the folidity of her judgment. I was young, faw little company; nor did I desire to
contract a large acquaintance.-The
world had not any charms for me. The gay pleafures of the town, wshich I had often heard mentioned, appeared to m e dull and insipid; nor v/as beauty itSelfs at least fuch as I had already feen of power fufficient to move me.
My father and mother had each of them received a very genteel and liberal education far furpassing thoSe of their rank in life. This was what I confeSs, often puzzled me, to think from whence ,	,	B 6	it
12 M E M O I R S of
it should proceed ; as I had never heard other mention made of their parents or ancestors, then as a people who had by honest industry, and careful frugality, acquired a trifling fortune and therewith purchafed that fmall estate on which we then rcfided.
Our parents had been very careful in the educating my fister and me in the most polite manner. I had learnt Dancing, Mufic, and theufual accomplishents for the cempleating a gentleman ; my fister had likewife from them received many improvements which were not fo eafily acquired at fchool.
Vfhenever a relaxtion from my studies was requifite, Mufick gave me a relief,
and this I made my chief diverfion.-------
But now a different Scene prefents.
■ My father having refolved that Lucy, should entirely leave the boarding fchool, her education being compleated, and for the future refide at home, he gave me orders to attend her in her return, and which orders I with Pleafure executed, as there was ever a very great mutual love fubfisting between us.
My fister on leaving the fchool took an affectionate farewell of a young lady, the
most
Mr. Charles Guildford. 13
most amiable I had ever feen.----1 was
prefent at this fcene. They appeared to have a very great friendship for each o- v ther, and their manner of parting greatly affected me.—I must confeSs I was greatly pleaSed with this young beauty, and felt a peculiar yet pleasing fenSation I had not before experienced.
I at that moment wished myfelf Lucy, and envied her the tender embraces she received from her fair friend.
How delicate are the fentiments and how exquisiiely sine the fenfations of that charming fex! Their fouls are wholy formed for love and friendship. ’Tis in their breasts alone we must expect to find the focialvirtuesin their greatestperfection.
We left the fchool without my learning this lady’s name but by the defcrip-tion I had formely received from my sifter of mifs Charlotte Worthy, I fancied it was she who was the object of miy admiration.
I wished her mine, but reflection pre-fented to ray view (if she was the lady I fuppofed) too many infurmoimtable obstacles, ever to hope the completion ot my wishes. The moment we had parted from this young lady, I enquired her
name ^
14 M E M O I R S of
name of Lucy. Her anfwer confirm’d me in my opinion, and I had now no reafon to hope that I should ever call her mine.
Mr. Worthy had already refuSed feveral offers from gentlemen of considerable fortunes, whofe extraction not being fo ancient and honourable as his own. She being a younger fon of one of the greatest families in the kingdom, and extremely proud, of the honour of his family, his chief failing; he had for that reafon refuSed to contract an alliance with them. What profpect therefore had I of Succeeding, being deficient in both.
ReaSon dictated to me in the preSent caSe and adviSed me to banish the new born passion, but love was too powerful and I could not resist its pleaSing force.—-I sighed-—I mufed.—ReaSoned, then sighed again, at the impossibility of ever iucceeding in my desires, yet still reSolved to love. My good genius whiSpered hope, and I gladly cherished the delusive phantom.
I made my dear Lucy the confident of my new-born paffion, desiring her assistance, and directions how to act.-------
She prudently advifed me to banish a
passion,
Mr. Charles Guildford. 15
passion from my breast, which might otherwife render me unhappy for life.
Advice came now too late; and I renewed my entreaties. Lucy confented to befriend me, fo far as to give me an opportunity of feeing Charlotte when she returned from fchool, which she informed me would be in a very short time, adding, “ My dear Charles I pity you, and “ that pity arife.s from the very great “ improbability there is of your ever “ fucceeding.
“ I am fatissied your dessgns are ho-“ nourable, therefore convinced of that, “ I will ufe my utmost endeavours to “ ferve you, but fear it will be to little “ purpoSe.”
MiSs Charlotte foon after left the boarding fchool, and returned to her Father’s feat where my sister immediately visited her.
She returned the visit in a few days, when I had the pleafure of being introduced to her.—We entered into conver-fation on indifferent Subjects, which Soon became lively and full of fpirit.—I was greatly pleafed with the wit of this young lady, which added to a charming and inexhaustible flow of fpirits which she pof-
feffed.
i6 M E M O I R S of
feffed, rendered her the most amiable, and entertajning of her fex.—Every moment difcovered new beauties in this charming maid. In short Charlotte in the few hours she fpent that day with us entirely compleated her conquest.
As for myfelf her prefence at that time gave me an additional flow of fpirits, ' which added greatly to the native gaiety of my temper, and she v:as lb kind as to express herfelf pleafed with the brother of her friend.
1 in justice confeffed it was her agreeable company infpired me with that happy difposition of temper, in which I then was.—She looked on this as a compliment, and as fuch made a lively reply to it.
' During this happy converfe the moments pasted unperceived, and time with
his feathered pinions fled fwiftly on.--
Hill the approaching evening gave us notice it was time to Separate. See my friend what an effect love had on a young unexperienced man.—But’tis proper for the prefent, to bid you adieu, therefore I Subscribe mySelf,
Yours, &c.
Charles Guildford.
LET-
Mr. Charles Guildford. 17 LETTER III.
After the visit I mentioned in my last, I had often the pleafure of feeing the agreeable mifs Worthy. As the brother of a friend, she always gave me a favourable reception, but I durst not as yet appear in the character of a lover.
I in the mean time purSued my studies with the greatest assiduity.
I had been adviSed by my father and my worthy friend Mr. Brown, to travel in order to study the works of the most famous masters, in Architecture and Painting, efpecially thofe of Italy and P'rance.
I was not lefs desirous of it before I had feen Charlotte, but on the contrary had determined to leave England the moment I should be properly qualified for travel-’ ling for the purpofe I mentioned, with which determination my friends were well acquainted. It was otherwife now, the face of things was entirely changed, love that powerful deity had extinguished thofe desires. Honor, Fame, and Riches, nor even the view of distant countries, and
a prof-
i8 MEMOIRS of
a profpect of all thofe master-pieces of art with which Italy and France abound, and from a view of which I had formerly fiattered mySeif I should receive the greatest pleafure, had not now any temptations for me, strong enough to draw me forth from my blessed retirement. But my honor was engaged for the performance of the promife I had made, to travel and render myfelf, if possible, an accomplished architect and painter ; it had iikewiie been mjy earnest request; befides my future welfare in fome fort depended upon it.
The thoughts of this at first gave me very great uneasinefs ; but when I reflected, that a feparation from Charlotte on fuch an occasion, was abfolutely neceffary in order to compleat my chief design ; I was much easier, and with tolerable patience expected the destined moment, when I was to leave my native country.
Lucy had long been desirous of going to Bath. My father had lately had a very handfome legacy left him, the chief part of which, as he told me, was designed for my travelling expences.
As my father was now able to fuppiy us with fufficient, to make a genteel appearance
Mr. Charles Guildford. 19
pearance at the Bath, he was willing to gratify my Sisters inclinations, as he did not desire to deprive either of us of any innocent pleaSures, and thinking it might likewise be of Service to me, desired I would eScort her thither, and Spend Some time there during the SeaSon which was then approaching.	^
He told me I Snoiild there See an epitome, of the Great World, and stwould be of fervice to us having as yet feen but little company, and must therefore confe-quently be unacquained with many fcenes of real life, in which I might probably be afterwards more converSant.
He farther added, as I intended to travel, ’twas highly neceffary I should fee fomething of my native country before I left it, and study the manners of the English, particularly in high life and not to go into foreign countries, and obferve their arts, manners, customs, &c. of other nations, and be at the fame time intirely ignorant of thofe of my own.
I readily complied with my father’s request, and the more fo as Charlotte was to pay a visit to lord Worthy, a near relation, who was foon expected down at his feat at L * * * * * about fifty miles
distant
20 M E M O I R S of
distant from our village, v/here my sister informed me, stwas fuppoSed miSs Worthy would Spend a great part of the Summer SeaSon.
I was therefore very well pleaSed with the propoSal my father had made, as knowing I should fpend my time in a ivery diSagreeable manner at home, during the abfence of that young lady.
Soon after mifs Worthy fet out for his lordships feat, accompanied by her parents fo that I could not have the pleafure of attending her any part of the way.
The country which till then was always pleafant and agreeable to me, now be-f came dull and insipid.—The fcene that was formerly fo delightful had now lost its power of charming, and was not any longer agreeable to me.
I had never confided my fecret to any but my sister; and now mifs Worthy was gone, I feared my behaviour might give my parents or fome other a fufpicion, and they might thereby make a difeovery of what I was desirous of concealing I t.herefore reminded Lucy of our intended journey, who as impatiently waited for the moment of our departure as myfelf.
The
Mr. Charles Guildford. 21
The generous girl told me she was not inSensible of the uneasineSs, the abfence of her friend gave me; and that Vv^ere it on no other account she should hasten our departure as foon as she could.
Lucy took an opportunity of renewing her request to my father, and he immediately gave orders for the neceffary preparations to be made for our journey.
We had among our domestics one John Trueman who had lived in our family for fome years. He was ordered to attend us to Bath : but it is impossible to exprefs the joy of the poor grateful fellow, at the news that he was to attend us; for he had always profeffed a very great regard and esteem for me, and I really believe he loved me sincerely.
Every thing being ready for our departure, we Set out in the stage coach, and Trueman accompanied us on horSeback. But should I proceed any further it would be making this letter too long, therefore I must defer giving you an account of our journey, and the company we had with us in the stage, till the next.
Yours, &c.
Charles Guildford.
LET-
22 MEMOIRS of
LETTER IV.
IM U S T now give you fome account of our journey. We had a very pleafant one. Our company were agreeable and diverting. There were four besides Lucy and mySelf; viz. a fat gentleman in black, who by his appearance feemed to be a divine fat on one side of me, and on the other hand fat a military gentleman. Opposite to the minister fat a fat, corpulent, rofy cheeked lady, who feemed to be about thirty ; her appearance was that of a rich widow, but she looked rather of the low kind, than a gentlewoman of birth and fortune. My sister fat opposite to me, and on her right hand fat a prim, demure young lady who feldom lifted up her eyes, unlefs to take a private glance at the gentleman in red, who foon informed us that he bore the commission of a Captain.
I remained silent, in order to make obfervations on my fellow travellers. I believe my sister’s intentions were^the fame.
. The captain at first diverted us by paying his addresses, in fome pretty loud
whifpers
Mr, Charles Guildford. '23
whifpers to mifs Prim, and made pretty free with her ladyship’s hand, which she very cautiousiy often withdrew for fear of defilement, at the fame time giving him many fignificant looks, vifible to the whole company, and which feemed to proceed from an angry heart, but a few private glances she gave him when she fuppofed herSelf unobferved by the rest of the company, carried with them a more favourable appearance.
I carefully obferved my companions, and there was Scarce a Single look eScaped me. I gueffed I should make a tolerable pliySiogmonist, and experience confirmed me in my opinion.
The gentleman in black Soon informed us what he was, and gave us a fignificant hint, that he was poffeffed of a pretty good living -, as I gueffed by his bulk and the quantity of flesh v/ith which he was cloathed, and which Seemed to be pretty firmly fixed upon his bones: in short he was not a Skeleton. The fat lady for a large quantity of Iblid flessi and well cloath’d ribs, if possible exceeded the divine.
The parfon and her ladyship entered into difcourSe together, and we Soon learnt
hat
I	V*
24 M E M O I R S of -
that madam was a widow, had faved a pretty large fortune by trade, which was increased by Some legacies her friends had left her, and that she had no children. The man of God brightened up prodi-gioussy at this diScourSe. He Said he was a widower, and, like'" the gentlewoman, was not troubled with any children, for which he tvas very thankful. As his dif-courfe did not then feem to be directed to any one in particular, I opened my lips, to ash him his reafon, if he had fuf-sicient to fupport them. “ Why really,” fays the parfon, “ they are very trouble-“ fome, and very expensive ; for though “ I have a tolerable living, of between “ three and four hundred a year, yet you “ know, sir, that is but little for a man “ that has been bred a gentleman, to live “ upon. I can’t bear fatigue and trou-“ ble; it overcomes me, having never “ been ufed to it. I am obliged to give “ a curate above thirty pounds a year, “ only to officiate for me in the week “ days, and of a Sunday morning; for “ I commonly preach myfelf on a Sab-“ bath, in the evening; but it is very fa-“ tiguing, and very troublefome; to fpeak
“ fo
1
A'
Mr. Charles Guildford. 2^
“ fo loud, and for near half an hour to-“ gether, without ceasing.”
“ I have time however by means of my “ curate ; to fpend a few hours with fome “ worthy friends in my parish. There is “ fquire Dull, and fquire Cobb ; and fe-“ veral other gentlemen, who are charm-“ ing companions. We live as happy as “ can be expected, or even desired; for “ they insist on having me out almost eve-“ ry day, a fox hunting, coursing, or chal-“ or fishing, or shooting, or fome Coun-“ try diversion, and I can’t deny them ;
“ and if I don’t go out with them or visit,
“ them, they will come and drink a bottle “ and fmoke a pipe along with me at “ home. I have rare October sir, in my “ cellar and they like it extremely well.
“ So we fpend our time merrily enough, in “ fummer with our country fports; and “ in winter we do not want for diversions,
“ but added the parSon I want a gooei “ careful houfe keeper,” giving the widow a very insignisicant look.
“ I ufe exerciSe, in order to reduce my “ size a little; but you fee,” putting his hand to his stomach, in a jocofe manner, and laughing heartily, “ I can’t bring “ down my fat.” To this I faid, I fuppofc sir,
VoL. I.	C	stis
f
26 M E M O I R S of
“ *tis for exercife you are now go-“ ing to Bath. That is one Reafon.” fays . he, “ butto tell you the truth,” whifpering in my ear, (but loud enough to be heard by the vshole company,) ’tis to fee if “ I can’t drop into a pretty comfortable “living, that is at last become vacant; “ and which I have long been in Expec-“ tation of. Tire patron is now at Bath, “ and I am going to pay him a visit, hav-“ ing fome interest with Him.”
ss'hough I had heard much of marikind, and read more ; yet I must confess I was furprifed at this reverend gentleman’s dif-' courSe : however I concealed it from the obfervation of my fellow travellers, that they might not think I was entirely ignorant of the world.
The Divine having given us this land-able account of himfelf, employed his whole time in ogling the widow, whore-turned his lovely glances in the most endearing manner; but he feemed anxious to know the extent of the lady’s fortune ; notwithstanding her own fpe-cesick gravity; was fufficient for any reasonable man ; yet the parSon wanted an addition of a more precious Substance, to render it still more agreeable.
There
Mr. Charles Guildford. 27
Hiere was nothing but this dreadful uncertainty preferved the parfons heart.
No fooner had the Widow hinted that it extended to fome thouSands; than she compleated her conquest, as was plainly evident. Soul and Body was now entirely devoted to her ladyship’s fervice, Fler beauty and the majesty and grace-fulnefs of her perSon; were his darling' theme. Several sine, common placed compliments, the reverend gentleman 'paid his new mistreSs on her Beauty, and at length in a whifper, confeffed the power of her cha’ ins.
The widow was moved, pretended to blush and appeared in a dilemma how to act. ’Twas evident that her ladyship was as nearly touched with Cupid’s dart, as her lover.
In the whole, I judged there was one match almost concluded.
Each had near exhausted their mao-a-zine, and repetition must necessarily enfue ; therefore -J fixed my obfervation, more particularly, on the officer and his favourite.
The Captain was staring at the blushing lovely, coy, demure maid, who often C 2	pretending
4	N
28 M E M O I R S of
dretending to hide her face from his faucy : n 1 uncontrouled eyes; took thofe opportunities of ogling her admirer through the reparations which she made between her fingers and which I imagine she thought she couldfafely do without dangerof being difcovered by the rest of the company.
The captain after a full gaze would cry in raptures, “ Demme madam you are “very handSome; You are extremely “ pretty ! You have made a conquest and “ I am your everlasting stave. ’ And then Seizing her hand would lift it to his lips with aip,the eagerneSs of an enraptured lover, when she would affectedly cry; “ Lard fir, I beg fir, pray fir,” Whilst the man militant with a lively warmth preffed her fair hand, which she would Saintly attempt to withdraw.
You will perhaps aSk me, if there were not fome civil things faid to Lucy, or if we held no difcouisse with our fellow travellers ? both fir! tho’ as to Lucy, she regarded not what was faid to her, and I was too much employed in making obfervations, to fpend much time in con-verfation.
I am afraid I have been already too tedious, but will attone for it by my future
brevity.
Mr. Charles Guildford. 29
brevity. I shall only acquaint you with the refult of the courtships I mentioned, and then proceed to more interesting fubjects.
The Captain before our journey wa« ended, made a declaration of love, in form to his fair charmer. As I was afterwards informed, the lover wanted her to furrender upon honourable terms, as. he called it, without the Sanction of the church. MiSs did not at first approve of that; but finding the captain refolutely bent on living a single life, she at length thought proper to furrender on his terms.
It was her first tranSgression of that kind, and she was fashcicndy puniSned for it. After he had poffeffed her, he was cloyed, growing cool, she upbraided him. He did not like upbraidings and therefore, abandoned her to shame and milery. She had a fmall fortune, though not ecjuiva-lent to the captain’s; and as he found, he could purchaSe her on easier terms than marriage, his not to be fuppoSed, that a man of bad morals, (for fuch he really was) would act in an honourable manner.
If nature, time, place; hot blood, and high fpirits, assist the designing lover C 3	with
30 M hi M O I R S of
with his perfwaSive eloquence, to rouze the raging passions, which were before in embryo, and every thing, even opportunity joining with his wishes, contributes to, and confpircs the fair one’s overthrow; where is the triumph.? or whofe is the glory ? But reflections aside, let us now return to the parfon and his lady.
The Divine as became his cloth ; had the fear of God before his eyes, which added to this consideration, that the widow was poffeffed of six or feven thotssand pounds, induced him to make her an offer of his hand and heart, according to the ancient lawful form. The widow gladly accepted the valuable prefent, and the loving pair where foon after married. But how was the reverend gentleman mistaken when he hugged himSelf for his address, in gaining a handfome widow with fuch a fortune! On enquiring of his • fpouSe how she had difpoSed of her money and if she had fecured it, she told him it was fecure enough, for it was all her last hustands affetts, and that she as administratrix was then in poffeffion of them.—
“ That’s right,” Says the ParSon interrupt-; ■	■ ing
I
Mr. Charles Guildford. 31
ing her, “ but, refumes SpouSe, there “ are debts to She full amount, or rather “ more, and thoSe effects, are bound “ with the payment of them ; and they “ must be paid Soon, unleSs you had ra-“ ther be obliged to it by law.”
The hushand stood motionksss. At length a deep groan issued, and down he dropt, the good vrife applied her lasts with SucceSs, and gave him immediate relief. He confeffed her kindnefs. Said ’twas then too late to repent, and there-, fore he might as well make himSelf cafy, for if he had not money enough, he had wife enough.' All his hopes were that he Sliould make amends for this foolish step, by getting poffeffion of the expected living.
Fie fucceeded in that, and now his two livings, in the whole, brought him in near feven hundred pounds per annum.
The Parfon for I afterwards Saw him, , Sometimes Said he was pretty well contented, only a wife without a fortune vexed him.
He Seemed to hint, could he but make his income an even thouSand he should be very well Satisfied ; but added, “ I must C 4	“ make
\
\
S2 M E M O J R S of
“ make mySelf eafy, diSpenfations and “ changes are not eaSy to procure.”
A long letter my friend, but at length you have the pleaSure of feeing the name of your
Sincere friend, Charles Guildford.
LETTER
♦
Mr. Charles Guildford. 33
LETTER V.
IF any of my former epistles have been agreeable to you, I hope this will prove no leSs entertaining.
On our arrival at the Bath having fettled ourSelves in genteel lodgings, and taken fome refreshments, we begged the • favour of our landlady’s company. Her name was Talkative.
We inquired of her, the news of the place, and what other lodgers she had.
She anfwcred fully to all our questions, and when we had once moved the fpring of her tongue, ’twas with difficulty we stopped it.
She gave us a general history of Scandal, an account of the chief company .then at the Bath, in which were included many long descriptions, of their perSons, fortunes, and equipages, together with an account of the amours, and intrigues of the chief personages there. ’Tis need-lefs to be more particular.
In regard to her lodgers, she informied us, she had only one; that a genlteman, who by his apppearance she judged to be of considerable fortune. That she be-C 5	sieved
4
34 M E M O’l R S of
sieved he was a man of good fenfe ; feemed to be very generous ; was very good natured and agreeable, as far as she had feen of him but that he had not been long at Bath.
We enquired his name. She faid it ctwas Honor, we then begged her to in-itroduce us to his acquaintance. She gave us her promifp. Mr. Honor early the next morning paid us a visit, welcomed us to Bath in the most polite and genteel manner, readily accepted of our invitation to breakfast with us, and I foon perceived that he fully anfwered the character Mrs 'Talkative had given of him.
He was handfome, genteel, free and eafy, his wit lively, his judgment Solid and penetrating ; in short he was made to charm, and the most agreeable companion I have ever met with.
He Said he understood we were strangers ; and thatjie was almost So himSelf; being but lately come there, after making the Tour of Europe : but that he was very ’intimate, with one Sir John Philips, a man who had contracted a very large and extensive acquaintance in the Beau Monde : and that by his means he could
introduce
Mr. Charles Guildford. 35
introduce us, into a genteel acquaintance during our’residence phere.
He frankly confeffed, that he was very much prejudiced in our favour, and that whatever Service was in his power to perform for us he hoped we should be fo free as to make ufe of him, and without farther ceremony inroll him in the number of our friends: we returned him thanks for his offers, eSpecially thofe of his friendship. He desired we would permit him to accompany us that morning, to the Long Room. We thanked him and readily conSented. He begged us to , be more free and behave as if we had been long acquainted. I promifed him I would, my sister curtefyed in silent assent, and we feparated to dreSs,
Just as I was dressed, Mr. Honor introduced a gentleman, whom he pre-fented to me as his friend, Sir John Phillips. He was a lively, gay young fellow. Upon entering into converSation wdth him.
I found that he was poffeffed of a very extensive knowledge of the v/orld, had a great share of good fenSe and wit, but his wit was inclined to fatire.
He could not avoid giving us feveral C 6	.	fatyrical
\ /
3 6 M E M O I R S of
fatyrical characters of fome of his acquaintance, before he introduced us to them.
“ There is my lord Courtly,” fays he “ a nobleman, of a very genteel fortune, “ has a place at court, and great interest, “ for that reaSon his friendship is much “ courted, he is a very civil polite gentle-“ man, will embrace you, fold you in “ his arms, offer you his friendship, and “ beg to be reckoned in the number of “ your friends: himSelf, his Sword, his fortune are all at your fervice, and you may command them whenever you “ pleafe.”
“ Thefe are all momentary ; for if any “ one depends upon his word, they are “ certain of a diSappointment In short “ one single thread, from the webb of a fpider, will weigh down ten thoufand “ of his promises.
‘ You can’t help Satyrizing your friends, “ Jack,” Says Mr Honor.
I anSwered, “ I hope there is no one “ that really deServes the character. Sir “ John has given us.
“ I am afraid you’ll find it too true,” Mr. Honor replied.
“ 1 am really Surprised at it,” Says I, “ for to me it appears very ridiculous,
“ that
Mr. Charles Guildford. 37
“ that a man should be lavish in his of-“ fers of friendship or fervice to a man “ and yet never intend to perform any of “ thofe promifes he fo liberally makes.
“ He must appear defpicable to every “ one that knows his real character, and “ to himfelS likewiSe; if he would but “ pafs an impartial and strict examination “ on his own actions.
“ He is what we call a great man,” fays Sir John, many court his favour,
“ and endeavour to cultivate a friendship “ with him for their own private interest,
“ though at the fame time whilst they are “ flattering him with their tongues, they “ defpiSe him in their hearts.
“ And that he justly desserves I replied; “ and his flatterers at the fame time meet “ with a proper return.”
The entrance of a friend has interrupted me, therefore at prefent, adieu.
Yours, &c.
Charles Guildford.
.	LET-
38 MEMOIRS of '
LETTER VI.
NOW I shall proceed again to Sir John’s character.
Aster we had made feveral moral reflections on lord Courtly’s character. Sir John adds, “ There is Dick Rover a “ young fellow of fortune, who is reSolv’d “ to fpend it in dreSs, and entertainifients “ for the ladies. He is what they call a “ genteel lover. The first lady he meets “ with a fair face, he protests he loves her, “declares a violent paffion; fwears e-“ ternal constancy; fometimes tho’ per-“ haps very feldom, he compleats an “ intrigue; and then goes to another. “To her he vows, she has charmed his “ roving foul to constancy; and fixed it “ eternally hers. Intrigues or breaks off “ and then to another; and is constant to “ each till either fucceSs has crowned his “ hopes andpoffeSsion cloyed his desires, or “ that there are no longer any hopes of “ fuccefs.
“ I have known him”-prithee for
“ shame Jack desist,” Says Mr. Honor in-• terruping him, “ and don’t treat thy ac-“ quaintance thus.” I am only describing them,” Says Sir John, proceeding, “ I .	“ have
' /
Mr. Charles Guildford. gg
“ have known him have no leSs than five “ different appointments depending at one “ time; when it has required his utmost “ ficill, to manage prudently; fo as to “ prevent a diScovery from either quarter,
“ and a diSpofal of them in a proper man-“ ner, that he might not exhaust too great “ a quantity of his fpirits, I have not pati-“ ence to hear you out,” thou eternal fa-tyrist fays Mr. Honor.
“ I have done,” anfwered Sir John, “ only I must acquaint Mr. Guildford “ with the character of miSs Simper. She ‘* is a young lady that is always fmiling, “ gay and chearful, fo chearful that she “ is continually laughing, but it is at no-“ thing ; and makes me doubt the found-“ neSs of her intellects, I believe in real-“ ity she is little better than an ideot.
“ Then there’s.”-------Well,” fays Mr.
Honor interrupting him again, “ I have “ done,” fays Sir John, “ only you will “ observe miSs Flutter, if you should “ chance to fay a civil thing to her, En-“ paffant, she is all on sire, all in confu-“ sion ; her blushes appear; her bofom “ rifes and falls, in the most pretty and “ artlefs manner, at least it feems fo to “ thofe who know her not, her hands
“ tremble,
9
40 M E M O I R S of
tremble, her pulfe beats quick, and “she is in very great diforder, and all “ this for fear you should desist from “ whiSpering civil things, and pay thofe “ compliments she thinks her due to fome “ other beauty
Have you done now ?” fays Mr. Honor, “ Yes,” Says Sir John I have, becauSe “ you are impatient, only, for God’s Sake “ dont proceed any farther,” Mr. Honor “ faid interrupting him, “ I did not isi-“ tend it,” returns Sir John laughing, “ but you are frightened at nothing, for “ what I intended to fay was, that its “ proper to give Mr. Guildford fome in-“ sight into the characters of thoSe, to “ whoSe acquaintance I would introduce “ him ; that he might not be deceived “ by falSe appearances; but you will not “ permit me to give him a tenth part of “ the characters, you know I could easily “ do.” I know Says Mr. Honor, “ you “ can if you pleafe give my friend many “ pretty characters, and fuppofe you will “ make ufe of the first opportunity my “ abSence gives you, to make him ac-“ quainted with mine. “ That I will,” Sir John replied, and it shall be a pretty one too. “ I don’t doubt it in the least,”
lays
Mr. Charles Guildford. 41
fays Mr. Honor, my sister coming down at this instant intertuptedthe conversation, and it took another turn.
Lucy when she came down, was laughing. After Sir John had paid his compliments to her, I aSked her the occasion of her mirth; she faid the floors were rubbed So Smooth that she did little elSe but siide from one place to another when she stirred, fo that by the time we left Bath she should learn to Ske^t.
We could not help laughing at her fancy, Sir John paid her the compliment of being a sine lady, and that I must certainly be extremely happy in the company and converfation of fo amiable a sister. We returned his compliment, and though I received it as fuch, yet I must confefs Lucy that day appeared formed for conquest:.
Her eyes Sparkled with joy, and the thoughts of her approaching pleafure in making her appearance in the long room, had cast a glow upon her cheeks, which added to an agreeable fmile, and a pretty ferene eafy countenance, made her appear lovely,
I plainly perceived that Mr. Honor obferved her with a peculiar pleafure,
and
42 M E M O I R S of
and feemed charmed v/ith her appearance, her lively v/it and agreeable humour. In Sliort, I did not doubt but Lucy had gained a conquest before she had made her appearance in the long room. As tve were v»^aiking along Mr. Honor Said to me, “ My friend Sir John is fond “ of fatire, rather too fond of it; yet I “ must confeSs there is I think too much “ reaSon for him to exerciSe his fivourite “ talent.
“ The morals and manners of man-“ kind are now growm So vicious, and “ vice is So much the mode, and Such “ countenance given to it in the Beau
Monde; that its a moral impossibility “ for a man that’s not endowed with an “ uncommon share of prudence and diS-“ cretion^^ to efcape free and untainted ; “ and ’tis with the greatest difficulty that “ he can preferve himfelf from the infec-“ tion,
“ A man ought to be continually upon “ his guard, againft thofe prevailing vices “ that are now fo much in vogue, and to “ keep the strictest guard over his passions “ for fear the insinuating, infecting “ venom, should corrupt his morals, and “ destroy his principles.
“ Thofe
Mr. Charles Guildford. 43
“ Thofe who are placed in fuch emi-“ nent stations in life as to be distin-“ guished by birth, fortune and empSoy-“ ment, ought to Set examples to thoSe .
“ that move in a lower Sphere.
“ Their virtues or vices are very con-“ SpicuoLis, and innumerables eyes are “ fixed on them to obServe their con-“ du6h ' '	.	'
“ The world is cenSorious and often .
“ penetrates, with its diScerning eye, into “ their utmost feceffes : yet though they “ cenSure, the generality will notwith-
-	“ standing, ape the ridiculous Behaviour “ and run into the fashionable Folsics of
-	“ their fuperiors. So that in every clafs “ may be found an imperfect refemblance “ of thofe that are a degree above them,
“ even from the lowest rank of life to the “ highest.
“ This folly is' epidemical and like “ an infection, fpreads itfelf overthewhole “ kingdom or rather over the whole world.
“ The low plebians would appear like “ rich traders ; rich traders as gentle-“ men of fortune, gentlemen of mode-“ rate fortunes as noblemen, and noble-“ men as kings.
Many .
I
44 MEMOIRS of
'	“ Many live to the very ej.tint of their
“ incomes, and if they have credit, de-“ pend upon that; contract large and “ exceffive debts, to fupport that gran-“ deur in which they have fo foolishly ac-“ cuftomed themlelves to live ; and then “ in order to clear themSelves, and cheat “ their creditors, wsho perhaps labour hard “ for the common neceffaries of life ; take “ advantage of thofe laws which were “ made for the benefit of the honest in-“ dustrious and unfortunate trader.”
We were now arrived at our destined port which interruped the converfation and all faiher reflections, but I shall defer any farther account till my next, in the mean time I am my dear friend.
Yours, &c.
Charles Guildford.
- " - ‘ ''
■r’:r	LF -
I
Mr. Charles Guildford. 45
LETTER VII.
IFI O P E you are too wtII acquainted with my sincerity to believe I would ever attempt to impeSe a falshood upon your understanding; and this consideration, joined to my knovdedge of your being well acquainted with the world, induces me to think, ’twill be no great dish-culty to gain your belief to what I write. Therefore without farther ceremony I shall affure you, that by the best obferva-tions I could make, on thofe to whom Sir John introduced me, not only on my first acquaintance with them, but at other times when in their company, and conversing with the n; I found the description he had given me, of lord Courtly, Dick Rover, MiSs Simper, MiSs Flutter and many others, to be exactly true.
A vast medley of different characters; a great number of different people ; of almost all ranks and denominations, there daily prefent themSelves to view. In short an epitome of the world in general, may be found at Bath.
Nothing but being an eye witness to many things I then faw, and have often
since
46 MEMOIRS of
since feen with almost equal wonder, could have convinced me, that there were fuch people in the world; or that there were fuch things done, as I there Saw. But my dear friend. I have since learnt not to wonder at any thing, that is in the power of man to perSorm.
My friends and my books, had often informed me of flatterers, knaves, fools, coxcombs, fops &c. but I always thought with proper deference to my kind informers ; that for my good, they fpoke rather too cenforioufly, of mankind; for I did not think that ’twas pofiible for human nature, ever to be fo far vitiated, as I have often fince by experience found it is.
Friends and acquaintance, are now fy-nonimous terms. But there are few who are acquainted with the infinite pleafure arifing from real friendship. ‘
Is it not shocking in the highest degree to hear a man with the most Solemn aflev-eratlons, promiSe thoSe things with his mouth, which are as Sar distant from his heart, and from his thoughts of performing them; as heaven from earth!
This was what I afterwards experienced, in my acquaintance with lord Courtly ^
tho’
Mr. Charles Guildford. 47
though I never trusted to any promiSe he made me: but this was rather owing to the character I had heard of him, from Sir John Philips than to my own jndgement;	,
otherwise I doubt, I should have been deceived by thoSe fair and Specious marks of a worthy generous man; as many before had been.
Dick Rover entirely anSwered the character Sir John had given him, for I have often been an eye witnefs of the addresses he has paid to* feveral ladies of distinguished beauty, wit, and fortune; and which were Severally made with all the fervor and ardency a real passion could inlpire.
MiSs Simper as Sir John Said, was continually laughing at the Jest of every fop, and the falSe wit of every coxcomb pleafed her, she was often laughed at; and almost as often joined in the laugh against herfelf, which would add to the mirth of the company and consequently to hers; when she did not perceive that it was at her expence, her acquaintance diverted themSelves. When she at any time SuS-pected the truth, she then joined the general chorus, to hide her concern and confusion, from the obfervation of the company.
MiSs
■48 M E M O I R S of
Mifs Flutter’s character had been as well delienated by Sir John’s. Her anxiety was often preceptible, and all her art was infufficient, to hide her concern from a judicious eye.
There were many coquets, that had a large share of vanity; almost as many prudes with a great share of hypocriSy *, a ' very great number of Fine Ladies, who wanted for neither beauty, nor wit; yet 1 believe poffeffed but a fmall share of modesty, or good nature; though I am certain there were feveral that were truly amiable and poffeffed every focial virtue.
My fister being a new comer, beaus and fops, (though I make a distinction, I believe it’s only nominal; for there is little effential difference between them;) buzz’d about her, and many profeffed themSelves her admirers.
Lucy had been too well bred, to give affront to any one, that did not designedly offer any to her; yet she in a pretty genteel manner, diiengaged herSelf from them, and Sir John Philips, and Mr. Honor; were the chief of her acquaintance, amongst the gentlemen during our residence at Bath.
Mr.
Mr. C-HARLES Guildford. -49
Mr. Flonor behaved to us with the 'greatest politencSs, his compliments in in general were far more particular to Lucy than to any other ladies of his acquain-tOice.
• I obferved it, but did not take any notice of it to either oS' them.
As Mr. Honor feemed to me, to be an honest worthy, generous man; and as fuch, would Scorn to be guilty of a mean action, I entertained a very great esteem for him, and thought m.ySelf honoured in , the friendship of a man fo greatly my fu-perior in fortune, merit, and every accomplishment both natural-and acquired.
He had read the most valuable authors, had travelled Sor improvement, and had Seen and been converSant in Several for-eigh courts from whence he had acquired a very great share of politehefs and good breeding. Fie had a natural eloquence, which added to a vast fund of knowledge both of men and books; rendered him a very agreeable and instructive acquaintance. He was well made, and poffeSSed of an uncommon fiiare of manly (not ef-leminate beauty, and of every necessary accomplishment, to compleat the Real line gentleman.
VoL. I	D	Nq
^ M E M O I R 'S of
No wonder you will fay, if he engaged the particular attention of the fair fex.
I v/as feveral times paid the compliment of being like this worthy man ; but I will affure you, I had not the vanity to -believe thoSe that attempted to impoSc upon me, in Such a palpable manner.
’Tis pity that there is not, a Severe punishment invented for all flatterers; and ■thoSe guilty of the crime of ingratitude; Breach of friendships, promife breakers'; and other like offences, which the laws do mot take cagnizance of; for what*can be more offensive or more prejudicial tofoci-ty in general ? But the laws cannot do it, and contempr is the only punishment can he inflicted.*
We often enjoyed the pleafure of Mr. Honors company and fpent our time very much to our fatisfaction.
I uSed in my converfations with iny sifter, to alk her fentiments, concerning the company we daily faw at the Bath; efpecially her female acquaintance. She one day faid, “ they are not all mifs 1“ Worthy’s, my dear Charles,” and gave .
* Horace in his Satires, takes particular notice of Ingratitude
me
' • Mt. Charles Guildford. 51
me a particular look. I was a little con-^ fuSed. She faid, excuSe me..my dear, I “ did not intend it as a jest; but I mean “ they are not all equal to that young lady,
“ in merit; and I really think there are “ few can claim fo great a share.”
I anfwered, “I am obliged to you my “ dear Lucy : you now fpeak the language of m.y heart.” I vras proceeding, when she interrupted me, by desiring my opinion of the place, the company we had feen, and the rnerit of our acquaintance,-and I freely gave her my fentiments on the chief part, but excepted Sir John, and Mr. Honor, leaving that part for Lucy to expatiate on.
She owned her furprize at wshat she had feen, since her arrival at that city; v/as equal or rather fuperior, to what I had confeffed, on the recital of Sir John’s in- ' structions, before our appearance in the long room ; and which she had not at first had an opportunity of hearing; therefore was very much unprepared for the Scenes tliat ensiled.
She wondered I had not mentioned Sir John and Mr. Honor; and Said, Ihe eS-teemed them both, as men of very great D 2	merits
£2 MEMOIRS of
merit; but that*was all she faid on that she id.
I acquieSced in her opinion, andaffured her I had ever esteemed them as fuch; that T did not believe there were any •fnore v’orthy of jiraife; and but few could equal them.
I judged it was proper to defer giving any hint, of what I thought concerning her esteem for Mr. Honor, asl knew she .was mistrefs of an uncommon share of prudence, and therefore I could Safely trust to her conduct, but it is time to conclude, therefore I fubfcribe myfelf
Tour’s
,	Sincerely,
Chalres Guildford..
LET-
Mr. Charles Guildford.- 53
LETTER Vim
My opinion of the regard I fuppofed my sister entertained for Mr.^ Ho-no'r,'was every day farther confirmed.
I could not but aprove of it, in regard to the worthiness of the object. Myesteerti for him daily encreafed, and the more I converfed with, and knew him, the grea*' ter was my wonder and furprize.
He entertained a very great regard for me, and we contracted the strictest friendship. The friendship of two brothers born in the fame moment, and from their infancy bred up together ; could not be more strict nor could we be dearer to each other.
With what insinite pleaSure, did that dear man perform any kind office for me, and how would he rejoice at any opportunity that offered to do me Service. None but Souls the most generous, who have experienced the Same, can judge what infinite pleaSure it gave me, v/he.n • ever I was able, in any Sort to retaliate the least part of that generous man’s kindneSs, and good nature.
D 3	Th®
54 MEMOIRS of
The facred tie I believe was nevcrr made stronger, or more strictly obferved.
Well might I love and esteem him, a man fo formed to attract the attention,, and engage the affections of all that knew him. So generous, So good, and So humane; that knowing and loving him, were but one and the Same thing.
His greatest pleaSure consisted in giving relief to merit in distreSs. ss'o bring the deServing man forth, from obScurity -and make him shine conSpicuous, in his proper Sphere.
He would Sometimes Say, “ Charles:
“ yonder is an objecst of pity I have feen “ this morning-, will you go with me to *■ give the poor wretch fome relief? But “ what occasion, have I to ash you to go,
when I have acquainted you of my “ knowledge of an object of compassion ?
You must excuSe me, when I fometimes mention, what the partiality of a friend' would make him Say.
But to return to my Sormer Subject. How many v/orthy and generous acts, ‘ have I myfelf been witneSs to; tliat that humane man has perSormed; and what an innate SatisSaction have they given him.
O
Mr. Charles Guildford. 55^
0	my friend! who can deScribe the im-sinite pleafure a generous heart Seels, fronr the conlciousneSs of having performed .. a worthy action! None but great Souls,, can feel thoSe delicate SenSations. ’Tis a. joy unknown>to the griping, penurioiisv wretch; who hoards his ill acquired wealth in strongboxes, and chests cramped.with-iron; Softer in its nature than the miSer’s« heart.
How many poor, deSponding SouL,, were relieved by the bounty of my friend. How many agreeable, and contented families, Ov/e that happy Serenity, and eaSy situation in life they now enjoy to his generosity !
1	hope you will not think me partial;, but this is a theme, on which I could for ever dwell.
Gaming, you know, makes a principal part in the diversions at Bath. A vice* which though always very predominant: there ; is now, I think, if posiible, more fo. My friend cautioned mie against having too at a fondneSs for that curled diversion; and made many moral and just reflections" thereon; the truth of which were foon verified, in Several instances, of the folly' of thofe,., who pursued it with too great
D 4,	an‘
' { ^
S6 M E M.DIR S of
. an eagerneSs, and paid too great an atten--^ tion to momentary pleaSures, which after«^ wards cost them insinite pain.
There was one WilSon, (I think thar ■was his name,) who made a very genteel: appearance, and was esteemed as a man of birth, and fortune; but whom I have reafon to believe was nothing but a common sharper or gambler. He kept gen^ teel company. Spent money liberally, aneS iflgratiated hi.mSelf into the favour of feveral sine ladies, and of feveral noblemen and gentlemen of fortune; but there were few of Isis acquaintance but what it was in., general thought, paid dear for his friendship in fome shape or other.
* He carried off from Bath in a fmall. time, a pretty large fum; that chiefly from the gentlemen *, and fome ladies were fufpected to have got, others lost more by him, than any or them-desired.
Is it not my dear friend, very furpriss ing that gentlemen of family and fortune who have been li'berally educated, and' commonly esteemed men of judgment, and a delicate taste; can be fo far infatuated, as to contract a friendfi ip, at least a pretty strict intimacy witli common fiturp-ers, whom they meet with at a gaming table?
Mr, Charles Guildford. 57.
ble? Men whofe morals and principles are vitiated and depraved to the greatest degree;'and whoSe profligate lives have long been forSeited to the Iword of jiiStice.
’Tis far beneath the dignity of a man, that is him Self poffeffed, of any the least fiiare of merit; to keep company with fuch vile mifcreants.
For a gentleman to hazard his fortune, by afibciadng and gaming with fuch;, proves him a votary of the goddefs Folly.
How many amiable vrives, lovely children, and happy families; have been rendered miserable by that vice.
And often ’tis to be feared, greatly feared; the miSeries attending the wretched I'ufierers, have not been temporary, but have been the cauSe of actions that luve.rendered them of a very lone dura-tion.
What have the authors of thoSe miSe-^ ries to anSwerfor! reflection is their greatest enemy and an appoplectic fit the only friend they can fly to.
Where is the man that is nobly born, could bare to See,, or even endure the thought oI his wretched offspring craving ^ proteelion Srom thoSe, whom perhaps they ^ once commanded, in the characters of. menial Servants.
D 5.	A'se
ss M E M O r R S' of
As to the fair fex, I think, they in par-. ttcular should make choice of leSs dangerous and more innocent diversions than thofe of a gaming-table.
But if man, lordly man: whtifomuch values himfelf on his fuperior judgment: Sets them the example, who can wonder if they tread in his steps!
Example is prevalent, more efpecially the examples of thoSe, whom the fair-Sex are, from divers connections in liSe, engaged to love and esteem.
If a debt of honour, as ’tis falfely cal-, led, is contracted by a lady of beauty, whether sino;le or married, and she is unable to pay it, what advantages does it give the winner! And how often have thoSe advantages been made uSe of
But I must at prefent bid you adieu^
lash, my dear friend, yours;
■	,	Charles Guildford-. ,
L E .D
t. .
Mr. Charles Guildford.'. 59
' /
LETTER, IX.
ITHINK my last was chiefly em--ployed in encomiums on my friend Mr. Honor, and concluded with fome, (pe'rliaps to you,) . unneceffary reflections on the detestable, vice of gaming.
I would not v/iilingly be tedious, but will endeavour to be as brief as possible.
I believe this epistle will be a Specimen of my promised brevity.
Mr. Honor, after we had been Sometime at Bath, declared himSelf my fisters i’.iimircr, and begged permission to pay lii.s addreffes to her parents for their con-fent, to make him happy.
Lucy acquainted me with Mr. Honor’s' declaration, and the propoSals he had made the firll opportunity she had confeffed that he was not diSigrreable to her; and farther added that if her parents, and' her dear brother, had not any objection ;• she could approve of him as a companion for life.
’ I ashed what anfwer she had given hum: She Said no certain one, but referred himS to me; and if I was willing, he might purSue Such steps as he thought proper,, D 6,	, having
6o MEMOIRS off
having before affurcd him, that she hadi not, nor did expect any fortune, at least-worth mentioning.
His-generous foul feemed to re;_joice at this discovery, and convinced her that his views were not in the least mercenary, or his designs Sordid and baSe; be confeffed himSelf excesiively pleaSed at her generous frankneSs,
Mr. Honor foon after mentioned it to ^ .me; and told me, though he had given, me feveral hints, which he balieved 1 had not observed; that he had a very great regard for my sister, yet he did not chuSe to explain himsself, until he had declared his Sentiments to the perSon most concerned, and if she approved his addreffes, he then determlnecl to try for the Sanction of her friends approbation, hoping Ij would give my confent, and be his advocate as he assured me his future happi-nefs depended on his fucceSs..
I again mentioned to him how trifling Lucy’s fortune was. He affured me that his own was fufficient, and that he did not require any addition to it by marriage.
That this was a circumstance which far from giving him any uncalineSs, afforded him the greatest pleafure, as it would coiir
vince
Mr. Charles Guildford. 6h
vince me his regard was sincere and un-biaffed by any interested views. He then preffed me in the most urgent manner, to uSe my endeavours to bring the affair to a happy and Speedy conclusion.
I told him we should Soon return to----
and that then I would endeavour to gain my parent’s conSent, and affureddiim that when they were Satisfied of his character and that ’twas agreeable to Lucy’s inclinations, they would readily comply with-, his request.
My parents in this reSpect and in many others, were of a very different taste, to the generality, of the moderns; who I find have lately obtained an act to prevent clandestine marriages, which gives a parent, or the relations of a young lady a very^extensive power, over her. A power I believe more extensive than nature ever designed to entrust into the hands of-any one.
SuppoSe r was a parent, aTelatlon, or a guardian; does either entitleme to con-troul, perhaps the well placed affection of my daughter, my relation, or my ward.
If a young lady has fenfe. Surely that will enable her to cliuSe for herfelf, and
place'
: 62 M E M O I R S' of'
place her affection's on fome worthy ob--ject, with whom she is, in her own mind convinced, that she can happily make the voyage of life.
Can any one controul the inclinations of another, and direct them what courSe they shall take ^ May not a man as Soon change the System of the univerSe? Let the parent who is desircus of controuling the inclinations off his child, fuppo e the Icene changed; that he had a parent still living, that his affections were fixed on Some worthy lady, who was deficient only in point of Sortune. I'hat tfie father thinks a Sufficient inducement to deny hjs conSent to what his Son most ardently wishes for; and who thinks that his Sather in denying it, obstructs his happineSs, and will by Such a denial render him miSerable for life. Would he not in luch a cafe be apt to think his father unjust I do not,., strictly fpeaking, fay it is just in the.fon to think him So, but only alk the question if he would not think him unjust, and that in the highest degree ? Let him apply
^ k.
I believe thoSe that were the most active in passing this bill into a law, intended ;
, \
Mr. Charles Gun. DFORD. 63
ded it chiefly as a prefervative, that any^ young lady, who is poffeffed of a fortune may not be able to marry a young fellow Avhofe fortune is not in fome Sort equivalent to hers; let his merit, his deSerts,. and accomplishments, be what they will.
If you have money sir you shall have the lady, if not, your hopes are in vain.. This, tome, feems to be the language of' many.
But I am growing tedious, to return to my former fubject therefore: when I had-mentioned our intent of leaving Bath loon, Mr. Slonor begged he might accompany us. I gladly confented. His impatience hastened oUr departure, from a town, pardon the expression, full of folly_> and vice.
Sir John Philips did not chuSe to go with us, but promifed to call on us in his, return to town.
I acquainted my father, by letter, of our intended return, and of my friend’s accompanying us; whoSe chamcter I had before given him, therefore did not doubt but that my parents would receive him, according to his merit.
We went in a coach, hired for ouisselves
tliere-
6.4.' MEMO IRS' of'
therefore stwas more, agreeable returning than going; but how could it be other-wife when we had fopleasing a companion. ' I promifed brevity, therefore fubfcribs-myfelf ^
/
yours &c.
Charles Guildford.
LET r E R X.
WE had a very pleaSant journey, and were greatly entertained with, the diverting yet improving conversation of Lucy’s admirer. My sister and I . were joyfully welcomed home, by our kind and affectionate,parents. I preSented my friend to, them, and they gave him a very friendly, polite reception.
Mr. Flonor the first opportunity, renewed his propoSals; and begged my father’s confcnt; who confeffeel his only objection' was, Lucy’s fortune, which he did not think was in the least ec^uivalent
to
Mr. Charles Guildford. 65
to what a man of his merit, exclusive of his own fortune might justly expect". That as that objection w'as too great to-be removed, he hoped Mr. Honor would excufe him if he could not comply. My friend, at this-, was struck dumb with astonishment. My father lefthim to give him an opportunity of recovering himSelf,’ from the furprize, his difcourfe had threw him into.
Mr. Honor made ufe of this opportunity, to find me. Defpair was paintr-ed in his countenance, and with visible* emotion, he told me that my father had. refuSed his conSent. I started, pauSed;, then begged him to-relate the conversation that had pasted between them. He did, and this revived me; as I knew my friend’s happiness depended on the fuccefs. of his prefent designs. I determined to. ufe the influence I had, and did not doubt of fuccefs. I affured him my father’s reafon was only owing to a reluctance, in giving my fister in marriage to a man of hisfortuneand merit; without.an adequate fortune, that generossty and Some pride I‘ durst fay were his only motives and that he had not any other caufe for refusing his confent.
Mr
66 MEMOIRS of
Mr. Honor begged if that was really all the objection, his happiness might be no longer delayed; but that I would intercede for my father’s eonfent, as fortune was what he did not in the least desire, with a young lady of my sister’s merit, nor did he want it, and farther that he could not be happy without her. He told me he had a father living, of whofe confent he was fully affured, it always having been a rule with him for any man, especially his own Son, who had a fortune fufficient to fupport himSelf and a wife, according to his birth, not to require fortune, but merit with a woman.
He farther informed me he had large expectations on his father’s death, which was a period he should not ever wish for, was he thereby to become poffeffed of the Indian world, as he had been the most:., kind and indulgent parent, and that had he been otherwife, his fentiments in that refpect would have been the fame. I promifed him my affistance, and gave him hopes that my intercession would not be in vain.
I applied, according to my promiSe, to my father, and to my ever kind mother who was preSent when I made this appli-
Qation.
Mr. Charles Guildford.’ 67
cation. I affured them that my friend had a due fenSe of their honour; but that I was certain the happineSs of his future life depended upon their compliance, that he was a man of foiid judgment,,and well knew how to distinguish between beauty and merit; and that the latter ' was the prevailing charm in Lucy, that attracted his esteem; that he had a handfome fortune, clear from incumbrances, and needed not the portion of a wife to make good the payment of any debts.
I farther added that he was affured of his father’s conSent, who was the honourable Thomas tlonor, ESq; of Honor-hall in Yorkshire ; a gentleman of birth and fortune. My father faid he had heard of old Mr. Honor.
I proceeded,, made ufe of all the per-fuasions I was master of, to gain his confent, and my mother’s; and affured them if I was not certain that a refuSal would be highly prejudicial to my friend, I would not urge it, as I was fensible of the very great inequality of their fortunes..
My mother at length convinced by my reaSons joined with me, in my intercessions, though she was before against it; through the Same principle of honour.
My
M E M O I R S ' of
My father at length overcome with our joint importunities conSented on conditionr that Mr. Honor would obtain his father’s confent, and farther would at any time afterwards, if it should be in my father’s power to give Lucy a fortune, accept of it.
I propofed it to Mr. Honor, who, tho’ he did not want the conditions, y’-et gladly embraced the opportunity of compleat-ing his wishes.
Mr Honor obtained his father’s confent, and preparations being made; he foon after eSpoufed my dear Lucy; Fle had before desired us immediately on the celebrating his nuptials' to repair to his own Seat, and that we would accompany him thither, to which we could not refuSe our conSent. I easily gueffed the generous motive, but did not mention it. The ceremony over, we went to his Seat at ——— in Nottinghamshire; where I found there were preparations making for our reception.
Old Mr. Honor arrived Soon aSter, he shewed us particular marks of favour and reSpect; and Seemed extremely wtSi pleaSed with the choice his Son had made by what paffsd between.my lather and him,. I had
reaSon
Mr. Charlts Guildford.
reafon to believe they had been formerly acquainted. We were entertained in the most agreeable manner.
The neighbouring poor enabled by the bounty of my worthy brother: gladly rejocied on the happy occasion.
’Ids neediest to defer]be his fine feat, pleafant gardens, and the delightful litn-ation of the whole ; or the particulars of the entertainment we met with. I shall only affure you that ’twas in every refpect worthy of the man whom I could now call by the dear name of brother.
Lucy wished for the company of her friend Mifs Charlotte Worthy ; to have graced her Nuptials, and have been a witneSs to her happiness ; but she was not ,as yet returned from Lord Worthy’s.
We fpent fometimeat Mr Honor’s feat in the most agreeable manner. Winter drawing on, and our parents being defi-rous of our returning home, Mr. Honor propoSed to Lucy ; fpending that Winter in London, to which she readily confented, but begged to fee her friend Charlotte first, whom she had acquainted of her marriage; and who had in anfwer fent her a letter of congratulation upon the happy occafion.
Mr,
70 M E M O I R S of •
Mr. Honor propoSed to return with us to my father’s Seat where Lucy'was to meet her friend; and from thence pro-ceed to London.
I had Seen Bath, and Intended to take a view of London. From what I had already Seen, I judged, I should before I left the kingdom have Seen enough of my na-tive^country without making the tour of it.
‘ T had before acquainted my brother with my intentions, of taking shipping for France in order to proceed on my in-' tended tour; after I had taken_ a view of the city of London.
He approved of my deSign and insisted on) my accompanying him to town, and Spending the winter there with him, and afterwards, he Said, if Lucy approved of it, they would go with me to Paris.
We each gladly embraced the propoSal he had mack, and meaSures were taken accordingly.
He would have had my father and mo-ther to have favoured us with their com-pany to town ; but they begged to be excuSed, as they never deSired to return to a place with which they were already too well acquainted.
Ever.y
\
Mr. Charles Guildford. 71
Every thing being agreed on, and the preparations made for our departure finished, we Set out for our own Seat. I in particular wished for an opportunity of feeing Charlotte before I left the country and was fully reSolved if I possibly could to declare my esteem for her; before I Set off for France, my uneasineSs on that head, being my chief reaSon for going a-broad So Soon.
But the theme is engaging and may perhapsflead me[too far , therefore for the preSent I must bid you adieu, and Sub-;Scribe mySelf.
^	Yours &c.
Charles Guildford.
P. S. A few days before we left Not-tinghamshire, Sir John Philips, who was informed of my friend’s wedding; called ' 'tocongratulate him on the occasional. He staid two or three days, and then Set for-wards for London.
A
-	’L E T-,
72 MEMOIRS of
L E T T E R XL
Th E day after we arrived at our village Charlotte returned from Lord Worthy’s. She immediately paid my sister a visit, and was by our whole family received in the politest manner.
This opportunity of enjoying the company and converfation of her I loved, you may assure yourfelf I embraced with pleaSure ; but yet it was not Such a one 1 wished for.
1 observed Charlotte’s eyes at our meeting: when I paid my compliments to her I thought I could obServe a pleasing emotion and a particular, I may Say a very lively vivacity in [them. — I construed every thing to the best advantage. See - how delusive are our hopes ? and how ,'ready we are to flatter ourSelves into a belief of thoSe things we wissi for.
How happy was I now in her Company ! yet not compleatly So. Tho’ this was very agreeable, yet’twas not entirely " Satisfactory. I wanted an opportunity of declaring myfelf.
I mentioned it to my fister (who perceived my uneafinefs:) and tiefired her
tld
Mr. Charles Guildford. 73
to procure me a private audience as shon as possible; Lucy as before, kindly pro-miSed me her assistance, but knew not what to do.
The time during Charlotte’s first visit flew Swift, and the hour of parting drew near; my heart Sunk, my Spirits failed me.
-■I knew not what 1 either did or Said.—
I was confuSed and vainly wished, 1 could stop the courSe of time. Charlotte at length left us. I grew duli, and melancholy: Nothing pleaSed me: I was careleSs of every thing that concerned me .• I wanted yet dreaded to know my fate.
My Sister pitied me, and was reSolved to ' uSe her utmost endeavours to Serve me, and establish me in the fivoUr of my mistreSs, for she had before assured me that I already possessed a very large share of her ‘ 'esteem.
My Sister Soon returned her friends vi-fit, she took aU opportunity of mention--ing me. Charlotte Sighed on hearing my name, as my sister afterwards inform-ed me. She enquired the cauSe: Char-lotte anSwered she knew it not herSe’f, but that it was grown habitual. Ti's love., re-pliedLucy: “ NosherepliedI do noTnow'
^ what it is, I have long puZzled mySelf to
VoL. il.	E	“ find
^4 M E M O I R S of
“ sind out the caufe of it, but cannot “ fay that the fuccefs of my enquiries has “ anfwered the trouble I have given my-“ myfelf.
Lucy in her converfation with Charlotte feveral times brought Love on the carpet; this was a fubject on which Charlotte agreeably dwelt, and gave my dear Lucy fome faint hopes, that I might gain the poffeffion of my mistrefs’s heart.
They made each other feveral friendly viSits, without ceremony; in most of which I enjoyed the pleaSure of Charlotte’s company. My sister in one of theSe visits .kindly gave me the long wished for opportunity, by her abfence, which I embraced. I'rembling I approached the awful fair; I attempted to fpeak, but knew not how, I was fully fensible how precious the moment was, and at length with difficulty and in a confufed and abrupt manner pronounced the words,-— I love,—I stopt and fcarce ventured to look up.—At length I did, and thought the amiable'Charlotte feemed to view me with an eye of pity and kind regard.
Emboldened by the favourable omen, as I thought it; I declared my esteem for her in the most pathetic terms^ yet had
pru-
Mr. Charles Guildford. 75
prudence enough to beg pardon for my prcSumption.
But alas! the' happy omen Was now changed, she blushed with anger, feemed greatly furprized at my affurance, and irowningfaid, “ I could not have thought, " -“ Sir, that you would ever have presumed.”—-My Sister coming in, interrupted .her diScourSe. She took leave of her, and at parting gave me a look that Sufficiently testified her diSpleast-ire.
My sister was greatly Surprized at this •change in her friends behaviour. As for me, I was entirely confunded. It was with difficulty, I recovered my fcattered Senfes. My sister not yet fully recovered from her furprize, desired the particulars of our short conversation.
I told her the whole. The starting tear approached her eye; stie Said she pitied me; and feared her heart was already^ engaged. This dist.f-acted me, I dreaded as much mySelf
I desired her if possible, to gain me another interview, that I might be fully informed of my fate.
Lucy faid she had reaSon to believe she had forSeited her esteem; as Sire must think her privy to my design,' but in the E 2	most
^6 M E M O I R S of
most obliging manner affured me she would for n,y fatisfaction, attempt it tho* she greatly feared the fuccefs of her endeavours.
Oh! how cruel is fufpenfe to a man in Such a situation !
Charlotte, who was goodneSs itSelf, did not blame my sister but permitted her to visit herasuSual, yet notwithstanding that, she desired my lister would excufe her returning thofe visits, on my account.
At length however on my Sister’s repeated intreaties she favoured me with an interview. 1 was going to throw myfelf at her feet, but she farbid me, kindly aS-furing me, she had forgiven what had passed; and would excuSe it, on condition I never attempted to renew the fubject; and that on thofe conditions, she would esteem me as the brother of her friend, and converfe with me as before.
I was rejoiced at this condefeension and made her the most grateful acknowledgments my heart could fuggest. Our time drew near for our journey to London, Charlotte was likewife going with her parents. She kindly, can I Say cruelly ? permitted me, in company with my sister
to
Mr. Charles Guildford. 77
to visit her there, on the conditions she had before impoSed. Though this was not fo favourable as I could wish, for I still entertained hopes, that I might in time fu'ccced, yet it was more than 1 expected, or had any just reaSon to hope for.
I gladly conSented to the conditions, and this in Some Sort, reaffured me and made me more ehearSul, for I was fronv my late diSappaintment, grown extremely melancholy.
Charlotte at length fet out ; she being gone, I hastened our departure as much as I possibly could; and my worthy friend and my sister, who were ever ready to oblige me, complied with my request to depart the enfuing week.
I took a Sorrowful farewell of my indulgent parents; my father having first taken care to give me directions how to receive any remittances I should want; with ample instructions how to behave my' felf in foreign countries.
He particularly charged me not to enter into any diSpute, concerning religion;, yet never to deny my own, nor ever to dif-coLiisse on the policy of states or govern^ ments, or make any comparifon’s between thofe of foreign countries and my own, E 3	eSpecL
78 MEMOIRS of
efpecially as* to. the republic of Venice^ wniiiltUere, if I should visit it as I intended to do.
“ There is,” fays my father, “ one ge-“ neral exception, and that is, if you con.-“ tract a friendship with any worthy man “ of whoSe honesty and sincreity you are “well convinced; and you are desirous “ of gaining any uSeSul knowlegde, which “ it is in his power to give you, in Such “ caSe you ought to Speak your miiH “ freely and should do So at all times “ to a real Sriend; but to distinguish “ between the true and falSe requires “ a nice and diScerning eye.
“ Be cautious how you contract a “ friendship with a foreigner, whilst in ‘‘ foreign countries; unleSs you are well “ acquainted with them, tlieir circum-“ stances, professions, &c. For there are “ innumerable Spies abroad in every “ place of public reSorc,. belonging to “ the government and the inquisition,
“ who strictly obferve a stranger’s actions, ' “ and behaviour.”
I thanked my father for his instructions,. took an affectionate farewel of Mr. Brown, and. a few, other friends
and.
Mr. Charles Guildford. 79
and then; fet off for London, as this is a proper period for concluding,
I Subfcribe myfelf as ufual,
yours,
Charles Guildford.
LETTER XIi:
WE had an agreeable journey. We travelled in Mr. Honor’s coach, and by eafy stages, at length arrived at the justly famed metropolis of this kingdom, v/ithout being in the least fatigued.
A very handSome houSe genteely furnished in Saint James’s Sqiiare was, by Mr. Honor’s orders, ready for our reception. . My friend insisted on my residing with him during my stay in town, to which I could not deny my affent. •
Mr. Honor was 'U acquainted with London and with every thing curious in '• E.4^	it.
8-0 MEMOIRS of
it. My sister had as well as myfelf express fed a desire of feeing fomething of the city. He offered to be our conducter, and to .shew us the principal things, that were worthy of our obfervation.
The next day the coach was ordered to the door. We got in, and drove towards the city, th:at being she first excursion,, we intended to make.
We took a view of that magnificent piece of building, faint Paul’s; which justly claims the particular attention of strangers. As I had not yet feen any of the Italian models, I was not fo capable of judging of the particular beauties, elegancies, and defects of this piece of mo»
' dern architecture.
Several things I must confefs gave me then and afterward difgust, efpecially the point of view, which ought at least to be as'Sar distant as Temple Bar, in my opinion; but as it Is now situated, there is not room to take a proSpect 'oS it. In regard to the prd'ent situation, what proSpect there might otherwiSe have been, is destroyed by that long received Superstitious notion, of erecting any place of worship due East and West, as if the
COHr
Mr. Charles Guildford. Sr
congregation were designed to worship the rising Sun.
I could never conceive that there was any fixed point, to which we were to direct our prayers; but that the deity is at all times, and in every instant of time, in every part of boundlefs fpace.
I have, since my return from Italy taken another view of faint Paul’s; and re- ,* ally think there are feveral fiults in that building, that are easily diScernable to a competent judge.
Not only the portico but the whole structure itielf, is on the outside, divided into two stories ; which conSequendy indicates the fame division v:ithin, which is abSurd. The portico, I think Ihould have projected farther, which would have given a grander contrast to the front, and aided the perspective within.
If the dome had been raiSed in thecen* tre of the whole, and two Spires added to the East end, to anfwer thoSe at the West with proper ornaments; it would have made a great addition to it.
There are Several other exceptions to be ta'ken to it^ which I need not notice to you, as you are yourSelf- a competent iudge; but vet, notwithStandino; Some E 5	fau Itg,
S2 MEMTOIRS of
faults, I think it is a grand and magnificent pile, and an ornament to the nation in general.
If the architects plan had been exactly followed, what a glorious city would ' London have been, and what a magnificent profpect would Saint Paul’s have given : the whole city itfelf with the addition' of fuch a church properly fitua ted, would have been the wonder of the world.
Sir Christopher Wren laid down a plan wherein w’'as a defign for one large fpaci-ons Street, to reach from lAldgate to Temple Bar, in the middle of which was to have been a large fquare, capable of containing Saint Paul’s church, round which would have been a proper distance for a viev/ of the whole, fo that it would not then have been confined, and penned up as ’tis mow, where it can’t be feen to^ any advantage; but there would have been a long ample vista at each end, . to have reconciled it to a proper point of view.
'He alfo propofed to build-all the parish churches in fuch a manner, as to be feen at the end of every vista of houfes, and fo difpofed in their distances from each
other
Mr. Charles Guildford. ,83
other, as not to appear confufed in the profpect ; which would have given a proper heightening to the whole bulk of the City, as it silled the landshape : and alio to build the -houfes uniform, and fup- . ported on a piazza like thoSe of Covent Garden, and by the waterside, from the. Bridge to the Temple, along broad v,/harf where he designed to have ranged all the halls belonging to the Several Companies of the City, with proper wharehouSes for merchants and to vary the Edifices, and make it one of the most beautiful and moSt ufeful ranges of building in the world.
The great Fire, gave them a proper opportunity, to carry fuch a glorious fcheme into execution ; what a pity ’twas ' not done !
The fame of fuch a city would have attracted the attention of the whole world and have drav/n Foreigners of ail nations to have viewed it; Vv^hich would in time have paid for the building of the whole.
The buildings in London are many of them expensive, but inelegant or fo badly situated as to be hid from our fight.
Tlie next 'place we vifited was the Exchange. This is certainly a costly, grand extensive fabrick but it w'aiits an ample E 6	area
84	E M O I R S of
area before it, that a perfon might at one view be capable of comprehending the whole, and not be obliged to view it in parcels which destroys the intent of the the thing, and confuSes the obferver. But the vast concourSe of people I there faw, attracted my Attention too much, for me to regard the Architecture of this noble structure with that due observance, I had. intended to bestow on every piece of art I found in this city, worthy of my obfervation.
I was .greatly furprized, as the coach drove along througli the city, to See the innummerable crowds of people that thronged along the streets ; but I was much more SurpriSed at change, to See Such an assembly of men, whom 1 conSidered as representatives of all the different parts of the earth. Merchants that traffick from pole to pole, from east to west, and to the uttermost bounds of our Globe.
How much bissinefs, fays I to myfelf is there tranSacted on- this fmall fpot of ground. Agreements made, and tranl-actions carried on, whofe influence reach to the farthest parts of the Earth. The whole globe itfelf is here traverfed^ and concerns fettled though at the greatest
distance
Mr. Charles Guildford. S5
distance. The commerce of the kingf dom is extended to every Nation, principality, dominion and people under the fun.
In short my fatisfaction would have continued much longer, but I was reminded, by my friend that ’twas time to pfcceed on our excursion.
We left the Exchange, and from thence, proceeded to the Bridge, where we had a proSpect of the river and stripping, and likewi e of a great part of the City which v/ith the distant view, give us the ProSpect of a delightful landstcape. The buildings that are upon the bridge are a very great incumbrance, L think, and gives it a very diSagreeable look.
What a delightful proSpect would it give, if it was freed from that incum---brance.
From the Bridge we drove to the Tower an antient venerable place ; but really I can’t praife it much, either for its beauty, strength, or magnisicence.
Whilst we were down at Bath, I had taken a ride to Bristol ; where we staid two or three days, to view the fiiipping &c. I think that is- a sihe fea-port town, that carries on a large trade. There are a
great
86 M E M O I R S of
great' number of ships belonging to itL and many continually coming there. They have a very fine quay, where their flipping lies, near a mile and a half in length, which is continually crowded with ships from all parts of the world ; and the quay from one end to the other, appears, by reafon of the vast number of masts, ropes, &c. like a large forest in. wunter.
d’he fiiips of war don’t come up to Bristol, but commonly anchor at King-road.
But to return to London. We walk’d down a considerable way, by the fide of the Thames. How happy and how great is London, nay even the whole Kingdom rendered by that fine river; which proudly Swelling bears So many rich and Stately ships! ships without number, that lie in many places on this fine river, on each Side for many miles.
How far in number do they exceed thoSe at Bristol, or oS any other Sea-port town in England or perhaps in the known' world. And what a glorious appearance would they make, if they lay altogether in regular order! but that would be inconvenient, for the number of ships far ex-
• . ceeds
.	Mr. Charles^ Guildford. '87,
eeeds thofe of Bristol, the wharfs and quays be distinct andfeparate and there is greater room.
’Tis^ not for Bristol or any other fea-port in this nation, to stand in Competion with London, the Metropolis of the kingdom, and tho’ Sir Christopher Wren’s plan, was not followed, yet ’tis still in-many refpects perhaps the finest City in^ the whole world.
I had almost forgot my promifed brevity, however I. at lengh fubfcribe myfelf,.
Yours &c.
Charles Guildford-,
V '
#
■ X	••
L E T-
88 MEMOIRS of
LETTER, XIII.
TO give you a description of every thing I Saw in London and Westminster, &c. during my residence in town that was worthy of observation ; would not only be needleSs as you ate well acquainted with thoSe things; but would be alSo morally impossible in the compaSs of a few letters.
I shall iust make mention of a thing or two more, of the curious k nd, and then change my Subject.
The Monument is I think a noble column, and may in many reSpects justly vie-with the most celebrated ones of antiquity. It is bold, beautiful, just, and harmonious ; and the baSs relief at the baSe is finely performed. It’s a very great pity that it is fo badly situated.
The situation of most public buildings in the city of London is badly choSen, and feveral places which ought to be left free and open, not only for the beauty of the proSpect, but for .convenience likewiSe are crowded with trifling buildings of little conSequence.
Saint
«
Mr. Charles Guildford. 89-
Saint Dunstan’s church is incumbered with shops, and is only a deformed incumbrance itfelf. Itfpoils the beauty of Fleet-street, and the profpect of Temple-Bar.
Many churches in and about London are fo much crowded at the entrance, that they are fcarce perceived by a stranger when passing along the streets.
The Strand a sine noble street ; and which is the grand channel of communication between London and Westminster is greatly and very improperly crowded, with a very large body of buildings, extending from the Butcher Row to the New Church.
The New Church in the Strand is a pretty building, and is fufficiently decorated to pleafe the ignorant, but not to appear even agreeable to a good judge. It is all Ornament without proper vacuities to relieve the Eye, and give an agreeable, contrast to the whole that is absolutely neceffary. ’Tis alSo divided into two stories which has ruined its Simplicity, and broke the whole into too many parts.
If Saint Margeret’s Church in West^ minster was removed, it wouid.leave room, for an agreeable view of Henry the fe-veath’s ChapeL
Westminster'
90 MEMOIRS of
Westminster Abbey is a venerable fi-brick on account of its Antiquity, but there is not much in the architecture of it to pleafe a judicious eye.
The fronts ought to have been raifed above the rest of the building, whereby the lines w^ould have been varied ; and a very great grace would have been added which it now wants.
The wTst end is yet unfinished; and I believe the two towers on each side of it were by the builders of this ancient pile designed to give that elevation, it is apparently fo defective in.
Within are many famous monuments but few without faults. ’Tis neediest to enumiCrate any more of thefe particulars, ' only that I viewed every Square and street of any note, in and about the famed metropolis,, and Iheartily wish that the Eng-lifn had a more refined taste, I mean a true one, and then we should not be liable to fo much cenfure from foreigners for our want of elegance.
Is not Italy enriched by the vast number of foreigners that visit itAnd what . is the reaSon of it ? The magnisicence of their buildings, their excellent paintings ;
Mr. Charles Guildford. gi
ings; and the number and variety ot each.
Italy has been and still Is the School of arts. ’Tis doubtleSs owing to the very great encouragement given to the profeS-fors,, and to thofe excellent genius’s that have appeared among them.
France is fully fensible of this, and of the very great prosit arising from the encouragement given to men of genius.
How do they cherish a man of genius ? and what vast encouragement do they give to fuch .? Several examples have been lately shewn us, which you are well acquainted with’
Was there not Mr. K--------an Engf
lishmanof an unco.mmon capacity? for England is far from being barren, in regard to the production of ingenious men, who went to France for the encourage--ment he could not meet with here ? wero not is inventions curious, and^ of public utility to this kingdom Was there proper encouragersient given him ^ Has not . France rece ived him with open arms ?, Have they not Settled a handSome revenue^ upon him, and an annuity on every child he. has, that will Settle in the kingdom what curious inventions is that man master ,
of ?;
' 92^ MEMOIR S of .
of? France receives the benefit of them, and gives him the due reward of his merit.
Established as this man is; beloved, honoured, valued, and esteemed by every one ; himSelf and his family provided for in the most genteel, and generous manner : the protection he enjoys from many people of fortune, rank, power and honor, v/hofe word he has often experienc’d is not like the generality of courtiers, but always facred, and to be depended upon : notwithstanding he is amaffmg of immenfe riches, by the fale of his inventions, which the crown allows him, and protects him in : notwithstanding all the advantages he is there poffeffed of he would furrender the whole *, entirely leave it; and return to his native country, could he meet with one half of that encouragement the crown of France now gives-him.
There if he alks a favour ’tis granted, him. The crown is his constant protection, that he shall have no wrong of any kind whatever offered him. For any new invention he has a gratuity to, the utmost of hia wishes; and the fale of it
imme-
Mr. Charles Guildford. 93
imttiediatly Secured to him and his heirs.
If a nobleman, or any of the king’s ministers give him a promife, he depends upon it; their word is a fufficient fecurity and it is constantly pertormed,
A certain English nobleman at Paris a man of strict honor, and integrity who knew him, was acquainted with his genius, the encouragement he had met with there, and every neceffary circumstance ^ relating to the whole ; being fully fensible of, and regretting the loSs our country fust’ained by his abfence, fpoke to him ; and engaged him to come over to England to the duke of ******^ to whom he would write in his favour; and that he .. did not doubt but his grace would take care, and have a proper provision made, for him and his family, equivalent to that he should leave behind him.
He confented, but reSolved first to come over himSelf, and fee if lie could meet with better fuccefs, than he had formerly had.
Fie attended on his grace, and was received but coolly. His grace had either forgot his friend’s information, or not receiv’d any.
The
§4 M E M O I R S of
The gentleman wrote to the nobleman at Paris, by whofe instigation he had come over; he foon received an anfwer ' from him, wherein he gave him directions to attend his grace the duke of on an appointed day, when he would engage that he should meet with a better ^ reception.
He went, and was gracioussy received. Flis propostls examined,‘and his grace promised him, he might depend upon proper encouragement.
But affairs of state, and things .of greater concern, engaging his grace’s attention ; the gentleman at length returned to France, not having any hopes of fucceeding here; justly prefering a certainty before a very great uncertainty. But to return to the fubject, from whence I have deviated.
The French have reformed their taste, and Seem to know what true taSte is. The palace of Versailles is an instance of this.
How many foreigners of distinction, has that noble piece of Building drawn thither to view it! and what benefit has
France
Mr. Charles Guildford. 95
France received by that stately fabrick, and the curiosity of strangers !
I wish the English would follow their , example in true taste, more than they do; or at least not follow titeir example fo’ much in trifles, and neglect things of greater'confequencc.
I am my dear friend,
. -.	yours; &a
Charles Guildford,
■ C *.	/	•
*	'	I'	s
L E T-
S6 ‘ M E M O I R S of
LETTER XIV.
I S almost timetto refume my for-
j[ mer fubject.
We were foon introduced into genteel acquaintance, people of fashion, I affure you, as to the particulars of every company, visits, converfation, &c. and how we daily fpent our time would be very tedious, 'but as you have feveral times de^ sired me to give you a few of the characters with whom I was perfonally acquainted ; i shall in compliance with your request, give you a short defcription of fome of thofe perSons, amongst whom 1 first made my appearance in town.
We went feveral times to court; visited the playhouSes, went to feveral opera’s masquerades, concert?, balls, &c. faw every ' place and thing that was polite, fashiona-able or cunous; and in Seeing of that faw much Saw little.
I believe you are impatient to know vdiat SucceSs I had with Charlotte. Why 1 visited at Mr. Worthy’s in company v/ith my brother and sister pretty oSten ; and Charlotte returned our visits.
I
Mr. Charles Guildford. gj
1 could have Spent my whole f me at Mr. Worthy’s for I was now very intimate there; few families v/ith whom I was acquainted lived So happy or gave me So much pleaSure, exclusive of my regard for the younger branch of it; as that v/or-thy and honouiable family did. All was peaceful, happy and Serene.
Our family was as harmonious, and fo might another in which I was acquainted, had it not been for the unhappy temper of a woman, who was a miSery to herfelf and all that knew her, and which was entirely owing to her ownshad temper.
Mr. James Thompfon, a divine, was the hushand of this gentlewoman. A marl that was pious, just and good. He had read much, was poffeffed of all the focial virtues ; well acquainted with the duties of his function; and performed them ae-coreiingly.
He was what might be called a good man, but his wife a termag;int. I have often compared the good man to Socrates Lor patience, and hiswite to the termagant Xantippe.
She was Seldom eaSy or pleaSed at any thing he either Said, did, or adviSed. He .meekly bore whatever (he Said ; and when
VoL. I. .	F	fije
^8 -MEMOIRS of
she was cool w'ould reafon with, at least advife her; for she would feldom or ever give him a direct anSwer to any question , he ashed her, as wherefore did She Such •and Such a thing, with So much heat and paffion ; or w’^ouki it not have been better ■to have do-ne it in a cool, moderate manner, without enfiaming herSelf with anger. ^
MiSs Betfy, the daughter of Mr Thompfon by a former wife, was a genteel, free, good-natured young lady, very much re-iembling her father in good humour, and of a mild and agreeable temper. '
This young lady, the unkind stepmother mortally hated; and endeavoured by every means she could devife, to ruin her in her father’s good opinion ; but he as a prudent, wife man, hearkened not to the many siy insinuations she often made; she at length found it im.practicable, and was I believe for that reaSon reSolved to harraSs the poor girl out of her life; vrhich she might easily have effected, if the young lady had not had fo excellent a tutor, to instruct her how to bear with her step-mo-thef’s furious temper.
Hove
Mr. Charles Guildford. 99
How ridiculous did this lady make hcr-felf appear, in the eyes of all who knew her.
Her relations, her acquaintance, in short every one who knew her dissiked her. No one was pleaSed with any thing she Said or did, at least but Seldom, though it was ever So commendable, nor ever v/ould, unlefs she had formed a reSolution ‘ never to offend or appear difagreeable ; if site had done that she might have regained that favonr and affection, she had by her own imprudence lost.
One day fomething had happened to disturb her. When dinner was fent in she looked at it, then at the fervants, then at MrThompSon, with fuch a furious, angry viSage; that plainly indicated the uneafinefs, and rancour of her heart.
She uttered feveral diirefpectfal words in a restrained, but angry tone. Mr. I hompSon, like a good mild man, feemed to obServe it not; but roSe with all the Sv/eetneSs imaginable, craved a blessing on his frugal repast. Sat down compoSed-ly, deSired me to eat, begged leave to help me, &c. and Spoke with all the milJneSs imaginable. She looked on hi u only v/ith eyes of dlSdain and contempt, F 2	and
ICO MEMOIRS of
and Sat frowning, reddening, staring and at length burSc into a violent passion.
Flow uneaiy must the preSence of fuch a perfon render me I think you my dear friend must be fully Sensible, what my situation must be at that time. How many ladies, who are mistreffcs of families, will, whilst at table, behave wdth polite-neSs, complacency and good nature to :their guests ; and at the Same time give -their Servants, for the least fault imaginable, and often for none, the most piercing, furly,’ ill-natured looks; which must conSeciuently give their guests more anxiety than all their complacency can make amends for.
I really think, if It is intended for a correftion of any fault a fervant is guilty of, it is not only highly imprudent, but very ungenerous not to their fervants only, but likewiSe to their Sriends that are preSent; the Servant is only provoked and confuSed by stich a procedure, and by that means cornmits many blunders, which they might not otherwiSe have been guilty of, and friends are hurt, as fupposing theiiiSelves the innocent occasion of the yiihole.
But
. )
Mr. Charles Guildford, ‘ioi
But Mrs. TliompSon, instead of endeavouring to behave in a complaiSant manner, rather endeavoured to affront thgSe • whom her hushand e steemed as his friends, and thought proper fometimes to invite to fpend an hour or two with him. *
Mr. ThornpSon was but too fensible of this, and Seldom invited any but partied- , lar friends, whoSe discretion he could conside in, and whoSe good SenSe and good nature he could depend upon. Mrs. Thompson could, whenever she^pleafed, behave to her company with Inimitable grace and good manners, but when Hie did at any time behave in the ridiculous manner I have before mentioned, Mr. ThornpSon endeavoured to divert the attention of his guests, from the diSagreeable Scene, and to make amends by his own good-nature, and pleastint conversation, for the foibles of his termagant wife.
But I am afraid I grow tedious, therefore fubfcribe myfelf as uSual,
** V	^
Your’s &c.
Chalres GuildforU. Fa	L E .D
10.2 MEMOIR s"o/^
LETTER. XW
My last, I dare fay, on account of the fubject, was difagreeable enough. I shall now drop the family affairs of my friend Mr. ThornpSon, and give you a more particular description of his character and life.
He constantly attended divine Service himSelf; unleSs inevitable neceshty prevented him. Though his income was but Small, yet he performed many charitable acts with it. He relieved many poor distress’d families; visited their sick beds; and gave them whatever relief ' he poffibly could; fupplied them with healthful restoratives, and gave them that confolation his lunction required from him.
His friendly visits were frequent according as occasions required. He often lamented his inability of doing good offices to thofe that merited his bounties; faying, it was a thing he could not bear, to lee our fellow creatures wanting the common neceffaries of li% and not afford them fome assistance. ,
He
Mr. Charles Guildford. 103
He took all the care he could that the children of the poor should be educated and brought up in a proper knowledge of the deity, that they Imbibed found principles, and right notions and ideas of things, and gave them Sussident instructions to guard, in Some Sort, against the evils of life; and to free their minds from the common errors and prejudices of the vulgar Sort.
His Sermons, his lectures, his diScourSes and conversations, were full of excellent morality; given in the plainest manner and yet dreffed in the most perfuasive eloquence; the meanest capacity might with cafe imbibe thoSe excellent rules he laid down for the canduct of life, to guide them to a happpy eternity; whilst the most judicious perfon must be highly pleafed and delighted with the language that stowed from his lips.
His converfation amongst friends, was free and eaSy; and at the fame time that it was pleafant and agreeable, was alfo improving ; his behaviour was affable and polite; his opinion on, and observation of things just and true, and his reflections proper, and prudently made.
How many excellent diScourSes have I heard him make on various Subjects I F 4	How
104 MEMO I R S of
How sine his fentiments! How just his remarks!
I dined with him one day when a young gentleman that was there Seemed to take particular notice of Mrs. ThompSon’s behaviour, w'ho at that time happened to be in a very bad humour.
Mifs BetSy v:as at table, to wshom the chief of her malice and ill-will feemed to be directed; but the young lady, in return, behaved in the most engaging, and ' agreeable manner, and with fuch civility and good nature as must have charmed any, but the most obdurate and favage heart. When dinner was over, and the ladies were v/Tthdrawn; the young gentleman by his difcourSe, shewed himfelf an inveterate enemy to matrimony, railed at it tor a considerable time ; and threw out feveral fcurrilous, indecent reflections against a fex, which he did not, by his physiognomy feem to hate; So much as he would by his diScourSe have insinuated.
When the young gentleman had made an end oS his ridiculous diScourSe, he ashed Mr. d'hoiyipSon his opinion upon that Subject,
“ Why
Mr. Charles Guildford; 105
“ Why Sir,” fays the doctor, “ I will “ give you my opinion in as few w^ords “ as possible. You have run on in the “ most ludicrous strain imaginable ahd “ railed at matrimony, which is the most “ honourable and happy state on earth.
“ A state that was originally defigned by “ the Almighty, as a blessing to man^
“ kind. ’Tis the chief end of the crca-“ tion, and woman is one of the most beautiful parts of it. They were de-“ signed as a relief to the cares of man,
“ Woman when good and virtuous feems “ to be fomething more than mortal.”
“ Every one is not good. ’Tis not to “ be expected. Human nature is too “ far depraved. If any of the fex are , “ bad, we should commifferate them, and “ the worfe they are, the greater ought “ our pity and compassion to be for thoSe “ unhappy fair ones; but there are not So “ many are as good as fair.”
“ Perhaps Some instances which you “ have Seen oS Mrs. ThompSon’s unhappy “ temper, being a liitie too warm, has “ given you encouragement to talk in “ the manner you have done, as you per-“ haps expected my approbation of your F 5.	y diss'
io6 M E M O I R S of -
“ diScourfe, but | will affure you, if that “ is the caSe, yoU are greatly mistaken. > “ Your fufpjcions of the fex in general “ are wrong, and your bad opinion un-“ justly grounded. If I thought it was “ poffible to eradicate thoSe falSe notions “ you have imbibed, I would endeavour “ to do it, but I am afraid it would be a “ fruitleSs labour.
“ Mrs. 7'hompSon’s temper is not Such as I could wish, but in other reSpectsshe “ is a good and worthy woman; and in my “ opinion makes ample amends for that “ one failing: I therefore hope thesiipremc “ being will accept of the atonement; Ihe “ is pious, virtuous and charitable ; but is “ not at all times able to fubdue her tei> “ bulent passions; and where is the wiSest “ man that can ?
“ The impetuosity of her temper is “ natural, and I never withstand it, but “let it like a torrent rush on, and by dc-“ grees it destroys itSelf and iubSides into “ a gentle calm. When she is cool, i “ give her the best advice I can, how to “ Subdue thoSe paffions which Sometimes “ gain a Superiorly over her reaSon, and cool reflection brings her to a due “ SenSe of her fault, which she readily ac-
“ know-
Mr. Charles Guildford. 107 •
“ knowledges, and endeavours to amend. •
“ What can a man, a reaSonable one at “ least desire more.”
How prudent was this behaviour, if his diScourSe was not absolutely true.^ Mr. ThornpSon proceeded.
“ I therefore beg you will never at-“ tempt to take any liberties with me, or “ offer to Say any thing injurious of the “ Sex, or throw out any diSreSpectSulhints!,
“ that may in the least relate to Mrs.
“ Thompfon, becaule I shall look upon “ it as an affront offered to me, and it is “ in reality Such; for what ought to be “ more dear or precious to a man, than “ the hono :r and good character of his ^ “ wife, and the hushand is bound by, all “ lav/r> divine and human, to protect her “ Srom inSult or diSgrace.
“ Wliat an infinite blessing is a good “ wife ? She lightens, and eaSes our las' bouring breasts of the one half of our “ cares. She adds greatly to, and par-“ takes of our pleaSures, which makei “ them far more agreeable. She is our ■“ greatest friend not only in proSperity “ but in adveissity alsh, and when every “ one forfakes us, she continues firm to “ our interests, whether wetland or fall.
F 6	“ She
I
io8 MEMOIRS of
“ She fooths us with the kind harmony “ of her gentle voice; and perfuasive elo-quence, attends on our Sick beds, and “ bears us company through all our af-•‘ fiictions.
“ What a valuable blessing is a true “ friend ? W^hat miSerable creatures “ should we be ? how rude! how rough! “ and unpolished! was it not for the dear “ and agreeable fociety of women } what “ pleaSure would this toilSome life yield, was that insinite blessing axcluded ?
“ The journey of life, though in rea-■“ lity short; to every wile man Seems long and tedious; how much more So ■“ if that blessing was wanting to Sweeten our toils and enliven our hearts ? How “ melancholy should we be ?
“ Are not all mankind as liable to een-Sure for their errors. If the bad of each “ Sex were Seperated from the rest, on “ whoSe side would the balance prepon-derate?” He ended.
The young man stood corrected, confessed his error, and promifed amendment. How good, how generous, and how humane was this of the worthy man ? To cover the failings of a woman,
who
Mr. Charles Guildford. io^
who would have plagued a man lefs wife, out of his fenles, but I believe my friend was too prudent to be much affected by it, unleSs in tender pity to her falling.
How much was the unhappy woman: indebted to him ? And how happy and agreeable might site have passed the jour-: ney of life with a man like him. How -miserable must his life have been rendered, had he not always prudently guarded himSelf against her temper 1
But here my reflections must end with my letter.	^ ,
your’s,
Charles Guild|^rd%
LET-
110 MEMOIRSof-
LETTER XVI.
WFI E N the young gentleman was gone, Mr. I'hompfon continued his difcourfe to me: “ I am for-“ ry,” fays he, “ to fpeak harshly to “ that youth, but he is a near relation of “ mine, and I'think it my duty, fome- '
“ times to correct him, when 1 fee an oc-“ casion; and to ufe my utmost endea-“ voLirs to reclaim him from his follies. ‘
“ We are guilty of many ourfelvcs,
“ which we indulgently, I may fay fool-“ ishly, overlook; yet if others are at any “ lime guilty of the Same, we inimedi-“ ately exclaim against them for it, and “ oSten with tco much warmth.
“ We ought not only to Set examples , “ tof but endeavour to reclaim each other “ in as mild and gentle a manner as we “ possibly can; and not endeavour to “ blacken and depreciate the characters “ of thoSe, who do not act at all time.'^ .
“ right. Man is frail, and Sometimes “ unavoidably errs. T^roper sllowancts “ ought ever to be made for the common “ frailties of human nature. Thefolliesof -y youth, more particularly, o’.ight to be
“ excuSed
• \
Mr. Charles Guildford, hi
“ excufed, where they do not indicate “ an ontire depravity, or a very bad dif-“ position.”
“ How differently do we view the “ world and all fublunary things, when '“we grow old and have by age and expeT “ rience gained wifdom, to what we do “ with youthful eyes ! How vast is the “ difference!
“ You, Sir,, are young, and have yet “ feen little of the world : make it your “ ,peculiar care to act according to right “ reaSon. You will consequently then “ never commit any action, which you “ think in your own mind is unjust, and “ if Such is your conduct, you will have '	‘‘ an eternal peace of mind, and need
“ not at any time fear an happy iffue ot “ whatever y u take in hand.
“ Read good authors. Such as are va-“ lued for jiheir real and intrinsic worth, “ affociate yourfelf with men of learning' “ and merit: endeavour to accomplish “ yourfelf in the most perfect manner: “ make yourfelf entirely master of thofe •‘ arts you intend to profefs; and study “ every ufeful fcience lo far as is neceffa-“ ry, to give you a competent know-y ledge, and a just idea of things; and
that
. 112 MEMOIRS of
“ that will in general be very ferviceabic “ to you in life.
“ Endeavour to fubdue your paffions,
“ and guard well against temptations. By “ this I mean, take care that the affections “ of the foul (which are commonly in “ themlelves just and laudable) do not “ degenerate into vicious passions, blind “ your reaSon, and lead you into follies,
“ w'hich you might otherwiSe eScapc.
“ Study mankind, for which you will “ have a sine opportunity in London..
“ Ishe many various characters, that v:ill “ here preSent themSelves to' your view will perhaps give you a diSgust to this “ nation, at least to the principal part of “ it; and make you think a foreign “ country preferable to it; but experi-ence will shew you that foreign coun-tries abound with knavery and folly as well as England. Italy in particular, if “ you should happen to be converfant -“ am.ong the clergy ; will yield you ma-“ ny instances of knavish Superstition ;
*• and the people’s undue and Sordid Sub-“ mission to their power. Folly and Su-“ perdition are equally blended, and are “ the chief fupports of the papal powers,
^ “ But I shall leave you to make your own
‘‘ remarks
i
Mr. Charles Guildford. 113
“ remarks, and if I am living when you “ return to England,^ I should be glad to know your opinion on thofe fubjects.” My opinion was then and still is the fame with my very good friends. I was delighted with the conversation of this worthy man, and no part of my time except when I v/a? in the company of Charlotte, was fpent more agreeably than with . him. My brother and sister feveral times visited him, and he returned our visits, il'bey were greatly pleaSed with him and esteemed him as a common father. Every one that knew him, loved and valued him. But this is at preSent enough cf his character, I believe you must not expect anymore ; for v/as I to give you afull defcription, and an account of all his vir-.tues, k would run my epistle to an uncommon length.
Mifs Betfy his daughter was a lovely young lady; fo modest, fo prudent, and So much like her excellent father, that had not my affections been pre-engaged and sirmly fixed, I stood a dangerous test, but my regard for Charlotte was too great and too sincere ever to be changred.
O
But now the fcene varies and a far different profpect rifes to your view..
You
114 MEMOIRS of '
You have feveral times desired me to give you the characters of fome of the chief perlbns with whom I have been or still am acquainted. I must comply with-ycur request, though unwillingly; for if the character is good I may appear partial, and if bad a detracter; what can I do.^
Why fpeak truth and shame the D—^-i as the laying is; but I am afraid his wor-.ship has not much shame in him.
Ah! an interruption. I must therefore bid you adieu,
Your’s &c.
-	....	Charles Gilil^djord.
/ *
;	' '	• i	L'ET-
Mr. Charles Guildford. 115
LETTER XVII.
My dear friend, I must just bring you acquainted with my lord simple, who was the perSon that gave me the interruption men ioned in my last; and take my leave, having a little affair to diSpatch that requires my immediate pretence.
My lord was formerly a perSon of fafiiion and fortune. He had lived the life of a debauchee fome time, and not having a very large share of fenSe or jndgement, was by his expensive pleaSures drawn into mortgage his estate for a ; pretty large fum, which was foon fpent; he then took up more money, v/hich his follies, with the affistance of Some ufurers and knaves that furrounded him, foon destroyed ; and he was just ready to fall a prey to poverty and miSery, when meeting with a citizen’s daughter of a large fortune, he paid his addreffes to her. The young lady being desirous of a title, and her parents being as willing as their daughter, to conclude a match with this uoUe-man, and as fond of the honor ; my lord
married
Tt'6 M E M O I R S of
married her and foon difpoSed of her fortune to redeem hst estate,
My lord and lady dreffed very gen-• teely : had a gay, in short a grand equipage, and a large retinue of Servants *, kept genteel company, and lived in the most extravagant manner. In a few years they had leveral children, who had the melancholy proSpect of being rendered . miSerable by their father’s, I may fay their parents folly. The estate was going again In the fame manner as before. My lady herfelf was very extravagant, and I had a hint given me when I was in London, and became acquained with them, •that her ladyship had confented to make an assignment of her jointure, in order to 'shpport that grandeur they had fo long lived in. What a profpect tvas this for "the hclplefs infants ! My lady was pretty haughty, and their werefew below herown dignity, whom she would condefeend to tonveisse with.
She had feveral times, after her marriage deSired her father to leave of businefs 'and Itee at the polite end of the town. Her mother was as desirous of it, and Seconded her honcurable daughter’s requesh The good old man, at length tired, by
their
Mr. Charles Guildford. 117
their rcptiated importunities. conSented ; threw up his businefs, vrhich at tnat time brought him in Several thouSands'a year ; and followed, his wife and daughter’s directions. They pitched upon a large-stately liOuSe, in one of the Squares near the court v/hcre he Settled, to the very great Satisfaction of his directresses, to Spend liis money as Safi as he could.
My lord and his lady assisted them in tlieir laudable defign, and when I return’d from my tour, the father and mother had with grief for their folly, and a dread of poverty and miiery dropt into the cold and filent grave. My lord and his lady were obliged to retire to the country; where they now live upon a fmall estate and fome allowance from the crown, Scarcely Susheient to Support them as private people. Her ladyship who had rather more wit than my lord, made uSeof that to Support a Superiority over him, vrhich she had long gained in the most in-Solent manner. She often reviled him, and still continues to do it, w^ith the imSe-rie.s and distreSs he has brought upon her and her unhappy chudren. My lord is So mean as to humble himScif to her, u> Satisfy her pride in the most abject manner
lig ' M E M O I R S of
ner; and she fenSible of the aScendency she has gained, exerts her authority in ^ the most cruel manner, makes her lord appear in the most ridiculous light to all that know him, nay, even to his own Servants; and has in short at length almost distracted him. Will this conduct, do you think my dear friend, ever reclaim him r I think it never will. But I hope-here is enough of Icandal at one time.
I am in haste, therefore hope you’ll ex-cufe
1
yours; &c.
" c '	Charles Guildford.
I. E T-
I
Mr. Charles Guildford, irj
LETTER XVIII.
tyr E R E is more characters following , j[ .ny friend ; its what you desire, and 1 mull comply. The next that I shall give you is that of Jemmy Prim, an affected formal fop, a mere coxcomb.
He was a young fellow that was tolerably well made, but not contented with ^ the face that nature had given him, he uSually attempted to mend it with paint. Having but a Imall fortune his friends had put him clerk to one Mr. Chicane an ‘attorney in town.
jemmy preferred gay company, and . the diversions of the town, to the study of the law, and Seldom gave my lord Littleton or his Samousteommentorany trouble. There was a young lady whofe name was . Gay, who lometimes vssited us, that introduced him to our acquaintance. They ' were distant relations. She wa§ a mere coquet, and uled Sometimes to gallant it with her couSm, v/ho had Such a good opinion of his own dear formal phiz, and well m.ade body, that he imagineo; every young lady that looked at hirr;, must ne-ceffaniy be in love with the dear creature he hlmfelr fo much admired.
Mifs
120. MEMOIRS of
Mifs Gay having a pretty fortune, and fometimes giving him a kind glance attracted his attention, and (I SuppoSe, in pity to the love sick girl,) he Solemnly, and in a very formal manner, as she herSelf told us, profeffed himSelf her very humble fervant.
The young lady, willing to divert herfelf, and her acquaintance at the wretch’s expence, feemed to encourage his addreffes and the notions he had entertain’d, uSed him as one of her constant dang-Icrs, and in return, made him appear in the m.ost ridiculous light wherever site went.
Had she behaved otherwiSe the poor young fellow would not have appeared to any great advantage in company, dreSs and dangling after the ladies being all he understood.
If the company, being men, were any time tallcing on any ferious fubject, whilst he v/as preSent,. he would Seem to hearken, with the greateSc attention, to hear every one’s opinion, and would then adopt that he liked best, and give it as his own, with all the Solemn, dogmatick affurance of the greatest, pedant.
If
Mf. CUarSes Guildford. 12S
If he was at any time called upon to give his opinion first, and the fubject was beyond his comprehension, he would turri k off with a ridiculous laugh, or a con-t temptuons Sneer, as a thing not worthy his observation, or consideration. He Loon discovered his ignorance and that he had received but a very indifferent eel-ucation.
I'he liberal arts he was entirely ignorant of, and very little verfed in common fchool learning. He had a forry ambling v/it, which he often-endeavoured to fpur on, by throwing out a wretched pun, endeavouring at a quick repartee or fometimes giving you a word which he intended as a dotible Entendre, when perhaps it would Scarce bear any construdlion.
His judgm.ent was but very indifferent, and by what I could perceive of hiin, he Iremcd to*be little better than a fenfelefs block.
He endeavoured to imitate the sine gentleman, and to bethought a conniffeur of paintings, architecture, statuary, carv*-ing, and other curious arts; to be well verSed in ancient and modern history, geography &c. and that he had read the best of authors, and yet at the fame time
VoL. I.	G	feemed
322 M E M O I R S of
feemed desirous of being esteemed a very modest gentleman in regard to thoSc things.
He had, like many more idle young fellows cafe his eyes over, (lor one can’t properly lay read,) Some short treatiSe, or Some piece of criticlSm, and had retained a few confuSed notions, or indistinct ideas of things, hut alas that was really worSe than nothing, as that knowledge he thought he had, made hint often Jpeak without reflection, or neceffary consideration, where he had better have held his-tongue.
Good-manners and polite-breeding he "pretended to be entirely master of, but the imitator was too plainly discovered,
• under the borrov/ed diSguiSe. He Seemed proud of being esteemed a man of intrigue and gallantry, but I believe he never attempted to look a woman i» the face with a design of begging a favour of fuch a nature, which he often vainly intimated' he had received from feveral sine ladies.
How cautious ought every woman of honour tr be in keeping company, with fuch impudent, audaucious wretches How vain and contemptible do thoSe Sel-
lows
Mr. Charles Guildford. 123
lows appear in the eye of the world, particularly of their acquaintance; to whom they are^ continually boasting of their amours and intrigues, in which there are no reality, and if there were, their difgrace would only be fo much the greater.
As for Mifs Gay, she took care to discover her intentions to all she knew, and by that means in Some Sort lecured her reputation, though many, oS the wiSer Sort justly cenSured her behaviour and conduct in general.
I Subscribe mySelf as uSual, - ,•
^	I - '
yours &c.
Charles Guildford.
’	.	♦	y.
G 4	LET-
,	V.
124 M E M O I R S of
LETTER. XIX.
MISS Gay and her cousin, gallanted it about, and were as troublefome to people as they possibly could be.
' They were one day on a visit at Mr Ho-' ■ nor’s when my brother aSked the young gentleman how he liked the law. I believe the young fellow had honest principles, or perhaps had not courage to un-.idertake tliat laborious study; however his anSwer was, that he neither liked his master nor his profesiion, for he believed most that belonged to the law were not very honest,
Mr. Honor faid he looked upon the the profession itSell to be not only henest Tut honourable; but that there were feveral rules and practices that were originally intended for the benefit of the parties concerned, which were now by the attornies employed, perverted and made - ufe of to prejudice each other.
That delays of courSe must. Sometimes happen which were unavoidable; and that the attorneis made uSe of fuch, of courfe and made it customary. That the attor-^ nies on each side often agreed to give each
oth er
Mr. Charles Guildford. 125
other time and thereby deferred the trial of a caufe as long as they possibly could, and if they did not agree togetlier, the one or the other when he wanted time would apply to the-judges, and giving a pretence Sor the delay they craved, which the judge had not an opportunity of examining into, gain that time they had no right or any just claim to.
That though Some were not So just as they ought to be, yet that he knew Several honest worthy gentlemen that belonged to, and profeffed the law, and that he did not in the least doubt but that there were ’many Such.
The young gentleman confeffed, that Mr. Honor was right in what he had advanced, but in anSwer to it, gave us Several instances of dishonest practice in his master, and feveral others concerned with him, which were fcarce credible, and for that reaSon I shall not here relate any of them. As to the profeffion it is honourable, and as to the professors it is dishonourable to siing an odium upon a whole body, for the faults of a few individuals.
1 must con lefs Mr. Honor and mySelf were greatlycturpriSed at what he Said, and* is there was any dependance to be placed^ G 3	on
126 M E M O I R S of
on his relations, fome of the profession, are a nufance, and a very great one to fociety, I may fay the greatest pests.. But in all large focieties, many fuch men are found of that and various other professions who not only deServe cenfure, but even the most fevere punishment; yet many of them act with fo much art, and their vil-lany is often fo well concealed from every one, but thoSe who arc themSelves as bad, and often parties concerned, that they eScape unpunished. Some are certainly overtaken, and meet with the reward due to their demerit; though this does not happen often enough to deter others from being guilty of similar practices.
But accerding to my Sentiments which I have mentioned before, collective bodies are not to be Scandalized, for the faults of individuals. If the contrary fentiment 'was iull, there would be too much latitude for the exercife of it, as there is i believe fcarce a profession or trade in this kingdom from the highest to the lowest that does not produce too many instance;? of bad and knavish men. Even divinity ■and physic will make good what I fay. And yet they are in themSelves genteel and honourable, and of great Service to
^mankind
Mr. Charles Guildford. 127
mankind. So in the mercantile world, every man who gets a large fortune does not acquire it honestly, instanced in the destroy! ng of inSured ships, in felling goods that have been fmuggled, and thereby cheating the government of the duties intended for its fupport, and consequently adding additional taxes, to the great grievance of the Subject, and the enriching of a few private villains, and yet I am well fatissied that there are in this kingdom many good divines, many worthy phyficians, and many honest merchants, who acquire by their refpective professions genteel fortunes, with honour and honesty.
Among the other trades ufed in this' kingdom there are innumerable instances of knavery daily practiSed, yet there are doubtleSs many fair dealers. But to you I need not, carry my reflections any farther on this Subject, ordeScend to particulars. Nor can I at preSent proceed any farther in my history as an affair of moment calls me away, therefore I must here hastily conclude.
yours,
Charles Guildford. G 4-	L E T -
'	i.2.8 MEMOIRSof
LETTER XX.
My dear friend since I v/rote my last, I have accidentaly met with a -ientiment similar to my own in what I mentioned in that letter,, on. condemning a collective body oS men or a whole profession &c. for the faults of a few individi;*, als. It is I think much better expreffecf than my own, therefore I shall beg leave to give it you in thq authors, own words after giving a Snort abstract of fome previous obfervations. It is taken from a letter in the Spectator No. 537.
Amongst other things the author obfcrves that the Spectator has in fome of his fpecu-lations affertefito his readers the Dignity of Human Nature. The author of that letter thereon obServes that the Spectators carmot be-inSensible: that tlfis isa controverted doctrine, that there are author? who conSider human nature in a very dif-r fere.nt view and that books of maxims h^ve been written to shew the Falsity of of all human Virtues.
Fle then obServes that the refections made on this Subject, uSually take Some tincture Srom the tempers and characters of thoSe that make them, and gives in-
stance?;
Mr. Charles Guildford.
stances to prove his affertion. He then proceeds and fays that “ from all thefe “ hands we have Such draughts of man-' “ kind, as are represented in thoSe,bur-“ leSque pictures, which the Italians calt “ Caricature’s where the art consists in-“ preserving amidst distorted proportions and aggravated features. Some distin-“ guishing likeneSs of the perSon, but in “ Such a manner as to transform the most a-“ agreeable beauty into the most odious “ monster.”
This tho’ not immediately applicable to the Subject I was upon, yet is in Some meaSure, but I have mentioned it for the Sake oS the following ressection which is apropos, and which I' give in the authors words viz.
“ It is very disingenuous to level the “ best of mankind with the worst, and “ for the faults of parriciSars to degrade ^ the whole Species-: Such methods tend “ not only to remove a man’s good opinion “ of others, but to destroy that reverence “ for himSelf, which is a great guard of “ innocence, and a fpring of virtue.”
I shall not quote any more, time will not permit.—But refer you to the letter' leaving.. given you a fpecimen to induce G 5	you
130 ^ M E M O I R S of
you to read it.—But don’t you think the-expreffions neat, and the reflection applicable to the fubject of my last ?
But, reflections now apart, I proceed with the continuance of my history and the relation I \xas making concerning-Mifs Gay and Jemmy her dangler. Soon after the converfation we had with Jemmy on his profeffion, &c. We miffed both him and his cousin for fometime, we wondered at their abfence, and the rather, os it Seldom exceeded three or four days.
Upon enquiry after them, as we fear’d fomething extraordinary had happened, we had the following account given us by a perfon that we had reaSon to believe v/as well acquainted with the whole. MiSs Gay and a young gentleman who had Sor Sometime paid his addreffes to her, were one evening at a place of public, diversion. The gentleman had ordered a collation, and lome choice wines to be prepared which when ready, he invited his mistrefs to partake cf.
She was very warm, and not in the least fearing any accident, drank more freely than ever she had done before. They were in a pleafant private harbour,, when the lady being in high fpirits, the lo.
ver.
Mr. Chart Guildford. 131
ver encouraged by many kind glances she had often given him, emboldened now by hope and not choosing to pay the price of his liberty for the enjoyment of the fair if he could otherwife fucceed; attempted to gain favours which were inconsistent with the lady’s honor to grant; but she refufed him with a haughty diSdain.
The lover, who did not entertain a very extraordinary opinion of the lady’s virtue occasioned by her constant coqucttry, kid cloSe_ siege to her notwithstanding the repulSe he had met with, and pushed boldly on, till the fair one at length half compelled half conSenting, fiirrended. her honor.
'’I'hey afterwards agreed to go. down to a pleaSiiit country village fome miles dif-tanc from London. The lover had a friend who resided there; to him they went, where they met with a handfome reception and v.'ere genteely entertained as a new married pair, who were desirous of keeping their connection a fecret froixu the world for Some time.
'She young lady To prevent any enquiry being made after her, and to fecur her reputation, fent wmrd to her cousin-jemmy and another relation, or tv;o, who G 6	were
t^2 M E M O I R S of
were greatly concerned at her abfencej that she was gone to visit a dying friend; who was, extremely dear to her (having been fuddenly fent for,) and would return - as Soon as the lady was either dead and interred, or likely to recover, of which at that time there was not the least hopes.. Her cousin Jemm.y however foon after heard the truth of what Mifs Gay had fo artfully endeavoured to keep fecret, for the lover out of mere vanity had difcovered the whole affair to an acquaintance, who told it to Jemmy and feveral others, infomuch that her reputation was at length entirely ruined, and she durst not return, to town.
The lover Soon after leSt the ruinydMiSs Gay to dreadful reflection. She knew net what to door to whom to fly for refuge. She at last refolved to go to France.
Jemmy heard,of her reSolution and that she was gone. He followed her: for what reaSon no one knew. ’Twas generally thought that for the Sake of her for-, tune, he intended to offer her his hand.. That was however what we could not pretend to determine therefore easily reSolv’d> to wait the event without giving ourfelves
any
Mr. Charles-Guildford,
any farther trouble about them. But iti almost time to drop the fubject., I have not forgot my promifed brevity, as you will fuppoSewhen you fee this, but its not owing to design, for I am obliged hastily to Subfcribe myfelf
yours sincerely, ChvArles Guildford*
LET-.
134. MEMOIRS of
LETTER, XXL
My dear friend we are now coming* into more polite life. Prepare yourielf for an acquaintance witii lady Fondle: and her Lap-Dog. you’ll excuSe me, 1 hope for making her ladyship’s Lap-Dog a party, when 1 affure you that this little curious beast is not of the common Sort, but one of the most extraordinary creatures that ever was formed, at least, her fair mistrefs thought fo.
A Richlieu, a Mazarine, or even a great
-----has not received more complii-
ments from fawning, cringing courtiers, or fycophants and flatterers than Chloe.
Lady Fondle was a lady of a very large and extenSive fortune, of extraordinary beauty and pretty good parts ; a lively wit inclined to raillery and fatire. Her accomplishments and fortune rendered her one of the first ladies of the british courts and she was in high favour there.
She studied her glass a confiderable part of her time, Sor fine' airs, curious glances, &c. yet did not in the mean time forget her charming Chloe. Chloe was-
,	her
Mr. Charles Guildford. 135
her ladyship’s chief companion during the time she fpent at the glaSs, taking a look at each alternately, sirst perusing the charms of her own beauteous form, then viewing thofe of her lovely Chloe.
No one attempted admittance to her ladyship, before they had sirst paid their compliments to Chloe, if she was in the way, that being the only meshod to gain the lady’s favour..
Her ladyship’s lovei-s were all extremely fond of the little creature, in proportion-to the love for the’fair owner, judge then how numerous must be the compliments paid to this favourite.
Any one that v/anted the lady’s interest to gain a favour at court, sirst ingratiated themfelves into Chloe’s good will, that being the only way to attract lady Fon-dle’s notice, or gain her esteem.
Mr. Honor being of an ancient and honourable family, was esteemed by the nobility &c. as of their own rank, and they associated with him accordingly..
He was introduced to lady Fondle foom, after our arrival in town. He in general siked her ladySnip, but did not approve of the common method. uSually made iiSe
of
1:3 fi MEMOIR S- of
of to gain her favour, nor did he attempt!. it, at the expence of his fenSe, by courting her ladyship’s Lap-Dog, a beast he was not extremely fond of.
Her ladyship was Sensible of Mr. Ho--nor’s intirnsic merit, and she feemed to entertain the regard of a friend fon him. He appeared amiable and deServing in her ladyship’s eyes, and she behaved to him with a particular complaiSance,. as to a man of meric and worth ; whom she esteemed,as Such, yet would Sometimes* prettily reSent the affront»-he olrered to her little Chloe.
Her ladyssiip ScaTce ever visited any where without Chloe, and there was not one, Mr. Flonor excepted, who held anyplace in. her ladyship’s esteem imleSs Chloe was a favourite with them.
She was always stroking, kishng, and hugging oS the dear creature, and often protested in my hearing that she I'eally believed was her dear Chloe to die, she should expire the Same moment.
O I how ridiculous, but obferve. A misfortune Soon happens that require alf her ladyship’s fortitude.
Chloe had always eat at the fame table*,^ and in the iame genteel manner, as her
mistteSs.
Mr. Charles Guildford. F37
inistrefs. I'he finest china, or the most curious plate, were fcarce good enough for the dainty beast.
China bought at the greatest price, and the most cutious glasses &c. her ladyship had, were often broke by Chloe, who was very unlucky. The fair lady’s temper on fucli occasions would fomietimes be disturbed, and her Servants commonly felt the effects of her anger,.
Chloe had no moderation in eating, and this Spoiled its digestion. Fine rich turkey carpets, and velvet cushions, silk and damafk furniture, &c. was in common ufe with this little puny sickly animal who often fpoiled it.
The like effects of courfe ensiled as in other misdemeanors, and rendered Chloe hateful to the domesticks. Several who had not paid their compliments to her,; had been dlstharged; others had met witli tlie fame fate by, their careieSsnefs in attending on her; and feveral were diS^ charged without their wages, and lost) fiieir characters if they offered in the least to be impertinent.
By theSe and other means Chloe lofu she esteem of the fervants in general,
and.
t
i3ss M E M O I R S of
and at length a conspiracy was formed to destroy the poor deliquent, without either judge or jury.
Chloe foon after this refolution was made, died of a burning fever, notwithstanding the best advice and assistance was given her. They were unanimouOy of opinion that the patient h«d been inhumanly poifoned, and many of her ladyships fervants were immediately discharged on Suspicion, and new ones established in their places.
Her ladyship shut herSelf up, and weeped, moaned, and lamented in the most immoderate manner, fully reSolved’ that nothing but Chloe’s return to life should ever comfort her. An admirer of the lady’s, being acquainted with the caufe of his fair mistreSs’s grief, one day destred admission to her ladyship, which was for fometime refufed, according to her ladyship’s strict orders not to admit any one, except a particular friend or tw'o to condole with her.
The lover, often repeating an affurance he had given her ladyship’s attendants that he had a certain and effectual rem.cdy for her prefent grief, and accompanying his req^uest with a liberal prefent, which
he
Mr. Charles Guildford. 139^
he had before forgot; he was admitted, into her ladyship’s appartment, where the fair mourner fat weeping on her Settee.
The lady not being informed of his approach, on his entrance started, but recovering from her Surprize, and daitipg a furious look at him, she enquired the reafon of his prefent intrusion. The gentleman immediately produced a beautSul Lap-Dog, very much Tike the deceafed -Chloe, which he preSented to. her ladyship, and hoped that would plead his excufe. The lady received the pretty creature with an extaSy of joy, put it to her boSom, and almost fmothered it with kisses. Her ladyship in about half an-hoUr’s time Sufficiently recollected herSelf to return her lover thanks for his curious an.l extraordinary prefent, and assured, him she would always gratefully remember his preSent kindneSs. The lover embraced the happy momaent, and with proper reSpect, mentioned his passion, and liis long Services &c. The lady could not be unkind when he had' just before Sa greatly obliged her, and after a little necessary ressrve gracioussy promiSed him her hand,
They^ ^
I4Q M E M O I U S of
They were foon afterwards rcarriedv. About a month aster the Solemnization of their nuptials, the Small-pox, that fatal; distemper to life and beauty, carried her ladyship off, and Chloe was liiing by the fi:rvants to appeaSe her manes.
What a dreadful resiection docs hert preSent itSelf to a considerate perSon !. /what time had this lady to, prepare herSelf for a future state ? How shocking ! to enter thus into eternity, into the awful, prefence of an offended deity ! To ufe Shakefpears words, changing the pronoun.
Cut off even in the blossoms of Her sin..
UnhouScl’d, unanointed,. unameai’d;
No reck’ning made, but fent to her: account.
With all Her imperfections on Her head.
Oh horrible! oh horrible ! most horrible !
Most horrible Indeed as the poet ex-preffes it, in my opinion in a double, ssnfe, in regard not only to the murder of Flamlet’s father, but the dreadfulnels. of his hasty exit.
The
Mr. Charles Guildford. 541
The lady’s cafe is in one particular similar to the latter.
I need not offer farther reflections. On--ly this if site had lived as many days in miSery and strict repentance, as she Spent yTars oS maturity in folly, she would have thought that lire long, site otherwife eS-teenied short.
Adieu my dear friend, at prefent adieu.
Charles Guildford,
L E T-
/
142 M E M O I R S of
LETTER XXII.
, /f L- Honor had not been long in i.VA town before a gentleman in an old rusty coat that had formerly been black, a peruke which might originally perhaps in the time of Charles the sirst, be a fort of dark grizzle, but had now lost its colour, the hair grown strelght, a fword, which fometimes faw the light for the benefit of oiling, but was now put on with a sine old fashioned belt to adorn the worthy owner, and which had been carefully preserved through Several reigns, but was " now grown venerable for its antiquity. A shirt with a pair of ruffles well wore, and a neckcloth of the fame kind, with other things Suitable, begged admission to him.
The gentleman before deScribed was admitted to him in his cloSet, (for the meanest < perSon was never denied admittance,) and after staying Some time he departed, Seeming very well pleaSed.
Mr. Honor afterwards informed me, that this gentleman’s name was Mr. QLiill an author by profeffion, who had not met with the SucceSs he expected in the diSpo-
Sal
Mr. Charles Guildford. 143
Sal of his pieces, and was therefore very poor.
He had preSented Mr. Honor a Small piece containing a few characters. The piece if printed, might perhaps make a Small pamphlet. Mr. Honor had peruSed it during the author’s stay, being unwilling to give him unneceffary trouble. The author was not desirous of publishing it, if he could get any thing by it without. Mr. Honor gave him ten guineas, and he w^as very well fatissied with the fuccefs of his piece, and never returned for it, tho* Mr. Honor told him he might have it a-gain alter he had shewn it to a friend or two, if he thought he could get any thing of the bookfeller for it; but the old gentleman affured him he had rather not apply to any of them as he was already Sufficiently Satisfied and that ’twas now become Mr. Honor’s property.
I will to oblige you give you a short extract from fome, at least Such principal parts as I can remember. In the first ' place Squire Curious preSents himSelf to your view, a gentleman of a pretty large ibrtune and good family.
He was fo far infatuated with the notion of being an extraordinary virtuofo that
he
t44 M E M O I R S of
he expended the greatest part of his fortune in purchasing things of no real value except antiquity could stamp a value on them, or that any thing uncommon in the courfe of nature, could by fuch a bor-tion be esteemed of more intrinsic worth.
Whatever proportion their value bore in the esteem of others, antiquity or fomes-thing strange, was the quantity and quality noted by him, and the more antique or more strange any thing was the greater price be paid for the curious bauble.
He had after many years industry, and with very great expence, got a sine collection of curious trifles, almost compleat (if it would ever have been compleated) but alas he died, and left the whole be- , hind him, for any that would or could purchafe them. His wife and children were left to feek their future fupport from, the Sale oS his expenSive treaSure, at least if stwas not a treaSure, the whole cost an immenSe one.
But enough of Squire Curious. The next is Mr, Lancet, a gentleman who having kept a stall on tower-hill to Sell Second hand pamphlets, &c. at length turned Surgeon, and Set himSelf forth in
the
Mr. Charles Guildford. 145
the publick papers for a famous man, of many years practice. The vulgar herd being often troubled with a difeale which is the neceffary confequence of a debauched life, applied to the new furgc-on for privacy and cheapneSs, who foon got money, took a handfome houfe, pur-chafed good furniture, stepped into his chariot, appeared gay, and passed for a gentleman ; in his own opinion at least.
A fee often fecures him from an inquiry by the regular bred fnrgeons, whole officious honesty is not fufficient to make them resist the temptations of a bribe, for a falSe return.
But London I sind is now well stocked with common quacks of all forts. Tlie most common fellows from the dregs of the people turn doctors, furgeons, chy-mists, &c. and being of honourable families keep their chariots &c. with their arms, I was going to fay (borrowed, or whofe they are, I know not, j to fupport their ancient dignity.
But this is descending too low, hov/e-ver to make amends give me leave to make a uSeful resiection or two. What do thele public common quacks perform ?
VoL. I.	H	destroy
\
i4si M E M O I R S of
destroy the health, and endanger the lives and Safety of many of his Majesty’s foolish fubjects; who vainly hope a cure, from thofe ignorant wretches, who know not the nature of the diSeafe, they pretend to remedy.
They tamper with their patients until they in their great wiSdom pronounce them incurable, and often render them So; a regular stirgeon is then applied to, and if not too late he Searches to the bottom of the diSeaSe and is at insinite trouble to undo the whole of what the other has been So long doing, and when this is done, the cure is then begun and all this to the very great miSery and torture of the Suffering patient, and if. he is at length cured ’tis at an immenSe cxpence which might have been Saved if a proper application had at sirst been made.
But quacks are not the only perSons who delerve cenSure. The regular bred physician, Surgeon &c. is oftentimes guib ty of impositions nay villainies, which any reaSonable man'would esteem inexcuS-able in the greatest Barbarians. They often trifle away the lives of thouSands
and
Mr. Charles Guildford. 147
and kill Secundem Artcm., where nature itSelf would cure, if left free to operate.
A quack fometimes gains fame as well as a physician, where neither deferve it. If the quack has shill fufficient to sind out the nature of the difeale, and that nature will, if not obstructed, perform the desired cure, it is a happy moment wherein to establish his fame. He may apply a few simples which he knows are inoffensive, and if the patient recovers, ’twas the doctor performed the cure. If the doctors shill is fufficiently known, his fiine established, and he can fafely give the preference to the increafe of his wealth if his patient be rich, rather than to his reputation, medicines are then applied to continue the deSeaSe, and prevent a recovery. If the patient dies, stwas the diSeaSe not the doctor that killed.
The regular physician in this particular agrees with the pretender to physic. A quack may fometimes perform a cure but ten to one if ’tis with a recipe of his own invention, but with one he has either borrowed or purchafed.
I have known feveral instances of male-practice which are fcarce credible. How cruel! to keep a patient lingering in the H 2	greatest
I4S MEMOIRS of
greatest mifery, till the difeafe grows incurable and thereby throw the miferable lufferer into the ocean cf eternity, before the destined time according to the common courle of nature. An expensive hill of courSe Succeeds. That to the rich, the poor are tortured for experience. T he poor are regarded by few, yet when they enter the lists for the immortal prize they stand the fairer chance, the rich being liable to far greater temp ations.
The poor ought not therefore to be deSpiSed as our great creator makes no distinction but by good works. That Sa-crilegeous practice of robbing the earth of its buried inhabitants, is shocking to humanity fcarce any but the corps of the poor SiiSfer this violation, becaule none will defend the rem.ains of the indigent deceafed. -Is experience to be gained at the expence of honour, humanity, and virtue! shock- > ing to every hum.ane heart!
There are many unhappy wretches cut off by the fword of justice; they are more proper. But what a horrid practice is it to encourage a villain to drag the interr’d body of a worthy perSon from the grave which one would think a Susheient shelter,
and
Mr. Charles Guildford. 149
and mangle it in the most inhuman manner.
'i'he antient Heathen’s knew not this custom. The most barbarous nations never were acquainted with it. But as Tra-jau Bocalini fays, “ One doctor formerly “ was enough to cure a hundred diSeaSes,
“ and now a hundred doctors are not “ enough to cure one diSea'e.” I shall here give you a renTirk-tble in.lance which con-sirms the above.
A gentleman had got a trifling wound in hi.s leg, a Surgeon was Sent for: he dreSSed it, still the sieSn mortified and the bone bscame foul. Some more gentlemen of the faculty were called in. A con-fultation held, the leg pronounced inciite able, and they agreed to cut it off. The gentleman was informed of their reSolution, and would not conSent to the operation, until he had had the opinion of an bid woman in Greenwich much famed Sor her extraordinary fkill in Surgery &c. The ‘ gentlemen were affronted; he insisted upon it and she was Sent for. <She examined the wound. Several terms of art were propoSed to her to breed confusion, she anSwered she understood not the'terms but could cure the wound. The gentle-H 3	maa
150 M E M O I R S of
man willingly fubmitted himfelf to her care and she performed her promiSe. He is now living to testify the truth of this • and fo is the perSon that cured him, at Greenwich.
But I SuppoSe you are almost weary, I . will thereSore at preSent bid you adieu.
yours sincerely
^ Charles Guildford.
LETTER XXIII.
My dear friend, I have roved, I have wandered far from my former fubject, love. Yet like a prisoner confined by bounds and limifs, I run to the utmost extent and then stop; look round and wonder where I am; gaze at the objects that Surround me like a newborn infant, when it sirst Sees the glorious 'light, or a man long blinded by cataracts recovered. But now I again return, and Subject mySelf to eternal all powerful love.
1 have a question to aSk before I proceed. Whilst I have been diverting, at least
amusing
Mr. Charles Guildford. 151*
amusing you with the characters, and folly of others, are you not at the Same time more diverted with mine ; or do you justly ridicule it.^ Flow must I appear in your eyes! I at sirst acquainted you with thofe excellent moral rules my father So often inculcated to me, for my future conduct in life, and the many cautions he has given me never to expoSe the follies of others &c. But who can I blame ? You for ret]uesting me to act thus ? or myfelf for complying with that request ?
I will blame neither at preSent, and for this reaSon; When you desired me to give you the characters of fome of my acquaintance in life, certain arguments you then made uSe of, convinced me; that in complying I should not do wr-ong, 1 hope the fame arguments may still be made ufe of in my favour.
If I have fet forth the characters of fome few perfons, under fictitious names and in a ludicrous strain, yet it was not with any malicious design. They that apply any of the characters here given, (bad ones I mean,) confeSs th mSelves guilty.* ThoSe that are conScious of their innocence wsili approve it. No Scandal is intended to be thrown on any Society or body of men, H 4	but
152 M E M O I R S of
but fome individuals of each are fensible of the truth of what is here asserted. How-, ever I must now return to my own affairs.
The time for my departure for France, drew nigh; Charlotte knew it, my eyes (though my tongue was silent,) pkinly told her the situation of my heart, and how much I dreaded a feparation. Tho’ Mr. Honor continued firm to his former resolution of accompanying me, and taking Mrs. Honor with him; yet on the profpect of leaving my native shore, and being feperated So far distant not only from my parents, friends, and all I held dear in my liSe, my worthy friend and my sister excepted: but to be feparated from the preSence of Charlotte gave me a prodigious pain, I grew melancholy, and w'as in a very uneaSy Situation.
Company grew irkSome; diversions I had no taste for; nothing pleaSed me when abSent from Charlotte. I was ordered silence, but I learnt the knguage of the eyes, how easily learnt by lovers. 1 hat I had learnt was very evident, Charlotte obferved it, and feemed pleafed with my conduct: I mean becaufe I had laid my tongue under restrictions, I had reSolved Sooner to conlume in silence,
than
Mr. Charl es Guildford. 153
than offend with the lauguage of my tongue. I remembred the conditions on which I enjoyed the prefent bleshng, and was unwilling to forfeit it, by my own miS-conduct.
My uneafinefs increafed, and became visible to the tender Charlotte, who feemed to pity me. This gave me courage, as I fondly hoped, it would be an introduction to the passion, with which I my-felf-was infpired.
In a conversation I had with her before my departure, I Set forth in very pathetic terms the regret with which 1 should leave my native country, my diScourfe was ex-preshve of my meaning though delivered in the most modest and reSpectful manner. The generous Charlotte, unwilling to give me pain rebuked me not; nor feemed to understand my real meaning; but fympathiSed with me in the most tender manner, and when the fcene became too moving, wiSely turned the diScourfe to fome other fubject.	' ,
My Sister had mentioned my uneasineSs, to Charlotte, who had affured her that she had observed it, and sincerely Sympathised with me, for that my regret muSc neceffa-rily be great at parting with all that was H 5	dear
154 M E M O I R of
dear to me (my sister and Mr. Honor excepted) for a considerable time at least, and that time very uncertain ; and that I must likewife be SenSible of the necesiity of foon loosing the company of thofe two friends that intended to go with me part of the way.
“ His heart, fays she is generous and “ full of tender fentiments. He loves his country and his friends, with “ the most tender affection, and his Sor-“ row at parting with them, must be very “ great.
Ofate!” faid she, with a sigh, ”how “ cruel!—How blind, and inconsistent “ is fortune !—Merit fo confpicuous and “ not discerned by that hood-winked god-“ deSs!—ExcuSe me my dear Lucy; em-“ bracing her, the starting tear appearing “ in her eyes, I love,—I tenderly love “ your brother.—I can no longer conceal “ it.”
You remember ShakeSpear’s description of concealed love my friend, where Viola giving the history of her own 'love to the Duke Says,
“ She
Mr. Charles Guildford. 155
-------“ She never told her love,
“ But let concealment, like a worm i’th* “ bud;
' “ Feed on her damalk cheek, she pined “ inthoiight,'
“ And with a green‘and yellow melan-“ choly,
“ She fat like patience on a monument,
“ Smiling at grief.
This is I think fomewhat applicable in the prefent caSe. Chaidotte, would not have dif-covered her’s unlefs to a generous purpofe. But to return to Charlotte’s conversation she proceeded and Said, “ I have really loved “ him a considerable time. The deScrip-“ tion you had often given me of him, charmed me, and I from thence enter-“ tained a very great regard for him be-“ fore I Saw him. This raiSed my curio-“Hity, and I was desirous of conversing “ with him, but could not mention it, “ fearing you might think me guilty of “ an unpardonable folly. But when! Saw “ the manly youth, my heart tho’young, “ was touched with love, and the more I “ knew and converSed with him the more “ mv regard for him incereaSed.
H 6	1
is6 M E M O I R S of '
♦
“ I at length dilcovered the situation “ of my heart, and attempted, but in “ vain, to conquer it. Fresh beauties “ continually opened to my view.' I “ dreaded the confequences. I visited “ lord W. There I tried all the inno-“ cent diversions the place afforded, but “ to no purpoSe. Your brother’s merit “ shone conspicuous in every action, and “ and has impressed his image sirmly on “ my heart. His merit renders him “ worthy of the finest woman the British “ court produces. I am too fensible of “ it.
“ It was,the many infurmoimtable ob-“ stacks that I know will intervene,
“ and render it morally impossible, ever “ to join our hands, whoSe hearts I know “ are already, (for the peace of each,) too “ sirmly connected; that made me re-ceive, in the manner I did the declara-“ tion he made me, Though it was very “ agreeable to me, to be esteemed by the “ man I loved and whoSe veracity I did “ not doubt, yet how could I ungene-“ roussy give him hopes that are vain and “ groundless, or any encouragement to “ expect, what can never be perform-“ cd.” '
“ I
Mr. Charles Guildford. 157
“ I was mySelf greatly affected at the “ treatment I had given him, but “ O my Lucy! my dearest friend ! what ' “ could I then or what can I now do !
“ London has fcarce any diversion for “ me, and will have still leSs, when he is “ gone. He always, appears to me in the “ most amiable light, and I often ressect “ how happy must that woman be who is “ connected with fuch a man! The injunc-“ tion I laid on him, never to mention his “ love, he has strictly obferved; yet the “ language of his eyes is more eloquent “ by far, than I can exprefs. I am well “ acquainted with the Sentiments of his “ Soul. He dreads a Separation, and t “ dread the approaching moment, as “ much as he does. I cannot excuSe my “ imprudence, yet how can I avoid it,
“ Love is powerful. His force is too “ great for me to wsithstand. How is it “ possible, when the wifest of men have “ Submitted to his command ? I can “ not give encouragement to your bro-“ ther’s passion: you know my reafons, “ and cannot blame me.
“ He travels to gain experience, and “ to compleat himfelf in thofe arts he in-“ tends to profefs. I wish he may gain
a perfect
15B MEMOIRS of
“ a perfect peace of mind, I dread my fa-“ ther’s power and temper. If he should “ be deSirous of marrying me in the “ mean time, I dare not resist, and how “ unhappy must that render him if he “ truly loves; which I doubt not but he “ does. Should it happen as I have too “ much reaSon to fear it will, how miSe-“ table shall I be for the remainder of my “ life.
“ I am refolved to act, in every re-“ fpect; conformable to that duty I owe “ to the best of parents. If they are •‘ cruel it is not my fault. I will endea-“ vour to fubmit patiently to my fate. “ Fortitude my dear is what I fear I shall “ often want. I Snail apply to that Being v/ho is the constant protector of inno-“ cence and virtue; and hope I shall “ sind the relieS I desire. How happy “ could I be with the man I love, were “ thofe obstacles removed that obstruct “ our happirieSs! fiut duty bids me not encourage the fond passion. ReaSon “ directs me to combat my preSent affec-“ tions. May heaven grant me that aS-“ sistance I fo greatly want. I must, I “ will obey the commands that duty,
“ reaSon
/
Mr. Charles Guildford. 159
reaSon, honour and prudence impoSe “ upon me; but fear I shall be unhappy.
“ Do not tell your brother my dear “ what' has pasted. I esteem you a diS-“ creet and sincere friend; and I can “ Safely trust the fecrets of my heart, in “ your bofom. I am convinced of your “ fidelity my dear, and therefore want “ not any affurances oS it. You are an “ instance that a woman can keep a “ Secret as well as wiSer man. His from you I hope to receive the only “ comfort I shall ever expect in this life.
“ If you think it will in any Sort eaSe “ your brother’s pain, by letting him “ know I am not inSensible of his love “ you may, but be Sure, adviSe liim not “ to found any hopes on it; as you can “ inSorm him I am Sully reSolved never “ to act contrary to that duty I owe my “ parents; and if it is not in reality a “ duty incumbent on me, to act in that. “ reSpect according to their desires ; yet “ I shall always make their will my law. “ But this I shall leave entirely to your “ discretion.”
So Saying with tears in her eyes Charlotte abruptly took her leave. Perhaps you may ash if my sister was diScreet, how
I
i6o -MEMOIRS of
I came to be acquainted with the whole of this converfation ?—That I may perhaps, inform you hereafter ; but do affure you she did mot behave in the least ungene-roussy to her friend, in breach of the confidence repoSed in her; but acted Intirely to her liking, and had her approbation on all she did.
This epistle is run to an uncommon length, it is therefore time to conclude it.
Adieu my friend, I as ufual ssubferibe mySelf,
Your’s
Sincerely,
Charles Guildford.
L E T-
Mr. Charles'Guildford. iGi
LETTER XXIV.
Be F O R E we left London my sister after mentioning the many obstacles there were to the completion of my desires, and that it appeared impossible I should ever Siicceed, acquainted me that Charlotte had a great regard for me, but that the refolution she had made was never to act contrary to her duty.
You may more eafily guels than I de-fciibe my situation, siuctuating in the greatest uncertainty between hope and deSpair. Her love rejoiced me; her prudence amazed me. I greatly admired her conduct, yet wished she was not fo fevere.	^
On the eve of our departure for France-I took my leave of Charlotte. Hwas a cruel feparation. She confeffed she lov’d but dreaded the effects of a passion she termed unhappy. I can’t deScribe the tender Scene, therefore will not attempt it.
We left England, the particulars of' our voyage and journey, would rather be difagreeable than entertaining. It fuf-fices that ’twould have been pleaSant to
me
I ha M E M O I R S of
me had myheait been eaSy, but when the mind of man is uneafy and difcontemed what relish has he for pleaSure ?
We had genteel lodgings at Paris, Mr. Honor was acquainted with many of the French nobility, and people of falhion. The manners customs, &c. of the French are well known, I need not deScribe them to you.
The Sovereignty, with an abSolute power Seems to be vested in their king, who is their Sole lord; and he can whenever he pleaSes; command I may Say the lives and Sortunes of his fubjects, which are entirely in his hands. I will not Say he is fo absolute as the grand Seignor i. e. the king must not act in So open a manner as the Sultan, but yet the king of France and his ministers can find means to command the lives of any they pleafe to take. ’ How dangerous, how precarious is their Situation, when under the dominion of an unjust and cruel prince!
How excellent, and how far preferable to this is the English constitution, and the prefent form of government! How valuable, in Such a country, is a true patriot ! The English were ever esteemed a people, jealous in the highest degree of
their
Mr. Charles Guildford. i6g
their liberties and privileges. That jealoufy lately iecmed to be, by artful management, laid dormant, and fecured from blazing forth; but to what purpoSe!
. TheBririfli virtue is not yet, entirely loll:. No! Britons still dare affert their rights, and fiiew the world they still hold Sacred thole bleffings, their ancestors have pur-chaSed at the expence of their lives and fortunes; and that they will not Sufier an infringement from any with impunity.
During our residence in France, which v/as for a considerable time, we made Several parties of pleaSure, which were rather irkSome than agreeable to me, occasioned by the situation I was in. We visited every place, at any reaSonable distance from Paris, that was worthy of note. What a palace will VerSailles be, when finished! How many royal palaces are there in France! Why can not the English monarch, rival his neighbouring brother, in grand and magnisicent palaces, and fuperb buildings ?
The Louvre ; what a noble building ! It is an ornament to Paris in general. It is situated on the Seine, but it has never been finished according to the original de-» flgH,
With
i64 M E M O I R S of
With this palace the Tuilliries has a eommiinication. The latter is a beautiful palace. It is joined to the former by a gallery built by Henry the fourth. It tronts the river, and is esteemed th.e finest piece of its kind, of any in Europe. “This gallery is about four hundred and fifty yards in length, and ten in breadth, is adorned with exquifite paintings, and pieces of fciilpture, &c.
There,is a fine palace at St. Germain, another at Fontainbieau, and feveral others belonging to the French monarch. j-Fhe Canals of Briare and Orleans open a communication between the Seine and the Loire, whereby Paris is furnished v/ith the productions of the interior parts of the kingdom; and a reciprocal traffic carried on between the northern and fou-thern provinces
There are many exquifite paintings, in and about Paris. Thofe in the palace of St. Germain’s are exquifite. In the gallery that joins the Tuilleries and the Louvre, are many fine paintings, which re- . preSent the chief cities in Europe. The principal staircaSe in the palace of Verfail-les, confists of the finest marble, is above ten yards wide, and is beautified with admirable
Mr. Charles GuilOfqrd. 165
mirable paintings and pieces of fculpture,
&c.
In the cabinet of rarities are feveral paintings by the greatest masters. The cieling of the chapel is enriched with most exquisite paintings. There is a gallery and Salon in the royal palace belonging to the duke of Orleans, at St. Cloud about two leagues West of Paris, painted by Mig-nard and very much admired.
There are feveral good paintings left in the Louvre. There are apartments under the gallery mentioned before, for all forts of ingenious artificers, who are employed by the king. The gallery'of the palace Royal in Paris is silled with the pictures of the most illustrious perSonages of France, drawn by the greatest masters.
I think it is either the palace of Luxemburg or Orleans in Paris, that hath in the great gallery, on the right, fome paintings, by the famous Paul Reubens representing the history of queen Mary de Medica (who built it) from her nativity to her death; in twenty large pieces ; ten feet in heighth; which are placed between the windows.
In the cathedral of Notre Dame, in the choir are many sine paintings. The Sor-
bonnc
i66 MEMOIRS of
bonne, a college in Paris, famous for learned men, has a sine library, in which is two large manufcript volumes, of a French transsation of Livy, in the reign of Charles the fifth, embellished with paintings in miniature on vellum. An art that has been lost near three hundred years.
- There are feveral public libraries in Paris. And sirst. The Royal library has about sixteen thoufand valuable manuscripts, and above eighty thouSand printed volumes. All perSons, foreigners as well as natives have free admission and proper accommodations for their studies.
Secondly, The library of St. Victor, it is open to the public three days in the week.
Thirdly, The library of Cardian Maza-rin.
Fourthly, I'he library of Mr. Ripon-fonds.
And fifthly. The library of the fathers of the Christian Doctrine.
The royal physic garden, has a good anatomy School, well furnished with Skeletons. Any one may be admitted to See the operations in the kings laboratory.
Excellent
Mr. Charles Guildford. 167
Excellent examples for England to follow. The galleries of the palace of Fontainbieau are silled with excellent paintings, and many of the ceilings are painted by the most celebrated, Italian masters. But Versailles is the place which pleaSes me most. I have lately been over to take another view of it, but of that more hereafter.
I have been pretty particular, I think • in my relation ot what I faw in Paris, &c.
I must not be fo particular, concerning every place of note I visited during my travels, otherwiSe I shall grow tedious, and diSagreeable, instead oS giving you pleaSure. After staying Sometime at Paris, I very unwillingly took leave of my worthy friend and my sister, and fet out attended by honest Truman for Rome.
I think the particulars of a journey, being different items of where the traveller dines, fups, &c. is far from being agreeable, unlefs I had met with Something merry to have diverted you. Such things thereSore I shall omit, and in my next give you a short^account of Some things I law, that were really curious and worthy of obfervation, in Some of the most remarkable place.s through which I travelled
. or
i63 M E M O I R S of
or which I made in my way to fatisfy my curiosity; as I was going from Paris to Rome. Many things I should have omitted, that I have not, had you not requested the contrary.
If I should grow tedious you must blame yourfelf, and not
your Friend
Charles Guildford.
wa;s-	wsii?
LETTER XXV.
I pasted through Orleans, Lyons, Orange, Montpellier, MarSeilles, Genoa, Milan, Parma, Modena, Bologna, Florence, Pifa, Leghorn, Sienna, and other places which I now can not remember.
I was greatly pleafed with the many sine pieces of architecture and painting I faw during my stay in France, Italy, &c. but particularly at Rome.
BUt there are in feveral parts of France, Spain and Italy, many things worthy
Mr. Charles Guildford. 169
thy a travellers notice. As for Spain, though I had once intended to have visited it, yet when I was in Italy, my mind changed and I thought the trouble too great, as alSo that Italy would afford me opportimities fufficient, to gain both plea-^ fure and knowledge.
But to my promife, of fome few things I noticed mr was acquainted with in my travels as far as Rome. The choir of the church of St. Nizier, in Lyons is adorned with excellent paintings, which exhibit to the obferver’s eye the history of our Saviour.
The paintings in the Town-houSe or Guild-hall are exquisite; particularly thofe of the grand stair-caSe, where Lyons is re-' preSented in flames. At Orange near' Dauphine is a triumphal arch almost entire, SuppoSed to have been eredted by Marias when the Romans poffeffed that city; it is curioussy painted with the representation of divers fkirmishes on horle-back.
There are fine paintings, in the church' of the Annunciation in Genoa, and in feveral of the churches there. There are exquifite paintings in the Duke of Dori-as’s palace in Genoa.
I	The
.170 MEMOIRS of
The cathedral of Milan is a rich and beautiful piece of antient building, in v/hich there is great variety of curious, costly workmanship; and many valuable things belonging to it. There is the Ambrosian library in Milan, famous for it’s curious manufcripts, particularly one of Jofephus in Latin, and another of the famous Leonardo da Vinci. It contains many curious designs in mechanicks and particularly in engineering.
. Lewes Sforza, sirnamed the Moor, Duke of Milan, called Leonardo, who was famous for his knowledge of the literal arts and Sciences, but particularly architecture and painting to his court, and appointed him a pension of five hundred crowns.
Leonardo, by the Duke’s desire, entered himfelf a member of the academy, that prince had just before established for architecture. This proved of the greatest benefit, to the academy. He banished the old Gothic fashions, and reduced every thing to the happy simplicity and purity of the ancient Greeks and Romans, The Canal called Mortefena which fup-plies the city of Milan with water, is above two hundred miles in length, and
is
Mr. Charles DuildForD. 171
is navigable throughout. It passes thro* the Vatteline, and the valley of Chiaven-na, conducting the waters of the river Adda, to the very walls of Milan; and enriches both the city and the adjacent campaign wuth the Po and the Sea.
This was defigned by the Same Prince, and the execution of it committed to Le-, onardo. It was a noble and difficult en-terprize, every way worthy of Leonardo’s genius, and by that great master executed accordingly. Our Lord’.i Supper, which he, by the Duke’s order, painted for the refectory of the Dominicans of St. Maria delle Gratie, is an excellent piece> and reckoned Leonardo’s master-piece.
There is a copy of this painting, at St. Germain in France, took by the order of Francis the sirst, who would have re*> moved the original to France, but that it was impracticable, the history being painted, on a thick wall, and taking up no leSs than thirty fquare feet in area. The original is now imperceptible, the moisture having diluted the colours it being painted, in oil; for the wall was not fufficiently Secured from moisture and dampneSs.
What a pity that this noble Duke should be engaged in an unhappy war. He I 4	was
17-2 MEMOIRS of
was taken prifoner, and carried to France where he died in the castle of Loches. On this the academy was destroyed, the profeffors turned adrift, and the art efi'ec-tually banished out of Milan.
Italy gained by thefe misfortunes of the Milanefe, for Leonardo’s fchool being broke up, the Scholars fpread themfelves over the whole country. He had made painters, carvers, architects, founders, and engravers in crystal and precious stones, &c.
Out of his fchool came, Francis Mebzi, CeSar Sesto, Bernard Lovino, Andrew Salaino, mark Uggioni, Anthony Bal-traffio, Gobbo an extraordinary painter, and carver, Annibal Fontana a worker in ’ marble and precious stones; Bernazzano an excellent painter of landshapes, Paul Lomazzo, and feveral others. I could sill a volume in the praiSes of Leonardo ■ who is my greatest favourite.
He was invited by Francis the sirst to France when he was old, he languished lometimc at Fontainbieau, and that noble prince one day visiting him, he to fiiew liis fenSe of the lavour, railed himSell on his bed; at that instant he was Seized with a fainting fit, Francis stooping to
fupport
Mr. Charles Guildford. 173
fupport liim, he expired in the monarch’s arms.
There is another piece v/rote by Leonardo, in the Ambrosian library, being a treatiSe on lights and shadows. Leonardo wrote thirteen treatiSes, but.they are diSperSed in different places. Before 1 take leave of Leonardo da Vinci I think it v/ill not be amiSs if I give you a relation of two particular circumstances, taken from the history of his life, prefixed to his treatiSe of painting, a curious piece a translation of which was published in London in 1721: which are theSe.
In the year 1503, the Florentines re-Solving to have their council chamber ■painted, Leonardo, by a public decree 'was elected to that performance. Fle had 'made a considerable progrefs in one side of the chamber, when he had the morti-sication to sind that his colours did not stick, but as fast asthey dried they loofened from the wall. Michael Angelo, in concurrence with Leonardo, painted another side of the room; Michael though he was but a young man, yet he was become a very able painter; and had at that time acquired a very great reputation : inSo-much that at 29 years of age he v/as not I 3	afraid
174 MEMOIRS of '
afraid to vie with Vinci who was sixty. Each had his friends and. partizans, who far from bringing them to a better understanding, helped the more to embitter them against each other; fo that Michael and Leonardo commenced open enemies.
About this time Raphael coming fresh out of Perugino’s fchool, was led by Leonardo’s reputation to Florence ; the sirst view of Vinci’s works struck him with astonishment, and wrought a reformation in him, to which all the glory he has since acquired, may be justly aferibed. He began now to look upon the dry, harsh manner of his old master Perugiao with contempt; and to fet before him the tendernefs and delicacy of Leonardo for his imitation; and with fuch incredible vigour, as well as fuccefs, did he follow his new master; that he arrived by degrees at the utmost pinnacle cf his art; and to this day, for the foftneSs and Iweet-nefs of his figures, reigns. abSolute and without rival.
You will not be leSs pleaSed with Leonardo's character, therefore from the fame author I will give you a Iketch of it, that you may love him as a great man, as well as I do.
He
Mr. Charles Guildford. 175
He died at the age of 75, extremely regretted by all that knew him, or who loved the polite arts, honoured with the friendship and esteem of a mighty King. Nature perhaps never was more lavish, than in the compoSure of this great man, for she gave him even all that she had.
He was extremely handSome and well shaped, his strength was Surprizing and he acquitted himSelf with uncommon ap-plaufe in all exercifes of the body. But the talents of his mind were still more extraordinary than thoSe of his perfon ; he joined to a polite behaviour, the greatest strength and elevation of mind : a fur-prizing vivacity, to an unwearied application to study; a good stock of learning to a pleasing converlation. He refrained from marriage that he might work with , the more freedom; on which occasion one of his friends faid that Leonardo would marry no mistrefs but painting, nor beget any children but the works he performed.
So far 'from the author who wrote his life, but now, as I am upon a darling theme, permit me to give you a few extracts from the transiators preface whofe? language, and fentiments &c. will greatly pleale you.
I 4	He
176 MEMOIRS of
He fays, Leonardo da Vinci was a man fo happy in his genius. So conSummatein his profeffion, So accomplished in the arts, ib knowing in the Sciences ; and withal So much esteemed by tlie age wherein he lived ; his works So highly applauded by the ages which have Succeeded, and his name and memory still preServed with So much veneration by the preSent age ; that if any thing could equal the merit of the m>an, it must be the SucceSs he met with.
Scarce ever, perhaps was there a man of So extensive, and yet of fo accurate a thought v/ho could range over fuch vast fields of fcience, and, at the fame time, attend fo cloSely, to the minutest circumstances. ’Tis this that feems to make up Leonardo’s character; ’tis that distinguishes him trom the rest of mankind, and in this view, he stands not only a-bove the greatest painters but on a level with the greatest men.
In another place the fame writer justly fays, how vast, how immenfe an art is painting, as considered and handled by Leonardo ! fcarce any thing in the whole fystem of nature, but comes within-its compafs. Not the minutenels of the fmall-
est
Mr. Charl es Guildford. 177
est things, not the magnitude of the largest that fecures them from its cognizances ! nay as it the various appearances of the material worjd, were too fcanty too limited a Iphere ; it reaches out into the intellectual world, takes in the motions and passions of the human foul; and by the force ot Light and Shadow, makes the operations of an incorporeal agent, the visible objects of a corporeal organ. * The province of a painter, as our author has fixed his boundary. Seems too wide and Spacious to have been ever discharged in its full extent, by any man but himSelf The management of the pencil, and the mixture of colours, with the knowledge of perSpective, and a habit of designing, wherewith most painters feem to content themSelves, make but a-part of the art as understood by Leonardo. To theSe he calls in the assistance of
* For the fatisfa£lion of the fpeculatlve curious who are admirers of Mufic, Painting and Poetry, we beg leave to refer them to Mr. Harris’s difeouWe on thole three arts being one of three treatifes pub-lifhed by that gentleman in 1744-j where the operations of painting in the l'ubje6ls mentioned above are very judiciouiiy and curioully treated of. AlfotQ letters on talle, puabliflied in 1757, by Dodfley.
I 5	Other
178 M E M G I R S of
other arts ; anatomy, optics, meteorology mechanics, &c. Searching attentively into the powers of nature, in order to form an art that may imitate her, and from the^ depths of philofophy, drawing means for the improvement of painting.
’Tis not in painting alone, but in philosophy too, that Leonardo has furpaffed all his brethren of the pencil; nor does it appear in the least improbable, but that ^twas his uncommon shill in the latter, to which, in great meaSure, he owed his Surprising SucceSs in the former. The truth is, thefe are two faculties, that may be nearer a kin, than every one, perhaps is aware of; nor would there be any thing, methinks, very daring in the aS-fertion should I affirm, that philoSophy is absolutely neceffary, byway of preliminary to painting. To paint, ’tis allowed is to imitate nature: But, is not the Knowledge of nature, evidently requisite to the Imitation thereofAnd must it not be pleafant, to fee men about to re-prefent natural objects, who are unacquainted with the nature and properties • of the objects to be reprefented ! Quacks indeed there may be in painting as well as'in other proteffions, but to become
a regu-
Mr. Charles Guildford. 179
a regular painter, ’tis indiSpenfably neceffary that a man ferve an apprenticeship to philofophy. We have people v,^ho pre*-' tend to cure diSeafes without knowing a-ny thing of the animal oeconomy, or of the powers of medicines; and we have others who would be thought to paint, by the mechanifm of a hand, and a pencil moving in this and that direction r but, as the college will never allow thr former to be physicians ; fo I fee no reafon why the latter Oiould be complimented with the title of painters.
The example and fuccefs of Leonardo, cannot fail. Sure, to animate our painters to the study of philofophy and mathematics, If this great master could turn the old philofophy of his'age to sh good an account in painting, what might not be expected from the System of nature,, as it stands under its prefent improvements by the moderns ? We fee what laudable ufes he makes, even of a defec- ' tive doctrine of light: to what a pitch would he have carried his art, had he been acquainted with the new, the noble: the Newtonian theory of light and colours, what improvements would not he have made, had the diScoyeries of a Ba-_ ,I d	con
i8o MEMOIRS of
con or a Boyle been known in his days or had it been his fo'rtune to have lived in ours ? I know not how our painters will anfwer it, if their art should feem to decline, at a time when the knowledge of nature and of Geometry which are the very basis whereon it is built is fo wonderfully improved : but this I dare venture to pronounce, that they will never reach Leonardo in painting, till they have sirst rival’d him in philoSophy.
But it is time to return to myTotmer fubject. I shall therefore proceed in giving you an account of fome other curious pieces of art, &c. I faw in the courSe of my travels, and for that purpofe I now remove my fcene, from Milan to Parma.
The cupola of the cathedral of Parma is beautifully painted, and by an excellent hand. I believe it was done by Cor-regio.
The church of St. John is exquisitely painted, and beautifully adorned ’vvith curious workmanship, &c.
The duke’s palace, is a noble and an elegant structure. The gallery of the theatre is hung with a great number of pictures, all executed by celebrated maf-iters.
.At
Mr. Charles Guildford. i8i
At Modena, the apartments of the duke’s palace are adorned with paintings, by the best masters.
, At Bologna in the halls of the mar-quifs Rinucci are feveral curious large paintings, &c. and the apartments adjoining to the halls are furnished with exquisite paintings.
The legates palace is famous for the cabinet of Aldrovandus, in which (among other things are Several hundred large ma-nuScripts of his own writing, fifteen whereof are silled with the figures of birds, beasts, fishes, and plants all iiiuf-trated with their natural colours.
The church of Saint Paul is remarkable for its sine paintings, on the roof and on the dome ; and feveral pictures of the life of St. Paul done by a masterly hand, over the feats of the monks. At St, Gio-voni del Monte, in Bologna, is an admirable picture of St. Cecilia with an instrument of muSick in her hands : on one side of her are the figures of St. John and St. Paul; and on the other Mary Mag-delen and Sr. Austen. This is a master-peice of the famous Raphael, and is el-teemed one of the greatest treafures of the city.
In
i82 M E M O I R S of
In the church of the Dominican’s is a tomb of St. Dominic, over which is an excellent picture of the faint, done by that great master Guido Rheni. The church of the mendicants alfo, abounds with excellent paintings; of which the most beautiful pieces, are the calling of St. Matthew and a dead Christ.
In the convent of St. Michael in Bofco near Bologna, there is a piazza painted in FreSco, but it is much decayed. The ' rooms, &c. of the public Schools in Bologna, are adorned with admirable paintings, &c. In short, Bologna abounds with sine paintings. The duke of Florence in his new palace called Pitti; hath many exquisite paintings, with which his apartments are adorned; but the famous gallery of the old palace, is furniSned with the best collection of pictures and statues in the world.
The Domo or Cathedral in Florence called Santa Maria Florida, hath exqui» site paintings, on the cupola, and altar,
&c. The collegiate church oS Sc. Lawrence is adorned with excellent paintings,
&c. But the chapel adjoining to it of the lame name, the burial place of the Medician family, is the finest, and most
costly
Mr. Charles Guildford. i8f
costly piece of work, on the face of the earth.
There is alfo a famous library belonging to the convent of St. Lawrence. The diforders of Lombardy, and the misfortunes of his antient patrons tthe Sforzi, obliging Leonardo da Vinci to quit Milan, he retired to Florence, which might be called the place of his nativity, for he was born in the castle of Vinci, situate in the valley of Arno, a pleafant place, a little below Florence,
During his residence there, he painted feveral sine pieces. The principal piece on which he bestowed the most pains, and in which he took the greatest pleafure,. was the picture of LsiSa commonly called la Joconde. This was a divine piece ; Francis the sirst was fo charmed with it^ that he purchaSed it at the price of four thouSand crowns; and it is still to be Seen? in his Successors cabinet..
This work cost Leonardo four entire years, and yet is Said to be left unsinish’d.. While he was employed in painting this. ' lady, he had musicians constantly attending; always playing upon instruments,, or singing with their voice.s to divert her,, and to prevent her from shewing a certain
indolence
i84 MEMOIRS of
indolence and melancholy which people out of action are extremely liable to,
• About the fame time he painted and finished feveral other valuable pictures, the one a nobleman of Mantua, and an other a daughter of Americus Benci, much admired in thofe days for her incomparable beauty. He alSo finished a Flora about the fame time, which is still to be feen in Paris.-
Leonardo continued at Florence, till . the year 1513. The most considerable of his works at that time, were a piece representing the virgin with her little Son ; and a Baptist’s head; the one now in the possession of the Botto, and the other in thoSe of Caniello Albizzi.
Once more I leave my favourite painter but it is now in the arms of death, and with him Heave Florence, the occafion of mentioning him afecond timie. Now to Pifa, I shall only mention the cathedral of this place dedicated to the blessed Virgin aid called St, Mary. The choir of this church is painted by the most famous masters, and is exquiSitely well done.
I staid Sometime at Leghorn to obServe the manners, dreSs, customs, &c. of the different people that came from almost all
parts
Mr. Charles Guildford. 185
parts of the world to that city. Leghorn is I think the best place in Italy for meet-■ ing with foreigners from almost all nations, but more efpecially from Turkey. Making my observation on mankind in this city engaged my attention too much, to enquire what curious paintings or pieces of architecture, performed by Samous masters were there; So that I obServed nothing of that kind worth observation, excepting one church, I happened by chance 'to notice which was a pretty piece of architecture, and adorned with fome good paintings &c. but I have forgot the name of it, however it is not material.
And now for Sienna. In the library belonging lo the cathedral of that place, the great actions of Pius the fecond, are admirably well painted. The colours feem not at all faded, though ’twas done above three hundred years ago.. Foreigners that learn Italian, ufually stay at Sienna for that purpoSe, where the Italian language is Spoke and taught, in its greatest purity.
Rome is the next place, I shall mention, but shall not be too particular for fear of making my epistles of too great a length,
but
/
i26 M E M O I R S of
%
but by my future brevity attone for the very great length of this.
I am, my dear Friend,
your’s sincerely.
Charles GuiEOforb,
LETTER XXVI.
Rome that famous antient city-once the mistrefs of the world, tho’ now greatly fallen in its glory, is the place I am next to give you fome account-oS, Ihe nature of the place I think sirst requires, that I mention a few of the holy relicks here preServed as the most Sacred and valuable things. Things which I - have not elSewhere taken any notice of, thinking the few I shall here mention, -belonging to the religious &c. of this city, fufficient to give you a just idea of the fuperstition of the people, belonging to the church of Rome.
Several
Mr. Charles Guildford. 1^7
Several veffels of our Saviour’s blood, fome pure and Some mixed with v/ater as it came from his side at St. Eustachius’s and St. John de Lateran. The table on, which Christ eat the last Supper, at St. John de Lateran. A Holy handkerchief of , our Lords, in the fame church ; there is another of theSe in St. Peter’s church. There is another of theSe handerchief’s shewn at Eurin, another at Cadoin in Perigort, another in BeSan^on, another In Compeigne, another in Milan, another in Aix-la-Chapelle.
Each of theSe is esteemed the real one, where its kept; and the rest but counterfeits. The reed given our Lord for a feepter in St. John de Lateran. An image of Christ, faid to be made by himfelf, and fent to king Algarus, at St. Silvef-ter’s, in the sieli of Mars. Another made by Angels; in the chapel of Sancta Sanctorum.
The head of St. John the Baptist,'In the Convent of St. Sylvester. There are dif-forent parts of this Apostle’s head shewn in divers places and each esteemed originals, quite real, notwithstanding this is whole. But perhaps like fome others of the Apostles, he had feveral heads.
The
i8fi MEMOIRS of
The assies of St. John the Baptist arc preferved at St. John de Lateran, and yet the Geneofe pretend they have them, and actually shew fome which they post-tively alledge are the real ashes of the Saint. The heads of St Peter and Saint Paul are preferved in the church of Saint John de Lateran.
Tlie bodies of thefe two last Apostles mixed together. Hiefe bodies v/ere both equally divided, and weighed by Pope Sylvester: one moiety of v/hich is preserved in the church of St. Peter the other in St. Paul’s. A chain and fword,of St Peter preferved in the church dedicated to him. St. Matthias’s head preferved in the fame church. The stone on which St. Peter’s Cock crew, the column which was cleft aSunder from' top to bottom, on the day of the paffion; and the Stone on which Pilate’s foldiers cast lots for Christ’s garment, pelerved in the, church of St. John de Lateran.
St. Stephen’s body, in the church of that name. The body of St. Lawrence, in the church bearing his name; together with a veffel full of his broiled flesh, and another full of his fiit, when broiling on. the fire.
There
Mr. Charles Guildford. 189
There is the Gridiron on which he fuf-fered Martyrdom ; and the coals wherewith this bieffed Martyr was broiled to death for the faith, in St. Eustachius’a church. The,., body of St. Sebastian, in St. Lawrence’s church. There are three or four bodies of this Saint, shewn at different places, all really the true bodies of the Saint: They might be multiplied after his death perhaps, for the benefit of the faithful*
There is one of his heads in St. Peter’s cliucrh. There are feveral other heads of his in different places.
Shall I stop here and not proceed any farther on|thefevenerable relicks! No. Weil ^ then I will mention a few more in general and proceed to other things. If I should err in any particular, I-hope you will charge it on my treacherous memory, or my careleffnefs in making my notes: but the foregoing and following relicks I have either Seen or heard of in Rome, but most of them I actually Saw; an account of the rest, I received from perfens of honour and veracity.
But thefe amongst many others have been defended in very large and copious - treatifes wrote on purpoSe, by many of ’
the
tgo M E M O I R S of
the pious father’s of this church. But to my list of relicks. The Tail of Baalam’s aSs, St. Christopher’s Stone Boat. St. Anthony’s Millstone, on which he failed , to MuScovy. Crums of the Bread that fed the five thoufand. The towel with which Christ wiped his difciples feet, part of the wood of the crofs, feveral nails of the fame. Some of the Manna in the wilderneSs. The blossom’s of Aaron’s 'rod. (I do not know how thefe have been preServed So many ages. But faith, a strong faith my friend Solves all difficulties.) One oS the bieffed Virgin’s combs, (there are many of theSe in the world.) The shift of the bieffed Virgin, when our Saviour was born. The brains of St. Peter. ('I’heSe are the individual brains, which Calvin declared were a mere pumice stone.) A singer of St. Anne. The head of St. Luke. (There are Several of theSc.) St. Patrick’s' staff, with which he drove all the venomous creatures out of Ireland. The fore-singer of St. John the Baptist. (There are many of theSe alSo.) The Smock of St. PriSca in which she was martyr’d, one thouSand Seven hundred years ago. (This might easily be preServ^.
ed,)
Mr. Charles Guildford, igt
* cd,) though tis now fomething decayed, (in the fame manner that the blossoms of Aaron’s rod were.) A rusty fword belonging to St. Peter,^the head of St. Dennis, which he carried under his arm the length of two miles after it was cut off, the fponge that was dipt in vinegar and given to Christ. (There is another or two of the fame fort.) The point of the launce with which his side was pierced, (there are feveral heads and points of this launce.) Many crucifixes, which have performed very great miracles testified by many pious cardinals, bishops, archbishops, &c. and numberlefsBulls man) of whichpious popes (a blessing on their holinefs) have made in favour of the aforefaid crucifixes. The head of one of thefe wonderful crucifixes being bald, a peruke, made of the bieffed virgin’s hair is fixed to it, and which may be taken off in hot weather. The bieffed Virgin’s flipper and one of her shoes. The famous Rivet had the figure of this shoe engraved and published with licence. Pope John 22d. ordained that thofe who should thrice kiSs it, and reheaisse three Ave Maria’s, with devotion to her bieffed honour and reverence, should gain feven
hundred
\
192 M E M O I R S of
hundred years of pardon, and be freed from many fins. The Bieffed Virgin’s needle and thread. Fler picture by St. Luke. (Several others of thefe by the Same hand,) A toe, a finger, and a flipper, of St. Peter. His epiScop.al chair, vestments &c. Flis Rochet in which he uSed to Say MaSs when at Rome. A shoulder oS St, Paul’s. Several bodies of St. Bartholomew. The ssdn which was flayed off this bieffed Apostle. (There is another Ikin of this faint but it w^ants the hinder parts,) the rib, shoulder, arm, one foot, and a piece of an another, belonging to St. Matthias. The bones of Abraham, Ifaac, and Jacob. St. Thomas a Becket’s hair shirt, which Gononus’s Chronicon affures us, the bieffed Virgin fewed herSelf for him ; and then hid it under his bed. (Was not that very kind of her!) St. Appolonia’s javr, a partofher head, feveral of her teeth apart of her tooth, &c.(there are many ofthis faint’s jaws, &c.) With the bodies, faces, shulls, and pieces of Skulls, jaws, teeth, hair, bones, hands, arms, fingers, legs, toes, finger and -toe nails, oS divers other antient, and modern Saints, Some Sound, Some rotten.
Some
Mr. Charles Guildford. 19^
forne a little decayed, but most in a stinking condition.*
But enough of Romish relicks and now to fome of their curious pieces of architecture.
St. Peter’s at Rome is a noble building, the work ,pf above one hundred .years.
The height from the pavement to the top of the croSs, which is over the ball is four hundred and thirty two feet, and the diameter of the ball eight feet four inches. To the top of the crofs on St. Paul’s church in London is three hundred and forty four feet; the difference is eighty eight feet.
The cupola of St, Peter’s in Rome, was copied from the cupola of the cathedral in Florence, being the sirst osi that kind ever built in Europe.
There are many excellent paintings in the church of St. Peters at Rome. Taken together it is certainly one of the finest modern structures in the whole world.
The fame of this noble building is too great to receive any addition from my
* Dean Swift, in his Tale of a Tub, mentions feveral of thefe things, in a very humerous manner.
« VoL. I.	K	pen,
194 MEMOIRS of
pen, and I doubt not but you are too well acquainted with the particulars of the whole, in regard to the architecture of it, and the paintings, fculptures &c. that adorn it, to need information from me.
I must defer an account of the residue of my obfervations in Italy, till another opportunity, and am at prelent, my dear friend
Your’s, &c.
Charles Guildford.
LETTER .XXVII.
My lafl: concluded with a few parti-
culars concerning St. Peters at Rome: I now proceed to other things thtt have perhaps been lefs noticed by you.	,
The
/
Mr. Charles Guildford. 195
The church of St. John de Lateran is ' the metropolitan church of Rome, tho’ its far inferior to St. Peters.
It was built by Constantine as was old St. Peters.
On the altar of St. Stephen, in the church of St. Paul about a mile from. Rome, is a beautiful picture reprc-fenting the stoning of St. Stephen, done by the ingenious 1 avinia Fontana.
The chapel of Sixtus the fifth, is justly admired for its excellent paintings, &c. Here is the last judgment done by Michael Angelo. This chapel joins to the great hall, or Sala Regia, in the Vatican, of which I shall prefently take more particular notice.
The churches in general in Rome are curious pieces of Architecture, and are adorned with good paintings, fculptures &c. and other curious workmanship.
I have mientioned fome of their relicks ’ds needleSs, and would be a fruitleSs labour to enumerate every particular, I can’t, nor would it be entertaining: I fiiall therfore paSs to his hoiineSs’s palaces, and from thence to the palaces of fome of the principal families at Rome.
K 2	.Dhe
MEMOIRS of
• The Vatican of courfe is the sirst to be mentioned.
The Vatican is one of the pope’s chief •palaces, and is situated near St. Peters in Rome. It is adorned with .the most ex-•quisite paintings, done by the greatest 'masters.	’
■ The great hall, or Sala Regia, has an ''admirable piece of Leo in his pontifical habit, meeting Attila king of the Huns. 'Here Michael Angelo has uScd his great-•est art in the circumcision of St. Peter, and the conversion of St. Paul.
Opposite to this hall is the chapel of <Sixtus the fifth which I mentioned be-fore.
The library, in the Vatican, is esteem-''ed the noblest collection of books both in print and m.anufcripts, in the world.
OppoSite to the chapel of Sixtus the fifth, is the Capella Paulina, in which are many valuable paintings. In short the whole palace is full of exquisite paintings and adorned throughout with every thing to attract the attention, and pleafe the eye of the mofc curious obServer.
The Bclvidere, a fort of pleafure houSe adjoining to the Vatican, abounds with
excel-
Mr, Charles Guildford. TA)V
excellent paintings. There are fome very^ , good paintings in the MonteCayal’o, the popes fummer palace, but not So exqui-Site as thofe in the Vatican, &c.
7'he Capitol is the third oF the pope-s. p ilaces, in which are fome excellent historical paintings.	•	. ;
The Farnc.'e palace belonging to the duke of Parma, in Rome, is adorned with excellent paintings. The gallery throughout, is painted by the famous Ca-cacliio, who has here repreS<;nted witlv great art the feveral deities, assisting at the triumph of Bacchus'.
The palace of Barberini is ad or neel w'ith excellent paintings, &c. The great hali is painted in FreSco, by Peter Corro-na, who has beautifully reprefented the four cardinal virtues, and the triumph of glory.
The palace ofi.Colonnas has excellent paintings. The palace of the Eorghde family is adorned with the choicest paintings.
The houSe of Pinciano neari* Rome, belonging to the Same family, L adorned^ with a vast number of sine-piftures. .
The othe palaces oS most note, are thoSe of Aitiere, Mazarini, Phampiiia,’'
K 3	and
198 M E M O I R S of
and Giustiniane.; and which are each a-dorned with sine paintings, &c.
There are fome excellent paintings in the villa belonging to the family of Lite at Tivoli near Rome.
I hope this short account will prove fa^ tisfactory. Let us vary the Subject. I observed that agreat part of the land in Italy lay uncultivated. This is I believe occasioned by the heavy tax laid upon corn. So that the poorer land will not raiSe crop fufficient to pay the dluties, &c. together with the necessary expence attending it.
’Twas happy for England fuch a tax has not been been impoSed. Italy is but thinly peopled ; occasioned by So great a number of both Sexes being tied up by vows of' chastity from propagating their fpecies.
The country in general may be faid to be poor (their churches, &c. excepted) and that poverty proceeds from fo many lusty young people being shut up in cloiS-ters, &c. and not increasing the wealth of the public by their labour and industry.
The avarice of fome of the pope’s is another occasion of the poverty of the people.
Similar
Mr. Charles Guildford. 199
Similar caufes in other countries will consequently have the like effects.
The prime ministers of neighbouring princes, ought to take notice of fuch things; and Set the effects oS the ill management of others before their eyes, for examples, in order to amend whatever they sind' defective in their own conduct.
Every man ought in justice to his country, to do all the good he can for it.
So much for Rome, and its curiosities, &c, I am, m.y dear friend,
’	yours, &c.
r ^	Charles Guildford.
LET-
, A'-' '
200 MEMOIRS of
LETTER XXVIII.
From Rome, my dear friend, I beg leave to conduct you to Venice. Suppofe yourfelf on the Rialto. This is the principal bridge, over tlie grarai canal in Venice.
It is esteemed one of the finest in Europe. It consists of one single arch, all of marble, has rails On each side, and tv:o rows of shops in the middle. 7he compals of the arch is one third part of a circle, the width of it on the level of the water, from one extremity to the other, is ninety-siVe feet, and the heighth twenty-four.
It was deSighed by the celebrated Michael Angelo. ’Tw^as built in the year 1591. The building of thii famous bridge cost 250,000 ducates. In the Doge’s palace at Venice is the chamber of the college, in which is painted Jupiter darting his thunder; an admirable perforntance done by the famous Paul Veronefe.
But the great council chamber exceeds all the rest, for its exquisite paintings done by Paul Veronefe, and Tinto-
ret.
Mr. Charles Guildford. 2oj
ret, who Seem here to have exerciSed their utmost Ikill. The principal pieces are the .battles of the Venetians, the siege of Constantinople, the history of pope Aleie^ ander the third, treading on the neck of the Emperor Frederick Barbarofa, and a representation of ParadiSe, very much admired by the nicest judges.
In the refectory ot the convent of the benedictines, on a little isiand opposite to the fquare of St. Mark, is a reprefentati-on of the lords Supper, painted by Paul Veronefe, and is one of the most cele^ brated pieces in the city.
The church della Salute is adorned with exquisite paintings. The Venetians especially the nobility, in the furniture of their palaces have a greater number of paintings than any other city in Europe, done by the best masters, fuch as Titian, Paul Veronefe, and Tintoret. The last is more esteemed at Venice than elSewhere ' in Italy.
Several sine pieces of his are to be feen' in the Scuola St. Rocco, or fchool of St. Roch; particularly a picture of the Annunciation, which is reckoned extremely valuable on account of the lively exprel'-sion of furprize, admiration and joy, that K 5	'	app ar
202 M E M O I R S of
appear in the virgin’s face, on the happy occasion.
I have not mentioned Naples yet; which is by all esteemed the garden of Italy. His great pity VeSuvius, that famous dreadful Volcano is fo near to it. .Dis but about eight miles distant. It lies eastward. The churches in Naples are remarkable for their sine paintings, ’tis needlefs therefore to mention them more particularly excepting the church belonging to the convent of the Carthusians, near the castle of St. Elmo in this city, which hath, among many other sine paintings, the nativity of Christ by Guido, and feveral pidlures of the Lords Supper done by the greatest masters.
The church of Loretto about three miles from the Adriatic fea or gulf of Venice, is adorned with excellent paint-' ings, and is poffeffed of an immenSe quantity of riches. In this church is enclofed the holy houfe faid to be brought by Angels from Jerufalem, to fome other place and fome lime afterwards removed again by angels from thence, and put down in the place where it now stands.
What immenfe riches have they gained by this preposterous device ? Now I
have
Mr. Charl es Guildford. 20^
have left Venice I shall proceed a little. ' The Ducal palace, now the residence of the popes Legate in Ferrara is furnished wish Several excellent paintings. The church belonging to the Carmelites, is justly admired for its exquisite paintings. Ferrara is situated near the Po, which is the finest river in. Laly.
The church of St. Anthony in Padua -'which is fubject to the Venetians, is adorned with excellent paintings, fculpture, &c. The church oS St. Justina in Padua was designed bythe famous Palladio. Over the high altar hangs an exquisite piece of painting done by Paul VeroneSe, representing the martyrdom oS the Saint to whom the church is dedicated. I liked Venice extremely'well and therefore continued there Some considerable time.
This city is extremely pleaSant and a-greeahlc, and the many diversions I found there gave mie very great entertainment.
I copied Several pieces of Tintoret’s and Paul VeroneSe &c. during my stay there, and took a draught of the Rialto and of the Doge’s palace. I alSo copied Several _ pieces and took feveral draughts in Rome and otjier places where my stay had given me an opportunity.
K 6
'^64 MEMOIRS of
I had now a pretty good collection, with fome few original pieces I had purchafed &c. My own works I had shewn to feveral good judges in Venice &c, and they were fo kind as to approve of them. This gave me fome fatisfaction as I was ‘in hopes my parents love ahd tenderneSs for me with the very great expences they had been at, had not been bestowed on a foil entirely barren.
But the thoughts of Charlotte my dear friend often gave me pain. The high fenfe she entertained of her duty charmed me ; but the miSery she Suffered on that account, was the Subject of great uneasi-nefs to me.
This alone was fufficient to cut off all my hopes. The confent of her parents must be gained. I had neither birth nor fortune to recomm.end me. England was still dear to me, notwicstanding I had little to expect from it.
I had long defigned to take a view of that other famous Volcano mount .Dtna, in the ifiand of Sicily. I thought I might as well take shipping at Venice, and fail down the gulf, to the issand of Sicilly, where after having taken a curfory view of mount iEtna, and what other things I
should
Mr. Charles Guildford 205
should sind there worthy observation, I might from thence fet fail for England, without visiting the continent again, as I had feen enough already on the continent to fatisfy my curiosity.
The effects of this design I shall acquaint you with in my next, and am at prefent,
yours, &c.
Charles Guildford.
LETTER XXIX.
WH E N I had taken leave of my friends at Venice, I embarked on board a ship bound for the ifiand of Si-‘cily, accompanied by honest Truman.
We failed down the gulf, and were just got out into the open Sea; when a Turk-ilh vesiel came up, and clapped us aboard. A Smart engagement enSued, and we fought like delperate people; who were rather reSolved on death than ssavery: -	however
2o6 M E M O I R S of
however it was to little purpofe, and only ferved to enrage the Turks, which made them afterwards treat us more barbarousiy than they otherwife would have done.
We were obliged to furrender. They took great part of us on board their ship, and put, us in Irons, where we were left to bemoan our wretched fate. The rest of the prifoners were left on board the ^Venetian ship with a fufficient number of hands to guard them.
We continued Some time on the Seas, and at length were carried up the gulf of Saloniki. We were foon after put on shore at Saloniki where we were carried to the Bazar, or market-place and expofed to fale like fo many beafts.
Trueman and mySelf were purchafed by a well dreffed, elderly tu.'k, after he had ashed fome questions concerning us, and taken a thorough furvey of our perfons &c. Slonest Trueman was extremely glad we were both purchafed by one maS-ter, for I believe the poor fellow dreaded, not even ssavery more, than he did a reparation.
We were, by our new master carried to a handSome, genteel houSe, in Saloniki; were we remained for feveral days, without
M^-'LharleS Guildford. 207
without knowing for what we vTre designed, not then being put to any fort of labour.
Haley, (themame of our master) fpoke a fort of barbarous English, but plain enough to be understood. He ashed me many questions in relation to my education, profession, &c. and at length begged me to give him a full account of my life'.
He had behaved very well to me. I could not refufe to comply with his request, and therefore fatissied him in every particular, to the best of my remembrance. He leemed pleaSed with my in-genuouSneSs, and the Sincerity with which I had made the relation.
He then told me, that I must not look upon him as my master; for that he had only bought m-", for the uSe of a veiy worthy young man for whom he was a Ibrt of factor there. That he resided up in the inland parts, at Sophia, and then lay dangeroussy ill there.
The generous Turk behaved in the most friendly manner to us, treating us rather like companions than Oaves. When I hinted my fear of being feparated from ' 7'rueman, who* had been a foster-father to me and attended me from my infancy, he
kindly
■ 208	M E M O I R S of
kindly informed me that his power ex* tended So far as that he could and would affure me, we needed not to dread any Such thing. He endeavoured all he possibly could to lighten our chains, and to make us eaSy under our affliction.
We at length Set out from Saloniki; for Sophia, where our master resided. When we arrived at his houfe, Haley went up to Ofman (for that was the name of our maf-ter,) and after staying fome time with him came down and took me up to him.
Ofman aSked me Several questions in regard to my Skill in physic. I acquainted him with what I had studied, viz. Botany : and that I had learnt Some valuable Secrets in physic of a particular friend : but that stwas a fcience I had not studied in order to profefs, but for the preSent preservation of my own health.
He complimented me, by affuring me, that as I fpoke fo modestly of my abilities he doubted not my fkill and that he would " trust himfelf entirely to my care for his cure, if he was curable. I told him I would not attempt to promiSe him SucceSs but that I would endeavour to the utmost of my power to Serve him.
I
Mr. Charles Guildford, 209
I then by his desire passed to a'n examination of his disorders &c. and Soon found he had brought a complicanon of -.diSeafes upon him by luxury and debauchery ; and the little care he had taken oS his health.
The CEcoiVomyof the human body, is extremely tender, and delicate: it is the most curious and most wonderful of any thing the world affords. The innumerable veins, arteries, nerves, muScles, joints, bones, and every thing that belong to the human body, is truly wonderful! Flow furprizing 1 how visible in this, is the hand of providence, of a being far fuperior to man !
To Sec the whole regularly dillioSe'd in fuch beauteous order, without any' the least cbUsiilion or ifregularlty; rfiuff, if rightly considered,'- give a rafional being, many curious and uSeful refiections, anei many just ideas of the power of the. deity.
Each part anfwers to the whole, and is a neceffary part of it. Theste is nothing fuperstnous. As to life, vvhat is it ^ Who can define itThe most deSpicable infect possesses that, which is not in the power of the greatest monarch to give to inanimate
matter
210 MEMOIRS of
matter. But to return to my former shb^ jedl, from which I have deviated.
I prefcribed my patient a regimen with a proper diet. I \vas furnished with every thing neceffary and requisite for the purpofe. I extracted the juices of feveral fo-poriferous herbs which when mixed with others of a strong nature, 1 administred to him. This at the fame time that it gave him that rest which he very much wanted, cleanSed his body, from thoSe vicious humours it had contracted, purging his blood and refining it; whilst it diSperSed the electric sire equally through all parts, and brought his body into a proper order, for the reception of fome balSamics and tinctures which I afterwards prepared for him*
Thefe cherished the vital parts, and the vicious humours being before purged off, the medicines I gave him met not with any opposition to obstruct the force of Its operations, or overpower its virtues. My patient foon felt the effects of my advice, and preferiptiDns; and thoSe that knew him, WTre very much Surprized at the great alteration they Saw in him. He Soon recovered, his health was sirmly established ;
Mr. Charles Guildford. 21 i
" ed; and his constitution greatly strengthened.
Ofman was extremely grateful and very generous to mie on occasion of the fervice I had done him.
Trueman had been from my sirst arrival at Sophia, by the generous Ofman destined to attend on me as ufual; and Ofman daily gave me fome mark of his favour. He could talk English pretty well; having from his infancy been ac-’ ciistomed to converSe with English chrif-' tians.^
He had promifed me my freedom and that he would handSomely reward me, if I performed the desired cure. He performed his promif^ and im.mediately on his recovery, made me and Trueman free, gave me jewels, precious stones, money, &c. to the value of above one thoufand pounds English stirling money, together with a valuable diamond ring from his own singer, worth two hundred guineas, all which he insisted on my receiving, not being much to him, as he w'as poffeffed ot immenfe riches.
• It was by this means he had freed himfelf from the common prejudice of his countrymen who feldom apply to the power of medicine, but trnft to fate.
. He
212 MEMOIRS of ^
He likewife made Truman a prefent ofi feveral jewels, &c. to the value of near ^ two hundred guineas. We had converSed pretty much together.' I had entertained a veiy great regard for him, and really esteemed him very much. He was a man of Solid judgment, who was well acquainted with tiie v/orld. Fle was poffeffed of excellent virtues, and his notions of things with his actions, in general, were founded on the strictest rules of real honour, juS-tice, and probity.
He was a generous, humane, worthy, man ; far excelling many Christians who are esteemed good, and was little inferior to any. His greatest faults vrere owing to youth undirected, and not to bad principles. Being ready for my departure, he feemed uneafy, and begged me to continue Sometimie with him, faying as he had a very great friendship and regard for me, he knew not how at that time to bear a feparation.
Fie had been a benefactor, friend, and protector to me. I could not well deny him. I confented. But my epistle grows long. Adieu, my friend, yours,
Charles Guildford*
. ,	L E T^
. ; -Mr. Charles Guildford. 213
LETTER XXX.
IM U S ss’ drop my former fubject, that I may acquaint you with things as they happened, tho’ not as I knew them.
Charlotte as I afterwards learnt, wa,s now if poffible grown far more beautiSul. dder fortune which before was great, was increafed by Several large legacies, which were left her.
So much beauty with Such a very expensive Sortune attracted many admirers. .Among the many that paid their addreffes
to Charlotte, was lord L-----a youQg
Scottish nobleman of an ancient,and honourable family. His fortune was not very large, but in regard to perfonal merit, he was poffeffed of every accomplish-.ment, every qualification requisite to render the marriage state happy.
Mr. Worthy approved of-this young, nobleman, and as Charlotte could not make any objection to him ; he insisted on her receiving his addreffes, and that she would esteem him -as the man he designed for her future Hushand.
' This was a hard injunction to Charlotte and one that she could not well obey
without
214 MEMOIRS of
without doing a very great violence to her felf. But she had made it an established rule never to let her affections carry her to any action beyond the bounds of duty, and as her father (who was in other refpects a tender and affectionate parent,) insisted on her admitting the addreffes of lord L.--could she refufe ?
No, she refolved to obey, tho’ death was the confequence. W'hat an unparalleled instance of filial duty !
But are there not duties owing from the parent to the child? and great ones too ? there certainly are, but yet the non-pertormance of the parents, will not ex- ■ CLiSe any neglect or diSobedience in a child in many instances.
A child is in duty bound to obey the lawful commands of a parent,' though the parent doth not perform the duties incumbent on him. But on fuch an occasion, as is before mentioned, all laws divine and human leave the child at freedom.
In regard to their affections, and chusing if prudent, the courSe they intend to steer in future life, there I think they ought to be left intirely free.
A pa-
Mr. Charles Guildford. 215
A parent has not authority over the intellectual parts, after a child is grown to years of maturity. He may by his pru-dentadvice direct his child in the choice of a companion for life, but if the affections are already engaged, his authority immediately ceafes, and he has no longer a power in that refpect.
Lord L-------by the fathers confent,
paid his addreffes to Charlotte, who according to her former refolution fummit-ted.
• The writings were drawn, fettlements prepared, and every thing was foon got ready for the facrisice of the charming maid.
O how many bitter sighs, how many precious tears did it cost the lovely mourner. Her preparations were not like thoSe of a joyous bride, but far different.
Grief and forrow fat painted in her countenance, notwithstanding all her endeavours to difpel the gloom. Nothing but the melancholly Ideas of a miferable life silled her mind. Her onlyOiope was that it would be but short. What a Sacrifice to duty, cruel duty!
The
2 i 6	, M E M O I R S of
The day was fixed, and the hour drew nigh, wherein the fair Charlotte was to furrender herfelf up a facrisice to the man she could not love, as a proof of her duty.
She had feveral times requested her father to permit her to continue in a single state, as she did not desire to change her condition in life ; but no, he refuSed and insisted on her cornpliance. Charlotte could only grieve in silence and beg relief from heaven, which just before the appointed day, unexpectedly arrived, though not in the manner she desired.
Lord L.-------had received a fall from his
horfe, the confequences of which were a violent contusion in his head, and an inward bruiSe from a blpw he received in his fall on his stomach.
He lay dangeroussy ill for a considerable time, and no one expected his recovery.
Charlotte was not fo inhuman as to rejoice at the melancholy occasion of the nuptials being deferred, but greatly pitied the miSerable fufterer.
His lordship at length grew better and his health began to be established, when venturing out too Soon to visit his mistreSs
before
Mr. Charles Guildford. 217
before the wound in his head was entirely cured, he got a violent cold, the wound broke out a fresh, his stomach was not yet recovered, a fever enfued ; and in a very short time he Sunk under the weight of his difeafes, to the very great grief of all that knew him, even the tender Charlotte, who was thereby releafed from the nuptials she fo much dreaded, let fall a gentle tear on the occasion, and greatly pitied his unhappy fate.
She now hoped for freedom, but how
short was the reSpite lord L----’s death
o;ave the fair fufferer. It foon beinor known that Charlotte was free from her
former engagements, the earl of C-------
by Mr. Worthy’s permisiion paid his addreffes to Charlotte, on whom the father as before, laid the cruel injunction to admit the earl’s addreffes.
TheearSs fortune was not very extensive, but to this Mr. Worthy made no objection, as he was of an antient and lionourable family, and poffeffed of every perlonal accomplishment requisite to compleat the sine gentleman.
The earl was a man of real worth and honor, and as Such behaved in all hL actions. Fle was as a lover affiduous in Vol. I.	L	his
2i8 M E M O I R S of
his attendance on Charlotte. Charlotte, after a Serious resiection on the consequences oS putting in execution a st'-heme site had long intended to put in practice, on any emergency, now fully reSolved to compleat it.
At a private conference between the earl and Charlotte, she acquainted him that her affections were already engaged, v/here duty bid her bestow her hand. That she could not, iS she married any other man, give her own actual free conSent,, or bestow her' heart where file gave her hand; Sor which reaSon Sne Said she greatly feared the union he, in conjuction with her father, fo ardently desired, would only render them unhappy for life; but left it to his generosity and prudence to act in fuch a manner as he thought proper.
The noble earl made Charlotte feveral compliments on her frankneSs, and affured her, that he was So far from forcing her inclinations in his favour, when they were engaged to another, that he would assist her as much as lay in his power, and would no longer be an obstacle to her hapoincSs.
I-Ic
Mr. Charles Guildford. 219
He took his leave of Charlotte, and desired a private conference with Mr. Worthy, with whom he staid a considerable time; when he w’as gone Mr. Worthy Sent for his daughter, with whom he appeared to be greatly offended.
Charlotte endeavoured to appeaSe him ' in the most gentle manner, as she greatly feared the earl had informed him of what had passed between them. But the earl had acted more prudently, had taken the whole upon himSelf, by assuring the father of his mistrefs that he was fensible that the lady had not that real affection for him with which he was defirous of inspiring the woman wdiom he intended for his wife ; and after reafon ing with him fome time on the before mentioned point of how far a Sather’s authority extends, and whether they were allowed to force their children into the marriage state contrary to their affections,-&c. and fet-ting forth the whole in the most lively colours, he convinced the old gentleman that he had not acted entirely right, with regard to Charlotte.
Mr. Vvterthy when he had examined his daughter concerning the diSgust she had leveral times shewn to entering into ( h	L 2	the
Z20 M E M O I R S of
the marriage state, confeffed himfelf pleafed with thoSe instances of silial duty, she had already given him, and affured her that Sor the future she should be leSt at liberty ro act in tJiat reSpect, as she pleaSed ; on condition she would never debaSe ' herSelf, and dishonour her family, by marrying a perSon whoSe birth was beneath her own.
Charlotte gladly accepted liberty on thoSe terms; affured her father she would at all times readily obey his commands; ithat she would never marry without his conSent, and approbation; and made him the most grateSul acknowledgements for the favour he had conSerred on her. Charlotte was now, in comparifon to her late condition, happy. She no longer dreaded being forced to marry the man she did not love, notwithstanding she was debarred frorn having the man on whom her affections were placed.
Several Gentlemen of birth and fortune applied to Mr. Worthy for permission to pay their addreSfes to his daughter, but he, like a man of real honour, continued sirm to his promiSe, and affured Such as applied to him, that he had left his daughter entirely to her own choice; and
there-
Mr. Charles Guildford. 221
therefore their chief point must be to gain her conSent, and they would be certain of his of courSe.
It being left to Charlotte to give her lovers a conclusive anSwer, she Soon idismissed them from their attendance on her, as she had not the least inclination to co-quettry. How and when I received this inforntation, I fiiall Some other time ac> quaint you, and am at preSent, '	,
your’s
Charles Guildford.
LETTER XXXI.
SH o R T L y after my arrrival at Sophia,
I wrote to England an account of v;hat had befallen me,' and expected an anSwer during my residence there, but none came. This made me uneaSy, as I always dreaded the worst. I was in Some Sort relieved by the company and converSition oS Osinan my generous friend L 3	other-
222 M E M O I R S of
o'therwiSe my life would have been by my reflections rendered miferable.
OSman wms a man of excellent natural parts; very humane and very generous. Flis principles were chiefly good and noble, but the luxury in which he had been bred up, had very much debauched him. His father, who was then dead, was in his life a mian of great note, in the Grand Seignor's court. He ufed often to be at the Porte, ’and there was Scarce a Divan of any confequence held, but lie was preSent at it.
He at length obtained for the many Services he had performed for the Grand Seignor, the government oS a very large province, which was a very imiportant trust ; and which during his life-time he executed with great honour, justice, and integrity.
OSman being the only cliild his father had, though he had, (according to the custom of the turks,) Several wives'; was indulged in every tiling he desired, and being leSt entirely to his own will when he grew up to years of maturity, his inclinations led him to the adoration of the fair fex, and he devoted hirnlelf entirely to their fervice. He turned libertine, and
his
Mr. Charles Guildford. 223
his inclinations and desires beii;g violent, he puiSued them v/ithout alloy.
His fortune being Immenfe, he gave himfelf almost wholly up to a debauched life, -which brought that complication ot diforders upon him, under which he laboured when I sirst faw him.
'He knev/ fomething of the English tongue, as I before obl'erved, which he learnt of an English siave, a tavourite of his; whom he had, not long before, freed, and fent home to England with a tortune to fupport him. He alSo learnt oS4!^s Englifnman fome of the principles of the Christian religion, 'A'hich he very much admired and greatly commende.l : but could not So far Subdue his passions, as to follow thofe excellent moral rules he had learnt.
As I entertained a very great regard for this noble generous man, I ufed my utmost endeavours to teach him to fubdue his passions, and to hearken to the dictates of right reafon, as alfo to give him as just an idea of the Supreme Being, as I possibly could, but ot that more hereafter. His Soul was capable of entertaining all the Social virtues ; and though he was a debauchee, yet there were in his conduct Seve-L 4	S ral
224 M E M O I R S of
ral things, that shev/ed he fometimei acted, or endeavoured to act; according to the strictest rules of honour, and juS-tice, from good and humane principles.
I therefore needed only to root out a , few weeds, that were from the liberties his religion allowed, unhappily fprung up in a rich foil, to enlarge his understanding, and clear that mist Vv/hich clouded his reafon; in order to make him vrith eaSe imbibe the principles and fundamental rules of the Christian religion.
I shewed him as well as I possibly could, according to Locke, the original, certainty, and extent of human knowledge; and explained to him the grounds and degrees of belief, opinion, and affent which with the arguments I made ufe of on that occasion, 1 thought would cure him of any unreafonable prejudices, which he might have entertained in favour of mahom.ctiSm, and other things which he had assented to. vfithout examining. I inculcated to him Some moral rules; explained the nature, and cauSes of many things; and then deduced the whole, from the original and sirst cauSe. The Sunda-
mental
Mr. Charles Guildford, 225
mental rules and principles of the Christian religion, I explained to him in the most eaSy method, and fet the whole in the clearest light I could. He at length confeffed himfelf entirely converted, and gloried in the apellation of a Christian; often looking back with wonder and amazement on his former ignorance.
We applied to a Christian priest belonging to the Greek church, then at Sophia, who after examining my friend, baptized him by the name of Charles, he being reSolved to be called by my name.
When I had initiated him in the School of virtue, and led him into the roadof truth and knowledge ; I perfuadcd him to travel, in order to draw off his affections from thoSe pleaSures, he had been already immerSed in, and prevent him trom falling again a Sacrifice to his reigning paS-sion.
He conSented, on condition I would go with him as far as Galaza on the Euxine Sea, where he had Some affairs of moment to tranSact; which had been deferred on account of his late illnefs; and that then he would not desire to detain me any longer in Turkey ; but would accompany L 5	me
, 226 M E M O I R S of ,
me to Adrionople and Constantinople, the two principal places I wanted to fee, during my residence in thoSe parts.
I conSented on theSe conditions, and preparations were immediately made tor our departure. My melancholy encreaS-ed, as I could not hear from England, but the noble OSman endeavoured all he could to diSpel the gloom, and to divert my melancholy; but could not render Turkey, though in Europe So agreeable to me, as Italy: but as diSagreeable as it was, it would have been far more diSagreeable to me, had I been deprived of the company and conversation of my friend.
The people, their religion, government, laws, customs, manners, language, dreSs, &c. were So far different from what I had ever been accustomed to, that it is no wonder if it appeared diSagreeable.
A \ery great difference my fiie.id, between that, and Italy, which is reckoned the garden of the world. But an uneaSy mind rendered things far more diSagreeable than they might perhaps have ap-peareei to a perSon entirely eaSy and free, (charlotte whofe djstreffed situation I then
knew
Mr. Charl ES Guildford. 227
knew not, engaged my attention 100 much, to relish other pleaSures. I dreaded what miglr happen in my abSence, though now I had Scarce any hope left. But had I known how near the unhappy moment was, that would have deprived me of all my hopes, I must unavoidably have added greatly to my uneasinefs.
Thefe things, as we pursiied our journey not only to Galaza, but on our return likewise attracted my attention So far ; that I took little notice of the places through which we passed, or the enriosi-t es we Saw. We Set out from Sophia,^ and travelled on without stopping any considerable time until we arrived at Hi-copoli, where OSman staid Some time at a friend’s houSe.
We were very well entertained, and in a very noble manner. OSman had at length almost forgot his late fevere sit of illneSs, and was attempting the conquest of a beautiful girl belonging to his friend’s family.
I perceived it, and took an opportunity to remonstrate to him, in a cool manner; his ingratitude to that Supreme-Being who had So lately restored him to life and L 6	health
22S M E M O I R S of
health, and all its attendant blessings; and the sin he was going to commit by betraying to ruin an innocent girl, and desired him as a Christian ferioufiy to ressect on ir.
He confeffed the remonstrance just; was not offended at my freedom, and promised amendment. Women are not easily to he met with in Turkey. They converSe but little with men. They are therefore easily conquered, nature pleads as powerfully in them as in our fex, and they are more capable of entertaining the tender passion. In Turkey a woman has but little time to deliberate on matters of love, and therefore t.hofe that furrender strike foon.
For this reafon, I esteem it a happy deliverance, for the young lady, on whom OSman intended to try his Skill in the art of love, for she did not appear to have any diSiike to my friend, who was a very handSome man, in the prime of life, and the very flower of his youth.
I had fcarce broke off this intrigue when I discovered that he had found means to get into his friend’s Seraglio, to a beautiful fiave he had feen there; when
his
f
Mr. Charles Guildford 229
his friend, confiding in his honour, and the little inclination he could have for the fair fex, after having fuffered So much for their fakes, had shewed him his beauteous treaSure.
This siave had taken as great a liking * to OSman, as he had to the fair lady; OSman had found means to convey a letter to her, wherein he had declared his paS*-sion, and begged her to conSent to an interview. She agreed. A golden key, let my friend into her apartment, and' leveral times into the gardens belonging to, this little Seraglio, when fiie was there.
I have little reaSon to think they met without making the intended uSe of thoSe opportunities, their art and industry had given them.
' I dreaded the conSequence oS this intrigue, for I not only fetwed a diScovery but aiib a relapSe from virtue ; and that he would again run into thoSe Scenes of vicO and debauchery he had So lately emerged from.	'
I was therefore from this and other circumstances, fully reSolved to remove him, as Soon as poisible, from Hicapoli. The conlequences of this reSolution I believe
you
230 M E M O I.R S of
you, wi’.l fee in my next. I am at prefent, my dear friend,
yours &c.
Charles Guildford.
<S8	'S?ocSI?ic§Sr
LETTER, XXXII.
I Me NT ION ED my last diScovery to OSman who was not only greatly Surprized, but confuSed alSo and wondered by what means 1 had made this diScovery.
“ My dear Charles,” Says he, “ you “ must certainly have a familiar to attend “ on you ; that you thus know every > “ thing, though ever So Secretly carried “on. I confeSs I was to blame. I have “ not entirely performed what I had pro-miSed, when 1 became a Christian ; but “ I will for the future uSe my utmost en-“ deavours to conquer my passions, and “ behave as a rational being.
“ I
Mr. Charles Guildford. 231
“ I was tranfported with the paffion with “ which the beauteous siave had inSpired “ me, and reaSonably judging she would “ not be unkind, could I gain admittance “ alone.; I did not allow a ressection of a “ Serious nature to enter my breast.
“ I gained admittance as you know,
“ and must confeSs I Succeeded to my ut-“ most wishes. But possession cloys: I “ can now reflect; and am Sorry for my “ folly. The easier we gain posiession of “ what we desire, the fooner we grow “ weary of it.
“ Is not reaSon strong enough to Sub-“ due theSe turbulent palsions? You affure “ me it is. You have given me an in-“ stance of it in that wiSc heathen, Socra-“ tes. I think he was a Surprizing man.
“ I will endeavour to imitate him.” I -commendeel his reSolution, and urged him to leave Hicapoli. Fle conSented, and we Soon after Set out for Galaza. Our journey was pleaSant enough, as the greatest part of our time was Spent in conveiss-ine: together on the late adventures at
O	O	^
Hicopoli; and proper reflections made thereon.
• We staid at Galaza Some time, when one day Achmat the Turk, with whom
we
232 M E M O I R S of '
we then were) introduced an English gentleman to me, who had just been ranSom-ed from ssavery. He w'as going over to ' . England, and offered me his fervice, in carrying over any letters I had to Send.
I accepted of his kindneSs, and w'^as just going to write, when a packet arrived from Sophia, directed to OSman. Fle opened it, and within v/as one from En land for me.
This was very lucky; for had I fent my letters away by the English gentle-m,an, before I had received thoSe from England; it would not only have given me greater uneaSmeSs, but would alSo have cauScd my friends in England far greater, at the thoughts of their packet being lost.
I eagerly broke open the feal, and the first that preSented itSelf to my view, was . from my brother and fister. Therein they gave me the account which I before ' fent you, concernihg the distreSs of my fair Charlotte, and the many fevere trials she had undergone.
The reading of this epistle gave me many different emotionsof joy, grief, furprize &c. that alternately took place in my mind; but recovering mySelf I proceeded
Mr. Charles Guildford. 233
ceeded to the peruSal of my other letters, from my parents,' the other from my friend Mr. Brown, my old tutor.
My parents, my brother, and sifter and my friend Mr. Brown all offered to ranSom me. Flow great was my pleafure! I immediately anSwered thele letters; affured them I was already at liberty. and acquainted them with the reaSons oS my stay in Turkey, and that I would Set Sail for England, as Soon as I cenild . poSsibly part with the worthy OSman.
The English gentleman by our requests Spent the remainder of the day with us. Our Host, to entertain us generoufly treSpaffed on one of Mahomet’s commands by procuring Some excellent wine; of which each drank pretty freely. In the evening the English gentleman, having taken my packet, and affured me he should fet fail the next day, and that he would take the greatest care imaginable of what I entrusted to him, took his leave;
We continued a little longer at Galaza, and then Set out for Adrionople. When we arrived there, I was greatly furprized at the appearance of the place, as I really
expected
234 MEMOIRS of
expected it would ha\T m.ade a far better, appearance tlian I found i^ did.	,	• '
The old leraglio, and a few other places destined for the ufe of the Grand Seignior, and fome of his prime iiiinistcrs, still retain a look of prelieminence over the rest ; yet there was nothing extraordinary in them.
We sta^d a short time in this city, took a view of the principal parts, and then went down to Constantinople.
If I v/as furprized at the appearance • which Aeirionopie makes, I was much more furprized, and my dlfappointment was far greater, when I arrived at Constantinople, the metropolis of the Turkish empire, where one of the grandest and most powerful Mon arch s in Europe resides ; where the Ottoman family keep their court, and hold their great Divan’s,
&c. Reflections of this nature raifed my expectations to a very great heighth, and that might, perhaps, make it appear more deSpicable to me : But I must conSeSs, I only esteemed the whole of this large city. Suburbs, &c. on each side of the river, as a confuSed heap of irregular buildings.
The Grand Seignior’s Seraglio is a very large extensive building, but 1 cannot Say
that
Mr. Charles Guildford. 235
tliat I much admire the beauty of that edifice, So Sar as I could See of it. I do not in the leaSc doubt but the apartments are richly furnished, according to the fassiion of the country, but thoie I could not See.
The gardens, looking into the .Archipelago, must be extremely pleaSant, and are generally reckoned to be very grand and noble ; but as to that I cannot affirm any thing farther concerning them, as I was never admitted into them. One thing I must confeSs, that when you are upon the water, at Some distance from the city, it appears extremely well, and it really affords a very beautiful proSpect, as you See the tops of the moSques and leraglios, &c. which, by the refleelion of the Sun’s light, on the whole make a beautiful appearance. The irregularity of theSe struCltires, and their being diSperSed . . amongst the rest of the buildings, adds much to the beauty of the whole, and has then a very agreeable effect on the eye ; but a stranger who takes a proSpect of the city (which I should before have observed, lies upon a declivity towards the water, which renders the landscape still more agreeable) I Say, when
a stranger
2 j6 M E M O I R S of
a stranger has thus taken a profpect of the ciiy, his difappointment is very great when he entets into it.
I believe I must stop, at prefent, it is almost timie, I shall have occasion to m.cri-tion this city again, when I shall give you a farther account of it, and its inhabitants. I, at prefent, Subfcribe myfelf.
Yours,,&c.
Charles Guildford.
LETTER XXXIII.
AF T E R we had continued fome time at Constantinople, I would have taken leave of my friend, in order to return to England, but we neither of us ■ knew how to part.
How true are Dryden’s words !
“ Parting is worfe than death.”
The
Mr. Charles Guildford. 237
The generous friendly Ofman had wrote to Haley, at Sophia, to difpofe of ail his houshold effects, &c. and to'bring down the produce thereof, with his jewels, and all his riches, &c. together with his staves, to Constantinople.
He told me his design in this was, to turn all his treaSure into a portable Substance, and then he would accompany me to England, where he intended tp Spend the residue of his life, in the profeffion of ■ that religion he had, through conviction, embraced ; and where, he hoped,he should for the future, enjoy the pleafures of my company, &c.
I was extremely glad of this ; and that I needed not now any longer dread fo cruel a feparation, as I was fensible ours must have been on each side.
When Haley arrived at Constantinople with his attendants, &c. thofe staves that choSe to go over with us, into Europe, were freed, but continued in the fervice of their generous master. The others Osinan alfo made free, and gave to each a handSome preSent-,safter which he left them at liberty to go wherever they pleaSed. OSman, after he had procured bihs for his immenSe treaSure, and for what money I
had,
238 M E M O I R S of
had, and after we had fettled our affairs, and fecured our bills, of which he insisted that I fnould equallyTiare with him; we embarked on board a veffel bound for the isiand ot Sicily, intending, from thence, for the Satisfaction of my friend’s curiosity, to proceed to Venice ; after a Sliort stay, to go to-Rome ; and from thence proceed, through Italy, to Paris ; and then to England.
Now, when I was out at lea, it was that I was pleafed with the proSpect of Constantinople, for really it was beautiful.
We v/ere got out into the open Seas, and were proceeding for the isiand to which we were bound, with a fair wind, greatly diverted with the rolling of the waves, and the pleaSantneSs of the Sea, when the Scene was, to our very great Sur- - ^ prize, entirely changed.
Now, like a siery meteor. Sunk the Sun !
The promiSe of a storm ! the shifting gales ForSake by sits, and sill the flagging Sails. HoaiSe murmurs, of the main from far were heard,
And night came on, not by degrees prepar’d ;
But
Mr. Charles Guildford. 239,
But all at once ; at once the winds ariSe, The thunders roll, theforky lightning flies. In vain the master iSfues out commands ; In vain the trembling Sailors, ply their hands;
The tempest, unforeSeen, prevents their care,
And, Srom the sirst, they labour in deSpair: The giddy Snip, 'between the winds and tideis
Forc’d back and Sorwards, in a circle rides; Stunn’d with the diff’rent blows, then llioots amain,
’Till counter-bufi'’d, she stops, and steeps again.
And now with Sails declin’d.
The wand’ring veffel drove before the wind;	[lcw,J
ToSs’d and retoSs’d, aloft, and then be--. Nor port they Seek, nor certain courSe they know.
But ev’ry moment wait the coming blow.
The long expected blow came at last ; the Slip Sprunk a prodigious leak ; we every moment expected to sink. The boat v/as immediately ordered out, ani every one crouded as fast as possible into her. OSman, and mySelf, had taken care
of
240 MEMOIRS of
of our fervants, &c. and feen them in the boat, and were going to assist poor Truman, who being old, could not lb well help himfelf, when the boat broke looie, and drove off from the ship. So that OSman, mySelf, and Trueman, were all the human creatures then on board a sinking ship.
The ship drove on right before the wind fill she bulged on a rock, on which we were cash by the violent miotion of the veffel, when she struck. We were very much hurt and bruiSed ; however, we with difficulty, got up towards the top, where we might rest in'Safety from the , -waves. There v/e continued till day appeared, vrhen we found ourfelves in a country, which, to us,feemed uninhabited.
Not the mark or footsteps, of any human creature appeared to our view; the wreck i was fixed to the bottom of the rock, a monstrous depth below,and made us tremble at the sight. How had wc, in that dreadful time, through fear, gained the heighth of fuch an enormous rock ?
We each returned thanks to that Being, whoSe hand had So visibly Saved and protected us in this imminent time of danger.
^ We still put our trust and confidence in
Him,
Mr. Charles Guildford. 241
Him, who had hitherto been our only guardian, though we were actually destitute of the common neceffaries of life, and had Saved nothing out of our ship, but the cloaths we had on.
We could, from the rock, perceive that the country in which we were, was pleaSant and agreeable. The day began to clear up, and by the earth below, we perceived the Sun, when in the Meridian, was exceffive hot; but to remedy this, the land was cooled vrith Several rivers, -and adorned with many woods, &c. that were diSperSed about the country.
ASter we had viev/ed.the country round us, we got down on the land side, and immediately made for the nearest, wood we faw, which, when we entered, we found it to be extremely pleaSant, and which was rendered more So, by a winding river that ran through it. We found feveral forts of fruits, roots, &c. with which Oiman was acquainted. We eat freely of them, drank at the river, and thereby very much refrefiied omsseives. This done, we Sat down to reflect on the very great vicissitudes of human life. How mutablo " are all things here belovr! Good fometimes arrives, when least expected, and
Vol. I.	M	many
242 M E M O I R S of
many evils come unforefeen ; but their vicilTitude is fo great, and the change fo often and fo fudden, that we ought not to put too much confidence in the one, or repine too much at the loSs of the other.
How numberlefs are the woes of human life 1 Dangers at all times invade and fur-round us. Difeafes and disappointments, from adverle fortune, or our own follies, from private or public enemies; from ■ friends ; from our families, from our most intimate concerns ; and from ten thou-siind various caufes.
Religion was now our comfort, and our dependance on the Supreme Being, our only fupport. How true are thele words of the poet:
Thy force alone, religion, death diSarms, Breaks all his darts, and every viper charms.
OSman now confeffed the force of thofe precepts that I had taught him. That they had given a new turn to his thoughts, to his inclinations and desires, strengthened his mind, and made him far more capable of bearing misfortunes.
His
Mr. Charles Guildford. .243
i His passions, he faid, were before unbounded, and fo Strong, that his reaSon could not combat with them, but he hoped he should in time Sufficiently Subdue them.
“ Have you not, my dear Sriend,” Says the noble OSman, “ given me an in-“ stance that human reaSon, iS rightly “ uSed, with a sirm reSolution, is able to “ Subdue thoSe turbulent passions that af-“ Sect the human Soul ? Socrates is the “ perSon I mean, who hath, in his own “ perSon, Set an example to ail mankind, “ well worthy of imitation. It is an ex-“ ample, I will, Sor the future, endea-“ vour to follow in the strictest manner.
“ How amiable are virtue and wiSdom! “ How excellent, how divine are the in-‘‘ nate. virtues of a SpodeSs Soul!”
•	1 anSwered, “ There is nothing more
amiable, or more worthy our obSer-“ vance here : virtue is the noble cauSe “ Sor which we all are made ;” for as the poet Says :
Our liSe is short, but to extend that Span 1 o vast eternity, is virtues work.
M 2	-I must
■s	\
^44■ MEMOIRS of '
I must at prefent bid you adieu, and proceed farther in my next.
I am, my dear friend,'as ufual.
Yours, &c.
i '	Charles Guildford.
LETTER XXXIV.
I Must proceed on my former fubject, and give you a short abstract of Some of our difcourfes, after we had fettled ourfelves.
My converfation with OSman was as follows. ’‘ It is WiSdom directs us in our conduct through life, shews us the paths “ of virtue, and teaches us to avoid the • errors we should otherwiSe run into. It “ is WiSdom unmaSks all thoSe Specious “ ills w'e meet with in life, and diScovers “ many hidden truths we should not •“ otherwsse know. When we act amiss,
y she
Mr, Charles Guildfor .	245
she informs us of it, and directs us how “ to act for the future.
“ Though the foul, whilst it informs “ this mortal frame, is greatly confined “ and limitted, yet how many great per-“ factions is the human mind poffeffed “ of! With what vigour does she act! — “ How piercing is her sight! — How “ fwift are her thoughts !—Flow many “ noble landfcapes does she draw in the “ brain !—How far can we view by the “ help of Reafon, and thereby often dip “ into the great ocean of eternity !—-Our “ thoughts in an instant paSs through im-“ menfurable fpace, and reprefent to our “ view the planets and fixed stars.—We “ fearch the hidden fprings and caufes *•' of the operations of nature, and even “ the wonders of the great deep stand re-“ vealed to sight.
“ Human reafon is very extensive, all “ must, allow ; yet, notwithstanding, we “ must crave the affistance of the divine “ author of reaSon herSelf, who created “ and presides over all.—The Secret
Springs of motion, and all wonderful “ works of the creation are his.—It is he “ directs and guides every caufe to its P original, destined, and uSeful end.
M g.	‘‘
246 M E M O I R S of
“ Aj5 to the human mind, Mr. Dia-“ per, in his Callipseda, fpeaks of it,
“ and of its power, &c. extremely well “ in thefe lines.”
But if external features may furprize.
And a just texture charm th’ unweary’d eyes; '
What are the god-like beauties we admire. When confcious fouls within themfelves retire ?
Th’ angelic natures, tho’ a while Immur’d, Yet know they are from age and death fecur’d.
Matter, however, moulded or refin’d.
Can ne’er be thought to form a thinking ' mind.
When the sick, weak, dlffolving body lies.
And rigid death has fix’d the languid eyes;
Freed from thofe irkSome bands th’ im-' mortal fair
Mounts up unfeen,and fpurns the grosser air.
' Brutes, by mere fenSe, or Secret impulSe move.
Hate wi-thoiit thought, and without rea*
Son love,
But
Mr. Charles Guildford. 247
But she from simple terms conclusions-s draws,	I
Notions abstract, and univerSal laws, > And from th’effect purSues the undoubt- I ed caufe.	J
Too bright for fenfe, fuch notions are * innate,
Heav’n must at sirst imprint, or loul create. With pleafure theSe tli’ attentive mindern-
ploy, ^	_	. .
And, conScious of herfelf, fiie feels a Secret joy.
Nor does the mind on theSe alone revolve,
But wand’ring far, improves her grand reSoIve :
She makes her voyage o’er that liquid world.
Where winds have bluster’d, and where billows curl’d.
She views the num’rous nations of the deep.
Where vast Leviathan’s their empire keep..
* Oar author, as to this line, is, I think wrong, for Mr. Locke has, in his excellent effay, plainly proved there are no innate ideas. This I obferved to my friend Ofman in my difcourfe with him, as I would not willingly lead him into any error.
M 4	In
\
■248 M E M O I R S- of
In air and land, with fwift admiring eyes,l; Of painted birds, or shaggy monsters 1 fpies,	t
Or frightful Behemoth’s prodigious size, j,
“ The verSes, Ithink, are not the most “ excellent I have read on that Subject, “ but they sirst preSented themSelves to-“ my thoughts.
“ But now to man in general!
“ Hovr noble a cretture is man, if con-“ sidered in a proper light! How majei-“ tick! Flow bleSSed with every grace.
“ Man is faid to be the image of, and ■“ greatly beloved by the Deity, wheiv “ just and upright. The Supreme Be-“ ing, vrhen he created man, gave him a “ power over ail that is on the Vv'ide ex-“ tended earth, and, for that purpofe^^ “ Superior ReaSon was bestowed upon him
by the Deity.
“ When ReaSon shines in its full per-“ fection, how glorious ! how divine does “ she appear. How does the conScious “ mind purSue her boundleSs flight, thro*' “ he different chains of cauSes from,
“ whence
* /
Mr.-Charl ES Guildford. 249
“ whence many of thoSe numberleSs ef-“ Sects we See in this world proceed.
“ By the helpof ReaSon, joined to great “ experience, the mind is enabled to judge “ of the reSult of things long before they “ happen.
“ What a curious piece of living ma-chinerv is man How nice, how beau-“ tiful is the structure ; with what won-“ derful art, is the noble v'ork perform-“ ed ; and how compleat the whole !
“ Man ssiews the univerSe in miniature, “ ail the various beauties thereof arecon-“ nected in him.
“ The reasoning Soul exalted sits within “ the various folds of the brain, whoSe “ textures are So finely wTOught by the “ divine author, that Scarce any thing here is comparable to it. The I’oul, “ there Seated commands the whole, and “ as Sewell Says.”
At the least hint the conScious Spiriu start,
Loaden with images from ev’ry part;
In branched tubes the Subtle atoms roam. And from each fenSe bring fresh.advices home.
M-5;	The
250 M E M O I R S of
The immaterial mind attends above, While they inform how outvrard object:^ move.
“ Some are of opinion that the foul of man is not immaterial, but as Mr. Locke, Mr. Diaper, and many others, have ob-“ ferved, matter, howfoeve'r refined, can “ never be thought to form a thinking “mind.”
OSman gave his affent to what I Said, and after ashing a few questions, &c. I proceeded again as follows.
“ Notwithstanding the fuperior ex-“ cellence of the foul, she will, Some-“ times, whilst thus confined, stoop to “ low desires, far beneath the dignity of “ a rational and an immortal being ; but *‘ it is'Reafon alone must correct her er-“ rors. When the mind impartially views “ itfelf, and purfues her ov/n thoughts, how different do things appear ? But “ now I am Speaking of the mind, which “ may be called a Spiritual being, permit “ me to quote what Milton fays of the “ excellence of the nature of fpirits. His “ description is, I think, the finest 1 ever V read.”
Spirits
Mr. Charles Guildford. 251.
Spirits that live throughout Vital in every part, not as frail man.
In entrails, head or heart, liver or reins. Cannot, but by annihilating, die ;
Nor in their liquid texture mortal wound Receive, no more than can the fluid air : All heart they live, all head, all eye, all ear. All intellect, all fenfe ; and as they pleafe, > They limb themfelves, and colour, shape, or fize
Affume, as likes them best, condenSe or rare.
For fpirits, when they pleafe.
Can either fex affume, or both; fo foft And uncompounded is their essence pure. Not ty’d, or manacled with joint or limb. Nor founded on the brittle strength of bones.
Like cumbrous fieSli, but in what shape they chufe,
Dilated or condens’d, bright or obfcure. Can execute their airy purpofes.
And works of love or enmity fulfil.
Excufe me, Sir, for fo many ricitals from other authors, but I think a few lines, fometimes, out of our best poets, will not be difagreeable.
M 6	The
252 MEMOIRS of
The lines I have already recited, and many others, I repeated to Ofman feve-^ ral times in our converfations during our stay on that coast, being, I think, not only diverting, but very improving, and which might be easier retained in the memory than dull profe. Bvit enough on this fub^ ject at prefent.
We had wandered through a great part of the wood into which we had at sirst entered, and found it very large and exten-r live, and furnished with many ufeful palatable fruits, roots, &c.
We faw feveral horrid beasts, whole xlevouring jaws, we, with difficulty, avoided. This made me often reflect on the power that is faid was at first conferred on man over thefe inferior parts of the creation ; and is it not strange, that he has fo far lost his fovereignty, as to fear thofe, who, we fuppoSe, were at first fubjected to him We durst not go far up into the inlaUd parts, fearing we should fall into worfe hands than thofe of the favages of the wood.
We fixed on a place, not far distant from that where we first entered, for our constant lodging at night, being in. a
large
Mr.- Charles Guildford. C53'.
large shady tree that grew there, and re-~ folved to continue in that place fome short: time, to fee if we could receive any assistance from the fea.
We visited the shore feveral days, and at length providentially found the vessel,’ in which we were wrecked, was not destroyed, but fixed fast in a cleft of the rock.
She was furrounded wsith the beating furges, except on the laird side, and there the rock interpoSed ; vre had no boat,' nor knew we how to get to her.
Ah ! I am hindered at prefent, but you may expect a farther account of ,our proceedings in my next.,
lam.
Yours, &c:
Charles Guildford^.
L E T-
t
524 MEMOIRS of
LETTER XXXV.
WHEN we had found the wreck, we confuked Some time what method we should make uSe of to get to her. Trueman could fwim very well, I could Swim tolerably, but Ofman could not.
We laid a plan in order to purSue, and then Trueman and I jumped in ; OSman stood on the shore, very much SurpriSed at the rapidity with which we cut the rising Surges. ShakeSpear gives a beautiful description in his Tempests of a perfon Swimming in a storm, but I shall not trouble you with it, you are well acquainted with that author’s works.
We got to the ship in Safety, but it was with very great difficulty that we got into her; she was pretty much damaged, yet there was not any great quantity of water in her.
We found aboard feveral planks, of which we made a float, and let it down into the water ; then fixing feveral ropes, S . hanging down her side, to affist us in get- ’ 'ting up again ; we fixed a strong cable to the side of the ship, and throwing a fush-cient quantity over upon our float, with a
fmall
Mr. Charles Guildford Z55
fmall stick of timber, and feveral of the carpenters tools, &c. sit for our uSe, we got down upon the stoat, and with rowing and dragging, got it to the nearest part of the shore, fit for landing on.
Ofman, with open arms, received us, extremely glad of our fafe return. I told him as he was not aboard, and as we had not then tried our float, we had not brought any thing but what was for prefent uSe. He wondered at our materials, and enquired the uSe, which we foon shewed him.
We dug a deep hole, wherein we fixed our pole, which was large and strong. We tlien drew up the cable, the one end of which was fixed to the fide of the veffel, and drawing it as tight as v;e could with all our force, we fixed it firm to the post we had Set up, and made the whole Secure. This was for a guide for our float.
When every thing was ready, v:e ail of us got on board our float, went to the ship, got in, examined it, and found many things which were not hurt by the water.
The chest wherein all our treaSure lay, was Safe ; this was great joy to us, as we.
hoped
256 M E M O I R S of
hoped foon to get out of that place. We Secured this chest, and fome other things, aboard our float, and fet fail for land, where we foon arrived in fafety by the help of our cable.
With our carpenter’s tools, we miade a little four wheeled carriage, to draw our chest and other things up to the wood.
We got fail doth, furniture, and many other valuable effects out of the veffel; built a large commodious hut in the wood,' and strongly fortified it against any foreigrr invaders.
No relief, or profpect of any, appearing, we continued our daily labour, and with a clofe application to our businefs, we, at length, pretty well cleared our vcf-’ fel, and willing to make the most of her, we broke up her quarter deck. &c, and by degrees got a pretty large quantity of boards!, ana other timber from her ; when one night a storm arofe, which continued all that night, and great part of the next day, fo that it did not entirely clear up till the day after. We then went to visit the remains of our, wreck, but found it gone, therefore we had no more to expect from that quarter.
Wee-
Mr. Charles Guildford. 2-57:
We now established all our houshold affairs. We had got sire-arms both great: and fmall, furniture, provisions,, tools,, and every thing needful for liSe ; but being debarred from conversing with tfie world, rendered it irkfome.
Ofman had affured us, that from the knov/ledge . he had in the geography of' the country, we. were in, an, uninhabited;^, and unfrequented part of Asia., which he fuppofed was.occaSioned by the difficulty of access to the shore, and the country, being inhabited by many horrid monsters,, and dreadful wild beasts, of which we had feen feveral, and been in imminent danger from them. That in the inland parts,, and along the-coast, at fome distance on each side of us, were many, inhabitants, but not fuch as he should care to trust, himfelf into their hands, erpecialiy in the company of Christians, and he himfelf one, for that the inhabitants in general, , were a Set of illcterate Turks, but obstinate in their Superstitions and, in fact, little better than brutes. The whole Seri-oufiy considered, we reSolved to continue where we had fixed our habitation, and never to venture far from it, until relief appeared.
Pa,re.
258 M E M O I R S of
Part of our time was fpent in domestic affairs ; part in hunting, fishing, shooting, &c. the rest in converfations in natural philoSophy, religion, poetry, &c. and concerning the liberal arts and Sciences, in which I instructed my friend, as far as my judgment would extend.
Here the captain’s instruments, books, pens, ink, and paper, &c. which I found in his cabin, were of insinite fervice to us. The mathematical books were either in Latin, Italian, French, or English, either of which I understood tolerably well.
Ofman was desirous of learning as much as he possibly could, in relation to the Deity and his works. 1 was extremely well pleaSed at it, and I instructed him to the best of my abilities, for nothing gave me greater pleaSure.
How happy is that man, vrho, through groSs effects, can See the cauSes of things ! ^ How wife is he, who cultivates his mind, and learns the various laws of nature ? But what do v/e gain by theSe studies? Is a question may possibly be ashed. We learn from whence the fleecy Snows, and bluS-tering winds, ariSe. From whence proceeds hail, rain, thunder, lightning, Srosts,
dews.
Mr. Charles Guildford. 259
dews, and all the different feafons of the circling year.
To obferve the earth, and all the planetary orbs, in this our Solar System; how they roll on high, in immenSurable Space, run their appointed rounds, and ever find the point from whence they first began ; thefe things, and an acquaintance with other, the laws of nature, &c. of courSe direct our thoughts to the first cauSe, to the first mover of our System, and all created Beings.
One first principle must necessarily be, and him we call God; for who but him could on thofe immenfe bodies the planets, or our earth, (esteemed as one,) imprest the mighty different forces, that continually act upon them^ and hurl them on with inexpreffible rapidity.
From Chaos,’'^ from a rude and undigested mass, was this world at first created, nor could fo great a work compleated
* This is the general opinion, but as the author of Religio Philofophi obferves, it is an abfurd notion. Of what ufe was that undigefted Mats. It muft have a beginning. And the Supreme Being could as well create a world out of nothing, as out of Chaos, that mull; at firfl: be created cut of no-thing.
with
z6o MEMOIR S of
with So much order, in Such a just and rc-gular manner, and with So many beauties; be the work of chance 1 No, the whole, and even every part, shews that it is the product of a divine architect.
Did the various atoms and Seeds, of which the whole is compofed, assemble of themfelve?!, without fome sirst power or sirst principle, to direct them in the-formation of fprings, rivers, feas, mountains, vallies, istands, promontories, craggy cliffs, and verdant plains; with all the various herbage of the fields; beasts, fowls, sishes, infects and every living thing that moveth upon the face of the earth; beauteous groves, charming fields adorned with blooming trees, loaded with delicious fruits, and every thing requisite to render life agreeable, and man^ reafoning man, the npbler creature, tar fuperior to ail! could thefe be the work. -of chance
The whole creation Swarms with life, and nothing here sis ufelefs. The earth,, the air, the Sea abounds with life, and. hourly teems with various births. Does chance produce thefe?
The vast preffure of the air, which is^ cii every body of the fmaliest dimensions.
Mr. Charles Guildford. 261
ons, and which is on that of a moderate sized man, fometimes, fourteen or fifteen thouSand pounds weight or more, and Seldom leSs than eleven thouSand ; yet is by us never felt, fo far as to hurt us. Did chance form the elastic Spring Or make ■the different powers both active and paS-five, to operate So equally, as never to clash but instead thereof to act with the greatest regularity, and harmony, each to its originally destined end, and ordain that from the various caufes of things, fuch certain ends shouid be the reSult thereof.^ Impoffible 1
Who formed, compounded, feparated the different elements of fire, air, earth, and water, (of which the whole is fuppoSed to be compoSed,) (for theSe afe e-stcemed the four prolific principles of which the world is formed) but a first cauSe or power.? and that must be the deity.
How grand, how noble is our Solar System ! yet it is but a Small Speck, when -considered as a part of thofe innumerable fystems, that are existing in immenSurable Space, and if this System was entirely annihilated, it would Icarce leave a blank in the works of God.
The
262 M E M O I R S of
The numerous stars that gild the fpangled concave, were not formed for man alone, fo reafon tells us; but
From deeper reafons of the Maker’s thought.
Was that sine fystem ■ of creation wrought.
Mr. Baker’s poem called the Univerfc, is fufiicient to convince any reaSonable man, of the truth of the above affertion. But our age is grov/n wifer than former ones; and have made far greater dilcoveries than ever were made by mortal man; not by following the rules of the'antients, entirely, for as a certain author fays, had the prefent age of philofophers fatissied themfelves with the fubstantial forms and Occult Qualities of Aristotle, with the Solid Spheres, Eccentricks, and Epicycles of Ptolomy, and the antient astronomers ; then the great lord Bacon, Copernicus, and Defcartes, with the greater Sir Ifaac Newton, Mr. Locke, and Mr. Boyle, had rssen in our world in vain. We must have blundered on, still in fuc-ceffive generations, amongst abSurdities and thick darkness, and a hundred uSeful
I
Mr. Charles Guildford. 263
ful inventions for the happinefs of human life had never been known.”
The reflections &c. in this letter are the chief of what I, in a fuller manner inculcated and demonstrated to my noble pupil. In relation to a chaos out of which the world is fuppofed to be created,
I explained that according to my note in page, 259.
I have exceeded the bounds of an ordinary epistle, but you will not, for the future, often be troubled with philofophy and fuch grave stuff, from
yours sincerely,
Charles Guildford.
LETTER, XXXVI.
I HAVE already informed you,' how v/e fpent our idle hours. We had been here a considerable time, and had never feen a human creature except ourfelves.
We
MEMOIRS of
We at length grew impatient, and knew not if we should ever be releafed by the arrival of any ship to that part of the coast- We had made feveral short excursions up the country, but durst not venture too far, as death; or at least ssa-very for life, might be the confequence of our folly.
We kept a constant look out towards the fea,^hoping relief from that part; but to no purpofe. Uncertainty we then thought worSe than death, and at length relblved, one and all, to fecure our trea-fure and venture up into the inland parts after we had taken a large compals by the Sea coast.
Preparations were made for our departure, and when every thing was ready and the appointed day arrived we fet off, and directed our courSe to the place were we were wrecked. The wind was then very high, and Seemed to threaten a Storm. The Sea v/as in a violent agitation, very , rough and turbulent.
We viewed with amazement the wondrous deep, and were agreeably diverted with the rolling and toffing of the tem-peStuous main. The wind was rather too high, otherwise it rendered it very cool
and
Mr. Charles Guildford. 265
pleaSant, after having taken a farewel look, (as we intended it.) We were returning from the fea shore, when we were agreeably furprized with the appearance of a ship, that drove, before the wind, which blew full for land, tho* not very strong.
She dropped her anchor as near the fiiore as she possibly could, and foon after fent her boat to land. We joyfully welcomed the men on shore, I found they were bound for the issand of Cyprus, and after that were to proceed to Venice. They had been out Some time, tossed about with contrary winds, and wanted water which was the reaSon of their making to land. We very readily gave them what affistance we could, and when they were fupplyed, made our preSent situation, So far as related to our being cast away, and unprovided of any means to get off that difagreeable shore, known to them.
They in anfwer to this told us, they would make their captain, who was a good natured man, acquainted v/ith our ■ cafe, and they did not doubt but he would immediately give orders for the boat to return and fetch us on board if
Vol. I.	N	we
266 MEMOIRS of
we were difpofed to take the voyage with them and land us at Venice, if we approved it.
We in anfwer to this informed them that we should think ourfelves greatly obliged to the captain, and them for fuch a very great kindnefs, and at the fame time informed them that when wt came to Venice we could pay for our passage, and would likewiSe reward them for their trouble. For as to paying immediately for our paffage, we thought it was not proper to give them the least hint that it was then in our power to do it, as we did not know what fort of a perfon the captain was, or what the principles of his men were, and as we judged it might be of dangerous conSequence to let any one, especially in that part of the world, know the riches we were poffeffed of, riches being often too great a temptation for many to resist.
The failors on this put off for the ship, and we with eager eyes stood on the shore, watching the motion of the boat, and waiting her return with the greatest anxiety.
We foon after faw the boat gain the ship, and in a very short time, to our
great
Mr. Charles Guildfor D.' 267
great joy law her returning to land. As Soon as the boat came to the fitore, a genteel man, with great activity jim^P^d on land, whom we took, for a Superior officer and Soon found we were not mistaken for' it was the captain himSelf
The moment he approached us, I knevv him, and he as Soon recognized me. He embraced me with great demonstrations of joy, and in the French language, which he Spoke fluently affured me, that the relation he had received from his men, had given him great pleaSure as it enabled him to relieve three of his Sellov.'-creatures out of the greatest distreSs, but that this pleaSure vras greatly heightened by discovering that one of them was a perSon he had a great regard for.
. OSman, the captain, and mySelf then walked up the country a little way, and when we were out of sight of the Sailors, and in no fear of being overheard I freely difclofed to the captain, the real situation of our affairs, and the treaSure we were poffeffed of.
The captain was a Venetian, man a of very great honour and humanity, and the confidence I placed in him, was N z	the
268 M E M O I R S of
the least return I could make him for his friendly behaviour.
He in the most genteel and generous manner offered us a paffage for ourSelves and Trueman to Venice, and alSo to carry our riches, and whatever we had Saved out of the wreck, freight-free. As to the latter we strongly oppofed it, and he at length with much reluctance agreed with us for our paffage and alfo for the freight of our goods, '&c. Our things were foon fetched down to the fea side, put into the boat, and foon on board. We then waited a short time for the wind when that proving favourable, fo as to permit us to leave that place, we weighed our anchor and fet Sail.
Not to enter into any other particulars, ’tis fufficient to inform you that we arrived in fafety at Cyprus, a sine issand, one hundred and sifty miles long, and feven-ty broad: Subject to the Turks.
We stayed at Cyprus Some time, but for OSmasss fake we did not think proper to go on fiiore, but continued on board the ship.
I am unwilling to quit this issand without faying Something'of it. But tore-turn to our own affairs. The Captain
having
Mr. Charles Guildford. 26g
having finished his bnsineSs at Cyprus we fet fail. But misfortunes Seemed to attend us, with an obstinate perSeverance. We had not been many days out at Sea, before a strong gale of wind fprung up, in a contrray part of the heavens, to that from whence it had lately blown, and notwithstanding the utmost endeavours of the master and failors drove us, much against our wills, on the coast of Egypt. We were obliged to comply with what was too powerful for us to resist, and therefore fubmitted, only taking care the ship should not be drove on the land.— Luckily just as we approached the shore, a flat calm Succeeded to this violent gush and the captain ordered the anchor to be dropped.
The Captain on my enquiring in what part of the world we were, informed me, we were not far, he was certain from one of the mouths of the famous Egyptian river viz. the Nile.
This raifed in me a strong defire of fecr ing a part of that river So famous in hif-tory. I told the captain of this, and aficed him, if it would be any inconvenience to fend his boat with me and Ofman, who ■ -	N 3	was
270 MEMOIRS of
Was as defirous as myfelf to fee it. Fle anSwered no, provided we did not stay long, for that he must embrace the first fair wind which offered for failing, otherwise, if lie should neglect it. and any accident should happen to the ship, before he finifiied his voyage, though ever So remote, he should be liable to make good to his owners all damages, w^as it even the total loSs of the ship and cargo.
When I understood this, a circumstance I had not before thought of, I told him I would readily lay aside the thought of going, but as I had expressed a deSire of Seeing this river, he insisted on it, that I should not be disappointed, only begged I would excuSe his going with us, as the late accident had created Some busi-neSs for his men to regulate fome things’on board and to prepare for failing, and that his duty as Captain obliged him to continue on board to fuper-intend his men, and give neceffary directions, &c. This desire of his was fo reafonable that we readily complied with it, and Ofman and I, (the boat being ready) got in, leaving Trueman on board, who at that time was ill and could not attend us.
We
9
Mr. C harles Guildford. 271
We coasted along the shore for fome time, then landed and having received proper directions from one of the fail-crs as far as he could give us; Ofman and I went on leaving the Sailors with the boar.
We viewed the country as we walked, and employed our eyes to the best advantage, and for once feasted them with a sight of every thing that could come within their ken.
We had entered into an engaging conversation on all the works of nature that appeared before us, and had by that means wandered a considerable way up the country without immediately going along the coast, but yet could not difcoverany thing of the river. After we had wandered about a considerable time, without observing how the time passed night approached before we once thought of returning.
This furprized us, and on looking at my watch I found we had been abSent from the boat above four hours, and how the time had passed we could not conceive or otherwise account for it, than from the attention of both of us being deeply engaged in a very interesting converSation that we had had on a variety of curious and entertaining fubjects.
We
272 MEMOIRS of
We recollected that we had walked fast, notwithstandingourconverfation, and j Lidged we could not be much lefs than 15 or .16 miles at least from the boat fupposing v/e had walked in a right line : of this however we were not certain. We had been too regardlefs of the way we came, to .know how to return whilst it was light, much lefs could we expect to sind our way back in the dark. I then began to be uneafy for my friend, who through me was induced to take this ramble. Lie discovered my uneasinefs and desired I would not give mySelf any pain on his account; for he did not fear but that v/e should ieturn in Safety in the morning, if we could not get back that night, and that it was only taking our iodo-ing for one night in the sirst convenient tree vve could meet with. “ But,” Says he “perhaps the Moon will ‘‘rsse Soon and assist us ; how old is the “ Moon?” On this I began to consider and having luckily the preceding night observed the time of the Moon’s rif-in&-, found she would rife in about two hours. Ihis gave us fresh fpirits, and we had nov/ nothing to do but to fecure ourSelves for thoSe two hours, which we
Soon
Mr. Charles Guildford. 273
foon did by climbing up into a tree which luckily grew on an elevated place, from which we judged vre should have an extensive proSpect when the Moon rofe. All we bad now to wish for, was a sine night.
When we were Secure, that the time might not paSs heavily we renewed our former converSation and our two hours w'ere Scon clapSed, when to our very great joy the Moon roSe, and in a short time shone extremely bright, and v/e had a very extensive proSpect of a country as agreeable as most I have Seeen.
Notwithstanding the extensiveneSs of our proSpect we could not however See either the Sea or the river we had been in Search of. However to our left, at a prodigious distance from us, and about the part where I fuppofed our ship lay, I thought I could diScern Something like the top-Sails of our ship, which after ' considering for fome tim.e we both concluded must be the ship at anchor.
On this we got down, and determined to go right on in that direction, and never loSe sight of the destined place.
We
274 M E M O I R S of
We piirfucd our little journey v/ith Spirit tor a considerable time but to no purpoSe, We could not di'ccver either our ship Or the Sea. We nevertheless continued in the Same direction till the Sun roie, and preSented us the finest pioSpect of the heavens, and the moSt beautiful merning I had ever Seen. OSman was greatly charmed with it, for he had never feen Such a glorious fight beSore.
But our joy v:aG Soon turned into Sorrow. We had not long continued on our journey, after Sun-riSing when wve WTre Surrounded by a dozen indigent inSolent Turks, who we had reaSon to believe were a gang of thieves. We were immediately Seized. Refistance was in vain, they stripped and bound us. Then Searched our cloaths, divided the booty amongst them, when two who appeared Superior to the rest undressing equipped themlelves in our cloaths, which they appeared to do out of a Srolic and gave us their’s which after they had unbound us they obliged us to put on. Then fastening us together drove us off in very great haste in the midst of them.
Osinan
Mr. Charles Guildford. 275
OSman durst not diScover himSelf Sor he had, thofe wretches would doubtleSs, though they had not any regard for religion themSelves, through a principle of Superstition, have made a merit of destroying him, for having changed his religion and quitted his country, and have facrisiced me to their reSentment as the instrument of that change.
I by my converfation with Ofman, and the stay I had made in Turkey could fpeak their language indifferently, and therefore by OSman’s desire, applied to thefe wretches to conduct us to our ship and promised them we would pay them any reasonable Sum for our ranSom. But to • this they only anSwered we were too far from the Sea for them to return: that they had busineSs of more confequence, that if they had not, they would not trust a couple of Christian dogs, that we were at prefent their siaves, without hope of redemption ; that they could not lofe time in waiting for any ranSom, and that as Oaves they should treat us, and dilpoSe of us at the first market they came to.
Such my friend was our situation at that time, and for fear you should grow
too
ayb ‘ M E M O I R S of
too melancholy, I will conclude my letter, with affuring you that if what you have already, read of my history hath given you any entertainment, through the novelty, &c; of it, you will in my'future letters sind that what I have already related is nothing to the many furprizing and uncommon incidents OSman and mySelf afterwards met with, I am,
yours sincerely,
Charles Guildford.
End of Vol. I.
' ' ' ^
■ >	' '.S	' y , S" 'T, --i
, ' ,	. ■- -V,.	- -■
• )■	■ .	, ' ^ ' c ;	, ,	■:' ■ •'
\	■	■ ' ■ i..	.
.•	'	•	I
\ -
' i
I ■	'	-0	.	.
’ t .	‘ .
; ( * '
■' S '
/ f \	■	-
/ [/ ^	'(Fd.tA''Z.	\
VI LA VKPfV-<fic^V:€A^ ■ d. ' a ^ AZdr X /i /-... ■ / -/
'2	" ■'V ^	. *	9	...•/ ’
• o‘'u/t
■ T ■■/ '	..	.,. V
f ■ T/'A rd.VA ■ . s--. yf-V'd.V:.-.
y--/,,	y.;.	/ i. ■ ^.--7 Nv-
■ /■	/	■ '^'	i,-
, /. Jri-'A
F	‘ '	'^' J ■•/
-•'	v/	v; ', •’ f
_______;_____
r	■	'	'	(
'■/ " D	‘ -	' '	'
,./ ' /■' ' A'
:..-e;'' ......... y/A	■
■' X	--. N C"'
■A ' ^	^
I	"	■ ■ '
‘ ■ /	•	•	/	t

R
AH?
7fc( V.I


^ iiv
lEjii ■ i"‘’sl^B
Bl IS
■Ir^l 'i i
m&\ < i r ,
Bp 1 .(!' i‘i	''
v .~'d r iiit'i^^l
I' 'dd rhelH
HI' N P ^ T^H ■suj ^
Wkl!


’V; •	.
‘.•V; y

, ■ ' / ' 10
c	V ^ : V
■■■■'.-''-■'tv..;. .'
>5. / V ’ -
' ' ; 1 ^
I i'
V i ,	'■	^ -	' s. ■ ' - ^ i ,
V -'SllSses '	’■ V ' ■;.
^	' “S	j ■'
^ ^ \ -
(	.	* . ■ ' d' .	/	'
■	S'	. ^
■	' c ■ ■■■■' ■
- i ' -N'	'	'■■./	« V " '	-	,. S .■	^
s' -■ i C V i Of*	C' ' . ,
MEMOIRS
o F
Mr. Charles Guildford,
In a regular
*	t
SERIES of LETTERS,
Wrote by
H I M S E L F to a F R f E N D. The whole founded on real Facts.
In TWO VOLUMES.
VOL. n.
«OCOM6OO9M€Od»eOOd660OOdOOO«OOOOO9COOOO9O«aOO»OOdO0O0OeOM«MOOaMOCMt0MtM
sseo«oocceoosooo.c>cooa.a.o9ocs«aE>oooM«eoas.ooeoo«»aoooooaesD9c«oosoo«otewe6MC
LONDON:
Printed for R. W i t h y, at the D u n g i a d, in Cornhill. M.DCC.LXI.
■ ■ ■	^ y .	. C ■	* :.
, - / .
r. '	'	-	‘ ' .-■■'	■	-u'	.
'	^ ' y \ - p ^ ^	'
■•	'.L	' ' ■' " Css .H ■
-	■	■	■'	,>:, ■/: V
-	'	■- .''w	. v; I • ■	■	! V . - • '	‘ I
-*?''^*5flr'Var''^<r''^''5er'SaeN(Sr'h6:^Sl^	<c
MEMOIRS
O F
Mr. Charles GuildSord.
LETTER I.
Y last gave you an account of ^ M our being made captives by a Set of raScally Turks, and ve-ry villainous fellows we found them.—They uSed us extremely ill, and the only name they gave us was Christian dogs. They obliged us to run on foot as fast as they rode, and if we ac any time halted, they forced us on with blows. One thing was favourable for Vol. II.	B	us
{
2 MEMOIRS of
us, ^ eife we fitould have been absolutely killed with fatigue. The circumstance was this, Some of their horSes were old, lean, half starved beasts, that they ufed almost as bad as they did us, and with Such beasts they could not travel very fast. I affure you this was of infinite Service to us, we often wished every beast they had was lame. But however we were very thankful their condition was no better.
We had travelled in this manner a considerable time, when we learnt they intended to Sell us at Cairo Notwithstanding we were to be Sold as staves, yet I must acknowledge it gave us great pleaSure that it was at Cairo we were to be Sold,
- becauSe I hoped there to meet with Some of the European conSuls or fadtors or Some one who would engage for our ranSom, or that at the worst we should easily find means to Send to Venice or to England.
We were communicating our Sentiments to each other on this Subject, and by that means endeavouring to* relieve ourSelves a little, under the preSent load of miSery, at a place where our wretches stopped to bait, v/hen a villainous 7’urk,
who
Mr. Char-LeS Guildford. 3
who we fuppoSed was appointed for that purpoSe, listened with great attention to our diScourSe, and though we Spoke in French, he understood a part of what we faid, our Speaking of conSuls and factors, &c, made theSe fellows fuppoSe we had interest at Cairo, and that we could get money there, but we found by their diScourSe, that they judged we could by our interest at Cairo get them Seized for their unwarrantable proceedings with us, and were therefore determined to prevent us, which they thus efiected.
As Soon as we arrived at Cairo, they locked us up in a private houSe and there kept us two or three days, but they Supplied us with provisions enough, which we SuppoSe was for their own advantage. At the end of this time, a Surly, ill-looking fellow was introduced to us; who after examining us in many particulars, tending to discover who and v/hat we were, and to whoSe interrogatories we gave in general equivocal fanSwers, purchaSed us of our thieves and immediately took us to shis own houSe, where to our very great mortification, we found he was an Armenian, that he designed to carry us up the country for fear of the conSequences B 2	should
4 M E M' O I R S of
should any of the European ConSuls inter-poSe, and in the night we were hurried off with Several others, as wretched as ourSelves.
I will affure you our preSent Situation was So terrible, that had not our hands been confined, we fiiould have attempted every thing in our power, to regain our liberty, even at the hazard of our lives: for defpair had made us deSperate, but the artful Armenian had before met with deSperate Europeans who would not patiently Submit to their fate, and had therefore taken So much care, that we had not even the least hope left.
Notwithstanding we were in Such a situation, yet we met with Something to alleviate our distreSs. This was the company and conversation of a young gentleman, who was a fellow Slave: his name was Omar. He came from ISpahan the capital of Perfia, and had been taken travelling, nearly in the Same unfair manner as we were. He was a youth who had received a liberal education, and had travelled much. He appeared to be a genius of the first rank, and this added to a lively wit, rendered him one of the
most
Mr. Charles Guildford. §
most agreeable companions I had ever met with.
OSman was as much pleaSed with him as I was: we Soon contracted a friendship Sor each other, and had it not been for our miserable situation, we shouid have formed a very happy triumvirate.
In a few days we stopped at fome place on the Red Sea, but what the place was I really do not know. I Saw nothing of it, therefore shall not pretend to fay anything concerning it.
Though we could not improve by obfervations, we gained by our friend O-mar’s communicative temper. He had travelled over part of Egypt, particularly on the coast of the Mediterranean Sea. We were inquiring about Cairo from whence we came. He informed us that Cairo was Subject to the Turks, and governed by a Beglerbeg, who had a revenue of fix hundred thoufand Scheriff’s or Zechins a year. TheSc coins are called alSo xeriffs and che-queens, and are worth about nine shillings; and four pence, five pence or fix pence sterling. This Salary is paid out of the grand Seignior’s treafury, and yet the Sovereign does not loSe any thing by it, for B 3	he
6 M E M O I R S of
he has as much paid him from the country, and there is another Sum of six hundred thouSand zechins, or chequeens applied yearly to pay the Turks who are fta-tioned there. Tliii Beglerbeg commands sixteen Sangiacks or provinces. A pretty extensive dominion for one Beglerbeg, of which there are in different parts of the Turks dominions near thirty, though every Beglerbeg hath not the command of quite So many provinces.
Grand Cairo is one of the princpal ci« ties In Egypt, and may be looked upon as the Metropolis: for there the Beglerbeg resided, when we had the misfortune to be trapanned into ssavery. Gianber built it, and about the year of the Hegira 362 he made it the royal Seat.
Cairo is called Great or Grand Carlo, in reSpect of the advantages, which it has above all the cities of Africa. It is situated about 2 or 3 leagues lower and on the opposite side to that place where the antient Memphis stood. There is a castle * which is built on a rising ground commands a very fine proSpect, and enjoys an excellent air. Ihis castle has been very large, magnificent, and Strong, but is
now
Mr. Charles Guildford. ’7
now greatly decayed and altered for the woisse. It is however beautified with Several pieces of MoSaic work, which is really curious. The water of the Nile is conveyed thither by an aqueduct of one hundred and fifty arches. The inhabitants of Cairo a=:e very numerous, an instance or two to prove this is recorded in history. In the year 1618 there died . above six hundred thouSand people of the pestilence, and yet there was Scarce any of the inhabitants in appearance missing. In a plague that happened about the year 1672, there were six hundred eighty thouSand of the poor people died, and only about four hundred of the richer Sort.
It has been computed that this city contains two hundred thouSand houSes, near eighteen thouiand considerable streets, and that it is between tv/enty and thirty leagues in circumference. But in this computation are included Old and New Cairo, Festat, Babylon, Charaffat and the Boulac, that may be Said to join all together ; Sor New Cairo alone is not So large as Paris, which is much lels than London.
B 4	’Tis
8 M E M O I R S of
’Tis at Cairo that thofe fine carpets are-made that we call Turkey carpets. It was about five miles South-East of the pyramids, and two from the Nile West that the regal city of Memphis formerly stood, which was once the strength and glory of Old Egypt, in which city was the temple of Apis, and the Sumptuous temple of Vulcan. Here alSo stood the face of Venus, and that of Serapis. A city once adorned with many antiquities, but now even the ruins are almost gone.
But my dear friend it is time to conclude this epistle 'therefore I fubfcribe mySelf,
yours.
Chahles Guildford,,
LET-
✓
N
Mr. Charles Guildford. 9
LETTER II.
IN my last you had Some account of Cairo, which I gave you for your entertainment, and wish it may afford you as much pleaSure in the reading as it did us when we heard it.
I shall in this give you a short account of Aleppo, as I think it will afford you a more agreeable amuSement than a dull and diSagreeable relation of the miSeries we Suffered in our ssavery, and the anxieties we sselt under Such mortifying circumstances.
Aleppo is the principal, as well as the-largest city of Syria, one of the m.ost famous of the east, and the third in the Ottoman empire, if we consider it as the rendezvous, of the Caravans, and of the Turkish armies; as the magazine of jewels, Spices, silks, and other valuable commodities, which are brouctit thither by Sea or land, and from thence Sent into other parts of the world, by the port of Alexandretta or Scanderoon.
This city is Situated about one hundred miLs from. Alexandretta or Scanderoon,
which
10 M E M O I R S of
which is the Sea port and road for all ships to lade and unlade their goods, which are transported by camels to and from Aleppo. Their commodities are chiefly silks, camlets, gallnuts, valaneed, a Sort of acornshell ufed by curriers to drefs their leather, cotton, yarn mohairs, Soap, drugs of all forts, galls, &c.
Ihey alSo deal in gold, Silver and precious stones &c. that are Sold by the Mit-tagal, which is one dram and a half. As for Alexandretta or Scanderoon, the Sea port of Aleppo, it only consists of a Sew despicablehouSes inhabited by the Greeks, who keep public drinking houSes for the failors, and the meaner Sort of the people, where many Turks often make free to break their prophets command, that they Ihould not drink wine, and that together with the strict injunction he laid on them to keep themSelves clean were two of the most political and best institutions any law giver ever made ; lor the Turks in general, are a very filthy people, and madmen when they get drunk; therefore this Sufficiently evinces the necessity of the above positive laws.
The dwellings appointed for the vice-confuls are convenient, and are the only
build-
Mr. Charl ES Guildford. ii
buildings of any Signification, in this Seaport. The air here is very bad, especially in Summer. It kills many, and is productive of very dangerous distempers.
As we are, at prefent in Egypt, I think to add to your entertainment, I will from Varenius give you a very curious account of the river Nile, or rather two accounts, the one antient, the other modern. You may not have Varenius by you, or if you have, fome of your friends who think thefe letters worth their peruSal, may not, this is therefore my reaSon for the quotation I am going to make.
Varenius obServes that Some rivers at a Set time of the year, riSe beyond their banks and overflow the adjacent countries. The first and most celebrated among theSe is the Nile, which Swells to Such a degree that it covers all the land of Egypt except the Hills. The deluge begshs about the Seventeenth ot June, and increaSes forty days, and decreaSes as many. So that at this time, all the cities wshich are most of them built upon hills, appear like So many istands. Antiquity hath given a large account of this inundation; becauSe in that part of the earth which vras then B 6	known
12 M E M O I R S gI
known (before the eastern and western’ parts were difcovered) sto river was found to be the Same, except the Niger, which therefore was fuppoSed to communicate with the Nile under ground. Seneca,, (Says Varenius) has deScribed the inundation of the Nile, the best of all the anti-ents, and therefore I cannot but give it in his words.
“ The Nile (Says he) is increaSedin the-middle of Summer; from before the riS-ing of the little Dog star, to beyond the autumnal equinox. Nature hath placed this most noble river in the sight of all mankind, and ordered it fo, that it should overflow Egypt at a time when the earth,, being driest with the Summer heat, might Suck in more of its witer, and fufficiently quench its annual thirst. For in that part of Egypt which lies towards Ethiopia, there are few or no showers; and thofe that fall do not refresh the earth, which is unaccustomed to rain-water. Egypt builds her whole hope upon this, and is fertile or barren, according as the river affords it more or leSs water. The hushand-man never minds the heavens, and the poet Ovid does not jest when he Says,
“Th*
Mr. Charles Guildford
“ The herbs beSeech not Jove to pour “ HimSelf upon them in a shower.
If we knew where it begins to increafe we might perhaps find out the cauSe of its increafe. But after it hath wandered over vaSc deSerts, and made its way thro’ fens and marshes, and unknown countries, it collects its disorderly waters about Phi-las The island of Fhilas being on every side rocks and rugged, is washed by two^ rivers which there come together and Surround the whole issand. TheSe having their former names mix together and are called the Nile, which being increafed in breadth, glides gently from thence thro* Ethiopia, and the Sandy deSarts that afford a passage to the commerce of the Indian Sea. The cataracts atterwards receive it, which fill the eye with Something great and amazing ; there the Nile rushes against the broken mountains in its way, and is forced into the narrow passages and hollows that are made in the hard rocks, dashing against the stones that obstruct its current, and overflowing fometimes all the obstacles that interrupt it. Here its courSe is obstructed, which,
makes
}
14- M E M O I R S of
which makes it rife in waves and Surges: and there it is confined between two rocks and frets and foams to be enlarged; So that its waters which before glided gently along, being put into violent agitation, rush from one rock to another, and make it appear more like a torrent than a river. Now it looks thick, muddy and troubled and half covered with froth, which is not its natural colour, but owing to the injury of the places it flowed through. At length having freed itSelf from all obsta-^ cles, it falls on a Sudden from a prodigious heighth and with a noiSe dreadful to the country thereabouts; which the colony that , were placed there, by the Perfians, could not endure; their ears being stunned with the continual noiSe, that they were forced to transport themSelves to more quiet habitations. The incredible boldneSs of the inhabitants is reported among the miracles of this river. They get into their boats by pairs, the one guides it, and the other throws out the water, and after thay have tumbled Sometime among the raging waves' oS the Nile, they get into the narrowest channels, and avoid as much as poSSible the dangerous creeks in the rocks; then guiding the boat with
their
Mr. Charles Guildford. 35
their hands, they are carried headlong down the middle of the current, by the force of the whole river, and when the Spectators are in great fear and begin to lament, believing they are oveiSet and drowned by the great weight of the water, yet they are in an instant feen Sailing a great way from the place where they fell down, being carried as fwift as a stone out of an engine. Nor does the boat in its fall overSet, but is carried Safe into the Smooth water. Tile first rising of the Nile, is perceived about the aforementioned ifie of Philas, a little way from whence it is divided by a rock, called by the Greeks, Abaton, ‘ which none ever aScend but their rulers: there the rising of the river is observed and marked upon the sides oS the rock. A great way below this there are two eminent rocks called, by the inhabitants, the Veins oS the Nile, from which a great force of water flowetii; yet not So much as to do any harm to Egypt. The priests throw offerings in at their mouths and the governors giSts of gold, while the holy rites are performing. From this place the Nile Seems as if it had got new strength, and rolls along a narrow
and
i6 M E M O I R S of
and deep channel, being hemmed in by the mountains on each side, and hindred from enlarging its breadth. When it comes to Memphis, it is again at liberty, and wanders over the countrv, dividing itSelf into rivulets, and ciissuSing its streams over all Egypt, through innumerable canals made by art, as commodious as possible. At first it is divided,, but the waters being continued, it stagnates and appears like a large troubled fea. The breadth of the country thro’ which it is extended, breaks the violence of its current, being no leSs than the whole land of Egypt. As much as the Nile increaSes So much do their hopes for that year, and the hushandman is not de-ceived who computes his product by the meaSure pf the river. It brings troubled water and mud upon the land a?id dry Soil, and leaves its dregs and filth upon the ground that is most chapped with draught, and v/hatever clammy fatneSs-it brings along with it, is Sprinkled upon; the driest places; So that it manures the ground two ways, by watering it, and covering it with mud; but the places it doth not reach are bare and unfruitful., If it increaSe above Such a height it does
not
Mr. Charles Guildford. 17
not So well. The nature of this river is alfo wonderful; for when other fmrll rivers waste, and wash out the fatneSs of the earth, the Nile, by how much it excels , others in greatneSs, is So far from wasting and eating out any thing, that it rather adds new vigour to the pining ground, at least puts it into a better temper, by Saturating the Sandy places with fiime and mud; So that Egypt does not only owe the fertility of its Soil to the Nile, but even the Soil itSelf. When It overflows the fields it makes a pleaSant appearance, for the plains and vallies lio hid under the water, and the towns, appearing like istands are only to be Seen ; and they have no commerce one with anot her in. the inland places but by boats; the leSs alSo the people See of their lands the more they rejoice. When the Nile is confined within its banks, it is poured into the lea by Seven mouths and every one of them hath the appearance of a Sea, besides Several other Small branches, and canals that are cut from one shore to another. Moroever it breeds living creatures equal in bulk and noxiouSnefs to my at Sea, from whence one may judge
of
i8 MEMOIRS of
of its greatneSs, by its aifi rding room to play in, and Sustenance Sufficient for Such vass animals. Eabillus the best of men, and Sldlled in all kinds of learning, relates, that when he went governor into Egypt, he Saw at the Hera-cleotic mouth of the Nile (which is the greatest) a company of Dolphins coming from the Sea, that were met by a troop of Crocodiles trom the river, as it were to give one another battle. The Dolphins though they are harmlefs animals and do not bite, yet they were too powerful for the Crocodiles, whofe backs are hard and impenetrable even to the teeth of larger animals than themSelves, but their bellies and lower parts are Soft and tender, into theSe the Dolphins, Swimming under water, thrust their long Spikes or prickly fins which they carry upon their backs, and wounded them So thatcheylet out their bowels by which Several of them being killed the rest turned their tails and fled. They are creatures that fly from the bold, and purSue the timorous; nor do the inhabitants of Tentyra overcome them fo much by their natural or Superior valour as by their rashneSs and contempt of them; for they follow them of their own accord, and
drive
Mr. Charles Guildford. ip
drive them into the Snares of nets that are laid for them; tho a great many of them that have not courage enough to piirSue like the rest, are destroyed. TheophraS-tus relates, that the Nile once brought down Sea water; and it is certain that when Cleopatra reigned it did not rife for ■ two years, viz, in the eleventh and twelfth years of her reign, which they Say portended bad fortune to two great perSons, viz, to Anthony and Cleopatra, who Soon aSter lost their empires. Callimachus relates, that the Nile, in former ages, did not overflow for nine years.
Now I come to enquire Into the cauSe of the Nile’s overflowing in Summer, and I shall first begin with the opinions of the antients. Anaxagoras was of opinion, that the melted Snov/s poured down from the mountains of Ethiopia into the Nile, makes it overflow; and all the antients believed this to be the cauSe; ES-chylus, Sopocles, and Euripides, have taught the Same. But this is evidently falSe for Several reaSons., First, Ethiopi.i, is the hottest country upon earth, as appears from the tawny or fun-burnt colour ot the inhabitants, and the Troglo-dites who build their houSes under ground:
the
3L0 MEMOIRS of
the rocks alfo are as hot as fire, not only at noon but even at the cloSe of the clay; the dust under foot is So hot that men cannot walk upon it; Silver is unSoldered, the joints of images are disjoined, and whatever is laid on them for ornament dissolves or is peeled off. The South wind, which blows from theSe places, is immoderately hot, and thoSe creatures as Serpents, &c. that elSe where uSed to hide themSelves in the winter, never withdraw there, but are found in the open field's all the year. There is no Snow nor heavy rain falls at Alexandria, which is a great way removed from theSe immoderate heats. How therefore should a country fubject to So much heat, be covered with Snow all the winter! Some mountains indeed may have fnovr on them there, but , not more than the ridges of Thracia or CaucaSus; and the rivers that flow from ^ theSe last. Swell in the Spring, and the beginning of fummer, and are leSs again in winter; becauSe that in the Spring the Snow is washed down by the rain, and if any is left it is melted by the first heat pf the Sun. Neither the Rhine, Rhone, IS-ter, nor Cayster, are Subject to this; they only are out a little in Summer, though
the.
Mr. Charles Guildford. it
the Snows are very deep on the northern mountains. The PhaSis, and the Boryst-thenes would alSo riSe at that time, if the Snow could produce great rivers against Summer. Moroever, if this were the caufe of the increaSr of the Nile, it would flow most at the beginning of the fummer, for then the Snow, being large and entire, is melted in greater cjuantities. But the Nile is in its grandeur four months, and is then alv/ays the Same. If we may believe Thales, the anniverSary north whnds resist the deScent of the Nile, and hinder its courSe by driving the Sea in at the mouths of its channels,, fo that being repulSed it runs back upon itSelf; and is not increafed, but becauSe it cannot find a passage, it overflows and breaks out in every place where it can make its way. Euthemenes of MarSeilles, agrees with him, and gives this testimony. I have Sailed, Says he, in the Atlantic Sea whence the Nile flows larger as long as the anni-’ verSary north winds blow, becauSe that then the Sea being urged by the winds, replenishes its stream; but when they ceaSe, the Sea grows calm, and the Nile returns with Id's force. Besides, the fea water is asso Sweet, and Che monsters in it re-
Se ruble
22 M E M O I R S of
Semble thofe of the Nile. But wherefore then, (Say I,) if thefe winds make the Nile Swell, doth it riSe before they begin to blow, and continue after they are over AlSo why doth it not grow greater when they blow stronger ; for it is not increafed or lessened, when they blow more or leSs, which it should be if it depended on their force. Moroever, theSe winds blow against the shores of Egypt, and the Nile deScends the contrary way against them, but why should it not flov/ from whence they bjow; if it hath its origin from them.f’ Besides, it would fl w from the Sea pure and green, not troubled and muddy as it doth now. Add to this that innumerable wltneffes contradict this testimony, and though men might lie SaSely and put any fables upon us, as long as the coasts were unknown; but nov/ the foreign coasts are frequented by merchant ships, yet none of them mention the the green colour of the Nile, or that the lea hath any other taste than uSual; which is alSo diSagreeable to nature for the lim evaporates the lightest and freshest particles. Besides, why doth it not increaSe in winter, when the Sea is Sometimes raiSed with greater winds, than theSe annual
Mr. Charles Guildford. 23
nual ones which are commonly moderate, and further if it proceeded from the Atlantic fea it would cover Egypt at once, and not by degrees as it does. Oenopi-des of Chios fays, that in winter the heat is kept under ground, and therefore dens and caverns are then hot, and mountain-water is warm alfo, that the veins of the earth are dried up by internal heat, but in other countries the rivers are replenished with rain: only the Nile which is not Supplied in winter, and increaSes in Summer, V'ihen the interior parts of the earth are cold, and the fountains are fresh and cool. But if this were true, all the fountains would increafe, and run over in Summer. Besides the Subterraneous heat is not greater in winter, though water, caves and wells, are then warm becauSe they do not admit the external cold air; So that they are not absolutely hot, but only exclude the cold: for this reaSon they are cold in Summer, becauSe the hot air is kept from them.
Diogenes Apolloniates Says, that as the Sun draws moisture to it. So the dry and parched earth draws it from the Sea, and other waters, for it is impossible that one
part
J
24 M E M O I R S of
part of the earth should be dry whfen the other is moist, becauSe it is all over perforated and full of intercourses, through which the dry places draw moisture from the wet, otherwise they would long since have been burnt up. P’or this reaSon, the fun draws the waters to it, and the meridian places that have most need of it; alSo where the earth is most dried it draws most moisture to it. As in lamps the oil runs towards the place where it is conSumed, fo the water runs towards that place where the earth is parched up with heat
From whence therefore should it come but from the cold northern parts ? Does not the Propontis for this reaSon constantly flow into lower Seas, not as others do by a flux and reflux, but by a constant and rapid courSe towards the Same point ? And unleSs by theSe intercourses, places that vranted vrere replenished by thoSe that abounded, the earth would be Soon dried to dust, or laid under v/ater.
I would willingly alk Diogenes, why, since the Sea and all rivers meet together they are not larger in all countries in the fummer? The Sun Scorches Egypt more
. than
Mr. Charles Guildford. 2£
than other countries and therefore the Nile increaSes more; and in other parts of the earth there is alfo Some increaSe of the rivers. But I aSk him, why then is there any part of the earth without moisture ; since the hotter it is in any place, the more moisture it draws from other countries.? And, lastly, why is the Nile fo Sweet, if it draws its water from the Sea ? For no water is So Sweet as the water of the Nile. So far Says Seneca.
And as Varenius obServes, from this passage of Seneca, we gather the opinions of the antients (eSpecially of the Greek philosophers) about the cauSe of the inundation of the Nile. But, as he further obferves, none of them are true, becauSe in thole times nobody had travelled out of Europe, So far as the Springs of the Nile, or had visited the nations that border on them, which are very remote from Egypt. But the true cauSe is since discovered by the English, Dutch, and Portuguese, who trade with the nations that border upon thele Springs, in the king-
* Seneca did not think, when he wrote this of Ethiopia, which he had before mentioned, or of the many countries that He in the torrid zone,*
Vol. II.	C	doms
26 M E M O I R S of
doms of Congo, Angola, Sofala, Mozambique, &c.
I must make my own observation here, that I think Verenius’s observation right, and by this we See what the learning of the antients in natural history and philoSophy was, and this alSo shews us how much we are obliged to the moderns, particularly Lord Bacon, who laid the foundation for the glorious improvements since made.
But I fear, unleSs the curiosity of the fubject makes amends for the length of this letter, you will be heartily tired before you get to the end of it. However, ril here conclude it.
Yours,
Charles Guildford.
L E T.
Mr. Charles Guilford. 27
LETTER III.
WELL, my friend ! what do you Say to my last long letter I Shall I proceed a little farther on the Same Sub-jeess, and give you the Substance of what the inoderns Say on the Same ? I ought you v/ill anSwer, that I may not lead any one, that is unacquainted with the Subject, into an error, by Seneca’s various accounts, &c.
As my motive is laudable, it will be ass-excuSe Sor my farther purSuing the Subject of my former letter. I fiiall therefore, from Varenius, give you a note, taken from Salmon’s PreSent State of all Nations, Vol. V. page 10, II.
The river Nile, or Abanes, which, in the Abyffine language, signifies the father of rivers, hath its Sources, as is generally held, in 11 or 12 degrees of northern latitude, in the empire of Abyssinia, but whe-. ther the Portugueze jeSuits, as is pretended, or any other perSons, have discovered the very fountains it iSSues from, is very much questioned. I perceive, the 0000-* try where it riSes, as Some of the natives relate, is covered with vast impenetrable C 2	woods.
28 M E M O I R S of ^
woods. This river runs a courSe of about fifteen hundred miles, from Ibuth to north, for the most part, and a little below Cairo, dividing itSelf into two branches, one inclining to the east, and the other to the west, falls into the Mediterranean; the two mouths being about loo miles aSunder. As for any other branches of this river, our modern travellers take no notice of them, and probably, thofe that have been mentioned by antient writers, were only canals, cut from theSe, particularly the canal which was made to convey water from the river to Alexandria, Seems, in our maps, to be laid out for one. Flowever, certain it is, that there are no other branches navigable at this day, than thoSe of Damietta and RoS-fetto. While the river is contained within the bounds of the ordinary channel, I do not find it is broader at Old Cairo, than the Thames at London ; and, in the dry-est SeaSon of the year, is fordable in many places. In the upper parts of the stream tnere are Seven cataracts, v/here the water fails in sheets from, a very great height, causing a prodigious noiie •, but through Lower Egypt it Slides along with a very gentle stream, and passengers are
Seldom
Mr. Charles Guildford. 29
Seldom Surprized by tempests on it. It is observed, the water is very thick and muddy, eSpecially when it is Swelled by thoSe heavy rains which constantly fall within the Tropics in the beginning of the fummer, and theSe are the occasion of its'Overflowing the low lands of Egypt annually.
The Niger alfo, a river in Africa, of no leSs courSe than the Nile, though not So famous, overflows the adjacent countries at the Same time as the Nile does. When it is at the highest, people may Sail, in • boats, all over Negroland, though not without great danger.
So the Zaire, in Congo, overflows. The Sam.e does the river Rio de la Plata, in Brasil. The Ganges alSo, and the Indus; theSe two last pour out their waters upon the earth in the rainy SeaSon, viz. in June, July, and August, when the inhabitants gather the water into ponds, and preServe it, that they may be Supplied at other times of the year, when there is Scarce any rain. This inundation makes the land very fruitSul.
The river which waters the royal city of Siam, called Menam, overflows in September, October, and November, at which C 3	time
30 M E M O I R S of
time the fields, and alfo the streets in the city, are wholly covered with water. So that the people are forced to make uSe of boats to Sail from one houSe to another. This cauSes very great fertility.
The Euphrates alSo overflows Mesopotamia on Some particular days of the year ; there are othens of lesser note that over-flovr the countries through which they run, /or an account of which I refer you, to Varenius.
But Oh ! my friend! permit me, before I quit Egypt, here to make a reflection on the Sate of empires. What a glorious state was ISgypt once ? This was a lourishing state when it took the name of Egypt, which was about 877 years after the fiood, and doubtleSs it had been a great kingdom many years before that change was made.
It IS now SuppoSed to be the best peopled state in the world, but I cannot readily agree to that, b;cauSe, I think, China more populous by far. But it must be ackno-wledged, if any dependance is to. be placed on history, that Egypt was for-nterly very well peopled ; an instance of this is mentioned in history,, viz. that in
the-
Mr. Charles Guildford. 31
the feign of AmaSis, it contained above 20,000 cities.
It has, likewise, for many ages, produced very large quantities of corn, which was the reafon that the Romans called it the publick granary of the v/orld. And, in ■ fact, it is observed, that the plenty, or Scarcity, of all the Roman empire depended on the harvest of Egypt. They owe this fertility of their Soil, as hath been before obServed, to the Nile, whoSe waters are SuppoSed, among other things, to repoSit large quantities of nitre on the nroLind when it overflows the lands.
O
What monuments of power, magnificence, riches,, fcience, and antiquity, does iSgypt yet fiiew us, in the ruins of its pyramids, obelilks, _ labyrinths, and other publick buildings. The noble works of their antient Kings, raiSed at- an immenSe experice, not only to tranSmit to posterity eternal marks of their wealth, &c. but alSo from a more glorious, ancl perhaps, political principle, that of employing their people.
It is Said, that in the lake Meris may be Seen the place where the famous laby»-rinth stood that contained above three thouSand three hundred rooms.
C 4	Egypt,
32 MEMOIRS of
Egypt, at the beginning, had native kings, who governed their Subjects with a free and unlimitted authority, and till the government of Renmmenitas, Son of Amasis, who ruled in the year of the world 3454, were all called by one general Sirname, or title of Pharaoh, being a name of dignity, as with us the name of emperor or king is. But though Egypt has been for many ages governed by kings, yet the royal Seats have been changed. The first royal Seat we read of was Tanis, where the court of that Pharaoh, mentioned in Scripture, was held. Thebes was alfo a royal Scat; then Memphis, which was the Seat of the kings, of the race of Coptus, until Ne-buchadonozer Sacked it. Alexandria was alSo a royal Seat, where the Greek kings resided for 900 years, till the Arabians took Egypt, and made Testat, near Old Cairo, the metropolis. After Gianber had built Cairo, about the year of the * Kegira 362, he made that the royal Seat,
* This is in the chronology, a celebrated epocha among the Mahometans, and the event which gave rife to it was, the flight of Mahomet from Mecca. It is the year of the Julian period 5335, anfwering to the year of Christ 622.
as
Mr. Charl es Guildford. 33
as I have mentioned before, and So it has since continued, even under the Turkish power.
Baron Holberg, in his introduction to Universal History, justly obServes of F,-gypt, that it is particularly worthy of admiration, on account of the very great number of its inhabitants, the many arts that were cultivated among them, the great fertility of the land, and their stupendous edifices.
The walls of the city of the Sun, which I have mentioned before, by the name of' Thebes, were 140 * furlongs in circumference. Buiiris, its founder, adorned it with many magnificent buildings, and other ornaments ; and Several other kings who Succeeded him, added greatly to its magnificence, particularly by erecting statues and large obelisscs, of one entire stone. So that there was not a city on the earth So richly adorned as this. The grandeur of this city, in other reSpects, may, in Some Sort, be determined from a consideration of its gates, which were loo in number.
But my friend, if you’!! not think me prolix, 1 will, now I am in Egypt, give ypu
* A furlong is the eighth part of a mile.
C 5	a few
34 M E M O I R S of
a few particulars concerning the largest oF the pyramids, that amazing work, and very great wonder of the world. It has four Sides, each containing Seven acres ; the whole area of this pyramid covers a Space of more than eleven acres. The north side meaSures 693 feet,, the perpendicular height is 493 feet, the real aS-cent is equal to the diameter of the baSe, or 693 feet; 360,000 men were employed in this work, which they Scarcely compleated in 20 years.
But permit me to return to their government, and take a short view oS the various changes the state underwent.
CambySes, the Son of Darius, in the year of the world ^454, was the first that made the Egyptians stoop to a foreign yoke ; he, with a strong army, invaded and conquered Egypt, took PSammenitus: captive, put him to death, committed very great destruction, and reduced the country into a province. It remained in Subjection to the Persians above 150 years, until the reign of Ataxerxes Longima- -nus, in whoSe time the Egyptians Set up Inarus, Son of PSammenitus beSore king of Libya, who governed happily till Ar-taxerxes, with a great fleet, and a large
body
Mr. Charles Guildford. 35
body of men, came upon them, out of Phcenicia unexpectedly, and Soon reduced them again to his obedienee ; from which time it was Subject to the Persian kings, until the reign of Darius Nothus, when they were expelled by Amirteus born in the city of Sais, or PeluSium, now Ca-iixerne.
Amirteus reigned six years, and then for about 91 years was fuceedeed by four MendiSian princes, after that by three Se-bonltes, until Nedtabanes the Second, in whole time Artaxerxes Ochus bereaved him of his kingdom, and So Egypt fell again into the hands of the Persians, to whom it continued Subject till the destruction ol ]i)arius Codornanus, by Alexander tliC Great, who brought it ,to the Grecian, or Macedonian kings, that reigned live veass over it; after Alcxan,-ders death, it Sell to Ptoiomeus, sir-named Lvagus, whence all the kings, his Successors in that kingdom, were called Ptolornies, adding to that of Fcolomy Some other mine.
You know this Ptolomy the first of that name, was one of Alexander’s generals ; and after Alexander’s Sudden death, when empires and kingdoms fell 10 the C 6	lots,
M E M O I R S of
lots of the brave and the bold, he poS-Seffed himSelf of Egypt, and there came after him nine other kings, who bore the name of Ptolomy.
The race of the Ptolornies unhappily ended with Cleopatra, the daughter of Ptolomy Auletes, courted at first by Julius CteSar, and afterwards by Mark Anthony, through whofe favours she kept her Sovereignty ; but Augustus, at the battle of Actium, ruining Anthony’s fortunes with the death of Cleopatra, who poifoned herSelf, made it a Roman province, and it continued under that empire, till the reign of Heraclitus, who held his royal court at Constantinople. After the dividing of the Roman empire into eastern and western, Egypt fell to the Greek, or western share, till the Egyptians Submitted to the Arabian caliphs, about the year 704, to whom they remained faithSul till conquered by the Mahometans. In the year 1155, Syra-con, or Xarracon, by others Alerddin, Schyrachoch, an Armenian general, or prime Vizier of the king Damas, by his victorious arms, took captive the Caliph of Egypt, and made himSelf master there, with the title of Sultan, or Souldan; and
it
Mr. Charles Guildford. 37
it continued in that name and race, till the year 1242, when the Mamalucks, the offspring of a people, on the banks of the Euxine Sea, mercenary Soldiers,, kept in the pay of the Sultan, by the murder of their lord, made themfelves masters of the country, under the tyranny of whoSe race and possession it groaned from 1255, until the year 1517.
The last Sultan of Egypt, who was called Tomumbey, the Second of that name, and who was elected Sultan by the Mamalucks having wars with the Turkish emperor Selim, was defeated by him, and fled to Cairo, where he was taken captive, and delivered up by a Moorish prince. This happened in the year 1517, when he was miSerably murdered, his body tied to the tail of a camel, and then dragged through Cairo. This victory, gained by Selim, So ruined the power of the Mamalucks, that Egypt hath ever since been Submitted to the Turks.
When I consider the history of thefe people, and of many other states, particularly the Mexican, I cannot help pitying the unhappy people greatly, to think a state, like that of Egypt, or that of Mexico, under the government of their
Incas
3^ M E M O I R S of
Incas should undergo Such changes, how terrible is the reflection, for a people,, -who have for many centuries, been under the government of their own princes, al-moSt inStantaneoufiy to have all their royal family destroyed, their palaces and other publick buildings, and often their temples demolished and eraSed to the ground, millions of the unhappy people of both Sexes, and of every age, from the oldest to the youngest, fall a bloody Sacrifice to ambition, and a tliirst for wealth ; their government abolished, their laws changed, their whole state Subverted, and themSelves, from a free people, made the staves of a foreign power.
Even the fate oS a Single perSon, the monarch’s I mean, is fiiocking. Think of the fate of Tomumbey, after reigning as Sovereign, over an extensive and very famous nation, every delight, every pleasure SubServ’ient to Iiis will, and thouSands of people his Subjects at his coniinand, thus to fall, thus to. be cruelly murdered, and then his body dragged a wretched, bloody, horrid Spectacle through the pubr-lic'k streets. It is shocking to humanity ! What a reverSe oS fortune this my friend ! Well might the poet Say,
Who ,
Mr. Charles Guildford 3,9>
“ Who knows what changeful fortune “ may produce.^
And do you, my friend, SuppoSe, it was ever possible tliat the thought of fb wretched an end,, fiiould have ever entered into the mind of Tomumbey, when Sitting in his palace on a magnisicent throne, with his warriors and courtiers Surrounding him, obSequious to his will, and attentive to his nod, pleaSed wdth every Smile, and in raptures, if kindly noticed by their Sovereign. Faith, when I reflect on the various degrees of wretch-edneSs and miSery, that have attended on many-powerful Sovereigns, and partictilar-!y their prime ministers and favourites, I cannot help thinking a private life the most eligible, and yet my friend, there is in the honest and generous mind, an active principle that strongly impels the possessor on towards the pinnacle of glory, v/here,
■ when Seated, they may assist at the helm of government, be of infinite Service to the community, and justly merit the glo-cious title of a True Patriot! glorious indeed ! the most noble title that can be conferred on man.
But
40 MEMOIRS of
But I am'running into my old error, of Sending you very long letters; notwithstanding I often conclude with a promife of being more conciSe. You must, my friend, excuSe me, when I am on a favourite Subject, I cannot well avoid it. I believe my next will afford you entertainment of a different kind. .
Yours, &c.
Charles Guildford.
‘ LETTER IV.
Notwithstanding I was rather prolix in my last, I must mention a few more particulars concerning that country, once So famous in holy writ, and alSo in profane history. Egypt is at preSent inhabited by Cophties, Moors, Arabians, Turks, Jews, Greeks, and Franks. The Turks now govern the country as I have noticed before. The Cophties are natives of Egypt, have a particular language to
them-
Mr. Charles Guildford., 41
themSelves, and a certain Sort of writing, not much different from that of the antient Greeks. There is not, however, now above fifteen thouSand, at the most, of theSe people leSt, millions of them having been put to the Sword, partly by the Pagan Emperors for their adhering to the Christian faith, and partly by the Christian Emperors, for their obstinacy in maintaining the opinion of DioScorus, one of their Patriarchs, concerning one nature, one will, and one perSon in JeSus Christ. It is observed in history, that a governor under the emperor Dioclesian, maSSacred, in one night, at Christmas, 80,000, who were buried at Mount Achnim, in the Upper Egypt; and, at another time, near ISna, the Same, or another governor, put to death So many, that they could not be numbered. It is likewiSe Said, that Justinian the Emperor, cauSed 20,000 Cophties to be killed at Alexandria ; but theSe are not the only losses the unhappy Egyptians have Sustained ; they and the whole world have been great loSers, bt^cauSe arts and Sciences have greatly Suffered by.their wars at various • times. The library belonging to Ptoiomeus Philadelphus, to which he himSelf added, amongst other
things.
42 M E M O I R S of
things, tv/o hundred thouSand volumes of manuscripts, fell a SacriSice to war. There were alSo a prodigious number of. books in the library at Alexandria, which were unfortunately lost when Julius Cteiar made war there.
You know the Egyptians were famous for arts and learning. The invention of arithmetick, geometry,''physic, &c. is attributed to them, for which reaSon Egypt is called the MistreSs of Arts. From thence Pythagoras and Democritus, learned their philoSophy, and Lycurgus, Solon, and Plato, their forms ot government. Here flourished the learned grammarian AriS-tarchus ! Herodian and Didymus, So well Skilled in Sciences; Appianus the historian, C. Ptoiomeus the geographer, TriS-megistus the philoSopher, and many others of equal note.
One of the most remarkable things in Egypt is, the vast quantities oS Salt yearly made at the Salt pits and cisterns near Alexandria, Srom the water of the Nile, which is, in itSelf, the Sweetest and the freshest in the world, and yet yields a very excellent Salt, having the taste of violets. This quality proceeds Srom the nitrous earth ; for if a piece of it be laid in
tliC
Mr. Charles Guildford. 43
the Sun, it will become as v/hite as Snow ' on that side which is expoSed to the Sun; they make So much Salt as to produce yearly eighteen thouSand French crowns.
Strabo, of old, divided Egypt into thirty-Seven parts, by the Greeks called Monoi; Ptolomy enlarged it to 40 ; and Herodotus reduced it to 28, But 37 feems most agreeable to the mysterious temple or labyrinth (on the Ibuth fide of the city of Alexandria, near the lake Me-reotis, and adjoining to the Sepulchres of King Mct'is, and his wife) in the midst whereof were 37 palaces belonging to the 37 jurisdictions of Egypt, whereof 10 were in Thebes 10 in Delta, and 17 in the middle region, unto v^^hich reSorted the Several presidents, who had there their particular temples to celebrate the festivals of their gods. There were alSo 15 - chapels, containing each a Nemesis, to adviSe of matters of importance concerning the general welfare.
I, in one of my Sormer letters, mentioned our Slopping at a place on the Red Sea; I believe it was Suez, but am not ctTtain. I'his Sea is by others called the Arabian gulph, and is more properly r gulph than a Sea. It fioweth out oS the
Indiaix
44 M E M O I R S of
Indian ocean, between Aden, a town in Arabia, and Cape Mufiedon in Africa, having Africa on the west, and Arabia on the east. It runs to the eastward as far as the Isthmus of Africa, to the town of Suez, where there is a harbour for the Turkish fleet, and receiveth only a Sew frnall rivers, but not one out of Africa. It is extended from the South east to the north west ; its form is oblong. I'he most probable opinion why it is called the Red Sea is, that it came to be So called Srom the red Sand that lies upon the shore, and IS often mixed with the water by the violent flux and reflux of the Sea, which is extraordinary in this gulph, inSomuch that it tosses it backwards and forwards like ashes, and keeps it from falling to the bottom by its violent agitation ; this is related by thofe who have been there, who farther add, that it Sometimes appears as red as blood, but if it be kept in a veS-Sel without shaking, the red Sand will Subside, and may be Seen in the bottom. It very often happens, that violent storms blowing from the Red Sea, towards Arabia, or Africa, carry with them Such heaps of red Sand, as to cover whole caravans, or troops of men and beasts, whoSe bodies.
Mr. Charles Guildford. 45
dies, in time, are thus converted into true mummy. As to Suez, which I have mentioned above, it does not contain above two hundred houSes, with a bad port, and yet it is the Turks arSenal upon the Red wSea. The haven is Small and shallow, for neither gallics nor ships can enter into it, till they are half unladen, which is the reafon that most of the vessels lie in the road, where they are more Secure than in the port. The governor keeps two Small galiies, and Some other veffels, to maintain his authority in the Red Sea. The commodities of the East Indies were heretofore brought thither, and then conveyed into Europe ; but the Turks do not, at preSent, enjoy that commerce, becauSe the Christians have now many Settlements in the Indies. The ships Set out from Suez in the Spring and Summer, when the north wind blows, the South winds being most constant in winter and autumn.
I have one more thing to notice before I quit Egypt, and then I believe I shall proceed to a different Subject. SeSostris, Darius, and other kings of Egypt, have attempted to cut a channel between the Red Sea and the Nile, that out of the Indian
46 M E M O I R S of
dian-Ocean and through the Red-Sea, they might fail that way from the mouth oS the Nile into the Mediterranean, which would be of great advantage to Egypt and other countries upon the coast of the Mediterranean. But history Says they were forced to desist from this enterprize becauSe the Red-Sea was discovered by the artificers, to be much higher than the Inner Egypt. And its farther Said that other kings of Egypt of old, and of late the Egyptian Sultans, and Turkish emperors, had frequent conSultations about cutting through that Istmus that joins Africa to Asia, and Separates the Mediterranean from the Red-Sea; but it is further observed, that the reaSon why they did not proceed was, that the Indian and Red-Sea were Sound to be much higher than the shores of the Mediterranean: and therefore it was feared that the Red-Sea would overflow them, eSpecially Egypt, which is reckoned by every one to be a very low country,
Vareriius is of a difierent opinion, and thinks political reaSons prevented them from carrying any deiign of that kind into execution, viz. expence, infinite labour
Mr. Charles Guildford. 47
l>our, many difficulties, a prodigious tract of rocky ground to go through, and above all, their fear that the Christian states would by various means receive much greater advantage from it than they themfelves, and deprive the Grand Seignor of considerable revenues arifing from goods conveyed by a land carriage, &c. And farther still, that the Christians, who excel them in navigation, might invade thoSe countries, or even Medina itSelf, the Sepulchre of Mahomet.. For a considerable fleet would in a short time tranSport a great army of men, and all manner of provisions from Europe to Arabia, by Such a canal.
But now my friend I have done with Egypt. I return to our own adventures.
We were as I before obServed to you, confined cloSe priSoners, during the stay we made at the place which I have before mentioned on the Red-Sea, from what reaSon we could not conjecture, unleSs for fear we should by Some means get out of our purchasers power, who had not bought us fairly, i. e. we were not properly the property of thoSe that Sold us.
As we had no entertainment, and as our confinement was very irkSome, you
may
4« M E M O I R S of
may be affured we studied for every entertainment we could think of, to amufe ourfelves. This could only consist in converlation. As is uSual in Such circumstances, a part of our entertainment was a relation of each other’s adventures, for fuch they might be called.
Omar gave us fome account of his family, and of himSelf, and as the history is but short and contains a good moral, I shall beg leave to give it to you, and wish your entertainment may equal that which we received in hearing it.
Omar came from ISphan, or Spaliawn, the metropolis of Persia, which was the place of his' birth, and where he had received a part of his education, the rest had been compleated in his travels, which had been very extensive.—He was really an accomplished youth.—His heart, fuch as I could wish it, and his perSon really fine, though diSguiSed under a Slaves habit.
His Sather was a man of genteel fortune, learned, and very curious. This made him. fond of every foreigner of learning and merit, that ever came to ISpahan, or that he ever met with in the courSe of his travels, for he had been a
very
Mr. Charles Guilford. 49
very great traveller, and had Spent large Sums of money, during his residence in foreign parts in Searching into, and learning of various arts and Sciences.
When his father fettled at ISpahan, his fortune was greatly reduced, but being one of the principal perSons in the place, and having a large fiiare of learning and merit, he was Soon married to a beautiSul young lady, of a good family and a very large fortune. This again established him, and enabled him to purSue his studies with fresh vigour and' I'pirit. He foon expended a conSiderahle part of his lady’s fortune in the purfuit5 of knowledge, and in educating Omar and a Sister, that were the fruit’s of his father’s marriage. His houSe then became a common receptacle for men of learning of almost every profeffion, and particularly the liberal arts.
His lady was an accomplished woman and Superintended, in a great meaSure, her daughters education. During Omar’ii infancy a German was introduced to the father as a man of profound knowledge, particularly in chymistry, and who understood the nature of minerals in general, extremely well, and what were the princi-
VoL. II.	D	pies
5® M E M O I R S of
'pies of every metal, particularly of the Superior ones. Ah 1 1 am prevented from proceeding, I will give you a farther account of this German in my next.
Yours
Charles Guildford.
♦
I
■	LETTER, V.
I proceed according to the promiSe I made in my last.
The German insinuated himSelf into the father’s favour, who found he was a man possessed of a prodigious fund of knowledge. The German at last informed the old gentleman, that he had employed a great part of his time in examining into the nature of metals.
He alledged that all metals, consist of two principles, viz. Mercury, as the basis, or miatter, and Sulphur as the cement: the first the SubStratum, or metalline matter; the Second, which renders it fixed
and
Mr. Charles Guildford. 51
and malleable. That the Mercury was the Same as common quicksilver, only more clear and .pure, the fulphur a, peculiar Sort of matter, Specially denominated Sulphur of metals, and Said by Homberg and ether modern chymists to be light, or fire.
That, this being united with the Mercury, fixes it; and according to the different degrees of union and coherence therewith, produces different metals.
That Homberg by retaining Mercury, a long time in a moderate fire, had ob-*> tained gold from it, and from thence inferred that gold consists of a Sulphurous or igneous part; and a heavy mercurial part fixed thereby : and that by only taking away the Sulphurous, or fiery part of the gold, it is reduced to running Mercury. I'hat as to the gravity of gold, and its being heavier than Mercury, both Mr. Boyle and Mr. Homberg had demonstrated that the particles of fire or light were heavy, and their insinuating themSelves into the pores of the Mercury and there fixing; increaSed its Specific gravity. And concluded, by assuring ^ the old gentleman that metals were tranS-mutable into one another, and in short D 2	that
52 M E M O 1 R S of
that he very well understood the proceSs and could absolutely change pure Mercury into pure gold.
That just as he had made himSelf maS-ter of this invaluable Secret, and procured a Small quantity of gold worth about five hundred pounds, it was difcovered, and he was obliged to fly from his native country on that account. That he had travelled about from place to place, but had not yet determined where to fix his residence! and that now his money, arifing from his gold, wasalmost gone, and he could not renew his proceSs without Some expensive materials, and Some 'conveniences which he could not procure, and that he likewise wanted the assistance of a man of learning and good SenSe, free Srom all prejudice, to go through the proceSs with him, and assist him therein.
That were thesse things done he did not make the least doubt but that he should ityon acquire a Sufficient fund, both Sor himSelf and his assistant, to sit down contented for life and let the art dye with him, as was it publickly known, it would be as publickly followed, and the value of that precious metal, would decreaSe So aS'yjiot to be v/orth the Searching after.
Omar’s
Mr. Charles Guildford. 53
Omar’s father was ambitious.	He
knew the value of gold, and the influence it had.	T he German’s relation rouSed
Some ambitious thoughts in his mind that had for Sometime lain dormant. He thought if he could poffeSs this glorious shcret, he could raiSe himSelf and his family to Some of the greatest dignities in the kingdom, by making them the richest Subjects.
After he had Several days conSideredon what the German had Said, he determined to join with him, and give him all the assistance he could ; not doubting but that the German would communicate the Secret, in consideration of the Services and / assistance the old gentleman intended to promiSe him. We muSt do justice to Omar’s father, by observing, that he in* tended to enter heartily into the German’s Scheme, to join their united forces, and let the profits, arising from their labours, be equally divided between them, in a fair and honest manner, and to compleat the whole he intended to betroth his young daughter to this German, who he was Satisfied would in a short time be a very rich man.
Dj	ge
54 M E M O I R S of
He carried the first part of his defign into execution, and Soon aScer communicated the whole of Isis plan to the German, who after taking the Same into consideration, not cliuSmg to comply in too hasty a manner, without mature deliberation, at length required three days to consider of his friends propoSal. This very request confirmed the old gentlcinan, in the good opinion he had formed, of his German friend.
But his lady who had overheard their conversation, and who knew more of the world than her hushand, who had not studied men So much as books, for the first time, in a mild manner remonStrated to him the uncertainty attending Such a design, the expence, and that if it fiiould not Succeed, it must inevitably ruin his family.
Her remonstrances greatly Surpriz^ed him, and he was a little irritated, but however Suppressing his diSpleaSure, he dismissed her, with informing her that he had not Spent So many years in study, not J to know what he was about, that should it Succeed it would be of infinite Service to the family, and Ihould it not, he would Spend but little in the proceSs, as his regard for
her
Mr. Charles Guildford. 55
her and his children, was too great to Suffer him to injure them, in an article of Such conSequence, and thereSore desired her as a proof of her regard for him, to obServe the most profound Silence on this occasion, and to make herSelS perfectly _ eaSy, and place an entire confidence in his prudence.
The poor lady was obliged to Submit j she durst not Say any more, and even iit' faying what she had, Ihe depended on his; very great regard for her, otherwife SUo might by Such a step have rendered the rest of her liSe miSerable. O my friend \: the Persian ladies are not So happy, as the Englifii ones. Our fair country womendd not know hov/ Superior their situation is, to the most magnificent of theSe ladies, I'hey posseSs the Same fiiare of freedom and liberty as their hushands, and have almost :as much pov/er, many of thent more. On the contrary the Persian and Turkish ladies, and in fact the ladies of many other natisms, have Scarce any will of their own, but are Submitted to the tyrannical power of their lordly hulbands, in the most abject manner.
/	. But to return to my history. The
German at the end of the three days, after D 4	a
S6 M E M O I R S cf
a very long introduction, and professing the greatest regard ior Omar’s Sather, from whom he acknowldged, he had received many favours,' agreed to enter into the design, according to the plan laid down by his worthy friend.
After they had entirely Settled their plan, they proceeded to the execution of it, on which they entered with thegreatt est Spirit. The German Subscribed a Sm.all Sum towards purchasing the necessary materials which W'as all he could Spare, the old gentleman Subscribed above twice as much.
The German undertook to buy vrliat was necessary, and it was agreed that the proceSs should be carried on at Omar’s houSe, and that the German should there take up'his residence, that he might more constantly and with greater eaSe attend the proceSs. This the German, in appearance, with reluctance conSented to, as being unwilling to become an incumbrance to his friend.
The German now provided a great variety oS materials, or various kinds, whoSe uSes and applications on this occasion even puzzled, the old gentleman. They were
Mr. Charles Guildford. 57
at length ready and began their proceSs, and now their hopes encreaSed.
Tliey with eager expectation attended, and at last to the very great joy and Surprize of the old gentleman, a little gold was produced as a fpecimen, tried and found pure, and of fuperior value to any he had ever Seen.
What was the old man’s joy, at the sight of this all-powerful metal?
“ Gold! yellow, glittering, precious ‘‘ gold!
“ Gold! that will make black, white t.
“ foul, fair; wrong, right:
** BaSe, noble; old, young; coward, va-“ Slant!
“ Hal you gods! why this “ Will lug your priests, and Servants “,f.om your sides,
“ PlucSt stout mens pillQw.s.from bplow “ the‘r heads ’
“ This yellow fiave
“ Will knit and break religions: blefs “ the accurj’d:
“ Make the hoary leproSy ador’d: placs ■“ thieves,
H 5	,‘LAnd
'	5^ M E M O I R S of
And give them title, knee, and appro^ “ bation,
“ With Senators on the bench. .
Thus Says ShakeSpear, in his Timon of Athens, and Garth Speaks well to the fame purpoSe, when he Says,^
“ Gold makes a patrician of a stave ;
“ A dwarf anatlaSs; a TherSites brave; “ It cancels all defects.
“ It guides the fancy and directs the “ mind;
“ No bankrupt ever found a fair-one “ kind.
The old gentleman v/ith inexpressible joy, runs to his lady and shews her the precious metal, exulting at the Superiority of his judgement over her’s, when he had now gained this convincing proof.
The lady viewed it, then modeftly aSked if that was all, and how much it had cost. The old gentleman was dissatisfied with the question. But being good natured, only gently chid her, for being • still dubious, and then told her it was only a Specimen not the Sole fruits of their labour and expence. That he did not
in
Mr. Charles Guildford. 59
in ihe least doubt, but a short time would produce Sassicient to convince her and amply reward them for all their pains and expenre. That he would then with a great part of the gold produced pur-chafe a much larger stock of materials, enlarge their works rnd in a short time make a very great addition to their wealth; that when he was as rich as he wished, he would employ his interest at court, and likewiSe his gold, in behalf of his friend,
himSelf and his Son, and-----The lady
begged he would be kind enough to stop there, and not think of that ’till he had first obtained the principal point.,
Omar was startled at this, considered a moment, and then Said, 1 li tve been rav-■ ing---the proSpect of the SucceSs I hope . to have, owing to this Specimen, has affected me rather more than it ought—t I could not help exulting greatly, I only wish for wealth and power for the Sake of my family, and that I may be enabled to do good in ray generation: your rebuke'though fevere is iust. I am obliged to you for in I v/ill purSue my prelent ‘design, finish that and then lay plans for future operations-
D 6	To
6o M E M O I R S of
To this his lady anSwered, she esteemed his behaviour on this occasion, as a fresh proof of his regard for her, and only desired he would act with caution, and not engage too deeply until he was certain the SucceSs of the proceSs, would an-wer for their labour and expence.
Omar in anSwer to this assured her he would punctually follow her advice, and once more repeated his desire to her, that she would make herSelf perfectly caly.
FTe returned to the German. The German knew Omar intended to betroth his daughter to him. He had therefore exerted himSelf with uncommon care and assiduity. When Omar returned, he had produced more gold, in short the proceSs .being ended, the gold produced w'as almost double in value to the expences of the principal materials.
' The old gentleman on Summing up the account was So overjoyed that his friend the German was obliged to detain him Sometime by force, in the room were he then was, for fear he should commit Some extravagant act, and thereby drScover the whole of their proceedings. However when he grew more calm, he conSented
tha«
Mr. Charles Guildford fir
that the affair should be difcovered to his lady ; but cautioned him not to exaggerate too much, &c.
The old gentleman according to his friends advice informed his lady of their SucceSs, in a more moderate manner than he had done before, and as a proof of what he laid produced the golden harvest of their labours.
She was now herSelf prodigiouOy Surprized, and from Such a convincing proof of the German’s abilities, formed a far more favourable opinion of him than she had hitherto entertained.
She had before stron ly oppofed her hushand, in his design of betrothing their daughter to the German, which v:as the only reaSon why it had been delayed : ssie now a.^ readily came into the Scheme, and desired it might be done without loSs of time, least the German, who had before esteemed himSelf honoured in the intended alliance, being now enabled to repeat his proceSs, v:ithout Omar’s affiance, should change his mind.
That I may not extend this letter, to too great a length, I will stop here and conclude mySelf, yours sincerely,
Charles Guildford.
LET-
62 M E M O I R S of
LETTER VI.
Tli E old gentleman and his lady deliberated feriousty on this affair. O-mar had often reflected on what his lady had Said, relative to the German ; another thought likewise made him rather uncertain how to act, and that was owing to his tenderneSs for his infant daughter, who was not capable of making a choice for herSelf, and when ambition did not influence him, his humanity and parental affection prevailed, and he could not readily conSent to the Sacrificing her to interested views. TheSe considerations determined him to wait, at least', till they had tried the SucceSs of a repetition of their proceik He made uSe of his uSual plea to the German for not fulfilling his promiSe, that his lady yet oppoSed it, but that he believed he should Soon gain her conSent, for that thdr SucceSs had greatly interested her in his lavour.
Omar then communicated his design to the German of repeating the proceSs, but first to enlarge their works, and buy a much larger quantity of materials, that the produce arising from their labours might be £b much the greater.	As
Mr. Charles Guildford. 63
As to renewing the proceSs, the German readily conSented to it, but oppoSed the enlarging the works till they were more experienced, and to enforce his argument alledged, that in the last proceSs, he had made Some observations that oave him ve-ry great pleaSure, and had greatly raiSed his hopes, but that he could not with certainty depend on the observations he had made till he had repeated the proceSs, that he should, in the Second proceSs, renew his observations, and attend more circumspectly to Some particular parts of the proceSs, than he had before done, and it might turn out to great advantages.
Omar was Satisfied with thcSe reaSons, when the German, not to leave him any longer in doubt, produced a Sinall paper of powder, and informed Omar, that during the proceSs, the first Specimen cf gold was produced, and whilst he was abSent, he had mixed Some of that powder, about as much as he had then in his hands, with the materials, as believing it would not only expedite the proceSs, but alfo add greatly to the pureneSs and quantity of the gold, they should extract ; that he believed it had Succeeded, but did not think proper at first to mention it, fearing
he
64 M E M O I R S of
he might raiSe his friend’s expectations too high, and afterwards diSappoint him. Ihat he would once more make the experiment, and to gain certainty, would carry on the proceSs in Several crucibles, in each of which should be an equal quantity of the materials neceffary ; and that into two of them he would put an equal quantity of that powder, when the proceSs was in proper order for its reception, and then they would Soon have occular demonstration whether this powder would anSwer their expectations, and the trouble, expence, and time required, for the making of it. Fcr he obServed, that it was compoSed of Several ingredients, that were dear ; that it was long in making, and required a great deal of care and art to bring it to perfection, but that he was well acquainted with’ the proceSs, and had Several times m.ade it: that though they should want new materials for the making it, &c. and though it was attended with expence and trouble, yet it would richly pay tor the whole, should it anSwer in their next proceSs. That then they would immediately prepare for the making of it, and alSo greatly enlarge their former works, buy a large quantity of materials,
' and
Mr. Charles Guildford. Ny
and in two or three processes at most, richly repay themlelves for all their labour, trouble, and expence.
The German, had never, till now, been in appearance warmed with the SucceSs of their labours, never had he exulted at the proSpect of growing rich ; never had he promiled msuch, but always appeared cool and tranquil. Now he Seemed to Speak with peculiar pleaSure, and his joy appeared on his countenance, at the proSpect their future labours Seemed to promiSe them.
Omar looked on this as a certain omen of the most glo ious SucceSs, and embracing him with the greatest demonstrations of joy and friendship, told him he should command both him and his; that he should be certain of his daughter if he approved of her, and that he would in every thing, be, for the future, guided by his fuperior knowledge ; that whatever the expences were, that attended Such a glorious undertaking, he did not regard it, but would chearfully Support it to the utmost extent of his fortune.
The German professed himSelf obliged, and received this declaration of kindneSs with all the modest diffidence natural to
a man
66 MEMOIRS of
a man of learning and merit, but who is not vain of his accomplishments. 'I'his liil! ferved to confirm the old gentleman, ' that it vv’as this very individual man who was to make the fortunes of him and Ifis family, and as fuch he was determined he would efteem and treat hi 111 . Idiey ^gain purchaSed materials, and again repeated their proceSs with the variations the German had propoSed. But ye gods ! v/hen the powder was tried, and the old gentleman Saw it Succeed ro their utmost wishes, v/hat v/as his joy ?, It was inexpressible ! For which reaSon I fiiall not attempt to delineate it.
The German had now, by this Second proof of his fidll, entirely gained possession of his heart, and he would have Sacrificed, in the first transports of his joy, not only his infant daughter, but even all his family, to the fervice of the German, who had discovered every part of the proceSs, not only of producing Gold, but alSo of making the powder to expedite the proceSs, and increaSe the quantity of the Gold they were in quest of.
The German embraced the happy moment: both the old gentleman and his lady were now as much his friends as he
could
Mr, Charles Guildford. 67
could wish, and the young Sophia wa^ betiothed to him'in the most Solemn manner, and thereby his v/iSnes compleated. I’he old gentleman, immediately on the betrothing of his daughter, paid the German a large Sum, amounting to near half of what he was then worth, as a portion with his daughter, and v/as likewife very liberal in his promiSes, to his betrothed Son-in-law.
Omar did not doubt but he should now . be Soon enabled to make a very gCxOteel provision for his Son, as well as for himSelf and his lady, &c. in fact his head was full of golden dreams and the moSt glorious hopes'. He was every thing he could wish in idea. Well, the contract over, and the German now esteemed as one of the family, they, by his desire, rest a little from their labours, take their pleaSure, and, after Some time Spent aC home, make a tour over different parts of the country, to amuSe and improve themfelves. Masters, &c. are provided at home for the compleating the education of the young Omar and his Sister Sophia ; the old gentleman determines they shall both have the most liberal education he can give them, particularly his Son,
who in
68	MEMOIRS of
whom he flattered himSdf he should, in a few years. See the Sha’s Athemat Doulet, i. e. the Emperor’'s prime minister in temi-poral affairs, and that probably he himSelf ’ might be made Seobre, i. e. principal or high priest. The family lived happily, gaily, and merrily for Some time, till at length the old gentleman begins to think it is time to purSue their former labours, and put it out of the pov/er of fortune to disappoint them.
They renew their works accordingly, purchaSe proper utensils and materials, not only for the enlarging of the gold proceSs, but alSo for the making of the curious powder I have mentioned before. Every thing being at length ready for making of the powder, they begin, and the old gentleman cloSely attends the^pro-ceSs of making it, not having before feen it, and being very defirous of learning it practicably, for fear any.accident should happen to the generous German, who permitted him to attend, whilst he employed himSelf in collecting of other materials, and preparing for their future operations, and Sometimes taking a little relaxation from the fatigues of fuch laborious wo.k. Every thing Seemed to go on in a
very
Mr. Charles Guildford. 69
very fair, but very How manner, till the old gentleman began to be a little impatient to finish the powder, that they might proceed to the grand work. The German particularly charged him to be cautious in the preSent proceSs, and very patient, for that he had not yet gone through the half of what was recpuifite Sor the making of the powder properly ; this was very diSagreeable news for Omar, and he, for the first time appeared angry with his Son-in-law, for ever engaging in the making of it, when they could have done without it^ only by having more patience.
The German anSwered, it was the very thing he wanted, for if he could now exerciSe his patience a little, and willing- ” ly Submit, he would not again meet with So diSagreeable a taSk. The old gentleman, on considering his Son-in-law’s argument, and that the other proceSs, without the assistance of the powder, was very flow ; and that this powder, when made, would remove that diSagreeable part of the proceSs, and, perhaps. Serve them as long as they should want it, was contented, begged the German’s pardon, and chear-fully Submitted to the drudgery of attend-ing it till ^compleated. The old gentleman
/.
70 MEMO I R S of
man continued to attend this stow powder proceSs till his patience was once more tired out, and he began to be angry with the German for not attending a little doSer himSelS than what he had hitherto done. The German did not Seem to like this impatience of his father-in-law, and, in a half angry tone, told him, he was not uSed to Such work, or elSe he would think nothing of the attendance ; and alledged, that he had attended three times as long before he coiild compleat the proceSs. That he would, however, as he was So impatient, haSten it, and he must take the conSequences, which the German accordingly-did, the old gentleman very readily resigning the care of it to him, and not much caring what became of the powder, knowing, let the worst happen that could, it might be difpenSed v/ith, and that it was only making a leSs quantity of gold at a time, and continuing the "proceSs a little longer.
The German, however. Some Sew days aSter informed him, he had compleated the powder, and that they would now renew their other proceSs, and make at once a large quantity, that they need not work again for a conSiderable time, not till their
own
Mr. Charles Guildford. 71
own Inclinations led them to it for employment. In conSequence of this laud-ble resolution, they prepared all their materials that they had purchaSed, and began their proceSs. And here you must permit me to leave Omar and his Son-in-law till my next. I Subscribe mySelf,
Yours,
Charles Guildford.
LETTER VII.
IN my last I informed you, that Omar and his Son-in-law, had made grand preparations for a golden harvest, and a rich one they expected. The old gentleman’s hopes were now raiSed to the highest, and he, in a fiiort time, expected to be worth more money than all he had hitherto Spent, since he had been his own master. He, from day to day, attended the proceSs, with piercing greedy eyes, until the day arrived, when the gold, according
72 M E M O I R S of
cording to their calculations, would begin to appear, which happened according to their expectations, and greatly rejoiced the old gentleman. This was the time for putting in the powder, and therefore he immediately cried out to the German, ‘ Put in the powder put in the powder ! The German obeyed, a proper quantity was put into each vessel, and instantly the gold, that began to appear, vanifiied, and with it all their hopes.
The German, in a frantic manner, exclaimed, ‘ We are ruined! v/e are un-‘ done.; The old gentleman looked aghast and pale with fear. It was with the utmost difficulty and with a trembling voice, he cried, ‘ What’s the matter ?’ To this the German replied, that the powders had ruined all their hopes, by Spoiling the whole of their materials, just as the gold was coming to perfection. The old gentleman, with equal diffculty to that with which he aSlced his first queftion, enquired the reaSon why The reaSon is, replied the German, your excessive impatience in attending the proceSs for making the powder, and obliging me to hasten it, by which I lost my calculation, and could not properly regulate the proceSs. And is
all
Mr. Charles Guildford. 73
all our labour, in, both processes lost ? Says Omar. That it certainly is, Says the German, and we must begin again. At theSe words the old gentleman dropped backwards, lay motionleSs for fome time, till recovered by the friendly assistance of the German, v/hen he stamped on the floor, tore his cloaths, and even his hair, through vexation, and would certainly have committed fome deSperate act, had he not been prevented by the German, and by him assured, that they might yet recover Some gold out of thefe materials, viz. that which had at first appeared, and which might, perhaps, pay them the expences they had been at, in theSe pre-parations. This was Some little comfort for the old gentleman ; they immediately applied to their fires, enlivened them, did all they could to perfect their imperfect work, and in a few hours produced a Small quantity of gold, which, on fettling their accounts, did not clear a fourth part of their expences. They had nothing now to do, but to renew their proceSs, and endeavour to mal-ie themSelves amends for this disappointment.
The question now was, whether they should renew the powder proceSs, or im-E	mediately
74- MEMOIRS of
mediately proceed to the gold proceSs without it. The old gentleman was here undetermined; he would have begun both at the Same time, but they required So much attendance, as to render it impossible for them to bring either to perfection ; he had before Seen, in the Second experiment they had made, the Surprizing effect of the powder, and tvas very well convinced^ that if they could bring it to perfection, it would make him ample a-mends for all his trouble ; that the proceSs, wsithout the pov/der, was very tedious, and did not yield any thing like the quantity of gold, as it did when Supplied with the powder. In short, after maturely weighing each alternative in his own breast, he determined to repeat the proceSs for making the powder, and for that purpoSe to enlarge their works, that they might make a treble quantity, as it would not require any more trouble or time, comparatively Speaking, than to make a third part of the quantity he now intended to make. He communicated this determination to his Son-in lav/, who highly applauded his judgment. The old gentleman, however, desired he w^ould assist in the taking upon him an equal part, at
least.
Mr. Charles Guilford. 75
leasts of the attendance, which the German readily conSented to ; and-having prepared every thing necessary for this proceSs, at a pretty large expence, notwithstanding the frugality and oeconomy of the German, who had taken upon himfelf the care of buying every thing necess Sary, the old gentleman liberally contributing his quota of the expence, they once more began their procels for the making of their powder.
Sometimes the old gendeman attended the proceSs, Sometimes his Son-in-law, till the old gentleman’s patience vras once more almost dred out. But he durst not now open hia ntouthto make a complaint. At length, however, the proceSs wa»' cOiOpleated, and the German declared it was the most perfect he had ever Seen. This was glorious news for the old gentleman, and he was now as much exalted with joy, as he had been before oppressed with grief.
Their gold proceSs was now prepared with the greatest expedition, and every thing Soon got ready. The powder was at length produced, when, O, dire miS-fortune ! on examining their produce, every crucible but a Small one, was either E 2	fiav^ed
^	76 M E M O I R S of
flawed, broke, or melted. Ten thouSand pities, for the little crucible contained gold Sufficient to deSray a fourth part of ail their late expences. The old gentleman on Seeing fuch a glorious crop from So little materials as were put into this crucible,, entertained great hopes, and calculated their late loSs at an immenSe Sum. But as they were now possessed of that glorious powder, wshich he was convinced by this experiment was properly made he did not inthe leaSt doubt but that they should, in the next trial, recover all their losses. The gold proceSs, now the powder was ready, would not take up a great length of time to finish, and therefore he determined, that after they had rested themSelves by a relaxation for a short time, as a week or two, they would begin again. In short, the old gentleman, from every new disappointment, Seemed to gain fresh courage, and the greater his disappointment was, the greater was his reSolution to proceed.
The German very readily came into his meaSures, but desired they might rest for a mont or two, for that it was tlieir impatience, was the principal cauSe of all their dHappointments; and that had they
pro-
. \
Mr. Charles Guildford. 77
proceeded deliberately, and with proper caution^ and had not been too impatient, their last proceSs would, he did not doubt, have Succeeded to their utmost wishes, and have yielded them an immenSe treasure. Whilst the father and his Son-in-law were thus Seeking after immenSe wealth, the young Omar grew up, and was Sent on his travels to gain a.fund of knowledge, equal to the wealth his father intended to give him.
The young Sophia grew up under the care of a very indulgent mother, who endeavoured to form her mind on the most perfect model. The time drew near when she was to be delivered into the arms of her intended hushand, who waited impatiently for the happy moment that was to give him possession of a young lady woiv thy of a much better fate.
The old gentleman’s finances began to grow low. He Several times called on bis Son-in-law to renew their proceSs, and at length confessed that the education of ' his children, the portion he had given with his daughter, and the expenfive manr-ner in which he had lived for a long time, since their acquaintance, had almost ruined him, and that he must now, through ne-E 3	cessity,
78 M E M O I R S cf
cessity, renew the gold proceSs to Supply his wants.
The German appeared alarmed at this, he had SuppoSed the old gentleman rich. Fle, however, endeavoured to conceal it from his father-in-law’s notice, and promised Soon to indemnify him. The old gentleman had Sufficient penetration to discover that his relation had given the "German uneasinefs, this alarmed him, and yet he knew not why. For as to the ^old proceSs he had Several times been an eye witneSs of the gold produced in the fire. But then if his fon-in-law could really by that proceSs produce what quantity of gold he pleaSed, why need he be uneaSy at his circumstances. I'hey were rich enough to buy materials for feveral processes, and that would immediately recruit his finances.
Thefe refiections cauSed the old gentleman to doubt, and that doubt almost drove him into deSpair. He immediately determined to recal his Son, to defer the gold proceSi till he came% and then to let him as a Spy over the German ; tor when he came to consider, he found, that notwithstanding all the gold produced, he had been a very large Sum out of pocket,
exclu-
Mr. Charles Guildford. 7^
exclusive of the portion he had given with his daughter to the German.
In pursuance of this reSolution, he recalled his Son, and in the mean time found, to his excessive mortification, that as he Said nothing to the German about renewing the proceSs, So the German equally ai'oided faying any thing about it, nor did he ever offer to make any preparations for it.
The young Omar Soon returned home, and hi.s father now intended to put the finishing stroke to his making of gold, and See whether he had hitherto been impoled upon or not. Give me leave here to conclude, and to make the remainder of tiffs history the Subject of another letter.
Yours,
Charles Guildford.
E 4	L E T-
w
Fo MEMOIRS of
LETTER VIII.
WELL, my friend, now the grand diScovery is going to be made., T he father confesses to his Son, the whole cf his proceedings with the German, to the very great astonishment and confusion of the ybunger Omar. But complaints were now fruitless; there was Still room to hope, from what the father had been an eye witneSs to, that Some advantage, might be drawn from the gold proceSs; and though it fiiould not anSwer their most Sanguine wishes,At might enable them to live for the preSent, to repeat the proceSs from time to time, and by that means privately to raiSe a genteel Subsist-ance. Some time was Spent after the Son’s, arrival, before the father propoSed to the German the renewing of the proceSs, becauSe he would not give his ingenious Son-in-law, any reaSon to SuSpect his intentions. Nor did the old gentleman think proper, at first, to retrench his expenSive manner oS living, Sor he Still rested a dependance on his art.
In the mean time the young Omar visited at the fiouSe of a widow lady, who
had
Mr. Charles Guildford. 8i
had married an European, that was lately dead, leaving her possessed of a very am" pie fortune, and likewiSe two fair daughters, whoSe names were Hacena and Ki-lana ; the widow’s name was Edzerbeina. Having been many years married to an European, site had imbibed their manners. Omar had often visited the family beSore he left ISpahan, and during his vi-’ Sits, having free admittance to-the young la lies, who v/ere educated after the manner of the Europeans, and not shut up ' from any commerce with mankind, he had though young, contracted a particular fiiendiliip for the youngest called Ki-lana. You know the poet Says,
“ Friendship with woman is neighbour'to “ love.”. ,
And Omar verified' the truth of thofe v/ords; The^ young ladies regard v/as equal to his, ydiichOmar acc'identally discovered by her behaviour, on entering the apartment where she was Sitting at work, just after his return to ISpahan, before the young lady knew that he was in that part of the world. This gave him great joy, but that was Soon Suppressed,
E 5	v/he
gE M E M O I R S of
when he reflected on the wretched circumstances to which he had great reaSon to fear his Sather would reduce his Samily. Flowever, whilst in her preSence he endeavoured to banish all melancholy refiections, and to appear chearful and eafy.
His mistreSs alked many questions concerning his travels, the places and people he had feen, their laws, customs, and manners, and made Such judicious remarks on many things which he mentioned in the courSe of his relations, that he was greatly pleaSed with her judgment; but the more she pleaSed him, the more pain it gave him to think that he must at last be deprived of a blessing, he had once flattered himfelt he should be able to posseSs.
Edzerbeina perceived the mutual regard they had for each other, and was very well pleafed, as from the figure O-mar’s father made, she judged he must be possessed of a very extenSive fortune, and therefore she had not the leaSt objection to make to the youth, not doubting but that the father would readily comply with fuch terms, as she should think proper to demand for her daughter. For this reafon she often invited Omar to her houSe, and he had always free admittance to the
young
Mr. Charlfs Guildford. 83
young ladies, in the preSence of Edzerbeina. The temptation was too strong for Omar to resist, and he Spent the greatest part of his time at Edzerbeina’s; at last, however, he thought it was proper to bring things at home to a Speedy conclusion, that he might know whether he was “ to posseSs the fair Kilana, or not.
He had fixed his refolution of declaring himSelf to Edzerbeina the moment the • grand affair was determined, and, if it Succeeded to afk her conSent, if not to make known his circumstances, and trust to fate for the completion of bis wishes, for he could not bear the thoughts of leaving Edzerbeina any longer in an error with regard to his circumstances. No: he was too generous, even to wish to impoSe either on her, or the young lady. He applied to his fither to renew the proceSs. He conSented, Spoke to the German, and told him, he could not Support his expences any longer, and must sty to that as to his last reSource.
The Gerniah conSented, and they again, as uSual, Set to work. The old gentleman told his Son-in-law, that Omar had often preffed him to diScover the proceSs, and that with his leave he would, as he E 6	thought
S4 . M E M O I R S of
thought it was a request he could not, in justice, deny him, and that was his own fon, arrived at years of discretion, to request Such a thing, he would not himfelf deny it.
The German conSented, Saying, was it only in consideration of their relation to each other, he fiiould readily agree to it. Tliis gave the father and Son very .great‘pleafure, as they thought it a particular mark of his confidence, and a fort of ■proof of the certainty of his art. They proceeded. In short, young Omar attended the German So cloSe, that he, with all his art, could not produce gold.
The German found he was watched, and to evade the punishment due to his villainy, fled from the houfe, leaving bis betrothed behind him, but taking with him the portion the father had given him, and a large fum of money he had defrauded the father of, under a pretence of buying materials for the powder and gold processes, at ten times a dearer price than what he paid for them. He afterwards Sent a letter privately to inform him, that out of generosity to a family he had in-' jured So much, he would aclviSe him not any longer to endeavour to make gold,
for
Mr. Charles Guildford, fiy
for that it was in vain. That distreSs hacl forced him to make uSe of that fcheme, to get a Support. That the gold produced was put into the vessels ; that the first overplus gold was what he had borrowed, and Some of his own, and introduced to gain credit ; that he afterwards, by degrees, paid himSelf out of the money allotted for materials, that the crucibles broke, &c. in the last experiment were damaged by him ; that the f rst powder they made, not Succeeding, v;as only a finesse ; and that he had, during the courfe of their experiments, made Some chemical compositions by which he had railed money to make farther amends for the gold he was obliged to produce to preserve his credit. That to conclude, he had discovered the whole of tins affair to prevent him from ruining himSelf and family entirely, by a fruitleSs Search after the art of making gold, and hoped as a reward for Such a Service, he would forgive him, and if he would not permit him to return to his houfe, yet that he would Sufier him to confirm his marriage, and let him have his daughter, whom he would take care to maintain with the portion he had been So kind as to give him.
You
80	M Ji iVl U 1 K b Ot
You may, my dear friend, more easily conceive, than I can exprefs, the astonishment this letter cauSed, and the terrible distreSs it threw the whole family into. The father was distracted, and well he might, he had ruined his family. The mother mourned in Silence, avoided reproaching her hushand with his folly, nor ever dropped a hint tending that way, but endeavoured to confole him as much as 'possible for his misfortunes ; this generous behaviour affected him much more than the most bitter reproaches. The fon was in as bad a Situation as his diSconSo-late father. He imediately fled to Edzerbeina, declared the very great regard he had for her daughter, that his father, by fome unforeseen misfortunes was ruined, and, therefore, as he was now reduced to a state of mifery told her, he must forbear his visits.
Edzerbeina was not So generous as to overlook this one circumstance, want of fortune in the worthy Omar, and, therefore, after pitying him. for his misfortunes, told him, she could not, consistent with the duty f a parent, that was desirous of Seeing her c/Sddren well established in the world, any longer encourage his visits.
This
Mr. Charles Guildford 87
This was the finishing stroke that rendered Omar compleatly miSerable. It was what he expected, yet a flattering gleam of hope had occasionnally shot acrois his gloomy mind, and gave him Some relief, till Edzerbeina gave the decisive blow.
As to Omar’s sister, she declared, that the German had been always her aversion ; that she found her parents were both determined she Ihould marry him ; that she knew her father’s honour was engaged, that they both esteemed it for her interest, had warmly engaged in the design, and Seemed fully bent to compleat it; and therefore Sne was determined to yield without the least reluctance; that she might not give pain to thofe she So dearly loved, but confessed fiie should have been unhappy, and that now, with their permission, she would rather stay with them, and share their fate, though ever So wretched, than live in the greatest affluence vfith the villain, who had been the came of their destruction. Her parents readily conSented, well knowing the German never durst appear to claim her. As to the father, the reflections he made on his own folly, the fudden disappointment, and the consideration of his present
88 M E O I R,S of
lent circumstances, worked So violently on his mind, and So greatly agitated him, that it threw him into a fever, and he died in ten days after this last fatal disappointment. His lady, who beSore this terrible blow, was Sufficiently unhappy, W'as now wholly overwhelmed with grief, and So great was her distreSs for the loSs of her hushand (for she loved him tenderly) that xlie couid Scarce Support it; however, considering the unhappy Situation of her family, and particularly reflecting on her daughter’s youth, beauty, and poverty, and not knowing what friends, or enemies, Sne might meet with, was she depriveid of her paternal affistance, she determined, for her Sake, to exert herSelf to the utmost, and So bear up against the weight of woe, that, at prefent. So much oppressed, her. She Summoned all her fortitude to her assistance,' and nobly did she bear her misfortunes ; that’s the truest virtue my friend ; well, has our inimitable poet ShakeSpear expressed himSelf on this Subject :
“ In Struggling with misfortunes “ Lies the true proof of virtue : on “ fmooth Seas
“ Flow
Mr, Charles Guildford. 89 '
“ How many bauble boats dare fet their “ Sails,
“ And make an equal vray with firmer “ vessels!
“ But let the tempest once enrage the Sea,
“ And then behold the Strong ribb’d “ ArgoSic,
“ Bounding between the ocean and the air “ Like FerSeus mounted on his PegaSus.
“ Then where are thoSe weak rivals of the “ main ?
“ Or to avoid the tempest fled to port,
“ Or made a prey to Neptune; even thus “ Do empty show, and true priz’d v/orth “ divide
“ In storms of fortune.
I think, my friend, you will not be an-? gry, if I here conclude my letter, I Saucy if it is not long enough, it yet contains matter enough to Satisfy you at this preSent time. I shall, therefore, without farther apology, conclude, and SubScribo mySeif,
Yours, Sincerely,
Charles Guildford.
L E T-
90	MEMOIRS of
LETTER IX.
TFI E picture our poet drew of a perSon, poffeffed of fortitude, in the lines I quoted in my last, exactly . agrees with Omar’s mother. Her character was inimitable. Omar had a fine example before his eyes, he endeavoured to profit by it.
He took care of his father’s interment. He then fettled his affairs: Sold Isis houSe, rich furniture, plate, jewels, &c. i. e. the principal part, as alSo many curi-oSities, instruments, machines, &c. his father had purchaSed, which did not lell for much. LikewiSe the greatest part of his library, only reServing fome of the best authors, and thoSe that were most uSeful for himSelf. PurchaSed a Small genteel houSe in a private part of the town, that was pleaSant and healthy, there he fettled his mother and sister, and then by his mother’s desire Set out towards Scanderoon in Egypt, thare to Search for an uncle his mother’s brother, who was rich, old, and unmarried, and who they judged was there, or at Some of the fea ports on the
[coast
Mr. Charles Guildford. gt
coast of Egypt on the Mediterranean Sea, but whom they had not heard from for a considerable time, and therefore did not immediately know were to find him. As he was passing along with the caravan, they were attacked by a defparate gang of Banditti who took him, and Several others that w*ere forward to engage. This happened Soon after they were got out of the PerSian dominions and had entered Egypt.
Omar was carried about, and exchanged from master to master, till he had tra-verSed great part of Egypt, and at last fell into the hands of the Same fellow who had purchaSed us.
And thus my friend, I have brought his history down to the time when we became acquainted with him.
But to return to our own misfortunes. We had almost for the preSent exhausted our fubjects of entertainment, in fact our Spirits were depressed by reflections on our unhappy situation. We knew not either what we had to hope or what to fear. Perpetual ssavery we needed not to dread: we had only to hope we might either eScape, or fall into better
hands
92 MEMOIRS of
hands, that would treat with us for our . ranSom.
O hope! how charmingly does Cowley write on that delusive phantom.
“ Hope of all ills that men endure “ The only cheap and univerSal cure!
“ Thou captive’s freedom, and thou sick ^ “ man’s health!
“ Thou ioSer’s victory, and thou beggar’a “ wealth!
“ Thou Manna which from heav’n we “ eat;
“To ev’ry taste a Several meat!
“ Thou strong retreat 1 thou Sure entail’d “ estate,
“ Which nought has power to alienate !
“ Thou pleaSant honest flatterer; for “ none,
“ Flatter unhappy men but thou alone ! Hope, thou first fruits of happineSs, Thou gentle dawning of a bright Suc-“ cefs,
“ Who out of fortunes reach dost stand,
“ And art a blessing still in hand.
“ HappineSs itSelf’s all one In thccj or in possession.
“ Only
i
’ Mr. Charles Guildford. 97
Only the future’s thine; the preSent “ hia;
“ Thine’s the more hard, and noble “ bliSs. ^
“ Best apprehender of our joys, which “ hail
So long a reach and yet can’st hold So “ fast!
“ Hope, thou Sad lover’s only friend!
“ Thou way, that may’st dispute it with “ the end!
“ Men leave thee by obtaining and strait “ flee
“ Some other vray again to thee.
“ Hope, whoSe weak Being ruined is
“ Alike, if it Succeed, and if it miSs!
“ Whom good or ill does equally con-“ found,
“ And both the Fiords of fate’s dilemma “ wound!
“ Vain shadow, which dost vanish quite,
“ Both at full noon, and perfect night!
“ Flope, thou bold taster of delight!
“ Who, v/hile thou should’st but taste, “ devour’st it quite I
“ Thou bring’st us an estate; yet leav’st “ us. poor,
“ By clogging it with legacies before.
The
I
94 MEMOIRS of
“ The joys which we entire should wed,
“ Come defloured virgins to our bed.
“ Hope, fortune’s cheating lottery;
“ W here for one prize, a hundred blanks “ there be:
“ Fond archer hope, who tak’st thy aim “ So far, -
“ That still, or Ihort,or wide thy arrows are.
“ Thin empty cloud! which the eye de-“ ceive s
“ With shapes that our own fancy gives:
“ A cloud which gilt and painted now “ appears,
“ But must drop preSently in tears.
“ Brother of fear, more gaily clad !
The merrier fool o’th’ tv/o, but quite “ as mad!
“ Sire of repentance! child of fond de-“ sire!
“ Thou blow’st^ the Chymisss and the “ lover’s fire.
“ Leading them still inSenSshly along, *
“ By the strange witchcraft of Anon !
“ By thee the one does changing nature “ thro*
“ Her endleSs labyrinths purSue:
“ And th’ other chaces woman, wshilc “ Site goes
“ More ways and turns than hunted na-V ture know.5.	I
Mr. Charles Guildford, 95
I have given you this at length, be-eaufelthink there is Such a rich luxurian-cy of thought, that is Scarce to be equalled ill any poet, whoSe works I have ever read. Permit me, whilst I am on this Subject, to give you four lines of Dryden’s on the Same, that I think are for their con-ciSeneSs inimitable.
“ Hope with a goodly proSpect fills the “ eye,
“ Shews, from a rising ground, possession “ nigh:
“ Shortens the distance, or o’erlooks it “ quite :
“ So eaSy stis to travel with the fight.
But I must now return again to our melancholy history. Our worthy owner fearing we should, make our efcape, as Soon as he had tranSacted his bufineSs, hurried us up the country, a prodigious way, in company with Several other un-happy wretches.
\Ve at length, after many days hard travelling, arrived at Bagdat, a strong-town of Turky, on the frontiers of Per-^ Sia, situated on the river Tigris, in the province of Iraca-arabic: this town was
formerly
o5 M E M O I R S of
formerlythe capital of the Saracen empire.
The next day alter our arrival at Bagdat we were Sold to a merchant who dealt in staves. We had now passed through fo many hands, that we could not entertain the least hope of gaining our freedom by any application to magistrates or others, without paying our ranSom, as this last master of ours had certainly fairly bought and paid for us, and this was doubtleSs the reaSon of our paSSing thro’ thoSe Several hands, and of being conveyed So far up the country.
* Ishe only hope we now had left was that WT fiiould have liberty of applying to our friends to ranfom us, and that we should not be fo much confined, or So hardly treated as cf late we had been.
' But whether he, vrho Sold us last, had given us the cht^racters of deSperate men or not, I cannot tell, but we were cloSely guarded, employed great part of our time in fome Sort of labour or other ; and when not employed as cloSely confined as we had been beSore.
A fellow fiave who was juSc ranfomed, obtained a pafs to travel with fafety, and Soon left us, intending to go to Grand Cairo. By him, OSman and I wrote to 1	.	the ,
Mr. Charles Guildford. 97
the captain of the vessel, who was to have carried us to Venice, not doubting but he had taken care of our treaSure, and desiring him to remit us bills. The letters our fellow fiave promiSed faithSully either to dtliver, or Send by Some fafe conveyance to him, without delay. For .he knew too well the miSeries attending our preSent situation, to be in the least dilatory, on Such an occasion.
I likewise gave him Several letters to forward by different strips to England to my friends to inSorm them that I had been taken by the Turks a Second time, but that I Soon expected remittance, from a friend to redeem me and my friend OSman, that then we should endeavour to return to Italy and from thence to England. I likewise ventured to write a few lines to Charlotte, which ! inclofed in a letter to my Sister, and desired her to de-LVer Charlotte’s into her own hands.
Omar had inSormed us that the best way would be, when we obtained our ranSom’s to proceed to ISpahan and from thence go with the Caravan’s to Gom-ron on the Persian gulph, where we fiiould meet with fiiips from all parts of Europe. I'liat tliereiore it would be
Vol. *11.	F	most
^ 8 M E M O I R S of
most adviSeable for us to direct my friend^S in England, to Send their anSwers to his mother’s, to whom he would write to receive them, and to take care to Send them afier us, provided we.should be gone before they come. I followed his directions and accordingly deSired my friends to direct their letters as Omar had adviSed.
We now began to be more chearful than vre had ever yet been under our fia-very. We were Sometimes employed, and Sometimes idle. We had desired our new master to permit us three to be together, we informed him we were gentlemen, told him our cafe, and affured him on our honours we had fent for our ranSom’s and that we would not endeavour to make our eScape, or do any thing which should injure him.
The perfon who took our letters had informed him that we had Sent for our ranSom’s, in hopes that it would induce him to treat us with the greater kindneSs »and this, together with our assertions, had Such an influence on him, that he granted us our request, did not treat us with So much Severity and gave us much greater liberty than we had hitherto enjoyed.
We
Mt. Charles Guildford. 99
We had now each of us, a much greater flow of Spirits than we had before enjoyed, a’nd could now find a great variety of Subjects for conversation that afforded us entertainment.
Our friend OSman gave us an account of Constantinople, and of the nature of their government, &c. A few particulars of which I shall give you, and then proceed to other Subjects.
Though you are prejudiced, my friend. Says OSman, directing the first part of his diScourSe to me,” against Constantinople for the irregularity of our buildings, &c. Yet when you reflect on its Situation you’ll acknowledge, you have never Seen a city So happily situated, for enjoying all tire conveniences of life. I mean by commerce.
It stands in Europe, on a part of the main land, that projects out towards the Bolphorus of Thrace. On the right hand is the White-Sea, by which there is an
BGfphorus, ligctfies, a narrow fea, or channel, feporating two contiaents, and ferviog as a comnu>-nication between two feas. The Bofphorus of 'rhrace is likewife called the Straits of Coiiilantino-pie, which divides Europe from Afia.
E a	eaiy
3 00 MEMOIRS of
eafy passage into Asia. Bigypt, and Africa, whereby it is Supplied with ail the commodities of thofe places. On the left hand it has the Black or Euxine Sea, and L Palus Meotis, by which it is furnished with all the commodities of the north; inSomuch that there is nothing which can be uSeful or pleaSant, which is not brought plentifully to this city. The port is by nature the finest in the world, being fix miles in compaSs, and a mile over, and So deep in every part of it, that a ship may lay her head on shore vrithout dan-ger.
The air in Summer would be very hot, were it not cooled by a breeze which comes every afternoon from the mouth of the port, and renders it much more healthful than it otherwiSe would be; So that no diSeaSes are known there but the plague, which it miust be confessed makes a great havock every year. It is very shbject to earthquakes. So that Sometimes two happen in a day. It is Surrounded with good walls, and to the landSidethey
f A Sea of Turky which divides Europe from Aha, extending from Crim Tartary to the mouth of the rvier Don or Tanais.
y .	are
Mr. CfiARLES Guildford. lo-r
are double, being built in Some places of free-stone, and in others of brick. It has. twenty-two gates, six towards the land and as many towards tlie port, and along the streight of the V7hite Sea, the v/hole being about twelve miles in compaSs. The castle of the Seven tower^ joins the double wall on the continent side, to thoSe that lie upon the White Sea. In going by Sea from this castle to the Seraglio,, there is a Square tower stands in the water, about two paces from the city walls. Not far from this tower is a fountain, to which the Greeks pay a great veneration, and Say wonderful cures have been done by it; near this fountain stands a pleafure houSe of the Bostangi Basha, or overSeer of the gardens.
It is a pavilion covered over, just without the walls of the Seraglio. Beyond this are a great number of cannon placed,. So as to strike any Ships that paSs, between wind and water, to hinder their entrance into the Seraglio, or port. TheSe pieces are always charged. But never discharged unleSs it be on the first or .Second day off the month Bairam, to give mussulimea notice of that Iblemn feast, or on the account of public rejoicings,
F 3	In
102 M E M O I R S of
In the midst of theSe pieces of cannon, is one of the four posterns of the Seraglio,, called Bostan Capi, or the gate ot the gardens. It is fortified viith two large Turrets, guarded by two companies of gardeners, who keep all from entering at this gate, except the Sultana’s and officers of tfie Seraglio. After you have passed the cannon and doubled the cape you pafs by a fountain from which most of the ships take in fresh water, you come to two Kioshes built by Sultan Soliman,. to view the going out and the coming in of the men of war, and divert himSelf with his women, of v/hom he had plenty. Both of them are adorned v;ith gilded cupola’s alcoves, Sopha’s, quilts, cushions, carpets, and all other things fit for fo great a prince; but nothing can be imagined more noble than one of them.
At theSe pleaSure houSes there are always Some Small galiies lie, ready to attend the Grand Seignior, whenever he thinks proper to divert himSelf. Tl eSe ga’hes are richly gilt and painted in every part, even the Qars and graphing irons.,
I shall
Mr. Charles Guildford, log-
I shall in my next proceed to the city, but least my letter Siiould be too long,. I tvill here conclude.
Yours, sincerely, Charles Guildford.
LETTER X.
Ccording to the promiSe I made you I\_ in my last, I shall here mention a few particulars concerning, the city of Constantinople, and then vary my Subject. I have not a copy of my former-letter, a considerable time Since Sent you, concerning Constantinople, therefore, if I Ihould here repeat any thing I there mentioned, impute it to the length of time elapled, and excuSe|it,.
Constantinople is Situated on Seven little hills, as old Rome was, and the houSes are So diSpoSed, by accident, I preSume, and the situation of the ground on which, they are built, that one houfe does not.
F 4	deprive:
104 MEMOIRS of
deprive you of the fight of another. Tho’" the streets are in general; narrow, yet there are many stately buildings in them. The moSques are»alSo, in general, magnificent, the most famous of which is that of Santa Sophia, which was antiently a Christian-church, built by Justinian, and dedicated to the WiSdom. of God. This fabric is, 114 paces in length, and 80 in breadth, and as many high, Square vrithout, but round within. The moSque is very Spacious, with a dome in the middle, in form, of a flatted globe, which is a singular kind of architecture. It h payed with fine marble, and in it a tomb, which the Turks Say is Const'antine’s, and a stones on which they believe, the virgin washeei our Lord’s linnen, to which they beay great reverence...
The church was painted in MoSaick, with crosses, and images of Christ, the-Virgin, ^nd others, which yet appear, though the Turks have endeavoured tQ, deLce them, Sor they fiiffer no images,. V>^ithin arc two galieries, one over the other, that go roufid the church, and are Supported by 62 pillars, which it is Sup-. P>Sed were for tlie women, wFien uSed aa a. church. On the outside of it are four
Mr. Charles Guildford. ro5
steeples, very high and Slender, on which ate Several balconies, from whence they call to prayers. It is large enough ro hold 4000 people, which number uSually meet in it at the Passover.
There are Several other moSques, called Imperial, the chief of which is named So-liinania, becauSe it was built by Sultan' Sohinan, whoSe cofiin remains in it, adorned with carpets, and a turban Set with heron feathers and precious stones; this> place is a)So illuminated with many lamps,, kept constantly burning. Several Alcoran’3 are chained to it, that the people; may read them, and pray for the defunct’s-Soul. All the moSques have hoSpitals and Schools, where a great number of Scholars are maintained and educated. Most of the antient statues,, obelishs, and pictures, Set up by Corsstantine and his Successors, are entirely ruined, yet the large Flippo-drome, where they exerciSed their horSes in racing, is still to be Seen. It is a largo Square, 550 paces long, and 150 broad. In the midst of it is an obeliSlc, almost entire, marked with hieroglyphics ; near which is a pillar, compoSed of large stones,, without cement, and towards the end of it, another made of three braSs Serpents
twisted
io6 MEMOIRS of
twisted together, whofe heads make the-capital. It was Said to be the TaliSman, or Spell, raiSed by Leo ISauricus, the emperor, against Serpents, So that none would come near, till Mahomet II. when he took Constantinople, beat off the under jaw oS one of them with his zuagaye, and now they are faid to do no hurt.
The grand Bezistam or Exchange, is a noble building, being a great round hall,, built with free stone, and furrounded with a thick wall, in which are fiiops full of the richest merchandize. It has Several gates, which are shut fast at nights; and^ becauSe no body lies in it, it is guarded by watchmen till it is opened again. Each body of merchants, or tradefmen, have an apartment by themSelves, and no man may Sell the Samie goods in another’s place. There is alSo another Bezistan, but not SO: large as the former,, or So well Supplied, with merchandize. There are leveral markets, one called the woman’s, in which is a pillar, 147 feet high; but I believe this I mentioned formerly.
The grand Seignior’s Seraglios are all remarkable buildings, being the palaces where the Ottoman princes generally keep their courts ; there are two of theSe belonging
Mr. Charles Guildford. 107
longing to the grand Seignior, the old and the new, which being much the more noble building, though not any thing near fo magnificent as the palace of So great a prince ought to be, is called the Grand Seraglio. It is of a triangular form, two Sides of which are encompassed by the Thracian BoSphorus, and the other divides it from the town. It is three miles in eircumSerence, and incloSed with a strong wall, upon which are Several watch-towers,, alfo many gates both on the Sea and land Sides, but the principal is towards the city ; the rest; being never opened but on Some Special occaSions. The chief gate abovementioned, is guarded by Several companies of porters, under the command; of the captains of the companies. A company of Janizaries watch without the palace, and are to give notice of any accident. In this Seraglio arc many stately rooms, Suiting the SeaSon of the year, the greatest part whereof are built upon plain ground, and Some upon the hiih and Sea fide, among v:hich last: is the chamber where the g-rand Seignior gives audience to ambassadors, baihas, &c: Hiis room stands in a court, adorned with many
beau-
io8 MEMO r R S of
beautiful fountains, and is- furnished with rich carpets of crimSon velvet, embroidered, and ornamented with pearls^ and the walls covered with fine white stones. Near it is a Small room, lined with silver plate, gilt with gold* To theSe lodgings of the Jbultan, belong fome very fine gardens, containing all Sorts of flowers and fruits,, handfome walls, and elegant marble fountains ; there are alSo lodgings for the women, like a nunnery, wherein the Sultana queen, the other Sultanas, and all the grand Seignior’s women dwell, in which are bed-chambers, dancing rooms, bagnios, and all other buildings necessary for the fervice of the women ; there are alSo/ convenient rooms for the principal and inferior officers, all vrell furnished, among, which are the Sultan’s private treaSury and wardrobes, both strong buildings, v/ith iron doors, which are kept continually ■ shut, and the former is Sealed v/ith the So-vereiom’s Seal. In the Seraglio are alfb-rooms for prayer, baths. Schools, butteries, kitchens, distilling-rooms, places to fwim in, and to run horSes, for wrestling and Sliooting at butts, and, in a word, all other convenienciesssor a prince’s palace.
At the entrance into, the Seraglio is a
stately
Mr. Charles Guildford, io^'
stately gate, where there is a guard always standing of 50 capigies: this leads-into a Spacious court, a quarter of a mile Square, but it is not paved; the basha’s may ride in it; there is in it an hoSpital, a place for timber, &c. and over it an hall, where weapons of antiquity are kept. Beyond this is another court, far more beautiful, adorned with fountains,. cypreSs trees, &c. it is 300 paces Square, and the walks paved. In this court all must walk on foot, except the grand Seignior ; here are alfo Several, kitchens, with their offices-and larders, for the Sultanas, and the officers of the court. On the left fide is the Sultan’s little stable, containing about 35 horSes Sor his uSe, and over it rooms for their furniture, which are very rich, anss fet with many jewels. Next the stables are rooms for the officers of the Divan, or court of justice, and near thereto the chamber where the Divan firs, and a little behind that is the gate v:hich leads to the women’s- lodgings. At the end of this court is the royal gate, v/hich leads to the Sultan’s lodgings, where none are to enter but the gentlemen that attend him, &c. v/ithout the Sultan’s leave. The gate is kept by the chief chamberlain, and
a com-
iro MEMOIRS of
a company of white eunuchs. The court rs paved with fine marble, wrought with MoSaic wmrk, adorned with curious fountains, and a lake, where the Sultan has a gilt boat for his reception. In the buildings, which are Sumptuous, are a chamber of audience, a row of Summer rooms, standing on a little hill, looking to the Sea, a large hall standing on pillars, and opening towards the east, and by it the grand Seignior’s bed-chamber, the walls of which are covered with the finest China, and the floor with very costly carpets of silk and gold. The posts of the bedSceads are Silver ; the canopy, bolsters, matrasses, and pillows, are alSo of cloth of gold. Behind the hail is a place to shoot in, where many bows and ari'ows are kept.
The Divan sits Sour days in the tvcek, viz. Saturday, Sunday, Monday, aiid TueS-day, on which days the chief Vizier, who is the Supreme judge, and reprcSents^ the grand Seignior, with all the rest of the Viziers, are to be there by daybreak. Before this grand assembly the petitioners Speak for tliemSelves, not be-ina: allowed councestors or attornies. When the chief Vizier harh heard their Suits, he eonSults with the bashas, and then re_-
Solves.
Mr. Charles Guildford. i it
Solves and determines them as he will himSelf; this he uSually does after dinnei-, and then he repairs on Sund;iys and TueS-days, to the chamber of audience, to give the Grand Seignior an account of what bufineSs he has diSpatched. The Sultan> fometimes will come privately to a little window, which is covered with a lattice, and looks into the Divan, to hear the cauSes ; and this obliges the prime Vizier, to act circumSpectly and justly in managing affairs while he sits there, though, at other times his hands are open to bribery, and he will carry buSineSs as he pleaSes ; but all things are cliSpatched without delay.
When an ambassador from a greatprince arrives, he is first, with great Iblemnity, conducted to the prime Vizier, with whom he dines, and is then conveyed to a room near the imperial gate, with his attendants, where he remains till the Sultan is ready to receive him.
In the rnean time the ambassadors prefent, is carried about the Second court, in the fight of all the people, and then is brought to the Sultan, and the Grand Vizier Sends the ambassador Several vests, appointed by the antient ciiStom, for himSelf and gentlemen to put on for that ce-
remo-
ir2 MEM O I R S of
remony. The vests for the ambassadors,, are of cloth of gold, but for the rest they are of little or no value, yet the ambassador is obliged to make a preSent of more than the v/orth of them, and then he is conducted, by the master of the ceremonies to kiSs the Sultan’s hand, which is no more than his hanging fieeve; this done, She interpreter declares the ambaS-fador’s commission, to which the Grand Seignior makes no anSwer, diSdaining to. Speak to a Christian, but turning to the prime Vizier, refers all proceedings to his discretion, and So the ambafSador departs, -bov/ing his head to the Sultan, but not putting off his hat at all. The ambaSSi-dors of petty princes, or states, though they have vests given them., yet come not to the Divan, but go privately with their preSents. All ambassadors are maiji-tained by the Grand Seignior, except tstoSe from the state of Venice, during their abode at the port, but it is hard to get his allowance* through the baSeneSs of the ministers. But I mnast at prefent conclude,.
Yours,
Charles Guildford..
L R T-
Mr. Charles Guildford, itij.
LETTER XI.
AS you Say the Subject of my last was curious, and that you were pleaSed with it, I shall proceed.
All perSons that live in the Seraglio, are the Grand Seignior’s Oave.s, as, in fact, are all thoSe that are Subject to his dominion ; for they all acknowledge, that whatever they enjoy proceeds from his good will, and that their estates and lives are absolutely at his diSpoSal. There are, i n the Sultan’s court, above 12000 women,, old and young ; his concubines, who are-kept for their beauty, are all young vir--gins, brought from Several countries, in--ifructed in good behaviour, dancing, music, Singing, and curious v/ork, &c. being Sent to the Grand Seignior as preSents, by the Tartar, basha’s, and other gentlemen, arid So their numbers are uncertain y theSe virgins, immediately upon their coming into the Seraglio, are made Turks,, by their using this ceremony; ‘ There is.
no God, but God alone, and Maho-“ met is the messenger of God;” and then being examined by the mother of the maids, they are placed in a room,
tvith
114 M E M O I R S of
with their equrds in age and diSpositiom Alt the women .live like nuns, but have large apartments to dwell in ; their beds, are coarSe and hard, made of flocks, and by every tenth virgin lies an old woman, and there are lamps alvrays burning by them. Near their apartments they have baths and fountains, and above their bed-cliambers, places to Set and Sew it. Tliey dine in companies, and are waited upon by other women, wanting nothing that is necessary for them ; there are alSo Schools for fuch as will learn to read, or Speak the Turkish language, work or play, and Some hours are allov/ed them for walking and recreation.
The Sultan never Sees theSe virgins, unleSs when they are first preSented to him, or vrhen he desires to have one of them for his bed-fellow, and divert himSelf with music, or any other pastime. When the Grand Seignior desires a fresh mate, he gives notice to the grand master -of the feiaglio, who chuSes Some of the fairest and most pleasing,, and having placed them in two rows, in a room, brings m the Sultan, who walking four or five times in the midst of them, views them, and as he goes out, throws his handkerchief into.
the
Mr. Charles Guildford. 115
the virgin’s hand, that he makes choice of. This choice is accounted a great favour, and the governeSs uSes all the art she can to prepare her for it, by attiring, painting, and perfuming her, and at night, file is brought to sseep with the Sultan, in certain chambers, Set apart for that pur^ poSe in the women’s lodgings. By the bed they have great wax tapers burning all night, and Moorish, women Sitting by them. In. the morning, when the Sultan rlSes, he changes all his apparel, and leaves them to his bed-fellow, then departs to.> his own lodgings, from whence he immediately Sends her jewels, money, and. vests of greater, or leSs value, according to the Satisfaction site gave him.
If any conceive by him, and bring him forth his first begotten child, site is called Sultana Queen ; and, if it be a Son, she is, confirmed and established by great feasta and Solemnities, and thence forward has an apartment. Servants, and a large reve-. nue appointed her, and all perSons in the Seraglio muss pay her the reSpect of a queen. The other women that bear him, children are all called Sultanas, but not queens, yet five in Separate apartments;, are well Served and attended, and have
m
sr6 M E M O I R S of
no want either of money or apparel, according to their degree. But if the firSc-begotten Son of the queen, who is heir to the empire, happens to die, and another of the Sultana’s hath a Son to Succeed the deceaSed, the former is deprived of her revenue and royalty, but remains a Sultana, and the latter becomies Queen, and So the title deScends from one to another, by virtue of the Son’s right of Succession. TheSe Sultanas never go out of the palace, but in the Sultan’s company, and are never Seen by any but by Such as attend them, v/ha are black eunuchs, and are taken proper care of, that no danger may enSue.
The Grand Seignior’s daughters, sisters,, and aunts,, have lodgings alfo in the Sg:-raglio, and live by themSelves in continual pleaSure, till Such time as. the Sultan fiiall be pleafed to give them in marriage, and then they come forth, carrying each a chest along with them,, v/hich the Grand Seignior allows them, commonly full of rich apparel, jewels, and money, to the amount of thirty thouSand pounds sterling, alSo women Slaves and eunuchs, anei he Sometimes continues, their allowance of
a thou-
Mr. Charles Guildford. liy
% thoufand, or fifteen hundred aSpers ^ per day, which they enjoyed in the Sera»« glio. Nay, if the husband of the lady has not a houfe fit for her, the Sultan ve-jy often gives her one of his own.
As for the husband, he is to make her a bill of dowry, of at least 100,000 Sequins -f in money, besides vests, jewels, iand other ornaments, which amount to a great Sum. When married they converfe with men no more than they did before, but only wsith women, visiting their old ace|uaintances in the Sei*aglio only, and not this without the Grand Seignior’s leave. The Sultanas thus married, are for the most part their hushand’s mistresses, inSulting over, and commanding them as they pleaSe, wearing a dagger in token of their power over them, and Sometimes they will put them away, and take others, and a divorce of this kind commonly proves the death of the hushand.
The other females either grow old in the Seraglio, and So are made mistreSs over the young ones, or are Sent into the old Seraglio, which they account their best
* Each wprth Something more than an Englilh Sarthii^. f Each worth about 5 s. 4.(1. 5 d. or 6 d, fterling-
fortune
^^3 M L M O i R S of
fortune, becauSe, from thence, they may be married with conSent of their mistreSs, and carry avray the riches they have got, which often prove very considerable, partly from Saving out of the Sultan’s allowance, and aiSo from the preSents made them by the basha’s wives, &c.
There are above 20O enUuchs in the Seraglio ; the black eunuchs and black girls Serve the Sultanas, and the (^leen’s women; theSe eunuchs, whilst they are boys, ' are brought up like the white ones, and after are Set to wait at the SultaRa’s gate, under the command of the Aga they have a pension of sixty aSpers a day, and t wo vests, v/ith linnen, and other neceS-Saries, yearly, besides preSents given therU by Such ladies as come to See the Grand Seignior’s women ; they are never Sent abroad in any employment, but Serve for ever in the Seraglio ; their busineSs is to carry messages from the Sultanas to the Capi Aga, to be delivered to the Sultan, ancl attend upon the ladies in health and SickneSs.
The Grand Seignior’s Sons, by the Queen, are brought up by themSelves, by choice nurSes, which arc found out of the Seraglio ; aud if he has Sons by other Sultanas,
Mr. Charles Guildford, it'9
tanas, they are brought up alfo by themfelves, but may play with them till they are fix or Seven years old ; they live with the v/omen nine or ten years, and about fourteen are circumciSed with great pomp, as weddings are kept among Christians. The Sons, ft'om five to ten years of age, are taught to write and read by a Schoolmaster, who, for that purpoSe, is admitted into the womens apartments, at certain times, but does not See them, unleSs tv/o or three old, ugly, black Moorish women;
, but daughters are little regarded. When the Sultan’s Son, who is heir to the crown, ' is circumciled, he is Sent abroad, with a Suitable equipage, and under the care of principal eunuchs, to be governor of Magnesia, and the provinces about it, but as deputy to his father.
The victuals of the Seraglio are dressed by cooks brought up to this bufineSs; they wear white caps for distinction, and are, in the whole, about 200 ; they begin their busineSs early in the morning, for the Sultan rifes early, and must always have Something ready for his breakfait. He dines at ten o’clock in the morning, and Sups at six in the evening, both Summer and winter; he fits v/ith his legs a-
croSs
i
i £ 0 MEMOIRS of
crofs, according to the Turkish fashion, and has a rich napkin laid before him ; he carves for himielf, but does not ufe eidier knife or fork, for his meat is So tenderly dressed, that he easily pulls it in pieces with his -fingers ; he Seldom Speaks at table, but to pleaSe Some Aga, to whom he Says a word or two, and throvv^s him a loaf. The Grand Seignior’s dishes are all of gold, and yellow porcelane, Scarcely to be had Lor money, in which he eats chiefly in Lent, which lasts a whole moon : he never eats fish unleSs with his women, or when he Sees it talcen.
The Queen and Sultana’s are Served by the black eunuchs, and he by the vrlrite, but the former only m copper difiies, if the ' Sultan is not with them. They drink their sherbet v/ith Snow, which costs them dear, being brought from the hills, and kept under ground. The Grand Seig-iiioFs, Sultanas, and Bafiias bread, is made of wheat, brought from BurSa, .and ground there, v/hich is very white, and of a fine taste.
The prime Vizier may go in or out of the Seraglio, when he pleaSes, either by iea or land; when lie goes by v/ater, he L
carried
Mr. Charles Guildford. 12'r
tarried in a barge covered with crimSon velvet, under which he sits, his AgaS standing round him. When he goes by land, he always rides on horSeback, and commonly comes out of the gate of the palace. The people, in his way, follow him with repeated acclamations of their happineSs, which he returns by a nod, and Such as are, or believe themSelves wronged, preSent to him their petitions, which his highneSs orders to be received, and having read at his return, gives command for re-dreSs, to make good the title he assumes, viz. “ The Refuge of the World.” The Grand Seignior, at Constantinople, by the Sea side, has a large stable of 1000 horSes, for the uSe of his houshold, of which the master of the horSe has the charge, and lesser stables at his houSes of pleaSure in the country, of ten horSes each.
Upon the first day of their Bartramy or carnival, the Sultan shews himSelf publickly, and lets all the great men, and better lort of his Servants, kiSs his vest, when he is richly dressed with ail his best jewels, and Sits down on a Persian carpet, where his throne is Sec, the prime Vizier tellirg him the names of the perSons, that he may take notice of them ; he chiefly re-
VoL. II.	G	Spedta
122 iVl iL iVi u 1 it o or
fpects the Mufti, and other doctors of the law, of the highest degree. The ceremony being ended, he goes to the moSque of Santa Sophia, the company attending him, where he hears divine Service and a Sermon, which being concluded, he retires to his lodgings, and dines alone,, as on other days, yet he orders a Sumptuous banquet in the Divan for the Bashas and other Grandees, and a great dinner in the court yard for the rest of the company. After dinner he Sends a New year’s gift to all of them, according to their quality ; but as the Grand Seignior gives, fo he alSo receives preSents from the Bashas, and other great perSons, at the Same time, who strive to exceed each other in the value of their gifts, that they may gain favour.
Besides the Seraglio here deScribed, there is another in Constantinople, mentioned before, called the Old Seraglio, fo named becauSe it was the first, built by Mahomet the Second. It is a large place, about four or five miles in compaSs, and Seated in the best part of the city ; it is Surrounded by a high wall, has but one gate, and that is of iron, which is kept by a guard of white eunuchs. The inhabitants of it, are all women and eunuchs ; the women
ar«
Mr. Charles Guildford. i%^
are only fuch as have been put out of the Grand Seignior’s Seraglio, viz. the Sultanas of the deceaSed monarch, Such as are fallen into diSgrace, and Such as are infirm and defective in Something that should fic them for the Sultan’s bed; they are governed by an old woman, who is to take care that they have all things necessary, according to the ufual custom of the houSe. The Sultanas have lodgings, and are pretty well ferved, though far short of what they had in the Sultan’s Seraglio. If they -are rich when fent thither, they take care to make it publick, and procure them a good hushand and jointure. The Sultan will Sometimes go thither to visit his grandmother, fisters, and other relations, or when he is melancholy.
In the Suburbs of Constantinople, called Galata, are Some good houSes, well built; many Greeks and Franks live there ; there is alSo the finest fish market in the world, where there is great plenty of all Sorts of fish to be had very cheap.
Beyond Galata, lies Pern, a large borough, Separated only by burying places. (Galata being Separated from the city by the port.) In this town refide the ambassadors from Christian princes, for the G 2	Enipc-
124 MEMOIRS of
emperor’s, the king of Poland’s, and the republic of Ragonza’s only, may refide at Constantinople. The houSes are high and handSome, being inhabited by Greeks of quality. But it is time to c onclude my letter.
Yours
Charles Guildford.
LETTER XIL
WELL my friend if I thought I should not tire you with the account I give you of theSe people, I would venture a little farther, Ithink nothing more curious than an account of people in different nations, their buildr ings, &c. together with their customs, manners, learning, religion, government, &c. As it is not every one, I may Say there are but few, who have an opportunity of knowing any thing of their feh ipw creatures that inhabit the other parts
of
Mr. Charles Guildford. 125
of the world, but by the relation of a few.
I will therefore proceed without farther apology, only I will before hand affure you, I will not be too prolix.
The Turks are in general well shaped, and have strong and robust constitutions. Isheir habit is of itSelf Sufficient to make them appear graceful, and to hide deSecta if they have any. As for their dreSs ,i shall not be particular. They uSually wear two daggers, their handles and Scabbards being ornamented with gold, and Som.e-times with precious stones.
Their heads are generally covered with a crimSon velvet cap, without brims, about which they wreath a white or red turbant, which is a Sash of silk or linen many ells long; and by the fashion of this the quality of the men is known. The dreSs of the ladies of Constantinople, hath a peculiar air of grandeur and magnificence, and much exceeds the apparel of other women in Turky.
Their head-dreSs is compoSed of many handerchieS’s of various colours, all worked with gold and Silver, Set with a G 3	great
126 MEMOIRS of
great variety of precious stones, and adorned with Several Sorts of flowers. They can put it on or off without undoing it: they uSually wear it Several days, and then alter it, into Some other fashion, but it is often So heavy that it is a burthen to the wearer. Their outward garment is a white gown, edged at the bot-^ tom with gold lace and fringe, which in winter is lined with fur, as the men line their garments. The ladies in the Seraglio fometimes wear on their heads a fur cap, others a round plaiting like the jew-ish women, with a feather on each sick and plumes at their ears.
The Turks shave their their heads, but Sufier their beards and mustacho’s to grow, have a great esteem for a man v:ith a lovely beard, and think it a great affront to take a man by it.
They make great uSe of bathing, both, for keeping their bodies neat and clean, and for their health-lake ; and in every town they have many fair Bagnio’s, the Smallest village never being without one. The poorest perSon, man or woman goes to the bath once aweek. The women go in by themSelves attended by the women
only
Mr. Charles Guildford. 127
only, and it is a capital crime for a man to go into a bath where women are.
They have no Sumptuous feasts, but are content with a little. They uSe no knivCs but pull their meat to pieces with their fingers, it being dressed properly for that purpofe, and then every one takes his share. Water is in general their drink, tho’ they have good Snerbet, made in Egypt of Sugar,lemon-juice, muSk, amber greaSe, and roSewater. At their great treats they give coffee, sherbet, and perfurne for their beards. They Spread quilts on the ground for their bedding and every one lies on his own.	,
They will play at chefs, draughts, tables, &c. but never play for money or any thing of value becauSe they think it Sinful; and yet they will Spend a whole afternoon at theSe games. The Turks have here the advantage of the civilized Christians.
The Turkish language is a primitive and oriental tongue, and though not very copious, yet it is grave and pleaSant, rich and elegant enough. They are not much addicted to Sciences, yet have doctors of the law v/ho explain it in all the SenSes that can be given it. They are G 4	too
1<2? M E M O I R s of
too much addicted to fortune telling, and ridiculous whims, in Searching Sor Suture events, and never undertake any thing of conSequence, without first putting Some of thele whims in practice, and as that; anSwers they either proceed or defer their defign.
They have few physicians, being very healthy becauSe of their frequent bathing and temperance.
As to their religion, they acknowledge one God, and Say mahomet is his prophet. There are in that as in most other religions, ill the world many abSurdities, of which the Turks might be easily convinced, but their prophet has politically provided against innovation, by commanding, that whoever contradicted it, should be putta death.
- A Christian is not allowed to touch th® Alcoran, arid as to the Turks, they, fiy reading it, in their opinion, merit para-dife. It is written in pure arabic, and the Turks are So bigotted, as to believe it cannot be turned into any other language; and Sor this very reaSon, they call the Persians heretics becauSe they have ttanfiated it shto thdr tongue.
This
Mr. CttARtES (juiIdfMD. 12^
This book contains all their laws both canon and civil; but is full of rabbinical fables. According to this book, the Turks worship. God, the eternal and almighty creator of heaven and earth; deny the Trinity, nor will they allow any images in his worship, either painted or engraved. They are fond of predestination, and extend it even to the most indifferent acti-' ons. It is this mak-es them fight without fear, believing if they are killed, they should have died at home fome other way; nor do they even uSe any method to preserve themSelves from the plague or other infectious diSeafes.
They believe that JeSus-Christ was con* ceived by the Spirit of God, in the Vir-giii’s womb; but deny him to be the Son of God, who is one, and hath no partner; 'They believe a Suture state, but they have a strange idea of it. One of their happinesses which they are to enjoy in pa-radiSe is, the constant fociety of lovely virgin’s, with black eyes, and Ikins as white as ermine, alw^ays young.
They pray for their dead, and call on their Saints to recommend them to God. They allow of guardian angels. They circumciSe their children, as the jews do C 6	only
«30 M E M O I R S of
only not at eight days old, but at eleven or twelve.
When a Christian turns Turk, he is alfo circumciSed, but a Jew is not. The Turks receive the ten commandments of MoSes’s law, and to them Mahomet has added five, viz. To believe one only God, and to worship him as Such : to fast during the Ramadan: (Similar to our lent.) To pray at the hours appointed : To give the poor yearly a fortieth part of their Substance: to go in pilgrimage to Meccaonce in their lives.
The Turks have their Clergy, as all ‘other religions have, to Solve their doubts and celebrate divine Service. They are most ot them knowing men. The chief ecclesiastic is the Mufti, whom they reverence as much as the Romanists do the Pope. He is choSen by the Grand Seig^ nior, and is always a learned man in their way, that is much verSed in the Alcoran, for he reSolves all matters of conScience, and gives his deScisions in little writs, to which even the Sultan himSelf must stand, though by adding thefe words (but God is the best judge,) he shews that he does not pretend to infallibility. He is married.
Mr. Charles Guildford. 131
Fle is held in fuch high veneration, that, the Grand Seignior himSelf rifes to meet and Salute him when he comes to court. It is unlawful by their law to put their Mufti to death; yet Some Emperors. have done it. There is but one Mufti, he resides at Constantinople where he findi businefs enough; the justices perform his offices in other places. The Sultan conSults the Mufti in state affairs, as when he designs to put any prime mir nister to death, diSgrace a'Basha, or.un,-dertake any other busineSs of importance, but the Mufti has no power over the Imans, or priests, becauSe the Turks have no hierarchy.
The marriage of the Turks is of thre« Sorts, having as many Sorts of wives. Firih lawSul wives, which they take after the following manner; the man that defirei to be married, agrees with the'parents ot| guardians of the maid about what they wil give Sor< her portion, which the justice. beSore whom the agreement is made, writes down. This done^ he gets a priest . to bleSs his marriage, and then the bridegroom on the marriage day, leads the bride to his houSe^ her baggage being carried by horSes or camels before them, G 6	and
M E M O I ‘R § of
and there they feast and are merry, this’ men and women by themSelves, where they commonly have mufic &c. for the diverfion of the company. TheSe wives the Turks may divorce when they pleafe, by Saying, (I part with you for three times.) But if a man puts away his wife wrongfully, he must return her dowry; though if he does it upon just grounds^ or she forSakes him, he gives her nothing. When a woman is thus divorced, she must not marry another man ’till four months after, that she may be certain whether Sne was with Child, Sor iS she be, the hushand that divorced her miust keep it, and if she be not. Such matches are often made up in that time. A man that hath divorced his wife cannot marry her again ’till she has been first married to another man, and then he may take her back. Of theSe wives the Turks can have but one.
They may alSo have wives which they take with leSs ceremony than the former, for they only go to the justice and tell him that they take Such a one to be their wife, promiSing to give her So much if they divorce her. This the Cadi, or juf-dce writes down, and gives the man a
copy.
Mr. Charles Guildford. 135
copy, then he may keep or divorce her as he pleaSes, performing his promiSe and maintaining the children he has by her. The Turks may have as many of thefe wives as they can keep, but to Save charges, Some of them will have no more thai> one or two.
The third kind of wives are women staves, and of thefe every man may have as many as he will, and the children begotten of them are held as legitimate, as thoSe of the former wives, and have as much title to the inheritance of what the father leaves behind him, iS by his will he makes them free, otherwiSe they remain staves to the eldest ch Id, by the lawful wife ; but if a Turk takes a stave to his Ted, he must not Sell her again if she has children, Sor she becomes a member of his family, if Site proves barren she may be lold again as often as her masters will.
The Turks buy all Sorts of Oaves, of every religion and nation; but Christians and Jews may not buy a Turk. Every Wednesday at Constantinople there is a market for Oaves, where every one may buy for their Several uSes their lust not excepted. TheSe Slaves are bought and Sold like HorSes, viewed, reviewed, and felt all over their bodies, and their mouths
looked
134 M E M O I R S ol -
looked into, being alfo examined concerning their country and age. A beautiful virgin, at thefe markets is held at a high rate, but the Seller is anSwerable for her virginity, for if site prove otherwiSe, he must return the money she was Sold for, and Submit to a fine for his fraud.
The Haves of the Turks are not So miserable as is SuppoSed. If they have merit, they have great favour shewn them, and may live happily; they are very frequently, alSo, in favour with their miS-tresses, who, through a tender compassion, natural to their Sex, make them preSents, &c.
Tlie Turkish women are commonly beautiSul, strait, and well shaped, but they never go abroad without a veil to cover their faces; they are cleanly and neat, for going into the bath twice a wTek is of great Service to them in that reSpect. , When they go abroad, they generally muffle up their hands. So that there is nothing but their eyes uncovered; nay, their shiSt fieeves cover their hands, becauSe it is a thing of ill repute to fiiew any part of their bodies, yet in the corner of a street they will venture to uncover their face to a friend, or a young man
they
Mr. Charles Guildford, 135
they like, though, if difcovered, they are bastinadoed. They are very haughty, and extremely lazy; they do nothing, but sit embroidering a handkerchief, and yet they will have staves to attend them, let their hushands be ever So poor ; this idleneSs makes them vicious, and Seek only ways of obtaining their pleaSures, of which their hushands are So jealous, that they will not Suffer them to shew themSelves to a man, and, if they do, they are certain of receiving the bastinadoe on a part I do not chuSe to name; for this reaSon the women are Seldom Suffered to go to the moSques or markets, or appear in their hushands shops.
As to the buryings of the Turks, there is as much lamentation, howling, and crying, as among the wild Irish, and as diS-Sffreeable as the howls of the Savages. They bury without the city, according to the custom of the ancients, becauSe they will not be affected by the noxious vapours arising from their corpfes.
The Turks are, in general, honest people, and love honesty, whether in Turk, Jew, or Christian. Some are bad enough, and there is not any large Society on earth, but will, on examination, be found to be
plen-
136 M E M O I R S of
plentifully provided with bad members ; they are very zealous for religion, and endeavour to make as many proSelites as they can. If a Christian is guilty of ever So great a ctime, he is, in general pardoned, if he will turn Mahometan. They are very loyal. Seldom quarrel among themSelves; they are strangers to duelling, this is the natural conSequence of their great prophet’s wiSe policy, who forbid them wine, and gaming for money ; they are, however, very proud and haughty, and often inSolent towards ChriStians, but as to this I fancy the Christians can retaliate it on any who visit our hoSpitable shore.
The empire of the Turks is hereditary, and passes regularly in a lineal deScent to the right heir, who is always of the Ottoman family, for which the Turks have fo great a veneration, that they will not fubmit to any other government.
The Sultan’s power is abSolute, and his will the only law by which he rules. He is not curbed by any written law or cuS-tom. So' that the oppressed have not a right to complain. He may take away any mail’s estate, prefer the meanest perSons to the highest dignities, and Send for
the
Mr. Charles Guildford. 137
the head of any perSon he pleiSes, without trial of justice, and ncione has a right to enquire the caufe. This unlimited power of the Sultan, is founded on the Mahometan religion, which enjoins a blind obedience to all his commands under pain of damnation.
Some of the Sultan’s have oSten gone abroad incog: to See if their orclers are punctually obServed; and this is of Service to the Christians, who by that means are more free from affronts, than they otherwise would be. The Sultan Amurth wens out often thus; and one day ordered a butchers head to be cut off, for Selling meat above the fixed price; and two more men to be beheaded for Smoaking Tobacco, which had occasioned feveral fires in Constantinople, their houSes being built of wood and very liable to take fire.
The chief minister of state is the Grand Vizier, who is called king of the-Turks. He receives ambassadors, hears their propoSals, and gives them an anSwer; the two audiences which the Grand Seignor allows them being only for ceremony, at their coming and on their departure. He pays the army, condemns criminals, and decides law-Suits; but no trial here, unleSs
138 M E M O I R S of
JeSs in a difficult caufe, v/ill last above four iiours, without Sentence given one way or other. So that no man is wearied and ruined by lawyers and delays, as in other places: nor is there, according to what my friend Ofman Says, any fear but that justice will strictly be administered^ becaufe, at the end of the hall where they fet, is a window covered with black crape where the Grand Seignior hears and Secs -when he pleaSes, what passes, without being discovered; and the judges, fearing he may be there, dare not paSs an unjust Sentence; for if he finds it out, it would immediately cost them their lives.
They take great cate of provisions. &c. that every thing may be cheap, and strictly examine all weights and meaSures, &c. The Same precautions are taken that no quarrel happens in the streets, for there’s a law that if a dead body be found before any one’s door he must pay for blood five hundred piastres. So that every one is obliged to take care.
To prevent accidents in the night, every one is prohibited from going abroad unleSs in Lent, and if any one is found in the streets, he is carried before a magistrate.
Mr. Charles Guildford. 139
gistrate, and punished, unleSs he can prove he had good reaSon for being out.
But my dear friend, enough of the Turks, and enough of this letter; Yossll not have any reaSon to complain of this being short“““But not to make it longer I here end it.	■
Yours,	>
Charles Guildford.
LETTER XIII.
IN your anSwer to my last, you alk me what learning the Turks have amongst ^ them, and whether they cultivate the Sciences ^
In anSwer to this I must inSorm you, that in the first place there are Some of them are men of SenSe and possessed of Some learning, but there are only a few, and the greater part if not all of thofe that have learning are in a great meaSure beholden to the Christians for it.
But
MO M E M O I R S of
But my friend, when you consider that the Grand Seignior is deSpotic, you will not wonder at his Subjects being ignorant. They are educated in ignorance and fear. The implicit obedience they pay to their Sovereign’s commands implies the greatest ignorance not cnly in them, but even in he who commands them. He has never any occasion to deliberate, to doubt, or to reaSon : he has only to will.
In deSpotic estates, each houSe is a Se^ perate empire. Their education, which principally consists in learning how to live with others, is confined within narrow limits; education hath only to instill into the hearts of her pupils, a principle of fear, and to give to the mind tfie knowledge of Some few principles of religion. Learning would there be dangerous, and emulation fatal, and as for the Social virtues, Aristotle, could not believe there were any proper for staves ; it is this which lays a great restraint on education in a deSpotic government.
They have little thereSore or nothing to do with education, you m.ust remove her, and begin by making a bad Subject to make a good stave.
What
Mr. Charles Guildford. 141
What end would it anSwer, by education to form a good citizen, in order afterwards to bear a part in the public miS-fortunes.? If he loved his country, he would endeavour to releaSe it from the miSeries attending Such a government; if he could not Succeed, his own ruin must be the conlequence of his miScarriage ; and if he did fucceed, he would run a great riSque of ruining himfelf, his prince, and the empire likewiSe.
As to fear my friend tis absolutely necessary in a deSpotic state. Political honour is not here found. That glories in the Scorn of life, and the only force of despotic princes, consists in the power of taking life away. Honour therefore in Such a state would be dangerous, and what is called political virtue will on reflection appear unnecessary.
People who are capable of having a ' great esteem, for themSelves, are the most likely to cauSe a revolution. Fear is therefore necessary to abate their courage, and extinguish in them every Spark of ambition.
In deSpotic states the nature of their government demands the most perfect obedience
\
t42 M E M O I R S of
dience, and the very moment the will of the prince is known, it must be obeyed.
In Peissia when the king hath condemned a perSon no one dares Speak in favour of the culprit or demand any grace for him. If the prince is even drunk or out of his SenSes, the Sentence must be put in execution notwithstanding; he would otherwise be contradicted, and ’tis there a maxim, that the law (for fuch is the prince’s will) cannot be contradicted.
Yet religion may be oppoSed, to the princes will. The Subject will abandon a father or flay himSelf if the prince commands it: but they will not drink Wine, if he desired it; or even if he ordered it. The laws of religion are precepts fuperior to his, becauSe they are given to the prince as well as to the lubject. But when the question relates to the laws of nature, its then different, the prince is fuppofed no longer to be a man.
But I will here end my long observation on the Turks, by giving a few lines of AddiSon’s on that invaluable bleshng liberty.
Oh
Mr. Charles Guildford. 143
Oh liberty I Thou GoddeSs Heavshly “ bright,
ProfuSe of bliSs and pregnant with de-“ light;
Eternal pleaSures in thy preSence reign, “ And Smiling plenty leads thy wanton “ train.
“ EaS’d of her load Subjection grows more “ light;
“ And poverty looks chearful in thy fight. “ Thou mak’st the gloomy face of nature “ gay,
“ Giv’st beauty to the Sun and pleaSure to “ the day.
It would never, my friend, enter into 'the mind of a Turk, to write Such lines were the Turks the best poets in the world. But now I bid them ad eu, and return again to our own history, though our fituation was changed for the better yet it began to grow irkSome.
A considerable time had elapSed and we heard nothing of any ranSom coming, we were impatient though if we had considered viie could not have an anSwer stom Venice, if we had Sent a Special messenger. But its natural for mankind to com» plain, and be uneaSy under aifiictions.
Wc
144 MEMOIRS of
We at length coolly deliberated on onf* fituation and finding that by too eagerly wishing for an anSwer to our letters we only increased ouf pain, and made our time appear much longer than it was, we determined to uSe our joint and utmost endeavours to banissi melancholy from our breasts, and paSs away our time as merrily as we could under Such circumstances, and that each member of our triumvirate should every third day find entertainment for the other two, and for himSelf.
This was readily agreed to, and that neither of us should mention a word about ranSom under a month, and So from month to month till they came.
Each of us Spent a part of our respective days allotted us to find entertainment in teaching the other two, the native tongue of the entertainer, and I will assure you, it proved an excellent method of passing away time. We each started Subjects for the entertainer to expatiate on, and both OSman and Omar Several times when it was my day, paid me the compliment of giving me natural philoSophy, for my Subject,
Cm
Mr. Charles Guildford. 145
One day to fiiew the PerSian, who boasted much of the SweetneSs of his language, and who now understood ours pretty well, a Specimen I repeated to him the following lines which are my favourite ones: they were wrote by Garth, on the purSuits of the learned, &c. and as they are on natural philoSophy, I dare affirm you will be pleaSed with them.
“ In all her mazes nature’s face they “ view’d,
“ And as she disappeared they still pur-“ Su’d:
“ Wrapt in the shades of night the god--^ “ deSs lies,	I
“ Yet to the learned	unveils	her	dark !
“ diSguiSe,	f
“ But shuns the	groSs	acceSs of vulgar j
“ eyes.	J
“ They find her dubious now, and then, “ as plain ;
“ Here she’s too Sparing, there profuSely “ vain:
“Now she unfolds the faint, and dawn-“ ing strife,
“ Of infant atoms, kindling into life.
VoL. II.	H	How
146 M E M O I R S of
“ How ductile matter new meanders takes,
“ And llender trains, of twisting fibres “ makes.
“ And how the viScous Seek a cloSer tone,
“ By just degrees to harden into bone;
“ Whilst the more looSe fly from the vital urn:
*‘ And in full tides of purple, stream's “ return.
“ How lambent flames from life’s blight “ lam.p ariSe,
“ And dart in emanations thro’ the eyes :
“ Flow from each Sluice a gentle torrent “ pours,
“To flake a fev’rish heat, with ambient “ show’rs.
Whence their mechanick pow’rs the “ Spirits claim.
“ How great their force, how delicate “ their frame.
How the fame nerves are fashioned to “ Sustain,
The greatest pleaSure and the greatest “ pain,
“ Why bilous juice a golden light puts on^
And floods of Chyle, in Silver currents run.
** How the dim Spec of entity began,
“ To work its brittle being up to man.
To
Mr. Charles Guildford. 147
' To how minute an origin we owe,
“ Voung Ammon, CasSar, and the great “ Nassau.
“ Why paler looks impetuous rage pro-“ claim,
“ And why chill virgins redden into flame.
“ Why envy oft transforms with wan diS-“ guife,
“ And why gay mirth fits fmiling in the “ eyes.
“ All ice, why Lucrece; or Sempronia, “ fire.
“ Why S—— rages to Survive desire.
“ Whence Milo’s vigour at th* olimpicks “ shown,
“ Whence tropes to F—ch, or impudence^ “toS-«-n.
“ Why Atticus polite, Brutus Severe,
“ Why Me—n muddy, M—que why* “ dear.
■“ Flence ’tis we wait the wondrous caush “ to find,
■“ How body acts upon impassive mind..'
“ How fumes of wine the thinking part “ can fire,
“ Past hopes revive, and preSent joys in-“ Spire.
H 2	Why
148 M E M O I R S of
“ Why our complexions oft our Souls de-“ dare,
And liov/ the passions in the features “ are.
“ How touch and harmony ariSe betweenj “ Corporeal SubSianccs, and things un-“ Seen.
“ With weighty truths mysterious to de-‘‘ cry,
Which in the womb of distant cauSes lie.
Both my friends were greatly pleaSed with theSe sines, and I, as far, as was in my power, gave them an explanation of thoSe Subjects mentioned in the above lines, that I had any knowledge of. But my companions were not wholly employed with things of a Serious nature. For notwithstanding my friend OSman’s reiterated prcmsses, and Omar’s love" for Kilana, they had gained the hearts of two beautiful female Haves, and were content to pafs away a few hours in amorous dalliance with their fair mistresses.
As for Omar I could not take thofe liberties tvith him, I could with OSman, I therefore only told him, I thought he paid Kilana a very bad compliment. He anSwered he had little proSpect of ever
being
Mr. Charles Guildford. 149
being happy with that young lady, that at preSent he vras very unhappy, in Such a Situation, that no one need envy him any pleaSure he could find here, that hi> amour with the beautiful girl, was in his opinion a very innocent amuSement, that his laws and religion allowed it, that in fact; it behoved a man in Such distressed circumstances, to do every thing he could to alleviate his distresses, and Sooth his melancholy, which otherwiSe might have an unhappy effect on the mind or at least on his health. That notwithstanding his preSent attachment he still retained the Same reirard ter Kilana, and ever should. That every man’s actions were to be viewed according to certain rules, which I do not think it here prudent to mention, and that he would leave me to judge whether he was greatly to be condemned.
As to my opinion, it was not, I found of much conSequence with my young friend, in this affair, though in others, where his passions were not strongly engaged he v/ould readily have followed it.
But I fiiall here conclude my letter, by Subscribing mySelf, as uSual;
Yours, Sincerely,
Charles Guildford.
H I	LET-
150 MEMOIRS of
LETTER XIV.
WELL my friend, my remonstrance^ which I made in pretty strong terms to OSman, met with little more fucceSs, than my hint to Omar. In fact they both in a free jocofe manner laughed at me, and told me, that notwithstanding all my philoSophy, and all my love for Charlotte, on whoSe beauty I had been very liberal in my praiSes, I should Soon fall a Sacrifice to the power of the little God Cupid.
That they were certain he had got one of his best arrows, v;ith an excellent point,, and- feathered Vv-irh a Georgian feather, that would overcome every obstacle, and Slid its way co my heart.
I told them I defied the god’s power, though assisted with all the beauty of the-eash But Still they only laughed and Seemed highly diverted with, my bOvifted courage, as they called it, and engaged their honours I shr-uld falla Sicrificefo the Snare that was laid Sor me.
I only looked on this as a jest, yet determined, to be on. my guard, and not
give
Mr. Charles Guildford. 151
give thoSe that I had taken the liberty of reproving for their folly, liberty to laugh 'at me for mine.
A ftw days passed in this manner, when I judged what my intriguing friends had faid, was only a jest. To confeSs the truth, I was not much obliged to them for their company, for they readily left me alone, whenever they could enjoy the company of their favourites. And since their acquaintance v/ith thefe girls, I had often passed a good part of my time alone, and under siich circumstances. Self, was not always the most agreeable compar ny. I Several times, for their fakes, as well as my own, almost wished our owner, who v/as himSelf pretty much employed, and who looked on us as men of ho nour, and therefore did not keep a strict guard over us, knew of my companiona amours. He had not much employment' for us So that we had a great part of our time to ourSelves, and farther, we had agreed to make him amends for our time, as alSo for the liberty he gave us, oS walking about Some very fine s:ardens he had.
Such was my Situation when one day my companions, as they had Several times H 4	before
152 M E M O I R S of
before alked me to take a walk in the gardens, to which I readily conSented.
We amuSed ourSelves there, for Some time, when I walked up towards a Summer houfe at the farther end of the walk., I arrived at the Summer houSe, and was passing it, to turn down another walk when I was greatly Surprized by one of the most beautiful young ladie.s 1 ever beheld, sitting in an elegant genteel dishabille, in a pensive manner, but in Such a Situation, that I had a full view of her face, which was then wholly uncovered.
She feemed oppressed v;ith Something that lay heavy on her mind, and I could not avoid engaging mySelf in what con^ cerned lo amiable a creature.
I approached her with that reverence and reSpect I thought justly her due, and v/ith all the deference imaginable, enquired the caufe of that m.elancholy that, appeared on her face.
She with all the SweetneSs imaginable,, anSwered, she was Sorry I had Surprized her in Such an attitude, and much more that I had discovered any the least appearance of a melancholy, the caufe of v/hich
she
Mr. Charles Guil DFORD. 153 •
she had great reaSon to fear, she should never be able to remove.
*	Fler Sweet and amiable manner of Speak-
ing, together with her perSon, inSensibly engaged me to enter into a particular conversation with her, and endeavour to find out, the cauSe that gave pain to this charming fair one. I gently pressed her to esteem me as a friend, that if it was in my power, I would relieve her of the anguish under which fire Seemicd to labour, or if not, yet that I was ready to do her any Service I could.
She Seemed to fetch a deep sigh, at what I Said, and So far from Saying it was not m my povver to Serve her. Said nothing, but Seemed to view me with concern, and as I thought in a languishing manner, that affected me prodigiouHy.-— Pardon me my Sriend, and may Charlotte do the Same; I nov/ forgot every thinsr, but how to Serve this beautiful young creature, and ingratiate mySelf , with her.
This being my intent; you may believe I uSed every argument I could think of, to dilcover the cauSe of this young beauty’s uneasineSs. She Seemed greatly pleafed with my behaviour, her counte-H 5	^ nance ,
15^4- MEMOIRS of
nance gradually cleared up, and nothing but the most charming Smiles appeared., tier eyes brightened and shot forth fuch kind. Such piercing glances that melted all my frozen blood ; my boasted prudence and philoSophy vanished, I was now become the Slave of a newborn passion, and had but one single grain of prudence left, which was to extort the Secret that I wanted to know, from the fair one, for fear Some engagement, destructive to my hopes should be the cauSe of her uneasineSs.
She had given me reaSon to believe that m.y behaviour hitherto had not diS-pleaSed her.—I therefore persisted in my resolution, and again pressed her to make a free diScovery to me.—She couid not any longer resist my importunities: she confessed it was love.—d started at it, and; was prodigiousiy confuSed—-She obServed it—And I thought tvsith pleaSure.—This furprized yet pleaSed me. I was ready enough to construe the whole to my own advantage.
I wished mySelf the object of her love, and ventured freely to tell her, what were my wishes. She did notSeem dissadsfied, but after recovering herSelf from the moSt
charm-
0
Mr. Charles Guildford. I5'5
charming confusion confessed, if Such were my vrishes she was happy.
If she SuppoSed herfelf happy, I thought mySelf blessed beyond expression, or even the conception of any but mySelf. I was lost in an extaSy of joy—I could not at first believe what I Saw and heard a relity,
I imagined the whole a dream, and Seared to av/ake.
I have often reflected Since on this Scene, and am always, whenever I think oS it, greatly Surprized at the prodigious aScendancy. that beauty So inStantaneoufiy gained over my Soul.
I need not aScer this my Sriend, tell you tliat I now endeavoured to improve the the hcppy moment. I pleaded my pafsi-on with all' the rlieto-ric I was mailer of, and in fact love had given a furprizing vo- ^ lubility to my tongue.
I Spoke the Persian language, which I found the fair one was compleatly miS-trds of, almost as fluently as if I had been born a PerSian, The diakel: of love, I -had learnt, unknowingly from Omar, whom I had often heard expatiate with great eloquence and elegance on his darling,the me.
H 6	Oil!
■1£6 MEMOIRS of
Oh my friend! what power have the fair Sex, by their perSonal charms, and acquired accomplishments over our haughty Sex, who vainly SuppoSe themSelves lords of the creation, when we are often to our cost, convinced, that the fair Sex, are born to reign over us, who govern all things elSe, except them, and our own passions. In fact ’tis our weakneSs that lays the foundation for their conquests.
But to return to my new and Surprizing adventure, notwithstanding all my eloquence, I could not Succeed in my design. The opposition I met with only Served to increaSe my paffion. • She at last, left me, but I first extorted from her a promife of meeting me the next day, at the Same place, and about the Same time.
When file was gone I began Serioufiy to reflect on this adventure, and found I had gone a great way in a very short time. I now for the firSt time missed my companions.—I then SuppoSed that this was the Snare they had mentioned to me, and conScious of my folly and weakneSs, I blushed, though alone, at the part 1 had acted, and was really vexed to. find 1 had fell a Sacrifice to their reSentment, for Such
Mr. Charles Guildford. 1£j
I deemed it, as I had made free with them, for their amours particularly with OSman, and had myfelf always Supported the character of a man who could not be Subdued by the most powerful charms of any new beauty.
The remembrance of Charlotte Served greatly to heighten my distraction, and I was left in a wilderneSs of incoherent ideas that fluctuated in my mind, and v/hich Lcould not with all my art, reduce to any regular order.
1 walked backwards and forwards a considerable time in the garden to com-poSe mySelf, and to get the better of the agitation I was in, that I might make my appearance before my companions, and be able to act in Such a manner as to prevent their triumph, and stand the test of their enquiring eyes.
I at last compoSed mySelf pretty well, and was just going to leave the gardens when OSman and Omar met me. They took no notice of my Stopping at the Summer houSe, but on the contrary begged my pardon for leaving me So abruptly, for that they had each of them received a Summons from their fair friends, which they were in honour obliged to obey.
I
T58 MEMOIRS of
I only anSvVered ’twas very well. Anei although they Said no more yet I could , obServe, their eyes were very inquisitive, to diScover the Situation of my mind. Night came, when I was little diSpoSed for sseep and was heartily chagrined. I determined, after a long consultation with mySelf, to keep the appointment I had made the next day, and let the fair one know, my Sentiments, that I looked on the whole as a Scheme of my friends, and inSact to break my chains and never more approach my Seducer.
^ A goodly reiblution you will perhaps Say if I did but keep it—I'rue my friend, that little particle if, is the, principal word—But wait patiently and See the event in due order of time.
I before obferved to you that I was not much diSpoSed ro rest. I employed mySelf the greatest part of the night in Studying how to behave the next day So as., to come off with honour, and to ferengthen my resolution of taking a final leave of this fair one. ■ Flow much time, my' friend, hov/ much pains docs it coll us to . get the better even of a newborn passion 1 What muSc it do when confirmed by time! What an aScendancy have the, fair Sex over us!	X
Mr. Charles Guildford. 159
I Slept a little, aroSe, appeared as chearful as ever among my companions. The hour, the destined hctir approached that was to determine whether I could act like a man, and gain the aScendancy over my own paSSions or not. It came, I went to the Summer houSe according to my appointment. The fair one was there before me.
She looked at me with a fixed attention for a m-oment, and then with Such a kind concern aSlced me if any thing had happened to give me uneasineSs, that greatly disconcerted me. There appeared So much tenderneSs, and So much charming mo-deSty in the inquiry she made, that it very much affected me. What was become of my resolutionI could not tell her the true cauSe. Her concern unmanned me.; There appeared So much innocence, modesty, and Sincerity in her, that I could not conceive her capable of deceit, and therefore could not give credit to my own Suspicions, that she had only acted by design, or was any ways concerned in the Scheme I had luppoSed laid on purpoSe for me. The excuSe my friends had made the preceding evening, now appeared plausible and to confeSs the truth I was Satisfied
i 6o M E M O I R S of
fisfied still to W'ear the fair ones chains. She Saw the power she had over me, and behaved in Such a manner, as confirmed me in the opinion I had formed of her character, and the love she professed Sor me. You may impute this to vanity my Sriend, and perhaps that might lend, a helping hand.
My natural reServe now vanished, and I again acted the part of a tone! lover.---She took the advantage of the humour I vras in, and again ashed me the cauSe of my uneaSineSs that appeared on my countenance when I sirst approached her, adding, that had I been there first and waited any time for her, she should then have readily paid lierSelS a com.pliment, by Supposing that the cauSe. But as on the contrary file v/as punctual to her appointment, file thought that if I really loved her, the finding her there would have had a very difierent effect on me, and Sue could only impute it, to a want of that love I profeffed.
This was a reproof, I So little deServed that i could not bear the thought of her entertaining Such an opinion of me, and therefore to e,raSe that lliSpicion from her mind, freely confessed a part of the caufe,
viz.
Mr. Charles Guildford. i6i
viz. my SuSpicion of a Scheme ; in the most ingenuous manner. Though she appeared diSpleaSed with the distrust I had shewn of her fidelity, yet the ingenuous ' confession I had made, gave her Such a convincing proof of my regard for her that she readily forgave it, and acknowledged herfelf greatly obliged to me for the confidence I had placed in her, and to remove every Scruple of mine behaved with equal ingenuity, by assuring me, that she had often Seen me, since my arrival at Bagdat, and that her affedlions were involuntary engaged and had given her very great pain, as she had Several times met me and given me an opportunity of Seeing her, but that I did not Seem even to notice her, and that that only was the cauSe of the melancholy, I had the preceding evening obServed.
Such a confession my friend, from So charming a creature, could not fail of having its natural effect on a mind like mine, and I in return acknowledged mySelf as much obliged to her Sor this confession as she could poSsibly be to me.
Such a conversation as this must necessarily renev/ our mutual protestations,. of eternal love for each other, and as my
fair
l6z M E M O I R S of
fair one had again acdnowledged the power of the winged God, I again endeavoured with all the art I was master of, to render it productive of our mutual pleasure. But notwithstanding the love site had confessed, she in other refpects Seemed as cold as Snow on the mountains of CaucaSus, for I remember luch was the simile I uSed, when I told her my mind on that occasion. To this she Smartly anSwered, nearly in the Same words as our great poet Pope, in his essay on man.
“ Self-love and reaSon to one end aSpire, “ Pain their aversion, pleaSure their desire: “ But greedy that its object would de-“ vour,
“ This taste the honey, and not wound “ the fiow’r.
The two last lines contain the full meaning of her anSwer. She Seemed to hint that she feared I was like the rest of my Sex, eager in the purSuit of my pleasures, but Soon diSgusted on possession.
I uSed every argument I could think of to . remove her Scruples, but to no purpoSe. I had however reaSon to believe that by perSeverence I fiiould at last Succeed
Mr. Charles Guildford. 163
ceed, and I fully determined, fuch a glorious prize should not be loSc, for want of that requisite. We again once more parted with a promiSe of meeting the next day, ancl here my friend I think its proper to conclude my long letter.
Yours,
Charles Guildford.
LETTER XV.
I WAS So much absorbed in reflection?, on the happineSs. I expected to find,, in the possession of this beauty, that I thought of little elSe, and was almost thrown off my guard before OSman and Omar, who however took So little notice of my looks, that I concluded, that So far from having laid any Scheme to draw me into this, they even did not know of it. We passed our time as uSual, and my friends generally'disappeared, the one after
✓
i64 memoirs of
ter the other, before the time of my appointment.
I again attended my fair mistreSs, again pleaded my paSSion but still found the fort would not Surrender notwithstanding I laid cloSe siege. This opposition Served to inflame me the more, and though only three days were elapSed since our acquaintance, I had made as much progreSs in love, as if it had been three years.
Notwithstanding the obstinate opposition the fair one made, her behaviour Seemed to promiSe SucceSs, for Sne every day nay every moment I was with her Seemed to grow kinder, and I did not in the least doubt but I should in time Succeed.
She was a Georgian, and I have fince learnt that the Georgian women are compleat mistresses in the art of love. As to my fair ones oppoSition, you’ll assc the reaSon, and wonder, if she had any notions, of what the English ladies call modesty and chastity. And if she had, why, I should endeavour to Seduce her! Its a question that may naturally be ashed. But in my justification at least I must give you an ingenuous anSwer.
The
Mr. Charles Guildford. 165
The Georgians, as to modesty, posseSs the lame share as uncultivated human beings, ’till they loSe any remains of it they have, when they grow up, by the general example they continually See before their eyes, and as to chastity, the people live almost as free as nature’s commoners. Their education therefore, if they have any, is quite the reverSc of an English lady’s.
By this you will Say, I Seem to insinuate that my fair-one was not possessed of thoSe amiable virtues, which are the principal ornaments of the fair Sex, and that renders them worthy of being beloved. And on this Supposition, you may reaSonably alk what charms I could find in her, So strongly to attach me to her, particularly when my heart was pre-engaged.
Yet I think you know mankind too well to require an anSwer to Such interrogatories. But permit me however to anSwer in a few lines from Pope in his essay where treating of Self-love, paSSion and reaSon he Says.
“ Thicker than arguments, temptati-“ ons throng,
“ At best more watchful this, but that “ more strong.
And
i66 M E M O I R S of
And I am certain I’m a living instance ' to prove the truth of his words, but Sec
what he Says in another place.
“ As man, perhaps, the moment of his “ breath,
“ Receives the lurking principle of death;
“ The young diSeaSe, that must fubdue at “ length,
“ Grows v/ith his grovrth, and strength-“ ens with his strength :
So cast and mingled with his very “ frame,
“ The minds diSeafe, its ruling paSsion “ came;
“ Each vital humour which should feed “ the whole,
“ Soon flows to this in body and in Soul.
Whatever warms the heart, or sills the “ head,
“ As the mind opens, and its functions “ fpread :
“ Imagination plies her dang’rous art,
“ And pours it all upon the peccant part,
“ Nature its mother, habit is its nurSe;
“ V/it, Spirits, faculties, but make it woisse.
“ ReaSon itSelSbut gives it edgeandpow’r;
As Heavn’s best beam turns vinegar “ more Sour;
We
N
Mr. Charles Guildford. 167
“ We, wretched Subjects tho’ to I'awssul “ Sway,
“ In this weak queen. Some fav’rite still “ obey.
“ Ah I if she lend not arms, as well as “ rules,
“ What can she more than tell us we are “ fools !
“ Teach us to mourn our nature not to “ mend,
“ A sharp acGuSer but a helpleSs friend !
“ Or from a judge turn pleader, to per-“ fuade
“ The choice we make, or justify it made; “ Proud of an eafy conquest all along,
“ She but removes weak passions for the “ strong.
Are not the whole of thefe lines, particularly the last four inimitable ? Such was my caSe at thatjundlure.
But now to return to my fair one. As to modesty, I believe she had as much as most of her country women, whilst young, viz. Very little, for they have Scarce v/ords in their language to expreSs the ideas of modesty and chastity. And as to chastity, it was every mioment lyable to be invaded by her old master, if he had
been
r5S M E M O I R S of
been So inclined, for she had been taken prisoner by Some Turks in an excursion, and had been Sold to our owner, who had made a preSent of her to his favourite, who ufed her very well, and gave her every liberty she could wish, and all the indulgence she could grant. But Setting aside that, I believe her temper was Such, as not to let any young fellow who was agreeable to her, die at her feet through cruelty.
And is it to be wondered at? She had never been taught the doctrine of fubdio ing the paSSions, or acting contrary to her inclinations. In what manner therefore was she to act, why.? as her natural inclinations directed, she had no other rules to regulate her conduct by.
IS Such were miy fair ones principles, why did I meet with Such an obstinate resistance. The best reaSon that can be given my friend, not through a conSciouS-neSs of acting wrong, did she at first avoid furrendering her beauty to my arms. Such an idea was the most foreign of any from her mind. No my friend, art was the caufe, too ready a compliance might Soon have produced Satiety. She purSued the only means she could to render
Mr. Charles Guildford. 169
der me constant. She knew our Sex : to do her justice, I must confeSs I believe it was not to her own experience but to ob- ’ Servations she had made in her own country, in Persia where she had been, and in other places, and to relations she had heard.
But to return to myfelf, I relate to you things as they happened, therefore always give you my Sentiments as they v/ere at the time of acting. Love was at preSent my predominant paSsion. It, like Aaron’s rod. Swallowed up all the rest.— As for reaSon she was not at this time, even a stiarp accuSer, but rather tprned pleader to perSuade.
I now thought of Omar’s arguments, and that Some of them were very strong. 1 need not, after what I have Said, inform you, that I proSecuted this affair with the greatest vigour, without once reflecting on my conduct, or what the future con-. Sequences might be. If reflection at any time wanted to Suggest thoughts not a-greeable to my paSSion, I immediately ba-nilhed Such rude intruders.
A Sew days made me master of the perSon of my fair mistreSs, her heart she bef a-e assured me I Solely pofieSSed. I now Vol. II. ■ I	Swam
lyo MEMOIRS of
fwam in a continual round of pleaSure. My fair mistrefs w'as as well pleaSed with me as I was with her. We Spent many hours together, with So much tranSport, and Such an exceSF of bliSs that none but thoSe who have felt the like, can form an idea of our happinefs.
But my dear friend, what is more uncertain or fleetiag than human happineSs. Every thing finite, and that depends on us poor mortals, is liable to change. Such an exceSs of bliSs as I have just before mentioned, was too great to be of long continuance. I will not Say, my friend, that possession cloyed, or that the ardour of my paSsion abated, but as I believe, (unleSs I am different from other men) the real caufe, reaSon, after a full gratification of inordinate deSire, began to aS-Sume her Seat, and now became a sharp accuSer and not wholly a helpleSs friend. When after the highest enjoyment, the Spirits grow languid, a few leiSure hours hanging rather heavy on my hands, when my Soul was not wholly bent on the object of an ungovernable paffion, I had time for reflection. I did reflect, and thofe reflections convinced me, that I had acted wrong, been the dupe to my
passions,
Mr. Charles Guildford. 171
passions, which it is the busineSs of every man possessed of common SenSe to Subdue. But instead of conquering my passion, my whole study, to my shame I must confeSs it, had lately been employed in the gratification of them.
Happily for me, the common frailty of the fair-Sex, at least of fome of them, now came in a lucky moment to my assistance. I was just beginning to consider in what manner I should act So as to extricate mySelf, from an affair that now began to give me great uneasineSs. The remembrance of Charlotte was a continual reproach to my late procedure. I could not avoid thinking, I had acted by her, as I told Omar he had by Kilana, paid her a very bad compliment.
But no more refiections. My fair Georgian was of an inconstant disposition. I had before obServed the Georgians are adepts in the art of love. In fact I discovered her disposition was greatly inclined to variety, and just at this time, a young gentleman, who happened then to be unhappily in our owners power, becam.e her favourite, and as site began to attract his notice, she gradually began to withdraw herSelf from my company, and at last I 2	feemed
172 M E M O I R S of
feemed only to Spend her time with me, when she had nothing elSe to employ her. I was not dissatisfied on this occasion but determined to make a proper uSe of it. I . exerted mySelf with particular care, to discover this intrigue as it would entirely tree me from an affair, that my cooler reaSon would not permit me to proSecute, i must in justice to mySelf Say, it was not owing to any diSgust I had at first taken to my fair mistreSs: but Solely owing to the reflections I had made, for before I tiiScovered her affection for my rival, I loved her as well as ever, but the diScovery of her inconstancy, you may reaSonably SuppoSe, gave a very great turn to my affections, and Served to assist my reaSon, in freeing mySelf from the aScendan.T ■ -cy she had gained over me.
As it was now of conSequence to me, to produce a convincing proof of the Georgian’s inconstrncy, I was very obServant of what passed and Soon discovered her, indulging her favourite passion, in the arms of my happy rival, on whom I had reaSon to believe, ssie had practiSed the Same arts, she had on me.
The moment my purpoSe was anSwered J withdrew, as I had no right to deprive
another
Mr. Charles Guildford. 173
another, of taking a draught, from that Circe’s cup, from which I had too plentifully drank.
The Georgian had Seen me, for the fcene of their amour, was in the fummer houSe, where I had first fell a Sacrifice to her bewsitching charms and the arts she had aSterw^ards practiSed, and I couid not discover them, and retire without being Seen mySelf. For this reaSon, I judged I fiiould not See my Georgian any more. I was greatly mistaken. She met me as I tvas entering the houSe. Sir lays fiie, after what has passed between us, and what you have lately discovered, you will be Surprized that I now meet you, and particularly at my addressing mySelf to you, but however, in consideration of the mutual regard we have had for each other, and the many happy, happy hours we, have Spent together, withdraw a moment with me, that we may come to a proper ecclairciSement.
I was greatly Surprized at her assurance, in meeting and Speaking to me, but much more at her desiring an ecclairciSement. Out of regard to our former love, and . farther out of the reSpect due to her Ses, though she was intitled to little, I could I 3	not
.174 MEMO I R S of
not deny her request, and therefore signifying my assent, she conducted me to-a private harbour, at another part of the garden than that where I had lately discovered her amour with miy rival.
I SuppoSe file was not willing to regale my eyes, with a sight of a place, she SuppoSed, must at preSent give me great pain; and therefore politically made choice of a place, that wotild not recall to my mind any ideas, but thoSe that v/ere agreeable.
The rcStVlt of this meeting I shall relate-in my next, and at prefent SubScribe my-iblf,
Yours, &c.
Charles* Guildford.
y
LETTER XVI.
Th E moment we entered into the Secret receSs, she thus addressed me. Toil doubtleSs Sir, SuppoSe you. have juft
caufe-
Mr. Charles Guildford. 175
cauSe to reproach me with inconstancy and perfidy, and the reaSon why you think So is, becauSe you SuppoSe your own inconstancy is unknown to me. Now Sir if Such are your thoughts, believe me, you are greatly dece.ved. It is not to be SuppoSed that a love So tender as mine, could be neglected, without raising fuSpi.-cions, and luch was the natural effect of your apparent eoolneSs; I was above complaining; I therefore determined to know the cauSe.—I am Satisfied what the cauSc was, and cannot bear a divided love. As you have been inconstant to me, I have reSented it, in my opinion, in a proper manner. I have returned your unkind treatment, by a retaliation.
Nay frown not Mr. GuildSord, Said she, on my looking very sternly on her, at this strange diScourSe. If my preSence is offensive, I am ready to depart. But for the honour of my Sex, and particularly of my country-women, I mustjuS-tify mySelf, and affure you, I Sliall for ever glory in the revenge I have taken, particularly at your being an eye witnelk of it.
I could not bear her inSolence and excessive affurence any longer.—I freely told I 4	her
lyd MEMOIRS of
her my mind, not in vulgar terms of reproach, that would have been giving her an apportunity of triumphing, at gaining the only point, she feemed then to aim at, but in genteel, yet contemptuous terms'. This had the desired effect, it prevented her design, and in Some Sort humbled her. But she was blessed with assurance, and Soon recovered the little confusion I had thrown her into.
Finding her former plan would not fucceed she changed her method of proceeding, and acknowledged that by my method of anSwering her, she feared I was innocent of what file had laid to my charge, and that she had been grossly impoSed on. That she had Sincerely loved me ; that fiie had placed the moSt unrer Served confidence in me, that she had depended on a continuance of my love, and that I never would transfer that love to any other object, at least in that part of the world : that she had been informed I had lately acted by her, in the Same man* her as she had by me ; and that what siy had done was only through a principle^of revenge, common amongst her countrywomen, for the neglect and contempt with which she SuppoSed I treated thoSe
charms.
Mr. Charles Guildford. 177
charms, I mySelf had often Said she poS-feffed, and the love she had professed for me. That her regard was still fo great for me, that if I would only condeScend to assure her, her Suspicions were ill grounded, and the information she had received falSe, she would immediately dlss card my rival, and never give me cauSe for a future complaint, unleSs I first Set her the example.
Many other arguments she tiled, to recover that esteem she had totally lost, but I did not then think it proper to inform her of my real Sentiments. I must confeSs I never yet met with a woman So fidlled in deep dissimulation, possessed of fo much art, mistreSs of fo much assurence, or a foul. So strongly inclined (too much like her country-women) to revenge, and that the most cruel.
I considered my own Situation at that time, and was very Sensible, that unleSs I could by Some means Secure her, she would prove my most inveterate, as well as a very dangerous enemy. What could. I do in Such a caSe ? Practice an art my Soul abhorred, as much as I now did this dangerous Syren,
I 5	When
lyg MEMOIRS of
When I difcovered her, with her new lover I had made an observation, that now Served as a key, to diScover to me that the whole of her difcourfe was the effect of the greatest art and dissimulation, and in fitort that she only wished to lecure us both.
The observation I made was the plea.-Sure she took in the embraces of her new admirer, and I was certain that was not the first time by many that they had ofiered up their adorations at the altar cf Venus.
This convinced me, not revenge, but another abominable passion, induced her to act thus., I therefore determined to provide for my'own Safety, to wholly diS-engage mySelf from her, and therefore to take my mealures accordingly.
To compleat my defign, I Seemed to give credit to her assertions, and appeared inclined, to a reconciliation, which wherrshe discovered, site proceeded again '" in her justification with So much art and Subtilty that I was greatly Surprized at her wit and addreSs, at the Same time that I heartily deSpiSed her for it. I may with justice Say she was a Second Cleopatra.
Il
Mr. Charles Guildford. 179
It is really impossible for me to inform you, of all the arts she made uSe of. She became the most kind, tender, languishing creature that ever existed, but thanks to my stars, the more art she uSed, the more I deSpiSed her.
To affect a reconciliation, I told her I insisted on a particular concession. Such a one as in fact I durst not have ashed from an English lady; but I knew'my Georgian had a pretty good assurence to Support her in a trial, to her not very Severe. The conccffion 1 expected was, that as my two friends OSman and Omar, notwithstanding all our Secrecy, knew of our connections, Sne fiiould before the nr make a free acknowledgement of the steps file had taken, with the new reSolution She had made, and promiSe if ever she repeated her intrigues with'her new admirer, or any other, whilst we were on good terms (as 1 would on that occasion for ever forSake her) she should never attempt a« again to justify herSelf, never attempt to reproach me with leaving her, never offer to Speak to me agim, and finally never entertain any the least reSentment against me, but as freely forgive me, for my neglect of her, as I should forgive I 6	her '
iSo MEMO 1 R § or •
tier for indulging a pafliort, which I should then SuppoSe she never COuld or would attempt to conquer, any more than T should my neglect and disregard of her, and for which I shouid at least have as good reafon and it would be as well 'Sounded as her foible. •
To thefe terms she conSented, and then, I Scarce know how to mention it. Seemed inclined to Seal our reconciliation tho’ but just releaSedfrom another man’s arms with a renewal of our former Scenes of voluptuous pleaSure.
But as I had at preSent, through her own art, which I intended as her punishment, gained the Superiority over her, I objected against it, by insinuating, that it was not customary with Christians, So Soon to take a woman to their arms, that had been defiled by another. But gave her room to believe, I would the next evening meet her, in the Same place provided she complied, that day with the terms I had propoSed.
On this, she Seemed to hint that I still retained my reSentment. I anSwered, as ’ the revenge she had taken, for a SuppoSed neglect, was only in purSuance of a cuS-tom she had learnt from her native place,
and
Mr. Charles Guildford.
and even imbibed In infancy, as a principle of education, I should easily excuSe it, as she had made So kind a condescension and a still kinder promiSe, she mightdepend upon it I should still preServe the Same regard I ever had for her, which was equal to any she had ever professed for me.
1 then judged I might with Safety make that promife, as I did not in the least doubt but-.she would break hers the first fair opportunity that offered.
But I must here conclude, and inform you of farther particulars in my next. In the mean time adieu.
yours,
Charles Guildford.
LETTER XVII.
I BELIEVE my fair Georgian was disappointed in tv/o reSpects, one I need not mention, the other was, she hoped if
I
1^2 M Jb iVl U 1 K 5 or
I had conSented to her desires, she would by that means have avoided the diSagreeable confession I wanted her to make. But finding there was only that method left to pacify me, she thought proper to comply, and accordingly went through the ceremony with a very good grace.
After I had taken leave of her, I informed OSman and Omar oS my reaSon for calling them to witneSs my mistreSs’s resolution, and tire promiSe she liad made. Omar commended my prudence, as believing they might now be a check upon her, otherv/iSe my life might have fell a Sacrifice to her reSentment, and nothing but my continuing my connections with her, till the moment of my departure,, could otherv/ile have Secured mie against her.
That if I now, through her own fault, fiiould again neglect her, she could not v/ith SaSety to her own, make any attempt against my life, and as for her reSentment, in any other light, I need not regard it, as I now deSpiSed her, as much as I had formerly loved her.
I freely acknov/ledged to my friends P never intended to have any farther connection with her, but only to amuSe her,
till,
Mr. Charles Guildford. 1-83
till she herSelf gave me an opportunity of quitting her, which I did not fear but she would furnish me with, in a day or two if I could but be vigilent, and for that purpoSe I begged their assistance which they very readily promiSed, and we laid our plan accordingly.
My friends were as vigilent as my miS-treSs was artful, and the next day, when she fuppofed we were particularly employed as we had always hitherto been every day since our arrival in our studies, Omar diS-covered the fair one’s perfidy, that Set me free from the connections with her, and instantly called me, (I being at that time very near him) to be an eye witneSs of the guilty Scene.	’
We immediatly retired, and I never after Spoke to the guilty culprit, who I believe gave herSelf very little pain for it, unleSs what aroSe from reSentment at the concessions she had made.
You may wonder how: she came to act fo indiscreetly, as to be liable to Such frequent discoveries ? Why that was not her fault, she took every precaution she could viz. that the circumstances of time and place would allow 5 and as to the rest, she
would
i84 M E M O I R S ot
would Sooner have run any riSque than ever have Suffered a disappointment.
As to mySelf, I will affure you, this affair gave me very great pain, for a considerable time after; not that I had lost, but that I had ever gained this Georgian ^ for a mistreSs.
In short I cannot think of it now without regret.——Yet not to have fell, I must have been more than mortal, therefore, that I might not pafs for a God, I condescended to sink a step beneath my natural dignity, and prove mySelf lefs than man. But no more refiections; they may be diSagreeable. I have this Satisfaction to fay, I learnt more of the arts ufed by the fair fex, (the worst part of them at least,) than if I had travelled over three fourths of the terrestial globe.
But I will here conclude with this part of my history, that I may with more propriety begin my next letter.
Yours,
Charles Guildford.
LET-
Mr. Charles Guildford. 1S5
LETTER XVIII.
T T A V I Fl G freed mySelf from my amour and my friends not being So much employed as they uSed to be, the length of time we once more had unemployed, was really diSagreeable, as we now began to be uneaSy about our ran-foms.
Just about this time, Saphis our owner’s; fon, whom we had never yet Seen, arrived from ISphahan. He was by profession a merchant, had travelled much, was well acquainted with the world, and although he had not studied books much (though in Speculative knowledge he was not deficient,) yet he had studied men, and made many curious observations on the mannerSj laws and government, &c. of the people he had been amongst in his travels. If ever he met with foreigners, he was always curious to learn every particular he could Srom them concerning, their country, &c. that there were Sew parts of the known world, but what he was Someway or other pretty well acquainted with. He was humane and generous, and no bigot to religion. Religion
m MEMOIRS of
gion was a Subject, he had been in-■quiSitive concerning and finding there were almost as many religions in the world, as there were different nations on the face of the earth, he had compoSed a private religion for himSelf, though in external practice, he Seemed to adhere to the religion cf his ancestors.
He had introduced himSelf to our acquaintance, as Soon as he came to Bagdat, and we Soon became intimate. One of the first topics that he entered on was^ religion. He discovered OSman was become a Christian, he knew I was one, and he found by his conversations with Omar, .that though young, he was little more biassed in favour of any particular religion, than himSelf.
When I was intimate with him and found he would not be offended at my freedom, I aSlced him what was his religion, for I found he was not prejudiced in favour of any particular Sect. He anSwered his real religion was confined to a few plain eafy principles and rules, the chief of which wTre, that there was but one Supreme Being infinite in wiSdom, power, and goodneSs, who created the univerSe, and every being that existed
the rein
Mr. Charles Guildford. r8y
therein. And as he had created, So he constantly preServed them, by the Same infinite wiSdom power and goodneSs, that to him we were indebted for our being, and every blessing we enjoyed: and therefore,, that the most perfect obedience to his laws and the most perfect gratitude for his favours was what we owed him.. That one of the principal laws we ought to obServe, was contained in the Christian religion, viz, “ to do to every one, as “ vre wish they should do to us, in the “ like circumitances.” That in doing this we should “ do as much good and as “ little harm to our fellow creatures, as “ we possibly could.” And that “ uni-“ verSal benevolence was the principal “ charaSteristic of a man-.
That as to Christ, Mahomet, Zoroass ter, Confucius, &c. whom different nations esteemed as the Saviours of mankind, and as Something more then men, thoSe were opinions he could not hold. That there was So great a difference between them, that it was hard to determine, to which to give the preference. That each was great in his ov/n manner of teaching. 'That their religions might, though lib different, be properly adapted for the
peopk:
i88 MEMOIRS of
people professing them, their country, their climate, and their manner of living-
That I need not fpeak in deSence of Christ, or my friends in defence of Mahomet, that he would readily allov/ them the honours due, particularly to Christ, viz. I'hat each had laid the foundations for a religion, now professed by millionsi, that fome of them must be wrong, why not all ? they were great teachers. That was all the honour he could allow them. That the Christian religion, which he in* formed me he was well acquainted with, contained many excellent moral rules, for the conduct of life, but that it was not perfect any more than the rest. That he was not fond of disputes, particularly religious ones.
He would leave every man freely to enjoy his ' own opinion. I had mine, he had his. But he believed I did not differ greatly from him, in my opinion ; for that his religion was plain and eafy, and did not ermtain any thing in it that would contradict or offend our reaSon, that reaSon which the deity had given us, to distinguish between right and wrong.
I
Mr. Charles Cvildford. 189
I did not think proper, as he had objected, against religious diSputes, to enter into any with him. Nor was I fond of Such d’Sputes, but desirous of knowing Something more of his Sentiments I desired him to proceed and told him my reaSon for making that request.
Lie continued. He Said most men had a religion of Some kind or other, that tho’ there had been and still was many idolaters in the world, yet even they had a dark confuSed notion of a being, that they could not comprehend. That the more learned part of the world, and the more civilized people, amongst whom the Sciences were cultivated, had discovered this being to be a Spiritual being. That we were extremely addicted to idolatry, and yet had no great inclination for the religion of idolaters. That we are not fond of Spiritual ideas and yet are most attached to thole religions, which teach us to adore a Spiritual being. That this proceeds from the Satisfaction we find in ourSelves, at having been So intelligent as to chuSe a religion, which raiSes the deity Srom that baSeneSs in which he had been placed by others. That we look upon idolatry as the religion of an ignorant people; and the
religion
tgo MEMOIRS of
religion which has a Spiritual being for its object, as that of the most enlightened nations.
But to Speak of our religion and the y>rofeffers, he Said, he often wondered greatly at the abSurdity of thofe bigots, who wanted wholly to reject natural religion and Substitute revealed in its p’ace. What was he Said to become of all the rest of the world
Idolaters were ufed as an objection to natural religion. It was a bad argument. A Set of people who were byaffed by the prejudices of a very bad education and of customs and ceremonies established a-mong them by the artifice and cunning of their villainous priests. That they were employed in a variety of things that prevented them from ever making proper reflections, or elSe hovi eafy was it to discover a God by thoSe faculties our minds are endowed with, and that it was not reasonable to SuppoSe God had left himSelf without a witneSs. It was even blaS-phemous to SuppoSe the deity had created us, as beings from whom he expected a particular worship, and yet had not put it in our power to diScover him, without a revelation. That if it was insisted on,
thofe
Mr. Charles Guildford. 191
thofe that defended Such an opinion must shew that a revelation had been made to all mankind, even from the beginning of the world, and in every age and every nation, where the being of God was then unknown.
We were here interrupted, therefore I v/ill likewise make a pauSe and reServe the rest oS his conversation for my next.
yours,
^ . i
Charles Guildford. -
LETTER XIX.
SAPHIS on renewing his diScourfe observed, that his Sentiments in many reSpects, were agreeable to one of our great English authors, whom he had Several times read, having learnt the English language, when young, from a particular friend, who had obliged him with feveral of our best authors.
That
1,2 MEMOIRS of
That agreeable to that author, there were without doubt many men in the world who had not any idea of a God, at least any that was worthy of him; bUt yet it was ov/ing to their situation, manner of life, &c. and their being abSorbed in pleafures or employed in procuring the conveniencies of life, that fo wholly engaged their attention, as left them no time to reflect on a being, who was hot corporeally preSent to their SenSes.
He observed in the Same author’s words, that the visible marks of wiSdom and power, appear So plainly in all the works of the creation, that a rational creature who will but Serioussy reflect on them cannot miSs the diScovery of a deity: and the influence that the diScovery of fuch a being, must necesiarily have on the minds of all, that have but once heard of it, is fo great, and carries fuch a weight of thought and communication with ir, that it feemed more strange to him, that a whole nation of men should be any where found fo brutish, as to want the notion of a God than that they should be without any notion of numbers or fire.
He
Mr. Charles Guildford. 195,
He continued to obferve according to the fame author, that the deity, having furnished us with thoSe faculties our minds are endowed with, he hath not left himfelf without a witnefs; since we have fenfe, perception, and reaSon, and cannot want a clear proof of him, as long as we carry ourSelves about us. Nor can we justly complain of our ignorance in this great point, since he has So plentifully provided us with the means to diScover and know him. So far as is neceffary, to the end of our being, and the great concernment of our happinefs.
Well take, fays he, a short view of this author’s argument, which is fo clear, 1 think no one will deny the truth of any part.of it. After observing that to shew, we are capable of knowing, i. e. being certain that there is a God, and how v/e may come by this certainty, he fays, I think we need go no farther than ourfelves, and that undoubted knowledge we have of our own existence.
He then proceeds with his argument, which he conducts in the following manner.
I think, fays he, it is beyond question, that man has a dear perception of his Vol. II.	K	own
194 MEMOIRS of
own being; he knows certainly, that he exists, and that he is fomething.
In the next place, man knows by an intuitive certainty, that “ bare nothing “ can no more produce any real being, “ than it can be equal to twp right an-“ gles.” If therefore we know there is fome real being, and that non-entity cannot produce any real being, it is an evident demonstration, that from eternity there has been fomething, since what was not from eternity, had a beginning, and what had a beginning, must be produced by fomething elfe.
Next it is evident, that what had its being and beginning from another, must alSo have all that which is in, and belongs to its being from another too. All the powers it has, must be owing to, and received from the fame fource. This eternal fource then of all being, must alfo be the fource and original of all power; and fo this eternal being must be alSo the most powerful.
Again, a man finds in himSelf perception and Knowledge. We have then got one step farther; and we are certain now, that there is not only Some being, but
Some
Mr. Charles Guildford. 195
Some knowing intelligent being in the world.
There was a time then, when there was no knowing being, and when knowledge began to be; or elfe, there has been alSo a knowing being from eternity.
If it be faid, there was a time when no being had any knowledge, when that e-ternal being was void of all understanding. I reply, that then it vras impossible there should ever have been any knowledge. It being as impossible that things wholly void of knowledge, and operating blindly, and without any perception, should produce a knowing being, as it is impossible, that a triangle shouki make itfelf three angles bigger than two right ones. For it is as repugnant to the idea of fenfelefs matter, that it should put into itfelf, fenfe, perception and knowledge, asit is repugnant to the idea of a triangle, that it fiiould put into itfelf greater angles than two right ones.
Thus frorn the consideration of our- , felves, and what we infallibly sind in our own constitutions, our reafon leads us to the knowledge of this certain and evident truth, that “ there is an eternal, most “ powerful, and most knowing being.”
K 2	I'he
196 M E M O I R S of
Tlie thing is evident, and from this idea duly considered, will easily be deduced all thofe other attributes which we ought to afcribe to this eternal being.
But fays he I need not Say any more, as a Christian, addressing himSelS to me, I know your Sentiments, you may in many particulars agree with me, in Some circumstances, and thoSe to a Christian material ones, you may object.-—I will not ash you the question, becauSe I think I have heard and read the most material arguments tiled in Support of the opinions I hint at, and think your learned men have employed themSelves more in the vindication of certain opinions than in making a free and impartial enquiry concerning their truth.
I would have fpoke in defence of the impartiality of thoSe writers he mentioned, but he stopped me : Says he, you need not now, from the natural inclination of defending your countrymen, and thofe who have wrote on fome of your favourite tenets, fay any thing concerning them.
I would not enter into an argument with you, becaufe I will affure you, I have not formed my judgment on thefe
things
Mr. Charles Guildford. 197
things without sirst passing the strictest examination, on every point of conSequence, and I believe you too honest and ingenuous to deny any reaSonable proofs brought against you, and you might be foiled. I do not wish to triumph. I have always made it my endeavours to fearch out, and practice the best religion, and I have in fome fort formed a religion for my private practice, the principles of which, I have mentioned before and which may be Slmimed up in a few words, viz. “ There is but one God the author of our “ being on whom we are dependent, and “ to whom we are indebted for every “ blessing we enjoy.” That therefore “ we are under the greatest obligations “ imaginable to him, should be always fubfervient to his will, and obey all his “ commands.” And I think that the most perfect manner of performing our duty to him and man alfo to compleat the whole principle consists in “ ever acting “ towards all mankind, as we would wish “ they should act, with refpect to us, un-“•der the like circumstances”. As to the external practice of religion, I can worship the deity in a moSque, a Greek, a protestant, a Roman, or any other Christi» K 3	an;
198 M E M O I R S of
an church, therefore do not think k-strange that I externally conform to the; worship of my ancestors. It is proper I should do fo, for my fafety, for my character,, and for an example to. many who never have an opportunity of reflecting properly, and for whom even the religion Mahomet has taught, is better than none. I can give you feveral examples, to warrant my conduct, amongst your countrymen, and particularly among your divines, whofe busineSs it is to teach and propogate the Christian religion and who. live l?y it.
Such werehhe fentiments of Saphis, and Ofman Seemed to pay a particular atten-. tion to what he Said. As to Onjar, I believe he was nearly of the fame way of thinking.
But it is time to finish this epistle. 1-cannot tell how the Subject may pleafe,^ therefore will not be too prosix.
Yours,
Charles GuiLPFORiy,,
Si a	LET
Mr. Charles Guildford. 199^ LETTER XX. ^
I OBSERVED in my last that OSman paid.
a particular attention to what Saphis had Said, and I must now inform you, that he feveral times afterwards brought the fame fubject on the carpet, and Saphis finding he was desirous of enquiring after truth, and did not any longer chufe to hold his opinions on trust, and as I had, when I instructed him in the fundamental rules of Christianity, defired him to reflect, and not to take what I faid for granted, but to let his reafon convince him, and form his opinions for himSelf, he now feemed determined to follow my advice; and Saphis often obligingly entered into arguments with him, and made many curious obfervations.
You know Saphis and I differed iu opi-rpon in fome things, viz. where I thought he made too free with fome articles of the Christian faith. And though Ofman had a much greater regard for me, than for Saphis, yet as I would not attempt to byafs his judgment, but wished him to judge for himSelf, Saphis’s arguments, on thofe fubjects were we differed, appeared to him the strongest. I was too weak a K 4,.	cham.'
200 MEMOIRS of
champion, to defend my cafe in every point, and Saphis gained the advantage — Ofman became his profelyte, yet stilh held to the moral rules of the Christian religion. I had exerted myfelf to the utmost, in fair argument, and therefore finding my friend had sirmly embraced the tenets of Saphis, thought ’twas proper to drop all farther diSputes, and as we had in a courSe of conversations, nearly exhausted all that couid be Said on the Subject, we agreed not to renew them any more, and each of us punctually obferved t'he argreement.
So much my friend for religion; and, now to return to our own history. We had not yet received any anSwer to our, letters, and our anxiety was again renewed for the loSs of our liberty. It was a. very unhappy Situation to be Ihut up in a part of the wodd where we were entire strangers Sarfrom home, and all our Sriends. VSe had litttle now either to imiprove or employ ourSelves, and in fact it was Spendir ing our time in a strange manner.
Saphis discovered our uneasineSs, and in compliance with his obliging manner of enquiring the caufe, we were Sorced to,
make„
Mr. Charles Guildford. 201
make him acquainted with ir. He told us it was not convenient for him to lay down the money for the ranSom of all of us, and his father loved money fo well (his greatest fault) that he knew he would not part v/ith either of us without the money was sirst paid, nor even take his fecurity for our ranfoms, as if he offered it, his ftther would anfwer, he might as well do it himSelf. But that he could, conveniently, pay the ranfom of one, and Cpply him with money for his journey, to go cither to Venice or England and negotiate the affair in perSon,
This was a propoSal that our generosity would not Suffer us to accept, nor could we bear the thoughts of parting, and any one of us to beat liberty, and leave the other two in fuch a situation, for now we were three css us, we did not know how to paSs our time, what then would two of us do ^
This prevented us from accepting of the generous offer Saphis had made; Tie feemed greatly affected at his then inca^-pacity of helping us, in fuch a manner as would be agreeable to each of us.
After considering Some time he told us he had thought of Something, that would K 5
£02 MEMOIRS of
give a relief though not a total one, to our uneasinefs; and that was, he would apply to his father, and engage him to let us go with him to Ifpahan, where we should have a much better opportunity of negotiating for our ranfom. That though he could not gain our liberty on credit yet he could gain fo far on his father if he engaged to be anfwerable for them.
We were greatly pleafed with this pro^ pofal, and the sirst opportunity that offered he applyed to his father who after much perfuasion and Saphis having .engaged his word and honour to bring us; back or our ranfom, without any equivocation, he agreed to it.
He immediately informed us of it that he might not keep us a moment longer than he could help, in fulpenfe. This added greatly to our pleafure, particularly as Saphis intended to fet out for Ifpahan in a few days.
But how uncertain are all human things! Saphis the day before he intended to fet out on his journey fell ill, of a dangerous fever, which in a few days reduced him to Such a state that he was gi-. ven up, and with the hopes of his life, vanished;
Mr. Charles'Guildford. 203
nished our most fanguine hopes that we had lately fo liberally found.
Well might we fay, as Dryden in his Oedipus writes,
“ PleaSure never comes sincere to man, “ But lent by Heav’n upon hard uSury:
“ And while Jove holds out the bowl of “ joy,
“ E’er it can reach our lips, ’tis dash’d “ with gall
“ By Some leSt-handed God.
I will here conclude my letter. The Subject is too dull to be prolix.
yours
Charles Guildford, ## %'m itt # # #	# ftt	^ it*	^ ^ #
L E T T E R XXL
I HAVE before mentioned Sortitude my Sriend. It is a noble, and a very iiSe-ful virtue, we were oliged now to make uSe oS it. But I fiiall not keep vou long K 6	'	in
204 MEMOIRS of
in fufpenfe. When I found Saphis was in fuch imminent danger I went to him, and told him that I, faw the affistance he had hitherto had, was of no signification; but if he would give me leave to preScribe for him and take care of him, I would ufe my best endeavours to recover him, as I had fome knowledge of physic and might be of Service to him, though as it was not my profession, I was cautious how I acted, and very fearful of undertaking the care of any one, unlefs in fuch a cafe were there were but little hopes of a recovery, and that owing to unshilful-neSs, for they had but few physicians, and they knew but little. I was fearful of having the death of my friend imputed to my rash and ignorant prefumption, should I have failed in my attempt to recover him. But I was now convinced he would dk; unlefs fpcedy and powerful assistance was given hinri, and therefore confcious of this, I could with the greater eafe to my-felf, offer my assistance. 'I had affur* ed the father there was fcarce room to hope. And a perfon who attended Saphis by his own desire in quality of physi--cian had affured them both of the fame.
Saphis.
Mr. Charles Guildford. 205
Saphis was greatly pleafed at my offer; and readily fubmitted himfelf to my care, I need not defcribe a long attendance to you. I by the help of a simple medicine to throw off the fever, and fome powerful restoratives foon cured my friend, to the great Surprize of his physician, himSelf and his father. His constitution was excellent, and that was now of great Service, for no fooner had I abated the fever than his constitution operated jointly v/ith my restoratives in a very powerful manner, and theSe restoratives I continued, till he was (perfectly recovered.
And now our hopes were again revived; and our melancholy once more banished. The father was become our friend, on account of the fervice I had done his fon. He would have given me my ranfom, he loved money too well to offer us all freedom. And in fact I might think myfelf greatly obliged to him, knowing his disposition, for the osier he had made me, but however I did not think proper to accept it. I only desired him to six a reafonalde ranfom for all, fo as that he might not any ways be a loSer by us, and to give his fon credit for that ranfom till-we had an opportunity of paying Saphis
the
2oss MEMOIRS of
the money. This he freely confented toe and Saphis being ready to depart, we fet out with fome attendants, and other company, and joining a caravan travelled on-by eafy stages without any accident till we arrived at ISpahan.
Saphis gave us our freedom the moment he left his father’s, depending on our honour for the money he was to pay. He alSo accommodated us genteely, gave us tv/o attendants and fupplied us with what money we wanted, and as he had a, genteel large houfe in Ifpahan desired we would take up our residence with him, during our fca.y there.
Omar as Soon as he arrived at Ifpahan, went to his mother’s, and after a short stay returned and desired that Saphis,.OSman,. and I would accompany him there, that he might have an opportunity oS introducing us to his mother and sister.
We complied vdth his request, and were Soon introduced to two of the most amiable women I had ever Seen. We Spent Several hours with them in the most agreeable manner, and when we came to take our leave, Omar and his mother, strongly preffed OSman and me to reside with them, but Saphis kno'wing their circumstances,
Us
Mr. Charles Guildford. 2’oy-
as strongly oppoSed it, and neither of us were willing to accept of the offer for that reafon.
As for Omar sit was but reafonable he should stay there, for we could not in juf-tice wish, for our own fakes, to deprive his mother and sister of his company.
When v/e were returned to Saphis’s, fome busineSs requiring Saphis’s abSence,. OSman and I were left together. I immediately ashed him how he liked Sophi»i, Omar’s sister. He anfwered, “ I can fcarce tell what to Say.—If I confefs I never yet faw any of the fair fex, I liked fo well, you will anfwer its only a return of my old passion, but I will affure you, my regard for her is very different from any thing I have yet experienced, and its very well if her being betrothed to that German does not prove to,me a very unhappy circumstance.”
I was not much furprized to hear my friend Ofman talk in this manner. I had observed whilst he was in company with ' Sophia, that he paid a particular attention to every thing she Said. Sophia was both handSome and genteel. But had she been the revdrSe she poffeffed Such a fund of knowledge that would have cured eve-
D
2o3 MEMOIRS of
ry other eiefect. What an effect then, must she have on the mind of Ofman ? Beauty and good fenfe are too powerful for most men. They were for Ofman.
But I muft at prefent drop this Subject. Omar early the next day came and gave us an invitation to dine v/ith him. We went and fpent a very agreeable day. We took a view of the city, and as we were passing through one of theprincipai streets, Qmar v/as accosted by a genteel elderly lady, who stopped him a moment, whilst v/e walked gently on. He foon joined iis and wkh very great joy in his counte-^^ nance told us the lady we had feen was Edzerbeina the mother of his fair msistrefs Kilana, who had expressed very great joy at feeing him again in ISpahan and had given him an invitation for. the next day.
This was conftrued as a good omen, and I charged him to improve this favourable .disposition in Edzerbeina, and not to be his own enemy, by being too Scrupulous.
Omar told me he believed his love for Kilana would carry him above every, trif-iin2: consideration.
But
Mr. Charles Guildford. 209
But I must give you a farther account of this affair in my next,
youths,
Charles Guildford^
LETTER XXII.
I IN my last mentioned the invitation-Edzeisheina had given to Omar. Fle’ went accordingly, and after staying feveral hours came and informed us that Edzerbeina had freely confeffed that Kilana, after his departure had behaved to her extremely well and never made any complaint, but that she had obferved her to labour under a very great uneafinefs, and^ feared it would grow into a fixed melancholy. That her dutiful behaviour had prodigiouOy affected her, and gave her very great pain: that meeting with -Omar thus accidentally had faved her-much trouble and expence,for that she had eletermined to fend, feveral fpecial meffem.
gersi.
210 MEMOIRS of
gers after him to bring him back if there was a possibility of finding him, to reward both him and her daughter for their mutual attachment.. And to conclude,, it, it was agreeable to him their nuptials should be celebrated as Soon as proper preparations could be made.
Omar with joy accepted the propoSal, and I heartily congratulated him on his. good fucceSs, and alked him if he would be long before he vrould compleat the affair. He affured me he would not, for the cup might be dafued from his lips before he tasted, unlefs he was expeditious, and therefore a few days should determine it, and six fortune, fo, as not any more to play him assippery trick.
Omar the next day, introduced us tO' the ladies. We were each of us greatl)e pleaSed with his choice. We Spent a very agreeable day at Edzerbeina’s,, and at night took leave of the ladies and retired to our respective habitations..
The next day Saphis inSormed OSman and me, that he believed marrying would go on at this time., for that (OSman had -confeffed Sophia’s power, and he must honestly confeSs Hacena’s, Sister to Kila-m. We were Surprized ! He informed us,
he
Mr. Charles Guildford. 2ri
he had feveral years before accidentally met with Hacena at the houfe of an European merchant, who. was that day going to leave ISpahan.
That he had Spent two of the most agreeable hours in conversation with her that he had ever Spent in his life; that she was very fensible, and likewiSe very agreeable in her perSon. That he did not know her, but intended to enquire of one of the merchant’s domestics, that did not go with him, who she was, and as he found that domestic was, to stay at Ifpahan, he did not think there w^as occasion to enquire for any one elfe. That a day or two after the merchant was gone he found out this domestic, and ashed him who the lady was and where she lived,, when to his very great mortification he found the domestic did not know her, and that there was not any other perfon left in Ifpahan belonging to the merchant, that did know her. That this was a very great difappointment to him, and that he had oftentimes endeavoured to sind her out, but could not. That to conclude, now fortune had favoured him by a diScovery of her when he least expected it,, a.nss he found fiie was not engaged he de-
te.rmine.di
212 MEMOIRS of
terrnined to act as Omar intended, viz; to apply Immediately to Edzerbeina if he could first gain Hacena’s confent, as he would that very day get Omar to introduce him again to the ladies, and give him an opportunity of declaring himfelf to Hacena, who by her behaviour he had reafon to hope, would not reject him and that then one day should make both O-mar and himfelf happy.
Here he stopped when Ofman sighedi and wished there were no more obstacles to his happinefs, than there were to Saphis’s, just at this moment Omar entered: He informed us he had just been paying a visit to the ladies and that, that day fe-ven-night was fixed, for his efpousing Kilana. We congratulated him on this good news, and then told him he must now lend a helping hand to make our common friend happy.
Omar desired an explanation : we then informed him of what had paffed just be--fore he came in. Omar immediately an?^ fwered, if fuch were his friends fenti--*' ments, he could affure him of SucceSs, for that long since Kilana had in considence told him of Hacena’s meeting Saphis as he had mentioned,, that she was then
greatljr
Mr. Charles Guildford. 213
greatly pleaSed with him, and having reafon to think she had made an impression on hint, had ever since avoided engaging herSelf, hoping she should Sometime meet with him again, for she did not know him, any more than he knew her, and that after they had the preceding day left the ladies, Hacena had informed Kilana that Saphis was the perfon she had before feen at the European merchant’s. This gave us all great pleaSure, as we were every one of us nearly interested in what concerned a man, who had been So great a friend to us.
Saphis was that day introduced again to the ladies, and was So happy as to gain both his mistreSs’s approbation and Edzerbeina’s conSent, to eSpouSe Flacena the Same day that was fixed for Kilana’s nuptials.
Whilst preparations were making for the celebration of the nuptials of our two friends, Ofman feveral times visited Sophia. The natural conSequence enSued, for the more he converged v/ith and knew her, the more he loved her.
OSman SuppoSed that Omar was his filter’s confident, knowing they had a very great regard for each other. He had
there-
2H MEMOIRS of
therefore often aSked Omar what Isis sifter’s Sentiments were with reSpect to him but CO no purpoSe, Omar always avoiding the Subject with the greatest care.
This gave OSman great uneasineSs, as be imputed it to Sophia’s diOike of him, or at least an indifference for him, and' therefore thought his friend did not chuSe ' to give him pain by the diScovery. At other times the fiatterer hope would amuSe him, with a Supposition, that he was not indifierent to Sophia, but that the obstacle that prevented them from being happy' was Such, as there was not a possibility of removing, in any manner that would be proper or fatisfactory to them, and that this rendered all their hopes and wishes abortive, and therefore Omar from a motive of prudence, avoided laying any thing that might give encouragement to a paffion that must at last prove fruitleSs.
OSman only made his complaints to me, being unwilling to give his friends who were’]list going to be happy, any pain for him, and thereby interrupt their happineSs without adding any thing to his own,
Flowever
Mr. Charles Guildford. 215
However he gave himfelf fome eafe by communicating his grievances to me-. And though at preSent there was little hopes of fuccefs, yet I forefaw it would be of fome fervice to him, though it made him uneaSy, viz. lay Some restraint on his predominant paffion which no other con-* sideration had been strong enough to keep within due bounds.
The day arrived for the completion of our friends happineSs, when the nuptials were celebrated, and we all Spent the day together, with the freedom of English people, at the houfe of Edzerbeina. Ofman had feated himSelf near Sophia, and was a long time engaged in converfation with her, which Omar obferving, he called OSman aside, and thus addressed him, “ Do not SuppoSe my triend that by my “ calling you now aside, I am of the tem-per of either your countrymen, or my “ own, viz. that I do not care to trust my “ sister in converfation with one of our “ fex. No, far from it. And was it not “ for one consideration, I fiiould be great-“ ly pleaSed to See the regard you have “ for my sister. However, that obstacle “ that now gives you So much pain may ■“ in time be removed. ’Tis but waiting
“with
sli6 MEMOIRS of
with patience. I am myfelf this day
made happy in the poffeffion of a wo^ “ man I love in the most tender manner, “ and certainly, there is not any happinefs “ on the earth can equal it. As I am “ happy mySelf, I cannot bear to fee a “ friend unhappy, and not give him all “the relief in my power, I am now go-“ ing to put the greatest considence in “ your honour, and hope out oS regard “ to me, and your love for Sophia, you “ will not make an improper uSe of what “ I am going to fay. Without farther “ introduction then, I will assure you my “ sister’s regard for you is equal with your “ own, but she has learnt the European “ art of difguising her fentiments, and “ its the highest proof she can give of “ her prudence, under the preSent cir-“ cumstances. Make a proper uSe of “ this information. Wait with patience “ a time may come, and we know not “ how Soon when she may be free. Now “ do not be offended with my freedom, “ but honestly to confeSs the truth, I was “ before, SearSul of intruSting you with “ this Secret. You know I am well ac-“ quainted with your disposition, and that
“ your
Mr. Charles Guildford. 217
“ your passions are often too powerful for “ your reafon, I am now fpeaking like a “ Sriend, not as Sophia’s brother, but I “ think from the observations I have “ made, your regard for Sophia is too “ great, to permit you to attempt any “ thing prejudicial to her honour.”
Here Omar ended his difcourfe, and here I will end my letter.
yours,
Charles Guildford.
LETTER XXIII.
IN my last I gave you the particulars of Omar’s difcourfe to OSman. It’s lussicient here to inform you that OSman had too much good SenSe to be offended at any part of ir, particularly as it came from a friend. That which related to Sophia’s regard for him you may believe gave pleaSure to one of his Sanguine hopes. Vol. II.	L	And
/
2i8 MEMOIRS of
And fanguine he was, for he afterwards affured me, he v/as much easier, now he knew Sophia had a regard for him, and did not doubt but the time would foon come when he should be happy.
1 desired he would not place too great a dependance on that, and in fact I began to fear Ofman would think of stopping at Ispahan and wait till Something should happen in his favour, and by that means, be deprived of the knowledge he might gain by travelling and I of an agreeable companion and sincere friend.
But enough on this Subject at preSent, I believe, in one of my former letters I obferved, that Edzerbeina could give her daughters very genteel fortunes, and I will affure you neither Saphis nor Omar had any reafon to complain on this occa-, sion.
Omar the day after his marriage called qn wSaphis, and Ofman and I being with Saphis when Omar called he desired to fpeak with Saphis alone, which we were furprized at, there being the greatest intimacy Subsisting between us, and we having never made any of the afiairs of either of us a Secret from the rest.
'	Saphis
Mr. Charles Guildford. 219
Saphis withdrew with him, but returned in a few moments faying, “ he would be determined by us, and that if Omar could gain our conSent after he had informed us of the motives for his refufal, he would comply with his request.
He informed us that Omar out of the fortune he had received the preceding day with his lady, had been offering to pay him for his own ranfom and ours alfo, and that he had refufed accepting of his propofal, becaufe he did not think it right to appropriate any part of that money to fuch a ufe : that as he had himfelf received a genteel fortune with his lady the full account ot wh ch he had no occasion to acquaint his father with, he could out of his own private purfe remit his father the money, without any prejudice to himfelf or his lady, as, should he furvive his father, he should have that and much more returned. He now desired our opinion freely, adding, that if Omar had a genteel fortune of his own he might not have wholly refuSed his offer.
We returned for anfwer that he ought to accept of Omar’s, but not of ours, and that we should foon have a remittance to L 2	an
2ao MEMOIRS of
anSvver that, Saphis was chagrined at our determination, but faid as he had agreed to abide by our determination lie must fubmit. But that there was one method of still fatisfying our too fcrupnloiis honour, which was that he would accept, though much against his will of Omar’s ranfom, and with it, would remit ours to his father, and we should be his debtors, but insisted on it that we should viiot wait a moment at Ifpahan for a remittance of money to pay him : that if we thought proper to wait any time there for Our pleaSure or conveniency it was a different thing, but the moment we were desirous of leaving the country, he would Supply us with money and bills, to enable us to purSue our travels, and we might remit the whole when we returned to Venice or England.
This Saphis strenuousiy - insisted on, and as we did not intend, immediately to leave the country, and were in hopes we fiiould Soon receive remittances, to SatisSy Saphis we promiSed to comply with his terms, and this affair being now Settled, we refolved to sit down contented at ISpahan for fome time, to fee fomethieg
of
Mr. Charles Guildford. 221
of the manners, customs, &c. of the Tter-sians and take a little pleafure, by way of relaxation, and entertainment after the many fatigues we had undergone.
Scarce five days had elapfed after this, when as we were one day walking out to view a part of the city <3Sman and I had not yet feen, vrith Saphis and Omar for our guides, Omar met with his uncle, that I have mentioned in one of my former letters.
He was come back to ISpahan with an intent to leave off busineSs and Settle there, for he had got an immenSe fortune. We immediately adjourned to Omar’s, where Omar informed his uncle of all their mil-fortunes. The good old gentleman Said, they should not long havecauSe to complain but that he would be a father to them, in the place ofhis deceafed brother. He in, a few days, after having fettled his affairs, divided his fortune nearly into three equal parts. One third he gave to Omar, one third to Sophia, and the remainder he fecured to Omar’s mother, fiiould she furvive him, and affured her she should live with him, and he would take the fame care of her during his^ life, as his L 3	bro-
22Z MEMOIR S of
brother would have done had he been living. This made the family very happy, but Omar and Sophia choosing, as they were themfelves, by the bounty of their uncle, rendered indepcndant, to place their mother in the fame state, joined in making a very handfome provision for her.
The uncle when he was acquainted with it, laughed, and faid, as they were themfelves young and no enemies to marriage, -they fuppoSed his sister might marry again, and that he might likewiSe marry, but as for himSelf he never should think of it, notwithstanding which it was no reafon his Sister might not if she thought proper, and he fiiould not wish to confine her to a Single life. And in short was greatly pleaSed with this testimony of filial duty that the young ones had given her.
The very moment this affair was Settled Omar again called on Saphis and in-fisted on his accepting oS our ranSom, Saying his own only objection was now removed. Saphis anfwered had he forefeen it, he fiiould have provided against it, but, as we v/erc not averfe to the propoSal, (Omar having by his pressing intreaties
Mr. Charles Guildford. 223
ties before prevailed on ns,) Saphis accepted of his offer and now as they were both ready to fuppiy us with money, we had nothing but Sophia to detain us in Ferfia.
Olinan was not fatissied with this, as fupposing I should be Soon for leaving ISpahan, and he did not know how to stay, and let me Set out for Europe alone.
I could not bear to See a friend, I sh dearly beloved, uneaSy, when it was in my power to give him any relief, therefore to give him as much Satisfaction as I could in this particular, I informed hiiTij I would stay at ISpahan Some time longer, and as he intended to sind the German, and endeavour to get him to relinquifn his claim to Sophia before a magistrate, I promised him my assistance, and to wait there patiently till he had brought the affair to Some conclusion.
OSman expressed himSelf greatly obliged to me for this miark of my regard, which he affured me he should alv/ays esteem as one of the greatest obligations I could confer on him.
We were now to begin our enquiries concerning the German, and here we were at agreat loSs. We applied to Omar L 4	to
224- MEMOIRS of
■ to fearch among his fathers papers Sor the German’s letter, that we might See if he had not in that, mentioned the place of his retreat.
We accordingly applied to Omar who found the letter, and on examination we difcovered that it mentioned the place of his retreat, placing his considence, as there faid, in the old gentleman’s honour.
This was one fuccefsful step, and gave OSman very great Satisfaction, a.s lie^e-steemed it a good Omen for the beginning of our enquiries, the Succefs of which I shall defer till my next, and at prefent bid you adieu.
Yours,
Charles Guildford.
L E.D
Mr. Charles Guildford. 225
LETTER XXIV.
WE had no fooner gained the information mentioned in my last, then w^e immediately went in fearch of the German, to the place mentioned in his letter.
When we came there we found he was removed, for fear of being difcovered, and it was with great difficulty that we could learn the place he was gone to, and even should not have gained any intelligence, but that Omar made ufe of all powerful gold, a never failing remedy.
We traced the German, as directed, and we;re again difappointed, for he had made another remove, but gold still befriended us, and we went on from place to place, till at length we arrivea at the place of his residence.
When we came there, we v/ere informed he was extremely ill, and almost at the point of death. OSman knew much better than I did, what was to he done and desiring I would stay there im-’ mediately left me. In about half an hour he returned with one of the principal magistrates, who on his entrance de-L 5	manded
226 M E M O I R S of .
manded admission for himfelf and us to the German, The people of the houfe durst not refufe, and we were immediately admitted.
We faw the German extended pale and wan, and almost worn out, on a wretched bed : the furniture of the room was as wretched, and every thing about us boi’e the most horrid appearance of extreme poverty: as to the German he was the picture of miSery itielf. I cannot defcribe the horror of the fcene, nor will I attempt it. I shall only mention the principal particulars. The moment the Germrn faw the magistrate he fainted away, and it was near half an hour before he could be recovered.
He at last returned to life, and recovered his fleeting Senfes. With' die most ghastly look I ever faw, and with the greatest horror and fear strongly imprinted on every feature of his face, he aSked the magistrate if he was come to lead him to execution, and begged in the most abject manner, that as he had but a few hours to live he might be permitted to die in his bed.
Ofman here interpofed, and affured him, he should die in peace, that.no one
should
Mr. Charles Guildford. 227
would molest him, and that we only came to request him to do an act of justice, and make fome retaliation to an injured family before he departed this life.
Oh ! fays he, you mean the family of my noble, my generous friend Omar whom I have indeed greatly injured. All the retaliation that is in my power I will make, but what can a ruined miferable wretch like me, do to Serve them. I have robbed that family in the most cruel manner, reduced them to poverty, and the greatest distreSs, and now am mySelf just-• ly punished, for should I recover from this illnefs, yet, I should die with famine, not having wherewith to fupport me, and the want of the common neceffaries of life has been the principal caufe of my preSent illneSs having lo far overcome me. The moment OSman heard this he Sent for a physician, and gave the German a purfe to Support him at preSent, with a a promiSe of farther affistance.
Fle then informed him of the cauSe of our coming. The German with very great fatisfaction conSented to his request,' an instrument was immediately prepared whereby the German in the preSence of the magistrate Solemnly renounced all L 6	da im
228 MEMOIRS of
claim to Sophia, and assigned his power to Ofman. This the German immediately executed, and then in the most fo-lemn manner returned thanks to the deity who had given him this opportunity of doing an act of justice to a branch of the injured Omar’s family.
He then informed OSman that he was greatly obliged to him for his generosity, that though it was too late to Save his life, it would pay his debts, and bear his funeral expences, and that was all he wished.
That it was poverty, had obliged him to pursiie the baSe arts that had ruined his friend. That he would the very next day after he had wrote to Omar have returned what he had left of Sophia’s fortune, but that a domestic who had been privy to all his villainy, had that very day robbed him of almost all he had, and fled, and that ever since he had lived in the most miserable manner, moving about ' from place to place, and every moment dreading when he should be Seized for debt, or die through famine.
.	After pausing a few moments, he clafp-
ed his hands together, lifting them upi, and directing his eyes upw'ards with a
sixed
Mr. Charles Guildford. 229
sixed attention for fome time. He was at last heard to fay, “ have mercy on me “OGod!” then gafped, stretched himfelf out and died.
Ofman took care of his funeral, faw him decently interred, and paid feveral debts he had contracted, and thus ends the German’s history.
No obstacle now remained, and OSman immediately obtained Sophia’s conlent, as alSo her mother’s. The day was sixed for her nuptials, and preparations were made for the Same with the greatest expedition. Two days before the time appointed for the completion of my friends wishes, my good old and faithSul Trueman arrived, to my very great furprize and joy.
lie Informed us, that our letters had been fent both to Venice and England in fafety. That thoSe for Venice, which were designed for England were immediately diSpatched after him, he having, on ' Settling his affairs at Venice, where heshad Secured all our treaSure, Set off Sor England to See if our Sriends knew any thing oS us, many enquiries having been made at all the Seaports on the coast of Egypt,
near
230 M E M O I R S of
near the place wdiere we were miffed. That just as he arrived in England, my friends received my letters, and foon after thofe from Venice. That he took their directions, returned to Venice, and from thence fet out for Ifpahan, my friends not chusing to trust any other conveyance, and Trueman himfelf desiring to be the messenger. He had fecured bills on fom.e of the principal merchants in Ifpahan, to a very large amount, the obtaining of which, and miany obstacles he had met with in his travels, being the caiiSe why he had not Sooner got to ns, I must here conclude.
Yours, &c.
Charles Guildford, T'S '	LET-
Mr. Charles Guildford. 231
LETTER XXV.
Trueman had brought me the agreeable news that my parents and friends were well, as was Charlotte alsh, and unengaged, but had preServed her freedom with very great difficulty. My sister had wrote to me that she had delivered my letter to Charlotte who was greatly affected at my misfortune, and fpoke of me in the most tender manner. My friends were greatly alarmed at my situation, but Trueman affured them if they would let him be their messenger, he knew fo much of the manner of travelling, &c. that he could foon get to us, and would anfwer for the conducting us back in fafety. This had in fome Sort made them eaSy.
After I had made all my enquiries concerning my friends in England, &c, I now enquired concerning affairs at Venice and what happened after we were miffing.
He faid the men that went w'ith us, after using their utmost endeavours to find us, at night returned to the ship, when the captain finding they were returned
with-
MEMOIRS of
without us ordered them to go back to the fame place and wait till we came, being certain that we should return when the moon rofe,.for he judged we had been Surprized by the night coming on before we expecteti it.
Trueman desired he might go with them. They went and waited till Sun rising; when Trueman propoSed that fome of the men should go back with the boat to the ship and desire the captain to Send them Some more men that they might be divided into Several parties, each to take a difierent way up the country and proceed in Search of us.
I'he captain readily conSented, left the Snip under the care of one oS his officers, took two others, with him, went himSelf on shore with as many men as he could Iparc, and took with him arms and ammunition for the whole. V/hen he landed he divided his men into four fmall.parties, one he commanded himfelf, one Trueman commanded, and two officers headed the other parties : then they feparated, each travelling a great way up the country, where they fpent the whole day in a fruitlefs fearch after us. They paffed a fecond and a third day in the fame man-
ne r
Mr. Charles Guildford. 233-
ner and then gave us up as lost, siippof- , ing we had in the night fell into the Nile. But the captain on reflection told Trueman he was of opinion we were taken by fomie straggling robbers, and he made not the least doubt but that he should hear from us, foon after he got to Venice, where he adviSed Trueman to go and wait for our return, or at least till he heard from us.
Trueman had fecured every thing that belonged to us at Venice, taken every proper precaution, when not being employed, he could not Slay there any longer, being very uneaSy at not hearing from us, and for that reafon fet out for England.
Two days after Trueman arrived at ISpahan, OSman and Sophia were married, and now we had nothing to detain us there, only it was proper to stay a little longer out of a compliment tothe new married pair, particularly to Sophia, whom it would have been cruel to have immediately deprived of the pleafure of the company and converfation of her friends.
I wanted to fend to England to inform my friends of our fafety and of Trueman’s
arrival
■234 MEMOIR S of
arrival, but was under a great difiiculry how to fend, for unlefs I Sent by a Special messenger, there was little probability of my letters arriving beSore the time I intended to be in England.
I mentioned this to Trueman, and he Supposing I had Some thoughts of Sending him, which I had not, immediately desired I would not ash him to go, that he did not regard the trouble, would go twice as far with pleafure, if I went, but he couid not bear the thoughts of leaving me any more.
I told him I did not intend it. He expressed the greatest SatisSaction at this aS-furance, and then informed me, there was an English young gentleman he had Some knowledge of, at ISpahan, whoSe friends resided in England, ssshat he had been under the care oSan unde at ISpahan, who having met vfith misfortunes had died and left this young gentleman unprovided for, and that he believed the youth would be glad to undertake a commission that would deSray his expences and enable him to return to his native country.
I Sent Sor this young gentleman and when he came was greatly prejudiced in his favour, by a peculiar look oS honesty
and
Mr. Charles Guildford. 2^5
and good nature that was imprinted on his countenance, and by his genteel ad-drefs and behaviour.
I thought I knew fomething ot his features, and I, for that reaSon took the liberty of enquiring into his name and family.
I found his name was ThompSon and that he was a very near relation of my worthy friend of that name, the clergyman I have mentioned in my former letters. I paffed an examination on this young gentleman as to his abilities, &c. in trade, and had great reafon to be fatissied ; I then desired him to call on me in two or three days. In the mean time I applied to Saphis, alSo to Omar and his uncle, and to feveral others that I was then acquainted with in ISpahan to give Mr. Thompson credit for fuch merchandizes as would be advantageous, to instruct him, &c. and to make him their factor, consign goods to him and give orders for other’s, &c. and fo to carry on an extensive commerce immediately between them. I fucceeded very well in my applications. Omar’s uncle gave Mr. Thompfon excellent instructions for trade, &c. and having fome valuable commodities from the •
east
236 M E M O I R S of
east,. Still undiSpoSed of, gave him credit for them, and in a Sew days Mr. Thompson was extremely well Surnished with goods. I lupplied him with a Sum of money, more than he would have taken had not I preffed it on him, and Sor vv-hich he insisted on my taking his note. But though I Said nothing to him I never, intended to call on him for payment, and thereSore aSterv/ards burnt it.
He paid us Several visits, and Spent a few days with us, and when ready to depart, I delivered to him my letters, and he took his leave of us.
I must here end my letter.
«•
yours,
Charles Guildford.
LET-
/
Mr. Charles Guildford. 237
LETTER XXVI.
AS the manner in which we fpent the hours at ISpahan during the reSc of the time we staid there, will afford you little entertainment, I will give you fome curious particulars that Saphis made me acquainted vrith, and which I dare fay will afford you much more fatisfaction.
I have already given you his character, and I believe mentioned that he had travelled much, and converfed with many fensible men, of various nations. That by his inquisitive temper he had acquired a very great fund, of knowledge which might be faid to be almost univerlal, efpecially as to geography, 'History, &c. and the laws, manners, ■ and customs of most of the people, we have any adequate knowledge of, and even of fome that we at this time know little of.
I shall not repeat the particulars of all our conversations, as it would to you, in writing be tedious, nor shall I write by . way of dialogue, as that will be too prolix, and would oblige me to introduce
perSons,
23^ M E M O I R S of
perfons, which will to you as a reader be difagreeable.
Method I must likewife beg leave to avoid, as time will not permit me to obferve it, therefore shall only enumerate Such particulars, which I think are worthy observation, as they occur. To proceed therefore, the particulars I hint ar, were without farther preamble as follows.
As we were now in the Empire of Persia, my first enquiry was concerning that famous city called by the Greek and Latin authors Perfopolis, but by the Persians and other oriental people, called E-lamis, and was informed that this city was, when in its perfection, the Metropolis of the known world. It was then allowed to be the richest, nobless:, and most beautiful city on. earth. That its structure was fuperb the greatest part of its buildings being compoSed of cedar and CypreSs: the order of its building was fo curious and regular, that it was then justly called, the glory of the world.
When Antiochus Epiphanes, had by plunder obtained at JeruSalem ten tuns of gold, he marched to PerSopolis with his army in hopes of getting the greatest booty in the world ; and though Babylon
Mr. Charles Guildford. 239
Ion and Shufan were very rich, in one of which the Macedonian got 50000 talents, and in the other nime millions of gold, as alSo 50000 talents in Bullion ; yet in Per-fepolis there were found 120000 talents or according to others thirty-two millions Seven hundred and fifty thouSand pounds.
As to the lofty palace of the Persian emperors, its situation, profpect, rich-nefs, and the curious arts employed therein, they were incomparable, and threw Alexander into the greatest amiazcment when he entered it.
And its not any wonder my friend, that a Macedonian prince should be astonished at fo much magnisicence.
Yet my friend this rich, this famous city, and even this fuperb palace, worth perhaps more than the hereditary dominions of that vain conqueror, or rather Madman, was at a drunken feast, in the heigth of a debauch, by the instigation of that wretch, known to us by the name of Thais, at the command of this he'o, whom we abSurdly call Alexander the great. Set on sire, and reduced, to ashes. An action So inglorious to his memory, that left an indelible Stain on his name,
even
240 MEMOIRS of
even to his greatest admirers, who fay, he would, on cool reflection, have quenched the destructive flames he had kindled, (if possible) with his tears.—A pretty at-tonement indeed, for fuch wanton jcru-elty.
Next to SuSa, or Shufan. This was a place famous for one of the three royal palaces, belonging to the Median mo-narchs. It was here Ahashnerns kept his court, as alSo feveral other kings. Here Alexander married Statyra daughter to Darius. Here he made a feast for 9000 guests, to each of whom he gave a cup of gold. Hei he got 9000000 of coined gold and 50000 talents in filver. It is Situated on the river Choaspis, the waters, of which river were in fuch esteem with the Perfian Emperors, that they ufed no other. Here Cyrus the great entertained the beautiful Parthea. Here Alexander gave 10000 talents, to pay the debts of thofe who were defirous of returning into Greece, and here he received a recruit of 30000 young Soldiers. At this place it was, that (according to Scripture) Esther obtained So much favour for the Jews, and Haman was hanged instead of Mordecai.-It is Slid that the palace of Sufa, built by
Darius
Mr. Charles Guildford. 241
Darius, was enriched by Memnon, with the fpoil of the great and noble city of Thebes in Egypt, and that the stones were cemented with gold. How far you will credit this I cannot tell. However, excepting that at Perfepolis, stwas esteemed one of the most fuperb structures, belonging to the Kings of Persia. This city is now deSolate.
As to the procedui*e of Ahashuerus’s with regard to the Jews, and his allowing them the liberty of defending themSelves, instead of recalling the Sentence, I Scarce have occasion to inform yon, that fuch was the stupidity of the Persians, relative to the will of their fove-reign, that whatever laws they make, or whatever commands they give they are irrevocable, as fupposing they are infal-liable, and the most cruel order given by their monarch, even when drunk, could not be revoked when fober.
As to SuSa let me notice one thing more before I quit it, which is, that Varenius mentions a little well atSufa, which makes their teeth fall out that drink thereof. As to this I cannot tell what to fay, as I could not learn, but would fooner Vol. IL	M	fubmit
242 M E M O I R S of
fubmit to the credit of fuch an autho than diSpute it.
Permit me now to make a quick tran fition, viz. from Sufa to Japan. An Em pire the situation and extent of which we know little of, and from which al Christians (the Dutch excepted, if fuel you can call them) are excluded by a fevere edict. S'or this reaSon, and as I car inform you of Some particulars, knowr to few, I hope to afford you Some entertainment.
In the philiSophic-al transactions, N° 118, you will sind it mentioned, thai whether Japan be an issand, or annexec to the land of Jeffo, the inhabitants ol both countries doubt; becauSe vast and inaccessible mountains interpoSe which hinder a communication.
Neither doth it as yet clearly appear, whether this land of J effo is a part of Tartary, or whether it is divided trom it, by an arm of the Sea. I'he ChineSe affirm that Tatary runs 300 China leagues beyond their famous wall; So that if we follow them, the country of Jeffo, and alSo Japan, may Seem not to be isiands but annexed to the continent.
Japan
Mr. Charles Guildford. 243
Japan lies eastward of Asia, not far from China, and is in a great meaSure, if not wholly Surrounded by the pacific ocean. It is equal to, if not larger than Great Britain. Some compute its length at above feven hundred miles. Its breadth in fome places 180, or 200. The eastern part of it fronts California in America, from which it is computed to be 4200 miles distant. Some think they communicate, but I believe they are greatly mif-taken.
The Emperor of Japan, according to the custom of Eastern prince’s, hath feveral wives, however, contrary to others, only one bears the name of Midai, or Em-prels, she hath her own court and palace in particular, feparate from tthe Emperors. He is obliged by a law of the country to eSpoufe the daughter of the Dairo, or chief priest. When there is one who is marriageable, and then she, preferable to all other eastern princeSs’s, takes the title of empress which is contrary to other oriental states who give this title to the first of the Sovereign’s wives, wsho bears him an heir to the crown, and if fuch heir dies, the title is transferred to the mother of the next heir.
M2	I must
244- MEMOIRS of
I must obferve to you, that the Dairo, is by hereditary right, legal heir to the crown, but his ancestoi's having been de-poSed, the fucceffors of the sirst uSurper, have kept poffeffion of the civil, and left the ecclesiastical power, and many external marks of honour to the Dairo’s and their fucceffors. Otherwife thoSe powers were, before Such uSurpation united in the Sovereign.
The Son of the Emperor of Japan no fooner attains the age of fifteen, than he is obliged to quit Jedo, the metropolis of the Empire, and to remove to Sarunga, where he is obliged to remain, and there hold his court until the death of his father.
Several Emperors, ufurpers of the Empire have entertained very great hatred to Christianity, (which had formerly made a great progreSs in this nation) and to the profeffors, and in 1639, an edict was published at Macao, whereby the Portuguese where forbid, on pain of death ever to land in Japan, on any pretence whatever-. The king of Portugal, to appeafe ToxogunSama, then emperor ; fenr, the. next year a numerous embaffy, with rich prefents to Japan. But the Emperor w^as
not
/
Mr. Charles Guildford. 245
not to be appeafed. He caufed every man (two only excepted) to be put to death in a very cruel manner.
Thofe two he preferved to fee the horrid execution, that they might return and inform the king of what tliey had feen, and to inform liim from the Emperor, that he would Serve him and even the God of the Christians in the fame manner should either of them dare to fet foot in Japan.
The Dutch still carry on a commerce v/ith the Japanefe, but they enjoy this privilege, becaufe the JapaneSe -do not look on them as Christians.
Particular businefs calls me off at prefent, therefore I will here corrdude this letter, and as ufual Subfcribe mySelf,
Yours,
;
Charles Guilpforb.
M 3	LET-
246 M E M O I R S of
LETTER XXVII.
I Will beg permission to continue my account of the Japanefe, and to proceed without farther ceremony.
The Emperor of Japan is a defpotic psince. Flis will is the only law by which his fubjedSs are governed, however there are certain general customs that prevail as laws, i. e. where the monarch adls, in punishing crimes, &c. and according to the method uSed by his predecessors. His will is So abSolute that no one dares op-poSe it, or make the least remonstrance to him. He regulates affairs of conSequence by the ministry of his principal mandarins who are his chief oshcers, and always • attend him: their foie employment is to be the depositary of his orders, to reduce them into arrets and edicts, to publish them, and to take care as well by themfelves, as by their deputies, that they are executed through the whole empire.
The provinces are governed by Viceroys, whofe dignity is hereditary but notwithstanding that, Chancellors are Sent from court into thoSe provinces, to Super-intend the conduct of Such Viceroys who are obliged to take the ad-
the
Mr. Charles Guildford. 247
vice of thoSe chancellors, in tire administration and government of public affairs.
The revenues of the Emperor are Said to amount to 28^ millions, of which he does not Spend a 3d. part in the Support of his troops and the expences of his court and state; the remainder is deposited in his treasuries at Jedo, which are guarded with great care, and there it remaines, in Several great towers appointed for that purpoSe, and which must contain immenSe riches, having been there accumuiated for a great number of years,
. I think my friend, a bold adventurer, with a good force, who couid make liim-lelS master of this treaSure, might with eaSe get the crown, for which reaSon, if I was emperor of Japan, I would not keep fuch a treafure amaffed together in one place, under the care of any one body of men whatever. I would diSperSe it in various places, and conceal it as much as poffible from the knowledge of any, who might be in other reSpects powerful enough to be my competitors,
I shall not enumerate the provinces of this empire, or other fuch like particulars M 4	of
24§ M E M O I R S of
of this state, as they will afford you little entertainment and as you can readily apply to proper authors for a knowledge thereof, but shall only mention Such things as you may not perhaps be acquainted with, and then proceed to o-thers, that may to you, be more interesting.
The Emperors of Japan generally aS-Sume Some famous name as a part of their title,, Such as Kombakundono Signifying Sovereign lord, or TaikoSama signifying Grand Seignior or master of the Empire.
The Japanefe are idolators, and worship the Sun. There are amongst them different fects to the number of twelve. .Dis immaterial to mention the particulars.
Meaco was the ancient residence of the Emperors, but Jedo is at preSent. The Emperor resides at Jedo, and the Dairo' resides at Meaco, where be keeps his palace and court.
They have ten un-iverfities or public Schools, where ) outh are taught elo-' quence, histoiy, astrology, poetry and arithmetic. There is alSo a famous university at TakuSangin, and Several academies of Bonzes, where the Sciences are cultivated.
Among
Mr. Charles Guildford. 249
Among the Japanefe, almost all crimes are punished with death, becaufe they look on any difobedience to fo great an Emperor, as an enormous crime. The punishment is not intended to correct the guilty, but to avenge the prince. Thefe ideas arife from extreme fervitude, and more efpecially as the Emperor is foie proprietor of all estates real and personal, almost every crime that is committed is against his interest-
They punish with death any one who is guilty of a lie before a magistrate; a thing which is contrary to natural defence.
That which hath fcarce the appearance of a crime is feverely punished, and what is very Surprising they punish with death any one who hazards his money at play;
Its very well for many of our sine modern ladies my friend, that we have not fuch a law in England. I fear, if Such a law was to be made, it wmuld iS possible heighten the Spirit of gaming.
I'he japaneSe are a strange people. They diSregard the greatest dangers and misfortunes, and will on very trifling occasions rip themSelves up. Do Such pu-
nishmcnts as I have before mentioned cor-M 5	reel:
_ 250 MEMOIRS, of
rect them ? Or is not death rather rendered familiar than terrible to them ?
The JapaneSe Say, with relation to tha education of their children, that they should be treated mildly otherwife they may be rendered refractions to their parents : that siaves ought not to be treated too roughly, otherwiSe they may stand on their defence, &c. By the fpirit which , ought to reign (on fuch principles) in their domestic government, cannot they judge how they ought to act in political and civil government f
A wiSe legislator would endeavour to lead the minds of the people to a proper point, by a just temperature of rewards and punishments, by maxims of philoSophy, morality and religion adapted to their characters, by a just application of the rules of honour, and by the enjoyment of constant good, and of a Sweet tranquility. But under a deSpotic power they have not recourSe to Such amiable. Such gentle means.
MonteSquicu in his curious treatiSe de L’ESprit des Loix, L. 6. cap. 13. (where you will See a particular account oS the a-bove law^s, &c.) mentioning one of their Emperors whom I shall preSently Srom another
Mr. Charles Guildford. 251
ther author particularize) fays, he neglect:-ed to marry, and gave himSelf up to infamous pleafures, by which means he ran the riSque of dying without a fucceffor. .That the Dairo fent him twm very beautiful daughters ; one of whom he married through reSpect, but did not consummate his marriage. That his nurSe Searched for the most beautiSul women; all was uSeleSs; at length the daughter of an armourer pleaSed him; he determined him-' Self, and had a Son by her. The ladies of the court irritated at the preference given to a perSon of Such low birth, Smothered the child. The crime was concealed Srom the Emperor, becauSe he^ would have shed a torrent of blood. And, as MonteSquieu justly obServes, the cruelty oS the laws prevent their execution ; and when the puniStunent is beyond mea-iure, they are often obliged to prefer impunity.
So stir MonteSquieu. hi Some other n -Spects the author of the work intitulec. I.e.s Souverains du Monde, published a. Paris, V. 5. §.2. Art. 7. is rather more particular.
This Emperor wasToxogunSimia, who Succeeded his father KonboSama in 1631, M 6	and
252 MEMOIRS of
and was the fame who massacred the Portuguese, as I have mentioned before.
He informs us that this wretch was averSe to women, and beSides poffeffed a ' detestable inclination : that at length determined to have a Successor to his empire, he eSpouSed the daughter of a simple working armourer, by whom he had a Son, whom he left in his infancy, dying in 1653. That the Grandees did not think it proper to acknowledge him as heir to the crown, thinking they should be dishonoured, if governed by the fon of a woman whoSe extraction was Ib low: that they therefore preferred (^lane, a near relation of the last Emperor,ashgning him sive tutors for the administration of affairs during his minority. He obServes of this prince that he was worthy of his crown and acted with great wiSdom and good order in his government, and that the Europeans might form new hopes of once m.ore gaining admittance into that empire. As to this I believe, if they did they have been difappointed. As to the death of the armourers grandSon, I imagine we may prefer MontsSquieu’s account. As to the reft of the account given by the author of Les Souvereins
du
Mr. Charles Guildford. 143
du Monde, I imagine we may depend upon it, as I have found him very just in many other things But to return to the laws and customs of theSe people.
The JapaneSe reject pecuniary pains, becauSe the rich would elude the punishments due to their crimes. But v/ill not the rich fear the loSs of their fortunes As to the reafon why the JapaneSe hate the chriftian religion. MonteSquieu obServes-, L. 25. cap. 14. That the MagiS® trates look on the constancy which the Christian religion inSpires its profeffors with, when they are desired to renounce their Saith, as a very dangerous thing: they imagine it augments their audaucity. The law of Japan punishes feverely the least disobedience. They order any one to renounce the Christian religion ; iS they do not renounce it, it is a diSobedience ; they punish this crime, and the continuation of this diSobedience appears to them ro merit another punishment.
Punishments amiongst the JapaneSe as mentioned before are regarded as the vengeance of the princefor an inSult committed against him. The Songs of our maatyr’s appear as an outrageous infult to him. The tide of martyr irritates the
magistrates
2£4- MEMOIRS of
magistrates, in their minds it Signifies rebellion, and they uSe their utmost efforts to prevent the chriStian religion from being propogated.
But my friend it remains a doubt whether the Christian religion, which our devotees are ib fond of propogating is dapted to every form of government, allowing (what I fcarce know how to allow) that it is adapted to every climate, and to the manners, customs, and connections, &c. of the various and innumerable inhabitants of this terraqueous globe; fo widely different from each other in different nations. If not, I would beg leave to propofe a question to thofe who are more capable of judging of this miatter than I am viz. Whether under the pretence of propogating our religion among foreigners, we have any right to fubvert the established form, of government of any state (which must, as it appears to me, be often the caSe) against the will of the princes and rulers of Such people, to anSwer Such purpoSes, especially, as the protestant Christian System, allows, agreeable to reaSon, that thoSe who do not profeSs Christianity, may be Saved, as well as us?
Montef-
Mr. Charles Guildford. 255
MonteSquieu L. 25. c. 15, treats very judiciouQy on the propagation of our religion in,shr distant countries, and justly obferves it is not to be wondered at if foreign princes often forbid the introduction of new religions, and the making of fuch innovations, as it is too often productive of intestine troubles.
Foreign princes often admit the Euro-})eans into their states, that they may reap advantages from their knowledge, commerce, &c. But certainly a judicious prince will not tamely fubmit to the extirpation of the established religion of his country, (which may tend to the Subversion of his government, and perhaps to his own extirpation by drawing on him the vengeance of his Subjects, for his tame Submission to Such innovations,) especially when their own religion may be properly adapted to their climate, laws manners, customs, connections, and many other circumstances.
I fancy oiir European Christian princes would not approve of the Ttirks, Persians or ChineSe, introducing themSelves a-mong us, with intent to convert us to their manner of thinking.
I am
256 M E M O I R S of
I am certain the religion of any of thofe people would not be agreeaS)le to the English government, and why should ours be agreeable to any of theirs. I should be very glad to fee a proper religion introduced amongst all mankind, but I would not wish for any individual to be rendered unhappy by ir.
But I have wrote enough on the JapaneSe, as alSo on the Subject of religion, and the propogation thereof. And least I should by prolixity grow difagreeable, I will conclude my letter.
yours
Charles Guildford.
LETTER XXVm.
T\ O vary my Subject, my friend permit me to make Some observations on the empire of China, the laws, cuS-toms, and manners of thoSe people, &c.
Saphis
Mr. Charles Guildford. 257
Saphis had formerly been intimate with a fensible ChineSe. The foil own ng observations are the Sruits of Such acquaintance, and of Some reading, &c.
The climate of China is Such, that it greatly Savours the propogation of the human Species. The women are extremely fruitful, inSomuch that it is alledged they have not, in that reSpect, their parallel on earth. The most cruel tyranny cannot stop the progreSs of propogation. Notwithstanding the tyranny there practised, China, is by reaSon of its climate, &c. always peopled, and for ever tri-umpli’s over the tyranny of their govern-^ ment.
China, like all other countries, where rice is cultivated, is fubject to frequent famines. It requires great labour to water and take care of it, and consequently employs many people. The greater the number of hands employed there is the leSs proportionable share of land for the fubsistence of reSpective families.
When the people are distressed with famine, they diSperfe themSelves in Search of Subsistance ; they form themSelves in different parts into parties of three, four, or sive, and commence robbers. The
greater
258 MEMOIRS of
greater part are at sirst fuppreffed,- and perhaps exterminated, others encreaSeand are likewife exterminated. But in fo great a number of provinces, and where they are far distant from the court, it may fometimes happen that a band may meet with good fortune. They Support and strengthen themSelves, gradually en-crcaSe into an army, go immediately to the capital, and their chief mounts the throne.
Such is the nature of the thing, that a bad administration there is immediately puniSned. DiSorder Suddenly ariSes joe-cauSe a prodigious number of people want Subsistance. The reaSon why abuSes are not So readily punished In other countries is, they have not Such a SenSible effect ; the prince is not fo fuddenly informed nor in fo forcible a manner as in China,
The Emperor of China is not taught as our princes are, that if he governs ill, he will not be happy in a future state, and leSs powerful and poorer in this. It is neceffary that his government should be good, or otherwise he will loSe his empire and his life.
As
Mr. Charles Guildford. 259
As notwithstanding the exposing of children, the people every day encreaSe in China, it requires indefatigable labour, to make the earth produce Sufficient for their nourishment. This requires oS the government Such a particular attention as is not found elSewhere. It is therefore always a point of the greatest confequence that every one may purSue his labours without fear of being deprived of the fruits thereof. This government ought therefore to be rather domestic than civil.
The principal object of the legissators of China, considered as fuch, is to cauSe the people to live in tranquility; they are desirous that men should entertain a great reSpect for each other, that each individual ' should be always fensible that he owes much to others, and fhat there is not any citizen whatever, but hath, in Some reSpect a dependance on Some other fellow Subject. They therefore give to the rules of civility the greatest extent.
So amongst the ChineSe, we See that even the villagers uSe among themSelves, the Same ceremonies as the people v/ho move in a higher Sphere do ; very proper means tor inspiring affability, ancl a certain Sofc-
neSs
2dd MEMOIRS of
nets of manners So neceffary to render life agreeable, to preServe among thoSe people, peace^ good order, and unanimity, and to prevent their running into thofe vices which are the neceffary effects of voracity. In fact to free a people from rules of civility, is opening a door to many errors, and I may fay vices. Civility is a kind of barrier which prevents men from co’Tupting each other.
The different characters of nations are-compofed of virtue and vice, good and bad qualities. The happiest compositions are thofe from whence the greatest good refults.
The precarious life of the Chinefe, renders them extremely active, and gives them an excessive desire of gain; that no commercial nation Whatever can depend upon them.
This acknowledged infidelity hath preferved to them the commerce of Japan ; not any European dealer daring to act under their name, whatever facility there might be in’ the attempt by their maritime northern provinces.
In China they punish the fathers for the faults of their children. The fame
at
Mr. Charles Guildford. 261
at Peru. This is an effect of deSpotic • power. In China they Say, they punish the father for not having made a proper uSe of the paternal powder which nature hath established, and which the laws hath augmented: this necesiarily SuppoSes that the ChineSe have not any idea of what we call honour. Among us the fathers whoSe children are condemned to punishment, and the children whoSe Sather’s have been Suljected to the Same Sate, are Sufficiently puniSned by shame, whereas the punishment in China is loSs of life.
MonteSquieu^ L. 7. c. 6. treating of luxury, efpecially with reSpect to China fays, Sumptuary laws are, for particular reaSons, in Some states absolutely neceffary. The people by reaSon of the climate may become fo numerous, and on the other hand, the means of Subsisting may be fo uncertain, that an univerSal culture of the land, may be abfolutely neceffary. In fuch states luxury is dangerous, and there, fumptuary laws ought to be rigorous. Therefore, in order to know whether luxury ought to be admitted or prescribed, we ought first to view
the
2.62 M E M O I R S of
the relation fubfisting between the number of people and the means of living. In England the foil produces much more grain than is neceffary for the nourishing thofe who cultivate the lands, and who procure cloathing. They may therefore have frivolous arts, and confequently luxury. In France fufficient corn is raifed for the fupport of the labourers, and thofe who are employed in the manufactories. Farther commerce with strangers may for frivolous things fuppiy So many neceffary things, that they need not fear luxury.
At China on the contrary, the women are fo fruitful, and the human kind multiply fo fast, that the lands, however well they are cultivated, are fcarce fufficient for the nourishment of the inhabitant.s. Luxury there is, ‘ confequently pernicious and the Spirit of labour and oeconomy is there as requifite as in any republic whatever. They must thereSore attach themfelves to thoSe arts that are neceS-ceffary, and avoid thoSe that are voluptuous.
See the Spirit of thoSe fine ordinances of the ChineSe emperors. “ Our anceS-
torf,”
Mr. Charles Guildford. 263
tors,” fays an Emperor of the family of Tang, “ held it as a maxim tliat if there “ was any one man who did not labour, “ or any woman who was not employed, “ Some one in the Empire, would Suffer “ either cold or hunger.” And upon this principle he cauSed an insinite number of the Bonze’s monasteries to be destroyed.
The third Emperor of the twenty sirst Dynasty, to whom Some precious Stones were carried, that were found in a mine, cauSed it to be stopped up, unwilling to fatigue his people by labouring for a thing which could not either nourish or cloath them.
“Our luxury is So great,” Says Kiaj-wenti, “ that the people ornament with embroidery the shoes of the young boys and girls, that they are obliged to Sell.” So many men being employed to make cloaths for one only, is it not the reaSon that they have many people who want cloaths ? There are ten men who eat the produce of the lands to one labourer, is not that the reaSon why So many people want food.
In the history of China we find twenty-two Dynasties, i. e. that it hath undergone
264 MEMOIRS of
gone twenty-two general revolutions, exclusive of an insinite number of lels conSequence. The three sirst DynaSties were of a long duration, becauSe the state was wiSely governed, and the Empire was leSs extended than it hath been since.
But we may in general Say, that all theSe Dynasties began as well; virtue, attention, and vigilance are neceffary in China: they were found in the beginning of their Dynasties, but were wanting at the end of them. In fact it was natural that Emperors who were bred up in the fatigues of war, and who arrived to that heighth by pulling down from the throne a family Swimming in voluptuouSneSs, would preServe that virtue which had proved So uSeful to them, and would dread that voluptuouSneSs which they had Seen So fatal to others.
But after the three or four first princes,’ luxury, idleneSs, and voluptuouSneSs would take possession of their SucceS-Sors; • and they confine themSelves in their palaces, weakening their minds, Snortening their lives, and their family declining; the grandees elevating themSelves, the Eunuchs gaining credit, they
would
Mr. Charles Guildford. 265
would place only infants on the throne, the palace becomes the enemy of the Empire, an idle people inhabiting it i*uin thoSe who labour, the Emperor is stain, or destroyed by an uSurper, who is founder of a family, the third or fourth fucceffor of whom, shuts himfelf up in the fame palace.
As to the fpirit of the laws of thefe people, &c. I will beg leave to refer you to Montefquieu, particularly to L. 19. c. 17, 18, 19, with which you v/ill be greatly pleafed.
I will only notice one article more, viz. their industry, from Monfieur Defian-des’s effay on maritime power, and commerce addressed to the count de Maure-pas. This author fays, the Chinefe (who far exceed the Egyptians, in commerce, &c.) have rendered their whole country navigable and eafy pf acceSs, by cutting canals of communication from one river to another, and contriving thofe canals with fuch industry, that there is fcarce a town; nay fcarce a villlage which has not the conveniency of water carriage. Further, we fee upon theSe rivers, a prodigious number of people, active, frugal, wholly employed in studying and carry-Vol. II,	N	ing
266 M E M O I R S of
ing on of commerce, and who very feldom go on shore; and as all thefe people have not any thing but boats of different figures for their estates as well as habitations, it frequently happens that thefe boats unite and form a kind of Hamlet, which the Chinefe range with fuch fym-metry, that they call them with great propriety, Water-Towns. By this means, if the expression may be ufed, the whole nation is in motion; they proceed in their voyages, they avoid idleneSs and indolence, and they never sind any thing difficult where profit (and the author adds) or honour is to be acquired. But I believe as to honour, I mean what the Europeans understand by the term, they know little of it. They are to live by cultivating the land, and by commerce which they certainly carry on in a very exten-five manner.
7'he most judicious reflections I ever met with, relative to the Chinefe, are made by MonteSquieu, who amongst other things obServes, as to carrying on a commerce with the ChineSe, thoSe who deal with them ought to carry their own Scales, meaSures, &c. Sor their government acquieSces in their gaining by Sub-
tilty
Mr. Charles Guildford. 267
tilty, tho* not by open violence, which they as feverely punish, becauSe it would disturb the public tranquility.
But tis proper to quit the fubject, as alSo to bring this letter to a conclusion. For the preSent therefore, adieu.
Charles Guildford;
LETTER XXIX.
I S time my friend to refume the JL thread of our own history.
Lou may now imagine, that the tumults of the paffions of my feveral friends on the interesting occasions I have before mentioned, were now in fome meafure fubsided, and that a gentle calm, a state of the mosh agreeable tranquility took place. —ReaSon once more assumed her Empire, and we began to deliberate on the measures we were to purSue.
The connections formed among my friends by Hymen and friendship were fomething particular. .
N 2	Saphis
268 MEMOIRS of
Saphis had fo much dependance on his father that he did not choofe to quit the East. His lady’s regard for her mother and sister, made her desirous of continuing at Ifpahan. This he could not (through regard to his father) wholly comply with. At length it was agreed to make Ifpahan the place of their general residence, and to Spend a few months every year with his father.
Omar’s lady was likev/ife desirous of residing at Ifpahan. This he the more readily confented to, as he was fond of obliging her, and likewife of continuing in a place where his mother was desirous of passing the rest of her life, and he would not deprive her of the fatisfaction she received, after her misfortunes in the enjoyment of his company and converfation. Bessdes he had already fuffered too much from travelling, therefore determined to pafs the remainder of his life, as a private man, in tranquility.
As for Sophia, she had too great a regard for Ofman, to oppofe his inclinations, which were to pafs with me the remainder of his life, in my happy country: therefore she readily agreed to accompany us to England.
Cur
Mr. Charles Guildford. 269
Our meaSures being thus agreed on, (after we had engaged to carry on a correspondence by letters with our friends,) Sophia, \Ofrnan and your humble fervant attended by Trueman, and feveral of Of-man’s domestics, with two female fervants to attend Sophia, after taking an affectionate leave of our friends, (a defcription of which, I must through incapacity beg leave to bmit,) Set off with the caravans for Gomeran on the Persian gulph. There, after a short stay, we took shipping, and after a profperous voyage through the Arabian Sea, we proceeded through the Red Sea, to the farther end. We then joined fome caravans that were, on our arrival, ready to depart' for Alexandria ; where we arrived in fafety after a tedious journey, which was not the most agreea-ble I have ever made, but however, wc did not experience fo many difficulties as we had formerly undergone, and the amiable tamper of Sophia, joined to her good SenSe, rendered this journey, leSs irkSome to us then it would otherwiSe have been. In fact my friend Ofman was happy, and that contributed greatly to my happinefs, I must here beg leave to add, that he, who had formerly Suf-N 3	fered
270 MEMOIRS of
fered his passions to get the fuperiority over his reafon, now he was entered into the matrimonial state, made one of the best hushands I have ever known.
At Alexandria we took shipping, crof-fed the Mediterranean, and paffed up the gulph of Venice, and after a very pleafant voyage arrived in lafety, at that noble city.
Having fettled our affaiis, and shewn OSman and Sophia the principal building.s, paintings, &c. of which there are a sine collection, we made the tour of Italy, arrived at Rome, and there, for a short time, took up our residence.
' After having feen every thing worthy our notice in Rome, we departed for Paris. On our arrival there vye diSpatched letters to England, that my friends might be acquainted with our Safety, and the place of our residence. Having taken genteel lodgings, fettled ourSelves, and rested a little from the fatigues of our journey, we hired a genteel carriage, and visited Versailles, Saw the wFole of that noble palace, its gardens, &c.—We were likewife feveral times at court, where Sophia was greatly admired. We visited every place of note, in and about Paris,
and
Mr. Charles Guildford. 27T
and fpent our time in the most agreeable manner. I must confeSs I was anxious to return to England that I might Sec Charlotte, (who engroffed rather too much of my attention) as alSo my friends.
My anxiety everyday encreafed, but unwilling to disturb the happineSs of Sophia and OSman, I carefully endea* vouied to conceal it from them. OSman, however, who knew the regard I had for Charlotte, discovered the uneasineSs I laboured under, and knowing, from experience, how diSagreeable Such a Situation must be, (aSter having taken a view of the principal things worthy of notice in Paris,) hastened our departure.
An English gentleman, with whom we had contracted an intimacy at Paris, and who was going alone In his own carriage to Calais, having learnt that we designed to fet off for England in a few days, waited for us, insisting, that we shouid accompany him in his carriage. We accepted his offer, and having made proper preparations for our journey, took leave of Paris.
On our arrival at Calais, wc Spent an agreeable day with the gentleman who had favoured us with his carriage, and a N 4	ship
272 M E M O I R' S of
ship then being in the port, bound for Dover, we the next day took leave of him, (he having businefs at Calais,) embarked, and after a few hours falling, (the weather being sine, and the wind favourable,) we arrived at Dover. There, (that we might not be Seperated) we hired a genteel landau, and drove immediately to my fathers’s little feat, where we were joyfully received by him, my mother, &c. whom I had before informed of the time I intended to be with them, that they might not be furprized.
My worthy friend Mr. Honor, and my sister Lucy (who during my abfence had been bieffed with three sine children, two boys and a girl;) and my old friend Mr. Brown, were there ready to receive us: at my appearance, they were fo far overpowered with joy, that they for fome moments entirely lost their faculties of fpeech.
But I cannot attempt to defcribe the fcene, therefore as a painter, I must draw a veil over it.
Tumultuous joy by degrees fubsiding, gentler passions Succeeded.
I must obServe one thing, that my noble friend, the generous OSman, was by all esteemed as my patron, protector, and
friend
Mr. Charles Guildford. 273
friend: as one that had faved me from ignominious Slavery, returned me again to my native country, and the arms of my friends; and as fuch, was ever regarded by them.
Every one was likewife rejoiced at the sight of honest Trueman,'and being c-^ steemed by all, as my foster father, he was overwhelmed with the profusion of their grateful joy; at the honest old man’s fafe return to his native country.
I enquired of my fister concerning Charlotte, and was informed she was at that time in London. Businefs calls me and I must abruptly conclude.
Yours,
Charles Guildford.
LETTER XXX.
I Continued in the country fome short time, and then fet out for London* accompanied by Sophia, Ofman, my bro-N 5	ther
274 MEMOIRS of
ther and sister, and attended by Trueman, and fome fervants of Mr. Honor’s. I paid a visit to Mr. Worthy, in order to obtain a sight of Charlotte. I fucceeded. I paid my compliments to Mr. Worthy V and his lady, and met with a friendly reception.
Charlotte came in. I paid my refpects to her, (avoiding particularity) as an acquaintance, just returned from abroad, but durst not be more particular, in the prefence of Mr. Worthy and his lady.
Our meeting was fuch as you may imagine. My eyes fpoke the language of defpairing love; her’s anfwered me; tho* the prefence of Mr. Worthy and his lady made each of us endeavour to restrain thofe talkative things, but to little purpofe; notwithstanding a difeovery was what we equally dreaded,
I at length recollected myfelf, and dreaded the obfcrvance of Mr. Worthy and his lady, who hail taken particular notice of my emotion on feeing Charlotte, which with the incoherent anfwers I gave to feveral questions they alked me, concerning the observations I had made in my travels; in Some Sort difcovered to them the true state of my mind.
After
Mr. Charles Guildford. 275
After a long visit, I took my leave and the next day received the following note, from Charlotte.
“ Sir.
“ My papa has difcovered your regard “ for me. He charges me, with the crime “ of difobedience ; a crime I have affured “ him I would not on any account be “ guilty of. He insists, as a proof of that “ obedience I profefs, that I never fee you “ again, without his permishon. I am. “ certain you will not desire me to act “ contrary to my duty, and thereby in-“ cur a parent’s diSpleafure. I need not “ affure you, that I think it hard to “ comply with the injunction. I fear I “ shall alfo be denied the company, and “ converfation, of my dear Lucy. I “ know not how to act. I dare not difo-“ bey the facred commands of a parent. “ —I dare not complain, or fay it is cru-“ el. Fortitude, that virtue which I must “ recommend to you, and hope, the com-“ mon comforter of mankind, will in fuch “ a situation, enable me to comply with “ my father’s injunction. Don’t condemn “ me---a proper opportunity may offer “ for my vindication.
your’s
Charlotte Worthy.”
276 M E M O I R S of
.Dis impossible to defcribe the effect, this epistle had on me.—My fpirits were entirely depressed.—I funk.*—My dear Lucy came in the critical moment, to my relief.—1 shewed her the letter.—She was herSelf as much distressed, but her tender care for me, made her endeavour to conceal her concern. — Mr. Honor, and the generous tender hearted OSman came in, read the epistle; and greatly pitied my situation.
My constitution was not able to bear the violent emotions, which thoSe turbulent paffions of forrow, rage and defpair gave me. Nature was almost everpow-ered : life almost fpent. I was for a considerable time confined to my bed. No one expected my recovery. In this situation I continued fo long, that every day would be my last; was the general expectation. My friends alternately visited me, furrounded my bed, and in silent forrow pitied ray distreSs.
I pitied their’s, and do sincerely affirm that I felt the distress of my friends, more than my own.
Lord Orrery fays, in his remarks on Pliny’s epistles. Lib. 2. ep. 9.	“ Friend-
y ship like infpiration, drives us forward
“ with
Mr. Charles Ctuildford, 277
“ with resistlefs impetuosity, and makes “ us act and feel for others with different “ and more violent agitations, than we “ ever telt for ourfelves.” How true! and how fully proved, in this moving fcene.
But great as my distrcfs was, judge what it must have been, had I known that Charlotte was like mySelf, reduced to the lowest ebb of life, and her death every moment expected.
Tho she was in this wretched condition, yet by the advice of fome cruel relations, her parents had made a fixed refolution, never to confent to an alliance between us, if it would fave her from the grave; and their objections were, the meannefs of my birth and fortune, no one knowing me or from whence I claimed my origin.
My friend Mr. Brown, who (as I obferved in fome of my first letters) understood many excellent fecrets in phyfic; did by his extraordinary shill, (after discharging the phyficians and apothecary, &c.) recover me, to the very great joy and Surprize oS every one.
I defired Mr. Brown to attempt the cure of Charlotte, though there was no
possi-
2 7» MEMOIRS of
possibility of her ever being mine; yet notwithstanding that, and my late sit or illneSs, of which I was but just then recovering, I found my love was not in the least abated.
I had learnt from a friend in Mr. Worthy’s family, that they had agreed to propofe an alliance between Charlotte, if she should recover, and a young nobleman at court; who would be proud of the alliance, and that they were to be married as foon as possible, to cut off all farther hopes, that either of us entertained, oS an alliance happening between us.
Mr. Brown was introduced by a friend: into the family, in quality as a phyfician. They trusted entirely to his care. He attended the fair one fome time, until she was on the recovery ; and when his attendance might be diSpenSed with, he left a prescription, with full directions, &c. After I h M taken leave of my friend in London, and was able to travel; I returned into the country. And here it may be proper ro conclude this letter; therefore at prefent adieu.
i
Charles Guildford.
LET-
Mr. Charles Guildford. 279
LETTER XXXI.
ON our arrival in the country, Ofman would have given me the one half of his fortune, but I refufed it, affuring him I had already fufficient to fupport me, in all my expences.
His fortune was immenSe. He inSisted om my acceptance of fome valuable jewels. He prefented a fet for dreSs, to my mother, another to my sister, and Several jewels to my father, Mr. Honor, and Mr. Brown. TheSe, and Some others, he had got new Set in London, according to the English fashion.
He then purchafed an eftate, with a beautiful feat, in our neighbourhood, and with him I fpent great part of my time. Mr. Honor’s father died durino: my abfence; and Mr. Honor had by Lucy’s desire, bought a handfome feat near my father’s; for as it was a very pleaSant country, there where many elegant leats, diSperSed about it.
My brother and sister, Mr. Brown, Sophia, and OSman, residing near us, were but as one family. How happy should I have been in the fociety of fuch valuable
friends,
28o MEMOIRS of
friends, but that a constant melancholy reigned over my heart, and embittered all my pleafures.
We had not been long in the country, before my father was called up to town, on an extraordinary occasion; viz. the death of his brother, who had made my father foie executor of his will, and left him all his fortune, after paying a few fmall legacies.
My father thought businefs might divert me, and therefore desired me to go with him. My health being tolerably established, I desired my father to fpend the winter in town, he readily conSented, and we had Soon the pleaSure of feeing the rest of our friendly circle with us.
Ofman one day accompanied me in a visit to Mr. Thompfon. Mrs. Thompfon was dead. The good man was not in very good circumstances; having greatly distressed himSelf by his charitable dilpo-sitioii.
We dined there. Mifs BetSy dined with us. OSman took particular notice of her, and after we had taken leave of them, desired I would introduce Sophia to an acquaintance with mifs Betfy, which I accordingly
Mr. Charles Guildford. 281
cordingly did, and they foon contracted an intimate friendship.
My father had in his gift, a very good living; the incumbent of which was just then dead. I Spoke to him, and he gave it to Mr. ThompSon, who was accordingly inducted to the very great SatisSaction of the parishoners, who were well acquainted with his character.
I shall here conclude, as in my next, I intend to vary the Subject.
your’s ^
Charles Guildford.
LETTER XXXII.
My Father, who was well acquainted with the cauSe of my melancholy, and the objections Mr Worthy raifed, to an alliance with me; informed me, he would himfelf apply to Mr. Worthy, and did not doubt of fucceeding,
I was
2Hz M E M O I R S of
I was too well acquainted with my fit-thers honour and veracity, to entertain any the least doubt of what he laid.—I wondered; yet believed. My father applied according to his promife, and brought me the joyful news, that they had confented to my union with the amiable Charlotte.
GueSs the pleasing furprize it gave me. ’Tis impoffible for me to defcribe my situation. I must once more make ufe of the painters art. Charlotte was Soon informed of the change in Mr. VVorthy’s fentiments. The pleasing news had the fame effect on her. She foon recovered. We mer, I need not inform you that it was with insinite pleafure we once more beheld each other. None but thoSe that have felt the like, can form an idea of our happinefs.
I now recovered my native temper; and pleaSure again became agreeable to me. The Society of my friends was once more pleating and miy melancholy was entirely banished. You may be desirous of knowing how Mr. Worthy’s objections were removed.
Take the following short history of our family. My father was the eldest fon and
heir
Mr. Charles Gufldford. 283
heir of the earl of B. He was bred up at court. He had a brother and sister fome few years younger than himfelf. He was a very great favourite with the old earl, who indulged him in every thing he desired. His inclinations led him to travel.—The tour of Europe was his choice. He mentioned it to the earl and his lady. They confented, and furnished him with every thing neceffary for that purpofe.
On his return to England he met with my mother, who was esteemed one of the greatest beauties in the English court. She was daughter to lord D. The greatest part of whofe fortune was lost, by what means stis immeterial to mention: the rest defcended to his fon.
My father loved, declared his pashon, was well received; and treated with honour, and a generous franknefs; for my mother at sirst affured him, she was not poffeffed of a fortune, nor had any expectations. This was what he did not, regard, but having gained lord D’s confent, he applied to the earl of B. for his, which was refuSed. He, in the heighth of his passion, regarded it not; and against the earl’s expreSs commands, married the ladv he loved.	This
9
284 MEMOIRS of
This entailed mifery on both. The earl disinherited my father, and made his brother heir to the whole estate. My father had then about sive hundred pounds per annum, which the earl could not deprive him of: with this he retired into the country, and not being able to Support the dignity of his birth, he concealed himSelf from the world, and affumed the name oS Guildford, under which you have hitherto known me, it being my travelling nam.e.
' ■ I mentioned in one of my former letters a legacy left him, just before I went down tb Bath. ’Twas his sister who died unmarried, that had left him what fortune she poffeffed at the time of her death .
The earl of B. died a few years after he had disinherited my father, and his fecond fon took up his estate and title; under a pretence that my father was dead and that without iffue. And enjoyed ir, without the least remorfe, for the cruel ufage my father bad received. Until a fever feized him ; and he found his death was near. Having never entered into the matrimonial state, he made a new will, and_therein appointed my father Sole executor, and gave him his whole fortune.
A
Mr. Charles Guildford. 285
A knowledge of theSe facts are fussici-ent to convince you that Mr. Worthy could not, when he was acquainted with the whole, object either to our family or fortune. This fortunate revolution, was what my father never expected, and that was the reafon he kept his children as well as the world in ignorance, of the family from whence they fprung, that we might fubmit to our fate without knowing it, and confequently without repining.
My father gave me a genteel fortune,, and insisted on Mr. Honor’s accepting fuch a portion, as he would have given with his daughter at her marriage, had he then been as earl of B. poffesifed of the fortune belonging to his title. He likewife in fome fort returned the generous OSman’s kindneSs, in preSenting him with Some curious paintings, busts, &c. and other curiosities, of which Ofman was particularly fond.
Things being at length ready for the celebration of our nuptials, our friends in general were invited, and we had a grand company. My worthy friend Mr. Thompfon performed the grateful office for me, and joined me for ever to the woman I loved.
With
278 M E M O I R S of
With what pleafure was that happy day fpent! Yet how long, how tedious aid I think it! Night arrived, and to uSe the words of Milton,
To the Nuptial Bower,
I led her blushing like the morn; all Heav’n,
And happy constellations on that hour. Shed their felected influence; the earth. Gave signs of gratulation; and each hill: Joyous the birds: fresh gales and gentle airs,
Whisper’d it to the woods; and from their wings
Flung rofe, flung odours from the fpicy shrub;
Difporting, still the am’rous bird of night. Sung fpoufal, and bid haste the evening star
On his hill-top to light the bridal lamp.
After the celebration of our nuptials, and a short stay in town, we retired into the country, where we live as happy as we can wilh, free from the noify cares of tumultuous life. Mr. Honor continues near us, has feveral fine children by his Lucy, and live as happy-as they can wish.
Ofman
Mr. Charles Guildford. 286
Ofman has feveral children likewife, by Sophia, and they are as happy as mortals can be. Mr. Brown is still living, and well. Mr ThompSon resides on the living my father gave him; keeps a curate in the other: and with his income does much good. MiSs BetSy is married to a gentleman in the neighbourhood, and her happineSs is equal to her merit.
By Mr. ThompSon’s directions, and with his affistance Mr. Honor, OSman, and mySelf; have between us, established a School for the breeding up and educating of a certain number of poor children of both fexes, where they are provided wilh every neceffary, and taught uSeful knowledge, fufficient to preferve them from the dreadful effects of ignorance. When they are old enough to be put out, we intend to have them bound to fuch handicraft, or other busineffes as their inclinations may lead them to the choice of; and if they merit our farther bounty when their time is expired; we shall advance, or give them fomething, wherewith they may fet up in their respective callings; and by this means may become uSeful members of fociety.
The
288 M E M O I R S of
The care of shefe children is committed to Mr. Thompfon, the first promoter ot this charity. In regard to the education of our own children, we purSue Mr. Locke’s and the archbishop of Cambray’s instructions as near as we pof-fibly can; and which are methods I would recommend to every parent.
You desired the particulars of my life, I have complied, and hope in the whole it will prove agreeable to you. I am, my dear friend,
youFs sincerely,,
Charles Guildford.
FIN I S.

TR
rVi
MH7

