
►y/-:VA


i
TO
>■4:
t«*''
. • 1*


•i


£?SP^
.. '





w
11'
'^r


1:
•*Z»b r <%'.*i
^■v ■>:>. C

V.vtK

aaigrA



=49



inches

vl*
yr I
ii» r.'
1 k

01 i I I I I I I I 7 I I I I I I I I|2< ■ M > < < > |3> > > M > I > k > > >
centimeters
I I I I |5 I I I I I I I I |6 >>> M I I I|7I I I M I I I Is I I I I I I I I l9 I I I I I I I I I ^0
1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10	11 (A)	12	13	14	15
39.12	65.43	49.87	44.26	55.56	70.82	63.51	39.92	52.24	97.06	92.02	87.34	82.14	72.06	62.15
13.24	18.11	-4.34	-13.80	9.82	-33.43	34.26	11.81	48.55	-0.40	-0.60	-0.75	-1.06	-1.19	-1.07
15.07	18.72	-22.29	22.85	-24.49	-0.35	59.60	-46.07	18.51	1.13	0.23	0.21	0.43	0.28	0.19
500	200
§■ S'
dOt> p«r inch <Op(M«l)
II Si
CO oo
600
700
300
r400
Sr-



^ VT' ,
r;«v ^
> =
16 (M)
D50 llluminant, 2 degree observer
Density
0.04
0.09
0.15
0.22
0.36
0.51

fht^ad
49.25
-0.16
0.01
38.62
-0.18
-0.04
18(B)
28.86
0.54
0.60
19
16.19
-0.05
0.73
20
8.29
-0.81
0.19
21
3.44
-0.23
0.49
22
31.41
20.98
•19.43
23
72.46
■24.45
55.93
24
72.95
16.83
68.80
25
29.37
13.06
-49.49
26
54.91
•38.91
30.77
27
43.96
52.00
30.01
28
82.74
3.45
81.29
29
52.79
50.88
■12.72
30
50.87
•27.17
■29.46
0.75
0.98
1.24
- . • W ••_A ' V
m.mwF
o
1^.
“.yf 3t

<<


tf Ifi 6
i~r*
•77.' 7T O
r+ C/i “
^ r:

CD
rB
(X>

AD-
^ a

to
•O!?*



.h
Colors by Munsell Color Services Lab

^ dt o
■'M
tr" q*
		
i.		
i	%
^yatqowswyagvagiigawgo ^
“O	
Q) OQ CD	m O
to	Q.
_|	O
O	c
O	to • •
Ofq’ • •	
• •
I Q) I

5 i?
U)
$ < ^


»x-x<«»«>x^x

:>x«*x-x«:-:-»x-:'C*
^x->X'>x*;*x-x»xJ5	:^wx*}Wfrx*;-;'x5

ss;

i3|


y>**
iESIIS;
iSs-;

> .1.
iiC
<•!<
y>


X s
y-- -•■	
- " ,V	
s - -C	
	
y •'yX-'	
'•>! *!*Sl*l«*«?***>t^#%"*S!*f Vl!#“. •
•:^:::*:;:-x-<x*:*»t-:-;.:-:-:-:*
^ ;S^:::?<:-:;:;:.=:::::::i:::;::::
-•* -------------------------------

X ■>>


. i’*.‘S.; b
bl.'C"-.
1
'I
1,
THE HISTORY OF
A
R
A,
AND THE
•: s
Jn fix Letters.

Written by^the celebrated Mrs. R(>W E, Author of Xhtldters from the Dead Ao the Living,
Letter I.
From Laura to Aurelia ; first inveighing against the pleafares of a rural life; then reprefe'ntirig her'brother a§ an Infidel; and giving an accoount of his, System of franCmigjation ; concluding with her distike of His fcheme, andherunwil-lingnefs to renounce her profpcfls of an immortal state.
Letter If.
%
To the fame, giving an account of her brother’s criminal paflion for Charlotte, his peculiar treatment of her, and . her detestation both of him and hisimpious conVerfation.
Letter III.
,	,	i'	r
To the fame, giving' an acccunt of her being reconciled to ^ a rural life, and her adventures with the Handfoma Hermit,’
Letter IV.	^
To the fame, giving her a relation of a fccond uifit which Ihe paid to the Handfome Hermit, in company with her brothci’s mistrefs, the stifeonfoiate Charlotte ; and the ef-ffcfis which his virtuous deportment had upon her; of her Sincere repentance for her past follies, and,her earnest fo-licitationsto be freed fromthe poWer of her licentious lover
Letter V.
To the fame, giving an Bcceunt hf CbarlOttc’silncece repentance, aiid her uncle’s reception of her into his favour and p.oteftidn ihereudon. "Tn the conclufion (he .gives her a hmtiauaMce of hdf conference with tfi'e Hatidfome Hermit who foretells his approaching fate, and’endeavours tQ convince her that the hopes of Christianity are no delufiohs,
* ■	Letter VI..

,To the fame, relating the death of Philocles, the, Haudfume .Hermit, according to his oW-ri prediiition; and of the imC portant est'. 61s of it, viz her abfolut e coiiveffation from her former infidelily, and her firm ,belirf .of a life everlasting.
A
A poetical epistle frdm'the ihffiana! regioM, to conyince the
fair unbeirever of the certainty of a future' state, ana to forewarn her of the torments prepared forvthoje^^ho die
without a stucere contrition avidXorrow for .iheii fins.


r
I

J >'	’
• ‘ t
ri* ,1 ,
' ■ (f
^	' T
. • i\
) .



'•
i .A:

i .	*
i
j*’-
‘j
.

y
- - J


pi-
r'f . -'' '
• i.'i'	‘
•'■-W'C
i J-
T . d -	- ■ L '	S'


-No' •
f
A.‘


L . .
r r'

%
' 0
At No. 28, Great Tower Street, Losdow
LETTER PRESS
R
N
Is neatly performed with Accuracy and Expedition,
on- moderate Terms; viz.
Shot)
5
See.
Of this Size, (and Paper) printed for Three Shillings and
Sixpence a Thoufand :
On finer Paper for four Shillings and Six Pence a
Theufand ;
Larger and fnialler Bills at proportional Prices,


A
R
D
S

(
O
$9
U
I
Elegantly Printed for
Two Shillings lOo
w
Eight Shillings for 500 Fifteen Shillings 1000.
i
4
i
4
4
4

As the above Prices are nearly
It Shillings in the Pound lower
Than ufually charged by other Printers,
Earneji will he required,
COPPER PLATES neatly Engraved and Printed on reasonable Terms.
%
S .J
LETTERS,
Laura to Aurelia
('From^Mrs. ‘Rowe’s Letters.)
-/
faffion for the handfc
L E T T E R I.
My dear Aurela^
COULD your importunity have prevailed with my brother to shave left me in London, you had been free from the vexation that I shall cer-
itainly give you, by making you the confident of all my country adventures ; and I hope you will relieve my chagrin, by telling me what the dear, bewitching, buSy world is doing, while I am idly iauntring away my time in rural shades. How
^	A	^ A A	- - - —
happy are you, >my dear Aurelia ! How 1 envy
you the enjoyment of dust, of crowds and noiSe,
with all the polite hurry.of the beau monde !
My brother hrouglu me hither to See a country Seat he has lately purchaSed. He would Sain
-pershade me it is finely Situated ; but I should (think it more finely lituated in the Mall, pr even Tn Cheaplide, than here. Indeed I hardly know
A 2	WhcKe
C 4 3
V
where we are ; only that it is at a dreadful distance from the Theate Drury-lane, from the Opera, from the MaSqerade, and every thing in this world that is worth living for.
I can fcarce tell you whither to direfl your letters We are certainly at the ends of the earth, on the borders of the continent, the limits of the habitable
u,nder the polar star,
I
among wild people thought we should never have
nor could I
and Savages.
come to the end of our pilgrimage ; forbear ashing my brother, if w'e were to travel
Not a mile but
by dry land to the Antipodes. '
Seem'd ten, that carried me from London, centre of all my joys.
the

The country is my averfion ; I bate trees and hedges ; steep hills and- stlent vallies. The la tyrist may laugh ; but to m,e
e
Green fields and shady groves, and crystal Springs,
And larks, and nightingales, are odious things;
\ «
I had rather hear London cries, with the rattle of coaches, thau fit listening to the rrielanchbly murmur of purling brooks, or all the wild muSic of the woods. The fmell of the violets gives me the
fresh air murders me ; my constitution
is not
enough to bear it
the cooling
Zj^yphyri 'will fan me into a catarrh, if ! stay here much longci. -.
U
If

(
)
I
If thisSe are the feats of the mufes, let them uneckvietl enjoy their glittering whimsses, and converfe with the vilionary beings of their own 'fopmin,g. I have no fancy for dvyades and fairies, nor the least prejudice to human Society ; a mere earthly beau/with an embroideit d coct Suits my better than an aerial lover with his shining treffesand rainbow wings.
i	4	>	-	/,	-	'	• y ^
The Sober twilight, which has employed So many Soft descriptions, is with me a very dull period ; nor does the moon (on which the poets doat] with all her starry train, delight me halS So much as an assembly room, illuminated with veax candles. This IS what I should prefer to the glaring liin. in his meridian Splendour. Daylight makes me lick; it has Something in it So common and vulgar, that k leetns fitter for-peaSants to make hay in, or coun try lasses to (pin by , than for the uCe of people
N
/
You pi ty me, I know, dear Aurelia, in this deplorable state. The whole creation is a blank to me, it is all joylels and defolate. In wdiatever gay images the mules have dressed theSe rustic abodes, I have not penetration enough to dilcover them: not the flowery field, nor fpangled Iky, the roSy morn or balmy evening, can recreate my thoughts. I am neither a religious, nor poeticaj. enthufiast; and without either of theSe qualifications what Ihovid I do in filent retreats, and penfive Piades.
*•	'i*. k
I
( 6 )
I find mySelS little at eaSe in this abfence of the noiSy diverfions'bf the town. It is hard for me to keep up my Spirits in leiSure and retirerpent. It makes me anxioussy inquisitive what wist become of me when my breath flies away. Death, that ghastly phantom, perpetually intrudes on my (olitude j and in Some doleful knell, from a neighbouring steeple, often calls upon me to ruminate on coffins and funerals, graves and gloomy Sepulchres. TheSe diSraal fubjedls put me in the vapours, and make me start at my own shadow ; nor have I acquired any great degree of fortitude by turning freethinker, and unlearning.
All that the nurSe and all the
have taught.
P0p€
You have been too often of our party, not to know that my brother is a very infidel. He has a Sort of a vanity in making me proSelyte, and freeing my mind from thoSe prejudices (as he calls them, and Superstitious notioris which govern a great part of the world. But as he finds me a little unwilling to refign my immortality, he has furniihed me with a System of tranfmigration, and the efernal wandering of the Soul from .one fpecies of being to another
However, I do not find myfelf a gainer by renouncing my creed, which allowed me to hope, that after the period of this mortal life, I might be an angel, or at least equal to tbofc bright effences.
But

( 7 )
But by this fantastick Scheme, to which my brother is making me a convert, my pretentions are Sunk : the utmost I can expert, when I have shifted my preSent existence, is to grin in a monkey or look denmre in a broad-faced owl, or to fit a chattering magpye in a bush. It is a chance among which of the animal race I am to be numbered : whether I shall mount the air wfith the winged inhabitants, or crawl upon the earth among my brother reptiles, or graze in the meadows among the horned tribe. Indeed I have no great stomach to grafs or hay, and as little inclination to sseep in a den, or stretch my airy bulk on the dewey plain but as it is yet uncertain, whether I am to stalk or By, or fwim; I am still at a loSs which of thefe various elans to greet as my next kindered.
€
However, I am better pleaSed with being what I am, than any thing elle. 1 had rather be a celebrated toast, fluttering at a ball among beaux and pretty fellows, than the most gaudy butterfly with painted wings, hovering over a bed of tulips. If this should be my enfuing fate, it will be a mortifying decent from a goddefs to an infeSl.
And really there rs fomething fo gloomy and uncomfortable in thefe profpedls of futurity, that if I confider them much longer, I shall turn Christian again, in defiance of my brother, and a learned unbeliever his companion, who are perpetually ridiculing my concern about a vifionary hereafter as they term it.
.N
( 8
Indeed this would be the least of luy cares, were I not extrerneiy at leiSiire ; biit ds I shi? st is iinpoffib'e for me to avoid being IblicitOii.^ What fate attends me, when I restgia this trarifitory life :
fur I must certainly die ; I am ihortM beybhd contradiction ; this truth fits heavy oh my Soul • there is no flying its evidence, nor does this plate afford any atnuSement to diVeVt the gloomy refleStion. If I should turn devotee, you would think it a more wonderful metamorphofis, than any I have yet narried. But in all changes I am
. I
constantly
Yours, Sc,
Laura
. S. I have a Secret tc) tell you concerhing my rot ei, which you fliall know in my next letter ; ur am as impatient to diScover it, as you can be to hear it.
LETTER II.
I
Have too much confidence in my dear Aurelia', conceal any thing from her ; nor can it be an injury to my brother to trust you with his charaaer
and know him to she as great a libertine in his praaice as his pi incipies.
( 9 )
But in whatever freedom he has indulged himSelf, I must own he has always endeavoured to give me a just fenSe of honor, and the decorum due to my lex. While he has taken pains to free me from the restraints of religion, he has left nothing unfaid on other Hiotives, that might raiSe in me the tenderest
which made me
/
concern for a,clear reputation, the more reSent his Scandalous conduSl,
when
I found he had a mistreSs in his houSe, whom he had Sent hither two or three days before we came. I knew not what to do, nor how to behave mySelf in this exigence, till I found she was rather an objeSl of compashon than reproach; * and that she came hither not to indulge an infamous amour, but to shelter her (elf from want, and the refentment of her relations.
She told me the story of her misfortunes, as well as the distrefs andcoafufion she was in would permit ; and, ashing me a thouSand pardons, ingenioussy owned she had engaged my brother to bring me with him, or not to follow her.
p	•	'	.
I found her education had been striSlly modest, and that she was unacquainted with the vicious part of the world. She is hardly fixteen ; her name Charlotte ; the only child of a noted citizen, who was utterly ruined in his affairs by a crafty
Jew.
From the height of credit the poor man
found himfelf Sunk into circumstances of diS^racc
O
and indigence.
B
This
lO
This was a melancholy turn to Charlotte iufl in the vanity of youthful expectations^
•J	^ t -1	•	1	^
to find herlelf, from the affluence of fortune, fo Suddenly reduced to poverty and contempt. My brother, whom ffle had Sometimes Seen with her father, but knew nothing of his character, took this unfortunate criSis to tempt her with rich prefents, and fair promifes, to leave her friends, and to retire '	^
to
iodg
private
In this diffraction of affairs, her father being under an arrest, and all his effects Seized, She was Surprized into a compliance
with my brother’s propofal ; nor did he
give her time to of her relations
who had
or con full any
Soon got
intelligence nf this dishonor,, and Sent
her a Severe Injunction to fee their faces ^10 more.
This
fatal
tidings of her mother’s death that followd, and the full evidence that She was deluded by my brother with feigned promifes of marriage, had almost proved fatal to her
nor could any argument allay her
till her dillreied lover errgaged
never

•.A
I	M
4	*	/
11
never to afk any future favour of her, but what the nicest virtue might grant. On this condition, She engaged to go to his new feat in the country ; for indeed Ihe had no other refuge. He has kept
; She lodges in my apartment, and is treated by him with as much decency as if She was his lister.
I never thought fuch a libertine would turn Platonic : stis an unufual relinement, and, I believe, the first gallantry of this kind he ever practifed. But he has an esteem, a tendernefs for her, of which, by his diffolute manners, I always thought him incapable of.
F	*	'
9
Her behaviour is really modest ;. nor was there ever a more natural imprestion of truth and innocence, than appears in her face. Her too credulous temper, and unexperienced years have betrayed her irito this state of Shame and mifery ; of which, tho’ too late, (he Seems exquifitely fenlible. Since I began this letter. She -came into my olofet, and, with a flood oLtears, begged me to contrive Some way ;tofree her from this dangeruus .place.
B

f C
But
12
)

€ C
** But whither. She' Said, can 1 fly ? My friends will never receive me; nor have I the confidence to fneet their reproaches. My crime has fent a tender mother weeping to the grave; it loads my father’s hoary head with a heavier weight of Ibrrow than all his other misSortunes. . Love was not my excufe ; I am yet a stranger to that pastion ; it was a cowardice, it was a fear of poverty, a criminal distrust of celestial providence. I fhould have begged, I fhould have starved, rather than parted with my innocence on fuefi mercenary terms. However fincere


fi
€C
€C
4e
€t

if
€i

my repentance is, it can fignify nothing with regard to the world. The fcandal will never be obliterated". I must ‘‘ either face the public contempt, or ‘‘ waste my days in a joylefs obfeurity.
Put my condition in the best light : “ would this falfe man, as he promiSed,

if
a

if
if
if
marry me ; whatapprobious language, what terms of infamy, must I expect iri his intervals of chagrin ! Belides this, the impiety of his conversation terrifies me, while I hear him make a jest of thofe facred fubjects for which I have
'	been
«,
11
13
been tauglit the highest veneratiom I fhould live much happier with a wild ** American.”
I made no reply ; the re a Toning was too just to admit a contradiction, this melancholly instance makes me more than ever reSolved not to lurrendcr, nor even capitulate, on any terms. But thofe
of a lawful English wiSe.
Adieu ^
Laitra.

* \ *-
» t *
t

LETTER m.
HAT mutable things we are ! You will be Surprized to hear I am grown Sond oS the county, and have a re list! for its harmleSs delights. I can talk to an echo, or listen with great attention to a purling stream, I am in a fair way to make garlands, invoke the muSes, and write pastorals. Since you heard laSl frorn me, I have met an agreeable adventure, that had given a Sort of romantic turn to my imagination.
^ A

As
V.
(
14
As I was taking my constant diverfion of riding on the downs, the evening being exceeding pleaSant, I wandered Some miles beyond my uSual limits, till I came in fight of a vene rable pile of building, which could not be distinguished from a
^	o	^
church, by nothing but the want of a steeple ; every thing had about it an air of grandeur and antiquity. At Some distance from the houfe there was a thick
i'
wood, with Several line walks cut thro' it.
I had a great inclination to ramble in thofe agreeable Shades : and alighting, ordered my footman to wait at the place where I left him. It was not long before I came to the centre of the forest, in which was a large grafs-plat of circular figure, with a double row of high elms, growing in the Same Sorm round it. In the middle of the green was a little mount, that, by eaSy steps of turli had a winding afcent to the top ; where stood an harbour of mine, woodbine, and roSes, twisted together with a fort of elegant diforder. The gaudy bloffoms pleafed the light.
Ci
while their mingled fweets perfumed the ambient air. On the lower branches of the
circlin
"S
^
t -
^5
circling elms, hung Several gilt cages, with a variety oS finging. birds in them, which were now chanting their evening Songs, while a mulical flagellet in clear and fhrill refponfes, anSwered from the delicious arbour.
I began to think indeed there was Such things as enchanted forests and vocal groves, or that the great Spirit of nature was Solacinsf ifefeif in thofe innocent
abodes. However, female curiofity led
me on, till I came to the charming; bower: where I found a well-dFened youth, of about Seventeen, fitting with a flagellet in his hand. His complexion was a lively brunette, that difgraced the lilleys and the roSes : his dark hair fell in large and graceful curls below his neck ; nothing could be more elegant than his Shape and features ; nor was there any Such thing as meeetingthe Splendour of his eyes without being fenfible of every darting glance.
I
Some apology for my which he anSwered . with
an eafy civility. Nor could I perceive
that
my
gave him the least
Surprize or confufion, He received me
with.
/	X
"nI'A'Ic
i .-'i

' v' • 7	-

•A
'c:s -{

■
hi
' i
i
} i
i
. I
»
d t
:L
i s
M
i!
11
I j 1 1
t -
h
M

. f S
Cl

V 4 \
: ■ H
j'
■f!b
*c
i;: ^
1



. T »'
.	»>v
i6
-Cr'V
*..•
1
'rA^'
V
y
wl
rP
■ : - V
'.' A
■ with perfect coiupoSure, nor Seemed td
^	m

have any manner of cunofity, to know
«	•	1	.-T	•
whence I came, or whither I was going;
*	^	^ 'T	* 1
nor, to my great mortification, did he aik
whether I was a mortal or a ooddefs.
O
It gave me Some uneafineSs, I confeSs,
tofindmy SelS no more an object of Surprize
to one who perhaps had never Seen any
thing fo fine in his life : for I was in a very
rich habit, blazing with Scarlet and gold.
You cannot imagine how it humbled my vanity, to obServe with what indolence and tranquility, the young infenfible looked at me ; and the more, becaufe
be did not feem to want wit orpolitenefs
I was extremely vexed, that at three
he treated me with as much
twenty,
indifSerence and refpedf, asif I kadbeen
his great grandmother.
This fedatenefs gave me a curiofity to
pry into his liudies ; for I faw two books
lye near the place vvhere he fat

W1
ten
I opened them, I found one was, A
difcourle of the governmentof thepaliions
the other, A treadfe of the immoriaiity of the foul. I had nothing today on thole
but. after Some formal
grave
s
diicourSe
difcourfe of the fine fit nation of the place, I took my leave oS it ; the young philolbpher attended me to the limits oS the wood, where I left my Servant; and there we parted, without any reluctance on either fide.
But I own I had a relllefs curiofity to know the history of this lovely youth, and
to v/hom the houf

belono^ed.
o
Nor was

it long before I received SatisSaction, Srom a clergyman that was riding the fame road with me. He Said, “The manfion “ was Sir Harry Lizard's, a man of merit, and well acquainted with thes.world ; at which he was now diSgusted, and grown account of the death of his eldest Son, to whom he had gi ven a liberal education, and with a generous allowance.

is
€C







cs
6%

cs

Sent him into Italy ; where his time was Spent in the most distblute manner ; till being unhappily engaged with a lewd woman, in a fit of jealouSy he Shot himfelf through the head. This tragical event made Ste Harry refolve to givehis younger Son a quite differerit education. Indeed his character is entirely reverSe oS his eldest brother’s.
C

he
/
i8







he is remarkable for his early piety, and great profieiency in all Sorts of
and
But
cr tr>>
very
ingenious perSon for his tutor. Philocles, that is tSie young gentleman’s name, has too great an allay of gravity for his early years, and is of So retired a temper, that he is known by the title of ThFhandfi very
X
Here the clergyman left me, overjoy’d
with this intelligence. As
home, I related my adventures to Charlotte ; who gave me little attention, being as I told you, in the utmost anxiety at
stie was
fbon as I got
manner of life to confined. l am, dear Aurela,
ours»
A U K. A»
LETTER
Ince you received my last letter, I have taken another ramble into Sir Harry
Lizard’s forest.
brother knows And the first afternoon
19
aSternoonlLound him engaged, I perSua-dedCharlotte togowith me: who was glad of any pretence to fly from her own gallant though She exprefied but little curiofity to fee mine.
At the enteranee of the grove, we left the Servants to w’’ait with our horfes till we returned. In my first vistt I perceiv’d by Philocles’s difeourfe, that when the evening was fair, he constantly Spent it in the charming bower; where we now found him reading Dr. Young’s True Estimate of human Life, with fuch attention, he did not immediately fee us, and Seemed Surprized at the encounter.
It diverted me, to find his philofophy difeorapofed, I began to flatter my Self it was the effect of my charms. The hopes of Suchaconquest delighted me more than all my past victories. It gave a Sudden vivacity to my thoughts; and refolving by my wit to Secure the conquest by my eyes, I began with great gaiety to rally him on his reclufe manner of life, and loling his gayest hours in a joy lefs Solitude.
i
^ K.
O 2
By
20
}
By this iime the youngltoichadafrum’d his natural Superiority ; and instead oS replying, as i expected, in a gallant and modifh strain, he
talked to me of the Satisfactions of virtue, the tranquility of the mind in the redlitude or its paffions: themes, which from another perfon would have eompofed me better than a dofe of
But here,
—------The grave rebuke,
Severe in youthful beauty, added grace Invincible — ----——
Like the fallen angel in Milton,
-----———AbaShed I stood.
And felt how awful goodnefs is, and faw
Virtue how lovely in her native lhape!
The glory that darted from his eyes, the agreeable accent, the moving eloquence that stowufrom thofe rofy lips, command-ded my whole attention.Had lie preached a fermon, 1 could liave patiently listened
to the blooming orator

—From morn to noon.
From noon todwey eve, afummersday.
•	'	Milton.
And yet I could not forbear fometimes laughing at his gravity, and begging he
^	would

21
would put hirnSelf into holy orders. But
he was not to be rallied out oShis Sobriety
Nor could I poffibly draw from him that
flattery, with which till now I had been
addreffed. He Seemed rather to have an
inclination to humble my vanity.
Charlotte, the whole time. Sat in a pen-live lilence, while the tears, which fhe
strove to conceal, would Sometimes drop
from her eyes. Philocles, in every paule
of conversation, Surveyed her with looks
thatexprefSed great humanity : but I was
in no diSpolition to be jealous of any thing
I looked on So inferior to mySelf.
However, my’’ concern to conceal this
affair from my brother, made me break
off the conversation a little abrubtly, that
we
might be at home at the ufual hour. As Soon as ever we were got alone, I aliced
Charlotte, how She liked the handfome
hermit.

Oh (Said fhe with a tender
6 C
emotion] that I had never Seen him !

Till now I was not fenlible oSthe injury
6^
this barbarian your brother has done
cs
me.
He has cut me off Srom all the
6 i
law Sul joys of life, from the pleafurc
6 6
of a reciprocal affedlion for a man of

worth and virtue.; With my innocence
6 e
I lo
/

a right to that happinefs. What! am I a prostitute ! a kept mistrefs ! your
c s
brother’s——O infamy ! your brother’
s

wli—e |i
9)
SC
li-


I


22
€C
:C i

i i
5 S
i;

i A


4 €



c;
a
t »
^ i

i.6
SC
jf ■

f C
€ ^
<> ^
I
IS you had not been that. Said I,
Charlotte, you had been a beggar.
** O envied titled She replied, O glorious Poverty ! thou ball been the choice of faints and heroes ; virtue has made thee her fanctuary, herpeaceSul retreat, I could have fed on wholefome vegetables ; quenched my thirst at Some crystal brook, indulged my harmlefs stumbers on the verdant tur^r, undisturbed with guilty Sears. Pardon me, Said She, recollecting hcrfelf, thefe paffionate Sallies. I find myfelf more than ever undone, condemned to waste my days in Sullen obScurity ; in the pride of life, the bloom of Soft defires, to langLiiSh in folitary defpair. My confcience' will not Suffer me to gratify an unlawful pastion ; nor Should any
advantages, were my guists a Secret,
me to impofe on a man of I have been true even to this rake thathas undone me, and frustrated 11 my hopct of a lawful happineSs.’^
3.
4 XlclL xb
my brother has Spoiled your laid I. But, dear Charlotte,
why Should that thought afflict you
marnege
who
intend to oafs

f u t u re
t j me


(C
if
f€
€f

ff
4C
(f
if
if
if
if
ff
ff
if
if
ff
ff
if
ff
23
time in penitence and retirement ? has the handSome hermit altered vour
pious resolutions p’'
if
No, fhe replied) he has rather con-
firmed them. Never had the cauSe of
“ virtue a more reliflleSs advocate. Me-
thinks I See the beauty that lightens in
his face;
1 hear the charming accent
flill; I felt the energy of his argument;
my foul gave iu full accent to the celef-tial didiates. I wondered vou could
So often interrupt the graceful orator with your ill-timed raillery. I could
have listened to his lecture of morality
till the midnight dews had fallen, til
the stars had let.”
“ Dear Charlotte, Said I, forgive this
interruption ; I find you are in love.
My intention is intirely frustrated, of
having your picture drawn as the Fair
Penitent, with a lamp and prayer book
before you. I perceive you delign yet
toconverfeamong stnful mortals. Will
you go with rne tomorrow to hear ano
tlier lecture from the charming divine ?

r::
• s


V
I
'i
24


** Rather. Said She, let me retire to the filent grave, to conceal my inSamy. I vi^ould not deceive him with an air of innocence, while I am confcious of my own difhonori I know myfelf; this is the crifis of my mifery ; nothing can obliterate this Secret fenfe of Shame. I may retire from the publick view, aS it i^ my full reSolution, but what is a
resolution at fixteen ? Without peculiar affifiance from Heaven, I Shall never conquer the didlates of love and nature, in this perplexity, I muff either marry Some worthleSs wretch, that knows my infamy, or deceive Some man of merit, to whom it is a Secret.
Here flie burst into a stood of tears, intreating me to write to an uncle She had to receive her into his favor, and let her live in his family. This I promifed; nor defpair of prevailing. My concern for her makes me forget it is time to

€6






6 C

€6

fC

6Q
Subscribe myfelf
humble fe
Laura.
LETTER
25 )
Jf

LETTER
V.
I
OHarlotte, to her great /atisfaftion, has this morning left us, and is gone to her uncle ; who was eaSily per-Swaded to receive her, after he was alTured of the Sincerity of her penitence. But I found it a harder talk to prevail with my brother to, reSign the idol of his affeHions: though he loft nothing by her abfence, but the pleafure of gazing on her.
I am in pain till you know the Sequel of my adventure with Philocles ; who, fince 1 writ lalf, has Several times, by appointment, met me in the delicious bower; but Hill, to my great vexation, he appeared infenSible of any tender imprelTion. I could difern nothing in his Converfation, but a pious defign to convert me to Chriftianity, and convince me of the folly of the new Scheme to which my
brotherhadmade me a prpfelyte. ,.
,	•'	'*	t '	-
But the laft time we met, I obferved a foFt confufion in his looks, till after a long paufe, (which I had no mind to interuptjJ “ I am going (Said he) to Set my Self jnva very ridiculous light to one of your charaHer : but .1 am content to pafsfor an enthuSiaft, till the event con-“ vinces you of the truth of what I fhall relate.
“ If a domeftic tradition may be credited, there has no perfon died out of our family, but whait has had a warning of their approaching^, fate,, by hearing mufic passing through the houfe in the dead Silence of the night; which is bear’d by none hut the perfon concerned.. My mother and Sifter both foretold their own death from this prefage. 1 fee you Smile, (continued Philoclesj; but I have the fame warning, and. am
D

ii
u
i i it 6 i ti €i
4t
ft
f-e
Sf
( 26 )
*•
Superstitious enough to credit it. Last night Some trifling disorder kept me waking ; my thoughts- however, were placid and Serene : Some verSes 1 had heard my lister repeat in her last SickneSs, came frefli into my memory.
f£
if
ff
Ci
ff
Ci
6i
6C
Ci
a
a
a
cc
Ci
Ci
While night in Solemn triumph reigns, Affcend, my foul, the heav’nly plains ;
Thy flight to thofe gay regions take;
Angels and God are still awake,
The Smiling stars will light thy way To the gladfome realms of day,
While drowSy men with idle themes. Fantastic joys, and airy dreams.
Are entertain’d; do thou convcrfe
With heav’n, and heav’nly strains rehearfe i
Vifit the peaceful climes above.
And through the fields of pleafure rove; Forget the Scenes of care and strife.
And, walk among the trees of life:
Taste the rich fruits of paridife,
And bathe in flowing streams of blifs;
Solac’d in thofe eternal Springs,
Lofe every thought of mortal things,
Ci
Ci
Ci
Ci
cc
a
** Just as I had repeated thefe verfes, I was Serenaded by an invifible mulician, with the Sweetest strains that ever delighted mortal ears. The harmonious echo Seemed to paSs from rodra to room, till it came into my chamber; where, after a Short Space, it funk away in a gentle cadence.
<	f
“ I kiiew my obfequies were now Sung, and heard the fatarSumnions without furprife. Death was a theme familiar to my thoughts, as I never expefted or delired to reach the decline of life”.
I listened to“ this waking dream'. As forbear latighing.
story as to a fairy tale, or a fort of gravely as he' told it, I could not
“ This
(	27	)
ft if • (
ii
fi
U
u
ii
tc
a
li
a
i i
a
a
fi
i(
‘VThis, Madam (laid he) is what I expefted: but it will hot make rne lefs Serious on a fubjeft of fucbi importance. You have often rallied me on a manner of life of fo unfuitable to my years. Perhaps it may be more the effeft of reafon than inclination. My brother’s tragical end convinced me of the fatal effefts of loVe, and made me refolve never to admit that diftraSIing passion to my breaft. But whatever oppoSition I have made, my heart has not been infenfible of your charms, nor with all my philofophy Sufficiently guarded against the allurements of love and Soft defire. Even now, when I find my Self difengaged from every other care, I have the utmost Solicitude for your happinefs. I ana distrelfed to leave you in this state of infidelity; for this is the last interview we fhall have, unlefs I am premiitest to make you a vifit from the immortal regions, in order to convince you, that the hopes of Christianity are no delufion.”
C(
C6 IS. 46 4 6 4 ( 44
tt
6 6 4i 46
a
46
“ This propofal (Said I) charmes me. There would be no relisting Such evidence. I hope you v/ill prove a ghost of honor, and not fail the assignation : which on my fide ffiall be punftually kept, on condition you appear in open day-light, and drelfed in your celestial finery. With thefe circumstances I may venture to prornife you, neither to run away, nor to fall into fits. The place of your reception (though not perhaps Suitable to your future dignity) ffiall be a painted alcove fronting a walk Shaded with limes at the end of my brother’s garden.”
r •
“ The gaiety (replied Philocles) with which you treat this fubjeft, perfwades me you have courage enough to be as good as your word ; which is the last and only favour 1 have to afk. I must now bid you farewel, and, in the reiirement of my clofet, prepare to make my exit with a fortitude becoming thofe Sacred principals to which I have adhered.”	D 2	Her^
F
/

/

o
8
Here,: with a tender confuSipn in his looks, he abruptly left the place, and gave me leifu' e To refleft on the odd converfation that had passed. But as vissonary as Some part of it appears,!, would fainbelieve the lost confession he made is no stSHon ; for I find myfelf excefTively in love. But'this fhall be a Secret to the young enthufiafl, till he has got over the fplenetic fit ; which, as whimfical as it appear gives me a fecret uneafinefs- He has certainly infefted me with Some religious panics. I have loft my tasse for every kind of diverSion, Company is molesting, and Solitude tirefome. Self-reflebtion distraSls me. Whether I look forward or backward, the profpeft is all
. But I fhall expofe myfelf, by owning thefe weaknesses to one your charaUer.
Adieu, S3'c.
Laura.
L E T T E R
VI
H,- my Aurelia ! I have furpiifing things to tell you The lovely Philocles is dead. His prcfageswere too certain. About a week after our last interview, 1 heard the melancholy tidings, that Sir Harry Lizzard had loft his only fon by a fudden death.- The charming youth was impatient of mortality, and is gone to converfe with his kindred angels.
You will wonder to hear me treat thofe fubjeHs ferioussy which I have rediculed. It is a change that I myfelf can hardly credit. I never imagined my inclinations were fo tenderly engaged, nor that any kind of adverfity could have diade fuch an aheration in my temper.

(	29 )
After the first emotions of grief were over, I recoleSled the appointment we had made; but rather wilhed than believed fuch an interview poffible. However my mind was prepared for conviftion. I began to reafon with Cato.
If there’s a’Power above,
He must delight in virtue ;	«
And that which he delights in, must be happy.
I found my felf now interested in the truth of Christianity. The firm belief of a life everlasting, would, in this exigence, have been my greatest confolation. My hopes and fears prevailing by intervals, and kept me in the most tormenting fulpenfe, while I waited for the decifive hour. As foon as it came, without any consternation, I attended at the appointed place,
i
i
It was a charming retreat, where art and luxurious nature displayed their various beauties. The evening was . still; the fun in golden Splendour defending to the west-, ern Ikies, glittered through the trees. Every thing looked gay; new life and beaiity appeared, oh all the vernal; profpe61;; the plants put on a frestier green, the flowers displayed a brighter hue, and diffufed ambroSial tragrancy,- ' Nature feemed animated with confeious joy, as gladdened at the approach of lomd heavenly power.
i-	'	*	*
An unuful alacrity infpired my thoughts,, and Soothed ray foul with a Secret delight; while a Soft melodious found,-rifing by just degrees, filled the region round with transporting harmony.
•	•	•	•	S	*
In the height of thefe agreeable agitations; astherofy morning breaks from a cloud, the charming Philocles stood apparent before me. There was fomething in his afpe6l So ferene and bencficiant. Such a fweefenefs and .
^	affability
't


( 30 )
• w
affability, that banilhed every thought of fear, and filled my breast with divine tranquility. Ineffable pleafure Sparkled in his eyes ; youth in eternal ,triumph fat on his brow, and painted his face with rofy bloom. His temples were cstcled with a wreath of celestial rofes, which were mingled among his flowing hair with a fort of ornamental negligence.	/
After a fhort paufe, he began with a voice that would have allayed the anguifli of death, and charmed the wildest difcord into calm attention: every accent breathed celestial love and harmony, while he defcribed the bowers of blifs, the Soft recesses and manfions of immortal pleafure.
But it is impossible for me to paint the beautiful ideas, or imitate the emphafis of his language. The powers of eloquence f<*t on his tongue, and commanded all the motions of my foul, which at that blifsful period Seemed enlarged in its Superior faculties ; every word was penetrating and fignificant, his manner perfeHly graceful and tranfporting ; in^ his difcriptions I faw the glories I felt the joys of immortality. But in the midst of my attention to the fparkling oiator, I could not help obferving, that he often cast his eyes on the fliadow of a dial, which was placed on the top of a little marble pedestal, on which, with a becoming gesture, he leaned with his right hand,
I fancied his time was limited ; for at the last glance I faw him cast on the dial, he vanissied, and with him all my joys.
Thismomentry view of the celestial beauty has obfcured all earthly glory. Never will the fun difclofe a fcene of pleafure to my fight; the vanities which lately amufed me, have lost their charms; my thoughts are fixed 011 fuperior objeHs ; a divine and immortal ardour infpires my foul, and determines all its motions, With the evidence
• ■ A •,



N :t ■ '’•-'-.io'.
'C
( 31 )
dence I now have of the future existence, my notions of happinefs are lefinedand enlarged, my hopes bright and unlimited.
Adieu my dear Aurelia I I am not without hopes, that this relation will have the fame effeft on your praftice, as the heavenly vifion has on that of.
M A-D AM,
Your rnoji humble fervant^
Laura.
Am oret to CoRiscA,
From the black regions, from the mournful plain, Where horror in eternal triumph reign ;
From the low caves of hell, and dens ©(might,
Far from the frontiers of celestial light:
This from the wretched amoret receive.
And at my cost thefe dreadful truths believe :
That ’tis no fiftion pious men adore,
But there’s indeed ajust almighty Pow’r ;
That human fpirits after death furvive.
And to indeterminable ages live ;
That^ fields of light, and blest ethereal plains,
Are no conceits of vifionary brains ;
But there are happy bow’rs, and Ihades of love.
With pure exhaustlels fprings of joy above;
Immortal crowns the vi\|^ous to reward,
And glorious triumphs for the just prepar’d,
Nor question the furprifing truths I tell.
While I the fecrets of the deep reveal;
For hell is no enthufiastic dream.
No statefman’s tricks, nor poet’s fab’lous theme :
No pious fraud, or mercenary lie
Of fubtil priests, to gain the confcience by,
Tis all toofadly true which they maintain.
And far beyond whate’erthe poets feign Of streams of liquid fire, and burning lakes.
Infernal gibbets, and eternal racks,
Gorgons, chimeras, furies, and their fnacks.


<r:-


( 32
* J
-
ii

Nomortal can a juft conception frame,
Nor find for halt the terrors here a name,
Then thun the flow’ry paths that downward tend ; To hell they lead, and in damnation end. Flyfromthe fnaresofthat inchantingfin,
Whofe fatal joys have my perdition been.
Like thee, with all the pride of beauty gay,
In loofe delights, I lately fpent the day ;
Like thee accomplilh’d, and like the admir’d,
My eyes the favage and polite infpir’d.
Whene’er I fpoke, my wit new conqueft won ; Thoufands came here, by my foft airs undone.
With wild furprife my alterM looks they view,
And with loud curfes ftill my flight purfue, '
For learn, before too late, licentious fair.
Each face does here an equal horror wear.
And urtdiftinguifli’d youth and age appear. ^
Depriv’d of ey’rycharm, and ev’ry grace.
We all delcehd to this detefted place.
Illuftrious Helen, once the grecian
In folding fhades-her hated form would hide :
And conlcious Thais fears to be defcry’d.
Ifaw them latelyhy the trembling gleam, :
The pale blue light of inaufpicious flames ;
No blulh paints their cheeks, their \yanton eyes No more with love’s contagious darts furprife,
Rafh Cleopatra mourns her hafty doom.
Fam’d Julia thro’ the crowd’s no longer known ; Ev’n ovid's eyes her blafted charms difown.
Curs’d be the arts that did my foul betray,
And lead my eafy virtue first aftfaV ’Tis past—and my repentance comes too late.
But thou may’ft yet avoid this cruel fate.
Perfidious beauty, quit the roads of vice;
Its fmooth defenls to certain death entice,
•A	•	*
Like Dives, from th’ infernal coafts 1 fend.
To warn my carelefs unbelieving friend :
For tjibu, while yet a lovely guiltlefs.maid.
To fin, by my example, waft betray’d And fhould’stthouto thefe mournful regions come ’Xwould vaftly aggravate my heavy doom.
'	•	F I N 1 S.
I' •»
&

V

A-

• '4:


V
\f ■.






'%7i|	
	tf
Li m	
	
	If'
f J	II


i


inches
'■ft;
.LjLttl

1

~ X
	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10	11 (A)	12	13	14	15
L*	39.12	65.43 o	49.87	44.26	55.56	70.82	63.51	39.92	52.24	97.06	92.02	87.34	82.14	72.06	62.15
a*	13.24	18.11	-4.34	-13.80	9.82	-33.43	34.26	11.81	48.55	-0.40	-0.60	-0.75	-1.06	-1.19	-1.07
b‘	15.07	18.72	-22.29	22.85	-24.49	-0.35	59.60	-46.07	18.51	1.13	0.23	0.21	0.43	0.28	0.19
D50 llluminant, 2 degree observer
Density
0.04
0.09
0.15
0.22
0.36
0.51
centimeters
|0I I I I II I I 1 H > M I I I I |2> I I M > I I |3< > I M > > I k I > > M < > I l5 I I I I I I I I |6 I I I I I I I I |7 I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I |9 I I I I I I I I Oo
500	200
5	o'	q) Si
S	^	iR m
tfoH P*r liKh	gQQ
•obden
§1 Si
700
300
r400
f


16 (M)	17	18 (B)	19	20	21	22	23	24	25	26	27	28	29	30
49.25	38.62	28.86	16.19	8.29	3.44	31.41	72.46	72.95	29.37	54.91	43.96	82.74	52.79	50.87
-0.16	-0.18	0.54	-0.05	-0.81	-0.23	20.98	-24.45	16.83	13.06	-38.91	52.00	3.45	50.88	-27.17
0.01	-0.04	0.60	0.73	0.19	0.49	-19.43	[55.93	68.80	-49.49	30.77	30.01	81.29	-12.72	-29.46
i
0.75
0.98
1.24
1.67
2.04
2.42

Colors by Munsell Color Services Lab ^