 
■ 'r- -- ■' ■ 
C ■■. ‘ 
AA: «‘, 5 s, X -- .' v;; - ■, ■ ■ ii ■, ■■ VI; : 
* ' '■''- ■ 1. ■ ■ t 
^cvf> ''*’i,, yr;; 
'■ • C" " 


■ ■■ >■ v 
- : «• ■ ■■: ’-■; ■'■ ■ • 
-... CX V -'-: -; vc. 
a.‘ii '"Miie..* 
r.. • ’• 
- -■ './■?'.■■' ■ tv': "’f.: ’.'- ' l' 'v V ■»' 
/- 
LI V‘ '■’ ^' C > 
t ^i'■'. r'i^n' sp; ?: 
N ’ ^ ' r r: ‘. fs" 
ia 'lc'; .-. yfh 
'■ ■■ v '■■ 



>.■ 

X 
C 
: 'ii 
#•'‘t 
... ^.. I / 
ei 
Mas^i 
THE 
GODFREY F. SINGER MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY 
MR. AND MRS. JACOB SINGER 

t, 

■■■, 
V ^ N 
i f 
V ■ ■ 
hct ■ 
'ti 
\ -! \ 

'-: .vs 
r 
’■ ■■ V 




a.f’k 

m 
y'*>v, 
■ try, 
, 
IH. 
L LI C I T LO 
A NOVEL. 
VOL. I. 

mi 
— 
k f ■ 
1m*3:. 

''-' '■ ■'• ifflifejvi* la ’'r y d ■ 



'
■T 

jv,. i 
, ' i' i 


mm 
ILLICIT LOVE: 
NOVEL. 
By Mrs. MORRIS, 
Author of the Rival Brothers, a Novel; Poems, 
<< Trust not a man; they are by nature false, 
Fickle, Subtle, deceitful, and inconstant; 
« If a man talks of love, with caution trust him j But if he Swears, he’ll certainly deceive.” 
Otway. 
IN TWO VOLUMES. 
VOL. I. 
L O N D O N: 
Printed for the Author; 
And Sold by H. D. Symonos, so, paternoster k.ow; and W. Beil BY, 6, Pall Mali. 
M DCC XCI 


n 
01 CO 03 CD 
QOH 
> 
TO THE HONOURABLE 
Mrs. MASSEY. 
JM A D A Mj 
Having obtained your private approbation of the fon lowing streets, I am happy to have your permission to throw them in a public manner under your prp teuion. — A Lady, whose public and private charauer does honour to all whom yoh are pleased to regard with particular attention, VOL. I, a and 
7. COCCI 
m 

VI 
DEDICATION. 
and whose lovely children, from the bright example of their excellent parents, shine with unexampled lustre in the exalted sphere in which they move, cannot fail to give a sanction to whatever you are pleased to patronise. Permit me, therefore, in a public manner, to applaud those virtues which all affect to admire, though few possess;; earnestly to pray, that you may, with your amiable partner, whose brow has long been encircled with a crown of laurel, and whose great and heroic actions in the field of battle, 7 with 
DEDICATION. 
Vll 
with those of his noble brother (whose magnanimous soul now Soars in the regions of bliss), be handed down to posterity, and held forth to view as bright examples to every future hero, and every virtuous character. — And may you both long, very long enjoy every various blesting Heaven has fo liberally bestowed, and which the great and good fo eminently deserve, is the Sincere prayer of, Madam, 
Your obedient Cousin, and devoted humble Servant, 
R. P. MORRIS, a 2 




h 
T 
PREFACE. 
HE following pages, like some former work of mine, contain a narrative drawn from real life; it is a faithful relation of incidents which actually occurred. They are not the rambling and incoherent productions of fancy, nor the exuberant overflowings of a learned and well taught pen j but an absolute recital of facts, plain and Amply told, as they really 
I: 
happened a very few years since. 
I have not yet had occasion to tread the wild and trackless paths of imagination; real life has furniflied me with fcencs sufficient to engross 
my 


II 



1 i 
'I 
t 
L 

X 
PREFACE. 
my attention hitherto; and I trust, from the observations I have made in life, that it will be sufficient to employ me in future. 
I have been aflced by one of the 
greatest and most learned men of 
the age. What right 1, have to relate fasts; and why I do not have recourse to fancy, as the moult laudable of the two? — To which my answer is briefly this. Which of the two artists would the world at large, upon mature deliberation, esteem the most, him that ftiould faithfully delineate with Ample and judicious colourings, one of the tremendous cataracts in North America, with all its real surrounding 
beautiful 

PREFACE. 
XI 
beautiful horrors; or he, that Should paint one descending from the moon to the earth, with all the moll glowing taints that art and nature can unite, and finished by the strictest rules that pencil can define? — I am induced to think, that to the first, though we mufb not give our immediate approbation, yet wefhould be led to make the following observation: 'This really exijis that only in the imagination of the painter: 
, we must allow the artist to possess great abilities, be mailer of his profession, and to deserve that applauie superior merit claims j yet, upon re colledlion, we muil acknowledge the 
f 
former ought to claim our attention moil, as a faithful copier of real nature. 
A 
r 
} 
i i 
d ■ 
ri 
id 
M 

/ 

s 
/ 

XU 
P R E F A C E 


cure. These are my ideas; if they are opposite to the learned gentleman’s, I hope he will impute it to the erring judgement of a woman’s pen, and not to that of the heart. 
To those gentlemen who were kindly pleased to point out the grammatical errors of the last, I return my, most sincere thanks j and hope, if they honour this with a perulal, they will see their kind observations attended to: therefore, throwing myfelfon their candour, and that of a generous public, I beg leave to subscribe myself. 
Their ever obliged and obedient humble servant. 
THE AUTHOR. 

1l LIC I T LOVE 
LETTER I. 
MISS GREVILLE TO MISS HOTHAM. 
DEAR JULIA, 
Yesterday I was prevented from writing, by that odious thing danby’s arrival. He throws a gloom wherever he appears. The very sight of him gives me the vapours. What can the creature mean by plaguing ine with his passion, as he calls it? vol. I. B ' for ' 
\ i 
I 

S 
id. 

2 ILLICIT LOVE. 
\ 
for I never can or will like him. This I have signified to him more, than once, and yet the wretch will still dangle after me. What a difference between him and the dear fellow Dawson!! comparison must be admitted. The one all frolic, life, Spirit, and gaiety; heedless of everything but a handsome woman. The other, a dull, serious, (entimental soul, without the least spark of intrigue in his composition. O horrid! I expire at the bare idea of such a creature for a husband. Give me such as Dawson for a car a fpoja, and let all sensitive plants, like Danby, choose a rib from among such serious mortals 
. as 
ILLICIT LOVE. 3 
as yourself; Amen, says your kdy fhip. 
But now to inform you how I first: became acquainted with this enchanting Adonis, whom you make such inquiries after. I thought to have given you a circumstantial account, but I am not old maid enough to be particular, therefore you must take it briefly thus. It was at York assembly that I first: saw him, and that evening I was hot engaged to dance with any one in particular, neither did I think I should dance at all, until I had been at the rooms near an hour. The minuets were over, and I had 
B 2 sullenly, 

, 1; 
I 
t 1 
4 ILLICIT LOVE. 
sullenly retired to a seat, not choosing to give my hand for the evening to any of the .country boors that had solicited it. I was admired, and that was enough for me. I had walked a minuet with my fitter’s humble servant, on purpose to display the elegance of my person and dress (which, by the bye, was the mott charming in the room,) that I might be the topic of conversation, envy and admiration, > — I mean for the ensuing evening— — work for the country damsels— — it not ?■ 
I was sitting ruminating how many smart fellows I Should have had fluttering 
1 
ILLICIT LOVE. 5 
tering round me, had I appeared at a circle in town, dressed as I was, when, oh heavens! the divine, the enchanting Dawjon made his appearance. He entered the room carelessly, lolling on the arm of a young fellow, who seemed the counterpart of himself - eyed, with particular attention, every fair fly that presented herself to notice, with rather a dissatisfied air, — till my fair form offered itself to view j and then, ye 
I 
gods! with what rapture he hastened to request the honoijr of my hand for the evening! A few minutes before, I was determined in my mind not to dance at all, but oh! i his 
B j form 



.6 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
form.. his everything, commands the instant he requests, and in obedience thereto I arose with pleasure, and joined the moving circle with a person I had never seen before. All. eyes were upon us, and every tongue busy inquiring, Who is he? As they concluded he rnuft be known to me, the Miss Egertons were requested by several to alk me his name. I only smiled and answered - — would soon know. The elegance of his dress added charms, if poltible, to his enchanting person. It was'pale ■blue. and silver, with a white satin waistcoat tamboured with silver his ruffles, mod: elegant point. I was 
in 
ILLICIT LOVE. 7 
in a pale pink spotted with silver, and, as luck would have it, had the greatest part of my jewels on. This gave me an air of importance superior to any in the room. Charlotte was the partner of Frederick. He adores her and she him; they did not therefore regard much who danced with me. Papa and mamma were among the dowagers and old maids in the card room, fo that I was left in a manner to myself. 
After the first danee was over, he led me to a chair, and placed himself beside me. His friend was engaged in the same manner with Miss B 4 Bolton. 




ILLICIT LOVE 
Bolton. After some discourse usual on. such occasions, he requested the honour ' of knowing my name. I readily complied; and then pointing out my filler to him, he surveyed her with attention, and re rnarked, Ihe was handsome, but that her charms fell abundantly Short of mine. 
How pleasing is flattery to a female mind! — I was happy to hear him say,, that even my aster’s beauty was inferior to my own. The evening, as you may imagine, palled exceedingly agreeable. At half past twelve my father ordered the coach, and at that time 
I was 
b 
I > 
ILLICIT LOVE. 9 
I was totally ignorant of the name of my partner, but when Charlotte came up, and told me the coach was ready, I was very desirous of knowing whether he had an inr clination of feeing me again (for to be ingenuous with you, I must: confess I wished he might). I accordingly requested the favour of his name, adding, I Should be happy to see him at my father’s, if he meant to stay any time in the neighbourhood, as I Should wish to acquaint him who had honoured me with his hand that’ night. My spark answered me his name was Dawson, but was very little known here, being 
but 
I 
•tr,. ^ ^ 
hi ' 



; I 
lo ILLICIT LOVE. 
but lately come into this country and that his present residence was at B. where he had purchased an estate, and meant in future chiefly to reside. He allured me, he should take the earliest opportunity of calling at my father’s, for he Should be miserable until he had the extreme pleasure of feeing me again: but at the same time seemed to express a wish of rather feeing me in any other place than at my father’s, until he was better known in this neighbourhood. His reasons for such a wish I cannot imagine, neither shall I trouble myself to inquire. I vas going to reply when 
Frede 


XT 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
Frederick came to escort us to the coach, Dawson prelted my hand, and •whispered Softly, he Should from that evening resign his liberty to my alr powerful charms. He accompanied me to the coach, breathing a Soft kifs on my hand, as' he raised it up, and genteelly bowing, the coach drove off. 
The Sequel you Shall have tomorrow, as I am now under an engagement to meet him at keyton^s mother’s; it is the only felicity I ever enjoyed. The idea of meeting him furpastes any pleasing thought you can comprehend. You are too 
^ dull, 



i ' M 
TT 

if 

1 ' I 
J. V 
‘ it 
(i 
It 
i 
n 
i 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
dull, too serious, and too sentimental, to coincide with my notions. Adieu. Let me hear from you by the return of James. 
Ethelinda Greville. 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
13 
LETTER IT. 
MR. DAWSON TO FREDERICK LUMLEY, esci^ 
Y my soul, Lumley, thou art a fool! why, thy fermonizing epistle is enough to throw even a rake into the vapours. I have been accustomed to regard thee as a fellow of sense and spirit, but now thou hast proved thyself an errant idiot. What! to persuade me not to meet one of the finest girls in the country, when fly offers to come three parts of the 
way 
iyj 
‘to 
'‘II 
\ 
: 1 


■ j 
kt 

1; SI 
f i 
Ti 



T' ' I I! 
V f 1 
1 

4, I 
. 1. 
i- -- '■ 

I'lhi ( iiifi Tii'ii 
14 ILLICIT LOVE. 
way herself! Why fly, and every girl of Spirit, must call nie an afs if I did not. — No, no, faith; no musty rules for me — that domestic thing called wise lliall not abridge me in my pleasures. I married her money, and not her person; it is enough for her to have the honour of calling me her husband, without expecting anything elfe. With regard to the vows at the altar, which you argue fo learnedly on, I must affure thee I gave them to the winds as soon as they were made (if made at all, but faith I don’t recollect a Syllable of the matter).. It was the money I adored, and the ce 4 remony 

ILLICIT LOVE. 
»5 
remony which the parson muttered over I regard only as the deed of conveyance; in the name of Venus therefore, let us hear no more of such fluff. — ’as to destroying the peace of the family, what have I to do with them?, If girls will fall in love with me, who is to blame? Why, not Dawjon, to be sure, answers my old friend at my elbow. And if lb, then here’s have at ye, my pretty lass, for a month or fo, and then the next fool may be as welcome as the first, and thy friend Dawson in quell of another kind fair one; may Ihe be the counterpart of this! and then I run no risque thou knowest, but have the 
pof 
i t 
A 
d 
i i 
I I 


mu 
j. 
1'^ 
J s 
V 
If. 
V 
^4.1 
ft;? 
r, i 
■SL' 
Hi 
Ph 
ty i 
ill 
IL 
I 
I: 
hi 
1st 
Ir 
^11 f 1 
i wi 
41; 
i i 
s Oi 
bji; L. 
'I’ 
'! i ' 
I I' 
L !■ 
i; .-' 
Ji ' 
■‘j! 
(ti j 
iii 
m \ 
»! I 
II I 
i6 
ILLICIT LOVE; 
possession of a devilish smart girl and nothing to pay. I trust when I have next the pleasure .of feeing thee, of being able to ling, with propriety, 
“I kifs’d and I prattl’d with fifty fair maids, 
“And chang’d them as oft, as you fee.” 
Bravo! excellent lines, and well adapted to my roving fancy. ’tis now near six, and eight is the hour of assignation. I am all impatience to meet my Cytherea, therefore, rot it, 1 can write no morej for 
“I feel my blood mounting " Like iireams in a fountain 
! and 


ILLICIT LOVE. 
17 
ani I Shall be all titter, titter, titter, till the soft moment arrives that lays me at the feet of my aidoring goddess. Farewell for tonight; tomorrow I will send thee rny answer respecting Lambert; Tis a cursed silly affair to be Sure; but as it turns out, the bantling must be provided for. Thy judgement is Superior to mine therefore point out a remedy, and I will endeavour to effect a cure. Let me hear from you the instant you have heard from her brother, but don't let me have a word about virtue, and such stuff; if thou dost, I am no longer thy friend. 
Dawson, 
vol, I. G 

rm 
■ ■ ■ S 
'Nia. 

IM 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
LETTER III 
MISS GREVILLE TO MISS HOTHAM. 
my dear Julia, for the promised sequel. 
As soon as my father had properly adjusted his wig (which had been a little discomposed by a jolt of the coach), he observed to me, that the gentleman who came to the coach door was a mighty smart fellow was he your partner, Ethelinda? Yes, Sir, was my answer i and I told my 
father 
liite 


ILLICIT L O V £. ig 
father what I knew of him. His reply was, he had never heard of any of his name in that country before, and therefore supposed he was some Londoner. Frederick remarked he 
I 
might possibly be the brother of the famous Nancy Pawjon. This occasioned a laugh. I was angry with him for hinting such a disgraceful relationship. What reason had he to insinuate such a low idea? but he is jyanhy% friend ^ therefore I need not wonder. 
My father had won t play; my mother had lost; fo that their discourse soon turned on their rec 
2 fpe£live 

20 ILLICIT LOVE; 
Ipeflive fortunes. We trio were filent. The two lovers enjoying their thoughts, and I mine. 
About twelve the next day, Keyton came smiling into my drefling room with a letter in her hand. My heart gave a Ipring, and I eagerly asked who that letter was for? She as readily answered, Yourfelfj Madam j it comes from a gentleman that waits in the meadow for an answer. He sent a poor lad to me, to desire me to come to him. When I came, he allced whether I was Miss greville’s maid? I told him I was. He said, He would give me a couple of 
guineas 
I 
k 

ILLICIT LOVE. 
21 
guineas if I would take that letter to you; and here they are. Madam. Is not he a good-natured gentleman? Do pray, dear Madam, read it, and 
let me take back an answer. I will 
( 
get your pen and ink, that you may do its and away She goes to fetch them. The contents of his letter were, ' that he was my profesied admirer, but was unhappy to find I was already pre engaged, as a gentleman in the neighbourhood had informed him. On that account he Should not presume to visit at my father’s, which he otherwise intended to have done: but as he felt he could not live without feeing me, 
C 3 earnestly 
I 


I i' 
Sit 
te 
2z ILLICIT LOVE. 
earnestly implored I would favour him with an interview at any time and place I ftiould thinlc proper to appoint. 
I read over the contents again and again. In every line he manifested the lover. i I was sorely vexed at the hint he gave of my pre engagement. Who can the fellow be that has told him such a falsity?? if my father is pleased to nominate Danhy for a husband for me, is that the reason I must receive him as such?? avaunt the thought! Dawson shall be mine, or none at all. 

f 
f 
Well 
ILLICIT LOVE. 23 
Well, but to the letter. I had just finiftied reading it when Keyton returned with my ftandifti. What to do I knew not; to appoint a place to meet him at, was what I could 
not easily come into; and wholly to 
\ 
deny him, equally perplexed me. Keyton feeing me ^mbarralted, entreated to know the occaston. I told her, the strange gentleman, who had sent the letter by her, destred to see me at some place I would appoint,, but that I knew not of any acquaintance at whose house I could conveniently meet him, therefore Should not send him any answer. She exclaimed, Do pray. Madam, write 
C 4 some 
i - 
S 
(I 1 \ 
‘ II 
it; 
r, i 
24 ILLICIT LOVE. 
something or other, for I am certain he will be unhappy if I go to him with such a mestage. At her pronouncing the word unhappy 1 took up the pen, and wrote a few lines in answer. The purport of which was, that he may rest astured, I was not pre engaged; and that whatever he might have been given to understand on that Subject, was entirely groundless. Therefore desired he would not let that be an obstacle to his calling at our house; especially as I knew not of any place that I could with propriety meet him ati and writing I stiould in future object to. 
* This 
11 

i 
ILLICIT LOVE. 

This letter I sealed and sent by Key tonne, who returned in about a quarter of an hour, with a note wrote with a pencil, wherein he exprested himself happy to hear I was not pre engaged i but that he Should not think of presuming to visit me at my father’s, until he had had the happiness of Seeing me alone, for cogent reasons, which he would acquaint me with at our meeting; and again requested I would appoint a place. Still I was perplexed, not knowing what to do. At last I wrote him, that I Should be at II on wednef day, and after tea would take a walk on the parade, when he might 
take 
I ^ 
I « 
i ^ 
i 1 

ri 
il 
u 
11 
26 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
take occasion to speak to me, whether alone, or in company. This Keyton expeditiously took to him. He seemed quite in raptures at the contents, and bid her tell me, he should not fail the extreme happiness 
of meeting me at H. 
When Wednesday arrived, agreeably to my promise I went to H. and told my mother I Should just step to saintry’s the milliner, and be back again time enough to tea. As soon as I entered the parade, he saw me (he had been waiting sometime), and joined me in an instant, thanking me in the most polite terms 
for 
^ 1; i 1 
'1' 
0 
ILLICIT LOVE. 27 
for my condescension, as he called it, in meeting him, cc. I was perfectly charmed with him. Oh Julia! his manner is fo engaging, that I know not how to describe it. We had a deal of discourse the little time I stayed with him; but he refused to tell me his realbns for not calling at my father’s, till he had an opportunity of feeing me in a place where he could talk to me without interruption. As he leemed very earnest to desire an interview, I told him at parting, if he would call on me in the same manner as he did lafl, sometime next week, I did not doubt but I should be able by that 
time 
j 
1:! 
i )' i 
• i 
C 
I 
28 ILLICIT LOVE. 
time to fix oij some convenient place. 
I 
: 
«! 
i!! 
t 
11 I. 
He thanked me in terms the most enchanting, and promised to call. I expect him tomorrow. I have, by the assistance of Keyton, fixed on her aunt’s. She lives near B. A few presents will effectually purchase her silence. So that I shall have nothing to fear from that quarter. I intend to meet him there on Friday; and ' on Monday I will send you word what his motives are in desiring me to keep the meeting a secret. It will be foto all but you. Adieu. 
I remain yours, Ethelinda Greville. 

J i 
30 ILLICIT lovt. 
LETTER IV 
MR. DANBY TO MR. ordwayj 
DEAR ORDWAY, 
OUR letter did not reach me 
Y “: 
till yesterday, as, I had left town some hours before you arrived there. I am happy to find you are fo well recovered as to be able to bear the 
fatigue of travelling, without inconvenience. 
On that account, shall expe£t you at Danby House. The journey will be short, easy, and amazingly pleasant. I will take no 
excuse. 
a; 


rnimam 

ILLICIT LOVE. 
31 
excuse, as I intend to pafs the remainder of the summer here. You partly know my reasons for preferring it to that house in Surry, the situation of which you have fo often ad 'mired. But to speak in the Scripture phrase, Where your treasure is, there will your heart be alfo.’* The too amiable and too lovely Greville holds me in chains of adamant. I endeavour to break them, but cannot. 
11 
I ■' 
¥ 

In vain do I call my former boasted philosophy to my assistance. The more I court it, the more it flies me. love, tyrannic love, 4 reigns 
( 
1 
K ] 
32 ILLICIT LOVE. 
reigns despotic, and I am content to drag a willing chain. 
I was at her father’s yesterday.' 
1 
On my entrance into the breakfast parlour, where they all were, joy on feeing nne appeared on every countenance, but that of Ethelinda. Had Jhe smiled on me with that cordiality and frankness the rest did, I 
I 
should have esteemed inyfelf hlejfed indeed. Instead of which, a remark able coolness appeared in her manner of speaking to me, that I had never observed before j and on my takinsr her hand as I sat down by her fide, a cold Shivering, like the damp of 
death. 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
33 
death, .seemed to overspread me; what it could indicate I cannot possibly imagine. Certainly I have not a rival. If I have, and ftie Should prefer him to me, then farewell to happiness!! without the poffeltion of this lovely angel, I find I shall be for ever miserable indeed! Her friends are all strenuous in my favour, and it seems to be the first wish of their heart to see me allied to their family. May their sanguine wishes be speedily accomplished!! I shall not envy an Eastern monarch the possession of all the various beauties of the earth! 
VOL. I. 
D 
Six 

5 - 
Six months are now elapsed since I first saw her ^ stie then appeared and does now appear perfectly divine, at 
least to me; to others, who are not doomed, like me, to be her Slave, her excessive vivacity may be displeasing; but not to one who sometimes stands in need of a cheerful companion to distipate the gloom that involuntarily overspreads him. 
Let me therefore entreat you to come and Spend a few weeks with me, that you may be able to exercise your wonted talent of soft perfuasion, to make this enchanting girl my envied property. I will not receive any 
letter 
ILLICIT LOVE. 35 
letter from you. ’tis your presence alone that I request 
I thank you for the caution you have given respecting Dawjon. He has purchafeii a house at B. and Darner informs me, he has seen him twice at York Astembly. He pastes there, I find, for an unmarried man, as well as his infamous companion jvillfon. The first night he appeared there, he danced with Miss Greville. Had the divine creature known, that 
evening, what an abandoned wretch 
She fo greatly honoured, I think She would not have easily consented to dance with him. But be that as it D 2 
may, 
LI 


36 ILLICIT LOVE. 
may, I (hall give her a few hints who and what he is, that she may be cautious how Ihe notices him in future. • 
r 
’tis now time for me to hasten to my lovely girl, as I have appointed to make one in a party on the canal this evening j therefore farewell. I shall expe6t you on Thursday. 
Dakby. 
T 
I 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
37 
LETTER V 
MR. DAWSON TO FREDERICK LUMLEY;, ESQ 
DEAR FRED. 
Y first grand point is accom plislied. I have prevailed on my dulcinea to meet me incognita at a little lonely cottage two miles from B. a place the dear girl has fixed on herself (mind that, Lumley). It is at a relation’s of her maid, a little, 
I 
lively, ignorant country wench, who undertakes to deliver my letters unknown to any one j and although not 
D 3 quite 
i‘i •imtftilttiirfi aiii, Sua.... ^ 


hr 
38 ILLICIT LOVE. 
quite eighteen, has a head and heart as well formed for intrigue as any old pimp of sixty. 
This works rarely, does it not? My head is almost topsy turvy with the bare idea of being master of such a couple of Spirited lastes. By miy soul, I am a clever fellow, or I Should never be fo fortunate, as first to begin with the mistress, and then — oh, what then! exclaims the non intriguing, Lumley! — Why, to be Short, end with the maid. This will just employ me two months, and then the next fool may be as welcome as the first, as I have told thee already. Bravo! 
bravo! 

t: 
ILLICIT LOVE. 39. 
bravo! a Short life and merry one; the old vulgar adage is and has been always adopted by Dawjon j and thus I go fv/immingly on. 
But I forgot to tell thee, that this pretty damsel is absolutely engaged to thy old acquaintance Danby 1 although fne positively denies it. She astured me yesterday. She despifes him too much to indulge even a thought about him, being too dull and sentimental for her choice. I believe it; for the devil is in it, if a girl of Spirit won't prefer a smart fellow, like me, to such a serious, compound of oddities as Panhy. I 
D 4 have 


■ 
Wv 

ILLICIT LOVE. 
have now got a most glorious opportunity of revenge for the insult he put on me at nando’s. He was then esteemed a fellow of Spirit, and I a Sneaking puppy, by the monkeys that frequent there, because I did not chule to draw my sword on being pulled by the nose. Where can there be a more glorious revenge than to debauch the girl he means to marry? She will be obliged to wed him, to cover you know what. .Oh, ye gods! hovf I stiali enjoy the foofs mortist ' cation! She cannot have me, neither can her friends compel mei am therefore safe on that Score. See what advantages we married men 
enjoy; 




i ■ 
ILLICIT LOVE. 41 
enjoy. By heavens! I am glad i’m 
married, as it does not damp my 
\ 
Spirit for intrigue in the least; on the contrary sets a keener edge to nay inclinations. 
However, I must be cautious in my manoeuvres, lest my plot Should be discovered before it is ripe for execution. Whatever She might hear concerning my marriage, I Shall astert to be entirely false. This I can easily do, as Mrs. D. will not be here till the latter end of November, and then not to stay, for I have found means to persuade her the house is very damp, which may endanger her ^ 
health j 


’^1^ 
- t 
! 
; 1 
; f 
LI 
I I 
u 
42 ILLICIT LOVE. 
health; this She implicitly believes, and I have not a Servant here but what I have hired in the country; neither Shall any come till I have completed my design, which is, to ruin, as the vulgar call it, bothmifs and Maid, and then Danby may marry which he pleases, whilst Dawjon is in pursuit of fresh game. 
I Shall write again to thee on Wednesday next. Willfon, who is to stay with me Some weeks, will send my letters by a relation of his to town; and by him I shall expect a return. ' 
Thine, in every fense of the word, 
Dawson. 

ILLICIT LOVE. 
43 
LETTER VI 
MISS HOTHAM TO MISS GREVILLE. 
DEAR ETHE, 
OUR two last letters have given 
me the most fensible concern. I am for more reasons than one, sorry to hear of your attachment to Mr. Dawson: anci although I have not the pleasure of knowing him, yet something tells me, he is not a fit acquaintance for a friend of mine, especially my esteemed Ethelinda. 
j 
What can occasion these ideas I knov/ not, uniefs it is that air of 
I 
- nayftery 


4 ■; i • 
i ’ 
i < 
I 
( i \ ( 

J 

I i 
I; 
II 
ft 
. i 
A 
f \ 
P 
44 ILLICITLOVE. 
mysteiy which you Speak of relpefting his objections to visiting you at your father’s. Were his designs perfectly honourable, he could not hesttate a inonnent. That silly plea which he makes use of, concerning your engagement, is certainly a feigned one. There must be Something more at the bottom, than irierely the fear of a rival, unless he is conscious of not posteffing those amiable qualities which Mr. Danby is known to inherit. In that cafe, I Should not be surprised at his fearing the fcmti jiizing eye of your parents, ” who, I am certain, would prefer a man of principle and virtue for a child of 
, theirs. 
msmm 

ILLICIT LOVE, 
4s 
theirs, before the first; man on earth, who could not boast of being in reality what they could wilh. 
Pray, therefore, be advised by me, and either not see him at all, or infill on his visiting you at home. That uncommon share of vivacity which you possess, will probably tempt him to take liberties with you, if you consent to see him in private (especially at such a house as that you mention), which he would not dare to do, if his conduct were under the inspection of your friends. Not that I mean to insinuate anything to hia 
pre 
6. 
f 
ij 
Th ■ i 'if' 
.f 
LI 

ijl 
ri! II ® i I 
H, 
LI H 
PI! 
f i 
L; 
ti. i 
/ i i 
} I 
L 
U 
^ i 
II 
11! 
46 ILLICIT LOVE. 
( 
prejudice. I only hint that he post fibly migh^ he tempted to do it. Beauty and Iprightlinefs, like yours might be a temptation for a philosopher (if opportunity offered much more such a gay, intriguing young man as Dawson. And I have always laid it down as an invariable rule, that the man who can affect an air of mystery where none is requisite, has certainly some dark, bad design at bottom. However, your prudent 
judgement, I trust, will direct you 
) 
how to aft, that you may have nothing to blame yourself for in the end. 
I lliall 
: i.:, ^ 

ILLICIT LOVE. 47 
• I shall keep what you have entrusted me with an entire secret, and remain 
Ypurs sincerely 
■ |. Hotham. 
P. S. The little animal you wrote for, shall be sent by the coach next Thursday. Your mother’s kind donation was thankfully and very sea fpnably received by the affli£led people. Their prayers are incessantly offered up for Mrs. Greville, and allb Mr. Danby, who has, I find, been, as he always is in cafes of distress, a liberal benefactor. I most sincerely 
wish) 
) 
; (-1 ■' 
i ini 
1 i 
! 1 




ILLICIT LOVE. 
wilh you could be as sensible of his worth as every one that has the pleasure of his acquaintance is; but that we must leave to time. Adieu. 

ILLICIT LOVE. 
49 
LETTER VII 
MISS GREVILLE TO MISS HOTHAM. 
EACE, my dear Julia, to your pious remonstrances! Why will you blame me for an attachment to a handsome fellow? Your concern really makes me laugh. What in the name of wonder can make you sorry for my having such a dangler as Dawson?? am happy to hear you say, you have not the pleasure of knowing him (left you might steal him from me); although, for one reason, I at the same time wish you vol. I. E did. 
L 
pi 
50 ILLICIT LOVE. 
did, for tiien all your remonstrances would cease. 
I am now to inform you, I have feen him at ’keyton’s aunt’s. His reasons for not visiting at my father’s are very forcible, being on account of a quarrel he some months ago had with Danby, relative to some female. He has let me greatly into the light of danby’s private character, who, he tells me, at present keeps the girl they had the quarrel about. This is an excellent discovery, and would serve to irradicate all ■ tender sentiments, supposing I polteffed any for your charitable and pious Mr. 
Danbv; 
\ 

ILLICIT LOVE, 
SI 
Danby; but thank my liars I have none, or ever shall 
- am Torry you are led to luppole Dawson capable of deceiving me, and 
of taking liberties j that, i am cer 
\ 
tain, he woum detest the bare idea of : It is your friendship for Danby that makes you behold him in such an odious light: I cannot think you really fuspeist him of destgns injurious to my peace; it cannot be; I will not admit of it ^ therefore Shall continue to see him in private, till I can prevail on my mother to forbid Danby's vistts. Stolen pleasures are sweet j and I have no reason to fear E 2 a dif 
5n ILLICIT LOVE. 
a discovery, as the road is most exceedingly private.. 
His motives are certainly honourable, and my own ideas of rectitude will keep him in awe, should he presume to take freedoms which prudery forbids. Not that I mean to call your kind admonitions prudery; no, believe me, I regard them as the serious advice of a serious sincere friend, who has never known love’s pleasures, or felt love’s pains. I enjoy the former at present; whether I (hall ever feel the latter, or not, time alone mull determine. 
don’t 



S’ 
ILLICIT LOVE. 53 
don’t blame me for my vivacity, as it is that, Dawson affures me, which charms and holds him fall my willing flave. What a triumph is mine! who will not envy me I all my fair neighbours will, I am certain j 
f ■ 
therefore I shall think of nothing, but how to keep my captive safe. Adieu. 
your’s, 
Ethsunda. 
E 3 
J 
rr 
54 
ILLICIT LOVE, 
LETTER VIII 
MR, DANBY TO MR. ORDWAT. 
DEAR ORDWAY, 
t^yrhy will you any longer delay your journey? If you are capable of travelling at all, I entreat you to come; for I really now stand in need of a friend like you. 
I yesterday made proposals in form to Mr. and Mrs. Greville for my Ethelinda. They received them with infinite pleaflire. Was happy in the idea of feeing me soon their fon in 
law. 

ILLICIT LOVE. 55 
law, not doubting in the lead of their daughter’s ready acquiescence, and of speedily appointing the day to bleh me with her hand. — I was therefore desired to take an opportunity soon after dinner to found her inclinations on the subject 5 which I did: but, oh Heavens! what was her answer— — thought! it chills me to think of! — it was briefly this; I will give it you in her own words: “I “thank you. Sir, for your partial opinion of me, but mull be inge“ “and acquaint you, that I never can be yours, as I cannot “think of being united to a perlba whole public and private character £4, “do 
XC 


56 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
do not at all correipond.” Saying this, Ihe left me without the least; ^remony 5 whilst I, incapable of comprehending her meaning, flood motionless, and remained fo for some moments after fly had left the room. 
fc 
C 
What can She postibly mean? To what can She allu(je? Can never think of being united to a man whose public and private character do not correspond/’ What villain has dared to throw a stigma on my character, or wrongfully to accuse me to this lovely woman? None but such an infamous wretch as daw/on and his astociates can be guilty of a meanness 

HH 

wmm 

ILLICIT LOVE. 57 
nefs like it. I must endeavour to come to an explanation before I give her up entirely ^ and if the calumny originates from the quarter I suspect it does, no place on earth Shall hide the dark astastin from me; and although I have hitherto despifed and condemned duelling, yet when touched in fo tender a point as this, who can postibly avoid it? 
I saw my fair one no more that evening. She complained of a headache, and retired to her room., I was unwilling to make Mrs. Greville acquainted with the rebuff I met with; therefore feigned an engagement that 
I pre 
V 
71 
t 
\ 

i ■ 
il 
> 
1 
j 
j ■ 
i 


58 ILLICIT LOVE. 
I pretended to have forgot, ' which, I 
i 
alleged, was of great moment to me; and acquainted Mrs. Greville I was under the necessity of leaving their house that evening, but would be there again in the morning. 
1 ^ 1 w Upon this I left them for the pur 
1‘ • pose of sending Williams to make 
Ei inquiry relpedting Dawjon, who, I 
0 w t find, is now at H. 
:). t 1 ■ If you cannot come immediately 
r on receiving this, I shall be still 
\ more unhappy than I am at present" 
"which prevents my saying more— — 
i L i? / i V than that I am truly. 
h ■ Your friend, 
H Danby, 

ILLICIT LOVE. 
59 
L E T T E R IX 
MISS GREVILLE TO MISS HOTHAM. PEAR JULIA, 
rpell me, my friend, tell me, for heaven’s sake, how I shall bear the rigid commands of inflexible parents? commands that I have been unaccustomed to fulfil, which makes them appear to me derogatory to pa rental love. Yesterday, for the first: time, they enforced them with unexampled fternnels in regard to Danby. “’tis my will, ^’ said my father, that you receive Mr. Danby as a 
"future 

, 
i I 

ti 
1 L 

AHA, 

LI 
If 

(t 
6o 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
“future husband. You cannot make a “better choice. I expect your instant“ “ready acquiescence. ’ ’ — Laconic, but significant— — was going to remonstrate; but he interrupted me by saying“ “/ hear nothing, Ethelinda. Mr. Danby this morning aiked mine and your mother’s consent to address you seriously on the subject, which we immediately granted. He is a most amiable and deserving character; and if you make any objections to the choice we ‘‘ have made for you, remember you ‘‘ never share with Charlotte a shilling“ “my fortune.” I was still desirous of informing him what Mr. Dawson 
told 
CC 
C 
ic 


ILLICIT LOVE. 
6i 
told me respecting danby’s keeping .the girl they quarrelled about ^ but my father abruptly left the room; and my mother, whose heart, will, and mind, are ever at my father’s dist pofal, as soon as he had left the room, bid me retire to dress, as it was near our time of dinner. — I obeyed, and Sullenly withdrew. 
- Charlotte Seemed much pleased at the commands I had received; and, whilst dresting, Said, She Should be quite happy to See Mr. Danby her brother-in-law. — Wished he had made choice of her before She saw Frederick. Heaven grant thy pious wdsti! said I; 
but 
isl 
'f 

6i ILLICIT LOVE; 
but it is now too late. What a dif poiition Ihe possesses J;. I cannot, nay I dare not, make her my confidant : her temper is too forbidding; and ’tis to you alone I can impart the secrets of my heart. 
Soon after dinner they all left the diningroom, leaving me and Danby alone. When they were gone, he in a familiar manner accosted me, and made me a tender of his hand; accompanied, as he said, with the sin i cerity of his heart. My answer was truly laconic. That I could not think of giving my hand to a perlbn whole public and private character did not 
corre 





ILLICIT LOVE. 63 
correspond, and then left him to make out the enigma as he thought pfo^ per; but I dare say he perfeaiy knew what I meant, as he coloured exceedingly. Thus you see a guilty conscience needs no accuser. I left him, and retired to my room, complaining of a sudden violent headache, which afforded an excellent excufe.for not coming down to tea, or supper '4 but I find I had no reason to have confined myself on Danhf^ account; for I understand he left our house soon after I quitted him, acquainting my mother he Should be with us again soon today. I expert him every moment, and Charlotte has been tea • - zing 
/ 
v 
V 
V ' 
f” 
f drii 
1 '.r 

1 
ia 

il 
ir ^ V 
w 
64 ILLICIT LOVE, i 
V zing me this hour to fini out what reception I gave Danby; but to her I am mute. She is his friend, therefore not a fit confidant for me, as I observed before: no, no; let my refusal be made known to the elders by him -- self it Shall not come from me. 
tonight I am to meet Dawfoa, to whom I shall impart the injunctions I have received. He, no doubt, will stimulate me to aft in oppost 
I 
tion; and, in order to avoid this said match, Should he propose an elopement to Scotland, I think I shall not make any violent objedhons j but resolutely, like other heroines, brave ■ every 

ILLICIT LOVE. 65 
every danger, and grace Gretna with my presence. It will only serve for a little small talk among the forsaken nymphs of the village. My father will probably rave, and in his passion,, he will never see me again j but .that will be only for the moment. When he comes to behold die choice I have made of a fon in law to him, his passion will readily subside, and I shall be quickly reinstated his joint heiress, his beloved Ethelinda. 
don’t I reason as many a pretty damsel has before me? surely you will say Aye; why then adieu to vapours, and all the et cater as ofdif 
VOL. I. 
F 

.1 ^ 
i - r :. 

/ 


0 
1 - i. 
Mi 
66' 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
appointed love and Dawfbn,. all lovely Dawson, I am ready to be thy wife at Gretna green, or any other convenient place, whilst Danby, with his philosophy, madly raves at love, and in a fit of heroism takes a trip to the Elysian fields. — And then, as the song says, 
wtilfi: they tell the dismal story. 
With a stgh I’H cry Poor Tom VI 
wonder he is not come, having told my mother that, he should be here early this morning. I have several times told him, half ferions and half in jest, that I could never like him for a husband j but I must now be thoroughly serious, and let him see, 
by 
J 
ILLICIT LOVE. 67 
by all my words and actions, that I utterly dislike him; and that I never mean to be his property. The sooner it is terminated the better, as then the accomplished Dawson will be permitted to visit at our houle; till then, he will not. I am sent for. Adieu, my dear Julia j will write again soon. 
Yours affedtionately, 
Ethelinda. 

F a 
1 ■ A 
't 
VI 
I!, r' 
'■ 
■ ■■ •♦, 
h ■* * Si 
III 
5 
68 
ILLICIT LOVE, 
LETTER X 
MR. DAWSON TO FREDERICK LUMLEY ESQ. 
DEAR FRED. 
KINGS go on fwimmingly at the Grevilles. The om man, in peremptory terms, commands the fair Ethelinda to receive Danby for a husband i whilst the blind deity as effeistually opposes it. Last night I saw her at the usual place, and then 
t 
brought her to a confeltion, that me, and me alone, mull constitute her future happiness. Bravo! what a ' devilish 
ILLICIT LOVE. 69 
devilish clever fellow I am! to be able to do more with this Smart girl in one week, than Danby could accomplish in a year! Now a con festion is made, there will be no re ceding; and if I Should take a few liberties, thou knowest, Lumley, I have a good plea. Should She pout, or look angry, I Shall make the usual observation, Surely you can not have Spoken truth; have you not told me that you loved me Her answer will necestarily be in the affirmative. Why then is it polfible for a woman to be angry at any freedoms a lover may take, when She is certain She is beloved in return? 
F 3 This 


1^' 
n 
11 f 
I ff f I 
f; S; > is 
70 ILLICIT LOVE. 
This will soften her. I shall proceed to take some trifling freedoms at firftj and fo proceed, by degrees, till, ah, till what? Why, till Ihe is made a fit wife for that piece of vegetation Danby, or any other fool that chooses to marry her; fo here is at you, my fair one, as quick as possible; left my scheme should be discovered before it is ripe for execution. In love and war thou knowest' all stratagems are lawful. 
But I had forgot to tell thee, that when she informed me her father insisted on her marrying Danby, fly dropped broad hints to make me 
propose 


B. JW w — ■•'lectit^wepbhkiiarlsr 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
7^ 
propose an elopement, but that bait would ^ not take. I feigned not to understand her, but persuaded her to endeavour to prevail on her father to discard Danby, and then the road would be fair for me to make proposals in form. This, She says. She will try to effect, but doubts of success, as her father has had this match in view some years, and now wisties to see it accomplished; which that he may, but not till I have done with her, prays thy friend 
Dawson. 
F 4 

72 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
LETTER XL 
DANBY, ESQ TO C ORDWAY, 
DEAR ORDWAY, 
Y last informe(i you of the disagreeable tete-a-tete I had with my Ethelinda, and of quitting gre ville’s house in consequence of it, which I left with a heart distracted by various passions. 
As soon as I reached my house, I dispatched William to make inquiries respecting daw/cn. He was not to return without Some account 
or 
ILLICIT LOVE. 73 
or other. Nor did he come back until the next day, when all the information that he could get was, that he was much talked of among the Ladies, and his company greatly wished for : That Miss Greville was looked' upon to be the only lady he Teemed desirous of forming an acquaintance with as he precipitately left every circle in which She did not appear. There were various conjectures formed respecting him, but all concluded him to be a young man of fastiion, with a large independent fortune. Good God! what absurd ideas people in general form; and what silly notions do we entertain of 
those 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
those with whom we are not intimately acquainted! ■ 
V 

Thus a man of virtue with principles that do honour to human nature, and who despises every idea of deception, Shall pafs unnoticed thro’ the busy scene of life, and his company be scarcely sought after, by even his most Intimate Yriends, unless by those whose hearts are In unison with his own; whilst a fop, a fribble, a gambler, and debauchee, ^ are admired, applauded, and their company courted by even the most virtuous of the other sex. This wrong and ’ absurd distindion, adopted by 
the 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
75 
the Ladies, puts virtue out of countenance, and encourages vice to ride triumphant j it opens a field for the destruction of innocence, and paves the way to those preposterous matches which we see too often and almost: daily announced to the public. 
These, my dear friend, are my refiedtions j they strike me, at present, as if, in future, I should feel the force of them. Should my Ethelinda be sofar lost to herself, as to prefer fo infamous a personas Dawson to me, and I should live to be convinced of it, I must, nay I shall, without a sigh, resign to him 
7 

f. 
■i 
u 
?lf 
rii 
■1 
n 
I 
76 ILLICIT LOVE.. 
all my pretensions to her as a perfoii unworthy of a moment’s thought. If her friends can reconcile themselves to such an absurd choice, be it foi Shall have only then to wisti. She may enjoy that happiness with him, which She might uistnterfuptedly have experienced with me. All that I can do, to warn her against the impending evil which awaits her, I most certainly will do, by letting her into the knowledge of dawfon’s real character, as far as I am acquainted with it. 
There was a rumour forne months since, when I was in town last, of his being about to be married to a Mrs. 
Wells, 


ILLICIT LOVE. 
77 
Wells, a widow lady, with a large fortune. I paid little or no attention to the report at that time j but now I would wish you to make all possible inquiries. She lived either in or near St. james’s Square. Her former husband was a Creole. Mrs. Spencer, I think, can give you some information reipe6ting her. Do be as Ipeedy as possible in your inquiries j but let your intelligence be authentic. I ffiould not choose to point out anything to Miss Greville but what may be depended on as a satin the mean time I ffiall endeavour to come to an explanation with her re lpe£ling her laconic and ambiguous 
express 
r. 
78 ILLICIT LOVE. 
expression, in refusing me j till when I shall be very, very unhappy. 
a; 
if; 
I intend being at Greville Houle this evening; and hope my next will inform you what I at prefont almost die to know. I have been fo much indilpofed ever since I wrote to you last, that I was under the painful necessity of sending to Mr. greville’s the next day, acquainting them of my inability of waiting on them, agreeable to appointment j since which, their repeated kind inquiries after my health plainly evince they entertain for me the tenderest regard. 
I am 
1 


ILLICIT LOVE. 
79 
I am sorry to find you have had a relapse; you must be very careful, otherwise your complaint will probably increase with every return. If you continue in the state you are at present, I most strenuously advise the Bristol Hot wells, being certain they will be of infinite service to you. I would not, have you fatigue yourself with waiting long at a time; let me have a few lines in answer to mine,, and that will be as much as I can desire. Adieu. I shall write again on Thursday.. 
friend. 
f 
■ ri 
Danby, 
i 
t : 
* \ 
/ ' 
■ V ■ f: f: 
8o 
ILLICIT LOVE, 
i 
I; 
«- \ 
4 = i ■ 
LI h i P i 
f ^ 
f 
!)• 
LETTER XII 
MISS HOTHAM TO MISS GREVILLE. 
/ ■ DEAR ETHELINDA,. 
r ' T i 
} ■ ' \ js it possible that you can hentate a 
moment to believe what all the 
world, save yourself, would instantly 
pronounce a fact?? am positive 
you are to blame in persisting to see 
Mr. Dawson, after what I acquainted 
'you with in my last. However, 
since that will not convince you, 
take the account literally as I had 
it from Mrs. Bows, 
On 

ILLICIT LOVE. 
8i 
CC 
CC 
On my afldng her whether she knew a Mr. Dawson, who about a year since lived in cavendifh fquare, she looked me full in the face, and answered, with great emotion, “Know " a Mr. Dawson, Miss Hotham! what can be your reasons for asking such a question?? hope you have no acquaintance with him.” I replied in the negative; but I was intimate with a young lady that had Ibme slight knowledge of him, and who would wish to be better informed who and what he was. ‘‘ Good heavens, Miss!” !” Mrs, Bows, acquaint her he is of all creatures on earth the last she should form vol. I. G " an 
■ 
82 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
jet 

an acquaintance with. A wretch without any kind of principle; a profelted gambler, and were it not for his wife’s income, he would be a vagabond!” — Wifei I ckclaim ed 1 has the villain a wife 1 Yes j did you not know it? She answered; he has been married these six months to a widow of large fortune. Her former husband was a Creole, with whom she came to England for the recovery of his health, but he died soon after their arrival. Dawson met with her at Mrs. stretton’s rout, at whose house Mrs. Dawson visited for sometime after her marriage, till her hiifband was found to be laying snares 
to 
! t 


t 
ILLICIT LOVE. 83 
to debauch Mrs. stretton’s Udeft daughter: this was discovered by the accidental dropping of a letter from Miss stretton’s pocket, the morning after she had received it. 
\ 
This discovery led to an explanation; and Miss Stretton confessed she had not forbid his writing; and that he pretended to be violently in love with her; and often' lamented he had not the happiness of knowing her, previous to his marriage (she being at school); that he had frequently desired her to meet him at a house in chandois ftreet (which house, upon inquiries fmce, proved to be a G 2 bagnio); 




i * I 
I 
1 
I : 
1, 
1/ 
84 ILLICIT LOVE. 
bagnio); this, however, she declined, as not thinking it prudent: and the letter which had been dropped, ex 
•v. 
pressed his regret at her inflexibility of refusal, and proposing another house in marylebone, at a friend’s of his, of the name of Willfon, who, he said, was a very reputable chak rafter, and that willfon’s filler, an amiable young lady, lived with him as his housekeeper (he being unmarried), and who would be very happy to cultivate an acquaintance. This Willfon turned out to be as great a ralcal as Dawson, living entirely upon gambling and swindling; and the girl whom Willfon calkd his filler. 

was 
mtm 

ILLICIT LOVE. 85 
was a creature he had kept for a considerable length of time. 
When this confession was made, Mrs. Stretton dispatched a message to Mrs. Dawson, requesting her immediate presence. She readily came, and the letter was instantly produced to her to read; which she did with no small emotion, and appeared to be exceedingly hurt at the treachery of her husband, who she could not be persuaded was guilty of anything fo infamously bad j and if, upon taxing him with it, she should find him guilty, she would not live with him another' day, 
G 3 All 
( 

j'i, f, 
I 
'VDU 
‘v 
t J 
• i L ■ 
ikii t 
<S‘ i 
86 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
i 
All her acquaintance. She said, had blamed her for her precipitate choice; but that hitherto She had had no reason to lament, it, as he always behaved to her with the greatest politeness and the stridlest honour i and till She was amply convinced of his infidelity. She would not rashly pronounce him guilty of such deception. At saying this. She left them, in order to interrogate her husband upon the subject; but who found means to convince her, that the whole of the accusation was a mere fiction, calculated solely to fet them at variance; solemnly affirming, he had never even Shown her common 
civility ^ 
BH 
'9 
i 
ILLICIT LOVE. 87 
civility; and effectually to convince her of the truth of his astertion, he would consent to see Miss Stretton in her presence, and then ask her such questions as Mrs. Dawson Should choose to propose. These offers and afilirances induced Mrs. Dawson to believe that what She had been told at Mrs. Stretton's arose, as he had observed, from some private pique, and was meant to cause a separation between them. These ideas stie communicated, by letter, to Mrs. Stretton, at the same time informing her,, stie was sorry to find Mrs. Stretton capable of such a meanness, as to accuse a gentleman of a crime that he G 4 ' would 
X 


.iisatk 

ILLICIT love. 
would blush even to think of, much less to put in execution. She con eluded by saying, Ihe was convinced of Mr. dawfon’s conjugal love, and of his total innocence of the charge; and, on that account, could never think of visiting her more. Thus dropped the acquaintance at Mrs. stretton’s. 
When the villain found he had 
succeeded in imposing on his wife's 
credulity, in order to be revenged on 
Miss S. for difcloling the secret, he 
made it a point in all companies to 
alperfe her character, and to insinuate 
that Ihe was always at his service 
privately as a mistress' 
'
'II II 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
These reports reaching the ears of her cousin Danby, he happened, by accident, to meet Dawson at a coffee houfe, where he immediately accused him. of it before company, and demanded fatisfaflion for aspersing the character of his innocent cousin. The rascal refusing to draw, Mr, Danby pulled him by the nose, and turned him out of the coffee room, to the no small diversion of the whole company j since, which time he has been afraid to be seen much in public, and is now, I find, at his old pranks in the country. 
Thus endeci Mrs. b^wes’s, account 
of your favourite. Every circumstance 
appears 

\ '1 


I 
: 
I I 
} 4 

. 
5? 
V 
f 
L 
f i 
i ^ 
i t 
f 
f 
5 
f ' 

i 
a ' 
fi 
go ILLICIT LOVE. 
appears too plausible to be doubted. No wonder now that he should object to visit at your father’s; or that he should infmuate evejy thing to the prejudice of Mr. Danby, a person whose character has hitherto been unfulliedj and whose public and private sentiments have ever been in unison. 
I 
Fly then, my dearest Ethelinda; for heaven’s sake, fly the delusive flatterer, whose only aim is your inevitable ruin, and who seeks only to destroy! Listen, let me entreat you, before it Is too late, to the voice of friendship, and instantly discard every 
tender 
ILLICIT LOVE. 91 
tender sentiment, should you possess any, for fo infamous a wretch. Let a silly, romantic passion give place to reason and truth j and let those favourable ideas you have formed for a contemptible villain, be immediately transferred to one, whom every woman of virtue mull esteem and love. 

If you do not comply with my request, I must be free and tell you, that notwithstanding our long friend fiiip for each other, I never can think of correfpondjng with a person who can persist in an intimacy with a man with whom even the mofl: abandoned would blush to acknowledge an 
acquaint 
y 
t. 
i w 
t ft 
n 
I 
f! 
vh 
I, 
92 ILLICIT LOVE. 
acquaintance. For what can be worse than him who can unfeelingly destroy the peace of a family, by robbing an innocent and inexperienced girl of the only ornament that can dignify the female character, leaving her exposed to the resentment of her injured relations, whole honour would suffer with hers j and to the insults of a world, that is never disposed to treat the frailty of human nature with ' lenity or compaffion, but always exaggerate rather than extenuate the fault? but such, I trust, will never be the fate of my Ethelinda. What distress would equal mine, were I ever to hear that my friend had fallen 
into 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
into the snare laid for her by such an abandoned wretch! Your next will make me happy, if I hear you mean never to see him more; but if on the contrary, then adieu to friendship. I shall be easy in my own mind to think that I have, without any envious motives, cautioned you against the impending evil. Adieu j may you be advised, and happy, is the prayer of your sincere' and affectionate friend, 
Julia Hotham. 
AF 
i 
P. S. Present my respects to Frederick; tell him, I hope to see him, if he comes to town, soon after his arrival, as my father has fbmething to propose to him about his estate. 
i .J 

II 
fi! 

94- 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
LETTER XIII 
dawsonj es(i. TO FREDERICK LUMLEY, ESC. 
DEAR FRED. 
jp RIT H E E talk no more of women’s virtue; it is to me a mere 
bubble. What girl can resist, when such a smart fellow as me is bent on conquest?? polit is idle fluff; my ethelinda’s virtue nods already, and I shall soon, very soon, be in the quiet possession of what the diffident Danby would blush to think of.. 
In 
asm 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
95 
In a kind of pet my enamoured nymph told me lafb evening, that she had been informed by a friend I was already married, and that if it was true, Ihe wondered how I could have the insolence for a moment to 
think of her, See. and this with a 
1 
great deal more stuff to the same purpose, I affected to be offended at what I called her unjust accusation, and gave her to understand, if she was disposed to listen to every idle tale which envy or jealousy might be tempted to invent to my prejudice, I stiould take a final farewell of her that evening, and leave her to the possession of him whom I was certain would not love her with half the ardour 



'S' s 
96 ILLICIT LOVE. 
dour which I didj for I considered that none but a low, grovelling spirit would attempt a vindication. I was about to quit her with an assumed indifference, when die burst into tears, and exclaimed. Oh, dear Mr.dawfon, how can you use me thus! I do not, neither will I, believe anything that shall be said to your prejudice j will that content you, as I now firmly believe it to be fabricated for the foie purpose that I may think of none but Danby. — I advanced back again, throwing myself at her feet, and exclaimed. Now, my Ethelinda, you prove yourself an angel; henceforth I am devotedly your entire flave. 
This, 

ILLICIT LOVE. 97 
This, aiid some more, equally fiiitable to my views, elieftually brought her to my purpose; and before we parted, I prevailed oh her to content to adhiit me at night into her father’s garden; in which place I hope to accompiifli rhy wishes much 
better than at the house we liow meet 
at. Now don’t fefmohize upon the occailoti, when thou fendft an anlwei to this i for I am bent on the completion of my work. Thai puppy Dariby difappolnted the before, in iny attempt on his little deniure coil sin, or my life to a tii rhep btit 1 had conquered, notwithftandihg the discovery j for, Alexander like, I vol. I. H never 
'H 
II 

"‘i ■ 
L 
98 ILLICIT LOVE, 
never attacked (but that once) without succeeding. 
Bravo, Dawson!! art the man for the ladies. Among an army of them rd be bound to do more execution in one month, than a whole legion of fcientifics would in a year. Nothing like Spirit, Lumley, by Jove, and a Jang froid to be used occasionally 
When the dear creatures imagine they are likely to lose us, even their most darling passion must give way, to retain the lover whom a few moments before, with all the heroism 
peculiar 
wmlilmlmimiri 

ILLICIT LOVE, 
99 
peculiar to the sex, they threatened to discard. 
I shall pride myself more 6n this conquest than on any other I ever made before. This will establish my fame amongst the Ladies; and whatever the squeamish may affect to think of my morals, all girls of spirit, i’m sure, will admire me, and applaud my conduct. So, here’s. Tartarlike, turn free booter, and endeavour to' secure all that comes in my way. 
I had forgot to tell thee, that we were discovered yesterday, walking together, at the end of a field which 
H 2 leads 
t 
■t 
0 
1 
i 
VI 

100 ILLICIT LOVE. 
leads to the old woman’s house where we meet. It has been the custom of my charming lass to alight at Some distance from the house (whenever She rode there), ^ to give the horse to her servant and bid him wait at a neighbouring ale stoufe for her return. This he did without fufpeftirig his mistress went to meet any person till yesterday when our little quarrel having occasioned her to stay longer than usual, he came in quest of my fair one, thinking Something had unhappily befallen her; and as we were coming down the field, arm in arm, I talking a thousand tender things, and She credulously believing every 
word 

ma 
ILLICIT LOVE. loi 
I ■:.. 
word I uttered, when lo! au of a sudden, her fervaiit appeared, staring as if frightened out of his wits, at feeing me with his mistress. I however, although a little perplexed, had presence of mind sufficient to give her a hint to keep our meeting a secret from him, and to make him believe I met his mistress, by accident. The fellow said to my charmer, “I “was coming. Madam, to see for you; as you stayed fo long, I was afraid something had happened.” — Something has happened, indeed, John (laid Ihe); " and if it had not been for this good gentleman, I Should not H 3 “have 
€C 
tc 
C 
CC 
CC 

r 
102 ILLICIT LOVE. 
have reacheci you tonight, for just as I came up to old. Mrs. keyton s, by accident I turned my foot on a stone, and sprained my ankle s and had not this gentleman providentially come past:, I Should not have been able to v/alk, the pain being fo very great. I was crying out for help, when he fortunately saw me, and he has kindly astifted me to come thus far to meet you.” 
€€ 

tc 
C 
The poor iimple fellow seemed eagerly to believe everything told hirn. I asked him where the horses were; he answered, Down yon“ 
“
€t 
ILLICIT LOVE. 103 
der.” — I replied, he had better fetch Miss greville’s, as the less she walked the better, and we would endeavour to put her on it there. 
II 
isj 
list 
Whilst the fellow was gone, I hai enough to do to quiet her apprehensions, in regard to her father's being made acquainted by the servant of her being seen with me; however, I at last Succeeded, and we parted with a firm resolve not to run the like risque again: no, no, the garden will be the best place, where the first Scene Shall be Romeo in perfection; then leave all the rest to me, • a few meetings of that sort, I trust, will H 4 answer 

I: C 
104 ILLICIT LOVE. 
answer my purpo(cj apd then for the maid. iv^oney yvill do there, with a fe: w fine phrases. Now what think you of me, Lumley? won’t rny scheme take, think ye? I am certain It will; I Shall send thee an account of my success which I hope will be 
r)) " •’"t '•l'f*'*, " : 
fbon. Prithee join in the prayer, and thou wilt prove thyself the friend of 
P AWSON, 
For 

€C 
what’s life without passion. Sweet pastion of love 
P. S. don’t fail to let Willfon know whether any rumours have reached Mrs. dawfon’s ears; no doufit but scandal has done me that piece of service; but I know how to reconcile matters there. 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
LETTER XW. 
MISS GREVILLE TO MISS HOTHAM. 
J 'I 
C 
PEAR JULIA, 
H A T a painful alternative have ' you prefcribeii! I acknowledge 
r 
the justness of your admonitions \ but to your advice I cannot give my ' astent. I can never think any perfop deserving reprehension, until I am convinced of his meriting it. 
V 
I am positively sure Mr. Dawson is not the perfop you allude toit tnuft be some other of the same 
name. 




rit 
L i 
I? 
r ' 
r t 
I t 
st f 
J 
k 1 
V ' > ’■ 
ft 
'dl 
WA! 

If 
ft: W 
i 
r. 
I i 
j 
io ILLICIT LOVE. 
name. I have taxed him with being married, and likewise with the other crimes you lay to his charge; to all of which he has answered with that unequivocation and precision, as convinces me you have done it purposely to favour the addresses of Danby; and that your charges are not founded on any degree of truth. Thus much for your allegations. 
I mull: now inform you of some 
I 
matters refpetting your favourite Danby, who has been confineii to his room ill. Yesterday he was better, when he again, to my great mortification, made his appearance at our house; 
he 
2 
ILLICIT LOVE. 107 
he was received with rapture by all but me; and in spite of their and your favourable opinion of him, I cannot see him with any degree even of complaisance. ’tis Dawson, all conquering Dawson; he alone is mine. Danby, I find, is come to stay some days; on that account, I shall not venture to see Mr. Dawson at the usual place; but meet him at night in the garden behind our house. 
Certainly there can be no harm to meet a man that loves me with unexampled tenderness, when all his actions are of the rnoft delicate kind. 
I can 

to ILLICIT LOVE. 
I cannot, nay, I will not, admit that there can be the least impropriety in if. H there were not sufficient re^fons for his not visiting at my father’s, it would be different; and whilst his actions give the lie to the faults alleged against him, I cannot think you should condemn rne, for what all who love like me would applaud me for doing. 
Oh Julia! Julia! may I one time or other see you as much in love as I am at present, and I ann certain you would then cease to talk fo coolly on the subject. I shall one time or other catch you breathing a few short sighs 
for 
ILLICIT LOVE. 105 
for an absent lover, ahd willing for the morrieht that will bring him to your arms. Now was you a prude, you would probably blush at such an infihuitibn; but as you have ri'dt a spark of that about you, I think yoii will only say. Dear giddy girl, hd^ she does romante 1 
How, or in what manner, I shall bring about the affair to hriy father (I mean what I have been told respecting dahby’s mistress), I khdv/ not; something must be done, and that soon, or I shall run crazy. op pofitiori is the soul of woman. I must purposely oppose this match, because 9 it 
- -- ' S 
:? I 1 i t 
r 
h 







i. i 
V? 
m 
rh f 
no ILLICIT LOVE. 
\ 
it was first: proposed by my father I know not how it was, but I never could bear to hear danby’s name mentioned, even before I knew him, and whilst he was on his travels. It is not therefore altogether the attachment I have to Dawson that establishes my dislike to him. 
I acknowledge he possesses virtues j but a fig for virtues solely in a man What have they to do with complete happiness?? idle ftuff} sophistry all; give me for a husband such a personas Dawson, one who possesses virtues indeed, but widely different from what you mean by that appellation i 

.M 
■ L 
ha ' 
ill 
I?: ?: 
LOVE, iir 
lation; and in that situation I shall not envy the greatest lady upon earth. 
But I had forgot to tell you, we are to have a small concert at our house tonight, when, like Signior Giordini, I am to lead the band. This will fet the pious swain in raptures, as I intend to play part of handel’s Messiah. i’ll do everything to please him, except marrying him j but there avaunt the thought! Give me life, spirit, love, frolic, and gaiety, till I take a trip across the Styx, and enter the Elysian fields, where 1 shall have nothing then to wish for. 
We 
t : • 
i “' 

A 
M 
- VI 
I »’ 
!' 5? 
^ i ‘ 
i V 

LI 1; 
LI 
5 1!! 
K' i 
Hi 
IV 
n = 
V ' 
if : 


hi iltieit love: 
We are to have with us the Egertohs, and their olci prim auiit, a vestal of sixty, according to her own account, but I believe sorely against her will, and for that reason, raves severely against the whole male creation, arid won’t suffer one of them to tbiich even the herii of her 
f 
gasmeht, lest it Should discompose it. Oh heavens! I would not be inch a neglected mortal for the 
j 
whole empire of Indoftan* 
■ i •- »• 
Frederick will be in town about the latter end of next week, but this 
I 
I learned by the bye, as Charlotte and myself are upon indifferent terms. 
She 

r 
ILLICIT LOVE. 113 
She complains of my indifference to Danby, and I parry her strokes with great good-humour. She has not as yet discovered my attachment to Dawson, though I fancy Ihe fulpeds it, but don’t know how to come at the truth; be that as it may, let her find it out as he can: I am determined not to understand any hints file may drop concerning it. 
The Ladies are to stay with us some days, which will prevent my writing. If you think my love a fault, pity, but don’t condemn me; for love I miift. The encroaching urchin will not admit of my desertion. 
vol. I. I I Should 

I / ‘ 
f I 
114 ILLICIT LOVL. 
/' 
I Should be supremely happy could I bring you to plead the cause of Dawson with the same energy you do thatof Danby; but that indeed I can never expect; I must therefore rest 
I 
contented with assuring you, that let whoever will, be my lover, you shall ever be the friend next my heart; and may you always retain the same sentiments for me, is the sincere wish of Your 
Ethelinda Greville, 


V 

illicit LOVL. Ill 
LETTER XV 
DANEY^ ES(L; TO ORDWAY^ ESQ 
DEAR ORDWAY, 
omething tells mc that all is 
not right in the breast of nay ethe linda. I write now from her father’s^ where I have been ever finee I wrote to you last 
A few (days after I carne here I took an opportunity of speaking to her alone respecting our conversation when I was last here and lamented 1 had not an opportunity to come to an I 2 ecclair' 
0 
i i 


■f! 
Ti j \ 
» i 
« I! 
n i 
j ■ i 
ii ILLICIT lovei 
ecdairciltement with her before. I begged her, in the most delicate terms, to acquaint me of the particulars of her accusation against me, and who had been her informant. She coolly answered“ “the “person was, mattered notj she Should orily inforai me, that a “friend had told her I kept a girl, “and had done fo for a' considerable time; that with such a stigma she could never think of being my “wise, as she should rather make choice of a ^rofejfed libertine than “marry a man who could make use of any deception to gain the heart 5‘ he wished for.” She was about to 
withdraw. 
ILLICIT LOVE. 117 
withdraw, as She had done before, but I earnestly entreated her to stay, and listen for a moment to what I might say in justification of myself. With visible reluctance stie sat down, and two or three times a sigh escaped her, which She endeavoured to suppress; I conjured her to tell me the name of the person who was the author of the foul calumny; but She persisted in her refusal, and said. She 
would be candid enough to confess 
She ever could be mine, I then desired her to name her reasons, as I was positive they must be something more than the cause alleged. She answered me. That her realbns were 
I 3 ^ 
I 
iig ILLICIT LOVE. 
to herfelfj and desired I would rest contented with what Ihe had already said. I aflced her. Whether I jfhould inform Mr. and Mrs, Greville of her reasons for declining the offer of my hand? She said, I was at liberty to make what use I thought proper of her refusal, and begged I would not trouble her again with any discourse upon the subject. She then withdrew, leaving me in a state better felt than described 
■ what can her aversion possibly spring?? cannot be from dam fon, as he, I find, has left the country for sometime, and when here. 
was 

ILLICIT LOVE. 119 
$ 
was never leen but once in the company of Miss Greville. Had he continued here, I stiould have been led to imagine he had found means to get an interest in her heart. I knov/ him capable of the basest action; but he is absent 5 and her sister Charlotte 
also astures me, that She was never 
\ 
under the least engagement to any gentleman before She knew me. Whence then can this distike to me originate? 
I thought I stiould be under the painful necestity of taking leave of the family immediately; but on my acquainting her father and mother 
I 4 
b fl 

1 y 
120 ILLICIT LOVE. 
with my fituatlon, they insisted on my stay arsti of knowing what Ethe' linda had said, which could occaliori in me fo Sudden a refolye. I could rather have wished not to have informed • them of what had pasted between us, but a thought struck me, that probably She might think I feared a discovery of what I might choose to keep a secret 3 and as I was conscious the whole was an absolute falsehood, I conceived it better to acquaint the old people with it, to give them every opportunity to convince my 
I 
Ethelinda that she had been greatly inifinformed and imposed upon 5 and the report railed by some person who 
envied 
I 
V 

ILLICIT LOVE., 21 
envied my happiness, and who meant to be, or already was, my rival. 
With this thought I resolved to see Mr. and Mrs, Greville. They came to me in the parlour; I expressed a desire to thank them for the very kind partiality they had hitherto entertained for me, but that I was under the painful necessity of resigning their proffered alliance, to one who might be more agreeable to the inclinations of their daughter than I seemed to be at present. The old gentleman starting, exclaimed, What! what! Mr. Danby resign;; daughter! why? what reason 
have 



f 
7* 
[r 
s22 ILLICIT LOVE. 
have you to do that Reasons best known to Miss Greville/’ I replied. — Reasons best known to Miss Greville, do you say? — I answered in the affirmative; and he immediately requested an explanation. I then related to him what had pasted between me and ethe iinda; adding, that as Miss Greville appeared to' be fo extremely av.drfe to an union with me, I thought it most prudent to withdraw my pre tenstons; for I would never wish to posfefs the hand of any lady upon earth who would not, i at the same time, give me the full possession of her heart. Time, I fiid, might 
convince. 
\ 
ILLICIT LOVE. 123 
\ 
convince Miss Greville of the falsity of the report raised to my prejudice; and until jhe was Jo I Should not choose to continue my addrestes. In the mean time, would leave both 
them and Miss Greville to make 
( 
what inquiries they thorgnc proper into the affair. 
The old gentleman listened with 
I 
great attention, until I was about to take my leave, when he exclaimed aloud, Mr. Danby, you are too generous! too' noble! Ethelinda does not deserve you! the whole that She has been told to your pre judice, I know to be a lie, a 9 d -- -- dr 


f24 ILLICIT LOVE. 
fc cj -- d lie! and if fly does not 
let me know the author of the scandal, I will immediately disown her as my daughter. She must, and Shall be yours, let who will dare to have any pretensions to her! You Shall not leave us thus; I therefore inftft'on your staying. Pray order your horses to be put up again, for go you Shall noti answered the good old man, that if it was his earnest desire, I certainly would stay j but, at the same time, mull requeil he would not make use of his authority over Miss Grevilie, or attempt to force her to do anything rejpedling myfelfj 
coptrary 
IC 
CC 
1 
ILLICIT LOVE. 125 
contrary to her own inclination; alturing him it would give me more pleasure to see her happy with a person she might prefer to me, than to behold her my wife by the commands of her ■parents, merely out of regard to me. I therefore begged they would not use any compulsive measures to enforce obedience, as I Should esteem Miss greville’s frtend jhip beyond any other woman’s love. — I stiall not use any authority, said her father j but am determined to come at the bottom of her strange behaviour. If she can be blind to your merit, Mr. Danby, stie is unworthy the name of my child. I must entreat 



h.: - 
¥■ 
I 
; f 

126 ILLICIT LOVE. 
treat you to stay here, until I arn convinced of the author of this infamous report; for by G — he Shall not escape my vengeance, let him be who he will. Sit down, Mr. Danby, I will ring for Ethelinda. The bell was no sooner rung than the lovely girl appeared. 
Well, Miss, ’’ said her father, you have dared, I understand, in defiance of my authority, to refuse the hand of Mr. Danby. "'Pray, what are your reasons?? great ones, I suppose. Come, Miss, I insist on knowing the truths speak immediately, orb G — d ru make you— — ’’ 
, 

CC 
ILLICIT LOVE. 127 
Seeing her frightened, I ventured to interpose, and told Mr. Greville, I thought him too harsh, desiring him to moderate his pafiion, as I was pretty certain Miss Greville was not in fault. I entreated her to dry her tears, and hoped She would never more be diftrested on my account. 
Her father however, insisted on knowing who it was that had in 
i 
formed her of my keeping a mistress— — hesitated— — began again in the same passionate manner to demand the truthj the whole truth, cat length, after much reluctance, she owned it was the gentleman that danced 
with 
‘ 1 

S i 
i '■ ll 
ILLICIT LOVB. 
with her at York ajfemhly lately, who had afllired her, he knew Mr. Danby well, and had only hinted it to her as a circumstange She might pofilbly know before. — I then askeii Mils Grevilie, whether his name was not Pawjon? She answered in the affirmative. 
This was what I suspected I told her father I would verytooh convince him what reasons Mr. Dawson had to asperse my character, if they Should be alone in the evening; as I had wrote to a friend to make some inquiries respecting him, to which I had not yet received any answer, but 
expected 
i 1 r 
r 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
129 
C 
€C 
expected to have one in a few hours., 
'' Well, Miss” ” Mr. Greville, I suppose your delicacy will not permit you to receive the addresses“ “a gentleman, whom every one “knows to be an amiable, worthy gentleman, because a, coxcomb, a puppy, a rascal of a fellow, whom nobody knows, has told you that he keeps a mistress. Very pretty reasoning truly! you deserve to have a worthy man for a husband, to be sure!! suppose you have dared to correspond with the “scoundrel, have you not?” — She vol. I. K an 
CC 
SC 
C 
€C 
fc 
CC 
CC 

ir 
‘I 
i if 
11' 

f 
H ll 

\ I 
99 
Cf 
C 
CC 
€C 
130 ILLICIT LOVE. 
answered No indeed. She had not And I insist upon it, Ethelinda, continued Mr. Greville, that you never do. You are destined by me to be the wife of Mr. Danby, and you will, in that cafe, be the envy of your acquaintance, and the pride and honour of your family i but if you act in opposttion to mine and your mother’s wishesj rest astured that misery and want will attend you, and be your 'portion, As soon, therefore, as Mr. Danby has been generous enough to convince you of the infamy of Daw son’s character I expect you to consent to be Mr. danby’s wife. 
I insist 
ff 
€C 
CC 
CC 
CC 
m 
ILLICIT LOVE. 131 
I insist on your begging his par don immediately/’ — This I would however, by no means admit of; but desired that he would give me leave to see Miss Greville to her apartment, which was complied with, and She withdrew 5 but spoke not a word to me, when I exprelted my regret at having occasioned her fo much distress; sullenly dropping a curtsy only as we parted. 
I took a turn or two in the garden to recover my Spirits a little, but found it ineffectual. How this matter will terminate. Heaven only knows! I should be happy could I 
K 2 possess 


132 ILLICIT LOVE. 
possess her hand by her own consent j by any other means I can never even wish her to be mine; as matches that are not founded on a reciprocal love cannot, in my opinion, be by any means happy. I shall wait with impatience for a letter from you, which, I trust, will terminate a fulpenfe that is at present very irksome. Could I find out for a certainty, where that wretch Dawson at present resides, I would endeavour to prevent his doing any further mischief to me. However, as it is, I mull rest contented. I am called upon by Mr. Greville to see some improvements he has made near his house j I lliall close this at my return. 
The 



ILLICIT LOVE. 
*33 
The first thing I saw on my en 
\ 
into the falloon at my return, was your letter brought by William, for which accept my sincere thanks j it came very luckily for me, as I had an opportunity, a few hours after, to convince Miss Greville how much Ihe had been imposed upon. You are certain, I find, of his being married. This I imparted to Mr. and Mrs. Greville, and they seemed happy to hear of it j for I believe, from some hints, they are apprehensive the rascal had endeavoured to correspond with Ethelinda. She has hitherto been their favourite child, and her future happiness in life ap' 
'
J 

134 ILLICIT LOVE., 
pears to be the grand object of their wishes. Something, although 1 know not what, tells me, that I am not destined to be the person who is to make her fo; for the evening when we were together, and Mr. Greville had desired me to relate what I knew of Dawson, I observed her countenance change repeatedly; and when I came to produce your letter, wherein you write who he is married to, fly burst into tears, and was near fainting. Greatly alarmed, I 
run and caught her in my arms; but 
\ 
she desired Ihe might be permitted to retire, as she was perfectly convinced of the injury done'me; said, 
she 
I. 
- 


ILLICIT LOVE. 135 
jfhe wistied She had never Seen daw fon, as She now believed him to be a great villain: She could say no more; tears stopped her. I felt exceedingly for her distresied, agitated mind, and hope, although I may never have the happiness of being her husband, that stie is saved from destruction, which certainly would have been the cafe, had not Providence designed me as the instrument to prevent it. Had I known, when I pulled him by the nose at Nando's, that he was married, nothing, I am certain, would have protected him from my severe vengeance; but I only heard that he had asperfed my 
coufm’a 
I have not seen her llnce she retired to her room. Heaven grant Ihe may be convinced of the impropriety of forming an intimacy with such an abandoned character, is the ardent wish of 
Your sincere friend, 
if 
Danby, 
END or THE FIRST VOLUME. 
LI of Pa. Library 
AL ^ 


'ii 
. I 
/ 
Ak 
4 
I 
■ s 
■ ri 
•7 i 
irish 
i/m 
FAX. V 
'■ f; ■ - 'f 
L V i 
i., It 
L v/ tai 
- 
< 
AJU 
* / r 
/ 
A ‘ r 
«* ■C‘ 
T ■ -' ■ ' ■ r .: ■ / V 
.■ t 
■:, 'iit ■■ A 
s'ctc f 
.e, -- ' '■ 

■■'A' “"Ai 












^•2 
THE 
GODFREY F. SINGER MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY 
MR. AND MRS. JACOB SINGER 
. '.: r. 
r s 




-- -- -- -- ... r 
• 

■ .vvc^yv ■ 
; CV''C ■' AA‘" a. 1 
"■■IS 1 
'
ni ■ - ■■■': '. C '; ^ •« .1 
;.; C 
tl ' t V ' ' -. ' ■ ' V ■■; ■■: '; ?': 
■ ■! " ■:;, ■■'■.' ' ’; ■ ■'''i j', ' ■ '1 '■; i.. ’ V rid 
t 'VT?)' |> 
J 

• ia • 

ILLICIT LOVE: 
NOVEL. 
By Mrs. MORRIS, 
Author of the Rival Brothers, a Novel; Poems, 
Trust not a man 5 they are by nature false, 
Fickle, Subtle, deceitful, and inconstant; 
“If a man talks of love, with caution trust him; But if he Swears, he’ll certainly deceive.” 
Otway. 
IN TWO VOLUMES. VOL. IL 
LONDON: 
Printed for the Author 5 And sold by H. D. Symonds, N 20, Paternoster-row j 
and W. Beilby, 6, Pall mall. M DCC XCI 
1 





vt T 
U. ^ V o 
r ', zrihcrr S ■* - ^ ■ '■ * O Tft V ....'i -&,. 
.N.. - a:, - L L ' a ' .i \i. Si ■., ca ■■; - j. : A? th / 
■": it \.ZMAA ■' i 
"4 

Cs ’^T ■■-■' ■- vi: X,... ■- LA rsd;; f sril«. 

tehsil.:;., : rj ..'..iij/n 
ft, LI vi j ‘.' -■ -■(. i;; '$• --. ' 
rd '■ 

a : ■ d ■: '■ -* avft., 

aitfer ' ■ s i*’.'' L’; -'-.; ': ' ' - 
-- L .D ^ 4- >■:. 
f: .Ck ln, o a 
■£: ' 
; ccnlcua |.: L; b 
^ -: ai' ■' V VI, C'' '' - UC 
a v^v^lia / "• 
: ?y: imi tf 
U. of Pa 
Library 


ILLICIT LOVE. 


ill 
the same terms I trust to have the lovely Ethelinda, and a fig for philosophy religion, morality, and all the €t ct^teras of priestcraft nonsense. But now to the purpose. 
I have met the dear girl several times since I last wrote to thee, in a romantic, love inviting bower, at the end of her father’s garden, near the fields. It is an enchanting Spot, built on the top of a declivity, at the bottom of which is a fishpond. The bower, or rather room is elegantly fitted up, either for pleafiire or repose; ’tis there the dear girl tells me. She is often obliged to entertain her father 
and 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
and mother, in company with Danby, on the guittar. Envied mortal at present! but which of us will soon be the moult foi shall leave thee to determine, when I tell thee, I have presumed (as my fair one calls it) to take liberties which modesty forbids j these, after a little pouting at first, have always been forgiven. The idea of losing me will feal my pardon in an instant. She has orocured'. a 
i. 
key to the garden gate which leads into the fields, and by the disguise which I have assumed since I have been in the same village, I am under no apprehension of a discovery. I am certain I could have accomplished B 2 my 

"tri 

f. f ■! 
[ ■ i 
I r 
d I 
d r 
I! T! 
i. 1 
1 
'S' > II 
-' L k' 
AK' 
k 1 


4 
ILLICIT LOVE, 
niy purpose last night, had I not had a prior engagement on my hands with one of the little rustics in the village, who has been at my dilpofal this week paid. You see i’m not idle, having work sufficient on my hands. At present I shall not close this, till I can inform thee that I am the happy Dawson. tomorrow night i’ll do as Polydore fays: 
Wait on and watch her locse unguarded hours; 
Then, when her roving thoughts have been abroad. 
And brought in wanton wishes to her hearty 
I’ th’ very minute when her virtue nods. 
i’ll rush upon her in a storm of love. 
Beat down her guard of honour all before her. 
Surfeit 

Wf ■ 

■5if=h -- T!!?__ 
ILLICIT LOVE. 5 
Surfeit on joys till e’en desire grows sick; Then by long absence liberty regain. 
And quite forget the pleasure and the pain.” 
Excellent speech!! best: that ever was penned, by Jupiter! fo now adieu, till the above is realised. 
Half past three in the morning. 
■ Novv, Lumlev, w.dpfe triimaph can equal mine? I have conquered; stis enough. Now, Danby, thou art welcome to take her for thy spouse, or anything elfe thou stiak chuse to make her. I fnould now be content to resign her, though 1 cannot say but I Should much rather choose to continue the intimacy a little longer, 
B 3 till 


Id 
6 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
I 
: i ^ i 
L : i 
i CI 
till I was assured (if liie should be married) that a certain event would convince the fond doting husband, that some other fortunate fellow had (hared his bed, or pofteffed it before him I mean, and been a copartner in his wife’s charms. 
But I must tell thee in what manner I succeeded. The appointment was made at half past ten, as usual, it being their general time of going to bed; I hastened to the garden gate, from thence to the bower, where, as Lothario says, 
I found the fond believing lovesick maid, 
Loose, unattired, warm, tender, full of wishes; 
“Fierceness 




I catch’d the glorious golden opportunity. 
And with prevailing youthful ardour pressed her. 
Till, with short sighs and murmuring re luctance. 
The yielding fair one gave me perfect happiness.” 
I stiall continue here till there stiall be a discovery, which I hope will be soon, left Mrs. Dawson ftiould take it into her head to come down, in order to see the house. I Shall not undeceive my lovesick damsel, to tell her that I am married, till I am certain of what I hiftted to thee B 4 above; 
‘h./ >! 
s^seescwrr 
8 ILLICIT LOVL. 
above; • when I am sure of it, I Shall 
throw off disguise and let her know that 1 am irrevocably tied to another; that it is impofiibie for me to be her husband; and as that is the" cafc;, advise her by all means to give her hand to Danby. Upon my soul, 
I think I ought to be a member of the Privy-council, for having such an excellent head at contrivances!. I am a perfect; Machiavel! am I not, think you? I have founded her maid; Die ccnfents to go off with me, as soon as her mistress commences Mrs. Danby. I intend to take her to town, when She will fait my purpose devilisti well for a week or two s and then fly 
may 
L I 



ILLICIT LOVE. 9 
may dispose of herself to the bell: bidder. Variety, pleasing variety, what charms are thine! could I but •wheedle my old lady to give up a few hundreds a year more of her income, I would have a perfect Eastern seraglio, and, like the Grand Seignior, change as often as a new one could be procured. I am interrupted. A note from Ethelinda! O the whims of women! what’s the matter now? This is it j read Lumley. My scheme works rarely. 
'“My dear adored Dawson, 
‘‘ How, or in what manner shall I express my grief! My father 
“has 


$4 
1 i 



10 ILLICIT LOVE. 
ec 
C€ 
CC 
CC 
€C 
€t 
C 
€€ 
CC 
CC 
CC 
CC 
CC 
CC 
CC 
CC 
€C 
has this moment left me, and that in such a passion, as I never saw him in before. He has inftfted on my informing him who was the person that told me such lies of Mr. Danby. I hesitated. He stormed j and with threats that Ihudders me to think of, obliged me to declare the truth; it was in the presence of Danby. He interfered, ’tis true, to calm my father’s anger, ' and only coolly said, he fufpeited as much, which indeed had induced him to write to a friend in town, to make inquiries after you \ an answer to which he had not as yet received, 
I 
“Turning 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
ir 
€€ 
CC 
CC 
CC 
CC 
CC 
CC 
CC 
CC 
CC 
CC 
CC 
CC 
CC 
CC 
CC 
c 
Turning to my father, he said— — Sir, pardon Mils Greville, Ihe knows not Mr. dawfon’s private character, or what reasons he had to asperse mine; but I hope to have the pleasure (he added) of convincing both yourself and Miss Greville, that what (he has been told is altogether falje and malicious— — turning to me, begged my pardon for the distress he had occasioned, and hoped never more, on his account, I should have occasion to drop a tear. — My father then alked me. Whether I had dared to correspond with you? ifj had, he would forever 
disown 
V 
i 




iz 
ILLICIT LOVE. 

disown me. — 'I told him I had notj 
but at the same instant wished % 
“to plead your cause— — hear my sitter on the stairs 5 am “therefore prevented from saying“ “only to desire you not to sail “being in the arbour as usual. Your 
“Ethelinda.” 
MISS greville in Continuation., 
“Charlotte only came to fetch f her calafti •, they are all gone out in the coach, therefore I embrace “the moments of their absence to “resume my pen. I was going to acquaint you something refpefling 
“my 
LI 

ILLICIT LOVE. 
13 
my father’s difcourle, but am in terrupted again; Charlotte is re turned to fetch me; my father will have it, the air will be/of service to “me. i^et me entreat you to come as early as you possibly can. After the sacrifice I have made, I am certain you can deny me nothing. “I send Key tonne for some ribbon, “that Ihe may have an opportunity, “unfufpedtedly, to deliver you this. 
“Yours eternally, 
"Ethelinda Greville.” 
i!! 


Poor, fond, deluded maid! fo you really think I can deny you nothing! What think you of that, Lumley? 
10 And 
■P. 



14 ILLICIT LOVE. 
And poor Danby, in order to convince his fair one Tis me instead of him/elf that loves the girls, is obliged to have recourse to inquiries, to satisfy his intended deary what a dog I am! Be it fo ^ I care not 3 I am the visofy and mind not how soon my being a Benedidt is known to all of them. I Shall meet her again 
tonight, and will continue to do fo, until my being in the village Shall be discovered. I am properly prepared for ftghsy tearsy reproachesy and fo forth i to all of which I Shall plead Love. There is a devilish deal in that monosyllable, according to my ovv.d ideas, and I Shall endeavour to 
make 
mm 
mm 
ILLICIT LOVE., 5 
make every girl 1 meet with believe fo too. Tom is going off with the letter to Mrs. Dawson; therefore I must abruptly take my leave. 
Thine, 
ft 
Dawson. 

lypm ■ I_UI* 

i6 ILLICIT LOVE. 
I II 
I f 
, LETTER XVII 
FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME. DEAR FRED, 
H Heavens! as the girls say, what a night I have had 1 Swooning, crying, .reproaching, 'and the devil knows what; but however his over; fo there’s an end to it. 

I went agreeable to the assignation, but did not find my lass, as usual, in the garden; I Sauntered about near two hours, and was about to return to my cottage, when I Saw, at a 
distance, 
ILLICIT LOVE 
distance, a glimmering light, and presently after my dear girl made her appearance 3 but instead of flying to me, as usual, with all the ecstacies of love, on my going to embrace her, ■she riidely pushed me from her, and said, She was come to insist on knowing the truth of something that She should ask me.’’ — I desired her to name it. Her question was, — Are you, or are you not, married Why that question, 
my dear girl said I: have not I already Satisfied you on that subject?” ?” answered— — Mr. Dawson, you have not; I will have no evasions; answer me explicitly.” — vol. II C First 
tc 

^4; 
'jmlt 'fic -- 


i8 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
C 
CC 
First tell me, Miss Greville, what your reasons are for astdng that question; and then I will submit to be catechised in what manner you think proper.” — Why then. Sir, ” said stie, if you must know, Mr. Danby has received a letter from a friend in town, Xince I sent to you this morning, which contains a long account of your marriage with a widow lady, whose former husband was a Creole; now answer me, is this, or is knot, a truth?” Why then, my dear girl. Since you insist” ” anfv/ered, on my telling you, I must be candid, and acknow ledge the truth, that I am married.” 
— Married, 
€C 
€C 
CC 
XC 
€C 




A 

ILLICIT LOVE. 
19 
- — Married, did you say !” She exclaimed, and fainted away. I caught her in my arms, and kissed her lips again and again, to re animate her beauteous form; but it was fo long before I could accomplish it, that I began to be in a d -- d puzzle. At 
length, however, her heaving bosom once more manifested returning life, and She burst into tears, and exclaimed, — Oh Davffon! Dawson!! could you use me thus? Then you are married, and I am completely miserable! What, ah what will become of me! My father, will disown me s and you, in whom I have reposed the greatest confi c 2 dence. 
CC 
€C 
€C 


■ t J 


20 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
CC 
CC 
CC 
c 
CC 
CC 
CC 
CC 
CC 
CC 
CC 
CC 
dence, turn out to be, what I have fo often been told, a complete villain. You have it not in your power to make me the least reparation. I fondly believed, that by sacrificing my honour, I might have had it in my power, by that means, to prevail on my father to consent to your being my 
I 
husband; but I can never now be yours, or danby’s. What, ah what will become of me !” 
k 
V 
V 
Seeing her cry fo much, I cannot say but I was hurt. Conscience! Conscience!! wilt intrude sometimes!! I take elpecial care not 
to let it trouble me long. 
I held 
ILLICIT LOVE. 2x 
I held her in my arms, and endeavoured to quiet her apprehensions, by telling her, that She made the matter infinitely worse than it really 
was; for that as love, fmcere love, 
\ 
was the basis of my attachment to her. She could marry Danby, to prevent disagreeable consequences, and we could continue our intimacy as well afterwards as now. I had only to lament, that it was my great misfortune to be married to a woman whom I utterly despised before I had the extreme happiness of knowing my adored Miss Greville 5 and as matters now stood, fte must not condemn me, but Love irresistible 
C 3 Lovt! 
i! 
l i 
si 


11 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
A 
i, f. 
Love! and desired her to rest assured, that I Should ever be her most: faithful lover; for that I distiked my wife too much to bestow a moment’s' thought about Jucha being; that I had married her for pecuniary reasons, and my heart She never had posteffed^ nor ever would; but it Should be entirely at her difpo/al aloney notwithstanding She might be the wife of another. Our intimacy, I said, might be continued with greater security after She was married, than at present. I would therefore advise her, by all means, to comply with her father’s wishes, and, as soon as possible, be Danby's wife; that I would continue 
to 



ILLICIT LOVE. 23 
to meet her every night in the same manner, till fly went to town, when there would be opportunities enough for us to meet, even more convenient than at present. 
This, and a great deal more such insipid fluff, dried her tears, silenced her reproaches, and, once more, we were upon as good terms as ever. She has promised to follow my advice implicitly; fo that, if I continue in the country, Danhy will be as Cajar was before him, in every fenle of the word. 
Bravo! braviffimo 1 may all my amo, urs end like this! 
Prays thy friend C 4 Dawson. 



24. 
ILLICIT LOVE.. 
LETTER XVIIL 
MR. DANBY TO MR. ORDWAY. 
DEAR GRDWAY, 
MOST sincerely beg pardon for my neglcifl. Your letter has rous’d me from my lethargy, and made mg quite a new mortal (if I may fo deem my present pleasing situation). Had not my thoughts been entirely engrossed by the lovely Ethelinda, you Should have received intelligence of the happy change in my favour, without the trouble of requesting it i but, as Gay says. 

wh?n 


ILLICIT LOVE. 
25s 
When a lady is in the cafe. 
You know all other things give place.’’ 
But now, to explain what I hint at above, I must inform you, that ever since the receipt of your letter respecting daw/ouj which, as I told you, I communicated to Miss gre ville and her parents, I have been happily blessed with the smiles of my Ethelinda. — I believe I related to you the exclamation She made use of on hearing Dawson was married, and of her retiring to her room immediately astern when She had quitted us, the old gentleman seemed in ecstasy, as he was certain Ethelinda was now convinced of her error, ^ and would 
soon 

26 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
soon consent to be Mrs. Danby. — I doubted the remark then, and was too much depressed in spirits to continue in the room j but the next morning was agreeably surprised by a viable alteration in her behaviour to me. — I was at breakfast when she entered; I rose and presented her a chair. — She appeared pleased widi my attention in a manner I had never seen before; and on my presenting her with a cup of coffee, she smiled, and thanked me; and on Mr. gre ville’s saying“ “Ethe, what is your opinion now of Mr. Dawson; don’t you think he is a pretty sort of a fellow?” — She, smiling, answered. 

ILLICIT LOVE. 
27 
fvvered, I do indeed, papa 3” at the same time figh’d, and turning to me, said, If Mr. Danby can pardon my unjust opinion of him, he Shall have no occasion, in future, to re pent his partiality for me.'’ — • Well said, Ethe," anstvered Mr. Greville, now you are my daughter again; and when you 
V. I 
are Mrs. Danby, I Shall think myself blessed indeed; which I hope will not be long first, now you are convinced of his worth." — She bowed astent, which I took as a good omen, and it has proved fo; for ever since that happy morning She has been ail kindness; and last even 
C 
CC 
CC 
mg 

28 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
ing I got her to consent to be Mrs. Danby before we leave the country. Dear enchanting girl! with what rapture do I gaze upon her charms! Mr. Greville and family know not how to express the pleasure they feel in the idea of our approaching union. — Charlotte is to be the wife of Frederick at the same time. — So that you can form Tome little idea of the pleasure I at present enjoy, to repay me for the anxiety I have stif fered hitherto. — I Should be happy to have your company here, but as that is im.poftible, you must be content to receive intelligence in rather an uncouth manner, till I am blessed 
with 
II 
i 
If 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
29 
with the han(i of my (dear lovely maid, whose future happiness Shall be the whole study of my life. let me hear as often as postible how you are. — I feel for your confinement in a sensible degree, and frequently v/ish you here, to have it in my power to soften its rigour. — God bless you; may you recover soon, is the sincere prayer of your friend 
Danby. 
P. S. Dawson, I find, has left the country for sometime; neither him nor his wife have been seen at the house he purchased as yet ^ fearing, I suppose I stiould make disagreeable 
discoveries 
■_________________________________ • 


ILLICIT LOVE. 
discoveries respecting his character. We expect Miss Hotham here about the latter end of next week. — She is Shortly to be married to the Hon. Mr. Farnham, a very amiable, deserving young man; and Miss H. all that can be desired in vfoman, at least, according to my ideas; though Some allow her Sister Julia to excel her, but fly is rather, I think, too Serious, bordering on melancholy ^ but George Stretton is absolutely as much her captive as I am my adored greville’s; this I understand by Ethelinda, who corresponds with the charming girl again; Some misunderstanding took place between them concerning Dawson 
I 
6 
’im 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
3* 
fon; but as the impediment is now removed, the correspondence is 
again renewed. Adieu. I am called 
upon. 

-- LI t 
1 

A: 
ra: 
: 
32 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
LETTER XIX 
MISS GREVILLE TO MISS HOTHAM. 
> 
MY DEAREST JULIA, 
FTER fo long a silence, I ansi certain you will be happy to hear that I ann everything you can wish me. — In Short, I am loon to be the wife of your friend Danby. I am now heartily sorry our correspondence was ever interrupted on that score— — is now effectually forgot, and happiness is again restored to the breast of Ethelinda. Charlotte is to 
be united to Frederick at the same 
\ 
time j 


ILLICIT LOVE. 33 
time] to six which, depends on my ladyjhip. I believe it will not be long, as nny father seems fo anxious to see it completed j and I have my own private reasons for granting their request, which is partly that I may see Charlotte fliackled, for Ihe teases me to comply, but wants to put it off as to herself: this, however, I will not admit of; Ihe must become a wife at the same time that I do, or I shall part with too much to please any one. But I forgot to drank you for your very kind letter j - Charlotte gave it me yesterday. If you had not first broke the ice, I believe I Should hardly have ventured to write j but vol. II D you 




3+ 
ILLICIT LOVE, 
you are all goodness. I sincerely congratulate you on your lifter’s approaching marriage. I cannot help laughing to myself, to think what an awkward let we married ones lhali appear, this winter, in town. Oh Heavens! I expire even at the idea! no fluttering beaus, no flattery, no compliments paid to us, but by mr husbands. Horrid! horrid 1 absolutely horrid! Well, if it were not for one thing more than another, I think I Should scarcely consent, even now; but as matters standi hardly know how to revoke my kindness of consenting, as I have done, to their request— — told the creature I 
would 


-- -- '^ii ngm»^mt|, i I 
ILLICIT LOVE. 35 
would confider of it, and give him an answer, he looks upon it as an irrevocable promise, and plagues me to comply accordingly. — Charlotte will let you know the time, for I have not patience to write about it. Adieu my dear friend, and believe me Your 
Ethelinda Greville. 


t I 

i36 ILLICIT LOVE. 
LETTER XX 
MISS HOTHAM TO MISS GREVILLE, 
* DEAREST ettte, 
letter has given me more pleasure than I have experienced for some weeks past. That kind compliance with the wishes of your friends establishes you in mine and my fifter’s good opinion, and plainly shows the goodness of that heart we are all fo very desirous to see happy; and that, I am certain, will be the cafe, when united to the good Mr. Danby. Next Thursday, I find by Charlotte, 
IS 

1 
r 

ILLICIT LOVE; 37 
is the day fixed; I am sorry I cannot absolutely promise to be at your house as my mother is at present somewhat indisposed owing to a slight cold She caught at, Vauxhall, My After, you may depend upon it, will make one .Df the happy party, 1 have seen your jewels (I mean those Mr. D. means to present you with, ^ previous to the happy morning) 5 they absolutely surpass anything I ever saw, and plainly evince the: love of him; who means to make the present. Sister Bell is almost led to. envy you the possession of such a husband, and such jewels, though I really think Mr. Farnham will not be much be.. : 3 hind 

f ‘i’ 
: L 
38 ILLICIT LOVE. 
hind hand but envy, you know, my dear, is inherent in the bread of every female, efpecialjy where finery is in question this is my father’s Observation. Your sister seems pleased, in a great degree, to think on your approaching happiness she seems to forget her Own in the contemplation of yours. She is a dear worthy soul, and I sincerely hope, will be as happy with her amiable cousin as, I trust, you will be with Mr. Danby. I suppose you know the reason why my fifteris marriage is delayed; but left you foould not, I must inform you j it is something respecting the future 
disposal of my father’s estate in Kent 
/ 

I 

f * 
ILLICIT LOVE. 39 
but this, I hope, will soon be adjusted, for, though I do not mean to become a wife myself, yet I have a fmcere wish to lee all my acquaintance enter that state, when there is foch flattering profpedfs of future happiness, as at present seems to await you all. — But I have one request to make; as it will be the last whilst your name is Grevilie, i think you will grant it me under your hand .and foal, and then I shall conclude I have finally discharged my duty as a friend; it is this: that ify after your marriage, you Should chance to meet dawfcuy you will treat him with all the contempt sod 4 infamous 

irr 
f' 
t.. 
40 ILLICIT LOVE. 
infamous a wretch as he most richly merits. I have my private reasons for making this request, which, I think, you will the more rea(iily comply with, when I affure you, it is for the sake of your future peace of mini that I aste it. When, once a woman becomes a wife, every other i(iea ought to be absorbed in that alone. According to my notions of rectitude not even common civility ought to be fnewn, after marriage, to' those who, before, had any pretenstons to our favour; but such as Dawfoa ought, in a fuperlatiye degree, to be cautiousty stiunned. It was happy for' you that his villainy was discovered 

ILLICIT LOVE. 4^ 
covered in time, or, in all probability, your peace of mind might have been wretched for ever: this circumstance alone Shows us how cautious we ought to be in forming acquaintance with those we are not perfectly assured deserve to be ranked in the: class of intimates; but may your future conduct, my dearest Ethelinda, give the lie to any afperston the infamous wretch may think proper to propagate (as he did by Miss Stratton), is the sincere prayer of Your 
t 
!• 
Julia Hotham; 
1: 1 
sit 
ii 

H 
L 
V 
^ i .♦ [ 
'• 1! i 
] if 
If 
II 

1 




'ri I a 1 
w:! 

1 i i S 
I,.! 
; I 
i 1 
4i ILLICIT LOVE. 
i 1 
LETTER XXL 
BAWSON TO 
tumley, ES 
DEAR FRED. 
rjphy letter aftoniflies me! is it possible that Willfon has told my wife of the intrigue with elhe linda? It cannot be j I will not believe it. — But whether he has or has not, as thou valuefl: my friendoiip, the moment you receive this, go to my house, and prevail on Mrs. Dawson not to leave town j for rest assured, I shall be there by Sunday evening. Tell her, I am on my way 
to 


ILLICIT LOVE. 43 
to town, but mean to stop at eve red’s, in Lancashire, for one or two nights. In short, tell her anything to prevent her coming here j and I know how to reconcile matters when I am once at home. — Damn it, if I could but prevail on her to add a little more to that Ihe has already granted, fo as to make me independent of her, i’d care not what ftie knew of my intrigues; but as matters at present (land, I am obliged, to worship the devil for fear, but most curfedly againll; my inclination. But I must inform thee how affairs are here: — In the first; place, danby’s lovely angel becomes his property 
tomorrow 
i j ( 
- t 
rii. 
L 1, / 

D 
° I 
! ' Hi ’ f si 
I 1: 
\! h 
* n. 
n S 
LI 
44 ILLICIT LOVE. 
tomorrow morning; this haste is occasioned by the fair maid herfeif, who is now as impatient to become a wise as (he was two months ago averse to it. — See vdiat miracles can be worked, in a short time, by such a fellow as myself! I fancy Ihe would hardly have commenced wife fo soon, was I not pretty sure Ihe is in a certain secret condition; and another argument, equally as cogent, induced me to press its completion; which is; I begin to be curfedly tired of garden fcenes with the selfsame person, arid wanted, of all things, to be flatting Lome other game; and none now remains but her maid, as I have roused 
all 
1 
ILLICIT LOVE. 45 
iall there was to be had, without a discovery, in the neighbourhood. i^his same girl as 1 told thee in a former letter, agreeable to appointment, is to Set off with me tomorrow evening, .during the entertainment made for her mistress, who I am to meet this evening, as usual, in the arbour s therefore, as this will reach thee just one * day before me, I * must: desire thee to let thy fellow get a lodging Some way near mary ie bone, and let him be at the sv/an, Hoiborh^ ridge, to receive her when the coach comes in, as I ftiall quit it a few miles out of town, and take another to go Lome in. She is a nice titbit ^ 
as 
I * 
i f 
; i 1 
Ij : ^ 
V 


>! 
46 ILLICIT L O y E. 
as (he has vanity enough to believe I am in love with her, I think I can be 
constant to her for about a month; 
) 
but I fancy I stretch too long, for, upon recollection, a month is a devilish long while to be confined to one girl. However, I mufl; continue to make it possible, unless a new one can be procured. Not a soul suspects my being here; Danby has made inquiries repeatedly, but my disguise effectually bars suspicion; what can the fellow mean by it? Does he fuf pecl his deary, I wonder? whether fo or not, he will have more reason at a future period, as he may depend upon it I (hall not be idle in propagating 
mv 

ILLICIT LOVE. 47, 
iny triumph when I come to town, of which her maid will be a striking proof. “This will be a glorious revenge } and I, as Chamont says. 
More glory in’t. 
Than if posteffed of all that fortune Ever threw on fools. 
Methinks I see thee now exclaimingjv Oh Dawson!!! what a dog thou art! how many girls hast thou already ruined! when will thy mad pranks be ended? Why, I will tell thee, not till the heat of this said confticution of mine is allayed, and the dear bewitching things ftiall say,. “Dawson, thou canst no longer please F but that will not happen 16 there. 
C 
n 
p u 
LI 
; 1 
! ■ - 
i; : L 
i 
; i 

!! ' 
ILLICIT LOVE 
these fifty years, according to ' my own reckoning. How long in thine, I leave thee to determine; but it is 
almost time to close this, as the old 
/ 
man who takes my letters to the post is at present waiting, and I am to be in the garden rather early this evening, to plan matters for our future meetings in town, if I can ever be prevailed on to keep them; but that is at present a mute point: I have had posteflion enough already, even in a woman’s eonfcience; but however, I will pro mi/ey although I may never perform. There is several visitors at old gre ville’s already, on account of the double marriage; but I had forgot. — /- to 
ILLICIT LOVE. 49 
; to tell thee that ethelinda’s filler is; to give her hand at .the same time to, a cousin of hers, a finical puppy of a (fellow that I never saw but once, and ithat was when I first beheld my fair Ethelinda; joyful evening! that ever paved the way to the mofl ample revenge ever bellowed on roving mor -- ital! ’tis now very near the time for meto be off— — I mull dole .this! or I .shall be too late. — Do as IHAVE above desired thee, and thou wilt prove thyself the friend of 
Dawson. 
P. S. If Willfon is in town, en •deavour to secure him till I come; 
vol. II E and 
& L 
rj 
• ' - -■ - “-? ■'.>'■ *: ■ r rr: : .#' I f 
% 
50 ILLICIT LOVE. 
and if he has really said what you informed me, I will oblige him to recant the whole before Mrs. Dawson, and declare it is a lie, or I will lodge him in prison directly. 
ILLICIT LOVE. sr 
LETTER XXII 
\ 
MR. DANBY TO MR. ORDWAY. 
istraction! horror! what shall I say to my friend! or how relate the horrid tale I must now unfold! ye blelfed attendant Ipirits, that look with compassionate eyes on the diftrelfes of blind, deluded mortals, assist me to collect my scattered senses, sufficient to pour the anguish of my soul into the bosom of that friend w’ho has ever sympathised in all my cares, and partook of all my sorrows! Look down, oh merciful God! and 
E 2 indulge 
^ it * 

52 
ILLICIT LOVE. 

ii 
indulge me with an eye of pity j and alm, calm my distracted soul, and enable me to remember I am a man. I must throw down the pen, for I cannot proceed. — Tears stop me; it is too much to recoiled):. Pardon my weakness, my dear friend. — I am now a little more myself; and will go on to impart to you what must for ever be reposed within your own bread. 

I 

II t 
‘ t 
Yesterday morning, which T informed you was to bless me, as I vainly thought, with the hand of my lovely Ethelinda, and to raise me to the ftimmit of all my earthly wishes' 
'


ILLICIT LOVE. 
s3 
beheld her a lifeless corpse!! God! I cannot proceed; — pity, pity me, oh my friend! — I again resume my pen, and will relate the story as minute and connected as I can. 
il 
The evening preceding yesterday we had Ipent in the company of a few friends, who had been invited to partake of a friendly supper (as Mr. greville thought) on the double happy occasion of the expected nuptials. About ten, Miss Greville complained of a slight headache; I advised her to retire to bed, and endeavour to sleep, as the most efficacious remedy;, flic appeared happy at my proposal.. 
3 and 
«? 

ILLICIT LOVE. 
and retired accordingly, saying to me, as I quitted her in the veftibulcj that " I might spare her now a little “earlier than usual, as I may pro very soon have too much “of her company.” — My answer was, that for a certainty I never “should think fo.” — She tripped up the stairs, and smiling said“ ““go, you are a flatterer.” — These were the last dear words I ever heard her lovely lips pronounce; the bewitching smile with which it was Ipoke, is still before my eyes. Gh woman! woman!! art thou! 
When Mrs. Greville went to her own apartment, between eleven and 
twelve. 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
55 

twelve. She ordered some fack whey to be brought her, of which She drank, and then ordered her maid to carry it to Ethelinda, and destre her to drink, as She seemed Slightly indisposed. The Servant obeyed the orders y but on coming to Miss grc ville’s room. She discovered miss G. was not in bed, nor had been there all the night; her night clothes were on the chair, and the bed the Same as in the evening; She was of course Surprised at this, and went down to her fellow servant (miss greville’s maid) to inquire for her mistress, and was answered, She must certainly be ' in bed, and had been there for two 
E 4 hours; 
U 
i i 

I i 
: i! 
56 ILLICIT LOVE. 
hours; the other asserted the contrary in positive terms; whilst Miss .greville’s maid as sharply cohtefted that (he had made a mistake, and gone into Miss charlotte’s room in -- Head of her miftrefs’s. 
I 1 
luis f t! 
Errs 
i 
E M 1 I 
Whilst they were contending for the truth, Mrs. Greville rung the' bell for her maid; the servant went immediately to her mistress, and Miss greville’s, in a great hurry, hastened to the garden. Mrs. G. chided her maid for staying, which induced the woman to tell her reasons; Mrs. Greville was astonished, got out of bed direduy, and went to - her 

ilbicrt LOVE. 57 
her daughter's apartment to be convinced, which she too soon was, of the truth. — Miss greville’s maid was immediately called for, but lhe could not be found any more than her miftrefsj the alarm was then given by Mrs. greville’s running down into the dining — room. and exclaiming,. Lord, Mr. Grevilie! Mh greville! Ethelinda is lost! .ftie cannot be found anywhere 1 come' and search for her! come and search" for her! — I vas thunder ftruek; I flung down the glass I had in my’ hand, and darted across the room like lightning (not knowing what I 
did), and followed Mr. grevilie towards 
LI L 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
wariis the garden, he exclaiming all the way. damn’d villain! damn’d villain! he has stole my daughter I we’lt pursue him! we’ll pursue him! 
IA 
We entered the garden; I ran I know not whither the company exclaiming, - Miss Greville! and Mr. Greville calling. My dear Ethelinda! but no answer could we receive : at last I perceived a faint light at the bottom of the garden, glimmering through the Shrubs. I reached the spot before any person elfe,, and found it to be a candle in miss grevilie’s chamber - candlestick; it was placed on the top of a stope, ' 
which 
'i 

^ 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
59 
which led to a fifli pond, opposite a large arbour j I catched it up, and, in an instant, entered the fummer houfe, but no pa fon was there j on the table lay a gentleman’s hat, and a gold headed cane, with a cypher engraved on it, I.D.D. — By this time, Mr. Greville and the rest were come up to me, — on my (hewing it to them, no aftonilhment could equal what appeared on the countenance of every one. I could scarce believe the reality of my own existence— — concluded it belonged to Dawson, and that he was in the garden, or not far from it. 
We 
11 SI 1 
i i 
M 
|!! 
1; [ 111 
ik 
i t 
6o 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
We all hastened to the gardens gate which led to the fields, in order to pursue them, thinking the was eloped with him j but, on coming toi the gate, we found it locked on the inside, and the key in it; we then searched every place that we hoped would lead to difeover them; but Gur search was in vain for near an hour; and we were about to return to the house, to give orders for the horses and carriages to be got ready directly,, fet off in search of them : — when; oh ye eternal powers !’ ipare the recollection of my horrors!‘ at that moment, oh God! the' thoughts of it harrows up my soul! 
on 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
on looking with a dlftrafted look to that end of the pond where I had first seen the candle, there I thought 1 saw something white near the end of the water. — - I darted towards the place, and found it to be muslin fastened to a slick, which had supported some peas that grew near the water: I raised it up with my hand., and found it extended farther. I gave a loud scream, and had not frederick caught me, should have plunged headlong into the pond. — Before I could recolle6l myself sufficient to attempt to pull it out of the water, two gentlemen and Mr, Greville had dragged out the body of 
F, thelinda. 
I; 

ill 
IL' 


if 
V 
IL 
id 
jl 
i Jl 
11;. i 
i 
1 if 
VI 
1l 
it \ 

IS 

T i 
! 
Y 
► 
: A 

I 
I /. 

U, > 
62 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
Ethelinda, and the breathless beauty, lay extended at my feet, lifeless and inanimate as primitive dull. 
Mrs. Greville, on feeing the body of her child, was seized with con • vulfions, and carried to the house j as was likewise Charlotte j poor Mr. Greville not much otherwise;; surgeon was called in immediately; but all assistance came too late; and the body was carried into the house, to wait the coroner’s inquest, which sat yesterday afternoon. 
Nothing was seen in the house but horror and confusion j Miss Gre 
ville’s 
r 

ILLICIT LOVE. 
63 
yille’s maid was the only person that could throw a light on the dismal affair, but she could not be found. — Dawson, if it was him, escaped over the garden wall, as the tiles were broke where he made the descent from the wall, and his footsteps were traced to the Ipot. 
I must again lay down my pen. — In mercy pity me. — ’tis now near twelve o’clock. — I must lay down, and endeavour to take some rest. — Will conclude it tomorrow. 
Three times have I taken up the pen, to finifti the above and as often 
been 
L ’ 

r 1' < 

k r 
f 
t 
V 
i I 
h ' 
r h 
> a / 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
been obliged to lay it down again, What I have now to relate, you will .perhaps scarcely credit. — Surely, if; there is in hell, or elsewhere, a place of torment more exquisite than ano ither, it will be reserved .for the final lot of that execrable villain, Dawjon. 
Gracious God! and Father of mercies! pity me. — Why didst thou form .me with a heart susceptible of the finest feelings, yet permit me to experience the keenefi; anguish, and that in the person of her thou didst fo lovely make, and apparently with ■out blemish! couldst thou permit a heart to dwell therein, capable of fo -2 much 

ILLICIT LOVE. 65 
much deceit, as that which now wrongs me, and all those to whom “file was fo dear — But pardon my complaints, thou just and merciful God! and teach me in thy decrees to Jcnow, that whatever is, is right. 
I believe I left off where I informed you that the body of Mils G. was 
taken to the house— — remainder 
; 
of the night was Spent in Search of the Servant; the pond was dragged, as thinking stie might postibly have plunged into the pond after her mistress; but stie was nowhere to be found. The Search was therefore given over about five in the morning. vol. IT F I Spent 
A 

66 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
I Ipent the hours that passed from that period till four in the afternoon, in horrors not to be described— — poor servant informs me, I was from one at noon until half pad three in the afternoon in a kind of ftupe faftion, but was roused from it by intelligence being brought, that the maid was found, at a village a little way distant, going off with a gentleman in a poft chaife. — A tenant of Mr, greville’s stopped her, and brought her homej but the gentleman sat off instantly, 
, William was relating this to me, the Jury were assembling in 
the 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
67 

the hall, where the body of Miss G. lay; they had been, it seems, prevented from proceeding for several hours, as the servant who had been rriiffing, was the person they principally wanted to examine; and as soon as ftie was brought home, they proceeded to make the necessary inquiries. I was soon after summoned to the hall, as were the other friends of Mr. Greville. When I entered, the horror that appeared on every countenance beggars all description; and when the Coroner put the usual question to me, I being the first that was examined, and the first that was sworn, my senses forsook me, and, F 2 for 

68 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
for the first time in my life, I fainted away. — See in how Short a time sorrow can enervate the human frame! 
When I came to myself, they were examining Miss g.’s servant; her deposition was briefly this: — that her mistress, Tor sometime past, had constantly met a gentleman at night in the garden. — That his name was dtiw/on. — That he had been in the village for some weeks past in a disguise— — her mistress had often, told her, ftie loved Mr. Dawson beyond anything on earth j but that it was impossible for her to marry himj and as that was the cafe, did. 
not 

ILLICIT LOVE. 
69 
not think there was any harm in meeting him there. — That Mr. Dawson hai persuaded her mistress to marry Mr. Danby (as She was with child by Mr. Dawson— — to prevent a discovery of such a nature, She had consented to be married. — They had made an agreement to meet that evening for the last time in the country; but were to see each other when again in town. — That it was her usual custom to sit in Miss greville’s room till her mistress came in from the garden but having by accident forgot something. She had gone downstairs to fetch it, not thinking ^ anybody would go to her F 2 apart 

II 
i I: 
: ' 
II 
11 i 
u 
SI 
ill 
L 

70 ILLICIT LOVE. 
apartment in the meanwhile. — That as soon as fly found it was discovered, she ran immediately to the garden to tell her mistress, but had hardly time to reach the fppt, before she heard Mr. greville’s Voice in the garden. — That as soon as she had told Mils Greville of her father’s coming to search for her, Miss G. in a violent hurry pushed Mr. Dawson out of the fummer houfe, and bid him run to save himself, saying. If you. are caught here, you will be killed in the confusion— — he forgot his hat and cane, and making' directly down thro’ the shrubbery, jumped over the wall, by the assistance of a tree that grew 
near. 

ILLICIT LOVE. yt 
near. — She herself made directly to the house, and her mistress attempted to ' follow, but hearing somebody coming down the walk, her mistress turned Short round, and ran down the stope which led to the fishpond; and She heard something fall into the water, but saw her mistress no more; She therefore concluded it must be her that had fallen into the pond. — That whilst they were Searching for her mistress. She returned to the house, took her hat and cloak, and fet out in pursuit of Mr. Dawson; that She met him in the meadow, oppostte the garden, went away with him, ' and asiisted him to pack .Dp his clothes; 
F 4 and 
72 ILLICIT LOVE. 
znd as soon as that was done, they travelled to the village where She was stopped; they had waited for a post chaife to take them to London, as Mr. Dawlbn had told her She must not attempt to go back to her mistress, but go with him to town.. he would provide her a place, and buy her some deaths; that ihe had coa fented to it, and was going off. 
I Thus ended her deposition— — deferibe to you, my dear Ordway, the torments I endured, would be impossible! nature was too weak for the conflidtj and in a few minutes after she had ended her narrative, and 
I was 
ILLICIT LOVE, 73 
I was about to say something to the Coroner, I fainted a second time j and when I recovered, found inyfelf in bed, with a surgeon near, who, it seems, had bled me in the course,, the night. I had some deep, which rather composed me, and enabled me to write you this j but even at this moment I find myself strangely disordered: a 'flufliing on my brain, joined to repeated cold Ihivers, make me fitter for the bed, or probably the grave, than anywhere elfe. 
1. 
■,! if' 
h f 

1 ■' 
It is with the greatest difficulty I have supported myself to write fo much. I wilh to say something 
relative 




■ t f 
f ' 
, S' il 
1 i'; ’■'s 
u' 
■i 
1 ll' P ■ 
l 1 • 1'*' i - r i ' 1 1 1 1 
W Ir' ' ?' 
■; 
ft’ — rr 
n 
V 
ILLICIT LOVE, 
75 
LETTER xxiir. 
MISS CHARLOTTE HOTHAM TO' MISS HOTHAM., 
DEAR JULIA, 
EFORE this, I fuppole you will have received my distracted and incoherent letter of yesterday, wherein I informed you of the dreadful catastrophe which put a period to Miss greville’s life, on Wednesday evening. — O my dearest filler, to what a scene of misery am I now a witness?? as, I believe, cannot be parallelled. — In one room lies dressed, in the 
melan 
j 
rv 
I 
1.-1 
i ‘ CL 
d 
V 
I 
r 
U 1 
I 
ff fi 
; r:. 
it.. 
it 
L i 
- 
Ll! 
11 
‘l K 
'f ?■ 
i * h 
I * I 
! si' h 
1- P IR! 
T' si 
j: h 
I i 
V I 
A' I 
vl 
i 3 
: L I t s 
?■ i 
% ji 
if 

76 ILLICIT LOVE. 
melancholy habiliments of death, our once beloved, valued friend — like a lily levelled in the dull, by a rude and unexpected blast. The splendid dresses, costly jewels, and all the pompous preparations for, what Mr. Greville thought w’ould be, the happiest period of his life (in feeing his children happily fettled in the world), are now huddled together, and for ever buried from the eye. — Instead of the jocund song, the sprightly dance, the enlivening wit, and brilliant repartees, — all, all is horror, heartrending anguish, and ini vitable despair! 
The 
iit I 


» 
mm 



ILLICIT LOVE. 77 
The coroner’s inquest, as I believe I informeii you, brought in their ver di(fl accmental death. Preparations are therefore making, as fast as possible, for the funeral. Poor Mr, and Mrs. Greville, and Miss Charlotte, were removed to Mr. harding’s, previous to the inquest being taken. 
Mrs. G. was seized with convulsions 
/ 
she saw' the body or her child taken out of the water, and has remained in.that state ever since. Miss Charlotte is extremely ill with a fever, that heightens every hour. — Poor Mr. Greville and Mr. Danby, the last not the least in sorrow!! — misery let me draw a veil. 
'J' j 
V it 
76 ILLICIT LOVE. 
Poor suffering Mr. Danby! he is here, and we find it impossible to remove him : he was taken extremely ill yesterday afternoon, about four o’clock, and before .twelve became delirious ■, he raves incessantly on his Ethelinda — and that infernal villain Dawson; at times he imagines Miss Greville near him, and rises up with eagernels to clasp her to his bosom;; next minute he thinks he sees Dawson rolling down seas of sulphur, and devils lathing the hardened wretch; in an instant he changes to such plaintive sorrow, as would melt the hardest and most obdurate heart. He knows no one near him, nor permits 
us 

? 

ILLICIT LOVE, 
i to give him any sort of medi 
y 
cine. 
Frederick and myself are the only ones capable of attending on our truly unhappy friends, whose fate is fingii larly wretched. 
. Look down, O thou merciful and pitying God! upon the miseries .Df these thy wretched creatures 5 and 
deign to Shed the balm of comfort 
over their distracted souls. 
A few minutes before I began to 
write this, I stepped to the chamber of death, and took, for the last time,. a view 


8o 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
a view of our poor (departed deluided friend!! —! what were my ideas whilst I Surveyed that once beauteous angelic face! — What a leston to the young and giddy was there presented!! — perturbated heart throbs with redoubled force at the recollection of the miserable Scene, and brings to my remembrance those fine lines of Row, which begin. 
Trust not a man; they are by nature false.” 
How true is the above exemplified in our friend! but what heightens the horror of the deed is, the thought of her being not only the murderer of herfelfi but likewise that of a dear 6 little 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
81 
Fittle innocent, who, in a few months, in all probability would have added 
another wretched being in this frail 
world !' — And what further deaths it may occasion. Heaven only, knows at present— — bid fair to fall the wretched vichms. >, 
Let this’be a monitor to you, to me, and all those who shall know the dismal story, and teach us, how careful we ou: ht to be in what manner 
O 
we Men to the delusive flattery of 
I 
dark, designing villains. — I am called to poor Mr. Danby, who is taken worse; must therefore close this letter. Adieu, my dear sister. 
chak LOTTE itotham. vol. II G 

I « 

1 
1 
! : vl 
I 




82 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
ami 
< I, - 
1! 
P. S. Beg my dear mama not to make herself uneasy about me, as I find myself at present perfedbly well, and hope I ftiall remain fo, for the sake of poor Mr. Danby, who is now much worse 5 Frederick is with him, and four others, and it is with difficulty he is kept in bed. — Excuse these blots; my tears will fall, notwithstanding the resolution I am mistress of. — My poor Ethelinda is to be consigned to the dust tomorrow rnorning at four o’clock, for the sake of privacy, to prevent a throng of people but it is given out that it is to be at eight. 
3 
ILLICIT LOVE. 83 
LETTER XXIV 
, idawson TO lumleyj ESQ 
i dear FRED. 
H o u wilt be surprised to see this letter of mine come from my own house' ' I am in town a day sooner than expectation;; I have rare news to inform thee of j I am either the wisest fellow thou couldst ever boast of as a friend, or the moult arrant fool thoy ever heardeft of. .• 
In the first place, I must tell thee, that I have made a Ihift to get rid 
G 2 of 
s 


? 
84. ILLICIT LOVE. 
of both mistress and maid j but thou wilt ask, how this has been done? — ’tis such a damn’d bungling affair of it altogether, that I know not how to begin. 
Thou may eft remember that I sent thee word how prettily I had contrived matters with my Dulcinea. — That I was to meet her in the garden the evening previous to her marriage. — I went, and found her waiting.; — We had palfed sometime as usual, and were laughing at the credulity of Danby. — She was saying, how happy Ihe was in the idea of feeing me frequently in town, to which place Ihe 
would 

ILLICIT LOVE. 
would hasten as soon as possible— — had scarcely pronounced these words, ' when we were surprised at a sudden confuted noise at the upper end of the garden, near the house and, before I could speak, heard old gre ville’s voice bellow forth the name of Ethelinda; and heard thefootfteps of somebody, in a great hurry, advancing to the place where we then were: —? There was no time for consultation— — was the word given by my deary, which I immediately effected by a cursed high leap from the garden wall into a meadow adjoining, leaving my hat and cane as proofs to Danby, of his bride’s immaculate purity. 
G 3 She 
!' 
1 ' 
- I 
! 


86 ILLICIT LOVE. 
i 
She was to make the best tale she 
» 
to her noisy father, whom I heard vociferating Ethelinda! as I took the lover’^s leap; although ir was not quite fo high as the promontory of Lueat, yet, by my soul, I thought all my bones were dislocated, when I reached the ground; but Venus averted that misfortune, thanks to her goddefslhip, 
I made a short stop under the wall, and thought I heard a noise in the water; but the noise increasing from the confusion of voices, hindered me from being certain. 
Whilst 
f is'i 1 
ILLICIT LOVE, 87 
Whilst I was sauntering up the meaidowj highly diverteid at the denouement of my intrigue, I saw Miss greville’s maid - advancing precipitately towards me, exclaiming loudly. Lord, Sir, run, for I believe my mistress has thrown herself into the fishpond; and I have a thousand things to tell you of; bestdes, I am afraid my master will find me, and then, you know, I Shall be forced to tell all. — Very right, my girl, said I; therefore the sooner we fet off together the better. 
This I thought the best expedient, and the sooner accomplished the bet 
G 4 ter. 
V 

as 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
ter, as I did not much like an explanation to take place immediately, for very obvious reasons— — to make Short of my story, I hurried to my lodgings, bid my girl stay outside the window, from which I flung my luggage, and bid her go off with it to the end of the village. I then left five guineas on the table; came down flairs as softly as poflable, and, without any ceremony, left the house; but before I got to the end of the village, I was astonished to hear that my lass had, in reality, taken an absolute leap t’other fide of Styx. — I thought it high time to decamp, and hastened on with my new conquest to 
the 

ILLICIT LOVR. 
northeast next village, where we got about four in the morning: there happened to be an inn at this place,, but the devil a bit of a poft chaife could I get till eleven o’clock the same morning; when, as his infernal worship would have it,, just as I had put in luggage, and was ready to de ^camp, up comes two rascals, .and seizes hold of the safe;; they had hunted for her all that morning, were glad they had found her, for Madam Ethelinda had drowned, herself, and Ihe could tell all about it'j and, without, any more ceremony, hurried her off. 
This 

90 ILLICIT LOVE. 
N 
This I saw from a' window, as I did not choose to be visible to them, when I found out their errand. Asfoon as they were out of sight, I popp’d into the chaise, but not without paying the'hire beforehand; for on the above circumstance the owner was afraid to trust me; however, as soon as I had silenced all scruples, I bid the fellow drive like the devil until I reached town, where I now am in Jlatu quo, and shall wait upon thee tomorrow morning to convince thee of it. — I shall want to borrow a hundred pieces of thee for six weeks, which I beg thou wilt oblige me with j and am thy friend, 
D AWSON. 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
gi 
LETTER XXV 
LUMLEY, ' ESQ TO dawsoni. 
. S 
S I R, 
'You will, no doubt, wonder at your lafl: letter laying unanswered lb long but it is now tinae to affiga the reason, and to assure you that 
this will be the last you shall ever re( 
( 
from me. 
In the first place, the contents of yours both astonished and condemned me, for having kept up a correspondence with a man whose principles are 
a dif 

92 ILLICIT LOVE. 
a disgrace to human nature. In the second, I must beg leave to inform youj that a letter I have just received from a friend, who happened to be on the Spot at the time of the dreadful catastrophe, has fully opened my eyes; and your own, as well as my friend's letter fully convince me that I have, for years, held a correspond 
i 
ence with a determined villain. O Dawson!!! if thou hast but a Angle Ipark of honour in thee, not to mention religion, listen for a moment to the dictates of a friend, who,, though he never can attempt to keep up an intimacy with thee, yet cannot help still to admonifti thee against approaching ruin. 


ILLICIT LOVE. 
93 
My letter informs me, that the miserable father intends to pursue every means that can possibly be 
devised to bring such an abandoned 
wretch as you are to condign and merited punishment— — poor distracted, unhappy mother breathed her last in the arms of her remaining child two days after the funeral of her deluded daughter. 
Almighty God 1 is it possible that 
a human being, a man whom Heaven 
has crowned with accumulated blelt ings, can sofar forget his Maker, as to make a jest of the murders he him fdf has been the author of? I can 
scarcely 

i / \ 
^4 ILLICIT LOVE. 
scarcely credit it; but yet, at the same instant, I am but too well convinced of its reality. 
Repent; for heaven’s sake, repent, before it is too late, or thou art lost for ever! For sure, an impenitent wretch like thee, never entered the confines of Heaven; and probably thou wilt too soon be called upon to appear in the presence of that God, whose bounties thou hast fo wretchedly abused. The rod of vengeance hangs trembling over thy devoted head, and thou wilt certainly be summoned to answer for all thy heinous crimes, and all the miseries of a truly unhappy murdered fomily. 
The 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
95 
The only one that remains capable of risking his life, to send such a. being as thee out of the world, has made a solemn promise to pursue thee to the utmost regions of the earth, and from thy reeking blood to make some atonement for all the diftrafting horrors thou hast occasioned him. — The affair, I find, was made too public to admit of any palliation of the truth, and thou art universally reprobated as the most abandoned villain that ever disgraced human society. 
Mrs. Dawson, I suppose, by this time is made acquainted with the 
whole 




r. 
ft f i 
•1 ' 
1 I 
L > 
/• 
r - 
I 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
whole circumstance j and certainly, if 
file is not totally devoid of reason 
% 
fail to detest thee as much as all the world besides— — that is the cafe, what now must be thy miserable situation? Nothing but horrors can certainly surround thee. — Hadfl: thou followed my advice, which I long since gave thee, thou hadst not been the Wretch thou now art; but that is now past; and I shall always regret that my pen was ever disgraced by a cbrrefpondence with thee. 
As to the money you write about, J will be ingenuous and alture thee, that were I possessed of thousands beyond 
V ... 

ILLICIT LOVE. 97 
yond what I am, not a (hilling would I lend thee. — A time has been, when thou couldst not Boast of the poitefllon of a (ingle guinea. I was then ambitious to be thy friend, and could hot bear to know thee feel the want of what had been fo liberally bestowed on me. — But now farewell, and that for ever. — And may the conviction of thy crimes teach thee to be a repentant (inner, is the sincere prayer of F. Lumley. 
1 
P. S. Before 1 had closed this, a note has been brought me from thy wife, requesting my company on par vol. II H ticular 

■ ■ ''1 
98 ILLICIT LOVE. 
'N 
ticular business. I judge the purport 
of the message, and would lay my 
% 
life on the odds that thou wilt soon hear and tremble. — Repent, Dawson repent, is my repeated prayer ^ remember that I charge thee to do it. — I stiall difguile nothing from thy wife; and if She requests thy letters, I flialj most certainly give them up. 
I ■■ I 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
99 
LETTER XXVI 
DAWSON TO lumleyj ESQ. 
I 
amnation to your noofenfe f and may all le'rmonizing epiftles like thine be hurried to the infernal regions in an air balloon! — Pragmatical puppy! to attempt to preach repentance to a fellow like me! ab furdities like that, are too ridiculoua to be attended to for a moment. 
No, I have now fet my life upon s east, and will stand the hazard of the die. What I mean thou wilt probably ' Hz soon 


100 ILLICIT LOVE. 
soon know, or perhaps not at all well. — Be it either way, I care not a straw; and as I am an incorrigible villain, why e’en let me remain fo, since I am that rascal which the Being thou talked; fo much about has made me, what occasion is there for altering it, eipecially when I happen to be fo well pleased with it: then a damn for every one elfe; self, dear self, is all that I adore. 
Thou may eft show this to the old lady, with the rest, for what Dawson eares. — And as to your money, damn it, I can do without it. — Honesty is a mere farce, and those who first talked 

bout 



smmammmfiiiss: 

ILLICIT LOVE. tot 
about it, are as great fools as thee. A fig for honesty; and may honesty and fools go together, prays most fervently ' 
Dawson, 

3 

£02 ILLICIT LOVE, 
LETTER XXVII 
MISS HOTHAM TO HER SISTER. 
DEAR SISTER, 
L L is now over with poor Mrs. Greville; she breathed her last 
in the arms of the miserable Charlotte this morning, about five o’clock. Miss Greville haid been Summoned to attend her dying parent a few hours before, but was too ill herself at that time to be removed to her mother’s room. Mrs. Greville had remained in strong convulsions from the dreadful evening that put a period to Ethe 
linda’s 



ILLICIT LOVE. 103 
hilda’s life, until last night, about eleven o’clock, when stie, of a Hidden, fell into a kind of stunsiber, and fo remained for near an hour: this was joyfully perceived, by all present, as a happy presage to her speedy recovery ^ but it was all a delusive dream, that vanished in an instant; for when (he had lain about an hour in what we thought a profound sleep, fly waked, and asked eagerly for her daughter, desired to see her immediately, as (he was certain Ihe had not long to live. 
Miss Charlotte was made ac quainted with the desire of her mould 4 there. 


P 
tes 
f f & •; 
t04 ILLICIT LOVE. 
/ 
there, but .the reason for which She was sent, shocked her too much to be capable of going. This being communicated to poor Mrs. G. (as She seemed anxious to know the reason) She started at the thought of her child’s illness, and exclaimed, with a kind of eagerness, blested Jesus, thy will be done I but let me see my child, and then farewell. Miss Charlotte was therefore fetched immediately, though fo extremely ill, and carried to the bed stde by servants, but too ill to say any more than. Oh, my dear mother! — This exclamation, which she uttered in a low voice, drew the attention of Mrs. Greville, who, raising 

.Mai 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
los 
ing her head, perceived her child supported by two servants j she appeared much agitated at the sight, and eagerly starting up in the bed, said.. closer, my only child, let me give thee a dying mother’s -- -- Here the 
words faltered on her lips, a livid paleness overlpread them in an instant; and as Miss Charlotte extended her arms to receive her mother’s last embrace,, the suffering. poor parent expired in her arms. 
Oh heavens, I cannot proceed! — • But I must, that I may put a period to the Ihocking scene. Charlotte fell insensible on the body of her parent, I and 
i’i 
f ( 

Sr 


W. \ 
1 ’*■ 
if,? 
io ILLICIT LOVE. 
'N 
m.d. was, by violence, taken from the corpse;; Greville was at this period fallen into a sweet steep in the next room, and the transttion being fo sudden, he could not be apprised of it without, as we thought, its affecting him too much : She had astced for her husband likewise during the short interval she seemed to possess her senses, but we informing her of iiis being a little composed, she answered. Then let him sleep, poor man, he wants it much! Frederick was on one fide the bed, myself on the other. 
■} i 
At this distressing scene, poor Frederick seemed quite insensible for 
some 
r 

ILLICIT LOVE. to; 
feme moments; but when Miss Charlotte was taken fron) the body, he started in a kind of frenzy from the place where he stood, and in a loud vociferating voice exclaimed. Just Heaven! this is too much! Canst thou, O thou eternal God! permit murders like these to go unpunistied! If thou. Just, Being, canst allow it, then I myself will be the avenger, and as far as Heaven is from Hell, and the extremity of pole to pole, will I search for the abandoned murderer, plunge my sword into the villain’s breast, and send his soul precipitately, send it to that Hell from xvhence it sprung— — this he 
darted 




io ILLICIT LOVE. 
darted out of the room, immediately ordered the poll chariot to be got ready, and, in spite of all my entreaties to prevent it, left the house with these words: That he never ** would return till Dawson was no more: take care of Charlotte, and her poor father, my dear Miss“ “and Heaven will reward “you.” 
r \ ' 
He stepped into the chariot, and bid the servant drive, like lightning, 
to H -- -- --; where he’s going from 
thence. Heaven only knows j but the cause of the innocent, whom he goes to avenge,.! hope will protest him 
Hi 

ILLICIT LOVE. 109 
from all danger. — The noise made by Frederick awaked Mr. Greville. We amused him as well as postible from ' the reality of the cause, and only informed him that Mrs. G. had been something worse, but was then a great deal better and we hoped would soon be recovered; at my saying this, he Shook his head, and said, Oh Miss Hotham, your appearance speaks the contrary.’' — My eyes were, in appearance, starting from their Sockets; but to amuse him, and to avoid entering into a discourse on 
the subject, which would have be 
* * 
the whole, I informed him 
that Mr. Danby wanted to see me, 
'and 
LII 
r I i 



know 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
and that I was going to wait on him, desiring him to take his medicines, and that I would come to him again very soon. I then left him, and stepped to Miss Charlotte, who was too much exhausted to take the least notice of me. 
After giving some orders, I went to Mr. Danby, but he, dear fulferer, is lost now to every calamity, and the physician altures me, there is not the least prolped: of ever regaining his lenses more, admitting he should recover his health. — He knows nobody near him, and passively takes any thing.that is offered him; and, ex, - 
cept 


aswi^w(6siijc>"'^ ‘; ?'’'■ 
A" 
ILLICIT LOVE. Ill 
cept at ftiort intervals, can be taken anywhere, or done anything with. — What a miserable Rate! 
Pray don’t think of sending for me; I cannot leave the place. — I now am really in love with sorrow— — in his almighty power, will, I hope, jeftore my miserable friends in his own good time; till then we must submit— — have just been to Miss g.’s apartments, and found her a little better: how Ihe will bear the absence of Frederick, I know not; but 1 trust we ftiall be able to reconcile lier, by telling her that he is now with Mr. Danby; this is what I mean to 
afiure her, as well as Mr. Greville. 
Whilst 
r t 
1^ 

i i: ’; •' ^ r 
fa ■ 
^" * ILLICIT LOVE. 
Hi Whilst I aiio writing, F can hear 
If! ■ the moans of Mr. Greville, whose 
fh't ll{ij ' i i k \ LX •WI f ■ Al acuteness of pain, from the fever, makes him frequently delirious. 
■ 
I *! i t 
■ .*^ '■ I * 
m! 
, fiv) 
i < ‘ h! 
H) ’ ■ f( ( ■ lit! 
i L ?.' 
May I never be witness to such sorrows again, is the prayer of your affectionate lister, 
Hotham. 
P. S. If it be possible to trace out Frederick, I would wish my father to do it, and endeavour to prevent him from doing anything that may en' danger his life. 
bhljyp 
ILLICIT LOVE. 113 
LETTER XXVIIL 
FREDERICK GREVILLE, ESQ TO MISS HOTHAM. 
i 
DEAR MISS HOTHAM, 
y distracted soul has not known a moment’s peace since I left you last— — is my poor afflicted Charlotte? Does foe and her unhappy father still breathe? Or is foe, as well as the unfortunate mother, now no more? 
What horrors did I not feel, when I left you last— — you must vol. II I coni; 
? 
, I 
■■ ^ ■ /: ft 
'W 
?.■ 
I I 
M 
; js 
if R 
I If II 
A 
114 ILLICIT LOVE. 
conclude me to be like poor Danbp, out of my senses— — left you to guess the cause of my departure. — I scarce knew what I did, nor do not even now. — But I must inform you that, agreeably to the orders you heard me give the servants, I posted immediately to H — ' —, where I was disappointed of finding that abandoned mi/creant, Dawson. Impatient to wreak my revenge, I made all the inquiries I could, and at length found he palled through that town early in the morning of the day before. This intelligence rather hurt me, to find that he had, and was still likely to escape me for sometime j however, 
not 

ILLICIT ldve. 115 
not difcouragedj I immediately followed in purfuk, and the description I gave of him, traced him from place to place, till I reached town, where I now am, and every moment expecting to hear whereabouts he is as I have not been able as yet to find him, he not having been at his own house since yesterday morning, owing to some quarrel (which the servant informs William) that he has had with Mrs. Dawson— — to Heaven that some guardian angel, who Watches over the afflidlions of innocence, might inform her what a 
serpent Ihe has fostered in her bosom!! 
I feel 




/ 
ii ILLICIT LOVE. 
I feel myself inadequate to the task, or I should not hesitate a moment to move on the wings of lightning, to inform her of the whole horrid tranf a£lion! horrid! beyond description horrid 1 — If you see blots, pardon my weakness; the recollection of the lafl: scene flaggers all the man, and makes me fink to the softness of the too credulous sex— — my dear Charlotte, what mufl be thy feelings, if mine are fb acute! — Gracious Heaven pity and preserve her! 
I have endeavoured to trace the wretch in town, but, on account of the quarrel with his wife, have not 
been 
L 
i 
ILLICIT LOVE. 117 
been able as yet to effeft it. If William does not return with news of him, I shall go in search myself, for I am determined never to see my dear charlotte’s face again, unless the villain is no more. — I must lay down my pen, as I find myself too restless to write long at a time. 
I now again resume it, and that with a little more composure than before, since I can inform you, that part of my design is accomplished. William informed me, when he came back about an hour since, that he had fortunately met Dawson in St. james’s Street, and dogged him from thence 
I 3 to 
t 


lis ILLICIT LOVE. 
to a house in New Bond Street j he saw him enter, took the number, and then went to a public houfe near, and made inquiries who die people were who lived there: the answer was, that they let lodgings, and were reputed to be good kind of people : this was all that he could learn frorn them j but under a pretence, he went and aflced for another gentleman that he knew was in the country; but they said they had no lodgers of that name, only a Mr. Dawson, who came there he day before; that was information Sufficient for him, and he hasted immediately to inform me. I instantly sat down to write a short note to him, 
requeuing 


■ 
'sm 

ILLICIT LOVE, 
119 
requesting him to be at home at seven this evening j William took it, but he was not at home, nor had not been since ten that morning, I shall wait impatiently to hear of his being at home in the mean time, cannot omit sending off this by an express, that I may once more hear of my suffering friends. Take care of my dear, very dear Charlotte, my amiable Miss Hotham, and let nothing be wanted for her afflicted father, and the truly unhappy Mr. Danby, who is now lost to every sense of affliction. You may either never see me more, or see me the avenger of injured innocence, Adieu, my dear, dear 
u 
i if 

1! 
120 ILLICIT LOVE. 
Miss Hothamj may you be happier than your friend, is the sincere prayer of 
Frederick Greville, 
\ 
P. S. Do not be under any apprehensions in regard to my safety; I am determined to fight him before tomorrow night, if he be aboveground: I have been told he is a coward, be it foi care not; cowards made desperate can fight as well as any other man j and the Omnipotent Hand that guides the innocent will not fail to direct mine aright: I will hold him to the stake, let him fight me as he can. 

ILLICIT LOVE. II 
LETTER XXIX 
FREDERICK. GREVILLE, ESQ. TO MISS HOTHAM. 
DEAR MISS HOTHAM, 
THANK you, most sincerely thank you, for your kind solicitude for my safety. When your letter came, I could scarcely credit my senses, they have been fo long bewildered j 
as I did not imagine the man would 
have returned fo soon, but the transporting idea of my dear charlotte’s recovery has given comfort inexpressible to my tortured breaftj her 
poor 




H 
t '/ 
• 
ST 
*■. / 
i 
}^) 
122 ILLICIT LOVE. 
poor father, he is better too. “al mighty Being, and Governor of the univsrie, what thanks do I not owe thee for these obligations j restore but the afflicted Danby to the use of his senses once more, " and all, I trull, will be well again. 
when time has blunted the edge of 
“sorrow.” 
You will no doubt be solicitous to know what makes me write with more Ipirits than my lall. I would inform you of the reason, but cannot at present, as your father is at diis moment waiting for me; but my next lliall acquaint you of the whole: let it be 
sufficient 


ILLICIT LOVE. 123 
sufficient to tell you, that the Almighty, whose eye is ever over the unfortunate, and whose ear is ever open to their prayer, will prove the avenger of injured innocence on the abandoned murderer; and by the hand of justice, through his own machinations, ftiall the truly detested being fall. — Your worthy father i? irnpatient for me to go with him to one of the courts of justice, to see what neither you nor I three days ago could even hope for. — I have rhyme for no more. Adieu. 
F. Greville. 
U 
i 
! 
X.. 
1 i 
i! 


H 

m 
IIP 
f: 
'i 
t ] 
\ ■ 

;? 
I i 
i: 
I i 
\; 
124 ILLICIT LOVE. 
LETTER XXX 
FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME. 
DEAR MISS HOTHAM, 
T SHALL now inform you what I meant for the lasty you may remember that I told you in my first; incoherent letter, in what manner I reached town, and the hope I had of soon meeting with the wretch that had occasioned the first intense sorrow I had ever felt. I waited till twelve that night for an answer, but none came; in the morning I lent again, and requested to see him immediately. 
1 I 

ILLICIT LOVE. 125 
mediately, but the answer was juil the same as that of the preceding day, he had not been home since; his servant had and to him they had given the note j but neither had been seen since the man said he believed 
his mailer was going out of town for 
a few days, but was not certain; but desired a fire might be kept in the rooms; this they did, but no Mr. Dawlbn made his appearance. I waited in this irksome situation for five days, when the fellow that I had kept upon the watch, came and told me, that Dawson was just gone into the house, and that he appeared as if just come off a journey, or greatly 
hurried j 


rft^ 
E. ^ ■ 
Si 
If 
II ': 
It 
Af: 
y 
■ i 
if 
s 
ti 
r II 
Ir. /! 
i? 
^ a i 
V I 
; i i * i 
■ i?? 
n 
i »' ^ 
B i' ■ f 
O r 
bt! 
! f ' 
t' [: 
7 • TI.: 
- I 
126 ILLICIT LOVL. 
hurried; he left a chairman to watch his motions, whilst he came with this intelligence to me. I instantly put on a sword, took a brace of pistols, and hurried immediately to thehoufej but before I reached it, I was ^onifhed at feeing a large mob near the door of the houft that I was going to ■, I bid the fellow that was with me, go to ask the reason j they informed him, that a gentleman who lodged there had been guilty of a forgery, and that he had attempted to Ihoot the officers who came to take him, and that had occasioned the mob: I flew to the door on receiving this information, and the first: 
object 

ILLICIT LOVE. 127 
objet that presented itself was daw fon, held .by two men, who rudely forced him into a coach that was waiting at the door, and drove off amidst a rude rabble, that immediately followed it. 
I Rood for fbme moments lost in a kind of stupor, reflcfting on the hidden designs of fate, and on the mysteries of the great Disposer of events, who could in fo unaccountable a manner circumvent the designs of man, - and bring a wretch, too depraved to live, to infamy, shame, and, in all probability, a miserable death. — Such were my reflections for 
that 
% 
a 



128 ILLICIT LOVE. 
that moment; and this morning I find my prediction realised. 
i 
!■ 
vii 1 
U : 
1/ 
fi i 
t r, 
I should most likely have continued longer in the reverie, had not a gentleman come up, and tapped me on the shoulder, and, in a voice that I fancied I had somewhere heard, said— — I mistake not, your name. Sir, is Greville. — I started at the sound of my name, looked full in the face of the gentleman, and instantly recolle£led an old schoolfellow of mine at Westminster, Bill Pearcy, that you have often heard me mention as a remarkably good-natured fellow; I was extremely glad to see him, and 
shaking 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
lliaking him by the harud, asked him how he discovered me 3 he faui, the odd attitude in which I stood when; the coach drove off, and the different, fchfations that appeared on my countenance, induced him to take a nearer view, as thinking that I might be a, person interested in the fate of Dawson, or some relation 3 but on com in’g nearer discovered the mistake, and instantly recognised me. I went with him to a coffeehouse in Covent gardeh, y/here I briefly informed him of some particulars, and what my reasons were in being at Bond street, that morning, and that I was really interested in the fate of Dawson. 
vol. IL K The 
Jr 
win 
Id 
I 
id 
S?! 
f T 
)!) ■ ' I 
.•■r 
’i 
K ri 

i iii 
III 
^ ti 
130 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
The Short recital that I gave him seemed to wrap him in aftoniftiment; and when I had finished, he laid he could introduce me to the very person whose draught Dawson had forged for eleven hundred pounds, or something more, but could not tell exactly as to the sum. I was happy to hear him say fo, accepted of the proposition, and sent a fello?? to Bow-street to inquire for the gentleman, who it seems was there j this is the place where Dawson was taken to, before some justices who were then sitting; in about an hour the man returned with the gentleman, whose name is Liumley, an intimate acquaintance of 
pearcy’ii 
ILLICIT LOVE. 131* 
pearcy’s, and had been always of dawfon’s, till thelhocking cataftrophc in our family j after the introdudioni Mr. Lumley informed us thatke stood fully committed j and, as the sessions were on at the Old bailey, that he would moil; probably be tried the 
next morning. 
L 
He informed me that he and Dawson had always been upon a very intimate footing, till within a Short time, when some circumstances had induced him to alter his opinion, and to decline his acquaintance; this had exasperated dav/fon 5 and on Mr. 
• xmmley’s refusing to affill him with a 
K 3 ' temporary 
1j2 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
temporary sum, he had forged a draught on Mr. l.’s banker, for something above eleven hundred pounds: it was fo neatly executed, that were it not for a small blot at the end of the name, no one would have been able: to discover the fraud ■, dawfon’s servant presented it for payment, which would have been immediately done, had not the clerk into whose hands the draught was given, accidentally discovered the blot.. He told the servant to stop a few moments, whilst he ihewed the draught to one of the partners, who instantly compared it with, some former ones, and found they differed; he then gave orders for the 
mann 


ILLICIT LO VR. j33 
>■ 
man to be detained, whilst the clerk was dispatched tomr.lumley’shoufei to know whether it was his handwriting i he happened to be at home; when the draught was shown him, he was astonished, and immediately said, he knew nothing of the matter, and that it was a forgery j asked who presented it for payment, the clerk informed him,, that the person was detained by his mailer’s orders, till he ■returned with Mr. lumley’s anfwen Mr. L went immediately with the clerk to his banker’s, was Shown the man, ' who said he had the draught from 
I 
his mailer, Mr. Lumley, to whom he Bad been hired the day before Daw 
K 3 fon 
■4, 

r 

>34 IL L1C IT LOVE. 
fon had assumed that name); he was then asked where his master was; he readily answered, he is waiting not far fromhei*e31 will take you to him. They all went out together, pasted on the street a little way, and then went into a costee houfe; the servant inquired for the gentleman he left there, the waiter said he had left the costee houfe a few minutes before, in a great hurry; that he had been out once be 
m 
sore, and stayed a short time; came in again, and drank some lemonade; then went out again, and, in a few minutes, returned, took out some iilver, which he flung on the table, and, without waiting for the change,, left the coffee room. 
Mr. 
i 
M 

ILLICIT LOVE. 135 
Mr. Lumley defireii the young gentleman, who came with him from the banker’s, to step and get two constables, and follow him and the servant immediately to Bond street y this was done) Mr. Lumley followed the servant to the door, and entered after him, went directly to dawfon’s apartment, whom he found in the greatest agitation; a brace of pistols lay on the table, and the moment Mr. L made his appearance Dawson catched up one of them, and fired it at Mr. L but the agitation with which it was presented averted the intended murder, and instead of effedting its purpose the ball stiat 
K 4 tered 
M 
ij 

m 


sfbjiqivpjf .If JII9 ^ 


136 ILLICIT LOVE. 
tered a large picture which hung near the doorj he was about to seize the other pistol, when Mr. L advanced, and caught hold of his arm, and said— — now Dawson, the measure of your crimes is full. — He answered, I know thy errand, and damnation to the rest! — And before he could say more, the gentleman was come with two constables, amidst a prodigious quantity of people, who had got together in an instant, on the people below crying murder, at the report of the pistol; he was immediately taken down stairs, and put into the coach, and taken off, as I observed to you before. 
Mr. 


ILLICIT LOVE. 
IJ7 
Mr. Lumley faiid, that on his exa ^mination he neither confessed or denied anything, nor would Speak 
a Angle word to Mr. L though he 
•addrested him Several times; and Spoke quite evasive to all the questions; put to him by the justice but upon .the oath of Mr. Lumley, both him fels and Servant were fully committed. The festions is now near half over at .the Old bailey; therefore, I Shall not leave town till I am certain as to the miserable wretch’s fate. I was curious to know of Mr. Lumley what Mrs. 
I 
Dawson thought of his condu(st, as I made no doubt but Mr. L must know from his past intimacy with 
him 

/ 
i 
i ’ III I 

II 
F'V 
I i 
13$ ILLICIT LOVE. 
him; Mr. Lumley said, that by some means or other Mrs. Dawlbn had been made acquainted with the whole of our distressing affair; that she had sent for hm, upon receiving the news; and as she knew her husband corresponded with him, desired that she might see some of his letters. Mr. L in consequence of her request, gave some up; the contents plainly convinced her in what manner she had been deceived, and in the presence of Mr. Lumley, made a solemn vow never to see him more from that day; she immediately ordered everything to be'packed up, and before he returned in the evening she had 
taken 

ILLICIT LOVE. 139 
taken whatever she thought proper to have with her, and had left the house. He was short of money when he came to town, and when he returned to his house, about eight in the evening, he had not five shillings left; he could not trace his wife anywhere, as she only left a short note to inform him of the discovery fly had made, and her resolution thereupon •, he left the house like one distracted, and was not heard of again till the above discovery. 
The moment I hear his fate, I shall fly on all the wings of love and ■rapture to my dear afflicted Charlotte, 
and 

f40 ILLICIT LOVE. 
and endeavour to pour the balm of 
comfort into her truly distressed soul. 
\ 
adieu, my dear Miss Hotham, try to comfort my dear afbided friends, and prepare them to hear what I have related, and you will add to the favours already conferred on 
'Your ever obliged friend, 
F. Greville, 
P, S. I have sent down two of the most eminent physicians in town, to try what can be done for poor Danby. I am certain, when I return, however well my Charlotte and uncle maybe, yet his fusferings will almost distract me. Your worthy father will deliver 
this; 


ILLICIT LOVE. 141 
this j he is fo good as to promise to continue with you till my return, which I hope will be in about three days, unless more accidents happen. Your amiable mother and filler are very good j they endeavour to comfort me all they can. 
s 
zrrrir ' g'niairf ■. ^ II t An 


142 ILLICIT LOVE. 
m 
LETTER XXXI 
MISS HOTHAM TO MR. GREVILLE, 
1(, 
I! 
BEAR MR. .drevillej 
THOUSAND thanks to you for your very long letter and for the intelligence it contained ^ it has thrown a gleam of comfort over my opprested heart, and the arrival of my dear father has a little abated my sorrow for my dear astlifted friends. Miss Greville and her unhappy father are still something better; but the wretched Danby is an objecst that must be regarded with the most ten: 

: - 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
u3 
der pity; he remains in much the same state as when you left us; no material alteration has taken place, and the physicians cannot give any hopes of his ever regaining his senses more. Mrs. Greville was buried yesterday morning; we have not as yet let Mr. Greville know it; hov/ we shall break it to him Heaven knows; he thinks she still breathes; we mufti believe, leave that taflc to my father; Mr. Greville seemed overjoyed at the light of him; when my father had some discourse with him this morning, he said“ “dear friend Hotham, you know not what loss I have fuilained in my poor dear de“ 
“
1 I 
f' 
y • 

tj 
IS > 
v;; 

?1 
‘■?li 
r: 
■ti 
1 i; 
1 II i 
«' i 
L LI 
r V 
r y!’ 
r: i: i 
4, ^ 
i ■■ ‘ 
dii 
!; d: - i f 
®44 ILLICIT LOVE. 
“luded child; but your kind consolation will, I trull, with the alfiftance “of Heaven, reconcile me to it, and my poor wife j comfort her, do, pray “doj Ihe wants it much; her sorrow is great enough.” My father said, he would not have him think too intensely on the futgedl, but hoped that himfelti as well as Mrs. Greville, would soon be better; he Ihook his head, and said“ “fear that will never be, for they tell me Mrs. Greville has “been in fits almoll everfince; go, ” ' he said to my father, ‘‘ go to my dear “creature, and tell her you come to “comfort her; your amiable child will do the fame.” He pressed us to go, 
wc 
pp 

ILLICIT LOVE. 145 
we therefore left him. My father means to break it to him,, sometime today if possible, and likewise to let him into part of the contents of your letter; I have already read part of it to Miss Charlotte,, and as you are safe from danger, Ihe seems much happier; I was under the necessity to inform her where you were, as I had amused her too long to admit of deceiving her more. Let me beg of you to hasten your return as quick as possible, that something may be fixed on for the removal of our friends, as. ibon as they are well enough to admit of it, which I trust and hope will be loon. 
vol. II L Miss; 

L 
I * 
ILLICIT LOVE. 
Miss Charlotte the physicians pronounced out of danger when they came first. Mr. greville’s age is rather against him j but I trust, when they are removed from the spot where their sorrows originated, they may again possess tranquillity (leaving our dear Danby out of the question). I must expect you soon, and remain yours sincerely, 
Julia Hotham. 
rf 
ILLICIT LOVE. 147 
LETTER XXXII 
FREDERICK GREVILLE, ESQ TO MISS HOTHAM. 
MY DEAR MISS HOTHAM, 
i 
RECEIVED your welcome letter about five o’clock, and have the unspeakable pleasure to inform you, that I hope to thank you in person the day after tomorrow, for all your kindness to me, and those that are dear to me. Dawson was tried yesterday morning, and being found guilty, had sentence passed upon him about two hours since. I was in court at 
L a the 
! i 

ILLICIT LOVE. 
the time; and may I never be witness to Such a scene again, is my most sincere prayer, Picture to yourself a wretch hardened in v/ickednefs, called up to the bar of an awful tribunal, to receive a sentence doom’d to be pasted upon him by the laws of his country, and hear the affecting admonition given him by his judge, to prepare for a speedy approaching period that would precipitate him into the presence of that God, whose laws as well as that of man he had fo stiamefully violated; you would see him receive it with the utmost indifference, and smile at the doom pronounced against him. Turning 
his 
ILLICIT LOVE. " 149 
his eyes rounii the court with an affected composure, he discovered irie, among” ^ the listening throng, whose every eye appeared suffused with tears, to see him leave the place with an exulting smile at me, that Seemed to indicate he was preparing for a triumph instead of a Shameful death. — Such Juchy my dear Miss Hotham, was the scene that I Vas a witness to. 
Gracious God! what different sensations harrowed up my soul! J saw with a pitying heart, the wretchc.that I myself, a short time before, had doom’d to death, led away to wait for that hour that my very soul L 3 ' trembled 
r 
150 ILLICIT LOVE. 
trembled at. I saw him leave the Court with the most unaffefted indifference, and seemed to say to death, I do defy thee. 
1 cannot dwell upon the fubje^l j it hurts me too much 5 and I have been fool enough to drop a tear o( pity for the wretch that cannot weep himself— — he repent, sincerely repent, of all his crimes, and be forgiven! is the sincere and ardent wish. ofj dear Miss Hotham, 
Yours most truly, 
F. Grevillje. 
ILLICIT LOVE. 15* 
LETTER XXXIII 
MISS HOTHAM TO HER SISTER. 
Dear sister, ' 
T HAVE just time to inform you,, that we hope to be in town by Thursday evening j Mr. Greville is now fo much recovered as to be able to walk about; and Miss Charlotte is perfectly well. Mr. Danby is still the same; we have taken him out several times, but he remains insensible to everything; nor can any one make him know who are his friends: his whole soul is absorbed in the remem 
I brance 


152 ILLICIT LOVE. 
brance of Ethelinda. Mr. Greville has seen him twice, but it alfedted him too much, to find that he did not know him; on that account, we have prevented him from feeing the sufferer again. The physicians order the family to the south of France, to which place they intend to go in about a week after they reach town, if Mr. Danby is not too much affected with the journey thither. 
Mr. Greville received a letter yesterday from a Mr. Piercy, whom you have heard my father mention; he informed him that Dawson was ■executed yesterday was a week j was 
present 

ILLICIT LOVE. 
*53 
present at the execution, and says, he never before saw such an unrelenting wretch; and as he lived folie appeared to die; and with an agitated smile, that appeared forced on his countenance, he hallened into eternity. He had been reprieved twice; and the evening previous to his death, seemed to flatter himself with hopes of pardon; but about ten at night, he was given to understand that the royal mercy could not be extended any farther, and that he must prepare to die. He permitted, in the morning, 
, the clergyman to pray by him, but seemed not to take any notice of a word that was faidi and, as I observed 


154 ILLICIT LOVE. 
served before, in the manner that he lived folie died. — His wife is gone to Jamaica; she left town soon after he was apprehended. — With the hopes of soon feeing you, I remain your, and, my parents, ever affectionate 
Julia Hotham. 
THE END. 

is 



U of Library 


.sr 



-./ 
H 

154 
ILLICIT LO 
served before, in the manij he lived folie died. — His wife to Jamaica; she left town foo. he was apprehended, — With the) of soon feeing you, I remain your, my parents, ever affedtionate 
Julia ho r 
j 
''i! 
i 

VI S 
ram' 
ha' ci\v ^ 
Sift*., ’..r’. t> rv.., .., 

i ~' 
\yrri: 
*£■ • *t: 
VI \ 

1 'j / ' - 
ffa,., V * 
nf: : ■ ' S ■ ■■ 

"fv^f s^j; 

yy'; jte; 'AC 
j ‘ 
‘/^r; V|^C.TV^S 
vrv'a, 

v' f^ -- ■ N n: 4: ^'ib. 
‘r 'ia’mtri’" 
, '»is.’* ^H 1, ’ 
t, >£ .‘ 
C ' C. ‘ 
•isss' S. Ar: .AV^'V'^V.^>^A'YA VS 
v 'r • ^tkt'?r: rr: : A, V ^•. vs 
. ^ ** V, ti', 
■•‘, 1 ^ v1 „ ‘'^<-* 
aamtd; ^0 ^ ^vf'itmm 
/■ 'it ’ ■ A- -- 
''■ i't AA' ' 
• y <. ■ f j * 
• V i 
■ ••'*»'? — y.'.'f;; '»: 4- 'i“.' “.' •. >»- ', 
i 
\ ^ "ia' 
• r'•‘^'' hac' 
v ^iv’ "i, 5 
Ai ■ '■ ■ ■ 
: ■’ a4: ^^'-^■', ^■ ': ■ ■' 
A isiin 
i ■■ ‘' aj'''' 
VV''''^''V.> K; jypw'', H. ' K" -- 
‘W"H 
V .‘\' ': L r. .-, ', ■i''‘''i''‘i’ 
•'■ .: ' ■ a' ar ^rira' " tiv'l.'v: '; ' kv 'n''"^' 

