THE 
IRISHMAN 
OR, THE 
Favourite of Fortune: 
A SATIRICAL NOVEL 
FOUNDED UPON FACTS.

IN TWO VOLUMES. 

What astranges world this is! 

VOL. I. 
LONDON: 
Printed for W. GOLDSMITH, No 24. 
Pater-Noster-Row.  

TO THE 
RIGHT HONOURABLE 
GEORGE, 
LORD VISCOUNT 
TOWNSEND, 
LATE 
LORD LIEUTENANT 
OF
IRELAND. 

My Lord, 
Men praise often those 
they despise the most
- in their satire only is found 

[ii]
an homage to merit. Had 
you condescended to secrete 
your talents, genius and 
abilities, Envy would not 
have attracted every impar-
tial mind upon your con-
duct, and Sorced the gene-
ral esteem in your favour. 
However, active and artful 
the malice os your enemies, 
they proved as unsuccesssul 
in their attacks against the 
excellency of your character, 
as the Fop who impeaches 

[iii]
the virtue os the woman he 
could not seduce. Your 
actions, My Lord, in the 
height of your political ca-
reer, have betrayed the man 
of feeling and honour. The 
spirit of party, which created 
enthusiasts against your ad-
ministration, never warmed 
your noble soul with the de-
sire of revenge: calm in the 
midst of the storm, you 
weathered it with glory to 

[iv]
yourself and advantage to 
your country. 

You have known, My 
Lord, the hero of the per-
formance I have the ho-
nour to dedicate to your 
Lordship; he was a member 
of the Irish parliament, and 
particularly esteemed by you 
for the benevolence of his 
heart. Many hours you have 
enjoyed in his conversation 
--- he is now no more! a

[v]
sudden death has deprived the 
society of one of the best 
men that ever lived, and his 
lovely, faithful Harriet, of 
a husband, whose memory 
never will cease to live in 
her heart. 

The journal of his life, 
written with his own hand, 
was communicated to me; 
thinking it uncommonly en-
tertaining and instructive, I 
have obtained leave to pub- 

[vi]
lish it. Out of his adven-
tures I hake chosen, only, 
those that may be useful 
to the young men who, un-
taught by experience, mis-
take so often the shadow for 
the reality. 

Though the names are 
changed, you will easily, My 
Lord, find a key to the cha-
racters in this novel. Most of 
the personages have been at 
your levee; and, though no 

[vii]
longer at the same period of 
life, have so far preserved 
their former dispositions, as 
not to differ in their prin-
cipal features from the pic-
ture drawn of them.

I am not personally ac-
quainted with you, My 
Lord; but your public virtues 
have given you a claim to the 
esteem of all sensible men. 
This dedication is a tribute 
I voluntarily pay to the no-

[viii]
bleman who, should his 
country do him justice, 
would have his name trans-
mitted, with singular ho-
nour, to the latest posterity, 

I am, with respect,
My Lord, 
your Lordship’s 
most humble and 
devoted servant, 

The EDITOR. 


THE 
THE 
Favourite of Fortune, 
C H A P. I. 
^^jphis is a' strange world! exclaimed Patrick O’ Hara, meditating upon what he had been, what he was, and what he wished to be. 
vol. I. 
B 
Have 
i The favourite 
Have talents, modesty, or virtue, availed to my happlness? When •others, adopting a conduct the reverse of my own, have forced their way to grandeur or opulence, am I not a despicable wretch, feeding upon the benevolence of Sir James Walter? Is a good confcienee a com pensudon for dependence, and mise rj? Why do I indulge Scruples So easily discarded by men,, who have neither my merit nor understanding to boast? Does not vanity flatter me with a Superiority they really postefs over me? I tremble at the thought of injustice — I shudder at 
the 
OF F O R T U N E. ^ 
the idea of vice — Yet, through vice only, I can correct the iiialignity of fortune, and recover a rank to which I was entitled by birth and education! From a gentleman I am sunk into a Servant — Instead of commanding, I obey! — Would nature have given me a pleasing form to be of no advantage to me? When to that form the has added wit, and an ambitious heart, am I not unworthy Such accomplishments, by not turning them to the benefit of my passions Why do I silence pride, and the amorous longings of my Soul, when self denials, Sar from quenching the thirst B 2 of 
4 The FAVOURITE 
of my - desires, increase perpetually its poignancy in my breast? Is the honour of being a siave to virtue adequate to the Sacrifice I daily make of mystlf? I do not dare to think the contrary — My reason approves of my behaviour — does not drop one fatisfastory word against it — though in need of being convinced, I act the part of a fool — reflection compels me forcibly to perform it. — I am a Servant, and yet it is in my power to change my situation! — How often has Lady Walter darted at me Such a look, as clearly exprested, You are 
very handsome, Patrick TWOULD 
there 
OF FORTUNE. 5 
there be any harm to anfvver that expression with, You are very hand'. Some, my lady?” Would She understand me, what have I not to expect from a woman of her fortune and interest? — Sir James has been the best of masters to me! shall I dishonour him in return for his favours I Oh! my heart will never astent to that villainy — I will not tear the bosom of the man who feed?, and protects me, with grief and despair — Riches would become my torment, were I to acquire them by making Sir James unhappy No — let me rather be for ever a contemptible thing upon earth, than to be guilty of the sin of ingratitude. 
B 3 Such 
6 te favourite 
Such were the reflections of cur heroj who bravely fought against the Seduction of pleasure, and the bewitching charms of a life he could not enjoy, but at the expense of honour and. virtue. 
CHAP. 
0 F F O R T U N T. 
CHAP. II 
ADY Carolina Walter was young and lovely, but unluckily plagued with a sensibility that was at a perpetual war with, modesty. 
I am born too tender, Said She one day to herself; never can reason op pose effectually my feelings: in vain am I taught that love is a crime; though willing to believe it, my heart beats to pleasure— — I answer for a pastion I do not create? 
B 4 How 
8 The FAVOURITE 
How can I help Smelling a perfume I An amiable objed; is before my eyes — are not the fensations he causes, as forcible as the perfume I breathe I 
In confeqiience of a foible she could not conquer, Lady Walter made the art of dissembling her Sole study, and grew So consummate a proficient m it, that she graced at last the character, self-interest had bid her to assume. Having the misfortune to distike her husband, she discreetly masked her disgust with friendship, and astedfed an indifference for pleasure, which Secured his esteem and confidence 
sir 
OF FORTUNE. ^ 
i, 
Sir James Walter, persuaded, from his own aversion to vice, that his lady was proof against it, rested contented with the little Share of bliss he enjoyed, and let her behave as She pleased: : liberty he gave, her ladyship did not fail to make nfe ol No woman was ever fo zealous a devotee to Cupid; yet, when her taste and delicacy disagreed. She instantly deserted that deity, and Sacrificed to Virtue. It was not enough that a man should be noble or handsome, if he Spoke only to her Senses or vanity; her reason easily triumphed over a foible she could not gratify B 5 with 
lo The FAVOURITE' 
with honour to hersels: but, wheni her affection was Supported by the merit of a lover, then he was the whole world to her; in his Smiles,, careffb, or conversation, her happi ness was centred; with her, the man of parts was always an excuse for her deviation from virtue.. 
Lady walter’s partiality for our hero was at first caused by the excellence of his Shape, and the exquisite beauty of the most expressive countenance She ever beheld; but had he posfested no other charm, the impressed ston he made would only have 
glanced 
OF FORTUNE, LI 
glanced upon ber heart. His seeming ignorance of the accomplishments he was endowed with, the decency of his deportment, the Sudden colouring that enlivened hi cheeks whenever She gazed upom him, and a merit which Spoke him: worthy of the most exalted station in life, were the irresistible allurements, which, .by raising her curiosity and flattering her pride, had at traded her inclination, and m^dc her wish for his attachment. 
The bashfulness of Patrick amazed Lady Walter. 
B 6 Suchi 
12 The favourite 
Such a diffidence at his age! exclaimed she often inwardly; I do not conceive that. Is it virtue, my rank, or the fear of being deluded into a fruitless hope, that prevents his understanding me? Modesty, unknown to me, may Soften the expression of my looks — I am tender, but not bold — Patrick has not yet read in my heart, elfe he would have answered its language, and told mei must not think of ic 
CHAP. 
OF FORTUNE. 
'3 
CHAP. iir. 
■^; ^earied of the life he led, and almost unable to oppose the repeated'attacks i.ady Walter made upon his Senses, our hero attempted to believe it was more agreeable to postefs the goods of this world, than to be deprived of them. Thus, half armed against the feelings of honour and humanity, he no longer met the Smiles of Lady Walter with a blush, and left to chance the difposal of his virtue. 
Over 
14 The FAVOURITE' 
Oveijbyed at this alteration in patrick’s behaviour, her ladjfhip betrayed her content in every feature; and iess careful of preserving her reputation; than desirous of consirm inghcr conquest, She employed every Seductive art to captivate himi Had our hero been ever So virtuous,, his heart could not have long resisted a woman, who,, in every step” and gesture, was all grace and vo* luptuoufness; the desire of pleasing, still more attractive than beauty itself, strikes at once every Sense witte delight, and takes forcibly from us the. power of thinking. We See, 
listen,. 
o F F O U T U N e: 15: 
listen, feel, and then deliver up our reason to the delusion wc arc Surrounded with. 
The certainty of being loved, that would have encouraged a modem beau to taste immediately of the good fortune complimented him with,, was not Sufficient to embolden Patrick to abuse the foible Lady Walter cxprefsed in his favour;. Some more Substantial proof of that foible was necestary, to make him forget the distance between them, and the obligations he owed to Sir James 
One 
i6 The FAVOURITE 
One morning Patrick pasted by a bower, in which he Saw Lady Walter laying upon a bed of turf, strewed with flowers; her dress agreed with a summer’s day; and her attitude with the desire in his heart. The lovely sight stopped our hero — he gazed — a feigned steep invited him to approach -- Virtue Spoke, he fled away. 
Oh! the fool, the fool! exclaimed Lady Walter, as Soon as he was gone. 
And her inclination changed immediately into contempt. 
CHAP. 
OF FORTUNE. 17 
CHAP. IV 
will not forgive an Injury done to their charms.; indulge their vanity, and never a No, shall you hear from their lips, and never a frown shall you see on their brow. 
Our hero’s fear of offending cx asperated sh much Lady Walter, that, the instant she came into the house, she Sent for the steward, and bid him turn Patrick out of her Service. 
What, 
l*s The fanotrulte 
What! Patrick! Said the steward,, ^ with the accent of surprise and. Sorrow. 
His astonishment made Lady Walter fenstble of her indiscretion.. 
Yes, Patrick! replied her lady fiiip, calmly. 
He behaved So well, I thought he had no enemy : who has prejudiced your ladyship against him? 
Who? nobody. Am I not the mistress to act as I please?? 

O F F O R T U N E. 
And She turned her head, to conceal a half blush. 
You promised, my lady, to hik dying mother, you would take carc: of her Son. If you are not his protector, what will become of him?; Forgive, my lady; but I cannot help Shedding a tear for the unhappy youth — Poor Patrick I how afliicti cd he will be when he hears olyour anger! His Sole care was to Serve you; he had noi other thought, noi other pleasure., 
Arc you mad, Mr, Burton? faidi Eiady Walter Smiling., What inter 
pretar 
20 The FAVOURITE 
pretation do you give to an insignificant tone of ray voice? Have I Said 
I would forsake Patrick? He has 
% 
done nothing to merit my anger: for his good, Sir, I will part with him; it is to keep the word I gave to his mother, that he must leave me. Sir James and I are his friends, and will always be So: here his youth and talents are of no advantage to him; they lie buried, through his want of experience and knowledge of the world — 
She pansed, Smothered a sigh, walked, then sat upon a Settee. 
Tell 
O F 
FORTUNE. 21 
Tell Patrick to prepare to Set out tomorrow morning for Dublin. i’ll recommend him to the countess of Dempster; under the protection of that lady he cannot fail to prosper. 
God bless your ladyship I cried the steward, with tears stowing down his checks. 
Amazing! amazing, indeed! Said her ladyship, when left alone; how quickly we change! how fickle our hearts! an hour ago, the most fiery paffiqn raged in my breast, and now, I who part with the object of it! 
Am 

22 The FAVOURITE 
Am I not a prey to a momentary Indignation? Is it true I do not love Patrick? when he is gone, shall I not repent? shall I not long to see him? how cold he wasj when my soul was almost delirious! He was apprehensive of my anger !• — he gazed, praised every beauty — y^t gazed and praised only! Had he. loved me, would he have been fo discreet?? he would have braved death itself, had it been between him and me. — My anger, the anger of •a tender woman, would have helped him to victory, had he attempted to deserve it! — No more of Patrick — he is unworthy of me. 
CHAP. 
o F. FORTUNE. 
23 
CHAP. V 
^^00d news! my honest boy. Said the steward, funnlng with open arms to our hero, to morroi^ you leave this place, and go to .Dublin. 
To .Dublin! exclaimed Patrick, darting a stupid look at his friend. 
Yes, my boy, her ladyship, who wishes you well, will have you try jour fortune in the world. 
She 
24 The FAVOURITE 
She wishes me well, and will have me out of this place I Are you in earnest? 
Whence your surprise, Patrick? When you see me So charmed with her goodness, and the prospect before you, can you doubt my word? 
Oh! my honest friend, Mr. Burton! I did not expect Such news: though a delight to you, ’tis death to me. 
What do you mean? you are not in love, are you? 
Patrick 
o F F O R T U N E. 25 
Patrick thought it prudent to dls semble. 
I am So young, Mr. Burton, I am afraid to venture in the world : here 
I 
I am happy — could you not prevail over her ladyship to let me stay with her a few months longer? 
She is determined; you must Set out tomorrow: : be, my boy; thou shalt go with a good purse, and well recommended. Leave off thy bashfulnefs; it would do thee discredit at the Countess of dempster’s. A little teint of impudence, vol. I. C Pa 
26 The FAVOURITE 
Patrick, graces a lovely figure; Seem to esteem thyself if thou wilt be esteemed by others. Thou hast another fault in thee, my boy, which will be an obstacle to thy advancement, get rid of thy sincerity as fast as thou canst. Be true with those thoulovest, provided, however, thou hast no need of them; for modern friendship, dear Patrick, like devotion, is oftener the mask of self-interest and libertinism, than that of honour and virtue. Have more hypocrisy than manners; believe not the words, but the actions of men and women; deceit 
is 
© F FORTUNE. 27 
is perpetually upon the tongue of the latter — beware especially of her who will appear to thee the most: ingenuous — under the authority of her usarped reputation she is an Intrepid liar. I have known Some, Patrick, who Swore to falsehood with the same air of innocence as thou wuuldst Swear to truth. Find out the pastions of thy protectors, that thou mayest work effectually upon them; never talk to their reason but to their Senses— — their foibles only depend for their favours. With the great differnble thy merit; they would think it a C 2 Satire 
is The FAVOURITE 
satire against diem: Show them the picture of themselves; the more contemptible the character thoit Shalt astiime, the quicker thou Shalt arlse to the Summit ot independence and grandeur. This Speech, dear boy, thou didst not expect from me : but I love thee, and will not have thee a dupe to thy good nature. Follow my advice, and thou Shalt not err; the respect paid to the knaves in power, will tell thee the contempt the fools are held in. 
That 
OF FORTUNE. 29 
That minute Harriet peeping Into the parlour, the steward got up. 
Cheer your Spirits, my boy : all 
will be wdl. 
CHAP. 
20 The favourite 
CHAP. VI 
^^URSED women and their whims! exclaimed our hero, unmindful of harriet’s presence. 
Jefhus! how he talks! Said Harriet, crossing herself as She Spoke, 
What have I done to Mr. Patrick that he curses me So? 
I curse you, child I 
Child! Have I the looks of a child, Mr. Patrick? And She humour 

OF FORTUNE. 31 
moroufly stretched her head high, and showed, unknown to her, a bosom formed by the hands of Cupid to tempt mankind out of their reason and virtue. 
When innocence is blended with Sentimental vivacity, it has a power that no man can resist; be he never So in Sensible, or tormented with care and Sorrow, his Soul must awake, Smile and pant after bliss. 
The present bewitching Scene obliterated the past out of patrick’s C 4 mind i 
32 The FAVOURITE 
mind; his eyes wandered with de lig>ht upon the lovely Harriet, and his tongue attempted in vain to express the emotions he felt: twice his lips opened to tell what fly inspired; as often, from the too great sensibility of his heart, they closed again. 
Harriet, though a stranger to vanity, enjoyed the confusion She caused: from that moment She valued her beauty, which, before Patrick was affected by it, She hardly thought to be endowed with. 
Charm 
O F F O R T U N E. 33, Charming, charming Harriet I 
And he amoroiisly took lier hand to his lips. 
Why do you do that? You don’t 
1 
me!. 
The tone of the voice is the most: moving language of the 'pasiions; words have no meaning, when the heart does not Speak them. Patrick heard, trembled, was awed, did not know what to answer; he continued to kiss the hand he held, and to breathe sighs upon it. 
C 5 This; 
34 The FAVOURITE 
This is love — Is it not? 
And a Smile, that told him to say yes. 
Dear Harriet — 
He flopped, cast his eyes down, and Seemed absorbed in thought. 
Well? — Have you nothing to say? — Whstt was you going to talk? 
The soul of our hero, though almost disabled to defend itself 
against 
o F F O R T U N E. 35 against the temptation, Scorned to abuse the candour of the lovely maid; as he was going to answcr, agreeable to her desire, honour,, which he fancied to have rooted out of his breast, painted to him the heinousness of his crime, and forced him to respect her innocence. 

Harriet! you deserve a better fate than to be deceived -- I know not if 1 love you — look not dlsirested that I may not be false — you weep! I must fly, or that tear will make a villain of me. 
C 6 Stay,, 
36 The FAVOURITE 
Stay, Patrick! fear not lovely Harriet, cried Sir James Walter, who, iinperceived by them, was come into the parlour. I have Seen, and heard — I am pleased with your feelings, Harriet — with the honesty of your behaviour, Patrick. 
Is there any honesty. Said Patrick, in doing one’s duty? Had I been a monster, Harriet would have made me humane, and generous. 
With the corner of her apron the disconcerted Harriet covered 
her 
OF F O R T U N E. 37: 
her eyes, and then, with an unvo ' luntary Sobbing, turned to the door -- 
> 
Harriet! ' cried our hero, not knowing what he did, and stepping to her. 
\ 
Patrick! 
She stopped and darted a stde * glance at him. 
A few minutes silence. 
Come here, children, Said Sir James; before you part you must 
un 
ff The FAVOUHITE 
understand one another. Give me 
your hand, Harriet -- -- give me 
yours, Patrick — Now tell me how your heart beats, 
I do not, cannot know myself, Said our hero; at present, I am under the Sway of a most enchanting 
allusion if what I feel is 
true, I love — 
The eyes of Harriet brightened with joy; She half tendered her hand to Patrick -- Modesty drew k back. 
When 
OF F O R T U N E. 39 
When you are cool, Patrick, fald Sir James, i’ll put the Same question to you again. 
May I answer you in the same 
manner: 
Harriet gave him a Smile for his wish, and, dropping a respectful courtsy to Sir James, left the parlour. 
CHAP. 
40 The FAVOURITE 
CHAR VIL 
J^EAR mcj Patrick, Said Sir James. You was at Cambridge when a malignant fever carried off your parents, who, upon their deathbed, recommended you to my friendihip. Your education at the university, had given you a pride which did not become your circumstances, and the views I had formed for your fortune. I told you what your situation was, and advised youi to Submit to it.. 
Upon 
© F F O R T U N E. 41 
Upon the offer I made to receive you inco my Service, I Saw you redden with indignation, .and I acted as if I did not perceive it. That you might rise in the world, I thought proper to humble you: in the School only of misfortune could you be taught prudence, discretion, and to have no character of your own. By havihg learned to obey, Patrick, you will be able to bear with the disdains, haughtiness, or ill nature of those to whom chance has given a Superiority over you: this, dear Patrick, has been the motive of my conduct with 
you; 
42 The FAVOURITE 
you; now that you are Such as I wished you to be, it is time to appear in the world. Lady Walter has told me her intention of Sending you to Dublin; I have heartily concurred with it; there you shall be Supported like a man I love. The follies inherent to your age I shall forgive; but, mark me well, Patrick, if ever I hear you have brought dlfgrace upon yourself by a behaviour honour cannot justify, from that moment I am no longer your friend and protector — My heart, dear Patrick, is as much concerned in harriet’s happiness, as it is in your 
own 
j 
o R F O R T U N E. 43 own. Like yon, She is an orphan committed to my care — and indeed, an angel, under the form of a woman. Long ago I have known her partiality in your favour, and sighed, with Sorrow, at the undeserved return She met with from you. The Scene I have been witness to, has Seemed to have affected your heart: if it throbs for the lovely creature, indulge its feelings, Patrick, fear not to love Harriet — Love her even to excels — thy past sion for her will enlighten thy mind, and be a Spur to thy ambition : unless we be actuated by a 
power 
44 The FAVOURITE 
full interest, we calmly wait for opportunities we could create — wait for the favours of fortue, when we might ravish them from her. Let Harriet be incestantly present to thy mind — look upon her as the object of the anxious life thou art going to live; and its bitterness will change into pleasure at the thought of her. In thy absence, Patrick, I will watch over Harriet with the tenderness of a parent; to make her worthy of thee will be my foie care and study. 
Patrick, almost breathless thro’ the want of expresstng his gratitude, 
feu 
O F 
FORTUNE. 45 
fell on his knee before Sir James — he would speak— — words expired on his lips — by his tears only, he could tell what he felt. 
That language the tenderhearted Sir James understood well fit was the only one it became him to hear, it became Patrick to Speak, 
Get up, my dear boy, get up— — 
my Sensibility — I have no 
•» 
need of thanks. 
Then embracing him astedion ately, he desired him to prepare for his journey. 
CHAP. 
46 The FAVOURITE 
CHAP. vrii. 
TTHAT is the man, exclaimed our hero, to whom I intended the most poignant injury a mortal can receive! Had I done it, what a wretched situation I Should now been in! Blested be the God, who diverted me from offending him! — I thought it So easy to deviate from virtue — to launch into the paths of vice — yet at my first trial fear and remorse intrude into my heart, prevent my guilt, and force me to repent! 
o F F O R T U N E. 47 pent! How shall I expiate for the wanton desire of prostituting the dignity of man, and abusing the parts nature bestowed on me! paf sions are a bad guide — I shudder at the alteration they made in my principles. Conquered almost as Soon as they Spoke, I Smiled at the thought of infamy, and called art wisdom, and hypocrisy virtue! To the generosity of Sir James I owe the return of my reason — is it not rather to you, lovely Harriet, that I am indebted for it! I am afraid to inquire for that truth into my heart — how Seducing ingenuity! unmoved, I have beheld the beauty 
48 The FAVOURITE 
ty of Harriet — her innocence I am not able to withstand! -- I think I hear hct talk, see her move and Smile — the happiness of pleasing her unites to the thought of her in my mind — I am already less ambitious, less impatient of the misery of my situation — the love of Harriet forms every idea, creates every Sensation. 
Southeast non e amor, ch’e dunque quel ch’io fento? 
When young men give way, for the first time, to Sentimental reflections, they grow imperceptl 
■ bly 
o f F O RT U N E. 49 
bly, fo extremely fond of the object of them, that reason, at last, becomes the most humble Servant of their Intoxicated imagination. Reveries are always friends to women : the loss they Suffer by being known, they always repair by being dreamed of. Like a castle we build in the air, we form them of every perfection, which, when we awake, we would change into as many defects, did not our heart, welcoming the dear delusion, stint itself to truth. Hariiet was not one of those women whom reason could have deprived of her charms: vol. I. D the 
50 The FAVOURITE 
the cold eye of envy would have found no fault either in her person or character. She was at the tempting feason of the first kifs; in her eyes, on her lips, round her neck fluttered, sometimes by turns, but oftener beautifully intermixed, desire and modesty. More to nature than to art, Harriet was indebted for the graces of her gait: when she trip along, she always pleased, though she was not always admired. Harriet had no need of wit to captivate; however enchanting her conversation, still more agreeable was her silence; a tender 
® F FORTUNE. 5t 
der soul would, for hours, have fixed upon her attitudes and motions, conversed with delight with the languor, or the fire of her countenance. There was no coquetry in the dress of Harriet, nor difisimu lation in her looks: at one and the same time you was forced to confess She was as virtuous as She was beautiful. 
Forgetful of the past, present, and future, our hero was taken up with the image of Harriet when the steward came to restore him to. the thought of himself. 
D z Come, 
52 The FAVOURITE 
Come, my boy, since I lose you tomorrow, I will Spend a jovial evening with you; the Supper b ready. 
And will Harriet Sup with us, Mr. Burton? 
Harriet 1 Patrick. Does She not always Sup with my lady hast thou a fancy to the girl,? 
I, Mr. Burton! not I indeed! in the confuston lam, I know not what I Say — that Sudden journey to Dublin has turned my head. 
Come, 
o F F O R T U N E. 53 
Come, come, we will settle that head in bumpers of generous wine; I am impatient to get myself drunk in thy honour. Come come. 
Our hero followed the ffewardv muttering, Harriet! I love thee! — 
CHAP. 
54 The FAVOURITE, 
CHAP. IX 
# 
Burton had too much experience not to perceive Soon, that the pensiveness of our hera had another motive, than his journey to Dublin. He remembered the “Will Harriet Sup with us ?” and concluded he was enamoured of her. 
Thou art in love, my boy, I see it plainly, whispered the steward to Patrick: it is a disease natural 
ta 
OF FORTUNE. 5^ to thy age; it becomes young men to love: however, as thoii knowest not women, I will give thee a lecture upon them. Here we may disturbed; in my room we will be more free : follow me. 
Then taking a bottle of claret in each hand, he went with our her into his room. 
Lock the door, Patrick, and let us freely drink, and talk. Here is a bumper to Harriet: may she prove honest to thee! — 
D 4 
Pa. 
si The FAVOURITE 
Patrick pledged him with a Smile;., and then owned his inclination for Harriet. 
There is no harm in that, the steward : the lass is clever, and were I twenty years younger I know not but I might — But it is; not a question of me. So, yoit love Harriet I 
I do, indeed! 
What do you intend to make of her?. a wife, or a wh —? 
‘of fortune.. 57 
Gh! Mr. Burton, Mr. Burton! do justice to the virtuous Harriet. 
First, ^ I will do justice to thee, then to her, if she chances to defer ve stand 
vou doubt she will de serve it? 
I do upon my honour: feelings are not judges of the merit of women : reason and experience can only teach what they really are. No more than the little miss Smitten with her dolli thou couldst tell D 5 the 
58 The FAVOURITR 
the cause of tby taste for Harriet,, and justify tby prejudice In her favour. Woman, dear Patrick, is an unaccountable animal, whose affections it is almost impostible to be acquainted with; she has no other character than that she borrows from her passions; and as thesc vary perpetually, she sets at defiance the penetrating eye of her observators. Vanity and pleasure are the two idols of women; before them are constantly held in chains Truth and Virtue: to their shrine Friendship, Honour, nay Nature herfeif, are daily Sacrificed. 
Ido 
OF FORTUNE. 59 
I do not shy, Patrick, that L have drawn the picture of Harriet; brought up in this Solitude, the seed of passions lay still dormant in her heart; but will that seed never Spring forth Shall Harriet be always dead to envy, silly pride, or the love of distipation? unless thou art certain She never Shall be a prey to those foibles, thou art a fool to trust thy happiness to her. 
What a contempt you have of women, Mr. Burton! have you ever loved? 
D 6 
I have 
6o The FAVOURITE 
I have, Patrick. As the hist tory of my folly may teach thee wisdom, I ’ will relate it to thee. Fill the glass. 
CHAP. 
OF fortuni E; 6: 
C H A P. X 
History of Mr. BURTON.. 
■^HENI was lieutenant in the, Second regiment of the guards I contracted an alliance with a rich merchant’s wise, who, agreeably to the prescriptions of her polite doctor, had taken a house at Cheh sea. Her husband being incessantly told She was not well. Spared himself the fatigue of visiting her, and thus left her at full liberty to 
re 
62 The FAVOURITE 
reward him for his indifference. One night, as I was returning to London on foot, and muling upon the contents of a purse of gold I had received from my innamoratciy I heard the voice of a woman crying murder, and calling for help; I immediately ran to the place from whence the voice Seemed to come, and, favoured by the moonlight, soon Saw, at a Small distance, a Spectacle which warmed my blood with indignation and fury. A young and beautiful woman forced down upon the edge of a ditch, defending herself against two ruffians, 
0 1 F O R T U N E 6j: 
fians, whilst a third held a pistol to the breast of an elderly lady, who, now and then, put her head out of the coach, and filled the air with cries and imprecations against the banditti who attempted to ravish her daughter. I drew my Sword, and, as quick as lightning, fell unawares upon the ruf stans, and at the first thrust laid one dead at my feet; then, Snatching a pistol from the trembling hand of his companion, f struck So violently his head with it, that I put it out of his power to commit a further outrage. The attack had been 
So 
64 The FAVOURITE 
So Sudden and fuccessful, that, at my advancing, towards the third ruffian, I found that fear had made him fly from the field of battle: shut, as unlucky in his flight as he had been a coward in the action, he was taken by the coachman and the lady’s footman who bravely Secured him, feeing the danger was over. Content of myself, and followed, by the hearty thanks of the mother, who called me the preserver of her daughter’s honour, I stepped with the Servant to the young lady. How Shocking the sight, Patrick! I turned my head 
with. 
o F F O R T U N E. 
with horror— — to yourself a beauty of Seventeen who, though the Sable of death was Spread over her features, looked lovely, desirable and tempting — her covered with the blood of a villain who, falling across her, had expired on her knees — Let me draw a veil 
over the distreffing Scene -- -- Now 
give a new turn to thy imagination; let her hold her gayest pencil, employ her most lively colours to represent the charms which the disorder of her dress exposed to my view r like the friendly rays of the fun in the midst of a storm, they 
en 
66 The FAVOURITE 
enlivened the dismal prospect before me — I could, at last, gaze with delight, and forget the danger she had ran, and the sttuation she was in 
Oh! bring me my daughter, my daughter 1 exclaimed the elderly lady. Where is she? Where is my daughter I 
Her voice restored me to myself; I removed the corpse and took the young lady up in my arms; then love bidding me send the Servant out of the way, I commanded 
him 
'♦ r F O R T U N E. 67 
him to fetch me Some water. Patrick, I obeyed the forcible dictates of passion; to her lips, to her bosom I paid my tribute and homage — Nature heard me — My devotion awoke the senseless maid; after an unvoluntary flutter in every limb, She began to breathe, then Sighed, then opened her eyes; at that minute the servant appeared * She knew him. ' 
John I you, here 1 ^ 
And She cast a ghastly look round her. 
Good 
'6^ The FAVOURITE 
Good God! what do I behold f 
They fell, Madam, by the handi of that gentleman. 
Heavens be pralfed I to you, Sir, how Shall I express my gratitude? 
By not Speaking of it, Madam r in the Service I have done you I find my reward. 
Generous man I by lessening. the benefit you increase my obligation. 
Sophia! 
OPPORTUNE. 69 
Sophia! dear Sophia! I die with fear and impatience — come to the arms of thy mother, dear Sophia I 
My mother lives,! Oh, Sir! never can it be in my power to acquit myself towards you. — I am weak; deign to Support me. 
I pasted my arm round her walsh and half walked, and half carried her to the coach. The joy of Mrs, Cope was adequate to the fright She had had; her daughter and I were alternately the object of her carestes. 
You 
70 The FAVOURITE 
You will come with us, Sir, said Sophia; we must know my deliverer. 
“I did not give her the trouble to repeat the invitation. What to do with the prisoners was our next thought, we were at a great loss how to dispofe of them, when the patrol coming their rounds, we gave them into their custody. 
CHAR 
F O R T U N E. 71 
CHAP. XL 
J Must takeshreath, Said Mr. Burton, filling his glass; without this claret I could not with Spirit continue the odious tale. Let us .drink again — once more, Patrick — • now I am armed against the Shame of my past folly. 
I Sat in the coach opposite to Miss Cope, who, not yet able to thank me with words, compensated for her silence with the pressure of my hand. 
I think 
72 The FAVOURITE 
I think this hour the happiest I have ever lived, Said I to her, taking her hand to my lips. 
It will not be my fault if ever you cease to think it So. 
. The presence of Mrs. Cope preventing me from answering as my heart didated, I changed the conversation, and begged to know the reasons of the russians behaviour, Mrs. Cope told me, that coming from Chelsea, where they had Supped, they had been stopped by three highway men, who, 
after 
o r F O H T U N E. 73 
after having robbed them of their money and watches, were going away, when one of them, looking at Sophia, Swore She was a beautiful girl, called his comrades back, and prevailed over them to help him in his attempt against hen The villains complied >vith his request; Sophia was dragged out of the coach — Providence Sent you to my relief, Said Sophia, interrupting her mother; for my life and honour I am indebted to you; your courage and generosity will be perpetually in my mincl 
Yod L 
E 
The 
74 The FAVOURITE 
The coach flopping, we alighted at a fine house in Golden square; I followed the ladies into a parlour, where, at the sight of the blood upon her, Sophia Screamed, Shrunk back, reclined her head against her mother’s breast, Shut her eyes, and panted with fear and terror. 
Let not your imagination, lovely Sophia, poison minutes you ought to give to the pleasure of finding yourself Safe. 
i’ll follow your advice, captain, laid Sophia with vivacity, and drawsing near me. I am wrong 
to 
o F F O R T U N E. 75 to give way to Sorrow. — To please you — 
She stopped and looked at me. 
To please you, I wfill enjoy the happiness you have procured me. i’ll go and change niy dress: stay; ril be back in a few minutes. 
One Smile before you go. 
Tills I muttered with the accent of a lover. 
She breathed that Smile, Patrick; and my heart Spoke its thanks upon her hand. 
E 2 Mrs. 
76 The FAVOURITE 
Mrs. Cope was worn out more by malady than by age. Her mind did not Suffer by the bad state of her health; in the midst of her pains, cheerfulness and good nature animated her Speech and behaviour. Often forgetstil of herfcf, She had always feelings for others. Though brought up in affluence, She knew there were wretches in want of her bounty; to difeover them was her 
principal care and pleafure far 
from turning her head from the unfortunate, She thought it her duty to relieve them.. Her virtue was too real to be Severe : readier 
to 
o F F O R T U N E. 77 to excuse than to condemn, She never construed foibles into vices, or the errors of the Senses into those of judgement. Such, Patrick, was the disposition and character of the mother of Sophia, who Seemingly possefled her virtues, when, in reality, her Sole good quality was to conceal her vices. 
E 5 
CHAP. 
78 The FAVOURITE 
CHAP. XIL • 
^J^'^HE looks, Smiles, and afifabirity of Sophia made me rejoice in an event which flattered me with her esteem and gratitude. From those Sentiments to love, Said I to myself, there is but one step — since I love, I shall please — Thus, Patrick, deluded by my senses,. and sin adventure So romantic, I formed Sophia with every perfection, and adored that work of my fancy. 
Mrs. Cope, who had remained with me in the parlour, respected 
my 
OF FORTUNE. 79^ 
\ 
my reverie, and indulged it with her silence. At last, feeling the impertinence of my behaviour,. I made an apology for my absence of mind. 
I will not. Said Mrs. Cope with a Smile, ask who was the object of it; you would not perhaps Satisfy my curiosity. 
Indeed, Madam, I will not dis^ semble it from you; in your daughter my thoughts were centerec^ A beauty in the distress I have Seen her, has too much power over a man of my Sensibility : I fear that an incident So favourable to her will turn to my disadvantage. 
E 4 That 

8o The FAVOITRITE 
That compliment, captain, I expected from a man of your gallantry 
I am an enemy to falsehood, Madam, I say plainly what I feel. 
When you are cool, the illusion will vanish. 1 know the impref sions affecting circumstances make upon our heartswhile they last, reason is a stave to Sentiment; tomorrow you will perceive your error. 
May it be So I 
Why that wish?? you not fotced Sophia to esteem you? Who can boast a claim to the affections 
of 
or FORTUNE. 8i 
of a virtuous woman, if the man of honour thinks himself unworthy of them? Do justice to Sophia; it is the merit of the man, and not his rank or fortune that will determine her heart in his favour. The Service you have done me deserves a reward my gratitude will think none too great.. If fate has ordered that you must love Sophia,. please her and (he shall be yours. I beg only a favour of you; before you attempt to please my daughter, - inquire Soberly into your hearthave not the least doubt about its feelings; ■ let neither ambition nor avarice deprive you of your judgement.. 
E 5 I Scorn 
82 Th FAVOURITE 
I Scorn to deceive : no mean past fion Shall ever disgrace my heart— — love never having known the emotions and language, I cannot positively tell the nature of the new trouble to which 1 am a prey— — bring it, if possible, to the bar of cool reason. 
Then behave, captain, as (he will didate., 
As Mrs. Cope spoke those words, Sophia entered the parlour with an air, a gait, a gesture, that fixed my Soul in my eye; she Saw the pleasure she gave, and that knowledge made her still more lovely. 
When 
G F FORTUNE. 83 
When Venus went to meet Adonis, She had certainly the looks of Sophia, and was like her, thought less, Smiling, pleased with herself. 
This dress, Said Sophia, has operated a miracle: I have forgot the past, and will enjoy the present. Will my gaity be grateful to you, captain? I think it a return for your favour — tell me, it will not lesten your opinion of me — for — 1 know not why — 
A half blush.. 
I wlsh^ for your esteeim 
And unknown to her mother — E 6 Your 
s4 The FAVOURITE 
Your looks tell me you will Share in my mirth — Do I mistake. their exprefston 
Out of pity, charming Sophia, 
t t 
exert not your powers of pleasing be the reverse of yourself, or I Shall be miserable. 
Will ill nature, haughtiness, and; frowns make you more happy? 
Yes, much more So, than the bewitching accent you have spoke with. 
I am neither a prude, nor a, co qnette, captain; my looks, accent,, and Smiles belong to my age: I 
am 
ti F FORTUNE. 8^ 
am just Such as nature and education have made me — in the very presence of my mother I do not Scruple to declare that I esteem you — The preserver of my life and honour has an unquestionable right to my regard and friendship. Come,, dont be So grave — with your leave,. Madam, i’ll ring for Some refreshment— — glastes of burgundy will revive our Spirits. 
Thou hast had a good thought,, Sophia; ring the bell. 
The Servants came, and an elegant cold repast was Served 
We 
86 The FAVOURITE 
We will call when we want you, said Sophia to the Servants — I hate those people for their impertinence; they wonder I can be gay after my adventure; is it not natural to rejoice when we have escaped a danger we had not the Smallest: hope to avoid? Dear mother, and you,. Sir, deign to give your opinion of my conduct; is it ridiculous and unseafonable I 
I find no fault in it, Sophia don’t mind those fools; thou livest for thyself, and not for them. Let us sit down. 
Have I your approbation, captain? 
I hav 
OF F O P. T U N E. 87 
I have a mind to say no, that I may see how you would resent it. 
You wish to see me difpleased? 
What a glance she darted at me, Patrick! it completed her triumph ill my heart. 
Love bidding me to please, I humoured the enchanting sprightliness of Sophia, and reflection intruded no longer into my mind, but to make me Sensible of my hap piness. I told them my name, family, and situation in life. 
am 
8ss t h^ favourite 
I am related to the Secretary of war. Said Mrs. Cope, and I have not yet asked one favour which he has not immediately granted. I am your friend, captain; command my interest; I Shall employ it Successfully in your favour. Consider my house as your own — at all times I’H See with pleasure the protector of my daughter. 
Her repeating watch telling two o’clock, I got up, thanked Mrs Cope for her generous offers, and turning to Sophia, expresied in my countenance a want I did not dare to sneak;; understood me. 
Take 
© r F O R T U N E. 
Take it, captain : it is a debt you have a right to demand. I am not So unjust as to refuft to pay it. 
And with a stnile She tendered me her cheek. 
Your cheek! 
She blushed 
Steal— — not. 
I printed one kiss upon her lips. 
If I leave you my heart will you take care of it? 
I know 
, o The FAVOURITE 
I know not — will yoii trust it to me? — 
Promise me to use it well — 
No parley, captain; defendyour felf, or Surrender at discretion. 
deserve your victory — an honest heart ought to find grace with a generous conqueror. 
Fear not, captain; adieu, yuf qucs au fevoir. 
CHAR 
OF FORTUNE. 51 
CHAP. XIII 
R. Burton, having with fervency renewed his adoration to the bottle, continued in the following manner. 
When I was by myself, I would lit in judgement upon the new guests I harboured in my heart: but being in the height of my rapture, I could think only of the beauty, gesture, Shape, gait, and voice of Sophia. After Some hours Sleep, finding myself more calm, I reflected on sophia’s behaviour, 
and 
52 The FAVOURITE and thought, in Spite of love, that her disposition was too volatile, her wit too lively, and her countenance too free and voluptuous. 
She is young! this observation deluded my reason: I attributed her levity to youth, and the freedom of her nianners to her innocence. 
In the afternoon I went to pay my devoirs to Mrs. Cope and Sophia, and was received with the most engaging politeness and familiarity. Some company coming 
in. immediately after me, my eyes 
told 
OF FORTUNE. 93 told Sophia what my tongue was not at liberty to Speak; and her ^inswers in that language I interpreted favourably to my passion. Unwilling to engage at cards, I took a French leave and went to vauxhall 
Lost in a tender reverie, I was walking in the most dark and Solitary place of the gardens, when a heavy (hower falling Suddenly, I hastened toward the boxes — a female voice stopped my flighty I thought I heard Sophia. 
Wretch, 
94 The FAVOURITE 
Wretch let me go, exclaimed She amouroufly; have you not been happy? — It rains too hard — I neither can, nor will stay — let me go — 
Under these trees, answered a man, we Shall find a shelter against the storm — Come, lovely Sophia; deny not a man who adores thee — 
'‘then, from the rustling of her Silk, and her desiring him not to go So fast, I judged he was carrying her to the place he had Spoke of. 
What! Sophia! cried I with fury; a nd I rushed into the thicket 
OF FORTUNE. 95 ket they were in. Blinded by mad ness, I did not See a tree before me, and struck my head So violently against it, that I fell senseless at the foot of it; when L recovered, I found mjself So faint, So wet, and So giddy from the violence of the blow, that I gave over the Search after Sophia, and returned to London. 
The improbability of Sophia being at vauxhall, made me blush at my folly — Sophia at vauxhall in the arms of a lover! I wondered at my impertinence, and cursed 
love 
96 The FAVOURITE 
love for the injustice I had wantonly done to the virtuous maid. 
Tthouglit my reason convinced; 
it was not, Patrick. Could I mistake 
the voice of Sophia.? Jealousy \ 
ray breast — I realised what, a few minutes before, I had persuaded myself to be a chimaera. My situation being a torment not to be born with, I Sent my Servant to Mrs. Cope under the pretence of inquiring if I bad not left my fnufs box in her drawing-room. The ladies Sent me their compliments and an invitation to dine with them the next day. 
Whom 
D r F O R T U N E. 97 Whom did you Speak to, John? 
To the young lady, Sir. 
My fusprcion vanished, and I heartily despised myself for having indulged it. 
CHAP. XIV 
next day as I was going from St. james’s to the queen’s palace, I met miss Cope in company with a young lady and a pert coxcomb under the dress of a clergyman, whose familiar behaviour vol. I. F She 
The FAVOURITE 
she Seemed to countenance by her look 
I am glad to see yoti, captain. 
And one Smile to confirm what ihe Said. 
Why did you leave us fo abruptly yesterday f 
And she unaffectedly walked with me, leaving her company behind. 
I hate cards, charming Sophia. 
So do I, captain; had you stayed, we would have talked Some 
none 
F F G R T U N E. 99 
nonsense or another, and posiibly forgot the tedious hours. 
In your conversation I would have been happy — how did you pass your time? 
My friend Miss Robinson called upon me, : we went to kensington gardens. 
The very same voice that I heard yesterday! exclaimed I inwardly. 
The demon of curiosity made me turn my head; but, as if that motion had been to the clergyman a signal for retreat, he whispered a F 2 few 
100 The FAVOURITE 
few words to the lady he was with, and walked off. The whisper, and the Sudden retreat of that man, did not please me; at that minute only, I Saw the impropriety of sophia’s conduct. 
She would not have left her company, Said I to myself, had She not feared I Should know the voice of that man. This observation She instantly confirmed by waiting for her friend, and betraying an involuntary joy at the departure of the clergyman. 
Forgive, my dear, Said Sophia; but I hate to be Seen with Such a 
frib 
o F F O R T U N E. 101 
fribble as that churchman; I think our reputation more Safe with an officer of the guards. The deportment of that fellow is the Satire of decency and religion: look, how he walks! have you ever Seen anything So ridiculous? 
One would take him, indeed, answered Miss Robinson, for a pe fit maitre in love with himself, or going to a rende%~vous. 
I with, Amelia, you would get me rid of his acquaintance, or desire him to behave more confistent ly with his character. 
F 3 
Why 
102 The FAVOURITE 
Why don’t you forbid him yotir house, or frown him away from you when you meet with him in a public place I 
Mr. Parker, my dear, has the patience of a Stoic; he does mind an affront no more than a compliment; unless I tell him plainly, begone, you are a fool, he never will understand me. 
Though he is my coustn, I muss own he is a conceited fop 
However marked with real contempt the tone of sophia’s voice,. I fufpested her of hypocrisy; the 
more 
OF FORTUNE. 10^ 
more keen She had been in her Satire against the clergyman, the less I doubted her inclination for him: yet Such an air of innocence was Spread on her countenance, that I needed all my reason to impeach her honour and veracity. 
So young, and yet So vicious 1 — The thought was worse than death. — The fear of betraying that thought carried it fo often in my eyes, that Sophia began to grow uneasy and anxious. Reflection removed instantly her anxiety, and changed it into a concern for me. 
F 4 
What 
104 The FAVOURITE 
What ails you, captain? Are you not well? 
And (he gently tapped on my fingers with her fan. 
I had Such a dream last night — 
Can a dream distress a man of sense?? 
looked So much like reality,, that, even now, I am inclined to believe it true. 
It Is astonishing how eastly, we are a dupe to our imagination I What can that dream be, which made Such an imprestion upon you? 
You 
OF FORTUNE. 105 
You was the Subject of it, ‘ 
I, captain I 
And she laughed. 
Pray tell me the part I acted in it. 
The part of a fond woman ^ving herfelfup to the transports of a lover. 
And that lover was — 
'f 
It was not I. 
Poor captain! you are not happy in your dreams. 
Then taking an unfeigned air of dignity, • ' 
F 5 
Did 
io The FAVOURITE 
Did you not say you was inclined to believe your dream true? 
Patrick! her air of dignity confounded me: it commanded my respect and proved her innocence. 
Forgive, charming Sophia, 1 adore you — passion had intoxicated my judgement — grant me my pardon — 
Leave me, Sir. 
And I Saw a tear trickling down her cheek. 
Leave me. 
And she turned with her friend towards the ftable yard. 
CHAP. 
OF FORTUNE, icr^ 
CHAP. XV 
"vyhat a damned jilt that Sophia L Said Patrick, filling Mr. burton’s glass, and emptying: the Second bottle; So much art and hypocrisy at Seventeen! Had She really about her the innocence of my Harriet, Mr. Burton? 
The advantage, Patrick, was rather on the fide of Sophia; had modesty herfels chosen to come among us She would have put on the features and talked the language, of Sophia. 
F 6 
io The FAVOURITE 
At what School could She learn to be So vicious and false? 
At the School of nature, love, and necessity. 
So, my dear Mr. Burton, yoit Was a dupe to the tear She ilied, and believed her innocent! 
Passion bid reason away : no longer did I think Sophia guilty. 
God forbid Harriet Should have the soul of Sophia! 
Amen, Patrick : but let us have another bottle; call up one of the Scoundrels below. 
A Ser 
OF FORTUNE. 10^ 
A Servant came. 
Tell the butler to Send me two bottles of N ® 13. 
An’ please your honour. Mister Simon is So busy now — - 
Bufj! you dog! Can he be So busy as not to do what I command B 
An’ please your honour, what your honour says is very true; but he may kick me for the mest'age for ought 1 know. 
What is he So busy about? 
An’ please your honour, said Peter, playing with his hat, if I say 
it, 
no The FAVOURITE 
it, the young master there, may haps will be angry with me,. 
Fear not: Speak, Said Patrick, 
Well master, Mister Simon is making love, as they call it, upon the. terrafs to Miss Harriet, 
The deuce he does! Said Patrick,, getting up and going to open the window,. 
Come, come, Patrick, Said the steward, fit down: don’t Spoil the Sport; thy turn will come, my boy; don’t grudge Harriet the compliment Simon is now paying to her charms. Go, Peter, stiouldst thou 
have 
OF FORTUNE, lit 
have thy bones broke, bring me the wine.. 
Master Simon making love to: Harriet!. exclaimed Patrick. 
Is it not natural that a young fellow Should talk of love to a fine woman 
Can Harriet listen to him I 
That She does, I am certain of it. A woman, Patrick, must have a toy to play with, it matters not who he is. So long as he amuses her senses, or flatters her vanity; were She not a coquette She would 
die 
112 The FAVOURITE 
die with spleen. Be Sure that every hour a lover is absent is always given up either to his friend or enemy. Women are like gluttons, who, after having eaten an hearty meal, are still inclined to taste of every tempting trifle that comes before them. 
Let me peep out of the window. 
'To give her a new right to make a fool of thee! Be discreet, Patrick; if Harriet perceives thou art jealous She will use thee like a stave. Expect neither justice nor generosity from women : fond of thee if thou art indifferent, indifferent if thou art enamoured of them; such is their 
chaos 
FORTUNE. 11^ 
character: for one who will not abuse the conquest: She has made thousands will tyrannise over it. Care less for Harriet and She will care more for thee. 
Sure Harriet is not false! 
Simon has possibly an equal right with thee, to burst: out into the same exclamation But here is Peter. 
Here is wine, an’ please your honour. 
Without broken bones I hope, laid Mr. Burton. 
Quite 
II The FAVOURITE Quite sound, by jelhusi I Said I came from your honour, and Master Patrick.. 
‘what! two bottles? said Harriet. Does Mr. Patrick intend to get drunk I 
People, answered I, may Sure drink two bottles, and not get drunk. Miss Harriet said she wondered how a young man could sit drinking, when the evening was fo fine. He very likely likes it better, answered I; shall I tell him what you said, Miss r No no. Said Mister Simon.. Ye, yes, said Mist 
Har 
or FORTUNE. 115; Harriet. Sir, they wait for the wine, Said I to Mister Simon; an’ please your honour. Mister Simon damned me, and Said he was coming; then. Sir, as I was leaving them, I heard Mister Simon ask for a kiss — 
Fora kifs, said Patrick! 
Yes, for a kifs. Master; miss Harriet said She would not give it. Well, ril take it, said Mister Simon. 
Did he take it? said Patrick, 
I don’t know. Master; but (he ran away, and he ran after her; 
She 
ii The FAVOURITE 
She tumbled down, an’ please your honour, and — “What? Said Patrick, ” and I believe he would have tumbled by her, had not my lady’s waiting woman, who was with her, stopped him by the steeve, and Said he was a dirty Scoundrel to behave in that Saucy manner to Miss Harriet — ‘‘ ’tis well it is not worse” ” Patrick, returning calmly to his leat — Then, Sir, I called aloud for Mr. Simon, and he came to me swearing he would have the kifs, when he comes back. I told So, an’ please your honour, to Miss Harriet, who laughing, went into 
my 
t) F FORTUNE. ri 
my lady’s apartment. that’s all, an’ please your honour, I know of the matter. 
that’s enough, honest Peter, Said Mr. Burton; leave us alone. 
I don’t like the laughter of Harriet, Said Patrick. 
It is devilifhly ominous. Said Mr. Burton, drawing the cork out of the bottle; girls like the play, though they don’t like the man. When you have heard my cursed history, Patrick, you will know more than you do. Here is to you, my boy. 
D -- -- -- 
II The FAVOURITE 
D -- -- on to women! Said Patrick. 

don’t be So rash, boy, Said Mr. Burton; there are thousands, who perhaps, deserve to be blefied: thou hast but conjectures against Harriet, and conjectures are nothing. Judge not women upon their indiscretions, for all would be thought guilty. Listen with attention; i’ll continue my panegyric of women. 
CHAP. 
OF FORTUNE, 119 
CHAP. XVI 
J Deserve a thousand deaths if She is innocent, Said I to myself, following Sophia with eyes expressed five of love and Sorrow. She is not So excellent a comedian to perform with Such ingenuity a part which would not be her own. At her age it is impossible to dissemble So well: Vice would forcibly Spring forth under her mask of virtue. Why Should not two women agree as perfectly in the sound of their voices, as they do in complexion, gesture, graces, and 
man 
lio The favouritlll 
manners? Absorbed in the thought of Sophia, might I not be betrayed into the belief I heard her Speak? How often led by fancy, or passion, do we not hear, or See, what is neither Spoke, nor is to be Seen! Extreme love, and Sudden fear do not refledi; when they Sway in our hearts, every avenue to it is Shut up to reason. I was mistaken; Sophia was not at Vaiixhall. 
After this Soliloquy, the foollsh nefs of my behaviour came into my mind, and I wisely concluded, that a few more of Such impertinences would effectually make me as hateful, 
OF FORTUNE. Ill 
full, as I had already made myself contemptible. To prevent this event, more dreadful to me than the loss of my life, I resolved not to take the alarm, however extraordinary the conduct of Sophia, till I was fully Satisfied of her deviation from honour, and virtue; strengthened by this resolution, I went to Golden square: 
I found Sophia by herself, lost in thought, and leaning against the back of a chair; at the sight of me. She started in a theatrical manner, and tears immediately flowed upon her lovely face. I drew near her; 
vol. I. G with 
122 The FAVOURITE 
with one hand she carried her handkerchief up to her eyes, and with the other bid me to not approach. No Seduction, Patrick, is equal to that of grief in the countenance of a beautiful woman. Reflection may Set her Smiles at defiance, but in Spite of yourself, your soul Shares in her distress, and makes it her own had I been convinced of sophia’s guilt, her tears would have made me Swear to her innocence, would have melted my anger into tenderness, and my contempt into esteem 
What 
OF FORTUNE. 123 
What mortal care corrodes the breast of my lovely friend? 
This question from you to me !- — add not, Sir, raillery to insult — you know— — 
(he sighed -- 
Y ou know the cause of my Sorrow. 
Ought a jest to have offended 
you? 
You call a jest your Scorn of mel, — What in my conduct has given you fo miserable an opinion of my virtue? Is it iiiy not being able to G 2 Secrete 
124 The FAVOURITE Secrete from you the esteem you have inspired me with; I have no art — the imprestion you made upon me, I ingenuousty declared in my looks — you Saw it, and yet — ungenerous man! go from me — your presence is a torment — 
What could I faj^, Patrick? nothing'; I fell upon my knees, con fested myfeif a fool, and was forgiven. 
C HA • 
® F FORTUNE. 125 
CHAP. XVII 
T H E sacrifice of my reason Sophia rewarded with one kifs; and, from that moment my soul was in her hand, like wax She did modify at pleasure. No woman, Patrick, ever knew So well the art of pleasing, the art of working your senses into a flame, the art of making you pant after her poflesiion, Had her Smiles upon a man made me, diffident : with one look or a word she brought joy back into my heart. She had such an at trastive voluptuousness in her atti« i G 3 tude,. 
126 The FAVOURITE 
tude, as called irresistibly your Soul to six upon her lips — that attitude She did Seem to command; perpetually checked by modesty, you would have Sworn it was against her inclination she obeyed nature, and captivated your heart. 
Every day I found a new charm in Sophia, a new motive to glory in my passion for her. Mrs. Cope saw with delight the preference her daughter gave me over all the men of her acquaintance, and treated me with the familar tenderness of a mother. 
At 
OF FORTUNE. 127 
At last, impatient for happiness, 
I offered my hand; it was accepted; and the wedding day was fixed. I thought myself, Patrick, at the Summit of human felicity: to pos fess the woman we adore, and by whom we are loved 1 Can there be a Superior bliss I 
On the morning of the eve of our marriage sophia’s maid came to me. 
I want to peak to you, captainc. Can anybody hear me? 
G 4. 
No 
128 The FAVOURITE 
No body, pretty Nelly; my Servant is out. What is your message?? does my dear Sophia? 
You will not call her dear when you have heard me. 
What do you mean, Nelly? 
And I looked wild, and trembled in every limb. 
Your dear Sophia is false, Sir — - 
■ Falfel.good God! — no — it is impossible— — — you enjoy any pleasure in thus tormenting me? Your jest is death to me, 
I won’t 
OR FOR T U N E. 12^9, 
I won’t kill you. Sir; not I,, indeed! So, Sixy your most humble fervanc 
Stop, thou murdering maid 1 you have Said already too much — tell me you was not in earnest — tell me that Sophia is not false — oh I my heart is torm 
unless you are cool, I will not Speak,. 
Well — 
And I arose with fury — 
I will be cool — Speak, 
G 5 ' You 
130 The FAVOURITE 
You frighten me So, captain, I cannot speak— — 
false I Hell and furies I 
Sophia is not false, Sir 
And she stepped to the door 
You shan’t go, neuy — I must know all, and then die in agony ofrage — 
Pray, Sir, don’t hurt me — I came to Serve you — indeed I came for that only. ' 
And She fell at my feet. 
arlse; 
OF F O R T’U N E. 131 
A rise; fear not; • thou art Safe — now for the murdering tale — Spare me not — I am ready for grief, andi death.. 
Lord! how you talk! you will not Sure die for a girl, wlio does not love you— — you? A man to be So foolish!. fie 1 
How often, in thy presence, has not Sophia Sworn She did love me !: 
It is because She Swore it, ' that you Should not have believed her — have you not heard her Swear upon her hopes of everlasting happiness She never had given a kiss to G 6 a mam 
j32 The FAVOURITE a man — yet, how many did She not dally give to her lover I 
Her lover! who is he? 
Mr. Parker, 
A clergyman! Is he not 
He Is. 
Confusion! what a dupe I have been! what an infamous wretch Sophia! my blood is burning hot with indignation — Nelly, I once knew their intrigue — I thought I was certain of it — She persuaded me I was wrong — Heaven! what woman Shall man trust to, since Sophia is falfel 
Capos 
FORTUNE. 135-. 
Captain, if you are wise, you will make the best of my intellh gence, and behave like a man: call pride to your help, and by a bold stroke make your mistress the woman you intended for your wife. This is a revenge worthy of you : ril tell you frankly, that I Serve myself in Serving you. Mr. Parker had found his way to my heart before he was intimate with Sophia — her youth and beauty pleaded against me — 1 was neglected, then forsaken and then laughed at. The desire of revenge forced me' to Submit to my fate; I watched the lovers; 
fur 
t34 The FAVOUR IT H 
Surprised them, and am now their Gonfiden.d — This night Sophia and Mr. Parker have devoted to pleasure till this day prudence has 
ruled their enjoyments as you 
are to be married tomorrow I need not mention the compliment they are resolved to pay you; Now, captainj will you perform the part of your rival, or sit contented with the loss of your Sophia? Remember her charms- -- to' yourself the caresses of a fond woman who thinks to have her lover in her arms — Well? 
Ido 
0? FORTUNE. 13, 5; 
I do not hesitate, Nelly, Said I, delighted with this plan of revenge; but Parker must be punished, and' you rewarded— — 
Spoke, by all that ik good! exclaimed Nelly; in his punishment i’ll find my reward; I ask. no other of you Return upon: him the affront he intended to put upon you; force him to wed so? phia when you have obtained all: that she can grant. He is a coward- -- you insist, he will obey,. 
It shall be So.. I pled ge thee my honour and life. 
Now 
1-6 The FAVOURITE 
Now let ns look at our watches. Five and thirty minutes past ten by mine — just the same by your’s; that’s right. Mr. Parker comes at twelve at night — you must be at the door — mark me well -- precisely at eleven otelock;; don’t knock — you Shan't wait. i’ll let you in — from my room you stiall steal into that of Sophia — no light Shall be in it — not one word must you Speak — Sophia will be as stienc 
Agreed, agreed. Oh, thou my guardian angel who hath Saved me from infamy, how Shall I Show thee my gratitude! the reward I 
have 
or FORTUNE. 137 
have promised yon, Nelly, is not Sufficient: here is a purse of one hundred guineas; with this accept my friendship; never, Nelly, Shalt thou know want, if fortune continues to Smile upon me. 
Good captain! though I do not deserve this purse, i’ll take it, that I may not be thought a fool. Forget not the hour — 
No, no, by heavens, I Shall not. * Adieu. 
CHAP. 
138 The favourite 
C H A P XVIII 
J DO not understand tbatctove of yours, Said Patrick, helping hiin felf ta a bumper, and pasting the bottle to the steward; had you stncerely loved, you would either have grown mad, or plunged your Sword in the breast of Sophia, or pistolled yourself out of life. 
The Sentiment of my folly, Patrick, prevailed over pastion, and restored me .to my reason. Pride Spoke, and contempt deprived her 

OF F O R T U N E. 13^ 
instantly of all her rights to my heart: I felt that my senses only thirsted for the night of bliss I was to enjoy. Her beauty * ihe thought of revenge — fancy fired my soul, and I Submitted to their law. 
Faithful to her word Nelly, introduced me into sophia’s room. 
The daylight broke upon us, and revealed to Sophia a mystery, which overwhelmed her with despair. She stared at me with a ghastly look, and exclaiming “I am betrayed and undone !” Sunk in a Swoon upon her pillow. I had 
not 
140 The FAVOURITE not the inhumanity to exult in her distress; the sensation of pleasure, which still circulated iri my veins, made me her friend, and bid me to be generous. With the help of Some Salts, in a few minutes, I brought her back to herself— — opened her eyes, and turning them from me, burst forth into Sobbings and tears. 
Be calm, dear Sophia; out of respect for yourself be calm, and attend to me. Your reputation may still be free from blame; though you have used me as an enemy, I will be your friend and 
protec 
OPPORTUNE. 141 
protector. What will your tears, and Sorrow avail you .I' Be calm, dear Sophia; I am a man of honour, and will not betray you. 
- How She panted with fear and shame, Patrick! 
O! what a disgrace falsehood has brought upon me! I deserve it — I shall not complain — I am in your power — 
I will not abuse it. Your reason, Sophia, must tell you the part you are to act; change the husband into a lover, and the lover into a husband. Listen to justice, it will side for me. ' 
Had 
142 The FAVOURITE 
, Had not Mr. Parker an invincible aversion for marriage, I would not have deceived you — 
I will cure him of that aversion,; when he knows I am acquainted with the injury he pro posed to do me, he neither can, nor will dare to refuse you for his wife. 
Indeed! I have been very ungenerous to you — how Shall I make amends for the past? 
I Smiled — 
She understood me -- -- -- and the 
past was forgiven, and forgot. 
Mr. 
0 F F O R T U N E. 143 
Mr. Parker valuing his life more than his honour, became sophia’s husband— — was bribed into Secrecy — and I continued to act the lover, 
O, the infernal jade! exclaimed Patrick, what a lucky escape you had, Mr. Burton! you make me hate women. Let us drink; I must drown the thought of Harriet in this wine. Could you be happy with a woman, for whose favours you was not indebted to love, but to her fear of your indiscretion? 
pleasure loses Soon its charms, when the heart does not partake 
of 
144 The FAVOURITE 
of it. The illusion, that had Seduced my Senses, vanished with the gratification of the desire which had created it. No confidence could I place in the woi; nan who had deceived me; nature and her beauty, only, She had to thank for mj transports, and the silence of my contempt of her. — Sophia, dear Patrick, prejudiced me So strongly against her Sex, that to this day, I have considered woman as a toy, that has no other real value, than that wshich imagination gives it. Prosit by my experience, Patrick; adopt my opinion of woman, if 
thou 
OF FORTUNE. 145 
thou wilt not falla prey to that noxious, deceitful animal. 
CHAP. XIX 
J WILL drink no more, Said Patrick, that I may remember your lecture upon women; it would be folly to Set my reason against your experience — I don’t lo<^e Harriet htdf So much as 1 did before I heard you— — when 1 awake She will totally be out of my memory. Your Sophia, to a mind like mine, ' must be an infallible antidote against love — She looked more in vol. I. H nocent 
146 The FAVOURITE 
nocent than Harriet; and yet — what hypocrites these women are! 
Be like them, Patrick; return deceit for deceit; thou hast no other means to avoid the Snares they will lay against thee. If thou art not their tyrant, thou Shalt be their stave; there is no medium between those two extremes in a connexion with a woman. Circumstanced as thou art, thou Shouldst think of women, as thou dost of a diversion after hours of trouble or study; let her be to thee a play, a novel, a bottle of claret, anything capable of enlivening thy exhausted Spirits. — Beware 
# r F O R T U N E. 147 ware of turning that remedy into 
poison— — -- -- happiness will cease, 
when thy infatuation begins. Ambition, my dear boy, ought to be thy Sole passion;; it is diverted by the silly cares of a man of feeling, or gallantry, it will be productive of no good to thee. Nature having formed thee to please, it will be thy fault if thou lofest thy time with women: in this polite age they will Spare thee the fatigue of showing them a respect, they cannot inspire, but at the expense of their pleasures. Never fear to offend the women, who will smile upon H 2 thee 
148 The FAVOURITE 
thee with the looks of voluptuouf iiefs; let her reputation or virtue be no check to'thee; answer the language of nature, and thou Shalt be forgiven. Modesty in man is a perpetual object of ridicule for women; I know not a virtue they defpise more heartily than that — it is a mirror held to their vices, which the man of pleasure and of the world, never expose to their eyes. The man of true merit, Patrick, has no chance with the fair — he is a living Satire to themv — it Is only by being unworthy of their favours, that thou canst obtain them. Come, it is late; here is bon repos to thee. 
Our 
OF F O R T U N E., 149 
Our hero withdrew from the steward’s room, and muttered, as he went to’his own, Thanks to Mr. 
burton’s friendship, I have learned to know women! Never can I be a dupe to their art, if I follow his advice. The most innocent desires to please — that desire is naturally attended with coqiiettry — When a woman has began to be false, it is impossible for her virtue not to fall gradually a victim to her hypocrisy— — habit of deceit makes it natural to her — I am afraid there are - more Sophias in the world, than I thought of — She looked more innocent than Harriet! — With H 3 a mean. 
1^0 The FAVOURITE 
a mean, base, guilty soul, ' She looked more innocent than Harriet'! No longer, will I, from their features, form my opinion of women — their countenance is too often a .contrast to their hearts — Levity in a woman is neither So alarming, nor So dangerous, as an affeded reservednefs: when the behaviour agrees with the feelings, we cannot be led into error — 1 must avoid the sight of Harriet, Set out without venturing my reason and liberty — She is So young. So tender. So beautiful! — the danger, I fear, would prove too great for me — reflection would vanish before her charms — 
1 am 
GF FORTUNE. 151 
I am but a man — what man can withstand a beauty either Smiling or distrested! I must not See Harriet — time wsill convince me of her affection — if it is real it will outlive an absence of a few years — Then fortune, and love will crown lis with their most exquisite bliss 
Pleased with this resolution, Patrick thought no more, and gave way to steep. 
H 4 
C H A P. 
IS The favourite 
CHAP. XX 
tgarly the next morning onr hero was Sent for, by Sir James Walter. 
You will breakfast with my lady and me, Patrick, Said Sir James, tendering him his hand, in an affectionate rnanner, and then Set out for Dublin. A horse and Some gold are the, only equipage you want. This letter you will deliver to Mr. Felton my agent, who Shall 
provide you with lodgings, and a wardrobe becoming me to give, and 
you 
OF FORTUNE. 15^ you to accept. Deal with all men, dear Patrick, as if they were your enemies; trust neither to the friend ship they will feign for you, nor to their protestations of honour, and virtue. Actions and not words declare the man of pi'obity — The villain only talks of justice and honour, that he may be thought the reverse of himself. Form no connexions before you are Satisfied they are worthy of your esteem and confidence; even then, keep your Secrets in your own heart— — friend today may be an enemy tomorrow. PI east women, flatter h5 
1^4 The FAVOURITE 
their passions, indulge their whims, and nevtr appear to understand them when your discernment wculd humble their vanity. Be false in your own defence; but never employ art where none is intended against you. Lady Dempster is a great favourite with the Lord Lieutenant: it is in her power to Serve you. As, in her opinion, that man has more merit, who has the most handsome figure, I dare say She will think it her duty to use all her interest in your favour. Lady Dempster, Patrick, is not one of those women, whose self-love enjoys the 
respect 
or FORTUNE. 155 respect of their admirers; their Surprise at the sight of her charms is much more flattering to her pride; it is only in the desires of her lover that She finds the praise of her beauty. That taste you must comply with; many have lost her protection, who, had they humoured her fancy, would have been preferred to posts of honour, or profit. 
Our hero thanked Sir James for his instructions, and promised to make them the rule of his future conduct. 
Now, Said Sir James, tell me your thoughts of Harriet. 
H 6 Feel 
156 The favourite 
Feelings at my age, anstvered Patrick, are So much like passion, that it is very easy to mistake their nature; absence, only can discover k to me. If, far from Harriet, I can live happy — 
I understand you, Patrick : to that test I will have you put your in clination fpr her— — all men and women as prudent, none would repent the choice they make : but it is in our nature to be deluded, and to cheristi the delusion — few would to truth Sacrifice an agreeable error 
Afer 
OF FORTUNE. 157 
A Servant corning in, Sir James bid him to tell her ladyship the breakfast was ready. 
My lady is not well, answered the Servant; she won’t come down. This letter she Sends to Mr, O*’ Hara for Lady Dempster. Her ladyship wishes you a good journey,. Sir. 
. Proud, whimsical woman t exclaimed Sir James. don’t mind her impertinence, Patrick; a woman is not a tractable animal — let us breakfast. 
When the tea equipage was removed, Sir James gave Patrick a 
purse 
T5S Th FAVOURITE 
piirse of fifi: y guineas, embraced him. Saw him to his horse, and recommended him to his guardian angel. 
The change in his situation elated the heart of Patrick; pleased with the part he was going to af, he almost realised the flattering hopes he entertained, and Saw himself the object of envy and riding in state. When his vanity had stiffidently fed upon the bewitching dreams of the prospect before him, he thought of Lady Walter, and did not fail to do himself the honour of the whim which had deprived him of her company. 
She 
OF FORTUNE. 159 ^ 5 She was afraid, exclaimed he in a rapture, to betray my power over her; had not her husband been present, her discretion would have given way to love — at the sight of me, she would have forgot my silly behaviour of yesterday, and sighed a wish I would not go — her ladyship has cured me of my false delicacy — no other woman shall ever complain of my respect when her looks or attitude will tell me to be confident and happy, Mr. Burton is right; modesty In a man is an impertinence of the first magnitude; I must get rid of it. 
CHAP. 
io The FAVOURITE 
CHAR XXL 
jntoxicated with the consdous nefs of his dear self-importance, our hero rode thirty miles without stopping; and to please his horse, who by his unwillingness to proceed, Seemed to beg for refreshment, alighted at an inn, Patrick had hardly Sat down to his dinner, when a noise, accompanied with the polite epithet of w — e, b — h, c, struck his ears, and called him into the yard. 
Out 
OF FORTUNE. ii Out of pity, stop; don’t kill me, cried a young, and pretty woman decently drested, bedewed in tears, and with dishevelled hair, flying from a man, who, with rage in his countenance, horse wlpped her before him. 
Monster! said our hero, putting himself between the man and the woman he called a b — h and a w — e, are you not ashamed of yourfels? What! to beat thus a woman! what injury has fire done you? 
None at all. Sir, none at all I exclaimed the woman. i’ll tell 
you 
i The FAVOURITE 
you, Sir, how it happened; only let my husband give me the time to justify myself; I ask no .more. 
D — n the b -- -! fiid the man, 
stie is not my wife. 
What right have you then to beat her? 
What right? Blast you for your question 1 have I not a x'ight to beat anybody if I choose to do it.? Who shall Say no, when I say yes? 
And 
OF FORTUNE. i 
And he put himself in an attitude that would have frightened a man less intrepid than our hero. 
Softly, my friend, Said Patrick with great composure; you will find people enough here to dlfpute your right, if you attempt to exert it without any colour of justice. Let us hear this woman. 
Sir, Said the woman, I am as innocent as an unborn babe; if my husband Saw what he did not See, it is none of my fault. Indeed, I am innocent, Sir 
What! 
j64 The FAVOURITE 
What! cried the man, enraged at her afi'ertioii of innocence, did not your dress betray you? Was not your cap on one fide, your handkerchief ost your bosom, and your apron So rumpled — damn me I but you shall have another lash for your impudence. 
Protect me, Sir; protect me, gentlemen, addressing herself to the people of the inn, and the mob that had come to the noise — 'Protect me I 
All taking the part of the young woman, She was at liberty to tell the cause of their quarrel. 
Sir, 
OF F O R T U N E. i6j 
Sir, Said She, turning herself to our hero, I was coming down, when pasting by the door of a gentleman’s room, he politelj alked* me in; I went in, Sir. There wm a bottle of wine upon the table; the gentleman filled the glass, and gave it to me; I drank his health, and he pledged me. Sir; that’s all. When I came out I met my hus band who found fault with everything in my dress, though, to be Sure, Sir, everything was right in it. 
So much pother for a glasts of wine! Said our hero. For stiame, friend! ask your wife’s pardon. 
Ask 
i66 The FAVOURITE 
Ask that W— — pardon! I’H be 
d -- -- if I do! Come; let everybody 
look at his own business; my patience is exhausted; I will no longer be bullied out of my revenge. 
And breaking through the crowd, he lifted up his whip, and rushed towards the woman. 
You fhan’t beat her, you Scoundrel! Said Patrick, and he took him 
• ti 
by the collar. 
I will beat you, by G — d!! I don’t her — let me go — you won’t! 
And 
N) F FORTUNE. 167 
•; G And he aimed a violent blow at the nose of our hero, who, Springing aside, made a stroke at him, and levelled him to the ground. 
Ob, the villain! cried the young woman, he has killed my dear poor husband — help! — murder! 
stand 
She beat her bosom in an agony of grief. 
Is the woman mad? Said our hero, She calls her protector a villain, a murderer! 
Oh! the villain, the villain! ex clamied She again. 
And 
i68 The FAVOURITE 
And she helped the man up. 
Vexed at having lost his time, his dinner, and got a bloody nose, our hero would have horse whip ped the man and woman out of the inn, hd not the landlady diverted his wrath with her'entreaties, ' and Soothed him into a contempt for them. 
Who, Said our hero, would not have pitied that woman in her distress?? her innocent looks! — ■ let me never ride in a coach and six, if I am Such a fool again! ^ 
C II A 
OP FORTUNE. 169 
CHAP. XXII 
jpity is a foible, I must leave behind with my modesty, Said Patrick; in the career I have to run, a heart of steel becomes me better. Sensibility for others takes too much our attention from ourselves— — do what we will to oblige, we can, at the best, obtain only the name of a good-natured fool. Why the deuce Should I venture my life, or mypurfe, for people, whom perhaps, my benefits would make my enemies, or who, Should fortune raise them and fink me, would rejoice vol. I. I ' ill 
tjo The favourite 
in my misery, which would make? them more sensible of their own happiness? Charity begins at home: it is an excellent proverb — no longer do I hesitate — I will have no feelings but for myself. If the resolution is not generous, it is prudent — had I formed it sooner, this nose would not tell me I have been a. fool. 
After these reflections our hero called for his horse, and proceeded on his journey. He was within five miles of Kilmore, when ' he heard somebody behind him screaming, Stop him, stop him I” He 
turned 
o F F O R T U N E. lyr 
turned his head, and Saw a young woman carried away by her horse, and in an imminent danger of a fall. Patrick forgot his resolution, rode immediately to her aflistance, and was So fortunate as to Save the lady at the very moment she thought herself lost. 
Help me down, generous stranger; I am in Such a flutter— — am ready to saint. 
Our hero took her in his arms, and gently, at her desire, laid her down upon the grass. 
I 2 
Had 
172 The FAVOURITE 
Had you come one minute later, I Should have been thrown down — How my heart beats! 
And she put our hero’s hand upon it. Patrick paid her the compliments usiial on Such an occasion, and Spoke So feelingly of the happiness he enjoyed to see her Safe, that she forgot her misfortune to hear him talk, to See him Smile, Patrick sat down by her, and under the pretence of Supporting her, pasted his arm round the loveliest Shape he had ever prested to bis bosom. He gazed upon her, she blushed : he praised her charms, she Smiled; he 
beireed 
G F F O R T U N E. 17 3 
begged one kifs for his reward, it was granted. Youth and beauty on both sides — desire on one, gratitude on the other, would have made Patrick indiscreet, and tempted the lady to forgive, when their silence, expresiive of ayv northeast f^ai quoi both felt and neither mentioned, was interrupted by the arrival of a gentleman. 
How are you, sister.? I am almost dead with fear — are you hurt, Cordelia? 
I am well, thanks to this gentleman who Secured the horse and pre i 3 vented 
174 The FAVOURITE 
vented my sail — bad it not been for him I sincerely believe I should be no more. 
i ■ • 1 
I deserve no praises, Said our hero; I have done what everybody would have done for me. I am almost pleased with a disaster that procures me the pleasure of being acquainted with you. Was you going to Kilmore? 
We were, answered cordelia’s brother. 
I am glad of it, Said Patrick. 
And he amorousiy kisied the hand of Cordelia. 
Would 
, OF FORTUNE. 175 
Would your journey were for Dublin! 
It is for Dublin, Said Cordelia with a Smile, I am going to my husband, who lives in that city. 
V ^ 
Come, said Mr. Tilney, cordelia’s brother; it begins to grow dark, we will settle our friendship upon a bottle at Kiimore. 
This adventure looks well, said Patrick, getting upon his horse. Pity, for this time, has turned to my advantage. By'venus, Cordelia is a fine woman! She is married 
14 I 
176 The FAV our.it E 
— I ihan’t have, therefore, the foolish struggles of honour to combat with. 
CHAP. XXIII 
o U R hero rode by the fide of Cordelia, to whom he explained the nature of the impression she had made upon him, and of the remedy it was in her power to'administer against its growing fatal to his hap piness. A handsome young fellow, however impertinently he may talk, is always certain to please;; is his person and not his tongue, that Speaks eloquence, and carries persua 
fioii 
6 F F O R T U N E. 177 
lion with It. Cordelia looked as if Ihe listened, and yet did not hear one word of what he Said. 
You don’t answer me, dear Cordelia! 
don’t I? 
And stie half blushed, and half Smiled. With looks, Smiles and now and then a gentle prestiire of the hand, they continued the conversation, and arrived at Kilmore, where they alighted at the Talbot. 
Mr. Tilney taking upon him to see the horses at the stable, our he i 5 ro 
178 The FAVOURITE 
ro and Cordelia were ushered into a parlour. 
No man will be happier than I, Said Patrick, if my dear Cordelia will be as humane as she is beautiful. 
I don’t understand you. Sir, Said Cordelia. What do you mean? 
To love you. 
That I can’t help — you are very welcome to love me if you please— — 
Cordelia, won’t you return me love for love? 
I have 
OF FORTUNE. 179 
^ I have a husband, Sir; him only I must love — What has made you So bold? I am not used to Such language, I aflbre you. Keep your love to yourself, Sir, I won’t hear of it. 
You was not So Severe upon the road, Said Patrick, taking her hand in his. 
Pfhaw! ridiculous! leave my hand, Sir, or I will call. 
The deuce you will! 
And he ravished one kiss. 
Impertinent! Have I authorised ■ your behaviour? 
I 6 
Is 
io The favourite 
i 
Is not my homage a debt I must pay to your beauty? 
Walt then till I ask for it. 
• Your modesty * would oppose your doing yourself justice. 
Flattery will not do, Sir; discontinue a language offenstve to my vktu«. 
Is She in earnest? Said Patrick, viewing her from head to foot. 
Cordelia played her part So well, that our hero was awed into refped. 
Her 
G F FORTUNE. ii 
Her conquest will be the more glorious, Said Patrick; and lie put on the looks of a man of Sentiment, 
Mr. Tilney came into the parlour, and a bowl of punch was ordered. When the glastes had pasted round, Mr. Tilney Said he must go and change a bank note of twenty pounds having Some money to pay in the town. 
- You need not go for that trifle, Said Patrick, 
And taking his purse he told the money on the table. 
Bro 
tzi The FAVOURITE 
Brother, Said Cordelia, as you are going to settle accounts with Mr. Falker, the bank note will do as well as the money; there are many rogues in this town: who knows but you may be robbed? You have been So already once you know. 
Your are right, sister — pray, Si?, take your money up. 
After half an hour Spent in the most; Social manner, Mr. Tilney got up. 
I will be back against: Supper time; I leave you, sister, under the protection, of a man of honour. 
I must: 
OF fol^tune. 183 
- I must speak to you before you go, Said Cordelia. 
And dropping a curtsy to our hero, She stepped with her brother in another parlour. 
He. will make as good a dupe, Said Cordelia, as 1 ever met with in my life; he has talked of love to me, my dear; his purse Shall be mine I afllire you.. 
that’s well, Cordelia; but exchange not your favours with it — the fellow ishandfome — 
Fear not, my dear, no man Shall ever boast I have made him happy; 
the 
is The FAVOURITE 
the perpetual dangers to which I daily expose myself for you, ought to prove you my love and constancy — never, my dear, have I indulged the thought of betraying you — a Sad life we live, my dear! — 
Let us not complain, Cordelia: So long as there ate rich fools upon earth we cannot be miserable. 
Give me Some of the Soporific powder; if my lover is too presuming, a dose will make him dis creet. For all the world, my dear, I would not Suffer the embraces of a man, however So young, beautiful 
OF FORTUNE. 185 
tiful and generous; for yon only these arms will open -- don’t come at Supper — I fear I shan’t be able to lull that fellow asleep before twelve. Give me a kiss my dear; one more — again. 
Whilst our rogues were enjoying their good fortune, Patrick had be spoke an elegant Supper. 
I must make the most of her brother’s absence, Said he to himself; when we are alone, and free from the fear of being interrupted, nature and my carestes will warm the heart of Cordelia with the want of pleasure. I must be a silly fellow indeed, 
i86 The FAVOURITE 
deed, if her reason keeps awake and deprives me of victory. 
Another glass, Said Mr. Tilney, entering the room, and I will leave you for an hour — have care of my lifter, Sir, 
And he went away. 
CHAP. XXIV 
“PON my honour, he is a fine fellow! said Cordelia, sitting down, and darting a glance at our hero — would it not be prudent to give him a compensation for his 
purse 
> F T O R T U N E. 187 
purse, that he may be inclined to forgive the thief who stole it? The remembrance of his pleasures will Soften his soul, and make him indifferent to his loss— — beauty is a claim no fenstble woman will challenge — bestdes he has Saved my life — must I rob him in return for the favour, and not leave in his breast an agreeable sensation to comfort him In his misfortune? He will curse me less, when he thinks of the delights he has enjoyed — upon my honour, he is a fine fellow! — a very fine fellow, indeed! 
You 
i88 The FAVOURITE 
You are thoughtful, fair Cordelia! Said Patrick, drawing near her with more respect than passion iit his looks. 
- I am frightened out of my wits, answered Cordelia, casting her eyes down — my brother Should not have gone — I am not accustomed to find myself alone with a man — in an inn l. i wonder how he could leavemeb — 
You have nothing to fear. You Say So, but -- -- 
And she cast a look round her. 
What 
o F F O Pv T U N E. 189 
What is that door, Sir? 
The door of the room where I am to lie. 
What! a bed room 1 Good God, I Shall die with fear — keep farther — pray, Sir, keep farther — There is mischief in your countenance. 
Can you mistake the exprestion of love for mischief? 
And he fell upon his knees before her. 
It is just what I was apprehensive of. Said Cordelia. 
And 
190 The FAVOURITE 
And an hypocrite tear flowed from her eye,, 
Is love a crime? Are you not formed to please?? Cordelia! 
And he ventured one kiss upon her lips.? 
Is that your manner of protecting me, Sir? Will my protector turn the betrayer of my honour? 
As Cordelia Spoke only, Patrick grew more indiscreet: but vanity whispering her to Support the character (he had afllimed and to fall 
with 
OF FORTUNE. 191 
with more dignity, She put an end to the impertinence of our hero, and obliged him to delay his triumph. 
You have offended me, Sir, beyond the power of forgiving you —. Such an ufuage is unworthy of a man of honour — How you have deceived me! never more will I trust to the countenance of a man — indeed, I did not think you capable of Such thought, and Such behaviour. 
\ The feigned anger of Cordelia gave Such a charm to her shape and feature, that our hero, though ene briated with love and desire, was 
forced 
1^2 The FAVOURITE forced to keep within tsie line of admiration and decency. 
You are now, Said Cordelia with an inch anting Smile, Such as I wish you to be. i’ll reward you for your compliance to my commands; Will you have a Song? 
The riding dress, said Patrick, was not certainly invented by a devotee to Venus — It is an injustice to nature to bury thus the charms She gave you. I am always apt to believe that a woman cannot glory in the beauty of her neck or bcsom, when She takes So much trouble to conceal them. 
Come; 
OF FORTUNE. 193 
Come; have no 111 humour against my dress. Shall I help you to a glassj and give you a Song? 
i’ll drink with all my heart, Said Patrick; but Sure we can employ our time better than to sing. 
Will you deserve my anger again? 
Lovely Cordelia, frown no more upon a man who adores you. 
Well then, keep quiet and respect 
roe. 
Her virtue is not affected. Said Patrick, walking in the parlour; I fear 1 shall lose the day. 
vol. I. K ' It ' 
ip The FAVOURITE 
It is very warm, Said Cordelia, stepping to a glass and loosening half her waistcoat; it is lucky I did not put my stays on this morning: I do not conceive how women can wear them when they ride on a summer’s day. 
My Satire on her dress, Said Patrick to himself, has not been lost; her vanity is at work — She has no stays! — the observation is excellent — I must plague her coquettry with a Seeming indifference — She will come to me, if I don’t go to her. 
You 
0f FORTUNE. 195 
You may say what you please, Mr, O’ Kara, I think this dress extremely becoming. 
If by becoming you mean convenient, answered Patrick, I'am of your opinion. 
You have not Seen It well; come here, 
. You shan’t bribe me out of my own taste. 
What! are you fo obstinate? 
And She advanced towards him. 
♦ 
I think, upon my honour, that you are asteep. 
K 2 And 
196 The FAVOURITE 
And She wantonly Shook him by the sleeve, 
vvty do you tempt me thus, merclless Cordelia? 
I don’t tempt you — do I? 
Act as you look, and I Shall be happy. 
How do I look? 
The accent with which She pronounced the question, was decisive; our hero did not give one moment to reflection, and Cordelia was thrown into a political sit of reverie. 
I don’t 
OF FORTUNE. 197 
I don’t understand that. Said Cordelia, coming to herself. 
I cannot help it, answered Patrick; but it is So. 
‘ I will not advise a tender, virtuous woman, to be alone with a man of your merit. 
CHAP. XXV 
a misfortune befalls a man, it is rapidly Succeeded by others” — that’s a lie. Said Patrick; for to a bloody nose and a K 3 bad 
198 The FAVOURITE 
bad dinner have Succeeded the enjoyment of a beautiful woman and an excellent Supper. 
What do you Say? asked Cordelia, hanging amouroufly upon his arm. 
Our hero told the reflection he had made. Cordelia burst into laughter, and Said that the events of this life were like the weather, always uncertain; that, as to herself, she had often gone to rest with a cheerful heart, and awaked to the dismal tale of a loss, or to live a day of misery, 
It 
OF FORTUNE. 199 
It will not be my cafe tomorrow. Said Patrick, since i’ll see my lovely Cordelia. 
How happy I am. Said Patrick I What a charming adventure! How tempting a virtuous woman! Fortune, I thank thee for thy favour! 
It is almost twelve — God forbid my brother should find me here! — 
Cordelia, then, unknown to him put Some of the Soporific powder in a glass, and presented it to him. 
I 
I cannot part with you without drinking to love and constancy, 
k4 To 
2oo' The FAVOURITE 
To love and constancy, Said our hero. 
Fie drank, and the powder open ♦ \ 
rating almost instantly, left him at the mercy .of the lovely, virtuous Cordelia. 
This purse. Said Cordelia exulting in her fuccess, is mine by right of conquest — why should I Scruple to take it, when he himself did not Scruple to Seduce me, me whom he” thought the virtuous wife of an honest man? I deprive him of a trifle that cannot make him unhappy : but by robbing me of my virtue, did he not expose me to remorse 

OF FORTUNE. 201 
morse and a life of Sorrow? His crime was wantonly committed; mine is ordered by necessity. I will not however inflict the punishment he justly deserves — the beautiful youth I must pity — perhaps he has no friend in this town — he stianst be reduced to an absolute want — how calmly he steeps! he little dreams of his having been deceived by the virtuous woman he has So tenderly loved I — I never did an act of injustice with So ill a grace— — guineas! I will leave him ten — now for a parting kifs! — I must guard him against his ingenuity, that he may not another time fall K 5 a dupe 
202 The FAVOURITE 
a dupe to knaves — i’ll write a card and put it in his pocket — an advice may make amends for his loss. 
Cordelia wrote the card, took one kiss again, retired to her room, and Spoke the following Soliloquy, 
What power circumstances have over our hearts! whilst I lived retired, happy in the Smiles of my husband, the thought of guilt never entered my mind -- Vanity made me launch into the vortex of folly, and the wife was changed into a woman — Every time I wen^hto a public place, flatterers besteged 
my 
OF FORTUNE. 203 
my ears — my modesty grew familiar with their language — How easj the transition from virtue to vice! Tilney loved me — my taste for dissipation was indulged — his fortune he Squandered away to please me — me, the unworthy object of his attachment! I plunged him into misery, and he did not reprove me for it! he believed me innocent — my innocence was the only treasure he valued — to Support the woman he esteemed he degraded himself— — and poverty made him ingenious and bold — his life he incesiantly exposes, that I may be 
free 
204 The FAVOURITE 
free from want — his superior in the art of deceit, my repeated successes have made me callous to the voice of humanity and honour — to pleafiire and not to my generosity O’ Hara is Indebted for the ten guineas I have left him — Tilney 1 basely betray — Tilney who breathes but to make me happy !- — The devil is surely in me — How contemptible woman, when She gives way to pasifion — I hear my husband. 
Well, my dear Cordelia, what fuccess have you had? 
Here is the plunder, dear Jack 
And 
OF FORTUNE. 205 And she gave him the purse. 
How did you get rid of the gentleman? 
By a dose of powder — nothing else could have cooled his desires — he was So pressing. So bold! — I have had need of all my virtue and love for you to come off conqueror. It is, I affure you, a dangerous situation for a woman to be three hours in a tete a tfte with a handsome 
young fellow, who exerts all his 
♦ 
powers of pleasing her. If I had not loved you So much, I would, posiibly, not boast my triumph. 
But 
!2o6 The FAVOURITE 
But, dear Jack, your image was always between him and me; it was you more than virtue, who made me get the victory. 
My love, and esteem for thee, Cordelia, Shall never cease but with my life. Let us rest a few hours; at break of day we will Set out for Elphin, 
CHAP. 
o F F O R T U N E. 207 
CHAP. XXVI 
J T was nine o’clock, when our hero awoke; and his first thought was about the lovely, virtuous Cordelia. Impatient to see her, he was drested in one instant; a waiter came, and Patrick asked him if the gentleman and lady were up. 
Up, Sir! answered the waiter. Aye, aye, they have been up, and gone these six hours. 
Gone these six hours! exclaimed our hero, thunderstruck at the news; 
it 
2©8 The FAVOURITE 
it is impossible— — is a mistake — go, and see — 
They are gone 1 Say, Sir, — d — n them! they did not leave a poor sixpence to drink their health — Such people as that may go and be hanged for what I care. 
Good God! can it be true ?- 
Where did they lay? (how me their room, - 
The waiter went to cordelia’s room, 
« Here they lied, master. 
They 
OF FORTUNE. 209 
They! whom do you mean? Said our hero almost stupified. 
The gentleman and the lady, who came with you. 
D 
n! exclaimed Patrick, 
have I been made a fool again! 
And he came back to the parlour; he looked for his purse, and found only ten guineas in his pocket. Feeling a paper, he took it up, and read what follows. 
Be more cautious for the future; know those you form an inti 
C 
macy 
210 The favourite 
“macy with, if you will not be a dupe to more than one. 
“Cordelia.” 
CC 
This confirms my disgrace, Said Patrick; it is now beyond the pof iibility of a doubt. What a dis fembler woman is! The most virtuous would not have made a nobler resistance, would not have behaved with half her candour and decency — how naturally She performed the part She mimicked! In the midst of her raptures modesty enlivened her eyes, graced her Smiles, and attended her sighs — 1 thought 1 had an angel in my arms, and She was 
the 
OF FORTUNE. 211 
the most abandoned of her Sex! At what marks Shall I know the woman of honour, when Cordelia, Cordelia has deceived me! I fancy I see her fearful, blushing, talking me into respect— — be my Sensibility! will never reason help me against my feelings? Twice the dupe of women in one day! One I Save from the fury of her husband, and I am repaid with her Imprecations, and a bloody nose 1 the other owes me her life, and She steals my purse. Ought a monster’s vice, ingratitude, harbour in a female breast! When last night I boasted my happiness, Cordelia burst into laughter, 
and 
212 The FAVOURITE 
and hinted I might be unhappy today — How Soberly mischievous! I have no right to complain — Had I let the husband beat his wife, and the horse throw Cordelia down, I would not have eaten a bad dinner, and lost my money. I must for the future be less compassionate and credulous — Nothing is certainly more easy. 
After this resolution, Patrick mounted his horse, and took the road to Dublin. 
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME. 
U. of Pa„ Library 









V. [j 
A N i.. iriwtfflwep^. T 




V. 
„ 


THE 
GODFREY F. SINGER MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY 
MR. AND MRS. JACOB SINGER 

X 

f 

‘A; : 





\ > 



— r ‘ ■ ■.. 
ts^ 
"i 
>♦ : > is 
ft., ■ ^ 
W' 
. 

•hi 


i 51! 
t. 
( ■ 
• jv\viris^'i i'cstjniiih'.dt j 
■■ r. 

■. 'v^ 
5^1 

U, of Rau Library 
I 
THE 
IRISHMAN; 
O R, THE 
Favourite of Fortune: 
A SATIRICAL NOVEL 
FOUNDED UPON FACTS. 
IN TWO VOLUMES. 
What a Jirange world this is! 
VOL. II 
LONDON: 
Printed for W. G O L D S M I T H, N 24. 
F a*'''' nolie^ rnnx>, 
(T' 
"rx 

O' 


LOD 0 > 0 y 
THE 
Favourite of Fortune. 
CHAP. I. 
y 
ip 
•ft 
V 
P 
-■* 
y 
i 
C 
'dr 
co 
vc 

SURE, Said Patrick, all women are not So capricious, unjust, and profligate as Lady Walter, Sophia, and the two women I met yesterday! There are undoubtedly Some among the fair worthy the esteem of an honest fellow; Some vol. II B whose 

2 The favourite 
whole heart's are not the Slaves of their passions; or, whose paffibns are controlled by religion and virtue — How shall I judge of women ^ Should I not be isigltt to think that woman a libertine, who in her Speech appears the most virtuous; and that a modest wuman, whose levity indicates a corrupted soul? 
'Prudes Seem to fear the censure of the world, and the coquettes to brave it — Hke Sharpers, the former trust. their reputation to their tongue; like men of honour, the latter trust, it to their behaviour. The desire of pleasing is a coqiiettry of the mind, that Seldom affects V the 
OF FORTUNE. 3 the heart; it requires'too great an exertion of reason not to preclude love — when women are wholly taken up with the means of increa ■ fing their conquest, they are neces farily free from the dangers of a tender attachment. The woman of feeling Is the reverse of a 'coquette; her Sole pleasure is to be lost in her own thoughts; her foie study is to conceal them; her heart throbs forcibly at the sight of a handsome man; and her eyes would tell its emotions, should she not be a proficient in the art of hypocrisy. For one coquette surprised B 2 in 
4 The FAVOURITE 
in the hour, when (he is a worhan, thousands prudes are always at the * mercy of the man who talks to their fenses, and amuses their fan,, — Harriet, thanks to my propitious star! is not a prude. 
Then our hero indulged a reverie upon Harriet, and Soon after arrived'at Kells, where he alighted. Whilst the dinner was getting ready, Patrick Sat down at the door of the inn musing upon the Joss of his forty guineas, the falsehood of Cordelia, and Swearing never to help any woman in di stress. 
V At 
OF FORTUNE. 5 At that very minute a coach and four stopped at the inn. Curiosity made our hero peep into it; and he saw a lady who, though not a first-rate beauty, had a person exceedingly agreeable. She remarked Patrick, and whispered to a woman who sat by her, with an air that signified, ‘‘ Is not that a handsome fellow ?’* Her attention to Patrick depriving her of the care of 
\ 
herself, her foot slipped, and she fell into the arms of our hero, who gallantly had opened them to receive her. In her fall their lips met; and that accident, heightened B 3 by 
6 The ^' FAVOURITE 
by the' Sudden blush Spread over the lady’s cheek was observed and highly resented by a man who stood behind our hero. 
How dare you to kiss that woman, you rascal, you! 
Would you have that gentleman, Said the lady, let me tumble down, when I might have broke my leg, or my neck, by the fall? 
Who is that man? asked Patrick. 
Who elfe but a. husband. Said the lady, could behave in Such a brutish manner I 
Did 
OFF 0 R T U N e; 7 
Did he not klss you, Madam? 
suppose he did — Would there be any harm in that ?- — But he did not. 
He did. 
He did not. 
He did. '. ^ 
And he lifted his hand up to strike her. 
Strike, you brute, if you dare! Said the lady, with the tone of an heroine. Who, at your mahners, would take you * for an Alderman of Dublin, for the worshipful jus b 4 tice. 
8 The FAVOURITE 
tice, Mr. Dalton? don’t mind him. Sir. 
-1 mind him! answered Patrick, with a Supercilious look of contempt; not I indeed I 
You won’t, you fellow! I’H make you. 
Be quiet, Mr. Alderman Dalton Said Patrick; follow my advice, if you have any tenderness. for your bones. ' .y 
He trembles. Said the Alderman to the landlord; i’ll have the best of him. Then turning to our hero — 
Do 
OF FORTUNE. 9 
Do you think, you rascali you, that I am afraid of you 
And cocking his hat, he strutted before him in a fierce manner. 
Mr. Alderman Dalton, answered Patrick very calmly, I don’t doubt your courage. But I have not a mind to kick the husband of that pretty woman there. Besides you are too old, and I believe, not perfectly Sober. 
Sir, your most humble Servant, Said Mrs. Dalton, darting a Smiling glance at our hero. 
B 5 
tliacs 
10 The favourite 
that’s the language of a coward, fald the Alderman. 
And he held his fist to the nose of our hero. 
Madam, Said Patrick, will you give me leave to answer your husband?? 
\ 
dear Sir, you have my leave; indeed, you have. If Mr. Dalton is So fond of fighting, let him have his way. 
It is for you, my dear, for your dear honour, Said Mr. Dalton, that I am going to fight. 
He 
OF FORTUNE. II 
He has not offended me. You have been the aggreflbr — He looks too much like a gentleman to Suffer an affront put upon him — Come, make room -- let the gentlemen sight V — I wish you fuccess Mr. Dalton. 
And her eves told Patrick, that her wishes were for him.' - 
The good-natured wife! Said Mr. Dalton. I have now a mind not to fight. 
You shall, by Hercules! cried our hero. 
If I won’t, I won’t, Said Mn Dalton, shaking in every limb, and in b 6 treat 
12, ’ The FAVOURITE 
treating, by his dastardly countenance, the landlord to make up the difference between Patrick and him, and his Servants to take his part against him. 
Come, Mr. Alderman, defend yourself; I am ready for you. 
The deuce you are! -- Wait till F' am fo myself. 
Our hero took him by the Shoulder, and whirling him round, applied vigorousty his toe to that part, where Hiidibras says, lies the honour of a man. 
CHAP. 
OF FORTUNE. I 
CHAP II 
HOW do you find yourself, my dear, after the battle? Said Mrs. Dalton. 
He is extremely, well, Madam, Said Patrick : 1 have cured him of his disease: : dare say he Shall not have another fit of it, So long as he lives. 
I will hang the physician, or i’ll 
be d -- -- d. Landlord help me in; 
I will sign his commitimus; the Rogue shall go to prifoii. 
Not 
14 The FAVOURITE 
Not before I dine, I hope, Mr. Alderinan, Said our hero, bursting into laughter, and bowing respectfully to him. 
To beat a justice, an Alderman of Dublin! nay to laugh at him! it is high treason. 
don’t put yourself into a pastion for a trifle, my dear. Said Mrs. Dalton taking him by the arm, and helping him to walk in the house. It is la fortune de la guerre: today you have lost the vistory, tomorrow you may get it. 
Damn 
OF, F o R T U N E. 15 
Damn the fellow for his courage I I thotjght he had none. I fear I slant be able to get out from this cursed place to daj. 
Well, my dear, we will wait till tomorrow. Sit down at this window; the air will cool you. 
I don’t like that fellow — the kifs he gave you — are you not ashamed? Fie! the wife of an Alderman to have So little respect of herself, as to Suffer a kiss from Such a dirty Scoundrel! — I slant have the heart 
» 
to kifs you this month. 
You 
i6 The FAVOURITE 
You are Immenfefy delicate — Wtell, if you won’t kiss me — 
Some body else will — eh! is it not this you wanted to Say? — Juliette — Such airs will not do with me, I assure you. Had it not been for you, that fellow.would not have dared to touch me — you Spurred him to beat your husband— — mow? You look at him — don’t you? 
Is there any harm, Sir, to look at a handsome fellow? How often have I not Seen you look at a handsome woman P Did I ever find fault with it? 
^ The 
Sl, 
A 
OF FORTUNE. 17 
The cafe is very different — But come — let’s have no quarrel. Help me to a glass of wine. 
A man of your years to abuse a young man for nothing. 
A man of your years! — Come let’s have no quarrel, kifs me; let’s have no quarrel. 
To kifs you after your fufplcions of me! — Indeed I won’t — You do hot deserve Such an honest wife as I am — 
I was wrong — Forgive — kifs me’ — No more quarrels. 
Every 
i8 The FAVOURITE 
Every day you say the samel i ■ am very unhappy— — love you too much — Were I a coquette, I have beauty enough — 
I know It] I was wrong. don’t cry, 
Juliette; I can’t bear to see you cry. 
A;; 
yet you will plague me every hour in the day — If it is not one gentleman, it is another — You are Jealous of everything that comes in my way — I can neither look, nor' talk, nor Smile, nor read, nor write, nor think, but you believe I am in love, and that I betray you — It is a life of torment — You will kill me, I asliire you — 
My 

OF F O R T U N E. ^ 19 
'My dear Juliette, forget the past - — never more will I be jealous — pray — let’s have no quarrel — 
When So many young husbands ruin themselves for their wives who, you have often told me, are not So handsome as I am, are you not reproaching me perpetually for ex pences of which I am not even the object? Do I partake of the diversions every, woman of fashion or fortune is entitled to enjoy? Does not my neighbour, the deputy’s wise, eclipse me in jewels, dress, and retinue? Have I routs at my 
house? 
no The favourite 0 
house I live but for you and you complain of me! 
I do not complain — I am pleased— — am too happy — let’s have no quarrels. 
A good politician would indulge my vanity — Vanity in a young woman creates diversions, which make her less Sensible to wants a man of your years cannot — • 
Grant me a truce, dear Juliette — 
no more quarrels -- here is a fifty 
pound draught upon my banker let’s make peace — 
You 
O F F O R T U ND. 21 
You will not be jealous any morel 
No, no. 
Well, I will kiss you — now let’s dine. 
Then looking out of the window She Saw our hero, whole eyes — whose eyes — she understood their language. Did stie answer it? We will See in the next chapter. 
CHAP. III 
pains are too keen, Said the Alderman; I can hardly fit.. 
A pud 
22 
The favourite 
A pudding, which was at that moment Served upon table, put an 
end to his complaint, and, like the waters of Lethe, erased the past out of his memory. The dinner being luckily to his liking, his heart dilated with joy; he eat and drank, blesting the providence who had given him a good appetite, and the power of gratifying it. When every dill was removed, and he had but his wife to be entertained with, his Spirits Sunk, his good humoui vanished, and, with the sense o his pains, anger intruded into hi heart. 
] 
OF FORTUNE. 23 
If that handsome fellow, Said Mrs. Dalton to herself, was a gentleman, I think I would have no objection to an alliance with him : he is as much the pidure of life, as my husband is that of death. 
And fire stepped to the window. 
curse that fellow! cried the Alderman, attempting, but in vain, to rise. 
I wonder who he can be, Said Mrs. Dalton. 
A vagrant or a highwayman, for ought I know, ansvvered the 
huf 
24 The FAVOURITE 
husband: : elfe would not have respected an Alderman of Dublin? 
was 
Oh! for that, my dear, it ___ 
your fault — you was So provoking — ought he to mind the dignity of your station, when you forgot it yourself? 
And fo you take his part, eh? that vagrant's part against me, eh? 
I am only just, my dear; you drink sometimes too hard in the morning — indeed you do — brandy will kill you at last, you will see. 
I had 
OF FORTUNE. 25 
. I had not above three glasses whilst I was waiting for you — and that’s nothing, you know. 
The landlord knows perhaps who he is — fhall I ring for him? 
Do, do. • 
The landlord came, and answered the interrogatories of the Alderman, to the Satisfaction of his lady. 
His * countenance Speaks what he' is. Said Mrs. Dalton to herself; I knew he was a gentleman — ^110w, ten to one. i’ll keep what my looks have prornifed hlrii. ^ 
vol. II C What 
2: 6 The FAV.DURITE 
What do you say, my dear afked the Alderman? • ' 
That I am Sorry he Is a relation of Sir James Walter* I had at heart His behaviour to you, and wished it were in your power to punish him for it. 
Since he is a gentleman, Said the Alderman, I think no more of my disgrace. I have a iiiind to'drink a bottle with him 
ip. ^ ^ * 
don’t .do, that, my dear; Indeed. 
I could not Speak to the man who 
has kicked you fo^unmercifully. 
^ ‘ Upon 
OF FORTUNE. 27 
Upon honour, I believe I de served it. 
It is true — what does that signify? ^ I cannot help hating him, though I approve of what he did. I will leave the room if you call for him. 
Since you hate him So much, Said the Alderman, I — 
I’ detest him — no more of hiiu, iny dear. 
I am bruised all over, Said the Alderman; I Suffer in every inch of my flesh. 
C 2 
Go 
28 the favourite 
Go to bed, my dear — a few hours rest will do you good. FU sit in your room while you are asleep. 
You are good, very good, ex 
• ^ 
good, dear Juliette. 
A bedroom was ordered, and Mr. and Mrs. Dalton went into it arm in arm; fbe former delighted to be carcfted by a young wife, the latter intent upon betraying an old husband. 

CHAP. 
OF FORTUNE. 
'■29 
CHAP. IV 
J Do not displease the alderman’s lady, Said our hero to himself — he is old, I am young — he is ugly? I am handsome— — looks have told me her partiality — it is my business to convince her I am worthy of it. No danger can attendj^n intrigue with a vuman of her fortune — her feelings' agree certainly with her rank— — may be false, but not base — IHAVE nothing to fear, ^ but all to hope from hec conquest — Such a friend in Dublirf rnjly C 3 be 
30 The FAVOURITE 
be vastly nfeful fhould she not 
prove So, stie is a fine woman that’s enough. 
\ In consequence of this reasoning - hero exprested what he felt and thought in 'his countenance, and r conveyed it, in that language, to 'Mrs. Dalton, to whom nature arid ''destre explained its meaning, and i dictated an answer to it. 
'We want but an ^ opportunity. Said our hero, after having read her answer in her Smiles; 1 must procure one, or make the best of that she will give to me. 
From 
OF FORTUNE. 31 
From that‘moment Patrick watch: CD the steps of Mrs. Dalton; and feeing her retire with her shniband in a room, he guested it was to lull him asleep, that he might neither prevent her ‘pleasures, nor disturb her enjoyment of them. Otir hero was the mere emboldened to believe hifnfelf in the right, that 
f 
'Mrs. Dalton, as he wenttip stair?, had often turned her head in Search 'of him, and blushed ‘away her intention when She difeovered him. 
The lady’s'door was no Sooner Shut than he stole lip stairs t6 rr conmitre the sttuitticyn of the place, ' C 4 and 
32 The FAVOURITE 
and found in a corner of the gallery a Solitary passage which led to a still more Solitary room. ^ 
This is just what I want, Said our hero; if the lady’s looks have Spoke truth 1 shan’t long remain by myself. 
Our hero was not deceived; he had not laid in ambush half an hour when he saw the lady coming from her room and looking, before her, and then on each side of the gallery. As the darkness of the place he was in Secreted him from her stght, he plainly dlfcovered in her motions her Surprise at a disappointment llie 
did 
OF FORTUNE. 
did not expect. Mrs. Dalton was really astonished and ready to imi peach the gallantry and discernment of Patrick, when, reflecting upon the character of a man of honour, she Said, “The care of my reputation, and not a want of love and Sagacity prevents his appearancd'; he is not far ofls — that corner seeiib a retreat for lovers — Good Godd how I hate my husband when I think of Patrick! — Did I marry to fficrifice my Sensibility, and think only of the delights I am created to enjoy 1 has nature given mea heart not to feel — passions not to be happy by them !” 
C 5 As 
.34 The FAVOURITE.. Mrs. Dalton Spoke, levelled her, unknown to herself, to the .corner of the gallery, which (he jhadf hardly entered wsith a trem ^bling step, when the voice of a Servant made her start back. A struggle then followed between honour - and desire — the debate was Short, desire triumphed — Mrs. Dalton advanced, and found herself in the arms of Patrick when She had it no more in her power to retreat. Thus Surprised and defence less, her resistance was vain : She Surrendered at discretion to the conqueror, 
CHAP. 
o F F O R T U N E. 35 
CHAP. V 
^HILST our lovers, forgetful of all the world, were only studious of pleasing one another, their evil genius was upon the watch, brooding upon mischief, and Smiling at the difasier that was going to befall them. An unlucky cough awaking Mr. Dalton, he drew the curtain of his bed, and not feet ing his wife, the demon of "jealousy immediately invaded his brains, and infused in them its most malignant poison. He thought of our hero; 
C 6 and 
36 The FAVOURITE and his imagination drew faithsully the picture of his dlsgrace. ’ 
s 
I am a cuckold [- — exclaimed he, Ipping with a curse out of the bed. 
. I believe you are, Said his coachman who, at the time of his masters exclamation, had entered the room. Dress yourself; dose no time, or the birds will be flown. 
'Where are they? Where are they? An Alderman of Dublin a cuckold I — « ■ 
■ r. 
Make haste, Sir, — make no noise, r know where they are. I was; 
Sir, 
OF F Q R T U N E. 37 
Sir, in the next room, - and have heard them.. Pray make haste.. 
Damn yon,, you rascal, you I Why didn’t you tell them you was there, when you heard them I 
I wanted to be sure it was they,. At first they Spoke So low — then for a good while they did not speak at all — How could I know it was my mistress? — When She Spoke I knew her — Pray, Sir, make haste. 
Hell and Furies! i’ll kill them all. Give me my pistols — Call for my people — A cuckold! An Alderman 
of 
3« The FAVOURITE 
‘ of Dubliii a cuckold! Come, march, I follow thee. s’death! A cucklod^l 
The dlscreet Alderman cursed, and damned So loud, that our lovers had time to prepare against the danger, that threatened them. 
Jump out of that window, said the frightened Juliette to our hero — 
I will face the danger, replied he — * 
You ruin me If you do -- - 
Patrick hesitating, and her situation growing extremely critical, Mrs. 'Dalton thought it prudent to Save herself at thetexpence of her lover. 
Help! 
OF F O R T U N E. 39 
Help I help! Screamed she— — I am undone — Help!!! dear husband i Help! — Burst the door open — Deliver me from this villain — - 
j } 
Is it thus you love me, Madam? Said our hero, wondering at her audacity. You call me a villain, and charge me with a rape 1 -- - 
Mr. Dalton, overjoyed at the cries of his wife, made all possible haste to relieve her, exclaiming, as his people were battering the door, “She is innocent, my poor dear wife! She is innocent? hear how she Screams!” At the third push the 
door 
40 The FAVOURITE 
door was down, and our hero, whom the ingratitude, and perfidy of Mrs. Dalton had beggared of his courage and presence of mind, followed the advice she had given him, and jumped out of the window before any of the Servants could Seize upon him. 
Let not the villain escape. Said Mrs. Dalton, bedewed in tears, and throwing herself in the arms of her husband. Oh, my dear 1 yon came just as my strength began to forsake me — Would he had broke his neck !' Run after him; let the villain be punished — I am almost 
faint 
o F F O R T U N E. 41 
fahit ^support me, my dear, my dear husband.. 
Said the credulous aider man to his coachman, you See how things are. didn’t you say I was a cuckold L • ', i ", 
I, Sir! answered the coachman; 
i 
I have Said no Such things— — mistook me. Sir; indeed, you mistook me : I never had Such an opinion of my. mistress, I astiire you — She is as innocent as a lamb, I Swear to it. 
You may very Safely, Peter, Said Mrs. Dalton, 
didn’t 
: 42 The FAVOURITE didn’t you hear them talk low, and then not at all? 
■ It was ‘a dream, Sir; I cannot answer for a'dream — I do not remember a word of ihe matter — I am sure I heard nothing. 
'What signifies talking, rny dear? Said Mrs. Dalton, giving him one kiss — Will you not revenge me? The fellow for his impudence de serves to he tosted up in a blanket. Remember the blows he gave you — he deserves to be hanged— — he were! — 
But 
OT FORTUNE. 4a 
But how came you here? asked the Alderman? 
I will tell you, my dear I had left your room to breathe the fresh air when, walking by the corner of the gallery, that villain took me up, on a Sudden, in his arms, prevented my cries by. stopping my lips with his hand, and forcibly carried me into this room. Then the danger I ran, gave me a courage far above my strength; I filled the room with my cries, and defended myself like a fury, till, when I was almost exhausted, you heard my voice and came to my assistance. 
God 
44 The FAVOURITE 
God be blessed! Said the aider man; I am not a cuckold. 
that’s a pretty tale, by Jefhus! Said the coachman, burning to the door, and desiring his companions. to revenge they r misirefs. 
Fall upon the fellow, Said the 
i': ■ ^ 
Alderman to his people; go. i’ll follow you. 
‘ i 
Spare him not, '^ Said Mrs. Dalton, Spare not the villain, my dear Billy; I will rest in your room — Say, dear Billy, that you love me; do say So — I have had a lucky escape!! me— — canriot^ walk 
V — how 
OF FORTUNE. 45 — how my heart beats! -- the fellow is So strong and vigorous — 
I So weak and delicate 1 never before was I used in Such a manner — he treated me as he would have done the maid of the inn, without ceremony, without the least regard — You cannot conceive how bold he was, how he talked, how he behaved — those young fellows Speak a language you do not understand -- there is no refinernent in their expressions— — different from an Alderman of Dublin! Go now, my dear, after your people — i’ll sit down — one kiss before you go - — Oh, dear Billy! how I love you! * 
The 
46 The FAVOURITE 
The joy of the Alderman was too great to be exprested; My je’wel, my honey, ” were the Sole words he could Speak in return for her love and carestes. 
Your worship! your worship! we have him, we have him I 
Your Servants call, Said Mrs. Dalton; the fellow is Secured; Spare him not, pray Spare him not; 
CHAP. VI 
QUR hero precipitated himself in Such a hurry out of the window that,, not having the leisure 
C F FOR T U ND. 47 
Sure to look under him, he fell into a horfe pondi r from which he had hardly got out when he wasi Seized, by four or five stout fellows and carried into the inn yard. ^ The Alderman appeared at the gallery,. and, .with a‘> magisterial dignity. Spoke the charge the: lady hadslaid against the culprit, and condemned him to be tosted up in a blanket, in expiation for his Qstienee.c 
'Mr Dalton peeped outj. at the door, to behold' the countenance of our hero, astd'to hear his defence Rage and fury animated his features;, hut deprived of the use of his limbs, i u «. he 
48 The FAVOURITE 
0!^ 
he was laughed at by his guards, who" prepared themselves to put the Sentence inexecution. The yard was' Soon full of ..people who, inticed by the novelty of the fpedfacle, came in crouds'from every part > of i the village to partake of its diversion. A;; was brought;. Patrick ^ was"' laid upon it, and? jirked in the air amidst 'the shouts" of: hundreds of unfeeling spedfatorsp < d u. : r > 
is a - pity he Should fufrer, ' said Mrs. Dalton, since he is innocent f but he deserves it for his indiscretion— — i it does pot become ^ me to interest myselfsin his favour;! 
he 
OF FORTUNE. 49 he must be punlfhed that I may not be fuspected; the man who wantonly plucks up a rose cannot complain if he feels the thorns under it — However Severe the pain, he must endure it, and despise an accident he cannot avoid. Poor O’hara! beautiful youth 1 what a figure he makes! I hardly can help laughing -- how he curses me in his heart! 
The Alderman was bursting his sides with laughter, and calling, now and then, his lady to have her Share of his joy; but Mrs. Dalton, who was resolved to make 
vol. II D her 
50 The FAVOURITE 
her peace with our hero, did not choose to add insult to insult, and kept prudently incog, behind the fat alderman’s back, whose mirth She obligingly affected to partake. 
When the executioners were tired of their duty, Mrs. Dalton had the humanity to whisper to her husband to forgive our hero, and Set him at liberty. A pardon was in consequence thundered from the gallery, and every Spectator went away extremely Satisfied, Shouting the Alderman for the pleasure he had given them, and hooting at Patrick as they palled by him. 
Our 
o r F O R T U N E. 51 
Our hero confused, yet fierce in his looks, and darting anger and revenge at the Alderman, walked with a firm Step, though Suffering in every limb, and ascended the stairs which led to the gallery. His countenance portending no good, Mr. Dalton locked himself up in his room, and barricaded the door with chairs, tables, and whatever he thought capable to defend him against the attacks of our hero. 
Patrick, Scorning to pursue the enemy who cowardly fled before him, went into the fatal temple, where he had been alternately the D 2 fa 
52 The FAVOURITE sacrificer and the vldim; he laid himself upon the altar, and poured a volley of curses against the deity he had adored. 
I thought no danger would attend my homages to Mrs., Dalton — Base woman! how vilely site has betrayed me! when (he might have extricated herself without exposing me, She chose to make me a martyr to her reputation, and to rely for her innocence upon the breaking of my bones I I am punished Tor not having, at her desire, leapt out of the window -- Who the deuce would not consider twice 
about 
OF FORTUNE. 53 about Such a proposal? Is it then nothing to throw one’s Self out of a wsindow > lf there was no danger in that leap, why didn’t she at once venture it, and leave me by myself? because I hesitate, fly gives me up to the rage of an offended husband who, had she had but one minute more patience, might have been played off with one single word, without any injury to herself and to me. Damn my folly! I had Sworn never to help a woman in her disirefs — Why did I receive her in my arms when she was tumbling down from' her D 3 coach ?' 
54 The FAVOURITE 
coach The example of Sophia, or Cordelia ought to have taught me wisdom, and yet I obey Folly as Soon as she commands me! 1 got a bloody nose, lost my piirfe, and now have almost been drowned, and tested up to death! Had 1 Suffered for women worthy of my esteem, there would be a comfort in the thought; But like a fool, I have been the dupe of their hypocrisy, and of my good opinion of them. Are women dead to generous feelings? Can neither honour, nor love oppose effectually in their hearts the growing up of malice 
and 
o F F O R T U N E. 5^ and falsehood Even in my arms Airs. Dalton teemed with mischief! It was She who pronounced my Sentence,, and perhaps she Saw it executed! Can a tender woman be So inhumane? There was no necessity for the charge she laid against me — Had she waited I would have calmly gone through that window, and then unbolted the door, all her hushand’s Suspicions would have vanished before the Serenity of her looks, and the composure os her mind; how bold and wicked I What have the advices of Mr. Burton availed me? Indeed I deserve not to be pitied, D 4 Ohi 
56 The FAVOURITE 
Oh! Harriet, Harriet! my knowledge of women is not an encouragement to love thee! 
Then he sighed, and had the happiness to forget his cares and pains in sieep. 
CHAP. VII 
the Alderman was recovered from his fears, and no longer doubtful of his Safety, he reflected coldly upon the adventure, and remembered every Syllable his coachman had spoke; the 
recall 
OF FORTUNE.. 57 recantation of that fellow, after the Solemn declaration of his mis trefs’s guilt, he was tempted to take for a confirmation of his disgrace He had heard of tricks played by young wives to their old, husbands and his jealousy persuaded - that his lady had wit enough to deceive and betray him. Her scream in gs he recollected not to have heard before he had given, her the alarm; that reflection Silenced the authority of her displeasure against: Patrick, and mechanically carrying his hand to hia brow, he exclaimed,, I am a cuckold 1 ' 
As 

58 The FAVOURITE 
Mrs. Dalton, who had been absorbed in thought the whole time he had given to reflection, awoke from her reverie, and asked the cause of his exclamation 
How long was you, Madam, in that fellow’s room? 
Fi ve minutes I believe, Sir 
And she mimicked a Surprise at the impertinence of his question. 
Five minutes! 
And he Shook his head with an air that declared his incredulity. 
Mrs. 
• OF FORTUNE. s9 
Mrs. Dalton, (hriigging np her Shoulders with contempt, stepped to the window, and' warbled a favourite Song. 
She must be innocent since (he is So calm. Said the worthy alderman of Dublin. 
And he went to her. 
I am Sorry you are So handsome.. 
You are the most teasing, unjust,, whimsical man I ever knew in my life. Said Mrs. Dalton with a Smile. Who would condemn me for justifying your jealousy, and deserving; 
D 6 ' your 
6o The FAVOURITE 
your suspicions I Nobody, I am Sure. Were I not virtuous through principle, and the natural infenlibi lity of my disposition, you would force me to realise your fears. Provoke me not to an insidelity, which makes my modesty shudder at the thought of it. — Unmerited fuspi cions are the strongest temptations to vice. Out of pity for me, dear Mr. Dalton, don’t Speak me into a desire of revenge. Do me justice, and we shall live happy. Put well in your mind, that I neither can, nor will do you any injury. The love of my duty, and my inclination for you, are unquestionable Securities 
o? F O R T U N E. 6t 
cunties for my behaviour— — of impeaching it, for the contempt of a husband is certain death to the virtue of his wife. Will you ever think me false?? 
She amoroufly pasied her arm round his neck.. 
No, never, ray Jewel, my honey,, answered the Alderman, you are virtue itself; I do not deserve Such a virtuous wife. kiss me, my dear, kifs me. Oh 1 would I were young 1 
Form not that wifii, for I would love you less. Young men are So 
foolish. 
62 The FAVOURITE 
foolish, So Gonceited, So tedious, So much taken up with their dear Self — Upon honour, I don’t conceive how they can please a woman of delicacy. Their conversation has always given me a disgusf of them — When I hear you my ear is delighted; I am all attention, and bless my star for having given me a man of sense for a husband. Kifs me,, my dear. 
The enraptured Alderman would have thanked' her in a manner worthy of her. But thinking it best to put off his gratitude, he feigned a pain in his stomach, and unbarricading 
o F F O R T U N Ec 6^ 
ding the door, Sallied forth in the yard. 
How contemptible an old doting fool! said Mrs. Dalton, when ie was gone. How different O’ Hara t I will not have him hate, me — What shall 1 do to justify myself? — I fear he has reason to hold me In a despicable light — I will write to him. 
Then taking a pencil (he wrote the following billet: 
“To the lovely O’ Hara. 
“If you are a man of true gallantry, you will forgive my behaviour 
64 The FAVOURITE 
vioiir, however disagreeable it has proved to you. Necefiity forced me to act in opposition to my Sentiments. Though worthy of the Sacrifice of my reputation, pride bid 
"'t 
me not to make ic This foible is to our Sex, what honour is to yours;. 
'f', 
I love you, dear Patricklet this sincere declaration be my apology — -. My heart has bled at the sight of the punishment inflicted upon you;; to make you forget it, dear Patrick, will be my Sole care and study.” 
I write like a fool, said Mrs. Dalton; there is neither wit, nor passion in these lines — To be 'So .Soberly 
cool 
OF FORTUNE. 6^ 
cool at my age! What will he think of my sincerity? 
Her waiting woman coming in, prevented a further thought. Fanny was a confidant to her misiress, and knew very well the nature of her connexion with Patrick 
Have you no conscience, Madam, Said she to her mistress?? jeshus! you never shall keep a lover if you life them in that manner. So handsome a fellow to be tosi'ed up in a blanket! 
What is done, is done, replied Mrs. Dalton; I cannot help it. A 
divorce 
66 The FAVOURITE 
divorce would rob me of my fame and fortune; it is a loss I will not venture for any man. My husband is old, and labouring under complicated disorders; he cannot live long. Since he will not be a cuckold, I must humour his fancy. So long as he believes me true to his bed, it does not signify how I behave; my lovers must take their chance, enjoy it if favourable, endure it with patience if unlucky. Should they be So ill natured as to complain, or to boast, it is my business to oppose them with art and dissimulation; if my husband thinks me virtuous, the world will take my part, and believe 
o F F O R T U N E. 67 
lieve me innocent — Take this letter, Fanny; copy it, and slip it into the hands of Patrick. Go: I hear my tyrant. 
C H A' P. VIII 
. ' i 
J HAVE a mind to Set out, Said the Alderman; we may stop this night at Lord craddock’s. 
Have you any objestion, my dear? 
1 < * 
Your will is my law, my dear: we will go, when you please. 
Whilst 
68 The FAVOULITE 
Whilst the coach was getting ready, Fanny transcribed the letter, and then, unperceived, stole into patrick’s room. Finding him asteep, she put the letter in his bosom. 
Our hero awoke in high Spirits, and perfectly recovered from the fatigues of the day. 
A Sad reflection upon the past, Said he, jumping out of his bed, will do me no good. I must take things as they happen; if women will be below my esteem, how the the deuce can I mend them? They are not all like Mrs. Dalton; another 
o F F O R T U N E. 69 
there time 1 may be happier. what’s that paper I feel in my bosom? who the devil put it there! A woman’s hand — she doves me! for herself I believe. Damn her apology I to save her reputation she tofies me up in a blanket; that’s a disinterested love to be Sure. 
And he tore the letter to pieces. 
What afisurances women shave! she could not know I was asleep, yet she ventured in my room — She talks of her reputation! away with her, 'she is unworthy of a thought! ' 
Our 
70 The FAVOURITE ' 
’our hero Set out the next morning with a fixed contempt of women, and arrived at Dublin, resolving to court only the Smiles of Fortune and deserve her favours. Mr. Felton received him as a favourite of Sir James Walter, and Soon invested him with the insignia of a gentleman. 
When the vanity of Patrick had told him he might appear with honour to himself, he went to the Countess of dempster’s. The noble figure he made, and the name of Tady Walter, procured him an immediate admittance; he 
found 
OF FORTUNE. 71 
found her ladyship Surrounded by a crowd of men of every rank, who meanly disgraced themselves to merit her protection;; looks were obliging or disdainful, in proportion to the art they had of pleasing her, by making themselves more or less contemptible. When she Spoke, all were silent, ready to burst into admiration for words she made, on pnrpofe, destitute either of wit or meaning. Did she smile, joy was in every countenance; happened she to frown, a religious awe Spread itself on every feature. She distinguished a gentleman 
72 The FAVOURITE 
tleman in the circle, and envy Seemed to animate every heart; no deity had ever votaries in appearance more humble and passively obedient. At her nod, folly as fumed the name of reason, and rea son dwindled into folly. Her lapdog was in her arms: a noble lord begged the favour to kiss him, and Cupid pasted round, praised, caressed, and almost Smothered with kilfes. She asked if anybody could sing the new Song She heard / at Lady Mansts, and instantly twenty betrayed their impatience to please her by singing it. In the midst of that melodious noise our 
hero 
o F F O R T U N E. 73 
hero appeared in the drawing-room. The gracesulness of his carriage attracting the attention of her ladyship, She commanded silence, and with, ‘‘ Make room, gentlemen, ” site advanced towards him. The novelty of the regard She showed to Patrick fixed every eye upon him, and “Who is he? Who is he ?” was whispered from ear to ear. Our hero, Sensible that on his present behaviour depended the esteem or indifference of her ladyship, presented himself with an air that forced a concern in her breast, and respect from the Spectators. There was a look So irresistibly vol. II E charm 
74 The FAVOURITE 
i 
charming about Patrick, a dignity So unaffecledly commanding, Such a goodness of heart and ignorance of his own accomplishments, that Lady Dempster left off that part She had performed, for that of a woman under her most lovely form, She took the letter he gave with a Smile, read it, and then taking him to a window — 
I will thank Lady Walter for the opportunity She gives me to 
oblige you, •. 
( 
'ril attempt to deserve your goodness, answered Patrick, bowing respectfully 
Lady 
OF FORTUNE. 75 
Lady Walter recommends you warmly — she is a fine woman — 
Our hero guesied her meaning by the accent of her voice. 
To think her handsome, my lady, I must not See you, 
I won’t be flattered — that’s not the way to interest me in your favour — 
And fly glanced upon him an eye Speaking her gratitude for the compliment he had paid her. 
those women only are flattered who are a contrast with your lady ’ E 2 fltip 
si The FAVOURITE Ship — you are formed, my lady, to bear but the language of truth — It is an homage you have a right to expect from men of taste, delicacy, and honour. 
Bribe not my vanity, answered Lady Dempster; you have no need of it to gain my esteem. 
Though her ladyship did heartily despise the men in the circle, she feared their observation. No woman had a greater regard for the laws of decorum; the libertinism of her heart was Seldom visible in her deportment: it was a tribute her 
good 
Iff 
OF FORTUNE. 77 
good fense paid publicly to morality, from which, however, she did not Scruple to deviate in private, whenever love and opportunity consplred to make her happy. 
This hour, Mr. O’ Hara, I give to the idle and ambitious; for those I really consider, I have the rest of the day. 
And, without waiting for his an swer, she returned to the company. 
E 
CHAP. 
js Thi favourite 
CHAP. IX 
is a good thing, Said Patrick, to be young and handsome; had I only wit, talents, and merit to boast, I fear her lady strip would not thank Lady Walter for the opportunity stre has given her to oblige me. This is a strange world! 
And he mixed among the company. The ofsenstve indifference with which her ladystrip Seemed to enjoy the extreme Servility of her flatterers, pleased the pride of our 
hero. 
1 
O F 
FORTUNE., 79 hero, who concluded, from their respedlve behaviour, that her heart was a conquest worthy of him, and that he alone was agreeable in her eye. 
May I be So bold. Sir, asked a gentleman who sat by him, to inquire into your prescnt thoughts? You look as if in want of information; are you a stranger to the characters before you? 
Will you. Sir, give me a key to them?. I confess, I know nobody here, and that I am at a loss how to reconcile the conduct of those gen e 4 tlemen 
So The FAVOURITE 
tlemen with their rank, or the ap pearance they make. - 
that’s very easy, Said the gentleman, Smiling at the ingenuity of our hero; we want Lady Dempster, and stie has no need of us. Lord Carthegan, whom you See So watchful of her Smiles, Solicits a pension of two thousand pounds. 
I have heard of him, fald Patrick, he is immensely rich. 
He is fo, answered the gentleman; but he loves money more than his honour. 
Very 
O F F O R T U N E.. 8‘t 
Very likely he makes a good usc: of it. ' 
Oh! an extreme good one! he bestow it upon whores, horses, and wine.. 
Next to my lord is Mr, Machan,. who lately resigned a place of great prosit, because the. lord lieutenant refused to prefer one of his friends, : and wants to be restored into it he threatens to turn a flaming, patriot: but, as his abilities do not agree with that character,, all his hopes are centred in her ladyship’s favour. That gentleman who E 5 gazes 
Bz The FAVOURITE 
gazes So complacently upon himself in the glass, has had an ill run of fortune at hazard; and to repair it, he offers to sell his interest in the house, which, though not very con stderable, will be dearly bought through the mediation of her ladyship. The next to him is a Son of fortune, who, abusing of a contract he made with the government, is threatened with a prosecution, which he will certainly avoid under the protection of her ladyship. Do you see that officer on your left? he has been at every battle fought these twenty years past, and always 
be 

OF F O R T U N E. % 
behaved gallantly : no man in the army is more esteemed for his courage and knowledge in the art of war, yet all his merit would have availed him nothing, had not a pair of diamond earrings interceded for him. His generosity has procured him 'a regiment, and he is come to thank her ladyship for it. That young clergyman you see fluttering; ^ with the steps and mien of a buck,, who carries his head So high, and Speaks with Such confidence, is a favourite of the countess. A deanery is vacant; though it has been promised to a venerable old man remarkable for his learning and recti e d tilde 
§4 The FAVOURITE tude of manners, ten to one, that wretch, who is a scandal to all honest men, will be promoted to it. 
What do you mean by being a favourite? 
That word, when applied to a fine woman, has no double entendre it signifies plainly that She makes him happy. 
One would not think Lady Dempster has Such a favourite; She looks So decent, and reserved — 
Her looks, Said the gentleman, are a lie to her character. There 
are 
OF FORTUNE. 8'^ 
are two souls in her lady Ship; you See here the woman wrapped up in a mask; in her closet you would See the woman, of nature. 
You have been, in that closet very likely? Said Patrick. 
No man this fide of five and twenty was, I believe, ever admitted there; the countess in not fond of a Sentimental conversation; She compares it to those dainties which irri tate the appetite without Satisfying it 
How came you, Sir, by the knowledge of her taste ^ 
Bj 
U The favourite 
By the indlscredon of her admirers. Honour is not always upon guard against Spite — The man will Sometimes resent the affront put upon the lover. Her injustice and tyranny are intolerable. Few men are endowed with that pliancy of temper necessary to appear in the 
L 
colour which strikes her fancy. She has in her attachment the whims and inconstancy of a child the object of her affection to day^ may tomorrow be that of her dish like and hatred. 
.Her levity, Said Patrick, is the more extraordinary, that She Seems 
careo 
F F O R T U N E. 87 
careful of her reputation. Does She not Secure the discretion of her lovers by her generosity I 
Preferments are not always a compensation for ill ufage — 
At that very minute Lady Dempster dropping'ter fan, the gentleman arose with vivacity, and was So fortunate as to get the start of every one in the circle, and to present it to herladyfhip. 
What inconsistency in that man I Said Patrick to himself. This is a strange world! 
The 
88 The FAVOURITE 
The confiifion caused by the dropping of my lady’s fan, being ceased, our hero, desirous to know who that gentleman was, stepped to the young clergyman. 
Will you be pleased. Sir, to gratify an innocent curiosity? I beg to have your opinion ofthat gentleman, who leans upon the back of her ladyfhip’s chair?. 
He is a fool, a downright fool; answered the clergyman. That man has rendered important Services to the government, for whicn he would, long ago, have been 
hand 
© F O R T U N E. 89 
handsomely rewarded, had he cho sen to Sacrifice his good Sense to the stupidity of his protedors; but far from laying their follies under contribution, he will censure them, and talk of honour, virtue, and other Such miserable stuffs, which, I believe, have for ever shut his way to preferment. The only seasonable thing I have Seen him do in his life, is the taking up her ladyshlp’s fan; this attention will plead more effectually than all the merit he is really poffested of. 
shls is the favourite of her ladyship, Said Patrick, who, through 
her 
90 The FAVOURITE 
her mediation, is to be a dignitary of the church, though in every respect a disgrace to his profession! A Satire in return for her favours 1 Wshat a strange world this is! 
And he stole away out of the room. 
CHAP X 
JAM amazed. Said our hero, at the extreme facility Some people have to exchange virtue for vice, honour for infamy, and truth for falsehood — how wantonly ungrateful 
OPPORTUNE. 91 
fill that clergyman I ‘he owes his happiness to Lady Dempster, and yet he defames her, only to Show he has wit, and knows the world! His sin is heinous; he ought to be punished for it. However unjust, whimsical, and vicious Lady Dempster, she is neither So base, nor So guilty as the wretches who make, at her shrine, a voluntary Tacrifice of their honour and probity! Her foibles Spring from nature, theirs from reflection. Had he got a bloody nose, lost his purse, or been tosted up in a blanket, I would forgive him his ill humour; 
but 
92 The FAVOURITE 
but the rascal has no importance, but that he borrows from her esteem, and he standers the hand that feeds his vanity and gives life to his passions! If ever it be in my power to fink him into his former 
insignificancy, i’ll be d d if I 
miss the opportunity. From what I have Seen in her ladyfhip’s drawing-room, Tam Sensible that, to' • rise in the world, I must not depend. upon merit or virtue — I am Sorry for it. What can I do? I have no other choke than to imitate the vile fellows I have been with, or trust for my existence to the charity 
OF FORTUNE. 93 
rky of Sir James Walter — there is Something shocking in that word charity — I hate the very Sound of it — Would not Sir James laugh at me, nay despise me, should I tell him one day, “Sir, here 1 am just; Such as before I Set out; I could have made a noble fortune, but I thought it mean to owe to my person what would have been denied, to my ingenuity ?” The ridicule of Such a Speech is too evident; I will not disgrace myself with it: since Lady Dempster holds in her hands the tubs of evil and good, she is the deity I must court and adore. 
Our 
94 The FAVOURITE 
Our hero gave after dinner an an hour to the thought of Harriet, whom his fond imagination adorned with every charm, and then went to the play. He had not been long in a fide box, before Mrs. Dalton made her appearance with two ladies in the next: her dress was So extremely rich, elegant, and coquettish, that, at first, Patrick did not know the virtuous lady of the worthy Alderman of Dublin: but at the Smiling curtsy She half dropped to him, he Said, “It is the honest judge who, to palliate her ‘guilt, condemned me to be 
tossed 
O F 
FORTUNE. 95 tolled up in a blanket.” Mrs. Dalton read his thought in the return of his bow; and, that he might not indulge it, She Sat on that part of the box which was the nearest to him. Then playing with her fan. She whifperedto him — 
Fie! are you angry for a trifle? Look — am I not handsome enough to make you forget it? Will you Smile, you Saucy man? Smile upon me — 1 will be obeyed. 
The Sullen muscles of our hero did not hold against the bewitching attack; he Smiled, and She sighed 
her 
si The FAVOURITE 
her thanks, whilst the eyes of Patrick wandered with delight over her lovely persbn. Anger does not dwell long in a heart at the age of our hero; an injury done by a beauty who craves for pardon is easily forgot and forgiven. Of love and pleasure they talked and talked again; and both Swore a constancy, neither of them thought it in their power to keep. 
A Sudden and general motion of the ladies who were carrying their handkerchiefs up to their eyes, warning Mrs. Dalton of the acting of a Scene, during which it became 
a Sen 
’ © F F O R T U N E. 97 a' sensible woman to shed a tear, she put herself under arm, and paid the tribute of afsedied Sorrow to the distress of the unfortunate heroine of the piece. Then resuming her gaiety, she renewed with our hero a conversation much more agreeable to the feelings of her heart. 
tomorrow, said Mrs.' Dalton to Patrick, you will tell me the motives of your journey to Dublin. If pleasure be she cause, to me you must devote yourself; if ambition, for you ril employ my friends, my interest, and my purse. Friendship and love will unite in 
vol. II F me 
98 The FAVOURITE me to make you happy. Be as studious of my reputation as I shall be of pleasing you — no other return do I ask of a man of your honour and Sensibility. Follow me not; my people are at the door; they must not see you. 
C H A P. XL 
and friendship will unite in me to make you happy !” How quickly a sine fellow inipires a woman of this age with concern! I do not certainly owe them either thanks or gratitude, for a blockhead would be, as well as I, in titled to their love and friendship. 
Mrs. 
OF FORTUNE. 99 Mrs. Daltonshas nothing to do with my charadfer; to this handsome form of mine only She deigns to pay the compliment of her love and'friendship. The Sole accomplishment I did not value, as it was not my own, is the most likely to lead me to the temple of Fortune! How poor the chance men of merit have to please, or to rise in the world, when women have no taste, no delicacy, no respect for themselves! I must silence my pride, or return a beggar to Sir James walter’s. 
Our hero went next morning to Lady dempster’s, and was introduced into her dresting room. 
F 2 Lady 
loo The FAVOURITE 
Lady Walter, Sir, has given me So great an opinion of your morals, that I hope there is no imprudence in me to receive you at my toilet — 
Her ladyship has done me an honour I Seldom deserve, when I am with a lady of your exquisite beauty. The man who Sees you cannot think of morality. 
How can you say I am a beauty 1 • I am in Such a dishablllee — I look frightful — indeed, your compliment is a Satire. Have you not told the Same thing to Lady Walter? Tell me, I won’t betray you. 
Give 
J 
© F F O R T U N E. loi 
Give me leave, my lady, to talk of yourself only — 
You are young and discreet! It is, upon my honour, a rarity Seldom to be met with; few men would Sacrifice their vanity to the reputation of Lady Walter. You are afraid of me; are you? 
Of your charms, but not of your indiscretion. 
Hold your tongue! 
And (he put her hand upon his lips, 
I will not southeast told Such things — 
You 
102 The FAVOURITE You Should not inspir^ them and 
he ventured one kiss upon her ivory neck. 
Vastly pretty, indeed! i’ll write 
to Lady Walter how her moral young man dares to behave with 
me. 
You are the first lady of fashion I have Seen So tempting and desirable in her undress. I did not think you yesterday half So handsome, as I do now — Art is an enemy to beauty; it loses by it, the inchan ing illusion nature has Surrounded it with — at present only you are 
your] 
] 
F FORTUNE. 103 
yourself, and worthy of the homage of a man of taste and Sensibility. 
Go on, Mr. O’ Kara, go on ^ i’ll write all, I asttire you, to Lady Walter; she is the worst painter I have heard of in my life; you are the very reverse of the picture she drew of you. Come, go on, tell me Some more of those Soft things, that stow So easily from your Ups. 
Patrick, animated by her accent, and the voluptuous disorder of her dress, would repeat his attack upon her neck; but she opposed the attempt. 
-. - F 4 Keep 
104 The FAVOURITE 
Keep to flattery; a kiss is a language I do not choose either to answer or to listen to — What I you are Silent, and yet I am worthy of the homage of a man of taste and fensibility 1 Are you not that man, Mr. O Hara, or have I all of a Sudden, lost the illusion nature has Surrounded me with? 
Words', my lady, are not expref sive of the emotions you cause— — and not admiration, you must expect from me. 
Then It IS time for me to call my women — a moral man is more dangerous than I thought. 
And 
'OF FORTUNE. 105 
And She arose;; treading n luckily upon her gown, She tumbled upon the knee of our hero. Patrick was not a philosopher; Ire therefore lost no time In. considering whether the accident was natural or not; but turned it So rapidly to his advantage, that She politely let him talk his own language, In which, to her Satisfaction, he was extremely eloquent and ex presiive. 
•=•!&***** it * ^ * * -^- * * * 
they had taken Some chocolate, Tady Dempster insisted up on knowing the conversation hp 
had 
io The FAVOURITE 
had had the day before with Mr Creighton, and the clergyman. 
I observed you, Patrick; I am certain I was the Subject of that conversation. If you esteem my favour, you will not conceal anything from me. 
Could you forgive me, Said Patrick, were I So base as to betray Mr. Creighton — he thought me a man of honour — 
Will you take the part of that man against me? Talk not of honour, and please me — my enemies must be your’s — » your’s will be mine. 
The 
i 
OF FORTUNE, lot 
The tone of her voice decided Patrick. I must not live upon the charity of Sir James, Said he to himself; and he jelated the conversation he had had with Mr Creighton and the clergyman. 
The countess played too well the hypocrite to be hurried away by the violence of her indignation She listened with a Seeming indifference, and then Smiling, gently struck our hero on the shoulder. 
these two men, my dear Patrick, I have honoured with my friendship: for Creighton I procured last night a pension of five hundred F 6 ' pounds 
io The FAVOURITE 
pounds, and for the clergyman the 
deanery of A --. I thought them 
both worthy of my protection; you have dispelled the mist those Impostors had ralfed before my eyes; and you shall profit by their indiscretion and folly. By all that is Sacred, dear Patrick! I have had no other connexion with the clergyman than that which is daily formed in the world between people Sympathising in taste, and fond of the same amusements. I have a pas ston for music; he plays masterly upon Several instruments; and as I could command him at will, I thought it becoming me to reward 
his 
o F F O R T U N E. 109 
his readiness to oblige me. For those kinds of Services, dear Patrick, the great have more regard than for real merit; whoever flan ters their whims, or passions, is always Sure to find in them a zealous friend, and a generous protector. In vain does talent, genius, or learning plead for preference, we live for ourselves; and thosh who are studious of making our existence agreeable, * are the only men we value. Let not this truth be lost upon you; let it be, Patrick, the rule of your conduct. In the career yon have entered, thoirfands are your rivals for places and grandeur; 
no The FAVOURITE 
deur; he who arrives first at the goal, be it by stratagem or merit, has always the Spedfators on his fide; the means he has employed are always forgot in his triumph. Beware of pronouncing again the word of honour; that name, like that of truth, is pestilential at court. 
That advice proves me your esteem. 
And he ithanked her In a manner that enlivened her beauty, and added to her esteem of him. 
I will give you, dear Patrick, a more Substantial proof of my afisec 
tion 
J 
0 r F O R T U N E. m 
tion for you. The pension destined for Creighton, Shall be yours — 
Under what colour can it be granted to me, Said Patrick? I have yet done nothing to deserve it. You are not certainly in earnest — 
You have pleased me: is that nothing? Bid adieu to your delicacy, Patrick, or Seek for protectors where merit alone procures them. You have brought from the country an obstinacy of virtue, that, I fear, will obstruct my good intentions for you. Will 
you 
112 The FAVOURITE 
you be guided by me, or obey the dictates of your foolish heart? How came you not to improve your mind at the School of Lady Walter? Is her ladyship So Severe in her morals? Forgive the question; I had forgot you would not answer it. 
The happiness of pleasing you, my lady, deadens sin my heart every other passion; I can hardly think of fortune — Let me adore you; my soul wishes for no other good. 
• And So, my dear Patrick, you will feed only upon, my Smiles, 
and 
o r F O R T U N E. 113 
and refuse that pension, because you think yourself unworthy of it? I will not abuse an enthii' siasm So flattering to my vanity. When you forget yourself, I must be careful of you. 
Tell me the right you pretend to 
give me to that pension? 
/ 
/ 
For Secret Services, dear Patrick; that at once fatissies the court, and silences the envious. It is a present I make to my lover; and I will not be denied. Now, Patrick, I will indulge your honesty, and put it in your power to do good 
to 
314 The FAVOURITE to a sensible and virtuous man. Doctor Cramner has a just claim to the deanery, and would have obtained it, had not my interest prevailed over his merit; he Shall have that deanery; telst him So — tell him more — let him know that it is to you he Is indebted for it; the good man will welcome that dignity with the more plea Sure, that the hand which gives it Shall not expose him to the blush. I will write to his excellency the change I have made,, and I am certain he will be pleased with it... ... 

OF FORTUNE. 115 
The justice you do to Doctor Cranmer declares the nobleness of jour soul; you must, my lady, be born with a natural propensity to do good — 
That compliment, dear Patrick, I deserved before pride and ambition corrupted my heart. Could I today take a fancy for a Solitary life, and a disiike of the luxuries, that make me happy, I would Scorn to be false and unjust; but till that taste and that disiike force me from the brilliant stage upon which I am delighted to act, PH continue to perform the part which 
my 
ii The FAVOURITE 
my own inclination and the folly of men have imposed upon me. 
That ingenuous confesfion expiates for your behaviour, and makes you ten times more lovely to my eye; with me, dear my lady be tke woman you wish to be. 
I do not promise that, Patrick; habit is a Second nature — in spite of my inclination for you, my head, unknown to me, may often take the lead of my heart — I give myself up to you with my vices and virtues; let us forgive one another foibles inherent to our 
tern 
OF FORTUNE. 117 
tempers; pass me my levity, and I will, now and then, indulge your notions of honour. 
Let it be So, Said our hero. 
And he Sealed the agreement upon her Ups. 
I have a mind. Said Lady Dempster, you should carry my letter to his excellency; it will be better than a formal introduction. That man is full of his rank — answer his haughtiness with wit, and affect an indifference for his favours — there is Something of a woman in 
the 
p8 The FAVOURITE 
the composition of his character; he will be the more Solicitous to confer benefits upon you that you will be more careless of them. 
His love for you, my lady, is very natural, but how can you love him? 
Prostitute not that word, Patrick : can the woman who surren ders her power and reputation to you, love. his excellency? Ambition is a great tyrant — if men Sometimes Sacrifice their glory to it, why not a woman her delicacy? 
Is 
.or FOR T.D N E. 119 
Is not his excellency Swayed by vanity, rather than by a real paction?? 
he Sacrifices his interest to mine, I cannot doubt the reality of his affection, I know not, dear Patrick, the Why? But you have inspired me a confidence Savouring of indiscretion; 1 lay my heart 
open before you — 
Never stiall you repent it, dear my lady — 
You have a candour in your looks, 1 never Saw in any man before; 
120 The favourite 
sore; that candour must be the tallf man that has captivated me. Were all men like you, no woman would be tempted to be false; every woman would be virtuous through taste, were She not So by inclination. Men, dear Patrick, are the creators of our foibles, follies, and vices; from them we borrow our manners; to please them we are obliged to degrade ourselves. For one woman who will bear tamely the insolence or the infidelities of her husband; for one woman who will prefer a domestic life to disti pation, thousands will return the injuries done to them; thousands 
will 
OF FORTUNE. II 
will yield to vanity and partake of every diversion. What could check their thirst of revenge or their love of pleasure?? men vie with each other in contempt of religion and morality, do they not invite us to follow their examples, and be as profligate as they are? How could we be tied by virtues, the perpetual object of their Scorn! Will ridiculed modesty oppose effectually the feelings of our hearts, or the wants of our fancy? Unless virtue, honour, and decency re astiime their rights over mankind and put a stop to the tor vol. II G rent 
122 The FAVOURITE 
rent of corruption, we shall be carried forcibly by the stream. Pity the woman who Swerves from her duty, and do not condemn her; it is not an easy thing to Subdue nature and triumph over our pas stons, I am too grave; you will hate me. Has not my Speech deprived me of the illusion nature has Surrounded me with? 
The gallant Patrick proved her She had lost none of the charms he had praised in her. 
Lady Dempster wrote the letter, and our hero stepped with it to the castle. 
CHAP. 
OF FORTUNE. 123 
CHAP. XIL 
jpoor Creighton! Said Patrick; 
it is at his expense that I must be happy! I have dealt like a Scoundrel — how could I help betraying him! — those Sallies of honesty do not become a beggar — either I must return to Sir james’s, or be guided by the countess. How She talked! So Sensible of her follies, and yet So averse to her duties! She knows what site ought to do, and She acts in opposition to her judgement! She could have been an honour to her Sex -- how fatal the effects of G 2 pride 
124 The FAVOURITE 
pride and airshition! that pension. Should it be granted to me, will avail little to my happiness; the price of an ungenerous action cannot be beneficial to a man of honour — I talk of honour and I am a beggar [ -- Five hundred pounds a year! for what? For having pleased the favouisite of the lord lieutenant. His excellency will not, certainly, be Such a fool. Such an enemy to his country, as to feed my idleness upon the industry of the people. If he obeys the mandate of the countess, I cannot refute without making him my enemy — his hatred I must avoid — it 
would 
o F F O Pv T U N E. 125 
would be equally stupid and dangerous to put him in mind of his • duty— — Such ads of injustice are a prerogative of his place — be what it will, since I do not choose to live upon Sir james’s charity, I must not presume to be more wise and honourable than a lord lieutenant, who has it in his power to procure a pension of five hundred pounds to a man, who has no merit to plead in his favour. 
It was a levee day: our hero found in the drawing-room a throng of courtiers waiting for the presence of his excellency. Impatient to G 3, know' 
126 The FAVOURITE 
know his fate, he told one of my lord’s gentlemen he came from the countess, and he was immediately admitted to the closet, 
Why didn’t you wait till the levee was over? Said his excellency, musing over Some papers; Who are you? — What is your mesiage? 
This letter will tell your excellency. 
And he gave it to him. 
The woman is mad, I believe! I exclaimed' his excellency, looking at our hero, and getting up in a 
pet; 
OF FORTUNE. 127 pet; what merit has fly discovered in you worthy of five hundred pounds a year? 
/ 
It is a Secret, my lord, She reserves for your excellency; 1 have not the honour of her confidence. 
You have not the honour of her confidence! said the lord lieutenant, mimicking the pert accent of our hero. 
No, my lord. 
And he took carelessly a pinch of Snuff, darting, at the same timcy a glance at the glass before him. 
G 4 You 
128 The FAVOURITE 
A 
You think, perhaps, that Till comply with her request! 
I know nothing of the matter, my lord : I suppose you will. 
You. are wrong in your Supposition, for I will not. 
Very well, my lord; I am your most humble Servant. 
And with half a bow he stepped to the closet door, 
Who ever saw Such an asturance, ^ exclaimed his excellency! Stop, Sir. 
What 
OF FORTUNE, 12^ 
wtat is your pleasure, my lord I 
My pleasure, Sir, is to know where you have been taught that manner of begging favours? 
I have begged none of you, my 
\ 
lord; it is Lady Dempster,, and not me, you excellency refuses, 
A pretty distinction, upon my honour! exclaimed his excellency not a little startled at the answer of Patrick, and fearful of offending the conntefs. Were yorr in the place of Mr. Creighton,, would you, Sir, be deprived of a pension to which your Services G 5 would! 
Igo The favourite 
would have given you a lawful claim? 
That question, my lord, I beg. leave not to answer. 
To please Lady Dempster I must rob a man of merit of his bread I 
The reflection of his excellency struck to the heart of our hero, who, yielding to his feelings, w’^as going to act the man of honour, when self-interest whispered to him. 
Let him behave as he thinks proper; it is not your business to dictate what he ought to do; remember thou art a beggar.” 
His 
O F 
F O R T U N E. it 
His excellency stood penstve against a window, and, after a few minutes meditation, ^ turned with a Smile to our hero.. 
Since Lady .Dempster does not oppose the promotion of Doctor Cramner, you shall have the pension. Tell her i’ll send this afternoon mest'enger to London reserve your thanks for another day; I have no time now to receive them. No more of your sauciness, young man; remember that; for I will not bear with it, 1 astiire yoiu 
G 6 
m.d. 
132 The FAVOURITE 
And he went to the levee, leaning familiarly upon the shoulder of Patrick. 
CHAP XIII 
excellency honoured our hero with So many peculiar marks of friendship, that his acquaintance was courted. by the greatest men at the levee; and my lord, who observed the estests of his whimsical partiality, Smiled in himself at the folly of the devotees to the idol he had railed. Among those who came to pay their devoirs 
OF 
FORTUNE, 13^3 
voirs to bis excellency was Mr. Dalton : the worthy Alderman of Dublin stared with a gaping mouth at Patrick— — took him by the steeve. 
Do you know me I 
Yes, answered Patrick; I know you for the vilest rascal upon earth.. 
The deuce you do! you wanted to make a cuckold of me, and you have been tosted up in a blanket for it; I think, Sure, we should be even. Come, will you make it up? The friendship of a rich Alderman 
134 The. FAVOURITE derman is not to be disdained, take my word for it. 
Well, said Patrick, with all my heart; here is my hand : but there is another reconciliation to make — 
Oh r for that, nothing is more easy. My wife is the best natured woman living. Dine with us today; we will drink the past in champaign: I have the best in the three kingdoms. Will you come? 
You are So devilishly jealous, Mr. Dalton, I am afraid we Shall have a new quarrel. Either do not 
invite 
F F O H T U N E. 155 invite me to see your wife, or rely entirely upon her discretion; I have not a mind, I affure you, to offend her twice — the first frolic has taught me to be prudent. 
Come, come, as you will not venture to be tolled up again in a blanket, I won’t be jealous — tell me; you Seem very great with his excellency; have you really any interest with him? 
Have I? answered Patrick, putting on an air of importance — neither man nor woman can boast a greater. Have you any need of 
him? 
136 The FAVOURITE 
him? Speak the wordy and you will See what I can do. 
And you would oblige mel 
Why not? Are we not friends } 
I have opposed his excellency’s measures in the city. He looks upon me as his enemy. 
that’s the best situation imaginable; it is the Surest way to his friendship. i’ll have a bargain o mutual esteem Settled between you what is it that you want? 
This is not a proper place fc. such a Secret. 
Well;; 
o F F O R T U N E. 137 
Well; after dinner you will .disclose it to me. 
Lord Cartbagan, who had Seen our hero at Lady dempster’s, came to him. 
How do you do, my good friend, Mr. O’ Kara? Where do you live in Dublin? shan’t we crack a bottle together ^ What do you this evening? Are you engaged? We are a Set of the most jovial fellows in the world at G — Tavern. Will you make one? i’ll present you. 
I cannot possibly this night, my lord, answered Patrick; to rnorrow I am at your commands. 
Well, 

i38'the FAVOURITE 
Well, tomorrow; be it So. i’ll eall upon you; but, no: you’ll dine with me: I (hall expect you. 
And without taking notice of Mr. Dalton, he turned upon his heel and went out of the room. 
Is that a friend of yours alked the Alderman amazed at the familiarity between them, and vexed at not having his bow returned. 
Yes, ansvvered Patrick, coldly. 
He has a greater interest at court than any nobleman in the kingdom. 
I know 
OF FORTUNE. j39 
I know it, Said Patrick; and I can, I afliire you, dispose of his interest whenever I please. But excuse me; Something comes just now into my mind — I must talk to his excellency. 
And with the light steps of conscious importance, he pierced through the circle. 
The lord lieutenant had Seen him, with pleasure, converse with the Alderman, and was anxious to be acquainted with the nature of t heir conversation, Mr. Dalton was one of the capital men in the city, 
and 
140 The FAVOURITE 
and bad often through caprice or honesty, exerted all his influence against the measures of the administration, ' and been successful in his opposition to them. Several dou c^ ^trr'had been offered him in fe turn for his interest or neutrality; but none Satisfying either his vanity or avarice, his inflexibility had been proof against gold or honours, and he continued to fight under the banners of patnotifm, as a desperate robber who has nothing to lose and everything to gain. 
CHAP. 

or FORTUNE. 141 
C H A P. XIV 
Soon as our hero drew near to his excellency,, he was_whis pered in the ear — 
Are you intimate with that sek low Dalton? 
You do not encourage me to answer in the affirmative, my lord. 
don’t be Saucy, Patrick, Said' his excellency, simpering upon him. Tell me plainly if you have influence enough over that fellow to cheat him of his honesty. 
Does 
142 The FAVOURITE 
Does your excellency intend to purchase it? Is it worth money? What would you give? 
Anything but his own price. 
Well; i’ll be your broker, and take the job upon me. 
If you Succeed, your pension will then become a just debt paid you by the government; instead of an act of injustice, it will be one of gratitude. 
That I may enjoy it, my lord, with honour to myself, and bring the Alderman to your own terms, 
be 
o F F O R T U N E. 143 be a friend to poor Creighton; deign to say you will take care of him, and i’ll secure you the interest of Mr. Dalton.. ' 
The countess is So exasperated against him — 
Cannot your excellency, unknown to her, provide for a man of merit? Follow the dictates of your generous heart, my lord; let not poor Creighton Suffer by your goodness to me. 
It is well the countess does not hear you talk in that manner — 
life 
144 The FAVOURITE 
use your good nature ''with more discretion — bribe Dalton, and I will take care of Creighton, 
Now, my lord, you have won me effedually to your Service; your excellency may entirely depend upon my discretion and fidelity. 
Go and conquer. Said his excellency, tapping gently upon his Shoulder; let me hear of your victory as Soon as you obtain it. 
I am reconciled with my good luck. Said Patrick to himself; I did not bask cheerfully in the Smiles, of fortune, attended as they were 
with 
OF FORTUNE. 145 
with creighton’s disappointment; since he will not Suffer by me, and I can really be useful to government, I will not Scruple to enjoy my pension. In different manners people deserve Such rewards; the conquest of Dalton, may, for ought I know, prove as Serviceable to the nation as the gaining of a battle. A patriot is oftener an enemy to his country than its protector. His excellency and the Alderman want one another; it is a lucky circumstance; 1 must make the best of it. 
The worthy Alderman of Dublin wondered how a fellow he had wol. II H tosted 
146 The FAVOURITE ✓ 
toited up in a blanket could be So familiarly connected with the lord lieutenant and the first nobility of the kingdom. Ambition having, 
'on a hidden, taken postestion of his heart, he forgot the injury he had done his lady, and almost wished she had not been fo Severe, that he might have a right to the gratitude of our hero. It would ill Suit me, Said he to himself, to be jealous of a man, whose Interest with his excellency I can turn to my advantage. He may be, perhaps, a good-natured fool, and intend me no new injury; be it^whatit will, I 
must 
OF FORTUNE. 147 
must not offend him, stnce I am in need of his assistance— — I have already trusted him too much 
to put a stop to my confidence. 
¥ 
Then feeing Patrick retire from the room, he offered him his coach, which he politely refused. 
Tell your lady of our reconciliation. I have Some visits to pay. In less than an hour i’ll be with you. 
Then stepping into a chair he bid to Doctor cramner’s. 
H 2 
CHAP. 
148 The FAVOURITE 
CHAP. XV 
T is not So difficult to act the part of a courtier as I thought, Said our hero, proud of his Success, 
and of the figure he had made. 
How insignificant the difference between the men and women I have Seen! I do not know, upon my honour, if the latter have not the advantage. hypocrisy, though certainly an abominable vice, is a virtue in them that conceals the futility of their minds and the depravity of their souls. In a well' 
'
J 
GF FORTUNE. i4g> 
policed country bis excellency would dcserve to be whipped at a cart’s tail for having made the interest os Lady Dempster that of the nation he governs, and every one in his circle for their open contempt of honour and religion. I have my faults as well as they; there is no doubt of it: but, if I .am not too partial in my favour, I believe that my greatest foible is an inability to resist the allurements of beauty — Woman is So tempting an object — it works So forcibly upon my senses— — in the prime of life is invincibly armed against the Seduction of its powerful charms? 
H 3 The 
j50 The FAVOURITE 
I 
The voice of Mr. Felton, who ordered the chairman to stop, awoke our hero from his reverie. 
What news, my dear Mr. Felton? 
Some letters from the country. 
Thank you. 
He put them in his pocket, and got out of the chair. 
My dear Sir, I dome from the castle, and have Succeeded beyond my most Sanguine expectations. At my first Sally in the career of fortune, 
I have 
OF FORTUNE. 151 I have out ran hundreds who had started before me. 
Women, Said Mr. Felton, Smiling, know the value' of a fine figure. The ladies in Dublin are as great connoijfeurs of the merit of a man, as those of London; but trust: not to their constancy, my dear Patrick; they are here as fickle as in the regions of St. james’s. Put not off till tomorrow the favours they will lavish upon you today. You are a novelty; that charm will 
4 
Soon vanish: with it, dear Patrick, you will lose the Sole Superiority they are able to discover in you. 
B 4 Like 

152 The FAVOURITE Like a meteor you dazzle their eyes; profit by their intoxication — while it lasts, you may command all the faculties they are endowed with — but, a propos; Mrs, 'Price, a mil lener in St. stephen’s green, called upon you an hour ago— — new intrigue hatching for you, I dare say — sihe would not tell her mestage — 
It won’t do, said Patrick, turning his head with the air of a conqueror — 
And shaking hands with Mr. Felton, they parted with a mutual Smile. 
, ' I have 
OF FORTUNE. 153. 
I have not yet heard the pane gyrick of women, Said our hero, getting into his chair; ’ are they all false and deceitful? Is there not one among them true and honest.? Is it the fault of nature or of education } Can Harriet, brought up in the utmost simplicity of manners and ignorance of the world, have the heart of a Lady Dempster h No: Harriet emulous only of the praise of those whose esteem is an honour, has not the inclinations of the woman who feeds her vanity with trifles, and the admiration of the coxcomb or libertine. Natural H 5, was: 
154 The FAVOURITE. 
was the innocence Harriet displayed in her last conversation with me — She was with the butler upon the terrass! there was no harm in that — She may, Surely, love me, and yet Speak to another man— — history 
of Sophia, and the claret, had filled my mind with fears as child ish and vain, as her modesty is pure and untainted with the thought of vice. Harriet is a treasure I must 
preserve- -- unworthy I am 
of it! 
Our hero took one of the letters he had received from Mr, Felton — 
Dear 
OF F O R T U N E. 155 “Dear Patrick, 
“The lovely, virtuous Harriet has been at the point of deaths — ” 
The heart of our hero Shrunk instantly with a pang of Sorrow — the rich dye of nature vanished from his blooming cheeks — that rhoment only Patrick knew how much he loved Harriet — vanity, pleasure, or ambition, had before diverted her from his mind, or weakened the impreslion fheshad made upon him — her danger roused his dormant Senstbllity; and unvoluntary tears stowed from his eyes. He drew the curtains of the chair, and iii h 6 dulged 
156 The favourite 
dulged his feelings. Flattering hope, forcing itself through the gloomy thought, gave his soul one instant of Serenity; he took the letter again. 
“The lovely, virtuous Harriet has been at the point of death; but thanks to nature, and our cares, her recovery is no longer doubtful.” 
God be pralfed I exclairhed our hero. 
And joy brightened every feature. 
“You 
OF FORTUNK 157 “You have been the cause of the danger She has ran. Peter told her your jealousy of Simpson, and made you Speak, as very likely you did not. Your Setting out without feeing her made her apprehensive of your hatred: the tender Harriet gave way to despair — a violent fever — Oh, Patrick I what have I not Suffered! we had lost all hopes, when a happy crisis restored her to you, to me, to a whole family, of whom She is the delight. When She could hear, I talked; She listened to me; and her breast ceased to be tortured by 
the 
15^ The FAVOURITE 
the fear of being forsaken by yoin Many women, Patrick,, you will meet in the world, that shall please your senses better; but none who will affedi your heart So forcibly as Harriet -- walk with an honest: heart in the path of ambition. Remember, Patrick, that virtue is the Sole road to happiness.” 
“James Walter 
Killern hall. 
CHAP. XVI 
“l^l^ould that your example. Sir James, could warm my breast with imitative virtue! exclaimed 
OF FORTUNE. 15^ 
claimed Patrick: but at my age, and circumstanced as I am, I can only attempt to conquer my pas stons — the Suceefs, I fear, is not in my power. Shave already drank of the cup of pleasure— — not yet enebriated, who knows how the bewitching liquor may work upon my mind! self denials are Seldom welcomed in the Spring of life, especially, when they are an obstacle to our fortune. Harriet!. I know the value’of thy affection for me : but, that I may be the more worthy of thee, forgive a few wanderings of my reason and virtue; 
they 
io The FAVOURITE 
they will be the work of necessity, and not the effect of a corrupted taste or fancy 
The chair then stopping at the doctor’s door, our hero Sent his name up, and was immediately admitted. He found the doctor in his library. 
Whom have I the honour to receive? asked Doctor Cramner, ari iing with a pen in his hand, and’ advancing politely towards our heroa 
friend to the virtuous men,, who have no other right, to the 
favours 
OF FORTUNE. ii favours of the great than a merit, which, in this felfish and luxurious age, is too often Sacrificed to fool ishness or immorality. 
How lovely virtue is in the countenance of a young man! exclaimed the doctor. You are young, and yet have not the vices in fashion! How came you to escape the contagion? Formed to grace every folly, you are an enemy to them! 
praise me not, doctor; were I known to you, you might, perhaps, repent your esteem of me. I have, I asture you, a poor claim to it. 
Y our 
i6z The FAVOURITE 
Your modesty is an incontestlble proof of your worth. But, Sir, what procures me the honour of your visit? Am I So happy as to have it in my power to oblige you? My interest is very Small; Such as it is, you may command it. 
I come, Sir, Said our hero, with an accent that gained the heart of the doctor, to beg of you to accept the deanery of A --. 
I have been just told it was granted last night to Mr. Gaily. 
Very likely it was, doctor; but it is now your’s. 
God 
OF FORTUNE. 163 
God be be blessed!! the doctor, in a forcible rapture of joy; 1 Shall have more means to do' good. 
And tears caused by virtue flowed on his venerable cheeks. 
Patrick was moved; and he Said to himself, How unlike him I am! 
Is that the use, doctor, you pur pose to make of the emolument of the deanery? Said Patrick, with a Smile. don’t you fear to give yourself a ridicule? 
My conscience, dear Sir, is my Sole judge; if it approve of my 
actions, 
164 The FAVOURITE 
actions, i’ll laugh at the vain censure of men. The poor and unfortunate have demands upon me, in proportion to my abilities; their expectations it is my duty to Satisfy. 
Mr. Gaily would, I am certain, have Substituted his wants to the pretensions of the miserable. 
Far from me. Si’*, to think ill of that gentleman! he is at that season of life, when passions are, not easily controlled : his heart my be very good, though fancy may sometimes lead him astray. • Independence changes a man, my dear Sir: V wtre 
OF FORTUNE. 165 
were Mr. Gaily promoted to the deanery, he would, perhaps, forsake his youthful errors, devote himself entirely to virtue, be an ornament to Society, and an honour to religion. 
It is a Perhaps, doctor, to which I would not trust the happinefe of the distrested. May you long enjoy you new dignity! 
To whom am I indebted for it? 
To your virtuous life, doctor. tomorrow i’ll call upon you; we will go together to his excellency’s. 
Then 
i66 The FAVOURITE 
Then they entered into a further conversation, in which they acquitted themselves in'such a manner, as greatly increased the good opinion they had conceived of each other. 
CHAR XVII 
I 
A honest man, Sai4 Patrick, is the noblest spectacle on earth. How happy the doctor, to be founded to Say, I have no enemy but the vicious. Shall it never be my lot to boast the same advantage! too many are ' the temptations 
o F F O R T U N E. 167 
tions youth and ambition throw in my way — I cannot yet hope for So desirable a change in the state of my mind — though I eagerly long for it, my sighs are still for pleasure and fortune — I must visit often dodor Cramner — in the company only of a virtuous man I can sind a remedy against the malignity of thepoison that rages in my heart. 
With this last resolution our hero arrived at the alderman’s. Elated with the honour of having for his guest a man who was intimate with the lord lieutenant and the nobility of the kingdom, Mr. 
Dalton 
i68 The FAVOURITE 
Dalton had invited a Select company to dine with him. At the sight of Patrick, Mrs. Dalton affeded a blush, and, in the hearing of her husband. Spoke in the following manner. 
I hope, Sir, you have learned to be discreet, and not to expose me any more to the necessity of calling my husband to my relief. 
It shall be my study. Madam, to Spare you that necessity. Shall we not Seal our reconciliation with one kifs? 
Mrs. 
OF FORTUNE. 1(^9 Mrs. Dalton turned modestly to her husband, as to ask leave. 
By all means; by all means; Said the Alderman. 
And our lovers used, or rather abused his consent. 
Our hero having Saluted the ladies, and bowed to the gentlemen, put on one of those looks which call irresistibly the general attention to yourself. The uncommon comeliness of his person, Set off to the best advantage by the unstudied elegance of his dress, and the plain vol. II I nefs 
lyo The FAVOURITE 
ness of his manners, was the admiration of the women, and the envy of those of his Sex. Careless of the impression he made, he showed no particular distindion to wit or beauty, and was polite and gallant with a flattering impartiality. His extreme civility was the more agreeable, that it was unaffeded, and Seemed to Spring from his heart. Before they sat down to dinner, he had made a friend of every man, and created a desire in his favour in every female breast. Mrs. Dalton finding an opportunity to venture a whisper, complained of his neglect, 
I love 
OF FORTUNE. 171 
I love yon, answered Patrick; Prudence bids me to appear indiff ferent. 
Our hero taking no notice of the obliging glances darted at him, and affecting not to answer their Smiles, his Seeming insensibility added a new lustre to his excellent qualities; and each woman wllhed the more eagerly for the honour of his conquest, that she Saw her rivals ready to engage.for obtaining it. Patrick had too much Sagacity not to perceive their vanity was at work. pleased with the emulation he had caused among them, he Secreted I 2 his 
172 The FAVOURITE his joy, and enlivened their attempts with looks, Smiles, and flattery. 
What children these women are! Said Patrick to himself. Strangers to the real value of a joy, they fight for its glittering appearance, as if their happiness was centred in the poflefflon of it! What heads must these be, that turn So easily at the sight of a fine fellow! Oh, decency, reason, and virtue! where Shall 1 look for you, if the heart of woman is not the temple in which you dwell! 
When 
OF FORTUNE. 
Hi 
When the first coiirse was removed, a gentleman alked if there; were any news at the castle ^ 
There are many, Said a patriotic Common councilman; and Such as we may expect from the arbitrary disposition of the court. Mr. Gaily, that wretch who is held in universal contempt, is preferred to the deanery of A --. 
He is not. Said Patrick; it is Doctor Cramner. 
I have it from the best authority, answered the Common councilman, looking with disdain at our hero; 
I 
and 
174 The FAVOURITE 
and I lay one thonsand pounds to five hundred, that I am right. 
Done; Said Patrick; I take the bet. 
Where Is your Security, Sir? I do not value the word of a courtier this empty glass. 
Fie! ridiculous! exclaimed the ladies; are these your manners, Mr. Plump? 
The hue of indignation coloured the cheeks of our hero, who was getting up to vent it, perhaps, upon the face of the proud wealthy citizen, 
when 
OF FORTUNE. 175 
when Mr. Dalton desired him to sit down, and begged his leave to be his feciiisity. 
I accept it, Said Mr. Plump, whom the motion of Patrick had Sisightened into civility. 
Our hero Smiling a thank to tile ladies, asked the Common councilman if he would Submit to the decision of the lord lieutenant. 
I will, answered Mr. Plump: his Secretary is the authority I have mentioned. We will see who has the best. 
I 4 Patrick 
i-76 The FAVOURITE 
Patrick called for paper and ink, and wrote the following card. 
Mr. O’ Hara presents his respects to his excellency: begs to know who is to be preferred to the 
deanery of A -- -- -- -, as he has a bet 
of a thousand pounds depending upon his excellency’s decision.” 
i Will this card do, Sir? 
And he pasted it to Mr. Plump. 
Send it, Sir; send it. It is very well. 
Will you be off? It is time yet, Sir, Said Patrick. 
By 

o F F O R T U N E. 177 
By no means; by no means; answered Mr. Plump, to whom the proposal of Patrick was an omen of his success. 
You will repent, Said pauick. ril run that chance. - 
And he laughed at the thought of having taken in a courtier. 
*■. I 
The card was Sent, 
Are you Sure to win, asked, in a half whisper, a young lady, who sat by our hero? I would be Sorry if youvwere to lose.. 
5 Fear 
lys The FAVOURITE 
Fear not. Madam, answered fa .trick. 
And in a gentle prefiture of her knee he marked his gratitude for her concern. The young lady let him declare his gratitude in his own manner, till a pinch he received told him he grew too presuming and indiscreet. 
The dinner was almost over when the mestenger came back and delivered a paper to our hero, who read it aloud. 
“I wish you joy, dear Patrick; you have won. Doctor Gramner IS to have the deanery. P 
Who 
OF FORTUNE. 179. 
Who, after this, will trust a courtier’s word. Said Mr. Plump, getting up in a fury. Damn the rascals — Sir, you may send for your money when you please.. 
And muttering imprecations against the Secretary of the lord lieutenant, he left the room. 
Let us forgive him his ill humour, Said Patrick; his foolish obstinacy has cost him dear. I am less pleased with the gain I have made, than with the Sorrow he exprest'es for having lost it, and the part the ladies have taken in my favour. 
I 6 The 
io The FAVOURITE 
The young lady was not the last to compliment Patrick upon his Siiccefs. 
You may win that Sum as easily as I have won it, Said Patrick to her. 
What do you mean answered the lady, without anger. Explain yourself. 
Let ns make a bet. 
What is it r MA 

I lay you that thousand Mr. Plump h^lost, against one hundred 
OF F O R T U N E. ii 
dred, that you will not grant me a tete a tite before twelve o’clock to morrow. 
Mrs. Clifter, though more tender than virtuous, had till then preserved both her virtue and her reputation. To the want of merit in her admirers, and not to her want of sensibility, Ae was indebted for the chastity of her morals, and the silence of stander : but her defence having always proved fuccess full, she fondly did.herfelf the honours of the vidories she had obtained over her despicable or unskilful enemies. This error Patrick 
rectified. 
i82 The FAVOURITE 
rectified. As soon as he looked and Spoke his desire of pleasing, Mrs Clifter became sensible of the ascendency he gained over her, and Said to herfeif, In Spite of my past 
triumphs, I fear I am but a woman.’’ The • pinch She had given him to stop the wandering of his hand, stie had put off to the moment her modesty made it indlfpen stble, and, even then, she had un voluntarily stghed at the necessity of it. His impertinence had alarmed her virtue, but, at the same time, had roused in her heart feelings she had ever before been acqainted with. 
She 
. OF FORTUNE. .1s3 
She was in the height of her inquiry into the nature of her new sensa tions> when the answer Sent by the 
i 
lord lieutenant finished the picture she had drawn of Patrick. Love and vanity uniting against: her, she faintly resisted their impulses, and lamenting her fate, yielded to the temptation of being happy. 
Keep your money, Sir, anfvvered she, with a becoming dignity; I may give my heart, but never will sell it. 
Your delicacy charms me, said Patrick, with a fentimentaf accent: 
would 
i84 The FAVOURITE 
would I were worthy of that heart you will give, and not sell! 
A sigh betrayed her Inclination to believe he was worthy of it — but honour commanding still in her heart, (he turned her' stgh into a Smile, and that Smile into an affectation of indifference. 
We are observed, Sir; more than one invidious eye is fixed upon me — if you esteem me, fotget; at present, that I have a heart to give. 
Our hero obeyed, and restored to the other ladies their right to his homage She had stolen from them. 
C H A P. 
or FORTUNE. 185 
C H A P. XVIIL, - 
jmmediately after dinner Mr. Dal 
^ took our hero into his closet, 
/ 
I shan’t detain you long from Mrs. Clifter," Said the Alderman, with a roguish Smile. The bufi ness I have^to impart to you will be told in a few words. I compliment you upon your choice; she is handsomer than my wife, and, ten to one, will not be So Severe. 
You are not happy in your opinion of women, Mr. Dalton; and I do not deserve the compliment 
you, 
i86 The FAVOURITE 
you pay me. Mrs. Clifter, 1 affiire you, is very indifferent to me. 
You have no need of discretion wih me, Said the Alderman; if she pleases you, Vi be your friend, and procure you opportunities of feeing her. 
You are very kind, Mr. Dalton, answered Patrick, who giieffed the motives of the alderman’s offers — my heart is at present engaged; I have not the least thought of Mrs. Clifter — pray what is your business?? 

OF FORTUNE. 187 
Mr. balfour’s contract with the government to cloth the army expires in a few days, can you procure it to me? ' 
The deuce! this is no trifle Mr. Dalton; the benefits of Such a contract are very considerable. You ask a favour of the greatest importance; a favour, that none but the greatest friends to administration can expect from the minister. What can you give in return for Such a favour? Speak freely; you may depend upon my honour and Secrecy. 
‘ My interest in this corporation. 
Oh, 
i88 The FAVOURITE 
Ob, avarice, avarice! how ma ny rogues thou makeft! exclaimed Patrick in himself. The villainy of that wretch is unjustifiable, he has a princely fortune and no children. 
What are you musing about? Said Mr. Dalton. 
Is your interest So great as to deserve So high a bribe? 
I can command almost two thirds of the votes in Dublin. I have So often embarrasted the government and counteracted their operations, that they are Sensible of my power. 
And 
OF FORTUNE. 189 
And that power you will employ for them if you obtain the contract. 
I will, Since I cannot obtain it upon other terms. 
Very well. Now Mr. Dalton let us settle another point, without .which I will not Serve you. What stiare do you intend to give me in your profits? What ready Sum of money? and what annuity? 
Why, to be Sure, you must have Something for your trouble. 
What will that Something be? 
I cannot tell you. 
Well, 
190 The FAVOURITE 
Well, Said Patrick, I will tell it for you. Your profits will amount every year between two 
I 
or three thousand pounds. Will they? 
Thereabout, answered the Alderman, not a little displeafed with the Selfishness of his new friend, and to have put himself in his power. 
You are therefore able, Said Patrick, to give me three thousand pounds in cash, and an annuity of five hundred, while you hold the contrad. You cannot certainly Say I am extravagant in my demands. 
Not 
or PORTUN E. 11 
Not extravagant! exclaimed the Alderman, walking in the closet. 
Mr. Dalton, Said Patrick, - let us talk coolly upon this matter. Do you think in your conscience your interest in the city not overpayed with two thousands a year? Where is the patriot that would not be purchased for half the value? For ought I know, the lord lieutenant may esteem you influence not worth the tenth part of the price' you ask— — give you ten minutes to consider — either comply with my conditions, or think no more of the 
con 
192 The FAVOURITE cnntract; through my means only you can obtain it. 
Shall I lose two thousand pounds a year? Said the Alderman to hlm felf. Avarice answered, No; and he obeyed its di6fates. 
Come, Sir; I will have no difference with you; get me that damned contract, and i’ll comply with your terms — It is better to have that, than the sterile honour of being one of the leaders of the Scum of the earth : too many needy patriots have fed upon my folly. I am wearied of praises I pay with gold. 
This 
OF FORTUNE. 193 
This night Till See the lord lieutenant; and tomorrow you shall have his answer, Said Patrick, shaking hands with the Alderman. 
Step to the company, Said Mr. Dalton; i’ll make a memorandum of the agreement between us. 
This is a lucky day! Said Patrick; it Seems that Fortune has forgot the whole world to think only of me. What a good thing it is to be young and handsome!! all the women I have Seen in Dublin, Mrs. Clifter pleases me the best — few would have refused the bet I vot. II K pro 
194 The FAVOURITE proposed to her — the Snare was alluring — a disinterested woman cannot be vicious through choice; Sentiment only can make her a' devotee to pleasure. There is a decency in her deportment infinitely more attractive than the coqu(!ttry/of Mrs. Dalton, and the voluptuous spriglit liness of the counstess. The tenderness of lier looks and accent declares her a woman of feeling — li bertinism is too legible on the features of the others — in Mrs Cllfter V the heart Speaks — my partiality is perh 3 ill-founded — woman Is So deceit. : L! — I must beware of my Senses, lest they delude my judgement 
OF FORTUNE. 195 
nient — should I be So happy as to be confirmed In my opinion of her, farewell to the countess and Mrs. Dalton, 
CHAP. XIX 
F our hero’s absence, Mrs. clll ter having convinced herself that the peace of mind refiiltlng from a virtuous life was preferable to the delights of guilty bliss, resolved not to brave a danger her Sensibility told her (he would not be able to 
overcome. 
K 2 
By 
ip The FAVOURITE 
By flight only I can Secure my triumph, had She Said to herself; I must not expose my virtue to the temptation of pleasure— — I dis graced in my own eye, though thought innocent by all the world, I would be the most wretched of my Sex; a prey to remorse, each day would be marked with an agony of intolerable grief — Painful is self-denial — religion requires it — would 1 had not come here today 1 — Oh, my heart is torn by love and virtue! 

At that moment our hero entered the room, and, at the sight of him, Virtue fled, and left the 
Sway 
OF FORTUNE. 197 
Sway to Love. The discretion of Patrick assisted Mrs. Clifter against the impression he made. Unwilling to make her the Subject of a female chit-chat, which he knew to be always dictated by envy ‘or malignity, he chose not to perceive she sat by herself on a Sopha, This respect for Mrs. Clifter fnrprlfed our hero. “It is not thus, Said he, that • I love Mrs. Dalton U and he placed himself behind her chair. Mrs. Dalton turned her head and whiipered in his ear — 
This morning I wanted to consult you about trifles I will have K 3 you 
19s The FAVOURITE 
you choose for me; the eye of a lover is a better judge of dress, than vanity; i’ll think myself more agreeable when your taste has pointed to me what I must wear. Tomorrow, i’ll be, at twelve, at Mrs. price’s, in St. stephen’s green — ^ Do you love me still, dear Patrick? 
And profiting by the attitude she was in, she fixed her Soul on his lips, 
T adore you, Said Patrick. 
And he returned the amourous kifs. 
I know not, Said Patrick to him,, how men can withstand the 
Seduction 
OF FORTUNE. 199 
ftdudion of a fine woman’s carelies — I am asraid they owe their victory more to impotency than virtue. 
And muttering the following So llloquy, he stepped to Mrs. Clifter, who was looking in a music book. 
My cafe must be that of a woman; why should she not partake of the desire she forces into my heart? I am to her what she is to me; our emotions cannot differ but 
1 
in a greater or less degree of Sensibility. It is only in a sincere love of her duties she can find a Support against palfion, and Subdue its craving wants. Has Mrs. Clifter that K 4 arm 
200 The FAVOURITE 
arm against me? I must put her to the test. 
And he bepo’cd leave to sit bv 
OO 
her. 
Powerful were the struggles of honour in the breast of Mrs. Clifter; yet love conquered at last, and She listened to our hero. He was permitted to visit her in the absence of her husband, whom bustnefs had called to Cork. 
Where are you going? Said She tenderly to him; why don’t you Sup with us? Though it is imprudent in me to wish you would stay, 
I can 
OF FORTUNE. or 
I cannot think of losing you. Where are you going? I Sufpect your connexion with Lady Dempster — I have Seen the animated whisper of Mrs, Dalton — I have but a tender heart to oppose to their charms — will it Secure me your love and constancy? Shall I not have my credulity to bewail? — No rival you Shall have in my heart — a Share only in your’s will not Satisfy me — deceive me not — will you love me — love but me? — You do not know perhaps the greatness of the Sacrifice you expect from me -- shabituated to be loved, I fear it is not in your K 5 power 
202 The FAVOURITE 
power to do me justice — will not your contempt of women Influence your opinion of me? Shall I be dasted among the libertine, though sentiment and my consciousness of your merit will be the Sole cause of my defeat? If you love and do not esteem me, I cannot be happy. 
Patrick Spoke, and her fears were dissipated. The certainty of pleasing the lord lieutenant with the news of Mr. dalton’s treachery to honour and his country, prevailing over his inclination of staying with Mrs, Glister, our hero arose — 
To. 
OF FORTUNE. 2©^ 
tomorrow TH see you, beautiful Amelia. preserve your esteem of me: upon it rests my future happiness. 
CHAP. XX 
J AM wrong, laid Patrick as he was going to the castle, to Seduce the virtue of an honest woman who, had 1 not warmed into a fever, her insignificant inclination for me, would, postibly, never have have deviated froin her duty. • If, from her behaviour, I can judge.. K 6 of 
204 The FAVOURITE 
of her character, my happiness will make her miserable' -- pleasure will not justify her guilt — in spite of my transports, it will keep alive in her heart, and stand always between her and me — Is She really virtuous? How many the ways of deluding! too proficient in'that art is woman — the mask of virtue is So tempting! — — through coquettry She may wear it — who could boast the looks of Cordelia? Was I not forcibly betrayed into a conviction of her innocence? There is no knowing woman till She is put to the trial — I will make it. 
His 
w 
OF FORTUNE. 205 
His excellency was charmed with the conquest of the Alderman, and assured our hero he deserved more than the pension he had obtained, as he had gained Mr. Dalton without any expense to the government, who would not have hesitated to purchase his interest with douceurs still more considerable. 
Let him come to me tomorrow, early in the morning, Said his excellency; we will have the contract drawn and signed. As to you, ril reward your diligence and victory over that rascal with no Small Share of lottery tickets, till there 
IS 
2o6 The FAVOURITE 
is Some place vacant worthy of your acceptance. 
I 
I wish, refiimed bis excellency, after Some minutes reflection, you would not often visit Lady Dempster; I siiould not like to have Such a sine fellow as you are for a rival in her affections. 
You do me too much honour, my lord, answered Patrick; her lady Ship is too Sensible of your merit, to take any notice of me. 
‘ My merit, Said his excellency, is not that which always pleases the women best. How often have you Seen her? 
"T wice> 
OF FORTUNE, 207 
Twice, my lord. 
But twice! that’s very well. You have no need ofsher; i’ll take care of your fortune.. 
If She is offended at my neglect, and asks the cause of it — 
Well, tell anything but the truth. 
Should She think you have forbid me to see her — 
God forbid She Should think it I My suspicion would make her in love with you — aiid that must not be, Patrick. 
* I al 
2o8 The FAVOURITE 
I affure you, my Lord, that I neither love Lady Dempster, nor care for her affection. 
Well Spoke. And you will continue in the same indifference? 
Your excellency may depend upon it. 
Since it is So, you have my leave to see her — Seldom, however. 
Oh! never if you please.' 
No, no. She must not put it in her head that I am the cause of the discontinuation of your visits. ^ I know 
o F’ F O R T U N E. 209 I know the women too well to trust their constancy to their reason. 
Our hero, after having diverted the lord lieutenant with the Scene between him and the patriotic Councilman, retired to his lodging, revolving in his mind the events of the day, thanking Fortune for her favours, meditating upon the best means to Succeed in his attack against Mrs. Glister, yet wishing sincerely she might prove victorious ver him. 
CHAP. 
210 The FAVOURITE 
CHAP XXL 
Incertain of the turn his adventure with Mrs. Clifter would take, our hero thought it prudent to put off to another day his visits to the countess and Mrs. Dalton; and his first care, after a hearty breakfast, was to write an apology for a behaviour which, as his reputation was not yet established, might have brought his merit in question. He was Sealing the two letters, when at one and the same time, he received one thousand pounds from 
Mr. 
\ 
OF FORTUNE. 211 
Mr. Plump, and a billet from a chairman, who stole away as Soon as he had delivered it. 
Patrick paid first his homage to the banknotes, and then opened the billet, which run in the following manner. 
“To Mr. O’ Kara. 
“You are too lovely, and I too tender — in vain does virtue oppose your triumph in my heart; your presence would stlence her voice, and strike my soul with a desire of making you happy — 1 love you, 'dear Patrick: but I love myself 

212 The FAVOURITE 
Self better — In absence only I can find an antidote against; love — to be Secured from guilt I must sty — the post-chaise is ready — to sty is a torment — adieu.” 
God be blested! exclaimed Patrick; I have found at last a virtuous woman! Her example points out to me the course of life I ought to adopt; I am already nch enough to follow my own taste — the conquests I have made are not an honour a man of delicacy can boast — yet my vanity is Seduced: — I am still under the Sway of ambition and 
pleasure 
o F F O R T U N E. 213 
pleasure— —! Harriet, Harriet! how unworthy I am of thee! 
Then Patrick wrote to Sir James Walter the fucceis he had met with, and desired him to deliver the following lines to Harriet. 
‘‘ When I have received Some favours more from fortune, i’ll come and lay them down at the feet of the virtuous and lovely Harriet, “Patrick O’ Hara.” 
This is too laconic, Said Patrick — but how can I talk of love to Harriet when my heart Smiles at the idea of the countess and Mrs. 
Dalton! 
214 The FAVOURITE 
Dalton! What a weak and an in consistent animal man is! Will my “reason be always the stave of fancy? Shall I for ever act in contradiction to my thoughts and feelings, and contiiiue wantonly in a career I know full of danger? Cannot youth and virtue agree? Must what one 
commands be; constantly opposed, 
, 
by the other? How rapidly beauty and pleasure destroy the best resolutions! 
The clock striking twelve put an end to our hero’s reflections. He had no time to deliberate about vice or virtue; his honour was at 
stake; 
OF FORTUNE. 215 
flake; he flew to Mrs. price’s, In St. stephen’s green. 
After be had chosen the trifles Mrs. Dalton was to adorn herself with, Patrick went to Lord caj thagan, who in the evening took 
him to G -- -- - Tavern. Whoever 
has been at Ar -- ’s or a1 -- -- ’s, 
may form an idea of the place where our hero was. A Set of noble knaves and rich fools met regularly at that tavern to strip one another of their fortune, and riot in every kind of luxury a depraved taste could • think of, and money could procure. Patrick Vas received with 
the 
2i6 The FAVOURITE 
the utmost civility, and Lord gar thagan was asked by everybody in the room, “Has he a good purse ?” Upon his lordship’s answering in the affirmative, their regard for our hero increased, and in less than ten minutes he found himself intimate with men of whom he knew not either the name or the title. The dice were produced, and the Sacrifice began. 
Hear me, Sir, Said Lord Garth agan to Patrick; as I have brought you here, honour bids me to give you an advice. Defend ' your money as well as you can; 
for 

OF F O R T U N E. 217 for as we do not expect any mercy, we give none., 
And he stepped, to ihe" hazard table. 
that’s a good advice, Said .Patrick. 
And he followed his lordship. 
Our hero was amazed at the quantity of gold and banknotes that lay ready for the favourites of fortune, and he could not help wishing. he was the pbstestor of vol. II L them. 
IS The FAVOURITE 
‘them.* At the lovely sight the Demon of play invaded his heart, and he boldly ventured in the field of Folly. Chance, or the Skill of his energies prevailed against him ■ at the first onset; but his courage gathering new strength from the ipss he made, he renewed the fight with So much vigour and prudence, that he obtained at last a most complete victory.' The sobriety of our hero had courted Fortune, and forced her on his fide. He was the only one whose head had braved the fumes of the champaign, and kept clear in the 
midst 

o F, F O R T U N R 219 
mldfi of a storm of repeated Lumpers, Once thrown into confuston, the enemy could not rally to advantage,; they lost the day, and the conqueror, rich with their Spoils, returned home, crowned with laurels' 
'XXIL 
N man in So little a time. Said Patrick, covering a table with banknotes, was ever So fortunate as I have been. 
And, falling on his knees in a devout rapture, he thanked the L z. Creator 
220 The FAVOURITE 
Creator of all things for the unmerited favours he had bestowed upon him. 
No longer can I continue a behaviour my situation only could justify, resumed our hero, looking at the treasure before himi Poverty imposed upon me a disgraceful part to perform — it was not in my power to Sacrifice to virtue, when necessity forced me to comply with the vices of my protedors. My passions have no more that motive to plead in their favour — how happy I am to have not one pretext to be base— — be at liberty to aest 
the 

O F F O R T U N E. 221 the man of honour 1 who knows to what lengths ambition, by degrees, would have carried me? A Have to administration, would not I have at last done their dirty work with a willing heart? Could I have preserved my integrity in the midst of a corrupted court? It is more probable I would have adopted their manners,, and, upon reflection, turned as great a villain' as any one of them' When vice is openly Supported and encouraged by rewards, what man, unless he has the Soul of an Epictetus, will not be tempted to desert the terns 
3, - plfc 
The favourite 
I 
pie of Virtue? — To avoid guilt, Mrs. Glister flies from me — how few the men who, in their political career, have her resolution 
and fortitude! Prudence bids me to restore Reason her rights over me 
-- -- with near twenty thousand 
pounds, and' the annuities I have got, I can live a life the more happy, that it Shall be free" from remorse and the anxieties attending ambition. In the company of the 
virtuous Harriet, i’ll find happi 
t. ' 
ness, whose faint image only I 
have met in my transient amours. From this moment I will have 
friends 
OF F OR T U N E. 223 
friends and no protectors, Speak the language of truth and not that of flattery. 
Thus the good fense of Patrick prevailed over the vainglory of being difliinguifhed more by honours than by real merit. Astan age when all other men are Swayed by 'pleasure, pride, or interest, he had. the courage to Shake off their yoke, and devote to religion, virtue, and philosophy, a life he was strongly solicited by nature, fashion, and the Smiles of the fair, to consecrate to libertinism, diffl 
pation, 

. ' ^ '[ 224 ]' 
patlon, and folly. To the lovely Harriet he Surrendered his liberty, and never repented the Sacrifice of it. 
FINIS. 
U. of p ■ Uibraf'y 
V 
% 
w 
4r 


. V ^ 
'' •■»*% 
i ■■»» 
r" >'••' 
\'4lv] 
■'J'.' ’I 

Cits 

‘; dk. 
C 

Vri. 
a. 
A ^. 
T 

j - ...^^ 

J ■■ 7> 
R'' 
'' '■*. 
'-" SV 

!. N : LI 
'0* ■ 
SI', F’ 


V ‘S2.'s 


ml' ' 

GODFREY F. SINGER MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY 
MR. AND MRS. JACOB SINGER 
V -- ' 
ii 

• r • ■ 

M 
V 
% - 
rv,, ^ / 
rif'" ’■ / ■• 
■ i 

VI 
'X 
V 
w 
iai 


■ 
* • s l 1 
• : ^ A 
o ^ T ■ ' 'A: -: % 
-.. -- ■• -. ' ^ .^-... j. AM 

THE 
I R I S H M A Nj 
OR, THE 
Favourite of Fortune: 
A SATIRICAL NOVEL 
FOUNDED UPON FACTS. 
TWO VOLUMES. 

What a Jlrange world this is f 
VOL. I. 
LONDON: 
Printed for W. G O L D S M I T H, ' N 24. 
fofer hofler ro' w, 
Murs 

'.''i; s 
VT .' 
'■ 
rt: 
I" 
■" i: 

:; 
- 
5^. 
^ / 
,. ■ '' J • V 
) ‘i' '■’'.' 
rv.'" ^ 


• '» 

rir 
U. of 
J ihrwipv 
m 
oh 

TO THE 
RIGHT HONOURABLE 
GEORGE, LORD VISCOUNT TOWNSEND, 
LATE 
LORD LIEUTENANT 
O F 
IRELAND. 
My Lord, 
EN praise osten those they defpise the most in their Satire only is found vol, I. A an 
r 
o 
€. r 
OZB83G 
il D E DI C A T I O N. an homage to merit. Had you condescended to secrete your talents, genius and abilities, Envy would not have attracted every impartial mind upon your conduct, and forced the general esteem in your favour. However active and artful the malice of your enemies, they proved as unsuccessful in their attacks against the excellency of your character, as the Fop who impeaches 
the 
DEDICATION. is the virtue of the woman he could not Seduce. Your actions, My Lord, in the' height os your political career, have betrayed the man os Seeling and honour, Th&’ Spirit of party, which created enthusiasts against your administration, never warmed your noble soul with the desire of revenge : calm in the midst of the storm,, you weathered it with glory to A 2- your -- 
IV 
DEDICATION. yourfels and advantage to your country. 
You have known, My Lordy the hero of the performance I have the honour to dedicate to your Lordship; he was a member of the Irish parliament, and particularly esteemed by you for the benevolence of his heart. Many hours you have enjoyed in his conversation— — is now no more! a 
Sudden 
DEDICATION. V 
Sudden death has deprived the Society os one os the best men that ever lived, and his lovely, faithful Harriet, of a husband, whole memory, never will cease to live in her heart. 
The journvtl of his life, 
written with his own hand, was communicated to me; thinking it uncommonly entertaining and instructive, I have obtained leave to publish 

VI D E D I C A T I O NL 
lish it. os his adven 
■p 
tures I hafe chosen, only, those that may be ufesul to the young men who, untaught by experience, mis take fo osten the Shadow' for the reality. 
Though the names arc changed, you will eastly, My Lord, Sind a key to the characters in this novel. Most of the personages have been at your levee; and, though no 
Ion 
DEDICATION, VII longer at the same period of life, have sofar preserved their former difposttions, as not to differ in their principal features from the picture drawn of them. 
I am not personally acquainted with you, My Lord; but your public virtues have given you a claim to the esteem of all fenstble men. This dedication is a tribute I voluntarily pay to the nobleman 
vlii DEDICATION.. 
bleman who, Should his country do him justice, would have his name transmitted, with Singular honour, to the latest posterity, I am, with respect, 
My Lord, your lordship’s most humble and devoted Servant, 
The E D I T O R. 
THE 
THE 
Favourite of Fortune. 
C H A P. I. 
^"jphis is a strange world! exclaimed Patrick O’ Hara, meditating upon what he had been, what he was, and what he wished to be. 
vol, I. 
B 
Have 
i The favourite 
Have talents, modesty, or virtue, availed to my happlness? When •others, adopting a conduct the reverse of my own, have forced their way to grandeur or opulence, am I not a despicable wretch, feeding upon the benevolence of Sir James Walter? Is a good confcienee a com pensudon for dependence, and misery?? do I indulge Scruples So easily discarded by men,, who have neither my merit nor understanding to boast i Does not vanity flatter me with a Superiority they really postefs over me? I tremble at the thought of injustice — I shudder at 
the 
5 F F O R T U N E. ^ 
the idea of vice — Yet, through vice only, I can correct the itialignity of fortune, and recover a rank to which 1 was entitled by birth and education! From a gentleman I am Sunk into a Servant — Instead of commanding, I obey! — Would nature have given me a pleasing form to be of no advantage to me? When to that form the has added wit, and an ambitious heart, am I not unworthy Such accomplishments, by not turning them to the benefit of my pastions} Why do I silence pride, and the amorous longings of my soul, when fellde nials, far from quenching the thirst B 2 of 
4 The FAVOURITE 
of my - desires, increase perpetually its poignancy in my breast? Is the honour of being a siave to virtue adequate to the Sacrifice I dally make of mystlf? I do not dare to think the contrary — My reason approves of my behaviour — does not drop one satisfadory word against it — though in need of being convinced, I act the part of a fool — reflection compels me forcibly to perform it. — I am a Servant, and yet it is in my power to change my situation! — How often has Lady Walter darted at me Such a look, as clearly exprested, ‘‘you are very handsome, Patrick TWOULD 
there 
a F 
FORTUNE. 5 
there be any harm to anfvver that expression with, ‘‘you are very handsome, my lady?” Would She understand me, what have I not to expect from a woman of her fortune and interest? — Sir James has been the best of masters to me! shall I dishonour him in return for his favours I Oh! my heart will never astent to that villainy — I will not tear the bosom of the man who feeds, and protects me, with grief and despair — Riches would become my torment, were I toacqulre them by making Sir James unhappy No — let me rather be for ever a contemptible thing upon earth, than to be guilty of the sin of ingratitude. 
B 3 Such 
6 The FAVOURITE: 
Such were the reflections of our heroi who bravely fought against the Seduction of pleasure, and the bewitching charms of a life he could not enjoy,, but at the expense of he??' nour and virtue. 
CHAP. 
ff fortunt. 
CHAP. IL 
Lady Carolina Walter was young and lovely, but unluckily plagued with a sensibility that was at a perpetual war with, modesty. 
I am born too tender, Said She one day to herself; never can reason op pose effectually my feelings: in vain am I taught that love is a crime though willing to believe it, my heart beats to pleasure— — I answer for a pafston I do not create? 
B 4 How 
8 The FAVOURITE 
How can I help Smelling a perfume E An amiable obje6l is before my eyes — are not the fensations he causes, as forcible as the perfume I breathe I 
In confeqiience of a foible she could not conquer, Lady Walter made the art of dissembling her Sole study, and grew So consummate a proficient iir it, that she graced at last the character, self-interest had bid her to as fume. Having the misfortune ta distike her husband, she discreetly masked her disgust with friendship, and afsedfed an indifference for pleasure, which Secured his esteem and confidence 
sir 
OF FORTUNE. 9 
Sir James Walter, persuaded, from his own aversion to vice, that his lady was proof against it, rested contented with the little Share of bliss he enjoyed, and let her behave as She pleased: : liberty he gave, her la dyship did not fail to make nfe of. No woman was ever fo zealous a devotee to Cupid; yet, when her taste and delicacy disagreed. She instantly deserted that deity, and Sacrisiced to Virtue, It was not enough that a man Should be noble or handsome, if he Spoke only to her Senses or vanity; her reason easily triumphed over a foible She could not gratify B 5 with 
lo The FAVOURITE' 
with honour to hersels: but, wheiii her affection was supported by the merit of a lover, then he was the whole world to her; in his Smiles,, caresses, or conversation, her happi ness was centred; with her, the man of parts was always an excuse for her deviation from virtue.. 
Lady walter’s partiality for our hero was at first caused by the excellence of his shape, and the exquisite beauty of the most expressive countenance she ever beheld; but had he postested no other charm, the impressed ston he made would only have 
glanced 
O F 
FORTUNE, LI 
glanced upon her heart. His seeming ignorance of the accomplisti ments he was endowed with, the decency of his deportment, the Sudden colouring that enlivened his cheeks whenever She gazed upom him, and a merit which Spoke him: worthy of the most exalted station in life, were the irresistible allurements, which, .by raising her curiost ty and flattering her pride, had at — traded her inclination and m^dc her wish for his attachment. 
The bashfulness of Patrick amazed Lady Walter. 
B 6 Suchi 
12 The FAVOURITE 
Such a diffidence at his age! exclaimed she often inwardly; I do not conceive that. Is it virtue, my rank, or the fear of being deluded into a fruitless hope, that prevents his understanding me? Modesty, unknown to me, may Soften the expression of my looks — I am tender, but not bold — Patrick has not yet read in my heart, elfe he would have answered its language, and told me — I must not think of it. 
CHAP. 
OF FORTUNE. 
'3 
CHAP. III 
T^earied of the life he led, ant! 
almost unable to oppose the repeated attacks i.ady Walter made upon his Senses, our hero attempted to believe it was more agreeable to postess the goods of this world, than to be deprived of them. Thus, half armed against the feelings of honour and humanity, he no longer met the Smiles of Lady Walter with a blush, and left to chance the difposal of his virtue. 
Over 

14 The FAVOUR! TR 
Oveijbyed at this alteration in patrick’s behaviour, her ladjfhlp betrayed her content in every feature; and iefs careful of preserving her reputation; than desirous of confirming her conquest, She employed every Seductive art to captivate himi Had our hero been ever So virtuous,, his heart could not have long resisted a woman, who,, in every step' and gesture, was all grace and vo luptuousnefs; the desire of pleasing, still more attractive than beauty itself, strikes at once every Sense witte delight, and takesvforcibly from us the. power of thinking. We See, 
listen,, 
OF fortune: 15, listen, feel, and then deliver up our reason to the delusion we arc Surrounded with. 
The certainty of being loved, that would have encouraged a modem beau to taste Immediately of the good fortune complimented him with,, was not Sufficient to embolden Patrick to abuse the foible Lady Walter exprested in his favoursome more Substantial proof of that foible was necestary,. to make him forget the distance between them, and the obligations he owed to Sir James 
One 
i6 The FAVOURITE 
One morning Patrick pasted by a bower, in which he Saw Lady Walter laying upon a bed of turf, strewed with flowers; her dress agreed with a summer’s day; and her attitude with the desire in his heart. The lovely sight stopped our hero — he gazed — a feigned steep invited him to approach -- Virtue Spoke, he fled away.k 
Oh 1 the fool, the fool! exclaimed Lady Walter, as Soon as he was gone. 
And her inclination changed immediately into contempt. 
CHAP. 
OF FORTUNE. ly 
CHAP. IV 
will not forgive an injury done to their charms.; indulge their vanity, and never a No, shall you hear from their lips, and never a frown shall you see on their brow. 
Our hero’s fear of offending exasperated sh much Lady Walter, that, the instant she came into the house, she sent for the steward, and bid him turn Patrick out of her Service. 

What, 
IS The fanotriute 
What! Patrick 1 Said the steward,, ^ with the accent of surprise and. Sorrow. 
His astonishment made Lady Walter fehstble of her indiscretion.. 
Yes, Patrick! replied her lady slip, calmly. 
He behaved So well, I thought he had no enemy : who has prejudiced your ladyship against him? 
Who? nobody. Am I not the mistress to act as I please?? 

O F FOR TUN E: 
And she turned her head, to conical a half blush. 
You promised, my lady, to hi's dying mother, you would take care of her Son. If you are not his pro* tector^ what will become of him ?■ Forgive,, my lady j but I cannot help Shedding a tear for the unhappy youth — Poor Patrick! how afflicted he will be when he hears olyour anger !’ His Sole care was to serve: you; he had no' other thought, no other pleasure.. 
Arc you mad, Mr. Burton? faidi Lady Walter Smiling., What inter 
20 The FAVOURITE 
pretatlon do you give to an insignificant tone of ray voice? Have I Said I would forsake Patrick? He has done nothing to merit my anger: for his good, Sir, I will part with him; it is to keep the word I gave to his mother, that he must leave mev Sir James and I are his friends, and will always be So: here his youth and talents are of no advantage to him; they lie buried, through his want of experience and knowledge of the world — 
She paused, Smothered a sigh, walk cd, then Sat upon a Settee. 
Tell 
O F 
FORTUNE. 21 
Tell Patrick to prepare to Set out tomorrow morning for Dublin. i’ll recommend him to the Countess of Dempster; under the protection of that lady he cannot fail to prosper. 
God bless your ladyship 1 cried the steward, with tears flowir^g down his cheeks. 
Amazing! amazing, indeed! Said her ladyship, when left alone; how quickly we change! how fickle our hearts 1 an hour ago, the most fiery pastion raged in my breast, and now, wilsho part with the object of it! 
Am 
22 The FAVOURITE 
Am I not a prey to a momfntary Indignation? Is it true I do not love Patrick when he is gone, shall I Tiot repent? shall I not long to Sec him? how cold he wasj when my soul was almost delirious! He was apprehensive of my anger 1* — he gazed, praised every beauty — yet gazed and praised only! Had he. loved me, would he have been fo discreef? no, he would have braved death itself, had it been between him and me. — My anger, the anger of a tender woman, would have helped him to victory, had he attempted to deserve it! — No more of Patrick — he is unworthy of me. 
CHAP. 
OR FORTUNE. 

CHAP. V 
QOOD news! my honest boy, ' ' Said the steward, funning with open arms to our hero, to morrov^^ you leave this place, and go to Dublin. 
To Dublin! exclaimed Patrick, darting a stupid look at his friend. 
Yes, my boy, her ladyship, who wishes you well, will have you try jour fortune in the world. 
She 
24 The FAVOURITE 
She wishes me well, and will have me out of this place I Are you in earnest? 
Whence your surprise, Patrick? When you see me So charmed with her goodness, and the prospect before you, can you doubt my word? 
Oh! my honest friend, Mr. Burton! I did not expect Such news: though a delight to you, ’tis death to me. 
What do you mean? you are not in love, are you? 
Patrick 
OPPORTUNE. 25 
Patrick thought it prudent to dis femble. 
I am So young, Mr. Burton, I am afraid to venture in the world : here 
I 
I am happy — could you not prevail over her ladyship to let me stay with her a few months longer? 
She is determined; you must Set out tomorrow: : be Sad, my boy; thou shalt go with a good purse, and well recommended. Leave off thy bashfulnefs; it would do thee discredit at the Countess of dempster’s, A little teint of impudence, vol. I. C Pa 
26 The FAVOURITE 
Patrick, graces a lovely figure; Seem to esteem thyself if thou wilt be esteemed by others. Thou hast another fault in thee, my boy, which will be an obstacle to thy advancement, get rid of thy sincerity as fast as thou canst. Be true with those thoulovest, provided, however, thou hast no need of them; for modern friendship, dear Patrick, like devotion, is oftener the malk of self-interest and libertinism, than that of honour and virtue. Have more hypocrisy than manners; believe not the words, but the actions of men and women; deceit 
is 
ID F FORTUNE. 27 
IS perpetually upon the tongue of the latter — beware especially of her who will appear to thee the most: ingenuous — under the authority of her usarped reputation she is an Intrepid liar. I have known Some, Patrick, who Swore to falsehood with the Same air of innocence as thou wuuldft Swear to truth. Find out the passions of thy protectors, that thou rnayeft work effectually upon them; never talk to their reason but to their senses— — their foibles only depend for their favours. With the great dissemble thy merit; they would think it a C 2 Satire 
£8 The FAVOURITE 
Satire against them: Show them the picture of themselves; the more contemptible the character thou shalt astiime, the quicker thou shalt arlfe to the Summit ot independence and grandeur. This Speech, dear boy, thou didst not expect from me : but I love thee, and will not have thee a dupe to thy good nature. Follow my advice, and thou shalt not err; the respect paid to the knaves in power, will tell thee the contempt the fools are held in. 
That 
OF F O Pv T U N E. '29 
That minute Harriet peeping into the parlour, the steward got up. 
Cheer your Spirits, tny boy : all will be well. 
CHAP. 
20 The favourite 
CHAP. VI 
^^URSED women and their whims! exclaimed our hero, unmindful of harriet’s presence. 
Jefhus! how he talks! Said Harriet, crossing herself as She Spoke, What have I done to Mr. Patrick that he curses me So? 
\ 
I curse you, child! 
Child! Have I the looks of a child, Mr. Patrick? And She humour 
OF FORTUNE. 31 
morously stretched her head high, and showed, unknown to her, a bosom formed by the hands of Cupid to tempt mankind out of their reason and virtue. 
When innocence is blended with Sentimental vivacity, it has a power that no man can resist; be he never So in Sensible, or tormented with care and Sorrow, his Soul must awake. Smile and pant after bllss. 
The present bewitching Scene obliterated the past out of patrick’s C 4 mind 1 
32 The FAVOURITE 
mind; his eyes wandered with de lig>ht upon the lovely Harriet, and his tongue attempted in vain to ex press the emotions he felt: twice his lips opened to tell what fly inspired; as often, from the too great sensibility of his heart, they closed again. 
Harriet, though a stranger to vanity, enjoyed the confusion She caused: from that moment She valued her beauty, which, before Patrick was affected by it, she hardly thought to be endowed with. 
Charm 
G F. F O R T U N E. 3 3, 
Charming, charming Harriet! 
And he amoroiihy took her hand to his lips. 
Why do you do that? You don’t 
t - 
love me!. 
The tone of the voice is the most moving language of the passions; words have no meaning, when the heart does not Speak theni. Patrick heard, trembled, was awed, did not know what to answer; he continued to kiss the hand he held, and to breathe sighs upon it. 
C 5 This; 
34 The FAVOURITE 
This is love — Is it not? 
And a Smile, that told him to say yes. ', 
Dear Harriet — 
He stopped, cast his eyes down, and Seemed absorbed in thought. 
. Well? — Have you nothing to say? — Whstt was you going to talk? 
The soul of our hero, though almost disabled to defend itself 
against 
o F F O R T U N E. 35 against the temptation, Scorned to abuse the candour of the lovely maid; as he was going to anfwery agreeable to her desire, honour,, which he fancied to have rooted out of his breast, painted to him the heinousness of his crime, and forced him to respect her innocence. 

Harisiet! you deserve a better fate than to be deceived— —! not if 1 love you — look not distrested that I may not be false — you weep! I must fly, or that tear will make a villain of me. 
C 6 Stay,. 
36 The FAVOURITE 
Stay, Patrick! fear not lovely Harriet, cried Sir James Walter, who, iinperceived by them, was come into the parlour. I have Seen, and heard — I am pleased with your feelings, Harriet — with the honesty of your behaviour, Patrick. 
Is there any honesty. Said Patrick, in doing one’s duty? Had I been a monster, Harriet would have made me humane, and generous. 
With the corner of her apron the disconcerted Harriet covered 
her 
or F O R T U N E. 37 
her eyes, and then, with an unvo ' luntary Sobbing, turned to the door — 
/ / 
Harriet! ' cried our hero, not knowing what he did, and stepping to her. 
\ 
Patrick! 
She stopped and darted a stde ^ glance at him. 
I 
A few minutes silence. 
Come here, children, Said Sir James; before you part you must 
un 
38 The FAVOURITE 
understand one another. Give me 
your hand, Harriet -- give me 
yours, Patrick — Now tell me how your heart beats. 
I do not, cannot know myself, Said our hero; at present, I am under the Sway of a most enchanting 
allusion if what I eel is; 
true, I love — 
The eyes of Harriet brightened with joy; She half tendered her hand to Patrkk -- Modesty drew it back. 
When 
OF FORTUNE. 39 
wten you are cool, Patrick, fald Sir James, i’ll put the Same question to you again. 
May I answer you in the same 
manner i 
Harriet gave him a Smile for his wish, and, dropping a respectful courtfy to Sir James, left the parlour, ' 
‘CHAP. 
40 The FAVOURITE 
CHAR VIL 
jpjear mcj Patrick, said Sir James. You was at Cambridge when a malignant fever carried off your parents, who, upon their deathbed, recommended you to my friendship. Your education at the university, had given ypu a pride which, did not become your circumstances, and the views I had formed for your, fortune. I told you what your situation was, and advised you to Submit to it.. 
Upon 
o F F O R T U N E. 41 
Upon the offer I made to receive you in^o my Service, I Saw you redden with indignation, .and I acted as if I did not perceive it. That you might rise in the world, I thought proper to humble you: in the School only of' misfortune could you be taught prudence, discretion, and to have no character of your own. By havihg learned to obey, Patrick, you will be able to bear with the disdains, haughtiness, or ill nature of those to whom chance has given a Superiority over you: this, dear Patrick, has been the motive of my conduct with 
you; 
42 The FAVOURITE 
you; now that you are Such as I wished you to be, it is time to appear in the world. Lady Walter has told me her intention of send ing you to Dublin; I have heartily concurred with it; there you shall be Supported like a man I love. The follies inherent sto your age I shall forgive; but, mark me well, Patrick, if ever I hear you have brought disgrace upon yourself by a behaviour honour cannot justify, from that moment I am no longer your friend and protector — My heart, dear Patrick, is as much concerned in harriet’s happiness, as it is in your 
own 
o R F O R T U N E. 43 own. Like yon, She is an orphan committed to my care— — indeed, an angel, under the form of a woman. Long ago I have known her partiality in your favour, and sighed, with Sorrow, at the undeserved return she met with from you. The Scene I have been witness to, has Seemed to have affected your heart: if it throbs for the lovely creature, indulge its feelings, Patrick, fear not to love Harriet — Love her even to excels — thy passion for her will enlighten thy mind, and be a Spur to thy ambition : unless we be actuated by a 
power 
44 The FAVOURITE 
full interest, we calmly wait for opportunities we could create — wait for the favours of fortue, when we might ravisti them from her. Let Harriet be incestantly present to thy mind — look upon her as the object of the anxious life thou art going to live; and its bitterness will change into pleasure at the thought of her. In thy absence, Patrick, I will watch over Harriet with the tenderness of a parent; to make her worthy of thee will be my foie care and study. 
Patrick, almost breathless thro’ the want of expresstng his gratitude, 
'fell 
O F 
FORTUNE.. 45 
fell on his knee before Sir James — he would speak— — words expired on his lips — by his tears only, he could tell what he felt. 
That language the tenderhearted Sir James understood well — it was the only one it became him to hear, it became Patrick to Speak. 
Get up, my dear boy, get up— — my sensibility— — have no need of thanks. 
Then embracing him astestion ately, he desired him to prepare for his journey. 
CHAP. 
46 The FAVOURITE 
CHAP. VIII 
nriiat is the man, exclaimed 
our hero, to whom I intended 
the most poignant injury a mortal 
can receive! Had I done it, what 
a wretched situation I should now 
been in! Blested be the God, who 
diverted me from offending him! — 
I thought it So easy to deviate from 
virtue — to launch into the paths of 
vice — yet at my first trial fear and 
remorse intrude into my heart, prevent 
my guilt, and force me to repent! 
o F F O R T U N E. 47 pent! How shall I expiate for the wanton desire of prostituting the dignity of man, and abusing the parts nature bestowed on me! paf sions are a bad guide — I shudder at the alteration they made in my principles. Conquered almost as Soon as they Spoke, I Smiled at the thought of infamy, and called art wisdom, and hypocrisy virtue! To the generosity of Sir James I owe the return of my reason— — it not rather to you, lovely Harriet, that I am indebted for it! I am afraid to inquire for that truth into my heart — how Seducing ingenuity! unmoved, I have beheld the beauty 
48 The FAVOURITE 
ty of Harriet — her innocence I arti not able to withstand! -- I think I hear hct talk, see her move and Smile — the happiness of pleasing her unites to the thought of her in my mind — I am already less ambitious, less impatient of the misery of my situation — the love of Harriet forms every idea, creates every sensation. 
Southeast non e amor, cfe dunque quel ch’io fento? 
When young men give way, for the first time, to Sentimental reflections, they grow imperceptibly 
o f F O R T U N E. 49 
bly, fo extremely fond of the object of them, that reason, at last, becomes the most humble Servant of their intoxicated imagination. Reveries are always friends to women: the loss they Suffer by being known, they always repair by being dreamed of. Like a castle we build in the air, we form them of every perfection, which, when we awake, we would change into as many defects, did not our heart, welcoming the dear delusion, stint itself to truth. Harriet was not one of those women whom reason could have deprived of her charms: vol. I. D the 
50 The FAVOURITE 
the cold eye of envy would have found no fault either in her person or character. She was at the tempting feason of the first kiss; in her eyes, on her lips, round her neck stuttered, sometimes by turns, but oftener beautifully intermixed, desire and modesty. More to nature than to art, Harriet was indebted for the graces' of her gait: when she trip along, she always pleased, though she was not always admired. Harriet had no need of wit to captivate; however enchanting her conversation, still more agreeable was her silence; a tender 
® F FORTUNE. 5t 
der soul would, for hours, have fixed upon her attitudes and motions, conversed with delight with the languor, or the fire of her countenance. There was no coquetry in the dress of Harriet, nor dissimulation in her looks: at one and the same time you was forced to confess she was as virtuous as she was beautiful. 
Forgetful of the past, present, and future, our hero was taken up with the image of Harriet when the steward came to restore him to. the thought of himself. 
D z Come, 
52 The FAVOURITE 
Come, my boy, since I lose you tomorrow, I will Spend a jovial evening with you; the Supper is ready. 
And will Harriet Sup widi us, Mr. Burton? 
Harriet 1 Patrick. Does She not always Sup with my lady? — hast thou a fancy to the girs? 
I, Mr. Burton! not I indeed! in the confusion I am, I know not what I Say — that Sudden journey to Dublin has turned my head. 
Come, 
o F F O R T U N E. 53 
Come, come, we will settle that head in bumpers of generous wine: I am impatient to get myself drunk in thy honour, Come come. 
Our hero followed the ffewardv muttering, Harriet! I love thee! — 
ic 
CHAP, 
54 The FAVOURITE, 
CHAP. IX 
Burton had too much experience not to perceive Soon, that the pensiveness of our hera had another motive, than his journey to Dublin. He remembered the “Will Harriet Sup with us ?” and concluded he was enamoured of her. 
Thou art in love, my boy, I see it plainly, whispered the steward to Patrick: it is a diseafe natural 
td 
OF FORTUNE. 55 to thy age; it becomes young men to love: however, as thoii know efi: not women, I will give thee a lecture upon them. Here we may be disturbed; in my room we will be more free : follow me. 
Then taking a bottle of claret III each hand, he went with our her into his room. 
Lock the door, Patrick, and let us freely drink, and talk. Here is a bumper to Harriet; may she prove honest to thee! — 
D 4 
Pa. 
56 The FAVOURITE 
Patrick pledged him with a Smile;., and then owned his inglination for Harriet. 
There is no harm in that, the steward : the lass is clever, and were I twenty years younger I know not but I might — But it is not a question of me. So, yon love Harriet?. 
I do, indeed! 
What do you intend to make of her?. a wife, or a wh —? 
OF F O R T U N E.. 57 
Gh! Mr. Burton, Mr. Burton! do justice to the virtuous Harriet.' 
First, ^ I will do justice to thee, then to her, if she chances to defer ve it, ' 
And vou doubt she wilh de serve it? 
I do upon my honour: feelings are not judges of the merit of women : reason and experience can only teach what they really are No more than the little miss Smitten with her dolli thou couldst tell D 5 the 
58 The FAVOURITR 
the cause of thy taste for Harriet,, and justify thy prejudice in her favour. Woman, dear Patrick, is an unaccountable animal, whose affections it is almost impostible to be acquainted with; she has no other character than that she borrows from her passions; and as thesc vary perpetually, she Sets at defiance the penetrating eye of her obfervators. Vanity and pleasure are the two idols of women; before them are constantly held in chains Truth and Virtue: to their shrine Friendship, Honour, nay Nature herfeif, are daily Sacrificed. 
Ido 
OF FORTUNE. 59 
I do not Say, Patrick, that L have drawn the picture of Harriet 5 brought up in this Solitude, the seed of passions lay still dormant in her heart; but will that seed never Spring forth Shall Harriet be always dead to envy, silly pride, or the love of dissipation?? thou art certain She never Shall be a prey to those foibles, thou art a fool to trust thy happiness to her. 
What a contempt you have of women, Mr. Burton! have you ever loved? 
D 6 
I have 
6o The FAVOURITE 
I have, Patrick. As the hist tory of my folly may teach thee wisdom, I ’ will relate it to theci. Fill the glass. 
CHAP. 
OF FOR TUN: E; northeast 
H A P. X 
History of Mr, BURTON. 
■^HENI was lieutenant in the Second regiment of the guards^ i contracted an alliance with a rich merchant’s wise, who, agreeably to the prescriptions of her polite doctor, had taken a house at Cheh sea. Her husband being incessantly told She was not well. Spared himself the fatigue of visiting her, and thus left her at full liberty to 
re 
62 The FAVOURITE 
reward him for his indifference. One night, as I was returning to London on foot, and muling upon the contents of a purse of gold I had received from my Innamorata^ .1 heard the voice of a woman crying murder, and calling for help; I immediately ran to the place from whence the voice seemed to come, and, favoured by the moonlight, soon Saw, at a Small distance, a Spectacle which warmed my blood with indignation and fury. A young and beautiful woman forced down upon the edge of a ditch, defending herfeif against two russians. 
o I FORTUNE 6j: 
fians, whilst a third held a pistol to the breast of an elderly lady, who, now and then, put her head out of the coach, and filled the air with cries and imprecations against the banditti who attempted to ravish her daughter. I drew my Sword, and, as quick as lightning, fell unawares upon the russians, and at the first thrust laid one dead at mj feet; then. Snatching a pistol from the trembling hand of his companion, f struck So violently his head with it, that I put it out of his power to commit a further outrage. The attack had been 
So 
64 The FAVOURITE 
So Sudden and fuccessfiil, that, at my advancing, towards the third ruffian, I found that fear had made him fly from the field of battle: shut, as unlucky in his flight as he had been a coward in the action, he was taken by the coachman and the lady’s footman who bravely Secured him. Seeing the danger was over. Content of myself, and followed, by the hearty thanks of the mother, who called me the preserver of her daughter’s honour, I stepped, with the Servant to the young lady. How Ihocking the stght, Patrick! I turned my head 
with 
o F F O R T U N E. 
with horror— — to yourself a beauty of Seventeen who, though the fable of death was Spread over her features, looked lovely, desirable and tempting — see her covered with the blood of a villain who, falling across her, had expired on her knees — Let me draw a veil 
over the distreffing Scene -- -- Now 
give a new turn to thy imagination; let her hold her gayest pencil, employ her most lively colours to represent the charms which the disorder of her dress exposed to my view r like the friendly rays of the £un in the midst of a storm, they 
en 
66 The FAVOURITE 
enlivened the dismal prospect before me — I could, at last, gaze with delight, and forget the danger she had ran, and the sttuatian she was in 
Oh! bring me my daughter, my daughter 1 exclaimed the elderly lady. Where is she? Where IS my daughter? 
Her voice restored me to myself I removed the corpse and took the young lady up in my arms; then love bidding me send the Servant out of the way, I commanded 
him 
# T 
FORTUNE. 67 
him to fetch me Some water. Patrick, I obeyed the forcible dictates of passion; to her lips, to her bosom I paid my tribute and homage - — Nature heard me — My devotion awoke the senseless maid; after an unvoluntary flutter in every limb, She began to breathe, then Sighed, then opened her eyes; at that minute the Servant appeared t She knew him. ' 
John I youi here 1 
And She cast a ghasliy look round her. 
Good 
'6^ The FAVOURITE 
Good God! what do I behold f 
They fell, Madam, by the hantk of that gentleman. 
Heavens be praised I to you, Sir, how shall I express my gratitude? 
By not Speaking of It, 'Madam: in the Service I have done you I find my reward. 
Generous man I by lessening. the benefit you increase my obligation. 
Sophia! 
o F F O R T U N E. 69 
Sophia! dear Sophia! I die with fear and impatience — come to the arms of thy mother, dear Sophia I 
My mother lives,! Oh, Sir! never can it be in my power to acquit myself towards you. — I am weak; deign to Support me. 
I pasted my arm round her waish, .and half walked, and half carried her to the coach. The joy of Mrs, Cope was adequate to the fright She had had; her daughter and I were alternately the object of her carestes. 
You 
70 The FAVOURITE You will come with us, Sir, Said Sophia; we must know my deliverer. 
- I did not give her the trouble to repeat the invitation. What to do with the prisoners was our next thought, we were at a great lioss how to dispofe of them, when the patrol coming their rounds, we gave them into their custody. 
CHAR 
OF F O R T U N E. 71 
CHAP. XL 
J Must take breath, Said Mr. Burton, filling his glass; without this claret I could not with Spirit continue the odious tale. Let us drink again — once more, Patrick — now I am armed against the Shame of my past folly. 
I Sat in the coach opposite to Miss Cope, who, not yet able to thank me with words, compensated for her silence with the prefiture of my hand, 
I think 
72 The FAVOURITE 
I think this hour the happiest I have ever lived, Said I to her, taking her hand to my lips. 
It will not be my fault if ever you cease to think it So. 
, The presence of Mrs. Cope preventing me from answering as my heart dictated, I changed the conversation, and begged to know the reasons of the russians behaviour, Mrs. Cope told me, that coming from Chelsea, where they had Supped, they had been stopped by three highway men, who, 
after 
C T F O U T U N E. 73 
ester having robbed them of their money and watchesj were going away, when one of them, looking at Sophia, Swore She was a beautiful girl, called his comrades back, and prevailed over them to help him in his attempt against hen The villains complied >vith his request; Sophia was dragged out of the coach — Providence Sent you to my relief, Said Sophia, interrupting her mother; for my life and honour I am indebted to you; your courage and generosity will be perpetually in my mincl 
vol. L 
E 
The 
74 The FAVOURITE The coach flopping, we alighted at a fine house in Golden square; 
I followed the ladies into a parlour, 
/ 
where, at the sight of the blood upon her, Sophia Screamed, Shrunk back, reclined her head against; her mother’s breast, Shut her eyes, and panted with fear and terror. 
Let not your imagination, lovely Sophia, poison minutes you ought to give to the pleasure of finding yourself Safe. 
i’ll follow your advice, captain, Said Sophia with vivacity, and drawing near me. I am wrong 
to 
o F F O R T U N E. 75 to give way to Sorrow— — please you — 
She stopped and looked at me. 
To please you, I will enjoy the happiness you have procured me. ni go and change my dress: stay, * ril be back in a few minutes. 
One Smile before you go. 
This I muttered with the accent of a lover. 
She breathed that Smile, Patrick; and my heart Spoke its thanks upon her hand. 
E 2 Mrs, 
76 The FAVOURITE 
Mrs. Cope was worn out more by malady than by age. Her mind did not Suffer by the bad state of her health; in the midst of her pains, cheerfulness and good nature animated her Speech and behaviour. Often forgetstil of herfeif, She had always feelings for others. Though brought.up in affluence, She knew there were wretches in want of her bounty; to discover them was her 
principal care and pleafure far 
from turning her head from the unfortunate, She thought it her duty to relieve them.. Her virtue was too real to be Severe : readier 
to 
o F F O R T U N E. 77 to excuse than to cohdemn, she never construed foibles into vices, or the errors of the Senses into those of judgement. Such, Patrick, was the disposition and character of the mother of Sophia, who Seemingly posteffed her virtues, when, in reality, her Sole good quality was to conceal her vices. 
E 3 
CHAP. 
78 The FAVOURITE 
; CHAP. XIL • 
^J^^HE looks, Smiles, and affabirity of Sophia made me rejoice in an event which flattered me with her esteem and gratitude. From those Sentiments to love, Said I to myself, there is but one step — since I love, I Shall please — Thus, Patrick, deluded by my fenses,. and an adventure So romantic, I formed Sophia with every perfedfion, and adored that work of my fancy. 
Mrs. Cope, who had remained with me in the parlour, respected 
my 
OF FORTUNE. 79^ 
my reverie, and indulged It with her silence. At last, feeling the impertinence of my behaviour,. I made an apology for my absence of mind. 
I will not, Said Mrs. Cope with a Smile, ask who was the object of it; you would not perhaps Satisfy my curiosity. 
Indeed, Madam, I will not dist semble it from you; in your daughter my thoughts were centere4* A beauty in the distress I have Seen her, has too much power over a man of my Sensibility : I fear that an incident So favourable to her will turn to my disadvantage. 
E 4 That 
\. 
8o The FAVO.DRITE 
That compliment, captain, I expected from a man of your gallantry 
I am an enemy to falsehood, Madam, I say plainly what I feel. 
When you are cool, the illusion will vanish, 1 know the impref sions affecting circumstances make upon our hearts; while they last, reason is a stave to Sentiment; tomorrow you will perceive your error. 
May it be So 1 
Why that wisti? ifave you not forced Sophia to esteem you? Who can boast a claim to the affections 
of 
or FORTUNE. 8i 
of a virtuous woman, if the man of honour thinks liimself unworthy of them Do justice to Sophia; it is the merit of the man, and not his rank or fortune that will determine her heart in his favour. The Service you have done me deserves a reward : : my gratitude will think none too ffreat.. If fate has 
O 
ordered that you must love Sophia,. please her and She shall be yours. I beg only a favour of you; before you attempt to please my daughter,, inquire Soberly into your heart; have not the least doubt about its feelings; ■ let neither ambition nor avarice deprive you of your judgement.. 
E 5 I Scorn 
82 Th FAVOURITE 
I Scorn to deceive: no mean past Sion Shall ever disgrace my heart — Of love never having known the emotions and language, I cannot positively tell the nature of the new trouble to which 1 am a prey— — bring It, if possible, to the bar of cool reason. 
C 
Then behave, captain, as she will dldate. 
As Mrs. Cope Spoke those words, Sophia entered the parlour with an air, a gait, a gesture, that fixed my Soul in my eye; She Saw the pleasure She gave, and that knowledge made her still more lovely. 
When 
OF FORTUNE. 83 
When Venus went to meet Adonis, She had certainly the looks of Sophia, and was like her, thoughtless, Smiling, pleased with herself. 
This dress, Said Sophia, has operated a miracle: I have forgot the past, and will enjoy the present. Will my gaity be grateful to you, captain? I think it a return for your favour — tell me, it will not lesten your opinion of me — for — 1 know not why — 
, s fa 
half blush. 
I wish' for your esteenir 
And unknown to her mother — E 6 Your 
84 The FAVOURITE 
Your looks tell itie you will Share in my mirth — Do I mistake' their expreiston 
Out of pity, charming Sopliia>. 
» i 
exert not your powers of pleasing be the reverse of yourself, or I Shall be miserable. 
Will ill nature, haughtiness, and frowns make you more happy? 
Yes, 'much more So, than the bewitching accent you have Spoke with. 
I am neither a prude, nor a, coquette, captain; my looks, accent,, and Smiles belong to my age: i 
am 
6 F FORTUNE. 8^ 
am just Such a nature and education have made me — in the very presence of my mother I do not fern pie to declare that I esteem you — The preserver of my life and honour has an unquestionable right to my regard and friendship. Come,. dont be So grave — with your leave. Madam, ni ring for Some refreshment— — glasies of burgundy will revive our Spirits. 
Thou hast had a good thought, Sophia; ring the bell. 
The Servants came, and an elegant cold repast was Served 
We 
86 The FAVOURITE 
We will Gall when we want you, Said Sophia to the Servants — I hate those people for their impertinence; they wonder I can be gay after my adventure; is it nut natural to rejoice when we have escaped a danger we had not the smallest hope to avoid? Dear mother, and you, Sir,, deign to give' your opinion of my conduct; is it ridiculous and unseasonable?. 
I find no fault in it, Sophia don’t mind those fools; thou livest for thyself, and not for them. Let us sit down. 
Have I your approbation, captain? 
I hays 
OF F O R, T U N E. 87 
I have a mind to say no, that I may See how you would resent it. 
You wish to see me displeased? 
What a glance she darted at me, Patrick! it completed her triumpli in my heart. 
Love bidding me to please, I humoured the enchanting sprightliness of Sophia, and reflection intruded no longer into my mind, but to make me Sensible of my happiness. I told them my name, family, and situation in life. 
I am 
Th favourite 
I am related to the Secretary of war. Said Mrs. Cope, and I have not yet asked one favour which he has not irnmediately granted. I am your friend, captain; command my interest; I Shall employ it Successfully in your favour. Const -- der my house as your own — at all times i’ll See with pleasure the protector of my daughter. 
Her repeating watch telling two o’clock, I got up, thanked Mrs Cope for her generous offers, and turning to Sophia, exprested in my countenance a want I did not dare to sneak;; understood me. 
Take 
© r F O R T U N E. 
Take it, captain : it is a debt you have a right to demand. I am not So unjust as to refuse to pay it. 
And with a finile She tendered me her cheek; 
Your cheek! 
She blushed.' 
Steal — askshot. 
I printed one kiss upon her lips. 
If I leave you my heart will you take care of it? 
I know 
90 The FAVOURITE 
I know not — will yoii trust it to me? — 
Promise me to use it well— — - 
parley, captain; defend yourself, or Surrender at dlfcretion. 
Deserve your vidfory — an honest heart ought to find grace with a generous conqueror. \ 
Fear not, captain; adieu, ques au fevolr. 
CHAR 
OF FORTUNE. 
y 
, 1 
CHAP. XIII 
R. Burton, having with fervency renewed his adoration to the bottle, continued in the following manner. 
When I was by myself, I would lit in judgement upon the new guests I harboured in my heart: but being in the height of my rapture, I could think only of the beauty, gesture, shape, gait, and voice of Sophia. After Some hours Sleep, finding myself more ‘calm, I reflected on sophia’s behaviour, 
and 
52 The FAVOURITE and thought, in Spite of love, that her dlspofition was too volatile, her wit too lively, and her countenance too free and voluptuous. 
She Is young! this observation deluded my reason: I attributed her levity to youth, and the freedom of her manners to her innocence. 
In the afternoon I went to pay my devoirs to Mrs. Cope and Sophia, and was received with the most engaging politeness and familiarity. Some company coming 
in immediately after me my eyes 
told 
OF FORTUNE. 
told Sophia what my tongue was not at liberty to Speak; and her tmswers in that language I interpreted favourably to iny passion. Unwilling to engage at cards, I took a French leave and went to vauxhall 
Lost in a tender reverie, I was walking in the most dark and Solitary place of the gardens, when a heavy (hower falling Suddenly, I hastened toward the boxes — a female voice stopped my flighty I thought I heard Sophia. 
Wretch, 
94 The FAVOURITE 
Wretch, let me go, exclaimed She amouroufly; have you not been happy? — It rains too hard — I neic there can, nor will stay — let me go — 
Under these trees, answered a man, we Shall find a shelter against the storm — Come, lovely Sophia; deny not a man who adores thee — 
'‘then, from the rustling of her Silk, and her desiring him not to go So fast, I judged he was carrying her to the place he had spoke of. 
What! Sophia! cried I with fury; a nd I rushed into the thicket 
OF FORTUNE. 95 ket they were in. Blinded by mad ness, I did not see a tree before me, and struck my head So violently against it, that I fell senseless at 
the foot of it; when L recovered, 
( 
I found mjfelf So faint, So wet, and So giddy from the violence of the blow, that I gave over the Search after Sophia, and returned to London. 
The improbability of Sophia being at vauxhall, made'me blush at my folly — Sophia at vauxhall in the arms of a lover! I wondered at my impertinence, and cursed 
love 
96 The FAVOUIUTE 
love for the injustice I had wantonly done to the virtuous maid. 
Tthouglit my reason convinced | it was not, Patrick. Could I mistake the voice of Sophia? Jealousy % 
rny breast — I realised what, a few minutes before, I had persuaded myself to be a chimaera. My situation being a torment not to be born with, I Sent my Servant to Mrs. Cope under the pretence cf inquiring if I had not left my fnust box in her drawing-room. The ladies Sent me their compliments and an invitation to dine with them the next day. 
Whom 
D r F O R T U N E. 97 Whom did you Speak to, John? 
To the young lady, Sir. 
My fuspicion vanished, and I heartily defpised myself for having indulged it. 
CHAP. XIV 
next day as I was going from St. james’s to the queen’s palace, I met Miss Cope in company with a young lady and a pert coxcomb under the dress of a clergyman, whose familiar behaviour vol. L F She 
The FAVOURITE 
ihe Seemed to countenance by her look 
I am glad to see yoti, captain. 
And one Smile to confirm what ihe Said. 
Why did you leave us fo abrups ly yesterday.? 
And ihe unaffectedly walked with me, leaving her company behind. 
I hate cards, charming Sophia. 
So do I, captain; had you stayed, we would have talked Some 
non 
CF FORTUNE. 99 
tionfense or another, and posiibly forgot the tedious hours. 
Tn your conversation I would have been happy — how did you pafs your time? 
My friend Miss Robinson called tipon me, : we went to kensington gardens. 
The very same voice that I heard yesterday! exclaimed I inwardly. 
The demon of curiosity made me turn my head; but, as if that motion had been to the clergyman a signal for ^ retreat, he whlspered a F 2 few 
100 The FAVOURITE 
few words to the lady he was with, and walked off. The whisper, and the Sudden retreat of that man, did not please me; at that minute only, I Saw the impropriety of sophia’s conduct. 
She would not have left her company, Said I to myself, had she not feared I Should know the voice of that man. This observation She instantly confirmed by waiting for her friend, and betraying an involuntary joy at the departure of the clergyman. 
Forgive, my dear, Said Sophia; but I hate to be Seen with Such a 
frib 
o F F O R T U N E. 101 
fribble as that churchman; I think our reputation more Safe with an officer of the guards. The deportment of that fellow is the Satire of decency and religion: look, how he walks! have you ever seen anything So ridiculous? 
One would take him, indeed, answered Miss robinson, for a pe fit maitre in love with himself, or going to a rendez vous. 
I wish, Amelia, you would get me rid of his acquaintance, of desire him to behave more coiifistent ly with his character. 
F 3 
Why 
102 The FAVOURITE 
Why don’t you forbid him yoiir house, or frown him away from you when you meet with him in a public place 1 
Mr. Parker, my dear, has the patience of a Stoic; he does mind an affront no more than a compliment; unless I tell him plainly, begone, you are a fool, he never will understand me. 
Though he is my coustn, I muss own he is a conceited fop 
However marked with real contempt the tone of sophia’s voice,. 1 fufpested her of hypocrisy; the 
more 
OF FORTUNE. 103: 
more keen She had been in her Satire against the clergyman, the less I doubted her inclination for him: yet Such an air of innocence was Spread on her countenance, that I needed all my reason to impeach her honour and veracity. 
So young, and yet So vicious f — The thought was worse than death. — The fear of betraying that thought carried it fo often in my eyes, that Sophia began to grow uiieafy and anxious. Reflection removed instantly her anxiety, and changed it into a concern for me. • 
F 4 
What 
104 The FAVOURITE 
What ails you, captain? Are you not well? 
And She gently tapped on my fingers with her fan. 
I had Such a dream last night — 
Can a dream distress a man of sense?? 
looked So much like reality, that, even now, I am inclined to believe it true. 
It Is astonishing how easily. we are a dupe to our imagination!; What can that dream be, which made Such an impression upon you? 
You 
© F FORTUNE. ip 
You was the Subject of it, 
I, captain I 
And she laughed. 
Pray tell me the part 1 acted in it. 
The part of a fond woman ^ving herfelfup to the transports of a lover. 
And that lover was — 
'i 
It was not I. 
Poor captain! you are not happy in your dreams. 
Then taking an unfeigned air of dignity. 
F.? 
Did 
io The FAVOURITE 
Did you not say you was inclined to believe your dream true? 
Patrick! her air of dignity confounded me: it commanded my respect and proved her innocence. 
Forgive, charming Sophia. 1 adore you — passion had intoxicated my judgement — grant me my pardon — 
Leave me, Sir. 
And I Saw a tear trickling down her cheek. 
Leave me. 
And she turned with her friend towards the ftable yard. 
CHAP. 
OF FORTUNE. 107 
CHAP. XV 
■^HAT a damned jilt that Sophia I Said Patrick, filling Mr. burton’s glass, and emptying; the Second bottle; So much art and hypocrisy at Seventeen! Had She really about her the innocence of my Harriet, Mr. Burton? 
The advantage, Patrick, was rather on the fide of Sophia: * had modesty herself chosen to come among us She would have put on the features and talked the language, of Soph ia. 
F 6 At. 
io The FAVOURITE 
At what School could she learn to be So vicious and false? 
At the School of nature, love, and neceslity. 
So, my dear Mr. Burton, you Was a dupe to the tear she Shed, and believed her innocent! 
Passion bid reason away : no Ion ger did I think Sophia guilty. 
God forbid Harriet Should have the soul of Sophia! 
Amen, Patrick : but let us have another bottle; call up one of the scoundrels below. 
A Ser 
OF FORTUNE. 109 
A Servant came. 
Tell the butler to send me two bottles of N ® 13. 
An’ please your honour. Mister Simon is So busy now— — 
you dog! Can he be So busy as not to do what I command? 
An please your honour, what your honour says is very true; but he may kick me for the mest'age for ought 1 know. 
What is he fo busy about? 
An’ pleaseyour honour, Said Peter, playing with his hat, if I say 
it, 
no The FAVOURITE 
it, the young master there, may haps will be angry with me.. 
Fear not: Speak, Said Patrick, 
Well master, Mister Simon is making love, as they call it, ■ upon the. terrafs to Miss Harriet, 
The deuce he does! Said Patrick,, getting up and going to open the window,. 
Come, come, Patrick, Said the steward, fit down: don’t Spoil the Sport; thy turn will come, my boy;; don’t grudge Harriet the compliment Simon is now paying to her charms. Go, Peter, stiouldst thou 
have 
OF FORTUNE, nil 
have thy bones broke, bring me the Wine 
Master Simon making love to Harriet!. exclaimed Patrick. 
Is it not natural that a young fellow Should talk of love to a fine woman r 
Can Harriet listen to him ?: 
That She does, I am certain of it. A woman, Patrick, must have a toy to play with, it matters not who he is, So long as he amuses her senses, or flatters her vanity; were She not a coquette fly would 
die 
II The FAVOURITE 
die with Spleen. Be Sure that every hour a lover is absent is always given up either to his friend or enemy. Women are like gluttons, who, after having eaten an hearty meal, are still inclined to taste of every tempting trifle that comes before them. 
Let me peep out of the window. 
To give her a new right to make a fool of thee! Be discreet, Patrick; if Harriet perceives thou art jealous stie will use thee like a stave. Expect neither justice nor generosity from women : fond of thee if thou art indifferent, indifferent if thou art enamoured of them; Such is their 
chaos 
FORTUNE. 11^ 
character: for one who will not abuse the conquest: She has made thousands will tyrannise over it. Care less for Harriet and She will care more for thee. 
Sure Harriet is not false!' 
Simon has possibly an equal right with thee, to burst out into the same exclamation. But here is Peter. 
Here is wine, * an’ please your honour. 
Without broken bones I hope, laid Mr. Burton. 
Quite 
114 The FAVOURITE Quite sound, by jefliusi I Said I came from your honour, and Master Patrick.. 
What! two bottles Said Mils Harriets Does Mr. Patrick intend to get drunk? 
People, answered I, may Sure drink two bottles, and not get drunk. Miss Harriet Said She wondered how a young man could sit drinking, wiien the evening was fo fine. He very likely likes it better, answered I; Shall I tell him 
f • 
you Said, Miss?? no. Said Mister Simon.. Yes, yes Said Mist 
Har 
OF FORTUNE. 115 Harriet. Sir, they wait for the wine, Said I to Mister Simon; an’ please your honour. Mister Siiuon damned me, and Said he was coming; then. Sir, as I was leaving them, I heard Mister Simon ask for a kifs — 
For a kifs, said Patrick! 
Yes, for a kifs. Master; Miss Harriet said She would not give it. Well, ru take it, said Mister Simon. 
Did he take it? said Patrick, 
I don’t know, Master; but (he ran away, and he ran after her; 
She 
ii The FAVOURITE 
she tumbled down, an’ please your honour, and — ‘‘ What? Said Patrick, ” and I believe he would have tumbled by her, had not my lady’s waiting woman, who^was with her, stopped him by the sleeve, and Said he was a dirty Scoundrel to behave in that Saucy manner to mifs Harriet — “’tis'well it is not worse” ” Patrick, returning calmly to his seat — Then, Sir, I called aloud for Mr. Simon, and he came to me fwearlng he would have the kiss, when he comes back. I told So, an’ please your honour, to Miss Harriet, who laughing, went into 
my 
OF FORTUNE. 117 
my lady’s apartment. that’s all, an’ please your honour, I know of the matter. 
that’s enough, honest Peter, Said Mr, Burton; leave us alone. 
I don’t like the laughter of Harriet, Said Patrick. 
It is devilishly ominous, Said Mr. Burton, drawing the cork out of the bottle; girls like the play, though they don’t like the man. When you have heard my cursed history, Patrick, you will know more than you do. Here is to you, my boy. 
D -- -- -- 
II The FAVOURITE 
D -- -- on to women! Said Patrick, 

don’t be So rash, boy, said Mr. Burton; there are thousands, who perhaps, deserve to be blefied: thou hast but conjectures against Harriet, and conjectures are nothing. Judge not women upon their indiscretions, for all would be thought guilty. Listen with attention; i’ll continue my panegyric of women. 
CHAP. 
O F F O R T U N E, 119 
CHAP. XVI 
J Deserve a thoufaiid deaths if She is innocent, Said I to myself, following Sophia with eyes expressed five of love and Sorrow. She is not So excellent a comedian to perform with such ingenuity a part which would not be her own. At her age it is impossible to dissemble fo well: Vice would forcibly Spring forth under her mask of virtue. Why Should not two women agree as perfectly in the sound of their voices, as they do in complexion, gesture, graces, and 
man 
no The favouhitlli 
manners? Absorbed in the thought of Sophia, might I not be betrayed into the belief I heard her Speak? How often led by fancy, or passion, do we not hear, or see, what is neither spoke, nor is to be Seen! Extreme love, and Sudden fear do not refledf; when they sway in our hearts, every avenue to it is Shut up to reason. I was mistaken; Sophia was not at Vauxhall. 
After this Soliloquy, .the foolish nefs of my behaviour came into my mind, and I wisely concluded, that a few more of Such impertinences would effectually make me as hateful, 
OF FORTUNE, tit 
full, as I had already made myself contemptible. To prevent this event, more dreadful to me than the loss of my life, I resolved not to take the alarm, however extraordinary the conduct of Sophia till I was fully Satisfied of her deviation from honour, and virtue; strengthened by this resolution, I went to Golden square: 
I found Sophia by hcrself, lost in thought, and leaning against the back of a chair; at the stpsht of me. She started in a theatrical manner, and tears immediately stowed upon her lovely face, I drew near her; 
vol. I, G with 
122 The FAVOURITE 
i 
with one hand she carried her handkerchief up to her eyes, and with the other bid me to not approach. No Seduction, Patrick, is equal to that of grief in the countenance of a beautiful woman. Refiection may Set her Smiles at defiance, but in Spite of yourself, your soul Shares in her distress, and makes it her own; h had I been convinced of sophia’s guilt, her tears would have made me Swear to her innocence, would have melted my anger into tenderness, and my contempt into esteem 
What 
OF FORTUNE. 123 
What mortal care corrodes the breast of my lovely friend? 
This question from you to me !- — add not, Sir, raillery to insult — you know— — 
she sighed — 
You know the cause of my Sorrow. 
Ought a jest to have offended 
you? 
You call a jest your Scorn of mel — What in my conduct has given ^ you So miserable an opinion of my virtue? Is it my not being able to G 2- Secrete 
124 The FAVOURITE Secrete from you the esteem you have inspired me with; I have no art — the imprestion you made upon me, lingenuousty declared in my looks — you Saw it, and yet — ungenerous man! go from me — your presencc. is a torment — 
What could I Sa, Patrick? nothing'; I fell upon my knees, con fested myself a fool, and was forgiven. 
C HA 
® F FORTUNE. 125 
CHAP. XVII 
T H E sacrifice of my reason Sophia rewarded with one kifs; and, from that moment my soul was in her hand, like wax She did modify at pleasure, No woman, Patrick, ever knew So well the art of pleasing, the art of working your senses into a flame, the art of making you pant after her possession. Had her Smiles upon a man made me, diffident; with one look or a word site brought joy back into my heart. She had such an trastive voluptuousness in her attte.. G 3; tude,;. 
126 The FAVOURITE 
tude, as called irresistibly your Soul to six upon her lips — that attitude She did Seem to command; perpetually checked by modesty, you would have sworn it was against her inclination she obeyed nature, and captivated your heart. 
Every day I found a new charm in Sophia, a new motive to glory in my passion for her. Mrs. Cope saw with delight the preference her daughter gave me over all the men of her acquaintance, and treated me with the familar tenderness of a mother. 
At 
OF FORTUNE. 127 
At last, impatient for happiness, 
I offered my hand; it was accepted; and the wedding day was fixed. I thought myself, Patrick, at the Summit of human felicity: to pos fefs the woman we adore, and by whom we are loved 1 Can there be a Superior bliss 1 
On the morning of the eve of our marriage sophia’s maid came to me. 
I want to Speak to you, captainc. Can anybody hear me? 
G 4^ 
No 
128 The FAVOURITE 
No body, pretty Nelly; my Servant is out. What is your message?? does my dear Sophia? 
You will not call her dear when you have heard me. 
What do you mean, Nelly? 
And I looked wild, and trembled in every limb. 
Your dear Sophia is false, Sir — 
‘ False! Good God! — no — it is 
{ 
impossible— — — you enjoy any pleasure in thus tormenting me? Your jest is death to m e. 
I won’t 
OR F' O R T U N E. 
I won’t kill yon. Sir; not I,, indeed! So, Shy your most humble servanc 
Stop, thou murdering maid 1 you have Said already too much — tell me you was not in earnest — tell me that Sophia is not false — oh 1 my heart is torm 
unless you are cool, I will not Speak 
Well —,. 
And I arose with fury i j 
I will be cool — Speak. 
G 5 ' Yau 
130 The FAVOURITE 
You frighten me So, captain, I cannot Speak — 
Sophia false! Hell and furies I 
Sophia is not false, Sir 
And she stepped to the door 
You shan’t go, Nelly — I must know all, and then die in agony ofrage — 
Pray, Sir, don’t hurt me — I came to Serve you — indeed I came for that only, ' 
And She Sell at my feet. 
arlse; 
OF FORTUNE. 131 
A rise; fear not; • thou art Safe— — for the murdering tale — Spare me not — I am ready for grief andi death.. 
Lord! how you talk! you will not Sure die for a girl, wlio does not love you— — you A mam to be So foolish!. fie I 
How often, in thy presence, has not Sophia Sworn She did love me !i 
It is because She Swore it, ' that you Should not have believed her — have you' not heard her Swear upon her hopes of everlasting happiness She never had given a fciss to G 6 a mani 
j32 The FAVOURITE a man — yet, how many did She not dally give to her lover I 
Her lover! who is he f 
Mr. Parker. 
A clergyman! Is he not? 
He Is. 
Confusion!! a dupe I have been! what an infamous wretch Sophia! my blood is burning hot with indignation — Nelly, I once knew their intrigue — I thought I was certain of it — She persuaded me I was wrong — Heaven! what woman Shall man trust to, stnce Sophia is false! 
Caps 
FORTUNE. 135-. 
Captain, if you are wise, you will make the best of my intellb gence, and behave like a man: call pride to your help, and by a bold stroke make your mlstress the woman you intended for your wife. This is a revenge worthy of you : ni tell you frankly, that I Serve myself in Serving you. Mr. Parker had found his way to my heart before he was intimate with Sophia — her youth and beauty pleaded against me — 1 was neglected, then forsaken and then laughed, at. The desire of revenge forced me' to Submit to my fate; I watched the lovers; 
fur 
t34 tne FANOITRITH 
Surprised them, and am now their confident — This night Sophia and Mr. Parker have devoted to plea» sure till this day prudence has 
ruled their enjoyments as you 
are to be married tomorrow I need not mention the compliment they are resolved to pay you; Now, captain; will you perform, the part of your rival, or sit contented with the loss of your Sophia? Remember her charms -- paint to’ yourself the caresses of a fond woman who thinks to have her lover in her arms — Well? 
Ido 
o? FORTUNE. JAS 
1 do not hesitate, Nelly, Said I, delighted with this plan of revenge; but Parker must be punished, and‘ you rewarded— — 
Spoke, By all that is good! exclaimed Nelly; in his; punishment i’ll find my reward; I ask no other of you.. Return upom him the affront he intended to put upon you; force him to wed Sophia when you have obtained alb that She can grant. He is a coward — if you insist, he will obey,. 
It shall be Soi pledge thee myi honour and life. 
Now 
$ 6' The FAVOURITE 
Now let ns look at our watches. Five and thirty miiiutes past ten by mine — just the same by your’s; that’s right. Mr. Parker comes, at twelve at night — you must be at the door — mark me well -- precisely at eleven o’^dock;; don’t knock — 3^011 Shan't wait. i’ll let you in — from my room you stiall steal into that of Sophia — no light Shall be in it — not one word must you Speak — Sophia will be as stienc 
Agreed, agreed. Oh, thou my guardian angel who hath Saved me from infamy, how Shall I Show thee my gratitude! the reward I 
have 
Of FORTUNE. 137 
have promised yon, Nelly, is not Sufficient: here Is a purse of one hundred guineas; with this accept my friendship; never, Nelly, Shalt thou know want, if fortune continues to Smile upon me. 
Good captain! though I do not deserve this purse, i’ll take it, that I 'may not be thought a fool. Forget not the hour — 
No, no, by heavens, I Shall not. * Adieu. 
CHAP. 
138 The favourite 
CHAP XVIII 
J DO not understand thatctove of yours, Said Patrick, helping biin felf to a bumper, and pasting the bottle to the steward; had you stncerely loved, you would either have grown mad, or plunged your sword in the breast of Sophia, or pistolled yourself out of life. 
The Sentiment of my folly, Patrick, prevailed over pastion, and restored me .to my reason. Pride Spoke, and contempt deprived her 

OF FORTUNE. 13^ 
instantly of all her rights to my heart: I felt that my senses only thirsted for the night of bliss I was to enjoy. Her beauty r the thought of revenge — fancy fired my soul, and I Submitted to their law. 
Faithful to her word, Nelly, introduced me into sophia’s room. 
'The daylight broke upon us, and revealed to Sophia a mystery, which overwhelmed her with despair. She stared at me with a ghastly look, and exclaiming “I am betrayed and undone !” Sunk in a Swoon upon her pillow. I had 
'not 
140 The FAVOURITE not the inhumanity to exult in her distress; the fensation of pleasure, which Rill circulated iri my veins, made me her friend, and bid me to be generous. With the help of Some Srdts, in a few minutes, I brought her back to herself— — opened her eyes, and turning them from me, burst forth into Sobbings and tears. 
Be calm, dear Sophia; out of respect for yourself be calm, and attend to me. Your reputation may still be free from blame; though you have used me as an enemy, I will be your friend and 
protec 
OF F O RT U N E. 141 
protector. What will your tears, and Sorrow avail you.? Be calm, dear Sophia; I am a man of honour, and will not betray you. 
- How She panted with fear and shame, Patrick! 
O! what a disgrace falsehood has brought upon me! I deserve it — I shall not complain — I am in your power — 
I will not abuse it. Your reason, Sophia, must tell you the part you are to act; change the husband into a lover, and the lover into a husband. Listen to justice, it will side for me. ' 
tiad 
£42 The FAVOURITE 
, Had not Mr. Parker an invincible aversion for marriage, I would not have deceived you — 
I will cure him of that aversion,; when he knows I am acquainted with the injury he pro posed to do me, he neither can, nor .will dare to refiise you for his wife. 
Indeed! 1 have been very ungenerous to you — how Shall I make amends for the past? 
I Smiled — 
She understood me -- -- -- and the 
past was forgiven, and forgot. 
Mr. 
0 F F O R T U N E. 143 
Mr. Parker valuing his life more than his honour, became sophia’s husband— — was bribed into Secrecy — and I continued to act the lover, 
O, the infernal jade! exclaimed Patrick, what a lucky escape you had, Mr. Burton! you make me hate women. Let us drink; I must drown the thought of Harriet in this wine. Could you be happy with a woman, for whose favours you was not indebted to love, but to her fear of your indiscretion? 
pieasure loses Soon its charms, when the heart does not partake 
of 
144 The FAVOURITE 
of it. The illusion, that had Seduced my senses, vanished with the gratification of the desire which had created it. No confidence could I place in the woi; nan who had deceived me; nature and her beauty, only, She had to thank for my transports, and the silence of my contempt of her. — Sophia, dear Patrick, prejudiced me So strongly against her Sex, that to this day, I have considered woman as a toy, that has no other real value, than that which imagination gives it. Prosit by my experience, Patrick; adopt my opinion of woman, if 
thou 
OF FORTUNE. 145 
thou wilt not falla prey to that noxious, deceitful animal. 
: C H A P. XIX 
J WILL drink no more, Said Patrick, that I may remember your lecture upon women; it would lie folly to fet my reason against your experience — I don’t lo^e Harriet half So much as 1 did before I heard you— — when I awake She wilh totally be out of my metho ry. Your Sophia to a mind like mirie, ' must be an infallible antidote against love — She looked more in vol. I. H nocent 
146 The FAVOURITE 
nocent than Harriet; and yet — what hypocrites these women are! 
Be like them, Patrick; return deceit for deceit; thou hast no other means to avoid the Snares they will lay against thee. If thou art not their tyrant, thou shalt be their stave; there is no medium between those two extremes in a connexion with a woman. Circumstanced as thou art, thou stiouldst think of women, as thou dost of a diversion after hours of trouble or study; let her be to thee a play, a novel, a bottle of claret, anything capable of enlivening thy exhausted spirits— — 
# r F O R T U N E, 147 ware of turning that remedy into 
poison -- -- thy happiness will cease, 
when thy infatuation begins. Ambition, my dear boy, ought to be thy Sole passion;; it is diverted by the silly cares of a man of feeling, or gallantry, it will be productive of no good to thee. Nature having formed thee to please, it will be; thy fault if thou lofefl; thy time with women: in this polite age they will Spare thee the fatigue of Showing them a respect, they cannot inspire, but at the expense of their pleasures. Never fear to offend the women, who will smile upon Hz thee 
148 The FAVOURITE 
thee with the looks of voluptuouf iiefs; let her reputation or virtue be no check to'thee; answer the language of nature, and thou shalt be forgiven. Modesty in man is a perpetual object of ridicule for women; I know not a virtue they defpise more heartily than that — it is a mirror held to their vices, which the man of pleasure and of the world, never expose to their eyes. The man of true merit, Patrick, has no chance with the fair— — is a liv iiig Satire to them— — is only by being unworthy of their favours, that thou canst obtain them. Come, it is late; here is bon repos to thee. 
Our 
OF F O R T U N E., 149 
Our hero withdrew from the steward’s room, and muttered, as he went to’his own, Thanks to Mr. 
burton’s friendship, I have learned to know women! Never can I be a dupe to their art, if I follow his advice. The most innocent desires to please— — desire is naturally attended with coqiiettry — When a woman has began to be false, it is impossible for her virtue not to fall gradually a victim to her hypocrisy— — habit of deceit makes it natural to her — I am afraid there are - more Sophias in the world, than I thought of — She looked more innocent than Harriet! — With H 3 a mean. 
150 The FAVOURITE 
a mean, base, guilty soul, She looked more innocent than Harriet! No longer, will I, from their features, form my opinion of womeiv — their countenance is too often a .contrast to their hearts — Levity in a woman is neither So alarming, nor So dangerous, as an affected reservednefs: when the behaviour agrees with the feelings, ive cannot be led into error — 1 must avoid the sight of Harriet, fet out without venturing my reason and liberty — (he is So young. So tender. So beautiful! — the danger, I fear, would prove too great for me — reflection would vanish before her charms — 
1 am 
G F FORTUNE. 151 
I am but a man — what man can withstand a beauty either fmilingp or distrested! I must not See Harriet — time will convince me of her affection — if it is real it will outlive an absence of a few years — Then fortune, and love will crown us with their most exquisite bliss. 
Pleased with this resolution, Patrick thought no more, and gav« way to steep. 
H 4 
C H itp. 
ISZ The FAVOURITE 
CHAP. XX 
tgarly the next morning onr hero was Sent for, by Sir James Walter.. 
You will breakfast: with my lady and me, Patrick, Said Sir James, tendering him his hand, in an affectionate manner, and then Set out for Dublin. A horse and Some gold are the. only equipage you want. This letter you will deliver to Mr. Felton my agent, who Shall 
provide you with lodgings, and a wardrobe becoming me to give, and 
you 
O F FORTUNE. I s3 you to accept. Deal with all men, dear Patrick, as if they were your enemies; trust neither to the friendship they will feign for you, nor to their protestations of honour, and virtue. Actions and not words de* dare the man of probity— — villain only talks of justice and honour, that he may be thought the reverse of himself. Form no connexions before you are Satisfied they are worthy of your esteem and confidence; even then, keep your Secrets in your own heart— — friend today may be an enemy tomorrow. Please women, flatter H 5 their 
r The FAVOURITE 
their passions, indulge their whims, and never appear to understand them when your discernment wculd humble their vanity. Be false in your own defence; but never employ art where none is intended against you. Lady Dempster is a great favourite with the Lord Lieutenant: it is in her power to Serve you. As, in her opinion, that man has more merit, who has the most handsome figure, I dare say She will think it her duty to use all her interest in yoi^r favour. Lady Dempster, Patrick, is not one of those women, whose self-love enjoys the 
respect 
or FORTUNE. 155 respect of their admirers; their Surprise at the sight of her charms is much more flattering to her pride; it is only in the desires of her lover that She finds the praise of her beauty. That taste you must comply with; many have lost her prote(stlon, who, had they humoured her fancy, would have been preferred to posts of honour, or profit. 
Our hero thanked Sir James for his instructions, and promised to make them the rule of his future conduct. 
Now, Said Sir James, tell me your thoughts of Harriet. 
H 6 Feel 
156 The FANOURIJE 
Feelings at my age, anstvered Patrick, are So much like passion, that it is very easy to mistake their nature; absence, only can discover it to me. If, far from Harriet, I can live happy — 
I understand you, Patrick : to that test I will have you put your inclination, for her— — all men and women as prudent, none would repent the choice they make; but it is in our nature to be deluded, and to cherish the delusion — few would to truth Sacrifice an agreeable error.. 
Afer 
OF FORTUNE. 157 
A Servant corning in, Sir James bid him to tell her ladyship the breakfast was ready. 
My lady is not well, answered the Servant; she won’t come down. This letter she Sends to Mr, (I Kara for Lady Dempster. Her ladyship wishes you a good journey. Sir. 
. Proud, whimsical woman i exclaimed Sir James. don’t mind her impertinence, Patrick; a woman is not a tractable animal — let us breakfast. 
When the tea equipage was removed, Sir James gave Patrick a 
purse 
158 Th FAVOURITE 
purse of fifi; y guineas, embraced him. Saw him to his horse, and recommended him to his guardian angel. 
The change in his situation elated the heart of Patrick; pleased with the part he was going to af, he almost realised the flattering hopes he entertained, and Saw himself the object of envy and riding in state. When his vanity had stifficiently fed upon the bewitching dreams of the prospect before him, he thought of Lady Walter, and did not fail to do himself the honour of the whim which had deprived him of her company. 
She 
OF FORTUNE. 159 > ’ She was afraid, exclaiihed he iti a rapture, to betray my power over her; had not her hufbaiid been present, her discretion would have given way to love — at the sight of me, she would have forgot my silly behaviour of yesterday, and sighed a wish I would not go — her ladyship has cured me of my false delicacy — no other woman shall ever complain of my respect when her looks or attitude will tell me to be confident and happy. Mr. Burton is right; modesty in a man is an impertinence of the first magnitude; I must get rid of it. 
CHAP. 
io The FAVOURITE 
CHAR XXL 
jntoxicated with the conscioust nefs of his dear self-importance, Gur hero rode thirty miles without stopping; ■ and to please his horse, who by his unwillingness to proceed, Seemed to beg for refrestiment, alighted at an inn. Patrick had hardly sat down to his dinner, when a noise, accompanied with the polite epithet of w — e, b — h, c. struck his ears, and called him into the yard. 
Out 
OF FORTUNE. ii Out of pity, stop; don’t kill me, cried a young, and pretty woman decently dresised, bedewed in tears, and with dishevelled hair, flying from a man, who, with rage in his countenance, horse wipped her before him. 
Monster! said our hero, putting himself between the man and the woman he called a b — h and a w — e, are you not ashamed of yourfels? What! to beat thus a woman! what injury has fly done you? 
None at all. Sir, none at all! ejcdaimed the woman. i’ll tell 
you 
te The favourite 
you, Sir, how it happened; only let my husband give me the time to justify myself; I ask no .more. 
D — n the b -- -- -- -- 1 Slid the man, 
stie is not my wife. 

What right have you then to beat her? 
What right? Blast you for your question 1 have I not a x'ight to beat anybody if I choose to do it.? Who (hall Say no, when I say 
yes 
And 
OF FORTUNE. i 
And he put himself in an attitude that would have frightened a man less intrepid than our hero. 
Softly, my friend, Said Patrick with great composure; you will find people enough here to dispute your right, if you attempt to exert it without any colour ' of justice. Let us hear this woman. 
Sir, Said the woman, I am as innocent as an unborn babe; if my husband Saw what he did not See, it is none of my fault. Indeed, I am innocent, Sir.. 
What!’ 
j64 The FAVOURITE 
What! cried the man, enraged at her affertioii of innocenee, did not your dress betray you? Was not your cap on one fide, your handkerchief ost your bosom, and your apron So rumpled — damn me I but you shall have another lash for your impudence. 
Protect me, Sir; protect me, gentlemen, addressing herself to the people of the inn, and the mob that had come to the noise — 'Protect me I 
All taking the part of the young woman, She was at liberty to tell the cause of their quarrel. 
Sir, 
OF F O R T U N E. i6j 
Sir, Said She, turning herself to our hero, 1 was coming down, when passing by the door of a gentleman’s room, he politelj alked me in; I went in, Sir. There was a bottle of wine upon the table; the gentleman filled the giass, and gave it to me; I drank his health, and he pledged me, Sir; that’s all. When I came out I met my husband who found fault with everything in my dress, though, to be Sure, Sir, everything was right in it., 
So rauch pother for a glass of wine! Said our hero. For shame, friend! aik your wife’s pardon. 
Ask 
i66 The FAVOURITE 
Ask that w — ’s pardon! I’H be 
d -- -- if I do! Come; let everybody 
look at his own business; my patience is exhausted; I will no longer be bullied out of my revenge. 
And breaking through the crowd, he lifted up his whip, and rushed towards the woman. 
You shan’t beat her, you scoundrel! Said Patrick, and he took him by the collar. 

I will beat you, by G — d! if I don’t her — let me go — you won’t! 
And 
OF FORTUNE. 167 
V And he aimed a violent blow at the nose of our hero, who, Springing aside, made a stroke at him, and levelled him to the ground. 
Oh, the villain! cried the young woman, he has killed my dear poor husband ^help I — murder! 
And stie beat her bosom in an agony of grief. 
Is the woman mad? said our hero, She calls her protector a villain, a murderer! 
Oh! the villain, the villain! ex clamitd She again. 
And 
i68 The FAVOURITE And she helped the man up. 
Vexed at having lost his time, 
i 
his dinner, and got a bloody nose, our hero would have horse whipped the man and woman out of the inn, hd not the landlady di r verted his wrath with her'entreaties, ' and Soothed him into a contempt for them. -0 ■ 
Who, Said our hero, would not have pitied that woman in her distress?? her innocent looks! — let me never ride in a coach and six, if I am Such a fool again! ^ 
CHAP.' 
OP F O Pv T U N E. 169 
CHAP. XXII 
jpity is a foible, I must leave behind with my modesty, Said Patrick; in the career I have to run, a heart of steel becomes me better. Sensibility for others takes too much our attention from ourselves— — do what we will to oblige, we can, at the best, obtain only the name of a good-natured fool. Why the deuce Should I venture my life, or mypiirse, for people, whom perhaps, my benefits would make my enemies, or who. Should fortune raise them and sink me, would rejoice vol. I. I - ill 
ryo The FAVOURITE 
in my misery, which would make them more Sensible of their own happiness? Charity begins at home: it is an excellent proverb — no longer do I hesitate — I will have no feelings but for myself. If the resolution is not generous, it is prudent — had I formed it sooner, this nose would not tell me I have been SL fool. 
After these reflections our hero called for his horse, and proceeded on his journey. He was within five miles of Kilmore, when he heard somebody behind him screaming, Stop him, stop him I” He 
turned 
o F F O R T U N E. 171 
turned his head, and Saw a young woman carried away by her horse, and in an imminent danger of a fall. Patrick forgot his resolution, rode immediately to her assistance, and was So fortunate as to Save the lady at the very moment She thought herself lost. 
Help me down, generous stranger;; am In Such a flutter— — anl ready to saint. 
Our hero took her in his arms, and gently, at her desire, laid her down upon the grass. 
I 2 
Had 
172 The FAVOURITE 
Had you come one minute later, I should have been thrown down — How my heart beats! 
And she put our hero’s hand upon it. Patrick paid her the compliments usual on Such an occasion, and Spoke So feelingly of the happiness he enjoyed to see her Safe, that she forgot her misfortune to hear him talk, to See him Smile, Patrick sat down by her, and under the pretence of Supporting her, pasted his arm round the loveliest shape he had ever prested to his bosom. He gazed upon her, she blushed : he pralfed her charms, she Smiled; he 
begged 
G F F O R T U N E. 17 3 
begged one kiss for his reward, it was granted. Youth and beauty on both sides — desire on one, gratitude on the other, would have made Patrick indiscreet, and tempted the lady to forgive, when their silence, expresiive of ayv northeast ft^ai quoi both felt and neither mentioned, was interrupted by the arrival of a gentleman. 
How are you, sister.? I am almost dead with fear — are you hurt, Cordelia? 
I am well, thanks to this gentleman who Secured the horse and pre i 3 vented 
174 The FAVOURITE 
vented my fall — bad knot been for him I sincerely believe I should be 
no more. 
I deserve no praises, Said our hero; I have done what everybody would have done for me. I am almost pleased with a disaster that procures me the pleasure of being acquainted with you. Was you going to Kilmore? 
We were, answered cordelia’s brother. 
I am glad of it, Said Patrick. 
And he amorousiy kisied the hand of Cordelia. 
Would 
, OF FORTUNE. 175 
Would your journey were for Dublin! 
It is for Dublin, Said Cordelia with a Smile, I am going to my husband, who lives in that city, 
V ^ 
Come, said Mr. Tilney, cordelia’s brother; it begins to grow dark, we will settle our friendship upon a bottle at Kiimore. 
This adventure looks well, said Patrick, getting upon his horse. Pity, for this time, has turned to my advantage. By Venus, Cordelia is a fine woman! she is married I 4, — I 
176 The favourite 
— I fhan’t have, therefore, the foolitli struggles of Honour to combat with.. 
CHAP. XXIII 
o U R hero rode by the fide of Cordelia, to whom he explained the nature of the impression She had made upon him, and of the remedy it was in her power to'administer against its growing fatal to his hap piness. A handsome young fellow, however impertinently he may talk, is always certain to please; it is his person and not his tongue, that Speaks eloquence, and carries perfua 
fioii 
o F F O R T U N E. 177 
fion with It. Cordelia looked as if She listened, and yet did not hear one word of what he Said. 
You don’t answer me, dear Cordelia! 
don’t I? 
And She half blushed, and half Smiled. With looks, Smiles and now and then a gentle prestiire of the hand, they continued the conversation, and arrived at Kilmore, where they alighted at the Talbot. 
Mr. Tilney taking upon him to see the horses at the stable, our he i 5 ro 
178 The FAVOURITE 
ro and Cordelia were ushered into a parlour. 
No man will be happier than I, Said Patrick, if my dear Cordelia will be as humane as she is beautiful. 
I don’t understand you. Sir, Said Cordelia. What do you mean? 
To love you. 
That I can t help — you are very welcome to love me if you please— — 
Cordelia, won’t you return me love for love? 
I have 
OF FORTUNE. 179 
^ I have a husband, Sir; him only I must love — What has made you So bold? I am not used to Such language, I asture you. Keep your love to yourself, Sir, I won’t hear of it. 
You was not So Severe upon the road, Said Patrick, taking her hand in his. 
Pfhaw! ridiculous! leave my hand, Sir, or I will call. 
The deuce you will! 
And he ravished one kifs. 
Impertinent! Have I authorised 
your behaviour? 
1 6 Is 
io The favourite 
I 
Is not my homage a debt I must pay to your beauty? 
Walt then till I ask for it. 
■ Your modesty would oppose' your doing yourself justice. 
Flattery will not do, Sir; discontinue a language oftenstve to my vlrtui. 
Is She in earnest? Said Patrick, viewing her from head to foot. 
Cordelia played her part So well, that our hero was awed into refped. 
Hct 
o F F O R T U N E. isi 
Her conquest will be the more glorious, Said Patrick; and lie put on the looks of a man of Sentiment. 
Mr. Tilney came into the parlour, and a bowl of punch was ordered. When the glastes had pasted round, Mr. Tilney Said he must go and change a bank note of twenty pounds having Some money to pay in the town. 
- You need not go for that trifle, Said Patrick. 
And taking his purse he told the money on the table. 
Bro 
tzi .DHE FAVOURITE 
/ Brother, Said Cordelia, as you are going to settle accounts with Mr. Falker, the bank note will do as well as the money; there are many rogues in this town: who knows but you may be robbed? You have been So already once you know. 
Your are right, sister — pray, Sif, take your money up. 
After half an hour Spent in the most Social manner, Mr. Tilney got up. 
I will be back against Supper time; I leave you, sister, under the protection of a man of honour. 
I must 
OF FORTUNE. 183 
I must speak to you before you go, Said Cordelia. 
And dropping a curtsey to our hero, She stepped with her brother in another parlour. 
He, will make as good a dupe, Said Cordelia, as I ever met with in my life; he has talked of love to me, my dear; his purse shall be mine I affure you.. 
that’s well, Cordelia; but exchange not your favours with it — the fellow ishandfome — 
Fear not, my dear, no man Shall ever boast I have made him happy; 
the 
i The FAVOURITE 
the perpetual dangers to which I daily expose myself for yon, ought to prove you my love and constancy — never, my dear, have I indulged the thought of betraying you — a life we live, my dear I — 
Let us not complain, Cordelia: So long as there ate rich fools upon earth we cannot be miserable. 
Give me Some of the Soporific powder; if my lover is too presuming, a dose will make him dis creet. For all the world, my dear, I would not Suffer the embraces of a man, however So young, beautiful 
OF FORTUNE. 185 
tiful and generous; for you only these arms will open -- don’t come at Supper — I fear I {han’t be able to lull that fellow asleep before twelve. Give me a kiss my dear; one more — again. 
Whilst our rogues were enjoying their good fortune, Patrick had be spoke an elegant Supper. 
I must make the most of her brother’s absence, Said he to himself; when we are alone, and free from the fear of being interrupted, nature and my carestes will warm the heart of Cordelia with the want of pleasure. I must be a silly fellow indeed, 
i86 The FAVOURITE 
deed, if her reason keeps awake and deprives me of victory. 
Another glass. Said Mr. Tilney, entering the room, and I will leave you for an hour — have care of my lifter, Sir, 
And he went away. 
CHAP. XXIV 
“jjiton my honour, he is a fine fellow! said Cordelia, sitting down, and darting a glance at our hero — would it not be prudent to give him a compensation for his 
purse 
> r T O R T U N E. 1s7 
purse, that he may be inclined to forgive the thief who stole it? The remembrance of his pleasures will Soften his soul, and make him indifferent to his loss— — beauty is a claim no Sensible woman will challenge — besides he has Saved my life — must I rob him In return for the favour, and not leave in his breast an agreeable Sensation to comfort him In his misfortune? He will curse me less, when he thinks of the delights he has enjoyed — upon my honour, he is a sine fellow! — a very sine fellow, indeed! 
You 
i88 The FAVOURITE 
You are thoughtful, fair Cordelia! Said Patrick, drawing near her with more respcct than pasiion lit his looks. ■ 
- I am frightened out of my wits, answered Cordelia, casting her eyes down — my brother Should not have gone — I am not accustomed to find myself alone with a man — in an inn l. i wonder how he could leaveme! — 
You have nothing to fear. You say So, but -- -- -- 
And Sire cast a look round her. 
What 
o F F O Pv T U N E. 189 
What is that door, Sir? 
The door of the room where I am to lie. 
What! a bed room! Good God, I Shall die with fear — keep farther — pray, Sir, keep farther — There is mischief in your countenance. 
Can you mistake the expression of love for mischief? 
And he fell upon his knees before her. 
It is just what I was apprehensive of, Said Cordelia. 
And 
190 The FAVOURITE 
And an hypocrite tear flowed from her eye,, 
Is love a crime? Are you not formed to please?? Cordelia! 
And he ventured one kiss upon her Ups.) 
Is that your manner of protecting me, Sir? Will my protector turn the betrayer of my honour? 
As Cordelia Spoke only, Patrick grew more indiscreet: but vanity whispering her to Support the, character She had afllimed and to fall 
with 
OF FORTUNE. 191 
with more dignity. She put an end to the impertinence of our hero, and obliged him to delay his triumph. 
You have ofifended me, Sir, beyond the power of forgiving you —. Such an ufuage is unworthy of a man of honour — How you have deceived me! never more will I trust to the countenance of a man — indeed, I did not think you capable of Such thought, and Such behaviour. 
The feigned anger of Cordelia gave Such a charm to her Shape and feature, that our hero, though ene briated with love and desire, was 
forced 
1^2 The 'FAVOURITE forced to keep within tsie line of admiration and decency. 
You are now, Said Cordelia with an inch anting Smile, Such as 1 wish you to be. i’ll reward you for your compliance to my commands; Will you have a Song? 
The riding dress, Said Patrick, was not certainly invented by a devotee to Venus — It is an injustice to nature to bury thus the charms She gave you. I am always apt to believe that a woman cannot glory in the beauty of her neck or bcfom, wdten She takes So much trouble to conceal them. 
Come; 
OF FORTUNE. 193 
Come; have no ill humour against my dress. Shall I help you to a glass) and give you a Song? 
ril drink with all my heart, Said Patrick; but Sure we can employ our time better than to sing. 
Will you deserve my anger again? 
Lovely Cordelia, frown no more upon a man who adores you. 
Well then, keep quiet and respect rue. 
Her virtue is not affected. Said Patrick, walking in the parlour; I fear 1 shall lose the day. 
vol. I. K ' It 
194 The FAVOURITE - 
It is very warm, Said Cordelia, stepping to a glass and loosening half her waistcoat; it is lucky I did not put my stays on this morning: I do not conceive how women can wear them when they ride on a summer’s day. 
My Satire on her dress, Said Patrick to himself, has not been lost; her vanity is at work— — has no stays 1 — the observation is excellent — I must plague her coquettry with a Seeming indifference — She will come to me, if I don’t go to her. 
You 
F FORTUNE. 195 
You may say what you please, Mr. O’ Kara, I think this dress extremely becoming. 
If by becoming you mean con venient, answered Patrick, I'am of your opinion. 
You have not Seen it well; come here, 
. You slant bribe me out of my own taste. 
What! are you fo obstinate? 
And she advanced towards him. 
♦ 
I think, upon my honour, that you are asteep. 
K 2 And 
196 The FAVOURITE 
And she w^tonly Shook him by the Sleeve. 
Why do you tempt me thus, merciless Cordelia? 
I don’t tempt you — do I? 
Act as you look, and I Shall be happy. 
How do I look? 
The accent with which She pronounced the question, was decisive; our hero did not give one moment to reflection, and Cordelia was thrown into a political sit of reverie. 
I don’t 
OF FORTUNE. 197 
I don’t understand that. Said’cordelia, coming to herself. 
I cannot help it, answered Patrick; but it is So. 
* I will nut advise a tender, virtuous woman, to be alone with a man of your merit. 
CHAP. XXV 
a misfortune befalls a man, it is rapidly Succeeded by others” — that’s a lie. Said Patrick; for to a bloody nose and a K 3 bad 
198 The FAVOURITE 
bad dinner have Succeeded the enjoyment of a beautiful woman and an excellent Supper. 
What do you Say? asked Cordelia, hanging amouroufly upon his arm, - 
Our hero told the reflection he had made. Cordelia burst into laughter, and Said that the events of this life were like the weather, always uncertain; that, as to herself, fire had often gone to rest with achearful heart, and awaked to the dismal tale of a loss, or to live a day of misery. 
It 
OF FORTUNE. 199 
It will not be my cafe tomorrow. Said Patrick, since i’ll see my lovely Cordelia. 
How happy I am. Said Patrick I What a charming adventure! How tempting a virtuous woman! Fortune, I thank thee for thy favour I 
It is almost twelve — God forbid my brother Should find me here! — ' 
Cordelia, then, unknown to him put Some of the Soporific powder 
in a glass, and presented it to him. 
/ 
I cannot part with you without drinking to love and constancy, 
k4 To 
2oo' The FAVOURITE 
To love and constancy, Said our hero. 
Fie drank, and the powder operating almost instantly, left him at the mercy .of the lovely, virtuous Cordelia. 
This purse. Said Cordelia exulting in her success, is mine by right of conquest — why Should I Scruple to take it, when he himself did not Scruple to Seduce me, me whom bethought the virtuous wife of an honest man? I deprive him of a trifle that cannot make him unhappy : but by robbing me of my virtue, did he not expose me to remorse 

OF FORTUNE. 201 
morse and a life of Sorrow? His crime was wantonly committed; mine is ordered by necessity. I will not however inflict the pnnishment he justly deserves— — beautiful youth I must pity — perhaps he has no Sisiend in this town — he stianst be reduced to an absolute want — how calmly he steeps! he little dreams of his having been deceived by the virtuous woman he has So tenderly loved 1 — I never did an act of injustice with So ill a grace— — guineas! I will leave him ten — now for a parting kifs! — I must guard him against his ingenuity, that he may not another time fall K 5 a dupe 
202 The FAVOURITE 
a dupe to knaves — i’ll write a card and put it in his pocket — an advice may make amends for his loss. 
Cordelia wrote the card, took one kifs again, retired to her room, and Spoke the following Soliloquy, 
What power circumstances have over our hearts 1 whilst I lived retired, happy in the Smiles of my husband, the thought of guilt never entered my mind -- Vanity made me launch into the vortex of folly, and the wife was change into a woman — Every time I went into a public place, flatterers besieged 
my 
OF FORTUNE. 203 
my ears — my modesty grew familiar with their language — How easj the transition from virtue to vice! Tilney loved me — my taste for dissipation was indulged — his fortune he Squandered away to please me — me, the unworthy object of his attachment! I plunged him into misery, and he did not reprove me for it! he believed me innocent — my innocence was the only treasure he valued — to Support the woman he esteemed he degraded hlm felf — Love and poverty made him ingenious and bold — his life he incesiantly exposes, that I may be 
free 
204 The FAVOURITE 
free from want — his superior in the art of deceit, my repeated successes have made me callous to the voice of humanity and honour — to pleasure and not to my generosity O’ Hara is Indebted for the ten guineas I have left him — Tilney 1 basely betray — Tilney who breathes but to make me happy !- — The devil is Surely in me — How contemptible woman, when She gives way to pafiion — I hear my husband. 
Well, my dear Cordelia, what fuccess have you had? 
Here is the plunder, dear Jack, 
And 
OF FORTUNE. 205 And She gave him the purse. 
How did you get rid of the gentleman? 
By a dose of powder — nothing 
else could have cooled his desires — 
he was So pressing, So bold! — I have 
had need of all my virtue and love 
for you to come ofs conqueror. It 
is, I asiture you, a dangerous situa 
Uon for a woman to be three hours 
in a tete a tfte with a handsome 
young fellow, who exerts all his 
powers of pleasing her. If I had • 
not loved you So much, I would, posiibly, not boast my triumph. 
But 
!2o6 The FAVOURITE 
But, dear Jack, your image was always between him and me; it was you more than virtue, who made me get the victory. 
My love, and esteem for thee, Cordelia, Shall never cease but with my life. Let us rest a few hours; at break of day we will Set out for Elphin. 
CHAP. 
OP FORTUNE. 
207 
CHAP. XXVI 
J T was nine o’clock, when our hero awoke; and his first thought was about the lovely, virtuous Cordelia. Impatient to see her, he was drested in one instant; a waiter came, and Patrick asked him if the gentleman and lady were up. 
Up, Sir! answered the waiter. Aye, aye, they have been up, and gone these six hours. 
Gone these six hours! exclaimed our hero, thunderstruck at the news; 
it 
2©8 The FAVOURITE 
it is impossible— — is a mistake — go, and See — 
They are gone 1 say, Sir, — d — n them! they did not leave a poor sixpence to drink their health — Such people as that may go and be hanged for what I care. 
Good God! can it be true ?- 
Where did they lay? (how me their room. 
The waiter went to cordelia’s room. 
> Here they lied, master. 
They 
OF FORTUNE. 209 
They! whom do you mean? Said our hero almost stupified. 
The gentleman and the lady, who came with you. 
D 
n! exclaimed Patrick, 
have I been made a fool again! 
And he came back to the parlour; he looked for his purse, and found only ten guineas in his pocket. Feeling a paper, he took it up, and read what follows. 
Be more cautious for the future; know those you form an Inti 
C 
macy 
210 The favourite 
“macy with, if you will not be a dupe to more than one. 
“Cordelia.” 

This confirms my disgrace, Said Patrick; it is now beyond the possibility of a doubt. What a dis fembler woman is! The most virtuous would not have made a nobler resistance, would not have behaved with half her candour and decency — how naturally She performed the part She mimicked! In the midst of her raptures modesty enlivened her eyes, graced her Smiles, and attended her sighs — 1 thought 1 had an angel in my arms, and She was 
the 
G F 
FORTUNE. 211 
the most abandoned of her Sex! At what marks Shall I know the woman of honour, when Cordelia, Cordelia has deceived me! I fancy I see her fearful, blushing, talking me into respect — Cursed be my Sensibility! will never reason help me against my feelings? Twice the dupe of women in one day! One I Save from the fury of her husband, and I am repaid with her Imprecations, and a bloody nose! the other owes me her life, and She steals my purse. Ought a monster’s vice, ingratitude, harbour in a female breast! When last night I boasted my happiness, Cordelia burst into laughter, 
and 
212 The FAVOURITE 
and hinted I might be unhappy today — How Soberly mischievous! I have no right to complain — Had I let the husband beat his wife, and the horse throw Cordelia down, I would not have eaten a bad dinner, and lost my money. I must for the future be less compassionate and credulous — Nothing is certainly more easy. 
After this resolution, Patrick mounted his horse, and took the road to Dublin. 
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME. 
U. of Pa„ Librapy 
’f 
ft - rh.. .i ^^'i 
r i 
4''' 


swjtst?': ir 
. • ■■ i 
hv" \\ ' 
vc C‘ : 
S*NC. ..i 


THE 
GODFREY F. SINGER MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY MR. AND MRS. JACOB SINGER 




T 
I 

Jr, 




VAIL: 

Ak L V _ 

.•^iifcfp’l' tfs _ .Ji 
f ■ 

Hi 
■1^ 
\ ’X 


% ■ -. '• 


mw ■ 
mv 
r' i: _ 
mi.^? ' i vf 
C 
Z'f li, -, LL.. %.. ■«<<■ 


, -4” ■' - ': ■■ •■■ '• '• .-, : 4 
V' -' ■', - - ■;. ' ', - 
k ' ''. '' ••• an ’in»»t rir yit’mo -4 
>■; ■ ■- ■ ■ 
var: : •;, -, -;, 
‘C. 

IF 
■ 

•. « 
T'. ^ .=. 
■' t; p ^. 
, VAU. 

of Rau librapy.j 
5. : iv 

THE 
IRISHMAN; 
OR, THE 
Favourite of Fortune: 
A SATIRICAL NOVEL 
FOUNDED UPON FACTS. 
IN TWO VOLUMES. 
jvbat a Jirange world this is! 
VOL. II 
LONDON: 
Printed for W. G O L D S M I T H, N 24. 
Pofr^ nofe^ row, 
<r’ 
r 
n 
v 
tr 
A 


* 
r 
r - 
Lf). oj o > 
■0 y 
OH 
THE 
Favourite of Fortune. 
CHAP. I. 

o 
n 

V 
p 
4t 
V 
(S’ 
'rou 

x 
cr. 
URE, Said Patrick, all women are not So capricious, unjust, and profligate as Lady Walter, Sophia, and the two women I met yesterday! There are undoubtedly Some among the fair worthy the esteem of an honest fellow; Some vol. II B whose 

2 The favourite 
whose hearts are not the Slaves of their passions; or, whose paffibns are controlled by religion and virtue — How shall I judge of women } Should I not be right to think that woman a libertine, who in her Speech appears the most virtuous; and that a modest woman, whose levity indicates a corrupted soul? 
'Prudes Seem to fear the censure of the world, and the coquettes to brave it — like sharpers, the former trust. their reputation to their tongue; like men of honour, the latter trust it to their shehaviour. The desire of pleasing is a coquettiy of the mind, that Seldom affects 
the 
OF FORTUNE. g the heart; it requires 'too great an exertion of reason not to preclude love — when women are wholly taken up with the means of increa • ling their conquest, they are necef sarily free from the dangers of a tender attachment. The woman of feeling is the reverse of a 'coquette; her Sole pleasure is to be lost in^her own thoughts; her Sole study is to conceal them; her heart throbs forcibly at the sight of a handsome man; and her, eyes would tell its emotions, Should fly not be a proficient in the art of hypocrisy. For one coquette surprised 
B 2 
m 
4 The FAVOURITE 
in the hour, when She is a worn an, thousands prudes are always at the * mercy of the man who talks to their senses, and amuses their fan,, — Harriet, thanks to my propitious star! is not a prude. 
Then our hero indulged a reverie upon Harriet, and Soon after arrived at Kells, where he alighted. Whilst the dinner was getting ready, Patrick sat down at the door of the inn musing upon the Joss of his forty guineas, the falsehood of Cordelia, and Swearing 
m 
never to help any woman in di stress. 
V At 
I 
OF FORTUNE. 5 
At that very minute a coach and four stopped at the Inn. Curiosity made our hero peep into it; and he Saw a lady who, though not a first-rate beauty, had a person exceedingly agreeable. She remarked Patrick, and whispered to a woman who sat by her, with an air that signified, ‘‘ Is not that a handsome fellow ?” Her attention to Pa 
■ 
trick depriving her of the care of 
\ 
herself, her foot slipped, and she 
* 
fell into the arms of our hero, who gallantly had opened them to receive her. In her fall their lips met; and that accident, heightened 
B 3 by 
6 The FAVOURITE 
by the' Sudden blush Spread over the lady’s cheek was observed and highly resented by a man who stood behind our hero. 
How dare you to kiss that woman, you rascal, you! 
Would you have that gentleman, Said the lady, let me tumble down, when I might have broke my leg, or my neck, by the fall? 
Who is that man? asked Patrick. 
Who else but a ■ husband. Said the lady, could behave in Such a brutish manner I 
Did 
OFF 0 R T U N E' 7 
^ ^ *• 
Did he not kiss you, Madam? 
suppose he did — Would there be any harm in that? — But he did not. 
He did. 
He did not. 
He did. : 
And he lifted his hand up to strike her. 
Strike, you brute, if you dare! Said the lady, with the tone of an heroine. Who, at your manners, would take you for an Alderman of Dublin, for the worshipful jus b 4 tice. 
8 The FAVOURITE 
tice, Mr, Dalton I don’t mind him. Sir. i, 
T mind him! answered Patrick, with a Supercilious look of contempt; not I indeed! 
You w^on’t, you fellow! TH make you. ' 
Be quiet, Mr. Alderman Dalton Said Patrick; follow my advice, if you have any tendernefa for your bones. 
He trembles, said the Alderman to the landlord; i’ll have the best of him. Then turning to our hero — 
Do 
OF FORTUNE. 9 
Do you think, you rascals you, that I am afraid of you 
And cocking his hat, he strutted before him in a fierce manner. 
Mr. Alderman Dalton, answered Patrick very calmly, I don’t doubt your courage. But I have not a mind to kick the husband of that pretty woman there, Besides you are too old, and I believe, not perfectly Sober. 
Sir, your most humble Servant, Said Mrs. Dalton, darting a smiling glance at our hero. 
B 5 
thacs 
10 The favourite 
that’s the language of a coward, Said the Alderman. 
And he held his fist to the nose of onr hero. 
Madam, Said Patrick, will yon give me leave to answer your husband?? 
! 
I dear Sir, you have my leaver indeed, you have. If Mr. Dalton is So fond of fighting, let him have his way. 
It is for you, my dear, for your dear honour, said Mr. Dalton, that I am going to fight. 
He 
o F F O R T U N E. II 
He has not offended me. You have been the aggrefibr — He looks too much like a gentleman to Suffer an affront put upon him — Come, make room — let the gentlemen sight — I wish you fuccess Mr. Dalton. 
And her eves told Patrick, that her withes were for him.' • 
The good-natured wife! Said Mr. Dalton. I have now a mind not to fight. 
You shall, by Hercules! cried our hero. 
If I won’t, I won’t, Said Mn Dalton, Shaking in every limb, and in b 6 treat 
lathe FAVOURITE 
treating, by his dastardly countenance, the landlord to make up the difference between Patrick and him, and his Servants to take his part against him. 
Come, Mr. Alderman, defend yourself; I am ready for you. 
'•. Tct 
The deuce you are! — Wait till T. am fo myfelst 
Our hero took him by the Shoulder, and whirling him round, applied vigorousty his toe to that part, where Hudibras says, lies the honour of a man. 
CHAP. 
GF FORTUNE. I 
CHAP II 
HOW do you find yourself, my dear, after the battle? Said Mrs. Dalton. 
He is extremely, well, Madam, Said Patrick : 1 have cured him of his dlfeafe : I dare say he Shall not have another fit of it, So long as he lives. 
I will hang the physician, or i’ll 
be d -- -- d. Landlord help me in; 
I will sign his commithms; the 
Rogue shall go to prifoii. 
C ^ Not 
14 The FAVOURITE 
Not before I dine, I hope, Mr. Alderman, Said our hero, bursting into laughter, and bowing respectfully to him. 
To beat a justice, an Alderman of Dublin! nay to laugh at him! it is high treason. 
don’t put yourself into a pastion for a tisifle, my dear. Said Mrs. Dalton taking him by the arm, and helping him to walk in the house. It is la fortune de la guerre: today you have lost the vistory, tomorrow you may get it. ' ' 
Damn 
OF, F o R T U N E. 15 
Damn the fellow for his courage I I thought he had none. I fear I (han’t be able to get out from this cursed place to daj. 
Well, my dear, we will wait till tomorrow. Sit down at this window; the air will cool you, 
I don’t like that fellow — the kiss he gave you — are you not ashamed? Fie! the wife of an'alderman to have So little respect of herself, as to Suffer a kiss from Such a dirty Scoundrel 1 — I slant have the heart 
» 
to kifs you this month. 
You 
i6 The FAVOURITE 
You are immenfeiy delicate — Wtell, if you won’t kiss me — 
Some body elfe will — eh! is it not this you wanted to Say? — Juliette — Such airs will not do with me, I assure you. Had it not been for you, that fellow.would not have dared to touch me — you Spurred him to beat your husband— — mow? You look at him — don’t you?. 
Is there any harm, Sir, to look at a handsome fellow? How offen have I not Seen you look at a hand forne woman Did I ever find fault with it? 
The 
bf FORTUNE. 17 
The cafe is very different — But come — let’s have no quarrel. Help me to a glass of wine. 
A man of your years to abuse a young man for nothing. 
A man of your years! — Come let’s have no quarrel, kifs me; let’s have no quarrel. 
To kifs you after your suspicions of me! — Indeed I won’t — You do not deserve Such an honest wife as I am — 
I was wrong — Forgive — kiss me‘ — No more quarrels. 
Every 
i8 The FAVOURITE 
Every day you say the samel i ■ am very unhappy— — love you too much — Were I a coquette, I have beauty enough — 
I know it, I was wrong. don’t cry, Juliette; I can’t bear to see you cry. 
And yet you will plague me every hour in the day — If it is not one gentleman, it is another — You are jealous of everything that comes in my way — I can neither look, nor talk, nor Smile, nor read, nor write, nor think, but you believe I am in love, and that I betray you — It is a life of torment — You will kill me, I aslure you — 
My 
k 
OF FORTUNE. .19 
'My dear Juliette, forget the past -- nevermore will I be jealous — pray — let’s have no quarrel — 
When So many young husbands ruin themselves for their wives who, you have often told me, are not So handsome as I am, are you not reproaching me perpetually for ex pences of which I am not even the object?? I partake of the diversions every, woman of fashion or fortune is entitled to enjoy? Does not my neighbour, the deputy^s wise, eclipse me in jewels, dress, and retinue? Have I routs at my 
house?? 
The favourite 
house I live but for you and you complain of me! 
I do not complain — I am pleased - — am too happy — let’s have no quarrels. 
A good politician would indulge my vanity — Vanity in a young woman creates diversions, which make her less Sensible to wants a man of your years cannot — • 
Grant me a truce, dear Juliette — 
no more quarrels here is a fifty 
pound draught upon my banker let’s make peace — 
You 
OFF O R T U ND. 21 
You will not be jealous any more? 
No, no. 
Well, I will kifs you — now let’s dine. 
Then looking out of the window She Saw our hero, whose eyes — whose eyes — she understood their language. Did she answer it? We will See in the next chapter. 
CHAP. III 
pains are too keen. Said the Alderman; I can hardly fit.. 
A pud 
22 
The favourite 
A pudding, which was at that moment Served upon table, put an 
end to his complaint, and, like the waters of Lethe, erased the past out of his memory. The dinner being luckily to his liking, his heart dilated with joy; he eat and drank, blesting the providence who had given him a good appetite, and the power of gratifying it. When every dill was removed, and he had but his wife to be entertained with, his Spirits sunk, his good-humour vanished, and, with the Sense o his pains, anger intruded into hi heart. 
] 
OF FORTUNE. 23 
If that handsome fellow, Said Mrs. Dalton to herself, was a gentleman, I think I would have no objedfion to an alliance with him : he is as much the pidiure of life, as my husband is that of death. 
And file stepped to the window. 
curse that fellow! cried the Alderman, attempting, but in vain, to rise. 
I wonder who he can be, Said Mrs. Dalton. 
A vagrant or a highwayman, for ought I know, answered the 
huf 
24 The FAVOURITE 
Husband: : elfe would not have respected an Alderman of Dublin? 
was 
Oh! for that, my dear, it ______ 
your fault — you was So provoking — ought he to mind the dignity of your station, when you forgot it yourself? 
And fo you take his part, eh? that vagrant's part against me, eh? 
I am only just, my dear; you drink Sometimes too hard in the morning — indeed you do — brandy will kill you at last, you will see. 
I had 
: of FORTUNE.' 25 
. I had not above' three glasses whilst I was waiting for you — ands that’s nothing, you know. 
The landlord knows perhaps who he is — shall I ring for hiin? 
Do, do. 


The landlord came, and answered the interrogatories of the Alderman, 
A, ^ 
to the Satisfaction of his lady. 
his‘countenance Speaks what he’ is. Said Mrs. Dalton to herself; I knew he was a'gehtleman — now, ten to one. i’ll keep what ihy looks have promised hiiii. ' 
vol. II C What 
26^ Th e F A V.D’U RITE 
What dof you say, my dear asked the Alderman? V ■ 
That I am Sorry he Is a relation of Sir James Walter, I had at heart His behaviour Sto you, and wished it were in your power to punish him for it. 
Since he is a gentleman, Said the 
I - ' i 
Alderman, I think no more of my 
■ r LIS ’. 
disgrace. I have a mind to‘drink a bottle with him. -. 
I - ^ 
f : - 
don’t, dp, that, my dear; Indeed. I could not Speak to the man who ' has kicked you fohunmercifully. 
v 
upon 
OF F O R T U N E. 27' 
Upon honour, I believe' F defer vcd it. * ^ 
It is true — what does that signify? ’ I cannot help hating him, though I approve of what he did. I will leave the room if you call for him. 
Since you hate him So much, Said the Alderman, I — 
F detest lino more of hiiu, niy dear. 
^ I am bruised all over, said the Alderman; I Suffer in every inch of my siefh. 
C 2 
Go 
28 The FAVOURITE 
Go to bed, my dear — a few hours rest will do you good. i’ll sit in your room while you are asleep 
■ ' 
You are.good, very good, ex tremely good, dear Juliette. 
A bedroom was ordered, and Mr. and Mrs. Dalton went into it arm in arm; She former delighted to be carcfted by a young wife, the latter intent upon betraying an old husband. 
J, 
I 
CHAP. 
OF FORTUNE. -29 
CHAP. IV 
J Do not displease the alderman’s lady, Said our hero to himself — he is old, I am young — he is ugly, I am handsome— — looks have told me her partiality — it is my bufiness to convince her I am worthy of it. No danger can attend' intrigue with a vuman of her fortune— — feelings' agree certainly with her rank— — may be false, but not base — IHAVE nothing to fear, ^ but all to hope from lier conquest — Such a friend; in Dubliri' ifi^y C 3 be 
The TAVOURITE 
be vastly nfeful fhould She not 
prove So, She is a fine woman that’s enough. 
\ In consequence of this reasoning, our hero exprested what he felt and Hhoiight in 'his countenance, and conveyed it, in that language, to 'Mrs. Dalton, to ‘whom nature arid 'destre explained its meaning, and i dictated an answer to it. 
'We want but an opportunity, fald our hero, after having read her answer in her Smiles; 1 must procure one, or make the best of that She will give to me. 
From 
OF FORTUNE. 31 
From that‘moment Patrick watch; CD the steps of Mrs. Dalton; and feeing her retire with her husband in a room, he guested it was to lull him asleep, that he might neither prevent her ‘pleasures, nor disturb her enjoyment of them. Our hero was the more emboldened to believe himself In the right, that 'Mrs. Dailton, as She went up stair?, had oftein turned her head in Search 'df him, and blustied hway her intention when She difeovered him. 
The lady’s'door was no Sooner fhtrt/ thshi he stole n’p stairs t6 rr conmitre the sttu^tion of the place, 
• : ' C 4 and 
32 The FAVOURITE 
and found in a corner of the gallery 'a Solitary passage which led to a still more Solitary room. 
This is just what I want, Said our hero; if the lady’s looks have Spoke truth I shan’t long remain by myself. 
Our hero was not deceived; he had not laid in ambush half an hour when he Saw the lady coming from her room and looking, before sher, and then on each side of the gallery. As the darkness of the place he was in Secreted him from her sight, he plainly discovered in her motions her Surprise at a disappointment llie 
did 
OF FORTUNE. 
did not expect. Mrs. Dalton was really astonished and ready to imi peach the gallantry and difcernineht of Patrick, when, reflecting upon the character of a man of honour, she Said, “The care of my reputation, and not a want of love and Sagacity prevents his appearance he is not far oflt — that corner seenb a retreat for lovers — Good ge>d^t how I hate my husband when I think of Patrick! — Did I marry to fficrifice my Sensibility, and think only of the delights I am created to enjoy! has nature given me' a heart not to feel — passions not to be happy by them !” 
C 5 As' 
54 The FAVOURITE 
Mrs. Dalton Spoke, levelled her, unknown to herself, to the corner of the gallery, which (he ]had hardly entered wdth a trembling step, when the voice of a •servant made her start back, A Jstruggle then followed between honour and desire — the debate was stiort, desire triumphed — Mrs, Dalton advanced, and found herself in the arms of Patrick when She had it no more in her power to retreat, Thus Surprised and defenceless, her resistance was vain : She Surrendered at discretion to the conqueror, 
CHAP. 
o F F O R T U N E. 35 
CHAP. V 
^HILST our lovers, forgetful of all the world, were only studious of pleasing one another, their evil genius was upon the watch, brooding upon mischief, and .Smiling at the difasier that was going to befall them. An unlucky cough awaking Mr. Dalton, he drew the curtain of his bed, and not Seer ing his wife, the demon of jealousy immediately invaded his'brains, and infused in them its most malignant poison. He thought of our hero; 
C 6 and 

36 The favourite 
and his Imagination drew faithsully the picture of his disgrace. h 
I arn a cuckold !- — exclaimed he, leaping withateurse out of the bed. 

. I believe you are, Said his coachman who, at the time of his master’s exclamation, had entered the room. Dress yourself; lose no time, or the birds will be stowh. 
Where are they? Where are they? An Alderman of Dublin a cuckold 1 -- - ' ' ■ 
Make haste, Sir, — make no noise 
• • ' h! i 
I know where they are. I was; 
Sir, 
OF FORTUNE. 37 Sir, in the next room, and have heard them.. Pray make haste, ■ 
Damn you,, you rascal, you I Why didn’t you tell them you was there, when you heard them? 
I wanted to be sure it was they. At first they Spoke So low — then for a good while they did not speak at all — How could I know it was my mistress? — When she Spoke I knew her — Pray, Sir, make haste. 
Hell and Furies! i’ll kill them all. Give me my pistols — Call for«my people — A cuckold! An Alderman 
of 
3« The' FAVOURITE 
‘ofdublift acnckbld! Come, margh, I follow thee. s’death! A cucklod^l 
The discreet Alderman cursed, and damned So loud, that our lovers had time to prepare against the danger, that threatened them. 
Jump out of that window, said the frightened Juliette to our hero — 
I will face the danger, replied he — 
You ruin me if you do -- - 
Patrick hesitating, and her situation growing extremely ciitical, Mrs. Dalton thoiiglit it prudent to Save herself at the expehce of her lover. 
Help! 
o F F O R T U N E. 39 
Help 1 help I Screamed She— — 1 am undone — Help! help! dear husband f Help! — Burst uhe door open— — me from this villain — - 
. I! 
Is it thus you love me, Madam? Said our hero, wondering at her audacity. You call me a villain, and charge me with a rape hr' 
Mr. Dalton, overjoyed at the cries of his wife, made all possible haste to relieve her, exclaiming, as his people were battering the door, “She is innocent, my poor dear wife! She is innocent? hear how she Screams 1” At the third push the 
door 
40 The FAVOURITE 
door was down, and our heroi whom the ingratitude, and perfidy of Mrs. Dalton had beggared of his courage and presence of mind, followed the advice she had given him, and jumped out of the window before any of the Servants could Seize upon him. 
Let not the vsillain escape, Said Mrs. Dalton, bedewed in tears, and throwing herself in the arms of her husband. Oh, my dear I yon came just as my strength began to forsake me — Would he had broke his neck !' Run aster him; let the 
► r * \ 
villain be 'punished — 1 am almost 
saint 
OF FORTUNE. 41 
fahit ^support me, my dear, my dear hiishand!. i 
Well, Said the credulous aider man to his coachman, you See how things are. didn’t you say I was a cuckold L ■ ■ j r 
I, Sir! answered the coachman; I have Said no Such things — you mistook me, Sir; indeed, you mistook me : I never had Such an opinion of my. mistress, J asture you -- r 
She is as innocent as a lamb, I Swear 
'
to it...,. 
You may very Safely, Peter, Said Mrs. Dalton. 
didn’t 
42 the’ifavourite didn’t you hear them talk low, and then not at all? ' > 
'.'It was ‘a dream, Sir; I cannot answer for a dream — I do not remember a word of the matter — I am sure I heard nothing 
•, 
'What signifies talking, my dear? Said Mrs. Dalton, giving hsim one kifs — Will you not revenge me? 
The fellow for ‘his inipudehce de serves to she tdfiied up in a blanket. 
"Remember the hloivs he gave you — he deserves to be hanged— — he werej —. ^ 
But 
•f)f FORTUNE. *4^ But how came you here? asked the Alderman? 
I will tell you, my dear I had left your room to breathe the fresh air when, walking by the corner of the gallery, that villain^took me np, on a Sudden, in his arms, prevented my cries by. stopping my lips with his hand, and forcibly carried me into this room. Then the danger 1 ran, gave me a courage far above my strength; I filled the 1 room with my cries, ?and defended myself like’ a fury, thl, when'i was almost exhausted, you heard ^ my voice and came to my assistance. 
God 
44 The FAVOURITE 
God be blessed! Said the aider man; I am not a cuckold. 
that’s a pretty tale, by Jefhus! Said the coachman, Snrning to the door, and desiring his companions to revenge their mislrefs. 
Fall upon the fellow, said the Alderman to his people; go. i’ll follow you. 
Spare him not, '^ Said Mrs. Dalton, Spare not the villain, my. dear Billy; I will rest in your room — Say, dear Billy, that you love me; do say So — I have had a lucky escape I Support me— — caniiot walk 
— how 
OF FORTUNE. 45 — how my heart beats !- — the fellow is So strong and vigorous 
I So weak and delicate 1 never be • was I used In Such a manner — he* treated me as he would have done the maid of the inn, without ceremony, without the least regard — You cannot conceive how bold he was, how he talked, how he behaved — those young fellows Speak a language you do not understand -- there is no refinernent in their expressions— — different from an Alderman of Dublin! Go now, my dear, after your people — FH sit down — one kiss before you go — Oh, dear Billy! how I love you! ’ 
The 
46 The FAVOURITE 
The joy of the Alderman was too great to be exprested; My jewel, my honey, ’* were the Sole words he could Speak iri return for her love and carestes. 
Your worship! your worship! we have him, we have him! 
Your Servants call, Said Mrs. Dalton; the fellow is Secured; Spare him not, pray Spare him not. 
CHAP. VI 
hero precipitcted himfels in Such a hiifry out of the window that,, not having the leisure 
C F F O R T U ND. ’ 47 
Sure to look under him,, he felbinto a horse pondi t from which he had hardly got out when he was Seized by Tour or five stout fellovvs, '" and carried into the inn yard. The Alderman appeared at the gallery, aiid, .with, ab magisterial dignity. Spoke the" charge the lady had. laid against the culprit, > and condemned him to bei tossed up in st [blanket, in' expiation for his Qstenee.', '. 
'mri Daltfpnopeeped oiatr^at; the door, to behold' the countenance of our hero, astd to hear his defence. Rage and fury animated his features;, hut.deprived .of the ue of his limbsi^i 0 < he 

48 The' FAVOURITE 
he was laughed at by his guards, who prepared themselves to put the Sentence in.executioni The yard was’ Soon full of .people who, inticed by' the novelty of the fpedf able, came jn.. crowds from every part of j the village to partake of its diversion. A: : > was brought;. Patrick ' wasl laid upon it, and? jirked in the air amidst the Shouts of hundreds of unfeeling Spedators; " ^ d cs iitnh, > 
it is‘a pity he Should Suffer, Said Mrs. Dalton, since he is innocent f but he deserves it for his indiscretion— — i it ldoes not become me to interest myselfin his favour;! 
he 
OF FORTUNE, 49 he must be punished that I may not be fuspected; the man who wantonly plucks up a rose cannot complain if he feels the thorns under it — However Severe the pain, he must endure it, and defpise an accident he cannot avoid. Poor O’hara! beautiful youth 1 what a figure he makes! I hardly can help laughing -- how he curses me in his heart! 
The Alderman was bursting his sides with laughter, and calling, now and then, his lady to have her Share of his joy; but Mrs. Dalton, who was resolved to make vol. II D her 
50 The FAVOURITE 
her peace with ohr hero, did not choose to add insult to insult, and kept prudently incog, behind the fat alderman’s back, whose mirth She obligingly affected to partake. 
When the executioners were tired of their duty, Mrs. Dalton had the humanity to whisper to her husband to forgive our hero, and Set him at liberty. A pardon was in consequence thundered from the gallery, and every Spectator went away extremely Satisfied, shouting the Alderman for the pleasure he had given them, and hooting at Patrick as they palled by him. 
Our 
o r F O R T U N E. 51 
Our hero confused, yet fierce in his looks, and darting anger and revenge at the Alderman, walked with a firm step, though Suffering in every limb, and ascended the stairs which led to the gallery. His countenance portending no good, Mr. Dalton locked himself up in his room, and barricaded the door with chairs, tables, and whatever he thought capable to defend him against the attacks of our hero. 
Patrick, Scorning to pursue the enemy who cowardly fled before him, went into the fatal temple, where he had been alternately the D 2 fa 
52 The FAVOURITE sacrificer and the victim; he laid himself upon the altar, and poured a volley of curses against the deity he had adored. 
* / 
I thought no danger would attend my homages to Mrs., Dalton — Base woman! how vilely stie has betrayed me! when Ihe might have extricated herself without fcx postng me, She chose to make me a martyr to her reputation, and to re -- ly for her innocence upon the breaking of my bones! I am punished Tor not having, at her desire, leapt out of the window -- Who the deuce would not consider twice 
about 
o p F O R T U N E. 53 
about Such a proposal?? it then nothing to throw one’s Self out of a window? — If there was no danger in that leap, why didn’t she at once venture it, and leave me by myself? because I hesitate, she gives me up to the rage of an offended husband who, had she had but one minute more patience, might have been played off with one single word, without any injury to herself and to me. Damn my folly! I had Sworn never to help a woman in her distress— — did I receive her in my arms when she was tumbling down from' her D 3 coach ?■ 
54 The FAVOURITE 
coach? The example of Sophia, or Cordelia ought to have taught me wisdom, and yet I obey Folly as Soon as (he commands me! I got a bloody nose, lost my purse, and now have almost been drowned, and tosted up to death! Had 1 sufisered for women worthy of my esteem, there would be a comfort in the thought; But like a fool, I have been the dupe of their hypocrisy, and of my good opinion of them. Are women dead to generous feelings? Can neither honour, nor love oppose effectually in their hearts the growing up of malice 
and 
o F F O R T U N E. 5^ and falsehood Even in my arms Mrs. Dalton teemed with mischief! It was She who pronounced my Sentence,, and perhaps she Saw It executed! Can a tender woman be So Inhumane? There was no necessity for the charge she laid against me — Had she waited I would have calmly gone through that window, and then unbolted the door, all her hushand’s Suspicions would have vanished before the Serenity of her looks, and the composiire os her mind; how bold and wicked! What have the advices of Mr. Burton availed me? Indeed I deserve not to be pitied, 
D 4 Ohl 
56 The FAVOURITE 
Oh! Harriet, Harriet! my knowledge of women is not an encouragement to love thee! 
Then he sighed, and had the happiness to forget his cares and pains in sieep. 
CHAP. VII 
when the Alderman was recovered from his fears, and no longer doubtful of his Safety, he reflected coldly upon the adventure, and remembered every syllable his coachman had Spoke; the. recall 
OF FORTUNE. 57 
recantation of that fellow, after the Solemn declaration of his mis trefs’s guilt, he was tempted to take for a confirmation of his disgrace.. He had heard of tricks played by young wives to their old, husbands 
t ' ‘, 
and his jealousy persuaded' ' that his lady had wit enough to deceive and betray him. Her scream in gs he recollected not to have heard before he had given, her the; 
i f ^ 
alarm; that reflection Silenced the' authority of her displeasure against: Patrick, and mechanically carrying his hand to his brow, he exclaimed,, 
I am a cuckold'!, b ■ •' 

- d s 

58 The FAVOURITE 
Mrs. Dalton, who had been absorbed in thought the whole time he had given to reflection, awoke from her reverie, and asked the cause of his exclamation 
How long was you, Madam, in that fellow’s room? 
Five minutes I believe, Sir. 
And she mimicked a Surprise at the impertinence of his question. 
Five minutes! 
And he Shook his head with an air that declared his incredulity. 
Mrs. 
OF FORTUNE.. s9 
Mrs. Dalton, Shrugging up her shoulders with contempt, stepped' to the window, and: warbled' a favourite Song. r 
y 
She must be innocent since she is So calm. Said the worthy Alderman of Dublin.. 
And he went to her. 
I am Sorry you are So handsome.. 
You are the most teasing, unjust,, whimsical man I ever knew in my life. Said Mrs. Dalton with a Smile.. Who would condemn me for justifying your jealousy, and deserving; 
D 6 ' ' your 
6o The FAVOURITE 
your Suspicions I Nobody, I am Sure. Were I not virtuous through principle, and the natural insensibility of my disposition, you would force me to realise your fears. Provoke me not to an insidelity, which makes my modesty Shudder at the thought of It. — Unmerited Suspicions are the strongest temptations to vice. Out of pity for me, dear Mr. Dalton, don’t Speak me Into a desire of revenge. Do me justice, and we Shall live happy. Put well in your mind, that I neither can, nor will do you any injury. The love of my duty, and my inclination for you, are unquestionable Securities 
o? F O R T U N E. 6t 
I 
eurities for my behaviour— — of impeaching it, for the contempt of a husband is certain death to the virtue of his wife. Will you ever think me false I 
And She amoroufly passed her arm round, his neclu 
No, never, my jewel, my honey,, answered the Alderman, you are virtue itself; I do not defer ve Such a virtuous wife. kiss me, my dear, kiss me. Oh! would I were young 1 
Form not that wish, for I would love you less. Young men are So 
foolish, 
62 The FAVOURITE 
foolish, So Gonceited, So tedious, So much taken up with their dear Self — Upon honour, I don’t conceive how they can please a woman of delicacy. Their conversation has always given me a disgust of them — When I hear you my ear is delighted; I am all attention, and bless' my star for having given me a man of sense for a husband. Kifs me,, my dear. 
The enraptured Alderman would have thanked' her in a manner worthy of her. But thinking it best to put off his gratitude, he feigned a pain in his stomach, and unbarricading 
o F F O R T U N Ec 6^ 
ding the door, Sallied forth in the yard. 
How contemptible an old doting fool! Said Mrs. Dalton, when she was gone. How different O’ Hara t I will not have him hate, me — What Shall I do to justify myself? — I fear he has reason to hold me In a despicable light — I will write to him. 
then’taking a pencil fhc wrote the following billet; 

To the lovely O’ Hara. 
** If you are a man of true gallantry, you will forgive my behaviour 
64 The FAVOURITE 
vioiir, however disagreeable it has proved to you. Necefiity forced me to act in opposition to my Sentiments. Though worthy of the Sacrifice of my reputation, pride bid me not to inake ic This foible is to our Sex, what honour is to yours.'. 
■ • ‘.; fil 
I love you, dear Patrick;, letthis, sincere declaration be my apology — -. My heart has bled at the sight of the punishment inflicted upon you;; to make you forget it, dear Patrick, will be my Sole care and study.” 
I write like a fool. Said Mrs. Dalton; there is neither wit, nor passion in these lines— — be 'So Soberly 
cool 
OF FORTUNE. 6^ 
cool at my age I What will he think of my sincerity? 
Her waiting woman coming in, prevented a further thought. Fanny was a confidant to her misiress, and knew very well the nature of her connexion with Patrick, 
Have you no conscience, Madam, Said She to her mistress?? Jefhus! you never shall keep a lover if you life them in that manner. So hand some a fellow to be tossed up in a blanket! 
What is done, is done, replied Mrs. Dalton; I cannot help it. A 
divorce 
66 The FAVOURITE 
divorce would rob me of my fame and fortune; it is a loss I will not venture for any man. My husband is old, and labouring under complicated disorders; he cannot live long. Since he will not be a cuckold, I must humour his fancy. So long as he believes me true to his bed, it does not signify how I behave; my lovers must take their chance, enjoy it if favourable, endure it with patience if unlucky. Should they be So ill natured as to complain, or to boast, it is my business to oppose them with art and dissimulation; if my husband thinks me virtuous, the. world will take my part, and believe 
o F F .D R T U N E. 67 
lieve me innocent — Take this letter, Fanny; copy it, and slip it into the hands of Patrick, Go: I hear my tyrant. 
C H AP. VIII 
. ' i 
J HAVE a mind to Set out, Said the Alderman; we may Slop this night at Lord craddock’s. Have you any objestion, my dear? 
Your will is my law, my dear: we will go, when you please. 
Whilst 
68 The FAVOURITE 
Whilst the coach was getting ready, Fanny transcribed the letter, and then, unperceived, stole into patrick’s room. Finding him asteep. She put the letter in his bosom. 
Our hero awoke in high Spirits, and perfectly recovered from the fatigues of the day. 
A reflection upon the past, Said he, jumping out of his bed, will do me no good. I must take things as they happen; if women will be below my esteem, how the the deuce can I mend them? They are not all like Mrs. Dalton; another 
o F F O R T U N E. 69 
there time 1 may be happier. what’s that paper I feel in my bosom? who the devil put it there! A woman’s hand — fly doves me! for herself I believe. Damn her apo logy I to Save her reputation She tosses me up in a blanket; that’s a disinterested love to be Sure. 
And he tore the letter to pieces. 
What asturances women shave! she could not know I was asteep, yet site ventured in my room — She talks of her reputation! away with her, 'siie is unworthy of a thought! 
Our 
70 The FAVOURITE ' 
’our hero Set out the next morning with a fixed contempt of women, and arrived at Dublin, resolving to court only the Smiles of Fortune and deserve her favours. Mr. Felton received him as a favourite of Sir James Walter, and Soon invested him with the insignia of a gentleman. 
When the vanity of Patrick had told him he might appear with honour to himself, he went to the Countess of dempster’s. The noble figure he made, and the name of Tady Walter, procured him an immediate admittance; he 
found 
OF FORTUNE. 71 found her ladyship Surrounded by 
A 
a crowd of men of every rank, who meanly disgraced themselves to merit her protection;; looks were obliging or disdainful, in proportion to the art they had of pleasing her, by making themselves more or less contemptible. When she Spoke, all were silent, ready to burst into admiration for words she made, on pnrpofe, destitute either of wit or meaning. Did she smile, joy was in every countenance; happened she to frown, a religious awe Spread itself on every feature. She distinguished a gentleman 
72 The FAVOURITE 
tleman in the circle, and envy Seemed to animate every heart; no deity had ever votaries in appearance more humble and passively obedient. At her nod, folly as fumed the name of reason, and rea son dwindled into folly. Her lapdog was in her arms: a noble lord begged the favour to kiss him, and Cupid pasted round, praised, caressed, and almost Smothered with kistes. She asked if anybody could ling the new Song She heard / at Lady Mansts, and instantly twenty betrayed their impatience to please her by singing it. In the midst of that melodious noise our 
hero 
o F F O R T U N E. 73 
hero appeared in the drawing-room. The gracesulnefs of his carriage attracting the attention of her la dyship, She commanded silence, and v»iith, “Make room, gentlemen, ” She advanced towards him. The novelty of the regard she showed to Patrick fixed every eye upon him, and “Who is he? Who is he was whispered from ear to ear. Our hero, Sensible that on his present behaviour depended the esteem or indifference of her ladyship, presented himself with an air that forced a concern in her breast, and respect from the Spectators. There was a look So irresistibly vol. II E charm 
74 The FAVOURITE 
I 
charming about Patrick, a dignity So unaffectedly commanding, Such a goodness of heart and ignorance of his own accomplishments, that Lady Dempster left off that part She had performed, for that of a woman under her most lovely form, She took the letter he gave with a Smile, read it, and then taking him to a window — 
I will thank Lady Walter for the opportunity she gives me to oblige you, 
'i’ll attempt to deserve your goodness, answered Patrick, bowing respectfully. 
Lady 
OF FORTUNE. 75 
Lady Walter recommends you warmly — she is a fine woman — 
Our hero guesied her meaning by the accent of her voice. 
To think her handsome, my lady, I must not See you. 
I won’t be flattered — that’s not the way to interest me in your say vour — 
And she glanced upon him an eye Speaking her gratitude for the compliment he had paid her. 
Those women only are flattered who are a contrast with your lady ’ E 2 ship 
76 The FAVOURITE Ship — you are formed, my lady, to hear but the language of truth — It is an homage you have a right to expect from men of taste, delicacy, and honour. 
Bribe not my vanity, answered Lady Dempster; you have no need of it to gain my esteem. 
Though her ladyship did heartily defpise the men in the circle, she feared their observation. No woman had a greater regard for the laws of decorum; the libertinism of her heart was Seldom visible in her deportment: it was a tribute her 
good 
OF FORTUNE. 77 
good sense paid publlckly to morality, from which, however, she did not Scruple to deviate in private, whenever love and opportunity conspired to make her happy. 
This hour, Mr. O’ Hara, I give to the idle and ambitious; for those I really consider, I have the rest of the day. 
.3" 
And, without waiting for his answer, she returned to the company. 
E 
CHAP. 
js Thi favourite 
CHAP. IX 
r is a good thing, Said Patrick, to be young and handsome; had I only wit, talents, and merit to boast, I fear her ladyship would not thank Lady Walter for the opportunity she has given her to oblige me. This is a strange world! 
And he mixed among the company. The ofsenstve indifference with which her ladyship Seemed to enjoy the extreme Servility of her flatterers, pleased the pride of our 
hero. 
O F 
FORTUNE.. 79 hero, who concluded, from their respedlve behaviour, that her heart was a conquest worthy of him, and that he alone was agreeable in her eye. 
May I be So bold, Sir, asked a gentleman who sat by him, to inquire into your prescnt thoughts? You look as if in want of information; are you a stranger to the characters before you? 
Will you. Sir, give me a key to them?. I confess, I know nobody here, and that I am at a loss how to reconcile the conduct of those gen e 4 tlemen 
So The FAVOURITE 
tlemen with their rank, or the appearance they make. - 
that’s very easy, Said the gentleman, Smiling at the ingenuity of our hero; we want Lady Dempster, and She has no need of us. Lord Carthegan, whom you See So watchful of her Smiles, Solicits a pension of two thousand pounds. 
I have heard of him, said Patrick, he is immensely rich. 
He is fo, answered the gentleman; but he loves money more than his honour. 
Very 
O F F O R T U N E. 8 r 
Very likely he makes a good use: of it. ' 
Oh! an extreme good one! he' bestow it upon whores, horses.. wine.. 
Next to my lord is Mr. Machan,. who lately resigned a place of great prosit, because the. lord lieutenant refused to prefer one of his friends,, and wants to be restored into it he threatens to turn a flaming, patriot: but, as his abilities do not agree with that character,, all his hopes are centred in her lady ship’s* favour. That gentleman who E 5, gazes 
§2 The favourite 
gazes So complacently upon himself in the glass, has had an ill run of fortune at hazard; and to repair it, he offers to sell his interest in the house, which, though not very con stderable, will be dearly bought through the mediation of her ladyship. The next to him is a Son of fortune, who, abusing of a contract he made with the government, is threatened with a prosecution, which he will certainly avoid under the protection of her ladyship. Do you see that officer on your left? he has been at every battle fought these twenty years past, and always 
beo 

F F O R T U N E. % 
behaved gallantly : no man in the army is more esteemed for his courage and knowledge in the art of war, yet all his merit would have availed him nothing, had not a pair of diamond earrings interceded for him. His generosity has procured him a regiment, and he is come to thank her ladyship for it. That young clergyman you see stuttering; with the steps and mien of a buck, who carries his head So high, and Speaks with Such confidence, is a favourite of the countess. A deanery is vacant; though it has been promised to a venerable old man remarkable for his learning and recti e d tude 
§4 The FAVOURITE tude of manners, ten to one, that wretch, who is a Scandal to all honest men, will be promoted to it. 
What do you mean by being a favourite? 
That word, when applied to a fine woman, has no double entendre it signifies plainly that She makes him happy. 
One would not think Lady Dempster has Such a favourite; She looks So decent, and reserved — 
Her looks, Said the gentleman, are a lie to her character. There 
are 
OF F O RT U N E. 8’^ 
are two souls in her lady Ship; you see here the woman wrapped up in a mask; in her closet you would See the woman, of nature. 
You have been in that closet very likely? Said Patrick, 
No man this fide of five and twenty was, I believe, ever admitted there; the countess in not fond of a sentimental conversation; She compares it to those dainties which irri tate the appetite without Satisfying it. 
How came yon, Sir, by the knowledge of her taste ^ 
Bj 
U The FANOURITE 
By the indiscretion of her admirers. Honour is not always upon guard against Spite — The man will Sometimes resent the affront put upon the lover. Her injustice and tyranny are intolerable. Few men are endowed with that pliancy of temper necessary to appear in the 
L 
colour which strikes her fancy. She has in her attachment the whims and inconstancy of a child the object of her affection today,, tomorrow be that of her dislike and hatred. 
Her levity, Said Patrick, is the more extraordinary, that She Seems 
i 
careo 
F F O R T U N E. 87 
careful of her reputation. Does She not Secure the discretion of her lovers by her generosity I 
Preferments are not always a compensation for ill nfage — 
At that very minute Lady Dempster dropping'^her fan, the gentleman arose with vivacity, and was So fortunate as to get the start of every one in the circle, and to present it to herladyfhip. 
What inconsistency in that man I Said Patrick to himself. This is a strange world! 
The 
88 The FAVOURITE 
The confusion caused by the dropping of my lady’s fan, being ceased, onr hero, desirous to know who that gentleman was, stepped to the young clergyman. 
Will you be pleased. Sir, to gratify an innocent curiosity? I beg to have your opinion ofthat gentleman, who leans upon the back of her lady ship’s chair?. 
He is a fool, a downright fool; answered the clergyman. That man has rendered important Services to the government, for whicn he would, long ago, have been 
hand 
OF FORTUNE. 89 
handsomely rewarded, had he cho sen to Sacrifice his good Sense to the stupidity of his protestors; but far from laying their follies under contribution, he will censure them, and talk of honour, virtue, and other Such miserable stuffs, which, I believe, have for ever Sliut his way to preferment. The only seasonable thing I have Seen him do in his life, is the taking up her ladyship’s fan; this attention will plead more effectually than all the merit he is really poffested of. 
shls is the favourite of her ladyship, Said Patrick, who, through 
her 
90 The FAVOURITE 
her mediation, is to be a dignitary of the church, though in every re spedi a disgrace to his profession! A Satire in return for her favours 1 What a strange world this is! 
And he stole away out of the room. 
CHAP X 
JAM amazed. Said our hero, at the extreme facility Some people have to exchange virtue for vice, honour for infamy, and truth for falsehood— — wantonly ungrateful 
OF FORTUNE. 91 
fill that clergyman! ‘he owes his happiness to Lady Dempster, and yet he defames her, only to Show he has wit, and knows the world! His stn is heinous; he ought to be punished for it. However unjust, whimsical, and vicious Lady Dempster, she is neither So base, nor So guilty as the wretches who make, at her shrine, a voluntary Tacrisice of their honour and probity! Her foibles Spring from nature, theirs from reflection. Had he got a bloody nose, lost his purse, or been tost'ed up in a blanket, I would forgive him his ill humour; 
but 
92 The FAVOURITE 
but the rascal has no importance, but that he borrows from her esteem, and he standers the hand that feeds his vanity and gives life to his passions! If ever it be in my power to fink him into his former 
insignificancy, i’ll be d d if I 
mlss the opportunity. From what I have Seen in her ladyfhip’s drawing-room, Tam Sensible that, to rise in the world, I must not depend upon merit or virtue — I am Sorry for it. What can I do ^ I have no other choice than to imitate the vile fellows I have been with, or trust for my existence to the charity 
OF FORTUNE. 93 
rky of Sir James Walter — there is Something shocking in that word charity — I hate the very Sound of it — Would not Sir James laugh at me, nay defpise me, should I tell him one day, “Sir, here 1 am just such as before I Set out; I could have made a noble fortune, but I thought it mean to owe to my person what would have been denied, to my ingenuity ?” The ridicule of such a Speech is too evident; I will not disgrace myfels with it: since Lady Dempster holds in her hands the tubs of evil and good, she is the deity I must court and adore. 
Our 
94 The FAVOURITE 
Our hero gave after dinner an an hour to the thought of Harriet, whom his fond imagination adorned with every charm, and then went to the play. He had not been long in a fide box, before Mrs. Dalton made her appearance with two ladies in the next: her dress was So extremely rich, elegant, and coquettish, that, at first, Patrick did not know the virtuous lady of the worthy Alderman of Dublin : but at the Smiling curtsy she half dropped to him, he Said, “It is the honest judge who, to palliate her guilt, condemned me to be 
tofsed 
OF FORTUNE. 95 tolled up in a blanket.” Mrs. Dalton read his thought in the return of his bow; and, that he might not indulge it, she Sat on that part of the box which was the nearest to him. Then playing with her fan, she whisperedto him — 
Fie! are you angry for a trifle? Look — am I not handsome enough to make you forget it? Will you Smile, you Saucy man? Smile .upon me — 1 will be obeyed. 
The Sullen muscles of our hero did not hold against the bewitching attack; he Smiled, and she sighed 
her 
si The FAVOURITE 
her thanks, whilst the eyes of Patrick wandered with delight over her lovely perlon. Anger does not dwell long in a heart at the age of our hero; an injury done by a beauty who craves for pardon is easily forgot and forgiven. Of love and pleasure they talked and talked again; and both Swore a constancy, neither of them thought it in their power to keep. 
A Sudden and general motion of the ladies who were carrying their handkerchiefs up to their eyes, warning Mrs. Dalton of the acting of a Scene, during which it became 
a Sen 
o F F O R T U N E. 97 a' sensible woman to shed a tear, she put herself under arm, and paid the tribute of affected Sorrow to the distress of the unfortunate heroine of the piece. Then resuming her gaiety, she renewed with our hero a conversation much more agreeable to the feelings of her heart. 
tomorrow, said Mrs. Dalton to Patrick, you will tell me the motives of your journey to Dublin. If pleasure be the cause, to me you must devote yourfels; if ambition, for you i’ll employ my friends, my interest, and my purse. Friendship and love will unite in 
vol. II F me 
98 The FAVOURITE me to make you happy. Be as studious of my reputation as I (hall be of pleasing you — no other return do I ask of a man of your honour and Sensibility. Follow me not; my people are at the door; they must not See you. 
C H A P. XL 
‘TOVE and friendship will unite in me to make you happy !’’ How quickly a sine fellow in^ires a woman of this age with concern! I do not certainly owe them either thanks or gratitude, for a blockhead would be, as well as I, in titled to their love and friendship. 
Mrs. 
OF FORTUNE. 99 Mrs. Daltonshas nothing to do with my charadfer; to this handsome form of mine only She deigns to pay the compliment of her love and'friendship. The Sole accomplishment I did not value, as it was not my own, is the most likely to lead me to the temple of Fortune! How poor the chance men of merit have to please, or to rise in the world, when women have no taste, no delicacy, no respect for themselves! I must silence my pride, or return a beggar to Sir James walter’s. 
Our hero went next morning to Lady dempster’s, and was introduced into her dreffing room. 
F ^ Lady 
loo The FAVOURITE 
Lady Walter, Sir, has given me So great an opinion of your morals, that I hope there is no imprudence in me to receive you at my toilet — 
Her ladyship has done me an honour I Seldom deserve, when I am with a lady of your exquisite beauty. The man who sees you cannot think of morality. 
How can you say I am a beauty! I am in Such a dishablllee — I look frightful — indeed, your compliment is a Satire. Have you not told the same thing to Lady Walter? Tell me, I won’t betray you. 
Give 
J 
o F F O R T U N E. loi 
Give me leave, my lady, to talk of yourself only — 
You are young and discreet! It is, upon my honour, a rarity Seldom to be met with; Sew men ' would Sacrifice their vanity to the reputation of Lady Walter. You are afraid of me; are you? 
Of your charms, but not of your indiscretion. 
Hold your tongue! 
And (he put her hand upon hi lips, 
I will not fe told Such things — 
You 
102 The FAVOURITE You should not infpir^ them 
And he ventured one kifs upon her ivory neck. 
Vastly pretty, Indeed! i’ll write 
to Lady Walter how her moral young man dares to behave with 
me. 
You are the first lady 'of fashion I have Seen So tempting and desirable in her undress. I did not think you yesterday half So handsome, as I do now — Art is an enemy to beauty; it loses by it, the inchan ing illusion nature has Surrounded it with — at present only you are 
youre 

F FORTUNE. 103 
yourself, and worthy of the homage of a man of taste and Sensibility. 
Go on, Mr. O’ Kara, go on t i’ll write all, I asture you, to Lady Walter; she is the worst painter I have heard of in my life; you are the very reverse of the picture she drew of you. Come, go on, tell me Some more of those Soft things, diat stow So easily from your Ups. 
Patrick, animated by her accent, and the voluptuous disorder of her dress, would repeat his attack upon her neck; ' but she opposed the attempt. 
- F 4 Keep 
104 The FAVOURITE 
Keep to flattery; a kiss is a language I do not cboose either to ansvver or to listen to — What I you are Silent, and yet I am worthy of the homage of a man of taste and sensibility!! you not that man, Mr. O’ Hara, or have I all of a Sudden, lost the illusion nature has Surrounded me with? 
Words', my lady, are not expref flve of the emotions you cause— — and not admiration, you must expect from me. 
Then it is time for me to call my women — a moral man is more dangerous than I thought. 
And 
'0 F r O R T U N E. 105 
And she arose;; treading n luckily upon her gown, she tumbled upon the knee of our hero. Patrick was not a philosopher; he therefore lost no time In. considering whether the accident was natural or not; but turned it So rapidly to his advantage, that she politely let him talk his own language, in which, to her Satisfaction, he was extremely eloquent and ex prefsive. 
****** At 
**************** 
they had taken Some chocolate, Tady Dempster insisted upon knowing the conversation he 
had 
io The FAVOURITE 
had had the day before with Mi Creighton, and the clergyman. 
I observed yon, Patrick; I am certain I was the Subject of that conversation. If you esteem my favour, you will not conceal anything from me. 
Could you forgive me, Said Patrick, were I fo base as to betray Mr. Creighton — he thought me a man of honour — 
Vvlill you take the part of that man against me? Talk not of honour, and please me — my enemies must be your’s — » your’s will be mine. 
The 
i 
OF FORTUNE, toy 
The tone of her voice decided Patrick. I must not live upon the charity of Sir James, Said he to himself; and he jelated the conversation he had had with Mr Creighton and the clergyman. 
The countess played too well the hypocrite to be hurried away by the violence of her indignation She listened with a Seeming indifference, and then Smiling, gently struck our hero on the shoulder. 
these two men, my dear Patrick, I have honoured with my friendship : for Creighton I procured last night a pension of five' hundred F 6 ' pounds 
io The FAVOURITE 
pounds, and for the clergyman the deanery of AI thought them 
both worthy of my protection; you have dispelled the mist those Impostors had ralfed before my eyes; and you shall profit by their indiscretion and folly. By all that is Sacred, dear Patrick! I have had no other connexion with the clergyman than that which is daily formed in the world between people Sympathising in taste, and fond of the same amusements. I have a pas ston for music; he plays masterly upon Several instruments; and as I could command him at will, I thought it becoming me to reward 
his 
J 
o F F O R T U N E. 109 
his readiness to oblige me. For 'those kinds of Services, dear Patrick, the great have more regard than For real merit; whoever flan ters their whims, or passions, is always Sure to find in them a zealous friend, and a generous protector. In vain does talent, genius, or learning plead for preference, we live for oiirselves; and those, who are studious of making our existence agreeable, ' are the only men we value. Let not this truth be lost upon you; let it be, Patrick, the rule of your conduct. In the career yon have entered, thoirsands are your rivals for places and grandeur : 
no jthe favourite 
deur; he who arrives first at the goal, be it by stratagem or merit, - has always the fpedfators on his fide; the means he has employed are always forgot in his triumph. Beware of pronouncing again the word of honour; that name, like that of truth, is pestilential at court. 
That advice proves me your esteem. 
And he sthanked her in a manner that enlivened her beauty, and added to her esteem of him. 
I will give you, dear Patrick, a more Substantial proof of my afiec... ‘ tion 
0 r F O R T U N E. m 
tion for you. The pension destined for Creighton, stiall be yours — 
Under what colour can It be granted to me, Said Patrick? I have yet done nothing to deserve it. You are not certainly in earnest — 
You have pleased me: is that nothing? Bid adieu to your delicacy, Patrick, or Seek for protectors where merit alone procures them. You have brought from the country an obstinacy of virtue, that, I fear, will obstruct my good intentions for you. Will 
you 
112 The FAVOURITE 
you be guided by me, or obey the dictates of your foolish heart? How came you not to improve your mind at the School of Lady Walter? Is her ladyship So Severe in her morals? Forgive the quest tion; I had forgot you would not answer it. 
The happiness of' pleasing you, my lady, deadens sin my heart every other pashon; I can hardly think of fortune — Let me adore you; my soul wishes for no other good. 
'And So, my dear Patrick, you will feed only upon my Smiles, 
and 
or F O R T U N E. irj 
and refuse that pension, because you think yourself unworthy of it? I will not abuse an enthu siasin So flattering to my vanity. When you forget yourself, I must be careful of you. 
Tell me the right you pretend to 
give me to that pension .J 
/ 
Secret Services, dear Patrick; that at once fatisfles the court, and silences the envious. It is a present I make to my lover; and I will not be denied. Now, Patrick, I will indulge your honesty, and put it in your power to do good 
to 
II The FAVOURITE to a Sensible and virtuous man. Doctor Cramner has a just claim to the deanery, and would have obtained it, had not my interest prevailed over his merit; he Shall have that deanery; tell him So — tell him more — let him know that it is to you he Is indebted for it; the good man will welcome that dignity with the more plea Sure, that the hand which gives it Shall, not expose him to the blush. I will write to his excellency the change I have made, and I am certain he will be pleased with it.,. V 
The 
OF FORTUNE, iig 
The justice you do to Doctor Cranmer declares the nobleness of your soul; you must, my lady, be born with a natural propensity to do good — 
That compliment, dear Patrick, I deserved before pride and ambition corrupted my heart. Could I today take a fancy for a folltary life, and a disiike of the luxuries, that make me happy, I would Scorn to be false and unjust; but till that taste and that disiike force me from the brilliant stage upon which I am delighted to act, PH continue to perform the part which 
my 
ii The FAVOURITE 
my own inclination and the folly of men have imposed upon me. 
That ingenuous confession expiates for your behaviour, and makes you ten times more lovely to my eye; with me, dear my lady be tke woman you wish to be. 
I do not promise that, Patrick; habit is a Second nature — in Spite of my inclination for you, my head, unknown to me, may often take the lead of my heart — I give myself up to you with my vices and virtues; let us forgive one another foibles inherent to our 
tern 
OF FORTUNE. 117 
tempers; pass me my levity, and I will, now and then, indulge your notions of honour. 
Let it be So, Said our hero. 
And he Sealed the agreement upon her lips. 
I have a mind. Said Lady Dempster, you Should carry my letter to his excellency; it will be better than a formal introdudion. That man is full of his rank — answer his haughtiness with wit, and affect an indifference for his favours — there is Something of a woman in 
the 
ii The FAVOURITE 
the composition of his charadfer; he will be the more Solicitous to confer benefits upon you that you will be more careless of them. 
His love for you, my lady, is very natural, but how can you love him? 
Prostitute not that word, Patrick : can the woman who surrenders her power and reputation to you, love. his excellency? Ambition is a great tyrant — if men Sometimes Sacrifice their glory to it, why not a woman her delicacy? 
Is 
.OP FOR T.D N E. 119 
Is not his excellency Swayed by vanity, rather than by a real paction?? 
he Sacrifices his interest to mine, I cannot doubt the reality of his affection, I know not, dear Patrick, the Why? But you have inspired me a confidence Savouring of indiscretion; 1 lay my heart 
open before you — 
Never Shall you repent it, dear my lady — 
You have a candour in your looks, 1 never Saw in any man before; 
120 The favourite 
sore; that candour must be the tallf man that has captivated me. Were all men like you, no woman would be tempted to be false; every woman would be virtuous through taste, were She not So by inclination. Men, dear Patrick, are the creators of our foibles, follies, and vices; from them we borrow’ our manners; to please them we are obliged to degrade ourselves. For one woman who will bear tamely the insolence or the infidelities of her husband; for one woman who will prefer a domestic life to disti pation, thousands will return the injuries done to them; thousands 
will 
OF FORTUNE. II 
will yield to vanity and partake of every diversion. What could check their thirst of revenge or their love of pleasure?? men vie with each other in contempt of religion and morality, do they not invite us to follow their examples, and be as profligate as they are? How could we be tied by virtues, the perpetual object of their Scorn 1 Will ridiculed modesty oppose effectually the feelings of our hearts, or the wants of our fancy? Unless virtue, honour, and decency re astiime their rights over mankind and put a stop to the tor vol. II G rent 
122 The FAVOUP.ITE 
rent of corruption, we shall be carried forcibly by the stream. Pity the woman who Swerves from her duty, and do not condemn her; it is not an easy thing to Subdue nature and triumph over our pas stons. I am too grave; you will hate me. Has not my Speech deprived me of the illuston nature has Surrounded me with? 
The gallant Patrick proved her She had lost none of the charms he had praised in her. 
Lady Dempster wrote the letter, and our hero stepped with it to the castle. 
CHAP. 
OF FORTUNE. 123 
CHAP. XIL 
jpoor Creighton! Said Patrick; 
it is at his expense that I must be happy! I have dealt like a Scoundrel — how could I help betraying him! — those Sallies of honesty do not become a beggar — either I must return to Sir james’s, or be guided by the countess. How She talked! So Sensible of her follies, and yet So averse to her duties 1 She knows what site ought to do, and site acts in opposition to her judgement! She could have been an honour to her Sex -- how fatal the effects of G 2 pride 
124 The FAVOURITE 
pride and ambition I that pension. Should it be granted to me, will avail little to mj happiness; the price of an ungenerous action cannot be beneficial to a man of honour — I talk of honour and I am a beggar [ -- Five hundred pounds a year! for what? For having pleased the favourite of the lord lieutenant. His excellency will not, certainly, be Such a fool. Such an enemy to his country, as to feed my idleness upon the industry of the people. If he obeys the mandate of the countess, I cannot re fuse without making him my enemy — his hatred I must avoid — it 
would 
o F F O Pv T U N E. IZ5 would be equally stupid and dangerous to put him in mind of his duty— — Such ads of injustice are a prerogative of his place — be what it will, since I do not choose to live upon Sir james’s charity, I must not presume to be more wise and honourable than a lord lieutenant, who has it in his power to procure a pension of five hundred pounds to a man, who has no merit to plead in his favour. 
It was a levee day: our hero found in the drawing-room a throng of courtiers waiting for the presence of his excellency. Impatient to G 3, know' 
126 The FAVOURITE 
know his fate, he told one of my lord’s gentlemen he came from the countess, and he was immediately admitted to the closet. 
Why didn’t you wait till the levee was over? Said his excellency, musing over Some papers; Who are you? — What is your mesiage? 
This letter will tell your excellency. 
And he gave it to him. 
The woman is mad, I believe! I exclaimed' his excellency, looking at our hero, and getting up in a 
pet; 
OF FORTUNE. 127 pet; what merit has She discovered in you worthy of five hundred pounds a year? 
It is a Secret, my lord, She reserves for your excellency; 1 have not the honour of her confidence. 
You have not the honour of her confidence! Said the lord lieutenant, mimicking the pert accent of our hero. 
No, my lord. 
And he took carelessly a pinch of Snuff, darting, at the same time, a glance at the glass before him. 
G 4 Yort 

128 The FAVOURITE 
You think, perhaps, that fli comply with her request! 
I know nothing of the matter, my lord : I fuppose you will. 
You. are wrong in your Supposition, for I will not. 
Very well, my lord; I am your most humble Servant. 
And with half a bow he stepped to the closet door. 
Who ever Saw Such an asturance, ^ exclaimed his excellency! Stop, Sir, 
What 
OF FORTUNE, 12^ 
wtat is your pleasure, my lord I 
My pleasure, Sir, is to know where you have been taught that manner of begging favours? 
I have begged none of you, my 
I 
lord; it is Lady Dempster,, and; not me, you excellency refuses, 
A pretty distindion, upon my honour! exclaimed his excellency,, not a little startled at the answer of Patrick, and fearful of offending the conntess. Were you in the place of Mn Creighton,; would you, Sir, be deprived of a: pension to which your Services G 5 would; 
Igo The favourite 
would have given you a lawful claim? 
That question, my lord, I beg leave not to answer 
To please Lady Dempster I must rob a man of merit of his bread! 
The reflection of his excellency struck to the heart of our hero, who, yielding to his feelings, was going to act the man of honour, when self-interest whispered to him. 
Let him behave as he thinks proper; it is not your business to dictate what he ought to do; remember thou art a beggar, ” 
Hi? 
OF FORT UNE. igt 
His excellency stood penstve against a window, and, after a few minutes meditation, turned with, a Smile to our hero.. 
Since Lady Dempster does not oppose the promotion of Doctor Cramner, you shall have the pension. Tell her i’ll send this aff ternoon; a mesi'enger to London reserve your thanks for another day; I have no time now to receive them.. No more of your sauciness, young man; remember that; for I will not bear with It, 1 astiire yoiu 
G 6 
m.d. 
1^2 The FAVOURITE 
And he went to the levee, leaning familiarly upon the (boulder of Patrick. 
CHAP XIII 
JJIS excellency honoured our hero with So many peculiar marks of friendship, that his acquaintance was courted. by the greatest men at the levee; and my lord, who observed the effedfs of his whimsical partiality, Smiled in himself at the folly of the devotees to the idol he had raised. Among those who came to pay their devoirs 
OF 
FORTUNE, 1^3 voirs to his excellency was Mr. Dalton : the worthy Alderman of Dublin stared with a gaping mouth at Patrick— — took him by the steeve. 
Do you know me H 
Yes, answered Patrick; I know you for the vilest rascal upon earth.. 
The deuce you do! you wanted to make a cuckold of me, and you have been tosted up in a blanket for it; I think, Sure, we should be even. Come, will you make it up? The friendship of a rich Alderman 
154 The FAVOURITE derman is not to be dlfdained, take my word for it. 
Well, Said Patrick, with all my heart; here is my hand : but there is another reconciliation to make — 
Oh r for that, nothing is more easy. My wife is the best natured woman living. Dine with us today; we will drink the past in champaign: I have the best in the three kingdoms. Will you come I 
You are So devilishly jealous, Mr. Dalton, I am afraid we Shall have a new quarrel. Either do not 
invite 
[OF F O K T U N E. 135 invite me to see your wife, or rely entirely upon her discretion; I have not a mind, I affure you, to offend her twice — the first frolic has taught me to be prudent. 
Come, come, as you will not venture to be tolled up again in a blanket, I won’t be jealous — tell me; you seem very great with his excellency; have you really any interest with him? 
Have I? answered Patrick, putting on an air of importance — neither man nor woman can boast a greater. Have you any need of 
him? 
136 The favourite 
him? Speak the wordy and you will see what I can do. 
And you would oblige me? 
Why not? Are we not friends? 
I have opposed his excellency’s measures in the city. He looks upon me as his enemy. 
that’s the best fituatlon imaginable; it is the Surest way to his friendship. i’ll have a bargain of mutual esteem Settled between you what is it that you want? 
This is not a proper place for. Such a Secret. 
Well; : 
o F F O R T U N E. 137 
Well; after dinner you will .disclose it to me. 
Lord Carthagan, who had Seen our hero at Lady dempster’s, came to him. 
How do you do, my good friend, Mr. O’ Kara? Where do you live in Dublin? shan’t we crack a bottle together What do you this evening? Are you engaged? We are a Set of the most jovial fellows in the world at G — Tavern. Will you make one? i’ll present you. 
I cannot possibly this night, my lord, answered Patrick; to rnorrow I am at your commands. 
Well, 

i38'the FAVOURITE 
Well, tomorrow; be it So. i’ll eall upon you; but, no: you’ll dine with me: I (hall expect you. 
And without taking notice of Mr. Dalton, he turned upon his heel and went out of the room. 
Is that a friend of yours? asked! the Alderman amazed at the familiarity between them, and vexed at not having his bow returned. 
Yes, answered Patrick, coldly. 
He has a greater interest at court than any nobleman in the kingdom. 
I know 
o F F O R T U N E. j39 
I know It, Said Patrick; and I can, I assure you, dlfpofe of his interest whenever I please. But excuse me; Something comes just now into my mind — I must talk to his excellency. 
And with the light steps of con scions importance, he pierced through the circle. 
The lord lieutenant had seen him, with pleasure, converse with the Alderman, and was anxious to be acquainted with the nature of t heir conversation. Mr. Dalton was one of the capital men in the city, 
and 
140 The FAVOURITE 
and had often through caprice or honesty, exerted all his influence against the measures of the administration, ' and been successful in his opposition to them. Several dou c^^rr'had been offered him in fe turn for his interest or neutrality; but none Satisfying either his vanity or avarice, his inflexibility had been proof against gold or honours, and he continued to fight under the banners of patnotifm, as a desperate robber who has nothing to lose and everything to gain. 
CHAP. 
w 
o T F 0 R T U N E. 141 
C H A P. XIV 
Soon as our hero drew near to his excellency, he wasjvhis pered in the ear — 
Are you intimate with that sek low Dalton? 
You do not encourage me to answer in the affirmative, my lord. 
don’t be Saucy, Patrick, Sai3' his excellency, simpering upon him. Tell me plainly if you have influence enough over that fellow to cheat him of his honesty. 
Does 
142 The FAVOURITE 
Does your excellency intend to purchase it? Is it worth money? What would you give? 
Anything but his own price. 
Well; i’ll be your broker, and take the job upon me. 
If you Succeed, your pension will then become a just debt paid you by the government; instead of an nct of injustice, it will be one of gratitude. 
That I may enjoy it, my lord, with honour to myself, and bring the Alderman to your own terms, 
be 
4 
o F F O R T U N E. 143 
be a friend to poor Creighton; deign to say you will take care of him, and i’ll Secure you the interest of Mr. Dalton.. ' 
The countess is So exasperated against him — 
Cannot your excellency, unknown to her, provide for a man of merit? Follow the dictates of your generous heart, my lord; let not poor Creighton Suffer by your goodness to me. 
It is well the countess does not hear you talk in that manner — 
life 
144 The FAVOURITE 
nse your good nature hvith more discretion — bribe Dalton, and I will take care of Creighton, 
Now, my lord, you have won me effedually to your Service; your excellency may entirely depend upon my discretion and fidelity. 
■go and conquer. Said his excellency, tapping gently upon his Shoulder; let me hear of your victory as Soon as you obtain it. 
I am reconciled with my good luck. Said Patrick to himself; I did not bask cheerfully in the Smiles, of fortune, attended as they were 
with 
OF FORTUNE. 145 
with creighton’s disappointment; since he will not Suffer by me, and I can really be usefiil to government, I will not Scruple to enjoy my pension. In different manners people deserve Such rewards; the conquest of Dalton, may, for ought I know, prove as Serviceable to the nation as the gaining of a battle. A patriot is oftener an enemy to his country than its protector. His excellency and the Alderman want one another; it is a lucky circumstance; 1 must make the best of it. 
The worthy Alderman of Dublin wondered how a fellow he had wol. II H tested 
146 The FAVOURITE 
toised up in a blanket could be So 
familiarly connected with the lord 
lieutenant and the first nobility of 
the kingdom. Ambition having, % 
'on a sudden, taken post'estion of his heart, be forgot the injury he had done his lady, and almost wished she had not been fo Severe, that he might have a right to the gratitude of our hero. It would ill Suit me, Said he to himself, to be jealous of a man, whose Interest with his excellency I can turn to my advantage. He may be, perhaps, a good-natured fool, and intend me no new injury; be it "what it will, I 
must 
OF FORTUNE. 147 
must not offend him, since I am in need of his astistance' — besides, I have already trusted him too much to put a stop to my confidence. 
Then feeing Patrick retire from the room, he offered him his coach, which he politely refused. 
Tell your lady of our reconciliation. I have Some visits to pay. In less than an hour i’ll be with you. 
Then stepping into a chair he bid to Doctor cramner’s. 
H 2 
CHAP. 
148 The FAVOURITE 
CHAP. XV 
T is not So difficult to act the part of a courtier as I thought, Said our hero, proud of his Success, and of the figure he had made. How insignificant the difference between the men and women I have Seen! I do not know, upon my honour, if the latter have not the advantage. hypocrisy, though certainly an abominable vice, is a virtue in them that conceals the futility of their minds and the depravity of their souls. In a well' 
'
G F FORTUNE. 14^ 
policed country bis excellency would dcserve to be whipped at a cart’s tail for having made the interest of Lady Dempster that of the nation he governs, and every one in his circle for their open contempt of honour and religion. I have my faults as well as they; there is no doubt of it: but, if I, am not too partial in my favour, I believe that my greatest foible is an inability to resist the allurements of beauty — Woman is So tempting an object — it works So forcibly upon my senses— — in the prime of life is invincibly armed against the Seduction of its powerful charms? 
H 3 The 
j50 The FAVOURITE 
I 
The voice of Mr. Felton, who ordered the chairman to stop, awoke our hero from his reverie. 
What news, my dear Mr. Felton? 
Some letters from the country. 
Thank you. 
He put them in his pocket, and got out of the chair. 
My dear Sir, I dome from the castle, and have Succeeded beyond my most Sanguine expectations. At my first Sally in the career of fortune, 
I have 
j 
OF FORTUNE. 151 I have out ran hundreds who had started before me. 
Women, Said Mr. Felton, Smiling, know the value' of a fine figure. The ladies in Dublin are as great connoijfeurs of the merit of a man, as those of London; but trust: not to their constancy, my dear Patrick; they are here as fickle as in the regions of St. james’s. Put not off till tomorrow the favours they will lavish upon you today. You are a novelty; that charm will Soon vanisti: with it, dear Patrick, you will lose the foie Superiority they are able to discover in you. 
B 4 Like 
152 The FAVOURITE Like a meteor you dazzle their eyes; profit by their intoxication — while it lasts, you may command all the faculties they are endowed with — but, a propos; Airs. 'Price, a mil lener in St. stephen’s green, called upon you an hour ago — Some new intrigue hatching for you, I dare say — She would not tell her mestage — 
It won’t do, said Patrick, turning his head with the air of a conqueror — 
And Shaking hands with Air. Felton, they parted with a mutual Smile. 
I have 
O F F O R T U N E. 153; 
I have not yet heard the pane gyrlck of women, Said our hero, getting into his chair; are they all false and deceitful? Is there not one among them true and honest? Is it the fault of nature or of education? Can Harriet, brought up in the utmost simplicity of manners and ignorance of the world, have the heart of a Lady Dempster f No: Harriet emulous only of the praise of those whose esteem is an honour, has not the inclinations of the woman who feeds her vanity 
with trifles, and the admiration of 
1 
the coxcomb or libertine. Natural H 5 was 
154 The FAVOURITE. 
was the innocence Harriet displayed in her last conversation with me — She was with the butler upon the terrass! there was no harm in that — She may, Surely, love me, and yet Speak to another man— — history 
of Sophia, and the claret, had filled my mind with fears as child ish and vain, as her modesty is pure and untainted with the thought of vice. Harriet is a treasure I must 
preserve- -- unworthy I am 
of it! 
Our hero took one of the letters he had received from Mr, Felton — 
Dear 

.OF FORTUNE. 155 “Dear Patrick, 
“The lovely, virtuous Harriet has been at the point of deaths — ” ' \ 
The heart of our hero Shrunk instantly with a pang of Sorrow — the rich dye of nature vanished from his blooming cheeks— — rhoment only Patrick knew how much he loved Harriet — vanity, pleasure, or ambition, had before diverted her from his mind, or weakened the impression fheshad made upon him — her danger roused his dormant Senstbllity; ’ and unvoluntary tears stowed from his eyes. He drew the curtains of the chair, and in 
II 6 
dulged 
156 The favourite 
dulged his feelings. Flattering hope, forcing itself through the gloomy thought, gave his soul one instant of Serenity; he took the letter again. 
“The lovely, virtuous Harriet has been at the point of death; but thanks to nature, and our cares, her recovery is no longer doubtful.” 
God be praised 1 exclairhed our hero. 
And joy brightened every feature. 
“You 
OF FORTUNE. 157 “You have been the cause of the danger She has ran. Peter told her your jealousy of simpson, and made you Speak, as very likely you did not. Your Setting out without feeing her made her apprehensive of your hatred: the tender Harriet gave way to despair — a violent fever — Oh, Patrick! what have I not Suffered! we had lost all hopes, when a happy crisis restored her to you, to me, to a whole family, of whom She is the delight. When (he could hear, I talked; site listened to me; and her breast ceased to be tortured by 
the 
The FAVOURITE 
the fear of being forsaken by yoin Many women, Patrick, ^ you will meet in the world, that shall please your senses better; but none who will afledi your heart So forcibly as Harriet -- walk with an honest heart in the path of ambition. Remember, Patrick, that virtue is the Sole road to happiness.” 
“James Walter 
Killern hall. 
CHAP. XVI 
I^^OULD that your example. Sir James, could warm my breast with imitative virtue! exclaimed 
OF FORTUNE. 15^ 
claimed Patrick: but at my age, and circumstanced as I am, I can only attempt to conquer my pas stons — the Success, I fear, is not in my power. Shave already drank of the cup of pleasure— — not yet enebriated, who knows how the bewitching liquor may work upon my mind! self denials are Seldom welcomed in the Spring of life, especially, when they are an obstacle to our fortune. Harriet! I know the value of thy affection for me : but, that I may be the more worthy of thee, forgive a few wanderings of my reason and virtue; 
they 
io The FAVOURITE 
they will be the work of necessity, and not the effect of a corrupted taste or fancy. 
The chair then stopping at the doctor’s door, our hero Sent his name up, and was immediately admitted. He found the doctor in his library. 
Whom have I the honour to receive? asked Doctor Cramner, arising with a, pen in his hand, and' advancing politely towards our hero. 
A friend to the virtuous men,, who have no other right, to the 
favours 
G F F O R T U N E. ii favours of the great than a merit, which, in this selfish and luxurious age, is too often Sacrificed to fool ishness or immorality. 
How lovely virtue is in the countenance of a young man! exclaimed the doctor. You are young, and yet have not the vices in fashion! How came you to escape the contagion? Formed to grace every folly, you are an enemy to them! 
praise me not, doctor; were I known to you, you might, perhaps, repent your esteem of me, 1 have, I asture you, a poor claim to it. 
Your 
i62 The FAVOURITE 
Your modesty is an incontestable proof of your worth But, Sir, what procures me the honour of your visit? Am I So happy as to have it in my power to oblige you? My interest is very Small; Such as it is, you may command it, 
I come, Sir, Said our hero, with an accent that gained the heart of the doctor, to beg of you to accept the deanery of A --. 
I have been just told it was granted last night to Mr. Gaily. 
Very likely it was, doctor; but it is now youfs. 
God 
OF FORTUNE. 163 
God be be blessed!! the doctor, in a forcible rapture of joy; 1 Shall have more means to do' good. 
And tears caused by virtue flowed on his venerable cheeks. 
Patrick was moved; and he Said to himself, How unlike him I am! 
Is that the use, doctor, you pur pose to make of the emolument of the deanery? Said Patrick, with a Smile. don’t you fear to give yourself a ridicule? 
My conscience, dear Sir, is my Sole judge; if it approve of my 
actions, 
164 The FAVOURITE 
actions, Fll laugh at the vain censure of men. The poor and unfortunate have demands upon me, in proportion to my abilities; their expectations it is my duty to Satisfy. 
Mr. Gailj would, I am certain, have Substituted his wants to the pretensions of the miserable. 
Far from me. Si’*, to think ill of that gentleman! he is at that season of life, when passions are, not easily controlled : his heart my be very good, though fancy may Sometimes lead him astray. • Independence changes a man, my dear Sir: V wtre 
OF FORTUNE. 165 
were Mr. Gaily promoted to the deanery, he would, perhaps, forsake his youthful errors, devote hlm felf entirely to virtue, be an ornament to Society, and an honour to religion. 
It is a Perhaps, doctor, to which I would not trust the happinefe of the dlstrested. May you long enjoy you new dignity! 
To whom am I indebted for it? 
To your virtuous life, doctor. tomorrow i’ll call upon you; we will go together to his excellency’s. 
Then 
i66 The FAVOURITE 
Then they entered into a further conversation, in which they acquitted themselves in'such a manner, as greatly increased the good opinion they had conceived of each other. 
CHAR XVII 
L 
A honest man, ^ stiitj Patrick, is the noblest Spectacle on earth. How happy the doctor, to be founded to Say, I have no enemy but the vicious. Shall it never be my lot to boast the siime advantage! too many are ' the temptations 
'OF F O R T U N E. 167 
tions youth and ambition throw in my way — I cannot yet hope for So desirable a change in the state of my mind — though I eagerly long for it, my sighs are still for pleasure and fortune — I must visit often dodor Cramner — in the company only of a virtuous man I can find a remedy against the malignity of the poison that rages in my heart. 
With this last resolution our hero arrived at the alderman’s. Elated with the honour of having for his guest a man who was intimate with the lord lieutenant and the nobility of the kingdom, Mr. 
Dalton 
i68 The FAVOURITE 
Dalton had invited a Select company to dine with him. At the sight of Patrick, Mrs. Dalton afisected a blush, and, in the hearing of her husband. Spoke in the following manner. 
I hope, Sir, you have learned to be discreet, and not to expose me any more to the necessity of calling my husband to my relief. 
It shall be my study. Madam, to Spare you that necessity. Shall we not Seal our reconciliation with one kiss? 
Mrs. 
OF FORTUNE. 1(^9 Mrs. Dalton turned modestly to her husband, as to ask leave. 
By all means; by all means; Said the Alderman. 
And our lovers used, or rather abused his consent. 
Our hero having Saluted the ladies, and bowed to the gentlemen, put on one of those looks which call irresistibly the general attention to yourself. The uncommon comeliness of his person, Set off to the best advantage by the unstudied elegance of his dress, and the plain vol. II I nefs 
lyo The FAVOURITE 
ness of his manners, was the admiration of the women, and the envy of those of his Sex. careless of the impression he made, he showed no particular distindion to wit or beauty, and was polite and gallant with a flattering impartiality. His ex trem^e civility was the more agreeable, that it was unafiseded, and Seemed to Spring from his heart. Before they sat down to dinner, he had made a friend of every man, and created a desire in his favour in every female breast. Mrs. Dalton finding an opportunity to venture a whisper, complained of his neglect, 
I love 
OF FORTUNE. 171 
I love you, answered Patrick; Prudence bids me to appear indifferent. 
Our .hero taking no notice of the obliging glances darted at him, and affecting not to answer their Smiles, his Seeming infenfibillty added a new lustre to his excellent qualities; and each woman wllhed the more eagerly for the honour of his conquest, that she Saw her rivals ready to engage.for obtaining it. Patrick had too much Sagacity not to perceive their vanity was at work. pleased with the emulation he had caused among them, he Secreted I 2 his 
172 The FAVOURITE his joy, and enlivened their attempts with looks, Smiles, and flattery. 
What children these women are! Said Patrick to himself. Strangers to the real value of a joy, they fight for its glittering appearance, as if their happiness was centred in the possession of it! What heads must these be, that turn So easily at the sight of a sine fellow! Oh, decency, reason, and virtue! where Shall 1 look for you, if the heart of woman is not the temple in which you dwell! 
When 
OF F O R T U N E 173 
When the first coiirse was removed, a gentleman alked if there? were any news at the castle? 
There are many, Said a patrlo 
/■ 
tic Common coiincsilman; and Such as we may expect from the arbitrary disposition of the court. Mr. Gaily, that wretch who is held in universal contempt, - is preferred to the deanry'of A -- --. 
He is not. Said Patrick; it is Doctor Cramner. 
I have it from the best authority, answered the Common councilman, looking with disdain at our hero; 
I 
and 
174 The FAVOURITE 
and I Jay one thousand pounds to five hundred, that I am right. 
Done; Said Patrick; I take the bet. 
Where Is your Security, Sir? I do not value the word of a courtier this empty glass. 
Fie! ridiculous! exclaimed the ladies; are these your manners, Mr. Plump? ' ' 
The hue of indignation coloured the cheeks of our hero, ^ who was getting up to vent it, perhaps, upon the face of the proud wealthy citizen, '. when 
OF FORTUNE. 175 
when Mr. Dalton desired him to sit down, and begged his leave to be his Seciusity. 
I accept it, Said Mr. Plump, whom the motion of Patrick had frightened into civility. 
Our hero Smiling a thank to tile ladies, asked the Common councilman if he would Submit to the decision of the lord lieutenant. 
1 will, answered Mr. Plump: his Secretary is the authority I have mentioned. We will See who has the best. 
I 4 Patrick 
1*76 The FAVOURITE 
Patrick called for paper and ink, and wrote the following card. 
Mr. O’ Tiara presents his respects to his excellency: begs to know who is to be preferred to the 
deanery of A -- -- -- -, as he has a bet 
of a thousand pounds depending upon his excellency’s dechion.” 
[ Will this card do, Sir? 
And he pasted it to Mr. Plump. 
Send it, Sir; Send it. It is very well. 
Will you be ofif? It is time yet, Sir, Said Patrick. 
By 

o F F O R T U N E. 177 
By no means; by no means; answered Mr. Plump, to whom the proposal of Patrick was an omen of his success. 
You will repent, Said Paldck.' 
i’ll run that chance. 
And he laughed at the thought of having takeii in a courtier. 
“. I 
The card was Sent, 
Are you Sure to win, asked, in a half whisper, a young lady, who sat by our hero? I would be Sorry if you .were to lose.. 
I 5 Fear 
lys The favaurlte 
Fear not. Madam, ansvvered .trick, - •, 
And in a gentle prefsure of her knee he marked his gratitude for her concern. The young lady let him declare his gratitude in his own manner, till a pinch he received told him he grew too presuming and indiscreet. 
The dinner was almost over when the mestenger came back and delivered a paper to our hero, who read it aloud. • 
“I wish you joy, dear Patrick; you have won. Doctor Gramner IS to have the deanery, P 
Who 
OF FORTUNE. iy9* 
Who, after this, will trust a eourtier’s word. Said Mr. Plump, getting up in a fury. Damn tyre rascals — Sir, you may send for your money when you please.. 
And muttering imprecations against the Secretary of the lord lieutenant,, he left the room. 
Let us forgive him his ill humour, Said Patrick; his foolish obstinacy has cost him dear. 1 am less pleased with the gain I have made, than with the Sorrow he. exprestes for having lost it, and the part the ladies have taken in my favour. 
I 6 The 
io The FAVOURITE 
r The young lady was not the last to compliment Patrick upon his Siiccefs. 
You may win that Sum as easily as I have won it, Said Patrick to her. 
What do you mean answered the lady, without anger. Explain yourself. 
Let ns make a bet. 
What is it r 0 
I lay you. that thousand Mr. Plump h^lost, against one hundred 
OF F O R T U N E. ii 
dred, that you will not grant me a tete a tite before twelve o’clock - tomorrow. 
Mrs. Clifter, ' though more tender than virtuous, had till then preserved both her virtue and her reputation. To the want of merit in her admirers, and not to her want of sensibility, she was indebted for the chastity of her morals, and the silence of stander : but her defence having always proved successful, she fondly did.derself the ho nours of the vidlories she had obtained over her despicable or unskilful enemies. This error Patrick 
rectified. 
i82 The FAVOURITE 
rectified. As Soon as he looked and spoke his desire of pleasing, Mrs Clifter became Sensible of the ascendency he gained over her, and Said to herself, In Spite of my past triumphs, I fear I am but a woman.” The • pinch she had given him to stop the wandering of his hand, siie had put off to the moment her modesty made it indifpen sible, and, even then, she had un voluntarily sighed at the necesiity of it. His impertinence had alarmed her virtue, but, at the same time, had roused in her heart feelings she had peyer before been acqainted with. 
She 
: O F F O R T U N E. 1s 3 
She was in the height of her inquiry into the nature of her new fensa tions^ ..when the answer Sent by the 
i. 
lord lieutenant finished the picture 
.. J 
she had drawn of Patrick. Lovje and vanity uniting against her, she faintly resisted their impulses, and lamenting her fate, yielded to the 
* i 
temptation of being happy. 
Keep your money, Sir, anfvvered she, with a becoming dignity; I may give my heart, but never will Sell it. 
Your delicacy charms me, Said Patrick, with a fentiraentaf accent: 
would 
i84 The FAVOURITE 
would I were worthy of that heart you will give, and not Sell! 
A Sigh betrayed her inclination to believe he was worthy of it — but honour commanding still in her heart, (he turned her" stgh into a Smile, and that Smile into an affectation of indifference. 
We are observed, Sir; more than one invidious eye is fixed upon me — if you esteem me, fotget; at present, that I have a heart to give. 
Our hero obeyed, and restored to the other ladies their right to his homage She had stolen from them. 
C H A P. 
or FORTUNE. 185 
C H A P. XVIIL, ' 
jmmediately after dinner Mr. Dal, 
, took our hero into his closeti 
/ 
I shan’t detain you long from Mrs. Clifter, Said the Alderman, with a roguish Smile. The business I have^to impart to you will be told in a few words. I compliment you upon your choice; she is handsomer than my wife, and, ten to one, will not be So Severe. 
You are not happy in your opinion of women, Mr. Dalton; and I do not deserve the compliment 
you, 
i86 The FAVOURITE 
you pay me. Mrs. Clifter, 1 alsure you, is very indifferent to me. 
You have no need of discretion wih me, Said the Alderman; if she pleases you, TU be your friend, and procure you opportunities of feeing her. 
You are very kind, Mr. Dalton, answered Patrick, who guessed the motives of the alderman’s offers — my heart is at present engaged; I have not the least thought of Mrs. Clifter — pray what is your business?? 

OF FORTUNE. 187 
Mr. balfour’s contract with the government to death the army expires in a few days, can you procure it to me? 
The deuce! this is no trifle Mr. Dalton; the benefits of Such a contract are very considerable. Youafk a favour of the greatest importance; a favour, that none but the greatest friends to administration can expect from the minister. What can you give in return for Such a favour? Speak freely; you may depend upon my honour and Secrecy, 
My interest in this corporation. 
Oh, 
i88 The FAVOURITE 
Oh, avarice, avarice! how ma ny rogues thou makeft! exclaimed Patrick in himself. The villainy of that wretch is unjustifiable, he has a princely fortune and no children. 
What are you musing about? Said Mr. Dalton. 
Is your Interest So great as to deserve So high a bribe? 
I can command almost two thirds of the votes in Dublin. I have So often embarrasted the government and counteracted their operations, that they are Sensible of my power. 
And 
O F 
FORTUNE. 
4l W Jk W ^ ^ 
And that power you will employ for them if you obtain the contract, 
'f 
I will, since I cannot obtain it upon other terms. 
Very well. Now Mr. Dalton let us settle another point, without .which I will not Serve you. What Share do you intend to give me in your profits? What ready Sum of money? and what annuity? 
Why, to be Sure, you must have Something for your trouble. 
What will that Something be? 
1 cannot tell you. 
Well, 
190 The FAVOURITE 
Well, Said Patrick, I will tell it for you. Your profits 'will amount every year between two or three thousand pounds. Will they? 
_ ^ 
Thereabout, answered the Alderman, not a little displeased with the Selfishness of his new friend, and to have put himself in his power. 
You are therefore able, Said Patrick, to give me three thousand pounds in cash, and an annuity of five hundred, while you hold the contrad. You cannot certainly Say I am extravagant in my demands. 
Not 
OF FORTUNE. 191 
Not extravagant! exclaimed the Alderman, walking in the closet. 
Mr. Dalton, Said Patrick,, let us talk coolly upon this matter. Do you think in your conscience your interest in the city not overpayed with two thousands a year? Where is the patriot that would not be purchased for half the value? For ought I know, the lord lieutenant may esteem you influence not worth the tenth part of the price' you ask— — give you ten minutes to consider — either comply with my conditions, or think no more of the 
con 
192 The FAVOURITE cnntract; through my means only you can obtain it. 
Shall I lose two thousand pounds a year? Said the Alderman to hlm felf. Avarice answered, No; and he obeyed its dictates. 
Come, Sir; I will have no difference with you; get me that damned contract, and i’ll comply with your terms — It is better to have that, than the sterile honour of being one of the leaders of the Scum of the earth : too many needy patriots have fed upon my folly. I am wearied of pralfes I pay with gold. 
This 
OF FORTUNE. 193 
This night i’ll see the lord lieutenant; and tomorrow you shall have his answer, Said Patrick, shaking hands with the Alderman. 
Step to the company, Said Mr. Dalton; i’ll make a memorandum of the agreement between us. 
This is a lucky day! Said Patrick; it Seems that Fortune has forgot the whole world to think only of me. What a good thing it is to be young and handsome!! all the women I have Seen in Dublin, Mrs. Clifter pleases me the best — few would have refused the bet I vot. II K pro 
194 The FAVOURITE 
proposed to her — the Snare was alluring — a difinterested’woman cannot be vicious through choice; Sentiment only can make her a devotee to pleasure. There is a decency in her deportment infinitely more attractive than the coqu^ttry/of Mrs. Dalton, and the voluptuous fprigsht lincss of the countess. The tenderness of looks and accent declares her a woman of feeling — li bertinism is too legible on the sea tures of the others — in Mrs Clifter the heart Speaks — my partiality is perh 3 ill-founded — woman is So deceit. : L! — I must beware of my Senses, lest they delude my judgement 
OF FORTUNE. 195 
ment — should I be So happy as to be confirmed in my opinion of her, farewell to the countess and Mrs. Dalton, 
CHAP. XIX 
r our hero’s absence, Mrs. chs ter having convinced herself that the peace of mind resulting from a virtuous life was preferable to the delights of guilty bliss, resolved not to brave a danger her Sensibility told her (he would not be able to 
overcome. 
K 2 
By 
196 The favourite 
By flight only I can Secure my triumph, had she Said to herself; I must not expose my virtue to the temptation of pleasure — Were I dis graced in my own eye, though thought innocent by all the world, I would be the most wretched of my Sex; a prey to remorse, each day would be marked with an agony of intolerable grief — Painful is self-denial — religion requires it — would 1 had not come here today 1 — Oh, my heart is torn by love and virtue! 

At that moment our hero entered the room, and, at the sight of him, Virtue fled, and left the 
Sway 
G F FORTUNE. 197 
Sway” to Love. The discretion of Patrick assisted Mrs. Clifter against the impression he made. Unwilling to make her the Subject of a female chit-chat, which he knew to be always dictated by envy ’or malignity, he chose not to perceive she sat by herself on a Sopha, This respect for Mrs. Clifter fiirprifed our hero. It is not thus. Said he, that • I love Mrs. Dalton and he placed himself behind her chair. Mrs. Dalton turned her head and whispered in his ear — 
This morning I wanted to consult you about trifles I will have K 3 you 
19s The favourite 
you choose for me; the eye of a lover is a better judge of dress, than vanity; i’ll think myself more agreeable when your taste has pointed to me what I must wear. Tomorrow, ril be, at twelve, at Mrs. price’s, in St, stephen’s green — Do you love me still, dear Patrick? 
And profiting by the attitude she was in, she fixed her Soul on his lips. 
T adore you, Said Patrick. 
And he returned the amourous kifs. 
I know not, Said Patrick to himself, how men can withstand the 
Seduction 
OF FORTUNE. 199 
fcdudion of a fine woman’s carefib — I am asraid they owe their victory more to impotency than virtue. 
And muttering the following So llloquy, he stepped to Mrs. Clifter, who was looking in a music book. 
My cafe must be that of a woman; why should she not partake of the desire she forces into my heart? I am to her what she is to me; our emotions cannot dlster but in a greater or less degree of Sensibility. It is only in a sincere love of her duties she can find a Support against palfion, and Subdue its craving wants. Has Mrs. Clifter that K 4 arm 
200 The FAVOURITE 
arm against me? I must put her to the test. 
And he begged leave to sit by 
her. 
Powerful were the struggles of honour in the breast of Mrs. Clifter; yet love conquered at last, and She listened to our hero. He was permitted to visit her in the absence of her husband, whom bufiness had called to Cork. 
Where are you going? Said she tenderly to him; why don’t you Sup with us? Though it is imprudent in me to wish you would stay, 
I can 
OF FORTUNE. or 
I cannot think of losing you. Where are you goingi Sufpect your connexion with Lady Dempster — I have Seen the animated whisper of Mrs. Dalton — I have but a tender heart to oppose to their charms — will it Secure me your love and constancy? Shall I not have my credulity to bewail? — No rival you Shall have in my heart — a Share only in your’s will not Satisfy me — deceive me not — will you love me — love but me? — You do not know perhaps the greatness of the Sacrifice you expect from me -- shabituated to be loved, I fear it is not in your K 5 power 
202 The favourite 
power to do me justice — will not your contempt of women influence your opinion of me? Shall I be dasted among the libertine, though sentiment and my consciousness of your merit will be the Sole cause of my defeat? If you love and do not esteem me, I cannot be happy. 
Patrick Spoke, and her fears were dissipated. The certainty of pleasing the lord lieutenant with the news of Mr. dalton’s treachery to honour and his country, prevailing over his inclination of staying with Mrs. Glister, our hero arose — 
To. 
OF FORTUNE 2©3i tomorrow I’H see you, beautiful Amelia. preserve your esteem of me: upon it rests my future happiness. 
CHAP. XX 
J AM wrong, laid Patrick as he was going to the castle, to Seduce the virtue of an honest woman who, had 1 not warmed into a fever, her insignificant inclination for me, would, posiibly, never have have deviated from her duty. • If, from her behaviour, I can judge K 6 'of 
204 The FAVOURITE 
of her character, my happiness will make her miserable- -- will not justify her guilt — in spite of my transports, it will keep alive in her heart, and stand always between her and me— — She really virtuous I How many the ways of deluding I too proficient in that art is woman - — the mask of virtue is So tempting! — through coquettry she may wear it — who could boast the looks of Cordelia? Was I not forcibly betrayed into a conviction of her innocence? There is no knowing woman till she is put to the trial — I will make it. 
His 
OF FORTUNE. 205 
His excellency was charmed with the conquest of the Alderman, and afiured our hero he deserved more than the pension he had obtained, as he had gained Mr. Dalton without any expense to the government, who would not have hesitated to purchase his Interest with douceurs still more considerable. 
Let him come to me tomorrow, early in the morning, Said his excellency; we will have the contract drawn and signed. As to you, ril reward your diligence and victory over that rascal with no Small siiare of lottery tickets, till there 
is 
2o6 The FAVOURITE 
is Some place vacant worthy of your acceptance. 
I 
I wish, refiimed his excellency, after Some minutes reflection, you would not often visit Lady Dempster; I Should not like to have Such a sine fellow as you are for a rival in her affections. 
You do me too much honour, my lord, answered Patrick; her ladyship is too Sensible of your merit, to take any notice of me. 
■ My merit, Said his excellency, is not that which always pleases the women best. How often have you seen her? 
"T wice, 
OF FORTUNE, 207 
Twice, my lord. 
But twice 1 that’s very well. You have no need of her; i’ll take care of your fortune., j 
If She is offended at my neglects and asks the cause of it — 
Well, tell anything but the truth. 
Should She think you have forbid me to See her — 
God forbid She Should think it I My fuspicion would make her in love with you: -- aiid that must not be, Patrick. 
• I al 
2o8 The FAVOURITE 
I afflire you, my Lord, that I neither love Lady Dempster, nor care for her affection. 
Well Spoke. And you will continue in the same indifference? 
Your excellency may depend upon it. 
Since it is So, you have my leave to see her — Seldom, however. 
Oh 1 never if you please. ’ 
No, no. She must not put it in her head that I am the cause of the discontinuation of your visits. ^ I know 

OF F O Pv T U N E. 209 I know the women too well to trust their constancy to their reason. 
Our hero, after having diverted the lord lieutenant with the Scene between him and the patriotic Councilman, retired to his lodging, revolving in his mind the events of the day, thanking Fortune for her favours, meditating upon the best means to Succeed in his attack against Mrs. Glister, yet wishing sincerely she might prove victorious ver him. 
CHAP. 
210 The FAVOURITE 
CHAP XXL 
Ncertain of the turn his adven ture with Mrs. Clifter would take, our hero thought it prudent to put off to another day his visits to the countess and Mrs. Dalton; and his first care, after a hearty breakfast, was to write an apology for a .behaviour which, as his reputation was not yet established, might have brought his merit in question. He was Sealing the two letters, when at one and the same time, he received one thousand pounds from 
Mr. 
\ 
OF FORTUNE. II 
Mr. Plump, and a billet from a chairman, who stole away as Soon as he had delivered it. 
Patrick paid first his homage to the banknotes, and then opened the billet, which run in the following manner. 
“To Mr. O’ Hara. 
“You are too lovely, and I too tender — in vain does virtue oppose your triumph in my heart; your presence would stlence her voice, and strike my soul with a desire of making you happy — 1 love you, 'dear Patrick: but I love myself 

212 The favourite 
Self better — In absence only I can find an antidote against love — to be Secured from guilt I must sty — the post-chaise is ready — to sty is a torment — adieu.” 
God be blested! exclaimed Patrick; I have found at last a virtuous woman! Her example points out to me the course of life I ought to adopt; I am already rich enough to follow my own taste — the conquests I have made are not an honour a man of delicacy can boast — yet my vanity is Seduced; — I am still under the Sway of ambition and 
pleasure 
o F F O R T U N E. 213 
pleasure— —! Harriet, Harriet! how unworthy I am of thee! 
Then Patrick wrote to Sir James Walter the Success he had met with, and desired him to deliver the following lines to Harriet. 
‘‘ When I have received Some favours more from fortune, i’ll come and lay them down at the feet of the virtuous and lovely Harriet, “Patrick O’ Kara.” 
This is too laconic, Said Patrick — but how can I talk of love to Harriet when my heart Smiles at the idea of the countess and Mrs. 
Dalton! 
214 The FAVOURITE 
Dalton! What a weak and an inconsistent 
animal man is! Will my “reason be always the stave of fancy? Shall I for ever act in contradiction to my thoughts and feelings, and contiiiue wantonly in a career I know full of danger? Cannot youth and virtue agree? Must what one commands be constantly opposed by the other? How rapidly beauty and pleasure destroy the best resolutions! 
The clock striking twelve put an end to our hero’s reflections. He had no time to deliberate about vice or virtue; his honour was at 
. stake; 
OF FORTUNE. 215 
stake; he flew to Mrs. price’s, In St. stephen’s green. 
After he had chosen the trifles Mrs. Dalton was to adorn herself ' with, Patrick went to Lord c?.r thagan, who in the evening took 
him to G -- -- Tavern. Whoever 
has been at Ar -- ’s or a1 — — ’s, 
may form an idea of the place where our hero was. A Set of noble knaves and rich fools met regularly at that tavern to strip one another of their fortune, and riot in every kind of luxury a depraved taste could ' think of, and money could procure. Patrick Vas received with 
the 
2i6 The FAVOURITE 
the utmost civility, and Lord gar thagan was asked by everybody in the room, “Has he a good purse ?” Upon his lordship’s answering in the affirmative, their regard for our hero increased, and in less than ten minutes he found himfels intimate with men of whom he knew not either the name or the title. The dice were produced, and the Sacrifice began. 
Hear me. Sir, Said Lord Garth agan to Patrick; as I have brought you here, honour bids me to give you an advice. Defend your money as well as you can; 
for 
OF F O R T U N E. 217 for as we do not expect any mercy, we give none. 
And he stepped ^ to, the 1 hazard table. 
Thafs a good advice, Said Patrick. 
And he followed his lordship. 
Our hero was amazed at the quantity of gold and banknotes that lay ready for the favourites of fortune, and he could not help wishing. he was the pbstestbr of vol. II L them. 
is The FAVOURITE 
them.' At the lovely sight the Demon of play invaded his heart, and he boldly ventured in the field of Folly. Chance, or the Skill of his enernics prevailed against, him ■ at the first onset; but his courage gathering new strength from the ipss he made, he renewed the fight with So much vigour and prudence, that she obtained at last a most complete victory.' The Sobriety of our hero had courted Fortune, and forced her on his fide. He was the only one whose head had braved the fumes of the champaign, and kept clear in the 
midst 
o F.. F O R T U N R 219; 
mldfi of a storm of repeated bumpers. Once thrown into confuston, the enemy could not rally to advantage; they lost the day,, and the conqueror, rich with their Spoils, returned home, crowned with laurels. 
'CHAP. XXII 
N man in So little a time. Said Patrick, covering a table with banknotes, was ever So fortunate as I have been. 
And, falling on his knees in a devout rapture, he thanked the L z. Creator 
220 The favourite 
Creator of all things for the unmerited favours he had bestowed upon him. 
No longer can I continue a behaviour my situation only could justify, resumed our hero, looking at the treasure before himi Poverty imposed upon me a disgraceful part to perform — it was not in my power to Sacrifice to virtue, when necessity forced me to comply with the vices of my protedors. My passions have no more that motive to plead in their favour — how happy I am to have not one pretext to be base — to be at liberty to aest 
the 
o F F O R T U N E. 221 
t 
rhe man of honour I who knows to what lengths ambition, by degrees, would have carried me? A Have to administration, would not I have at last done their dirty work with a willing heart? Gould I have preserved my integrity in the midst of a corrupted court? It is more probable I would have adopted their manners,, and, upon reflection, turned as great a villain as any one of them." When vice is openly Supported and encouraged by rewards, what man, unless he has the Soul of an Epictetus, will not be tempted to desert the tern l 3. - pie; 
222 The favourite 
I 
pie of Virtue? — To avoid guilt; Mrs. Glister flies from me — how few the men who, in their political career, have her resolution and fortitude! Prudence bids me to restore Reason her rights over me 
-- -- with near twenty thousand 
pounds, and' the annuities I have got, I can live a life the more happy, that it Shall be free from remorse and the anxieties attending ambition. In the company of the virtuous Harriet, i’ll find happi ness, whose faint image only I have met in my transient amours. From this moment I will have 
friends 
OF FORTUNE. 223 
friends and no protectors, Speak the language of truth and not that of flattery. 
Thus the good fense of Patrick prevailed over the vainglory of being distinguished more by honours than by real merit. At an age when all other men are Swayed by 'pleasure, pride, or interest, he had, the courage to shake off their yoke, and devote to religion, virtue, and philosophy, a life he was strongly solicited by nature, fashion, and the Smiles of the fair, to consecrate to libertinism, diffl 
pation, 
I 
Wi 

■[ 224 ]' 
patlon, and folly. To the lovely Harriet he Surrendered his liberty, and never repented the facriliee of it. 
. i 
FINIS. 
BU. 

of Pa • 
laai 



: V‘ 

Am 

- 
/-' IV ' •■ 
ck 


.t 
r^r~zi€' 
arixa 
f^''' t f' V 
R * *, '‘■.’"..'I V • r' ' 
. ^ i/iv ' - ■ > 
\%. t, '. • » V. • /. ' ^'" ." \ 
Vi;; ■ •‘■^ 





C 

- 
AS r 
K 
J ■■ 7- 
Y 'Atr ■: 

L ck 

r 

C : V' ■' 



■■*; ar 

r' 
: \. 



. K ■ 
F. 


‘s?3i& 
■; ' i ^■^. 
--, '*4^. '*■ ■' « 

'*vsr': ’" 
r 
, C, 
f 
L -- i,, 
, 'J 'i 
tllf* 

> ‘vad.fs\ 
> -,;. '; tw, ' -1 
; - * CT 



