JEMIMA and LOUISA. 
IN WHICH IS CONTAIN’D, 
Several Remarkable INCIDENTS 
RELATING TO 
TWO LADIES 
distinguish’d Families and Fortunes. 
In a Series of Letters. 
BY
A LADY. 

"A Woman write! The Town cries One and All, 
No Wonder Bedlam's lately found too small 
Have not we Head and Hands, and Pens and Ink? 
And what should ail us then but we can think?"

Clive’s Epilogue to Bays in Petticoats. 

LONDON:
Printed for the Author, 
And sold by OWEN, at Homer's-Head, 
near Temple-Bar.
MDCCLIX. 


INTRODUCTION. 
It being customary for every scribbler, 
when they transmit their works to the 
public, to give some account of the subject 
they treat of, and the motives that induced 
them to such an undertaking, (by way of 
preface) I therefore beg leave to acquaint the 
perusers of the following sheets, that they are 
the production of a female pen, which acknow-
ledgment will, I hope, in Some measure, plead 
an excuse for their errors, and be a means of 
preserving them from a great part of that cen-
sure they may be justly entitled to. 

As to the contents; they are a plain rela-
tion as some remarkable events, with as little 
variation as possible, from the account I re-
ceived from a friend who was formerly well 
acquainted with the parties concern’d; but 
for some good and sufficient reasons, I chose 
to give the persons and places feign’d names, 
and to relate the story in a series of letters, 
that have indeed nothing to recommend them 
to the readers attention, (except being founded 
on facts) as they are void of any embellish

[INTRODUCTION.]
ment as language or sentiment. But as novel 
reading is become fashionable, I hope the in-
troducing one requires little apology. 

The motives of the publication, proceed 
from two desires, in which, as I am equally 
anxious, I have endeavour’d to the utmost of 
my ability, to prove equally successsul, the 
amusement of the purchaser, and the bene-
fit of their 

Most obliged 
and obedient 
humble Servant 
The Author. 


 
THE 
CONTENTS. 
Let. 						 	Page 
1. Miss Courtly to Miss Wellers 1 
2. miss Wellers to Miss Courtly 6 
3. Miss Courtly to Miss Wellers 8 
4. Miss Brand to Miss Courtly   11 
5. Miss Emily Courtly to Miss Brand 12 
6. Miss Courtly to Miss Wellers 15 
7. Miss Wellers to Miss Courtly 22 
8. Continuation of Miss Wellers to Miss 
Courtly 						ibid. 
9. Miss Courtly to Miss Wellers 28 
10. Miss Brand to Miss Emily Courtly 34 
11. Miss Brand to Miss Jemima Courtly 37 
12. Miss Emily Courtly to Miss Brand 40 
13. Continuation of Miss Emily Courtly to 
Miss Brand 						ibid. 
14. Miss Brand to Miss Emily Courtly 43 
15. Miss Jemima Courtly to Miss Brand 45 
16. Miss Courtly to Miss Wellers 46 
17. Miss Wellers to Miss Courtly 49 
ik Continuation of Miss Wellers to Miss 
Courtly 53 
19. Miss Courtly to Miss Wellers 54 
20. Miss Wellers to Miss Courtly 56 
21. Miss Emily Courtly to miss Brand 58 
22. Miss Brand to Miss Emily Courtly 61 
23. Miss Courtly to Miss Wellers 62 
24. Continuation of Miss Courtly to Miss Wellers 64 
25. Miss Emily Courtly to Miss Brand 66 
26. Continuation of Miss Emily Courtly to Miss 
Brand 67 

[THE CONTENTS.]
27. Miss Wellers to Miss Lewis 68 
28. Continuation of Miss Wellers to Miss Lewis 71 
29. Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers 74 
30. Miss Wellers to Miss Lewis 75 
31. Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers 77 
32. Miss Wellers to Miss Lewis 78 
33. Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers 80 
34. Continuation of miss Lewis to Miss Wellers 81
35. Continuation of Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers 84 
36. Miss Blyden to Miss Lewis 85 
37. Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers 87 
38. Continuation of Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers 89 
39. Continuation of Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers 93 
40. Continuation of Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers 96 
41. Continuation of Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers 98 
42. Continuation of Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers 99 
43. Miss Blyden to Miss Lewis 100 
44. Mr. Blyden to Miss Lewis 102 
45. Continuation of Mr. Blyden to Miss Lewis 103 
46. Miss Rainsford to Miss Lewis 104 
47. Continuation of Miss Rainsford to Miss 
Lewis 106 
48. Continuation of Miss Rainsford to Miss 
Lewis 108
49. Continuation of Miss Rainsford to Miss 
Lewis 112 
50. Miss Blyden to Miss Lewis 116 
51. Miss Rainsford to Miss Lewis 118 
52. Continuation of Miss Rainsford to Miss 
Lewis 122 
53. Mr. Blyden to Miss Lewis 127 
54. Mr. Clavering to Miss Lewis 129 
55. Miss Blyden to Miss Lewis 130 
56. Miss Rainsford to Miss Lewis 132 
57. Miss Blyden to Miss Lewis 136 

[THE CONTENTS.] 
58. Mrs. Clavering to Miss Lewis 142
59. Miss Blyden to Miss Lewis 146
60. Mrs. Clavering to Miss Lewis 148
61. Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers 151
62. Continuation of Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers 154
63. Continuationon Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers 157 
64. Continuation of Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers 160 
65. Continuation of Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers 163 
66. Continuationof Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers 165 
67. Sir Harry Harwood to Mrs. Lewis 167 
68. Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers 168 
69. Continuation of Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers 170 
70. Continuation of Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers 172 
71. Continuation of Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers 174 
72. Continuation of Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers 177 
73. Continuation of Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers 179 
74. Lady Harwood to Miss Wellers 180
75. Miss Wellers to Lady Harwood 181
76. Lady Harwood to miss Wellers 185
77. Miss Moore to Lady Harwood 186
78. Lady Harwood to Miss Wellers 190
79. Continuation of Lady Harwood to Miss Wellers 197
80. Continuation of Lady Harwood to Miss Wellers 200 
81. Continuation of Lady Harwood to Miss Wellers 202 
82. Continuation of Lady Harwood to Miss Wellers 204
83. Continuation of Lady Harwood to Miss Wellers 207
84. Continuation of Lady Harwood to Miss Wellers 208 
85. Continuation of Lady Harwood to Miss Wellers 210

[THE CONTENTS.]
86. Continuation of Lady Harwood to Miss Wellers 216
87. Continuation of Lady Harwood to Miss Wellers 217 
88. Continuation of Lady Harwood to Miss Wellers 219 
89. Mrs. Clavering to Lady Harwood 220 
90. Lady Harwood to Miss Wellers 221 
91. Miss Wellers to Lady Harwood 226 
92. Continuation of Miss Wellers to Lady Harwood 227 
93. Mrs. Granville to Miss Wellers 228 
94. Miss Wellers to Lady Harwood 232 
95. Mrs. Granville to Lady Harwood 234 
96. Miss Wellers to Lady Harwood 235 
97. Lady Harwood to Miss Wellers 236 
98. Lady Harwood to Mrs. Lewis 237 
99. Conclusion 238 

JEMIMA. AND LOUISA. 
LETTER T. 
Mss courtlv to Miss Wellers. 
Y dear Fanny will no doubt wonder at my long Silence; but I hope, and trust, when she know’s the oc casion, she will readily excuse her Sriend : my aunt Kitty has been extrernely ill, and I was the only person she would Suffer to attend her; she well deserves my tenderesc rare, I have often experienced hers; she is now’ much better, and 1 have taken this my first opportunity of complying with the desire expressed in your last epistle. I cannot possibly explain the present situation of my affairs without giving you a kind of a history of my iifc (the best part of which you arc well acquainted with) from the time of my dear.. mamma’s death to this present Seventeenth year of my age. I believe the easiesc way of telling my story will be as to one who knew nothing of it. 
B • To 
2 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
To be truly Sensible of a mother’s value one must have'experienced the loss of her; this loss I Sustained in the eighth year of my age; she left a Son two years older than me? and a daughter one year younger; it was thought quite improper Sor me to remain with my father, it being a dangerous age to be left to Servants management; I was therefore Sent to School in a few months after my mother’s death, and my brother to an academy; my father could not think of parting with all his children at a time fso Soon alter the loss of his wife) So refblved on keeping my Sister Emily at home for Some months, and never after could bring himsels to a resolution of parting with her, which was the Source of my misfortunes : my absence, and her presence, made great difference in his affections between us; and as his love increased towards her, his dissike was more and more apparent to me. During the Space of eigh years my brother and I lived very unhappy at our Separate Schools, never Seeing my father but at the times of breaking up, and then our holidays were very much shortened, and our time Spent less agreeable than at School. 
• My brother was then Sent to the University to complete his education; and I being arrived at the age of sixteen, and generally 
thought 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 5 thought handsome, became very much the talk os the neighbouring gentlemen, Horatio was one who most distinguished himsels by his particular regard to me; he was an accomplished man, his age about twenty-three. I wul open my heart to my Fanny and hide nothing from her, I thought him more than agreeable and gave him the Small encouragement that lay in my power: the vigilance of my tutoress perhaps prevented my ruin, but I think she neither adfed a prudent or friendly part: without admonishing Horatio, or reproving me, she Sent to my Sather (as I have reason to imagine) a much worse account than I rleserved. 
I was one day musing on the unmerited indifference os my father toward me, when I was Surprised with the account of his being at the School, and wanting to Speak with me: I joysully obeyed the Summons, but how shall I describe the agony I was in, when, with a stern look and angry voice, he pronounced these words : “I have Sent Sor you, Jemima, “to acquaint you, that you are to leave this “place tomorrow morning, where your “next residence will be, I am not yet deter“ “Your imprudence has rendered it “necessary where ever you are, that you B 2 “should 
4 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
“should be under strict confinement; and, “I think, my own'house the properest place, “but that I tremble at the thoughts of “having you So near my Emily; she, has “hitherto, been a prudent, good, and du“ “child, and should you corrupt her, I “should then have no comfort in lite.” He was then pleased to order me from his presence; I complied, with the assistance of Mrs. Teachum, for I was almost unable to walk : when I vyas a little composed, I got my things in readiness for my departure, took leave of my School fellows, and the next morning Set out in a chariot my father Sent Sor me; I knew not where I was to be conveyed, but in a few hours Sound myself arrived at my father’^ gate: I was condudled to a chamber by my Sisters, Abigail, who sncer ingly told me, she would not insist on my paying garnish, then flirted out of the room, and locked the door. I Saw not my father nor Sister for a week. In a few days after my arrival, Mrs. Abigail told me, that at my sister’s intercession, my father permitted me to walk in the garden from six till eight in the morning; I was glad of that privilege, and rejoiced to find her attendance was excused; in one of those walks it was, that I 
met 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 5 met our friend Mils Brand, who contrived to give me an account os horatio’s behaviour on my being So Suddenly removed. I think, 
'indeed, he did not behave well to the father of her for whom he proseffed So great a regard. miss Brand Sent the next morning about Seven o’clock to know how our family did, her Servant came in at the back door through the garden, I met her, and inirrie diately wrote. a letter to thank that lady for her kindness to me, to inform her of the situation of my affairs, and to beg the favour of her to convey a note from m? to Eloratio; depending that she would, I enclosed it fun sealed) in my letter to her; the contents were to upbraid him for his haughty behaviour to my Father, and to charge him as he valued my esteem, to amend it for the future. Thus I insensibly drew myself into a private corre Ipondence, which, in any other cafe (than mine is at present) I should abhor. A few weeks after my return home, my uncle shell 1 dern died, and my aunt Kitty came to live I with my Father : she procured me the.liberty I, now' enjoy of making one in the family, 
I and the still greater liberty and pleasure of corresponding with you. My sister’s Sudden kindness, makes me fear she has Some mis ^ B 3 chievous 
6 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, chievous design against me. Pray let me hear from you often, and don’t think your agreeable epistles an ever tyre 
JEMIMA COURTLY, 
LETTER II 
Miss Wellers to Miss Courtly. 
My dear Jemima., 
YOU have many thanks due from me, for the obliging detail you have entered into of your affairs; the chief of which I find I was before acquainted with : I think the friendship that has always Subsisted between us should have entitled me to your earlier confidence; I sincerely pity you in your present situation, but however unkind your Father may be, it will not in the least excuse your transgreffing the rules of prudence or modesty. Consider, my dear Mima, how little knowledge you have of Horatio; you know himuo be gallant and polite, you have had but little opportunity, and perhaps Ids inclination, to examine his morals; which I greatly fear are faulty : if you regard yourself, 
. let 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 7 let no consideration whatever, draw you on to continue a correspondence which must be greatly detrimental to you. Mrs. sheldren’s company I look upon as a great happiness for you, she has more insiuence over your Father than any one I know; make it your study to oblige, and please her, she is really a good woman. Let me advisc you, make as little use of the liberty given you as possible, Seem always deliroiis of their company; and this, I hope, may be a means of establishing you in your father’s favour. Continue to let me hear how you go on. Mamma and I design waiting on Mrs. Sheldren when file is a little Settled in her new habitation, then I shall hope for the pleasure of a little conversation with you, which is much more satis fadfory than writing, for I think a thousand things I have not time to pen down. My rnother is a great confinement to me, as I am always with her, and she likes to have me read to her while she works; I make little use of my fingers but when I write to you: I have dropped all my other correspondents, but whilst life remains, I hope always to continue a friendship with my dear Jemima. I I have just heard your brother is coming to Courtly Hall, which gives me great pleasure, B 4 as 
8 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
as I am lure it must be a great Satisfaction to 
you. My time obliges me to conclude. 
I amy Jincerely yours., 
FRANCES WELLERS. 
L E T T E R III 
Miss jemlma'courtly to Miss wcllers. 
’HEN 1 shall be able to write anything to my dear Frances that may conduce to her entertainment I know not; but greatly fear it will not be in a short Space of time : my sister (or rather the daughter of my Father) Seems to have forgot her near affinity both to me and my brother; he is really an amiable young man; and (I have heard) very Sensible; but, I fear he will hardly be able to avoid the deep laid Schemes os Emily. I love him the better for the regard he always expresses for my much loved f iend. My inclination entirely coincides with your advice, concerning the correspondence between me and Horatio; but cannot at present break it oss, as I lately received from him (by miss Brand) a letter full of 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 9 
tenderness to me, but intimating Some, dreadful resolution, if my affairs should not Suddenly take Some more favourable turn. I will endeavour to take your advice in my behaviour to the family, but cannot pretend to like their company, when they make it So extremely disagreeable to, me. My aunt Kitty Vv'ill now be extremely glad to See your Mamma, and Self, whenever it Suits you; and, I may venture to affure you, there is nothing but a reconciliation with my Sather, could give me equal pleasure. Do not think it hard that your Mamma desires So much of your company; I sincerely wish I had a mother to read to. I should think myself guilty of the highest ingratitude, if I could ever renounce the friendship Subsisting between us, and think I have reason to depend on the continuance of it from you. Just as I had dispatched my last letter to you, I Saw my brother ride into the courtyard; I ran with open arms to receive him, and he expressed equal joy at the sight of me: my Father and Sister w’ere at church, which gave me an opportunity of Spending an hour in piivate conversation with my brother, a happiness which I Sear I shall not often enjoy. When they returned from church, and found us B 5 toge 
lo JEMIMA AND LOUISA, together, my Sister was in great confusion, yet forced a Seeming civility to us both; she Soon retired; I Saw her touch my father’s Sleeve, and he immediately followed her; they went but into the next parlour, where we heard them frequently mention our names with great warmth : they returned in about half an hour, and my sister desired me to take a walk with her in the garden; she kept me there conversing on different Subjects near two hours; on my return, I found that my drawers had been Searched, but could not guess for what; it gave me great appre hehsion, but little concern, as I never kept any letters there that I did not choose should be Seen. I then Sat down to examine the contents of a letter from miss Brand, which I had in my pocket; I had just finished it, and was going to read one (that was inclosed in hers) Srom Horatio, as my Father entered the room. Snatched it out of my hand, and vent downstairs, without Speaking a word. It is impossible for me to describe, or you to conceive, the terror 1 was in; and what will be the event Heaven only knows: I fear it will be a more strict confinement; will therefore beg of you to suspend writing till you hear further from the unfortunate 
JEMIMA COURTLY, 
ll P.S.. 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. it 
P. S. inclosed you have a letter from miss Brand to me, which I think a very odd one. 
LETTER IV 
Miss Brand to Miss Jemina Courtly. 
Dear Miss Courtly 
I HAVE Sent you another letter from Horatio. What a fine thing it is to have Such a lover! I wonder your Papa shud ob gedl to the man for his want of fortin, espe shily when he can give you anus: Horatio came to Southeast me the other day, and wrot the letter at my house : I ashure you miss Mima, he is a very gallant man, and can make a grate many fine fpcches; to be shure he is a pa shonate man; but, I believe, a woman of equal Spirit might live tolerably happy with him : I have allways herd a very bad car letter of him; but every boddy has Sum eni mys. Pray, take care your Papa Sees none of my letters, burn them as Soon as you have read them. You Say, you are very .careful] of horatio’s letters, I think, you need not give yourself any truble about them i for, I don’t beleeve, your Father iu b 6 Spedts 
12 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
Speds you corispond with him. When you See miss Wellers, pray, give my love to her; I don’t sopose you have Seen her laitly, Sor she Sems to be a lady who is desireus of contracting new frendships, and sorsaking old ones; among which is. 
Tour humkel Servant, 
Marv Brand 
L E T T E R V 
Miss Emily courtly to Miss Brand. 
ONCE more, my dear Molly, I have got miss Courtly into her chamber; where I Sltall keep her, till I find it more compatible with my views, to have her come into my father’s way, which, I do not yet design. My Scheme of horatio’s letter Succeeded beyond my expectation; the Old Man went up and caught it in her hand, just going to Solace herself with the contents: he believes my brother brought it, and is vastly inraged against him; I shall take care to prevent their coming to an eclairciffement; I have Sent 30u five guineas, would have i Sent 
JEMIMA AKD LOUISA. 13 Sent you more, but cannot at this time Spare it. these commotions make the Old Man horrid cross, as well to mc as to everybody else, but must be content to bear Some inconveniency Sor the profit it will yield hereafter. You ask me that stupid question. Why I had her brought homei should think you might easily See it was to exasperate my Father, and Sor the better execution of my project. I would have you to continue to write to her, and to Send horatio’s letters, always insinuate what you can against miss Wellers, who is a great obstrudion to me,, she is as King Richard Says, “a Spider that “I would have Some friend to tread upon.” Mrs. Sheldren is much better: she I fear will prove a great encumbrance to me, not that I have reason to fear anybody, as I have got So much the ascendancy over my Father. As civility costs me nothing, I take care to show as much of it as I can, both to my brother and sister; for by that means I shall be less suspeded. I will now give you Some general rules for your conduct when you write to Jemima; appear to be very much in her interest, and don’t Scruple to Speak against me, but not too much of that: endeavour to sting her as much as poshble without appearing to design it; Speak well of Horatio, for I would 
have 
14 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. hayo her continue to like him : but when yoiii See Horatio, endeavour to lessen his opi nioh of my sister, but persuade him to keep up the correspondence, with her, and give her no reason to think he loves her less than ever; this part you must manage with great discretion or you will ruin all : you must constantly Speak well of my brother; but at the same time endeavour to give her a Suspicion os him. I think this is all I have to Say to you at present, only, I desire you will let me have a copy os your next letter to Mima ^ and to give me a particular account of your interviews with Horatio. I have now So much business upon my hands with providing for the family, keeping my father in proper humour, and disposing of my brother and Sister, that I have Scarce time to write to my dear miss Brand what is necessary to the happiness of her 
affefhonate Friend 
Emily Courtly 
LET 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 15 
LETTER VI 
Miss Jemima Courtly to Miss Wellers* 
Dear Miss Wellers^ 
I A M indeed confined to my chamber as I expected, but still write, in hopes of finding Some method to convey my afflidions to you; the pity of a Sincere friend is a great alleviation in misfortunes: they still treat me with civility, who I am obliged to Sor it, I don’t as yet know. I was reading in my chamber when the bell rung Sor dinner; I was preparing to go down when Mary entered the room; she had a napkin hung over her arm, which she Spread upon the table, and then told me. My Papa desired I would not come out of my room till I had further orders from him; she then mentioned what was provided for dinner, and desired to know what I would choose : that I might not appear obstinate, I named what I chose, which was brought me up after they had done with it in the parlour. At five o’clock my aunt Kitty came up; I was writing when she came in Some thoughts that occurred to me out of Fop's ejfay on Man; she desired to 
see 
i6 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
See whit I was employing myself upon; I immediately gave her the paper, she did but just cast her eyes upon it, and returned it; Saying, That is well my, dear Jemima, shad you always employed your pen in So good a manner, you would not now have been forbid your father’s presence : my heart was So full I could not answer one word; she paused for forge time expecting me to Speak : I recovered myself a little, and then ashed her. Why I was; and how long I might expect to be thus treated? she ashed me. Was it not Sufficient provocation to my Father my corresponding with a man he had absolutely forbid me ever to think of more. I told her, that had my liberty been continued me, I would have broke off that correspondence; that Some circumstances made it absolutely necessary for me to adt as I had dor e; she then entreated, I would acquaint her with the whole affair as it had passed between us; and if she found I was sincere, she would continue my friend, as she had always been : her looks were then So extremely tender and kind, and her request made with Such ear nestness, that I could not refuse it, but srank ly told her the beginning of our acquaintance, the contents (as well as I could recollect) of every letter that had passed between us; she 
Seemed 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 17 
Seemed vastly pleased that I had not given him So much encouragement as she apprehended I had; and asked me, if I had any of his letters by me; I could not place So much confidence in any one (but my dear Fanny) as to part with them into their hands; ib answered, I had always destroyed them as Soon as read : she then asked me, if I would copy a letter she should pen me to Horatio; if I would, she would endeavour to persuade my Father, that I might always bear her company; which, I hope, continued she, will not be very disagreeable to you : I told her, it would be my greatest happincss; that nothing should be wanting on my part to oblige her; but that I could not help thinking it a very hard case, and a very great injustice done to my character in the world, that my younger sister should be mistress of my father’s family, whilst I was to think it a favour, to be allowed the privilege of a cat in creeping about the least frequented parts of the house; she Said, d'hat would not be her case when I was her companion; for, that I should visit and receive visits from all her acquaintance : and, as for the management of the family my Sister had been used to it; and 1 having Spent my time at School, could not he Supposed 

i8 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. posed to understand housekeeping; and the less I had to do, the less I could disoblige in. She feared I had Some unmerited enemies; but, is I wrote the letter she would give me, and continue to do as she would advise me, which should always be (to the best of her judgement) for my advantage, she did not doubt of establishing me in my father’s favour. I returned her my sincere thanks, and promised a cheerful compliance with all she should advise me to do. She then ordered tea and coffee in her dressing room. My Father and sister were gone out on horse backc When the Servant told her tea was ready, she took my hand, and led me in where my brother was sitting; he rejoiced greatly to See me released from my confinement : my aunt told him, she had found in me all the compliance she could wish; he joined with her in giving me comfort and advice. After tea, as the weather was very fine, my brother proposed our walking in the wilderness; my aunt agreed to accompany us, but walked at Some distance to give us an opportunity of Some private conversation, which she rightly judged would be agreeable to both : our time was short, we made the best use of it we could, by Settling a method 
of 
Y JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 19 
f of corresponding with him through you (which, I hope, you will not object to.) I, ■ fear your goodness will make me too intrud ing, when I am, pray do not Scruple to tell me So; we have never been allowed to write to each other since I left School: he will convey this to you, as he designs riding over to See your Mamma and you Some day this week. I have thought of a method to continue to correspond with you : my chamber window, you know, looks to the road, Williams, the walking confedlioner, comes by once a week, and takes your house in his way; by a little basscet fixed to a long string, which I can easily get, I can convey any Small parcel in or out of the window. You must Speak to him of it, I think we may depend upon his fecresy, especially after he has brought one letter (which, no doubt, he may be bribed to) as it would be the ruin of him to consess he had ever done any Such thing. 
Whilst we was walking, a Servant came and told my aunt, that my Father and sister was returned; we immediately went in the back way, and they lest me at my chamber door. 1 am determined to wtite anything my aunt shall didfate to Horatio. I had my Supper Served in the Same manner as my dinner. 
20 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, ner. This morning early my aunt brought me the letter I was to copy, and putting it in my hand. Said, I hope you continue in the Same resolution as when we parted last night; she did not wait for an answer, but leit me immediately. The following is the copy of what she wrote. 
To HORATIO GRANVILLE, esq; 
Sir, 
I AM Sorry I have made myself So ridiculous, as to correspond with you in a clandestine manner : I was not then So Sensible as I now am, how disagreeable it was to my Father and family: the unmerited kindness I have lately been treated with, induces me to take the following resolution, which is, that on any account whatever will I again put pen to paper for your persisal; nor, will I ever read further than the direction of any letter you may by Some unaccountable method have put into my hands: you, I think, can have nothing of consequence to Say concerning me; but, if you have, it must be to my Father, as I here Solemnly declare, I never more will, in any shape whatever, think of you but as my Father shall direct;; I am certain, will always consider the happiness of, 
Jemima Courtly, 
JEMIMA AND Louisa. 21 
I have not yet had resolution to give my aunt the copy directed for Horatio; that Solemn declaration I cannot relish : if I write it. What can absolve me from keeping it? Can I answer, That weakness may not tempt me to break my oath, for Such it is? I hope, my aunt was not the didtator of those artful lines; Sor then she would not be that friend I have always thought her: stis a mean artifice, to draw me in to take an oath without my knowledge; but let the consequence be what it will, that letter to Horatio I never will write. My brother’s horses I See are ready; I am to drop this out of the window, I hope he will get it Safe, then do I not doubt your having it. Do not fail thinking of the confedtioner, as my brother leaves us Soon, and I shall then have no method of letting you Sympathise in my distresses, if the window Scheme fails. Adieu; may you be happier than 
Phur affefiionatey 
Jemima Courtly. 
LET 
22 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
LETTER VII 
Miss Wellesrs to Miss courtly. 
My dear Jemima 
IS N AT C H a few moments, to acknowledge the receipt os your letter by Mr. Courtly. I am delighted with the Scheme of conveying our letters, will not fail to apply to Williams; it is really hard to be reduced to Such methods to write to a brother and a female Sriend. You shall hear Sully from me very Soon; but can’t at present add more, than that, 
I am i fmcerely ycurs^ 
Frances Wellers. 
LETTER VIII 
js^mifs Wellers to Miss Courtly. 
IT provokes me beyond expression, to think, that you, my dear Jemima, should be So Scandalously confined. I wish you could be relieved by pity, as you have mine sincerely. Treat you with civility! they must 
be 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA 23 be worse than brutes if they did not, when you Submit yourself So tamely to their tyrannical wills! Mary, I fear, is a creature of your sister’s; if you could bribe her to your interest it would be very useful : feel your way carefully before you give her anything of consequence; buy her to convey Some tristing letter to me, wherein be careful you mention nothing that may cause any sufpi cion, was she to betray you. Your aunt, I believe, is your friend, be careful to oblige her, and to continue her good opinion of you: I need not repeat to you the influence (Superior to any one else) she has over your Father. I think, you could not have done better than you did, in telling Mrs, Sheldren ingenuously your affairs : the pleasure of her company, and your restoration to liberty, should, I think, induce you to write that letter to Horatio. You Surely do not perfectly understand the contents of it, you there are to promise, never to do that which consistent with your happiness never can be done: Surely, my dear, you do not imagine you could, without the approbation of your Father ever think of marrying Horatio ^ and, as to your corresponding with him (without that prospedb) I am too certain of your good sense, to supposc, you would ever think of 
conti 
24 JEMIMA At^d LOUISA, continuing it; by all means, let me persuadl you, to write that letter immediately, ani give it to your aunt. You are now disgracefully treated, but no one blames you; on the contrary, they pity you, and consider, tha you erred besore you were capable of judgi ing Sor yoursels; but if you persevere, yoi will then have all to blame, none to pit) you. What I am going to mention is not with any wishes of your father’s death, but by course os nature, he must be expected to die before you; and is you oblige him in this, and establish yoursels (by your conduct) in his opinion, you will, in all probability, have it in your own power to live many happy years with Horatio, if you continue to love each other, which, give me leave to tell you, is a question : for, as my mother tells me, Such childish passions are not the most lasting! and if you should alter your minds, i How will you bless the hands that prevented! your being for ever chained together! by your compliance. How will your sister’s| views be disappointed! that, methinks, should Spur you on to adt with becoming resolution. Mil's brand’s letter, is indeed, as you observe, a very odd one; be caresul os her, 1 there luspedt a Snake in the grass: there’s a great deal of low art contained in it; her observation 

JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 25 tion os horatio’s being a gallant man, is thrown out to make you jealous, which would greatly concern me, as ’ds a certain sign of love: then her Saying, He was a passionate man, is as extraordinary, she has Some meaning in it; his my firm opinion she is in love with him hersels; 1 am convinced fiie is; her kind advice to you to be caresul os Iter letters and careless os his as not being luspeded, was you to be Searched, there is equal danger of his being found as hers. I really believe she is in league with your Sister, there is Several very suspicious circumstances, one in particular: she has lately bought many things she has not an income Sor; nay, more, she was Seen at church, with the diamond sing your Sister used to wear on her first finger, you know, ’tis a remarkable good one, and, I am Sure, would not have been given her, wdthout Some material consideration : certainly, a Scheme, for her to'send a letter from Horatio, the day your brother came home, and then Miss Emily was to coiitrive to have a Search made, that it might be imagined he was the conveyer of it. Mils Brand is desirous of insinuating my making new friendships and forsaking old ones, I hope, I need not assure you of the contrary; her desire is to Icssln your esteem C Cr 
26 JEMIMA; AND LOUISA. 
Sor me, that you may be quite destitute. I have heard she says many ssighting things of you; and this I know, she was the first that blazed about your confinement, and intimated, that care was taken but just in time; she had Sears stwas rather too late, as she thought you had gone great lengths before you was, suspedled; then she pretends to be vastly concerned, and professes great love for you, and regard Sor the honour of your family. Its along while since I have Seen her, she is a person not at all pleasing to my Mamma, which I am very glad of, for if she was, I must Submit to her company. I will now endeavour to divert you with Some of our neighbourhood conversation, they Say miss Preston is going to be married toi'a man immemsely rich, but Such a miser, that he almost starves himself; he is not above four foot five inches high; So excessively thin, that you may See through him; has had but one coat these twenty years; his usual diet is water gruel and bread; he never has any other liquor in his house than water; if he has any fragments of bread left, he canst trust it to locks like other misers, but carries it about him : does it not Surprise you, that So gay a woman as miss Preston, should be able to bear the thoughts of Such a wretch as.drimes, 
(for 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 27 (for that is his name) I can Scarce believe it, but am told, stis really to be a match very Soon; whatever be his inducement I cannot guess; I cannot suppose, that Chip can be susceptible of love, but stis that is the cafe it Seems. Your brother tells me. Mils Emily treats him with great civility, more, indeed, than he could wish Srom her: our Servant will be Sent tomorrow to your house, with a message from Mamma and Self to Mrs. shel dren and the miss courtly’s, that we design ourselves the pleasure of waiting on them that afternoon, if agreeable: I hope we shall be received, as I long much to See you, and to know how Mr. Courtly got home, he went very late Srom our house. We are to dine today at Mr. preston’s, I shall hear from miss Sally the particulars of the affair between her sister and Grimes; I shall believe what I hear Srom one of the family; I wish he may be there. Mamma rings for breakfast, I shall have no opportunity of writing again : tomorrow Thomas shall convey this by Some Stratagem or other, he is a clever fellow, and I dare Say, will get it Safe into .your hands; if he does riot succeed, he is to bring .it back to ’ 
Tour affefbignate.y 
Frances Wellers. 
C 2 LET 
28 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
LETTER IX 
Miss Jemima Courtly to Miss Wellers. 
My dear Miss Wellers., 
Thanks to the dexterity of your Servant for your obliging letter; before I begin to answer the contents, I must tell you how he conveyed it to me : I was sitting alone in my chamber, and heard Something hit against my window, I did not regard the first time, but hearing it again and again repeated, I got up, and close under the window Saw Thomas, he did not wait for the string which 1 had prepared against Monday, but V ith one jirk throwed it clear in at the window, and instantly rode off. I paused but to fasten ray side of the door which I had not the thought to do before; I then opened and read your kind advice, which, I am Sorry to tell you, I think is reasonable and right, and Sear, I shall never have resolution to copy that letter to Horatio; 1 allow your arguments are very just, that I could never think of marrying without my father’s consent; though my mother’s fortune was fettled on younger children, yet the disposition 
JEMIMA AND ldllsa. 29 tion of it lest So entirely to my Father, chat I am sensible, he may give my Sister Emily nine thousand nine hundred and ninety-nine pound?, and the remaining one pound he may think Sufficient Sor my portion; but, if I should ever be So happy as to gain his con icnt, or by any accident become mistress of myself, what could it avail me, when in all probability, Horatio, in consequence of my iblemm declaration, would have given over all thoughts of me, and very likely engage his affections to one more deserving than myself, who, would not renounce him Sor ever; to obtain the poor satissa<5lion of creeping about a house, and' yifiting with an aunt: no; it shall never be, whilst I have the satis fadtion of conveying my letters to you, and remain Satisfied of horatio’s affections, I cannot be truly miserable. I cannot think of having anything to say to Mary, as that creature has always behaved with So much insolence to me; nor do I See any use it could be of: she is So Selfish a creature, good nature would have no influence over her; and as to money, I need not tell my Fanny I have none, as had I, her Servant should not have gone unrewarded for his trouble and fidelity. I cannot think miss Brand means me any harm; she is a vulgar low bred wo c 3 man. 
so JEMIMA AND LOUISA, man, and there’s an oddity in her letters ij cannot well make out; however, your opinion, shall prevent my trusting her, or having anything os consequence more to Say to her. They continue to treat me as usual, only I see less of my aunt; she has Several times aficed me for the letter I unguardedly promised to write; she tells me, stis entirely out of her power to replace me in my father’s opinion, without I consent entirely to give up Horatio: I make fair promises that I will not write to or See him, but that will not do: I lament greatly to her, that I have not the liberty of writing to you, or my brother, when he leaves us, which will be Soon. I write full of the hopes of Seeing you tomorrow, but we, perhaps, may not have an opportunity for any private conversation : pray, desire your Mamma, will insist on Seeing me. My sister never favours me with her company; I have the liberty of walking in the garden when my Father is out: I find myself So Siridlly watched when I; go downstairs, which I cannot do without first ringing my bell, when my goaleress comes, and makes as much racket at the door as if she •was turnkey to Newgate. 
Yesterday, I met Emily in the wilder ness, we chopt upon one another in the cross 
walk; 
J E MI M A AND LOUISA 3 e walk; conscience stung her! she turned directly back, and ran as hard as her legs could .carry her, I walk’d on quite composed, I .shave not answered Mist brand’s letter that; I Sent you, since that I have received another j more unaccountable than the first, which I shall enclose : I think it is better I Snould entirely break off the correspondence with her, and take no Surther notice than in a Sew lines: tell her. That I am obliged to her Sor the trouble she has taken, but that I am determined never to write to, or hear Srom Horatio again; this I am resolved upon. IS you will oblige me in one thing, stis a Savour which I will never desire you to repeat. I cannot bear that Horatio Should imagine me ungrateful, which must be the cafe, is I discontinue wtiting to him So abruptly. The favour then I have to ask is, to convey a letter Srom me to him; I will desire you to Seal it when .you have read it, and is there is anything imprudent in it, return it me again, and I will write anything you shall pen, that may tend to asture him of my regard : do not deny your Jemima this one Savour, you are always usecl to oblige me. I shall take an opportunity to Slip this unobserved into your hand tomorrow. OI how I long for the time! How glad shall I be to See you! yet C 4 dreads 
32 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, dread the sight of my father; perhaps, I shall not be to dine with you, only come down when he is not there : is I should dine below, I know it will vex you, to See Emily lupercede me at the head os the table. Why should no: my aunt take that place is I am unfit Sor it.? Vfhat does your Mamma think of me.? I hope, I have still her good opinion, that will give me great Satisfashion. I should be glad, is an opportunity should offer, of Seeing my brother besore he goes, but greatly doubt it. I need not desire you would justisy my character III all companies where you hear it condemned. I think, it was very cruel in miss Brand, to hear what she Says she did, and not contradi(5l: it. I loose my appetite excessively, but at prescnt find no inconveni endy from it at all; I really believe it may be better, as 1 use So little exercise. You are very kind in writing me the occurrences of the neighbourhood: what you tell me of miss Preston greatly Surprises me, she certainly trusts to her Spirit to conquer his co vetousness; I have heard much talk of that Grimes, my Sister Emily is very fond of him; I have often heard her Speak in his praise to my Father; Surely then, he cannot be So very covetous as is reported; if what she Says is true, that she is Sure he would 
n arry 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 33 : ■ marry any agreeable woman with a thousand. or fifteen hundred pounds. Pray let me hear how affairs go on between these extraordinary lovers, and when the wedding is to be consummated. 
I read a great deal in my p re Sent confinement, have no great variety, but the books I have are well chosen, Such as may well bear reading over and over again. Pope and a'd dison, can never tyre. I dress myself every, day, as if I was to dine below, or See company, and am determined to continue it as long as my clothes will last; I think it helps to amuse me and keep up my Spirits: you cannot imagine how easy I make myself, considering my Situation. My paper is full; adieu till tomorrow, when I shall have the. pleasure tff giving you this, from 
Pcttr affeohonate^. 
Jemima Courtly,. 
LED 

54 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
LETTER X 
Miss Brand to Emily Courtly. 
Dear Miss Ernilyy 
IWOUD not So long have deserd writing to you, and acknoliging the receit os your kind present, had I not wated for an intervew with Horatio, who I Saw the day besore yesterday; as Soon as he com in he inquired after Miss Courtly, I faind a grate deed of consern at what I was going to tell him; but at last made shist to utter, I am Sorry So fine, a gentleman shud fling away his love on a lady who regards it So little; he Seemd in great Surpries, and ask’d me the meaning of what I Said: I repeated. That I was Sory he should throw away his love on a lady that regarded it so little, as not only to receve the adreses of another man, but even to make advances to him, as I was well ashured Miss Courtly had done. He asked me. Who the man was ^ I pretended to know who it was, but to conseel it Sor fear of consequences; he then very calmy Said, miss Brand, I have So good an opinion of you, as to think you wold not tell a faisfity, knowing it to be Such; but this I must tell you. That 
if 
JEMIMA ANO LOUISA. 35 is angels Swore ic, I wold not beleeve my Jemima wold be faulse to me, or that there is a man in the world for whom she would throw of her moddesty So Sar, as to make advances to him. I was vastly consounded at this unexpeckted behavor, but had just sense enuff'to Say, That it must Sertinly be a ma lishous report, that I could not think she: would give the incuragement to any other man that she had to him; he replyd, per ■haps. Madam, there may not be many men that would study So much to deserve it as I have done,, and ever shall: he went away im .mediately, and left me, as you may imagine,, very ill Satisfied, with the effect: of his visit,, of which, I think, 1 have given you a full account. I can’t think, why you wold make him jealous, and dissike your sister, if she is. not to know it? You will, perhaps, think me very stupid, but I reely can’t imagine. t shall take care strictly to obsei ve the iiostruc tions given in your last: Sure, never was so good a head and heart met together as inc yroa. I am not Sorry, that your Father is So,. ill umerm, as he will be the easier work’d' upon, I hear your brother is to leave yoy; very Soon, Good shows for us! I know Horatio will not be abell to stay from me long,. 1 expect him Soon making abundance of 
C 6. 
apo, -. 
36 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, apologees for his abrupt leaving me; I will send you as pertickelar an account of his next visit as I have done of thiis: in the mean time, you may imply yourself in reading a copy of my letter to your sister, which I have not Sent to her, nor shall, till I hear how you like it. Pray, when you have lea sure, write to me as formmerly, Sor it is a long time fense I have heard from you, excepting on the present bisness; I beleeve I had forgot to tell you, that I have inclosed my letter to your sister. You need not have made any excuse about the five guineas, I think it is a very hansom present, and shall always confider it more as your goodness, then the desart of. 
Tour affetcjjoonate Friend 
and very humble Servant 
Mary Brand. 
P. S. The account of Mr: brewin’s conversation with me is very true, but have improv’d it a little to plage her. 
LET 
JEMIMA AND LOUSIA. 37 
letter XI 
mt Brand to Mijs Jemima Courtly. 
"Dear Miss 
I Wonder much that I have not heerd from you in anser to my last letter, when it contand Such agreeable news. Horatio, I beleeve, loves you to destrackshon, he is So consernd he has not heerd from you laitly, and So am I, for I do think he deserves a return of his love, even from the finest woman in the world; and, you may depend upon your letters coming Safe through my hands. I think, you shud take care of your Sister, she Seems an artfull kind of a gal, and, I beleeve, has no grate regard for you : 
I realy beleeve, miss Fanny Wellers is of her partey, they are very fond of each other, and miss Wellers takes very little notis of me, because she knows me to be a friend to you and Horatio; I think you wold make a very fine cupple, and wish your marage was as near as Mr. Grimes and miss preston’s is, it wold promis to be a much more happy one then theres does at present. Your brother’s company must be very agreabel to you, he is a very good and very clever young gentle 
38 JEMIMA AND lou rsa. man, and Seames to have a very grate asexl shon for you; but I would not have you trust him with any Secrets, Sor fear he shud| betray you. I shud be very glad to See youj at my house, and beg, that in your next ietterj you will fix your time eather^to come, to me, or Sor me to wait on you. I am very uneasyl .at the carreckter you have in the town; l will give you a pertickalar account of a con versashon I had to days ago with Mr. Brewin, I met him at Mrs. tagg’s, the milliner’s; 'Said he. What a fine peace of work there is at Mr. courtly’s, have you heard of it miss, Brand! I Said, I had the honour of an acquaintance with the family, and knew that you was in Sum dishcultys at present, but hop’d you would Soon git over them; but I had not heerd of anything cxtraornery that ■had happend lately. Why then Said he, ni tell you : The eldest miss came from •school Some time ago; her Father was ob leged to fetch her from thence, because she had a likeistg to a good for nothing, young fellow, of no Sortin, who, thqy thought wold run away with her, for She was allways ■a bold young hu'ffey: when she came home,, he still folow’d her, and site contrived frequent meatings with him, which, when her father found her ouu he, lock’d her up;,, but 
locks. 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 4* her when she was reading it; I fancy, your invitation must shock her a little, - as she will be obliged to Set down tamely, and write to you, .She canst come to See you, because she is confined; nor can desire your company, because she has only a chamber, and that not to receive company in : her knowing the bad character she has in the world will be very Serviceable to me, as it will make her unwilling to appear in public, were she permitted. I think, I may now Say, I have her under my thumb, for she cannot stir without my leave, though she does not know it; I believe, I shall be able to manage her very well, notwithstanding my aunt’s great kind ness to her. She cannot possibly now correspond with miss Wellers, or anybody but you, without my knowledge. One thing mortifies me exceedingly, which is. That Mr. Grimes is going to be married to miss Preston; I don’t know whether you ever Saw him, he is a hideous creature, entirely calculated to make the married state unhappy: I had once a thought, of getting my Father to offer him my sister with about a thousand pound, and i’ll be hang’d if he would not have accepted her; for he might keep a woman in his manner for fifty years with half that Sum; I must now look out Some where 
else 
40 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, 
LETTER XII 
Miss Emily courtly to Miss Brand. 
My dear Molly, 
idispatch this and your letter to Minia, | with the utmost expedition, that no timej may be lost before she has it. I approve of it vastly; you are, really, a more notable; contriver than I imagined. I will the first opportunity write to you more fully. 
I am, yours. 
Emily Courtly. 
LETTER XIII 
Continuation of Miss Emily Courtly. to Miss Brand. 
Bear Molly, 
I MUST again assfure you, I am vastly pleased with your letter to Jemirfia: you have, indeed, observed my instructions to a tittle, but done it much better than I could possibly expect: I should like to have Seen t her 
JEMIMA AND l.duisa. 43 
L E T T E R XIV 
• Mil's Brand to Miss E. courtly. 
Many thanks are dew to you, my dear miss Emily, as well for your Sormer favours as .your last kind preasant, which is as good as new, 1 must likewise thank you for your approbation of my con duckt, and for your oblegeing inquiry into my history; but will only Say, That you must neffesaryly know the beds of it; and as for partickalars, I seer, they will tend only to lesson me in your opinion, as I have ser tinly been gilty of grate imprudences in my time: another reason I have for refusing your kind request, which is. That I am a very bad Spellar and no extraunary writer, and have a grate dissike to that impliment; I depend you will not take.amis rny resusal, now you know my reasons for it. 1 have: receeved a very od letter from miss .Courtly, which I shall inclose in this; she takes a verry formal .leave, and Seams to be displeascd at everything i’ve done. I do not intend to anser her unless you advise it : I fear she suspedts us, but it matters not much, as I immagin her bisness is pritty well done; and as in her 
con 
42 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. else for a husband for her; but. Sear, fiiall never meet with his Sellow : I have at present a little Spare time upon my hands, will employ it in giving you his picture;; I have altered my mind; for is you have never Seen him, you must Soon, for he goes' constantly every day to miss preston’s. I Send you this letter by the gardener, and with it, a blue and white striped lute string Suit of clothes, which was my mother’s; she never wore it but twice, and none of our Servants have ever Seen it. 1 have osten heard you fajf, That there were Some passages in your life, that you thought .would furnish a his tory, (as we shall have a good deal of leisure lime) I wish you would exercise it in giving me an account of them; I Sancy it would be very.eatertaining, as, are all your letters to. 
touraiffefuonate Friend 
Emilv Courtly. 
1. E T 
JEMIMA AND I.DUISA. 43 
LET E R XIV 
Miss Brand to Miss E. Courtly. 
M' 
‘ANY thanks are dew to you, my dear miss Emily, as well for your esormer favours as .your last kind preasant, * which is as good as new; I must likewise thank you fori your approbation of' rny cons'duckt, and for your oblegeing inquiry into my history; but will only Say, That you must neffesaryly know the beds of it; and as for partickalars, I seer, they will tend only to lesson me in your opinion, as I have fer tinly been gilty of grate imprudences in my time: another reason I have for refusing your kind request, which is. That I am a very bad Spellar and no extraunary writer, and have a grate dissike to that impliment; I depend you will not take.amis my refusal, now you know my reasons for it. 1 have receeved a very od letter from miss .Courtly, which I shall inclose in this; she takes a verry formal .leave, and Seams to be displeased at everything i’ve done. I do not intend to anser her unlds you advise it: I fear she suspedts us, but it matters not much, as I immagin her bisness is pritty well done; and as in her 
con 
44 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, finement she can not jestify her sels or hurt] us. I am Sorry for your disapintment in' Mr. Grimes, but don’t let that vex youjj had your sister marrid him, she void have' bin purely out os the way to be Sure; but that may be contrived still, there may be men enust Sound to Suit your purpus, if you can bring your father into it; and if not, I think, you may do well enuff with her in her chamber, till her father’s deth, or till you are marrid; but. What must be done with her then? I suppose, You wold not have her in your house? and to leave her with your Father wold never do. Now 1 think of it, I should like her for my boarder very well; but all this is a distent prospe6t, I think, we have affairs at present in a very good situation; but if thare is anything more to be done, I beg, you will beleeve, that you may allways command, 
tour most ohlegedy 
and obedient humhel servank 
Mary Brand. 
LET 
J L m1 M A AND L O U 1s A. 45 
LETTER XV 
Miss Jemima Courtly to Miss Brand. Miss Brand, 
IW R I T E this letter, to thank you for all your former adls of friendship to me; but cannot think of ever writing to you again but on indifferent Subjects. I do not intend to continue a correspondence with Horatio : I cannot bear any refiedlions on miss Wellers (who has always been So extremely kind to me) or my relations, and your two last letters have been filled with invedlives against them: the ill opinion Some people entertain of me gives me little concern, as I have no hopes of Soon, if ever, appearing again in the world; but this I must tell you, I think it would better have become one who professed their klf my friend, to have justified my character when she heard it aspersed, than to have pretended ignorance of it; as all the country knowing your intimacy in our family, will construe your pretended ignorance of my affairs, as a confession os what I am accused of. I will not trouble you any further, than to repeat my thanks for the kind services you have done, the unfortunate, 
Jemima cocrtly. 
si JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
LETTER XVI 
Mss Jemima Courtly to Miss Wellers'. 
'HAT can be more mortisying, than to think, that yesterday, the Same hjo.use contained, my dear Sunny Wellers’' and me, and that we fiaould be deprived the pleasure of Seeing each other; stis Some alleviation, to think, by your trusty servant’s caresulness, you have my last letter, with that to Horatio inclosed; let me conjure you, as you value my happiness, to convey it as Soon as possible. As your Servant has Such frequent opportunities of coming this way, and is not the least sus pedled, I think, it is better you should not apply to the walking confedlioner. I must stow give you Some account of yesterday : In the morning, Mary, when she brought my breaksast, told me. That Mrs. and Mils Wellers, were coming to dine with us; I look’d Surprised; and answered, Not with us, Mary; I fear, I shall not be of the Company? she made no answer. I Saw nor heard of my aunt or Sister the whole day. I dressed myself better than usual about twelve twelve o’clock, in expectation every moment j alter 
JEMIMA'AND LOUISA. 47 aster you came, of bang Summoned downstairs; but it was not So : about three o’clock, in'came my goaleress, with the appurtenances of my Solitary dinner. I ashed her; If the family dinner was ready she told me. They were just Sat down to table in the hall; I then pushed the table Srom me, and burst into tears; she brought up Something for my dinner, but I did not eat a morsel, indeed, I could not; she left the things standing, though 
1 ordered them out. I desired she would carry a message from me to you, to inquire after Mrs. Wellers and yourself; and beg of her, to desire leave of my Father, that I might be permitted to See you for a little time, in presence (if he thought proper) of my Sister; she had the complaisance to hear me out, and then told my, She was Sorry she could not oblige me, but that she had been ordered, never to carry messages about the house; and, that she valued her place, and our family too much, to do anything to disoblige. I was So provok’d, I Said no more. When she left the room, I fastened my(elf in, and Spent the remainder of the day in laying on the bed, and looking out of the window, to See you pass by in your way home; when I Saw Thomas turn out of the road to my window, I immediately put a 
waier 
48 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, wafer into the letter for you, and throwed u. the Sash; he came directly under, and caugi the letter. I did not enclose the letter fron< miss Brand, that I mentioned to you, buti is now inclosed in this. Pray, let me havi the particulars of your reception by our fa mily. IS you See Horatio, pray, tell him He must not expect to hear any more fron me as yet, and press his leaving this part o the country Sor Some time. My brother leaves us tomorrow, as he has just Signist by a note fiipt under my door: he tells me, He will come into my chamber when tli; family are a bed, by a key he has had made to the door, which he will leave with me, case of any emergency; this pleases me much, I will make up this letter for him to convey to you; as I am Sure, he will not leave this part of the country without ssrll visiting Swinderby Abby. I must beg you to contrive Some way of letting me have a little paper and a Sew pens, ink I have in plenty. 1 long for twelve o’clock, as that hour will bring my brother to my room, God grant w: may not be found out! my sister is just gone out on horseback with niy Father; perhaps, I may now be favoured with a visit from .my aunt; I hope, I shsil not; for, I really, am not well enough to See 
her, 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 49 her, my Spirits are quite fluttered. I will write no more now, but endeavour to com pose myself a little. Adieu; believe me, 
Affeflionately yoursy 
• Jemima Courtly. 
LETTER XVII 
Miss Wellers to Miss courtly. 
INDEED, my dear Jemima, you could not be more mortified at our not Seeing each other than I was. My Mamma is quite angry with all your family, except your brother. I will begin, and give you the particulars os our visit: When the first compliments were over, we directly alked for you, and expressed Some Surprise, that you were So long coming to us; and ashed, miss Emily, IS you knew we was come? site an swered, She, really, could not tell. I then desired she would let you know. I never shall forget the affected looks of concern your Sister put on, when she Said, She was Surprised, I should be a stranger to that, which she thought the whole country was D acquainted 
50 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, acquainted with: that her Father thought it proper to confine you to your chamber, onj account of Some very great indiscretionsi which, she was Sorry to Say, her sister had been guilty of. My blood, really boistd; I felt the colour fiy up in my face; I could have fell’d her to the ground : I was going to speak, but was interrupted by my mother! she answered miss Emily for me; which, l believe, upon the whole, was better; as Ihej was much milder than I could have been: She told her. We had, indeed, heard of your disgraceful treatment and confinement; and, that she was inclined to believe it, by not hearing from you Sor Some time; but Said, She could not help thinking, there was a great difference between proper care being taken to prevent your corresponding with Horatio, and your being debarred the privilege of feeing and conversing with those friends, who, she was certain, would always | advise you for the best: miss Emily began here to stretch her jaws, as is going to Speak, but was interrupted by Mrs. Sheldren; who j very gravely told my mother. That her brother was certainly the best judge how toad in his own family; that he had the tenderest regard that was possible for you; and, that she was positive, he would do nothing but 
what 
JEMIMA ano LOUISA. 51 3 what was absolutely necessary for your honaur and Safety : She then Said, It was a very disagreeable subject to her, and that she begg’d } the discourse might be waved; my, mother I Said nothing, but lifted up her hands and t eyes: your Father just then came in, my ( mother went up to him, took hold of his hands, and begg’d, he would give us leave to see you; and, that he would replace you in his favour; that she would answer for your future conduct: that it would be Such as would merit a continuance of his regard and indulgence; she paused; I rose up, and stood before him, to make intercession like -- wise: your sister walked hastily about the room; your aunt muttered, what I could not distindly hear: your Father at last Spoke; he turned from us, and Said, She has almost broke my heart, Mrs. Wellers; you don’t know what you ask; let me beg, as you va lue my friendship, never to mention that ungrateful girl to me again: had it not been for my dear Emily, I had died with vexation; but she comforts my distresses; at these words, the deceitfus wretch fawn’d upon him like a dog: my mother would still have continued her intercession for you, but was absolutely stopped by your father’s Saying, Herpust leave the room, if she persisted in renewing D 2 - the 
52 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, the discourse. I Spent a most stupid day, did not open my lips till dinner: when I Sat by your brother, he was very obl'ging, and talked a great deal to me; he retired Soon after dinner. My mother ordered the coach two hours Sooner than we at first inteiidedi they did not press our stay, but Seemed as glad to part .with us as we were to go 5 thus ended our dull visit, and, I believe, we shall not Soon again See Courtly hall. It was thomas’s own thought, coming under your window, I am glad he Succeeded So well. You may depend I will deliver your letter to Horatio. miss brand’s letter was, indeed, very odd; I am glad, you will have no more to Say to her. I will advise Horatio as you desire, think it quite a right method os proceeding. Your brother conveyed me your last letter, he is greatly, assessed at leaving you in So unhappy a situation; He lay at our house that night, which he did not choose your Father should know. It is, really, a Sad thing, to be concerned with Such odd people, that everything, though os ever So innocent a nature, must be concealed Srom them. I am Sorry your Spirits are So much affected as your brother tells me they are. The private key may be of Service to you, pray be caresul to conceal it. *^ mis Preston was yesterday 
mar; 
; AND LOUISA. 53 
'married to Mr. Grimes, she has no nfc\y ^ clothes for the wedding; they are to Spend the winter in the country; he has hired a little holise and one Servant maid; it is amazing that she can thus Submit, Horatio is now below stairs, I sty to give, him yours; will give you an account of his visit in my next; till then, adieu. 
Tours for ever 
Frances, wrller^. 
LETTER XVIII 
Continuation of Miss Wellers to Miss courtly. 
My dear Jemima 
HORATIO is just gone, I would have had him dine with us; but he Said, He could not; he read your letter Several times over: the whole time almost that he stayed was that way employed. He Said, He had been vastly uneasy at not hearing Srom you through miss Brand, but now was heartily glad you had taken another method, as he had lately Seen in miss Brand many things he U 3 difiiked. 
54 JEMIMA aid LOUISA, dissiked. I took an opportunity to urge his leaving this part of the country for Some time; which he has promised to do, Saying, As there was no possibility of Seeing you, all places were alike to him; but requested the favour of me, to send you a letter he would fbring me Sor you, before he lest this place; which, I assured him, I would Safely convey. My mother desires her love to you, and bids me assure yon, next to myself, you are the person in all the world she loves most. Fare well. I remain, 
affsshonatdy yours 
F, Wellers, 
LETTER XIX 
Miss Courtly to Miss Wellers. 
My dear Fanny, 
I Received both your kind favours, with horatio’s inclosei wherein he takes a kind and tender leave, vowing eternal fidelity, and earnestly requesting the favour of hearing from me when he is arrived in London, which he is immediately to acquaint you 
with: 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 55 with: I depend upon your letting me know it, though I do not intend corresponding with him, unless affairs should take a happier turn, which at present, there is little prospedt of. I now see neither my aunt nor Sister; but, am in hopes, when they hear Horatio is gone, they will allow me more liberty. Mary tells mb, there is a gentleman visiting in the housb; she Says, He is the most accomplish’d gentlernan, understands all sorts of farming, and is the best judge of cattle in the king dom; fine accomplishments. Ate they not? the creature talks to me So incessantly about him, I fancy he Comes to pay his addresses to Emily; I wish that may be the case, and that she may accept them. miss preston’s wedding much Surprises me: I wish her hap piness, but think there’s little prolpedt of it. It greatly concerns me, that it is not in my power to reward poor Thomas for his fidelity and kindness to me: I will pause, that if he comes, I may not make the poor fellow loiter about, as that would certainly cause sulpi cion, and prevent the continuance of our correspondence; which, would be the greatest mortification that can happen to the unfortunate, 
Jemima Courtly.. 
LET 
si JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
LETTER XX 
wellers/i? courtlv. i 
Your letter, my dear Jemima, gave me infinite satissadion, to find you So well Satisfied with horatio’s taking your advice in quitting this place; he has since been to take his leave of me, and earnestly requested me, to let him hear of your health, and anything material that might happen in his absence, which, I have faithfully pro r^iised I will do. Pray, what is the name of y, our new visitor? I will make inquiry about him, let him be who or what he will; I wish he may have miss Emily, as I am inclined to believe, you would be better treated both by your Aunt and Father, were she out of the way. You have heard me talk of miss Lewis, she has been Some time with me, which I have not besore, I believe, told you: you must have Seen her; she knows you, she tells me, very well; has met you here at Swinderby; now I recoiled;, you Spent two or three days here together one Christmas holidays, when your Father was in town. My mother, thank God, uses herself to herself 

1 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 57 Self a good deal more than she used to do; I fancy, she thinks I shall not remain long Single, and that his best to wean hersels by degrees, than all at once; for, do you know 
I have it from all quarters, that I am in love, and going Soon to be married. Well! 
1 am glad I know nothing of all this myself: Emma has laid me five guineas, I am not single twelve months hence; is it not odd, people should take Such notions into their heads, without any foundationwith this letter Thomas shall convey you fomc paper and pens; I beg, you will not make yourself uneasy about him : I am Sure, h’ is Sufficiently happy in an opportunity os Serving you. miss Lewis, poor girl, is Sadly hurried about, to be out of the way of Sir Harry Harwood, who her good Mother and Aunt are greatly afraid should run away with her: he is an officer in the army, and his regiment is now quartered near Woodberry; and, on that account, Mrs. Lewis was So kind as to favour us with her daughter’s company, instead of sending her anywhere else : she is a Sprightly Sensible girl, good-natured to the last degree; 
• I love her excessively, Mrs. Lewises sotex tremely careful of Emma, her only child, that this is the first time of her being ever trusted without Madam Swaffam to attend 5 her, 
58 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, her, which. used to mortify us all excessively : she is an old governess that brought her up; we never knew how to entertain her, but we found out the way to fatigue her excessively, for go, or do what we would, she would never quit her charge. I shall hope for a letter from you by the return of Thomas; I remain, 
Sincerely anti affefiionatgly yours 
Frances Wellers. 
LETTER XXI 
Miss Emily Courtly to Miss Brand. 
Dear Miss Brand, 
jemima’s last letter to you Surprises me greatly; I cannot conceive what could induce her to write So to you; I cannot think she suspeds us? and you have done nothing So materially to disoblige her, that she would give up hearing from her lover, rather than jcontinue a correspondence with you; she must certainly have taken miss at your not contradidtfhg what you heard at the milliner’s j or, perhaps, Horatio has disobliged 
her? 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 59 her? Well! that is the very thing I most wish may be the cafe; for I have in the house a Mr. Mullins, who I design shall in a short time make miss Courtly his spouse 5 T must tell you as briefly as possible all about it: I have persuaded my Father, that the only way to Secure the honour of the family, is to marry my sister as Soon as possible, to Some Sober good kind of a man; that she will otherways ruin herself with Horatio; he instantly determined I was right, and Said, He would look out for Some Such Sort of person; I then recommended this Mullins, as one I had heard an extraordinary character of, which my Father Seemed highly to approve: he is a pretty Substantial farmer, but has present occasion for six or eight hundred pounds, which my Father has agreed to give him 5 and Mullins agrees to take the encumbrance of a wife, for the sake of the money, he knows her affections are engaged, but he Says, He matters not that, he warrants to teach her country bufiness, and make her useful to him, and that will content him; he Says, Too much love in a wife is fulsome, and she’h like him well enough when she is iised to him; his notions are not very delicate, I must own; but he is an admirable 
D 6 fel 
6o JEMIMA AND LOUISA.; fellow for my purpose: I am in high Spirits, | to think how Soon I shall be clear of my in 1 cumbrance, and with the loss of So little mo j ney too; for I don’t imagine, my Father will ever give Iter more than he at first pays down wsith her; and then, you know, all I the remainder of my mother’s Sortune will be my own; glorious thought! I have cut in finely with aunt Sheldren, she is quite of my fide; yet, for all that, I wish she was anywhere but with us, for should Jemima get the canting of her over by hersclf, she may Soon Spoil my plot, and undo all I have done; 
I take as much care as possible to keep them asunder. Horatio, I dare Say, will mourn heartily for the loss os his mistress; but when the first transports of his grief is over, I fancy any woman of tolerable fortune .will Serve his purpose : I, really, should like him very well myself; he is, certainly, a prodigious clever man; and, I think, my person is not much inferior to miss courtly’s, and with my fortune, I believe, will not prove unacceptable to him; but before I proceed to any Such step, I shall take care to make myself independent; which I must contrive Some way or other, when my old dad is in a right humour to work upon; but more of 
that 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA 6i that another time, I can at present write no more. I remain, 
Miss brand’s 
affefhonate Friend, 
Emilv courtly. 
LETTER XXII 
Miss Brand to Miss E. courtly. 
Bear Miss Emily, 
I AM delited with your fkeme of Mr. 
Mullins; how I shall like to see that pretty cretur yoked! Oh! miss, I had like to have forgot. Who do you think I met at Mrs. tagg’s, the millener’s ^ why, Horatio himsels: he took very little notis of me, he was buying Some glows and a watch string; he told me, He was going to London for the Winter, was to Set out that very afternoon; neither he nor I menshon’d your sister; he left the shop before I did, Mrs. tagg’s prais’d him up to the Skies; and Said, It was a great pity, he should like a lady, who she had herd Such Sad things of; when to her knollege, there was manny fine ladys dying i for 
62 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, for him. Indeed, I hope, you will Soon get your aunt out of your house; how came you, to let her come there. Do you know, last Sunday, thare was scarse a farmer’s dauter in this plase, but what was at church in a Silk pettecote : I wish to God, I had one, it would last me my life tiem; but, I Seer, I shall never be abell to by one. If 1 can be of any servis to you, pray, let me know; there is nothing in the world I wou’d not do to Serve you; as I shall all ways remember the manny favours bestow’d on, 
LETTER XXIII Miss Courtly to Miss Wellers. 
Tour very affefhonate^ 
Mary Brand. 
GH! my dear miss Wellers, I am in a dreadful situation! How shall I pen the shocking account? my aunt has just been with me, and bid me prepare to See a Mr. mullin’s, who my Father designs I shall marry : How she Surprised me! I raved; she heard me for Some time > then told me. It was in vain to make any resistance \ that it 
was 
JEMIMA AMD LOUISA. 63 was my father’s determination, and it must be: she desired I would compose myself, as I positively must See Mr. mullin’s in a few days; God, forgive me! I gave her a violent shove from me, and Said, Could I have expected this from you, madam .J I may be obliged to See the man, my father may continue to confine me or turn me out of doors, but never shall he force me to marry any man who I object to; she answered. it’s very well, child! we shall See that! remember, you would not oblige me in taking the good advice I gave; and, I affure you, need not cx vpedl any favours from me. So now, my .dear Fanny, you See, what a friend I have in my aunf Sheldren; she talked a great deal to me, which I never answered, till I was So provok’d, I could not contain myself. Thomas is under the window. Adieu. 
Tours c. Csfr. 
Jemima courtly. 
leti 
64 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
LETTER XXIV 
Continuation of Miss C o u r t L y to Mss Wellers. 
My dear Fanny 
I Concluded my last abruptly, bytheun' expected arrival of your Servant; wa: Sorry, you should Send him empty handed sit was, really, no Small mortification to me, I will now continue my account from where left off: About five o’clock, my aunt camt again to See me; she had not been in the room ten minutes, when my sister stung open the door, and in stalk’d a most hideous fellow, imagination cannot form one So frightful! My auntjose up, and Said, This is Mr. mullin’s, my dear; he bow’d : Madam, said I to my aunt, I have not been used to fed company for Some time; I am deny’d thel sight of my best friends, and, I beg, I ira not be troubled with the company of 3 stranger, whose very appearance is disagree able to me; she trembled with passion. Madam, Said the man, I will not trouble you longer with my company at present; she is 2 pretty girl, Said he, (turning to my aunt) 
like 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 65 like her much; I am Sure she will come to in time, and out he walk’d, my aunt 'trotted after with my sister. I find their design is to make me miserable; it shall not, cannot be: What power on earth can make me repeat those dreadful words, that would for ever join me to a man I detest. I am quite ill with this cruel persecution! Oh! my dear Fanny Wellers! you have a good and affe<stionate mother; have no tyrant of a father; no sister to ill use you: it is impossible, (I hope) that you should ever know half the; ashi(stion I endure. Pray, Heaven, I keep my senses, for am now So consused, I know hot what I write; Why is my brother not here? he, perhaps, might have Some influence in my favour. 
The miss Lewis you mention, I very well remember: she is, I think, very lively and agreeable; she has beeti jok’d Some time, I think, about Sir Harry. I long vastly, to _ know, who they Say, you are in love with, and when the match is to be : should take it very unkind, if I thought it was only a Secret to me; but while people are young and single, the world is always matching them. I wonder, 1 have had no letter from my brother. My head aches dreadfully, So must 
leave 
66 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, leave Scribbling, and make this ready against Thomas comes. I am. 
With the greutefi Sincerity 
Tour ever affeflionatcy 
Jemima Courtly. 
LETTER XXV 
Miss Emily Courtly to Miss Brand. 
Dear Miss Molly, 
1h A V E not time to write to you all I could wish; let it at present Suffice, that, Madam, has relolutely refused Mullins; but that will not Save her, for married to him Ihe must be, as Sure as she lives. He, is in a hurry for his money I find. So, 1 fuppose, will Soon renew his addresses. 
I have Sent you a blue Satin petticoat, which I never wore; it was but just come home as I received your last letter; I am glad I had it for you. Farewell, my dear Molly, I must away to my Father; ’tis not fit he should be left too much alone at this critical time. I remain. 
Tour obliged Friend, 
Emily Courtly. 
let 
JEMIMA AND LOUSIA. 67 
letter XXVI 
Continuatim of Miss Emily Courtly to Mijs Brand. 
OH! my dear miss Brand! it’s impossible to describe the agony I am in, with rage and disappointment: my Schemes are all abortive; my sister is out of my power, she has out witted me, and carried on ia correspondence with miss Wellers during her whole confinement, which never was difcovered till yesterday I have not patience to enter intxi the particulars now, but will tell you all when I See you, which, I beg, may be as Soon as possible, to consult with me, for Something must be done: my Father is Sufficiently enrag’d, she has no share in him at present; but, then she has So powerful aa advocate in Mrs. Wellers, I tremble to think what may be the consequence : and, as she is with Fanny Wellers, she may now see Horatio; nay, perhaps, marry him, there’s the sting! that’s my greatest torment! and how to prevent it, I know not! my invention, that used always to be ready, when I had a 
point 
70 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, ing. She could Secret her in aback room; but she absolutely refused, telling her, She could not consent to accept admittance into her father’s house as a Savour from her Sister, those were terms too hard to Submit to; Emily then asked her. Where she proposed going? she reply’d, To Mrs. Wellers, who, I hope, will receive me: won’t you, Thomas, take me under your protection, and conduct me to your mistress; don’t you think, Thomas, your mistress will receive me; the poor fellow was So affected he could hardly Speak, but Saintly utter’d: Oh, yes, madam, I am Sure she will! pray, madam, endeavour to make yourself easy, I am Sure you will be welcome at our house. Oh, without doubt! Said Emily, with a scornsul Sneer, and went in. Jemima then walked out of the yard, and Thomas followed her, till they came to the place where he had lest his horse, which, Thomas, begg’d she would please to ride, and he would walk; but (he judg’d it would be easier riding behind him, than Single, on a man’s Saddle; So ordered him to mount, which, in compliance with her desire he did, and Safely conduced her to our house, to the very great Surprise of all our family. She was for a long time incapable of letting us into the cause of her i slight; 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 71 flight; So the chies of this account is from Thomas; she is now, thank God, more I composed. My mother is just Sat out for Courtly hall, to make intercession for her with Mr. Courtly, the Success of which embassy shall be the subject of my next; for, my dear Mima, is in too great disorder to be left alone. So, must now conclude. 
Tour affectionate 
and obliged humble Servant 
Frances wbll£rs. 

LETTER XXVIII 
Continuation of Miss Wellers te Miss Lewis. 
My dear Emma 
I Concluded my last, with assuring you, that my next should give you an account of my mamma’s reception at Courtly hall, and the Success of her visit, from which she is just return’d: Mr. courtly’s resentment is carried to that height, that it has entirely taken place of his reason; he storm’d like a madman at the sight of my mother; and it was a long time before she could prevail with 
him. 
72 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, him, to hear what she had to Say; and when he was a little more composed, and Suffered her to expostulate with him, it tended to no manner of purpose; he was deaf to all entreaties, and has Solemnly declared, never to receive her again: poor Jemima Seemed to dread nothing So much as being taken in again; never did I See So affecting a Scene, as the interview between she and my mother, on her return from Courtly hall: she stew to my mamma, and Said, Well, madam, wshat is the result os your visit; I hope, you have not consented to Send me to my Father upon terms I can’t Submit to. miss Courtly, Said my, mother, what are the terms you can’t Submit to? would not you wish, to make one in your father’s family? Yes, answered she. To make one in my father’s sa mily upon my own conditions, and not other ways, that is. To be admitted as his daughter, but not his prisoner; think not, dear madam! 1 mean to be an encumbrance to you; that is far from my desire, I only beg your protection till I can dispose of myself: I think, I could make myself usesul to a lady in the capacity of a Servant, at least. i’ll endeavour it; for, rather than endure the frowns of my Father, and triumph of my sister, I would embrace, with chearfulness, I the 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 73 the lowest degree of Servitude; my mother, tenderly embracing her. Said, My dear miss Courtly, you are not, nor shall not, be reduced to Such circumstances; I bless God, I am able to prevent it! Your Father has, indeed, refused to reinstate you in his favour; he is deaf to all remonstrances; but let it not afflict you So greatly; you shall find a home in my house, and the Same treatment and privilege in every respedt, as my own daughter. The dear creature’s gratesul heart was So Sull, site could not utter her acknowledgment, but taking fast hold of my hand. Said, Oh! then madam, I have here a Sister, and though a cruel Father, still I have a bles sing I never thought to experience, an indulgent mother; she then wept, as, indeed, we all did; but, as Soon as possible, I recovered mysels, and used every means I could think of, to divert her thoughts from those disa greeable refiedlions: — —. My mamma says, miss Emily Seems vastly uneasy at her sister’s being with us, and wants very much to have her home again; which made my mother less anxious after it; for she Says, she clearly Saw, her desire proceeded from a kind of envy and pique; So, that she strongly suspedted Some ill design in her: in which, I am pervaded, she judges very right. Mils Courtly E has 
74 JEMIMA AND LOUISA 
has wrote to her brother, So we cxpedl to see him here very Soon. Mamma, has just lent to propose our taking a little walk, as it is a sine evening, in hopes, it will amuse poor Jemima; So must bid adieu to, my dear miss Lewis, and conclude myself, 
Her affetuonate Friend 
and obliged humble Servant 
F. Wellers. 
LETTER XXIX 
Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers, 
Dear Miss tvdlers, 
Your two obliging epistles have given me both pain and pleasure in extreme. Poor miss courtly’s treatment, for a long time, has been cruelty in the highest degree; her father’s inhumanity, I believe, can Scarce be parallell’d: How happy then, is her present situation, in being released from his tyranny! Oh! how amiable, does dear Mrs. Wellers appear, in thus exerting herself in the cause of injured innocence: her genero' ' and goodness can never be Sufficiently 
com 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. y commended. I am vastly glad Mr. Courtly is Soon expected with you, as it must be a great comfort to his Sister: and lam greatly' mistaken, if anthony’s company, is not Somewhat more than agreeable to my dear. Fanny; you must excuse me, you knov/, I love to banter a little upon that head. Pray, let me hear of your proceedings, and make my compliments to miss Courtly; the Same waits on your mamma and Self, from 
Tour affefhonate Friend 
and obliged humble Servant 
Emma Maria Lewis. 
LETTER XXX 
mis Wellers to Miss Lewis. 
My dear Emma 
IT ever was a pleasure to me, to comply with every desire of yours; but more particularly, your last request, of an account of our proceedings, in regard to my dear Jemima; as her affairs entirely engross my thoughts and attention. Mr. Anthony Courtly came to us immediately after he received miss E 2 courtly’s 
si JEMIMA AND LOUISA. courtly’s letter, and has since been to make intercession with his Father: he used every argument in his power, and urged every circumstance that thought could Suggest in favour of his sister without fuccess. He is now Set out for London, to acquaint Horatio with what has happen’d, and purposes bringing him down to visit us; but we greatly fear he will have Some difficulty in finding him, for Jemima had not So much as open’d his letter, when her Father Surprised and took it from her : but she has recolle<fi; ed the name and place of abode of a gentleman in London, 'with whom, she knows, he is very intimate; So, we hope, Mr. Courtly, will get information there. You Smile now, I dare engage, and think, I long as impatiently for anthony’s return, as poor Jemima. \vell! if my Spirits were quite compos’d, I could banter a little too upon that head: imagine what you please, perhaps you may not be much mistaken. Mamma and Mil's Courtly joins in compliments with. 
Tour very affefiionate.. 
F. Wellers. 
LET 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 77 
LETTER XXXI 
Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers. 
My dear Fanny, 
YO U have actually made me the exact resemblance of a humour’d child, tjie more you indulge me the more I cover. Your obliging compliance with my last request:, makes me now impatient to know the event of young courtly’s embassy; I hope he will Succeed in his inquiry, miss Courtly, will Surely then be happy: your mamma would, doubtless, rather, check than encourage her inclinations, if she had not entertain’d a very good opinion of Horatio; So that I imagine, there is no other bar to their prospedl ol a happy union, than want of fortune : I have heard he is very much the gentleman, and a man of letters. miss Blyden knows Some of his family, and informs me, she had heard he was design’d for a clergyman; but never any further account of him. There is a coach with company just stopped at 
our 
; 8 JEMIMA and LOUISA, our gate; So must deny myself the pleasurc of adding more at present than, that, I am, 
Etar Miss wellers’s, 
very affeffionate, 
and obliged humble Servant 
Emma Marta Lewis. 
LETTER XXXII 
Miss Wellers to Miss Lewis. 
Bear Miss Lewis 
Your curiosity is natural, and needs no apology; on the contrary, I think, you are extremely kind in So far interesting your ielf in the affairs of one, for whom you know I have So great regard. 
Mr. Courtly is return’d with Mr. Granville, whose character I will now give you, as receiv’d from Mr. Courtly; who has made stridl inquiry after him, both at the college where he was educated, and of Several gentlemen to whom he is well known: He is of a good family, and was (as you have been inform’d) design’d for the church; 
but 
JEMIMA AND LOUSIA. 79 but Some friends from whom he was promis’d great Savours being removed out of power, and other misfortunes that have since happen’d in his family, has hitherto prevented his reaping any real benefit or advantage from his education : He is os a lively disposition, and when very young, was guilty of Some irregularities; but has since taken quite a different turn, and according to all accounts acted with great Sobriety, prudence and economy : He is undoubtedly a man of scnse, is extremely polite, and Seems to have a great share of good nature. My mother is excessively pleas’d with his behaviour, and has assur’d him, that if all his actions correspond with what she has already Seen, he shall always meet with a welcome reception at our house; but added, that (as he has declared his only wish and highest ambition is to procure Some station or employment, that may enable him to Support Mils Courtly gen tcely in the marriage state) she would by all means advise him to reside in London, as he will there be most in the way of preferment. miss Courtly and he are entirely of that opinion, and have mutually agreed to make themselves as easy as polsible in their state of Separation; and patiently wait Sor Some happy event, that may ■ unite and E 4 crown 
8o JEMIMA AND LOUISA, crown their wishes. My dear Jemima is much more cheerful and compos’d: Anthony and Horatio are quite pleased with Mils courtly’s continuing with us, (which my mother has insisted on] for her brother proposed putting her to board in Some family in this neighbourhood; but my mamma told him, she would by no means consent to part with So great a pleasure and comsort, as her a dopted daughter; So begg’d he would desist from any further proposals of that kind. I am quite happy, and all are abundantly easier than before this affair was So Settled. I am, with due compliments and respedt to yourself and family, 
our olllged Friend 
and Servant 
Frances Wellers, 
LETTER XXXIII Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers. 
I AM quite delighted with your pleasing account of your mutual lovers; am heartily glad Miss courtly’s affections are fix’d 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 8r on a person So deserving, and meets with Such just return. I am going to Spend a few weeks in London; am in the greatest haste imaginable to get my accoutrements ready. So beg you will pardon my abrupt conclusion. 
Tours jin^erely, 
Emma Maria Lewis. 
P. S. I shall do myself the pleasure of visiting you on my return from London. 
LETTER XXXIV 
Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers. 
My dear Miss ivellers^ 
I HOPE, and trust, you will pardon, my not paying my respedts in Cambridgeshire besore I return to Woodberry, when I acquaint you with the occasion of breaking my promise : it’s a most joyful Summons, and the only thing that could possibly atone for the mortification of leaving London without Seeing you. I talk and write, and think So much of dear Mist Blyden, that yoia can be no E 5 stranger 
82 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
stranger to her; she is very shortly to marry Mr. Evanion, and honours me with a request, to attend as one of her bride maids. All things are Settled, and brought So near a conclusion, that I must Set out early on Saturday morning to reach blyden lodge in due time; this match gives me the highest delight; I am So alive, I can hardly Support the joy that has Seized me; for that couple are both my bosom friends; and without partiality, most worthy creatures.; who have been kept in the dreadsul state of suspence, for two years, by an uncouth and obstinate Father and Uncle; that could no ways agree upon their Settlements. till within these six weeks; in which time, a lawyer, by great diligence, has finish’d all things necessary. 1 really believe their affedfions for each other is great and sincere; their fortunes are very ample, and they come together with every prosped of happiness: : wedding is to be next thursday, the ceremony perform’d at her parish church; there will be six bride men and maids, all cleverly pair’d; the maids dress’d in blue lute string trimm’d with white; the bride and bride groom in white (of course; ^ on that, and the two following days, will be public entertainments extremely magnificent; a, ball each night. They have contrived to 
fix 
JEMIMA AND L O tj IS A. 83 
fix their attendants as they think will prove agreeable; for which reason, L am appointed to Sir Harry Harwood; I take it kind, be cause I know they mean it So; but, upon my w ord, I don’t like him at all; that is, I 
like him well enough; -- nay, I like him 
very much — that is -- -- -- I — I — think 
him very clever, and all that; but, upon honour, I have no partiality for him; however, it does not signify who or what I like; nor, indeed, do I like or difiikc anybody particularly.' How much! How Sincerely I wish for my dear Fanny Wellers at this wedding! for it will be a most joyous affair. I think, the pleasure of my London journey ends in the compleatest manner; and, I ought, with the greatest satissadlicn, return to my melancholy mother and aunt, and endeavour to divert them, for they are infinitely kind and good to me; and worthy people they are, tho’ the dej edion os their Spirits, and retired way of living, makes it too dull for a young person; So much So, that I can never think of ashing one with less good Nature than your sels, to visit me at Woodberry, Mr. Blyden is to retire to a hunting Seat, and leave the lodge (which is, really, a glorious mansion) to the young people. I propose staying a month with them, and then return home, where, I E 6 shall 
74 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, shall depend on Seeing you very Soon; In three days after the wedding, I will write you a full account of all proceedings. In the interim, I am, with due rejped to yourself and family, 
fannv’s 
affeflionate and devoted 
Emma Maria Lewis. 
LETTER XXXV 
Continuation cf Miss Lewis to Mijs Wellers. 
idear Miss wellers t 
A Circumstance has happen’d to cloud our joys for the present; but hope, we shall Soon recover them, though not in the high degree that So lately promised us. Mr. Blyden was Seized last Monday with an apoplexy, which carried him off in a Sew hours. I hear miss Blyden is greatly affected;; hope this marriage in expedlation, will be the means of carrying off her concern. The wedding is to be postpon’d for Some weeks at least; during which time, if it is as convenient to you, as it is agreeable to me, I will 
do 
JEMIMA and L.O uisa, 85 do myself the pleasure of waiting on you. I must at present be short; as a letter of con dolance to dear miss Blyden is indispensable. I am. 
Tours faithfully 
E. M. Lewis: 
LETTER XXXVI 
Miss B L y D E N to Miss Lewis, at Miss Wellers. 
Dear Miss Lewis., 
I Return a thousand thanks for your very kind and comfortable letter: it claim’d a more early acknowledgment; but I have been So ill for these ten days, that I could not possibly take pen in hand, and am at this time extremely indispos’d : my Spirits are So violently affected, that I Sear, I never shall overcome this affliction;; I have every comfort that is possible, after the loss of Such an affectionate parent; who has showed me the greatest regard in his last at, as I am left his whole estate in my possession and dispoial; which is a happy alteration from a will just found, of two years date 5 in which 
I 
86 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
I was left entirely in my uncle’s power as to marriage; and the estate Settled on him in case 1 died without heirs; tho’, I believe firmly, that I should have met with the most generous treatment Srom him, if one may judge of him by his writing; which plainly shows him a man os sense and goodness. He has Sent me a very kind and affectionate letter, begging me to look on him as my Father, promising to aft that character in every particular; desiring my wedding might be deferr’d half a year, in resped and decency to my dear Father; (which was my intention, before I had the honour of his letter) he is So kind, as t&come directly from Ireland to comsort and advise me, and will bring his lady with him, intending to stay till I am quite Settled. How happy it is to have Such a relation! Now, my dear Emma, I have an extraordinary favour to ask, that you must not resuse, because I have Set my heart upon it: It is begging you will come directly to this house of mourning, to comfort and assist me in the ceremony of receiving my uncle and aunt, who we expect here Some time the week after next: I long for his arrival, tho’ shall be greatly shock’d at first feeing him; and should he be like my Father, know not how 1 shall Support it. I depend on Seeing 2 you 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. ^7 vou very shortly : it is that hope wshich enlivens and enables me to write this; Sor till within these three days, I have not been enough myself to attend to anything. I am, 
Dear Emma, 
Tour much affiiffed Friend, 
Louisa Blvden. 
LETTER XXXVII 
Lewis to Miss Wellers. 
Dear Miss (Vellers, 
Blyden lodge. 
IM U S T beg you will make my grateful compliments, and return ten thousand thanks to your mamma, in my name, for all her favours, and particularly her good nature, in permitting me to leave you So Suddenly. I know you will readily pardon me; theresore shall only Say, I Sincerely wish for an early opportunity, of Spending a calm and tranquil month with you. I know you delight to indulge me, and naturally love those that I do; therefore shall make my louisa and her family the Subject of this letter. 
Never 
s8 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
Never was the loss of a man So much re’ gretted as Mr. Blyden; Sorrow extends it’s Self many miles round the country; I very Soon met with feeling lamentations for his death, which increas’d apparently as I reach’d nearer and nearer the lodge; where I found all inconsolable, and my dear louisa So alter’d, that I Scarcely knew her. Her woman tells me, she is Surprisingly better, since her expedlation os me and her uncle: he is upon the Sea, and Mr. Evanion is gone this morning for Falmouth to meet them. He is amazingly affected with Mr. blyden’s death, was very urgent with louisa to marry privately, besore her uncle’s arrival, as all things was Settled in a satissadlory manner. Old Mr. Evanion was very desirous it should be So; and I endeavoured to persuade her to it all in my power, but it was impossible; I really must consess, I think she judges best; for, as she is entirely her own mistress, it will appear more respedful to her uncle, and more decent to the deceas’d father; but I had Such an irresistible desire it should be So, that I could not forbear persuading, contrary to my opinion. I desire you will favour me very Soon with a letter; for we greatly want amusement. I am, Tours entirely., 
Emma Maria Lewis. 
LET 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 89 
LETTER XXXVIII Continuation of Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers. 
Dear Miss Wellers, Blyden lodge. 
Your letter both pleased and entertained me. 1 took the liberty of reading the comical parts to Miss Blyden; and had the Satisfaction to See her Smile for the first time since my being here; and I (though melancholy) laugh’d excessively. I am concern’d Mrs. Wellers was a little displeased; but mothers don’t always enter into young people’s jokes and Schemes; nor, indeed, is it proper: for I am very Sensible, without the check of experienc’d years, our Spirits would Sometimes flow above high water mark. Miss Blyden delights to hear, me talk of my Frances and Jemima. I indulge her prodigiously, and she insists upon my going to the St. Cecilian meeting at sa lishury; and desires, I will persuade you and Miss Courtly to meet me, there, and then prevail on you both, to honour her with your company at Blyden lodge. She has made me a most agreeable party; con fisting 
of 
90 JEMIMA AND LOOISA. of three young women, and three very Suitable men, besides Mr. Evanion; who will wait on you to conduct your ladyships to sa lishury, where he will couple you properly for the time; he attends us as a caresul guardian to high and unthinking Spirits; for as we look upon him as a married man, we Will not Suffer him to coquet it with the girls. II you rejedf this Scheme, I never will forgive ir. Our good folks arrived last Monday; it was a fluttering day to my louisa, and no very pleasing one to me; for So ungracious a Countenance as Mr. blyden’s, never before met my eyes: the women are all queer, auk ward, and reserved; their attendants numerous, and most shocking in appearance; I have not to this hour found out the use or denominations of half. Mr. Evanion has told me, he thought he should have sunk at the first sight of them; neither he nor I imagine we can ever forget our first interview; as to miss Blyden, the melancholy and unavoidable reflections, the sight of her father’s own brother, and her new adopted father must occasion, lest no room for observation in her : but I must no longer omit giving Some account of their characters, least you may be (as I was) prejudiced by appearances: we find in Mr. Blyden, a very 
extras 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 91 
extraordinary share of sense and good nature, with but one fault, which is, (without drinking any great quantity) being always dis guised from dinner till bedtime;; even then he is perfect goodness, telling his whole Soul, and I Sear, incapable of even necessary disguise : I think, we may justly call him, A rough diamond; and esteem his niece most happy in a valuable uncle : Mrs. Blyden is a good Sort of woman; that you know, signifies, A harmless person, not the least of a fool, but without any active genius or Sprightly sense; she much resembles a very tame cat, neither offending or pleasing, but always civil and compilable: their Servants (for I must mention them again) are really excellent; So far exceeding our English ones in duty and diligence, and much more cunning, (I cannot call it sense) than their appearance gives room to expect; I firmly believe, they would die in a cause of their master’s. Mr. Blyden honours me with long and frequent conversations; the preference he Seems to pay my judgement is, perhaps, the reason of my admiring him So much; but, really, all like him, who have been in his company. He was yesterday morning ashing my opinion of miss blyden’s Spending Some time in London before her marriage; 
and. 
92 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, and, really, his reasons for it was So good that I am quite convinced it is right, and am desired byshim, to Sorward the affair. I was Sorry, to find in this conversation, that he did not entirely approve Mr. Evanion; but there does not appear the least intention to put off the match; So far from it, that he proposes him to attend her to London, and to stay there till the six months is expired : for he very justly observes, it is necessary she should See the world a little before she enters into it; and be acquainted with other men, equal to her in merit and fortune, besides Mr. Evanion, which she never yet has. He greatly blames her Father for not educating her in London; and thinks, as she is one of the first fortunes, her alliance ought to be noble. However, is highly Satisfied with Mr. evanion’s merit and fortune, and thinks a title may Soon be procured. Mr. Blyden Seems to have Some considerable share of family pride; but quite approves his niece’s pleasing herself in this and every point; he is. undoubtedly excessively fond of her. Tomorrow we expect Mrs. blyden’s Son by her first husband, his name is Clavering; and I learn Srom her woman, he’s a most accomplish’d man, and has a large estate; shut is 
mar 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA 93 married, and parted from his wise; therefore Something is wrong stis plain; when I have Seen him, you shall know more of him; till when, I am, 
Tour obliged and obedient, 
Emma Maria Lewis, 
LETTER XXXIX 
Continuation of Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers, 
Dear Miss Wellers, 
TH E day aster I wrote to you Mr. Clavering arrived, he is, * really, an agree i able man; but, I cannot think him a person of equal merit with his father inlaw. yef terday Sir Harry Harwood came, he is to accompany us to London. Miss Blyden is much indisposed, which makes me very unhappy; I really think her extremely ill, and cannot persuade her to have any advice. Indeed, we have met with Several things to ruffled us lately; one of which is, Some disagreements between Mr. Evanion and Mr. Blyden. I hope, all now is composed again in that quarter; but the quarrels run very high, 
they 
94 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, they began upon trifles, but proceeded to what, I fear, will not Soon be fettled; for the young gentleman was piqued to find himself deceived; and more So, that he appeared a deceiver in the eyes of Mr. Blyden very clearly, and suspedted by miss Blyden a little : for on the old gentleman’s examining the Settlements, he found them quite ineffectual, and out*of their power to make them good; this Mr. Blyden thought necessary to tell his niece, who was greatly shock’d at the thoughts of being deceived by the man she best loved; but she was Soon persuaded to believe him innocent, and no doubt but he is; Mr. Blyden is excessively vexed, and endeavours to work her up to a resentment; hut it would be impossible, I firmly believe, did she really think him guilty! The old gentleman carries his anger So far, that she is determin’d to end the dispntes by marrying in a few days, which, I think, is the best way; as she is entirely mistress of herself. The wedding will now be quite private; Mr. Blyden has refused his presence, intending to remove himself and family the day before. He now has Sent to invite me into the garden, for Some conversation on this unhappy affair, I imagine. So no more at present. 
JEMIMA AND I.DUISA. 95 
I am now return’d from walking, and much happier than.when I sat out; finding by Mr. Blyden, that his great anger was only pretended, to try his niece, how far her affections were engaged; that he was vastly disgusted at old evanion’s ill usage;; rather Sorry, she should be allied to Such a family; the more, because he was offer’d a duke’s Son for her, and thought her fortune and accomplishments deserv’d it; however; he was Sensible of young evanion’s merit, and should be happy in that marriage, now he Sound her So firmly attach’d to him: he hoped his appearance of warmth would not too much affect her, and desired me to tell her his motive; and furthermore, that he was ready to attend her nuptials, as the next tuesday, (if she chosesit) but rather advised the first plan, of going to London. I went immediately to miss Blyden, and relieved her much afflicted Spirits. She directly Sent for Mr. Evanion, and the first Scheme is again agreed on; we are to Set out for London the week after next, without you can obtain the liberty of coming to St. Cecilia, and then we put off our journey for a fortnight longer; we are now quite composed and reinstated : my louisa’s Spirits revived; Mr. 
Evanion 
g6 JEMIMA and LOUISA. Evanion happy; and 1 am alive again; Evanion and Clavering are great Sriends; Sir Harry as Sprightly as a bird; and we only want my little blyden’s former liveliness, to make this lodge Gaiety Hall; I will not be a month in London, without taking a trip to Swinderby*abby; till when, I am, 
fvith ail humility 
Emma Maria Lrwisi 
LETTER XL 
Continuation of Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers. 
Many thanks to my dear miss Wellers for her two obliging letters; how kind she is not to be exact with me! however, it will Soon be in my power to write to you from morning till night: for all my joyous Schemes are over, and poor miss Blyden goes heavily off tomorrow, with no other company, than her aunt, Sir Harry, and Servants. Mr. Blyden thinks, Mr. Evanion cannot with Safety leave his uncle, till they have contrived Some means to remove Mr. Burman, the steward, who, they have found, by Some lucky chance, corresponds 
with 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 97 with a very distant relation of Mr. evanion’s, who endeavours by Burman to intercept our young friend; and it is entirely owing to him, that all this unhappiness has been between the uncle and nephew : this Burman was always look’d upon as particularly honest, but none can escape Mr. blyden’s penetration. I look upon his being here as a most fortunate circumstance to louisa, for he finds the whole estate in a very bad condition, and stays in the cotintry to Set things to rights. As for me! poor me! Sir Harry Harwood is the impeshment to my London journey; for, as Soon as my mother and aunt heard os his going, they Sent absolute commands Sor me to return home; since which, I find he only goes to introduce the blyden’s to his mother and sisters, and a few people os fashion in town, an then returns immediately to his quarters; from this, you may conclude all here in a melancholy Situation. I am vastly glad Mr. Evanion will have So chearsul a companion as Clavering to keep up Tils Spirits: we go the first day’s journey with them, and Mr. Blyden does me the honour 'os Seeing me home, from whence, I shall. Soon indulge myself in wtiting to you. I am. Tours in the Dumps 
Emma Maria Lewis. 
F LET 
98 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
LETTER XLI 
Cmtinuation of Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers. 
My dear Fanny Woodberry. 
I HAVE really been ill ever since I came home, and not able to write, which makes me again indebted to you two letters; the last Mr. Evanion was So obliging to bring me yesterday from Blyden lodge; he looks extremely dejected, and complains of that lurking enemy Burman, who continues his mis chiess without possibility of removal. miss Blyden has been ever since her arrival in town greatly indisposed, and continues So much So, that she has not been able to write to any of us; this greatly afflidls Mr. Evanion, and the more, as he cannot obtain the liberty of Seeing her, notwithstanding the unwearied pains good Mr. Blyden takes for that purpose. He informs me, Sir Harry Harwood will return on Thursday, and proposes to Spend a fortnight with our nearest neighbour. Sir Hugh Hetchmore, which will add Some little cheer fullness to this Spot of despair. I am. 
Tours fmcerely^ 
E. M. Lewis. LET 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 99 
LETTER XLII 
Continuation of Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers, 
My dear Miss Wellers, 
TH E young Baronet Spent yesterday with us, and inform’d my Mother of his intended stay with Sir Hugh; she was horrid cross all the day; and this morning told me, I look’d melancholy, and that she insisted on my paying you a visit to divert my thoughts a little from my sriend’s troubles, which she observed lay heavy on my Spirits: this journey, she knew well would take iny fancy, and So, Fanny, I shall be .with thee in a few days after you receive this. Till when, I am, with due respedl to Mrs. Wellers, miss Courtly, c. 
Tour pleased, 
and obedient Friend and Servant, 
E. M. Lewis. 
Fa 
LET 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
LETTER XLIII 
Miss Blyden to Miss Lewis at Mijs Wellers. 
My dear Mifi Lewis, Grosvenor street. 
IH O P E you know it is illness has prevented my writing to you; nothing else in the world would have hinder’d my indulging myself in this manner. Oh I Emma, how much have I wish’d Sor you here! or to be again in the country; not one gleam of joy or happiness have I known since my being in London: my journey was melancholy; you know, I had nothing to make it otherwise. The day after my arrival, I paid my 
respedts to i>ady L -- -- --, Lady B -- -- -- -, and 
Lady Harwmod and daughters, (to whom < Sir Harry introduced my;) they are all polite and agreeable, and have been infinitely bilging to me. If I continue mending, am to go to court on Monday next, which will be the Second time of my going out. I am So unhappy in this great metropolis, I am Sometimes inclined to return immediately; but then the bad accounts I receive from the country makes that thought equally disagreeable 
i 
JEMIMA AND LOUSIA. loi able; So, that I am truly miserable: for by what I learn, my uncle is but just come in time to Save my noble estate (I think, I may without vanity call it noble) from the ruin my dear father’s easy temper, and the negligence of unjust stewards has involved it : among which, Anthony Plain amazes me, as he was always esteemed honest and capable os his trust : his total discharge I can by no means consent to, for he was a great favourite of miy father’s; therefore, have desired his removal to the care of the Small estate in Lincolnshire. Mr. evanion’s differences with his uncle makes me vastly un easy, as it appears impossible to remove the cause. That vile Burman is too cunning for his honest antagonist; had it not been for my uncle’s penetration, we never should have found him out. I beg, I may hear from you frequently; and, that you will make my best compliments to Mrs. and miss Wellers, and miss Courtly. I am, 
With all Jincerity^ yours., 
Louisa Blvden. 
F 3 
LED. 
102 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
LETTER XLIV 
Mr. Blvden to Miss Lewis at Miss Wellers. 
Madam, 
I Depend you’ll excuse my giving you this trouble, as I know your readiness to Serve those who want your assistance. I must now beg you will join with me in persuading louisa to part with Anthony Plain, who is a very improper person for her Service; and she is partial to him even to her ruin. There is Sad confusion at old evanion’s: I wish I knew how to extricate the worthy young gentleman from his troubles, which, I fear, will effedb him greatly. I sincerely regret your not being, able to go to London with my niece, as you are a comfortable and proper companion for her: I am likewise Sorry, as you could not go to tovrn with her, that you left Woodberry at this time; as I continually want your advice in her affairs. 1 am, Madam, with the utmost resped, 
Your meft devoted Servant, 
Isaac Blyden. 
LET 
JEMIMA AND I.DUISA. 103 
LETTER XLV 
Continuation of Mr. Blvden to Miss Lewis. 
Madam, 
I Must beg you will not think of mentioning to miss Blyden your desire and opinion os hastening the marriage, which I sincerely hope will Soon be farther Srom her thoughts than ever, but I So well know the influence os your advice, that on receiving the honour of your letter, 1 immediately Set down to write this, and Send my Servant over with it, to prevent (if possible) your Sentiments of this affair going to louisa, who, I hope, will not once think of marrying a pennyless man in disgrace, for Such poor Mr.evanion now is, being forbid ever to enter his uncle’s doors; but I have happily prevailed on him to Settle 800 a year upon my young friend, and Sent my Son to accompany him when he chuses to go, and greatly fear London will be the place; if it is, shall per suade my niece to return home, as this is the only place he cannot come to : however, should she persist in her intention of marrying him, Sne ought, in common prudence, to stay till her estate can be brought into Some order F 4 and 
104 jemima and LOUISA and regularity (which Vv'ill be at least a year accomplishing.) This I hope you will join with me in persuading her to. I remain. Madam, 
your most obedient 
hunthle Servant, 
Isaac Blvden, 
LETTER XLVI 
Mtfs Rainsford to Mss Lewis at Miss Welle R*J. 
Bear Emma., 
AM amazed at not hearing from you in all this time, I am certain it is two months since I wrote, and am So angry that I was determined to take no notice of it, but leave you to the quiet possession os those happy people, who have lately engaged all your attention. Indeed I am piqued, I think you unkind, I could almost Say ungratesul, to neglect one who regards you So much as I do; and still I love you too well I think. The occasion that now tempts me to trouble you, is an invitation from my grand mamma Higham into Devonshire, and another Srom miy aunt Burton 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 305 tonne to London. As I cannot go to both, and must accept one, I would wish to govern myself by your movements, and chuse that where I shall be most likely to See you. If I do not hear from you extremely Soon, I shall then believe fwhat I now with Some reason suspedt) that you mean to drop me, in that case my study will be to avoid you as much as it is now to meet you. It is reported in this part of Somersetshire that you was Sent away sromwood berry on Sir Harry harwood’s account, it is odd So long as that regiment has been in this part of the world, that I have never Seen this much talked of captain. My uncle and aunt Willet, with all their children, have been with us a week, and are to stay while their house is repaired, which makes us above thirty in family, that upon my word I shall rejoice to get out of the crowd. I want your advice how to ad in resped to miss Blyden, in cafe I go to London. 1 have met her at races, and Such country affairs Several times, and we have always conversed together, now ought I to take any notice of her on going to town. I must confess myself very ambitious of contracting an acquaintance with her, yet would not be too forward, lest she should think it more for the honour than pleasure of knowing her that 
F 5 I 
io JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
I Sought it So much. My best respedts attends you, who am, with all Sincerity, 
Tour obedient friendy 
- Anna Ma. Rainsford. 
LETTER XLVII 
Continuation of Miss Rainsford to Miss Lewis. 
jr] ] r • Bingfield park; 
My dear Miss leutsy ° 
ifieely pardon you, your excuses are So good and my love So great, that you have all my forgiveness and all my pity; for you must have Suffered greatly, and poor miss Blyden I am Sincerely grieved for; my determination is for London; I shall Set out on Friday; as Soon as I get there, will Send to miss Blyden, as I doubt not of a polite reception from that amiable lady. I must mention Something to you in confidence that very greatly concerns me. I beg it may go no Sarther. A Sew days ago, young Mr. Evanion, and another young gentleman, pasted through this town, it was at the time of the races; they staid one day on that account; and I have been credibly dn i formed, 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 107 formed, Mr. Evanion was extremely drunk the whole time, made many ridiculous bers, and lost a hundred and twenty guineas, and behaved very ill in other respedts. The gentleman with him expressed great concern, and with vast persuasion got him to bed about three in the morning. Since he has been gone, we hear a rumour, that he has lest his uncle in displeasure, and is never to return. I imagine, if this is true, the match with miss Blyden must be quite off. I find there is many alterations at the Lodge, most of the old Servants dismissed, and the tenants greatly offended at the changes. All the low people give Mr. Blyden a terrible charadfer; but the more Sensible part of the country esteem him a man of merit and parts: I theresore conclude it a happy circumstance to his niece his being here. I beg you will excuse all the faults and blunders in this epistle, as my thoughts are wholly engaged on my London joys, which I depend upon being vastly prodigious! as I never was there, all things will be new to me; then one very happy thing is my being just come of age, and have received a year’s interest of my bles sed godmother’s twelve thousand pound legacy, with all the dear old woman’s diamonds. I am determin’d to show away, and go to every public place. I hope to God I shall be F 6 thought 
io JEMIMA AND LOLMSA. thought handsome in London; I know I sm reckon’d So here; ’tis a folly to disguise myself Emma; you have all I think just as it comes; don’t expose me, and let me very Soon be assured that you will still love her, who, while she treads this earthly globe, will always be 
your mofi affectionate Anna Maria Rainsford. 
LETTER XLVIII 
Continuation of Miss Rainsford to Miss Lewis. 
My dear Emma, St. james’s ftreet. 
HAVE been four days in London, and am not much pleased;; my aunt is really a mighty grave kind of a gentlewoman, and without I can Some way or other brush up Some Sprightly acquaintance, I Sear all my afternoons must be Spent at the corner of a stupid card table. The day after my arrival, I had the pleasure of the politest card I ever Saw from Miss Blyden; and the next morning she honoured me with a visit, and has engaged me 
to 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 109 to dine with her tomorrow. All this highly delights me; but I was very Sorry to See, as you will to hear, that poor miss Blyden has lost all her vivacity, notwithstanding wstich,, she still remains handsome, tho’ very pale and thin. I find she Seldom goes into public, when she does, it is to court, where she h ta! ken great notice os by many people of quality. 
I have Spent all my mornings vastly to my satis sadlion, in equipping myself with clothes osall Sorts. The full dress’d Suits are a dark blue, flower’d with silver and colours; a yellow, flower’d with Silver; a rose colour’d Satin, trimm’d with Silver, and a wshite and silver with a little purple. My Second dresses arc, a flower’d lutestring, a pink damask, and a blue and white tissue : these things, with what I had before, I hope will make me taring fine. I forgot to tell you. i’ve laid out a hundred pounds in lace; but what will all this fignisy, if I may not go abroad to show them? I was this morning promised vast indulgences while in London; two or three plays, to go to court, and to See the lions and the waxwork;; made me horrid cross, but luckily for me, the old lady did not See it. I am this moment a princess in happiness; for my goddess of a mantua woman has kept her word, and brought home the white and silver, which I shall deck 
myself 
110 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. myself in tomorrow to wait on miss Blyden. a good angel! to take So much notice of me; it is very lucky; for I have no chance of a companion out of my aunt’s acquaintance, as her woman informs me she visits only three and twenty people; and they generally treat her with a pool of quadrille (which she loves as her eyes) they meet at five, and part at eight i we then come home, eat a tart, and a piece of Gloucestershire cheese toasted, or cold; which you like best, drink a glass of dry mountain. Say our prayers, and to bed at ten. In the morning we rise at eight, pray heartily, and breakfast at nine upon weak tea, made worse with fkim milk (call’d here thin cream) and used for the wholesomes. We have always a noble joint of meat for dinner, the remainder of which is given away at night : at each meal I have a lecture on the unwhole fomeness of country luxury; all things So different to what I have left! burr i’ll Soon please myself, or I am much hiistaken. I have hired a very elegant chariot, and a pair of bays by the month, as long as I stay in town; for my aunt’s is an old cathedral vehicle, with an old coachman and purblind horses, that we can’t go faster than an old woman with a corn upon every toe. I have a very fniart footman already come, shall put him in my father’s livery. 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. III very, as he may perhaps be of his family; but I pray most ardently, that Anna Maria rains ford may never see Bingfield park any more; it will be very hard, wosht it, Emma, if I don’t get a husband with my fortune, and not an ugly face, let me tell you? The moment my new equipage comes home, FU fly about the town, if I goby myself; but I have a Scheme for company; for at chapel yesterday, Some Smart girls Sat in the Same pew with me, it Seems it is their place; next Sunday FU invite them to come to See me; they live just opposite to us, and have a handsome brother, that delights me. it’s a fine warm morning, and my aunt Sends to invite me to walk in the Park with her; old cats, you know, love to Urn themselvcs; but we must first to chapel; well, FU humour the tabby, that she in iny turn may humour me; for if possible. i’ll keep her in good temper, lest I should be order’d into the country for high rebellion a gainst an aunt; and though I have an independent fortune, I should not chuse to adt in open defiance, without an absolute necessity. Farewell, I hear old crazy come lumber, lumber to the door, like a funeral hearse. Compliments to good miss Wellers, and tell her 
I know 
II JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
I know Anthony Courtly very well, and hear of all his motions. 
Toursy 
Anna Maria Rainsford. 
LETTER XLIX 
Continuation of Miss Rainsford to Mtfs Lewis. 
r St. james’s street. 
Detir Emma, 
YO U will now have a very stupid epis tle from me, for I am very dull, though at the same time have much reason to be pleased; and So am both happy and unhappy. I do affure you, I greatly fear I shall make you vastly uneasy : I went this day (Sori can’t sleep till I tell you) to dine with miss Blyden; I thought the Servant who let me in look’d melancholy, and confused : he showed me into a diningroom, where I Sat above a quarter of an hour without Seeing anybody; then came in a most agreeable man, (I must observe that) with only one impersedtion, that I could See about him; and that is a Small claret mark on one cheek: he address’d me with a very dejedled voice 
and 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 113 and countenance, made apology for Mils Blyden and his mother (who, I Sound was miss’s aunt) their no: appearing, his cousin, as he call’d her, being extrenaely ill, and not just then able to come to me; I immediately defir’d leave to return home, and wait on her again at a more convenient time; but he begg’d I would Stay, Saying, It was quite necessary, and that he would give me his reasons why it was So : he began, That I could be no stranger to the match concluded on between miss Blyden and Mr. Evanion; and that the world judg’d it must prove very happy, as it had been a pashon of long standing; and began without any interested views of either side, at a time, when neither os them was old enough to have any Such consideration, and continued after noble and rich alliances were offer’d to both: that they were esteem’d persons of great and equal merit and sense: How happy was then the prospedt! continued he; and how shocking it must be to every one that hears, Mr. Evanion has Suddenly taken to drinking, and every other vice in consequence of that! this we perceived in a few days aster my cousin left the country : we Sufpedted him about a month before that, but then it came on with great rapidity! how to acquaint miss Blyden 
with 
II JEMIMA AND LOUISA, with this unhappy change was our greatest distress, and it was indispenfible her knowing it! but our contrivances were Soon stqpt by his resolution to visit her; the regard his merit had attracted from me still remain’d, that with my respedlful affection to miss Blyden, induced me to accompany him to London; and infinitely I suffer’d in that attendance, as she loiter’d on the road, going many miles out of the way, to any place where was a cock match, fair, or bull bating, behaving all the time like a dissolute reprobate! much to my shame and consu fion! we arrived in town but last night : I with difficulty kept him from miss Blyden; and left him, as I thought. Safe in bed this morning, while I waited on her, to endeavour at breaking it to her; but before I could Sum up Sufficient resolution, he broke in upon us, with all the rage of a mad man! I can Say no more on this head; you may more easily imagine, than I can describe our confusion! I got him away about two hours ago; the time since, has been employ’d in comforting my dear Cousin : and we have persuaded her to See company, and go out in moderation, Srom this moment, as that will be most likely to carry off her affliction: : takes our advice, and will wait on you presently; 
she 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 115 
she desires her discomposure may pass for illness, and intends playing a game at whist in the asternoon, with you and two or three other Sriends, who she has appointed to meet here. I ask’d him, IS he could assign any reason Sor this unfortunate change in Mr. Evanion? he Said, It was his opinion, that that damnable Burman was the whole cause, by Setting him at variance with his uncle! and then the Settlement turn’d out bad, which hurt him excessively. Searing, it might be thought, he knew it, and kept it Secret to cheat miss Blyden; these conjoin’d, I fear, hurried him to the vice of drinking, which together has, I fear, a little touch’d his brain. He was proceeding in these melancholy refiedions, when miss Blyden enter’d the room; she received me with the utmost politeness, notwithstanding her trouble Sat heavy on her countenance; in her face was express’d the height of distress, and great resignation. In the afternoon came in two Sprightly girls, and a handsome man, (upon my life he was) they were Sir John hale’s daughters and Captain Bryerton. miss Blyden obligingly desir’d to introduce me to their acquaintance; which they most com plaisantly receiv’d, and promised me the ' honour os a visit on Friday; and engaged me 
in 
ii JEMIMA AND LOUISA, in their party for the play tomorrow, and to court on Sunday; how lucky is this for me! they are girls of Spirit, and, I am certain, we shall be excellent companions. Egad! that bryerton’s a charming fellow! he runs much in my head. miss Blyden desires I will visit her often; and, really, it would give me pleasure to oblige her, but she de jedls me So much. Compliments, as due from. 
Dear Miss lewis’s 
obedient humble Servant 
Anna Maria Rainsford. 
LETTER L 
Miss Blyden to Miss Lewis. 
grosvenor street. 
I Thank my dear miss Lewis for her kind letter: can she pardon my not answering it as Soon as Such an obliging Savour deserved? but I have had a great deal to employ my thoughts, and am at this time very incapable of writing, my mind is So disorder’d. I hope you have heard of my misfortunes, as I cannot 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 117 not attempt to relate them without ruffling myselsmore than I can bear, antkthat I know would add to your concern, which L am Sensible is already very great, is you are acquainted with my troubles; however, I will write, concluding, you know as much as I do: my aunt is very indulging to me, and Mr. Clavering most extremely kind, quite the tenderness os an affectionate brother in every particular : he advises me not to give way to immoderate grics, but See a little company, and go out Sometimes, but not too much os either; he makes me play at cards now and then, and is teaching me backgammon, always studying to employ my thoughts vdtholit hurrying my Spirits. I wish it was more in my power to entertain miss rainssord, but she is too lively Sor me now; but I have introduced her to Some young acquaintance, because, I know Mrs. Burton, is a very, grave, retired woman, for Such a gay girl. How shock’d my kind uncle will be to hear of my affliction! but I learn, he knew it before I did. What a providence it was for me his coming hither; or, I should. Oh! dreadful to think of, been married! before this unhappy, this terrible change had happen’d. What, or who, in this world can we depend on? My dear Eimma, 
I 
ii JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
I hope, I pray, you are still the same You an’c chang’d, I hope? however, I am happy now; for I can never again be surpriz’d, shock’d, or Srighted. I shall never more go to the Lodge, nor into any part of that country nor the next, nor the next to that; I never will leave the house I am now in. I must not write any more at present, I find myself fatigued; and Mr. Clavering thinks I have wrote too long. My best compliments to Mrs. and miss Wellers, and all my love to you. I am. 
Tour obliged 
Louisa Blyden. 
LETTER LI 
Miss Rainsford to Miss Lewis at Miss Wellers. 
My dear Emma, 
NOW I am alive, and in high Spirits, my chariot, my men, and all my fine clothes, are come home; my acquaintance vastly increased; and I have been at court, at plays, and at operas, every morning in the 
Park 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 119 Park, and all things go clever. I was introduced to the royal family; the prince talked prodigioussy to me. I like plays better than operas; but as the latter is reckoned genteelest, 
I go most to them. I am more and more charm’d wdth Bryerton; we are always together, but I cannot learn what fortune he has, that I should like to know. My aunt Seems to take my flying about very patiently, only observes, she is glad I don’t live always at London, and let’s me know she shall go early into the country this Spring; So I must make the better use of my time: I think I have broke off the evening prayers, as I make it a rule never to be at home at that time; for the morning devotions I march down decently and orderly enough, as I cannot well refuse it; and as I am an early riser, it is not much amiss; for really one should pray, a little, but I cannot love So much of it. There is going to be three grand Subicription balls; I hope I shall get tickets; if I don’t, how will 1 abuse Bryerton and Clavering; egad. i’ll Swear at them; now don’t frown and look cross, Emma, because I rattle; for rattle I will as long as I live; and do no more harm when i’ve done, than your prim prudish ladyship, who, i’ll be hang’d else, loves Harwood better than I do any man upon earth. I 
know 
120 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, know you’h be angry if I Send this letter without mentioning miss Blyden; and I can Say nothing of her but what must give you pain; for file is an object of distress and melancholy; but as I have So lately been thinking of love, cannot help observing how Sweet she looks on her cousin, and how often she calls on his name; and I think heperfedly idolises her; I never Saw So much admiration; I almost envy her, for he is really a charming fellow. I was vastly surprised yesterday at miss blyden’s, to find him and his mother in deep mourning; I learn it is for his wife, who died in Ireland about two months since, and they have just heard it. Poor Evanion has now acted his last Scene in England: three days since he headed Some rioters in pulling down a house of ill fame; he narrowly escaped being taken; but Mr. Clavering gave him a thousand pounds, contrived his escape, and begg’d him to go to Some very remote place, and in about a twelvemonth’s time, write to him by a feign’d name; they thought miss Blyden would have died when she heard this account; she lay in fits for Several hours, and has kept her chamber ever since; but I hear she is now rather more com posed than she has been since this misfortune. 
But 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 121 But, away with this melancholy, and let me prepare for the grand ball next thursday; there will be fifteen hundred people at it; I wish you was to be one of the company, a! So miss Wellers, Miss Courtly, Sir Harry and young Courtly : I hear the ’squire resides at Swinderby, and that the baronet has made you a visit, since which he has made proposals in form at Woodberry, but rejected on account of circumstances, he having but three hundred a year besides his commission; you see I know every tittle about you. I am invited to dine with louisa tomorrow; will give you account when I come home how she does, which I know will please you better than all my rattle; 
Farewelly emma^fays 
Annama. Rainsford. 
LET 
122 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
L E T T E R LI 
Continuation of - Miss Rains ford to Miss Lewis at Miss Wellers. 
Vear Mss Lewis, St. james’s ftreet, 
I ASK pardon for not answering your letter much Sooner; but really I have been So much engaged lately, you cannot imagine how much; not one half hour to Spare, but that in the morning for prayers, and having a vast deal to Say, I must begin with abusing you, lest I should not have time or paper left Sufficient for that purpose: you are a Spiteful little devil to Say i’ve no admirers, and a fibbing toad to Say you have been told So; for all that know me, know I have hundreds; but no matter what you think, you country bumkin, quite a milkmaid to me; I find you want to learn who I like most; that you never ssiall, Emma, i’ll give you my word; not even when I am married; for the man I like best will never come to my share; and I shall not make myself unhappy about that neither, loving grandeur better than I love him; I am determined on the first t man 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 123 man who will keep me a Set of horses, and all things answerable thereto. I have an im mensity to Say to you, and will not be at home to a prince till this letter is concluded. Since I wrote last, I have had a fine scolding bout, and very near being Sent into the country in high disgrace: the poor lady, God bless her! really thinks my virtue in danger! for thinking it necessary to stay more at home, I must needs invite about six or eight young Sparks to entertain me, who behaved So wild and noisy, that ray aunt vow’d home, she would carry me, the next day, firmly believing those people would hurry me to the devil in a moment; but I with great condescenfion, and Seeming penitence, have got a reprieve, upon promising to go out but four times a week, and only where she chuses; it will be easy to cheat her, you know. The day after I wrote to you, I dined with miss Blyden, and in the evening, Mrs. Blyden, I, and an old captain Grant, went to the play; we Sat in the Green Boxes; for Mrs. Blyden is So low Spirited, she can’t bear to dress; Seldom appears at all in public, or comes down to any but particular people at home. I was horrid mad to go without a young fellow, and Clavering staid to keep his cousin company till we returned; however, I chatted the time away G 2 menily 
124 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, merrily enough with two or three beaux, while Mrs. Blyden wetted as many handkerchiefs; for it was a very deep tragedy. Within this last month my Lord D — has wliilpered love in my ear; lo may a dozen, you’ll Say; but to Speak plain and boldly, as you are my friend, it was marriage he talk’d of; he has a very large estate, and is tolerably handsome; however, I prefer’d my other admirer Bryerton much before him; therefore kept my Lord D -~ in play, in hopes of bryerton’s declaring himself; and thursdays ball fix’d me. i’ll tell you how it was; I and Bryerton went in the edgerly’s party; he was as close as my petticoat for two hours; heard me refuse six or Seven partners; one os which was Lord D —; and presently a young fellow call’d to him, Frank, do you know miss stephenson’s here? No, Says Frank, is she! upon your life! Yes, Says t’other, she is; and he left me like lightning, and in three minutes was dancing with this stephenson. So homely a pug I never Saw; but it Seems she has twenty thousand pounds; So much for bryerton’s love my God, how mad I was! I could have kick’d with all my Soul; but i’ll tell you how I serv’d him; now getting a partner was the difficulty, after refusing So many; but I luckily Sound Lord D -- -- -- pouting in a corner 
; I went most graciouoy up to him, and 
Said 
jemimaand LOUISA. 125 Said, is your lordship engaged with a partner? He answer’d sternly, no madam. I then made a congee, and ask’d, if he could pardon my fickleness; but when he did me the honour to ask me, I had So violent a pain in my fide, that I thought more of going home than dancing; but it was now So much better, that all the happiness I wish’d for was the pleasure of dancing with him. He Surlily Said, You had, madam, a great Bryerton by your side, which the pretty miss stephenson I See has removed; however, I am your stave at all times, and led me gruffly to the dancing; where I was all good-humour and pleasantness, insomuch, that he begg’d me to go into the tea room for a little private chat; I most willingly consented, As we pass’d, in a Snug corner, like turtle doves. Sat Bryerton and his girl; I colour’d; in truth, I could have cry’d for madness; but conquer’d myself, and, with a great flirt, I brush’d off the beast’s wig, and terribly tumbled stephenson’s hair; Madam, Says I, I asse ten thou Sand pardons : she look’d Sower, and up flew Bryerton; Madam! wsith a challenging air, Says he. Sir, Says I (bursting with laughter) do you want Satisfaction, appoint your place. Sword or pistol, which you please! He look’d fury itself, So much, that Lord O —. seem’d frighten’d, and Said, Dear Mr. 
G 3 Bryerton, 
126 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. Bryerton, an entire accident, upon my honour; but I must not See the lady affronted, and tell you, Sir, her affronts are mine. Qiiite compos’d, the Captain reply’d, I mean not to offend miss rainssord; and as she has apologised to miss stephenson, I have done, and, wish your lordship much happiness with the lady. We proceeded to the tea room, and there my Lord again urged his Suit, and begg’d liberty to wait on my father with proposals;; I readily granted, and he southeast out next morning. I am inform’d all things goon Smoothly, and we expe<5t him back the latter end os the week. Now, Emma, you know as much os my affairs as I do. My aunt is in great Spirits with the thoughts of this match; he has clear nine thousand pounds a year; what a glorious Sound! That rascal Frank Bryerton has not four. I hope stephenson will baulk him; that would delight me. I am all impatience for Lord D— —; I long to be buying wedding cloathsi they sstall be taring fine. I beg, Emma, you’ll not trouble me with jemima’s afflidions; louisa’s are loo much for me; I am only made for joy. All my compliments attend you and the family where you are. I am, for a little while longer, your faithful 
Anna Ma. Rainsford. 
LED 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 127 
LET T E R LIII 
Mr. Blvden to Miss Lewis at Mijs Wellers. 
Madam 
inclos’d, you have a letter from my Son, whose modesty would not Suffer him to ad dress you, even in writing, without introduction, and begs me to open his case, and plead for him. You See, my dear miss, the inconvenience of good nature; for we trouble you with all our difficulties : Mr. Clavering has unhappily taken a strong affection for miss Blyden: I call it unhappy, because I So much doubt its success; and, without your kind assistance, it must remain unknown to my niece; for neither I nor he have courage to mention it; he having but two thousand pound a year; which is So much inferior to her fortune, that the world would condemn me greatly for proposing it; and is, through your means, this match should be effected, I am certain of general censure : however, my conscience will acquit me of any wrong thing, as my only reason for urging this luit is, that I know him to be a man of true merit, and in tirely calculated to make her happy. All my G 4 desires 
128 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, desires centre in that wish: if she does not approve my Son, I wish to know Some man she could prefer; for I really think her happiness and my character depends on her marrying, as this late disappointment Sets too heavy on her Spirits, and the world will think I have interested views in keeping her single; therefore most earnestly entreat you will endeavour to learn who it is she could chuse for a husband;; will engage she shall command the man, whoever it may be. 
I Madam with the great eft rejpef!^ 
Tour most obedient Servant 
Isaac Blyden^ 
LET 
JE MI M A AND L OU IS A. 129 
LETTER LIV 
Mr. Clavering to Miss Lewis at Miss wellers’j. 
Madam., 
bond street. 
Concluding Mr. Blyden has introduced the occasion os my addressing you iil this manner, shall trouble you only with a few words, aster begging ten thousand par dpns for taking the liberty os asking a favour, which nothing but your exceeding good nature entitles me to do, and that I hope will induce you to forgive and endeavour to Serve one, whose happiness, I firmly believe, is only in your power to obtain. Should you be kind enough to undertake my cause, and fortunate enough to Succeed, the whole study of my life shall be to make Miss Blyden happy; which, I am certain, Miss Lewis will esteem the best return I can make to her goodness. If I prove unsuccessfui, the remainder of a miserable life shall be Spent in prayers Sor your happiness, and for cutting short the days of him, who is, with all reverence. 
Tour mofi humble., 
and obedient Servant., 
George Clavering. 
G 5 
130 'JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
LETTER LV 
Miss Blvden io Miss Lewis, at Miss Wellers. 
My dear Mijs Lewis., 
SOME time ago I desired miss Rainsford, (and I hope she did) to inform you, that by the advice of the do6for, and desire of my aunt and Mr. Clavering, I retrain’d from writing, which we Sound was too much for my hurried Spirits. Thank God I am infinitely better than I was, that is, much more composed, though still very ill in body; but hope I am now well enough to return all the thanks that is due for your obliging and affcdtionate letter. How kind it was not to dwell on a Subject, which I find, you are Sensible fills me with melancholy reflections. On the receipt of your favour, I took the first opportunity os telling Mr. Clavering (in the gen teelest manner I could) that it was my fix’d determination never to marry, but Spend the Small remainder of my days in the happiest and most composed manner possible; for that my Spirits were So wounded, I never should recover them, and am very Sensible, my death 
is 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 131 is much nearer than anybody imagines. As to marrying for my uncle’s credit, I never shall consent, though I would do almost anything else to oblige him; but, I am convinced, he is So good a man, the world can never censure him. lam Sure, there is nobody So Scon as himself that 1 should wish to heir my estate, after Some legacies of friendship that I intend leaving. Indeed, that I have left for my will, is to be signed and Sealed this day. 
I suppose, you know, miss Rainsford 
is going to marry Lord D -- -- -- -- --; it is a 
prodigious match lor her; I am very glad of it; for she is So delighted with the thoughts of all her grandeur, and she is really a good na tur’d obliging creature, and comes and goes just as I am disposed : She diverts me very much Sometimes, and Sometimes she is too much for my poor Spirits; then I Send her away. I have been consulted vastly about her clothes; she honours me with a high opinion of my fancy; all things are in prodigious forwardness; the wedding will be thursday Sortnight, I fancy; I am invited, but have not the least thoughts of going; for was my health Su 1 cient, my Spirits are much too low for Such joyous occasions. 1 go nowhere but to church; and Sometimes Mr. Clavering Sorces me to air in Hyde park. As to my G 6 aunt. 
132 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, aunt, she is worse than me, for going out, or feeing company. My uncle presses me greatly to return home; but that I never will on any account, it would only be to Spend my few remaining days in.greater misery. My dear Emma, I beg you will never mention to me any person or thing relating to any part of Devonshire, Woodberry only excepted. Write to me continually, and do not wait letter for letter, as I am Sometimes not able to take a pen in hand for Several days. My best regards await yourself and Mils Wellers, and I remain. 
Dear Miss Lewises 
ftncere and affefiionate 
Louisa Blvden. 
LETTER LVI 
Miss Rainsford tq Miss Lewis at Miss Wellers. 
Dear Emma, 
y Lord return’d as expected, and all things Settled to every one’s satisfac and now all necessary preparations are 
M 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 133 in Surprising forwardness, So much, that Thursday Seshnight is the appointed day; and believe me, it makes me a little grave : upon my word Pm melancholy; but when all the fine things rush into my head, i’m all joy again: but, my dear, as you are my very good friend, I must clear up what will otherwise make you wonder; which is, how So great a wedding could be So Speedily equipped: it is thus. The very good Lord, who is entering the marriage state with me, was on the brink of it with another lady of great fortune, about four months ago: and was for Some reason (I care not whatj broke off; therefore, the Same fine things (without affront) may Serve a woman with twelve thousand, that was intended for a lady with thirty. I am to have the most expensive chariot and Sedan in London; a pair of flander’s mares, and four footmen: my lord’s chariot is a very fine one, with a pair of pie balds, and two footmen, Silver laced liveries: my diamonds are remarkably fine, a large pafr of earrings, hair Sprig, necklace and stomacher, complete; all my own diamonds I shall Send to my sister. I have a large pearl necklace, each bead as big a pea; a moco stone watch and equipage, with my lord’s picture Set in diamonds; an four excessive fine rings: 
now 
134 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
Now for my deaths : About ten days ago, my aunt Sent for me into her closet; she began with Anna Ma. you are mighty private in all your affairs : I Suppose, you think me an old woman, and not capable of choosing wedding deaths I answered, My dear madam, I thought you did not like to be troubled about Such trifles. My dear, replied she, I do not think clothes for this occasion is a trifle : for, I think, you ought to appear fine; and, I fear, whether your finances will hold out; for you have been very extravagant. I was happy to find her in a good-humour; and Said, with chearsulness, That as I had great variety of new clothes, I should buy but very little on this occasion. She immediately went to her cabinet, and after fumbling for sometime, gave me a parcel of paper, and said. There my dear, is my opinion; now please yoursels, and I shall be happy. I thank’d her abundantly, imagining, I was to take it as a favour; but knew not what it was, till I made my escape upstairs, where I found it to be eight hundred in banknotes. Ye gods! how happy I was! I flew to the mercers, and bought a gold ground, flower’d with red, green, and silver: a pink tab bey, cover’d with the richest point de span : a white and gold; and a white and silver, 
which 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 135 which I am to be married in : I gave one hundred pound for a Suit of point; have bought two Suits of Brussels, a Suit of Mechlin; and my wedding night cap and shift, contains twenty yards of point, at twenty shillings a yard. Of the wedding day, my Lord, and his mother, are to fetch me and my aunt in the dowager’s coach to the house, where we dine with all his lordship’s relations; in the evening, we all go to Supper at my lord’s house in grosvenor Square, and at eleven at night we are to be married; till after which time, you’ll hear no more of me, as every day is engag’d in being introduced to his relations, who are all to make their entertainments before the wedding; for the day after we go into the country for a week; then return, and to court, cc. ci 
am yours, Cfr. 
Annama. Rainsford, 
L E T 
136 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
LETTER LVII 
Miss Blyden to Mijs Lewis at Wellers. 
j r • grosveuor street. 
My dear Mtfs Lewts, 
I AM desired by miss rainssord, to give you the particulars of her marriage, which, I do assure you, is rather extraordinary; she Surprised me, who knew more of it than anybody else. Intends writing very Soon herself, but did not choose to be the first messenger : I do believe at present, she is the happiest mortal breathing, and I hope, will continue So; for her husband is a very accomplish’d, and (I think) a worthy good man, tho’ not the lord you imagine; Sor to the amazement of every one, she married Mr. Clavering, my cousin Clavering! last Thursday night at our lodgings, and went home with him about twelve o’clock. You shall now know all I do about this odd affair: Last Monday morning she was with me before I was up, look’d very melancholy, and hardly Spoke till after breakfast, that the Servant quitted the room. I took notice of her dullnels, and afk’d if there was any particular 
reason: 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 137 reason : I fear, says she, I am going to do a very foolish thing; indeed I must; for it is too far gone to retrad now. I hope, says I, you have no reason to alter your opinion of 
Lord D -- -- She Said, Her opinion of 
him was just the Same, and So was her affection; for that she never liked him, but was dazzled with his title and fortune : and now, to her misfortune, found all that was insufficient to make her happy; and did she marry him, must infallibly be miserable: but thought she never could show her face after using him So basely; for that everything was fixed, and Thursday was the appointed day. I was Sorry (I Said) she had carried things So far; but it was using him much more honestly to put it off, even now, than marrying a man to make him miserable. But, Says she, I shall be miserable, a miserable creature, if 1 don’t marry him. Then, Said I, miss rains ford, what can be done, if you must be miserable cither way ^ however, marry not my lord for the universe, if you can’t love him; for that will be very great folly. Why, Says she. How cross and unfortunate it is, that a man should like me, whose love I cannot return; and bitterly she sigh’d, and turn’d pale, I was really frighted. Why, I thought. Says I, your Spirits was So high, that no body’s 
138 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. missortunes much affected you. I was once Such a brute, answer’d she, and sigh’d again terribly. I am Sorry to see you So low, I Said, but for heaven’s Sake, don’t marry Lord 
D -- -- -, you’ll Soon overcome the trouble, I 
hope. She Sat two hours after this, without Speaking three words. I was very ilk and melancholy, and we seem’d more Suitable companions than ever we had been before. At last, with a faint and trembling voice, she ask’d, If I thought Mr. Clavering would ever marry. I answer’d, I hoped he would, as I thought him qualified to make an excellent husband. Is it true, says she, that you have refused him. Very true. Says I, for I would not marry a Prince. She then rose to go; I persuaded her to stay dinner, but she hurried away in great confusion. On refieft ing on what had pass’d, I thought it appear’d clearly she liked Mr. Clavering: 1 immediately waited on my aunt, to consult her how the match might be brought about; she much approved it, and Sent directly for my cousin, as no time could be lost; for, I plainly Saw, nothing but the certainty of Mr. Clavering, would induce her to quit my lord’s dazzling grandeur. When my cousin came, I left mother and Son to consult proper measures, and retired to my room; my 
aunt 
JEMIMA AND LOUSIA. 139 aunt came to me presently, and after Some necestary compliments on the occasion, Said, Mr. Clavering approved of it So much, that he had Sent Sor liberty to wait on her at any hour most agreeable to her: before we had done Speaking an answer came, desiring he would come immediately, as she was engag’d all that afternoon, and Several days to come : it was just our dinnertime;; I persuaded him to fast for once, as I well knew Lord 
D -- -- wouldbe with her before five; about 
which time, Mr. Clavering return’d, and inform’d us all was Settled. I directly Sent to invite her to breakfast with me next morning, agreeable to which she very obligingly came: a countenance So full of joy and shame I never Saw; she thank’d me abundantly. I then inquired, what she had done in respedl to Lord D —; she Said, Nothing yet; she really wanted resolution. I hinted, that Thursday drew very near. She would have put the disagreeable office upon me; but, I begg’d to be excus’d. She left me, vastly embarrassed with her two lovers; but I did not greatly pity her, knowing she had Spirits Sufficient Sor any undertaking. On Wednesday night, Mr. Clavering desir’d I would invite her to Spend the next day with me, as it must be an awkward one to her; that being 
140 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, ing the day fixed for the wedding. I directly Sent; she came to us pretty early, dressed in her bridal Suit of white and silver, and all things Suitable to it. She Saw I was Surprised, and merrily Said, This is in honour of my wedding day. I knew her to be So odd a girl, that I hastily Said, I hope you have not married Lord D — 7 this morning No, thank God, ' she answer’d with a most joyous coun teance, I unmarried him yesterday : how to do it, puzzlecl me exceedingly : at last, I thought the genteelest way was to wait on him; or to Say the truth, I fear’d he might fly in a pashon, and my aunt might hear him. Why, have you not told Mrs. Burton of it. Said I? O! my God, Says she, I can’t have the face to tell anybody! About five minutes before dinner, in came Mr. Clavering, as fine as a Prince, quite out of mourning. I stared at him, .and he coloured excessively. aster we had dined, he desired to Speak with me in the diningroom; we went upstairs, where he begg’d, I would give him and miss Rainsford leave to be married at my house that evening. With all my heart, I Said, but was Surprised at it’s being So Soon. He urg’d, that it would Save a great deal of ttouble and confusion; for, that one wonder would now Serve for her not marrying Lord 
D —, 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 141 —, and marrying him: and should her Sriends know anything of it, they would most probably intersere in favour of his lord ssiip; and all things being maturely consider’d, tfiey judg’d it quite right to do it thus Suddenly. Very maturely consider’d, indeed, thought I, to put off one match, and conclude another in three days! but I had no objection, if they had none; So down to the parlour we went. My aunt was next inform’d, and all points Settled. I was concern’d their wedding entertainment was only a family dinner; but endeavour’d to make a mends at Supper, by ordering the housekeeper to do all in her power upon So short notice. About five o’clock, Captain Bland dropped in, by appointment, I suppose, Sor father in the ceremony. At six came the clergyman; we drank tea, and married my friends about eight: after which, I desired, they would Send a handsome message to Mrs. Burton; they instantly did, desiring permission to pay their duty that night, or the next morning. Her answer was. Not to dare to attempt Seeing her Sace as long as they lived. This made the bride look grave; but she Soon recovered her Spirits. As I thought.this would make a prodigious noise in town, I advised their taking a trip to Paris, till it was blown I over; 
142 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, over: but Mr. Clavering Said, His affairs would not permit. I then begg’d them, to. go down to the Lodge, and visit my uncle; for, I thought, she could not with any decency appear in public. This they agreed to, and Set out about twelve the next day : I breakfasted with them, when she desired me to give you an account of this affair, in confidence of your Secrecy. I promised writing to you as Soon as she arrived at the Lodge. I am fatigued with the enormous length of this letter; and beg, you’ll excuse all ceremony, from. 
Tour affefhonate, 
Louisa Blvden. LETTER LVIII 
Mrs. Clavering to Miss Lea'is at a/z/j Wellers. 
Dear Emma, Blyden lodge. 
CONCLUDING you know all things relating to my wedding, I shall write, as if I had been married these twenty years : I wish to God, that you and Wellers, and all you 
girls 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 143 girls was married : thank Heaven, I am, and to a man, that I love and like; and one, who loves grandeur and riot, as well as I do my sels. The night before I Set out (I won’t Say the night I was married Sor the world) we supp’d with Mils Blyden, and had the most elegant entertainment I ever Saw. I can’t help loving that foolish little toad, though she has vowed eternal lamentation and weeping Sor her love. Do you know, I travelled all Friday night, because I would not pals by Bingfield by daylight, for fear of Seeing my Father, who, I know, will never forgive me. We dined at the Lodge a Saturday, where Mr. Blyden received ns with the greatest af sedion and politeness. I live here like a princess, in grandeur, and much happier, I dare believe: How can miss Blyden be So Silly, to forsake this charming place.? my Father intends to persuade her to go to Bath : I hope, she will; if site does. i’ll meet her there, that is, is Clavering will let me; for he is consounded wshimsical: but old Dad Blyden always takes my part; So hope, I shall manage him. He wants me to go to Ireland; but I won’t; Egad! I won’t: I am in tiptop Spirits, with the thoughts of three assemblies we are going to have; where, I hope, to See Sir Harry. I hear his regiment 
144 jemima and LOUISA. 
is going from this part of the country; shall hope, Mrs. Lewis will Send for you home, when he is gone; for company is all 1 want at present: 1 shall visit you most violently, when I get you here. Old Evanion is extremely ill"; stis thought he’u die Soon : he has never recovered the loss os his nephew. I am rejoiced, he Sound out burman’s wick edness, who, is not only turned out of his place, but drove out of the country: and Mr. Blyden has undertaken to get his estate in order: it’s amazing, how much he has done to both the estates; and what good he does in the country, tho’ none of the tenants love him. Mr. Evanion is not easy a moment without Mr. Blyden; and, really, the melancholy Scene overcomes him; it is too much Sor his Spirits : I wish he was better, or dead; Sori hate all these dulneffes. However, Clavering and I gallop about, and visit the neighbours : we shall very Soon beat up their quarters at Woodberry, and put your old women in a suss: Egad! i’ll plague them finely about Harwood; we expedf him here every moment, he is to dine with us today. I must dress for dinner; therefore, can add nothing more, than mine and clavering’s compliments to you and your friends Write me much about Wellers and young Courtly, 
but 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 145 but Say nothing of the melancholies: Pray does that girl Wellers, yet know she’s over head and ears in love with Courtly? I am. 
Tour most obedient 
Annama. Clavering. 
P. S. Sir harry’s just left us, and I have Something to tell you will make your heart leap, and your very ears glow. He beg’d me to prevail on you to keep yoursels disen gauged tomorrow se’nnight, for he should certainly Spend that day at Swinderby; and I can assure you the journey is purposely to See you. Poor girls, how I pity ye, ye courtly’s ye lewis’s, ye wellers’s, and all the languishing tribe : had ye half my resolution and Spirits, you would be as mad and as gay as myself. Once more, I Say adieu, and once more, write the dearly beloved name of. 
Tour moji devoted, ^ 
Annama. Clavering. 
II 
LET 
146 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
LETTER LIX 
Miss Blvden to Miss Lewis at Miss wellersv. 
Dear Miss Lewis, 
grosvenor street. 
I HOPE, long before this, Mrs. Clavering has perform’d her promise, and wrote to you. I find my uncle likes her extremely, and is much pleased with the match. Both he and my Cousin have offer’d to wait on Mr. rainssord, buthe will not on any terms hear of a reconciliation. She is a good-natured engaging creature, but So wild and mad headed : She is a lucky girl to have fallen into a family of honour, and to have met with a man of fortune. My uncle urges sh kindly my going to Bath, that I cannot possibly reftise it, tho’ I am certain, neither waters nor medicines can be of any Service to ine; yet to oblige my friends, I have Suffered a phyficiah to attend me for Several weeks, but my aunt is now So far of my opinion, that she presses it no more, and has agreed to my discharging him. My uncle has got a friend to take me a house at Bath; for my Spirits would not bear a lodging, 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 147 as I do not intend ever appearing in public. All our Servants, except my aunt’s woman and chambermaid, and two footmen. Set out tomorrow se’nnight, and we Set out two days after. I shall invite Mrs. Clavering to come to me, as I know she will be in her element at Such a gay place. I shall then recommend him to think of Settling in Some place, for possibly they may neither os them think of a house, till their family is just on the point of increasing, nor then neither perhaps, for they are a very inconsiderate couple. Next post I purpose writing, to beg Mrs. Lewis will give you leave to come to me at the Bath, trusting it will not be disagreeable to you. I greatly fear her denial, for my uncle’s letter this morning informed me, he had been at wood berry, and found your mother Sending the chariot and old governed, to fetch you home without any notice. She being extremely uneasy at Sir Harry harwood’s absence who she heard was gone into Cambridgeshire, near Mrs. wellers’s; and that the regiment wa? very Soon to go t^uite away, and no body knew where : I hope her fears are unnecessary, because he is rather too expensive a man, though not addicted to any vice.; and a«stuall, y has but two hundred a yes^r.be sides bis commission. A poor baronet Emma, is a H 2 very 
14^ J EMI M A AND LOUISA, very bad thing; then what is still worse I thinki is, Mrs, i.ewis’s unreasonable dissike to him : and your being her only child, must make it an unhappy match to all parties. I shall Send this letter to Swinderby, as I know miss Wellers will Send it you if you should be gone, which I fear must be the case. My best affections attend you. And I subscribe, 
My dear lewis’s 
most obliged and obedient 
Louisa Blvden. 
LETTER LX 
Mrs. Clavering to Miss Lewis, at Miss wellers’j. 
IH AVE ten thousand things to Say to my dear miss Lewis, what shall I begin with? Oh! old Evanion is dead, he died yesterday morning, and has lest Mr. Blyden all his estate : he delivered his will in preience ol Some of the most material os his neighbours, declaring himself thoroughly Satisfied with the dilposal of his fortune, therefore it can’t be disputed. We had three assemblies last week, I wore my finest Suit, 
and 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 149 and immensely fine I look’d; I danced each night with the Duke of K —, and began the balls with him. he’s acliarming man, has been ever since with us at the lodge, went away this morning; he has engaged me to dance with him next assemblies, for he has Settled to have three every month. When I was dress’d, egad, 
I long’d for Lord D — ’s Diamonds, how mad I was to part with them, aster having tried them on, pranced about the room, and looked myself a thousand times in the etess. By gad 1 look’d charmingly; however I have got a charmer in their room, but a very devil, my dear, to manage. He is as obstinate as a hog, we have many a brush, but i’ll never give up my humour to any man upon earth; 1 married him to please mysels, and i’ll manage him for the Same reason, by my bonnet I wdll. Lord bless me! now I think of it I hear you are coming, or come home; however i’ll Send, this letter to the Abbey, and let them pack it back again is you are gone. I learn the Woodberry old dame Sends for you home, for fear of Harry, why don’t you cure her fears and the world’s curiosity, by marrying the man, nothing like itemma, marry him, take my advice and you’ll thank me. How mad the noble tribe of Bingsield park will be to hear of my sine clothes, my H 3 charmer 
150 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
charmer Glavering, and the honours I received at the balls. Now Till tell you Something I have contrived; all must allow my cousin louisa has money enough; then why should not my good father in law Blyden leave us old evanion’s estate, and let us live there, while he lives? that I should like prodigioussy. I shall sty to Woodberry, and rattle your old woman the moment I hear you are come home. I hunt three mornings a week; Clavering has bought me a very fine horse; well he is a good creature, that’s true; but not the obedient stave he was to Mils Blyden; there is Something vastly unaccountable in that girl! for though she is good natur’d, affable, and not exquisitely handsome, yet everybody stands in awe of her! her uncle is vastly unhappy about her health; he thinks her in a dangerous way; now I don’t. I do think she is more humoursome than sick; I would lay my lise she’ll marry, though everybody believes she wont; only think of me when you hear ihe’s as gay as a bird at Bath; for its impossible she can grieve much longer for one mam The Sweet creature has invited me to Bath; how kind it is, egad i’ll go and rout her about, and mysels to. i’ll enjoy the place I am determin’d; for as.i have made my fortune, I don’t value my behaviour; Till laugh, ■ ' with 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 151 with the young men, laugh at the old ones,. and despise all prudes. I know mother Lewis won’t give you leave to go : but now, my dear little angel, for once take my advice, marry Harwood, and keep your wedding with us at Bath; nothing So high as to surprise people with a Sudden marriage. I conclude, 
jiear Miss lewis’j 
moji affefuonatey Annama. Clavbring, 
LETTER LXL Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers. 
Dear Miss Wellers^ 
Woodberry. 
I KNOW you hate repetitions, therefore will not trouble good Mrs. Wellers or you with any more thanks for the innumerable favours conserr’d on me at Swinderby. I got home yesterday to dinner, and was joyfully received, till they held a private conference with madam Swaffam, and then all was turn’d Sour; for that old lady and I quarrel’d the whole journey : she has really told stories to H 4 vnj 
152 jemima and LOUISA. 
my mother and aunt, most abominable ones‘ 1*11 tell you all about it: The morning I left the abbey, while I was dressing, she Said she must Search my pockets, and accordingly made Such an attempt; I was in a great passion, and gave her a violent push, which I believe sprain’d her ankle, and was very near throwing her down; now, she Says, I box’d her ears twenty times, and beat her with the bellows; upon my word I never thought os any Such thing : then at night the coachman drove to a wrong inn, she call’d to him to go right, but the more she call’d the faster he drove, till we got to Sir Harry harwood’s quarters; and she tells at home, that as she bid the man drive to the star, out at one window, I bid him out of the other, drive to the crown, I really did not know what inn Sir Harry was quartered at. The next misfortune was, my treading on her gown as she was alighting, and down she roh’d, hurt herself dreadsully, and was carried directly to bed. I Sent Sora Surgeon and a nurse, and thought I behaved very well, but because I did not sit in the room with her, she Said I purposely flung her out of the chariot, and sat up all night with Sir Harry. I must consess she was So cross, that I Saw very little ol her, till we Sac out again; 
we 
JEMIMA and 'LOUSSA. 153 we were obliged on her account to stay a day and a half at the inn; she groan’d and call’d me her murderer all the way home, but was well enough to lock me up the next night : to convince, her, she Should not confine me, I took the lock off in less than ten minutes, that cured her os locking all the rest of the way; and we grumbled, groan’d and quar rd’d home, without any material adventure. The old woman’s lies put my mother and aunt in Such a passion, that I don’t know what would have been the consequence, if luckily good Lady Hetchmore and Sir Hugh had not come in this morning; the young gentleman was quite in my party; but the kind and considerate interposition of the old lady, quite reconciled us, on my promising not to desire to go anywhere, but to Lady hetchmore’s; which I readily did, as we have no other neighbours I much care for. This privilege I should not have had, but niy Lady insisted on my going to her hduse, and anywhere she chose to take me. I hope you will write to me very frequently, for my Spirits want Support. This moment I have a message from Mrs. Clavering, she comes to me tomorrow, I shall be merry then I am certain, for she is a droll creature, I believe you knoi^ H 5 it. 
154 JEMIMA AND Lotus A. it. Be alfibred, my dear Fanny, that I am, faithfully yours, 
Emma Maria Lewis 
LETTER LXII Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers. 
Dear Miss Wellers^ 
Woodberry, 
YO U must have heard of my missortune; 
the whole world must know the loss I have Sustained! Surely I now am miserable, never to be happy more! she’s dead! my louisa’s dead! but how no creature knows! for the morning, the unhappy morning they were to Set out for Bath, she was found lifeless in her bed! You, I know', will Sympathise in my grief: Can my loss ever be repaired So kind! So Sensible a friend and neighbour! So good to all the world! This is indeed a country of tears; poor Mr. Blyden is inconsolable, and Mr. Clavering in the utmost concern i they Set out yesterday for London, and Mrs. Clavering has flown to me, quite in despair! her grief knows no moderation! she is like a mad woman, and almost distrads me, who want no addition to my trouble. The poor 1 Servants 
JEMIMA an p LOUISA. 155 Servants that were going to Bath, are Come home in the greatest affli^ion, and are much troubled that Mr. blyden’s gentlgman would not let them return to see the remains of their dear Lady; and Mr. Blyden, (who is kind to ev^ry body) is fo concern’d they were not per niitted to go back, that he has given them leave to return and attend her corpse down; which is vast satissadlipn to the poor creatures, All these little particulars Mrs. Clavering will tell me, and I am too well pleased with indulging my Sorrow to prevent her, and th? Same reasoq makes me transmit it to yop. My dear Fanny, I never shall recover this stroke f it is a blow So Severe I but why should I be So wicked to repine? why do I upbraid the Almighty by my unreasonable grief I Why should I wish to Snatch from heaven a fliint, who has So long been prepared Sor thpse blifsr full regions one whose affiidfions had worn oujt a declined Srame, much top tender Sor this turbulent world. One who had been tried in a sea os adversity, and Submitted to the divine will, with a truly Christian Spirit! and yet I would contend with God, and Snatch her from him! Would bring this glorified angel, back to her Srail mortality and wqes. Qh I my louisa, how wicked I am I how barbarous I H 6 would 
156 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, would be to you, my best and tenderest friend! Can you be Sensible of my folly, and regard me with apityingeye.'* Oh! that you might be permitted to be my guardian angel : How carefully should I be attended. Oh! my louisa thou blessed Spirit! thou happy angel! protect me from every step of wickedness; lead me through the paths that thou hast trodden, that I may follow thee : Oh! guard me through the day, and guide my steeping fancy to dream of thee! My dear miss Wellers r never knew Sorrow till this, nor ever can be Sensible of any greater. Oh! Send me Some comfort; but it Is impossible; you cannot restore my louisa, she is gone for ever, and with her all my earthly happiness! How terrible is death! and how little thought of, till he visits us? I knew the infirm state of louisa’s health, but never dreamed of death’s invading So Sweet a form; but what is beauty? what is merit? what are riches? they cannot Save us from the grave, or louisa had not died; but could her worth have been rewarded in this life? Oh! no, to make her truly happy, all behind is truly miserable. I must Submit, it is the will of heaven, and the only reward of her great patience and sufferings. I will trouble you no longer with my 
melancholy 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 157 melancholy thoughts which are the Same over and over again; but I have no other friend to Sympathise with me, and take me in every humour, as I know your good nature always does: With that comsortable dependence, I Subscribe, 
Tour obliged humble Servant, and affefiionate friend, 
Emma Maria Lewis. 
LETTER LXIII 
Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers. 
My dear Fanny, 
The happiest moments I know are when I am writing to you, and my only com sort communicating my Sorrows; therefore I hope you will give me leave to relate the last doleful Scene of my dear miss Blyden : The honours paid her remains, quite overcome me with pleassng melancholy; all her household went to London to attend the corpse, and that good Mr. and mrs sblyden, and Mr.' Clavering attended also; she lay in state 
at 
158 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, at London two days, then Set out with twelve coaches and six, in the greatest funeral pomp that is possible; two clergymen first, then the hearse, a state coach, Mr. and Mrs. Blyden the next, aster them Mr. Clavering and a Cousin of miss blyden’s, who is heir after her uncle; all the rest fill’d with Servants; and fifty horsemen; she lay in state three nights at the lodge before her interment, the whole house was open, and hung with mourning, the family being at Evanion mount; The Blyden estate has Several hundred tenants, the chief of which met their Lady 20 miles from the lodge; a more mag. nificent funeral never was known, except for a prince; nor ever any creature So much lamented and with So much reason. Her ears were ever open to the complaints of the dis treffed, and her heart and purse to their relief. I suppose you have heard she has left miss Jemima Courtly, five hundred pounds, only from hearing me Say how worthy she was, and how cruelly treatly by her relations : She has also been So kind as to leave me the Same Sum, and two guineas a piece to all her tenants, five to her lower Servants, ten to the upper ones, and fifty to her own maid, and Anthony Plain, who I fear was a villain, though she could never believe it. Mrs. Ciavering goes 
home 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 159 home tomorrow, but is So kind to promise me Srequent visits. How I shall Support my Spirits when she is gone distresses me, as I have not one creature to Speak to, except my mother and aunt : Indeed Fanny I am a miserable wretch; can’t you come to me? You never can do a higher adt of charity and compassion; but I know its impossible, therefore will not flatter mysels with false hopes I must obey a disagreeable Summons to dinner, and, contrary to my inclinations, take leave of my dear Miss Wellers, who I hope will believe me to be her 
Vtry obedient 
and affeshenate Friend Emma Maria Lewis 
LET. 
io JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
LETTER LXIV 
Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers. 
Dear Miss ivellers.^ 
Upper wood berry. 
1h AVE received three kind letters from you, and now return a thousand thanks. I beg’d Madam Swaffam to let you know I was too ill to attempt writing; but fear by your last favour, she was So ill natured as to deceive me. I have been much better Some time, but a trembling continued in my hands that I could not hold a pen till this day. I think I must have died, had I not lest home; good Lady Hetchmore would fetch me away, and absolutely refused swaffam’s coming with me, for she has great influence over my mother. Oh! Fanny, I have been at the lodge, and thought it would have killed me, but my Lady was engaged to go there, and would take me with her. Indeed Mrs. Clavering beg’d as the greatest favour that I would come with them; and I was willing to brush through the first visit, that I might indulge the pleasing melancholy of reflecting on my dear louisa, and the many happy hours we 
have 
JEMIMA AND LOUSIA. ii have pass*d in that place together; we found all the family apparently affeded with grief; and Mrs. Clavering more concern’d than I thought possible for her, for So long a time; 1 love her the better for it. We staid at the lodge two days, breakfasted one morning at Evanion hiount. I am happy to. find Mr, Blydcn keeps up all the ancient grandeur and hospitality of both families; for everything, and all the Servants, is exactly kept as if a family lived there; and a dinner provided every day in the aid hall for thirty poor people; he has displeased me only in one particular, which is, having Sold all the timber on both estates, to be cleared at the purchalers pleasure;, he has already received on account, forty thousand pounds. I think it ten thousand pities to cut down Such charming woods; nevertheless he is a good man, for there is much attention paid to all that louisa delighted in; her poultry, her garden, and her own peculiar flock of sheep; and all her charities pundlually preserved; in short, I do love him for all these, and a thousand little circumstances too tedious to enumerate. They are to come to Sir hugh’s next week, and Lady Hetchmore will not part with me till aster that time; she intends to persuadc, my mother to look out 
Sor 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA, for Some chearstil companion Suitable to my years, or to place me in Some lively family j for she even thinks her own too melancholy, or would propose it, as she would think herself very happy in my company. I heard the other day that our clergyman Mr. Duncombe, is going to Send for a niece from London; if it is true, and she should prove agreeable, it will be a happy circumstance for me, as he is coming from Ashbourn to reside in a little tenement at the end of our garden. Sir Hugh insists upon my concluding, that we may go to battledore and shuttlecock;; with my lady and Self, join in best respe<5ts to you and yours. I am, 
dear Miss wellersv faithful humble Servant, Emma Maria Lewis. 
L E T 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 163 
LETTER LXV 
Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers. 
Dear Miss Wellers, Woodberry. 
WE have just parted with Mr. and Mrs. 
Blyden, and Mr. and Mrs. Clavering: every meeting is a renewal of grief; they staid three days with us, and drank tea one afternoon at Lower Woodberry. Mr. Blyden finds he cannot pay miss courtly’s legacy, till she is of age, but will send her the interest, as it may prove a great comfort tosher. My dear Fanny, I must tell you wfiat a pleasing present Mr. Blyden brought me; it was my louisa’s fine pearl necklace, made into a bracelet of six rows; the locket is her picture Set with rubies, on the inside is her hair plaited under a crystal, and the letting of the mbies is curioussy enamel’d. Mrs. Clavering is quite distracted to go to Bath, but her hus band won’t hear of it. Lady Hetchmore is gone this morning to Lower Woodberry, to desire my mother will let me go to Bath with her, where she goes next week to stay two months; but I much fear she will not Succeed; 
how 
i64 jemima and LOUISA, how dreadsul it will be if she does hot? but how happy I am in having Such a good friend Lady Hetchmore is just now return’d extremely angry with my mother’s refusing to let me go on any terms that could be pro posed, even those of taking my old woman; however she obtain’d me much more liberty than my mother willingly granted; it was removing Swaffam out of my bed chamber, to go to the lodge, and to walk out whenever I chuse it, accompanied with any attendant she pleases to appoint; these indulgences will make me go home with a little more cheer fuiness than otherwise I should have done. You will hardly hear from me again before I get home. I shall then please myself with writing to you the very first opportunity j till then remain. 
Tour moji obliged 
Emma Maria Lewis. 
L E T 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 165 
L E T T E R LXVI 
Continuation of Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers. 
My dear Miss Wellers, 
IH AVE been at home three days, and find all things much more agreeable than they have been these two years; partly owing to good Lady Hetchmore, and partly to a very extraordinary letter that I found by chance in my mother’s dressing room; I in close you a copy of it. I have not yet tried any of my liberties, but shall very Soon, that they may not be forgot; my mother Sent me, the day after my return home, to visit our new neighbour Mr. Duncombe; I staid and drank tea with him, you know what a chatty old man he is; he smoked his pipe and moralised; he advised me not to associate much with Mrs. Clavering, indeed he feared she was a child of the devil’s, and a very immodest and profane young creature; why says he, she Swears like a trooper, and dances and hunts with all the rakes in the country. He then told me, he had Sent for a niece to keep his house, that he hoped we should be friends 1 and 
i66 JRMIMA AND LOUISA, and companions, for he heard she was a modest •well behaved girl; he then read me a lecture on imprudent marriages, and Said girls should let their parents chuse their husbands, for it was by no means proper they should think of Such things; he hoped I should never desire to marry a red coat, for they beat the devh’s march and carried women to hell by Sacks full: I could not help laughing at the good man’s oration; he shook his head, and we parted about eight o’clock. My mother and aunt are always pleased when I Seem to like the doctor’s company : His niece comes in a fortnight; I have no notion I shall like her, for 1 want a lively companion, not one to make me more stupid than I am already. Lady Hetchmore has promised to inquire for one at Bath. My best respeds attend swin derby, and believe me 
Pifur obliged and obedient 
Emma Maria Lewis; 
LE T 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 167 
LETTER LXVII 
sr Harry Harwood to Mrs. Lewis, enclosed in the foregoing, 
mad^my 
YO U will, without doubt, be Surprised at my addressing you in this manner; but the regard I have for your daughter’s and your happiness, is the present occasion of my giving you this trouble; your unreasonable confinement of, and behaviour to miss Lewis, is lessening her peace at home, and reputation abroad, and your own at the Same time; I therefore beg she may be treated as her duty and goodness deserves. You may depend on my honour, and the Solemn promise I now make, that I never will steal your or any person’s daughter; you may trust my prudence for miss lewis’s Safety at present, as I never will marry, till mine or the lady’s fortune enables me to maintain her with credit as my wife. What I have Said is the strictest truth, and likewise what I am going to Say, the Same; very few are the opportunities I have of commanding my time, but whenever that happens. 
is JEMIMA AND LOUISA, pens, assure yourself it will be Spent in Seeing your daughter, and not to be prevented by the Source or artifice of mean spirited women. I am a gentleman by birth, education, and behaviour; till I forfeit that character no per son is justified in using me ill, and shamefully affronting me from their house, for no other crime than preferring her daughter to all other of their Sex. I am, 
Madam 
Tour mojl ohedieniy Henry Harwood. 
LETTER LXVIII 
Continuation of Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers. 
t7 Woodberry. 
Bear Fanny., ^ 
I A M but just return’d from the lodge, where I Spent eight days, had old encumbrance with me, who was the less troublesome, because she was sick all the time, Mrs. Clavering behaves So vastly indiscreet, that she is the ridicule of the whole country; she and he nave promised to come and Spend two or three 
days 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 169 days with me, I hope they will not be with us. on a Sunday, lest our old doctor should preach at her, (as she calls it) for he entertains a shocking opinion of her wickedness. I expected to have found my new neighbour miss Moore, at the parsonage; but find she is detain’d on account of her mother’s death, and is to bring a Sister with her; as they have now neither father nor mother, and left in very indifferent circumstances, entirely dependant on their uncle for Support: they are to come the beginning of next week; I am glad they will be near So good a woman as Lady Hetchmore. I had a letter from her yesterday; she has found So much benefit by the Bath waters, that she proposes being at home in less than a month. She desires me to make her compliments to Mrs. Wellers and you; to whom this family joins in best re speds. Believe me 
Dear Fanny ‘ 
* Tours to commandy 
Emma Ma. Lewis. 
LET 
lyo JEMIMA and LOUISA. 
LETTER LXIX 
continuationaf Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers. 
My dear Mijs Weller., 
I defer’d writing to yon till after Mr. 
clavering’s visit, hoping that chearsiil company might enliven me, and make my letter more entertaining. They left us the day before yesterday; we Spent our time in great good-humour and pleasantry; even my mother and aunt showed Some sense of pleasure, and have lately given me a vast deal of liberty,.! really believe owing to Sir harry’s Severe letter. I must now give you Some account of our neighboursthey have been a week here; poor miss Moore is now extremely ill, it happen’d very unlucky. I invited them to dine with us one day with Mrs. and miss Vincent, and Mrs. Clavering, Sori want to introduce them to the principal people of our country, as they really are excessive fine girls. The moment they came into our house the eldest was Seized with a shivering fit, and obliged to go home direduy, where she has been confin’d ever since : She is about Seven or eigh 
an 
JEMIMA Af^d LOUISA. r; i and twenty, has been a perfect beauty, but the troubles osher family has wore her to shin and bones; she has had a complete education, is a great reader and uncommonly Sensible, which together make her a most agreeable companion; her sister miss Jenny is between eleven and twelve years old, is quite an elegant girl, and a promising beauty, owes all her accomplishments to her sister’s instructions, who is a perfect mother to her. Jenny has great vivacity, and frights her old uncle exceedingly; he prophecies her growing like Mrs. Clavering; Olivia, which is the name of the eldest, is much better; I shall now take her in the chariot three or four times a week, Sor the benefit of the air. Lady Hetchmorc will be at home next tuesday, and desires me to meet her there, and Spend a week with her, which is a prodigious joy to one who Subscribes, 
i^'our obliged, 
£ihd affeflionaie Servant Emma Ma. Lewis. 
I 2 
LET 
272 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
LETTER LXX Miss Lewis to Mijs Wellers. 
Dear Miss fvellers, 
Upper woodberry. 
I CAME here last tuesday, and had the pleasure of receiving good Lady hetch more and Sir Hugh in perfefl health. In conversing over the various occurrences of our populous neighbourhood, I thought the Miss Moores arrival was none of the smallest. Lady Hetchmbre was So pleased with my account os them, that she determin’d to dine at my motlier’s, and drink tea at the parsonage the next day; we did So, and my Lady was greatly charmed with the Moores, and has Sent a milch’d ass for Olivia, wsho is very much inclined to a consumption, but has recovered her late fit of illness. The coach goes tomorrow to fetch the parson and his nieces to dine here. Lady Hetchmore Sends for me, I must defer the finishing this letter to another opportunity; not a moment has been my own these three days. I go home today, not to return for Some time I imagine, but will give you a history of our proceedings; Mr. 
Duncombe 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 173 Duncombe and miss Moores, came as expected. Sir Hugh was prodigioufiy struck with Olivia, he owns himsels Surprised, notwithstanding our account; and gave Mr. Duncombe a purse of twenty guineas, in consideration of the increase of his Samily. They had not been gone half an hour, when Sir Harry Harwood came in, quite unexpected. The next day Lady Hetchmore judged it right to show nothing clandestine^was meant, that they should Send his and their compliments to Lower Woodberry, and propose drinking tea with them that afternoon.' A very civil answer, that they should be glad to See us was return’d. We go, and Lady Hetchmore does not intend to press my coming back with her. 
I go with more satissadlion than common, as I am Sure of an agreeable companion in Olivia. 
I Say Sarewell for the present, as the Baronet invites me to Battledore. Adieu * 
Emma Ma. Lewis; 
13 
LET 
174 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
I, E T T E R LXXI Miss Lewis io Mijs Weleers. 
My dear Fanny. ^ 
lov/er woodberrj. 
H AVE Some very interesting things to communicate; and having been in a state of great stispence for two or three days, chose to know Some certainty before I wrote to you. We were genteely received by my mother, but my aunt.was very angry; 1 was not permitted to return. The next morning Lady Hetchmore and Son came to breakfast with us, aster which Sir Hugh desired me to take him to the parsonage; we' Spent two hours very agreeably with Olivia, then return’d: to the old ladies, whom we found all out of temper, even Lady Hetchmore, who parted Saying I shall be with you again Mrs. Lewis Sooner than you think for; my mother muttered as Soon as you please my lady, but it shall be to no purpos?. All that day they were vastly ill natur’d, and Said I shoulti go no more to Upper Woodberry, if they were to be thus teased. In the afternoon I went to the parionage, old Swaffaiii was dispatched after 
mca 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 17^ me, and ordered not to quit her charge. She came to us in So impertinent a manner, that I was highly provok’d, but dare not say any anything. I Soon proposed walking, and took Jenny Moore to keep me company,. Swaffam sollow’d, I walk’d very leisurely for a mile and a hall, the old woman complaining, of dreadsul tyre; I then mended my pace, till we left Madam Swaffam quite out of sight. She returned in a violent rage puffing and blowing, frighted my mother and aunt, to think where I was gone; they immediately dispatched John to Sir flugh’s, where he found Sir Harry very composed with my lady and Son at cards. I return’d before it was dark, and they took no notice of my absence, but Swaffam was ordered to lay with me; this made me horrid mad. I got up early in the morning, lock’d madam into my room, and went direflly to Olivia. By nine o’clock Lady Hetchmore and Sir Hugh came again, they were both with my mother and aunt till twelve, then came to the parsonage, and took miss Moores home to dine with them. I then went to my mother, and found her in pretty good-humour; she Said Lady Hetchmore and Sir Hugh teased her to death, to marry me to a beggar; she aflced me if I chose to marry a beggar? I said no, nor did I apprehend Lady I 4 Hetchmore 
i; 6 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. Hetchmore proposed any Such thing; she Said very near it, for his estate was but two hundred a year nominal, his commishon and that together made a bare 300, and what was that for a baronet and his lady; I answered it might do very well is the lady’s friends would give her a Suitable fortune. I find Says she, the Hetchmores and you have Settled the whole affair. I assured her I knew nothing of the matter. She then asked me if I should be contented with two thousand pounds and two hundred a year during her life : I Said very well; and thought her extremely kind, as I am very Sensible she could not conveniently Spare any more; for you know all her estate is but six hundred a year, out of which she has contrived to Save the two thousand pounds I am to have, and one that she reserves for any emergency. There is no body without Sailing or oddity; but upon the whole, I must acknowledge my mother to be a worthy good woman, and all I have or shall have, I owe to her frugality and prudent management; Sor my Sather had brought two thousand a year to six hundred; and on that a considerable mortgage, which my mother paid off, by living on one hundred per annum, till I was ten years oldh After our conversation, my mother Sent a letter to Lady Hetchmore, 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 177 more, which she answered; and I find they all breakfast with us tomorrow. I know you So well, that I am Sure this letter will give you great pleasure. I am quite angry you mention nothing of Anthony; for which reason I only sign, 
Emma Ma. Lewis. 
LETTER LXXII Miss Lewis to Miss Wellers. 
My dear Fanny 
Upper Woodberry. 
1m U S T begin vfith my uppermost thoughts, more particularly as you make the whole subject of your letter. The match : I think has made a rapid progress; but nothing less than a Rainsford could conclude one So Soon as you Seem to expect. They breakfasted with us as was appointed, and Lady hetch more insisted on taking me hohne with her, which was readily consented to. Sir Harry is gone to settle Some affairs, will return in a fortnight, and be married diredtiy, as his regiment goes in three weeks to Ireland, 
1 5 ' which 
lys JEMIMA AND LOUIS A. which Suits us extremely well, for our fortunes being Small, we have no thought of new clothes, or any of the Bridal parade. I have two Suits So clean, that they may very well pass for new in Ireland. Since I came here we Spent three days at the Lodge; I took Jenny Moore with us, but all the entreaties we could use, would not prevail on Olivia to go, for which reason our baronet return’d the Same night, Sor he lives but in her company however more of his flame hereafter. Mr. Clavering is passionately fond of Jenny Moore,, quite the love of a doting father to his child : He gave her twenty guineas, poor Jane put it into my care; the girl was quite astonish’d, never having Seen So much together insher days., I must now proceed to my account of. Sir Hugh, and acquaint you with his melancholy Sail — ^ — into love wish. Olivia it is So certain, that he determin’d to ^ihrry her, but she absolutely rejedts ho prodosals, and will not listen to a Syllabfe on tfiat Subjedf, My la<ly was, Sorry at first,, but has So great a regard for her shn’s happiness, thay she now uses ^11 possible persuasions with Cliyia to consent. I slave been employ’d in this affair, Oind uled my utmost endeavours to no purpoie; in Short every friend has interfered', and none It is really amazing, for all look’d on 
JFMIMA and LOUISA. 179 on the match as concluded, when they Saw how far Sir hugh’s affections were engag’d, Sor he was actually enarnbur’d the first mo merit he Saw her. I bcg rny best compliments may be acceptable to Mrs. Wellers, yourself, ^ and your Jemirna. I am,. 
M dear Fannfs Ever affefuonate.^ 
Emma Ma. Lewis. 
LETTER LXXIII 
(Iontinuatwi of Miss Lewis to Mffs^ Wellers. 
Tocat Miss Wellers, Woodberry. • 
Evert day since I wrote, has been en • in taking leave os my friends, i ani So hurried that I can hardly steal a mo nient To take this farewell of my dearest .Papny. - Sir Starry has been return’d these ‘ three days. tomorrow at eight o’clock we • are to be married, and Set out directly for' Falmouth, to embark for Dublin. Lady Fletchmore and Sir Hugh will lie hcte to ■ night, 
18o J E M L M A AND LO U IS A. night, as he does me the honour of giving nte away, and her ladyship condescends to be present at the ceremony. The thoughts of parting So Soon, makes us all very melancholy; the refore it will be an exceeding dull wedding. Pray give my best respedls to your good mamma, and tell her I return her ten thousand thanks for all her kind favours; in like manner I do to you, begging you will conser one more upon me, which is to continue that friendship when married, as you have hitherto honour’d 
Emma Ma. lewisj 
LETTER LXXIV Lad Harwood to Mijs Wellers. 
My dear Miss Wellers^ 
Dublin. 
IH AVE only time to tell you we are Safe rived here, after a dangerous and tedious voyage, and long with the utmost impatience to hear from you. I am terribly sick, and in a dreadful inn, which I shall leave tomorrow, we being invited to a gentleman’s house. I fancy Mr. Blyden has Some intention of Jeav i ing 
JEMIMA anidto^ii^a. ing England, - for almost all his ihsh Servants came over in the ship with us; but the reason they gave us, was, that Mr. Blyden thought two Sets of Servants too many, and would not part with any of louisa’s. When you favour me, direct to Dublin, as then it will' come to me wherever I may happen to be, for we shall be continually moving. Sir Harry joins in compliments to yourself and family, with 
My dear fannyv 
most obliged and 
affeflionate Servant Emma Ma. Harwood 
LETTER LXXV 
Miss Wellers to Lady Harwood. 
TH E agreeable news of my dear Lady harwood’s Safe arrival in Ireland, gave me joy inexpressible: I know not how I should have Supported my anxiety, on account 
of 
r.82 JEMIMA and LOUISA, of not hearing, from you Sooner, had not a very particular circumstance intervened, that help’d to employ my thoughts; nothing less than the nuptials of my dear Jemima. So Sudden a conclusion of an affair that has been So long in agitation, and of which there only appear’d a distant prospedf, must Surprise you, till you are. acquainted with the following particulars. Mr. Granville during his residence in London, used every possible means for the attainment of Some employ,. Suitable to his genius and education, which he has at length accomplish’d, byv renewing, his acquaintance with a fellow 'collegian, who is now chaplain to the duke of B. The duke has a Son who,, purposing to make the touros Europe, wanted a gentleman to accompany him in his travels; with which Mr. Davis the chaplain acquainted Mr. Granville, and knowing him properly qualified, - offered to recommend him: Horatio thanksully accepted the proposal, and was accordingly introcluced to the duke and his Son, who both highly approv’d him, and presently made an agreement to the endre satissadlion of both parties. granville instantly wrote, to acquaint Anthony Courtly with. this fortunate event, desiring bini to. meet him. at our house, declaring he could not possibly think of leaving England 
till 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 183 till he had Secured his Jemima, and hoped she would not reject the terms he had to offer; which were to allow her the whole Salary he was to receive of the young nobleman, during his absence, as his own Sortune he Said, would be Sufficient for him in that attendance: So honest and generous a proposal could not be objected to, it met with the general approbation of us all; and now nothing remain’d but to fix the day for their marriage; the Thursday following was concluded on, and the ceremony perform’d at our parish church by Horatio^s friend, Mr. Davis: His Grace is So pleased with the account his chaplain has given him of this wedding, that he immediately sign’d an agreement to pay Mrs. Granville two hundred"per annum, in quarterly payments during her hushand’s attendance on his Son, which is considerably more than was at first intended him. You cannot conceive how happy this affair has made us all; Jemima has now Scarce a wish ungratified, except that of a reconciliation with her fhther; time we'hope may gain that point, -, tho’ there are little hopes of it at present. Horatio seem’d very desirous of fettling his wife besore he went abroad, and was consust ing with Anthony upon that Subject, when my mother interposed, begging, him not to 
think 
i84 JEMIMA and T.DUISA. think of depriving her of the pleasure of Mrs. granville’s company, till his return; telling him neither she nor I could consent to resign Such an agreeable companion to anybody but himself; he made a very polite answer, and seem’d thoroughly Satisfied with its being So determined. Mr. Davis informs us that his Lordship intends us the honour of a visit, before he and Mr. Granville leave England, which I believe will be in a fortnight or three weeks. I have now only to add an earnest desire, that my dear Emma will as Soon as poshble favour me with a letter, which will, I hope, bring a better account of her health and Situation, than that I have already receiv’d. My mother and our whole family joins in compliments to Sir Harry and yourself, with 
My dear Lady harwood^j chliged and affefuonats 
bumble Servant 
Frances wellersi 
L E T: 
JEMIMA AND I.DUISA. 185 
LETTER LXXVI Lady Harwood to Miss Wellers. 
My dear Eanny^ 
Dublin. 
The day after I wrote to you, we came to our friends house, and I was immediately Seized with a violent fever, with which I was three days given over, have had six blisters, and Suffered extremely. Sir Harry was obliged to leave me besore I was out of danger, to attend the regiment into the extreme part of Ireland, where they expect a rising every day. I shall Set out to overtake' him the day after tomorrow, tho’ I am still excessively weak and low; for I find myself vastly dejected by being among entire strangers, who endeavour to be extremely civil; but all things appear awkward and strange to me. I was persed happiness yesterday in reading my packet of letters from England, among which, yours gave me infinite joy; I return you ten thousand thanks for the obliging detail you have given me of Mrs. granville’s happy change of life; upon which, I beg leave to congratulate her, and sincerely 
wish 
is JEMIMA a?fd LOUISA, wish her all the happiness that can attend the marriage state. I have an account to give you that will Surprise you, it did me very greatly : You will find it in the inclos’d letter; I transmit it in confidence, that it will go no further. From 
Tour sincere > affefhonate Friend 
m.d. Servantfs Emma Ma. Harwood; 
LETTER LXXVII 
Moore to Lady Harwood.. 
madam 
Woodberry. 
1 Enter tain the highest sense of the honour you have done me, in writing to her who had not the least reason to expecst a pleasurc of that Sort. I embrace the very first opportunity of returning my grateful thanks for So kind a Savour; and am grieved to be obliged toresistthe Solicitation of Such a friend, to.. au' 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. isy an honour, that the world must judge me mad in So obstinately resusing: how it shocks me, to be Sued to Such honour and riches, by So many eminent persons, v/hose great kind ness to me claims all my obedience, and all my gratitude. You will be amazed to find me declare, that my gratitude obliges me to reject these honourable proposals. I cannot, dare not, give my reasons; all my Suture expedlations depend on my keeping them Secret from my uncle, if it did hot, I could never publish my shame to the world; but to you, dear.madam, who I know will pity my misfortunes, I will throw off all disguise, and give you a true history of my life. My mother, (who was my uncle duncombe’s own lister) married a shopkeeper at Oxford, whole ambition and extravagance brought us. at last to the greatest distress; it was his natural turn, and he gave me the best and most expensive education. I grew up handsome, which increas’d his vanity and ambition, not doubting but I should make my fortune among the number of young students who fill that place. My person and his bountiful treating, did not fail to draw all the young fellows he thought proper to entertain; but in one thing he was careful, that was, in only picking up Such as he was well informed were 
very 
i88 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, very large fortunes; tho’ he might Sometimes be mistaken. He dress’d me in the most extravagant deaths, and nothing was Spared (not even paint) to make me more alluring. I was carried to all the public diversions, and in less than a twelvemonth after my coming from School, I became particularly admired by a Mr. johnson; my father who gave me many instructions in the art of coqueting, ordered me to give this gentleman great encouragement, for he knew him to be a man of large and independent fortune; this was an easy command to me, for he was sensible, genteel, and handsome, (So like Mr. Clavering, that on first Seeing him at your house, it gave me that sit os illness, you must remember I was Seized with); at last my Sather order’d me to deny nothing Mr. johnson wish’d or desired. A circumstance Soon happen’d that my father seem’d to think a fortunate one; he then exerted himself, and insisted on marriage; Mr. johnson, with great reluctance, consented; the day was appointed, but before it came, the intended husband was flown, and has never been heard of since. My father’s fortune growing lower and lower, and all his hopes in me blasted, it Seized his Spirits, that brought on a desperate malady; and one and the Same day, made me Seventeen, 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 189 teen, fatherless, and a shamesul mother, to that unfortunate girl, I call my Sister. That fatal day, plunged us into extreme poverty. 
I think: no distress could equal ours. As Soon' as I could move, we lest the detested place of my ruin, where my former finery and ridiculous pride, render’d me then the object of every bodies Scorn. Without friends, or pity, we placed ourselves in London, in the cheapest lodging we could find, where my mother and self, by working with our needle, kept otir' selves and my infant from starving. My poor uncle who has always believed Jenny to be my mother’s daughter, desired that as Soon as Ihe was, able to be of any assistance to his Sister, that I would come to live with him; this my mother insisted on my doing, when poof woman she refign’d a life, which by her hushand’s and child’s wickedness, had been a heavy burden to her for Several years. My uncle was then So kind to take us both, since which time you know every circumstance renting to me. Now, dear Madam, could I with any honesty, with any gratitude, or uiodesty, consent that So honourable, So worthy a gentleman should be So deceived, and take polution to his bed? no, he never shall, I never will be So lost to fense of shame, but endeavour to dedicate the remainder of my 
days 
190 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, days to contrition, and the Service of God My whole attention shall be, to bring up my child in the paths of virtue; and all my earthly joy and concern is to preserve the friendship of my few, but inestimable worthy neighbours. I hope, madam, this open confession of my guilt, will not prove the means of my loosing your esteem, but trust you will rather pity than despise a penitent sinner, who while she lives will ever be 
Tour Ladyjhifs mojl devoted, 
and grateful Servant, 
> Olivia Moore. 
LETTER LXXVIII 
Lady Harwood to Miss Wellers. 
Dear Miss Wellers. Coleraine. 
I A M just arrived at this place, had a very disagreeable journey; not overtaking the regiment till I came to londonderry, and it was terrible travelling in a strange country by 
myself. 
JEMIMA AND LOUSIA. 191 myself. I am still very weak, and was obliged to stay almost a week at a sarm house; it was' the most lonely melancholy situation I ever Saw, at the foot of a tremendous mountain; at that place, to my great astonishment, I learned the history os miss Brand your neigh bo ur, which I will relate to you, and make no doubt but it will Surprise you as much as it did me, tho’ we always thought Something very odd appear’d in her: To make you understand her history, I must begin in a very round about manner, and give you an account of other people, who you know nothing of; in our journey hither, we were one night belated, and I was taken So ill, that with great difficulty I was got to the farmhouse I before mention’d, where everything bore a mean, but neat appearance; and I was received in, So polite a manner by the master and mistress, as plainly showed they could not always have lived in that obscure manner. I was pleased to find they did not want for the common comforts of life. Such as decent clothes, good food, and necessary fuel, a maidservant, and two farm men; At Supper there appeared one who certainly had been a beautilul wmman, about thirty years of age, she was extremely nielancholy, and did not Speak at all; very 
Soon 
192 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
Soon retired. When she was gone, the gentlewoman of the house inform’d me she was crazy, and that her brain was turn’d by misfortunes, adding that they themselves had known So much affliction, that they Sympathised with the unfortunate, and therefore their compassion induced them to take care of that lady. I went early to bed. So heard no more that night. Sir Harry was obliged to leave me, and proceed on his march to Coleraine, therefore my Servant lay with me; 
I ash’d if she had learn’d any particulars relating to the family, that had So kindly received us. She answered only, that they were the best people in that county, and their names were Morris; and the other lady was mad, her name was Perldns. During my stay with these good people, I had a great deal of agreeable conversation with them, in which I took the liberty to observe, that I imagin’d they had not always lived in that retired Situation; on which she in the most good natur’d manner Said, I See, madam, you are curious to know my missortunes, and I will give you my real story. I was the only daughter of a rich citizen, a very rich one indeed; but married a young man unknown to my father, which displeas’d fiim So much, 
• that' 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 193 that he gave all his money to public charities : This gave me but little concern, as I was di re^fly on my marriage, received in an affectionate manner by my hushand’s relations, who indulged me in everything that was agreeable, and educated me with their daughters; for my father thinking money a Sufficient happiness and qualification, entirely neglected both my improvement and amusement; I therefore thought my change vastly for the better. In a Sew years my father and mother died, and a house and an estate of about five hundred a year left to the quiet possession of me, my husband and little Son we lived in a state of uninterrupted happiness, till he was old enough to go to the university, when we Sent him to Oxford, to pursue Such studies as he liked best, thinking Some profession might make a pretty addition to his paternal estate; but to our great afiiiclion, he turn’d out everything that was wicked and extravagant, in So much that he Soon brought us to real poverty, and would as certainly have brought us to absolute beggary, had not his extreme wick edness obliged him to leave England; we then collected our little remain, and came over to this country, where we purdias’d our farm, and have lived in peacesul Sorrow these ten years: Our Son not knowing whefe to find us, K as 
194 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
'as v/e changed our names: we have heard of his being sin Ireland by a feign’d name, and with an impudent woman that he brought ii'om England, who is twenty years older than he is. ■ Here the poor woman left off. The next day in conversation, I mention’d Cambridgeshire; she ash’d me what part I was acquainted with; on my telling her, she ash’d if I knew a miss Brand. I Said yes. She ash’d what character she bore, and how she behaved; I Said as to character she had none, for nobody knew anything of her; and her behaviour was decent, but vulgar; She Said, if it was agreeable to me, she could give Some hccount of miss brand’s life, and the misfortune of the poor lady who lived with them. I gladly accepted her offer, and she inform’d me as follows.; that miss Bralnd was the daughter of an attorney at Wapping in England, that he died when she was about twelve years old, and had committed her with five hundred pounds to the care of his brother who lived in the neighbourliood of Londonderry; she came to him an ignorant obstinate girl; he took Some pains to improve her, but to no plirpose; she increased daily in ill nature, vulgarnefs and boldness, till at last she proved with child by a black smith’s mi an, who at the Same time had a wise : This shock’d her 
uncle 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 195 uncle extremely, and to hide her disgrace, he Sent the story to a Sriend at cork, and begg’d him to find Some tradesman in desperate circumstances, that would marry her, and he would add three hundred pounds to her sor tune. A husband was Speedily Sound, but not a tradesman; a ruin’d gentleman, and ruin’d by extravagance; the event os this match was misery; he used her very ill : She flew to Dublin, and became a common prostitute for Support; her uncle forced her from that way of life. Sent her to a friend in England, and desiring him to place her in a Sober family in a remote country, and as long as she behaved well, he would pay for her board, and allow her fifteen pounds a year for clothes. Her husband aster Spending her fortune in various debaucheries, ran away with an heiress of forty thousand pounds fortune, from a boarding School; he kept her Some time at Cork, answerable to her fortune; but neither that, her great beauty, or good nature, did long' preserve her Srom his ill treatment. He brought her to this village, where he left her in the utmost distress, and her friends refusing her any relief or comfort, she grew melancholy mad; our compassion induced us to take her, and we will keep her as long as we K 2 live; 
196 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, live : Thus ended these two remarkable shistories. I was Soon obliged to leave these jgood and unsortunate people, who we Sound It very difficult to reward Sor their kindness to me. At last. Sir Harry thought a present of wine might prove acceptable, and accordingly Sent them a hogshead of red, and the Same of white. I am very happily Situated in this place with a clergyman and his wife, but I fancy our stay in this part of the country will not be very long; we are in Some apptsi* henfion of going to Germany, which I cannot in the least relish. With the hopes of hearing from you Soon, I remain. 
Dear Miss Wellers, 
Tcur affeflionau^ 
Emma Ma. Harwood; 
LED 
JEMIMA AND X ti L 4. v97 
LETTER LXXIX Continuation of Lady H a r V o o d /.? 
Mifi w£l, L RS. 
My dear mis Moellers. 
Chester. 
HOW Surprised yoii must be to find I am in England, if you havt not heard the unhappy occasion of my Sutidea coming, on account of my mother’s dangerous illnesr; the moment I heard it, I took shipping for Falmouth, but was So unlucky to be cast away on the Welch shore; the strip and most os the crew perish’d; but thank God, I, my maid, and two men, were miraculouily Saved by a Small fishing boat, which got us to Holy • head, Srom whence we was conveyed on most terrible horses to this place, where fright and fatigue So far overcame me, that L am obliged to stay all this day, and employ the little strength 1 have, in writing to two or three of my best Sriends, whom (I flatter myself) .will rejoice to hear of my Safety. I hope to find myself Somewhat better, when I have a little unburthen’d my mind of the various c'rcum k 3. stcnce* 
198 JEMIMA.AND LOUISA, stances which at present agitate my Spirits; for to gries, fright, and fatigue, is added. Surprise, joy, amazement and concern; Sor know, my dear Fanny, I have leen Mr. Evanion! the real yobng Mr. Evanion! him that I once loved So well; and I cannot help loving him again : but I must be regular in my account? or you will think me light headed. Near a town call’d pvuthyn, which I pass’d through yesterday, the horse started and siting me, it ivas near a cottage into which they took me; when I was a little recover’d, a Surprising genteel young man caught my eyes; he had a tauny complexion, and an unshaven head and beard. 1 look’d steadfastly at him, and recolledted his Seatures, as he instantaneousiy did mine. You must judge our Surprise, I can’t describe it, he appear’d rather shock’d than pleased, and Said, he flattered himself he was So Situated as never to be heard of, or Seen by any that knew him. I was going to mention fbme past affairs, but he earnestly begg’d meto wave those subjects;; desiring to know in what state miss Blyden was, adding his fears that she was married, which (he was ashamed to own) would grieve him infinitely more than to hear she was dead. I then thought it best to inform him of the 
truth. 
JEMIMA AND' L.D.DISA. 199 truth, that she really had been dead a great while: he Said, that was happsiness Sufficient for him; that he should now Spend his days in the greatest tranquillity, and rejoice in the passing of every hour, hastening to his end with the highest delight, hoping to meet her in heaven, where his innocence and integrity would appear; for that, which was judged wickedness, was a disorder of his brain; that he had been, perfectly well ever since he came to that retirement. I ash’d him if he did not 
he would accept a Small annuity from us, to Support him with the necessary comforts of life; he Said he had more left of the thousand pounds Mr., Clavering gave him, than would last twelve years; and he hoped and pray’d his days might not continue half that time. Indeed I think they cannot, for he appears in a deep consumption. I was grieved to leave him; he (after various entreaties) promised to write to me, on condition that I would take the trouble of Seeing him interr’d with miss Blyden; I engaged to do So, in casei Surr= vived him, wdiich I think very probable, notwithstanding the bad state of health I am in. I hope toshe able to fet out tomorrow;; hasten home with the greatest expedition, K 4 and 
200 temijvia AND LQIHSA.. and write to you the first leisure moment. My best'compliments attend all friends, and 
believe me 
Tdtr faijhful Fr'undy 
eivim/v Ma. Harvyoos** 
LETTER LXXX 
Lady H A R WOOD to Mijs We L L e r s. 
My dear Mifi itelku, Lower woodberry. 
YO U have heard by miss Moore, (who f desired to write to you) os my arrival at home, and how extremely ill I found my rnother; aso the Severe fever which [ had; occasion’d, by. my sright.s and Satigue. Thank God we are all in a favourable way, and I hope Soon to be able to See my friends, and give you Some account of the state of our neighbourhood, which at present I know nothing of myself: Have just heard of Lady harwood’s death, in a letter from Sir Harry, which has been come almost as long as I have, but they thought it not proper to give it me,, till this day. Sir Harry is So kind to give his 

JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 201 his four sisters her jointure, who othcrwile had not a halfpenny; Such an action is true generosity and greatness of mind •, for Sew men with his Small fortune, would have given way three hundred a year : But how much more commendable it is, to al in this manner, than to keep Such near relations, as poor dependants on Sorne Small yearly allowance, as many would have done? Such an action affords more real satissadion, than the highest grandeur. My mother and aunt joijis wirh in best compliments to yoursds and family. 
I remain,. 
My dear eanny^s Mpjl afefiiorajcy 
E mi'.ia Ma. HA RWOOD. 

LT‘ r 
302 JEMIMA AND; L O UJS A. 
LETTER LXXXI 
canlhiiation of Lady Harwood to Miss Wellers. 
My dearefi Fannyy 
Lower Woodberry.. 
Return thanks a thousand, for all your kind letters; they have given me infinite pleasure : Surprise and astonishment hast prevented my answering them as Soon as I wishm; to have done. Mr. and Mrs. Clavering have been to See me; they staid two days, and insisted on my returning to Spend a fortnight with them, which I consented to, though with reludlancej on account of poor clavering’s flights, always fearing her getting into Ibme Scrape; but five days had pass’d,. when Mr, Clavering came to me in private, and Said Some urgent business required his going into Wales immediately, and that he must stay at least five weeks, and begg’d my to take the charge os his wise during that time,, offering to conduct us that evening to wood berry. I thought (at that time) I knew his reasonsj and was glad to go home, hoping 
my 
I 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 203 my mother and aunt might'prove sc>me restraint to her great gaiety. We had not been here a week, when the old housekeeper’s Son came over to know what orders Mr. and Mrs. Blyden had left with Mrs, Clavering, for they had lest none at home. This question greatly surpris’d us; in short, on inquiring we found, that Mr. Clavering had not been Seen since he came with us to Woodberry; that Mr. and Mrs. Blyden Set out extremely early the next morning, on horseback, without any.servant; went to Exeter, where they heard of their going on board an Irish vessel, which sail’d immediately; and that the steward and gentleman went away in the middle of the night, unseen by anybody, nor, can they conjecture which way they went. You may with truth, imagine us in the greatest amazement, for what can be the reason of this conduct, it is impossible to guess. All the Servants are in exceeding perplexity, not knowing how to ad in any resped. Mrs, Glavering is like a distraded creature, she lay three days in fits, what to do with her distresses me greatly; I must get Some person to ^ go over to her father, and beg him to take her home. Mr. Brook I think is the most proper man in the world for Such an undertaking. I intend going tomorrow to the Lodge, and K 6 will 
204 J E MIM A AND L ODI's A. will Send Sor, him to come to me.. I wish Sir, Harry was come, we have reason.to cxpedh him every hour, for my last, letter was wrote on hrs return Srom Coleraine, to. embark Scr england. You must not expect to hear any shore from me till I have Settled Mrs. Claver. 
. she quite distradls. 
you know. 
how violent she is in all .her passions. Farc -- well, dear Emily., 
I am yours 
Emma Ma. Harwood. 
LETTER LXX}HL Lady Harwood, to Miss Wellers. 
Dear Miss Wellers, Lower Woodberry. 
I AM this instant return’d from the Lodge, it is impossible to describe the consusion. of the Servants: The first thing 1 look’d Sort was Mrs. clavering’s jewels, all gone, even, seventy pounds Sbe had left in her, cabinet, was gone, the door broke open, Sor she had the key with her; the Servants offer their oad.s they found it So, Soon after blyden’s 
depar 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 2^5, cure. We can no longer doubt their villainy,., but the cause of So Sudden removal, is very difficult to guess. Oh! my Emily, have we. not reason to suspedt my dear, dear miss. Blyden did not die a natural death; : Sor you. must remember, how odd it happen’d, when, none but those cursed Irish folks was with her,, all her own Servants being Sent out of the house; and, perhaps, poor Mr. Evanion.. might be poison’d; I can now recollect a thousand odd circumstances; : do you not re -- member the terror that struck us on • these. creatures first, appearance? I must proceed' vfith my. account; I Sent for Mr. Brook, who carefully examined all over, the house,, and Sound the. iron chest ..that contain’d the. diamonds and cash, open and empty; he also. went to the mount, and found that treasure trunk irvthe Same condition : He has Sent an express to the nearest relation os each estate; and is gone oil my ambaffy to old rainssord; in X ase of no success, I have begg’d him to write to her brother, who I am certain will take Some care of her; but thought it best to apply first taher father. It comforts me to find I have your pity in all this distress, and now I stand more in need of it than ever; for So ^ far. from Seeing Sir Harry, as L expefled, have 
just 
2o5 jemima and LOUISA, just received a letter from him, insorming me, that Some private bufiness of the greatest consequence, required his going into the extreme parts of France, but should use the utmost diligence to make his journey expeditious. All things conspire to make this affair as bad to me as possible; the hetch mores being absent, and Sir harry’s unthought of retardment,, deprives me of every one that could comfort me; for Mrs. clavering’s grief, is quite to despair; she is inconsolable, and I am never from her a moment; and my mother and aunt are So cross, they are really unbearable.. LI only write now to ease my Spirits,, by communicating my troubles. You mush therefore excuse all ceremony in 
Tour affefuonate Friend, emm‘a Ma. Harwood.. 
LET ^ 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 5oy 
LETTER lxxxiir. 
lady Harwood to Miss Wellers. 
Dear Fanny,.. Lower woodberrjr. 
I HOPE I am in the way to be happier than I have been Some time. I confess it with joy, and insorm you, Mr.. Rainsford comes this night to carry away his sister, for she has really been toa much for my Spirits; Yesterday morning I receiv’d a most polite and obliging letter from him, for old Rainsford positively refused doing anything for her •, but the kind brother has prevail’d on Mrs. Burton to take her on these conditions, that she is to be her inseparable companion, without showing any discontent or ill humour. If Mrs. Clavering chuses to Submit to. this, he will allow her twenty guineas a year for clothes, which kind offer she has accepted, I have had the satissadtion of hearing from Sir Harry,., he is arrived Safe in France, jj^ll here join in due respeds. I remaih. 
Tour Jincere Friend 
and obedient Servanty Emma Ma. Harwood. 
LET 
J.D MLMA AIDS O ors A. 
LETTER LXXXIV intimation of Lady Harwood to Mifi 
W E L L £ R S. - 
My dear eft Fanny ^ 
lov/er Woodberry, 
WAS glad to find young Mr. Vincent.. was as good as his promise in calling at s winderby, to insorm you os my, accident im Spraining; my wtist, and that there was no expedlation of being able to use it for several weeks, tho’t hoped (and the Surgeon gave' me reasonj that I might have wrote a month ago, but we were both mistaken; this is the first effort, and it is with difficulty I now do it; but a strong inclination renders it' pradicable, tho’ painful. I am in daily expectation os Sir Harry, he writes in prodigious Spirits, and tells me he shall bring with him a friend, that will both fright and delight me; that he dreads the consequence of our meeting, and begs me to prepare for the greatest Surprise and joy. I never knew any person, thacthe. Seeing of them would both fright and delight me, without your ladyship traverd on foot from Swinderby, and arrived in the ■ middle 
JEMIMA AND loursa. 26^ middle of the night; however I must prepare for astonishment, which I do with all necessary flutters and tremblings, for 1 have not been composed since I received Sir Harry’§. fetter, though he promises I shall know who it is besore I See them. My mother and aunt have been very good humour’d ever since poor Mrs. Clavering left us; but they confess the fears they had of my having her to keep, which I really would have ventured CO have done, had she been quite deferred. She absolutely resused to oblige me by writing Some times, vowing no creature should ever hear from her, and wish’d the whole circle of her acquaintance would forget there ever was Such a person in the world. However she has wrote once, for in packing up her clothes I contrived to put twenty guineas, which she beg? to know whither it was accidentror design; she concludes the latter, and expresses the highestr gratitude. My wrist will only give me leave; to add how much I am 
My dear Fannv wellers’x Very affefiionate Friendi and obliged humble Servant;.. 
Emma Ma. Harwood:. 
LEX 
210 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
LETTER LXXXV 
cmtinuatidn of lady Harwood to Miss Wellers. 
My denrejl Fanny 
F you are in the world, you must alrsady have heard who my Surprising friend was. I thought the meeting would have kill’d me; but I Survive; you must imagine all the rest. And now I will not lay down my pen, till I have informm you, how my dearest ever dear louisa was found,, in what Situation; how she got home, and. the whole history os the cursed. blyden’s. I could not believe my eyes, but it is she, her very shin and bones; nothing else I do assure you; thank God she is already mended, tho’ it is only three days that she has been with us. But to my narrative; just as Sir Harry was coming home, at an inn where he was, in bed, the peoplo came to tell him a gentlewoman was just arrived with a. broken leg, three broken ribs, and other violent hurts from a terrible overturn, and that they had no other bed fit to put her into. He. immediately rose, and went to Some other; in 
the 
JEMIMA and LOUIS A. ii 
the morning he inquired who it was; but could not learn the name, nor any other particulars, bstt that they were supposed to be on Some very urgent business, Sor the gentleman and all the Servants, except his wife’s maid. Set off at twelve o’clock, and were to travel all night. Just as Sir Harry was mounted to proceed on his journey, a message was brought him from the lady, (who was then judged to be dying) begging to Speak with him. Lie went to her, but could not guess by her countenance, who she was, till she inform’d him her name was Blyden, and, that she could not die in peace without confeshng the various wickedness she had been guilty of; and thea in extreme agonies, and with assuttering accent, she began as Sol lows : I must first insorni’ you that Mil's Blyden is still living, and confined by our villainy, in a Sarm house within five miles off mensa, a town that is a hundred and fifty miles from Paris. She thenshegan a regular account of her life, which I will transmit to you as perseduy as 1 possibly can. This Mrs. Blyden was born of mean parents in Oxfordshire, her first Setting out, was a Servant in a public housc at Oxford, where she was Soon corrupted, and became a common prostitute; that the man who passed for her Son. by the name of Clavering, was really 
Son. 
2t2 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. | Son to a Mr. johnson, of a very good estate | that she first corrupted him,, then persuaded him to rob his father, leave a young woman who was with child by him, (and that he had j promised to marry) and go with her into Ireland, where they pradised all Sorts of cheats and villainies to Support their extravagance i that they cultivated acquaintance with all worthless people, among which was Mr. Blyden, the real uncle of miss louisa Blyden, who had run out a very large fortune, and was reduced to the greatest extremity, when he had the offer of marrying Miss Brand, (who was with child by Some married man) and her uncle gave her a fortune to conceal her shame; he Soon Spent her money and turnm her olt;. then married a beautiful girl withia very large fortune, who (through mrs. blyden’s wicked pursuafion) he Soon deserted; they had not quite Spent her money, when miss blyden’s father died;, then directly they laid the Scheme os making a prey of her, which they judged must serve them their lives very amply, and did not doubt of Succeeding: little, apprehending how difficult it would prove. Their plan was for Clavering to marry miss Blyden; and, to atone for Some of their wickedness, they was to Send a larg^ Sum of money to Mr. johnson, clavering’s 
fathers 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 213 father, who lived in great poverty in Ireland by the name of. Morris) that Mr. Blyden always pretended being drunk, to prevent hit steep designs being suspestled; that his first scheme was to get rid of the old Servants of both estates, and to Set Evanion and his uncle variance; In all this'he Succeeded, but clavering’s match he found was extreme difficult to bring about, He then contrived to give young Evanion Some intoxicating drug, which quite turn’d his brain : So far it went 11. Then a journey to London was contrived, where Mrs. Blyden was afraid to show her Lee, least fiie. should be known, therefore would not often go out, or appear in company. As to Clavering he had taken the precaution to contrive a claret mark on his face, as Soon as he came to England: that finding olcl Evanion in a bad state of health, Blyden Soon contrived to forge a will in his own favour. When they found it impossible to marry Clavering to Mils Blyden, they Soon judged her death necessary to com pleat their designs, but could not bring themselves to that pitch of wickedness, as to murder her; therefore contrived to forge her death, and hide her : To effect that, they got her Servants out of the way,, under pretence of going to Bath; in the mean time. Clavering thought 
miss 
214 JFMIMA and LOUISA. 
Miss Rainsford a fine girl, and that her sor tune was a good pretty morsel; and to Save Settlements or presents, che contrived to hurry the marriage in the manner related; and that he brought about by the help os her Maid, who he bribed to persuade her that he certainly was very much in love with her, only courted miss Blyden for the sake of her fortune; and that it was clear to her, Mils Rainsford liked Clavering; in this manner she persuaded her into a fancy she liked Clavering, telling her they would be the finest couple in England; that they would certainly be the envy of everybody; thus she prevail’d, and they Succeeded : that miss Blyden had made a will, where she left miss Courtly arid me five thousand pounds apiece, and all the other legacies three times as much as was Said. That they judged it mjost prudent to produce some will 6f miss blyden’s; and therefore gave every one that was named in her will Something, to prevent suspxion. I lend this history with horror and amazement; his all I can Say upon it. My dear miss Blyden is to stay with me, till Sir Harry (who is gone to fetch Mr. Evanion) returns; I hope he is still living, but we have reason to doubt it, therefore we give miss Blyden very Small hopes of Seeing him. Poor creature, 
she’s 
JEMIMA AND LOUSIA. 215 file’s quite like one waked out of a frightsul dream. I fancy she has been out os her mind, Sor she remembers nothing hardly that has happen’d since her leaving London; and Sir Harry Says, she was quite stupid all the way home. She recovers hourly, and has cried Several times lately, which we think a good sign. In my consusion I have negledbed to inform you of a most material circumstance; that is, the motive of their Sudden flight; it was owing to one of their principal Servants being taken up for a robbery and murder, the dread of his confeshon hurried them off. However, all this villainy was hang’d with him, for he did not mention it. There is all possible Search making in Ireland, to bring these people to justice, and it is thought they cannot escape. I can write no more atpresent. My dear Finny farewell. 
Emma Ma. Harwood. 
LED 
2.i6 JBMIMA and LOUISA. 
LETTER LXXXVI 
Lady Harwood to Mijs Wellers. 
Bear Miss Wellersy 
Blyden lodge. 
I Snatch this moment before I go to bed, to tell you we came here the day before yesterday, in order to receive Mr. Evanion, who came last night, but gave us no other Satisfaction, than Seeing him before he dies. I must not pretend to describe the meeting. Ail our troubles has been nothing to this Scene. Poor louisa is only affected with a stupid kind of melancholy, which the physicians are of opinion will never leave her, and that she may live many years, which I thought was impossible; for anything So thin I never law before. We have just received from Iredand, an account of the miserable end of the bly dens; the woman died despairing; old Blyden was Sound hanging in a barn, not quite dead, but irrecoverable; Clavering vas taken, and immediately shot himself; many of the Servants are taken and confined in Several goals; the steward who forged Mr. evanion’s will, 
will 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 217 will certainly be hang’d, and Several ps the others, for diverse robberies and forgeries that can be proved upon them. Thus ends that hellish crew. And now 1 must conclude faithfully yours, 
Emma Maria Harwood. 
LETTER LXXXVII 
Lady Harwood io Miss Wellers. 
Mf dear Fanny, Lower woodberry. 
IH AVE not had Spirits Sufficient to write Sor So long a time, that I fear you’ll ac cuse me os great neglect. I came home but last night, and have promised louisa I will Soon go and Spend a month with her, but Sir Harry would not let me stay any longer, fearing it was too much for my Spirits. The day after I wrote to you last, poor Mr. eva nion died; he was buried in the lodge vault. miss Blyden took it amazingly calm. She was with him at the time os his departing; after which she went to her room, from whence she never intends to come any more. 
L The 
2i8 jemima and LOUISA. 
The day ascer^he was buried, she Sent for Mr. Brook, and put all her affairs into his hands, desiring him to allow the house steward three thousand a year for the family expenses; and the overplus of her estate, which is at least five tligusand a year, to be given in charity. She will See no creature’s face on any consideration, but Mr. Brook, me, her own maid, and the chaplain who reads prayers to her twice a day. She appears persedtly Sensible nd quite resign’d, but a perpetual melancholy on her countenance. Now I am So far Settled as to be able to command my own time, I want to know how I may prevail on Mrs. Wellers to give you liberty to make a charitable visit at Woodberry; for when the Hetchmores are absent, I have not one reasonable or decent neighbour; and my mother finding herself decline very fast, will not Suffer me to attend Sir Harry any more while she lives; and he is now going with the regiment into Scotland, which will be eighteen months besore it returns. Now judge my Situation, if it is not deplorable; and as I can write nothing entertaining, will trespass no longer on your time, than to affure you that I am yours unalterably. 
ej^ma Maria Harwood. 
LET 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 219 
LETTER lxxxvill 
cmtinuati&n of Lady Harwood to Miss Wellers. 
SINCE I wrote last to my dear miss Wellers, I have received a letter from Mrs. Clavering, which I here inclose. From the account she gives of her new acquaintance, I have no notion she will prove of any real advantage to her; on the contrary, greatly Sear the gay Scenes she is going to reenter, may Subject her to greater inconveniences than any she has yet experienced; for I understand, this miss French is a person of no fortune, though in high life, and much taken notice of by people of Sashion. When I have Seen her, will give you more of my opinion, still then, adieu, and believe me to remain. 
Tour ever affefhonate^ 
Emma Maria Harwood. 
L 2 
let. 
22.0. JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
LETTER LXXXIX 
Mrs.. Clavering to Lady Harwood, in clojed in the foregoing. 
OH! my dear Lady Harwood, I am Surely the luckiest of unlucky mortals, I have met with Such a friend! the world eanst produce her equal! but I must calm my Spirits, before I can give you a rational account of this matchless excellence. 
My aunt. Sweet creature, one evening indulged me with a frish to Ranelagh, with the only tolerable Smart girl in the circle of her acquaintance; one of our party was a miss French, daughter of Some old Cit; that’s her missortune, not her Sault, poor dear; she is exquisitely handsome, extravagantly genteel, sings like an angel; that’s nothing; what’s above all, file’s acquainted with all the people of quality in the kingdom! and can you believe it ^ This adoreable creature has invited me to Spend a month with her, when my aunt goes into the country; and to convince you that miracles are not ceas’d, she has consented, I might indeed go directly; but I chuse to stay till she is out of the hearing 
os 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 221 of our joyous Schemes, ' not that thrs'lovely has anything os the flight in her compo -- sition; the reverse entirely, languid, gentle, c. See. I long with the uuriost impatience to See you, and have no hopes of any opportunity, unless you will permit me to bring miss French with me? If I can prevail with her to take Such a trip, how completely happy shall I be. I have twenty thousand Schemes in view, but none So much at heart as Seeing your ladyship. I am, with all possible resped, 
Tcur moji ohltged., 
and most. devoted, ^ Annama. Claverino, 
LETTER XC 
Lady Harwood to aiifs Wellers. 
Dear Mijs wellersy 
The night before yesterday, myexpeded visitors arrived, Mrs. Clavering and miss French. I embrace this leisure half hour to return thanks for your last obliging L 3 ' favour. 
222 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, favour, and to give you (if possible) Scrne idea os the latter lady, who is the highest charadser I ever met: sincerely wish my account could entertain you, as she has entertain’d us. They came in about six in the evening; Mrs. clavering’s joy at meeting was great, and I was truly glad to See her; you know her pleasing gay good-humour, it always engaged my partiality. Her friend is a striking figure, hand Some and genteel; her dress was elegantly dirty and ragged, quite the Smart Slattern. She went through the hall into the parlour, and without taking notice. os any one, ‘flung herself into my mother’s easy chair, in a fainting attitude; we were much alarm’d, and drops were call’d Sor: Mrs. Clavering affured.us, she’d Soon recover, but was of a delicate nature, and easily Satigued : She then rais’d hersest, and began with dear ladies, a thousand’pardons; but Such a jour 'ney, and Such roads, are only to be sustain’d by rustic frames.' I am all confusion to perceive that the discomposure which had totally involved me, So ablbrb’d my senses, as to disable me Srom paying the decent ceremonies on this pleasing occasion. Here she again grew Saint and languid, but the Seasonable entrance os Coffee and tea Soon revived her drooping Spirits. About eight o’clock 
she 
JEMIMA ktto totl^al' she begg’d for Some hafitioni^sis comfo'ri^,. which after a little puzzle os' burs, and her more intricate explanations we found to be mu sick; I therefore offer’d to show her to mv ' harpsichord, but Seared it was not in peitecc tune. Oh! my dear lady Harwood, (she cried) take me a thousand miles from an instrument out of tune, I die at discord : but me’m, can’t you ask the favour of Some ol your neighbours to come in and make us up. a little clash; I slant recover till I have had Some music, that’s a healing balm to all my wounds. I told her our remote Situation, upon which she immediately fell back in her chair, but Soon recover’d, hum’d a piece of an Italian air, and begg’d to be conduced to her Chamber Dormir, not choosing any Supper. On taking leave, she desir’d not to be call’d dll twelve, except the morning was remarkably clear, and the Sun of an Italick warmth; for the English damps must have taken off the extremity os her voice, ages ago, had not the utmost care been taken. 
I yesterday took Some opportunities os inquiring a little into her situation; find she is the only child os a very ridiculous old man. On ass sing in what part of i^ondon she lived i was answer’d by. Oh! me’m, my pa’asbu siness obliges him to’ reside: in, a inost filthy L 4 - part 
224 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, part of the Metropolis — in the city, me’m, but he is So Ixveetly indulgent, that I might live where 1 chuse — filial duty, me’m, is an impediment to that gratification; for nothing less than a conjugal attachment, shall ever take me from So kind a parent. We also touch’d upon the subjc(5t of singing; I find it is with the utmost reluctance that she quavers forth to less than fourscore or a hundred persons; nor then, except the whole company join in assuring her, its only a private party: If a duke and two or three lords lay at her feet during the performance, it adds infinite Spirit to her Song. Sometimes (I learn) there are parties made os noble personages, and she invited to sing, and as frequently disappoints them; the consequence of which, she gave me in the Sollowing manner; that the morning after one of these invitations, the whole company forced themselves upon her to breakfast; and then. Says she, me’m, I was obliged to sing, for my dear pa’a is So fond of hear ing me applauded, that I cannot resist his importunity, when 1 See the dear good old man prostrate on the ground, kissing my Sect, and offering me the world to indulge him and my friends with a Song, half a Song, nay a million for three notes; and then their praises, me’m, 
are So -- -- 1 must, indeed I must totally obscure 

jemima and LOUSIA. 225 Score my voice; for really, me’m, the ap plauses quite confound my Senses; I must, me’m, give it up, Sor the world is So satyrl cal; wou’d you imagine that the people who live near me, (neighbours i’ve none, me’m) talk os inditing my pa’a, me’m, bccause the noblemen’s coaches that wait on me, keep the avenues to their shops, me’m^ always block’d up; and certainly it is rather hard, that I should obstruct their customers, who have ali. I use from the other end of the town. 
My dear miss Wellers, I have tired myself and pen, in writing this girl’s nonsense. ex cuse ceremony in your 
emma'.maria Harwood.. 
L 

LET 
226 JEMIMA AND LOOISA. 
L E T TER XCI 
mijs Wellers to Lady Harwood. 
Swinderby Abbey. 
Return dear Lady Harwood many thanks for the entertaining account of her visitors; am glad to find they have takeiy their leave, as T cannot suppose Such oddities can^please for any length os time. I am re -- joiced to hear miss Blyden appears rather more chearfu!; heartily wish she could be prevail’d on to quit her chamber, and See a little company, but you Seem to think it impossible to carry that point. 
I have lost my agreeable companion Mrs.. Granville, but am happy under the refiedliom of its being a removal greatly to her advantage; old Mr. Courtly having Sent her a very' affedlionate letter of invitation home she instantly obeyed; and I am now in hourly expedation of hearing, from her. Pray my best respects to Mrs. Lewis, the same attends your ladyship, Srom 
Tour affefiknau and ohhgedy 
F. Wellers. 
LET 
JEM'SMA AND houiba., 227 
L E T T E R XCII. 
Continuation of mip Wellers to Lady Harwood. 
My dear Lady Harwood., inderby Abbe). 
B y the friendship that has long Subsisted, inviolate between us, our Separate con nedlions Seem united; I love your louisa, you my Jemima; theresore am convinced the inclosed letter will give you infinite satis fadion. I never experienced a pleasure equal to what it afforded me., 
My mother and Self propose to Set out tomorrow for Courtly Hall; from whence, wshatever occurs that can in any respect contribute to the entertainment of dear l^y Harwood, .shall be communicated by her 
faithful Friatd 
and Servant 
FR ANCES WELLERS^'. 
L (d 
U E T 
228 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
I. E T T E R XCIII 
Mrs. Granville to Miss Wellers, inclhjed in the foregoing. 
Courtly Hall. 
HO, W varied the Scene since I last pen’ll a letter to my dear miss Wellers Srom this place, then was I the unhappy objeiff of my father’s displeasure, now his chief delight; then only a Secret admirer of Horatio, now his happy wife; and what was then my reputed crime, is now my greatest triumph. Blessed change! Innumerable refiedlions of this kind croydon my memory, and retard the ► chief design of this epistle — but without further digression. i’ll now proceed. 
As to our first meeting, it may easier be intagined than describ’d; after the alternate transports of joy and grief were over, my father inform’d me, that all my unhappiness had proceeded from my sister’s treachery, at length discovered by miss Brand, who'in a letter to my father, with a vast deal of pretended contrition, declared herself confederate with Emily, in forming various Schemes Scr injuring me in my father’s affc^ions; most of 
which, 
JEMIMA AND I, O U LS A, 229 which, both you and myself have long been acquainted with. 
As Soon as my father had perused tha letter, he Sent Sor Mils Brand, who then gave a particular account of their wicked combina' tion, and produced the letters she had received from my sister, protesting remorse of consci * cnce, prompt her to a discovery, that she had long been a stranger to peace of mind,, and never should enjoy a moment’s Satisfadfion, still the grievances she had been aoceffary to were redress’d; but how false that assertion, pique and resentment were her Sole instigators, Sor it Seems as Soon as I was out of the power of my sister, and she found miss Brand could be of no further Service, she treated her with great coolness and indifference, and at length totaldisregard. miss Brand quickly perceived this alteration, but having present occassen for a little cash, resoived to put Emilyst friendship once more to the trial; accordingly requested the loan of five guineas, which Emily resused, desiring miss Brand would never trouble her upon Such accounts, nor ever expecst any Such favour Srom her. 
What a fortunate circumstance was this to me, miss Brand resolving on revenge, divulged their vile conspiracy, and thereby turn’d the tide of my adverse fortune, and 
prevented 
2^0 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, prevented the train of ills I might have Suffered from a continuance under a parent’s displeasure. 
My, father justly observing miss Brand never repented the Sewing discord in our family, till she found it no longer of advantage to herself, .presenting her with five guineas, frankly told her he should regard' that Sum as much too trifling a recompense for the benefits that accru’d from her disco, very, but could not think of rewarding as a virtue, what evidently appear’d the result of a contrary principle. What pity was it, that a; man So capable of judging right, should So. long be milled by prejudice and partiality > but God forbid I should even in thought reproach or censure his past condikst, since he now makes Such ample amends by the utmost : tenderness and paternal affedhon. 
My aunt Sheldren has acquainted me with emily’s situation, that as her unnatural behaviour had made the sight of her unbearable to my father, he insisted upon her quitting his house, and was with difficulty prevail’d on to make any provision for her, but by my. aunt’s earnest entreaty, he has promised she shall be decently provided for during her life, tho’ not as his daughter, and has put her to 
board; 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 23f board in a family at a very considerable distance. 
I believe you have often heard that my. mothers Sortune, which V as ten thousand pounds, was to be distributed according to my father’s discretion among the younger children; he therefore has allotted one. thousand of it Sor my sister’s maintenance, and the residue is reserved for my portion, and to be paid Mr. Granville at his return, an event my father Seems almost as anxious after: as myfels; he alsh seconds me in an earnest desire, which is partly in your power to gratify, I mean the pleasure of Mrs. Wellers* and your company at Courtly Hall,, which, will greatly add to the felicity of 
Tour mcft. affffhonate^ jjemima Granville: 
LET 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
LETTER XCIV Miss willers to Lady Harwood. 
Dear Lady Harwood 
Courtly Hall. 
I Received your obliging favour a few days aster my arrival at this place; Mrs. Granville desires me to prcsent her most respedtful compliments and thanks for your congratulations, tor which I likewise think myself extremely obliged to you. Young Mr. Courtly came to conduct us Srom Swinderby hither; he desir’d that at our first meeting, we would take no notice os former affairs, as his father seem’d too Sensibly affedfed whenever the leasts mention was made of them. 
Old Mr. Courtly received us with great politeness, and appear’d tolerably cheerful; you cannot conceive what pains he takes to make us all happy, his whole study and attention is constantly bent upon that endeavour. 
I am vastly glad to hear your mother is well enough to propose going to Upper wood berry, and think her remaining there while 'mu are at Blyden lodge, is an excelienti 
Scheme, 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. agg le, as Lady Hetchmore and Mrs. Lewis litablc companions, and will be happy each other, but your Situation with poor Sa must be excessive melancholy. how as your company is her desire, I am ied it’s a pleasure to you to comply. All family join in compliments to your ler and sels, with 
Tcur obliged. 
and affsfitonau 
F. Wellers. 
. S. Old Mr. Courtly was yesterday Several •s engaged in private conference with my her. 
LET 
234 JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
LETTER XCV 
Airs. Granville to Lady Harwood. 
Dear Madam 
Courtly Half. 
I A M commishon’d by miss Wellers to acquaint your ladyship with Some particulars of a nature that will not So properly admit os a relation from hcrself. Your ladyship I am certain is no stranger to the reciprocal regard my brother and miss Wellers have for Some years entertain’d for each other,, but the unhappy situation of our family oblig’d them to conceal their well placed affecstions^ till now. My father, by my brother’s desire,, has made proposals to Mrs. Wellers, and assur’d her, that if he Succeeded in his embassy,, his happiness would be com pleated, for had he the choice of the whole Sex, miss Wellers would be the first woman he would point out as a wise for his Son. Mrs. Wellers declaring herself equally Satisfied on her daughter’s account; the lawyers were instantly employ’d in the necessary points relating to Settlements,, c. and as Soon as they are com pleated, the marriage will be Solemnised. Now I have 
broke 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 235 broke the ice, I believe miss Wellers will give you further information in a short time. 1 am with due respedt, 
Tous Ladyjhifs mcft obliged and obedient humble Servant Jemima Granville, 
LETTER ixcvl 
Wellers to. Lady Harwood. 
My dear Lady Harwood 
mrs. Granville having acquainted you with the particular engagement that has for Some time engross’d my attention;. I hope you will readily excuse my neglect iitnot writing to your ladyship before this. 
Every circumstance is now Settled relating to my espousal with Mr. Courtly; and now my dear Emma, let me prevail with you to honour me with your presence at the ceremony, which is to be performed at swin derby, on the anniversary of Mrs. granvilts wedding day; I must despair os the happiness 
of 
.^^6 JEMIMA AND LOUISA, of Mrs. lewis’s'company, as I fear the journey would be too Satiguing, but as my joys Will not be complete till I have Seen her, will make a visit at Woodberfy as soon as possible. I suppose you are not now with miss Blyden, So shall direct this letter to Woodberry, and hope very Soon to receive one Srom your ladyship. I am 
Tour affefiionate^ cf. 
Wellers. 
LETTER XCVII Lady Harwood to Miss Wellers. 
My dear Miss Wellers^ 
I A M preparing with all Speed Sor Courtly Hall, I was at Blyden lodge when your kind invitation came, but my dear louisa immediately consented to my leaving her, obligingly Saying, she could part with isie without reluctance on this occasion. My mother would most gladly : accompany me, could she Support the fatigue of the journey,, but as she is very certain of the contrary. Says 
her 
JEMIMA AND LOUISA. 
her best and tenderest wishes that ever will attend you, must Suffice. I am with joy and giadness inexpressible 
Tour affe^ionate^ c. 
Emma Maria Harwood. 
LETTER XCVIII Lady Harwood to Mrs. Lewis, Honoured Madam 
A M sase arrived at Courtly Hall, where I was received with the greatest friendship and politeness by the whole family. We are to Set out for Swinderby next Saturday, and in a few days aster, the marriage is to be there consummated; the young folks intended a private wedding, but old Mr. Courtly insists upon its being very public, and celebrated with great joy and festivity; he designs keeping open house Sora Sortnight,. As Soon as the visits are received and return’d, the bride and bridegroom will accompany me to. 
W ood 
238 jemimaand LOUISA. Woodbcrry, and Spend a few days with us. I am. 
Dear Madam 
Tour dutiful and 
affeeiicnate Daughter Emma Maria Hadwood. 

CONCLUSION. 
IN about a twelve month after Mr. Anthony courtly’s marriage, Mr. Granville return’d from his travels, an event that com pleated the Selicity of that family. Old Mr. Courtly Soon became truly Sensible of his Son in law’s great merit and just title to his parental regard, in So much that he gave him eight thousand pounds, exclusive of the fortune Mrs. Granville was entitled to by her mother’s marriage articles, which he caused to be Settled in like manner on her issue. 
As young Mr. Courtly resided at S winderby, old Mr. Courtly proposed Mr. granville’s continuing with him, but horatio’s active 
genius 
C O N C L U S I O N. 239 genius naturally inclined him more to the pursuit os Some employment and a town life, than a country retirement; his firm attachment to the young nobleman he had travelled with, greatly contributed to strengthen that choice, as by residing in London, he could have more frequent opportunities of Seeing his lordship, yvho likewise entertained the greatest esteem and friendship for Mr. Granville, which he afterwards manisested, by procuring him a post of great honour and profit, i^ich he enjoyed during his life, and filled with the highest reputation. 
Immediately after the death of Mrs. Wellers, Mr. Anthony Courtly removed to Courtly Hall, as Swinderby Abbey was extremely disagreeable to Mrs. Courtly, after the loss of her mother. 
Old Mr. Courtly lived to a great age, in a state of uninterrupted tranquillity. 
Mils Emily Courtly shortened her days by intemperate living, endeavouring to drown the refiedlions of a guilty conscience. 
miss Blyden persevered in her resolution of never quitting her chamber, and lived Some years in that melancholy Situation. After her decease, everybody that were in the least deserving her notice, Sound themselves remember’d in her will; her more particular acquaintance 
*59 CONCLUSION, quaintance were bequeathed very considerable legacies, and large Sums entrusted to her executors to be distributed in both public and private charities. 
After the death of Mrs. Lewis, Lady harwood’s mother. Sir Harry Sold his commission and retired with his lady and family to wood berry. 
Mrs. Clavering continued with her aunt Burton during her life, and after the death of her aunt, was received and Supported by Mr. Rainsford her Sather. 
The miss Moores were, after the death of their uncle Duncombe, genteely provided for in Lady hetchmore’s family. 
Lady Harwood, Mr. Anthony Courtly, and Mrs. Granville, were the last Surviving person, the only circumstance that made the loss of their consorts Supportable, and, that could alleviate that misfortune, was observing all the amiable qualities of the deceas’d Survive in their offspring, which they did in Such eminent degree, that to all the issue of those happy pairs, might be justly ascrib’d, that fine encomium on the family of a gentleman inter’d in Westminster abbey : That all the Sons •were valiant and all the Daughters virtuous. 
F I N I K 




vub 


i'. 
Ft, ■' 
i ’ ' ri, ■ i ■ 
it 
'tic, 

r '.'D,, t.. 
'dsa 
/ 
r 
sv /2. AI, ALL; JLV 
I /^ICAIP /lr^rij ^ 
^ 2,. 

e zc>^7?^ze> 
sn^mivd.:. 


