, A
LESSON FOR LOVERS.
OR THE
HISTORY
OF
COLONEL MELVILLE,
AND
LADY CHARLOTTE RICHLEY.
VOLUME I.
--,	— - . , --	-r-
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR FRANCIS NOBLE, AT HIS. CIRCULAT-ING LIBRARY, OPPOSITE GRAYS-INN'GATE, HOL-BORN. MjDCCjLXXXIII.
P R E F A C E.
The writer of the following work hopes an attempt to furnish an hour of innocent amufement to the virtuous mind, or to draw forth the tribute of a pitying tear for fussering merit (in an age where fo many precious moments are fool’d, frolicLd, or loung’d away) may at least meet with fome degree of approbation, if not with applaufe.
It is humbly prefumed this fpecies of writing, whilst it renders vicious characters the objects of detestation, and whilst it warms the fufceptible heart to feel for distressed worth, will not be judged ufelefs, nor wholly destitute of instruction.
The moral oS the following-------but
the author will not anticipate, nor Say more on this head, lest he should be like ' that writer who exhausted his whole Subject
iv	PREFACE.
ject in a very long preface, and had nothing new to fay in his book.
For the errors in this work, the writer begs leave to recommend to the critic the following lines of our admirable poet Mr. Pope :
u Whoever thinks a faultlefs piece to fee, u Thinks what ne’er was, nor is, not e’er (hall be : “ In ev’ry work regard the writer’s end,
11 Since none can compafs more than they intends Survey the whole, nor Seek flight faults to find, u Where nature moves, and rapture warms the mind. u And if the means be juft, the conduct true,
“ Applaufe, in Spite of trivial faults, is due.”
ESSAY ON CRITICISM*
ERRATA, vol, i.
Page. Line.
1 57	2 for fair, read fine.
6o 8 for lovers, read admirers.
16 /or Mrs. rfflJ a Mrs.
66	14 for univerfal, read univerfally.. .
67	23 for Sure, read pure.
107	10 for oa, read of a.
22 for intentions, read intention.
J33	i° /^motions, read nations,
A
A
i
LESSON
FOR
LOVERS.
LETTER I.
COLONEL MELVILLE, TO SIR HENRY BELLMOUR.
\t	* ichley - Park, June 2d.
JL ES, my friend, I allow, with you, that Lady Charlotte Richley is lovely in her perfon—-highly accom-' plished—her manners gentle—her heart good—and her understanding finely ■ cultivated—and yet—aStonishing as it may Seem to you—I fee this very amiable, this fine young creature every day, and indeed all the day (for the good old Earl is perpetually leaving ns together) with just the fame indif-vol. i.	A	ference
2	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
ference I should my great-grandmother. —I hear her sing the most impassioned notes, without feeling one of thole thrilling tremors of which you often prate fo much aboutand I lead her 'willing hand up the dance with not a jot more pleafure or emotion than I should that of a sister. Her eyes, her i sine complexion, and the fymmetry of her features touch me no more than if I was contemplating the picture-gallery in Hampton Court.—No, Harry— thy friend is not formed for the fofi . passion of love.
u I have in tents, and fighting fields been bred, u Unknowing the Seducing charms of woman.”
I expect daily to receive orders when I am to embark for America, and most heartily wish to be again Serving my King and country .---I am Sick—sick to death, oS this idle, this loitering life in thefe foft fcenes.
“ A dreadful punishment,„ you cry, “ furely, to be the favourite compa-
“ nion
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	3
“ nion of that worthiest of men, Earl “ Richley, and his charming daughter; “ and to have this calamity happen in “ one of the most beautiful situations “ in England, is still more lamentable.” Your raillery, my friend, is just:—I have nothing to blame but my own callous heart. It is true, I feel the most exquisite gratitude for my ever revered friend, the excellent father, and all the tender esteem of a brother’s affection for his lovely daughter, but nothing more. I certainly am, at this moment, in the most odd predicament in the world—the most unaccountably circumstanced :— trying (shall I call it ?) to raife in my heart a passion for this very amiable woman, as a return for the unbounded care and tenderness of her admirable parent, from my almost helplefs infancy (when my noble father, General Melville, died fo gloriousty in battle) even to this prefent moment.—rHeavens! with what aim oft parental affection did this best A 2	of
4	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
of men cauSe ihe to be educated in the Strictest line of moral virtue !—How excellent the preceptors with which he furnished my inexperienced youth !— with what unremitting assiduity ! with what care and fidelity has he managed and improved the fortune my father bequeathed me ! how strenuously and Succefsfully has this noble friend procured me that high command in the military line I now enjoy! You remember the affecting circumstance— you still recollect, my Henry, what I have fo often recounted to you, the little history of my infant years—you cannot forget that my gallant father expired in the arms of my revered benefactor ;—-and with his dying breath, in faltering accents, could only pronounce,—“ My poor Charles!—my boy !—be his,’—friend—he would have faid ; but, in that dreadful moment, his Speech forfook him. Lord Rich-ley, straining him to his heart, could
only
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	5
only fay—“ I will be his guide—his guardian—'his fathers
Ah, Bellmour! not a doubt with me remains, but that the good man intends as fully to make the latter title as certain as he has done the former:— his whole prefent behaviour plainly denotes his intention.
“ My Charles,” he is continually calling me “ what is your opinion of this or that improvement in the park or gardens ?—What, my childrenwith an intelligent glance at his fair daughter and your favoured Charles, “ what are your opinions of thesis alterations ?”
Is not this fpeaking pretty plainly ? —A thoufand circumstances, too, occur to my thoughts, even from my childish days, to corroborate this idea.
When I constantly fpent my annual recefsfrom School,at Richley-Park, how perpetually did my noble guardian pro-poSe little parties oS pleasure, in which A 3	I, by
- 6	A LESSON FOR LOVERS. '
I, by his generous permission (unSought) was always Lady Charlotte’s partner in the dance-—her attendant in the chace —and her fellow-student in history, geography, and the more showy accomplishments.—How often has this worthy nobleman fancied the Song of his darling daughter (he never had another child).was incomplete, except accompanied by my flute-—or that her harpsichord performances still wanted the addition of my violin.—In short, my friend, it feems as if we had been educated for each other.'—Possibly this very Suggestion of mine (Sor Such is the strange unaccountable caprice of man) may be the only reaSon that I have none oS thoSe unealy hours—-thoSe anxious moments oS SuSpenfe that your dying, doating lovers have. I love difficulties—I am fond oS arduous undertakings—but here the path Seems fo etif—that there are no pains required« to even attempt the conquest—the
prize
L	*
*	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	7
prize Seems already mine.-—You will not, my Bellmour, SnSpect me, I trust, oS vanity, if I Say I have abundant rea-Son to believe I am far—'Very far, Srom being indifferent to Lady' Charlotte : indeed, to confeSs the Secret truth (in the utmost confidence) I have long thought So.------A - particular circum-
stance, a few days since (not to mention others) has confirmed me in this opinion. Above a year ago I presented her with a beautiful goldfinch, of which she has been remarkably fond: she constantly fed it with her own hand; —she drest its cage with flowers;—and it stood in the window of her own apartment.—By Some accident this little favourite was lately Sound one.morning Siretcheel at its length,—cold and dead. —Lady Charlotte even shrieked when she beheld this sight. The Earl and I, who were walking in the gallery, near her dresiing-room, hastened to See what could possibly be the matter—when A 4	we
$	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
wTe found her weeping over this beautiful bird, and vainly endeavouring to warm it, by her kiffes, into life.
“ Pho, child!,, Said my good old friend, “ is this all ? I Seared you was taken Suddenly ill.—Another goldfinch may Soon, Surely, be procured.',
“ Yes, Sir,„ she returned sighing emphatically, “ another may—but I never—never can love another like this / —this, was a mo (I particular favourite. —O my poor bird ! I would give every ]ewel I have to purchaSe thy precious life.”*—And again she pressed it to her lips.
“ Why, child, is not one goldfinch as good as another?’, Said the Earl.
“ Ah, no ! my Lorei,„ rejoined she, Sighing-,—and that instant cast a look oS inexpressible tenderneSs on your friend.
I retired Soon aSter to my apartment; —I examined again and again the above little incident;—but still, shall I Say, it
had
j	A LESSON FOR LOVERS,	I J
I own fake, as that of her excellent" fa-y ther, who, good man (as your gallant parent was his most beloved friend) naturally transferred all that affection to the fon he felt for the father; and how could he shew it better, than by one day uniting your hand to that of his darling only child ? To which let me add (moral and good as his own conduct is) the very excellent character you possess (a rare thing' in this dissipated age) is no fmall inducement to him.
That this amiable Lady Charlotte would make an excellent wife, I have not a single doubt: but the misfortune is, though handfome, young, accomplished, rich, Sec. she still wants in your eye that unaccountable fomething, that can only be felt, but never defer idea,—The old faying, that marry f rft, and love will come after, is furely of all others the most falfe, abfurd, and ridiculous.
I cannot
l8	A LESSON FOR LOVELS.
I cannot but wonder that fuch a tender parent as the good Earl, should wish to know, before your departure for America, your final opinion in this interesting affair; that on your return, crowned, as I doubt not you will be, with laurels and victory, you may receive, as a reward, the hand of the lovely daughter from this fond parent.
I have already figured to my Self your tete-a-tete with Lord Rich!ey.---fie tenderly mentions his plan \—you all reverential gratitude, in one of your generous exalted effusions oS Soul, make the fatal Sacrifice of your hand, without yotxsJxtarU—But can it be possible that my friend, Charles Melville, will ever marry the woman Whom he tells me is as indifferent to him as his great grandmother f Forbid it love !—forbid it honour!—In the utmost impatience of the Sequel oS your adventure, I remain, My dear Charles,
Most sincerely yours,
HENRY BELLMOUR.
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	19
L E T T E R III.
COLONEL MELVILLE, TO SIR HENRY BELLMOUR.
*
Richlcy.Fark, June I%th*
Dear Belhnour,
< Your kind letter arrived one day too late :—you prophesied juStly, that I should Suffer my gratitude to get the better of every other consideration; and that I. should think nothing too great a facrisice for what I owe to this most worthy family.—I have, indeed, on a very interesting conversation I had with Lord Richley, been—but when I tell you how critically I was circumstanced, I believe you will join with me in thinking I could not do other-'wiSe.
My good old friend propoSecl a walk in the park, where, taking me into a shady wood, and being both Seated, after
20	A LESSON FOR LOVERS?
ter Some little silence, he began in thi, manner.
“ It is ncedleSs, my dear Charles to Say how anxious I shall be for you] welfare in this very important war ii which you are going to engage in Nine rica.—Your fate is perhaps oS mor< conSequence to me than you may ima gine.—I grow old—and, having Ion? Since given up the huSy Scenes of pub lie life, feek for that quiet in the bo Som of retirement, I am convinced car never be found in the gay world.—Jr regard to any kind of terrestrial happiness, exclusive of that which relates tc the difpofal in marriage of my darling daughter,—ipy fweet child,—I have none :—it is there I feel.’,
Here, Harry, I felt an unaccountable twinge in my breast.—I had before been sitting, during his Lordship's ha rangue, pinching my rushes, picking my fingers, with my eyes firmly fixed
Ox
I
[	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	21
on the green turf beneath my feet,— The good man continued.
“ I fay, it is for my Charlotte alone, I have a worldly wish :—when I have bestowed her hand on Some worthy man, I shall sink into my grave in peace. If a partial father’s fondnefs deceive him not, she will be a treaSure to whoever is her future huSband.—Her heart is good;—her education has been under my own eye :—in short, she is ^.111 wish her to be.„
Here, my friend, I interrupted his Lordship, or rather joined with him in his praifes of his amiable daughter.
“ Lady Charlotte:—is indeed—-she is—certainly is—a most accomplished young lady—-lovely in her perfon, and every way worthy the higheft regard.”
A Sentiment o{gratitude impelled me to Say this.—It was, indeed, no more than bare common justice to give this teStimony to her merit; but my Lord
instantly
22	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
instantly caught it ;—and with visible rapture feized my hand.
“You do, then, think my Charlotte amiable?’,
Before I could reply he went on.
* ‘ Well, Charles, I will be plain with you :—I tell you, sincerely, 1 know no man in England, but yourfelf on whom I would bestow this jewel.—Nay, to fay the truth, I have long had an eye to this matter.—Your dear father and I, when you were both in your infancy, talked this affair over:—I told him, it was more than probable, my little Charlotte (then in her cradle) and his Charles, might one day render our amity stronger, by being united for life. With pleafure, my good young man (he was pleafed to shy) I fee you have sirmnefs to resist the reigning vices of this diliipated age ; your merit in every lenfe of the word, joined with the unfortunate accident which made me take you under my care, has strongly
endeared
•	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	23
endeared you to me I love you, my Charles, for your father’s fake—-I love you for your own.”
Here, my Henry, I found mySelf So much penetrated—-So much affected by the good mail's tenderness, I could not restrain my tears—I drew out my handkerchief. Lord Richley obferved this, and with pleafure exclaimed,
“ Restrain not thofe precious drops, facred to thy inestimable father.— When a foldier weeps—So far from esteeming it a weaknefs—I think it .a-proof of the most exalted humanity.” We were Some moments silent:— my heart, at that interesting moment, Seemed all gratitude, and I verily believe, had Lady Charlotte been the most diSagreeable woman under the Sun, I should have thought no Sacrifice too great.
“ Your Lordship (I stammered out) does me too much honour—infinitely too much."
“ Tell
£4	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ Tell me—and tell me truly (faid the good man, regarding me with an eye of the utmoft tenderness) have you, my Charles, have you ever feen —come, be free, and tell me your whole foulhave you yet' ever feen the woman you could prefer to my Charlotte ?—You must, my child, be very explicit—the cafe requires it:— and tell me likewife, could you be happy with her in the married state ?„
“ My good Lord (Said I, and here, Bellmour, I fpoke the truth) I can most honestly affirm, I have never yet feen the woman I could prefer to Lady Charlotte Richley.—As to happinefs, is there a man on earth, in anfwer to your Lordship’s other question, who could not be happy with So lovely a woman?’,
Whether my old-friend thought this a final anfwer .on. my side, I know not; —but he once more caught my hand— and in a delighted accent exclaimed ;
—“ Say
[	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
' —“ Say no more-—fay no more	it is
done.—You must now, my boy, ferve I your king and country this campaign :
, on your return, I will reward you ; with my Charlotte's hand.„
I bowed low—and was just making my acknowledgments of gratitude,-when Lord Sandown’s coach drove up the avenue, through the very wood in which we were stated :—here, therefore, all farther converfation on the fubject was stopped, and we hastily repaired to the houfe. I now feln an unufual weight at my heart. I sighed, I knew not why;—and had I then received your letter, Bellmour, I should have been thoughtful indeed.
Lord Sandown and his party staid fupper, which I was not Sorry for.—I obServed my good old friend to cast a few very intelligible glances at his fair daughter—and there was, I perceived* a conSciouSnefs in her eyes, that convinced me the diScoursh we had in vol, i.	B *	the
2.6	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
the park was before concerted—I b< lieve I looked confoundedly awkwar the whole evening.
After the company were gone, an we were just retiring to our apartmeni <—Lord Richley, on my bowing r< Spectfully low, and wishing him an Lady Charlotte a good night, Suddenl exclaimed, his heart being open, an
his fpirits higher than ufual,--“ Han
form and ceremony:—give me th hand, Charles.'’
Saying which, he instantly put it i the fair hand of his daughter.*—-Sb blushed—I looked foolish—whilst th rood Earl faid------“ Thus—thus
O
join your hands.’,
I bowed with the most unfeigned r< fpect.—But was it not odd, Harr; that I did not prefs the- pafTroe hand ( • the lady to my lips ?—I have since r collected ink little circumstance.— Would any other man in. my situatio mt have done it?—Ah, Belimour! ha 9	I bee
A LESSON K)lt LOVERS.	%*J
I been truly in love with Lady Charlotte, with what rapture, instead of all that bowing refpect, should I have received from her father fuch an inestimable treafure as his daughter’s hand!
On retiring to my apartment, I will honestly confefs to you, I found myfelf fo diSconcerted—fo full of reflection— at what had passed on this occasion, that I fairly fat up ruminating and walking in my chamber till day-light, •—I felt I was, by an unaccountable fatality, abfolutely engaged to a woman, who, though amiable and good in a high degree, I was not particularly attached to.—But yet, my friend, I defy any man living (circumstanced as I am in every refpect to Lord Richley) on fuch a conversation as palsied in the park, to have acted otherwife than I did.— * Heavens! when that best of men was tenderly beftowing on me (apparently his inferior, in every refpect) his darling child !—his all!—could I—could B 2	any
28	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
r'
any man—(unprepoffeffed as I am, to ai other woman) have been able to utte 46 My Lord, I am not violently in lo “ with your daughter, fo I choofe “ decline the honour intended me, le “ I should hereafter be touched by tl “ blind boy in favour of another.”-I defy any man living of the least de cacy to act otherwife than I have don Certain it is, the good Earl had firr ly fixed his mind on this union ar poshbly one reafon of my being fo e tirely his favourite may be, I had nev< fought, by any means unknown to hit to gain fecretly the affections of h daughter, numberless as have been tl opportunities I have had of fo doing.-If his Lordship should give me th merit, I certainly have no right to it for I honestly confess, a thought neve occurred to me to gain her affection either directly or indirectly.
I am most critically circumStancet —Ah, my friend! how apt, how pron
at
l	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	29
1 are we to blame the actions of others ! ---Alas! we little know the intricacy— the peculiar delicacy (as witness mine) of their situation ! Never more will I pretend to arraign the conduct of others, unlefs I know their trials.
I know not what ails me—but fome-thing whifpers to my foul, I am undone.—Bellmour, ctis thy foreboding letter.—But it was honeil:—kind—and truly friendly, and thereSore forgive me.
I will take this unaccountable heart oS mine most Severely to talk, for even daring to Suggest, that the best of men drew me into this engagement.—Wretch l what do I talk oS beiim drawn in /---Is
o
not the lady in question defervedly esteemed one oS the most beautiful women this day in England ?—are not her accomplishments, her temper, and understanding admired by all who know her ?—and am I So blindly foolish, as not to fet a just value on fuch a bleSsing, given by a fond father to my B 3	arms
50	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
arms unfought ?—Ah! rather let me devote my whole life to make her happy. Lady Charlotte then—-But why do I Sigh ?—to youl dedicate the remainder of my days :—I muft not—will not think of any other woman.
But adieu for the prefent to the Subject of love ;—I am now called to glory in the field of battle.^—May victory await our arms in quelling thefe refractory Americans!
Adieu, my faithful—my beloved friend.—If possible I will write to you from the port where I shall embark with the troops. In the mean time, believe me I am
__ «
most faithfully yours,
CHARLES MELVILLE.
T TT 'IP
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	3!
LETTER IV.
LADY CHARLOTTE RICHLEY, TO THE HONOURABLE MISS BLANDFORD.
HJunei^th.
E is gone—my Lucy—gone, perhaps for ever !—Yes, Colonel Melville left us yesterday, to hasten with all Speed to this dreadful American war. I can truly exclaim with poor SigiS-niunda:
u Oh I am nought but tumult, w Fears, and weaknefsd’
The amazing dangers to which he will be expos’d,—the wide watery ex-panSe which So Soon will divide us,— the daily, hourly perils to which his precious liSe Seems (from his ardor) to be 'devoted to his king and country, all contribute to make me wretched. —You know, my Lucy—you have long known my growing attachment, B 4	even
32,	A LESSOU FOR LOVERS.
even from my earliest years, for this most amiable young man.—He is the first I ever loved :—the first, the only one my young inexperienced heart ever breath’d a sigh for:—can you, then, wonder I should not feel ten thoufand anxious fears, in a Separation full of fo many dangers ?—Indeed I now look on my Melville as my def-tined hufband, since the ecckirciffement has been made by my father a few days since, of which converfation I gave you an account in my letter of Thursday last *. How fortunate that my dear parent’s choice and my own should fo exactly correfpond!—Lucy, I shall, I find,—I shall never be able to Support this miSerable abSence, if you do not " very frequently fend me one of your fpirited and enlivening epistles.—O that that I possessed one half of that delightful stow of fpirits you do!—you perfectly feem to Set every earthly ea-
*■ This letter appears not.
1 amity
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	33
lamity at open defiance. — Had it pleafed Heaven to try you with fuch a terrible abfence from a favoured lover as T mast experience, I’ll lay my life not a : >gle sigh would have efcaped thnt ht m ry heart of yours.—You wou ^. ^ danced, fung, and caroll’d away an care at your harpsichord as ufual.
What a day of melancholy reflection was yesterday !—In vain I applied to music, or books for relief; —the former only heightened my fadnefs,—the latter ferved to bring him (there is no other him) before my eyes, as pointing out to me the most instructive, or amusing passages, as ufualI walked in the grove,—but it feemed wild and Solitary ;—and I sigh’d when I Saw his favourite bench under the Spreading elm, where he has SO often Sat.—The wilderneSs too—the myrtle bower—the pavilion—in short every Spot, his uSual haunts, brought my amiable Charles to my view, and B 5	with
V-l	A j.EjSON TOR LOVERS.
i'v i... ,C .kSA: o; thoughi.\—-ct/tt he may never m;e revisit his native land.
His conStancy, my dear, I doubt not —his affection, I am convinced, I possefs.—Not that he has ever been very proSuSe in professions, or vows, raptures, Sec.; but Sor this moderation I like him the better:'—that diffidence, that unaffiAning manner of his, is to me particularly engaging.—I repeat, I have not a single doubt oS his tenderest affection; but my SurpriSe was a little excited on the evening, in which my my fond father'joined our hands—(I don’t mean, child, that we were united by the chaplain)—my beloved parent, I fay, put my hand into that oS Melville’s ---he held it a few moments—I could' have preffed his to my heart—almost by an involuntary impulfe :—but whilst my willing hand trembled at his touch,, his, methough't, Seemed prijftve,—cold. Neither did he raiSe mine to his lips.— Was it not strange r°—but he. was overawed
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	35
awed by his refpect—by that infur-mountable timidity of his.—It could be nothing elfe.
Methought poor Melville feemed as much hurt with this reparation as my-felf*.—He appeared for fome days melancholy, abfent, and thoughtful.—The leave he took at parting was full of re-fped: my father was prefent; and much as he has forwarded our alliance, yet, no doubt, his prefence must have been a fort of refiraint on the parting lover’s fide, as well as my own. My eyes followed his horfe, till, to ufe the words of poor Imogen in Shakefpeare, I had brought it,
----«.--u By the diminution of Space,
a To a size no bigger than a gnat;—
“ And then I turn’d mine eye—and wept.59
What are age will it be before we can hear from him !—Pity me, Lucy:
* How willing are we to believe what we wiflt!— and how little did the tender heart of Lady Charlotte know the real caufe of Melville’s Secret chagrin!
—-and
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
—and I charge you to write as foon as possible : ufe your utmost endeavours to divert my melancholy.—You know I am fond of your characters :—what fort of ladies are thofe newly, arrived at the grove ?—Heigh-ho !
“'If, in his country’s rights defending,
“ He fhould fom'e'diSafter prove,
“ Pity, with affe&ion, blending,
“ Will but more increaSe my love.”
This melancholy epistle is at last going to be'finished, with affuring you, I am, in all dispositions.
Most truly yours,
CHARLOTTE RICH LEV.,
LETTER V.
v MISS BLANLF0RD, TO LADY CHARLOTTE RICHLEV.,
Monday, jBJandford-CaJUe..
Upon my wordl am ashamed,—absolutely ashamed of you.—-Why, my dear, what a love-sick difmal epiStle have you
written l
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	37
written ! and all for what ? why, truly, becaufe, forshoth, this Melville (a pretty fellow I grant he is) is gone in pur-fuit of glory; and will return loaded with trophies, and crowned with laurels :—what more can you desire ? would you have him eternally pinned to your apron-string?—-Fye, for shame, Lady Charlotte,—-would you have a man, born, I doubt not, to be an honour to his country, and probably the means, in part, of quelling our enemies, would you, I fay, have this man (bred and born a warrior) loitering—idling, and languishing his life away in the Soft fcenes and shady bowers of Richley-Park ?—singing to your lute,—and piping to your harpsichord?—Ah, my dear, would I were with you for an hour I would make you Anile in the midst of all your grave airs, I warrant ye.---I would foon laugh away all theSe diSmal vapours, and deSponding fears, that your letter is full of Srom one end to
the
38'	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
the other.'—-In the name of goodneSs, child, what would you have ?—This lovely fellow will return—(you know I always admired him)—and return your betrothed and faithful lover,—vour dear father in raptures,—writings drawn ---wedding cloaths elegant and Splendid,—the day appointed,—Lucy Bland-ford your bride-maid,—ceremony pei% formed in the chapel,—journey to London,—fick for a few months,—a lovely boy,-—See. Sec. Sec. All this I prognosticate,—if you will have but a little patience.——Now trust me, my Sweet girl, but I would give my very best laced-head to be betrothed, as you are, to half as sine a figure,-—to half as accomplished a man as your gallant Colonel.
And was that too SuSceptible.—loo foftened heart of yours piqued, becauSe Charles Melville did not preSs your singers till they were black and blue ? *—you will call me here a strange madcap.
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	39
cap.—And fo I am.—Poor man ! he was, I doubt not, overwhelmed with confusion at the goodnefs of the worthy Earl, and with the beauty of his fair daughter.—He will have his ardors, never fear, child, all in due time. —-Now is my abominable letter flung on the floor.—Well, come, I will be good and grave, like yourfelf.
And now, my dear Lady Charlotte, all raillery apart, let me intreat you not to give way to a melancholy which can do no good.—It will hurt your health, and grieve the heart of your beloved father.—Every thing is in the most happy trainimaginable.—Why,— why for ever will the human heart (and that of our silly fex particularly) be fo industrioufly creating its own imaginary evils, and taking up “ farrow on intereflf as if we had not real inevitable calamities enough to struggle with ?—Alas! :
ii How
•	4°	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ How many pine in want, and dungeon’s gloom? u Shut from the common air, and common ufe 44 Of their own limbs! how many drink the cup “ Of baleful grief, or eat the bitter bread Of mifery! fore pierc’d by wintry winds,
4‘ How many ihrink into the fordid hut u Of cheerleSs poverty!**
Let us, my dear friend, ruminate for one minute on thefe real calamities of liSe, in which thouSands are this moment pining, and then let us be ashamed of “ trifles light as airV
You desire me to Send you an account oS our new neighbours, the fox-hunting Mils Bounces, or rather the race-horsing ladies, who have lately taken that beautiSul Seat near ours, called the Grove. IS it will be any kind oS amuSement to your low Spirits, I will endeavour to give you an account of them, from what I faw when I was last at Lady Woodford’s.
I was, with a large party, making that amiable bride a visit, when there drove up the avenue a prodigious high
phaeton.
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	4!
phaeton, with two very Amazonian-looking ladies in it, drest in starlet and gold: and in short they made a most martial appearance. Their habits, hats, and feathers were all in the most extravagant taste. They entered the room with the most intrepid air of mafculine affurance. A gentleman who fat next me, and who enjoyed them above all things, whifpered ; “ Thefe girls are fitter to storm a fort than enter a drawing-room.”
pown they fat, with two enormous Ipng hunting-whips in their hands.--* After lifting up their hats, and placing them on the back of their heads, the eldest thus addressed herfelf to Lord Woodford :
** What a sine cover your Lordship has at the bottom of your park!—are there manyssbxes V
Now, my dear, you know Lord Woodford (who, though I really believe him to be one of the worthiest and best of
human
4*‘	A LESSON TOR LOVERS.
human beings, if he has any foible, So far from being a fix-hunter, is firmly inclined to be a fribble) is delicate to exceSs ; a perfect valetudinarian ; almost aSnaid the wind should blow on him ; never on any account mounts a hoisse; is chiefly in his study, or engaged in philoSophical experiments:— he, of all men, who is So delicate him-Self, loves delicacy, SoftneSs, and gen-tleneSs in our Sex (witneSs the choice of his Sweet bride) : he, I Say, afforded at this instant the most striking contrast that ever was exhibited to the stout, Amazonian Mils Bounce, who had put So abrupt and strange a question to his Lordship about foxIL and who, to uSe the words of a very delicate author, “ look’da noifeP
“ I profeSs, Madam,„ returned his Lordship in a SoSt voice, visibly shock’d at the air of his guest, “ I know not—-I never hunt.”
Here.
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	43
Here, to avoid fays he, and fays /he, I will give you the conversation in the first characters.
Mifs Bounce. Not hunt!—O now I recollect, ’tis the turf your Lordship is fo fond of.—I remember your bay silly Spindle-shanks winning the Nottingham plate lastyear.—Never was better fport: the knowing ones were finely taken in —O’ Kelly was beat quite hollow.”
Poor Lord Woodford fat aghast;— whilst my next neighbour, Sir Edward Warner was in ecstasies at a conversation So exquisitely ridiculous, and trod upon my toe, to remark it, So forcibly, that I had almost Screamed aloud.
Lord Woodford. “ Indeed, Madam, I never had a horSe ran in my liSe—of all amuSements I dillike horSe-races the most.”
Mifs Bounce.	“ Why, sister, did you
not tell me that Spindle-shanks was Lord Woodford’s, and that he was got out of Nut-cracker, whoSe grandam was
MiSs
44	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
Mifs Slim, whofe great-grandam was O’Brien’s Fly-catcher, who won every thing at York meeting that year;— whofe sire was the famous Busiris— whofe sire’s sire was Sly-boots?—His colts were remarkably bony and
strong.----You know we had- a colt
out of Srly-boots.”
Mifs Dorothy Bounce.	“ I never could
tell you, sister, that Mifs Slim’s pedigree was of the line of Busins ;—you are Speaking all this time of Mifs Slammakin, instead of Mifs Slim :—She won the fweepstakes at the first Spring meeting last year at Newmarket.„
Think, my Charlotte, what a curious converfation this was, for about fifteen ladies and gentlemen, sitting round a tea-table.
Mifs Bounce (reddening.) “ I should hardly mijlake, I think, in fuch a matter of confequence.—Well—if it was not you—it was little Tom—or Charles Pigot’s jockey told me this:—I mean
- the
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	45*
the little fellow who always rode in red.„
Mifs Dorothy Bounce. “ Not in red, sister, but in green:—I know I lost, in betts, a cool two hundred on his head.” Whilst theSe sisters were engaged in an altercation concerning the colour of the jockey's drefs,—Sir Edward Warner, after endeavouring to compofe the mufcles of his risible countenance, addressed himfelf to the eldest sister thus: Sir Edward Warner. “ I faw yoii riding, Mariam, the other morning on the Down^;—I think the mare you rode is thO most beautiful creature I ever beheld.-—Pray how old is she -?” Mifs Bounce.	“ It is not a mare, Sir,
—-it is a gelding-you mean, I believe, the little fwitch-tail poney I was upon. —He is five years next grafs.„
Mifs Dorothy. “ The gentleman means, I fancy, sister, the mare you was upon last Thurfday :—you know you
went
46	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
went out upon Molly Mogg to See the racers fweatedV
Mifs Bounce.	“ Sure, sister, I know
when, and what I mean—-Sure, I know a mare from a gelding.”
It was not, my Charlotte, in human nature to resist almost bursting out into a loud fit oS laughter at the cloSe of this curious dialogue.—And now, I hope, I have given you enough for a Specimen of theSe celebrated ladies.— 'They Soon took their leave, Saying they had a new ftudd building ;—which they must go to inSpect—as they must their rubbing-houfe.”
TheSe ladies were no Sooner departed, than, as is ufual,. the company, one and all, vented their opinions pretty freely :<—but I have neither room nor time to tell you the mirth our maScu-iine ladies had excited.
Pity that two women oS fortunes, So very large as theirs, and who will probably be a prey to a couple of turf
gamblers,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	47
gamblers, should have fallen into this
tD	1
most ridiculous taste !—But I am told it is going to be the ton among fome very fashionable ladies. No fpecies of gaming among the men is more abfurd than this.-—In our fex it is dreadful!—-That mafculine intrepidity, which the ladies now fo much affect, is to me the most difgusting thing in nature.—Ah, how unlike in air, in drefs,- in manner, is the lovely friend I am now writing to U—whofe merits are—-whofe beau-., ties are—-to uSe an expression of my favourite Milton :
“ Not obvious —not obtrusive,
But retir'd.”
I have two more characters to acquaint you with, but must reserve them for my next letter, which Shall be in a few days.—Adieu then Sor the preSent. —Be cheerful,'—-be happy—and believe I am
faithfully yours,
LUCY BLANDLORD,
L £ T-
43	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
LETTER VI.
THE SAME, TO THE SAME.
Blandford-Cajile, June 30th.
J NOW,, my dear Lady Charlotte, am going to fulfil my promife relative to the little anecdotes, or characters I mentioned I would give you in my last. Am I not a vain girl to imagine, or to take it for granted, that a letter from me can divert that tender melancholy which I fear too much preys on the fpirits of my fweet friend ?—But Lady Charlotte commands, and her Lucy obeys.
But to begin my fubject of a Mr. Barton, a character with whom I was perfectly charmed, and who dined with me one day at Lord Woodford’s. Heavens ! how was I delighted with his benevolent Sentiments on even the most trivial Subjects!
Lady
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	49
Lady Woodford’s little Italian greyhound, by an accident, received a violent hurt in its leg. Mr. Barton ran—he flew to take it in his arms;—■ he bound it up—he fed and cheriflied it the whole day.
“ People in general,„ faid he, “ do not shew compassion enough to thefe poor animals. What of fenfe and feeling do they not possess, in common with ouisselves, I should be glad to know. —Speech is denied them indeed—but' they have more Sagacity-, I Sancy, than is generally imagined.—More attention than is commonly paid, is due Srom us to the brute creation.—I have two old hoisses, paft labour, Sor whom I have purpoSely built a warm comfortable building, and I have aligned a groom constantly to attend them.—I visit them daily, and Seed them often with my own hand-—my old houfe-dog, too, who is both blind and lame, is careSully .Dor* i*	C	provided
£0	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
provided for, as an old and faithful friend.„
You, my Charlotte, who know my peculiar attention to the brute creation, will imagine how much theSe benevolent principles prejudiced me in the favour of Mr. Barton.
After dinner, a difcoursh was brought up of the Scarcity of fruit this dry Summer.
“ Indeed,” Said this good-natured man, “ I never tremble myfelf about fruit in my own gardens.—I Suffer very quietly the blackbirds and thrushes to eat oS my cherries, and am amply rewarded for it with their fongs.—As to wall-fruit, the fnails and infects are Suffered, for I never kill any, to feast on them as much as they pleafe. I have no idea of the rectitude of destroying an innocent being, merely for eating that food which nature has allotted it in common to eat of; and to which it has as good a right, for ought I know to
the
A LESSO’N TOR LOVERS.	51
the contrary, as I have myfelf.—-It is astonishing to me that men should exer-cife fo much cruelty and tyranny, as they generally do, over this poor inoffensive part of the works of creation* without once considering that, as Shakefpeare fays,
“ The poor beetle that we tredd upon, u In corp’ral fuff’ranee finds a pang as great u As when a giant dies.”
I fat all this time, my dear, in raptures, at the converfation of this delightful man.
We afterwards walked in the gardens, where an infect (a fort of trouble-* Some sty) Settled on the arm oS a lady preSent. She naturally was going to destroy it. Mr. Barton Stepped hastily to her; “ Sor humanity's Sake, Madam, let me Save the life of this poor little innocent :■—what has it done ?—and why should you kill it?—-why should you wage war againSt an enemy fo every way your inferior ?„—Thus Saying, he C z	took
52-	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
took it tenderly in his fingers, and laid it in the midst of a beautiful rofe in the next tree we came to of that kind.— In Short, not a single incident happened 'the whole day, in which the extreme compassion of this most humane man did not shine in high lustre.
Impressed with the utmost veneration for fo benevolent a character, when . I returned home in the evening, I gave my dear father an account of all I had heard and feen, as ufual ; and'among the rest, was not a little full of the praifes of the humane Mr. Barton.-— My astonishment was, however, much excited, when I Saw my father shake his head, and heard him exclaim,— “ Ah, Lucy!—my poor child—I must undeceive you.—I know Mr. Barton well;—this very man, who would not destroy a fnail, nor kill a Sly, is perhaps the greatest tyrant, to the utmost degree of cruelty, in his family, that can be imagined: his wife—poor deferving
unhappy
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	53
unhappy lady, has been long confined to her‘apartment with a dreadful cancer in her breast, the effects of a brutal cruel blow he gave her.—-This is an undoubted fact.—‘His eldest fon, the most promising young man in the world, whom he uSed, in regard to his union with a lovely young lady of family and merit, with the utmost treachery in the fettlement of their marriage; and since, has caufed them to be turned out of doors, wholly destitute, and, at this time, they are even in want oS the common necessaries of liSe, though this cruel parent is exceS-sively rich in money, and has a clear eState oS five thouSand pounds a-year. His only daughter, a fine girl of eighteen, by the conStant unremitting cruelty (continued my father) of this humane man of'yours, my Lucy, who tells you he builds houSes and stables for bis horfes and dogs to die in with comfort,—his daughter, I repeat, is now in C 3	a deep
5T4	A LESSON f'OR LOVERS.
a deep decline ;—nay, has been fo a considerable time.—-A journey to Bristol, it is faid, might recover her ;—but this, the bad man withholds from one of the beft and most dutiful of daughters, alledging, cruelly, that he shall not indeed Squander his money in journies Jo public places, under the notion of HI health.”
“ Oh Sir,” faid I, “ forbear to proceed —can there be fuch a monster in
nature ?„
“ Yes—yes„-— returned my father, “ many fuch:-—not kill a fly indeed! he ought himfelf to have been hanged many years since for beating a day-labourer almost to death ; for the poor wretch languished only two days after, and then died.—-His feat is about twelve miles from mine,—but I never fee nor will converge with Such a monster.”-
O my Charlotte, how little do we know men from what they fay! the teft is their aBions.
I now
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	$$
I now must tell you a little anecdote, which, as it does honour to the fmceri-ty of our fex, I think ought to be mentioned. Few women, I fear, would have been fo ingenuous as Lady Sand-ford, who, with her worthy hufbancl Sir William Sandford, has lately been fettled in our neighbourhood.—The fact I hint is this. It feems Lady Sand-ford, then Mifs Temple, had always lived with an aunt, who, though in reality, a good woman, was far gone in many French ridiculous fashions. She had lived much in France, and never dreffed without using a considerable quantity of rouge. Her young niece was obliged to come into this ridicu: lous custom, and likewife continued it when she returned to England.—Sir William Sandford faw her at a ball at Bath ; and at length, on being farther acejuainted with her amiable manners and accomplishments, fell passionately in love with her.—Her fortune and C 4	rank
$6	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
rank in life were ecpal to his own ; however, he had not yet declared him-felf her lover--—Indeed the idea of her ■painting, which was very visible, was no very fortunate circumStance in her favour, as he was continually told of it. —Sometimes he believed it true at others, fuch was his affection for this really lovely woman, he was almost tempted to disbelieve the evidence of his own eyes.—At length lie was refolved at once to try her fncerity in this matter, as well as her love.—-“ If,” faid he to himfelf, “ she regards her face more than me, she will difavow this odious report:—at least her manner will convince me, if I tax her with truth or not.„
The next morning he waited on Mifs Temple, when, being alone with her, he began a difcourie of the cen-forioufncfs of Bath.
“ Even you, fair lady,” Said Sir William, “ do not efcape c'cnfure: the.
tongue
"a LESSON FOR LOVERS.
tongue of stander reports that the lovely bloom in that fair face of yours is not your own, but the effect of art.— Can it be possible ?”	“ Why, yes*—
(faid the fweet unaffected girl, with an air Somewhat confuSed, though her eyes beamed with truth) it is not only poffible, but it is true.—I will tell you frankly, Sir William, how it is.”
Obferve her merit in this, my dear! Sor the Baronet had not then declared himSelS, and she might have imagined Such a conSeshon from herSelS might at once have damped his paffion, which was very evident to her and all her acquaintance :—yet Such was her adherence to truth and fncerity, that she was refolved to Sacrifice all other considerations to it.—Great, therefore, I Say, was her merit, in making the acknowledgment.—But to proceed.
“ Yes, Sir William,” repeated she with her uSual Sweetnefs, “ I fairly and honestly acknowledge the charge.— C 5	'The
5*3	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
The truth is, I have long lived in a country, and with a relation, with whom, from unavoidable necessity, I was obliged to conform in an article which I was convinced could not corrupt my heart, nor hurt my morals.. In France, rouge is looked upon as innocent as hair powder is in England.. —I repeat I do uie it—and, indeed, life it confiantlyd.
At that moment a natural blush dyed i her cheek with a deeper vermillion,— and she apparently feemed consisted.
Sir William, aftonished at the extreme ingenuoufnefs and fmplicity of her confession, beheld her with a ssort of rapture.—The good fenfe, as well as frankness of her unaffected anfwer, charmed him to cxcefs.—She certainly might have difavowcd the charge :—* and I am half inclined to think, few ladies, beside Mifs Temple, would have acted as fne did.—To be brief, he acknowledged his passion, and in two
months
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	59
months after they were married. They are now fettled near us, and I am hap~ py in the acquisition of fo very amiable a woman. You will believe me when I tell you, that she instantly burnt her rouge, her cofmetics, Sec. and never after refumed them.—To fay the truth, fo pretty a woman as Lady Sandford Sfands in no need of foreign aids for beauty.
My father perfectly adores her for her sincerity.—You know he is often fevere on the foibles of our fex.—Non would laugh to hear him exclaim,— “ I defy any other woman in England to have acted like Lady Sandford on fuch a charge.—No	-fo far from' owning
it, though painted an inch thick, and looking like a fluecoedAwall, they would have drawn themfelves up with great indignation, and in high wrath, with a tofs of the head, exclaimed,—“ I paint, Sir?—I shorn your words.—Good Heavens!-—I would not for the world be
guilty
fio	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
guilty of fuch a deception.—You offend me beyond meafure, Sir, with your abominable conjecture :—and from this day forward, I desire never more to fee your face.—Paint indeed! very sine, truly!—No, I thank nature I have no occasion to ufe an to gain lovers V
Thus my poor good father runs on with what the fex in general would fay on fuch a home charge, whilst he acknowledges Lady Sandford should have a bujl erected to her memory.—Indeed I think fo too.—Don’t you, my dear?
I am likewife happy in the acquisition of another amiable neighbour, Mrs. Falkland.—I think I must give you a short account of her, as wrell as of her sister, wrho is a profejjed beauty, as it will confirm my constant maxim, how much more probable a woman of good temper and good understanding is likely to become a wife, than a mere vain, dressing, affected, though handfome girl,
fluttering
o
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	61
stuttering about at every place of public dissipation.
It is an unfortunate truth, that most of our fex wish to be admired, yet tstke the utmost pains to shorten the term of admiration, by exhibiting fo many follies, that instead of love, they excite pity, which generally borders upon contempt.
The celebrated Congreve mentions a lady who was fo beautiful, that none could view her without admiration ; but who was fuch an idiot, that she could not fpeak without making herfelf ridiculous.—That witty author justly remarks on the occasion,
u That what hep eyes enthrall'd, her tongue unbound.”
But let it be remembered by thofe . who are not idiots, but having' preat volubility of tongue, can talk, with feeming propriety, on many common and trifling fubjects that
“ What
6 2	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ What their eyes enthrall, their deeds unbind
For it will render them equally ridiculous to act, as to jpeak nonfenfically. I wuuld recommend to my fex to resign this universal thirfi for empire, and consider,
w One felf-approving hour, whole years outweighs u Of stupid Rarers, and of loud huzzas.”
In fact, we pile but by obeying; for man will always bow to the shrine of beauty, if he fancies it an act of his own choice, and does not think he is compelled to it.
An exorbitant fondnefs for drefs is another particular which renders our fex ridiculous, where they think to gain admiration. An unaffected plainnefs in attire, as well as in manners, will always gain esteem; whilst a gaudinefs of external appearance and affectation of behaviour, are certain to meet with contempt. But, alas ! this pasilon, from the higheft to the lowest, feems to be epidemical,
and
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	6£
hncl has obfolutely infefted the whole fex.
“ This univerfal passion: we eSpy,
Gleams in the low, and glitters in the high} u Iu variegated tad.-knots, here cliff lay’d,
6i .And there refulgent, in the gems parade.”
But I promiSed my Charlotte I would give her fome account of the different characters, See. of theSe two sisters, the Misses Bromley.
Sophia, at the age of eighteen, was very homely in her features, and her shape was Sar from being formed with Symmetry. Her understanding was however extremely good, and her disposition remarkably Sweet and gentle., £he passed her time occasionally in the domeStic duties—in curious needleworks, and in cultivating her mind with the most approved authors.
Caroline had received Srom nature all the charms she was able to bestow. —Flora Seemed to have painted her cheeks with the dew of roSes, and to 3	have
64	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
have lent the ripenefs of the finest cherries to her lips : her Symmetry oS shape was equal to her beauty, and in fact her beauty excelled all description.
But, alas! MiSs Caroline was too Sensible oS her charms. Proud by nature, she was undone by flattery, and may be Said to be a martyr to praife; for no compliment, however over-ftmined and hyperbolical, was paid her, but she implicitly believed it to be true. Nay, when she was called a gocfcteSs, she never thought it a word of couisse in the System oS male flattery, but actually fancied herSelf to be Somewhat divine, and consequently imagined that no mortal existing could be worthy oS her.
Mr. Falkland, amiable, worthy, rich, and young, Saw her by accident, and became deeply enamoured of this vain lady. He, lover-like, told her he had made an enumeration oS her various charms, and had found them to amount in number exactly to ten thouSand. Ca-2 .	, roline,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	6^
roline, fancying she had him entirely at her devotion, determined to ufe her power over him, for fonie time to try his love, for hve and patience are by many women ufed as fynonimous terms.
But Falkland happened, with all his merit, not to be the mo ft patient man in England, or at leaSt he was not fo far gone in love, but he understood that an affront was not a compliment; fo that upon the first rebuff from Caroline, one half of her charms flew away, and vanished; and the remaining five thoufand proved to be in a critical situation; for foon after, on being refufed her hand to dance with him at a ball, and giving it to a rival ; together with her frowns, affected airs, and coquetry the whole evening, occasioned Falkland fo to recover his lost reafon, shat the once beautiful and admired Caroline now appeared to him the most difagreeable woman in the British dominions. Such are the effects of pride and vanity.
Caroline’s
66	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
Caroline's late lover having very frequently visited at the houfe of Mr. ‘Bromley, could not but obferve the striking contrast in the behaviour of the two daughters. Tlie charms of the gentle, ttnaffe&ed Sophia Soon found the way to his heart.—He was amazed to think he had So long overlooked them ; he Soon declared himSelS her lover, and in a short time after became her happy hufband. Thus did SweetneSs of manners, and good SenSe, without the aid of perfonal charms, triumph over all the airs oS an univerfal admired beauty.—From a variety oS Such incidents—incidents wholly owing to her own Solly, the justly disappointed Caroline has almost fretted heisself into a consumption.
Some Sweet lines oS Dodsiey occur to me on this occasion.
a What is the tincture of the finest: /kin, u To peace of mind and harmony within?
44 What is the Sparkling of the brightest eye,
S‘ To the Soft Soothing of &- caIm reply J
u Can
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	67
“ Can comlinefs of form, of fliape, or air,
44 With comlinefs of words and deeds compare? u No;—thofe, alas! th’ unwary heart may gain, u But theSe, tnefe only, can the heart retain
Do, my dear Charlotte, write, and tell me your Spirits are better.
You ash me, in one of your former letters, to tell you if the amiable Baronet, Sir Edward Willis, who fo often visits here, and whofe feat is in our neighbourhood, has yet declared him-Self my lover.
No—no—child ;—we are certainly riiost singularly circumstanced.—I fancy we must remain a brace of Platonics, arf pleafeye.—We affuredly are equally Satisfied with each other :—nay, we have absolutely entered into a correspondence of writing—(would you be-. lieveit?)—We, however, intend, my dear, that odious love shall be quite out oS the question, and be quite content with Sure friendship. What our stars
may
68	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
may have in Store Sor us, I know not; but at: preSent we must only Scribble on the most indifferent Subjects:—we must, So the fates will have it, though we See each other every day, shut our eyes and ears to each other.
You know I am engaged, though he never was the man oS my choice, to
Lord M-------, who went to the South
of France above a year since for the recovery of his health, and whom com* mon report now Says is dead, though his death has never been Sully authenticated. Some Say, he is no more,— Some, that he is recovering. Is not this uncertain state of SuSpenSe the moSt tantalizing thing in nature ?—
My agreeable friend is likewiSe in exactly the Same unfortunate predicament, he being contracted to a lady of great fortune (now in the "West-Indies) by the parents of both at an early age, when their young hearts could have no share at all in the matter.—-A report
came
, A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	_ 69
came over last year that this lady had died of a putrid fever,—and feveral circumstances were mentioned to corroborate the report; but still none that, to a man of fuch nice honour, fuch delicate Sentiments as Sir Edward Willis, can justify him, at preSent, to make another choice.—Thus critically—thus delicately—my dear Charlotte, are we both circumstanced.—In my own breast ], however, verily believe my old lover is dead, and that Sir Edward’s Lady likewiSe is no more :—but time can alone only unravel this mystery.
That my friend could be inSpired with a tendernefs for me exceeding the bounds of common amities, I certainly believe; and I will confeSs to you, if I ever were to play the fool, and marry, —why he—he indeed, to Say the truth, would be the only man I ever did, or ever can love.—But more oS this in my next.
One
70	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
One of our Servants, who is coming your way, conveys this long packet to your fair hands.—I expect you will
write by his return, and-
This instant I See my Platonic friend driving up the avenue.—He beckons me.—Adieu, then, my dear, you will excuSe my abrupt conclusion, and believe me ever
Your affectionate
LUCY BLANDFORD.
LETTER VII.
LADY CHARLOTTE RICHLEY, TO MISS BLANDFORD.
MRicbley-Park, July iO.
Y Spirits, I thank Heaven, joined with the kind endeavours of my lively amiable Lucy, are better.
My father lias had a letter from my Melville :—-he writes he was well but I rather wonder, my dear, there
was
I
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	*jl
was not one line for me in the packet. Was it not odd? not one line indeed. But in writing to one, he wrote to both; and I certainly ought not to expecct the hurry and fatigue he must now ne-ceffarily be engaged in can give him time to sit down and write love-letters. We are both acquainted with each other’s hearts; they are united, and that is Sufficient.—May the gallant youth „ live to return in health and Safety to the SaithSul arms of his Charlotte ! This is my constant and most ardent prayer.
But now to your Platonic affair.—
Ah Lucy !—-you are Sairly in for it— over head and ears, child.—Methinks I long to whiSper in the ear of your fe?itimental friend, that
“ Friendfhip with woman, is sister to loved*
Never let the man imagine, that, with all his phdoSophy, he will be able to hold out againft Such an assemblage of both outward and mental charms, as
he
72	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.'
he will find at Blandford Castle lie is absolutely fool-hardy to attempt Such a warfare.-- Ah, my Sweet Lucy, to fee you daily—to hear you play—to listen to your impaffioned notes, Sec. 8cc. Sec. he had need be endued with the total apathy of a monk of the order of La-Lrappe.
You are, indeed, both most critically circumftanced with regard to the life or death oS thoSe quondam lovers a-broad. Beware—beware, my dear girl, how you admit this tyrant love, under the Specious Sanction off iend/hip.
I am all impatience to' fee, and I most ardently befeech you to - fatisfy my longing curiosity, Some of thofe letters you mention, which pafs betwixt your Platonic friend and your-felf;—they must be curious.—You are both violently in love, child, with each other, I am convinced ;—and yet, for- . Sooth, calm, fiber friendjihip only dictates to your pens.—How is this?—and
what
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	73
what fort of a connection is this to be ? —I am dying to fee this new mode of conversing—all pure fentimcnt /
u Hail Sacred friendfhip—passion most refin’d, u Thou purest rapture of the human mind, u Two hearts united, by true friendfhip7s bond, a Spurn felfifii views, and to excels are fond.”
Prithee, my dear Lucy, difpatch a Servant with fome of thofe love-letters —with fome of thofe effusions of enthu-fiaflic friendfhip, I meant to have faid.
I heartily thank you for your agreeable account of your horfe-racing ladies. —Heavens! what jockeys in petticoats!
I hofiour the ingenuous confesson of Lady Sandford—it was- frank—it was noble.—I will, however, hope for the honour of my fex, there are others who would have acted as sincerely as she did.
What a wretch is the falfely-hu-mane Mr. Barton! well might my Lucy approve his feeming benevolence, who feels not only for every fpecies of
vol. 1.	D	human
74	A LESSON FOR LOVERS*
human mifery, but extends her compassion to every infect, however Small, and to our weak sight insignificant.— The blade oS lowly graSs, which trembles to the wind, my Lucy, in her evening walk, will not tread on, lest, as I have heard her often remark, she should
s.
crush to death the little inhabitants that may have taken thctr shelter on its Slender blades. I wonder not then, my dear, that you who posseSs extensive benevolence in (o high a degree should think So favourably of this Mr. Barton. Heavens ! what art—what deceit mult that man be possessed of!—Pity, as the ingenious author of the Spectator observes, but there could be a cryftalcafe-nient to the human breast !—what difco-veries should we then make !—Perhaps we should See the heart of a certain very amiable young baronet, panting with the most tender pafjion, whilst his tongue only talks of friendfhip and cold amity. ~I should, too, perhaps, See the little
heat
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	75
heart of a certain tender fair lady of my acquaintance in a violentflutter,whenever the faid agreeable man appears, and all this is yet only for mere friendfhip / A favourite author of mine (the ingenious Dr. Langhorne) Speaks with much truth and humour on this kind of information : he wishes for a “ microfcope fir the mindV
“ It were to be wished,” Says he, “ that we could extend the philoSophy of optics So far as to procure a microscope for the mind; but I would have the uSe of it lie under theSe restrictions; In the first placed no Sool, reputedly Such, should be permitted to apply it, any more than a Sword should be put into the hands of a madman ; for the Sight might make him miferahle, but it .would not make him wife. In the next place, I would have it So constructed, that it could not be applied to the breast of another, for then the whole chain of Society would be broken to pieces.
D 2	Hulbands
76	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
Hufbands and wives, parents and children, brothers and sisters would, in many families, be at open war.—Peace would entirely defert the court, and would Scarce find refuge in the hamlet.
-—The competitors for wealth and power would be shocked with the execrable wishes and designs of each other; ' and the hard-handed peafant would behold his neighbour thirsting for his funeral, and his farm. But there are two characters to whom I would have it applied, viz. the fanatic, and the flatterer, and at the fame time I would have them fensible of its application.—Such ridiculous circumstances would be the most adequate punishment imaginable.’,
Perhaps, after all, it is best to take things as they are, and that to be happy, we must be deceived.
My father, this moment, calls me to walk in the park.—Your friend, I think, my dear, caufed you to break off abruptly your last kind epistle :—you will ah
low
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	77
low my excufe to be as just, T am convinced ; therefore shall only add, that I expect the precious depoft I alk for very fpeedily. In the mean time, I am, Most faithfully yours,
CHARLOTTE RICHLEY.
LETTER VIII.
MISS BLANDFORD, TO LADY CHARLOTTE RICHLEY.
TBlandford-Cafile, July
O let my dearest friend fee how absolute her commands are to her SaithSul Lucy, I difpatch a perron purpofely .with two or three very harmlefs epistles,— quite in the platonic fyft em. I Send too, by the Same conveyance, a Small box of shell-flowers, a pair of garters for good Lord Richley, and a new fashioned little card-purSe for your Ladyship. —A fit aftonment, you will Say, of trifles, to be Sent with love-letters.—But, D 3	child,
yS	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
child, they are not love-letters, I will affirm:—I might receive just the fame from my great grandfather.-—I should, however, tell you that the Subject of one oS my friend.s is partly to ash pardon for what / had called a capital offence :—though I don’t Say it was So very-—very capital a crime —but, however, it was wrong.
Now my Charlotte exclaims laughing, “ What, did your fellow Platonift Steal a lciSs, or prefs your hand, or— what other enormity did he commit?"
Laugh, my dear, if you will, but I will tell you exactly how the affair happened.
I had just finished singing, and playing on the harpsicord, the favourite Italian air of Se non Felicice, &c. of Sac-cliini’s,—when my hand happening to lay carelessly on the edge of the harpfi-cord, he Snatched it to his boSom. .
“ lied, you cry, “ what he?”
Why,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS,	79
Why, my dear, Sir Edward Willis happened to be in the parlour with me alone, and him I mean.*—Before I could recollect myfelf, he preffed it to his bo-font, and then to his lips, with a fervour I had never obferved in him before.-—-I was excessively stuttered to fay the truth ; and blushed as red as your Colonel's coat.—“ Fye-—fye for shame, stammered I--I am quite astonished at you—-Sir Edward.”—But instead of relinquishing my hand, he continued imprinting a number of kiSSes on it— (Blest me, my Charlotte, the red marks remained half an hour afterwards)— whilft he Softly exclaimed, “ My angel, my divine Lucy, pardon me."—I began to look extremely grave—and starting up, walked to the window.—•“ If . you, Sir Edward, forget—I do not:—” I hardly, indeed, know what I did fay, for in truth I was violently fluttered with anger. Company coming in, pre.. vented his anfwernig,—but, however, D 4	this
8o	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
this affair funk deep. When I retired to my cloSet—I must (faid I) put a Stop to theSe liberties for the future.—To kifs my hand in fuch a manner !—intolerable !
Tire next day I Sent him the following letter.
■. .....gaBSCga&a***	--
“ WHERE siepty our reaSon, my good friend,when you So far forgot yesterday, that the hand you Seized is not mine ? —You know well that action was inconsistent with the character you have always maintained.—Scarcely could I believe the evidence of my Senfes when you So far Sorgot yourSelS. And were not your Sudden exclamations as improper as your action of Seizing my captive hand, and almost devouring it ?—Don’t accuSe me oS an affected nicety in this matter; I only appeal to your judgment, whether it was right or wrong.— Nay, I have another bill against you.
“A
A LESSON FOR LOVERS'.	stl
“ A few days since, when we were Sitting in the myrtle bower, and talking on the most indifferent Subjects,-— did you not begin a conversation about my future welfare in liSe, with regard to temporal happineSs, and end it with a deep Sigh accompanied with theSe words uttered with a particular emphasis ?— “ ExcuSe my earnestneSs, MiSs Bland-ford, for indeed I love you most sincerely.”—Have you forgot this ?—IS you have, permit me to remind you oS it, that you may not, in Suture, allow your-Self So great a latitude oS expression :— I must, and do absolutely insist on the total banishment oS the monoSyliable love. Not that, according to its just and proper signification, I pretend to object against it i^but then by love I mean no guilty passion,—-no criminal desire, but the most exalted esteem and regard, Sounded on reaSon and virtue. To this I have no objection. I would not admit a single doubt that your Sen-D 5	timents
$2	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
timents are lefs refined than mine on this Subject :—but, situated as we are ,the word is certainly exceptionable, and mnft by all means be diScarded.
“ As to our epistolary commerce, it certainly is not only innocent, but laudable, iSkept under proper restrictions. Your correspondence is, in fact, too valuable to me to bear the thought of losing it without concern ; but there is no blefsing in this liSe which I would purchaSe at the expenSe oSthe leaSt wilSul deviation Srom the strictest rules oS propriety and decorum. On reflection, I am convinced you will think me right, So long as the objeBs oS our former attachments are SuppoSed to remain in the land of the living.—Friendfip I allow, but must utterly Sorbid love. Adieu.
LUCY BLANDFORD."
Now, Caroline, I shall give you my friend’s anSvver to the foregoing epistle, —and here it is.
“ BLESS
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	^3
“ BLESS us! what a rout do you make, my charming friend, about the moft innocent thing in the world !— Fie!—to be angry at a harmlefs little civility, authorized by daily custom, and which I might have ufed to any woman breathing !—What, after all, was this great and mighty crime ? why, truly, I happened accidentally to feize on the white wonder of dear Lucy’s hand.—Accidentally, I repeat, for 1 call Cnpid to witness, I had no malice pre-pen fe; my crime was the effect of inadvertency only:—nay, stis you, and you only, my lovely friend, are to blame: why did you melt my foul by your impassioned notes, which as Milton fays,
“ Would create a foul, under the ribs of death.”—
Why, I repeat to you, do you exhibit . thofe too powerful attractions ?—Be-caufe you yourfelf are a mere Stock—a Stone,—does it Sollow that all your hearers and beholders must be fo too ? and is it right yoif should make■mountains
2	Of
ss4	a LESSON FOR LOVERS.
of mole-hills ?—Depend on it, my phi-lofophy will never fo far defert me, as to lead me into an irregular pash on; though you, perhaps, are the only lady in the world who could make me forget Some certain vows formerly made to one, to whom (if living) I will perform. —This I will however fay, that if I am to be ever in love, it can be with none but yourfdf; for you fo totally eclipfe every other woman whom I have feen, that I fear no arrows from any other quarter. But the worst is already pash “ I have feen your lovely form—I have heard your enchanting harmony—I have read your inimitable letters—and yet my heart is whole; abfolutely found as you would have it; and my danger is every day lefs in proportion to my familiarity with you. Your peace, my dear Mil’s Blandford, is dearer to me than worlds, and nothing is farther from my thoughts than that I should, for one single moment* give you pain,
This
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
This I give you under my hand, that if I should love you, even to defpera-tion, you shall never know it.
“ But what a little tyrant you are to insist oh my blotting out that beauteous monofyilable called love, though each dear letter of its name is harmony! —whofe magic found controuis the human mind:—and yet, forfooth, thefe four little magical letters, which compost this dear, foft, and fweetest of all words are to be erafed!—and for what? I should be glad to knqw:—I'fancy even Diana herfelf, or the strictest vef-fr^virgin that ever existed, would have been puzzled to have found a reafon for L Look ye, Madam, 111 do what i I can to oblige you ;■ I’ll forbear this hateful word, as long as it is neceffary, but I hope you will permit me, at a proper feafon, to make ufe of it again: —and indeed, what a stupid figure will a letter make from one end to the other, that is destitute of this pretty
little
86	A LESSON EOR LOVERS.
little fyllable ! The empire of dullncfs will foon take place without it.—But the fair Lucinda commands, and I obey.
“ If with the name of love you will not blefs, u Then term my paffion friendjhip in excels; u Adopt a term, and give it to ray flame; tL To keep the pajjion, I’ll resign the name.”
“ But in Serious SadneSs, mv too ami-able correspondent, are you not a little frudifh all this time?—I have not a friend in the world whom I have not oSten told I love Jmcerely. Why, child, it is a mere expression of courfe: where then the mighty crime ?—But be eaSy,— be pacified:—iSI love you to exceSs, you shall be as ignorant of it as the' bust on the marble monument of your mother: for what signifies talking; of love to fuch a breathing jiatue as yourlelf!-—you will allow me, I hope, as a friend, to fay, that I am (without clifputing about words )
Most devotedly yours,
EDWARD WILLIS.',
Here,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	sty
Here, my Charlotte, was fresh matter for altercation.—-Aye, and for anger too.—O this fex !—how does he . harp on the word—the very word I would have (between us) totally expunged!—My anfwer was as follows.
“ STILL—Still, my esteemed friend\ will you give my Scrupulous delicacy cauSe to reproach you.—Mcthinks you talk of love more than friendfhip.—In the name of goodneSs what would you desire ?—In truth, you have little to lament.—If my conversation—my letters—-my music, Sec. are So agreeable to you as you would make me believe, in truth’s name do you not enjoy them all? —CeaSe, then, to dwell on impossibilities ; but let us be content with calm, Sober friendfhip—a more intimate union, depend on. it, was never meant for us.— Nay, for my part, I can form no higher
■idea
83	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
idea of happiness in this world, than of what my ideas of friendfhip are capable. You Speak of love, as of fome thing infinitely beyond it:—-Now this, for the life of me, I cannot comprehend : what generally (to my way of thinking) goes by that name, appears to me to be a mere phrenzy of the mind, inconsistent with reaSon, nay, oSten with common SenSe. Esteem and admiration, founded on reaSon and virtue, are to be found in friendfhip.—What then is this exalted Something which you call love ?—I have no comprehension of the thing at all: there is, perhaps, Some defect in my heart, which renders me incapable of Seeling this palsion, and consequently it must be imposhble for me to form any just conception of it.—I have oSten heard people talk of the bliisful union (as they term it) oS love, founded on friendfhip, of a tendernefs which unites two hearts in one; and that, 3	this
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	89
this state, when it ha£ the fanction of marriage, is productive of the most exalted fatisfaction the human foul can know ;—that it is a state of perfect happinefs beyond the power of language to express or thought to conceive : but alas—alas! where shall we find this happy state ?—It is nothing elfe, I much fufpect, but a mere fiction of fancy:—a pleasing picture of what never was, nor ever will be found -on earth.—If this be the love you mean, stis the effect of imagination only, take my word for it:—a virtuous friendfhip,
I will maintain, is worth a hundred fuch loves, and the noblest affection on this side the grave: nor do I wish a greater blefling than a virtuous friend.— As to the word love, which you make fuch a pother about, on my banishing it, I have no objection to a definition of it, provided it is not applied to myfelf
“ Adieu
90	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ Adieu for the prefent;—be fatif-ficd with jriendfip, and believe that I shall ever remain, whilft you deferve it, Your very cordial friend, and sincere tvell-wijher,
LUCY BLA NDFORD.”
Here, my dear, follows Sir Edward’s anfwer.
“ HEAVENS ! Mifs Blandford, how formally do you conclude your laSt letter! Cordial friend!—jincerefiuell-wifhcr! Is it come to this?—but I must be dumb as the grave.—Not a single Syllable' of complaint shall drop from my pen,— though my poor heart is—no matter.
•—But to proceed.
“ How shall I reconcile this mighty difference between our ideas oS love and friendfiip ? how shall I define the latter to you, Madam,I repeat, who Speak with So little reverence of that omnipotent charm oS nature as to call
ib
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	9.I
it phrenzy ;—to you, who are guarded by aifabfolute infenjibility from its operations'? The definition of this pleasing pretty madness, you will, however, allow me to make, and I will avail my-sself of that allowance. But obferve, I do not form my ideas of it, from what I have read, or from what I have remarked in others, but from what I feel my Self.
“ Love, therefore, is an assemblage of Soft ideas, the most cheering, and comforting to the human mind imaginable : a principle fo divine, that it teaches us the most tender benevolence to the party beloved, maugre every Sentiment of our own interest, or advantage : a passion to which we may afcribe the 1110ft exalted heroiSm—a passion (in few words) whoSe infancy is most plcaf-ing to individuals concerned; whofe progrefs is the moft fruitful of worthy actions, whereby mankind can be benefited, and which State is the accomplishment of one of nature’s high appointments.
92	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
pointments. In short, two words, Madam, give ns to underSland what each other, mean. Your friendfhip is only friendship Simple and alone ; my love is love and friendship blended, and that you must acknowledge to be a state of the most fupreme fatisfaction. Believe me this state is fomething more than chimera :—But I will no farther attempt to defcribe, what, perhaps, when you meet with a fellow-mind to your own, endued with taste, fenfe, and , fvveetnef's of temper, you will acknowledge to be that state of happinefs nearest approaching to Heaven. That your guardian angel may have this state of bliSs in Store for my fair friend, is the ardent wish of
Her faithful
EDWARD WILLIS.”
And now, my dear Lady Charlotte, what do you think of our conteft, and our correspondence?—I doubt you will think us both a couple of fools, wsho are quarrelling about words and wrang-
A LESSON TOR LOVERS.	9^
ling about the shadow, when we ought to embrace the fubstance.
We are now upon fuch a footing of flarched formality, that you would die to fee us : “ Mifs Blandford this—and Madam do you pleafe to do that, Seed7 fr—whilst I put on my gravest airs, and take care not to sing my love-sick, paS-sionate, dying airs at the 'harpsicord, when we are alone.—Heigh-ho—I heartily wish I knew of a certainty whether that quondam lover of mine, Lord
M------, were really dead, or whether
he does ever intend to return and give me his hand.-—Sufpenfe is a dreadful state : and to fay truth, I really believe poor Sir Edward knows a little of that uneafy state, as well as myfelf:—would ♦ you believe it, my dear? since my late prohibition, the man sighs,—walks by moonlight in a grove of willows near his park,-—(pray Heaven he does not throw himfelf into the stream which murmurs by)—is abfent,—peevish. His
Servant
9'4	a lesson for lovers.
fervant lately ashing him (as my Kitty tells me) if he dined at home, was an-fwered with a Smart box on the ear, and “ Don’t trouble me with your impertinence.’,
This, from a master of the best temper in the world, wras astonishing:— however, he turned round directly— “ Pardon me, Frank,—here’s a guinea to make you amends.—And do you hear ?—Go to the post-houfe, and See if there are any letters for me come from the WeJI-IndiesV
Now Frank, who had certainly never studied the learned Mr. Locke’s famous treatiSe of the Human Understanding,
«—in which that great author So admirably treats oS a chain of ideas following each other ;—poor Frank, I lay, could not conjecture,—why his good-natured master should first give him a box on the ear, then give him a guinea, and bid him See iS -there were any letters from the Weft-IVdks.-—Now, this 7 can
account
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	gj
account for,—and fo can you, my dear, I fancy.
I can pretty well prognosticate what Ioth our fates will be.—His fine West Indian lady will return; he will give her his hand, from motives of honour;—■ they will be just civil to each other;— meet in public;—have feparate equipages, and feparate houfes;—whilst Sometimes he will perhaps breathe a gentle sigh (am not I a vain hussey, Charlotte?) when he thinks of the myrtle bower at Blandford-Castle.—His cafe will not be singular .-—hundreds are at least leading the fame insipid, wretched life, whom their parents (as in Sir Edward’s cafe) have Sacrificed the peace of their children from lucrative motives only.
Your poor Lucy, too, my dear, will lead much the Same hum-drum—as it were—kind -of life, as Prior admirably calls it, with my gouty lord and master
Lord M------. He, too, will return
and hobble with me to the altar:—I
shall
96	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
shall grow foon peevish ; difcontented; —a mere mope ;—out of humour with every body, and every thing;—dwindle into a downright, pale-faced woman of quality!—read Sometimes over my poor Sentimental Edward’s charming definition oS love;—and sigh becauSe I cannot Sind it true.
But here I must do my good parent the justice to Say this curious match with Lord M-----was not oS his pro-
curing.—I Sancied, forSooth (as does many a Soolish girl who enters the state oS matrimony) that it was .absolutely necessary to be married; and that it was not very material, iS the man had a good character, whether I could hang or drown my-
Self for him.—Lord M------had an
excellent character—and though old enough to be my father, I thought it was a state to be preferred to that of living an old maid.—My good aunts, Prifcilla and Deborah, had fo prejudiced
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	97
diced me against the state of ancient virginity, that (foolish thing as I was) I imagined any hufband was to be preferred to none.—Very falfe reafoning this, you will furely fay.—But yet, I verily believe half the young women (aye, child, and old ones too) run into the noofe of matrimony, with even a man barely indifferent, for the above reafon: but if ever afterwards they find they have a heart, dreadful is the confequence.
You, my fweet friend, who will be happy in the man you really do love, and by whom you are equally beloved, will run no rifque in this most important affair of marriage. The extreme ill health of my ancient lover obliged him to go abroad ;—in the mean time, I became acquainted with this very agreeable man, Sir Edward Willis. Pray Heaven that I may not find I have a heart in his favour!—But SeriouSly, my dear, if I do find I am too fenjlble of
vo l. x*	E	his
9S	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
his thouSand perfections, however mife-rable I may be, I will take care not to make myfelf infamous, as too many of our ladies have done, when under the like circumstances.
I am happy if my letters (fuch as they are) can, as you kindly tell me they do, divert in the fmallest degree the pangs of abfence—that death to love.
If I meet with any thing in the circle of my acquaintance worth communicating, I will inform you; in the mean time I give you full leave to laugh over the inclofed pacquet, and fubfcribe myfelf ever, ever
Youffs, most sincerely,
LUCY BLANDFORD,
--	sa—'i i	----
An interval now passed of feveral months, during which many letters were written between Lady Charlotte and her agreeable friend: the editor,
however,
A. LESSON FOR LOVERS.	99
however, has not inferted them, as they contain nothing material to the thread of this history.—The most material circumstance, during this period, was a Severe action which had happened in America;—in which Colonel Melville behaved with the utmost cou-= rage and gallantry. The English troops, however, had many taken prifoners, and many wounded. The above intrepid officer wrote (as may be Suppo-” Sed) to Lord Richley, who was now Setting out with his Sair daughter to vl-sit an estate in Ireland by way of a-mufing her anxiety in the abSence of her lover. Colonel Melville wrote al-fo to his friend Sir Henry Bellmour, which epistle, as it contains a very interesting matter to his peace, I shall lay before the reader.
e2 let-
1.00	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
LETTER IX.
COLONEL MELVILLE, TO SIR HENRY BELLMOUR.
N.Head Quarters, Albany, Feb. 2.
OW, indeed, my friend, am ] doom’d to eternal wretchedness !—undone for ever!—Yes, Bellmour, at length I find I have a heart, and that, perhaps, the most fufceutible which ever felt the agonies of love. O that your kind—your friendly warning had arrived in time long before I left England !—Long before ?—Ah! wretch that I am ! what would I fay? am I not betrothed—engaged to Lady Charlotte Richley ?—Am I not tied in bonds of filial gratitude to her worthy parent, which never—never can be broken, to be h6rs—and hers alone?
O my beloved friend, how do I long to repofe my griefs in thy faithful
breast—-
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	IOI
breast—the feat of tender confidence and manly virtue !—But will you yet, my worthy Bellmour, after this fameful confess on,—will you yet, allow me to dwell a few minutes on the fatal Subject: that has ruined my peace of mind for ever ?—Believe me my mife-ry originates Srom the Sudden effects of a furprife, which—not even thy tried philofophy could resist.—Hear then my unfortunate tale, and pity— hut do not condemn.—I will be juft—I will be true to the merit of Lady Charlotte.—But ah! I feel I can never love any woman but the divine Fanny Sidney.
You will grant me, I trust, fome moments attention, whilst I acquaint you with a few interesting particulars.
Not many days after the last very Severe engagement with the rebellious Americans (of which I imagine the Gazzette has been full) as I was sitting one evening in my tent, my aid-de-E 3	camp
102	A LESSON FOR LOVERS,
camp came to me in haste, and faid he had a most singular affair to impart : the circumstances of which were, that a beautiful young lady, about Seventeen, was waiting without the lines, begging my aid and assistance to fusser her by a note to the general officer to pafs into the enemy’s camp, in order to attend her dying father, a British captain, who is among the number of the priSoners, and wounded mortally.
I was Struck, I conSeSs, with the singularity oS the request !—“ My God ! (Said I to the officer who informed me of this) does she consider the extreme danger of resigning herSelf (a beautiful young creature, as you deScribe her to be) into the hands of a deSperate and cruel enemy ?—and that too at almost the hour oS midnight!—Who is herSather ?„
I was anfwered, he was the brave Captain Sidney, who behaved So gallantly at Rhode-Isiand.
“ How
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	10^
« How great,„ faid I, “ must be the refolution of this girl!—tender—young —and delicate !„—It appeared to me almost an effort above human nature.
“ I sind,„ faid my aid-de-camp, “ this lovely creature came with her father from England, and has attended his fortunes throughout his campaign,
which has hjeen tedious and perilous.
!
They were long stationed^ at Halifax, and in many Other parts.—What will you do ?„ continued he ; “ she appears almost: exhausted for'want of reft and food, and has been dreiiched in rains above thefe last twelve hours.”
“ Good Heavens !„ faid I, “ what can be done ?—carry her a cup of wine, and fomething to eat then {hatching up my pen, I wrote three lines to recommend her to the protection of the general officer.
This singular affair, I must confess, dwelt Strongly on my mind, and I flept that night but little.—The next day I E 4	was
104 A LESSON for lovers. was unavoidably obliged to visit a priSo-ner in the barracks, who had difpatches for me of the utmost importance. In this very recepticle for the wounded, it feems the brave Captain Sidney had been confined; but good Heavens! what was my astonishment, when, in pasting by a wretched hole (chamber it could not be called) I Saw a number of Soldiers, of the rebel side, endeavouring to tear away from the body of a man just dead, the loveliest creature my eyes ever beheld ! She Screamed—she clung to the bodv as iS her own death alone should Separate her from it.—-At sight of me she loudly exclaimed, with inimitable passion and persuasion,— “ O Sir! for God’s Sake—Save me— Save me from theSe bad men—they would part me shorn my dearest father?’, still clinging to the body.
Oh, Bellmour! it is not in language —it is not in the power of the warmest fancy to expreSs the peculiar beauties
of
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I05
of this enchanting girl-—Again she streamed to me for aid and protection. —I was wonderfully affected.—I desired the Soldiers to quit her, who, however, were not offering rudeneSs to her perSon, Save in the action of parting her from the corpSe.
“ Every attention—every care,” -Said I, “ madam, shall be extended to the relics of the worthy officer your good father.„
You will pleaSe here, my friend, to obServe, I had learnt the deceaSed was the brave Captain before-mentioned.
“ I muft beSeech you,” continued I, “ not to remain a moment longer in this dreadSul place :—your pet fanal Safety is concerned :— for Heaven’s Sake be
persuaded.,,----But I found it in
vain to expostulate.; she was almost; frantic ;—raving with grieS.
“ You must be removed (continued I to this beautiSul girl.—Ah! how Superlatively lovely in her tears and E 5	heart-
Io6	A LESSON FOR LOVERS,
heart-movingdiforder!)-—you must this moment be removed to fome place of Safety*”
“ Hah! (faid she, staring wildly in my face, her poor head beginning to turn) are you not my brother Frederic ?—Yes—yes—-yes—let us bury— let us bury him.”—(pointing to her father) “ I thought, my Frederic, you had been killed at Rhode-ISland.”
I had two friends with me—and as it was impossible to fuppofe common humanity could admit of this poor destitute girl remaining longer in Such a Scene oS conSusion, I caught her up at once in my arms, leaving one oS my companions to take care of the dead body, and to See it decently interred, whilst the other assisted in carrying off our precious burthen, who had fainted in my arms. Never, furely, was there, as at that moment, fo moving—fo foul-harrowing an object !■—her sine hair totally dishevelled, and hanging carelessly
ou
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	107
on her bare lovely bofom;—her face —but-------
u Oh fhe was more than language can expreSr,
“ Or youthful poets fancy when they love.3*
Her head, all the time I was conveying her to my tent (for which I had previously afked permission of the American general) was reclined on my bofom—and she remained, during my walk, which was about a quarter of a mile, in a strong fainting fit.
When I arrived at my tent, I caufed her to be conveyed into the most retired part of it; where, 'with water, drops, See. she at last came fo much to herfelf as to open her charming eyes.—We laid her gently on a couch.
“ Softly, gentlemen,’, faid I, on two or three of my companions endeavouring to assist in recovering her.—“ Softly, we must not hurry her fo.„
Methought, though their intentions was purely kind, I could not bear any one to approach her but myfelf,—much
lest
loB	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
lefs to touch her hand, or endeavour to ashst.—Ah, Bellmour! how rapid— how instantaneous is the real passion of love l—I defy, however, any young fellow, in my situation, to behold fuch an object as Mifs Sidney without emotion. She continued rambling in her head the chief part of the day ; Sometimes calling me her father—Sometimes her brother Frederic :—her voice— her manner irreftflible. Once she SoStly whiSpered me,—“ Where have you buried him ?—doisit let the rebels know where you have laid him—keep that a profound Secret—they will tear his poor wounded body out of the grave— and then„—(shrieking) again she Sell into sits.
My Surgeon to the regiment having bled her, she began gradually to, recover her SenSes.—I paSs over her affecting lamentations ; indeed they were Such as would have melted any heart SuSceptible of the least compashon. I
conjured
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	IO9
conjured the enchanting girl to be compofed—and to repofe Some trust in me.—That I had known and reflected her worthy parent, and that I would now be father—brother-—friend to her for ever:-—ah, my Henry!—my tongue faultered, when it was almost going to pronounce, hup and, though my heart most vehemently desired to give her that assurance.
The lovely girl was placed in a kind of little room or clofet, at the back of my tent, where I had occasionally kept my books, Scc.—She had now been in this assy him three days, during which time I was devising a hundred Schemes how to place her in fafety with fome honourable friend.
“ My God!„ faid I, “ what or where can I bestow her?”
I will not conceal from you', my friend, that I found a paffion, violent as tender, growing in my heart every moment for this fair unfortunate.—Indeed
tio	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
deed every hour I difcovered fome new perfection. O Harry! had you feen her delicate confusion—her modest timidity, when she found she was in the hands of a stranger—though treated with the utmost delicacy and honour— I fay, could you have feen her diftrefs on this occasion, you could not—would not wonder that I adore her to distraction. A thoufand—and a thoufand times at this period I endeavoured to recollect the merit—-the accomplishments of Lady Charlotte—my indifpensible obligations of gratitude to her moSt worthy father; —but, alas! alas! my reafon cooly told me, there I had fixed my faith and honour, whilst my heart could acknowledge no other Sovereign than the adorable Fanny Sidney.—Allow me, however, this Small merit' I beSeech you, Bellmour, that in the beginning of this most violent affection I felt gaining ground every hour, I had strength oS rcSolution Sufficient to come to a determination
of
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	Ill
of fending her to fome English ladies, wives of fome of our general officers in camp, who were foon, I understood, to fet out for England.—-This, I thought, would be a fafe and proper means, by placing her under their care and protection, of getting her fafely conveyed to England, where I was determined to provide for her for life.—After much consideration, a thought occurred to me oFwriting a letter to my old frien'd, Mrs. Nelfon (widow of my worthy tutor) who has a houfe in a fweet retired situation near Bath, desiring her to take the care of Mifs Sidney as a boarder, See. acquainting her, you will fuppofe, with the very singular incident of her 'sidling into my hands.
You will, perhaps, here wonder, my friend, that I should talk of providing for this young lady for life, when posh bly she might have relations in England in affluence, who would most likely gladly receive her ; but alas! I found
she
112	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
she had none. I had gathered by little recitals from the lovely girl—for I would not give her the pain of recounting her little history at large, as I found it had been distressful—I had gathered, I fay, that she had no furviving relations in England ; that her father, mother, with herfelf, at the early age of eleven, had been in America; Captain Sidney, before the breaking out of the American war, being stationed in Nova Scotia ; that she had loil a brother, a gallant young officer, in the dreadful affair at Rhode Ifland ; that having lost her mother, she had lived till the last twelvemonths in a very retired part of North America, with a relation of her father’s ;—that since the death of the above lady, she had attended her father through many hardships, as his health, being but very indifferent, made her tender cares for him necessary ;—and that during our late action with the
Americans,,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	Ilg
Americans, and since, she had Suffered extremely.
On finding the amiable maid had no connections in this part of the world, I judged it most adviSable to Sorward my Scheme oS Sending her to England : and this I communicated to my lovely charge.
Ah, Bellmour! had you Seen the SoSt bluSh which dyed her languid cheek,—-the tender confusion which at once Seized her when I mentioned her removal— you would at that inStant, my friend, have thought, as I did, that your almost distracted Melville was not wholly indifferent to the young heart of this Sweet girl.—There is a wonderful simplicity —an enchanting innocence in her manner, which may be easily accounted for, bred, as she has been, in almost the wilds of America, and wholly unacquainted with the common forms of unmeaning flattery, and all that Specious kind of sidle nonSenle which paS-
ies
H4 A LESS0N FOR lovers.
Ses under the name of politenefs:—she is, in short, fmplicky itfelf, void of the least particle of art.—A proof of this appeared when I propofed my Scheme of her leaving America.
“ O Sir! (bursting into tears) do you then renounce me ?—I shall never See you more!—I could wish, methinks, to See you once again, to thank you for your kind care oS me in my distreSs.”
I assured her it was by no means my intention to renounce her. I then informed her oS my whole design oS Supporting her in England—at the Same time hinting that, according to the received customs, and forms of liSe, I could not, with propriety, let her remain in my tent.-—She took the hint, and here her delicacy was as great as her gratitude :—the Sormer made her See the necessity of her removal;—the latter impelled her to throw heisself at my feet:—she caught my hand, and bedewed it with her tears.—-My God !
what
A LESSON fOR LOVERS.	I I jj
what were the agonies of my bofom at that moment!—I fussered her to remain a few minutes (hardly knowing that I did fo) in that foul-moving attitude ;—and, after placing her in her chair, begged her not to over-rate a common act of friendship.—“ Mrs. Nelfon,” added I, “ you will find, Madam, a worthy woman ;—she will love you as her own child. I will write to her instantly ;—which letter you will convey to her, and by which you will See the footing you will be on with that good lady.”—Saying which I then fat down to my deSkand wrote the following lines, and directed them to Mrs. NelSon, at West-Green, near Bath.
Camp, Albany, America.
“ My worthy friend,
THE many instances of your readi-neSs to Serve and oblige me, both before, and since the death oS your excellent
116	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
cellent huSband, my ever honoured tutor, renders an apology for what I am going to propofe to you, I trust, unne-ceffary .■—But to come to the point at once.
“ By an unfortunate incident, occasioned by the fatal chances oS war, the bearer of this letter, MiSs Sidney, fell under my protection. The merit— the bravery of her gallant father, who died in the Service of his king and country, entitle her to the utmost re-Spect, and I am determined to Support and provide for her helpleSs innocence. —She has no friend in this part of the globe to whom I could commit her in charge;—and her connections in Eng-
o'	o
land have likewiSe been long dissolved. Will you, therefore, my good Mrs. NelSon, take the trust oS receiving under your rooS this very amiable and distressed young lady ?—Her age, barely Seventeen—her perSon uncommonly fine,*—make it necessary she should be
carefully
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	1 1 7
carefully preferved from the arts of a treacherous world. With whom, then, my worthy friend, can I deposit this valuable charge fo properly as with yourfelf?—You will form her heart, which stems good, to virtue, and to. happinefs,—You will gently lead and guide this poor unhappy orphan to peace and comfort. Her under/landing,
I find, has been extremely well cultivated, and she has read a great deal.— For thefe advantages she is obliged to a worthy friend, since dead, in this part of the world.—You will, however, my dear Madam, find her masters in the genteel accomplishments of music, dancing, Sec. of which, I imagine, she is totally at prefent unacquainted :—in short, 1 beg you would look on her as your own child; and as fuch educate and instruct her in what you think befitting.—Possibly, when her poor father’s affairs are fettled, Something handSome oS property, may be coming to her;—
if
I I 8	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
if not, I shall annually provide for her, and .. fie of her in marriage to fome woruN man. I purpofe, for the pre-fent, giving you a hundred guineas per annum for the board and care of this young unfortunate, and I flatter myfelf you will find her no difagreeable acquisition.—Heaven is my avitnefs (1 trust you know my heart too well to difbe-lieve me) I have no sinister view in this.
<—The world—the prying, wife world, you know, is often apt to be cenforious in what it cannot comprehend ; and I • have known many an action termed a vice, merely from its not being underfood as a virtue, and judging by narrow, minded conceptions only.—You will, therefore, dear Mrs. Nelfoii, be particularly cautious of naming me, in this matter as the friend of Mifs Sidney, as it may possibly hurt her future life in fettling, delicately as she is circumstanced.—I need fay no more on this head to one of your known prudence and
knowledge
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I 19
knowledge of the world, your own dif- -cretion will befufficient to direct you* “ Some ladies of known reputation and credit, who are coming to England, will convey your fair charge fafe to your hands.—How long she may remain with you is uncertain :—it is more than probable that I shall enter into matrimony with a lady of great family in England foon after my return, and perhaps then Mifs Sidney may reside with us.
Adieu, my very dear friend, all fuc-cefs and happineSs attend you with your new guest. Be affured, whatever expenfe, more than I have mentioned, may be incurred on her account, will be most gladly re-imburfed, and all favours acknowledged by,
* Good Madam,
Your very sincere and faithful friend,
CHARLES MELVILLE,
This
120	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
This letter having finished, I pre-fented it to my fair ward to read.—I purpofely mentioned to Mrs. Nelfon my future marriage, not only that it might preclude her imagining I had any designs upon this young Lady of that fort myfelf, but that by this method Mifs Sidney would fee (when she read the letter) what I much wished her to know, that I was an engaged man. —The fubject was too delicate for me to enter on alone,—and my motives for this enchanting girl to know the above unhappy anecdote-—(Ah, my friend, do I live to call it an unhappy one ?)—my motives, I repeat, were not ungenerous.—Her peace, I find, is too dear to me, to fuffer her one moment to be tortured with the pangs of an hopeleSs affection.—She might pof-sibly imagine the few favours I intended to bcsstow on her, together with thofe I had shewn already, might proceed from a motive more tender than
common
A LESSON FOR LOVERS;	121
common friendfhip;—and I was the more desirous to give her fome hint of my enthralled state, with regard to a lady in England, becaufe truly Bellmour (vanity apart) I had obferved many—many marks of a beginning tenderness in the bofom of this dear girl for your poor friend.—Alas ! she has no arts—not one little trick of the fex, which fo often, wheri they would conceal a pasiion, they can put on.—The enchanting Fanny—all truth and heavenly innocence, an hundred times betrayed her foft confusion at my approach —her rising blush—and evident difor-der, on my accidentally touching her lovely hand.-—But let me baften to quit the fubject, which I shall instantly do, when I have informed you the ladies who are fetting out for England (among whom is the worthy Mrs. Mill-wood you have heard me mention, and her daughter of the age of my fair charge, and who will be a proper com-vol, i.	F	panion
Ill	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
paiiion to her on the voyage) all of the whole party, in sine, expressed their affurances, and with pleafure, that they would have her fafely conveyed to the houfe of Mrs. Nelfon, as foon as possible after their arrival in England.
At length, yesterday morning, I conveyed this most charming girl to the above ladies.—What Ifuffered in * parting with her, beggars all defeription: —O virtue, virtue, may thy rewards in a future ft ate (as I doubt not they will) fully compenSate for thy trials in this ! *—On the morning oS our parting, my
I
* That Colonel Melville was a hero in the field, we doubt not; but we will be bold to fay, that the exalted action of resigning up Mifs Sidney, in the noble manner he did, with the whole of his honourable behaviour to that unfortunate young lady, places him in a Ihining light, infinitely beyond all the CaeSars, Alexanders, and Anthonys that ever existed, with all their Rpman cars of triumph, and poeans oi victory. So true is it,
One felf-afproving act whole years outweighs,
4‘ Of world'y honours, and of loud huzzas.”
Sweet
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	123
fweet Fanny—my Fanny!-—Ah, Lady Charlotte, forgive thy wretched Melville !—But to proceed—Mifs Sidney, the morning of our departure, almost fainted in my arms, as I lifted her into the carriage to convey her from the tent—then bursting into tears, witte fweet simplicity, she begged I would keep for her Sake a string of American Wampum (she had collected in her travels) with Some very beautiSul shells— this simple preSent I preSer to all the gems in the world ;—ah, Bellmour, had you feen the look which accompanied this gift!—her expressve eyes—shining with love and gratitude !-—Oh dif-traction l—I must fly Srom the cruel Subject.
Ever, ever yours, the wretched ' % _	melvilLe*
F 2	LET-
124	A LESSON FOR LOVER-3*
LETTER X.'
SIR HENRY BELLMOUR TO COLONEL MELVILLE.
__	London.
X ITY thee! my noble-minded friend ! —Indeed I do most heartily:—and yet, I know not, that trials like thine, which call forth the most exalted honour, and the most refined virtues, can be looked, on as fubjects for regret. Thou excellent young man! teach me to imitate thy worth.—I have been drawing a parallel betwixt the great Scipio, of ancient fame, and yourfelf;—but you, —-you, my Melville, upon investigating your different trials, infinitely exceed him in heroifm : the fair lady he loved was betrothed to a favoured lover, confequently she could make no return of affection to the amorous Scipio :— but you, my friend, dissevered a first
beginning
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	125
beginning pafiion in the^ breast of this lovely girl, which few—very few young fellows, let me fay, of this age, but would have taken an advantage of.— Singular, certainly, is your trial;—singular is, indeed, your virtue.—I cannot recollect, in any of our fentimental novels, a distrefs like thine, and almost wish it could be made public, for the fake of all the modern young men of fashion.
My dear Charles, it will give you pleafure to hear that your fair ward is fafely arrived at the peaceful mansion of the good Mrs. Nelfon. I have been lately at Bath, and could not help, for thy fake, calling to fee how matters went on at West Green. I faw Mifs Sidney, and think she is a most lovely girl.—Mrs. Nelfon is delighted with her, and, above all things, is charmed with her simplicity, sincerity, and her entire ignorance of what is called fajhionable politeneSs.
F 3	The
126	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
The latter, your good old friend tells me, is as praife-worthy as it is extraordinary. Mrs. Nelfon, who is visited and much refpected by Several families of distinction near her, cannot make the amiable girl comprehend why people who are called “ vastly good—the befl people in the world, &c.” should continually, as the fweet girl obServes,/hy what they do not mean. One lady tells another, she would die to ferve her, yet whifpers to a third, “ I wish that horrid woman was out of my houfess— Another caresses her friend with every term of the fondest attachment; but, no fooner is she departed, than - she laughs with derision at her every word and action. “ How is this, Mrs. Nelfon ?” fays the good Mifs Sidney; “ pray tell me.”
You will easily conceive how much the worthy woman is delighted with the Sweet simplicity and artieSs questions of her young charge fo different
I
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	127
rent from the affected, pert, bold things who inf eft every quarter of both the town and country. And yet, with all this beautiful innocence, your old friend tells me, she possesses an uncommon, strength of understanding; and has read (whilst under the tuition of that American lady you mentioned) most of our best authors in history, poetry, divinity, and other ufeful parts of literature. The ladies who brought her to England, were careful of their charge; and Mifs Millwood, whom I am acquainted with, was fo delighted with her amiable fellow-traveller, that they have entered into a correspondence by letters.
I greatly applaud your delicate method of acquainting this lovely girl (in your letter to Mrs. Nelfon) that you are (as you call yourfelf) an engaged man; it was generous, my friend—it was no* ble.—It is, indeed, more than probable that she might entertain,--or at least .	F 4	be
128	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
be furprifed—-(from your extreme attention to her, not to fay one word of your pershn, &c.)—She might, I repeat, have been furprifed into the pashon of
love.----lam this instant interrupted.
******* * * * *
I have just heard another action has happened near you, more Severe than the last :—pray Heaven you are SaSe ! —A gentleman has told me you are among the number oS the wounded: —though, he hears, but Slightly So.—I long for particulars.
Earl Richley has been (as I SuppoSe you know by his letters) Some time with his fair daughter, at an eft ate of his Lordship’s in Ireland, on the account oS changing the air for her health, which I hear is but very indifferent.
With the utmost reluctance I am obliged to conclude, as I have, at present, no leSs than two families in my houSe out of the north ;—a perfect inundation of country cousins, maiden-
aunts,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	129
aunts, 8cc. &c.-—thefe good folks, I am obliged to fquire about from morning till night. Don’t be furprifed if I tell you in my next, that my little black-eyed cousin Patty has almost made me fay, with Benedict in the comedy, “ when I faid I should die an old bat-chelor, I did not know I should live to be married.„—	-'
Adieu, my excellent Melville : may Heaven preferve you.—I hope the report of your wound is falfe.—Believe me,	\
MoSt faithfully yours,
HENRY BELLMOUR.
LETTER XL
MISS SIDNEY, TO MISS- MILLWOOD.
WWejl Green,'
HY, my amiable friend, will you again infiji on knowing the eaufe of that Secret grief you Say you are convinced F 5	~	has
J$0	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
has taken possession of my mind, wher I have fo often declared that, Surely the death of a beloved father, and o: an amiable brother, are eauSes Sufficiem to call Sorth thoSe grievous sighs yoi mention, and account for that habitua SadneSs which you Say Seems to havt taken possession of my Soul.
My situation, which-youf fo kind!) enquire after, is beyond any thing ir this world I could have imagined agree able. The incomparable Mrs. NelSor is not only the tender toother hist t most injlrufiive friend.—-Indeed, m} Emma, I stood in need of Such an one A perfect wild American, just caughl from her native woods, or a young Hottentot found in a Solitary cave could hardly be more unknowing of the prefent fajhions and ways of the world than your poor Fanny.
You have heard me often deScribe my rural residence, in one of the mod Solitary Spots of Nova Scotia. Hid
from
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I'Jl
from the world—encompassed by the vaSt woods, of which that country a-bounds, I Saw—I knew nothing but what my books told me.—-The worthy woman with whom I dwelt,—and a few Indians, who inhabited a tract, of land not far Srom our abode (with whofe simple life I was charmed) were the only human beings I ever converfed with, from the age oS eleven till sixteen;—when my dear parent took me from my Solitude,—and whofe fortunes, I was determined to at tend.
Never shall I forget the piercing cries of the poor Indians, when I had by signs informed them I was going to> leave them for ever. They Galled my departure a journey beyond the great mountain; an idea which conveys to thefe poor people an immeasurable distance. This tribe oS Indians, are the moft simple-minded, inoffensive jand industrious of any in North America. Why they were So particularly attached.
l$t	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
ed to me (if I may make ufe of that ex? preSSion) was merely from a principle of gratitude; a virtue, I assure you, thofe innocent people possess in a very strong degree.—I had frequently taught them the ufe of fome medicinal herbs, a knowledge I had acquired from the good old friend I lived with, and whom they regarded almost to adoration, believing her to be a female magician, she having performed fome wonderful cures in inflammatory cafes, by the aid of Dr. James’s valuable powders, on a few of their women and children.
I taught feveral of their young maids to ufe the needle ;—and endeavoured to give fome of the elders a notion of a Deity, by pointing to the fu/i,—the moon, &c.—as made by the poWr that I adored. On thefe occasions, the awful silence thofe poor wretches ol> Served was truly affecting;—and I am convinced, if proper instruction was ~	given
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I33
given them, much might be done in this ' very important article.
I had occasionally conferred on them little trifling favours in bestowing certain trinkets and ribbons I had belonging to me.—With thefe they would adorn their arms, and look upon me with a fort of enthusiastic gratitude.
I am fully perfuaded we too rashly judge the Indian notions, when we indiscriminately fay, they are all cruel, revengeful, barbarous, Sec.
Their wars, it is true, are conducted with a degree of ferocity confined alone to uncivilized nations. Trained in the belief that the destruction of their enemies is just, and acting generally on the principles of defence and felf-prefervation, in what do they differ, in thefe refpects, from the more polished Europeans, but that the manner.. of sighting their battles is not fo Systematical? Their method of treating fame of their unfortunate captives',
whom
r34 a lesson for lovers. whom they put to cruel deaths, is indeed highly blamable ; but then we ought to make fome allowance for the force of habits and customs. Towards others of their vanquished, they extend a benevolence no where elfe to be met with. The widows and relations of thofe who have the misfortune to fall in battle, frequently adopt fuch captives as strike their fancy, to fupply the place of the deceafed ; and the community six on others to live among them as friends and brethren. With the white men, who ufe them wTell, they- live in, friendship, are fond of doing them Services, and will even attend them as domestics, when not engaged in hunting parties, or other occupations of their own.
Let us not judge then of their com duct, till we are better acquainted with their motives, and Springs of action. Their reafon, certainly, is obScured, but their principles are innocent: their
pashons
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	135
pafiions may be excessive, but they are not corrupt.
Ah, my dear friend! how much to be preferred is one of thefe wild In* dians, with all his honest roughness, to the Smooth, the refined European villain, who boasts of his politeneSs, whilst he is cutting his neighbour's throat,, in whoSe face he deceitfully Smiles ; or Secretly planning the destruction oS that friend, whom he prophanely calls by that facred title, and whom he invites and caresses at his table! if this be refinement and politenefs, give me the Savage den, with liberty, faith and friendship for my companions, and I would forgo the gilded palace, and all the artificial acquirements of the polished world.
How would my Emma, who is So fond of fcenes of nature, have been delighted with the rural simplicity of thefe Indians near whom I dwelt! The village, if I may fo term it, was
Situated
I36	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
situated by a pleafant stream, which, issuing from'a rock, ran through a ver dant valley into a large lake, in which were numbers of beautiful little isiands, arrayed with greenest herbage, or enamelled with fweet-fcented flowers.
The village (of huts) is of a circular form, and bounded on one side by a vast foreSt; on the other, by furrounding craggy rocks. The walls of the cottages are compote cl of green turf, with branches of trees interwoven ; and the roofs are covered with reeds artificially plaited! andl withered leaves. Every thing is in the most simple state imaginable : no domes—no pompous pillars —no different orders of architecture to decorate the buildings, but all is rude as were the habitations of the antediluvian world.
The young men of this nation follow the chace.—Their principal businefs Seems to be to provide food for the whole community (they having every
thing
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	137
thing in common) or to defend them from the hostile attacks of their enemies. The women remain at the village, and have a variety of occupations fuited to their age and condition. Besides the care of their children they are ingenious in preparing the bark or rliind of fome odoriferous trees, with which they weave curious strings and girdles,—whilst others prepare belts of wampum.'—Thefe, according as the colours are variously mixed, ferve as tokens of friendship to their kindred, or to allies of their feveral tribes. Their little ones are early inured to labour, to danger, and fatigue.—It is incredible at what an early age they are taught to handle the bow, the oar, the tomahawk and the javelin. When one of their warriors returns viBorious, the whole village is one continual Scene of feStivity and mirth. Both young and old mingle in the dance, and
record
13 S	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
record the warrior’s exploits in Songs of joy.
As thefe Simple people have no particular property, they are untainted with the love of wealth, that bane to focial felicity ; and as they possess every thing in common, they know not the pangs of avarice, nor the fears of poverty. Temperate and inured to labour, they are brave, active, and vigorous. Their affections devoid of pedantic formality, are ardent and unaffected. They exprefs their emotions with all the freedom and simplicity of nature. Their joy is rapturous, and their Sorrow vehement. Oii my departure, they Set up a kind of wailing long, gave me belts of wampum, shells from the rocks, and coral of beautiful colours, and hung on my garments :—•• and whilst fome were recommending me to the great fpirit that governs the whirlwind (for fo they Style their God) others followed me, in forrowful silence,
to.
A LESSOR FOR LOVERS.	139
to die edge of the mountains.—I was wonderfully affected.——So much for thefe stmple Indians.
I hear there has been a Sharp engagement with the British and American troops.—My gratitude to my noble preferver, makes me anxious for his fafety--Heaven guard him from danger—is my hourly prayer------Alas ! I
fear he may have fallen—if not in Slaughter—into-the hands of our cruel
o
enemies.
Mrs. Nelfon, my worthy friend, my guide, and my inStructreSs, is in the greatest esteem among Some very genteel families in this neighbourhood ;— but, my dear, to you I Say in confidence, not one of theSe very genteel people have I Seen, who appear to me to poffeSs that great virtue called fince-rity. I have been at times almost fhocked at the apparent distimulation of people who have professed the utmost affection to Serve each other.
.	,	“ Why
140	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ Why do thefe people still continue to vifof fay I to Mrs. Nelfon, “ if they fo fecretly contemn and de-fpife each other ?—would a favage Indian do this ? Ah ! no——no.„
My good friend Smiles at my simplicity.
“ You are now in the world, Mifs Sidney,v Says she, “ and are happy that you can See through this Species oS falsehood/,
“ Aye*—-this world!” thought I.
To-morrow we go to Spend the day with a lady of extraordinary character for charity, piety, and all other virtues:—I will give you an account of this visit in my next:—mean time I SubScribe mySelf, with the plain ftncerity of a wild Indian,
Your faithful friend,
FANNY SIDNEY.
L E T-
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I4I
LETTER XIL
THE SAME TO THE SAME.
IWeJl Green.
AM now going, my dear Emma, to fulfill my promife, of giving you an account of our visit to Lady Grace * * *.
I was much prejudiced in favour of this Lady from the character I had frequently heard of her in company. Mrs. Nelfon and I were conducted into a room where feveral gentlemen and ladies were assembled. The latter, after fixing their" eyes on me (for what caufe I cannot conceive) fell into a kind of whifper, in which the lady of the houfe joined, and I thought feemed to eye me with very particular observation. 1 was extremely abashed, and hardly knew what to do to avoid her eyes. I was, however, Somewhat relieved, by her attention to me being called off
on
I42	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
on the arrival of a perfon who had brought her a paper of fome public charity to be fubfcribeel for.—She look-S ed it over.
“ Let me fee what Lady B------and
Lord S------fubfcribe.—Put me down
ten pounds more than they:—hefure put my name down:—the last time you forgot,„
“ Charming Lady Grace (exclaimed Several oS the gentlemen)—what a noble Soul you poffeSs!”
This lady, I should Say, has an estate of about five thoufand a-year, and an
immenSe fum in the funds.--------She
is turned of fifty—with a perfon remarkably plain, and, I think, Something in her manner forbidding.
Three gentlemen who live constantly in the houfe with this charitable lady, drank tea with us.—One of them is her ladyship’s domestic chaplain; the other two she ufuaily retains in her
family,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	143
family, for Some reaSons I could not very well understand.
One oS theSe gentlemen began, “Pray have^you heard, Madam (addressing himSelf to Lady Grace), that MiSs
p------ is grown remarkably fat of late,
and is gone into the country ?„
“ Indeed! (Said her ladyship, her eyes Sparkling with pleaSure) well—-this is news!—My God !—what will this world come to ?„—casting up her eyes, and raising her shoulders.
I could not, for my part, conceive how a young perSon growing fat, and taking a journey into the country, could be construed into cenSure.
“ But above all,” Said her Ladyship’s chaplain, “ my indignation is railed against the baronet at the Abbey—and that young creature he is going to marry.—A mere child!—Fye,—fye,—a man of his age !—it ihews a wanton hankering aSter the vanities and pleasures
144	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
v fures of this world unbecoming his years.„
“ Nay (faid the lady of the houfe) they ought to have been married fome months since, I hear.—But come let us go to prayers (a custom I find in the family never miffed) let us go to prayers.” • Servants now came in with books and cushions, and we all kneeled down. —The chaplain, who had been fo freely fpeaking of his neighbours, prayed moft fervently and loudly, as did her ladyship.
This folemn office being finished, the converfation took the fame turn of Scandal as before, in which the two gentlemen (who live with her ladyship) bore a great part. Novice, as I am, in the affairs of the world, I could however plainly fee, that they were fpeaking of characters (few of the company joining with them) that were by no means sit fubjects for calumny.
When
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I45
When we returned home, Mrs. Nelfon afked me how I liked my visit, and I plainly told her I was disappointed in the opinion I had formed of Lady Grace, and wished to know if she thought me wrong.
“ It does not become me,” returned the good woman, “ to fay what my thoughts are of that lady.—I have obligations to her family:—her father was find to my poor Mr. Nelfon:—I therefore can fay nothing more than that the world fpeaks highly of her.” This was all I could get from my friend.—-But, alas, my dear, I Soon Saw a worthy old clergyman in this neighbourhood, who Sully explained her character.
“ My good child,„ Said this venerable man, “ you are young—but ob-SerVe, in your future life, all is not gold that gliStens.—I have no prejudice a-gainst this lady---but the real fact is* her motive for charity is oftentation.—-vol. 1.	G	Under
I46	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
Under the cloak of religion, she prac tifes the most voluptuous vices. Sh commonly retains two or three vifi tants in her family (besides her chari table chaplain) whom the world is t< look upon as objects of her extrenr benevolence and greatnefs of foul; bu in fact, thefe wretched men are kep for the purpofe of gratifying her lovi of detraction, by picking up, and re tailing to her, fcandalous tales of he: neighbours ;—if, for other reafons,' sh< must anfwer for it:—the world, sin fancies, can fay nothing of So pious—Sc charitable a peisson.—But, alas ! alas Such pretensions to religion is, and muf be highly offensive to that Being, whc Sees the heart. There are,” added he “ too many of this character, who con ceal their baSe hypocriSy under th< maj}. oS religion.„
“ Heavens !” Said I astonished, “ is ii possibles
“ Vert
9/
A LESSON TOR LOVERS.	I47
“ Very certain,” replied the good man, “ but thefe characters are fo apt to deceive by their fpecious appearance, that fo young and inexperienced a perfon as yourfelf ought to be fet right.— There are fome few, and but a few, however, who fee the real malignity, envy, and other vices of the heart of Lady Grace. Her riches proteB her from general cenfure ; for the world, though it affhBs to fpeak of money with contempt, is, and ever will be, attracted to its owners, and will bow down before its shrine.„
Ah! my dear Mifs Millwood, where do we find vices like thefe among even the wildest of the Indian tribes ?—If this is to be refined, may my abode be with the wild beasts of the deSart, on the banks of the lake Ontario!
Forgive this dull letter :—my Spirits are low, an habitual SadneSs Seems to prey on my heart.—What is this / G 2	worU
I48	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
world that we poor deluded mortal: make fuch a coil about 1
u When I consider life, ’tis all a cheat,
Yet, fool’d with hope, we favour the deceit;
Trust on, and think to-morrow will repay, To-morrow’s falfer than the former day:
Lies worst: and while it fays we Ihall be blest, With Some new joys, cuts off what we posse ft, Strange cozenage’ none would live past years again Yet all hope pleal'ure from what yet remain.”
Thus it is, and ever will be while list continues.—But a truce with reflection as you will, I fear, think this epistle tot long already; I will, therefore, not adt another wTord, but that I am,
Most truly yours,
FANNY SIDNEY
LETTER XIII.
MISS MILLWOOD TO MISS SIDNEY.
N	Oakley Lodge, Monday.
OTHING but the actual sight o my dear andamiable Fanny, could hav< given me more pleafure than her laf
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	149
very agreeable letters, and nothing could have prevented me from thanking her for them before, but’ having been to town to make preparations for a wedding.—Not for my own wedding mv dear, obferve that.—There is fome difference, you will fay, in being a bride, and a bride’s-ma id. The latter, I am very shortly to be, to an old, and dear friend, whom I believe you have often heard me mention:—a Mifs Patty Rivers, from the north oS England ; who is just going to enter the state of matrimony with Sir Henry Bellmour, a very handSome, and, what is still better, a very worthy, good young gentleman. You would be delighted with my friend Patty—her character is purely feminine:—timid and gentle to excefs:— Small and delicate in her perfon, it Wrould Seem like downright cruelty to offend her in the least degree : one loves her at first-sight.—There is an inexpressible SoftneSs in her whole manners G 3	—she
I ho	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
—she feems to intreat not to command your esteem.—Thefe kind of mild characters (as Some elegant author observes, whofe name I have forgot) are to the foul, what the mild green of a beautiSul meadow is to the eye :—'you are not furprifed, but you Seel an tin-Speakable fatisfaBion in the contemplation.—This little, artlefs Patty, who really appears like a girl of thirteen, though in Sact she is nineteen, very Soon made a conquest of the agreeable Baronet, to the no Small Surprsse, I San-cy, of her two elder sisters, both fine women, and proSessed beauties.—Sir Henry has behaved most nobly, for as theSe three sisters, though oS an ancient good family, had but moderate For--tunes, he has given Patty's to her siS-i ters—and would not touch one shilling of it. There is, my Fanny, and always was to me Something in the divine quality of generofity wonderfully attractive.——It is more than justice,----it is
more
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	Ij[t
more than charity it is more than good faith ; in fact, it feems an affenisi lage of virtues blended.—Doirst you think fo my dear ? *
You would have given me infinite pleafure if you had told me your health had mended ; for though you will net own it, indeed, child, yon are not well. ---You have griefs, my fweet girl,— and why will you not commit them to the bofom of friendfhip ? If you will not fusser me to Jhare them, you make me but your friend by halves. Perhaps fome American chief, or fome Indian warrior may have made an impression on your fufceptible heart.— I am half inclined to think the gentle youth belongs to the five nations, oS which, you Speak with So particular a pleafure.—* If you love your Emma, why not make her your confidant ?
* Poor Mifs Sidney, whofe very foul was oppresi led by the extreme generofity of the amiable man (lie loved, easily assented to this opinion of her fair friend.
G 4.	I am
JhZ	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
I am quite delighted with your just and artlefs obfervations on the mfmcere manners of the age.—Capital vices may have been, perhaps, in former ages, as prevalent as at prefent; but I am apt to think the fawning infmcerity—the falfe politenefs we every day meet with, increafes upon us daily.
I am interrupted-—fome one knocks at my clofet door :—it is my mother; --she enters, and kicks over my shoulder.
“ What, writing to our dear Fanny ? (you know how she loves you my friend) give me the pen, Emma.”— c* There it is, Madam.”
Mrs. Millwood, in continuation,
MY good Mifs Sidney will permit an old woman to fcribble a few lines, who most sincerely loves her —and indeed, my dear child, had you not been consigned to the worthy Mrs, Nelfon, you
never
A LESSON FOR LOVERS/'	153
never should have left your Emma, I assure you.—Pray let us have your company at Oakley Lodge:—your conversation will be as instructive as your letters. I read them over and over* with fresh pleafure. I agree perfectly in Sentiment with the worthy old clergyman you mention, concerning the hypocrify of this age, amongst all its other shameful vices. There are, 1 fear, too many Lady Graces. Th6 more, my good child, you fee of this nation, the more will you be astonifh-ed at its want of virtue,—of sirmnefs. Thofe people who pafs for what the world calls “ excellent-—-heavenly—the bejl hearts in this world, 8cc.„—I should be glad to know, upon investigation, in what their goodnefs consists.—I am not here fpeaking of fuch an hypocrite as Lady Grace;—nor of the fine, th every fine folks of the ton (a term, if you remember, on our voyage, I explained to-you) but I am fpeaking- of people of G 5	large
154	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
large fortunes, who reside on their own estates in the country, and who are reputed rnofl excellent—moft worthy, &c. I am not glancing at any particular perSons, but at that kind oS very insipid character in general, of the affluent, who, though they do not live in a state of vice, yet I should be glad to know what virtues they practiSe. It is true they do no harm, but then they do no good. How many hundreds of thefe heft people in the world live just in the following manner ?—Obferve I am not here fpeaking of the vicious, libertine part of the world, for I give that up as incorrigible. To begin, then, with a good gentleman.
He rifes, perhaps, about feven in the morning : if fond of dogs, takes a turn to his dog-kennel—Breakfast, and looking over a number ofpolshV/z/pamphiets, is his employment till eleven,—then is’ ordered his horsh, under pretence of' that very important article health;
but,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	.155
but, in fact, the ride is to procure a voracious appetite for his dinner; where a table is provided in the highest style of modern gluttony. We will fuppofe fome company dine with this good man, whom he cares no more for than they do for him.—After a most unccushion- * able meal of Soups, ragouts, fricassees to the number of. twenty dishes* (enough for the Support of ten poor families for a whole month) the lady of the mansion, his. wife, retired from table (who is likewifeone of thefe good people before-mentioned). 1 proceed with faying the huSband and his company, after Sitting over their wine Sor two hours, Settling, the affairs of nations, which: never will be fettled, at length shunter to the gardens;—or if the weather will not permit, sit down in the 'drawing-room to Sober whist, or^qua- . drille with the ladies.—At length, the. hour of Supper arrives, which is duly honoured.—Two. hours, are Spent afterwards
I$6	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
terwards in mere chit-chat,—the company retire,—the clock strikes eleven, when the gentleman and his wife go to rest.
This, my Fanny, is a true description oS the method of the life of a good man of fortune in the country.—I should be glad to know what one virtue is here exhibited.—But now for the lady of the mansion.
She riSes about nine,—by ten has finished her tea,--r-and if she has chib dren, I mean daughters, I take it for granted, they are Sent to Some oS our improving boarding-Schools in or near the metropolis;—or, otherwiSe, she has a French governeSs in the houSe, to whom the girls are wholly entrusted; this being the preSent reigning mode oS polite education.—The good lady, then, perfectly Satisfied her children in the high road of instruction, has nothing herSelS to do with their education, r—But to proceed with her day.
Breakfast
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I hf
Breakfast being over, she finishes working a leaf in an apron, or if she is fentimental, writes to a friend, or shunters into the park.—Perhaps keeps a few Chinefe pheafants, or stlk-worms, which employ much idle time that might be better managed ;—but this is taffe.
The morning being at length killed, the hour of drefling arrives, which, with trying a new head-drefs or two9 in order for the enSuing races, in the next county town, Sufficiently fill up the time till the bell rings for dinner. Here the good lady takes her feat, and this doing the honours of the table, is perhaps, the greatest bufinefs of her life. She remains at this board of luxury till fome little time after the deSert is removed, and then retires into her drawing-room, where cards (if any company) '- lea, and perhaps a turn in the gardens, empshythe hours till the time oS Supper ; after vvhichcthehxrar of rest Soon
arrives,
I5&	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
arrives, and thus finishes the little business of the day.
This, my dear Mifs Sidney, is nearly the conStant life of even what are called the be ft people living.—That fuch lives are passed without being marked with vice, I grant; but, alas ! alas ! where are the active virtues which should adorn and ennoble the human life ?—Thefe good people are undoubtedly harmlefs and inojfenjive, and fo are the marble Statues in their gardens ; but do they Search out Sor objects of distress ? do they ever enter the for-did hut of poverty ? do they themfelves fee the shivering wretch at their gates fed and cloathecl ? or are the remains of their luxurious table carefully distrh-buted among their indigent neighbours ? ah, no!—Do they instruct the ignorant? advife the imprudent ?—comfort the drooping heart of the afflicted? or draw forth, and reward modest merit hid in obfeunty?—no, not one of thefe virtues-
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	J Jg
tues do they practife.—Do they even think the instruction of their orwn children a duty incumbent on themfelves, or take fo much as. the least thought or concern about improving their morals ?
■—that interesting affair—-that most of all important considerations, in which, > not only their prefent, b ut their future state of happiness depends.---No, this is never done by the great and affluent: —they would be astonished at the bare mention of fo great a fatigue. To ab-jlain from evil is thought virtue fuftcieni, but I very greatly fear, that the omifi fion of our duties is as culpable as crimes committed.
You will be lost in aStonistimcnt, my dear young friend., at the deception you will meet with mcbaraBers throughout every rank of life, from the highest to the lowest.. AH the world (at least our refined, our polite world, as it is called) feems to act in a maj'L I know, at this, time, fe veral most extraordinary
good
160	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
good characters, who, stis true, owe not one shilling in the world:—never drink,—nor game :—are constant attendants on the divine worship :—talk much of morality, virtue, and fo forth :
-—and yet, my fweet girl, inexperienced as you are in the ways of this world, can you be brought to believe there is Scarcely a more unworthy character to be found ? They keep up the hypocritical shew of Sanctity; but cruelty, tyranny, and every Species of the most insistent contempt appear in their private families to all around them.—-A deferving wife, dying of a broken heart; children pitiable, and wretched to the extreme, their education totally neglected; are too often Seen in the habitations of theSe worthy perSonages.
•—When I Survey the placid Serenity —the feeming benevolence■—the foft footling demeanour of theSe grand deceivers% my SurpriSe is equal to my detestation, and I am ready to exclaim aloud, in
the
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	l6l
the words of an excellent author of our fex,
ti And you, my gentle Sir, So meek, So true—— u But here I’ll strip ye, and expofe to view.
u Thy wife, thy children, tremble in thine eye, u And peace is baniflied, when the father's by.”
To deceive well, my Fanny, feems now the grand art—the foie businefs of life.
One could hardly believe, but So it is, that it is very possible Sor a man to pay his tradeSman with great exactpeSs, yet never bestow a single penny on an object of distress.—It is very posilble he may keep his church constantly, and inveigh bitterly against the fcoffers at religion, and the vices of wine and women; and when he walks the Street, turn away his eye with the chafe look of a vestal, from every young or pretty woman he meets :—yet will this hypocrite, under pretence of perhaps visiting
• I 62	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
siting fome sick friend in the country, steal into a hackney-coach, which com veys him to fome private fnug little lodging near the metropolis, to visit a pretty young girl he keeps there, whom to debauch he has perhaps ufed the most vile arts.-—And poshbly he may chufe to add adultery to his crimes of this kind, and have, in fome other corner, the wife of the man for whom he feigns a friendship, and invites daily to his table.
“ Is this possible ?” my unfufpeBing young Sriend aSks.
Most constantly done, believe me.
Be upon your guard, my good MiSs Sidney, against theSe impoflers. I would have you (and So I adviSe my Emma) to be innocent as the dove, but yet wife as the ferpent, The more, my innocent young friend, you See of this falfe thing, the world, you will find fresh matter still for wonder and indignation. You will See many a good lady,
whofe
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	16$
-whofe time is much devoted to her cloSet-clevotions, and to the divine Service of-the neighbouring church, in the intervals oS either, wholly employed in calumniating her neighbours, or in rendering her poor fervants miferable by a continued feries oS Scolding and ill-nature, A poor relation may pine in want and obfcurity; for this good lady has nobler aims than giving Small pecuniary matters. She intends after death (for she does not approvegiving in her lifetime) to leave a very considerable Sum to an hofpital in her neighbourhood, where her name will be carved, and her good works Specified in capital letters to future ages.
You will lee, besides, my de^r child, the chafe difconfolate widow, who, as Shakefpeare admirably remarks,
' u Shudders at pleafure's very name,”
has her Savourite John to amuSe her melancholy hours.—But this character is too odious to dwell upon,
You
I64	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
You will frequently, my young friend, be delighted with the extreme charity (as you will fuppofe it) of thole good ladies who often take a young girl, in very indigent circumstances, by way of companion.—But be not deceived by this fpecious, and, to all appearance, very agreeable title; for be assured, the poorest beggar, who, as Otway fays,
U Lives on fordid fcraps at great men’s doors,”
is infinitely more happy than the above wretched companion, as she is called.—It is true, she sits at the luxurious table of this good lady; but, from certain looks she receives, is afraid to either eat, or to fpeak.—The fervants look on her with envy, with a mixture of contempt. If she, at table, calls for bread or water, they will be fure to bring her Something different. Perhaps, once in a twelvemonth, she occupies a corner of the coach, to make a visit in company with her beneSactreSs, but is rated afterwards in her return home, for daring
A LESSON FOR LOVERS*	16h
ing to open her lips in Such an assembly, or Sor Saying yes, when she should perhaps have Said no. TheSe poor un-happy girls, whoSe lives are much more wretched than that oS a galley-stave, are, in fact, kept for a kind of butt on which the good charitable lady, when she finds herSelS neither sick nor well, which is often the cafe, when her lord has diSpleaSed her; or when her milliner has disappointed her of a new cap; when her favourite lap-dog or monkey is dead; or she has had the mist fortune of being neglected at the last ball—has nothing to do in the midst of all thefe difasters, but to vent her ill-humours, her overflowing ill-nature on the poor wretch who, she knows, dares not open her mouth in return, but must “ sit Mkepatienceon a monument,” becmtfc she is fed, doathed and houfed under her hofpitable roof. Better would it be to
“ Meet the hungry lion,
u Or houfe with wolves in open air.”
iffst	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
But methinks I fee a tear stealing down the cheek of my gentle Mifs Sidney : it wTould, indeed, make “ pity’s Self to gisieve,’, on reflecting there are numbers of poor, oppressed, h'elplcfs, young women, in the fame wretched situation.
Emma is now* come to finish her letter.-—I must, however, add, that my health, which you fo kindly enquire after (the want of which, as you know, was the foie caufe of my leaving my dear hustand in America) is still but very indifferent.
Adieu: believe me, most affectionately,
Your’s,
SUSA N N & MILLWOOD.
Mifs Milhimd, in continuation.
WORTHY, excellent woman, as my mother is, what a charity will it be in good Mrs. Nelfon, and my beloved
Fanny,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	l6j
Fanny, if they will comply with her, and my request in vifiting Oakley Lodge !—You will, my dear, be charm- • ed with its rural situation.—The shady grove of pines, the winding streams that shine between the hills, would all wonderfully pleafe an imagination fo fond of the beauties of our beneficent Creator, as is that of my dearest Fanny.—Some favourite lines I have read in our great poet, Mr. Pope, will best defcribe thefe lovely fcenes.
“ Here hills and vales, the woodland and the plain, w Here earth and water, Seem to strive again; u Here order, in variety we See,
“ And yet, though all things differ, all agree. u Here waving groves, a chequered fcene difplay, u And part admit, and part exclude the day; li As fome coy nymph her lover’s warm addrefs,
_ “Nor quite indulges, nor can quite fhpprefs.
“ Here, interfpers’d in lawns, and op’ning glades, u Thin trees arife which Ihun each other’s (hades: a Ev’n the wild heath, difplays her purple dyes,
“ And ’midst the defert, fruitful fields arife.”
Ah! when will my dear father, the , general, return from thofe hostile Ame rican
168	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
rican plains?—When will he once more visit thefe fcenes of peace and fecurity ? —Surely, my Fanny, of all trials, it is the most grievous to have a beloved •friend expoSed to Such imminent perils! —But be hush’d, my murmurs,—his king—his country claim his Services, and we must Submit to the Sad Separation.
You may depend on my writing, when I get to town to attend my dear little friend Patty on her approaching happineSs :*—•but I Sancy it will be deferred on account oS a Sew relations oS hers coming to the wedding, till their arrival a Sew weeks hence.--Heaven preServe you, and believe me,
Most truly yours,
EMMA MILLWOOD.
P. S. This enormous pacquet I fend by an honest farmer in our neighbour' hood. I think I should love you at fweet Oakley Lodge, better than I did even on Jld.pboard.~Do let nie try the experiment.
KP An
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	169
An interval now passed of fome months. The letters which were written in that fpace are not infer ted, containing nothing essential to the story.—A very material circumflance, however, happened to Colonel Melville, he having met with a wound in. one of the American engagements, which, though not mortal, had yet brought him into a very ill state of bodily health; on which account he got leave to return to England, being ad-vifed by his physician to try the Bath waters for his recovery.
After fpending a few days in London with his worthy friend, Sir Henry Bellmour, he arrived at Bath. He,had, on his immediate' return to England, difpatched a messenger to Earl Richley,s feat; hut was informed that family were still in Ireland; a circumstance Co-lonelMelvilledid not know, as fome letters had unfortunately been lost in their passage to America.	'
VOL. I.	II	It
I70	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
It may be imagined Colonel Me ville, on his arrival at,Bath, paid a vii (as the distance was little) to h old friend Mrs. Nelfon.—He faw tl lovely girl who reigned foie mistrefs his foul —he obferved a fecret langui in her appearance (notwithstanding tl joy her innocent heart, on his arrive testified), which made her, in his enra tured eyes, ten thoufand times mo: beautiful than ever.—He was astoniS ed at the improvements she had mat in thofe accomplishments for which si had masters ; he was struck with tl charms of her increasing stature, no in the full perfection of youthful bea ty. In truth, his virtuous refolutic was put to the feverest trial in perf vering in his fixed refolve, to abfe\ himfelf, as much as possible, from tl habitation of this dear, this dangeroi girl—dangerous, becaufe he thougl himSelf bound by every tie of honour 1
ful;
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	171
fulfil his engagements with Lady Charlotte, and to marry her at all events.
Such was the extreme honour of this worthy man, he made one visit, only, to Mrs. Nelfon, and feigned fome ex-cufe for abfenting himfelf ever after. In sine, he found it absolutely necessary for his peace that he should not expofe himfelf to the hazard of feeing the enchanting beauty of the young, and art-lefs Fanny ; and more efpecially, as he was now convinced, from the whole of her behaviour, in that one interview, that he was far from being indifferent to the dear girl.
He had written to Lord Richley, but as yet had not received an anfwer.— In this manner circumstances remained, when the following letter was written by one lady to another, who were both then at Bath.
<■>	t r 'F
1*1%	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
LETTER XIV.
MISS FREELOVE TO MISS CHILTON.
My dear Gatty,
*	Bath, May xji.
A.BSOLUTELY wounded, almost tc death!—for,
“ From every part a winged arrow flew.”
0	my dear, fuch a man have I feen: —Nay, a perfect dcmi-god !—a Nar-: i(liis!---a man of the moon!-—Such eyes !—Such a figure!—-his manner!-— O Heavens! never was your poor Sriend So Struck--So totally over head and ears in love.—
“ But with who?” you aSk.
Listen child, “ whilst I the tale unfold"
1	went last night to the ball, for the first time.—“ Ah! would 1 had Staid and Said my prayers at home!”
\ .	'	To
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	173
To a very brilliant affembly, as my evil stars would have it, to the new rooms I went.—My drefs enchanting :
■—pale pink, with silver flounces:— my jewels, fuch as drew the envy of every woman in the room:—my hair drest with fuch exquisite taste (for you know I always keep that moil ufeful of beings in the houfe, a French hair-dreffer, to whom I give fifty guineas a-year),—my hair, I repeat, sit to captivate a thoufand modern beaus, could however, I think, be Surpassed by no art whatever, except by the hcky hand I had yesterday at my toilette, in So beautifully mixing the lilly with the rofes I laid on my cheeks, that imagination, I should fuppoSe, could not, in its wildest flights of fancy, equal my appearance : thus charming—and wiping to charm, did I enter the ball-room, with an air noble, yet delicately languishing, and fweetly feminine.
H 3	You
174	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
You well know, my dear Gatty, nothing in this world can equal the ecstatic delight of failing up a crowded room, whilst you have the heartfelt rapture ' of hearing from the men—What a sine creature!—a charming girl!—who is she ?—what is she ?—-where did she come from ?„
All this, and much more, was faid, believe me.—In short, a general buzz ran through the whole ajjembly; when I, perfectly unmoved, fwam up the room, and took my feat.—In a moment I had the immenSe Satisfaction of hearing it announced, in pretty loud whifpers, that I was Mifs Freelove, the great hefrefs, niece to Sir Thomas Freelove.
I was afked to dance by Lord D-----;
but this I refufed, intending not to expend all my stock of charms at once ; but to manage them wifely : I chofe to Sit still, and reconnoitre the male part of the company.
Whilst
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	IJjy
Whilst my eyes were glancing over a few insipid fellows, who were gazing as much at my jewels as my face,— what should enter the room but the finest figure in nature !—A colonel, an* pleafe ye,—drest in the most bewitching manner of military elegance.—His perfon,—his fine features,—eyes and hair—uncommonly attractive !—Heavens ! what an air of manly dignity throughout his whole form !—and yet what fweetnefs !—He appeared, however, Sar from being in a state of health ! a melancholy too was Spread over his fine countenance, which gave him in-expreshble charms :—his right arm hung in a Sash, which gave me to imagine he had most probably been lately wounded, and returned from America.
You know, my dear, I am particu* larly partial to an officer in the army. —In short, who can withstand a Scarlet coat, with all its enchanting appendages ?—Judge, then, iS Such a figure as H4	I have
Jj6	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
I have deScribed, and of my favourite profejjlon was to be beheld with indifference.-—In a word, I at once yielded up to the blind deity, who at that moment transfixed his very sharpeSI arrow in the centre of my bofom.—I looked at Colonel Melville (for that is his name, I find)—I sighed—I foftly exclaimed in my heart, “ Thou art the man!”—Again I sighed, and looked : ——when he, finding a vacant feat just by me, stung himfelf into it, with a care-lefs languor in his air, which was wholly irresistible :—but to my astonishment (would you believe it, child ?) he hardly vouchsafed me a lookthough I put a thoufand little arts in practice, which you and I Gatty, are acquainted with.—I adjusted my tucker—1 moved my bracelet, to shew my well turned arm .----Still the handSome inSenflble (though in a ball-room) Sat with his eyes fixed on the ground, as if lost in thought.—“ Is this man blind ?” thought
T ___
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	177
I.—At length I dropped my fan. This manoeuvre will do certainly, I concluded: —but, alas ! he either did not, or would not See this San, though almost at his feet! for he, a moment after, roSe and walked to a gentleman at Some little distance. In short, my dear, I really felt mySelf nettled.-—What an opportunity had I given him of preSenting me with this uSeful part of my dreSs! He had Sat by me Sor the Space of five minutes, with just the Same cold com-poSure as he would by his great grandmother.—Intolerable this, you must allow. I was dying to know if he was married or single.
The company being much engaged in dancing, I Sauntered into the card-room, where the first object I Saw was my gentleman.—“ Nov/ (thought I) my last . and grand effort must be made to excite his attention/,—You know, child,
I am a perfect misixeSs in the art of faming gracefullyan empty Seat that V H 5	moment
178	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
moment preSented itSelf almost clofe to where he was standing.—-This opportunity was not to be overlooked.—I flung myfelf into the feat with a tottering languid air,5 and foftly exclaiming,
Oh Heavens S—the excessve—the heat-—O, I faint!—On faying which, I clofed my eyes, and fell back in the prettiefl fit, child, you ever beheld.
I heard, on my Soft exclamation, for I did not chufe to open my eyes, a violent clutter and fust of all around me.—In a moment I had twenty Smelling-bottles applied to my nostrils,— and was almost Suffocated with eau de luce—Spirits of hartshorn, Sec. for you may easily conceive the fainting of fuch a woman in figure as myfelf made no Small bustle .—At length I thought proper to breathe a gentle sigh,-—to extend my arms, and at last to open my languid eyes.—But, Heavens! what was my tranSport, on finding the bewitching Colonel himSelf to be the first in
assisting
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	179
assisting me, and prefenting me, on my returning to life, with a glafs of cold water*!
“ Drink this, pray, Madam (Said the enchanting man, with a tone oS voice inexpressibly Soft); how do you?—are you better?”
“ You are very good, Sir (Said I, foftly lifting up my eyes, and fixing them on his), I—am better—the excess five heat—quite overcame me—I must retire—I must have my chair called.” —I looked round me.
“ Will you give me leave, Madam (Said the charming bellow), to attend you to your chair.”
Ha, ha (thought I), have I got you at laft ?
I attempted to rife—but here was So weak, as you will SuppoSe, from my late
* The excessive vanity' of Mifs Freelove, made her construe the common civility of Colonel Melville into a particular attention to her: an idea which never entered his head.
diSorder,
180	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
disiorder, I could hardly Siand without help—I tottered—and Seemed ready to fall.—His arm was immediately offered with a most graceful bow.—I accepted it to lean on.—Oh, Gatty, what was then my pride !—my pleafure!— Thus fupported, I faintly walked, resting on the arm of the finest young fellow in the univerfe, to my chair,—into which he put me;—and bowing with inimitable grace, wished me a goodnight.—I thought he sighed,—but am not certain.
I am absolutely dying for another in-terview.--He must—he shall be mine* —Can my perfon be overlooked—can my fortune be defpifed ?—Imposhble ! —No—no—Gatty,—I have no fears, of that kind :—and if I do; not give you occasion to congratulate me as Mrs... Melville in one poor month, why I will give you leave, child, to make me eat and drink my whole Stock of coSme-tics, May-dews, and bloom-waters.—-
To
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I St
To be Sure, I could wish this charming fellow had a title—there is Something So pretty in the Sound oS my lady—'Well 1 one cannot have every thing.—ASter all, if he should be a married man!— But he will do;, even then, to flirt with*
-—No matter for the frowns of a jealous wiSe.—I need not explain 'myfelf farther to you, whoSe Sentiments on- the fubject of amouv and gallantry, are pretty much the Same with thoSe of Your affectionate
L. RREELOVE*
'”r 1 % LETTER XV.
THE SAME TO' THE SAMEL
Bath, May. to.
' C^iONGRATULATE me, my dear Gatty 1
“ What! has a wedding,” you cry,
“ already taken place V
No.
I $2	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
No, child:—too early days yet to talk of that;—but, however, yoti may with me rejoice, that every thing is in the happiest train imaginable for Such an event taking place*
Would you believe it, child ? I am now under the fame roof with Colonel ' Melville.
“ How is this ?” you Say.
Have patience, and I will tell you.
I most fortunately heard where he lodged, which it was no difficult matter to diScover, as I had my emissaries -• at work. A thought instantly occurred, how mighty clever it would be to get under the Same roof with himSelS. In that cafe, you know, my dear, a thoufand little opportunities might arife of Seeing him—and tete-a-tetes. in-expreshbly delightful, I would Set my wits to work to procure.
No Sooner, then, had I heard that Colonel Melville lodged in an extreme handSOme houSe (and no other lodger in
it)
A LESSON FOR LOVERS*	183
it) near the Circus, than I instantly began to find a number of faults with my apartments. The fun was intolerably hot, my windows admitting too much of its rays my crimSon bed oS damaSk was too warm for the SeaSon :—the street was noify:—in short, I picked a thoufand faults with my situation. I Sent for the mistrefs of the houfe, mentioned the particulars of my 'complaints* and told her I could bear with the inconveniences no longer.—The poor woman, to fay the truth, expressed her desire of doing every thing to accommodate me agreeably :—but I told her that was out of her power, for I difliked the Situation oS her houSe, and that I was determined to leave it. She gave me a look of SurpriSe and concern, and left the room. So here I ‘ am, child, writing in the very next a-partment to that of Colonel Melville* I have, however, not yet been able to put any of my stratagems into execution,
184	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
tion, as it was only yesterday in the evening I arrived here 5 and this morning he is gone out to take an airing.— I am fixedly reSolved he shall not efcape me :—nay, it is imposhble.
Since my last letter, I have been lucky enough in meeting him in public. I went a few nights since to the play, where the first perfon I faw, in the fame box, was my handSome Colonel: but, to my furprife, he appeared not to recollect me.—Or, perhaps, what is indeed more probable, he might, Srom motives of diffidence, and fear oS offends ing, forbear Speaking L However that may be, I was determined to avail myfelf oS the opportunity that offered.— He looked, if possible, more enchant-ingly than at the ball.
I Sat Some time considering how I Should accost him; when perceiving he hacl a play-bill in his hand (obServe
* How ealily does vanity reconcile every thing to its own desires.!
I Cat
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	IS h
I fat very near him) I put 6n one of my most bewitching looks, and leaning gently forward!, faid, in a Soft voice,— “ May I beg the favour, Sir, of looking for one moment at the play-bill you have in your hand ?---'There is one performer whole name I should be glad to know.„
“ Most willingly, Madam,„ replied he, bowing,—but didl not still Seem to recollect he -had ever Seen me before.
On my returning the bill,—“ I am much obliged to you, Sir,„ Slid I.— “ Indeed (affecting a- little stutter) I have many-^d-many thanks to return on . another occasion/,
“ Madafn!’, returned he, Somewhat SurpriSed.	- -
“ Your obliging care oS me,” re-plied I, “ in my fainting-fit the other 'night at the ball, delerves my zttmofl thanks .„
“ I should have been wanting, Madam, in humanity,', anSwered he, “ not
to
186	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
to have assisted you, or any lady in the like distrefs.„
. I did not much like, my dear, his any lady, as it was putting me upon a general footing.—However, in the courfe of the evening, I think I pretty well attracted his notice,—and may venture to affirm my conquest is certain. The moment the play was over, though there was to be an entertainment after it, he got up, and bowing, wished me a good-night.
“ I think,„ faid I, yawning, “ I begin myfelf to be tired.—-I shall go home .—the entertainment is but stupid, I fancy.„
I flung on my cloak—and as he then too was departing, he offered me his hand to lead me out. Imagine my rapture to be a fecond time led out in public by this charming fellow, the eyes of the whole houfe upon us!—all Bath, most certainly, will give me to him before to-morrow night.
“ Whofe
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	187
“ Whofe fervant, Madam, shall I call?„ faid the too amiable man, who, I think, more than once had Squeezed my hand as he led me to my chair.
What! thought I, you would be glad to know my name, I fuppofe.— “ Mifs Freelove’s fervant,” faid I aloud. So that he was now acquainted with my name, at least.
I stung myfelf into my chair with all
the sine airs of a Lady S---,and fweet-
ly fmiling, wished him a good-night.
I must here break off,being this instant going to the Pump-room with a large party,
Wedtiefday morning.
'Every thing is en-train—just as I could .wish* Thrice have I [accidentally on purpofe) met my gentleman on the stairs.—A profound bow from him the first time.—“ How do you, Sir? (faid I, quite in the familiar style) I am your near neighbour—(pointing to my apartment!
188	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
ment)—I extremely like this part oS Bath, and moved my lodgings accordingly.’,
To be fure, child, fome Smart fellows would have made me a few pretty compliments on this occasion, as how happy they were in having fuch a Lady as MiSs Freelove in the Same houSe3 Scc.—but the Colonel was Struck dumb —absolutely dumb—Such an effect had my fudden prefence on his Spirits.
The next day I met him again, as ii by accident—he had a piece of music paper in his hand.
“ Are you musical, Sir?” Said I.
“ A little, Madam,” returned he.
“ I am immoderately So,', replied L “ I have often (carelefsly) a little craft. in my apartments, and I intend Soon tc have a famous singer who is here :—J shall have a Small party to hear him : and, if it is agreeable to you, Shall be glad of your company, as you are mu licah„
He
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	189
He bowed profoundly" low:—and away ran I to my apartment. Some Squeamish prudes, I fuppofe, would have called hie over forward,—and that I had been making advances to the Colonel ;—but you know, child, a woman of fashion, as I am, is above all vulgar forms and starched ceremonies.
The next day, I met my handfome Melville. Mine he foon will be to all intents and purpofes, I was running up stairs, just come from the Pump-room, when, as I fay, I met the lovely fellow coming down.
Now, thought I, you shall not efcape me.—At that moment I contrived to strike my flipper against the stairs— and down I fell—and violently exclaimed, “O! I have broke my ankle!—O my ankle!—ah, thefe nasty French ■ heels !„—I had no need to fay more, for, like winged lightning, my handfome fellow stew down five steps at once; and tenderly endeavouring to
raife
I90	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
raife me up/4 Are you hurt, Madam?” faid he, in a tone of voice foft as an angel’s.
“ I have certainly,” faid I, “ broke my ankle.—O, I am in exquisite torture !”
“ Let a furgeon be fent for„ faid he.
Kind, was this not ?
I tried to help myfelf with his ashst-ance from the ground. “ I will hope the best,” faid I, as I had Substantial rea-fons why I did not chufe an experienced furgeon should examine my foot—being unhurt.—“ Perhaps it may be, (rubbing my ankle and foot, whilst I had contrived my flipper should drop off) perhaps it may be only a violent bruife.—I will try to stand.-—Shall I beg the favour of your arm ?—Surely, Co-' lonel, you was born for my fupportV— I laid a particular emphafts on that last word. “ If you can walk,„ faid he, “ it may be better for your Sprain.-—
Lean
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I9I
Lean—lean, pray, Madam, your whole
weight on me.”
I did, I affure you, Gatty ; and that too pretty clofely.—Ah, my dear, what would Billy Dimple, and Captain Saunter, and half a hundred more of my dying enamoratos,. have given to have been So near me as was then Colonel Melville!
At length, with extreme pain, wry faces, and miSerably hobbling, I got to the top of the stair-caSe; when, observing his dining-room door, which was cloSe to me, to stand wide open, a clever thought struck me.
“ Oh !„ Said I, “ I can walk no further—I cannot.„
“ Will you do me the honour,” Said my Supporter, “ to rest a moment in my dining-room?—there is an eaSy chair."
Just what I aimed at, Gatty.—My apartments, I should here Say, were
about
3 p2	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
about ten Steps farther in the fame paS-fage.
“ I thank you, Sir, you are very good. I will hobble to that fopha if I can.”
At length, after much Teeming difficulty, I was pleasingly stated in Colonel Melville’s lodgings.-------I looked
round, and immediately Spied a harp-sicord, a violincello, and other tnush cal instruments.
“ O, I find you are a proficient, Sir.”
He Smiled, but Said, no.
I begged, whilst I was resting my foot, he would oblige me with the found of his harpsichord. He fat down to it, and played, with the greatest taste and elegance, a delightful concerto.
My Gcd! thought I, what a man is this !
A profusion of- compliments followed on my side, for his inimitable performance. My fervant then being rang for, I, with affected difficulty, got
to
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
to my own dining-room, to which very politely the most amiable of men attended me.
In the evening I received a genteel enquiry how my ancle did.
Even as my heart could wish, nry dear Gatty, does this affair gradually proceed.—Expect to receive foon a wedding favour, accompanied with bride cake.
I intend, in a few days, to have fome Select hands for a Small concert, to which the Colonel, most certainly, will be invited. Being not quite recovered from my Sail, I am inventing an elegant difhabille for the occasion : a most enchanting dreSs, believe me. A matter oS fuch importance is a Sufficient ex-euSe for my abrupt conclusion.
Ever yours,
K. FREELOVE* -
Vol. i.	I - LET-
194 ~A LESS0N F0R lovers, LETTER XVI.
COLONEL MELVILLE, TO SIR HE^NRY . .	"	BELLMOUR..
My dear friend,
Bath, May 14.
X HOUGH pressed in time, having Some difpatches to fend this evening for America, yet your kind desire o begging me to write three lines con cerning my health, must be complied with. My wound is better—but alas! my bodily health far—Sar fron well. A low fever hangs on my fpi rits, and preys upon me continually But it cannot be otherwife, torn, a: my heart is, between the Struggles o: honour and gratitude for the Richie} family, still in Ireland!, and for the tenderest affect ion of the lovely Fanny
Y01
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	jgh
You aSk me in your last letter * when I faw her ? Alas! my friend, I have inflicted an eternal banishment on myfelf from all my foul holds dear, tho’ only five miles afunder.—I will not—• cannot fee her.
-----a Magic is in her eye.”—
u She is. in gracious mind", in manner,
“ And in perfon, the perfect pattern a Of all female beauty.”
% am endeavouring to divert my mind from thinking on this too dear, too dangerous maid, by the various little trifling amufements of this idle place ; —but alas! alas! foe reigns triumphant,
u Fills every fenfe, u And pants in every vein.”
If a man in my situation of mind, could be diverted at objects about him, Bath certainly abounds with more characters to excite the riftble faculty than any other place whatever.—We have at prefent a choice fet of characters of
* This letter appears not.
I 2	‘ all
396	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
all kinds.—Coquets in abundance.—In the houfe I am in there lodges, at this time, the most finijhed character of that order I have ever met with.-—Never did I behold fo vain, fo pert, fo affected a thing.—Her name is Freelove, a woman of fortune, I fancy :—but I know not what to think of her.—I aiti, however, civil to her, as I lodge in the fame houfe, but nothing farther.—On my word, she is most marvellousiy com-plaifant to your friend :—but, alas ! “ vain are all her fond endeavours*”— My heart is irrevocably engaged.—Ah! would I could fay my hand were to go with it! I fancy it will not be long before Ladv Charlotte returns.
*/
You tell me in your last letter she has had two or three very considerable offers of marriage, but that she has re-SuSed them Sor—ah Bellmour! I will . endeavour to do her jujlice.
And So, at last, your pretty cousin Patty has made you acknowledge you
are
A LESSON EOR LOVERS.	197
are not proof against the powerful eye of beauty. I know no man fo likely to be happy in the married state as yourfelf; delighting, as you do in every domestic virtue.—You, my Bellmour, will have the woman of your choice— and both will be, as my favourite Poet Thomfon beautifully exprefles it,
“ Each, to each a dearer Self.”—
Your kind endeavour to divert me, in the midstofallmy prefent gloom andlow Spirits, by fending me a receipt to cure love, I affure you did not only excite my risible mnfcles into a Smile, but, in fact, I laughed heartily. I give you leave to laugh, in your turn, at my anfwer, which I have attempted in verst. But before I tranfcribe this anfwer of mine, I must repeat your never-failing receipt, which fays, “ Take eight ounces of Confuted at ion, half that quantity of Indifference, ten grains of Ingratitude, six Scruples oS Patience, too good I 3	handfuls
I98	A LESSON FOR LOVERS. '
handfuls of Employment, four months Abfence, and add as much Difcretion as you pleafe : thefe boil together without intermission, till a third part be con fumed :—cool it with a few Slights: fpread it on the thoughts of your mi stress's Imperfections, and apply the plaister lukewarm to your heart, where it is to remain till it drops off of itfelf. If this fails, you tell me my cafe is deSperate.”
This is your recipe, and here follows my anfwer.
Oh! kind physician, thy advice will prove u But little Service to thy friend in love.
Whene’er Confederation I apply, u New beauties in my Fanny I defcrv,
“■ To all perfections (he has Such pretence,
“ ns warm'-; my foul from cold Indifference. u Ingratitude's a guilt fhe does not know ;
“ She thanks the Heaven’s for blessings they bestow : u She other obligations never knew,
“ For all the earth affords is but her due. u shd Patience to the wretch upon the wheel,
“ He knows no torments like the pangs I feel.
“ Employment hath my peace of mind destroyed, u For ’tis on her niy thoughts are all employed.
« To
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I99
To little passions Abfence gives a cure,
“ To great ones adds, and makes them to endure,. u For Imperfections would you Search my fair,
“ Find Spots on ermin, catch the ambient air. u Teach me the art to be no more her Have, a And write thy (kill upon the restlefs wave.
“ Ail thele you muss; perform ’ere you can find u Fault in her perSpn, blemifh in her mind.
“ Thy ikill is vain, nor can my pain remove:
“ Too true, alas!—there is no care for love.”
Adieu, my dear Harry, it it now high time to conclude. Believe me,
most faithfully yours,
CHARLES MELVILLE.
LETTER XVII.
MISS FREELOVE, TO MISS CLIFTON.
TIT T	Stithy IMfly 20*
W E go on (meaning the dear Colonel and myfelf, child) as fwimmingly as heart could wish:—in short the affair is in great forwardnefs :—he looks, and ftghs, but has as yet made no direcl .
I 4	declaration
200	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
declaration of his pafsion :—I expect it however daily, nay hourly.—He plays with my lap-dog :—has visited, on invitation, my tea-table more than once : —has been prefent at my little concert—and appeared wholly ravished at the part I bore in it. There is, as I . think, a timidity, however, about the charming fellow, for which I cannot account; considering that I behave to him with all the French freedom imaginable. I am going to the play to-night; raid intend to give him fuch an invitation to be my con duel or, that it will be im-poshble for him to resist it.—I am interrupted—Milliners and mantua-mak-ers !—I come—I come.
# -*■ * *******
Monday evening.
I HAVE just, my dear friend, heard a most difagr£eable piece of news—indeed it has almost petrified me with " aStonishment.—Can it be?—Impossible !
“ What?”
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	201
“ What ?’*—you ash.
Why, child, take all at once the horrid Sentence.—Colonel Melville, it Seems, is engaged, and shortly to be married to Lady Charlotte Richley.—DeuSe take her for me.—She is amasingly hand-fome I understand—her fortune im-menfe, being the only child of Earl Richley. This most dreadSul intelligence has almost deprived me of my reaSon :—I thought I should have died on the Spot, when the tidings were first communicated.—It is an abfolute fact.
MiSs Granger, who lives in the very neighbourhood oS this detestable Lady Charlotte, who at prefent it Seems is in Ireland, Lucy Granger, I repeat, lives within a mile of Lore! Richley s Seat in England.—and tells me this horrid match has long been determined/ on. Her manner oS revealing it, indeed, was So innocent and natural, I have not a doubt of the truth of this provoking affair. She accidentally had 15-	a glimpfe
2-02,	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
a glimpfe of the. divine fellow as she came to me this morning.—On her entering my apartment, “ Good God,” Laid she, “ what! is not Colonel Mel-•“ ville married yet ?—I SuppoSe by his “ being alone in his carriage at the door “ the affair is not yet over.”
“ Why, no,„ Said I, really taking the matter to myfelf; “ no-—we are not one yet—all in good time.—I don’t know how foon (looking down) I really dont know how fan it may be —perhaps in about a month.—I shall not buy my cloaths still I get back to town.—My jewels and equipage, you know, will loon be procured.—So you have, MiSs Granger,” continued I, “ heard of our affair?—I may'venture to Say it will foon be concluded.’,
Here I looked accidently at MiSs Granger, who to my astonishment was Standing; aghast.
But not to dwell on this shocking Subject,—Suffice it to Say, she at length
told
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	203
told me the whole horrid tale.;—In short, a fpeedy marriage, if not timely prevented, mujl, I find, take place.
1 concealed my tormenting chagrin, as much as I could from Lucy, as it world, you know, have made a fine fubject, for diversion.1-—I affected to fay, a lucky thought was it not ? that I Sup-pofed-she had meant Colonel Benfon, (an officer in the guards) who, you know, has long; had a tendre for me.
O how I rave !—-Curfecl—curfed fate ! Gatty, I am -absolutely distracted. —Think for me—contrive—Set all your wits to work, ho-w this formidable match may be prevented.—But thou art a Stupid poor Soul!—no invention in the world!—I begin to have a Scheme rumbling in my brain, which I thank Heaven is pretty Sail oS Inventions ‘ m take a turn in my anti-chamber, and Summon a hundred little miSchiev-ous Sylphs to my aid.
* ****** * # # *
I have
204	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
I have it, Gatty, I have it in this little plotting heart of mine :—it will do. ---Melville,—the enchanting Melville Shall be mine at last; and that too without making ufe of any of the pretty Italian-methods of poifoned gloves, or other cu-.rious devices, to rid me of my too formidable rival.—Now, Gatty, is that dull head of thine Set to work.—Perhaps you will not guefs my innocent stratagem for ten thoufand years.— Thou art, child, amazingly backward in thefe matters.—-Well! I will take pity on thee.
You know there are Such things in the world as newSpapers.—I will Send a certain paragraph to a friend I have in London, to be inSerted in Some of the London papers,—two of which I constantly take in.—Now do you understand? now do you begin to comprehend me ? What that important paragraph will be, you shall know m my next,
I must
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	20$
I must abruptly conclude this letter, as not a day, nay an hour, is to be lost.
>—You must allow, my dear friend, my cafe is singularly pitiable.-—Heavens ! when I was, as I fondly imagined, on the very eve of happinefs,—then— then to have my cup dashed with gall t —O infupportable !-—Some girls would instantly have recourse to a gentle dofe of Laitdanum on fuch an occasion—but I will firft try my innocent device—I must now fet about it—fo can only add, that I am, at prefent,
Your much chagrined,
and difappointed friend,
L. FREELOVE,
LETTER XVIII.
THE SAME TO THE SAME..
%
J	Bath,.May 3a.
OY—joy—my Gatty !—never was a fcheme fo well contrived, or fo happily executed, as the one—the impor-
20si	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
tant one I have to relate. I have done her business pretty effectually, I fancy t her Ladyjhip, at least, will never be Mrs.. Melville.—Again I have him at my beck, child.-—But now for particulars.
I Sent" my paragraph to London, and by the next post day, down came the newfpapers under a cover to your then half broken hearted friend.—I found wliat I desired inferted, in the fullest manner, to my heart’s content. My eye ran over it with even rapture, asT doubted not the very heft effects would stow from it. I put thefe papers carefully by, and in the afternoon wrote a polite card to my gentleman to inform him, that I had just received fome new pieces of music from London, (which I really had) and! that I should be glad if he would fendl his violincello to my apartment, and come himfelf to try them over.—-I concluded with hoping he would come to tea. At length, agreeable to my request, he came.—I
(	was
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	2.0J
was in hopes to have had him all to myfelf, but one of thofe infipid beings came in, called a good kind of young woman, a Mifs Fennymore:—• a fort of girl that would do well enough, as Lady Townly fays, “ for a west afternoon in the country-;” but in this dear place of . gaiety and dissipation, your gOod girls are dreadful. However,, she came.
“ Sit down, child,„ faid I, which she did, and I heard no more of her than any other inanimate piece of /?///-life in the room.—But now for my Scheme of Schemes,
When we were in the midst of tea,
, *—Melville sitting opposite, fo that he could not avoid my Scrutinizing eye, —“ Heavens !„ Said I, “ Colonel, I beg ten thouSand pardons, for not Sencl-. ing you last night’s papers.—Here they are,„—(routing them Srom Some books in the window, and taking one in my hand)—“ let me See—let me See,”—
continued
2o8	a LESSON FOR LOVERS.-
continued L looking them over,—“ No news from America worth a farthing.
■—But here is- a wedding I fee.—So— fo”—muttered I, “ fo Lady Charlotte is married at last..—Upon my word !— I believe there never was fo fine a woman in Ireland before, handfome as the Irijh are faid to be."
There I stopped to reconnoitre my' gentleman.—Obferve,Ichofe this fcene to pafs at the tea-table, that he should not efcape my enquiring eye.
“ Colonel, won’t you drink another dish?„ ashed I, fixing my eyes on his; when oh ! Gatty, would you believe it, the fine fellow, who had fat before carelefs, languishing, and inattentive-, was roufed by the broken fentences I had muttered.
“ A wedding !—Ireland !—Lady Charlotte !—what—what—is that, Madam?,7 faid he visibly fluttered.
Ah—thought I—is it then foP
“ You
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	209
“ You was reading Something about Ireland, Madam :—I beg to hear it.”
I now, Gatty, with a most audible voice, and every grace of elocution, read as follows:
“ On Friday last was married in Ireland, at the feat of the Right Hon. Earl Richley, near Dublin, Sir Thomas Del-‘ wyn, Bart, to his Lordship’s only daughter and heirefs, Lady Charlotte Richley, a lady of great beauty, fortune, and every accomplishment that can adorn her fex. After the ceremony, the new married pair fet out for the feat of Sir Thomas, near Waterford, attended by a great retinue.”
I now looked up full in Melville’s face, when, Heaven's ! never did I fee fuch evident marks of perturbation:—he was in an universal tremor.—His counte-‘ nance, from a glowing red, now turned pale—then again red :—he henfd,—ho took out his handkerchief—he cough’d, -—-and all this was done to hide his
diforder*,
2 10	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
diforder*. WhilSt I, all fweetly innocent, ashed, “ what is the matter, Sir, are you ill ?„—I was just going to be faivcy enough to offer my bottle of falts ;—but, to my agreeable furprife; I faw no marks of fainting in the hand-fomest face in the world :—no: fo far from it, his eyes feemed re-animated, as if with fome Sudden joy :—his cheeks glowed with beauty :—and throughout his whole Srame, there appeared an air
The reader will doubtlefs wonder that the Co-1 lone! Ihould fhev/ fuch evident marks, of confufion -at the marriage of a lady for whom he was perfectly indifferent; but the fact was this: his perturbation arofe from the hidden rapture which had feized liis heart, on the poffibility he could now be united to his-adcred Fanny.—Whoever has loved as the Colonel loved, will eafily account for his feelings at this moment. So rapid are the ideas of lovers, and So apt are they to believe what they wijfi, that at once he implicitly believed the paragraph juft recited to be all gojhel. He had heard, to corroborate his belief, that Lady Charlotte had had offers of marriage made to her, and for a long time had received no intelligence, from Ireland..
of
A LESSON'FOR LOVERS.	21 I
of ineffable fatisfaction. I repeat with agreeable furprife I faw this: for at once it evidently appeared to me, that the fudden flujh of pleafure which his every feature exhibited, Sprang from the hope that, now being rid oS his Iriflo engagement, he might possibly obtain one day the favour of Mifs Freelove7s hand.—I Saw the whole affair at once.—Well—well, my adored Melville, rest contented—my heart-, my fortune, and perfon are entirely, I promiSe you, at your command. But to proceed.
He now began to laugh and chat on a number oS enlivening Subjects : indeed I had never before feen him in fuch Spirits.—Ah, thought I to my Self, how much, poor Lady Charlotte, are you deceived in this man !—No man, my Gatty, if he had loved a woman* could in the hour of hearing she had given her hand to another, have betrayed fuch; fecret fatisfaction. In
fact,.
212	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
fact, I have nothing to do but to bring matters to a conclusion as Soon as poS-sible, left he should hear the Sair lady in Ireland Still continues a Spinster. But even then, child, I have Sound out the delicious Secret that he loves not Lady Charlotte.—I have likewiSe discovered, from a thouSand glances, sighs, Sec* that he is not a little enamoured with your Stir friend Kitty.—I beg you will Send patterns of Silks as Soon as posiible. -—I Shall be married in white and sib ver.—But I have not half done with my plot of yesterday.
As my good genius would have it, the most corroborating circumstance happened imaginable.
I think you know my old anni* De~ ^ borah O'Hara, lives in Dublin ; and that about once a-year, the good lady takes it into her head to write to me. In short yesterday I received this annual letter ; and most luckily just after we had finished reading the newSpaper.
On
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	2 I g
On taking the letter front the fervant, 1 faid, “ I shall now have fome account of this sine wedding, I fuppofe, as thefe old maiden-ladies love to talk about weddings as well as we-young ones.—Why, here's a letter as long a'$ my arm.—Good old foul!„
I looked it over, whilst my fertile brain was at work.'—At length I had the pleafure of hearing the Colonel ash, (just what I wanted) “ Have you, Mifs Freelove, any farther account of this wedding ?”
“ O yes !” anfwered I.—“ Upon-my word it was a most fplendid affair.—• Shall I read what my aunt fays ?„
“ If you pleafe, Madam, I am all attention.’,
So I hope, thought I,---and accord-v . ingly very fluently (nothing like an in" ventive brain, child) read as follows, after having mentioned the parties names.
“ The
214	A LESSON FOR LOVERS*
“ The procession, for fo I may call “ it, was truly elegant. Six carnages, “ the attendants with white and silver “ favours, made no Small show. Such “ a wedding has not been here Sor “ many years. I had a glimpSe oS the “ bride, who appears to be a very love-“ ly woman.—The bridegroom too, u appeared young and handSome.— “ The bride-maids, two young ladies “ oS quality, were most elegantly drest. “ —Earl Richley (a very reSpectable “ character) looked as happy as any of “ them on this joySul occasion,—I was “ much pleaSed with a wedding which “ looked fo much like thofe I remem-“ ber in former days, when I was a “ young woman; when open houSe “ was kept on thefe occasions, and fa-“ milies for many miles invited. The “ parties then had no occasion to fktdk “ into Scotland. I hope, my dear “ niece,, I shall live fo fee you married,
“ ■—Tell
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	21$
« „Tell me if you are like foon to be “ a bride.’,
“ Well,„ faid I, “ Colonel, was not this an extraordinary wedding ?„
“ Yes, indeed,„ replied he, with an air of the most perfect Satisfaction.
Thus, my dear friend, have I, with very little trouble, you fee, brought matters almost to the point I wish :—■ the Colonel is on the eve of declaring himfelf;—I shall not long protract his happinefs ;—-the day of days will foon be appointed; the ceremony be over ;—and away we fly to dear London, to partake of its enchanting pleaSures. At prefent, as Lady Wijhfort fays in the Way of the W orld) I have fuch an oglio of affair^ on my hands, that you cannot, in reafon, expect me to fcribble more now ; liut be assured, that in all situations, I shall ever remain,
Your very affectionate friend,
K. FREELOVE.
L E T-
216	a LESSON FOR LOVERS'.
LETTER XIX.
COLONEL MELVILLE TO SIR HENRY BELLMOUR.
LBath, Twelve at night, May 30.
ET no man defpair, my dear Harry !—I have news to impart that will astonish you above expreshon.—At length the cloud that hung over me is at once difpelled :—the fetters that Seemed by the inevitable hand oS Sate, to be preparing for me, are now burst in funder, and Fanny,—the enchanting Fanny, I may, and foon, I hope, shall call my own.
O Bellmour! I am abfolutely wild with joy.—What a turn has happened in my favour, when I was ‘even lost to hope! Heaven—that wonder-working power.
N	“ Prithee,„
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	217
“ Prithee,’, you cry, “ ceafe your raptures, Charles, and tell me what is this mighty caufe of joy ?„
Well then—in one word, Lady Charlotte Richley has given her hand in marriage to an Irish Baronet:—the particulars I have had at large. In fact,
I heart! a letter read from Dublin with a circumstantial account of the whole affair; besides having feen it in the public papers.—Guefs my astonishment !—may happinefs attend her!
Providence orders all for the best, for I find, by my feelings (or rather not feeling) on this occasion, that I never could have loved her as I ought.—An uni-verfal trepidation Seized me, most certainly, on my first hearing this interesting affair;—but it was the rapturous idea of the lovely girl at West-Green, that silled my Soul with transport, in the possibility—nay, probability, that I now most shonourably may make her mine.
vol. i,	K	As
218	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
As there is no impediment now to bar our bliSsful union, to-morrow, by dawn of day, I shall fet out for Mrs. Nelfon’s, and lay my heart—my hand and fortune at the feet of the divine Fanny Sidney.—O Bellmour! think of my extacy !—shall I then live to call her mine ? yes, mine, by the most Stored of all ties, the marriage-band.
Lord Richley, I imagine, and doubt not, has written me an account of this alteration in his family, but many accidents may have prevented my receiving it. I wrote immediately on my arrival in England, which however poffibly, from fome mifchance, his Lord-ship may not yet have received.
It is now midnight, but though it is only this evening I heard this most interesting matter, I could not go to reft till I had cliSpatched a Sew lines to my Bellmour.—To reft, do I Say?—
y No; Fanny has murdefd deep.”
Hlis
A LESSON FOR LOVERS. .	219
’Tis well if I do not commit fome extravagant folly through my excels of tranfport.—To give you an instance :
I was this evening at the coffee-houSe, when a gentleman aSked me how old I thought General Washing-ton, the American commander might be? my thoughts being wholly taken up with Fanny, I anfwered, about eighteen, I fancy.—He stared with astonishment.
“ But eighteen !„ cried he, “ a wonder of his age !„
Another aSked me if I thought there would be a junction of the two fleets ? and I immediately replied,—eyes Soft, yet piercing.
In short, I have abfolutely lost the ufe of my reafon ; I can think and talk of nothing but my beloved girl.
Rejoice with me, my faithful friend: but you are now a lover yourfelf, therein 2	fore,
220	. A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
fore, in fome degree, can judge of the prefent Supreme delight oS
Your happy and asseffionate,
MELVILLE.
Prithee write, but doifst torment me with thy croakings, as, “ you can hardly think my news possible !„—or, “ that it never can be So,’, Sec. Sec. It is, my Bellmour, an undoubtedfad,—I remember, in one oS your letters, you mentioned her Ladyship having had Several offers oS marriage.
$0“ Colonel Melville, as Soon as post fible, flew on the wings oS love to the - charming MiSs Sidney, whom he had fo long and pasiionately adored.—He at once made a declaration oS his Sentiments, and an offer of his hand and heart.—-It is needleSs to Say with what astonishment, or with what joy the lovely girl received this pleasing confession :—it indeed cannot be deScribed.
Thofe
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	221
Thofe few only who have been in the fame delicate circumstances with her-felf, can judge her feelings.—She had, indeed, to fay the truth, long and tenderly loved Colonel Melville.—Destitute as she was of the , gifts of fortune, dependant as she was on the bounty of her patron, her young heart, simple, and till then untouched, yielded itfelf a fpotlefs victim to all-powerful love.— The noble fuccour Colonel Melville had given to this unfortunate maid, in the hour of her bitterest distress, when befet with a rude band of declared enemies, her father lying dead before her, and mifery in every shape before her eyes ; his generous pity, his tender cares, and his exalted, generosity, had all fo far combined, as to render him as dear to herfelf, as fie was to this most excellent man. From the extreme hopeleffhefs of her passion, her health was visibly impaired. Mrs. Nelfon, with the tender anxiety oS a fond pate 3	rent*
22 2	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
rent, enquired her malady, hut was only anfwered that she was well—-quite well.
Most justly might thefe beautiful lines of Shakcfpeare be applied to the poor Fanny.
She never told her love :
U But let Concealment, like a worm i’th’ bud, u Feed on her damaik cheek. u She pin’d in thought; and with a green, u And yellow melancholy, u She fat like Patience on a monument “ Smiling at grief.”
We would here give the Substance of the affecting interview between Colonel Melville and Mifs Sidney, but that every novel abounds with conver" fations between lovers (which, by the bye, it is utterly impossible to defcribe) and that though thefe foft fcenes may be very pretty and agreeable to the parties concerned, they certainly are mighty dull at fecond-hand.—Suffice it to fay, the enraptured Colonel had
stung
A LESSON FOR LOVERS,	223
stung himfelf, in the tranfport of his declaration, at the feet of Fanny, and she had fainted in his arms..
Such was the noble unfufpecting heart of this most worthy man, that, all glowing as his honest breast was with truth and Sincerity, the Smallest idea, the least shadow of a doubt that the marriage of Lady Charlotte might not, perhaps, be true, never once entered his head, as he certainly would have fufpected Mifs Freelove as the laft perfon in the world capable of fuch a plot. Not from his having a favourable opinion of her, but from looking on her as a very weak foolish woman, devoted wholly to vanity and pleafure.—Alas! how was he deceived, as many others are, in that most Specious and detestable character, a coquet! The odious Mifs Freelove, like the rest of her tribe, hid under the appearance of a thoughtless gaiety, and a carelefs play-fomenefs, the deepest cunning, envy* K 4	rancour9
224	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
rancour, and, in short, every malignant quality of a bad heart,
A few days had now passed since she had put her late diabolical Scheme into execution, when a thought struck her, that, to prevent Colonel Melville’s knowing the truth, till she had drawn him into marriage, she would tiy to intercept any letter from Ireland, which might be left at the post-office Sor the Colonel. She accordingly Sent for letters of the above defcription, when, to her inexpressible joy, there was a large pacquet just arrived.—On receiving it> she locked herfelf into her clofet, and greedily devoured the contents. They conveyed a fund of information to this bafe woman. Three letters were in the pacquet—two from the good old Earl, who wrote with all the tender-nefs of a fond father;—and a long one from Lady Charlotte; Sensible and delicate in the highest degree. This was a pleasing diScovery to the wicked woman,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	22$
man, as thefe letters informed the Colonel they should return in about six weeks to England. Mifs Freelove, therefore, thought no time was to be loft, and was therefore determined to put all her advances into immediate execution ; but to her utter astonishment -and difappointment, she never could find the Colonel at home.—She recollected, that from the next day after the newfpaper affair, he had not been in the lodgings two hours in a day.—He was not at the pump-room, the play, nor the rooms.—In short, he went abroad early, andstayed late;—a mystery which she could not fathom. The reader, however, will truly and naturally conclude, that, as the fond heart of our worthy lover was devoted to Mifs Sidney, fo were all his hours.—Chance, however, in a very short time, difco-vered to her falfe rival what she fo much wished to know, and which the following letter to her friend will best explain.
' K 5	LET-
2 26	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
LETTER XX.
MISS FREELOVE TO MISS CLIFTON.
'I g	Bath, June Sih.
-*■ URIES feize and tear me if I am not revenged of this infensible, this wretched Melville! OI have at length, my friend, made fuch a mortifying dif-covery, that I am almost petrified with amazement!—Yes! yes! he can love I find!—his haunts I have at last detected :—his odious haunts are not in the _ city of Bath:—a fnug quiet retreat in the country is much more fecret and Secure.—O how my foul fpurns fuch fly hypocriticaltranfactions!—But I will endeavour to give you the horrid particulars as well as I am able.
I think you know that I have an Italian singing-master to attend me thrice
a-week*
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	227
a-week.—Yesterday he came. I had been wondering and fretting the whole morning where the Colonel could be, and was in no very good hrimour when my music-master arrived, who alfo, I should here fay, ufed to attend him as well as myfelf
After one fong, very badly performed, my thoughts being full of nothing but this wretch, this Melville, “ Your -other fcholar,„ faid I peevishly, “ Sig-nior Mindora, is'not at home:—-nay, - he is never at home, I think:-—I have not feen him thefe four days.—Tt is very strange—very strange indeed.'’
Guefs my amazement, when the Xta? lian anfwered me in his broken English, and with the most jmpe.rd.ng polite-nefs imaginable, in the following manner.
“ It be no strange, Matame, for de fine gentelman to love de preety girl. ..—De Colonel ride by my houfe evhry day:—he go to fee leetel pretty mistrefs.
—She
- /
228	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
—She have fine eyes,—fine breast,— sine air,—fine ev’ry ting-*.”
O the wretch! thought I, and was obliged to take out my falts:—I thought I should have fainted:—whilst the communicative Italian, continued his tale.
“ Vest-Green be de fpot of pleafure where de I'eetel mistrefs be.—Dere be pretty arbour,-—dere be de fnug aparte-mente.—De good Colonel never fail to go;—he be inteed de fine gentelman. —She be ver young—She be char-man tess
“ And where (fai-d I to the wretch, who dwelt with delight on the lufcious
* It may perhaps be wondered at, that the mullein aster fhould fo readily betray this vice of a kept-mi strefs (as he thought) in his Scholar, Colonel Melville ; but the reader is desired to obServe, that the curious character who made the difeovery was an Italian finging-mafler; and that be came from a country as famous as France is for looking on the leetel, pretty kept-miflrefs, fo far from a blot in the fcutcheon, that it is looked upon in thofe countries as the most distinguifhing mark of a fine gentleman.
ftory,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	22$
story, whilst I was ready to burst with rage and vexation) where is this West-Green you talk of ? Is it near Bath ? —At whofe houfe does this great beauty reside?-—and where did yon fee her?„
“ She be call’d MiSs Sidney—-and she live at Mrs. Nelfon,—who be ver good voman to get de preety girl for de „ handSome Colonel.— Yes, indeed.— Vest-Green be no more den five miles: —evsty body know that pleafant place. —I did See my good Colonel go into de houfe, and did See his leetel mistreSs, all charmante, stand at de vindow.— Ha, ha, taut I, my dear Sir, you know vere de pretty girl be.”
I could bear to hear no more :—but Saying I was,a little engaged that morning diSmiffed my informant.—Indeed-1 had got quite enough.
Mindora was no Sooner departed, than I stung mySelf on the bed in an agony oS grief, revenge and deSpair.—
A
23O	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
A thoufand fchemes I formed to frustrate his farther visits to.this—*-1 can-
not name her with common patience— but could six on nothing.—Alas! So young—-So handSome, as she was described to be, she will long and deeply engage him.
ConSusion on them both, Say I.— I believe every tittle of the horrid account to be true ; my honest Italian told all in the natural simplicity of his heart:—he did not, however, Seem to look upon the matter in the light we do.—ASter all, Gatty, Italy and France are the only countries to live in with freedom.	.
Is it not enough to drive one absolutely distracted to loSe Such a divine fellow ?
«—No, never shall this detestable Mifs Sidney enjoy him whilst I am in being.
Do you know, shy friend, I pity poor Lady Charlotte Richley from the bottom of my foul.—Ah ! unhappy deceived woman! Little, alas! do you
imagine
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	23I
imagine that your falfe betrothed Melville, whom probably you are pining after, is at this very moment rioting in blifs with a kept-mijlrefs l Oh distraction !
Tuefday morn\
Thus far I wrote yesterday: after a mishrable night, I am at length come to a final determination to fee this girl.
“ But how ?„ you alk.
I’ll tell you.—I will go in a chaife to this little village called West-Green. I will, at fome inn there, leave my carriage for an hour or two, faunter into the village, and pafs by the houfe of this old vile procurefs, Mrs. Nelfon. I will just then be taken ill, knock at the door for a glafs of water, be very faint, and beg to sit down in the houfe a few moments.—Now do you begin to comprehend my fcheme ?
But
2$2	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
But this, this is nothing to my future plot of revenge I am now meditating, —and oS which I will inform you in my next. By this visit I now mention, I shall have the pleaSure oS gratifying my revenge in confronting this odious man and his sine lady, and of shewing him I have detected him in his haunts.
“ Good Heavens! Colonel Melville I ...—shall I Say, innocently Smiling, whilst my heart is bursting with revenge, “ who should have thought oS Seeingyou here? upon my word it is a pretty situation. —Do you lodge here?—have they more lodgings to lett? Truly I should like vastly, for a little fresh country air, to take an apartment here..
Thus, child, do I intend to teaSe the once dear fellow, but now he is absolutely my aver/im.. I will be a- thorn in his side for the prefent; but. I have a glorious project of mifchief in agitation for a future day ; which, I hope,.before one month is at an end, to fee com-
pleated.
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	2'3 g
pleated.—But I will not anticipate. You shall know all in my next; in the mean time wish me good fuccefs.—I do love a little revenge at my heart.—— Wish every Demon, from his gloomy abode, may aid and ashSt in the vengeance she is meditating,
Your plotting friend,
Jt. FREELOVE.
LETTER XXI.
MRS. HANNAH COMBS TO MISS CLIFTON.
Honoured Madam,
_	Bath, June 14D.
JrTOW shall I begin my shocking story, having the Sad news to impart, that my poor lady now lays d^ad oS a violent putrid fever, after three days illnefs ? She expired this morning, in the greatest agonies, about four o'clock, and left me a difconfolate miferable woman;
for
234	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
for I fuppofe, dying fo Suddenly, there is no will.
I am but a poor Scribe ; but iSyou will excuSe the bad writing, and worfie inditing, I will try to put down the Sad shocking particulars as well as I am able.
On ThurSday morning last my latly’s French woman being; Sent to London .onSome~Secret bufineSs—for fecretsall ladies have, to be Sure;—I waited entirely upon my lady in her abSence.
“ Combs,„ Said she, “X am going this morning a little airing to West-Green/, I think she call’d the place* “ and you may go with me.” ,
I thought She Seemed in a grave humour, and nothing I could do- would pleaSe her.—We Set out and got to' the village SaSe; but, as ill luck would have it, had the great misSortune of being overturned just at the entrance oS the place.—I Strained my wrist, and broke my shin—but my lady received no hurt: however, as it rained very hard, and as
there
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	235
there was, luckily, a poor fort of farm houfe -just by, my lady ran into it to efcape the shower.—I went with her into a back room, where were a woman and two boys all extremely ill of a putrid fever :—the woman and one of her boys Seemed near death, and lay on a low bed near the sire. It rained full an hour, all which time we Stayed there, and there my poor lady caught her death to be Sure.—But to go on with my Sad story.
The weather clearing up, my lady Said she would walk down into the village leaving me to go to the chaiSe, and wait for her, as she Said she would be back in an hour.—I could not imagine where she was going.—To be Sure I have a little curiofoy, as all women, I believe, have.
Out she Set by herSelf, and I went to See about the chaiSe : in about an hour my lady returned Seemingly much out of temper, having, she Said, lost her labour ;
236	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
bour; for that thoSe she went to See were gone out for the day.—Un-fortunately too, she was almost tho-rough wet, it having again rained.---She Seemed quite out of Sorts.—We got home in good time, but my poor lady could eat no dinner. At night she complainedi of being very ill, and the next day was in a high fever. The physician Said it was a putrid, very dan-gerous diSeaSe. She continued still worSe, and was then given over. She laid in great agonies, and was very light-headed, raved continually about a Lady Charlotte—I think that was her name---and a wedding in Ireland.—I don,f know what she could have in her head—but she often talked about West-Green.
To make short this shocking story, she called me to her a few minutes be-fore she died,—Said I was MiSs Sidney, and Screaming out, cried, “ Don't you fee thoS’e frightful Spectres that are
come
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	237
come to Seize.me ?„ Saying which, she fell into great agonies, and expired immediately.—She is, I am Sorry to Say, a very ghastly corpSe, as she died in great agonies the Lord have mercy on her poor Soul!—I think she had fome very particular assail* in hand, but that fhe best knew.
I have wrote to her' uncle, and I hope he will do Something Sor me, as, to be Sure, for twelve years I have lived under the French woman a very discontented life: no vails—no perquisites!
Hoping, good Madam, you will ex-cufe this very Sad and bad Scrawl, 1 remain (and beg you will consider my distreSs) your
Most SorrowSul, afflicted, defpairing humble Servant,
to command,
HANNAH COMBS
Thus did the vile MiSs Freelove fall a victim to revenge, falshood, vanity,
and
23 3	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
and malice.—May the idle and vain of her Sex, however high their rank, shun her vices, lest they meet the end she did, and which she justly merited!
Colonel Melville, who could not poSsibly divine that his letters had been intercepted Srom Ireland, was extemely S'urpriSed he heard nothing Srom Lord Richley :—he Suppofed, however, Srom his filence, that worthy Sriend might be most likely, now, Soon intending to re-visit England ; therefore, being uncertain where to find him, omitted writing to Ireland.'—The reader will imagine (as the Colonel firmly believed Lady Charlotte Richley was now the wife of another man) that he entirely attached himfelf to his beloved Fanny; their hearts had long been united ; and he now began to prefs for an early day to complete his happinefs—-which thefe happy lovers had partly fixed to be Soon after the marriage of .	.	Sir
N
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	239
Sir Henry Bellmour, from whom they had received a most kind invitation.
In the mean time, Lady Charlotte,all tender,-affectionate,-and whofe whole foul was devoted to her Melville, whom she passionately loved, was under the greatest anxiety for his health and life; dreading, from his silence, all that the most tender fears could fuggeft. That amiable lady had received two or three propofals of marriage, from noblemen of great merit and fortune :—but her heart was too firmly attached to Colonel Melville not to reject them instantly. - She continued to correfpond with her agreeable friend Mifs Blandford, and frequently desired her to fend what fubjects for amufement she could . find to entertain her dejected fpirits. —'That kind friend foon granted her request, as will appear from the following letter.
L E T-
2^0	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
LETTER XXII.
MISS BLANDFCRtf, TO LADY CHARLOTTE RICHLEY, IN IRELAND.
H	South-Grove, June 18th.
OW abfolutely unnecessary, my dearest friend, is your kind injunction that I should “ write foon—very foon,„—when it is giving myfelf the greatest pleafure I can know in this cruel abfence from the friend of my heart! ---For heaveNs fake tell me when Lord Richley talks of returning. My patience, like fome other virtues, is tir’d, and almost exhausted.—I have a thoufand things to communicate :— particularly, that if you do not come to England foon, probably you will no longer find there a Lucy Blandford.— You start—perhaps she may, however, be found in Lady Willis. In short, the platonic lovers, I fancy, will foon be
at
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	241
at liberty to be more intimately united: that formidable word love, which 1 had abfolutely banished, is at length recalled. You have heard, doubtleSs, besides, by my last letter *, that Lord
M----- —- is really no more, and that his
heir has taken the title and estate, &c. Sir Edward Willis, too, has every reaSon to believe his betrothed lady is no longer in the land of the living: but a few weeks will Soon change doubt into certainty; as he has diSpatched a friend purpoSely to the West Indies to gain the real truth.
You See this, my Charlotte, dated from a Sweet villa of my Sather’s, in the wild of Suffex :•—the Situation dlelight-fully romantic. We have been here near a fortnight; in which time I have Spent whole days in rambling through copSes, woods, and enamelled meadows. In one of theSe agreeable excursions,
* This letter does not appear.
vol. i.	L	I met
Z<\2	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
I met with--------not a lover, child—
an adventure, that .though ■ distressing has been singularly pleasing; and of which I will give a full account.
A few davs since I fet out on a walk, and having wandered near half a mile, found myfelf near the fumrnit of a hill: a Situation So beautiSully romantic I had Scarce ever before beheld.
For nature here—
a Wanton’d as in her prime, and play’d at will u Her virgin fancies.—
“ Wild above rule, or art, and beauteous, form’d u A happy, rural Scene of various views.”
Whilst I was contemplating this af-femblage of rural beauties, which the divine Author of all elegance and perfection had fo lavishly poured around, I efpyed at the end of a little winding path, almost overgrowii with hazel, and other copice wood, a low straw-rooffed cottage, or rather a miferable hut. A fmall quick-fet hedge, neatly cut, and a few stones before the door,
white
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	243
white as show, led me to believe the owner of this little homely mansion, poffeffed neatnefs, however oppreffed with poverty.
Whilst I was standinp- at the wicket that opened to this peaceful abode, my attention was drawn to the found of the voices of children ; when at length I defected two of the most lovely girls, sitting under a goofeberry bush, I had ever beheld.—From their exact similitude to each other, they appeared to be twins of the age of about five years.—I obferved, fuch was their like-nefs to each other, that there was a fmall bit of red ribbon tied(round the wrist of each: their drefs tbo, which was as plain and coarfe as possible,
‘ though perfectly clean, was exactly a-like. I obferved they were both knitting, which led me to believe the parents of thefe pretty children must be themfelves industrious, who could initiate their little ones, at fo early L 2	an
244	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
an age, into fo ufeful an employment. They were however playful in the midst of their work, and Sung and laughed alternately.—They had not obferved me, as I was almost hid by a large apple tree, behind which I stood.
Whilst I was making many reflections on the beauty, the innocence, and cheerfulnefs of thefe pretty children, my attention from them was drawn to the most amiable young woman I ever beheld, who came out of the cottage with two fmall bafons of milk, and a crust of brown bread in a broken plate. She advanced to the children, whofe mother, though fo young, I found she ' was, from her manner of addresiing them. She appeared pale and emaciated, with a fixed melancholy in her countenance, which was really lovely, notwithstanding a sickly hue. Her drefs was that of a peaSant, and her hair, which appeared to be very fine, was bound up under a little clean coif.
Uy
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	245
My hiding-place entirely fcreeneel me from all observation, and I heard her addrefs the children thus:
“ Well, my dears, I have brought your dinner :—but I fear you have both been very idle.—You, Sophia, have been pursuing butterflies this whole morning:——and you, Louifa, have been looking for a bird’s nest.— Fye,—fye, the knitting goes fadly on I find.„
“ Indeed—indeed mamma—(faid the fweet girls both in a breath)—my Stocking is almost done, and So is my Sister’s.—Indeed we have been very good.—I will tell the truth that I did run after one butterfly, but I would not kill it, believe me, I would not: Sifter Sophy never took a bird’s nest in her liSe ; did you Sophy ?”
• I, who you know, am So Sond of nature in. its purest State, was delighted with this Scene.
L 3	“'Well,
24b	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ Well, my dear children (faid the amiable mother, sitting down on the grafs, -and tenderly taking them in her arms, alternately kissing each) well*—
I believe you—I must never have you kill thofe pretty birds that sing fo Sweetly,—nor any thing in Sport:— the Same good God that made you made them.—Come, eat your dinner, and be thankSul you have it.„—Saying which she retired.
Her words, her manner, and the whole of her deportment convinced me she was a perSon who had known better days. My heart yearned to relieve her; for poor she certainly appeared to be—her hufband, I SuppoSed, was _ a day labourer.
Now, the grand point was, how I should introduce mySelS. The Scheme oS desiring to sit down to rest me a Sew minutes in the cottage, after a very long walk, feemed the most feasible plan I could six on.—I thereSore opened
the
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	247
the little wicket, and walked up the path to the cottage, and gently tapped at the door, which however stood wide open, for as Imogen fays,
a Poor houfe, it kept itJelfA
No perfon whatever appearing, I turned back into the garden to the children whom I kiffed, and gave a few trinkets out of my pocket to play with.
“ Where is your mother, my dears, ashed I, is she at dinner ?„
“ No,” faid one of the fweet girls, “ she very Seldom has any dinner, except when she can get milk.—She’s poor now,—but I remember She told me I once had a sine white frock ;— and So had my sister.—My mamma Spins now, and we knit:—we must do Something to helpV
v “ My God !„ exclaimed I, and was wonderfully affected to hear theSe little innocents imagine their knitting could go towards their Support, in the num-L 4	ber
2J(S	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
bcr of articles that are necessary to Sub-sist a family.
“ And where is your father, my pretty dears,” Said I.
“ We never had a father,” anSwer-ed one of theSe lovely babes.
“ Yes, sifter Sophy,” Said the other, “ we had a father,-—but you know, mamma Says, iS we talk of him we shall make her cry for he is gone—gone a great way osh„
Whilst they were Speaking, their mother came to us :—and curtSying with great reSpect, and with even an air oS politeneSs, whilst a faint blush overSpread her languid cheek, begg’d to know iS I had any commands with her.
I told her that having Satigued my-SelS with walking, I would be much obliged to her, iS she would give me leave to sit down a Sew moments in her houSe.
Vou
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	249
“ You do me honour,” faid she, “ Madam:—my poor hut is indeed a miferable one ;—but you are heartily . welcome.„
There was fomething in her manner which astonished me:—an elegance, I may fay, which nothing could diS-guife.
We were now arrived at the houfe -—which indeed feemed even the abode of poverty itfelf:—an old chair, in which I Seated mySelf, a broken table, and a Spinning wheel, Seemed the whole of the furniture.—The floor was, however, perfectly clean; and there was a neatnefs throughout. I felt myfelf Somewhat diSconcerted:—and though I was convinced the amiable woman before me was poor to the lowest degree, I would not on that very account, methought, shock her delicacy, by an abrupt manner oS relieving her distreSs.
V/ho knows, thought 1, but this per-Son may once have lived in the affluence
I do,
2$0.	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
I do, and that poshbly she may be as much, or more entitled to refpect ?
“ I fancy,„ faid I, after a short paufe,
“ you was fpinning before I came in:—
I beg I may not hinder you.—Do you Spin much ?„
“ Yes, Madanr,—I have now no other means to Support mySelf and thoSe poor children in the garden, and I have not a very quick hand at it So that we oSt:en„---
She stopped—she blushed.—I was visibly affected.
“ Have you lived here long ?—The Situation oS your houfe is remarkably pleaSant.,,
“ I have been here about half a year, and am quite pleaSed with my cottage (looking round her with a kind of half languid Smile) and begin to think that health, and, I thank God, I am better than I have been, with a disposition to be pleaSed, will make any Situation reconcilable.-—I have known the' world:
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	2hi
—a difficult fcience to thofe in prosperity, but to the wretched an eaSy leS-fon.”
She paufed.
I was astonished at her manner of expression, and I could not SuppreSs the rising tear.—I took out my hand-kerchieS, and wiped it away.
“ I tried (Said she with an air of modest diffidence) to take in plain-work, y but being a stranger, no-one would employ me :—the Same objection I found too in regard to Setting; up a little School.”
“ That,” returned I, “ could you have effected it, would have been an eligible Scheme.”
“ I can bear poverty mySelf, madam, and God preServe me from a greater misfortune than that oS being poor.—I have not occasion Sor a great degree oS
resignation to Support poverty ; little is wanting for the real neceSSaries oSliSe, when we are capable of deSpising imaginary
*
2h2	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
ginary wants.—It is for my children . alone, I feel:—’tis there, I find, I am wretched :—Heaven I trust will preserve them.„
“ They, indeed, are lovely babes,” Said I, wiping a tear that would steal down my cheek ; I shall oSten call to See them and youisselS.„
She bowed reSpectSully.
I was now contriving how I could Slip a Small preSent into her hand.
“ I think,„ Said I, “ I will come and drink a Syllabub to morrow evening in this Sweet Spot.„—looking into the garden.—“ Accept, pray, oS that trifle for the ingredients.,,—throwing on the table a guinea.
The poor woman, aStonished, burst into tears.
“ O Madam! she could only Say, “ is it poffibk
I hurried away as fast as I c6uld, to hide my fensibility, which indeed was much excited.
As
r
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	2hh
As I Walked home, I found a strong defire to be farther acquainted with this poor amiable young perfon ; who, I . was convinced, had not only Seen bet-better days, but must, from that peculiar elegance oS manner and Sentiment she discovered, have been born and bred in a very genteel Sphere of life. Heavens! Said I to mySelS, what must shave been her Sufferings!—her helplels inSants too!—I am happy, however, that I have at length discovered this poor family.
On my arrival at home, I ordered a large baSket oS meat, bread, wine, Some tea and Sugar to be packed up, and Sent immediately to the cottage. I should here tell you* I ashed her name on my leaving her, Saying, “ Pray who must I enquire for?„
“ They call me,” Said the amiable 0 young woman, blushing, “ Dame Hopkins.”
Her
254	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
Her manner in faying this, led me to fuppofe it was not her red name.
I waited impatiently for the hour of going to the cot of this poor dame Hopkins ; as impatiently, my dear friend, as fome fine ladies, whom you and I know, would have done to have gone to Lady B—’s rout, or to a maS-qued ball, at Cornely’s.
At length the hour arrived, and I Soon reached the little obScure habita-tation. The two lovely children ran out to meet ~me, their shining eyes Sparkling with joy at my approach.— Such is pure, uncorrupt nature, in its early State. “ Mamma, mamma, they cried, “ here is the good lady come, come to See poor mamma,” and fondly kiffed my hands, in a transport of’joy.
O, my dear, what do the fafhionable „ part of our Sex loSe by not enjoying Scenes like thefe! I could not contain my tears, So exquisite was my delight;
but
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	2 11
D
but they were tears of extreme pleafure.
Whilst I was indulging my fenfibility with thefe little angels, the lovely mother herfelf appeared. I could Scarce reStrain her Srom Sailing at my Seet in a tranSport of gratitude.
- o Madam, let my tears—let my children’s tears—Speak our feelings.” The day being very warm,- and as I had before told her, I should chuSe the-Syllabub, I had mentioned, in the garden, she conducted me to a rustic bench under an old oak, which she had rendered the Sweetest Spot you can conceive :—here, indeed, she had shewn that she must have trifle. In short, all I Saw still heightened my extreme curiosity to know who and what this little family had been.
The amiable wr>man, I Sound, had the whole day been employed in adorning this beautiful Spot for my reception, She had twisted branches of
Sweet
¥ ‘
256	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
Sweet-briar, round the feat oil which I was to sit, intermingled with honey-fuckles, whilst the pretty children, I found, had been employed in strewing the grassy carpet under my feet with flowers, as they likewsse had the path, which led to this rural feat. A little board was naileti up in form of a table, over which was fpread a cloth, white as the driven Snow: the Syllabub was placed ready, with the addition oS a plate of wood-strawberries, and Some other rural fruit, the production of the neighbouring copfe.
“ I shall fancy myfelf, Mrs. Hopkins,', faid I, Smiling, and Seating my Self, “ in a kind oS terrestrial paradiSe, with theSe little angels by my side. Indeed you have shewn that you have a taste for rural beautyand I was going to add, as well as for elegance; but I check’d myfelf, fearing it would remind her of a better state, in which I
was convinced, till fome very grievous
misfortune
A' LESSON FOR LOVERS.	257
misfortune had befallen her, she had before been accustomed to. To confirm me entirely in this belief, I fecret-ly difcovered her handkerchief, and other parts of her linen to be of remarkable fineness.
During the most agreeable repast I ever partook of, which was still heightened by the balmy fragrance of a field of blooming beans adjoining, and by the delightful melody of a neighbouring thrush,
“ Whilst: So loud the blackbird fung, u That the woods and vallies rung,”
I obferved the lovely woman, for fo I must call her, often endeavoured to fupprefs the rising tear.—I placed her fweet girls near me, on a bank of mild chamomile, and fed them from my hand, whilst I was delighted with their innocent prattle ;—for, unconfcious of form, or ceremony, they sting, laughed, and talked without restraint.
“ Sophia,”
25S	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ Sophia,„ faid the fond mother, with the tenderest accent, “ you must not prate fo fast. My dear children, little girls should be feen and not heard.„
“ I am delighted with their innocent prattle—indeed with all I fee and hear.—“ You, Mrs. Hopkins,„ looking upon her with, I believe, a particular anxious curiosity, “ attract likewife my sincere regard.„
She was affected.
“ I should excite your pity too, good Madam,” she modestly replied, “ were it poshble you could know my fuffer-ings.—They have been great;—but I trust my resignation is equal to my lot. -r—I have been unhappy,—but I am in-- dined to think when we are/o, we too often defer ve it.—However, I am convinced (after fome little paufe) human happinefs does not depend on any degree of ft at ion, or on any external circumstance whatever.”
“ It
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	2 $9
“ It is true,” returned I. “ But, notwithstanding, I find myfelf strangely interested in your distreffes.—Pofib bly, I may, in fome refpects, be able to render you a little fervice :—I would not pain you, Mrs. Hopkins, by a recital of your misfortunes:—and yet —methinks—I wish to know them.”
“ If you, Madam, “ she returned with inimitable fweetnefs, “ will not think a short account of my fufferings impertinent, I shall with great pleafure inform you of the particulars of my life ; not, I thank Heaven, marked with grn'lt.—I was born to affluence,— but a fatal marriage—fatal in its effects to me, has been my ruin.”
Here she wiped a falling tear from her pale cheek ; but having again assured me the recital of her griefs could not now possibly add to them, and I having informed her I wished to hear her story—indeed I was "on the very _ tenter-hooks of womanish curiofity—
she
2siO	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
she paus’d for a few moments, as if recollecting her ' Scattered thoughts;— Nthen Sweetly turning to the children, who were standing by,—“ Go, my Sophia,—go my LouiSa,—go to play on the green, and be Sure gather the finest noSegay oS the Sweetest flowers for this lady.—You are too young yet, my poor babes, to listen to the fate that has, and will involve your future days in poverty and its train of evils.”
End of Volume I.
S’4''	A
L E S S 0 A .
\ ' ' V-
F O R
LOVERS.
V O L. II.
/
■	/	■ V; ."h '•	' -.V'-
' lie's-	. k
>vfy>; • ' ■ - ’	. .
p-A Vbf . A, ■<■■■" ' ■/
' '	' •	,	-V/'	' • {■■■ '	• ■■■'•.
• •	.	■' ,Ap	* 'V ■.	...
0. ■ ‘ ' ^ ■_ •T'": ■v\ ,S •. ’ • y V-:	. 1 - O
* -V'-,	' v:. '	.	■ ’ .	'	... U-
•	"	*	■ . w." *
.,. . . , ■ VV ’
...	.■ <■ e* ' ~.
. **>''
>’•	' f-t-Jf.	■■ •,*■■■
; lists ' ;vtly V yfyfi
A
' LESSON FOR LOVERS.
J
OR THE
HISTORY
0 F
COLONEL MELVILLE,
AND
LADY CHARLOTTE RICHLEY.
~	Volume ii.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR FRANCIS NOBLE, AT HIS CIRCULATING library, opposite grays-inn-gate,
HOLBORN. M,DCC,LXXX III.
*	.	* • S ' ’ ' ■ • . ‘ ■» '	' i:'
- • .* „ 0
J	'	'	.
;>•" •• ...
'	*. -	'{—■ . ■	“	*	-	’v"'
. t . T 'V V*'. *L . '	.	' hie
•'	-	C', ■	'■ i A,y:	'	.
*:r. -rf • >r*T'“"L •	. t A j" ■"A‘ ,r-	■•
S'	- L-L. ,..'7 ■■	’ '	■ ’rfyyr i- ,
_	r	-	.	-V. •
ly’iaLr-riT v "tV
'	■'	.	,N.
• ‘ A	'	f
A' ,	i '	*' ^ ^ ^ ^ ^	^	^
^	+	r	"
gggpN •	. '
HSS-'/vv..- _ .:	.. -.cist-
0 f-^v . -L ;
ri . - r Eriih1 Mr ; /' r. 'o .t	;•
‘	'*x	v?r«rr ... - «■*?
••■-	'i	'-A-:A rr:d - ;	,: ^
‘ : wd> • •	'■ ‘
w«; -1 cOA
A
L E S S O N
.
FOR
LOVERS.
MISS. BLANDFORD IN CONTINUATION.
‘	THE HISTORY OF MRS. HOPKINS.
'' 7^7"TIEN Mrs. Hopkins’s children *	* * were departed, the amiable
- woman recited her narrative in the JL. following words:
mf" “ I am the only child of a 'gen-jfjitleman of large fortune in the west. Skof England, whofe ancestors, as well as jLhimfelf, were remarkable' for their urn L shaken honour and hofpitality, and for ^Spending in'their family mansion, a ■ § very ancient feat, a clear estate of two (/> thoufand pounds per annum, in every jfe-act which private charity, or gentility L of life, among his neighbourhood, could U- vol. it	B	dictate.
r
6	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
dictate. To fay he was barely beloved, perhaps is not giving a fufficient testimony of his merit;—I may indeed fay, he was almost adored.”
Here she wiped the trickling tear that would steal its way.
“ I fear,” faid I, interrupting her, “ you have undertaken a taste which will be too much for your tender Sen-sibility of heart:—I will defer my curiosity to fome future periods7
“ No, dearest Madam, I will now, iS you pleafe, proceed.
“ I lost my mother at a very early age, and received my education, till 1 arrived at the years of twelve, under a maiden aunt, who came to reside at the abbey (for fo was my father’s feat called) on the .death of my mother, This worthy relation (my aunt) I had alfo the misfortune to lofe at the above-mentioned age, which is perhaps one of the most critical in the life of out fex. Our manners, our Sentiments are
then
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	7
then forming apace, and require the utmost attention to direct and manage.
“ As my dear father perfectly doat-ed on me, he was rather embarrassed in the plan of education he should pur-fue, to perfect me in the various accomplishments in which I had been initiated. He, who lived quite in the style of an English country gentleman, detested the thought of introducing a French governefs to fuperintend my education; and our remote distance from masters in the fcience of dancing, music, &c.,made him at length determine to place me at a very capital boarding-fchool, in a large city, in the fame county we lived. At this fchool my father was pleafed to think I made many improvements: and there I continued till I had attained my sixteenth year.
“ My father beheld me, on my return home, with a kind of rapture, which paternal fondnefs can only experience.
B 2	As
8	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
As I was tall and womanly of my age,' I was made to preside at the head of his table —and in short to be quite the mistrefs of the abbey. Happy period!
“ I employed great part of my time at my harpsichord, my pencil, and needle; but above all my amufements I was fond of reading. Unfortunately I had a taste for romances and novels, and my aunt had, among her collection of books, the whole of which she had bequeathed me, a great number of thofe works of imagination.—I fay unfortunately I was fond of works of the above kind; for 1 am convinced, tho? they were all of the, best authors we have in the English language, in that department of literary amufement, yet they certainly, though they did not corrupt my heart, or deprave my mo-rals, fofiened my mind to a dangerous degree, and made it, I verily believe, too fufceptible of receiving an impref-
fm
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	9
[ton foon afterwards, which (she continued sighing bitterly) was eventually the caufe of my ruin.—But to proceed ' sin my story.
“ I had much leifure, wras always fond of retirement, and as I was wholly miftrefs of myfelf and my time, I devoted hours every day to the perufal of thefe too agreeable studies.
“ My father, who was high-sheriff for the county, a justice of peace, and engaged in other public offices, was often from home. One morning, particularly, he fet out for the quarter fesiions, which he always attended, and I indulged myfelf the whole day in reading in the garden a favourite romance.—The evening being yemarkably	'
sine, in the month of June, I walked on a terrace, which overlooked the avenue from the park, in expectation of feeing my beloved parent arrive ;—but instead of him, to my affright, I eSpied one of the fervants, who had gone with B 3	him
10	-A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
him in the morning, riding with all Speed towards the houSe.
“ For Heaven's Sake, Said I, Peter, what is the matter? where is your maS-ter ?—has any bad accident happened ?” “ Be not alarmed, Madam, he replied, nothing has happened, Heaven be praiSed, to my master; but a poor gentleman, I believe, is killed, in endeavouring to reScue him Srom a highwayman we met with just now on the great heath that leads to the park.” “ You terrify me to death, Said I.— But is my father indeed Safe ?„
“ Yes, indeed, Madam. I have leSt Robert, my fellow Servant, to attend him and the poor gentleman who acted So bravely, but fear he has breathed his last.—Good God ! with what courage did he knock the pistol Srom my master’s breast ; whilst, like lightening, he flew to his Succour!—but, alas ! in the Scuffle, the highwayman sired another pistol at my master’s deliverer,
and
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	II
and 'down he fell dead, as I fuppofe :— a dreadful gash in his head, besides, from the fall.—-I am come home to order the chariot to bring him gently to the abbey:—my good master stands by him, holding his bleeding head. Indeed he owes his life to him, though he has lost his own:—for I believe he is certainly dead.”
“ O Heavens! exclaimed I, poor unhappy gentleman !„
“ A thoufand ideas that instant rushed into my miftd, which I had picked up in my romances, of a father re-fcued from death by a brave deliverer, who had nobly rifqued his own life to fave him. Run, Peter, faid I, and order the chariot to be made ready immediately.*—I will myfelf inform the houfe-keeper to fee that a bed be prepared.—I did fo—and assisted her in tearing fine linnen for bandages, Sec. against the furgeons arrived; a meS-fenger being ordered to fet off directly, B 4	by
12	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
by my father’s direction, to bring two as foon as possible.
“ When I faw every thing was in order, I hastened to the terrace, and waited fome time, but faw neither the chariot return, nor my father.
“ This, in good truth, Said I to myfelf, is indeed an adventure!—A father delivered from the hand of a merciless robber,—a gallant stranger rifqning his life,—wounded—and perhaps killed in the rencounter, and brought in that state to the houfe of him whom he had refeued !-—Surely, thefe circumstances are equaky marvellous with any to be found in the annals of fiction.
“ This little period of time before the carriage returned, was certainly pre-pidlicial to my future repofe ; as by recollecting an hundred familiar instances from my books, my mind was foft-ened to an high degree of fufceptibL lity.
“ At
A' LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I3
\ “At length I defected a kind of melancholy procession advance up the avenue : my father riding Slowly on horfeback, the chariot following, and Several men bringing up the rear. I still remained on the terrace, where I obferved a kind of bier was carried to the chariot door, in order to bring the wounded gentleman through the garden, a nearer way to the houfe : Six' men having laid the gallant Siranger gently on this conveyance, advanced to the garden, in which I Stood. My dear Sather being alighted from his ho.isse—I ran—I stew to welcome his Safety and arrival:—I hung on my beloved parent’s neck :------1 wept with
i°y”
“ Oh ! my Sophia, Said he, what do we not owe to that poor gentleman ! —I hope you have ordered the best bed; as nothing shall be wanting pn my part for his recovery. But alas ! —alas! in Saving .my life, he has, I B 5	fear,
14	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
fear, lost, or will in a Sew hours lost his own !—Never did I See Such un daunted courage—Such matchleSs intre pidity as the gallant youth (an entir< stranger to me, my Sophy) shewet your poor Sather.—Are the Surgeon yet come ?”
“ Before I could anfwer—my whoh attention was drawn to the most af fecting sight in nature, or at least SucI then it appeared to me.
“ The bier passed Slowly by me, oi which was laid the dying Slranger though to me he appeared already dead:—and yet never had I before feei fo lovely a figure.—A countenance though pale, yet handfome in the ex treme:—tall, finely formed, and dreS with equal elegance and neatnefs.—Hi eyes were clofed, as if in death:—hi sine hair, dark and stowing, hung care lefsly over his forehead, on which fpiecl a large wound, through whici ct stream of blood stowed plentifully.—
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	15
My young heart, unuSed to sights like thefe, was throbbing, at an object So piteous.—I felt mySelS strangely agitated.
I longed—and yet custom forbade, to be one of his assistants to the apartment allotted him :—the Servants, and my Sather, all attended, and he was laid in the bed:—but all this time, it Seems he had not Spoken a word.— But am I not, Madam,„ Said the amiable Mrs. Hopkins, “ am I not too minute in my account oS this incident ? the circumStances dwell strongly on my mind.”
I assured her I was delighted with the manner of her recital, and begged her to continue to be as minute as post sible.—“ The minutia, added I, are in fact, highly necessary in theSe caSes. , As the finest traits, the almost imperceptible touches of the pencil, give a-likeneSs to a picture, So do the workings of the most delicate SenSations of the human heart on the most familial'
occurrences
16	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
occurrences of life, hefl convey an ide of the Sentiments and dispositions o the mind. We are all liable to ’th fame passions, but it is the various de grees and operations of them, tha characterize and distinguish the feve ral perfons :—pray then, dear Madam continued I, looking affectionately o her, (for indeed my heart yearned t aSIist her) I befeech you not to he lei minute.—I could hear you for an age.
She bowed—and continued.
“ The furgeons did not arrive till late hour ; and my father—poor goo man!—fat up with the stranger an Servants, the chief part of the night.— I, girl-like,—but what could be e^ pected from a girl of sixteen ? ran t the door of the sick gentleman, an aSked every one who came out, if th stranger-, who had fo nobly faved my si ther’slife,Sthat circumjlance dwelt Strong ly on my young mind) was yetappareni iy dead ?—At length, I was informe
b;
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	17
by my" father that the Surgeons were of opinion, if the ball, which had passed into his right side, could be extracted, and his arm, (which it Seems was broke, and which I had not heard oS before) could be Set properly, being terribly7 bruiSed; and if the contusions in various parts of his body, as well as head, could be Sound not to be So bad as they then imagined, he might, in time, recover.
“ He is a sine young man, added my father, and is certainly in a genteel fphere of life.—His drefs, his elegant watch, his sine horfe; in short, his whole appearance, confirms this belief.,,
“ Had he no fervant with him ?” alked I.—“ No,” replied he.—“ I fancy he was coming from the races. He happened to be riding over the heath, just as the villain of a highwayman shad clapped the pistol to my breast.—He stew like winged lightening to my aid, and a most dreadful feu she enfued betwixt
18	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
twixt him and the mifcreant who had assaulted me, and who, at last made osh I confess,” added my father “ I should be glad to know the name and family of my deliverer, that I might Shew him every proper refpect.”
“ In about two days, the furgeons pronounced their patient feemed in a . fair way to have the ball extracted:— My Sather came to me, with joy to tell me (and with a joy I had never before experienced I heard it) that the gentleman had fpoken ; that he was quite Sensible ; and that he had even expressed gratitude for the care that had been taken oS him.—But to proceed.
“ In about a week, there began to be every Symptom in his Savour: he was ordered, however, to be kept quiet, to prevent a Sever.---In the following week, he was fo much better as to have my father sit with him an hour every day.—I longed, and yet I could not with much propriety, to ash a great
' - deal
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	19
deal about him :—but my father Soon unaSked, began the Subject of the sick gentleman, (for So he was called throughout the houSe) as we were one morning at breakSast.”
“ Upon my word, Said the good man, I am perfectly delighted with this amiable stranger. I find his name is Douglas:—that is an ancient name —a great name.—(I should here Say, that if my beloved parent had any foible, it was that of fondneSs for pride of birth, and ancestry of family.) I have at length gathered Srom him, continued he, that he is nephew and heir to Sir Thomas Douglas, now in India :—a re-Spectable Samily you See, Sophy:—that he is a student at Oxford, nay, I think he Said he was a gentleman Commoner— but he is of the Same college I was.— He is really a fine young man.”
“ For a fortnight following, my father Sat hours in the apartment, every day, of the wounded stranger, who
was
20	A LESSON FOR LOVERS,
was now entirely thought to be out of danger.—My dear parent talked of nobody, and of nothing elfe, but his fenfe, his learning (my father was himfelf an excellent Scholar) his wit and various accomplishments. In short, he was delighted with him, and the gallant incident which had brought him first acquainted, Strongly prepossessed him ifi my father’s favour, as he pof-Sessed a large share oS gratitude, as well as every other generous principle. Our houfe-keeper, too, was continually ringing in my ears the praiSes oS the poor gentleman up stairs.„
“ Have you not Seen him yet, MiSs Sophy?„ she would often fay; “ O he is the Sweetest man! fo good natured! fo handfome !„
“ In truth, I was almost talked into a prepossession for Mr. Douglas before I had well feen him, and the decorum, which custom prefcribes of not visiting a gentleman in his chamber, made me,
still
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	21
still more impatient and anxious to behold again this agreeable stranger.
“ At length, the fatal day wasnow come that I was again to fee him. Alas! by what a stender thread does our ha-pinefs, or mifery depend in this world! and what lasting great effefts Spring Srom the most trivial caufes l
“ One morning my Sather, after a thoufand encomiums bestowed on Mr. Douglas, Said, “ Sophia, we will drink our tea, child, this aSternoon in his apartment :-phe is now able to sit up and converSe :—it will be Some amuSe-ment to him:—therefore order your tea-equipage to be carried there.—You have no objection, I.prefume ?”
“ No, certainly Sir,„ I faintly an-Swered, bluShing like Scarlet.
“ I well remember, I did not that day negled my drefs.—I was uneaSy till the hour oS tea arrived, and when it didg, my father led me to the apartment of Mr. Douglas.
“ Here
22	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ Here, my friend,„ faid he, “ I have brought you a visiter.—My Sophia will thank you for your care of meV
“ I shall, methinks, never forget thoSe words.
“ I curtsied, and, much confuted,** stammered out,—“ much obliged— “ hoped he was better.”
“ Mr. Douglas was, perhaps, at that time, the most amiable object in the world:—notwithstanding his late ill-neSs, imagination can hardly form a finer figure.—He was reclined on a Sort of couch,—his arm in a fling.—His eyes were piercing, expreflive, and yet Sull of foftnefs.—There was a languor in his sine face inexprefsibly engaging:— a fweetnefs in his countenance, and yet a manly dignity.—-But why should I dwell on beauties fo fatal in the event ? —Suffice it to fay, his understanding uncommonly good, added to the most brilliant wit (fetting the graces of his
pershn
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	23
perfon aside), rendered him the most agreeable man on earth.—His knowledge for his years, which appeared not more than twenty-one, was alfo wonderful.
“ During tea, I faid but little: I, however, when I could steal a look at this very amiable man, obferved I was not unnoticed by him. I even faw, or fancied I faw him regard me with particular attention. Soon after tea I left the room, my father being engaged with him in a very learned and critical difcoursh on the ancients and moderns.
When I retired to my apartment, I sighed, and felt an unufual weight at my heart.—I took up a volume of Rousseau’s Eloifa, which happened to lay on the table, and imagined, in the foft fcenes there defcribed, I read the character of Douglas in that of St .Prieux. ■—I retired to bed, but not to steep.
“ For
24	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ Fora fortnight following, hardly a day passed but my father and I drank our tea with our agreeable guest, who every day afforded fresh matter for our esteem; as did his fenfe and manner our admiration of his accomplishments, which were indeed many, and great.— * His taste for music, poetry, and paint-- ing, was uncommonly good, and his Superior talents had been finely cultivated.
“ Whether Mr. Douglas faw my growing attachment for him, I know not, but certain it is, I Saw many tokens and marks in him (fuch as my novels had taught me) of a passion in him for me ; and this, to a heart young as mine, tender, and romantic, encreaS-ed what I felt for him. It is true he had yet never given me any proofs of his. affection (my father being always prefent) any farther than the language of his expressive eyes would permit,' but thofe Spoke pretty intelligibly.
“ My -
f	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	2$
“'My dear excellent parent, was perfectly infatuated with this amiable young man -and one morning I was extremely furprifed when meeting me in the garden,;—“ Sophy, my dear,” faid he, “ come sit down in yonder arbour a few minutes:—I have a word for your ear.”
Being feated, he thus began :
“ I am abfolutely delighted with this Mr. Douglas:—what do you think of him, Sophia ?—-tell me truly.”
“ I think—I think,„ faid I excessively stuttered, “ that he is a man of good fenfe.„
“ Uncommonly fo, rejoined my father. Then, after a short paufe, he turned to me.—-You know, my beloved child, my life is wrapt up in yours— all I have is yours,—and only yours.— My most predominant wish is, as I now grow old, to fee you married before I die, to fome worthy man,—of whom I myfelf have an opinion.”
“ Oh
26	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ Oh Heavens! thought I, what is he going to fay ? my heart throbbing with unufual perturbation.
“ Should the character---the family —the connexions of my brave, young deliverer, on a Jirifi enquiry, turn out what I wish, could you, my dear,— Speak Sreely,—think of him in future— {yXprefent, the affair is quite out of the queftion)—but could you, I repeat, look upon him with a degree of partiality ? —Come, tell me.—I will be free to acknowledge I know no young man to whom I would So Soon give your hand. —What Say you ?”
“ I think, Sir, I think in time I might be induced to think favourably of Mr. Douglas :—I might, perhaps, in future, have a partiality.„
“ Imagine, Madam,” Said Mrs. Hopkins to me, “ my feelings on this occa» Sion.—Alas! I then loved him to distraction r
“ Say
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	27
“ Say no more—fay no more, my child,,, faid my father, visibly pleafed, “ I shall, this very day, write to his tutor at Oxford, to enquire his character, family, and connexions ; without, however, acquainting him with my particular views.—Indeed it is proper I should know, at leaf who it is I have in my houfe.—But now, Sophia,” faid he very gravely, “ by all your duty to me, I charge you most folemnly, till you receive my fandion for it, not to listen, directly or indirectly, to any kind of compliments, or little cuftomary encomiums, which fuch polite young gentlemen as our guest is, are continually making your fex:—I Say, look on them only as mere words of course: and let this little diScourSe oS ours be as if it never had been.—We know not yet, my dear, what the character of Mr. Douglas is.—I have been Speaking of a future day : you are yet too young—I would not wish—at preSent, an alliance
of
\
28	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
of any kind.„—He paufed. “ Bu come, let us go into the houfe.—' charge you remember what I have tok you, of guarding against a few fashion able compliments.—Mr. Douglas wil now be foon able to be our guest be low stairs :—he is now pretty well.— Remember my charge, Sophia.„
“ I am all obedience, Sir,” faid I “ to your command. I will be particu larly careful of my behaviour, I pro mife you.„
“ I know I can depend on my child,’ faid this best of men.
“ Alas ! how deplorably weak,— how inconsistent is human nature !— and what is the refolution of a girl o Sixteen years old! Certain it is, that m3 dear parent’s forewarning me, anc prohibiting me Srom then entertaining any particular attachment to Mr. Dou glas, did more in his Savour, than ever my own heart was doing :—and a:
certaii
if
*
[j	i A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	2h
certain it is, that the garden converfa-tion had affected me beyond expression.
“ Could it be imagin’d possible (but fnch is human nature) that in the evening of that day, my father being retir’d to write his letter to the tutor at Oxford, and I unfortunately left alone a few minutes with Mr. Douglas, who was that afternoon well enough to walk into the library, where Stood a fine harpsichord, on which he had been playing delightSully: could one imagine, I Say, that in one moment, I should forget my promiSe as well as duty to the best oS parents ? But fo it was.
“We were alone, as I have Said, Sor a few minutes. Mr. Douglas was playing on the harpsichord, when on his looking round and obferving my father had left us, he began singing and accompanying himfelf in the most fweet and plaintive Song I had ever heard. The words were Italian, but I B	knew
26	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
knew enough of that language to t particularly struck with the fubjef which was a complaint of hopelefs lov the object of it being,greatly fuperior t the enamour’d fusserer.
“ .This fong, tender, elegant, an pleasing in the utmost degree, M: Douglas performed in the highest Italia taste. It was even dangerous to hea: He fung it as if it were the inmojl expre [ton of his foul, and fixed his sine eye on mine. I blushed extremely;—-a in fact, he feemed to be exprefling h own fentiments in what be was singing and addrefling them to me. Havin finished it, he afked me how I liked th poetry of that fong?
“ It is very tender,„ replied I lool ing down.
“ Could you not pity, Madam, th unfortunate youth who should fuffer f feverely ?„
“ Perhaps I might—(I hesitated) •--if he deferved it.„
“ The
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	27
“ That instant he fuddenly rofe, and throwing himfelf at my feet, exclaimed, “ My angel,! am that unhappy lover,—
I am that unfortunate wretch, doom’d for ever to defpair.” In short, he declared a most violent paffion, which, he Said, from the first hour he faw me, took its birth : that he wished to heaven he had died in his late illnefs, fooner than be the prey which he now must be, to all the miferies—the torments of an hopelefs love—“ for hopelefs, added he, it mufl be.—But fay—fay you do not hate me.„ He took my hands and wetted them with his tears. For my part, 1 thought he behaved like one distrac" ted .* he, indeed, faid he was fo. Aster the most rapturous declaration, he be-feeched me only to declare I did not hate him.
“ Hateyow/ Mr. Douglas,„ I instant^ ly exclaimed, “ no—-far from it.”
“ At that moment, we heard my father coming through the gallery:—he luckily, however, did not obferve our B 2	confusion
2 8	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
confusion. I fay our, for it was mutual. Mr. Douglas had just time to re-feat himfelf at the harpsichord, when my father entered the room.
“ That dear, and unfufpe&ing parent, aster fome general conversation, faid, “ Mr. Douglas, I hope foon you will be able to take an airing—we have delightful rides in this neighbourhood,— and I shall shew you all that Devonshire affords.—It is now your long vacation at Oxford -your Summer re-cefs ; fo you can have no excufe for going there—I hope you will let us have your company as long as you can.„
“ I foon left the room, and retired, in imitation of fome of the heroines of - romance I had read of, into the most shady grove in the gardens ; where I fully ruminated on the heart-felt dif-courfe in the library. I need not add, it had made the deepest impreflion on my foul imaginable.
-	“ But
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	29
“ But my God! faid I, what have I done? O my father, I have at once broken my Solemn wortl to you, in not only listening patiently to a declaration oS the most violent passion, but I have even assented to it—nay, have evidently pitied him who made it, and confefjed I did So.—-Ah, rash Sophia, weak and imprudent!
“ Thus did I, for a Sew minutes, justly blame, as I deServed, my having Suffered a downright declaration of love, Srom a man who was almost a H stranger to me, and, by the SoStneSs of my behaviour, actually encouraged him.
“ But here let me draw a veil over my inexcuSable conduct. I ought here, indeed, to be ashamed to acknowledge, that, in the enSuing fortnight, Scarce a day passed, but that Mr. Douglas, by billets,—by the most passionate letters, which he contrived to flip into my hand, and which I foolish girl received,
B 3	still,
30	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
still vehemently urged his love, anc conjured me to give him fome kind o anfwer.
“ As I had, from my very cradle been trained up in sincerity, and th( most rigid truth, I naturally abhorrec every fpecies of deceit.—I was there fore determined to shew my fncerity a1 least, and, imprudent as I was, to the highest degree, I wrote an anfwer tc my very ardent lover, in which I a-vowed my affection.—Alas ! I considered not, that fuch a declaration w oust necessarily occasion innumerable difficulties and confequences not to be fur-mounted !
“ Mr. Douglas, after this my simple ponfeshon, appeared all rapture :—in short, we foon began perfectly to understand each other, and were quite upon the footing of lovers.
“ You will pleafe Madam,„ continued the amiable woman, “ to obferve, that this very critical period, was before the
anfwer
t	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	3 I
! anfwer was received from the tutor at Oxford, to whom my father had written.—
“ Sometimes (lost as I was in love) thefe thoughts would occur:—Good God ! what am I doing ? Who knows, after all, what character this too amiable young man may bear ? But thefe prudent reflections foon vanished : and I believe it is an undoubted fact, that the tyrant love, where he once takes poffeiTion, is the most arbitrary of all lawless tyrants whatever.
“ In a few days, one afternoon whilst we were sitting at tea, the post letters were brought.—My father, I faw opened one impatiently, and appeared struck and thoughtful, while reading its contents.
“ Pray heaven, thought I, this be not' a letter of bad news from the tutor at Oxford!—I foon fauntered into the garden, where my father, in fome little time after came to take his even-33 4	ing
32	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
ing walk. “ Sophia,„ faid he, very gravely “ I have received a letter from the tutor of Mr. Douglas at Oxford ; but I am equally furprifed, and indeed •grieved, to find his character not fuch as I either wished or expected.’,
“ Perliaps,” Said I extremely difcon-certed, “ the gentleman may be prejudiced against Mr. Douglas.„
“ Prejudiced !„ Said my father,—“ no, no, Mr. Goodwin is the most just of men :—I knew him formerly, and can rely on his word.„
“ I was struck with the utmost concern.
“ Here child,„ continued he, “ you may read the letter.” Which he gave me with the most diffatisfied air imaginable :—adding, “ I never can have any good opinion of a man who has deceived me in the account of himfelf—I am obliged to Mr. Douglas, for preferring my life, but no other connec-
-' tion
t
4	i
A LESSON FOR LOVERS. .	33
tion than common civility, will I ever have with him.”
“ Thefe words were a dagger to my heart: I thought I should have fainted.
I held out the letter with a trembling hand,
“ Nay,” faid my father, “ put it in your pocket, and give it me to-morrow. —-Read it at your leifure. Oh! my dear child, how happy am I, in forewarning you to avoid all particularity • for this young man !—what a happinefs that you have kept him at. a referved di[lance /„
“ Imagine Madam,” continued Mrs. Hopkins, “ what I endured at this moment. My guilt, to the most indulgent parent that ever lived, now Slushed at once to my view, in all its aggravating colours.—I ought—alas ! I know I ought, that instant, to have stung myfelf at the feet of this unfufpecting ■—this excellent father,, and confessed my rash—my unpardonable conduct:
B 5	but
34	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
but shame—rand probably my affection, for my too amiable lover restrained me.
“ I took a copy of Mr. Goodwill’s letter, it is here in my pocket-book: —I have,„ faid Mrs. Hopkiifs sighing bitterly, “ found it but too true an account, faying which, she prefented me with a letter containing thefe words:
Worthy Sir,	Oxford—
I am favoured with your’s ; but am forry I cannot give fo pleasing an account of my pupil Mr. Douglas as I could wish.—He is neither nephew, or heir to Sir Thomas Douglas ;—but, I believe, has fome Small connection with that gentleman.—-The fortune oS Mr. Douglas is very Small, and Some few fafhionable levities he has indulged in, have pretty much reduced his finances. •—He was intended Sor the church, but of late he Seems to have laid that Scheme entirely aside.—His understanding
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	35
ing is uncommonly good, fo that I hope, in time, he will fee his errors. His learning is very extensive, and his wit and humour remarkable.—Upon the whole, I believe Mr. Douglas’s vices are more the vices of the age, than of the man. At prefent, he is thoughtless and extravagant; and much addic< ted to pleafure.
I am, Sir, with all due refpect, Your most obedient Servant, Theophilus Goodwin.
“ This letterss continued the amiable woman, “ on my retiring, and examining its contents, stung me almost into agonies. I was fully convinced my father would never give his content to my marriage with Mr. Douglas ; on the other hand, I had given him fo much encouragement, that though not abfolutely engaged to him,Such were my high-liown, romantic notions of honour and gratitude, that 1 should have looked
on
$6	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
on myfelf as highly blameable, to have retracted my esteem, or to have altered my behaviour to my lover, merely be-caufe his fortune was fmall, or his character did not pleafe an old peevish fellow of a college, his tutor.-—Alasd faid I, what has fortune to do with Love P—A cottage with fuch a man as Douglas, would be a palace.—And after # all, 1 do not fee that this letter contains fo very—very dreadful a character as my poor father stems to apprehend.
“ I past a miferable night; and on returning the original letter to my dear parent, “ Are you not amazed,„ faid he, “ at the deceit of this young man, in palming himfelf on me for a nephew of Sir Thomas Douglas ?„
“ Perhaps,„ anfweredT, “ you might miflake him in that account.'—Words, Sometimes, are,„—
“ Here my father interrupted me..
“ Mistake him ! no—no------—I arn
not apt to be fo much miftakenss
“ I found
"f
jfjjj	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	57
“I found what stuck most with this y truly yV/? wr#/, was this deception of Mr. v Douglas:—for fuch, I must here remark, was my father’s extreme up-, rightnefs and integrity of heart, that it was a rule with him in life, whoever had once impofed on him by a falfity, that perfon, he never more looked upon, with the leaSt degree oS Savour, or forgiveness.
“ From the time, therefore, of the - unfortunate arrival of this tutor’s letter, my father visibly, to my thinking at least, altered his behaviour to Mr. Doui glas: he was civil, and behaved with* common good manners, but that was all. Nodonger did he hang on his' every word—no longer did he laugh incest • Santly at his brilliant wit and stashes of humour. Whether my lover faw this alteration, I know not:—but certain it is, he continually pressed me most vehemently to give him every proof of ’ my affection* consistent with virtue;---i	That
38	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
That he loved me, at this time, and a dently fo, I have not the least shado1
of a doubt.-----Alas! who knows nc
the extreme rapidity of two your hearts, intoxicated with the delirium < love ! In truth, we feemed to exist b\ for each other.
“ The Summer vacation being no' nearly expired, when it had been fixe for his departure Srom the Abbey, M Douglas appeared almost distracted he kneeled,—he wept,—he intreated would at length give him my hand i private.
“ Your father,” exclaimed he, “ n< ver—never, will give his conSent fear:—and I cannot live without m angelic Sophia.”
“ I Secretly, indeed, Seared my f ther would never more desire his con pany at the Abbey: a thought whic gave me the most poignant anguish.
“ Let us fly—let us fly to Scotland
faid my lover continually.------“ Be
ah.
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	39
ah,” faid Mrs. Hopkins, at this part of her story, “ how shall I be able now to proceed ?—wretch that I was to content to a step fo rash !-—fo mad!—To plead my youth, alas! is but a poor „ excufe :—no—felf-accufation shall attend my every Sentence.—I was unpardonable ,—wholly inexcuSable.—Do you not detest a wretch, madam (to me Said she weeping) who could deceive the tenderest, best oS parents in So ca-' pital a manner ?—do you not abhor my conduct ?„
“ I beSeech you, my dear Madam,” Said I interrupting, “ lay not the blame
So heavily on yourSelS.-----You was
wrong certainly, but there were many extenuations of your fault.—Your extreme youth,—your inexperience,— your having no mother to guide or direct,—your gratitude, which was So • strongly excited for the preserver of your father’s life,—a first passion in a young heart, tender and sincere;—not
to
40	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
to mention, what indeed I think greath in your favour, that your worthy pa rent had certainly by his partiality fo: Mr. Douglas, greatly forwarded you: attachment for him ;—all thefe thing, considered, I must fay, (continued I •there is much—much, to be faid ii your behalf.-—Pray proceed. I fup pofe you both, fearlefs of confequences stew on the wings of love to Scot land.„
“ Alas !”—faid the amiable woman: “ too furely I took that fatal step.--One moon-light night, in an evil hour I fet out with my fond Douglas, in a poshchaife and four, which waited in the park for this, mad fcheme ; and. notwithstanding the great distance, we arrived at Gretna-Green in lefs than sis days.—This affair compleated, out next equally romantic step was to return to the Abbey, and throw ourfelves at the feet of my much injured parent. 5—T'liis being our vain intention we accordingly
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	41 '
cordingly fet out from Scotland for ‘ Devonshire, I having fufficient cash by ; me for that wife expedition.
“ Notwithstanding fome moments ' of pain for wshat my father would feel on the account of our flight, I fuppofe i I was, at this period, the happiest of | human beings. My Douglas was past • sionately tender—tender to excefs.— j In short, we were wholly given up to joy and love.—
; “To love which knows no wish, Nor no ambition, but itfelfP
“ In fine, we were now arrived near the village in which stood my father,s feat, when a thought occurred to me, that we had better first stop at a most worthy clergyman’s (the rector of our parish) a very particular friend and intimate of my father’s ; and who alSo, with bis good wife, had been from'my cradle extremely kind to me.—Our chaife and four then was bid to stop
at
r
42	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
at the houfe of Mr. Woodville, th worthy rector.
“ He, good man, who was sitting i his porch, enjoying his evening pip< was astonished to fee a carriage dm up in fuch haste to his silent mansioj He approached us, and I had began t alight.
“ Merciful Heaven !” faid M. Woodville, “ is it you Mifs Sophia ?— I beg your pardon, Madam—for I luj pofe you are Mrs.—Mrs. Douglas b this time.„
“ I am ft faid I, with an air of fati faction. Heavens ! as if to sty from tender father, into the arms of a ma of whofe morals I had heard but a indifferent account, was a matter c pleafure !—“ Pray Sir, tell me,” Laid ! “ how does my father ?„
“ Well in health,„ anfvvered he “ but„-—he stopped and sighed.
“ We now entered the parlom where Mrs. Woodville was sitting
Sh
■	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	43
II She received me with a look of con-
■	cern and difpleafure.—She rung the
■	bell for tea, and we fat down. The J worthy woman, methought regarded 1 me, however, with an eye of pity, in 5 the midst of her astonishment.
j| “ My dear child,” faid she, (for fo I she always ufed to call me) “ you look I fatigued.”
J “I am all impatience,„ I cried, “ to $ fee my father.”
'	“ Mr. Woodville shook his head.
“ I will not flatter you,'’returned he, “ he is, indeed, extremely difpleafecl at
•	your abrupt, unadvifed flight, and I fear,—greatly fear—he never will con-
; fent to fee you.„ “ O Heavens !„ I cried, “ Mr. Douglas and I will kneel —will implore—will die at his feet.— i Oh ! Sir! he muft—he will forgive us.„ [	“ Here my hufband, who posseffed
j every power of rhetoric, in his un-} bounded flow of the most pershasive
•	language pleaded our caufe; but in
vain..
y
t
44	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
vain. The good man only replied, ii was out of his power to ferve us ; foi that my father had vowed never more to fee us, and that he had begged om names might be never mentioned tc him.
“ I wept, and interceeded no more,
“ We remained that night at the worthy Rector’s.—Mr. Douglas, in the morning, again applied to our kind host to interceed for us.—We however thought it most expedient to write a letter expreshve of penitence, and af-furances of future duty. This we did, and on our knees, in 'the prefence of Mr. Woodville, it was fent, but returned unopened.
“ Come,„ faid Mr. Woodville, wiping a tear from his benevolent eye, “ I believe, young folks, you love each other—and what is done is past recovery : I will go to the Abbey, and try what can be farther pleaded in your caufe.—Come Dolly,” fpeaking to his
wife,
I	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	4jf
I wife, “ put on your hat, you shall go I with me :—we will fee what our joint I endeavours can do.”
I -	“ How truly kind was this !
I “To the Abbey they went on their kind errand ; whilst we remained in a state of the most dreadful fufpence : but it was Soon changed to terrible certainty ; for on their return, Mr. Woodville faid, fo far from hearing the least tittle in our favour, that my father had expreffed great anger to him and his wife, for daring to interceed for a man, who had, he faid, fo far abufed the rights of even common hofpitality, as to bafely steal the daughter’s affections, whilst her deceived\ parent was hugging the fnake in his breast:—that my deceit —my perfidy and. ingratitude to a fond father, had now for ever obliterated all his tenderness : in short, that he renounced us both—that he would never give us a shilling—and that he utterly gave us up for ever.
“ I fainted
46	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ I fainted—and can only remember I found myfelf, on recovery, in the arms of my fond hufband, who was tenderly kiffing, and embracing me ;— and assuring me, he would be father—. hufband—-lover—every friend in one.
“ Think not my fweet love,” faid he, clafping me to his bofom, “ that , the want of your fortune can be any diminution to my affection :—no, whether you brought the wealth of the Indies—or were poor as beggary itfelf, whilst I can call my Sophia by the name of Douglas, it is to me a matter of no difference.,,
“ In this manner did this then tern del* hufband endeavour to comfort me, but I wept without ceasing,—as if I had even then a perception of my future mifery.
“ We then began to consider what step to take next.—We had only one guinea betwixt us. My aunt had left me a legacy of five hundred pounds,
which
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	47
which had been paid into the hands of my father’s lawyer. This was, undoubtedly, in my power then to receive :—and, indeed, all I had then to depend on. Whilst we were talking this matter over, Peter, my father’s old fervant, arrived at Mr. Woodville’s —I had a glimpfe of him, but he Teemed to shun me.
“ Peter,„ faid I, bursting into tears, “ will you not fpeak to me ?„
“ Ah, Madam, how could you”— he could fay no more.
“ He had brought, it stems, a note from my father, of utter renunciation, if I may fo exprefs myfelf.---—This was followed by fome other fervants bearing all my boxes, trunks and wearing apparel. On feeing thefe with the note arrive, a fudden gleam of joy darted on my foul, but it was as quickly dissipated, as is the lightening,s flash, on my tearing open the billet, and reading theSe dreadSul words:
“ My
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ My child that was,
“ YOU have broke my heart-—yet I shall die with this my last wish, that you may never have caufe to repent of having bafely deceived your poor, fond father, who fo tenderly doated on you from your earlieft infancy, for the rash —the fatal fake of throwing yoursielf into the arms of a worthiest—an extravagant libertine.
“ Your Aunt’s legacy, as in equity bound, I shall fend you, this evening, by my lawyer :—from me, expect nothing.—I am as much afflicted at your deceit, as with any other part of your
shameful conduct.------1 desire to hear
no more from you; which is all, from
Your greatly injured, and abufed Parent.”
“I wonder
■' 3	/	"	*
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	49
“ I wonder Madam,” continued Mrs. Douglas, for I shall call her no more Mrs. Hopkins ; “ how I out-lived this letter—cruel I cannot call it—for 1 dele rve cl it—and even more.—On reading it, I fell into strong hysterics, and remained very much disordered the next day.
“ The lawyer came, and paid the five hundred pounds in Bank-bills. A message was Sent, at the Same time, to poor Mr. Woodville, desiring him not to harbour us any longer. I think I before mentioned, that my poor father was inflexible, whenever he found he had been treated with deceit. Many worthy families,.in the neighbourhood, I understood, had interceededfor me. but in vain ; among whom was a Mrs. Summers, of whom I shall have occasion to Speak in my story.—My father, however, forbade her, on pain of his eternal difpleafure, ever to mention my name more.
C	“ My
ho	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ My God! faid I, what is to be done ?
“ Mr. Woodville kindly advifed us to leave Devonshire.—“ Indeed,” continued he, “ I cannot, I grieve to fay, wish you to remain here longer, after what my kind patron has Said.”
“We took this hint, and Soon determined to Set out for London;—that place of general rendezvous for the imprudent, the idle, and dissipated; as well as the buSy and industrious.
“ On the morning oS our departure for the great metropolis, I felt an un-uSual SadneSs at my heart.—Something Seemed to whiSper to my Soul I was undone.—Mrs. Woodville pressed me to her maternal boSom: she even wept over me.
“ We may live, Said l,perhaps to meet again.
“ I got into the chaiSe with my beloved hufband :—but in paSIing by the avenue which led to the abbey, I sighed—
I drop’d
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	51
I drop’d a tear, which Mr. Douglas tenderly kissed away*—We Set out, I should Say, with all my boxes and trunks, and our five hundred pounds, my portion. At London we arrived in SaSety, after a three days journey.” Mrs. Douglas was just got to this period of her interesting story, when the declining Sun, and my watch, warned me to defer any farther curiosity for the preSent, and wait till the next evening for the conclusion of her affecting tale.
“ I must now,” faid I, “ depart; but will remember to be with you again tomorrow, at five in the afternoon.— Adieu, dear Mrs. Douglas, then, for the preSent; remember you are Safely landed at London —I shall be all impatience for the hour of hearing how you went on there.„
She sigh’d—and shook her head.
4 I will go,” faid she, with a Sweet languid Smile, “ to my Spinning wheel.„ C 2	ASter
hi	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
After a kind leave taken, I hastened home in a State oS mind leSs tranquil than I had leSt it.
I was extremely punctual the day following in my visit to the cottage, and had previously fent a provision of tea, defiring it might be prepared in the little bower.—In the bower, therefore, we drank our tea, the lovely twins playing round us.
Mrs. Douglas rofe every moment in not only my esteem, but my admiration: the elegance of her manner,— her fine understanding,—in short, a thoufand graces I obferved in her, which strongly attracted my attention.
Our repast being over,—“ Well,” faid I, “ pray continue your interesting history, and I beg you will continue to be very minute
“ I would do every thing to oblige you, Madam/,'—she replied bowing.
. “At London we fafely arrived.— Where, at once, as if our finances were
to
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	53
to last for ever, my hufband took ex" treme handfome lodgings in Pall Mall. I remonstrated, that a fmall apartment would have been more Suited to our circumstances:—but this he would not hear oS.
“ Hang care,„ Said he, “ let us enjoy the prefent, and leave the future to take care of itSeiS.—You know we are commanded to do So.„
“ ThoughtleSs man !„ Said I.—He Smiled, and kiffed me.
“ The first two months were wholly4 Spent in dissipation and the public amuSements. I had never before been in London,' and my poor, imprudent huSband, was continually proposing our going to the play or the opera, he having an extravagant passion for both amuSements.
“ The hurry, the constant variety oS Scenes, and the great bustle of the noiiy metropolis, did at first Somewhat divert my thoughts from regretting the oS my excellent father’s affection; yet G 3	whenever
54	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
whenever it did occur, I felt it very Sc-verely:—though in truth, as I have Somewhere read, “to be beloved by the dear object we love, and to enjoy that love, is more than a balance for all the miferies and misfortunes oS the world.—My Douglas was all to me.— In possessing him my fate was, as I foolishly imagined, evenhappinefs unmixed. My huSband was indeed tenderneSs it-Self':—possession had not Seemed to make the least abatement oS his paflion.
“ In the Space of four months we had already Spent above an hundred pounds. —-I was frighted at this:—but whoever knows London, and its expensive amuSements, will rather be Surprized the Sum was not larger.
“ For Heaven’s Sake, my dear Douglas,” Said I, “ let ns consider our lest fening, mouldering state oS cash.— What do you intend to do?—Let us think how we are to live.—I shudder to think oS this expensive town—Let us retire rather into Some remote county
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	h$
in the north of England, and there take a little cottage—no matter how mean.,, “To this expostulation and advice, I was anfwered,—“ Sophia, you are a very pretty girl-but indeed, child, a most miferable reafoner in thefe cafes.” “ Blinded as my affection for my huSband made me, I could however fee that he was dissipated, thoughtlefs, and unfettled to the last degree. Sometimes he talked of getting a genteel post, by means of a friend, in one of the public offices;—and at another of going on the stage.
“ I care not,„ I ufeel to fay, “ what your profeffion is, provided you are in fome honest way of getting a livelihood.”
“ Mr. Douglas possessed an infinity of mirth and humour, and whene ver I gravely remonstrated on our declining finances, he would either laugh, or gaily repeat,
“ Since life is a fpan;
“ Let’s drew, the way over, with flowers. *
“ He
i
56	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ He came to me one day in violent haste, faying, “ My angel,„ (by this appellation he frequently called me) “ do give me a bank bill of fifty pounds.—Here’s my dog of a taylor at Oxford has found me out, and the rogue wants his money/’
“ Well,„ faid I, “ I am glad (giving him the note) we have the Sum.—Do you owe more, my dear, at Oxford ?”
“ Only," returned he carelessly, “ a-bout two hundred pounds, and forty guineas I borrowed from my old tutor Godwinshying which he left the room humming an Italian air.
“ My God!’, thought I, what will become of us?”
“ I now began Soon to find mySelSin a condition (being Some months prcg-^ nant) that would Soon be a considerable encreaSe to our expences : I therefore, more vehemently than ever, desired we might now quit our very handfome
lodgings,
A LESSON FOR .LOVERS.	57
lodgings, and retire to fome other better fuited to our circumstances.
“ This,at last,shy poor carelefs Douglas confented to :—and we took a Small unfurnished part oS a houfe in a retired Street near Cavendish-Square.
“ Being determined to be as frugal in buying our furniture as possible, and having heard of a large auction, in the next street, with a variety of necessary houshold goods to be diS'pofed of, I mentioned it to my hushand, and he Said he would go there and purchafc fuch articles as were proper.
“ We had now no more cash remaining than two hundred pounds ; one hundred of which, he took in his pocket for the above necessary furniture, and immediately walked out for the auction. —But, good heavens! what was my vexation, when instead of ufefu! articles of life I expected, Mr. Douglas had Sent home from the fale, a harpsichord, of forty guineas price, with a pedal stop, C 5	and
$8	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
and about six old pictures in gilded frames.
“ Are you abfolutelymad, Mr. Douglas ?” Said I, on his return.
“ My dear girl,” anSwered he, “ the pictures are of old Paul Veronefe, and Claude Lorraine: never was Such a good bargain ! they are worth two hundred guineas, and I got them Sor only fixty. —They are amazingly fine : a treafure for a lover as I am oS virtu.—Never was Such a pennyworth—I have made a good morning’s work.—I shall have them cleaned and brushed up, and then you will rejoice with me that I have had an opportunity of making So eafy a purchaSe.”
“ I stood aghast.
“ As to the harpsichord,” Said he, there is a richneSs in the tone, I could not resist—A peculiar SweetneSs.—Indeed, that is as great a bargain as the pictures.”
“ AH
A* LESSON' FOR LOVERS.	59
“ All this, Mr. Douglas,” replied I, “ may be, but, you know, we really stand in need of the common necejfaries: of life.„
Angry as I was, with my thoughtless hushand, his joy appeared fo extreme on his morning,s acquisition, that I half forgot my anger.
“ He Sat down to; the harpsichord, and played a delightful concerto, that I should1 hear its tone.. When over, he claSped me to his boSom, and thus was my anger, for that time, done away.,
“ Our really neceSTary Surniture being then Soon after procured, reduced our Small stock of cash to sifty pounds only.—I began to- be excessvely un~ eafy; but, alas ! what were thefe uneasinesses to the dreadful, heartsselt asi fliction I experienced when one day, as I was sitting in a melancholy mood alone, I happened to take up a newspaper, and. read, the following paragraph ! ■
“ On
60	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ On Sunday died, after a lingering “ illnefs, which he fustained with chriS-“ tian fortitude, Robert Morley, Efq. “ of West Abbey, in Devonshire: a “ gentleman fo univerfally beloved, that “ his death is lamented by all who had “ the happinefs of his acquaintance.’,
“ O my father!—my dearest father!” I exclaimed—and violently shrieking—-fainted away.
“ My hushand found me in that condition, and, indeed, strove all he could by every argument, to foothe and comfort me:—but I resisted all comfort,—. violently crying out, “ It is I—-it is I have killed my poor parent! Oh wretch that I am!—it is 1 who brought him with Sorrow to the grave.'’—And, indeed, Said Mrs. Douglas, bursting into tears, there was every reaSon to Sup-poSe my conduct had been the cauSe oS • the fatal lingering illneSs, as mentioned, as he had ever been remarkably healthy for his years.-—Yes—yes —it was my
mad—
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	61
mad—my shameful folly, that destroyed that beSt of men !—and, alas ! I foon •—foon found his pt'ophetic words too fully verified.
“ For Several weeks I continued in a most miSerable State :—and to add to my Sorrows, we were now perpetually beSet with duns, for debts my hufband had either contracted in Oxford, or London, before I knew him.—Our last fifty pounds was now gone, and i had been obliged to pay off Some oS thoSe debts with Selling my watch Set with diamonds, which had been my mother's.
“ I should have before-Said, that when my eyer-lamented Sather Sent me my wearing apparel, my jewels and all my little trinkets oS value, were Sent me at the Same time.
“ Before I had parted with the above watch, I had Sold a pair of fine diamond earings, and we were now living on the Sale of my Brussell’s laced lappets.
“ Mr.
62	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ Mr. Douglas talked of many wild Schemes oS getting into Some way of living:—but they ended in nothing.
“ One day he began tranSlatingSorthe bookSellers, by which he certainly might have got Some prosit, but Such was- his remissneSs—his careleSs neglect—and entire dishpation,that he could get little enployment oS that kind.—And now to complete my Sorrows, if not already done, methought, I perceived a kind oS referve, or rather coolneSs, in the behaviour oS my huSband, which shocked my foul.—-I attributed it however, to the dreadful state of our circumstances, which I imagined had Soured his temper I was however grieved beyond expreS-Sionr— His anSwers were oSten pettish, as on my alking a question he would Say. “ How should you, a woman, know any thing of this matter ?„ with many other peevish retorts of the like kind.
“ I do not here mean, that my huSband treated me with unkindngst in
any
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	63
any essential matter.—I attributed the change I mention merely to the situation, of our unfortunate affairs,—or, perhaps, to that too common indifference which generally takes place after a twelve-month’s marriage.
“ He frequently now staid out till midnight, without afligning any apparent caufe for it. One time in particular, he returned in high Spirits.—I was sitting up for him, reading, by a fmall glimmering fire.—He gave me a kifs, and flung twenty guineas into my lap.
“ There Sophia,” faid he, “ have I not been lucky?”
“ Lucky, my Henry!” returned I, much amazed, “ how did you get them ?M
“ Afk no question/, Said he, “ and be Satisfied with my good fortune.”
“ Another night he produced ten gui-^vr.i,Reas, and So on; but he ever evaded my question how he came by the money. I was a good deal alarmed, fearing he
was
64	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
was become that defpicable character a gamester.
“ I now in one month more expected to become a mother, when one afternoon, as I was sitting alone, ruminating on my distrest situation, I received a post letter from the Mrs. Summers I before mentioned in Devonshire. —I had corresponded with her oSten since I came to London, but Srom that kind of SalSe pride or shame, which all feel who have brought down ruin on themfelves, as I had done, I never mentioned in my letters our low circumstances.—I had often, and indeed truly faid, that Mr. Douglas behaved with much affection.
“ Mrs. Summers,, whom I most sincerely loved, and whom I would have been glad to oblige in any instance, she having been extremely kind, though unfuccefsful iff her interceshons for me to my justly ossended father, now wrote to acquaint me, that her darling daughter,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	65
ter, and only child, was coming to London to have her jewels new fet, to have an Italian stnging master, for fome little time, she having a remarkable fine voice; and, in short, for a jaunt oS pleaSure; and that, as we had been old School fellows, she should be particularly happy iS I would permit her Lucy to be a Sew weeks with me.
“ I was rejoiced at this. Lucy Summers, was my dearest, and most intimate Sriend ; we were just oS the Same age, had been inseparable intimates at the boarding School, where I left her, and where she had remained till aSter my foolish elopement.
“ Mrs. Summers politely in her letter begged I would inform her if Lucy’s coming would be any way inconvenient ; adding, she had no acquaintance in London but myfelf, and could not choofe her daughter to be in a lodging-houfe alone. .
“I should
66	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ I should here fay, she did not know I was fo near my delivery.
“ I communicated this letter to my hushand, who by all means faid, he desired the young lady might come to us.
“ It will make no difference, faid I, in our table:—Lucy Summers is not accustomed to elegance ; and I am convinced her good mother will amply make up to us any little expence we may be at on her account.
“ I wrote as kind an invitation as I could, and in leSs than ten days MiSs Summers arrived,.—Her mother could not accompany her on account of a gouty complaint to which she was Subject.
“ My friend, whom I had not Seen, as I Said before, since I left the School, was much grown. She was a tall, fine girl, always rather oS the large size:— handSome, but not delicate, having Something in her air and manner that bordered on the maSculine :—however,
she
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	67
she was at this time a fine full-formed girl: barely eighteen, perfectly good natured, much addicted to romping, carelefs, and free.
* “ I received my old companion with an unfeigned joy, and for an hour I perfectly forgot all my griefs. We laughed and talked over a number of stories and Scrapes at School, which we had been engaged in, with great pleasure, and my Douglas joined in our mirth—in short, he Spent a very a-greeable evening, and did not retire to bed till a late hour:—my hufband, who certainly was the most agreeable companion in the world for a focial hour, was in high fpirits. We were no fooner entered our apartment than he began laughing.
“ My Sophia, what a great bouncing, ma'fculine girl, this friend of yours is i A mere Devonshire hoyden !■—What indelicacy!—not the least degree oS foftnefs, or feminine beauty about her!
With
63	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
With the stride and air of. a downright trooper, she has the face of a country rfiilkmaid! Her voice (for she had fung a fong after Supper) is the mere Squall, and Scream of a common ballad singer. My liSe for it, iS she should be taught by all the Italian singers in London, they never can give her tafle :•—she is devoid oS Sentiment.-—The girl has good eyes,—but her immenfe perfon, and her very robust appearance, render her a perfect antidote.—How old is she ?„ “ About eighteeen, replied I, hut, for Heaven’s fake, my dear Harry, pray be civil to her:—you know I have • great obligations to her worthy mother. —-You shall not, Said I laughing, abuSe my Lucy thus :—she is a good natured girl, and deServes better treatment.’,
“ Good natured she may be, he re. plied, -but1 it is astonishing to me, tsht you, who are So remarkably delicate yourfelf, should be So attached to Such a trooper in petticoats. Never was there
So
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	69
fo strong a contrast as there is betvveen you too.—But, what am I to /quire this great girl about to the play, and the opera?—She never was in London, I think you faid, before :—I shall have a fine time of it, if I am to be her chapron to public places ;—but, as your friend, 1 certainly will shew her every civility
in my power.------How long will she
stay?„
“ Till after my recovery from my approaching confinement, undoubtedly, returned I. Do, dear Harry, be civil to her, I befeech you.„
“ I will—I will—Said he—but she is a perfect tramontane.’,
“ A week passed on very agreeably on all sides.—I was glad of Mifs Summers’s company, as I thought a third perfon prevented my hufband frorri brooding over the difagreeable circumstance of our low finances.—As he often produced five or ten guineas out of his pocket, I was convinced the
gaming-
yO	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
gaming-tables were his refource; a thought which gave me the most poignant anguish.
“ My young friend, who had never feen Garrick, at length, attended by Mr. Douglas, went to Drury Lane theatre to the tragedy oS Lear. As my condition made me think it not So prudent for me to venture into public, I stayed at home, and to my great Surprise, they did not return till near twelve o’clock.
“ Lucy, Said I, obServing her hair fomewhat dishevelled,—why your cap is half off.’,
“ That wretch your hufband, replied she laughing, has quite demolished my drefs.—Never was fuch a romp.„
A romp !—-faid I,—I thought I had been acquainted with all hk vivacities, but I never knew he was a romp before.„
“The following day, this romping continued:—indeed I laughed heartily to fee them.
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	71
“ Lucy, faid I, you have quite the Spirit of an abfolute rioter:—I shall have all my china, tables and chairs broke: —do, good folks, take care, you do not hurt each other.”
“ A fqueamif wife, would perhaps Sometimes have been rather diSpleaSed at the liberties which this Species of a* mufement, called romping, necessarily occasions. Lucy,s cap was flung on the ground, whilst she was flapping Douglas with her flipper, which he had tom from her foot.—I fay fome wives, would have frowned at this, but I was unfuf * _ petting, and always adopted that couplet of the poet,
“ O free for ever be his eye, ii Whofe heart to me is true.”
“ At length the dreadful hour arrived of my being feized with the pangs of child-birth. Dreadful I repeat—for I fuppofe no woman ever fussered more.
I laid a whole week in agonies, arid was attended by two furgeons : at last
I was,
72	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
I was, however, delivered of twins—. thefe dear babes now with me.
“ The extreme weakness I was now in, rendered it necessary I should be kept as quiet as possible.—Mifs Summers Sometimes would look in upon me ; but I constantly begged she would not confine herfelf in my apartment: besides, I was too ill to talk.—My hufband, to my astonishment, did not shew that joy, on the birth of the children, as is ufual, with most father’s, at their first becoming fo.
“ Sophia,” faid r he one day, “ I should be more with you, but you know one cannot leave our guest quite alone.„
“ True, faid I, I hope you try to amufe her?”
“ I might, indeed, have heard they were amufedt) as even when I-was at the worst, I could hear the harpsichord going,and at other times, violent sits of laughter, rompings, Sec.
“ I
A LESSON FOR LOVERS. * 7J
“ I began now to be able to sit up in my bed, though extremely weak.— My hushand and Mifs Summers had that afternoon drank tea in the room.
“ Harry, faid I to my hushand, I shall be quite angry if you do not look at your little girls.”
“ Aye, girL, Said he, I wish they had been boys. What are we to do with two girls ?”
“ Nay, faid I, it pleafed Heaven to fend girls, anti we ought not to repine at that.
“ Heaven! exclaimed he, laughing, what had Heaven to do with it ?—Upon my word, Sophy, you grow fo folemn —fo prudish”—
“ Do I ? faid I faintly. There was Something in his manner So inexpressibly cold——So. indifferent, that, joined with the very weak State I was in, I could not help shedding a few Silent tears, which were unperceived.
vol. n.	D	“ That
\
74	.A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ That evening my hushand attended Mifs Summers to a new opera.
“ As he now could not fo often fre quent thofe gaming houfes, where ] was convinced he had got his late resources oS cash, I was obliged to Supply him, for his preSent occasions, with a Sum which aroSe Srom the fale of two very handSome Suits of cloaths, I had before my marriage. In short, I almost stript my Self, and had nothing now of real value remaining, but a very beautiful diamond siecklace, which I much esteemed, and which I was determined nothing but the last neceshty
should make me part with.
\
“ I had now lain in Several weeks, but still remained extremely weak, low, and languid ;—obliged ibequently to lay on the bed for Several hours in the day.
“ One afternoon, when I was justlaid down, my hushand came into the room,
and
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	75
and told me he was excessively pressed, for a fmall Sum.
“ I shall go out to morrow morning, faid he, to meet a gentleman, who, I have the pleafure of informing you, will effectually ferve me, with Lord S—, in a genteel post:—but there are fees — fees — on thefe occasions to clerks, Sec. and where to raife a fum necessary for the occasion, I know not. •—•Is there any thing left Sophia?”
“ Nothing,faid I sighing, but our very last refource—the diamond necklace— and if you are fo pressed,—why, you muSt have it.—-But do, my dear, manage it frugally.—We have -nothing now remaining.—My rings are, nay even my common wearing apparel is gone
—all gone !-----Here, take my keys,
and you will sind the necklace—it is in iny bureau."
“ My hushand accordingly put the necklace in his pocket, and coming to Da	tltc
76	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
the bed-side, he gave me a flight kifs, and left the room.
“I dropped afterwards into a short Slumbei’, which was interrupted by Mifs Summers. She fat down in a chair, by the bed-side, and began chatting in her volatile way—it was now about eight in the evening;.
“ .Lucy, Said I, lend me your Salts, my poor head akes Sadly.”
“ She took out her pocket handker-chief with her Silts :—that instant our maid came to desire she would come down to a milliner who had brought her bill.—Mils Summers then hastily left the room ; and I putting my hand on the table, which stood cloSe to the bed-side, to take up the Salts, obServed, with the pocket handkerchieS, a letter much rumpled ; taken out, I SuppoSe, by mistake, with the other things.
“ I was however exceshvely SurpriSed, as by the light of the candle, I Saw it
was
(A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	77
was written in my hufband’s hand-writing. I took it up, as may be naturally imagined, and there being no one pre-fent but my two fweet babes asieep by my side, I read it. But, good Heavens ! I was almoft Struck dead—petrified with astonishment, and horror, when I Sound it was the most paSSionate love-letter that imagination can Sorm, from the most ungrateful oS all men, my hushand, to MiSs Summers.—By the date, I Saw it had been written four days beSore.—It gave me clearly to understand, that she had fully granted him the entire possession of her perfon; and in his rapturous manner oS expression, he moSt ardently defired her to grant him a repetition of his former happi-neSs that night ;—that he should give the ufual signal at her chamber-door; that Jhe alone was the wife oS his Soul; —that he now knew what it was to love;—and that he was hers, and only hers, for ever.
D 3	•“ Jt
73	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ It is amazing to me that, on reading this molt dreadful letter, I preserved myienfes:—and what is still as wonderful, that I did not faint.—On the contrary, heaven, that instant, feemed to infpire me with that just refentment, which Such cruel, bafe, and unmerited tifage deferved.—I felt my Spirit rouS-eci:—and at that moment my foul Spurned the leaft idea of having any future connection with fuch villany.
“ Abandoned man ! faid I, at the very period that thy poor, deceived wife, who had Sacrificed her father, fortune, fame, and every worldly consideration for thy fake; who was even on the brink of the grave, and that occasioned by the dreadful perils of child birth on thy account:—then-then to Seduce—to betray my friend entrusted to our hoSpitable care !—-fe-duce did I Say ?—Ah, vile girl U—deceitful—cruel-—haSe—ungrateful creature!	.
" My
(A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	79
“ My heart feemed, at this moment, almost bursting with rage and refent-ment;—when, looking round, I fpyed my children.—Softnefs now took pof-Seshon of my foul, and a flood of tears came to my relief. I wept till I could weep no more,--and again feemed to be re-animated with fome little degree of Spirit.—'The firmnefs that ever attends abfolute tiefpair, now feemed to calm my grief;—and a thought instantly occurred which, with Surprizing reSolution, I put into practice.—I rang the bell Sor my maid.
“ Nanny, Said I, give me pen, ink, and paper, I want to write a billet.
“ I instantly took my hufband’s horrid letter, and folding it up, put it in a cover, in which I wrote the few following words.
Mr. Douglas,,
For the future, caution the next young woman you jeduce, to be more careful of your letters ; lest, as in the D 4	prefent
80	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
prefent cafe, they should fall by accident into the hands of an injured wife, who has Sacrificed her-all for your happiness.
Sophia.
“ This letter I carefully Sealed with his encloSed; and ringing my bell, afked the maid if her master was in the parlour. She Said yes, and that he had just Sent out for a cold chicken and lobsters, tor himfelf and Mifs Summers.—
“ Well, Said I carelessly, give him this letter,—I am now going to reft, and do not come in again to disturb me: —I want nothing—^nothing for fupper, this night.
“ I felt myfelf raifed.—No, faid I (the maid being gone) I will not meanly yield to this vile wrong :—my just indignation will fufliciently fupport my Spirits'*
“ The clock now struck eleven.— What I felt, at this dreadful period, I cannot defcrihe, it can be imagined only:
—A fort
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	8*
—A. Sort of gloomy fatisfaction aroSe in my Soul, however, that I had informed the most deceitful of men, and his equally guilty paramour, that I was Sully acquainted with their perfidy.
“ It is needleSs to Say what night I pasted.—My hushand had not, it may be imagined, Slept in my apartment, oil account of my iilneSs Sor Several, weeks: I was therefore alone, Save the company of my two ' Sweet babes.—One Lour I wept over them, the next, almost frantic, I execrated the vile Douglas, and his lewd affociate :—at length, just at day-break, I dropped into a gentle doSe.—Some little noiSe having waked me, again all my miferies returned.—My maid coming in„ I enquired, I know not why,, if it was a fine morning.—Yes madam, Said she, it is a lovely one.. They have charm-,-ing weather.„
“ Lhey ! returned I, who V
“ Mils. Summers, and my mashers* D 5	madam;
82	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
madam, they Set out this morning in a
post chaiSe and four, and are gone Some
journey,--to Dover, I think.—-I heard
them both Say, last night, they hoped
to be in France in a Sew days.”
“ What more the girl Said I know
not ;■—for now my late philoSophy for-
fook me,—a.hidden pang feized my
heart,—I shrieked,—and Sell into strong
hysterics. A violent Sever Succeeded •/
this agony, in which, I was afterwards informed, I lay three weeks, perfectly delirious —Sometimes raving on the name of Douglas ;—and at other, calling out Sor falfe Lucy Summers.—I know nothing of what past at this dreadful period, but what I have since been told '.-—-I only remember, when I recovered the ufe of my reafon, my weak-neSs was fo extreme, that my voice could with difficulty be heard.—I feemed, at that moment, to have but an imperfect view of my miferies.—I looked round my bed.—“ Had I not, faid I in
a faint
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	§3
a faint accent, had I not once two dear little babes ?—Had I not once an hufband —Had I not, too, a friend ?„
“ O madam,,’ interrupted I, the amiable woman at this affecting part of her history burSting into tears ;—“ I cannot bear this—but yet—go on.”
“ I looked round,„ continued she ; “ and faw three people kneeling round my bed.—One was my maid, the other a nuisse, and the third a gentlewoman, by her appearance, with a cordial in her hand, of which she pershaded me to take a little. This humane perfon, I afterwards learnt, was the widow of a clergyman, who lodged directly opposite the houfe I lived in, and though an entire Stranger to me, yet, from the apothecary who attended me, had heard So very melancholy an account of my caSe and, situation, in being abandoned by my hushand, that, shorn motives of mere humanity only, it - v	Seems
84	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
Seems, she had often visited me, though, alas, I knew it not! To this worthy woman, who was herfelf but in very moderate circumstances, I may Say, under heaven, I owe my recovery.—She now conStantly Saw me every day ;— she brought me the most nourishing Sood, and would lay my languid head on her kind maternal boSom.
“ You are very—very good madam, Slid I, indeed I want your aid.”
“ A fortnight had now past, when I was just able to sit up a few hours every day.—My poor babes uSed to be brought to me, and I wetted them with my tears. —Mrs. Harris, the name oS my kind friend, did not on theSe occasions, like most impertinent confolers, blame my grieSs, but tenderly Soothed, and mixed her tears with mine.
“ I was now able to tell her my Sad history—(little as my difobedience to the best of parents could recommend me
to
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	8^
to the eSteem of any one)—and I alfo informed her of my wretched state of poverty.—Indeed, at this time, I had not a guinea in the world.—Mrs. Harris looked on me with the most tender compaSIIon.
“ I grieve, Said she, my dear, that I, from a very contracted income, have it not in my power to be of ejjential Service to one I So sincerely commife-rate.—I will, however, dilcharge for you this expensive nurfe of yours, and likewiSe your apothecary’s bill.”
“ How truly kind was this !
“ This angelic woman, for So I must call her, talked to me So Sensibly, So properly, and with So much Christian piety, that though she could not cure, she, at least hufhed my griefs, and'enabled me to bear them with Some Small degree of calmneSs, and resignation.
“ But I now was to experience an- • other misfortune in the lofs of this dear friend.—-She was one morning found
dead
r
/
86	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
dead in her bed, having been feized with an apoplectic fit.—-Thus was I deprived of my last and only remainingfource of aid and comfort!—But God.s will be done, I humbly faid.
“ When I was able to think on my forlorn situation, and in fome meafuie relieved from the violence of this last affliction, I at once determined to quit my lodgings, and to remove with my' poor babes, whofe Smiles were now my only comSort, into Some retired corner oS the town, where I would take by the week an obScure garret.
“ I talked with the landlord of the houSe where I then was, who conSented to take the furniture I had, which was all good, at an appraiSement of about thirty pounds, which was the Sum I owed him " for rent.—At this Sad period, to raiSe Sufficient cash for my removal, I was likewiSe obliged to diSpoSe of almost the Sew remaining necessaries of common apparel I had.—I have before Said
I had
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	Sj
I had long since difpofed of every thing cojlly.—I was now reduced to one gown only, and for linen I was equally necessitous.
“ And here a new affliction tried md —which was, being obliged from poverty alone, to part with the faithful good girl, my fervant.
“ Nanny,” faid I weeping, “ we must part—I am now poor myfelf,—and am now going to retire to fome garret best fuited to my very low situation.— I cannot fupport you, my good girl it would be even an injury to your future welfare.”
“ My dearest Madam,” faid this faithful creature, bursting into tears, “ let me—-let me still attend you :—I will work for you, indeed, without reward : I afk none but being with you, and the dear little misses.---Pray let me go with you.”
“ Will you quite break my heart V returned I? fobbing:—“ no—no, it cannot
8S	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
not be.—Think, my dear girl of your own interest, and forget your poor mist trefs.„
“ She still vehemently begged I would permit her attendance evengratis, which I, however, from motives of generosity, could not permit, and for a whole day we remained in this most trying conflict.—To me it was truly fo, as the faithful creature alternately was weepr ing over the poor children and myfelf.
“ Ah!” faid Mrs. Dougl as, bitterly sighing at this affecting period of her history,—“ little do the rich, the great, the dissipated, know the thoufand— .thoui'and heart-felt pangs, that the breast of feuftbility feels, when plunged in poverty and distress like mine!—In. the prefent cafe, I however (grievous as our parting was) at length got the better of this too affecting contest.
“ The faithful- girl having faid she would remain no-longer in London, as she could not live with me, she fixed
on
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	89
on fetting out, the following day (when 1 too was to depart for my garret) to return to her friends in the north of England.—Our parting, when the time came, indeed was more than I could bear.—She kiffed my children repeatedly by turns—She hung on my neck in a passion of grief—and at length I was forced to tear myfelf from her, and get into a hackney coach to avoi'd her tendernesses. This I did with my two poor babes, and a Small bundle of linen—all my stock! When I parted Srom this most worthy girl, my very heart Seemed to die within me:—indeed, perhaps, at that moment, there was not a more forlorn, a more destitute being among the daughters of affliction in the whole world than myfelf.
“ I stoppM at a fmall shop, which had Fn upper chamber to let in a very ob-fcure street, and foon agreed to take it by the week.—My poor babes were then both in a fweet steep.—When the
woman
90	A LESSON FOR LOVERS,
woman of the’houfe was departed,I fa t down on an old worm-eaten chair, and wept for a length of time without intermission.
“ In a few days I began to enquire for a little needle-w^ork, and with much difficulty got Some, that the woman.of
■the houfe procured me--------but, alas!
could make but little with - it! Such is the dreadful State oS a reduced gentler woman ! I, who had ever been ufed to eaSe, constantly waited on, and accuf-torned to good living, had now no Servant to attend me, and the little mor-felftook to Support life, was obliged to be prepared by my own hands:-—So that what with the constant attending two . Such helpleSs children as mine, So young as they then were, must occasion—I had, alas, not a single hour, indeed moment, to employ at my needle (my only Support) but when they were both * asieep, which was Seldom the cafe. My situation wTas, therefore, distref&ful to
the
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	91
the last degree. To add to that distrefs, my health gradually declined, and I had not a friend on earth to whom I could apply for relief under thefe accumulated evils. The worthy Mr. and Mrs. Woodville had been long since gone to Lifbon, to a fon who was there fettled: the distant relation, who now was in possession of that large fortune and host pitable mansion which my own wretched folly had deprived me of, was a fordid old humourist, and to whom I could not have a thought of making known my distresses.—There is a dignity often in poverty (if I may So expreSs myfelf) which will even Support the unfortunate, though almost famishing from day to day, fooner than afk relief of an haughty fuperior.—Whether this fen-timent arifes from pride, or from for-i titude, I will not pretend to determine.
“ Mrs. Summers, that worthy friend, to whom I could even with propriety have applied, had not the late dreadful
incident
92	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
incident happened, was now the very Jajl perfon to whom my bleeding heart could sty for relief. Heavens! could the wife of the vile feducer of hj?r only child,---though that child guilty as himfelf, and the companion of his wicked flight,—tear her wounded foul with a repetition of the forrows they had both occasioned ?—But, however, though I knew it not at the time, I might have Spared mySelS any reflections oS that kind, as that dear and valuable woman wras then ho more :—her wretched daughter's conduct having, it Seems, by Some accident,reached her. —She, who was the most tender oS mothers, unable to bear So Severe a stroke, funk under it, and lived only one wTeek after the Satal tidings.—But to return to my miSerable Self.
. “ Poor and pitiful was my condition: for six weeks I Subsisted only on a little weak tea, and bread; for my dear children was all my anxiety.—For
them
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	93
them I procured milk, and fed them continually.—My lovely babes (faid I, clafping them to my fond bofom, whilst they now began to laugh and crow incessantly) had we now the diamond necklace to find us bread, the produce, of which thy wretched parent is at this time wantonly fpending on his wicked paramour, it would be well.
“ I could now get no needle-work and in short the last diStrefs feemed to stare me in the face-—I woukf gladly have undertaken a Service in any reputable family, but my children rendered every thought of that kind abfolutely j	impracticable.
|	“ Whilst I was one'evening more than
commonly affected with my wretched situation, and having not at that time two shillings left in. the world, after having difcharged. my weekly lodgings,
I I happened, merely by accident to un-I	pin a little bit of rnuflin, which though
I I had often Seen in my Small bundle of j	linen,
94 A LESS0N for lovers. linen, I had never before regarded. I now, however, opened it, when to my no fmall furprife, I found carefully, wrapt up in paper, two guineas.—1 was astonished.
“ Heaven! faid I, this is thy appointment!,, I fell on my knees, and audibly gave thanks for fo feafonable a relief—but my amazement was, how this mighty Sum to me (a starving wretch) came there.—At length, I concluded my poor faithful fervant had taken this method of giving to my wants, what she knew I would not have received from her hands.—I wept, and faid to myfelf, I now remember her Saying at parting, “ Pray madam, take care oS the little red bundle.„ In short, I was convinced it was poor Nanny's bounty. —How precious in the sight oS him who alone knows the heart, must be fo pure an offering oS gratitude and affection !—almost, her little all
“ I began
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	gh
“ I began the next day, when the first Slights of my furprife were over, to be rather fcrupulous in breaking this inestimable treafure :—I ought, faid I, not to ufe it.—Perhaps, after all, it might be put up in fome mistake.— No—-no—-I will not touch it:«—I will restore it to her, when opportunity permits—-in the mean time providence will provide for us, I doubt not.
“ Alas! how piercing are the cries
(of hungry children ! and what is the refolution of a poor, almost famished 1 being, to the above ideal determination !—At that moment, I heard my poor b'abes cryingfor bread; whilst my J own tongue was parched to my mouth with thirst.----------
" “ My fcruples, for in justice I really i could have none, now forfook me: I immediately changed one ,oS the guineas, and with a fmall part of it, procured Some strengthening food.
“ A thought
96	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ A thought one morning struck , me; to go at once into fome little village, in a county distant from London, where, in a cottage of twenty shillings a year, I might, in a much cheaper manner than in that expensive city, provide bread for my poor little ones and felf.
“ I packed up accordingly my Small treafure, and with my two babes Set out, resigning mySelS to the will oS heaven, on my journey. Having luckily heard oS a returned post-chaiSe, and other cheap modes oS travelling, I got at last to a Small town, on the borders oS Sussex.—There, I remained in the houfe oS a poor widow, for above three years. My condition, however, was iniSerably indigent, though I just made shiSt to Support my children and mySelf with bread, and the cheapest diet I could procure.—My needle was my only reSource:—but the constant head-
achs
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	97
achs I laboured under, occasioned by the shocks of grief I had fustained, rendered me incapable of sine needleworks.—I had before attempted to ) teach a little fchool, but met with no encouragement. I had one comfort, how-' ever, in the midst of my poverty, that i I faw my dear little girls in perfect health:—and in truth, if the partiality of a fond mother did not deceive me,
| all I wished them at their tender age to be.
“ My health not permitting me to get my living by my needle Solely, I procured a Spinning wheel, to which I applied mySelf with Such ashduity, that I [ Soon became mistreSs oS that branch of !	, industry ; and I had Soon after an op-
portunity oS gaining this little habita-, tion upon easier terms than living in a town; the brother oS the woman where I lived, Saying, he had a little cottage (meaning this) which he would gladly permit any perfon to live in, Sree of vol. ii.	E	rent,
98	A LESSON FOR LOVERS,
rent, who would take care of his garden. As I am particularly fond of the country, and as I should have no rent to pay, I eagerly embraced this ]fro-pofal, and the next day moved my children and my Spinning wheel, See.-—to this little peaceSul abode; the distance from the town being only a Sew miles. -—Here I have remained above half a year. The Sweet air of the place agrees with us; and by the help oS what vegetables my little garden produces, and what milk and bread 1 can get, I make shiSt to Support life with humble resignation to the great Author oS my being.—My SaithleSs hushand, and my falfe Sriend, his vile assfociate, I have never heard the least tidings oS, neither do I now ever expect, or desire it.
“ And now,"Madam,” Said this lovely woman, “ have I at length brought my little history to a conclusion.—To you,„ she was pleaSed to Say, “ it can be of no uSe as a warning ; but to the
giddy
h	■	'
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	99
giddy—inconsiderate part of my Sex, it might possibly convey Some instruction.—Thus, Madam, was I undone, by uniting mySelf to that worst of all detestable characters, a man of pleafure «—a libertine—which character, in whatever light it may be looked on by the gay and Sashionable part oS the world, in reality comprehends every thing that is baSe, vile, and contemptible.„
Here the amiable Mrs. Dougla< ceaSed Speaking. Your own feeling heart, my dear friend, will Suggest tc you what mine Selt at her affecting tale ■—Her artleSs, and unadorned mannei >i	of relating her distresses, was peculiar
ly pleastng, and drew from me a Sym pathy I never before experienced.
After every assurance of friendship to assist and provide for her and th« little ones (concerning which I have ; Scheme in my head). I finished my ven agreeable visit.—It is Ho’w'high time 1	‘ likewiSe, to finish this large pacquet
E 2	whicl
/■ ■
100	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
which I have luckily an opportunity oi
fending by Lady S----, who will he
in Ireland in lefs than a fortnight. Adieu : it is needlefs to add,
How very sincerely,
I am yours,
LUCY BLANDFORD.
LETTER XXII.
FROM LADY CHARLOTTE RICHLEY TO MISS BLANDFORD.
a	Wefiford Houfe, near Dublin,
XJL MILLION of thanks to my kind
Lucy for her interesting little history
of the amiable Mrs. Douglas.—I could
almost wish it could be made public,
for the lesson it contains.—My pity is
extreme for the unhappy woman, and
her lovely little ones. See we not, that
by means infcrutable, she was at length
led by the kind hand of a tender watch-
on
*	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	10
ful providence, to my Lucy’s generou aid, by whofe tender compalsion ever '	woe will be banished and every car
be foftened ?—This amiable womai must, my friend, be a pensioner o mine, as well as yours.—I*am deter mined: fo do not oppofe me in thi matter.—The little Sophia, too, shal be my care, whilst Louifa is yours.— : **. I do, not mean to part thefe love!
babes—but I wish to educate, am *	cloath, and to provide handfomely fo
r one, whilst you, my Lucy, are exer cising your tender cares for the other —Pray tell me how you intend to pro l	vide for the poor Mrs. Douglas :—
but be fure remember, I shall go you halves in ashsting her.
Indeed, I long most impatiently t< visit England, for is not my MelvilL there?—We have yet had no letter in anfwer to our last, which is won dershl. I fear he is ill;—-I fear hi wound is broke out afresh;—in short, i !	£3	fee
102	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
feel a thoufand tender anxieties on his account.—His faith, and truth, my Lucy, obferve, I doubt not;—no—it is his precious health for which I fufFer.
You know I am fond of fcribbling, and Sometimes am guilty of sinning in rhyme. You will be no way furprifed then iS I inform you of a tranSgreshon I fell into lately oS that kind.
I was walking last night, by moonlight, in a grove in our gardens, when the following pastoral lines, Supposing myfelf that instant a shepherdess, lamenting the abfence oS my favourite Swain, struck into my head.
I.
What fhepherd, or nymph, of the grove,
Can blame me for dropping a tear,
Or w ailing aloud as I rove,
Since Thyrsis no longer is here ?
My flocks if at random they stray,
What wonder now he’s from the plains?
His call they were wont to obey,
His beck rul’d the nymphs and the Swains/
II, How
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	IOJ
II.
How heavy the time rolls along,	■
Now ThyrSis is far from my sight!
How dull is the nightingale’s Song,
That once us’d to give fuch delight !
The meadows, that erst were fo green Now lofe all the verdure of May,
The cowflip, the vi’let, are Seen To droop, fade, and wither away.
in.
Can I ever forget how we stray’d To the foot of yon neighbouring hill,
To the bower he had built in the (hade,
Or the river that runs by the mill ?
There, kind by my side as he walk’d,
And heard the blythe stories I told,
How Sweet was the thrufh from the Spray,
And the Meeting of lambs from the fold !
IV.
My flocks now disorderly stray
And bleet their complaints in my ear,
No more they leap, frolic, or play,
But fad as their miflrefs appear.
But, ah ! if ray ThyrSis were feen,
My flocks how they’d ikip o’er the plain l Each flow’ret would Spring on the green,
Each nightingale charm me again.
E 4	V. For
104 A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
'	v.
For him a green arbour I’ve made,
Enrich’d with each flagrant flower,
The fun’s fcorching heat it will Ihade,
And ikreen him from mid-day’s fierce power. Return then, my Ihepherd, return,
Your coming no longer delay 5 O leave not your Daphne to mourn,
But hasten, my fhepiierd away.
You fee I commit all my follies to the kind bofom of friendship.—But a truce with my own tender affair, till I have expressed the extreme delight I experience on the approaching happiness of my beloved Lucy. Your Edward next to my Melville, is the worthiest best of men.—I have lately feen a gentleman who knows him perfectly well, and he gives him a character as amiable as estimable.—You will, however,—you muft permit me, my dear, when we meet, to laugh a little at the pure, fiber, fentimental friendfhip betwixt you both, being converted into
downright stark-staring love.---------1 am
*	glad
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	ioy
glad you have at last taken that pretty little monySyllable into consideration. I am convinced you will never permit it to fuffer banifhment again ; on the contrary, that you will find new beauties in it every day.
You aik, my Lucy, how I Spend my time in a country, where I have not cultivated a great deal of company, fearing it would break into my favourite plan of retirement. My chief amuSe-ment is reading the best authors, both ancient and modern. I often think, if our fex would fpend a few hours every day in conversing with the dead, and examining the excellent precepts which books afford, they would find a more folid and lasting pleafure, a more Secret and refined SatisSaction, than can possibly ariSe Srom the applauSes oS a fool, or the adoration of a coxcomb. It is certain, the Female part of the creation have more leiSure for Such improvements, and it is, I fear, equally E 5	certain,
106	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
certain, that they are too apt to neglect the opportunity. How lost to wifdom, nay even to common fenfe, are fome of our fex, who can fee no beauties in the noblest pages, and diS-cover no charms in the finest writers ! Reading is an amuSement formed to fuit every mind, and calculated for . every temper : an amuSement, in Spite of fortune, we may always enjoy, and which will attend us through every stage oS life, and divert when we most stand in need of conSolation. Here the tender, generous mind, may Sym-> pathize with the misfortunes oS the unhappy; and even rejoice at happi-neSs, though it be imaginary: here we may learn to tread in the pleasing paths of virtue, and shun the dangers which Surround us: here we may fee the horrors which attend vice and guilt, and whilst we range over a field fo Spacious, extract Sweets Srom every flower it contains.
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	107
The pleafure of knowledge, my Lucy, is fuch as no unforefeen accident can rob us of; as no time will be able to destroy. In profperity it will add a relish to our gayest hours, and in .the day of adverftty will calm our griefs* and fosten every care.
It is astonishing to me how any human being can be at a lofs for employment, and that too of the rnost agreeable kind, when the works of fuch numbers are open to their view: when they may converge with the greatest men, the most exalted geniufes the_. world ever produced ; and enjoy thofe delightful contemplations, even in Solitude and retirement.
The celebrated Mr. Sheridan’s Secret for the ladies, was, he told them, of fuch a nature, as would not only make them more amiable, but Secure to them abSolute dominion over the men. His Secret, at length, was no other than to recommend the frequent
reading
a
Jo8	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
reading of the tranflations of the ancients, and the best of our English modern authors ; by which means their minds would be fo cultivated, and So highly improved, as to be able to communicate Satisfactions, as yet almost unknown to the Se£. - This Sensible writer, and truly ingenious man, whoSe name both in Ireland and England will ever be mentioned with esteem, judiciouSly obServes, what a vulgar error it is to SuppoSe that the intellectual faculties of women are not So strong as thoSe of the men. He' is convinced that we have generally quicker conceptions, better memories, and a greater volubility oS tongue than the men; the left of which, he adds, is too proverbial to need insisting on. Why, then, should theSe faculties be buried In ob-Scurity ? and why should we neglect what would make many men ashamed of .their own ignorance, and neceffarily excite them to a laudable example?
T A*
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	IO9
I clo not mean that I would have a woman fpend her whole life in laborious refearches, and abstracted fciences, which might even blunt that Jharpnefs in which she is thought to excel; every woman is certainly not a Dacier, nor a Gabriella Emilia de Bretuil,Marchionefs de Chatelet, who explained Leibnitz, tranflated Sir Ifaac Newtosss Principia Into French, with Notes, and wrote institutions of Physiques; in every one of which the depth of her judgment is shewn to all who are capable of understanding her. This Lady alone is a great and shining proof how far female intellectual faculties may be cultivated. '
I would, however, have our fex acquire that fort of knowledge which is most ufeful and agreeable. Studies that can awaken a laudable curiosity, and lend graces to the imagination, is a fpa-cious field in which we may exercife
ourshlves
IIO	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
ourfelves with an unbounded limitation. Natural history, and a knowledge of the terrestrial world, are agreeable and ufeful parts of women’s studies. That portion of the former, called experimental philofophy, in a courfie of observations and expenments,. offers a Spectacle well worthy the attention of a reafonable being. But, alas ! in vain does nature pour forth her amazing wonders and exquisite beauties to the greatest part of women, and indeed of men; as few, very few,of either will give themfelves the trouble, or time, to investigate what is fo wonderfully to be found in every part of this boundleSs creation.—And yet, one should imagine, that to be struck with? the admirable concord which reigns in every part oS the univerfe, and to wish to know its Springs, would be natural to every one who ranks in the prder of rational beings. Nature is a large
book
A LESSON FOR LOVERS*	III
book open to all: and I often think, if fome of our prefent beauties of the age would fometimes fix two fine fpark-ling eyes upon a book, in fearch of ufeful knowledge, or would they contemplate on the wonders contained even in a common field, they would not be fo often bent -on unworthy objects as they ufually are.
I have lately read a work, faid to be written by a female hand, which has given me much pleafure. Its title is,
“ Literary AmuSements; or, Evening “ Entertainer/’ Besides two oriental tales, equal, I think, to any thing I ever read oS the kind, there are many interesting ^ and instructive stories in common life. In Some thoughts thrown, together on the advantages of Lnprov- -ing the mind in the female fex, and on thofe studies that are most proper for them, this ingenious and moral writer obferves, that “ Women are
much
112	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
much more capable of attention than is ufually imagined :—they only want application.—If most women would bestow the fame time in the study of hif-tcry, which they too often dedicate to the reading of novels and romances, they would foon draw forth ufeful lessons for the conduct of their lives, and, from the most interesting faffs, receive an instruction which truth alone can givess
There is fcarce any girl, it must be granted, who has not read, and with eagernefs too, numbers of romances and novels, many of which ferve only to corrupt the mind. But then it is but justice to acknowledge, that there are others that come not within the reach of this cenfure; on the contrary, that merit approbation : hut Still "they fall infinitely short in improvement of real history. W ork s of imagination,when. properly conducted, have alluredly their
ufe,
/
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	II3
ufe, and the younger part of our fex, in particular, may reafonably be allowed fometimes to look into them ; but the warmest advocate, for this fpecies of writing, I believe, will confeSs it to be a fault to make them, as too many young females do, their entire Study.
Certainly, the beautiSul representations which the annals of human nature bestow, are the most proper to form the heart and judgment. Women in all ages, have had fo great a share in most events, and have acted fo many parts therein, that we may look on fome histories as the regiSter of our own actions. Let us therefore reclaim our rights, and from history draw forth ufeful lessons for the conduct of our future lives. We may depend on it, my friend, the men, when they marry,
‘ expect fome thing more than mere beauty, in the women they choofe to make the focial companions of their
lives:
I 14	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
lives: they estimate beauty only as a relative, an adventitious quality in a wife, and prize the beauteous cafket, but in proportion to the value of the intellectual jewel it contains; and hence it is, that the British females have it in their power to claim a fuperiority over all the fex in the world; as the endowments of the mind confer an additional lustre on the advantages of perfon, for which they are fo justly celebrated. Men may like to hear us sing, —to play on various instruments,—to fee us lead the dance,—but, alas! thofe acquisitions, though agreeable, are, at best, but fplendid accomplishments that attract for the moment: fo true, is it,
. that nothing can be long prized but Sterling fenfe and genuine virtue. *
“ Sacred, Substantial, never-fading good 1”
Write, my Lucy, and let it be foon, for be affured your letters, next to
thofe
A LESSON For LOVERS.	I15
thofe of one, whom it is neediest to mention, give the most unfeigned delight to,
Your most faithful,
And affectionate,
CHARLOTTE RICHLEY.
P, S. My father has had an attack of the gout; but as he is better, hopes Soon to revisit England.
LETTER XXIII.
MISS BLANDFORD TO LADY CHARLOTTE RICHLEY.
South-grove, July 10.
VJjREAT was the pleaSure my dearest Charlotte’s very agreeable pacquet afforded her Lucy ; but, alas ! like all other pleaSures in this world, it had its alloy!—Need I Say the bitter drop, that poiSoned the rich cup, was the
little
I 16	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
little hopes you give of very fpeedily returning ?—I repeat fpeedily, for my Edward, begins to be extremely importunate, forfooth, for an early day to crown, as he calls it, his happinefs: —and I have always fet my heart or it, if that event ever fiould happen, that my fweet friend would be my bride-maid.—Well! I must not repine at what cannot be helped.
You will, my dear, naturally fup-pofe from this hafie of my now avowed lover, that he has at length heard for a certainty, that the doubt with regard to the lady in the West-Indies, is now at an end.—It is : for before his friend, whom I mentioned to you in my last, could fet out on his voyage, a most authentic account of the particulars of her death arrived from her nearest relations. My beloved father, whom you love, as much as I do yours, is almost in as great a hurry to have the important
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	117
portant affair (need I fay marriage?) concluded, as my lover is.
“ Well Lucy,” he fays, “ when is your day fixed? you never can meet with fuch another man as Sir Edward Willis. (Indeed, my dear, I am of my father’s opinion.) You are above all trifling, child, on this occasion.”
To fay truth, my Charlotte, to trifle, as my father calls it, with a tuan under the fanction of friendfhip, with whom I have fo long correfponded, and to whom I have, in a manner, laid my poor, unfufpecting heart quite open on a thoufand occasions;—I fay now to raife objections—now to draw myfelf up, with a—“ Pray, Sir, wait my time, I befeech you,”—would be a ridiculous affectation, of which I am not capable. —I have, indeed, often thought, with my favourite author Richardfon, that the woman who once brings herfelf to correfpond with a man, though not immediately on the fubject of love,
lays
Il8	A LESSON FOR LOVfiRS.
lays herfelf under a kind oL delicate obligation: at least I think it is a kind of tacit acknowledgment, that the friend, fo favoured, is far from being difagree-able. A designing, artful man will easily turn the lady’s good opinion into his own private advantage. I think the poor unhappy Clarissa, near her last moments, obferves, to her exalted Anna Howe, that she may, perhaps, date her misfortunes to herfelf, in fo early giving her vile Seducer So particular an encouragement as to correfpond with him, by letters, on Some Subjects oS geography and'history, beSore he commenced her lover ; which, as she justly obServes, Srom her sitting down regularly to write him long letters, even on thoSe Subjects, indifferent as they were, yet to fuch a man, they certainly gave him a hint he was not difagreeabk to his lovely correspondent.^—It is true, my dear, this man you will Say was a Lovelace\ and Heaven forbid there should
be
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	II 9
be many of that vile stamp.—Whilst my friend and correspondent, I have every reafon to believe, is a Sir Charles Grandifon,
Your tender pity and consideration for poor Mrs. Douglas, and her fa-therlefs babes, is all noble—all humane, like the rest of your conduct. But, my fweet friend, you have fo many pensioners—fo many widows—fo many orphans, who daily taste your bounty, and in the words of feripture, “ are “ warmed by the fleece of your cloath-ing,„ that furely, you might allow me Some Small merit in taking the "whole oS this little distressed family to my-SelS.—But what can I Say in this matter ?—you will have your own way in theSe things.—Well then—Sophia, the 4 very prettiest little Smiling cherub you ever Saw shall be your care, and LouiSa mine.—As twins, it is curious to ob-Serve their affection as uSual in that affinity. When I fee them fondly bestowing
120	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
stowing on each what each is most ar dently wishing for herfelf, I am ready tc cry out with that fweet poet Waller, on his feeing two favourite twins;
“ Tell me lovely, loving pair,
u Always to yourfelves fo dear.”
At prefent, Mrs. Douglas remains in the cottage. I have prefented hei with a bank bill of fifty pounds, with apparel for herfelf and little ones, of al. forts, and constantly fend her what oui table affords every day. My Edwarc (my, I repeat, for hang all affectation' is anxious to fee her, which he ha* not yet done ; for, whenever I have hitherto made my little visits to her, he has had the goodnefs to sit down tc read to my father, or to endeavour tc amufe him by a repetition of many little pleasing stories. How does thii amiable man endear himfelf to me bj a thoufand namelefs ashduities, and at tentions to my beloved parent!—Ii
that
A 'LLSSON TOR LOVER'S.	I'2I
short, my dear, I love him—as well— almost as well—as you do your Melville.
We, that is my Edward and I, are going to ramble this sine evening in fome of the romantic situations of groves and hills, with which this beautiful Spot abounds ; and most probably we shall call at the little cottage of Mrs. Douglas. My lover has no Small curiosity to See that amiable woman, as I have told him a few particulars oS her interesting story—-though but a few.
He is now playing So melodioufly on his German flute, just under my window, that you muSt excuSe my preSent inattention to my pen.—Adieu, therefore^, till to-morrow.
The hour oS walking is now arrived, as Milton Says,
u Sweet hour of prime,
‘ u Nov/ is the cool, the fragrant time.”
Just returned from a delightful walk, I take up my pen, to Say I have made a most pleasing diScovery.*—But as you vol. n,	F	wish
t
122	A LESSON TOR LOVERS.
wish me to be always minute, take the particulars as follow.
Edward, and his Lucy, in the courfe of their fweet ramble this evening, at length crept up the -winding path that leads to the little cottage of Mrs. Douglas, the fcenes whereof were picture fque beyond defcription.
The evening being Sweetly Serene and warm, we found the amiable inhabitant of the humble straw-rooffed cot, sitting at her fpinning-wlieel under a large elm in her garden, whilst the little Sophia and Louifa were playing by her side :—but imagine my astonishment, when my lover, fixing his eyes on Mrs. Douglas, Suddenly exclaimed,—“ Good Heavens ! is it pof-jsible ?—Yes—no—yes it is—it is my cousin Sophy Morley, of West Abbey, in Devonshire * !„
“ Gracious
* The critical reader may perhaps here wonder that Mils Blandford, in her mentioning Several par-•	.	ticulars
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	12$
■“ Gracious Being,’' Said she in the Samemoment,“doI live to See my cousin Edward ?-—Oh!" continued she, endeavouring to riSe from her wheel, “ tell me--tell me—iS indeed you are Son to my uncle Willis ?”
I thought for my part she would have Sainted.—-Indeed this pleasing diS-covery beggars all description ; I cannot do the Scene justice. Suffice it to fay, Sir Edward ran to Mrs. Douglas, embraced her with all the tender kind-neSs of a near, and dear relation; whilst ' the Sweet woman returned his embrace, with a modest joy, and a kind of chaf-■tened rapture, beautiful to behold.
Imagine my astonishment, who stood staring by all this time.
Uculars to Sir Edward, relative to Mrs. Douglas’s story, had omitted to mention the name of Weft Abbey, in Devonfhire, or indeed her maiden name j But thofe minute circumstances Ihe had never men* tioned, as not thinking them any ,way material.
She had often talked of the amiable woman as an 'object of distrefs, but no farther,
F 2	A number
124 A LESSON for lovers.
A number of questions were ashed on both sides, in the fame instant, and I at once gathered, that Sir Edward Willis is fo nearly related to this amiable woman, as to be her firjl cousin ; his mother being her father’s sister —that they were almost bred up together from children, Sir George Willis, the father, having a feat very near the Abbey.—I learnt likewiSe that on the death of Lady Willis, her diSconSo-late hushand left Devonshire, taking the young Edward his only child, with him to an estate of his, in the north of England.
This event happening about the time of Mifs Morley being fent to the boarding fchool, as before mentioned in her Story, accounts for Sir Edward having not been made acquainted, by not being on the Spot, with the particular circumstances oS his cousin’s love-affair with Mr. Douglas. He had heard in general of her elopement with
Some
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	125
Some gay young man, and that his good uncle had been, Some time, no more.
Sir Edward's long abSence afterwards Srom England, on his travels, prevented him from hearing any more of her transactions, any farther than the general cry of the world, that “ Mifs Morley was ruined—was undone—and, most probably, by death, had fallen a victim to her own folly.” You will imagine, my dear Charlotte, the extreme joy and furprife of my lover on this occasion.—He now took the little Sophia and Louifa in his arms, and tenderly kissing them, exclaimed, “ Gracious Heaven !„ (that instant reflecting on what mujl have been their Sufferings, and glancing his benevolent eye at the Sordid cottage,
. —the Spinning wheel,—Sec.—whilst the tear oS tender humanity stowed down his manly check, “ Gracious Heaven !„ Said he, “ could my uncle F 3	behold
126	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
behold his darling, his Sophia, in this. poor dwelling !—this lonely cot !-—-—could he fee thefe lovely babes,. fmiling hi-poverty ?”
“ O ceaSe my beloved cousin,’, Said the fweet woman bursting into tears, “ my mad—my rash folly merits all— all I have fuffered :—nay more. It was I, that fent my poor parent to the grave ;—it was I—„
“ Come, interrupted I, who had been weeping at this affecting fcene, “ Come, let us forget the past—and enjoy the prefent unexpected happi-nefs,—Come let us have a Sillabub on the honey-fuckle bench.„
This little repast being prepared, we fat down in perhaps one of the most rural, Sweetest Spots in the world :—-an univerSal joy appeared throughout the whole happy groupe.—My amiable Edward took the little Sophia and LouiSa and placed them on each knee; ■—and whilst he was delighted with
their
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	12J
their Smiles and innocent prattle, he was every moment exclaiming, as was his lovely kinSwoman, “ Can it be ? —Do I live to behold you again ?„ And at intervals they both recollected and repeated many pleaSurable Schemes they had been engaged in, in their early days..
“ Do you remember, Said my lover, when in attempting to climb an old willow, that grew over the moat at the Abbey, in order, cousin Sophy, (for So he still calls her) to procure you a beautiSul goldfinch, that I missed my hold, and Sailing into the water below, had very nearly lost my liSe for your Sake ?—Or do you remember, how oSten I uSed to play truant, from the School in the neighbouring village, to play at blind-man,s-buss, in the hall • at the Abbey ?—aye, many a good whipping-bout have I Suffered for your faked
-4
F 4	“ And
V
12!S	A LESSON FOR LOVER?.
“ And have you forgot,” Said the Sweetly Smiling Mrs. Douglas, “ how-many bushels of peaches and nectarines, I have stolen Srom the garden walls for you ?-—To the last moment oS my life 1 shall never forget the pretty little white horfe you gave me with the stowing mane.—I remember, I cryed, when I went to the boarding School, to be obliged to leave k behind me.”
In theSe kind of pleasing recollections, and in a thoufand old stories oS former happy days, did the minutes infensibly pafs.—The evening shades began now to prevail,—and at length the amiable cousins were obliged to part for that evening.
My good father on hearing, at our return, of this interesting meeting, and that the unfortunate but worthy woman, is the red very nearest relation Sir Edward Willis,, (his now fon-in-law eleff) has in the world, most kindly insists on my fending the coach to-morrow
A LESSON FOR LOVERS. ^	129
row for her and the pretty little ones, to come at once to reside under our roof, till we have found an agreeable retreat for this amiable family, near us at Richley park.—My father, has an elegant little villa, situated almost between the feat of Sir Edward Willis and ours, in the fame county, which pretty habitation, we think, will be very eligible for the purpofe.—Sir Edward hopes the odd old humourist, to whom his uncle left his estate may be brought to do fome thing for this amiable family-—he will try, at least, he
fays, what may be done.--------He fays,.
he thinks he remembers Douglas at the university; that he was a remarkable fine figure ; and had wit, and shining parts, in a very fuperior degree..
Pity, my Charlotte, that thefe men!
. of fuch extraordinary genius, andi wit, should make ufe of them, ter their own utter ruin,, fo often as they do l there are many of thefe great geniufes, who F 5	in
133	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
in fact possess every fenfe, but common fenfe.
Sir Edward can hardly restrain for a • moment, his astonishment at this diS-covery of his beloved cousin. They were, I find, from their similar age, and being nurfed and bred up under one rooS, Snore like a brother and sister, than the Sormer relation. “ My God, (he exclaimed in our evening walk home) is it possible I should find Sophia, whoSe most indulgent parent would hardly Suffer
t( The winds of heaven, to visit her too roughly?”
u She, who had many attendants at her command, who was cloathed in the most delicate attire, and “ Sared “ SumptuouSly every day is it poS-(ible, I Say, that I should find this darling of all who knew her in a mud-built hovel, earning her daily bread,— in an obScurity almost impervious to the human eye ; and who, but Sor you, my generous Lucy (he was pleaSed to
fey)
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	T.D
shy) perhaps at this very moment, would have been destitute of a morfel of bread to fupport sinking nature ! Gracious Heaven, how wonderful art thou in thy difpenfations to us poor mortals ! and by what methods dost thou bring thy everlasting purpofes to perfection, by means unfeen by human eye !„
“ She must have been,” faid I, “ before her calamities,—nay now she is, a very lovely woman.”
“ She still retains,„ returned Sir Edward, “ the fame beautiful features which, when a girl, she was fo remarkable for. I have not feen her since she was a girl, it is true, but the little red strawberry-mark, under her left eye, which I have kiffed in play a hundred times, her penetrating eyes,
<—and in short her every feature, made it impossible I should not recollect her. Her stature is certainly greatly en-creafed, but she was at the age of twelve, remarkably tall, which makes
her
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
her perfon still lefs difficult to recollect. Her excellent father was an honour to human nature: his probity, his benevolence—his whole life which was one continued feries of virtuous actions, will long render him deferv-edly lamented, as a public lofs.—I was abroad when his death reached my ears my heart felt it very fensibly : but little did I then know my cousin Sophy was struggling with the miferie3 attendant on a bad hushand, joined with poverty.„
I cannot express, my beloved Char^ lotte, how much pleafure this agreeable incident has given me.*—In Mrs. Douglas I shall have a companion,—-a relation,—a friend.—Heaven has indeed rewarded me most amply in her, in each of thofe titles, for any little pecuniary matters, I may have been able to shew her. You will be charmed with my acquisition.—So unaffected—fo artlefs—and Sensible is she.
I am
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	133
I am highly pleafed with your paf-toral ode; and have you this moment standing before me, in idea, in the drefs of an Arcadian shepherdess, with your crook, and your showy stock feeding by your side.—In return for what you have been fo obliging to fend, I enclofe an ode, on a singing bird :«— but take notice I do not give it you as my own.—It is the production of a much lamented friend of my Edward, who died a few years since,—Here it follows.
ODE TO A SINGING BIRD.
I.
O thou that gladst: my lonely hours,
With many a'wildly warbling fong, ,
When melancholy round me lowers,
And drives her fullen storms along ;
When fell adverfity prepares,
To lead her delegated train,
Pale Sicluiefs, want, remorfe, and pain,
With all her host: of carking cares,
The fiends ordain’d to tame the human foul,
And give the humbled foul to Sympathy’s controul.
Sweet
134	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
II.
Sweet Soother of my mis’ry fay,
Why doss thou clap thy joyous wing ?
Why dost: thou pour that artlefs lay ?
How canst thou, little prifoner, Sing ?
Hass thou not caufe to grieve,
That man, unpitying man, has rent From thee the boon which nature meant Thou Ihouldft as well as he receive ?
The power to woo thy partner in the grove?
To build where instinct points?—Where chance-directs to rove ?
III.
Perchance, unconfcious of thy fate,
And to the woes of bondage blind, ,
Thou never longll to join thy mate,.
Nor wifhefl to be unconfin’d:
Then how relentlefs he,
And fit for ev’ry foul offence,
Who could bereave Such innocence Of life’s best blessing, liberty j
Who lur’d thee, guileful, to his treacherous Snare,. To live a tuneful (lave, and dissipate his care 1
IV.
But why for thee this fond complaint}
Above thy mafter thou art bless;
Art thou not free ? Yes. Cairn content,
With olive Sceptre Sways uuy breast.
Then
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	135*
Then deign with me to live.
The falcon with inSatiate maw,
Shall ne’er thy destiny contrive,
And ev’ry tabby foe fhall mew in vain,
Whilst pensively demure, Ihe hears tliy melting strain.
V.
Nor fhall the fiend, fell famine, dare Thy wiry tenement aflail:
Thefe, thefe fhall be my conftant care,
The iirnpid fount and temp’rate meal:
And when the blooming fpring,
In checquer’d liv’ry robes the fields,
The fairest flowerets nature yields,
To thee officious will I bring:
A garland rich, thy dwelling fhall entwine,
And Flora’s frelheft gifts, thrice happy bird, be thine.
Whatever may be your opinion of the compoftion of the above little ode, you will I doubt not approve the fen-timents, being as they are, on your favourite fubject—tender humanity to a little prifoner in his wiry prifon.—I am interrupted.
We dnefdap
136 A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
Wednefday evening.
I have the pleafure of informing you, that our coach has, this day, brought from the cottage, the worthy Mrs. Douglas and her two fweet girls. —We are delighted with our guests. The amiable mother behaves with all that eafy politenefs which is the true characteristic oS a gentlewoman. The children, all Smiling innocence and beauty, are amazed with all they See and hear. Having always been accustomed to the most wretched Scenes of poverty, the lovely innocents cannot Sufficiently express their wonder to fee fo large a houfe■—to fee fuch a number of attendants—of which they could have no idea. They curtsied to our footmen, as to fo many fine gentlemen ; and at dinner (all simple,, beautiful nature, without art) exclaimed, “ O mamma, how many dishes are here !
<—look, Sophy, at m^ fine plate.”
“ And
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	137
“ And mine,„ faid the little Louifa, obferving the figures on the china, “ is covered with pretty flowers.”
Mrs. Douglas, dear woman, gave them a significant wink to be silent— but my father, who, as well as Sir Edward, was delighted with their pretty prattle, desired they might be entirely at liberty ; for that they both were always charmed with the workings of ftmple nature without constraint; and that they were convinced, they could never See it to Such perfection as in the preSent instance.
On our retiring afterwards into the drawing room, the gilded pictures, the rich furniture, Scc. were fresh matters oS Surprife to theSe Sweet little prattlers* Their extreme delight at the novelty of the Scenes around them, drew tears of maternal SondneSs from their amiable mother.
“ MerciSul Heaven!” she cried looking round, “ teach me to bear this
astonishing
I38	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
astonishing change with moderation, and humble thankfulness !—Do you not wish,” added the fweet woman fmiling through her tears, “ do you not wish, my little Sophy, to know how the poor robin-red-breast does which you left behind you in the rofe bush at the cottage?„
“ Yes, for the poor robin, mamma, I should like to go there once again—but indeed I had rather fee thefe fine things.„
x “ Ah nature! nature!” faid the tender Mrs. Douglas.—She here feemed op-preffed with what she called her gratitude.—She burst into tears, and emphatically exclaimed,—“ O Mifs Blandford—how—how shall we—”
I interrupted her.
“ I befeech you, dear Madam, to restrain the fentiments of your warm •—your grateful heart, which abundantly over-rates any trifling little matters>
we
A LESSON FOR LOVERS..	139
we are doing, or may do for fo much merit.„
#**#****■ * *
Friday morn■.
I date again, my dear friend, to fay, that we are all on Monday next to fet out for Richley park. We go through London, where we purpofe staying about a fortnight;—and where I am •—O Charlotte !—where I am to make preparations it feems for a very early day. Thefe men, child (my dear father, and my Edward) drive' on at a jlrange rate-—W ell—if it mu ft be fo, it muft I think.—Adieu, most probably this will be the last letter you will ever receive from,
Your devoted,
LUCY BLANDFORD*
LETTER
140	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
LETTER XXIV.
L-ADY WILLIS TO LADY CHARLOTTE RICHLEY IN IRELAND.
Hanover Square, July 2,4-.
My Dear Friend,
In one poor fortnight, from the date of my last epistle, am I metamorphofed from the laughing, Sprightly Lucy Blandford, into (however a much happier character) the fober, affectionate wife.—Yes, my dear Lady Charlotte, “ Yesterday’s fun, Saw the awSul ceremony peissormed!”—At St. George’s church, Hanover Square, where So many timid, blushing damSels have resigned their liberty, as well as your poor Lucy, did I vow eternal obedience, love, Sec. to my worthy Edward.— You will think, perhaps, I have been in wondrous haste to have this matter
concluded..
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	iqi
concluded.—Over-perfuaded, child !-—
that was the cafe.—I was most power-*
fully befet, to fay the truth.—On one side, the best of fathers;—on the other., the fondest of lovers ; and Mrs. Douglas too, dear woman! would not let me rest.—All thefe good people were in a kind of combination;—were all firmly bent (I faw through their whole design not to let me have a moment’s rest, till I had aftuaUy fixed the day : and to confess the honeSt truth, I had & powerful pleader in my own bofom.— In short, for the fake of peace and quiet, on all sides, I gave at once into the share that was laid for me.—I repent not however.—Need I fay that my beloved hushand is all rapture ? or that my excellent parent is at this moment one of the most delighted of beings? He gave my hand at the altar with visible fatisfaction.—Well! it is a most awful ceremony,—that’s certain; but
as
142,	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
as you will So SOon go through the whole of it, I shall not pretend to deScribe it.
Mrs. Douglas attended me to church, and I must inform you of the following pleaSing circumstance, as it gave me Singular pleaSure.
On our stepping into our carriage, as well as in alighting on our return from the awful Solemnity, I was most agreeably SurpriSed to See the little beautiful twins, Sophia and LouiSa, ha-bitated in an extreme pretty Arcadian kind of dreSs, standing at the door with each a baSket of flowers on her arm.—On our alighting from the car-riage, theSe lovely^ children began Strew-ing the way before us with flowers, through the hall and passages leading to the drawing-room ; observing all the way, a m6st profound Silence, and walking just before us, as they had been instructed, by their amiable mo-ther to do, who it Seems had privately concerted this very pleasing compli-
merit.
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	143
meat.—Was it not a fweet thought? We were delighted with it. Thefe beautiful little angels attended the bride and bridegroom the whole day, in their pretty fancied drefs and character.
Mrs. Douglas, my now agreeable kinfwoman, rifes every hour, if possible, in my esteem and admiration.—Her virtues are great and many:—-her heart is good and tender; she has great Sensibility, of which she has given me a proof that has much affected me.
She came just now into my clofet, and after fome little talk of the happiness of hearts being united in the married state as well as hands-, She tenderly exclaimed; “ Ah! my dear Madam, I once was happy as you now are :—* I once had a fond—an affectionate huff ' band, of whofe fidelity and tendernefs I could no more have entertained a doubt, than I could of the evidences- of my own fenfes.—Happy—happy Lady
Willis r
144	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
Willis !„ continued the Sweet woma weeping, “ your angel has been watcl ful over your fate;—but mine has step regardleSs oS its charge.”
I was much affected.—After Son little talk on this Subject, she at lengt confessed to me, that, in Spite of tl extreme falshood— the deceit—and i gratitude of her hushand—she yet cou not hate him.—“ Hate, do I fay?„-
exclaimed she,----“ No-----wretch*
though he has made me, yet I ci never hate the father of my precio children. He was the firfl, the ot man for whom I ever sighed, or ev shall.—Fain—fain would I try to e tenuate, in fome degree, his guilt.-Who knows, Lady Willis,„ continu< she, with an earnest concern in h manner, “ but that' the thoughtlei and perhaps too fond MiSs Summei might be herSelf as culpable as him-There was certainly, well as I once lov< her, a freedom,—a boldnefs in h
manne
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	Ihh
manner, which might probably invite, rather than forbid his advances.—-I fear, indeed, my poor friend, was rather of a giddy, diffipated turn, before the fatal journey to London, which, alas ! has been the destruction of us a'll.”
“ Ah i my dear Sophia,” Said I, gently wiping a tear from her languid cheek, how ready are we to try to find an excufe for thofe we love V
“ Pardon,” Said she, “ my weakliest—but—but lie is my hujbandV
“ Call it not weakneSs, my amiable -friend,” returned I, “ I term it the highest effort oS heroic generosity to forgive Such injuries.’,
I have been hurried fo fast into this fame state of matrimony, that I have not had time fufficient to have all my necessary appendages of the bridal state ; but milliners, mantua-makers, and jewellers, are all busily employed for my ladyf ip.—I am at. prefent incog ; and shall fee no company whilst vol. ii.	G	I am
I46	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
I am in town:—indeed, at this SeaSon of the year, there is very little to be found here.
You will direct to me, my beloved friend, to Richley park; to which place we go next week, and where we Shall stay fome little time before we return to our own Seat.—I am charged not to forget my hufband. s—(how new that found!)—most kind and reSpectSul compliments with my father’s.—What will the good Earl Richley Say to my marriage ?-—You know he always called me his fecond.—Farewell, my dearest friend.
Yours, most truly,
LUCY WILLIS.
LETTER
(
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I47
LETTER XXV.
FROM LASY CHARLOTTE RICHLEY TO LADV WILLIS.
Wefford Houfe, near 'Dublin.
JOY—joy—my beloved friend! the warmest congratulations a sincere heart can dictate attend my Lucy, Sir Eel-ward Willis, and your refpectable father, on a marriage which gives me unfpeakable fatisfaction.
If I could have one moments regret, in this general SeaSon oS joy, it is, that I was not assistant at the awful ceremony, either as bride-maid, or with the little lovely Sophia and Louifa strewing the path with flowers, Sor your ladyship and the happy bridegroom.
My father Sends his particular congratulations, though you have doomed him, he Says, to a perpetual wearing the willow for your Sake. He is re^ G 2	joiced
148	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
joiced you have made choice of a man fo worthy of you: in short, I am convinced every one who knows you will rejoice. But your little friend Cupid, I fear, will murmur at it exceedingly : he had many accufations against you before, and for that reafon asserts, that this theft is the more aggravating, becaufe it is not the firft of which your ladyship has been guilty. He is, however, determined you shall not think he has been driven to, de-fpair: the little god knows too well his power was never fo advantageousiy placed, as with my Lucy; and as the only refource to keep it there, he is become friends with his brother deity, Hymen. For your fake, all their former animosities and enmities are entirely over: they have even entered into a treaty which is to be binding for many years. It was signed in great form upon your wedding-day. On his part, Cupid promifes to be th'e
lover,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I49
lover, as long as Hymen shall be the hushand : it remains for yon, my dear, to fecitre their union, and to clofe the bands which unite them. If I might advife, Cupid’s wings should abfolutely 4gbe cut; othervvifc he may, in fome unguarded moment, forget the treaty, fly away, a|id then, unable to vindicate himfelf, proclaim war against Hymen ; and, if it ever comes to that, all good faith will be ir-recoverably broken. Hymen must be miferable, when love enjoys no happinefs. Your happiness, my fweet friend, depends on theirs : their good or bad understanding, will either fweeten or imbitter your days.—But •why do I talk of any days but happy ones? ■—Thofe who know Lady Willis, will know, likewife, they mufl past on in peace and innocence. Had I a mufe at my elbow, you should certainly have an epithalamium on this occasion:
•—but, indeed, no mufe of mine is e-c]ual to the Subject ;—fo you must G 3	even
I ho	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
even be content, in plain profe, with my fmcerefl wishes for every happinefs to attend von.
I am delighted to hear you have found, in the worthy Mrs Douglas, not only a pleasing companion, but al-fo a relation.—I hope, and doubt not, that the all-wife diSpenler of events, who has tried her virtues in adversity, will abundantly reward them in prosperity. You, my incomparable friend, are the guardian angel whom heaven Sent to her aid. I am much interested writh her affecting history, and beg you will continue to be very minute concerning her.
- Where, on earth, can this dear man,—this Melville, be?—-or what can he be doing ?—-He certainly must have received our lastpaquet*:—but how astonishing is it, he should never answer it ?—My weak heart is full of
* This was, unfortunately, what the baSe MiSs Freelove had intercepted.
fears
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I 51
fears for his health.—But pardon me, my fweet friend, for disturbing your prefent felicity with my simple anxieties, and tender fears.
Adieu! all imaginable compliments of congratulation attend your caro fpofo ; and believe me to be unalterably, in every situation,
most sincerely your :	affectionate friend,
CHARLOTTE RICHLEY.
" ■■ ■— — 1 ■     ■ ■ ■■ - ■ . .   .. .. ... ■ —^
LETTER XXVI.
* SIR HENRY BELLMOUR TO COLONEL MELVILLE.
I	London, July 20.
HOPED ere this, my dear Charles, to have acquainted you I was become
“ Benediff,
* Several letters, previous to this, had pasted lately between thefe worthy friends, but they are G 4	not
I52	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ Benedict, the married man ft and one of the happiest of human beings; but an unfortunate affair, which has just happened in my family, has retarded my felicity for a short time. Be not, however, alarmed, I am well,—perfectly well in health ; as is likewife my lovely Patty ;—in whom I, if posiible, discover a fresh charm every day.—~ But, not to keep you a single moment in fufpenfe, relative to the above unfortunate affair I mentioned at the beginning of my letter, take the following particulars:
I think you must remember, when you and I were at Venice, a remarkable well-looking youth, of a most pleaf-ing addrefs, who came to offer himfelf to me as a Valet de chambre ; and that I took him into my fervice, and favoured him (as he appeared above the
not infertect, as containing little more than the joy each expressed on the pleasing profpect of being both foon united to thofe they loved.
common
A LESSON FbR LOVERS.	I h$
common rank of domestics) with every mark of esteem his merits demanded. —You may possibly perhaps remember this young man by the name of Roz-zelli, buti if not, I must proceed to fay, he possessed, among other ufeful requisites, many agreeable talents; particularly an uncommon fine taste and execution in music :—on the lute he excelled.—His father, he told me, was a Venetian musician, but that, having a large family, he cliofe to enter into fervice.
This amiable young man was my a-manuensis; and-, from his extreme attachment and fidelity, exemplified in a thoufand instances, gained my confidence,—and I ought to fay like wife, my gratitude; as he rifqued his own life to fave mine.
Soon after you left me in Italy, I had, on occasion of a quarrel about a lady, on whofe account I was, however, perfectly innocent, incurred the G 5	hatred
154	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
hatred and revenge of an Italian nobleman of very high rank.
One evening, as 1 was returning to my lodgings, with no other attendant but my faithful fervant, I was befet by three bravos, two of whom knocked me down, whilst the other villain stabbed me in my breast, with a Stilletto. They left me, as they imagined, for dead, and immediately made their e-fcape. My poor Rozzelli conveyed me, weltering in my blood as I was, to my apartments ; and, weeping over me with the tenderest care, got all imaginable help.—My furgeons immediately pronounced I was a dead man, for that my wound had been given with a poifoned weapon ; a cruelty peculiar to fome nations, where frantic jealoufy is predominant. I was resigned to my fate,—but my trusty valet was inconfolable—and wept without ceasing. At length, my furgeons having left me as incurable, I fell into
a Slumber
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	l$$
a Slumber of fome hours, and, on a-waking, found myfelf amazingly better.—I faw Rozzelli sitting by my side, who feemed overjoyed at my visible change for the better.—To be brief, in one week I was So well, as to have no complaint left but weaknefs :—-but I was extremely concerned to find my faithful Servant ill, and daily drooping. I found the poiSon from my wound had been extracted ; and, from many circumstances, began to conclude the above poor youth had performed that most exalted oS all heroic acts, oS risking his own liSe to Save mine, by Sucking the poiSon from my wound; and, at length, he confessed, that, whilst I was steeping, he had applied his lips to the part affected.—Imagine my a-stonishment!—I instantly put-into his hands, a purSe silled with a large Sum of money ; but this, to my still further amazement, he refufed, and with even a degree of difdain.---j\L^cy, in truth,
could
15&	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
could be no equivalent return for So wonderful an act oS exalted kindneSs. —I endeavoured, however, to make his situation as comfortable as possible, and his health began, at length, to be better; but I always obServed a pensive melancholy in his countenance, for which I could not account.
It is needleSs to Say how much his astonishing fidelity and care for my welfare, in a number oS instances, had endeared the excellent youth to my regard.-—But to come to the distressful point.
For theSe last six weeks, Rozzelli has visibly declined in health ; neither could any persuasions prevail on him to have the advice which his languishing state required.—But gueSs, my dear Melville, my astonishment a Sew days since, when (as I was sitting with my Patty, and her amiable friend MiSs Millwood, who is come to us, on account of the approaching nuptials) one
of
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I $J
of my Servants came hastily into the room, and begged me to go to Mr. Rozzelli, for that he was fo much worfe, as to be believed just departing.
—Imagine my concern.—I ran infiant-ly to his apartment, where I indeed found the poor, inestimable youth, visibly drawing to his last moments.—
He was shpported by pillows, whilst a death-like palenefs was fpread, over his.
. languid countenance.
“ My dear Rozzelli,” faid I, “ how do you ?”
“ This—this is kind indeed,” returned he in broken, trembling accents,
“ to fmooth my passage to eternity !—
I am just—just going,—but yet cannot i depart, till, Oh!—-but promife me your forgivennefs :—fay you will forgive a wretched—”
“ Forgive ss—-----faid I, affected to
tears, “ my beloved Rozzelli, I would do every thing to fave and ferve you.
—What can I do for you ?„
“ Alas !
158 A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ Alas ! Nothing—nothing can now be done,„ faid the poor dying youth; “ but—where—where is your dear hand ?„
He took it, and faintly pressing it to his lips—(I was astonished—but almost petrified with amazement, when he continued in feeble accents inimitably affecting:—and at this moment, my Patty fearing the worst had happened, had gently stolen into the room, and was, unperceived by my poor Rozzelli,
listening)---“ No, all aid is vain:—-
I feel the powerful hand of death—but cannot—cannot leave you, till I have revealed I am—I am—-a wretched woman !„
“ Good God !„ exclaimed I, “ I am all amazement!—pray proceed !„
“ Have you forgot,” she faintly continued, “ the Lady Laura D’Aumarez, only child to the Marquis De Loretto? —I am that unfortunate woman :—/ am that once happy daughter ;—who,
through
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I h$
}■
through the exceSs of a tender, but hopelefs passion, left my father’s houfe, -—blind,—lost,—to every thing but my unhappy pasiion, for jou, my Bellmour ft —(O Melville ! imagine my amazement at this astonishing difcovery !)—-“ I difguifed myfelf in the habit of a page—and thus got admittance to yoyr adored prefence, under the guife of an humble domestic.—To be near you,— to See you daily,—to watch, with ten-derest care, your every request, were all-—to me an infinity oS happineSs !— You may poflibly recollect you Saw, two Succeeding nights, at the opera at Venice, a young lady of quality, with whom you converSed, and led to her
chair.----I am that unhappy woman,
who, alas ! Srom the first hour I Saw you, may date my miSery
“ O heavens !„ Said I, “ is it possible? —I do,—I indeed recollect having Seen the lovely Laura,—Proceed, dearest
Madam,
l6o	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
Madam, with your most distressing dif-covery.„
Melville,—she was the lovely woman, whom nothing but her high rank, and my then very moderate circumstances, my father being at that time alive, would have prevented me from addref-Smg.—You have often heard me mention her with rapture. I had feen her,, indeed, but twice ; but that was enough to complete her conquest'*.—The dear woman thus proceeded:
“ What more,;—what more can I fay ?----Pity me,—and Sometimes be-
stow a thought on the dying Laura D’Aumarez.”
* It may, perhaps, appear Surprising, that Sir Henry Bellmour fhould not recollect, in his Valet, the features of ^this beautiful Venetian lady ; but whoever considers the extreme difference which the habits of the Sexes make, joined with Rozzelli’s always wearing a large black patch on one eye, made Such a thought impossible to enter the Baronet’s Bead.
I was-
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	16-1
I was affected beyond the power of utterance —I raifed her languid head, and placed it on my bofom.
“ What—what return can I make,” faid I, in broken accents, “ to that incomparable friend, who si> nobly faved me from death ?„
Indeed, my friend, to fay truth, I had almost forgotten, at that wretched moment, that I was under the most Solemn ties',—the most binding pro-inifes to-another woman,—to my beloved Patty.—I had almofi added, to that which I had already faid,—“ Live— live my incomparable friend, I will reward thy pashon but the dear generous maid, to whom I am betrotb-ed, fprang forward, from where she had been concealed from the dying lady, and, falling on her knees by the bedside, with inimitable tendernefs and fensibility, contributed to the most heartfelt fcene the human mind could feel.
“ No---
162	a LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ No—no,”-—faid my fweet Patty, “ no, madam, you shall not die:—■ Bellmour shall be yours, you shall be his.—Let not me, wretched maid, as I am, be the foie obftacle, as I undoubtedly am, to the union of two fuch incomparable perfons.”
O, Melville, what a fcene was this • —here the dying La lira had a fainting fit,—and we thought her gone for ever!—-At length she once more, on hearing the name of Bellmour pronounced, opened her dying eyes and fixing them on me,—“ I die,„—faid she,—“ but I die contented, thus happy in your sight—your touch—■
your tender pity.----Farewell:—a
long—a last farewell!—Give me your hands.—(she feebly took a hand of each of us, who were both kneeling by, transfixed in forrow.)—“ give me your hands.—Thus let me join them.
•—Heaven blefs you—blefs—you both, —(pressing a hand of each to her cold
lips.—
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	163
lips.—Then, foftly exclaimed) “ Oh Bellmour, receive my latest breath !„
It was, indeed, her last-she died
—died, that moment, in my arms, as I was endeavouring to raife her on the pillows.
For a few minutes we stood gazing on the pallid corfe.—a fweet fmile still remaining.—How pregnant was the object before us of reflection !—But I cannot,—will not dwell on the melancholy fubject: my tears must flow— will ever flow for this unfortunate, this noble-minded woman. Heavens ! what strength of mind did she exhibit, in braving the horrors of death for thy Bellmour!—and what must have been her silent pangs, to fee the daily, the hourly preparations for my approaching marriage with another! This was evidently the canfe of her death.—My generous Patty is continually exclaiming, “ It was I—it was I—that killed the Lady Laura !„
You
164	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
You know me too well, my friend, not to fuppofe this melancholy affair has funk deep into my heart: indeed it has.—Why—why-—did she not discover heisselS years ago ?—But what would I Say ?
Every possible mark of honour and refpect I have paid to the poor cold reliques oS the dear departed:—she was interred, as befitting her high rank and noble birth, in a vault I had purpoSely made in my parish-church in the country ; and long—long will her revered memory remain in my “ heart of hearts.„
Among many other most affecting circumstances,, it Seems, when the attendants were preparing this dear lamented woman Sor the coffin, they found, tied round her body, cloSe as pofsible to her heart, a very Small miniature picture of thy Bellmour, Set round with diamonds, oS immenfe value. The likenefs is amazing:—this
she
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	1 6 ij
she must long have worn in Secret, as it is dated Sour years since. ■
You will not, after perusing this most melancholy story, wonder that we have a Sew days SuSpended our nuptial ceremony: this Small reSpect is Surely owing to the memory oS the e-ver lamented Laura D’Aumarez.
But now, my Melville, Sor Subjects more agreeable.—-I depend on your promiSe of visiting East-wood park, that our nuptials may be celebrated on one and the fame day. It is neediest, I trust, to tell you, that my happinefs will be doubled, by the knowledge that your future felicity on earth, will be entered to you by the poSSeSsion of all you hold most dear, as well as my own. Indeed we have both a profpect of permanent happinefs: we have not, lovely as are our brides-eleff, made their beauty the fate attraction: where that alone is done, I have often ob-ferved Satiety Soon take place.—External
166	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
nal beauty alone, often creates a violent N - pash on, and the enamoured man mif-takes the violence of love for its duration: he judges of the future, by that which pleafes him now, without considering how far that which pleafes to-day, may be difagreeable to-morrow.—We are, in short, all of us too apt to depend on ourfelves, as if we were always the fame, and yet we are changing every day.— I hope, however, my dear Charles, that you and I shall prove the common-received maxim to be falfe; “ that we enjoy lefs what we obtain, than what we hope fir, and that we are feldorn happy but in expectation V
Adieu !—I shall get the old chapel put in repair, on the approaching joyful occasion, with a new altar-piece; where you will receive the hand of your lovely Fanny, on the fame day which will give my equally amiable maid to,
Your most sincere friend,
BELLMOUR,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	167
‘LETTER XXVII.
LADY WILLIS TO LADY CHARLOTTE RICHLEY.
YPrimrofe-Hill.
OU fee this, my dear friend, dated from the fweet villa of Mrs Douglas: a ueat little elegant houfe, adjoining almost my beloved hufband’s park, and of which he has given her the entire poSSeshon. He has alfo fettled two hundred pounds per annum on this very amiable, but unfortunate relation, to which my father and I add another hundred ;>—fo that her circumstances now, with many other advantages a-nfing from her being fettled fo near us, are perfectly eafy. Never was, furely, fuch humility—fuch moderation, as our charming cousin poffesses, in her every word and action!—We have had the utmost difficulty to force
UDon
r68	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
upon her the above mentioned benefits.—Tire meanest cottage, the dear woman faid, in our neighbourhood, would be quite fufficient, or a little farm of twenty pounds a year. My Edward, all generous benevolence, would fain have put her in the entire possession of a handfome feat of his, not many miles distant, but this she abfolutely rejected ; and, at length, we have got her to six in this fweetly-ru-ral habitation, called Primrofe-Hill. The situation of jt is beautifully romantic, as it has every advantage in profpect, that hanging woods, rocks covered with the greenest verdure, and a clear, but rapid river, can bestow. The houfe, which consists of only a hall, a parlour and three chambers, is furnished by the direction of its humble mistress, in the most simple, but ^ neat style imaginable: instead of chi-• na, she insists on plain delph-ware: —and in lieu of chintz or damafk furniture,
> • *
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	169
nkure, will have nothing more costly than a white cotton or fprigged linen throughout the houfe. Her little houfehold she has limited to two maidservants, and one boy in livery. A Small meadow, adjoining her garden, in which we have Sent her a cow, Sor the ufe of her children, adds much to the pictureSque Scene which Surrounds this most pleasing abode. It is, indeed, almost impervious to the eye oS mortal man, being “ emboSomed,„ as Milton calls it, in loSty trees. After having crossed the river by a bridge, overgrown with weeping willows, you Spy . a meandering little path, through a rocky kind of broken cliffs, which, after paS-sing a thick copSe, the abode of all the thrushes, nightingales, and blackbirds in the neighbourhood, you inSensibly gain the little Summit oS PrimroSe-Hill. The houSe, which is a white stucco, and neatly siated, is situated in the middle of a garden ; in which roles,
VOL. II,	H	iaSminm
170	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
jaSmine, and honey-fuckles, are bloom ing in their highest beauty. From th< garden, which, on one side, adjoins s hanging rock, covered with wile thyme, and a variety of odoriferou: fweets, intermixed with the greenest ■ herbage, we defeend by fome steps in to a little wilderness, Solitary beyonc all description ; no Sound invading the ear, but the distant dashing oS waterfalls, or natural caScades among the rocks, Save the moaning oS the pining turtle-dove. A clear rivulet runs brawling through tins Small Sairy Spot of inchantment, which still adds (with the addition of a rustic bench of twined osiers on its banks) to the beauty oS the whole truly-Sylvan Scene. My Edward is So charmed with this Solitary brook and its lowly bench, that he has written on the latter, “ O Sweet retreat!”—and on the humble wicket, which leads to this melancholy, but pleasing Spot, he has inferibed,
il Sacred
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	171
4< Sacred to peace and Solitude-,
“ Where midnight fays and fairies dance,
“ All hail! May no rude blast “ Invade thy Springing flowers,
“ Nor fpotted fnake lurk on thy banks;
** Thy daSied banks, where roSes Ihed a couch, u No bird of night be heard, u Save Sweetest: Philomel, who whilst u She warbles her love-labour’d fong, w Her notes, in tears doth fleep l*”
Our dear cousin has only been Settled in her beautiSul retirement one week : a very short time, indeed, was necessary for Settling a perSon So ea lily Satisfied, and So perfectly contented with the humblest comforts of life.
I am forry to fay the fpirits of this very amiable woman are still low:— still feem oppressed with the remembrance, as I fuppofe, of her hufband’s perfidy.—'Often do I fee (though I fay riothing) a silent tear steal down her languid..'cheek :—as often do I hear -. her check a rising sigh.
f
* Milton.
H 2	Last
tyi	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
Last night we walked in the lone!) wilderness, which 1 have been at tempting to defcribe, by moon-light As I was fondly leaning on the arm oi my beloved Edward, he, in rapture' with the enchanting fpot, exclaimed, —“ Surely nature intended this elysi-um for the abode of happy lovers!
“ Aye,„ Slid Mrs. Douglas, tenderly sighing, “ for faith and cmflancy like
yours—If my poor-—unhappy”--------she
stopped.
“ Indeed, Sophia,” faid I, “ if you are thus melancholy, you must not walk in the wilderness by moon-light.”
I would not here, rny dearest Charlotte, be understood that our lovely cousin nourifies a grief which renders her infensible to the pleafures which our friendship has prepared for her ;— far from it:—she is, indeed, all gratitude ;—all humble thankfulness:—and of your offered kintlnefs too, my fweet friend, she is highly feasible :—but
there
A LESSON FOR LOVERS. •	173
there is a Soft kind of melancholy a-bout her, in the midst of all her ft riving to be cheerful, which makes me fear it may hurt her health.
“ Why is it,„ she often exclaims, “ my dear lady Willis, that, in the midst of happinefs, the fighing heart will remind one of imperfection ?„
“ Ah, my friend,„ I reply, “ the Sighing heart of a tender woman, never can forget the firf object of its fenfibi-lity and affection.”
Time, however, and the various little fcenes of varied life, which must necessarily occur, joined with our unremitting endeavours to arnufe and entertain this fair mourner, will, I hope, calm all her griefs, and hush her for-, rows into peace.
>	Wednefday evening.
Thus far I had written yesterday, the afternoon of which was fpent fo pleafantly, that I must endeavour to H 3	give
/
174	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
give you an account of it.—Still at fweet -Primrofe-Hill.—As we were sitting yesterday, after dinner, the little Sophia and Louifa ran into the room, with their laps full of shells and flowers.
“ O mamma,’, faid Sophia, her shining eyes testifying her joy, “ where do you think we have been?—Look at thefe fine shells.„
“ And where did you get them?’, Said their fond mother.
“ Why we have been up to the very top of the great high, white rock, at the bottom of the wilderness, with Mary, our maid, and there we faw the old man who lives—who lives in the cave, with a long white beard: he gave us thefe shells and stowers.”
“ The old man !”—we all exclaimed, ■—i“ an old man live in a cave in one of thofe rocks at the bottom of the wildernefs ?—impossible !’'
Two
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I'75
Two gentlemen who had dined with us, and a young lady in the neighbourhood, inftantly one and all faid, there was undoubtedly an old man resided in a cave there, who was- called the hermit of the white rock.
-Mr. Dennis, one of the gentlemen, who is a learned clergyman, faid, “ This venerable man, I allure you, ladies, is a very extraoTdinary character :—he Supports' himfelf entirely from roots and the vegetables of the rock ; whilst his only drink is what a Small adjoining cafcade, near his cave, Supplies him with. I,„ continued Mr Dennis, “ who am Sond of feeing novelties, with Some little difficulty, one day, aScended this rock, to get a sight oS this wonderSul hermit; and, in good truth, my trouble was Sully compensated.—I Sound him, indeed, a man of extraordinary knowledge, great learning, and uncommon abilities. ‘ He is almost grown double with age, and.
H 4,	has
1 y6 A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
has a long silver beard, clown to his girdle.—In this folitude, he told me, he has lived near two years, wholly giving himfelf up to prayer, meditation, and abstinence.—As to abstinence, tI should indeed imagine he must, in his situation, be almost in a starving state ; and as to prayer and meditation, I really believe he practifes both ; if I may judge of his truly Christian Sentiments, his resignation, and Submission to the will of heaven. Why a man of Such very extensive understanding should have Secluded himfelf from the world, in this manner, is a mystery I know not. I should indeed have visited him again, but have been long abSent Srom this county.—You did not know,„ continued Mr. Dennis, “ that you had a hermit So near you, Mrs. Douglas, though his-rock is that very one which almost hangs over the little wilderneSs in your garden/,
“ O
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	177
“ O Heavens!'’ laid I, “ I am dying to fee this hermit.—I must fee him.—Did you never hear of him Sir Edward?„
He replied, he thought he had Sometime since, but did not believe the story, till now, to be true, So thought no more about it.
“ Very Sew people,„ replied Mr. Dennis, “ have heard oS this man:— and indeed his extreme privacy makes it next to impossible he should be known, as he never quits his rock, which is entirely out of the road to any place whatever.”
“ I beg,„ Lid I, “ we may make a party, and get a sight oS this wonderful man.„
The young Lady, MiSs Mortimer, who was with us, desired to make one of the nttmber, and my dear Edward was delighted with the Scheme.
H 5	“ I assure
l - x	"	"
Ij8	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ I assure you, ladies,„ faid Mr. Dennis laughing, “ you will have fome difficulties to encounter'’
“ Mary the nurfe-maid, was now called, as it feemed, by the childrens account, that she had difcovered a fmall winding path, up one part of the rock, more accessible, than what lay on the other Side.—In short, the evening being remarkably fine, we all, excepting poor Mrs. Douglas, who had a violent cold, and was fearful of increasing it, Sallied Sorth with Mary for our guide, and with Some trouble (what is it that perseverance will not Surmount?) we at last afcendcd the rock.
"Whilst we were on the road to it, MiSs Mcfrtimer and I laughed heartily at the possibility of perhaps the hermit, after all our pains, being no more than fome beggar, or fun-burnt old gipfy in his cave, whom Mr. Dennis, as she faid, in his creative fancy, had metamorphofed into a most extraordinary
LESSON FOR LOVERS."	179^
nary fine character of a hermit, forfooth, who had philofophically forfaken the world and all its vanities. “ Dennis,” added the agreeable lively girl, “ you shall fuffer for this: for if I sind your account not true, I will make you take the lover’s leap from yon tremendous jutting rock, into the lake beneath, as a punishment for our fatigue and your/ credulity.’,
“ If ladies,” faid he dryly, “ will have curiofity, why they must pay for it.„
But to proceed, with much laughter, and infinite pleafantry, we at length Surmounted all our little difficulties.
A deep cave now preSented itSelf, overgrown with ivy, and holly:—on one side oS it was a Small garden oS herbs " • and roots:—but what attracted most of our attention was, the hermit him-Self, Seated on the stump of an old oak, at the very entrance of the cavern. On our approach, he very reSpectfully
omit*
J8o	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
oroSe. I never faw a more venerable figure. His hair and long beard were white as silver,—his garment a coarfe black Sort of loofe gown, tied round his waiSt with a cord, still added to his uncommon appearance.
Our gentlemen made a proper apology for intruding on his retirement, which the hermit anfwered with fo much politeneSs, and eafe of manner, that convinced us he must have been acquainted, in better days, with genteel life, at'least.
He begged we would walk into his cave, the neatnefs of which I own fur-prifed me. , At the farther end was a bed of strewed rushes ; in the middle of his habitation stood a Sort of table, or rather a large stool, which he had himfelf made out of the branches of trees, twined most ingeniously together.
■—On my noticing it, “Necessity, Madam/, faid he, “ is the mother of invention."—The roof of this cave he
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	l8l
had fo polished, that it had even the Smooth appearance oS a beautiSul marble. There were Several Seats, Scooped Srom the sides oS the rock, covered with green moSs. In short, we were delighted with all we Saw. On our exprefling an astonishment'at his choosing So absolute a folitttde,—“ It is,” Said he sighing, “ Sor that very reaSon that Ido chooSe it. —My Sorrows are great, and many; and in this Sequestered Spot I chooSe to bury them in oblivion.—I have known the world;—I have known affluence; —and this I know, that one hour’s eon-- verSe with my God, in this quiet retreat Srom all its vanities and Sollies, is much more than adequate Sor what this Seclusion can inflict, and much more than an equivalent Sor any thing the * world can bestow.'7
We were charmed with his Sentiments. Sir Edward and the gentlemen Soon entered into a ciiScourS’e on natural philoSophy; the herjiiit having produced
182	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
duced an infinite number of petrifactions, curious foffils, and other beautiful productions of nature he had found among the rocks.—On thefe Subjects he difplayed great knowledge—and indeed on every other.
I expressed my furprife how he could possibly have fupported himfelf in that abfolute Solitude So long, on merely roots and water.
“ Little, Madam, very little,” he replied, with a Sort of resigned Smile, “ is needful Sor the Support of nature.—I have cultivated a Small Spot, adjoining my cave, Sor roots in the winter months, and in thoSe oS the Summer, bountiful nature abundantly Supplies me, even with luxuries.—Every bush affords me berries ;—and I find a kind oS wild strawberries among the green verdure oS the rocks, wonderfully refreshing. I have a stint and steel with which I strike a Sire.—Alas!” continued the good old man, when imaginary wants are annihilated.
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	183
lated, how few—how very few things are, in reality, requisite for our fup-port!”
“ Your doctrine, Sir, “ faid Sir Edward, “ would he but little relished, or indeed understood, by the generality of the world—at least by an age like the prefent, devoted as it is to the most shameful luxury.”
“ Are you not afraid,” faid Mifs Mortimer, “ of being molested by strangers in fo folitary a retreat ?”
“ I have feen no human being,” replied the hermit, “ fave that worthy gentleman once before (pointingto Mr. Dennis), and two lovely little children, who this day called here with their attendant.—I have a few books, and this divine one in particular,” continued he, taking up a bible, “ which fupports my fpirits.—I am not alone:—I trust, my God is ever—ever prefent with me.—I have known—but I cannot proceed—remembrance stops my tongueA
Now,
2 34	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
Now, thought I, would I give the world to hear this old man’s history.—> Some very particular events, Surely, must have occasioned him thus to fly Society and the allurements oS the world. The elegance of his language, and his Sentiments on every Subject, So uncommon in a perfon oS his appearance, raiSed my curiofity to the very highest pitch.
•—Whether he obServed this" propensity in me, 1 know not, but he continued : —“ My Sorrows are too bitter to bear repetition—they are (pressing his hand to his heart, and sighing bitterly) deeply imprinted here;—but they are too great for utterance.„
After this declaration, you know, my friend, we could not, in common good manners, desire a difclofure oS his afflictions.
“ 1 wish,” Said this amiable old man, “ I could refresh you ladies, aSter your troubleSome walk to my poor abode, with tea, or coffee:—but theSe are what
I am
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	185
I am wholly destitute of:—but permit me to offer part of my little store, of fuch refreshments as my rock—my cave affords.,, Saying thus, he retired to the inner part of his dwelling, and quickly returned with a paper of wild wood-strawberries, fome hurtle-berries, and nuts of the last year’s produce.
“ Excufe,” faid he, “ ladies, the simple fare of a poor old hermit.”
“ Nay,„ laid I fmiling, “ you treat us even with delicacies.„
The good man would alfo prefent us with many natural curiosities of fof-sills, pebbles, and petrified mosses, wonderfully beautiful, and with which I intend to decorate fome of my most elegant Indian cabinets.
We now began to think of departing, as the evening drew on apace. My Edward, and Mr. Dennis, both pressed the obliging hermit to leave his foli-ttitle for a day or two at least, and give them the pleafure of his company.—
“ We
-c
186	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ We have books,„ faid they, “ and you,Sir, shall be as retired asyoupleafe —But he begged to be excufed, as he never more intended going into the
world again:-----but faid, he Should*
efteem it a particular favour, if we would honour him with another visit.
“ I do not,” faid the good man, “ quit the world becaufe I diflike fociety,but becaufe I would, in this fcqueStered a-bode, have more leifure to bestow in my preparation for a future state, which I hope foon to experience, and becaufe I wish to breathe my last on yonder rushy bed.—But where,„ faid he, feeing our attendant Mary, who had before stood without the cave; “ where, young woman, are thofe fweet little ones you had with you this morning?
I hope no accident happened on their defcent from the rock.—Sweet babes ! ---how did their innocent prattle delight me !—Pray let me fee them once more.—Do they live near this place.”
“ Only,„
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	187
“ Only,„ faid I, “ at the very foot of your formidable rock: they are your nearest neighbours. I will foon—very foon come again, and bring thofe little prattlers with me.”
We now took our leave of the hermit, who attended us to the Summit of his rock, Srom whence we proceeded the way we had came, and arrived Soon aSter, the distance being not more than half a mile,'at PrimroSe-Iiill, where we found our amiable cousin playing with her two Sweet children.
“ O, Mrs. Douglas,„ Said I, “ we are enchanted with this hermit—never did I See So charmings an old man ! you must—you shall accompany us the next time we pay him'a visit.”
W e now Sat down to a most cheerSul S upper, and talked oSnothing but the hermit :—indeed it was a matter of astonishment to us all how a man, apparently accustomed to very genteel liSe, could have existed, Sor above two years, destitute
1 88	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
titute of almost the common Supports oS nature,—without a friend,—without one necessary comfort.
“ How old is he ?„ Said Mrs, Dou-glas.
“ Full fouisscore, I dare fay,” replied I; “ but you will be charmed with him notwithstanding.',
We Spent a moil: agreeable evening in chatting about this old man.—My dear hushand fays, he will Send a man on the morrow to clear the path, which leads to the cave, oS Some impediments, So that our journey, in Suture, will be .more agreeable and eaSy.
I have a most wonderful curiosity to know a little oS the hermit’s history: —and hope he will Soon Savour me with it.
MiSs Mortimer has a brother, who, next week, is to Set out for Ireland. To him, thereSore, shall I entrust: this voluminous packet, and he, as Soon as possible, promiSes to deliver it into
your
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	189
your ladyship’s fair hands.—I am just now interrupted—but hope foon to be able to finish my epistle adieu, therefore, for the prefent.
’#***'#** * # *
Ten at flight.
WIIAT uncertain wretches thefe men are !—But,	i
u When a lady’s in the cafe, * u All other things muss; then give^Iace.”
Thus truly does the poet Gay pronounce.
This provoking brother of Mifs Mortimer, Sets out early to-morrow, it Seems, for Ireland, by which means I am obliged to fuppreSs a thoufand things 1 had to fay to my beloved friend, the er of my heart.
The very agreeable man, who bears this epistle to your fair hands, is on a matrimonial Scheme', I find, to Some Irish Lady of great fortune and beauty.
Your congratulatory letter, my Sweet Charlotte, I have carefully locked up, as I have a certain Scheme in my head,
relative to the epithilamium I intend to t
/v,n
190	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
fend you, on the fame occasion, very shortly.—Suppofe I /leal the Sentiments oS your charming letter, and put them into rhyme ?—It shall be So.—At preSent, I have a quarrel both against Cupid and Hymen:—the latter, for protracting thus long your marriage :•—the former, that he does not lend his wings to your tardy Colonel.—-Hasten your next letter-sh-and I beSeech you tell me when you visit England, and iS your nuptial day is approaching,—Believe me, most faithfully, Your
LUCY WILLIS.
P. S. I will write again very foon.
— ■■ . —........---- —
LETTER XXVIII.
THE SAME, TO THE SAME.
O"	Primrofe-IIill, Monday noon.
MY dear Charlotte, I have a wonderful event to relate.—You will hardly believe that—but I will not anticipate.
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I91
pate. To lead to this interesting matter, I must tell you the following particulars.
About a week since the day being sine, and my friend, Mrs. Douglas, recovered from her late indifposition; I propofed a fecond visit to the hermit on the white rock. Accordingly a party of six, with the little Sophia and Louifa, fet out for the cave, the path of it being now made very tolerable.
After a fweet walk, in-which we had frequently stopped to behold the amazing beauties which vangated nature has fo profufely shattered around; we at length gained the Summit oS the rock, where, at the entrance oS his cave, on a bank of mofs, fat the hermit reading. He arofe with much politeness, and welcomed us to his Solitary retreat: but how great was my astonishment, when on fixing his eyes on Mrs. Douglas, he started back with amazing perturbation, and with a deep groan Sell
SenSeleSs
Ip 2	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
fenfelefs at her feet!—Imagine our fur-prize.—We stew to help him; but the ' children, who were just before us, had now stung themfelves down by him, crying out—“ Oh the poor hermit!— the poor hermit!”
Whether in his falling, or occasioned by their bufy little hands, as well as ours, who tiled to give him air, by throwing off his hat, 1 know not; but, in the confusion, all together, off drop-ed a very long, white, silver beard from the chin of our hermit; and alio, asj long and venerable a falfe head of grey hair, which difcovered our imaginary old man to be a very handfome young fellow, about twenty-five years of age : 'and though he appeared emaciated ;— and though his eyes were now clofed, for he was in a strong fainting fit, I think I never faw a finer countenance.
We were alHn the utmost astonishment at this wonderful metamorphosis, as you may well fuppoSe, when instantly
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	I93
tantly, on Mrs. Douglas approaching him to give her assistance with the rest of us, she fuddenly shrieked out, “ O my hushand U—my hushand!—he is, he is my hushand ss---and down^ she fell, alfo, without Seeming liSe, or motion.— What a Scene oS confusion Was here!— My Edward ran Sor water, to the next * caScade : Dennis (who was with us) was endeavouring to raiSe my Sweet cousin Srom the ground —the children were Screaming,-—“ O my mamma “ is dead!—and the poor hermit is dead !”—I was applying my bottle of -Salts, and chaffing the temples oS eaclr of the Sainting objects.-—At length, after they had both been very plentiSully Sprinkled with water, they began to shew Some signs oS returning life- I Seated Mrs. Douglas (who now just began to open her fair eyes) on a bank of wild chamomile, whilst my hufband was busily employed in his cares for Douglas;—for Douglas he proved to I	be.
t$4	A' LESSON FOR LOVERS.
he. He was the first whofe SenSes.nov returned :—when most pathetically he exclaimed, “ O hide me—hide mefroir that-dear—that injured excellence!--Gracious Heaven, do I live to fee hei once again '■—O let me,” added he throwing -himfelf on the ground, “ hen let me die .----breathe out my foul ir imploring the forgiveness? of that in ■jured angel.-—O my Sophia (endeavour •ing to crawl towards her) in me be hold your wretched hushand:—the one vile Douglas ! but long—long since i convert to thy virtues.”—He wept a loud.
Imagine what we, the by-Standers felt at a feene fo entirely affecting for it is not in the power of languagt to do it justice.
Whilst the poor penitent Douglai looked?//? to his angelic wife,as to form heavenly being oS a Superior order, she Snatched a look at him of mingled a-stonishment, and, I thought, of inex
pressibk
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	195
pressible tenderness :—it was, however, not unattended with a certain air of difpleafure, which fuch wrongs as she had received from this hushand might well juSlify.
He now took the little Sophia and LouiSa in his arms, and kissing them with unfpeakable tenderness (for it could not be here doubted, but that he knew they were his own, not only from the powerful tye of nature, hut-frOm my having called them by their names) he wept over them with the most tender expressions of SondneSs; and kneeling between each of theSe lovely babes, “ Come, my little Sophy,” faid he, “ come, my pretty LouiSa, conduct me to thy much-loved parent: — there kneel with me, and implore her forgiveness for thy most wretched father/’
He was now at the feet oS his beauteous wiSe; when, “ O Sophia,„ he Said, in accents the most moving, “ let theSe Sweet innocents plead for me;—r
I96	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
in them behold your once-loved Don glas.”—He funk almost prostate at he: knees, the children kneeling—-my Swee friend could not bear this, indeed i was foul harrowing.
“ Douglas—my Douglas,„ faid she in a low, but trembling accent, “ win why did you deceive me ?—why did y 01 leave me—leave your poor Sophia tc Struggle with miSery ?—to lament thj cruel abSence ?—All—all elSe I could have borne:—but„—Her tears hen choaked her utterance.
Do you think, my Charlotte, I did not weep at this truly moving Scene i «—Indeed I did, my Edward too, anc the worthy Mr. Dennis, gave the strongest proofs of their Sensibility : ir short, there was not a dry eye amon| us. The most angelic of women (foi fo I really look on Mrs. Douglas to be^ -—at length continued :
“ . Why, my mge dear hushand, did you leave me in the dreadful reflection that you loved another woman?—It
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	197
was there”—A flood of tears prevented farther utterance.
“''Oh name her not,„ he cried;— “ detestable, abominable woman—as she is.—Oh ! I could a tale unfold, which would convince my fweet love, that, culpable as I am,—I was not the wretch that firft feduced.—O she was viler
He stopped;—and whilst his very foul feemed torn with the conflicting pafiions of love, shame, grief, and de-fpair, his little Sophia did more for him in one moment, than all his rhetoric could have done 5 fo wonderful, fo powerful a pleader is nature in the fweet simplicity of a child.
“ O mamma,” Faid she, “ will you not look once on the poor hermit ?—fee his tears :—fee his agonies :—what has, he done to offend?—I love him—donct you, sister LouiSa ? pray look upon him. —Nay, mamma, you shall give him once your hand.„
I 3	“ Ah!
tgS	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ Ah! my fweet child,” faid her mother, bending forward, “ thy artlefs pleadings melt my foul !„
Douglas obferving a ray of kindnefs beaming in her eye, arofe and caught her in his arms.
“ My heavenly angel,” he. exclaimed, “ forgive thy Douglas, and accept his penitence!—Oh, do not drive him to deSpair !”
In short, Charlotte, for I must be brief, the whole of what was faid oil this affecting occasion by each of them, is impossible for me to defcribe.—-It consisted of every thing that was tender,—moving,—and affecting, to the utmost degree. Whilst tears, and sighs of tranfport were alternately blended, ——the repentent hufband held his for-, giving angel to his breast in an agony of joy -whilst she (Such is the Sorce of nature, where Love, as in her gentle boSom, for this her fir ft, and only object of affection, had never been obliterated)
with
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	199
with chastened rapture dwelt on his every word.—But the pen of a Richard-foA—of a Roujjeau—could only do justice to a reconciliation of fo deeply-in-terefting a nature, as that of fo tender, and affectionate an union, as we were witness to *.
After a thoufand tender intreaties for forgivenefs, on the part of Douglas;
*• Some readers, who are not deeply (killed in the knowledge of the human heart, or fome ftarched prudes may here exclaim, u It was strange, me-thinks, that Mrs. Douglas, after the wrongs (he had received from her bafehtfband, would evenfo much as deign to look on him, much more to be reconciled :—fuch a wretch Ihould have kneeled, and in-treated for an age, before he Ihould have met with the least hope of forgivenefs.5’—B r. aiking pardon, for di/Ient ing in opinion from the'.'e critics, I must: Jbeg leave to fay, that Heaven itfelf, (that feat of purity and mercy) we are taught to believe, Will be appeaSecl by penitence ; will look with au eye of compassion on a contrite heart, which owns with deepest: Sorrow its offences :—we ought not then to fuppofe, that a tender wife, who Bill loved, would be more obdurate than even offended Heaven itfelf,
I 4	again
200	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
again weeping over his new-found children, Sec. it growing now the middle of /	the day, (for we had taken our walk
just after breakfast) my Edward, willing to make the day—the joyous day as agreeable as possible to us, as it was interesting to the parties concerned, Sent two of our Servants, unknown to us ladies, to our own Seat, for a cold collation, wines, Sweetmeats, and fruits of all kinds.—Imagine, thereSore, our wonder, when being Seated in the cave, we were Summoned to a most elegant dinner, which was Spread under Some very high, and beautiful ash trees, at a little distance behind the caVern :—the day being excessively fultry, made the situation, which my dear hushand had thus Jlyly chofen, more delightful:—in short, we fat down on craggy stones, covered with thick grey mofs, with which' this rock abounds, a Set oS the most real, happy beings, 'that perhaps this world affords. Douglas, and his Sophia,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS*	201
phia, however ate but little ; a tear I obferved of mingled shame and joy often stealing down the cheek of the former, and a tender sigh, as often efcap-ing the gentle bofom of the latter. To add to our delightful entertainment, for fo I must call it, we were on a fudden charmed with a band of music:—horns, clarinets, and hautboys being placed in x different parts of the wood, anfwering each other, and which were rendered still more charming, from the sine echo among the rocks. This too, you will readily fuppofe, was my beloved Edward’s contrivance ; the band being » . # 45 -that we always keep in our houfe.
“ This,„ faid the fweetly—Smiling Mrs. Douglas, “ is too—too much !”— adding in a low whifper; “ Was I ever unhappy, Lady Willis?—Ought I to complain ?:—Surely, the felicity I now enjoy, feems more than a counterbalance for all my Sufferings’”
I 5	I pafs
£02	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
I paSs over, my dear Charlotte, the manner—the lively gratitude, which animated every feature of my amiable cousin, when she introduced my Edward and me, by the title (as she was pleafed to call us) of the Prefervers of hers, and her childrens lives, and from the horrors of abfolute want and mifery.—■ Douglas, on hearing this, would have siting himfelf at our feet.
“ O my wife !—my children ! (exclaimed he most pathetically) here let us kneel, and pour forth our thanks for Such exalted goodnefs !„—In truth, we had enough to do to calm his tranfports on this head.
“ W e,„ faid my beloved hushand, “ have done nothing:—nothing, but what the most common humanity required.—-What mighty merit can there be in barely doing one’s duty ?.—It has pleafed Heaven to blefs my Lucy and me with affluence ; and it would be criminal, in my opinion, if we did not
only
A LESSON -FOR LOVERS.	203
only afford relief to fussering merit that may fall in our way, but alfo feek out for objects of distressed worth, to comfort and assist them.-—Fortune’s giSts are merely adventitious:—I look on -myfelf as only theJleward, of the large possessions it has pleafed the Author of all goodnefs to bestow on me.” -
All this time, poor Douglas was holding one hand on his breaft, which feemed almost convulfed, with his face covered with the other.—At length, he burst into a flood of tears, more expref-ftve than all the language in the world.
In the courfie of the day, we gathered from this real penitent, for fuch he truly is, a few heads of his story, relative to his life abroad, and the reafons which influenced him to bury himfelf in folitude.—A few particulars only we we gathered ;—for it could not be fup-pofed, that, agitated as he was, from fuch a contrariety of pashons which he then experienced, he could sit down
calmly
2o4	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
calmly to tell a long story, or a cold, tedious narrative.
All we gathered from our late Hermit was, that he was not the feducer of the wretched Mifs Summers, though he confessed, with the deepest shame and contrition, that she had given him rea-fon to believe she was pregnant by him:
that, in confequence of this, and her perpetually intreating him to fly with her to fome distant country, to conceal her growing infamy, of which she then had the art to make him believe he was the foie author, he took the fatal step of quitting England :—that the partner of his shameful flight,,foon afterwards, fell into every excefs of levity—and, to his utter astonishment, at the end , of/'even months, was delivered.of a live full-grown child ; of which, she acknowledged, on his reproaching her with a prior engagement, that she was pregnant two months before She came to their houfe in London ;——that she
confessed
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	205
confessed alfo, that her mother’s footman was the father; and that, to conceal this matter from her eye, she had desired a journey to town ;—which her fond, unfufpecting parent, easily granted.-----•“ She had then,” added Mr.
Douglas, “ nothing to do, but to find out fome man, to whom she might make fuch advances, as should make it almost impossible for him to efcape her share. -----1, alas ! confess, with the deepest Sorrow,, that wretched man was my-Self!—It was I who was her dupe !—-It was I who was infatuated,—enfnared by her arts !—But I will not,—cannot dwell on the shocking particulars: —Suffice it to Say, that, Soon aSter the birth oS the above mentioned child, she fled to Vienna with a German Count, or rather Some gambler, who had taken upon him that title ;—and, I thank heaven, I have heard no more of her.„	'
“ And
206	a LESSON FOR LOVERS.
“ And where,„ faid our fweet cousin, the pattern of all female tenderness, “ where is the poor infant all this time ? what mifery must fuch a helplefs little unfortunate being be expofed to !
“ A few days only,” replied her hushand, “ after its birth, terminated a life, which, in all probability, would have been wretched.”
He then proceeded to fay, as he had been long feized with the most poignant remorfe for his abominable conduct to the most deferving and amiable woman in the world, he could neither rest night or day without instantly returning to England :—being determined to throw himfelf at her feet ;■—to intreat her forgiveness of his attrocious errors;—and, by the ffrictest adherence to morality and virtue, merit her attention.
“ To England, therefore, I came,” added he. “ Alas ! I considered not, my fweet love had, most probably,
from
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	lOJ
front my shameful flight, been under the cruel necessity of feeking a more humble dwelling!—On my arrival in London, I repaired to our former lodging, my Sophia, but, alas' was informed you had lest it near a twelve-month before ; and could get not the least information to where you had fled with the dear, fatherlefs, little ones.—Almost distracted, I travelled, in an agony of grief and defpair, almost England over, in fearch of my Sophia :—alas ! in vain—not the least trace—or probability could I ever find, of what my foul fo ardently panted to recover.-—And now in defpair, joined with deep—deep repentance, for my infidelity-—my crime in abandoning the loveliest of women, (no other crime, thank heaven, I know) I fought for comfort in my God.—At length, religion, with its angels aid, pointed out the only road to peace. That God, ever willing to receive the penitent invoker,
208	A LESSON FOR LOVER
voker, in his mercy, directed me to this most folitary fpot:—where, I trust,
I have, by the strictest life of prayer and mortification, in fome Small degree, washed away the guilt of my offence. My crime, I conSeSs, was great, but I Solemnly aver, that never before, nor since my connection with that artful woman, have I ever fwerved, even in thought, from my incomparable— my dearest, only love.—My hours, in this fweet folitude, for to me it never appeared dreary, have been dedicated wholly to my God :—fave thofe I. fpent in prayer, for .my adored ,wife and lovely babes.—Alas ! little could I have imagined that all I held dear in this world, was within fo Small a distance from my retreat!—I will convince you, by my Suture conduct, my much-loved wife, that, where the heart is not wholly corrupted, it may, by the divine assistance, be again a convert to virtue.,,
Here,
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	20g
Here, casting a look of inexpressible . tenderness, mingled with a kind of ingenuous shame, the penitent Douglas ceafed Speaking.
Towards the evening of this delicious day, we all efcorted the hermit from his cavern,down to the wildernefsat the bottom of the rock, that fvveetest of all fpots, which I have, in a former letter, endeavoured to deScribe. Here, whilst we were drinking our tea, in this most beautiful retreat, our horns and clarinets were playing in an adjacent wood, which hung over the water, from an impending rock —whilst fome foft flutes and hautboys were diSpoSed fo happily in various parts of this little paradife, that the whole was altogether ravishing. I was charmed with every part of the behaviour of our new-found hushand:—he was tender,—yet diffident ;—delicately attentive to his Sophia’s every word and motion :—and, whilst his little ones hung on his neck,
he
210	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
he was alternately bestowing his caresi fes on each, and hugging them to his bofom.
We remained in this most beautiful retreat, the wilderness, till now the full moon rising, as Milton phrafes it, “ in clouded majesty/’ exhibited the most glorious sight in nature :—-when the whole happy group retired, for the night, to Primrofe-Hill.
Several days have pasted since this most agreeable difcovery.—The more we fee, the more we admire Douglas: and, if ever there was a fmcere penitent, be is one. My opinion of him is, that, like many other young men, whofe hearts are yet good, he posseffed, before his bad conduct, great animal fpiisits, high health, a stow of mirth, and much good nature,"all which made him a most agreeable companion ; but I cannot brag of his oeconomy.—It was his reduced finances, owing to his want offolidity, which, as Jie has now confessed
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	til
fessed to his amiable wife, was the foie caufe of that gloom she obferved in him, previous to the arrival of Mifs Summers. Agreeable as Mr. Douglas was, in the days of his flafhy wit and vivacity, I would, however, not recommend a man of that character for a hufband. I am not very fond of your men of wit alone : fome admired lines of -Mr. Pope, in his Essay on Cnticifm, croud into my head just now:—-they are thefe.
<c Unhappy wit, like most mistaken things,
“ Atones hot for that envy which it brings.
“■ In youth, alone, its empty praife we boast j u But foon the fhort-liv’d vanity is lost.
■“ Like fome fair flow’r the early Spring {applies, u That gaily blooms, but e’en in blooming dies. u What is this wit, which most our cares employ } a The owner’s wife which other men enjoy. u Still moss our trouble, when the moss: admir’d, li The more we give, the more is still requir’d,
“ ’Tis what the vicious fear, the virtuous ihun,
' By fools Lis hated, and by knaves undone.”
Douglas
212	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
Douglas is certainly a better man for his afflictions.—I am of opinion that the fchool of adversity is the best in the world, to teach us virtue :—his flashy wit, which, as Hamlet fays,
u Us’d to fet the table in a roarg’
is now ripened into Solid wifdmi. He now knows the real value of time, and oS money ;—two things of much more real utility to us than are too often imagined: my liSe for it, he will be good for the future. He often exclaims, with the divine pfalmist, “ It is “ good for me that I have been in “ trouble, that I might learn God’s sta-“ tutes.”
Mrs. Douglas has just been telling me how much she was mistaken in th© character of Mifs Summers.
“ Could I have imagined," she Said, “ that a girl bred in the country, and apparently not acquainted with the follies of the town, should ever have turned out thus ?—Indeed I had remarked
ci hnlAr/pfc
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	21 3
a boldnefs in her manner;—but then there was a ftmplicity about her, which made me look on all the freedoms, in the romping airs she gave her-felf with my hushand, with a very favourable eye.„
“ Ah ! my dear Sophia,„ faid I, “ you was greatly deceived in this your former companion:—there is often much deception carried on under the simple gu-ifeofa country girl. Artiefrinnocence is what they often ajfeff; but, in fact, I have feen the deepest cunning hid under the malk;—and many a man of merit and fenfe, has been drawn into a marriage with one of thefe artlefs •hoydens. Thefe country romps make nothing of throwing their arms round the neck of a pretty fellow, with whom they are striving in a game of innocent play, as it is called, or of unbuttoning his waistcoat, or even tearing it from his body;—in short, of taking many liberties, I must fay, that a town-bred
girl
14	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
girl would blush to think of. Alas l there is now no fuch thing as rural simplicity to be met with; whatever there might be in the days of good Queen Elizabeth. Every village now abounds with as many country coquettes, as any parish in the city of London or Weft-minster.„
I cannot wonder that my Sair friend, in her early days at the Abbey, was struck with the very sine figure of Douglas, I affure you, my dear, har-raffed as he has been by cares, and worn with abstinence in his hermit-' state, he is the very handfomest man, even now, I ever fet my eyes on,—-your fine Melville, and my Edward excepted.
VSe fee, my friend, in the once gay Douglas, what a sincere repentance— what a deep contrition will do, with the assistance of heaven, towards making a sincere convert to virtue. The Scheme the worthy penitent now
means
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	21$
means to purshe is to go into orders; (for which it feems when at Oxford h£ was intended:) my hushand has promised him the valuable rectory, in our neighbourhood, of Westbury, on the immediate death of the preSent old incumbent : So here, my dear, this worthy little family will be enabled to live very comfortably; theliving being near five hundred pounds per annum.
You may perhaps wonder, as I did, -that when we first visited the hermit in his cave, he should not recollect the perfon of Sir Edward Willis; as I mentioned to you in one of my former letters, fome time since, that he had Seen Douglas at Oxford; but, in fact, it was merely enpajfant that he had Seen hirn, they having never been intimately acquainted : and it was, you will believe, impossible for Sir Edward to discover Douglas, had hebeenindeedmore known to him than he was, under that enormous length of grey hair, which
almost:
2>r6	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
almost covered his face, and with a beard, which hung down to his middle.
It is utterly impossible to exprefs our prefent felicity .--Our lovely cousin begins to recover her fpirits and beauty ; both which must have been greatly impaired by the constant forrows she has experienced for thefe last five years of her life.—She is even lively enough to tell our hermit, that she shall banijh him to his cave on the white rock, if she ever catches him tripping again.
v“ Ah !„ faid he in return, looking with unfpeakable fondnefs, “ I will truft you for thatmay I not, Lady Willis ?”
I leave you to guefs our prefent happinefs :—but no, my friend, your faint ideas and fuppofttions I fear cannot do it justice :—to .know it perfectly, you must become one of the number of us _ happy wives, and confefs with us, that no felicity on earth can equal that of
being
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	217
being united to thofe we love. That you may, my dearest Charlotte, Soon, very Soon, return to England, and make - the happy experiment, is most sincerely wished by,
your very faithful,
and unalterable friend,
LUCY WILLIS.	,
ICD During the late period, in which the preceding letters were written Srom Lady Willis to her fair friend, feveral epistles had likewife passed between Sir Henry Bellmour and Colonel Melville, relative to the approaching nuptials of both.—In confe-quence of a most pressing invitation from the former to the latter, to celebrate his happy day with the amiable Mifs Sidney, at the fame time, that he should likewife give his own hand to the mistrefs of his affections, Colonel Melville, with his lovely bride eleff, and Mrs. Nelfon, were preparing to fet K	out
218	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
out on their journey to Sir Henry’s * delightful feat, at Eastwood-Park.
Mifs Millwood, who had always pro-mifed her fair friend, Mifs Patty Rivers, to attend her as a bridemaid, was now with her at that hoSpitable mansion, from whence that worthy young lady wrote the following letter, which the editor prefents to the candid reader.
LETTER XXIX.
JMISS MILLWOOD, TO MRS. MILLWOOD.
Faflwood-P ark f Sept. £.
My dear Madam,	^
The most joyous party, perhaps this world affords, in which I include Colonel Melville, Mifs Sidney, and good Mrs. Nelfon, who all arrived here a few clays stnee, are at length assembled in this delightful feat; which,
with
A LESSON FOR LOVERS,	219
with its furrounding groves, shady woods, and foft fcenes of rural peace, stems to be peculiarly adapted for the residence of thofe fond lovers who now inhabit it ; and who, to-morrow, are to receive the hands of the two most lovely women in the world, at the altar of the chapel of this ancient mansion ; which chapel has been just now repaired and beautified, purpofely for this very happy occasion.
You will hardly think, perhaps, we * want any thing to compleat our preSent felicity.—One happinefs, however, is Still not in our power to obtain :—it is, my dearest Madam, your preSence on this joySul event:—how very—very untoward, were the Sates, that rendered it impossible Sor you (by the arrival oS my uncle) to make one oS this happy circle !—You desired me, in this vexatious abSence, to be as .particular as possible ;—I hope it is K 2	needleSs
220	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
neediest to fay, that to obey you, is tl greatest pleafure of my life.
Thefe weddings are to be celebrate with all the magnificence imaginable for the gentry are invited for man miles round, to a most elegant fuppe and mafquerade in the gardens, whic are remarkably variegated with woo and walks uncommonly delightful; an which are to be lighted up with an ir finite number of lamps, beautifully d Versified. The poor, too, are in general of Several parishes contiguous to Eaf wood-park, to partake of the pleaSure which are preparing Sor them on thi joyous occasion : Some large tents ar already fixed for their reception in th park, where they are to be regalei with a proSusion of good cheer. Aj ox is to be roasted whole ; and thi young men and maidens are to danc< to the Sound oS the pipe and tabor oj the green lawn before the houSe.
Fannj
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	221
Fanny Sidney is, if possible, more lovely than ever :—she has confessed to me, that her late declining state of health was entirely owing to her daring (her own humble phraSe) to lift her eyes (though without a prefumptuous hope) to Colonel Melville.
“ Ah !„ faid the fweet girl, “ I believe I should have died if„—
“ If what ?„ faid the above-mentioned most amiable man, who that moment entered the room.
A tender dialogue now took place between them (for they regard my prefence not one single straw)—and which can be better imagined than expreffed.
What an honour will fuch a couple be to matrimony: and what a blesh'ng will they be to all around them!
But here I am interrupted by my Fanny, and Patty both, who desire my opinion of fome very rich and elegant bridal favours.—Adieu then, dear Madam, for the prefent —to-morrow, K 3	—happy
22 2	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
—happy day! I shall be Scribbling tc you, as often as I can get from the joy ous company.
duofday morning, Ten o’clock.
FOR three minutes am I stolen uy to my clofet to tell my dear mamma, that at nine, this morning, the happy nuptials were celebrated in the chapel: —the brides both behaved better than I had imagined they would.—-I, to fay the truth, was very foolish; for I could] not help dropping tears (I know not wdiy) whilst the awful ceremony was performing.
Ladly Bellmour, and Mrs. Melville, (tranfportingnames!) were habited exactly the fame—in white lustring gowns and petticoats, embroidered with rich Silver Sprigs, which, in the pattern of the silk, were beautifully intermixt with large bunches oS roSebuds. Their sine hair was ornamented with a brilliant diamond comb ; and Sprigs, oS the utmost
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	223
most elegance, in jewels besides. We bride-maids, for there were four of us, were all in genteel new fancy-dresses, all habited alike.
Sir Henry and his incomparable friend, feem above the order of human beings:—you will easily fuppofe what must their figure be (apparently the two handfomest men in England) when adorned in a taste the most rich and elegant that can be imagined: I think, however, I must give the preference to Melville his eyes feem animated with uncommon lustre, and the transport, with which his Soul is entirely possessed, Seems to brighten every feature oS his manly countenance.
Six little girls (all children oS ten years, cloathed in green) with chaplets of roSes, preceded our proceshon from the houSe to the chapel; each with a basset on her arm, strewing the path with flowers.—On our return, a band of music Saluted us in the great hall; whilii: horns and clarinets were differently diS-
2 24	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
pofed, in various parts of the woods, which almost furround the houfe. Immediately on our arrival in the drawing-room, wre fat down to a very elegant breakfast, in a stow of fpirits, not easily to be conceived.
We had just finished this repast, when a messenger arrived with a letter for Colonel Alelville.—No bad news, however, I fancy.—He took it, and retired to the window.—He then put it in his pocket, and fixing his eyes for the fpace of a minute, on the carpet, —he faid to his lovely bride, in a foft tone, “ My Fanny, I am going into the library for a few moments.„—He instantly retired ;—and I left the room at the fame time, to write thus far to my dearest mother.
We all dine (I mean our prefent
party, for the neighbouring gentry are not to assemble till towards evening)—-
in a Superb newly erected temple, in the most shady part oS the wood.—This
temple
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	22$
temple is dedicated to love and friend-flip.—A concert of foft flutes, are to
------O gracious heaven! what do I
hear ?—The found of a pistol,—in the library! my God !<—The pen drops from my trembling hand.
Tuefday night, ten d clock.
O Madam, what words can paint the ' fcerie of horror I have to relate !— Colonel Melville—do I live to write it ?—lays breathless, having by a pistol shot himfelf through the head!. Guefs our astonishment—-our mife-ry at this most shocking—fatal deed tl —But oh the poor—distracted Fanny !—Language here fails !—she is— She is—in a state of abfolute phrenzy { ---Bellmour, it Seems, having heard the fatal Sound, instantly left the ladies, and rushing into the library, found his dearest, beil-beloved friend had fallen in the above most rash, and fatal act:— K. 5	the
22&	A LESSON FOR toVERS.
—the unhappy Melville was gone fo: ever!
In the general confusion and distrac tion which enfued, it was impossible t< conceal from Mrs. Melville that fom accident of death had happened; thougl what the accident is, she at prefen knows not, excepting she thinks he hushand has received his (death by th hand of chance.—But thought is now n< more.—For, after remaining in fits fo fome hours, she is now in a state of thi x most pity-moving delirium.—Exped not particulars, for, indeed, I am un able to recite them.—Poor—unhappy Bellmour is the picture of silent woe —and yet obliged to comfort all.
This moment he has given me th enclofed letter, which I fend you, fo I am myfelf in too distracted a state t< copy it.—The contents will too full explain the caufe of this dreadful cats strophe.—Here then, Madam, read th letter:—the foul-moving, but truly h
nocen
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	22*]
nocent caufe of all our woe.—At prefent I can write no more.—Haraffed to death—my heart bleeding—my eyes Swimming in tears—how can I go on ? —I will date again to-morrow, if I am able to hold my pen.—Oh ! Heaven! is this the happy bridal day ?—But here, my dear Madam, read the fatal letter^
EARL RICHLEY TO COLONEL MELVILLE.
Richley Park, Sept. 3d.
My dear Charles%
I CANNOT delay a single hour to acquaint you with the joySui news (Sor Such, I am convinced, it will be to you) that I am just arrived with my beloved child at Richiev-Park, where we both most impatiently wait your arrival.—1st will be needleSs for me to beg you to Set out immediately, as you
know
1
228	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
know our felicity will be very imperfect till we fee you.—Your noble conduct in America, and the fpirited exertions you have shewn in the caufe of the best of Sovereigns, render you more dear to me than ever.—But your reward shall be proportioned to your merits: —the band oS my Charlotte is ready to crown my young warrior with happi-neSs:—she is, iS possible, more yours than ever; and, I trust, you will find
her SpotleSs heart a treaSure.------The
dear girl has been visibly drooping in your abSence, and has reSuSed Some very noble and worthy alliances, Sor the Sake oS her Melville; and whom I likewiSe preSer to all the titles and wealth in the world.—She has told me' all-—all she has Suffered in your abSence: —she is now standing by me, and hhtfles whilst she reads what I am writing.—But why?—were you not engaged to each other, by all the ties of tender affection, almost Srom the days
oS
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	229
of childhood, as well as from thofe of honour ?—Why then should our Charlotte blush at this confession ?
Oh ! my dear boy, my old fond heart is full of this most happy alliance!—Hasten to us, therefore, I be-sseech you, as foon as poffible.—The lawyers shall be fet to work immediately^.—the folemnity shall be celebrated with the utmost pomp and magnificence :—I will have all the country invited.—I kept open houfe above a month, on account of my own happy day, when I wedded my Charlotte^ lovely mother.—You shall both do the fame.—I will have no private doings. ---Charlotte wishes (she is above all affectation) forfooth, to flip into the chapel with you only, fave myfelf and the parfon ;—and then to hide herfelf, to avoid the parade and formal ceremony of company ufual on thefe occa-sions.—But I tell her, T mujt have the management of this affair myfelf, fo
much
23O	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
much have I fet my heart upon it.—-I intend to fpend the remainder of my days at my little villa, at North Lodge :—for I shall give up Richley-Park, with its estate and all its appurtenances, immediately, into your and
Charlotte’s poffefsion:------and long-—
long may you live to enjoy them!
Your dear bride eleff wishes, I know, to fend you a thoufand loves; but an over framed delicacy, which the ftmpk girl cannot get rid of, fubdues her inclination.------But come, my dear
Charles, hasten to her willing, arms., and to thofe of your most tenderly, and very affectionate
friend, and (I will add) father.
RICHLEY...
P. S„ The Bearer of this has orders to find you, if you have left Bath. Adieu.
Mifs
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	231
Mifs Millwood, in Continuation.
WHAT a letter has this most worthy, fond father written !—Good old man !—I have been weeping over it.— Poor Lady Charlotte !—she too will be driven to distraction !—Bellmour has just been telling me a few particulars.
—Unhappy Melville !------Delicate to
excefs—of honour fo nice and exactly fcruplous, what ruin hast thou occasioned !—Ah ! why were virtues given
thee for fuch a purpofe ?----But no
more of this prefumption is in the inquiry.
• I must hasten now to the poor for-‘ lorn Fanny. Alas! she cannot long furvive !
Monday morning:
ALL—all—my dear madam, is now
over----the fond—the tender pair, I
trust, are now at peace.—Yes! both, last night, were consigned to the cold
■—the
232	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
—the silent grave.-----My heart is al-
most broken !—I have wept till I can weep no more !—1 will, however, try to fend you a few broken particulars, preceding the most lamentable end of the lovliest woman on earth.
I had watched by her, without intermission, till Thursday morning, when her exhausted Spirits Sunk into a little Slumber.—In the mean time I stole to my apartment, leaving the good Mrs. NelSon and Several attendants in the room; and,Srom the silence I afterwards found, hoped her siumber had continued : but, merciSul Heaven! what
was my affright------my shock------too
great, indeed, for utterance—when I faw her enter my apartment, fantastically drest, with a profusion of flowers and jewels, stuck diforderly in her di-shevilled hair !-—She had on, besides, a black cloak, which she had carelefly flung over her shoulders—and a white
and silver petticoat.----All which, it
Seems, her attendants, to pacify her
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	233
distraction, had fuffered her to put on*
Thus strangely attired—and with the most frantic air of wildnefs—in hasty steps she entered my,room. Advancing towards me with an air which harrowed my foul (ah, madam, alas! she knew me not!) she thus addressed me.
“ Are you, pray, the lady of this mansion ?—Where—where have you
hid him ?-----Don’t you fee (looking
down on her distracted drefs)—donst you fee I am ready to attend him to the altar ?>—This—this is my bridal drefs.—But where is the bridegroom all this time ?—I demand him (Jlernly) at the hands of fome of you.—I very —very grevioufly fufpect fome foul play.—Hark !—Hark!—my poor Melville calls !„
“ “ Oh ! Mrs. Nelfon,„ faid I, “ she kills me—I cannot bear it.”*—I burned into tears.—The dear unfortunate
then
234 A LESS0N F0R lovers. then looking up in my face, as if trying to recollect me, and with a foster tone of voice, inimitably affecting, exclaimed,—“ Emma!—are you, my Emma Millwood ?—pray tell me,—for, indeed, my poor brain is quite—quite
gone.-—Had I not once a hujbandt--
Hark ! the wedding peal Summons me to the chapel!—Are the bride-maids all ready ?„—I wept.'—“ Why do you weep?-—What, weep at a wedding?”
“ I will not weep,„ anfwered I, “ if my fweet Fanny will return to her apartment."
“ Fanny V7 she exclaimed loudly, “ am I not Mrs. Melville then ?„— and instantly she again relapfed into the most frantic air imaginable.—She broke from us, and darted into the gallery, we clofely following ; when, unfortunately, the door of the room, where the corpfe of the wretched Melville was deposited, then in a cof-
► ■
sin, was just opening by an attendant,
who
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
who was coming out, she rushed forward, and at one view, feeing the awful recepticle, she flew to its side, and hastily pushing away the coffin lid---“ Hah ! have I then found my lo ve at last ?—Good Heaven ! I thank thee.— Never—never more will we be fepa-rated—Melville—thy Fanny calls !„ —Then obferving the ghastly wound on bis temple, she tenderly exclaimed, “ Ah ! my murdered love !—who— who did this ?”
In the instant, she kiffed his cold— palid lips with unutterable tendernefs, and sinking on his breast, in an agony of woe, with a heavy groan, she expired.
Oh ! madam !—I must now throw down my pen.—My eyes are drowned in tears.
Tuefday morn.
I now proceed to add a few more words on this mournful fubject.
Believing
236	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
Believing our beloved Fanny to be only in a fainting fit, when she funk • upon her Melville’s breast, every remedy, that the tender friendship of Sir Henry Bellmour, his amiable wife, and all prefent could fuggest, was made ufe of to restore her :—but, alas! vain were all our endeavours !—The breath that animated her lovely form, was
fled for ever!-----
Thefe haplefs lovers, this enraptured hushand, and lovely bride, of one hour only, were both placed on one-
bier,------were both interred in one
grave, in that very chapel in which,
So few days since, they had received each other’s vows, at the altar! I am, my dear Madam,
your affectionate, afflicted daughter,.
EMMA MILLWOOD.
* icr Sir Henry Bellmour, the day after the Suneral, diSpatched a letter to Lari Richley to inform him of this fad
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	237
difaster, together with the caufes that led his unhappy friend to give his hand to MiSs Sidney, iw ftemmg violation of the folemn engagement that had pasted between him and Lady Charlotte ; af-furing him, that nothing but a full conviction of that Lady’s marriage with a gentleman in Ireland, as announced in the London papers, could have prevailed with his truly deferving friend to unite himfelf to another, however dear that other might have been to him. He reminded his Lordship of'the strict honour that had ever accompanied the actions of that most amiable of men, and befeeched him not to harbour any opinions unfavourable to his memory, and to become his pleader with Lady Charlotte, both as a juftice due 'to de-ceafed merit, and as a balm of comfort to the afflicted mind of that Lady, under fo distrefsful a circumstance.
Earl Richley, on reading the letter, felt the most poignant anguish. Parental
238	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
rental affection for his lovely daughter; the dreadful effects that might follow when she should hear the fate of her Melville; the many virtues possessed by that unfortunate, but generous-minded man ; the shocking manner of his death ; the occasion of it; thefe alternately rushed on his tortured mind ; a tumult of conflicting passions took possession of his breast : his inmost,foul was shook; and all his faculties were at once fufpended.—He dropt on the floor, and remained, for fome time, in a state of total infensibility.—Before he had well recovered his disiipated fenfes, and just when he had power fufficient to re-feat himfelf in the chair from whence he had fallen, his adored daughter entered the room, and beheld her beloved parent in a condition that called for all her fortitude to Sustain. She ran to him, and taking him tenderly by the hand, earnestly requested to know the cauSe of his affliction.—:De-
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.'	239
prived of the power of utterance, and forefeeing not the confequences that might follow from a too precipitate information, he pointed to the letter on the table.—She haftily took it up, with a mind forboding fome heavy mif-fortune.—But what words can defcribe the emotions she felt on reading, that her Melville was married to another?
-—On reading he was dead?—On reading his own rash hand had deprived him of life?—On reading that the horrid deed was done from a delicate, but mistaken principle of honour, in having given too eafy credit to the forged tale of her being already married ?—A violent stream proclaimed the disposition of her mind in that dreadful moment ; horrors of the most dreadful kind fuc-cesiively assailed her, overpowered her weak frame, and she instantly fell motionless at the feet of her affrighted father.—But not to dwell too long on fo melancholy a fubject, it will be fuffi-
cient
24O	A LESSON FOR LOVERS.
cient to fay, that, after a lingering ill-nefs of feveral months, in which her adored Melville was constantly on her mind, this admirable lady resigned her fpotlefs foul into the hand of that Almighty Power who alone was capable to form and give it.
Thus were three amiable and worthy perfons plunged in the deepest mi-fery, and precipitated to the grave, by the bafe arts of a woman devoted to intrigue.—The reader will easily recollect the character of K. Freelove in the former volume, and by that means be at no loSs for a farther explanation.
How pregnant of morality is this little history !—In the eye of eternal rectitude, which feeeth not as mm feeeth, the Smallest deviation Srom the path oS fin-cerity is, doubtlefs, highly culpable.---Alas! whilst we are paying the tribute of a pitying tear to Sufferings like theSe, let us still reflect, that if the noble-minded Melville,—great, and many as
his
A LESSON FOR LOVERS.	241
his virtues were—-had not ajjenlcd to Earl Richley to give his hand (too often, and too fatally done, alas !) where he could not give his heart, this dreadful cataftrophe had been prevented.
But I leave it to the intelligent reader’s reflections, to expatiate farther on the miferies attending an assurance of the lips, where the heart affents not: I will only add this plain maxim of the poet, which conveys an instruction well worth regarding:
“ ’Tis not enough tbo’ fenfe and taste may join ?
* In allow wordsJIncerity must:Ihine.5’
.	- T H E E N D.
•	I.
ERRATA, Vol. II.
Page.	Line.
56	14 for Godwin, read Goodwin.
67	12	for he, read we.
69	2	for too, read two.
104	2	Dr flagrant, read fragrant.
134	15	for Then, read Yet.
/
' ( '
. f '. . r ■■
f	^	4
•-/.	;.	-■ ~ .	J: ■ x •	•1
.■■■ ■ ~ * ■■■ ’ *
. '	',:'v ■''	-	\ ' ■	.
.	%,'i '	f	_
•	CN-. ■
-	V
■ m	** '
/ . : » *
x • ,
l ,	7
1 "
! ■■	W.' '	■■■ ■■ ' ■■■
.if-
t ' • ' . ■ '■'C'-L .. ' :■	, ' ■	' 7 ■ ■ r'
;,t ■■ ■■■
■
L:| '• 1 /	■	■	. ;
- C Aft:
'	: ;	.... : C
n	$11
»	.4 Rff
%
i
' ' ' . '<
l 1
. ■'	■.•' -■	-	'	^	. '■;' c
,	'	^S-rsA
' ' ' cU.. i;	*5
' iN	-.r! rAW/+	. -
CvLT;-:.,;.	t ct .
• *:	*■■■	...si*
if ■.. V.■	.	' ; <;"S-	:'r ■	-	■.■•':'■
l L	■
., '
h-	«5T'
.	'^. t
T f c -
c* \	• v '' -t :"
-	A	H	?
*	' -'N	nC b\
V	te\	"	nNs '
h •■'■.. *	:
x -	i -'%	r -v
^	' '**	'V	s/
V	\	’	^	~	Vo
\N.xrs	^
\ N	vv.
X	*. S ^	‘
\ i i ->
k	*
V N •.
"N-	lX N -'■; v .
\	V	\
\ c ,	’ *>••	.	''	'
' \ . •
A t	' S	*	* 1
■ j A ' V
_ v *	'	•	•	.	• ■
\ •: • , /
.• .V-'' '■ ■	i '
-	-	..	■	* T ■
•i T 'f'f X ir ’
.3*-	'	*	'	-
*
\r ,	#
' • • •' •	■
4 m' '	■	■
♦j*-''''*.'
V	'	‘ v	’
' T	*
