LOUISA.
A
SENTIMENTAL NOVEL.

"New Ways I must; attempt, my Virgin Name 
To raise aloft, and wing my Flight to Fame.”

LONDON;
Printed for T. Lowndes, in Fleetstreet; and G. 
Kearsley, in Ludgate-street.

MDCCLXXI. 


In a few Days will be published,
In Two Vols. 12 mo. Price 6s. bound, 
The BROTHER. A Novel.	
By a LADY. 


Advertisement.
The following elegant Novel is the Pro-
duction of a Lady, who, to a fine Ge-
nius, has added every Advantage, that could be 
derived from a polite Education. A conSiderable 
Portion of that Modesty and Diffidence which 
constantly attend the humble Footsteps of the 
most meritorious of the Sex, had consigned it 
to the private Study, to be called forth occa-
sionally, only as a rational Amusement for a 
few select Friends, who might prefer such En-
tertainment to the common Methods of pas-
sing the Time in the Country at Cards, or in 
the uninteresting Chit-chat of the Tea-table.

As an Antiquarian would produce his Cabinet 
of Shells and Fossils—a Florist his variegated 
Tulips---or a Lover of the fine Arts his valuable 
Collections of Sculptures, Paintings and Draw-
ings,the Fruit of long Researches,and great Ex-
pence---to Persons of their own Taste and Ge-
nius---So her Letters were now and then read 
to Such Ladies, as had not too much Vanity to 
think they had nothing to learn either from 
Precept or Example---nor were so immersed in 
the fashionable Pleasures of the Times, as to 
pay no Attention to any Thing that has a Ten-
dency to regulate the Judgement, to mend the 
Heart, or refine the Manners--at the Expence of

[ADVERTISEMENT.]
robbing them of the Time they devote to idle or 
luxurious Dissipations. They had not long an-
swered this valuable domestic Purpose, when a 
Lady, who had been converfant in the polite 
World, and had observed the great Defects ge0
nerally to be met with in the epistolary Style of 
the female Sex, of which some flagrant Instances 
had lately been exposed to the World, imagined 
that she had discovered in these Letters, a Mo-
del of easy, delicate, correct writing on fami-
liar Occurrences, the Publication of which 
might prove highly beneficial to young Ladies, 
in the genteel Ranks of Life.

On this Principle, she solicited the too timid 
Writer, to permit her to take the Copy to Lon-
don, and to consent to give them to the World, 
if a Gentleman, who w'as esteemed a tolerable 
Judge of literary Merit, and of the Taste of 
the candid, discreet part of Mankind, should 
concur in an Opinion---that their more general 
Circulation through the Channel of the Press 
would answer any one valuable Purpose to So-
ciety. To his Decision the Public stands in-
debted for a chaste, sentimental Novel, comprised 
in a Series of Letters, which he begs Leave to 
recommend as a Pattern to the fair Sex which 
they cannot take too much Pains to imitate---
and he farther ventures to pronounce that, if

[ADVERTISEMENT.]
refined Sentiments, expressed in Simple, unaf-
fected, yet elegant Language---if a happy Dis-
tribution of the collated essence of many of our 
most celebrated Writers, throughout this little 
Volume---if an uniform Attachment to the most 
perfect Representations of Honour, Fortitude, 
Integrity of Manners, and exact Decorum---if 
the Introduction of natural, yet alarming and 
pathetic Events---if the Felicity of virtuous, 
endearing Characters, has Charms to please 
in an Age, but too much addicted to the looser 
Produdiions of the Press, which vitiate the 
Manners and corrupt the Heart---they cannot 
fail of meeting a favourable Reception, and the 
Patronage of those in particular, who are con-
cerned in forming the Manners of the rising 
generation. Should the judicious few un-
fortunately differ from him in Opinion, and 
think he has over-rated their Merit, on him 
alone let all their Cenfure fall-let the Punish-
ment due to False-Criticifm be his Fate---"not 
to be credited a Second Time.”---If he has pre-
sumed to fix his Imprimatur on this Collection 
of female Epistles, without a proper warrant, 
be it remembered in Extenuation of his Fault
---that attempts of this Kind are very rare, 
and the Necessity of fostering the tender Plants 
of Female Erudition, in such Times as these, 
obvious to every Man of common Understand-

[ADVERTISEMENT.]
ing, who wishes to see the fair Sex recover from 
that Delirium of false Taste, into which their 
travelling Connections with our gay Neigh-
bours the French have thrown them. On this 
Consideration alone, he flatters himself they 
will be received in Preference to some of the 
pernicious Bagatelles lately imported into this 
Country, and to others of a less delicate Cast, 
fabricated here by a Native of France. Of the 
fair Authress nothing more need be added---but 
that as she lives retired from the World, in a 
Manner suited to the Sentiments contained in 
some of her Letters---it matters not, whether 
she is one of the Miss Grahams, Lady Brude-
nell or some real Lady of Quality, who 
conceals her Name and Character for pri-
vate Reasons.--Suffice it to say, that the Pub-
lisher is impowered to declare with the greatest 
Veracity, “ That they are the genuine Letters, 
as they were delivered to him in Manusript, 
of a Lady of Distinction”---who has promised 
to continue her ingenious Labours chiefly for 
the Service of her own Sex--if the present At-
tempt meets with public Approbation.	

T. M.


LOUISA.
'f
LETTER I.
Louifa Fermor to Lady Saville.
SICK of the World and all its delusive Pleafures, I was often tempted to hide my Self in Some obScure Retreat; when any good Aunt’s Bounty prefented me with an Opportunity of executing my Wishes for Retirement, in a Manner more Suitable to the Life I had led. You know, my dear Sophiny with what Impatience I waited for the Day of my Departure, and how often I chid the lingering Moments for not flying faster: Yet when this wished-for Hour arrived, what Pangs did I not feel, when embracing my amiable Friend,
I bid her adieu ? All my Schemes of Happinefs B	Seemei
St	L O V I S A:
Seemed destroyed by that fatal Word. Bloom--■. Vilf without my Sophia^ has no Charms; Nature in vain lavishes all her Beauties on this Savoured Spot, if Lady	does not blefs it
with her Prefence.
Obliged to leave you behind me, I should, perhaps, have Submitted to it with lefs P.eluc-tance had I left you in the Enjoyment of Such Company as you would have choSen ; but the Jargon of Lawyers, and the Rattling of Parchment, are but ill calculated to pleaSe the Taste of my lively Friend. How justly punished would your Father have been, my Sophia^ had he lived to have Seen that Settlement which tempted him to prefer Sir Charles Samlle to ■3.W your other Admirers, now difputed by his - Heir; and what he esteemed the Means of your future Felicity, become the Source of all your Anxiety 1 Melancholy Instance of the Short-Sightednefs of Parents ! Had your Heart been consulted, had you been permitted to w’ait till you could have fuhilled' your Engagement to Lord Sedley, how much Mifery would have been Spared 1 But all was to be given up to Satisfy Lord IValtoris offended Pride and his Avarice. It was cruel, my Dear, to punish the Innocent, to make the Son Suffer for the Father’s Faults! Lord Sedley^^ Constancy
would
L O U I S A.	^
would have obtained the old l>ord’s Confent at last, had your Friends been leSs haughty;- ^ but the first Refufal was not to be pardoned, and my Sophia was Sacrificed to the wounded Pride of her Family. Your UnhappineSs was-perceived, when it was too late to remedy it, and my unfortunate Uncle Smarted fevercly for the Tyranny he had exercifed over his darling Child : Death delivered you at last from this Hufband So odious to you, and after the two Years you had pasted v/ith him, I was in Hopes my Sweet Friend would never more have felt UneafineSs; but this vile Sir Lhotnas continues to torment you. It is high Time to reward the most faithful of Lovers, but the generous Soul of my Sophia will not permit her to bestow her Hand on Lord Sedle^, till she can give him a Fortune as free from all Claims as the Heart she has fo long referved for him. I must commend your Delicacy in this Point, my dear Lady Saville., yet my Compaifion for your Lover makes me wish now and then, that you had not quite fo much.
In talking of my Friends I entirely forget myfelf; I have negledled to fay a Single Word of my Journey, my Houfe, &c. but I will be more fatisfadfory, and inform you, that after travelling Post for two Days, I arrived at B 2	iMoovi- hill
4	L O TJ I S A.
Bkm~hid. little fatigued, tho’ I had come two hundred Miles in that short Space of Time.
As to my Habitation I shall be more defcrip-tive in niy next; at prefent, I am fo much taken up in lamenting the Lofs of my charming Companion, that I cannot attend to any Thing elfe.
b Write often to me, I befeech you, and do ROt forget how dear you are to your
'C ' ■ ^	JjOuifa>Fermor»
i.'
LETTER
L O V I 5 A.	5
L E T TER II.
Saville to .Mifs Fermor.
DID you, my dear Lomfd., but See th« strange Change your Abfence has made in your once lively Friend; you would, I am Sure, reproach yourfelf for being Accessary to a Metamorphofe, which proves So disadvantageous to her; Instead of that Vivacity^ which you have So often commended, a filent pensive Melancholy prevails over all my Looks and Actions ; behold me then Spoiled for an Agreeable} What Amends can you ever make me for being the Caufe of a total Defertion of all my Flirts ? for this I expedl will be the certain ConSequence of my assuming this new Character.
I went last Night to try whether the gay Circle of Ranelagh would dissipate my gloomy Ideas. Lord Sedley.^ Colonel North and the handSome Warhurton foon joined my Party : My Lord, as uSual, a(5led in his own amiable Charafler, and Sympathized with me in the 1-oSs of my charming Friend ; the Colonel, who you know treats Female Friendship as a Joke, pretended to believe my Dejedfion of Spirits proceeded from Some other Caufe; tho’ T	B 3	he
~6	L O H I S A.
he owned himSelf pofed to find out a ReaSon for 'sit; I looked too handSome to fear Negledl, and added, in a Whifper, that Sedley’s Attention left him no Room to form Conjedfures on that Side ; this Whifper was loud enough to be overheard by Lord Sedhy; I punished the Colonel’s Indelicacy, by not deigning to Speak to him all the Remainder of the Evening. Warburton, lest he should incur the fame MiS-fortune, talked only on the most trifling Sub-jefls ; Such, indeed, I must confefs, are best Suited to his SenSeand Judgement. By Eleven o’clock, I began to yawn and wish myfelf at home again, and, for once in my Life, I quitted Ranelagh heartily tired of it. If this Humour continues long upon me, I shall absolutely commiflion you to Seek out Some rural Cottage in your Neighbourhood, where I may indulge my unfociabk Disposition.
Thefe Lawyers plague me to Death ; I could almost wish Sir Thomas had gained his CauSe, that I might get rid of them : Yet, my Louifa^ Money is So elTential an Ingredient towards making Life happy, that it cannot be So without it. I would fain compromise the Affair, and willingly accept of Six Hundred a Year, instead of the Twelve left me by Sir Charles \ but Mr. Wejlon adviSes me strongly against doing
L O U r S A:	gi
iing it, and I believe him disinterested enough,, notwithstanding his Profession, -to have only my Welfare in View.	-
Adiea my fweet Friend f I am interrupted, and can only add, that I ant
Most sincerely your’s,
Sophia Savllk't
P. S. I am all Impatience to have an Account of your Villa ;, I want to viftt pu m Spirit*
f
%•
•'L ■
C-
t	N'
j
«	E 4 LETTER
' t	LOUISA.
LETTER III.
Mifs Fermor to Lady Saville.
Bloom-hilL
Gome SopUa^ since you are Spoiled for the gay World, come to Bloom-hilf it is large enough for us both, without feekingoutfor any other Cottage : I shall not be fatisfyed with your visiting me only “in Spirit;” you arc impatient “ to have an Account of my Villa,” fake it then from its partial Poffesibr. It stands in a pretty Village, a winding Shrubbery leads to the front Door, a fmall Hall at the first Entrance gives the Houfe a certain Air, and has an excellent Effeist; this Room is filled with TuberoSes, Carnations, Orange Trees, and many other Sorts of Sweet and delicate Plants j besides this you are to fuppofe a breakfasting Room, a large eating Room, and all convenient Offices on this Floor: On the next, a dressing Room fo elegantly furnished as to vie with any we have Seen ; a Library well chofen and completely fil'led j Several Bed-Chambers fitted up in the neatest Manner ; I am particular, but my ^ Sophia expedfs a minute Description of my Mansion ; it is situated near a Soft and clear River, which flows in a gentle Current at the Bottom of a hanging
Garden
L O U I S A.
Garden, and forms a charming ProSpedl from the Windows ; I have a Green-houSe and Such a Dairy ! you will be in Raptures with it—but I will Say no more of that, you shall judge for yourSelf. The Country about me is of the most romantick Kind, and affords So great a. Variety of Scenes, that the Eye is never Satis-- • fyed with gazing.
All the Villagers assembled to receive me,, and welcomed me with a Grace peculiar to the Children of Nature; never did I fee a more lovely Groupe than they made.
Think as you will. Lady SaviHe, but I can fancy no Pleafure greater than that of ruling Such a State ; I amabfolute by the free Choice of my Subjects, who treat me as their Superior, their Friend, their best Refource on all Occasions of Distrefs. Yes, Sophias I am. quite of that ambitious Roman’s Opinion, v/ho preferred being the first in a Village, to being the Second in Rome ^ there are Charms in the Sound of firji which fecondhzs not: In your large Town, even my dear - Savillfs Merit may Sometimes be unnoticed; what Chance then has. your lefs brilliant Friend ? Can you wonder therefore at the Preference I give to Bloom-hilhl
,	'	CB 5	I do -
10 LOUIS a;
I do not recolledl: ever giving you the HiS-tory of this Said Aunt of mine, who has So kindly fatisfyed my Ambition; she was, my Sophia., an elder Sister of my Father’s, and, early in Life, much admired as a Beauty ; if Painting may be depended upon, she had, indeed, Charms enough to boast of; but a Cold-jiefs in her Manner kept all her Lovers at a Distance; Girls in her Days were not quite So forward as they are in ours; Bashfulnefs and Referve were reckoned great Accomplishments then, and a pert Mifs was shunned, I fuppofe, by all her Female Acquaintance as a dangerous Companion : But Such Opinions being deemed unfashionable at prefent, I shall not expatiate on them, but continue my Narrative. Many sighed for the fair Prude, but none dared to Speak, till one Youth more adventurous, or more encouraged, I fancy, than the rest, poured out the Didlates of his throbbing Fleart, and So eloquently pleaded its CauSe, that the Nymph first learnt to pity, then love; a Soul like hers once warmed Soon burnt with Violence; the Flame was at its Height, when the Caprice of her Parent forbad her thinking more of Morton, and added his Command to her, to prepare herfelf to receive Sir Samuel Warner, an old, Superannuated Beau, whofe immenfe Estate enfurcd her a Fortune to which her Love was 2	to
L o w r 'a K. ‘-‘FF
to be Sacrificed j it was too much to comply with both Orders, she promiSed not to diSpoSe of herfelf without her Father’s ConSent, but absolutely refufed to accept of the Baronet j; Time, she hoped, would Soften the Rigour of her Fate, and she did not ueSpair of prevailing on-her Father by the ready Compliance she had^ shewn to his Will in one Article, to listen to her Entreaties to him to recall Morion'. Her Lover, not quite So patient as she might haver expecsied, quitted the Country, and in So doing. Seemed to have lost all Remembrance of his , Vows of eternalConjlancy j he appeared in Tov:n, captivated the Heart of a Woman of (^iality,> who had a large Fortune, and married her in six Weeks after he had parted with his Mistress’ in the Country: This Shock was too great, she fell sick, and was brought to the Brink of the Grave, but the Goodnefs of her Constitution prevailing over her DiSorder, she recovered,, and retained So fixed an Aversion to all Mankind, that after she lost her Father, she retired-to this remote Part of the World, and never Suffered any of the Sex to approach her HouSe it is to this Prejudice I am indebted for her Fortune, preferring me to her Nephews.
What unaccountable Effedls are produced by thatThingcalled Love ! Take Caie, my Sophia^
£ ^	LoH
12	L O U I S* A.
Lord Sedley does not prove a Morton^ lest you should become as whimsical a Being as my poor Aunt: You have, indeed, one Advantage which she had not, your Education will preferve you from an ill-placed Constancy; should he abandon you, you would have a Variety of Flirts left, and may chuSe another Lover; I shall not allow you, Sophia, tochuSe another Friend, as you can never loSe your
Loiiifa Fermor.
?
LETTER
L t) U I S A.	13
i 'hv' h-jrjvJ
L E T T E R IV,
- ' Lady Saville to Mifs Pcrmor.
'	^	,	Stanhope-Strut
IF any Thing could reconcile me to the Mi^ fortune of being feparated from the Erienxl of my Heart, it would be to find^her So- happily fettled. I am charmed, myMomfay h^ yond Meafure, with ‘ your Account of Bloom-hiUy it has but one Fault, and that is its Distance from Town j but you and I think fo differently of this fame Town, that what appears to me a Fault, I know you will esteem an additional Advantage.
What an unaccountable Mortal was that old Aunt of yours ! So, really, becaufe Morton was not Knight-errant enough to Swallow a Bowl of Poifon, or to plunge the Dagger into his faithful Breast, on finding himfelf negledled for another ; she took an unconquerable Aversion to the whole Race of Man ! Very reasonable this, upon my Word 1 I will, however, revere her Oddities^ since they have contributed' fo largely to place my Louifa in her preSent eligible Situation.
Your quitting the gay Scenes of the Metropolis, to bury yourfelf among the Savages in Wales,, has given Sufficient Matter for Wonder to most of thofe you left behind. Lady AJh-
feld
T4	L O U I S A.
fold declares it utterly impossible for the agree*^ able, the polite Mifs Fermor to exist in Such-a Land of Barbarifm ; in So faying, she Speaks the Sentiments of all your Female Acquaintance. The Men, more Sincere in regretting the Lofs of you, curfe (as they term it) the unnecessary GeneroSity of that queer old Souly your good Aunt, which has robbed the Beau Monde of fo bright an Ornament; they live in Hopes, however, of feeing you return to it,, with redoubled Splendor. Sir 'James Brude^ nell alone Seems pleaSed with your Retirement.
I know not what to make of this Man ; he came to me Some Days after your Departure,, enquired much about my Friend.^ hoped she had had a pleaSant Journey, liked the Country,,
Src. but never once allowed himfelf to pronounce your Name : I fatisfyed his Enquiries he left me in better Spirits than when he came in. I would give a good deal to find out what he means by this enigmatical Behaviour!	n
I have promised to chaperonne Mifs Maxwell to Soho this Evening ; the Party is to confist of Lord Sedley^ Colonel North and Adr. Max'-well, who is just returned from, making the grand Tour, and is, I hear, (\mtQ zn Adonis.	|
Adieu my dear Louifa ! the important Bufi-nefs of the Toilette calls for the Attendance of Your sincerely assedlionate,
Sophia Savilk,
L O U I S A.
L E T T E R V.
Mifs Fermor to Lady Saville.
Never was Lady AJhfield fo much mistaken, my dear Sophia<i as in Suppofing your Friend lost to Society, and Surrounded' by Barbarians; my pretty Rusticks are the' most civilized People in the World ; but lest that should not be credited, let me inform you, that I am in a Neighbourhood remarkable for its Gentility; I meet every Day with Some of my Acquaintance here, and may live abnoji as much in publick as you do : But Bloom-hill enjoys the charming Advantage of being as retired, or as gay as the Taste of its Owner directs. It is not always that I chufe to mix with the World. “ Solitude is Sometimes best Society.” When I am in the contemplative Mood, I shut my Self up in my Library, or stroll about the sine Walks with which this little Eden i& well fupplyed, and after having issued my Orders for a general R.efufaf I have no Fears of being interrupted.—But as my Reveries may not be fo amusing to my lively Friend as the other Part of my Entertainment, I hasten to make you acquainted with Some of my Visitors. The Family that lives nearest to me is Mr. Riverfsy he married the youngest Mifs JJion, a fweer,
agreeable
i6 L O U I s :a.
agreeable, young Woman, who courts mf Friendship with an Eagernefs not to be resisted ; she is not ^uite So handfome as her Sister Lady Lemple, but she is infinitely more attractive; she doats on her Rivers, and knows herfelf to be equally beloved by him. Her Sister and Sir John are now on a Visit to them. Your old Admirer still sighs when he Speaks of you ; his Lady frowns, looks distatisfyed, and turns the Conversation. Lovely as she is, my Sophia, she docs not Seem to have acquired an abSolute Empire over his Heart; she is beautiful, but she wants all thofe enchanting Graces which are found in Lady Saville, and her Hushand is Sensible of her Deficiency. Every Body hur-ryed to See me on my Arrival. The Duke of Leicejier, whom we knew when Marquis of Dereham, has a sine Seat within five Miles of Bloom-hill, generally comes down for two Months in the Summer, and during his Stay Brook-Abbey is crowded with the best Company, whofe Prefence makes the whole Coun-try gay. His Sister, Lady Charlotte Milner, lives with him; she is well-bred, perfectly quiet and compliant in her Disposition ; by her Good-humour, makes full Amendsfpr herWant of that Vivacity, fo charming. So dangerous, and Sometimes So destrudlive to the more amiable Virtues, She manages her Brother’s Houfe,
entertains
i
LOUISA.	17
entertains his Company, establishes good Order and Regularity in his Family, and acquits herfelf well of all she pretends to; it is not necessary, my dear Sophia, Chat she should do more. I am grown exceedingly partial to this Sort of Woman ; every Day convinces me of her Value. With more shining Accomplishments Lady Charlotte might lofe Half of her Worth; but it is in vain, I know, to endeavour to bring you over to this Opinion. Your own Charailer shews you the Possibility of uniting the Amiable and the Agreeable in one Perfon ; and when I refledl on ray dear Lady Saville I am obliged, I confeSs, to give up the insipid Goodnefs of Lady Charlotte.
Hitherto, my dear Friend, I have taken no Notice of your Account of Sir James', my Mind has dwelt long on that Part of your Letter, but I have restrained my Pen from entering on the Subjedl:. I agree with you, So^ phia, that it is an extraordinary one ; I condemn his Proceedings, wish to hate the Man, but find, after all my Efforts, he is infinitely dear to me. Speak of him Sometimes in your Letters ; tell me how he looks, adls and fpealcs ; I am deeply interested about him ; you only know the Weaknefs of your Friend, and you only would excuSe it.
I am.
iS L O U I S A.
I am anxious to hear of your Law-fuit ; know how Lord Sedley is treated, and whether he does not now and then want my Assistance,, when his Sprightly Sophia v&iVihs to listen to the Reafonings of a Lover whoSe Heart she can anfwer for, but whofe Judgement she will not always be guided by.
If he wishes to preferve you from Tempta^ tion, he must come with you to Blootn-hilly for we have a Number of Such pretty Fellows hereabouts, that you will be* in great Danger I assure you. I will not now give you a List of them, as I am just going to join a large Party-at Brook-Abbey^ and have only LeiSure to write; vayifM my Sopkid.^
Ever affe^ioxiate^
ItQuila FirmtyFf
(
E E T T E It
I
LOUISA.
r
LETTER VI.
Jhady Saville to Mifs Fermor.
Stanhope- Street.
HOW unable am I, my Lomfa, to const u<st myfelf, with Prudence, through the gay Scenes in which I am daily engaged, without your friendly Advice and Assistance! Thanks to my departed Caro, who, conScious of his own Want# of Charms, never fuffered me to be a Moment out of his Sight. Is it then furpriSing that with my DiSposttion, I should, in enjoying my Liberty, be guilty of 2u thoufand Follies I But it is high Time to let you into what has given Rife to thefc Sage Reflections. In my last, I mentioned my Intention of going to Mrs. Cornely/s with Mifs Maxwell \ we went there about Ten a’Clock, and found Colonel North, with the divine Maxwell, in the outward Room, impatiently waiting our Arrival; never having Seen the latter before, he was introduced to me in Form : Such a Face ! Such a Figure ! Absolutely, Louifa, I was obliged to keep my Eyes fixed on Se.dlef& Pidlure (which you know hangs at my Watch) that his Idea might not quit me, lest this Sweet Fellow’s should take his Place. I know my Sentimental Friend will chide me
fojc
3te	LOUISA.
for this Levity ; if she blames me already for this Part of my Behaviour, with how much more ReaSon shall I be cenfured for what follows ?
My mw PaJJton did not engroSs me So far as to make me bear with Patience Sedley's Absence 5 it was very unuSual with him to break through his Engagements ! What could detain him ? I grew unhappy, nay, was almost out of Humour; the Colonel perceived it, and was malicious enough to dwell on the Subjeft; Max~ welf too, wondered what could detain Lord Sedley from ,fuch a Mistrefs ! but thought it a lucky Circumstance for my other Admirers^ as it gave them a Chance of being noticed by me.
His amiable Sister endeavoured to introduce a new Difeourfe, but it was to no PurpoSe.
After pasting three restlefs Hours there, we parted, but not without having first appointed to meet our Beaux the next Morning at the	i
Exhibition in Spring Gardens.	,
I expedled at my Return home to have found, at least, a Card of Excufe from my Lover ; not a Single Line was there ; you may guefs my Slumbers were not quite uninterrupted. I rofe earlier than ufual, tryed to amufe myfelf with the Town and Country Magazine; I Scarcely
knew
LOUISA. 21
Icnew a Word of what I read, threw it bye with Difgust; went to my HarpSichord, all was Difcord! Breakfast was brought up, I could not touch any Thing ; ordered my Chair to be ready by Eleven, meaning to pay a ViSit or two, in Hopes of hearing Something of Sed-ley\ just as I was stepping into it, who should prefent himfelf at the Door, but the identical Qbjed: of all my UneaSinefsl
The Anxiety I had felt about him immediately gave Way to ReSentment for the Indifference he had shewn the Evening before : He came up to me, took hold of my Hand, began to exprefs his Regret for not having attended me according to Appointment; I stopt him short, by faying, with the most assumed Air of Indifference, that I could not possibly stay to hear his Apologies, as I had promifed to meet Some Company at that Hour, and without wait-ifig for his Reply, I got into my Chair, which, I fuppofe, he followed at a Distance, as I had not been ten Minutes at the Exhibition-Room, when he entered: Determined to punish hisNeg-kdl still, I encouraged Maxwelfs Attention to me, admired only the Pictures pointed out by him as well executed, and, in short, had only Eyes and Ears for him. Sedley appeared hurt at this visible Preference, Scarcely Spoke, and when he
-did
■Q.%	LOUISA.
did, it was in So gentle a Tone, that I had almost forgot myfelf once or twice, and looked! kindly at him; wmuld I had, Louifa ! it would have Saved me Some anxious Hours; but fuch was my Infatuation, that I refufed his proffered Hand, and accepted of	to lead-
me to my Chair.
As Soon as I was alone, I Saw the AbSurdity of my Behaviour, and wished to recall it, but it was too late ! I was engaged in the Evening to a private Party at Lady D.’s; Soon after I went from home Sedley called at my Door; he Seemed to doubt the Footman’s Veracity, when told I was abroad. He has not been here this Morning, nor will he, perhaps, after being refufed last Night, chufe to rifque another Denial.
Every Rap, I hear, carries me to the Windows. I wish he knew how very penitent I am for having made him Suffer; and yet, perhaps, Such a Knowledge might make even a Sedley too preSumptuous.
My Law-Suit is as far as ever from being terminated. Sir Thomas-SaviUe is come to Town ; I hope his Avarice will make him adlive to bring it to a Conclusion. I am far gone in the Penferofo Style, but am at all Times My dearest Louifa’s,
iSi SavUhk
LOUISA. • 2t
LETTER VII.
Mifs Fermor to Lady Saville.
Bleom-hibL
CHIDE yoH, Sophia ! indeed I ssiould ill de-Serve the Name of Friend, if I could calmly hear of your Follies : Yes, -Lady Saville, your Follies I repeat, for I know no other Word that -can exprefs your Behaviour to Lord Sedley. Have you not had Sufficient Proofs of his Attachment to you, to be convinced he must hav« Suffered, atleast as much as you did, by his Absence from you? Eye, Sophia, to increafe his . Pangs by your Reception of him ! it v/as unworthy of your Charadler to indulge fo childish ;a Humour. Even this Part of your Conduct .does not feem excufable in any Light : What then, my Dear, shall I fay to the other ! When forgetting what you owed to yourfelf and to your Lover, you encouraged the impertinence -of every Coxcomb ; I am not acquainted with your Adonis, but Colonel North merits no other Title I am Sure. Are you not mortified in re-flediing, that, in humbling the Man of your Choice, you lessened yourfelfin the Eyes of every one? Can you be angry, if Maxivell, in con-Sequence of your Encouragement, should think Eimfclf entitled to any Favour ? Or, iFSedley,
■di.^^usted
24-	LOUISA.
difgusted with your Behaviour, should give you up to the Contempt you merit ? Do not, my dear Lady SavilV fuppoSe you can reconcile Contradiiiions; it is impossible to give Pain to the Objeft we love, without partaking of it; one must fympathize in all its Sufferings : But, putting Self-Love out of the Question, will not your Generosity reprove you Sufficiently, for abusing the Power you have over a worthy Heart ? If it does not, Sophia, I shall have a very poor Opinion of it; I shall conclude my once perfedl Friend has lost all thofe (^alities, on which our Friendship was founded ; and shall for the future esteem Lady Saville to be a meer Coquette, formed only for the Amufement of Petit-Maitres.———But the Conclusion of your Letter destroys all Such injurious SuSpicions, and my Sophia, in her Penitentials, becomes worthy again of the Esteem of her Louifa.
I know Sedky too well to imagine you went often to the Windows without feeing of him ; he would be impatient to clear up your Mistake, and has, I doubt not, by this Time convinced you that Indifference had no Share in his Ab-fence from Soho : I wish my Sophia may justify, herfelf as well; but his fond Soul will not require So many Proofs of your Innocence ; fmile upon him, my Dear, and he will dishelieve the 5	Evidence
LOUISA.	25
Evidence of his own Senfes, when they told him you did wrong. If your Friend did not judge of your Behaviour in a more difpaffionate Manner, you would never hear of your Faults.
But leaving the Sequel of your Adventures to your next Letter, I shall give you foihe Account of our Proceedings: We have Lovers, Coquettes, Quarrels, and Reconciliations too, I can tell you, here as w^ell as with you,
I told you in my last I was going to dine at the Abbey ; we had all the World (this Part of it I mean) there: The most confpicuous Figures in the Company 'were, the young Earl of Petcrtfield-i juft returned from his Travels, full of himfelf; holds his own Country in utter Contempt, fpeaks broken Engli/h, that is, he So frequently applies to the French and Italian Languages to help out his Converfation, that I fancied he muft have forget his Mother-Tongue 5 he fings agreeably, plays on most: Inftruments, dances and rides wtII j upon the Strength of which Accomplishments the Ladies pronounce him to be a fine Gentleman, Lady	looks as
if she wished to engage his Notice ; he is totally ignorant of the Meaning of Looks, and treats lier only with the Refpecl due to her Rank, for he is an e.^tacl Obferver of \h.Q Laivs'of Pn~ tedency.
C	Not
LOU I S A.
Not Such a Being is Lord Medway,, who i-s likewise on a ViSit at the Duke’s ; he has afted throughout Life with the highest Honour and Propriety in the Discharge of every Duty j the Hero, the good Son, Hushand, and Father ; polite in AddreSs, handfome in PerSon: a deep Dejecstion, at preSent, appears in his Countenance, and expresses, yet better than his Sable Drefs, the Grief he feels for the LoSs of an amiable Wife, who has left him a numerous Family of Infants.
There alSo is Lady Roberts, a young Dowager, who at eighteen voluntarily wedded Age, Deformity, and Infirmity, and thought herfelf well paid by the Profpedl of a large Jointure, for all the Defagremens she met with : She is in the Second Year of her Widowhood, and would listen again to any old Lord who would offer her the fame Settlement. Avarice, always detestable, becomes yet more So in the young ; it is the Vice of Age, and one almost forgives it in thofe who have out-lived all other Enjoyments; but when Youth a£l:s So unnatural a Part it fills one with Horror. Lady Roberts is infinitely difpleafing to me ; every Adlion of her’s Seems tainted with the SordidneSs of her Soul. She has no claim to Beauty, unleSs what she fancies there is in a Pair of tolerable dark Eyes; which
having
LOUISA.	27
having been praifed once or twice in her Life, ihe SuppoSes they cannot be withstood j and to render them as killing as possible, she has practised every Method of turning them, from the Soft Languishment of Love to the inquilitive Stare of Curiosity j she has in sine Such a Variety of Looks that her Eyes are never Seen in their natural Situation. Many a VvT'oman has Set up for a Beauty on having been told of one Feature’s being better than the rest, and perhaps reckoned sine from Speaking comparatively of the others. Do you remember when we made the Norfolk Tour, how you amufed yourSelf with poor Mifs Harris ? who having been admired for a well-turned Arm, never afterwards was Seen in any Attitude but the famous one of Cleopatra’s: “She lay and leant her Cheek upon her Hand,” and with a Face as broad and as coarSe as a Porter’s, she aimed at the “ languish-ingly Sweet” Look, So celebrated in the beautiful Egyptian Qiieen : I am every Day reminded of Mifs Harris by feeing Women led into the fame Error.
You will think me Severe, Sophia‘s I do not' intend to hurt the Perfons, it is their Foibles only I would cure; but lest my Friend should mistake my Meaning, I will leave theSe for the agreeabkj the handfome Sir Edward Seymour^ C 2	who
iS	L O U I S A.
who may boast of his Charms with Justice : He is gay, lively in his Conversation, preferves the Air military which he contraded in the Army ; is a great Favourite with the Ladies---but un-
fortunately for the rest of the Sex, the Superior Beauty of Caroline HaJUngs has fixed his wandering Attention : She is a tall, elegant young Woman ; hasthe Softest blue Eyes you ever Saw;, which telbSir Edzmrd every Moment how much he is beloved. He is the most obfequious Lover that can be, and is Sure of always being well-ireated; O Sophia! I beg your Pardon, I really meant no Restedlion on you. Lord Sedldy, I dare Say, is perfedly well Satisfied with you by ihis; and I am always	'	'
. yoiir.affedionate
.	D Esrmori,’.
ym	. L	■	.
^	' ' i	.	- bsiAnu
■r.y:n- ■	• •	,	.	^
-	, . ,	e ■ bre.SS
^
, - •	N ■ - -	— <4 Q -i
. ... -	. - •	- -	• • : • w- *V 3 v-t
'-C d.d. fu/' -	-.0^^ y n ::c\	'
I	■)
LETTER
L O U I ^ A.	29
LETTER VIII.
Lady Saville to Mjfs Fermor.
Stanhope-Street*
UNconScionable Loulfa^ what a Lefture have you given me ! Indeed, my Dear, I regret much your not having accepted of our worthy Friend the Rev. Mr. B. as you would have been an. excellent Alliftant to him in the composing of his Sermons. Had I received your grave Epistle Some Days Sooner, I should infallibly have hanged myfelf upon the reading of it: but luckily it did not arrive till I had recovered my ufual Flow of Spirits; to do which, need I tell you, it was necestary to make my Peace wish Lord Sedley ? The amiable Man was no Sooner permitted to Speak, than he justified himfelf: Very Soon after I had diSpatched my Letter on Monday^ he came, was admitted, and without making me one Reproach for my unkind Behaviour, entered immediately on the SubjedI of his Defence : Guefs, my charming Friend, how much ashamed I was of my past Condudl, when I learnt that his Abfence had been occasioned by the earnest Request of a dying Friend. You may remember to have beard him Speak wish much Warmth of Capt.
C 3	Gardiner 3,
30	LOUISA.
Gardiner'i who, it Seems, had been quartered with his Regiment for Some Weeks past at R. The poor young Man was Seized with a fore Throat and Fever; the Symptoms appearing dangerous, he begged an ExpreSs might be Sent to Sedley., to acquaint him with his Danger, and bis Anxiety to fee him before he expired. The Messenger found him at his Toilet; on hearing of his Friend’s Illnefs, regardlefs of all other Engagements, he listened only to the Didiates of Friendship and Humanity ; they did not however So far drown the Voice of Love, as to make him forget to order his own Man tp come to Stanhope-Jireet^ and to give me an Account of his whole Proceedings ; Had "JohnJion been more pundlual, 1 had been lefs unjust ; but he has been Sufficiently punished in being discharged by the best of Masters.
Sedley., although he lost not a Moment, only got Tifne enough to R. to receive his Friend’s last Sigh : Melancholy, dejected, he hastened to quit the difmal Scene, in hopes of finding Confolation in my Company ; but how did I disappoint him by my Caprice! Senfible of rny Fault, I almost deigned to beg his Pardon ; promised never more tojudge from Appearances, and was all Good-Humour and Complaifance. Half of tbeSe Concessions would have more than
fatisfiea
LOUISA.	jt
Satisfied him. I will, my Loidfa^ follow your good Counfels, and never again give Pain to ft) worthy a Heart: Maxivelf fromhhis Hour I renounce thee; what are all thy gaudy Attractions, when compared with the more estimable Qualities of my Sedley ?
My Lover takes the Advantage of my being in this high Good-Humour, and grows importunat# with me to fix an early Day, to bleSs him with my Hand : But I cannot confent to he his, till 1 have a Certainty of bringing him Some Addition to his Fortune ; his generous Soul is offended at the Thought j he thinks eight thoufand a Year might Satisfy my Ambition ; that ffiall be entirely at my Command, what Need then of more ? Such Arguments do Honour to his disinterested Passion, but Serve not to change my Purpofe.
The lively Frederick left Town last Week, -to pay a Visit to Sir William Melville \ He declared he would not leave Wales without feeing the Sweet Louifa., and had the Asilirance to add, . “ Who knows how far my Eloquence may prevail on her to listen to my Love ? I shall have a glorious Opportunity of making mySelf to be heard ; nothing like shady Groves and purling Streams for inSpiring la hells. FaJftmP He C 4	would
L O .D I A.
w^ould have rattled on an Hour longer, had not Sir James Btvdenell put an End to bis Difcourfe, by telling hiin abruptly, He thought a Genius like his better calculated to Succeed with a Lady lefs fond of Retirement;” I vvas of the * Baronet’s Opinion, bat v/ould not give him the-Satisfa<fi:ion of declaring my Sentiments; on the contrary 1 encouraged Frederick to hope 'for every Thing from his pretty PerSoii and agree-^bie.Manner.	.
What a Pity that Lady Charlotte MUner fhauld sigh for fuch a Coxcomb ! Could she not transfer her Passion to the more worthy Lord Medway.^ and confole him for the LoSs he now deplores i
It is fuch Women as Lady Roheris, wha have fixed upon the Sex the Imputation of being mercenary,; They ought to be banished from Society.
I take the Hint you meant, my Lomfa.,. to. give me in expatiating on Mifs Hajiingf& Behar viour to Si\x Edward Seymour i You shall nevec i have CauSe again to complain of your
Sofhia Savilk,-
r ..........	' ■ b	' L E X-
'■	.	i
LOUISA.	33
LETTER IX.
V
Mifs Yexmox to Lady SdiYiWQ,	i
I Congratulate my charming Friend on the Recovery of her Spirits; and rejoice in the HajDpinefs of the deferving Lord Sedley ; may it be as lasting as it is merited !
^xxjatms Brudenell Seems to have studied the Taste of your Lornfa^ ab, my Sophia I has he not difcovered too her Partiality to himfelff I am almost tempted to believe that he has, amd from thence has proceeded that Notice, which I foolishly fuppoSed the Confequence of his Pre« ference of me. I am humbled exceedingly in the Thought ; hate Sir James and defpife my-felf: What a difagreeable State does it reduce me to! I require, my dear Lady Savilloy all your perfuastve Language to bring me back .to. Some tolerable Compofure; exert all your Powers, I beSeech you, to do it, for never did your Friend stand in fuch Need of your AS-’ fistanee !
If I thought Sir James would feel my Behaviour, I could almost bring myfelf to encourage the Assiduity of Some of thofe who have offered me their Hearts Since I came to Bloom-hHl.
■	C5	i
t
L O 0 I S A.
I would—in short, my Sophia, I know not what I would do, or fay; I am horribly out of Sorts-*--
. But I will not punish you with my Ill-Humour, you who have given me no Caufe of Complaint———away with all humiliating
Thoughts------1 am worthy of my Friend’s
Esteem, and all the rest of the World shall be indifferent to me.
We live here in a Manner that would amaze you; Such Gaiety! fuch Splendour ! Upon my Word' you would hardly credit me was I to give a full Account of our Way of Life : DreSs, Visiting, Dancing, Music, every Thing that helps to dissipate is employed; happily I am af-Sured that this does not last more than two or three Months in the Year ; I should elSe forfake my Sweet Houfe and Seek for Retirement elfe-Where ; I cannot indulge my Taste for it as I would do without being particular; and Singularity is the last Fault I would commit; it is always a Proof of Some Thing’s being wrong.in the Heart or Head. Sometimes, indeed, under a Pretence of Businefs, or Some other Engage- j ment, I enjoy my desired Solitude ; but too fire-	|
^uent a Repetition would destroy the Force of	'
Biy ExcuSe. 1 do not however go abroad only to amufe	I am always desirous 6f reaping
Some
I
LOUISA.	35
Some Advantage from my PleaSures, and have been amply repaid for the last Visit I made, which was to my pleasing Mrs. Riversy at whoSe Houfe I became acquainted with a most charming Girl; quite an Angel, handfome. Soft, insinuating to the last Degree; her Name is Windham; she has promifed tO visit me, to come and stay Sometime at Bloom-hill. I am not apt, Sophia, to be caught with meer Beauty, or to be struck with a violent Partiality at first Sight ; but in this CaSe I was : Did I believe the strange Doctrine of Some Folks, I should most certainly imagine that our Souls had been formerly acquainted, and flew to embrace each ether at this Second Meeting.
Mrs. Rivers is very fond of this lovely Cecilia, and has her often with her at Bentley-park. She is the last Remains of a once flourishing Family; the Daughter of a Couple famed for their Beauty and Constancy; her Father at twenty married MiSs Cope, a celebrated Toast in this Country, who had hardly reached her sixteenth "Year; Time improved her opening Beauties, and her Hushand’s Love increafed from PoITef-sion ; he knew no Joy but in her Sight, and felt no Pain which her similes could not remove ;
Violent as his P.aflion wSs, it had no Mixture «f JealouSy in it; his Cecilia gave him ho Ro’om C si	to
36	L O U I S Ai
to fuSpeil her of being lefs fond than h« was 5 not Satisfied with the Adoration he paid her, he would have her idolized by the whole World : He knjew that to fee and admire her was the fame Thing; she was therefore carried to every Place ipf public Refort, and never appeared at any without a Profusion of Finery; Drefs, Equipage, Attendance, all was proportioned to the I>oye that gave it. This Daughter was the first Child they had, and engrossed all the Tender-nefs left in the Heart of each Parent; she was Called by the Name of her Mother; and had hardly arrived at her feventh Year, when the Pregnancy of Mrs. Windham (who had lost fcveral other Children) gave new Joy to the Family, as the Estate was entailed on the male Heir, a distant and unworthy Relation : All irnaginable Care was taken of the charming Woman., whofe Delicacy of Constitution mada them apprehensive for her j an Accident however frustrated all their Designs : Mr. Wind-ham in riding out one Day was thrown from hi§ HorSe, and taken up, to all Appearance, dead ; his Wife, anxioussy waiting his Return, was placed at her Dressing-Room Window, which looked down a long Avenue leading to the HouSe ; when, after impatiently expe^ing to fee him, she perceived hi§ Man galloping, up with vicdeEt Cojisternation in. his Looks; her Ap-.
■	prehensions
V o u I s a:	^
prehenfions got the better of every other'Cphli-deration; she'ran to entjiiirb for stet Hustian^ when just as she got into the Halt he w« brought in paTe and breathlefs j Paintings Tuc^ Oeeded each other So rhpidly that she never recovered fustic ieritly to hear, that after Bleediri^ Mr. Windham was declared' to Be out of Danger ; in a few Hours she was delivered of a SohS who lived not many Minutes, and put ai>End at once to the Hopes and the Life of its unfortunate Mother. The 'wretched Hushand, hardly able to leave his Bed, inSisted on being carried to his Wife’s Apartment y the ReSistance they shade‘tjj his Will, and more than that the visible Oriei that appeared in the Face of every one he Saw, too plainly fpoke his Misfortune; he grew outfi^l geous, would be Satisfied, and at last forced sils Way into the Room where lay the inanishal;^ Forms of his beloved Cecilia and his infant Soh^ Agonies not to be defcribed followed tins Sight • Distraction Seized the Brain of this linhappy Man ; he raved, accufed Heaven of Injustice^ refufed to quit the Corpfe of his Wife, lovely even in Death i For two whole Days and Nighrs did he continue in this imgovernable Tranfport, but at the End of that Time, overcome by the Agitation of hiS Mind, he funk into a State of Stupefa<stion, from which nothing could' roule him, till his Daughter was brought to' Kim,
/	wh§.
3S	LOUISA.
who had until that Time been kept out of his Sight; the little Image of its Mother no Sooner appeared, than starting up, he Seemed to awake as from a profound Sleep, but it was the last Effort of exhausted Nature; he had hardly Time to kifs the weeping Innocent, to pronounce a Father’s Blessing on it, and recommend its help-lefs Innocence to the Protedion of an all-bountiful Providence, before he breathed his lash In lefs than a Week thus was the poor Cecilia deprived of both Parents : Her unkind Cousin took Possession of the Houfe immediately, and the Orphan was hardly noticed by him; her Story though could not fail of exciting Pity : The Mother had had many Friends, and among thoSe one kinder than the rest undertook the Care of her; fending her abroad for Education, that being cheaper there than in this Country. She remained eight Years in France., and came back to her Benefa(streSs, Lady Williams., So much improved that she excited general Admiration wherever she came ; her Friend, Sensible ofherCharms, and dreading their Effedi from her Situation, was very desirous of Settling her before she died, as she was old and infirm ; many Offers were made, but Mifs Windham would listen to none of them : She thought it a lefs Misfortune to live on the narrow Income of her Fortune (which did not exceed two thousand
LOUISA.	39
Sand Pounds) than to accept of Some hundreds a Year from a Man whoSe PerSon or Principles were odious to her: Lady Williams was generous; she could not blame the Sentiments of Cecilia; but advifed her Sometimes to endeavour to conquer her Reludlance; Death at last deprived her of this best Support, and at eighteen the beauteous Cecilia was left to guide herSelf through all the intricate Mazes of the World. She would have returned to her Convent, and have ended her Days there, but her littleHeart could not confent to renounce one ObjeSt: Lady Wil--lia?ns had a Nephew, who was continually in the Houfe with this charming Girl, and who called himfelf her Friend^ becaufe he knew himfelf to be her Lover \ she, artlefs and unfuSpedling, believed he meant no more than he Said ; she gave Way to the Sentiments he infpired, talked of the Friendship she had for him, not knowing any other Name for her Attachment. On the Death of his Aunt, Lord Carrington continued to patronize Mifs Windham; all her Acquaintance repaired to See her at the Lodgings she had removed to, and she has ever since been visited and caressed by all the Neighbourhood ; Lord Carrington’s Behaviour gives every one Room to fuppofe they are engaged to each other, but nobody Speaks of it either to him or Mifs Windham^ as they do not make it public thcmSelves.
1 have
40	L O U I, S A.,
I have always forgot to mention, to you that my old Flirt Lord Lovelace has a HouSe in this Part of the World: We meet frequently; he^ always gay, always gallant, talks Nonfenfe from one Day to another and wonders I can be So infenSible to all the fine Things he fays. He' vows every now and then to punish my Indifference, and to let up Some other Idol in my Place. He has So little Meaning in- what he fays that I hardly know when he intends to be: attentive or negligent.
. #
I shall tire you, Sophia, with the Length of my Letters; I do not consider Sufficiently all the Engagements you have on your Hands; a’’
Love, and a Law Suit to attend to at once, is furely Employment enough for one Woman I I will not encroach farther on your Time, than to asiure you,
I am ever your’s,
homfa Firmer^
I
LOUISA.	42
L E T T E R X.
Lady Saville to Mifi Ferraor.
Stanhope-Street, ’
I Am half angry with you, my dear Louifa^ for Supposing rne So engrossed by my Lover, or my Lawyers, as not to be able to Spare a Moment to Friendship. Have you then forgot that your Sophia is incapable of Seeling any Pleafure equal to that of conversing with you ? I dare even to make this Declaration before Lord Sedley ; he is too reafonable not to make large Allowances for an Affedlion which began in our earliest Years, and which Time has only increafed, at least on my Part, Take Care, my Louifa, and don’t let me be rivalled by the Sweet Cecilia^ whofe Picture you draw in Such amiable Colours, that I have great Rea-Son to fear her. Dear, gentle Girl, may she meet in Lord Carrington a tender Prote<stor I
Iler astedling Story had awakened all my Sensibility ; it threw me into a Flood of Tears ; when who should enter, at that Instant, but Sir garnet Brudenell I He enquired into the Caufe of my DistreSs ; I told him it was occasioned by a Letter from Louifa; he looked thunderstruck! “ I hope, Madam, no Misfor-
tune
41 LOUISA.
tune has befallen Mifs Fermorl Speak, my “ dear Lady Saville^ for you know not what I “ Suffer from my dreadful Sufpence \”—MiSs Fermor^ Sir yanm, is much obliged to you for the lively Interest you take in what con-“ cerns her. Jt is not her Misfortunes, but “ thofe of her Friends, which she defcribes in So pathetick a Manner, as to demand my “ Tears.” Whether he thought he had discovered too much by his passionate Emotions, 1 cannot fay, but certain it is, he endeavoured afterwards to assume a fangfroid'm Speaking of you, which was foreign to his Nature. He staid near two Hours with me; I watched every Look in Hopes of discovering Some hidden Scent of his dark Soul, but in vain ! Indeed, my dear Friend, he is not worthy of you; I am Sincerely grieved to find you are fo partial to him : But why, Lomfa^ should you be humbled ? You v/ho never had a Thought that, if known, would not have refledled Honour on you. Be lefs Severe on yourfelf, and believe me, when I assure you, you are more perfedl: than most other Mortals,
Mr. Wejion shas just left me ; he Saw Sir Yesterday, who Seemed to wish to have Matters compromised between us ; a certain Sign that he fuSpedls a Decree will be
given
L O U I S A.	43
given in my Favour ; but be that as it will, I shall for once indulge him and come into a Measure that will for ever rid me of him and the Law.
I was this Morning agreeably Surprized with the unexpedled Sight of my Brother, just returned from D. where he had been to aS- v fist his Friend Bennet in carrying his Elediion : ffhe riotous Life he has led there has agreed but ill with his Looks; he is however in fine Spirits, enquired much after his belle Cou-* fme^ and has promifed to accompany me to Bloom-hill fometime this Summer. He is gone to join a large Party of his eledlioneer-ing Companions at the Star and Garter Tavern, but is to return to me with Sedleyy in-the Evening, which is to be Spent quite en fa-‘ mille\ could my Sweet Louifa but join the Trio, how very happy would it make her.
Sincerely affedlionate,
S. Savllk*
%
M	LOUISA.
LETTER XI.
Mifs Fermor to Lady Saville.
Bloom-hill.
WHAT a strange, inconsistent Man is that Sir ‘James Brudenell! He is not worthy of my R.egard ; indeed, my Sophia^ he shall no longer engage the Heart of your Friend: I thought him amiable; he fpoke feelingly, and I fancied his Soul didlated thoSe Sentiments, So happily expressed 1 So adapted to my own ! His Language drew my Attention ; I listened to him, and Esteem followed. He grew more particular ; his Notice charmed me ; I was uneafy when he was abfent; became in-, attentive to every one elSe. You perceived my growing Inclination, and, blinded by your partial Fondnefs, you Suppofed, my dear Lady Saville^ Sir James did not behold me with Indifference. I had not dared to trust to my own Judgement, but of your Difeernment I had no Doubt. Day after Day Sir James and I met ; we conversed for whole Hours together, and Seemed mutually concerned when forced to part; every Thought of mine was engrossed by him, Howard, about this Time, made me Proposals far above what I could have expefted ; I refuSed him without Hesitation ; my Friends “'	wondered;
-
L O ' tr I S A.	4S
wondered j all, but my Sophia, condemned me. My Heart was Satisfied with what I had done, and Sir James recovered from the Gloom he had been iii from Mr. Howard’s approaching me. I imagined he was every Day on the point of declaring himfelf; 1 found out new Reafons every Hour for his Delay ; he has, at last, deprived me of that flattering Hope I He-has lately avoided me; he Suffered me to leave Town without coming to bid me adieu ! Re-fentment will, I flatter myfelf, prove at.Iength .more powerful than Love ; I shall defpife the^ ungenerous Man, who, after going. So far, abandons me to my own Folly.
You are unjust, my lovely Sophia, to your’ oyv.n Merit, injmagining it possible for anyone, to, rival you with me. Amiable as Cecilia is, there wants many Degrees to make her equal to you in my Opinion ; have- then no Apprehen-Sions.of losing your	Friendship.
"^Just as I was going to Dinner To-day, Frede~ Etch arrived ; I was rejoiced to fee him, and forgot, for a Moment, that he might imagine I •was grown fonder of him than I uSed to be ; but' one cannot contain the first Sallies of Joy ofte feels at feeing an old Acquaintance. This rgood-natured young Man is worthy of the Regard you have always shewn him ; He tells me
you
46	LOUISA.
you have agreed to take Six Hundred a Year, and to releafe Sir Thomas from all further Demands. You are very reasonable, my Sophia^ but I cannot wonder that you should prefer Mediocrity to the trifling Uncertainty of getting a larger Income. Frederick., who st quite your Champion, is very angry at it: “Wonders what “ could bring Lord Walton to givehis Daughter, and fuch a Daughter too I to a Man incapable “ of discovering half herPerfcistions ? Is amaz-“ ed that Sir Charles could be fuch a Fool as to “ leave your Jointure in fuch a Manner, as to “ have it disputed by the Rogue his Heir !’^ •
The next Step is to draw a Comparison between the two Brothers, and after giving the Preference to the Blockhead, he has no Mercy on the Knave ; Sir Thomas, his Wife and Children, are all brought in for a Share of his Spleen. “ His Brother is a Mifer, an igno-“ rant Wretch; his Wife (who, it Seems, is	I
“ very ugly, a capital Crime with Frederick^)	|
“ has no Notion of Good-breeding; born and “ educated on her Father’s Farms, how should	|
“ she know any Thing of the World ? Then	[
“ the Children are fo many troublefome, difa-	'
“ greeable little Wretches, quite the genuine	j
“ Offspring of fuch Parents”—When he had talked himSelf out of Breath, I could not help ashing how he came to be fo dj^fferent from the
4	rest I
LOUISA. 47
test of his Family . He bowed, shewed his white Teeth, and “ SuppoSed, as the Fates destined ‘‘ him for a younger Brother, Nature might ‘‘ shew him Some Kindnefs.”
I have Sent for Mr. and Mrs. Armhage to come to me ; it would not h&proper you know, my dear Sophia., to remain tete-a-tete with a Smart young Man ; my Neighbours might be Scandalized, efpeciallyas Frederick must play the Lover to every Single Woman that becomes near.
My little Cecilia will be with me in a Day -or two ; I have charged my lively Companion not to make Love to her, for she shall not be troubled while she is under my Protection ; He had the Assurance to afk me if I was afraid of losing him myfelf ? Protested that he could utter foft Nonfenfe enough for two or three Women at a Time.’’ He may rattle on, no one will believe him, when they know the Heart of your
Louifa Termor*
48	LOUISA.
LETTER XII.
Frdtn the Same to the Same.
I Have left Frederick to entertain my Company, and am come to amuSe myfelf for half an Hour with my dear Sophia. There is a large Party aflembled in the Hall; they had propoSed Dancing; I hear the Sound of Fiddles, and conclude they are all engaged by this Time. I never Joy in my Affluence fo much, my dear Lady Saville^ as when it enables me to diffuSe Pleafure to all around me; it is then only I am SenSihle of the Comforts of having a good Fortune.
I mentioned in my last, having Sent for Mr* and Mrs. Armitage; they kindly obeyed the Summons, and are now with me. They are a worthy and happy Couple, have as many Virtues, but leSs Money, than Some in the Neighbourhood. However, as their Wishesare confined to their Circumstances, they may be Said to be as rich as many, whoSe larger Estates cannot i Supply their more unbounded Desires. She is a pretty, little, unaffested Woman ; anxious to pleafe, and very fuccefsful in her Endeavors, i for no one finds Fault with Mrs. Armitage \	|
without absolute Beauty, without Superior 2	Talents,
I
I
L O U I S A.	49
Talents, she pleafes every Body. Her Huf-band she charms; he is a plain Sort of Man, and not attempting to be any Thing more, he enjoys all the Merit of his natural Charader.
Mr. Rivers vlllts me frequentlyhe obferves every Word I fay, nay he examines my very Looks. Pie interrupts the Attention of all thoSe whom he fuSpeils of having any Defigns on my Heart; difappoints their Intentions of entering into DiScourSe with me, and Sometimes is So eager to hinder them from rendering me any little Service that I am afraid he will bring him-felf into fome Scrape. He insists on being my* Cecisheo, assures me his Wife will not be jealous, and under that Title he takes upon him-felf the whole Management of me. If I was a Coquette, his Proceedings woul.dbe a Restraint upon me, I should lofe all Patience with him ; as It is, he now and then diverts me, at other Times releafes me from the Importunities of the whining Fidhe, Nevertheless his Behavior has Something of the extraordinary Kind in it.
Among thofe doomed, my Sophia, to feel the Power of my bright Byes, let me mention to you the old Lord Grimjby, formal, pompous, Sublime in every Thing ! He approaches my Prefence with all the Ceremony of the last
D	Age;
50	LOUIS A.
Age ; the Road to my Houfe is lined for a Quarter ’’of a Mile (at least) with his Attendants in their best Liveries. Half an Hour before he arrives I am informed of the Honour intended me. A running Footman announces his nearer Approach ; and last of all, his important Figure defcends from a Coach gaudy ^enough to cut a Figure in a City Proceffion.
He enters the Dresting-room.; bends low, advances a few Paces; makes a full Stop to contemplate fome new Beauty, which has struck him ; I rife to receive him ; he grows rapturous. Seizes my reludlant Hand, vows I must be Lady Grimjhy^ or he shall be miferable; He feats himfelf on the Chair nearest to me; ufes every Argument to convince me of his Paf-fion; my Ambition is tempted by a Repetition of his Genealogy. “ My Lord, I have “ no Destre of being greats Virtue does not al-ways adorn Rank asin you.’^ A gentle Inclination of the Head, thanks me for the Compliment. My Avarice is then attacked, by an Offer of fettling Two Thoufand a Year upon me; “ Riches, my Lord, do not enfure Hap-“ pinefs; I am perfedlly happy with half the “ Sum you fpeak of, and have no Defign of “ changing my State at prefent.” When all I this has failed, my Sensibility is applied to; I am alked if I can confent to'deliver him up
‘‘ to
i
i
LOUISA.
<€ to Wretchednefs “ The Pangs of Love ** are not So terrible, I fancy, as your Lord-ship describes them to be : Every Day proves “ they may be endured without any of thofe “ dreadful Confequences you apprehend.” Nothing being capable of melting my Obduracy, he sighs most piteoufly, takes his Leave in the most lover-like Manner, and returns to his Carriage with the Same stately March in which he entered this Repository of all his “ Hopes,” as he is pleafed to call Bloom-hill.
He is not to be repulfed ; piques himfelf on having a thorough Knowledge of the Sex., and impertinently asierts, that Women may be brought to any Thing by an obstinate PerSc-verance. If I do not prove him afalSe Prophet, may I forfeit the Esteem of my Sophia I
I shall be happy to fee your Brother ; do not let him forget his PromiSe of coming with you : Your Company will give new Life to the wea-lied Spirit of your
Louifa Fermoro
i ^
D 2	LETTER
52	^ o u I s a;
LETTER XIII.
rFrotn Lady Saville to Mifs Fermor.
S-A RE you not afraid, my dear Girl, of feeing JLX your old Aunt’s Ghost arife indignant " from the Grave to reproach you for contaminating her late chaste Abode with the Company of So many Smart Fellows ? There certainly is no Truth in the Stories we are told of, Apparitions,
. or you must have received a Visit from her long ere this. Was I Frederick I should have a thoufand Fears about my Sweet Perfon! for ..should the Genius of the Place not have fled with the Spirit of the late Inhabitant, who knows ‘ but it may wreck its Malice on his bright Eye§, ■fine Hair, or white Teeth ? Pray tell him that I do not think him Safe at.D/(J5»i-D7/: He may take the Caution in more SenSes than one.
The Contrast between your two Right Honourable Lovers is I confeSs both striking and amusing. There is a Degree of the bon Sfon about Lovelace^ which makes him a creditable looking Flirt: But as for that pompous Wretch Grimjhy, I beg he may be diSmisted in ■shis own formal Manner, before I join you.
i
L O D I A.	^3
1^0, Louifa, not content with enllaving every Bachelor you fee, you eVen extend your Conquests over the married Men ! If Mrs. Rivers has no Anxieties about her caro Spofo, she has a much higher Opinion of his Honour than I have: This is not the Age for Conjugal Fidelity. When I fuppofe Rivers guilty of Inconstancy to his Wife, I mean to condemn him only as the Aggressor; my fweet Friend has much too noble a Way of Thinking to encourage in the ssightest Degree a Passion which
must be criminal.-----1 never, Louifa.^ fufpedled
you of an Atom of Coquetry, at a Time when your Heart was wholly dife.ngaged ; much lefs ReaSon have I now to entertain Such a Suspicion, when I know it to be far too much engrossed by one Objedt.
•-------A-propos, do you know he is become
the most conjiant Visstor I have ? He will absolutely be in a short Time ranked in my Lift of Lover s.^ not by my Self, but by my Neighbours : The man perfecutes me—always the fame Set
of Questions;-------When did your Ladyship
hear last from Bloom-hill? What Sort of Neighbourhood have they there ? Is there much Society kept up ? Does MiSs Fermor live retiredly ? or is she fond of mixing with the Crowd ? Has D 3	she
V
54	LOUISA.
Ihe not made fifty Conquests? To each of ■which Interrogatories I anSwer in the Style 1
think will be most diSagreeable to him.---
Yesterday I was determined to kill or cure him of his unaccountable Whims ; for which Pur-poSe, after going through my Lejfon as ufual, I added, that as a Friend I would entrust him: with the Secret of your being much taken with Lord Medvjay. \—it was nothing new for you to conquer, but to be conquered was indeed a Novelty : I charged him to be Secret; I might have Saved mySelf that Trouble, for I had struck him dumb, and effedlually prevented his Blabbing.., Near an Hour pasted in the most profound Silence on his Side; I endeavoured*to extort a few Words from him, by afking. Whether he meant to go to the Mafquerade on Monday next ? Had he been at Ranelagh last Night ? A laconic No was all the Anfwer.—At last he got up, took his Hat, and making me. a Silent Bow marched off.
I really began to fear he had either hanged or drowned himlelf; on my Brother’s coming in this Morning I begged he would go in Quest of him : He went and found Sir yames alone, in his Study, the Pidlure of Defpair ; Lord Welton after many Entreaties at length prevailed on him
N	to.
/
LOUIS A.	0;
to dine with him at AlmacF&; they took Stan-hcpe-Jireet in their Way; i have the Misfortune' to be in high Difgrace with the Baronet; he Scarcely Spoke to me : He however muttered out Something like Yes, when I deSired he would meet me in the Evening with my Brother at the
little Theatre in the Hay-Market.-1 am
perhaps wrong, my Louifa^ to dwell on this-Subjeft, but you desired me to mention him ;; and I think his strange Behaviour more calcu* lated to raiSe your Wonder than your Esteem.
Lord Sed/ey has begged I would go to the next MaSquerade in the Drefs of Zara ; he is to be my QfmanHeavens preferve me from Nerejiati-in the Shape of Maxwell!
Adieu, my best-loved Friend; return with, equal Warmth the Sincere Affedlion of your
Sophia Saville^
t> 4, LETTER
56	LOU I S A,
LETTER XIV.
Mifs Fcrmor- to Lady Saville.
Your Suspicions of Rivers alarmed me, my dearest Sophia ; I began to obferve his Condudl with a most Scrutinizing Eye ; the Examination has fully justified him. He is attentive to me, he watches me when I am in a large Circle ; but reduce the Party, and I am no longer obServed by him ; his very Attention has nothing of the Anxiety of Love in it; if I laugh he joins with me ; if 1 am grave he is not affedfed by it; He is desirous of having me behave with Indifference to every one, but he is perfedlly eafy as to my shewing any Preference ^ to him. When I am with his Wife he takes great Notice of me ; when we are teie-a-tete he talks in Raptures of her Charms. I have been very particular in my Remarks, and am now quite Satisfied that he means no Harm by his odd Behaviour: He is So very indifferent to me, Sophia^ that I have no Fear of being impofed on in the Judgement I have formed of him.
How could you, my dear Lady Saville, take Pleafure in making Sir 'James uneaSy ? I would have Spared this ungrateful Man the Pain he
Seemed
L O U I S A.	57
Seemed to feel on receiving your Intelligence; I am Sorry he has been hurt on my Account. Indeed, my Sophia^ you must not make USe of my Name to Such ill-natured Purpofes. Alas ! Sir 'James little knows how distant from my Thoughts the rest of his Sex are ; how determined I am never to listen to any Propofals that don’t come from him. Unkind Lady Saville., to indulge your Wit at his Expence!—He is unaccountable, he may be abfurd, but he is . dear to me; and I would have you reSpedi the Object of my Tendernefs : If he has no Title of himfelf to your Regard, treat him, my Dear, for my Sake with lefs Cruelty.
Frederick Says he is more afraid of the Power ©f the living Fair than of the dead. He is So delighted with the rustic Amufements of the pretty Villagers, that I am afraid he will never enter again into thofe of the great World ; he fits whole Days under the Shade of a fpreading Beech ; has exchanged his red Coat for a green one, and is quite an Arcadian in his Speech ; joins the Dance on the Green; talks of the Happinefs of tending a Flock, and pipes upon the oaten Reed like any Shepherd. Cecilia’s Beauty had almost destroyed his new Character; he was forced to parler en Capitaine when he D 5	wanted
/
58	L O U I S A.
wanted to expreSs his High-flown ExtaSies ; But as I have condemned him to abSolute Silence on that Subjedl, he is returned to the rural Diversities of the Place; and indulges his Passion for Romance in its full Extent.
Lord Lovelace has lately eredled a sine Build-* ing in his Park which he calls the Temple of the Graces ; The Beauty of the Edifice gives it a Right to be called by any Name ; the whole Country has been entertained at it in the most magnificent Taste : We dined there a few Days •ago, thirty or forty in Company. We had Dancing, Cards, Mufic; a Profusion of Delicacies of every Sort at Table; nothing was-omitted that could contribute to the Pleafurcs of the Party; yet after fome Hours a general Languor took Place of the Mirth that reigned at first ; every one was confcious of she Change, every one endeavoured to revive the dying Gaiety, but their Endeavours failed, and we parted, after passing Seven or eight Hours together, without the least Inclination to lengthen the Time : I have been often struck, my Sophia,, with the fame Thing happening, and I have as often been puzzled to find out a Reafon for it ; a Number of People meet together by mutual Confent, each-Jhoping to be entertained ; they
exert
L O U I S A.	S9
exert all their Powers of pleaSing; every Thing promifes to Succeed to their Wishes; the first Hburs are passed in the highest Enjoyment; na vifible Accident happens to damp this Joy ; ye after a short Time it vanishes, and they count
its R-eturn in vain..Let Philofophers deve*-
lope the Caufe, 1 cannot.
We had Belles and Beaux enough to-furnish? a whole Drawing-room ; the Gentlemen most deferving of the latter Appellation were Sir-George Shirley^ Sir Henry Berkly^ the gentle Lindfay-i Col. Smythe^ the last not the leash pleaSing of the Set ; a dozen others^ whofc Names andPerfons are well known to you, but I have not Time to mention them at prefent.
Our Ladies	Mufgrave, on whofc
Account Sir George Shirley Spends his precious Hours in the Country; she has Vivacity, Features, Figure and Fortune to recommend her ;. protests she loves George^ but cannot help flirting with every other agreeable Ma»; her Lover grows jealous, his Vanity at least is hurt; it is oftner that than their Love, that fuffers; v he pouts, refufes to fpeak to her again ; and after making himfelf appear like a Fool, he begs -D - 6 ■
6o	LOUISA.
her Pardon, promiSes not to be captious any more, and permits her to make him relapfe again into his Folly; for the fair yulia, on the Strength of his PromiSes, indulges her Qo-quetry.
Cecilia JVtndham was not the least admired of the many admirable ones who were there; the Sweet Girl has Such a Soft, gentle Innocence about her that she charms every Heart; yet lovely as she is, she does not strike the Eye like MiSs Lenox, whoSe vivid Bloom, whofe Speaking Countenance, whofe irreSistible Manner, all together make her the Idol of the-Men; it is not Admiration only she inSpires, her Charms absolutely fafcinate : The feeling Soul oi Lindfaj is devoted to her ; but the Duke of Leicejier is too powerful a Rival to leave him any Hope of Succeeding with her; there is no contending with a Coronet; of what Estimation will all his Merit be when compared with the Rank of the other ? I am concerned for the amiable Youth, he deferves a better Fate. I am almost angry with the beautiful Arabella for not preferring him to her noble Lover.
Lord Carrington pressed my little Friend to : dance ; she refufed, she did not chuSe to do it; ' the poor Child is So fenfible of her Passion, that ;
I	she
LOUISA.	6i
she imagines that every one must perceive it:
I chofe to sit still with her ; we talked on Several interesting Subjedls; she does not Speak without betraying all the amiable Weaknefs of her Heart.—Never did I meet with Such exquisite Sensibility; she has ' too much for her Peace.
Have I ever Spoke to you of Mr. Plympton^ who married Barton? I had t)\Q Happinefs of feeing him at Lord Lovelace*s ; she was there too : He would not contribute to our Gaiety you may fuppoSe, when I tell you he is a dull, heavy Mortal; does the best-natured Things in the,World with the most Ill-humour ; disagreeable in his Perfon, auk ward and clumSy ; has no AddreSs, no Pashion about him ; yet Such as he is, he is exceedingly beloved by his Wife, who fees no Fault in him; happy Diversity of Sentiments ! Was it not for that, one Half of the World would be condemned to live single. Mrs. Plympton is barely not handSome ; has an Elegance of Perfon that almost makes one forget she has no other Charm ; and is So perfectly good, that one is tempted Sometimes to reckon her agreeable.
I am pleafed to find myfelf at home ; to have my charming little Society with me : I will go
t©
V
62	LOUISA,
to no more Entertainments, I am tired and dif-gusted with the stiff Formality of large Companies,
Adieu, my dear Sophia; believe me always your’s
X. Fermor^
LITTER
LOUISA.	63
L E T T E R XV.
Prom the Same to the Same.,
I AM become a PerSon of great Bufinefs ; I have undertaken no lefs a Talk than fettling a Plan for the Education of. Youth. Your Louifa, my dear Sophia, is trying to forget her own Unhappinefs in promoting the Happinefs of others. Most of the Villagers have large Families; the Children, till they come to an Age to labour, are Suffered to waste the most valuable Part of their Lives in playing and running about, and often contrail: a Habit of Idle-nefs then which they never get over: To remedy this grand Evil, I have established a School in the Place ; a decent Sober Couple teaches the Children what Learning is neceffary for them ; the Man is the writing and reading Master; his Wife instrudls the Girls in all Sorts of uSeful Needle-works. They are divided into different Classes; from four to ten Years old : When they arrive at twelve the Boys will be ufeful to their Fathers, and are not to come any more to School; most of the Girls are designed for Service, and after twelve are to be put under the Tuition of my HouSe-keeper, who is to instrudt them in all the Arts of Cookery; So many of them attending her every Day for that PurpoSe.
1 know
64	LOUISA.
I know not how far my good Intentions may anSwer; but I am Sure that Learning may preserve from Vices which Ignorance often occasions ; if out of thirty or forty five or six turn out well, I shall rejoice, my dear Lady Saville, in having contributed in Some Meafure to their ' being ufeful Members of Society, and shall think myfelf amply repaid for my Care and Trouble.
I have one Day in the Week Set apart for distributing Prizes to thofe who excel in any Branch ; it is an Encouragement to the Children, and So trifling an Expence to me, that I shall not mifs the Money I lay out in the Pur-chafe of them, at the End of the Year.
I have a NurSery too for thofe unhappy Infants who are deprived of their Mothers at an Age when they want most Attendance: I visit them every Day, and fee that they are properly taken Care of.
Old Age has its Resting-place too : It i& dreadful, my Sophia, to reflect on the Miferies that Years, Infirmities, and Poverty bring on our Fellow-Creatures ! I would Soften the Misfortunes of thofe who labour under any of thofe terrible Difasters, the most shocking of any to
human Nature !---It costs but little to relieve
the
I
LOUISA.	65
the Necessities of the Poor ; I should pay much dearer for Pleafures that would leave a painful Void in the Heart after the Hour of Diffipation, I am ashamed when I remember that an Evening’s Entertainment has often been more expensive to me than the Maintenance of a Faniily for a whole Week.
All the Inhabitants of the Village dine at the Hall on Sundays; and repay my Bounty by their chearful and pleafant Looks: There is a large Meadow behind the Houfe, parted from the Garden by the River; there they generally assemble to celebrate their harmlefs Sports ; not all the Sparkling of a Birth-Night Crowd can convey fo pleasing an Idea ; to shine completely they must have all the Simplicity, and only the
innocent Desires of my Sweet Villagers.--
We have a May-pole crowned with a Garland of blooming Flowers, around which they dance every Evening after Sun-Set: They laugh, they play, and their Lives pafs away without one A6tion that can make them fear the End of them ; are they not to be envied, my Dear ?
-------Frederick has just been with me ; he
is obliged to leave us to-morrow; he regrets it, we have Reafon to do fo too : His lively and agreeable Conversation kept us from Melancholy j
66	LOUISA.
choly ; even MiSs Windham was amufed by him* He declares if he had staid one Day longer he must have diSobeyed my Orders — he could bear it no longer—he never in his Life could Sit by and look at a lovely Woman without Speaking to her; and his Tongue is So faithful an Interpreter of the Didfates of his Heart, that had he once opened his Lips to Cecilia he must have
told her all be felt.-1 replied, that as he had
Said as much to a thoufand other Women as he could have done to her, there could be nothing new in his Speeches, therefore there no great OccaSion to grieve for the Lofs of them ; ——he calls me infenfible Creature, trips out of the Room in a Minuet Step, humming a. Tune.
This poor little Cecilia loves to a Degree that makes me tremble for her: Few Men, my dearest Sophia^ are worthy of Such an Attachment. I am not pleafed with Lord Carrington' Behaviour ; he has engaged the Astedlions of an. amiable and deferving Girl;he does not attempt to conceal his Love for her; Why then does he not marry her ? I would enquire of MiSs Windham ; I would interest myfelf in bringing the Affair to a Conclufion, but she does not give me an Opportunity ; and it is too delicate a Subjetst for me to begin it to her. She is wrapt
up.
LOUISA.	67
up in contemplating the Perfe£lions of her loved Lord ; she is hardly fenfible of the Tendernefs I shew her; always good-humoured, always^ complaisant, she enters into every Scheme I propofe ; she is ruled by my Choice of Amufe-ments ; but she only conSents to join in them, she does not enjoy the Smallest Degree of Pleasure from them ; She comes home tired, low, unhappy ; runs to her Apartment, shuts herfelf up there for Hours, and Sometimes returns to me with visible Marks of her having been in Tears. I want your charming Spirits, my dear Sophia, to Support her Anxiety and my own ;— I am often tempted to murmur, I am often discontented with my Self, but I am ever
Your affedionate
Louifa Fermor»
LETTER
68	LOUISA;
LETTER XVI.
Lady Saville to Mifs Fermor.
Stanhope-Street,
YOU blame me, my gentle Friend, for my ill-natured Wit on a late Occasion ; may I alk if the Crime would have appeared fo heinous had Sir ‘James not been the ObjedS on whom it was exerciSed ? Your Partiality to him, my Louifa, makes every Thing he fays or does appear in the most favourable Light: My Friendship for you, on the other Hand, renders
his obfcure Proceedings unpardonable.-But
I forget that you have desired me to treat him as a Man the most dear to you ; that Title shall from henceforth Secure him from all my ill-natured Wit and unkind Raillery.
It is no Fault with you to want Gallantry ; I shall not therefore injure him, when I tell you, that he had not Sufficient to make him keep his Promife of meeting me at the Hay-Market on Wednefday Evening : He Sent his Excufe by Sedley; a violent Head-ach obliged him to go home; only a polite Way of faying. He could amufe himfelf better with his own, than with Mr. Foote’s Humour.—The next Morning I received a civil Card from him ^ “ He was much
con-
L O U I S A.	69
• concerned he could not have the PleaSure of attending me the preceding Evening; and still more So, that it was not in his Power to waif on me before he left Town, which hO was obliged to do that Day, as particular BussneSs demanded his Attendance in the Country^’*
' But to what Part of the Country remains still an inviolable Secret to me.———What would I give to purchaSe a Belt of Invifbilityy that I might trace the Source of this mysterious Conduit ! Not a Spark of female Curiosity in this ^ Wish I assure you, my dear Girl; the Interest I take in all that concerns you has alone dictated it.
After describing fuch a Circle of Beaux and -Belles as that you were in at Lord Lovelace’s^ how can I pretend to amuSe you with the Ac-> count of what passes in a Place vulgarly called " the Beau Monde ? I fee nothing here, my Dear, Jialf So beautiful as your MiSs Lenox: I almost
think Beauty confined to that Name.--------------1
should add, that I meet not with a Smart equal to the ill-fated Lindfay^ could I for a Moment divest myfelf of Sedlefs Image.
My Brother propoSes our Spending three or four Weeks at Southampton during the Seafon : -lie joins with Lord Sedley in wishing me to
chang«
70 LOUIS a;
change my Name j my Law-Suit is now ended, what ExcuSe can I have for refusing to make a ' worthy Man happy ? I alked Lord Walton “ Why he did not enter into a State of which he Spoke So highly ?”	“ Why, Faith, Sophia,
when I meet with a Woman as capable of making me as happy as you are likely to be, I will
not hesitate a Moment about it.”--How
, thefe Men love to flatter each other ! Sedley will,
I fuppofe, take the Opportunity of returning the Compliment at a proper Time and Place.
We are all in high Preparation for the Maf- < ' querade : My Drefling-room is silled with Turbans, Vests, Trains, and all the gaudy Apparatus of a Sultana’s Drefs.———I am So frequently interrupted by the different People employed on the Occasion, that 1 Scarcely know what I write; nothing can however make me forget to affure my dearest Lsuifa that I am her jiffe^ionate
S, Saville..
LETTER
N
I. O U I S A.
LETTER XVII.
lidifs Fermor to Lady Saville.
My Partiality makes me, Sophia, think favorable of all Sir ’James fays and does. Your Prejudice, my Sweet Friend, prevents you from allowing him any Merit; which of us then is the most unjust? I am not, however. So blinded as to approve of his breaking his Promife to you.
You wrong me in Supposing I Ho not think Gallantry necessary to make a Man agreeable ; I am far from being of that Opinion, but, my dear Sophia, we have different Ideas of the Same Word. I expeist Attention, I would have a great Deference paid to the Fair Sex in gene-raH but I not require that constant Attendance, that absolute Devotion which you do. I allow my Gallant to think and adl as he pleaSes, Ido not wish to diredf his Judgement; He may be extremely complaiSant, but he shall never be obliged to give himfelf up to my Guidance; I should enjoy no Satisfadlion in ruling a Slave, who durst not contradidl me. I am exceedingly flattered when a Man of SenSc agrees in Opinion with mey but should he dif. fer, I am humble enough to Suppofe I may -he
wrong,
72 LOUISA.
wrong, and can be perfuaded to think as he-does.
Pleasing as Politenefs is, I give it up when it clashes with Sincerity, I am particular, my dear Lady Saville, but I hope I am not very ridiculous in thinking thus ; I do not diScIoSe my Sentiments to every one, to you I am Sure I may with Safety; your Friendship Secures me from the Sharpnefs of your Wit; you will Spare the Head, in Consideration of the Heart that diftates {\xch Jirange Dodlrine; you know it capable Of feeling the tenderest Affedlion for you, and willing to give you all the Merit of your Superiority.
But to return to this unaccountable Sir ’James: He is gone out of Town, you fay, he -went out Suddenly, no one knows where : He delights in Mysteries ; he loves to puzzle People; he Succeeds, but in raising my Wonder he lofes much of my Esteem. I do not love this dark, mysterious Way of Adiing: Yet, perhaps, my dear Sophia, he is Sensible of your Distike to him, and imagined it would be a very immaterial Circumstance to you, to be acquainted with the Place of his Residence.—I know not from whence it comes, but there is So much more Pleafure in ]\xdg\ngfavorably of the Adions of others, than in condemning
upon
.LOUISA.	73
upon Appearances, that I can Seldom prevail on myfelf to do the last. (Sir James Brude-rail out of the Question)—I am convinced that to form a right Judgement of any PerSon’s Conduif, one must have been in their Circumstances; for does not Behaviour depend more on Situation than any Thing elfe ? Difference of Charadlers makes Sometimes a Difference in Actions; but the most perfedl ar^ liable to fail at Times. It therefore Seems unfair to me, to expert entire Uniformity throughout a whole Life ; human Nature is much too imperfedl to attain that Excellence.;—I moralize, my Sophia, but I fear I do not convince you : You never enjoy Sober Reflexion, but when you have had a Surfeit of Pleafure; .should this reach you before the Fatigue of the MaSquerade is gone off, it will stand a better Chance than if it came just when you have engaged in fome new AmuScmcnt.
Cecilia is -still with me; we strole about the Woods all Day long. Sometime walking Arm in Arm, at others taking different Paths, as our Inclinations direcl; we often meet in the fame Spot after having wandered for Hours: Do not, from this Account, fancy wc are unsociable ; we are very good Company, I assure you, when we pleafe to enter into ConverSa-E	tion.
74	LOUISA,
tion. The little Windham has nothing of the gloomy in her Melancholy ; her extreme Timidity renders her diffident of herfelf, to the last Degree ; her Doubts of pleaSing do not, however, hinder her from trying to do it; she studies the Humours of thofe she converfes with, she conforms entirely to them : She is not diS-pleafed, I can fee, at finding mine conformable to her own, in Love of Solitude.—She is now returning from a Ramble, she looks up at my Window, a Sweet Smile of Satisfadfion glows on her lovely Face—she raps at my Door; I leave you for a while..-
Monday Night.
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^
I left you, my dear Sophia, to give Audience to my little Friend ; she entered my Room as Soon as I had laid down my Pen.—She hoped she did not interrupt me; but her Impatience to shew the Confidence she had in me, had made her over-look every Thing elfe. I af-fured her she had not given me any Interruption ; there was Time enough to finish my Letter, which was not of very great ConSe-quence. She endeavoured then, in a Voice more musical than the Syren’s, to apologize for the Referve she had hitherto maintained—-hut that she had Secrets in which others were
concerned^
t	*
, L O U I S ^ A.	75
concerned, and therefore she had not been at X/iberty till now, to lay open her whole Heart to me. Her frequent PauSes during this Speech, her continual Changes of Complexion, made me conclude she was going to Speak on a Subject the most interesting of any 'to her.—Impatient to relieve her from the Difficulty of explaining herfelf, I could no longer contain myfelf; but after assuring her I did mot wish to know more than she would b* pleafed to tell me, I added, if you mean to fay you love and are beloved, I will assist you in the Confession, by telling you that Lord Car--iringtod.s Behaviour has long informed me of his Attachment to you, and your Senfibility leaves me little Caufe to doubt of your feeling the Force of his Passion. Have I not divined, my dear Mifs JVindham, all you had to fay to me?—“ You have indeed, my amiable, my kind Mifs Fermor^ guessed Some Part of what “ I should have faid; but you can never dif-cover half of what I feel for your generous Friendship to me.”—“ I will hear nothing “ of that, my Sweet Girl; your Company more than repays any Kindnefs I can shew you. I will not have you, for the future, consider me in any other Light than that of a tender Sister, who wishes to promote your F 2	“ HappineSs
76	LOUIS A.
Happinefs, and who, in doing that, find* “ all her Cares rewarded.”
A full Confidence followed this Conversation : Lord Carrington has Family Reafons for concealing his Love; he waits but for an Opportunity of avowing it publickly. He had made Sure of her Esteem before he attacked her Heart; she has not a Doubt of his Honour ; it would have been the Heighth of Cruelty to have uttered a Sufpicion of it. I am an Enemy to private Connexions of this Sort, but I could not bring myfelf to fay So. He confents to her entrusting me with their Engagerhent: He may poshbly have good Reafons for his wishing to conceal it from the rest of the World.—— I must, in Pursuance of my general Maxim, fuppofe he means to adl well.
15he is So wrapt up In him, that my Advice might give her Pain ; but I am convinced it would have no Effedf, as to putting her on her Guard : She has a thouSand Anxieties about her not deServIng the Love he has for her ; but she has not a Fear of his deceiving her.
She has been more eafy and compofed since she has made me her Confidante.
Your Southampton Scheme does not pleaSe jne; I forefee that it will interfere with your I	coming
LOUISA.	77
coming to Bloom-hilf and I shall not forgive your Breach of thatPromife. l^ovA Walton \s a sidgetting Wretch ; he is never Satisfied with remaining long in any Place; you will be carried over half the Kingdom, before he Suffers-you to fix any where : I should prefer I.ord Seciley to him, as a Guide; he would, I am Sure, have brought you to this peaceful Retreat, rather than have carried you into that variegated Scene.—Come you must, at all Events, if you mean to preServs the Friendship of your
IQulfa Fermor.
E 3;	LETTER
LOUISA*
LETTER XVIIL
Lady Saville to Mifs Fermor.
Luefday.
After all is Sald and done, I believe you,.
Louifa.) enjoy more real Pleafure, when jeated in the Midst of your happy Villagers, than it is pcffible for me to do, Surrounded by iv:enty Coxcombs;—and yet I am much afraid, you are indebted only to my Fatigue for this very Sentimental Observation. When I have recovered my last Night’s Revel, I will confult my Heart, and tell you honestly in my next, whether I am really become a Convert to your Opinion or notI almost fuSped: already what will be the Refult, for I do not remember that I formed one Wish during the whole Time I staid last Night at Mrs. Cor-7ielyfSy to be out of the gay Bustle; on the contrary her Nymphs and Shepherds charmed me more than any of thofe defcribed by Sir Philip Sidney in your admired Arcadia—~hzd Symptoms thefe !—But to proceed with an Account of my Evening’s Amufement-—After having been assured by my Glafs and Barber, that I looked more like an Angel than ever, I stepped into my Chair, with an uncommon Glow of Pleafure and Self-Satisfadion, determined not t&
confine
t O U I S A.	yg:
eunfine my Conquefls to Turks alone ; hut to make Christians, Jews, and Infidels feel the Weight of my Chains; thefe ambitious Views all fled at the Sight of Sedley.^ who waited at the Door to receive me with his Mafk olS; he looked So hand feme in his Turban, that I no longer wished to captivate another Soul, lie did not quit me an Instant y his Prefence, however, did not deter a Pojihumus Fconaim frorri being exceedingly troublefome to^ me; I guested the Figure	Maxwelf s y my Brother
confirmed me in the Sufpicion, but would not give me a pofitive Anfwer :• I told Lore! Seddy my Surmife,. upon- Vv^hich recolle^ling, i fup-’ pofe, the Encouragement I had once given to-his Ailiduity, he thought it now incumbent on him to put an End to all his farther Pretenfions, and therefore made himfelf known to him ; and forgot his ufual Politenefs So far, as to tell him “ his Company was extremely diSagreeable “ to the Lady, and begged he would leave “ herPojihumus obeyed, and I was relieved from his teazing Protestations of Love and eternal Fidelity.—Colonel North, in an elegant Domino, attempted to tell me, under a Mafk, what he has So often repeated in the most barefaced Manner, viz. that he was the most wretched of Beings, and must continue fo, if I. did not give him Some Reafon to hope : As
E 4	my
8o	LOUIS A;
iny Anfwer was not very flattering to his Hopes, he tryed, I imagine, to find Some fair one leSs tinkind ; you know he is Seldom at a Lofs upon fuch OccaSions; a Girl of Patnios foon con-foled him, and bestowed that Pity on him which had been refufed him by the Daughter of Lujignan.
I cannot fay the Brilliancy of the WrC equalled that of.the Dresses,
Mrs, D. was the only Female there, whofc lon-mois deferved ApplauSe; our Friend Mr. Meadows did not difguife his natural Charadier So far as to be deficient in Clevernefs.
Upon the Whole, I do not think Mafque-' rades a Species of Amufement calculated for the Englijh Genius; we want the charming Vivacity of the French., to make them prove entertaining; we should be more shining, if we were lefs Solid.—It was Five o’Clock thisf Morning, before I got home.—Sedley assumed with his Habit, JealouSy enough, to make him hope I should not go to any more mafqued Balls If I find he retains any Thing of Oftnan today, except his Love, I shall certainly quarrel with him.
I am glad the little CmV/ahas dishurdened her
Heart
. LOUISA.	U
Heart to you ; it must have relieved her greatly. What Reafons can Lord Carrington have for concealing his Love from the World ? I own a Conduct of that Sort always sills me with Suspicions not much to the Honour of the Man: But I, my Loiiifai Seem to have made k a Rule to follow a Maxim much the Reverfe of yours 3 I judge not always the most favourably of Addons, which bear a double Interpretation 3 call me, if you pleafe, a Mifanthrope^, but you will find in the End, that I am fel-domer deceived than you.—-Be that as it may^ you will always find me
Your affedtionate,
S, Smillt*
E S	L E T T ER
LOUISA:
LETTER XIX.
Mifs Fermor to Lady Saville,
OMy dear Sophia, would you believe, I have Seen him! I have heard him Speak !—Ah I how did he look ! how Speak ! not like that Sir 'James I once knew; all was changed,—hardly a Trace left by which I could have known him, had not my Heart told me by its Emotions, it could only be him.—-But let me try to recolledl my Scattered Senfes, that I may inform you how the strange Event was brought about.—Mifs	was ob-
liged to leave me on Friday Morning ; to dissipate the Chagrin I felt at her Abfence, I Set out refolved on taking a long Walk; I went on, hardly fenSible of what I was about, till I found my Self in a large Wood, where I had never been before : A Soft, green Bank offered me a commodious Seat; I threw mySelf upon it and took out of my Pocket Youngs Night thoughts, as being the Book best Suited to my Train of Ideas; a Solemn StillneSs reigned around me ; the dark Shade of the Trees formed a Gloominefs, fit to infpire Horror ; not a Leaf moved ; I had read Several Pages, wrapt up in - Meditation, was still purSuing my pensive Au-
z	thor
LOUIS A\ %:
thor, when a little Rustling made me turn my Eyes to the Part from whence, I imagined, the Noife came j but not feeing any Thing, 1 wae going to continue my Lecture, when I beheld Sir 'James at my Feet; Seizing my Hand with an Eagernefs that terrifyed me, he cryed, in a Voice hardly intelligible, “ You Tee, Madam, a Wretch before you—who cannot—-dares' “ not—O MiSs Fet'mory pardon a Man you “ have undone—I have alarmed you—No---“ I am odious to you;- it is not Surprife, but “ Hatred I read in your Looks.—1 will leave you, Madam—I will banish myfelf forever “ from you ; I am justly punished.’* On faying this he quitted me as abruptly as he had* come; I endeavoured,, in vain, to Speak ; !■ could not articulate a Syllable ; his Appearance petrifyed me So unexpedied—fo unlike him-Self; then his Behaviour, his Conversation So very extraordinary—to accufe me of having undone him I to read Hatred instead of Surprife in my Looks—ah ! Sophia^ they were not ex-preshve of the Sentiments of my Heart, if they told him he was hated ! But he was not enough himfelf to judge of any Thing.-—He has certainly lost the Ufe of his Reafon—the Wildnefs of his Eyes Speaks the Difeompo*-Sure of his Intelleds—unhappy Sir James ! the £ 6	Recollediioni
84	LOUISA.
Recollection of his whole frantic Manner freezes me with HoworJ
I remained fixed as a Statue on the Spot he had left me, and should have continued there much longer, had not my Servants, terrifyed at the unuSual Stay I made abroad, difperfed themSelves about to look for me, and after Searching every other Place, the faithful An-" thony at length thought of this and found me : Terror was So painted on his Countenance, that 1 was struck with Apprehenfion when I faw him; his Joy at discovering me explained the CauSe of it; he told me that on finding I did not return at Three o’Clock, Jones had been extremely alarmed ; that she had Sent all the Servants to enquire about me at different Places; and that after a fruitiest Search, he had recollected this Wood and had walked on to it, in Hopes of finding me there. It was near Six o’clock in the Evening when I got home; I went to Bed immediately, very ill and much fatigued ; I was confined to my Apartment for three Days.—This Man, my dear Lady Savilky is destined to give me Pain only.—I am more at a Lost than ever to know what he means : What can be his Motive for this uncommon Way of going on'? During my Confinement I had'Messages four or five Times a Day from
Bmtky-'fark^
LOUISA.	85
, Bently-park.—I must enquire whether Sir James is in the Country still, and whereabouts he is : Perhaps, he may be there; yet I never heard Mr. Rivers mention him, as being of his Ac--quaintance.
I am not yet Sufficiently recovered to go abroad, or admit Company : I will write to you again in a Day or two, my dearest Sophia i I am s not at preSent able to add more than that I am
Your astediionate
L, Fermor^
LETTER
S6	LOU I S K..
LETTER XX.
From the Same to the Same, ■
Bloom-hill.
YGUR Silence, my dearest Sophia^ wouldi sill me with Anxiety, did I not conclude you must have left London by this, and are fa^ much engaged with the new AmuSements you. find at Southampton.^ ao not to have found Time yet to write.
Some Part of the Riddle mentioned in my last" has since been explained ; Sir ‘James Brudenelf Ii am told, has just purchaSed the Estate to which that sine Wood belongs; he has been down at it this Fortnight; Signisied his Intention of not paying or receiving any Visits during his Stay^ in the Country ; his Ill-state of Health the Ex-cuSe given for this.—I am distressed beyond' Meafure at sinding he is toste fo near a Neighbour to me, this Purchafeof his not being three Miles from my Houfe.—What strange Inconsistencies are we guilty of daily! I, who once knew no Pleafure equal to that of feeing this Man, who passed whole Days in conversing with him, now shudder at the bare Thought ofi meeting him, and wish mySelf any where rather than in his Neighbourhood; help me, my
charming.
LOUISA.	87
charming Friend, to account for this Change of Sentiment,
I have had Letters from both my Brothers Sir Charles Speaks of the DiverSions of Paris en Philofophe; he is not carried away with the vast Profufion of Magnificence be fees about him he is not apt to be caught by the Eye. But William.^ whofe livelier Imagination does not give him Time always to eonSult his Reafon,. ■ talks in Raptures of the Dauphinefs’s Beauty protests he Should fuppofe her Natures Majier^ piecey did he not See So many of his Country-Women there, whofe Charms equal, hers : Hc“ is delighted with every new Entertainment and enjoys the Scheme, fo kindly propoSed by his elder Brother, of continuing his Travels with him. They intend going on to Italy^ when Paris has done rejoicing for the Royal; Marriage.
My Doors are opened again to all the World ; ,
I will try once more what Effecst a Variety of Company may have on the Melancholy that
would confume me, was I to indulge it.-
The Noife of Carriages proclaim the Arrival of fome; I must quit you, my dear Lady Saville,
Monday
88	LOUISA.
Monday Evening, I return again to the most pleaSing Employment I have, that of pouring out my Soul into the gentle Bofom of Friendship. I have Seen a Number of my old Acquaintance, come to congratulate me on my Recovery; and have been introduced to fome new ones by the Family from Brook-Abbey; I will tell you of thefe by and by : at prefent I must dwell on the Subject nearest to my heart. Mr. and Mrs. Rivers were amongst the foremost of thofe who came to give me Joy on my Return of Health. The Con-verfation for Some-time was un-interesting enough, till among other Topicks the late Sale of Druids-Grove came upon the Carpet; the Duke, turning to Mr. Rivers^ enquired “ whether his Friend Sir "James Brudynell was still at that Place ?” Before he anfwered the (^estion, he fixed his Eyes on my Face; his unfeafonable Stare difconcerted me ; I blushed, looked down, and was quite confufed ; I was Scarcely able to attend to what he faid, till he fpoke of his Design of going abroad ; He left the Country two Days ago, and talked then of crossing the Sea ;”—“ but he did not know whether he would keep his Refolution ; his State of Health made his Friends' wish him to go to Nice^ or fome fuch Climate.” My Countenance underwent a Second Examination at the CloSe of this
Speech ^
LOUISA.	89
Speech ; if I was dlfcompofed before, I was quite angry now; he perceived it, looked another Way, and gave me Time to recover my-felf.——~Is it not strange, my Sophias this Friend of his has never been Spoken of before ? and is it not still more strange, that Rivers should endeavour to discover how I am astedted towards Sir James P for his Looks I am now convinced mean that: Has he So little Difcernment him-Self, that he is obliged to employ another to find
out my Thoughts ?--But I will not, my
dearest Sophia^ tire you longer with tracing the various Windings of this Labyrinth ; Time wish T hope, help us to the Clue.	^
I come now to thofe whoSe Charadiers are not quite fo intricate. Sir Henry Savage, who you may recolledl to have Seen in every Place of polite Amufement, was one of the Strangers in my Circle to-day ; handfome as he is, he shines more in a feledl Party, than in the mixed Round of public Company; he has Senfe, AddreSs, Sentiment, and Vivacity : I told Lady Charlotte she had brought a dangerous Man among her female Acquaintance in the Country; his Merit is not of that Sort which charms her ; she did not Seem Senfible of the Danger 1 feared.	j
Uu
90	L 0> U I S A.
Mr. and Mrs. Burdet were alfo here. He iS" elder Brother to your little Sincere Admirer, the Captain of that Name ; quite the Man of Mode, fcrupuloufly obServant of all the Laws of xhchon Lon I his Manner, his Language, his DreSs, are all in stri£l Conformity to the reigning Fashion ; he studies that as another would one of the Sciences : Luckily he has not mistaken his Talents, for in my Opinion he would not have Succeeded half So well in any thing elSe. His Bride is exailly Suited to him ; has Beauty enough to justify his Choice; puts on her Gloaths with as much Judgement as Lady 6V and' understands perfefUy how to adapt her Ornaments to her Complexion; has not Wit enough to find out his Want of it; and is indifferent enough not to wish he should make a very fond Hushand. How lucky is it. Lady &aville, that this Couple came together! Had any adverfe Fate parted them, they might have fallen to the Share of two valuable People, who would have been rendered unhappy by them : As it is they will enjoy perfedl Tranquillity; he will purfue his PleaSures unmolested ; she her’s .with the fame Security ; they deSire nothing more, they will therefore be-fatiasted.
1 waif
LOUIS A.
I wait a	Letter	from	you	with the ut» ^
most Impatience; you will not I am per-fuaded keep me long in this State, knowing how truely I am
Your affeftionate
I.Quifa Fermor*
*	M	*
H M
- v;	*
LETTER
52	LOUISA:
LETTER XXL Lady Saville to Mifs Fermor.
Southampton,
TH E Hurry which ever attends on my Brother’s Actions, did not allow me Time to acquaint my much-loved Friend with the Day of my Departure from London ; by which means her two last Letters, being diredied to Stanhope-Jireet^ did not reach me till last Night.
It is hard to fay, my Louifa, whether the Contents of them infpired me with most Re-fentment or Amazement: The first mentioned Passion, I think predominated.—I have long regarded Sir ynmefs Behaviour with Astonishment j every Step he takes feems but to increafe my Wonder I—I think an Explanation of his Proceedings So very necessary, that 1 wait but your Confent to mention the Affair to my Lord Walton.^ whofe near Affinity to you makes it incumbent on him (in your Brother’s Abfence) to refent a Treatment So unworthy of you : The Fear of hurting your delicate Senfibility has alone kept me So long Silent on that Subje6l to> him.
LOUIS A:	93
Sir ynmefs Purchafe in your Neighbourhood is, I find, no Secret to his Acquaintance; my dair-voyant Sedley attributes it to his Paffion for you ; I hastily afked him if he had been admitted into his Confidence ? He replied, “No,— but that his Surmifes, were founded on the best Groundseager to come at the So much wished-for Secret, I demanded, en Maitrejfe, an Explanation of thofe ambiguous Words — when, lo ! and behold, all his Information had come from his Obfervation of the Baronet’s Behaviour when in your Company : Vexed to find myfelf thus difappointed in my high-raifed Ex-pedfations, I told him with an ironical Smile, “ That it needed not any very violent Exertion of Penetration to find out what was fo very visible to every body P he bowed in Return for my civil Speech, then begged Leave to accompany me to the Rooms, which are open all the Morning; I refufed going, but did it with fo good a Grace, that the Refufal could not offend.
----I would give the World, my Dear, that
your Sir James had a third Part of my Sedley''^ A7niability.—But why should I call him youfs ? The strange Wretch never shall afpire to fuch Excellence ; I will positively, Louifa, forbid the Banns.—Do not, my fweet Girl, fuppofe my Flightinefs proceeds from a Want of due Feeling. I sincerely partake of all your Emotions,
and
^4	L O U I S A.
and would willingly leave this gay Place, could my Prefence at Bloom-hill restore your wonted Peace of Mind ;—but what Effedl, alas ! would my Railings and Imprecations against your ungenerous Neighbour, have on a Heart So strongly, prejudiced in his Favour,?
Had Sir James continued at Druids-Grove,, I should have adviSed your Removal from Bloom' Mlf as the very Air he breathes must be infec-,tious to you ; but by his decamping he has left you in quiet .PoITellion of your little Eden^ and deprived me af a Plea for begging your Company,
Was my Mind more at Rest about you, I -should enjoy more than ever this my favourite Place of Amufement. The Seafon is uncommonly brilliant; the Weather So fine, as to shew the delightful Profpedls, with which we abound, to the highest Advantage : Sedley is in prodigious Spirits.;—in short every Thing conspires, except that intolerable Brudenell^ to make me happy.
What a fly Creature is Mr. Rivers ! I rejoice however that his Plot is found out: From the Charadler you gave of him at first, I was much inclined to Set him down on our List of Amiables;
*	but
LOUISA.	95
Ijut Since I find him in League with Sir James, I discard him quite.
I am Sorry %\x Chcndes Termor dessgns continuing abroad Some-time longer. The great Harmony that Subsists between the Brothers, is^ in my Opinion, the luckiest Circumstance that could attend them; as the Sentimental Gravity of the elder will temper the too great Vivacity of William;—I wonder I did not rather fay that ■William would improve his Brother—-it was certainly a Slip of my Pen-—for you know I always thought him most capable of instructing the rest of his Family, he is So perfedt in the Ways o^ the World.
Adieu, my charming Friend; that you may ^recover your Health and Spirits, is the earnest iPrayer of your
.Sophia Samllen
LETTER
I
96 LOUISA
LETTER XXII.
Mifs Fermor to Lady Saville.
NO—never, my Friend, will your Louifa con Sent to Lord TValiori^ being made ac- ^ quainted with her Folly: Never shall he call Sir James to an Account for his Behaviour, No, Sophia, on pain of forfeiting my Friendship, do not again make fuch a PropoSal to me.
I should deSpiSe mySelf did I fuppofe fuch a Step necelSary to enfure my Happinefs: I should de-Spife Sir James, was I obliged to the Protection of my Relations for his Change of ConduCt. Time, my dear Lady Saville, I repeat again, will be the best Interpreter of his Actions ; I
will trust to that alone for Peace.-After al|,
my lovely Sophia, of what shall I complain ? Sir James has made no Promifes, therefore he has broke none; he fays I have undone him ; he then thinks himfelf the injured Party !—It is he that should complain.—I allow that with a nice Senfe of Honour there is no Distinction to , be made between what is implied or aCtually done; but it is not by thoSe Rules the Generality of People judge.-1 should be reckoned
abfurd for imagining Sir James meant more than to amufe himfelf by being fo particular in his Notice of me; till he fpoke I had no Right to
fancy
LOUISA.	97
fancy he loved ;---ah ! my dear Sophia.^ would not one fuppoSe from thence that Men never Speak but their real Sentiments ? Yet every Day’s Experience Ihews the Falsity of that Supposition j their Words are full as equivocal as their Looks; yet I should be permitted to think myfelf deceived if he deviated from the one, while his Behaviour every Moment contraditSls the other; Custom, as whimsical as the Beings that instituted it, gives Laws which are not Supported by Equity, though they are blindly obeyed; we often yield to that Tyrant, when we should resist it, and are punished for our Complaisance by tlie hard Servitude it im^ pofes.
Leaving Sir 'James to purSue his Journey to Prance, or any where he pleafes; you shall not, my Sophia, hear of him again till he justifies your Opinion or mine of him.—I shall grow more referved to his Friend Rivers; I do not owe him So much of my Confidence as he has had : Happily, I have no Sentiments which I need be ashamed of; if I think favourably of an unworthy Man, the Error of my Judgement refledls no Dishonour on my Heart; thofe are always most liable to be impofed on, who are least capable of imposing on others; my Vanity is never hurt on Such Occasions; the Redlitude F	of
L O .D I S A.
*of my Intention always cortfoles me for the WeakneSs of my Understanding:; 'the Triumph of the Deceiver ds not .comparable to the calm .Delight of .SeIf-.5atisfaclion which falls to the Share of the deceived.—But do not mistake my Meaning, Lwould not have you fancy I imagine every one who is deceived can be as eaSy as I may:; I make great .Distinistions between thoSc who have been in that Situation : .Some by their Imprudence provoke the Deception that ruins them; others, obstinately bent on having their -^own Way, fall into the Snare that is in a Manner viSible to their Eyes; there are, in sine, various Caufes for .Deceit, as there are various Ways of pra<fi;ifing it,
I do not agree in your Oplhiorf of my two »Brot|aers; S>\xEharks certainly claims the Place your Pen gave him ; he is much properer to .direct his hare-brained Cadet^j than to be direfl-ed by him:: We have different Notions of WrL diam’s Knowledge ; I would trust to his Lajie.^ much fooner than to his Judgements; he is per-fe^ly agreeable, I own, and just made for a Flirt ; but give me the |^r<sjy^ .Sir Charles as a Companion for Life.——.Don’t you perceive, Sophia, how naturally partial we both are to thofe .who refe nblc us most ? I love William tenderly, but I have not she fame Kind of Af-
fedion
L O U 1 S	99
fe^Iiost for him, which I feel for his elder Brother : You on the contrary give him the Preference ; though you have a great RegardVor Sir 'Charles.
Lord Sedley’s great Spirits Speak your Good-Behaviour to him i and make me eafy, though, you are in the Midst of a motley Colledlion of. Obje<sts : I do not believe Maawell\. Figure could make you forget yourSelf again j the' Treatment he received at the Mafcjucrade, has,.. I dare fay, brought him over to this Way of thinking too, mortifying as it must be to him. Your Reafons for delaying your Marriage, do. not appear to me strong enough to justify your ’doing it.
Lord Carrington I hear is gone to joints his Mother and Sisters at Brijlol. Cecilia must post-tively remain with me till his Return j she will require all my Tendernefs to Support her during; hisAhstncc.
Sir Iienry Sa’Oage is become a very frequent Visitor at Bloom-hill \ we Spend whole Hours in fenUmental Difcourfes j They remind me, alas ! Sophia, of thofe Conversations So destruflive ta my Peace;—I will avoid them for the future; they are dangerous to the RepoSe I court.—-This amiable Man looks too! ah! Lady Sa^ F 2	villgj^
100	LOUISA.
vUle, how can I pretend to read Looi^s ? I who have already proved my Want of Skill.—But I absolutely renounce all Such Commerce ; Sir Henry shall be admitted no more : I do not fear his Power, my Heart does not warn me against him, but he recals to my Memory Scenes I wish to forget.
Adieu, my Sophia; continue to love me; it i$ on your Friendship depends the future HappineSs ©f your
Louija Fermr,
LETTER
'S:	^
¥
LOUISA.	lOJ
LETTER XXIII.
Lady Saville to Mifs Fermor.
I Might have guessed in what Manner, you, Louifa-, would receive my PropoSal for obliging Sir ‘James to declare himfelf.—You would not have your Folly, as you call it, known to my Brother; be honest and tell me whether your Apprehensions, as to what might have been the Confequence of two warm Tempers meeting together on Such a Subjedl, were not more powerful Motives for your keeping the Secret from Lord Walton, than any Fear you had of
his fuSpedling your Want of Senfe ?-But,
Upon Second Thoughts, do not anfwer my Question, as that v/vll necessarily oblige you to renew a Theme which you have refolved to drop :---A Resolution that gives me insinite Pleafure.
Your Conjectures in regard to my good Beha--^ viour are perfedfly just ; environed as I am by Anderfon, JAurray,^ Warhurton, and half a Score more pretty Fellows, I am inattentive to all but Lord Sedley :—Does he propofe Dancing, I give him my Hand in the most gracious Manner; is he for Walking, I immediately ring for my Hat and Cloak j---I really am astonished myfelf F 3	at
JC2 L O U I S A.
at this unufual Compliance, nor do I believe my Lord is lefs So but it is a Change too much in his Favour to admit of his expressing any Surprize about it, left, by a Caprice he has often experienced, I should choofe to make a few Alte-raiiom) by way of affording him Some Variety,.
Has he, my dear Lomfa^ bribed you- to bci-come an Advocate for him I What elfe can make you blame me for delaying to enter again into a State in which I found nothing but Mi-^ fery ? I allow my prefent Profpeils differ widely from the paft ; 1 am happy, I am Satisfied with. ‘ Lord Sed/ey as a Lover; but who can enfuremct ' of his making me equally fo when I am his Wife.^—-Notwithftanding the thoughtlefs, giddy Turn I appear to be of, there are Moments when I think fo ferioussy of my paft Sufferings, ^ as to give me a Dread of changing ray Condi.-. tion. Was I lefs attached to Lord ^r^f/^? than S am, I should moft indubitably prefer my present State of Liberty to the moft glittering^ Chains of Savery but as the Cafe Hands, my Heart refufing to part with him, and the Depravity of the Age not allowing of Platonic Love; I believe I muft even conquer all my DreadSf and make the good Man happy at the f '1£x|)ence of my Liberty.—Was he by Chance NtbTee this, I should undergo an Hour’s Perfe-
cution
n o u I s Av 103
cation to fix the Time,—the very Day no-doubt. . ... , I may, perhaps, do him the-Favour of naming fome distant Day, the; next Time he brings this Subjedl upon the! Tapis,.
A-propos; who do you thinlc, my Friend, has fallen a Vidlim to the Tyranny of Love ? No other than Lord Walton ! He, who fo long withstood all the Soft Languishments of the finest Pair of blue Eyes in England, is at last conquered by Eyes without-Golour,.Shape, or Size to recommend them ; I must, however, do Juff tice to his Taste, by adding,, th^t when you look at Mifs HetFert-n you perceive not one Qualification wanting to make her a complete Beauty : She is a Sweet, delicate Figure, rather tall than otherwise ; has the finest light-brown Hair, a charming Complexion, and the best Teeth you ever Saw; her Countenance is expressive^ of all that’s amiable, and is the truest Piisture of her Mind ; she is well-born, and has had an Education that does Honour to her Parents ; her Fortune is genteel, not large. My Brother was struck the Moment she entered the Ball-Room, on ’Tuefday last ; got himSelf introduced to her; begged for the Honour of being her L^rtner for the Evening.^ his tell-tale Eye^ feerned to hy for Life 3 but he prudently contented F 4	iiimfelf
i04	L O U I S A:
himSelf with only expressing his. Passion by the
moll flattering Attention to her.-He returned
siom the Ball thoughtful and silent; I rallied him at Supper, on the new-raiSed Flame; he coloured, looked foolish, and owned he admired Mifs Herbert~--h\xt bid me remember that Admiration and Love were not fynonimous
'i'erms,---We have since been a good deal
more with her; she improves much on Acquaintance ; I shall readily give myConfentto her becoming Lady Walton,
Adieu, my Sweet Louifa; continue to lov€5 Your affedionate
Sophia SaviJki
A'--'
LETTER
LOUISA. tos
LETTER XXIV.
A'fifs Fernior to Lady SavIIle.
Bloom- bilk
WHILE you, my dear Sophias are amusing yourfelf with the Gaieties of a public Place, I am shut up indulging my folitary Hu^ mour; full as much pleafed, perhaps, in viewing, the lively Colours of my Garden, as you can be in looking at the animated Beauties you Speak of; as our Amufements depend on our Tastes, the Difference in the last makes a great Variety in the other;, a well-dreffed Beau charms your Eye, a blooming RoSe delights-
mine.--Your Favourite may shmetiraes wound
your Heart, mine never carries its Malice further than my Fingers.—I leave you to determine which is the most dangerous.
I am glad, that Rebel to Love, your Brother,, has at last felt its Power : May Mils Herbert: revenge upon him ail the Affronts he has offered to the Rest of the Sex ! and may she, after convincing him of its Perfetstion, rev:ard his Conversion by becoming his !
I'he rational Manner In which you Speak of yoar approaching Change of Situation, removes every Doubt I had as to your HappineSs; yom F 5	wanted.
Ho6 L O U I S A. wanted but a little more Thought to makeyoU worthy of Lord	; he cannot fail of making
' yoci entirely happy* .
, I once mentioned to you my Brother’s Intention of going into Italy j Sir Charlefs Desire of returning into that Country again, was in a > Manner explained to me by TVilliam, who hints in one of his Letters, that his Brother having left his Heart zi Milan^ it was very proper he ■ should go back to fetch it from thence : Consi-deling the Nature of the Errand, I did not think it very likely to Succeed ; and upon finding the' Lady was a married one, I took the Liberty of expostulating with Charles on the Impropriety of his keeping up an Attachment, which must - be criminal or hopelefs : He fends an Anfwer to 7 this Letter, which, in my Opinion, does fo o much Honour to him, that I shall enclofe it to
To MIPS Fermor.
I should be angry with William.^ for betraying my Secret, my dearest Louifa^ had be not cho-fen you for his Confidante; but the Prudence he has shewn in that Point, makes full Amends for his Want of it in the other.
' Do not however be alarmed by him; your Charles will give you no Realon to fear for him ;
you
L O U I S A.' •	}07
you have not, my Sister, higher Notions of Virtue than 1 have. The Paffion I feel for the Countefs Barberiniy does not infpire me with a Thought I need conceal from you; I will therefore owrf to youj that I ani absolutely devoted to her :—Her Beauty, which gives one the idea of an Angel’s, which is admirably Supported by the Innocence and Purity of her Mind, does not Seem more formed to be loved than refpefted : Married extremely young, to a Wretch equally. deSpieable in Perfon and U.nderstanding, her Gondu^l has never given the least Room for Genfure; she is a complete Assemblage of all. that’s beautiful in Woman* . But was the Object of my Attachment lefs perfect than this an--gelic Creature, believe me, 1 would not hope ■ or alk for more than I do from her: It is contrary to my Maxims to debafe the Being ! love;
I could not reconcile^myfelf to the Thought off depriving her of my Esteem,, and of reducing, the Goddefs, of myjdjatry to the lowest Rank of human Nature. I am romantic, Louifa, and. always mean that she Woman who makes me her Slave, shall be fupertop (in my Opinion at least) to all the rest of the World, andshe can^ not be that who errs, even in Thought, from the Bounds prefcribed her to walk in ; youf Sex is confined to very narrow Limits, and tlHf Smallest Deviation from thofe is fufHcient to F 6y	destroy
io8	L O U I S A.
destroy all the EnthuSiafm 1 should feel from the Idea of abfolute Perfection,
Could the charming Barherini forget for one Moment what she owed to her Hushand, she would no longer command my Refpect ; and after the first Tranfport of PalKon, I should contemn her and hate myfelf. But Supposing I was even profligate enough to make her break thro" the Solemn Vow she has made without any Remorfe, I am much too delicate to accept of a divided Heart, and too jealous in my Temper V to imagine, she who had been, falfe to her Huf-band could be true to me.
TheSe Reafons, my Lomja, you must allow will always Secure the wedded Dame from my Attacks; I have much fublimer ones drawn from- Religion, but you are So well acquainted with thofe, that I need not repeat them.
I am however indebted to you, my Sweet MonitreSs, for the Advice you give me, not to trust mySelf in viewing-again the Charms that have fired my Heart., I will obey your fenfibls Admonitions, and let William^ go on to Itafy^ and afterwards join me at Vienna y. it is best to conquer by Flight; Love is an Enemy that won’t be defied^'
I	X ofies
LOUISA.
I often regret, my charming Sister, the Lofs ©f your Converfatron, and shall be happy to return again to you,, that I may enjoy the Heartfelt Satisfadlion of proving how sincerely I am your affediionate	C. Fenmr.-
Do you, my Sophia, agree wkh me in the Judgement I form of my two Brothers ? William never in his Life Suffered me to offer him a Word of Advice. I was always stopt short With “ I hate Preaching, Women should never mount the Pulpit j the pretty Souls are never So bewitching aa when they talk Nonfenfe S’ While Charles, fome Years older than mySelf^ and' much better able to diredl himfelf, was civil enough always to attend to what I faid at least, and fometiraes acknowledged himSelfber jiiesited hy my Counfek
I have brought C'eciHa back to Blootn-Hilty we are in the calmest State you can possibly imai-gine two People to be. She is all Hope, all Dependence ; I on the contrary having none,, neither wish or expefl any Change,
You have had Such a C^iantity of moral R.e-Eexions from the Brother and Sister, that £ hasten out of Compassion to finish this,
Your’s,
Jj, Fermori
'no	LOUIS A.
LETTER XXV.
Ladj/ Saville to Mifs Ferraor.
Had I not a few Traits of the mecifnnte in my Composition, our Lives would absolutely pafs in thei fame dull, unvariegated Round, from one Week’s End to the other; we should yawn ourfelves to Death.—-Do not,
Lmifay let this Preface alarm you too much-
I have not been guilty of any Imprudence—-only a little capricious or fo—occafioned by a > Small Fit of Jealoufy; which Seized me on Lord behaving with (as Lthought) too much' Gallantry to a very pretty Woman ; but to be as Judge of the Affair it is necessary you should s know each Particular,
A Tour of Pleafure to the Jjlf of JVight was propofed by my Brother; Mifs	and I-
were to choofe our Party, and be Dire£lresses in chief of each Movement; we accordingly fixed on Lady Lexington., Aunt to the future Lady' Walton'y Mrs. and Mifs Sawbridge, the Mother an agreeable, good-fort of a Woman, the Daughter pretty,. unaffedled, and lively; and the two MiSs Darnleysy whoSe Elegance of DreSs and PerSons we have fo often admired ; we excluded their formal Mother for two ReaSons,
first.
LOUIS A.	iir
first, hTcaufe we ^thought her an Antidote to all Mirth and Life; and Secondly, becauSe we did not chufe to add an eighth to the List of Females. We had So large a Field for the Choice of our Men, that it took us up Some Time, not who to eledi, but who to exclude : After much Consultation the following Names were agreed uponLord Nev'd. the greatest Flirt in Nature ; Lindfay^ too faithful to the Charms of Mifs Lenox to be struck with any other; War-burioti, nonchalant., affedled, and in one constant Attitude, best calculated to fet off his fine Per-fon to Obfervation ; Murray., bold, artful, and designing, fo bent upon acquiring the Title of a Man of Gallantry, that it is immaterial to him whether he does more than ruin the Reputation of a Woman ; Sir Thomas Anderfon, your old Friend, for whom I formerly accufed you of having a	; he is just returned from
his Station in the Mediterranean., retains all his Vivacity and agreeable Ways, and is not a lit-le improved in the Art of Small Talk, having taken, as he tells us, a few Lesions from the Italian Ladies; he enquired much about youj and joined with me in lamenting your Abfence. Lord Walton begged Admittance for his Frienda Spencer Danvers'y his ranking them as Such induced us to augment our Number to Sixteen.
a
'1
112 LOUISA.
A Gentleman’s Yacht was horrowed upon the Occasion, different Kinds ef Music provided, and Refreshments of all Sorts Sent on board-; we embarked at eight on Thurfday Morning, and had what was called a fkafant Sail of five Hours y I am you know a miserable Creature on a Water-Party ; unable to hold up my Head an Instant, I was confined the whole Time to the Cabbin : The youngest MiSs Darnley has^
1 k Seems, a long Time admired Sedley \ she took that Opportunity of letting him know it by noticing him only ; in vain did Mr. Danvers, her professed Admirer, endeavour to engage her; ho ' was treated with the utmost Contempt; not permitted to fay a Word to her ; or, if in Spite cf her Frowns he ventured to take her Hand, it was Snatched from him the fame Moment; Mifs Herbert, whofe kind Anxiety brought her down frequently to me, mentioned with Surprize the silly Girl’s Behaviour to her Lover, but Said not a Word: as to the ReaSon of it. Men, my Lauifa, are as little Proof against Vanity as the weakest of us can be; l^oxi^Sedley, flattered by the glaring Preference given him by this blooming Beauty, could not resist the Temptation of returning her Notice—he has a ' grateful SouK V/hen we arrived at Cowes, he flew to assist me in getting a.-shore ; Fanny Darnley desired he would return for her ; too polite to diSobey a Lady’s Orders,.
he
LOUISA.	113
he left me as Soon as landed, and went to osier his Hand to her, which was accepted ; unaccustomed to be So quitted, I looked behind, and faw her walking at Some Distance from us, reclined on his Arm ; my Countenance immediately betrayed the Emotions of rhy Heart; the good-natured Lindfay, fo lately in the Situation of feeling all the Pangs of Jealoufy, by feeing a powerful Rival preferred to him, read what pasted in my Thoughts, and without addresting himSelf to me in particular. Said “ he pitied Lord Sedley, whofe Politenefs obliged him to punish himfelf in fuch a Manner; had he not gone to the Lady’s Assistance, continued he, I SuppoSe she would have remained in the Yacht till our Return to-morrow, for she refuSed to
accept of any Hand but his.”-1 felt the
Delicacy and extreme Good-nature of this Speech in its full Force, and could hardly refrain from expressing my Gratitude to the Speaker : Lord Sedley and his Nymph had now joined us; he diSengaged his Arm from her’s, and begged my Acceptance of it; I was Woman enough to tell him, “ I was forry he should think my Prefence Such a Restraint upon him as not to follow his own Inclination” ; he understood my Meaning, and would have justified himfelf, could he have done it without accuSmg the Lady to her Face of the grossest Indelicacy;
I would
* II4.	L O H I S'
, I; would fain have laid the whole Blame on her,, and could almost have believed him quite innocent; yet notwithstanding this, there was a Weight about my Heart the whole Day that I could not remove; it affetsted my Spirits, I wished to be gay but could not: What had I to fear from So inSigniftcant a Rival ? 'Was I not every Way Superior to her —So far my Pride assisted me.—But then again, was not Lord Sedley a meer Mortal ? Aye—and a male Mortal too"! Sb fubjedl to Inconstancy, So fond of Variety! He bad*already loved me an Age the Time w^s arrived when his Passion being worn out, must ceafeof courSe. TheSe last Re-stedions out-weighed all the former ones j So you may gueSs, my dear Friend, how little I. contributed to the Life of the Party. We wenf. to fee CariJbroak-CaJUey and admired all the beautiful Views for which this Place is fo justly famed; Fanny Darnley’s Eyes attracted all my Observations—rthey were fixed on Sedky ; black and Sparkling as they are, they bad no Effect on him, except when-she addressed herfelf to him, by afking him any Question ; he then,
I fancied. Softened his Voice, and made up ks Teux dmx r Lord Nevil gave me a fair Opportunity to revenge my Caufe ; I was not in a Humour to profit from it; I rejedled all his At--tempts to enter into a-Flirtation with .me,—-Jn
the;..
L O tJ I S' A.	ri5 -
the‘Evening the MuSie was called K>r \ .Sedley^i came to hand me to the upper End of the RoomI refuSed to dance, and desired he would get Some other Partner; “ Indeed, my dear Sophia., you ufe me very ill, to fuppofe f could think of any other Partner.”—Why not, my Lor.d h if I do" not chuSe to dance, that is^ no ReaSon for your sitting still.”—“ Yes, it is Reafon quite Sufficient; Dancingbas no Charms \ for me, but thofe you give it v/hen you vouchsafe to blefs me with your Hand.”---“ Oh, my Lord, I fancy you would not find it quite fov void of Charms to-night without as ufual !’" —He sighed, shrugged up his Shoulders, and fat down by me. Mifs Mirherd joined her Intreaties with thofe of my Brother, that I would make up their Set for Cotillons; I at length confented:’ to itmy diSconfolate Lover thanked her for having procured, him a Pleafure which his own Eloquence could not effedf. D7«Ky, diScontented" at not having the Man of her Choice, would not dance the whole Evening; her more amiable sister Supplied her Place with Danvers \
Lord Nevily who never negledts Beauty, engaged Mifs Sawbridge y I need not fay who was Mifs Herberfa Partner. It was near one in the Morning before we retired to Rest the various Tranfaclions of the Day employed my Thoughts • fb much, as to,prevent me from sieeping till very
late; ;
tisi	LOUISA.
late; I had Scarcely forgot my Cares, when I was again awakened by a Summons to Breakfast : I found the whole Party assembled, except Sedley.^ who had not made his Appearance ; he entered a few Minutes after me, excufed his Lazinefs, by faying, he had not clofed his Eyes
till eight o’clock in the Morning.-We re-
imbarked for Southampton at Eleven ; I was determined not to be again accessary, by my Absence, to his meeting with any fresh Overtures from that forward Girl, and therefore staid upon Deck, although near fainting Several Times ; I Suppressed my Motive for So doing, and endeavoured to behave in Such a Manner as to make Lord Sedley believe I chofe that Situation more for the Sake of the fresh Air, than from any Concern I felt about him ; he gave me not the least Reafon to doubt his Fidelity—but my former Fears were not fo Soon to be calmed ; I was rejoiced when we got home, as it feparated -him from a Rival much too handfome and too tender not to be dreaded ; as foon as we were alone he explained his Motives for a Conduil: which had given me fo much Offence ;—you may be Sure, Louifa., that Fanny Darnley was called an imprudent, fond Alrfs, not fit to be trusted out of her Mother’s Sight, a Girl who had more Art, and more Coquetry than her
whc}e
L O U I S A.	II7
whole Sex beSideswhilst the innocent Sedley had only been induced to shew her Some .common Civilities, merely from his Deference to the fair Sex : Finding that did not entirely Satisfy
me, he tried another String----Was it
poshble Lady Saville could fuppofe Such a Woman as MiSs Darnley likely to rival her ! No, it was demeaning me to put myfelf on a Par with her; I certainly was a much greater Stranger to my own Excellence than the rest of the World was, if I imagined it poshble for any Woman to deprive me of a Heart I had once engaged:” In short. Sighs, Tears, and Vows were all made ufe of to convince me that I had always been the foie Posteffor of his Soul.— Glad to receive fuch Proofs of a Truth, which had I been long left in Doubt about would have made me the most wretched of Beings, I willingly forgave what had pasted ; he was urgent with me to tye the indissoluble Knot, which must bind him mine for ever; I declined fixing the Day, lest he should think me in too a great Hurry to deprive	of all Pretenfions to him ;
there is Something indelicate in having RecourSe to Matrimony by Way of Securing him ; I shall depend upon his Honour, and provided he gives me no new Caufe for Jealoufy, I will conSent iit a short Time to become Lady Sedley.
~-This
I1§	L O U I s A.
This foolish Affair has taken up So much of my Paper, that I have not any Room left to animadvert upon-the amiable Sir Charkfs
Letter:----^When I, my dear Lmifa, preferred
William to his Brother, it was not becaufe I thought him more Sensible, more generous in shis Way of thinking, or more deferving;—but as you very wifely defined it, merely becaufe he is more like mySelf: He needed not however that Recommendation, for his Affinity to my Itduifa would alone have made him dear to her
Sophia Savillei,
lETTER
L O -IJ i S -A,
_ LETTER XXVI.
Mifs Fcrmor t9 Lady Saville.
Blooni-hiU.
EE jealous,	fufpe^l: Mankind capa-
ble of every Thing that’s mean and baSe ; I will not.combat your Opinion again, but fub-Tcribe to it with all my Heart j your Sedkf s flight Fault is only a Fore-runner of his total Defertion; he is kind, however, to prepare 'you by Degrees.—Pardon, my dear Lady Sa^ vilUy thefe cruel SurmiSes; Lord Carrington -has destroyed all the Notions I had of the Honour of Lovers; he has abandoned my Ci?aV/r? destined her to Wretchednefs, after having Taifed her Hopes to the highest Pitch ; he has robbed me of my Friend, and merits all the ‘Execrations Such an Injury can draw upon him.—I will, however, fufpend my Anger, that I may give you Some Account of this unexpected Event. About a Fortnight ago I went with Mifs Wyndham to drink Tea with Mrs. Armltage^ we had not been long Seated when a Gentleman, just arrived from "Brtjiol^ made his Appearance.; after the first Salutations, we entered into Difcourfe about the Company at the Hot-Wdls 5 he mentioned^
2	Some
J^O LOUISA
Some Beauties, Some Wits, and a few great Fortunes who were there ; Said no Matches were talked of except Lord Carringtod.s and Lady Betty Sidney’s., and that the Friends of both Parties were So deSirous of having it take Place, that it would be finished as Soon as the—We heard no more, for our whole Attention was now drawn on the dear Cecilia, who, overcome with the Shock, had just now fainted away ; on recovering herfelf, she complained of the Heat of the Room, and begged Leave to go into the Garden for a little while; the Mistrefs of the Houfe accompanied her and me into it; I ordered the Chaife and insisted on her going home dirc(flly; as Soon as it could be brought to the Door, we got into it; I ufed every Argument I could, to perSuade her not to give Credit to the Report, and by the Time we reached Bloom-hill, she hardly believed it; So eafy is it to be brought over to the Opinion that most favours our Wishes!—She had received a Letter from him but that Morning; it was impoflible he could So foon have changed his Mind ; a Something like Doubt would now and then interrupt-her Security; she was reSolved to know all, and wrote to him by that Post ; her Impatience to receive his Anfwer made her leave me to go to her own Lodgings, which in the Town of M, I went every Day, or
Sent,
LOUIS A.	I2I
stnt to enquire what Account he gave of himfelf, but till Yesterday Morning she could not give me any Information ; I had your Letter in my Hand, considering the Frailty of Man as quite equal to that of Woman ; and was applauding the Delicacy and Noblenefs ofmy Sophia & Soul, when my Door flew open, and-the unhappy Cecilia^ pale, emaciated and the Image of Death, entered the Room, with a Countenance fo ex-preflive of her Feelings, that there was no Oc-cafion for Inquiries. “ I am come, my Friend, “ to bid you an eternal Adieu,” was the first Sounds she uttered ; I embraced her, befoughc her to be compofed, that fome Mistake, per-, haps, had happened, and that she should form no hasty Refolution :—“ Am I, my dear Ma-“ dam, difcompofed ? do you hear me offer to “ make one Complaint? does even a Silent “ Tear betray my Unhappinefs ?'—No, Mifs “ FermoVy I am above Such Expressions of “ Grief; an ordinary Soul may find Confo-“ lation, in exciting Pity, mine is not capa-ble of being foothed by that;—I do not “ wish to excite it in any one, more efpeci-ally in you, my amiable Friend ; your Heart is too compassionate, you forget your own Happinefs to join in Tears with the Unfor-“ tunate; with me you need not weep; -I fet you an Example of Compofure.”---! urged G	again
122	. LOUISA,
again that Some Mistake might have given Rife to her prefent Distrefs ; I desired she would not condemn Lord Carrington till she had full Proofs of his Guilt.—“ There can be no MiS-take ; I was mistaken when 1 thought myfelf beloved, he cannot be mistaken in what he “ fays of himfelf;—but as to Guilt, I do not “ accufe him of any ; he does what he fuppofes “ best,—-far be it from me to condemn him -“ I have no Right to find Fault, he has not in-“ jured me."’—On faying this, she gave me his last Letter -Letter did I call it ? Note more properly; a few unconnefled, unmeaning Lines, wrote with all the Marks of Guilt and Shame strong upon him ;—He owns his Engagements (a wretched Word to be fo abufed !) to Lady Betty Sidneys begs her [Cecilia’s) Pardon for having impofed on her and himfelf too; vows he has the sincerest Esteem for her, and concludes with wishing her happy ; a vile Wretch ! When he had deprived her of the Means of being So. Indignation took Place of every other Thought ; I perfefdy raved, when the Sweet, injured Girl, endeavouring to pacify me, laid all the Blame on herfelf; Said, her own Imprudence had drawn her into that Situation ; Lord Carrington had been brought to regard her with Compassion from hearing her fay she was unhappy; he had mistook one Sentiment for 4	another
LOUISA.	123
another; his Humanity had cauSed his Crime, and should certainly plead his Excufe. Finding she Spoke So calmly, I then tryed to prevail on her to forget him and to come and share my Fortune with me.—But there all my Rhe-torick failed : “ I have taken no hasty Refolu-“ tion, my dear Mifs Fennor^ but I am fixed as “ Fate; I v/ill leave England, I will bury “ myfelf in the dark Recedes of Some Cloyster, “ where I may never hear or fee mbre of “ thofe my fond Heart doats on ;—even you, “ the kindest Friend I have ever found, you “ will I abandon, and conceal from your fu-“ ture Knowledge a Wretch who has not me-“ rited half your Goodnefs.”
Seeing me going to Speak with Earnestnefs, “ Do not, 1 befeech you, my Sweet Louifdy “ attempt to make me difeover to you the Place of my Retreat, I am not yet certain “ myfelf where it will be—but I am deter-“ mined So to wean myfelf from the World, “ that I will keep up no Correspondence what-“ Soever.—Your Friendship, cryed fthe admi-rable Girl, letting fall a few crystal Drops, “ shall be the only Remembrance I will keep “ of all that has happened to me; in recolleft-“ ing that I shall find myfelf cheated with the Thought of having Some Share in the wor-G 2	“ tbiest
J24-	L O U I S A.
“ thiest Heart in the World.”—“ When J “ have been gone four Days, Send this as di-redled”—giving me a Letter to the infamous CauSe of all her Sorrows.—And now, “ my dearest Mifs Fermor^ I hasten to the Mo-inent most dreaded,—1 knew my vain Forti-tude would forfake me here—I was fenfible “ of my Weaknefs, and would have gone with-“ out feeing you, had not Gratitude and
•	Esteem forbad-mc.”—She fell upon my Neck I and fobbed aloud.; I was not in a Condition to
offer her Confolation, but could only Sympathize with her ,; she was hurrying from me, when I laid my Hand on her. Arm to detain her, and drew it hastily back almost Scorched by the . violent Heat of her Skin.: “ My dear Cedlia^
•	“ do not, I entreat you, think of undertaking a “ Journey now; you are in a high Fever,
and will not be able to proceed. -And who “ is there to take Care of you ?—1 will not, my dearest Girl, Suffer you to leave me thus.” “ I am not ill indeed, it is nothing but Want “‘liof -Sleep, I shall be well to-morrow. I ‘^‘ihave got orve who was an old Servant of my “ Mother’s to attend me till I get to Abhevilk, “ where 1 have many Friends : I shall be well “.. and happy too, my dearest Louifa, do not be uneafy about me—Adieu ; don’t, in think--y ing of me, hate the unkind —
She
L O' U I S A.	125
She could Say no more, but threw herfelf into the Chaife that waited, and drove out of Sight; leaving me in a State little lefs dreadful than her own.—“I have almost cryed myfelf blind, without giving the least Relief to my Sorrow ;
I call on the dear Cm'Dr continually, and fancy Tstill hear her fweet Voice; that I fee that heavenly Countenance, So Soft, fo gentle. So confo-nant to the charming Temper of her Mind !—
What, my Sophia^ can you think of the Wretch who could forfake fuch an Angel ?-and for whom ! for 'Lzdy Betty Sidney.^ Daughter to the old Earl of Wilton ; a Woman whofs hackneyed Face, if ever it had a Gharm^ has long lost the Power of it ; verfed in all the Ways of the.Worldy-and fo complete in the Manners of it, that, she can marry the Man she defpifes.—His Rank and Fortune are all she desires; Lord Carriyigton	be given up >for
one Superior to him but he need not fear that,—there is not another Fool in the>' three Kingdoms who would rob h'\m offuch a Mijlrefs. May his Punishment equal the Guilt that calls it down on him! may he, iij.. ]o{\ng Cecilia, lofe every Joy of Life! Maybe, in sine, to fum up his Miferies, marry this very Lady Betty am outrageous in my Expref-G 3	sions*.
126	LOUIS A.
Sons, but they do not half Satisfy my ReSenf" ment.—
I fcmetimes accufe myfelf for not Speaking my Suspicions to this poor, dear, believing Girl ; but had I done it, what would it have availed ? Infatuated as she was, she would have treated them as the Effedf of a Humour more dark and fufpicious than her own ; she would have condemned me, without having the Smallest Distrust in her Lover :—But SuppoSing I had even raiSed any Doubts, they would only have given her Anxiety ; I had no Proofs to Support my Opinion ; and it would have been cruel to have warned her of a Danger I could not tell her how to eScape.— Oh! my dear Sophia! did this inhuman Man know the Anguish he has given ; had he Seen, like me, the Supplicating Eye raifed to Heaven, as its only ReSource, and the beating Heart struggling with its Grief, yet above Complaint; lost as he is to Honour, he would have been made fenSible of the Wrong he has done; his Humanity would have taught him what he owed
to this injured Beauty.--1 am not So en-
grosted by this affediing Story, my dear Lady Savilkt as to be inattentive to your Concerns j I feel all your jealous Pangs, I refent Lord Scale-/s.— {\ know not what Name to give to that Species of Infidelity) but as to that impertinent
Faring
LOUISA.	127
Fanny Darnley.^ I will never forgive her. A Simpleton to imagine she could rival you for
one Moment!-----She did well to attempt it
out of your Sight, for the faint Rays of the Moon could not have been perceived but in the
Abfence of the Sun.-----I have an Antipathy
to thefe pert Chits., who are for engaging every Man that comes in their Way; they are the very worst Kind of Poachers.
At the Beginning of my Letter I railed at Mankind ; before I come to the ConduSion I can hardly prevail on myfelf to be more merciful to the other Kind-but lest I should loSe
all my Philanthropy, let me recolledl how much I am my dear Sophias affedionate
Loulfa Fermorwr.
G 4-	LE-.DTER'
128	LOUIS A.
LETTER XXVII.
Lady Saville to Mifs Fermor.
fS it then possible, my Lcuifa^ there can be fo much Perfidy in a human Heart? Caii Lord Carrington be the vile Wretch you represent him to be ?--
Did the shocking Narrative come from a leSs authentic Pen than yours, I would not be prevailed on to believe a Syllable of it ;—The infamous, perjured Man must have lost his Senfes! —-May he regain them when he becomes Lady i?i'ifry’s Hushand, that he may be made fenSible
of the full Extent of his Crime !-1 thought
no Good would come of his underhand Addresses ; what Man but himfelf would have carried on a clandestine Correfpondence with fuch an Angel ? Had he not wanted Honour, Candour, and GeneroSity, he would not have Scrupled to have acknowledged her long ago as the Woman of his Choice; nay, he would have
gloried in his Taste ;■-he could never have
been worthy of her;—but alas ! full well do I know how unable the dear injured Girl is, at prefent, to find ConSolation in that Thought,
could she even bring herfelf to adopt it.—--
If our wife Senators would repeal their Adi for
hang-
LOUISA.	129 ,
hanging the poor indigent Pvlan, who robs you i of a few paltry Shillings, in order to preferve him Self from starving, and would transfer that Punishment to the Wretch who cruelly deprives -an unhappy Objecst, forever, of all Peace of Mind j would it not be much more to the Pur- -pofe ?—But there is no Likelihood of their pro^ moting an A6l which would bring So many of their Confraternity to the Gallows.
Upon giving your Letter to	to read, I
was much pleaded to fee his Tears stow in Abun- ■ dance -yet who knows but they may be the
Tears of Hypocrify ?---This Salfe Peer stas
made me So fufpicious, that 1 cani never again ; repofe a full Confidence in any of his Sex , ;my Lover may think himfelf well off in having obtained my Promise of becoming his the first Week in September, before I received your last ; for I much question whether-his most perfuafive Language could, have prevailed now; I fancy v him a Carrington in his Hearty notwithstanding , all the Pains he takes to convince me of the contrary.--On Tuefday last I excufcd. mySelf from n
going to the Ball, wiHir*g to try whether a few -latent Sparksof (Iwill not allow-Love)butiCra-titude or Vanity would not break out, and oblige him to meet Fanny Ddrnley there; I felt an un-. -commo».Degree of PlappineSs,.. when, on find-i G 5 :	ing.
130	LOUISA.
ing me refolute upon not going, he begged I would permit him to pafs the Evening with me ; I concealed my pleasing SenSations, and affefsted
much Surprize at the Request-“ When, my
“ Sophia, shall I be able to convince you, that I “ know no Happinefs in your AbSence ? Is it “ Surprizing that I should prefer your charming Conversation to mixing with a Crowd, who can only have Charms for thoSe who have never “ experienced the BlifsofSuch a Tfete-d.Tfhef”— The Manner, the Voice, all convinced me he Spoke the real Sentiments of his Heart; I therefore thought it would be ungenerous to cavil at any past TranSa6iion ; and told him “ I should be very glad to See him.’’ Pundiual tohisAp-pointment, he entered my Drawing-room as the tJlock struck six ; we walked Some Hours on the Beach ; his Assiduity, the calm Serenity that reigned every where ; the gentle Rolling of the Waves, all combined to inSpire me with Soft-nefs and Complaifance ; my Lord is too good a Politician to let siip Such an Opportunity; he pressed his Suit with So much AddreSs, that I consented to marry him, in a few Days "after we ’ get to Londonnext Point will be now to forward the Journey as much as possible; he ■ tells me he has already Sent DiSpatches to his Coach-maker, Silver-Smith, &c. &c. His Ser-'rants have been made to ride post for thefe last
three
L O U I S A,	131
three Days to Sedley-park, and to his HouSe in Gharles-Jireet;—in short, my dear Louifa^ you would fuppofe a Second French Invasion was in Agitation, and that Lord Sedley was commissioned to stop the Progrefs of it. So very bufy has he been of late;—he really is in Such overbearing Spirits that I have once ®r twice repented of my Condescension.
Lord Walton has wrote to Lord Lexington.^ Mifs Herberfs Guardian; his Propofals are accepted, and he has been received by her in due Form., as a Lover ; her Heart owned him as Such before she had either alked or received Per- -mission for it.-—She is a happy Girl, in not meeting with Obstacles to her Choice from Parents or Guardians, who having out-lived all the more tender Passions, are too apt to regard Love but as another Name for Folly; by which means their unhappy Children or Wards too frequently are made the Vi<5fims of their Ambition and Avarice.—This Reflexion touches me fo nearly, that I will not trust myfelf any longer with it, lest 1 should grow difrefpedfful to a Memory I ought ever to revere.—
I purpofe, my Louifa^ paying of you a Visit Some time in OAoher;—the near Approach of ’ Winter’s dreary Seafon will not frighten me G 6	from
132	LOUISA,
from the Arms of Friendship : May I hope that you will accompany us in our Return to Town ? Indeed, my Sweet Friend, I cannot bear the Thoughts of your burying yourfelf entirely at Bloom-hiU'y let thoSe who are leSs calculated to adorn the World Seek for Retirement ; be more juft to your Accomplishments, and refufe not to join once again
Your affedlionate
Sophia- SavilJe,
^ ## ^
LETTER
r	LOUISA.	133
LETTER XXVIII.
Mifs Fermor to Lady Savillc.
Bloom-hill.
IRetradl, my dear Sophia., the Advice I gave you ; there is a NarrowneSs of Sentiment in condemning the whole Sex for the Fault of an Individual of it, that does not belong to the Heart of your Louifa.—-LiOX^ Sedley has proved his Constancy, and deServes the Reward you
promife him.---If Repentance can atone
for Lord Carringtorfs Crirne, he too merits Some Pity.—I Sent the Letter, according to the Request of my Angel-Friend, four Days after her Departure, and did not imagine it could have reached Brijlol, when I was Surprized by a Visit from this unfortunate Man ; the Mention of his Name at his Entrance into the Room,-roufed me from the deep Thought his Behaviour had occasioned ; hardly able to fupprefs my Anger and Contempt, I was going to demand in an imperious Tone, what had procured me the unexpedled (I might possibly have added, the undesired) Flonour of feeing his Lordship ? But he gave me no Time for Speaking, “ I ssy “ to you, Madam, as to my only Refuge-— Your Friendship for my Cecilia makes me
“ hope
134 LOUISA.
hope you can give me fom» Information of “ her—-I have been at M. I have enquired at “ every Place, but can have no Account of her.—Where, my dear Madam, shall I find' “ the fweet offended, the angelick Mifs Wind-ham\ Tell me, I befeech you,or prepare to fee “ me fall a Vidlim to my own Villainy—K
“ will not, I cannot live without her.”-
The Agitation with which he Spoke, told me his Feelings; I almost forgot he had brought his Misfortune on himfelf, and could have-given Way to Something like Compassion—but the Suffering Cecilia banished every Softer Thought; in recolIe61ing her Agony I lost all my Pity for his. “ I am Sorry, Sir, you have “ applied to me for an Information it is not in . “ my Power to give- you.—Mifs Windhmiy “ my Lord, in quitting of me refufed to tell me “ the Place she was going to; she did not In-tend her Retreat should ever be difcovered ; she has, I believe, left this Kingdom, but “ to what other she is gone is as great a Secret “ to me, as it can be to your Lordship.”—He stormed, imprecated the Vengeance of Heaven on himfelf-—execrated the Name of Lady Betty^ and was hardly more tender to his Mother’s.—
I was at a Lofs how to behave to him; it was not my BuSinefs to reproach him for his Perjury to Cecilia ; and I really had not Cruelty enough
to
LOUISA.	135
to do it for the LoSs of my Friend, a LoSs he
Seemed to be as fenSible of as mySelf.-“ I
“ have been drawn in, Mifs Fermor\ I have “ been made to believe I had a Rightto dowhat I pleafed ; Fool as I was not to fee I was at “ that Time led by others, and adSed against my “ own Inclination—but ISay not this toexcufe “ myfelf—I am a Villain in every SenSe of the “ \Vord — a dishonourable, vile Wretch!— “ I gave up my Cecilia^ I broke through the “ most Solemn Vows to her, and engaged my-“ Self to a Woman, who made,a Slave of me under a Pretence of Love---my d—ned Va-“ nity made me fancy she did me an Honour “ in preferring me to a Parcel of Coxcombs— she was too complete a Coquette not to “ know her Man — she made the most of my “ Folly.—My Mother, artful as a Serpent, “ forwarded her Deceit, and to Save me from “ the most amiable of her Sex, would have
“ wedded me to this Fiend.'— -Wrought
“ up to a Pitch of Madnefs, a..d furround-“ ed by their Snares, I forgot what I “ owed to Love and Honour, and in the “ Heiglith of my Frenzy ' wrote that curfed “ Letter which has robbed me of every Hope
“ of Happinefs.--But I will find out my
“ injured Love, I will repair my Fault or die “ at her Feet.——Read, Madam, this Let-
“ ter,
LOUISA'.
“ tei', and judge of my Lofs!”-1 migb-fe^’
have just as well have attempted to have read in Bedlam ; he raved. Swore, .and traverSed the Room with Such, hasty and loud Steps, that I could hear nor attend, to any Thing elfe.— Finding at-last, that it was not in my Power to . inform, him of. her Abode, and growing cool from Faintnefs, he begged my Pardon for the Trouble he had given, me, protested he would not rest till he had visited every Convent and Retirement in France, and left me venting, as he went out, fresh Curfes on himfelf for his infamous Condufl.-—r—..What a,. Difference, my dezvLophia, does Guilt make in ounMan-ner of fupporting Calamity ! The fweet, inno->^ cent Cecilia , felt her Sorrows, but hers was a calm, a resigned Grief; she adored the Being, who fuffered her to be oppreffed with Woe 5 ^ she did not question the .Justice of Heaven, she did, not murmur at its Decrees.Lord Car^ -rington,on. the Reverfe, Is plungedintoDefpair; . confcious he fuffers from .his own Fault, he cannot look upon his Punishment as expiatory; -he rages when he should repent, . and fwears instead, of blessing, .
Who would .not wish for CmV/aVLot, if f obliged to chufe one of the two ? Who would j not be the injured, rather than the Injurej? ?.—
2 ■	I i
0
LOUISA.	1^7
I know not what Succefs his Enquiries may meet with ; I mentioned Abbeville to him ; but ssie only intended that as a resting Place for a few Days.—Should he find her out, 1 do not believe it would anfwer any End ; a meek Temper when once offended does not pardon fo readily as a more hasty one would do; and a Soul as delicate as hers can never recover the Wound he has given it;—Confidence once betrayed cannot be renewed.
I will encleSe you this Letter, fo justly wrote and So feelingly dictated,-—
This violent Scene has almost obliterated all Remembrance of any other—Sir Henry Savage
was forgotten for Some time.-1 told you, my
dearest Lady	of his frequent Visits; I
told you alSo, that I should not permit him to continue them j I accordingly have avoided him lately, and was in Hopes he had thought no more of me, but I was deceived ; finding my Doors no longer open to him, he has wrote and declared his Passion in Terms the most tender and refpedlful; offers me his Heart and ‘ his Fortune in the most unreServed Manner ; and fpeaks of his Sentiments in Such a Way as would be most likely to infpire me with the fame, could I, Sophia^ bejust enough to the Merit of
Sir
138	LOUISA.
Sir Henry ; but I am Satisfied with acknowledging him amiable, without being the least inclined to love him. 1 am concerned to give Pain to a worthy Heart—but should I not in-“ jure him more by giving Encouragement to a? Passion I can never return ?
I have offered him my Friendship,,affured hirai-of my Esteem—He does not complain of me; but the rest of the World is impertinent enough to do it.—To Silence that, and to divert the Sad-nefs caufed by the different Events I have lately been Witnefs to, 1 have accepted of an Invitation often repeated from Fir-Wood\ I intenst goin^ there to-morrow, to which Place your next may be diredled.
I shall be happy, my charming Lady Saville^ to fee you and your Lord at Bloo7n-hilL—As to the important Article of quitting my Retreat, we will fettle that when we meet; you know what Power you have over
Your affedlionate
Lomfa Fermor^
Mifs Windham to Lord Carrington.
IT would be unjust, my Lord, to reproach, you i fenfible of the Impropriety of my own Conduff, I complain not of yours |r—The Woman^
LOUIS A.	1S9
man, who So far forgot the Regard she owed herfelf, as to confent to become yours by a private Marriage, was no longer worthy of your Esteem; she did not deferve to be your Wife, who could condeScend to be reputed your Mif-trefs : I lost myfelf in my own Opinion when I accepted of your Propofal ; can I then be fur-prized at finding I v/as equally funk in yours ?—■ I perceived not, I confefs, this Change; accustomed always to believe you Sincere as myfelf, I trusted to, the Professions you still continued to make, when after pretending Scruples as to the Manner of being married, I joyfully agreed to have the Ceremony deferred till you could have it publickly performed — Your Friendship, my Lord, I could not doubt, you had given me Proofs of the most difinter-ested Regard; as a Lover I might have dif-trusted you, as a Friend I could not ; under that Name you obtained my Confent to a private Union ; my Soul shuddered at the Request, but my Confidence in your Honour hushed all my Fears; thus my Dependance betrayed me, and made me facrifice to Friendship what I should have refufed to Love
alone :--1 refpedfed the Peace of a Mother
who was dear to you ; in being fo she could not be indifferent to me; your Rank had no Attradljons for me; happy in being posseffed of
you.
140	LOU I S A.
you, I was fatisfyed to remain in my own humble Situation ; I even rejoiced in an Opportunity of shewing you how little I wished-for. a higher. Unconnedled as I am, I could not have been the Choice of an ambitious Parent, and 1 have too great an Opinion of the Obligation of filial Piety, to have defired you to-difobey a Mother in an Article, wherein you would, from Motives of Interest, have been
obliged to have yielded to a Father.*---So far,
my Lord, in Justification of an Adlion, which has given you Such DiSgust, and has been the Source of fo much Anxiety to me. I shall add little more than to acquaint you of my Resolution of quitting my native Country; if my Heart repines at the Idea of never Seeing you more, I am glad to punish it for fo mean a Wish, by putting it out of my Power of ever doing fo: Fortune, my Lord, has made a great Difference in our Situations; Nature and Education, have given me Sentiments as nobble, at least,, as yours I will prove my~-Self deferving of your. Esteem, your Love I can no longer boast of—happy had it been, had I never thought myfelf Sure of that!—but I do not reproach you. Inconstancy may be with ,
you a constitutional Failing.-------Alas I my
Lord ! Want of Honour can find no Such Ex-euSe! You might have abandoned me with
Impunity,,
X O U I S A. T41
Impunity, you could not deceive me without a Crime.
May Lady Betty Sidney make you happy ! May she infpire you with Virtue as well as
Xove.'------In refleding on me, my Lord,
do not let any'Regret attend your Remembrance 'of me—-I am perfedily reSigned to the Fate that awaits me;—I shall be happy, becauSe I am •innocent; I shall be contented with my Def-iiiny if you are So with yours.
GeclUa Windham,
#
LETTER
142	LOUISA.
LETTER XXIX.
Lady SavilU to MiSs Perrnor,
Southampton.
Accuse me not, Lom/a, of InfenSibility, when you hear that instead of Sympathizing with Lord Carrington in his Distrefs, I rejoiced to find him Suffering ; let him Suffer on; he can never feel a third Part of the Anguish he has occasioned, unleSs it be from his own Guilt. The Man who could be prevailed on to renounce Cecilia Windham.^ must be a total Stranger to all the nicer Feelings of Honour and Humanity ; therefore he is in no Danger of failing a Vidlim to his upbraiding Confcience. There is little Merit in his being made fenfible of his Fault by fuch a Letter as hei’s; the most abandoned are most easily made to tremble by being told of their Conduft.—Should he be able to >trace the Abode of your Friend, what could he alledge in Extenuation of his Crime? or how •can he regain her abufed Confidence ?—I own I should be Infidel enough never to be again .perfuaded to believe a Word uttered by a Tongue which had once deceived me fo grosiy.—You, my dear Girl, by Nature formed with a more amiable Disposition, can at the Moment that
you
LOUISA.	143
you are trembling alive to the Misfortunes of your injured Friend, feel Some Gleams of Com-pal&on for the Author of her Mifery.—I admire your extenSive Goodnefs of Heart, but I, my Louifa,, must content mySelf with Admiration, for I shall never arrive at Imitation.
Lord Walton has just told me with a Look of Importance.^ that it is necessary for us to leave Southampton to-morrow, as he has BuSmeSs which requires his immediate Attendance; I know he is impatient to have his Settlements begun, and that he wishes to put Things en train for his Marriage ; but I shrewdly fufpedl: that he is instigated by his Friend Sedley to infist on this Sudden Departure.—If I was Sure of it, I would difappoint all their Machinations by deSiring my Brother would go without me, and promising to follow him next Week, or perhaps the Week after.-and Sedley are at
the Door ; I will leave you to join them, that I may find out whether my Conjectures are founded on Truth.-———
Just as I Said, Louifa—Sedley looked So con-Scious when I taxed him with the Plot, that I needed no farther Confirmation of it; my Brother, ever ready to assist his Friend, endeavoured to put on a Serious Face, and perfisted in his sirst Story; felt in his Pocket for a Letter from
his
^44 LOUISA.
his Lawyer, which mentioned the Necessity of his Prefence, and in Spite of his assumed Gravity, assured me with a broad Grin that Sedley had no Hand in the Affair;—he unluckily had left the Letter at his Lodgings, but would bring it the next Time he came to me; I deSired him “ not to take the Trouble of doing it; I believed it very possible he might have urgent BuSineSs in Town; but as I was not in the fame Situation, I should chufe to stay till the
Seafon ended.”-They looked at each other,
as if vexed not to have Succeeded better; my Brother, in his passionate Style, vowed I was the most perverfe Woman upon Earth;—wondered how Sedley could be enamoured with So much Inconsistency; and declared he would not be led Such a Dance by the finest Creature that ever was born: liis Friend was ungrateful enough to return his Kindnefs, by telling him he talked like a Man whole Passion had got the ‘ better of his Reafon ; that he knew not what he Said, and therefore begged he would ceafe his Harangue ;—this drew upon him the Reproach tjf being more culpable than me; he deServed all the Ill-treatment he met with. I left them to fettle that Point, but was Soon followed by Lord Sedley ; who in the most Supplicating Tone entreated me to humour my Brother by going (to-morrow with him.--— (Do you observe his
SlyneSs ?
I
LOUISA.	145
SlyneSs ? my Brother was the Perfon to be humoured.)—After Some little Altercation I consented to give Barker Orders to pack up my Cloaths, and promiSed to be ready by eleven o’clock.
I ^o this Evening to the Play with Mifs Herbert. The Play-houSe is really a pretty Small Building, and is, I assure you, properly divided into Boxes, Pit, and Galleries; the Performers, every Thing conSidered, not much amifs; they attempt to-night ^ane Shore; after having Seen the inimitable Mrs. Tates shine in that Chara£Ier without weeping myfelf blind, I think I have no Ill-conSequences to fear from my Grief this Evening.
I am glad, my Dear, you have left Bloom-/;///, as I began to grow apprehensive of your giving too much into the Melancholy you must naturally feel for the Lofs of the little Cecilia; I hope the Change of Scene will in Some Degree restore your Tranquillity.
* I have no Patience with Sir Henry Savage’s not waiting Some sitter Opportunity to make his Propofals; was there ever So ill-judged a Thing ? to fuppofe you would listen to him just at the Time you had been Witnefs to the perfidious Bafenefs of Lord Carrington. I wish H	I had
L O U I S A.
I had been in his Confidence, that I might have diredled him when to apply properly. You will guefs by that, my fweet Friend, that I could have liked his proving fuccefsful: Indeed, among the many Offers you have had, 1 fee none fo likely to render you happy as this last.—-Sir Henry is fenfible, handfomc, well-born j has a fine Estate, and what you prize above all, is very fentimentaL—dWit\\ fo little of this m my Nature, I have often wondered what could make you fo partial to your
Sophia Saville.
, .1
;' ;	-	- • ij;<
t " ■	!,
NX	-1
LETTER
t '
L O U I S A.	147
£0 LETTER	XXX.
h Mifs Fermor la Lady Savillc.
Fir-Wood.
GHANGE of Scene I am convinced, my dearest Sophiny produces but little Altera-tl.Qn in our Feelings; new Places, new Faces, and Conversation may for a short Time diverc the Attention from Melancholy, but we return to ourfelv.cs the Moment we are left alone, and pay a large Fine to the Grief we have attempted to efcape from: It is an inhuman Tyrant that preys on the noblest Part of its Captives ; and does not eaSily quit the Wretch it has once
attacked,---The unfortunate Cecilia is ever
prefent to me; her Sweet Image prefents itfeif to me in every Place.-The not lefs unfortu-
nate Carrington- affords me likewife fresh Matter for Anxiety.—Yes, Lady Saville, vile as he is, he is unhappy, and therefore claims my Pity; perhaps he is more entitled to it from having brought on his own DiSaster, as that Consideration must increaSe his Wretchednefs. ——You are not just, my Sophia^ to your ow'K excellent Heart, in Saying you cannot forgive the Creature who has once deceived you ; I make no- Distindion between Forgetting and H 2	For-
• .14^. L 0 IJ i S A.
Forgiving; there is hardly any, though we are So foml of Supposing there is ; it is a Subterfuge made USe of by ReSentment; for So long as we recolledb the Injury, we shall feel it: SorneOf-. fences are So heinous as not to allow of a Pardon from the general Society of Men; but in thofc Cafes the Forfeit paid by the Criminal makes him deferving of ForgiveneSs from each particular ;---but where the Frailty of human Nature may be urged, where strongly tempted the Mortal forgets himfelf for a Time, furely it would be equally ungenerous as unjust to condemn fuch a one to eternal Infamy.---------Yoii
would not do it, my dear Friend ; I know you better than you do yourfelf ; I have found out your being fentimentaf though you do not Seem to be acquainted with it; I have always found the Soul of my Sophia tender and compassionate to the Miseries of others, and incapable of giving Pain to any ; what then more is requisite to form this Character which attaches me So strongly f—I do not always fuppofe thofe feel most who talk best on the Subjedt; I would rather have my Friends Sympathise with me, than define the Nature and Caufes of this Sympathy,
Lord Walton knows nothing of the human Heart; he Spoke like an Ignorant, when he wondered at Sedleyh loring you with all your 5	Capricese
LO U I S A.	149
Uaprices*----He should be told, that a beauti-
ful Pidlure, though completely finished, never does more than pleaSe ; it cannot infpire Love ; it is the fweet	that charms : Your too
gentle and uniform Tempers make very good * Wives, when the Warmth of the Lover finks into the Esteern^ of the Hushand ; but before-that it is necefSary to infpire Fear as well as Hope.
You will See, by the Date of my Letter, that ' I am arrived at the End of the Journey I purposed making in my last.-------1 am in a large
Houfe, fitted up with Taste; kept with CEco-HiOmy, though filled with Company; the MiS-trefs of it (who is undoubtedly the principal -I(erfdnage) is stiff, referved, polite by Rule ; enters not into thofe agreeable Trifles which, give Life to Gonverfation ;. too learned to chat, too haughty to unbend her Mind to every one ; -her Superiority is humiliating to her Companions, and draws on her the Ridicule of her Superiors : But as every Charadler has Lights and,Shades, Lady Kofcom?mn is not without ber Share of Merit; she attends to the .Education of her Children, she infpedls the Accompts of her Steward, takes Care my Lord shall not be cheated, and endeavours to give him Confe-quence by her Notice, but this very Notice is , H 3	So
if9	L O U I S A.
fo fcrnpered with her natural HaughtineSs, that it only makes his InSignificance more glaring the,good Man hears her pronounce. Judgements from whence there is no Appeal, obey?,her with ■ Fear andT^^'^^hling, and admires her profound .Knowledge : Tenderncfs never appears defpV cable in a Man ; yet he is afraid of giving Way to the Dictates of his Humanity, left it should be a Repr^ch to his Courage j mean
where he fears, tyrannical where he loves,------
he is a perfect Compound of Littletiejfes,
Lady Mary Denton^ Sifter to Lady Kofcommon^ is lively, good-humoured; has Wit, which she knows how to uSe properly; ^ilways pleaSed with herfelf, and as willing to give a Degree of Confidence to thofe who are diffident; she flirts with every Man, without feeming to have fe-rious Defigns on any; laughs all Day long, and does it fo heartily, that one joins in her Mirth
without afking from whence it proceeds,---------
Thefe Sifters give one a perfedl Idea of the
fiiblime and heaufiful---you may guefs which 1
prefer.
Our Amufements do not vary much ; we have Some Characters worth mentioning, but I have not Time to draw them at prefent. The Situation of the Place is fine, without being pleaSing ; every Thing bears the Mark of the Tafte that
L p	-yUjjI	A.
Ja;id it put, apd want? fotnething pf the agreeable "
■ r-	■ ■■;.(:') i	ii|': ’■ ■; .. .• H
Lshall remain here a Fortnight or ten Days ;
X engagcd’niyfelF to do So at coming here, and cannot break my Word ; I try to make myfelf cafy under this Necessity.—Lady .Mtiry attends nae, I am forced to bid you adieu.	^ d j
^	* Tour’s S
V; ’	• '	Lotilfa	Ferm6v»>r,
%■: i ■	,-L VV : i	' -	. . ' a;'■
■	.	_	;	-
TO	'	^7	.(5	C	rM
5m ;	■	: ;. ,’ sti)oO
>di io .	.	;■ ,i r
I	\	'VC
' ■'■■ r
■■	■	•	- :	.-V
“- ■	L	'r' i	■ '	'	— f	j
‘ 1	■ 7 o;,	V-	, H 3.L	r‘	noil
'■' ■" hV' "tETTi'k
JS2	LOUISA.
LETTER XXXI.
1
Saville to Mifs Fcrmor.
1
Stanhope-Street.
I AM concerned, my dear Girl, to find that Fir-Wood has not yet had the defired Effedt on your Spirits.—Much, my Louifa^ as I value your amiable Senfibility, I could wish you to have possefied a few lefs Degrees of it: In forming this Wish I have only your own Peace in View, it might hurt mine ; becaufe Such a LoSs must be most felt by a Friend accustomed to your Sympathising in all her Distresses. I hope much from Lady Mary Denton's charming Vi-	'
vacity; you may perhaps catch the Infedlion, and by frequently laughing with her, regain
your ufual ChearSulneSs.--Her Charadter
pleaSes me infinitely better than that of her more stately Sister.—The little Peer you have, indeed, drawn in a most deSpicable Light:
Fond as I am oF Power, I should, Louifa, be miserable did I SuppoSe my Lord would dwindle into So mean an Objedt; I defign to drop all Pretensions to Tyranny with my Name, and only to retain Spirit enough to prevent mySelf from finking into the mere Houshold Drudge.
----Very pious Resolutions you must confeSs
I have
LOUISA.	153
I have taken against this important Time. The Day approaches very fast ; the fifteenth of this Month is fixed, my Dear, to put an End to my Reign; I will make the best USc I can of the Seven remaining Days, and play the Sovereign in every Action : I have often thought that should Sedley take it into his Head to retort my past Behaviour upon me, I shall make but a very filly Figure. He brought me last Night a very handfome Diamond Necklace and Sprig ;
I objected to accepting of them, as Sir Charlefsi Bounty, or rather his Pride, had lavished Jewels . enough on me to make me shine among the most brilliant ; Lord Sedley refented my Refufal with . a Warmth which I had never Seen him alTume before; he made fo Serious a Point of it that I was obliged to take them.—What a Fool I was for giving up my Prerogative before I have pronounced the fatal obey I 1 am determined it is . the last Concefiion I will make.-
He is for having it as public a Wedding as a ; Crowd of People, and a vast deal of Parade can . make it; but I have pofitively forbidden his thinkinij of invitins: more than his Aunt and Uncle, hrs Friend Clinton, MiSs Herbert, and : Lord JValton : The Ceremony is to be performed at St. George’s Church, from whence we Set off immediately for Sedley-park; my Brother and ' H 5	'	his.
:i^4 JL :.D U L S A.
his Lucy are to accompany us thither.-Not- j
withstandirig.iall my Endeavours to conduft | Matters with as much Quiet and Eafe as possible, I am kept in a constant Buftle and Hurry >	,
^ Lord Sedley will not let his Tradefmen take a Step without confulting me upon it. So that I am plagued all Day long with one or other of them.—•—Malgre all my Remonstrances to the contrary, my generous fLo\tr has insisted upon fettling sifteen hundred a Year ^9n ine j may Heaven, my Lomfa^ avert its ever being enjoyed by your
-T	Sophia SavUU^'	'
S	LETTER
L O U I S A. tsf
LETTER XXXIH
.Mifrlftxmox to 3edley.
Flr~IVo&d^
This is she Day destined to make my Friend a Wife; may it return each Year with an Increafe of Happinefs to her and to the amiable Partner of her Heart! How differently, my Sophia^ does this Morning dawn to that when forced from the Man your Soul doated on, you gave year Hand to him you abhorred— I rcoolleft with Terror the mournful Pomp in which we travelled to the Altar; where your :SRwilling Vow was uttered; your Father^^s half-fatisfied Countenance, Sir Charlefs unmeaning Brow knit, your Eyes Swelled with weeping, and your Louifa not much more chear--ful.-—I would not recal this horrible Scene to your Remembrance, did I not know that past^ Sorrows give a Zest to prefent Joys; you will’ be more grateful to Heaven for the Blessings you enjoy now, when you reflect on the Misfortunes you have efcaped from.
I am happy, my dear Sophia^ to hear you declare you will not ustirp more Power than the Mistrefs of a Family has a Right to ; it is unnatural to attempt more; a Woman cannot H 6	give.
I
156	LOUIS A.
give, but may receive Confequence from her Hufband j it is therefore the Businefs of every Wife to endeavour at keeping up the Greatnefs
of the Man she is to share with.^----Who
do you think is arrived l>ere ! no other than Sir Henry Savage! He certainly meant to repair the Fault you complained of; but it will not
do-----He pleads his Love, I offer Friendship ;
he is not Satisfied I fee it, but he does not murmur.---1 am tempted to tell him-Ah, Sophia!
what shall I tell him ? That fenSible of his Worth, I esteem him, nay wish to do more ;—
but alas !--What ?----That, notwithstanding	!
my Convidiion, I retain a Partiality for an Ob-
jedt of whofe Merit I haveReafon to doubt--
Oh ! no, Lady Sedley, I cannot bring myfelf to fay fo much.—To know what is right, and not to do it, is to lofe One’s-felf in Day-light—-— yet what Power has the Conviction of the Judgement over the Sentiments of the Heart ? —
My Understanding approves of Sir Henry.,---
but a stronger Interest prevails over the tenderer Part of me.-—He may be my Friend, I repeat it, but he cannot be more.—I am Satisfied with my Situation in Life, I do not v;ish to change it, unlefs that in fo doing I could promife myfelf more Happinefs; Fancy must be allowed
to diredf in that, more than in any Thing.-
Could I amufe myfelf with Petit-Maitres, this
Place
LOUISA.	157
Place affords Some who really make a great Figure; we have here young Denham^ who dances and dresses with more Taste than any Man in England], he owns himSelf convinced of this Truth, professes he is not ambitious of doing more; and is So good-natured to other People’s Follies, that his own are over-looked by the World : He flirts with Lady Mary all Day, is equally polite to every other Female, offends no one, is never offended with any
one.-He is of all Coxcombs the most inoff
fenssve, but it is a Sort of Being who gives no Kind of Pleafure to your
Louifa Fermor*
\
eWis
LETTER
K5« L O U I S' N.
LETTER XXXIII. '
From the Same to the Same,
I WRITE to you, my dear Lady Sedley^ fronr-the most beautiful Spot in the World ; I am Surrounded on all Sides with Groves, natural Cafcades, hanging Rocks, every Thing,in short for which So much Money and Pains are often expended to no PurpoSe;. Nature is not Ib-bountiful often as she has been, to this charming Vale.-'"' But where, you cry, does this enchanted Ground lie ?—It is on the Confines of Somerfetjhire-i my Sophia, in a little unknowns
Village.^--Finding So little Entertainment at'
Fir-Wood, I left it on	Morning ; , andi
in order to make a longer Tour, I ordered mys Postillion to take a different Road from that? which L had travelled before j you know I generally stop at any Place that strikes me, be the Objedl a Landscape, a Castle, or a Hut; , afters driving for Some Hours through an indifferent-Country, I faw at a little Distance from the Turnpike Road a most delightful Valley; 1= stopped the ChaiSe, and dire<sted the Boy to* turn off to the Right, a Crofs pointing to the Road which led to this charming Place : When* arrived there, a dirty hedge Ale-houfe was the only one that offered Accommodation; I was almost Sorry I had come out of my Way, and'
regreued
1
LOUISA.	159
/•gretted even the formal Party at Fir-wood. where I enjoyed Cleanlinefs if not Eafe;- it was-far advanced in the Day ; I could not think of fetting out again ;• to pafs my Time, I strolled’ into the Village, refolved to fee as much as-possible of the Profpedl I had come fo far for ; the View of the Country almost made me forget all my Complaints ; 1 passed Several neat Cottages, and came at last to one that fixed me to= the Spot on which I found it; it stood a little distant from all the others,- the Front fo covered with Jessamines and Woodbines, that no Part of it but the Door and Windows could be dif-cerned 5 a Small Chinefe Gate, painted green and white, led to this Fairy-Dwelling ;■ I fqf-got Politenefs to indulge Curiofity, and stood gazing at this uncommon Appearance of elegant Simplicity; the Air was perfumed with the Sweets diffufed from a Variety of Flowers fet on each Side of a narrow Gravel Walk, which went from the Gate to the Houfe j 1 had not remained many Minutes in this Situation, when I faw the Door open, and three genteel Females advance towards me; Surprize had fo totally destroyed all Recolledlion, that I did not fuppofe, at first, I had ever Seen them before ; but on looking attentively I was convinced of my Mistake, and found them to be the three Mifs Grahams i thofe charming Girls we
uSed
i6o	LOUISA.
uSed to fee every where, and whofe sine Forms made them the Objects of univerfal Admiration : We have often wondered, my Sophia, where they had hid themfelves after the Lofs of their Grandfather, whofe Death deprived them of an ample Fortune, and reduced them to a State much beneath the high Education they had had ! If 1 was amazed at feeing them, I was yet more So at the Manner in which they welcomed me to Eajlon, and at the EarnestneSs with which they invited me to walk in and look about their Cottage ; their Language was at once expressive of their Sincerity and Good-Breeding; I could not withstand Such an Offer ; On entering into Conversation they found what had brought mfe to their Retreat; and begged that I would consent to pafs a few Days with them ; I confent-ed, and was happy to find Such Company where I had only expected ProSpe<st.——
It is eafy, my dear Sophia, to give you an Idea of the Habitation of this agreeable Society j but I cannot hope to Succeed in deScribing the
Merits of thefe amiable Sisters.--Reduced to
live on lefs than a hundred a Year, one would imagine they would give Way to all the gloomy Discontent a Fall from Affluence generally occasions ; nothing like this is Seen, all is Peace and Harmony; always chearful, always Smiling :
LOUISA.	i6x
They talk of past Times; they are Sensible of the Pleasures they have lost ; they regret the Friends they were obliged to quit; but in doing this they make no melancholy Reflections on their Fate ; their whole Endeavour is to prevent giving Pain to each other; and they know that any one of them being affedted ‘ would make the others unhappy, they therefore avoid shewing the least Anxiety about their Situation ; they declare they have not the Smallest Hope of ever returning to the World they were forced to leave, but they thank Heaven for not obliging ^ them to live dependant in it, that being thei greatest Evil they could Suffer; viewing Things in that Light Eajton appears a Paradife to them.—Here is true PhiloSophy, my dear Lady, Sedley ! here are three young Women, who give. Lesions to half the boasting Stoics in the World! They left Life (as we simply call it) at a Time when the Pleafures of it appear in their most Seducing Shapes ; admired, caressed, they had met with no Disappointments to Sour their. Tempers; after a certain Age most. Women might wish to retire, but they had many Years to pafs before they could fear Negledl ; this it is that makes their Submission to the Necessity of living thus obfeurely So edifying! So amazing I
They
i62 L O U I S A.
They read, they write, they work, and pafe their lonely Hours in a Variety of ingenious Performances; the Care of the Garden fills up Some Time ; they are never idle, never unemployed, left the Want of Something to do should make them dwell too much on the Change they have experienced.——One rustic Maid does all the Work of the HouSe, and a Boy, beautiful as a Cupid, Serves them for a Footrhan, Garde^ ner, and Meffenger on all Occasions. Every Face about the Place Speaks the Happinefs of the Inhabitants; how different from the magnificent Seat I have lately visited !	,
I am charmed with the ingenuous Tcmpers, the delicate Sensibility of thefe three fweet Girls,-:
What a Shame, my Sophia^ that fuch Women should be consigned to Oblivion ! They who would do Honour to the first Houfes in thcKing** dom ; whofe Accomplishments enable them to j shine among the brightest, whofe Sentiments and Ideas raife them to an Equality with the highest ! Blush ye degenerate Wretches, who could fuffer Such Charms to hide themfelves in the defart Shade ! and who can tie yourfelveis to Uglinefs and Ignorance, when adorned with j the Wealth you know not how to ufe !—---
I should be as much puzzled as wat to decide which of thefe GoddeJJes has most Beauty
o»e
LOUISA. 163
one has Air, another has Shape, another has Delicacy ; all three have Charms Sufficient to make each extremely lovely.
I have pressed them to come to Bloom-hill j they thank me, but fay it would be contrary to their System to visit; they have constantly re-fufed to fee any of the Company in the Neighbourhood, meaning to conform entirely to their narrow Circumstances.
I have often thought, my charming Friend, how cruel it is to condemn Guilt and Infamy to Solitude ; to exclude from Dissipation the miserable Mortal* who most require its Assistance to make them forget themfelves; whilst only Innocence and Virtue can bear Retirement with Pleafure; Hearts like Mifs Grahams*^ whofe Testimony produces that calm Serenity, the certain Confequence of Self-Approbation arising from the Confcioufnefs of having done no Wrong.———
I should be at a Lofs how to return the Favours I have received from them, did I not perceive there are a thoufand Things which their Delicacy would not accept of from a known Friend, but which they may be Supplied with from an anonymous one, without hurting them or Biyfelf.^—1 would not, could I even prevail on
them
I
164	L O U I S A.
them to accept of any Thing, have them think themfelves obliged to me ; they should not thank me for making myfelf happy.—It is no longer	|
Generosity when we exact Acknowledgements	|
for the Favours we bestow ; and he who is not	|
repaid by the Pleafure of assisting another, never knew what it was to feel the highest Satisfadtion the human Breast is capable of enjoying; nor can he be entitled to the Charadler of being generous, though he should rob himfelf of his whole Fortune to give to others; he has mjS-taken himfelf, and should Set that down to the Account of Vanity which he places to that of Generosity.------It is thus we are eternally im-
posing on ourSelves, and often fancy we do a great deal, when we have done hardly any Thing ;—it is from the Intention only that our Adfions receive Value.
I shall be at home in two or three Days, and' hope to bear from my dearest Sophia^ who will always find me her affediionate
Louifa Fermr*
LOUISA.	165
LETTER XXXIV.
Iady Sedley to Mifs Fermor.
Sedley-park.
I Should be ungrateful to my charming Friend> was I to defer my Acknowledgements for the many kind Wishes she has formed for her Sophia’s Happinefs.—Why, my Louija.^ did you refufe to grace with your Prefence a Ceremony So different in every ReSpedl (excepting the meer Words) from the one you mention having been a melancholy Witnefs of, about four Years ago ?—No Swelled Eyes, no gloomy stern Countenances appeared here; it was all Joy, and fweet Content. Notwithstanding my Prohibitions against having a Crowd assembled upon the Occasson, I found Numbers waiting in the Church for my Arrival; I came difarmed of all my Caprice and Defpotifm, and therefore instead of calling up a Frown, could only Smile my Approbation of their Prefence.
Two Days after we got here we received congratulatory Vissts from the Families in the Neighbourhood.—You would be amazed to hear of the Concourfe, that a Curiosity to See the Bride has brought; there is not a stiff, formal.
i66	LOU I S A.
mal, old Figure, nor an aukward Mifs withia twenty Miles of Sedley-park who has not honoured me with a Look rYrom the former, I	I
hear of nothing but the Virtues, and amiable	:
Qualities of the late Lady Sedky j I mean to be	j
all Attention, and yet commit a thouSand	I
Blunders by puting in an Yes when a Negative is expe»sted ; my Lord tries to repair my Heed-leSsneSs, and fucceeds « merveille. The Idea of my being a fine Lady So over-awes the Mijfit,^ that they Scarcely utter an articulate Word ; to judge from their Looks, I should conclude that the Pleafure of gratifying their Curiosity could not possibly make them Amends for the Restraint they Suffer during the Visit. Do not, however, imagine that all our Visitors are in-	!
eluded in the above Sketch : the Dowager Lady and her two Daughters, Sir Robert L2Ay Lee^ S>\v Thomas Lady Egerton, Mr. and Mrs. Wilmoty are People calculated to shine where thoufands are agreeable.
Young	Son to the above-mentioned
Baronet, Mr. Fane-^ and Mr. Goring, I would Speak of as Smarts, did I not apprehend that my Friend would fuppofe Some few penchans	,
of Lady still remained in Lady Sedley.—
1
Major Clinton and Frederick are to be with
us
LOUIS A.	i6y
13S to-morrow: I have cautioned my Brother against letting his Lucy be much with them ; he has So high an Opinion of himfelf as not t® fear either the agreeable nonchalance of the Major, or the pleasing Vivacity of Frederick \ the dear Girl laughs at my Precautions, and af-Surcs me she has not the Smallest Share of Coquetry in her Disposition ; “ That"* more than
every body can fay,” adds my wife Brother with an arch Look ; whilst Sedley, who in fadl: has been the greatest Sufferer by my Propensity to that Gharafter, maintains that I was only •Coquette enough to make me quite the Thing;—his Complaifance shall be rewarded by my most studious Care to pleafe him always.
Yours from Eajion is just brought me. I am delighted with the Beauties of the Place you d.efcribe, but much more fo with the amiable Ipondudl of its fair Inhabitants: Mifs Graham/ Heroifm is a convincing Proof, that GreatneSs -of Soul is not confined either to Sex or Age.— Their Superior Worth has put me quite outof Conceit with your
S* Sedley^
.' r
j68	LOUISA.
LETTER XXXV.	|
Mifs Fermor to Lady Sedley.	j
Bloom-hill.
DO not be discouraged, my Sophia, at the Worth of others; it is always in your Power to equal MiSs Grahams, nay to excel them, as there is more Merit in making a right USe of Prolpcrity than in Supporting Adversity.--A certain Portion of hauteur enables
us to look with Contempt on Fortune when she flies us; and we naturally turn to Heaven for Succour when the Earth affords us none : But when Happinefs flows in upon us, we lofe our-Sclves in the Enjoyment of it; we worship Fortune as the Deity to whom we imagine our-felves indebted, and. Seduced by her Smiles, we give ourSelves up to her Dire<si:ion ; we grow infenSible to the Miferies she has removed far from us, we feel ourSelves happy and fancy all the rest of the World must be So. Poverty, on the contrary, reminds us perpetually of the DiS-treSs it is possible to Suffer; we weep our own and mourn for that of others; it is the best Teacher of Sensibility that can be; “To pity “ Woes, which we have felt, is but a partial Virtue !” The noblest Exertion of Humanity is
from
LOUISA.	169
front thofe who can refleft on the WretchedneSs they have never felt, and relieve th^ Indigence they cannot fear. Adversity is the School of Virtue, Prosperity is the Test of it. .
You are Surprized, my dear Friend, at the Mijjh who*Suffer So much to gratify their Curiosity to See you, but you do not consider what Advantages they derive from fuch a Visit; to talk of Lady Sedley, to quote her Phrafes, to imitate her DreSs, are all fo many new Charms they acquire in the Eyes of their lefs lucky Companions, who envy them a Distinction they purchased fo dearly ; thofe who have had the Honour of visiting your Ladyship, will, you may depend upon it, indemnify themSelves for the Restraint they Suffered, by the Confequence they will assume upon it.
The rude Breath of Autumn has already blasted many of the Beauties of Bloom-hiU\ if you do not come Soon, you will hardly credit the Description I gave you of it in a more favourable Seafon.—Mr. and Mrs,	have just left me ;
he tells me his Friend Sir James Brudenell is ex-pefted every Day at Druid's Grove', that he has been abroad for a little while, and is much better: VvShat is all this to me ?—Yet should 1 I	not
jyo	LOUISA.
not rejoice to hear that he is well ? That Is a Compliment I would not refuSe to any Fellow-Creature, and why then do I Scruple to pay it to Sir James I Why indeed, my dear Lady Sedley ! but becauSe I dare not allow mySelf to think at all of him; confcious of myown Weak-nefs, I dread his Power I-
Mrs. Rivers fays the Neighbourhood is quite deferted, half a Score Families gone out of it, ! Some to change the Scene, others to change their Names; MiSs Hajlings and Mifs Muf-grave are among the lash
'	* The Gout has robbed me of my high-flown
Enamorato Lord Gri?njhy, by fending him up to London two Months before his uSual Time, to conSult the famous Le Fevreif the Dodlor cures him of his Passion as well as his Pain, he stiall receive a Fee from me as from the Patient, j for I shall hold mySelf greatly benefited by the i Cure.----
If I find you delay coming to me much longer, I shall pofitively write to Lord Sedley to ufe his Authority to bring you ; he owes me this at least, for the Assistance I lent him during your Tyranny’, if he has any Refentment in him, he will not fail to shew it now his Dc^ is come i—but he has given fo 2	many
■ < -
L O U I S A3 171
many Proofs of his Generofity that I am. afraid my Malice will not be gratifyed—I will therefore depend on my Sophid.s own Heart for accomplishing, Speedily, the most earnest Wish of her
Louifa Fermor,
I2 LETTER
if,	LOUISA.'
LETTER XXXVI.
Lady Sedley to Mifs Fermor. ■ ^
YOU need not indeed, ma belle Louife, employ Lord Sedley’s Authority to induce me to viSit Bloom-hilli my own Impatience to be i with you will furnish Arguments much stronger | for ray going, than any he could urge. I re- J gret not the Devastation made by the SeaSoii among the Beauties of your Eden^ convinced that I shall find its chief Ornament in, all her primitive Lovelinefs j my Louifa will still be the charming Friend lever knew her; content with that, I feek nothing elfe.
Some unavoidable Engagements will detain us at	longer than we intended stay-
ing, unlefs a Summons to attend my Brother’s Wedding should make us break through them all. Mifs	left me Yesterday Morning,
but first engaged my Promife to be with her at that Time : I was extremely forry to part with her, having already the most Sisterly TenderneSs for her.
The quick Succession of Company we have Scarcely leaves me a leifure Moment; I grieve for the many precious Hours I am forced to 2	dedicate
L Q u I s A. 173’ dedicate to Form and Ceremony; Hours which I could employ to So much greater Advantage,
were I left to follow my own Inclination--------
but I forget that to attain to Mifs Graha?}if Lerfedlion, it is iiecelTary I should, like them, fulfil without murmuring each dilFerent Duty of my Station.
Among the Numbers led hither by Curiofity, Civility, or whatever you pleafe to call it, there are a Couple who have engaged much of my Attention the Wife for her Beauty, the Hushand for his uncouth Manner: Mrs. Craven is the fmallest, and most delicate little Figure you can conceive ; her Eyes have every natural Requifit* to make them fine ; and were they fet in a Head better verfed in the Art of playing them off, could not fail of doing Execution wherever she appeared ; her Hair is of the most beautiful brown, which heightens the eblo'uiJfanteVdhitznck of her Skin j she has a Complexion equalled only by a new-blown Rofe ; her Nofe, Mouth, and Teeth are of the most perfcdl Kind. It would have been too much to have added a large Share of Senfe, or much Wit to fuch a Form; Nature therefore, in Pity to Mankind, has made her as infipid as she is handforae : A Country Squire, in every Senfe of the Word, struck with her uncommon Charms, enquired who she was,
I 3	learnt
174	LOUISA.
learnt her Name, waited on her Father, made flattering PropoSals, and was immediately received ; she was told Mr. Craven had-a good Estate, and would be a fine Match for her; she had no Prepostestion in Favour of another to contend with, no perfonal Diflike to him, and therefore gave her Hand to him at the Time appointed by her Parents j if she was capable of j feeling any Regret at parting with them, it Soon gave way to the fomething\\k.& PleaSureof finding herfelf Mistrefs of a magnificent Coach-and-Six, which wheeled her down to his Family Seat; her earo Spofo.^ vain of her Beauty, took a Delight in shev/ing her about; she, unconfeious of j her Charms, appeared becaufe he bid her ; a very few Months pasted when the Wretch, no longer captivated by Novelty, left her whole Days alone, to riot with his drunken Companions, half a Score of whom he would now and then, after a Fox-chace, bring home for her to entertain at Dinner; Some of them, lefs infen-fible than himfclf, would fain have roufed in him a proper Senfe of the Treafure he postested, but like Sir 'John Brute,, she was his Wife, and therefore no longer pleafing to him : He brought her out of high Compliment to fee me, and at my earnest Entreaty staid three Days with us ; as I had been informed of their History before they came, I felt myfdf strongly interested about
the
LOUISA.
the little Woman ; my Anxiety however is much abated Since I find She is more inSenuble of her MiSery, than I had believed it possible to be. The first Day they cam.e, Frederick.^ caught by her Sweet Face, absolutely made Love to her before theHustand’s Face; he, good Man, knows not v*^hat Jealoufy is, nor indeed does she give him the least Caufe for it, not well knowing that she is the Objecst of Admiration. The Second Day our lively Friend owned that mere Beauty was not Sufficient to rivet his Chains, and the pretty Mrs. Craven is now mentioned by him with more Indifference than he uSually shews in Speaking of a fine Pidiure j it is lucky for her that the fame Fates which allotted her Such a Hushand should have deprived her of all Sensibility.
A-propos, now I am on the matrimonial Subjedl, I must tell you that Sedley shines in th« Char after of Benedidi the married Man ; Fre-^ derick declares ten Times in a Day, that we were born for each other ; this Declaration is generally followed by Some Severe Reflexions on the Man who aimed at coun-ter-afting our Destiny; ReSpeft to Elders is not among the Virtues marked down in hi« Catalogue.
I 4	My
176	LOUIS A.
My Lord makes ufe of the Advice you give him, to take his Turn of ruling, and insists upon my joining him in a Walk, which •	|
obliges me tb quit my dear Louifa^ after af-furingher that I am unalterably her affe(si;ionate
Sophia Sedlep
I
I
LETTER
L a U I S A\	17 7
LETTER XXXVII.
Mifs Fermor to Lady Sedley,
Forgive me, my Sweet Lady Sedley, for interrupting your Joy with an Account of my AMitfiion ; Sympathy is a Tax claimed by Friendship, and my Sophia will not refufe to forget her Happinefs for a Moment, in order to pay it; The unfortunate Fate of two hapleSs Lovers calls upon us to mourn; need I Say that Lord Carrington and his Cecilia are theObjedls I lament ? Ishe Letters I Send with this will best
tell you the melancholy Catastrophe.---1 am
overwhelmed with the Grief I feel, and not
able to proceed---read the enclofed and judge
whether I have not Caufe———
To Mifs Fermor.
Madam,
“ ALTHOUGH I have not the Honour of being known to you, I cannot help joining in the Grief you must Suffer for the Lofs of the amiable Mifs Windham, of whofe Death I undertook, at her Request, to inform you ; The little Time I had the Happinefs of living with her was Sufficient to render her extremely dear to me, and no one can more Sincerely regret I 5	Sl 'iC
lyS	LOUISA.
^he Misfortune that deprived me of fo charming a Companion.
“ The Solitude of this Place Seemed to have been its chief Recommendation to her; she arrived here about a Month ago, and from the bad State of Health she was in, did not pro-mife to remain long amongst us; having an Apartment near hers and being of the fame j Nation as herfelf, we naturally formed a i greater Intimacy; we Spent whole Days together; my new Friend, though in a viSible Decay, made no Complaints; she was all Refig-nation ; the Languor that appeared on her Countenance was imputed to her Illnefs, by thofe who were lefs attentive to her than I was, but the frequent Sighs, and the Silent Tear which now and then stole down her Cheek, told me that her DiSorder lay deeper than the Art of Medicine could reach ; no Word efcaped her Lips that could warrant this Suspicion, but it was plain to me that she was unhappy. She Spoke of you as of the Friend dearest to her ; she frequently mentioned the Names of foine other Ladies to whom she thought herfelf much indebted : Every Day shewed Some Alteration in her Looks; she was reduced to a Skeleton, but as she drew nearer to the Grave her Countenance became mo!*e chear-
ful;
L O U I S A.	179
ful; she Seemed delighted with the Thought of Death, and talked of its Approaches with a CompoSure that amazed me ; she took every Thing the Do£lors prescribed, but Smiled while she Swallowed the nauSeous Potions, as knowing they could not retard her Flight to the Regions of BliSs. About four Days before she expired she gave me the encloSed Letter,, which she deSired me to forward to you as Soon as she died : After writing this she meant to think no longer of any earthly Being ; but two Days afterwards a Stranger came who enquired with great EagerneSs for MiSs Windham-, the Rules of this Convent allowing: us to receive. ViSits in our own Apartments while v/e are Boarders, and she not being able to leave hers,, he was shewn into the Room where vtQ were Sitting together; the Sight of him had fuch an' Effect on the Sick Lady that she funk back in-her Chair, and continued for a conhderable Time without shewing any Signs of Life : The Gentleman wasnotmuch better, but recovered^ his Speech Sooner, and could hardly be prevented from executing the Vengeance on him- • Self which he called incefiantly upon Pleaven to fend down on him ; when the unfortunate Mifs Windham regained her Senfes, the first Ufe she made of them was to exprefs her Terror at feeingXord Carrington (for fo- the Rerfom I 6	was
i8o	LOUISA.
was called who had come to fee her) she talked of the Impropriety of his appearing in the fame Place with her, reminding him of his Engagements to another Lady; he made her no An-fwer, but to affure her he was free from all Tyes but thofe of Love and Honour, renounced all the Sex but herfelf, and continued to Speak of himfelf in Terms that shocked all who heard him.*-—After passing Some Hours in an Agi-
tation of Mind that made us fear his Head was affedled, his Violence gave Way to his Appre-henssons about her, and the Fear of increasing her Illnefs taught him to keep his DeSpair within Bounds; but his Recolledfion came too late, my Sweet Friend had Suffered Such a Shock from his unexpedfed Appearance that her delicate Frame could not Support it; her Lover, Such we now were convinced he was, trembling for a Life fo dear to him, put on an Air of CompoSurc as foon as she had pronounced the Pardon he Solicited with an EarnestneSs that would have melted the Heart of a Savage; to confirm the Pardon he entreated she would consent to become his that very Day ; she represented to him the Indecorum of being married in fuch a Manner, advifed him to wait till she grew better, but finding her Arguments did not Satisfy him, and knowing herfelf to be near her End, she at length confented, and they
were
LOUISA.	i8i
were married that Day, the last of her Life; she grew visibly worfe every Hour after she had Seen Lord Carrington.^ and lived but till Ten o’clock the next Morning.—The Grief of her Lord is beyond Description ; he had flattered himSelf with Hopes to the last, and at the Moment she expired he was planning Schemes of Hap-pinefs for Years to come; her Death was like the Sleep of an Infant—not a Groan—not a Struggle announced the fatal Period of her Life ; a Sweet Smile still remained on her heavenly Face, and might have been mistaken for the Expression of the innocent Soul that inhabited the beauteous Body, had not her anxious Lover been watching her with an Attention that would let nothing eScape it; he was the first who fufpedled she had breathed her last — he waited not long to be convinced, but giving Way to the Sorrow he had forced himfelf to fupprefs, he was no longer to be controuled : Never did I behold So wretched an Objeft; with Eyes flashing Fire, and a Voice made hoarfe by his Ravings, he threatened Destruction to all thatoppoSed his Fury—his Servants, terrifyed at the State they Saw him in, and knowing he had not been well for Several Days before. Sent to for Physicians ; he was carryed by Force to Bed in a raging Fever ; every Thing was done that Experience and long
Study
ig2	L O U I S A.
Study could didiate, but all proved vain ; ther poor Lord Carrington did not Survive his Cecilia: twelve Hours, and continues to the last Moment to accufe himSelf of having murdered his
Wife.------You may imagine. Madam, how
terrible Such a Scene must be any where, but here it Seemed to have received additional Horror from the Gloominefs of the Place, and the Calm we have been accustomed to enjoy ;—• but I will not dwell on a Subjedl which cannot but be as shocking to you as it has been to. your very obedient,
Humble Servant,
Anna-Maria Dormer.'f
Windham to Mifs Fermor.
A FEW Days, my dearest Friend, will’ end my Life and my Sorrows 1^—I am going, Lomfa, to that Place where nought can'happen to interrupt my Blifs; what a Sweet ProSpecst' to a Heart that has Suffered like mine !
“ My Disorder has allowed me Time for Reflexion ; I have repented of my Follies, I have implored the Pardon of a merciful God for the many Errors of my Life, and above all for my Forgetfulnefs of him, when I permitted a Creature to engrofs all thofe Sentiments of my Soul which w'ere due only to the Perfediion of the Supjreme Being.
“ My
LOUISA.	iSj
“ My Prayer, I trust, has been heard ; my Hopes revive, and I look forward with Joy to the Hour that shall Summon me into the Prefence of the just Judge ; whole Clemency will allow for the Frailty of human Nature, and whofe Justice may be difarmed by Sincere Repentance.	.
“We shall meet, my amiable Friend, in thoSe blest Abodes where HappineSs is pure and unmixed ; we shall be happy, even the wretched
Cecilia will be happy there !-Can I then
regret the LoSs of Life ? shall I repine at Heaven’s Decrees which have doomed me to Mifery on Earth, in order to reward me fo largely for my Sufferings ? I do not, I hope I never have,’ my whole Endeavour has been to Support with Patience the Trials it has Sent me.—Howtrifling and inconSiderable do all my past Misfortunes appear ! In this aweful Moment every human Being has lost its Power over, my Soul; the Virtues of my Louifa alone yield me Pleafure in the Recollection, as they enSure our meeting hereafter.
“ Do not grieve for me; before you receive this I shall be out of Pain : That which I feel now will not Suffer me to write more than that 1 am, even in Death,
Your affedlionate,
Cecilia WindhamV
I
184	LOUIS A;
LETTER XXXVIII.
Lady Scdley to Mifs Fermor,
Charles-Jireet.
Nothing, my Loaifa.^ {e> fleeting as Pleafure ! a few Hours ago every Thing around me breathed only Mirth and Joy ; your Letter arrived, I flew to receive it, fuppofing it must add to the pleaSing Emotions my Heart was replete with ; the first Sight of the ill-fated Cecilia’s Name gave a Damp to my high-raifed Spirits, guefs then what an Effedl the Sequel of her melancholy History must have had on me : I could not fuppreSs my Tears, and have therefore retired to give Vent to them, as well as to administer all the Confolation to my unhappy Friend which the most Sympathetic Heart can didiate.————
Death, my Louifa^ however dreadful the Remedy, was the only Balm that could cure a Wound like Mifs Windham’s : Her Heart Seemed to have been formed as much Superior to the rest of Woman-kind’s as was her PerSon ; she had been betrayed where she least expedled to have met with Deceit; all Lord Carrington s Vows and Protestations could never have effaced
LOUISA.	185
faced his Crime from her Remembrance; she might have forgiven him, but she could never have esteemed him as she had done; the Moment therefore that deprived her of the Senfe of her Woes was for her the most favourable; her Innocence Secured her from all thoSe Pangs which make Death So terrible to the Guilty; she had nothing to fear from an ill-fpent Life; her Piety, her entire Resignation to the Will of Heaven enfured her a Happi-nefs, which all the falSe Joys of this delusive World could not have bestowed. You will perhaps fay, I reafon like one unacquainted with the Misfortune of losing for-ever So excellent a Friend ; I allow you, Louifa., in the first Transports of your Grief, to be Selfish enough to mourn for your own LoSs; but Time and a little Reflexion will, I know, awaken all your native Generosity of Soul, and make you f® far forget Self, as to rejoice in an Event which puts a P.eriod to the Sufferings of your, angelic Cedlia.
Lord Carrington’s Death has retrieved him in my Opinion ; it was the only Atonement he could make for So much Perfidy. I begin now to think that he erred more from the ill-judged Advice of his Friends, than from the Badnefs of his own Heart, since,
as
i86	LOUISA.
as Soon as he was left to himfelf, he became So Sincere a Penitent.-—
The charming Lucy attends me in her bridal Attire; I must try to put on a chearful Look, however foreign to the Heart of
Your affedionate,
SeMcy»
H
:	t .
LETTER
LOUISA,	i87
LETTER XXXIX.
Alifs Fcrmor to Lady Sedley,
Bloom-hill.
IT v/ould be Ingratitude to my dearest So-' phials TenderneSs, did I refuSe to receive the Confolation she So kindly offers me; I cannot command my Feelings, but I will endeavour to moderate the Excesses they may lead me into : In reflecting on your Friendship, my charming Lady Sedley, I loSe the Remembrance of all Misfortunes; as long as you are left me I cannot be inconSolable for the LoSs of any other. The Destiny of the amiable Cecilia could not fail of touching my Heart, but that fame Heart must be likewife Sensible of my Sth-phia’s Happinefs; it will not therefore become a Prey to Melancholy, having Such a Counterpoise to its Afflitstion.
The Bodies of the unfortunate Lovers are to be brought to England to be interred in Lord Carrington’s Family Vault; His Mother and Sisters are come down to the Hall, and are buried in a Grief that bids Defiance to any Alleviation ; if we mourn, my lovely Friend, what must the Mother do who accufes herfelfof being the prime Agent of her Son’s Destrudlion ? It
was
iS8	LOUISA.
was not the Fever, but the Sword that put sni End to his miserable Life ; in a Fit of Delirium he fell a Viilim to the Defpair he was reduced to; and impatient at the flow Advances of Death, he Seized the Instant of his Attendants being Abfent, to finish the half-completed Work, and ran to meet the grim Monarch, hoping to overtake the hovering Shade of his Cecilia. The State of InSanity which he was in pleads an Excufe for the Rashnefs of the Action, the Manner of his Death must aggravate the Suffering of his Friends; Suicide has a Sound more shocking to human Nature, than any other ; every other Crime admits of Repentance and the Hope of Pardon but this ; what a heinous Offence must that be which deprives God of his darling Attribute, by rendering his Mercy ineffcistual !—But the poor Lord Carrington cannot be counted among the Number of thoSe hardened and daring Wretches-who rush unSummoned into the Prefence of an offended Deity, to avoid the ConSequences of Crimes which have rendered them the Scorn of the World ; his disordered Brain Suggested this fatal Step to him as the only one he could take had he lived, the Phyficians had no Hopes of his ever regaining his Senfes, his untimely Death must therefore have proceeded from his Mad-
nefs;
i
LOUISA.	i8g
nefs; and his Head, not his Heart, was to . ' blame.
A Letter is brought, I know the Handwriting, the Arms with which it is Sealed ; % Tremor Seizes me ! I can write no more till I have perufed this interesting Paper.—-—
IVedncfday Evening*
Have you not divined, my Friend, from', whom this Letter came? and need 1 tell you it was from Sir 'James BrudenelP. He is arrived, he is at Dmid’s Grove, intreats me to hear him, to let him relate a History that will explain his past Behaviour, confesses his Fears of the Idea I must have formed of his unaccountable Proceedings, but befeeches me to hear him and < then to judge of him—he is not the inconsistent Creature I must think him—he had Reafons Sor his apparent Abfurdity, they are now at an End, and he hopes to convince me that nothing but the truest Passion now sills his Heart.—
Have I not always faid, my dear Lady Sedley, that Sir James did not adl from Caprice? Have I not known, by the Sentiments I felt for him, that he was worthy of my Attachment?—Ah ! how fond am I of believing what most flatters .	my
igo	LOUISA.
my Teiidernefs! How can I be certain that he Speaks Truth in faying “ He had ReaSons for his Behaviour !” Weighty as they may appear to him, I shall not, perhaps, find them So when he has urged them in his Defence !■—. What an equivocal Proof do I bring of his ^ Worth in naming my Attachment to him ! Are we not often milled, my dear Sophia^ in our Choice of Objedls ? Do we not frequently overlook Merit, and place our Affections on the vilest of Beings ? And shall I pretend to fay my Prepoffefiion in Favour of Sir "James is a Sure Sign of his Excellence ? no, I will not, it may be my Folly, it may be his Worth, but till he has cleared up the Point, I will not attempt tp fay which has been the Caufe.
In my AnSwer, which has taken me Some Hours to prepare, though his Servant waited it with all the Impatience of a Man who expeCls to be reprimanded for Delay, I have desired he would write all that was necessary to remove the Prejudice his ConduCl must have given; but I could not fee him till I knew whether I was to consider him for the future in the Light
he wished me to. do.-— From the Coldnefs of
the Language, I think, Sophia, I am almost brought to retort upon Sir yirwrr all the Indifference he pnce affeCied towards me; I do not
mean
LOUISA.	191
mean ungeneroufly to take Advantage of his Declaration, but I durst not trust my Pen to run on in its own Way, till I have learnt more of this History he talks of.————
What a strange Situation has this Letter placed me in! Every Stir alarms me, I fancy each Moment that I shall fee or hear from him ; I go to the Window, not well-knowing what I look for, and comeback disappointed, though I had not formed any abfolute Expedlation; I have rung my Bell forty Times, yet when the Servants come up I have either forgot what I had to fay, or did not want any Thing when I called for them ; the Noife of the Aviary distraists me; I go into the most Solitary Walk in the Garden, but profound (^iet fuits me as little.—I return to my Desh, take up my Letter, and find nothing butmy5ij^^rVs Image can calm my troubled Soul; do not then wonder, my Sweet Friend, that I continue to write without having much to fay ; you will excufe your Louifa for making Ufe of the only Method to compofe her fluttered Spirits ; you will be fenfible, 1 hope, to the Friendship that draws me to you, and renders every other Thing incapable of Satisfying me.
I fliall be glad to hear of your Brother and his Lucy; prefent my Wishes by your Manner of
uttering
192 LOUISA.
uttering them; I commit then to you the Care of discharging what I owe to this charming | Pair, on their Union.	j
Your Company becomes every Day more necefSary to me ; I shall not accept of any Ex-cufe after you have performed your PromiSe to your new Sifter, but shall expedt you immediately to Set out for Bloom-hill: I never was Six Months before without feeing my Sophia ; her AbSence has made thefe laft pafs with a more lagging Pace than any ever did ; com* then my charming Companion, and revive
Your affedlionate
L, Fermor^
■
LETTER
LOUISA.	193
LETTER XL.
From the Same to the Same.
At Sir James BrudeneWs Request I Send you the History of his Life; you will find, my Sophia, that he has been more injured than guilty, you will forgive his past Con-du£t, you will do Justice to his NobleneSs of Soul, you will join your Louifa, in honouring the Man who could a6t as he did in Such trying Circumstances.
I am going to Bentley-park, he will meet me there; will you not come, my dear Sophia.^ to partake in the Happinefs of
Your affedlionate,
Louifa Fermor,
Sir James B rudeness to Mifs Fermor.
THE Liberty of writing to you. Madam, is more perhaps than I had a Right to expe(fi:, but it does not Satisfy my unreafonable Defires j I had promised myfelf the Joy of feeing you, I find mySelf disappointed by your Prohibition.—I Submit however, and in Obedience to you, I commit to Paper a Story, which I could wish to blot forever from Remembrance.
K	Lady
LOU I S A.
Lady Sedkyy as your Friend, has a Claim to imy Confidence ; I eon Sent to her being made i ^acquainted with all I tell you.	i
In perusing the following Narrative, let me befeech you, my lovely MiSs Fermor, to adl with your natural Benevolence, and to pity rather than condemn a Man, whofe whole Happinefs depends on you, and who, in Cbn-feising his Errors does not preSume to eXcuSe them ; but trusts only to your Generosity for the Pardon he hopes to receive : Do not let him who adores you, be the only Perfon who complains of your Want of Compassion.”
Hljlory of Sir James BrudenelL
Having lost my Father at a Time I stood most in Need of his Instructions, I found my-Iplf at sixteen left to my own Guidance, the Authority of a Guardian not extending beyond the Management of my Estate: Impatient to leave School and Confinement, I xjuitted Eton shortly after to go to the University ; I found there Numbers of my Acquaintance, among the rest Mowbraywho being feveral Years older than myfelf, had been my Friend and Protestor on my first going to School; ^e Gratitude I felt for his former Kindnefs liiade me now - shew him all imaginable Returns;
we
L O U I S A.	195
we becamethe most intimate Friends, all his were mine, we were constantly together; after?I had been Some Months there, he introduced me to Some Acquaintances, an elderly Lady and her Daughter, a blooming Beauty of twenty ; they lived at a Small Distance from —i— in a neat, plain Houfe, Suited to the Size "of their Family; an Air of Cleanlinefs and Simplicity appeared about them, but nothing in their Drcfs or Manner ever rofe beyond that; bray informed me that they lived on a very narrow Income, all that remained of thd Fortune of the Family ; Mrs. Melmoth was the Widow of a Clergyman whoSe Livings fell with himfelf, and his Wife and only Child had little or nothing left at his Death ; they Saw no Company but ourfelves ; having known my Friend in their Profperity, he found them out on their coming into--------Jhirey and: en-
treated them to permit him to continue his Acquaintance with them; he carried. me tq .fee them, as the Per Son for whom he bad the highest Regard; I was received upon that Foofing with all possible Civility: We viSited. there frequently, and always found ourfelves treated with the greatest Hofpitality; the evident . Marks of Joy which appeared in the Counte-fTanccs of both Mother and^Daughter on our Entrance, could not fail of m^kipg jus fuppoSe, K 2	ourfelves
\
.J.96	LOUISA.
ourfelves welcome Guests; the Thought of contributing in any Refp€<si: to their Happinefs jnade me always acccept of my constant Companion’s Invitations to accompany him in his Visits. I Sometimes fufpedled that Mowbray loved Mifs Mebnoth, at other Times I thought it impoffible he should; after Things had remained in this State about a Year, RiverSy the Friend upon Earth most dear to me, came to the University ; his Arrival drew off Some Part of my Attention from Mowbray ; I retained all my Friendship for him, but I divided my Time between him and Rivers; the Difference of their Charadiers did not allow them to agree well together; the one was cool, obstinate and dark in his Temper, the other lively, warm, and impatient of Contradidlion, had not a Thought he wished to conceal, or a Sentiment that would not bear publishing; I esteemed Mowbrayy I was grateful to him ; but ihy Tendernefs for Rivers was beyond any I could' feel for him ; the fame Lesions, the Same Pleafures had made us inseparable Friends at Eton, and my Removal to-- had not interrupted our Affediion.-1 had almost for-
got my new Acquaintance, when Mowbray cameone Day to reproach me with Ficklenefs ; he assured me, that Mrs. Meknoth regretted continually the unuSual Negledl I shewed them;
that
L O U IS A.	r<)7
that EU%a did not Say what she thought of it, hut that her Looks SufEcie'ntly proved her Giiri.v her sine Eyes had lost their Lustre, and lu-.r Complexion was entirely gone. I laughed at the Idea of being fuppofcd the Caufe of Such a Change, but to get rid of his Importunities 1 promised to go with him that Afternoon, to convince the Ladies that my Abfence proceeded not from any DifreSpedi to them ; he called upon me at the appointed Hour ; I went with him, and found every Thing he had told me verifyed ; struck with the Alteration in Mifs Melmoth, 1 exprested my Surprize; she (aid Ihe had been indifpofed, looked down, blushed, and Sighed ; the Mother Seemed to explain what she had left unSaid, by loading me with Reproaches for not having called upon them for six Weeks, and concluded with observing that N'egledl was more Sensibly felt by the unhappy than by thofe who were in another Situation I was hurt at her Speech, and to make Amends for the Fault I had committed, I was particui-larly attentive to her and her Daughter; rny Notice feemed to revive the drooping-F/sha ; she recovered her Spirits, and, when we parted, she told me she should foon expedi me agaiiii, Mowbray now appealed to me for the Truth of what he had fuggestcd, afked me whether I doubted Mifs MelmotV^ Attachment to me ?
K 3	and
i€j8	L O U I S A.
and perceiving I still did, he protested to mftv ' that having been caught with Her Beauty and-*' Srenfe he had got over all his Objections to Ma-S>' trimony, and had offered her his Hand,-Hut that she had rejected it with a Steadinefs that (her Circumstances conSidered) could proceed fforn nothing but her PrepoffeiHon in Favour of another; Love is quick-stghted, he had ob-^ Served her very striftly and found tio Name but mine that affedled her; if a Doubt remained, her Behaviour this Afternoon had entirely con-vincred him. I knew him to be free in his No-tiohsdn regard of Women; He did not ferupje to betray them ; but he had never before fpokc with fuch Refpedl of any other; he bad always' ridiculed Marriage ; he now fpoke of making Mifs Melmoth his Wife ; this to me ferved to strengthen the Opinion I had of being madc'a Convert by the united Force of Beauty and Virtue ; I was concerned that he should have beien refilled ; I wished him to have fucceeded with the amiable Girl, and curfed myfelf for having been an Obstacle to his HappineSs. Pardon, Madam, the Vanity that appears iri this Part ; i own I was Fool enough t6 fancy I wassheloved, but if ever fuch Prefumptiori can be exc'ufed, it is in a young Man just enter-jn^‘'i|ito Life, furrounded with Flatterers, and ^fpided to believe every one as fincere as hirh’^
stlf;
c
L O U I S A.>	199
SelfCould I have imagined my Friend meant to impofe upon nie ? Few People at eighteen' are fuSpicious ; it is not till we have learnt Deceit, ourfelves, that we can fuSpe<3: it in others; I' own I had nothing of it in my Temper; inca-, pable of uttering a FalSehood myfelf, I did not; fuppofe Mowbray could do it. This ConverSa-. tion made an Impression on me ; I refleiled frequently on v/hat I had Seen and heard ; si toldi mySelf Mifs Melmoth was charming, but I did not feel it properly j her Beauty was not of that Sort which touches me; 1 allowed her to-be extremely handfome, but it is not every Woman who is fo that I could love, I offered to give up feeing of her, in Hopes that Time and my Friend’s Merit might cure her Passion; but he refufed this with Contempt,, and' ashed me “ whether I thought hint indcft licate enough to wish to be the Second in Heart? he should go upon his Travels in % few Months, and made no Doubt of being abl^ to; conquer a Weaknefs that would hjni ' despicable in his own Eyes; as the lovely Eliza would not Suffer him to be her Hushand,-he would be at least her Friend, and endeavour-to promote her Happinefs, by doing all that lay in his Power for which Purj^Se he frequently reminded me of my PromiSe of being tnpre punctual in my Visits; ..every Tinie lIiw K.4.,	Mifi-
2co^ . LOUISA.
MiSs Mehtioth., 1 fancied I . perceived mbr€ plainly her Partiality to ine; being with her continually 1 began at last to ima-^ gine her Prefence in Some Meafure neceS-Sary to my HappineSs; we walked, wc romped together ; in every Instance she gave me So vifi--ble a Preference, that I must have been uncommonly stupid not to have felt it; in shorn my Vanity got the better of every other Sentiment, and upon a Certainty of being dear to her I ventured to make Some Professions of Tcndernefs to her ; she affeUed to treat them as the meer EffeUs of Gallantry, but did not difccurage me from purfuing the Difcourfe ; I had Scarcely finished the first Part, when I found my Heart recoil at the Idea of what I had Spoke; I attempted no more to dwell on that SubjeU:, but talked of indifferent Matters. A Sews Days after this going to pafs an Afternoon, as ufual at N. on going into the Parlour I Saw Mifs Melmoth drowned in Tears; she had never before appeared to fuch Advantage; Sorrow had given a Softnefs to her Features which they had notineommon; herlarge dark Eyeshorrowed new Charms from her Affliction ; 1 was shocked to See her in this Situation; I enquired the Occasion of it, and after much Perfuafion, 1 learnt that her Mother being reduced to great DistreSs for'Money, and not being able to fupport it
longer.
L O U I S A.	201
longer, had insisted on her accepting of an Offer she had just had from a young Man who had known her formerly; that Death was not half So terrible to her as the Thought of becoming the Wife of one whom she felt the greatest Aversion to ; that Mr. Mowbrad.% generous Manner of procecdiug would have prevailed on her to have become his, had it been* possible for her to have overcome the Repugnance she felt to marrying any but the Objeft' of her Choice j he had taken a Refufal from her' without acquainting her Mother of his Intention, and she acknowledged the Obligation to > him. It is impossible, my dear Madam, for you to guefs what various Senfations agitated me during this Information j Mifs Melmoth did not fay a Word, or cast a Glance, but what: told me she meant me by the Objebi of Fe?" Choice I her Tears flowed with redoubled Violence when she had done Speaking, and looking at me with an Expression in her Countenance that moved my very Soul, I could no longer restrain myfelf from offering her all the ConSo-lation I could give her; forgetting every Thing but the Distrefs I was WitnefsTo, I threw myfelf at her Feet, entreating her to weep no more, and to difpofe of my Peri’on and Fortune in any Way that would conduce most to her Happl-nefs : The Transition from Grief to Joy was K 5	£udJc%.
o.D o u-1 s A.
^(Sudden^ and sh« took no Pains to conceal it; pleafed at the Blifs I imagined I had caufed, I «njoyed all the Satisfadlion which a Sensible Heart is capable of feeling in Such a Consideration. Mowbray now talked of going abroad every Day, and actually fet out for the Continent two Days after this had pasted, recommending to me at his Departure to take Care of Eliza and her Mother ; I was willing to Spare him the Mortification of knowing how I had been received by them, therefore took ho Notice of the late Adventure, but promiSed him to shew them every Mark of Regard.
I had made Mrs. and Mifs Melmoth happy, but I was not So my Self; I felt none of thoSe Emotions which you, my dear MifsDmsr, have since caufed me to feel, and which must attend the .jw Lover ; .Eliza was tender, but she did not Satisfy , me ; her Smiles made her extremely lovely, but thej did not infpire me with more than Admira-vjfi ^ioii; I tried in vain to reconcile mySelf to the Step I:had taken j my Heart reproached me every Moment for facrisicing it to Compaffion, for that was the only Sentiment I could be Said to feel Melmoth.
“ Rivers obferved theDifcontent of my Mind, and in the most friendly Terms begged to know 'iC'	2	what
L d It i's a:	203:
w'Kat gave Rife to it j I had nbt ntet with owniiApprobation, 1 did- not iexpeft’: ht&^ had not acquainted him with the Engagement i had entered intobut on being pressed by him ’ to difclofe the Gaufe of my Anxiety, I'told him all i he did not diSappoint me; he abufed Mowbray iot drawing me into Such an Aci-quaintanee, bid me beware of the Arts that might be employed against me, and declared he would not rest till he had found out the whole o History of this Girl and her Mother; his Enquiries were all anfwered in their Favour j many People had known them in Surry, and fpoke much in Praifc of Eli^a^s Beauty, and the Pru-denccTif their retiring from the World after the Lofs of Mr. Melmoth: My kind Friend now " dcssred to be introduced to the Woman v^ho ' was to be my Wife, hoping to find out fome-thing in her Manner that might ferve to keep ^ me from fulfilling my Promife to her; with Mrs, Melmoth'^ Permission I carried	toN.- he^
faw her Daughter, thought her beautifulThe became acquainted with hetj .and pronounced < her amiable arid agreeable*
“ Immediately after Mowbraygone,' and Rivers had been known > to - them, , I found they expe<si;ed me to complete the Affair, and talked of makirt*g Preparations for our Marriage ;
"	>	K 6	the
4o4 LOUISA, the Mother took upon her to Speak of it, to Save her Daughter the Confusion of doing it; my Honour was concerned in adling up to what I had professed ; I shuddered at the Thought of being united to her, yet I would not encourage the leaff Temptation towards breaking off my Engagement; devoted as 1 was to Wretchednefs,
I was refolved to have no Guilt to repent of, but joining with Mrs. Melmoih, I begged Eli%a would name an early Day to make me hers for Life; as I wanted two or three Years of being of Age, I desired we might be married privately, and when I had finished my Education I should be proud of owning Mifs Melmoth for Lady BrudeneU^ to keep the Secret better I re^ fuSed to take Rivers with me, and went off the next Morning to Scotland.^ the Ladies taking a different Road in order to avoid Sufpicion ; we met at Edinburgh, and were married ; we had hardly quitted the Church when an ExpreSs enquired for me, and delivered a Letter in the greatest Haste to me; I broke open the Seal, but judge of my Amazement when I Saw in Rivers's Writing the following Words.
“ YOU are undone, Brudenell, if already “ married to Mifs Melmoth ! if you are not, • “ abandon her to the Infamy she merits ; Mow-“ bray has deceived you, Eliza "has joined him
“in
L O U I S A. 1^5
“ in the Fraud j she is the cast-off Mistrefs ^6f “ your falfe Friend, and has contrived to draw “ you in to marry her, that she might have a “ Father for the Child she is now big with.
“ Do not hefitate to believe what I tell you ; my Authority cannot be doubted : Come to me and learn all the Particulars of this vile “ Plot; I am impatient to hear my Friend has “ efcaped Ruin, and hope he will return un-“ shackled to his affeffionate
“ H. RiversV
‘‘ Astonished as I was at what 1 had read, I kept myfelf from discovering the Contents of the Letter I had received, but told the Ladies that urgent BufineSs demanded my immediate PreSence in London ; that they should return to N. and I would take Post and Set off directly the other Way ; whether their ConfciouSnefs of having acsted ill made them fear Detection, or whether they perceived by my Countenance the Ill-humour I was in, they did not expreSs the least Relu6tance to what I propofed, but in handing Eliza into the ChaiSe she befought me in the Softest Accents to return Soon to her ; the Innocence of her Looks made me ready to SuS-pedl; Rivers of having been impoSed on by Some malicious Slanderer; in bidding her adieu her
T enderneSs
2o6	L O V r S' 'At
'jf^etMlerneSs almost difaritied me of the Resolution I had taken of leaving her to go to Town ; I meant to meet mjr Fiiend there; intending, if he did hot give incontestiS>le Proofs of what he advanced, to leave him, and in Justice to EUd.a to publish my Marriage upon my going down to N. Rivers czme to London oo my Summons, and to corroborate his Testimony, gave me a Letter he had received from Mowbray^ who having been mortally wounded in a Rencounter at Xym, and finding himfelf on his Death-Bed, could not rest till he had confessed his Treachery, and implored the Assistance of the worthy Rivers in obtaining the Pardon he could hardly hope for from me. The first Part of Mifs MeU motifs Story was perfectly true; but it w’as ‘'Mowbray who had brought them down to N. and under various Promifes of Marriage, 5cc, had deluded the ill-fated	I was carried
to visit her with the Intention that Succeeded So " Well; for he was not more bafe than changeable,
'• and fancying his Passion for would end as alffdf his others had done, he intended, out of ^particular Yz\nt for her Family, to Save her from Contempt by providing a Hushand for her-in cafe of Confequences ..... Mrs. Mel--onoth knew of his Attachment to her Daughter, when it was too late to preferve her from his
Snares,
L O U I S A.	207
Snares, and confented to carry on the Defign against me to Save her Child’s Reputation. . , ;
You, my amiable Mifs Vermor., will hear . with Amazement of there being Creatures in human Nature fo void of Virtue, Delicacy, arjd Honour : I listened with Surprize at all I learnt of this dark Villany ; I regretted that Heaven had fnatched from me the vile. Author of my Pifgrace; I repented that I had not attended to the Dictates of my Heart, which had constantly refufed to ov/n MiSs MelmotKs Power; I upbraided myfelf with Vanity and Folly;! re-jedled all the KindneSs of my Friend, who endeavoured to conSoIe me for what had happened ; he assured me the Law would redrefs me, that it would Set aSide the Marriage I had contracted ; it was talking to the Winds, I would not hear Reafon; nothing could wash off the Stain from me; the Law might declare I was not married, but I had vowed to be hers in the Face of Heaven, and in the most Solemn Manner, and nothing could Set me free; beSides my Pride would not have permitted me to have Had my Name blended with hers in the public Talk ; the Privacy that had been obferved was the first Ray of Comfort that darted on me; I could trust fo the Prudence of my Friend Riven, and I was determined to make Secrecy the only
Condition
2o8	L 0 ‘ U I S A.
Condition on which I would ever conSent rO' provide for the miferable Girl, her Mother, arid more unfortunate Infant. Refpeding the Situation of the undone Eliza^ I would not shock her by a Sudden Accufation of Perfidy, but Sent her frequent Excufes for my Abfence, till 1 was informed of her being delivered of a Son, who died immediately after; as Soon as she could travel I Sent to let her know that I was perfectly acquainted with all her GuiltI pitied her DiftreSs, and as she knew she could have no lawful Claim on me, 1 offered her on her going abroad to remit her and Mrs. Mehnoth eight hundred a Year for their joint Lives, infisting upon her keeping her own Name, or taking any other but mine. The Propofal was agreed to, . they retired to the little Town of Avellim in the Kingdom of Naples.-----------Time had recon-
ciled me to myfelf in Some Degree; the artful MiSs Mehnoth had given me a Difgust to the female World ; I had no Inclination to form any Connexions with it; I refigned myfelf up to the Indifference I felt; I travelled through all the Courts of Europe without meeting with one who could make me regret my unfortunate Engagement, and returned to	fully perfuaded
of my Infenfibiiity : I had known Lord Sedley and Lord Walton abroad, they renewed the Acquaintance we had made there, they brought
me
LOUISA.	209
me into your Company, I converfed with you,
I lost the Tranquillity I had acquired—Your Conversation had a Charm in it that drew me continually towards you ; in hearing you Speak, my charming Alifs Fermor, I forgot all my Woes, but on leaving you my Grief became intolerable; I dreaded the Hour that was to rob me of you; I faw Numbers approach you with the Design of making themfelves dear to you ; I faw with inconceivable Pleafure that you gave Encouragement to none ; Howard, unexceptionable in all Refpedls, adored you, told you So, and offered Settlements that would have tempted a lefs disinterested Soul; my Fortitude forfook me, I could not flatter myfelf that he would meet with the Fate of lefs agreeable Men ; you refufed him, and I recovered from the Defpair I had been plunged in ; you deigned to take Notice of the Change, and forgive me, divine Louifa.^ if I fay your Notice repaid me for all 1 had Suffered ; a Hope, which I v/as afraid of encouraging, now and then started up ; J thought myfelf distinguished by you, I was So transported that I had almost forgot myfelf fo far as to offer you the Heart you had animated ; but your pure and unfpotted Charadfer forbad me; I dared not tell you I loved you while I had Such an Impediment to my Paffion as AdiSs
Melmoth ;
2to L O U I S 1^.
iMelmoih 'i I knew your Delicacy would be of^ fended, your Virtue would be alarmed at the Confession j and I loved you too sincerely to wish to deceive you in any ReSpedl. In one of thefe delightful Conversations, So prefent to my Remembrance still, when I heard from your lovely Lips Sentiments that would have given Beauty to Deformity, I regretted that Custom -had debarred the two Sexes from pofkIHng a-Sincere Friendship for each other,. aadUamented the Abufes that had rendered that charming Union fo fufpicious ; with all the Dignity of confeious Innocence, and the Sincerity of a Heart silled with the noblest Principles, you told me I should be your Friend, and you would trust me for not making an ill Ufe of the Title you bestowed j pleafed with the Honour you conferred on me, I accepted of youx Offer,, and thought myfelf completely blest., A little Reflexion told me I had done wrong in giving Way to my Joy, and the Moment after I had lost Sight of you, I accuSed myfelf of having deviated from the Rectitude I had hitherr to purfued.........Afraid of abusing the Sa-
cred Charadler of Friend, from the Knowledge I had of my Sentiments, I did not venture to go near you for Several Days, and when we met F affedfed an Air of Indifference; your Behayi-,	'	our,'
LOUISA.	2it
o«r shewed me plainly that I had been indebted only to my Assiduity for the Distindlion you had bestowed upon me before j you treated me vrith a distant Politenefs, more shocking to me
than your Anger would have been.The
Death of your Aunt carried you into Wales; when you had left London I had no Pleafure but in hearing of you from your beauteous Cousin ; hzdy Sedky., lefs partial to me than to you; faw the Concern I took in all that related to you, and indulged her Vivacity in Sporting with my Anxiety j having teazed her one Day with a Multitude of Questions, she punished my Im* portunity by telling me you Spoke of Lord Medway in Terms that gave her Reafon to fufpe(st your Heart was touched by him ; knowing the Character he bore, I trembled at the Rival you had given me : Having heard from Rivers, who watched you with the Eyes of an Argus, that you had many Lovers in the Neighbourhood y I desired he would enquire if I could find any Place near your Habitation to purchaSe j he Soon ihentioned DmVr-GriJw; I agreed to pay any Price for it, and found myfelf once more near you; charmed with the Situation of my new HouSc, 1 gave myfelf up to the pleasing Hope of feeing you unperceived, 1 traverSed every Wood and Lawn within a Mile of Bloom-Jftll, ~ and about ten Days after I came into the County-
212 LOUISA.
try I found you in the Grove, where you hacf thrown yourSelf on a Bank to read ; I stood for Some Time gazing in Silent Wonder, never did your elegant Form strike me So much ; a Dejection in your Air and Mien finished the Picture of the most exquisite Beauty 1 had ever beheld j an involuntary Impulfe brought me to your Feet; I Saw you terrified, I even imagined you diSgusted at my Appearance ; I knew I was guilty in attempting to make Love to you, I Suppofed the Purity of your Soul dictated to you to shun a Wretch who thought himSclf bound to another; I quitted you overwhelmed with Remorfe and ConfuSion.-——I had refuSed to fee any Company on coming to Druids-Grove; Rivert was the only one I Suffered to come near me; he assured me you had not given any Preference to Lord Medway^ he deserved the Esteem of every body, and you had given him your Share of it; he did not perceive you inclined to encourage the Addresses of any one, he obServed you with the most piercing Eye, and the Intimacy fubfisting between you and Mrs. Rivers entitled him to fay you had not made any Attachment since you came into th is Part of the Country. All this added to the Love I felt for you, you appeared every Day more worthy, and I became more wretched i was advifed to go to a more favourable Climate.
LOUISA.	,2ij
mate to restore the Health I had lost; vain CounSel ! It was not Sun-Beams that could dif-Sipate the Gloom which gave Rife to my Disorder : But willing to oblige thoSe who interested themfelves about me, I was preparing to embark for the South of France; the unhappy always imagine they may find Confola-tion in Change of Place ; I was going to try this ineffedtual Remedy for my Woes, and had refolved on leaving Druids-Grove to return no more to England^ where every Thing reminded'^ me of my Mifery; the additional Grief I felt in the Thought of never beholding you again, made me hope that a Speedy End would be put to an Existence that was now odious to me. Figure to yourfelf, my dearest Mifs	the
Situation of a Adan reduced to this State, and unable to form a Hope that was consistent with his Probity or your Delicacy.—"—
Things were in this Way, when a Letter from Avellino was brought me ; I found it contained a Request from Mifs Mehnoth to fee me, as she apprehended she had not a great while to •live ; I did not hesitate about going; it was indifferent to me whither I went; I durst not .flatter .myfelf with any HappineSs refulting from my Journey, but I was willing to know whether
she
214	LOUISA.
she really was as ill as she reprefented herSelf be. Agitated with many different Emotions, I arrived, and was condudled to her Apartment, where I found her almost struggling in the Agonies of Deathshocked at the terrible Alteration that Time and Remorfe had made in her, my Humanity was excited at the View; I no longer remembered she had injured me, but unhappy myfelf, I Sincerely partook in her Misfortunes ; BO People fuffer So much for other? as thofe who are wretched them Selves; Self-Love may be at the Bottom of this Sensibility, but if it renders it lefs generous, it does not make it more doubtful.—•~--Eli%a lived but three Days after I Saw her, and expired with all the Tokens of sincere Contrition. Mrs. Melmoth had died the Year before; and her Daughter, left to her own Reflexions, became a Prey to the Melancholy her past Conduct
must have caufed. .. I forbear dwelling on
a Subjetst, my dear Madam, which may give Pain to a Heart generous as yours; and if what I have related does not justify me in your Eyes, I wish not to trouble you with Misfortunes which you cannot relieved’
With all the Apprehensions of a Wretch who expe<sts the Sentence of his Judge, I
wait
LOUISA.	215
wait for your Anfwer. ...... Should your
gentle Soul incline you to shew the least ,Mercy, allow me, my amiable MiSs Fermor^ to fee you, to endeavour to convince you by ^vcry Word and Aftion, how sincerely devoted to you is the Heart of your
n i ""	J,BrudenellP
sCe <Ce yCS	sD® SC* 5*	3np g3 duP dtJ du? gup
L E T T E R XLI.
To Sir James Brudenell.
YO U have been unfortunate. Sir ynmes, and I pity you ; you have been generous^ and I refpcft you. 1 should be unjust not to esteem you ; I must be infenSible not to feel Pleafure in posiesiing a Heart So valuable as yours.
Mrs. Rivers irivites me to 'Kentley~fark,\ I go to*morrow, and shall be happy to meet Sir yernes Brudenell ihQiz.
Louifa Fermor,
;'" DMl \
^ ■ '
LETTER
2i6	LOUISA.
T. E T T E R XLII.
Lady Sedley to Mifs Fermor.
I WILL, my Sweet Friend, this Instant burn my Talifman, and give up all future Pretensions to the Art of Divination, lest by the continuing to pra6tice this uncertain Science, I should be led again to injure an amiable Object. Far from being offended with Sir ‘James for proving me a falfe PropheteSs, I esteem, 1 love him for it: Yes, love h.\m Louifa, do not be alarmed, Sedley overlooks my Pen, and approves of the Expression, and you cannot be more tenacious of your Lover’s Heart than he is of his Wife’s; if the dear Man has a Fault, it is the under-rating his own Perfeffions, which makes him now and then SuppoSe it possible for me to entertain a passing Preference to Some Coxcomb, whofe Folly may divert, but cannot make any
Impression prejudicial to him.-What am I
about! is it poISble that the once gay, fashionable Lady Saville should be transformed into Such an antiquated Country-Dame-like Cha-ra<Sler as to be employed in writing an Eulogium on her SpouSe ? Forbid it Ton! Pray, my dear Girl, let not the heavy Charge ever appear against your Sophia \ it would abfolutely disqualify me for being a Member of the female Coterie, besides fubjedling me to the contemp-7,	tuous
LOUISA.	217
tuous Sneers of all the sine Ladies of my Ac..
quaintance.---But to return to yames \ I
do most sincerely join with you, my Friend, in admiring his elevated Sentiments of Honour, *and hesitate not to pronounce him worthy of all the Tendernefs you feel for him. His generous Behaviour to the unfortunate Wretch, who was the foie Caufe of his Mifery, would alone be Sufficient to atone for a thoufand past Errors. The Motives now explained for a Conduist which has So often drawn my Reproaches, how noble ! kow great do they make that Condudl appear 1-He did well to de-
sire I might be made acquainted with his HiS-tory, for by that Means he has gained a real Friend, and, I hope, a powerful Advocate to plead his Caufe with you;—not that I believe he stands in much Need of my Interest ; his own Merit will be all-Sufficient when joined to your Prepofleffion in his Favour. 1 long to be Witnefs to the Happinefs that must attend tlie Union of Such a Couple. Lord Sedley is as much charmed as I am with the delightful ProSpedl which has opened to his Friend.
My Brother is not So engrossed by his own Happinefs, as not to be a Sharer in your’s ; ignorant of Sir ynTnefs, former Entanglement, he expresses his SurpriSe at your not having received Proposals from him a Twelvemonth ago, L	fo t
2i8	L O .D I S A.
for he is very certain you have been beloved ever Since the first Time of his feeing you : The poor, innocent Baronet is then accufed of Indo--knee, ilnconji/iency, and Tepidity of Soul; all capi-'tal Crimes in the Opinion of this new-married Man. 1 should fometimes be angry with him for his Injustice, did not Lord Sedley remind ma that Nature, in giving us the fame Parents,
< had indued us with much the fame DifpoSitions, and that Lord Walton does but a (si now the Part 1 did fo long ; So prevalent is Self-love, that, in order to justify my late Opinion, I cannot help, upon Second Thoughts, honouring the Warmth of Heart which induces my Brother to blame a ■Proceeding which ^to him appears injurious to the Peace of his much-loved Cousin.
My amiable Lucy Seems destined to add to the Felicity of all with whom she is connedled ; I frequently blefs the lucky Chance that threw her in my Brother’s Way.; he is.pcrfe<si:ly fen-Sible of her Worth, and will, I make no Doubt, render her happy. Wc returned Yef-terday Evening from Lord Lexlngtod.% Villa in Surry, whither we went as foon as the Marriage Ceremony was over. Lord and Lady Walton go in a few Days into Oxford--Jhire \ we shall then Set out to asture my dearest	by Word of Mouth, how much
j -am her affedlionate	S. Stdiey.
LOUISA.	21,
LETTER XLII.
Mifs Fermor to Lady Sedley.
Bent ley-Park.
CAN there be, my	Sophiay a Situation
more happy than mine ? To love and be beloved by an Objedi So justly esteemed by all the World, So perfe6lly worthy of the Ten-dernefs 1 feel for him: I know nothing that equals the Pleafures of a Heart thus fatisfyed , with finding its kind Propenjities justifyed, and the Indulgence of its Weaknefs authorized by Reafon.
I found Sir James here when I came ; we met as Friends who had been long Separated, and who had Supported that Separation with Impatience; he was So taken up with his own Joy that mine did not, I hope, appear fo vifible to him; yet why should	it did not, is it not
rather ungenerous to wiSn him not to fee how dear he is to me? Can I fuppofe the Man i love would abuSe my Tendernefs? But CuS-tom forbids Women to shew their Senlibility ; it makes us Hypocrites that the other Sex may^ find an Excufe for their deceiving us.—'That not being to be apprehended from Sir Jamesy I will hot, Sophia^ outof Coquettry, leave him L 2	to
I
220	LOUISA.
' to guefs only at the Sentiments he has inSpired,; was I alhamed of my Lover I might wifli to , conceal from the World my Attachment to him, but after having accepted of him to af-,fe£l an Indifference for him would be at.once debafing my Character.
Sir 'James has Sent an Exprefs to my Brother ;
■ I shall wait Sor his Approbation before I be-.come Lady BrudeneU\ it is a Compliment I owe to the best of Friends and Guardians. Do not be wicked enough, Lady Sedley., to afk me, whether, if I doubted of Sir Charlefs Confent, I would wait for it ? I shall not anfwer fuch Qiiestions, but by telling you, that if Sir was lefs deferving he would be lefs beloved by
me.----He feems determined to exceed the Ge^
neroSity of all my iormex Prkendans.^ and of--fers fuch immenSe Settlements that I am almost tempted to tell him I mean to be his Wife and not his Widow ; but I content >myfelf with circumferibing his Liberality as much as I possibly can ; I have abfolutely refufed to accept of .Pin-Money; I should perhaps have been hurt had he not offered it, as I might have .imagined he'wanted that entire Confidence in me which I expect him to have, but in taking of it.l should have lost Some Part of my Claim to it j I should not chufe to be independent of
hiiB
L i O U I S A. 221
him, it would diminish the Pleafure I shall feel on every OccaSion ; every Thing I wear will receive anew Value from being his Gift, every Arnufement I partake of will charm from his
being the Author of it.--1 arn much better
pleafed that it is Lady 5’t’r//(fy instead of Lady Sa~ ville.^ to whom I am Speaking; you who make fo excellent a Wife v/ill feel the Truth of all I fay, and will no longer ridicule the romantick Notions of your Louijayou will acknowledge, niy dear Sophias that there is more real Happi-nefs in being loved by an amiable Man than in being the Admiration of a thoufand Fops. Do not be afraid of being laughed at by (he giddy Females of your Acquaintance; you may allow thofe to laugh who know no other Joy ; they have not Lord Sedleys or they would all, like you, give up the empty Pleafures they now purSue with fuch Eagernefs ; let home be agreeable and no one who is capable of feeling will
go abroad by Choice.-----Be as fond of your
Hushand as you will, you will be kept in Countenance when you vifit Mrs, Rivers., who has almost as many Charms as you have, and full as much Tendernefs: She has a little Girl W'ho is a perfedt Beauty, Sir James caresses it from Morning till Night, and the fvveet Cherub is fo pleafed with his Notice that it never Sees him without a Smile. Mr. Rivers is as good a L 3	Father
5122	LOUISA.
Father as lic is a HuSoand and Friend. ~ He tells me none of my Lovers ever gave him So much Trouble as Sir Henry Savageand that his following me to Fir-wood put him out of Humour for a v/hole VSeek—that he is rejoiced to reSigii his Charge, for the most difficult Talk in the. World, is that of watching a Woman Surrounded with Temptations.
We expeft you in the Country with an Impatience that will brook no Delay ; I shall go to Biocm-hill in a Day or two, and shall carry my Friends from hence with me ; we shall there wait for you and Lord Sedky ; I shall grew jca- ' lous of your Lucy if I find myfcif neglcdied for her; she may be all you reprefent her to be, but her Perfedlion will not reconcile me to the Preference you give her; take care then, my dear Sophia, how you wound the Friendship of Your affedlionate,
Lomfa Fermor*
LETTTR
L.. O' U r S-' A.	2.2-5
LETTER XLIII.
D 'om the Same to the- Same..
Bkotn-hiH.
Not yet come. Lady Sedley ! Really yon mean I believe to try how far I can bear, with Patience, the Slights you put upon me: If that is your DeSign you will find by this that my whole Stock is exhausted ; T am absolutely angry, and could hardly bring myfclf to write again to you.----
My Brother has wrote, he approves of my Choice, he congratulates me on Subduing So obdurate and So worthy a Heart as Sir Jatnefs : I- had declared I v/ould not marry till I heard < from him j that being done, my Lover now fuppofes all Obstacles removed and presses me to name the Day; he will not hear of its being later than Some one in the next Week ; when 1 reply that 1 have promifed to wait for your coming, he tells me you have forgot your Engagement and do not intend to vifit Bloo7n hill; your Delay gives Such Force to what he. Suggests, that I can hardly forbear giving Credit to it, I stiould not bear to be. thus didlated to by Sir James according to L 4	your
124	LOUISA.
your System of Government ; but as I am certain, my charming CouSin, that I could not resign my Power with So good a Grace as you have done, I will not astumeit; after tyrannizing I Ihould never learn to obey, and as I am thoroughly ecavinccd of the Necessity of this last, 1 will not pradiice the other ; next Thurfday is then the Day fixed on, in Obedience to Sir yames: I fhaH not, my dearest So-fhia., think it completely happy without your Prefence ; and if you can possibly come to me before that Time, I stiaM be better difncfed to pardon all the Disappointments you have given . me lately.
We shall go from this Place to Brudenell houfe^ where we shall stay till after Chrijimas ^ I am Sure my Friend will not refufe to accompany me ; though the Country will not afford much. Amufement at that Seafon, but as Berkjhire is not quite So remote from the great World as this County is, I should hope you will not be in Such Danger of being moped as if we staid here.
Mrs Greville (Sir yanjefs only Sister) will, join us there, I am told she is a Widow and extremely pretty, but fo difgusted with. Mankind, from Mr. Grevilifs Behaviour, that she will never listen to any Propofals for parting
again
t
LOUISA.	215;
again with her Liberty: She had not been long in her Teens when she was addressed by Mr. Gre-ville.^ who was not many Years older than her-felf; her Friends oppofed the Match, thinking both Parties too	know their own'
Minds, but finding they were not to be per-fuaded to wait a few Years, to prevent a clandestine Marriage, they conSented ; they made a very hand Some, a very fond, and a very gay Couple, and for the first three or four Years after they married, were Patterns of conjugal Felicity, but at the End of that Time, Mr. GreviUi began to think his Wife a Confinement and his Children an Incumbrance; she very foon perceived the Alteration in his Sentiments, and being fenfible of her Charms she could not endure to have them flighted by him, when she heard'them admired by all the rest of his Sex ; yain and unthinking to the last Degree, she never once endeavoured to recall his wandering Heart, but vented her Ill-humour on him whenever they met; Reproaches, Threats, Quarrels, and the whole Catalogue of domestick Ills Succeeded ; he staid out whole Weeks to avoid her, and at his Return always found her lest difpofed to Peace; she would shut herfelf up with her Children and weep over them during his Abfence, but could not prevail on herfelf when he came home to give him a kind Recep-- tion, fo that he was never at a LoSs fof a Plea
for
126	L O' U r S N
for going abroad. Five Years Spent in thi,s miserable Manner made her forget all the HappineSs' she had enjoyed in the first three after she married ; the Death of her Hushand, which happened when she was not much more than three and twenty, delivered her from the Yoke she had fo long groaned under, but has not reconciled her to the World : her Beauty still remains, her Tendernefs is only confined to her Son and Daughter, who promife to make her a more grateful Return than their Father did ; her Brother is Guardian to them, and greatly attached to his Sister.-We are told frequent-
ly, my dear Sophia^ that Unhappinefs like poor Mrs. Grevillds, proceeds from a wrong Choice, but it is eafier to trace the Source of it, than to avoid it; every one fuppofes the Perfon they love most likely to make them happy ; blinded by Passion it is hardly possible for us to judge rightly of the real Merit of the Obje£i ; the Lover becomes a Hushand, and often a very different Being from what he appeared to be ; we perceive our Mistake when it is too late to remedy it; Some, more prudent than others, conceal their Knowledge of the Difference ; _ others, unable to contain their Surprize and Vexation, make known their Mifery, but both are equally wretched.-—What a Theme have I got upon ! Just on the Brink of Matrimony, how can 1 allow myfelf to imagine there is any
Thing © -
LOUISA.	227
Thing to apprehend from it ?—Alas, my dear Lady Sedley^ had I not your Example to oppoSe to Mrs. GrmV/^’s, 1 should never venture to \ trust my HappincSs to So precarious a Chance.-— As it is, even yowx Louifa has a thoufand Anxier-ties on the Approach of the Dayand will require all your charming Vivacity to keep up her Spirits.---Pardon me, dear Sir James., for this
Confession, I would not have made it to any but my Sophia, who knows how possible it is to love tenderly, yet have many Apprehensions on Such an Occasion. I have no Doubt of his Heart or Temper, yet how do I know but I may be myfelf the CauSe of his UnhappineSs and my own too, for I cannot imagine that in Such a Union there can be Separate BliSs or WretchedneSs ? How many Accidents may happen (without either of us being adlually in Fault) to interrupt our Peace ? How few Couples, among the many we know, are happy ? Thefe, my dear Cousin, are melancholy Reflexions!--1 have fat up late to write, let
me fancy the DarkneSs and StillneSs of the Night gives Birth to thefe gloomy Ideas ; if the Dawn does not dissipate them, I shall not fee my Lover with the Pleafure I have done.
Saturday Morning.
It was juft as I thought, my Friend; your Limifa	none of her Fears; the Voice
and
■?A$ LOUISA.
and Sight of Sir yames forbid me to doubt of Happinefs. I will not injure him by feeling the least Dread in pronouncing the irrevocable Vow ; he has as large a Share of my Esteem as my Love; a Choice applauded by the virtuous and the wife cannot be a wrong one. Has he not been tried, and has he not proved his Worth ! Away with all mean Sufpicions, they Suit not with Such a Situation as mine. ....
I had forgot to acquaint you with Sir yamefs GeneroSity to my Poor \ he will allow two hundred a Year to maintain my Foundations at Bloom-hilf and has promifed to pafs two Sum-.mer Months constantly at this Place; its Vicinity to Bentky-park will make it agreeable to us i both : The HouSe at Druid.s-Grwe is not foha-• bitable a one as this, besides we are naturally partial to the Place where we have known most PleaSure, and this then certainly has the Advantage of the other.
I fend this to you by a Special Messenger, the Post not being quick enough to Satisfy the Impatience of thofe who hope to fee you here ;
I need not name them, but my dearest Sophia may be assured that none of them are So desirous of having her here as her affedfionatc
Louifa Fermor,
L O U I S A.	229
LETTER XLIV.
Lady Sedley to Mifs Fermor.
CEASE to reproach me, my amiable Louifa.^ and learn the Caufe of my Seemingly unkind Delay. —In my last I informed you of my Intention of being at Bloom-hUl in a few Day’s*, in confequence of which all due Preparations were made for the Journey ; 1 talked inceflantly of the Joy of embracing my Sweet Friend, and complained of the immenSe Length of the Hours which detained me still in Town; my Impatience amounted to a Crime, and was near meeting with Punishment Sufficient to have atoned for one of a blacker Dye : My dear , Sedley has been in the most imminent Danger from a putrid fore Throat and Fever; he had felt the Symptoms of it for Some Days, but afraid of retarding my fo-much-wished-for Journey, he would not Suffer a Complaint to efcape him; his altered Looks first told me of his Indisposition ; terrified beyond MeaSure, I dispatched Meffengers without Number for Physicians, Surgeons,and Apothecaries;—Thephy- , steal Tribe arrived;; with a faultering Accent I begged to know their Opinions; the gentle H. too humane to deprive me of the little remain-4	ifig
LOUISA.
ing SenSe I had left, would not tell me what he thought, but faid he hoped Lord Sedley was not So ill as my alarmed Imagination had figured him to be a very few Hours convinced me that in thinking him dangeroufly ill 1 had not been mistaken; he was Seized with a Delirium, and pronounced by the more rough W. to be in Danger; in vain did they try to keep me ignorant of the threatened Misfortune, their Countenances betrayed what their Tongues refufed to Speak ; I quitted not his Bed-Side, my Sighs \ and Swoons recalled his Scattered SenSes ; forgetful of his own Pains he felt only mine, . which were Soon removed by finding his abated.
Two Days pasted, during which I experienced Horrors, the bare Idea of which makes me Ihudder at this Instant; Heaven, at last propitious to my Prayers, restored him tome; the Fever left him, and with it every dangerous Symptom. Ever anxious to give me PleaSure, my loved Sedley no Sooner finds himfelf able to leave his Room than he begins to Speak of going to Bloom-hiU\ I am apprehenfive of his venturing out as yet; I objed:, I remonstrate to him, but he is too much the Man of Fashion to pay any Regard to Remonjirances,, he therefore infists on our Setting out on Wednefday next.—I will not be unreasonable enough to defire you to postpone any longer the happy Day ; Sir 'James has had
already
G U I S A.	2,31
fekeady ReaSon enough to quarrel with me, I will not give him any fresh Caufe to call me his Enemy : As we shall be obliged to travel flowly, we must be a Week on the Road, and 1 would not for the World be accessary to your remaining Mifs	another Wfeek; wait not
then, mYAouifa, for our Arrival ; be assured that our best Wishes will attend you to the Altar, If Charms and Merit can irifure Happinefs, you of all Women bid fair for the most uninterrupted Felicity.
J rejoiced to find the latter Part of your -Letter wrote in a leSs moralizing Style than the Beginning of it. Mrs. Grevillf% Fate had, I perceived, given Rife to Some Reflexions not greatly in Favour of the State you are fo near entering upon : 1 am forry to own that ninety-nine Couple out of a hundred would Serve only to confirm you in the Notions you have imbibed.—Do not be offended Sir ‘James., I mean not to prejudice my Friend against Matrimony, I am convinced that it is very pof-Sible to be Supremely happy as a Wife, but I am equally certain that the most complete Wretch-ednefs frequently attends the Character. I hesitate not to affirm that my amiable Friend will rank among the first mentioned, she therefore has nothing to apprehend.-^----—
My
432	LOUISA."
My Brother and Sister staid in Town till Lord Sedley was quite out of Danger, and were Sincere Partakers in my Woe; the latter makes the best Nurfeyou can imagine j I was not Sensible of my own Talents in that Capacity until this Opportunity offered for displaying them ; may I never have Occasion again to exert them !
Iouifa be not jealous of the dear Lucy^ all amiable as she is, she cannot rival you with your	S, Sedley.
^	/§C
LETTER XLV.
Lady Sedley to Lady Walton.
Blootn-hill.
YOU were mistaken, my amiable Lady Walton^ when you fuppofed that I should be fo much engrossed at Bloom-hilf as not to bestow a Thought on my beloved Sister; dear as Louifa is to my Soul, she is not able to dif-poffefs the gentle Lucy of the Place she fo justly merits in my Affediion.
We arrived at our Journey’s End without meeting with any of thofe marvellous Adventures or furprissng Incidents which fo often be-falTravellers. Thankstothefertileinvention of this luxurious Age for th« Finenefs of theRoads,
and
LOUISA;	233
and the eafy Construflion of a Post-Coach ; how much more eligible than jolting, in full-drested Pinners, on a Pillion, behind our Surly Spoufes ! Observe I only mean to apply that Epithet to the Hufbands of thofe Days, for to be Sure the preSent Race differ as much from their Forefathers in DifpoSition as in Drefs j at least if you and I judge from Lord Walton and Sedley, we have good Grounds for Such a ConcIuSion.
Notwithstanding my expreSs Commands to my Friend not to delay her Marriage on our Account, we found her still Mifs Fermor; the dear Girl would not confent to have the Ceremony performed without us : Every Obstacle being now removed, the next Morning made her Lady Brudenell. You, Lady Walton.^ are not personally acquainted with this charming Relation, but you have So often heard me Speak of her, that you are no Stranger either to her external or internal Perfedlions ; never did She appear fo beautiful as at this Time ; the Country Air has added Bloom to Features which wanted nothing elfe to make the Face quite perfedl; her expressive Countenance gives evident Proof of the Happinefs which reigns within ; she has long loved Sir James, and loved him at a Time when she was uncertain of being loved by him ; gueSs then what she now feels on the Removal of all past SuSpicions; Doubts
and
’	D
^3+	LOUIS	-A.	^
and Anxieties have given Way to the most pleaSing Certainties. Sir yames is not behindhand with her in Happiness:, So that we are all ^Gaiety and	Contentment. Mr.	and Mrs. Rivers	\
‘ and a	few	more feledl Friends make	up	the	i
Party; we walk, laugh, and dance the whole Day: Sedley is So perfectly recovered that he disdains to listen to my judicious Admonitions ;
Should he relapSc again, I have threatened not tp trouble tnyfelf about him, but unluckily he is So well assured of my Incapacity to put the Threat into Execution, that it has not had the deSired Effe'dl: on him.
We have engaged to accompany Sir yames and Lady Brudenell into Berkfhire ; they are fo very happy in themfelves, that it will cost me fome Entreaties to make them confent to enter into the Dissipation of a Town Life; they shall however pofitively promife to join us after	:
Chrijimas in the gay Metropolis; she will, my dear Zrvry, be a strong Reinforcement to our Set of unfashionable Wives ; Heavens, what a Trio ! All handfome, in high Life too, and yet our Names unheard-of in Doctors Commons I
a Singular Instance this-----^I am Summoned
by Sir yanies-t my constant Partner, to attend
the Dance.-----Adieu, fay all that’s tender to
yoar Caro from Your afFeisiionate S. Sedley,
F • I N I S.
rri -	- ,'	■■ ,1
'	'	■	•	'''	''A
*	•	'' ^	I
b.	' •'•’	'
L'	*■	•	.
■ /■ ■ ■- ' :} ''S’’	■	'	'
" ^ ; ' ■	•	..	,	-'%;S
V •	,	'	'•
" ■ . . • ' ‘ A ■ ■
% '-f
F ■ - . ’ :	.	' ■' '	'
■ . ■ ■ .
I ■	'	•	^	^
_.
i ■■	‘
i -	'	.	'.	'	■, ■-	1
.	C-
I	757 /9/^>^ ■7'? rF	■ ,- -
' " cV- \
^'-_: . ■
- ■ '	• f
' .	' f\
f? '	'" ■	‘	.'■	> . C/	•, "’ ^
fri: -r4V~ teles’ '
IT ’■ ’	' "'j
N'-'v'*^-^.^ ' AAL.I f '^:--id:Ad.rilf.rd.y	%
f •;# '■	■ ■ ■,'■■■ ^.. ;: ",	' I
t -	'	: -	I
J ■ 'Sii ^ . -';	y ■"	■	*.
j.c , :	N:.,*'	^
;	•	.]■: 'F' ;	■ •' '■' :.'A fM
“ ■	.	• ', »	fl
- • :C ..'^ vS i -F^W
i ; : " . ,i iiS:'- ■ ^
I" ■ - v'C'I’S	'
;■ C. ' ^ _ . ,	^ < ■'%: ' '	* -:, ' ■
'. --	,':	-. ■;	'■■: .L.- ■	: t. .	',.■	?
r	■ r-	"-.r—■■ ■■■■	'-T ■; ■■■ - ;’
:	C-"	\	■■
: -C-	' ' y ,, . I
I? ''Ihiv
I vx V)
■■ \ ' 'N'-;-‘ L -•
i>._.,.,-:'.,:.■ ! ■ '.
■■ Zr^	^ f ■ '
.- i : ' , V ■ _ ■ ' ■ ■ ■	■
o' - ■-
S'-' ~~~'rry^-^I : ,	' ri
ii 'iS"''; ■ ■:; :;■:
■ !'■	i'
f ,■■- ■
•V ^	, * . ■
• .^:- : - ■
^ j ^'
