ggs Mufiers. 
gainil the murderers, or elfe cercifie Such Inquifitlons into dit 
King. Bench. ^ 
Villa Coroner (hall not be remifle, but duly execute his office according to Law, in pain of y 1. am' (hall hare for his see t«pon view of the body) i J i. 4 d, the goods of the murtherec, if he 
have any; if no, then out offuch amerciaments as fhallbcfct upon the Town Ship, that Suttered the murderer to clcape. 
Musters. 
Lifctat f P.af.3.ifany who halbe commanded tomufferby ny auxhorixed thereunto, doth absent himself (having no lawful txeufe) or at Such musters doth not bring with him his best Armi, he (hail Suffer ten days imprisonment without ball, to be imposed by the persons fo authorised, unlchc he will agree to pay 4« /. fora fine to the ufc of the King and Queen, and the heirs and fucceffori of the Queen, which fine (hall be estreated into the Exchequer by the Said persons fo authorised under their fcals within 2 months after such agreemenr, ad afterward levied as fines assessed by Ju* Ibices of aftizc and goal delivery in their Circuits. 
n. If any petfon authorised to muster, or levy Soldiers ball exaff or take any reward to difeharge or Iparc any from the laid service, he (ball forfeit ten times fo much, as he (hall fo exact or cake 
III A Captain or other Officer, which after he ikall have (for a reward) licensed a Souldier to depaic, doth not pay him his wages, and coat and eondud money, (hall forfeit ten times fo much as he (hall So take, and to the Souldier three times fo much a be Should have paid him. 
IV The one moity of the abovefaid forfeitures (except that limited CO the Souldier) is given to the King and Queen, and the other 'o the profecivor. 
V Justices of Aflizc, Justices of Peace, and Stewards in Lcets have power to hear and determine ihcfc offences; and the Justices of Afiize or Peace upon convistion of the offender miy commit him to pruon without bail, until he hath Satisfied the abovclaid j^nalties to the king, cu cn, and profccutor, or where there is na yrofccutor to the King and Queen alone. 
VI Offences comniitred during the time of Service shall be heard and dettnnined by the Chief Comaaandcri 
VII this t ff.all not dhebargefcrvicc of war incident to the ttmurc ohand, 
The 
boi>kj Pt'mted for, Jacob Tonlbn, dt the Judges Head in Chancery Lane mar fleet-street. 
HI s r 0 r. 
"W^lutamfs Lives jn Five; Volnmesr 
JA. Traossited from the Greek;, by fc vera! the most Eminent Hinds, aconsd vtoth ststy five Copper Cuts. 
^ A General Chronological History of France., beglnoing besore the Reign of Fharamsnd ^ and ending with that of Henry the Fourth, containing both the Civil and Ecckfiastical Tranfastions of that Kingdom. Written by the famous Monsieur Mezeray, Historiographer of France, 
The most diverting Travels of Ferdinand Mendez Tinto., a forutgal, during his ivavel sfor the spice of Twenty Years in the Kingdoms of Ethiopia, Cmna, tarta na, Cambinchma, Siam, pegh, Japan, and a great part of (he Eaf Indies, with a. Relation and dd’eriprion of the Places thereof their Religion, Laws, Riches, Customs, and Government in. the time ' of Peace and War: Where he five times Suffered Shipwreck j was siucen times 
Sold, 
r 
pi. 
5; X 
c.. 
UV' ' 

twe 
fc.: 
Div 
If: 
cs 
f.; 
th; 
c t 
A Catalogue of Bookj, 
Sold, and thirteen times made a Slave. Written Originally in the Vortugal toi>gue by himseis, and dedicated to the Mijesty cs Fhilf King of Spain The Third Edifion. 
The Pvcyal Commemaries of Dm in two Parts. The First Part treating of the Original of their Incas, or Kibgs, _ of their Idolatry, of their Laws and Government both in Peace and War, of ihc Reigns and Conquests of their Kings, with many other Particulars .relating to their Empire and Politics before Such time as the Spaniards Invaded their Countries. The Second Part, describing the nnarmer by which that new World was conquer’d by the Spaniards : also the Civil Wars bei tween the Fkarrijls and the Kltnagrians^ occasioned by Quarrels arising about the Division of that Land 5 of the rise and fall of the Pvebds, and other Particulars contain’d in that History : Illustrated with Sculptures. Written originally in by the graeulajjo ds la 
Vega y and rendered into English by Sir Paul K icaut. 
The History of the Life and Reign of the most Renowned and Vitstorlous piin cefs Elizabethy late (een os England, 
con. 
A Catalogue of Bookr. containing all the most Important and Rerriarkable palsiges of State, both at home and abroad fso far as they were jink’d vathengltlh Affairs) during her Jong and prosperous Reign. Written by willidmcamhdmclarences^kln^ at Arms. The fourth Edition,; 
state tracsisj in Two Parts: The First Part being a Colkdstion of several Treatises relating to the Government j privately printed in the Reign of King Charles the Second. The s.cond Part, consisting of a farther Colkcstion ot Several choice treatises relating to the Government, from the Year i6ho to i6dp. Published in a Body, to she the Necessity, and clear the Legality of the late Revolution, and our Happy Settlement under the auspicious Reign of their Majesties King williamz'os, c^ecn Mary,. 
The History ol the Wars, c. between the League and the Tvvo Kings, Hniry the Third, and Henry the Forth of France. Englished by Mr. Vrydefiy upon, the Command of King Charles II 
p 0 E L K r. 
The Works of out Ancient, Learned) and Excellent Eng'nfh Poet jeofferylhau: 
.alaiakgue ef Boch. 
ccr, as they have been lately compared by ihe best manuscripts, and fevtral things added never before in Piinr. To which is adjoin’d, The Story of the Siege of Thebes. By John Lidgate.^ Monk of Buryi Together with the Life oichaucer; with a di6lionary explaining the obsolete Words. 
The Works of that Famous engups Poet Mr. Edmond Spencer containing The Fairy een the Shepherds calen dar, the Aftory of Ireland; Whereunto is added, An Account of his Life j with other new Additions, never before in Print, 
The Works of Sir William jiavenanty consisting of those which were formerly Printed, and those which he designed for the Press, now published of the Original Copies. 
Mr. Milton's Juvenile Poems with his treatiseof Education. 
Mr. Miltons Paradije Lofty adorned withcutts. 
Mr. Milton's Paradise Regain d > with the Poems of Sampson .Agonijies. 
The Works ot Mr. Abraham cotaplejy consisting of those which were formerly Printed, and twe which he dtsigned 
for 
\ 
Catalogue of Books. 
for the piess, now published out os the Authors Original Copies.. To this Edi lion are added, Ihe. Cutter of coleman fireef and Several Copies of vcrses on the Author, byjpersoosof Honour: As alsoa Table to the whole Works j never before Printed. The Eighth Edition. 
The Satires of Peemus Jmius Juve^ mus transsated into English Verse, by Mr. Dryderij and Several other Eminent Hands; Together with the Satires of Aulits Terfius Flaccus i made English by Mr. Pry den > t^ith Explanatory Notes at the end of each Satire. To which is prefixed, A discourse concerning the o riginal and progress of Satire : Dedicated to the Right Honourable, Charlesy Earl of Vorfet and Middiefex^ by Mr. Dry den. 
Poems by the most deservedly admir’d fais. Catherine Phillipsi Lhe Matchkfs o rinda; To which is added Mohfieur Corneilles Pompey and Horace Tragedies, with Several other Transtations out of French. ^ 
Poems, written upon Several Occasions, and to Several Persons, by Edmund lvauere(^; The Fifth Edition, with Several Additions, never before Printed. The 

ii 
A Catalogue of Bod. 
ihe Mats Iragedy Alteredy with Some other Poems, by edmundwader teff, 
Dr. Don's Poems, with Elegies on the author’s Death; To which is added diverse Copies under his own Hand, never before printed. 
Sir John suckhn's Poems. Mr. Carevds Poems. 
Steps to the Temple, the Delights of the mu fes, and Carmen Deo Fojtroy by Rkbotrd Craflmw. The Third B'dition. 
Poems, (^rc. on Several Occasions'; with va lentinian, a Tragedy; written by the Right Honourable John., late Earl of rochesfer. 
Ovidds Epistles Transsated by several Hands. The Fourth Edition *, with the Addition of the epistles of Auhu Sabinm., in anfvver to as many of Ovid : adorn’d with several Cuts. 
The Odes, Satyrs, - and Epistles of Horace Englilhed by Mr. Creech. 
miscellany Poems in Two Farts, containing new Translations out of Virgif lucretit^s, Horace ovidaheikritus., and other Authors; with Several Original Poems, by the most Eminent Hands; publioied by Mr. Dryden. 
Poems on several Occasions; with a Voyage to the Istand of Love: By Mrs, A. Behne. 
Letters and Poems Amorous and Gallant. 
Mr. Shakefpears Comedies, Histories, and tra ^edie.s: Publilhcd according to the true Original Copies: Unto which is added Seven new Plays never before Drinted. 
A Catalogue of Books 
ted in ore: To which is added a Comedy, cal itd The Net Inn i with Additions never before publifhe d. 
Five New Plays, The Surprifaf Committee, 
Comedies; the Indian Queen Vefial Virgin, Duke of Lerma, Tragedies; Written by the Honourable Sir Rod. Howard. The Second Edition corrected. 
MISCELLAN E A. 
Senecds Morals, by way of Abstrad.thc Fifth Edition. To which is added, A Difeourfe, under the Title of an afterthought, by Sir Roger V ejhange. 
Tullf% Offices in Three Books, turn’d out of Latin into Engliffj, by Sir Roger L Efirange. 
Sir Roger V Efirange's Guide to Eternity, Englifhed from Cardinal Bona. 
A Dialogue concerning Women, being a Defence of the Sex : Written to Eugenia. 
Miscellanea, A Survey of the Constitutions and Interests of the Empire, Sweden, den mar^ Spain, Holland, France, and Flanders, Kith. their Relation to Englandin the Year 1671. 
. An Essay upon the Original and Nature of Government. An E, itay upon the Advancement of Trade in Ireland, upon the coniesure of Affairs in Ollober if: Upon the Excess of Grief: An Essay upon the Cure of the Gout by moj^a: By Sir William Temple Baronet. 
Observations upon the United Provinces of the Netherlands; By Sir W. Temple. The 6th Edition, r rencr). 
poemssc^c. writcep upon Several Occasions, and to Several Persons, by Edmund ivallev esq; The Fifth Edition, with Several Additions, never before Printed. The 

t. 
% 
CDI f. Df ic/td 
0^4' 
Spft 
tk 
i 
efuf fs tk 
s 
Hough 1 parted from you resolved to obey your impossible commands, yet‘kttow, Oh charming Sihia\ that after a Thousand conflists between Love and Honour, I found the God (too mighty for the Idol) reignr absolute Monarch in my Soul, and Soon banish’t that Tyrant thence. That cruel gounsellor that would B. suggest 
1» 
( 
a 
fugged: to you a Thousand fond Arguments to hinder my noble pursuit j Silvia came in view! her unrefistable Idea I with' all the Charm of blooming youth, with all the Attractions of Heavenly Beauty I loose, wanton, gay, all flowing her bright Hair, and languiftiing her lovely eyes, her dress all negligent as when I law her last, difcoyering a Thousand ravishing Graces, round white small Breasts, delicate Neck, and rising bosbm ^ heav’d with Sighs She wou’d in vain conceal, and all bectdes, that nicest fancy can imagicip Surprising Oh I dare not think on, lest my desires grow mad and raving ^ let it fuf jfice, Oh adorable Silvia I I think and know enough to justify that flame in me, which our weak alliance of ^qther and Sister has render d fo criminal 5 but he that 
adores 
ac 
‘ Fond 
noble 
lew 
th' all 
omh 
5 of 
inton, 
: Hair, eyes, hen I fhou round Ned wits iceali fancy Oh! Idires it fuf think, ^ that i alii r has that lores 
C 3) 
z.dot€s Sihia, Should do it at an uncommon rate 5 tis not enough to Sacrifice a single heart, to give youa simple pasiion, your Beauty Should like itself produce wondrous effects 5 it Should force all obligations, all laws, all ties even of Natures Self: You, my lovely Maid, were not born to be obtained by the dull methods of ordinary loving, and his in vain to prescibe me meafiires 5 and oh much more in vain to urge the nearness of our Relation. What Kin my charming are yon to 
me? No ties of blood forbid my pasfion 5 and what’s a Ceremony imposed on man by Custom? what is it to my divine^i/w^, tlwt the Priest took my hand and gave it to your Sister? what Alliance can that create? why Should a trick devisjed by the wary old, only to make provision for post b 2 rity 
’ C 4 } 
fterity, tie me to an eternal Slavery ^ No, no, my charming Maid, 'tis nonferrse all j let us ( born for mightier joysscorn the dull katen road, but let us love like the first race of men, nearest allied to God, promishuouoy they lov’d, and poffess'st, Father and Daughter, Brother and Sister met, and reap’d the joys of Love without control, and counted it Religious coupling, and ’twas encouraged too by Heaven itself: Therefore start not S'too nice and lovely Maid J at Shadows of things that can buttrightfen fools;; Put me not off With thefc'delays'5 rather say you but dislembled Love all this while, than now’tis born, to die again with a poor fright of nonsense. A fit of Honour.' a fantome imaginary and no more 5 no, no, reprefentine to your Soul more favourably 4 think 
tl 
y 
an 
1^ 
: hoii 
digi 
icolj 
( 5) 
think you see me languishing at your feet, breathing out .my last in fighssand kirri reproaches, on the pitiless 6'i/cmy refled when I aoi dead, which will be the rflore afhidipg^bjedvthe Ghost (as yoii re pilled to call it) of your Murdered ^ociour, or the pale and ble^dingtec of 
The lost ^philanuer, 
lid.davfhqle d 
andyct'm Letter from Silvia, 
: ni 
'If! 
B 9 
Ta 
(6) 
To Philander. 
OH why will you make me own ( oh too importunate Philander!) with what regret I made you promise to prefer my Honour before your Love? 
I contest with bluflies, which you might then tee kindlingin my face, that! was not at all pleated with the Vows you made me, to endeavour to obey me, and I then even wished you would obstinately have denied obedience to my just commands, have pursued your criminal flame, and have left me raving on my undoing : For when you were gone, and I had leash re to look into my heart, alas.' I found whether you obliged or not, whether Love, or Honour wereprefer’d, I, unhappy I, was 
either 

C 1 I 
ke riunai •gret Serin 
pnid] ileafei northeast, ti I they natelj jy joj 
yt Sti whefl] jarurej las rd 0^ jnoiir was ■itlier 
cither way innevitably lost. Oh what pitiless God, fond of his wondrous power, made us the objects of his Almighty vanity > Oh why were we two made the first presidents of his new found revenge? for Sure no Brother ever lov’d a Sister with So criminal a flame before: At least my unexperienced innocence ne’re met with So fatal a story: And ’tis in vain ( my too charming Brother) to make me inlenfibleof our Alliance 5 to persuade me I am a stranger to all but your eyes and soul. 
Alas, your fatally kind industry is all in vain. You grew up a Brother with me 5 the title was fixtin my heart, when I was too young to understand your subtle distinctions, and there it thriv’d and Spread 5 and Vis now too late to tranlplant it, or alter its Native B 4 Property 
( 8) 
Property: Who can graft a flower on a contrary stalk } Rose will bear no Tulips, nor the Hyacinth the Poppy 5 no more will the Brother the name of Lover. O Spoil not the natural sweetness and innocence we now retain, by an endeavour ftuitlefs and destructive 5 no, no, Philander ^ dress yourself in what charms you will, be powerful as Love, can make you in' yout Soft argument — yet, Oh yet, you are my Brother still, - But why, Oh cruel and eternal Powers, was not Philander my Lover before you destined him a Brother? or why being a Brother did you malicious and fpightful powers destine him a Lover! oh take, either title from him, or from me a life which can render me no satisfaction,, your cruel laws permit 
it 
ivl 
C 9) 
it not for Philand^ » nor, his to bless thee now. 
Unfortunate Silvia, 
Wednefdaj 
To Philander, 
Fter I had dismissed my Page this morning with my Letter, I walk’d ( fiird with fbft thoughts of ray Brother phiund^ der) into the Grove, artd commanding to retire, who 
only attended mei threw myself down on that bank of graft where we last disputed the dear but fatal bufineft of our fouls: Where our prints (that invited me) still remaip on the pressed gneens: There with Ten thorn B 5 ( Sand 
( lo) 
fandfighs, with remembrance of the tender minutes we past then, L drew your last Letter from mybo ibm^ and often kid, and often read it over 3 but oh, who can conceive my Torment, when! came to that fatal part of it, where you say you gave your hand to my Sister > I found my soul agitated with a Thousand different passions, but all insupportable, all mad, and 1 aving 3 fbmetimes I threw my self with fury on the ground, and pressed my panting heart to the earth, then rise in rage and tear my hair, and hardly Spare that face that taught you first to love : then sold my wretched Arms to keep down rising Sighs that almost rend my breast, I traverse ^iftly the confeious Grove 5 with any distracted show ring eyes dieted in vain to pitiless Heaven, die lovely filent shade favouring 
my 
incec 
'll rejj 'Hceiit totlij oufaj Sister wity 
IS, 
(") 
ms to at al jverlo, with es di avefl, uring ml 
my complaints, I cry aloud, Oh God! Philanders married, the lovely charming thing for whom I languish is married! — That fatal word’s enough, I need not add to whom. married’s enough to make me curse my Birth, my Youth, my Beauty, and my Eyes that first betray’d me to the undoing Objedf: Curse on the Charms you have flatter’d, for every fancied Grace has help’d my ruin on 5 now like flowers that wither unseen and unpostest in (hades, they must die and be no more, they were to no end created, since philandeps married: Married I Oh fate, Oh hell, 6h torture and confusion 1 tell me not ’tis to my Sister, that addition is needless and vain: To make me eternally wretched there needs no more than that Philandef smmkd! than that the 
Priest 
. r 12 j 
Priest gave I our hand a way from me 5 to another and not to me tir’d out with life I need no other Pafpprt than this Repetition, 
married I tis that alone is Sufficient to lay in her cold Tomb. 
^rftihed m.d. deff airing 
SILVIA 
Wednejiday night, bchfor.u .' 

\ \ 
1 I 
fro 
'nit) Other hfti. alone cold 
'airing 
Ik 
To 
I 

To Silvia. 
Twice last night, Ohunfaith ' fill and unloving Silvia! I Sent my Page to the old place for Letters, but he returned the object of ray rage, because without * the least remembrance from my sickle Maid: In this Torment, unable to hide my disorder, I Suffered my (elf to be laid in bed ^ where the restlest torments of the night exceeded those of the day, and are not even by the languifh er himshlf to be expressed 3 but the returning light brought a Short stutnber on its Wings 3 which was interrupted by my attuning Boy, who brought two Letters from my adorable Silvia; He waku me from Dreams more agreeable than all my watchful hours could 
( H) 
bring, fsr they are all tortured. — And even the fbfteft mixed with a Thousand despairs, difficulties and disappointments, but these were all love, which gave a loose to joys undenied by Honour 1 and this way my charming, shvia you Shall be mine, in Spite of all the Tyrannies of that cruel hinderer 5 Honour appears not my shvia within the dole drawn Curtains, in (hades and gloomy light the fantom frights not, but when one beholds its bluflies, when hsattended and adorned, and the Sun sees its false Beauties in Silent Groves andgrotto’s, darkalcoves, and lonely recesses, all its formalities are laid aside, it was then, and there, methoughtmy Silvia yielded, with a faint struggle and a Soft relistance? I heard her broken sighs, her tender whiipering Voice that trembling criedj« oh can you 
be 
II 

'tutel, mis 
ifficdl 
> bi 
> >yho. iraiinj fpigli It cm irsnot Irawn !oo[ny 
but when id the (ilent : oves, 
D, ani ^ieid a Soft ■oken /oice I you 
be 
(H J 
fb cruel. — Have you the heart — Will you undo a Maid, because (he loves you? Oh will you ruin mebecaufe you may > My faithless - unkind, thenfigh’d and yielded, and made me happier than a Triumphing God! But this was still a Dream, I wak’d and figh’d, and found it vanisti all! But oh my Silvia, your Letters were Substantial pleashre, and pardon your Adorer if he tell yob, even the difbrder you express, is infinitely dear to him, since he knows it all the estects of Love 5 Love my Soul! which you in vain oppose 5 pursue it, Dear, and call it not undoing, or else explain your fear, and tell me what your fost, your trembling heart gives that cruel title to? Is k undoing to Love? and love the Man you say has Youth and Beauty to justify that Love? A man 
that 
( lo 
that adores you with j(b fubmist five and perfect a resignations A man that did not only Love first, but is resolved to die in that a greeabl^ flames in my Creation I was formed for Love, and destined for my Silvia y and she for her Philander; And shall we, \ can we disappoint our Fate? noj my Soft Charmer, our souls were touched with the same (hafts of Love before they had a being in our Bodies, and can we contradict Divines Decree? 
Or is it undoing, Dear, toblefe Philander with what you must sometime or other (acrifice to some hated loath’d object, ( for can never love again) and are those Treasures for the dull conjugal Lover to rifle? Was the beauty of Divine (hape created for the cold Matrimonial kn brace? And (hall the eternal 
pys 
ve, no) tr£ ol; is ira 
u 
lut 
( H 
joys that Silvia can dispense, be returned by the clumfey huf band’s careless forcd insipid duties 5 Oh my Silvia (hall a Lust band ( whole insensibility will call those Raptures of jay! those Heavenly blistes f the drudgery of life J (hallhe l(hy receive ’em? While your Philander with the very thought of the excels of pleasure, the least postestion would afford, saints o re the Paper that brings here his eternal Vows. 
Oh where my Silvia lies the undoing then } My Quality and Fortune are of the highest rank amongst men. My Youthgay and fond, my Soul all Soft, all Love s and all silvia"*s 1 I adore her, I am sick of Love and lick of Life, till (he yields (he is all mine! 
You Say my Silvia I am married, and there my happiness is ^ ' (hip. 
() 
shipwrecked 5 but shvia I deny it, and will not haye you think it 3 no, my Soul was married to yours in its first Creation 3 and only Silvia is the Wife of my Sacred, my everlasting v0ws5 of my b lemn considerate Thought, of my ripen’d Judgement, my mature Considerations. The rest are all repented and forgot, like the hasty folly’s of unsteady Youth, like Vows breath’d in Anger, and die perjur’d as Soon as vented, and unregarded either of Heaven or Man. Oh why should my Soul Suffer for ever, why eternal pain for the unheedy short liv’d sin of my unwilling Lips? Besides, this fatal thing called Wise, this unlucky Sister, this Mertilla^ this stop to all my Heaven, that breeds Such fatal differences our Soft Affairs, this metiiua I say ^ first broke her Marriage Vows to me 3 
I 
Jenyii link it 
3 yoliii 
d cnl' acred myfe 
^ ofui| roaturf are b tk Touts r, and dj and vencri f Sooil il painl On of », this lis uu, this ireeds ir Soft 
loiej 
( o) 
I blame her not, nor is it reasonable I Should, She Saw the yourig Cefario., and lov’d him. cefahoy whom the envying World in Spite of prejudice must own, has un resiftable Charms, that godlike form, that fweetneis in his face, that softness in his Eyes and delicate Mouth h and every Beauty besides that Women dote on, and ^ Men envy; That lovely composition of Man and Angfel! with the addition of his eternal Youth and illustrious Birth, was form’d by Heaven and Nature for universal Conquest! and who can love the charming Hero at a cheaper rate than being undone? And She that would not venture Same, Honour, and a Marriage Vow for the Glory of the young Cefarw s heart, merits not the noble Victim 5 Oh I would I cou’d Say So much for the young Philander, 
who 
(" 20 0 
who wou’d run a Thousand tides more hazards of Life and Fortune for the Adorable Silvia, than that amorous Hero ever did for. mertil/a^ though from that Prince 1 tearn’t Some of ray disguiies for my thefts of loye^ for lie like jove courtectin Several Shapes 31 law *ejii all and fuster’d the dclu “on tctpafs upon me 3 for I had seen the lovely Silvia 3 Yes, I had Seen her, and I lov’d her too : But Honour kept me yet Master of my Vows 3 but when I knew her false, when I was once confirm’d, — When by my own Soul I found the diflembl’d paflion of her’s, when (he cou’d no longer hide the blushes or the paleness that Seized at the approaches of my diforderm Rival, when I Saw Love dancing in her Eyes, and her false heart beat with nimble motions, and Soft trembling feiz’d 
every 
CL 
ti 
I C 
C 
hen 
^ Foi th Hdli) Pririci Ses sole liti pes5l dell]. Iliad Ihd too; dafter knew con i Sou! on of )Dger enei esof [Saw and nble; iz’d Kl) 
C 21 J 
every Limb, at the approach or touch of the Royal Lover, then I thotight my (elf no longer obliged to conceal my flame for sz/ vtd 5 nay, ere I broke silence, e’re idiibover’d the hidden Treafiire of my heart, I made her falsehood plainer yet: Even the time and place of the dearaflignationsl discover d 5 certainty'! happy certainty! broke the dull heavy chain, and I with joy Submitted to my ftiameful freedom, and caress’d my generous Rival, nay and by Heaven I lov’d him forh, pleas’d at the resemblance of our Souls, for We were Secret Lovers both, but more pleas’dthat he lov’d Mertilla, for that made way to my passion for the adorable Silvia 1 Let the dull hot brain’d jealous Fool upbraid me with cold Patience: Let the fond Goxcomb, whose Honour depends on the 
frail 
r 
22 0 
frail Marriage Vovy, reproach me, or tell me that my Reputation depends on the feeble constancy of a Wife, persuade me ’tis Honour to fight for an untrievable and unvalu’d Prize, and that be cause my Rival has taken leave to Cuckold me, 1 (hall give him leave to kill me too 5 unreasonable nonsense grown to custom. No by Heaven I shad rather shou’d be false,, asfhe } than wish and languish for the happy occasion 5 the sin’s the same, only the ad’s more generous .* Believe me, my Silvia,, we have all false notions of Virtue and Honour, and Surely this was taken up by Some despairing Husband in Love with a fair Jilting Wise, and then I Pardon him 5 I should have done as much .* for only she that hks my Soul, can only engage my Sword, she that I love and 
Biy 
'11 
I Ho. 
takeo 
ibans 
(" 23 0 
myself only commands and keeps my stock of Honour:? ox Silvia.! the Charming., the distracting sil vial I could fight for a glance or Smile, exppfe my heart for her dearer same, and wisti no recompense, but breathing out my last gasp into her Soft white delicate Bofbm. But for a Wife! that stranger to my Soul, and whom we Wed for Interest and neceffi ty, A Wife, a light loose unregarding Property, who for a momentary Appetite will expose her fame, without the noble end of loving on, stie that will abufemy Bed, and yet return again to the loath’d conjugal imbrace, back to the Arms lb hated, that even strong fancy of the absent Youth belov’d, cannot fo much as render Supportable. Curie on hen and yet she kistes, fawns and distem bles on, hangs on his Neck, and 
makes 
( H) 
makes the Sot believe; — Damn her. Brute ^ i’ll whistler off, and let her down the wind, as Othdla lays. No, I adcre the Wife, that when the Heart is gone, boldly and nobly pursues the Conqueror, and generously owns the Whore, — Not poorly adds the the nauseous sin of Jilting tot: That I could have born, at least commended j but this can never Pardon 3 at worst then the world had laid her Passion had undone her, Ihe lov’d, and Love at worst is worthy of pity. No, no, mer r forgive your Love, but never can your poor dilfimulati on. One drives you but from the Heart you value not, but t’other to my eternal contempt. One deprives me but of thee mer iilla^ but t’other entitles me to a beauty more surprising, renders ' thee no part of me 3 and lb leaves 
the 
me 
ygnjd 
foh 
(25) 
the Lover free to Silvia without the Brother. 
Thus my excellent Maid I have sent you the stnse and truth ef ny Soul, in an affair you hr ^.lid ten hinted to me, and 1 take no pleafiire to remember 5! hope you will at least think myaverfion reasonable 5 and that being thug undifputably freed from all obligations to Mertilla as a Husband, I may be permitted to lay claim to Silvia, as a Lover, and marry my (elf more effectually by my e verlasting Vows, than the Priest by his common thethod could do to any other Woman lest beloved, there being no other way at present left by Heaven, to render me Silvias 
eiernal happy Laver, and PHILANDER. 
I die fofieym 
C To 

To 
xhpn J ^5^ 
fp^ 
you. w^re tbismpjcaipg, cqnie from Bdfont ^ and With infinite impar tience have expected feeing yoir here 3 which defer d my this tp the ld; plaic^3 ai Xapi & vain ( ph ador^fe ^ j^eve my faheies; filenpe^has givett you difquiei: ?^ hutifere uiy silvi4ynot charge me wtuh, np, ^, 0ve 
and 1^5? itam pp chappe 
strange accidepy, bufhiefs could divert mev Np 5 were the Nation finking, thp great Senate of the World cpnfbunded, our Glorious Designs betray’d and rui^eid y stand the st Qtyall in flame 5 like Nero unconc^’id f 
wou’d 
roi] 
m 

old pie efroni impa. 
['ainffl ice icwm 
th 
tfv 
'No 
jgteat 
inded 
'’dan£ 
all ID 
m’d 
woifii 
(27) 
would fing ray everlasting Song of Lov^ to Sihia ^ which no time or Fortune (hall untune. I know my Soul, and all its strength, and how it is fortified, the charming Idea of my young Sihia w for ever remain there j the original may fade, time may render it lest fair, lest blooming in my Arras, but never in my Soul h i (hall find thee there the' same gay glorious creaturethatfirst (urprishdsand enslaved me, believe me, ravishing Maid I (hall. Why then, Oh why, my cruel Silvia! are my joys delayed ^ Why am I by your rigo; rous commands kept from! the sight of my Heaven, ray eternal bliss An age j^y fair torraen tor’s^ast, four tedious live long days are number o’fe, since 1 beheld thd db|ect of my lasting vov^s^y my eternal wi(h^', can ybiifhtrik, Oh iinreafonablie C 2 Silvkf 
f 28 J 
Silmd! that I could live fo long without you, and yet I am alive I find it by my pain, by torments of fears and jealousies infopport able^ I langdifli and go downward to the Earth, where you will (hortly see me laid without your recalling mercy 3 ’tis true I move about this unregarded world, appear every day in the great Senate houfe at Clubs, Cabals, and private Consultations ( for Silvia knows all the bufiness of my Soul, even its Politics of State as well as Love) I Say I appear indeed, and give my Voicie! in public bufiness 3 but oh my Heart more kindly is employed, that, and my Thoughts are sik vias I Ten thousand times a day Lbreath that name, my busie Fingers are eternally tracing out thofesix my stick Letters 3 a thou send ways on everything I touch 
forn 
solo, ssri all torniet ifuppoi) do lere witm tis troi regardj ly in lubs, CL ftiltati(| eb iliticks [fayli [ny Vci It oh uploff : s are nesaj 
bufieh 
iciog 1 fa till htoqj 
(29 J 
form words, and make them Speak a tbousand things, and all are Silvia still, my melancholy change is evident to all that see me, which they interpret many mistaken ways V our Party fancy I repent my League with them, and doubting Tie betray the Cause,, jealous of me, till by new Oaths, new Arguments I confirm them, then they Smile all, and cry lam in Love 5 they would believe, but that they see all Women that I meet or converse with are indifferent to me, and So can fix it nowhere; for none can guess it Silvia 5 thus while I dare not tell my Soul, no not even to Cefarioy thq stifled flame burns inward, and torments mefo, that funlike the thing I wasj I fear Silvia will iofe her Love, and Lover too 5 for those few Charms She laid I had, will C 3 fade, 
( 3°) 
fade 5 and this fatal disiance will destroy both Soul and Body too, my very reason will abandon me, and I Shall rave to See thee 5 restore me 5 Oh restore me then to Bellfont.) happy Bell font still blessed with silvia^s presence!! me, Oh permit me into those sacred Shades, where I have been fb often (too innocently blessed! Let me Survey again the dearcha silvia on the Smooth Eirch 5 Oh when Shall I sit beneath those Boughs, gazing on the young Goddefsof the Grove, hearing her sigh for Love, touch" ing her glowing Small white hands, beholding her killing Eyes languish 5 and her Charming bosom rise and fall with fhort breathm uncertain breath 5 breath as fbft and Sweet as the restoring breeze that glides ove the new blown Flowers: But oh what is it what 
Heaven 

[6, 

ay tool Ion ni( 
eed 
rd 
ihenti illbfci Pemi! hofeli.| el 1 blel 'arcb: fmootl fit bc’; ing 0! Grovf, touch shandii es bh' bofoii rear as Soli breeze blown } tvbat leaven 
i tshj 
Heaven of Perfumes, when it inclines k)'tho. rkvjftt, 
and whispers Love, .'it day. nat name'alohd 
"What power with holds. roe then from rushing on thee, from .^refiing thee, with kisies^ fbldiog theeril iny tfan/j^orred Aritis, and foilownitg all the dictate of Lovi Without respect or Awe! vv'ha is it. Oh itiy Sihid can detain a love fe violent and raving, anti to wild 3 admit me Sacred Maid, adihif me agaio' to thoieffqft; d ^fi|ht§5 thatt.ihay sthd, ifpostiblc, what Divinity envious of iny bliss J checks my eager joys j my raging flame 5^ while you too make an experiment fworth the trialj what his makes deny her Impatient Adorer 
philander. 
My Page is ill, and I am obliged to triijl Brilliard with these to the dear Cottage of their ^endsvou^; send me your Opinion of his fidelity;; ah I remember I die to fie you, 
C 4. Xo 
( 5^) 
To Thildnder. 
N Ot yet? — Not yet? Oh yc dull tedious Hours, when will you glide away } and bring that happy moment on, in which I (hall at leafs hear from my Philander Eight and Forty tedious ones are past, and I am here forgotten still ^ Forlorn, impatient, restless everywhere 5 not one of all yourlitde moments (ye undiverting hours) can afford me repose 5 I drag ye on, a heavy Load s I count ye all, and blessed ye when you are gone but tremble at the approaching ones, and with a dread expect you 5 and nothing willing will divert me now \ my Couch is tiresorn'e, and my Glass is vain 5 my Books are dull, and conversttion insupportable \ Grove affordsme no reliefs nor 
even 
f 33) 
oh|i 
1 bri 
nws 
nypii 
tedi 
ere I 
tienst 
le ofj 
ndivti 
rcpof 
.oad) 
'e wk 
nble 
d witfc 
notlii: 
)st)i 
nycli 
ull, ' 
lej 
lem 
even those Birds to whom I have fo often breath’d "Philanders name, they fing it on their perching Boughs 5 no nor the reviewing of his dear Letters, can bring me any cafe. Oh what Fates is reserved for me! for thus I cannot live 5 nor surely thus I (hall not die. Perhaps Philanders making a trialofvertueby this silence. pur fuc it, call up all your reafbn my lovely Brother to your aid, let us be wise andlilent, let us try what that will do towards the cure of this too infectious flamelet us, Oh let us, my Brother (it down here, and pur Sue the crime of Loving on no further. cah me sister. hswear Xain So, and nothing but your Sifter: and forbear, Oh forbear, my Charming Brother to pursue me farther with your soft bewitching Passion 5 let me alone, let me be ruin’d with Honour, if 
C 5 I 
C 34) 
I most; be ruin’d. For oh \’twere miieh happier I were no more than that I (hoiild be more than V or he than isf/* Ofiah Brother : Oh let ite ever call you by that cold nabie^ till that of Lover be forgotten: — Ha! - Methinks on the Sudden a ?fit ofvertue informs my Soufand bids me ask you for what sin of mine, my Gharming Brother you still pursue a Maid that cannot fly: Ungenerous and unkind 1 Why did you take advantageuf thole Freedoms I gave you as a Brother.?.? smipd on you, and • fomedqes kissed you too 5 But for my Sisters sake, I play*d with you, fuffer’d your Hands and Lips to wander where I dare not now y all which I thought a Sister might allow a Brother, and knew not all the while the Treachery of Love; Oh none, but under 
that 
kind 
; ageo 
(35j 
that intimate title of a Brother, could have had the opportunity to have ruihd me 3 that, that betray’d me; 1 play’d; w, at; =mj Heart at a Game J did not unber' stand 9 nor knew f when lost, by degrees fo fubtif, and an authority So lawsiif, you won me out of all. Nay then too, even when ail was lost, I would npt • think it Love I wondet’d what ^ my o^epleis Nights, my waking eternal thoughts, and flumbririg Visions of my lovely Brother meant: 1 wonderd why^my Sop! was continually filled with wifties and newdestrss j and still concluded ’twas for my Sister all, till I dishover’d the .cheat by jealdufie 5 for when ray Sister hung upo: i your neckjkistjand careft that face that lador d, “Ohliow I found my Colour change 5 ray Limbs all trerabledj and my blood inrag*d, 
and 
r3«j 
! - 
and I could (carce forbear reproaching you: Or crying out. Oh why this fondness Brother some times you perceived my concern, at which you’d Smile 5 for you who had been before in Love, ( a curse upon the fatal time) could guelsat my difbrder 5 then wou’d you turn the wanton play on me: When Sullen withmy jea ipufie and the cause, I fly your foftimbrace, yet wish you wou’d pur/ue and overtake me, which you ne’re shil*d to do, where as ter a kind quarrel all was pardoned, and all was well again: While the poor injur’d innocent my isister, made herself Sport at our (Iclufive Wars 5 still I was ignorant, till you in a most fatal hour inform’d me I was a Lover. 
X Thus was it with my heart in those blessed days of innocence 5 thus it was won and Joft 5 nor can all 
^cproj, '^1 Q 
)ncer(i, 
3r 
Lov( 
time 
5 thin 
pk myjej 
y yoffi 
(97) 
my stars ia Heaven prevent, I doubt prevent my ruin. Now you are lure of the fatal conquest, you scorn the trifling Glory, you are filent now 5 Oh I am inevitably lost) or with you, or without you: And I find by this little silence and absence of yours, that ’tis most certain I must either die or be Philanders, 
SILVIA. 
whici lereat s par again: locent )ortat 'as ig* f fatal .over., thofej lus it n all I iny 
r/dorillus com not with a Letter, or that my Page whom I have sent to his cottt^e for one, bring it not, I cannot fispfort my Life; for Oh Philander, I have a Thousand wild 'dijirar Sting fears, knowing how you arefnvolvd in the Interejt you have ejpoujed with the young Casikrio: how danger surrounds you, how your life and glory depends m the frail fecrefe of Villains and Babels : Oh give me leave to fear eternally your fame and life, if not your Love; if Silvia could command. Philander jfhould be Loyal as he s Noble; and what generous Maid would not fufpeb his Vows to a Mijirefs who breaks 'em with his Prince and Majter; Heaven prefirve yqu and your Glory. 
to 
) 
I To 
f \ Heavens, 
: f: "; L yet^ ho' letter oome! 
! Wherd iiste you, my piu%fi4er ^ 
'i What happy place contains you! 
! if in Heaven, why does not Some posting Angd bid me haste after t you? if on Earth, why does not 
j jfortie little God of Love bring the 
’ grateful tidings on his painted 
Wings! if stck, why does not my own fond Heart by Sympathy inform me? but that is all active, vi,, wishing, impatient of de, 
,; silence, and busy in iroa gin®ti@n 5 if you are false, if you have forgotten yopr poor believing and distracted shvia., why I does not that kind tyr^nt Dea th, that meagre Welcome Vision of the de^airing, old and wretched, 
; approach In dead of Night, ap( 
() 

^conifi 4ndtt\ is pi )t font te aw DCS no: ingtli! 
3ainte notdii thyb ive, VI of If' ni if. 
)eliev' 
will 
ionol 
tcbei 
, ap 
roacfl 
roach my restless Bed, and tole the dismal tidings in my frighted listening Ears, and strike me fof ever filent 5 lay me for ever quiet, lost to the worlds lost to my faith lefsgharmerl But if a fensh of Honour in you, has made yoa resolve to prefer mine before your Love, made you take up a noble fatal refblutipn never to tell me more of your Passion y nhis were a Trial, I fear my fond Heart wants courage to bear 3 or is it a trick, a cold fit only assumed to try how much I love you } I have no Arts Heaven know’s, no guile or double meaning in my soul, ’tis all plain native simplicity, fearful and timercus as Children in the Night, trembling as Doves pursued 3 born Soft by Nature, and made tender by Loves vvhat, Oh I what will bepome of me then Yet wou’d I were confirmed 

X 
(4°) 
med in all my fears: For as I am, my condition is yet more deplorable, for i’m in doubt, and doubt is the worst torment of the Mind: Oh Philander, be merciful, and let me know the worst; do not be cruel while you kill, do it with pity to the wretched Silvia Oh let me quickly know whether you are at all, or are the most impatient and unfortunate. \ 
S ilv I A. 
Trdve^ i die for feme Relief, 
To 
( 4*) 
do! 
betlif 
iftin 
lai 
To Vhilattder. 
AS I was going to send away this endoshd, dm//^came with two Letters s Oh, you cannot thinkphilanderwiih how much realbn you call me fickle Maid 5 for could you but imagine how I am tormentingly divided, hew unrcfolved between violent Love, and cruel Honour, You would say twere imposgble to fix me anywhere, or be the same thing for a moment together: There is not a Short hour past through the Swift hand of Time, fincel was all despairing, raging Love, jealous, fearful and impatient 3 and now, nom that your fond Letters have difpers’d those Demons, those tormenting Councellers, and given a little refpit, a little tranquillity 
(42) 
k 
llty of my Soul like States luxurious grc^i^ eaq, it ungracefully rebels againse the Sovereign power that made it great andbappy 5 and now that tray t.pr Honour, heath the mutineers within 5 Honour whom my late mighty feara bad almost famiolt and brought to nothing, warrhkl and reviv’d by thy new ppptested flame, makes war against: Almighty Love! And I, who but lipw nobly refblved for Love, byj^ inconstancy natural to my sevbi: rather my fears, am turn’d oyer C to honour’s Ode : So the despairing man stands on the Rivers Bank, designed to plunge into the rapid stream, till coward kar Seizing his timorous' Soul he viewsaround once more the flowery Plains, and looks with wishing Eyes back to the Groves,, thenoghing stops, and cries. I was 
too 
'lt( LI hest "git 
t Traj itioet ny 
Mrnf; 
laijgl.i It aotf 
stiveii 
(h) 
toorafh, forshkes the dangerous shore, and haftcs away. Thus indiscreet was I, was all for Love, fond and undoing Love 1 But when I fav/ with full Tide flow in upon me, one glance of Glorious Honour, makes me again ye treat. I will — lam refblved — And must be brave! I cannot forget, I am Daughter to the great, and Sister to Mer 
ayet upfpotted Maid, fit to produce a race of Glorious hero’s! and can Philanders Love Set no higher value on me than base poor prostitution? Is that the price of his Heart? - Oh how I hate thee now I or would to Heaven I could. — Tell me not, thou charming Beguiler, thativfer alia was to blame ^ was it a fault in her, and will it be virtue in me ^ and can I believe the crime that made her lose your Helart, 
will 
X 
(44) 

* ' il 
will make me Miftrels of it No? if by any action of hers, the noble House of the Beralti be dist honodredjby all the Actions of my Life it (hall receive Additions of Lustre and Glory! nor will 1 think mertimd.s Venue lessened for your mistaken opinion of it, and (he may be as much in vain pursued perhaps, by the Prince cm farh as shvia (hall be by the young Philander i, the envying world talks loud ’tistrue, but oh if all were true that busy Bablcr says, what Lady has her fame > What Husband is not a Cuckold? Nay and a friend to him that ^ made him So } And it is in vain, my too Subtle Brother, you think to build the Trophies of your Conquests on the ruin of both mertil/a's fame and mine Oh how dear would your inglorious passion cost the 
great 
(45) 
great unfortunate House of the Beralti, while you poorly ruin the same of mertiuato make way to the Heart oi shvu\ Reraem ^ her. Oh remember once your Pailion was as violent for mertil la and all the Vows, Oaths, Protestations, Tears and Prayers you make and pay at my feet, are but the saint Repetitions, the feeble echoes of what you fight out at hers. Nay like young rzr/f, fled with the fair Prize 3 your fond, your eager Passion made it a Rape; Oh perfidious 1 — Let me not call : it back to my remembrance. — Oh let me die rather than call to mind a time fo fatal 3 when the lovely false Philander vowed his Heart, his faithless heart away.'to any Maid but Silvia: — Oh let it not be poffibleforme to imagine his dear Arms ever grac ped anybody with joy but shvia I 
And 

0 
Andyetthey did, with Transports of Love f Yes, yes, you loved I by Heaven you loved this false, this perfidious meniua\ for false She is 5 you loved her, and Till have it fo, nor shall the Sister in me plead her Gaufe. She is false beyond all Pardon 3 for you are beautiful as Heaven itself can render you, a Shape exastly formed, not too low, nor tdo, tall, but made to beget Soft desire and everlasting wiftiesin all that look on ^you3butypur facelyour lovely face! inclining to round, largfe piercing kng uiftiing black Eyes, delicate proportioned Nose ^ dimpled Mouthiplump read Lips, Xinviting and Swelling white Teeth, small and even, fine gomplexion, and a beautiful Turn! All which u had ah feito order in fo m jaging a manner that it charmed the beholders, both ^xes were 
undone 
X 
! 
CM J 
undone wttk looking on you? m.d. A h^sve heard a' witty man of your psfcpty your fyo^ ed iindiieto the ilfeague hud allo ^iation tthan ih^scaufe, and has cursed a Thousand times the talfc Mertilla^^ for preferring Cctfario ( less beautiful) to the adorable Philander 5 to add to this, Heavh! how you Spoke, when e’re you (poke of Love! in that you far (urpaft the young Ciefario 1 as young as he, almost as great and glorious ^ Oh perfidious Mertilh, 
Oh false. Oh foolisti and ingrate! that you abandoned her was just, ftie Was 4k)t worth retaining in your heart, nor could be worth dc sending with your Sword 5 - But ^ grant her falfejoh p^i/wer.' How does her perfidy entitle you to > ^ me .> False as (he is, you still are married to her 3 inconstant as (he % fheis still ybur Wife 3 and no 
breach 
) 
Breach of the Nuptial Vow can unty the fatal Knot 5 and that is a Mystery to common Sense 5 Sure fly was born for mischief, and Fortune when Ihe gave her yon, designed the ruin of us all 5 but most particularly 
The Vnfortunate 
SILVIA. 
To’ 
ow 
(49) 
To Silvia. 

lvli 
My Souls eternal Joy, y silvia. what have you done, and oh how durst you, knowing my fond Heart., try it with So fatal a stroke? what means this Severe Letter? and why So eagerly at this time? Oh the day! Is Mcrtillds Virtue fb defended Isit a question now whether (he is false or not? Oh poor. Oh frivolous excuse / love me not, By all that is good you love me not 5 to try your power you have flatter’d and feigned, Oh Woman 1 falle Charming Woman! you have undone me, I rave, and shall commit fiich extravagance that will ruin both: I must upbraid you, fickle and inconstant, I must, and this distance will not Serve, D 
X 
(50) 
’tis too great ^ my reproaches losh their force, I burst with refeut ment with injur’d Love and you are either the most faithless of your Sex, or the most malicious ^ and tormenting: Oh I am past tricks, my Silvia, your little arts might do well in a beginning flame ^ but to a fettled Fire that is arrived to the highest degree, it does but damp its flercenefs, and instead of drawing me on, would lestenmy esteem, if any shch deceit were capable to harbour in the Heart of Silvia 5 but (he is all Divinej and I am mistaken in the ' meaning of what (he says. Oh A my Adorable, think no more on that dull false thing a Wife 5 let her be banifbt thy thoughts, as She is my Soul 3 let her never appear though but in a Dream, to fright our solid Joys, or true hap piness5 no, let us look forward 
to 
(50 
to Pkafures vast and unconsned, to coming Transports, and leave all behind us that contributes not to that Heaven of Bliss: remem her, ohshvia^ that five tedious days are past since I sign d at your dear feet 5 and five days to a Man fb madly in Love as your Philander \ h 2l Age 5 "tis 
now fix a Clock in the Morning, Brilliard will be with you by Eight, and by Ten I may have your permififion to see you, and then I need not say how (bon I will present my self before you at Bellfonf^ for Heavens sake, my eternal bleseng, if you design me this Happinefi, contrive it To, that Imay see no body that belongs to bellfohf, but the fair, the lovely Silvia ^ kot I must be more moments with you, than will be convenient to be taken notice of, left D 2 they 

: il .J 
r 52 J 
they fu/ped our bufinest to be Love, and that dishovery, yet, A may ruin us. Oh! I will delay no longer, my Soul is impatient to see you, i cannot live another Night without it 5 I die, by Heaven, I knguish for the appointed Hour 5 you will believe when you see my languid Face, and dying Eyes, how much and great a Sufferer in Love I am. 
My souss Delight, you may perhaps deny me from your fear 5 but oh, do not, though 1 ask a mighty Blessing 3 Silvias Company alone, Silent, and perhaps by darkoh though I saint ^ with the thought only of fb blessed an opportunity, yet you (hall Secure me, by what Vows, what Imprecations or ties you please 5 bind my busy Hands, blind my ravioi edeyes, command my Tongue, j do what you will 5 but let me hear 
your 
r5sj 
your angel’s Voice, and Have the transported joy of throwing myself at your feet 5 and if you please give me leave (A man condemned eternally to Love) to plead a little for my Life and passion 5 let me remove your fears and though that mighty Task never make me entirely happy, at least it will be a great Satisfaction to me to know, that ’tis not through my own fault that lam the 
ifretci&d 
PHILANDER. 
I have ardered Bfilliard to vsi/iit your aotj> mandf at Dorillush Cottage, that he may mt he Pen at behfont; ^[olve to see me tonight, or 1 Shall come'withcut order, and injure hotkt My dear damnd ivife is difpfed of at n „ C^sano makst tonight; the opportunity mi |gj]£ ’ he lucky, notthatlfearherjealoiijic, but th effects of it, 
D 3 To 

(54) 
To Philander. 
I Tremble with the apprehen (ion of what you ask: How Shall I comply with your Spud desires ^ My Soul bodes Some dire estest of this bold Enterprise, for I must own ( and bluch while I do own it) that my Soul yields obedience to your Soft Request, and even whilst 1 read your Letter, was diverted with the contrivance qs feeing you 5 For chooh as my Brother you have all the free dckiisimagtoable at Bellfotit toen tertairj aild wrahl with me, yet it would be difficult and prejudicial to my Honour, to receive you alone anywhere vrithout my Sister, and cause a riifpkion, whidi all'about me now are very fat iiom, conceiving, except Milinda^. 
my 
'rein • Hoi Bd •e dis 
ize, ku Is ob 1, aiij .ettef, ivad(| as I fef; toeiii 
rcer'i 
i: t nif; is'hrf 
■ y 
link 
rrji 
C 55 J 
piy faubful Confident, and too fatal Coancdloi’5 and but for this fear, I know my charming Brother, three little Leagues Should not fi ve long days Separate phiuftder from his Silvia : But my lovely Brother, tince you beg it So earnestly, and my Heart consents So easily,, must pronounce my own Doom, and say. Come my pblander, whither Love or soft Desire invites you, and take this direction in the pnsnagement of this mighty Affair. I would have you as Soon as this comes to your hands, to haste to dorillns*s Cottage, without your Equipage, only Brilliard, whom I believe you may trust both from his own discretion, and your vast bounties to him 5 wait there till you Receive my Commands, and / will retire betimes to my Apartment, pretending not to be well $ and D 4 as 
'dii( 
( 
as Soon as the Evenings obscurity will permit, Melinda (hall let you in at the Garden Gate, that is nest the Grove, unseen and un fufpedfed^^but oh thou powerful Charmer 3 have a care $ I trust you with my All: My dear, dear, my precious Honour, guard it welly for oh I fear my Forces are too weak to stand your Shock of Beauties 3 you have Charms enough to justify my yielding, but yet by Heaven, I would not for an Empire: But what is dull Empire to Almighty Love lthe God Subdues the Monarch ^ 'tisto your strength 1 trust, for I "am a feeble Woman ^ a Virgiq quite difarm’d by two fair Eyes, an angel’s Voice and form 3 but yet P die before r yield my Honour 5 no, though curunhappy Family have met reproach from the imagined levity of my Sister 3 kis Till redeem the 
bleeding 

toyo: i feel ifarni' svok ■ befe thous net It 1 ]evi:, i ensttj eedi'f 
f57) 
bleeding Honour of our Family, and my great parent’s Virtues (hall shine in me 5 I know it, for if it passes this Test, jf I can X stand this Temptation, I am proof aginst all the World 3 but I conjure you aid me if I need it: IS incline but in a Languishing look, if but a wish appear in myeyes, or betray content butin a igh5take not, Oh take not the opportunity, left when you have done I grow raging mad, andditeoverali in the wild fit V Oh who would venture on an Enemy with•fuch unequal force? What hardy Fool dc would hazard all at Sea, that tees the rising Storm come rouling on > Who but fond Woman, giddy heedless Woman, would thus ex pote her Yertue to Temptaiio ^. 
cqcj know my danger, yet I permit it: Love, Soft bewi Love will have it So, that u D <5 
J J, 
deny what my feebler Honour forbids 5 and though f tremble with fear, yet Love Suggests, it ^ will be an Age tonight :; llong for my undoing 5 for oh I cannot stand the batteries of your Eyes and Tongue 5 these fears, thesh conflists I have a Thousand times a day, it is pitiful Sometimes to See me, on one hand athoufand cu fids all gay and Smiling present Philander with all the Beauties of his Sex, with all the fbftnels in his looks and language those Gods of Love can inspire, with all the Charms of Youth adorned, bewitching all, and all transporting on the other hand, a poor lost i Virgin languishing and undone, stghing her willing rape to the deaf shades and Fountains ^ filling the Woods with cries, Swelling the murmuring Rivulets with Tears, her noble Parents with a 
generous 
It 
imeji 
andf) prefei itiesc : nefsi egoi all tli (j, k ortidfi or done' to tin filliil 
witi 
mxh 
serous 
(59j 
generousrage reviling her, and her befrayed Sister, loading her bowed Head withcurfes and Reproaches, and all about her looking forlorn andfad. Judge, Oh judge rny adorable Brother, of the vastness of the Courage and Pallion, when even this deplorable prospect cannot defend me from the resolution of giving you admittance into my Aparment this Night, nor Shall ever drive you from the Soul of your 
gllfia, 
To. 

ffioj 

To Silvia. 
T Have obeyed tny 6’//zi/vs dear J Commands, and the Dictate of my own impatient Soul 3 as icon as I received them, I immediately to Horse for beufont, though I knew I Should not see my adora .ble Silvia till Eight or Nine at Night 3 but oh ’tis wondrous plea Sure to be So much more near my eternal Joy 3 I wait at doril /v/scottage the tedious approaching Night that must (better me in A its kind Shades, and conduct me to a pleasure I faint but with ima ‘ gining 3 his now my Lovely Charmer Three a Clock, and Oh how many tedious hours I am to languish here before the blested y^ont arrive! I know you Love, n jy Silvia and therefore must 
guess 
Dia oub f im 
Adoii 
reni Di iroad • raee 
Usti h iidj 
ovdj ndoi am to ileiieil Lovf, miift guefj 
( 6i) 
guefi at Some part of my Torment, which yet is mixed with a certain trembling Joy not to be imagined by any but Silvia, who farely loves Philander 5 if there be truth in Beauty, faith in Youth, (he Surely loves him much, andmuch morea above her Sex (he is capable of Love, by how much more her Soul is formed of a foster and more delicate Composition, by how much more her wit’s refined and eleva ^ above her duller Sex, and by how much more (he is obliged 5 if pasgon can claim Passion in return, fare no Beauty was ever fo much indebted to a Slave, as 5/7 via to Philander 5 none ever lov’d like me .* Judge then my pains of Love, my Joys, my Fears, my Impatience and Desires ^ call me to your sacred pretence with all the Speed of Love, and as Soon as it is duskiih, imagine me 
in 

(«3) 
in the Meadow behind the Grove till when think me employ d in e ternal thoughts of Silvia 3 restless and talking to the Trees of sighing her charming Name, circling with folded Arms my panting Heart, (that beats and trembles the more, the nearer it approaches the happy Bellfont) and fortifying the feeble trembler against a sight fo ravishing and for prizing 51 fear to be foftain*d with Life but if I faint in Silvias Avi it will be happier far than all Glories of Life without her. 
Send my Angel Something from you to make the Hours lest tedious, confider me, love me, and be as impatient as I, that you may the sooner find at your feet your e/erlasting Lover 
PEILANDBR 
frowdoriuusv Cottagel _ 
....... To 

(62) 
To Philander. 
I Have at last recovered fense enough to tell you, I have received your Letter by doriuus, and which had like to have been difcovecd 5 for he prudently e ngugh; put it under the Strawberries he brought me in a Basket, fearing hefbould get no other opportunity to have given it me 5 and my Mother feeing them look fo fair and fresh, fhatcht the baf ket with a greediness I have not Seen in her before 5 while she was calling to her Page for a porcel lane di(h to put them out, dm/ lus had opportunity to hint to me what lay at the bottom: Heavens.' had youfeen mydifbrder and confusion 3 what Should Ido? Love had not one invention in 
store, 



Fm 
(«4) 
store, and here it was that all the subtlety of Women abandoned ^c^me. Oh Heavens, how cold and pale I grew, lest the most important bufineft of my Life should be betrayed and ruined I But not to terrify you longer with fears of my danger, the Dish came, and out the Strawberries were pour’d, and the Basket thrown aside on the Bank where my Mother sat ("for we were in the Garden when we met accidentally Dorillus first with the Basket J there were Some Leaves of Fern put at the bottom between the Basket and Letter, which by good fortune came not out with the Strawberries, and after a Minute or two, I took up the Basket, and walking carelef iyup and down the Garden, gathered here and there a Flower, Pinks and Jessamine, and filling my Basket, fatdown again till my 
Mother 
)ottoi 
(«5), 
Mother had eat her fill of the Fruit, and gave me an opportu nity to retire to my Apartment, where opening the Letter, and finding you fo near, and waiting to see me, I had certainly sunk down on the Floor had not me z/w/i Supported me, who was only by 5 Something So new, and till now lb strange, Seized me at the thought of So Secret an interview, that I lost all my lenses, and Life, wholly departing, I rested on Melinda without breath or motion 5 the violent eficcts of Love and Honour, the impetuous meeting Tides ot the extremes of Joy and Fear, rushing on too Suddenly overwhelmed my Senses 5 and it was a pretty while before I recovered strength to get to my Cabinet, where a Second time I opened your Letter, and read it again with a Thousand changes of Countenance 

. (««) 
tk tenance s my wholeffnafs of Blood was in that moment fo discomposed, that I changed from an Ague to a Fever, Several timesin a Minute 5 Oh what will all this bring me to? And where will the raging fit end? I die with that thought, my guilty Pen Qackens in my trembling Hand, and I languish and fall over the unimploy ^ed Paper 5 — Oh help me Some Divinity, — Orjf you did, - 1 fear, I should be angry: Oh Fhiland^ era thousand pasiions and distracted thoughts crowd to get out, and make their fbft Complaints to thee 5 but oh they iose them selves with mixings they are blend ed in a confusion together, and Love nor Art can divide them, to deal them out in order Tomtimesl would tell you of my Joy at your Arrival 3 and my unspeakable Traiifports at the thought of Seeing 
th ts •keor dli 
!diih et plaisj thej bleoli, M 
eni, i 
: im£sl 
r yoe 
f 1 
( ^7) 
ingyou So Soon, that I Shall hear your charming Voice, and find you at my feet making lost Vows anew, with all the Passion of an impatient Lover, with all the e loquejice that sighs and cries, and tears from thofeloydy can cxprels, and sore that is enough to conquer anywhere, and to which course vulgar Words arddull. therhe torick of Love is half breath’d, interrupted words, languifhingeyes, flattering Speeches, broken Sighs, prefrmgkhehandjand fallingtears: 
Ah how dotheynot persuade, how do they not charm and conquer j ’twas thus with thefeloft easy Arts, that was won for fare no 
Arts of Speaking could have talk « my Heart away, though you esn Speak like any God : Oh whi ^ there atnl drivehtw%u~d^ij^#^ 
Twas not my purpose, not my business here, to give a ebarader 
of 
() 
of Philander, no nor to Speak of love^but oh like Cowleys Lute, my Soul will (bund to nothing but to Love: talk what you will, begin what dishourse you please, I end it all in Love, because my Soul is ever fixton Philanderand insen fibly its bias leads to that Subjects no, I did not whea I began to write, think of Speaking one word of my own weakness but to have told you with what refolv’d Courage, Honour and Virtue I expect your coming s and Sure So sacred a thing as Love was not made to ruin these, and therefore in vain my lovely Brother you will attempt it 3 and yet, Oh Heavens, I give a private affig nation, in my Apartment, alone and at night; where Silence, Love and Shader are all your friends, where opportunity obliges your pastion, while Heaven knows, 
not 
as Dt there rotbei ‘t, 0i al5f alone Love [ends, yonr lows, not 
( ^9) 
not one of allthefe, nor any kind power is friend to me 5 I Shall be left to you, and all these Tyrants, exposed without other Guards than this boasted Virtue, which had need be wondrous to resist all these powerful Enemies of its purity and repose .• I know notits strength, never tried it yet 3 and this will be the first time it has ever been exposed to your Power 3 the first time 1 e ver had courage to meet you as a Lover, and let you in by stealth, and put myself unguarded into your hands 5 Oh 1 die with the apprehension of approaching danger 5 and yet 1 have not power to retreat, 1 must on, Love compels me, Love holds me fasts the finiling flatterer promises a thou land joys, a Thousand Ravistiing Minutes of delights all innocent and harmkss as his Mothers Doves: 
But 
ijlj 
C 7° 
^ But oh they bill and kifs, and do a Thousand things I must forbid Philander 5 for I have often heard him say with sighs, that his Complexion rendered him lest capable of the Soft play of Love, than 
, any other Lover : J have foenhim stymy very touches, yet Swear they were the greatest joy oh | Earth; 1 tempt him even with my looks from Virtue and when I ask the Cause, or cry he is colds he vows tis because he dares not endure my Temptations 5 says his Blood runs hotter and fiercertp hisveifts than any others does, nor has the oft repeated joys reap’d id the Marriage Bed, anything a bated that which he wished,, he fear’d would ruin me: Thus, thus whole days we have sat and gaz’d and stgh’d, but durst not \ trust our Vertnes with fond 
My I 
ryo 
S caj 
% eenj 
1 4 is(sl iresi! faysi srceii: 1cs51k 
ap’d I lingj t, k thq 
at s 
rftim 
idi 
My Page is come to tell me that Madam the Datchefs of — is come to Bellfont ^ and I am obliged to quit my Cabinet, but with infinite regret, being at present much more tomy Soul's content impleyed 3 but Love must fbmetimes give place to and respect. 
dorium too waits, and tells Melinda., he will not depart without something for his Lord ', to entertain him till the happy hour. The Ruftiek pleased me with the concern he had for my Philander 3 Oh my Charming Brother, you have an Art to tame even Salvages, a Tongue that wotild charm and engage wildness itself, to sbftness and gentleness, and give the rough unthinking Love 3 ’tis a tedious time tonight, how Shall I pafs the Hours? 

To 


, V y V 
• '»! T' ' 
. 
IS 
T! ■ s ‘ 
I i’ 
J, T I i 
f72) To Silvia, 
SA Y fond Love, whither wilt thou lead me ^ Thou hast brought me from the noisy Hurries of the Town, to Charming iblitude 5 from crowded Cabals, where mighty things arerefblving, to lonely Groves, to thy own a bodes where thou dwelleft 5 gay and pleased amongst the Rural Swains in ftiady homely Cottages p thou hast brought me to a Grove of Flowers, to the brink of Purling Streams, where thou hast laid me down to contemplate on Silvia to think my tedious hours away in the fosteft imagination a Soul inspir’d bylove can conceive, to increase my Passion by every thin g I beholdjfor every sound that meets the fcnfe is thy proper Mu 
fickp 
ler 
; oali 
ryhsi 
larniie 
Cabal 
'folvic 
owdi 
: Riif Coll 
fmn 
Sick 
(73) 
sick, Oh Love, and everything inspires thy Dictates 5 the Winds a round me blow Soft, and mixing with wanton Boughs, continually play and kiss 5 while thole, like a coy Maid in Love resist, and comply by Turns 5 they like a ra vistit, vigorous Lover, rusti on with a transported violence 5 rudely imbracing its spring dressed mi stress, ruffling her Native Order 3 while the pretty j^rdsonthe dancing Branches incestantly make Love 5 upbraiding duller Man with his defe(stive want of Fire; Man the Lord of all! He o be stinted in the most valuable joy of Life 5 Is it not pity > Here is no troublesome Honour, amongst the pretty Inhabitants of the Woods and Streams, fondly to give Laws to Nature, but uncontroulvl they play, and fing, and loves no pa rents checking their dear delights, E nj 
C 74 J 
no Oavifh Matrimonial ties to restrain their nobler Flame. No Spies to interrupt their blessed Appointments 5 but every little is free and open to receive the young fletch'd Lover 5 every Bough is ccnscious of their paffi on, nor do the generous pair Languish in tedious Ceremony 5 but meeting look, and like, and love, imbrace with their wingy Arms, and Salute with heir little opening Bids 5 this is their Courtship y this the amorous Compliment, and this only the introdustion to all thttr following happiness 5 and thus it is with the Flocks and Herds, while fcanted Man,, born alone for the fatigues of Love, with industrious Toil, and all his boasting Arts of Eloquence, his Goddike Image, and his noble Form, may kbniir on a tedious term of Years with pain, expsnce, 
and 
mit 


vai 
fel: 
Hi! 
k 
101 
[01 
ih 
11 
ho 
m 

St A lenn' 
.Gve, ' all lit 
LIII 
Qoblt 
diod! 
ience. 
and 
(75) 
and hazatdbefore he can arrive’ at hapfinefi, ‘atid then too perhaps his Vows are unregarded, and all his Sighs and Tears are vain. Tdi me, Oh you Fellow lovers *5 ye a mojous, d ear Bruits, tell me, when ever yon lay latl*r guilhing beneath your Coverts, thus for your Sair She j and durst not approach for fear of Honour? Tell me, by a gentle Bleat, ye little butting Rams, do you ligh thus for your Soft, white Ews Do you lie thus concealed, to wait the coming Shades of Night, till all the curled Spies are folded? No, no, even you are much more blessed thah Man, who, is bound up to fettct’d by the nice Decencies csf Honour. 
My divine Maid, Thus were my Thoughts' employed, when from the Sarthest end of the Grove, where tnbw remain 5 I Saw doril E 2 lus 

C 

i' approach with thy welcome Letter 5 he tells you had like to have been Surprised in making it up V and he received it with much difficulty: Ah Sihia^ fhduld any accident happen to prevent my feeing you tonight, I were undone for ever, and you must expest to find me stretch’d out, dead, and cold under this Oak, where now I lie Writing on its knotty Root 5 thy Letter, I consefs, is dear j it contains thy Soul, and my happiness 3 but this after Story of the Surprise, Hong to be informed of, for from thence I may gather part of my Fortune; 1 rave and die with Fear of a disappointment 3 not but I would undergo athousand Torments and Deaths sor6’t7w4 3 but oh confider me, and let me not Suffer if pof fible3 for know my charming Angel, my impatient Heart is almost 
broke, 

f 
(11 I 
broke, and will contain it shlf without being nearer fiiy adorable Maid without taking in at wy Eyes a little comfort, no f I am resolved 5 put me not off with; tricks, which fbolilh Honour invents to jilt Mankind with 5 for if you do, By Heaven, I will forget: all confiderationsand respect, and force myself with all the violence, of raging Love, into the presence of niy cruel ^ own her mine,, 
and ravish my delight 5 nor shall the happy Walls of Bell font be bf strength shffident to Secure her, nay, perswade menot, for if you make me mad and raving, this will be theeffeds onk Oh pardon me, my Sacred Maid, pardon the wildneis of my franticklove I paused,, a turn or two in the lone path, considered what I had laid, and Sound it was too milch 5 too bold, too rude toap e 3, proach, 

( 78) 
proaeh, my Soft, my tender Maid : lam calm, my Soul, as thy bewitch iqg Smiles Hofli, as thy Secret Sighs, and willrefolve to die rather than offend my adorable Viigio^ only send me word what you thiok of my Fate, while Lexpest k here on this kiod Mossy, Bed where 1 now lie 5 which I would not quit for a Thronej iioceheye I may hope the News may soonest arrive to make me happier than a God / which that nc^hiog on my part may prevent, Ihere vow in the face of Heaven,! will not abuse the freedom my silviahxt^tsmt with^norshall ray Love go beyond the liniits of honour.hvto shall command with a Srown, and Setter me with a Smile y prescribe rules to my longing, ra vishteyes, and pinion my busy, fond, roving Hands, and lay at her Feet like a tame Slave, her Adoring PHILANDER. 
To 

■'mail! wite[ tsiglj en 
link; iere{ Slllj fotl 3peta 3 mall wt 
ly pff' )fhei eedoi orflii 
tlitsf 
d 
smile ig.« bufj' atlifl lorici let If 
c79j 
"To Vhilander. 
* \ 
, approach, you Sacred Queen of Night, and bring Philander veil’d from all Eyes but mine Approach at a fond Lovers call, behold how I lie panting with expectation, tir’d out with your tedious Ceremony to the'god of Day 3 be kind, Oh lovely Night, and let the Deity descend to his beloved Thetis's Arms, and I to my Philanders 5 The Son and I must Snatch our joys in the same happy Hours 3 favoured by thee. Oh Sacred, Silent Night! See, fecjthe ina moured Sun is hasting on apace to his expecting Mistress, while thou dull Night art slowly ling ring yet. Advance, my Friend! my goddess! and my Confident! 
E 4" hide 
i 
'■'tj ii 
(8o) 
hide all my Blushes ^ all riiy shft Confiifions, my Tremblings, Transports, and Eyes all Languishing, 
Oh Philander \ a Thousand things 1 have done to dlveft the tedious Hours, but nothing can ^ all things are dull without thee. 
I am tired with everything, impatient to end, as (bon as I begin therr^ even the Shades and fblita ry Walks afford me now no ease.. satisfaction and thought, but affiid me more, that used to relieve. And I at last have recourse to my kind Pen: For while I White, rnethinks I am talking to thee 5 I tell thee thus, my Soul, while thou, rnethinks, art all the while Smiling and listening by 5 this is much easier than filent thought, and my Soul is never weary of his converse *, and thus L would Speak a thousand things, 
but 
iblitig 
M bj 
rs'o 
d foliii no eafj; ht, y 
1 to 
■ecoofli while; kingiii y Soul! ail ik ig bfi 1 (lien? never id thiflg'i but 
but that still, methinks, words' do not enough express tny Soul,, understand that right, there requires looks 5 there is a Rhetoric in Looks, in Sighs and filent Touches that forpasfes ally there is an Accent in the Sound of Words too, that gives a Sente and soft Meaning to little things, which of themtelves areof trivial value, and insignificant y and by the Dadence of the Utterance may ~ fxprefsa tenderne/s which their own Meaning does not bear y by this I would insinuate, that the Story of the Heart cannot be fa well told by is way, as by Presence and Conversation y Sure ^ understands what 14 mean by this, which postibly is nontente to all but a Lover,, who apprehends all the little fond prattle of the thing beloved, and ^ finds an Eloquence in it that to ^ E 5,, a. ^ 
I'. 
( 82), 
a Secte unconcernm would appear even approaching to Folly .* Philander ^ who has the true Notions of Love ip him, appre^ bends all that can be laid on that dear Subjest: 5 to him I venture to Sty any things, whose kind and Soft imaginations can Supply all tpy wants in the deshription of the ^'^*ul I, Will k not Philander Answer northeast > -- - oh, where rt thou ^ I see thee not, I touc thee not 5 but when I haste wit transport to imbrace thee, 'tis Shadow all, and my poor Arms return empty tomy bosom ^ Why, Ob why cpmest thon not Why art thou cautious, and prudently waitest the stow paced Night : Oh cold, Oh unreasonable Lover why > — But I grow wild, and know not what I Say: impatient Love betrays me to a thousand Follies, a thousand Rastinestes: 
i 


(8f) 
I die with Shame 3 but I must be undone, and it is no matter how, whether by my own weakness, Philanders Charms, or both 3 I know not, but So It is destined, — Oh Philander it is two tedious Hours Love has counted, stnee you writ to me, yet ar but a Quarter of a Mile distant 3 What have you been doing all that live ^^long while? Are you not un |fl|kind? Does not Silvia lie neg «^jected and unregarded in your Thoughts? Hudled up confusedly with your graver bufiness of State, and almost lost in the ambitious Crowd? Say, say my lovely Charmer, Is fhenot? Doe not this fatal Interest you espoufe?* Rival your Silvia 3 Is She not tod often removed thence to let in that haughty Tyrant mistress? Alas Philander I more thau fear fheis? and oh my Adorable Loi - 
An 
mi 
Wlf 
entlf 
igtt! 
OKI 
and 
lent 
and 
fes; 


r. 
'A 
LI 
rs4j 
v€r, when I look forward on our coming happiness, when everb lay by the thoughts of Honour, and give a loose to Love 5 I run not Sarin the pleasing Carier, before that dreadful Thought stopped me on my way; I have a fatal prophetic Tear, that gives a check to my Soft pursuit, and tells me that thy unhappy ingagement in this League 5 this accurled Ast fociation, will one day undo uj both, and part for ever thee am thy unlucky sz? 5 Yes, yes, my dear Lord 5 my Soul does presage an unfortunate event from this dire Ingagement y nor can your faife reafbning, your fancied advantages reconcile it to my honest, good naturd Heart j and Surely the design is inconfiftentwithlove, for two filch mighty contradisti ons and Enemies, as Love and Ambition, or Revenge, can never 
(85) 
ver Sure abide in one Soul together, at least Love can but (hare Philanders Heart 5 when Blood and Revenge (which he mishalls gloryj rivals it, and has pofs bly the greatest part in it V Rethinks, this Notion enlarges in me, and every word I Speak, and e very Minutes thought of it, strengthens its reason to me 5 and give me leave ( while I am full of '•^he Jealousy of it) to exprestmy id^^entiments, and lay before you those Reafbns, that Love and I think most Substantial ones 3 what you have hitherto destred of me, Oh unreasonable Philander 3 and what (I out of Modesty and Honour denied) I have reason to fear (from theabfblute conquest you have made of my Heart) that fbme time or other the charming Thief may break in aud rob me of 3 for Fame and Virtue Love. 
begins 
‘M 1 
begins to laugh at. My dear unfortunate Condition being thus, it is not impossible, Oh Philander but I may one Day in some unlucky Hour, in Some fbft, bewitching Moment, in Some Spightful, critical, ravishing Minute, yield all to the Charming Philander 5 and if So, Where, Oh where is my Security, that I shall not be abandoned by the lovely Victor? it is not your vows^which you cali iacred ( and I alas belidve fb) tha^ can Secure me, though I, Heaven knows believe them all, and am undone 5 you may keep them all too, and I believe you will ^ but oh Philander in these fatal circumstances you have engaged yourself in 5 Can you Secure me my Lover? Your Protestations you may, but not the dear Protestor. Is it not enough, Oh Philander ^ for my eternal unquiet, and undoing 
to 
II 
r 
J 

to know that you are rnarried, and cannot therefcre be entirely mine Is not this enough. Oh cruel ppiknder > But you mosf espouse a fatal Caulejoo, more pernicious than that of Matrimony, and more destructive to my Repose: : give mt leave to reafbn with you, and Since you have been pleated tosti ust and astiidt me with the Secret, which honest, as I am, !• icih^ill never betray; yet, yet give leave to urge the danger of it to you, and contequently to me, if you pursue ity when you are, vdthme, we can think and talk, and argue nothing but the mightier Business of Love, and it is fit that I, So fondly, and fatally loved you, should warn you of the danger. Confider, my Lord, you are born Noble, from Parents of untainted Loyalty 5 blessed with a Fortune few Princes beneath Sovereignty 
(88) 
■: L 
vereignty are Masters of } blessed with all gaining Youth, commanding Beauty, Wit, Courage, Bravery of Mind, and all that renders Men esteemed and adgred 5 What would you more .> What is it, Oh my Charming Brother Then, that you setup for. Is it Glory? Oh mistaken, lovely Youth, that Glory is but a glittering Light, that Hashes for a Moment, and then it disappears 5 it is a falle Braver that will bring an eternal Blemif upon your honest fameandhoush^ render your honourable Name, hateil, detested, and abominable in Story to after Ages 5 a T ray tor the worst of Titles, the most in ^ glorious and shameful 3 What has the King, our good, our Gracious Monarch done to Philander How disobliged him? Or indeed, what injury to Mankind? Who has he oppressed? where played 
the 
rend; 
sit, ^ 
LIII 
7h 
atcli 
M 
theo 
raver 
^lenii 
Hod: 
'Jaiue 
inabi 
lytoi 
odifl 
Wb 
rcra 
jeedi 
Wb 
ayed 
tb 
( S?) 
the Tyrant, or the ravisher? What one cruel or angry thing has he committed in all the time of his fortunate and peaceable Reign over us Whose Ox, or whole Afs has he unjustly taken } What Orphan wrong’d, or Widows Tears neglected? But all his Life has been one continued Miracle 5 all good, all gracious, calm and merciful: And this good, this |ngod l\ke Ring is mark’d out for Slaughter, designed a Sacrifice to the private revenge of a few ambitious Knaves and Rebels, whole pretence is the pnblick good, and dpom*d to be basely murder’d 5 A Murder! even on the worst of Criminals, carries with it a co wardife fo black and infamous, as the most abject Wretches the meanest Spirited Creature has an abhorrence for 3 what to murder a Man unthinking, unwarned, unprepared 

( 9° J 
prepared and undefended! Ohj barbarous 1 Oh poor and mostun.| brave .f What Villain is there lost, to all humanity, to be Sound upon thc' face of the Earth, that when done, dare own fb hellifti a Deed, as the Murder of the meanest ofl his Fellow Subjects, much less the sacred Perfbn of the King 5 The lord’s Anointed 5 one whose awful Face tis impoffibje to look without that Reverence wherewith one would behold a God H for’tis most certain, that every Glance from his piercing, wondrous Eyes, begets a trembling Adoration ^ for my part I Swear to you, Philander I. never approach his Sacred Perfoii, but my Heart beats, my Blood runs cold about me, and my Eyes overflow with Tears of Joy, while an awful Confusion seizes me all over 5 and I am certain Should the most 
hard 
(9s) 
chardened of your bloody Rebels look him in the Face 5 the devil. ifli instrument of Death would drop from his Sacrilegious Hand, 
■ and leave him confounded at the feet of the Royal forgiving Sufferer, his Eyes have in them fbm^ thing So fierce. So Majestic commanding, and yet So good and merciful, as would soften rebel lion itself into repenting Loyalty $ %2ina\\^tcajus Marius Seem to say, 
I — Vt'ho is it dares hurt the King 
I — They alone, like his guardian Angels defend his Sacred Perfbn 5 Olil What pity it is, unhappy young Man, thy Education was not near the King. 
Tis plain ^ his reasonable, ’tis honest great and glorious to believe, what thy own Sense (if thou wilt but think and constder) will Instru^ thee in, thattreafon, Rebellion and Murder, are far from 
the 
evei 
er ap )Utni s col 
n0 
overj 
moi 
( 92) 
the Paths that leadto Glory, wlsicigd are as distant as Hell from heav’n|er What is it then to ad vance (fiocel^f say his plain, Glory is never tbi{y( way to be atchiev’d J Isit toadlst more thousands to those, Fortunt'al has already fo lavjfhly bestow’d orfst you ?Oh my Philander: ^ that’s t(f o double the vast Crime, which realicj ches already todamnation: wou’d, Ti your Honour, your conicience, _ your Christianity, or common manity Suffer you to enlarge your li Fortunes at the Price of another’s J ruin 5 and make the Spoils of fbme^ honest, noble, unfortunate Family, the Rewards ofyourtreacheryi Would you build your Fame on filch a Foundation .<? perhaps^on the destrudion os fbme Friend or Kinsman. Oh barbarous and mistaken greatness 5 Thieves and Robbers would scorn such Outrages, that had but Souls and Sente. 
Is 
ivl 
I 
( 93) 
Is it for addition of Titles? What elevation can you have much greater than where you now stand fixed? if you do not grow giddy with your fancied false hopes, and fall from that glorious height you are already arriv’d to, and which with the honest addition of Loyalty, is of far more value and lustre, than to arrive at Crowns by Blood and Treason. This will last ^ to Ages last 5 in Story last. While t’oherwill be ridicul’d to all posterity, Short liv’d and reproachful here, infamous and accursed to all Eternity. Is it to makec^y^wking?ohwhat is Cafario to myp hilander^ If a Monarchy you design 5 then why not this King, this great, this gootthis royalforgiver? This whowasborn aktijgand bornyourking^and holds his Crown by right of Nature, by right of Law, by right of Heaven it felf^heaven who has prefer v’d him, 
and 
r i 
ils 
V liih 
ifl' 
- 
\ 

C 94) 
and confirmed Mm our's, by a thbu* and miraculous escapes and f&ffei. ings, and indulged him ours by Ten thoushnd actsof Mercy, and indear ed him to us by his wondrous care and condu^, by Securing os Peace, plenty, ea/e and luxurious happi ne/s, o’re all the fortunate limits of his blestedkingdoms^ And will you? Would you destroy this wondrous gist of Heaven? This godlikeking, this real good we now postessjfor a most uncertain one ^ and wkh it the reposeosall the happy Nation? To establisti a King without Law, without Right, without Consent, without Title, and indeed without even competent Paris, for fo vast a Trust, or So glorious a Rule?one who never obliged the Nation by one sthgle act osgoodne/s, or valour in all the course of his lise y and who never stgmhzcd Bttiebto the advantage, df one Afati fall 
the 
0 
rh 
tc 
h 
ni 
B 
w 
T 
tl 
A 
jn 
tl 
(95) 
the Kingdom : A prioge unfortunate in his Principles and Morals and whose Sole, (ingle Ingratitude to his Majesty, for So many Royal Bounties, Honours, and (jlories heap’d upon him, is of its (elf e nough (o Set any honest, generous Heart against him h What is it bewitches you So? Is it his Beauty? Then vhtlmtier has a greater Title than Gefario^ and not one other Merit has he ^ stnee in Piety, Chastity, Sobriety, Charity and Honour j he as little excels, asdngrati tude, Obedience and Loyalty. What then, my d^dixvhilander} Is it his weakness? Ah, there’s the Argument: You all propose, and think to govern fb fbft a King: But believe me, Oh unhappy p/je Under \ Nothing is more nngover fe||nable than a Fool 5 nothing more obstinate, wilful, conceited and cunning 3 and for his gratitude, Let 
the 

!1 

i: W t : 'hr 
i ■ il' 
it: lilt' 
c90 


- i fj 111 
the World judge what he must prove to his Servants, who has dealt So ill with his Lord and master > he must reward those that present him with a Grown, who deals fo ungraciouoy with him who gave him Life, and who fethim up an happier object than a Monarch: No, no, Philander he that can cabal, and contrive to de i throne a Father, will find it easy' to discard the > wicked and hated instruments, that aftifted. him to mount it 5 decline him then, Oh fond and deluded Philander 5 decline him early, for you of all the rest ought to do So 5 and not to Set a helping hand to Joad him with Honours, that chose you out from all the World to load with Infamy: Remember that j remember mer tilla^ and then renounce him 5 do not you contribute to the adoring of his unfit Head with a Diadem, 
the! 

(97) 
the luostglorteus of Ornaments, who unadorn’d yours with the most inglorious of all reproaches. Think of this, Oh thou unconlider ing, noble Youth 5 lay thy Hand upon thy generous Heart, and tell it all the Sears, all the reastinings of her that loves thee more than Life, athousandsirgumentsicould bring, but these few unstudied (falling in amongst my foster thoughts) I beg thou wilt accept of, till I can more at large deliver the glorious'a rgu fnent to your Soul 5 let this ftis fice to tell thee, that like caf fandra<i I rave and prophely in vain 5 this Astbciation will be the eternal Ruin of phiiantier 5 for let it Succeed or not $ either way thou art undone 5 if thou pur sliest it, I must infallibly fall with thee, if I resolve to follow thy good or ill Fortune 5 for you cannot intend Love and Ambition, F Silvia 
II .• I; 
! ‘1 
(i; 
Hi 
\ ■ I" 
stll 
i, 
Silvia mdcafario at once: No, per suade me not 3 the Title to one or t’other must be laid down, Silvia or cvario must be abandoned 5 this is my fixed resclve, : if thy too powerful Arguments convince not in Spite of reason for they can dot 5 thou hast the tongue of an Angel, and the Eloquence of a God, and while I listen to thy Voice, I take all thou fayest for wondrous sense — Farewell 5 about two Hours hence I Shall expest you at the Gate that leads into the Garden Grove — Adieu I remember 
SILVIA. 
{99) 
To Silvia. 
*0 W comes my Charming Silvia fb skiird in the Mysteries of State? Where learned her tender Heart the Notions of rigid business?? her fbsttongde, form’d only for the dear Language of Love, to talk of the concerns of Nations and Kingdoms? Tis true, when I gave my Soul away to my dear Coonceljor, 1 referv’d nothing to myself, not even that fecret.thit fo concern’d my Life, but laid all at her Mercy ^ my ge nerousheart could not love at aless rate, than to lavish all, and be undone for 5 kis glorious ruin, and it pleases me, if it advance one, single joy, or^dd one demonstration of my Love to Silvia ^ ’tis not e nough that we tell those we love all they love to hearjbut one ought F 2 to 
.'<4,.. I 
[I no 

ITS 
m 


I 
f looj 
to tell ’em too, every Secret that we know 5 and conceal no part of that Heart one has made at pte? Sent to the Perfbn one loves 5 ’tis; a Treason in Love not to be pari doned^ I am Sensible that when my Story is told (and this happy one of my Love (hall make up the greatest part of my History) that! those that love not like me, will be apt to blame me, and charge me with weakness, forrevealingio great a Trust to a Woman, and amongst all that I (hall do to arrive at Glory, that will brand me [ feeblencss 5 but when Lovers (hall read it j the Men will excuse and the Maids blessed me! I 
me 
tl 
b 
tl 
(hall be a Fond, admir’d prestdent for them to point out to their re; mist resctving Lovers, who will be reproached for not pursuing my example. I know not what opinion Men generally have of the 
weakness 
C 
weaknefsot Womens butkisfore a vulgar error, for were they like my adorable Silvia I Had they had her wit, her vivacity of Spirit, her Courage, her generous Fortitude, her Cpmiiand in every graceful look and action,, were most certainly fit to rule and reigns and Man was only born robust and strong, to Secure them on thosh Thrones they are formed (by Beauty, Softness, and a thousand Charms which Men want 3 to postess. Glorious Woman was born for commandtind Dominion; and tbo Custom has ufiirpt us the name of Rule over all s we frohi the beginning found ourselves T ifi Spite of all our boasted prerogative) Slaves and Vastals to the Almighty Sex. Take then my Share of Empire, ye Gods! And give me Love! Let me toil to gain, but let Silvia triumph and F 3 reign, 
vit 

•j f i: : y ' 
vn 
, *1’ *1 'j1 i V 
L ’ 
m 
dat 
C 
■ ft '1; 

reign, I ask no more than the led flave at her Chariot Wheels, to gaze on my Charming conquer efs, and wear with joy her Fetters! Oh how prcud I should be to see the d ear Victor of my Soul fb elevated, fo adorn’d with Crowns and Sceptres at her Feet, which I had won 5 to see her Smiling on the a doring Crown, distributing her Glories to young waiting Princes there dealing Provinces, and there a Coronet. Heavens I methinks, I see the lovely Virgin in this state, her Chariot slowly driving through the multitude that press to gaze upon her, she dressed like ivenuf.^ richly, gay and locse, her Hair and Robe blown by the flying Winds, dishovertng a houfand Charms to vjiew 3 thus the young Goddess looked, then when she drove her Chariot down, defeend ingclouds to meet the love flek 
God 
(VC 
fo 
as 
Fc 
thi 
W( 
m 
le 
r 103 J 
God in cooling Shades 5 and So would look my Silvta\ Ah my Soft, lovely Meid^ Such thoughts as these fired me with Ambition. For me, I Swear by every power that made me love, and made thee wondrous fair ^ I design no more by this great enterprise, than to make thee Some glorious thing, e tevated above what we have Seen yet on Earth : to raise thee above Fate or Fortune, beyond that pity os thy duller Sex, who un dersland not thy Soul, nor can never reach the flights of thy generous Love! No, my soul’s Joy, I must: not leave sthee liable to their little natural Malice and Scorn, to the impertinence os their Reproaches. No, my Silvia I must on, the great design must move forward 5 though I abandon it, ’twill advance 5 it is already too far to put a stop to it 5 and now I am en f 4 tred, 
■|; L 
lii( 
() 
tred, it is in vain to retreat, if are prosperous, it will to all Ages be call’d a glorious enterprize^but | if we fail, it will be bate, horrid [ and infamous 3 for the World \ judges of nothing but by the Sue 1 cess 5 that Cause is always good ^ that is prosperous, that is ill that is i unfuccesful.shouldi now retreat,! j run many hazards 5 but to go on | I run but one 5 by the first I (hall a larm the whole Gabal with a jealousy of my discovering, and those are Perfbns of too great Sente and Courage, not to take Some private way of revenge, to Secure their own stakes^and'to make myself uncertainly Safe by a discovcty indeed, were to gain a re/uge So ignoble, as a Man of Honour would Scorn to purchase life at^norwou dthat bate nefs Secure me. But in going on, Oh Silzjal When three Kingdoms stiall lie unpostest, andbeexposed, as it 
were. 
f It 
r 105) 

were, amongst the raffling Crowd, who knows but the chance may be. mine, as well as any others, who has. but the same hazard, and throw for it > If the strongest Sword must do it ( as that must do it) Why not mine still > Why may not mine still? Why may not mine be that fortunate one? ce fario has no more right to it than Philander Vis true, a few of the Rabble will pretend he has a better title to it, but they are a sort of easy Fools, lavish in nothing but noise and nonsenfe, true to change atid inconstancy, and willa bandon him to their own fury for the next that cries Haloo: Neither is there one part of fifty ( of the Fools that cry him up) for his Interest, though they use him fora Tool to work with, he being the only great Man that wants sense enough to find out the Cheat, F 5 which 

; i's 
() 
which they dare imposh upon. Gan anybody of reason believe if they had designed him good, they would let him bare fac’d have owned a party fboppofite to all Laws of Nature, Religion, Humanity and common Gratitude? When his Interest, if designed, might have been carried on better, if he had still distembled and, stayed in Court: No, believe me, ilia the Politicians show him, to render him odious to all Men of tolerable feuse of the party 5 for what reason soever they have who are disobliged (or at least think themselves So) to setup for Liberty, the World knows renders himself the worst of Criminals by it, and has abandoned an Interest more glorious and easy than Empire to fide with, and aid People that never did, or ever can oblige him 5 and he is fo dull as 
to 
, ei 

hul 
ip 
nu 
?ol 
jo 
[oe 
it 

sin 
tb 

till 
at 
■fti 
( 107"^ 
to imagine that for his sake, who never did us Service or good (unless Cuckolding us be good) We (hold venture lise and same to pull down a true Monarch, to Set up his Bastard over us. Cefario must pardon me, if I think his Politics are (hallow as his Parts, and that his own Interest has undone him 5 for of what advantage Soever the design may be to us, it really (hocks one’s Nature to find a Son engaged against a Father, and to him Such a Father: Nor when time comes, stall I forget the ruin of Mertilla. But let him hope on — and (b will I, as do a thousand more for ought I know 5 I fet out as fair as they, and will start as eagerly 5 if I mist it now, I have Youth and Vigour Sufficient for another Race, and while I stand on Fortunes Wheel as ste roulsit round, it may be my turn 
to 


L ' 
0 io J 
to be o’th top s, for when ’tk Set in motion, believe me, Silvia it isr not easily fixed 3 however let it suffice, lam now in, past a retreat, and to urge it nov to me, is but to put me into inevitable danger 5 at best it can but Set me where I was that is worfethan death when every Fool is aimingatakingdom^ What Man of tolerable Pride and Ambition can be unconcern’d, and not put himself into a posture of catching, when a Diadem (hall be thrown among the Crowd > It were infenstbility, stupid Dullness, not to lift a Hand, or make an ef forttosnatch it as it flies; though the glorious falling weight (hold crush me, it is great to attempt, and if Fortune do not favour Fools, I have as fair a grasp for it 3 as any other adventurer. 
This, my Silvia., is my Senfc of a business you Somuchdread31 may 
rise, 

() 
rm 
rite, but I cannot fail 5 therefore, my Silvia urge it no more 5 Love gave me ambition, and do not divert the glorious effests of your wondrous Charms, but let them grow, and Spread, and see what they will produce for my lovely Silvia the advantages will raoft certainly be hersbut no more : How came my Love So dull to entertain thee fb many minutes thus with reafbns for an affair, which one Soft hour with sihiamw convinces what she would have it 5 believe me, it will, I will Sacrifice all to her repose, nay, to her least command, even the Life of 
(My Eternal Pleasure) 
roiirphilander. 
I have no longer patience., I tnuji be coming towards the Grove., though it will do me no ?ood, more than Ktowitig I am fo much nearer my Adorable Creature, 
I conjureyouiburn this, for writing in haste, I have not counterfeited my Handn 
To 

1 ‘ 
^ ''' i il 
r ^ u 
i 'I? 
i 
T 
III 
(no) 
To Silviai 
Writ in a. Pair of Tablets, 
“A CY Charmer, I wait your X ▼ 1 Commands in the Meadow behind the Grove, where 1 Saw Dorinda, doriuus his Daughter, entering with a Basket of cow stips for Silvia, unnecestarily offering Sweets to the Goddess of the Groves, from whence they ( with all the rest of their gaudy Fellows of the Spring) asturae their ravishing Odours. F take every opportunity of telling my Silvia what I have fo often repeated, and shall be ever repeating with the same Joy while I live, that I love my Silvia to Death and Madness,, my Soul is on the Wyack, till she Send me the happ advancing Word. And yet 
believe 
el 
rc 
le 
le 
irc 
to 
C 
V 
P 
C I” I 
believe me, lovely Maid, I could grow old with waiting here the blefsed moment, though fet at any distance (within the com pass of Life, and impossible to be till than arrived to) but when I am fo near approacht it, Love from all parts rallies and hastens to my Heart for the mighty in counter ^ till the poor panting o verloaded Victim dies with the 
pressing weight. No more, ...... 
You know it, for it is, and will be eternally Silvias, 
\? I 
PO STS C'R IP T. 
Remember, my Adorable it is noxo seven aclocv. I have my tvatch in my Handy waiting and looking on the jlovp paced Minutes. Eight will (juickly arrive I hope., and then it isdark^enough to hide me: thinkjohere 1 am, and who I am, waiting near Silvia, and her Philander, 
1 

H 
(112) 
I think, my dear Angel you have the other Key of these Tablets if not they are easily broke open: you have an Hourgood to write in, Silvia 5 and I shall wait unimployed by anything but thought. Send me word how' you were like to have been furl prized 3 it may pofhbly be of advantage to me in this night’s dear Adventure. I wondered at the Superscription of my Letter indeed, of vibhlich doriuus cou\a give me no other Account, than ^ that you were Surprised, and he " received it with difficulty give me the Story now, do it in\^ha rity, my Angel. Besides, I would employ all thy Moments, for I am jealous of every one that is not dedicated to silvia*s Philander, 
To 
tr 
( "3) 
To Philander.' 
I Have received your Table tsi of which I ha ve the Key, and Heaven only knows f for Lovers cannot, unless they lov’d likcis// 2i74, and her Philander) what pains and pantings my Heart fiiftained at every thought that brought me of thy near approach 5 every Moment I start, and am ready to faint with Joy, Fear, and Something not to be expressed that Seizes me. To add to this, I have busted myself with d resting my Apartment up with Flowers, fb that I fancy the ceremonious Bii. stnefs of the Light looks like the preparations for the dear Joy of the Nuptial Bed, that too is fb adorn’d and deck’d with all that’s Sweet and gay 5 all which postestes me with fo ravishing and Solemn 
a 

C jfl 
I N 

( iho 
a Confusion,, it is even approaching to the most profound sadness it fcls Oh Vhilabjder, I find I am fond of being undone 5 and unless you take a more than mortal Care of me, I know this Night fbme fatal mischief will befall me 5 what it is I know not, either the lost of Philander my Life or my Honour, or all together, which a disco/ery only of your being alone in my a partment, and at Such an Hour, will most certainly draw upon us: Death is the least we must expect, by Some Surprise or other, my Father being rasti, and extremely Jealous, and the more So of me, by how much more he is fond of me, and nothing would inrage him like the dishovery of an en tctview like this 5 though you have Liberty to range the hduse of Bell font as a Son, and are indeed 
V 
fli 
Si 
0 
E 
C “5) 
deed at Home there, but when you come by stealth 5 when he (hall find his Son and Virgin Daughter 9 the Brother and tthe Sister So retired 3 So entertained. — What but Death canenfue? Or what is worse, eternal Shame? Eternal confusion on my Honour?? Excuse, what eva fions, Vows and Protestations will convince him, or appease mer tiljds jealousy mertiluy my Sister, and Philanders Wife? Oh God! that cruel thought will put me into ravings 3 I have a thousand streams of killing reflection that flow from that original Fountain! Curse on the Allimce that gave you a welcome to bell font. k\x Philander., Could you not have stayed ten ftiort Years longer? Alas, you thought that was an Age in Youth, but it is but a Day in Love; Ah Could not your 
eager 

"ku: 
ih 
Si 
!. ' ‘ r s' b ■ ' 
tls'^.: 
■' f. ■. 
il H 
II 
h ■' i ^ 
..if ■ i 
At. !': 
( Ii) 
eager Youth have led you to a thousand Diversions, a thousand times have baited in the long Journey of Life without hurrying on to the last Stage, to the last Retreat, but the Grave 5 and to me seem as irrecoverable as impossible to retrieve thee } - Could no kind Beauty stop thee on thy way, in Charity or Pity? philan derlaw me then. And though mertiua was more fit for his ca restes, and I but capable to please with cl^ildiqi Prattle y Oh could he hot have Seen a promising Bloom in my Face, that might have foretold the future Conquests I was born to makfe? Oh was there no prophetic Charm that could befpeakyour Heart, engage it, and prevent that fatal Marriage? You say, my Adorable Brother, we were destined from our Creation for one another 3 that the Decrees 
of 
i 
t 
C 
of Heaven, or Fate, or both, de signed us for, this mutual Passion: Why then, Oh why did not Heaven, Fate, or Destiny, do the mighty work, when first you saw my Infant Charms } But oh philan der., Why do I vainly rave > Why call in vain on time that’s is dead and gone? Why idly wish for ten year’s Retribution That will not yield a Day, an Hour, a Minute: No, no, Vis past, tis past and flown for ever, as distant as a thouiand Years to me, as irrecoverable. Oh Philander What hast thpu thrown away? Ten glorious Years of ravishing Youth, of unmatched heavenly Beauty, on one that knew not half the value of it! Silvia, was only born to Set a Rate upon it, was alone capable of Love, Such Love as might de strve it: Oh why was thatcharm ing Face ever laid on any Bolbm 
that 
V L 

At 
.Dr 
fll 
> 
■ rn 
that knew not how to sigh and pant, and heave at every touch of So much diftrasting Beauty I Oh why were thbfedear Arms, whose Soft preflings that ravish where they circle 5 destined fora Body cold and dull, that could Sleep in fenlibly there, and not fo much as dream the while what the transporting pleasure figinified, bnt unconcerned received the wondrous blesstings, and never knew its Price, or thanked her Stars. She has thee all the day, to gaze upon, and yet she lets thee pafs her careless sight, as if there were no Miracles in view: She does, not see the little Gods of Love j that play eternally in thy Eyes 5r and since she never received a Dart from thence, believes there’s no Artillery there. She plays not with thy Hair, nor Weaves her snowy fingers in thy Curls of 
Jet, 
1 
( 119) 
Jet, Sets kin order, and adores its Beauty: The Fool with flaxen Wigg had done as well for her 5 a dull white Coxcomb had made as good a Property 3 a Husband is no more, at best no more. Oh thou, Charming Object of my e ternal wishes. Why wert thou thus disposed > Oh shve my Life, and tell me what indifferent impulse obliged thee to these Nuptials : Had Mertilla been recommended or forced by thetyranny of a Father into thy Arms, or for bate Lucre thou hadstchoten her, this had excused thy Youth and Crime 3 obedience or vanity I could have pardoned, — But oh — ’tvvas Love 1 Love, my p^i lander \ Tby raving Love, and that which has undone thee was a Rape rather than a Marriage 3 you fled with her. Oh Heavens, aiad to pofless, you stole the unloving 
Piize! 
11; 

Hi; 
ii 



f i20) 
Prize 1 — Yes, you loved her, falle as you are yoq did 5 Perjured and faithlest. Loved her j - — Hell and Confusion on the World, it was fb — Oh Philander I am lost 
his Letter was found in peces torn. 
t 
( 115) 
To Monsieur the Count of ll 
Loti, 
these Pieces of Paper which I have put together as well as I could, were writ by rpy Lady to have been Sent by ID or ip da, when on a Sudden Ihe rote in rage from her, Seat, tore first the Paper, and then her Robes and Hair, and indeed nothing has efcap’d the Violence of her Pallion; nor could my Prayers or Tears retrieve them or calm her : kis however chang’d at last to mighty Padions of Weeping, in which Employment I have left her on her repose, being commanded away. I thought it my Duty to give your Lord Ship this account, and to Sbid the pieces of Paper, that your Lordfnip may guds at the G occaiioii 
'll' 
'A f I? 
■: V 
; V II 
C 11+) 
occasion of the Sudden storm which ever rises in that fatal quarter; but in putting them in order, 
I had like to have been surpriz’d by my lady’s Father, for my Lord the Cotint having long fbl licited me for Favours, and taking all Opportunities of entertaining i me, fomid me alone in my cliam j ber, employed in Serving yours Lord Ship; I had only time to hides the Papers, and to get rid of him, ' having given him an aslignationr tonight, in the Garden Grove toj give him the hearing to what he! says he has to propose to mel ^ Pray Ileaven all things go righs too your lordlhip’s wish thisj Evening, for many ominous things ^ happen’d today. Madam, the[ ^ Counteis had like to have takeii|^ a Letter writ for' your Lordstiipf b today; for the duchess of — I a coming to make her a yisit, came tec ■: ol 

( II) 
on a hidden with her in my lady’s Apartment, and surpriz’d her writing in her dresting Room, giving her only time to Slip the Paper into her comb box. The fost Ceremonies being past, as Madam the duciiess uses not much, stie fell to Commend lily lady’s Dressing Plate, and taking up the Box and opening it, found the Letter, and Laughing, cry’d. Oh, have I found you making Love? At wliieli my Lady, with an infinite Confusion, would have 
retriev’d it, -- But the duchess 
not quitting her hold? cry’d. 
Nay, L amrefblv’d to see in what manner you write to a Lover, and whether you have a Heart tender or cruel; at which She began to read aloud, My Lady to blush and change Colour a Hundred times in a Minute; I ready to dye with fear; Madam the G 2 Coim 


I. ^ 
'k 
^ la 
S .1 

C) 
Countess in infinite Amazement, my Lady interrupting every word the Duchess read by Prayers and Entreaties, which heighten’d her Curiosity, and being Young and Airy, regarded not the Indecency, to which she prefer’d her curio stty^ who still Laughing, cry’d, She; was resolved to read it out, and know the Constitution of her Heart j when my Lady, whose Wit never fail’d her, cried, I befeecisi you Madam, let us have Ib much] complisance for Melirida to ask her Consent in this Affair, and then I am pleas’d you Should see, what Love I can make upon occasion I took the Hint, and with a reali Confusion, cry’d — I implore youj Madam, not to discover my weak f nefs'to Madarn the Duchess; S would not for the World -- -- -^ — Bethought 
to love So paisionately as your Ladilhip in favour of Jlexit] 
ha 
( 117). 
has made me profess under the narhe of Silvia to Philander. This incourag’d my Lady, who began to say a thoufsind pleasant things QL Alexis^doridm his Son, and my Lover, as your Lord Ship knows, and who is no inconsiderable Fortune for a Maid, inrich’d only by your lordship’s Bounty. My Lady after this, took the Letter, and all being refbived it Should be read, She her seif did. it, and turnd it So prettily into burlesque Love by'her manner of Reading it, that made Madam the duchel Laiight extremely; who, at the end of it, cry’d to my Lady — Well, Madam, I am Sctisfied you have not a heart wholly insensible of Love, that could fb well express it for ano tlio*. Thus they rallied on, ’till careful of my lover’s repose, the duchess urg’d the Letter might be immediately Sent away, at G I which 

( ii) 
which my Lady readily folding up the Letter, writ, For the cob^fttmt Alexis, on the out side: 1 took it, and beg’d I might have leave to 
retire to write it over m my own Hand, they permitted me, and I carried 
k after Sealing it to Dor Him ^ wdio waited for it, and wondering to find lih son’s name on it, cry’d, — mistresk Melhda^ I doubt you have mistook my present bufiness, I wait for a Letter from my Lady to my Lord, and you give me one from your feitto, my Son Alexis \ kwill be very welcome to Alexis I confess, but at this time I had 
rather oblige my Lord than my Son; I laughing, reply’d, He was 
mistaken, that Alexis at this time, meant no other than my Lord, which pleas’d the good Man extremely, who thought it a good Omen for his Son, and fb went his way satisfied j as everybody was, 
except 

C 115?) 
except the coiintess, who fstncy’d Something more in it than my lady’s Inditing for me; and after, Madam, the duchess was gone, She went ruminating and pensive to her Chamber, from whence I am confident fire will not depart tonight, and will poffibiy Sct Spies in every corner; at least ’tisgood to tear the worst, that we may prevent all things that would hinder this nights Assignation: As Soon as the Coast is clear, i’ll wait on your Lord Ship, and be your Conductor, and in all things else am ready to strew myself, 
My Lord, 
Tour lordjhifi*s wofi humble and mofi obedient Servant, 
Melinda. 
i,, 
i 
Silvia ^ order to wait on your. Uordjhip as soon as all is clear. 
G 4 
To 
( 
f ■ 
A 
i ■ 
120) ^ 
To Melinda. 
H Melinda what have you told me? Stay me with an immediate account of the recovery and calmness of my Adorable Weeping 6vai^, or I Shall enter palfont with my Sword drawn, bearing dowm all before me ’till I make my way to my Charming Mourner : Oh God I Silvin in a Rage!! in any paslion but that of Love.'’ I cannot bear it, no, by Heaven I cannot; I Shall do Some Outrage either on myself or at Belfora. Oh thou dear Advocate of my tenderest wishes, thou Confident of my never dying Flame, thou kind adminifsring Maid, send Some relief to my breaking Heart — Haste and tell me, silvia is calm, that her brigfii' Eyes Sparkle with Smiles, or if they 
Lan 
- C 12^1) 
Languish, say ’tis with Love, with expecting Joys; that her dear Hands are no more employed in e)fercifes too rough and unbecoming their Native softness. Oh e ternal God I taring perhaps her Divine Hair, brighter than the sun’s reflecting Beams, injuring the heavenly Beauty of her Charming Face and bosbm, the Joy and Wish of all Mankind that look upon her : Oh Charm her with. Frayersr and Tears, stop her dear Fingers from the rude aitauks,. bind her fair Hands: Repeat Philander toiler, tell her lie’s Fainting with the news of her unkind nesk, and'outrage on her lovely self, but tell her too, I die adoring her j tell her I rave, I tear, I curie my self— — — So I cloy, tell her I would break out into a Violeiics that, Should ■ Set kheelfont, in a,. Flame, but for my Care of lien. 
G 5, Heaven,. 
h' f>‘ 

C i2, Z) 
Heaven arid Earth stiould not restrain me, — No, they Should not, Butler least Frown Should still: me, tame me, and make me calm Coward : Say this, say ally say anything to charm her Rage nd Tears. Oh Lam mad, stark 
mad, and ready to run on that 
frantic bufiness I die to think her guilty of: Tell her how it would grieve her to see me torn and mangled; to See that Hair file loves, rufflm and diminish’d by Rage, violated by my insupportable Grief, my self quite bereft of all Sente but that of Love, but that of Adoration for my diarniing, cruel, intenfible, who is poitelt with every Thought, with every Imagination that can render me unhappy, born away with every Fancy that is in disfavour of., the wretched Philander, Oil write iiiimediatcly,., 
1 ■ or: 
.1 
( ih) 
or you will behold me enter a most, deplorable object ofpity. 
When I receiv’d yours, I fell io filch a Passion thaf I forc’d myself back to jonr/to his House, lest my Transports had hurried me to Belfont, where I Should have undone all: But as I can rest nowhere, I am now returning to the Meadow again, where I will expect your aid or die.. * 
From Dorillus his Cottage, almost nine a clockf 
To Philander, 
'
1 Must own my Charming pkl j Undery nij Love is now 
arrived to that excess, that every Thought which before but distom pos’d me, now puts rme into a Violence of Rage unbecoming my ♦ sc.x 

Sex; or anything but the mighty Gccafion of it, Love, and which only had power to calm what it had before ruffled into a destrfl ctive Storm; but like the anger’d Sea, which pants and heaves and retains still an uneaste Motion long after the rude Winds are appeas’d and hush’d to Silence. My Heart beats still, and heaves with the fensible remains of the late dangerous Tempest of my Mind, and nothing can absolutely calm me but the approach of the all powerful; though 
that Thought posteffes me with ten thoufandtears, which I know will vanilii all at thy appearance, and asfsirae no more their dreadful Sliapes till thou art gone again: bistrig me then that, kind Gestation, bring me my Lyfmder and Set me above the Thoughts of Cares., Frights or any other Thoughts, but 
those. 
’ ( 1^5) 
diofe of tender Love : haste then thou Charming Object of my e ternal wishes, and of my new de firs!^> haste to my Arms, my Eyes, 
my Soul, -- -- But ph be wondrous 
careful there, do not betray the easy Maid that trusts thee amidst all her Sacred store. 
’tis almost dark, and my Mother is retir’d to her Chamber, my Father to his Cabinet, and has left all that Apartment next the Garden wholly without Spies. I have, by trusty Silvia, Sent you a Key, Melinda got made to the, Door, which leads from the Garden to the backstairs to my a paitment, So carefully lock’d, and the original Key So closely guarded by my jealous Father: that way I beg you to come a way; but too well known to Ljfander^ and by which he has made many an escape. to and from Mertilia, 
Oh 
i I) 
h;; 


Oh Damn that Thought, what makes it torturing me, -- « let me change it for those of Lysander the advantage will be as greafas bartering Hell for Heaven; haste then, Lysander: But what need I bid thee. Love will lend thee his Wings; thou whocommandest all his Artillery, put them on, and fly to thy Languishing 
Silvia. 
01 faint with the dear thought of thy Approach 
To the Charming Silvia. 
With much ado, with many a Sigh, a panting Heart, and many a languishing Look back, towards happy Belfont^ I have recovered darillm. his Farm, 
where 
( stiy) 

where I threw me on a Bed, and lay without Motion, and almost without Life for two Hours; ’till at last, through all my Sighs my great Goncern, my Torment, my Love and Rage broke silence, and burst into all the different complaints both Soft and mad by turns, that ever possessed a Soul extrava^ gaudy seiz’d with frantic Love, Ah Silvia what did I not Say? How did I not Curie, and Who, except my Charming Maid? For yet my suvu is a Maid; Yes, yes, ye Envying Powers, She is, and yet the Sacred and inestimabletreasure was offer’d a trembling Victim to the o’er joy’d and fancy’d Deity, tor then and there, I thought myself happier than a Triumphing God; but having overcome all Difficulties, all the Fatigues and Toils of Loves long Sieges, vanquish’d the rnighty Fantom of the 
Fair, 
■ * i J 

A 
( rz8 > 
Fair, the Giant Honour, and routed all the numerous Host of Womens little Reasonings, past all the bounds of peevisti Modesty: Nay, even all the loose and silken Com terfcarps that fencm the Sacred Sort, and nothing stop’d my glorious pursuit: Then, then, ye Gods, just then, by an overtranfport, to fall just fainting before the Surrein dering Gates, unable to receive the yielding treasure 1 Oh.silvia! what Demorij malicious at my Glory, seiz’d my Vigour? What God, envious of my mighty Joy, rendered rne a Shameful Object of his Raillery? Snatched my (till then) never-failing Power, and left me dying on thy Charming bosbm. Heavens, how I lay I Silent with wonder, rage and ecstasy of Love, unable to complain, or rail or storm, or Seek for ease, but with my Sighs alone, which made, up all my breath;. isry .mad 
If 
I 
I 
( IZ9) 
desires remain’d, but all unactive, as Age or Death itself, as cold and feeble, as unfit for Joy, as if my Youthful Fire had long been past, or Silvia had never been blessed with Charms. Tell me, thou wondrous perfect Creature, tell me, where lay the hidden Witchcraft.? Was silvips Beauty too Divine to mix with Mortal Joys? Ah no, ’twas Ravishing, but Humane all. Yet Sure stwas So approaching to Divinity, as chang’d my Fire to awful Adoration, and all my wanton Heat to reverend Contemplation. — But this is nonfense all, ’twas Something more that gave me Rage, despair and Torments insup portable: No, ’twas no dull Devotion, tame Divinity, but mortal killing Agony, unlucky Disappointment, unnatural Impotence. Oh I am lost, enchanted by Some Magic Spell: Oh what can Silvia 
say? 
1''! 
S'liii 
4 J 

say? What can She think of my fond paslion; she’ll Swear ’tis all i 

a Cheat, I had it not. No, it could not be, fucli Tales i’ve often heard, I as often laughed at too; of disappointed Lovers; wou’d Silviri wou’d be j lieve ( as Sure She may) mine wasj excels of pastion: What! my Silvia! being arriv’d to all the Joy of Love, just come to reap the glorious Recompense, the Sull reward, the Heaven for all my Sufferings, ^ do I lie gazing only and no more A dull, a feeble unconcern’d Ad mirer! Oh my Eternal Shame 1 — i Curse on my Youth, give me, yej Powers, Old Age, for that hassomef excufo, but Youth has pone : ’tisf Dullness,, Infehstbility Where Shall I hide my heady when: this lewd story’s told? When itj Shall be confirm’d, Philander the: Young, the Brisk and Gay philan l ' who never fail’d the Woman 
he' 
I 
I 
cco 
he Scarce wisht for; never bauk’d the Amorous conceated Old, nor the ill favgur’d Young; yet when be had extended in his Arms the Young, the Charming Fair and Longing Silvia the untouch’d, unspotted, and till then, unwifhing lovely Maid, yielded, desencelefs, and unguarded all, he wanted Power to faze the trembling Prey: Defend me Heaven from Madness. bh Silvia, I have reees: ed on all the little Circumstances that might occastonthis Dilaster, and damn me to this degree of Coldness, but I can fix on none : I had, ’tis true, for silvips Sake, Some apprehenst ons of Fear of being surpriz’d; for coming through the Garden, I law at the farther end a Man, at least I fancy’d by that light it was a Man, who perceiving the glimps of Something approach from the Grove, made fostly towards me, 
but 


1 „ '!i, 
ml 
X iho 
but with Such Caution as if he feamd to be mistaken in the Per sbn, as much as I was to approach him : and reminding what me/in da told me of an Amgnation she had made to Monsieur the Count — imagin’d it him 5 nor was I mistaken when I heard his voice calling in l(jw tone — Melinda. — whicii I mended my pace, and e’er he got halfway the Garden recover’d the Door, and Softly unlocking it, got in unperceiv’d and fasten’d it after me, well enough astur’d that he law not which way I vanish’d: however it fail’d not to alarm me with Some Fears on your dear account, that disturb’d my reposef and which I thought then not northeast cefsary to impart to you, and which indeed all vanishd at the Sight of my Adorable Maid: When entering thy Apartment, I beheld thee extended on a Bed of roses, in Garments 
t 

() 
ments whictc if postible, by their wanton loose Negligence and Gaiety, augmented, thy natural Charms: 1 trembling, fell on my Knees by your bed fide, and gaz’d a while, unable to speak for Transt ports of Joy and Love: You toq were silent, and remain’d ib, (b long that I ventur’d to press your Lips with mine, which all their eager kisses could not put in motion, So that I fear’d you fainted; a Sudden Fright that in a Moment chang’d my Fever of Love into a cold Ague fit; but you reviv’d me with a Sigh ain, and fired me anew by premng my Hand, and from that filent Soft incou irageuent, I, by degrees, ravifil’d a'thousand blifses; yet still between your tempting Charming kifses, you would cry— — my 
pieanjer^ do not injure me, -- Be 
lure you press me not to the last 
Joys 
‘ i II 
m 
ii 9 
■; i] 
C J 
Joys of Love — Oh have a Care or I am undone, for ever; restrain your roving Hands, - — Oh whether wotuld they wander— — Soul, my Joy, my everlasting Charmer, Oh whether would yoii go. — — Thus with a Thousand Cautions more, which did but raise what you delign’d tp calm, you made me but the madder to pofliefs i: not all the vows you bid me call to mind, could now restrah my wild and head strong Pastibn; my raving Raging ( but my. fbft) desire : No, No, it was not 
in the power of feeble Fiefh and Blood to. find.: refistanae against: So many Charms; yet still you made me Swear, still I protested, but still burnt' on with the same torturing Flame, till the vast Pleasure even became a Pain : To add to this, I saw (ytsysjhuynot ah your hrt and Modesty could hide it) I Saw 
the 
C 13^0 
the i^avifhing Maid, as much inflam’d as I •, She burnt with e qual Fire, with equal languifh ment: Not all her care could keep the Sparks concealed, but it broke out in every word and look; her trembling Tongue, her feeble faint' ingnoice betray’d it all; Sighs interrupting every Syllable; a lan guishment I never Saw till then dwelled in her Charming Eyes, that contradicted all her little Vows; her Short and double Breathings heav’d her Breast, her Swelling Showy Breast, her Hands that grasp’d me trembling as they clos’d, while She permitted mine unknown, unheeded to traverse,, her Beauties, till quite forgetting all i’d faintly promised, and wholly abandoning my Soul to Joy, I rufht upon her, who all fainting lay beneath mynfeless weight, for on a Sudden all my power was fled 
'Swifter 
I. i 
C 
Swifter than Lightning hurried through my infeebled Veins, and yanisht all : Not the dear lovely Beauty which I pressed, the Dying Charms of that fair Face and Eyes, the cmsps of those Soft Arms, nor the bewitching accent of her voiccj that murmur’d Love half lino ther’d in her Sighs, nor all my Love, my vast, my mighty Pastion, could call my fugitive Vigour back again : Oh no, the morel look — The more I touch’d and saw, the more I was undone. Oh pity me, my too too lovely Maid, do not revile the Faults which you alone create. Conlideicall your Clrarmsat once expos’d, consider every Sense about me ravish’d, o’ercome with Joys too mighty to be Supported ij No wonder if I fell a Shameful! Sacrifice to the fond Deity, consi 1 der how I waited, how I strove, and still burnt on, and every tender 

touch still added. 
vigour 
(ms 
to the 
'by^your 
which: t Self mbsfhiii' 
conlistn’i 
•I want pmofhplw; to make this out ot fststlito'& teiy nest on aiy Chinch hr Ac 
cideiit, but tllis, ^ riiy Gliarming Silvia I am Sure, that had ilov^d you lest, i’d been lest wretched: or had webkrted slfuiiajoti faill terms," nor hw I left you with an opinion So distdvantagious for ly fa^derj but for that uiilmppy noise at your Chatnfier Door, which alarming: your Festf, ocealion’d your? rect)very from that' dear Trance, tb wmcli Love ahd lost desire had reduc’d yosi arid me from the most tormenting fileiit agony that disappointed joy’ever postesfafond e}^pecting heart with. Oh Heavens 1 tohave; fny ^^fe/h III my power, fav(^r’d by filerice, night ’ te retreat...................... 
le 
i 1 i 
or 
H 
(, IJS > 
a tame cold figher only, as if my Silvia that Allignatipn a lone by Sfealth, undrels, all loose and languishing, fit for the mighty bufmess of the Night, only to hear me prattle, See me gaze, or tell her what a pretty sight it was j to See the Moon Shine through the dancing Boughs. O Damn my harden’d dullness— — no more, -- -- -1 am all fire and mad 
I 
]( 
fa 
Refs at the thought, But I was fay' 
I ing, 6'/7tii^, wehaveboth recover’dj then when the Noise alarrn’d us.i ^ I long to know whether you think! we were betray’d,. for on that knowledge rests a mighty part of di my Destiny: I hope we are not, by an Accident that befell me at my going away, which( ( for my. untimely force of leaving my love bej ly Silvidy which gave me pains dej msupportable) would have given ret; me great diversion. You know our ■. fcai" 
b 
() 
fear of being difcover’d, occafion'd my disguife, for you found it northeast ceuary I Should depart, your fear had So prevail’d, and that inmelin* dah nightgown and head drefs \ thus attir’d with much ado, I went and left my Soul behind nie, and finding no body all along thegal lery, nor in my pastage from your apartment into the Garden,! was a thousand times about to return to all my Jpys; when in the midst of this almost ended dispute,! fiiw by the light of the Moon (whidfi was by good fortune under a Cloud and could not distinctly direct the sight) a Man taking towards me with cautious Speed, which mstdeme advance with the more haste to recover the Grove, believing to have efcap’d him under the Covert of the Trees; for retreat I could not without betraying which way I went; but just at H 2 the 
■ V V C = ■. ^ 
■ WK 


i A 
C) 
the entrance of the Thicket, he turning Short made up to me, and I perceiv’d it Monsieur the Count, who taking me for Melmdtt, who it seems he expected, caught hold of my Gown as I would have pafs’d him, and cry’d, nowm linday I see you are a Maid of Ho nour, — Come retire with me into the Grove where I have a present of a Heart and Something elfe to make you, that will be of more advantage to you than that o£a/exis^ though Something younger— — all confounded knew not what to reply, nor how, lest he Should stnd^ his mistake, at least if he difcol ver’d not who I was: Which j fence gave him occasion to go om ^ which he did in this manner What not a word, Nff//>^^, or d ou design I Shall take your Silena for consent? If So, come my prettj Creature, let us not lose the hoiif 
idvi 
] 
C) 
H 
tc 
Love has given us; at this he would have advanc’d, leading me by the hand which he pressed and kissed very amorousty: Judge my a dorable Silvia, in what a line condition your Lysander then was in. What stiould 1 do? to go had dist appointed'him worse than I was wlith thee before; not to go, betray’d me: I had much ado to hold mycountenance, and iinwii ^ ling to Speak.while Iwas tliusim pioy’d in thought, monfiemr fxxw ing me ( eager of joys to come,) and I holding back, he stop’d and cry’djfurejme///^^^, you came not hither to bring me a denial.i then reply’d, whispering, — Softly, Sir for Heavens sake (fweetning my voice as much as pofiible)conlider i’m a Maid, and would not be disc cover’d for the world. Who can discover us? reply’d my Lover, what I take fmm thee Shall never / H ^ he 
istsfl 
t 
!j‘l 
''JS 
K; ■ I 
it 
rif. 
t ’ i' yjifr 
4- 
I 
be mist, not by Alexis himfelfupon thy Wedding Night — Come 
— Sweet Child come: -- -- With 
that I puird back and whifper’d — Heavens would you make a mi strefs of me? — Says he — A mi strefsjwhat wouldstthou be ache rubin? Then I replied as before — 
i am no Whore, Sir, -- Nocrys 
he, but I can quickly make thee one, I have my Tools about me sweet heart, therefore let’s lose no time but fall to work: this last [ ( raillery from die brisk old Gentle;; man, had in Spite of Refblution i C almost made me burst out into | \ loud Laughter, when he took f more gravity upon him, and cry’d a ‘ — Come, qomtym^ll^da, why alu j this foolisli argument at this hour I in this place, and after fb much Sei rious Courtship, believe me i’ll be' C kind to thee for ever j with that he d dapt fifty Guineas in a Purse into k 
one 

C h5) 
one hand, and Ibmetliing elfe that Shall; be nameless into the other, presents that had been both woitli melindrcs acceptance: All this while wasi studying ablevafion; at last, to Shorten my pleasantadven turc, looking round, I cry’d Softly, are you Sure, Sir, we are Safe — For Heavens sake step towards the Garden Door and feestbr L would not be discover’d for t he World 
Nor I, ciy’d he -- but do not fear 
all’s Safe; — however see (Wiiist' 'per’d I) that my Fear my not disturb your |oys. With that he went toward thehouse, and I Slipping into the Grove, got immedli ately into the Meadow, where Alettttis waited my coming with briujord^ fb f lest the expecting Lovei*, : I flippofe, ranging the Grove for his sled Nimpfa, and I doubt will fall heavy on poor Me Undafwh.0 {bsill have the Guineas H, 4 either. 

V i, s ■lifi: ' ■■ i s 4's< 


V 
( 14+.3 
either! to restore or keep as: fliei 1 and the. angry: Counts cart agreej I, leave' Management of it toiler Wit and Conduct. • 
This account I thought necesia i ry to give my Charmer, that stie might, prepare melimaiov theaf.; iaujt, who understanding all that L pass'dhetweerkiis, may fbdispofe [ of ma^tcts, that nodiscovery may * happen by mistake, and! knows nxy isthi^a2.nd She can find a thousand excuses for the suppos’d; 
s, But my Ado, 
ia; bk.maid, my bustnefs. here ^ was; not to give an. account of; my Adventure only, nor' of my ravings, but to tell my sihia^l on what my Life depends; which, I is, in a permission'tc) wait oh her • again this insuing Nightly raake, | no exeufe, dor if you do, by all j I adore in Heaven and Earth, I'll i end hiy Life here where I received 

C > 
ved it. ni say no more, nor give your Love Instructions, but wait impatiently here the Life or Death of your 
A 
Lysandes 

T Six a Clocky and yet my Eyes have not closed themselves to jlee p: Alexis and Brilljard gives me hopes of a kind return to this 'and have brought their Flute and Violin to charm me into a fltmber: If Silvia lovey as I am juris jlte does, jliell wake me with a dear Consent to see, me, if not, I only wake do fees for 
ever. 
Ll 
i f 
ill 
H 
C) 
To my fair Charmen 
fl'; 


"Hen I had feal’d the in ciofed, my Page whom I Imd order’d to come to me with an account of any businefs extraordinary, is this Morning ar j riv’d with a Letter from cefarioj C which I have tent here inclos’d, that my Silvia, may tee how little I regard the World, or the. mighty Revolution in hand, > when tet in Competition with the J, least hope of beholding her ado 1 r^ble Face, or hearing her Char ^ ming Tongue when it whifpersf the lost Dictates of her tenderheart into my ravifh’d soui; | j)ne moments Joy like that stir tnoimts an Age of dull empire.i No, let the biisie unreguarded‘ Rout perish, tyre Caute fall or 
stand 
C 
stand alone for me .* Give me ’ hut Love, Love ahdmyavw^i I ask no mote of Heaven; to i which vast Joy could you but imagine ( Oh wondrous Miracle of Beauty!) how poor and little I esteem the valued Trifles of the World, you would in return contemn your part of it, and live with me in filent Shades for ever. Oh I Sihii, what hast thou this Night to add to the Soul of thy 
.i 
fmtandek! 
istri 
: LI 
i 
C 148) 
A 
St 3 
VI 
CI 
\ 
h : r 
To the Count of 
i A.. ' .JL. ■ 
ite allow you my .dear, to be ' JL v^y fond of fo much Beauty 1 a? the World must own adorns the lovely; Till permit 
Love too to Rival me in your Heart, but not out rival Glory; haste then, my Dear, to the advance of that, make no delay, but with the Mornings dawn, let me find you in my Arms, where I have Something that will Siirprizie you to relate to you : You were last Night expected at- -- -- -- behoves you to 
give no Umbrage to persons who’s Interest renders them enough jealous. We have two new Advancers come in of Youth and Money, teach them not negligence i 
C 
> 
gligence; si^teful and let nothing hinder : you' from taking Horie immediately, as you value the Repose and Fortune of 
My Dear 
Tour Cesario. 
I call’d lafi on you and 
your Page following me to my Coachy whijfer*d me — if I had any earned hujinef with you he knew where to find you) Ifoon imagin’d where ^ and bid him call within an hour for this, and pod with it immediately, though dark. 
kiii 
To 
if 
C I fo) 
To Pbiianderr 
Ah! what have 1 done fhuah’> devj and where Shall I hide my guilty blushing Face ?: Thou hast undone my Eternal Quiet: Oh thou hast ruin’d my everlasting repose, and I must never, northeast ver look abroad again : Curie on my Face that first debauch’d my Virtue, and taught thee how to Love! Curie on my tempting youth, my Shape, my air, my eyes, my voice, my hands, and every charm that did contribute to my fatal love, a lasting Curie on all — But thole of the adorable Philander fsihxa thole — evenin this raging Minute, my furious Palfion dares not approach' with an indecent Thought: No, they are Sacred ail, madness it self would Spare ’em, and Shoiiidst thou now behold me 
as. 
( i > 
as I sit, my hairdiflicverd^rufh’d and diforderm|my eyes bedewing every word I write, when for each Letter I let fall a tear; then (pressed with thought) starting,! droptniy Pen, and fell to rave anew, and tear those Garments whole loose negligence helpm to betray me to my Shameful ruin, wounding my Breast, but want the refbluti on to wound it as I ought; which when! but propoie, Love stays the Thought, raging and wild as ’tis,, the Conqueror checks it, with whispering only Philander to my Soul; the dear Name calms me to ajrj^ ealinefs, gives me the Pen into my trembling Hand, and I purfuemy Silent fbft complaint: Oh 1 shouldst thou lee me thus, in ah these Hidden different change ef Passions, thou wouldst say phl~ lander were mad indeed; mad nels itself can find no stranger 
motions: • 
If, 
1 
motions; And I would calmly ask thee, fori am calm again, how comes it my Adorable fhl landery that thou canst poftefs a Maid with fb muchmadnefs.^who art thyself a Miracle of fbftnefs, all Sweet and all serene, the most of Angel in thy Composition that ever mingled with Humanity; the very words fall fb gently from thy Tongue, — are utter’d with a Voice Sb ravishingly fbft, a tone fb tender and fb full of Love, ’twould charm even frenzy, calm rude distraction, and wildness would become a filent Listener; there’s fiich a sweet Serenity in thy Face, Such innocence and fbft ness in thy Eyes, Should desert Savages, but gaze on thee, Sure they would forget their native Forest wildness, and be infpir’d wkh^ easy Gentleness.: Most certainly this godlike power thou hast. 
Why 
I 
1 
(15?) 
Why then? igh tell mein the A gonyoftliy^oiii, why must those Charto that brin|bttahquility andrpeaefero all, make me aiane a wild, uns^mly raver f'why has It contrary estectfoh rne? Oh I all i actahd^fay is ijeitfect mad r Yet: thi^ is the leastueaccountabie: parr of' my most; wretched Sto ryyc ^gh i tahushneter behold" thy lovely: Tace again, for if I should) see I fiiguld blusti my Soul away : y ho, > no, vl: must: notj ^ nor ever morebelieve thy dear dcs ludingwbws r Neverthy charming perjufd.dat{^j after a viola tionlike to this (Dh’heaven, what have I done? Yet by that Heaven I swear I dare rrct asfomy soul lest it inform': me how I waste blame, unless that Fatal 'Minute would instruct.' me how to Revenge my wrongs upon my heart, my fond betraying laeart^.4 — De ^ 
Ipair 
■y 
mill 
iff I 
ri p 
Am 

I „M 
i ^ 
t,, ', 
I, 
L L 'i ■ 
15 ‘ 'I 
jftfif, ■ 
fpair and Madness feist me j dark, j f nest and horror hide mefrom huh man Sights after an eafinest like 2 this; — — What to yield, — \ 
t0 yield my honour i Betray the see rets of my Virgin wifhes ^my new desiresjtny unknown: shame fulflame, -- ^fiell and Death! 
f 
Where got I fb nuach confidence lt 
Where learned I the harden’d and unblushing Folly? Ta wish was! i Such a fault, as is a crime unpar j donahle to own y to show ddire is 1 such a Sin in Yirtae as.mustdcr! i Serve reproach frohrall the world; 1 but I, imlucky is have not only! 1 betray’d all thest, but with a i transport void of stnst and shame;; I yield to thy Arms, r~ ~ ril 1 
hot endure the thoughtj j — By Heaven! Icannot; there’s feme tiling more than Rage that anh mates thatthouglu: : Some Magic Spell, that in the iiudft of all my 
sense 
1 
1 
C *55 0 
serise of Shame keeps me from true Repentance; this angers me,, and makes me know my Honour but afantom: Now I could curse again my Youth and Love; but Oh / when I have done, alas phi underi find myself as guilty as before; I cannot make one firm resolve against thee, orstido, when I ccnfider thee, they weigh not all one lovely Hair or thine. ’tis all in vain, the Charming Cause remains. Philanders still as lovely as before, ’tis him I must remove from my fond Eyes and Heart, himi must banish from my touch, my stnell, and every other feiife; by Heaven 1 I cannot bear the mighty presture, I cannot see his Eyes, and touch his Hands, finell the Perfume every Pore of his breaths forth, taste thy lost Kisses, hear thy Charming Voice, but I am all on a stamc: No, is these I 
must 

in 

'it 
11 

C) 
must exclaim pn, not my Youth kis they debauch my Soul, no na rural propenstty in me to yield, or to admit of Such destructive fires. Fain I would put it off, but ’twill not do, I .am the Aggressor still; ehe, wii y is not every living Maid .undone, that does but touch er See thee? Tell me why? No, the ^ faultvin me, and thou art inno \ 
-- -- Were but my Soul less 
delicate, were it less lenfible of what it loves and likes in thee, 
I yet were dully happy; but Oh there is a nicety there So charm’d, : Id apprehensive of thy Beauties, as has betray’d me to unrest for 
ever : — ^ -- -- Yet fbmething I 
will do to tame this lewd Betrayer of my right, and it Shalhplead no more in thy behalf; no more, no more difperle the Joys which it conceives through every Vein, 
( cold and infenstble by Nature) | 
to 
( h7) 
to kindle new desires there— — more Shall fill me with unknown Curiosity, no, I will in Ipight of all the Perfumes that dwell about thee, in flight of all the Arts thou hast of Looking, of Speaking of Touching) I 
will I say assume my nativetem per, I will be calm, be cold, and unconcern’d, as I stave been to all the World, ' — But to Fhikn -- 
-- -- The Almighty Power he 
has is unaccountable j — By yonder breaking day that opens in the East, opens to See my Shame, — I swear— — that great Ruler of the Day, the Sun, by that Almighty Power that rules them 
both, I Swear -- 1 Swear 
charming lovely Youth! Thou art the first e’er kindl’d Soft de fires about my Soul, thou art the first that ever did inform me that there wasfuch a fortofwifh about 
me. 

me. I thought the vanity of being belov’d, made up the greatest part of the Satisfaction; ’twas joy to lee my Lovers stgh about me, a. door and praise me, andincrease my Pride by every look, by every i word and action; and him I fan 1 f cied best I favour’d^most, and he past for the happy fortune; himll 1 have suffer’d too, to kiss and press' ' to tell me all his Tale of Love, and stgh, which I would listen to with Pride and pleasure, per mitted it, and smil’d him kind returns; nay, by my life, then thought I lov’d him too, though I could have been content to have past my life at this gay rate, with = this fond hoping Lover, and thought no farther than of being greatjhavingdeh Coaches, Show; mg Equipage, to pass my hours in | drelling, in going to the opera’s and thetower, makevistts where 
I 
C 'i 19) 
I listjbe seen at and having still the vanity to think the Men w old Caze and Languish where I came and all the Wbmen envy me, I thought no farther on — ^butthou hast made 
me take hew meafiires, I now can think of nothing but of thee, I loath the sound ct Love from any other Voice, and Conversation makes my Soul impatient, and does not only dull me into Melancholy, but perplexes me out of all Humour, out of all patient Susterance, and / am northeast ver So well pleas’d when from Philander as when / am retirm, and curse my Chamcter and Figure in the World, because it permits me not to prevent being visited;; Thought of thee, is Worth the worlds/n joy men t; I hate to dressed, hate to be agreeable to any Eyes but thine j I hate 
the. 
! f 

’ / 
S n L 
IK [Cr 
ifh S mi. 

jis? i''' 
!'l ■ 

’'sii'i 
D : L 
lib 
?. >! 
I i' n .1 
C 
o 
the rioife dfoieqyipdge^ and! Crowds, = and ■ would be more! content to live with thee in Some! lone Shaded Cottage than^she a! Queen, arid hinder’d by tsh^graii«i dure one; mbments Coiiverlationl with Philander : Maist thou dei Ipife and loath me, a Curie the greatest that 7 can invent, if this be anything but real honest truth, No, no, Philander I I never lov’d till now, / understood it not, ^ nor knew not what those Sigh and Preffings meant which others gave me j yet every ipeajdn| glance thy Eyes put on, infora my Soul what ’tis they plead a languish for; If you but toucii my hand, my breath grows saints and short, my blood glows in mj Face, and runs with an unusual warmth through every Vein, and tells my heart w\i2it'^lisphilank ails, when he falls Sighing on my 
bosomj; 
(7£ 

■O' 
’r; 
In 
r: 
, e 
di)] 
S 
( idl) 
bosom *, oh then I fear, I answer every Look, and every Sigh and Touch, in the Same Silent but intelligible Language, and understood I fear too well by thee : ’till now I never fear’d Love as a Criminal. Oh tell me not mistaken foolish Maids, true Love is innocent, ye cold, ye dyll, ye unconfidering Lovers; though I have often heard it from the Grave and Wife, and preac^ht my iels that Doctrin : I now renounce it alh’tis false, by Heaven! ’tis false, for now I love, and know it all a fiction; yes, and love So, as never any Woman can equal me in Love, my Soul, being all compos’d ( as I have often Said) of Softer Materials. Nor is it fancy Sets my Rates on Beauty, there’s an intririlick value in thy Charms, wdiich fiirely none but J am able to understand, and to 
IS 
[dq 


\ ■ 
(.) 
tliosc that view thee not with my judging Eyes, Ugliness saneym woisd appear the same, and please as well. If all could love or judge like me, why does phijt Under past So unregarded by a! thousand Women, wsho never fighvl for him? What makes menilu who pofsestes all, looks oii thee. Seels thy kistes, hears thee Speak, and yet wants sense to know how blessed stie is; ‘ want of Judgement all, and how, and how can She that judges ill, Love well? 
Granting my paslion equal to its Object, you must allow it in linite, and more in me than any other Woman, by Irow much more my Soul is compos’d of ten derness; and yet 1 say I own, for i may own it, now Heaven an vl311 are witness of my Shame, | 
i own vdth all this’love, with al 
tm: 
thi) 
(■<!?) 
this Passion, So vast, fb true and Ib unchangeable, that I have Wishes, new unwonted Wishes;; every Thought of thee, I find a strange Difbrder in my Blood, that pants and burns in every Vein, and makes me bluhi, and Cgh, and grow impatient, a sham’d and angry; but when I know itthe effects of Love, I am reconcil’d, and wish and sigh anew; but when I stt and gaze upon thy Eyes, thy Languishing thy lovely dying Eyes; play with thy Soft white hand, and lay my glowing Cheek to thine. 
— Oh God! What Language can express my Transport, all that is tender, all that is fbft desire seizes every trembling Limb, 
and ’tis with pain conceal’d. -- - 
Yes, yes. Philanderj ’tis the fatal Truth, since thou hast found it, I confessed it toovand yet I love I 2 thee 


f? '•. 
■ 
m 
Shi 
I '' 5 j 
'5 L 
^ i: 

( i<^4) 
■thee dearly; long, long it was rliat I efsay’d to hide the guilty flame, if Love be guilt; for I eonsess I did diss^mdle a coidness which I was not.mistrefs 5f; there lies a woman’s Art, there all her boasted Virtue, it is but well distembling, and no more. ■but mine alas is gone, for 
ever fled; this, this feeble guard that Should Secure my Honour, thou hast betray’d and left it quite defenceless. Ah what’s a woman’s Honour when ’tis So poorly guarded 1 No wonder that you conquer with Such ease, wdien we are only safe by the mean arts of bate distimulation, an 111 as Shameful as that to which we fall. Oh silly re j fuge! What foolish Nonlbife, j fond Custorn can perswade; yet: fb it. is, and She that breaks her i Laws, ioies her Fame, her Honour 
^ 

C) 
nour and Esteem. i Oh Heavens! how quickly lost it is! Give me, ye Powers, my Fame, and let me be a Foollet me retain my Virtue and my Honour, and 
be a dull insensible -- -- -- But Oh 
where is it? I have lost it all; ’tis irrecoverably lost : Yes, yes ye charming psprjur’d Mao, his gone, and thou hast quite undoa ^ me. -- -- -- - 
What though I lay extended on my Bed, undrest, unapprehensive of my Sat, my Bofbra loose and easy of access, my Garments ready, thin, and wantonly put on, as if they would with little force Submit to the fond straying Hand : What then, pht/a/tder, must you take the advantage? Must you be perjur’d because I was temi^ting? ’tis true, I let you in by stealth by night, whole stlent darkness fa i 3 vour’d 
7 ^ 

i'l'h 
• CL 
i. > f 
'''/■ \, |>! 
■ : 'ct 
'* 
., L 'll.. ■? .i 
II : 

la 
C IS } 
vgnr’d your Treachery 5 but Oh Philander were net your Vows as binding by a glimmering Taper, as if the Sun with all his Awful Light had been a looker on? I urg’d yo^ir Vows as you pressed on, -- ^but Oh I fear it 
was in Such a way fb faintly and So feebly, I upbraided you, as did burr more advance your Ferjuries. Your strength encreas’d, but mine alas declin’d; till I 
II 
quite fainted in your Arms, left you triumphant Lord of all: No more my faint denials do persuade, no more my trembling .hands resist your force, unguard.' CD lay the treasure which you toisd for, betrayed and yielded to the lovely Conqueror. -- -- j 
But Oh tormenting, -- -- -- When you 
Saw the store, and found the Prize no richer, with what; contempt, (yes; ^ false dear Man.) 
with 
( ■) 
with what contempt you view’d the unvalu’d Trophy : What! despis’d, was all you call a Heaven of Joy and Beauty expos’d to view, and then neglected? Were all your Prayers heard, your Wistes granted, and your Toils rewarded, the treipshling Victim ready for the Sacrifice, and did you want Devotion to perform it, and did you thus receive the expected biesling — — Oh — — By Heaven i’ll never see thee more, and ’twill be Charity to thee, for thou hast no exciife in store that can convince my Opinion that I am hated, ioa tiled, -- -- -- -- 1 cannot bear that 
thought, -- -- Oris I do, it Shall 
only Serve to fortify my ilxt refblve never to See thee more, — And, yet I long to hear thy false excuse,. let it be quickly then 5 Ms my disdain invites I 4 thee 

«! \ 
11? 'i' 
H;; I L 1 
^ I ’1 I 
Still i 
thee 
there 
you 
To strengthen which, 
needs no more than that debt me hear your poor defence. -- -- -- But ’tis' a tedious 
tiipxe to that stow hour wherein i^dare permit thee, but hope not to incline my Soul to love: No, I am yet Safe if I can stop but here, but here be wise, resolve. and be my feist 
h 
C) 
To Philander. 
A S my Page was coming with jf \ the inclos’d he met Alexis Fit the Gate with yours, and who would not depart without an an i Swer to it; — togo or stay isrhc? Question. Ah, Phi lander! why do you press a heart too ready to yield to love and you!, alas, I fear you guess tod well my aniwer, and your own Soul might Save me the blushing trouble of’ a reply, L am plung’d in past hope of a retreat, and Since my fate has poim ted me out for ruin, I cannot fall .more gloriously. Take then, phl lander^to your dear Arms, a Maid that can, no longer resist, who is 
difarm’d of. all defensiv 
an. 
e Power, : .and dces 
She. yields, lire, yleias. confess it too; and Sure fhe.niust’ be morethan mortal that can hold 
I, .5. 

'.’•C L 
Iii 
hi 
t ■ IF 
1s ' 
Frf 
*. ■ II 
it 
fk (» 
t' >' ^ 

( 170) 
out against thycharms andvows. Since I must be undone and give! all away, 111 do it generouslyj and Scorn all mean reserves: I will be brave in Love, and lavisti all; nor Shall Philmder think I Love him well unless I do. Take, chan ming Victor, then, what yourj ov/n Merits, and what Love Iial given you; take, take at last th( dear reward of all your stghs an tears, your vows and flifferings, But since, phik/ider, ’tis an Ag to uight, and till the approach ol those dear stleiit hours, tlio| knowst I dare not give thee ad' mittance : I do conjure thee, gs to cefdrwy whom I find too pressing, not to believe the concerns great; and So jealoust am of thf; dear Safety, that everything larms my fears'; ' oh! fatisfie’enu then and go, ’tis early yet, ani if you rake horse immediately 
y€l 
( lyi) 
you will be there by eight this Morning; go, I Gonjure you 5 for though ’tis an unspeakabie Satisfaction to know you are So near me, yet I prefer your Safety and honour to all considerations elfe. You may Soon dispatch your Affairs, and render yourself time enough on the place appointed, which is where you last night waited, and stwiil be at least eight at night before stis poslible to bring you to my Arms. Come in your Chariot, and do not heat yourself with riding; have a care of me. and my life in the preservation of all I love. Be Sure you go, and do not, my Philander out of a punctilio of Love, neglect your dear Safety— — then, phila?? der^ and all the Gods of Love preserve and attend thee on thy way, and bring thee Safely back 
to 

To 
; i 
CH, thou most charming of / the Sex! thou lovely dear delight of ray transported Soul! thou everlasting treastire of my heart! what hast thou done? given me an oyer joy, that fails but very little of performing what griefs exeefs had almost finish’d before : Eternal blessings on thee, for a Coodnefs So Divine, Oh, thou most excellent and dearest of thy Sex 1 I know not what to do or t to say. I am not what I 
was, I do not speak, nor walk, 
nor think as I was wont to do; fiire the excess of joy is far above 1 dull fense, or formal thinking, it ■ cannot stay for ceremonious me * I rave with pleastire, rage with the dear thought of coming bxtasie. Oh shvia^ shvu^ SU 
vjti! 
1 y 
tt 
LI 
hiv: 
C 173) 
via! my Soul, my vital Blood, and without which I could as well 
fubfist -- -- Oh, my adorable, my 
Silvia \ methinks I prefi thee, kifs thee, hear thee sigh, behold thy Eyes, and all the wondrous beauty of thy face; a Iblemn joy has Spread itself through every vein, through every fensible artery of my heart, and I can think of nothing but of Silvia the lovely Silvia the blooming flowing Silvia I and Shall I see thee.? Shall I touch thy hands, and press thy dear, thy charming body in my Arms, and taste a thousand joys, a thousand ravishments? oh God! stiall I? oh Silvia, ^ say; but thou hast Said enough to make me mad, and I forgetting of thy Safety and my own, Shall bring thy wild a doring stave to belfont^2^n^ throw him at thy feet, to pay his humble gratitude for this great con 
descea 

, 4.. iji'tljii?; - rif 

IT;; 

j 
1 fr I 
ti 
^ ' ‘ ■1 ■' 
j t,,? 
h; 'rf „; VIF 4 
. .D 
defcention, this vast bounty. 
Ah, Silvia! how Shall I live till night? and you impose too cruelly upon nae in conjuring me to go to Cefario; alas! does Silvia know to what She exposes htvphila^der? whole joy is So transporting great, that when he comes into the grave Cabal he must betray the story of his heart, and in ji^u of the miglsty bulinefs them in hand be raving still on Silvia telling his joy to all the amazed listeners, and answering questions that concern our great affair, with Something of my love; all which will pals for madness and undo me: no, give me leave to rave in Silence, and unfeen’mong the trees, they II humour nly disease, answer my murmuring joy, and echo’s flatter it, repeat thy name, repeat that silvipsmlnq I and never hurt her fame; while the Cabals, business 

( 175) 
nefs and noifietown willadd con fulionto my prefenttranfport, and make me mad indeed: no, let me alone, thou Sacred lovely creature, let me be calm and quiet here, and tell all the infenfibles I meet in the woods what Silvia has this happy minute destin’d me : Oh, let me record it on every bark, on every Oak and Beech, that all the world may wonder at my fortune, and bless the generous Maid; let it grow up to Ages that Shallcome, that they may know the story of our loves, and how a happy youth, they call’d philanderfw2is once fb blessed by Heaven as to postefs the charming, the ador’d and lov’d by all, the glorious Silvia! a Maid, the most divine that ever grac’d a Story; and when the Nymphs would look for an Example of Love and Constancy, ' let them point out Philander to 
their 
L 
i' !f si 
■ s( 

() 
doubted Swains, andcry, 'sth| love but as the young Philander did, and then be fortunate, 8c then [ reap all your wishes: and when the [ Shepherd would \ upbraid his' Nymph, let him but cry, See here w\\2lt Silvia did to lave the i young Philander \ but oh! there never will be Such anothernymph as Silvia; Heaven form’d but one to Show the World what Angels are, and She was form’d for me, yes She was — in whom I wou’d i not quit my glorious interest to [ reign a Monarch here, or any bo \ gilded thing above 1 take all, \ take all, ye Gods, and give me but this happy coming night I oh, shviaysilvia! by all any promis’d joys L am undone if thy accident Should ravish this night from me: : this night! no not. for a lease of years to all eternity would I throw thee away: oir! I am all Same, 
all 
( h7) 
all joyful fire and ^bhn^^s^methiftks ’tis Heaven where ever I look a round me, air where I tread, & ra yishing Music when! Speak, be eause’tis all of silvia^ lqt me alone, oh let me cool a little, or I Shall by an excels of joyful thought lose all my hop’d for bliss. Remove a 

Hi 
AW XV WZAWWX.X. ~ -- -- -- -- - 
dazzling, you press my senses even to pain away — let me take air — let me recover breath : oh let me lay me down beneath Some cooling stiade, near Some refreshing crystal murmuring Spring, and fan the gentle air about me. I suffocate, I faint, with this dote loving, I must allay my joy or 
be undone -- -- - — i’ll read thy 
Cruel Letters, or i’ll think of fbme melancholy hour wherein thou hast difrnis’d me defparing from thy Pretence; or 
while 
i( 
() 
wliileyou pressme now to be gone with fb much earhestneg, you have Some Lover to receive and entertain j perhaps’tis only for the vanity to her him tell his nause -- ous pafsion to you, breatli on your lovely face, find daub your Gar 1 ments with his fuifbm imbrace: but oh, by Heaven,! cannot think that thoughtlaiid thou hast Sworn thou caiist not Suster it — if I shou’d find thee fals^ — but his hnpollible — oh! shou’d I find fn/ urio visit thee, him whom thy Parents favour, I shou’d undo you all, by Heaven I fhou’d — bilt thou hast Sworn, what need Ptoilmder | more? yes, T, thou hast Sworn t and call’d heaven’s Vengeance | down when e’er thou gavest a. look, or a dear Smile in Ictve to that pretending Fop; yet from his mighty fortune there is danger in liirn — what makes that thought 
torment 
iv 

I 
lar 
( 
. e 
//. 
1 leer 

rot 
efs 
fc 
oy 
nui 
iiri 
nt. 
hai 
lilt 
me 
CLI 
Di 
mi 
ed 
( 179) 
torment me now? — begone, for Silvin loves me, and will preserve my Life -- -- - 
I ain notable, my adorable cliarmer, to obey your commands of going from the light of happy Belfort; no, let the great wheel of the vast design roul on — or for e ver stand still, for i’ll not aid its motion to leave the mightier bust nefs of my love unfinifh’d: no, let fortune and the dullerfools toil on for i’ll not bate a minute of my joys with thee to Save the world, much less So poor a parcel of it jand Sure there is more Solid plesureevn in rhese expecting hours I wait to Snatch my bliss, than to belord of all the universe without it; then let me wait, my^/aa, in those melancholy Shades that ^zxtbelfontfvom dorillups farm j perhaps my Silvia, may walk that way fo unattended that we might meet and lose 
our 
11 
I 
i t 
L 
11 i 
■it 
m. 
ourselves for a, few Moments in those intricate retreats: Ah, L am dying with that thought. Oh Heavens! what cruel csestiny is mine? whose fatal circumstances do not permit me to own my pastion, and lay claim to Silvias to take her without control to Shades or Palaces, to live for ever with her, to gaze for ever on her, to eat, to loll, to rise, to play, to steep, to act o’er all the pleasures and the joys of life with her — But ’tis in 
vahi I rave, in vain employ myself in the fools barren bustneifi, wishing, 
this thought has made me as death : Oh, Silvia! I can ne’er 
be truly happy -- -- -- adieu, employ 
thy fell in writing to me, and remember my life bears date but only with thy Faith and Love. 
Philander, 
tvy, my Adorable, rohatyou cm do to meet me in thewood this efternemaor there fu live today. 
To 
Lo 
fly 
loui 
ia 
ela 
di 
rci 
tnei 
ou 
‘y 
m 
av( 
do, 
eim 

() 
To phl/anier. 
obstinate phiundet^ I conjure you by all your Vows, by all your Sacred love, by those dear hours this happy night defign’d in favour of you, to go without delay to Cefario; ’twill be unsafe to difbbey a Prince in his jealous circumstances. The fatigue of the journey cannot be great, and you well know the torment of my fears; oh I I Shall never be happy or think you safe till you have quitted this fatal interest : Go, my Philander — and remember whatever toils you take will be rewarded at night in the Arms of 
Silvia, 
i 
if 
To 
, : 
ifit i 
if 'I 
iiih 
To Silvia. 
whatever Toils you take Shall be rewarded in the Arms of silvta! — By Heaven, I am inspired to act wonders : Yes, silvta^ yes, my adorable Maid, I am gone, I fly as swift as light ning, or the Soft darts of love shot from thy charming Eyes, and I can hardly stay to say — adieu — 
To the Lady ^ 
Dear Child 
10 N G foreseeing the misery, 
, you must arrive by this fatal correspondence with my! unhappy Lord, I have often, with tears and prayers, implor’d youj to decline fo dangerous a passion; j 
lie, 
C 
he 
nd 
ke 
isu 
Iro 
lo 
hh 
er 
las 
reh 
)h 
not 
of 
C >85) 
I liaveneveryet acquaintedourpa rents with your misfortunes, but I fear I'must at last make ufeof their Authority for the prevention of your ruin. ’tis not, my dearest Child, thatepart of this unhappy story that relates to me, thatgrievs me, but purely that of thine. 
Confider, oh young noble Maid, the infamy of being a Prostitute 1 and yet the act itself in this fatal Amour is not the greatest stn, but tie manner which carries stn un ufiiai horror with it; for ’tis a Brother too, my Child, as well as a lover, one that has lain by thy unhappy sister’s fide fb many tender years, by whom he has a dear ' and Idvely offspring, iby which he has more fixed himself to thee by relation and blood: Confiderthis, oh fond heedless girl 1 and Suffer not a momentary Joy to rob thee of the eternal Lame, me of my 
. eternal 
’M M 

( 1%) 
eternal repose, and fix a brand upon our noble house, and fb undo us all. — — Alas, confider after an action So Shameful, thou mustob^ fcure thy self in fbme remote corner of the World, where honesty and honour never are heard of: No thou canst not Show thy face, but ’t will be pointed at for fbmdhing monstrous; for a hundred Ages may not produce a story fb leudly infamous and loose as thine. Perhaps (fond as you are) you ima gin the fble joy of being belov’d by him, will atone for thole affronts and .reproaches you will meet with in the censuring world: But Child, remember and believe me, there is no lasting faith in fist; He that has broke his Vows with Heaven and me, will be again perjur’d to Heaven and thee, and ah the World! -- -- -- heoncethouctit 
me as lovely, lay at my feet 
and 
sigh’d 
i5i1 
ti 
Hid 
I 
t 
ist 
id 
[bi 
LVI 
2s: 
sl.cl r 
J 
hs 
as 
ir 
IRC 
{ 
y 
Vo 

deg 
)ir 
as 
DV 
ai 
'1st 
■ts, 
C 185) 
figh’d away his soul, and told Such pitious stories of his Sufferings, Siich Sad, such mournful tales of his departed rest, his broken heart and everlasting Love, that Sure I thought it'shad been a sin not to have credited his charming perjuries; in such a way he Swore, with Such a grace he figh’d, So artfully he mov’d, lb tenderly he look’d, Alas, : dear Child, then all he Said was new, unusual with him, never told before, now ’tis a beaten road, ’tis learn’d by heart, and easily addressed to any fond believing Woman, the tatter’d, worn ouc fragments of my Trophies, the dregs of what I long Since drain’d from off his fickle heart; then it was fine, then it was brisk 8c new now pall’d and dull’d by beingre ■ pea ted often. Think, my Child, what your victorious beauty merits, the victim of a heart uncon k quer’d 
hs'f 

m 
r .'I 
qiier’d by any but your eyes: Alas, he has been my captive, my humble whining Slave, difclain to put him on your fetters now; alas, he can Say no new thing of his heart to thee, ’tis love at Second hand, worn out, and all its gaudy; lustre tarnish’f^befides, my Child, if thou hadst no Religion binding enough, no Honour that could stay thy fatal course, yet nature Should oblige thee, and give a check to the unreafbnable enter^rife. The griefs and dishonour of our noble Parents, who have been eminent for virtue and piety, oh Suffer ’em not to be reguarded in this cenfu j ring World as the most unhappy of ail the race of old nobility y thou art the darling child, the joy of all, the last hope left, the refuge or their Sorrow; for they, alas, have had but unkind stars to influence 
fv 
his 
T 
am 
Ilk 
steam 

ht 
a tdc gow 
as 
in, 
ulc 
j.ter til/ft 
ms 
and 
P.S. I 
cirunadvis’d 
xpringrno want of. 
ISC 
0\\ 
oi 
C 187) 
of virtue in their Education, but this last blow of Fate must strike ’em dead : Think, think of this, my Child, and yet retire from ruin; haste, sty from destruction ’wshich pursues thee fast; haste, haste, and Save thy Parents and a Sister, or what’s more dear, thy Fame; mine has already receiv’d but too many desperate wounds, and all through my unkindlord’s growing pasnon for thee, which was most fatally founded on my ruin, and nothing but my ruin could advance it; and when my Sister, thou hast run thy race, made thyself loath’d, undone and infamous as hell, defpis’d,, scorn’d and abandon’d by all, lampoon’djper haps diseas’d; this faitlilefs Man, this cause of all will leave tlieetoo, grow weary of thee, nauseated by use, hemay perhaps consider what sins, what evils, and wliatiricbnve 
j I 
K 2 
piences 
nji. 

i ...T 

It 

f 
U: 
C i88) 
cnees and stiames thou’st brought ‘ him to, and will not be the last ■ loath and hate thee: Forj though youth fanfie it h^ve a mighty race to run of pleafingj vice and vanity, the course will] end, the goal will be arriv’d to at; the last, where they will stghing stand, look back and view the length of precious time, they’ve fool’d away; when travers’d o’er with honour and discretion, how glorious were the journey, and with what joy the wearied traveller lies down &: basks beneath the Shades that ends the happy course, Forgive, dear Child, this advice and persiie it, ’tis the effect of ni pity, not nnger, nor could the name of rival ever yet have powet to banish that of Sister from my! Soul — iarewel, remember me;;; pray Heaven tliou.hasl: not this] night made a forfeit of thy honour 
• and. 
aid 
nc 
ei 
rr( 
I 
d 
LC 
a( 
oj 
C 
lei 

01 
q ee 
oi 
03 
C I S CI } ' 
and that this which comes from a tender bleeding heart may have the fortune to inspire thee with grace to avoid all temptations for the Suture, Since they must end in fbrrow.wiiich is the eternal nrav~ er oh 
Dearest Child, Pour ajfeuiondte Sijhr. 
Td Philander 

Sk menot, my dearest Brother, thereason of this Sudden change, ask me no more from whence proceeds this strange coldness, or why this alteration; it is enough my destiny has not decreed me for Philmder : Alas, I See my error, and looking round, about me, find nothing but approaching horror and confusion K 3 N in 
f 1.3 
■' r 
■; I 
I 
, I 
SIRI 
M 
( Ipo) 
in my piirsuit of love; Oh whither was I going? to what dark paths, what everlasting Shades had smi ling love betrai’d me had I purflim liini farther but I at last have iiibdukl his force, and the fond •charmer Shall no more renew his arts and flatteries; for i’m resblv’d as Heaven, as fixed as fate and death, and I conjure you, trouble iny repoie no more, for if you do (regardless of my honour, which if you lov’d you wou’d preserve) i’ii do a deed Shall free me from your importunities, that stiall a maze and cool your vicious stame: no more - - remember you have a noble Wife, companion of your Vows,, and I have honour, both wliiclj are worth preserving, and for which, though you want generous Love, you’ll find neither that nor Courage wanting in 
silvia 
To 

oil’ 
1(ls 
C ly ry 
id 
aid 
V e 
n 
Id 

1 u: 
it 
C 19 ^) 
to Silvia, 
E S, my Adorable Sihtd\ I will purflie you no farther, only for all my pains, for all my iufteringsjfor my tormentinglieep lefs nights, h thoughtful anxious days; for all my faithless hopes, my fears, my Sighs, my prayers and my tears, for my unequalsd and unbound pastion, and my unwearied pursuits in love, my ne’er dying flame, nd lastly, for my death; I only beg in recompense for all, this last favour from your pity y That you will deign to view the bleeding wound that pierc’d the truest heart that ever fell adacrifice to love : you’ll find my body lying beneath that sprea dmg Oak, So Sacred to Philmdery Since ’twas there he first took into his greedy ravisti’d Soul the dear,. 
. K 4 the: 
Ir 
ill 
ll 

r. 


C ipi) 
the Soft confeslion of thy Passion, though now forgotten and neglected all — — make wlrat haste you can, 
youlil find there stretch’d out the mangled Careafs of the lost 
Philander, 
Ah! Silvia was it for this that I was Stint in Such haste away this morning to Cefario? did I for this neglect the wdrid, our great affair, and all that prince’s interest, and sty back to Belfont^ on the wings of Love, were in lieu of receiving a dear blesting from 
tfiy hand, do I find -- never 
see me more -- -- good Heaven 
— — but, with my life, all ray complaints are ended; only stwouid be fbme ease even in 
death to know what happy Rival stis has arm’d thy cruel hand 
against philandeps heart. 
s 
VO 
; tl 
101 
)ai 
!i0j 
le' 
30 
mi 
d: 
: 
ca 
( 
To Philander. 
stay, I conjure thee stay thy Sacrilegious hand; for the least wound it gives the Lord of all my wishes, ril double on iny breast a thousand Sold; stay then, by all thy vows, thy love, and all the hopes I Swear fhdu.hast this night a full recompense of all thy pains from yielding Silvia; I do conjure thee stayfor when the news arrives thou art no more, this poor, this lost, abandoivd heart of mine stiall fall a victim to thy enu elty: no, live, my Philander I conjure thee, and receive all thou canst ask, and all that carx be given by 
Silvia.. 


K 5 
. s 
C 04-) 
To Philander. 
"H, my charming) how very ill have you re compenc’d my last Soft eonnumands? wiiidi were that you Should live; and yet at the Same moment, while you are reading of the dear Obligation, and while my Page was waiting your kind return, you de iperateiy expos’d your life to the mercy of this innocent Rival, betraying unadvisedly at the same time, my honour and the Secret of your love, where to kill or to be 
'kill’d, had been almost equally unhappy: 
stwas well my Page told, me you difarm’d him in this ran counter: yet you he Saysare wounded, Some Sacred drops of blood are 
uen to theearth and lost, theleaif 
of which are pretioiis enough to runibm captive Queens: oh! haste 
Phi 
P 
I 
Oi 
ai 
C 
a 
b 
t] 
u 
ir 
C 
a 
V 
n 
if 
( 19f) 
Philander to my Arms for cure, I die With fear therein ay be danger — haste, anddet me bath the dear, the wounded s^art in floods of tears, lay it to my warm Lips, and bind it with my torn Hair : Oh! Philandery I rave with my concern for thee, and am ready to break all laws of decency and duty, and fly, \yithoutx.onsidenng, totiiy Succour, but that I fear to injure thee much more by .the discovery, which Such an unadvis’d absence would make; pray Heaven the unlucky adventure, reach not Belfont\ Fofcario has no rea ibn to. proclaim it, and thou art. too generous to boast the conquest', and bv/vm was the only witneis,, and he’s as Silent as Secret as the. Grave;. but why, philaraer^ wnis,. he Sent, me back without reply? what meant that cruel stlcnce* — Philmder. will you not 
A 
my 
Qoey 
( Ipd) 
obey me? -- -- will you abandon 
me? can that dear tongue be per tir’d? and can you this night dif i appoint your Sihia? what, have [ I done, oh obstinately cruel, irreconcilable — what for my first offence? a little poor resentment and no more? a little saint care of my gal[)ing honour, cou’d that i diipiease fb much? besides I had a i eause, \yhich you stiall see; a Let' ' that wou’d cool loves hottest i fires, and turn k to devotion j by j Heaven kwas Such a check — fiich | 
a Surprise -- -- but you yourself 
shall Iudg it after that,! could say less than bid eternally farewell to love — at least to thee u.but I recanted ibon; one dear wdrd, one fbft relenting line Srom thee, i gain’d Love the day again, and I defpis’d the ceniiires oftlie duller, world : yes, yes, and I confefs’d yea hid%terteome, and, did. this 
merit 
ler] 
th 
ov 
eiv 
let 
uri 
)ur 
oir 
im 
xt 
hi 
rg 
ou 
nf 
vli; 
; ot 
rh( 
lea' 
uf 
ac 
till 
un 
arc 
197 > 
merit no reply? I asked the Boy a thousand times what you laid, how and in what manner you receiv’d it, chid him, and laid your filent fault on him, till he with tears convinc’d me, and Said he found you hastning to the Grove, 
-- and when he gave you my 
commands -- -- you look’d upon 
him with fiich a steadfast, wild and fixed regard, surveying him all o’er while you were opening it — — as argu’d Some unusual motion in you; then cried be gone — I cannot 
answer flattery -- good Heaven, 
what can you mean? but e’er he got to the farther end of thegrove, where still you walk’d a fblemn deathlike pace, he fli\v Fofeario pafs him unattended, and looking back, Saw your rancounter, law all that happened between you, then ran to your assistance, just as you parted; still you were rough 

rl 
ly filllen, and neither took notice of his proffer’d Service, nor that you needed it, although you bled apace; he offer’d you his aid to tie your wounds up — but you re ply’d -- be gone, and do not trouble me — Oh, cou’d you imagine I cou’d live with this neglect? cou’d you, my Philmder? Oh, what would you have me do? if nothing but my death or ruin can Suffice for my atonement, i’ll sacrifice either with joy; yes, fli proclaim my paslion aloud, proclaim it at Belfonty own the dear criminal flame, fly to my Philabp^ deps aid and be undone yfbr thus I cahnot, no I will not live, I rave, 
I languish, saint asid die with pain; say that you live, oh, Say but that you live, say you are coming to ^ the Meadow beiiind the Garden; grove in order to your approach to my armsqh, Lfwear that, ail 
yoiir! 
( 199) 
yourvows are true; oh, Swear that you are silvitcs; and in return, Ilil Swear that I am yours without reserve, whatever Fate is destin’d for your * 
silvu, 
I die with Irnfatiefice^ either to see or hear from you h I sir ^tk 
yet too soon for the frfi .•^oh 
therefore save me with the Uft^ or I fljdl rave and wildly betray all hy coming to Dorillus hk Farm, or seeking you wherea*er you cruelly have hid your self from 
Silvia 
did 
i VN 


1! 
To 
Sri 
( zoo) 
To Silvia. 
Ah, Silvia how have you in one day destroy’d that repose I have been designing fb many years 1 oh, thou false — but wondrous fair creature 1 why did Heayen ordain fb much beauty 8c fb much perfidy, fb much excellent wit and So much cunning, (things inconsistent in any but in Silvia) m one divine frame, but to undo Mankind: yes, Silvia thou wert born to Murder more believing Men than the unhappy and undon Philander. Tell me, thou charming Hypocrite, why hast thou thus deluded me? why, oh, why was I made the miserable object of thy fatal Vow breach? What have I done, thou lovely fickle Maid, that thou fliouldst be my murtherer?and why dost thou 
call 
i | 
( 101 3 
call me from the grave with Such dear fbft commands as woted a wake the very quiet dead, to torture me anew, after my Eyes ( curse on theif fatal serise) were too Sure witnefses of thy infidelity? Oh, fickle Maid, how much more idnd’t had been to have tent me down to earth, with plain heartbreaking truth, than a mean Subtle falshood, that has undon thy credit ill my Soul : Truth, though ’twere cruel, had been generous in thee, though thou wert perjur’d, falte, 
forsworn -- -- thou shouldst not 
have added to it that yet baser sin of treachery: you might have been provok’d to have kill’d your friend, but it were bate to stab him unawares, defencele stand un warri’dtmiie in my face and strike me to the heart; Sooth me with all the tenderest marks of passion— — with an Invitation too, that 
wou’d 
'ft I 
a 


1.; 
( 101) 
wou’d have gain’d a credit in one that had been jilted o’er th’world, flatter’d and ruin’d by all thy co zeningsex, and all to send me vain and pleas’d away, only to gain a day to entertain anotherlover in. Oh, fantastic Woman 1 destructive glorious thing, what needed this deceit? hadst thou not with unwonted industry perswaded me to have hasted to Ces arioj by Heaven, i’d dully liv’d the tedious day in traverstng th’ dowry Meads and stlent Groves, laid by Some mur muringfpring had stgh’d away the often counted hours, and thought on Silvia, till the blessed minute of my ravishing approach to her shad been a fond believing and impos’d on Coxcomb, and ne’r had dreamed the treachery, ne’er Seen theihake that bask’d beneath the gay, the smiling flowers; lecurely thou hadst cozen’d me, reap’d thy new 
joys 
C y 
joys, and made my Rival Sport at the expense of all my happiness : Yes, yes, your hasty importunity first gave me jealousy, made me impatient with Cefarto, and excuse myself to him by a hundred Inventions; neglected all to hasten back', where all my joys, where all my killing fears and torments resided — but when came how was I welcom’d? with your confirming Billet; yes, Silvuy how! let Dorillud inform you, between whole Arms I fell dead, ^ stiarneon me, dead — and the first thought my Soul conceivm when it return’d, was, not to die in jest. 
I answer’d your ccwmmands, and hastned to the Grove, where— — all that’s Sacred, by thy self I fwear(a dearer oath than Heaven and Earth can furnish me with) I did resolve to diejbut oh, how fbon my Soft my filent passion turn’d to 
loud 

"i 

rage 
C) 
rage easier to be born, to dire despair, to fury and revenge; for there I fsiwfofcarlo^my young, my fair, my rich and powerful Rival, he hasted through the grove all warm and glowing from the fair false ones Arms; the bin Ores which thy eyes had kindsd were fresh upon Iris cheeks, his looks weresparkling with th’ne w blown fire his heart fb briskly burnt with, a glad, a peaceful Smile dressed all his face, trick!d like a Bridegroom, while he perfum’d theair as he past through it -- -- none but the Man 
that loves and dotes like me is a ble to express my Sense of rage : I quickly turn’d thesword from my own heart to send it to his elevated one, giving him only time to 
-- -- draw -- -- that was the word, 
and I confefsyourspark was wondrous ready, brisk with success, vain with your new given favours 
he 
Itlc 
ral 
chi 
lis: 
rec 
lai 
ris 
ha( 
ant 
tha 
ani 
for 
ere 
wi 
roi 
fen 
yo' 
mi 
pa 
of 
tu: 
( ^0^) 
he only cry’d — t if sj/v/a he the quarrel — I am prepar’d — and he maintain’d your cause with admirable Courage, I confess, though chance or fortune luckily gave me hisfword, which I wou’d fain have rendered b^ck, and that way wou’d have died, but he refuted to arm his hand anewagaihst th’man that had not took advantage of him, and thus we parted; Then ’twas thatmalice Supported me withlife, and told me I stiou’d Scorn to die for fo perfidious and So ruinous a creature; but charming and bewitching still, ’twas then I bor row’d'fb much calrnnefs of my lest fening anger to read the Billet o’re your Page had brought me, which melted all the rough remaining part of rage away into tame lan guilhment: Ah, Silvia! this heart of mine was never form’d by Nature to hold out long in stubborn 
. Sullen: 
: 
( zoi^) 
fullennefsj lam already on the excusing part, and fain would think thee innocent and justjdeceive me prettily, I know thou canst, fboth my fond heart, and ask how it could harbour a faithless thought of Silvia -- -- -- do -- -- -- flatter me, 
protest a little, swear my Rival law thee not, say he was thereby chance -- -- -- lay anything; or if 
thou fawst him, lay with how cold a look he was receiv’d — oh, Silvia calm my Soul, deceive it, flatter it, ^ I Shall still believe and love thee on — yet Shouldst thou tell me truth, that thou art Salle, by Heaven I do adore thee lb, I still Ihouldiove thee on; fhou’d I have leen thee clalp him in thy Arms, print kisses on his Cheeks and Lips and more — lb fondly and lb doatingly I love, I think I shou’d forgive thee; for I Iwear. by ail the Powers that pity frail 
mor 

if 
'at 
£ id 
far 
C iri 
2: 
sin 
la 
tie 
et 
la 

10 
tio 
el 
'ai 
if 

< ^07 ') 
mbttaiity, there is no joy, no life, no Heaven without thee! Be false, be cruel, perjur’d, infamous, yet still I must adore thee; my Soul was form’d of nothing but of love, and all that love, and all that Soul is but yet since thou hast 
fram’d me an excuse, be kind and carry it on — to be deluded well, as thou canst do’t, will be the lame to innocence as loving; I stiall not find the cheat: FH come 
then -- -- and lay myself at thy 
feet, and fcek there that repose, that dear content which is not to be found in thisvast world besides; though much of my heart’s joy thou hast abated, and fixed a iress in mysoul that will not easily 
vanish- -- Silvidy take care 
of me, for I am in thy power, my life, my fame, my Soul are in thy hands, be tender of the Victims, and remember if any action 
of 
IS 
u 
^ I 
!A 
T' 


:. t '; ^ 
( zo } 
of thy life fhou’d show a fading love, that very moment I perceive the change, you Shall find dead at your feet the abandoned 
phiunder, 
Sad as Deaths I am going toward, the Meadow in order to my approach towards Silvia, the woru affording no repose to mey hut when I am where the dear Charmer 
is. 
To Philander in the Meadow. 
N D can you be jealous of me. Philander? I mean So poorly jealous as to believe me capable os falshood, of vow breach, and whacs worse, of loving any ' thing but the adorable philandep 
Oh, 
0 
crin 

in 
me me in 1 pof 

last 
'OU 11 j 
lar 
lal 
irui 
ire: 
ii)d 
ssloa t a 


aid 
C iop) 
Oh, I cou’d not once believe So cruel a thought cou’d have entered into the imaginations of a Soul io entirely pofreis with and fb 
great a judge of Love I Abandon me, reprdach me, hate me, scorn me, whenever I harbour anything in mine fb destructive to my repose and thine. Can I Fhilamler^ give you a greater proof of my pastion, of my Faithful never dying paltion, than being undone for, you? Have I any other prospect in all this Soft adventure, but Shame, distionour, reproach, eternal infamy, and everlasting destruction, even of Soul and Body : I tremble with fear of future pu nistiment; but Oh, Love will have no devotion ( mixed with his ceremonies) to any other Deity; and yet alas, 1 might have lov’d another, and have been sav’d, or any Maid but S/AA, misht have noll" " ■ 



( ZIO 0 
stfs’d without damoatioa But ’tis a Brother I pursue it is a Sister gives her Honour up, and none But cmnmce that everl read iofto* ry, vras ever found So wretched as to love a Brother with fo criminal a flame, and posflbly I may meet her Fate. I have a Father too as great as Molm^ as angry and revengeful where his Honour is con cern’d; and you found, my dearest Brother, now tim you were last night to a discovery in the Garden: I have Iom§ reason too to fear this night s adventure, fe as ill fate would have it (loaded j with other thoughts) I told not Mi unda of your adventure laftjiigto with Monfimr the Count, who j meeting her early this mbrningihad I like to nave made a difcoveiy, if’ he have not really fo already fli®, strove to fhumhim, but he cried" out — Me/ma^ you cannot fly 
me 
) 1 r! 
C 2^11) 
me by light, as you did last night in the dark — She turnm and beg’d his pardon for neither coming, nor designing to come, finceshehad relblv’d never to violate her vows to Alexis \ not coming, cried he, not returning again, you meant Melinda Secure of my heart and my purst, you s fled with both; Melinda whose Honour was now concern’d, and not reminding your estape in her likeness, Blushing, She Sharply denied the Fact, and with a disdain that had laid aside all respect left him; nor can it be doubted, but he fancied (if sly poke truth) there was fbme other intrigue of Love carried on at bell font, Judge my charming Phi imder.^ if I have not reasbn to be fearful of thy Safety and my fame, and to be jealous that, fb wife a Manas Monpeur^ did not take that parley to be held with a Spirit last L 2 night, 


LI 
I 
i! 

uiglite or that ’twas an Apparition he courted: But if there be no boldness like that of Love, nor courage like that of a Lover; Sure there never was fb great a Heroine as Silvia. Undaunted, I re iblve to stand the Shock of all, Since Yis imposlible for me to leave Philander any doubt or jealousy that I can dillipate, and Heaven knows how far I was from any thought of Seeing Fofeario when I urg’d Philander to ^qipslvt. I have, to clear my Innocence, lent thee the Letter I received two hours after thy absence, which sailing into my mother’s hands, whole Favourite he is, he had Permistion to make his visitj which within an Hour he did, but how received by me, be thou the judge, whene’er it is thy Fate to be oblig’d to entertain; fbme Woman to whom niy Soul has an iiitire averiion: I 
f 
r 
f 
t 
C 
ft 
k 
’t 
P 
ik 
fii 
be 
pith 

C 2.13 > 
forc’d a Complaisance against my nature, indur’d his wrecking court strip with a Fortitude that became the great Heart that bears thy ftiered Image, as Martyrs do, I suffer’d without murmuring or the, 
least stgn of the pain I endur’d -- 
’tis below the dignity of my migli ty Pastion to justify it farther, let it plead its own cause, it has a thoii land ways to do it, and those all Such as cannot be relisted, cannot be doubted, especially this last proof of facrilicing to your repose the never more to be doubted 

Silvia. 
About m hour hejice ipjalhx^ feb you to advance. 
f I 
r? 
( ii4) 
To the 
maiamy 
not always the divine L graces wherewith Heaven has adorned your resplendent beauties, that can maintain the innumerable conquests they gain, without a noble Goodness, which may make you fensibly compassionate the poor and forlorn captives you have undone: But, most fair of your Sex, his I alone that have a destiny more cruel and severe, and find myself wounded from your very frowns, and secur’d a Slave as well as made one; the very Scorn from those triumphant Stars, your Eyes, have the same effests as if they shin’d with the continual Splendour of ravishing Smiles, and I can no more stiun their killing instuence, than their all faving 
aspects, 
i 
I 
n 
h 
Sr 
in 
ni 
te 
w 
ce 
bl 
to 
w 

ia 
toi 
W: 
lej 
} 
tb( 
rei 
() 
and! flmll expire contenb ecfj fine I M by So glorious a Fate j if you will vouchffib to pronounce my dcjom from that Storehouse of perfection, your mouth, from lips that open like the blushing rose, strow’d o’er with morning dew, and from a breath Sweeter tiistn holy Incenfc; inoitler to which, I approach you, most excellent beauty, with this most humble petition, that you will deign to permit me to throw my unworthy Self before the Throne of your Mercy, there to receive the Sentence of my Life or Death, a happiness though incomparably too great for So mean a Vastal, yet with that reverence and awe I Shall receive it, as I would the Sentence of the Gods, and which I will no more resist than I wou’d the Thunderbolts of 5’n'z/e, or the revenge of angry : For, Mal 4 dam. 
I wi 



■* L tiltj 
^‘h’ f !iv 

C ird) 
dam, my immense paslion knows no medium between life and death, and as I never had the presump tion to aspire to the glory of the first, I am not So abject as to fear 1 am wholly depriv’d of the glory of the last; I have too long lain, convicted, extend your Mercy,, and put me now out of pain : You, have often wreck’d me to confess rny Promethian Sin; Spare the cruel Vulture of Despair, take him from my heart in Pity, and either by killing words, or blasting lightning from those refulgent Eyes, pronounce the death of ^ 
Madam y 
Your admiring Slave,, i : Eofcario^, 
t0 
i 
ij 
.r 
C 
0 
ij 
n 
la 
tl 
II 
E 
(It 
in 
C 217) 
To Silvia. 
Mj/ everuftmg Charmer 
I Am convinc’d and pleas’d, my fears are vanilh’t and a Heaven of fblid Joy is open’d to my view, and I have nothing now in project but angel bisightness, .glitcer^ ingyouth, dazzling Beauty, charming Sounds, and ravishing Touches, and all around me ecsialies of Pleasure, unconceivable Traur Iports without conclusion; Maho -- met never fansied Sudi a Heaven, not all his Faradife promis’d fiich lasting Felicity, or ever provided ^ there the Recompense of fiich a Maid as Silvia Such a bewitcli ing Form, Tucli Soft, Such glorious eyes, where the Soul Speaks and dances, and betrays love’s iecrets in every killing glance, : a, tace, 
L 5, 
where. 

C 2, ls) 
where every motion,, every feature Sweetly languishes, a Neck 
all tempting -- -- -- and her lovely 
Breast inviting preftea from the eager Lips such Hands, fiidi elafping Arms, So white So Soft and stender! no, nor one of all his, Heavenly enjoyments, though promis A years of fainting in one continued extasie, can make one moments joy with charming silvia,. Oh, I am wrapped (with hare imagination) with much a Piaster pleasure than any other dull 
appointment candispence -- -- -- -- Oh, 
thou blessing tent from Heaven to eate my toils o life! thou sacred dear delight of my fond doting Heart, Oh, whither wilt thou lead me, to what vast heights of Love.? Into extremes as fatal and as dangerous as tliqte'excestes were that rend red me So cold in your opinion. Olg, Silvia y Silvia have a 
care. 
one! 
si/ j 
chal 
dull! 
ovi: 
: A 
crdl 
itinj 
d 
0tl 
danj 
C 11^) 
ear of me, manage my o’erjoy’d Soul and all its eager pasuons, chide my fond heart, be angry if I faint upon thy Bofbm, afid do not with thy tender voice recall me, a voice that kills outright, and calls my fleeting Soul out of its Habitation: Lay not Such charming Lips to my coldcheeks, but let me lie extended at thy feet untoueh’d, unfigh’tupon, unprefs’d withkifses: Oh, change those tender trembling words of Love into rough Sounds and nob les unconcern’d, and when you lee me dying, do not call my Soul to mingle with thy sighs y. yet Should ft thou bate one word, one look or tear, by Heaven, I fhou’d. be mad oh, never let me live to lee declension in thy Love! no, no, my Charmer, I cannot bear the least stippos’d decay in those dear fondneltesof thine j and Sure none 
e’er. 
(4' !}5 
fil (■ 

r 
C '). 
e^^fer became a Maid lb well, not. ever were receiv’d with Adorath Otis like to mine! 
Pardon, my Adorable silviay the rashness of my paslion in this rancounter with eo[cario\ I am Satisfied he is too unhappy in your disfavour to merit the being foin mine y but ’twas Sufficient I then Saw a Joy in his Face, a pleas’d gaiety in his Looks to make me think my Rage reasonable and my Quarrel just; by the style he 
writes, I dread his sense lest than 
his Perfbn; but you, my lovely Maid, have Said enough to quit me of my Fears for both — the night comes on — - — I cannot call it envious, 
though it rob me of the Light that Should assist me to finisli this, iiiice it will more gloriously repay 
me. in a happier Place -- -- -- -- -- come 
on tlieii.; thou blessed retreat of Lovers, 
I foi'give thy Interruptions 
here. 
hei 
th( 
do 
i/j 
wl] 
ligi 
wl] 
lov 
tol 
here, stnce thou wilt conduct to 
the Arms of Silvia -- -- -- thea 
doring 
Philmder. 
If you have any Commands for me this Weeder i of the Gardens, xsiijom I met going in thither will bring it back; I wait in the Meadowj and darte this from the dear Primrofe^bank, where I have sat with Silvia 
To Philander. 
After the hapyy Night, 
’ ^ ^ done; yes, Philander, 
Jl ’tis done, and after that what will not Love and Grief oblige me to own to you? Oh, by what iiifensibie degrees a maid in love may arrive to say anything to iler Loven without blushixtg? I 
have 
0 ii 
{ 
: 
L 
C 3 
have kiaown the time, the blessed innocent time when hut to think I lov’d Philmder would have co ver’dmy face with Shame, and to have spoke it wou’d have fill’d me with Confufios -- -- have made 
me Tremble, Blulb, and bend my guilty Eyes to Earth, not daring to behold my Charming goncj^ueror while I made that balhtul Confestion -- -- -- -- though. 
now I am grown bold in Love, and I have known the time when being at Court, and coming from the Preience, being offered Some officious hand to lead me to my Coach, I have Shrunk back witn my Aversion to your Sex, and have conceal’d my Hands in my Pockets to prevent their being touch’d^ — — a Kifs would turn 
my Stomach, and amorous Looks (though they wou’d make me vain) gave mea hate to him that 
Sept. 
( 
C 
ir 
2 
& 
tf 
k 
V 
pi 
C } 
fent’em, and never any Maid re iblved Ib much as I to tread the Paths 6f Honour, and I had many Precedents before me to make me careful; Thus! was arm’d with re fblution, pride andicorn, against all Mankind, but alas, I made no defence against a Brother, but innocently lay expos’d to all his attacks of Love, and never thought it criminal till it kindled a new Destre about me. Oh, that I stiou’d not die with shame to own it — — yet lee (I say) how from one Soft degree to another, I do not only Gonfefs the shameful Truth, but act it too; what, with a Brother Oh Heavens 1 a Crime Ib monstrous and Ib new- -- -- by all 
thy Love, y thole surprising Joys 
Ib lately experienc’d — -- -1 never 
will — no, no, I never can — repentit: Oh, incorrigible Pallion, oh hardaed Love!. at least I might 
have 
II 
■ i t'ls 
( 224.) 
have fbme remorse, feme Sighing after my poor departed Honour 5 but why Should I dissemble with the Powers Divine, that know the Secrets of a Soul doom’d to Eternal Love? Yet I am mad, I rave and tear myself, traverse my guilty Chamber in a disbrdred, but a 16ft Confusion y and often opening the consdous Curtains Survey the print where thou and I were last night laid, Surveying it with a thousand tender Sighs, and kifs and press thy dear forshken fide, ihia gin over all our fblemn joys, every dear transport, all our ravishing repeated blifses, then almost fainting, languishing, cry -- phiun 
der! oh, my charming little God! then lay me down in tftgdear place you press’d, still warm and fragrant with the Sweet remains that thou hast left behind thee on die 
Pillow,, oh,, my soul’s 
Joy! my 
dear,. 
ir 
L 
P 
E 
tl 
if 
hi 
tl: 
fa 
ill 
I 
bi 
de 
V 
fai 
wto 

till 
d 
th 
thi 
th 

( ^^5 > 
dear, eternalpleafhre! what fbftness hast thou, added to my heart within a few Short hours? but oh, phl 
Under -- -- if ( as Fve oft been told) 
poitestion, which makes Women Fond and Doting, Should make thee cold and grow indifferent — if nauseated with repeated joy, and having made a full discovery of all that was but once imaginary, when fancy rendered everything much finer than experience, oh, how were I undon! for me, by all the Inhabitants of Heaven I Swear, by thy dear Charming Self, and by thy 
Vows. -- -- thou So transcendst all 
fancy, all dull Imagination, all wondering Ideas of what Man was to me, that I believe thee more than humane I Some charm divine dwells in thy touches \ besides all these, thy charming look, thy love, the beauties that adorn thee, and thy wit, I Swear there is a Secret 
in 
: : r 
li 
< zzd) 
in Nature that renders thee more 
.! in 
i * j C 
f. I' 1v' 
dpr and fits thee to ray Soul j do not ask it me, let it suffice, ’tis So, and is not to be told; yes, by it I know thou art the jman created for my Soul, and he alone that has the power to touch it; my Eyes and Fancy might have been diverted, I might have favour’d this above the other, prefer’d that Face, that Wit, or Shape, or Air — but to concern my Soul to make that capable of ibmetliing more than Love, ’twas only necessary that Philander stiou’d be form’d, and form’d just as he is, that Shape, that Face, that Height, that dear Proportion J I wou’d not have a Feature, not a Look, not a Hair ah terd, just as thou art, thou art an Angel to me, and I, without considering what I am, what I might be, or ought, without considering the fatal Circumstances of thy being 

j c 
in 
, 01 
w 
C 
hi 
fli' 
ali 
sot 

ga 
1!^ 
Sic 
Southeast 
no 
m] 
LI 
pe 
th 
a 
in 
I { 
( ZZ7 0 
ing married (a thought that Shocks my Soul when e’er it enters) or whate’er other thought that does concern my Happiness or Quiet, have fixed my Soul to Love and my Philanderj to love thee with all thy disadvantages, and glory in my Ruin; these are my firm re 
Iblves -- these are my thoughts. 
But thou art gone, with all the Trophies of my Love and Honour, gay with the Spoils, which now perhaps are unregarded: The rny stery’s now reveal’d, the mighty Secret s known, and now will be no wonder or surprise: But hear my Vows, by all on which my Life depends I swear— — ever I perceive the least decay of Love in thee, if e’er thou breakst an Oath a Vow, a Word, if e’er I see Repentance in thy Face, or Coldness in thy Eyes, (which Heaven divert) by that bright Heaven 1*11 
die: 
!i 
iz8 
cie: : may believe me, Tmce I had the courage and durst love thee, and after that durst Sacrifice my Fame, lose all to justify that Love, will when a Change fb fatal Shall arrive, find courage too to die; yes, die Philanderallure thyself I will, and therefore have, a care of 
s'ilvut 
To Philander. 
OH, where stiall I stnd repose, where Seek a stlent Quiet, but in my last retreat the Grave 1 I Say not this, my dearest Philander that I do, or ever can repent ^ my Love, though the fatal Source of all: For already we are betray’d, our race of Joys,, our course of 
‘ ' stolen 
’V 
l 
f( 
ll 
ti 
tl 
b 
LI 
V 
C) 
stolen Delight is ended e’er begun. I chid, alas, at morning’s dawn, I chid you to be gone, and yet. Heaven knows, I grafpm you fast, and rather would have died than parted with you; I Saw the day came on, and cursed its busy light, and still you cried one blessed fed minute more, before I part with all the joys of life I and hours were minutes then, and day grew old upon us unawares, ’twas all abroad, and had call’d up all the houshould Spies to pry into the Secrets of our Loves, and thou, by some tale bearing flatterer, wert leen in pasting through the Garden; tyre news was carried to my Father, and a mighty consult has been held in my mother’s Apartment, who now refuses to tee me, while I poltest with Love, and full of wonder at my new Change, Hyird with dear Contemplation, 
( for 
Il 
'I ■ 
Vi 
Slli 

hh 
I 
C o)) 
alter’d much since yesterday, however thou hast charm’d me) imagining none knew our theft of Love, but only Heaven mdmejmda: But oh, alas, I had no Sooner finish’d this inclos’d, but my Father enter’dmy Cabinet, but ’twas with such a Look— — ln inform’d me, all was betray’d to him; a while he gaz’d on me with fierceness in Iris Eyes, which fo furpriz’d and frighted me, that I, all pale and trembling, threw my felt at his feet j he Seeing my dit order, took me up, and fixed So steadfast and fo a Look on me, as would have broken any heart but mine, fuppdrted with 
ders Image \ I sighed and wept 
and silently attended when the Storm Should fall, which turn’d into a stiower fo Soft and piercing, I almost died to see it; at last delivering me a Paper -- -- -- -- ^here, 
I 
I 
h 
b 
k 
C) 
(cried be, wub a figb and trembling interrupted voice,! read wbat I cannot tell thee. Oh, sit cried be' — — thou joy and hope of all roy aged years, thou object of my Dotage, bow hast thou brought roe to my Grave withforrow? fo left m with the Saper in my hand: Speecblsls un mov’d a while I stood, till he a wak’d me by new flghs and cries; for pafling through roy Chamber by chance, or deflgn, hacaft his melancholy Byes towards ray Bed, and saw the dear dilbrder there, unusual then cried — Ob, wretched Sitvi*, thou art lost! and left me alrooft fainting; die Letter, I loon found, was one you’d sent from Derillui his Farm this Morning, after you bad parted from me, which has betrayed us all, but how it came into their hands I fmce have understood, 

( a52^) 
derstood, for as I Said, you were leen pafling through the Garden, from thence (to be confirm’d) they dog’d you to the Farm, and waiting there your motions, saw Dor Him come forth with a Letter in his hand, which though he fbon cenceal’d* yet not fb fbon but it was taken notice of, when hasting to Belfont the nearest way, they gave an account to Idonfteur^ my Father, who going out to dorillm^ commanded him to deliver him the Letter; his Vastal durst not difbbey, but yielded it with Such dispute and reluctancy as he durst maintain with a Man fb great and powerful; before Dor Him return’d you had taken Horse, fb that you are a stranger to our misfortune ™ What stiall I do? where Shall I Seek a Refuge from the danger that threatens us, a Sad and Silent Grief appears throughout belforay ♦ and 
j 
1 
f 
n 
I 
r 
n 
tc 
iw 
to 
C ^33) 
and the face of all things arc chang’d, yet none knows the unhappy cause but Monsieur my Father, and Madam my Mother, me linday and my felt; Melinda and my Page are both difinist from waiting on me, asstipgofed confidents of this dear Secret, and strangers, creatures of Madam the countess, put about me. Oh, Philander what can I do? thy advice, or I am lost; but how, adas, Shall I either convey these to thee or receive anything from thee, unless Ibme God of Love in pity of our miseries, stiou’d offer us his aid; I’H try to corrupt my new Boy, I see good nature, pity and generosity in his looks, he’s wellborn too, and may be honest. 
Thus far Philander I had writ when Supper was brought me, for yet my Parents have not deign’d to let me come into their pretence, - M thote 
1 
If 
C ^3+) 
those that Serve me tell me merthia is this Afternoon arriv’d at Belfont; all’s mighty closely carry’d in the countelses Apartmentri tremble with the thought of what will be the resiilt of the great consultation: I have been tempting of the Boy, but I perceive they are strictly charg’d not to obey me; he Says, against his will, he Shall betray me, for they will have him search’d, but he has promis’d me to see one of the Weeders, who working in the Garden, into which my Window opens, may from thence receive what I Shall Jet downjif it be true, lshall get this fatal knowledg to you, that you may not only prepare for the worst, but contrive to Set at liberty 
1 
I 
a 
C 
g1 
m 
Bi 
thi 
ip heart is ready to hreaky fjjg unfoytuhate 
and my eyes are drowned m ' J ^ 
Silvia. 
m 
U. 
my eyes Tears: Oh Philander, how much unlike the laji, “will frove this fatal night: fare re tit and think Silvia 

/ 
^35) 
This rvds Writ in the Cover to both the foregoing Letters to. Philander, 
philmder^ all that I dreaded, ^11 that I fear’d is fallen upon me: I have been arraign’d and convicted, three Judges, severe as the three infernal ones, fate in condemnation on me, a Father, a Mother, and a Sister; the fact, alas, was too clearly prov’d, and too many cir" Gumstantial truths appear’d against me for me to plead. Not guilty. But, Oh Heavens! had you teen the tears, and heard the Prayers, threats, reproaches and upbraid ings — — these from an injur’d Sister, thole my heartbroken Parents; a tender Mother here, a railing and reviling Sister there — an angry Father and a guilty Con' ' — thou wouidst have won m2 drdd 


: II ‘ 
C 2^3^) 
dred at my fortitude, my courage and my refblution, and all from l6ve 1 For Surely I had died, had not thy love thy powerful love Siipported me; through all the accidents of life and fate, that can and will Support me; in the midst of all their clamours and their raisings I had from that a Secret and a Soft reposc within, that whisper’d m^^philmder loves me still; discarded and renounc’d by my fond Parents, Love still replies, phiunder still will own thee; thrown from thy mother’s and thy sister’s arms, phiunder s still are open to receive thee: And though I rave, and almost dye to See them grieve, to think that I am the fatal cause, w ho makes So Sad confusion in our Family: for, oh ’tis pitious to behold my sister’s fighsand tears, my 'mother’s Sad despair, - my Father's, raging and his weeping, by me' ' 
, 
j 
1 
f 
( 
f 
LI 
V 
t] 
if 
h 
CC 
nc 
otho 

It 
: e 
C ^37) 
lanclioly turns: Yet eventhese deplorable objesls, that wou’d move the most obdurate stubborn heart to pity and repentance, render not mine relenting; and yet Fm wondrous pitiful by nature, and lean weep and saint to See the lad effects of my loose wanton love, yet cannot find repentance for the dear charming; sin *, and yet, shoud’st thou oenoia my, moterr’s languishment, no bitter words proceeding from her lips, no tears fall from her down cast eyes, but Silent and Sad as death stie sits, and will not view the light; shoud’st thou, I Say, behold it, thou woud’st if not repent, yet grieve that thou hadst lov’d me: Sure love has quite confounded nature in me, I cou’d not else behold this fatal ruin without revenging it upon my stubborn heart, a thousand times a day I make new vows against the God Ms of 
() 
of Love, but ’tis too late, and Sin 
as often perjur’d -- - — Oh, fhou’d^ 
the Gods revenge the broken vows of Lovers, what Lovesick man, what Maid betray’d like me, but wou’d be damn’d athousand times for every little love quarrel, every kind rcsentment makes us swear to love no more, and every finile, and every flattering Softness from the dear iiijurer, make us perjur’d: Let all the force of virtue, honour, interest join with my suffering Parents to perswade me to cease to love Philander yet let him but appear, let him but look on me with those dear charming eyes, let him but Sigh, or press me to his fragant cheek, sold me — and cvy 
• -- ah, Silvia can you quit me — 
na, you must not, you Shall not, nay, I know you cannot, remember you are mine -- -- -- -- there is 
filch doquencein those dear words 
when 
C ^19 y 
when utter’d with a voice So ten derand So paftionate, tiiat I believe 
’em irresistable -- -- alas, I find ’em. 
So — and easily break all the feebler vows I make against thee; yes, I must be undone, perjur’d, forsworn,,, * unnatural, disobedient', and anything, rat her 
than not lhihmtiep%> -- -- -- turn th6n, 
my Soul, from these domestic, melancholy objects, and look a broad, look forward for a while on charming prospects;; on Under,, the dear, the young, the amorous Philander j wliote very looksinfufe a tender joy throughout the Soul, and chase all cares, all Sbitows and anxious thoughts from thence, whose wanton play is Softer than that of young fledgkl Angels, and when he looks and Sighs, and Speaks, and touches, he is a very God : Where art thou, oh thou miracle of youth, thou 4 v charr 

C ^4 “^) 
charming dear undoer 1 now thou hast gain’d the glory of the conquest, thou Slightest the rifled captive; What, not a line? two tedious days are past and no kind power relieves me wlith a word, 
'or any tidingso^phiuntier -- -- -- -- 
and yet thou mayest have Sent -- -- -- - 
but I Shall never See it, till they raise up fresli wdtnelses against me -- -- -- 1 cannot think thee wavering, or foigetful*, for if I did. Surely thou knowst my heart So well, thou canst not think ’twou’d live to think another thought; Confirm ray kind belief, and send tome -- -- -- - 
There is a Gate well known t o thee through which thoupastest to in the read about half a league from hepce, an old Man opens it, his Daughter weeds in the Garden, and will convey this to thee as I have order’d her, by 
the 
C 24.1 3 
the same mestengerthou may’st return thine, and early as She comes I’U let her down a string, by which way unperceivmjishall receive ’em from her: i’ll Say no more, nor instruct you how you stiali pre serve your 
Silvia. 
to Silvia. 
That which was left in he hands hj her Father In her Cabinet. 
■ My adorable Silvia, 
1 Can no more describe to thee I the torment wdth which f part from Bellfont^ than I can that Heaven of joy I was rais’d to last night by the transporting effects of thy wondrous love; both are toexcefs, and both killing, but in different kinds.. Qh, Silvia ^ by all my M 5 unfpeak_ 
C) 
unspeakable raptures in. thy arms, by all thy charms of beauty, too numerous and too ravishing for 
^ncy to imagine -- -- Ifwear — .by 
this last night, by this dear new discovery, thou hast increas’d my love to that vast height, it has un donemypeace — all my repose is 
gone -- -- this dear, dear night has 
ruin’d me, it has confirm’d me now I must have cannot live 
without her, no, not a day, an 
hour -- -- to save the world, un 
iefs I had the entire posteffion of my lovely Maid : Ah, %ilviti^ I tm not that indifferent dull Lover, that can be rais’d by one beauty, to an appetite, and satisfy it with another, 1 cannot carry the dear flameyou kindle, to quench it in the imbraees oimertilla y no, by the e ternai powers, he that pretends to love, and loves at that coiirse rate, needs fear no danger from that 
passion.. 
he ne’re was born to love or dye for love; Silvia mertilla^ and a thousand more were all the same to Such a dull infenlible; no, Silvitty when you find I can return back to the once left matrimonial Bed, despife me, Scorn me, swear (as then thou justly may’st) I love not Silvia:. Let the hot brute drudge on ( he who is fir’d by Nature, not by Love, whom any bodies kifses can inspire)) ease the necestary heats of youth; Love is a nobler fire, which nothing can allay but the dear file that rais’d it; no, no, my purer stream stiall ne’re .run back to the : fountain whence ’tis parted, nay, it cannot, it were as poiliblc to love again where one has ceased to love,., as carry the desire and wishes back; by Heaven, tome, there’s nothing. So unnatural; no, Silvia it is you I must .poilefspyou have complete -- 
edi 
C 5 
td my undoing now, and I must 
dye unlest you give me all -- -- but 
oh, I am going from thee -- -- when 
are we like to meet -- -- -; oli, how 
Shall I Suppport my absent hours! thought will destroy me, forstwill be ail on thee, and those at Such a 
distance will be insupportable- -- -- - 
Shall I do without thee? if after all the toils of dull instpid life I coum return and lay me down by thee, ilerculem labours woum be Soft and easy. -- -- the hadh fatigues 
of war,, the dangerous hurries of affairs of state, the business and the noise of life, Icoukl Support with pleasure, with wondrous satisfaction, cou’d treat merdilu too with that respect, that generous care as. wou’d become a Husband, I could be easie everywhere, and every one shou’d be at ease with me; now I shall goandtnd no there, but Sigh and w^an 

L * 
L! 
( i) 
der like an unknown thing, on fbme strange foreign fhorej I Shall grow peevish as a new wean’d child, no toys, no bauble of the gaudy world will please my wayward fancy: I Shall be gut of humour, rail at everything, in anger Shall demand,, and sullenly reply to every question ask’d and answer’d, and when I think to ease my Soul by a retreat, a thousand fort desires, a thousand wishes wreck me, pain me to raving, till beating the. senseless floor with my 
feet -- 1 cry aloud — — my Silvia! 
-- -- thus, thus, my charnfing 
dear, the poorehilmder is em ploy’dwlien banish’d from hishea ven I if thus it us’d to be when only that blight outside was ador’d, Judge now my pain, now thou hast made known a tliousand graces more— — — pity me — for ’tis noti in thy power to guess what I 
Shall 
( > 
fiiall noweadure in absence of thee; for thou hast eharm’d my Soul to an excess too mighty for a patient 
stiffering: Alas, I dye already -- 
I am yet at doriuus his Farm, lin gring on from one swift minute to the other, and have not power to goja thousand looks all languishing I Ve cast from eyes all drowm’d in tears towards bellfont^hdivq light a thousand wishes to my Angel, from a Sad breaking heart — — Love wsill not let me go — and Honour calls 
me -- -- alas, I must away; when 
Shall we meet again? ah when, my Silvia— — charming Maid — thoust see me Shortly dead, for thus I cannot live, thou must be 
mine, or I must be no more -- -- -- - 
I must away — farewell -- -- -- -- may 
all the Softest joys of Heaven 
attend thee- -- -- — fail not 
to Scmd a hundred times a day, if poslible; i’ve order’d Aleods to do 
notlring^ 
C ^47 i) 
nothing but wait for all that comes, and post a way with what thou fend’st to me — again adieu, think 
on me -- and till thou .calsst me to 
thee, imagine nothing upon earth fb wretched as Silvia's own 
k7idw my Ani, that pajjing through the Garden this Morning, I met Erafto -- -- -- 1 fear, 
hejavo toe near enough to kmto me^and vuillginje an account of it, let me know whathappens — adieu half dead, just ta king Horse to go from Silviai 
Philander. 
Philander. 
Written in a Leaf of a table book. 
ikave^ only time to say on Thurfdtky I am destin’d a Sacrifice to Fofcario^ which day finishes the life of 
Silvia. 
To 
il 


T 
t t’r 
To Silvia. 
From Dorillus his Farm. 
raving and mad at the News your Billet brought me, I (without considering the effects that wou’d follow) am arriv’d at Beilfont j I have yet fb'much patience about me, to Suffer myself to be conceal’d at Dorillus his Cottage; but if I 'fee thee not tonight, or find no hopes of it -- -- by Hea 
venl’ll Set Beilfont all in a flame but I will have my Silvia) be Sure Ili 1 do’t -- -- what?? be married -- -- -- -- - 
Silvia to be married — and given 
from Philander 
Oh, never 
t hink it, thou sorsworn fair Creature -- -- -- What? give Fofcario 
that dear charming Body? Shall he be grafp’d in those dear naked Arms? tafse all thy klffes, press thy showy Breasts, commaiid thy 
joys 
1 
C 
LI 
I 

C h9) 
joys and rifle all thy heaven? Furies and Hell environ me if he do — Oh, Silvia faithless, perjur’d charming Silvia, — i — and can’st 
thou Suffer it -- hear my vows, oh 
fickle Angel — — hear me, thou faithless ravisher! that fatal moment that the daring Priest offers to join your hands, and give thee from me. i’ll Sacrifice your Lover; by Heaven I will, before the Altar stab him at your feet; the holy place, nor the numbers that attend ye, nor all your prayers nor tears Shall Save his heart; look to’t and 
be not false -- -- yet i’ll not trust 
thy Faith; no. She that can think but falsely, and She that can So ea stly be perjur’d -- for, but to Suffer 
it is Such a sin — Such an undoing fin— — — thou art fiii^ly 
damn’d! and yet, by Heaven, that is not all the ruin shall attend thee : no, lovely Mischief, no- -- 

( 2^50) 
strall not Escape till the damnation day; for I will rack thee, torture thee and plague thee, those few hours I have to live (if fpightfijl Fate pkrevent my just revengeupon 
Fofcario) and when Fm dead -- as 
jl Shall quickly be kill’d by thy cruelty -- know, thou fair Murderer, 
I will haunt thy light, be ever with thee, and Surround thy bed, and fright thee from the Ravilher; fright all thy loose delights, and check thy joys: — Ob, 1 am mad I — — I cannot think that thought, no, thou shalt never advance So far in wickedness, i’ll Save thee if I 
Can -- -- -- Oh, my adorable, why 
dost thou torture me how hast thou Sworn So often and So loud that Heaven I am Sure has heard thee, and will punish thee? how did’st thou Swear that happy bles fed night, in which I Saw thee last, daspkl in my arms, weeping with 
eager 
d 
(^51) 
eager love, with melting fbfmefs 
on my bofbme how thou fwor’st. 
dear night — ^ -- -- - 
strength more* 
remember oh, that 
— ^ -- -- let me recover 
— and then FH tell thee •I must repeat the story of that night, which thou perhaps 
(oh faithless I) hast forgot -- - 
that glorious night when all the Heavens were gay, and every favouring power look’d down and smil’d upon our thefts of love, that gloomy night the first of all my 
joys, the blefted’st of my life 
trembling and fainting I approacht your cliimber, and while you met and grafp’d. me at the door, taking my trembling body in your arms — remember how I fainted at your feet, and wshat dear arts you us’d to call me back to life — remerhber hov/ youkiffd and prest’d my face ^ 
-- -- -- em ember what dear char ^ 
words youfpoke — ^ — and 
when 
() 
when Idid recover, how I ask’d you with a feeble doubtful voice -- -- Ah, Silvia, will you still continue thus, thus wondrous Soft and fond? will you be ever mine and ever true -- what did you then reply, 
when kneeling on the Carpet where I lay, what, Silvia did you vow? hovvt invoke Heaven? how call its vengeance down if e’re you lov’d another man again, if e’re you touch’d or fmil’d on any other, if e’re you suffer’d words or acts of love but from Philander? both Heaven and Hell thou did’st awaken with thy oaths, one was an angry listener to what it knew thou’dst break, the other laugh’d to know thou woud’st be perjur’d, while only I, poor I, was all the while a stient fond believer; your vows stopped all my language as your kices did my lips, you swore and kifs’d, and vow’d and clafp’d my 
neck 
T 
t 
I I 
■ J 
( ^55) 
neck -- -- -- — oh charming flatterer 1 
oh artful dear begiiiler 1 thus into life and peace, and fond fccmty you charm’d my willing Soul! ’twas then, myas'/7^'/4, (certain of your heart and that it never cou’d be given away to any other) I prefs’d my eager joys, but with liich tender caution — ^liich fear and fondness, liich an awful past fion; as overcame your saint refl stance, my reasons and my arguments were strong, for you were mine by love, by shcred vows, and who cou’d lay a better claim to 5/7- 
via? how oft I cried -- -- Why this 
rifistance, Sihta? my charming dear, whose are you? not phiun der\? and Shall Philander not command his own ' — you must -- -- -- ah 
cruel -- -- then a Soft struggle fol 
low’d with half breath’d wordsi with Sighs and trembling hearts, 
and now and then -- -- -- ah cruel and 
unrea 
ml 
A 
( i54-) 
unreasonable was Softly said on 
both Sides: thus strove, thus argued — — — till both lay panting in 
each others arms, not with the toil, but rapture; I need not lay what fter follow’d this -- -- -- -- — 
what tender stiowers of strange in dearing rnktures ’twixt joy and Shame, ’twixt love and new siir prise, and ever when I dried your eyes with kistes, unable to repeat any other language than— — mj^ Silvia 1 oh my charming Angel! while sighs of joy, and closely grksping thee— — all the rest while every tender word and 
every ligh, was eccho’d back by theejyou press’d me -- -- r and you 
vowed you lov’d me more than e ver yet you did; then Swore anew and in my bosbm hid your charming bliishing .face, then with ex cess of love wou’d call onheavenbe witness oh ye powers (a thousand 
times 
t 
I 
f 
e 
t 
« 
1 
r 
S 
t 
t 
I 
I 
i 
( 
I 
I 
S 
r 
t 
€ 
C ^55) 
times ye cried) if ever Mstid eve 
loved like Sitviat -- -- -- punish me 
strangely, oh eternal powers, if e’re I leave phiunder^ ife’re I cease to love him; no force, no art, not interest, honour, wealth, convenience, duty, or what other necessary cause — Shall never be of force to make me leave thee — hus hast thou sworn, oh charming, faith less flatterer, thus kwixt each ravishing minute thou woud’st swear— — I as fast believ’d — and lov’d thee more — hast thou forgot it all, oh sickle charmer, hast thou? hast thou forgot between each aw full ceremony of love how you cried out, farewell the world and mortal cares, give me phhander^ Heaven, I ask no more r -- hast thou forgot all this? did all the livelong night hear any other fbundbut thofh my mutual vows/^finvocati ons, broken Sighs, and lost and 
trembling 
( 2, i6) 
treimbling whispers, say had we ny other busiacfs for the tender hours? oh, all ye host of Heaven, ye Stars that Shone, and all ye powers the faithless lovely Maid has Sworn by, be witness how she’s perjur’d; re veng it all ye injur’d powers, Tevenge it, stnee by it She has^undone the faithfullest Youth, and broke the tenderest 
heart -- that ever fell a Sacrifice to 
love, and all ye little weeping Cods of love, revenge your murther’d victim -- -- your 
fhiunder. 
To Thilander. 
In the Leaves of a Table book. 
, H, my Philandery how dearly welcome, and how need iess were thy kind reproaches? 
which 
■er^ 
C ^57) 
which ru not endeavour to convince by Argument, but Such a deed as Shall at once Secure thy fears now and for the future j I have not a Minute to write in, place my dearp^/'/^w^r, your Chariot in St. vincenps Wood, and Since I am not able to the hour of my flight, Jet it wait there my coming, "tis but a little Mile from Bellfonty Dorillus is suspected there, remove thy self to the high way gate Cottage — there i’ll call on thee — ’twas ludky, that thy fears, or love, or jealousy brought thee So near me, since Fd resblv’d before upon my flight. Parents and Honour, Interest and Fame, farewell — I leave you all to follow my phl Under — haste the Chariot to the thickest part of the Wood, for Fm impatient to be gone, and Shall take the first opportunity to fly to N mv 
58 
my Philander — — Oh, love me, 
love me, love me! 
Vnder presence of reaching thejefdmin which jhades mj Window y I mperceiv*d let down and receive what Letters you send hythe honefi Weeder; hy her send your sense of my flighty or rather your direuiohy for tis refllv d already. 
To Silvia, 
My Icvely Anges 
OO careful I will be of this dear >3 mighty Secret, that I wiibon iy‘say %hvia. stiail be obey’d, no more — nay, itl not dare to think oilir, lest in my rapture I shou’d my joy aloud, and buste 
winds 


.ic 
) 
winds fhoum bear it to Some officious listner and undo me; no more, no more, my Silvia, ex tr^'es of joy (as grief) are ever dumb k this blessing 
Wjbich you iproffer, I liad design’d toaskj, as Soon as you’d'convinc’d me of your faith | yes, smaa^ I had ask’d it, though ’twas a bounty too great for any Mottal to conceive Heaven ihou’d bestow upon him; hut if it dov mo 
mehf rst restgn the world, and bar tec all for love and charming silvia. Haste, haste my life; my arms, my bosbme and my Soul are open to receive the lovely fugitive; haste, for this moment lam going to plant my self where you directed. 
Adieti, 
N 2 

( io) 
To Philander. 
After her Plight. 
r A H, Philander how have you i \ a harmless poor unfortunate? Alas, where are you? why wou’d you thus abandon me? Is this the Soul, the Bofbm, these the Arms that shou’d receive me? i’ll not upbraid thee with my love, or charge thee with my undoing; ’twas all my own, and were it yet to do, I shou’d again be ruin’d for Philanderj and never find Repentance, no not for a thought, a word or deed of love, to the dear false forsworn f but I can dye, yes, 
hopeless, friendless- -- -- by 
all, even by Philander -- -- -- -- all 
but resolution has abandon’d me, and that can lay me down when e’er I please in Safe repose and peace; But oh, thou art not false, ir: rf thou be’fl:, Oh, let me hear it 
froiu 
i 
)ve, 
enc 
261) 
from thy mouth, see thy repented lovt^ that I may kiiow there’s no Such thingion Earth, as faith, as henesty, as love or truth; however be thou true, or be thou false, be bold and let me know it, fbr thus to doubt, is torture worse than death. What accident thou dear, dear Man, has happened to prevent thee from pursuing my directions, and staying for me at the Gate? where have I mist’d thee, thou joy of my Soul? By what dire mistake have I lost thee? And where, Oh, where art thou my charming Loyer? I Sought thee everywhere, out like the languistung abandon’d mistress in the Qmtides^ I sought thee, .but I found thee not, no bed of roses wou’d discover .thee; I iky/ no print of thy dearstiape, nor heard no amorous stgh that cou’d direct me — I ask’d the Wood and Springs, complain’d and call’d on N I thee: 
n( 
() 
thee through allthe Groves, but they confefs’d thee not; nothing bucecho’s answerm me, and when I cried phtundsir — cried — Philander thus search’ditill the coming night and my increasing fears made me resbive for flight, which fbon we did, and Soon arriv’d at but wiiither then to go Heaven knows, I cou’d not tell, for I was almost naked, friendless and forlorn; at last, cofulting bri/ijard what to do, after a thousand revolutions he concluded to trust me with a Sister he had who was Married to a Gideon of the Guard de Core, he chang’d my name' and made me pais for a Fortune he had stolen; but oh, no welcomes, nor my safe retreat were fufscient to re poseij^e all the infuing night, for I had no news of Philander; no, not a dream inform’d me; a thousand fears and, jealoustes have kept 

ut 
Ifr, 
k 
me waking, and Brill] dr I who has been all night in pursuit of thee is now return’d fuccesless and distracted as thy Silvidy for duty and generosity has almost the same effects in him, with love and tenderness and jealousie in me and since Paris affords no news of thee, (which Cure it wou’d if thoii wert in it, or oh, the Sun might hide himself with as much ease sts great Philander') he is resolv’d to Search St.vimemh Wood and all the adjacent Cottages and Groves; lie thinks that you, not knowing of my escape, may yet be waiting' thereabouts s Since quitting the Chariot for fear of being Seen, you might be So far advanced into the Wood, as not to find the way back to the Thicket where the Chariot waitedftis thus he feeds my hope and flatters my poor heart, thats fain wou’d think thee truer— — if N 4 thou 
bli 
( 264. } 
thou be’st not -- “but cursed be all 
Such thoughts, and far from S/L 'via’s Soul; no, no thou art not fa lie, it cannot be, thou art a God, and art unchangeable j I know by Some mistake, thou art attending My, as wild and impatient as I, perhaps thou thiak’st mefalfe, and thinkhs I have not courage to pur she my love and Siy; and thou perhaps art waiting for the hour wherein thou think’st I’H give myself away to Eofiarw: Oh cruel and unkind 1 to think I lov’d fb lightly, to think rwould attend that fatal hour; No Philmder^ no faithless, dear inchanter: Last night, the Eve to my intended wedding day, having repos’d my Soul by my re solves for flight, and only waiting the lucky Minute for escape, I feta willing hand to everything that was preparing for the Ceremony of the ensuing Morning; 
with 
C) 
with that pretence I got me early; to my Chamber, tried on a thousand brestes, and ask’d a thousand questions all impertinent, which would do best, which look’d most gay and rich,, then drestmy Gown with Jewels, deck’d my apartment up, an left nothing undone that might Secure ’em both of my ing pleas’d, and of my stay: nay,, and to give the less fuspicion, I imdress’d myself even to my under Petticoat and nightgown;; not take a Jewel, nor a Pistol, but deft my Women fimihing: my work, .and carelesty, and thus, undrefs’d, walk’d towards the Garden, and while every one was bu — fie in their office, ' getting my self out sf sight, I posted o’er the Meadow to the Wood as Swift as northeast from the God of: day, till I arriv’d most luckily where I found, the Chariot waiting, attended by. N. bziujarl 
(y 
) of wh ora, wlleli I' ( all fainting and breatlilefe with my ' swift flight d emanded his Lord, he lifted me into the Chariot, and, cried; a little farther, Madam; you will find him; for he, for fear of making a difoovery took yonder stiaded path — towards whicfowe. went, but no dear vision of ray I^qve appear’d — and thus, ray charming. Lover, you have ray kind adventure; send me Some ti dingshack that you are found, that you are well, and lastly, that you arc mine, or this that fliou’d have been my wedding day, will See itself that of the death of 
Paris, Thursday: from my. Bed ^ for vmnf of Qloaths^ or rathery news pluiande.ro,, • 
Siktia, 
cisi y 
To Silvia. '' 
My life, my Silvia my eternal joy, art thou then Safe? and art thou referv’d for pulm der? am I So blessed by Heaven, by love, and my dear charmiligmaid? then let me dye in peace, firice I have liv’d to see all that my Soul desires in Silvias being mine; perplex not thy soft heart with fears or jeajoufies, nor think fb basely, fb poorly ofmy love to need more oaths or vows, yet to com firm thee I wou’d Swear my breath away; but ph, it needs not here; — take then no care, my lovely .Dear, turn not thy charming eyes or thoughts back on afflicting ob jects; oh think not on what thou hast abandoned, but what thou art ar riv’d to; look forward on the joys of love and Youth, for I will 
dedi( 
() 
all my remaining life to render thine ferenc and glad j and yet, my Silvia,., thou art So dear to me. So wondrous precious to my Soul, that in my extravagance of love, I fear, I Shall grow a trouble rbm and wearying Coxcomb, Shall dread every look thou givest away 
from me -- -- a Smile will make 
Sigh or touch make 
me rave, a me commit a Murder on thee happy Slave, or my own jealous heart, but all the World besides is silvias, all but another Lover ^ but I rave and run too fast away, Ages must pais a tedious term of years before I can be jealous, or conceive thou canst be weary of phila?7der — FH be So fond, So dote ing and fo playing, thou Shalt not have an idle Minute to throw away a look in, or a thought on. any other; no, no, I have thee «qw, and will maintain my right 
by 
( "^^9) 
by dint and force of love — Oh, I ana wild to see thee — but, Silvia I am wounded — do not be frighteii though, for ’tis not much or dangerous, but very troublesbm, Since it permits me not to fly to Silvitty but she must come to me in order to it. has a Bill on my 
Goldsmith in Paris for a thousand Pistols to buy thee fbmetliing to put on; anything that’s ready, and he will conduct thee to me, for I Shall rave myself into a Fever if I fct thee not today — I cannot live without thee now, for thou art my life my everlasting charmer : I have order’d Brilljard to get a Chariot and fbme unknown Livery for thee, and I think the, continuance of pasting for what he has already rendered thee, will do very well, till I have taken farther care of thy dear Safety, which will be as. Soon as I am able, to rise; for most, 
unfortu 
^ (2.7^5 0 
fortunately, my dear Silvia qiiit ting the Chariot in thethicket for fear of being seen with it, and Walking down a Shaded path that Suited with the melanchdly, and seats of imfiiccess in thy adventure; 
I went So far, as e re I epum return to the place where I left the 
Chariot, ’twas gone -- -- it Seems 
with thee; J. know not how you mist' me — but poffess’d myself with a thousand false fears, fbme times that in thy flight thou mightest bepursued and overtaken. seiz’d in the Chariot and return’d back to Bdlfontftx that the Cliaisiot was found and seiz’d on upon fus picion, though the coach man and ' balljardwqvq difguis’d past knowledge 
-- -- — or if thou wert gone, 
alas, I knew not whither, but. that was a thought my doubts and fears would not Suffer me to ease my Soul withq no, 
( lyi y 
T (as jealous Ibvm do) imaginm the most tormenting things for my own repost, I imagin’d the Chariot taken, or at least So discovered asr to be forc’d awsty without thee: I imagin’d that thou wert falst -- Heaven forgive me, falst, my SILVIA and hadst chang’d thy mind; mad with this thought (which I fanfiedmost reasonable and fixed itin my stul) I rav’d about the Wood, making a thousand vows to be reveng’d on all; in order to it I left the Thicket, and betook my stlf to the highroad of the Wood, where I laid me down amongst the Fern, dost hid, with Sword ready, waiting for the happy Bridegroom, whom I knew (it being the wedding eve) wou’d that way pafs that Evening; pleas’d with revenge which now had got even the place of love; I waited there not above a little hour, but. heard the 
tram' 
(y 
trampling ofahorse, and looking up with mighty joy, I found it j alone he was, and unattended, for he’d outstripped his e quipage, and with a lover’s haste and full of joy, was making, towards Bellfmt \ but I ( now str’d? with rage) leap’dfrom my Covert, cried, stay, Fofcarioy e’er you arrive to Silviny we must adjust an odd account between us at which he stopping, as nimbly alighted; 
-- in fine, we sought, and many 
wounds were given and received on both fides, till his People com ingup, parted us just as we were fainting with loss of Blood in each others Arms \ his Coach and Chariot were amongst his Equipage j into the first his Servants lifted him, when he cried out with a feeble voice, to have me, wto now lay bleeding on the Ground, gut into the Chariot, and to be 
Safely 
(^75 y 
jfafely convey’d wherever I com manded, and So in haste they drove him towards Bellfont^ and me, who was refblv’d not to stir far from it, to a Village within a Mile of it; from whence I Sent to Paris for a Surgeon and dismist the Chariot, ordering in the hearing of the coach mstn, a Litter to be brought me immediately, to convey me that Night to Paris; but the Surgeon coming, found it not safe for me to be removed, and I am now willing to live, stnce silvia is mine; haste to me then, my lovely Maid, and fear not being discover’d, for I have given order here in the Cabaret where I am, if any inquiry is made after me, to Say, I went last night for Paris: Haste my Love, haste to my Arms, as feeble as they are, they ll grasp thee a dear Wellcome: i’ll Say no more, nor prescribe rules to thy 
love. 
C 274 0 
love, that can inform thee best what thou must do to Save the life of thy most pallionate Adorer, 
Vhilander. 
To Philander, 
I Have Sent Brilijard to See if the Coast be clear that we may come with Safety; he brings you instead of Silvia, a young Cavalier that will be altogether as Wellcome to phila^^der, and who impatiently waits his return at a little Cottage at the end of the Village. 
] 
'C ^75) 
To Silvia. 
From the Bastill. 
I Know my Silvia, expected me ‘ at home with her at dinner today, and wonders howlcou’d live Ib long as Since morning without the eternal joy of my Soul; but know, my Silvia., that a trivial misfortune is now fallen upon me, which in the midst of all our Heaven of joys, our softest hours of life, has fb often chang’d thy Smiles into fears and stghings, and ruffled thy calm Soul with cares: Nor let it now Seem strange or afflicting, stnge every day for this three months we have been alarm’d with new fears that have made thee uneaste ^y^vi vss.pmuni.epi arnas; we knew Sbme time or other the storm would fall on us, though we had for three happy months Shel 
tred 
tred our selves from its threatening rage; but Love I hope, has arm’d us both; for me -- -- let me be de 
priv’d of all joys, ( but those my charmer can dispense) all the Salle world’s respect, the dull esteem of Fools and formal Coxcombs, the grave advice of the cenfbrious Wise, the kind opinion of ill judging Women, no matter, fo my sev/a remain but mine. 
I am, my arrested at the 
luit of Monfiettr the Count, your Father, for a Rape on my lovely Maid : I destre my Soul, you will immediately take Coach, and go to the Prince Cefafia^ and he will Bail me out; I fear not a fair trials, and Silvia thefts of mutual love were never counted Felony \ I may die for Love, my silvuy but not' for Loving — goj haste, my sihu,. that I may be no longer detain’d from the Solid pkafure. and bust 
nefs 
C 
C 277 } 
nefs of my Soul -- -- -- haste, my 
lov’d dear -- -- haste and relieve 
Phihndir* 
Come HOP io me left j 
there should be ^ m order to detain Dear. 
To Thikmder, 
I Am not at all surpriz’d, my Philanderj at the accident that has befallen thee, because fa long expected and love and that has So well fortified my heart that I liipport our misfortune with a courage worthy of her that loves and is belov’d by the glorious Philander; 1 am armed for the worst that can befall me, and that is my being 
ren 
reiidred a public Shame, who have been So in the private whispers of all the Court for near these happy three months, in which I have had the wondrous satisfaction of being retir’d from' thewprld with the charming Phiimdef \ my father too knewt it long Since, at least he cou’d not hinder hiinself from guessing it, though his fond indulgence suster’d his Justice and his anger, to fleej^ and postibly had still slept diaim dot mertilla^s spite and rage (dshou’d Say just resentment, but 1 cannot) rouz’d up his drowste vengeaneei I know stienas ply’d himwihi her foftnmg eloquence, her prayers and tears to win him to content to make a pub lick bulinessof it; but lam en tred, love has arm’d my Soul, and ril pursue my fortune with that height of fortitude as Shall stirprite the world; yes Philandery. stncel 
have 
0 
1 LI 
t 
f 
r 
1 
1 
( 
( ^79) 
have lost my honour, fanle and friends, my interest and my Parents, and all for mightier love; ril stop at nothing now, if there be any hazards more to run, i’ll > thank the fpightful fates that bring ’em on, and will even tyre tjrem out with my unwearied pastion —, Love on, phila^dery if thdu darst, like me; let ’em pursue me with their hate and vengeance, let Pri ibns, poverty and tortures felze me, it Shall not take one grain of love away from my refblv’d heart, nor make me Shed a tear of penitence, for loving thee; no. Philander, Since I know what a ravishing pleasure ’tis to live thine I will never quit the glory of dying 
also thy 
Cefario, my dear is cming yo he your Bail; t»ith Monlieiir 
the Cpint of — -- -- -- -- — >7 dy to 
see you after your ftffcring far Silvia. 
Silvin. 
To 
C zo) 
I 
To Silvia. 
believe me, daxwiag Silvh, I live liot those hours I am absent from thee, thou art my life, my Soul and my eternal felicity; while jou believe this truth, my Silvia you will not entertain a thdusand fears, if I but stay a moment beyond my appointed hour, cipecially when Philander who is not able to Support the thought that anything shou’d afflict his lovely Baby, takes care from hour to hour to latisfie her tender doubting heart. My dearest, I am gone into the City to my Advocates, my Tiyal with Monsieur the Count, your Father, coming on tomorrow, and ’twill beat leasb two tedious hours e’re I can bring my adorable her 
Phihnder. 
To 
() 

To Silvia. 
I Was call’d oil, my dearesi: Child, at my Advocates, by Cefario^ there is fbme great business this e vening debated in the Cabal which 
is at Monjietir -- -- -- in the City; 
Cefario, tells me there is a very db ligent search made by Monsieur the Count, your Father, for my s/7 vitiy I die if you are taken, lest the fright Should hurt thee; if possible, I would have thee remove this evening from those Lodgings, lest the People who are of the Royal party Should be induc’d through malice or gain, to discover thee; I dare not come my self to wait on thee, lest my being Seem, Iliouid betray tiiee, but I have Sent pnll jard (whole zeal for thee shall be rewarded) to conduct theeto a little koiise In the eattcebm gh S. Gero mars 
■ () 
where lives a pretty Woman and Mistress to chevdiertomafo^ called Belmda^ a. Woman of Wit, and discreet enough to understand what ought to be paid to a Maid of the quality and character of sii/7 'uta; She a steady knows the stories of our loves thither i’ll come to thee and bring Cefario to Supper, as Soon as the Cabal breaks up; Oh, my I Shall one day re 
corapence all thy goodness, all thy bravery, sthy love and thy fusfering for thy eternal Lover and Slave, - 
. - Philander,. 
C 2, 85) 
To Philander 
SO hasty I was to obey phiun* deps commands, that by the unwearied care and industry of the faithful Brilljard, I. went before three a clock difguiz’d away to the place whither you order’d us, and was well receiv’d by the very pretty young Woman of the Houle, who has fenle and breeding as well as Beauty; But oh, pbilm der, this slight pleases me not; Alasj what have I done? my fault is only love, and that Sure I shou’d boast, as the most divine passion of the Soul; no, no Philander ’tis not my love’s the criminal, no not the placing it on phuandef the Crime, but ’tis thy most unhappy circumstances, thy being Married, and that was no crime to Heaven O 2. ’till 
( j84) 
till man made laws, and can laws teach to Damnation? if fb. Curie on the fatal hour that thou wert Married, curse on the Priest that joyiimye, and cursed be all that did contribute to the undoing Ceremony — except ^hilandeps Tongue, that answer’d yes — Oh, Heavens! was there but one dear Man of all your whole Creation that could charm the Soul of And 
could ye— — ye wife all feeing Powers that knew my Soul, could ye give him away? How had my Innocence offended ye? our hearts you did create for mutual love, how came the dire mistake; another would have pleas’d the indifferent jmertiuls Soul as well, but mine was fitted for no other Man; only Vhiianderj the ador’d Yhi imder^ with that dear fofin, that Ihape, that charming face, that hair, those lovely speaking eyes, 
that 


.( isf) 
that wounding fbftness in his tender voice, had power to conquer Silvia; and can this be a Siin? Oh, Heavens, can it? must laws which Man contriv’d for mere conveni ency, have power to alter the divine Decrees at our Creation — perhaps they argue tomorrow at the Bar, that Mertilla was ordain’d by Heaven for fiila/tier; no, no, he mistook the Sister, ’twas pretty near he came, but by a fatal error was mistaken, his hasty Youth made him too negligently stop before his time at the wrong Woman, he Should have gaz d a little farther on — and then it had been %ilvid.s lot — stis fine Divinity they tea, ch', that cry Marriages are made in Heaven — folly and madness grown into grave custom; Should an unheedy youth in heat of Blood take up with the first convenient She that offers, though he 

an 
C z8d) 
an Heir to Sbiue grave Politieian, great and richjand stie the outcast of the common. Stews, coupled in height of Wine, and Sudden Lust, which once allay’d, and that the fbber Morning wakes him to see his Error, he quits wdth stiame the Jilt, and owns no more the Folly; Shall this be call’d a heavenly Conjunction?? I in height of youth, as now I am, forctd by my Parents, obligm by Interest and Honour, to Marry the old, deform’d, diseas’d, decrepit Count Abtthomoy whole persbn, qualities and principles I loath, and rather than Sillier; him to consummate Ills Nuptials, fuppose I Should (as Sures ihou’d) kill myself, ’twere Blalphemy to lay this fatal Marriage to heaven’s charge — curse on your N onsense, yeimpoling gown men, cursed on your holy cant; you may as well'call Rapes and 
Murders, 

( 2^87) 
Murders, treason and Robbeiy, die acts of Heaven; because Heaven Suffers ’em to be committed, is 
vice of Priests, no more — to make the nauseated, tir’d out pair drag on the careful business of Life, drudg for the dull got Family with greater Satisfaction, because they’re taught to' think Marriage was made in Heaven j a mighty comfort that, when all the joys of life are lost by it: Were it not nobler far that honour kept him just, and that good nature made him reafb' nabie provision? daily experience proves to us, no couple live with iess content, less ease than those who cry Heaven joins; who is’t loves lets than thole that may?? where love is not, there is hate and loathing, at besr, disgust, difi quiet, noise and repentance: No, o4 p.hiuntier. 
( j88) 
pikla^der^tlmps a heavenly match when two Souls touched with equal pailion meet, (which is but rarely Seen) — when willing vows, with ferioiis Consideration, are weigh’d and made, wdien a true view is taken of the Soul, when no bale iotereil makes the hasty Bargain, wlien no conveniency or destgn of drudge', or Have stiall find it iie ccitary, wlien equal Judgments meet that can esteem the blessings they poilefs, and distinguisti the goad of cithers love, and let a value on each others merits, and where both understand to take and pay; who find the beauty of each others minds, and rate ’em as they ought, whom not a formal ceremony binds (withwshicli See nought to do, but dully give a cold consenting affirmative) but well constder’d Vows from fbft inclining Hearts, utter’d 
with 
( ^^9) 
with love, with joy, with dear delight, when Heaven is call’d to witness; She is thy Wife, Phihn^ der he is my Husband, this is the match, this Heaven designs and means, how then, oh, how came I to mils Philmder? or he his 
Silvia. 
Since I writ this, which 1 defignd not an invebive against marri age when I began bat to inform thee of my being where you direb etf; bud since I writ this, I say the House where I am, is broken open with Warrants and Officers for me, but being all undref and ill, the Officer has taken my pjordfor my appearance tomorrow; it seems they saw me when I went from my Lodgings and pursued me hafie to me, for I (ball need your Qoun' 
fit. 
To 
( ^90) 
To Silvih. 
ir 
Y eternal joy, my affliction 
______ is inexprefflble at the news 
you send me of your being surpriz’d; I am not able to wait on 
thee yet -- -- not being suffer’d to 
leave the Cabal, I only borrow this minute to tell thee the sense of my Advocate in this case j which was, if thou fhould’st be taken, there was no way, no Law to lave thee from being ravifh’d from my arms, but that of Marrying thee to somebody whom I can trust; this we have often discours’d and thou hast often vowed thou’lt do anything rather than kill me with a Separation; re&lve then, ^ oh thou charmer of my Soul, to do a deed, that though the name 
would 
( zpl) 
would fright thee, only can preserve both thee and me; it is— — though it have no other terror in it than the name, I faint to Speak it— — Marry; yes, 
thou must marry; though thou art mine as fast as Heaven can make us, yet thou must Marry; i’ve pitcli d upon the property/tis brill jard^him I can only trust in this affair; it is but joining hands — no more, my Sihia^' brilljard a Gentleman, though a Cadet, and may be Supposed, to pretend to fb great a happiness,, ‘ whole only Crime is want of Fortune; he*s handfbm too, well made, well-bred, and fb much real esteem he has for me, and i’ve So oblig’d him, that Fm confident he’ll pretend no farther than to the honour ofowming thee in Court; i’ll tie him from, it, nay, he dares not do’t, i’ll trust him with my Life — 
but 
Z 
but oh, Silvia is more — think of it, and this night we will perform it, there being no other way to keep Silvia eternally 

philandeps. 
To Silvia. 
II 
CIS 
Ow, my adorable %ilvia^ you have truly heed of all that heroic bravery of mind I ever thought thee Mistress of; for s/7 vidy coming from thee this Morning, and riding full speed for Yark^ I was met, stopped and seiz’d for High treafbn, by the king’s Mejf Sengers, and possibly may fall a facisifice to the anger of an incens’d Monarch; my Silvia bear this last Shock of Fate with a cou 
C i) 
rage worthy thy great and glorious Soul; ’tis but a little Separation, Silvia, and we Shall one day meet again; by Heaven, I find no other sting in Death but parting with my Silvia, and every parting woum have been the same; I might have died by thy disdain, thou mightst have grown weary of thy Vhilander, have lov’d another, and have broke thy Vows, and tortur’d me to Death these crueller ways; but fate is kinder to me, and I go blessed with my silvips Love, for which Heaven may do much, for her dear sake, to recompense her Faith, a Maid fo innocent and true to Sacred Love; expect the best, my lovely dear, the worst lias this Comfort in’t, that I Shall die, my Charming Silviid\ 
Philander. 
To 
C) 
To Philander. 
I’LL only say, thou dear Supporter of rny Spul, that if p/i/ lander dies, he mall not go to Heaven without his Silvia— — Heaven and Earth I Sweat it, I cannot live without thee, nor Shalt thou die without thy 
Silvia. 
b 

to Silvia. 
SOUTHEAST E, (ee, my Adorable Angel, what Cares the Powers Above take of Divine Innocence, tile Love and Beauty.; oh, See; vdiat they have done for their darling Silvia) could they do less? 
Know, 

( ^5>5) 
Know, my dear Maid, that after being examined before the King, I was found Guilty enough to be committed to the (from whence, if I had gone, I never had returned, but to my Death) but the messenger into whole hands I was comnutted refusing other Guards, being alone with me, in my own Coach, I resblvm to kill if I could no other way oblige him to favour my escape y I tried with Gold before I showed my Dagger, and that prevail’d, a way left criminal, and I nave taken Sanctuary in a Small Cottage near the Seashore, where I wait for sazt/a; and though my life depend upon my flight, nay, more, the life of ^ilvidy I cannot go without her; dress jour Self then, my dearest, in your Boys Clothes, and haste wit Briljard, whitlier this Seaman will conduct 
thee 
C) 
thee, whom I have hired to let us. Gil some Shore of Safety; bring what News you can learn of Ce sark; I would not have him die poorly after all his mighty Hopes, nor be conducted'to a Scaffold with Shouts of Joy, by that uncertain Beast the Rabble, who us’d to stop hischariot wheels with fickle Adorations when e’er he look’d abroad 
-- -- by Heaven, I pity him j but 
shvia^s presence will chase away all Thoughts, but thole of Love, from 
Philmder, 
I need not hid thee hafie. 
La Fin. 




Lemuel Kingdon, Efqj 
SIR, 
you wih give me leave to exfrefs my Gratitude in same me after e for the Favours I have received of you and to make an Acknowledgement where I cannot pay a Debt. 'Pis only what was long (ince defign^dyott, when pof • sibly it fnight have foundjomething a better welcome., by its having mada (as then it muh have done) a V'tyage to have kifpdyour Hands and might perhaps then have contributed in A 3 some 
The Epistle, 
some small degree to your Diver in A place where there is fotmti fo 
little -- -- In order to it Ifent you the 
frfi part by one of your Officers of which this is a Contmuation. But being obliged to lay it by for other more material bufnefs^ it has had the misfortune not to approach you till now and to which Honour it has nothing to entitle it but that of hearing your Name before it ^ which will put a value upon it to the World, And since I never was of a Nature to hoard any Good to my peculiar uf y 'tis with great fatisfabion I am by this short charaber ofyou^difiributing' a Bu ffing to that part af Mankind who have not that of knowing you. For there is an unspeakable poipr and pleasure in obliging 5 and "tisa pain to the good natur'^d to conceal any things whose Communication may gratify the World and I am uneasy when a good Man is not as well 
under 
Dedicatory 
under jiood by everybody as by my self; and I bo aft that Honour herewith more Vanity than of any other hap pinefs. Though I know, I hall be ' cenfupd by your Lovers for saying fo little where Jo much is due : But ftnce I write to the number that do not know you. rather than those that do, this will at least fuft see to floew how fine a thing Man can be, fo qualify^d and fet out by nature for eternal esteem. For, Sir, there is in you fomethmg, besides the common Fertues of your Sex, fa engagjng, some Art in Nature fa peculiar to your self, fo infimiating into the Soul, that there is not found anything fo dull in Humankind as not to love, honour, and value you : Nor is that Man born that is your Enemy, no not even amongfik. those phanatlcaidifpofitions, whose principles and opinions are Jo distant from those Hone ft and Generous A 4 ones 
The Epistle 
o^es of yours; at leaf they love the Man thd they rail at his Notions, ejleem the*perfon thd they aboml natethe Loyalltfi; nor can irefleii on the excellency of your Temper, but 1 think you born to put the ill na tftrd World into good-humour. Tot are always easy without Affeblation^ merry without extravaga?ice^ generous ^ and good without va nity., sedate and even without con sir aint, cheerful and calm as innocence ^ thd the World form and reel with mad confusion, fill from the Jerenity of your Looks we read the fair weather in your mind., which times or seasons can never discompose., while all goes well poith your Kjng and Country, Tou have a greatness of Soul, which it seems as if fate durfi not oppress, and he who is fo truly 7nagnificent within, needs not trouble the World for elbow room, and 'who is ambitiotts of more 
than 

Dedicatory, 
than you pojfe/s, does but pur chase an empty name at the expense of his Repose and Sense, and kjfens his Glory by equalling it to a Title. The Sun at noon is no wonder, but to see as great an illumination in a Star, though of the ftrfl magnitude we gaze at with Admiration. Title (that Trifle which you can command when you please and which'tis far greater to merit than to wear^j Jerves rather to render Vice more apparent than to elevate the virtues. Heaven has made you ?nore truly happyj and has fet no Blefftng at too vah a dijlance for your reach; hut has fuhdued even all your wi/hes to your pow^ty and left you almofi nothing to ask : having suited your Fame and Fortune to the greatness ■ your Mind. 
How soon at the choice of the mofl glorious Senate, that ever blefl the Land, was your valued name fnatcfd 
by 
The Epistle 
hy every glad and giving Voice, and made the Mdfiik of the happy Day, when black exclt/f oners were itifly damnd from the Field, and only stich untainted Supporters of the Royal Cattfe, thought worthy to bear a part in foglorious a Concern Giving c^y^r his Due. Here, Sify you appeared in your proper Sphereydifperfing that darling virtue of your Soul, lavijhly giving generously difpofng and dealing out according to your mighty Mindy and had the glory even of obliging a Monarchy than which nothing coidd be a greater satisfaction to yo, u. Bitty 
Siry you do all things with' a perfect goodgraccy and even Business, that toyle of Lifey you render Joft and eaficy and as if you alone were created to manage the Concerns of the' rvorldyyou make bufinefsyour pleasure and diversion, and laugh at those that fatigue them fives with mighty 
Dedicatory, 
affairs itinti who dffumeylike Trincilo, a dttll Gravity, to be efieerrkdgreaty ^ wifey and bttfiey whik^you diicover only the best and nohlefi fart of bufimfsy the effebs of it, the tefiy the Gentleman fo hdndfomly concealsy we perceive it no more than Fairy hoiifwlferyyvphich is fill dbed in the fjades and silence of the Flight y when Mortals are afleef, and who find all fair and clean m the Morning, but cannot guess at the' rnvifible Hand that did it, ^ lam fo good a subjeb that 1 wish ah his Majefifs work done by such hands, heads and heartsy fo effeuual and fo faithful; and then we shall fear no more rebelli onsy but every Man shall bask securely under his own Vine that has one — For my fart I have only efcafd fleaing by the Rebels y to ftarv^ morg^fecurely in my own native Prol vihceof voqtxy, M lam as well pleased at our late viboryy and 
the 
The Epistle, 
the growing Glories of my kjngy as he that has got a Cotnmiffion by it if I may have this Happiness added to it of still retaining the Honour of your Friendjhipf and be still numbered in the Crowd of 
S I R, 
Your most Obliged Humble Servant, 
AB. 
Lovey'. 
- 
( ‘) 
LETTERS 
F R O M A 
nobleman 
TO HIS 
SISTER 
The Second Part by the same Hand. 
The ARGV MENT. 
T the end of the first Part of these Letters, we left Philander impatiently waiting on the Seashore for the approach of the lovely Silvia; who accordingly caore to him 
dressed 

dressed like a Youth, to secure her ielffroma Dishovery. They staid not long to caress each other, but he taking the welcome Maid in his Arms with a transported foi bore her to a Small Vestel, that lay ready near the Beach; where with only brt//jard and two Menservants, they put to Sea, and past into holund, ^ landing at the nearest Port; wshere, after having refresh’d themselves for two or three days, they past forward towards the Dr, sik 'via still remaining under that a miable disguise: : in their passage from Town to Town, which is Sometimes by Coach, and other times by Boat they chanc’d one day to encounter a young hol hrsder of a more than ordinary Gallantry for that Country, So degenerate from good Manners and almost common Civility, 
and 
( 3) 
and So far Short of all the good qualities that made themselves appear in this young Nobleman. He was very handsome, well made, well dressed, and very well attended; and whom we will call O^iavio., and who, young as he was, was one of the States of holuna; he spoke admirable good French, and had a vivacity and quickness of Wit, unusual with the Natives of that part of the World, and almost above all the .rest of his Sex : Philander and Silvia having already agreed for the sjabin of the Vestel that was to carry them to the next Stage, Oflavto came too late to have any place there but amongst the common crowd; which the Master of the Vestel, who knew' him, was much troubl’d at,, and addresthimfelf as civilly as he coisd tophhander to beg permil Sion for one Stranger of quality B 2 to 
( 4) 
to dispofeof himtelfin the Cabin for that day; Philander being well enough pleas’d, So to make an acquaintance with Some of power of that Country readily consented; and Oclazno enter’d with an address fb graceful and obliging, that at first sight he inclin’d phiundas Heart to a Friendship with him, and on the other fide the lovely perfbn of f/r/d; ?er, the quality that a ppear'd in his Face and Mein oblig’d oflivio to become no iess his Admirer. But when he fainted Silvia, who appear’d to him a Youth of Qiiality, he was extremely charm d with her pretty Gaiety, and an unusual Air and Life in her Add rest and Motion, he felt a Iccret Joy and Plea Sure play about his Soul he knew not why, and was almost angry that lie felt Such an emoiion for a youth, tlio’ the most lovely that he ever 

( 5) 
ver law. After the first Compliments, they fell into Discourse of a thousand indifferent things: and if he mere pleas’d at first sight with the two Lovers, he was wholly charm’d by their Conversation, especiafly that of the amiable Youth; who well enough pleas’d vdth the young Stranger, or elfe hitherto having met nothing fb accomplish’d in her Short Travels; and indeed despairing to meet any such; ste put on ail her gay ety and Charms of Wit, and made as absolute a Conquest as ’cwas possible for her suppos’d Sex to do over a Man, who was a great admirer of the other; and Surely the lovely Maid never appear’d 16 charming and desirable as that day; they din’d together in the Cabin 3 and after Dinner repos’d on little Matreffes by each others fide, where every Motion, every B j Limb 
() 
Limb as carelessly file lay, discover’d a thousand Graces, and more and more enflam’d the now be ginning Lover; She cou’d not move, nor Smile, nor Speak, nor order any charm about her, but had Some peculiar Grace that begun ro make him uneasy;; from a thousand little Modesties both in her Blushes and Motions he had a Secret hope (he was not what stie teem’d, but of that Sex whereof She diteover’d fo many Softnestes and Beauties; tho’ to what advantage that hope wou d amount to his Repote, was yet a dilquiet he had not confidesd nor felt : Nor could he by any fondness between them or indite cretion of Love, conceive how the lovely Strangers were allied; he only hop’d, and had no thoughts of Fear, or anything that cou’d check his new beginning 
mng 
'( 7) 
flame. While thus they pafsm the Afternoon, they ask d a thousand Qaeftions, Of Lovers, OS the' Country and Manners, and their Security and Civility to Strangers; to all which osiavio anfwer’d as a Man, who wou’d recommend the Place and persbns purely to oblige their stay; for now Self interest makes him say all things in favour of it; and of his own friendsliip, offers them all the Service of a Man of Power, and who could make an Interest in thole that had more than himself; much he protested, much he offer d, and yet no more than he design’d to make good on all occasions, which they receiv’d with an Acknowledgment, that plainly diteover’d a Generosity and Quality above the common rate of Men; So that finding in each other Gccafioas for Love and Friend Osip,. 
B 4 they( 
() 
they mutually professed it, and nobly entertain’d iidbavlo told his name and quality, leftnothingunsaid that might confirm the Lovers of his Sincericy.this begot a confidence in phiurdn^ who Hi return told him So much of his Circumstances as fusticd to let him know he was a perfbn fb unfortunate to have occa fion’d the displeasurc of his King against him, and that he coo’d not co ntinue with any repose in that Kingdom, whose Monarch thought him no longer fit for those l4o nours he had before receiv’d : Oflavio renew’d his Protestations of Serving him with his int’rest and fortune, which the other receiving with all the gallant Modesty of an unfortunate Man, they came ashore where Coaches 
and Equipage waiting his Coming to conduct him to his House, he offer’d his new Friends the best 
of 
* ( 9) 
os ’em to carry them to theh Lodging, which he had often prefs’d might be his own'palace 3 but that being refus’d as too great an honour, he wou’d himself lee them plac’d in fbme one, which he thought might be most Suitable to their Quality; they excus’d the trouble, but he press’d too eagerly to he deny*d, and he conducted them to a Merchants House not far from his own, fb Love had contriv’d for the better management of this new Affair of his Heart, which he refolv’d to pursue, be the fair Object of what Sex Soever '. But after 'having well enough recommended ’em to the Care of the Merchant he thought it Justice to leave ’em to their rest, tho’ with abundance of Reluctancy; lb took his leave of both the lovely Strangers, and went to his own home. And after B 5 a 
( lo) * 
a hasty Supper got himself put to Bed : Not to steep; for now lie had other bufiness: Love took him now to task and ask’d his heart a thousand Questions. Then rwas he found the Idea of that fair lanbnown had abfblute possfesstion there : Nor was he at all dist pleas’d to find he was a Captive; his Youth and qi^iality promise his Hopes a thousand Advantages above all other Men : but when he reflected on the Beauty of phk iander^ on his Charming Youth and Conversation, and every Grace that adorns a Conqueror, he grew inflam’d, difbrdered, restless, angry and out of Love with his own Attractions; confider’d every Beauty of his own Person, and found ’em, or at least thought ’em, infinitely Short of those of his now fanfi’d Rival; yet ’twas a Rival that hecou’d not hate, nor did his 
pasiion 
II 
) 
pailion abate one thought of his Friend (flip for pvtund.r, but rather more encreas’d it, inlb rmich that he once resblv’d it (houd Surmount his Love if postible, at lead he left it on the upper hand, till time flfou d make a better discovery. When tir’d with thought well Suppose him asteep, and see how our Lovers far’d. Who being lodg’d all on one Stair Cafe (that is Philander Silvias and brf/ijttrdj it was not hard for the Lover to steal into tyre longing Arms of the' expecting Sihia; no Fatigues of tedious Journeys and .little Voyages had abated her Fondness or his Vigour; the night was like the first, all Joy! all Transport!! lay So near as to be a Witness to all their Sighs of Love, and little Soft Murmurs, who now began from a Servant to be permitted as an humble Com 
paiuoa; 
( 12) 
panion 5 Since he had had the Honour of being married to Silvia though yet he durst not lift his Eyes or Thoughts that way : yet it mighc be perceiv’d he was melancholy and Sullen when e’er he Saw tiieir Daliances \ nor cou’j he know he Joys his Lord nightly stole, without an Impatience; which if but minded or known perhaps had cost him his Life. He began from the Thoughts she was his Wife, to Lincy fine Enjoyment, to fancy Authority which he durst not assume, and often wish’d his Lord grow cold as posheffing Lovers do, that then he might advance his hope, when heliioud ever abandon or slight her : He cou’d not see her kils’d without blushing with Rdemmcnt, but if he hasaffisted to undreis him for her Bedhe was ready to die 
with 
( i5) 
with Anger, and woisd pow Sick, and leave the Office to himself: He cou’d not see her naked Charms, her Arms stretch’d out to receive a Lover wsith impatient Joy without Madness;; see her clasp him Sast when he threw himself into her fbst white bosom, and Smother him wdth Kistes: No, he cou’d not bear it now, and almost lost his Respect wshen he beheld it, and grew Savvey unperceiv’d. And ’twas in vain that he look’d back upon the Reward he had to stand for that northeast cessfary Cypher a Husband. In vain he confider’d the Reasons why, and the occasion wherefore : he now seeks for Presidents of ufurp’d Dominion, and thinks (be is his Wife, and has forgot that hes her Creature, and phk Und.ps Valfal. these Thoughts disturb’d him all the Night, and 
( H) 
a certain Jealousy, or rather Curiosity to listen to every Motion of the Lovers, while they were employ’d after a different manner. 
Next Day it was debated what was best to be done as to their Conduct in that place : or whether Silvia Should yet own her Sex or not; but She pleas’d with the Cavalier in herself, begg’d she might live under that dilguise. Which indeed gave her a thou land Charms to those which Nature had already bestow’d on her Sex; andp^/dwer was well enough pleas’d Sire Should continue in that agreeable drels, which did not only add to her Beauty, but gave her a thousand little Privileges, which otherwise wou’d have beendeny’d to Women, though in a Country of much Freedom, Every Day She appear’d in the r, she fail’d 
mt 

( ^5) 
not to make a Conquest on Some unguarded Heart of the fair Sex: Nor was it long e’er fire received biutt from most of the most accomplisti’d who cou’d Speak and write Punch. This gave them a pteafure in the midst of their unlucky Exile, • and She fail’d not to boast her Conquests to oev^zd, who every day gave all his Hours to Love, under the disguise of Friendship, and every Day receiv’d new Wounds, both from her Conversation and Beauty, and every day confirm’d him moro in his first belief, that She was a Woman : and that confirm’d his Love. But still he took care to hide his Pastion with a Gallantry that was natural to him, and to very few besides; and he managed his Eyes, which were always full of Love So equally to both, that when he was Soft and fond it 
appear’d 
C '«) 
appear’d more his natural Humour than from any particular Cause;; ■ that you may believe that all the arts of Gallantry, and Graces of good Management were more peculiarly his than anothers, his Race was illustrious, being defended from that of the Princes ofor^; ?e, and great Birth willshine through and (how itself in spite of Education and Obscurity .• ouavio had all those Additions that render a Man truly Great and Brave; and this is the Character of him that was next undone by our unfortunate and fatal Beauty. At this rate for Sometime they liv’d thus disguis'd under' feign’d Names. oflaao omitting nothing that might oblige’em in the highest degree, and hardly anything was talk’d of but the new and beautiful Strangers, whose Conquests in all places over 
the 
the Ladies are well worthy, both for their Rarety and Comedy, to b related entirely by thetn selves in a Novel. obavw every day Saw wsith abundance of pleasure the little Revenges of Love on thosh Womens hearts who had made before little Conquests over him, and strove by all the gay Presents he made a young pill monti (for So they call’d shvia^ to make him appear unrefistable to the Ladies; and while silvu gave them new Wounds, ohavio fail’d not to receive em too among the Crowd, till at last he became a confirm’d Slave to the lovely Unknown; and that which was yct more strange, she captivated the Men no left than the Women, who often gave her southeast rwades under her Window, with Songs fitted to the Courtihip of a Boy, all which added to 
their 
( i8) 
their Diversion: : Fortune had ffnil’d long enough, and now grew weary of obliging, fbe was.refbl ved to undeceive both Sexes, and let’em see the errors of their love; for Silvia fell into a Fever fb violent th^tphilanier no longer hop’d for her recovery, infbmuch that She was oblig’d to own her Sex and take Women Servants out of decency. This made the first discovery of who and what they were, and for which everybody languifht under a secret Grief, But obavia who now was not only confirm’d She was a Woman, but that She was neither Wife to phiunder nor cou’d in almost all po'iibili ty ever be So: That She was his Mistress, gave him hope that she might one day as well be conquer’d by him; and he found her Youth, her Beauty, and her Qnali' ty, merited all his Pains of lavish 
( 19) 
vifh Courtship. And now there remains no more than the fear of her dying to oblige him immediately to a discovery of his Past Sion, too violent now by his new Hope to be longer conceal’d, but Decency forbids he fhou’d now pursue the dear design;; waited and made Vows for her recovery j visited her, and found phiunkr the most deplorable Objeffc that Despair and Love coil’d render him, who lay eternally weeping on her Bed, and no Counsel or perfwasion cou’d remove him thence 5 but if by chance they made him sensible ’twas for her repose, he wou’d depart to ease his Mind by new Torments, he would rave and tear his delicate Hair, Sigh and weep upon obavios bosbm, and a thousand times begin to unfold the Story, already known to the 
Generous 
( 20) 
generous Rival; despair and hopes of pity from him, made him utter all; And one day, when by the Advice of the Physician he was forc’d to quit the Chamber to give her rest, he carried ofia ztio to his own, and told him from the beginning, all the Story of his Love with the charming Sii 'via; and with it all the Story of his Fate : Octavio sighing (tho’ glad of the Opportunity) told him his Affairs were already but too Miell known, and that he fear’d his Safety from that Discovery, since the States had oblig’d them selves to harbour no declar’d ENEMY to the French King. At this News our young Unfortunate shew’d a Resentment that was fb moving, that even Octavio., who felt a Secret Joy at the Thoughts of his departure, cou’d no longer refrain from Pity and Tenderness, 
even 
() 
even to a Wish that he were less unhappy, and never to part from Silvia: But Love Soon grew again triumphant in his heart, and all he could lay was, that he wou’d afford him the aids of all his Power in this Encounter; which with the acknowledgments of a Lover, whole Life depended on it, he receiv’d and parted with him, who went to ^ learn what was decreed in Council concerning him. While Phi under return’d to Silvia the most dejected Lover that ever Sate produced; wshere he had not figh’d away above an hour but he received a Billet by Oflavws Page from his Lord; he went to his own Apartment to read it, fearing it might contain Something too for him to be able to hold his Temper at the reading of, and which wou’d infallibly have disturb’d the repose of Silvia who 
shar’d 
( 22) 
stiar’d In every cruel Thought of phiunkps: when he was alone he open’d it, and read this. 
Octavio Sh Philander. 
My Lord, 
I Had rather die than be the un gratesul meltenger of News,, which I am Sensible will prove fo fatal to you, and which will be best express’d in fewest Words: Tis decreed, that you must rerire from the United Provinces in four and twenty Hours, if you will save a Life that is dear to me and Silvias there being no other Security against your being render’d up to the King of France. ‘support it well, and hope all things from the assfistance of, 
Frm the Council, Wednesday, 
'Tour Octavio. phuandtr 
\ C 
( D) 
Philander having finifh’d the reading of this, remain’d a while wholly without life or motion, when coming to himself he sigh’d and cried — -- Why— — — 
trifling Life -- If of the 
Wo Extremes one nrnfl be chojen^ rather than TU abandon Silvia, 77/ stay and be delivepd up a F/ 
bin to incenfd France -- -- -- -- -- -- 
'Lis but a Life -- -- At befl I never 
valvd thee -- -' -- -- And now 1 scorn 
to preserve thee at the Price of Silviah Tears! Then taking a hasty turn or two about his Chamber, he pawfing, cry’d -- -- -- -- But 
by my ft ay I rum both Silvia and my Jelfy her life depends on mine \ and 'tis impossible hers can be pre fervd when mine is in danger: by retiring I (hall shortly again be blefl with her sight in a more safe Security; by staying I resign my Jelf poorly to be mdde a public Scorn 
to 
( 24) 
to France, and the nrnel Murderer of Silvia, Now ’twas, after an hundred Turns and pawfesin termixt which Sighs and Ravings, that he refblv’d for both their safe ties to retire; and having a while longer debated within him lelsho w. and where, and a little time ruminated on his hard pursuing Fate, grown to a calm of Grief (less easy to be born than Rage) he halls to Silvia., whom he found Something more cheerful than before, but dares net acquaint her with the Commands 
he had to depart -- -- But Silently 
he views her, while Tears of Love and Grief glide unperceive ably from his fine Eyes, his Sou I grows tenderer at every look, and Pity and Compallion joining to his Love and his Despairs, fet him on the wrack of Life, and now believing it lest pain to die 
than 
( 25) 
than to leave stlvia.^xt{ohts to disobey, and dare the worst that Shall befall him; he t had Some glimmering hope, a%.overs have, that fbme kind chance will prevent his going or being deliverd up, he trusts much to the Friendfhipof Oflcvvio^ whose power, joyn’d with that of his Uncle, (who was one of the States also, and whom he had an Ascendant over, as his northeast phew and his Heir) might Serve him; he therefore ventures to move him to Compastiun by this following Letter. 
Philander to Octavio. 
T Know, my Lord, that the Exer 1 cite of Virtue and Justice is fb innate to your Soul, and So fixed to the very Principle of a generous Commonwealths man that C where 
o 
^) 
where those are in competition, stis neither Birth, Wealth, or glorious Merit, that can render the unfortunate condemn’d ^ you, worthy of your Pity or Pardon : Your very Sons and fathers fall before your juslice, and stis Crime enough to offend, (tbo’ innocently) theleaftofyour wholsbm Lawssto fall under the Extremity of their Rigour. I am not ignorant neith^t how flourisliing this necessary Tyranny, this lawful Oppression, renders your State; how Safe and glorious; how Secure from Enemies at home, (those worst of Foes) and how fear’d by those abroad: : then, Sir, your justifiable Method, and still be high and mighty, retain .your ancient ro?nm Virtue, and stillbe great as Rome her self in her height of glorious Commonwealths; rule your stubborn Natives by her excellent 
Exam( 
() 
Examples, and let the height of youf Ambition be only to be as severely Just, as rigidly Good as you please, but like' her too, be pitiful to Strangers, and dispense a noble Charity to the distress’d, compassionate a poor wandering young Man, who flies to you for Refuge, lost to his Native Home, lost to his Fame, his Fortune, and his Friends; and has only left him the knowledge of his Innocence to Support him from falling, on his own Sword; to end an unfortunate Life, pursu’d everywhere, and Safe nowhere; a Life whole only Refuge is Goodness; 
nor is it barely to preserve this Life that I have recourse to that only as my Sanctuary, and like an humble Slave implore your Pity : Oh, Offavioy pity my Youth, and interceed for my stay yet a little longer: Yourself C 2, makes 
( 28) 
makes one of the illustrious number of the grave, the wife, and mighty Council, your Uncle and Relations make up another considerable part of it, and you are too dear to all, to find a refusal of your Just and Compastionate Application, Oh! what fault have I committed against you that I shou’d not find a Safety here: as well as those charg’d with the • lame Crime with me, though of less quality?? I have encounter’d here of our unlucky Party, who find a fafetyamong you: Is my Birth a Crime? Or does the greatnest of that augment my guilt? have I broken any of your Laws,, com mitted any Outrage? Do they iuspectmefor a Spie to France.? Or do I hold any Correspondence with that ungrateful Nation? Does my Religion, Principle, or Opinion differ from yours? Can I 
design( 

() 
defi^n the Subversion of your glorious State? Can I plot, cabal, or mutiny alone? Oh charge me with fbnie offence, or your Selves of injustice. Say, why lamdeny’d my length of Earth amongst you, if I die? Or why to breath the open Air, if I live, Since I shall neither oppress the one, nor infect the other? but on the contrary am ready with my Sword, my youth, and Blood to Serve you, and bring my little Aids on all occasions to yours: and shou’d be proud of the Glory to die for you in Battle, who wou’d deliver me up a Sacrifice to Frame. Oh! where zfw is the glory or virtue of this 'pttrt&ilio^ for’tis no other? There are no Laws that bind you to k, no obligatpry Article of Nations, but an unnecessary compliment made a Nemine comradicen'e of your Senate, that argues nothing C 3 but 
( 3®) 
* 
but ill nature, and cannot redound to any ones advantage; an ill Nature that’s levell’d at me alone; for many I found here, and many Shall leave under the same circum ^ with me; stis only me whom you have mark’d out the Victim to atone for all: well then, my Lord, if nothing can move you to a Safety for this unfortunate, at least be So merciful to fii fpend your Cruelty a little,, yet a little, and'poliibly I Shali render you the Body of phiundtr.^ tho’ dead, to Send into France fa, ^if\otro / phyofyour fidelity tothatcrown: Oh yet a little stay your cruel Sentence, till my lovely Sister, who pursu’d my hard Fortunes, declare my Fate by her life or death ^ Oh, my Lord, if ever the Soft Passion of Love have touch’d your Soul, if you have felt the unrefistableforce, of young charms about your heart, 
if 
( D.) 
if ever you have' known a Pain and Pleasure from fair Eyes, or the transporting Joys of Beauty, Pity a Youth undone by Love and Ambition, those powerful Conquerors of the young— — — oh Pity ai Youth that dies, and will e er long no more complain upon your Rigours. Yes, ray Lord, he dies without the force of a terrifying Sentence, without the grim Reproaches of an angry Judge, without the fbon consulted Arbitrary -- -- Guilty! of a Severe 
and hasly Jury, without the ceremony of the Scaffold, Axe, and Hang man, and the Clamours of in confideringcrowds; all which melancholy Ceremonies render death fo terisible, which else wou’d fall like gentle (lumbers upon the eyelids, and which in Field I wou’d Encounter with that Joy I wdu’d the Sacred Thing I love.' But oh, 
., C 4^ t 
( 33) 
I fear my Fate is in the lovely Silvia and in her dying Eyes you may read it, in her languishing Face yoirll see how near it is approach’d. Ah! will you not fiiffer rne to attend it there? by her dear fide I Orall fall as calmly as flowers from their Stalks, without regret or pain : Will you by forcing me to die from her, run me to a madness ?- to wild distraction? Oh think it Sufficient that I die here before half my Race of youth be run, before the light be half burnt out, that might have conducted me to a world of Glory! Alas, stie dies — -- -- -- - the 
lovely Siilvia dies; She is figliing out a Soul to which mine is fo entirely fixed, that they must go upward together; yes, yes, she breaths it sick into my Bofbm, and kindly gives mine its disease of death: let us at least then die 
iu' 
( 35 )_, 
in Silent, quitted; and if it pleasc. Heaven to restore the languish’d Charmer, I will ign rnyfelsup to all your rigorous Honour; only let me bear my Treafurewithme, while v/e wander o’er the World to Seek us out a Safety in feme part of it, where Pity and Compassion is no Crime; where Men have tender Hearts, and have heard of the, God of Love; where Politics are not all the business of the powerful, but where Civility and good 
nature reign. 
Perhaps, my Lord, youll wonder I plead no weightier Argument for my stay than. Love, or the Griefs and Tears of a languishing. Maid: But oh 1 they are fiich Tears as every drop woisd ranfbm Lives, and nothing that proceeds from her charming Eyes can be valu’d at a Ids rate I In pity to her, to me, and your Amo c 5 rous 
( 54) 
rous Youths, let me bear her hence: For shou’d stie look broad as her own Sex, Should She appear in her natural and proper Beauty, alas they were undone. Reproach not (my Lord) the weakness of this Confession, and which I make with more Glory than coum I boast myself Lord of alltheuniverse : If it appear a fault to the more grave and wife, I hope my youth will plead something for my excuse. Oh say, at least, Ywas pity that Love had the Afeendant over Philattder's Soul, say stwas his Destiny, but say withal, that it put no stop to his advance to Glory; rather it Set an Edge upon his Sword, and gave Wings to his arnbitionj, ’yesjtry me in your Councils, prove me in your Camps, place me in any hazard -- - — ^ But give me Love I 
and leave me to wait the Life or 
Death 
( D) 
Death of si/vl, and then difpoijb as you pleate, ^ 
My Lord, 
Of Your Unfortunate 
* Philmckr,. 
Octavio So Philandetr 
My Lordy 
f Am much concern’d that a Re i quest fb reasonable as you have made, will be of fb little force with these Arbitrary Tyrants of State; and though you have addressed and appeal’d to me as one o that grave and rigid number, (though without one grain of their formalities, and I hope age, which renders vus less Gallant, and mors envious of the joys and liberties of 
youth, 
, 
youth, will never reduce me to fb dull and thoughtless a Member f State) yeti have fb Small and (ingle a portion of thdr Power, that I am asham’d of my inca ‘ pacity of fctving you in this great Affair. I bear the Honour and the Name, ’tis true, of glorious Sway; but I can boast but of the worst and most impotent part of it, the Title only; but the buste, absolute, mifehievous Politician, finds no room in my Soiil, my humour, or constitution and plodding restless Powder I have made fb little the business of my gayer, and more careless youth, that 1 have even lost my right of Rule, my Share of Empire amongst them. That littlepower(whofe unregarded lost I never bemoan’d till it rendered me uncapable of Serving phiunder) I have stretch’d to the utmost bound for your stay; insomuch 
that 
that I have receiv’d many reproaches from the wiser Coxcombs, have had my Youths little Debauches hinted on, and Judgments made of you (disadvantageous) from my Friendship to you 5 a Friendship, which, my Lord, at first sight of you, found a being in my Soul, and which your Wit, your Goodness, your Greatness, and your Misfortunes has improv’d to all the degrees of it : Though I am infinitely unhappy that it proves of no use to you here, and that the greatest Testimony I can now render of it, is to warn you of your approaching danger, and ha sten your departure, for there is no Safety in your stay. I just now heard what was decreed against you in Council, which no pleading nor eloquence of Friendship had force enough to evade. Alas, I had but one Single Voice in the number, 
which 

which I Sullenly and Singly gave, and which unregarded past. Go then, my Lord, haste to Some place where good Breeding and Humanity reigns : Go and preserve Silvia, ^ in providing for your own Safety; and believe me, till She be in a Condition to pursue your Fortunes, I will take Such care that nothing Shall be wanting, to her"’recovery here, in order to her following after you. lam, alas, but too sensible of all the pains you must endure by Such a Separation; for I am neither insensible, nor uncapable of Love, or any of its violent effedfs : Go then, my Lord, and preserve the lovely Maid in your Flight, since your stay and danger will Serve but to hasten on her death: Go, and be Satisfied She Shall find a Protection Suitable to 
her 
ere 
ion 

( 39), 
her Sex, her Innocence, her Beau, ty, and her Quality; and that where ever you fix your stay, Oie (hall be refign’d to your Arms by, my Lord, 
Your Eternal Friend, and Humble Servant, 
qiiavio. 
Least in this Sudden remove you fhovd want Money, I have tent you Several Bills of Exchange to what place Soever you arrive, and what you want more (make no Scruple to use me as a Friend j and command. 
After this Letter, finding no Hopes but on the contrary a dire necessity of departing, he told Brilljard his Misfortune, and ask’d his Countel in this extremity of Affairs. jsrifljard (who of a Servant was become 
(a) 
a Rival) you may believe, gave him Such advice as might remove him from the Object he ador’d. But after a great deal of diffembl d trouble, the better to hide his joy, he gave his advice for his going with all the Arguments that appear’d reasonable enough to vhilm der. And at every period urg*d that his life being dear to Silvia, and on which hers fo immediately depended, he ought no longer to debate, but hasten his Flight: To all which Counsel our Amorous Htroy with a Soul ready to make its way thro’ his trembling Body, gave a Sighing unwilling astent, *fwas now no longer a Dispute, but was concluded he must go, but how was only the question. How shou’d he take his Farewell? How fhou’d he bid adieu, and leave the dear Object of his Soul in an Estate fb hazardous? 
He 

: la 
( 4*) 
He formed a thousand Ideas to torment himself with; fancying he fhon’d never see her more, that he Should hear that (he Was dead, though' now Ore appeared on this fide of the Grave and had ail the signs of a declining difease. He fanfy’d Absence might make her cold, and abate her passion to him; that her powerful Beauty might attract Adorers, and (he being but a Woman, and no part Angel but her Form, 'twas not expected She fhoum want her Sexes Frailties. Now he cou’d confider how he had won her, how by importunity and opportunity Ihe had at last yielded to him, and therefore might to fbme new Gamester, When he was not by to keep her Heart in continual play : Then ’twas that all the despair of jealous Love, the throbs and piercing of a violent passion seiz’d his timorous and 
tender 
C 4^) 
tender Heart, he sans/m her already in Some new Lavers Arms, and ran o’er all the fbft Enjoyments he had had with her; and fansy’d with tormenting thought, that fb another wou’d. poltefs her: till rackt with Tortures, he almost fainted on the Repose on which he was Set: But sraj.ird rous’d and endeavour’d to convince him, toldjiim he hop’d his Fear was neediest, and that he would take all the watchful care imaginable of her Conduct, be a spy upon her Virtue, and from time to time give him notice of all that fhou’d past : Bid him consider her Quality, and that She was no common Mistrest, whom lure cou’d lead astray; and that if from the • violence of her Pastion, or her more Severe Fate, (he had yielded to the most charming of Men, he ought as little to imagine stie cou’d be 
again 
) 
N( 
( 
again a Lover, as that Sfie cou’d find an Object. of equal Beauty with that of Philander, In fine, he fboth’d and flatterd him into fo much ease, thatlie resolves to take his leave for a day or two under pretence of meeting and consukiog with Some of the rebel Party; and that he wou’d return again to her by that time it might be imagin’d her Fever might be bated, and Silvia in a condition to receive the news of his being gone for a longer time, and to know all his Affairs. While Brilljard prepar’d all things neceltary for his departure, Philander went to Silvia; from whom, having been absent two tedious Flours, She caught him in her Arms with a transport of Joy, reproach’d him with want of Love, for being^ab sent fb long .* But still the more she Ipoke lost sighing Words of 
Love 
( 44) 
Love, the more his Soul was leiz d'with Melancholy. His sighs redoubl’d, and he cou’dnot refrain from letting fall Some Tears upon 
her Bofbm -- -- -- -- Which Stlviti 
perceiving with a look and a trembling in her Voice, that spoke her fear, She cry’d, oh phk imitr! these are unufiial Marks of your Tenderness. Oh tell me, tell me quickly, what they mean. He answer’d with a sigh, and She went on — — Tis fbi am undone, ’tis your lost Vows, your broken Faith you weep; yes, Plnlmier., you find the Flower of my Beauty faded, and what you lov’d before you pity now, and these be the Effects of ic. Then sighing, as if his Soul had been departing on her Neck, he cry’d by Heaven, by all the Powers of Love, thou art the lame dear Charmer that thou wert; then presiing 
her 
) 
her body to his Bofbm, he figh’d a new as if his heart vere breaking — — I know (Ikys she)) there’s fbme hidden cause that gives these Sighs their way, and that dear face a paleness. Oh tell me all C for she that coffd abandon all for thee, can dare the worst of Fate : If thou must quit 
me -- -- -- - — Oil Philander y if it' 
must be So, I need not stay the lingering death of a feeble sea ver: I know a way more noble and more Sudden. pleas’d at her re fblution, which almost destroy’d his jealolifie and Fears, a thousand times he kifs’d her, mixing his grateful Words and Thanks with Sighs; and finding her fair Hands (which he put often to his mouth) to increase theirt^ires, and her pulse to be more high and quick, fearing to relapse her into her (abating) Fever he forc’d a 
smile 
C 4^) 
frnile, and told her, he had no Griefs, but what (he made him feeli no torments but her sickness, nor Sighs but for her pain, and left nothing unsaid, that might confirm her he was still more and more her Slave; and concealing his Design in favour of her Health, he ceas’d not vowing and protesting, till he had fettled her in all the tranquillity’ of a recovering Beauty. And, as since her first illness he had never departed from her Bed, So now this night he strove to appear in her Arms with all that usual Gaiety of Love that her condition wouh permit, or his Circumstances cou’d feign, 'and leaving ^ her asteep at daybreak (with a force upon his Soul that cannot be conceiv’d) but by parting Lovers, he stole from her Arms and retiring to" his Chamber, 
he 
( 47) 
he Soon got himself ready for his Flight, and departed. We will leave Silvias Ravings to be express’d by none but herself, and tell you that after about Fourteen Days amence Ofiavio receiv’d this Letter from Phila^' 
dtr. 
Philander to Octavio. 
>eing Safely arrived at 
__ and by a. very pretty and 
lucky Adventure lodg’d, in the house of the best Quality in the Town, I find myself much more at ease than I thought it posli ble to be without Stlvia, from whom I am nevertheless impatient to hear 5 I hope absence appears not So great a Bugbear to her as’twas imagin’d : Fori know not what Effects it wou’d 
have 
( 48) 
have on me to hear her Griefs exceeded a few sighs and tears; thole my kind absence has taught me to allow and bear without much pain: But Should her Love tran ij3ort her to extremes of Rage and despair, I feri should quit my Safety here, and give her the last proof of my Love and my Companion, throw my self at her Feet, and expose my live to preserve hers. Honour wou’d oblige me to’t. I conjure you, my dear osiavio, by all the Friendship you have vow’d me, (and which I no longer doubt,) let me speedily know how She bears my absence, for on that knowledge depends a great deal of the Satisfaction of my life, carry her this inclos’d which I have writ her, and Soften my silent departure, which posssibly may appear rude and unkind, plead my pardon and give her the Story 
C 49) 
ry of my neceltity of offending, which none can fo well relate as yourself; and from a Mouth So c loquent, to a Maid fb full of Love, will fbon reconcile me to her heart. With her Letter T send you a Bill to pay her 2000 Patacons, which I have paid Vantier Hmskin here, as his Letter will inform you, as al fb those Bills I receiv’d of you at my departure, having been sup ply’d by an English Merchant here, who gave me credit. Twill be an Age till I hear from you, and receive the news of the health of sik 'via : Than which two Blessings nothing will be more welcom to, 

Colkn, Generous Octavio^ Your Philander 
Direct your Letters for me to your Merchant timskm... 
D PC 
( 5°) 
Philander to Silvia. 
there is no way left to gain my sevtd.s Pardon, for leaving her, and leaving her in such Circninstances, but to tell her kwas tp preserve a life which I believ’d entirely dear to her, but that unhappy Crime is toofeverely pu nifh’d by the cruelties of my Absence : Believe me, lovely szlz>ia, I have felt all your Pains, I have burnt with your Fever, and sigh’d with your opprcllions; shy. Has my Pain abated yours? Tell me, and hasten my Health by the assurance of your recovery, or I have fled in vaia from those dear Arms to Save a Life, of which I know not what account to give you, till I receive from you the knowledge of your perfect Health, 
the 
() 
the true state of mine. I can only say I sigh, ahd have a Sort of a being in couen., where I have fbme more alturance of Protection than I cou’d hope from those int rested Brutes, who Sent me from you; yet brutish as they are, I know thou art Safe from their clownisti Outrages. For were they fenslefs as their fr ellow monsters of the Sea, they durst not profane fb pure an Excellence as thine; the Sullen Boars wou’d jouder out a welcome to thee, and gape, and wonder at thy awful Beauty, though they want the tender sense to know to what use kwas made. Or if I doubted their Humanity, I cannot the Frlendstiip of since he has given me 
too good a proof of it to leave me any fear, that he has not in my Absence pursu’d those generous Sentiments for V N, which he vov/’d 
to phiundtr.y 
of which 
the fir il: 
(50 
first Proof mast be his relating the necessity of my Absence,, let me well with my adorable Maid, who, better than I can inform her; and that I rather chose to quit you only for a short Space, than reduce myself to the necestity of losing you eternally. Let the Satisfaction this ought to give you. retrieve your Health and Beauty, and put you into a condition of restoring to me all my Joys, That by pursuing the Dictates of your Love, you may again bring the greatest happiness on Earth to the Arms of 
Your Philander, POSTSCRIPT, 
My Affairs here are yet So un scttsd, that I can take no order for 
your 
( 5?) 
your coming to me, but as (bon as I know where lean fix with Safety, I stjali make it my bufineis and my happiriefs; Adieu. Trail: Ofirtuio with your Letters only. 
This Letter qiiavio would not carry himself to her, vbho had omitted no day, scarce any hour, wherein he Saw nor or Sent not to the charming Stivitt; but he found in that which phd.ander had writ to him, an Air of coldness, altogether unufuahwith that paslionate Lover, and infinitely short in point of tenderness to those he had formerly Seen of his, and from what he had heard him Speak; fb that he no longer doubted (and the rather because he hop’d it) but that philmlr found an abatement of that heat, which was wont to inspire at a more Amorous rate; this appearing de d 2 clenfioa 
( 54) 
clenfion he could not conceal from Silviai^ at least to let her know he took notice of it; for he knew her Love was too quick Sighted and Sensible to past it unregarded; but he with reason thoughtjihac when She fhoisd find others observe the iitt'esligik Ole had put on her, her Pride (wblchis natural to Women in Such Cafes) would decline and idsenlier Love, for his Rival. He therefore Sent his Page with the Letters inclos’d in this Srom himself. 
Octavio to Silvia. 
Madam, 
f “'Rom a little necessary debauch I made last night with the Prince, I am forc’d to employ my Page in those Duties I ought to have persorm’d my self: He brings you, Madam, a Letter Srom 
Philander y 
( 55) 
Philander,, as mine which I have also Sent you informs me; I shou’d elsh have doubted it; ’tis, I thing, his Character, and all he says of Ofiavio confeftesthe Friend, but where he fjxaks of stiuia fore he disguises the Lover: I wonder the Mask slaou’d be put on now to me, to whom before he So frankly discover’d the Secrets of his Amorous Heart. Tis a Mystery I would fain persuade myself he finds abfoiutely necestary to his Interest, and I hope you will make the same favourable Constructions of ir, and not impute the lestend zeal wherewith he treats the charming stk 'via to any possible change or colch nefs, Since I am but too Satally sensible, that no Man can arrive at the Glory of being belov’d by you, that had ever power to Shorten one Link of that dear D 4 Chain 
( 5^) 
chain that holds him, and yon need but Survey that adorable Face, to confirm your Tranquillity, Ah a just value on your Charms, and you need no Arguments to Secure yonr everlasting Empire, or to establhh ic in what Heart you please. This fatal Truth I learned from your fair Eyes, eer they difeover’d to me your Sex, and you may as shon change to what I then believ’d you, as I from adoring what I now find you : If all then, Madam, that do but look on you become your Slaves, and languish for you, love on, even without Hope, and die, what must phiundtr. pay you, who has the mighty Blesting of your Love, your Vows, and all that renders the hours of amorous Youth Sacred, Glad, and Triumphant? But you know the conquering power of 
your 
yoo 
eiu 
a < fro 
vi 
fei 
bi 
I 
( 57) 
your Charms too well to need either this daring confeslion, or a defence of philandep^ Virtue from, 
Madam, 
Your Obedient Slave,. 
Ociavio. 
silvu had no Sooner read this with blushes, and a thousand fears, and trembling of what was to follow in philamkvs Letters both to osiavio and to her Seif, but with an Indignation agreeable to her haughty Soul, Ihe 
'd 
an 
cry’d -- -- How 
miifi Octavio see it too : By He a' if I fkot/d fnti it true he hall not dare to think it; then with a generous Rage She broke open Phtlanders Letter; and which file Soon perceiv’d did but too well prove the trurli of D 5 ovavids 
( 58) 
oiiavids Suspicion, and her own Fears. She repeated it again and again, and still She found more cause of grief and anger; Love oc cafion’d the first, and Pride the last : And, to a Soul perfectly haughty, as was that of shuia.^ ’twas hard to guess which had the Ascendant: She considered oiia vio to all the Advantages that Thought con’d conceive in one who was not a Lover of him; She knew he merited a Heart, though She had none to give him. She fojund him Charming without havinga tenderness for him, She found him young and amorous without desire towards him, She found him great, rich, powerful and generous, without designing on him, and though fhc knew her Soul free from all Pafiion, but that for phe lander nevertlielefs ste blullitand t.’as angry, that he had thoughts 
no 
I h 
( 59) 
no more advantageous to the power of those Charms, whidi ste wish’d might appear to him a above her Sex, it being natural to Women to desire Conquests, though they hate the corquer'd; to glory in the iriumph, though ibey despise the Slave: And Slae believ’d, while Offnvh had fb poor a Sense of her beauty as to believe it could be forsaken, he would adore it less: ancirir.st. tofatisfie her Pride, she left the Softer business of her heart to the next tormenting hour, and Sent him this careless answer by his Page, believing if she appear’d too angry it might look as if she valu’d his Opinion, and there fore diltembled her Thoughts, as Women in those Cafes ever do, who when most angry Seem the mostgalliard, especially when they have needof the friend flsip of those they flatter. 
( 6o) 
Silvia to Octavio. 
'I S it indeed, that you be f lieve Philander cold, or wcu’d you make that a pretext to the declaration of your own Passion; we Frernch Ladies are not So nicely ty’d up to the formalities of vertue^but we can hear Love at both Ears; and if we receive not the Addresses of both, at least wear perhaps vain enough not to be difpleas’d, to find we make new Conquests. But you have made your Attack with fb ill conduct, that I Shall irnd force enough without more Aids to repulse you. Alas, my Lord, did you believe my Heart was left unguarded when phi.ian drir departed? No, the careful charming Lover lest a thpufand little Gods to defend it, of no less power than iiimfdfj young Deities. 


r 
I 
) 
ties who laugh at all your little Arts and Treacheries, and Scorn to resign their Empire to any feeble Cupids you can draw up against ’em: Your thick foggy Air breeds Loves too dull and heavy for noble flights, nor can I stoop to them. The flemilh Boy wants Arrows keen enough for Hearts like mine, and is a Bungler in his Art, too lazy and remils, rather a heavy chus than a Cupid., a Bottle sends him to his Bed of Moss, where he Sleeps hard, and never dreams of Vemd. 
How poorly have you paid your Seif, my Lord, (by this pursuit of your discover’d Love) for all the little Friendship you have rendered me? How well you have explain’d, you can be no more a Lover than a Friend, if one may judge the first by the last : Had you been thus obslinate in your Pallion before 
* phk 
( (5=) 
Philander vrent, or you had believ’d me abandon’d, I Should perhaps have thought, that you had lov’d indeed, because I Should have seen you durst, and Should have believ’d it true, because it ran Some hazards form, the resolution of it would have reconcil’d me then to the temerity of it, and the greatest demonstration you cou’d have given of it, wou’d have been the danger you wou’d have ran and contemned; and the preference of your Pafiion above any other consideration. This, my Lord, had been generous, and like a Lover, but poorly thiis to Sec upon a single Woman in the difguifeof afriend, in the dark silent melancholy hour. of able nee from Philander,, then to Surprise me, then to bid me deli yer! to pad foe hearts! it was not like Oclauio ^ that Oflavio phi hndtr made his Friend, and for 
whose( 
() 
dear Sake, my Lord, I will no further reproach you, but from a goodness, which, I hope, you will merit, I will forgive an Offence, which your ill timing has render’d almost inexcusable; and expect you will for the future constder better how you ought to treat 
. SILVIA. 
As Soon as she had difmifs’d the Page, She hasted to her bufiness of Love, and again read over philan ders Letter, and finds still new occasion for fear; file had recorrle to pen and paper for st relief of that Heart which no other way coum find it; and after having wip’d the Tears from her Eyes, She writ this fbllowing Letter. 
Silvia 
( 
Silvia to Philander. 
Yes, Philattder, I have received your Letter, and but I found my name there, Should have hop’d it was not meant for Silvia : Oh! kis all cold — shortshort and cold as a dead winter’s day. It chill’d my blood, it shiver’d every vein. Where, oh where.hast thou lavish’d out all those fbst Words fo natural to thy Soul, with which thou us’d to charm; fb tun’d to the deaf mugck of thy voice? what is become of all the tender things, which, as I us’d to read, made little nimble pantings in my heart, my blusties rise, and tremblings in ray blood, adding new firs to the poor burning Vidtnn 1 Oh where are all thy pretty Flatteries of Love, that made me fond, and vain, and feta value on this trifling Beauty? Hast 
thou 
( ^5) 
thou forgot thy wondrous Art of loving? ishy pretty cunnings, and thy fbft deceivsings? Hast thou forgot em all? Or hast forgot indeed to love at all? Has thy industrious pafiion gathered all ti e Sweets, and left the rifled flower to hang its wither’d head, and die in st ades neglected? for who wtu prize it now, now, when all its perfumes are fled? Oh rny Philander, oh my charming Fugitive! w^as’t not enough, you left me like hlivtheftus on the Shore, on the forsaken Shore, departed from my fond, my clalp ingarms, • where I believ’d you fife, Secure, and pleas’d, wshen Sleep and slight, that favoured you, and rainm me, had render’d ’em incapable of their dear loss? Oh was it not enough, that wshen I found ’em empty and abandon’d, and the place cold where you had lain, and my poor trembling bosom un 
* poite st 
() 
poftefs’d of that dear load it bore, that I almost expired with my first Fears : Oh, if Philander lov’d, he wou’d have thought that cruelty enough, without the Sad Addition of a growing coldness: : wast’d, 1 miff’d thee, and I call’d aloud, lander! my Philander! But no phi lander heard ^ then drew the dole drawn Curtains, and with a hasty and busy view, survey’d the Chamber over; but oh! in vain I view’d, and call’d yet louder, but none appear’d to my assfistance but anto net and bri/ljard to torture me with dull Excules, urging a thousand feign’d and frivolous Reafbns to fa tisfie my fears : But I, who lov’d, who doted even to madneff, by nature Soft, and timorous as a Dove, and fearful as a Criminal efcap’d, that dreads each little noise, fancy’d their Eyes and guilty Looks confessed the Treafbns of 
their 
( ^7) 
their Hearts and Tongues, while they, more kind than true, strove to convince my killing Doubts, protested, that you would return by Night, and feign’d a likely Story to deceive. Thus between hope and Sear I languifht out a day. Oh Heavens .fa tedious day without p/7/vwer, who wou’d have thought, that such a dismai day Slioffd not with the end ofits reign have finifh’d that of my Life: But then oftxvioc^mo, to visit the, and who till then I never wsistit to see, but now I was impatient Sor his coming, who by degrees told me that you were gone — I never askd him where, or how, or why, that you were gone was enough to poffcssmeof all I fear’d, your being apprehended and Sent into Er your delivering yourself up, your abandoning me; all, all I had an easte faith for, without 
con( 
() 
conshlting more than That, Thou wert gone, — that very word yet strikes a terror to my Soul, disables my trembling hand, and I must wait for reinforcements from Some kinder thoughts. But, oh 1 from whence ston’d they arrive? from what dear present felicity, or profpectof a future, though never fb distant, and all thole past ones, Serve but to increase my pain 5 they favour me no more, they charm and please no more, and only present themselves to my memory to complete the number of my Sighs and Sears, and make me wist that they had never been, though even with Philmdtr ?Oh, say, thou Monarch of my panting Soul, How hast thou treated V/AD, to make her wist, that ste had never known a tender joy with thee: is’c postibie stc fhou’d repent her loving thee, and thou stou’dst give 
her 
flo[ 
( ^9) ^ 
her cause! say, dear false Charmer, is it? But Oh, there is no lasting Faith in Sin! — Ah — What have I done? How dreadful is the Scene of my first debauch, and how glorious that never to be regain’d prospect of my Virgin Innocence, where! fatejinthronm in awful ver tue, crown’d with Shining honour, and adorned with unsullied reputation, till thou, O Tyrant Love with a charming usurpation, invaded all my Glories; and which I refign’d with greater pride and joy than a young Monarch puts ’em on. Oh, why then do I repent? as if the vast, the dear expense of pleasures past were not enough to recompense for all the pains of Love to come? But why, O why do I treat thee as a Lover lost already : Thou are not, canst not, no. 111 not believe it, till thou thyself confess it: Kor Shall the 
omis 
C 7°) 
omission of a tender word or two make me believe thou hast forgot thy Vows. Alas, it may be I mistake thy Cares, thy hard Fatigues of Life, thy present ill Circumstances (and all the melancholy Effects of thine and my misfortunes) for coldness and declining Love. Alas, I had forgot my poor, my dear Philander is now oblig’d to contrive for Life as well as Love; thou perhaps (fearing the worst) art preparing Eloquence for a Council Table; and in thy busy and guih ty imaginations, haranguing it to the grave Judges, defending thy Innocence, or evading thy guilt : Feeing Advocates, excepting Juries, and ccnsronting Witnesses, when thou oiould’ft be giving sh tisfaction to my fainting love fick heart: Sometimes in thy labouring Fancy the horror of a dreadful Sentence for an ignominious death 
strikes( 
() 
strikes upon thy tender Soul with a force that frights the little God from thence, and I am perswaded there are Some Moments of this melancholy nature, wherein your silvia is even quite forgotten, and this too She can think just and reasonable, without reproaching thy heart with a declining pa{lion, especially when I am not by to call thy fond nessup, and divert thy more tormenting hours : But oh, for those Soft Minutes thou hast defign’d for Love, and hast dedicated to Silvia, Philander stiou’d dismiss the dull Formalities of rigid Bufinels, the presting cares of Dangers, and have given a loose to fbftnefs. coisd my phiunder imagine this Short and unloving Letter Sufficient to a tone for Such an absence?? has Philander then forgotten the pain with which I languish’d, wshen but absent from him an hour? How 
then 
( 7=_) 
then can he imagine I can live, when distant from him So many Leagues, and fb many days? while all the Scanty comfort I have for life is, that one day we might meet again; but where, or when, or how — thou hast not love enough fb much as to divine; but poorly leavest me to be satisfied by Ofi.a 'vio.f committing the business of thy heart, the once great importance of thy Soul, the most necessary Devoirs of thy life, to be supply’d by another. Oh Philander., I have known a blelfed time in our reign of Love, when thou wouldst have thought even all thy own power of too little force to satisfy the doubting Soul of Silvia : Tell me Philander,, hast thou forgot that time? fdare not think thou hast, and vet (O God) I find an alteration, but Heaven divert the Omen; Yet Something whispers to my Soul, 
I 
( 75) 
I am undone! Oh where art thou my Philander? where’s thy Heart? And what has it been doing since it begun my Fate? How can it jufiifie thy coldness,, thou this cruel absence, without accounting with me for every parting hour? My charming Dear was wont to find me bufi nefs for all my lonely absent ones; 
and writ the fbfteft Letters -- - 
Loading the Paper with fond Vows and wishes, which e’re I had read oer, another wou’d arrive, to keep eternal warmth about my Soul: nor wert thou ever wearied more with vuiting, than I with reading or with sighing 
after thee; but now -- -- -- Oh! 
there’s Some Mystery ink I dare not understand. Be kind at least and satisfy my Fears, for kis a wondrous pain to live in doubt, if thou still lowest me, Swear it E ostr 
oer a and curse me if I do 
not credit Vhee. But — if thou arc declining, — or ftg4id st be Sent a Shameful France — Oh 
thou deceiving Charmer, yet be just, and 1% know my Doom : By Heayjh 't last will find a welcom^ito for it will end the ton€eru>ofimy Doubts, and fears of losiit^.<thee another way, and I stiallj/havejthe Joy to die with thee f die belov’d, and die 
Thjy Silvia. 
Having read over this Letter, she fear’d She had Said too much of her Doubts, and Apprehensions of a change in him *, for now She sties to all the little Stratagems and Artifices of Lovers, She begins to confider the worst, and to make her best of that, but quite abandoned, ste could not believe 
her 
.< — 'i 
\ ^ y 
herself without flying into all the ragc'that disappointed Woman could be postefs’d wsith, (he ' calls dn/z/vy, Shows him his Lords Letters, and told him (while he ready her Doubts and Fears; he being thus instructed by herself in the way how to deceive her on, like fortune tellers who ga thers peoples Fortune from them selves, and there) return it back for their own Divinity; tells her he Saw indeed a change! glad.to improve her Fear, and feigns a Sorrow almost equal to hers: ’tzf evidentj says he, vzf evident that hts the moftr ungrateful of his 
Sex! Pardon Madam (continued he, bowing) If my Zyal for the mof charming Creature on Earth, inalte me forget my Duty to the htfi of Mafers and Friends. Ah Brilljard, cry"d She, with an Air of lan guishment that more eouamed E 2. him 
f 
\ 
j6 
him $ have a care least that mifiar ken zd.al for me jjjovd make yott profane Verttte^ which has not but on this cccafton fhew^d that it want -- ed Angels for its Guard. Oh Brilljard, if he he false— — the dear Man he perjured take take kind Heaven the ijfe you have prefervid, hut for a greater Proof 
of your Revenge -- -- And at that 
Word Sire Sunk into his Arms, wshich he hastily extended as she was falling, both to Save her from harm, and to give himself the pleasureof grasping the lovely’st body in the World to his bosbm, on wshich her fair Face declin’d cold, dead, and pale, but fb traa sporting was the pleasure of that dear Burden, that he forgot to call for, or to use any Aid to bring her back to Life, but trem ling with his Love and eager iflion, he took a thousand Joys, 
he 
( 77) 
hm 

mt 
n 
■k, 
k 
h 
f 
he kissed a thousand times her Lukewarm Lips, fuck’d her Short Sighs, and ravifh’d all the Sweets her bo fbm (which but guarded with a loose Night gowri)yielded his impatient touches. Oh Heaven, Who can express the Pleasures he receiv’d, because no other way he ever cou’d arrive to So much daring? ’twas all beyond his hope loose were her Pvobes, insenfible the Maid, and Love had made him insolent, he rov’d, he kiss’d, he gaz’d, without control, forgetting all respect of Perfbns, or of place, and quite despairing by fair means to win her, resblvesto take this lucky Opportunity; the Door he knew was fast, for the counsel she had to ask iiim admitted of no Lookers on, So tliac at his Entrance She had that pass for him her seif, and being near her Bed, when stie Sell E ^ into 
r 
/ 
) 
into his Anns, stt this last daring Thoughr, he lifts her thither, and * lays her gently down, and while he did fb in one minute, ran oer all the killing Joys he had been, Wirneis to, which She had given phiurtdtr, on which he never paws’d but urg’d by a Cupid altogether malicious and wicked, he refblves his cowardly Conquest, when fbme kinder God awaken’d Silvia and brought oshvto to the Chamber Door, who having been used to a Sreedom, which was permitted to none but hirnfelf, Murh Arttonett h er Vf ma n, wa i t i n g for admittance, after having knock’d twice fbstly : erd.^jard heard it, and redoubled his Difbrder, V hich from that of Love, grew to that of Surprise; he knew not what to do, whether torefufe answer ing, or to re establish the reviving Sense of Sthda; in this moment 
j y 
il( 
•() 
'ment of perplexing Thought, he faisd not hovcever to fet his Hair in order, and adjust him, though there were no need of lit, and stepping to the Door (after having rais’d Silvia Fetining her head on her Hand on the bed fije,) he gave admittance to ohavio; but oh Heaven, how was he Surprised when he Saw it was Octavio? his ' heart with more force than before, redoubled its beats, that one might easily perceive every stroke by the motion of his Cravat, be blush'd, which to a compl.xion perfectly fair, as that of bruljard (who wants no Beauty either in Face or Perfbn) was the more dih coverable, add to this his treni' bling, and you may easily imagine whatafuger he represensed himself to Od avid; who almost as much surpriz’d as himfeli to find thegoddefs ofhisvows and Devo* 
4. 
tioos 
_ ( 8o) 
tions with a yovingendimion alone, a Door Shut too, her Gown loose (which from the late Fit She was in, and brajarks Rape upon her Bofbmj was still open, and discovered a world of unguarded Beauty, which She knew not was in view, with Some other Difbrders of her head clothes, gave him in a Moment a thousand false apprehenfi ons: Antonett: was no icss surpris’d; So that all had their part of a mazement, but the innocent 5/7 ■'uiay whofeeyes were beautified with a raelancholly Calm, which almost Set the generous Lover at ease, and took away his new fears, however he could not choose but ask Bri/ijard what the matter was with him, he look’d So out of countenance, and trembled fb? he told him, how sikia had been, and what extreme Frights She had postess’d him with, and told him 
the 
ive 
?M’. 
( io 
the occdston, which the lovely silvu with hereyesand Sighs ac Tented to, and Brilljard departed; how well pleas’d you may imagine, or with what Gusto he left her with the lovely Ofiavio y whom he perceiv’d too well was a Lover in the difguise of a Friend. But there are in love those wonderful Lovers who can quench the Fire one Beauty kindles, with Some other Object, and as much in Love'as brpijarj was, he found Antomtt an Antidote that difpelpd the groster part of it; for She was in love with our Amorous Friend, and courted him with that pasti on those of that Country do almost all handsbme Strangers, and one convenient Principle of the Religion of that Country is, to think it no Sin to be kind while they are Single Women, tho’ o tiierwife (when vvivesj) they are E just 
ini 
(sn 
juff enough, rior does a Woman that manages her Affairs thus dis creetly meet with any reproach; of this Humour was our Antonett.^ who purfu d her Lover out, half jealous there might be Some amorous Intrigue between her Lady and him, Which ste sought in vain by all the feeble Arts of her Countries Sex to get from him; while on the other fide, he believing She might be of use in the farther difeovery he desir’d to make between o&tivio and Silvia not only told her she her self was the Object of his Wishes, but gave her Substantial s^roofs onst, and told her his Design, after ha ving her Honour for security that she wou’d be secret, the best Pledge a Man can take of a Woman: After jiie had promis’d to betray all things to him, she departed m her Affairs, and he to giving 
his 
_ ■ C s % 
his Lord an account of Silvia as ihe defir d; in a Letter .which came to him with that of Silvia, and which was thus : 
Philander to Brilljard. 
I Doubt not but you will wonder that all this time you have not heard of me, nor indeed can I well excuse it, since I have been in a place, whence with easel cou’d have lent every Post, but a new Affair of Gallantry has engag’d ray thoughtful Hours, not that I find ny Pastion there that has abated one Sigh for Sihia., but a Mans Hours are very dull, when undiverted by an Intrigue of forae kind or other, efpeciaily to a Heart young and gay as mine is, and which would not if pollmile bend under the Fatigues of more Serious thought and business!! oud nbc 
ted 
( s4) 
tell you this, but that I wou’d have you feign all the dilatory excuses that postible you can to hinder shvips coming to me, while I remain in this Town, where I design to make my abode but a Short time, and had not staid at all, but for this stop to my Journey, and I Icorn to be vanquifh’d without taking my Revenge, kis a Sally of 
Youth, no more -- -- a stasn, that 
blazes for a while, and will go out with enjoyment. I need not bid you keep this Knowledge to yourself, for [ have had too good a confirmation of your Faith and Friendship to doubt you now, and believe you have too much respect lot Silvia to occasion her any dist quiet. I long to know how Ihe takes my absence, send me at large of all that pastes, and give your lierrers to obavio, for none elfe Shall know where I am, or how to 
Send 
( 8$) 
Send to me : Be careful of silvu, and observe her with diiigence/or possibly I Should not be extravagantly afflicted to find She were inclin’d to love me les for her own ease and mine, Since Love is troublefbme when the height of it carries it to jealoufiesjittlc quarels and eternal discontents; all which beginning Lovers prize, and pride themselves on every disfrust of the fond misfrel, Since ’tis not only a demonstration of love in them, but of power and charms in us that occasion it, but when we no longer find the Mistress Ib desirable, as our first wishes form her, we value less their opinion of our Perfbns, and only endeavour to render it a greeable to new Beauties, and a dorn it for new Conquests; but you, bri//jjrd. have been a Lover, and understand tilready this philo fbphy. I need Say no more tiiao to 
to 
( s6) 
to a M u who knows Ib well my Soul, but to tell him I am 
Hu confiant Friend 
Philander. 
Till ’s came as bri/ijard.s Soul cou’d wish, and had he Sent him word he had been chosen King of po/ata, he coil’d not have received the news withfo great joy, and fb perfect a wtecom. How to manage this to his best advantage was the hufiness he was next to confiilr, after returning an answer; now he fancied himself Siire of the lovely Prize, in Ipight of all other oppo ficions i For (fays hein reafbning the cafe) if' jhe can by degrees arrive to acoldnefs to Philander, a' td conjider hin no longer at a Lover, she may perhaps donfidtr me as a mns hani; or jhon d jhe receive Octavio's ajdrejjesj when once I have fr rnd 
het, ' 
C 87)., 
her ffihu, I will make her pay frr kseping of every (uret. §0, either way he entertain’d a Hope, though never So distant from Rea Sun and Probability; but all things feern postib'e to longing Lovers, who can on the least hoperefblve to out wait even Eternity (if post Sible) in expectation of a promis’d Biesting; and now w ith more than usual care he re solv’d to dress and fet cut all his Youth and Beauty to the best advantage; and being a Gentleman wtw born, he wanted no Arts of dresting, nor any advantage of Shape or Mien, to make it appear V eli: pleas’d with this hope, his Art as now how to make his Advances without appearing to have desigrj’d doing Sb^ And first to act the Hvpocrite with his Lord was his Bufinds pfor he ccnfid er d right ly, if he stioaid not represent' 
'I 
(I! 
h: 'i' 
: S 
r f 
11 II 
sdlvip% Sorrows to the life, and appear to make him Sensible of em, he Should not be after credited if he related anything to her difad vancage; for to be the greater e nemy you ought to Seem to be the greatest Friend. This was the policy of his Fleart, who in all things wasinfpir’d withphanatical Notions. In order to this, being alone in his Chamber, after the defeat he had in that of Silvih^ he writ this Letter. 
Brilljard to Philander. 
My I ord, 
O U have done me the honour to make me your Confident in an Affrair that does not a little Surprise me : Since I believ’d, after Stlvia^ no mortal Beauty could have touch’d your Heartland nothing but your own 
excu 
( 89) 
excuses cou’d have suffic’d to have made it reafbnable; and I only wish, that when the fatal news flail arrive to Silvias Ear (as for me it never Shall) that stie may think it as pardonable as I do; but I doubt it will add abundance of Grief, to what She is already posteft of, if but fiich a Sear Should enter in hertcnder Thoughts. But Since his not my bufiness, my Lord, to advise or counsel, but to obey, I leave you to all the success of happy Love, and will only give you an account how affairs Stand here, Since your departure. 
Th it Morning you left the Brilly and Silvia in Bed, I muss disturb your more Serene thoughts with telling you, that her first Surprise and Griefs at the news of your departure, were most deplorable, where raging madness and the Softer passion of Love, 
complaints 
( po) 
complaints of Grief and Angy, Sighs, Tears and Cries were fo mix’d rogetsher, arid by turns So violently seiz’d her, that all about her wept and pity’d her; twas lad, 'twas wundtous Sad, my Lord, to see it: Nor cou’d we hope her Life, or that She would preserve it if She cou’d; for by many ways She attempted ' to have released her Seif from pain by a violent Death, and those that strove to preserve that, cou’d not hope She woo’d ever have return’d to fense again; Sometimes a wild extravagant Raving wou’d require all our Aid, and then again she wou’d 
talk and rail So tenderly -- and 
expressed her resentment in the kindest Softest Words that ever mad nep utter’d, and all of her PIP Under till She has Set us all a weeping round her, Sometimes slie’d sit as calm and if ill as death, 
and 
4 
( 9^ _) 
and we have perceived She liv’d only by Sighs and siieoe Tears that fell into her Bosom, then on a sudden wildly gaze upon us with Eyes that even then had wondvous Charms, and frantickly Survey us all, then cry aloud, where is my Lord pbk 
Imderl -- -- -- -- Oh, bring me my 
philandeh i briijjard : Oh, Antonett^ Where have you hid the Treasure of my Soul; then Weeping Floods of Tears, wou’d Sink all fainting, in our Arms. Anon with trembling 
Words and Sighs (lie’d cry, -- -- -- - 
Pttt oh my dear Philander is no snore you have (rirrendered him 
to France -- -- -- Ter, yes^ycdvegk 
ven him up, and he mufi die, fuhlickly die, (?e led a vi&im through thejoyfulcfotui — reproaced 
abid fall inglorioiifly -- -- Then 
rave again, and tear her lovely Hair, and act Siich wildness, ~ So 
moving 
we 
hearing a • Offcivio 
moving and fofad, as even infected the pictying beholders, and all we could do was gently to persuade her Grief, and Sooth her raving Fits; but (owe Svore, So heartily we vowkl that you were Safe, that with the aid of Ocittvio., who came that day to visit her made her capable of little reasbn from us kneefd and beg’d She would bat calmly hear him speak, he pawn’d his Soul, his Honour, and his life : pjliunder was as Safe from any injury either from France or any o there Enemy as he, as She or Heaven it (elf: Inline, my Lord, he vow’d, he Swore, and pleaded, till Ihe with patience heard him tell your Story, and the neceility of your abfeoce • this brought her temper back, and dry’d her Eyes, then sighing anfwer’d him 
-- -- tkit if for your faftj yott 
were 
- ( 93) 
were fled, jhe would forgive your Cruelty dttd your Ahfence, atid endeavour to be her [elf again : But then She wou’d a rhoufand times conjure him not to deceive her Faith, by all the Friendliiip that he bore Philander, not to poitess her with salse Hopes; then wou’d he Swear a new; and as he Swore, She would behold him with filch charming sadness in her Eyes, that he almost forgot what he wou’d say, to gaze upon her and to pay his Pity. But if with all his Power of Beauty and of Rhetoric he left her calm, he was no fboner gone, but she return’d to all the Tempests of despairing Love, to all the unbelief of faithless Passion, wou’d neither steep, nor eat, nor Suffer day to enter; but all was and gloomy as the Vault that held the £ fhefian Matron, nor suffer’d she 
any 
( 94) 
.any to approach her but her Page, and Count osiavio.^2ax^ he in midst of all was well receiv’d; not that I think, my Lord, lire feign’d any parr of that close retirement to entertain hin(i with any freedom, that did not become a Woman of perfect Love and Honour, though I must own, my Lord, I believe it impqf fible for him to behold the lovely Silvia without having a Pa (lion for her, what restraint his Friendship to you may put upon his Heart or Tongue, I know riot, but I conclude him a Lover, though without Success, what effects that may have upon the Heart of silvdapn ly time can render an account of: And whose Conduct 1 Oiall the more particularly observe from a Curiosity natural to me, to see, if ‘ it may be possible for Sihiato love again, after the adorable philan der^ which Levity in one ib perfect. 
w^ou’d 
( 95) 
wou’d cure me of the Difeafeof Lovey while I liv’d amongst the fickle Sex; But since no Such thought can yet get Poffefiion of my Belief, I humbly beg your lordsliip will entertain no jcalou* fie, that may be So fatal to your repose, and to that of Silvia., doubt not but my fears proceed perfectly from the Zeal I have for your lordship, for whose Honour and Tranquillity none fball venture fb far as, 
My Lord, 
Lour lort^d/lfi mofi 
• IV 
'and Strvant 
Briiljard.' 
POSTSCRIPT. 
isly Lord, the Groom(ijall fctfor ward with your coacehorfts tomorrow morning actor ding to your Order. 
Ha( 
() 
Having writ this, he read it over: not to see whether it were witty or eloquent, or writ up to the Sense of fb good a Judge as Philander, but to See whether he had caff it for his purpose;; there his Master piece was to be Shown 5 and having read it, he doubted whether the relation of silvips Griefs were not too moving, and whether they might not serve to revive his fading Love which were intended only as a demonstration of his own Pity and Compastion, that from thence the deceiv’d Lover might with the more ease entertain a belief in what he hinted of her Levity, when he was to make that out, as he now had but touch’d upon it, for he woum not have it thought the bustnefs of Malice to Silvia, but Duty and respect to phtundtrvih2x thought reconcil’d 
him 
J it 
C 97) 
him, to the first part without ah teration; and he fancied he had Said enough in the latter, to give any Man of Love and Sense a Jealousy which might inspire a young Lover in pursuit of a new Mistress, with a Revenge that might wholly turn to his advantage ^ for now every Ray gave him light enough to conduct him to hope, and he believ’d nothing too difficult for his Love, nor what his invention cou’d not conquet: he faucyd himself a very nluhitt 'vel already, and almost promis’d himself the Charming silvl, With these Thoughts he Seals up his Letters, and hastes to silzils Chamber for her further Commands, having in his politic transports forgotten he had lefr. Octavio with her. ocinvio^ who no sooner had Seen eri/ijard quit the Chamber all trerribling and difor h der, ^ 
( 98) 
der’d, after having given him entrance; but the next step was to the Feet of the newly recover’d languistiing Beauty, who not knowing anything of the freedom the daring Husband lover had taken, was not at all fiir priz d to hear cry (kneeling 
before her) Ah Madam I no longer tvondcy Octavio with 
ftuh rigour \ then Sighing declin’d his melancholy Eyes, where Love and Jealousy made themselves too apparent while stie believing he had only reproach’d her want of Ceremony at his entrance, checking herself, She started from the Bed, and taking him by the Hands to raise him, stae cry’d, Pije^ Lord,, and pardon the omtffi of tibat refpedi. which vans not 7v anting but wiih euen life, it self oitavio anfwesd, Tes, Madam, hut \ud.ook care, not to make the World 
my 
on 
ah Jo( 
() 
Afoltithly unhappy in your Eternal Lofsy anti therefore made choice of ficha time to die in when you were fire of a skilful person at hand to bring you back to life — My Lord — Said she (with an innocent wonder in her Eyes, and an ignorance that did not apprehend him) 1 mean Brill jard, laid he, whom I found sufficiently diforderd to make me believe he took no little pains to rest ore you to the World again. This he Spoke with Such an Air as easily made her imagine he was’ a Lover to the degree of jealoulie, and theresore(beholding him with a look that told him her disdain before she Spoke) She reply’d hastily, My Lord, if Brilljard have exprefi by any disorder or concern of his kind jtnfe of my fifferings^ I am more obligd to him for it than I am to you for your opinion of my Virtue and I hall h reafttr F 2 knoa 
( loo) 
kno'iv how to sit a, •vdut both on the one arid on the other, [tnce what he wants in quality and ah Hi > ty to serve me., he fuijiciently makes good with his Refge^ and Duty. At that (he would have quitted him, but he (still kneeling) held her Train of her Gown and befbught her with all the Eloquence of moving and petitioning Love, That jfje would pardon the fffeh of a Passion that covd not run mto leys extraz^agancy at a sight fo new and firangej as that (he jhoud in a morningwith only her Nightgown thrown loosely about her lovely body and which left a thousand Charms to view atone receive a Aian into her Chamber and make fal the Door upon '^emj which when from his importunity) was opend he found her all ruffled and almofi fainting on hep Bed, and a young hluhfiing Youth fidrt from her Arms with 
trembling 
O 
( lol) 
trefnhling li?nhs^ dnd. rt Heart that heat time to the ttme of aehve Lonae, fatiltring in his Speech as tffcarce yet he had recrtiited the Sense he had fo happily lost in the Amorous Encounter .- With that, Surveying of her self, as She stood, in a great Glass, which She coted not hinder herself from doing; Ore found indeed her Night Linen, her Gown, and the bosom of her Shift in Such difbrder, as if at least She had yet any doubt remaining that bri/ljard had not treated her well: She however found cause enough to excuse Octavios Opinion, weighing all the Circumstances together, and adjusting her Linen and Gown with blushes that almost appear’d Criminal, fbb turn’d to Oftavio^ who still held her, and still begg’d her Pardon, assuring him upon her Honour, her Love F 3 to 
() 
to Phiknkr ^ and her Frkdclihip for him, that fire was pdrfectly innocent, and that Bri/ijard^ though he should have quality and all other Advantages which he wanted to render him acceptable, yet that there was in Nature shmething which compell’d her to a sort of coldness and disgust to his Perfbn, for Qie had ib much the more abhorrence to him as he was a Husband, but that was a Secret to Ofiavio^ 
butfhe continu’d Speaking -- -- -- — 
and cry’d, vn, I he brought 
to yield to any hitt Philander; I own I find Charms enough in o ctavio to make a Conquefi:; but since the fojfefiion of that dear Man is Ml I ask of Heaven, I charge my Soul with A Crime, when I btct hear love from any othertherefore I conjure you, if you have any fa' tisfauion in my converjation, never 
to 
( 50.d 
to speak of Love more to me, for if yon do Lionoitr will oblige me to mttf^ Poors again ft feeing yoti : AH the freedoms of Pritndftjtp PH allow, give yon the Liberties of a Brother ^ admit yoti alone by Night, or any way but thit of Love; hut that's a reserve of my Sonl which is only for Philander, andtheeszly one that ever (hall he kept from Octavio. Sne ended Speaking, and rais’d him with a Smile; and he with a Sigh, told her, he mnf cornsnand; Then Ihe fell to telling him how fhc had Sent for Brilljard, and all the Dili course that past; with the rea fbn of her falling into a Swoon, in which She continued a Mo meat or two, and while (lie told it She blusli d with a Secret fear; that in that Trance fbme free domsmight be taken which She durst not confess, but while She F 4 Spoke 
() 
Spoke our fillmore paslionate Lover devour’d her with his Eyes, fix’d his very Soul upon her Charms of speaking and looking, and was a thousand times (urg’d by transporting pailion) ready to break allier Dictates, and vow Jiinifelf lier eternaislave; burr ho.. fearvi the refuic, and therefore kept himself within the bounds of feemiog Friendship ^ So that after a thou land things Oie Said of phl nwer, he rook his leave to go to Dinner, but as he was going out he Saw Brilljard enter; who, as I laid, had forgot he left obn •vio with her; but in a moment recollecting hirafelf, heblufh’d at the Apprehension, that they might make his disbrder the Subject of their Difeoursh; So what with that, and the Sight of the dear Object of his late disappointed Pleasures, he had much a do to 
assume 

C) 
assume an asturance to approach; but Octavio pass’d oiit and gave him a little release. stlvipscon fufion was almost ecjual to his, for She look’d on him as aravish er; but bow to find that Truth, which Ore was very curious to know, she call’d up all the Arts of Women to instruct her in; by Threats stie knew it was in vain, therefore file affum’d an Artifice, which indeed was almost a Stranger to her Heart, that of gilting him out of a Secret which She knew Iiie wanted gcnerosity to give litindsomly; and meeting him with a Smile, which she forc’d, she cry’d, How, now, brill jard, arc yon f fa int'hearted a Soldier, yon cannot Jee a Lady die TV it boat being terrified. Rather, Madam, (reply’d he blushing a new) fo foffhearted 1 cannot see the lovesnft Person in the Worjoi h 5 fainting 
( lo) 
farding in my Arms, • mthout being dtfordtpd with Grkf and Fear beyond the power of many days to refettk again. At which She ap proach'd him, who stood near the t)oor, and Shutting it, She took him by the hand, and Smiling, cry’d, And hadyo^ no otbsr bttfinrfs for your Fleart but Grief and Fear when a fair Lady throws her self into your Arms, it ought to have had some kinder rffeb on a P erf on of Brilljard Complexion 
And while (I'le Spoke this flic held him by the Wrist, and found on the Sudden his pulse to beat more high, and his Heart to heave his bosom with Sighs, which now he no longer took care to hide, but with a transported Joy he cry’d. Oh Madam, do not urrie me to a con flfon that mufl undo without making it criminal by my difeovery vd know I am your Slave — 
when 
( 507) 
when She with a pretty wonder ing Smile cry’d — mvhat,, a Lo v > and yet jo dall I 0 charming Silvia, says he (and falling on hi? knees) give iny profound lljpev a kinder Name : To which She am fwer'd -- -- tfti that know )ottr Sentiments 
may hejl injirttfi me hy what Name to calvem^ and yon Brilljard 
may do it without fettr^ yott fdw 
I did not firt^ogle in your 4^msy nor [irove I to defend the Kjjfes which you gave — Oh jaeavenri^ cry’d he, transported with what She Said, is id pojjihle that you coad know ofmy presumption and favour it toot I will no longer then curse those unlucky Stars that feiit Octavio jufk in the hie (fed Minute to snatch me fro?n my, heav^n^ the lovely .Victim lay ready for the Sacrifice, ^ Al prt'^ pared to offer *, my Hands my Eyes ?nv Lips were tired with Pleafire^ but yet they were not [atisf ed; oh 
'there 
( .c8) ^ 
there was Joys beyond th^fe raviftj ments of which one kind Minute more had. made me absolute Lord : Tes and the netxt^ Said She, had sent this to your — Snitching a Penknife that lay on her Toylets, where (lie had been writing, which She offesd fb near to his bo fbme, that he believ’d himself already pierc’d, So Senfibly killing were her Words, her Motion, and her Look; he started from her and She threw away the Knife, and walking a turn or two about the Chamber, while he stood immova ble, with his Eyes fix’d to the earth, and his Thoughts on nothing but a wildconfufion, which he vowed afterwards he could give no account of. But as she turn’d stie beheld him with Some compalti bn, and lemembring how he had it in his p^wer to expose her in ^..strstnge C^‘un: ry, ?nd own her “■ for 

( 109) 
for a Wife, She believ’d it necessary to hide her Resentments; and cried, Brilljard, for the Friendship your Lord has for you, I forgive you 3 hut have a care you never raise your Thoughts to a Preemption of that Nature more : Do not hope I will ever fail below Philanderh Love; 
go and repent your crime and ex 
peli all things elfe from my favour — At this he left her with a bow that had Some malice in it, and She return’d into her dressing Room. • — After Dinner o&avio writes her this Letter, Which his Page brought. 
V 
Octavio to Silvia 
Madam 
TIS true, that in Obedience to your Commands I begg’d your Pardon for the 
conc 
o)) 
! 
confefiion I made you of my palli on : But since you cou’d not but see the contradiction of my tongue in my Eyes, and hear it but too well confirm’d by my sighs, why will you confine me to the formalines of a Silent languiihment, unless to increase my flame with my pain. 
You conjure me to see you often, and at the Same time forbid me Speaking of my Passion, and this bold Intruder comes to tell you now, that ’ds impossible to obey the ftrfl:, wkhout difobli ing the lafl:; and Since the crime of adoring you exceeds my difb bedience in not waiting on you, be pleas’d at least to pardon that fault, which my profound respect to the lovely Silvia compels me to commit; for ’tis impossible to see you, and not give you an oc eafion of reproaching me : If I 
cou‘d 
I i 
() 
coum make a truce with my Eyes, andlike a mortified Capuchin, look always downwards, not daring to behold the glorious Temptations of your Beauty, yet you wound a thousand ways besides; your touches inflame me, and your voice has Music ink, that strikes upon my Soul with raviflring. tenderness; your Wit is unrefistable and piercing; your very (brrows and complaints have charms that m^keme Soft without the aid of Love: But Pity joyn’d with Past fion raises a flame too mighty for my conduct! And I in transports every way confess it: Yes, yes, upbraid me; call me tray tor and Ungrateful; tell me my friendqrip’s false: but Silvia yet be just, and Say my love was true, say only he had Seen the charming Silvia and who is he, that after that wou’d not excuse the rest 
in 
C 1*2) 
in one fo absolutely born to be undone by Love, as is 
iler dejtif^tislave^ Octavio. 
POSTSCRIPT. 
Madam, a?t^ong some Raretles 7 this Morning saw f I fotmd these Trifles Florio brings you, which be catife uncommon 1 presume to send yon. 
Silvia, notwithstanding the seeming Severity of her Commands, was well enough pleas’d to be disobey’d, and Women never pardon any fault more willingly than one of this nature, where the Crime gives fb infallible a demonstration of their power and Beauty; nor can any of their Sex be angry in their Hearts 
for 
foi 
hi 
m 
LI 


() 
for being thought desirable 5 and ’cwas not with pain, that She Saw him obstinate in his passion, as you may believe by her answering his Letters, nor ought any Lover to despair, when he receives denial under his Mistreffes own hand, which She Sent in this to o&aztio, 
Silvia to Octavio. 
on but ill judge of my Wit, or Humour, o&avio, when you Send me Such a presenr, and Such a Billet, if you believe I either receive the one, or the other as you designed : In Obedience to me you will no more tell me of your Love, and yet at the same time you are breaking your Word from one end of the Paper to the other. Out of respect to me you will see me no more, ancl yet are 
bribing 
C ^ ^4) 
bribing me with Presents;; ingyou have found out the Surest way to a Womans Heart. I must needs confess, Oftavw^ there is great eloquence in a pair of Brace lets of Five thousind Crowns : Tis an Argument to prove your Pastion, that has more prevailing reasbn ink, than either Seneca or Dully ccu'd have urg’d; nor can a Loiter write or Speak in any Language So Significant, and very well to be understood, as in that Silent one of presenting. The malicious World has a long time agreed to reproach poor Women with cruel, unkind, insenfib'e, and du I, when indeed ’cis those Men that are in fault, who want the right way of addressing, the true and Secret Arts of moving; that fbve reign Remedy against disdain. ’tis you alone, my Lord, like a young 
Columhm, that have 
found the direct 
( ” 5) 
iiiep 
ires 
ns I 

eirect, unpractis’d way tothatlit tls and fb much defir d World, the Favourof the Fair; nor cou’d Love himself have pointed his Arrows with anything more successful for his Conquest of Hearts: But mine, my Lord, like Shield, 
is already fb full of Arrows, Shot from Phtlrmders Eyes, it has no room for any other Darts: Take back your Presents then, my Lord, and when you make ’em next, be Lure you first confider the Receiver: For know, obavioy Maids of my o.uality, ought to find them selves Secure from addresfes of this Nature, unless they first invite; you ought to have Seen Advances in my Freedoms, consenting in my Eyes: or (that usual Vanity of my Sex) a thousand little trifling Arts of Affectation to furnish out a Conquest, a forward complaisance, to every 
Gaw 
() 
Gawdy Coxcomb, to fill my Train with amorous cringing Captives, this might have justified your pretensions; but oh the contrary my Eyes and Thoughts which never stray’d from the dear Man I love, were always bent to earth, when gaz’d upon by you, and when I did but fear you looked with lovejentertain’d you with phtun deps Praise, his wondrous Beauty, and his wondrous Love 1 and left nothing untold that might confirm you how much imposiible it was! e’er fhou’d love again, that I might leave you no room for hope; and since my Story has been So unfortunate to alarm the whole World with a Conduct So fatal; I made no Scruple of telling you with what Joy and Pride 1 was undone; if this encourage you, if obtivio have Sentiments lo meanly poor of me, to think because I yief 
dead 
W 
be 
ver 
M 

ani 
( 157) 
dedto Philmder, his hopes should be advanc’d? I banish him for e ver from my sight, and after that disdain the little Service he can render the 
Never to be alter I 
Silvia. 
This Letter She lent him back by his Page, but not the Bracelets, which were indeed very fine, and very considerable : at the same time She threatened him with banifh ment, She fb abfblutely expected to be difbbey'dinall things of that kind, that fire dressed herself that day to advantage, which since her arrival Ihe never had done in her own habits: What with her illnels and ploiuntierh absence, a careless negligence had seiz’d her, till rous’d and waken’d to the thoughts of Beauty by q&avws Love, Ike began 
(•>8). 
gan to try itstorce, and that day dressed. While She was fb imploy’d, the Page hastes with the Letter to his Lord, who chang’d Colour at the sight of it e’er he receiv’d it; not that he hop’d it brought love, ’twas enough stie would but answer, though she rail’d : Let htr (laid he in opening it vow (he hates me : Let her call me Traitor, an Dnjttfl y fo she take the pains to tell it 'this way; for he knew well those that argue will yield, and only She that lends him back his own Letters without reading ’em can give defpair.he read therefore without a sigh, nor complained he on her Rigours, and because it was too early yet to make his Visit, to (hew the impatience of his Love, as much as the reality and refblution of it, he bid his Page wait and Sent her back this 
aniwer. 
Octavio 
3y’d srto r aj iir; ove, 
aoi 
Said 
UJ, 
ms 
m 
eh 
ack 
ing 
Octavio to Silvia. 
) 
fair angry Silvia, How has my Love offended? Has its excels betray’d the least part of that respect due to your Birth and Beauty? Tho’i am young as the gay ruddy Morning, and vigorous as the gilded Sun at Noon, and Amorous as that God, V hen with fiich haste he chased young Daphne o’er the flow’ry Plain, it never made me guilty of a thought that Silvia might not pity and allow. Nor came that trifling pre tent to plead for anywisti, or mend my Eloquence, which you with Such Disdain upbraid me with, the Bracelets came not to be raff’d for your Love, nor Pimp to my Desires, Youth teorns those common Aids; No, let dull 
i:! 
Age ^rfiic those ways of Merchandise, who only buy up Hearts at that vain Price, and never make a Barter, but a Purchase. Youth has a better way of trading in Love's Markets, and you have taught me too well to judge of, and to value peauty, to dare to bid ib cheaply for it : I found the Toy was gay, the work was neat, and fancy new; and know not anything they wou’d So well a dorn as Sihtas lovely Hands: I lay, if after this, I should have been the mercenary Fool to have dunn’d you for Return, you might have us’d me thus; - — — Condemn me e’er you find me Sin in thought 1 that part of k 
was yet fb far behind stwas Scarce arriv’d in wish, You stiou’d have staid till it approach’d more near, before you damn’d it to e teroai Silence. To dove, to Sigh, 
to 
m, 
( ^21) 
— to weep, to pray, and to complain; why one may be allowed it in Devotion; but you, nicer than Heaven itself, make that a Crime, which all the Powers Divine have ne’er decreed one. I will not plead, nor ask you leave to love; Love is rny Right, my Business, and my Province; the Empire of the young, the vigorous, and the bold; and Twill claim my Share; the Air, the Groves, the Shades are mine to Sigh in, as well as your Philm^ derh, the echo’s answer me as • willingly, when I complain or name the cruel suvitt; Fountains receive my Tears, and the kind spring’s reflection agreeably flatters me to hope, and makes me vain enough to think it just and reasonable I should pursue the Dictates of my Soul — .Love on in spite of opposition,, I G will 
f L 
( 122) 
will not lose my Privilege, you may forbid me naming it to you, in that I can obey, because I can; but not to love 1 not to a door the Fair I and not to languish for/you, were as impossible as for you not to be lovely, not to be the most charming of your Sex. 
But I am So far from a pretending Fool, because you have been postefsd, that often that Thought comes cross my Soul, and checks niy advancing Love! and I would buy that Thought off with almost all my share of future bliss! Were I a God, the first great j 
Miracle Should be to form you a ' Maid again! For oh, what ever Reafbns flattering hove can bring to make it look like Just, the World! the worldtair silvmfiiiw will censure, and say -- vyou were to blame, but ’twas that fault a lone that made you mortal, we 
elfe 
Id 
( *2?) 
clse Should have adofd you as a Deity, and fb have lost a generous Race of young Succeeding herds that may be born of you! yet had phiunkr lov’d but half fo well as I, he would have kept your glorious Same entire; but Since alone for Silvid I love sil let her be false to Honour, 
via 
false to Love, Wanton and Proud, ill natusd, Vain, Fantastic ^ or what is worse let her pursue her Love, be constant and still dote 
upon Philander -- -- -- Ye still she’ll 
be the Silvk I adore, that Silvid born eternally to instave 
obavio, 
This he Sent by Ilorio his Page, at the same time that She expected the Visit of his Lord, and blush d \ with a little anger and coocern at the disappointment j however ihe G 2 hasted 
( '^4) 
bailed to read the Letter, and was pleas’d with the haughty resolution he made, in spite of her, to love on as his right by birth? and She was glad to find from these positive Refblves, that She might the more Safely disdain, or at least astume a Tyranny which might render her Virtue Glorious, and yet at the same time keep him her vslave on all occasions when She might have need of his Service, which in the Circumstances She was in, she did not know of what great life it might be to her, ste having no other design on him, bating the little Vanity of her Sex, which is an Ingredient So in termixt with the greatest Virtues of Womenkind, that those who endeavour to cure ’em of that disease,, them of a very considerable pleasure, and in most tis incurable; ive silvu then 
leave 
er. 
efe 
en 
( 125) 
leave to share it with her sek, Since lie was So much the more excufeable by how much a greater portion of Beauty she had than a ny other, and had sense enough to know it too; as indeed whatever other Knowledge they want, they have still enough to fer a price on Beauty, tho’ they do not always rate it; for had Silviit done that, file had been the happiest of her Sex; but as she was, she waited the coming of oitavio^ but not fb as to make her quit one thought for philmdeps Love and Vanity, though they both reign’d in her Soul; yet the first stir mounted the last, and she grew to impatient Ravings whenever file call: a Thought upon her Fear that philmlr grew cold; and postibly Pride and Vanity had as great a share in that concern of hers as Love it self, for She wou’d G 'i oft 
1 
( *26) 
oft Survey herself in her Gla^, and cry, Gods! Can this Beauty he d'^fpipd! this Shape! this Face! this Fotith! this Air! and what s more ohligitig yet, a Heart that adores thefugdtived.hat languijhes andfighs after the dear runaway. Is it possible he can find a Beauty added file, of greater Perfection — Bud oh"tis fan -- cy sets the rate on Beauty; and he may as well love a third time as he has a second. For in Love, those that once. break the Rules and Laws vfthat Deity fet no hounds to their Freafons., and difohedience. Tes, yes -- -- would file cry, he that covd leave Mertilla the fair, the young, the Noble, Chafl and Fond Mertilla, what after that may he not do to Silvia, on whom he has left Ties, iefs Obligations : Oh wretched Maid - — what has thy fondness done! hes satiated now with thee, as before with Mertilla, and carries all those( 

() 
dear, those charming Joys, to some new Beauty, whom his Looks have conquer d, and whom his [oft be witchi??g Vows will ruin. With that stie rav’d and stampd, and cry’d 
aloud, Hell -- Fires— — — 
'— Daggers — - Racks andpoyfon come all to my Re lief \ Revenge me on the perjttrd lovely devu — But III he brave — I will be brave and hate 
him -- -- Thisfhe Spoke in a Tone 
iefs fierce, and with great Pride, and had not paused and walked above a hasiy turn or two, but oflaviogis impatient as Love goud make him, entered the Chamber, fo dressed, fb Set out Sot Conquest, that I wonder at nothing more than that Silvia did not find him altogether Charming, and fit for her revenge who was form’d by Nature for Love, and had all that con’d render him the Dotage of Women »• But where a Heart is pre g. 4, poffestc 
() 
possessed, all that is Beautiful in any other Man Serves but as an ill comnarifbn to what it loves, and even phiuniers Hkenefs, that was not indeed Philander wanted the " Secret to charm. At o&avids entrance She was So fixed on her Revenge of Love, that She did not see him who prestuted himself as, fb proper an Instrument, till he first Sighing, Spoke, ah^siwn^lha/l I mver /ee that Betmty easy more? Shall I never see it reconcipd to content and a soft Calmness fixed upon those Eyes, which were formd for Looks all tender and ferenf; or are they refoled^ (continued he sighing) never to appear but in ftor?ns when I approach? Ter, re ply’d She, when there s a Calm of Love in yours that raijes it. Will yoti confine ?ny Eyes., laid he, that art by Nature soft?? not their fiknt Language tell you my iiearfs 


fd 
( irp) 
Story 'f But she reply’d with a Sigfi, It is mtgenerofjly done Octavio, thus to pursue a poor unguarded Mitd^ left to your' Carey your'pro mifes of Frkndfljif. mil yotb 
use Philander ndth such Treachery f Silvia, Said lie, my flames fo ptfi and reafonahky that I dare erven to him pronounce 1 love you; and after 
that dare love you on -- -- -- - — ' And 
would you (said she to satisfy a little fhort~liv*d Passion forfeit those Vows youve made offriendfjjip /i^pili™ lander? 1 hat Heart that loves youy Silvia (he reply’d) cannot he guilty of fo baje a thottght; Philander Is my Friestdy and as he is foi (hall know the dear eft Secrets of my Soul, I jhoii*d believe my Jelf indeed un -- grateful (continu’d liej where ter 1 lov d flood.d I not tell Philander; he told me frankly all his Soul, his Loves, his Griefs his Treafonsy and Efiapes.^ and in return Till pay him G K hack 
( 130) 
bdck with mine; tinii do you Imagine (Said She) that he would per mityour Love? How should he bin der me a^ply’d he) I do believe (Said she) hpd forfeit all his fafedy and his friend/hip, and fight ye : Ehen: Td defend my felfik'id he, if he were fo ungrateful While they thus argued, Silvia had her Thoughts a part, on the little Stratagems that Women in love Sometimes make use of; and Oclavio no Sooner told. her he would send philm der word of his Love; but she imagin’d that Such a Knowledge might retrieve the Heart of her Lover, if indeed it were on the wing, and revive the dying Embers in his Soul, as usually it does from liich occasions; and on the other fide She thought that she might more allowably receive obavws addreltes, when they were with thepermileon of Philanderhe 
could 
m. 

thai 
[lak 
(]; ( 
C) 
could love So well to permit it ^ and if he could not, She should have the Joy to undeceive her Fears of his Inconstancy, though She banish’d for ever the agreeable oiiavwso that on obtivipshxih^t urging thenecellity of his giving Philander that Sure Mark of his Friendship, She permitted him to. write, which he immediately did on her Table, where there stood a little Silver Scrutore which containd all things for his pui -- pose. 
Octavio So Philander. 
the! 
ig'? 
v'lo^ 
villi 
My Lordy 
Qlnce I have vow’d you my eternal Friendship: and ih t I absbiiitey believe my Sel honour’d with that of yours, I thiiik my Seif oblig’d by tlicse powers!! 
- 

(; ties to let you know my Heart, not only now as that Friend from whom I ought to conceal nothing but as a Rival too, whom in Honour I ought to treat as a Generous one; Perhaps you will be fb nnkiid as to say I cannot be a friend and a Rival at the same time, and that almighty love that fetsthe world at odds, chafesaii things from the heart where that reigns, to establish it self the more abfblutely there; but, my Lord, I avow mine a Love of that good Nature, that can endure the equal Sway of friendship where like two perfect Friends they Support each others Empire there; nor can the Glory of one eclipse that of the other, but both like the Notion we have of the Deity; though two distinct Passions, make but one in my Soul, and tho’ Friendship first enter d, stwas in vain I calsd it to my aid, at the 
first, 
() 
first Soft Invasion of silvips power; and you my charming friend, are the most oblig’d to, pity me, who already know So well the force of her Beauty. I would fain have you think, I strove at first with all my Reafbn against the irresistible lustre of her Eyes, And at the first astaults of Love, I gave him nor a welcom to my Bofbm, but like Slaves unus’d to Fetters, I grew Sullen with my ‘ Chains, and wore’em for your sake uneafiiy. f thought it base to look upon the Mistress of my Friend with wfifhing Eyes; but ibfrer Love soon furnifh’d me with Arguments to justify my Claim, Since Love is not the choice but t he face ofthesoul. who Seldom regards the object lov’d as’tis, but as it wishes to have it be, and then km ■ fancy makes it fbon the same. Love, that almighty creator of fbmething 
from 
C ^94) 
from nothing, forms a Wir, a Hero, or a Beauty, Vcrtae, good-humour, Honour, any ek cellence, when oftentimes there’s neither in the Object, but where the agreeing World has fix’d all these;; ’tis by all refolv’d, (whether they love or not J That this is (he, you ought no more phturtder to upbraid my Flame, than to wonder at it: It is enough I tell you that his Silvias to justify my Pafiion : nor is’c a Crime that I confess I love, since it can never rob Philmder of the least part of what ive vow’d him, or if his mere Honour will believe me guilty of a Fault: let this a tone for all, that if I wrong my Friend in loving Silvia, I right him in despairing; for oh, I am repuls’d with all the Rigour of the Coy, and Fair, with all the little Malice of the witty Sex, 
ancl. 
LI 
() 
and all the Love of Silvia to Phi 
unier^ -- -- There, there’s the stop 
to all my Hopes and Happiness, and yet by Heaven I love thee, oh thou favour’d Rival 1 
After this frank Confestion, my Philander i Should be glad to hear your Sentiment, finceyet in spite of Love, in spite of Beauty I am refblv d 
To die Philanderh contant Prkndy Octavio. 
After he had writ this, he gave 
it to Silvia : See ..charming Creature said he in delivering it) if after this you either doubt my Love or what I dare for Silvia. I neither receive it (Said She') as a proof of the one or the other; bttt rather that you believe by this frank Confejfiony to render it as a piece of Gallantry 
and 
C 
tind diver(to?ito Philander; for no Mtmof (enje will imagine that love., trm^ or drrivd to any height that makes a ptthlick Confefjion of it to his Rival. Ah, Silvia, anfwer’dhe, How mdtciotis is your Wity and how abive to turn its pointed mischief on me? had I not writ, you woitd. have said I durjl not 5 and when I make, e a Declaration of it, you call it only a slight piece of Gallantry : But., Silvia, you have wit enough toary it a thoafand ways, and power e hough to made ms obey; uje the ex' tremity of both, fo you recompense me at Ufl with a confffan that I was at leas found worthy to be mmihred in the Crowd of your Adorers, Silvia reply’d, H: en a dull Lover indeed, that 'woiid nrei Inf ruclions from the Wit of his Mifir 'fs to give her Proofs of As Pajjton, rr hat ever opnionyou have of my sere, I have too good a one of Otlaviuh to believe 
i t 



( >37) 
iievt that when hts a lov^r hell want Aids to make it appear j till then well let that Argument alone, and confider his address to Philander. She then read over the Letter he had writ, which She likd very well for her purpose; for at this time our young Dutch Hero was made a property of, in order to her Revenge on Philander : She told him, He had aid too much both for iiimfelfand her. He told her, He had declared nothinqi with his Pen. that he would not make fbood with ' his Sword. Hold r, fa id she, and do not ifnagine from the freedom you have taken m owning your passion to Philander, that 1 fall allow it here : what you declare to the World is your own Crime; but when I hear it., “tis no longer yours but mine; I therefore con]t4de you my i^ord, not to charge 'my Soul with Jo great a Sin against Philander, and Iconfefs to 
you 
( *3^) 
yof/' 1 (hall he infuntely trouhtd to he chltgdto hani(h you my fty^hf forever. He heard her, and ansver’d with a ligh; for She went from him to the Table, and seal’d her Letter, and gave it him to be inclos’d to Pbilmder, and left him to confi der on Iier last Words, which he did not 1 y to Heart, because he fanffd die Spoke this as Women do that will be won with industry : he in fiandiog up as She went from him, Saw himself in the great Glass, and bid his per fbn answer his Heart, which from every view he took, was reinforced with new Hope, for he was too good a judge of Beauty not to find it in every part of his own Amiable Perfbn, nor could he imagine from silvia!s Eyes, which were naturally Soft and languishing, and now the more So from her Fears and jealousies) that stie 
meant 

llo\ 
isti 
nki 
iw 
ilid 
Pa 
m 
Kv 
Hi: 
isd 
coi 
ici 
[](e! 
^OE 
II 
IS 
elf spi froi ore? s [0 olifl [0 
(ver 
H 
( >39). 
meant from her Heart the RL gours She express’d : Much he allow’d for his Short time of Court ship, much to her Sexes Modesty, much from her Qiiality, and very much from her Love, and imagin’d it must be only time and as fiduity, opportunity and obstinate Pastion, that was only capable of reducing her to break her Faith with phila/^der; he therefore endeavour’d by all the good dressed Sing, the advantage of lavishgaye ty, to render his Perfbn agreeable, and by all the Arts of Gallantry to charm her with his Conversation, and when he cou’d hand fbmly bring in Love, he fail’d not to touch upon it as far as it wou’d be permitted, and every day had the vanity to fancy he made Some Advances; for indeed every day more and more She founid She might have use for So considerable 
a 
a Person, fb that one may very well say, never any past their time better than Silvia and Ofiavio.^ though with different ends. All he had now to fear was from the answer PIA lmder\ Letter Should bting, for whom he had in spite of Love, fb entire a Friend (hip that he even doubted whether, (if pu under could urge Reasons potent enough) he Should not chuse to die and quit Silvia rather than be false to Friendship; one Post past, and another, and fb eight iucceflive ones, before they re ceiv’d one Word of answer to what they Sent; fo that Silvias who was the most impatient of her Sex, and the most in Love, was raving and acting all the extravagance of despair, and even 0 uttvio now became less pleasing, yet he fail’d not to visit her every day to Send her rich Presents 
and 

fi 
ler 
bis 


io 
b 
d 
d 
p( 

() 
and to say all that a fond Lover, or a faithful Friend might urge for her relief: At last obavio receiv’d this following Letter. 
Philander to Octavio. 
YOU have skew’d, obavio, a Freedom fb generous, and So beyond the usual Meafiires of a Rival, that’twere almost injustice in me not to permit you to love on; if Silvia can be false to me and all her Vows, (he is not worth preserving, if She prefer obavio to philaf^der, then he has greater merit and deserves her best : But if on the contrary She be just, if She be true and constant, I cannot fear his Love will injure me, So either way, oba vio has my leave to love the charming Silvia ^ alas I know her 
power 
( *4^) 
Power, and do mot wonder at thy Fate! for ’tis as natural for her to conquer, as ’tis for youth to yield, oh She has Fascination in her Eyes! a Spell upon hertongue, her wit’s a Philter, and her Air and Motion all Snares for heed lest Hearts *, her very Faults have Charms, her Pride, her peevish nest, and her disdain, have unrc' Sifted Power. Alas, you find it every Day -- -- -- and every Night 
She Sweeps the Toore along, and Shows the Beauty, stie inslaves the Men, and rivals all the WO' men! how oft with Pride and Anger I have Seen it; and was the inconfidering Coxcomb then to rave and rail at her, to curse her Charms, her fair inviting and perplexing Charms, and bully ed every Gazer : By Heaven I could not Spare a Smile, a Look, and She has Such a lavish Freedom 
fore 
lost 
in 
ni 
LII 
^3 
( m3). 
in her Humour, that if thou chance to love as I have done — ’twill fiirely make thee mad, if She but talk’d aloud, or put her little Affectation o, to Show the wondering Crowd what She could do; if She defign’d to Show the force of Beauty, Oh God! How lost in Rage 1 How mad with jea lousie, was my fond breaking Heart 1 my Eyes grew fierce, and Clamorous my Tongue and I have Scarce contain’d myself from hurting what I So much ador’d; but then the subtle Charmer had Such Arts to flatter me to Peace again — to clasp her lovely Arms about my Neck — to Sigh a thousand dear confirming Vows into my bosbm, and kiss, and Smile, and Swear — - and talk away my Rag * — and then — Oh my o&d wo, ro human Fancy can present the Joy of the dear reconciling 
moment 
.. C *44) 
moment, where littlequarrels rais’d the rapttire higher, and She was always new.thefe are the wondrous 
Pains, and wondrous Pleasures 
that Lovci by turns inspires, till it grows wise by time and repetition, and then the God astumes a feriousgravity, fnjoyment takes off the uneasy keenest of thepaflion, the little jealous Quarrels raise no more; Quarrels the very Feathers of love’s Darts, that send ’em with more fwiftnest to the heart; and when they cease, your transt ports lessen too, then we grow reafbnable, and confider; we love with prudence then, as Fencers fight with foyis 5 a Sullen brush perhaps Sometimes or So; but nothing that can touch the Heart, and when we are arriv’d to love at that dull, easie rate, we never die of that disease;; weve recoursc to all the little Arts, 
the 
tb 
sin 
ai 
an( 

(). 
the Aids of Flatterers, and dear dif fimulation (that helpmeet to the luke warm Lover) to keep up a good Character of Constancy and a right understandings 
Thus,, obavio, I have ran thro’ both the degrees of Love; which I have taken Ib often, that I am grown most learn’d and able in the Art: my easy heart is’ of the Constitution of thosh whom frequent sickness renders apt to take relapses from every little Cause, or wind, that blows too fiercely on ’em, it renders itself to the first Effects of nctv Surprijzing Beauty, and finds fiicb pleifure in beginning Pastlon, fiich dear delight of fancying new Enjoyment, that all past Loves, past Vows and Obligations, have power to bind no more; no Pity, no remorse, no threatening danger invades my amorous Course; 
H I 
() 
I Scour along the flow’ry Plains of Love, view all the charming Profpsct at a distance, which represents itself all Gay and Glorious / and long to lay me down, to stretch and bask in those dear Joys that Fancy makes So ravisti ing: Not am I one of those dull whining Slaves, whom quality or my respect can awe into a st lent Cringer, and no more; no, Love, Youth, and oft Succefshas taught me boldoefs and Art, Desire and Cunning to attack, to search the feeble stde of female Weakness, and there to play love’s engii\es; for Women will be won, they^vill, ofiavio^ii Love and Wit find any opportunitty. 
Perhaps, my ifriend, you re wun driog now, whar thisdifcour: e, this odd disc overy of foy^owii Inconstancy tends to f Then since 1 cannot bcitet pay you back the Secret 
you 
( h7) 
you have told me of your Love, than by another of my ov*u, take this Confession from thy 
Friend — — I love I -- -1 languish 1 
and am dyingh? — for a new Beauty. To you^o&avio, you that have liv’d twenty dull tedious years, and never understood the Mystery oflovejtill Sihia taught you to adore; thisi change may Seem a wonder, you that have lastly run more than half your youths gay course of Life away, without the pleasure of one nobler hour of mine; who like a miser hoard your sacred Store, or Scantily have dealt it but to one, think me a lavish Prodigal in Love, and gravely will reproach me with inconstancy — but use me like a Friend; : and hear my Story. 
It happened in my fast Da.; s Journey,, on the Road I overtook a Man of Quality, for fb his 
He qui 
.Dj 
II 
(, 48) 
quipage confeft’d, we join’d and fell into discourfe of many things indifferent; till from a Clrain of one thing to another, we chanc’d to talk of Frame, and of the Factions there, andlfbon Sound him a Crefarim *, for he grew hot with his Concern for that Prince, and fiercely owned his Int resi : This pleas’d me, and I grew familiar with him; and I pleas’d him So .well in my Devotion for cdfarioy that being arriv’d at Colkn^ he invites me home to his Palace, which he begg’d I would make use of as my own, during my stay at Collen. Glad of the opportunity, I obey’d, and fbon inform’d myself by a spanish Page (that waited on him) to whotn I was oblig’d; he told me it was the Count of Ckrinau^ a Spaniard born, and of Quality, who for Some disgust 
( h9) 
id 
at 
at Court retir’d hither; that frc was a Perfbn of much Gravity, a great Politician, and very Rich; and tho’ well in years was lately •married to a very beautiful young Lady, and that very much against her content, a Lady whom he had taken out of a Monastery, where She had been pentioned from^a Child, and of whom he was So fond and jealous, he never wou’d permit her to see or be teen by any Man, and if fly took the Air in her Coach, or went to Church, he oblig’d her to wear a Veil. Having learn’d thus much of the Boy, I disuifs’d him with a pretent; for he had already inspir’d me V kh Curiosity,, Prologue to Love, and I knew not of what use he might be hereafter; a Curiosity that I was re fblv’d to satisfy, though I broke all the Laws of hofpicauty, and even H I that 
t i 
( 550) 
that first Night I felt an impatience that gave me fbme wonder. In fine, three days I lan guisn’d out in a Disorder that was very near allied to that of Love. I found myself magnificently lodg’d; attended with a formal Ceremony : and indeed all things were as well as I coisd imagine, baling a kind Opportunity to get a sight of tins young Beauty : Now half a Lover grown, 1 sigh’d and grew oppressed with thought, and had recourie to Groves, to stiady Walks and Fountains, of which the delicate Gardens afforded variety, the most resembling Nature that ever Art produced, and of the most'melancholy re cesfcstancying there in Some lucky hour, I might incounter what I already lb much ador’d in Idea; which still I fornrd just as my Fancy vvijh’d, there, for the first 
two 
tv 
rv 

anc 
’5f) 
two days;! walk’d and sigh’d, and told my newborn Passfion to every gentle Wind that play’d among the Boughs; for yet no Lady bright appear’d beneath ’em, no Visionary Nymph the Groves afforded; but on the third day, all su’d of Love and Stratagem, in the cool of the Evening, I past into a Thicket near a little Rivulet, that purl’d and murmur’d thro’ the Glade, and past into the Meads; this pleas’d and fed my present a moroiis Humour, and down I laid myself on the Shady Brink, and listen’d to its melancholy glidings, when from behind me, I heard a sound more ravioiing, a Voice that Sung these Words: 

( 15?) 
in vain, you Powers aitove^ Tou gave me youth ^ you gave me Charms, 
Anti every tender sense of Love; todefhn^ me to old Phiicnoh Arms. Ah how cak Touths gay Spring allow The chiilingmfes ofthe^ rvintepssnow! 
All isught I tang ui(h by his fde, And fan fy of joys I never taste;; 
men in Dreams a Feafi provide And waking ft^d with grief they fafi. Either ye Gods my youthful fires allay y Or make the old Phileno young and gay. 
Like a fair flower in hades ohfcuritj, Though every fveet adorns my head, dngather'^d, unadmir d I if, 
And wither on my fi lent gloomy Bedy While no kind aids to my relief appear. And no kind Bosom makes me trk umph there. 
K 
By 
m 
- ^ C '51) 
By this you may easily guess, as isoon did, that the Song was fling by Madam thecountefs ofc as indeed it was; at the very beginning of her Song my joyful Soul divin’d it So! I rote and advanc’d by filch slow degrees asnei. there alarm’d the fair Singer, nor hinder’d me the pleasureof hearing any part of the Song, till I approach’d fb near as (behind the flielrer of fbme Jefiimin that divided us; I unseen, compleared thote Wounds at my Eyes, which I had receiv’d before at my Ears, Yes, 0-1 saw the sorely curhintt., leaning on a Pillow made of fbme of thote Jellimins, which favour’d me, and ferv’d her for a Canopy. Burr, oh my Friend.' how Shall I prcibnt’her toiheein that Angel form. She then appear’d to me? all young 1 all ravishing as 'newborn light to lost benighted Trail 5 • vdler^ 
( 
J 
velkrs; her Face, the fairest in the World, was adorn’d with Curls of Alining Jett ty’d up — I know not how, all carelessly with Scarlet Ribbon mixed vath Pearls; her Robe was gay and rich, Such as \oung Royal Brides put on when they uodresssor Joys; her Eyes were black, the Softest Heaven e’er made, her mouth was Sweet, and form’d for all delight, So red her Lips, So round, So grac’d with Dimples, that wsitliout one other Charm, that was enough to kindle warm desires about a frozen Heart; a fprighily Air of Wit compfeated all, encreas’d my Flame, and made, me mad with Love; end ids it were to tell thee, all her eeauriess^ Nature all o’er, wasia ind profufe, let it Sadice her ers.p.p.dfl her Mien, had 
^ilb 
'f‘ eiq, i. 
more oi 
iiapc 
mgd, in ’em than, hu ‘manitv 
: LII 
vit: 
P' 
vtii 
fid 
He 
rm, 
( «'55) 
manity! I Saw her thus all Charming! thus she lay! a Smiling Melancholy dress’d her Eyes, which she had fix’d upon the Rivulet, near which 1 foundjrer lying : just Such I fanfy’d fam’d ltf cretia was, when Tarcftnn first beheld her; nor was that Royal Ra -- vislier more inflam’d than I! or readier for the Encounter. Alone the i\>as which heighten’d my desires!! Gods! alone lay the young lovely Charmer, with wifistng Eyes, and all prepar’d for Love! the Shade was Gloomy, and the telstale Leaves combin’d fo elefe, they must have given us warning if any had approach’d fromeither fide! all favour’d my design, and I advanc’d; but with Sucii caution as not to ialisire her with a fear, instead of that of uneasy pace, with' Love in my, Eyes, and 
j 
■i 
Si 
., ( *5^) 
and burning in my heart — At my approach She scarce contain’d her cries, and rose fiirprizd and blush ing, discovering to me Such a pro 
portion*’d height -- -- fb lovely and 
majestic -- that I stood gazing on her, ah lost in wonderland gave her time to dart her Eyes at me, and e very look pierc’d deeper to my Soul, and I bad no fense but Love, st lent admiring Love! immoveable I stood, and bad no other motion but that of a Heart all panting, which lent a feeble trembling to my Tongue, and even when I wois'd have Spoke to her, it Sent a Sigh up, to prevent my boldoefs: and, O 0 bavioj though I have been bred in all the Saucy daring ofa forward Lever, yet now rwanted a convenient impudence, aw’d with a haughty fweemess in her Look, like a fave brave aster a vigorous onset, finding the danger file So thick around him 
sheers 
fni 

jw 
wan 

i 
LII 
Itl 

( 157) 
streets off and dares not face the presting Foe, struck with too fierce a lightning from her Eyes, whence the Gods lent a thousand winged Darts, I veil’d my own, and durst not play with Fire : While thus She hotly did pursue her Conquest, and I stood fix’d on the defenstve part, I heard a ruffling amongst the thick grown Leaves, and thro’ their Mystic windings Soon perceiv’d the good old Count of c/armauy approach ing, muttering and mumbling to old darmi^ta^ the Dragon appointed to guard this lovely Treasure, and which, (Ire having left alone in the Thicket, and had retir’d but at an awful distance had most extremely disoblig’d her Lord. I only had time enough in this little moment, to'look with Eyes that ask’d a' thousand Pities, and told her in their Silent Language 
how 
how loath they were to leave the Charming Object, and with a sigh I vanisht from the wondering fair One, nimble as Lightning, fiient as a Shade: To my firll: Post behind the Jefirnines, that was the utmost that I cou’d persuade my Heart to do; you may believe, my dear o&avioj I did not bless the Minute that brought old darifuti to that dear recess, nor him, nor my owmfate, and to com pleat my Torment I Saw him (aster having gravely re proaclsd her for being alone without her Woman) yes, I Saw him fall on her Neck, her lovely Snowy Neck, and Istiand kiss, and hang his tawny witherd Arms on her fair Shoulders, and prtts his nau feious, load upon cdiid Body, (Tor So I heard him name her) while ihe was gazing still upon the empty place, whence Oie Sad 
hm 

m 
yc. 
( 159) 
Seen me vanish, which he perceiving, 
cry’d -- -- My little Fool., what 
ipt thohgaz^efl on ttirn to thy none 
old Man ana buss him founds- -- -- -- 
putting him by with a dist I dain that half made amends for the injury he had done me by coming. my iard, cry’d She, c fen nowj jt/fi there I saw a lovely vfon, 1 ntef hehejd fo ef.cel lent a thing i Hoiiy cry’d he, a viji 
on, a thing -- -- -- what Vtftonl what 
thing? where? how? and when — Why thua, Said ^q..^widh?ny Eyes, and just now, it vdni(l/d behind yon jefji mines. Wkh that 1 drew my Sword — for I despair’d to get off unknown, and being well enough acquainted with the jealous nature of thtspanialds.^ which is no more than See and Slab, 1 prepar’d to Stand on my deseltv^e, till i coast reconcile him, if possible, to rea ibn; yet even in that moment I 
woa s 

( 
o 
was more afraid of the injury he might do ths innocent fair One, than of what he cou d do to me, but he not So much as dreaming (he meant a Man by her lovely Vh fion, fell a killing her a new, and beck’ning Dor mm a off to pimp at distance, told her, The qrovewas too f veetf the riveps Murmurs too delicate, and [he was fo curioujty dress that hltogether had iapir d him with a Love Fit \ and then as faultihg her a new with a Sneer which you have Seen a Satyr make in Pictures, he fell to act the little Tricks of Youth, that looked fb goafit in him — -- -- -- -- -- -- iii' 
stead of kindling kwould have damp’d a st tme, which (be resisted with a Scorn So charaftng gave me northeast V hope and fire, when to oblige me mors^vith Pride, t)is daiii, and lor. 1 ing in her Eyes, She stead like Diphuf siwoi the Ravish 
^ : 
r) 
'VI 
I an ip j 
rti 
f 
[]ti‘ 
flc; : 
lai; 
(!: 
; cv; 
; 
avj 
oh 
er, L e being bent on Love, pursu’d her with a feeble pace, like an old Wood god chasing fbme coy Nymph, who wing’d with fear out firips the flying Wind, and though a God he cannot overtake her; and left me fainting with new Love, new Hope, new jea loufie. Impatience, Sighs, and wsifhes in the abandon’d Grove. Nor cou’d I go without another view of that dear place in which I Saw her lie, I went — and laid me down just on the print which her fair Body made, and pressed, and kiss’d it o’er a thousand times, with eager Transports, and even fanfy’’d fair Califia there; there ’twas I found the Paper with the Song which I have tent you; there I ran o’er a thousand Stratagems to gain another View; no little Skates men had more Plots and Arts than I to gain this Object I 
ador’d. 
b; 
If 
fa 
A S' 
( i62) 
ador’d the Soft Idea of my burning Heart, now raging wild, a bandon’d all to Love and loose desire, but hitherto ray Industry is vain; each day 1 haunt the thickest Groves and Springs, the stowry Walks, close Arbours, all the day ray busy Eyes and Heart are fearchiog her, but no intelligence they bring me in : In sine, o&avio^ all that I can Once learn is, That the bright caifid had Seen a Vision in the Garden, and ever since was So pofiest with melancholy, that She had not since quitted her Chamber, She is daily presilng the Count to permit her to go into the Garden, to tee it She can again encounter the lovely but whether from any 
Description She hath made of it, (or from any other cause) he imagines how it was, f know not; but he endeavours all he can to 
hinder 
lal 
10: 

CIII 
I 
( *0?) 
hinder her, and tells her kisnot lawful to tempt Heaven by invoking an Apparition; So that till a Second view eases the Torments of my mind, there is nothing in nature to be conceiv’d So raving rrsad as I; as if my .despairs of finding her again increas’d my impatient flame instead of lesten ing it. 
After this Declaration Judge, ocjavio, who has given the greatest Proofs of his Friendship, you or I; you being my Rival, trust me with the Secret of loving my mistress, which can no way redound to your disadvantage, but I by telling you the Secrets of my Soul, put it into your power to ruin me with silvuy and to establish yourself in her Heart: a Thought I yet am not willing to bear, Sori have an ambition in my Love, that wou’d 
not 
() 
not while I am toy ling for Empire here, lost my Dominion in another place: but since I can no more rule a woman’s Heart, than a Lovers Sate, both you and stlvta may deceive my Opinion in that, but Shall never have power to make me believe you less my Friend, than lam t 
Your pulmdtr. 
POSTSCRIPT. 
The enclosed I need not oblige you to deliver; yott see I give you oppor^ tttnity. 
Octavio no (boner arriv’d to that part of the Letter which nam’d the Count of cur inati, but he stopp’d and was scarce able to proceed, - for the charming Cali [to, was his Sister, the only one he had, 
who 
b.c. 
!jul 
nai 
rt( 
jhii 
enj 
he 
kn 
m 
di 
H 
F; 
a 
C 
n 
1 
: mpi 
3® 
lal 
nm 
t, 
10 
r' 
'() 
who having been bred in a Nunnery, was taken thence to be married to this old rich Count, wsho had a great Fortune: Before h he proceeded, his Soul divin’d this was the new Amour that had engag’d the Heart of his Friend 5 he was afraid to be farther convinc’d, and yet a Curiosity, to know how far he had proceeded made him read it out with ail the disorder of a Man jealous of his Honour, and nicely careful of his Fame j he consider’d her young, about eighteen, married to an old ill favour d jealous Husband, no Parents but himstif to right her Wrongs, or revenge her Levity; he knew tho’ ste wanted no Wit she did Art, for being bred without the Conversation of Men, She had not learned the little Cum nings of her Sex; he guest’d by his own Soul that hers was fbft and 
apt 
( 16(5) 
apt for iitvprisllion, he judg’d from her conseflion to her Husband of the Vilion, that She had a Simple Innocence, that might betray a young Beauty under Such Circumstances; to all this he const defd the Charms of Philmder unresistable, his unwearied industry in Love, and concludes hfs* Sister lost. At first he' upbraids Philander., and calls him ungrateful, but Soon thought it unreasonable to acciife himself of an Injustice, and excus’d the frailty of Philander Tince he knew not that she whom he ador’d was Sister ti his Friend'j however it fail’d not to postefs him with inquietude that exercised all his W ro con. /idef fie' iitighteprevdnti an irirepstfabfe injtlvy to kisl Honour, krrd .ah inlhgiie that poilibly might cost Iriis Sister her Life as vfeil 'as Fftxhe n s ln midst 
( ^^7) 
of all these Torments he forgot not the more important bufiness of his Love. For to a Lover, who has his Soul perfectly fix’d on the fair Object of its Adoration, what ever other Thought, Fatigue, and Cloud, his Mind, that like a lost Gleam of new Sprung Light, darts in and Spreads a Glory all a round, isejl and like the God of day cheats e very drooping Vital, yet even these dearer Thoughts wanted not their Torments. At first he strove ifvj to atone for the Fears of 
with thole of imagining Philander falseto Silvia; ite, cry’d he, — If thotiheejl lofij Calista, at kafi A thy ruin has laid a Foundation for my Happmefs, and every Lrmmph Philander makes of tloy ‘verthe.^ it the more ficttres my Empire djversw^ via, and fnce thy Prother cantnot he happy hut by the sijleps being undone yield thou, 0 faathkfs fair 
one( 
() 
me, yvili to Philander, and make me hleft in Silvia! And thott (continu’d he) Oh perjurd Lover and ineonfiant Friend, glut thy insatiate flame — rifle Calista of every ver tue Heaven and Nature gave her, fo Imay but revenge it on thy Silvia! pleas’d with this jcjyful hope, he traverses his Chamber, glowing and blushing with new kindling lire, his Heart that was all gay, defus’d a gladness, that exprels’d it self in every Feature of his lovely Face his Eyes that were by nature languifhingdhone now with an un usual Air of Brisknefs, Smiles grac’d his mouth, and dimples dressed his Face, insenlibly his busie Fingers trick and dress, and fet his Hair, and without designing it, his Feet are bearing him to Silvia tilshe stepp’d Short and wonder’d whither he was going, for yet it 
was not time to make his Visit- -- 


r>ft; 
Ip 
flj' 
tff 
( 1^9) 
wmth&r foni heart j (laid he) 0 whither wot^dfi thou hurry this Slave to thy soft fires I And now returning back he paws*d and fell to thought — He remembered how impatiently Silvia waited the return of the answer he writ to him, wherein he own’d his Passion for that Beauty. He knew She permitted him to write it, more to raise the little brisk Fires of jea lolifie in Philander and tosctan edge on his blunted Love, than from any Favours She defign’d Octavio : And that on this answer depended all her Happiness, or the confirmation of her Doubts, and that (he wou’d measure Philanders, Love by the effects She found there of it : So that never Lover had Ib hard a Game to play as our new one. He knew he had it now in his power to ruin his Rival, and to make almost his own Terms I with 
() 
with his fair Ccoquerefs, but he consider’d the Secret was not render’d him for So base an end, nor cou’d his Love advance itself by ways fb false, dull, and criminal, — between each thought he paws’d, and now resolves (he must know he Sent an answer to his Letter; for fhou’d she know he had, and that he fhou’d refuse her the sight of it he believ’d with reason she ought to banish him for ever her presence, as the most clisbbedient of her Slaves. He walks and pawses on -- but no kind thought presents itself to stive him; either way he finds himself undone, and fromtlie most gajvand moil triumphing Lover on the Earchhe now, with one serious thought of right reafbning, finds he is the most miserableof all the Creation 1 He reads the Superscription of that phiunlr writ to sil which was inclos’d in his, and 
finds 
reo 
f bf 
frivii 
Itmi 

ioiii 
inds 
nds 
(171) 
finds it was directed only — .For Silvia, which uould plainly demonstrate ic came not fb into Hollmd, but that fbme other cover secur’d k; fb that never any but obavio the most nice in Honour, had ever fb great a Contest with Love and Fstiend Qiip: For his Noble temper was not one of those that cou’dsacrifice his Friend to his little Lusts, or his more (olid pasti on, but truly brave, refblves now rather to die than to confess phi undeas Secret; to evade which he Sent her Letter by his Page, with one from himself, and commanded himto tell her that he was going to receive fbme commands from the Prince of Orange, and that he wou’d wait on her himself in the Evening, The Page obeys, and obavio^zm. him with a Sigh and Eyes, that languishingly told him he did it with regret. 
I 2 The 
( »72) 
The Page hasting to Silvia finds her in all the disquiet of an expecting Lover; and Snatching the Papers from his hand, the first She Saw was that from phiunitr^ at which stie trembl’d with Fear and Joy, for Hope, Love and Despair at once seiz’d her, and hardly able to make a sign vv^ith her hand for the Boy to withdraw. She sunk down into her Chair, all pale, and almost fainting; butre astuming her Courage, She open’d it, and read this. 
Philander to Silvia. 
AH Silvh L Why all these Doubts and Fears? Why at this distance do you accuse your Lover, when he’s incapable to fall before you, and undeceive 
r, ti 
pet 
jiri 
() 
ceive your little Jealousies. Oh, Silvia, I fear this first reproaching me, is rather the Effects of your own guilt, than any that love can make you think of mine. yesf yes, my ’tis the Waves that roll, and glide away, and not the steady Shore. ’tis you begin to unfasten from the Vows that hold you, and float along the flattering Tide of Vanity. Tis you, whose Pride and Beauty scorning to be confin’d, give way to the admiring Crowd, that sigh for you. Yes, yes, you, like the rest of your fair glorious Sex, love the Admirer though you hate the Coxcomb. ’tis vain 1 tis great! and Shows your Beauties Power — is’t possible, that for the Safety of my Life, I cannot retire but you must think i’m steel from Love and Silvia 1 or is itpollible that pitying Tenderness I 5 that 
( w4) 
that made me uncapable of taking leave of her stiou’d be interpreted 
as falf^^p — and bate, -- -- -- and 
that an abfenee of thirty days, So sore d, and fb compell’d must render me inconstanc — lost — ungrateful — ^ as if that after .dafij hta ven e’er made a Beauty that coum charm me? 
You charge my Letter with a thoiifand faults, his Short, ’tis cold, and wants thote usual sofmestes that gave them all their We loom, and their Graces. I fear my silvia loves the Flatterer, and not the Man, the Lover only, not Pin under: And she confiders him not forhimfelf, but the gay glorious thing he makes of her! Ah! too tels int’rested! Is that your Justice? You ne’er allow for my unhappy Circamffaoces, you never think how Care opprestes me, nor what my Love contributes 
to 
iliip 
!ra!: | 
Hi 
?h 
I 
( c5) 
to that care. How Bufinest, Danger, and a thousand Ills, take up my iiarafs’d mind: By every power I love thee stiil, my Silvias but rhyme has made us more familiar now, and we begin to leave off Ceremony, and come to closer joys, to join our fncrest now, as people fix’d, refblv’d to live anti die together; to weave our Thoughts, and be united stronger. At first we stiew the gayest fide of Love, dress and be nice in every Word and Look, fet out for Conquest all; Spread every Art, Life every Stratagem — — ■' but when the Toyl is past, and the dear Victory gaiffd, we then propose a little idle rest, a little eafiefiumber: We then embrace, lay by the gawdy Show, the Plumes and gilded Equipage of Love, the Trappings of the Conqueror, and bring the naked Lo i A.. ver 
() 
ver to your Arms; we Show him then uncas’d with all his lirde disadvantages; perhaps the flowing Hair, (those Ebony Curls you have Ib often comb’d, and drefs’d, and kifs’d) are then put up and show a fiercer Air, more like an Antique Roman than phiunkr.^ and Shall I then, because I want a Grace, bethought to love you less; because the embroider’d Coat, the Point and garniture’s laid by, must 'I put off my Passion with my Dreis? No, Silvia Love allows a thousand little Freedoms, allows me to unbofbm all my Secrets; tell thee my Wants, my fears, complaints and dangers, and think it great relief if thou but sigh and pity me: And oft thy charming Wit has aided me, but now I find thee adding to my pain. O where (hall I unload my weight of cares, when Silvia who was, wont 
to 
4 
02 

hi 
■ep 

f kit le 
3wic: 
stat 
( d7) 
to Sigh and weep, and fufier me to ease the heavy burden, now grows difpleas’d and peevish with my Moans, and calls them the Effects of dying Love! instead of those dear Smiles, that fond bewitching Prattle, that us’d to calm my roughest storm of Grief, She now reproaches me with coidnefs, want of Concern, and Lovers rhetorick: : vv^hen I Seem to beg relief, and show my soul’s resentment, ’tis then i’m false;; my Aversion, or the Effects of Some new kindling Flame : Is this fair dealing, Silvia can I not Spare a little Sigh from Love, but you must think I rob you of your due? If I omit a tender Name by which; h I us’d to call you, must 1 be thought to lose that Pastion that taught me liich endearments? And must I ne’er reflect upon the ruin both of my Fame and For i 5 tune, 
tune, but I must run the risk of lofidg Silvia too? O cruelty of Love 1 Oh too too fond and jealous Maid, what Crimes thy innocent Passion can create, when it extends beyond the Bounds of reason 1 Ah too too nicely tender ND, that will not give me leave to cast a thought back on my former Glory; yet even that loss I cou’d Support with tameness and content, if I believ’d my fufife ring reach’d only to my Heart; but Silvia., if she love, must feel my Torments too, must Share my lost, and want a thousand Ornaments, my finking Fortune cannot purchase her : Believe me, Charming Creature, if I fhou’d love you lest, I have a sense fb just of what you’ve fiiffered for philmder,, i’d be content to be a galley stave, to give thy Beauty, Birth and Love their due;, but as 
las 
ji 
n' 
111 ll 
h' 
d 
(Irai 
and 
fl 
hi 
aad 
iv 
UK 
tti 
Ir 
L 
b 
in 
to 
sk 
whee ids I 
y 
log 
U 
Oriii' 
() 
I am thy Faithful Lover Sfill, depend upon that Fortune Heaven has left me ^ which if thou canst (as thoa hast often Sworn) then thouwou’dst Submit to be cheerful stilli be gay and confident, and do not judge my Heart by little Words, my Heart — too grpac and fond for Such poor Demonstrations. 
You ask me, Silvia where I am, and what I do; and all I can lay is, that at present I am Safe from any fears of being deliver’d up to Frartce and what 1 do is sighing, dying, grieving; I want my Silvia; but my Circumstances, yet have nothing to encourage that hope; when Irefblve where to Settle, you Shall see what haste I will make to have you brought to me: I am impatient to hear from you, and to know how that dear Pledge of our fbft hours advances. I mean 
what 
( io) 
what I believe I left thee poslefsm of, a young Philander: Cherish it, Silvia for that’s a certain Obligation to keep a dying Fire alive, be Sure you do it no hurt by your unnecestary grief, tho’there needs no other tic but that of Love to make me more entirely 
Tour Philander. 
If Sihlds Fears were great before fly open’d the Letter, what were her pains when all those Fears were confirmed from that never-failing mark of a declining Love, thecoldnefs and alteration of the Style of Letters, that first Symptom of a dying Flame / Qh where., said She, where., Oh perjupd Charmer, is all that Ardency that usd to warm the Reader? Where is all that natural Innocence of Love that could not, even to difco 
Obli. 
ilive, 
youi 
leedi 
^’e 
ltx‘ 
ivk 
: hol 
tliii 
nik 
an 
kn 
i 
ft!h 
A 
ver and express a Grace in eh qtiemty force one [oft Word, or one Passion, 0^, continu’d stie, he is lofi andgone from Silvia and his Vows; same other has him ■ all cufps that dear bodyj hangs upon that face^ga' jzes upon his Eyes, and listens to his Voicej when he is lookings igh ing, fivearing, dying, lying and damning of himself for some new Beauty - — -• • He is PH not endure it aid me Antonett I Oh where's the perjttrd Traitor! Antonett, who was waiting on her, feeing her rise on the Sudden in fo great a Fury woum have staid her hasty Turns and Ravings, beseeching her to tell her what was the occasion, and by a discovery to cafe her Heart, but (he with all the Fury imaginable, flung from her Arms, and ran to the Table, and Snatching up a penknife, had certainly Sent it to her Heart, had 
not 
not a}2tomtt stepp’d to her and caught her Hand, which stere' fisted not, but blushing refign’d, with telling her She was asham d of her own Cowardize, For, Said flw, if 1 had dtftgbpd to have been bravey I had sent yoti ojf, and by a iaoble eifouition have freed this Slave within (striking her Breast) from a Tyranny which it fhotid disdain to Jdffer under : With that She rag’d about the Chamber with broken Words and imperfect Threatenings, unconsider’d Imprecations, and unheeded Vows and Oaths: at v^kioixantonett redoubl’d her Petition to know the cause; and stie reply’d — Philander! the dear, the soft,, fond a ad charming Philander is now m more the fams<. 0, An rone tt, Said Ihe, didf thou hut see this Letter compapd to those of heretofore, when Love was gay Jind young, when new defre drefs*d 
his 
lill 
nm 
( Cj) 
Jbft Eyes in tears and taught his Eongtte the liarmony of Angels • when every tender v/ord had more of Paffton than Volumes of this fore*d.^thls trifling buflnefs. 0, thou wottdfl say I were the vjretchedfi 
thing that Nature ever made -- -- - 
Oh thou woud.fl cnrfe as I do -- -- 
Not the dear Murderer, but thy Erantich, ft If thy mad deceiv'd.^ believing eafle self; if thou rvert fo undone — — Then while She wept stie gave Antonett liberty to speak, vdiich was to persuade her, her fears were vain; She urg’d every argument of Love She had been Witoefs to, and coia’d not think it possible he cou’d be false: To all which the still weeping Silvia lent a willing Ear : For Lovers are much enclin’d to believe everything they wist). Antonett having a little calm’d her, continu’d telling her, that to be better 
convinc’d 

( ^84) 
convinc’d of his Love or his Perfidy, (be ought to have Patience fbou’d come to visit her, Foryott have forgotten Madam laid She, that that generous Rival has sent him Word he is your lo ver\ For Antonett wis waiting at the reading of that Letter, nor was there anything the open hearted Silvia conceal’d from that Servant; and Women, who have made a Breach in their Honour, are Seldom fb careful of their rest of Fame, as those who have a Stock entire; and Silvia believ’d after She had trusted the Secret of one Amour to her discretion. She might conceal none. See Madamj Says Antonett^ here is a Letter yet unread : Silvia, who had been a great while impatient for the return of Oflavws Answer from Philander expecting from thence the confirmation of all 
■ her 
Mi 
u 
( ‘85) 
her doubts, hastily snatch’d the Letter out of .Antoueth hand, and read it, hoping to have found Something there to have eased her Soul one way or other; a Soul the most raging and haughty by Nature, that ever postest a Body: the words were these. 
Octavio to Silvia. 
At least you'll pity me, Oh charming when you 
fhallcall to mind the cruel Services I am oblig’d to render you, to be the Messenger of Love from him whom Beauty and that God plead fb strongly for' already in your Heart. 
If after this, you can propose a Torture that yet rnay Speak my Pastion and Obedience in any higher meafiire, command and 
try 
( i86) 
try my Fortitude, fori too well divine, O rigorous Beauty, the business of your love lick Slave will be, only to give you Proofs ho w much he does adore you, and ne’er to taste a Joy, even in a distant Hope, like Lamps in Urns my lasting Fire must burn, without one kind material to Supply it. Ah Silvia, if e’er it be your wretched Fate to see the Lord of all your Vows given to another’s Arras — -- When you shall See in those Soft Eyes that you adore a Languishment and Joy, if you but name another Beauty to him : -- -- When you behold his 
Blushes fade and rise at the approaches of another Mistress. 
Hear broken Sighs and unasstur’d replies, when e’er he answers ibme newconqueress: tremblings, and Pancings Seizing every part at the warm touch as of a Second Char 
iet 

kit 
lot 
he 
lai 
i'll( 
tiei 
III 
u 
& 
N 
mer 
30 d 
veil 
e 3? 
( ‘87) 
mer. Ah, Sihia.^ do but do me justice then, and Sighing Say — I pity poor oifavto. 
Take here a Letter from the blessed phiundtr, which I had brought myself, but cannot bear the torment of that Joy that I stall see advancing in your Eyes when yon Shall read it o er — no — kis too much that I imagine all! yet blessed that patient Sond> nds G iny Pallion that makes me still 
Tour Slavey artd Tour Adorer 
Octavio. 
At finishing this, the jealous fair One redoubrei her Tears with Such violence, that stwas in vain her Wteman strove to abate the flowing Tide by all the reafb 
nable. 
able Arguments She could bring to her Aid, and silvu to encrease 
it, read again the latter part of 
the ominous Letter; which She wet with the Tears that stream’d from her bright Eyes. Ter, yer, (cry’d She laying the Letter downj I know, Octavio, this is no prophz fie of yottrs, hut st known Truth : aus you know too well the fatal timers already come when I (hall find these changes in Philander I ajs Madam, reply’d Antonett, How curious are you to search out torments for your own heart<i dnd as much a Lover as you are how little do you underjland the Arts and Politics of Love I Alas, Madam, continu’d she, you your self have arm^d my Lord Octavio with those Weapons that wound you : The lafi time he writ to my Lord Philander, he found you pofff^fs'^d with a thou find Fears and jtaloufies : of 
these 
w 
w; 

epi 
I'yf 
la 
sti 

to 
C 
I 
) 
these he took, advantatre to attack his Rival \ for what Man is there fo dull that woiid not assault his e nemy in that part where the mo (I eonfiderahle mijchief may he done ham; VD now octaviov ]ntere(l^ and his Bttjinejs to render Philanderall theijmbrage that ispojjibleoffo powerful a Rivals and to say anything that may render him hateful to yot4^ or at leaf to make him love you less. Away reply’d Silvia (with an uneasy Smile) how fooltjh are thy reasonings, for were it possible I coitd love Philander less is it to he P magin'd^ that (houd make way for Octavio in my Iieart^ or any af ter that dear Deceiver? No doubt of it ^ reply’d Antonett, hut that very effeb it would have on your Heart \ for Love in thejsoul of a witty Person is like a Scain of Silk; to unwind it from the Bottom, 
you 
(. ^9° 
yott mtifi wini it on another or it 
runs into Confufton and becomes of no ufcy and then of cotirfe, as one lejfensdhe other increases and what Philanderin Love Octavio, hr some one indaflrious Lover will mofl: certainly gain \ Ohj reply’d Silvia Tou are a great Philosopher Love. I (hotdd be Madam ^ 
in 
DU 
►0 
ill 


cry’d Antonett, had I but had a good Memory y for I had a young church man once in love with me who has read many a philofofhi cal levture to me upon Love j ‘ mong the ref he us to say the Soul was all crnnpos^,. cf Love, I us’d to ask him then if it were form’d of fo fest Materialshow it came to pajsthat we were no oftener j in love., or why fo ?nany were Jo long \ before they lov’d., and others who j never lov d at all ^ No quefiion but he anfvedd, yu wisely, fid shvia carelestiy and sighing, with her 
thoughts 
pe 
m 
% 
H 
m 
fit 
rt 
n 
Wj 
I 




( )_ 
thoughts but half attentive. Marry, anti folie MI, cry’d An tone tt, at lea ft I thought jo then, because I loved a little. He laid, Love of it self was tmabive, but ’twas inforn?d by Object 5 and. then too that Objelt mttfi depend on fancy; (for Souls, thd all Love, arc not to love all:) Now Fancy, he laid, waa sometimes nice, humorous, and fan, tajtick, which is the reajon we f often lovethoje of no merit, anddefpife those th.it are most excellent; and jometimes Fancy guides us to like neither; he us d to say Women avere like Misers, though they had always Love in sore, they seldom capd to part with it, but on very good in preft and security. Cent percent, mofl commonly Heart for ileart at left; and for fecunty he said we were ?noft times too unconfcidnahle, we aspd Vows at leas, at worst Matrimony — fkdfl angry, Silvia 
cry’d, 
^ I ^2) 
cry’d -- -- m.d. whais all this to my 
loving again? Oh Madam, reply’d Antonett^ He kid a Woman tv as like a Gamefler^ if on the winning hand., hope ini reft, and vanity made him play on hejfdes the pleasure of the Play it self; if on the losing, then he continued throwing at all to save a Stake at last if not to recover all y fo either way they find cccafion to continue the Game But oh Said Silvia sighing, What (hall that Gamester fetj who has already played for all (he lad.f and lojl it at a C aft? Oh Madam, replied Antonett, The Toung and Fair find Credit everywhere, there s (till a profpeb of a return, ^ and that Gamester that plays thus upon the tick is fare to lose hut little; and if they win, "tis ad clear gains. I find, laid Silvia, you are a good manager in love;; are for Ahe frugal part of it. Faith, Madam, (aid Antomtt, I an in’ 
deed 
ri' 

f. 
l ’ii 
icf 
h 
i « 
() 
tited of that opimo?tj that love and inprd.ft always do befl together, as two mojl excellent Ingredients in tvaf rare Art of freferving of Beauty. Love makfa us put on all our Charms and intref gives us dll'the advantage of dress without nthich ‘beauty is lojl, and of little ufii • Love wovd have us appear al ways neivj always gay, and magni^ itcent^ ' and money atone can render its f)y and we find no Women want Lowers fo'wuch as those who want pb ikoatsy ^ewdsy and' all the need far y trifiesaf Gallantry. Of this 
h{l opinion I find you your self to hev^ for even when domes 
Kndwhiife Heart ycu have no defig Vfel yoit drtjs to the bejl advan --, tagbj' and gut on manyy to like one : Why is this fitn that e ven unknown to your felfy you have a secret Joy and pleaftre in gaining C )nqtiells.i and of being adopd\and thought the mofi K Char( 
() 
Charming of your Sex. thttf is not from the mconfiancy of my Hearty <^ry*d livid, but from the little vd' nity of our Natures. Oh Madamj re ply’d Amonetty there is no Friend to Love like Vanity \ if it the falfefi betrayer of a Womans Heart., of my Pafjion or Humour (he can he guilty of not Love it Jelf betrays her sooner to Love than Vanity or Pride; and Madamj I mtld I might have the pleasure of my next tvijhf when I find you not only lifining to the love n/octavio, but even approving it too. Away reply’d Silvidj in frowning, your Mirth grows rude and troublefomey — Go bid the Page wait while I return an anfver to what his Lord h.tsfent me. So sitting at the Table she dismissed Jntonetty and writ this fallowing Letter 
|tii 
all 
an 
C 
tl 
ai 
d 
Silvia 
C *97) 
Silvia to Octavio. 
VI 

ifind o&avw this little Gallantry of yours, of Showing me the Lover, stands you in very great stead, and Serves you upon all occasions for abundance of uses; amongst the rest, tis no Small obligation you have to it, for fur fiifhing you with handsbm pretences to beep from those who ina portune you, and from giving ’en^ that Satisfaction by your Council and Conversation which postibly the unfortunate may have need of Sometimes 5 and when you are press*d and oblig’d to render m the Friendship of your Visits, this necestary ready love of yours, is the only evasion you have for the answering a thousand little questions I ask you of Fhiltmder; whose K 2 Heart 
198) 
Heart I am afraid you know much better than Silrijitt does. 1 cou’d almost wist), that 
all you tell me of your Pastion were true, that my Commands might be of Force sufficient to compel you to resolve my Heart in some doubts that oppress it: And indeed if you would have me believe the one, you must obey me in the other; to which end I conjure you to hasten to me, for Ibmething of an unusual coldness in pii/aptders Letter, and Some Ominous Divinations in yours, have put me on a rack of Thought; from which nothing but Confirmation can relieve me; this you dare not deny, if you value the repose of 
me 

(01 
ia. 
5hc 
( «99) 
• She read it over, and was often about to tear it, fancying it was too kind : But when she confider’d stwas from no other inclination of her Heart than that of getting the vsccrefs out of his. She pardon’d herself the little levity (he found it guilty of; all which, conlidciling as the effects of the violent Passion She had for phiunlr., file found it easy to do, and Sealing it (he gave it to Antonett to deliver to the Page, and Set herself down to ease her Soul of its heavy weight of grieli by her complaints to the dear Author of her Pain; for when a Lover is insupportably afflicted, there is no east like that of writing to the persbn lov’d : And that all that comes uppermost in the Soul, for true love is all unthinking artless speaking, incorrect difbrder, and withoutmethod, as’tis K 1 with( 
() 
without Bounds or Rule, such were unstudy’d thoughts, 
and such her following Letter. 
Silvia to Philander. 
my phiunder, how hard it is to bring my Soul to doubt ^ when I coctider all thy 
East tender Vows, when I reflect ow thou hast lov’d and sworn Methinks I hear the Mustek of thy voice still whispering in my Bptbm; methinks the charming ibftnefs of thy Words remain like icis’ningechos on my Soul, whose distant Voices by degrees decay till they be heard no more / Alas Tve read thy Letter o’er and o’er, and turn’d the sense a thousand several ways, and all to make it Speak and look like Love 
O I have flatter’d it with all my Art. Sometimes I sansy’d my ill 
reading 
LI 
rnf 
( 20i } 
reading ipoil’d it, and then I tund my Voice to Softer Notes, and read it oer again; but still the Words appeared too rough and harsh for any moving Air, which way ibe’er I changed, which way foe er I question’d it of Love, it anfwer’d in Such Language— — others wou’d perhaps interpret Love, or fbmething like it, • but I whove heard the very God himself Ipealt from thy wondrous Lips, and known him guide thy Pen, when ail the Eloquence of moving Angels flow’d from thy charming Tongue! when I have teen thee fainting at my Feet, (^^hil’st all Heaven opened in thy glorious facej and now and then sigh out a trembling Word; in which there was contain’^d more Love, more Soul, than all the Arts of Speaking ever found. What sense I Oh what reflections K 2: musf 
'I 
H'li 
h 
( 

h 
J 
must I make on. this decay, this strange — this Sudden alteraticn in thee? But that the cause is fled, and the effect is ceas’d, the God retir’d, and all the Oracles silenc’d 1 consefs r' — thou e ternal Conqueror of my Soul, whom every Hour, asd every tender Joy, renders more dear and lovely— — me why (if thou still lowest me, and iov’if as %vell) does love nor dict re to thee as before! Dost thou want words? Oh then begin again, repeat the old ones o’er ten thoufaod times, such repetitions are Loves rhetorick!! often have I ask’d thee in an Hour, when my fond Soul was doting on thy Eyes, when with my Arms, clasp ing thy yielding Neck, my Lips imprinting kifses on thy Cheeks, and taking in the breath, that sight from thine? How often have I 
ask’d 
ifli 
ni( 
() 
asked this little but important question of thee? des my Phi lander lon>emt? then kifs thee Sor thy Tes and Sighs, and ask again, and still tny Soul was ravisht with new Joy, when thou wou’dst an swer, Tes h 1 love thee dearly!, and if I thought you Spoke it with a Tone that seem’d less fbft and fervent than I wish’d; I ask’d So often, till I made thee answer in Such a Voice as I wou’d wisn to hear it; all this had been impertinent and foolioi in anything but Love, to any but a Lover: But oh — give me the impertinence of Love! talk little nonfenfeto me all the Day, and be as wanton as a playing and that will 
please and charm my Love Sick Heart better than all fine Sense and reasoning. 
Tell me, p/tedwer, what new ac' cdenr/what powerful misfortune H. 5 !v( 
() 
has befallen thee, greater than what we have experienc’d yet? cou’d drive die little God out of thy Heart, and make thee So unlike my fbft Philander? What place contains thee, or what pleasures ease thee, that thou art now contented to live a tedious day without thy Sihia, How then the long long Age of forty more, and yet thou livest, art patient, tame, and well; thou talkst not now of Ravings, or of Dying, but look’st about thee like a well pleas’d Conqueror after the Toils 
cf Battle -- -- Oh I have known 
a time -- -- -- -- but let me never 
think upon it more i it cannot be remembered without madness! What think thee fallen from Love! to think that 1 must never hear thee more pouring thy Soul out in fbft Sighs of Love? A thousand deaj Expressions by which I knew 
the 
C 205) 
the Story of thy Heart, and while you tell it, bid me feel it panting — .if -- Never to lee thy Eyes 
fix’d on ray Face -- till the Soft 
Showers of joy wou’d gently fall and hahg their Shining Dew upon thy Looks, then in a Trahfport lhatch me to thy Bolbm, and sigh a thousand times eer thpu cotdst ptter — Sivia, how I lo ve thee — Oh the dear feloquence those few Short Words contain, when they are lent with Lovers Accents to a ' Soul all languishing I but now — alas, thy love is more familiar 
grown -- -- Oh taste the other part 
o*th Proverb too, and fay’t has bred Contempt, for nothing lest than that your Letter Shows, but more it dos, and that’s indifference lest to be born than hate or anything -- -- - 
At least be just and let me know my Doom : Do not deceive the 
Heart 
( 2c6) 
Heart that trusfed all thy Vows, if thou be’st generous — if thou let’st me know — — thy date of 
L 0ve -- is out (for Love perhaps 
as Life has dates) and equally uncertain, and thou no more canst stay the one than Fother; yet if thou art fb kind for al my Honour lost, my Youth undone, niy Beauty tarnish’d, and my lasting Vows, to let me fairly know thou art departing, my worthiest Life will bb the only lost; But if thou still continuest to impose i pon my easy Faith, and I fhoted any other way learn my approaching Fate — Look to’t pvtlandtr — She that had the courage to abandon all for Love, and laithlest thee, can, when ll: e finds herself betray’d' and lost, nobly revenge the ruin of her fiime, and send thee to the other Wodd with 
Silvid. 

( 207) 
She having writ this, read it over, and fanfy’d She had not Spoke half the sense of her Soul Tanfyh if she were again to begin she Gouli express her fdf much more to the purpose she defign’d, than she has done. She began again and writ two or three new ones, but they were either too kind or too rough, the first she fear’d wou’d (hew a weakness of Spirit, Since he had given her occafionof Jealousy; the last she fear’d wou’d disoblige if all those jealousies were false, fly therefore tore those last fire had writ, and before She feapd up the first she read phi/atiders Letter again, but still ended it with fears that did not les sen thoseshe.had first conceiv’d^ffill She thought She had more to say as Lovers do, who never are weary of Speaking or writing to du dear object of their vows, and having already forgotten what She had Said just 
before 
I HI: 

Ilf 


vrl 
Fi V kat i 
( 2o8) 
before — — and her heart being by this time as full as eer, She began, She took up her complaining Pen,, and made it say this in the Covert of the Letter. 
Oh peiunka Oh thou eternal Charmer of my Soul, how fain I wou’d repent me of the cruel thoughts 1 have of thee : When I had finish’d this inclos’d I read againthy chillingletter, and strove with all the force ofloveand fbft imagination to find a dear occasion of asking Pardon for those Fears which press my breaking Heart: but Oh the more I read, the more they strike upon my tendered parr, — fbmething So very cold, fb careless, and indifferent you end your Letter which I will not think of it — by Heaven it makes me rave — and hate my little power, that could no longer keep the fbft and kind. O if those killing fears (bred 
i' 

1 
( 209) j 
by excess of Love) are vainly taken up in pity, my adorable in pity to my torturd Soul convince ’em, re drefs the torment of my jealous doubts, and‘either way confirm me; be kind to her that dies and ian guifhes for thee, return me all the softness that first charm*d me, or frankly tell me my approaching Fate. Be generous, or be kind to the unfortunate and undone 
SILVIA 
She thought stie had ended here, but here again She read phikndeks Letter, as if on purpose to find new Torments out for a heart too much prefs’d already; a fbwr that is always mixed with the Sweets of Love, a pain that ever accompanies the pleasure. Love elfe were not to be numbered among the passions of men, and was at first or dain'd in Heaven for Ibmc divine 
motion 
( io) 
of the Soul, tillwith his lost of paradiftdqh2i\jcht it, with jealousies fears, and curiosities, and mixed it with all that vas afflicting; but you’ll Say he had reafbn to be jealous, whole Woman for want of other Seducers listen’d to the Serpent, and for the love of change wou’d give way even to a devil, this little love of Novelty and knowledge has been intaisd upon her Daughters ever Since, and I have known more Women ren dred unhappy and miserable from this torment of Curiosity, which they bring upon themtelves, than have ever been undone by lest villainous Men. One of this Humour was our haughty and charming Stlvia., wbose Pride and Beauty poitesling her with a belief that all Men were born to die her Slaves, made her uneasy at every action of the Loin 



L 
7cr 
( r) 
Lover (whether belov’d or not) that did, but Seem to Slight her Empire : but. where indeed she ■lov’d and doted, as now on Philander, this Humour put her on the rack at every thought or fan sy that he might break his Chains, and having laid the last obliga^ tion upon him, stie expected him to be her Slave for ever, and treated him with all the haughty Tyranny of her Sex, inallthofe moments when Sbftnefs was not predominate in her Soul. She was Shagreen at everything, if but dif^ pleased with one thing; and while she gave Torments to others stie fail’d not to feel ’em the most sensibly herself; So that still starching for new occasion of quarrel with Philander she drew on her stlf most intolerable Pains, Such as doubting Lovers feel after long Hopes and confirm’d Joys, 
(he 

( 2‘2^) 
She reads and weeps, and when file came to that part of it that inquired of the health and being of the Pledge of Love -- -- she 
grew fb tender that (he wasalmoft fainting in her Chair, but recovering from the Soft Reflection, and finding She had laid nothing of it already, Ihe took her Pen again and writ. 
You ask me, Oh Charming Philantier how the Pledge of our lost hours thrives? Alas, as if it meant to brave the worst of Fate! it does advance my Sorrows, and all your Cruelties have not destroy’d that: But I still bear a bout me the destiny ofmany a figh ingmaid, that this (who will I am sure be like Phllmder) will ruin with his Looks. 
Thou (acred Treafiire of my Soul forgive me, if I have wrong’d thy Love. Adieu, 
She 
LI 
I 
( 213) 
She fiiade an end of writing this just when .^ntonett arrivd, and told her O&avio was alighted at the Gate, and coming to visit her, which gave her occasion to say this of him to phi urid.tr. 
1 think t had not ended here, but that oifavio, the bravest and the best of p’riends is come to visit me. The only satisfaction I have to Support my life in pik urid.eps absence, pay him those thanks that are due to him froth me, pay him for all the generous Cares he has taken of me; beyond a Friend! almost phiund.tr in his blooming pasfion when twas all new and young, and full of Duty, cou‘d not have render’d me his Service with a more ij|| awful industry: : he was made for love and glorious friend cherifh him then, preserve 
Ship. 
1 
pi; -,; 
■; R L 
Hi I 
) 
( 2'4 
Serve him next your Soul, for he s a Jewel fit for Such a Cabinet; His Form, his Parts, and every Noble Action, Shows us the Roy' alrace from whence he Sprung, and the victorious Orange confestes him his own in every Virtue, and in every Grace; nor can the ilii gicimacy eclipse him: Sure he was got in the first heat of Love, which form’d him fb a Hero — But no more. Philander is as kind a Judge as 
tl 
silv'ta, 
She had no Sooner finioi’d this and feal’d it, but oaauio came into the Chamber, and with Such an Air, with fiich a Grace and Mien he approach’d her — with all the languishment of Soft trembling Love in his Face, which with the addition 6f the Dress he was that 
day 
( 215) 
day in, (which was extremely rich and advantageous, and altogether such as pleases the Vanity of Women,) I have since heard the charming say, in spite of all her tenderness for phlafatr^ (he found a Soft emotion in her Soul, a kind of pleasure at his approach, which made her blush with Some kind of anger at her own eafinest. Nor coum She have blufh’d in a more happy Sea ion; for obavio saw it, and it serv’d at once to add a Lustre to her paler Beauty, and to betray Some little kind Sentiment, which poffess’d him with a Joy that had the lame Effects on him; Silvia fa wit 5 and the care fhe'took to hide her own, ferv’d but cto/in greafe her Blushes, which put her into a confuston She had miich ado to reclairti : ihe cast: her Eyes to Earth, and leaning her Cheek on 
her 
% 
Nf, b 
^ S'' 
m, ri 

( 2i8) - 
before, and ligh a thousand things with morefuccessr Love, like Poetry cannot be. taught, but hhin structed flows without painful study, if it be true; his born in the Soul, a Noble inspiration not a Science! futh he 
thought it dishonourable to: be guilty of the meanness of: a Lye and Say he had no answct .* He thought it rude to Say Te had one and would not Show it SV nbid: And he believ’d nsthe height of ungenerous bafehess td^shfetvfts While he reniaih’d this mbih’enf ft I lent, ’stlvta wh(5fc love, 'jealodqe, j and ifnpatience endusd no demy; i with 'a maiidotss half; Smijd‘ and a Tone als angry, in her Eyes, and pasfion od hd Tongue, She cry’d 7- — ^ 
.thxtaou fh parley let me kmv ^hti cm be fdfel tmjufi., m.d. fakhlffr^: joti kmv your Power \ and n pt'y 
tpi 

r; 
01 
h 
(, W 

( 2i;) 
impatk^t of hearings and what Jo nearly concerns my repose. At this, he only answering with a Sigh, Ihe purlu’d, Sure Octavio, you m krfiand me: philander’s anfmr to the Letter of your confefpng Passion hits not fo long been the fuhjeil of oar discourse and expeilation^ hut you ^aefs at mhat I mean? oilavioj whp on all Occasions wanted not wit, or reply, was here at a loss, what to answer: : he had confider’d before what he would Say: but let thosein love fansy, and make what fine Speeches they please, and believe them stlves furnish’d, with abundance of eloquent Harangues, at the Sight of the dear Object they lose all, and love teaches ’em a Dialect much more prevailing without the expense of duller thought: And they leave unsaid all they had fo floridly form’d 
before 


f 
V 
JL 
) 
repoft fo much as to be costcem^4 or what fjares this Heart that a aores yott : it has mt merited 
that Glory; nor dare I prejame to hope, you jhou^d fo much as u’i(k my Pajjion for Silvia, ffjottd fmnount my Friendship to Philander. If I did, reply’d She with a Scorn, I perceive I might ivi/h in vain. is/ladam^ answefd he, 1 have too Divine an opinion of the jttjlice of the charming Sihia to believe I oughtj or cotid make my Approaches to her Hearty by ways [o base and un^ generousy the result of even tolerated Treason is to hate the Traitor, Oh, you are very nice, Octavio, rc' ply’d Silvia in your punliiuo to Philander; hut I perceive you are not fo tender in those yott ought to have for Silvia : I find Honour in you Men, is only what you please to male it y for at the same time you think it ufmnerphs to betray Phi ‘‘v lander, 
and' 
!/^ 
'ill 
W -- s/fj: 
ite LI 
F 
icrk 
kd 
M 
toh 
wkc 
Vm 
ftrz't 
fe»i 
it m 
’{dtri 
Pur 
iphil 
( 219) 
to that itotith mci ea(inefs yoti found m me., have given a Civil warning to my Heart. In this I mu(l confefsy continu’d She, you have given a mucf) greater tefiimony of your friend -- (hip for Philander, than your pejjt on for Silvia; and I suppose you came not here to resolve your self of which you (hold prefer, that was decided er you arrivdy and this Visit I imagine was only to put me out of doubt : A piece of Charity you might have fpard. She ended this with a Scorn, that had a thousand Charms, because it gave him a little hope; and he answefd with a sigh, Ah Madam how very easy you find it to entertain Thoughts dijadvantageous of And how Jmall assault your 
me 
Wit and Cruelty can improve to a Crime. Tou are not off ataed at my Fritndfhip for Philander. I know you do not value my Life, and my L repose 

hastily j attd wonder why you jhovd have a greater friend/hip for Philander than for Silvia; especially if it be true that you say, you have joi/7ed Love to Frkndfhip '• or are you of the Opinion of those that cry they cannot be a Lover and a Friend of the same objeil Ah Madam cry’d our perplex’d Lover, I beg you to believe I think it fo much wore my Duty and Inclinatian to ftrve and obey Silvia than I do Philander, that I fvear to you. Oh charming Conquerefs of my Soul if Philander have betrayed Silvia, he has at the same time betrayed o ctavio, and that I wou d revenge it with thelofs of my life : In injuring the adorable Silvia, believe me, lovely Maidy he injures fo much more than a Friend, as Honottr is above the inclination, if he wrong yoity by Fleaven he cancels all I he wrongs my Sohfmy Honour, Mifirefsy 
and 
I 
hid 
igti 
flibi 

tbit 
Mf 
'fiof. 
viaj, 
In 
rep 
'Acb. 
mti 
ffli 
kn 
pa 
inr, 
pji 
cluo 
o 
) 
lander, you believe it no breach of Honour to betray the eternal re po(e of Silvia? Tott have promiid Philander j'ij/ifr Friendship \yott hav avoiv^d your ft If my Lover, my Slave, my Friend my every things and yet not one of thtfe has any tje to oblige yott to ?ny inprefl : Pray tell me, continu’d She, when you lafl writ to him, was it not in order to receive an an fiver from him ^ And was not 1 to fe that Anfver? And here yots think it no dishonour to break your Word or Promise;; which I find your false Notions of Virtue and Honour, with which yot^ firveyohy fives, when Indrefi, Design dr f If Love makes you think it necejjary. Madam, replied 0 iiavio, Tpu are pleased to pursue your Anger, as if indeed 1 had disobeyed your Command or reftts'*d to Show you what you imagine I have from Philander: Tes, I do, reply’d She L 2 hastily, 
( 224) 
t(j^otid nothe difflead to find 1 might with more freedom re -- ceinje your Addresses,, on the commfs c/philanderh reajonipg may dipend a great part of your Fateor fortune : Come come, produce your ^fedentials, they may recommend our Heart more effebually than all the fine things, you can fay., you know not how the leaf appzamnce of a sight from a Lover., may advance the Pride of a Mifirefs; and Pride in this Affair will he your hep: Ad' vocate. Thus (he insinuated with all her female Arts, and put on all her Charms of Looks and Smiles, Iweetned her Mouth, fbft> ncdher Voice and Eyes, adorning all the tenderness and little Affectations her Subtle Sex was capable of, while he lay all ravillid and almost expiring at her Feet; sometimes transported with imagin’d Joys in the poffeffionof the 
dear 
the 
pi 
int 


poi 
v; 
fill 
CC 
lie 

(, 229 ■ 
And my Sister : Fearing he had laid too much, he stopp’d and sigh’d at the Word Sister, and casting down his Eyes, blushing with Shame and Anger, he continu’d, Oh give me leave to say a Sifiery leajt Mifircfs had been too daring and frefimftious i and a Title that rvotdd not justify my parrel half fo welly since "‘twotdfd take the Honour from my jufi rejentment^and hlaft it with the scandal of Stlf'tn^ trefi OK jealous revenge. What you say replied She, deserves abundance of Acknowledgnnntfout if you woidd have me believe you, you ought to hide nothing from me 5 and he methinksy that was fo daring to confess his p(iff on to Philander', after that, vfntttre on any discovery: : floort, Octavio, I demand to see the re turn you have from Philander, for 
foffihly said She, Svveetning her 
charming Face into a Smile del?? 
m 
( ^^4) 
figh'dy / fljcm d not he diffjkad to find 1 might with more freedom rc cei^e your Addresses,, on the comnefs i^philaoderh reajomag may defend a great fart of your Fate, or fortune : Come, come, produce your (iredentials, they may recommend jour Heart more effebnally than all the fine things, you can say, you know not how the least appearance cf a flight from a Lover, may advance the Pride of a Mjftrefs; and Pride in this Affair will he your hefl Ad' vacate. Thus She insinuated with all her female Arts, and put on all her Charms of Looks and Smiles, fweetncd her Mouth, fbst ncdher Voice and Eyes, allurning all the tenderness and little Affectations her Subtle Sex was capable of, while he lay all ravifh’d and almost expiring at her Feet; sometimes transported with imagin’d Joys in the poffeffionof the 
dear 
ea 
ea( 

rfi 
k 
.iiv 
i’er 
W 
101 
all 
CO 
pe 
iig 
h 
afi 
k 
)l( 

( 
) 
flattering Charmer, he was ready to unravel all the Secrets of philaders Letter; but Honour yet was even above his Passion, and made him bluih at his first hasty thought; and now he strove to put her off, with all the Art he coffd, who had (b very little in bis Nature, and vvshofe real Love and perfect Honour had Set him above the little evasions of Truth, who fcorn’din all other Casts the bastnefs and cowardize of a Lye; and fb un fnccestful now was the little honest Cheat, which he knew not how to manage well, that twas Soon distovered to the Witty, Jealous, and Angry Suvia: So that after ail the stage a pallioncte Woman con’d express,, believ’d herself injur’d by the only two Perfbns in the World from whom Ihe expected most adoration? She L 4 had 
o 
■2i6) 
had recourse to that natural and ibsming aid of her Sex, her Tears, and having already reproach’d 0 bavio with all the malice of a defeated Woman, (be now continued it in fb moving a manner, that our Hero cou’d no longer remain imconquer’d by that powerful way of charming, but unfixt to all he had refblv’d, gave up, at least, a part of the Secret, and own’d he had a Letter from phk Under; and after this Confellioa knowing very well he cou’d .not keep her from the sight of it; no, though an Empire were render’d her to buy it ost: his Wit was next employed how he shou’d defend the Sense of it, that she might not think Philander false. In Order to this, he, forcing a Smile, told her, that Philander was the most malicious of his Sex, and had contrived the best Stratagem 
in 
C 2^7) 
in the world to find whether sip zfri still loved, or oiiavlo retain’d his Friendship for him : And but, tiuty continued he, I kmv tin 
'Nature of your curious Sex to be ftichy that if I fiould perfvade you not to see ity it would but the ?mre inflmie dcfre of fewg it, I wotid ask no more of the charming Silvia, than that jhe wotdd not oblige me to [Jjew, what wovd turn (o greatly to my own Advantage.: If I were not toofenfthley “tis but to entrap me that Philander has taken this method in his Answer. Believe me, adorable Silvia, I plead against rny own Life while I beg you not to put my Honour to the Lefi, by commanding me to show this led ter., and, that I join rigajnft the in t'pfl of iny own eternal Repose while I plead thus', she hears him with a hundred changes of countenance. Love, Rag", and jealousie swell in L 5 her 
ifv 
ns) 
fiercer Eyes, her breath beats Short, and She was ready to burst into Speaking before he had finishd what he had to Say; she calls up all the little Discretion and Reafbn Love had left her to manage her self as (he ought in this great occasion 5 stie bit her Lips and swallow’d her rising Sighs; but he Soon law the Storm he had rais’d, and knew not how to stand the Shock oflits Fury; he Sighs, he pleads in vain, and the more he endeavours to exciife the Levity of vh'dm der, the more he rends her Heart, and Sets her on the Rack; and concluding him false, She cou’d no longer contain her Rage, but broke out into all the Fur, y that madness can inspire, and from one degree to another wrought her Pallion to the height of Lunacy; She tore her Hair, and bit his Hands that endeavour’d to restrain 
hers( 
( 


from Violence, She rent the Ornaments from her fair Body, and discover d a thousand Charms and Beauties, and finding now that both his strength and reafbn was too weak to prevent the Mifehiefs he found he had brought on her, he calls for help : When Brilijard was but too ready at Hand, with Antonm and Some others, who came to his Afiistance: bril jard, who knew, nothing of the occasionof all this, believ’d it the Second part of his own late adventure, and fancy’d that oitavio had us’d fbine Violence to her, upon this he astumes the Authority of his Lord, and Secretly that of a Husband or Lover, and upbraiding the innoccntoflavio with his Brutality, they fell to Such Words as ended in a challenge the next Morn lag, for brtvjard appear’d a Gentleman, Companion 
to 

( 2^0) 
to his Lord; and one whom o&a 'vio cou’d not well refuse: : was not carried fb Silently but Antomtt.^ busie as liie u^as about her raving Lady, heard the ap' pointmenc, and qbauio quitted the Chamber almost as much disturb’d as Stlvta, whom, w th much ado, they perswaded him to leave *, but before he did lb, he on his Knees off. r’d her the Letter, and implor’d her to receive it. So abiblutely his Love had vanquish’d h’s Nobler Part, that of honour; but she attending no morions burr those of her own Rage, had no regard either to Octavios Profier, or his Arguments of Excuse; fb that he went away with the Letter, in all the Extremity of disorder;; last part of his flubffiifiion was not teen by ilriil j: ri] who immediately left the Chamber, upon receiving Oftn' 
( 2 21) 
rite’s answer to his Challenge; fb that Silvia was now left with her Woman only, who by Degrees brought her to more calmness;; prill]iri impatient to hear the Reproaches, he hop’d. She woum give Oclitvio when flic was return’d toreafbn, being curious of anything that might redound to his disidvantage, whom he took to be a powerful Rival, return’d again into her Chamber: But in lieu of hearing what he v.hihd; Stlvia being recover’d from her Passfion of Madness, and her Soul in a Slate of thinking a lictle with Reason, She mlltes obavio in the Crowd, and with a Voice her Rage had infeebled to a languisir menr, She cry’d — surveying carefully thosh about her, Oh wberps Octavio I Where is that Angel Man. he who of all his kind can g ive me comfort. Madam re p lye d 
Antomtt^ 
Ifii 
Antonett, he A while he was hercj he knee id and prayed in Ft am ^ hut for a Word, or Look., his Lears are yet remaining wet upon ■ your Feet, and all for one fenfhle Reply, but rage had deafen dyott; whit has ' he done to. merit this? Oh, Antonett, cry’d Silvia — ^twas.what he wotid not do that makes me rave, ritn, h.xu and fetch him bacjz — ■ But let him leave his Honour all behind .* Sell him he has too much consideration for Philander, and none for wy repoje. Oh, fly Brilljard — alave 1 no Friend in view, dares carry a Message from me to Octavio? Bid him Aeturn, oh, in ft ant ly return— — die, I ian guifh for a sight of him — Defsending Angels would not be flo welcome — • Why stand ye ft ill — have I no 
power with you— — none obey -- 
Then running hadiiy to the Chamber Door, She call’d her 
Page, 
( 2)3) 
Page, to whom stie cry’d — dd/e, hafte^dear Touthy m.d. jtrtdod^lviq out and. bring him to me mflmtly; Pell him I die to see him. The Boy glad of So kind a Message, to fb liberal a Covtr^ runs on his Errand, while She returns to her Chamber, and endeavours to recollect her Sentes against Oildvids coming as much as poitibly She cou’d : She dismifses her Attendant with different Apprehensions: Sometimes Brilljard believ’d this was die Second part of her first raving, and having never Seen her thus, but for Philander concludes it the height of ten derness and Pafiion for obavio^ but because She made So public a Declaration of it he believ’d he had given her a Philter, which had rais’d her Flame So much above the bounds of Modesty and Discretion; concluding it So, he 
knew 
m 
C 254) 
knew the ufustl Effects of things of that Nature, and that nothing cou’d allay the heat of S ch a Love but Possession, and easily deluded with every Fancy that flatter’d his Love; ma 1, stark mad by a ny way to obtain the last Blessing With shvia^ he consuks with arttot^afhow togqi one of 'uid.s Letters out of her lady’s Cabinet, and feigning many frivolous Reafbns, which deluded the Amorous Maid; he perswacled her to get him one, which She did in haif an Hour after : for by this time being in as much Tranquillity as kwas possible a Lover could be in, who had the H: pes of knowing all the Secrets of the falsh Betrayer, file had call’d to her; which 
Slae refblved should be in ail the careless Magnificence that Art or Nature cou’d put on; to charm 
obavh 
le 
ti( 
( 

to obedience, V hom t she had Sent for, and whom she i expected 5 but She was no Sooner i Set to her toy light, but ostavws; Page arriv’d with a Letter from; his Master, which She greedily snatch’d, and read this. 
Octavio to Silvia. 
I “) Y this tirhe, oh Charming J shvky give me leave to hope your Rage is abated, and your reasbn return’d, and that you will hear a little from the most unfortunate of Men, whom you have reduc’d to this miserabte Extremity of losing either the ado i rable Object of his Soul, or his Honour : If you can prefer a little Curiosity that will Serve but to afflict you, before either that or my repose, what esteem ought 
I 
I to believe you have for the uu fortunare; and if you hate 
meas cis evident, if you compel me to the extremity of losing my Repose or Honour, what Rea fbn or Argument have I to prefer fg careless a Fair One above the last.’tis certain you neither do nor can love me now; and how much below that hope fhaii the expos’d and abandon’d obavio be, when he Shall pretend to that Glory without his Honour: : me, Charming Maid, I wou’d sacrifice my life, and my entire Fortune at your least Command to Serve you; but to render you a Devoir that must point me out the basest of my Sex, is what my temper must resist in Spite of all the violence of my Love, and I thank my happier Stars that they have given merefblution enough rather to fall a Sacrifice to the last, than 
be 

he 
Inc 
ler 
Pj 
le 
)k 
a 
bi 
I 
it 
(237) 
be guilty of the breach of the first: this is the lost and prefenc thought and ple^fure of my Soul ^ and least it stioud by the force of those Divine Ideas which e ternally Surround it, be footh’d and flatter’d from its Noble Principles, I will tomorrow put myself out of the hazard of Temptation, and divert if poni ble by absence, to the Carapagne, those Soft importunate Betrayers of my Liberty, that perpetually Solicit in favour of you : 1 dare not fb much as bid you adieu, one sight of that bright angel’s Face, w^ou’d undo me, unfix my Nobler Resolutions, and leave me a despicable Slave, sighing my unrewarded Treafbn at your insensible Feet; My Fortune! leave to be dispos’d by you; but the more ufeless necessary I will for ever take from thole lovely Eyes, who can look 
on 
() 
on nothing with Joy, but the happy phiunier : If I have deny’d you one Satisfaction, at least I have given you this other of (ecuring you Eternally from the trouble and importunity of 
Mctdanij 
Tour pathful 
Octavio. 
^ This Letter to any other lest cure of her own power than was our fair Subject, woum have made them impatient and angry: But Shi found that there was Somthing yet in her Power, the dispensation of which cou’dfoon recall him from a ny resolution he was able to make of absenting himself: Her Glast stood before her, and every glance that way was an asturance and fe 
clirity 
iof 
tins 
t 
k: 
b 
P 
kf 
( d9) 
curity to her Heart, she cou’d not see that Beauty and doubt its power of persuasion. She therefore took her Pen, and writ him this answer, being in a moment furnifh’d with all the Art and subtlety that was neceltary on this occasion. 
Silvia to Octavio. 
My Lord, 
TH O I have not Beauty enough to command your Heart; at least allow me Sense enough to oblige your belief, that I fancy and resent all that the Letter contains which you have deny’d me, and that I am not of that Sort of Women, whole want of Youth or Beauty renders fb constant to purfiie the Ghost of a departed Lover : It is enough to justify my Honour', that I was not the first agrestor. I find 
my 

a 

my self pur su’d by too many Charms of Wit, Youth, and Gallantry, to bury myself bsneath the Willows, or to whine away my Youth by murmuring Rivers, 
or betake me to the last Refuge 
of a declining Beauty, a mona st’ry: No, my Lord, when I have reveng’d and recompencd myself for the Injuries of one Inconstant, with the Joys a thousand imploring Lovers offer, it will be time to be weary of a World, which yen every day presents me new Joys; and I Swear to you, that it was more to re compence what I ow’d your past fion that I defir’d a convincing proof of Philanders Falsehood, than for any other reasbn, and you have too much Wit not to know it; for what other use coil’d I make of the Secret; if he be false he’s gone unworthy of 

idg 
'ti. 
esa: 

pi; 

toot 
10 : 

lily: 
him 
ifl 
per 


me, 
( ^4^) 
I 
me, and impossible to be retriev’d, and I would as fbon dye my fish lied Garments and wear them O' ver again, as take to my imbra ces a reform’d Lover, the Native first Lustre of whose Passion is uite extinct, and is no more the ame; no, my Lord, She must be poor in Beauty that has recourse to Shifts fb mean; if I wou’d know the Secret, by all that’s good it were to hate him heartily, and to dispose of my Perlbn to the best advantage; tvhich in Honour I cannot do, while 1 am unconvinc’d of the falseness of him with whom I have exchang’d a thoufaod Vows of Fidelity, but if he unlink the Chain I am at perfect liberty, and why by this delay you fhou’d make me lose my time, I am not able to conceive, unless you fear I fhou’d then take you at your word, and expect the 
per 
performance of all the Vows of 
Love you have made me. -- -- -- -- If 
that be it— — Pride shall be your Security, or if other recom pence you expect, Set the Price upon your Secret, and see at what rate I will purchase the Liberty it will procure me; possibly it may be Such as may at once infrao' chize me, and revenge me on the perjur’d Ingrate, than which nothing can be a greater Satisfaction to 
SILVIA, 
She Seals this Letter with a Wafer, and giving it to Antomtt to give the Page, believing she had writ what wou d not be in vain to the quick fighted obavio: an tonm takes both that and the other which obavio had Sent, and left her Lady busy in dressing her 
Head 
I 
245 } 
head, and went to Chamber, 
who thought every moment an Age till She came, So vigorous be was onhis new design. That which was Sent to o&avio^ being seal’d with a wet Wafer he neat i ly opens, as ’twas easy to do, and read, and seal’d again, and Antomtt deliver’d it to the Page. After receiving what pay brillj^rd could force himself to bestow upon her; Some Flatteries of dis sembled Love; and Some cold kistes, which even Imagination cou’dnot render better, she return’d to her Lady, and he to his Stratagem, which vv/'as to counterfeit a Letter from obavio; she having in hers given him a Hint, hy bidding him feta Price upon the Secret, which he had heard, was that of a Letter from phf ladder, with all the Circumstances of it, from the faithless Att m tomtt 

''S' i if ^ llilfjl 
( h4) 
tonttt whom Love had betray’d 5 and after blotting much Paper to try every Letter through the Alphabet, and to produce them like those of obdvio, which was not hard for a lover of ingenuity; he fell CO the bulinefsof what he wou’d write j and having finioi’d it to his liking, his next Trouble was how to convey it to herj for osiavio always Sent his by his Page, whom he cou’d trust. He now was certain of Love between ’em? For th he often hsd persuaded Antonett to bring him Letters, yet (he could not be wrought on till now to betray her trust : And what he long apprehended, he found too true on both fides; and now he waited but for an opportunity to tend it feasonably, and in a lucky Minute. In the mean time siavh adorns herself for absolute Con 


ft 
V 

S 
P 
w 
45) 
qaell, and difposmg herself in the most charming, careless, and tempting manner file could devise, ‘she lay expecting her coming Lover, on a Repose of rich Embroidery of Gold on blew Satin, hung within fide with little a morous Pictures of Venm descending in her chariot naked tovi~ dona, stie embracing, while the youth more eager of his rural 
Sports, turns half from her, in a 
posture of pursuing his Dogs, who are on their Chase: Another of Ar midii, who is dressing the steeping wansiour up in wreaths of blowers while a hundred little Loves are playing with his gilded Armour; this puts on his Helmet too big for his littlehead that hides his whole face; another makes a Bobby horse ofhis Sword and Lance; another sits on.his Breast oicce, while three 
or four little Cupids are Seeming 
lei 
it: : >« 


■, i '.I 
C ^4^) 
to heave and help him to hold it an end, and all turted the Emblems of the Hero into ridicule. These and Some other of the like nature a dom’d the Pavilion of the langiufiling Fair One, who lay careletly on her fide; her Arm leaning on little Pillows of Point of Venice, and a Book of Amors in her other hand. Every noise alarm’d her with trembling hope that her Lover was come, and 1 have heard She Said She verily believ’d that acting and feigning, the Lover poffds’d her with a tenderness against her Knowledge and Will; and She found fbmething more in her Soul than a bare euriofity of Seeing or.d ‘vw for the Letters Sake: But in lieu of her Lover, She found her fell once more approacht with a Billet Srom him; which brought this. 

( h7) 
Octavio to Silvia. 
A H Silvidy he miift be more L than humane, that can withstand your Charms, 1 confds my Frailty; aid fall before you, 
the weakest of my Sex, and 
own I am ready to believe all your dear Letter contains, and have Vanity enough to wrest: e very hopeful Word to my own int’rest, and in favour of my own Heart : What will become of me, if my easte Faith sliou’don ly starter me, and I wdth Shame fliou*d find it was not meant to 
me, or if it were, kwas only to 
draw me from a Virtue which has been hitherto the Pride and Beauty of my Youth, the Glory of my Name, my Comfort and refuge in all extremes of Fortune : M ^ The 
m 
it w ( 248) 
i The eternal Companion, Guide 
^! i If ' and Counsellor of ail my asti ons : Yet this good you only 
b' ' ''' ' ' ■!: ' power to rob me of, and leave me exposed to the Scorn of all the laughing World : Yet 
■'1 give me Love I give me but hope in lieu ol it, and! am con rent to divest my self of all betides. 
Perhaps you will say I ask t09 mighty a rate for fo poor a Secret But even in that, there lies one of my own, that will .more expo Si the feebleness of my Blood and Name, than the Dishovery will me in parti^iular, fo tbstt I know not what I do, when I give yob up the knowledge you desire. Still you will say all this is to im hauiice its Value, and raise the Price : And oh, I fear you have taught my Soul every Quality It fears and dreads in yours, and 
, learned 
dni 
ol 
: or 
Yl 
: oi! 
( h9) 
learned it to chaster, for eve/y thought, if f coisd fix upon the rate to feu it at: And I with Shame con iess I would be Mercenary, cou’d we but agree' upon the Price : But my .respeft forbids me all things, but, filent hope, and that in Spighr of me, and all my Rea Sbn, will predominate? for the rest I will wholly resign myself and all the Faculties of my Soul to the charming Arbitr tor of my Peace, the powerful Judge of Love, the adorable Silvia : And at her Feet render all Pne demands; yes, She Shall find me there to ju stifie all the weakiiess dlls proclaims'; for I confeis, oh too too powerful Maid, that you have absolutely subdu’d 



: F( 
() 
She had no Sooner read this Let ter, but At'aonettt insfead of laying it by, carried it to Brtiljfirdy and departed the Chamber to make Vvay for ovavia^ who she imagistd coming to make his Vifiriand left Sikfia considering how fne Ihcifcl manage him to the best ad ■vantage, and with most honour ac. quit herself, of what She had made tiini hope; but instead of his coming to wait on her, an unexpested accident arriv’d to prevent him, for a meffeng^r from the Prince came wdth Conimands that he Should forthwith come to hishighneststlie Messenger having command to bring him along with him : So that notable to disobey, he only begg’d time to write a note of businefs; which was a Billet to stlvu, to excuse himself till the next day; for it being five Leagues to the Village where the Prince waited his 
coming, 

f 
coming, he cou’d not return that Night: which was the bufiiiefs of the Note, with which his Page hasted to Silvia : Brilljard^ Wsho wis now a vigilant Lover, and waiting for every opportunity that might favour his design, law the Page arrive with the Note; and as kwas ufiial, he took it to carry to his conqueress; but meeting Antcmett on the Stairs, he gave her what he had before counterfeited wkh Shell Art, after he had o pen’d what Oflavio had Sent, and found Fortune was wdioliy on his fide, he having. learn’d from the Page, besides that his Lord had taken Coach with Monsieur— — — go to his highness, and wou d non return that Night: Antonett not knowing the deceit, carried her La • dy the forg CL Letter, who open ei it with eager haste, and readsthis. 


M 5 
To 

■ ’ ( 252 } 
'T O T H E 
CHARMING SILVIA. 
Madam, 
Since I have a Secret which none 
__ but I can unfold, and that 
you have offered at any rate to buy it of me : Give me leave to say, that you, fair Creature, have another Secret, a Joy to dispense, which none but you can give the languishing obavio : If you dare purchase this of mine, with that infinitely more a^akiable one of yours: I will be as Secret as deaths and think myself happier than a faocy’d God! Take what Me .tliods you please for the payment, and what, time, order me, com ioand me, conjure me, Twill wait, watch, and pay my Duty it all itoiirs, to foatch the moil 
CGIV 
( 255 } 
convenient one to reap ibravioiing a Blessing. I know you will accuse me with all the coniidence and rudeness in the Woisid: But oh' to eonlider lovely Silvias that that Pafiion, vdiich coum change my Soul frorn all the course of Honour, has power to make me forget that nice lespect your Beauty aws me with, and my pallion is now arriv’d at Such a height, it obeys no Laws but its own; and lam obstinately bent on the pursuit of that vast pleasure, I fancy to find in the dear, the ravishing Arms of the adorable shvu : Impatient of youranswer, I am as love compels me, 
Madam, 
A‘4'’! 

Tour Slave. 
oct'lvio. 
The 
( 25'4) 
h he Page, who Waited no .ao' fwer, was departed; but^/a/twho believ’d he attended it, was in a thousand minds what to Sty or do r She biush’d as she read, and theii look’d pale with anger anddi'fdain, and but that She had already given her Honour up, it wou’j have been fbnietbiogmore Surprising; But She was us’d to Qiieifions of that Nature, and therefore receiv’d this with fb much the less concern : Nevertheless ’twas Sufficient to filhier Soul with a thoii fancl Agitations, but when She would be angry, the concideration of what file had writ to him, to encourage him to this boldness, .ifopp’d her Rage: when (he would rake it ill, Siie consider d his knowledge of her losl: Same, and that took olh a great part of her Relent me nt on that Side; and in midst ofali Ihe was raving for the knowledge 
( 255) 
ledge of phiuntiers Secret. She rose from the Bed, and walk’d about the room in much disbrder, fuii of thought and no conclusion;; is asliam’d to consult of this Affair with Amoftett., ?ind knows not what to fix on : The only thing she was certain of, and which was fully apd undisputably refblv'd in her Soul, vjrs never to consent to So false an Action, never to buy the Secret at fbdear a rate; She abhors oi^a vw, whom She regards no more as that fine thing which before she thought him; and a thousand times she was about to write her despite and Contempt, but SI ill the dear Secret staid her hand, and Ihe was fond of the Torment: Anbonett. who was afflicted to know the cause of this Disorder, ask’d her Lady if o&avio wou’d not come : No, ^ replied v// the Name, nor 
via. 
blufiling at 
ntvir 

( 256) 
northeast ver Shall the ungrat&ftd Man dare to behold my Pace any more, Jefn^ replied Antonett{^ What has he done, madam to deserve this Severity] For he was a great Benefacfor u Antonett, and had already by his Gifts and Presents made her a for tune for a Burgomaster: ilf hasy said Silvia committed stich an Impudence as deserves death from my Hand \ This She Spoke in rage, and walked away cross the Chamber. Whj^ Madamy cry’d Antonetty does he deny to give you the Letter: No, reply ed Silvidy but asks me such & for it, as makes me hate mj ft If, that .am rediad by my ill Conduct, to Addrejfes of that Nature'. Heavensy ivladam y What can he ask you to dfflift you fo! The presumptuous Many Said She. (in. rage) has the impudence to aslri what never Man, hit Philander was ever pof fef’^dof — Pit tlmaafonrtt laughed — 
■ (2)7) 
Gooti Lortlj Madam laid She, ad are you angry at fttch deftres in Mm toward you? I believe you are the jirjl Lady in the World., that was ever offended for being deprable : Can my thing proclaim your Beau -- ty more, or your icouth, or Wit d marry Madam., I wish I were worthy to he aspd the qgfpion by all the fine Dancing, Dressing, song making Fops in Town. And you ivoiddyields replied suvia: iflot fo neither, re plied Antonett, btit I wotdd spark my self, and value my self the more tfpon^t. i, Said Silvta, She that is fo fond of hearing of Love, no doubt bttt will find some one to praclife it with, lhads as I fjot/d fnd my Jelf indin d, replied Antonett. Silvia vas not So intent on Antontdts Raillery, but She imploy’d all her thought the while on, what Ihe had to do : and those lafi: Words of Antmedds jogg’d a Thought 
that 
C 
) 
that ran on to one very ad van tagious, at least her present and first Apprehension of it was Such; And fbe turn’d to Amomtt with a Face more gay than it was the last minute, and cry’d, Prltkt good Wench tell me what sort of Man wotdd foomft incline you to & yielding? If yott command me mx dam., to he free with your Lordjhif^ reply’d Antonett, I mufl conff there are two sorts of Men thxt ivod.d most' ajulainoufly imune me .* the firs is he that ivott d make mji fortune hef : the next he that wopd make my plea fire the youngyhe hmd. fom.^ or rather the well bred^ and good-humour d; but above all the Man of Wit. But what tvovd you say, Antonett, replied Silvia, if alt these. made up in one man food I make his Addresses to you j Why then mofl certainly, Madam reply ed Antonett; I fijttd yield him 
mf 
( 259) 
my hobtour.t ^ rmfonubk Siege. This though the wanton young Maid Spoke polsibly at first more to put her Lady in good-humour, than from any inclination She had to what file Said; yer after many Arguments upon that Subject, SA cd cunning eno’^gh to purfiie her design, brought the bsisinefs more home, and told her in plain terms that O&avio was theman who had been fb presumptious as to ask So great a Reward as the poftefiion of her self for the Secret stie defied; and after a thousand little Subtleties, having made the forward Girl confess with bludies, fbe was not a Maid; She infinu aced into her an Opinion, that what She had done already iwith out any other Motive than that' of Love, as She confefs’d in wshich intvest had no part, ^ wmu’d make the Trick the easier to do again, 
especially 

( AO) 
especially if file brought to her Arms a Perfoa, of Youth, Wit, Gallantry, Beauty, and all the charming Qualities that adorn a Man, and that besides stie flioum find it turn to good account; and for her Secrefies, stie might de pend Upon it, Once the Person to whote Embraces She Should submit herself, fliou d not know but that She herself was the Worhan; So that says Silvias I rvill have all and yoti that Rervard every way with tmbk?7n[yd Hottour. While She rpoke, the willing Maid gave an inward pleasing Attention, tlio at first' She made a few faint modest Scruples : Nor was (he less joy’d to hear it sliou’d be oiia ve, whom she knew to be rich, and very haadsbme; and (he immediately found the Humour of Inconstancy Seize her; and Brih jnrd appear’d a very Husband 
Lover 
( 2^1) 

Lover in coitiparifon of this new Brisker Man of Quality; So that after Some pro’s and con’s the whole Matter was thus concluded on between these two young per shns, who neither wanted Wit, .nor Beauty; and both crow’d over the Contrivance, as a most diverting piece of little Malice, that Slioud Serve their present Turn, and make ’em Sport for the future. he next thing that was const derd, w^s a Letter which was to be lent in Answer, and that Silvia being to write with her own hand, begot a new doubt, insomuch as the whole bustnest was at a stand : For when it came to that point that she herself was to content, she found the Project look with a Face So foul, that she a hundred times re fblv’d and unrefblv’d But Phi imkr fill’d her Soul, revenge was 
in 
: IS 
I 

( 2^2) 


in her view, and that one thought put her on new Refblves to pursue the design, let it be never fb bate and dishonourable : Ter, cry’d she at last, / can commit no aiiion^ that is not more exctifable., and honourable than that which octavio has done do me who uses me hkf a common Mistress of the Town, and dares ask me that which he knows, he durst not do if he had not mean and abjebl thoughts of me; his hase- -- deserves death from my hand if I had courage to give it him, and the leaf Jean do is to deceive the deceiver. \ptll then., give ms my Sertitore, says She; So sitting down she writ this; not without abundance of guilt and confusion;; yet a certain Honour which Hie had by birth, check’d the cheat of her Pen. 
Silvia 
( 263) 
Silvia to Octavio.^ 
The Price, oiiavio ^ which you have let upon your Secret,! (more generous than you j will give your Merit, to which ^ alone ’tis due : If I Should pay fo high a Price for the first, you wou’d believe I had the lest e steem for the last, and I. V oted not have you think me fb poor in Spirit to yield on any other terms. If I valu’d Philander yet — after his confirm’d Inconstancy, I wou’d have you think I Scorn to yield a Body where I do not give a Soul, and am yet to be perswaded there are any Such Brutes amongst my Sex, but as I never had a with but where I lov’d, foi never extended one till now to any but pbilmder, 
yet 
t' LI 
I! 
h i: 

( 264) 
yet So much my Sense of Shame is above my growing Tenderness, that I coum wish you would be fb generous to think no more of what you Seem to pursue with Such eirneftness and bade. But least I stioiild retain any Sort of former Love for Philander, whom I am impatient to rafe wholly from ray Soul, I grant you all you ask, provided you will be discreet in the management : Antonett therefore shall only be trusted with the Secret; the outward gate you Shall find at twelve only Shut to, and Antonett wait you at the stairs foot to conduct you to me come alone. I blush and gild the Paper with their Reflections, at the thought of an fncounter like this, before I am half enough secur’d of your Heart. And that, you may be made more absolutely the Master 
of mine, 
me immediately 
( 265) 
ately Philanders Letter inclos’d, that if any remains of Shagrien postest me, they may be totally vanquish’d by twelve a Clock. 
SA 
via. 
She having with much difficulty writ this, reqd it to her trusty Confident; for this was the only Secret of her Ladys Ole was refblv’d never to discover to Brilljard, and to the end he might know nothing of it She seal’d the Letter with Wax; But before stie seal’d it, She told her Lady, She thought Oie might have spar’d abundance of her Bly Slies, and have writ a lesi kind Letter; for a word of Invitation or Consent, would have served as well. To which Sthta replied. Her anger against him was too high not to give him all the defeat 
I 
seat imaginable, and the greater the Love appear’d, the greater would be the Revenge, when he fhoii d come to know, (as in time he Thou d J how like a false Friend She had treated him : This Reafbn, or any at that time wou’d have fervd Amonett.^ whose Heart was fet upon the new Adventure, and in Such haste She was (the Night coming on a pace) to know how She fhou’d dress, and what more was to be done, that She only went out to call the Page, and meeting Bnlljard, (who watcht every Bodies motion) on the Staircase, he ask’d her what that was? and she Said, to Send by o&avio^s Page; 2 )// steed At look in Said She (when he snatch’d it hastily out of her hand :) For I can tell you the Contents and 'tis featd jo it mtifi he known if you unrif it: Well ^ wellj Said he, if you tell /> 
me 
me it "'vill fatisfa my Luriojity as jit//; therefore TU five it the pa^e, She returns in again to her Lady, and he to his own Chamber to read whatanswer the dear Object of his desire had’fent to his forg’d one: So opening it, he found k Such as his Soul whh’d, and was Jill Joy and Ecstasy;; views himself a hundred times in the Glass, and fet himself in Order with all the Opinion and Pride, as if his own good Parts had gain’d him the Blefiing; he enlarg’d himself as’he walk’d, and knew not what to do, (b extremely was he raviih’d with his coming Joy : he blessed himself, his Wit, his Stars, his Fortune; then read the dear obliging Letter, andkllm it allc ver, as if it had been meant to him; and afier he had forc’d himself ta little more (erious consideration, he bethought himself N of 

m 
iii 
f; 
LII 

‘ (] 
( 2^8) 
of what he had. to do in order to this dear Appointment : He finds in her Letter, that in the first place he was, to Send her the Letter from Philander : I told you before, he took obarijips Letter from the Page; when he understood his Lord was going five Leagues out of Town to the Prince. obavio coifd not avoid his going and write to Silvia; in which he Sent her the Letter lander writ, wherein was the first part of the confession of his Love to Madam the Countess ot cla rinati: Generously ouavio Sent it without Terms; but d/v/z/v^ Aid his own forg’d one into andonetps Hand in lieu of it, and now he read that from Philander ^ and wonder’d at his lord’s Inconstancy; yet glad of the Opportunity to take Silvias Heart a ittie more off from him, he Soon re.. 
Solvd 
L 
', L 
solv’d She Should have the Letter; but beiag whctly Mercenary, and fearing, that either whea uncc She had it, it might make her go back from her promis’d allignati on, or at least put her out of humour, So as to Spoil a great part of the Entertainment he defignd : He took the pains to counterfeit another Billet to her, which was this, ’ 
To SILVIA. 
Q Ince we have began to chaster, 
0 you must give me leave to make the best of the advantage 
1 find I have upon you; and having violated my Honour to Philander, allow the breach of it in Some degree on other Occasions; not but I have all the Obedience 
N 2 * and 
lih’ 
'Wli; 
"'ri 


l 
70) 
and Adoration for you that ever poisefs’d thesoulof a most passionate and languishing Lover; But, fair Silvia., 1 know not whether, when you have Seen the Secret of thefalfe Phtlandtr, you may not think it lest valuable than you before did, and So defraud me of my due. Give me leave, oh wondrous Creature 1 to Sufpect even the most perfect of your Sex; and to tell you that I will no Sooner approach your presence, but I will resign thepaper you So much wish. If you Send me no answer I will come according to your directions; Ifyoudo, I must obey, and wait, though with that impatience that never attended a Suffering Lover, or any but, 
Divht Creature 
Tour Octavio. This 
- 
tlf 
II 
ie: :.. ■ 
r; a 
.'w 
JS 


This he Seald, and after a coo venienc distance of time, carried as from the Page to araomtt^ who was yet contriving wdth her Lady, to w horn fly give^ir, who read it with abundance of Impatience, being extremely angry at the rudcnefs of the Style, which She fancy’d much alter’d from what it was; and had not her Rage blinded her, She might easily have perceiv’d the difference too of the charactertho it came as near to the like as posstible (b short a prastice could produce; She took it with the other, and tore it in pieces, with Rage, and Swore she would be revenged; but after cdmer Thoughts she took up the Pieces to keep, to upbraid him with and fell to weeping for Anger, Defeat, and Shame: but the Afril Shower being past, she returned to her former Ilefentiiient, and had N 2 fbme 
1 
(.272) 
Some pleasure amidst all her torment of fears, jenloufies, and fente of oivvio^s dlird’pect, in the thoughts of Revenge; in Order to which ibe comrives how an iomt iliall manage herself, and commanding her to bring out Some finepoint Linen, Ihe dreis’^d up antomtps Head with them, and put her 00 a Shift Jacd w'itii the same ^ for though (he intended no light stiould be in the Chamber when (jilavio stiould enter, stie knew he understood by his touch the disference of fine things from other, in fine, having drefs’d her exarstly as She herself us’d to be when (he receiv’d OB avid % Visits in Bed, (be embrac’d her, and fancy’d she was much of her own Shape and bigness, apd that ’twas impossible to find the deceit: And now She made Antonett dress her up in her Clothes, and mobbing 
( 275) 
hing her Sarcenet Hood about her Head, stie appear’d Antomtt (all but the Face) that ’twas not easy to distinguish ’em : And Night coming on they both long for the hour of twelve, though with different designs 5 and having before given notice, ixvdit Silvia was gone to Bed, and wou’d receive no Visit that Night, they were alone to finisn all their bufmess: This while brt/ljard was not idle, but having a fine Bath made he wash’d and perfum’d his Body, and after dress’d himself in the nnest Linen perfum’d, that He had, and made himself as fit as postible for his Design ^ was his Shape, which w: as very good, or his Stature unlike to that of ociavio : And ready for the approach, he conveys himself out of the Houte. telling his Footman, he tvoud put himtelf to Bed after his Ban 4 thing 
i" mi 
ill: 
( 274,) 
thing, and locking his Chamber Door, hole out, and it being dark, many a longing turn he walked impatient till all the Candies were out in every Room of the House: : the mean time he employed his thoughts ona.thonsand things, but all relating to si/via; ibme tirites the Treachery he showed in this Action to his Lord, can fed short'liv’d Btefhes in his Face, which vanisisci as shon, when he considerd his Lord false to the most beautiful of her Sex : Sometimes he accused, and curs’d the Levity of AD, that could yield to 0 ciauw, and was as jealous as if She had indeed been to have received that charming Lover; but when his thought directed him to his own Happinest, his pulse beat high, his Blood flash’d apace in his Cheeks, his Eyes languished with L ove, and his Body with a feverish 
; h: r 
C 275) 
verish Sit? In thete Extremes hy turns he past at least three tedious Hours, with a striking Watch Sn his Hand; and when it told ’twas twelve, he advanc’d nearer the Door, but finding it Shut walk’d yet with greater impatience every half minute going to the Qoor 5 at last he found it yield to his hand that puslsd it: But oh, what Mortal can express his Joy! his Heart beats double, his Knees tremble, and a feeblencfs Seizes every Limb; he breaths nothing hut short Sighs, and is ready in the dark Hall to fall on the Floor, and was forc’d to lean on the Rail that begins the Stairs to take aik tle Courage : while he was there recruiting himself, intent on nothing but his vast Joy; Ocfnvw. who going to meet the Skince, being met halfway by that young' (?, wasdirnacht back again with 
J. k, O 
N OUT 
I';. I" 
) 
out advancing to the end of his five Leagues, and impatient to see Silvia after phiundeps Letter that he had tent her, or at least impatient to hear how She took it, and in what condition She was, jb| he, as fbon as he alighted, went Cj towards her houte in hope to have C: met Aritonett, or her Page, or fbme 
that cou’d inform him of her n"ij vveishre; though kwas usnal for v/y %4a to Sit up very late, and he I had often made her Visits at that Yff hour: And Briiljard., wholly intent on his Adventure, had left the Door open; fb that Offavio perceiving it, believed they were all up ill the back Rooms where bva 'itid.s Apartment was towards a Garden, for he Saw no Ifght forward: But he was no fboner eu ter’d f which he did without noise) but he heard a Soft breath made him make a Siand 
i ti 
VD( 
() 
land in the Hall: And by and by he heard ifhe fbfc tread of Some body descending the Stairs; Ac this he approaches near, and the Hall being a Marble Floor, his Tread was not heard : When he 
heard one cry with a Sigh -- -- — 
ivhd.s there f And another reply, Its I; who are you? The first, re ply’d, A fafthfid and an impatient Lover. Give me your Hand then., replied the Female Voice, I will conduct you to your Happtmfs. You imagine in what Surprise 0 ftavio was at So unexpected an adventure, and like a jealous Lover did not at all doubt but the Happiness expected was shvia, and the impatient Lover Some one whom he cou’d not imagine, but rav’d within to know, and in a moment ran over in his Thoughts all the Men of Quality, cr celebrated Beauty, or Fominc 
in 
■hi 
1 I'i' 

V P)) 
the Town, but was at as great a loss as at first thinking : Bttt 
he thou who thou wilt '., cry d he to hirnself; 7 rdytor as thott arty I will hy thy Death, revenge my self' mt the faithltfs Pair One : And taking out his Sword, he advanc’d toward the Stairs Loot, when he heard them both fbftiy ascend;; being a Man of perfect good Nature, as all the Brave and Witty are, he reflected on the southeast vere usage he had had from Silvia ^ notwithstanding all his Industry, his vast Expense, and all the Advantages of Nature. This Thought made him in the midst ofali his Jealousy and Haste, •pawfe a little Moment; and fain he woisd have persuaded him Iclf that what he heard was the Errors of his Sense;; that he dream d or that it was at least not to suvidy to whom' this yet, afeeoding 
ascending Lover was advancing : but to undeceive him of that favourable Imagination, they were no Sooner on the top of the Stairs, but he not being many Steps behind cou’d both hear and see by the ill light of a great sash window on the Stair cate, the happy Lover enter the chamber door of ND, which he knew too well to be mistaken; not that he could perceive who or what they were, but two Perfbns not to be distinguilh’d. Oh what human Fancy, (but that of a Lover, to that degree that was our young Hero,) can imagine the amazement and torture of his Soul, wherein a thousand other Passions reigned at once, and, maugre all his Courage and Resolution tered him to fink beneath, their weight, he hood holding himself up by the Rails of thestak case, wsiihouc 
having 
fii' 
A: 

) i'tj 
( 280) 
having the Power to ascend farther, or to Show any other Signs of Life, but that of Sighing, had he been a favour’d Lover, had he been a known declar’d Lover to all the World, had he but hop’d he had had fb much intvest with the false Beauty, as but to have been defign’d upon for a future Love or Ute, he woo’d have rufht in, and have made the guilty Night a Covert to a Scene of Blood; but even yet he had an awe upon his Soul for the perjur’d fair One; rho at the Same time he refblv’d Rie Should be the Object of his Hate; for the Nature of his honest Soul abhorred an a ction So treacherous and base : He begins ill a moment from all his good thoughts of her, to think her the most jilting of her Sex 5 he knew if locrest coifd oblige her, DO Man in bdufd had a bcr 
ter 
o, 
) 
ter pretence to her than himself; who had already without any return, even So much as hope, presented her the value of eight or ten thousand pound in fine Plate and Jewels: IS it were looser desire he fancy‘d himself to have appear’d as capable to have serv’d her as any Man; burr oh he con cders there is a Fate in things; a destiny in Love that elevates and advances the most mean, deform’d or abject; and debases and contemns the most worthy and magnificent : Then he wonders at her excellent Art of dissembling for phtunder; he runs in a minute over all her Passions of rage, jealousy, tears and fbftnes; and now he hates the whole Sex, and thinks ’em all like Silvia than which nothing cou’d appear more despicable to; his preftnt tboughr, and with asinile (while 
yet 
M • if 
hr ‘ 
'!■' 'if 
ll': I 
It i 

\ 
1 t 
''t, 

( 282) 
yet his heart wr^s insensibly breaking, he fanfies himfelfa very Coxcomb, a Cully, an ioipos’d on Fool and a conceited Fop : - value’s Sihia as a cornmon f ir Jilt, whose whole design was to deceive the world, and make her self a Fortune, at the price of her Honour, one that receives all kind bidders, and that he being too lavish, and too mode si: was re serv’d the Cully on pnrpofe to be undcae and jilred o it of all his Fortune; This Thought was So perfectly fixed in him, that he recover’d out of his excess of Pain, and. fancy’d himself perfectly cur d of his blind Pasiion, refblves to leave her to her beallly entertainment, and to depart; but before he did So, sh vtdj fwho had conducteckc'io a morous Spark to the Bed where the expecting Lady lay drds rich 
and Sweet to receive him) return’d 

: X 
■ 7' 

out 
( 289) 
out of the Chamber, ' and the light. being a little more favourable to his Eyes, by his being So long in the dark, he perceiv’d xxfantomtt^ at lest Such a Sort of Figure, as hefancy’d her, and to confirm him Saw her go into that Chamber where he knew She lay, he Saw her perfect Dress, and all confirm’d him; this brought him back almost to his fortner confusion; but yet he commands his Pafiion, and descended the Stairs, and got himself out of the Hall into the Street; and Silvia, having forgot the Street Door was open, went and Shut it, and return’d to Antonett\ Chamber with the Letter which Briiljartl had given to Antoftett, as She lay in the Bed, believing it Sihia: For that trembling Lover was no Sooner enter’d the Chamber and approach’d the Bed fide, but he kneel’d before it, 
and 

( 284) 
. and offer’d the price of his Hap pioefs, this Letter; which file imroediatciy gave to silvu unperceiv’d, who quitted the Room : And now with all the eager hade of impatient Love, She strikes a Light and falls to reading the Sad contents; but as (he read (he many times fainted over the Paper, and as she has since Said, hwas a wonder sire ever recover’d, having no Body with her. By that time she had iinisti’d it, she was So ill She was notable to gather Self into Bed, .but threw herself down on the place where (he Sat, which was the side of it, in Siich Agonies of Grief and Despair, as northeast ver any Soul was postefs’d of, but Silvias^ wholly abandon’d to the violence of Love and Despair: : is imposiible to paint a Torment to express hers by; and though She had vow’d to Antonm it Should 
; ^ 
not 
I 
( 285) 
not at all affect her, being fb prepoffefs’d before j yet when (he had the confirmation of her fears, and heard his own dear Soft words addrerd to another Object, saw his Transports, his Impatience, his Languishing Industry and Endeavour to obtain the new desire of his Soul; She found her resentment above Rage, and given over to a more Silent and leis Supportable Torment, brought her Sell into a high Fever.., where She lay without fb much as calling for Aid in this Extremity; not that She was afraid the Cheat she had put on would be discover’d, for 
(be had lest the remembrance that any Such Prank was plaid; and in this multitude of thoughts of more concern, had forgot all the rest of that night’s Action. 
Offavh this wshile was traversing the Street, wrapped in his Cloak 
just 
o85 

iilf 
) 
just as if he had come from Horse, for he was no Sooner gone from the Door, but his resenting palli on returned, and he refblvm to go up again, and disturb the Lovers, tko’it cost him his life and fame : But returning hastily to the Door he found it Shut; at which being enraged, he was often about to break ic open, but still fbme unperceivable Respect for Silvia prevented him, but he refblv’d not to stir from the Door, till he saw the fortudaterogue come our, who had given him all this Torment? At first he curs’d iiimself for being fo much concern’d for Silvia or her Anions, to waste a Minute, but flattering himself that it was not love to her, but pure curiosity to know w the Man, who was made the next Fool to hirafelf, though the more happy one, he waited ail Night, and when 
he 
( S) 
he began coo see the day break, which he thought a thousand years *, his Eye was never off from the Door, and wonder’d at their confidence, who woum let the day break upon them, hut the cloje tiran^n Curtains there, cry’d he, favours the hapfy Villainy : Still he walk’d on, and still he might for any Rival that was to appear for a most unlucky accident prevented briujardscorning out, as he doubly intended to do, first for the better carrying on of his cheat of being oilavio; and next that he - had. challeng’d ouavio to fight, and when he knew his Error, design’d to have gone this morning and ask’d him pardon if he had been return’d; but the Amorous Lover overnight, ordering himself for the Incounrer to the best advantage had Sent a Note to a Doctor, for fbmething that wou’d 
encouiiage 

(.88), 
encourage his Spirits, the Doctor came, and opening a little Box, wherein was a powerful Medicine: He told him that a Dose of diofe little Flies wou’d make him come ’ off with wondrous Honour in the battle of Love, and the Doctor being gone to call for a Glass of Sack, the Doctor having laid out of the Box what he thought requifiteon a piece of Paper, and leaving the Box open; our Spark thought if Such a dofewou’d encourage him fb, a greater wou’d yet make him do greater Wonders, and taking twice the quantity our of tiie Box, puts ’em into his Pocket, and having drunk the first with full Directions, the Doctor leaves him; who was no fboner gone, but he takes those out of his Pocket, and in a Glass of Sack drinks cm down; after this he Baths and dresses, and 
believes 
( 2§9) 
believes himself a very Hcrctdes^ that could have got at leaf! twelve Sons that happy Night; But he was no Sooner laid in Bed with the charnsing Stlvia as he thought, but he was taken with intolerable Gripes and Pains, Such as he had never felt before, insomuch as he was not able to lie in the Bed : This enrages him, he grows mad and asham’d, fbme times he had little Intermissions for a moment of ease, and then he wou’d plead softly by her. Bed fide, and ask ten thousand Pardons; w’hich being easily granted, he wou’d go into Bed again, but then the pain wuu’d feizehim anew, fb that after two or three hours of Distraction he was forc’d to oress and retire : but instead of going dowm he went softly up to his own Chamber, where he sate him down and 
cursed 
. J fi: .!. !r 
I■, lfft f 
s 
!(Hi 
tibi' 



curs’d the World, himself and his hard Fate; and in this extremity of Pain, Shame and Grief, he remain’d till break of Day; By which time Antomtty who was most violently afflicted, got her Coats on, and went to her own Chamber, where stie found her Lady more dead than alive. She immediately Shifted her Bed Linen, .nd made her Bed, and conducted her to it, without endeavouring to divert her with the History of her own Misfortune; and only ask’d her many Qiiestions concerning her being thus ill: To which the wretched silvu only answer’d with Sighs; So that Arttomdt perceiv’d iwas the Letter that had dtfbrder’d her, and begg’d she might be permitted 
to see it; yfhe gave her leave, 
>■ 
and read it; but no Sooner 
was She come to that part of 
it. 
_ ■ ( 291) it which nam’d the Countess of curmtth^ but she ask’d her Lady if she understood who that per fbn was, with great Amazement? atthisv/7 z/i^ was content to Speak, pleas’d a little that she Sboulcl have an account of her Rival. No, Said she, Dost thou knov her? 
Madaniy replied Antonety par' ticuurly well, fori have jered her ever face I tv as a Girl of five years old; foe being of the same Age with me, and sent at six years old both to a Monaflry y for jhe being fond of my puy her Father sent me at that Age with her, b th to serve and to divert her with Babies and Baubles, there we liv*d [even years togethery when an rr; Spaniard, the Count of cla rinau, fell in love with my Lady, and married her from the monafit rjy before (he Lad seen any part Af the ivcrfd beyond thoje 'jatjbijitd • O Walls 
( j-90 
»•» 
Myalls. She crfiviutrly to have had me to Collen with her httt he [aid J was too young now for her Service, ^ and fo sent me away hack to my own Town which is thk^ and here my Lady was horn too and is Sister to — -- -- Here She stopped, fearing 
to tell; which perceiving 
with abrisknds (which her Indisposition one woffd have thought could net have allowed) sate up in her Bed, and cry’d, iiab Sister to whom? Oh, how ■ thou wouldst gleafe me to say to osta vio. Why Madam would it fleafte yott sail the blushing Maid? Because laid Silvia '^twotid in part revenge me on his bold Addrejfet to me and he would also he obliged in ho nour to hts Familyy to tevenge him -- [elf on Philander. Ah Madam, Said she, as to his prejumption to wards you., sort it northeast has fiftflciently revenged it j at this she hung dowh 
her 
n 
I 
Uli> 
linn f w 
> I 
*/ r 
her head and look’d very fooiioi ly : ho)v^ said Silvia Smiling and rearing herself yet more in her Bed, Is any misfortune arrled to Octavio. Oh how 1 will triumph 
and upbraid the daring Man — -- -- -- - 
tell me quickly what it is; for no thing would rejoice me more than to hear he were p.unifl/d a little : Upon this Antonett tem her what an unlucky Night She had, how obavio was seiz’d, and how he departed, by which Silvia believ’d he had made Some discovery of the Cheat that was put upon him, and that he only feign’d illness to get himself looie from her embraces ^ and now ste falls to considering how She Shall be reveng’d on both her Lovers : And the best She can pitch upon is that of felting them both at odds, and making them fight and revenge themselves on one ano o 2 there 

■\ 
( 294) 
there; but She like a right Woman, could not dissemble her re leptment of Jealousy, what ever Art she had to do So in anypther point; but mad to ease her Soul that was full, and to upbraid Phi undtr^ She writes him a Letter, but hot till She had once more, to make her stark mad, read his over again, which he Sent oflyf 
*vto. 
Sih ia to Philandet. 
/ ES, perjur’d Villain, at last all thy Perfidy is arriv’d to my Knowledge 5 and thou hadst better have been damn’d, III or have fallh like an ungrateful Traitor as thou art, under the pubiick Shame of dying by the common Executioner, than have Salih under the grasp of my Revenge, 
( ^95) 
venge, insatiate as thy Lust, false as thy tre>fons to rhy Prince, fatal as thy Destiny, loud as thy Infamy, afid bloody as thy Parry. Villain/villain, where got you the Courage to use me thus, knowing my Injuries, and my Spirit; thou feest, bale Tray tor, I do not fail cn thee with Treachery, as thou hast on thy King, and m.stress; to which thou hast broke thy Holy Vows of Allegiance and Eternal Love but thou that hast broke the Laws of God and Nature! What cou’d I expect, when neither Religion, Honour, common Justice, nor Law cou’d bind thee to humanity; thou that betray’d thy Prince, abandon’d thy.wife, renounc’d thy Child, kill’d thy Mother, ravilh’d thy Sister', and art in open Rebellion against thy Native Country, and very Kindred and Brothers. oh after thisj, O 3 what 
( 
IV) 
what musl the Wretch expest, who has‘believ’d thee, and follow’d thy abject Fortunes, the miserable outcast Slave, and contempt of the World: What cou’d She ex pest, but jhac the Villain is still potent in thee unrepested, and all the Lover dead and gone, the Vice remains, and all the ver tue vanifted. Oh, what cou’d I expest frora shdi a Devil, ib lost in sin.and wijeedness, that even those, for whom he veniiistd all Ills Same, ' and lost his Fortune, lent like a State Cully upon the pub ick Faith, on the Security of Rogues, Knaves and Tray tors: e ven those Hay turn’d him odt of their Councels, for a Pveprobate too lewd for the villainous Society: Oh curs’d that I was by Heaven and Fate, to be blind nd deaf to all thy Infamy, and fuster thy adorable bewitching 
face 
re 
! Ij t 

J J 

( 297) 
Face and Tongue to charm me to madiiefs and undoing, when that was all thou hadst left thee thy false Per Son, to cheat the silly, easy, fond, believing World, into any Sort of opinion of thee, for not one good Principle • was left, not one poor Vertueto guard thee from Damnation, thoii hadfl: but one Friend let thee, one true, one real Friend, and that was wretched Silvia; fine, when ail a bandon’d thee but the Executioner, •fitd vcth thee, fufi’er’d with thee, starv’d with tivee, lost her Fame and Booour with thee, lost her Friend jierparenrs and all herbeau ties hopes for thee, and in lieu of all, found only the Accusation of all the Good, the hate of all the Virtuous, the Reproaches of her'kindred, the fcornofall chaste Maids, and curses of all honest: Wives : and in requital had only o4 thy 
_ ( ■) 
thy false Vows, thy empty 
thy faithlcia Embraces, and colei diffembkd h^iises. My only Comfort was, Sah miserable Comforfo to fancy they were true; now that’s departed too, and! have nothing burr a brave Revenge left in the room of all! in which fil be as mereijefs and irreligious as even thou hast been in all thy Asifions; and there remains about me only this Sense of Honour yet; that I dare tell thee of my bold defigo; a bravery thou hast never shewt^d to me, whotakest me unawares, stabb’st me without a warning of the how; ib wou’dst thou serve thy King hadst thou but Power; and So thou ferv’st thy Mistress; when I look back even to thy Infancy, thy Life has been but one continued Race of Treachery, and I (destin’d thy evil Genius) was born for thy 
tormen 
ii 
Tormentor, for thou hast made a very Fiend of me, and I have Hell within; all Rage, all Torment, Fire, dillradion, madness; 
I rave, I burn, I tear myself and faint, am still a dying, but can never fall, till I have grasp’d thee '‘with me : Oh, I should laugh in Flames to see thee howling by : I Scorn thee, hate thee, loarli thee more than ever I have lov’d thee, and hate myself So much for ever loving thee, fto be re vengd upon the filthy Criminalj 1 will expose myself to all the World, cheat, jilt, and flatter all •as thou hast done, and having not one Sense or Grain of Honour left, will yield the abandon’d body, thou has rlbed to every asking Fop : Nor is that ail, for they that purchase this, Shall buy it at the ptice of being my 
And ail Oaallaid in my Re O 5 
Z'0*S 
hi 
h'itt 
300 
V 
venge on thee; all merciless and as lelbiv’d as I j as 1! the injured 
Silvia. 
Having Shot this flash of the light ningofherfbul, and finisht her rant, She found herself much easier in the resolves on revenge fly had fix’d therec She Scorn d by any vain endeavour to recall him from his pas sion, She had Wit enough to have made those eternal Observations, that Love once gone is nevdr to be retriev’d, and that it was impoitn ble tocease loving, and then again to love the Same persoo, one may believe for Sometime ones love is abated, but when it comes .to ' a trial, it Shows it self as vigorous as in its sir ft Shine, and finds its ov/n Error; but when once ‘one comes to love anew Objest, it can never jeturn with more than pity, com pailion, or civility for the first: 
i lilts 
■ h 
as; 
501) 
This is a most certairi truth which all Lovers will find, as most Wives may experience, and which our Silvia now rook for granted, and gave him over for dead to all but her Revenge. Though Fits of Softnest, Weeping, Raving, and Tearing, wou’d by turns Seize the dilfra dead abandon’d Beauty, in which Extremities She has recourse to Scorn and Pride, too feeble to aid her too often : The first thing stie resolv’d on by .the advice of her reafbnable Counsellor, was to hear Love at both her ears, no matter whether Ihe regard it or not, but to hear all as a remedy against loving one in particular; for his most certain that the use of hearing Love, or ot making Love (tho’ ac first without design) either in Women or Men, - stiall at last unfix the most confirm’d and constant resbluti 
0: 1 
I 
r 
o ro 
00. 
Abtd ft/, 
1) 

tnce yott are a 
tfftr/d, 
con 
tinu’d Antomtt, that si^hs nor Tears hrinos back the wander d Loo 

naenj and that dying for him rvh be no revenge on him, but rather a kind assurance that y rit^ will no more trouble the Man, who is already weary of you, you ought with all your Power, Indttjlry,, and Rea Jon rather to seek the preservation of that Beauty, and fine humour to jtrve you on all Occasions, either for Revenge or Love than by a fooliflj and insignificant Concern and Sorrow reduce your self to tyre Condition of being for Ad by all, or at best hut paid : Slow 1 picy’d! cry’d the haught.dii/ad, Is there anything fb infopportable to our Sex as pity! Nofurely, repiy’d the Servant, when ’tis accompany’d by Love: Oh what blessed comfort 'tis to hear People cry -- - 
She was once Chamling, once a 
Beauty 

h’o 

u 
!Pll 
m 
ni 
'itk 
rtoi 
t4 
ilijf) 
for 
’S! 
lerei 
die 
)ni( 
( ^1) 
Beauty : Is anything more grating, Madam? At this rate ihe ran on, and left nothing unsaid that might animate the angry Sthta to love a new, or at least to receive and admit of Love, for in that Climate, the Air naturally breeds Spirits avaritious, and much inclines them to the Love of Money, which they will gain at any price or hazard, and all this discourse to Silvta was but to incline the revengeful listening Beauty to admit of the Addresses of osiavio^ because She knew he would make her Fortune. Thus was the unhappy Maid, left by her own unfortunate conduct, incotn pafs’d in on every fide with Distraction; and She was pointed out by Fate to be made the most wretched of all her Sex, nor had tee left one faithful Friend to advise or stay her youth in its ha — 
fy 
v4 
( n4) 
sty advance to ruin; She hears the perswading Eloquence of the flattering Maid, and finds now nothing So prevalent on her Soul as Revenge, and nothing fborhs it more; and amongst all her Lovers, orthofeat least that She knew a dor’d her, none was found So proper an instrument as the noble os?^ viojhh youth, his wit, his gallantry, but above all his fortune pleads most powerfully with her; fbthat She refblves upon the Revenge and fixes him the Man, whom (he now knew by fb many Ote ligations was oblig’d to Serve her 
Thus splvitt 
a 
turn on 
phitanatr 
found a little Tranquillity, Such as it was, in hope of revenge, while the paflioaateov<«7.d was wreck’d with a thoufed Pains and Torments, fucli as none but jilted Lovers can imagine, and having a thousand times resoiv’d to hate 
her. 
IV 
m 
Sit 
ers. 
’ aj ipei 
try; 
: hat 
lonl 
Ol>: 
kr| 
hii\ 
m 
hii&' 
ror_ 
lid 
( 3'55) 
her, and as often to love on, in spite of all — after a thousand Arguments againd her, and as many in favour of her, he arriv’d only to this knowledge, that his Love was extreme, and that he had no power over his Heart, that Honour, Same, int’rest, and whatever elle might oppose his. Violent flame, were all too weak to extinguifli the least Spark of it, and ail the Conquest he cou’d get of himself was, that he Sustered all his Torment, all the Hell of raging Jealousy grown to Confirmation, and all the Pangs of absence for that whole day, and had the Courage to live on the Rack without easing one Moment of his Agony by a Letter or Billet; .which in fuchcafes discharges the burden and preftures of the Lovesick Heart; ^ndsilvia who dressed, and suffer’d her self wholly to be 
carry’d 
’1 
'1 

A 4 
ftp 
{ 3a) 
carryd away by her Vengeance, expedied him with as much impatience as ever She did the cominu; of the once adorable Philander tho’ with a different Passion j but all the livelong day past in expectation of him, and no. Lover appear’d; no not fb tnuch as a Billet, nor Page at her uprifint co ask her Health 5 So that, believing he had been very ill indeed, from what Antomtt told her of his be in 2 So all Night, and fearipg now that it was no discovcry of the cheat put upon him by the exchange of the Maid for the mistress, but real (ickness, She resolv’d to Send to him, and the rather because Antonett alturm her he was really lick, ' and in a cold damp Sweat all over his Face and fdands which Ihe touclvd, and that from his in finite concern at the defeat, the extreme respect he fhew’d her in 
midst 

( 5n) 
midst of all the rage at his own disappointment, and every Circumstance; she knew k was no feign’d thing for any discovery he had made : On this confirmation, from amaid cuning enough to distinguish Truth from flattery, She writ o&a zio this Letter at Night. 
Silvia to Octavio. 
Fter Such a parting from a Maid fb entirely kind to you; She might at least have hop’d the Savour of a Billet from you, to have inform’d her of your health; unlefsyou think that after we have Surrendered all, we are of the Humour of most of your Sex, who despife the obli ger, but I believd you a Man above the little Crimes and Levities of your Race, and I am yet 
So 
'II 
irt'k 8 
(908). 
fo hard to be drawn from that Opinion *, I am willing to flatten myself, that 'tis yet Some other reason that has hindered you from visiting me Since, or Sending me an account of your recovery, which LI am too sensible of to believe was feign’d, and which indeed has made me So tender, that leasily forgii^e all the disappointment I receiv’d from it; and beg you will not afflict your self at any loss, you suflain’d by it, Since I am still fo much the same I was, to be as Sensible as before of all the Obligations I have "o you, send rne word immediately how yon do, for on that depends a great part of the happincss of 
Silvii. 

I .it 
L r 
r. 
You may easily see by this Letter Hie was not in a humour of either writing Love or much fiat' tery, for yet (he knew.not how 
she 
(d.oq) 
She ought to retent this absence in ail kinds from obavio, and therefore with what force Oie could put upon a Soul too wholly taken up with the thoughts of another, more dear and more af flisting, she only writ this to fetch one from him, that by it she might learn part of his Sentiment of her last action, and Sent her Pago with it to him; who, as was usual, was carried directly up to obaztiowhom he found in a Gallery, walking in a most dejested posture without a Hat, unbrac’d, • his Arms a cross his open Breast, and his Eyes bent to the Floor; and not taking any notice when the Pages entered, his own was forced to pull him by the Sleeve, before he wuuld look up, and starting from a thousand thoughts that oppressed him almost to death, he gaz’d wildly about him and 
ask’d 
) 
^sk’d their bosinefs : When the Page delivered him the Letter : he took it, but with Such confu fion as he had much a do to slip pore himself, .but refblving not to show his fecbleness to her Page, he made a Ihifc to get to a Wax Light,, that was on the Table and 
read it; and was not much' a 
maz’d at the Contents, believing (he was purfiiing the business of her Sex and Life, and jilting him on; (for Such was his opinion of all Women now) he forc’d a Smile of (corn, tho’ his Soul were bursting, and turning to the Page gave ’ him a liberal Reward, as was his daily use when he came, and muster’d no So much Courage as to force himself to Sa— —, tell your Lady it requires no anfster,, you may tell her too, that A am in 
perfeb good Health -- -- -- -- He was 
oppress’d to Speak more, but Sighs 
stopp’d 

tlli 
: er! 
ilii 
H 
tti 
H 
anc 
ai 
H 
i ol 
hioi 
loi 
A 
ive 
bis 
[nd 
-1 
; il,, abi 
( 30) 
stopped him, and his former refb lution, wholly to abandon all Cor,, with her, check’d his forward Tongue;, and he walk’d away to prevent himself from saying more : While the Page, who wonder’d at this turn of Love, after a little waiting, departed, and when obavio had ended his walk, and turn’d, and saw him gone, his Heartfelt a thousand Pangs not to be born or Supported; he was often ready to recall him, andw'as angry the Boy did not urge him. for an answer. He read the Letter again, and wonders at nothing now after her last Nights Action, thoall was riddle to him : He found stwas writ to Some happier Man than himself, however he chanc’d to have it by mistake; and turning to the outside, view’d the Superfeription, where there happen’d to be none 
at 


C 5) 
at ail, for Sllvid wti't in haste, and when fire did it stwas the least of her thoughts : And now he believm he had found out the real Mystery, that it was not meant to him; he therefore calls his Page, whom he Sent immediately after that of Silvitt, who being yet below (for the Lads were laughing together for a Moment) he brought him to his distrasted Lord; who nevertheless affum’d a mildness to the innocent Boy, and cry’d, My Child thoa hast miftakfn the Person to whxtm thou fbo/d.dfl haaje carried the Letter and I am Jjrry I opendu pray return it to the happy Man ’twad meant to giving him the Letter. My Lord, reply’dthe Boy, I do not use to carry Letters to a ny hutyottr lordjfjip : 'Tis the foot mens bajimjs to do that to other perlons. is a mistake tvhere ever 
it 
\ re 
jv I % 
Ethc 
:, oc i Id. 
i( vc 

: 
‘k: 
'^ot, 
'■ a 
a' ' 
( 0) 
it ikscry’d obavio Sighing, whether in thee or thy Lady sq turning 
from the wondering Boy he left him to return with his Letter to his Lady, who grew mad at the relation of what she heard from the Page, and notwithstanding the torment she had on her Sou], occasioned by Philander., she now found She had more to endure, and that in'spight of all her Love vow and Resentments, she had Something ioxobavtoto which she cou’d not give a Name, she fancies it all Pride, and Concern for the indignity put on her Beauty : But whatever it was this flight of his fb wholly took up her Soul, that She had for Sometime quite forgot Philander, or when Qie did think on him Twas with less Resentment than of this affront; ste considers Philander with Some excuse now; as having 

II 
( 314) 
ving long been poitefs’d of a hap piness he might gtow weary of; but a new Lover, who had for six Months incessantly. lain at her Feet, Imploring, Dying, Vowing, Weeping, Sighing, Giving, and Acting all things the most pastio nate of Men was capable of, or that Love cou’d inspire, for him to be at last admitted to the poffestion of the ravishing Object of his Vows and Soul, to be laid in her Bed; nay in her very Arms fas she imagin’d he thought) and then, even before gathering the Rotes he came to pluck, before he had begun to compote, orfi nioi’d his nosegay, to depart the happy Paradise with a disgust' ' Such a disgust, as first to oblige him to difsemble Sickaefs, and next fall even from all his Civilities, was a contempt She was not able to bear; especially from 
him 

rl: e: 
ra: 
V 
XV; 
i‘ 
) 
ler 
k 
him who of all Men living she defignd to make the greatest property.of, as most fit for her Revenge, of all degrees and forts: But when she refledfed with rea fbn, (which She Seldom did, for either Love or Rage blinded That) She cou’d not conceive it possfible that o&aztio cou’d be fall’n fo rid denly from all his Vows and pro fesssons, but on fbme very great provocation: Sometimes stie thinks he tempted her to try her Virtue to phi/a^dery and being a perfect Honourable Friend, hates her for her levity, but file confiders his pre fenrs, and his unwearied Industry, and believes he wou’d not at that expense have bought a knowledge which cou’d profit neither himself or phi/a^der; then Ore believes Some difgustful Scent or fbmething about Antoneu might di{oblige him; but having call’d the Maid, P conju 
( 3^^) 
conjuring her to tell her whether anything pass’d between her and obavio; Ihe again told her Lady the whole truth, in which there cou’d be no discovery of Infirmi' ty there; she embrac’d her, lie kiss’dher Bofbm, and Sound her Touches Soft, her Breath and bo fom Sweet as anything in Nature cou’d be; and now lost almost in a Confusion of thought, fbe could not tell what to imagine; at last she being wholly pofsefs’d that all the fault was not in obavto^^ (for too often we believe as we hope) She concludes that Antonett has told him all the cheat stie put upon him : This last Thought pleasd her, because it seem’d the most probable, and was the most favourable to herself; and a thought, that if true cou’d not do her any Injury with him. This Set her Heart 
a 

icn: 
1 
CI 
II 
hi' '.ct'i 
SI 
oil 
jd( 
till 
rii 
au 
aa 
bi 
( u7) 
a little to rights, and She grew calm with a belief, that if To it was, as now She doubted not, a sight of her, or a future Hope from her, wou d calm all his dif content, and beget a right Understanding : She therefore resolves to write to him and own her little Fallacy : But before She did So; 0 bavuj whose Pastion was violent as ever in his Soul, though ’twas oppressed with a thousand Torments, and languish’d under as many feeble Resolutions, burst at last into all its former softness, and he resolves to write to the false Fair One, and upbraid her with her last Nights Infidelity; nor con’d he steep till he had that way charm’d his senses, and eas’d his Sick afflicted Soul. It being now ten at Night, and he retir’d to his Chamber, he Set himfuf down, and writ this. 
( 3^8) 
1- 
Octavio to Silvia. 
Madam,, 
Oil have at last taught me a perfect Knowledge of my self; and in .one unhappy Night made me see all the Follies and Vanities of my Soul, which Self-love and fond Imagination had too long rendered that way guilty; long, long! ive play’d the Fop as others do, and skew’d the gaudy Monsieur,, Set a Value on my worthless person for being well dress d, as I believ’d, and furnifh’d out for Conquest, by being the gayest Coxcomb in the Town, where even as I past perhaps I fancy’d, I made advances onfome wlihing Hearts, and vain, with but imaginary 
Vistory, I still fool’d on— — 
was 
Vo.; : ' 
j; rev;; : C 
al!; 
d pt 
C u9) 
ea 
ny 
; h 
nd 
sit 
lad 
lily 
tlii 
: fie 
LII 
fol 
nit 
s 
adi 
rts 
was at last undone; for I Saw sik wk, the Charming Faithless sik via, a Beauty that one wou’d have thoi^ht had had the power to have cur’d the fond difease of Self conceit and foppcty, since love they fay’s a remedy against those faults of Youth; but still my Vanity was powerful in me, and even this Beauty too : I thought it not impostible td vanquish, and still dress’d on, and took a mighty care to stiew myself — a Blockhead, curse upon me, while you were laughing at my Industry, and turn’d the fancying fool to ridicule. Oh, he deferv’cl it well; most wondrous wellvsoi' but believing anything about him, cou’d merit but a Serious thought from Sivta. silvta! whole business is to laugh at all; yet Love, that is my Sin, and punishment, reigns still as absolutely in my Soul, as when I 'P? wisht 
( 3 ^) 
wloi’d and hop’d, and long’d for mighty Bleifmgs you cou’d give : yes, I still love! only this wretchedness is fix’d iq it, to See those Errors which I cannot fbu'n; my loves as high, burr all my wish; es gone; my paftion still remains entire and raving, but no desire, I buroj I dye, but do not wisli to hope, I would be all Despair, and like a Martyr, am vain and proud even in Suffering. Yes, si/vta -- -- when you made me 
. t -- •, 

i!. 

\ 
f.r.t • »" 
ite. ii 
— ' “‘r' 
wise, you made me wretched too ^ Before, like a false woroiipper, I only saw the gay, the gilded fide of the deceiving Idol, but now cis fali’n -- discovers all the cheat, arid Shows a God no more; and ’ris in Love as in Religion too, there’s nothing makes their Votaries truly happy but being well deceiv’d : For even in Love itself, harmless and innocent, as ’tis 
by 
: 1 Ch: 
en: 

.ucir: 
y, - 
IVP ■ lis V .< 
ijtkv h ': »thc 

ove 
C n 
m 
'() 
by Nature, there needs a Ik tie Art to hide the daily discootents and torments, that fears, distrusts, and jealo lies create 5 a little Soft distimularion’s needful, for where the Lovers easy, he’s most constant. But oh, when Love it shfs defective too, and managli by design and little interest, what cunning, oh what cautions ought the fair designer then to call to her defence 5 yet \ confess your Plot — still Charming shvia, was sub tiiiy enough contrivli, discreetly carry’d on — The stiadesof Night, the happy Lovers Refuge, favour’d you too : ’twas only fate was cruel, fate that conducted me in an unlucky hour, dark as it was, and silent too the Night, I Saw: — Yes, faithless Fair, I Saw, I was betray’d; by too much Faith, by too much Love undone, i saw my fatal Ruin and your Perfidy : and like ', l 4. ■ a 
LII 

II 
( 522) ■ 
a tame ignoble Sufferer left you without revenge! 
f must confess oh thou deceiving fair One, I never cou’d pretend to vchat I wiovd, and yet methinks, because I know my Heart, and the entire Devotion that it paid you, I merited at least not to have been impos’d upon; but after fb dishonourable an Addon, as the betraying the Secret of my Friend, it was but just that I fhoisd be betray’d, and you have paid me well, deservedly well, and that Shall m)ke me st lent; and whatsoe’re I Suffer, howe’er I die, howe’er I languish out my wretched life, Till bear my Sighs where you Shall never hear ’em, nor the reproaches my Complaints express: Live thou a punishment to vain fanta stick hoping Youth, live and advance in cunning and deceit, to 
make 
ui 
Ili.'.). .'.). 
1: 
k CL 
(is 5 
make the fond believing Men more wise, and teach the Women newer Arts of falqiood, till they deceive fb long, that Man may hate and fet as vast a distance between Sex and Sex, as I ve refolv’d (oh Sihid.) thou Shalt be for ever from 
eiiavio. 
This Letter came just as Silvia was going to write to him; of which Ihe was excreamly glad, for all along there was nothing express’d that cou’d make her think he meant any other than the Cheat stie put upon him in Antomtt instead of her self: And it was Some ease to her mind to be astured of the cause of his anger and absence,, to find her own thought confirniu, that P 5 he 
( 
3 ^4) 
he had indeed discoverd the truth of the matter: She knew Once that was all, She cou’d easily reconcile him by a plain Confession, and giving him new Hopes; She therefore writes this anslver to him, which She Sent by his Page, who waited for it. 
Silvia to Octavio. 
9f -- 

iown, too angry, and too nice Ociavio^ the Crime you charge me with; and did believe a per fbo of your Gallantry, Wit, and Gaiety wou d have pass’d over So 
o fanus; irb only ronroarb 
little assault, with only reproaching me pleasantly, I did not expect So grave a reproof, or rather So Serious an accusation. Youth has a thousand Follies to answer for, and cannot qbavio pardon one Sally of it in Silvia. I rather 
there expected to have Seenyou early here this Morning, pleasantly rallying my little Perfidy, than to find you railing at a distance at it; calling it by a thousand Names that does riot merit half this Malice: And Sure you did not think me fb poor in good nature, but I cou’d Some other coming hour have made you amends for those you lost last Night, poitibly I could have wish’d myself with you at the same time; and had I perhaps follow’d my Inclination i had made you happy as you wlovdliut there Mere powerful reafbnsthat prevented me; I conjure you to let me See you, where I will make a confefiion of my last Nights fm, and give you Such Arguments to convince you of 
reconcile vou to love, hope, and — 
( 3^^) 
ft being late, She only lent this Short Billet: And not hoping that Night to see him, she went to Bed, after having enquir’d the health of bri/ijard, whom She heard was very ill; and that young defeated Lover finding it impossible to meet Oflavio as he had promis’d, not to fight him, but to ask his Pardon for his mistake, he made a Shift, with much ado, to write him a Note, which was this. 
Afy Lord, 
fconfefs my yesterdays rude nefs, and beg you will give me a Pardon before I leave the World; for I was last Night taken violently ill, and am unable to wait ou your Lordstiip, to beg what this most earnestly does for Xottr lordfj'jtps 
mofi devoted strz>ant^^ Briiljard. This 
- jc 
.'’q I idtt 
.; h Ir 
U; 
; -- 
0\ 
This Billet stho' it signified nothing to obavio, it serv’d Silvia afterguards to very good use and purpose, as a little time Shall make appear. And obavio receiv’d these two Notes from bril jard and Silvia., at the Same time; the one he flung by regardless, the other he read with infinite pain, scorn, hate, indignation, all at once storm’d in his Heart, he felt every pastion there but that of Love, which caus’d ’em ail; - if he thought lier false and ungrateful before, he now thinks her falln to the lowest degree of lewdness, to own her Crime with fiich Impudence; he fanfies now he’s cur’d of Love, and hates her absolutely, thinks her below even his Scorn, and puts himself to Bed, believing he Shall steep as well as before he Saw the light, the foolish Silvia : But oh he boasts in 
vain. 
C p.s.) 
vain, the Light, the foolisli to ^/a was charming still; still all the Beauty appear’d, even in his stumbers the Angel dawn’d about him, and all the Fiend was laid : He sees her lovely Face, but the false Heart is hid; he hears her charming Wit, but all the eun^ ning’s hush’d: He views the motions of her delicate Body, without regard to those of her mind, bethinks of all the tender Words she has given him, in which the jilting part is lost, and all forgotten; or if by chance it crols’d his happier thought, he rowls and tumbles in his Bed, he raves and calls upon her charming Name, till he have quite forgot it, and takes all the pains he can to deceive his own Heart : Oh his a tender part, and can endure no hurt; he fboths it therefore, and at the worst resolves, Since the 
vast 
; 'A - 
, 1 • 
L : C 
p : e; : 
'[; V, ' 
S.; ( 
() 
vast Blesting may be purchas’d, to revel in Delight; and cure himself that way : These flattering thoughts kept him all Night waking, and in the Morning he resolves bis Visit 3 but taking up her Letter which lay on the Table, he read it oer again, and by degrees, wrought himself up to madness at the thought that Silvia was poffefsd : Philantier he could bear with litde Patience, but that because before he lov’d or knew her, he cou’d allow; but 
this -- -- this wrecks his very Soul; 
and in his height of fury writes this Letter without consideration. 
i 
Octavio to Silvia. 
Since you profess your Seif a common mistress, and Set up for the Glorious Trade of Sin; 
Send 
( DO) 
feed me your Price, and I perhap may purchase Damnation at your rate. May be you have a Method in your dealing, and I have mistook you all this wdiiie, and dealt not your way; Instruct my Youth, great Mistress of the Art, and I stijll be obedient; tell me which way I may be happy too, and puc in for an Adventurer; I have a Stock of ready Youth and Money, pray name your Time and Sum, for Hours or Nights, or Months; 
I will be in at - all, or any, as you Shall find leisare to receive the impatient 
od.tavio» 
This in a mad Moment he writ, and Sent it e’er he had coofiderd farther, and Silvias who expected not fo course and rough a return, grew as mad as he in 
- reading 
C 
: Cht 
• < 
S ' .’'1 
: T ■ 


iu: * 
i ■! 
C 33^) 
reading it; and (lie had much a do to hold her hands off from beating the innocent Page that brought it : To whom Ihe turn’d with Fire in her Eyes, Flames in her Cheeks, and Thunder on her Tongue, and cry’d, (w tell jour Mr'fier that he is a Vill Pm; and if you dare approach me any more from hhn; Vll have my Footmen vehip you; and with a Scorn that discover’d all the Indignation in the World she turn’d from him, and tearing his Note, threw it from her and walk’d her way: : the Page, thunder struck, return’d to his Lord, who by this time was repenting he had manag’d his Passion no better \ and at what the Boy told him, was wholly convinc’d of his Error, he now cohfiderm her Character and Quality, and accus’d himself of great Indiscretion;; as he 
was 
() 
he was sitting the most dejected melancholy Man on Earth, reflecting on his misfortune, the Post arriv’d with Letters from phiunder., which he open’d, and laying by that which was enclosed for Silvia he read that from Philander to himself. 
Philander to Octavio. 
: : e ■< 
Here is no pain, my dear o&avio^ either in Love or Friendstiip like that of Doubt; and I confefs^my Self guilty os giving it you in a great measure by my Siience the last Post, but having bufiness of fo much greater concern to my heart than evenwri' ting to found my fel/un' 
able to pursue any other, and I believe you coifd too with the less impatience bear with my neglect 
having 

( 333) 
having Affairs of the same nature there^our circumftancesandthe bu finest of our hearts then being fb resembling, methinks I have as great an impatience to be recounting to you the Story of my Love and Fortune, as lam to receive that of yours, and to know what advances you have made in the Heart of the still charming: though 
there will be this difference in the Relations; mine, when ever I recount it will give you a double Satisfaction, first from the (hare your Friendship makes you have in all the Pleasures of Phtknder., and next that itexciffes Silvia if file can be false to me, for ostavio; and still advances his design on her heart: But yours, when ever I receive it, will give me a thoustnd pains, which ’tis however but just I Should feel, Since I was the first breaker of the fblemn League and 
Co( 
() 
Covenant made between us : which yet I do by ail that’s Sacred with a Regret, that makes me reflect with Some repentance in all those Moments wherein I do not whdlly give my Soul up to Love, and the more beautiful Califta: yes more, becaiife new. 
In my last, my dear o&avio, you left me pur Suing, like a Knight errant, a Beauty enchanted within Some invisible Tree, or Castle, or Lake, or anything inaccesiible, or rather wandering in a Dream after fbme glorious disappearing Fantom : And for Some time indeed,! knew not whether I Slept or wakst. I Sa w daily the good old Count of cuvmm \ of whom I durst not fb much as ask a civil question towards the fatisfactionof my Soul; the Page was fenc into Holland (with some express to. a brother-in-law of the Counts j of 
whom 


, !• - 
>1 
ic 
j; 
; .i: : 
: Kn: 
f.: b; 
!Trl 
"Lull 

? ft 
( 355) 
335 
whom before I had the intelligence of a fair young Wife to the old Lord his Master, * and for the rest of the Servants they Ipoke all Spamfh, and the Devil a Word we understood each o there, fb that ’twas impostible to learn, anything farther from them : and I found I was to owe all my good Fortune to my own Industry, but how to fet it a working, I cou’d not devise;; last it happen’d, that being walking in the Garden which had very high Walls on three fides, and a fine large a partment on the other, I concluded, that ’twas in that part of the Honfe, my fair new Conquered resided but how to be refblv’d I cou’d not tell, nor which way the Windows look’d that were to give the Light, forwards that' part o’th’ Garden there was none j at last I law the good old Gentleman 
() 
Man come trudging through the Garden fumbling out of his Pocket a Key, I steptintoan Arbour to observe him, and Saw him open a little Door that led him into another Garden, and locking the Door after him, vanisht 5 andobferving how that fide of the Apartment lay, I went into the Street, and after a large compass, found that which fac’d that Garden, which made the forepart of the Apartment. I made a story of fbme occasion I had for fbme upper Rooms, and went into many Houses, to find which fronted best the Apartment, and still distik’d fbmething till I met with one fb directly to it, that I coil’d, when I got a Story higher, look into the very Rooms, which only a delicate Garden parted from this by street: there’twas I fixed, and learned from a yourig Dutch woman that Spoke good French 
that 
■ly 
■X 

C d7) 
that, that was the very place I looktfor; the Apartment of Madam, the Countcls ‘of curtnm: She told me too, that everyday after Dinner the old Gentleman came thither, and fbmetimes a Nights; and bewail’d the young Beauty, who had no better entertainment than what an old wither’d Spaniard of threescore and ten cou’d give her: I found this young Woman apt for my purpose, and having very well pleas’d her with my Conversation, and Some little Presents I made her, I left her in good-humour, and refblv’d to Serve me on any design; and returning to my Ludging I found old cunnau return’d, Ss brisk and gay as if he had been carefs’d by fb fair and young a Lady; which very thought made me rave, and I had abundance of pain to withold my Rage from breaking out upon him, 
To 
■ ( ?38) 
So jealous and envious I was of what now I lovki and defir’d a thousand times more than ever; Since the relation my new young female Friend had given me: who had Wit and Beauty fiifficient to make her Judgement impartial .• However I contain’d my Jealousy with the hopes of a fiidden revenge 5 for I fancied the business half accomplifht in my knowledge 
of her residence I feign’d Some 
.: tik 
.. e 
is) 
: ro' 
business to the old Gentleman, that wou’d call me out of Town for a week to consuit with Some of our Party, and taking my leave of him, he offered me the Compliment of Money, or what elfe I should need in my Affair, which at that time was not unwelcome to me, and being well furnish*d for my Enterprise, I took Horse without a Page or Footman to attend me, because I pretended my business 
Ml 
id 1 
was 
( 339) 
was a Secret, and taking a turn about the Town in the Evening, I left my horse without the Gates, apd went to my Secret new Quarters, where my young Friend receiv’d me with the Joy os a ^istrefs, .and with whpm indeed I cou’d not forbear entertaining myself very well, which engayd her more to my Service, with the aid of my Liberality; but all this did not allay one Spark of the Fire kindled ip my Soul for the lovely Cdtfta; and I was impatient for Night, against which time I was preparing an Engine to mount' the Battlement, for soit was that divided the Garden from the Street, rather than a Wall T All things fitted to my purpose, I fix’d myself at the Window that look’d directly towards her Sa sires; and had the Satisfaction to see her dean in g there, and look' 
'. iag 
C 34^) 
iag on a Fountain that flood in the midsl of the Garden, and cast a thousand little Streams into the Air, that made a melancholy noise in falling into a large Alablafler Cistern beneath : Oh how my Heart danc’d at the dear sight, to all the Tunes of Love; I had not power to stir or speak, or to remove my Eyes, but languilht on the window where I leaned half dead with joy‘and Tranfportj for Ihe appear’d more charming to my view: undrefs’d and fit for Love! Oh, my obavio, fiich are the Pangs which I believe thou feltst at the approach of Silvia, fb beats thy Heart, Do rise thy Sighs, and Wishes, So trembling and fb pale at every view, as I was in this lucky amorous Moment 1 and thus I fed my Soul till Night came on, and left my Eyes no Object, but my Heart — a thousand 



Ci( 
() 
Land, dear Ideas: and now I (ah ly’d out, and with good Success, for with a long Engine which reach’d the top of the Wall I fix’d the end of my Ladder there, and mounted it, and sitting on the top brought ray Ladder easily up to me, and turn’d it over to the other fide; and with abundance of east destended into the Garden, which was the finest I had ever sten; for now, as good luck wou’d have it, who was defign’d to favour me, the Moon began to stiine st bright, as even to make me distinguish the Colours of the Flowers that drefs’d all the Banks in ravishing order; but thest were Hot the Beauty I came'to postef^ and my new thoughts of dilpo fing ray Self, and managing my matters, now took off all that Admiration that was justly due to st delightful a place, which art Q 2 and 
•^1 
■fisl; ' 
■ (-342) 
and Nature had agreed to render charming to every Sense, thus much 1 confidefd it, that there was nothing that did not invite to Love; a thousand pretty re cestes of Arbours, Grotts and little Artificial Groves; Fountains inviron’d with Beds of Flowers, and little Rivulets, to whose dear fragrant Banks, a willing amorous God wou d make his Soft retreat, after having ranged about rather to Seek a Covert on occasion, and to know the Paffesof the Garden, which might Serve me in any extremity of Surprise that might happen. I return’d to the Fountain that fac’d cauflps Window,, and leaning on its brink, view’d the wshole Apartment, which appear’d very magnificent : Just against me I perceiv’d a Door that went into it; which while I was considering 
how 
■: n i 


'' C? 4? 3 
. how to get open, I beared it unlock, and skulking behind the large bason of the Fountain, (yet fb as to’ mark who came out) I Saw to my unspeakable transport the Fair, the Chamiing Q 7//?^, drefs’d just as she was at the Window, a loose Gown of Silver stuff iapt about her delicate Body, her Head in fine Night clothes, and all cafeless as my Soul could wish; (he came, and with her the old Dragon; and I heard her say in coming out., ~ ' r tbis is too fijne a Might to fieeg in \ prith'^e dor mina do not ^rttdge me the pkti ftire of it, since there are fo few that entertain Calista, last stie Spoke w ith a Sigh, and a languishment in her Voice, that shot new Flames of Love into my panting Heart, and trilfd through all thy Veins; wshik She pursu’d her Walk with the old Gentle 
woiiian 
very 
This 
i m 
C 344) 
Woman: and still I kept my self at filch a distance, to have ’em in my sight, but stid along the shady fide of the Walk where I could not be easily Seen, while they kept still on the stiiny part: 
She led me thus through all the 



, .j ■ 

Walks, through all the Maze of Love; and all the way I fed my greedyeyes upon the melancholy Object of my raving Desire;; Shape, her Gate, her Motion, every Step, and every Movement of her Hand and Head, had a peculiar Grace; a thousand times I was tempted to approach her, and discover my self, but I dreaded the Fatal consquence, the old Woman being by ^ nor knew I whether they did not expect the Husband there 5 I therefore with impatience waited when she wpu*d fj)eak, that by that I might make fbme difeovery of my destiny 

..j 
i oi 
, I 
I 
avi. 3 T.; i; 
FL; 
t’r t j ii 

wilt k ■. 
( 545) ■ 
ftiny that Night; and after having tir’d herself a little with walking, She Sat down on a fine Seat of White Marble, that was plac’d at the end of a graffie walk, and only shadow’d with Some tall Trees that rank’d themselves behind it, ’gainst one of which I leah’d : There for a quarter of an hour they sate as silent as the Night, where only lost bredth'’d Winds were heard amongst the Bows, and Softer Sighs from fair Califta; at last the old thing broke fiunce, who was almost afieep while She Spoke. Madam if yot4 are weary, let us retire to Bed, and not sit gazing here at the Moon : Tohed, reply’d qaufia, what should I do there? Marry Jeep auoth the old Gentlewoman, what jhovd yott do? Ah Dotmm. (sigh’d Califia) wovd Age wottd seize me too, for then perhaps I (hou d find QI4 at 
( 34^), 
ieajt the Piedfure of the Old; he dtiii aad lazy'. I love to eat and jieep not have my Sldmhers undi~ 
j 

d with Dreams more isifuppor 
talk than rny peaking Wife s J for rea/ond.htnfofprfjj'ts rising thoughts and the imj)o[fibility of obtaining keeps the fond soul in orders but Sleep — gives an unguarded loose to soft Dtfire^ it brings the lovely ian tom to my View., and tempts me with a thoufmd Charms to Love I see a Face a Mten^ a. Shape tt Look! such as Heaven never made, or anything bud fond Imagination! Oh "twas a wondlrous Vifon! For my fart, replied the old One, / am ficha Heathen chrljfian, ma dam, as I do not believe there are any such things as Vifwns, orqhofls, or Fantoms: But your head runs of a young Man, becauje you are ?nar^ ried to an old One \ such m Idea as you frarrfd in your Wyjhes, poffs'*d 
ymr 
• 1. 

, II rr 
i: ait 
/ 
: )' 
r 
: r. 
FF 
?5: r 
iir 
r, 

I 

n, 
, ?47,) 
your fancy ivhtch was soft rang (as in dted fancy wih he fomeiimcsf} that tt persuaded you 'twas a very Pantom or Viftpn, Let it he Fancy or Vifiony or whatever elfe you cm give a Name toreply’d Caltfta^ still "tis that that never ceas*d ftnce to torture me with a thousand Pains j and prithee why y Dormina, is not Fancy ftnce as powerful in me as it was before? Fancy has not been ftnce fokindy yet 1 have given it room for thought j which before I never did; 7 fet whole hours and days^and fx^d my Soul upon the lovely Figure ^ 7 know its Stature to an inch tall and divinely made; 7 saw his Hair long, Blacky and Curling to Pis h^afte^ all loohe and flowing *, 7 fa V his Eyes, where all the Cupids play d., Blacky Large and Sparkling Piercings LO' vingy Languishing;; saw hts I p.s. Sweety Dimpledj Red^‘ and S ftj a T'outh comp leasing all, like early Q 5 May 
( 
May; that looks, ajsd smells, and cheers above the refi : In Jtne, I Jaw him such as nothing but the ni cejl Fancy can imagineand nothing can defer ibe^ I saw him such as robs me of my refi, as gives all the raging pains of Love (Love I believe it isj without the Joy of any ftngle Hope : Oh, Madam, laid Dormina, that Love will quickly die, which is not nursd with Hope, why thavs its only Food. Pray Heaven I find it fo, reply’d Califia. At that stie sigh’d as if her heart had broken, and lean’d her Arm upon a Rail of the end of the Seat, and laid her lovely Cheek upon her Hand, and lb continu’d Sighing without speaking: : I, who was not a little transported with what I heard with infinite pain, withheld my self from kneeling at her Feet, and prostrating before her that happy Fantom of which She 
had 
ill ij®^ 

r, tr.; 

4 
( h9) 
had Spoke fo favourably; but still I feard my Fate; and to give any offence, whi’e I was amidst a thousand thoughts considering which to pursue;; cuu d hear Dormintt fhoring as fast as coo’d be, leaning at her east on the other end of the Seat, Supported by a White Marble Rail, which Califla hearing also turn’d, and look’d on her, then Softly rose, and slk’d away to See how long she qu’d Sleep there, if not wak’d. Judge now, my dear oihvio, whether Love and Fortune were not absolutely subdu’d to my Interest, and if all things did not favour my Design: : very thought of being alone with Cttlifla^ of making myself known to her, of the opportunity she gave me by going from Dormim into a bye Walk, the very Joy of ten thousand Hopes, that hll’d my 
Soul 
■ _ (; 3^0) 
Soul in that happy moment which I fancy’d the most bless’d of my Life, made me tremble all over; and with unalturm Steps, I Softly purfii’d the Object of my new Desire: : I even overtook her, and fearing to fright her, and cause her to make Some noise that might alarm the Sleeping Dormim, I flacked ray pace, till in a Walk, at the end of which stie was oblig’d to turn back, I remain’d, and fuffer’d her to go on; ’twas a Walk of Grass, broad, and at the end of it a little Arbour of Greens; into which she went and Sat dowra, looking towards me, and methoughr She look’d full at me; So that finding She made no noise, I Softly approach’d the Door of the Arbour, at a convenient distance, stie then stood up in great amaze as she after Said, and! kneeling; dowm 
in 


I 


■fi 
C 
in an. humble pdfture; cry’d Wonder not, oh Sacred Charmer of my §oul, to see me at your Feet at this late Hour, and in a place So inaccestible; for what Attempt is there fb hazardous, despairing Lovers dare not under' take, and what impollibility almost can they nor overcome? Remove your Fears, oh Conquerefs of my soiji, for i am an humble Mortal that adores you; I have a thoufahd Wounds, a thousand Pains that prove me flesh and Blood, if you woisd hear my Story : Oh give me leave ro approach you wdth that Awe you do the Sacred Altars; for my Devotion is as pure as that which from your Charming: Lips ascends the Heavens; - — - — With such Cant and Stuff as this, which Lovers serve themfeives with on occasion,, leffen’d the terrors of the frighted 

( 352) 
ed Beauty, and (he Soon Saw with Joy in her Eyes, that I was both a mortal, and the Same she had before seen in the outward Garden : 1 rote from my Knees then, and with a Joy that wandered all over my body, trembling and pandng I approach’d her, and took her hand and kifs’d it with a Transport that was almost ready to lay me fainting at her Feet; nor did She answer anything to what I had said, but with Sighs suffer’d her hand to remain m mine; her Eyes she cast to Earth, her Breast heav’d with nimble Motions, and we both unable to Support our stives, sate down together on a Green Bank in the Arbour, where by that Light we had, we gaz’d at each other, unable to utter a Syllable on either fide. I contest, my dear I have felt Love before, but do 
not 
tidshi 
rihlli 
: o, t 
II I 
jver 
in 

n 



( 953) 
not know, that ever I was pos fefs’d with Such pleasing pain, such agreeable Languishment in all my Life, as in those happy Moments, with the fair Caltfia : And on the other, I dare answer for the fbft fair One; file felt a Passion as tender as mine j which, when She coum recover her first transport. She exprefs’d in such a manner as has wholly charm’d me: For with all the Eloquence of young Angels, and all their Tnnocence too, she, laid. She whifper’d, she figh’d, the fbftest things that ever Lover heard : I told you before Ihe had from her Infancy been bred in a Monastery, kept from the sight of Men, and knew no one Art or Subtlety of her Sex : Butin the very purity of her Innocence, she appear’d like the first born Maid in Paradise, generously giving her Soul way to the j|reat 

[A 
( 954) 
Lord of all, the new formed Man, and nothing of her Hearts dear thoughts did Oie reserve, ( but such as modest Nature shou’d conceal) yet, if I touched but on that tender part where Honour dwelled; She had asenfe too nice, as twas a wonder to find So vast a store of that mixed with lb fbft a Pa (lion. Oh what an excellent thing a perfect Woman is, eer Men has taught her Arts to keep her Empire, by being himself inconstant? all I cou’d ask of Love She freely gave, and told me every Sentiment of her Heart, but stwas in Such a way, So innocently She confefsb her Passion, that e very Word added new Flames to mine, and made me raging mad : at last (he sufferm me to kifs mrh caution 5 but one begat another, — that, a Number — And every 
one was an advance to liappi 
jjetc. 


- .5., 

northeast( 
() 
nefg^, and I, who knew my advantage, lost no time, but put each Minute to the properest use, now I embrace, clasp her fair lovely Body dote to mine, which nothing parted but her Shift and Gown; my busy Hands find Pali Lge to her Breasts, and give, and take a thousand nameless Joys; all but, the last I reap’d; that Heaven was still deny’d; though She were fainting in my trembling Arms, still She had watching Sense to guard that Treasure: Yet in spite of all, a thousand times I brought her to the very point of yielding; but oh stie begs and pleads with au the Eloquence of Lovel tells me that what 0 e had to give She gave, but wou’d not violate her Marriage vow : No, not to Save that Life she found in danger with too much Love, and too extreme desire; stie told me 
that 
C ?5^) ' 
that I had undone her quite, she figh’d and wifh’d, that Ilie had Seen me Sooner, ever Fate had rendered her a Sacrifice to the embraces of old Clrtrimu y stie wept with Love and anfwer’d with a Sob to every Vow I made : Thus by degrees She wrought Tiie to undoing, and made me mad in Love; ’twas thus we past the Night $ we told the Hasty Hours and cursed their coming: We told from ten to three; and all that time Seemed but a little Minute : Nor would \ let her go, who was as loath to part, till file had given me leave to See her often there; I told her all my Story of her Conquest, and how I came into the Garden : She ask’d me pleasantly if I were not afraid of' old Clarimuj I told her no, of nothing but of his being happy with her; which thought I cou d 
not 
( 357) 
not bear : she affur’d me 1 had So little reafbn to envy him, that he rather deferv’d my Companion, for that her aversion was fb ex tream to him; his Perfbn, Years, his Temper, and his Difeales were fb disagreeable to her, that She cou’d not distemble her disgust, but gave him most evident Proofs of it too frequently; ever Since She had the misfortune of being his Wife; but that Since she had seen the charming Philamkr, ffor So we must let her call him too his Company and Conversation was wholly insupportable to her; and but that he had ever us’d to let her have four Nights in the Week her own, wherein he never disturb’d her repose, Oie fhou’d have been dead with his nasty Entertainment : She vow’d file never knew a fbft destre, but for phiuntitr file never had the least 
con( 
() 
concern for any of his Sex besides, and till (lie felt his touches— — ■ in his Kisses, and Suffered his dear Embraces, fire never knew that Woman was ordained for a ny Joy with Man, but fancy’d it design’d in its Creation, for a poor Slave to be oppress d at pleafiire by the Husband, dully to yield Obedience and no more : But I had taught her now fly Said to her e ernal Ruin, that there was more in nature than She knew, or ever fhou’d, had She not Seen Philander; She knew not what dear Name to call it by, but Something in her Blood Something that panted in her Heart, glowh in her Checks and ian guisli’din her Looks, told her She was not born for dartntm - or Love wou’d do her wrong : I Soothed the thought, and urg’d the Laws of Nature, the power 
of 
Ik C 

Rf: CI 
( 559) 
of Love, necessity of Youth' -- -- 
And the vvonder that was yet behind, that javifhing something, which not love orkifies cou’d make her guess at; So beyond all Soft imagination that nothing but a trial cou’d convince her; but She resistcd still, and still I pleaded with all the fubt’iest Arguments of Love, Words mix d with Kistes; stghing mix’d with Vows, but all in vain, Religion was my Foe, and Tyrant Honour guarded all her Charms; thus did we pafs the Night till the young Morn advancing in the East forc’d us to bid adieu : Which oft we did, and oft we figh’d and kiss’d, oft parted aud return’d, and figh’d again, and as ste went away She 
weeping cry’d, -- -- wringing my 
hand in hers, pray Heaven, Philander, this dear interview do not prove fatal to me 3 for, oh, I 
find 
C 3^0) 
find frail Nature weak about me, and one dear minute more would forfeit all my Honour. At this She started from my trembling Hand, and Swept the Walk like Wind Ib swift and Hidden, and left me panting, sighing, wishing, dying, with mighty Love and Hope, and after a little time I seal’d my Wall, and return’d unshen to my new Lodging. It was four Days after, before I cou d get any other happiness but that of Seeing her at her window, which was just against mine, from which I never stirfd, hardly to eat or steep, and that She Saw with Joy. for every Morning I had a Billet from her; which we contriv’d that Happy Night Should be conveyed me thus — It was a Bye street where I lodg’d, and the other fide was only the dead Wall of her 
Garden 

..ipi 

( 36‘) 
Garden, where early in the Morning She us’d to walk, and having the Billet ready, stie put it ‘with a Stone into a little Leathern Purse, and toft’d it over the Wall, where either my self from the Window or any young Friend below waited for it, and that way every Morning and every Evening She receiv’d one from me; but his impossible to tell you the innocent Passion she exprefs’d in them, innocent in that there was no art, no fain’d nice folly to express a Vertuethat was not in the Soul; but all she spoke confessed her heart’s lost wishes. At last, (for I am tedious in a relation of what gave me lb much pleasure in the Enjoyment) at last, I lay, I receiv’d the happy invitation to come into the Garden as before, and Night advancing for my purpose I need not lay that I deliver’d 
my 
( 5^2) 
myself upon the place appointed, which was by the Fountain, fide beneath her Chamber Window; towards which I cast, you may believe, many a longing Look The Clock struck ten, e leven, and then twelve ^ but no dear Star appear’(|: tp condust me to my Happinedi; at last I heard the little Garden Door (against the Fountain) open, and law cd lifl^ thete wrap’d in her Nightgown bnlf : T ran like Lightning to her Arms, with all the Transports of an eager Lover, and almost smotherm myself in her warrn ristng Breast, for She taking nie in, her Arms, kt go her gown,, which fasting open, stefc. nothing, but?0her Shift between; me and all her charming Body * But She bid; me. hear what She had to Say. bssofe k. proceiedrf ed farther, She' toidi'me sthcv was 
forc’d 
()^3) 
forc’d to wait till Dormtm was asleep, who lay in her Chamber, and then stealing the Key, She came Softly down todet me in. bttf^rkid I am ali tmdrefs^d,, 
and cannot walk in the Garden withyotijwill'^'ott promifeme on Love and Honour, to be obedient to all my Commands j tf I carry you to my Chamber, for Dorminah Sleep is like death it (elf; howe -- ver lest he chance to awake ^ and /hotild take an occafon to [peak to me 'twere absolutely necej/ary, that 1 were there; for fmee I frvd her such a trick the other Night and let her (leep fo long^.^(loe will not let me walk late. A very little Argument persuaded me to yield to anything, to, be with calt/ka anywhere; lb that both returning fbftly to her Chamber, llie put herself into Bed ^ and left me kneeling on the Carpet : But R fwas 
C 3^4) 
twas not long that I remain’d fb; from the dear touches of her Hands and Breast, we came to kifses, and Ib equally to a for getfulnefe of all we had promis’d and agreed on before, and broke all Rules and Articles, that were not in the Favour of Love; fb that stripping myself by degrees, while She with an unwilling force made fbme feeble resistance, I got into the Arms of the most charming Woman that ever Nature made; She was all over Perfection; I dare not tell you more; let it Suffice stie was all that luxurious Man could wish, and all that renders Woman fine and ravishing. About two hours thus was my Soul in rapture, while Ibmetimes She reproach’d me, but So gently, that ’twas to bid me still be false and perjur’d if these were the effects of it; if difohe 
dkme 
vnjh • 
'K' ' : 
"(T f; 
L T. i 

k 
- 
r, 
j’iit! 

( 3^5) 
dkrtce have fttch wondrous Charms; may Ifald She, be fiill commanding thee, and thott [HH difoheying; While thus we lay with equal Ravishment, we heard a murmuring noise at distance, which we knew not what to make of, but it grew still louder and louder, but still at distance too: this first alarm’d us, and I was no sooner persuaded to rise; but I heard a Door unlock at the fide of the Bed; which was not that by which I enter’d, for that was at the other end of the Chamber towards the Window. Oh Heavens., Said the fair frighted Trembler, here is the Count of cleri nau : For he always came up that way, and those Stairs by which I ascended was the Back Stairs; fb that I had just time to grope my way towards the Door without fb much as taking my Clothes R 2 with 
( 
^66’■) 
with me; never was any Amorous Adventurer in fb lamentable a Condition, i would fain have turn’d upon him, and at once have hindered him from entering, with my Sword in my Hand, and secur’d him from ever disturbing my pleasure any more, but She implor’d I would not; and in this Minutes Dispute he came So near me, that he touch’d me as I glided from him but not being acquainted very well with the Chamber, having never Seen my way, I lighted in my pastage on Dormmas Pallat Bed, and threw myself quite over her, to the Chamber Door, which made a damnable clattering, and awaking Dormntt with my ca tastrophe, She Set up Such a Bawl, as frighted and alarm’d the old Count, who was just taking in a Candle from his Footman, 

j 
ut 
- 5^7) _ 
man, who had lighted it at hss Flamboy : So that hearing the noise, and knowing it must be fbme Body in the Chamber, he lets fail his Candle in the fright, and call’d his Footman in with the Flamboy, draws his Tolledo, which he had in his Hand, and wrap’d in his Nightgown, with three or font woollen Caps one upon the top of another, ty’d under his tawny Leathern Chops, he made a very pleashnc. Figure, and fiich a one as had like to have betray’d me by langhing at it; he closely pursu’d me, though not Soclofe as to lee me before him, yet fb as not to give me time to ascend the Wall, or to make my escape up or down any Walk, which were straight and long, and not able to conceal anybody from Pur suers, approach’d So near as the R 'j Count 
( 3^8) 
Count was to me : What should I do? I was naked, unarm’d, and no defence against his jealous Rage; and now in danger of my Life, I knew ndt what to refblve on; yet I swear to you obavio, even in that minute • ( which I thought my last) I had no repentance of the dear Sin, or any other Fear, but that which pol fefs'd me for the fair cauiia; and calling upon Vtmf and her Son for. my Safety (for I had Scarce a thought yet of any o there Deity) the Sea born Queen lent me immediate aid, and e er I vas aware of it, I touch’d the Fountain, and in the same minute threw myself into the Water, which a mighty large basbn or Cistern of White Marble contain’d, of acompass, that forty Men might have hid themselves in it, they had purfu’d me So 
hard, 
h i:.; : 
a; 
id; 
JS 
iy 
ife 
I 
‘e* 
I 
)k 
^ I 
ler 
d 
01 
CD 
ef 
lie 
: r, 
( 3^9 
hard, they fancy’d they heard me press the Gravel near the Fountain, and with the Torch they search’d round about it, and beat the fringing Flowers that grew pretty high about the bottom of it, while I (bmetimes divm, and fbmetimes peep’d up to take a view of my busy Coxcomb; who had like to have made me burst into laughter many times, to see his Figure, the dashing of jthe Stream, which continually fell Tom the little Pipes above into the Bafbn, hindered, him from hearing the noise I might posti bly have made by my Swimming in it; after he had Surveyed it round without Side, he took the Torch in his own hand, and fiirvey’d the Water itself while 1 div’d, and fb long forced to remain So, that I believ’d I had efcap’d his Sword to die that foolliher way; Q 4 
.it'! 
C 37^) 
but just as I was like to expire, he 
departed muttering, that he was 
sore Some body did go our before him; and now he search’d 'every Vdalk and Arbour of the Garden, while like a Fish I lay basking in Element friii, not daring to adventure our, lest his hasty return should find me on the Wall, or 
in rnv Passage over : I thank’d. 
my Stars he had not found the Ladder, fb that at last returning to cal/ft p.s. Chamber, after finding no body, he defir’d (as I heard the next Morning) to know what t he Matter was in her Chamber: But Califtd^ who till now never knew an Art, had before he came laid her Bed in order, and taken up my clothes, and put them between her Bed and Quilt; not forgetting any one thing that belongm to me, She was laid.as fast asteep as innocence itself) So that Qh 
rinm 
rit: 
: : 
.. r' 

() 
rinati awaking her, She seem’d as surpriz’d and ignorant of all, as if She had indeed beeii innocent; So that Dormina now remain’d the only suspected Perfbn; who being ask’d what She cou’d say concerning that Uproar she made, She only Said, as She thought, that She dream’d his Honour fell out of the Bed upon her, and awaking in a Fright, file found ’twas but a Dream, and fo She fell asleep again till he wak’d her, whom She wonder’d to see there at that Hour; he told ’em that while they were Securely Sleeping he was like to have been burn’d in his Bed, a piece of his Apartment being burn’d down, which caus’d him to come thither; but he made them both Swear that there was no body in the Chamber of Calijia, before he wou’d be und, ceived, for R 5 he 
( 372) 
he vow’d be saw fbmething in the Carden, which, to his thinking was all in White, and it vanilh’d on the Sudden behind the fountain, and wecoum see no more of it. Califia disfembled abundance of Fear, and said She woum never walk out after Candelight for fear of that Ghost; and fo they past the rest of the Night, while J, all wet and cold got me to my Lodging, unperceiv’d, form young Friend had left the Door open for me. 
Thus, dear I have Sent 
you a Novel, instead of a Letter, of my first most happy Adventure, of which I must repeat thus much again, that of ail the Enjoyments 1 ever bad, I never was So perfectly well entertain’d for tm'o hours, and I am waiting wi h infinite impatience a Second Encounter. 1 shall be extremely glad to 

tel.' 
(15 
fell 
( 573) 
hear what progress you have made in your x^mour, for I have lost ali for Silvia., but the Affection of a Brother, with that natural Pity we have for those we have undone; for my Heart, my Soul and Body are all Califtd.sy the Bright the Young, the Witty, the Gay, the fondly Loving Califta : Only Some reserve 1 have in all for oba vio. Pardon this long History, for Yis a sort of acting all ones Joys again, to be telling ’em to a Friend fb dear as is the Gallant obavio to. 
. pmlwdtr, - 
POSTSCRIPT 

IJ 
ill' 
l l: 
if 
I ihouij for some Reafbns that concern my Safety have quitted ths Town before, but I am 
^ 374 J 
chain’d to it,, and have no fence of danger while Califta compels my stay. 
If obavios Trouble was great before from but his fear ol ca lfitis yielding, what must it be now, when be found all his Fears confirm’d, the pfesstures of his Soul were too exrream before, and the concern he had for Stlvia had brought it to the highest Tide of Grief; So that this addition o’er whelmst it quite, and left him no room for Rage; no, it could not discharge itself So happily, but bow’d and yielded to all the ex treams of Love, Grief, and fence of Honour; he threwhimfeifupon his Bed, and lay without Sense or motion for a whole Hour, confus’d with thought, and divided in his concern, half for a Mistress false, and half for a Sister loose and undone 


- 
( 57^) 
done; by turns the Sister and the mistress torture; by turns they break his Heart: he had this comfort left before, that if Califia were undone, her ruin made way for his Lpveand Happiness with sil 'tat, bu‘t now — he had noprofpect left that could afford aiw ease, he changes from one Sad Object to a nother, from Stlviato Caltfha^ then back to Silvia, but iiketofeverioi Men, that toss about here and there, remove for Some relief, he Shifts but to new pain, where e’er he turns he finds the mad man still; in this distraction of thought he remain’d till a Page from Silvia brought him this Letter: Which in midst of all, he started from his Bed with excess of Toy and read. 
SV 
tvia 
MV Lord, 
Fter your last Affront by your Page, I believe it will Surprise you to receive anything from Sihia but Scorn and dif dain; But, tny Lord, the int rest you have by a thousand ways been fb long making in my heart, cannot So Soon be canceisd by a Minutes Olience, and every Action of your life has been too generous to make me think you writ what I have receiv d, at least you are not wdl in your vsenfes; I have committed a fault against your Love, I must con fess, and am not afham’d of the little cheat I put upon you in bringing you to Bed to Antomtt instead of suvu : I was aiham’d 
to 
ii/j - ( 
1" ’.i' 
'n; : e A.. 

( Sll) 
to be So easily won, and took it ill your pallion was fb mercena ry, to ask fb courfely for the pos fefiion of me; too great a pay I thought for So poor Service, as rend ring up a Letter, which in Honour you ought before to have ilew’d me : i own I gave you hope, in that too f was Criminal; but these are Faults that furedeferv’d a kinder pimisbment 
than what I Jaft receiv’d -- A 
Whore — ~ A common miffress! Death, you are a Coward and even to a Woman dare not say it - when She confronts the Scan 
daller, -- Yet pardon me, I 
meant not to revile, but gently to reproach; it was unkind — at least allow me that, and much unlike Octauio. 
i think I had not troubled you, my Lord, with the least confesti on of my Rerentmeof, but f 
cou’d 
( 37^) 
cou’d not leave the Town, where for the Honour of your Conversation and Friendship alone I have remained fo long without acquitting my self of those Obligations I had to you; I send you therefore the Key of my Closet and Cabinet, where you Shalifind, not only your Letters, but all those preictus you have been pleas’d once to till ink me worthy ol: But having taken back your frienchip, I render you the !ess valuable Trifles, and will retain no more of 0 aaao than the dear memory of that part of his Life that was So a greeable to tie unfortunate 
Stlvia, 
He fl n 1 sh’d t his Let te r, re a di ng with Tears of tender Love; but considering it all over, he fancied 
she; 
; i .1. 


( ?79) 
fire had put great Confiraint upon her natural high Spirit, to write in this calm manner to hinij and through all he sounddifiem bled Rage, which yet was visible in that one breaking out in the middle of the Letter : He found Ihe was not able to contain at the Word Comnnon Mistress: in fine, however calm it was, and however design d, he found, at least he thought he found the charming Jilt all over; he fancies from the Hint She gave him of the change of antoneu for herself in Bed, that it was fbme new cheat that was to be put upon him, and to bring her self off with Credit: Yet in Spite of all this appearing Reafbn, he wfistoes, and has a secret Hope, that either She is not in fault, or that she will fo cozen him into a belief she is not, that it'may Serve as well 
to 

, ( So)) 
his willing Heart; and now all he fears is, that (he will not put So neat a Cheat upon him, but that he Shall be able to see through it, and still be oblig’d to retain his ill Opinion of her : But Love return’d, She had rous’d the Flame anew;; fofrned all his rougher Thoughts with this dear Letter, and now in haste he calls for his Clothes, and suffering himself to be drest’d with all the Advantage of his Sex, he throws himself into his Coach, and goes to Sthta, whom he finds justdress d clivalier, fand tetting her Hat and Feather in good order, before the glass) with a defignsto depart the Town, at least fb far as Should have rais’d a concern in Ofin, vto\ if yet he had any for her, to have follow’d her : he ran up without Asking leave, ^ into her Chamber, 
and 
ffii r( 

() 
and e’er Qie was a ware of him, threw himself at her Feet, and clasping her Knees, to which he fixed his Mouth; he remain’d there for a little Space without Life or Motion, and prefs’d her in his Arras as fast as a dying Man. She was not offended to see him there, and he appear’d more lovely than ever he yet had been: His Grief had added a languiflt' ment and palencfs to his Face; which Sufficiently told her he had not been at east while absent from her; and on the other Ode appear’d ten thousand times more charming than ever; that Dress of a Boy adding extremely to her Beauty .* Oh yon are a pretty Lover, Said She, railing him from her Knees to her Arms, to treat a Mistress Jo for a little in nocerit .Raillery. — Come Jit and tell me how joii came to discover the 
harmless 
liifc 
■() 
harmkfs cheat s Setting him down 
on the fide of her Bed : Oh name it no morej cried he, Lt that damned Ntoht he blotted from the year deceive me fhtter me, say yott> are innocenttell me my Senjes rave my Eyes were fdfe.^ deceitful, and my Ears were deaf: Say anything that m.iy convince my madmfy and brings me hack, to tame adorhg Love, What means Octavio, reply’d Silvia fire he is not fo nice and/qtiemijh a Loverj hut a fair young Maid might have been welcome to him coming fo frepapd for L ove tlio it was not fje whom he expended; it might have ferv^d as well Ptip dark at leah. iwdl 
faa reply’d o&avio, forcing a Smile — advance pursue thek ar defgn^ and cheat me flilf and to convince my Soul; oh swear it too, for Women want no Weapous of Defence Oaths j Vowsj and Eearsy 
Sighs ^ 
)AA 



( 583 
Sighs, imprecationsy ravi'rtgjj are all the Tools to f/ijhion zj^^nkind Coj: combs: : am an tafie fclloz., fit for ufey and long to he imtiated Fodl, come swear I n as not ritre the other Night. Dis granted Sir yon were : Why all this Pajjton? This Silvia Spoke and took him by the hand, which burnt with raging Fire; and though he Spoke with all the heat of Love, his Looks were fbft the while as infant Cupds: still he proceeded, Oh charming Silvia, fwce yon are fo imkind to tell me truths cet^fe^ ceafeto [peak at all, and let me only gaze upon those Eyes that can fo well deceive : Their Looks are innocent, at leafit they^ll flatter me, and tell ?mne that they lost their Faculties that Other Night. AA, reply’d Silvia I am bonvincd they did not, yon 
flaw Antonctt — -- -- -- Conduct a hap.. 
py Man interrupted he) to silvia’s 

( 384-) 
vial Bed, ch why by your confefft on mttflt my Soul be tortupd der a ’ at this he hung his head up 
new 
on his Bofbm, and figh’d, as if each Breath would be his last, Heavens I cry’d Silvia What ist Octavio says condudi a happy Louvre to 'my Beds by ak that’s Sacred I am abupd^ defignd upon to be betrayed and lojt \ what said you Sir a Lover to my Bed I When he reply’d in a fainting Tone, clasping her to his Arms, Now Silvia, you are kind, be perfeb Woman and keep to couzening ft ill — Now. back it with a very little Oath, and I am as well as e’er I saw your Falsehood, and nder will lose one thought upon it ?nore. Forbear, said She, you’d make me angry : In short what is it you wot^d say? or[wear you rave, and then fll pity what I now despise, if you can think me falsi. He only answered with a 
sigh, 
d 
rnim. 

() 
sigh, and She pursud, Am I not worth m answer \ me your Soul and Thoughts as etr you hope for Favour from my Love, or to preserve my Quiet, If you will promise me to fay^tis false., replyu he Softly, I will confess the Errors of my Senjes, I cane the other Night at twelve the Door was open -- — Mis 
true laid Silvia -- -- At the Stairs 
Loot I found a Man, and saw him led to you, into your Chamber; sighing as he went, and panting with impatience : Now, Silvia, if you value my repofty my life, myreputa tion, or my services, turn it off handsomely, and Fm happy: At that, being wholly amaz’d, She told him the whole story, as you heard, of her dressing Antonett, and bringing him to her 5 at which he smil’d, 
and beg’d her to go on- -- -- -- -- 
fetcht the pieces of brilljard’s counterfeit Letters, and shew’d him; 
this 
; C 5; 86) 
this brought him a little to his Wits; and at first sight he was ready to fancy the Letters came indeed from him, he found the Character his, but not the business,, in great amaze re ply’d, /jh Mndumy did yott know Octavioh Sotii fo welly and cotiid you imagine it capable of a thought like this? A Presumption fo dare ing to the fnoj} awful' of her Sex thf was unkind indeed. And did you anfver m Ter, reply’d ^qywith all kindness I cod.d force my Pen to express. So that after canvafing the matter, and relating the whole Story again with his lining taken ill, they concluded from every Circumstance Brilljard. was the Man; for Antonedt was calfd to Councel; who now recollecting all things in her mind, and knowing Brilljard but too well; file confess’d She verily believ’d it was 
he 



r .v 
N 
) 
he, especially when file told how she stole a Letter of oitavio^s for him that day, and how he was ill of the same disease still. od.taz>h then caird his Page, and Sent him home for the Note Brilljard had Sent him, and all appear’d as clear as day : But Antonett met with a great many Reproaches for Showing her Ladies Letters, which (he excus’d as well as she cou’d : But never was Man So ra vifh’d with Joy as oaavio was at the knowledge of Silvias innocence 5 a thousand times he kncel’d and beg’d her Pardon, and her Figure encouraging his caresfes: a thousand times he im brac’d her, he smil’d, and blush’d, and ligh’d with Love and Joy, and knew not how to express it most effectually : And shvinyv^’ho had other businefs than Love in her heart and head. suffer’d all the S marks 
( 
7QO 
5‘y 
marks of his eager Passion and 
Transport, out of design, for file had a farther use to make of 0 0avio; tho’ when she survey’d his person handsom, young, and adorned with all the Graces and Beauties of his Sex, not at all inferior to Philander, if not exceeding in every Judgement but that of Sihix; when stie const der d his Soul, where Wit, Love, and Honour equally reign’d, when she consults the excellence of his Nature, his Geoerofity, Courage, friendsbip, and Softness, She Sighed and cry’d, ’twas pity to impose upon him; and make his Love, for which file shou’d esteem him a Property tb draw him to his ruin, for So she fancy’d it must be if ever he encounterd Philander \ and though good Nature was the least Ingredient that form’d the Soul of this fajr Charmer, 
I' 
1>.vl 
C rae i 
aoviix 
yh.. vuuu • 
rr.cr; icug 1; 

’■ f 
s' iu 
t'. : ■ 
So, t, 
Id.. 
‘id U] 

r 

39x 
filer, yet now she found iliq had a mixture of it, from her concern for Offavio; and that generous Lover made her So many fbfc Vows, and tender Protestations of the Respect and awfulness of his Pastion, that she was wholly convinc’d he was her Slave, nor could (he see the constant lan guifher pouring out his Soul and Fortune at her Feet, without Suffering Some warmth about her Heart, which She had never felt, but for pjo 'tunder; and this Day She exprefs’d herself more oblige ingly than ever she had done : and pllows him little Freedoms of approaching her with more softness than hitherto she had; and abfblutely charm’d, he promises lavishly and without reserve, all she would ask of him; and in requital She assured him all he could with or hope, if he S 2 would 
. () 
would Serve her in her Revenge against phiunder : She recounts to him at large the Story of her undoing, her Qiiality, her for .tune, her nice Education, the care and tendernefs'of her Noble Parents, and charges all her Fate to the evil Conduct of her heedless youth : Sometimes therefle 6fion on her Ruin, She looking back upon her former Innocence and Tranquillity, forces the Tears to flow from her fair Eyes, and makes oslavio sigh and weep by Sympathy : Sometimes (arriv’d at the Amorous part of her Relation, She would sigh and languish with the remembrance of past Joys, in their beginning Love \) and Sometimes Smile at the little unlucky Adventures they met with, and their Escapes; fo that different Passions seiz’d her Soul while 
T: : 
see Spoke, while that of all Love 
fill’d 
t’s! 
( 393) 
filld Octavios : He cloats, fie barns, and every Word She utters inflames him still the more; he fixes his very Soul upon her Tongue, and darts his very Eyes into her Face, and everything She says, raises his vast Esteem and Pallion higher. In fine, having with the Eloquence of S cred Wit, and all the Charms of every differing Pallion finish’d her moving Tale, they both declin’d their Eyes, whole falling showers kept equal time and pace, and for a little time were still as thought: When oitavio^ oppressed with mighty Love! broke the fbft Silence, and burst into extravt gance of pallion, says all that men (grown mad with love and wilh ing'lcou’d utter to the Idol of the Heart; and to oblige her more recounts his Life in stiort; wherein, in spite of all his Modeflvv, S 3, jhq 
( 394) 
stie found all that was Great and Brave; all that was Noble, Fortunate, and Honest: : havini^ now, confirm’d her, he deferv’d Iter, kneeling implor’d she would accept of him, nor as a Lover for a Term of Pallion, for dates of Months or Years, but for a long Eternity s not as a Rifier of her Sacred Honour, but to defend it from the censuring World; he vow’d he would forget that ever any part of it was lost, nor by a Look or Action e er upbraid her with a Misfortune past, but still look forward on nobler Joys to come : And now implores that he may bring a Priest to tie the solemn Knot : in fpi^ht of all her Love for phiunier., file could not chule but take this offer kindly; and indeed it made a very great impression on her Heart, she knew nothing but the height of Love 
could 
t;. 
C V V r 

: C C 
iuw V 
with 
Min 
ilkc 
10 
C '" 
u'; - 
fc 
wo. 
stc 

( 595) ' 
could oblige a Man of his Quality and vast Fortune, with all tyre advantages of Youth and Beauty to marry her in So ill Circumstances; and paying him first thofeacknowledcjmenrs that were due on So great an Occasion, witn all the tendernestin her Voice 
and Eyes that Sue could put on 
She excus’d her self from receiving the Favour, by telling him, She was lb unfortunate as to be with Child by the ungrateful Man 5 and falling at that thought into new Tears, She mov’d him to infinite Love; and infinite Compastion; in So much that wholly abandoning himfeis to Softness, he affur’d her, if *st5e wmuld Secure him all his happi ness. by marrying him now that he would wait till She were brought to Bedj before he wmuld demand the glorious Recooipence 
( 39^) 
he afj: >ir’d to ^ fb that Silvia be ing oppress d with Obligation, finding yet in her Soul a violent Passion for Philander She knew not how to take, or how to re fuse the Blefiing offered, since Octavio was a Man, whom in her height of Innocence and Youth ihe might have been vain and proud of engaging to this degree: He Saw her pain and irresolution, and being absolutely undone vv’ith Love, delivers her philandtps last Letter to him, with what he had Sent her inclos’d; the sight of the very outside of it made her grow pale as Death 5 and a feebleness seiz’d her all over that made her unable for a moment to open it; all which confusion Oclavio Saw with pain; Mshidi file perceiving recollected her thoughts as well as She could, and opened it, and read it; that 
to 
10 
th: 
1h5 
wvfa 
hvl3z 
oiuhc 
Anti. ke.v k pc: 
^3 KH bt unto 
itccvi: 
'di, 

, Aacii 
: Hic: 
C 597) 
to obavio first, as being fondest of the continuation of the Flistory of his falshood, file read, and often paus’d to recover her Spirits that were fainting at every Period : and having finifh’d it She fell down on the Bed, where they fate; or tavio caught her in her fall in his Arms, where fbe remain’d dead' feme Moments; whilst he just on the point of being fb hicnfelf, ravingly call’d for help; and Anto^ mtt being in the dresling Room,, ran to ’em, and by degrees stlvia, recover d^and ask’ddr7/7wt?a thou Send Pardons for exposing, a weakness to him, which was bat the. effects of the last blaze os Love And taking a Cordial which net brought her, file rous’d, reviv’d, and took obdvw by tha Hand : Nom., laid file, jjjent yottr^ fils tlut generous Lover you havei frofefpd^. and give me ymr Kows 
S ^ ^ 
5$8 
) 
revenge on Philander, and after that by all than Holy, kneeling as bespoke, and holding him fast, bjali my injtired Innocence, by all my Nebk Fathers wrong, and my dear Slot hers Grief \ by all my SK flers Sufferings; I fvear! thmarry you, love you, and give you all! This She Spoke without considering Antonett was by, and fjx)ke it with all the Rage and blushes in her Face, that injured Love and Revenge could inspire: : on the other fide, the Sente of his SL sters Honour and that of the tender Pallion he had for Silvia, made him Swear by all that was Sacred, and by all the Vows of eternal Love and Honour he had made to Silvk, to go and revenge himtelf and her on the false Friend and Lover, and con fefs'd the tecond motive; ujhich was his Sisters Same; For, cry’d 
he 
cero'. 

he, that soul aiultrefsy that fd.lfi calisfa, is fo allied to me. But still he urged that would add to the jostnefs of his Cause, if he might depart her Husband as well as Lover; and revenge an iiijured Wise as well as Sister; and now he cou d ask nothing she did not easily grant; and because kwas late in the day, they conclude that the Morning Shall consummate all his desires: And now (he gives him herjbetter to read y For, faidshe, ^^ / hall ejleem my self henceforth fo ahfouitely octaviov, that 1 twill not fo much as read a Line from that perjt tred Ruiner of my Honour, he took the Letter with Sniiles and bo ws of Gratitude, and read it( 

() 
Philander to Silvia. 
there are a thousand rea fbns, dearest Silvia., at this time that prevents my writing to you, reasons that will be convincing enough to oblige my Pardon; and plead my cause with her, that loves me, all which I will lay before you, when I have the Happiness to see you; 1 have met with Some Affairs Since my arrival to this place, - that wholly takes up my time, Affairs of State, whose Fatigues have put my Heart extremely out of Tune, and if not carefully managed may turn to my perpetual Ruin, fb that I have not an hour in a day to Spare for Silvia; which, believe me, is the greatest Affliction of my Life; and S have no 
prospect 
prolf 
Tovi 
fine.; 

( 4^^) 
prospect of ease in the endlest Toyls of Life, but that of repo ling in the Arms of Silvia: Some Short Intervals: Pardon my haste, for you cannot guess the weighty businefs that at present robs you of 
ipour Philander. 
• 7'oulye, false Villain -- -- reply’d 
Silvia, ^ in mighty Rage, I can 
gtas ymr bt^flne/s, and can revenge it too 3 cuyje on thee Slave., to think me graven as poor in Sense as iio~ 
noiir '. To be cajovd with this -- -- -- 
Sttiff that would never Jliam a Chamber maid t Death I am i fa forlorn, fo despicable, I am not worth the sains of being well dissembled with? Confusion overtake himy Misery seize him may I be come his Plague while Life remainsy 
or 
n 
■I tk 
( 402) 
or fmkk tortures end him: This, with all the madness that ever infpir d a Lunatic, She utter’d with Tears and violent Actions : When qbdvio be Sought her not to afflict herself, and alniost winsd he did not love a Temper fo contrary to his own: He told her he was so¥ry, extremely fbr ry, to find She still retain’d fb violent a pafflon for a man unworthy of her least concern, when She reply’d -- -- Do not mi (take my 
Sottl, by Heaven tis pride^di/dain, Defpighty and Hate— — — think he floould believe this dull excuje could pafs upon my Judgement, ^ had the false Traitor told me that he hated me or that his faithless date of Dove was out ^ I had been tame with all my Injuries, but. poorly 
thus to imp of upon my Wit -- -- -- -- - 
By ' Heavn he (hall not bear the Affront to Hdl m Kfitimph t no 
rnore — ^ 
nr ■ 
r > 

rr 
o 
( 
more — Pve vo\pi hs{bai not — i nty Soul has and now will he at 
ease— — me, oh of/^i/tejand letting herself fall into his Arms, she fbon obtain’d what She ask’d for, one touch of the fair Charmer could calm him into Love, and fbftnefs. 
Thus, after a thousand tran fports of Pallion on his fide, and all the leeming Tenderness on hers, the Night being far advanc’d, and new Confirmations given and taken on either fide of purfiiing the Happy Agreement in the Morning, which they had • again resolv’d, they appointed that Silvia and Antonett Should go three Miles out of Town to a little Village,, where there was a Church, and that obavio Should meet tern there to be confirm’d and secured of all the happiness 
'(404) 
he propos’d to himself in this World — — ~ siivu being fb 
wholly bent upon Revenge (for the Accomplishment of whicha lone, She accepted of Ofiavioy) that She had lost all remembrance of her former Marriage with Brilljard : Or if it ever entered into her Thought ’cwas only consider’d as a Sham, nothing defign’d but to Secure her from being taken from petun der by her Parents; and, without any resped: to the Sacred Tie, to be regarded no more; nor did ftie design this with ouavio from any respect: Die had to the Holy State of Matrimony, but from a Lust of Vengeance which stie wmuld buy at any Price; and which lire found no Man fb well able to satisfy as qudv io, 
ct 
But 
C 4^5) 
But what wretched Changes of Fortune She met with after this, and a miserable Portion of Fate was destin’d to this unhappy Wanderer; the last Part of plnlmkps lise, and the Third and Last' Part of this History, (hall most faithfully relate. 
Tte End of the Second Tart, 
Love letters 
Between a 
N O B L E man 
And his 
SISTER. 


LONDON 
Printed for J. Id. J. E and Sold by Pho. Bmnet.^ at the Half moon in St. Churchyard, ip. 


3f 
jrary 
T O 
THOUGH. CONPO N, E 
having 
at Pdf 
SIR, 
when I was at Taris last Spring, met with a little Book of Letters, call’d, U intregue de ffdander & Sihiuy I ■ ^bhad a particular fancy ibefides my inciinaticns •sto translate ’em into Eiiff. flisti, which I have done fas faithfully as I could; [only where he Speaks of A z the 

1z5'^s4- 
Lhe ekille. 
the ingratitude of Cefario to the King, I have added a word or two to his Charaster that might render it a little more parallel to that of a modern Prince, in our Age j Sor the rest I have kept close to the French. 
The letters are Soft and amorous; and besides my esteem and obligation to you, I think it nowhere So proper to address So much tender Passion, as 
to 
Lhe Epistle. 
to a man whom Heaven and Nature has So well form’d both for difpen cing and receiving of Love as yourself, you having all in your person that is acceptable to Women and desired by Men, and when you please can make your self as absolutely the joy of the one as the envy of the other; to this is joyn’d a Virtue, Such as I believe the World has a3 rare 
Vhe Epifle. 
rarely produc’d in a man of your Youth, Fortune and Advantages; you have all the power oi the Debauchery of the Age, without thewilfyou early Saw the follies of the Town, and the greatness of your mind, disdaining that common Road of living, stiunn’d the the foppiili pratstice; your well judging pride chose rather to be singular and Sullenly retire, than herd 
with 
(the 
ear. 
'the 
nefs 
ling 
srd 
ith 
Lhe Epijlle> 
with that noisie Crowd, that eternally fit out bu finels enough to stock the Town with Wit and Lampoons, and the Stage with Fops, Fools and Cowards; If I might give my real judgement, you are above flattery, and one can almost Say no good or generous thing that one cannot justify in you, no ver tue you cannot lay a claim fo; many your A 4, modesty 
The hpijlle. 
modesty hides from the World, and many more you have, which envy will not confefi; for that just value you fct upon yourself, shy stunning the public Haunts, Cabals and Conversations of the Town, in Spite of all your Wit and Goodness, gives occafipn 
for malice to revenge it 
Gbuuncis, giycs dccafipii for malice to revenge it 
Gbbancis, gives Oucafipri for malice to revenge it Gbbuneis, gives hccaiipil for malice to revenge it gvouiicis, gives deeaiipd 
a: 
in 
ai 
id 
ill 
a: 
it 
It 
Uli( 
Hor( 
: nv]i 
that 
ipon 
niiig 
, ca ions ight and (ipn e it and 
Phe Epjller 
Amour of yours, So often urg’d with heat, and told So much to your disadvantage, by those who have not the happiness of knowing your true Principles ofhonor, your real good Nature, your common Justice, or sense of Humanity, to be such, as not to be capable of fo base, silly and unmannerly a practice, and So needicfs and poor a dea 5, sign : 
Lhe Epijlle. 
sign; For my part, Sir, I am vain and proud of the belief, that I have the capacity and honour to know and understand your Soul, (did I not too well the story also) and am well assur’d it has not a grain, not a thought of Ib foolish a Principle, fo unnecessary and dilho nest : And I dare affirm, that Since the imposition of the late Popish Plot upon the Town, there 
has 

: re 
lasj 
The Epistle. 
has not lb ridiculous and nonfensscal a History past for authentic with unthinking Man; but you should give ’em leave to rail, since you have So vast advantages above ’em. 
Sir, I would fain think that in the Character of Thilander there is a great resemblance of your self as to his person, and that part, of his Soul that was postest with Cove: 
rhi? Epjlle. 
He was a ifremch Whig, ’ds true, and a most ap paren£traytor, and there I confessjthe comparison fails extremely, for Sure no Man was ever fo incorrigible, So hardened in Toryism as yourself, fo fearless, fo bold, fo resolute, and confirm’d in Coyalty; in the height of all dangers and threat oings, in the bicffed Age 
id the )f Evidences. 
iwearing 
ign 

t D 
in 
rht 
: at 
The Efifik. 
dences, you undaunted held forth for the Roayl cause, with Such force of realbn and undeniable sense, as those that were not converted, at least were startled; and I shall never forget the happy things I have heard you say on that glorious sub jc(st, with a zeal So fer. vent, yet So. modest and gentle, your argument So solid, just, Ib generous and So very hearty, as 
Lhe Epijlle 
has begot you applau fes and blessing round the board: a thousind instances, a History I could write of your discourses and asts of Loyalty, but that even your Enemies allow, and I willfpare it here, and only say, you are an honour and a credit to the cause that’s proud to own you. 
In this you are far distant to my amorous Hero; but atle aft for my 
own 
Sfhe Efijlle. 
own satisfa<stion, and that I may believe Sihia truly happy, give me leave to fancy him liich a Person as yourself; and then I cannot fail of fancying him too, Speaking at the Feet of Sihia, pleading his right of Love with the same softness in his eyes and voice, as you can do when you design to conquer; when e’er you Spread your Nets for Game, you need 
but 
The efijue. 
but look abroad, six and resolve, though you, unlike the forward youth of this Age, fo nicely pursue the quarry,, it is not all, or any Game you fly at, not every Bird that comes to Net can please your delicate Appetite; though you are young as new desire, as beautiful as Light, as a morous as a God, and wanton as a Cuftd, that smiles and shoots, and 
d 
The Epistle. 
plays, and mischicfs all his fond hours away : Pray Heaven you be not reserv’d like our Hero for Some Sister; ’tis an ill sign when So much Beauty pastes daily unregarded, that your love is reserv’d to an end as malicious as that of our Fhilandefs. 
Perhaps you’ll be out of humour andory, why the Devil didst thou dedicate the Letters of a 
Whig 
The Epijlk. ■ 
Whig to me? But to make you amends Sir, pray take notice, Sihia is true Tory in every part; if But to love a Whig be not Crime e nough in your opinion to pauly our appetite, and for which even her youth and beauty cannot make an atonement; commodity which rarely fails in the Trade of love, though never was So low a Market for Beauty 
C of 
IS 

e 
fo 
She Epijlle. 
of both Sexes, yet he that’s fortified and stor’d like happy you, need never fear to find his price; for wit and good hiimour bear still a rate, and have an intrinsic value, while the other is rated by o pinion, and is at best but a curious pi<sture, where one and the same dull silent Charms make up the day, while the other is always new, and (to ufeyour own expression) 
is 
The Fpiftle. 
is a Book where one turns over a new leaf e very Minute, and finds fomthing diverting, in eternal new discoveries; it elevates ones Spirits, 
charms the Soul, and improves ones Stock, for every one has a longer date of hearing than ing, and the eyes are Sooner Satiated than the ear; therefore do not depend too much on Beauty, ’tis but a half Conquest 
as 
fpe 
k 
soon 

: afe 
find 
i' 
tiesi 
nge 
!eau ]onj 
The Epinle. 
quest you will make when you ftiew the Man only, you must prove him too; give the soft Sex a sight of your fine Mind as well as your fine Person; but you are a lazy Lover, and lie fallow for want of industry;; ruft your flock of hoarded Love, while you gaze only and return a Angle figher; believe me Friend, if you continue to fight at that Angle Weapon, there will be no great flore of Wounds given or taken on either fide; you must speak and write if you would be happy, since you can do it fo infinitely to purpose; who 
can 
Lhe Epifile. 
can be happy without Love? for me I never numbered those dull days amongst those of my life, in which I had not my Soul fill’d with that soft passion. To love! why ’tis the only secret in nature that restores Life to all the felicities and charms of living 5 and to me there fecms nothing fo strange as to see people walk about, laugh, do the ads of life, and impertinently trouble the world without knowing anything of that soft, that noble palfion, or without fo much as having an intrigue or an amusement, (as the French call it) with any 
dear 
Set 
Lovi 
sih 
^ofn 
lotni 
ipafl e on! efton san to 0 bngi about an( work ingol nor agan t, (as any dear 
Lhe epijue. 
dear (he, no real Love or con cettrej perhaps these Letters may have the good fortune to rouse and make you look into your Heart, turn o’er your store and lavifti out a little to divert the toils of Life; you us’d to say, that even the fatigues of love had a vast plea fiire in ’em; Philander was of your mind, and I (whose advice you like that Friend you have honoured me with the title of) have even prefer’d all the torments of Love, before dully living without it. Live then and love, thou gay, thou glorious young man, whom 
Heaven 
The Epinie. 
Heaven Has blessed with all the sweets of Life besides 5 live then and love 5 and what’s an equal Blessing, live and be belov’d by some dear Maid, as hobly bom as Silvia, as witty and as gay and soft as Ihe, (to you, who know no other want, no other Bleifing) this is the fiaoft advantageous t>ne he call wish you, who is. 
Sir, 
Tour obliged and Most humble Servant, call 

i uqu 
xhi : nd) and, : oyoi ant, i le ftij inii 
T H E 
ARGUMENT 
IN the time of the Rebellion of the true. P rote ft ant gonou Paris, under the Con dupl of the Prince of Candy( ( we will call cthiio) many illustrious Persons were drawn into the ajfociation^ amongst which, there was one whose Quality aid Forttme, ^ { join d with tm Touth and Beauty) rendered him more elevated intheefteeni ofthegay^ 
The Argument. 
part of the World than most of that Age. In his tender Tears \imhappily enough) he chanca to fall in Love with a Lady., tpfwm we 'will calk, who had Charms enough to engage any Heart 5 she had all the advantages of Touth and Nature a shape excalent ^ cth. 7720ii agreeable Stature., not too Jalf and far from Low., dat cateh Froportion d, her Face a little enclin d to round., fofr, smooth ard white; her ey^s were blew, a little languishing and full of Love and Wit 5 a Mouth curioujly made dimpled and. full of fweetvafs'^ Lips 
rounds 
Tetii 
to e?i 
The Afgnoient 
round/oftj plump an J red ^whitj teeth.firm and even 3 her Nose a little Roman 3 and which gave a rwhle grace to her lovely Face 3 her Hair light brown 3 a Neck and Bosom delicately turrid.^ white and rising 3 her Arms and Hands ex imlyjhap'd^ to this a vivacity of Youth en gauging 3 ^ Wit quick ing f, a Humour gaya fid an Air ‘unrefiftablyc harming 3 and nothing was wanting to comp/eat the joys pf the young Philander, {fo we call obit amorous Hero) hut mertiliar’s Hearty which the Ulujirmis ' Cefario had before pojjefsdf^ howeverj cor/fulting her 
Honour 
The Argument. 
Honour and her Intereji^ and knowing all the Arts as Women do to feign a tenderness she fields to Matry him: While Philander, who fcorna to owe kis happnefs to the commands of Parent sjor to chaffer for a Beauty with her confentfieals her away and Marries her, but see how transitory is a molentpajfiow^af ter being fatiatedy he slights the Prize he had fo dearly con querd 3 some say the change was eccafioyfd by her too visibly continued Imje to gcsario 3 but what eier fwas^ this was moji certain Philander ca/i his Eyes upc7i a young Maid, Sister to 
cini men,, ^bili om,! icfscf mt] 
The Argument 
Mertilla, a Beauty., vphofe early Bloom promise! wonders when come to perfehion y but I will [pare her pislure here., Philander in the following Epifiles., will of ten enough present it to your view: He lovd and ian guifdd long before he durft discover his Pain 5 her being Sijier to his Wife, nobly Born, and of undoubted Same, rendered his passion too criminal to hope for a return, while the young lovely Silvia (fo we shall call the noble Maid) figha out her hours in the same pain and languishment for Philander and kliew net that f was Love 
The Argument. 
)e 
tt the ier joycl Lover and Brother., whosfoon taught her to 
tinderjland twas Love -- -- -- he 
perfues it^fhe petfuits stand at laji yields, when being dif coverd in the criminal Intrigue he flies with him 5 he absolutely quits Mettilla, lives sometime in a Village 7iear Paris, caned St. with 
^ this hetraf d unfortunate till being found out, and like to be apprehended, ( one for the Rape., the other for the Flight) fljse is fored to Marry a Cadet, a creature of Philander 5, to bear the name of Husband only to 
her, 
ni 
)i 
k 
a 
cat 

k. 
10 
dti 
ceni wi.. 
f u 
b k 
■jer, 
The Argumenf. 
Aer, whik fhihndtt hij the entire fo^effion of her Soul and Body: Still the League went forward and all things were ready for a War in Paris 5 but "tis not my buftnefs here to mix the rough relation of a War., with the fbft airs of Lovely kt It fuffke^ f})€ hugpno^swere Defeated and the mitg got the dayy and every Rebel lay at the Vlercy of his Sovereign: Philander was tdken Prisoner made his escape to a little Cottage near his own Palace, not far from Paris, writes to Silvia to come to him, which he does, and i?ifpight of all the indujiry 
to 
The Argument. 
to re^feizf him he got amy with Silvia. 
After their Flight., these let ters were founi in their Cabinets at their House at St. Denis, where they both livd together ^ for the space of a years and they are as exaslly asfojfi ble flacd in the order they were sent, and were those supposed to be written towards the latter end ofaheir Amours. 
I 
(toi 
