 
IV 
•iz'i 
ha 


THE 
GODFREY F. SINGER MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY 
MR. AND MRS. JACOB SINGER 

t 
'y ^ 
J! 




L 
• i. ■ 
i, 
V 
■ r AF T' 
'h ' ■ ’ 
,, ■'■ ' ‘': V. <•,. 
r 





V 

1 
.D > vt>4. 
* ■• •' '*1 
I 
^ ■* ^ 
^ 1 ■ 
'ri 
M A R I A; 
OR, THE 
GENEROUS RUSTIC. 


. / " t ‘ fc 


i. -. 
'' ■ ' *'^ ■ 
. si. 
. /■, 
?■' ....,,; '. ’, ' .'... .1 i : .n .o 
i. i.. ui J i 
'■ 
■ fil 
'"i 
- 
A 
V 
i 
2 TO n t5iit.t.) 
.......rria'f^. ..; V.;; 


■ sm. 
jur.. • -. ' 
C 

.. V 
'■'■ TV' ' * • *, 
:, > ’■ LI 
•• ■ \ rt. .•. 


O R T H E 
GENEROUS RUSTIC. 
0 may nu: never love as these have loved I 
POSE. 
LONDON: 
Printed for T. CAD ELL, London,; And C ELLIOT, Edinburgh. 
M.DCCL5XXIV. 
•, r: 
■' ■;. r ts‘ -■' ■' L: 
■: •• • ■ 

yd: : ■ T ’ TATE t C '■>0'^’ 
\.. y i; 
; '■; -- \ " • •?; 
” vsw.;.,. 
.- i,, • 
-- - ■ ■ ■ 
■ IT 'M ■ T /” *, ■, ■ 
’ ’ •■ ' ■‘•S .'y' ' 
■.' s II V 
• • ■ ' ‘ •> '. 

1 
! 
1 
.0 jt a'.i '• f'ria~sy': : ' 
■ i ....... -■,., ' 

A 
W .'a V,, 4' VII' 
C, -, V ' 
'.»•: ■ i. 
Lr I 
, 'S' 
■? 
'r 

• S'' 
.0 

■..-■.■/? .'>* '■ '.i 
m 
Pi 
DEDICATION. 
To ALMERIA, 
WHO POSSESSES EVERY VIRTUE THAT ADORNED THE UNFORTUNATE MARIA, ARE THE FOLLOWING SHEETS inscribed: — WHILST THAT SHE MAY EXPERIENCE A MILDER FATE, IS THE SINCEREST WISH OF 
THE AUTHOR. 
r 
1 
: a r 

/. ... 
•. f T i ______________^ ‘. ri, 
4 •’. *'• 
’■ * ' 
rt'j'i'ji*. t .-'■<>. .-. V: ■•:. 'acft.f 
TO i if.. '•: i >.: .T F T laajrri'k^ 
: V •<!'. ‘D 


... • 

PREFACE. 
The unfortunate have a strong claim to every Service we can render them; and that man is the happiest who has most opportunities of lightning the load of wo with which the most virtuous, as well as the most profligate, are often oppressed. If we cannot relieve, we should ever sympathise with the sons and daughters of affliction. But if we are ignorant of their sorrows till death has kindly placed them beyond the reach of persecution, the only attention we can then show them, is to transmit their sufferings and their virtues to posterity; — who, though their sorrows may long have ceased, will not refuse to bedew the melancholy page with the tear of sympathy. 
Not having had the happiness of knowing the Marquis of Clerville or his Maria, I had it not in my power to attempt an alleviation of their sorrows. — If I had, my attempt might not have been crowned with success. But many are the revolving years that have elapsed since Clerville and Maria ceased to sigh. The only attention I can now pay the illustrious pair, is to perpetuate their unhappy fate. 
The Marquis of Clerville fell an early victim at the shrine of hopeless love. He adored a woman who proved herself worthy of him; and who exhibited a fortitude of mind that must excite the admiration, while her misfortunes claim the pity, of succeeding ages. She even preferred misery to peace, when the latter could only be purchased by what she thought the happiness of her Clerville. 
The Author is conscious that the following sheets may contain many errors; but trusts they will be pardoned, when it is considered that he wrote, not to immortalise himself but Maria. 

M AT 
•, * 
■. AR K. V L 
■ - * 'i'". ^'''' ■ ir * 
1' r. - j.: i rttft trausii^'i * ilcisa y'^^kjel^ tel., < 
.,... t.daia. hinn ho^rrtlc^^ 
• *., ■ *; .*•. • w: 
:; -. \. tisbir’ i.*m!: '’?'v.l;, '5-' •.' t, wis 
^ ■.; V ^ 
;, ' .Ct' •' »•'*>? 
i 
m '■4ft.; d.‘, “r i.‘ ‘ h A 
.. '• ' • ■ 

'• 1, '; '. *»vj ^^‘ 
0.., \ V 
t i 
V'’ 
K. ^ 
V -’ Tte: tete : : rclhci'■" Cdir: 
I ^t71v c'. ij./' 
la i ^ 9 4f 

g ' “': rc.^d'^ h. 'r 'o' %. stc'; :;, ^; 
■ w.. _ 'i; •. /. ■, : C >tirr: -: : »£s53rc»‘': t 
T _... /, lisib.: 
• aa: xt 
V -- C. >• - ': ava.k A r'. '. - -^; 
-* •.. L A *,. r, »,.. 

OR THE 
GENEROUS RUSTIC. 
CHAP. I. 
Fifteen years had just elapsed from the birth of the Marquis of Clerville, when he was deprived of 
his 
12 
MARI A. 
his father. His mother had no Sooner paid the last rites to her lord’s memory, than she removed from the family seat at Clerville to Paris, taking with her the young Marquis; who, more from necessity than choice, plunged at once into all the dissipation of the capital. His mother’s first care, on her arrival, was to procure for her Son a commission in the guards, that he might have an opportunity of mixing with men of his own rank. -- -- -- -- -- 
Here commenced his acquaintance with the Baron Fitzeu. In him he found a true friend, who was willing to Sacrifice even his life in his Service; and who endeavoured, but 
.1 
in 
MARI A. 

in vain, to prevent the misfortunes which afterwards befell him. The Marquis continued in the guards till he was of age; when that good sense of which he Was possessed, led him to See the folly of a life Spent in a continual round of dissipation and idle visits, lie therefore determined to quit the Service, and retire to Clerville, where he hoped to Spend his time more to his owm satissadion than he had hitherto done. He imparted his design to no one but his friend the Baron; who, however foolissi he might think it, feeing his friend determined, gave his approbation. The Marquis, delighted to Sind his plan approved by 
Fitzou, 

MARI A. 
Fitzou, resigned his commission;; without staying to hear the censures of his companions, Set out for cler ville, having first requested his mother to pass the Summer with him; With which request she complied, in hopes to reclaim her Son, whom she now considered as mad. On hi« ar rival at Clerville, he Sound the house much out of order, and the grounds like a desert; but he was too much determined with resped to his plan, to have his resoiution shaken by So slight an obstacle. 
CHAP, 
MARIA. 
15 
CHAP. II 
rr^he Marquis had Scarcely reached Clerville, when he received letters 
Srom all his quondam companions, rallying him in the strongest manner, on a resolution which, they affirmed, was condemned by all Paris, and which had exposed him to the ridicule of all his friends and acquaintances. To these letters the Marquis returned no answer, but that he must Submit 
with 
1*6 
M A R I A. 
with patience to their ridicule, as he was determined to persevere in apian which to him appeared to be highly rational. In a few days the marchio ness appeared, laden with epistolary admonitions from his uncles; which, bating that they were treated with more apparent respedi:, met with no better fate than did those of his gay companions. 
The Marchioness attempted to rally lier Son on his romantic plan; but finding he was not to be laughed out of it, she endeavoured to prevail by reasoning with him. Her argument?, however, produced no better efiecl 
than 
MARI A. 
17 
than her railleries j and the Marquis remained fixed in his intention of fettling at Clerville. The Summer was Spent in fruitless remonstrances on the part of the Marchioness, and unheeded replies on that of the Marquis. When the season drew near when the Marchioness was to return to the circle of her gay friends, she became more urgent than ever that her Son should return with her to the honours of Versailles and the amusements of Paris. But having made one great effort, and that proving unsuccessful, she bid him adieu; hoping nevertheless to reclaim him, after he should have Spent a Solitary winter in the B rookery 
i 
MARIA. 
rookery at Clerville. On her arrival at Paris, all his former companions stocked to her house, not doubting that they should there sind the Marquis, cured of all his romantic ideas. But on hearing that he had withstood all his mother’s entreaties, and their ridicule, they defpaircd of feeing him till next winter. 
The Marquis, in the mean time, was pursuing his studies and his improvements with vigour. He Spent the morning in viewing his estate and improving his pleasure grounds; while his afternoons were either devoted to study, or tovvisiting those of his neighbours. 
MARI A. 
rp 
Fours, the narrowness of whole fortunes prevented them from shining in the beau monde. 
B 
CHAP. 
20 
MARIA. 
CHAP. III 
N this manner had the whole winter elapsed, undistinguished by any remarkable event, when the Marquis received a visit from his old friend the Baron Fitzou, with whom he had kept up a constant correspondence; but who, till then, had been prevented from visiting Clcrville by his absence from France. The Marquis received 
MARIA. 
21 
eeived him with all those demonstrations of joy which are natural at the Sight of one who is dear to us, and Srom whom we have been long Separated. The Baron expressed the utmost satisfadion at finding his friend pleased with the plan which he had chosen, and which he owned had not at first appeared to him So rational as it now did. 
A few days after the baron’s arrival, as they were walking in the park, they observed at Some distance a carriage; which, on a closer infpedion, proved to be that of the Marchioness. On the sight of her Son, she alighted; 
B 
was 
22 
MARIA. 
was by him received with the utmost resped, and condufled to the castle j where dinner being Served up, prevented those ressedtions on his mode of life, which he above all things dreaded. 
The cloth was, however, no Sooner removed, than she inquired, whether he did not now See the folly of his condud, in retiring from the world, at a time when he was most qualified for enjoying it? To this inquiry the Marquis made answer, That had his manner of life been honoured with her approbation, he should have been completely happy, as nothing but her 
distike 
MARI A. 
•3 
distike of it could render it disagreeable. The marchioness, by no means edified with an answer So diametrically opposite to what she wished, aster having staid a few days at the castle, returned to Versailles, despairing of ever reclaiming her Son. 
The Baron Soon after received a Summons to attend the King; and the Marquis was lest, by his departure, in his usual Solitude. A solitude, however, which was frequently and agreeably interrupted by the visits of Monsieur Fenelon, the cure os the parish : a man of extensive learning, gentle manners, true piety, and B 4 liberal 
^4 
MARI A. 
liberal Sentiments. 
With such a 
neighbour, it was imposhble that the Marquis should ever feel entmi. By his assistance he had recovered hi knowledge of the clashes, and was become an excellent'scholar.. 
GH AP. 
MARI A. 
25 
CHAP. IV 
The goddess of Content had hitherto resided with her favourite votary at Clerville: but the melancholy hour of her exile was at hand, and a less friendly deity was Soon to fix his abode there. The Marquis had not as yet burnt incense at the altar of Cytherea j but the little god, jealous of his own and his mother’s 
honour,. 
26 
MARI A. 
honour, aimed a gall steeped arrow at his heart; and he who, till then,, had never Sacrificed,, was doomed himsels to fall an early victim at the shrine of love. 
The Marquis, one day as he was riding, being overtaken by a storm of thunder and lightning, repaired' for shelter to a neighbouring sarm house; the beauty of whose situation, as well as its vicinity, tempted him to visit it On his entrance, he found the master, his wise, and only daughter; Seated at a rustic board. He no Sooner appeared, than he was invited to partake of the rural repast j an invi 4 tation 
MARIA. 
27 
tati'on which he accepted without hesitation. But the lustre of maria’s eyes So engaged his attention, that it was with difficulty he could comply with the pressing invitations of the old people to eat. The storm disappearing, he with reluestance quitted the cottage; where, at that instant, he would have been glad to Spend hist days, provided he might enjoy the company of Maria. 
marla’s charms had made too deep an impression on the heart of the Marquis to permit of his not Soon repeating his visit. Accordingly, in a few days, on pretence of thanking them 
for 
28 
MARI A. 
for their hospitality, he returned to the cottage (the inhabitants of which had now learned the rank of their guest), that he might contemplate the charms of the fair rustic. As he approached the hdufe, he perceived Maria sitting under the shade of a large elm, with a book in her hand. He instantly alighted; and, advancing, addressed himself to her. But Maria, difconccrted at his appearance, and resseding on the easy manner in which they had formerly treated him,, fled to the house with the utmost precipitation, dropping her book; which was eagerly Seized by the Marquis. He then proceeded to the cottage. 
The 
M A II I A. 
29 
The old people, distressed to the last degree at the sight of the Marquis, apologised, in an awkward manner, for the treatment he had experienced at his Sormer visit; declaring, that nothing but their ignorance of his rank could excuse their conduct. The Marquis, who was ever amiable, was by no means inclined to be harsh to anything connected with Maria. He received their excuses with politeness; begged them to be composed j thanked them for their hospitality; • and, notifying to them his intention of dining with them, restored to the cottage its usual tranquillity, -- -- The old people, delighted 


MARI A. 
lighted with the Marquis, prepared for dinner, whilst the amusement of their noble guest was entrusted to Maria. -- A tash pleasing in itsels; but 
for which she was then but ill qualified, on account of her embarrassment and nescience of the world. 
Dinner, however. Soon released Maria from her tete-a-tete with the Marquis; and the whole family sat down to a neat but frugal board. Dinner being ended, the Marquis requested maria’s leave to visit the dairy With this request she could not refuse to comply; and accordingly attended him to the Scene of his happiest 
MARI A. 
3^1 
’.piest hours. During their conversation, he was So struck with her modesty and good sense, that he ashed permission to repeat his visit. Maria blushed consent; and the Marquis having taken leave of the old people, returned to Clcrville, leaving Maria in a state of mind to which she had been a stranger previous to her acquaintance wish him. 
C HAP. 
32 
MARIA, 
CHAP. V 
U T before I proceed Sarther in my narrative, it w'iil be neces fary to give Some description of maria’s mental accomplishments; for as her personal charms beggared all description, I shall pass them over in silence. Her father, though not a man of much learning himself, had (by advice of the Cure) spared no pains 4 on 
MARIA. ^35 
on her education. Music, painting, c. were accomplishments for which she was indebted to the vicinage of a convent, where she was placed from twelve to fifteen. The Cure had early implanted in her breast thosc Sentiments of piety and virtue which, aided by an uncommon fortitude, Supported her in those trying Situations in which she was afterwards placed. 
It is not to be wondered, that by a woman So accomplished, and So hand some, a deep impression should be made on a Sensible heart. The Marquis frequently repeated his visits; which at last alarming the old people, C they 
34 
MARI A. 
they now cautioned their daughter against him, as a man who, however amiable he might appear, would not, should opportunity offer, hesitate to ruin her. Maria, terrified by this admonition, received the Marquis at his next visit wdth a coidness that astonished him. He was not long at a loss to guess the cause of this alteration in her condud, Srom whom he now dreaded an eternal Separation. The mention of marriage was not to be thought of; and, from the check he had just received, he had no great hopes of success on any other ground. 
In 
MARIA. 
35 
In this dilemma, he applied for assistance to an aunt of maria’s; who rendered herself unworthy of Such a niece, by concurring with the Marquis in his design upon her virtue. She undertook to deliver to Maria the marquis’s proposals; which were Such as might be expefled from a young man deeply enamoured, whom respect for the absurd maxims of the world prevented from matching himself with one of inferior rank. They were received by Maria with deserved contempt; and she gave the Marquis to understand, that she never more would Sec a man who had been ca c 2 pablc 
36 MARIA. 
pable of offering her Such an in suit. 
C II A P. 
MARIA. 
37 
CHAP. VI 
HE Marquis Seeing all hopes of 
1 
poffeshng Maria at an end, gave 
himself up to despair. The Solitary life which he led, served only to increase his passion. maria’s image was ever present to his mind; and the day was Spent cursing his unhappy fate, born to honours which were the only Source of his misfortunes, C 3. and 
38 
MARI A. 
and of which he wished it possible to divest himself; whilst the night was pas sed in dreaming of his happier hours, which were now past recovery fled. 
Maria in the mean time had attempted, but in vain, to efface from her mind the impression which the Marquis had made on it: Sor notwithstanding his ungenerous offer, she loved him still. Her Sriends remarked with grief, that her former Serenity and cheersulness were gone. She who was once the gayest on the green, now Sat drooping at the side of a brook, that Seemed to Sympathise with her wo j whilst the hills, 
which 
MARIA. 
39 
which once reechoed her happy strains, heard nothing but sighs. — Thus did Maria Spend each Sad revolving day; doomed to love, yet forbid to hope, and conscious that her birth was the only obstacle to herhap piness. 
Affairs were in this Situation when the marchioness made her appearance at the castle; for the news of the marquis’s amour had reached Paris, with this embellishment, that he was Soon to be united to Maria. On her arrival, she found the Marquis plunged in the deepest melancholy. She urged him with the ut c 4 most 
40 
MARIA. 
most vehemence to return to Paris. To this, however, he would by no means consent, but promised to visit England: a country for which he entertained a high respeflj esteeming the English a free, a ' noble, and a 
generous people. -- -- -- The Marchio 
Jiefs, on receiving her son’s promise to leave Clerville in a few days, left the castle without mentioning Maria, having learned that there was no probability of his marrying her. 
C H A P. 
MARIA. 

CHAP. VII 
T^TO Sooner was the marchioness ^ gone, than the Marquis Set out for Dunkirk, without venturing to bid adieu to Maria. A few days landed him at Dover j whence he proceeded to Canterbury j where, - though no bigot, he visited the shrine of the mitred martyr. This ceremony performed, he Set out for the capital, 
where 
42 MARIA. 
where his rank introduced him to the best company; and in which, had he not been Sunk in the deepest melancholy, he would have shone with lustre: But she was So much altered by his misfortunes, that that wit which had rendered him the idol of Paris was banished, and he always appeared as if he was anywhere but where he was. 
In compliance, however, with his mother’s commands, the Marquis Spent two years in England; during which time he visited Bath, Windsor, the environs of London, and South Wales j where he was much 
struck 
M A RI A. 
43 
struck with the beautiful Scenery which everywhere presented itself to his view. Scenes So romantic did not Sail to inspire the Marquis with those ideas which he endeavoured to banish from his mind. During his residence in England, he constantly corresponded with the Baron; who had his positive orders to Send an account of Maria in every letter. 
The time of his banishment being now expired, the Marquis Set out on his return to France; and a Sew days landed him at Clervsile. 
C II A P. 
44 
MARIA. 
C H A F. VIII 
AS he was riding one evening Soon after his arrival, he observed a female figure reclined by the fide of a brook. He immediately jumped off his horse; and having sa stened him to a tree, advanced gently to contemplate the fair unknown. * — The trees that overshadowed the brook prevented her from Seeing the 
Marquis ^ 
MARIA. 
4s 
Marquis; who, on a nearer approach, discovered it to be his loved Maria. 

At the sight of Maria, the Marquis thought himsclf completely happy; for as she had declared she would never receive another visit Srom him, he had lost all hopes of feeing her again. He threw himself at her Sect; and eagerly Seizing her hand, kissed it before she was Sufficiently recovered from her surprise to discovcr who he was. No Sooner, however, was this discovery made, than Maria Swooned. The Marquis stew in an agony to get Some water Srom the brook. He 
tried 
45 
MARIA. 
all means to restore her; but in vain for Some time. At last, however, she opened her eyes; and casting them on the Marquis, fainted once more. Shocked at her relapse, he stood mo tionless with grief and despair, till he was roused by the arrival of one of his Servants; who, happening to pafs that way, and observing his master’s horse, had entered the grove in Search of him, dreading lest he had met with Some accident. The Servant was no Sooner perceived by the mart]uis, than he was dispatched to the castle Sor Salts, kc. but widi orders to mention to no one the situation in which he had Sound his master. 
MARI A. 
47 
ster. The Marquis in the mean time endeavoured, by throwing cold water on her face, to recover Maria; and he was fortunate enough to Succeed : for when the Servant returned, he found her Seated on a bank, reclining on his master’s arm, but very weak. 
Maria had no Sooner recovered Srom her Second fainting fit, than the Marquis entreated her to be composed; assiiring her that no violence should ever be offered her by him. A little comforted by these assurances, she entered into conversation with him, desiring him to permitjber 
to 
48 
MARIA. 
to return home, and to promise never to disturb her retreat. For though she was not happy there, nor ever could be anywhere, yet she there enjoyed a Sort os repose, which his presence would infallibly destroy. She owned that she had a great regard for him; a regard which would prevent her from ever being any one’s but his. But as she never could be his consistently wdth her honour, she was determined never to be his at all. tier happiness was a Sacrifice she had not withheld;; her honour should ever remain Sacred and inviolate. 
The Marquis begged pardon for the 4 offers 
MARIA. 
4? 
offers he had made her through her aunt, and pleaded in excuse the ex cess of his passion; observing, that the foolish maxims of the age in which they lived, had placed insupe rable obstacles between them and hap piness. He assured her, that it now gave him the highest pleasure, to think that she had treated his offers as they deservcd j and concluded with promising never more to make attempts of a Similar nature. 
Maria was by this time Sufficiently recovered to think of returning home: and accordingly, with the assistance of the Marquis, she reached the dairy; 
D ' the 
5^ 
MARI A. 
the Scene of happy hours that were no more to return, and on which they restefted with pleasure mixed with regret. Here Maria bid adieu to the Marquis, strictly forbidding him to visit her on any pretence whatever, and returned to the cottage; where her presence occasioned as much joy as had her absence uneasmess. 
C H A P. 
MARI A.' 
51 
CHAP. IX 
rr^he Marquis, in the mean time, returned to Clerville more enamoured than ever; and determined, that, as he could not confer the title of marchioness of Clerville on Maria, no other woman ever should enjoy it. As Soon as he found himself at the castle, he retired to his dressing-room, that he might be at leisure to D 2 indulge 
52 
MARIA. 
indulge sthose melancholy reflections that engrossed his mind. Here he Sat meditating on his unhappy fate till midnight, when he was alarmed by the horn os an express who rode into the courtyard. He immediately flew down; and Snatching the letter from the bearer, opened it with the utmost anxiety. He no Sooner cast his eyes on the writing, than he knew it to be the baron’s, who requested his immediate presence at Paris on business of the utmost importance. With this request the Marquis hesitated not to comply; and three days after, he reached the capital. 
Ga 
M A R t A. 
53 
On his arrival, the Baron informed him, that an uncle of his had died at Lishon, and had left him a considerable property; of which, however, he could not take possession but in person; and he requested the Marquis to accompany him thither. The Marquis wished not to comply: at the Same tjme, he could not refuse anything to the Baron; and So he at length determined to bid adieu to Clerville castle and to Maria for a few months. 
Before he embarked, however, he wrote to Maria, regretting his being obliged to leave Clerville: For tho’ D 3 he 
54 
MARIA. 
he could not See her, as she had not yet consented to receive his visits, he had the pleasure of hearing of her every day. Of this pleasure, however, he was now to be deprived; and in a few days the two friends embarked for Portugal. 
CHAP. 
MARI A. 
p5 
G H A P. X 
THEIR voyage was prosperous till they were within a few days Sail of their destined port, when one morning an Algerine corsair was discovered bearing down upon them. The appearance of this worthy follower of Mahomet excited very disagreeable sensations in the breasts of the crew, as their vessel was of force consider. d 4 ably. 
56 
MARIA. 
ably inferior to that of the corsair. He was now, however, too near to admit of their escaping j they therefore determined to Sell their lives or their liberties dearly. The Marquis, though a Soldier, had never Seen Service. He embraced with ardour this opportunity of showing that he had rot resigned his Sword because he knew not how to use it. A few minutes brought them close to each other, and a mutual discharge of broad Sides took place. The adion continued for twenty minutes, when the Marquis ordered out the grappling irons, and united the corsair 
to 
MARI A. 
57 
to them by ties of not a very duestile nature. His ardour increasing every minute, he at last determined to board them. In this bold attempt he Succeeded, and found himself in an instant on the deck of the corsair. Several of the crew attempted to follow the example of the Marquis, but perished in the attempt. Some few Succeeded, but were Soon Sacrificed to the rage of the enemy; who finding themselves boarded, fought with the utmost fury. The Marquis, however, had penetrated unhurt into the middle of the deck, where he was made prisoner; as the aim of the 
Ai 
58 
MARIA. 
Algerine cruisers is always to take as many prisoners as possible. 
At that instant the corsair lost her mainmast and considerable part of her rigging. This being observedby the French, they quickly made off, notwithstanding the threats and in treaties of the Baron, who was wounded in attempting to follow his friend, •and now sat upon the deck in a chair, to see if anything could be done to refeue him. But the French being Satisfied with the reception they had already met with, did not choose to hazard the event of a Second engagement; and a fresh gale Spring 2 ing^ 
MARI A. 
59 
ing up, Soon waited them beyond the reach of their disabled enemy. 
CHAP. 
^0 
MARIA. 
CHAP. XI 
•'"T^HE Baron still Sat on the deck,, beholding, with inexpressible anguish, the prison of his friend j a prison into which he had been led by his friendship for him. While he was indulging those melancholy reflections, his wound had bled So much that he was quite faint: but, faint as he was, he ordered out the pinnace, 
and 
MARIA. 
6i 
and determined to go and share the fortune of his friend. But not one of the crew would undertake to man it, expecting that as Soon as they should come within reach of the Cor 
fair’s guns they should all perish.". 
The Baron sinding that neither threats nor entreaties would prevail on the crew to row him to the Corsair, gave himself up to despair. He was now So weakened by his wound, that this new agitation threw him into a fainting sit; during which his Servant, assisted by Some of the crew, carried him to the cabin; where the Surgeon dressed his wound, and put him to bed. He sscpt for Some hours 5 but 2 no 
62 
MARIA. 
no Sooner awoke than it was evident he was delirious. He called on the Marquis; he offered to beggar hiin felf to procure his ransom; and ashed pardon of Maria for having deprived her of her Clerville. ' 
In this manner he continued raving for Some hours. At length he fell asteep; and having taken a composing draught, ssept found for Some time. When he awoke he Seemed much better, and was soon able to sit on the deck for the benefit of air. The winds had proved contrary ever Since they had parted with the cor fair 5 but they were now favourable, 
and 
MARIA. 
63, 
and a few days landed the Baron in Lishon; where his first employment was to prepare for a voyage to AL giers, which he determined to undertake as Soon as the state of his wound would permitihira. 
C H A P. 
^4 
MARIA. 
CHAP. XII 
•T^HE wished for hour at length came, and the Baron embarked for Algiers; where he arrived Safe after a short passage. He thought, that if he was once landed he should have very little difficulty to procure the freedom of his friend, having brought an immense sum with him for that purpose. In this, however, 
he 
MARIA. 

he was disappointed: Sor on his arrival at Algiers, he found that the captain of the corsair had Sold his friend to he did not know whom. Distressed to the last degree at this melancholy piece of intelligence, he inquired how long he had been Sold. They informed him, Some weeks; and that he was gone far up into the country, but to what place they did not know. In this dilemma he determined to Set out in Search of his friend; having procured an order from the Dey that he should be delivered up to him, on paying the price which had been paid to the captain. 
E 
For 
66 
tvl A R 1 A. 
For a long while his Searches were unsuccessful: but after having experienced nothing but disappointment for Seven months, he at last found the Marquis employed as a gardener in a retired part of the country. To attempt a description of the feelings of these two friends on this joyful meeting, would be Superfluous; and to execute Such a description, would be impracticable. I shall therefore hasten to inform the reader of what happened to the Marquis after he was taken prisoner. 
His treatment on board was not So barfli as might have been expected ■; 
and 
MARIA. 
^7 
and the corsair’s being much damaged put an early period to his confinement, as the captain made for Algiers with all possible Speed. His first care, on his arrival, was to dis pose of the Marquis, lest the Dey should put in his claim. The person who bought him resided in the most remote part of the country; and finding him a good gardener (that having been one of the marquis’s amuse ments at Clerville), he committed to him the care of his garden. This trust the Marquis executed with So much fidelity and ability, that he Soon became a great favourite with his new master. 
E 2 The 
^8 
MARIA. 
The old Mahometan was walking in his garden when the Baron entered. The Marquis and he stew into one another’s arms; in wshich situation they remained Sqr Some moments, to the astonishment of the musulman. At last, however, advancing towards them, he received from the Baron the dey’s order for the liberty of the Marquis. He read it over two or three times with attention, as it contained a short account of the marquis’s misfortunes. He then returned it, assuring them by their interpreter that it was totally useless; for that from that time the Marquis was his own master j but on 
one 
MARI A. 
69 
one condition only, that he did not offer to pay for his liberty. 
The two friends looked at each other with astonishment. At length the Marquis broke Silence; declaring, that if these were the oiily terms on which he could procure his freedom, he would end his days in stavery. An interesting contest ensued between the Marquis and his master; in which the former at last proved vidlorious, and the generous Mahometan was constrained to accept of a thousand pounds as an equivalent Sor the marquis’s freedom, 
70 
MARIA. 
dom, -- -- -- a Sum much greater than 
■what he had given for him. 
At the request of the Turk, they deferred their departure for Some days; during which time they wrote to France, informing their friends of the joyful event that had taken place the hour at length arrived wdien they were to bid adieu to the generous Mahometan; who, whatever his religious principles were, would have done honour to any religion. He embraced them at parting; and earnestly recommending them to the proteflion of the prophet, bade them farewell. The Marquis could not 
refram 
MARIA. 
71 
refrain from tears, at leaving a man whose conduct towards him had been So noble and disinterested. He bid adieu to a state of Servitude, with feelings not common on Such an occasion; and could he have forgotten his loved Maria, he would have felt still more than he did at quitting the. generous Mahometan 
E 4 
CHAP, 
72 
MARIA. 
CHAP. XIII 
nn H E two friends in a Sew days arrived at Algiers, whence the Marquis insisted on Sailing to lis bon besore they returned to France; declaring, that as the Baron had Sacrificed his own interests to his hap piness, he must now accompany him to Settle them. To this the Baron with reludance consented; and the 
day 
MARI A' 
73 
day for Sailing was fixed, when one evening as the Marquis and he were at Supper, a number of armed men Suddenly entered, and Seizing the Marquis, carried him off, notwithstanding all the resistance the Baron could make. 
Both the one and the other knowing the violences that are daily committed under that government, despaired of ever meeting more. But Clerville was doomed to Suffer unnumbered woes ere death should sign his release. He found himself conveyed to a large house about three miles from the town, which had all 
the 
74 
MARIA. 
the appearance of a palace. Here he pasted the night; and it would be Superfluous to add, a steeplefs one. The morning having made its appearance, he looked out of his windows, and beheld himself situated in a delightful garden, which Nature Seemed to have formed in Some lavish hour. Nor had art been less liberal. It was all perfe<stion; and appeared calculated for the abode of love and peace, if ever they had chosen to reside together. 
Whilst the Marquis was rcsteding on his own situation, he was interrupted by the appearance of a female I stave,. 
MARIA. 
IS 
flave, who accosting him in the language of the country, desired him to banish fear; for that he had been seized only to be condufled to bliss r That a beautiful young widow had Seen him as he pasted the window the other day; and was fo much struck, with him, that she determined to confer on him, herself and all her immense riches: that as Soon as he had. drested himself in the Turkish habit he was to repair to her, and that she would be his condudrefs. 
The Marquis determined to obey immediately j and having dressed himself in a dress which was brought him 
76 
M A R I Ai 
by the stave, he followed her into large room, at the upper end of which he beheld, Seated on a Sofa, a fine female figure, most richly adorned. She advanced a few steps to meet him; and having Saluted him in the manner of the country, she Seated him by hersclf on the Sofa and thus addressed him. 
“Christian, my stave has already informed you where I first Saw you, and how much I was struck with your appearance. If your mind be as beautiful as your person, I shall have no reason to repent the step I have taken. Should that prove the 2 » cafe, 
MA 'R IA. 
77 
t cafe, I will render your lise com •^pletely happy. IS, on the other hand, 4 shall have reason to regret my conduct towards you, exped to feel the •effeds of my vengeance. On the death of my husband, I determined to •become a Christian, and to marry one of your faith; as with you the women are treated like women, and not like staves; and one man sis not, 'as I am told, allowed to have more ' than one wife. These reasons determined me to marry a Christian; and as I am much pleased with your appearance, I will confer upon you my riches and my person. I have learn -- e'd from your attendants that you are 
not 
78 
MARI A. 
not married; I therefore doubt not of your accepting my offer. 1‘here remains then nothing for us to do, but to celebrate the marriage according to your rites; and then we will embark for your country with my treasure, which will enable you to live in Splendour and magnificence. 
To this address the Marquis listened with the utmost attention, but was perfeqly at a loss bow to reply. At last, however, after having paused for a considerable time, he answered in the following terms: 

MARIA. 
79 
“I am Sensible of the distinguished honour you intend me, when you southeast le£t me to be the partner of your riches and your bed. It is with reluctance I define an honour So flattering and So enviable : but vows which I have made, — vows of a most Solemn nature, — vows that must for ever remain sacred and inviolate render it impoffibje for me to accept that happiness which you So generousty •offer. I shall, however, remember with gratitude, and refleff with regret, on this day’s adventure I am sorry that my attachment to one who is now far distant, and who counts with anxiety the hours that intervene 
'8o 
MARIA. 
vene between this time and that of my expected return, precludes me from returning that a'ffedion you pro fess for me. Dt is true we are not united by the rites of our faith; nay, we never may be So: but we have exchanged the most Solemn vows, if we do not marry each other, never to marry at all. From these most Sacred obligations, no power whatever can release me. You must not therefore do me the injustice to attribute my refusal of your offer to insensibility of your uncommon charms, but to the violence of an unhappy passion, which will, I fear, one day prove my ruin 
During 
MARIA. 

'During the marquis’s discourse, zara’s eyes flashed fire; but when he had concluded it, fly gave no bounds to her resentment She felt herself injured, if not insulted, by this preference given to another; and determined from that instant to effect the ruin of the Marquis. He was by her staves reconduded to his prison, where he waited with fortitude the event of a transadioii from which he had everything to dread : for the Marquis well knew, that nothing is So dangerous as a slighted female. 
He had not, however, been long in his confinement, before the Baron en f tered 
02 
MARI a: 
tered his apartment, and once more restored him to freedom. For, ha, ', ving obtained an order from the Dey for that purpose, he easily discovered the prison of his friend'; and in a few minutes conducted him to the harbour, where they embarked for lif bon; well knowing they had everything to fear from the resentment of Zara. After a good passage, they landed in Portugal; where the Marquis found letters from all his friends, congratulating him on the recovery of his liberty. But these letters proved unfatisfadory. They contained not the name of Maria,; for whom his attachment was as great as ever, 
and 
MARIA. 
8^ 
and of whom it will now be proper to lay Something. 
, ff 
2 
CHAP. 
84 
Maria. 
C H A r. XIV 
fxepv the marquis’s depart ture, Maria relapsed into her former melancholy. She generally Spent the whole day on that Spot which had'witnessed the affeding interview between her and her lover, and which has been already described. Heaven, however, coinmiserating her Sorrows, Sent to her relief one of the most 
amiable 
MARIA. 
.85 
amiable women that ever lived. a delaide now made her appearance at the cottage. As her history is Something singular, and as she was the Sriend of Maria, the reader will, I hope, pardon my inserting a short account of it. 
Adelaide was the only daughter of the Baron and baroness daranda. Her father and mother lived in the greatest Splendour and magnificence; and by the time Adelaide had reached the age of Sixteen, found themselves necessitated to quit Paris, and retire to the family seat at Clermont. 
Y 3 The 
85 
MARIA. 
The Baron, to add to the many other bad qualities he possessed, was a gamester; and Some unlucky hit had almost ruined his affairs. The man who retires from the world only be cause he can no longer afford to live in it, after he has ruined shimfelf by vice, does not generally make the most agreeable companion, because he is never happy iri himself— — is to the good man only that retirement is pleasant. With such a companion as the Baron, however, was Adelaide doomed to spend her days when in the bloom of life; she was Suddenly torn from the admiration of Paris, and the friends of her youth, to? lin 
MARIA. 
87 
ger in a gloomy Solitude. But this she could have born, had it been the only Source of her unhappiness. But her father’s temper, ever bad, was now So Soured by his recent Ioffes, that he vented his Spleen on every one who came in his way. 
The baroness, his wife, was a mild amiable woman, who endeavoured to Soften her own lot and that of her daughter, but to no purpose. The Baron was continually cursing that bad luck which had reduced liiin to his present unhappy state; and, instead of being, cured of his passion for gaming, he was constantly” expressing 
f4 
hi 
88 
MARIA. 
his ardent wishes that he might Soon be in a condition to take the field 
once more. 

As Soon as they had arrived at Clenvont, the baroness and her daughter used every means to render the baron’s life as pleasant as possible. They invented little amuse ments for him; and tried, but in vain, to make him relish his new situation. lie grew more morose than ever; and they remained still un happy. 
Masters had continued in this state 
for 
MARIA. 
8p 
for near a year, when the baroness was taken ill. She found that she was dying; and having Sent for a delaide, she gave her her will, in which she had left her all she had to difpose of, viz. three thousand livres a year; appointing her cousin Monsieur de Vatres her guardian. With tears in her eyes, she recommended it to her to live with her father as long as she could, and to do everything in order to please him. At the Same time she added, “If you find yourself obliged to leave him, which I Sear will Soon be the case, retire to Mr de Varies, who will protest you; 
1. and 
o 
MARIA. 
and your own income will Support you.’* ‘ 
She had Scarce finished this dif -- course, V hen the Baron entered the room. He was just returned from a card table at the next town, to which he went as osten as he had money, in hopes of repairing his fortunes by Some lucky stroke. The Servants had informed him of his wife’s iss ness; and he appeared, when he entered, in great agitation. The Baronets no Sooner Saw him, than she put forth her hand to take hold of his j and having had just strength 
enough 
MARI A. 
91 
enough to recommend her daughter to his proteflion, expired. 
i 3 ■ 
CHAP. 
d. A 
ilv '0.0 > 
92 
MARI A. 
on ft' ' 
...........' 
nn: ?: 'd 'i 
"h J. 0; Oi L m‘ 
C H A P. XV ^ rio’ 
TCC 
A DEL A IDE, upon the death of; her mother, ' was So much afflicted, that she was thrown into a violent fever, and confined to her chamber Sor Seven weeks. "’on her recovery, she found her Situation worse 
V 
than ever." The Baron had been but little hurt by the death of his wife y 
and the impression which lihat event ’ - oc moii h i 

MARIA. 
93 
had made was now totally effaced from his mind. He informed his daughter of his intention to marry her to the Due d’albcville, an old worn out rake; and required her consent, By this match he was determined to repair his ruined fortune; for as the Due was immensely rich, and Adelaide was extremely handsome, the Baron expected that the greatest advantages would accrue to him from the connexion. ' 
Adelaide, shocked at the brutality ofg her father,, and the disgusting manners of her lover, determined to free herself from both. As her father 

94 
MARIA. 
there had declared his resolution, she knew she could only escape by putting herself under the proteflion of her friend and guardian Mr de Vatres; which she took the first opportunity of doing. He received her with the greatest kindness; assured her of his friendship and Support; and 
desired she would consider his house 
/ 
as her own. Adelaide thanked him for his goodness; but requested his leave to reside in the country rather than at Paris. She therefore desired him to choose Some place of retirement, where she might pafs her.days in regretting the loss of an amiable mother. - 
With 
MARIA. 
95 
With this request Mr de Vatres complied, and placed her with maria’s father, "who was a tenant of his. The old man gladly embraced the proposal, hoping that So agreeable a companion would be a great acquisition to Maria, who was now in a declining state. The two ladies Soon became attached to each other. Adelaide had Suffered; she therefore knew how to pity. She requested Maria to give her an account of her life and misfortunes On hearing of which, shcj could not refrain from tears; and endeavoured, by every means, to' Comfort the fair mourner : but in vain; Maria gave herself dstv/ up 

MAR ‘I A. 
up to despair, when she considered that her future prospedfs in life were clouded over,"^and not one friendly ray of hope appeared to dispel the Airrounding gloom 
'.iri' C. ^ - 
Aili;. ^ - -- ‘d 
.i «iiob'’ s ir‘ 
: : Ou Till CHAP. 
lue.' CL H aara' ^ 
I Ve» ■* 
', r 

MARIA. 
97 
CHAP. XVI 
A Ffairs were in this Situation when the Marquis and his frtcnd returned from Lishon. Immediately on his landing, he stew to Clerviile. He was no shoner there, than he repaired to the conscious grove. But — cjh — ^tfaere was no Maria there! To the cottage he durst not go till he had obtained her leave : G For 
MARLA; 
For that leave he applied; but it was obstinately refused. He petitioned for an interview; but to no purpose despairing of ever feeing her more, he returned to Clerville, where he was Seized with a fever, which lasted thirty days; during which time the Baron never left his bedside. When delirious, he called his Maria cruel; and begged her to visit him. Sometimes he lamented her death, and Sometimg prayed heaven to accelerate his own. The .physicians, however, at last gave the Baron hopes of his friend’s recovery; and a few days verified their predidion. The mar .quis’s fever gradually abating, he 
Soon 
MARIA. 
99 
Soon found himself able to walk in the parky but he was still So dejeffed, that 3 the Baron feared, unless Some step was taken for banishing his melancholy, he would Soon fall a victim 
to it iljulw.; 0» - 
adsiemit stoidw gmti ’ d. ■ neriw, ^ohst bod fd st'd " krn: V uiusm 8m A. f2rrif: .Kr 
mif! Jsti / V h'^gst '\ '. biiii tdjfipb 13d h^lt oil 
sluour 01 navj^r C H A P. 
>wod (^njoiafiyiiq. osit ..nv/u 8 .i do 2 qod noifio odj ovrg fles ryfib woi L hn£ ^ yiovoaoi/' rl r 
ibm odt .Dihoiq lioiv? stci 
3i! v(knh?.t »i ‘. 
nool - 
too 
M A ^ 1 A 
i'rtoiih'int^ N: nj ' .B ■ wfr'** •w^n*rt oy^hi bffi 
ds cs? -: »vf'.; l ..r| binot' r>rl Ic 
oo>, CHAP. XVII 
II iiupiiim uni ^lteqo>^, ( CLIV uj 
f) n; si ■ bed oh 
p"t^he.daron baste entertained pre 
“^3 justices against the marquis’s marrying Maria: but he was ashamed to diink of Sacrificing his friend to his'prejudices; and well knowing that desperate diseases require despe ratc remedies he proposed himself, that the Marquis should apply for his mother’s consent to the marriage. 
, f O He 
M A R I AT. 101 
He undertook te convey she marquis’s request to she marqbioness and to affure her, that nothing short of her conshnt could preserve the ush of her Son. 
To this proposal she Marquis listened with eestafy.. He had often d« terastned within hhftrelf to marry Maria; ^ but he feared that even she Baron would not Support fstm in So imprudent a.ehnice, no>time, ^ how over, was now to be lost; andrlthe Banm see out for Baris leavshg'ito his friend the delightfukoffice of in forming lmark‘ of she sto^'taken' in • her savour«»id3 ol e^iomhom 
ih. G 3‘ Tiiis> 
102 
MARI Av 
This office the Marquis Soon difi charged. He ssew' to the cottage rushed into her chamber, threw hiin'i Self at her feet, astd^vowed never to rise till she promised to bless him with her hand, provided lie should obtaiii his mother’s consent. The old peoi pie, who had followed him to the room, fdid not leave their daughter time to reply. They declared, that if the Marquis was in earnest, he was the best, ^ ‘the most generous of men Maria stood speechless. Adelaidej who had never before Seen the Marquis, was not at a loss to guess who hd was, and expected with impatience the reply of her friend. Maria. 

MAR IA, 
103 
ria, after recovering a little, assured the Marquis, that he was going to take a step of which he would repent when it was too late 5 but that since he declared his happiness depended on her becoming his, she should defer accepting the honour he now offered her, only till he should receive - the marchionefs’s, 'approbation. ■ !- ■ 

Maria had no Sooner given her Gonfent than the Marquis arose; and, Seating himself by her, reproached her for her.cruelty in refusing to see him: but before she could justify herself, .she quite qvercome 
an G 4 with 
104 
MAR I. A. 
with the Scene which bad happened' Adelaide stew to the assistance of her friend; and in a short time Maria, recovered.’^ ^ sr - 
, i 
The Marquis, who' till then had not observed Adelaide, bis attentiem having been wholly engrossed by Maria, now turning to the former, addressed her in the following manner: 



iot 
.'ifp 
Madam, as you are the intimate frrenjd^bf Maria, and are well quainted %ith her misfortunes as well as with ^hiej r»y coitdiiff will leave you toidoubt that I am the 
unsor 
M A R I A. 
105 
unfortunate Marquis of clervule. Permit) me to embrace this opportunity of thanking you for your goodness to Maria; for which I shall be ever grateful. I have long wished to commence an acquaintance with you; but maria’s injunctions forbidding me to visit her, has prevented it till now. I trust you will not refuse me either your friendship or your pity.” To this Speech Adelaide could make no reply, she was So much confused; but after a little while she retired and left the two lovers alone. The Marquis entreated Maria to delay her hap pinefsj no longer than the return of the Baron, whom he expecled in a 
O' ' 

M A R I A. 
few days. With this request she promised to comply; and it being late, the Marquis, ' having bid adieu to. Maria, returned home to prepare the castle for her reception. 
V ^ F V’ 3 
'... TA 
notth '■'d'* rr^ffw h =vi7"'> ^ 
t vf '3'str'^ rifd If 
bnr ftrsid oi 
. ^rroufl srfj nl irii 
■rnotl ^ th rit bstt^vliab ‘dw f)oq jg x>frtah'"inod fl‘7fto!d'?'»^'b''' sb B bnn .inelnoo led fo ■1o’ taijodi bjnow ash tminimb '■yol> 
MARI A. 
107 
o^q 
■V 
A ’ “-- 
,. y Cil;,, j, *, -- -- - 
i Oi S: -- ori ' 
cnoijq'^ jti : 
CHAP. XVIII 
A T length the wnshed for hour ^ arrived, when the Baron made his appearance at the castle. The Marquis flew to meet histi, and read' his fate in the Baroffs countenance; who delivered to him a letter from the Marchioness, containing a positive refusal of her content, and a declaration that she would Sooner follow 
Io 
M A R I A. 
low him to the grave than see him disgrace himself by So degrading a connexion as that he now wished toi make. ■ 

This news had neap proved fatal to the Marquis, After, however, having meditated for Some time, he went to Maria; informed her of his mother's determination but declared, that as Soon as ever the marriage Settlements could be drawn up, he would marry her, be the consequences what they would: Thatj: as to the loss of his mother's estate he should never feel it; for however Small his owa fortune might be, it waswfush 
dent 
A R 1 A lop 
Giem for them.'! He had too good an opinion of hotf, nnderftanditig, to suppose tivat she was ambitious of vittg in a higher Sphere j that for his own part, he should not hesitate a moment to sink kito a lower one, provided, he oould but can her 
rsmik 3fnol !o*isstde(; ir 
jlst lo' rr: ^’^rru r'sirar 

VI 
Maria affected to be delighted Wkh the thoughts o her approaching nuptials, - But BO sooner was the Marquis gone, than she applied to her father for leave to go for two days to her uncle’s, *5 who lived at a few miles distance. Ihis leave being obtained, she et out lasteadjof going to ifl30 her 
1^0 
MAR I A, 
her uncle’s, direded her steps to a convent; the Safest retreat of the unfortunate. It was Seventy miles from, Clerville. There she had a friend, through whole interest she was received by the abbess, who approved of her intention of taking the veil, and promised she should be concealed there till it should be out of the ipower of man to take her thence. Being now Safe from all. pursuit, she wrote the following letter to the Marquis: ^ V ^ 
; t “unv n‘i^c o: 
“My dear Lordte ' 
“It is now time'that;! should account for my precipitate retreat from I my 
MARIA. 
Ill 
my father’s house and from your arms. Blinded by your pashon, you offered to Sacrifice your friends, con nedlions, and a large estate, that you might marry a poor insignificant peasant -- -- one who never had many 
charms, and who Sacrificed the few she had at the shrine of melancholy. I should ill deserve the affection of the Marquis of Clerville, if I could accept the generous offer you made me in the heat of passion. No — I never will be yours; but 1 will deserve to have been yours. refled, my Lord, with pleasure, on the e escape you have had from being united 'to a girl, whose birth would have «; tar 
II 
MARIA. 
tarnished the lustre of your ancient house. In your cooler moments, the truth of what I now say will strike you forcibly. But lest it should be long ere these moments arrive, I shall not discover the place of my residence, till it shall be imposhble for you to disgrace yourself by a connexion with one, who, though unworthy the honour you intended her, is, and ever will remain, 
Yours, and yours alone, 
r 
marian 
The 
MARIA. 
113 
The same post brought a letter to her father, apologising for her con duff; and informing him of her intention of remaining in the convent till she should take the veil. 
CHAR 
14 M A R L A. 


.T 

f 
CHAP. XIX. 
’’’’T^HE Marquis no Sooner received her letter than he flew to the cottage. The first person he met was Adelaide,; who was in tears for the loss of her friend. She endeavoured to comfort the Marquis, but to no piirpofe. He inquired for maria’s father; who no Sooner appeared, than he taxed him with being privy to his 
daugh 
MARI A. 
115 
daughter’s elopement. The old man replied only by crying, and tearing his hair, and cursing his fate in having a daughter who rejected honour, and wealth, and happiness, for the sake of burying herself in a convent. 
The Marquis finding that none of her letters were dated, vowed to Set out the next day in Search of her. From this the Baron attempted to dissuade him: but sisiding him determined togo, he resolved at last to accompany hirn^^bn his journey 5 and the next day thej^ fet out.’'* Almost every convent in fran(^e was Search h 2 ed, 

ii 
MARIA. 
ed, but to no purpose. The marquis’s health was declining very fast, owdng to the constant fatigues he underwent, and to the agitation of his Spirits. He continued his pursuit, however, for near a year; during which time he had not been able to procure any intelligence of Maria, She constantly corresponded with a delaide, who alone knew where she was hid. This correspondence, in the end, proved the means of her residence being discovered by the Marquis. 
Marla, hearing from Adelaide that the Marquis still continued his pursuit. 
MARIA. 
117 
Suit, wrote him the following let 


ter. 
hih 
jv ■pninifoab 
O 
■ V >. 
My Lord, 
Do you still persist in pursuing an object unworthy os your attention? Desist from the inglorious pursuit; 
C ■ ^ i ^ jl' n.;. 
which, if crowned with success, will reflect nothing on you idut .disgrace. I will use my greatest efforts to prevent your ruin. Never more shall 
I' .u 
you contemplate the Source of all your Sorrows. You will accuse me of cruelty for forming this resolution : But however cruel you may now think me, you will one day own that she was your best friend, who,. 
H 2 at 
Ii 
M A II I A. 
at the expense of her own peace, endeavoured to make you happy, though against your will. Adieu, my Lord. I am in a few days to assume the veil. It will then be out of your power to ruin yourself, should you discover the abode of her who will weary heaven with prayers for your happiness, — for the happiness of one for whom she entertains an affection that will last beyond that grave to which she is now hastening. 
'I 
!! ■ ''' '; 11 ' ■„ u j w 
• C 
CHAP, 

MARIA. 
lit? 
CHAP. XX 
T 
HE Marquis received this letter late at night. Pie perused it 
Several times; and then retired to his 
V 
room, where he continued walking up and down till morning in great agitation. As Soon as the Baron was up, he desired him to Set out and follow him, without informing him where they were going. After tra h 4 veiling 
120 
MARIA. 
veiling a few miles, he stopped at a Small inn, finding himself So weak that he could proceed no farther. Here they breakfasted; and just after breakfast stepped into the kitchen, where the post was delivering out the letters for that district. As he was thus employed, the Marquis observed one directed by a well-known hand. He instantly Seized it; and before the post could prevent him, he broke it open. It proved to be from Maria to Adelaide; informing her, that on that very day she was to take the veil, in a convent only six miles distant from where the Marquis then was. The Marquis threw down 
the 
MARIA. 
I 21 
the letter; and running into the stable, Seized his horse, and Set out full Speed for the convent. The Baron, who had caught up the letter, and perceived the contents, ' immediately followed him; and they proceeded together to the convent, 
IV. 
When they entered the chapel, the ceremony was begun. The Baron trembled at the sight; but the Marquis Seemed to acquire new fortitude, and waited with heroic firmness the conclusion of the fatal rite. But no sooner was it over, and Maria pres paring to withdraw, than, ‘exclaiming with agony, “Cruel Maria!” he 
sunk 
1 22 
MARIA. 
sunk motionless into the arms of the Baron, and expired. 
The confusion that So melancholy aft event occasioned in the chapel, attrafled the eyes of every one. Maria no Sooner cast her eyes on the fatal Spot where the Marquis lay, than she sunk speechless into the arms of those who stood next her. She was immediately conveyed into the convent; where she remained insensible for Some time: But when she was recovered, they found that she had lost her senses. She raved; and, add ref sing herself to the Marquis, promised to marry him immediately 5 then ash' 
'
MARIA. 
123 
ed his pardon for occasioning his death. In this state she remained till evening, when she was conveyed to bed, where she got little steep, and that very disturbed. 
The Baron, in the mean time, had conveyed the marquis’s body to a neighbouring house; where all at tempts to restore him to life proved ineffedlual. The Baron was almost distrafted, and knew not what to do. ’next day, however, he repaired to the convent (having, in the mean time, dispatched an express to a delaidc, desiring her immediate presence), and endeavoured to See Maria. 
124 
Maria. 
ria. But she was not in a condition to be Seen by any one, for she waa still delirious. 
In this •condition did the Baron remain till adelaide’s arrival. The meeting between them was Such as one would expect between two people So circumstanced. After Some conversation, the Baron and Adelaide repaired to the convent, where Adelaide gained admission to her still delirious friend. Maria did not take the least notice of Adelaide, but continued still to address'her conversation to the Marquis. This melancholy Spectacle proved too much for 
Ade 
MARI A. 
125 
Adelaide. She was obliged to return to the inn, where she found the Baron preparing to accompany the remains of the amiable and unfortunate Marquis of Clerville to his Seat, where he was to be interred. 
'"ill u i 
ij.l 
C H A P, 
126 
MARIA. 
CHAP. XXI 
his arrival at Clerviile, the Baron found the marchioness walking in the Park, waiting the return of her Son, who she heard was cxpeded at home that day. She no Sooner beheld the mournful cavalcade, and learned the Sat of her a miable Son, than she burst into tears. the Baron proceeded to the hall, 2 where 
MARIA. 
127 
where he lodged the remains of his friend. They were no Sooner in the hall, than Surrounded by all his weeping domestics, who declared that they never could meet with So kind a master. The Baron begged them to be comforted j assured them he would retain every one of tsem in his Service as long as they pleased, and would endeavour to imitate the conduct of their late worthy master. 
The marchioness sent for the Baron to her room, and inquired the particulars of her son’s death. She Said, that though she could not but lament his fate, she was happy he 
had 
12 8 
MARIA. 
had not lived to disgrace his illustrious ancestors. The Baron left her, incensed to the last degree by So unfeeling a Speech, and prepared to fulfil a promise he had made to his friend; which was to send his heart inclosed in a Silver urn to Maria. He accordingly Set out for the convent. 
CHAP. 
M A K I A. 
129 
CHAP. XXII 
N his arrival he found Marla still delirious, but with lucid intervals. Adelaide, who during the baron’s absenbe had resided in the convent, gave him hopes of her recovery. But these hopes Soon vanished. For no Sooner did Maria receive from the Baron the melancholy legacy, than she became worse I than 
I 2 0 
MARIA. 
than ever; and Snatching up the urn, ran to the Soot of the altar, whence she would Suffer none to remove her, but Spent the whole night in weeping over that heart which was her’s in every sense of the word. 
In the morning she Suffered Adelaide to lead her to her apartment whence she never stirred for Some weeks. The Baron in the mean time returned to Clerville; where, after having celebrated the Suneral of his friend, he proceeded to execute his wall; in wshich he had left the e state of Clerville to the Baron, subject to a pension of three thousand 
livres 
MARIA. 
131 
Livres to Maria, and five hundred to each of her parents. 
This affair being Settled, he once more Set out for the convent. On his arrival, Maria appeared at the grate with her friend, which till now she had not done since she had received the fatal present. The meeting was affefung in the highest degree. The Baron and Adelaide wept in silence. Maria continued still to rave, and address herself to the Marquis. The Baron could bear this interview no longer; shut retired from the grate, leaving Adelaide to conduct her friend back to her apar.t i 2 mcnt. 
132 
MARIA. 
ment. At two in the morning Maria arose, and taking with her the urn, repaired to the chapel, where she continued weeping, till Adelaide waking, and missing her, went to the chapel in Search of her, ' and with difficulty prevailed on her to return. 
Maria continued in this state for Some time; but at length she changed her manner, and never Spoke at all, but remained in a deep and fixed melancholy. She was now fo much emaciated by her constant grief, that the physicians despaired of her life : But, to the astonishment of every one, she continued in this Situation 
for 
MARIA. 
13: 
for two years; during which time Adelaide never left the convent. At the end of this time Sne became So feeble, that Adelaide, Seeing her dissolution approaching. Sent for the Baron. On his arrival Maria appeared at the grate, Supported by a delaide and two nuns She was now So altered, that the Baron hardly knew her. He attempted to Speak to her; but was So much affected, that he could not. She made signs for them to bring her a chair, on which she Seated herself; and, resting her hand on the urn, alked him if that contained her clervillc’s heart. To this the Baron answered in the affirmative 
y 
h4 
MARIA. 
tive; on which she exclaimed, cler ville is dead I and. Sinking into the arms of Adelaide, ceased to sigh. 
It is impossible to describe the feelings of the spedators'. Adelaide threw herself on the corpse, and bedewed it with her tears. The Baron retired to the inn to give vent to his grief, whence he stirred not till next day. He then waited on the bishop of the diocese and the lady abbess of the convent, who both contented to his request, and permitted him to remove maria’s body to cler ville, where it was interred in the same grave with that of her unfortunate 
MAUI A. 
13s 
nate lover. On the tomb the Baron inscribed the following epitaph, written by himself, having previoussy in shrined the heart of Maria in a silver urn, and placed it, together with that of the Marquis, on their tomb. 
E PITAPH 
EPITAPH 
On the Tomb of 
CLERVILLE and MARIA. 
Written by the Baron Fitzou. 
i^assnot. Here Clerville and Maria Sleep. 
Sad pair! ye ceas’d at once to live and weep. Long o’er her clerville’s urn Maria wept, 
And each night a solemn vigil kept; 
But now like clerville’s do her sorrows cease, 
And maria’s soul is huih’d to peace. 
Lo! silver urns their wo worn hearts enclose, Whilst in the filent tomb they seek repose. 
Who ne’er on earth that dearest blessing knew. Shade them, ye willows, and thou mournful yew! Watch — O watch o’er their dull, ye gentle pow’rsl Who kindly calm the saints departing hours. 
So Shall Fitzou your praises ever fing. 
When through the choir the hallow’d anthems ring. 
N 
S. 

THE 
HISTORY 
O F 
ELIZA WARWICK. 
: <yj=x==: - — ■ 
VOL. I. 
'v 


'■ C •■% 
S. T 
»■_• \ I 
Y; i o TV 1 
vt'. 

T > 
ia 
C.; r 
M 
¥ 
V % 

•'■ 
t ■■ 
THE 
H L S T O R y 
O F 
ELIZA WARWICK. 
IN TWO VOLUMES. 
“Vaulting Ambition, that o’erleaps itsel^ And falls on t’other fide.” — — 
VOL. L 
, #■ 
LONDON, 
Printed for J. BEW, in Pater nofier row. 1778. 
•ff n rv'' 0 



A t ^-, 

•-• H... 
• a< 
V..; ■., f >• ■' ■ ^ * ► >'71? f * A # ^ 
'^ /. ' ■ 
S' VI ■ -. “S ’ / ^ 
'tr • .« * V. 
* ■, 'fr 4 vi .'1. C ■ A T' ftl Si 1 -’■* ^ k 
• ' ‘> " ■'. 
:,. ' sr: "' 
tek’./'c 
*' • '<. *. * .♦ 


To the Reviewers, ' ' 
Gentlemen, 
0 your proteflion I offer a Work, which has, indeed, little to recommend it to your notice, but the motive on which it was undertaken; and as that is Such as the most virtuous would approve, I dare to 2.^ your countenance to forward this attempt. 
Were I not as well convinced of your mercy, as of your jujiicd. I could hardly presume to offer the following sheets to the eye of criticism 5 but as I am Sure you will pass over many errors, in considera a 3 • tien 
VI DEDICATION. 
tion of the, rgquest I make you for that purpose, I beg leave to dedicate my first produtflipn to a Set of gen lemen, whose Sentiments I esteem, wbose abilities I admire.'’ • 
I am not So ungenerous, as to hope to prejudice you in my favour, by telling you that I ama female, and a very young one — Your gallantry might, to be Sure, on that account, whisper Something in my behalf — I 'do not mean that it should when I make that confeshon — nor should it be made at all, but that I think it necestary to apologise, as a woman, for this work’s not being written, perhaps. So accurately as you would expect it should be, did it come from one of your own Sex. 
Vll 
DEDICATION. 
And now, gentlemen, I will say no more in the vindication of Eliza Warwick — but will only hope, that, if there is nothing in her that can incline you to favour her, you will pass her by in Silence in your Review, and not mortify the delicacy (or, if you please, vanity) of one So much interested in her fate as I am, by any of those satirical strokes with which sentimental Novels in general are marked by your pen. 
I am. 
Gentlemen, 
Your admirer, and obedient Servant, 
The AUTHOR, 
l7 • ' V ^ X F A i U d u w 
2 /vtrtiia 
vtasd i’fri' j'vri t : il! C tijirfi Ct V - ihw : .N -, ASA'^PKK. H.L) * h .'i 1 Lier.. 'te 
LI 
i .2’ 'o ■; •' ■• ■; 
’’ 7. L ■ I / 
- 7 yl L <■; 1 C ■ r: C 
vo'^.' '"h isic'd '* ' 
, 3’ i'.j It (yyh../r> t hclq L,.; LI, 1 '^) 
I ■: .I C .Sr 13 'I f: ' S ift r,; : nvs. C n;. i A. 
.,., sth ^ i :;. yd v r> 
"■ t lis']' -- 
TI ' S'; i "5 0 '«■' .i i. 
2;, ' .Ilia 1j; H za.d.\.r': ^ 
u, 
SI 
r : .: D., 
t, *, -*•' 

I s’t .*; 
te ^ ■hl^■ •-, i #-» 
■ n ■ ' 
m AA K.J.. 
lt • 


.•A 

=x(8?> = 
■X> 
THE 
HISTORY 
o F 
ELIZA WARWICK. 

~x 

Ti? Miss Eliza Warwick. 

. Y Son is distracted, Eliza — he complains of my — os your rigour; he knows not the neceshty (as we do) of your absence from England — he asks for your story — demands it with wildness in his aspect— — me to unravel this myf ierjy this dreadsul eenigma, that is to put vol, I. B an 
2 THE HISTORY OF 
an end to all his hopes — he kneels — he bedews my hands wdth his tears — then rises — Swears he will find you out — no Convent — no Altar — no place, however Sacred, shall protect you — shall hide you from him. — I am upbraided with cfuel ty — you he calls an innocent victim, Sacrificed on the shrine of Avarice. — He exclaims against a marriage with Lady Isabella Trevice, and invokes Heaven to witness that he will never call her his. — In short, he wearies his Spirits So effectually, by giving way to these agitations os mind, that he throws himself breath less into a chair, and is Sor Some hours lost to all Sensibility of Surrounding objects — nor can any efforts draw a word cr look from him. 
For heaven’s Sake, Eliza, write to him the story of your life — show him the impossibility. 

ELIZA WARWICK. 3 
possibility, the madness, of a connexion taking place between you — tell him it muji not be — Shall not, I had almost Said — I cannot undertake this talk; be sides, It will receive double force from your pen — Adieu I — You must be happy in a situation So peaceful — So retired! I shall be ever Solicitous about your welfare, and will be rejoiced to have it confirmed that you no longer repine at your Situation. -- You are very lovely. Sensible, 
and attractive — dangerous qualities 
for a worldly life. 1 again repeat, 
you must be happy — everything considered, you cannot be otherwise. en 
close your packet for Lord Huntley in your next to me, I will deliver it — Heaven grant it may compose his mind, and reconcile him to the amiable woman I haye allotted for his partner! — My wishes will be then answered, and I shall be 
B 2 
crateful 
4 THE HISTORY OF 
•gratesul to you when I subscribe myself the happy— — my dear, always 
Your affectionate friend, 
C Huntley. 
P. S. By my son’s repeated request, I inclose a letter from him — but, remember, I depend on your promise, and your prudence. 
to 
ELIZA WARWICK, - 5 
To Miss Eliza Warwick. 
the unhappy victim of your cruelty. Madam, now humbles himsels besore you — he lays his heart at your feet, he opens its bleeding wounds — he presents them as So many trophies of your conquering eyes — he makes*no doubt your 
jyride will trample on them cruel 
Eliza! 
Hi ^ Hi 
, It is you that can inflict misery! — it is you alone who can behold it unmoved! 
-- -- You wish me unhappy because I 
adore you — you treat me with Severity,, while I kiss the hand that dooms me. wretchedness! 
Hi Hi 
Hi Hi 
B 
What 
6 THE HISTORY OF 
What a heart! Ah! Madam, what a heart must you poffess! In Such a form, 
too! -- Eliza— — Eliza 1 — why assume 
Such sostness Fair image of 
Deceit — restore my peace — restore my ii Sensibility. 

. you tiot blush — did you not sigh 
i — when first I told my passion?? -- 
not those eyes — ah! those destruqiive eyes! — did they not say, “Huntley, thou art beloved ?” -- -- Perfidious Sex! 
Ah! my Eliza, forgive me — pardon the distradlion that thy charms — that a 
cruel mother — have occasioned! where 
/. 
thou, most loved — most injured woman? 
ELIZA WARWICK. 7 
fnan? Where has the restless ambition of Lady Huntley conveyed thee ^ Hear me, Eliza — if ever you wish to See me happy — if ever thy gentle heart has pitied my Sufferings — if ever you wish to taste Selicity yoursels — inform me, I conjure thee, of the place of your residence 
■ -- -- then shall you behold your Huntley 
at your feet — his life — his hand — his fortune — are all at your command -- then 
will he live — then shall he be indebted to’ you, for more than life — for that peace of mind which winged its flight from him when you were torn away. 
“Return, blessed days — return, ye roseate hours 1” ^ 
I must hope, my Eliza, you will Speak comsort to my Soul. I will Say — Eliza Warwick has ever pitied the unhappy — ' Why, then, should a faithful lover de b 4 • Spair? 
8 THE HISTORY OF 
fpair? Adieu! too charming arbitress of my fate — be kind — be merciful — and let one Soft Sentiment plead for 
The unhappy 
^. Huntley, 

ELIZA WARWICK. 
it the Right Honour able the Marchioness' ' ■ Huntley. 
.alh, Madam, what a talk! What a command have you laid on me! Well might you shudder at the thoughts of .bearings Such a recital to the ears of the 
amiabl^marquis -- -- -- still more — much 
more — miist I endure at being ntyfelf the 
relater os So painsul a recital. -- Time 
and missortunes have not, alas! worn off the too keen edge of my Sensibility — and the wretch, who has born a great deal, must still bear more, because her Sorrow will be not completed till she overwhelms the object of her love in an abyss of misery. You Srown, Madam — Ah! forgive me, dear Lady !■ — a Sew — a very few days — and all is over — Lord Huntley 
will 
to THE HISTORY OF 
will not be tempted to Sacrilege the temple — to storm a convent -- -- A victim I 
am — but not to avarice — My days were blackened by missortune, and it is noitj only that I have a prospedt of happiness — One trial more — and then you will receive the welcome intelligence of my 
having bid adieu to all my troubles.' -- 
Situated as I am, 1 mujt he hlejfed.*' -- ^ Ah! Madam, my resradtory heart! Never, while it beats, shall I know peace — It is a presumptuous — discordant companion — it rebels against my better judgement — Soon will it cease to disquiet me — the little wretch, worn with perpetual flutterings, will ere long dash itsels against its cage, and by the last struggle expiate 
for all its faults -- Dear Lady! — if to 
love the generous Marquis be a crime — forgive and pity me, when you learn I died for it. 
I ant 
ELIZA WARWICK. ir 
I am weak and saint — but have reassumed the pen to assure you that I shall obey your commands. inelosed you will find the fatal packet, which your friendly hand undertakes to convey to Lord hunt lay. I shall enter upon the melancholy detail immediately. Think me not ungrateful, my Lady — think me not obstinate — ah! rather suppose me too yielding — too grateful in my nature. The tears of Sensibility flow whilst I write — and may they, dear Lady Huntley! wash from your remembrance the presump tuous wishes of 
Your ladyship’s Most respedlsully affectionate 
Eliza warwick. 

12 THE HISTORY OF 
To the Right Honourable the Marquis of Huntley. 
Yon R reproaches, my Lord, wound me less thajn your sostness, and I have only to wish that your letter had ended as it began — how easy would it be to have convinced you, you accused me wrongfully L — how easy to have justified myself! The perfidy of my Sex might be lamented by you — but you have no reasoii to exclaim against it from experiencing it in me. I am a woman, his true, my Lord — a weak, a helpless woman! — but honour, gratitude, and fidelity, dwell not firmer in the breast of 
4 
Tnan than in mine. Ah! my Lord, have I not proved it? The Sacrifice I am about to make will convince you of it. 
The 
•ELIZA WARWICK. 13 
The reproachful part os your letter thus answered, I am come to that which I 'find it much more difficult to reply to. — Ah! Huntley, why should I be more liardened to your Severity than your tenderness ^ — did Nature bestow on me a heart too Sensible for my peace ?■ — pr why must my happiness vbe the vidiim of 
capricious Fortune Dear Huntley! 
wish me not to forget my duty. 
Did I sip; h? — did I blush? — when first 
O 
.you revealed- -- -- what a Scene! 
— let.me draw the dark shade of oblivion over it — let me banish it for ever from my remembrance! Happy moments! Must I not recur to ye! Must I not rested: what bliss ye Seemed to promise! Suffer me today down my pen for a few minutes -- -- -- - 
This 
14 THE HISTORY OF 
This unpardonable weakness — forgive it, my Lord — delightful as it may appear to you now — aster your perusal of the following sheets, it will need an apology. I am going to lay before you the history os an unfortunate life — the mystery which you have So often wished to understand 
-- -- -- then will you find the poor Eliza 
an orphan in every sense of the wwd — * 
sriendless — Seduced — abandoned -- -- -- -- 
Is this the woman you fondly love? — this an object: Sor Lord Huntley to adore? — 
Imposhble! -- -- Oh! tear Eliza Srom 
your heart I — leave her to her Sat !- 
Yet — ah! my Lord, from your compas sion I claim a benignant tear — read, and 
pity me! -- r allow the tenderness of your 
Soul to whisper, she is unfortunate, not culpable— — merits my friendship, tho’ 
she has lost all title to my love. -- - 
Once more I must resign my pen -- -- -- 
* ^ 
ELIZA WARWICK. 15 
Lady isabella Trevice — Suffer your reason to behold her Such as she is, my Lord ^ — noble, rich, young, and beautiful — Now turn'your eyes on the poor Eliza — 
What a contrast !.....Be happy, my 
Lord — 1 can. never make you So — but in forgetting me, you will lose the remembrance of much misfortune -- My word, 
my honour, have I pledged to keep the Secret of my confinement — Suffice it to Say, I am in a convent, and was it written in the book of Fate that I could taste 
of peace, I might enjoy it here. 
/ 
Adieu! my Lord; my Sorrows will Soon be ended, and you may then, without regret, remember, that, while you thought me innocent, you loved me. -- The grave shows objects less criminal than they appeared in life; and, without a blush, you will Say, ‘‘ Eliza Warwick 
dared 
i6 the HISTORY OF 
dared to poffess for me the tenderest affection— — my Huntley — her agonising heart aspires to love you — and she now declares it, because the hour approaches when death will excuse her to you. To your merit I owe this confession— — I can Safely make it now, when the amiable Lady Huntley will have nothing to Sear from the discovery. Again adieu! ever dearest and most generous of men! Rested: with pity on the fate of 
Eliza Warwick. 
The 
T; H E 
HISTORY 
O F 
ELIZA WARWICK. 
Addressed to the Marquis of Huntley, 
I SHOULD, my Lord, preface this his tory with an assurance of my feeling regret at Sending it, since I know the Sensible heart of him to whom it is addressed — If it occasions a few pangs to that heart. Some tears may drop — I shall thank you for your pity — but much rather would I Save your generous bosoni from So distresssul a visitant — and for ever bury from your knowledge a story re •plete with wretchedness and woe. — Lady vol, I. C Huntley, 
t8 THE HISTORY OF 
Huntley, my Lord, has desired me to point out to you the impossibility of our ever being united — the most effectual method os obeying her is to Send you the Sad history of the unsortunate object that you would raise to the happiness of •becoming your wise — Behold, then, my Lord, I am ready to pass over once more the melancholy Scenes of my lise to do you Service — Scenes! which the bare recollection of throws my Soul into agonies — yet when I remember the motive of thus tearing open wounds which the lenient hand of Time had but just closed — when I remember that Lord Huntley is to be relieved from inquietude by my Suffering asresh — I undertake the talk with eagerness — every dart of Sorrow this relation must cost me will in Some measure be blunted by that restedtion. 
The cause in which I am engaged is a 
generous 
ELIZA WARWICK. 19 
generous one; it may Save your honour, 
my Lord — but must kill my hopes.. 
How much I prefer the Sormer to the latter — those happy emotions which took their rise Srom love — the Sacrifice I am 'going to make — will determine. 
My mother was the fourth daughter of the late Earl of Tenterdon — At the age of sixteen she was mistress of every accomplishment that could adorn her Sex — The luxuriancy of beauty which even at that early period she possessed, rendered her ■the object of general admiration. Lady Tenterdon (whether through vanity, or a mistaken sondness for my mother) was anxious to exhibit the lovely Lady Eliz^ Darcey thus Soon at Court. That point .of eeremony. So important in the eye of Nobility, being attained, she was ushered immediately into the gay world. — At C 2 every 
20 THE HISTORY OF 
‘every public place She constituted the principal part of admiration — The finest Spedtacle — the finest singer — the finest aftor — were dilgregarded the moment i.ady Fdiza appeared. She was the idol os her Safher, and ‘‘ the fond darling” (as Lady Tenterdon used to term it) os her mother’s heart.” — Eliza was the compass'by which their 'most ambitious hopes were Steered, and they doubted not the sase pilot wfio would bring them into thefiarbour they aimacd at, by adding to their illustrious connediions. 
’jfhe noise this new beauty made was not to be Surpassed by the renown of the most valiant — nor did csesar triumph over more conquests than did Lady Eliza dar ccy — her staves were as numerous asher different airs — and. Surely, in one So young, and So admired, many may be thought allowable. 
ELIZA WARWICK. 21 
In the Suite os her adorers the Duke of beauvarise was not the most unheeded; and,, if Lady Eliza felt no prepos seshon in his Savour, it was enough that Lord and Lady Tenterdon thought him. the most accomplished of men. — This nobleman,, with an immense fortune, had youth, sense,. person, and merit,, to recommend him. — The refractory heart will often. See objections in an object, where they really do not exist — the duke’s, faults with. Lady Eliza were not few — and, as he was too much in love to prove as good a rallier as her vivacity and in fensibility to his passion Suffered her to be, she treated him with a degree of Severity in her Satire which nothings but the most fervent attachment on his side could have excused, Lie proposed himr Self to the Earl as a match for his daughter, and was joyfully accepted of; an C 3 early 
22 THE HISTORY OF 
early day for the celebration os nuptials, * which were to be the foundation of southeast licity to all but f.liza, was as eagerly granted by Lord Tenterdon as Solicited for by the impatient beauvarise, 
Lady norsolk (my, mother’s Second Sister) was about that time going down to her Seat in Huntingdonshire; and Lady Eliza, during the drawing up os Settlements, and the preparations usual on Such occasions, desired leave to attend her sis ter into the country. 
Now, my Lord, am I approaching a period in which I begin to feel myself affected— — period on which the happiness of my honoured mother’s life depended. Lady Norfolk was that Sort of woman who strikes with admiration at the first view — her person was beautisul — in Saying 
that 
ELIZA WARWICK. 23 
that you bestowed on her the only encomium she merited — yet to accuse her of any flagrant crime would be unjust — her happiness centred in adoration, to everything else she was insensible — to meet with that darling tribute to her charms, she appeared continually in Some dish pated Scene — Never, with her own consent, would Lady Norfolk have left London, had she not known that her Lord loved Society So well, as to insure her a train os admirers — and that in Huntingdonshire she would reign over a. little principality unrivalled by any sister beauty — at least who could figure in So distinguished and attractive a line as she did — This ressedlion consoled her, and they departed from town.. 
norsolk mansion was the resort of the young and gay — pleasure ruled with ab c 4 Solute 
24 THE HISTORY OF 
Solute dominion, and each day was wit ness to the institution of Some new entertainment. 
Lady Eliza, very unhappy from the change that was So Soon to take place in her Situation, wished for more retirement, and to be enabled to indulge her chagrin without control — When she could steal a moment to herself, she reasoned with her heart -- Duty — gratitude 
— nay, ambition! — were urged to banish its insensibility — and every art used to inspire her Soul with thole Sentiments of love which the Duke was but too justly entitled to — yet all were fruitless; they recoiled against the purposc they were intended to execute, and she never thought of the connexion So Soon to take place without shuddering. — I will write to my father, ’’ cried Lady Eliza one day, 
almost 
ELIZA WARWICK. 25 
almost drowned in tears, I will open my Soul to him, and own I am unhappy.” Her pen was instantly employed — it addressed Lord.denterdon in terms that would have moved the most indifferent to the*woes of a fellow-creature — Alas! her Situation was truly deplorable! she had no resource but in the mercy of a man who was impenetrable to the pleadings'of Nature, when they were to clash with his ambition — and who on Such occasions resembled in his feelings 
“A savage bred in Scythian wilds: Soft hu manizing Pity never reach’d his heart.” 
Frequently was i.ord Tenterdon heard to declare, he would prefer feeing his daugh ters dead at his feet., than behold them wedded to the worthicfi men without titles and nches. His answer was therefore peremptory, and Lady Lliza received it with evident marks of horror. 
26 THE HISTORY OF 
One day, tired of the incessant crowd which hurried to norsolk mansion, she complained of indisposition, and excused herself from leaving, her apartment. — About nine in the evening, when she thought every person engaged in the Saloon, she was tempted by the Serenity of the weather, and the brightness of the moon, to walk in those delightful woods which Lord Norfolk had taken much pains to render beautisul. — The trees were thick, and the beams that broke through them from the Spangled horizon, and the charming orb which shone in its fullest Splendour, for Some time conspired to as sist the Sad turn of her mind, and gave her a taste of the voluptuousness of Sorrow, which she eagerly indulged. — Weary at length with walking, she Seated herself on the root of a large lime, and charmed by a melodious nightingale that 
had 
ELIZA WARWICK. 27 
had perched on one of its branches, listened to its melancholy notes with enthusiastic pleasure— — Sensibility, ever lively, ever exquisite, inspired in her breast the most delightful sensations, and she was nearly responsive to a Song So Soft — « So accordant to the harmony of her own soul. — The charm did not continue — the bird flew from that side of the grove, and her ideas reassumed their natural tendency — Happy bird!” cried she audibly, how unconstrained art thou! — Thy Song is happy, though ’ds plaintive; and thy little heart stutters not at ills to come — Ah! poor Eliza! how Soon wilt thou wish for its infensibility! how miserable will one short month make thee! Cruel father! most unkind of men! you postess not paternal feelings!” — A stood of tears prevented her Saying more, ♦and she was So totally absorbed in the 
idea 

THE HISTORY OF 
idea of her wretchedness,. that she perceived not a man standing before her, in an attitude of astonishment and compassion— — started at the Sound of his voice, when he thus exclaimed, “Ahd Madam, you Seem overwhelmed with affliction;; me to entreat that those charming eyes may be dried,, and employ me on any occasion that can even In the stightest manner calm your anxiety — I am a man of honour \ and,, though stranger to you, am authorised by that Sacred title to Say, you may dare confide' in me — My Soul is humane — it never 5’et' harboured deceit, or availed itsels of opportunity to hurt the innocent — judge, then, of the propriety of my Sentiments towards you, and how I am affected at beholding So fair a creature a prey to that devouring monster Grief — Say, Madam,, how I can possibly relieve you — and my 
zeal 
ELIZA WARWICK. 29 
zeal in Serving you will best vouch the sincerity of my words.” Lady Eliza was now struck with her imprudence — Fear sixed her torpid to her place whilst the stranger Spoke — when he ended, a numerous crowd os thoughts rushed on her itiind, and distradled her with fear and consiision — that which disturbed her most was, that she had partly revealed her Secret to a man she never Saw, and who might ungenerousty use the discovery to her disadvantage. — Filled with this idea, she quitted her Seat, and with a tone of high disdain exclaimed“ “! bold intruder — begone, and Seek no further to molest my retirement.” — The stranger bowed low, and retreated, when for the sirst time Lady Eliza viewed him with less inattention than she had done, and • in his discovered the most perfect form her eyes had ever beheld — ‘‘ Heavens !** 
Skid 
30 THE HISTORY OF 
Said Lady Eliza in a very low voice, who is it I have thus addressed? What a Savage must he think me! I will advance towards him — I will apologize.’* — She did So. — “Sir, I ought to ask your ■pardon” (cried the trembling beauty) for my incivility, and add my thanks for your generous offer — but, alas! I am imhapp)? — and no one on earth (but those who will not) can relieve me. — Adieu! Sir; forget this Scene.” She was hurrying Srom him, when the charming stranger caught hold of her hand., ‘‘ Rather ought I to implore your pardon, Madam, for my unseasonable interruption — but allow me to explain myself • -- I am an unsortunate man, entangled in an engagement the most cruel — My father has dragged me to Lord norsolk’s with the lady he has allotted for my bride — Sick of the company, but most 
of 
ELIZA WARWICK. 31 
■of her, I came into these walks to indulge a chagrin too visible to be concealed — and hardly had I wandered ten minutes besore I discovered you — Need I Say more? — I Saw your Sorrow — I heard your pathetic exclamations — and, unable to contain mysels longer, I dared to disturb your Solitude — Forgive me, Madam; 'tis I who should Sue Sor forgiveness.” Lady Eliza heard — and could have remained to listen, had he Spoke for ages. — At dength she begged him to Say no more on a Subject that made her blush for her 'behaviour; and, after assuring him of her concern for his unhappy situation, •told him her name — and begged to be informed of his. “My name. Madam, is Warwick — my father is a near neighbour of Lord norfolk’s, and with your permission I will call here tomorrow, and will hope to be favoured with a sight of 
the 
32 THE HISTORY OF 
the most lovely woman in the universe Lady Eliza would not accept of his attendance to the house; and, half dead with fear and wonder, she made the best of her way to her own apartment. — Ah !” cried she, throw ing herself into a chair, am 1 not indeed culpable? — these emotions — the Sound ofjhat voice — Oh! Warwick — Who and what art thous— — generous man! Your griess are equal to mine — our fate bears Some resembknce.” aster Such expressions, I need not Say that Lady Eliza Spent a disturbed and restless night; they are Sufficient to evince she took Some interest in Colonel warwick’s misfortunes. She arose early the next morning, dressed •with a care and anxiety she knew not how to account for, and thought the hours the longest she had ever Spent, when Lady Norfolk entering her dreffirig room, 
“Come, 
ELIZA WARWICK. 33 
Come, Eliza, ” Said she, come down, and See the beauty and admiration of the world — Young Warwick, just arrived from Italy, with all the airs and graces that Nature can bestow, or Art acquire, comes thus often to my house, to show his sense of the power of ray charms; • he was here yesterday, child — but you are So unaccountably dull — else you might 
have Seen him Sooner -- -1 must tell 'you 
a compliment he paid me — he took my hand as he was going away, and, looking at me very attentively, exclaimed, 
‘ Beautiful Lady Norfolk! how much does the loveliest woman that Nature ever •created resemble you! her eyes — her delicacy !^ “An Italian, or a Parisian, I 
suppose.?”, ‘ No, faith — an English Divinity, my Lady.’ ‘‘ there’s for you, Eliza — you See the poor man loves me — but I will keep him at a distance — He 
vol. I. D has 
34 the history OF 
has never Seen you yet, as he declared at dinner when Lord B. gave you as his toast — ease I should think he meant that you were like me — you know, my dear, your eyes have been paid the compliment os being thought like mine.’^ Thus she ran on, and might have done So much longer, without Suffering any interruption from Lady Eliza, had not Lady Norfolk's impatience to See this Adonis put a period to her volubility. Her sister, with blushes, and a pleasing palpitation, consented to attend her into the drawing-room, where all the company were assembled. One glance towards a large pier glass, which ressedted the whole of her figure, gave her encouragement, and told her she was never more adorned for conquest. With trembling steps Lady Eliza followed Lady norsolk into the room, where the insinuating warwick was Seated, 
not 
ELIZA WARWICK. 
35 
not less agitated than the fair one whom he momently expected. As Soon as the ladies entered, he approached with the rest of the gentlemen to pay them the compliments of the morning, when Lord Norfolk, taking the hand of Col. Warwick, drew him up to Lady Eliza, and begged leave to introduce him to her as the friend of his earliest days. 
Suffer me, my Lord, to pass over the minutes — the hours — that stew unper ceived by these lovers, (for sincere ones they very Soon became after this introduction,) until Lady Eliza received a command to return to town, importing that the Duke of beauvarife was impatient to call her his. She wrote to her mother, to open to her the situation of her heart — she besought Lady Tenterdon to be her advocate with her father, and D 2 urge 
36 THE HISTORY OF 
urge him to lay aside the cruel resolutioa of Sacrisicing her to ambitious motives — She declared her love for Col. Warwick, and concluded by assuring her Ladyship, that nothing but death could tear his image from her heart. ^ 
This letter exasperated both father and mother, and they Sent Lord Westley (their eldest Son) to attend her to town, and to carry their sinal answer to ‘‘ this undutiful daughter, ” as they called her. 
• When Lord Westley arrived at nor folk mansion, he addressed the gentle Eliza in the cruellest and harshest strain — he terrisied her with his unmanly threats, and Swore he would challenge' her lover, if she Seemed the least reludsant to part from him. The noise.and bustle, which this hotheaded young’ man occasioned, 
drew 
ELIZA WARWICK. 37 
drew Lady norsolk out of her reverie, and she was at last Sensible that Col. Warwick admired only her sister. Stung with resentment at being deprived of So delightsul a conquest, she loaded her with reproaches for her dishmulation and clandestine encouragement of him, and insisted on Lady eliza^s accompanying Lord Westley immediately to London;, bidding her, at the Same time, to he careful how Jhe ever entered her house again. 
The unhappy Sufferer, obliged to com ply, gave a passive hand to her inhuman brother, who put her into his chaise, and aster Some hours travelling, post arrived in town. 
Col. Warwick, on hearing of the abrupt departure of his loved Eliza, was almost deprived of reason : he Sought out ' D 3 his 
38 THE HISTORY OF 
his father, and, throwing himsels at his feet, entreated his Sanction to follow the mistress of his Soul, and Save her Srom falling a wretched Sacrifice to merciless oppreshon. His father at first ridiculed his romantic notions; but finding his dis tress too poignant to bear rallying patiently, assumed a Serious air, and told him he never could consent (or even listen a Second time) to a proposal So near bordering on madness — He reminded him os the large fortune he Snould get by his marriage with miss denson, and the Small one Lord Tenterdon could give his daughter — The first is an heiress, my boy, ’^ cried the miserable old man; “the Second may be a beauty -- but She has not an hundred and fifty thousand pounds to 
give her the finishing stroke come, 
come, Harry, you are a younger brother, and must court Sortune in the way I point 
out 
ELIZA WARWICK. 
39 
out to you -- -- -- If you do not marry miss 
denson, I Swear, by everything most Sacred, you, or your posterity, shall never be the better for a shilling os mine.’^ ‘ Keep, then, your pelf," cried the young man; M do not alk you for it. Sir; my happiness consists not in money — you convince me yours does; I will not les sen it, by taking a guinea Srom you; enjoy it. Sir, and with it every bleshng — I will wander in Search of that peace I should for ever relinquish in So detestable an union — bestow on me the parental wishes of a Sather — his all I desire." At these last words he kneeled again to the enraged Baronet, and taking one of his hands respedstsully pressed it to his lips — aster which, he mounted his horse, and galloped to his friend Sir Edward ben tick’s, where he staid three days, in expectation of hearing Srom Lady Eliza — D 4 His 
40 THE HISTORY OF 
His hopes were vain — no letter appeared in that time; and, his anxiety increasing with each minute, he imagined, as most people do, when warmly interested in any event which passes at Some distance from them, that every stranger who comes from that Spot can give intelligence of the important affair. — He rode towards London — and, in the heat of impatience, and torture os suspence, was ready to inquire of every one he met, coming from thence. Whether Lady Eliza was married? If Lord Lenter don kept her confined? csr. 
He was just alighted at Stevenage, when his Servant came to tell him, “that a gentleman inquired for him., and that upon being told he was on his way to London., he seemed glad of the information, and begged to be admitted to his 
conver 
ELIZA WARWICK.' 41 
ionverfation, for he had something of aeon fequence to deliver and communicate to him ‘ Show him inf cried the transported Warwick, ‘ he brings me tidings of my Eliza.’ He prophesied truly. 
Lady Eliza had been closely confined on her arrival in town, and allowed to see no visitor but the Duke of beauvarise, She considered that nobleman’s character — she knew there were Some amiable traits in it — and, without reserve, Srankly confessed to him the situation of her heart. — She implored him not only to defer the marriage, but to endeavour to convey a 
letter from her to Col. Warwick -- -- - 
‘‘ Ah! Madam, ” replied the astonished Duke, “what is it you tell me? A rival! — a happy rival, too! Is it posh ble !” He traversed the room in an agitation little short of frenzy — the asfiidted ' - ■ Eliza 
42 THE HISTORY OF 
Eliza burst into tears — the sight of them were too affecting not to make an irapres sion on the Sensibility of Beauvarile — He paused, viewed her with attention, and, falling on his knees, exclaimed, “Charming, amiable Eliza! for heaven’s Sake let me not See you weep — * Ah! pity me! — overcome not my resolutions — Suffer me to hope.” She arose, and turning, from him, ‘ Love me! Good God! can this be called love, to assist in making me miserable? — No, my Lord, So generous a passion your bosom is a stranger to.’ “I will convince you, Madam, ” (replied the unsortunate beauvarisei “that I am not the Selfish monster you take me for — No — I whll obey you, though you. command me to bring him to you — though you exact of me the painsul talk 
of bestowing you on him 1 will sty. 
Madam — I will Seek out this happy lover 
— I will 
ELIZA WARWICK.. 43 
— I will bring him to your feet — and then tear mysels Sor ever Srom your sight — lest your compassion should cause one sigh to escape your bosom, when you Sec me the victim os your cruelty.” As he ended he wiped a tear from either eye, and besought her with composure to em^ ploy him in her Service. Lady Eliza was penetrated with Sorrow — but restect ing on this opportunity as the only one perhaps she should ever gain os forwarding her wishes — with many tears, apologies, and encomiums on his exalted way of thinking, she entrusted the amiable beauvarise with a letter to Col. W arwick. 
* — ‘ Inquire for him, my Lord, ’ cried Eliza, ‘ at every stage between this and Warwick hall, Sori make no doubt he is on the road to London.’ The Duke received the packet with emotion; and, aster assuring her he would be Saithful to 
his 
3^4. the history OP 
his trust, quitted Lord tenterdon^s house with precipitation. “Ah! what am I about to do ?” Said he, as Soon as he retired; to resign the most desirable object in the world — nay, more — to Seek for my rival, and meditate with him how 
to secure her to him -- 1 shudder at the 
idea — I never can accomplish it -- Merciful Heaven! what a trial! -- -- — - 
Yet is it not incumbent on me to be generous? — Shall Beauvarife Suffer a low minded selsishness to prevent his making one effort that (though it costs him dear) will give happiness to the woman he adores? -- -1 cannot hesitate — Dear Eliza 
! I must not abuse your confidence — your peace shall be preferred to my own 
When the Duke got home, he ordered a hired chaise and horses, and without an attendant sat off immediately for Huntingdonshire— — 
WARWICK. 45 
tingdonshire — He had travelled great part os the night, and was waiting Sor fresh horses at Stevenage, when Col. Warwick stopped at the Same ina, whole name being accidentally mentioned by the waiter, in the duke’s hearing, led him to make the necessary inquiries, and caused his heart to throb with a variety os emotions — not the least predominant amongst them was that os pleasure, in So Soon having an opportunity of obliging the charming Eliza. 
The moment Col. warwick’s Servant presented his master’s compliments, and entreated the favour os the stranger’s company, the Duke followed him into the room, where Col. Warwick was waiting his arrival with impatience. No Sooner did he behold the elegant person of Warwick, and his animated countenance. 
46 THE HISTORY OF 
nance, than he sighed within himself at the very great advantages tins dangerous rival possessed, and reludtantly approved Lady eliza’s taste. 
asteruhe usual Salutations that two well-bred men (not having met before) are supposed to make, beauvarise proceeded to business — “Sir, ” Said he, with an agitation he could not conceal, I am come on an extraordinary errand; I have travelled post to embrace a man I have cause to hate — and, what is worse, to deliver him a tender billet Srom the mistress of my affections.” ‘ Strange, indeed 1’ replied Warwick; ^ Can I be os any Service to you. Sir, in this affair? — I should hope So, by your doing me the honour 
os desiring an interview’ -- -- -- -- “Hold, 
Sir, ” answered the Duke; “Do you know this hand showing him part os the Superscription 
ELIZA WARWICK. 47 
perscription of Lady eliza’s letter -- 
Warwick reddened — ^ Sir, you are dis posed to trifle — rendered desperate by wretchedness, I can but ill brook it — Who are you ?’ “A Sew minutes calmness” ” the unsortunate lover — I am that beauvarise who was intended 
for Lady Eliza darcy’s husband- -- 
dcspised — the miserable object of her aversion -- -- 1 am come to make you blessed 
— to prescnt you with this letter it is 
but just, after having given you both pain, that I should Seek for opportunities 
of doing you Service -- No thanks. Sir 
■ — (for Warwick had grasped his hand, and though his tongue refused utterance to his acknowledgments, his intelligeiit eyes expressed ail the grateful feelings of his heart) — I merit none — Were you in my Situation, would you not adt thus? — I will leave you to indulge the transports 
48 THE HISTORY OF 
ports that letter must cause, without constraint.” He hurried out of the room, and left Warwick absorbed in admiration and astonishment. He Soon recovered himself, however, at casting his eyes on the well-known writing of his Eliza; and, after kissing the letter with rapture, broke the Seal, and read the following words: 
The generous Duke of beau varise conveys this to your hands, my Warwick — and I have only time to tell you, that he will concert Some method 
for our meeting, and that Speedily. 
I am hurried — I am interrupted by my fears. -- Adieu!” 
‘ Ever dear! ever faithful Eliza V exclaimed he, ‘ thou hast made me the hap he hastened out in pursuit 
piest of my Sexi’ 
ELIZA WARWICK. 49 
pursuit of the most amiable of men, whom he found walking up and down the room in profound meditation — He advanced towards him, and throwing himself at his feet, he poured forth the effusions of a Soul overwhelmed with the tenderest obligations — He entreated beau varise to tell him, whether the Sacrifice he had made was a painsui one — ‘ Ah I if it is, ’ cried he, ‘ Warwick can be generous too, and he will never deprive So exalted a heart of its peace, tho’ his own should be the vidfim.’ “r iie, amiable youth, ” Said the Duke; “do not thus distress»me — I make no Sacrifice — inquire no further — Eliza loves you — and you alone can make her happy.’* i 
The friends Spent the remainder of the night, and Some hours of the following iiiorning, in conversation; each moment vol. I. E that 
50 THE HISTORY OF 
that brought them better acquainted showed them the intrinsic worth os both. — About six oklock they sat out together for London. 
I should be too prolix, my Lord, were I to enumerate the inany meetings the excellent beauvarise contrived for these lovers — However, the important moment arrived that united them, and that is too essential to be omitted. 
Lord Tenterdon began to grow uneasy at the dilatory work of the lawyers, and proposed to the Duke to marry his daughter besore the Settlements were finished — beauvarise played his part admirably — he assured his Lordship his wishes kept pace. with his desires, and he would testify his joy by giving a Superb bail, at his house in grosvenor square, the night besore the 
ceremony 
'ELIZA WARWICK. ^51 
cereriiony was to be persormed, and fixed it for the week following. 
The Earl promised that all his family should be there; but excused himself, as too gouty and infirm to be out late. — This apology was readily accepted — and the Duke waited on Lady Eliza to communicate to i her this intelligence. — The •plan was laid, and on the night of this ball, Lady Eliza, instead of being handed to her chair, was put into a chaise by Col. Warwick and the Duke, and they immediately Set off for Scotland. 
Lady Tenterdon, who had gone to her own apartments diredfcly as she was Sat down at home, heard nothing of eliza’s being missing till site arose the next noon. The most saithsul, and the favourite attendant of Lady Eliza had been ordered E 2 to 
52 THE HI S T Off Y OF 
to wait in the chaise, at Some little distance from the duke’s, for it was designed she should accompany her mistress In her •flight. Isle Servants of the house Supposed their young lady had been Suffered to go home with lady Emily Colville, her eldest sister, as it was very usual for her to do So — they had therefore no Suspicions — nor, indeed, could her unerring prudence (until that night) ever have given rise to.any. Her footman had been corrupted, and returned not till nine o’clock in the morning to Lord tenterdon’s — when, with wel'l diflembled honesty, he inquired wshether^‘ his Lady was returned? ” — and made out a feasible story, that he and the chairmen were in waiting at the duke’s from twelve o’clock the preceding night, and when they Saw Lady Tenterdon get into her chair, they expedfed to be called immediately — but 
the 
ELIZA WARWICK. 53; 
the dukes house being quiet, (the company having all Separated by six,) and finding it to no purpose to remain any longer, they came home to rest, making no doubt but that they should hear tidings of Lady Eliza at their return. 
Lady Tenterdon, when she was drefi^ fed. Sent to desire her daughter to attend her and her Lord at breaksast, in her dreshng room. Her woman hesitated — “You do not hear me, ” cried her Ladyship. ‘ Lady Eliza did not lodge at home last night, my Lady.’ — Nat lodge at home .f Was there ever Such stupidity! Do you go, (turning to another of her maids) — do you endeavour to understand this command !” ‘ Ah 1 my Lady, ’ exclaimed 
the affrighted Abigail, ‘ what Storer tells you is really true; Lady Eliza did not come home last night — she is, E 3 I Sup 
54 THE HISTORY OF 
I suppose, with one of our young ladies 
■ -- -- Tenterdon was wild with her 
presages — “What is it you tell me !” cried she; my daughter not returned! 
■ — Gracious Heaven! what can have become of her! — dispatch messengers to Lady Emily colville’s — Lady Llarriet pelham’s — she must be with one os her 
sisters -- Where are her Servants? — the 
men who attended her? — they can inform 
us.” Their story was related -- -- Half 
dead with terror, she stew to Lord Tenterdon, and Sound him writing in his closet — She insormed him os her fears, 
and ashed his opinion -- -- He replied, 
‘ Lady Eliza was gone to his daughter emily’s, and she need not alarm hersels.’ — But when the messengers returned Srom Lady colville’s and Lady pelham’s, with an account of her not beino; at either place, it became too Serious to be trifled with.u 
ELIZA WARWICK. 55 
lom Westley, who had been out of town Some days, at that moment alighted at his sather’s; and upon being told the cause of their alarm, he went to the duke’s, and inquired for him — The Servant, who opened a parlour door, and begged him to enter, insormed him that his Grace had Sat off for one of his country seats that very morning, by 
break of day.” -- -- What perplexities! 
-- -- They could Sorm no idea of eliza’s 
fate — But Lord Tenterdon, unwilling to believe his favourite Scheme would prove abortive, pretended to be well convinced that she was with Some female Sriend in London, and would be at home very 
shortly. -- -- -- All that day they were 
tortured with suspence — They concluded, that, if she designed to let Cost Warwick into the Secret of her elopement, she could riot do it in less than twenty sour E 4 hours; 
56 THE HISTORY OF 
hours; and after the receipt of her letter, Some time must be consumed ere Col. Warvv'ick could arrive in London: this resscdtion consoled them, and they determined that every Search should be directly made after the culpable fugitive. — But what appeared most unaccountable was, the Sudden departure of beau varise — “She could not have gone off with him /” — The very thought of it made the old Earl rub his hands, and exclaim, “Ah! I don’t doubt it — the girl has Spirit, and wants to surprise us with a frolic — the idea is good — the idea is good.” However excellent it might be, it did not calm his fears, which would intrude in Spite of his endeavours to stiste them -- -- All that day was Spent in fruitless 
inquiries — the night, in vain surmises, The next morning a letter from the Duke of beauvarise unravelled the mystery, 
and 
ELIZA WARWICK. 57 
and lest them without one doubt to give them comfort. I transcribe a copy of it to your Lordship, as it must Serve to show the nobleness of Sentiment which this young Nobleman possessed — He was a man who did honour to his country, and adorned the Court — Pity that Fate had not Spared him to England and his friends Some time longer! — But dare I arraign the decree of Heaven! — Alas! my Lord, the tear of regret will fall, in Spite of my resignation to its will. 
To the Right Honourable the Earl of Tenterdon. 
My Lord, 
‘^sensible of your lordship’s humanity, conscious of the tenderness you experience for the amiable * Lady 
58 THE HISTORY OF 
Lady Eliza, and well assured os her filial affection and love of virtue, I am Seated, not to become a Suppliant for her, (that I am Sure would be unnecessary,) but to awaken those Sentiments of compassion for the unhappy which are readily excited in your and Lady tenterdon’s bo ibms. 
Your Sweet Eliza, your darling child, my Lord, is the object Sor whom those 
Sentiments must now glow. -- -- -- -- Almost 
driven by my unsortunate passion, and your reiterated commands, to wed a man she could not love — even when she declared to you her inclination Sor another — be not Surprised if the brink of misery she stood on gave her courage to break through the cruel injundtion of a parent, by Seeking resuge in the protection os the most excellent of his Sex. — Your daughter. 
ELIZA WARWICK. 5^ 
ter, my Lord, is married -- -- 1 am the 
chief contriver os this union -- Too 
generous to deceive, she informed me of the Situation os her heart — and when I knew how worthily it was bestowed, I repaid her confidence, in the best manner I was able, by Securing her felicity — I did it at the moment she was most beloved by me — You, my Lord, Surely! 
will not deal less tenderly -- refleor, 
that, is a Lover could give up his dearest hopes in the possession of a mistress, a Father should do more Sora child who never erred till obliged to it by his arbitrary commands in a point where the ssightest compulsion ought never to be used. 
CC 
Col. Warwick, my Lord, is of a noble family — he has distinguished himself lately in the Service of his King which well authorised the rapid promotion 
to THE HISTORY OF 
tion of So young a man — his own Sex esteem, and wish to copy him; the other admire, and Sigh Sor him — Does not this evince that the amiable Warwick is Sensible, generous, sincere, and elegant? — My pen is inadequate to the eulogiums he merits — in a word. Lady Eliza only is deserving of him. 
“The only misfoitune Col. warwick at present knows, is the having offended his Sather by disappointing his views in an alliance he had planned Sor him with a woman of fortune as deformed in her person as she was in temper — and who promised him, in her appearance, a life of wretchedness, had they met in the connubial bands. He declared his aversion to the lady to Sir William Warwick, and that nothing should induce him to marry her; and for this open 
violation 
ELIZA WARWICK. 6r 
violation of his authority will, no doubt, feel his resentment. — Even the honour of being connected to your Lordship could not dazzle the eyes of a miser — burr, had Lady Eliza possessed an equal share, of fortune with miss denson, Sir William would have thought of this marriage with rapture“ 
“shudder when I rested; what the delicate Eliza would have Suffered with a lover less attached to her than I was — r her tears might not have moved him — her prayers and sighs wasted in vain, she would have become the Sad victim of parental authority — Ah! Lord Tenterdon, bless Heaven for her escape, and open wide your arms to receive this amiable child! — Suffer me to bring her to them; and for her Sake, as wtu as his own, •honour Col. Warwick with your friendship 
— your 
THE HISTORY OF 
- — your ashstance. By my advice they have lest England till you can view this affair in a proper light; on your answer, my Lord, depends their immediate return. 
Be convinced that I am not less your friend than besore this event happened — -^ and that I shall ever esteem mysels happy in testifying to your Lordship (or any i^art of your family) that I am, my Lord, 
Your and their sincere 
and most devoted Servant, 
Beauvarise.’’ 
Lord Tenterdon, upon reading this letter, looked and Spoke more like a madman than a reasonable being — he reproached 
ELIZA WARWICK. 63 
proached Lady Tenterdon with her care .leffness .that fatal night — he abused Lord Westley for being out of town — but most of all he execrated the noble beau •varise, as the cause of his greatefi misfortune. In vain did his Samily endeavour to pacisy him — Take no notice of the ungrateful girl, ’’ cried they in one voice — “let her Suffer for her disobedience — forget that you have Such a daughter — she is unworthy of our regard.” these unkind Suggestions Served but to raise more fiercely the Sparks of resentment in his bosom — and, retiring to his study, he writ the following answer to the Duke, which contained the most cruel of resolutions, and which no father but Lord Tenterdon could have adhered to. 
^0 
64 the HISTORY.DF 
“Lo his Grace the Duke of Beauvarise, ‘ 
‘‘ My Lord, 
Your graces letter has silled me with astonishment — I took you for a Sricnd, but you have proved a most dangerous enemy — It is necessary to assure your Grace, that I require from you no more good offices— — yet I have a favour to alk of you, my Lord, which is this, that you will inform the artful wtctch whom you insultingly remind me of being father to, to keep herself, her husband, and her poverty, far from my 
doors — they shall be shut to all three 
and never will I — in the awful sight of Heaven I Swear it — never wdll I relieve her, or hers, though ruin should stare them in the face, and beggary walk close 
upon their steps -- Tell them this, my 
'• Lord: 
ELIZA WARWICK. 65 
Lord; and assure Lady Eliza Warwick she shall never See or hear more from her enraged father, and 
Your grace’s 
Much disappointed Servant, 
Tenterdon.’* 
The Colonel, Lady Eliza, and her faithful domestic, arrived, after many fears of being, overtaken, at the place of destination; and there these faithful lovers immediately parted with their liberty, without one regret — Lady Eliza, indeed, often sighed at the "resentment she must experience from her family — but the idea of their cruelty, in meaning to make a Sacrifice of her, in spite of all her tears and entreaties, vindicated her conduct in her own eyes — She was not vol. I. F destitute 
(■6 THE HISTORY OF 
■destitute os hope that the Duke would be a successsul intercessor with Lord and Lady Tenterdon, and anticipated the joy she should Seel at being restored to their favour. — these restedtions calmed her Spirits, and in a little while she considered hersels as the happiest of her Sex. — Ah! 'how little could she foresee the calamities that were So near overwhelming her I — The blackest prospedls were gathering around, and the short sunshine that illumined her nuptials only gave an increase of horror to her situation when ingulsed in the storms of Fate. 
aster a Sortnight Spent In Scotland, in which time they received no intelligence Srom the Duke, they determined to return to England, and know what they were to expect from Lord Tenterdon. Warwick did not fuppose his father would '; ever 
ELIZA WARWICK. 67 
ever part with a shilling towards their Support; however, on his marriage, he wrote him a very respedtful letter, and acquainted him with his connediion, which he hoped would not offend the father, since it made the Son happy.’^ Sir William made no reply to this — but some days aster mentioned, in the hearing of a friend of Col. warwick, that he never would take any notice of the imprudent youth, wdio had forfeited a isine fortune by his folly, and with it his affection for ever adding, ‘‘ he will now find the difference, — and that to live upon .a wife’s beauty is easier in a lover’s theory than a hushand’s practice.” 
When the new married pair arrived in London, they Sent to the Duke of beau varise, begging tp see him p.s. Soon as his conveniency would permit them that F 2 pleasure— — ■ 
THE HISTORY OF 
pleasure — This amiable friend flew immediately to Col. Warwick's lodgings, 'and there with infinite reluctance he revealed the whole of Lord Tenterdoffs 
behaviour -- -- Sorry am I, ^’ Said the 
excellent beauvarise, to give a moments uncasiness to persons whom' love and honour conspired to render happy; but, alas! those two noble Sentiments, though they may contribute towards felicity, do not always insure it — and Lord tenter don’s restless ambition has power Sufficient to deprive them of their just reward — he is inexorable — he is unnatural — he sor gets humanity while he prophecies wretchedness— — he shuts close his heart when 
he Soretels poverty weep not, beau 
tisul Eliza, ” cried he, with emotion — ‘‘ those tears affecl me too deeply — Ah! my God! is it my Sat ever to give you nneasiness My fortune — my interest 
— shall 
ELIZA WARWICK. 6^. 
- — shall be employed in the Service of our Warwick — nor shall he, or his, ever know the stings of indigence, - as your illiberal father portends.” — ^‘ My Lord, * cried the agitated Eliza, ‘ Spare my sa there! — I have no reason to condemn hinii — ’he holds me culpable, and that I merit his resentment — ^ — My Warwick — ah !• what distresses have I brought down on thee! — do not love me less — ’something may yet happen to pacify Lord Tenterdon — in that hope be comforted — • and banish that look of despair, my dear Warwick, which Seems as if you already felt the wretchedness of Fate“ “! — wrethednefs! — Ah! why these heartrending expreshons, Eliza clasp ing her to his bosom — No, my angel, with you I can Sear neither — and 1 Swear by Heaven the single happiness of calling you mine transcends every other felicity F 3 this. 
70 THE HISTORY OF 
this world can give pomp arid Splendour 
ate despised by me — I ash a Soldier — and whilst I servt with zeal my country, and the best of Kings, we need not fear the frowns of. Fortune — they will both provide for my Eliza — and if she can fdregb the opulence and luxuries she is ihtitled to, we shall have enough to live on 3 and be more than blessed in edch other' 
This Scene was much too tender for the Sensible Soul of Beauvarife — After repeating his assurances of friendship, he bade the lovely couple adieu. 
After all, it was a Serious ressedtion how to Settle matters So oeconomically as to live upon the pay Col. Warwick then received, and more So when we ressedt that both parties had been bred up in all 
the 
ELIZA WARWICK. 71 
the Splendour of greatnessi .dertain it is, however, that love can metamorphos^ Strangely — and the gentle Lady Eliza became Such an adept in domestic affairs, asto live with elegance on the tristing Sum os three hundred a year. Col. warwick’s house was Small, but it was a perfect pattern for neatness — They kept two female Servants, and a footman — her ^ faithful Jennet was still with her, and officiated about her person -- Never did happiness arrive at a greater height — not. even amongst the great — nor did fewer wants arise unsatisfied than in this little humble dwelling. 
Lady Eliza was not quite a year married when she presented Warwick with a Son — but it lived only long enough to receive the rites of baptism, and the embraces of its parents -- -- Here I cannot 
F 4 but. 
72 THE HISTORY OF 
but bewail that even the protection of a brother was denied me !- 
ik 
The Duke of beauvarise never forgot that he had loved Lady Eliza, and pos seffed the highest Sentiments of regard for her husband— — was tender, assiduous, and faithful, to them both — and after having for a long time shught an opportunity of getting Warwick promoted, it So happened, that the regiment of which the Duke was General was ordered to the East-indies, and he lost not a moment in having his friend railed to the rank of Lieutenant-general — but the conditions were rather harder than the Duke wished them to be — and warwick’s accompanying the regiment was not to be obviated. 
, beauvarise, 
ELIZA WARWICK. 75 
beauvarise, unable to convey the pleas ing yet alarming intelligence in person, ' wrote Warwick a letter, in which his joy and grief were visibly blended — at the instant he congratulated him on the promotion he had acquired in the army, he trembled at the idea of Lady eliza’s feelings, when she should learn that their Separation was to be the consequence of it. 
The news, however dreadsul, was Soon imparted to her; and, about eighteen months after their nuptials, it was doomed that they should part for ever. 
Now, m Lord, do I shudder at the 
remainder os this story -- Ah!! me 
shorten it — let me hasten over the tragical death of my much lamented Sather! — ^ — He was drovrned, my Lord, in attempting 
^4 the HISTORY OF 
ing to Save the unfortunate'parent of a large family, who had gone on board to pour down his last bleshngs on the noble warwick’s head, for having charitably provided for three of his children. The Seas ran high between portsmouth and Spithead— — old man, however, took boat, and got Safely to the man of war in which the General waited Some hours for Sailing orders — They arrived at length — and, after many tears and prayers for his happiness, the grateful father took a final leave of his benesadtor — The vessel which he stepped into was a mere cockleshell,, 'in .sight of the ship it had left, and the humane Warwick, it was overset by si monstrous wave — Ah !” cried the benevolent General, “throw out your boats, and let us Save that worthy man, and the wretched creatures who are with him.” He was directly obeyed; and ' upon 
ELIZA WARWICK. 75 
upon Some of the Sailors looking terrified at venturing out of the ship in Such a tempest, the General leapt irito the boat and, calling on a few to follow him, it was in an instant filled. They encountered the waves for Some time with hopes os success — and indeed they in Some fneasure Succeeded — for they Saved the good old man, though all the rest were irrevocably lost — Warwick then gave orders to make to the Snip — the men did So — but the wind rose higher, and the Seas Seemed to kiss the heavens — at length the boat, unable to bear against the force os the contending elements. Split into a thousand pieces — Every man could Swim but my unhappy Sather, and his aged frierid — One of the good-natured crew offered to assist the General, and promised to convey him to the first ship; but he begged him to preserve his own life, and r that 
76 THE HISTORY OF 
that of the old man’s, IS it were possible;; and, aster audibly recommending his wife and his unborn insant to the protection os Heaven, yielded himself a prey to that merciless and tr emendous guls, from whence there was no redemption for him. 1 shall only add, that 
the unfortunate being who was the cause os his death was preserved by the affis tance os the lailor — but he only lived to lament his unhappy destiny. 
The Captain of the man of war, a brave officer, and a particular Sriend of my dear father, Sent immiediately an account os his fate to the Duke of beau varise — That nobleman was, when, the express arrived, endeavouring to reconcile the dying Earl of Tenterdon to his 
wretched 
ELIZA WARWICK. 77 
wretched daughter — Though the hour drew nigh when he would require mercy in his turn ‘ his firm soul shrunk not at its approach — nor could he be persuaded to change his unnatural conduct towards her. He told the Duke, ‘‘ I am Sensible 1 cannot recover — but were I Sure my daughter was even penitent for her crime, I would not pardon her the uneasiness it has cost me — I never whll recall the Sentence I have pronounced against her — and shall leave her the comfort of restedt ing on the choice she might have made, and that which her shlly elected— — is now too late to recover my lost opinion — nor shall I think that Soul my friend who from hencesorth names her in .my presence.” 
beauvarise, finding all that he could ■fay on the Subject was totally lost on So 
implacable 
THE HISTORY OF 
implacable a heart, took his leave with a degree of resentment he .could not conceal. — He could not go to Lady eliza’s immediately — he" knew not how to inform her of the shocking Sentiments that 
had been uttered by the earl much 
he feared for the Sufferings of her Sensibility, when she should hear her father, unforgiving, died — he (therefore threw himself into his carriage, and desired to be Set down at home; where, upon his arrival, the dreadful packet from Portsmouth was presented to him — He broke the Seal with a perturbation which nothing but presentiment could account for — he read with an agitation and Sorrow little short of frenzy — Ah! my adorable Eliza!” cried he, my fate at length prevails, and I am the innocent cause of all your Sufferings — Your husband— —! my gentle, amiable friend.! — your beloved 
Warwick, 
ELIZA WARWICK. 79 
Warwick, whom I tore from your happy arms, is now parted from them for ever — How shall I break this new, this horrible misfortune to thee? — Great Heaven Support her tender frame in the hour of 
trial!’’ -- A gush of woe here came to 
his relief -- and, aster Sending to tell Lady Eliza that he was going out os town for .a Sew days, and could not See her besore his departure, he got into his chaise, and travelled post, down to Portsmouth. ' 
As Soon as he shad alighted at one of fthe inns in that town, he found the house in great confusion, and was informed that a body had been thrown upon the strand, jby the violence of the waves, about an hour before his arrival, and was carried to that house to be publicly Seen and 
owned. -- -- -- ^ good God! what were the 
; feelings of .this amiable man on this intelligence! — 
8o THE HISTORY OF 
telligence! — Shocked to the Soul, and hardly able to stand, he desired to be shown to an apartment, which he had no Sooner reached than he Sell almost sense less into a chair — After Some moments Spent in a state little short of total inanimation, he recolledted himsels enough to express a desire to behold the melancholy object in question — The good-natured landlord begged his Grace not to think os going till the agitation which his compassion (he supposed) had occasioned should in Some measure Subside; and immediately changed the Subject, by informing him that two men of war, which were about to Sail for the East-indies, and whose Sailing orders had actually arrived, were detained by the loss of their principal Oshcer, who had died in preserving the life of a poor man who had .a numerous family, and their future 
Subsistence 
ELIZA WARWICK. 
81 
fubsistance depended on his living a few years longer. — beauvarise eagerly ashed 
Whether Capt. W -- -- -- was on Shore?? -- - 
man answered, No -- hut that he had sent to order a upper at his%oufe., and was expended every in/ant. The Duke 
dismissed his host, after desiring him to 
pre/ent his compliments to Capt. W -- -- -- 
as soon as he came in., and tell him he legged to have the honour of feeing him. 
When left to himself, his refiedlions •were of the most disagreeable Sort -- he wept — ihe lamented the wretchedness of the lovely Eliza -- he beheld her widowed form in all the eloquence of grief — he raised his heart to Heaven, and Supplicated that she might be endued with fortitude to survive a disclofure of the horrid tale — But how did he shudder when he considered that he mtist be the relater of 
vol. I. G it! — 
82 THE HISTORY OF 
it! — ‘‘ Ah! my noble friend! my dear Warwick V cried he, with emotion, “is it poshble I should susped: that you are in the house with me, and yet have no desire to behold thee! Can Death, with all its terrors, have worked So great a change in my heart? — Pardon me, thou dear shade os Warwick — I will hasten to take a last farewell of that charming, that noble form, which is all that is lest me os my friend.’’ He arose as he finished these words, and was making to the door, when it opened to usher in Capt. 
W -- -- -- : the Duke approached him, 
but an affectionate embrace was the only sign os joy he could testisy at their meeting — Ah! my Lord, ’ cried Capt. W — ^ * what a loss have we Sustained! — There was no possibility of Saving our excellent Warwick — the Sury of the storm .no 
assistance could reach him unhappy 
Harry! — 
ELIZA WARWICK. 8 
Harry! — but Sar more unhappy your 
Ah replied 
Surviving friends!’ 
beauvarise, whose tears kept pace with those that Sell from Capt, W — ’s eyes — “Ah! I have but one comfort lest -- Let us hasten to the apartment which holds the dismal corse — let us bury our Warwick like a Soldier -- let us pay the tribute of Some Sighs to his memory— — weep on the cold lifeless body of my friend.” They rushed out of the room together, and entered that where the melancholy object was deposited — beauvarise drew near the bed on which it lay, and looked attentively on the face — The haishtreatment it had met with from the boisterous element had changed it much, but the beauty and manly countenance for which he had ever been distinguished were still easily visible -- ^^ Ah! W —, it is Warwick! — no other man could poffess Such * G 2 a conn 
84 THE HISTORY OF 
a countenance — observe the figure — Does belvidere’s Apollo surpass' it— — was the favourite work of Heaven — neither in his mind or person could a blemish be discovered — and this inanimate clay is all that now remains.” ‘ I am Sure it is ho other than my dear h^rry, ’ answered 
W -- -- --; ^ yet his face is exceedingly 
changed! — Would we had Some evidence beyond all doubt that his poor corpse is not now floating on distant waves! — Were his obsequies to be attended by men who loved him living, and revere him dead; it would be Some comsort — and still more in his being interred at 
leal decently’ “Hold!” exclaimed 
'bcauvarise, perceiving through the bosom of the shirt a ribbon fastened about his neck, which he unloosed— — “is 'this? — A miniature of a woman; and, on the back of it, hair worked into this 
'motto. 
ELIZA WARWICK. 85 
motto, Even Death Shall not part us — 
This must give Some light.” Upon 
viewing the picture with attention they discovered the angelic features os Lady Eliza Warwick — and this gave them new •subject Sor gries and lamentation. 
aster two days Spent in getting his papers and things Srom on board the ship. General warwick’s body was conveyed to London by easy stages, and interred by torchlight with all the honours due to an Officer of his rank. As it was done with all the precaution possible, to hinder the Satal news from reaching Lady eliza’s knowledge, the Duke was in hopes that she would remain ignorant of it till he could hit on Some expedient most proper Sor breaking it to her — but, alas! my*unhappy mother was too Soon informed of her wretchedness — The morn g 3 ^ “ig 
86 THE HISTORY OF 
ing after the Duke lest London she Saw a particular account of the whole affair in the paper of the day — She had not gone quite through it, when Nature sickened at the sight — her eyes refused their office Surther — an universal tremor Seized her limbs — and she Sell senseless on the 
fioor. -- -- Jennet, who was in the next 
room, heard her sail, and ran to her assistance — she raised her Srom the ground, and, after having placed her on a Sopha, administered Some volatiles. — She opened her eyes — “Ah! Jennet — cruel Jennet! 
— why do you force me to live ?” -- -- -- - 
‘ What affects you thus, my dearest Lady? Honour your poor Jennet whtli your 
confidence.’ -- - “I will, ” returned the 
miserable Eliza — “reach me that paper” — she did So — and, rising from the reclining posture she was in, read with the utmost corhposure, and audibly, the whole 
melancholy 
ELIZA WARWICK. 87 
melancholy detail before related — not a break — not a sigh escaped her -- Jen 
net’s Sorrow was loud and piercing — At Such times she would stop until she was more composed, and then resume the horrible narrative — 'When it finished, the shocking paper dropped from her hand — her eyes were fixed — and, without uttering one complaint, she remained insensible 
as a statue. jennet, perceiving 
her situation, and knowing it to be far more dangerous than the most clamorous Sorrow, threw herself at her feet, and endeavoured to excite her tears by the most moving expressions she could make use of — but all in vain — her tears had been all exhausted when her husband gave her his last embrace — and at that dreadful moment her heart foreboded the most miserable consequences from that fatal Separation. 
G 4 Come, 
88 THE HISTORY OF 
. Come, Jennet, ” cried Lady Eliza, do not give way to Sorrow — Did you go to my sisters? Did you deliver them my letters.?” ‘ Yes, Madam — and they will not See me — no, my dear Lady,, they inhumanly desired me, by one of their Servants, to tell you they never will have anything to Say to you Now, thought this saithsul creature, she must weep — what I So ardently wish Sor will happen — she must be affected by their 
cruelty. -- Jeiinet was mistaken — Lady 
Eliza desired her to bring her hat and 
cloak -- - “I will walk, ” Said she —; 
“it will do 'me good — You shall go 
with me.” -- Her attendant suspected 
Something was wrong in her head, and would Sain have persuaded her to remain at home — but her Lady Seemed determined, and Jennet was obliged to comply with her caprice. 
Lady 
ELIZA WARWICK. 85 
■ Lady Eliza uttered not a word during the time she was walking, and Jennet was So buried in ressedtion that she perceived not her Lady had quitted her arm, until she. heard her rap at a door — She looked up, and Sound it was Lord tenterdon’s — In wild affright, she in treated Lady Eliza, in the most respedt full and ardent manner, to return from the inhospitable house — What, am I to be controlled by you too. Jennet!” Said the meek Sufferer, in the sostest accent — ‘‘ No — I will See my mother — I will behold, besore I die, my once tender parents — They can but use me ill — and that os late I have been accustomed to.’’ The porter at that moment opened the door — he was a new Servant, and did not know her — Upon her desiring to be shown up to Lady Tenterdon, a footman, who was also unacquainted with her, 
pbeyed. 
^0 TH HISTORY 
obeyed, and condudled her to an anti chambef, where the old Earl was Seated in a great chair. Supported by pillows, with all his family around him — She rushed by the Sellow, as he held the door in his hand, and was announcing her — ■ My father! my dear father !” exclaimed the agitated Eliza, as shesthrew herself at his feet — ‘ Wretch !’ Said the barbarian, ‘ avaunt! — Was this a Scheme to shorten the Sew hours of my existence? — Disobedient creature, begone! — How durst thou thus intrude thysels into niy presence— — will you not loose your hold? Why do not Some os you release me from this graceless monster P 
Lord Westley and his two sisters flew to the beauteous mourner — ‘ Ungrateful girl! — what presumption, to appear before a father and mother you have So 
highly 
ELIZA WARWICK. 
highly injured! — go, and sigh out your imprudence in obscurit)'.’ As they Spoke they endeavoured to raise her from Lord tenterdon’s knees, which she continued to grasp. 
Ah! my father 1” cried Lady eli 2a, do but bless your poor, your unhappy child' — Did you but know the wretchedness os her fate, your humanity could not permit you to resuse her that comsort — While I have strength to cling to these dear knees, you never, cruel brother! — nor you, unkind sisters! — shall tear me from them."’ ‘ I Say, begone !’ vociferated in a tremendous tone the unnatural old man. Lord Westley with violence dragged her from him. As he attempted to put her out of the room, she caught Lady tenterdon’s hand — ‘‘ Oh! my mother! — Save your once 
loved 
92 
THE HISTORY OF 
loved girl — your forsaken, undone Elh za! — Dearest brother, let me but throw my arms around her neck — let me die upon her maternal bosom! — I will give you no more trouble — indeed I, will go peaceably — if you will let me use my arms for one moment — if I do not expire at her feet — I shall walk out, without bidding — and Save your tenderness this struggle.” Whether Nature operated in the breast of Westley, or whether he wished to See his mother Spurn Eliza from her as his unworthy father had done, I will not determine; but her ferocious brother freed her from his barbarous hands, and she fell on her knees to Lady Tenterdon — “Ah! Madam — life is at its lowest ebb — Say, ere I am deprived of it, ‘ Eliza., thou art pardonep — give me that only comsort, I can now postess, to rested on, in the awful moment that 
approaches.” 
ELIZA WARWICK. 93 
approaches.” ‘lam stupefied, ’ Said her mother; ‘ I cannot Speak — The girl is not So handsome as she used to be — it astonishes me to See Such an alteration — however, I know what to impute it to — her husband has almost broke her heart by repeated ill usage, I suppose.’ “Oh never! never I” cried she, with emotion, her hands clasped, and her eyes lifted up, as is invoking his blessed Spirit to protect: her. ‘ Well, So much the better, ’ answered her ridiculous mother — ‘ but Something has certainly faded the roses os your cheek.’ “Your pardon, dear Lady — Oh! bestow your sorgiveness — let me not Supplicate in vain — For the sake of that Being tvho. never resuses mercy to the most abandoned mortal when he implores it — pity, and restore me to your favour!” and she caught hold of Lady tenterdon’s gown, who 
was 
94 THE HISTORY OF 
was about to leave her -- -‘ Psha! — let 
me go — I Sorgive you, poor wretch! — but I insist on your never letting me See 
that horrid face again — Begone!’ -- -- - 
“Blessings await you, my dearest Madam I -- -- Corn, my Lord, ’’ cried she, 
turning to the exulting Westley, “just help to raise my feeble limbs, and I will rpersorm my promise.” He assisted her, and Sollowed her to the bottom of the stairs; then ordered the Surrounding attendants ‘ to See that that woman departed the house immediately.’ What a Scene! 
■ — Oh! blessed shade of my most admirable mother! vouchsase to look down with pity, and hover over your poor unhappy child! -- Ah!! Lord, is misery 
hereditary? — Surely you will think So when you come to the end of my story! 
Lady 
ELIZA WARWICK. 95 
Lady eliza’s figure and emaciated icountenanee inspired at once, in the ' breast s of those domestics the haughty Lord addressed himself to, both relpedt 
and compassion- -- -- received her 
Sainting in her arms— — the hlimane Servants, who were witnesses of the cruelty os her brother, disregarded his conir mands So far as to convey her into an apartment, and procure her every neces sary relief — At length she recovered — a chair was brought, which carried her to rher.sad home — and she was lifted upstairs in a state of insensibility. When Jennet .had Sor Some time endeavoured to Speak ' ^comsort to her assliction, and perceived no alteration in the fixed despair of her countenance, her Sorrow broke through all restraint— — ‘! my dear Lady, art thou gone indeed? What will become of thy poor Jennet? Wilt thou not live 
to 
g6 THE HISTORY OF 
to bring thy hapless insant into the woidd? Wilt thou not live to protect: its innocence ^ Wilt thou die, and leave me, a wretch who would wish to follow thee, even to the grave? — Ah! my Sweet Lady, take — take me with thee, and let me inhabit with thee the mansions os the blessed.’ Here her grics became unutterable — her sighs and groans could only be distinguished. 
After Some hours passed in this manner, Lady Eliza arose, and, calling to Jennet, (who had in her agony of dis tress thrown herstls on the ground,) gave her her hand, and desired her to be attentive. 
‘‘ Jennet, ” Said she, with composure, “the moment is at hand when £ shall bid adieu to all my troubles — I 
hvwe 
ELIZA WARWICK. 97 
have Seen my Warwick — rhe has Soothed my heart, and Spoke Such things to me as would transport you with gladness .could I communicate them — he hovers over me, and waits but for my coming to be hapjty — that he assured me would happen Soon, and bid me hold myself 
’in readiness angelic Sounds! — then, 
'my Sriend, a period will be put to my .afflictions— — not for me, but re .joice that I have slipped my neck from the cruel yoke os bondage — You can ■best tell how I have Suffered, and should be most thanksul Sor my release — I need not tell my Jennet to love my memory —, and if my infant comes into the world with life, cherish, and teach it to lisp my ■warwick’s .name — inspire it early with 
reverence Sor its unhappy parents 
I have nothing to bequeath it but my jewels and watch — You will find ready Vql. I. H money 
98 the HISTORY OF 
money Sufficient to pay what debts I owe, 
and to reserve Some trifle for yourself 
If iny child dies with me, everything I own is justly yours; and let them Sometimes revive a tender Sentiment in your bosom, when they remind you of your wretched mistress.^’ 
Lady Eliza was taken very ill diredly Rfter this. When she had brought me into the world, she again Spoke to Jennet — again entreated her care of meant! desired her to look in a particular part of her escrutore for the most material events of her life., which she had penned from time to time, and, when I was old enough to Seel and understand them properly,, to put them into my hands — You, Jennet, ” continued fire,, finish the remainder of my story — and tell her with rny dying breath I 
blessed 
ELIZA WARWICK. 99 
blessed her — Adieu! my dearest, most faithful friend. IS the Duke of beau varise is still attached to my interest, tell him I implore him to protecst my child and you — thank him Sor all his goodness to me — and assure him I die in peace.’* thesc were her last words. She expired Soon after in an ecstasy os devotion, and went to join her Warwick in Heaven. 
When the Duke of beauvarise arrived in town, he stew to the hostse of woe. — Ignorant of my mother’s having been informed of the tragical fate of her beloved Warwick, he was not at all prepared Sor the new Scene of afssidfion he was about to endure. The maid that opened the door for him was the very image of Grief — her eyes were Sunk in their Sockets by weeping, her Sace was pale as death, and her whole frame H 2 Seemed 
100 THE HISTORY OF 
Seemed worn out with care and watching. As Soon as she beheld the Duke, her as fiitlion was renewed, and her tears stowed in abundance. The figure that presented itsels thus oppressed gave a shock to the tender Soul of beauvarise, and a presentiment of the most dreadsul kind rushed into his imagination. How is your Lady ?” was the first question — Her Sorrow redoubled — “Wherels she ?” cried the .Duke— — my Lord !’ — her Sobs prevented her Saying more. — Gracious God V exclaimed he, “what is all this? I must See her, I will administer comsort to her, is poshble.” Without waiting to inquire Surther, he went upstairs, and opened thestrawing room door — Oh Heaven! what a sight I — My mother was laid upon a Sopha — her coffin at a little distance Srom this shed of death — and I was Sast .asteep in my cradle, 
which 
ELIZA WARWICK. loi 
which was at my mother’s Sect — Jennet was kneeling by her dead mistress, and bedewing one of her hands with her tears — Such were the objects which struck beauvarise on entering this apartment. 
Jennet was So absorbed in Sorrow, that she heard him not when he came in — nor would she have been Sensible of it for a much longer time, had not the Duke exclaiitied, in the agony of his heart, Ah! my God !' Why am I not dead too !” This roused the saithsul attendant; and, turning her head to See’ from whence the voice came, she beheld' the Duke of beauvarise transfixed with grief and horror. She arose,, caught me up in her arms, and in a wild and pathetic manner presented me to hirri — ‘ My Lord, * cried she, ‘ that dear angel of light, ’ pointing to the Sopha, ‘ has h 3’ left 
102, THE HISTORY OF 
left to your care this helpless infant — her last words bequeathed to your Sriendship the charge of this poor orphan — and I conjure you, by your great humanity, never to desert her The Duke received me into his arms — and after embracing me with much tenderness, he Solemnly invoked Heaven to witness, he would protect me to the latest hour of his life — He then resigned me to Jennet — approached the Sopha — and kneeling by my mother, he shed a shower of tears over her lifeless form — He gazed on her with admiration and compashon — and, after Spending an hour thus mournsully by her, he gave orders about her interment, and left the house in a state of horror not to be dcscribed. 
Jennet would not quit my mother till she had performed towards her the very 
last 
ELIZA WARWICK. 103 
last ossices; and when those had been properly attended to, the Duke of beau varise took a house for us a little way out of town, whither I was conveyed Sor the benefit of the air. 
I will pass over my days of infancy', my Lord, in order to draw nearer those passages of my life which can only appear interesti>^g: I will therefore omit to dwell on the parental fondness the Duke Seemed to entertain for me at those years — and the tender caresses with which he used to load me — they were, indeed, the happiest moments of my life. — mas ters of every kind did this inestimable friend allow me, and he always inspedted and encouraged my improvements — I was fond of music, and had a tolerable voice — his Grace Spared no pains to render me a mistress of this accomplishment -- He H 4 would 
104 the HISTORY OF 
would take great delight in hearing me' sing; and often, with tears and embraces,, tell me I had all my mother’s notes— — would Spend whole days with us at R —; and was continually talking to me of my parents — He painted to me, in the liveliest colours, their many virtues, and would dwell upon thtm with enthusiasm: ' — He tied about my neck the miniature of my mother, and described the dreadful Scene he was engaged in when he found it — In short, he inspired me with the earliest affection for them, and would always listen with pleasure to my childish questions concerning them— — day, in particular, he was taken up in expatiating on my mother’s good sense — he then Spoke of her religion, her swtetness of temper, her repentance for the only Sauk she ever committed in her life, and the duty and assertion she bore her father and 
mother— — 
• WARWICK. 105 
mother — when I arose, and, looking up in his Sace, with streaming eyes, exclaimed, “And where, my dear guardian, are these parents of my mother? — where are her sisters? — her brother?. — Have I no friends in the whole world but you and Jennet?’’ This question. Spoken in the innocence and fearfulness of ray heart, affected Hm beyond measure -- ‘ My dear Eliza !’ cried he, hiding my tears in his bosom, ‘ you think too deeply — Heaven is your friend, my child — the Almighty never foisiakes the virtuous and innocent.’ He wiped my eyes; and bidding me be good, and to fear nothing, he left me absorbed in thought. I stew to Jennet, who was my other refuge, and desired her to come and pray with me, for if God was not my friend, I should have none to depend on for protection when she and my guardian left me. I threw 
myself 
io THE HISTORY OF 
mysels on my knees with emotion, and with Jennet I offered up Some pious ejaculations for my preservation. The Duke entered my closet at this moment; and respedting my employment, he lest us to ourselves. I Soon after Sought him in the garden; he returned with me to the house, and, leading me to the harpsichord, all my cares were forgotten in an instant. When he found my chearsul ness return, he ashed me if ijhouu have my ohjeflion to accompanying him to his seat in torkji'jire? — ‘ I will introduce you, ’ continued he, ^ to an agreeable and worthy woman, who will on your account, I dare Say, consent to Spend Some time with us at Fairy hill, if you do not dissike the proposal.’ I assured him it would be highly agreeable to me to attend him anywhere. Our journey was determined on, and the day .fixed for our departure. 
ELIZA WARWICK. 107 
I was then just turned of thirteen, and I will consi^ss I have hardly leen a girl of that age So beautisul. It is generally an awkward time of lise; but I was tall— — — and my proficiency in dancing, and walking well, had’ given my whole form an air os dignity. At that time I was insensible to the charms of my per son, having never heard it praised; and it is only the remembrance os what 1 then was that leads me to make the above as sertion. Indeed, my youth and extreme simplicity prevented my ever Setting any great value on beauty, even when 1 Saw it in another. 
I thought of the journey I was to make with pleasure, and wished the hours to fly faster, until the moment arrived which was destined Sor our Setting out. The Duke Saw with delight the happiness he * had 
io THE HISTORY OF 
had given me, and I certainly fancied; that in the variety of the Scene I should find infinite amusement. The much desired morning at length appeared; and my guardian, Jennet, and I, travelled together in the duke’s coach 
As we pasted the different Seats, Beau varise would amuse me with a descriptioni of the owners,, and tell me the names of the Several counties we went through 'As I was not accustomed to take long: journeys, I grew extremely fatigued when vve approached Baldock, and was really feverish; the Duke perceived it,, and,, though the day was not near worn, he stopped at an inn in that town, and Spent the evening and the, night there. The next morning I was better, and we again proceeded on our journey. He redoubled his assiduity to beguile the time,., and I 
laughed 
ELIZA WARWICK. 109 
daughed osten^at his Sallies os wit in his ^haradlers of the various men whose pos sessions had excited my admiration. 
I perceived at a distance a shady and sheautisul park; the house Seemed to stand sin the middle of it, and it looked like a stately bid ruin. beauvarise endeavoured to draw off my attention Srom it, and, when he thought he had Succeeded, drew up the blind on that side, and pretended the Sun was offensive. Ignorant of his .real meaning, I exclaimed, Just let me have one view, my dear Lord, of that charming Seat; its woods are delights S! 'whose is it'?’’ At that moment I cast .my eyes on Jennet; she was bathed in tears, yet trying to suppress them. My dear Jennet !” Said I, throwing my arms about her, “what ails thee? — thou art mot well, Sure !” ‘ yes, miss Eliza, ’ answered 
JIO THE HISTORY OF 
Swered she, ‘ I zm; but fatigue makes me low spirited: take no notice of me, I shall be better presently.’ I turned towards the Duke, and perceived he was agitated — Ah! my Lord, ” cried I, Seizing one of his hands, ‘‘ what is all this? - — Pray tell me — I cannot bear to See you affected without wishing to know the cause.” ‘ My Eliza !' replied he, embracing me, ‘ you shall know all >^ the estate we are now passing is Lord norfolk’s — there it was your charming mother’ -- -- Ah I no more, my Lord — 
I understand you -- My dear unhappy 
parents, what did you not endure! — At this place your love commenced — and it was followed by wretchedness unspeakable!! — my heart bleeds at the remembrance of your Sufferings! — Ah! my Lord, no wonder your Sensibility and jennet’s should, appear.” Overcome with 
the 
ELIZA WARWICK. III 
the emotions of my Soul, I Sunk on my knees, and was absorbed in an agony of gries — The force of Nature, and the delicacy of myv feelings, operated strongly on a very weak frame; and when beau varise railed me to the Seat, he perceived that I Scarcely lived — paleness overspread my countenance, and I ceased to breathe for Some minutes — Alarmed at my situation, he ordered the Servants to stop, and endeavoured by the use of volatiles to restore me, but without success — He Snatched me up in his arms, and carried me towards the fatal mansion that had caused this accident — and laid me on a bench in the park, while a Servant ran (to procure water, he. Srora the house. 
Lord and Lady Norfolk, hearing that Some persons of distinction were taken ill So near them, came out, with many 
of 
Itz the HISTORY OF 
os their domestics, to offer any ashstance that was 'requisite. Jennet (on whose bosom my head rested) Screamed at the approach of those well-known forms; and at that moment I opened my eyes. The Duke, who had been sitting by me, and chaffing my temples, arose on Seeing them draw near, and, Taking Lady norfolk’s hand, led her close to the bench on which I was placed — “Suffer me, my good Lady norsolk, ” Said he, to beg that you will contemplate this Sace — Does it not remind you of an amiable and long lost Sister? — Embrace her — it is the daughter of Lady Eliza Warwick.’/ The cruel woman .started at the' Soundj ‘ This, is a trick, my Lord — I understand sit — but that undutisul creature you Speak .of has long been thought os with detes tation by her family — If that is a child of hers, I pity the unfortunate creature, 5 
for 
ELIZA WARWICK. 113 
for none thatshelongs to me will ever Succour or take any notice os her; So she may recover this pretended Swoon as Soon as she pleases — and the Sooner she leaves this place the better “Inhuman woman !” exclaimed the Duke, as she turned off from us — “And you, my Lord norsolk, what do you Say to this?” — 
‘ That she will ever be dear to me, ’ * replied he, ‘ in Spite of the unrelenting cruelty of her relations — Would I could offer her an asylum in my house! — but, alas! I am not master of mysels or mine “Tour house! my Lord, ” cried beauva rise — “Not Sor the universe should my amiable young Sriend be a dependent on the Smiles os Such a woman as your wise — My house, indeed, will be ever hers — and my fortune shall only be valued by me as it enables me to Support and shield her from the miseries which attend on po vol. I. I verty — 
ki4 THE HISTORY OF 
verty — How are you, my Esiza? Speak to me.” I arose, and endeavoured to make my acknowledgments to Lord Norfolk for his civility, but my limbs failed me; and had not my kind protestor Sustained me in his arms, I had returned to that state of insensibility, from which, if I had never awakened, I had been happy. Lord Norfolk would not permit me to •leave his park until my strength in Some measure returned; and, after a little time Spent in procuring me refreshments, he Suffered us with reluctance to depart. 
I will be less prolix,, my Lord, in relating the remaining part of my journey: this accident I would not omit, as it was the first time I was taught to experience the curse of Sensibility. 
After making short stages, on my account, 
ELIZA WARWICK. 115 
count, in three days we arrived at Fairy hill. It was a most delightsul Spot nature lavished on it the choicest gists, and the duke’s taste had bestowed on it all the improvements of Art. 
When we alighted, we were received by a lady of a most benevolent and pleas ing countenance, accompanied with an air of dignity which commanded respect“ “wwthy Mrs. Heber, ” Said the Duke, approaching her, how agreeable is this! how great a favour! — Allow me to present to your maternal bo some this fair and drooping flower — Cherish it, my dear Madam, as the rarest of blossoms — and teach her to forget that llie is motherless.” That expression sost ened me at once, and my unhappy state darted full into my mind — I threw my fdf at her feet, and with a beating heart I 2 besought 
ii THE HISTORY Q f 
shesought her to love the poor orphan that was then a Suppliant Sor her tender ness. She raised me with streaming eyes, and, after kishng me with much affection, entreated me to be chearsul, and led me into my apartment, where she would have me repose mysels until Supper was Served. 
The next morning Mrs. Heber entered my room, and, aster inquiring anxiousty about my health, she proposed walking besore breakfast. 1 readily acquiesced, and I attended my .new friend into the groves and woods: they were the most romantic and beautiful that can be imagined. When the hour Sor breaksast was near, we returned to the house; and the remaining part of the day we Spent in the library, in the picture*gallery, in the music*room, and in the garden. 
Almost 
ELIZA WARWICK, iry 
♦ Almost two years I pasted at Fairy hill, in a Serene pleasalit manner, and thought mysels very happy. My beloved guardian provided me with excellent mas ters, not inferior to those I had from 
London, .' when we lived at R -- --; and 
the time I could Spare from the different avocations that Sollowed their attendance I devoted to my needle, which was em -- ployed on all Sorts of work. 
Mrs. Heberts Society I always thought ss valuably of as it deserved; that delicate Sensibility, which is the most beautiful ornament the Soul can wear, she pos sested in an admirable degree — Her way of thinking was refined, and her temper mild as the breath of Summer — I loved her much, and' have shed many a tear to the memory of my dear Mrs. Heber. 
I 3. 
The 
ii THE HISTORY OF 
The Duke would osten invite his neighbours to Fairy hill, amongst whom were Several very fashionable and very agreeable people os distindion. When he visited them, Mrs. Heber and I generally accompanied him, I need not be more particular, since in that time nothing of an interesting nature happened worth en gauging your lordship’s attention. 1 will hasten to those circumstances which form my narrative. 
One afternoon, before we had risen from table, a letter was brought the Duke; he read it, and with a joyful Smile told us we should Soon See a young man whoiti he esteemed much— — “know him, Mrs. Heber, ” Said he, turning to her — “This paper informs me that Sir Charles Beaufort is arrived from France, and that he will visit Fairy hill 
tomorrow. 
ELIZA WARWICK. 119 
tomorrow, and is now on his way here — He will bring with him Some friends, he Says — I am impatient to See him, aster So long an absence.’* We congratulated him on an intelligence that gave him Such pleasure, and Soon after lest him, to finish a piece of work that had engaged Mrs, heber’s and my attention Sor Several days. My amusements the next morning Seemed inexhaustible — My books, my harpsichord, and Mrs. heber’s conversation, were by turns pursued, and quitted with reluctance. The Duke reminded me of visiting my toilet I thought uncommonly .early: however, I obeyed him; and when Mrs. Heber was dressed, I attended her into the Saloon. Soon aster a good many gentlemen made their appearance — IS you will not think me tonne tedious, I will describe their different characters. 
I 4. 'Lord 
120 THE HISTORY OF 
Lord stamsord was that Sort of figure which one admires more Sor its air and smartness than any real beauty — He was rather under the middle size, had large Sprightly black eyes, white teeth, and an address that was infinitely pleasing — He had more wit than Sense, and less wit than good nature— — would have been an amiable man, had not his becoming master of himsels too early, with a sine fortune, and his having Sormed friendships with Some of the most abandoned of his own Sex, led him into vices, which became too difficult, and too habitual, in time, ever to be rooted from his bo some. 
Colonel Middleton was taller and thinner than Lord Stamford; his address was easy and polite; he was ever remarkable for his attention to the ladies; his eyes 
expressed 
ELIZA WARWICK. it 
expressed much sostness; his mouth and teeth were pleasingly formed; and his air en militaire was often found irresistible. He was a dangerous man for two reasons — the first, because his countenance prejudiced in his Savour; and the Second, a more immoral creature in his heart never existed. 
Mr. lawson was shocking — his face was a true picture of that which Bacchus was supposed to have; disgustingly red, and horridly pimpled — his figure was large, and terrisyingly masculine — he was thought to poffess wit, and it was therefore deemed necessary, by all his Set, to laugh heartily at every Sentence he pronounced — luckily he Spoke little, else their complaisance perhaps would not have held out quite So long — he was Something above merely civil in his address — he endeavoured 
122 THE HISTORY OF 
deavoured to appear gallant, but Nature had So cruelly treated him, both in per ibn and mind, that he could never Succeed with any woman of delicacy. 
Colonel Temple was not handsome,. but there was Something in his figure and air that was almost charming — he was rather Sallow, his teeth were very white and his voice (particularly when he Spoke to, OF os, our lex) was sostness itsels — he Sung with taste, and loved music — was Sensible, agreeable, and quite the man of fashion — his love of gaming, and indeed of most other vices, made him a valuable member of this chosen Society. 
Sir Charles Beaufort was, without exception, the handsomest man I ever Saw — his form, address, conversation, were all Seducing — his eyes were dark, and full 
of 
ELIZA WARWICK. 12^ 
of Sensibility; his nose was aquiline and his mouth and teeth were very beau tisul — he possessed an air of nonchalance in general that many women thought provoking, but which indeed gave him a thousand charms — he had a fine voice, was as fond of music as Col. Temple,, and was perfectly accomplished — he Spoke with infinite ease, and very Sensibly, on all subjedss — he had a happy command of expression, that never failed him and if anything could exceed his facility of Speech, it could only be the extreme share os art which he possessed in a Superior degree to any man. His father' and mother died early. The Duke of beauvarise, who loved his sister with extreme tenderness, undertook, at her dying request, to insped; the education of her Son; and, certain it is, in every branch of polite literature no one could 
surpass 
124 
THE HISTORY OF 
surpass Sir Charles Beaufort. The Duke sincerely regarded him, and treated him as his adopted child — He was in reality Such, as he proposed to make him Sole heir to all his possessions. Sir Charles, with very amiable, and, indeed, noble qualities, was Sent to Oxford; he there contracted an intimacy wnth Lord Stamford, and with many men, like him, of the most libertine principles — aster he left the University, he gave into the most riotous Scenes; and, with the Seed of every virtue in his breast, he was lost to virtue itself. 
beauvarise tried, more like a Siiend than a parent, to dissuade him Srom the mode of life he was pursuing — he painted to him the horrid consequences of Such proceedings, * same, sense, and principles, was he about to resign to the 
noisy 
ELIZA WARWICK. 125 
noisy and worthless pleasures (if Such can be called pleasures) .of libertinistn — he Said it was a proper time for him to make the grand tour, and proposed that he should leave England for that purpose immediately. Beaufort made no objection, and in a few weeks took leave of the Duke, and Set out for Dover; Srom whence he diredily embarked, accompanied by a very worthy man, whom the Duke shad made .choice of to she the tcompanion of his travels. 
No man could be more Solicitous to •reap advantages during this tour than Sir .Charles — every account beauvarise received Srom Mr. H' -- -- delighted him; 
and he made no doubt but his nephew would turn out according to his wishes. After an absence of four years, beausort •came back : his old friends, apprized of 
his 
126 THE HISTORY OF 
his arrival, stew .to meet him; and at his request went with him to fairy hrll Such, my Lord, was Sir Charles beau p fort — the man in the world most dangerous — most alluring. 
The Baronet and his companions staid three days with us, and then went to beausort’s Seat, which was but a few miles from the duke’s. Sir Charles became a constant visitor at Fairy hill; he lost his pashon for hunting in a few weeks aster his residence in Yorkshire, nor did he long pursue any of thole Sports which the season and country offered to the gentlemen. beauvarise, who loved them, was generally engaged with Lord Stamford, and many others, in Such amuscr ments. During those hours of pleasure to them, Beaufort begged leave to stay at home with Mrs. Hehcr and me; which 
was 
ELIZA WARWICK. 127 
was a request So often repeated, that k at length was thought unnecessary; and, indeed, we were So habituated to his company, that his leaving us, to attend the gentlemen, would really have been disagreeable both to Mrs. Heber and myself. Sir Charles walked with us, or read to us while we worked — Sometimes he would, sing and play, or accompany me when I Sung. Thus did he accommodate jiimself to our inclinations — and I certainly considered him the most pleasing, as well as the most amiable of men. His behaviour to me had a Sort of Something in it which I want words to express — it was snot an air os gallantry he assumed- -- was not a distant respect - — I was to •call it a Suppressed tenderness, and you would allow of the phrase, I think you could in Some measure form an idea of it. He was often melancholy, and fre 
128 THE HISTORY OF 
quently Sighed as if his heart was breaking — He used to fix his eyes upon me, and not take them off until he found he threw me into consusion — a consusion which I knew not how to aecount Sor, and which at that time I never felt at the intent gaze of any other man. 
Col. Temple was very ashduous about me; his love os music gave him numerous opportunities of being near me when I was engaged on .any instrument; at Such times he would pay me a thousand compliments, and once indeed went So far as to tell me, he never loved any of my Sex So Sincerely as he did me — reproached me for my indifference — and assured me, that, young as I was, could 1 but give him Some room to hope I might in time return his tenderness, he never would attach himself to any other 
woman. -- -- -- 
ELIZA WARWICK. 129 
woman. — — I was not So much a child as not to comprehend his meaning — I blushed, but it was with indignation — He mistook the eaiste, and tried to Seize my hand; but I arose with dignity from ithe harpsichord, and, with an offended air, desired him for the future to entertain me with Subjects better Suited to my years, and more agreeable to my inclinations — that, if he presumed to mention again to me So hatesul a topic, I would .certainly inform the Duke os beauvarise of it. As I turned from him, I was Surprised to find Sir Charles Beaufort had been behind my chair while 1 addressed mysels to Col. Temple, and, as I discovered asterwards, had attended to the whole of our conversation : he caught hold of my hand, and, with an air of ■exultation, whispered, “Charming miss Warwick 1’^ 1 broke from him, being; 
vol. I. K much 
130 THE HISTORY OF 
much agitated, and retired to my own apartment. 
I should have told your Lordship that the Duke of beauvarise began once more to be uneasy at the chain of acquaintance Sir Charles still continued linked to; and though his steps vere not absolutely those os a rake, yet it was to be feared that he might ere long descend into that shocking track, as he had constantly at his Side either a stamsord, a Middleton; or a lawson, to urge him to the commission gs every flagrant error: the Duke theresore got him appointed Ambassador 
to the court of -- -- -- in little more than 
Sour months aster his arrival in Yorkshire; and Sir Charles was within a short time of his departure, when he listened to the answer I made Col. Temple, and expressed his admiration, as I above related. 
.DLIZA WARWICK. 

When I entered my chamber, I Seated mysels at one of the windows which looked, into the garden, and threw open the Sash, in order to enjoy the Serenity of the night, and at the Same time to indulge my tears, which stowed Sast, for what reason 1 could not tell. I had not continued thus many niinutes, when I beard the Sound os voices just below me, and Soon found they issued from the lips of Sir Charles Beaufort and Col. Temple. 
‘‘ By Heaven, ’’ cried the latter, with impetuosity, ‘‘ I love her.” ‘ True, ’ Said Beaufort; ^ but, dear Temple, tho’ I can feci for you, 1 cannot exculpate you from a want of Sriendship to me — I declared to you my Sentiments of her from the first moment I beheld her — .You acted not So ingenuousty by me — you endeavoured, by an underhand me k 2 thod. 
132 THE HISTORY OF 
thod, to Seduce her from me Faith, I was wrong, ” repliefi Temple; but at that instant I forgot my friend, and could not command myself — She is all loveli jiess! — I am devilishly unhappy — But she likes neither of us ‘ Therefore, * answered 
Beaufort, ‘ let us hpth try for her. If you are So happy as to gain her, you will be as dear to me as ever: if, on the contrary, I should chance to be the more fortunate man, let not that divide our regard and intimacy“ “is my hand, ’* replied Temple; “you are a generous fellow ^ but, dear Temple, * Cried Sir Charles, * what an advantage do I give you over me! — Here am 1 about to be banished from her — Her young heart will be assailed by So dangerous an object as you are — She will receive the daily admiration of thousandsi — Never, 'ohi never, will one shought of 
Beaufort 
ELIZA WARWICK. 
Beaufort pass her imagination! am almost distratsted !* “Hold!' Sir Charles, ’’^ returned Temple; you shall not outdo me in generosity — If she can be So far won by your insinuating manner as to feel a tenderness fw you, and you can get a promise of love front' hef before you go, I Swear to you, by the word of a man of honour, during your absence I never will mention a Syllable of my own pashon to her; nay, on the contrary, I will forward yours with all my eloquence." 
I heard no more; Mrs. Heber entered my room, and I quitted the window. 
Would you believe, my Lord, that my extreme simplicity never Suffered me to think that I was the subje(ft of their conversation The declaration that Col k 3 Temple 
134 the HISTORY OF 
Temple had made me os his love only appeared one of those unmeaning thap sodies 1 had read os — and though I knew they were not to be encouraged, but to be Severely rebuked, yet I certainly did not think that men were So dangerous as I had heard them represented. I wondered who this Sair one was; and, had I understood my heart’i emotions, I should have known that curiosity did not So much inspire that won der as jealousy. It is a truth that Sir Charles Beaufort engrossed much of my affection. 
I returned to the company with Mrsw Heber. Soon aster, Sir Charles and his friend entered. Col. Temple approached me — uttered Something like an apology for what had incurred So much of my displcaiurc, but assured me he would endeavour 
ELIZA WARWICK:. 135 
cenvour to hear the weight of my cruelty without one complaint — He sighed — I affected not to hear him — It is certain my eyes eagerly Sought after Sir Charles, who was at that minute in deep discourse with a very pretty young woman, the daughter of a worthy clergyman of Yorkshire, whom the Duke patronised, and who, with many other ladies, had come to See us — “Am I hateful to your sight, charming Eliza!’’ continued Col. Temple, “that you thus avoid even to look at me? But indeed therein you are merciful; for those eyes have but too fatally wounded me already.” At that instant Sir Charles had been presented with a flower, which the fair creature whom he was talking to had taken from her bosom — Without knowing what I did, I arose — ‘my first intention was to have approached them — ■ but reason came to my aid; and this K 4 Simple 
136 tile history OF 
simple questiorf, which I ashed myfelfy brought me back to my Seat — ‘and what is it to thee Eliza., whether Jbe is the favoured lady or not P — I again resumed my chair — Colonel Temple went on — » “Well, then, lovely miss Warwick I since 1 am thus disaoreeable — since I dos 
O 
not merit a word — a look — I will retire — • 1 will endeavour to leave this fatal house — Would 1 had never entered it!” I then Saw Sir Charles carry the flower to his lips; and, in my agitation, I exclaimed, ‘ My God f Col. Temple thought he teased me, and supposed that the cause of my restleffness; he theresore, with a sigh, and a lov/ bow, retired to the further end of the room. Sir Charles, who had osten turned about, to observe my treatment of his rival, was Soort made Sensible of his ill fortune; and, in a Sew moments aster, my heart bounded with 
pleasure, 
'ELIZA WARWICK. 137 
pleasure, wshen I Saw him quit the pretty' miss Herbert, and advance towards me. As he drew near, I perceived the traces of melancholy on his features — he stood Some time before me, his arms crossed, and his eyes fixed on my face, without uttering one Syllable — at length he drew the chair Temple had left nearer to mine, and Seated himself — Charming Eliza 1 “cried he, in a tremulous accent, “I have but one fortnight longer allowed me to remain in England — the time is drawing near when perhaps I shall bid you a last’ adieu — Receive my thanks, my Sweet young friend, for the many moments of pleasure you have afforded me — for the hours of happiness you have indulged me in — To the scnse of your conversation — to the divine harmony of your Soul — am I indebted for the blissful Scenes I have experienced at Fairy hill — the 
happiest. 
t38 the HISTORY OF 
happiest, indeed, os my lise He paused — 1 could not answer him — He affected not to perceive my emotions, and continued to Speak — I have one favour, lovely miss Warwick! to ask os you — a favour that, perhaps, your amiable heart will grant, when 1 assure you it will in Some measure Soften the rigour of my absence from those I love.’’ I told him I should be ready to do everything in my power to contribute to his ease, and earnestly begged to know how I could oblige him. He took my hand — tears stowed from his eyes — and he exclaimed, ** Ah! happy 'i’emple !” He arose ab ruply, and left the room. I was astonished — I was unhappy. -- -- -- My God! 
thought I, this womans whoever Jhe isy has aimojt dijlrafied him indeed! I was ready to cry, with Ophelia, 
Ah! what a noble mind is here o’erthrown.’^ 
. - And, 
ELIZA WARWICK. 13^ 
And, really, So absorbed was I in pity for him, that I Seemed, in the midst of a crowded room, to be totally alone, and buried in refiediioit. Lord Stamford with an air of liveliness peculiar to himself, came up to me, took my hand, and led me to the top of the room — Here,. Temiple, ” exclaimed he, ‘‘ take up your violin, and give us a minuet — miss Warwick and I will show you what dancing is.’^ A murmur of applause ran through the company; it was thought to be a good proposal; and the obliging Col. Temple condescended to do as he was desired. I could not in politeness resuse to dance, but 1 was much mortified at it; a reverie in which 1 had been engaged was broken in a cruel manner, and the object of it was So infinitely dearer to me than any other in the Saloon, that I thought my amusement was rather 4,. ' prevented 
ro THE HISTORY OF 
prevented than forwarded by this gay Sally of Lord' stamford’s. We began — The men Seemed delighted — Col, Mid dieton whispered loud enough (as he intended) to be heard by all, that he never before beheld So graceful a form — I was compared to euphrosyne — to Thalia — nay, to Venus * herself — Diaffs modesty was not forgotten — norhebe^s flush of youth — In short, had I believed.half that was Said of me, 1 should have supposed myself an “earth treading star.” When my minuet was ended, I received the compliments of all the company — The Duke approached me, kissed my handy and thanked me for the pleasure I had given him — This Speech was the only one I regarded, or that could have given me the least Satisfaction. Col. Temple projxised that he should give his instrument to the duke’s valet, who played 
well. 
ELIZA WARWICK. 141 
well, and that dancing might become general. The thought was resished by all, and every one prepared for this favourite diversion. At that instant Beaufort appeared — Col. Temple and he Spoke a few words apart — The matter Seemed determined— — Col. Temple came up, and alked me to dance — I hesitated — but civility was ever to be considered, and, without making any objection, I gaye him my hand. Lord stamsord, who had in com{stiment to an old lady (never Supposing she would attempt to engage in an entertainment So little calculated for one of her appearance) begged (the honour of dancing with her, and who was fairly taken in, called out, that there Should he a change of partners every two dances — This occasioned a good deal of mirth, and though I believe I laughed Jnore than any one, it was not So much 
at 
142 THE HISTORY OF 
at the expense of his 'uenerable friend., as at the idea of quitting Col. Temple for one whom I liked better. 
• My eyes followed Sir Charles — I wished to See the object of his election— — I supposed it would have been miss Herbert, and I was not mistaken — He threw himself upon a Sopha while every one was making his choice — He held the ilower miss, Herbert had given him in his hand, and Seemed to enjoy its sra ‘grance — She passed him at the minute — - “Sir Charles, ” Said she, do you not dance?” ?” ‘ Madam — I am too lazy.’ Fie! sye.i” answered she, what a reason !” He took her hand, ‘ Will you be my partner, pretty Fanny, if I can prevail on mysels ?’ “Yes, ” she replied, with a blush, I am not engaged yet.” Well, then, if you can .bear, with .an 
inattentive 
ELIZA WARWICK. 143 
inattentive absent fellow, I am at your Service He led her to the Set, and I heard no more. 
Colonel Temple was all gallantry— — avoided any particular declaration of his pashon, but kept in that line of delicate Slattery which our Sex admires — he grew lively as I listened, and when he did not make love I always thought him agreeable. He told me an anecdote whidi had much wit in it, and I was in the height of enjoying it, just as Sir Charles, who was dancing down, offered to turn .me in the figure — He looked at me stead fastly, and again exclaimed, Ah J happy Temple !” This brought me to my fels — his stories were asterwards insipid — and 1 looked forward with impatience to the conclusion of the Second dance. At length the desired moment came — the 
whole 
, 44 THE HISTORY OF 
whole room wtre changing their partners, when I Saw Lord Stamford advancing towards me — Without Seeming to have observed him, I made up to the .door, and ctifappeared in an instant. Soon after, 1 was returning to the Saloon, when in the apartment leading to it I perceived Beaufort reclining on a Sopha — I approached him — “You are not well. Sir, ” cried I, ‘‘ I fear.” He arose, and •threw himself on his knees before me — •* Lovely Eliza !’ Said he, ^ )'ou now See .at your feet a wretched objeist^ — an object: who at the instant he inspires you with; pity is the daft person in the world who merits it from you — Lleave you to mor .row, charming miss Warwick! — I leave you in despair — hardly know what I would Say — but, ah! my amiable — my adorable young friend^’ continued he, : bathing my hands with his tears, ‘ compassionate 
ELIZA WARWICK. 145 
passionate and Sorgive me !’ Dear Sir Charles! I do not understand you — You are unhappy — Make me the friend of your Sorrows — I am young, his true; but I have a Sympathising and Sensible heart — Tou leave us to morrow^ did you ' say? — Ah! no — you did intend to remain another fortnight — Why this Sudden resolution ?” ‘ business of the most 
Serious nature calls me hence — but I have one Savour to alk of you before I go’ — Name it, ” cried I impatiently — ‘ It is this — I shall take leave of the Duke before he goes to bed, and will let off for London early in the morning — Now, my Eliza, do I draw near to my request — This is Friday — Next thursday night, at twelve otelock precisely, will I Secretly revisit Fairy hill — to the summerhouse, that is embosomed in the orange grove, will I repair — May I hope that you will vol. I, L meet 
146 THE HISTORY OF 
meet me there I started at the proposal — I hesitated — ^ Ah T continued he,, in the most pathetic manner, ‘ stis as. I feared — and you will not give me the sa tisfaidtion of imparting to you the Secret of my Soul — a Secret that the Suppression of has caused me a tlxiusand pangs — a thousand hours of torture — But go, cruel Eliza! — those pangs, those tortures, cannot affetst you Ah!’* cried I, sob bing, you are mistaken — But why this mystery? May I not let Mrs. Heber know that you wish to See me next thursday? Where can, be the harm of that * if no harm is apprehended, why not meet me without letting Mrs. Heber know anything of the matter ?* Well, then, my dear Jennet will go with me.” ^ No, miss Warwick, * cried Sir Charles, with a.disconsqlate air, ‘ dp not think of obliging me — I will not put 
you 
ELIZA WARWICK. 147 
you to So much inconvenience — You are afraid of me — you imagine I am not worthy to be trusted — Adieu! lovely eliza!! — me forgiving you this trouble He was about to leave me, when I caught hold of his ami — Stay, Sir Charles — I have never been accus tomed to conceal anything from my faithsul Jennet — I am very young — I do not know whether I should ad: properly in granting your request — yet, at the Same time, I am Sure you would not alk of me that, which you know would make me appear imprudent, should it be discovered. I have an implkit confidence in you — I consider you in the light of a brother — Tell me, then, sincerely, were I your sis ter, would you have me grant this request to any other man ?” beausort was struck with what 1 Said, but more So with my manr^er he, however, Soon recovered L 2 himself — 
148 THE HISTORY OF 
himsels — ‘ Amiable simplicity !* exclaimed he, ‘ Charming innocence! — No, my Eliza! were I your brother, I would not object to your meeting a man, whom I knew to be one of strict honour, anywhere, or at any hour — IS you have any doubt of mine, you are in the right to resuse me what I ask“ “! Sir, ’' Said I, ‘‘ I am willing to believe your reasoning, and I will meet you on thurs day night.” He was transported — he kissed my hands — he broke out in ex 
preshons of the most rapturous Sort -- 
I stood amazed — He, observed it, and by degrees resumed that air of dejeduon which had always So highly interested me.; beausort led me into the dancing room, where he became my partner for the night, a privilege he insisted upon usurping, as it was the last of his stay at Fairy hill. The .Duke .desired him to 
uiance 
eliza Warwick:. 149 
dance a minuet with me — He took me out — Ah! what ease! what elegance! — • He was, indeed, everything that could charm the heart of woman. Our little ball was continued after Supper, and it only broke up at six in the morning We then offered to retire. Sir Charles advanced to Mrs. Heber and the rest of the ladies, and begged leave to be permitted to Salute them, as he intended to Set off for London in a few minutes Good God! how I trembled! — He ap proched me — Col. Temple stood near us — beaufort’s agitation was perceptible — I felt motionless, and colder than a statue — He whispered, ‘ My Eliza! — my ever charming mistress and friend! — love me! — and, oh! forget me not next Thursday.’ He could Say no more., The tenderness of his manner was observable, and Several that were standing by remark l 3 ed, 
x50 THE HISTORY OF 
ed, that “Sir Charles was in lo’wep Temple remained silent, and attentive,, till our Sarewel had ended — then Said, ina low voice, to his friend, “Now may I retort, ^ Ah! happy Beaufort!” I turned my head hastily, and Saw a Smile on Sir charles’s countenance — I was shocked — and it them for the sirst time entered my head,, that men can appear more affected than they really are. I compared the difference of our sensations — Ah I how impossible was it for a gleam of pleasure to have entered at my heart! the avenues to it were choked with Sotr row, and overwhelmed with melancholy. 
He is gone, ” cried I to Jennet, as i opened the door of my apartment he is gone, perhaps, for ever.” I threw myself into her arms, and gave way to a violent burst: of affliction. 
, * Whom 
ELIZA WARWICK. 151 
* Whom do you mean, miss Eliza ?* The question consuied me — I told her, My friend — Sir Charles Beaufort.’* * Ah V Said she, ‘ think no more of him — he is not worthy of So much distress — Dry your tears, my dear young Lady, and repose yourself after all the fatigue you have endured Jennet for the first time in her life offended me — “Go, Jennet, ” cried I, “I will undress myself — Yoti have sat up all night, and must be weary — Go, go — I will not be attended further.” She would not be dismissed— — put me to bed, and left me. When she Was gone, I heatd voices in the garden — I arose, looked through a crevice of ray window shutter, and saw Sir Charles and Col. Tempfe walking in the garden — the latter Seemed to be dreadfully agitated, and by hrs gestures was endeavouring to reafbn' the other out of a contrary Opinion L 4 to 
152 THE HISTORY OF 
to his own. Sir Charles appeared cairrr, lively, and determined. The conversa> tion concluded with a warm embrace; and I Saw no more of them. 
I then began to reflect: on all that beauf fort had Said to me — I imagined that ‘he, loved me, and was engaged to another — I then thought that impossible, else the Duke would talk of his intended alsiance — At last, I supposed I was too young •to have inspired him with Such a pashon as Col. Temple pretended to express for me; and that he only wished to See me, in order to point out to me Some method by which I could be Serviceable to him — At the Same time 1 bewailed his absence — osten did I deplore it. I stepped little all that morning — I wept much. Jennet came into my room about noon, and I left my bed. She was evidently startled 
at 
ELIZA WARWICK. 153 
at my appearance, questioned me about my rest, and Seemed to doubt the truth when I assured her nothing ailed me. I went down to the breakfast table, which waited for me — The Duke was shocked at the Sight of my Swollen eyes and pale face — He tenderly ashed me the cause — I blushed — I evaded his question — He Saw he gave me pain, and was silent. He often viewed me with attention during the time of breakfast; and, after it was over, he told me in a whisper, he wanted to Speak with me in his closet, He withdrew. I promised to follow. Never did I attend him with So much reluctance — My heart sickened at the idea of being questioned by him about a Sorrow that I knew not how to account for — However, with trembling steps I gained his apartment — He opened the door to me; and, 
leading me in, he stopped short > 

*54 
THE HISTORY OF 
My dear child !” cried he, what am I to think of this altered countenance? Could one night’s raking have caused Such devastation! Where are the roses? where the glow of health, and vivacity of Spirits, that were So perceptible in every feature yesterday? — Is it now, my dear Eliza! that you treat me with reserve How have I merited it from you ?’* I burst into tears — He took me in his arms' -- -- - 
c 
Ah! my Sweet girl! what is it that thus affects you? Do you weep for the abscnce of your friend Sir Charles? or is this the consequence of your last night’s fatigue 
* Both, both, my Lord cried I. — Thanks, my Eliza! for this confidence, Cherish your affection for l^au 
fort — 
ELIZA WARWICK. 15^ 
fort — I hope he will deserve it of you How amiable is this Sensibility! — I adore k!” He encouraged me — Sir charles loves^ my ward with as generous a friendship as she regards hm? — Has he not told you So, Eliza Yes, my Lord,, has often assured me, that he should never forget me.’ “And was that all ?” ‘ I don’t know — he has thanked me for amusing him — but, alas!' it was never shi my power — he has talked almost, as kindly to me as ever your Grace did — and my gratitude makes me lament his absence.’ beauvarise Seemed pleased with, what he heard -- and, we joineduhe com? pany.. 
Mrs.. Heber Said, in the course of the day, she thought Sir Charles had hurried from us Sooner than was necessary — Not a; jot, ” answered the Duke i, “he 
staid 
t56 the history OF 
staid until the very last moment — he has affairs of infinite consequence to Settle, before he leaves London, which called upon him more Suddenly than he expected, and which I should have thought ill of him, had lie neglected.’^ 
beauvarrse, glad of an^opportunity to Separate beausort’s companions Srom him, invited them all to make a few wteks stay at Fairy hill after Sir charles’s departure from thence, which they readily assented to, ' 
I will forbear to deseribe the emotions of my heart, when I thought of meeting Beaufort — and the Sear and shame which overwhelmed me at the reflection of the step I was going to take without the advice of Jennet or my guardian — yet, my Lord, I will own the minutes Seemed 
tardy 
ELIZA WARWICK. 157 
tardy until the day arrived, and I counted the hours with impatience. 
Thursday morning at last appeared — 
! arose with the .Sun -- -- 1 blamed my 
hasty iresolution — I lamented my promise— — then I questioned ray heart, where ►could the harm be? and it replied, that it only lay in deceiving Jennet. Ah !” icried I, there it is — it is that must ►give me this repugnance to perform my promise — but show can I avoid deceiving her? — he begged I would not discover him — and why may I .not See, this amiable, this unhappy.sriend? — Pardon me. Jennet — I must obey him for once — but it is the last time J will do it without your, approbation.’’ In order ro compass my design with more ease, i begged the Duke to alk Some ladies, and to let us have a shttle ball again at Fairy hill,. He never 
.refused 
158 THE HISTORY OF 
refused any request I made him, and all was done as I desired. Col. Temple alked me to dance with him — I consented to it. Often did I absent myself in the course of the evening, in order that my going out at the appointed hour should not appear extraordinary.' I objected to a formal Supper, and a sideboard therefore was its Substitute. Had it been other -- wise, we must have Supped at twelve. 
Ah! my Lord, how difficult it is, with a large share of Sensibisity, to aft up to the forms which cold prudence prelerves! — how difficult is it for a girl little more than fifteen to See through the .arts of an insinuating and dangerous man, or to resist his eloquence when he has made an impression on her heart! I w’a« hurried by an inexplicable impulse to‘ •meet Sir Charles Beaufort — I persuaded 
myself 
ELIZA WARWICK. 159 
myself he foresaw that I could be of service to him, and that he was going to tax my friendship — Had I conceived I should have heard a declaration of love from him, my innocence and pride had kept me from the interview clani destineiy planned. 
I was dancing down with col Temple, when he pulled out his watch; it was a repeater; and he struck it, through affected Sport, in Col. middleton’s ear: it founded twelve — I looked at my own — ^ it was indeed the hour— — knees trembled under me — an unkersal tremor Seized my whole frame — and my appointment stared me in the face. When the dance was ended. Col. Temple, by his Seeming inattention, gave me an. opportunity of shipping, out of the room —, did So — I slew Some steps — I then stopped 
to 
to THE HISTORY OF 
to listen — I Saw my guardian at every turn — I .heard Jennet in every wind — At length I reached the garden door — never had Lfound it So difficult to open — my fear deprived me of strength, and it was feme minutes before I could unlock it — At last I accomplished it — and with a ibeating and trembling heart I advanced towards the grove. At the entrance, I stood still — I wavered within myself whether I should proceed or turn back — I thought of the allegory sh inimitably described in the Adventurer, when one of diana’s nymphs had been prevailed on by Apollo to meet him at a late hour in a Secret grotto — I Imagined the moon had hid her beams from me, as she had then resused them to.her — and I besought Heaven to instruft me what to do. The stillness of the night — the awful shade of the grove — tlirewover my whole Soul 
an 
ELIZA WARWICK. ii 
nn awe which cannot be expressed — and I remained transfixed with doubt and fear. 
* I was thus irresolute, thus wavering, When a deep sigh proceeded, from the grove — “Ah !” cried I, “stis he — he thinks I have forgotten him — Did I not promise faith.sully ?” This determined me; and I struck at once into the awsul shade. The cloud that had helped to cast a gloom over my Spirits now disappeared, and the moon shone forth in all her gloryj Ishad not advanced many steps, when I tibserved a charming and well known form approaching — Ah! my Lord, never can I describe the emotions, the sensations, that took possession of my Soul at that 'moment — a moment which will ever be femembered by me with horror. 
Sir Charles Beaufort, on perceiving that I was atstually tcome, to meet hiin^... vol.. I. M Sprung 
, t62 THE. HISTORY OF 
Sprung forward, and was at tny feet in m instant — ^ — 
^ Ever lovely — ever adored Eliza! is it possible Are you really thus condescending? Is it to persorm a promise you made; that I am mow indebted Sor your presence?? does the pashon that glows in my bosom exist in yours? Am I Jo happy as to be obliged to your love for this favour ?’ “I ammome, Sir, ’’ replied 
I, assuming much dignity, “to know by what method I can be of use to you — You hinted to mcj that you had • a Secret to inform me of, the concealing of which had cost you some pangs — if, therefore, by revealing it to me, I can in any manner Serve you, you will find in me, as I assured you, a friend ready to compashonate and oblige you.” He was struck at my air of reserve — he blamed 
diimlelf, 
ELIZA WARWICK. 163 
limsels, I am certain, for having unbo somed his Sentiments So Soon — it was not 'the way to disann me — He had art enough to perceive it, and he changed his manner — he threw from him that air of freedom, and adopted that of softness and .dejedrion. 
‘ I have travelled, amiable miss Warwick! jx)st Srom London, merely to obtain the honour, the happiness, that I am now possessed of — Your Smiles, your kindness, have often charmed me — do not no w kill my hopes by these looks of hatred and disdain — Consider, Madam, that this may be the last time the wretched Beaufort twill ever trouble you — this may be the last meeting we shall ever have — Behold me, lovely Eliza! a Suppliant on my knees — refuse ‘not what I have to afk.’ He wept — his tears Sell M 2, upon 
ja. the history of 
upon my hands -- -- -- 1 begged he would 
rise — I begged him to enter the summerhouse, and be Seated. ‘no, never .will I leave this humble posture, ’ cried he, with emotion, ' ‘ until I receive your pardon for my presumption — Prepare to wonder at it, beautiful Eliza! — prepare 
to kill me with your Srowns -- -- -1 love 
you, Madam -- -- -- Heaven, that Heaven 
that hears, can witness to my truth -- : from the moment that I first beheld you, I became your stave — IHAVE loved you — let me repeat it — I, have breathed since, 
but to adore you -- - — Now, .charming 
Eliza! .bid me begone — tell me to leave 
your presence for er- -- Madam, 
I will obey you — I can dies Ah! my Lord, what words! — but they were nothing to his manner — his fervency — his 
agitation — his look of despair !Oh!! 
God! what were, .my Sufferings!. -- — 
what 
ELIZA WARWICK. 165 
what were my constidts! My pen will not obey my fingers — for, a few minutes' I resign it. 
I was motionless — I was too much as -- fedled to Speak. He perceived he had gained me to himsclf, and he lost not the victory he had taken Such pains to make: he proceeded — d Is it to your compashon. Madam, I owe this silence? Do you fear to pronounce my doom? — Ah! gentle Eliza !’ think, then, ere you’ Speak — think of my wretchedness — pity my Sensibility.’ Again he wept — again were my hands bedewed with his Salle tears. Overcome with the poignancy of my sensations, I Sunk down upon a turf of grass that was behind me — a sickisii ness came over me — everything danced M 3 before 
i66 THE HISTORY OF 
besore my sight ^and I became insensible yen to Sir Charles Beaufort. When I recovered, I Sound mysels in his arms — he had chased my temples with the hun gary ivater k had a plied t o my nose a little while before, and it recalled my Scattered senses -- 
‘ How arc you, my angel ?’ with an animated tenderness — ‘ The dews of the night, I fear, have occasioned foine Sudden chill — lean upon my arm — let me Support you to the summer house.’ I obeyed in silence,, and we entered the room — A pause ensued — our wices were choked with our tears — At length I recollected that I might be missed — “I must leave you. Sir Charles, ” cried I, for the preservation of your own Secret — it is necessary that I should return to the house.” ‘ Ah !’ Said he, ‘ will 
you 
LLIZA WARWICK, le f 
you leave me in despair? and can you oo without giving me one ray of hope I — If I was dear to you — if I could obtain Srom you Such an assurance — what an enviable situation Snould I be in !■ — ah 1 how happy would you make your beausort!’ “Dear to me! Sir Charles — if that, Sir, can give you comfort, be assured you are dear to me.’^ ‘ But Temple, ’ replied he. ‘‘ Ah! name him not' — he is odious to my eyes.’’ Beaufort was all rapture — how osten did he thank me! — how often did he invoke Heaven to witness the purity and sincerity of his love! He gained a promise Srom me, that I would listen tono man' on the Subject he then addressed me, till his return — I gave it cheerfully, and with alh my heart. He cut off a ringlet of my hair, which had got loose by the wind, with his own Sciffars, and vowed it should M 4 never. 
i68 THE HISTORY OF 
never be Separated from his bosom. Thus did he delay my return to the house, till it was absolutely too late for me to consent to remain longer. The dreadful moment then approached, and we were obliged to bid each other adieu. how frequently we parted! Again he would' return, and throw. himself between me and the path I pursued to get out of the grove. In short, my‘lord, I tore myself Srom him — and at that instant it ap r peared as if the mortal and immortal part of me had Separated for ever. I reached the house more dead than alive. — 1 fiew to my apartment — I there threw mysels on my knees, and implored the Omnipotent Power to preserve Sir Charles, and to take me under his gracious' protection. Some one rapped at my door — I aficed, who was there? — I knew the duke’s voice — He readily Sound'admittance; 
ELIZA WARWICK:. 
tance; and he kindly reproved me fof my long absence from the dancers — ho Said, he had come to my closet before; but as I did not fpeal he would not dijiurh me thinking I perhaps chose to be alonei He then desired me to return with him to the Saloon, which I could not obje<5f: to — and I entered it with a blushing consciousness;; was a sensation, however, more agreeable than the one I pos seffed on quitting it. 
Col. temple’s eyes penetrated my Soul— — could not bear them — He Said very low to me, that there was something out of that room extremely fascinating; for I seemed to forget to return when I once left it. A look of indignation contained my reply. He Seemed disturbed, and could hardly hear me Speak,, or See me move, .with common patience. He was jealous 
1^0 THE HISTORY OF 
5/ old me; then eyed m.d. 
significantly, and alked. If he reason fo be jealous of anything? I assured hinr I did not know of any right he had to be jealous of me — that I was perfectly indifferent towards him — and that I thought him both unkind and impolite to dwell on a Subject: that he knew I hated. He bowed, and left me — and I avoided him ior the remainder os the baulk 
In about a week from that night, Beau vafise and Temple received letters from Sir Charles Beaufort; they contained fare wels to both, and to Say, that ere they could reach Fairy hill he expected to tread foreign ground. The Duke read' to me aloud Some passages of his; and paused upon that in which he was charged to offer Mrs. Heber and his lovely ward the best and tenderest wishes of his heart. 
beauvarise 
ELIZA WARWICK. 171 
eeauvarise Smiled — he took my hand — # Is not this a presuming wretch, my dear Eliza I was in a universal tremor — I answered, ‘ No, my Lord.’ Ha 1” 
cried he, “would you accept the tender ness he offers ?” ‘ Surely, my Lord, if 
you have mo objection,.. I would with pleasure.’ He Snatched me to his heart — “No, my dear timid creature. So far from raising one objection to it, I would become my nephew’s advocate — Does he require one in that bosom ?” ‘ Ah! no, ’ cried I, the tears Sallingfast Srom my eyes, ‘ I am presumptuous enough, my dear guardian, to love him, next to you, better than any man in the world “Continue to do So, ever loved Eliza! Beaufort is a noble fellow — lie has Some faults, I will allow; but they are of that kind which his youth only can be taxed with — his heart is a good one — and I never met ■ with 
rya THE HISTORY OF 
with a man of stronger natural sense, or one who could have done more credit to his education.” He changed the Subject.. I Soon after quitted his closet more' happy than vrords can express. 
^ Ah !’' Said’ I, ‘ I am permitted to love' this amiable man — nay, beasivarise commands me to do So.’ I laid open to Jennet the situation of my heart, concealing only from her the private interview I had' with Sir Charles. She Seemed very much affected at my relation; and I could plainly perceive that he was one of the last men she would have chosen for my husband. Whether it was Some private anecdotes she had heard of him in that county, that prejudiced her, or whether it resulted from her own penetration, I know not; but certain it is, she conceived towards him an insuperable disgusti ' She 
ie LI Z A W A R: W I e K. j 73 
. She was a woman of infinite sense and de jicacy, and her.sentiments of virtue and honour were not inferior to those of famed Xucrece. She told me, to conftder how very young L was that Sir Charles beau fort would in all probability see women more of his own age, and more lovely than I could pretend to be — that men were never conjiant — and that young ladies charafle .rifiics should be always prudence and reserve. I sighed at the truth of her ob dervations, and promised her I would never do anything without her advice and. approbation. 
As I left Jennet, 'I met Col. Temple — He took my hand — ‘‘ miss Warwick, I beg of you to favour me for five rpinutes .with your company in the little drawing-room — there sis no one there, and I have Jomething of conseguence to Say to you.’’ 
‘ If 
, %74 the HISTORY OF 
^ If Col. Temple, ’ replied I, ■* is going to reassume the old Subject, I neither can nor will listen to him.' 
No, ” Said he, upon my honour, mot a word of my own pashon shall you hear; but I have a matter of Some consequence to communicate, which will, I have no doubt, give you pleasure — Come, tcome, we have no time to lose.” 1 sol stowed him into the little drawing-room; when he. Seating me, and placing a chair '■near mine, thus began t 
When Sir Charles Beaufort first Saw ‘you, lovely Eliza! he told me he had Seen in you the only woman that could .unake him happy — he described you with all the eloquence of love, forgetting that 'w’'e had all beheld you, at the Same time, .and became your .admirers— — 
for 
ELIZA WARWICK. 17^. 
for me, I stopped not at admiration' — * I looked — I listened — and I loved — Nay, no interruption — shall no more plead my own cause, nor have I any Selfish view in desiring this tete-a-tete. You know, amiable miss Warwick, that I behaved ..ungenerousty to mysiriend — I disregarded the confidence he had placed in me, and dared to disclose to you the Secret of my Soul — Beaufort overheard me — he .reproached me with want of honour — I pleaded guilty to the Severe accusation, shecause i merited it, in the point he alluded to — He pitied, and reinstated me in his esteem — I promised, as Some re compence for my baseness, to forward his Suit with you — and he has now put my friendship to the trial.” At these words he drew from his pocket a letter directed to me — Here, charming Eliza!” coi. tinued he, pale and trembling — here 
is 
THE HISTORY OF 
is a tender billet from the man you love hers an admirable Sellow — he is a man of honour — Read it, and do me the honour to intrust me with your answer.” Col. Temple arose, bowed, and was leaving me, when I caught hold os his arm — ‘ Ah! my sriendv cried I, ^ pity my youth — my inexperience— — imprudence! Take from me this dangerous • letter — Why all this mystery, if no harm is intended me .^ The Duke knows I regard Sir Charles Beaufort, and he is pleased with me for acknowledging it — He has Surther desired me to love him for his Sake' — Wh)^^ then, this clandestine proceeding? No, Sir — I can never consent to it — If .you insist on my keeping this packet, I will do So; but, rest as sured, I wdll immediately show it to my guardian and Jennet — never will I again experience Such reproaches as .my heart. 
made 
ELIZA WARWICK, iy; 
made me besore,,, when I yielded to your friend’s request of meeting him in private.’ Col. Temple was petrified with astonishment — He gave me time to recollect mysels — and Snatching up the letter, which I had thrown down, I put it in my pocket— — ‘ is very well, Sir, * cried I; ^ I have taken my resolution Do not ruin beausort Sor loving you, ’* exclaimed he. ‘ By no means, Colonel Temple — I will only be convinced shat my honour, my innocence, are not con spired against.’ Saying this, I lest him abruptly. Now, my Lord, how am I to describe what passed within my heart? — I cannot attempt it. I held in my hand a renewal os vows which had before given me Such pleasure — I held this letter, however, undetermined whether or not to break the Seal — I will show it to she Duke, ’ I exclaimed — ‘ he will no’t vol. I. N be 
i; ^8 THE HISTORY OF 
; be angry, for the sake of my ingenuouf ness — but first of all I will carry it to Jennet, and confess the whole affair I stew to her apartment — I shed many tears, and acknowledged the interview I had had with Sir Charles. I then presented 'her with the unopened letter 1 had re tceived; and, after relating my conversation with .Temple, I ashed her how I should proceed? It is, not in the possibility of words to express how shocked she was at my narration of the grove adventure — She shuddered at my danger — 'she blessed Heaven for my escape. Beaufort appeared to her in the light of a Seducer, and she Seemed to execrate the minute that first presented him to my sight. Ah! my God! have I not had tcason to lament it also! 
Jennet tenderly Sympathised with me 
in 
ELIZA WARWICK. 
179 
in bewailing the ad: of imprudence which had given Sir Charles beausort reason to suppose me an easy conquest— — how ^ever, encouraged my repentance, and caresully avoided throwing me into despair — She painted to me, in strong and lively colours, the dangers I had exposed mysels to — and made me, for the first 'time, susped that the most ungenerous advantage might have been taken of it — Some merit, then, was his due, I thought — but, alas! he only wished, at that time, to make an impreshon on my heart — he well knew that an early one in his favour, attended with a confidence, which his behaviour that night was calculated to finspire, would do more for him, when I .became of an age to return his passion • tenderness, than all his rhetoric, at a more advanced period. 
N 2 
Jennet 
io THE HISTORY OF 
Jennet advised me to repair to the' Duke, and to unbosom myself to him with the Same unreserve I had shown towards her; but I felt I know not what at the idea, which for a long time made rne irresolute. At length her arguments prevailed; and I lest her, to Seek beau varise. 
I found him in his closet — I approached him with Sear and awe — I thought he looked graver than usual — My fancy Suggested a thousand horrid ideas — but he Soon dishpated them, by ashing me, with a Smile, if I wanted anything that he could oblige me with? I was unable to Speak, but threw my arms around his neck as he Sat, and Sobbed aloud. He pulled me gently on his knee, and clasp ed me in his arms — “What is it that thus afflidis my child? Why this Sorrow? 
Does 
ELIZA WARWICK. ii 
.Does my Eliza doubt of my love? Can she doubt of my readiness to Serve her ?’* 
^ Oh! no, no, my Lord; but I am unworthy of that love — I have deceived you in an artful manner — and I am now come, my guardian, my protestor, my all that’s good, to beg your forgiveness, and to make atonement for my crime.’ He would not Suffer me to accuse myself thus, but begged me to treat him as a friend — declared he would prove himself one, and that my confidence should not be misplaced. 
I then began — I concealed nothing from him — assured him the reproaches .of my heart were very bitter — and concluded by giving him the letter, and telling him of the conversation I had with Colonel Temple. ‘ And now, my dear N 3 guardian. 

HE HISTORY OF 
guardian, you do not absolutely hate your poor unworthy child, ’ cried I. 
‘‘ No, my Eliza !” Said he, you arc as dear to me as ever — I admire the amiable innocence and Sensibility' of your Soul — I never rejedied a penitent yet — and I trust I never shall — You were faulty only in one respeft, my love — that was when you endeavoured to deceive me in your meeting with Sir Charles — I will not dwell upon the indelicacy os that — your youth and simplicity prevented your viewing it in any light injurious to prudence — but the event demonstrates, that Sir Charles blinded you with a show' of friendship, when he really felt a very dis ferent Sentiment for you * therefore that must teach you, my dear Eliza, to be ever on your guard against the persua sions of a man. As for this letter, what 
arc 
ELIZA WARWICK. 
are we to do with it, my little friend?' Shall I throw it in the fire continued he, laughing, “or shall I indulge your ’ curiosity with a sight of its contents first I blushed — Come, come, ’^ answered he, I See you do not care for the poor fellow So here it goesand he made a motion with’his hand, as is he really intended it for the stailies. Without knowing what I did,. I caught his arm — he laughed out, and embraced me with affection -- ^ Here, Eliza, ” Said he, “take it — it is with my consent and approbation you peruse this billet — and what makes me inexpreshbly happy, is, the prospedt I have of giving to Sir Charles Beaufort So excellent and lovely a bride as my Eliza Warwick will be. I shall; take no notice of this affair in my letter to my nephew — nor shall I mention it to Mr. Temple — So you may acton that N 4 occasion 
; 84 the history OF 
occasion as you will.*’ I threw myself at his feet, and blessed him a thousand times: he raised me to a Seat with much tenderness, and lest me to read the delightful letter I was again possessed os. 
I cannot give you the copy os it, niy Lord — I burnt it long since, with many others, which merited no other fate — Happier had I been, if the dangerous and charming language they contained had reached no Surther than my sight; but, alas! there was a Satal infedtion in all he wrote, or Spoke, that ever found its way to my heart. 
Col. Temple reproached me frequently for this adt of confidence towards my guardian and Jennet, and once muttered that he could wijlo I might not repent it. I told him, that, let things happen as 
they 
ELIZA WARWICK. 185 
they might, I never should regret having done my duty — that, if a breach with Sir Charles was to be the consequence, I should be Sorry Sor it, but that the idea os having acted well would in a great measure Support me under Such an afflic^ yion. I gave him, at the Same time, a letter for his friend, which beauvarise and Jennet had both approved of, wherein I mentioned the whole affair— — the horrid sensations I endured at having acted in So clandestine a manner — congratulated him on the countenance the Duke afforded him on this occasion — and ended with begging him to believe my regard for him was invariable. 
I waited impatiently for an answer to this letter — One month rolled on without a line from Sir Charles — another came and went — and still no news of him. 
The 
i86 THE HISTORY OF 
The Duke, in order to divert my ideas,, continually had balls at his own house, and carried me to those places of amuse ment which the county afforded. We went to the races at Richmond — I found the place and company agreeable; and Sir charles’s neglect was osteri forgotten. I was much admired — my hand on a ball night was considered as a prize worthy of contention Among the gentlemen of Yorkshire, who prosefied themselves my lovers, were two, whose characters entitled them to my esteem,, had not my gratitude Sor their disinterested conduct: concerning me exacted Srom me the highest friendship. 
Sir James Millmant was a man of large fortune — He was thought handsome, and; was certainly Sensible, and much accomplished — He paid his addresses to me in 
form. 
ELIZA WARWICK. is, 
form, alked me of the Duke, and begged him to employ the interest he had with ' me in his favour. My engagement to Sir Charles beausort was the only circumstance that could have prevented beau varise from recommending to me Sir James as a lover. I resused to listen to his proposals, and he was dismiffed witli great reluctance on his part. 
Mr. warley’s possessions were not inferior to Sir james’s — He applied in the same honourable manner to the Duke,, ■assuring him my heart was all he Set a value on ^ and entreated, at the Same lime, that he would not think os bestowing with me any Sortune, since I was already much Superior to his hopes, and stir above all pecuniary advantages. The Duke thanked him Sor his generous offers, but pleaded my extreme youth, and 
his 
ts8 THE HISTORY OF 
his having other prospedts in view some, as an excuse Sor his and my resusal 
Mr. Warley, who was all amiablenels, had certainly engaged my affections, had I Seen him before I did Sir Charles — His person was elegant, and, Seemed the peculiar favourite of the Graces; they played about him in every gesture, in every action— — was no accomplishment he did not, as a man of Sashion, excel in — He was remarkably Sensible; and, with a gentleness os voice and manner, no less lively and humorous. Mr. Warley did not take his dismiffion in the Same manner as Sir James Millmant — he haunted me wherever I went and was for ever Sounding in my ears he Should love me to the lajt moment of his life; yet, ” would he Say, “do not make yourself uneasy — go on — refuse me — you have my consent.. to 
ELIZA WARWICK. 189 
to do So, is you do not prefer me to every other man — Only Suffer me to See you — to be near you — to render you Sometimes little Services — In short, look upon me as a Sriend — I will ever be one to you — and in my heart an ardent and sincere lover.” We Soon returned to Fairy hill, accompanied by a large party from Richmond. 
One night, as we were coming from a lady’s house, a few miles from the duke’s, where we had been dancing, Mrs. Heber complained of a violent pain in her head. She was put to bed Soon after in a high fever. I Sat up with her. •she was delirious. The next morning her physicians pronounced her III imminent danger; and 1 lamented my fate, on my being about to lose So valuable a friend. She continued a week in this 
Situation 
190 THE HISTORY OF 
situation, and > on the ninth, day expired In my arms. 
My God! my God! how shocked: : was! — So Sudden, So unexpetsted, was her "loss! — and at a time, too. So melancholy! — just as her only Son had arrived in •england, after an absence of three years, .with his regiment. 
Mrs. Heber was of a good*family in "the West of England. She married an .amiable and handsome Officer, who had the crime of poverty to be urged against shim, and which was too atrocious a one ever to be forgiven by Mrs. hebcr’s pa f rents. Her own fortune, hovcever, she enjoyed independently of her family; and this her honourable husband had fettled upon her before he would make isimself master of her hand. She had 
', oue 
ELIZA WARWICK. 191 
one Son by him. aster many years of happiness, they parted for ever — he was ikilled in the last war, and she was left a .really disconsolate widow. She retired into Yorkshire Soon after, and her Son entered into the army. beauvarise made him a present of his commishon, and employed shis interest to Serve him. 
Mrs. Heber often used to Speak of sher ■past life with an emotion of which I •partook, and of her Son's being So Sooa to return to her .maternal arms with a pleasure that Seemed to .compensate for all her past inquietudes — but the abrupt hand of Death interposed, and put a si vjial stop to all her hopes and fears. 
My close attendance upon my good. Mrs. Hfeber loon gave me the fever which shad deprived her of life — a fever So contagious 
Tgz 
THE HISTORY OF' 
tagious in itself, that hundreds were at that time expiring of it in the North of England. The shock her death had given to my Spirits, and the fatigue I underwent in sitting up with her at nights, prepared me, as it were, to re -- ceive it with all its violence — I grew very ill — I wandered continually. Beauvarife Seldom lest my bedside. In my moments of delirium I called Srequently on my guardian to Save me, and osten prophesied that I should want his fatherly pro tedsion. The duke’s agitation at Such times would be dreadful. My 'youth, and the extreme innocence os diet I had always been accustomed to, and which on no account beauvarise would ever Suffer me to deviate from, enabled me, at length, to shake off this horrid, this fatal disease, and most unexpectedly a turn was perceived in me for the better. 
- As 
ELIZA WARWICK. 193 
As I began to sit up, and gain strength, 1 observed the Duke was not So osten in my apartment as I expected. I ashed Jennet for him, but she always evaded my question. He would now and then look in upon me; and, as my room was darkened, I could not iterceive that he was obliged to be Supported until he gained my bed. He would then sit by me for a few minutes, and leave me as shon as'poshhl^* One whole day, however, passed, and 1 Saw nothing of him. Upon my inquiring the caiise, Jennet told me he had a jught cold., which confined him to his apartment. Another went ever, and he did not appear. My heart misgave me, and I believed that Jennet had not discovered to me the truth. She often absented herself from me, as I was then well able to walk about my chamber; and it was in one of those absences 
vol. I. O that 
194 the history OF 
that one of the maid fervants of theshoufe came in, to know if I wanted anything? “Yes, vi(stoire, ’’ cried I, I want to Speak a few words to you.” The girl was pleased to be made of Soifnuch consequence, and she drew near me with readiness and pleasure. iby the questions I ashed her, and from her simplicity, I learned a, dreadful Secret — that her Lord was ill of the Same disorder I had recovered from, and that he was then thought to be in imminent danger. ' Well, go, ” cried I, “. do mot .stay longerand I rewarded'her, though she had told me the worst news si had. ever .heard in my dise. When she was gone, I threw my sels on my knees — “Ah! my.dod, ” exclaimed I, “.now is the time, now is the rtime, that I shall need your assistance— — Eliza! wretched orphan! what is icoshecome.of.thee.! — Ah! Spare tom, 
for 
ELIZA WARWICK. 195 
for pity^s Sake Spare to me, my dear guardian — Take all — but leave me him and Jennet.” 
Jennet Soon after came into me; it was near bedtime, and she entreated me in a voice interrupted by her sighs to let her undress me, and to go to my repose. I Suffered her to do as she pleased, and I got into bed. She Sat by me for Some time, in the course of which she endeavoured to suppress her Sobs, when, thinking me asleep, she retired from my apartment. 
Ah !” cried I, jumping up, he is dying, and they will not give me the comfort of taking a last farewell from his dear lips — 1 will go — I wnll see him once more — I will beg him to bless his poor child — I will take a last kiss — Ah j can O 2 1 think 
196 THE HISTORY OF 
I think os it, and live! — I shall take it laji look — Oh! my guardian! my friend! — and am I indeed to lose you !” I threw mysels out of bed — I hurried on a Sew things — and, taking up a light that was lest in my room, with quick steps I took the way to beauvarise’s apartment. As I went through an antechamber that led to it, I Saw Mr. Warley and Colonel Temple in, deep conversation. I drew near them. They started back at Seeing ihe. Mr. Warley. took hold of my hand -- ■^he ashed me whither I was going? “To the Duke, ” answered I. ‘ Ah !’ no, ’ cried he; ‘ allow me, dear miss Warwick, to persuade you to return to your own room.’ .Dol. Temple, in the meanwhile, shut the door. 1 fell upon my knees in an agony os Sorrow — I prayed, I entreated them not to oppose my ipclinations — I pointed to m, y head, and 
begged 
ELIA WARWICK, 
begged them to consider that — then to my heart, and assured them it would break, if I was not permitted to See him. Mr. Warley, with a look of compassion and respedt, laised me; and, after endeavouring to reason me out of my desire to no purpose, led me to the duke’s chamber. I walked in, to the amazement of his physicians, and every other individual' in the room; and with treni blins: limbs I reached the bed. beauva rise, who had heard an exclamation, and my name pronounced, put back the curtain with his hand; and, as soon as be Saw me, he called out, ‘ Ah! my Eliza! this was not well done His voice overcame me — Ah! my dear guardian !” cried I, do I really hear you Speak! Has Heaven been pleased to attend to my prayers! — Oh! my Lord, do not command me to leave you — I am well — O 3 indeed 
.198 THE HISTORY OF 
indeed I am — and can taste no repose, unless I am permitted to watch by you.’* He took my hand — he kissed It — he prayed me to be composed — and, if I loved him, to consider that my health was the first cbjed: of his care. 
Jennet made it her request that I should not Sit up that night; and, with a heart .bounding with pleasure to find he was yet alive, I yielded to her entreaty, and retired to my own apartment. Sleep did not visit me, nor was I Solicitous Sor her presence, lest a much dreaded calamity should happen in that interval of insensibi lity. I arose with the day, which I fancied would never dawn — I dressed myself entirely, and crept to my guardian’s room. He was asseep — So were all his attendants, in their chairs. I pulled off my ssippers, lest I should disturb him, and walked 
Softly 
ELIZA WARWICK, ig^ 
fbftly to his bedside — I there Sat down on the ground, and leaned my head against one of the posts — tears fell in torrents down my face, and I lifted up my heart to God to beseech' his protection of my truest, - dearest, best friend. In about an hour the Duke stirred — he called to his valet for drink — I arose, - ^ and gave it to him^he didmot know me — he Said / tvas a guardian spirit, that came to warn him hence — ‘^ Oh! no, my Lord, ” cried I, “I am your own Eliza, the poor orphan whom you have loved.” 
‘ Yes, yes, ’ Said he, ‘ I know you have assumed her fomi, for in that you could best converse with me.’ I ashed Dr. 
D -- -- what he thought of his patient — 
I besought him to tell me with candour, for I could better bear by degrees his loss, than to hear Suddenly I had Sustained it. He looked at me with compashon, O 4 and 
200 THE' HISTORY OF 
and Said, ‘ compose yoursels, my dear young lady — Prepare for the worst — My candour (since you do exadf it) bids me inform you, that in a very few hours your 
guardian wilp -- He paused, and hu 
Hianely turned Srom me to wipe his eyes. The current of my tears Seemed at that moment to be stopped — my blood congealed — and I hurried Srom him to conceal my emotions. Ah! my Lord, what emotions! — You know what I owed to beauvarise — you know how I loved him ■* — and him I beheld expiring besore me 1 -- -- -- Good God! it was thy will. 
I returned immediately to the chamber which contained my most precious trealsire — I placed myself at the head of his pillow — I considered it as the last Sad 
attendance 
‘ELIZA WARWICK. igi 
attendance I should pay him. While he stepped, I kissed his loved face, and bathed it with the tears os affliction— — looked on myself as the child os Sorrow, and the outcast of comfort — My grief lay heavy at my heart, and my sighs were 
sighs of despair oh! when I look 
back to that day — that fatal day — my Soul sinks to the earth — I experience the most 
dreadsul pangs -- -1 tremble at the idea 
of going on — yet. Lady Huntley, your commands shall be obeyed. 
bcauvarise awoke after a steep of Some 
hours — He called Dr. D -- -, who went 
to him — “Sir, ” Said the Duke, “how long do you think it will be before this heat entirely consumes me? — I should like to See my nephew — to give him a most Sacred charge — Do you imagine I can Survive many days — many hours? — 
. Could 
ao2 THE HISTORY OF 
.Dould he be Sent for time enough to receive my last injundtions The amiable physician hesitated — yet begged him keep his mind undijiurbed\ that at the time Be pronounced him in danger, there were jiill hopes from his having enduredi his illness fo long; and advised that Sir Charles Should he sent for, but entreated Mm not to reflefi upon what he Should say to him, before his arrival; he told him, ■there would be a turn in his dforder that day, and that everything depended on bis composure. 
The Dodfor went to Col. Temple, and told him of his conversation with the Duke — ‘ yet, ’ Said he, ‘ I have So little hope of his grace’s recovery, that I should think it best not to dispatch your express for Sir Charles till two hours hence — at six o’clock the duke’s fate. will be determined. 
ELIZA WARWICK. 203 
. With what anxiety, with what perturbation, I waited for that time, I shall not tell you; Suffice it to Say — it came too Soon, 
About five o’clock the Duke called for his Eliza.” I was sitting at the head of his bed, and directly arose, and came forward to the side towards which he lay. He then ashed for Jennet and Col. Temple; they also attended: when, raising: himsels, he stretched forth his hand, to receive mine:. 
My dearest child!” cried he, in a composed and audible voice, ‘‘the hour is now come when the great God has plcased to call me hence — Grieve not for my departure — Think more of the lessons of virtue I have given you, than the endearing caresses you have received from 
me — » 
ac. the HISTORY OE 
me — the first will ever be my Substitutes; whereas the latter, though pleasing, could never be depended on— — me as one Setting out on a long journey, not as a parent dead to you Sor ever — and be 'persuaded, that, if you continue to walk in the paths of innocence and goodness, we shall once more See each other, in those mansions os the, blessed where grief and Sorrow never enter, where death will not intrude, and where we shall no more be Separated — Ah! my Eliza I’"* throwing his arms about me as I kneded, “suppress these tears — give not way to your affliction — in Sir Charles Beaufort you will find a protector — a guardian — a husband— — bequeath you to him as 'the choicest and most valuable gist 1 have 
to leave him -- Jennet, ” continued he, 
give me your hand — Grieve not Sor me though we have been long sincere 
friends — 
ELIZA WARWICK. 205 
friends — Comfort your dear charge, and guard her virtue Srom the Snares, of designing 
men -- -- Col. Temple, I have 
one favour to alk of you — let your friend know that It is my, dying request to him to make this charming creature happy — Lexpedt she will be his wife — : but tell him, if he dares to insult, or plot against, her innocence — if he stands not forth her protector in .every fense of the word — ■ may Heaven avenge her wrongs, and in^ fiidt on him every curse Shave provided 
largely for her by my will — in the mean time, she has unlimited credit on 
my banker -- -- It is my advice that She 
retires from Fairy hill, and returns to the house she possessed in Surry during her childhood — there will her innocence be more Secure, more sheltered, until she 
is united to Sir Charles Beaufort you 
have my good wishes, Col. Temple ^ 
and 
206 THE HISTORY OE 
• and my earnest entreaty is, that you will never behold patiently my Eliza wronged 
-- r.he grew faint — he fell back 
upon his .pillow' -- 1 thought he was 
gone; and, clasping my hands together, 'I shrieked with violence — He again arose 
he put his finger on his mouth, and ■ raised.his e)'es to Heaven, as is to admonish me to bear its decrees in Silent resig oiation — then, beckoning, me to come to his arms, he threw them round me— —, his head upon my .shoulder — and,, - 
• a deep sigh, breathed out his Soul 
for ever. -- -- -- -- -- -- .dh! my Lord 
—.. my breaking heart! -- -- -- -- 


- W 

“As' Soon as his blessed Spirit had winged its flight, husbands were mnloosed that clalped me to his bosoin, .and 1 was torn 
from 
ETIZA WARWICK 2si7? 
from him, fpeechless, though not insen sible. I endeavoured, I struggled, to hold him still; but the Superior strength of Col. Temple Soon disengaged me from ” shim. They carried me into another apart utient, and laid me on a sopha;; Dr. 
, D -- -- ordered an attending Surgeon to 
take Some blood from my arm. They, administered.volatiles — they preached patience — but, alas! they had a Soul to deal with. So Sensible to the distress it was overwhelmed, in, that at the moment it bade defiance to all their cool philosophy. 
< Could I, my Lord, describe the horrors of my situation at that time, I .would.. Tpare your humanity the recital— — .ah! how inadequate is my pen; to Such a jtalk! — or Indeed what pen, what tongue, r.could do justice to the.sheenness of my .anguish! 
: .Dr..d. 
2o8 the history of 
Dr. D -- -- Spoke much to me — he 
tried to excite my tears — he wished to hear me Say Something — but I continued absorbed in the most dismal restedlions — I could not command one Syllable — The duke’s last groan vibrated on my hearing — My eyes rolled around, as is to find him whom they had ever been accustomed to view wdth delight — My heart beat Isigh with Sear and horror; and if I were to compare it to the stutterings of a poor hare within a Sew minutes os becoming a wretched’ victim to its merciless persecutors, your Lordship may form Some judgement of its painsul.emotions. 
Jennet, whose Sorrow had rendered her unable to ashst me. Sat weeping by the corse of our generous friend — but when she heard of the condition I was m., she offered to present herself before me. Dr. 
D- -- -- 
WARWICK. 209 
D -- -- consented to it, hoping that the 
sight of her affliction might move me to Vent my grief in as audible a manner. She entered the room where I lay — she advanced totvards me, bathed in tears, and threw herself at my feet. She was the only object I could have regarded at that instant — her distress was ever persua sive, ever eloeiuent, vv^ith me — and I loved her better than all the world beside. I arose on Seeing her — I looked at her for a while in the greatest agony — I wiped the drops that Sell from her eyes with my apron, and kissed away those that Succeeded them — At length. Nature, overpowered with the terrible conflict it endured, relieved my labouring heart with a plentisul shower of the bitterest tears I had ever shed before. From that hour my grief was less dangerous; but, ah! could anything have been more exqui vol. I. P Site! 
SIO THE HISTORY OF 
site! The lenient hand of Time, my Lord, has rendered it less violent; but never do I pass over these Scenes in idea without experiencing the Same sadness I then endured. I was put to bed Soon after in a Second raging fever. 
For three days after the fatal one I have been describing, I was continually delirious; my disorder attacked my head entirely, and there were little hopes of my recovery, from the .extreme weakness of 
my situation. To Dr. D -- -- ssdll am 
1 indebted for the prolongation of a life which I would with pleasure have yielded into the almighty’s hands,, had it been his will to have taken it. Ah! my Lord, it was reserved for an affliction far Superior to that which I have already painted. 
On the fourth day of my illness, I was 
more 
ELIZA WARWICK. 2n 
more reasonable — I knew Jennet, and most os my attendants — I Sometimes, indeed, ashed Sor the Duke; but memory too Soon reassumed her place, and convinced me that I had Seen him for the last time. The idea shocked me — the lafi time would I frequently rej.>eat to myself — Good God! I was not prepared Sor Such a stroke! — I did not take my leave of him — I must See him once more— — all events I will attempt it. On the sisth day, I ashed Jennet to let me visit beau varise apartment — “There is a melancholy consolation in the thought, my dear friend, ” added I, which I am Sure you will not deny to Sorrow like mine — I shall be composed — I shall be easier after it — IS you love me, dear Jennet, do not resuse me this Savour.” My manner Surprised her more than the request — there was an inexpreshble Something in my P 2 countenance 
212 THE HISTORY OF 
countenance which (as she asterwards told me) she did not like — a look of anguish — a trait os despair — ihy eyes were heavy, and fixed on the ground — a deathlike paleness had taken possession of every ■ feature — His true, my illness had been a long one; but grief only could have given me So pallid a hue — it was not the usual 'languor which accompanies sickness— — was a fixed melancholy — a gnaw >ing vulture of The mind, which had preyed on the roses of my cheeks — She evaded 'iny request — she Seemed to dread a re -- newal of it — I theresore desisted from importuning her further on the Subject; determined, however, to accomplish the design of Seeing my guardian once more. Isle next day I was permitted to walk about my apartment; and I endeavoured to appear chearsul, in order to give no xuspicion of my intention. I retired that 
ELIZA WARWICK. 213 
night early to bed, under the pretence of being overcome with steep. Jennet, wdio had watched by me constantly, was prevailed on by my entreaty to go to rest Soon, as she really required repose, from the fatigue she had undergone, both of mind and body; and in her place I had desired that Vidtoire should be permitted to sit up in my chamber. I struck my watch at eleven, twelve, and one — I then thought it time to execute my project: — I put back the curtain with my hand, and observed that the maid was fast asteep — I stole from my bed, put on a few things, wrapped cloak about me, - and, taking up the light that burnt on the hearth, went to the duke’s apartment. I pasted along with fear, lest I should be discovered; but when I arrived at the door of his chamber I was Seized with horror — I shivered — a cold dew overspread P 3 my 
214 the history of 
my face — and I rested my aching head 
against the wainscot“ “!” cried: 
I to mysels, after a short pause— — “this be the room which I have entered with pleasure So often? — Why these trembling limbs? — Why this universal dread? — Can it be the image of Death which I fear to behold? or Is it the altered, the pale face of vas guardian? — Ah! my dear guardian !” continued I, in a stood of Sorrow — ah! my best Sriend! — “I cannot Sear to See thee — Death may have robbed thee of those charming Smiles which comforted the heart of an orphan, but still she must behold thee with reverence and love.’’ 
My Spirits returned after these restec tions, and I entered his chamber with confidence — I walked up to the bed — I Saw nothing — 1 looked into his closet — 
the 
ELIZA WARWICK. 215 
the object I Sought was not there -- -1 
stopped — I listened — a deathlike silence prevailed throughout — ‘‘ Where can he be!” Said I, in despair — Surely they have not conveyed him to his cold lodging already! — Ah! too certainly they have — and I shall never See him more.’’ I clasped my hands together in agony — I called on the dear, the Sacred name of beauvarise — My voice echoed through the vaulted roos, and the name of beauvarise resounded in Sainter accents to my woe. My horrors returned — I thought I beheld the form of my guardian — I Saw him struggle with his torments — I heard 
his dying groan — I heard him shriek —. 
My Lord, my Seelings at that moment beggar all description. 
I hastened, with trembling steps, from that Suite of apartments,, where every P 4 thing 
2i6 the history of 
thing added to my fear and dread, anti I was making towards my own chamber, when 1 refletsted that perhaps they had lain the Duke in the Saloon. The wish of Seeing him once again was strong enough to overcome my terrors, and I advanced to the Saloon — I opened the door with caution, and on my entrance I was shocked with the apparatus of Death — The room was hung round with black; and in the middle, upon forms, was raised — oh! how shall I call him? — my protedor, parent, friend — the person whom 1 loved beyond every earthly good — there he lay, unconscious of the pangs that wrung the heart of his wtetched Eliza. - On chairs Tat Several attendants, who, insensible to the horror of the Scene, had reposed themselves in the arms of steep.. The lights that were disposed about only Served to show the awful., So - lemnity 
ELIZA WARWICK. 217- 
lemnity os every object, but those which were placed on each side of the coffin discovered to my afflicted sight the deathr struck countenance of beauvarise. After a pause, in which time I had taken notice of every circumstance I have mentioned, I drew towards the corpse; and, laying my candle down, I fell on my knees before it — “You, ” cried I, wh6 have been more than a father tome — you, who have been my kind, monitor — my Sympathising friend — my Soothing comforter — you — oh beauvarise!. — deign Sroni that Heaven where you sit enthroned — deign to cast a pitying eye on the distresses 
of Eliza -- Better had it been, my 
blessed guardian, to have left me destitute, the outcast of fortune — better had it been, if you had suffered me to experience the hardships of that fate which threatened me — far better, than to have. Snatched 
sis THE HISTORY OF 
Snatched me from calamity — to have fos tered me in your bosom — and have Subjected me to Seel the greatest misfortune that can besal me — this Separation from you.” I arose — I stood Some time leaning over the side of the coshn — during which Space I kissed each dear hand of this revered, this excellent man. Exhausted,. at length,, with the excess of grief which assailed my bolbm, I threw myself on the body, and Sobbed aloud — I Spoke to him — I called on him — I proclaimed my despair — I invoked his assistance — and my senses were So entirely engrossed in the ressection of my misery, that I heard not Col. Temple enter the room. 
Temple was restless and uneasy that night — the gloom of the Scene around him had thrown over his Ipirits an unusual 

ELIZA WARWICK, 
lisual sadness — and, distiking the thought of retiring to bed, had taken leave of Mr. Herbert Some hours before, and had Saw up to read, in a room adjoining the Saloon. He imagined he had heard a noise Several times; but had disregarded it, as the mere work of fancy: at last,, my impetuous grief broke through all bounds, and the names of guardian friend,, and father,, founded evidently on his ear. 
‘ Heavens f’ Said he, ^ I hear the voice of miss Warwick I’ — He opened the door hastily, and entered — he beheld me hanging over the coffin — my cheek close to that of the dear objecst I So much lamented — my tears, which had fallen in abundance, had wet his lifeless face r his hands were grasped in mine. Col. Temple was struck with amazement at the 
sight. 
220. .THE HISTORY OF 
sight, and remained Some minutes inca -- pable of motion : at length the exclamation of ‘ Good God !’ pronounced in a loud and emphatical voice, rousedi me‘ from my miserable restedhons, and 1 quitted my reclining posture. Col. Temple then advanced to Speak to me — his wwds were rather sharp — he reproached' me with a want of piety — “first, in my regretting the will of the Most High and Secondly, in endangering my own life So rashly — he concluded by begging me to retire to my own apartment, and to leave to undisturbed repose the cold clay of the dead. 
I leaned on the coffin, as he Spoke — I Suffered him fo chide on, without interruption. When he had ended, my heart rose up against him — I looked on him at that instant as an unseeling monster — I 
considered 
ELIZA WARWICK. 221 
considered him as unworthy os my resentment — and, waving my hand to him to be gone, rcstimed my Sormer position. He approached me — ‘ miss Warwick cried he, ‘ let me implore you 'to consider your health — the thinness of your dress, your being out of bed at So late an hour aster So Severe an illness, together with the dreadsul conssidts you ex pose youisielf to in Such a melancholy Scene, must inevitably endanger that lise So precious to all that know you — Your "Jennet — do you not pity her? — what will 'she Say to this untimely visit At her name I again arose — Yes, Sir, ” replied I, I will obey you — I will preserve my 
‘lise, since it is dear to Jennet — I will ever consider her peace in jireserence to my 'Own — and for her Sake I will consent to 'retire from this Scene os Death -- but, ^ oh! my God!” continued I, turning towards 
£22 THE HISTORY OF 
wards the coffin, how can I think of bidding this object adieu for ever! — My •dear guardian H kissing his pale lips, we must part — yet I trust it will not be long ere we meet in that Heaven to which you have ever bade me look up for hope! — Ah! then, farewell! my parent! my all that is good and affectionate— — to hover over me in the day of danger — forget not your poor .Eliza — and guard her innocence.” Overcome with the exertion of my soul, I Sunk down upon his breast; and a shower of tears relieved me. Col. Temple listed .me in his arms, and was hurrying me away; but I broke from him — “Ah! Sir, ” exclaimed I, “one more embrace -- the favour is a Small one — do not resuse it to me.” My agitation prevailed, and Col. Temple permitted me to approach the coffin. My adieus were pathetic — r 
I kissed 

ELIZA WARWICK. 223 
I Listed his lips — his hands — I threw my .arms around his neck, and held him as is I meant never to unloose my hold. With difficulty I was torn from him — .and methought at that dreadsul moment 1 felt the weight of every misfortune I have.experienced since. 
The next day he was interred; and i was kept in the furthermost part of the ■house, lest I should suspedt his being carried away. My grief, if I had thought So, would no doubt have broke through .all restraint; and I should have occa .stoned to Jennet and Col. Temple much anguish and .trouble. 
In a little wstile I grew more calm, more resigned — Jennet and I would walk Lor hours, and talk of our departed friend with a Sorrow that .was peaceful; and resigned. 

1224 the history of 
signed. In a short time, I abhorred the idea os remaining longer at Fairy hill, and Jennet and I prepared Sor our return to Richmond, in Surr}^ I had many os fers Srom Several Samilies of condition, tlrat w’ere neighbours of the amiable Duke, to come and reside with them; but the Sweet and humble retreat which Beauvarife had pointed out to me, wore a thousand more charms in my imagination than all the pomp of greatness. 
'You must, no doubt, my Lord, wonder at my having written So many pages •without once mentioning the name of Beaufort; and, indeed, your surprise may be natural, when you figure to yourself .a young heart enssaved by the beauty and allurements os this very man, whom I have So long Sorborne to make the Subjedfc 'I my pen; but, at that time, I thought 
myself 
ELIZA WARWICK. 225 
myfels ill-treated by him; not a line had I received in answer to the letter I wrote him; and I consess I believed jennet’s predidlion of his inconstancy verified : Col. Temple, however, two days before my departure from Yorkshire, told me he had heard Srom Sir Charles, and ashed me if I was not impatient to share his information? — I listened to his intelligence with a kind of Sullen discontent— — did not put one question to him concerning his friend — and arose, and left the room. 
The next day I dined at Lady B -- -- ’s, 
(an agreeable woman, who was a friend of my dear guardian’s) — She had a good deal of company — amongst whom was a 
Col. asgill — he had just come from -, 
and had Seen and known beausort intimately there. He was ashed many things vol. I. about 
226 THE HISTORY OF 
about him — to all of them he replied much to the honour of Sir Charles, as a man of gallantry, and a favourite of the ladies. He then Spoke of a Lady Gertrude dorset — described her as a resplendent star that shone in that great city — and Seemed to Say, that no woman there had pretensions to wif or beauty when she appeared. He observed, no man Saw her, without feeling her power, and groaning under, it; for though her captives were numerous, yet to all she pre ^ a degree of distant reserve that threw them into despair. A lady present ashed, “if Sir Charles Beaufort was one of her admirers ?” Col. Algill answered, that he could not positively assert it, as he never heard it from himself — but that the world talked loudly of Ms being not only A LOVER, but the one moji likely to prove Juccefsful, I blushed — Something 
ELIZA WARWICK. 227 
arose in my bosom, which I could not conquer — I fancied every eye upon me — I trembled Sroiff a certain consciousness. Col. Temple Saw my consusion, and kindly endeavoured to call another Subject— — had wit and livefiness, as I have Said besore; and he Soon engaged every one to listen to and regard him alone. In the mean time, I recovered my composure, and, with one indulged sigh, vowed to forget him Sor ever. 
Behold me nowj my Lord, taking leave of the Sweets of Fairy hill — not a shrub, not a flower, but appeared interesting to me at that moment. I visited every chamber of the house — I wept — I prayed in that where the Duke had breathed his lash From thence the wildernesses, ' the lawns, the park, were repaired to — they received my farewell — And the grove, 0^2 that 
sq the history of 
that grove that had witnessed the false •vows of Beaufort, was not passed by in forgetsulness — Some tears were shed on the occasion — “Here' would I Say, I first discovered him — here he kneeled, and implored my compashon^ — there I fainted, and in his arms was I Supported’* — In short, my Lord, rerhembran.ce Somehow made that Spot Sacred to me, and I considered it „as .the altar of my most Serious engagement. 
We departed at length, and after a three days silent and melancholy journey arrived at the peaceful little dwelling which I had quitted with Such tumultuous pleasure. I will not attempt to describe our emotions when we entered it; it is Sufficient to say, that everything reminded us of the treasure we had lost, and all our affliction was renewed. Col. Temple, 
whose 
£LIZA WARWICK. 22g 
whose Sriendship I really prized, attended Us to Richmond; and, after begging leave to breaksast with us the next morning, he took his leave, overwhelmed with Sympathy at the sight of our grief. 
At this place, my Lord, we Soon regained that tranquillity of mind which time and religion could alone have repossessed us of — its rural Scenes and pro spedts^ together with the excellent library my guardian had chosen for me, occupied our whole attention — and though I could not conquer my Selfish regret, when I ressedted on the parent I had lost, yet it was a Sort of regret unattended by any turbulence of Sorrow — on the contrary, k was a refined melancholy, no' less de lightsul (from the conviction of his being happy) than it was reasonable. 
CL 
Col, 
230 THE HISTORY OF 
Col. Temple and Mr. Warley, (the latter had quitted Yorkshire for Some months,) an old lady and her daughter, were the only persons we admitted as visitors. The ladies had exeellent qualities, which attached me to them; and I siiall always preserve for them, every Sentiment of esteem. 
Mr. Warley often Spoke and wrote to me on the Subject: of his passion;; as I ever acted towards him with inge nuousness, he Soon perceived that his former Sentence was irrevocable; he therefore dropped the Semblance of a lover, and assumed that of a real and disinterested friend : the continuance of this history, however, will show that I was never absolutely rooted from his heart. 
We had been about eight months in 
Surry, 
ELIZA WARWICK. 231 
Surry, when Col. Temple, with much 
agitation, told me one day of the late 
duke’s house in grosvenor square being 
burnt to the ground, and that his will, 
and other papers os consequence were 
consumed. He Suffered much at the idea 
of my fortune’s being lest to the mercy 
of a man who had already given me reason 
to suppose he could abuse my tenderness. 
In Spite of my resolution to give 
him up, my heart still pictured Sir Charles 
beausort constant, still saithsul to his vows 
— it told me he would clear himsels -- -- 
\ 
Mistaken, silly heart!' — Ah! my Lord, it was then devoted to him — and I did not think Temple just in doubting his honour concerning me. 
Another half year rolled on in that peacesul chearsulness which innocence ever knows; and one night, as Jennet 0^4 and 
232 the HISTORY OF 
and I were sitting near the fire, she at work, and I reading to her, we were alarmed at the Sound os a carriag e ado 

vancing up the avenue. I laid down my book — I trembled — and yet I knew not why. “It is a late hour, ” exclaimed Jennet, “for a visit Srom the Colonel!” 
‘ Ah !’ cried I, ‘ Surely life brings no disagreeable tidings!’ “Fear nothing, ” 
answered she; “trust all to God.”. At that moment the door opened, and Temple entered — “Fair Eliza !” Said he, railing my hand to his lips, ‘‘ will you pardon this untimely season which I have chosen to break in upon your Solitude ?” ‘ Certainly, Sir, ’ replied I; ‘ but you 
must have Some reason’ -- -- -- True,? 
returned he; my friend is impatient to behold you aster So long an absence — and with your permishon we will give him entrance.” So Saying, without giving 
ELIZA WARWICK. 233 
ing me time to answer, he exclaimed loudly, “Entrez monfieup* — and that instant I beheld Sir Charles Beaufort at my feet. My amazement exceeded everything I can describe— — did he appear So charming! His dress was negligent — his hair was rather dishevelled — and; indeed, his whole form wore an aspedt of hurry and confusion. He Seized my hands — he held them locked in his — while his eyes were eagerly fixed in my Sace — Not a Syllable could he articulate for some minutes — At length, pressing my hands alternately to his lips and bo some, he repeated, ‘‘ My Eliza! my dear Eliza! — Good God, I thank thee.” 
‘ Rise, Sir, ’ cried I — ‘ Why all this emotion ?’ He started up — he looked at 
nie steadfastly — he paused -- -- ‘ Be Seated, 
Sir Charles, ’ continued I (with a composure 

234 
THE HISTORY OF 
posure which nothing but my pride could’ at that time have allowed me). He turned towards Col. Temple, “Do I live,, my friend! Is it to me Eliza Speaks? Is this her love } Is this the way she testifies the affedfion she hsrfelf confessed to feel Sor me? — But I See how it is — Some happier man — Alas! poor faithsul Beaufort, is this the mieeting you have So fondly Sought for!” ‘ Sir, ’ replied I,. 
‘ if you supposc’i have evec listened on the Subject of love to any other man. you are mistaken — I have always respedt ed my promise to you as Sacred — *lf you‘ have been as mindsul os your vows to tne, your heart must acquit you of perfidy — but if you have nor, appearances Speak truth.’ He fell upon his knees — I am shocked to say, my Lord, that in that posture he appealed to Heaven in the vwjt joumn manner to witness that he 
never 
ELIZA WARWICK. 235 
nez'er^ even in thought betrayed those vows — he invoked it to give him patience to support my indifference — he swore that he would relin^uijh life fame., and fortunes to be convinced for one moment of my love He stopped — he expected me to answer; but, alas! the sincerity of his looks, the Solemnity of his protestations, and, above all, the dcspair which was imprinted on his features, struck So deeply on my heart, that my pride had all forsaken me, and I was nothing more than the most weak and credulous of my Sex, He Soon observed the change of my countenance; but, taking no notice of it, he continued — 
Pardon me, miss Warwick, for having thus broken in upon your retirement — I will trouble you no longer — I am not worthy of one look — nor do you feel for 
me 
236 the HISTORY Of 
me any of that tenderness which now possesses the unhappy victim os your hatred -- -- 1 go. Madam — ‘1 leave you for 
ever — In Some' other clime will I drag on this hated existence— — own country is now no longer dear to me — that which I most prized in it is lost, to me — and I 
must become a wretched exile -- Weep 
not, charming Eliza! — do not Seem at once So cruel and So compassionate— — tears will deprive me of reason — ah! they stow not for Beaufort, but for the misery of a fellow-creature — I feel the distinction and will Spare your generosity.” 
He pressed my cold hand to his bosom— — appeared as if about to tear himself from me — and yet as if his Soul could not consent to Such a Separation — Once more he kissed my hand — his tears fell in large drops upon it — He entreated 
my 
ELIZA WARWICK. 237 
my pardon for betraying Such weakness, 
and hastily arose -- Good Jennet, ’* 
cried he, ' as he pasted her, forgive me — I cannot address you as I ought.” 
He was hurrying out — Col. Temple stew after him, and, catching hold of his 
arm, brought him again to my feet -- - 
I ventured to look at him — His eyes were suffused in tears — his whole person. W2.S a pathetic and expressive representation of the most exquisite Sorrow — Whilst he kneeled, his hands were clasped, as if imploring my pity — I could contain myself no longer — I Smiled — I reached forth, my hand to him — He Seized it with rapture -- -- What a change was here produced 
! — he was no more the image of Sorrow — he was .all glowing animation, joy, and gaiety — Sometimes, indeed, he would appear thoughtful for a moment — 
and 
238 THE HISTORY OF 
and in the course of the night I observed him to strike his forehead with his hand, as if repentant of Something that lay deep •in his heart — My own Selicity, however, made me suspedt nothing — and, above all, I could never suppose him guilty of a breach of honour. About twelve o’clock the gentlemen with great reluctance left us. 
I will pass over the many days that Sir Charles Beaufort s|tent with us in our retreat, and hasten to that important one which fixed me wretched for ever. Sir Charles, on his first appearance amongst us, begged me to settle an early day for The celebration of our nuptials; and, indeed, Seemed So extremely anxious for it, that Jennet persuaded me to consent to marry him Soon. He talked of being 
obliged to return • to - j.. ■ ■ fgr a few 
weeks, 
ELIZA WARWICK. 239 
weeks, and entreated that I might b? made his, irrevocably, before his Second .departure from England. He told me my settlements were drawing up<^that if their not being finished could make any oh’^ jefiion with me to the performance of the Aeremony.^ 'he would certainly wait., in order to give me a fatisfaflion that his honour in that cafe, could not afford me. My pride was startled — I ever detested pecuniary considerations — and I assured him that I despised what he called a fa tisfafhon — and that the Settlements not sheing, completed, or even not drawn at all, should make no alteration in the day allotted for our union. That fatal day, mylord, at length arrived — beausort told me that a clergyman, a friend of his, would perform the ceremony — and 'that friend arrived with Sir Charles, in Jiis .carriage, at the appointed .time — It 
was 
240 THE HISTORY OF 
was done privately — and Sir Charles gave us as the reason for it, and for its being kept Secret, at least for Some months, that his aunt, a Sister of his father’s, for whom he had ever entertained the highest respedi, wished him to marry the daughter of a friend of hers, wstose noble blood, as well as beauty and fortune, made her a desirable object to the old lady’s ambition — ‘‘ but, ” continued he, ‘‘ I preser my dear Eliza Warwick, in her native charms, without Splendour or friends, to Gertrude dorset, withal her titled honours and appendages, and interest at Court.” A thrilling coldness rushed tlixo* my heart at the mention of that name nay, I thought he blushed as he pronounced it — but I chid my Sancy, as daring to grow suspicious. Col. Temple tvas not present on this occasion — he had been called into Ireland Some days before, 
to 
ELIZA WARWICK. 241 
to receive the last adieu of his father, who was on the point of death, and from whom he was to inherit a large fortune. Col. Middleton assumed that day the title of my father — Ah'! my God! what a thought! 
A whble week was Spent in extreme igaiety by Sir Charles and a few of his most intimate companions — As for my part, though I thought myself happy, yet I would often wipe off Some straying tears, that would involuntarily flow from mty eyes — I 'knew not the reason, and reproached my heart for seeming until ankfuil to Heaven for the felicity I enjoyed. Sir Charleses tenderness grew every day more lively — and he would in all thirds endeavour to anticipate my wishes. His presents were the most rich and elegant that could be devised — my jewels were extraordinary sine — and every vol. I. K thing 
242 THE HISTORY OF 
thing else, either for my dress, equipage., or attendance, was magnificent beyond .description. 
We Soon removed from Surry — Sir Charles supposed that his constant resi .dence at our house would be remarked — he therefore carried me into a part of England where I was not known — and we passed in Derbyshire for a new married couple of the name of Sydney, Still I lived very privately, and Saw hardly any one except his own intimate friends who were all of his own Southeast?:. 
, The place he had chosen in Derbyshire was a charming one — The house was old — but its antique form, together with the Snade of its woods, and park, gave me a sort of veneration for my new habitation which was very pleasing. Jennet, too, liked our situation; and we were for Sometime exceedingly happy. 
ELIZA WARWICK. 243 
Two months were Spent before I heard anything of col Temple — He at last arrived — and as I stew to receive him, I was stopped by hearing high words between him and Sir Charles — — I was lltocked’ — I remained where I was — and endeavoured to learn the cause of their 'quarrel. 
^ You have injured me, * cried Temple, ^ in the nicest ix>int — you have ruined the peace of iiiy mind Sor ever V 
Is it possible, ’* answered Sir Charles, that our Sensibile comrade. Will Temple, can of a fuddeti have picked up Tuch antediluvian notions 1 ” 
^ By Heaven, Sir, ’ returned the other, ^ I am not jesting — / am a man of ho 
.nourd 
R 2 
f' Nay, ” 
""'244 the history OE 
Nay, ” answered Sir Charles, does any man dare to doubt mine ?” 
■ ‘I do, ’ Said Temple — I more than doubt it — I affirm that you are a base; betrayer — you are the ruiner os innocence.” I shuddered at the word. Sir Charles grew hoarse with passion — Mr. Temple, ” cried he, “Such another wwd, and my Sword shall cram it dovv^n your throat, ” ‘ Hold, Sir Charles, ” replied the cool Officer, I am to be bullied by no man undeii Heaven — the Sword, with; yv'hich you threaten So valiantly, shall try to revenge the harsh expressions I have used towards you— — too, claims vengeance, for the vile part you have (b meanly atsted concerning my amiable joung friend — Name, therefore, your hour^your place — I will meet you most pundlually — but first I will See Eliza.’.. 
,, ■ * -. “Never” 
ELIZA WARWICK. 214^ 
Never, returned Sir Charles — never, by Heaven !’* ‘ There you are mis ‘ taken, * answered Temple — ‘ I will See' her, though I die in the attempt — I will Speak to her — I will expose you to her in your true colours beausort was now more vehement than tvtx -- villain, fcoun dref coward., were the words that issued’ from his mouth — and my Sears So totally overcame me, that I Sell senseless on the gound. In Some time after, I Seemed' to' awake Srom a deep steep; and, gathering strength enough to^rise, I leaned against the wainscot, to Support my feeble frame: at that moment I happened to turn my head towards a window on the landing of the staircase, when I perceived Sir Charles, Col. Temple, Col. Middleton, and Mr. lawson, walking in deep conversation down the avenue: it gave me new life — I thought all had beem R 3 made 
246 THE HISTORY OF 
made up again — and, with a degree of agility which a little before I could not have assumed, I ran to jennet’s apartment, and related to her the whole of the conversation. She Seemed much shocked at it; and, after cur conferring a long time on the Subject, we, both concluded that Sir. Charles had Seduced, Some time besore, either a favourite girl of Col, temple’s, or one of his relations; and that he meant to revenge himself upon Sir Charles, by discovering the affair to me. Ah! my Lord, how injurious was this idea to the real Sentiments of col Temple! — / was the friend he wished to have Saved — I Was the unhappy cause of this quarrel. Though the Colonel had many libertine principles, he had one Sentiment which almost compensated for the want of every other virtuous one: often did he Say, that innocence wore in 
, his. 
ELIZA WARWICK. 247 
his eye So awful and lovely a garb, that he would not injure it to be made the happiest mn in the world — and never was a confidence thoroughly reposed in him, but he considered it as one of those’ engagements of honour, - too dear,, and too Sacred, ever to be abused by him. Wte imagined that Temple, since his departure from us, discovered Some treachery in his Sriend, and that he was then returned to make him Sensible os his feeling it properly : however, we comforted burselves with Supposing that Mr. Middleton and Mr.. Lawson had adjusted matters, and reconciled them, in Spite of all the Sury they had levelled against each other. Yet, my Lord, my delicacy was all alive on the occasion — every word that Col. Temple had uttered impressed me with horror — What a vile wretch '* I often exclaim, “do I cherish in * R 4 my 
248 THE HISTORY OF 
my bosom, if he could betray an inno^ cent heart, and plunge it Sor ever in guilt and wretchedness!” Ah! Heaven! little did I think that unhappy creature was myself. 
. In about an hour after the gentlemen 
had left the house, I was alarmed by the 
door of my closet’s being opened Suddenly 
and with violence — I turned about to See 
» 
who it could be that would thus intrude upon my retirement, and beheld Sir Charles Beaufort standing besore me — fury and despair painted in his countenance — his coat and stockings bloody — his hair dishevelled — and his whole, form a striking resemblance of guilt and horr ror. I Screamed aloud at the sight, and retreated Some steps from him; but he advanced towards me — caught me in his arms — and, pressing me to his breast, bi 
ms 
ELIZA WARWICK. 249 
me not be alarmed. My terror was beyond description — Air! beausort, ” exclaimed I, ‘‘ why these disordered looks? why this blood } Great God! Surely no accident?” -- ‘ You are mine, my Eliza 
!’ cried he — ^ you are now mine for ever — no cursed power can tear you from me — I have silenced the only enemy that would rebel against me — and 1 have nothing more to Sear.’ 
Silenced enemy I — What do you mean? Why Such ambiguous words? Where is your friend ?” He started Srom me. Dear Beaufort! where is col Temple?” He folded his arms, bent his eyes to the ground, and answered, ‘ Mention him no more, my love — he is gone — curse his cool heart! — Yet I once 
loved Temple -- -- But you — oh! you, ’ 
continued he, catching hold of my hand 
with 
150 the HISTORY OF 
with wildness, and looking eagerly in my face — What!’’ cried 1, trembling all’ over. ‘ Nothing — it is passed.’ He' walked from me, and threw himself breathless into a chair. At that instant Some one rapped at the door — I was unable to Speak — Sir Charles bid to come in — Col. Middleton entered— — 
Beaufort!” Said he, lose no time — change your clothes, and take short leave of your amiable wife — Con suit your sasety — your life depends upon your flight.” I flew towards Middletoii' — I fell on my knees before him — Sir, ” cried I, in an agony of grief, I conjure you to tell me, what is the matter why must Sir Charles go? whither is he to fly? where is Col. Temple? and what blood is that with which Sir Charles is covered ?” Beaufort quitted his seat, and 
ran 
ELIZA WARWICK. 25# 
ran to raise me — he led me to a chair; and, drawing one near mine, he thus began — ^ Temple insulted me — I resented it — he Swore he would relate to you a tale of me, which was as salse as it was malicious — He loved you himsels, and wanted to inspire that gentle bosom with hatred for your Beaufort, who lives but to adore you — I could not put up with Such treatment — my honour, my jealous honour, would not admit of it — We sought ' — Temple fell — His Servant has conveyed him in a chaise to the next town, which he will never See — and I must immediately Set out for -- --, whither I 
should have been obliged to go, had not this unlucky affair hurried my departure.’ 
I heard no more — my heart died within me — and I Sunk breathless into those murderous 

U' 
47 
!!ii 1i 
r; ^ 
553? THE HISTORY OF 
derous arms which he had opened to ceive me. When I recovered, I foi myself in bed, Jennet weeping by side. She informed me, that whe fainted. Col. Middleton took that opj tunity to force Sir Charles from me, : he was then changing his dress in anot apartment. Soon after, he entered room — Our adieus were very tende very Solemn — He charged me to thim him alone — and to keep inviolate tt vows of fidelity I had confeerated to i At the awful ceremony., and in the of God. Impious man! I gave him ^ Such charge — I begged of Heaven diretst his steps, and to Send him b: to me in Safety — I implored him to careful of his health, and to let me h from him often — Thus we parted. I Sc •began to think Col. Temple a bold greffor; and though I shuddered wl 
ELIZA WARWICK. 25^ 
I refledfed that the person I loved had imbrued his hands in blood, yet I re joiced that he was not the victim of the quarrel. 
Jennet and I were once more left ourselves — We reassumed our usual oe cupations — Sighs would often escape us at, the remembrance of Col. temple’s former friendship; but as we imagined he had lost his life about a creature that was perhaps insamous, we looked upon it as the judgement of Heaven, and only bewailed that Sir Charles was the chosen instrument ms its vengeance. Ah! my Lord, I was not then Sensible that I had by this fatal stroke lost my only protector 
• stow Saw less company than ever Col. Middleton would Sometimes arrogate - - to 
254 the history OF 
to himself the privilege of coming to visit me on the Same footing that Col. Temple formerly did; but what different Sentiments guided this man’s heart! His behaviour to me used, to be very particular, when 
> chance diretsted that I should be alone with him — Once he dared to whisper, that he loved me — I started back with indignation — but, recovering mysels a lit 
> I desired him to chuse Some other sa ■=mily to destroy the peace of, and Some other friend to abuse than Sir Charles Beaufort — I assured him, that I detested him and his principles, and, did I not Set a value upon beaufort’s lise too great to be riliqued in the chastisement of So unworthy and insignificant a creature, I would Immediately inform him of bis 
aguturable intentions towards him. Col. Middleton, on my quitting the room di jedly, departed from the house; and I 
.never 
ELIZA WARWICK. 255 
: never Suffered him to be admitted to my presence afterwards, until Beaufort returned. 
The letters I received from Sir Charles 'Were didsated in that style for which he Was ever famed — and their language seem «ed the real language of love. He talked of his return to England with the warmth of impatience which an ardent and sincere lover may be fupposed to feel — he Spoke with rapture of the many charming hours we had passed together — and lamented that their joys were broken in upon, though for So short a time. He entreated me to be cheerful in his absence • -- yet not to forget that ue. was in .despair until the blissful moment 'Jhouid .arrive that would bring him once more to .my feet. In short, my Lord, I used to read these dangerous lines with delight — ' .and 
£56 THE HISTORY OF 
and my tears would fall fast upon e Sentence that mentioned his flight f England. 
'Five months had dapsed before pardon was obtained; which, though all his interest had been employed, t up more time to effect than he, or friends, supposed it would have d( The relations of The generous Ten were astiided, and enraged, at bis timely, melancholy loss; and they deavoured to counteradt the design; beaufort’s friends, whose interest, h ever, was much Superior, and the affair represented in (o fpfeious and false a LI to his Majesty, that he bestowed his 3 eious pardon sin a very full and Satis tory manner off Sir Charles. In aboi fortnight aster he received it, he arri 
sin England. He wrote to me from Dc 
ELIZA WARWICK. 
257 
— he did the Same from London — yet still I did not See him — It was Surprising! — My heart took the alarm — but another letter, which made Some excuses, and pleaded that his absence from me was unavoidable. Soon made me believe him as true and tender as ever; and I con soled mysels with that idea for all the anxious moments I had Spent in his absence. 
The hour at last arrived which brought him to me, and I really thought it the happiest of my life — Ah! what joy, what rapture. Seemed to glow in his bo some when I ran to meet him i — How often did he Swear that he had never tasted peace since that fatal day on which he had been torn from hse! — And often' was I clasped to his heart with a wild ecstasy, that .appeared (I have * since vol. IS thought) 
THE HISTORY OF 
thought) as if he feared to lose me™his terror, lest Such an event should happen, .certainly embittered many of those minutes which might have been delightsul •to him, had not his guilt given him reason to dread that Some accident would one day discover to me the horrible Secret of his perfidy — Oh! in what misery did it involve us both! 
I cannot tell you, mylord, how hap ^pily 1 pasted six months aster Sir charles’s arrival in England — He was continually with me — and he Seemed to shut out every Other Soul from his heart or conversation. The hours we Spent in reading, w'alk ing, and playing on various instruments, brought back to my remembrance the most delicious part of my stay at Fairy hill — and that idea was Sufficient to give me felicity — but the man I .loved was 
Tnine 
ELIZA WARWICK. 259 
mine (I then thought) beyoad the reach of Fate, *, which was a bliss So extensive, and So exquisite in itsels, that that alone would have made me preser my Situation to every other mortal’s upon earth. 
aster receiving repeated letters Srom London, Beaufort with much regret took leave of me, though he assured me it should be the shortest visit' he ever made to that metropolis — He embraced me five or six times before he could prevail on himself to enter his chaise — Our tears 'stowed reciprocally — We sighed as il Some Sad event was to Separate us for ever — At length, with much difficulty, we parted. Tell me, my Lord, was it presentiment that occasioned our Sadnels at this fare wel} Could our hearts have So strongly presaged that our happiness was about to end for ever Why did my eyes Sollow S 2 'his 
26o the history of 
his carriage till it was gone too far to be perceptiblew"hy did my breast Swell * high with Sorrow, and Nature itsels to me Seem annihilated? — Alas! his absence for Some days, when his presence in town Seemed necessary, did not use thus to affect me! — I never wept — I never held him back, as if I wanted his protection -- Some sighs would.escape me, but they Soon dispersed in air — and the hope of his return illumined every feature — Far different this 'parting! -- I lamented his leaving me with a degree of Sorrow which my reason could not conquer — I reproached myself for not persuading him to stay — I feared a thousand accidents would befall him — I prophesied that I should never embrace'him more. My Lord, my condition at that time was deplorable! 
.In Some stays after, I received a letter 
from 
ELIZA WARWICK. 2-61. 
from Sir Charles — He Spoke of our parting, and thanked me for the proofs of tenderness I gave him., which were dearer to his heart than any other circumfiance under Heaven, he Said — He bade me keep up my fpirits ^ that though his affairs in Torkfhire required at that time his immediate attendance, yet they should fa on he dispatched, and he would^hajien hack to those happy scenes in Derhyfhire which hf had lately quitted with such dreadful re luflance — He told me he would give orders to decorate my garden at Fairy hill with the moji fragrant and delightful flowers against the time that 1 should viftt it myfeif — He hoped thcfifutious name of Sydney would soon he thrown afidey and assured me, that, when his aunt relented, he would avow me as Lady Beaufort to the world — He concluded with desiring me to he convinced of .the fervour of his S ^ sentiments 
262 THE HISTORY OP 
sentiments towards 'Aie and that he ever would continue the tendereji and mojl faiths full of husbands. 
This letter I Seized with trsnspott from the Servant who had brought it from the postoffice; but, in turning the Seal up to break it, I observed that it appeared damaged, and as if it had been opened before: the idea struck me, but I vas too impatient to read the contents to Suffer my thoughts to dwell upon a trifling Suspicion; and, when I had perused them, they So wholly engrossed me, that I sus pected no longer — besides, had it made a deeper impression on me, I knew not whom to accuse — I did not think I had a rival Who could come at his letter — nor did I believe I had an enemy in the World— — would have been needless, therefore, to have let any Such apprehensions 
ELIZA WARWICK'. 263 
Hensions disturb me, for it was impossible that I could have Satisfied mysels as to the person who was capable of Such an action 
Two days after the receipt of this' epistle, I was Surprised to See a coach and Sour, with many attendants, drive up the avenue — As it was Sir Charles beaufort’s livery they wore, my heart was Seized'with that Sort of uneasy palpitation which one does not know whether to impute to hope or fear — however, as I had no motive to think it should proceed from the latter, I began to fiatter myself that I had every reason to suppose he was returned; and perhaps^jiad brought his consenting aunt with him. I was Soon undeceived — for a lady, very beautiful, was ushered in to me, instead of the old one I expected. I received her with as S 4 ' much 
264 THE HISTORY OF 
much politeness as I could assume,; begged to know to whom I was indeh for the honour of So pleasing a favoi She approached me — she looked stedsa in my face — and, bursting into a vioi ssood of tears, exclaimed, “Ah! God! she is too handsome! — far Su rior to me, indeed, in loveliness! —; I have lost him Sor ever !” I was am jngly shocked — I took' her by the ha and, leading her to a Ibpha, Seated my near her. 

* Madam, ’ cried I, hardly able to frain from weeping at the sight of afflitstion, ‘ you Seem to labour un Some distress which wrings your ht with Sorrow — if it is in my power to leviate it, by any method in the woi be So good as to point it out, and ] shall find me both ready and happ} 
ELIZA WARWICK. 265 
contribute to your repose She looked at me again, but with a degree of sternness she had not put on before — she considered me with attention, and in silence, for Some' moments — At length, rising from her Seat, with much violence she cried, “Yes — you are the vile creature I took you for — You have, ’indeed, a beautisul face, and a fine shape — but the 
infamy of your conduct- -- ‘ con ' 
dufi !* repeated I, in a tremulous tone — “Yes, ” answered she, turning quick upon me — “Have you not Seduced my husband by your arts? Does he not leave me day after day, week after week, .011 your account? And when he does return, does he not come Sullen, pensive, and unhappy? — O vile, vile enchantress! why should you be thought Superior to hrs •faithful, virtuous Gertrude.?” ‘good God! Madam, * cried I, with emotion, 
‘ you 
266 THE HISTORY OF 
^ you must mistake me for another — I encourage no man, I love none, but my husband— — the object whom you lament as lost to you is amongst the number of Mr. sydney’s friends, I may have 
Seen him, but be assured I’ here 
shb interrupted me — Sydney! — Sydney! — Yes, I am in that fecrst d th^t fidlitjous name cannot blind me.” I burst into tears. She Seemed struck with them — she looked penetrated — and, pausing for Some moments, as if to recollect herself,. she approached, and took me by the siand. 
You See, Madam, ” cried she, before you an unhappy woman — pardon the rudeness, the harshness, of my conduct— — be So good as to answer truly a few questions that I am about to alk 
you -- -- It is not an idle curiosity that 
prompts 
ELIZA WARWICK. 267 
prompts them — my confidence you shall poffess in return — and you may perhaps be brought to think that the very man of whom I complain has in a very material point deceived you grossl, I wiped 
away the tears hat stowed in torrents from my eyes; and, bowing an assent to her request, I waited with impatience to hear the nature os her inquiries. “Is not, ’’ continued she, Sir Charles Beaufort and Mr. Sydney one and the Same person ?” I blushed, and hesitated — ^ — There !” Said llie, “you cannot deny it — I was well convinced of it Srom an authority undoubted — However, I will proceed — and beg to know, what The terms are upon which )’ou live with this dangerous man ?” I told her I was married to him. She shook her head; and, looking at me with an aspedt of compassion, which at that time I thought humiliating. 
i68 THE HISTORY OF 
Hating, prayed me to tell her the circum 
cumstances of our acquaintance and con nedtion. 
‘ Madam, ’ replied -1, I know no 
why I am thus interrogated — As you Saj you are unhappy, and you affure me you; inquiries do not proceed from mere curiosity, I will consent to unfold the Secrei os my heart to you — entreating you, a the Same time, Sor Sir Charles beausort’l Sake as well as my own, not to discovei it to any person in the world, since the most unhappy consequences to him maj be derived from Such a proceedured 
I then frankly related to her everything concerning beaufort’s intimacy with me, beginning from our first acquaintance at Fairy hill down to that present moment in which I Spoke. Her surprise and con 
ELIZA 'WARWICK. 269 
cern were manisest during the time of my relation; and, when I had ended, she threw her arms around my neck, and Sobbed bitterly. 
1 cannot express to you, my Lord, the different sensations of my bosom at that moment — I was bewildered in a labyrinth of doubt, fear, and astonishment — I knew mot whom I Spoke to, I could form no motion of what she was — I did imagine the little history I had given her would have pacified and undeceived her with respedt to the infidelity of her husband— — 1 perceived that her agitations increased, and she was become more miserable than besore — yet there was a com .pashonate tenderness in her manner to, me : that was, at once pleasing and amiable. 
The lady, Soon after the excess of sher 
grief 
27f the history of 
grief had abated in Some measure, endeavoured to regain her composure; and taking me by the hand, exclaimed. Ah! charming Eliza! I am grieved to be the ill-fated messenger of woe to one So amiable and lovely; yet I must assure you, you have been deceived in the most artful and most cruel manner imaginable.” ‘ Tell me, * cried I, with 'trembling impatience, ‘ how -- how am I betrayed Stay, ’* resumed she — 
hear me wnth calmness — and I will return, as I promised, the confidence you placed in me. 
The Duke of .Derby, my uncle, who was at once my guardian and parent, gave me a foreign education, from Some prejudices in his own which he could never conquer. I Spent a great part of my childhood Ainder the best 
masters, 
ELIZA WARWICK. 
271 
masters, and was carried by his Grace into Italy, where I completed the part of my education that lemained unfinished. v’hen I was eiohteen, my uncle thought os returning to England; and at my re* quest he consented to make Some stay at 
■ -- -- -- -- -, at wshich Court I was intro. 
. and made much noise as a stranger and a beauty. It was there I first Saw Sir Charles Beaufort — his person, his .address, his wit, all conspired to charm me; and I distinguished him from all .other men who offered their adulation at my shrine. Whether vanity, or admiration os me, induced him to stutter round mei know not; but certain it is, he was stattering, tender, and attentive to 
me alone. All the ladies in -- -- -- -- -- envied 
me — I was considered by them as. one who had monopolised, in Sir Charles .Beaufort, everything that was charming 
in 
272 THE HISTORY OF 
1, 
LI f 
in the Sex. The men, on the other were no less jealous of the favour I with from me; and we were, at th time, the envy and admiration o .great .and*fashionable city. I have thought, that all this was a stimi to Sir charles’s ashduity — the idea C Tying the prize Srom So many po' and accomplished rivals was too dt Sul for his vanity to resist — and h do believe, was more interested ifuccess than his heart. 
The Duke of Derby Saw mj .diledtion for, Beaufort, and ashed .Le had .ever deelared .himself my I I ajfured him not (for it was true) his behaviouri owned., was parti. and by it he gave me reason to fuj was beloved by him — hut that he hi ver seriously told me fo. The Dul 
ELIZA WARWICK. 175 
Xlie, and immediately waited on Sir Charles — He told him, that Vis niece was no en courager of danglers, and that he mufi heg of him either to acknowledge himself a candidate for my hand, or to appear less often with me, and less ajfiduous in his manner when in my company — that it was no advantage to any woman to permit fiich unmeaning gallantries, and that he was de termined Lady Gertrude Dorset should not. 
Sir Charles embraced my uncle with much warmth — begged him to repeat the charming sounds which licensed him to declare his love for the divine Gertrude — assured him that nothing hut his fear of being refused prevented a more solemn declaration of his passion— — he would wait upon me in the evening, and till then entreated the Duke to become his friend and advocate. 
vol. I, T My 
s74 THE HISTORY OF 
‘‘ My uncle returned, and imparted to me the conversation he had had with Sir Charles — he.desired me to accept of him at onccy and not to follow the odious cujtom of keeping men in expefiationy as followers of my train — One thing or the other he inftjled fhotdd be done — either to rejefly or accept of him soon. 
He lest me, not doubting which way I had determined; for my partiality for this ungrateful man was much too visible •to endure concealment. 
I will own to you,, beautisul Eliza! that I adorned my person with care that day, and waited with a Sort of painsul impatience Sor the evening; which may well be conceived, when my Situation is considered. The hour of eight arrived — I Saw not Sir Charles — — Nine came — 
still 
ELIZA WARWICK. 275 
still he was not with us -- My uncle 
grew uneasy — I unhappy -- -- At length 
his carriage drove into the court — and the most elegant of his Sex alighted, with Such an air os hurry, and gaiety, that I directly forgot I had waited Sor him at all. If the sight of his person only could thus appease my resentment, what must I have Sdt when he entered the apartment! His apologies were the lightest, the most complimentary — his address the tenderest, the most Seducing — There was Something, howevct, in his countenance, at times, that betrayed a lurking uneasiness — but he had the method of making that countenance subser ' vient to his purpose — I persuaded myself that it was a rnelancholy air which Some strokes of my raillery had occasioned In about half an hour after he came in, a Servant appeared, and told my uncle T 2 that 
» * 
THE HISTORY OF 
that dhe Marquis de Vinftn begged lei peak to him in another room for i minutes. Fie arose, and left us — cumstance which, though I did su would happen during Sir charles’s yet overwhelmed me in agitatioi consusion. 
“Ah! Madam, I will Spare yc recital of our conversation — Beaufoi the most persuasive, the most pash of lovers — he Seemed to live on similes he now despises — he appeal be ambitious only of the poffesh ►this heart which he now disdains when I refieist upon his looks, his ’ his vows — my God! — when I : that tender, that delightful scene can I think it poshble he shouk change !’’ 
ELIZA WARWICK. 277 
Here a stood of tears interrupted her voice — and if there was an object in the universe more miserable than heisiels at that instant, it could only have been the wretched auditor of her woesul tale. 
“I will cut short, ” resumed she, “the Scenes os tenderness that pasted for Some time, and hasten to that which is of more importance. We were Soon to be united — the day, the hour, was fixed — when I received an acepunt of the death of an amiable and tenderly loved brother, which threw Srom me all my joys, and immersed me for a week in Sorrow and affliction. I postponed our marriage, on consideration os my mourning; and, as I thought, even for decency’s Sake — Sir Charles did not Seem to approve of this resolution; and my uncle, who was much attached to him, peisiuadcd me to have the ceremony 
r 
478 THE HISTORY OF 
remony privately persormed — A licence had been gained besore — everything was rtady — and I was Solemnly united to Sir 'Charles Beaufort by my uncle’s great friend, the Archbishop of C — - 
IT: 
End of the First Volume. 
XL. i 
THE 
HISTORY 
O F. 
ELIZA WARWICK. 
IN TWO VOLUMES. 
“Vaulting Ambition, that o’erleaps itfel^ And falls on t’other fide.” — — - 
VOL. II 
9 
LONDON, 
Printed for J. BEW, in Pater nofter rotr. 1778. 


'f r; 
; ■, C t: ' • ■ ■ 1. ri akaf /stijs: 
; ■ ifv, - r ■ ‘ • A cvd'.dr., jv' 
g • : "; 
‘ - k « =^4 •. ’ • - ■ *, ■ : * -•_■ Vl ■ fs' ’ ' ». * T‘ •. ' ■ ^^. *’ 
c^vir.i. N' 
T r. •■raf ’■ ' ♦ UW jf, • • • * »- ^ fai. T, ' “C. 
. 
* ■' ‘ ■ •.; ', r 
I;; .':... C. >. ^ ' V; •. -^,..; il ‘ ~'* Nv ' ■' •'. 'S. '' .■ ■ ' ■ •., ■ ■■ t; ' '., ' ' ''i.' V' ' •, • C <. .1. • •'-■. I. 


XX 
THE 
/ 
HISTORY 
O F 
JELIZA WARWICK. 
ocr 
X 
Letter to the Marquis of Huntley, continued. 
N( 
O Sooner, my Lord, had Lady Gertrude pronounced her union with Sir Charles Beaufort, than I Sunk liseless on the Sopha where we were sitting. Ah! dear God! with what horror do I look back upon that day! With her lady vol. II B ship’s 
r THE HISTORY OF 
ship’s care I was brought back to my fenses — She would willingly have Secreted the remaining part of her story, because she Said it affected me too deeply — but, alas! what worse could I hear? When she declared to me that I was robbed of Artue, she had told me everything that could strike horror into my Soul — I however made one bold effort to recover my composure; and, aster ashing her pardon for So unseasonable an interruption, she relumed her narration as follows: 
“The Archbishop was Sworn to Secrer cy, and I became the wife of the man I loved. In about three months aster our marriage, during which time Sir charles’s tenderness for me Suffered no abatement, he received Some English letters, one of which threw him into a state os agitation that, with all his art, he could not conceal. 
ELIZA WARWICK. 3 
ceal. He perused it over repeatedly; and, as he lest the room, I heard him, wkli a sigh, exclaim, ‘ Lovely, injured innocence! ’ My curiosity was excited — ^ I languished with a desire os Seeing that letter— — the next morning I contrived to steal it out of the pocket of the waistcoat he had worn the day before — I was sure it was the Same, for I had taken particular notice of its fold, and the writing which addressed it to my husband. I read it over in hurry and confusion — yet every word is still imprinted on my memory. aster I had finished it, I returned it into the Same pocket, and left •his dressing-room without being suspedt, edi will repeat to you the purport of this letter — it was written by Mr. i'era ple, of whom I had often heard him Speak. He told Sir Charles his presence was wanting in England, to Settle Some B 2, affairs 
4 THE HISTORY OF 
■.affairs which the Duke of beauvarise hast lest unfinished — he Spoke os his house in grosvenor square, which was rebuilding, and begged him to come over if it was only to give proper directions about it — ^ yet, ’ added he, ^ if what I have already mentioned can prove no inducement to you, suppose I assure you that the lovely Eliza is still more charming than when you left her Here, Madam, he drew a picture of your beauties — the pencil, though it was held by the hand of a lover, did not do you justice — yet at that time I believed no earthly mortal could have arrived at Such perfection, either in mind or person, as was there described • Spoke of .your virtue, your Sense, and your accomplishments — he accused him of having treated you with disrespect, and want of affection — he reminded him .of his engagements to you, and Swore to 
See 
eli2ra WARWICK. / 
stfe them persormed, or he would call'sir Charles his Sriend no longer. This was' the most interesting part of the whole; and this, I will Srankly consess, gave me uneasiness enough. Some days after, Sir Charles mentioned to me, that bujinefs of importance required his presence in England, •^as the time of hfs embajfy at that Court' •cohere we' were was ahnojl expired and. be had obtained a leave of absence for some weeksy he would, let me remain in 
-- -- --; ■ and having given some necessary 
orders about a townhouse for my reception and seen that everything was ready to receive me, he would return — • make his farewell to the Court inform, in charafier of Minijier from England — and. take me over with him to those scenes of pleasure and delight which awaited me in my own country. I begged him to let me attend him then and Said that our mar * B 3 riage 
6 THE HISTORY OF 
riage might as well be declared directly as at any other time. He objected to my accompanying him, for the reasons above alleged; and as to owning our nuptials, he thought any time would be a proper one — ‘ yet, ’ cried he, kishng my hands with a gdant air, ‘ do you not think it could be celebrated with more pomp and Sestivity when we return to England together? Everything in which my Gertrude is concerned should be elegant. Splendid, magnificent: now I must leave you in two days; how, then, is it poshble to avow our marriage at present? I shall be laughed at all over 
■ -- -- --; they will call me the most insensible 
of lovers, the most degajant bridegroom — yet I mujt leave you I plainly Saw he did not like my reasoning on the matter; 1 therefore pretended to be Satisfied, entreated him to return as 
Soon 
ELIZA WARWICK:. f 
soon as poshble, and not to forget the faithful heart of Gertrude, which woulc! attend him in spirit everywhere he went. We parted Soon after, and he embarked' for England. 
“During hia absence I heardbften from him — his affairs detained him — he quarrelled with every thin that kept him from me, he Said. Ah! he was then abusing, the most Solemn vows, the most Sacred cngagernents:! 
** About Sour months asrerhis departure, 1 expected my brother. Lord Goodwin, from Ireland. He had written' to congratulate me on my marriage, and' promised to See me Soon in — - —, 
“Some time after he arrived, I ashed' him if he had staid long in England? 
B 4 He 
& 
THE HISTORY OF 
He told me, not three hours — that could ajfure me that though he had not Seen my husband, he had heard of him, from an intimate friend of his, a Col. Temple, who had been a Schoolfellow of my brother’s, and whose intimacy with him was renewed by their meeting in Ireland. ‘ I told Temple, ’ continued my brother, ^ of your marriage with his friend; at which he Seemed shocked, and much amazed: however, though he Said little on the Subject, I could Soorr perceive Sir charles’s Sriends in England had other views Sor* him — but you, my dear Gertrude, will by your affability and amiable deportment reconcile them to you Sooner than by boasting of your high birth and great fortune — the latter you have too much good sense to mention, the former you ever pradlife.’ 

In 
ELIZA WARWICK. 3 
In less than a fortnight after Lord goodwin’s arrival, I was surprised to See Sir Charles beausort enter my dreshng room — I stew to receive him, half wild with joy — but, oh! my God! how shocked was I to perceive his Salutation in return; languid — cold — and polite He informed us, - that he had fled from England after having revenged himself on col temple for offering him a gross insult •which nothing hut his life could extenuate — he had deprived him of that — and had employed all his interest to rfprefent the affair in a favourable light to his Majesty and that he hoped soon to receive his gracious pardon. 
aster five months. Spent in -- -- -- -, 
from the time of his arrival, he was written to by Several os his Sriends, to declare their success, and to congratulate him orbis 

ro THE HISTORY OP 
his being empowered to return oine mor to his own land, in sasety and honour. Our marriage was then publicly owned 
at -- -- --, and we departed foi' England 
with joy and impatience. When we got to London, I was eondufled to grosve nor square: our house was large, and fitted up with extreme elegance and Superbness. Sir Charles remained in town until we were both introdueed at Court he then left me, to go into the country, ' where be continued a whole fortnight without writing me a line. On his return _ rcproaehed him for having left Wf, almojt a sir anger in London y for fo long a time., and fo soon after my' arrival — I Said that I was quite ignorant of the English cufiomsy and. therefore required a greater share of his attendance. He made me a cool bow— — me he was prvudy.m all. atcafionsy U Jbew Vmfelf ... * my 
ELIZA WARWICK. it 
wy juve — but ashed me direduy, pvhy I did not choose a female infirufior? for he •uowed no one was more ignorant cf the, proper punctilios amongst my sex than he was — mtreated me to apply to my aunty (the Dowager Lady Newport,) or to many other of my relations., whom he named — and that would spare him at once fa intolerable a Share of hono urj and pleasure“ 
“ludicrous manner in which he treated my reproach stung me to the soul, and I Soon quitted the room, in a stood of grief. 
One evening I observed him, as he was writing in his library, with the door on ajar, lay down.his pen, open.his bosom, and take out a crystal locket which he carried to, his lips, with fervour,; 
tears 
ti THE HISTORY OD 
tears streamed upon it, and he exclaimed', -* Charming, injured Eliza!’ Ah! Madam, with what dissiculty did I restrain' my resentment! / did command it — 
and, having heard enough, I stew to my own apartment, to indulge my Sorrow. he lest me repeatedly in the Same manner, and I had no doubt but that his repeated absence was occasioned by the dangerous and beautiful creature Colonel Temple had mentioned in his letter. 
“When he was in towm, he would shut himself up alone for hours; and he was continually writing, asshe Said, upon business: however, in Spite of all my es sorts, I could never get a sight os any of those epistles which he penned with Such care and delight. About a Sortnight ago he returned from one of his long and frequent journeys, and had not been three 
_ days 
ELIZA WARWICK. 13 
days in i.ondon before an express arrived for him Srom Yorkshire — his presence there was Suddenly wanted; and he left me, to obey the Summons. He had written a long letter the night before his departure, and laid it on the table in his library. I heard him tell his valet to carry it in the morning to the postoffice;; I contrived better — I desired the Servant, when I got up, which was earlier than usual, to give the packet to me; and, as I was going out, I would make one of my Sootmen deposit it in the office Sor him. The fellow thanked me, opened the door of the library, the key of which Nstad been entrusted with him for the purpose, and bringing to me this much wished for prize, I carried it to my closet, broke the Seal, and read the tenderest, the most impashoned words that ever were dictated. It was addressed 
to 
14 the history of 
to you, Madam — you were the object that inspired them. Ah! Heaven t my distraction almost made liie discovet my design. I Sealed the letter again, and carried it to the postoffice; but I took care, ere it lest my hands, to write down .your address. Sometimes I thought of revealing iny Sentiments to you through the Same channel Sir Charles did his. I began two letters, but left off dissatisfied. At length., the Scheme I have executed, os coming into Derbyshire, and obtaining a personal interview, struck me as being the best and Surest way. Here, Madami my. story ends. I See the effect. it has had upon you — but, ah! charming Eliza! forgive me, if I have made you unhappy — it is not that I Sought. I love the man who has deceived you — • I pity your situation — and if it were possible for me to alleviate your Sorrow, I 
should 
ELIZA WARWICK. i 
should think mysels Sortunate in showing you that I consider you no longer as an injurious rival.” 
Now, my excellent Lord Huntley, represent to yourself my Sorrow and despair. I arose — I stung myself at the feet of Lady jgertrude Beaufort — I implored her pardon for the misery I had caused her — I avowed to her the innocence of my heart at the very moment I had injured her peace of mind — Ah! ma* dam, ’ continued I, ‘ ^stist rne to leave this horrid, this guilty house! — the very air, which I breathe, is pestilential — Ah! let me sty — let me sty from .Such perfidy •^but, oh! my God! where, orto whom,, can I go? — No covering, now, have I to hide my head — no innocence to revive my despairing heart — My crime stares me in the face — and every friend I had must 
turn 
isi THE HISTORY OF 
turn their backs when I appear.’ ■ I wept not, my Lord — I wtas in too much agony to weep — My hands were clas^ted with rigour — my Sace was pale as death — my jips quivered with cold — and my knees ■refused to Support my Srame — not a Spark .of lise was perceptible but in my eyes — they rolled around, as if to find the author of my wretchedness, and to pierce iiiin with their lightning. Thus was my situation described to me asterwards: 1 knew not how I looked, nor hardly •where I was. Ah! unsortunate Eliza! 
Jennet came into the room — What a Scene ensued betwixt us— — was Soon made Sensible of the horror of my fate — * and this new misery Seemed to her more insupportable than any other she had experienced. She entreated Lady Gertrude to give us places in her coach to London r. — there 
ELIZA WARWICK. 17 
there, ” continued she, ‘‘ my dear young Lady shall not want— — have strength still to work — and my labour shall be employed in maintaining her — ^ But, oh! let us fly Srom this horrid place — let us bid adieu to it for ever — every moment that we stay renders us more criminal, more wretched.” 
Whilst Jennet Spoke thus, I had time to refieft upon what I should do preparative to my departure from Derbyshire. Lady Gertrude assured us we might command her coach, and that she would See us comsortabiy Settled in London — “in the mean time, ” added she, “I will lodge you at the house of an old Servant of my own, till you can look about you for a situation’ that may Suit you better.” Her words wrung my Soul — I had not been accustomed to be obliged to strangers vol, II - C — much 
i8 THE HISTORY OF 
— much less to the Sort of woman that I perceived Lady Gertrude to be — My guardian had bred me up in ease and opulence — Sir Charles beausort had given me a taste for magnificence — My heart sighed at the air of lively hauteur which shone in Lady gertrude’s features — yet I thanked her for becoming the inshument of fathoming this fatal mysterious conduct of Sir Charles. I left the room, to prepare for my journey, whilst Jennet ordered in refreshments for Lady Gertrude. 
I Separated the wardrobe I had before I lived with Sir Charles from that which his profusion bestowed on me after; the former I packed up, the latter I returned into the chests from whence I had just taken them out. My jewels, my trinkets, in short, everything which was presented, me by huh, I put up into 
drawers; 
ELIZA WARWICK. 19 
drawers; and, locking them, I gave the keys to Mrs. Sindall, a trusty Servant, whom Sir Charles had appointed my housekeeper. aster that was done, I retired to my closet, threw mysels on my knees, and aster giving way to a violent flood of tears, and recommending to the pity of Heaven my wretched condition. Supplicating also mercy, as far as God Saw me guilty in my connexion with Sir Charles, I took up my pen and wrote, the following lines; 
To Sir Charles Beaufort. 
The unhappy wretch, Sir, who now addresses you, means not to reproach you with your perfidy, nor to tax you with her misfortunes — I am, it is true, reduced to the very brjnk of de ^ Spair, 
20 THE HISTORY OF 
fpair, and now totter on the precipice of destrudtion — no friendly twig can I lay hold of to Save my Sail — My innocence, which was my only dowry, I have been robbed os — and the peace of mind that conscious virtue gave has been violently torn Srom me — ryet, Sir, I will not reproach you — you may reconcile to your 
sels the treating me thus 1 was a 
poor orphan — 1 had neither friends nor fortune — perhaps you thought me too ambitious — Be it So, ' have I not Suffered Sufficiently 
Then, Sir, I have one favour to alk of you — If your triumph is complete— — the Sacrifice of my honour, innocence, and reputation, ' has gratified your pride — oh! Sir, for once let pity fosten your heart, and do not deny, me the only gleam of cbmfbrt yet remaining — 
ELIZA WARWICK, 
maining — I conjure you. Sir, not to persecute me in my retreat — never let me again behold a man whom I have So much reason to abhor — Permit me to Spend the few years, or hours, to come, of my lise, in lamenting my credulit}', 
and expiating my offence 1 quit your 
house this moment — your Servant will deliver to you the keys os those drawers which contain the finery of prostitution — Heaven give you repentance! — and may the ruin os poor Eliza be the last of crimes for which you will one day be judged!” 
This letter I also Entrusted to the care os Mrs. sindaw; and prayed her, when her master came into Derbyshire, to give it to him; but not, on any account, to Send it by the posh She was a good Sort of woman, and I had no doubt of her C 3 doing 
22 THE HISTORY Of 
doing as I desired. Mrs. Sindall promised to obey me. A few tears strayed down her cheeks when I bid her adieu; though, she had no notion that I was any other than the wise of beausort, and that my absence would be but temporary. 
I had almost forgot to mention, that, with Some presents of money Srom my guardian, (made me at different times,) besides a very beautiful watch, of many coloured golds, adorned with diamonds of the first water, and Several other rich trinkets which his affection and generosity lavished on me, 1 icst Derbyshire still possessed of Some things of value, which was a little comfort to Jennet, who Seemed to dread the poverty that Soon aster stared us in the face; yet let me do her the jus tice to declare, that it was for my Sake alone she shrunk at its approach. 
Our 
ELIZA WARWICK. 23 
Our journey to London was a melancholy one, on the part of Jennet and me. Lady Gertrude endeavoured to restrain her satissadtion; but exultation still danced in her eyes, in Spite of all her efforts to conceal it. My poor heart was torn with constiding passions; but judge So properly of it as to believe, roy Lord, that a detestation of the author of my misfortune was not the least predominant — How differently did he appear in thole minutes to my imagination! — it pidlured him the murderer of Col. Temple — the perpetrator of infaruy. I deplored the wretchedness of my fate — I bewailed my loss of parents — of beauvarise — and of Temple I was friendless and miserable to the last degree in my own opinion. I beheld Lady Gertrude Beaufort with an eye of compashon; and if I envied her at all, it was not for the opportunities C 4 she 
M the history of 
she would have os Seeing Sir Charles, and being continually with him, but for that unsullied virtue which she possessed, and which I could never more attain; yet, my Lord, amidst these woes, the ressedlion os my never having given Beaufort reason to suppose he could have gained me on cheaper terms, afforded me Some comsort; and though, to all appearance, I had been robbed of virtue, I ever adored its image, and it was ever engraven on my heart. 
When we arrived in London, Lady Gertrude ordered her people to carry us to Mrs. morris’s; they did as they wtre desired; and a very decent looking woman having made her appearance, and, pressed us to walk in, her Ladyship accepted the invitation, and desired us to follow her. We had not been long Seated, 
when 
ELIZA WARWICK. 25 • 
when Lady Gertrude begged to Speak to Mrs. Morris in another room : they lest us for Some minutes; and upon their return I was introduced to her as a lady, who, upon Lady gertrude’s recommendation, had taken lodgings there in preference to every other place. The. good woman was kind, and teasing with her compliments — I was heartily sick, distressed, and fatigued. Lady Gertrude Soon aster took her leave, and wished me dll happiness in my nezv habitation: I thought she Spoke those words with a degree of emphasis which shocked me; however, my poor heart began to be accustomed to the rubs of fortune, and I endeavoured to prevent testifying that I was hurt by this last indelicate Jiroke of hers. 
When Jennet and I took poffeshon of 
our 
i6 THE HISTORY OF 
our apartment, we dismissed the thrisfy landlady, begging to be left to ourselves: our request was complied with; and we gave a loose to our Sorrow. We recapitulated every Scene that had happened which could have given us the least Suspicion; and we both agreed, that things had been carried on So Secretly, that our knowledge os beaufort’s baseness must have proceeded from inspiration alone. That night we neither of us ssept — I was burning with a fever, which I imputed to the cffed: travelling post ever had on me; but it was of a more Serious nature. The next day I was worse; and, in the evening, became delirious — I had every Symptom of the most alarming and dangerous illness. Jennet Sent for an apothecary who lived near us; he pronounced my case to be desperate, but gave me medicines, which evidently increased the disorder. 
ELIZA WARWICK. 27 
order. She refused to let me take any more of them, and dispatched a messenger to Dr. H -- --, whose humanity, not 
to Say a word of his merit as a physician rendered his ashstance the most desirable thing in the world to her at that crisis. He told Jennet that I certainly was in infinite danger, but not to despair; Sor my youth might do much for me:, he was not divested of hope, he Said; and, with proper care and attendance, I might do very well again. Dr. H -- prophesied 
truly — it was the will of Heaven that his shill, and’jennecs tenderness, should restore me — but indeed, my Lord, my health has never since recovered the violent shock which my Soul received at that fatal time — it was the cause of my illness — that alone reduced me to the door of death. Dr. H -- -- -, upon taking 
his leave, told me he had no more 
advice 
xb THE HISTORY OP 
advice to give me which would require, my Sending to my apothecary any sur there; but he had Jiill a piece, that, is I would promise to follow, he should impart to me -- 1 promised faithfully — — 
Well, then, Madam, ” Said he,. resped: fully taking my hand, “1 cannot insure you health long, unless you determine to cast from you immediately those Subjects of uneasinest which have occasioned this violent emotion in a frame So delicate — Something has disturbed you — you are of a disposition, I Sancy, to brood over calamity — but, ah! Sorbear — your sense, your religion, must teach you resignation — you endanger your life by meditating on circumstances distressful, and which human prudence could not foresee— — must theresore owe the preservation of your life to a calm and cheerful patience — dishpate your ideas when they 
grow 
ELIZA WARWICK. 29 
grow too interesting; and, by a noble effort of heroinism, recover at once your peace and health.” Tears streamed down my cheeks as he Spoke — He was affetsted — but kindly endeavoured to contribute to my chearsulness by calling another 
Subject. In short, my Lord, Dr. H -- -- 
Spoke to me in So gentle. So Sensible a manner, that I thought os his departure from me with reiudtance. 
'When I was pretty well recovered, I found that my expenses (Sor Jennet Spared no cost in getting everything Sor me that she fancied I required) had Swallowed up what little ready money we had; and, after a long consultation with her, I prevailed on her to let me apply to Some milliner for employment — “I can draw and paint well, ” cried I; “it will be an amusement to me*‘to do Such Sort of work 
on 
30 THE HISTORY OF 
on their fan mounts; and, as I have a ^uick hand, I will contrive, by my industry, to Save Some of those trinkets which my dear guardian gave me — I will, however, part with a few at present; till I am Settled in thi^ new way of life, we must raise money as we can; aster that I promise you we will want for little.” Jennet could not bear the thought of this undertaking; but I overruled her objections, and applied to Mrs. Morris that very night to Speak to Some milliner for me on the subject. She Soon insorm ed us, that she could get work enough of that Sort for me; and, as I was to be paid in proportion to what I executed, the price could not then be determineci. 
I desired Mrs. Morris • to bring me Some the next day, and to six my employment with one of those milliners she had Spoken Xo. Everything was done as I directed,. 
and 
ELIZA WARWICK. 
31 
and I entered upon"my new plan with an apparent chearsulness, which I Saw my amiable Jennet was both amazed and pleased at; yet she could not overcome her Sorrow at the sight — tears and sighs would Srequently escape her — and I would Surprise her, with her eyes fixed up to Heaven, and her hands dasped with fervour, as if invoking the blessed Spirit of my mother to comfbrt and pray for her unhappy child. 
Jennet was cook, nurse, compamon, and Sriend, to me. I was often unhappy to See her have So much work and trouble, and as often did I try to share it with her; but there she was ever refractory. She took in plain linen, and executed a good deal of it; for which she was very well paid. As for my fan mounts, they were more amusing at first 
than 
3^2 
THE HISTORY OF 
than they wtre asterwards; but everything I undertook Soon grew tiresome and insipid to me: I laboured, however, at the work, and ever pretended to Jennet that it was highly agreeable to me. 1 had received Some money for my performances; and though I did not think it adequate to their value, yet still, as it helped to maintain us, I was contented to go on at the Same rate. 
Mrs. Morris one evening had a cold — 'I had finished a week’s talk, and Jennet was theresore obliged to get the millinecs direction, and carry it thither herself. As she waited in the shop to receive her money. Col. Middleton entered it, to look at Some ruffles. Jennet hung her head, ■and disappeared as Soon as she could, telling the woman, that, as she Saw she •was busy, she would call another time. • • 
col 
ELIZA WARWICK. 33 
Col. Middleton, however, knew her, in Spite of her endeavours to conceal her sels; and, without Seeming to take any notice of her, he dogged her, at a distance, to the door of our house. She entered it in much consusion, and informed me that she had Seen him — It stuttered me extremely — I started at every Sound — I trembled at every noise ^ yet neither os us supposed he had observed her. About ten o’clock that night I heard a bustle on the stairs — Mrs. morris’s voice was loud — she declared no one should go up without my orders — I could not distinguish any reply that was made her; but hastening to the door, I turned the key, and bolted it besides. The lock was tried by Some one on the outside; but finding 1 was prepared to resuse them admittance, the door was violently forced open, by its being pressed against with Vgl. 1l D much 
34 the HISTORY OF 
much strength, and in rushed Sir Charles Beaufort and Col. Middleton. I cannot tell you what my emotions were at beholding the former — I Screamed in an agony os woe — I clapped my hands involuntarily to my eyes, to prevent their Seeing him. He approached me — he threw himself at my feet. 1 started from him. 
« 
Ah! my God!” cried he, how little did I expect this, when last we parted! — Is this my tender, my enchanting Eliza! — Oh! pity, pity your Beaufort — I am in despair — I am engulfed, in wretchedness. Do you sty me? Will you not even look at me? — Alas! I would not hurt you for the world — Do but Speak to me” — and, rising, he advanced to embrace me — do call me once more your Beaufort — then let me 
die — 
ELIZA WARWICK. 35 
die — Sori can alk no more.” His voice, my Lord — oh! that harmonious accent — it still vibrates on my ear — yes, his voice was then the voice os despair indeed. I pushed him Srom me with all the strength I could assume— — calling up my resolution, I Spoke to him thus: 
* You have robbed me. Sir, of innocence, peace, and reputation — you have abused the most Sacred engagements — you have broken the most Solemn vows — What more do you desire os me that you have not yet obtained— — to persecute me to the very verge os the grave — is to render my life still more insup portable than you have already made it — if Such be your wish. Sir — why I must still bear up against your cruelty, and only entreat of Heaven to shorten the few days yet remaining of my wretched D 2 life — 
g6 THE HISTORY OF 
jise — Ah! my God !’ continued I, with ilreaming eyes, ‘ it was your blessed will to Snatch Srom me my .guardian — Upon his dying bed. Sir, he bequeathed me to you — he told me to fear nothing — that; fqu would be, my.father r my protedsor — my husband— — how little did he think you would prove my bitterest enemy I — the Seducer os my youth — the betrayer of my innocence!’ 
During this Speech, which was pronounced with the utmost warmth of Suffering Sensibility, Sir Charles regarded me with the most fixed attention. When .1 mentioned the Duke of beauvarise, he started;; when I accused him of becoming my enemy, he threw himself on .his knees before me. When my grief Thoaked my voice, and stopped my ut ^terance, he .looked up in my face — he 
paused 
ELIZA WARWICK. 37 
paused for Some moments — and then, catching hold os a part of my gown, ^ he exclaimed — - 
Speak on, my Eliza! -- cover me with infamy — yet, if this will extenuate my crime, hear me, ye blessed faints!’’ 
-- -- ‘ Hold, Sir, ’ cried I, inteitupting 
him — ‘ no more — I am sick of your perfidy — you have Sworn too often to deceive me again He bowed, and remained Silent; but his Sorrow was agonising' — he Sobbed aloud — his tears fell upoi\my gown, which he still hugged close to his bosom — the sighs of his Soul burst forth, in Spite of all his efforts to suppress them — and at the moment I beheld him with horror, I pitied his situation.. 
I turned to Col. Middleton — Sir, ’ Slid I, ‘ let me' implore you to prevail D 3 on 
38 THE HISTORY OF 
on your friend to depart— — am 1 thus perplexed Is it to renew my distress? Is it to cast me into the most dreadsul of torments? Is he not now acting against all reason — against his honour? where is his amiable — his beautisul wife? Why does he not now recompense his charming Gertrude Sor all the pangs I unknowingly made her Suffer ?’ 
'At her name he raised his eyes — He Seized my hands — Eliza!” cried he, “never, for the Sake of my ]teace, never mention her again — Oh! the cursed wretch! — she is the Sole cause of your ruin, and my misery — Her arts — Damn her! damn her !” ‘ Sir Charles, ’ replied I, ‘ Sorbear — I will not be compelled to hear you longer — do not stay to See me die at your feet.’ He caught me in his arms — I struggled to disengage myself — 
I Sue 
ELIZA WARWICK. 3^ 
I Succeeded, and was quitting the room, when Col. Middleton threw himself between me and the door — This was past all endurance, and I burst into tears — Sir Charles immediately approached me — ‘‘ Most adored of your Sex! since I am indeed become the unhappy object of your aversion, be under no apprehension — I will leave you instantly — but first let me present you with what your guardian left you in my hands, and which is yours by every title upon earth.” — He kneeled — he clasped my knees — I was in an agony os despair — but he arose, and taking from his pocket a large paper, he put it into my lap. I threw it Srom me. He would not stay to hear my resufal; but, bidding me an adieu which Seemed to rend his heart asunder, he precipitately left the room with Col. Middleton, 
D 4 
Jennet 
40 THE HISTORY OF 
Jennet had been out of .the way during this Scene; she had gone home with her own work as Soon as it was finished, and by that means escaped the sight os Sir Charles Beaufort. When she returned, she Sound Mrs. Morris bathing my temples with lavender water, and recovering me Srom a fainting sit, which had Seized me on their departure. She was Soon made acquainted with the cause; and mrs. Morris added, that upon her assuring Sir Charles no Such lady as he described lived there, Col. Middleton told her he would take his oath that he had Seen Jennet enter the house about three hours before; and, without hearing anything Surther, Sir Charles ssevv upstairs, and was followed by his Sriend. 
Mrs. Morris Soon aster quitted the room; and I told Jennet all that had 
passed, 
ELIZA WARWICK. 41 
passed, and presented her with the paper Beaufort had given me. She opened it — it was a Settlement os a thousand a year on me during my lise, and at my death to be disposed of as I pleased. We both exclaimed together,. “How shall we contrive to return it to him I” It was at last determined that Jennet should go early to his house in grosvenor square, and leave it with his valet, who was trusty, and faithsul to him. She did So; and vvith our poverty we were happier than if we 'had condescended to be obliged to him. Jennet also went to look Sor other lodgings Sorus: we considered ourselves as no longer Safe, since Sir Charles vras privy to our habitation; and she fixed on a Spot retired, and conveniently situated Sor our work. 
t0 Mrs. Morris we discovered the Secret 
of 
42 THE HISTORY OF 
of our abode; and, as she disinterestedly approved of our .removal, we agreed to convey our things away from her house that very day. 
Sir Charles persecuted that good wet man — he was continually with her to endeavour to get intelligence of the place of our residence — he gave her letters to carry to me, but she would diredtiy return them to him, feigning ignorance where to find me; So I did not hear more from Sir Charles for a length of time. 
What often Surprised me, my Lord, was, that Lady Gertrude deigned no sur there to visit me than just whilst it could Serve her own purpose to do So — I thought I could not have treated any poor creature in that way — however, on the whole, 
I was 
ELIZA WARWICK. 45 
I was not Sorry for it; for, to Say the truth, I abhorred the idea of Seeing either her or her husband. 
A few months had pasted, when one day Mrs. Morris came to visit us — She Seemed to be in great affliction — We all ed her the cause — and I do asture you I was shocked when she informed us of it. 
‘‘ Lady Gertrude Beaufort, Madam, ” Said she, “I attended on Srom the earliest days of her infancy until her return to England, when my years pleaded want of rest; and, as I could no longer be of Service to her, I retired to keep liouse for mysels — She has ever been kind. and gracious to me — and I must very Soon lose her for ever.” Here she burst into a stood of tears. We prayed her to explain hm Jhs was about to lose her — we inquired 
44 the history OP ’ 
quired with eagerness concerning her — and felt ourselves interested in her Sat. 
Why, Madam, ” Said she, I Sear things are worse at home than they should be — Sir Charles beausort sharcely ever Saw his Lady Sora length of time — She was courted, admired, attended, by every other man of fashion and elegance — To forget her Sorrows, she almost lived in public — Her form, her constitution, were both delicate — The event is, that she is now So far gone in what the physicians call a galloping consumption, that I Sear a very few weeks, if not days, must put an end to her existence.” 
The good Mrs. Morrises gries redoubled — jennet’s tears and mine accompanied every Syllable she had uttered — and she left us infinitely concerned at the 
melancholy 
LLIZA WARWICK. 45 
melancholy end of a young and beautisul woman, whose asslidtion I doubly lamented, as having been the unfortunate though, innocent cause of it. 
Jn about a month after, we were told by Mrs. Morris of Lady gertrude’s death; and Jennet and I were sincere and artiest mourners of her untimely fate. 
I had now a calamity, my Lord, to contend with, that I tremble to name — If through the Series of wretchedness that has besallen the unhappy Eliza you should •have dropped a tear, refuse not at least Some sighs of compashon to the memory of my dear and ever valued Jennet. 
It was about this time she was attacked with a violent bilious complaint in her stomach, attended with a fever — it was a 
long 
46 THE HISTORY OF 
long and Severe illness she endured — however, to all appearance she recovered of it, though in fact its hold had taken too deep root ever to be exterminated but with life. Jennet was pronounced by Dr. : H — — to be out of danger — that is, ” ..continued he, in a low voice to me, “out • of immediate danger — Good Spirits, and nourishment, are now the remaining prescriptions I give, and from which I have. every hope.” She grew better, as I thought; ..and this was a comfort to my heart be '.^yond what it had experienced before Sor many months. 
Whilst Jennet was gaining strength, I .neglected my work, in order to amuse her, by reading to her the works of Such authors as she was fond of; and as a total stagnation was by that means put to our getting any money, which we 
were 
ELIZA WARWICK. 47 
were then much in want of, I Sent to beg Mrs. Morris to come to me one morning. She immediately obeyed my Summons; and I charged her with the disposal of a diamond ring, and Some other trinkets, which I prayed her to Sell to the best advantage. She kindly undertook the talk, and gave me a promise of returning in the evening. This amiable woman, my Lord, (who, it Seems, had been informed of my Sad story from the mouth of her late Lady,) wept at the office my necessities had forced upon her, and she lamented sincerely my change of fortune. Her humanity, however, misted her judgement, and induced her to take a step which was more disagreeable to me than the parting with all the jewels in my pos seffion could have been. 
Sir Charles Beaufort ha been constantly 
48 THE HISTORY OF. 
stantly importuning her to disclose the Secret os my retreat to him, particularly since the death of Lady Gertrude; and she had as constantly withstood every temptation he had offered to induce her to reveal it: but, when she considered his unabated love for me — when she re stedted that she fcould no longer injure her loved mistress by Such a proceeding — ' and, above ail, when the knowledge of my poverty called Sor her assistance — she thought she could not do better than give Sir Charles Beaufort an opportunity of declaring his honourable intentions towards me — without having an idea that a confidence once abused is Seldom or .never regained — Indeed, to argue more from my own Seelings, my delicacy once alarmed, once disgusted, would ever teach me to abhor and shun the wretch who had conspired against my peace, against my virtue. 
ELIZA WARWICK. 49 
Mrs. Morris, after weighing maturely each consideration, whether or not she should impart to Sir Charles a Secret he fo ardently wished to become master of, ' found many more conveniences, if not pleasures, would result Sroln an interview between us, than could possibly happen from her keeping a pertinacious silence, vrhich must inevitably cause misery to one if not both of us. Fraught with this mistaken notion, instead of carrying my ‘ trinkets to a jeweller, she made the best of her tvay to grosvenor square. sir charles’s valet, knowing what a welcome visitant his master would think Mrs. Morris, Soon brought her to the Speech of him; and the good (yet weak) woman related to him not only my place of habitation, but the story of the commission which I had given her. 
vol. IL 
E 
Beaufort 
50 
THE HISTORY OF 
beausort Seemed transported, and thanked her on his knees for her unexpected intelligence. He begged her to give him the trinkets i’had entrusted to her; and, charging her not to mention a word of what had pasted, presented her with fifty guineas, and desired her to tell me she had Sold them for that Sum. Mrs. Morris gladly accepted them for my use; and, priding heisielf on the success of her negotiation, she hurried to me at the time appointed, and gave me the money in the Secret manner Sir Charles had advised her. I was surprised at the largeness of the Sum, as I had before parted with Some other of my guardian’s presents, which I had thought of no less value, and which had not yielded me half that profit; however, she answered my objections So as to remove them — I made no Scruple to receive the sisty guineas, 
and 
ELIZA WARWICK. 51 
and imputed to jennet’s ignorance os Such bargains the trisse she had Sold the others for. 
I was happy to have it in my power to contribute now So greatly to my dear jennet’s comfort, and by procuring little delicacies engage her to take a larger portion of nourissimcnt than she had done for Some time. She was ignorant os this late aequisition, as I feared it might grieve her, if I mentioned anything of parting with the baubles I had So much prized. 
That evening, 
as I 
was entertaining 
Jennet in the usual way os reading to her aloud, the door of the room we were in Suddenly opened, and Sir Charles Beaufort stood before us. I was about to fly, on perceiving who it was; but he prevented me, by catehing hold of my hand. 
E 2 He 
52 THE HISTORY OF 
He was dressed in Sull mourning, he looked thin and pale, and there was Something in the turn of his features that bespoke despair. 
“Stay, Eliza, ” cried he, in a composed and sost accent; I do assure you I will not terrify — I will Say nothing that can offend you — Be yoursels, ” continued he, leading me to a Seat — ‘‘ resume that happy tranquillity wdiich you once pos scssed — Look on me — I am the unhappy, the repentant Beaufort, with whorri you have Spent Some blisssul moments — those, it is true, .are passed — but Jtill I am your lover — dispel, then, these fears, and be persuaded that my own lise and fasety are not So dear to me as your re >’pose.” 
v’ 
$ 
‘ Ah! Sir, ’ replied I, ^ how different 
•have 
ELIZA WARWICK. 53’ 
have ever been your words and actions! Have I not before assured you, that my repose, which you pretend to value thus highly, depended on never Seeing or even hearing from you' more? And yet you take the very step which, os all others, you are well Convinced must be the most obnoxious to my Soul.’ 
‘‘ I did not, cruel Eliza!” answered Sir Charles, “suppose that horror would have Subsisted after the death os the unhappy Gertrude — I own you have still the Same cause to reproach my perfidy — but. Surely, you have not the Same to re fuse me now and then a sight of you! — you can injure her no longer — but, ah! rested:, by depriving me os the only joy 1 can experience on earth, you render me at once an object of despair — of wretched ness unknown before.” He kissed my E 3 hands 
54 THE HISTORY OF 
hands with ardour, and the drops os repentance Sell Srom his languid eyes — He raised his head at the Sound of gries which issued from a'corner of the room — He observed Jennet, who shad crept Srom the fireside on his entrance, and, to avoid his sight as much as poshble, had retired to a chair as far Srom him as the small ness of our humble apartrncnt would permit her to go — She had in vain endeavoured to suppress her Sorrow and resent ment, and hoped to have escaped his notice entirely; but Sir Charles Beaufort ever esteemed Jennet, and, if he had not Seen, would have ashed me for her, especially as Mrs. Morris had described to him the long and painful illness she had endured. 
As Soon as he beheld her, he quitted me, and, approaching her, he kneeled 
and 
ELIZA WARWICK. 55 
and kissed her hand — My much revered, my good, my kind Jennet! Suffer me in this posture to entreat your pardon for the anguish, the misery, I have occasioned your dear ward and you — Ah! my amiable friend !” continued Sir Charles, ** my love for her was ever firm — was ever unabated — but a cnrsed insatuation -- -- Well, ds that no more — poor Gertrude has fully expiated Sor all the Sorrow 
she has caused me, and” ^-‘ Stop, 
Sir, ’ cried Jennet, ‘ stop— — do not question you about your marriage — If you had a right to break the most Solemn vows, God alone must exact an account why and how you should poffess that right — However, Sir, in defiance of all your oaths and promises, you married — • Had your villainy stopped there, it could not have affected us — But why, in the honoured names os her Sather, mother, E 4 and 
56 THE HISTORY OF 
and guardian — I ask you, Sir, in their names — why did you dare to insult and betray the innocence of a young and helpless orphan, who had nothing to depend upon but that spotless fame which your brutality, your dishonourable proceeding, has cast an indelible stain upon? — Begone! begone !’ exclaimed she, with a strength os voice which I thought her weak frame incapable of exerting — ‘ be gone, vile man! — And, oh !’ continued she, clasping her hands with fervour, * may I never again be tormented with the sight of one who has robbed my Sweet, my lovely young lady, of that Serenity and peace of mind which Heaven, with her immaculate innocence, had given her as her dowry.’ Sir Charles Beaufort was shocked, was agitated bejmnd description, at this animated, this strong reproach. As for my part, I Sat a motionless 

ELIZA WARWICK. 57 
tionless spedtatress of the Scene — my heart had been So long inured to fears, and Sorrow, that I Seemed at that moment to be deprived of those keen sensations which I had So often experienced before even at the mention of this unworthy man — but I was then exhausted — my terrors for jennet’s life had lately put my feelings to their utmost stretch — the cord appeared at that moment to have been relaxed from over much straining, and I was for the only instant of my existence insensible to the woes before me. 
Beaufort arose — “Madam, ” cried the unfortunate man, “you are just — I am but too Sensible of it — Alas! however Severe, I merit all you can Say — Yet I did hope — yes, merciless Jennet! I did flatter myself — you would not have rejeded the penitence of a wretch, who has nothing 
58 THE HISTORY OF 
thing but his penitence to offer to his' God and to your honoured lady — But I am punished deservedly — IS I Swear, you reproach me with my broken vows — if I Submit to your accusations, but beg you to remember mercy, you command 
me to be gone, and to despair well, 
then, I will go — but, yet, how shall I? 
-- -- Oh! compassionate me, Jennet, ” 
throwing himself once more on his knees before her — here I lay open to you' my bleeding, my agonising heart — 1 am miserable — yes, I am miserable in the utmost extreme of the word — wound me no further — intercede for me — let me claim a more legal title to her, to your Savour — the ceremony of marriage — oh! bless me with its performance — she is mine by every other right — yield her to me now in that Sacred band, that must insure us bliss for ever.” Jennet was torn with 
'consticiing 
ELIZA WARWICK. s9 
conflicting struggles — she knew too well she should not long Survive — the idea of leaving me without one friend in the world, without the shadow of a protestor, shocked her tenderness — but her delicate Soul still recoiled at the thought of giving me a Second time to a man from whom my honour had received an injury, never to be compensated in her opinion — yet his unfeigned penitence, his open avowal of marriage, his soul rending grief, all conspired to make her pity and strive to relieve his agony. 
When Sir Charles had done Speaking, he fixed his wild impatient eyes in her face — She wept plentisully — she could not utter a word. He approached me — he took my cold, my pashve hand — and led me to the Sect of Jennet — 

Here, 
6o THE HISTORY OF 
‘‘ Here, Jennet, ” continued he, look on this masterpiece of persedtion — Will you not insure her youth a fond, a cherishing protedfor?” Jennet looked up, and, clalping her arms around me, she exclaimed, ‘ What does my dear miss Eliza Say? — Will she consent? — 1 shall not long be with )teu — Will you once more trust to the vows of Sir Charles Beaufort? — Shall he Supply the place of your poor saithsul Jennet?’ “Never, ” cried I, with a firm composure, never, as long as I live, will I trust to a mail from whom I have Suffered Such injury; yet, ” continued I, “mistake me not,. Sir — I forgive you — from the bottom of my heart I forgive you — My prayers for your health, your repentance, and your happiness, shall be your attendants ever — • but never can I con lent, even Sor your own credit’s Sake, to give you a wife 
whose 
ELIZA WARWICK. 6t 
whose innocence is stained, whose character is lost.” 
Perhaps, my Lord, you may suppose I wept — perhaps you represent to your fels my Sorm as a pathetic picture of woe — No — I resembled an insensible statue — I had no tears — I felt no grief — nothing could at that moment have made an impression on my Soul — even the distress, the agonising distress, os Sir Charles Beaufort affected me not. Now you may believe that I had conquered Sensibility itself. 
He clasped his hands in wild astonishment — he wrung them in deep despair — he cast himself at my Seet — he besought me to recall the dreadful Sentence I had pronounced — he exclaimed against it in 'she agony of his heart — he Swore to put 
an 
62 THE HISTORY OF 
an end to his wretched lise, if I persisted in resusino: him. 1 beheld him in meek Surprise, and pitied the affliction his own guilt had involved him in — I told him, if he would leave us immediately, (for 1 Saw my poor Jennet was almost overcome by the violence of his Sorrow,) he should hear from me in two days at farthest — that I would consider well on all that had passed that night, and that he should Soon receive my determination, provided I neither Saw nor heard Srom him ill the mean time. 
‘‘ Ah !’* cried he, must I leave you in Such horrid uncertainty! — you have, perhaps, doomed me already to eternal mise ry, and you Sear to repeat it to me — but do not — I will not alarm you — I will not expire before you — I will Spare your eyes the terror os that Scene.” ‘ Well, well, * 
answered 
ELIZA WARWICK. 63 
answcred I, ^ pray oblige me in my turn — I do not wish to in Spire )’ou with hope — I am above acting towards you with duplicity — Give me, however, two days to determine finally — If I can bring my sels to think of you with less horror — if I can So Sar compassionate your repentance as to reward it — I will tell you So — but at prescnt I must be candid enough to Say, my delicacy, nay, my senses, must be lulled asseep, is ever I conlent again to assume the title of your wise. Adieu! Sir — till you quit this house 1 will Suffer nothing to plead for you in my bosom.’ 
The unfortunate Sir Charles was too much shocked, too little himself, to os fer to detain me; and I walked out of the room without molestation. When I was gone, he entreated Jennet, in the most pathetic manner, to become his 
advocate. 
64 the HISTORY OF 
advocate. Site promised little — but he flattered himsels, from the share os pity she Seemed to bestow on him, that she would plead for him with success — yet he took his leave in no enviable state of mind — doubts, hopes, and fears, were the companions of his breast — and the reproaches he mlist have made his own heart were not the least os his punishments. 
'When we were left to ourselves, I prevailed on Jennet to retire to rest directly, Saying that at breaksast, the next morning, we weuld talk over the strange occurrences of the evening. She assented to my proposal; and as Soon as she was in bed, and asleep, I returned to the o there room, and, throwing mysels on an old sashioned row of chairs, I gave a loose to those seiisations which until that moment 
ELIZA WARWICK. 65, 
incnt I imagined I had Sor ever conquered. 
You will wonder, my Lord, why I should have put off Sir Charles to a later day, and why I should have kept him for an instant in suspence — but, if you will consider my situation at that period, you must be convinced, that, had I not by Some little art engaged him to quit us, my dear Jennet, already exhausted, would Soon have Sunk beneath the fatigue of mind and body that opprested her. 
The next morning my kind friend aiked me what 1 had determined on? 
‘‘ My dearest Jennet, ’’ cried I, is it poshble that you, who know me, should doubt one minute of my resolution? — Everything telk me I should not hearken vol. II F to 
si THE HISTORY OF 
to Sir Charles — my Soul disdains his perfidy — and who knows but this repentance may be Such a piece os his art as we cannot See through? — But if in that respedt I should injure him, my heart no longer acknowledges his empire over it — I once loved him — ah! my God! to what a degree os fondness did I love him! — but at the instant I ceased to ejieem Sii: Charles beausort, the purity of my Sentiments forbade me to behold him longer in the lio; ht of a lover — I will Sooner die than vow to honour a man Sor whom I must ever possess the most entire contempt.’^ 
Jennet argued with me, but she had the worst side to desend. We at length agreed to change once more our place of habitation, and that I should then write to Sir Charles, and leave my letter with Mrs. Morris for him. We determined 
however. 
ELIZA WARWICK. 67 
however, not to inuust her again with Gur Secret, as we suspedted it was she alone who could have discovered our retreat to Sir Charles. 
Jennet and I went together in a coach to many houses that advertised Sor lodgers, and at last we made choice of one that Seemed most eligibly situated for us, and fettled the terms. I had our things car tied thither that very day; and after discharging all our expenses at the former lodging. Jennet and I immediately took poffeshon of our new one. Prior to our (departure though, I lent Sor Mrs. Morris,, reproached her with the insormation she had given to Sir Charles Beaufort, and assured her os its hing occasioned me much trouble and vexation. The poor woman confessed to me, whth tears in her eyes, the whole story; and the idea Fa of 
€8 THE HISTORY OF 
of the fifty guineas distressed me beyond measure: however, as I had broken in upon them, I gave Mrs. Morris my watch — I entreated her not to deceive me, but to Sell it; and, as it was, with its chain and appurtenances, a very beautiful, and, indeed, magnificent ornament, I did ho}te, with the ring and the other things which Sir Charles had taken Srom Mrs. Morris, it would make up to the Sull the Sum which he had Sent me by her. At the •fame time I gave her a letter for Sir 'Charles, which I begged her to deliver to him the next day. We Said nothing of our intentions to leave the house we received her in; and she bid us adieu! promising to do all as 1 directed. The letter I Sent Sir Charles Beaufort was as ibllows.: 

ELIZA WARWICK. 69 
LQ Sir Charles Beaufort. 
At the moment that I must resuse a request on which (if your protestations may be believed) your happi ness depends, my Soul trembles at the idea of giving you uneasiness — but it is past — My reason, my delicacy, my peace, called loudly on me to determine as I have done; and you. Sir, must blame my cruel stars, not me, if you think that in this point I have treated you with rigour. 
Mrs. Morris will make good to you the money you were So kind as to Surnish her with for my use; with it. Sir,, receive my thanks for your generous intention. 
F 3 
I once 
jo THE HISTORY OF 
I once more entreat that I may he thought of by you no further than as a friend, who will ever pray sincerely for that ’serenity of 'rtlirid which your return to virliie can alone insure. Adieu! Sir: this is the last time, I'trust, that you will consider'it wbrth your While to perseciite a wretch worn with grief, and little able to contend ap^ainst a new affliction 
O 
Heaven gu^rd ybu! 
Eliza wiarwick.’’^ 
We were now Sure that we had escaped for ever this dangerous, this insinuating rnan; and we once more endeavoured to regain that tranquillity which our constant fears and alariiis ha’d deprived us of for many a long day : but, alas! — ah! they will never end! — northwest, did I Say? — Un 
srateful 
ELIZA WARWICK. 71 
gratesul Eliza! — Yes, my Lord, they will very Soon cease to torment; and .the unfortunate orphan, who now relates her woes, will, ere many days expire, ^be transsated to those blisssul regions where .pain and .Sorrow .come not — Be not as feded, dear Huntley, at this assurance— — with, me at the projpect whkji now opens besore me, and with ms look forward with exultation and delight. 
Soon after .we were Settled in our new .abode, - I Saw rny dear and amiable friend visibly dying by .stow gradations — i?er strength deserted her — a Sever consume, d her — and the gnawing vulture, grief,, .preyed upon her vitals. ajl this I Saw with terror, with agony. Ah! my Lord, who can paint the excpiisite misery I en f 4 dured! — 
72 THE HISTORY OF 
dured! — my hand trembles as I write — my heart sickens at the bare remembrance of what I was at that time about to Suffer. 
Dr. H 
whose kind assistance I "again implored, gave me little reason to hope her recoverst, and in a short time assured me all medicine was sruitless. Jennet was herself pcrsetshly sensible of her approaching dissolution — yet I never believed it would happen So Soon. 
One evening, as I was reading to her while she lay on the bed,, she arose from her reclining posture, and, taking hold of my hand, she thus addressed me: 
“My dear young lady! be not alarmed, be not grieved, at an event that will happen in a few hours, and which all our • care 
ELIZA WARWICK, 73 
’care has not been able to prevent — God .has pleased to call me out of this world, •'at a time, indeed, when most I wished to live — when your friendless situation would render your Jennet a necessary companion — and when her Services would appear to you most usesul — But how shall I do my duty to my Creator, if I thus repine at his commands? -- Yet, oh! my dear, my valued child!” cried she,, em ‘ bracing me as I Sat, how shall I leave you, thus alone, as it were, in the wide world! — Who will attend on you in sickness?? — will comfort you in Sorrow h” ‘ Oh! Jennet, Jennet, ’ replied I, clasp ing my arms about her as if to detain her from going, ‘ do not, do not leave me — What will become of me, indeed! — I have no one to comfort, no one to protect me but you — Ah, God! will you Snatch from me the only consolation I ‘ have 
.DHE HISTORY OF 
have left -1 “’ She replied not — and I railed .up my eyesito her face — Ah!! Lord, : I jperceived at that moment she was Struggling with .Death — ‘ What, ’ cried I, frantic, ‘ will you go, then .j’ — Jennet, Jennet, my dearest, best of friends! will you forsake the poor (Orphan (you shave loved So long .?’ ’‘she raised her eyes to' Heaven, as if entreating its, protection of me — she eouldmotlspeak — her voice iliad failed her — her breath jgrew short. The idea of losing her gave way at that instant .to a consideration less Selfish, and I exerted my reason to appear composed, and 4to ashst her in her dying moments. She 1 shortly I after grasped my hand with fervour — and, laying‘her face on my lap,. !as 1 fatshy her, exisired. Thus died the sincerest of friends, .and the most amiable of women! 
*- 


When 
ELIZA warwrc'k. 75 
When I found that she was really^gone, my shrieks brought up tlte landlady of the house, who was, most fortunatelyffor me, of a humane and gentle disposition. She Spoke to me in that common style which people on Such occasions mistake for comfort — she, however, let fall many a tear at the sight of my affliction — and if she knew not how to alleviate my Sorrows, she could at least Sympathise in them * but, my Lord, I then gave myself up as. a creature despised by the world, and: abandoned by Heaven — I reflected on; jcnnet’s tenderness, her faithfulness, both to my mother and to me — My misery arid! despair are nob to be expressed. 
‘‘ Ah!*’ wouldii often Say, asl embraced her lifeless form — ah! my more than parent! — in this stroke, in this one stroke, have I experienced the greatest ^ misfortune 
^6 THE HISTORY OF 
missortune that could besal me! — Now to whom can I apply for advice? — to iwhom shall I unbosom my full heart? — Where shall I find Such a Sriend? — Such a friend Inow, I have not one friend 'in the world!” 
When my Jennet was buried — oh! 
good God! what a Scene !-1 will Spare 
• you, my Lord — I will pass it over. 

In desraying the expenses os jennet’s burial I parted with my last guinea, and I had neither resolution not Spirits to undertake any employment for my Subsistence — a stow’sever hung upon me — and I was, Srom fatigue and anxiety,, emaciated to a mere Ikeleton. My kind landlady waited upon and nursed me with 
the 
ELIZA WARWICK. 77 
the tenderness of a mother — but, I know not how it is, my Lord, poverty and pride are Such inseparable companions, that I could not bear to be further obliged than I had a prospcd: of repaying — I therefore shunned Mrs. Adams, and would remain whole days, locked up in my apartment, without beholding the face of any creature but a servant who would bring me up for breakfast and - dinner Something that her good mistress would provide for me. In the mean time, grief preyed upon my heart, and, like a pernicious reptile on a rose, destroyed my health and Lloom. 
Mrs. Adams indulged<me in my retreat 'for Lome days; but when she supposed That the violence of my distress had decreased, and reason was about to resume sits Seat, she absolutely^insisted'on my taking 
7» THE HISTORY Of 
ing Some air, and leaving those Sad apartments ostener than I did. This was very disagreeable to me — I hoped that my Sorrow, as it could affect none but myself, might have been Suffered to take its .course, and that my melancholy and ' wretchedness would not have been dis c turbed — but Mrs. Adams pleaded to me : the duties os religion— — To those duties kjtiy heart assented. 
.1 now began to think once more of applying for Some san mounts, to procure me Subsistence — I imparted my Scheme to Mrs. Adams, and she agreed to get me Some — They in 4 little measure helped to ijestore me to mysels — buti alas!; my Lord, to what was 1 restored! — only to a more Sensible and persedt knowledge of my unhappy situation. It is true, I e; x claimcd not — I wept not So frequently — - 
but 
ELIZA WARWICK. 79 
but a Surer and more fatal despondency had taken root in my bosom — and it wai not, because I was less violent, that I was more happy — on the contrary, I felt that the melancholy I then endured would very Soon become a Surer poison than that of a louder and more turbulent sorrow could possibly 
At the end of one week, when I was to return the work I had taken complete, Mrs. Adams was not well, and, rather than be the occasion of inconvenience to her, I determined to carry the mounts toyself. I left the house very plainly at* tired, with the hood of my cloak drawn tp about my Sace, and was, I thought. Securely hidden from the prying eyes of any I should chance to meet; but the .fevent will prove I was known, in Spite of all my caution. ■. .at 
•1 had 
Bo THE HISTORY OF 
I had not turned many streets in my way home, when I listed up my head Suddenly on hearing my name pronounced id a low and tremulous tone; but what was my amazement, my Lord, to behold in the person that thus accosted me no other than my old friend Mr. Warley. I shlushed — I was concerned at the rencontre — however, I tried to make the best of it, and Snsiled through those tears that forced their way into my eyes. He begged me to give him leave to attend •me home — I desired him not to think of it — but he overruled my objections ■by his kind and obstinate entreaties, and J consented to it at length, though with, much regret. As Soon as we arrived at my poor home, and I led the way into my little .drawing-room, the amiable Air. Warley Sell at my Seet, and burst into a stood of tears. This affected me 
more 
ELIZA WARWICK., 8i 
more than I had been before; and, Seating myself, I pointed to a chair near me, which I wished him to occupy. Mr. Warley could not Speak, but Silently o beyed me. The agitations os us both were too great, too exquisite, for Some time, to be described. After many minutes had elapsed, he exclaimed — 
Ah! my dear miss Warwick! is it thus we meet? Is it thus, at last, I See you!” ‘alasi Mr. Warley, ’ replied I, ‘ these emotions are too great Sora poor creature, Such as Eliza Warwick, to occasion in your bosom — I have been unfortunate, it is true — but misery is the lot of mortals — let not, then, my griefs draw from you those tears which may be shed in common Sor mankind — Bewail not that it is Eliza that endures, but that she has not fortitude Sufficient to bear her. Tol, II G trials 
2z the history of 
tfiais as she ought.’ “Ah !” cried he. Snatching my hand with rapture, “adversity has not, I find, changed those sen timehts which ever came still improved from those lips — No despair! — no complaints! — Ah! my Eliza!” Mr. war lay sighed, and looked with significance upon me. To give a turn to the Subjedr, I ashed him how long he had been in town? Three weeks, ” answered he, have I been in Search of you — As Soon as I returned from Ireland, I learned from Lord Stamford your history since his friend’s arrival in England — I posted to London, in order to Seek you out, and offer you my friendshipbut first I re solved to See Sir Charles, and desire ati explanation of his treatment of you — In order to accomplish that design, I called at his house, and Sent in my name; but I was told he was 'Merry and could see 
ELIZA WARWICK. 83 
no one — I then repaired to a cpffee house, which I knew he frequented, and where, if the story cff his indisposition was feigned, I should stand Some chance of feeing him — There I found Col. Middleton — he confirmed the account given me by 'Sir .Charles beaufort’s servants, and acquainted me that his love for anti anxiety about yon had reduced him to the deplorable Jiate he was then in — Middleton next briefly informed me of the whole affair, since that.diabolical deceit of his friend’s, down to your resusal of him after his wife’s death, and your change .of habitation, which has since Secreted you from shim — He added, that 1 he wished he could jinforpt meaf your place of retreat — Were it in his power to dojt^ Sir Charles Beaufort Should not lie despairing and dying — your direflion would soon be known to him and the unhappy lover be enabled to pour G 2 the 
84 THE HISTORY OP 
the soft tale into your perhaps pitying ear.. My blood arose” continued Mr. Warley, “at the unconcern and free air os Middleton, and, aster telling him plainly, with all the warmth I Selt on the occasion, that Sir Charles Beaufort had afied the part of a villain., I left him to chew the cud of his resentment. What to do after this, I knew not — his intelligence had almost thrown me into despondency, and 1 could form no method by which I could discover your abode — however, as Col. Middleton had in his relation told me of the street in which Mrs. Morris lived, who knows, thought I, but this woman is in the Secret, but pretends ignorance in order to shield Eliza Srom their persecution. Big with this hope, I repaired to the woman’s house, and made many inquiries concerning you; to all which she answered with tears in her eyes, and 
, an' 
ELIZA WARWICK. 
an affuranee of your not having thought it worth your while to mention to her your purpose of removing — you could not venture to trujl hery she Said, since Jhe had heen weak enough to disclose a circumjtance you had done her the honour of intruflingy. in confidence., to her diferetion.. 
‘M, however, continued to visit Mrs. Morris, more from the pleasure of hearing you praised, and described in your different avocations, ‘ than Srom any idea of gaining intelligence of you. She endeavoured to put me in a way os being Successful — she 'gave me a direction to the milliner’s from whom you took work, and told me that perhaps she knew Something concerning you — though, added she. Jennet used to be very cautious not to let those people have the leaf hint relative to her Lady, in any refpefl, and Ifuppofe con to do fo^ jtill 
G 3 I was 
86 THE HISTORY OF 
I was determined to try — and, having learned the name you had assumed to them on your application for business, I went immediately to the shop, and inquired particularly about you. They laid, they expected to hear Srom you on Saturday night, but they knew nothing of your place of residence — that they only engaged to buy from you the work you completed, and theresore it was immaterial to them where you lived.. 
My impatience for the arrival of Saturday is not to be told; and when I arose this morning, Something like an agreeable presentiment rushed across my heart. I resolved to lurk about the street and shop all the evening, and to stick close to any I suspedled till I heard their business. When you passed me, I was struck; but, on a nearer view of you, 
'I thought 
ELIZA WARWICK. 87 
1 thought the figure, though dignified and elegant as it appeared, was too emaciated for yours; yet I determined to follow you Secretly into the house — Ah I when I heard your voice, I rio longer doubted — I was going to throw myself at your feet — I was about to discover myself to you besore every one — but prudence restrained my impetuosity, and the fear of wounding your feelings and delicacy overcame the violence of my transport. I did intend to conceal myself until your arrival at home, but I found it was impossible; my impatience broke through all restraint,, and the event has made me happy.” 
Here Mr. Warley kissed my hand with an expreshve joy in his countenance, which I had long been a stranger to behold. 
G 4 I thanked 
88 THE HISTORY OF 
I thanked him for the trouble he had taken on my account, but at the Same time regretted it. He would not hear me on that subjeds, but inquired anxi oussy Sor his good and much revered friend Jennet. At this mention of her name, my grief was all awakened, and my heart throbbed with Sorrow too big for utterance. Mr. War lay understood my emotions, and turned Srom me to conceal his tears. 
From that hour, my Lord, Mr. war lay became a constant visitor at my poor dwelling; and, will you believe it? in Spite of all my missortunes, it still remained in my power to make him happy. He made me an offer of his hand, as suring me, at the Same time, his heart had ever been my property; but I resused his generous offer, by telling him, that, 
if 
ELIZA WARWICK. 85 
if I would not marry him when my innocence was the brightest charm I owned, I would never pay him So poor a compliment as to do it when I was a bankrupt, not only of that, but of every other. I was Sorry to perceive that the steadinels of my resolution made him unhappy : he loved me with a degree of Sentiment and ardour which Souls like his alone caa. 
, Seel. 
Mr. Warley came to me one day, and told me he had a piece of intelligence to communicate to me that he flattered him sclf would give me pleasure. As he was ever studying Some adt of kindness towards me, I hardly wondered at the look of delight which was suffused over his whole countenance. \ 

I wrote “immediately, upon my finding 
^0 THE HISTORY OF 
ing your lodging, ” Said Mr. Warley, “to Lord norsolk — I painted to him, in the liveliest colours, - your virtue., and dijlrefs — I Spoke of the Duke of Beauvarifds bounty, and of the fortune he bequeathed you — of the unfortunate fire uhich in art ill-fated hour defiroyed all hope of a provision from your guardian — and that you Voere too great, too noble, to descend to accept of a maintenance from the man who had fo highly injured you. I asked him, if he did not think the honour of his wife's family concerned in rescuing an amiable niece from poverty and ruin? — ^ that it was very uncertain how long you might lie concealed from Sir Charles beau fort, whom, though he had offered you the mojl honourable recompense, your soul disdained, and your virtue abhorred — that his malice, and the advice of his friends, might fiimulate a man of such abandoned. 
principles 
ELIZA WARWICK. gt 
principles to take same violent measures to regain you in his power and that it was a cruel Jituation for any young creature to he exposed to — hut surely more horrible.,, when it is conftdered that this amiable unhappy female is the niece of Lord Lenter^ don and Lady Norfolk; and that, though fhe has great relations, Jhe cannot amongd. them find one charitable friend who would reach out an arm to screen her from insult, I then mentioned to him, cruel Eliza I” *’ continued Mr. Warley, “my love and admiration of you, and your fixed resolve to' ptinijjj me for daring to aspire to fo much beauty, and fo much virtue — I also added,. that, would you have accepted of my hand and fortune, or my fortune without any expeflation on my fide of a return, Lc d Norfolk would not have received such an application. I waited, ” Said Mr. Warley, with an extreme impatience .for his 
answer, 
THE HISTORY OF 
answer, which I received last night. He tells me, he ever loveti and refpeftedyou, and that upon the death of the Duke of Beauvarife he w. uld have offered you an asylum in his house hut for some family reasons, whieb at length he has inurely overcome — and that Lady Norfolk vnll send her own inaid in their pofi coach for you whatever day you will pieafe to appoint— — house' and everything in it (he promises) fhd.ll be rendered as comfortable ayid agreeable to you as you could wifhp What strange news was this, my Lord! — I remained motionless — I did not think I heard truly — The idea of being owned by my family, the thought of finding a parent in Lady Norfolk, and the hope of her and Lord Norfolk's protection. So overcame me with a fensa tion of joy, that I was unable to pour forth my gratitude to the worthy and, friendly. 
ELIZA WARWICK: 93 
friendly Mr. Warley. He was affedfed ' at the sight of my agitation — he kissed my hands — he bid me look on him as a brother — and that, if I did not like my reception and treatment at norfolk man sion, he would endeavour to place me Somewhere more to my satisfadhon. 
When I had the power of utterance, I Said all that a heart overflowing with thankfulness, and admiration of his worth, ■could dictate; and, as Soon as he was gone, I wrote a respedtful and tender letter to Lady Norfolk, acknowledging her' and her lord’s goodness to an unhappy orphan, and telling her that in three days I would be ready To throw myself at their feet. 
I parted with Mrs. Adams and the amiable Mr. Warley with a siullness and grief 
of 
^4 the HISTORY OF 
of heart which no words can describe, and took my Seat in the carriage by a stern and bold looking woman whom Lady Norfolk had Sent to accompany me down to Huntingdonshire. 
When we were got off the stones of : London, I looked back, as if to bid adieu to my ever dear Jennet, whom I haddest behind — the road, Too, which I travelled, .reminded me of her and my guardian; momently. 
My companion was on the whole .very jstlent, * but she Seemed to read my Soul — iher eyes were never out of my face, and .once she muttered, as wcigot out to take • Some refreshment on the road, “'Faith, you are twenty times prettier than my Lady, even when she, was in the bloom of youth; .and a hundred i times/more So 
than 
ELIZA WARWICK. 95 
than she thinks.’* I regarded this not, : however, and pretended not to have •heard it. 
As we drew near to Norfolk castle, who can relate my agonies! — Ah! my Ood !” eicclaiitied I, forgetting the attendant — “ah! my jod!! was herty it was the very place, my dear;, dear mother first’saw the ‘objedl of her love — it was here that my guardian, that Jennet, first pointed out to me \i\2.^ihat was nor folk.dastle — it was in that park I fainted > — ’twas there Lady nbtsolk beheld me •with horror and disdain.” I clasped my hands together — I wrung them in the deepest Sorrow — i’breathed a wish, that I was disencumbered of this mortal'clay, and in the Society of those blessed Spirits who, I doubted not, were hooking on me, ’with compashon — I named them Severally 
■ — : my 
$5 THE HISTORY OF 
— my father — my mother — my guardian — my dear Jennet — and to each loved appellation I dropped the tribute of a tear. The woman who was with me awakened me to reason by ashing, in a cool, Sarcastic manner, “Whether travelling was apt to give me a fever PI told her, if she supposed me delirious, she was mistaken — but that, indeed, I had lately experienced Sorrow Sufficient to turn the brain even of a stoic — ‘ however. Madam, * continued I, ‘ I make no complaint — I hope I am going to be happier under the wing of Lady Norfolk than I have been ever since the death of my guardian, * 
The insolent, unfeeling creature Smiled, .but did not think it worth her while to ^eply to this Speech. 
When .1 arrived at the castle. Lord 
Norfosh 
ELIZA WARWICK. 97 
norsolk hurried to the coach door, and presented me with his hand — Welcome!” cried he, ‘^welcome! my dear niece! — your aunt waits with impatience to See you.” I would have thrown my sels on my knees besore him, but he prevented me; and, clasping his arms around me, he Seemed already to Seel a tender ness for one who only could have expected Srom him compashon. He led me through many magnificent rooms before we reached that in which Lady Norfolk lay reclined on a Sopha. Her dress had Something So negligent and So elegant in it, that, had I known her then, as I do now, I should not have had a doubt of her expecting other visitors besides her poor niece that evening. As I entered with a low and respedlsul curtesy, she just nodded her head; and when I approached her throne, and threw myself at her vol. II H feet, 
98 THE HISTORY OF 
feet, begging os her to accept my thanks for her humane and generous patronage, she vouchsafed to Say, “You may rise, and sit down.” I obeyed her. In truth I wanted Support, and my limbs almost •denied their office. Take off her hat and cloak, ” Said she to one of her female attendants. I Saved the woman the trouble. Stand up, ” cried the unfeeling Lady norsolk, and let me See this celebrated figured I did as I was desired. She laughed Supercilioussy — You tlimk yourself very handsome, miss Eliza — don’t you ?” ‘ Ah! Madam, ’ replied I, kneeling, and catching hold os one of her hands, which 1 bathed with my tears, ‘ I have no beauty — I wish for none — Look into my heart — could you but read the Sentiments of that, you would find my gratitude more worthy your observation.’ ‘‘ Prettily Said, I vow, ” exclaimed 
she — 
V 
ELIZA WARV/ICK. 
99 
she — Some one has told you, I suppose that these heroics become you.” I was hurt — I was shocked beyond description. Lord norsolk hastened and raised me from the humiliating posture I had thrown mysels into — “Charming Eliza !” cried he, “you are fatigued — Would you not preser retiring to bed instead os staying Supper? — ^mething warm, Some Sackr whey, will relresh you — and your sever ish look makes me apprehend that it wuj be prejudicial as well as disagreeabk to you to sit up longei’.” 1 bowed assent — my tears choked my voice, No, *' Said her Ladyship, she must stay Supr per — why Surely she is not now So delicate !” I felt the sharpness of that expression— — my Lord, I wished my shlf even poorer than ever, and painting fan mounts. Lord norsolk endeavoured, to turn it off, by remarking, that my aunt H 2 was 
loo THE HISTORY OF 
as always felfiffj. Poor man! his heart was good — but a little exertion ot Spirit would have been much better for hjmsels^ •his Lady, and me. 
At Supper’ a very large party of ’both sexes were assembled. I was in a dejha hille, which Lord Norfolk excused, by telling them Lwas a traveller. He presented me to every individual, by the title of miss Warwick, Ms niece; and ■many compliments were paid me which I am Sure I by no means merited. I begged leave to sit at table by Lord Norfolk — he immediately took me by the hand, and placed me next him. We were not long at Supper, when a beautiful young man entered, and, after making Some confused apologies for his late appearance. Seated himself at the lower, end of the table. We happened to be 
Just 
ELIZA WARWICK, rot 
jtlst opposite to each other. My Lord whispered me, that that was a cousin of mine, and his only Son. Lord Westbrook seemed struck with my appearance — he could not remove his eyes from my face. lady norsolk, observing it,, alked hitir Whether he intended to Sup, or x.o jiar gaze all night? The youth blushed — but replied, with a grace, 'That if such a 'phenomenon was often exhibited, he could forget to eaty and live by gazings^ This occasioned much wit from the company, but brought down upon me Some bitterness from his mother. 
When the cloth was removed, a gentleman whom Lady Norfolk Seemed to admire much, and who was placed next her, observed, in a loud whisper, that I strongly resembled her Ladyship. My aunt appeared pleased with the Speech, H 3 (Sor 
102 THE HISTORY OF 
(Sor age would ever be thought to look like youth,) and laughingly replied, Jhe hoped her eyes had somewhat more fire in them. Her admirer, hotvetcr, chose to mortify her, by Saying, “Faith I Madam, is yours have So much, your Ladyship must be more destructive than I have ever Sound you.’’ ‘ insolence !’ retorted Lady Norfolk, and cast on me a look of indignation and anger — At that moment, indeed, no one could have denied but that her e, es had more fire in them thaa fvveetness. The ladies arose — Lady Norfolk Spoke to an attendant, and desired me to Sollow her — I obeyed, and I was conducted to the apartment allotted for me. 
Here, my Lord, I dismiffed the Servant; and, prostrating myself, I poured forth my Sorrows into the bosom of shy 
God — 
ELIZA WARWICK. 103 
God — I bcsought him to strengthen my mind and heart to endure the trials he was pleased to Send me — I prayed Sor resignation to his will, and Sor comfort in my affliction. My Soul was Somewhat relieved by this fervent Supplication. I got up, and threw myself on my bed. What a night did I pass! Often would I say, “In this house how happy has my mother been! and, ah! how miserable also I’' Then their dear forms (my father’s and my mother’s) would rush on my idea; and the picture of my mother, which hung about my neck, was kissed, and bathed with my tears. 
The next morning I arose very early, and, dressing mysclf in a neat elegant dejhabille, though with a heavy heart, I stole Softly into the garden, in order to try whether the air would not remove H 4 from 
104 THE HISTORY OF 
from me a headache, which anxiety, and a wretched night, had inssiflied on me. I had not walked long, when I beheld Lord Westbrook turn out of an ^lley; and, besore I could avoid him, he met me So Suddenly, and So nearly, that it was impossible for me to retreat. He was Surprised at the rencontre — he Seemed to be awakened Srom deep meditation. I apologised for the interruption, and was proceeding, when he caught hold of my hand — • 
“Stay, Madam, ” cried the amiable young nobleman — I have been meditating, stis true — but will you pardon me, if I Say you have been the Subject os thole meditations ?” I expressed my amazement, and ashed how one of whom he knew fo little could for a moment employ his thoughts? ‘‘ I haye Seen you but 
lately. 
ELIZA WARWICK. 105 
lately, I own, ” replied he, “but my father has frequently described your charming person to me; and he the other day informed me of the whole of your story — Ah! my amiable cousin, I fear you will not be much happier here than you have been — Lady Norfolk execrates the memory of my unfortunate aunt — and her daughter’s admirable deportment can make, I fear, but little impression on a heart So prejudiced against her parents. I have not ssept all night — I threw myself on my bed, indeed; but it afforded me no rest — the reflections of what your Sensibility must have Suffered, on your entrance into this house, and the fear of what you have still to endure from Lady norfolk’s pride and implacability, have made me too unhappy to have allowed nn to taste'peace since I have beheld you, ’’ ‘ Good God !’ cried I, with 
emotion. 
ro THE HISTORY OF 
emotion, ^ what will become of the wretched Eliza y A stood of tears prevented my saying more. Lord Westbrook Seemed not less affedfed; but he infreated me to make myself as easy as poshble — “and sold he, things are as bad as I apprehend they will be; Lord Norfolk and I shall think of Some happier asylum Sor So much gentleness and virtue.” As he Spoke those words, he pressed my hand to his lips, and viewed me with a degree of tenderness and compashon which gave me comfort. I thanked him for his goodness;; he advised me to retire to the house, lest we should be Seen together. I followed his direction, and went to my own apartment. Some hours after, the woman who had been Sent Sor me to town came in, and desired me to accompany her to her lady’s dreshng room. As Soon as we entered it, Lady Norfolk arose from 
her 
ELIZA WARWICK. 107 
her toilet, and, viewing me steadfastly from' head to Soot, she celled out, You think, no doubt, miss Eliza, that that: pretty face of yours, and that fine person, will entrap my fon, or Some gentleman more to jom gout than Mr'.warley; but I have Sent for you, to give you a caution of endeavouring to expose those charms to Such a purpose. I know not what company we shall have today;; if it is made up of the young and thoughtless of the other Sex, for their sakes,, as well as your own, you shall not appear — no more Sir Charles Bcauforts, if you please,. Madam.’^ ‘ Ah! my Lady, * returned I,. ‘ you know but little of me, if you imagine Society has any charms for me — • 
* No !* cried I, with art emotion of agony — ^ when I was made Sensible that I had lost my honour, my only desire was to retire from the eyes of a bnsy world — 
Under 
lo THE HISTORY OF 
Under your protection, Madam, I shall be Safe — I wish to See only those whom 
you approve of -- -- As Sor the hope of 
conquest, Heaven can witness Sor me, I desire it not — nor is there a man in the 
world whom 1 would marry -- -- -- Fear no 
imprudencies Srom me — and do not reproach me with the greatest misfortune of my life A violent burst of grief put an end to my words. No more, girl, ” Said she, ‘‘ no more — I hope you will be prudent — but what are you crying for? — I did not offend you, I suppose, by giving you a little friendly caution.? I could not Speak — but taking hold of her hand, I kissed it respedtsully. “Well, well, ” Said she, “I believe you will be a good girl. You are fond of drawing, and ‘ you paint well,. I hear — here, try your ssdll upon this, ” giving me a miniature of herself — “take a copy of that 
picture. 
ELIZA WARWICK, icg 
pi<fiure, and, is you execute it well, I will reward'you Sor it.” I told her, if I could on any occasion oblige her, that thought would be a Sufficient reward. I took Srom her the miniature, and she gave me the key os a Small library which had belonged to a daughter of hers she had lately lost, saying, I Should find conveniences there for amujing myself either in reading writing., drawing., or fainting. I expressed many acknowledgments for her kindness, and I was going to Seek this charming room, when her Ladyship desired the Same woman to conduct me to it. I tripped aster her with a lighter heart than 1 had followed her with before. As we passed through a gallery leading to the library, we were met by Sir George Williams, who had remarked the night before my likeness to Lady Norfolk. He, shiiled confidently in my face, and endeavoured 
^10 THE HISTORY OF 
voured to catch my hand; but I Soon repulsed his forwardness by a certain look of hauteur, which if women were used, on Similar occasions to assume, they would Soon awe Such wretclies into bashsulness. He made way Sor me directly, with an oblequious bow, and an air of confusion. imy bold attendant remarked this Scene rand, with a Sneering, Supercilious tone, asked lire if 1 thought Sir George Williams was as fine a gentleman as the Mr. Warley Jloe had seen take leave of me in London? I answered her only by an aspedt os contempt, and .desired her to lead on to the room I wanted to See. 
'The library .was situated delightfully— — commanded a view of the park and gardens — and the books in it were delicately chosen — none but by the best aur thors. J had not long been Seated there, 
when 
.ELIZA WARWICK, m 
when I received an order from Lady Norfolk to breakfast upstairs; and accordingly chocolate and tea were brought to the library. Lord Norfolk came to the door Soon after, and begged admittance, I hastily stew to it; and, falling on my knees, I attempted to pour forth my gratitude for his goodness to an helpless orphan : but he would not Suffer me to dwell on the Subjeff; and raising me from my knees, he led me to a chair, and drew one himself near mine. He inquired about my health — Spoke osmy fatigue — and, at length, brought on the fubjetst of Sir Charles beaufort’s behaviour to me. I expatiated more on his repentance than his guilt, and I perceived that Lord Norfolk wissied a reconciliation .to take place between us; but I expressed So much horror at the thought, as silenced .•him ter ever on that topic. He hinted 
.to 
112 THE HISTORY OF 
to me, that Lady Norfolk had many peculiarities — that he feared I Should find it difficult to accede la moji of them — there was nothing on earth, he Said, would give him greater pleasure than to tnake my life eajy^ if he could not make it happy — and, at the Same time,, he presented me with notes for two hundred pounds, which he prayed my acceptance os, and desired me to make him my banker — that he would receive with joy my draughts., cind pay them with punfluality. My heart overflowed with tenderness, and acknowledgment, for his humane, his generous behaviour; and I thanked him more wdth tears than words. After wiping wnth shis, own handkerchief my eyes, he alked whether I would not give them the pleasure of my company in the hreakfajiing parlour? I excused myself from going flown, and he left me more reconciled to 
my 
ELIZA WARWICK. 113 
my situation than I had reason to apprehend I should have been. 
Sir George Williams, however, gave me no rest; he was constantly under my window, or keeping Sentry at my door, in hopes of Speaking to me: but, as I judged of his intent, I shunned him; and when by accident I met him, I always received his sine Speeches with the most discouraging reserve I could assume. IS he dined at the castle, I was not Suffered to leave my room; if only a family party assembled, Lady Norfolk would vouchsafe to let me eat at the Same table with her. At Such times Lord west •brook’s eyes Spoke “unutterable things, ” and I was Sorry to perceive that he loved me with, ardoun 
‘one .day, when Lady Norfolk was with vol. II I me 
t14 THE HISTORY OF 
me in the library, the Sash of a window was open, and we perceived a paper thrown into it from the garden. Lady norsolk ran, and took it up — What is this ?” cried she, “what is this her eyes darting fire at the Same moment. I answered, with conscious innocence, ‘ I know not, my Lady; but I suppose it might have Sallen in there, not from design, but accident.’ Aye, aye 1 ” returned she; well, miss, we will See” — and she broke open the letter, for Such it proved. Ah! my Lord, I can never describe her rage, when she perceived the writing and name of Sir George Williams. It contained a declaration of love for me, a lamentation of my being So confined, which he imputed to envy and jealousy merely, as it was well known (he Said) that my charms were irresistible, and that no woman’s could be compared 
to 
ELIZA WARWICK. 115 
to them, but she must Seem a Soil (however lovely out os my sight) when I appeared. He avowed his being struck with me from the first moment he beheld me in my travelling dress; and concluded by wishing, since Lady norsolk would not allow him a sight os me aster that first .interview, she had Spared him Srom Seeing me at all. 
“Fool that I was, indeed !” exelaim, ed her Ladyship, Sorgetting that I heard her — Ah! 1 little imagined the witch 
C) 
; was So handsome !” Reeolledting who was present, she cried, But I will be ‘revenged — Yes, you are Lady Eliza dar cey’s own daughter, L am w^eli convinced — you artsul, intriguing, vile creature !” What expressions r i was terrified to. death at her look and manner — I endeavoured to exculpate myself — I offered to 1 2 consront 
iisi THE HISTORY OF 
'Confront Sir George Williams, and to appeal to his honour whether he had evct received encouragement from me — but 'nothing could pacify her — and she at length fiuitted the room in the most ex ’travagant rage. — I am Sorry, my Lord, to be obliged to expose the Saults and follies os a woman whom Nature intended I should respect — nor would her cruel behaviour to 'my mother, or me, have 'made me expose them, had it not 'been imposhble, in the course os this history, to Screen them from your eyes. When Lady Norfolk lest me, my griefs burst forth afresh — in truth, I was almost worn out by them — my heart. So long accus tomed to Sorrows and alarms, was now, instead os becoming,, rendered weaker everyday — my nerves were all unstrung — and 1 had neither health nor ■sjiirlrs to Support me under the various •tonsiids I endured. 
ELIZA WARWICK. 117 
When I collejfted' reason enough to rested: on what was best to be done, I hastened down to Lord norfolk’s study. Ho admitted me; and. Seeing me violently agitated, he kindly Soothed and encouraged me to tell him all that had pasted to afstid: me in the way I was in. He was shocked at his wife’s behaviour which I cloaked up as well as I could; and bidding me compose myself,. and not Suffer Such a trifle to affect me, he left me, to Seek Sir George Williams. What pasted between them I know not, but Lady Norfolk Soon after appeared Satisfied of my being innocent, and 1 never heard more from the troublesome Baronet. 
I led, however, a miserable life — My constant fears of this vain, passionate woman — my dread of her son’s increasing I 3 pashon — 
ii THE HISTORY OF 
passion — the insolence of her female attendants — and, lastly, the state of wretched dependence I Seemed to live in — increased my detestation of my existence, and threw me almost into despair. 
In about two months after my residence at norsolk castle, (during which time I heard punctually from Mr. Warley,) a packet was brought up in haste, and 1 was told that a man on horseback had been Sent post with it. I was Surprised— — retiring with it to the library, I determined imnjedlately to Satisfy my curiosity. I attempted to break the Seal once or twice — but a fatal foreboding still kept me irresolute — yet I thought nothing could happen to me which I should dread to hear — and, in Spite of my feelings, I opened'the letter. Judge, my Lord, of my horror and grief when i'perused the following lines: 
ELIZA WARWICK. 119 
ISO Miss Warwick. 
Ah! lovely Eliza!. will ou forgive me, when you learn that Sir Charles Beaufort is no more — and that he dies by the hand of Warley } He now lies expiring before me — and a few minutes will convey him to that awful tribunal Srora whence there is no appeal — 
— -- -- -- Warley — wretched, despairing 
warley!! — only Sends him thither, with all his sins upon his head — but, by this one stroke, he sorseits Sor ever the esteem of the woman his fond Soul dotes 
on -- -- Oh !' miss Warwick, think me 
not a murderer! -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 
Your heart has never been alienated from beausort — your eyes have told me So at the moment you pronounced his I 4 doom 
120 THE HISTORY OF 
doom to be irrevocable — yet you loved him — and, ah! what a wretch, what an abhorred wretch, must I now appear to your affrighted imagination! 

'I Sat down in hopes of exculpating mysels in Some measure — but, alas! I am all distraction — his groans — his dying groans — ah! they Sear my Soul — and eve ry pang I give him I think you Seel through Sympathy. There lies, I cry, the man whom Eliza Warwick preferred to every other — and, for that reason, that I have deprived os lise — Ah! miserable, unhappy Warley! 

* * 
The 
ELIZA WARWICK:. 121 
The unfortunate vidtlm of my resentment has called for pen, ink, and paper — he means in these last moments to address his much injured Eliza. He will implore your pardon — you will shed tears of Sorrow to think of your cruelty— — you will execrate for ever the man who revenged a cause which you trusted 
alone to Heaven -- -- It was not a time 
to have exacted from him satissadlion Sor his crimes — ah! he was z penitent — a 
sincere, Suffering penitent but I will 
endeavour to recollect myself, and give' you a saithsul detail of this unhappy quarrel. 
Last night, my ill fate led’ me to a certain fashionable club, rather more inebriated than I should be willing to acknowledge on any other occasion. The first person I Saw', on entering it, was 
Coh 
122 THE HISTORY OF 
Col. Middleton, who, taking me by the arm, led me to a room wherein Lord Stamford, Mr. lawson, Sir James mill mant, and Capt. Hartdal, were over Some claret. I was in Spirits; and every man there, except Middleton, had taken a Sufficiency of wine to Suffer him to Say ^iny thing that occurred without restecstion,. cither before or after it was expressed. I joined the Bacchanalian Society, and drank to the healths of Some os the finest women in Europe. When my toast was called for — “Here, ” cried I, with a degree of ecstasy I always Seel when about to Speak of you — here, then, 1 will give you the greatest beauty, and most acdomplished creature, that England, or any other kingdom, can boast of producing” — I was attended to with eagerness— — “” continued I, is miss Warwick.” Sir James Millmant started 
at 
ELIZA WARWICK. 123 
at the sound, and, clasping his hands with fervour, exclaimed, “Oh Eliza! never, never, shall I Sorget thy Sweet innocence and loveliness !’^^ — He dropped on one knee, and drank you in a bumper. Lorsh Stamford followed his example,, as did every one present; and, vshen your name was pronounced, every heart Seemed as much prostrated to pay it homage as were our persons. Soon after. Col. Middleton asked me, if I had been successful in my Search to find you? I put on am air of nonchalance, and demanded, whether d.was to me he spoke?? patiently repeated his question. I then told limit did Pot concern him, or any one elfey whether I had or not — but by my manner I gave, him every reason to snppose I had, and had met with a reception as highly flattering as indeed it was. “.Dh ho !” 'cried Middleton, you are lucky, 
and 
j24 the HISTORY OF 
and she has been less cruel to you than to others, no doubt! — Pray, Warley, upon what footing do yob stand ?” My choler arole — ‘I perceived he hinted at a connexion which my love for you never could urge, and even for thinking of which your angelic purity would for ever have abhorred me.., 
** I desired him to part with' that Sar -- castic grin with which he then Spoke of you, put on perhaps for humour, but which, indeed, rendered him as odious as it exalted you — ‘‘ As for the footing on which 1 stand with her, ’^ Said I, I .will own, it is that of a lover — she knows I adore her — and I have made her an offer both of my hand and fortune — an offer that were she to accept would make .me the most blessed, the most envied of my Sex.’’ ‘and will she accept it?’ «•> - cried 
ELIZA WARWICK. 125 
cried the cool Middleton. “No matter, ’* returned I; “time will discover all.” 
By Heaven! I will not wait for ’its discovery, ’ exclaimed a man, who at that •instant rushed into the room, 1 turned about, and Sound it was Sir Charles Beaufort, who had, mn being informed that’! was coming in with col. Middleton, retired TO an adjoining chamber, hoping that the ingenuity of his friends would have torn from me the Secret of your Fcsidenee. Ishad been expected there, it Seems; asthat club was my usual haunt about eleven at night: and this Scheme was proposed by all piesent. Sir James Millmant 'enteredintodt with Redesign of .‘serving you alone, as he declared to the Avhole party, and to me a thousand times •since; that he judged it wouldbe hap •^pier for youy were you to forgive Beaufort 
126 THE HISTORY OF 
fort, after this trial of his constancy, and receive him once more to your Savour. 
At the sight of Sir Charles beausort, my heart almost leapt out^os my bosom tvith desire to tear his panting Srom its Seat — and I should have thought myself at that moment in a 'state os felicity, could I have beheld him gasping at my rfeet. Who are you cried I, with a tone os contempt and pashon, (which, my brave adversary would not brook) — “Who arc you, that thus dare to' in 'trude into the presence os men of ho ■.nourv ^ 1 am replied he, ‘ one that will chastise, your insolence, and teach you more refpe(3: .* Teach it to me .now” ” hitting him a blow : .on the Sace. Sir Charles returned it with • violence — and the gentlemen interposed. We had now gone too far to recede — the 
indignity 
ELIZA WARWICK. iif 
indignity I had received, though justly, stuck in my throat — and, desiring Sir Charles to meet me the next morning in Hyde park, I was about to leave the company. ‘ Hold, Sir, ’ cried Beaufort, * our honour, our courage, demand that .one of us should die — I have had a blow, which, by Heaven, I would not take icalmly Srom the first nronarch in the World— — Sir, we will meet to» miorrow, as you appoint — but let us live like friends this night — Stay with us — we will call for more wine — and let me Talk with you on a Subject near my heart — let me talk of my adorable Eliza p No, ’\rctuined I, you shall not con rtaminate So pure a Subject with your ibreath — Be it Sussicient that I tell you she is not in london ^she is out of )teur reach for ever.” ‘ Damned, damned ‘warley P exclaimed the aistidted beau' ^ ' • iurt, 
128 THE HISTORY OF 
fort, with a passion os grief not to be expressed. I offered to go, when he laid hold os my arm — ‘ By the hereaster one of us will Soon enter into, I conjure thee to tell me whether she has given thee en •couragentent ?’ 1 broke from him, and 
left the house. 
This morning I Sent for a lawyers my will was drawn up; and I bequeathed you everything I had, which was worth your acceptance, in case fortune favoured my rival. Millmant came much agitated tome immediately aster, and offered to .'be ‘my Second. I agreed to it; and we 'Went forth to meet our adversaries. 
• ft \yq Sound Sir Charles and Col. Middleton there betore us — and, after .the ‘iisual Salutations, we prepared .for the licncontret d3eawfort^ however, on our 
unsheadiing 
ELIZA iwarwick. 129 
tinsheathing our Swords, advanced; and took me by the hand 
* Warley, ’ Said he, ‘ one of us must fall — I will not be content unless it is the case — but, ere it be too late, do me the favour to Say, whether Eliza has listened to the addresses of any man since her refusal of me? — I shall die in peace; if I can be convinced she has not — And though you have grossly injured me, yet, as I am going to take fatisfaclion by arms, I would not resuse you Such a con solationin your dying moments.’ ^ “Suppose 1 was to tell you she had ?” cried I, with unheard of barbarity. ‘ Then, ’ replied he, in an agony, ‘ I have injured her Sufficiently — and my Sword should be 
jturned from yours to my own heart -- -- - 
Go, go, Warley, and be happy — she will make you Supremely Ib — Fear not but I : vol. II K will 
IO the history of 
N. 
will revenge upon myself the blow I took from you, and the one I dealt you — — Adieu !* He was actually going — but I caught hold of him — ‘‘ No, beausort, 
upon my Sacred honour, she has resused those offers I talked of last night — and she never will marry, she affirms, as long as she has life ‘ While I have life. 
you mean, ’ returned he — I thank you, 
Mr. Warley — and now for t^engeance.’ ‘we sought — Sir Charles sought rather his own destruction than mine— — on my telling him he treated me like a boy, he threw himself, when I was not aware of it, with violence on the point of my sword, and fell a voluntary victim to love and jealousy, 

We had him conveyed diredfly to shis own house; from whence I have not stirred j nor will I, until he has .breathed 
'.his 
ELIZA WARWICK. 131 
his lash He will see no one but me and Col. Middleton; and the affair is yet'a Secret. He continually presses my hand, and Says, 
I thank thee, dear Warley! — I was tired os life — She whom I love will reward you Sor having rid her of a monster ' — I trust this will expiate for ail my offences towards her Ah! my Elizal pardon, pardon the wretched — the guilty Warley I 



Beaufort has given me a letter to inclose to you — he Sias fallen into a soft deep — I will go and watch by his bedside. 



K 2 
ic 
His 
132 THE HISTORY OT 
His starts are Srequent — he is quite •’delirious. He awoke just now, and, o tpening his curtains with a violence which made his wounds bleed afresh, he exclaimed, ‘ His she! — tread lighter — my 
'wise will not hear you ^eliza! Eliza! 
'Surely you will not, leave me already! — — Look — look There! — she glides - out of •that door — She is gone."' He clasped his 'hands together with fervour. “Who is ■gone, dear beausort ?” alked.d here plied, ^ Yes, yes, Jhe is gone,, and never io return — dear, blessed, angelic sweet ness!’ 'He Sunk, and fainted. 0h! my jll fated hand! 
* 




€( 
Now, my dear miss W” arwick! now 
, are my heartstrings bursting -- Oh!! 
calm — be composed — Speak comsort 
to 
i: El A W A r: WI C'K.. 
to my Soul -- -- -- Alas! you must stand in 
need os it yoursels. I am about to Set off Sor Dover, Srom whence I expect to arrive in France im a'sew hours. I intended not to mention the unfortunate’ Beaufort — but I can think — Lean write of nothing else — He died in my arms,, an hour ago, imploring the pardon of his God, and his Eliza — He is gone — ah! Miss Warwick, he is gone for ever — and the miserable. author of his death is doomed m wander, like a Second Cain, accused and deserted by those whom most he loves. Pity, - for heaven’s Sake, pity my distraction! 
“I inclose poor beaufort’s letter eead^ and lament — but abhor not 
“The unhappy 
Warlev.” ' 
K 3 

j34 THE HISTORY OF 
y 5t(? Miss Warwick, 
Now, Madam, have I more courage to address you than when I appeared besore you a Suppliant for your love — I then laboured under the idea of having injured you irreparably, though I offered all the recompense in my power — but now the ease is different — your rigid virtue will be appeased, when you hear that my death is the price of its vengeance.; and your happiness complete, when you are insormed I die by the hand of a more favoured, more honoured rivak Delay not his happiness — crown amply every wish of his heart — and Spare not your thanks to him for having delivered you from a tormentor — Such is Beaufort considered by you — the once loved, the onbe too happy Beaufort! 
“Now 
ELIA WARWICK. 135 
“Now., I Say, do I address you with more confidence, since it is not for your 
love I am going to petition — Ina Sew 
a very Sew hours, I shall be ranked a amongst the dead — then shall I be alike itisensible tro the tenderness or disdain eveii' 
os Eliza Warwick! -- -- -- No, charming 
— no, inexorable Eliza! — I shall never again trouble you with my odious pashon 
-- -- But let me hope, that you will not 
execrate my memory — that you will not abhor the wretched man who caused your 
calamity -- -- Forgive and pity me now 
that I cannot again offend— — rested:,, that if I, by the blackest deceit, robbed you of your honour, (your virtue is still 
immaculate,) I died to restore it in 
the arms of Warley it will receive new lustre — and may you be happier than even the halcyon prospcdis of love that now Salute your eyes can promise you! 
K 4. Oh 1 
136 THE HISTORY OF 
Oh! Test — oil! loveliest, purest of women! adieu! -- -- Had I tifne, I would 
write on — I would, in Spite of all, repeat 
lagain my adoration of you -- -- Perhaps 
you may weep -- -- -- O God! would Eliza 
weep for me? — for Beaufort — who has 
injured her !^ -- -- Ah! if you have one 
'tender Sentiment yet remaining, by all our past love, I conjure thee, banish it 
not trom thy bosom -- -- -- Oh! could I 
live to tell thee but it is too late -- 
‘my pains are intolerable — my head Swims ' — the light itself is exiled from my eyes. 
* 

'I have recovered from the faintness which had Seized me — I return to the only object in the world my Soul regrets to leave — Eliza! I Saw thee in a dream — Ah! it was but a dream — for you were. - kind — ' 
ELIZA WARWICK. 137 
kind — you listened to my love — your eyes danced with pleasure — and your whole Sorm wore the aspedt of gaiety and de' ' I awoke transported — I opened my arms to receive thee — Ah! it was but a phantom to delude my imagination. I Slept Soon aster, and I again beheld thee but, alas! how changed! — shu were melancholy itsels — yet a patient resignation adorned your lovely brow. You approached, and took me by the hand — Beaufort, ’ you cried, in that Sweet ac •eent which still vibrates on my dying ear, 
‘ how long is it since that fatal day we parted in Derbyshire! — IHAVE not known one moment’s peace since then — nor shall I, until we meet in Heaven. You are going, bcausort — you will Soon die — I will pray for thee’ — and you wept. I kissed off the tears that abundantly stowed down thy cheeks, and I embraced with 
ardour 
138 THE HISTORY OF 
ardour'thy beauteous person — Now, ’^ cried 1, awaking, now am I at length happy ” — but, turning to Speak to thee,, I beheld that I had clasped my pillow,, and that my angelic Eliza had left me forever. 
» ‘‘ Most loved, most honoured, most adored Eliza! now must thy beausort ■bid thee an eternal adieu! — My wounds' bleed — they give me anguish — but, oh !' what pains can equal the thought of beholding thee no more! -- -- My senses' 
fail me — my heart expires — — and nowy dear, dear Eliza! Save me !” ■ — - 
When I had perused Mr. warley’s letter — what can I Say, my Lord? — ah !' how can I give you an idea of my horror 1. .My thoughts vere dark, were vyild, con.. — • 
ELIZA WARWICK. 135 
fused — He is dead, ” I cried — Warley, thou art no murderer — It is I — it is I alone, who have destroyed him.” I held Sir charles’s letter in my hand — I feared to open it — I kissed the cover — * I put it into my bosom — Not a tear came to my relief — not a sigh broke forth — yet, my Lord, I was miserable — His lovely form occurred to me — his love — his Seducing Smile — his tenderness — alh all' rushed at once into my mind 
Cruel Fortune !” exclaimed I, malignant stars! what have you not brought upon me! what new affliction have you yet in store! — No, ” continued I, “it is imposhble — it is all Spent now — your quivers are emptied — nor is there one event on earth that can even discompose me — my devoted head has been uncovered to .the pitiless storm of your resentraentr? f,, not 
u6 THE HISTORY OF 
not another blast that you can Send cat effect: it — my heart is broken — my Spirits 
fail me -- Come Forth, ” cried L taking 
his letter from my" bosom — ‘‘ come forth • — }>erhaps there’s* comfort in this.” I read it — Nature sickened at this last shock ■ — it could not stand this last proof of his ‘love — even my proud delicacy, which had born up So long against his tenderness', now. Sailed me — and'i Sunk liseless' in my chair. When I recovered, -1 found myi self Supported by Lord Westbrook. His •tears Sell at my distress, and • his grief Seemed not inferior to mine. He inquired the cause of my Sorrow ?■ I held up the fatal letter.' He took it from me, and turned aside to conceal his emotions. At that instant Lady Norfolk entered the room — Her rage was visible at beholding, me alone with her Son — She reproached me with arts I possessed not — she upbraided 
ELIZA WARWICK. Ht 
braided me with inclinations I did not feel — She “Concluded with insisting to See the letters I had received, and the an swers I was about to return by the ser^ i vant who waited for them. 
•' Alas! Madam, ’’ cried I, you need ’ not heap fresh oppressions on a poor wretch hardly able to endure those she already groans under — 1 feel * no tender •ness for any min now living (and I wept) i — but for Lord Westbrook I will profesta friendship — As for the packet I have received, here it is — I mean not, Madam, to conceal from your Ladyship the event which is there related — an event which, though it highly affedrs me, can by sio means interest my. auntv j 
Lady Norfolk took the letters, and wdth Lord Wpstbrook retired from the 
dibrary; 
142 THE HISTORY OF 
library. When they were gone, I re jssedted on the various torrents of misfortune which I had stemmed — I lifted up my heart in thanksgiving to that Almighty Power who had ordained me a lise of Suffering — I lamented that I had not sor i titude, that I had not resignation, to com ibat with the Sorrows of this world — yet .still 1 thanked him for having Sent me those trials and asslidtions, which were .intended to prepare me for a better -- Ah Said I, “my God, make the burden of my griefs sit lightly now as, possible, if it please thee to .do So — my; heart faints under its oppreshve weight— — Nature droops at the idea of new rmisfortunes — Spare me, oh! most mer iciful Judge behold. I am thy 
jvanty and Supplicate thy clemency.” 
I arose, took up my pen, aad wrote i}ie following lines to Mr. Warley.; 
lelrza WARWICK:. - 142 
“To Mr. Warley, 
.Dis true. Sir, I loved shim — He is now no more — and even hig faults (considering the motive which gave rise to them) become dear to me — Yet: •you are not his murderer — IHAVE been the cause of his grief — his despair — and shis death. i.would comfort you — but alas! despair and wretchedness alone in shabit the bosom of, 
/ 
shlliz A Warwick; 
>» 
•lady'norfolk Soon after returned with my mournful packet, and I presented her with my answer to Mr, Warley, This .unfeeling woman, my Lord — but I will Spare her conversation — I wsih refrain 
from 
the HISTORY OF 
from discovering to a heart like yours the treatment! underwent from her, even whilst she Saw me absorbed in misery. •from tlrat day my residence at noisiolk castle was embittered by the cruellest language, ' the most mortifying deportment, from her Ladyship; and I was determined to leave her house, though gaining my livelihood by the hardest labour <tnould be the consequence 
* day I was walking in that wood ■ where iny mother first beheld the object of'her'dove, whent'faw a young and charming lady beckon to me from a Secret part of it. I stew towards her — joy •impelled my steps — and yet I could ashgn ‘•no reason. for' it. As 1 approached the • tree undecwhich she stood, she reached •forth her hand to receive mine, and, •turning.with me into a thicket;, we Seated ^ - otirselves 
ELIZA WARWICK. 145 
ourselves on the verdant turf; and, in a Sweet and compassionate voice, she thus addressed me; 
“I am no stranger, Madam, to your history, nor to the unkind treatment you receive Srom one who should be a parent and Sympathising Sriend to you — Lady norsolk’s character, however, is too well known, to teach any one not to expect from dier a contrary behaviour towards a woman more beautiful and more accomplished than hersels. My name is Powis — I am a near neighbour of this lady’s — and the amiable Lord Westbrook has encouraged me to Speak to you on a Subject that So nearly concerns you, and to make you a proposal, which your acceptance of must render you as happy as it will my friend Lady Huntley.” I thanked her for So much goodness, and in tears vol. II L besought 
34si the history of 
besought her to favour me with what she had to propoie. Lady Huntley, ’^ replied she, was on a visit, Some time ago, at my sather’s — She heard os your youth, your beauty, and your misfortunes — She desired me, if I could obtain a sight of you, to offer you her house as an asylum, her Sriendship for your protection. She knew your charming mor there — they were intimate cornpanions in their infancy, and dearly loved each other. As they grew up, that intimacy would have Subsisted, but that Lady Huntley Spent the greatest part of her life abroad; her health, which was precarious, made her residence in the South of France, and at Naples, absolutely necessary. She lost. Some months since, a fine young daughter; and she thinks, if you would do her the favour os living with her, she should, in the company of one So Sensible and 
amiable 
ELIZA WARWICK. 147 
amiable, forget her missortune. Her only Son is now abroad upon his travels — he is not expected in England very Soon — and in the meanwhile Lady hunt lay is Sacrificed to gries and nielancholy. I have long wished to have an opportunity of Speaking to you on this topic; and as Lord Westbrook insormed me that yonder grove was a Savon rite haunt of yours, I have planted myself near it Sor Some time unobserved, and have at length been So happy as to gain the Savour of your attention.’* 
My gratitude to this fair stranger exceeded the bounds of expreshon^ and I could only testify it by my tears and broken exclamations. She bade me to rested; on all she had Said, and to meet her the following day in the Same place. I promised to do So; and we parted. 
L 2 This 
148 THE HISTORY OF 
This proposal, I will own to you, my Lord, created Some emotions in my breast os a very painful kind : the idea os being obliged to a stranger for that protection which my own relations could afford me affected me Sensibly; but, when I re ’stected on the amiableness of Lady huntley’s character — the intimate acquaintance ■she had had with my mother — when I refiersted on her known benevolence — her affability — her good sense — I made no doubt the „chaiige I should make would be for the better — If it is not, ” cried I, “the world is before me., and Providence my guide; I can leave Lady hunt lay, and earn with honest labour my breadi” As I was returning to the house, I met Lady norsolk, with a Suite of gentlemen and ladies, going into the park. The gentlemen took off their hats, on feeing me, with relpect j and Several of 
thein 
ELIZA WARWICK. 149 
them exclaimed that I was beautiful, “Pho! pho !’* cried my kind aunt, ‘‘ you' cannot See a tolerable - looking creature, but you endeavour to turn her head with a notion of her being hand.. — Begone to your room, miss darting at me a look of indignation. 
I was retiring Sast, when Lord Belville caught hold of my hand — No, Madam, ” Said he to Lady Norfolk, “miss Warwick'is much too charming, as well as too amiable, to be thus Secluded' Srom the world — Your Ladyship Sorgets, perhaps, that she is your niece, but we cannot So easily part with the idea of her being the loveliest star that has ever shone amongst us.” I disengaged my hand from his Lordship; and pleading, as a wish for my return to'the house, my having taken a long walk, he obligingly assented to it, with an assurance of his L 3 regret. 
J5Q THE HISTORY OF 
regret, and a low bow. After I lest them, I believe I was Spoken of with Some de r gree os kindness by the men; for, when they were gone. Lady norsolk came into the library, and descended to absolute abuse. She Said / was always putting myself in the way oj being itoiiced by the. cdher sex; but that., indeed., if I was fo ungrateful as to requite her favours by endeavouring to inveigle her fon into a connefiion with me -- a scheme it was evident I meditated -- iht could not expeffy but that imprudence (not to use a harfier word) would ever mark my char after. She ajfured me, she foould never think of keeping a beggaks brat, becaitfe that BEGGAR had been her ftfler — that I was. fo incorrigible, she was absolutely Jick and tired of throwing away fo much good advice upon me. I Sell at her feet, and thanked her for the charity she had exerted 
in 
ELIZA WARWICK, ’isr 
in my behalf — begged her, showever, to be convinced that I meant not to See any man, when the fineness of the day, and iny love of meditation, induced me to visit the grove — “Spare, then, my Lady, ” cried I, “my character — I will not trespass further on your goodness — the heggaps brat you Speak of is too proud' to be more indebted to you — and 1 will leave your ladyship’s house with a grate Sul heart for the maiy Savours you have gonserred on me.” She stung out of the 
That very day I received a packet, directed to me, in Sir Charles beaufort’s handwriting. It came from one of his executors, who had unavoidably detained it till he could learn my place of residence. It was a bequest of a thousand a year during my life — his picture— — L 4 Watch 
7^2 THE HISTORY OF 
watch and trinkets Mrs. Morris had taken to him — the former of which I had hoped she had Sold, and given him the money she had received for it — But now, I will own, I did not regret this last deceit of hers — Sir Charles knew the sincerity of my intentions — and, without its being dis posed of, I regained the present of my guardian which most I valued 
I was much affeded by the kindness and generosity os Beaufort — I could now accept of this Settlement, since no Selfisti motive could have resulted from his obliging me — I wept over the last tribute of his affection— — wished I could recall him to life — though, had he lived, my Lord, to this present moment, my delicacy would have started at the thought of admitting him again as a lover. 
Lady 
ELIZA WARWICK. 15j 
Lady norfolk’s behaviour to me altered visibly aster her knowledge of this change in my situation — I was her mecs at every Second word— — the beggarly brat existed no longer. Still her aversion to me was unconcjuerable — and I satv through all her endeavours to conceal it. 
I met miss Powis as we had appointed — She rejoiced in my newly acquired fortune, and proposed that I should accept an invitation she would make me, to Spend Some days at her house, and that before Lady Norfolk — That, aster I was with her, she would write to tell Lady Huntley all that had happened; and that, if she pleased, miss Powis and I would wait upon her at elmswood. 
Everything was done accordingly, and Lady norsolk objected not to my 
acconi 
j54 the history OF 
accompanying my kind friend to Sir Harry powis’s Seat, which was at a Small distance from norsolk castle. I was above deceit, however; and, just besore I stepped into miss powis’s chaise, 1 begged leave to Say a few words in private tb her Ladyship. She gave me "the desired audiences and I thus addressed her; 
I have many thanks to offer you Madam, for the protection you have as forded me — Your late behaviour, though, has convinced me that I am more an encumbrance to you than anything else — and as Lady Huntley has done me the honour of ashing me to Spend Some time with her, and as I am Sensible it will be better for me to reside with Some lady whose amiable character will shield me against insult, than to live by mysels, where the eyes of a malicious world will be prying: 
into 
ELIZA WARWICK. 15^ 
into my recesses, and calumniating the most innocent actions, I have accepted her kind invitation, and mean to return no more, as a resident, to norsolk castle* I entreat, however, your Ladyship to believe, I shall ever retain a just sense of your favours towards med’ She would have Spoken, but shame and vexatiorv tied her tongue; I therefore took the opportunity of giving her a short embrace, and quitted her presence with more pleasure than ever I had entered it. 
Lord Norfolk and Lord Westbrook, who had been in the Secret, took leave of me with Swollen hearts. Lord Westbrook, as he handed me to the carriage, put a letter into my hand — “Do me the favour, ” cried he, ‘‘ to read this, and I will go for your answer tomorrow.” I received it from him; not suspedting that 
it 
156 THE history of 
it was a declaration of love, and put ir in my pocket. When we arrived at powis halh, I was received most court eussy by Sir Harry Powis, whose reverend figure and exalted character I need' Say nothing of to your Lordship; your admiration of and esteem for him having commenced at a much earlier period than' did my acquaintance with him. in'miss Powis I experienced a faithful friend — a lympathizing consoler — and from the day we first met our love and intimacy have hourly increased. 
miss Powis reminded' me, when I had got to her houst, of reading Lord westbrook’s letter, and would have retired whilst I perused it, but I held her hand — “No, ” Said I, “I have no Secrets from you — I know not the purport of this letter — but we will be informed of it together.’’' 
ELIZA WARWICK. 157 
there.” She threw her arms around my neck, and Solicited a continuance of my confidence. I wept with joy at Such kind usage, having been a stranger to it Sor Some months, and received comfort from rhis proof of her affedfion. I broke open the Seal, and read the following lines to Jierj 
“v’t? Miss warv/ick. 
You are going, charming Eliza! — you are about to leave norfolk castle — and the unhappy westbrook’s heart you will take for ever with you — Why'am I not permitted to make an open avowal of my pashon for you! Why are my words, my actions, limited thus, while my adoration for you knows no bounds! — Yet, ah! my fair cousin, you return not this passion — your looks 
were 
158 THE HISTORY OF 
were cold ^ they answered not to the expressions, the warm cxpreshons, os my heart. I am wretched — I will own to you, I am miserable! — From the instant I beheld you, I became your conquest — and my eyes have told you So a'thousand tirfies. With what difficulty I have sup preffed a fuller declaration of it before, no language can describe — and, but I feared a discovery of it, (Sor your Sake,) nothing could have restrained the impetuosity of my Soul. Oh! lovely miss Warwick! by the tenderness of that bosoni which has So often melted at the idea of another’s Sufferings, pity a man who lives shut to love — who can never oease to adore 
you -- -- tomorrow— —! tomorrow— — 
it propitious! — it will decide for ever .the fate of 
Westbrook.” 
My 
ELIZA WARWICK. 159 
My astonishment was great on reading this letter — I could not have supposed things would have ever come to this height — and I acknowledged to miss Powis that 1 did not think they would. Upon looking into her Sace, I perceived Some starting tears, and a consusion, which she in vain endeavoured to conceal. I took her hand, and, pressing it to my lips, I begged to be informed of the cause of those emotions. She told me, they were pleaders in the cause of her friend. I assured her I was very Sony she interested herself So highly in it, for that it was imposhble for me to encou .rage Isis pashon without doing a violence to my heart — I am, ” continued' I, insensible to the professions of the most .eloquent, the mess charming — I never .Saw but one whom I could love, and he” 
! — -- -- -- 1 turned aside to weep — miss 
Powis 
io THE HISTORY OF 
Powis embraced me with tenderness, and I perceived that her eyes Sparkled with unusual vivacity. She talked of my cru elty r and as she pronounced the name of Westbrook she blushed — Suffice it to Say, my Lord, that I Soon discovered that miss Powis regarded my handsome, amiable cousin with eyes of love — and, when 'she was convinced I could never behold him in that light, she frankly owned to me her pashon for him. In the mean time I Saw Lord Westbrook — His tears, his entreaties, his despair, conspired to move my pity; shut my Soul Seemed dead to every livelier sensation — I pleaded many motives for my not encouraging his Suit; but, above all, I conjured him never to think of marrying a woman who professed to feel Sor him only friendship- -- ^ ^ are, ” Said 1, “my Lord, imperfections in human nature, which the 
cautious • 
ELIZA WARWICK. ii 
cautious eye of esteem will not overlook — To make, theresore, the connubial state a happy one, the dazzled sight os love is absolutely necessary — All appears right in the darling object— — every word, every action, nay, even every Saiilt, has Some peculiar charm. That pashon will, I grant you, ripen into friendship — but it is os all friendships the most delightful — warm — animated— — composed' — It forms the happiest moments of our lives — and though love generally terminates in a state thus tranquil, yet never did a marriage prove Such exquisite felicity, which did not commence with, all the agitation, all the perturbation of love.” Lord Westbrook thought this reasoning might he good; but his heart refuled to listen to its dictates. He was always at powis hall, and, in Spite of all i.could Say, ever avowing to vol. II M. me 
; 36i2 THE HISTORY OF 
■me his pashon. miss powis’s attachment increased towards me, although I was her rival. Her looks were paler and more wan than when I first beheld her; yet she laboured to conceal the cause of Such an alteration by all the Spirits she could assume. 1 now began to ressecst on the propriety of my leaving Huntingdonshire — 1 was the occasion of much .gries to my Sriend; and the longer I staid with her, the more incorrigible would Lord westbrook’s pashon become : for both their Saiees, I thereshre resolved ito Set off for El mi wood directly;; aster imparting my design to miss Powis, we fixed on the next day for our journey. Before I left powis hall, I begged Lord Westbrook to give me his company for, a Sew minutes in the garden — I there, .with great sincerity, thanked him for his .multiplied goodness to me and ajfured him 
1 Should 
ELIZA WARWICK. 163 
ijhould ever retain the mojl grateful sense of the obligations I lay under to him. I then, with equal candour, begged him to believe that my heart was wholly untouched by his flattering gallantry' — I owned., thd. he was an ohjesi of my perfefi esteem., yet I had never beheld the man., ftnce I flw Sir Charles Beaufort., who could inspire me with one tender sensation— — / Em not to persecute me with a renewal of ihofe vows which had already given me fo much uneafimfs — that ahfence., and the society of other women more amiable., more worthy his regard., would entirely dissipate me from his idea — that Miss Powis would often inform him of me — and that he would oblige me ever., by floewing her as much attenti n and esteem as her hd.ma nity to the distresses of an orphan cxaffed fro7u every fenjible., every generous mind — ■ and his friendfloip for me would, 1 was M 2 fare. 
jj54 the .history OF 
sure.) teach him to regard and respect her for my fake., more than he had ever dons before. Lord Westbrook, with a bursting heart, promised to comply with every commandi would choose to impose on him — and, taking a pathetic leave os me, he retired into the woods, to conceal his Sorrow. I Seized that opportunity to depart from the Hall, and miss Powis and I Sat forward on our journey to elms wood. 
Lady Huntley met us'hals way. Her amiable deportment, her engaging aspedt, her elegance of figure, struck me at once with a love and respedt Sor her, which have momently increased since dtat hour. She threw her arms around me, and, preshng rte to her bosom, called me the child of her Sriend — her virtuous, her injured Eliza! — Ah! ‘ how different this 
reception 
ELIZA WA.DWICK.^ 165 
reception Srom that which I had experienced Srom Lady Norfolk!' 
Now, my Lord', am I to describe Some os the most pleasing hours of my lise — a life chequered by the most exquisite 
delights 
the bitterest misfortunes! 
When we alighted at the charming leatr of elmswood, it appeared to me a Scene of blissful enchantment — The groves, the lawns, the park, the falls of water and gentle streams, 'all Seemed to have been tiie peculiar care' of Some Supernatural being — and the dear inhabitant os this Second paradise presided as the Genius of Virtue. Here, how happily did I live for Some months — The company, the conversation, of Lady Huntley, were too delightsul to be expressed— — the notion of my not being a dependent on her M 3,. favours, 
i66 THE HISTORY OF 
favours, but the chosen companion of her hours, rendered my Situation still mere blisssul. We walked — we read — we Saw company — but what a different Set of people to those Lady norsolk’s Vanity would assemble at noisiolk castle! — Beauty, virtue, accomplishment, and sense, were to he Sound amongst the visiters of elmsvvood — there, neither wit, grace, nor any other charm, was visible in any of the females but miss Powis, who, on account of her Superiority, was an object of detestation to Lady Norfolk — In short, my Lord, when I compared my present situation to that which had So lately been my lot, I listed up my heart in gratitude to that beneficent Creator who had Supported me through all my trials, and brought me at length to a state of earthly felicity. 
The 
ELIZA WARWICK. 167 
The largeness of my income enabled me to give content to others whom Fortune had not Smiled upon; and in my visits to the humble cottagers I loved their simplicity, and respeiled their innocence — I was called by them the Daughter of Peace — and, in my attendance on their sick beds, they thought themselves better, when I reached forth the medicines. With what anxiety, with what Sympathy,, did I hang over the couch of an expiring mother, or the father of a family! How did I strive to cheer the drooping mourners, and Soothe their Souls to comfort 1^ — Ah! my Lord, whether in Courts or cottages, the loss of an amiable parent is irreparable — and of all af fiidtions, next to the loss of honour. Surely it is the greatest! 
these Scenes I visited,, to keep me M 4 humble — 
i68 THE HISTORY of 
humble — What, though 1 tasted the Sweets os fortune, was I, on that account, ta think no more os misery? — Ah! no, the child of Adversity is taught, by Sad experience, to feel for others — and how happy are those who, with Such Sentiments, have power to Succour the afflicted! — Fhat notion I had ever imbibed from my earliest insancy — and misfortune had impressed it on miy heart. 
Amongst the visiters of Lady hunt lay, two gentlemen in particular honoured me with their love — Sir Edward top don and Mr. Pawlet made me the most honourable and (in point os Sortune) advantageous proposals — but I rejedsed them, from a reason I gave before — and at that time “I was fully persuaded a heart could love but once."’ 
Lady 
ELIZA WARWICK. 169 
Lady Huntley used to Speak of yoil' osten, my Lord — She described yon, Such as I really found you to be, sensible, handsome, witty, polite — but there were Some charming traits in the portrait which Lady Huntley passed over, and which could be perceptible to the eyes os dove alone. 
I did not apprehend danger Srom Seeing you — I thought I had beheld all that was amiable in the Sex already sighing at my feet — and that, at best, you could be but a copy os Some of the most worthy -- -- -- Then I ressedted, that a man who 
had Seen all that was beautisul, all that was lovely, in woman, and had been So universally distinguished by them in every Court ho*had visited, would never bend his eyes to the insignificant Eliza, but would raise them to Some lady more his 
equal 
fjo 
THE HISTORY OF 
equal in points of fortune, beauty, and' reputation — the latter I considered as unconquerably tarnished — and though my virtue was, in fad:, not injured, the fairness 
of my character was lost Sor ever -- -- 
I do assure you, my lord, I rejoiced at the idea of being unnoticed by you — I was tired of hearing the Same declarations from the mouth of every man I conversed with — and my heart was So wholly inseitj' fible to their different merits, that I was convinced its feeling a Second attachment Was a circumstance not only improbable, ^ but absolutely impossible 
• the first six months of my stay at elmswood, I osten Saw amd heard from Mils Powis — Lord Westbrook had accustomed himself to her conversation — • he was constantly a guest of Sir Harry Powis — he discovered many amiable qualities 
ELIZA WARWICK. 17? 
lities in his daughter, many charmsnn her peision — he walked, Sung,, and danced, with her — they read together — and he was her constant attendant on every excursion, either os charity or pleasure, that she made — In fine, my Lord, under the name of friendship, love found its way a Second time into the heart of Westbrook; and, whilst he adored miss Powis, he had not a thought that any Sentiment but esteem guided the warm wishes which were so often offered up by him for her happiness. The Sollowing accident, however,. Soon undeceived him. 
Lord Belville, who had Seen miss Powis one evening at norsolk castle, was struck with her beauty, but more with her cow veri'ation. He got Lord Norfolk to introduce him at powis hall, and from that day he professed himself her lover. The 
greatness 
172 THE HISTORY OF 
greatness of his fortune, his ancient pe -- digree, but most of all his nobleness of Soul, recommended him to Sir Harry Powis as a man worthy his daughter’s^ acceptance; and he prevailed upon her to admit his visits, until a further acquaintance should either justify her re fusal of him, or his amiable qualities' should make an impression on her heart. This was but reasonable; and miss Powis, to oblige her father, consented to it; though she was well convinced no man, but one, could ever inspire her with a' tender regard. In the mean time. Lord Westbrook was a witness of the assiduity os his rival; nay, he even made him the confidant of his passion. Lord Westbrook became Sullen, pensive, and unhappy — he hid himsels continually in the woods — and when chance, or the regularity os the family hours,, would present, 
miss. 
'ELIZA WARWICK. j73 
'miss Powis to his sight, he would turn from her, and remove, if possible, out of the sound of her charming voice. He often endeavoured to leave powis hall; but, besore he had got half a mile .from the avenue, he was always brought back again by an impulse as strange as irresistible. He imputed all this, at sirst, to friendship — he thought his situation shad been delightful, till Lord Belville intruded— — had more of miss powis’s .conversation — 'heshad possessed her confidence— — now it was far different — she would Soon be married — Lord Belville •was alone entitled to those hours os unre served Sriendship she had bestowed on .him — and he now considered himsels as an intruder, not as an agreeable andshse full companion to' Sir Harry and his daughter. Thus whispered jealousy; and she determined, by one resolute exertion, 
to 
174 the HISTORY OF 
to tear himself from a place which had once yielded him delight. His plan was to go to London Sor the winter; and, aster ordering his horses, he was about to leave the house without bidding any one in it adieu. As he passed the music room, in order to gain the courtyard, he perceived, as the door lay open, miss Powis alone, and leaning on the harpsi t chord as if in tears. He thought no more os his resolution, but entering the .room, he drew a chair near hers, and took hold of her hand. He inquired the cause of those tears? — he begged to know whether Some trifling quarrel with her : lover had not occasioned them? At that question they redoubled. “Well, miss Powis, ” cried he, ‘C be not grieved — Lord Belville will Toon own his fault, and you will regain once more your .ascendency over his conquered heart — 
vi^here 
LLIZA WARWICK. 175 
'Where is he ?- — I will bring him to your feet.” He arose to go — She caught hold of his arm — ‘ Ah !’ ieplie; d she, ‘ do you take pleasure in insulting me? — I abhor Lord Bclville — I wish I had never Seen him !’ “I wish So too!” sighed out 
the charming Westbrook. ‘ And why, ' alked miss powis — ‘ why do you wish So He Saultered — he hesitated — that simple question opened to him the truth. • “because, ” cried he, preshng her hand TO his bosom, “I love you.” She blushed — she evaded the Subject— — ashed him why he was booted r — and whether she intended to leave them? He Said Xes — that Ford belviue was the man Ahofen by her for happiness— — that he aou’.d not bring hts freward heart to be a witness of his triumph. He bade her, adieu — She recalled him — They wept — .they embraced — In short, my Lord, the 
Scene 
lys the histoi^y OF 
Scene concluded by Solemn vows on both sides never to part again. % Sir Harry was insormed of these proceedings; and Lord Belville, since he could not himself be the favoured lover, was contented to See the amiable Westbrook in possession of that person which he once hoped to have called his own. Lord and Lady Norfolk resused not to consent to their union; and my Sriend, very Soon after, met with that just reward vv^hich her love, her constancy, her merit, claimed. 
Lord wesibrook, on their marriage,, wrote me a humorous letter,, and assured me he hdidi pun finally obeyed my last command. I laughed at the idea of his loving me, and answered, I was persuaded that he had mistaken the name of what heselt — that it might have been a lively, a tender friendship — Sor that love viftted 
the 
ELIZA WARWICK. 177 
the heart hut once — and I was convinced my excellent eitftly had awakened in him tliose refined, those exquisite emotions, which he could never have experienced before, and which once lost could never be retrieved again. Thus, my Lord, did I reason on the Sublimity of this passion;; alas! I dreamed not that there was fttll a man in the world who could inspire me a Second time with, love, in all its purity, its ardour, its refinement — I knew not, at that time, Lord Huntley. 
Aietter from your Lordship, about a fortnight aster this, to Lady Huntley, taught her to expeds you Soon in England. Her joy was great beyond measure — ■ her life, her best hopes. Seemed centred in'you. She thought the weeks, the days, the hours' ' until )mur arrival — and she reckoned them all with ‘vol. II N ''impatience. 
=178 THE HISTORY OT 
impatience, and counted them with anxiety. I now begged leave to retire Srom elmswood — I pleaded that her Ladyship would Soon have a loved and long lost companion restored to her arms, and that with her permission I would quit her until your Lordship married, when I promised to return, and live with her Ladyship until the hour which should Separate us by the hand of Death. Lady hunt lay would not hear of my going — she threw her arms around me, and called me her dear daughter — she Said, Jhe hoped her fan would love., and deserve me, better than did Sir Charles Beaufort. those, mylord, were her ladyship’s words — words which, at that time, gave me un easiless — but which have since fed me 
with delusive hopes ah j have I not 
ever been the Sport of fortune! 
'Think 
ELIZA WARWICK. 179 
Think not, my Lord, I mean to reproach Lady Huntley Sor the part she has a(sted — oh! no — I honour her for it — I, ady Isabella Trevice, when compared with the insignificant Eliza, was too Superior a match to have hesitated one moment os accepting -- w’hat am I, my 
Lord? — Reflect a while — turn back to Some of those fatal passages since the death of beauvarise — and behold me dishonoured, poor, and friendless — Now, who can .murmur against the commands : os Lady Huntley! 


1 have been ill, my Lord — I have been ’very ill, since I wrote the above — Death ' ihas laid on me his cold, but welcome hand — I live but to persorm my last pro mise to you — I live but to give you the N 2 Sequel 
ibo THE HISTORY OF 
Sequel of my melancholy story 

Regret me not, dear Huntley! but drive me Srom your mem ^ry — Shed not a tear over my grave, but allow one to my life — it is in living I have been wretched — 
in dying, I trust, I shall be happy 
Oh! with what pleasure do I look sor ward to that blessed moment! — with what confidence do I expert its approach! -- Huntley— — dear Huntley 
! — I leave this world — I leave even 
thee -- the first is nothing — in the last I 
f comprehend every pang that I shall Suffen 
* 
aster being anxioussy expected by Lady Huntley for Some time, your lord ship made your appearance at elmswood. I was not present when you met jmur, mother — 1 was, if you remember, in the 
gardenj 
ELIZA WARWICK. ii. 
garden; whither, aster your first Salutations, Lady Hbntley led you, to be introduced to her Eliza, as she called me. I was employed, on your approach, in pruning a Savourite rose tree; nor did I. hear ou, until her Ladyship caught my 
hand, and bade me behold, her fon -- -1 
turned towards you -- -- What a Sorm! 
— what grace!. — what benignity! — struck 
iny astonished eyes ■ your Lordship 
Seemed not less amazed — You beheld me with wonder — with reverence — with admiration -- -- ‘I blushed -- -- You could 
not Speak — and in a consused manner 
carried my hand to your lips -- -- You 
think me vain, perhaps, my Lord — - 
Ah! pardon me — At this awful hour, when the grave is open to receive ray emaciated Sorm — when every charm has given place to a dying languor — and when that beauty, which has been thought N 3 well. 
is THE HISTORY OF 
well os, even by yon, my Lord, is now become indifferent to me — do not suppose that, at Such a time, my mind 
can taste os vanity -- That I was more 
than handsome is true — that you were too Sensible of it, from the first moment you Saw me, is also a Sadt — and I Speak os it, not as my boast, but my misfortune. 
The amazement which the beauty of your person at first excited in me Soon Subsided, and 1 regarded your Lordship as the Son of my benefadtress, as the friend of my future days — Love had not then intruded itself into my heart — and I viewed you with that esteem only which the amiableness of your character exacted from all. 
Suffer me, my Lord, to repeat minutely every Scene, every trisiing traos 
action. 
ELIZA WARWICK. i8j 
si: ion, which interested me, from your arrival, until my departure from elms wood — To you, who love, it cannot appear tedious — or is it should, and after reading thus Sar you have altered your Sentiments of me, and hold me no longer worthy of your attachment. Send the recital to my dear Lady Westbrook, who will peruse each word with pleasure, and Sympathise in every trisse that concerned Eliza — Concerned, I Say; for I shall cease to live ere this can draw the drop of pity from her eye. 

You must recollect.. Lord, that elmswood was the resort of all that was gay, agreeable, and charming, after your lordship’s arrival — thehouse was thronged with visiters, and crowded with happy 
N 
faces — 
.184 THE HISTORY OF 
faces — Mine was the only one that wore the aspeft of composure — all besides were joy, tumult, and delight — I alone was placid without emotion, chearsul without noise — The constant bustle of the Scene,, however, fatigued me— — sighed for Solitude — I sickened for retirement -- The 
riotous congratulations of the country gentlemen — the tiresome gallantries of the more accomplished ones — the witty hitternejfes that passed from one pretty woman to another — too; aether with the constant amusements of dancing, concerts, and card assemblies — made me regret that the Serenity of elmswood^s shades had flown for ever on the approach of its Lord -- -- 1 endeavoured to 
court it often — but, if I was found alone in the woods or groves, the raillery of the men, and the insinuations of the ladies, gave me, at length, a dread of 
Sollowinp; 
ELIZA WARWICK. 185 
following my inclinations — and I gave into every project of mirth in my own desence. All this time, my Lord, you regarded me whth an eye of attention — You were polite to every one — but to me you were assiduous — I imputed it to your desire of complimenting, i.ady Huntley, by being attentive to one whom you. thou: ht dear to her — but I little imagined that those douceurs proceeded from a more interested motive. 
One evening, as I was dancing with: Sir Edward Topdon, a string of pearls, which was tied round my neck, ' and to which the miniature os my guardian hung. Suddenly broke, from my having strung them on too stender a thread — The pearls were Scattered about the floor, and the picture dropped into my bosom. I begged Lady priscilla Stanton to dance 
^ with 
i86 ' THE HISTORY OF 
with Sir Edward until my return, and said I would go and put up the portrait,, which I prized too much to trust into my pocket, lest by Some accident I should break the crystal, and damage the paint -- ing. She consented to take my place and as I made' towards the door, I Saw four or five of the pearls, which the dan -- cers Sect had struck out of their way,, just by it. You at the moment entered the room as I stooped to pick them up. the picture Sell out of my bosom on the floor — You were on your knees in an in -- stant — and the sirst thing you laid your' hand on was the miniature. I told you os the accident, and laughed at the loss os my sine pearls. I was not attended to — but your eyes devoured the portrait,, which you still held. I ashed you Sor it, and thanked you Sor your trouble — You Said you would give it to me the next 
day. 
ELIZA WARWICK. ihy 
day, and put it into your pocket. I was astonished at this — but lest the room,, highly glad of an excuse to steal from my partner; and, as he did not know how the picture was already disposed os, he supposed my absence was occasioned by my care of .it. The next day I ashed for this precious resemblance — You gave it to me with an air of gallantry, and Sighed. I received it without a blush, and with infinite composure. I perceived. you' were surprised — Sor you knew not that it was the representation of my guardian. 
In two or three days after, a party on hoisieback was proposed for all the ladies, and every gentleman attended them with an assiduous pleasure, which men of po liteness are wont to assume on Such occasions. 1 was a good horsewoman;; 
the 
m THE HISTORY OF 
the Duke of beauvarise took pleasure in ‘ having me taught to ride, as he thought,, if ever my health required that exercise, I should find my knowledge in the ma -- nagement of a horse particularly usesul. I rode a young Arabian, which I had ^ commissioned lordwestbrook to get form; it was remarkably beautiful, Spirited, yet easy to manage. 
During our excursion, we met a drove of oxen; one of them was refra£lory, V and Some countrymen, who were in an adjoining field, called out, that it had jujt gored a pnjfengert and they were going to Jecure it with ropes. The creature was at Some distance Srom us, at that time; but, by its contortions, wt judged its approach would be dangerous. The ladies shrieked out violently, but my fear had deprived me of voice — You, my 
Lord, 
ELIZA WARWICK. 189 
'Lord, without regarding the many females of consequence who were in an equally hazardous situation, leapt Srom your horse, and running to the poor Eliza, you took her off in your arms, and lifted her on the other side os the fence, where she would be perfectly Safe. I was fainting with terror — you Supported me, and by your tender care recalled me to life. In the mean time, the Surious animal was forcibly held, by the strength of a monstrous rope, which Some of the countrymen, with great dexterity, had slipped round its head, and tied it to a tree, until the rest of the party had pas sed. Its frightful bellowing alarmed my • horse, and my pretty Arabian ran away from the Spot, nor ever stopped until it tumbled down a remarkable precipice, •which effectually put an end to his fright .•and his life together. I lay exposed to 
the 
190 THE HISTORY OF 
the heat of the fun, in an open field, till one of the attendants brought a chaise from the next town, and your Lordship and I returned in it to elmswood — In the course os our journey, the terror and Satigue I had Suffered occasioned a faintness to Seize me — my eyes grew, dim — an universal tremor possessed every limb — it was So Sudden, that I had not time to prepare you — and when I found ..myself sinking, as I thought, I caught Told of your hand, to Save my — Your fright, your tenderness, your anxiety, ..never shall I forget — each sensation appeared in your countenance at that mo .ment. As I revived from the insensibility that Soon after overcame me, I' found you kneeling on the bottom of the carriage — my hands clasped in yours — your cheeks pale and wet with your tears. The Servants, who had run for water to throw 
ill 
ELIZA WARWICK. 191 
sin my face, exclaimed, that I was dead., and that all ivas in vain — but when you Saw; me open my eyes, no joy could equal that which danced in yours. We Soon after arrived at elmswood; and I retired to my apartment, to endeavour to gain repose— — howtver, resused its aid — and, indeed, I was not Solicitous to court it — Your image was present to my fancy — your looks — your words — Every action betrayed your tenderness, and filled me with doubt, perplexity, and pleasure — Ah!” !” I Say, ‘‘ why these emotions? — why this presuming hope? — Is it possible I can love again? — Huntley, uhou art too amiable — and Eliza is weak mess itsels.” Then would I strive to be convinced I ought not to flatter myself with those delusive, fond ideas, that would, in Spite of reason, inspire me with delight — His eyes, ’M cried, his 
true. 
r92 THE HISTORY OF 
true, Speak the language os love, but he has never yet Suffered his lips to declare to me that pashon — his agitations, which I have So lately witnessed, might •have been caused by compassion— — knows Lady huntley’s Sriendship for me — and it is to' that, perhaps, I am indebted for these proofs of his regard.” — I will own to you, my Lord, I liked not this mode of arguing, and I quitted my bed with a degree of peevish inquietude, which my woman had never before discovered in me. 
■ Your attentions Srom that day redoubled — Your endeavours to please — your fear os offending — the Sensibility which shone in your countenance — all told me .'I was dear to yom -- but your Silence upon that Subje(r: rendered me stow to believe what the certain knowledge of alone 
would 
ELIZA WARWICK. 
193 
would have made me happy -- -- -- 1 was 
restless, anxious, and uneasy — the air of xoldness which I assumed towards you, in order to conceal the real Sentiments of my bosom, was an exertion which its tenderness could ill Support, but which my rcason approved, and which deceived your Lordship as to the real situation of my Soul. 
I pasted a whqle month, from this period, in all the tortures of suspence, undetermined what to do — whether to leave Elmfwood, and bury myself in Solitude for ever, or to go to Lady westbrook’s, and remain with her, till time and absence stiould oblitctate from my heart the impreshon you had made on it. At length, the moment So often dreaded, yet So ardently wished for, arrived, with all its delights — all those exquisite emo vol. II O tions. 
194 the history OF 
tions, which only such a declaration, from such 2i man, could inspire. 
One evening, aster a long walk which a large party of us had taken, when we entered the Saloon, all Seated themselves in haste, and avowed their fatigue — A boucjuet os roses and myrtle, which I had in my bosom, became troublesorne, and I threw it on one of the windows near me — Nobody, as I imagined, had observed me — but your Lordship Soon after, walking (as if without design) to the place, took up the flowers, and fixing ^ on me the most impassioned look, you .carried thein to your lips — I was not on my guard — I was too attentive — and Surprised into a deep blush— — started into those orbs, which at the instant told you (as I supposed) the Secret of my 'Iicart — What did not yours Say in return 1 
— you 
ELIZA WARV/ICK. 195 
— You fixed the bouquet in your bosom, and Seemed to behold it as an object of adoration — This accident consused — delighted — nay, charmed me — and that evening I considered as the happiest of my lise. 
The next morning you were missed at breakfast, and your absence was imputed to your having visited your friend Mr. Pawlet. The ladies proposed a rambling excursion; but I confess, as I found you were not to be of the party, I could not think of making one — everything would have appeared fiat and insipid — and I should have been fatigued before I had got halfway— — therefore excused myself, as having letters to write; and, as soon as they were gone, I retired to my own apartment. 
O 
Youf 
^1, 6 THE HISTORY OF 
Your miniature, which I had begun vto draw, engrossed. every leisure moment of my time; and instead os taking up .the pen, I employed my pencil. I had sat to it about an hour, when the beauty of the day tempted me into the garden I struck down that shady walk where my Sweet rose tree bloomed, and Seated myself by it, to enjoy its Sragrance. The : mildness of the weather, the .resreshing, breezes that gently fanned every leas, the, melody of the birds, all silled my Soul with harmony; and a certain lightness hung about my heart, which till the evening besore it hadfiong been a stranger to. I had not enjoyed this tranquillity a quarter of an hour, when the Sound of ap ^ preaching footsteps intruded on my ear I arose hastily, with a design, to leave the ..place, just as your Lordship presented .yoursels before me — I blushed — curtesied 
.- — I, attempted 
ELIZA WARWICK. 197- 
-- I attempted to retire — but you Seized my hand, and with a look of expression,, which my fancy now brings to my view, you begged me to stay one moment, and to hear you. My heart throbbed — I was unable to stand — and, walking back a few' steps to the Seat I had quitted, I was glad of a pretence to resume it. So little were my knees ^ble ho Support me. you threw yourself on the turf beside me — and, after telling me how miserable you' were to find that you had often incurred my displeasure, by an assiduity which your love alone inspiredbyouuntreated my pardon for the uneasiness you had given me, and assured me you resolved to tear yourself from elmswood, in order to restore my peaces you paused— — could 
not Speak — Thus you went on — As Sor my own, too charming Eliza! that has for ever fled my breast — All I have to do O 3 is 
198 THE HISTORY OF 
is to bewail your cruelty, or rather my own unworthiness, and to give you back happinet's by Sacrificing my own.” Here, my Lord, you may remember I exclaimed, “My peace,, alasv'" and a torrent of tears Sell on my bosom. You took my handkerchies, apd wiped my cheeks — you thanked me for my pity, and Said you would endeavour to deserve it -- that that day would he the laji of your residence at elmfwood ~ and that you would same times come to vtjit Lady Huntley., and to contemplate,, at a humble dijtance,, my per feflions. I Sighed — Adieu! Eliza, ” you cried, and Sell at my Seet — I reached forth my hand to .you — Our tears streamed — our eyes met — and we^exclaimed at once, ‘‘ Ah! must we part!” ’, It was then, Huntley, you were made Sensible of my love for you — it was then you Seemed to live, to breathe, but for me — 
Ah! 
ELIZA WARWICK.' 199 
Ah! with what ardour, with what delicacy, did you paint your passion !- — with what pleasure, with what transport, did I listen! — From that hour our vows were united — and Heaven can witness to the sincerity, the purity, of them. 
To Lady Huntley we communicated our attachment — She embraced us — she approved of it — she declared she should look Sorward to the day os our nuptials with impatience and delight — Your lord ship, however, at that time, knew not my history — an enigma, I often told you, which, when unravelled, would, perhaps Sever the cord of love which bound your Soul to mine; but which I should entreat Lady Huntley to impart to you, as the talk of giving you pain would be too much for my tenderness to Support: besides, as her Ladyship was not a party O 4 concerned. 
200 THE HISTORY OF 
concerned, she could tell it with more composure than the unhappy Sufferer could have done. You, I remember, at that time, desired not to hear it, since you Sound it was a melancholy tale, and one which made me Suffer to rested: on — yet it was one I insisted you stiould hear before the indissoluble knot was tied. 
How happily did we pass two months after this mutual avowal! With what felicity did we look forward to Succeeding years! 1 made a Solemn vow, that, if 
anything should happen to interrupt the bright prosped of our union, I would retire to a convent, and shut myself up there for the remainder of my days — to penance and mortification would I dedicate the few years of my unfortunate life that I must be fated to drag on, and expiate Some of those crimes which 1 must 
have 
ELIZA WARWICK. 20i 
have been guilty of to have drawn on me So Severely the vengeance of Heaven — Ah! my Lord; the Almighty Suffered me' not to depend on mortal for happiness — • he has instructed me to expect no earthly comforts, that I may Seek for more glorious, more permanent felicity — and bies* fed ever be his will I 

Huntley — when I look back to the' delightful hours I have passed with you — ■ when I revisit that rose tree in idea, where first I beheld you, where first you declared to me your pashon — do I not regret that life flows out So Sast? — and yet — why? 
—.. — Ah! my Huntley! Fate has placed 
an insurmountable bar against our connexion — and death, in that case, must be desirable. 
* 

* 

ao2 THE HISTORY Of' 
In this state of happiness were we, when Lady Darnington, and her daughter, Lady isabella Trevice, wrote to invite themselves to elmswood — I remember I shuddered at the tliouaiht os their coming; and you, my Lord, shrugged your shoulders, praised thdr good nature but wished they had Shown a little less upo7t this occafton — Lady Huntley looked displeased— — Darnington was an old and a dear Sriend os hers — her daughter Was handsome, amiable, and had a hundred thousand pounds — reasons which Lady Huntley gave emphatically, and which were Spoken with a firm and reso lute voice, tor their beina; welcome to her house. I will be less prolix, my Lord — The ladies arrived — Youth, health, affluence, and beauty, shone conspicuoussy in Lady isabella — good sense, pride, and 
art, marked her mother’s character -- 
elmswood 
ELIZA WARWICK. 203 
llmswood was again a Scene of open festivity— — Darnington and her daughter, by their courteous and affable deportment, Soon engaged all hearts to approve them — and every one experienced the Sunshine of their Smiles but the pre sumptuous rival of Lady isabella — Seemed, at that period, to be neglected by all but you — but in your kindness, your unabated tenderness, I was happier than if I had whole nations paying me adulation. 
One night, however, I recollect to have 
been uneasy — and you occasioned it -- 
Perhaps you forget the circumstance — I will remind you of it. 
After dinner, I Seated myself in the bow window at the bottom of the Saloon. You Soon followed me thither, and stood 
?io the HISTORY OF 
up before me. We talked and laughed' about indifferent matters for sometime, when I perceived a Sudden gloom Over spread your Seatures. I inquired the: cause -- * you looked earnestly in my face, and told me you had a favour to’ ask— — demanded it — You whispered, that I wore the picture of a man near my heart— — ’’ you cried, “answer me sincerely, and tell me whose it is — S had it in my poffeshon a whole night — I ssept not — I Sat up to contemplate it — No words can express my misery, my jealousy— — gave it to you the next day — *1 penetrated your Soul when you’received it from rhe — but you blushed not — you. betrayed no confusion — you took it with eomposure and conscious innocence — that made me easy in Some measure— — I perceive you still wear it — do not refuse" to satisfy my curiosity, or rather to quell 
my 
ELIZA WARWICK.. 
my anxiety, when I demand of you his name — his title to a place in your bo som.’" You stopped — you considered me again with attention — and your steadfast gaze called up a blush into my cheeks — You gave me not tiiiie to reply — Had ■eliza, what is this? consusion! — Nay, 
.then. Madam” -- -- -- -- ‘ Stay, my.dord, 
Said I, ‘ this portrait need not inspire you with jealousy — itsvlikeness is no more— — was my guardian — my friend I ..could Say not another word — my tears stowed — and the recolledfion of Beauva* • rise rushed into my heart. “Tears, too — this is strange! — but I do not like this friend, miss Warwick — If he is dead, these emotions declare you loved, or ra vther you still love, his fiade, with ardour 
-- -- Your guardian — ha! he was a very 
youthful oner 
.Pardon 
Zo THE HISTORY OF 
Pardon me, my Lord, if I Say you were in this instance cruel — you roused my pride — you Seemed to doubt my truth., my fidelity. I arose — and, walking from you with an air of indignation, and Sorrow, retired to my own apartment, where I wept the loss os this friend, this guardian — Irreparable missortune! which even to this hour I deplore. 
In a great V hile aster, I returned to the company — I Saw your Lordship hanging over the chair of Lady isabella tre vice, while she.sung the tendered, the most impassioned Sounds — The sight was painful, but I endeavoured to conceal my chagrin. Dancing was proposed — You led my exulting rival forth, and cast on me thc' most indifferent, the most piercing looks of neglect.. Edward Top, don Solicited my hand — I gave it to him, 
and 
ELIZA WARWICK; 207 
end joined the happy throng, but with contrary sensations to those which silled the breasts of all I approached. The whole evening you were devoted to Lady Isabella, and I to that degree of mortification which Sensibility like mine was ex posed to. 
After Supper, you entreated Lady Isabella to bless you with the melody of her voice — She Sang these words, with a look, of expreshon which cut me to the soul shut which you Seemed to receive with shell ght: 
SOFT confufioii’s rosy terror Quite expressive paints my cheek,; 
Look again, behold your error, 
Bluflies eloquently speak. 
What tho’ filent Is my anguish, 
Or breath’d only to the air, 
■"mark my eyes — and, as they languish 
■ what have written there.” 
She 
2o8 the HISTORY OF 
I 
She stopped -- -- Her coral Tips— —! 
Tow beautifully were they turned! —? — You kissed her hand with fervour, and Swore that Such a mouth as hers alone was made to express the passion it inspired. My bosom filled — my foolish ■ heart ssuttered ^i thought of marmon tel’s Elmira and .Delia — and I supposed my inconstant Soliman lost to me for ever, r Sir Edward Topdon insisted that I should follow the example of Lady isabella, for Shat not even her ladyjjoip could exceed me Jn harmony. I begged to be excused — 
- for that aster her, and Such a compliment, 
- my voice would appear but indifferently. This objection was overruled, and I Sung a Soft Italian air, which describes a man as the zephyr that kisses every flower it •meets, and concludes with cornparing the. singer, who is imagined to be in love, to 
a riyer which follows faithfully but one 
cqurse. 
ELIZA WARWICK. 209 
course. My voice Saultered once or twice; but I Sung clearly, and Succeeded that night particularly well. You stole a glance at me, without meaning that I should observe you; but our eyes met — you withdrew yours hastily, and turning to Lady Isabella, you beat time with her fan on her lovely hand, which she carelessly displayed on the table. Your unkindness almost threw me into tears; and when I had ended, the applause os every peision present, but yoursels and Lady isabella, gave me little pleasure. You vt'ere silent on the occasion; and it was you only whose approbation I wished for — every compliment that was paid me I received with indifference. When we retired Sor the night, steep stead my eyes — my grief was inexpressible— — did I lament, at that time, my dear Jennet, who would have Sopthed, who could have comforted Vor. II P ' my 
210 THE HISTORY OF 
my affliction!! -- Jennet is a Saint 
in Heaven — and Such are not to be regretted. 
The next morning I looked out of my window as Soon as it was light, and the first object that struck my eyes was your Lordship walking in the garden, with the most disconsolate air imaginable. I knew not whether to grieve or to rejoice at this sight — Ahi’^ cried I, who knows but he is now plotting how to break with me, without appearing too unjust, in order to make an offer of his hand to Lady Isabella Trevice ?” — The thought distraded me — Indeed, Huntley, ” continued I, 
there needs no great art on the occasion — I will free you from all engagements to me, is you can be happier with her.” The distress I endured, however, convinced me it would be no easy Sacrifice. 
ELIZA WARWICK. 211 
I will own to yon, my Lord, I studied my toilet with anxiety that morning — I put on the dress most becoming to my shape — the cap, the ribbons, best Suited to the turn os my features and complec tion. The miserable night I had pasted gave me a hedfic, which added to the bloom of my cheeks and lips; and I looked to be in better health than I really was. We met at breakfast — (and it was at that meeting I expeded to read my Sat) — You approached me with an air of penitence and Sorrow — you endeavour .ed to take my hand, which I witheld, with, perhaps, too much dignity. You .appeared mortified, humble, 'and Submissive; and retired behind my chair, on which ymu leaned, without uttering a word. Lady isabella strove to attract your notice — hummed a tune audibly enough — .called you to view a ring — proposed a P 2 thousand 
212 THE HISTORY .DF 
thousand parties — to all which you replied with coldness, .and returned to me, whom she had hoped to Seduce you from — However, I took no notice of you,; which moitified you, and pleased her,; and, aster breaksast, I left the company, and returned to my closet. I had not been there an hour, when you rapped at the door. I opened it; but, finding who it was, was leaving the room. You iii treated me to stay, and hear a few words you had to offer in your justification. I remained. Your apologies.were So elegant, So submishve r your air So melancholy — and looks So despairing — 
that you did not find it difficult to obtaini my pardon. In return, I told you whose portrait I wore, and added, 'that you would respedt him, as well as 1 did, when you should hear the story of my life, in which he bore the principal and most 
shining 
ELIZA Warwick:. 213 
‘shining part. From that time our affection for each other Seemed to increase — > and it was the first and last quarrel weever had to'torment us. 
Lady Darnington and Lady Huntley used to have many conversations alone — and 1 thought, my Lord, aster Such, Lady Huntley would appear cold and reserved towards me. One day she hinted that her Jon had better., for both our fakes., think no more of marrying me — He is unacquainted, ” Said she, “with your history; and, when he hears it, may perhaps alter his Sentiments in regard of you” - — I was shocked — “Men, ” continued her Ladyship, are unaccountable creatures — burr, my dear Eliza, if you Sollow my advice, you will never think of trusting to.any of the Sex again, ” ‘ah !'Madam, ’ cried I, ‘your 
r 3. 
Ladyship 
214 the history of 
Ladyship reasons justly — but would to Heaven you had deigned to tell me So besore! — As Sor my own part, dearly as I love your Son, I could tear myself, I believe, from elmswood, in order to contribute to his felicity — but his Soul will shudder at the idea os giving me up for ever Lady Huntley Smiled, and ashed me if I did not know the sex?? retired from her presence, confounded, and un happy. Soon after. Lady Huntley Spoke more plainly on the Subject — She told me, that Lady darnington’s daughter had conceived a pashon for my Huntley — that with her he would poffess, not only an accomplished person, but a fortune as immense as it wouldbe advantageous — She threw a shade over my character, as it was received in the world, yet was So good as to do justice to my principles — She reminded me of my family’s looking 
bt 
ELIZA WARWICK. 215 
hit coldly on me, still she confessed there was high cruelty in it — She then drew a finished aud charming picsture of my rival — and made it very plain to me, that my conduo: was injurious, in endeavouring to engi'oss you to myself. I could answer her but by my tears — for, indeed, I was not equal to that heroic exertion she stimulated me to adopt. 
About this time, you talked of Spending Some weeks at Sir William radnor’s — My heart trembled at the thought of your quitting elmswood — but Lady Huntley made me give her my promise not to reveal to you the least part of any of her conversations on that dreadful topic — So 1 had no hope of your remaining, unless I made it my request to you — but, by a like engagement of my word, I was prohibited from doing that — be p 4 sides, 
5116 THE .DISTORY OF 
Sides, as business preparative to our mar riage, as you imagined, called you theiice, I could not have prevented you, without assigning a reason Sor your delay. Thus I concluded to Say nothing on the subjedt to you, but to trust it all to God alone. 
When you came to take your leave os me — ah! how charmingly you looked I — it was the last rhyme I should ever See you — this I apprehended — you threw your arms around me, and pressed me to your bosom — The action was free — more So than any I ever knew you to assume towards me — but the mournsul ressedtion that it was the laji time prevented my chiding you for it. I wept. You Seemed affedsed, even to sadness — but you prayed me to conquer those emotions, which, though ssattering to you, pained you to excite in the tender heart of one So dear 
to 
ELIZA WARWICK, it; 
to you. I could not reply — I Sobbed audibly. You ashed me, whether you had not better stay at elmswood, since I Seemed So unhappy to part with you I was just going to answer jes, - when Lady Huntley entered the room." She'cast a terrisying look of displeasure at me, and entreated you, my Lord, not to delay So long the business of'con Sequence which called you from elmswoed — She Smiled at least she tried to Smile, at the folh, as she styled if,, of So much grief, when your absence would not be long — Shej in short, prevailed on you to go — and, after giving me a hurried, though tender embrace, you threw yourself into your chaise — and from that moment I have not known one cheering ray of comfort. 
You 
fti8 THE HISTORY OF 
You will think me very tedious, mylord, in writing these events of my life; but my extreme weakness will not Suffer me to proceed Saster — My pen is thrown down every ten minutes, in order to give me time to recover from the constant faintings I endure — My senses, thank Heaven, are still perseds, though I am altered in every other respect— — my form is So reduced, So emaciated, that,, could your Lordship again behold it, you would Scarcely believe that I could be the Same Eliza you loved at elmswcod. 
When you had left the house. Lady Huntley reasoned wdth me upon the advantages that would accrue to you Srom your connedlion with Lady isabella — She then put it to my love, to my disin 
tercstedness, 
ELIZA WARWICK. 219 
terestedness, which I would have you adhere to, your engagements to me, or to the will os your mother, though altered,, and the proposals made you by Lady Darnington in Savour of her daughter? 
I hesitated — I affnred her Ladyship that which made you happiest should be preferred by me — but that I believed my Huntley loved me better than all the riches of Golconda — and that not evem the accomplished mind and beauteous person of my rival could ever make you: Swerve from the Sincere and ardent love you professed to feel for your Eliza. It was then hinted to me, that you admired Lady isabella more than your delicacy towards me would Suffer you to confess — that you were a man of So peculiar a turn of mind as to abhor all engagements with a woman who had Selt any former prepoffeshon in the Savour of another — 
that 
220 THE HISTORY OE 
that, when my story became known to' you, you might still affect, perhaps, through kindness to me, a love unabated, and an attention unremitting — but that in your heart you would draw comparisons between the woman jou might have had and the one you unguardedly chose. The determination was lest to me, to judge which side it would favourably incline to — Alas! I was too Sensible of Lady isabella’s persedtions, not to believe you would have regretted the loss of her -- i\tid (Srom Such a Iketch os your disposition) I feared a little time might See me your aversion — *^ Ah !” cried I, I Seel it all too plainly — I will hide mysels Srom the world — I will ssy from elmswood — I will stee your Son from those engagements which you tell me he repents of — I will 
leave this place and him for ever 
yet I could not have believed that riches 
and 
ELIZA warwicrk. 22i 
and Splendour would So far have Seduced him from me — Alas! I have felt the stings os poverty — but never, even in those moment?, would I have shared the throne of a monarch whom.i could not love — rbut I am conscious that I am unworthy of So great an honour as that, of being his wise — my Same, you Say, is tarnished — Good God! how unjustly! — but tarnished it is — and therefore am I no object Sor the ambition os Lord hunt lay.” My tears Sell in Such abundance, that even Lady Darnington, who was present. Seemed affected— — head Selt So strangely, that I feared my senses were forsaking me — and, ashing for pen and ink, I thought I would write to you before it was too late. aster my letter was finished, I gave it to Lady Huntley, and begged her to deliver it to you; she promised me on her honour to do So, and I 
.make 
THE history OF 
make no doubt she has been ’ true to her word. I then wrote to a relation of the Duke os beauvarise, whom I had known in my childhood, who had always been very kind to me at that timie, and who became a nun Soon after, and was now 
Lady abbess of the convent of — ^-, 
to entreat her to receive me as a pensioner in her house, from whence I hoped never to remove whilst I had life. I added, that I should be with her in two days .after the receipt of my letter, and stat .tered myself‘with the expectation of being received by her with no less tender .ness than I had formerly experienced from her. After it was Sent away, I prepared for my departure from elmswood with a degree of resolution that 1 did not think J was mistress of. 
During the two days that I remained 
at 
ELIZA WARWICK. 
223 
at that Sweet place, (a delay I could not avoid making,) I Saw Lady Huntley but Seldom, and the other ladies still less often. For my part, I avoided no one — I wandered about the apartments, the groves, the garden, and every place I had conversed with you in, with a kind of melancholy pleasure which is better imagined than expressed— — tears would stow in torrents when I pasted by your study — but when I looked on your picture, which hung in Lady huntley’s dreshng room, my heart was ready to break — and many a time, when I have intended to go to another part of the house, my steps have been involuntarily led to that very room — nor would I be Sensible of having gone wrong, until the drops, which would fall from my eyes on' my contemplation of that charming face, would tell me I had mistaken the right ^>ath. 
the history or 
•on the fatal third morning, Lordered my carriage to be got ready; and by nine o’clock everything was prepared. Lady Huntley had not lest her room at that hour; a circumstance very unusual with her — Lady Darnington, too, and Lady Isabella, appeared not at breakfast 1 took a dish of chocolate, and endeavoured to Swallow part of it, but in vain,. I, then went up to Lady huntley’s apartment, and, tapping at the door, begged admittance. As Soon as I entered, I threw myself at her feet r i thanked her for her unmerited goodness to me, and entreated her to believe me grateful. She raised me with fondness, and embraced me in tears. Lady Huntley told me,, there was one favour yet remaining which she had to asse of me — but which, before .she named it, I must promise to comply vwith. Tired of life, I did not think she 
.could 
ELIZA WARWICK. 225 
could have ashed anything, then, that could render me more unhappy; and, without hesitation, I bound myself to grant her request. I was shocked when she insormed me it was only to keep Secret from you the place of my retreat. I told her Ladyship, that, by this new prohibition, she had inflicted on me a severer wound than any she had given me besore; ‘‘for by this means, ’’ cried I, “Huntley will never, though he may wish for it, have an opportunity of Seeing me again — That I have Sacrificed to your ambition, Madam, my dearest hopes, my fondest wishes, you must be convinced - — ah 1 why, then, do you desire to per liecute me further? — If Lord Huntley still loves me, I will never resign my pretensions to his heart — but if he is, as you shy, altered, why this care to conceal from him my abode .^ — Surely your Ladyship vol. II has 
226 THE HISTORY OF 
has dealt with candour by me! — Never would I leave England, did I suppose my doing So could cost your Son a pang — no, Madam, not even tho’ your frowns should be the consequence.” Lady hunt lay then assured me, she believed your love for me was much abated since your knowledge of Lady isabella Trevice — and, ” continued she, it wifi be a Security for you, to keep your residence a Secret; Sor men are inconstant wanderers, and he may, perhaps, ressedt, aster his marriage with your rival, on the beauties of Eliza Warwick, with love and ardour, — his visits, at Such a time, would be inconsistent with your virtue, and his cha radfer — I therefore make this a request, not only for his Sake:, but yours.” This Speech quieted my Sears of your uneasiness about me — and I imagined my going was a plan long concerted, and with your' 
knowledge. 
ELIZA WARWICK. 
227 
knowledge. The idea of your perfidy cost me much misery, many sighs — I threw myself into Lady huntley’s arms, and wept aloud — I called upon God to witness the woes of my soul — I besought Lady Huntley to forgive this first and last effusion of them in her presence— — Starting up, I bade her adieu, and was hurrying to the door, when your picture caught my eye — 1 stopped — I clasped my hands together with a look of wildness, •which alarmed your mother™i contemplated it in agony — At length I exclaimed, “Best, dearest, most generous of men! farewell! — If you are false, may Heaven ne’er avenge it — but, if you are true — 
oh! my God !” -- -- -- -1 could Say no more, 
Tut fell senseless into the arms' of Lady Huntley. I was removed from her dref sing room during my infensibility; and, •when I recovered, we bade each other 0^2 adieu 
228 THE HISTORY OF 
adieu with many tears. As I hurried from her, Lady isabella Trevice met me on the stairs — I made her a low curtesy — May the Almighty bless you, dear Lady !’^ cried 1, and took her hand — “You will be very happy Soon — and my prayers for a continuance of your felicity shall be daily offered.” Lady isabella was So good as to wipe my eyes with her handkerchief; and, bidding me keep up my Spirits, kissed me, and we parted. As I got into the hall, 1 remembered my rose tree — I flew into the garden — I struck down my loved shade— — when I arrived at that Spot, ever dear, ever Sacred, I kneeled, and put up Some prayers Sor your happiness — I then cut off four or five roses that bloomed, and, putting them into my bosom, I returned with a bursting heart to the house. There all the domestics met me, and lined the 
court 
ELIZA WARWICK. 229 
courtyard to bid me Sarewel — Many of them were audible in their Sorrow -- all Seemed affected— — in truth, when I shook them by the hands, I wept very plentifully. My own Servants regretted my carrying them from elmswood, though they assured me they would ever continue with me, go where I would; a resolution that I persuaded them all, but my own maid, to change, when I reached Dover. 
Now, my Lord, behold me in my chaise, about to leave the place most dear to me, with an idea of never again Seeing it or its loved Lord. 
When I drove from the gates, I Sent forth a sigh to my Huntley that almost tore my Soul — I looked back at the mansion as long as my sight could reach it — and when it could no more be Seen, my 0^3 ^^e^rt, 
230 THE HISTORY OF 
heart, I am Satisfied, became a broken one — I grew very ill — on the road an inward lever eonsumed me, and an uni versal lassitude took possession of my whole frame. My watson, who travelled in the chaise with me, tried to per suade me to rest on she way, for she apprehended that my illness proceeded Srom fatigue alone; but I knew the cause better, and wished to arrive at my convent, in order to experience the consolatory advice os my Sriend, the lady abbess; therefore hastened on my journey, and arrived at Dover in two days after my departure from elmswood, A vessel lor Calais was about to Sail immediately. watson and I embarked, and we were in Some hours Safely landed on French ground. 
The seasickness I endured augmented 
my 
ELIZA vfarwicic. 23t 
my indisposition — it was too violent for So weak a person to Support — and I began to think my lungs were affected— — the longer I was on the road, the more uneasy I became — I Seared my approaching dissolution would happen before I could reach one Sympathising friend' who would perform towards me the last charitable offices — I therefore travelled with as much Speed as possible until I 
arrived at -- -- --, where I was received 
by the pious abbess with all the warmth,, ail the tenderness, of a mother. I was' put to bed directly in a high fever — a fever which has never left me since — and which will, in a very short time, corn pleat the work it has So Successfully begun. 
I have little more to add to this his tory, my Lord, than to affure you, when I received your letter, which you wrote to me on your return to elmswood, my 
w4 
grief 
332 THE HISTORY OF 
gries and dcsjiair exceeded all belies. I am now, I trust, resigned to the wise decrees of Providence — I'behold the awful moment, which is at'hand, with patience, and a joy which religion alone can inspire— — expect with confidence a release from my woes -- and humbly hope for a happy transiation to the bosom of my God. 
And now, my Lord, nothing more remains but to bid you an eternal adieu I 
• -- -- Dear Huntley! — best beloved of my 
soul! — receive from your Eliza her dying wishes, her prayers, for your happinesa — May Lady isabella Trevice bestow on you that share of felicity which it was 
denied me to assist you in obtaining! -- 
Lady isabella is virtuous, innocent, and beautisul — Eliza Warwick is — Nothing. 
ELIZA WARWICK. 233 
ISO Miss Warwick, 
IV E, live, for your Huntley, my adored, my injured, my virtuous Eliza! — Lady Huntley has taken compassion on my Sufferings, and informed me of the place of your retreat — I siy to you upon the wings of love — I breathe but to express the ardour, the sincerity, of my affection— — wait only Sor your Sriend 
Dr. H -- -- --, who has promised to be my, 
companion to Dijon — he will, I flatter myself, reinstate you once more in health — your Huntley will restore you to hap piness. Ah! my Eliza 1 should fate Separate -- -- -- -- There is madness in the 
thought! -- -- -- -1 will hope — yes, my 
ever charming, my ever amiable mistress, I will hope, that Heaven, in pity to my prayers, will Spare a life So precious. I 
know 
234 
THE HISTORY OF 
know not why I write — I shall be with 
you, perhaps, Sooner than this letter -- -- - 
Oh! what transport, what exultation, is in the idea os clasping Eliza once more 
to my constant heart I -- -- -- Chase Srom 
you this cruel illness — be yourself again — and, ah! live to make happy ' 
S 
Your saithsul, 
"your adoring 
Huntley. 
To 
ELIZA WARWICK. 235 
Lo Lady Huntley 
I AM arrived, Madam; at Dijon; and though I have been here Some hours, I have not yet Seen the object os my anxious thoughts. A Madame de Granville,, whole character does honour to her Sex, and who is a particular Sriend to the ab bess of the convent my Eliza was in,. persuaded miss Warwick, Sor the benefit os purer air, to Suffer herself to be removed to her house, which stands upon a hill at Some little distance from Dijon, and which commands the most extensive and beautiful prospedt. After Some difficulty, the gentle Sufferer consented toi do as they would have her, and she was conveyed in a litter to the Seat of Madame de Granville. The little journey has af sedted her much, and her strength and Spirits have not yet recovered it. 
236 THE HISTORY OF 
On our arrival, we went immediately 
to the convent of -- -- -- -. We were 
there informed, by the Lady of the house, of miss warwick’s removal to Madame de granville’s; and the reverend and amiable nun gave me a letter to that lady. She Seemed overjoyed at' the mention of my name, and offered up Some pious ejaculations for my preservation. As 
Soon as Dr. H -- -- -- and I quitted her 
presence, we directly Set off for Madame de granville’s. She received us with all the affability and politeness So natural to the French; and it is Sroni her house I now write. 
Dr. H -- -- -- will not let me appear until 
he has prepared Eliza to behold me. When she received my letter, which was but last night, she listed up her languid eyes to Heaven to beseech its bleshng on 
me, 
ELIZA WARWICK. 237 
me, and, putting her hand upon Madame de granville^s arm, she exclaimed, “This dear Sriend, Madam, of whom you have heard me Speak, is coming to make me happy, he Says — ah! that can never be again— — with a Smile, she laid her hand on her heart, and cried, I Seel — 
I Seel it is too late.” The Lady endeavoured to reason her out of that notion, as it Seemed to make an impreshon on her that might have a Satal effect. “No, ” continued she, “there you mistake — I really do not wish to live — not even for my Huntley — I have had So many hopes. So many fears, to contend with, that I am weary of expectation — I have looked, for Some time past, beyond this world for happiness — and God Almighty has at last decreed that my wish should be fulfilled — I die. Madam, ” added the angelic creature — ** 1 die Satisfied — — Perhaps my 
Huntley 
238 THE HISTORY OF 
Huntley will come time enough to receive my last sigh — If he should not — ah! tell 
him that that sigh belongs to him.” - 
But why do I reflect So deeply? — Ah! Lady Huntley, my tears stow like a weak 
girl’s — my Sears distraist me is she 
should be So ill indeed — ah! if I should lose — never, never, ' shall 1 taste os comfort more. Dr. H -- comes out of her 
apartment — he beckons my approach. 

T have Seen her — but, ah! my God! how altered I — how emaciated i — Death has, indeed, began his ravaging work — and I shall be deprived of her for ever 
■ -- -- : 1 am come Srom her, in order that 
she should try to steep — I know not what to do with myself — my thoughts are all horror and confusion. 
isis 
ELIZA WARWICK. 239 
1 will write on — I will describe out meeting. 
When I left you, to attend Dr. H — 
I ashed him eagerly how he Sound her? He shook his head, and taking me shy "the arm, he led me into another room — My dear Lord Huntley, ” Said he, medicine has no power in this case — Nature Seems worn out — she has not, I "fear, many hours to live.” He turned aside to wipe away the humane drops that Sell Srom his eyes. As Sor me, I ■ did not weep — but my brain appeared ’to take sire. He went on — “She is in’ ffo confirmed a decay, that miracle alone, can restore her — and in So swist a one., that we arrived but in time to bid her adieu.” The room Seemed to turn round with me — My head was strangely affect' -' — I fell into a chair y i endeavoured to 
conceal 
> 
240 the history of 
conceal my agonies — I ashed ‘ if I might 
not See her ^ Dr. h told me I must 
strive not to hurry, not to discompose her — You must yoursels be calm, ” Said he. I promised to be So — and he led me to the door of her apartment. He entered first, and ashing her whether she would object to See her friend Lord Huntley, she answered, in a weak though still harmonious accent, “Objefi to see him! — ah! no. Sir — I have endeavoured ’to prepare my soul to receive with com posure the mortal dearest to it — I am.resigned, let what will happen — and I can now bear, without emotion, even the sight of Huntley.” I then approached — She was sitting on a Sopha, Supported by pillows, dressed in white — and, tho’ altered by the extreme thinness of her form, she was at that moment lovelier than any aether woman 1 ever Saw in health. She 
woulcj 
ELIZA WARWICK. 241 
would have ariscn on my appearance — but I prevented her, by throwing myself at her feet, and holding her hands in mine. She Smiled on me, as I fixed my eyes in her face, and ashed me if I knew her again? ‘ Ah !’ cried I, ‘ why, why that question? — Do not these emotions testisy that my heart is devoted to you, alone ?’ She bowed her head towards me — and I kissed with rapture those cheeks, those lips, on which the flush of health .and beauty had So lately been conspicuous — I Spoke to her of our marriage — I entreated her to name an early day for its celebration. “Ah!” returned she, “no more os that, my Huntley! — Death will Soon claim me for his own — and in his meagre Sorm I shall view 
charms unspeakable -- lise is no longer 
dear to me — I have lost all sense os its joys — and am equally insensible of its vol. XL 11 pangs.” 
242 THE HISTORY OF 
pangs.” She Soon aster Sainted — and until she again opened her eyes my misery was beyond conception. 
She ashed Dr. H -- -- sis he remembered 
her saithsul Jennet? The good man assured her be did, and that her death had osten given him coneern. “You behold here, Sir, ” Said she, “one like her, worn out with care and Sorrow — •this difference, indeed, is in our Sat, that her age was comsortless, whilst my youth is nipped in its bud, with delightful pro spedls before me, could I live — May I die with her resolution! — and may we meet and know each other in Heaven !”, She clasped her hands with joy and fervour 'at the bare idea, and Sunk back upon her pillows. She reached me her hand, which I pressed to my bosom r*, and, looking stedsastly at me, she es 
..elajmed, 
ELIZA WARWICK. 243 
■claimed, My God! he looks pale! — It is I who am the cause of this altered countenance — Tell me, are you not well ‘ Yes, * answered I, ‘ but I will Soon follow you — your Huntley shall protect you in the unknown world you are launching into — he shall be your Safeguard, your attendant, ever “No, ” cried she, with a firm voice, no, I charge thee — hurry not thy departure Srom hence before it pleases Heaven to give thee thy dismission— — not for me — I shall find a friendly condudtor on my way — and with him i’ll wait in expectation of thy com incr.” She then waved her hand Sorus to retire — •and Madame de Granville Says, she has composed herself to rest. 

R 2 
It 
244 the history OF 
It is now three hours since we lest. her to repose — and she has not stirred, or rung her bell. I am alarmed — Who knows but this steep is her last — or rather 
that it is the steep of death itsels! 
Oh! that idea his horror’s voice that 
Speaks! -- -- -- -- 1 will be composed — 
I will hope — my God, I will hope the 
best -- -- -- -- -- Oh!!! -- my 
breaking heart! 

* 
Another hour is pasted, and still she 
is quiet. Dr. H -- -- appears uneasy — 
Madame de Granville is bathed in tears — and watson wrings her hands, and laments the loss of her angelic lady -- - 
I can neither weep nor complain — My head Seels strangely — but my Soul is tor, 
,! -- -- Hark!! — : hear a noise — 
Madame 
ELIZA WARWICK. 245 Madame de Granville is at my door -- -- -- - 
She lives! — and one ray of comfort'darts 
on my thoughts -- -- -- -- -- She has Sent to 
Speak to me — I sty to attend her. 




Eliza Warwick is gone -- she is gone 
for ever! -- -- -- Too cruel mother! — 
inhuman Lady Huntley! — behold — behold the fatal effefls of Ambition / — ' She died in my arms — She.smiled to the 
last -- -- But, hark! -- -- her voice! — 
her step! — her Sorm !' — -- Eliza, thou 
shalt not wander eternity alone — Huntley Swears thou shalt not. 




Who called me? 
I was with 
her — 1 gave her comfort — I opened my 
- 3 
arms 
246 THE HISTORY OF arms to shield her from violence — 
She whispers that she is happy — she bids 
me follow -- -- -- My head is too hot 
cool it — ease it with thy Soft hand, my Eliza! 
But how is this, ^my mother. Say 
ye? -- Nono, no — not my mother — 
She has murdered -- -- -- Lady Huntley 
steeps in peace — but Eliza — ah! Jhe will never steep again. 
Dr. 
ELIZA WARWICK. 247 
Dr. -- -- -- to Lady Huntley, ' 
I AM Sorry, Madam, to be the mes senger os Sorrow to your Ladyship — but, = alas I the cruel tash must be imposed on Some one — and who So proper to undertake it as a friend? — In that light, ma 'dam, I consider myself to your family — and wish that my Sympathy could leffea the weight os your affiidtion. 
Lord Huntley is dangerousty ill — and has been delirious ever since the death of 
the Sweet, excellent miss Warwick ...- 
The Scene was affecsting — your Ladyship may wish to know it — and I will, with, all the composure I am master of, relate it to you. 
R 4 
After 
548 THE HISTORY OF 
aster a steep os Some hours, from which I Scarce!v expected she would have awakened, Miss Warwick desired to See Lord Huntley and his Sriend. We repaired to her apartment immediately. On our approach, she reached Softh a hand to eaclb I took one with reverence — Lord hunt lay received the other in silent agony — ‘‘ Doctor” ” the dear lady, “1 thank you for your goodness to me — you have, indeed, been ever kind, ever compassionate, to me -- and Sor my dear Jennet, whom you attended with unremitting zeal, I beg os God to bless you — Nay, do not weep, dear Sir --! shall be happy.” She then turned to your Son, who was kneeling by her — “Come, my dear huntley!! comsort — your Eliza makes it her dying request — We shall meet again — I will implore the Almighty to Suffer me to be your guardian angel — I will 
hover 
ELIZA WARWICK. 249 
hover over you — I will give you notice (if that may be permitted me) of the 
moment of your death in the mean 
time, adieu! my best, my dearest friend!” and she embraced him with affection.. Lord Huntley held her to his bosom, and cried, with eagerness, ‘ By Heaven you shall not go! — or I will fall before you She raised her head from his shoulder, and looking at him with fixed attention — “If ever I was dear to you, preserve your lise — think on all I have Suffered, and ressedt whether my trials have not been more Severe than this one stroke — Religion held my hand — and I am now my Huntley, at this awful instant, happy.” She then presented him with a miniature of herself, and bade him to remember, when he looked upon it, her love — her gratitude — her friendship. He held it to his lips. And now, ” crihd 
the 
250 
THE HISTORY OF 
the dying angel, and now, my huntley!! is all over” — He threw his arms about her — her cold hands clasped his neck — Adieu! my love! — my dearest Huntley! a long farewell” She them raised up her eyes to Heaven — and aster: offering up Some pious'ejaculations,, in which she pronounced the name of jesus' audibly, her gentle and spotless Soul disengaged Srom the lovely form of clay which had So long confined it, and winged its flight, without one struggle, to the. mansions of the blessed. 
It is now. Madam, that I find my pern unequal to the talk of description — it would be presumptuous Sor Such a one as mine to attempt to represent the grief,, the despair, the horror, os the unsortu nate Marquis. He would not be prevailed on to leave the lifeless form of his. 
angel 
ELIZA WARWICK. 251 
angel (as he called her), nor could all I could Say, or the melancholy Scene before him, provoke one tear from his eye. His countenance was dark and gloomy — his eyes had a Sort of fixed and steady look, which I had never observed in them before. He osten called on her, and Seemed to expect her reply. He would then clasp his hands together, and exclaim, that Jhe was murdered. He Soon aster complained of his head, and began to talk very incoherently. I will not repeat the many pathetic, the many affecting things his Sorrow and madness uttered — it is enough to Say, a fainting sit, which was occasioned by the conssidt he had long endured, afforded us an opportunity of conveying him from the dismal sight of death to his own apartment. After his recovery Srom it, he appeared more composed, and called for pen and 
ink. 
252 the history ot 
ink, to write to your Ladyship. He' wrote not long at a time, but would now and then return to it, with a kind of wildness in his looks and manner, which alarmed me greatly for him. I believed his mention of the Subject that had given, him So much pain affedtfed him deeply,, and I stole out of his room the' materials for writing, in order to prevent his dwelling on the fatal description. He missed them not — he had Sorgot that he had written — and from that hour Lord hunt lay has neither appeared, nor Spoken, like himsels. I must confess to you, Madam, that I think him very ill — nay, more,, that, if a change Sor the better does not happen hi twenty-four hours, I shall de spair of his ever conquering the violence of his disorder. 
I Send this away immediately, that your 
Ladyship 
ELIZA WARWICK. 253 
Ladyship may be prepared Sor the worst; and will write again when the period arrives which will either revive or kill luy hopes. 
I must once more repine at being obliged to communicate Such mournsui tidings rand beg leave to assure you. Madam, that you Scarcely can Seel more on this occasion than I do. 
"I have the honour to be your ladyship’s 
Most obedient and devoted Servant, 
ivijon. 
W -- -- H 

^54 the HISTORY OF 
V William pvadnor. 
S L R, 
To your delicacy, and your friendship for Lady Huntley, must I consign the painsul talk os disclosing to her an event, for which, I fear, she is but ill prepared, and which must mark her future days with Sorrow and repentance. 
I will make no apologies for imposing on you So disagreeable an office — If I was not convinced of the generosity of your friendship, which is ever ready to expose your Sensibility to Suffering, in order to prove Serviceable to an object worthy of •esteem, you would be the last man in the world to whom I would thus write, 
or 
ELIZA warjwick.. 255 
. or to whom this commishon ought to be .entrusted. 
At this moment, Sir, my tears stream for the loss of a Sriend — a loss So recent, and So Satal, that it calls for more fortitude than I poffess to behave on the oc .casion with any composure — How will you Suffer, wshen you are insormed, that the young, the blooming, the amiable Lord Huntley -- -- -- yes. Sir -- Lord 
Huntley, expired this morning — in a situation the most deplorable — the most affecting — to be conceived. 
I cannot, at this time, be particular — .Suffice it to Say, his head was touched by dcspair — his heart was broken by grief. At twelve last night i.observed his disorder was past the reaeh of medicine; and the physicians whose help I had Summoned 
256 THE HISTORY OF 
moned from Paris as Soon as he was taken ill, all declared, with me, that his dissolution was near. Lord Huntley had an interval of reason, which continued during the .last hour of his life — He in treated, in that time, to be carried into ■ the chamber of the lifeless'miss Warwick — I indulged him in the request — and, with many embraces, and joysul exclamations, he Spoke to his dead Eliza, and itold her he obeyed her call. Then, turn, in, he addressed jhimsels thus to me; 
My dear friend, ” and he took my dtand, ‘‘ I Seel — I know that I have but .a Sew minutes longer to remain in this world — I have beheld Eliza arrayed in all her charms, who has .beckoned me to those celestial places where her Selicity is not entirely persedt till I join her — I go, my good Dr. H — •, without one regret — 
nay. 
ELIZA WARWICK. 2^ 
nay, with a joy that I never experienced 
before -- -- comsort my mother — beg Sir 
William Radnor to ashst, with his friendly, assiduity, and peculiar good nature, the painful tash — tell her I love and respedl her, with affection and duty — and that what she has done lately proceeded rather from an error in her judgement, than any ill intention of her heart — and that idea 
must be her consolation -- He paused 
-- -- He then bade me adieu — and, expressing himsels in a style of the most persedt devotion to the Omnipotent Creator, whose Scourge he had kissed with patience, threw his arms around his lovely partner in asslidlion, and breathed his last on her bosom. 
Wshat a field do the melancfioly corses, I have just ceased to gaze upon, afford Sor ressedtion! When I look on them, vol. II S 1 behold 
258 THE HISTORY OF 
I beheld tht^fatal consequences of perm 
dous ambition -- -- -- But I must restrain 
my pen -- -- Unhappy, misjudging mother 
! how are you punished! 
I must entreat. Sir, your Speedy commands about the. manner of conveying the precious remains of Lord Huntley and his Eliza to England; and have the honour to be. 
Dear Sir, 
Your most obedient humble Servant, 
jdijon. 
W 
H 
FINIS 
.wi- 
-- - >ck 
^ ^ V 

‘•i^> '.'’ ... 

Ar. 
. •.. - I .' 
":. : ' vvc ' ■'• -; - j 
'■ : ' ' y ^ S 
'. •• 
, - V - * ■ 
.D■•■'AC^ •• 
... ■’ .*’ 
via' ' 
. \ 

Ic 
f * '. ~ ^ V. "AM 
V ■? ' ’■ - •*. ♦. V • 
T. 
V; 'N; L : 
^ vy. 


fa.er}4ml^ (f 
?R' ' 
. '; ■ 
tzd. - 
tA57 
i' 
''' 


, II 
T.., .., - 
<■■ - ' ' ' c7r 
i. 



■ftri'rri.. C. ■' ' 
r /■ 
•. i r,, 

r ^ J. ‘ ». VN, 
_ V I ^-.. ', f V I % ^ ■ w V 
■ W •. 1 • fc' ■'. _ 
si53 
•*. ‘ F'‘ '.*', 
'.3r : V - 

i.' .' 

I 
.J 

'.K 

; -55^ 
da 
0. 


30353 

