THE
HISTORY
OF
MELINDA HARLEY,
YORKSHIRE.

LONDON:
Printed for G. Robinson, No. 25. Paternoster-row, 
and J. M'CLIESH, Edinburgh.

M,DCC,LXXVII.


INTRODUCTION.
As it has been often observed, that 
the style of most Novels is rather 
calculated to warm the passions, and to 
raise the hero or heroine far beyond the 
level of common life, instead of endea-
vouring to instruct or inform the mind, 
by such sentiments and examples, as may 
be of real use to them in life; so I have, 
to the best of my poor abilities, pursued a
n opposite plan, and I may venture to 
assure my fair readers, that they will at  
least receive no hurt or prejudice from
the perusal of the following pages. The 
more learned part of my readers will, I
hope, show a good natured indulgence
to such faults or mistakes in the language
as may appear to them, though I flatter, 

[iv]
myself, that they will not be viewed with 
a microscopic eye. As my intentions 
are good, and none of my characters 
are drawn to give offence to any parti-
cular person; so I sincerely wish, that 
none may be disobliged at them.


MELINDA HARLEY,
.<..4.4..<,<i.4 .4..<.4 .4.^.<.4 .4-4’-< ■< •4-<'4'-< ■« •< '4-<-< ■<}'
LETTER L
My Dear Amanda,,
According to my promiSe, I noW' sit down to give you Some account of this charming place, where I have already Spent three weeks in a most agreeable manner. The houSe is situated on a Small eminence, in the midst of a delicious valley interSperfed with trees, and watered by a very fine river, which appears, from the windows, in many fe-parate and unconnefled Spots. Tlie gardens are laid out with exquisite taste, and contain the choicest fruits and flowers;
A 3	in
I 6 ]
In short, wherever you turn your eye, noble woods. Spreading waters, and elegant temples strike the view, and exhibit, to a Serene and tranquil mind, an image of paradiSe itSelf. Sir Robert and Lady Wandle Seem to be very fond of each' other, and at great pains to show the utmost attention to their guests. Their children obey them through love, being fully convinced that nothing is required of them, but what is conducive to their happinefs and instruDion. We have had a good deal of company since I came here, and a continued round of diversions, Such as balls, concerts of music, fishing, &c. have been the conSequence. My Spirits are almost exhausted, and I begin to wish for the quieter Scenes of life again. I am glad to hear from my aunt Lady Wandle, that we shall Soon
be
C 7 ]
be enabled to enjoy them, as most of the company are going home to prepare Sor London. I will Soon wTite you again.; in the mean time, believe me with sincere esteem, yours,
Melinda Harley.
Wottoii-hall, ?	.
oa. i6.1775' S
LETTER II.
Lo the fame.
WE are now, my dear friend, got into the gloomy month oS No-,vember, wshen, according to one of the French writers, the English people begin to hang and drown themSelves: What pity it is that the sin of Suicide should be much more frequent in this our happy
Hand'
■9
C 8 ]
Issand than in other countries groaning under the iron rod of oppression ? We are indeed too oSten unhappy in Spite of all our blessings, and ill deServe the many mercies we enjoy : Most of our wants are artificial, and his happineSs is much better assured who has learned to con-trad his desires, than he who gives them full Scope, though he has wherewith to Supply them. Were a Soreigner, however, to step in amongst us here, he would fee nothing of that gloomy disposition, and, I hope), would be inclined to think that the charge made against us was either unjust or too general. Last week most of the company left us; and yester- | day we had a visit from Mr Viner, a \ young gentleman who has lately fucceed-ed to an estate of L. 500 a-year, left him by an old uncle who was an intimate
c 9 :
mate friend of Sir Robert’s. The young man Seems to have had a genteel education, is very modest, and when he gives his opinion, delivers himSelf with shat degree of diffidence which puts me in mind of Mr Pope’s caution on that head, •u'vz.
Be cautious always when you trust your fenSe, And Speak, though Sure, with Seeming diffidence.
It has been often obferved, that the con-verfation of most people is defeflive, not So much for want of fenfe or learning, as for want of good breeding and discretion. I know nothing more agreeable than to be in company with well bred people, who are always endeavouring to pleaSe and to gain the favourable opinion of one. another j nor is it necessary in
doing
C lo ]
doing this to Sacrifice our Sincerity ; for ■ though blunt truths need not be Spoken at all times, yet there is no necessity, in point of politenefs, to Speak contrary to the truth. I believe few people are offended at the mere difference of opinion, provided that you do not treat their fen-timents with a degree of contempt or ridicule. True politenefs, then, must consist in an eaSy stream of conversation, without vehemence or airs of Superiority, and in pleasing without flattery, or con-tradiding without provoking. Remember me kindly to your mother, and believe me to be, your’s sincerely,
Melinda Harley.^
I
LE.D '
I
E ” 3
?
1
LETTER III.
To MiSs Harlev.
HOW much am I indebted to my dear Melinda for the two letters with which she has lately favoured me from Wotton-hall. The company of Such agreeable people as you deScribe, cannot fail to cheer the mind, and to make the winter glide infenSibly away. How much might we increafe the hap-pineSs, and Sooth the miferies of one another, were we Sincerely inclined to it ; instead of which how often does it happen, that, in the midst of eafe and affluence, we Suffer the demon of difcord to fow jealousies, piques, and animosities, amongst ourfelves, So as to imbitter our
enjoyments.
C I* ]
enjoyments, and impair our pleafures.
“ Hail ye Small Sweet courtesies of life,*" fays the benevolent Stern, for Smooth do you make the road of it. I do Sincerely agree with you in thinking, that the company of well-bred people is one of the greatest pleafures in life. You must re- j member Mr Meriot, who was deferved-	|
ly refpeDed as an honest upright man j	;
but, as he wanted the gentle virtues, I | never could love him ; his own children ! Seemed only to obey him through fear, ^ and were under a constant restraint in his company. Morofe and Surly, he al- | ways gave his opinion as a dictator. In- . |-deed he was generally left at liberty to '' enjoy his own opinion, though ever So abfurd, as few people were at the pains to contradifl him. Such people, you’ll obSerre, are generally indifferent to music
1
C o ]
lie and chearful amuSements. What is related by Polybius, oS two people in Arcadia, is remarkable, the one nation being as much hated for brutality as the other was beloved for benevolence; and this difference w'as imputed by him, to the one cultivating a taste for music, and the other defpiSing it : Yet, my dear, this paffion for music may be carried too far, as in Italy, wdiere Sentiment gives way to the luxury of found ; the harmony of which is preferred to painting. Sculpture, and other liberal arts much more ufeful. A propos, I have heard that Mr Viner has a sine taste for music, and performs Sweetly on the German flute ; but for this I rely on your judgment, as your taste and fldll in that in-chanting art is So generally acknowledged to be just and true by the best con-B	noifleurs.
E H ]
noiffeurs. I am told likewiSe, that Mr Viner has a most engaging addreSs, which makes him a great favourite of the ladies. Be Sure to let me know if
i
all this be true, and if he has any faults to balance So many agreeable qualities.
We have no new's here since you left us, i except that MiSs Sidley, the rich heireSs, | was last week married to young Lord Modish; it was .a mere Smithsield bargain, concluded by their reSpeflive parents, So probably in a year or two they will not give Sixpence for one another. Tom Rawley is the fame good-humour- i ed unthinking creature that ever he was, ! and, though he has Spent most of his fortune, he appears gay and unconcerned; he is really a true Christian in this, that he never thinks of to-morrow, but allows
f
C <5 ]
lows it to provide for the things of it-Self. Adieu, my dear,
Amanda Beaufort.
Morton Abbey, ?
Nov. 15. 1775. S
LETTER IV.
1	To MiSs Beaufort.
THanks to my dear i^manda, for her kind letter: I was out walking in the garden, when my maid brought it to me j I knew the hand, and immediately stew to my room, and there feasted upon it. Believe me, nothing can give me greater pleaSure than to hear from you. We have been now long accustomed to unboSom our minds to one B 2	another,
i:	]
another, with unSuSpicious confidence. I have been, for Some time past, indiS-poSed'with a cold in my head, but thank God, am now well and in good Spirits. Sir Robert and Lady Wandle are very kind and attentive, they Seem to vie in anticipating my very wishes. The eldest MiSs Wandle, though but fifteen years of age, is already qualified to be a companion to any woman: She has studied geography, and has made her-felf pretty well acquainted with the Roman history, as well as that of her own country, by which she can form comparisons of men and manners. Is it not strange, that young girls in general are So ignorant of the history of their own country, a piece of education, which even the French women, in Spite of all their levity and dissipation, are ashamed
of
C '7 ]
of being deficient in. External accomplishments, Such as dancing, dressing, music, &c. are no doubt necessary in a certain degree, but should this be our only care, while little or no pains is taken to cultivate the mind. We cannot always be young and handSome ; So Surely we should endeavour to qualify ourSelves for being reasonable companions, and not bestow our whole attention upon the body, which, in leSs than a year, may become the prey of worms. We are told, by a late genteel and entertaining traveller, of a remarkable instance of female fortitude, in a Bologna beauty, who, when dying, bequeathed her body to the public view, in order to curb the vanity of others. Mr Brydone faw the sheleton. ■ You de-fire to know about Mr Viner. It is ve-
B 3	'■y
C '8 3
ry true, that he has a genteel taste in music, and plays remarkably well upon the German flute. We Sometimes have a little concert. Sir Robert and he play first and Second, while Lady Wandle and I accompany them with our voices i Mr Viner is deServedly a favourite of all who know him, becauSe he does what he can to keep you in good humour with yourSelf, while he never Seems to over-rate his own talents; but that which is the best proof of his charaDer, is a generous and compaffionate regard for the niiferies of his fellow creatures. Show me a man of Sensibility and compassion, and I See a thouSand good qualities besides. Of this happy disposition in Mr Viner, I will just give you one instance which I had from my aunt. My Lord Squeezum has lately railed his
estate
C 19 3
estate more than double, in conSequence of which, five hundred people are oppressed to gratify the luxury of one man ; for you know, my dear Amanda, that avarice must grow on the roots of luxury. Most of the old tenants are gone, and their places are silled up by new comers, who have little or nothing to lofe ; So we now hear of nothing but impounding and distraining, while the flatterers and fycophants about court, are continually crying out to his Lord-ship, that this is owing to their want of industry. Among thofe unhappy people,
I was a poor widow, whofe hushand died two years age, after a tedious illnefs*, leaving six children, all under age. A difeafe fpread amongSt her cattle, and, in a few months, she lost eight of her best cows, and one of her horfes returning
j
C J
turning with a load of lime, Sprained his foot, So became unfit for Service. In this manner, struggling with grief and poverty, she fell in arrears sixty pounds of her rent, for which ail her cattle and implements of hushandry were lately Seized in order to be fold, and orders given to turn her out of the farm.. Indeed, from what I can learn, my Lord himfelf was unacquainted with the particulars of her story, for he naturally does not want humanity,' but has unfor- . tunately, like many others, given himfelf up to indolence, and leaves the management to commissioners and factors. Words, however, cannot expreSs the distrefs of the poor woman and her family, when they heard of their cruel fate,
Mr Viner, hearing of her situation, mounted his horfe, and, like a guardian ’
angel,
I
C 3
angel, flew to her relief j he paid the debt, and diSmiffed the hard-hearted meffengers of the law ; then put into her hands L. 40 more, which in all made out the Sum of L. 100, for which, indeed, he took her bill, only with a view to quicken her industry. I believe it may be. difficult to tell, which of the two felt the most pleaSure, she in receiving, or he in giving ; but I will venture to Say, that none of the great ever en- * joyed So much real happineSs, either in the purchaSe of a sine horSe, or in the building of a dog-kennel. We are told, that when the Duke of Luxemburgh was dying. Some of his friends complimented him upon his many warlike at-chievements; to which he anfwered, that he then would rather have it to fay, that he^had given a cup of cold water
to
I
[ 22 ]
to a perSon in distreSs, than to have gained all his viflories. Adieu, as I believe that I have left mySelf little enough time, before dinner, to write to my mother; besides I am afraid that I have tired' you ; but the time flips away infenSibly, when writing to So dear a friend. I ^ ever am, yours,	|
Melinda Harley. ^
P. S. As to Mr Viner"s faults, I have not yet found them out, though I
I ;;
make no doubt but he has Some ; for,
II
where is the man or woman free of fail-
si
ings and human weakneffes ; happy are
.	.	' r
they who have balm in their blood, and
whofe good qualities greatly overbalance	^
their infirmities.
t
I
LET-	‘
t 23 ]
LETTER V.
To MiSs Harley.
YEsTERDAy I was made very happy, on my return home from a ■courSe of visiting, to find a letter from f my dear Melinda. How can you talk of tiring me by the length of your letters ! The reading of which, constitutes one of the chiefest Sources of unwearied pleafure to me. There lies the difference betwixt mental and fenfual enjoyments; the first, by proper care, is always increasing, while the other, deriving no affistance from the mind. Surfeits, and Soon cloys the poffeffor: In this our kind Creator, as well as in every thing elfe, manifests his goodnefs, that man may be led, from a proper
fenfe
r 24 ]
fenSe of his own happineSs, to a nearer and more cloSe reSemblance to the Deity. IntelleDual improvement shuts up the avenues to vice, and must gradually tend to moral improvement, or to the perfection of the will and appetites. What a fine character do you give of Mr Viner!	;.
I begin to. SufpeD, that you are already | half in love with him ; no wonder, tho" in point of birth and fortune, as an only | child, you have no doubt a title to look ^ at much higher game. Your notions j of female education are very just, and I still hope to fee a more rational System introduced and encouraged by the men.
It is generally allowed that nature has done her part, and that we even excel the men in fancy and quicknefs of apprehension. We should Surely endeavour, then, to wipe off that afperSion
thrown
:	3
thrown upon our Sex, by a late celebrated writer, who avers that no flattery is too groSs for us, and that he never knew a woman who could either reaSon or aft consequentially Sor 24 hours together. We have lately had a melancholly Scene in this neighbourliood; last Sunday, when the rest of the family were at church, except an old Servant woman, MiSs Julia Finchley, third daughter to Mr John Finchley of Morton, went off in a post chaiSe with Captain Brian, Second brother to Sir Harry. He is a man of Sore honour, and has already fought two j duels; the first becauSe his veracity was questioned ; and the other, becauSe he was put in mind of a debt which he owed to one of his companions; So making the honourable Support the diflionourable part of his charafter ;
C	and
I
I
t 26 3
and now he proves himSelf a man of Spirit, at the expence of the peace and happineSs of a worthy family.
The poor old father Set off on his return from church, in quest of his daughter ; but returned home the next day, having learned from Some of the country people that the Seducer had provided himfelf with four horfes to his ehaife, ■ and was Seen driving fast away on the , road to London, wshere probably the poor viDim will Soon be left to shame and miSery, as I hear that the Captain is ordered for America in the Spring.
I have been to visit Mrs Finchley, and to give her all the comfort that I could;
My heart bled for her, I really thought she would have died ; for three days she < has not tasted viDuals, and, with much difficulty, has been prevailed on to take
a
C 27 ]
a glaSs or two oS wine. I am glad to hear, that Sir Harry loudly exclaims against his brother, and Swears that he never w-ill See him again, if he can help it. Were all honest men, in a proportionable degree, to show their reSent-ment at Such a baSe adfion, the villain would indeed be punished; for Sew men, be they ever So wicked, can stand against the contempt oS Society ; our tongues can avail little, but were it the SaShion for every bad man to be ill looked upon, there would be Some hopes of a reformation. I have dwelt too long on this melancholly SubjeQ;, eSpecially as I know your tender feelings. May all happi-nefs attend you, my dear friend,
Amanda Beaufort.
Morton Abbey, 0 Dec. 22. 1775. 5
C 2 .	P,S,
C ^8 ]	j
!
P. S. My mother joins me in best rc^ i . SpeDs to Sir Robert and Lady Wandle, with the compliments of the SeaSon to you all.	j
1^
LETTER VI.	I
To MiSs Beaufort.	|
f
LAst week I received my dear A-manda’s favour, the latter part of i which has given me the most Sensible concern. I have read your account of the Finchley family to Sir Robert and my aunt, who have often since expressed the utmost abhorrence and indignation at the vile Seducer. Indeed it frequently becomes the fubjefl of our conversation.	,
Flow
C 29 1
How much do I pity Mr and Mrs Finchley, as well as the deluded unhappy girl. I make no doubt but the villain made warm protestations of unalterable love, and has promiSed to marry her in London ; but I SuppoSe he looks upon his promises as free donations, and himfelf at liberty to put what construdions he pleafes upon them. Though I am by no means difpofed to palliate his condud, yet I am afraid that she has been deficient in that modest referve and retiring delicacy, which rather shuns the public eye, and keeps fuch men at a due distance. Indeed I always thought her too I	brish and forward, instead of showing-
I	that Sweet Sollicitude to pleaSe, by every
I gentle and decent attradion. I have likewise been often Surprized at her parents too great indulgence, in allowing C 3	her
i
C 3° ]
her indiscriminate fondneSs for novels ( and romances to be So much gratified^
Instead of endeavouring to gain ufeful knowledge, she always delighted in that kind of reading which warms the fancy, and Softens the heart. She was too of- j ten gauding abroad, where, instead of | conversing with a dignisied modesty, her | behaviour was too unreServed, which, however innocent in the main, probably	j	I
at first might encourage her Seducer, i	^	|
am afraid, my dear friend, that you will i ( begin to think me too Severe a critic,	(
and with justice did I deliver my Senti-	;i
ments publicly in this manner to all of my acquaintances ; but I delight to un-	f
bofom myfelf to you ; for the keeping	tj
all Secret is the maxim of a little mind, : . tl and a cold heart. As there is a levity	n
and diffipation in the prefent age, there au
is
[ 31 1
is Surely nothing So proper to check thb as a proper SenSe of religion, one of the chief Securities for female virtue; and without which we are apt to contract a hard and mafculine temper, the most dif-gusting of all our faults, to men of taste and fenSibility. Much depends, likewife, on the proper management of our time, which hi general should be divided betwixt reading, working, walking, and genteel amufements ; early rising, due exercife, and proper amufements are necessary to preferve health and good humour, while works of taste and fancy, with the ashstance of ufeful books, in-fufe habits of virtue, and a due fenfe of decorum. We are told, my dear, that . the Romans, before luxury crept in a-mongst them, dreaded nothing So much as idlenefs, being more afraid of that
than
C 3^ ]
than of the enemy.^ You will think, no> / doubt, that I have got into a very Serious moralizing strain, wh’ch I believe is partly owdng to your last letter, and to the company of Mr Randolph our chaplain here : He is one of the best of men ;	‘
chearful wdthout levity ; his conversation j is at once entertaining and improving :	' ■
Most of the country people Submit their	i
differences to him ; he Spends a great	J
part of his time in visiting the sick and	)
asslicledj by which his own mind is more	t
and more SubjeDed to the feelings of hu-	h
manity, and he has it in his power to	d
render them much Service, by repreSent-	ft
ing their Situation to thofe who are wil- ' fil
I
ling and able to give. As the weather to has been bad for Some days past. Sir Ro-bert Sent word to all his tenants in the he neighbourhood, that they might come ,, lio
and j
f
C 33 ]
and hear Sermon on Sunday last: Accordingly we had a very good audience af-fembled in the great hall; and the honest preacher, as far as I could learn, acquitted himSelf to the Satisfaction of all preSent: He has promiSed me a copy of his diScourSe, and, if it can in the least gratify your curiosity, you shall have it lent to you by the first good opportunity. Before I clofe my letter I must anfwer you concerning Mr Viner : You fay, then, that you fufpeCt me to be half ia love with him : Indeed, my dear Amanda, I frankly own that I refpeCt and e-steem him, otherwise I should be inSen-Sible to real merit; he is very attentive to every body, and particularly So to me, but you know my Sentiments on that : head, that I never will Suffer my affec-^ lions to be engaged, without previousty
acquainting
C 34 1
acquainting my parents; they have beert ‘ always good and kind to me, and I should ; ill deServe a continuance of their tender-neSs, if I ventured on So material a step . in life without their concurrence and ap- ■ probation. Sir Robert and Lady Wandle ' join me in best compliments and kind wishes for your health and profperity, and : many happy returns of the new year. Adieu.
Melinda Harley. ^
P. S. I beg that you may prefent my best compliments to poor Mrs Finchley, |j and tell her how sincerely I condole with her : May she accept of the wine and oil . let which we are all ready to pour into her Vii wounds ; and may that Being, who has • tha thus permitted her to be fo Severely bruif- off ed, endue her with that degree of forth has
tude
1
i'	[ 35 3
tude necessary to bear her up in her present distreSs, until time shall gradually weaken or obliterate the memory of this unhappy incident, and afford her comfort by the prudent and good conduct of the rest of her children.
LETTER VII.
To MiSs Harlev.
I Have read my dear Melinda’s kind and Sympathizing letter to Mrs Finchley, except that part of it relative to Mr Viner ; she returns you her sincere thanks, and, to prove that she is no ways offended at the freedom you have taken, has requested a copy of your letter, j	which
I
t 35 ]	I
which I could not refuSe. Mr Finchley, j good man, is determined, if possible, to | convert the preSent misfortune to the •• future good of his family: He has made j a diligent Search after all the foolish plays and novels in the houfe, and yesterday ■ he committed them all to the flames; but, » in honour to Richardfon, Fielding and Dr j Smollet, has preServed Pamela, Clarissa, ' Tom Jones, Humphrey Clinker, and a , few others excepted. All the family who 1 are in health, are to rife at six in Sum- (	(
mer, and Seven in winter. Every morn- ii ing one of the girls, by turns, reads aloud	n
a paper of the SpeDator ; and, while the ii rest are at work in the parlour, another ' t.l reads aloud, an hour before dinner, ! pi Hume’s history of England. Before : ■ tci Supper another paper of the SpeDator or , Su Guardian is read again, except on Sun- “
day,
i: 37 3
day, when one of Fordyce’s Sermons to young women is then preferred. Sir Harry has Sent a very kind letter to Mr Finchley, professing his readineSs to Serve him in thing that lies in his power, and declaring, at the Same time, the utmost abhorrence of his brother’s condufl. You have excited my curiosity much tO; fee the late Sermon which good Mr Randolph gave you at Wotton-hall, So pray make out your promiSe in Sending me a copy by the first opportunity, eSpecially if it is a short one, for you know I never was fond of long Sermons ; I am quite in love with the charadler you give of the good old man. May heaven long preServe So valuable a life, as a blessing to mankind, and may he at last, as he Surely will, receive that joyful Sentence, “ Well done good and Saithful Servant, D	“ enter
C 38 ]
enter thou into the joy oS thy Lord.” Your anSwer concerning Mr Viner shows that good SenSe and Sensibility which always distinguished you ; and, at the Same time, is expreshve oS that tender regard and duty wshich you owe to the best of parents. May kind providence guide and proteD you in all your ways, and | may you glide gently down the stream : of life, without anxious or uneafy cares;	!
though a moderate share is, I believe, highly neceffary to rouze us into adion, j and to prevent our thoughts being too . much fixed on the vanities of this world. Adieu, my dear friend, and negled no opportunity of writing to me, I pray.
MelinDx\ Harley.
LET-
[ 39 ]
LETTER VIII.
To MiSs Beaufort.
My dear Amanda’s last letter gave me much pleaSure, as by it I find, that Mr and Mrs Finchley are not quite overwhelmed with the blow they have received ; but, on the contrary, have introduced Such new regulations into the family, as I hope will have the desired effecl. We have lately had a wedding here, and a very merry one I do assure you. Sir Robert has a very laudable custom, in my opinion, oS giving a wedding dinner to all his tenants as they enter into the matrimonial state. They all conSult him beforehand, and the day preceding the marriage, the D 2	steward,
C 40	]
stew'ard, by Sir Robert’s order, carries a Suit of cloaths to the bridegroom, and Lady Wandle fends, by one of her maids, a gown to the bride. ThoSe doaths are Spun in the houSe, out of Sir Robert’s own wool, and are just adapted to the station of tbofe people. The v/hole expence. Sir Robert astitres-me, does not cost him above 40 or L. 50 a-year, which is amply made up by the conScious pleafure he receives, in being So instrumental to their happineSs. Another good custom he has, which I think wiSe and political. On the first day of the new year, tliey all come to pay their rents, when a dinner is prepared for them. After dinner. Sir Robert goes down to them, and enquires particularly about their families ; in the doing of which, he has Something kind and obliging
I
C 41	2
ing to Say to every one of them. You may easily gueSs what effefls this must produce ; J:-hey all love him, and there is Scarce an instance of one of them falling in arrears of rent. Sir Robert has, within theSe few years, raiSed his estate from L. 2500 to L. 3000 a-year, being of opinion that a moderate rife of rent stimulates industry, whereas the too general custom of doubling and tripling of rents, destroys it altogether, occasions broken tenants, and even hurts the morals of the people, by blunting the fenfc of truth and justice in their minds. It is then they have recourfe to cunning and chicane, and think that all got off the landlord is fair ; besides. Says he, can there be a greater pleaSure to a man of an eafy and affluent fortune, than to fee his tenants with good coats and D 3	Smiling
C 42	]
Smiling faces, enjoying the fruits of their own industry, and paying their rents punDually: But to return to the wedding. After dinner we all went down stairs, and joined our endeavours to in-creaSe the happinefs of the rustic pair, by~ dancing. Singing, <6re. Mr Viner had come before dinner, by expreSs invita- ^ tion, and brought his German flute ; he ' played Some Scotch tunes, which Lady Wandle and I accompanied with our j voices, to the Seeming Surprize of the rural’ I band. Some of whom humbly requested ! to hear the tune of 77/ never leave thee, twice repeated. At nine in the evening ' they left us, and went home quite enraptured with the pains we had taken to en- j tertain them. This young couple are ! well look’d, and defcended of creditable parents j from what I could learn, they
have
!
C 43 1
have a very good proSpeD of peace and happy contentment. Next morning,Lady Wandle acquainted me, at breakfast, that Sir Robert and she intended to paSs six weeks in London, and, as they pur-pofed to Set out next week, would be glad of my company ; I professed myfelf much obliged ta them, and confented, provided that my parents had no objections j accordingly I have written to my mother by this post, and have little doubt of their refusing me the jaunt along with Such good company. Shall I tell you, my dear Amanda, that, upon my aunt’s propofal, I did obfcrve Mr Viner change his colour, but he Soon refumed his prefence of mind, though I thought he continued graver than ufual until he left us to go home, which was about an hour after j he would not be perfuaded to stay
dinner.
C 44	]
dinner, as he Said that he had Some busi-neSs upon hand, but would do himSelS the honour of Seeing us before we went away. When he was gone Lady Wandie rallied me a little upon the late appearances, | and I endeavoured to laugh it off as well as I could, until Sir Robert came into the room, which broke off the converSa- j tion for that time. This moment John Ranby has called, to ash my commands to our houSe at Dalberry, and I have given him the Sermon, which I hope will j anSwer your expectation. Mr Randolph, who has been abSent Some days on a visit, has often lamented, in conversation,
t
the narrov/ ways of thinking. So common among the lower clafs of people, in matters of religion, and the little pains taken | by most preachers for eradicating tlioSe prejudices, by inculcating the great duties
' ►
C 45 ]
ties of morality, one aSter another, upon their minds : Like the Jew^s of old, he fays, they value themSelves too much on their privileges, and confine the mercy of God to their standard of faith.—A most ungenerous notion, as iS the Supreme Being was not the common Father of mankind ! The Gentoos in India, whom we affeD ta defpife, have much more liberal and enlarged ideas of the divine mercy, as they compare heaven to a vast palace situated on an eminence, where are many different avenues, all leading to the fame happy place, and open to all nations where there are honest men, who fear God and work righ-teoufnefs. Indeed Mr Randolph thinks, that our Confession of Faith, in fome articles, gives them too much room to indulge thofe confined notions, and to trust
tQ&
I
[ 46 ]
too much to borrowed or imputed righ-teouSneSs ; though our Saviour him- ■ SelS plainly lays down the terms of our Salvation, and shows, that not the hear- j ers only, but the doers of his will, are to expect grace and favour with his Father in heaven. Adieu, my dear friend, for the prefent, and be assured that you i shall hear from me very Soon after our arrival in London.
Melinda Harley. '
__________________________________!
LETTER IX.
Lo the fame.
Though now removed to a greater distance from my dear Amanda, I still think that I enjoy her company and
conversation I
I
C 47 ]
conversation when I sit down to write to her. In five days aSter my last letter we Set off Srom Wotton-hall, aSter I had received an expreSs from Dalberry, with my parents permission ; they had not the least objeclion, but, on the contrary, Seemed pleaSed that I had an opportunity of feeing London in fiich good company; and, at the fame time, my father Sent me an order on his banker for loo guineas. We arrived here on the i8th, after an eafy journey of lefs than four days in Sir Robert’s own coach. The day after Mr Viner left us, we had a very genteel card from him, requesting the honour of our company to dinner at Manden houfc, (for that is the name of the Mansion houSe left him by his unde.) The houfe is Small, but very neat and elegant; every thing about it being laid
out
t 48 ]
out with taste and judgment. Mr Viner-, during the two years that he has been in possession of the estate, has made Several gravel walks, and other improvements, much for the better. After feeing the building at a proper point of view, we then lost it, and drew neat obliquely, during which we were prefented with an agreeable variety of different objeds. When the coach stopped, Mr Viner came to hand us out, and expressed his fatis* fadion easily and politely for the honour I we had done him at a time when we I must necessarily be much engaged in pre- i paring for our London journey. Our dinner did not consist of a profusion of dishes, but of the best kind, and elegantly dressed ; while Mr Viner showed an eaSy, well-bred attention to all his company. After dinner we were con-
duded I
f
C 49 ]
duded into the garden ; and, while Sir Kobert and my aunt were walking a little fast to fee the cafcade, we stopped near a Seat in the midst of a sine walk, from whence we had a view of an artificial sheet of water, one end of which is hid from the sight, no doubt to give greater play to the fancy, while the margin is fringed on one side with alders, and on the other is over-hung with stately oaks and beeches. The houfe itfelf appears liere to advantage, half Surrounded with shrubbery ; with a statue of Venus de Medicis on one side, and Apollo on the other, with his left hand extended, after shooting his arrow. I could not help expressing my approbation of the whole Scene ; and then ashed Mr Viner the name of the w'’alk we had entered upon, to which he replied with a Smile, that it E	was
C 5° ]
was the Lovers Walk, and hoped that I approved of the name; I blushed at first, but Soon recovering inySelS, anSwered, that I SuppoSed the name was not new, but had been given by Some former poS-fcffor. Mr Viner then told me, with a modest air, that this was a walk of his own making, and that my first question brought the name into his head : Thrice happy, continued he, should 1 be in the invention, iS you. Madam, would deign to give your Sandlion to it, and condescend to become the mistreSs of it, and all that belongs to Manden-houSe. I am much obliged to you. Said I to Mr Viner, | for the preference you Seem to give me, but am, by no means, prepared to decide upon Such an important affair, especially in the abSence of my parents, without whofe concurrence, I never will en- t
gage
I
C 5* 3
gage my affeftions; but, at the Same time, cannot refuSe you my esteem. He bowed, commended much my notions of duty and reSpeD for my parents, and hoped that I would give him leave to write to me in London. This I could not refufc j but Sir Robert and my aunt coming up to join us, put an end to any further conversation on the Subject. Mr Viner had ordered tea to be got ready early ; and immediately after we returned to Wotton-hall, where we arrived a little after six, the distance being five miles, but a sine road. That Very night I wrote to my mother, informing her of what had pasted at Manden, adding that I would not then mention my own opinion of Mr Viner, as Sir Robert and my aunt were much better judges of his merit and character. As our stay E 2	here
C 52 1
here will be at leafl; fix weeks, we are reSolved to make a proper uSe of it, and endeavour to See all that can be Seen and, in order that 1 may have it more in my powTr to entertain my dear Amanda on my return, I shall keep a journal, of my proceedings. Pray write to me Soon, as that, never can fail to increafe the happineSs of, yours sincerely,
Melinda Harley..
London, 7 Feb. 20. J 776. S
> nil a n	1^1 ~i n » — — - -   arT'ir nrr •iTirr~7iiiiii 1 hi-'it- i nf h
LETTER X.
To Mifs Harlev.
IWas made very happy last Monday, by my dear Melinda’s letter from London, where if you enjoy as much happineSs
as I
I
C 53 ]
as I wish, you will Surely get your incsi-nations Sufficiently gratified. On TueS-day I paid a visit at Dalberry, and beSore dinner your mother and I had Some conversation about your late jaunt and visit to Manden-houSe, She then alked if I knew Mr Viner; to which I anSwered, that I had accidentally been in his company once or twice, and that I had heard him Spoke of as a very pretty gentleman 5 upon this Some company came into the room, which put a stop to any farther ecclairristinent on the SubjeD. Amongst the rest we had at dinner a Mr Aik, who has been a Bristol merchant, and very Successful in trade, having made at least a fortune of L. 60,000, Some call it much more. According to the custom of the'world, you may be Sure great attention was paid to him. He bears the E 3	charafler
C 54 ]
charadler of a very honest man, but at the fame time Seems to have a pretty high notion of his own importance, nor has he, in my opinion. Sacrificed Sufficiently to the graces, without which a man may be rich indeed, but never can be agreeable. I heard him enquire particularly about you, and what stay you propoSed to make in London j probably as he has purchaSed an estate in this neighbourhood, he now intends to commence Mr Viner’s rival, without knowing it, and to be your humble admirer. If So, and that you are perfuaded to give him your hand, pray make him first Subscribe to his own fallibility, and that he must not exercife his dominion contrary to your privileges within doors. You fee what a looSe I give to my pen in writing * to you j pray forgive all this nonSenSe,
but
C 55 3 -
but should he in reality make propoSals,
I Scarce think that the bait held out will be Sufficient to make you Swallow it, tho" fixed on a golden hook. I make no doubt, before this reaches, that you will have heard from your mother. PleaSe to preSent my best reSpedts to Sir Robert and Lady Wandle, and believe me to be, wish unfeigned attachment, your’s.
Amanda Beaufort*
P. S. I had almost forgot to tell you shat the Sermon, which you were kind enough to Send me, is in general much liked. My mother declares that she will have it printed, if she can get Mr Randolph’s confent; his notions of religion are I think free and liberal, tending to eradicate the narrow notions of Superstitious and bigotted Christians.
Fof
C 56 3
For modes of faith let gracelefs zealots fight. His can’t be wrong, whole life is in tlie right.
Pope.
LETTER XL
To MiSs Beaufort.
I Am aSraid that my dear Amanda will think me So much engrossed with the pleasures of London, as to be leSs mind* ful of her friends than ufual; but alas, I have far different caufes for this alteration in my conduD. Much of my time has been taken up in writing to my father, mother, and to Mr Venir. My father, in particular. Speaks much of iiiy cautious and dutiful condud: at Manden-
houfe.
C 57 ]
houfe, commends me for not engaging: my affedlions ; and hopes that I will now reap the fruits of my own prudence and propriety of behaviour. After thefe compliments, he proceeds to acquaint me, that I now have it in my power to be the partner of a man of very good charafler, and poffeffed of an ample fortune. Neither he nor my mother mentions his name, but content themfclves with faying, that he had Seen me Several times at York, when I staid there with my cousin Harriot. I SuppoSe this must be the very Mr Afk you mention, but I really remember very little about him, as it is Some years ago, probably he was not a man of that weight and confe-quence then; but, from what I can re-colleft, he had nothing genteel or striking in his appearance. In my anfwer to
my
C 58 ].
my parents, I have assured them that I never will give my hand to any man without their conSent. That I hope they will rest Satisfied with this declaration, until 1 return home. Mr Viner’s letter was couched in the most polite and re-SpeflSul terms and concludes with hop* ing, that my stay in London will not be longer than was at> first intended. In my anSwer, I again professed my esteem, but gave him no further hopes than I • had done before at Manden-houSe. So much, with regard to mySelf; but, O heavens, wdiat a Scene am I nov/ to diS-cloSe to you. On TueSday last I received a card, wrote as follows: “ If Mifs Harley has not quite forgot the unhap-“ py Julia Finchley, and will deign to ‘‘ pay her one visit, before it is too late,
“ pleaSe to follow the bearer.” It was
just
C 59 ]
just after breakfast when I got the card, and I lost no time in ordering a chair, after which I was conduced to Mary la Bon, where I found the unfortunate girl; but, good God, how shall I describe her Situation and appearance. She was Sitting on a bed, in a mean wretched apartment, her eyes Sunk in her head, while every thing around manifested the houSe of mourning in all its variety.
. She was fcarce able to rife, and began to beg pardon for the trouble she had given me ; I replied, that I was extremely Sorry to fee her in Such a Situation, and that if I could do any thing to promote her eafe or relief, that she might freely command me, as it would be the greatest happinefs in my life. How kind are you, my dear MiSs Harley, Said she, to take Such notice of So great a
criminal.
C 6o 3
criminal. I begged of her to desist from accusing herfelf, being convinced that her fufferings would fully atone for her offences ; and then requested that she would tell me her story in as few words as possible, that she might not be too much fatigued by the recital: Accordingly she proceeded to acquaint me, that her feducer, after repeated promiSes of marriage, had prevailed upon her to elope from her father’s houfe, as he had particular reafons for not marrying in the country; but affured her, that the ceremony should be performed immediately on their arrival in London, and letters should be fent to all their friends to acquaint them of it, when he made not the least doubt but a happy reconciliation would take place immediately. In this manner he impofed on my foolish
credulity.
st o ].
credulity, until we arrived in London, where he at sirst hired genteel lodging' in Brompton-row, Sor the benefit of the air ; but (as she afterwards found) his money running short, he pretended that, on account of Some particular buSinefs, he had hired the preSent lodgings only for a short time. She then told him, that if he performed his promife in marrying her immediately, she could put up with any inconveniency for a time ; but he artfully found one pretence after another, to postpone the ceremony, until feeing my health visibly decline, and sinding me often in tears upon his return home, he appeared Somewhat moved, and went So Sar as to name Some day next month for the marriage-day. Alas, cryed she, I had, by this time, gained So much knowledge of my betrayer, F	that
r 6^ ]
that I could See little or no appearance of happineSs even then. How often did I resteD, with anguish of mind, on the happy and peaceful Scenes that 1 had quitted, when living under the roof of innocence, and under the proteDion of the best of parents, whofe goodnefs I had thus abufed, and whofe enjoyments must be embittered by my undutiful behaviour. My dear Mifs Harley will ex-cuSe my thus wandering from the narrative, to indulge a few gloomy restexions, wiliest burst in upon the thread of my story. Behold then the Sequel: Last week he Supped with Some of his companions at a tavern in the city, (from whence indeed he never returned Sober); and when they were all heated with' wine, one of them reproached him with his bafe condufl, in bringing Such mife-
ry,
t
C 63 ]
ry upon an unhappy Samily ; and, after Some warm altercation, they both started-up, drew their Swords in a moment, and, before the rest of the company could interfere. Captain Brian received a mortal wound in the left breast, by his antagonist Mr Billers, who immediately ssed. A Surgeon was Sent for direflly, by the master of the tavern or Some of the company ; but all his efforts proved in-effedual, grim death had claimed the unhappy man for his prey ; and he. Captain Brian, died next morning, sincerely owning that he had got the due reward of an ill fpent life, and requesting the furgeon to acquaint me, that he died a real penitent, imploring my for-givenefs. Here she stopped, and WTpt bitterly, lamenting her own unhappy fate, and the mifery which she must have F 2	brought
[ 64 3
brought upon her wmrthy parents. I begged her to take comfort, and inSist-ed on her drinking a glaSs oS wine to Support her Spirits, until I Sent Sor a physician. Alas, Said she, your kindneSs is. in vain, death now can only be my physician ; Sor though the Spirit oS man may Sustain liis infirmities, yet a wounded Spirit wsho can bear ? Still, iS I could See my father, Said she, and obtain his for-giveneSs, I should be perfectly resigned, hoping that my example may prove of lasting benefit to many others, and that providence has permitted this for wife ends; but does my dear Mifs Harley think, that an ostended parent will con-defcend to visit So guilty a cliild. At this my heart overflowed with tender-neSs, and, after difpatching a Servant for a physician, I proceeded to' affure her
that
C 65 ]
that I made not the least doubt of her father’s SorgiveneSs, and if she pleaSed that I would Send an expreSs off inime-. diately Sor liim to come : To this she consented with great SatisSadlion. I then wrote the following short letter, and having hired an expreSs, Sent it off in leSs than half an hour.
Dear Sir,
“ I am just now sitting with your un-‘‘ fortunate daughter Julia, who is very “ ill, and begs for God’s fake to See you. Captain Brian is dead. I need Say no more to a man of your fenfe and hu-manity.
“ Melinda Harley.”
After this, with great difficulty, I prevailed on Mifs Finchley to accept of the F 3	Small
C 66 ]
Small Sum oS ten guineas until her father came. We did not wait long for the physician, who Seemed to be a man of great humanity ; but, on our going out together, he candidly owned that he had very little hopes, as he Sufpefled that her disorder was far beyond the reach of medicine, but that he should visit her-‘every day, and do all that he possibly could for her recovery : In the mean time he advifed a nurfe tender to be hired, which was instantly done at the recommendation of the landlady, who promifed to attend herfelf as much as she possibly could, and to fee that the patient wanted for nothing. Upon my return home, you may easily guefs how much Sir Robert and Lady Wandle were affected with the story, and ever after this, during my visits to Mifs Finchley, were
very
C 67	]
very impatient for my return home to give them an account oS my poor patient. On the siSth day the landlady of the houSe told me, on going in, that she was much weaker, and had twice fainted away the preceding night, which alarmed them So much that she had ventured to fend for the physician in the middle of the night, who gave her fome cordial which feemed to revive her fpirits a little, but that he thought her fast going, and wished that her father might arrive in time : Just when the landlady was giving me this account a chaife stopped at the door, and Mr Finchley stepped out with fear and grief painted in his countenance. I took him into another room, and, as far as I was able, prepared him gradually for the worst ; then, calling for gMs of wine, I went up before him
to
C 68 ]
to announce his arrival, which Seemed to give her new liSe. A languid joy Sparkled in her eyes, and, upon his entering the room, she roSe up to receive him-— While he caught her in his arms with theSe words.— O my Julia.—And can you forgive your Julia, Said she ?—And does my mother forgive me ?—And shall I, do you think, find pardon at the throne of mercy ?—To all which questions being anfwered in the affirmative by the good old man, then Said she, with a faltering voice, I die content. May you receive as much comfort from each of your other children as you have received pain from me. She then funk down upon her bed, held out her hand to me. Said Something about my kind-neSs, which I could not distinctly understand, and Soon after expired. Mr Finchley
C 69 ]
ley fainted, and got him removed tO' another room, where he lay inSensible for Some time, and, upon recovering his SenSes, called out,—Thy will be done O God, San£lify thofe Sufferings unto me. Next day Sir Robert waited on him in his carriage, and insisted on taking him home to his houSe, which the good old man readily conSented to, after that Sir Robert had given the necessary orders for a decent burial. May I never have occasion to vrrite to my dear Amanda So melancholy a letter again. My fpirits are quite funk in Spite of all Lady Wandle’s kind efforts to cheer them. Adieu.
Melinda Harlev,.
LET-
✓
[ 7° J
LETTER XIL
To MiSs Harley..
HOW very affeDing has my dear Melinda’s letter been, and how kind and Sympathising have you shown your-Self to the unfortunate. Your tender compaffion Seems to have carried you out of yourSelS altogether, yet it must have been a Sort of pleasing anguish, that Sweetly melts the mind towards the unhappy, and will of courSe terminate in a felS approving joy. God has formed us for a Social state, as the best Security a* gainst the ills of life, and the better to enjoy its comforts, and by means of both our nature no doubt attains to its highest degree of improvement and perfeflion. It is exerciSe which gives health and
strength
C 71. ]
strength to the body; So nothing tends to refine the moral taste So much as the cultivating of moral Sentiment by choice books and choice company; but above-*all, by repeated aDs of humanity, po-liteneSs and hoSpitality. And I believe, it is a great inducement to the exsrciSe of benevolence, to view human nature in a Sair light, and to put the best con-struDion on one another’s actions. Our passions are the rude materials of our virtue, which kind heaven has given us to work up, to polish and refine into a divine piece of workmanship. They furnish out the whole machinery, the calms and storms, the lights and shades of life. They give virtue its struggles and its triumphs: To conduct them well, is merit : To mifapply them, is demerit. After this train of moralizing, which
your
C 7^ ]
your last letter inSenSibly led me into, I must now endeavour to divert your attention, by an account of a very singular affair which happened in our vicinage a Sew days ago, betwixt Toni.Dawley and Rob Waters. They happened both to Sup at Mr RobinSon’s, when the conversation happened to turn upon politics, and the unhappy contest between Great Britain and her Colonies. Mr Robin-Son very modestly Said, that he could not help approving of Sir Robert Walpole’s opinion, which was to tax the Americans, by enforcing the navigation-afls, and preserving the monopoly of their trade, which must occasion their wealth and industry to center in Great Britain, without alienating their affedtions. Mr Waters was very Severe against the conduct of the Colonies, and of the Bostonians
I
: 73 ]
nians in particular. Spoke warmly of their ingratitude and riotous proceedings. Mr RobinSon allowed, that no man in his SenSes could vindicate the tea-riot, their tarring and feathering of cuS-tom-houSe officers, frc. aDs of infolencc destruDive of that very liberty, for the fake of which they had taken up arms ; yet it might be a question how far their punishment, which involved the innocent with the guilty, did exceed the bounds of moderation ; and whether an entire conquest of them would compensate for the decay of their trade, and the alienation of their affedlions. We are told. Said he, that Solon the famous lawgiver at Athens, having heard from Some of his friends, that his laws were thought deficient in Some refpeds, and leaning too G	much
E 74 ]
'much towards the popular prejudices: True, replied he, but they are as good, as they can bear. Yet continued Mr RobinSon, there is one circumstance wliich must give every man pleaSure, who is a real friend to this country, which is, that we must, by this time, have convinced them by the briik Sale of our manufactures, since their nonimportation agreement took place, that we can Subsist without them. This being done, he now Sincerely wished Sor Such a peace and reconciliation, as would firmly establish the constitutional authority of the mother-country over every part of the empire, and, at the fame time, preferve the liberties of America. Most of the company Seemed to acqui-eSce in thoSe moderate Sentimestts, except Mr Waters, and he expressed himfelf
very
C 75 ]
I very warmly against his friend Tom Raw-ley, for laughing at the great heat which he Seemed agitated with: Upon this, Some of the company gave a new turn to the difcourfe, and the fubjetSl: of America I was not once Spoke off again, during^ that night. Next morning, however, Mr Waters waited upon Tom, and told him that he had uSed him last night very unlike an old friend, by treating his opinion with So much ridicule, therefore demanded Satisfadfion. In vain did Mr Rawley affure him, that he was by no means an enemy to his opinion in general, and only thought him wrong in the manner with which he conduced the dispute, especially as Mr Robinfon had shown So much moderation on his side, and that it would be ridiculous for two friends to quarrel about Such a trifle.
G 2	That
C 76 J
That no doubt there were,'as in the time of Charles the first, good people on both sides of the question, who viewed the matters in different points of light, which should induce every well bred man to expreSs himfelf calmly and politely, So as not to disturb the peace and harmony of the company. This by no means Satisfied Pdr Waters, vrho still insisted on Satisfaction, or that she would brand him with cowardice : That was too much for any man of Spirit to bear. Accordingly they both went out, repaired to the place agreed upon, wshere, having Settled the distance and other preliminaries, Mr Rawley received the first sire wshich grazed his hat ; then standing firm like a true hero, he called out. Fire your Second pistol, Mr Waters. What do you mean, replied the other,,
vrhen
• I
j
C 77 ]
when I have not received your first fire. No matter for that, cryed Tom, you are welcome to sire again, for as yet I feel no inclination, on my side, to take away the life of a friend. This had the desired effedt. Mr Waters threw down his pistol, crying out, O Tom forgive my petulance and folly, I am ashamed of my own condudl thus contrasted with yours, how much have you shown yourfelf Superior to me in true courage ! Then ha- ' ving both embraced, they returned home in great good humour. Tom has gained immortal renown, every mouth is open in his praiSe, and I think with rea-Son. Let me know when you are to leave London.
Adieu my dear friend,
Amanda Beaufort.
G 3	L E T-
C 78 ]
LETTER XIIL
To MiSs Beaufort.
yj'Y dear Amanda’s last kind letter, L and Lady Wandle’s constant attention towards me, has helped much to-recover my Spirits, though good Mr Finchley Y situation claimed from us all a far Superior regard. Indeed nothing has been wanting that could in the least degree be conducive to his health and recovery ; he kept his bed Sor Some days, during which time Sir Robert’s own physician constantly attended him once a day at least. He is now much better, and goes regularly out in the carriage with Sir Robert to take the air. The Supreme Being has, my dear Sriend,
thought
^	C 79 3
thought proper to blend, in the whole oS things here, a vast variety of discordant and contrary principles ; light and darkneSs, pleaSure and pain, good and evil, that we. Seeing nothing but iinper-feftion and want of complete happineSs in this Sublunary state, may be led to Seek for it in a future. How much then have they to anfwer for who Seek to violate this last refuge of the miserable, and to remove from the eye of the afflicted this most pleasing hope, this glorious pillar, which fupport the weakneSs of humanity, and without which existence would be given to many of the human Species, rather as a curSe than as a bleS-fing from the hands of our benevolent Creator. Mr Finchley bears his late trial with that degree of fortitude which is equally distant from ralhneSs and cowardice.
C 8° J
ardice, and, though it does not hinder him Srom feeling, yet prevents him Srom shrinking under the stroke.—The Lord giveth., the Lord taketh away ; hlejfed be the name of the Lord., was the language of the good old man.—Your account of the late duel has entertained us very much ; Sir Robert and Mr Finchley are both in raptures with Mr Rawley’s con-du6t; indeed we all think that he behaved nobly, and are glad that his antagonist became So Sensible of his own folly ; for, next to the doing of a good action, the candid acknowledgment of a - fault claims our approbation. Indeed, my dear, I have always thought thofe quarrelfome wretches to be the pests of Society. They are for the most part cap- i tious men, who feek to Screen the infa- | my of their lives under fome honourable '
quarrel..
I
r ^	^
quarrel. The brave man only can forgive. Cowards have done good aDions: Cowards have Sometimes fought, and even conquered, but a coward cannot forgive. Mr Finchley fays that a proper stigma or degree of ignominy, infliDed on the perfon of the challenger, would have a much better effeO; than as the law stands at prefent. Severe laws are fel-dom executed. So the guilty efcape with impunity ; whereas sines and degradations, exafted before Courts of honour, Such as are held in Sweden, would have a much better effedl in checking thofe fubverters of peace and established order, who not only violate the laws of God and man, but expofe the long list of their friends and connexions to unSpeak-able anguish and distrefs. I believe we shall all Set out very Soon for the country
again.
C 82 ]
again, and, as my stay at Wotton-hall will be short, before^ I go home shall flatter mySelf with the approaching hap-pineSs of feeing my dear Amanda in a week or two at most.
Adieu my dear friend,
Melinda Harley.
London, ?
April 5th. —— S
LETTER XIV.
To MiSs Beaufort.
WE all arrived in good health at
Wotton-hall on the 15th, ha- i ving in our company a Mr Lanton, who IS a relation of Sir Robert’s, and lately
returned
I C 83 ]
returned from the East Indies, with a genteel eaSy fortune, gained at no ex-pence of charader, guiltlefs of rapine and depredation ; he is chearful, frank, and open, gives a fine charafler of Mr Halkins the prefent governor, and fays that he has done all that a man could do to re-establish the Company’s finances under proper management and cecono-my ; and at the Same time to proted: the poor natives from being any longer oppressed by their cruel talk-masters, which had occasioned the depopulation of a great part of that once happy country, fo deservedly named by Aurengzebe the Paradile of nations. What a reproach to Engli.shmen, fo jealous of their own liberties, thus to have made fo wanton an uSe of their power over the defence-leSs inhabitants 1 This, my dear Amanda,
[	84	]
^a, is the dire effeDs of luxury, which brings along with it an inSatiable thirst after riches, which, in the general opinion of the world now, feems to fupply the want of every virtue. Poverty alone may be Supportable ; but when taxed as it is, with infamy. Some of the wifest and best of men have difficulty enough to bear up under this additional pressure. Individuals have amassed ministerial fortunes, while the public is poor, and left to shift for itfelf; but death, fays our political writers, is just as unavoidable to the political, as to the animal frame. Beggary is the conSequence of ssavery in fome countries, and probably ssavery will be the conSequence of beggary in ours. Corruption has been long, not only established, but openly avowed; while the rage of a falfe and Squandering
i	[	85	]	,
ing policy must (if Some remedy is not i Soon applied) bring our liberties into more real, though leSs apparent danger, than during the reign of prerogative. Mr Lanton likewife informed us, that just before he left Bengal, a gentleman of his acquaintance had, when dying, given positive orders to burn his body, according to the Gentoo fashion, which was done accordingly; Happily for his wife, she was not of the Gentoo religion, to burn along with him. We ashed, wshat could be the origin of So barbarous a custom ; to which Mr Lanton replied, that, in the Bedang or Gentoo bible, there is this remarkable expreffion, A%. “ The woman who dies with her huf-band, shall enjoy eternal felicity with “ him in the next world.”—Besides, though they are not forced by violence H	to
[ 86 3
to burn, they are, fays he, in a manner forced by custom ; and shame, the greatest of all evils in this life, would be their portion, if they refuSed. Thus stimulated by the fear of shame in this world, and by the hopes of happinefs in the next, it is no great wonder that the voice of nature is stifled, and common fenfe Set at defiance. In every thing elSe, he fays, that their religion inculcates the purest morals ; when old people, past all hopes of recovery, and lingering under cruel pains, are carried down to the Ganges, and delivered over to the god of that river. Their humanity to the brute creation is So great, that most of their SeDs live on milk, rice and vegetables. They .believe in transmigration, and that after certain periods of expiation, according to their different offences, the/
will
C 87 ]
will all be made happy in the Sruition of the Deity, who cannot delight in the con-( fmued miSery oS his creatures, nor would he have created but to bleSs. ASter this, Mr Lanton SurpriSed us by his account of the Savage ferocity of the ty-gers in that country, who frequently Swim from the banks of the river, and destroy the unhappy boat-men drowned in steep. They are Such firm predesti-Rarians, fays he, that they will not be at the pains to Set a watch for when awake, they have a particular cry, which they uSe, called the tyger cry, which effectually frightens him away. It is an undeniable faCt, that wshen a Dandy or common rower is carried off by a tyger, his companions place a fraall stick on the opposite bank, in the shape of an oar, while a Small rudder is placed on the II 2,	like
[ 88 ]
like Satal accident happening to the Mangy or pilot, thus denoting the accident to others passing that way. Yesterday, a few hours after our arrival, we had a visit from Mr Viner. I thought that he looked much graver than uSuaL None but Lady Wandle and I were in the drawing-room ; and, upon her being called out for Some time, he told me that he was much afraid, that a more rich and perhaps a more fortunate rival had got already my parents conSent, and only hoped that no perfuasions would induce me to give m.y hand in barter for a shining fortune, unleSs that I thought him every way besides worthy of my regard and esteem. 1 assured him that he had little caufe to be uneafy on account of that gentleman, who never w'ould be a dangerous rival to him: That
I
,
C 89 1
I hoped my parents would pay a greater regard to realities than appearances; and that as happineSs was the objeD of all our purSuits, I could not SuppoSe that they would Sacrifice the Substance for the shadow. Finally, my dear Amanda, I consented never to bestow my affeOaons upon any other man, frankly owning that he, Mr Viner, had acquired the highest place of regard and esteem in my breast. At the utterance of theSe last words, he Seemed quite transported from the depth of fear and doubt, to an excefs of hope and joy. He Said, that, after So gracious a declaration, he would not allow himfelf to harbour any future fufpicion of my conduct, as contrary to • his happineSs; nor would he even SuppoSe, that my parents would persist in recommending any man contrary to my H 3	own
C 90 3
own choice. He then Suddenly Snatched a kiSs from my hand, crying out, let this then be the Seal of our mutual constancy. Soon aSter, Lady Wandle entered the room again, and, in a little time, we were joined by Sir Robert, Mr Finchley and Mr Lanton. Never did I See Mr Viner to Such advantage: To real modesty he joined a polite eaSy assurance : The graces Surrounded him, and lent him all their assistance. So that he expressed himSelf with the utmost propriety and perSpicuity on every Subjed that was introduced; while, at the Same time, he listened with a well bred attention to every one elSe as they Spoke : In short, WT Spent the evening in the most agreeable manner, even Mr Finchley Seemed to Sorget his late misSortune, and gave way to his natural chearful-
neSs
C 91 3
nefs and good humour. After Supper, I the conversation turned upon land and I new leaSes, when Mr Viner informed Sir Robert, that his leafes being to expire next year, he had Sent for his tenants, and told them, that, after the I most impartial inquiry and mature deliberation, he found that his estate could bear an advanced rent of L. 150 a-year, without the least oppression : That if they chofe to continue in possession, they might consider upon it; and if the pro-pofal was reasonable, they had no more ado than to proportion the new rife to their refpective farms. They unani-moussy agreed to the propofal, and have since, he added, laid on the proportion to the fatisfacUon of all concerned. Early next morning, Mr Viner left us ; and, before dinner, my father arrived,
and
C 92 3
and told me that my mother was impatient for my return home, as she had been indiSpoSed for Some time with a Se- | vere cold ; So we Set off to-morrow for Dalberry. I shall not cloSe my letter 1 until I get there.	J
Wotton-hall, ^	\
April 16.---5	'	I
1
Yesterday, my dear Amanda, I got Safe to Dalberry, where I found the face I of nature all Smiling, the meadows crown- | ed with verdure, and the trees putting forth their leaves, rejoicing in the beams :• of the Sun ; but alas I cannot participate in the general joy. My mother and all the Servants Seemed extremely happy at my return, and aiked me a thouSand questions about my jaunt to London. After dinner my mother took me into
her
i
-i
I
I
' I
C 93 ]
her cloSet, and then began by telling me
(what a sine proSpeD 1 had, in conSe-quence of the propoSal made by Mr Ash, and how happy both she and my Sather were at the prudent and cautious conduct which I had shown at Manden-hoiiSe, the owner of which had too Small a fortune to be any temptation to me ;
I and concluded by Saying, that she made no doubt but I would agree in thinking ' that Such an offer was too good to be re-jeDed, eSpecially as he, Mr Ash, had at - the Same time an irreproachable character. To all this I only anSwercd, that I never considered riches as the chief in- ' gredient in the Scale of happineSs, and that it was of too much confequence to my future welfare to decide hastily upon. My mother appeared to be Surprized at the coldnefs of my anfwer, but obferved,
at
C 94 ]	I
at the Same time, that neither she nor | my Sather had any intentions to hurry the affair on too fast, though she was | perSuaded that all our friends would think it the most extravagant madnefs to refufe Such an advantageous offer. Thus, my dear friend, you fee what opposition \
I have reaSon to expe£l in the completion ' of my wishes. Pray come and stay with me Some days, as I want much to See you. I find that next week Mr Ash in- i tends me the honour of a visit; he has I already Sent a card to my father to en* I quire after my health. Remember me	^
kindly to your mother, and believe me,	^
Yours most sincerely.
1,
Melinda Harley.	p
D alb err y,	?	^
April 17.:;----5	01
LET. i •
1
[	t ]
L E T T E R XV.
I	To MiSs Harlev,
■^^Esterdav your Servant brought JL me your kind, entertaining letter,
I which I delayed to anSwer until this •morning, having desired John to tell you that 1 would Send my own Servant with it. I have been a good deal Satigued for Some days past in attending my mother, who has been very ill with an Erysipelas in her face, and a degree of fever at the Same time, owing, I believe, to her catching cold. She is now better, and desires me to thank you kindly, in her name, for your attention towards her ; I do not know but it is well for you that she is not Somewhat younger, otherways she might become a dangerous
C 96 ]
rous rival to you. She dined one day lately at Mr RobinSon’s, in company v:ith Mr Viner, and she has been raving about him ever since, as the most engaging, attentive, well bred man, that she has | Seen of a long time. A propos, have you i heard thaCMifs Amely, Second daughter I to Mr RobinSon, has made a very foolish I marriage with a Mr Thornberry, contrary to her father and mother’s exprefs desire and intreaty. The man has made money by farming, and makes a tolerable appearance when he comes abroad.
He is allowed to be an honest man in his dealings, but is very deficient in his temper to thofe who live with him, and are anyways dependent upon him. I hear : that she has already requested of her father not to pay up her portion, which is L. 1000, but to reServe it for her future
maintenance,
!
t -97 ]
maintenance, as she thinks it impossible to live with him. I have not yet learned I all the particulars, only I understand that it will be difficult for her Sather to get this accomplished, unlest that Mr Thorn-berry gives his confcnt. Thus, poor wo-I man, does she reap the fruits of her own folly and obstinacy. She was indeed past the prime of youth, but furely marriage is not essential to happineSs ; and I know nothing that can render a woman more defpicable than this notion of marriage, being abfolutely necessary ; besides, it is the very way to prevent it, and experience shows, that many women have passed through life in a very happy, eafy, and refpedlable manner, without entering into the matrimonial state. Thank God that the place of my nativity was not amongst thofe Gentoos you mention, I	and
1
C 98 ]
and that I run no rish oS being burnt.
A death that I abhor as much as Falstaff abhorred to drown! But, jesting apart, wshat reaSon have wt to be thankSul, my dear Melinda, Sor having our lot cast in , Such an enlightened age, and in a coun- j try So justly renowned Sor arts and Sciences, but above all Sor civil and religious liberty. May kind heaven long preServe thoSe invaluable blessings to us; and may our rulers be guided by a sincere love for their country, and never led aside by a Spirit of avarice, or by the blind impulses of ungovernshle passion. I love and admire the character of Mr Hastings the prcfent governor of Bengal—May he meet with a rev/ard equal to his merits.
I commend your frank and sincere con-du£t towards Mr Viner, and 1 still hope to fee you both happy, in Spite of thoSe
unfavourable
[ 99 3
i unfavourable circumstances that you mention. Pray keep up your Spirits, for all will yet end well. If possible I will ' fee you to-morrow, though I can make no stay with you at prcfent. I will now
(conclude by advising you striflly to adhere to your own maxim, which is never to marry any man contrary to your , parents corifent, and far leSs to give your 1 hand to a man v/hom you can neither I love nor esteem. Nothing but the most indigent circumstances, joined to the I probability of being highly ufeful to a Set of deferring relation^, can, in my opinion, tempt any reafonable woman to. make Such a Sacrifice of herfelf, nor even then, unlefs he be a man of a fair cha-rafter. Your parents are too fond of you to persist in recommending any man contrary to your own inclinations j and I 2.	you
C lOO ]
you are too dutiSul, and have too just a' SenSe of your own digiiity, to think of any man who is not entitled to the approbation and esteem oS the good and virtuous part of mankind, and every way qualified to	make you happy. Thus cir-	'
cumstanced, you will agree in time, So take comSort from your unalterable friend,	•
Amanda Beaufort.	'
■
L
-
: ■ • ■	.	LET- i
,
j
! \
I	C ]
I ^
LETTER XVL
To MiSs Beaufort.
Kl” OW Sorry am I that your stay here ^ was So short. Never did I stand ^ more in need of my dear Amanda’s prefence, to whom 1 can with Safety unbo-I font mySelf at any time. Since you left || me, Mr Ash has been here again : You know that be had, in his first visit, Satis-II sied himSelS with paying me a particular I attention, without any declarations oS |. love. At his Second viSit, my Sath'br pro-poSed that we should all take a walk in the garden beSore dinner, as the weather i was So inviting. ASter Some time the rest of the company fell behind, and turn-' eel round to another walk, Mr Ash then
I 3	began
,
It'
1
C 102 ]
began, in a decent enough manner, to acquaint me of his intentions, hoped that I did not take amiSs his first mentioning it to my parents, especially as I was then in London. That he was very happy in obtaining their approbation, and hoped I that this circumstance would induce me ' to lend a favourable ear to his propofals, |
efpecially as he understood that my affec-
(
tions were not otherwise engaged. I sincerely thanked him for the honour he had done me, and professed to retain a grateful fenfe of the preference which he ^ was fo kind as to bestow upon me; that neverthelefs I should no longer deferve his esteem, if I did not candidly own that « my affections were fo far engaged to another man, that I could not in honour betray his interest and happinefs. I af-fured him, at the fame time, that I did
not j
C ]
not harbour the Smallest reSentment at
this (Mr Ash’s) conducl; in having signified his intentions to my parents first, and that I sincerely wished him happy in a better choice. He Seemed much Surprized, and expressed his disapprobation of my father’s conduct (by giving ' him So much encouragement) in a manner that I thought was not altogether ' genteel; I then undertook to justify my I father, by assuring him that neither he or my mother were then acquainted with i all the circumstances. So could not mean to deceive him ; but, on the contrary, were warmly attached to his interest. He then requested to know if he might take the liberty to enquire the name of his rival; I frankly named Mr Vi-ner. Mr Viner, Madam, Said he. Surely you do not intend to throw yourSelf
away
!1
C 104 ]
away upon a man of his Small fortune I I don’t know. Sir, replied I, what you mean by throwing mySelf away, as Mr Viner has an eaSy competency of his own, and I think the qualities of his mind jl abundantly Supply the deficiency of his fortune. Madam, replied he, with a kind of stately air, I beg pardon, and just as he had finished theSe words, a Servant came to inform us that dinner was ready. We all walked in, but in Spite of the great attention shown to Mr | Ash during the time of dinner, he appeared difconcerted and out of humour, ■ destitute of that fweetnefs of temper and I complacency of behaviour, the fruits of a liberal education, he appears to mea-fure his regard for people, according to the weight of their purfes, or to a ready compliance with his will. Very Soon
after
C 105 ]
after dinner, he ordered his carriage tOi be got ready, and then took his leave. My father followed him out, and I ob*-ferved from the window of my room that they conversed for Some time together. After Mr Ash was gone, my father came into my room, with a Severity of countenance new to me. He began by upbraiding me in sharp terms for my disingenuous conduD, in writing from Wotton-hall Such assurances of not hai-ving engaged my affedlions, when I knew the contrary, and of giving Mr Ash Such a reception at prefent as to make him depart in anger. I begged of my father to command his temper, and again assured him that I never would give my hand to Mr Viner, or to any man without his conSent; but hoped^ that he would show the fame regard for
my
!
[ io6 ]	1
my peace in not forcing my choice : In shortj I Said every thing that I could ‘ think of to mollify him, but all in vain.
He left me abruptly in a passion, though he Saw me all in tears ; Soon after, my R mother appeared, and the Same mortify- | ing Scene was repeated, adding, that if Mr Harley or she had encouraged a man j advanced in years, or a man of weak ' parts, who could not acquit himfelf in company with propriety, that in this . cafe, great allowances would be made for Such an acl csi difobedience ; but, in the preSent situation, it must appear to every body as downright obstinacy; especially, as I had confessed before I went to London, that my affections were not engaged. What could I Say, my ; dear Amanda, to parents otherwise good and tender, but at preSent blinded by !
prejudice
C 107 ]
prejudice and falSe appearances. The 1 voice of reaSon was ineffedual. I fell
*at my mother’s feet, and befougfit her compassion and interceshon with my father ; she feemcd to be moved and foft-ned for a little ; then frankly owned, that ||' if she undertook my defence, she was much I afraid that it would provoke my father to a greater degree; and besides, Says my mother, with what face, Melinda, could I I undertake to argue against myfelf, for I was alw^ays of the fame opinion with your father in this affair, and we Scarce doubted of your ready acquief-cence, after your last letter from Wot-ton-hall : I beg, therefore, that you
would again take your own conduCt ini'
to consideration, and, after the many proofs that we have shown of our tender affection for you, do not force your
parents
I
I
C ]
parents to an alteration of their colidudt towards you, by perSevering in obstinacy, and manifesting a total disregard to their wishes and desires, wliich terminate in your welSare. I am perSuaded, added she, that, after mature deliberation, you ' will of yourSelf come to a more reasonable way of thinking, and See your own interest in a proper point of view. Af- ' ter this, she rofe and left me to my own thoughts'; but how shall I defcribe the pain and anguish which I fuffered all that evening. I began to be afraid, that i I could not long bear up my Spirits under the frowns and diSpleafure of thofe to whom I owed my birth, education, | and all the happinefs that I had hitherto enjoyed. On the other hand, I detested the thoughts of betraying my engagements to one of the most deferving men,
who
C 109 ]
who had no other fault but that of a Small fortune, in comparison to his rival. In this dilemma, I determined in my own mind to continue as I am, single, without changing my condition ; I and Surely my parents will, I hope, be at least Satisfied, and require no more of an unhappy child. I did not clofe my eyes all night. Adieu, my dear Amanda, and, if possible, come and stay with i me Some days ; There is no body at present, that I wish So much to See.
\
Melinda Harley.
P. S. This moment I have a card from Mr Viner, to enquire after my health, and to inform me of his intentions to pay us a visit to-morrow. I have excuSed myfelf at prefent, as being K	indiSpofed,
r n	f
L	iio j	!
indiSpofed, and have desired him to postpone his visit until Wednesday. Of this I immediately acquainted my mother, being determined to act openly.
M. H. I!
LETTER XVII.
To the fame.
The reaSons given by my dear A-manda, for delaying her visit, are too just for me to find fault with, and as you give me hopes of being here on Saturday next, I shall endeavour to curb	j
my impatience as well as I can. On	I
Wednesday, as expeded, we had a visit from Mr Viner: He has bought a new carriage, and his drefs was elegant, but not gaudy, his whole behaviour and appearance was fo much like a man of taste,
that
C *>1 ]
that my mother, in Spite of her prejudice, could not reSuSe her approbation of it: After all, my dear, he found but a cold and formal reception from my parents ; but as he knew the reaSon, and was well acquainted with my Sentiments, he Seemed not So much mortified as one might have expefted. Before he went away, he found an opportunity to tell me, that he had accidentally met with Mr Ash, at the houfe of Squire Philips, on Monday last, where he, Mr Ash, be-, haved in a haughty and infolent manner towards him : That, however, nothing had passed which could be called a real :	affront, and that he, Mr Viner, Satisfied
. himSelf, with oppofing his rival’s opinion oftner than he otherwise would have done, purely to mortify his arrogance ; in the doing of which he, Mr Viner, K 2	w^as
I
C ]
was very happy in the thoughts of having commanded his temper, and to have [ delivered his Sentiments in Such a manner, | as to procure a majority of the company upon his Side of the argument; and that he attributed his owm cool behavi-	J
our and preSence of mind, to what had	'
in effedl happened to Mr xVsh at our houfe, which he shrewdly fufpeded then from his rival’s apparent peevishnefs, ; and want of temper. After a dish of tea,
Mr Viner took his leave in a polite eafy manner, giving us to understand that he j was engaged to pafs the evening at Mr Robinfon’s. My father still continues in his former notions, and in his strong prejudice in favour of Mr Ash ; and though my mother does not ex-preSs herfelf So warmly, yet fine always concurs with him in opinion, still
expe fling
i
I
I
I	C ”3	]
expeding that I will (as they call it) See my own interest and advantage at last. Alas, my dear friend, how few Seem in-! dined to follow the plain diftates of rea-Son ; and though possessed of every thing necessary for real happineSs, yet by creating artificial wants, and endeavouring to graSp at a shadow, while they negled the Substance, thus diSquiet and torment their own minds, and live more to other people than to themSelves. My Spirits are So low that I can proceed no farther, So must now lay down the pen.
Farewell, my dear Amanda, Yours,
;	Melinda Harley.
j	K 3	L E T-
• C "4 ]
LETTER XVIII.
Lo the fatnc.	,
OMy dear Amanda, to what new
Scenes of distreSs am I reServed!	|
Two days after you left us, I had another visit from Mr Ash. He came in "a coach and four, attended by three fer-vants in livery. After the ufual compliments were over, and that Some time had been fpent in conversation about the weather, politics, <L^c. my father and mother left the room, one after the	*'
other, no doubt by design. Mr Ash	|
then began, by paying me Some very ' flattering compliments, and concluded, by expressing his hopes, that I would at i last be propitious, and yield to the joint entreaties of himfelf and my own parents, '
whole
j	L ”5 J
I whoSe goodneSs and tenderneSs I had always done justice to before, and who could have no other view but my happi-neSs and prosperity: Finally, that nothing was wanted but my Smiles and approbation to make him the happiest of men.
I anfwered, that I was entirely fatisSied I with his good intentions, as well as thofe of my beloved parents ; yet thought rny-felS in Some meaSure a judge of what So j nearly concerned me, and hoped that my forhier conduft would be justified in the end: That he Mr Ash was no doubt j worthy of a better partner : That I was j	much obliged to him ; but never v/ould
alter my mind while Mr Viner lived;
I	therefore requested of him as a man of
'	honour, that he would no longer persist
' in a fruitless purSuit, which could anSwer no other end but to give us a great deal
Of
I ^
i
C ]	;
oS uneaSmeSs. He still perSevered, notwithstanding, (no doubt emboldened by 1 the interest that he held with my parents) I and I continued to refuSe in as well bred a manner as I could, but at the Same time with sirmneSs of mind. In this { manner we Spent an hour at least, when I was happily relieved by one oS the Servants opening the door, to acquaint us that dinner was upon the table. Our | appearance in the dinning-room, was ac- I companied with Such an air of Silence and Solemnity ; that, had a stranger pop’d in u upon us, he would have been very apt to take us Sor aSmall knot oS quakers waiting for the Spirit to move us. Happy should I be if nothing worfe had infued after Mr Ash left us ; but the inclofed letters which I received on the very day following, will Serve to give you a proper notion
I
1
r'
if	C ”7 ]
' '^1'
j tion of that dreadful state of anxiety to ( which my mind is reduced. They have 1 increased my love and esteem for Mr Viner, and of courfe my fears for his-
I	^	i
Safety. He has, indeed, with Roman fortitude, declined the mad thoughts of going out of his way to fight a duel;
I but should they meet, good God! my foul shudders at the horrid conSequences! O my dear, that reasonable creatures, and tlioSe too, profeshng a religion which breathes nothing So much as peace, love, and even the forgiveneSs of injuries, ssiould, in thoSe enlightened times, continue to follow this Gothic custom, founded upon ignorance and barbarity. Never did I Spend Such another night as the last. I dreamed of nothing but naked Swords and ghastly wounds ; I thought that Mr Viner appeared to me with a
pale
1
[ ii8 ]
V
pale and languid look, yet did he utter the following words: Fear not, my charmer.
Said he, for we still shall be happy. Have	j
you any faith in dreams 1 and if you	'
have, what can this mean ? Does the pre-didion relate to this or a future state ? j I am weary of conjedures! and shall now \ lay down my pen, trusting that kind providence will interpofe to avert the impending danger.
Adieu, my dear Amanda, Melinda Harley.
i’
P. S. I really think that my parents are Softened, since they read the follow- | ing letters.
I
LET-
r “9 1
LETTER XIX.
To Mr ViNER.
“ Sir,
“ -^TOU cannot Surely be ignorant of -I. the inSuperable difficulties that “ lie in your way. Mr and Mrs Harley “ are determined against you, and the “ beauteous prize herSelf declares that
1“ she never will be yours without their “ conSent. CeaSe then from a vain pur-“ Suit; or let the fate of arms decide. ‘‘ If you prefer this last alternative, I do “ expedt that you will prove yourfelf a “ man of honour, by meeting me any day ‘‘ you pleafe to mention next week, at “ the Crown and Anchor Tavern in j “ London, where the time and place !	“ shall
I
I
,. 1
shall be agreed upon ; becauSe, for “ many reaSons, I think it would be pro-‘‘ per to remove from the country be-‘‘ fore hand.
“ None but the brave deferve the fair! i “ I am, Sir,
U
“ Your most humble fervant,
« R. Ash.’*
LET- I
,	C ]
LETTER XX.
To Mr A s H.
Sir,
«c 'ir Am just now favoured with }mur “ Jl card, and shall loSe no time in an-'■ Swering it. Know then, haughty Sir,
' “ that my principles are against duelling, “ both as a wicked and a foolish custom. “ I hold it to be a crime to go out oS I ‘‘ my way Sor that purpoSe, and to de-^1’ Sert the station wherein providence has I ‘‘ placed me. True courage, in my ‘‘ opinion, does not consist So much in “ exposing our lives wantonly, as in per-Severing in the discharge of our duty, “ and in not trembling at the breath of “ Sools. Of the three laws, viz. That of God, of politic Societies, and^ of “ Fashions, I cannot, without renoun-L	“ cing
j
I
1
1
[ 122 ]
“ cing my common SenSe, allow the two “ first to give way to the last. You call “ upon me to prove mySelf a man of ho-	Q
“ nour; to which I anSwer, that I never	I
‘‘ can have any notion of honour as di-stinfl from virtue ; and accordingly, ^ “ when Marcellus built the temple of \ “ Honour at Rome, the way into it was ‘ only through the temple of Virtue, j “ Such notions as Separate the man of j honour from the man of virtue, must be pernicious to Society ; nor can in-“ decencies be cured by them : But,
“ pray Sir, do not preSume that this kind of philofophy takes its rife at pre-fent from any fear of you. I shall “ continue my visits to Dalberry, and “ shall probably meet you at public pla-‘‘ ces oftner than ufual ; you know my 1 “ road. I shall take care to be provided
“ with
1
:■	c >^3 ]
“ with the means of defence, and if you should pretend to obstrud my passage,
I “ I do exped to make you pay the price “ of your temerity. The prize in dif-putc is of too much estimation in my “ eyes ever to give up, but at her own “ exprefs desire ^ and while she herfelf I “ continues to favour me with her e-J “ steem, I trust that, by the help of God, “ I shall overcome all other difficulties.
1‘® I am. Sir,
“ Your most humble fervant.
“ Henry Viner,”
•v
La	LET.
C 124 ]
LETTER XXL To MiSs Harlev.
Madam,
I Have taken the most early opportu« ] nity to fend you incloSed a copy of Mr Ash’s letter to me, and my anSwer to it. Happy shall I be, iS my condu6l in this affair shall meet with your appro- h bation, which I make no great doubt of,	I
from my previous knowledge of your Sentiments on the Subjed of duelling.
I am,	j
Madam, with refpect,	,
Your most obedient Servant.
Henry Viner. ‘ *
.1
L E T- /
1! ’
I
C 3
LETTER XXII.
•'	To Mr ViNER.
■	Sir,
(YOU can be no stranger to my opinion oS duelling, and, had you acted otherwise than you have done, it would have given me much more unea-fineSs j nor could I, contrary to my judgment, have preserved the Same degree I of esteem for you that I have hitherto 1 professed. Continue, Sir, to aD up to i the diDates of your own conScience, and be perSuaded that your conduD will be approved of, at least by all the wiSe and virtuous part of mankind. I have no more to add, but my affurance that your Safety and welfare is dear to me.
I am. Sir,
Your most humble fervant.
•	' Melinda Harley.
:	L 3	LET-
■i 1
C .3	''	■; i|
LETTER XXIII.	,
I
To MiSs Harley.
FI’OW much am I indebted to my ^ i- dear Melinda for the pains she has ' ^ taken to inform me of every circumstance relative to her preSent situation, i and for the confidence she is pleaSed to put in me, which never shall be abuSed! -You will, perhaps, before this reaches to hand, have heard of the strange accident which has happened to Mr Ash, and of <• . Mr Vmer s noble behaviour upon that occasion ; but as Some of the circum- j stances may not be told you, and others may be mifreprefented, I shall now endeavour to give you as clear and concife ■ an account of the whole as I can recol-
leCf,
f I
i
j	[	]
'	leD, having received my information?
from one of the gentlemen who was upon the hunting party that day. Mr Vi-I ner, it Seems, had not intended to have been of the party, but, hearing that Mr Ash was to be there, he postponed fome ^ buSmefs, and threw himfelf in the way, j to convince Mr Ash, no doubt, that he
was determined to aD up to that line of
I
I conduD which he had expressed in his I anfwer to the challenge. They were both well mounted in purfuit of a stag; but the chace was long, and Mr Ash be-•; ing a heavy man, his horfe w^as fatigued So, that in jumping a ditch he missed the leap, and fell in upon his rider. Mr Viner, who happened to be at a Small distance. Saw the accident, claped Spurs to his horSe, and instantly flew to his re-I lief. When he came to the side of the
ditch
1
[ 128 ]
ditch he dismounted, and having with great difficulty, raiSed the horSe, So as to Squeeze in a piece of wood below him, j he then, by degrees, after repeated efforts, drew out the body of Mr Ash, who was at first quite infenSible ; Mr Viner’s ^ | Servant coming up Soon after, assisted his master to draw up the body, thus bruif-ed and covered with mud, to the edge of the bankj where, after applying a Smelling bottle to his nofe for Some time,	I
and chaffing his temples, he was So far	■
restored to his fenfes as to know the per-fon who had taken fuch care of him. O 1 Mr Viner, Said he, with a low voice, I have not deferved fuch kind fervice from you.—I am very Sorry, replied Mr Viner, ; for this unlucky accident, but am So far happy, at the fame time, that I was near | enough to be of Some ufe to you. Mr
Ash
J'
i
C 129 3
j Ash gave his hand to Mr Viner, expref-Sed a warm SenSe of gratitude, but added,
(that he believed it was all over, as he SuSpedted that Some blood vessel had burst within. In the mean time Mr Viner’s Servant galloped off to a chaife within sight, and having advifed the company I within of the accident, they immediately came out, and ordered the driver to fly off to Mr Ash, and to carry him home. Mr Viner then w'cnt with him, and fup-
( ported him in the chaife, having next Sent away his fervant for a Surgeon, who arrived at Newhall (the name of Mr Ash’s houfe) foon after the chaife. Mr Ash was immediately bled, but continued to complain much of his head, and of a great weight and oppression in his breast. A new expreSs was Sent off to York for a physician and an attorney,
and
'I
[ ‘3° 1
and before night Mr Ash had Settled all his affairs. Mr Viner, and my dear Melinda are among the legatees, and are | each of you to receive L. 5000. He Spent the night in great agony, and died early next	morning. Mr Viner, 1 hear,	\
has catched cold, owing to the great heat that he had put himSelf to in relieving Mr Ash from under his horSe, and then Sitting by him for Some time afterwards expoSed to a cold north wind before the chaiSe arrived ; but I hope that he will	Soon	get the better of it. Be	^
Sure to write to me Soon, and believe me to remain with inviolable attachment, Yours,	i
Amanda Beaufort.	ij
LE.D	'
i
■	LETTER XXIV.
S	To MiSs Beaufort.
i	indeed heard Some con-
r1 V W Sufed and indistinD accounts of ' the melancholy accident which had bell fallen Mr Ash ; but my dear Amanda’s c	letter has cleared all our doubts. The
I	testimony that you Say Mr Ash has given
of his regard for me, is much beyond i what I had any title to exped from him. i To how many fatal accidents are we fub-jeded to in this short transitory state. Your letter has brought the following passage into my mind from Mr Young’s
I Night Thoughts.
In human breast what bolder thoughts can rife,
- Than man’s preSumption on to-morrow’s dawn,
You
C 132 3 '
You will, no doubt, however, in the midst of this gloomy Scene, allow, that I must necessarily derive great comfort, when 1 tell you, that the whole of Mr Vincr’s conduD of late is much admired
I
by my parents. They have confented frankly that I should fend off my Servant early in the morning to enquire after his health. I am unalterably yours,
Melinda Harley.
' I
1
LET-
rr
^ 133- 3
LETTER XXV.
|i	To the fame.
I Alas my dear Arnanda ! the Servant is returned and brings word that Mr Viner is confined to bed with a ' fever; his Sister is arrived to take care of him. She writes that he was very warm and uneafy all night, but Seemed very happy at the receipt of my card, and desired I her to write, that he hoped in a day or ' two, to anfwer my kind enquiries with his own hand j however, they have, by the furgeon’s desire. Sent for a physician. I do not like thofe appearances. My Spirits are much agitated.
Adieu, my dear Amanda,
Melinda Harley.
M	L E .D
1.
C '34 ]
LETTER XXVI.
To the fame.	' j
GOod God! To what a painful talk
am I reduced, the day after I wrote ^ to my dear Amanda last, Mr Viner continued much the fame, but since that, the fever is increaSed. Last night he was delirious, and in his rovings often men- | tioned my name. My mind is on the rack. O join with me in prayers for his recovery.
'	, Adieu, Adieu,
Melinda Harley. ■
LET-
I
I
1	C '35 ]
LETTER XXVir.
I	Lo the fame.
WE are much obliged to MiSs Beaufort Sor her kind enquiries,
'	dear child begs me to write for her,
1 as she cannot Support her Spirits Sufficient-1 ly to take up a pen. She is still in bed,
I	and has taken nothing all this day, but
I	one glaSs of wine ; Mr Harley and I are
using every means to give her comfort, and to Support her Spirits. We have assured her, that if God shall pleaSe to restore Mr Viner to health again, no body elfe shall be allowed to interfere in giving the least interruption to their mutual J happinefs. The fervant is returned from ! Manden-houSe, and brings word, that Mr ; Viner is indeed very bad, but that Mr
M 2	Manley
[	3
Manley his physician, had not yet gtveir up all hopes of his recovery, and that the-crisis oS the fever was now expected..
May kind heaven pity and relieve us all with better news to-morrow ; for should he die, Mr Harley and I dread the consequence. For God’s Sake come over and comfort my dearest chsild, if you poffibly can leave your mother. Melinda often mentions her dream, and Seems, distradled betwixt hope and fear. In what a dreadful state of anxiety and fufpence must we continue for Some time yet but still hope, the Sweetest pashon of the mind, and given to us by our kind Creator to Supply the abSence of every other enjoyment, comes often to my relief, and bids me not defpair.
Adieu,
Deborah Harley.
I.D.D
t
1
I
C '37 ]
LETTER XXVIII.
To the fame.
I) Ejoice my dear MiSs Beaufort with V your friends at Dalberry. Last night Mr Viner fell into a profuSe Sweaty i and then drop’d into a Sweet stumber Sor four hours, at the end of which he awak’d pretty cool and ealy; I have not delayed one minute to give you this early intelligence, well knowing how much you will share in the general joy, efpecially as Mr Manley the physician thinks that he is almost out of danger. My dear child is ,	quite transported with the joyful tidings,
I	though now and then she checks herSelf,
and allows a transient cloud of fear to step in for a time, and to Snade the Sunshine of her hope and joy j but this Soon M 3	vanishes
i
C '38 J
vanishes again, and gives way to more pleasing SenSations. Mr Harley is Set off himSelS to See Mr Viner, and to bring ’ more certain intelligence. May the angel of peace,	health and harmony, now
dwell	among	us, and may our Suture	' j
cares be to increaSe the mutual happineSs; j of one another.
Adieu,	I
Deborah Harley.^	|
i
L E T-	I
I
f	C *39 J
LETTER XXI2C.
Lo the fame,.
Safe, my dear. Mr Harley ik X~A. returned, and Says, that Mr Viner is now quite free of the fever, and as his Spirits are good, Mr Manley has no doubt but his strength will Soon return, eSpeciaU ly as a letter from my dear Melinda was delivered to him by Mr Harley’s own hand, which has diSpelled all his doubts, and has made him, as he Says himSelf, the happiest of men. After fome private converfation, he told my hushand, that he would now give him a strong proof of his daughter’s prudence and tender affedion for -her parents; though, by doing fo, he run fome rilk of lessening himfelf in their esteem. He then open-
cd
!
r
[ 140 1
' ed his cabinet, and gRve Mr Harley two letters, the copies oS which I now fend to you, as follows :
t
To Mils Harley.
Madam,
*r Am wtII informed that my rival has X Succeeded So far with your parents, that a Scheme is concerted to carry you off to London, and, after making you | drink deep of the pleafurcs and amufe-ments in that great city, they hope to make you forget an unhappy, though unalterable lover, left to ruminate upon ■ his loSs, and to creep out of the world with as little notice as he came into it, ' and to go off with no other degree of |l credit, than that of adding a single unit ]■
i
r
[ 141 ]
to the bills of mortality. If you have any pity, then, still left for me, and fortitude enough, at the fame time, to shake off your fetters, pleafe to m.eet me at two in the morning, near the East corner of the garden-wall, where you will find the means of eScape, unlefs you chooSe to remain and confole yourfelf:
!	“ That for the lack of gold you left me.*"
Fear not your parents refentment; it cannot continue long, cSpecially as Sir Robert and Lady Wandle will most af-'	furedly afl as mediators. I am. Madam,
■	with the most unfeigned reSpedI and
j I esteem, yours to command,
’	H.. ViNER.**
f.	■'	,	To.
C 142 3	i
1
To Mr ViNER.
Sir,	I
J Cannot allow mySelf to think that | my parents have agreed to any Such Scheme as what you SuSpect, and 1 still hope, that a little time will remove their prejudices ; but I never can conSent to ■ fly off like a thief in the night, and So to w'^ound the hearts oS thoSe to whom I owe my birth and education. They have been good and kind to me, and have, in my tender years. Sacrificed much of their time and rest Sor my hap-pineSs and welfare. I am perSuaded that ' they still mean to purSue the Same plan, and have only, at this time, (unhappily indeed for us both), mistaken the road. II Let us then fortify our minds with pati-cnce. I hope, in time, to gain my mo- ■
r 143 ]
thcr over to our interest, and that my ' father will be Softened, by hearing from ^ all quarters, that Mr Viner is a man of fenfe, and of Such a character, as will, in all human probability, give him no ^ cauSe to repent of Such an alliance. In the
[mean time, rest assured and Satisfied, that the lack of gold shall never diminish my regard and esteem for you, nor shall I ever break the promiSe that I made to j you at Wotton-hall, of banishing every other man from my heart. I remain,
SIR,
Your most humble Servant, Melinda Harley.”
Mifs Beaufort will not wonder that the value of our dearest child should now be much enhanced in our eyes, after
'	[	144 ]
ter Such a proof of her dufiSul regard and attention to our peace and quien We now wait only for Mr Viner’s recovery, in order to six the happy day. As your mother is now So much better, we shall exped you both next week at Dal-berry. In the mean time, remember me kindly to her, and believe me to remain, with sincere esteem, yours,
Deborah Harlev.
A Few days after this, Mr Viner was So far recovered, as to ride out every foernoon: He then wrote to Mifs Harley, that he expeded to have the Superlative happineSs of waiting upon
' >
r
C ‘45 ]
t)n her at Dalberry, on a stay agreed iip-I on betwixt Mr Harley and himSelS; accordingly, on that day. May the 15th, he Set out aSter breakSast from Manden-houSe with his Sister, and arrived at Dal-I	berry beSore dinner, where he Sound a
I I	Small Seledf party come to share in the
1 ;	joys of that happy day. MiSs Harley
I	had requested of her parents to invite
I	only a few of their nearest friends. Ac-
I .	cordingly, cards were Sent to Sir Robert
^	and Lady Wandle, Mr Lanton and the
j	benevolent Mr Randolph, and one or
^	two more of their most intimate acquain-
|j	tance. Mrs and MiSs Beaufort had been
I	there Some days before. It would be
''	difficult to find words to expreSs the ge-
neral and unfeigned joy of that choSen ! company, eSpecially of the happy pair.
\ When Mr Viner entered the room, a N	Sweet
I
C U6 ]	I
Sweet crimSon blush overSpread the coun- j tenance of the lovely Melinda ; and tho* | it was difficult for them both to SuppreSs | the vast emotions and overflowings of I the heart, yet they had shch perfedl com- j ' mand of themlelves, as to behave with I fo much eafy decency and propriety of , S condud, as to increafe the pleashre of ; their friends, who all admired ^ them. ’S After dinner, the nuptial ceremony was performed by the good Mr Randolph, who had lately been preferred to a vica- S
rage of L. 300 a-year.	i
j
---------------------------; The earth
!
Gave sign of gratulation, and each hill;
Joyou? the birds ; freSh gales and gentle airs WhiSper'd it to the woods, and from their wings ' i flung rofe, flung odours from the Spicy-fhrub, Difporting till the amourous bird of night Sung fpoufal, and bid haste the evening star On his hill-top to light the bridal lamp.	^
Thus,
[ 147 3
P	Thus, (gentle reader), have I told thee
all their state, and brought their story to \	the Sum of earthly bliSs.
I	MiSs Harley was just then 19 years of
I	age, and Mr Viner 26.
The evening was’Spent in decent mirth ' and chearful conversation. After Supper Melinda retired, and not long after a hint was given to Mr Viner by Sir Robert, that his health might Suffer aSter So late an illneSs, were he to sit up any longer with the company ; accordingly, he wished them all a good night, and followed to feast in the virtuous conversation and embraces oS his charmer.
Why not, indulgent reader? For Grace was in all her steps, heaven in her eye, i In every gesture dignity and love.
After Mr Viner had Spent Some weeks at Dalberry, the happy pair now prepar-!	N 2	ed
■i
I
C 148 ]•
cd for Manden-houSe. Mr and Mrs Harley, (who now wondered how they could be So long blind to Mr Viner’s i merit,) perSuaded them to stay one other week, after which they all Set out tcge-ther, Mr and Mrs Harley having promised to stay a fortnight with their daughter and Son-in-law, during which time. Sir Robert and Lady Wandle, Mrs and Mifs Beaufiirt, paid their first visits to the new married pair, who now live reSpeSted and admired by all the vicinage. Scarce a day passes without their doing Some good, for which end they both agreed to live considerably within their income, well knowing that frugality is the fountain of liberality, and that parade and vain ostentation shut up 1 the avenues of hurrianity and true gene- j roSity. Mrs Viner often visits the houSe j Pi
of
([	-49 3
of mourning, not for its own fake, but becauSe it is fruitful in virtue. Mr Vi-ner is a most ufeful Justice of Peace, and by the help of Blackstone’s Commentaries and his own good disposition, he is enabled often to accommodate petty
1 differences, and to prevent law-fuits a-mong his neighbours. In their ainufe-ments, they study an agreeable variety, the food of taste and Sentiment. Mr Viner Says, that though he loves order and method, yet, deviations from established rules and customs, he thinks, are friendly to thought and original Sentiment, provided they are kept within due bounds ; in which caSe they Serve to animate the dull Scenes of life, and agreeably to stir the passions, which are apt to stagnate, and to breed ill humours in a continued calm. In short, every day N 3	brings
[ "5° ]
brings new and real pleafure to this hap-' py couple ; that love for one another increases and consolidates, into that kind oS friendship which is the union of two fouls by means of virtue. They are both |i frank, open and affable, and though they	|
detest stander and calumny, yet they are	i
strangers to that Species of worldly pru-	i
dence and hypocriSy, which makes a	j
Secret of every thing, a talent, which	j
people of mean genius and cold hearts	|
are fittest to excel in. Mr Viner is	;
fometimes a little quick, but he never in-	^
corporates anger, and by a wife flexibility	:
of temper, gives Such proofs of his can-	j
dour and good nature, that his Servants	!
and tenants love and refpeft him. He	|
candidly owns that his natural temper	11
was too quick and hasty when a boy ;	i
but his parents were at the utmost pains ', i
to
j
C >5- ]
to reftiSy this deSeft, for which he cannot be grateful enough. Education, Says he, is the ruling motive that governs most of our actions in life. We are more or lefs tractable, as we have i	been more or lefs cultivated in youth.
'	' When taught early to bend our tempers,
! and to accommodate our wills to thoSe of others, it grows into a custom ; but, if we are allowed blindly to follow our own I humours and caprices, we are apt to J increafe in impertinence as we grow up in years. Mrs Viner is mild, gentle, and affable ; and if she meets with a pleafur-»' able anecdote, takes delight in commu-■ nicating it. In about a tvrelvemonth, Mr and Mrs Viner received an additional happinefs, by the birth, of a sine boy, who was nurfed by his mother, Mrs Viner , being fully convinced that no other milk
could
[ 152 ]
could be So uSeful to the child as her own, MiSs Beaufort and the good Mr Randolph Spend much oS tlieir Spare time at Manden-houSe. Mr Harley having a detached farm contiguous to Mr Viner’s estate, which was lately Set in leaSe for L. 350 a-year, has given the abSolute diSpoSal of it to Mr Viner in the mean' time, and, at his (Mr Harley’s) deceaSe, has fettled his whole eState, L. 1250 a-year, upon the eldest Son of the marriage. Mr Viner, in confequence, has fettled his own estate upon the Second Son, and allows Mrs Viner to referve the I^. 10,000 left by Mr Ash for the ufe of their daughters, in fuch proportions as she may think proper. Thus circumstanced, j and furrounded with eafe and afiiuence,	1
they both look upon themfelves as hea-	I
yen’s trustees, for the relief of mifery and
distreSs.
• !■
ll:
wP'
,	C '53 J
distreSs. When the eye Sees them, it blesses them, and when the ear heari them, it gives witneSs unto them ; the blessings of him that was ready to perish comes upon them, and they have cauS-ed the widow’s heart to sing for joy. In leSs than three years Mrs Viner was the mother of a beautiSul girl, who, as she grew up, discovered all the good qua-j lities necessary to Sorm an accomplished ' woman, and became the admiration of all around her : And now the fond parents, resseding on the vicissitude of hu-' man affairs, and that Some of their children at least might be left in want of a guide to condud them in their entrance • ; into the world ; they, by repeated intreaties prevailed on the good Mr Randolph to commit a few diredions to paper, for the benefit and advantage of both the-
>
' »
C 154 3
Sex. May all parents take example by them in their laudable ambition, for rearing the minds of their young ones ; for justly does Solomon obferve, Train “ up a child in the way he should walk, “ and when he is old he will not depart ‘‘ from it.”
FINIS.
I
✓
A
S E *R M O N
B Y
Mr R A N D O L P H.
*
/
V	'-^- '. ":®	' C-
^ '^Lc ^	['- A -'-* '''^%.-S,	'4
^• ->•'*'	?	>--■'- I
*5f‘' *'';.	^	i'f'-. '
-'-^ ..-:'t^--^	• '■ ■t .-	■	■ \'	■ aa
r':.-iC’.^r^U_:4/ f:'A-ri i	' _ ■	'C.- -4i^
■--,.	:v; C:: '■ '' - ^ A-	_	i.'":,%
.'H;C5,'	I
f'C	■' ■ '	.'	.''• *-
-1-- ^-''	'- ^	i ; i '•	C- ?'O	-■ .	“ ' •
-' - V?.- .	c 4-A > " V i : V> 14 'i..-
-	v; L:-. . ' -	;	■-	,; . - - m
,5^	,-..L- . . •’	.	.•	'	■
-	■ , ■ ■ ^
•	' ■• L .	, ’•
! ^
A
I S E R M O N.
I
Galatians ii. i6.
I Knowing that a man is not jujiijied by the works of the law, but by the faith of Chriji, See.
A Popular enough text, my brethren ; but, in explaining it, you must not expeCt that I will endeavour So much to gratify or pleaSe any of my hear-, ers in their prejudices, as carefully and critically to investigate the real truth of -it according to the Apostle’s meaning; and this is not to be done, unleSs we O	consider
C -58 ]
consider the cauSe of that expl'ession, and the general Scope of his writings. The negleft of this, joined to the great partiality which people in all ages have entertained for their own particular opinions, has occasioned many fierce contentions, and divided Christians into So many different Sefts. In all the Scripture our Saviour does not impoSe on us the belief of one modern creed ; and, had our learned men, instead of taking up their time to form creeds and confessions, ,endeavoured, with a true Christian Spirit, to enforce the praflice of virtue, and that meek and holy religion So well calculated, by our blessed Saviour, for our own happinefs both here and hereafter ; I fay, had they afted in this manner, and were men only diSpofed to be more modest and circumfpeft in their
Speculative
L >59 J
I Speculative opinions, keeping up the ex-! erciSe of love and charity to one another; then difference of opinion could be attended with no bad conSequences ; but, on the contrary, would appear like So many different roads leading to the Same happy place : But alas 1 it has been too much the custom of people in all ages, instead of endeavouring to raife them-felves up to the true standard of religion, to bring down this or that fystem to an-fwer their own corrupt inclinations, and to favour Sometimes their most abfurd prejudices. Some teachers, instead of enforcing the plain dodlrines of morality contained in the gofpel, have endeavoured to make religion an intricate Science. New tenets have been adopted, and every method praclifed on the credulity of the people, that best fuits the disorderly O 2	affeflions
[ ifio ]
affeDions of the human frame ; thereby running after popularity, instead of fecu-ring to themfelves that popularity which follows the conscientious discharge of a man’s duty.
In treating of thefe words in our text, I shall, by God’s affistance, firji-) endeavour to show what is meant by the faith here mentioned. Secondly^ What is meant by the works of the law ; and then, shall conclude with Some observations and encouragements to Such a faith as must evidently lead to holinefs of life.
jpi^, then, to show what is meant by the faith here mentioned. I hope there are none of you who entertain Such a Superficial view of faith, as to think it can
be
C ]
be conSerred by baptiSm, or any outward proSeffion of the Christian religion: No Surely, true faith can never consist merely in giving your assent to the truths of the I gofpel. They are fo well attested by the 1 different Apostles and Difciples of our Lord Jefus Christ, and even their testimony, corroborated in many principal facts, by profane authors themfelves, that they are no more to be doubted of in point of history, than that Julius Cas-far, or William the Conqueror, invaded Britain ; but, were it otherwife, and that the principal facts of the gofpel were involved in fuch obfcurity or uncertainty as to contradict that reafon given us by God himfelf, in order to determine us in our choice ; in that cafe again it would be no longer a real but an affeCtation of belief, brought on, either by the preju-O 3	dice
t i62	3
dice of education, a partial iiSe of our reaSon, or a mean denial of our understandings : So that we fee, my friends, in whatever w'ay we take faith as an af-fent only to Such and Such truths or propositions, there can enSue no degree of merit from bare opinions or abstruSe Speculations on the SubjeD. The faith then here mentioned, must go farther^ It Surely means, besides this assent, aa inward trust and confidence, which banishes all immoderate fear and anxiety from the mind, and teaches it to repofe itfelf, with a Sweet compoSure and Serenity, on the goodneSs of God, in the various dispensations of his providence to-tvards us, though they Sometimes Sail out contrary to our wishes and expeDations j for we are very incompetent judges of what may be good for us. Thus we
fee
[ i63 I
I fee our Saviour rebuking his dilcipTes for want of that faith or trust: Matth.
' viii. 2si. And he faith unto them., Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith f Then he arofe and rebuked the winds and the fea, and there was a great calm.
This temper of-mind, or righteouS-nefs of faith, will entertain fuch habitual and just views of Spiritual things, as must naturally lead to holineSs of life, and to the practice of the focial and moral duties fo much enjoined by our Saviour in the whole Scope of his doctrine. This is the fame kind of faith which this very Apostle Speaks of. Gal. V. si. Lor neither circumcifton nor uncir-cumcifton availeth any thing, but faith which worketh by love. In short an attentive reader will easily fee, that in all thoSe places where the Apostle prefers faith to
worlcsj^
t:	I
w^'orks, he Speaks of the works of the law, the ritual law of Mofes, and not the works of the gofpel law, which is quite different: The reafon is plain ; the Jewish profelytes were striving to bring the Gentile converts under circumcision, and of courSe to fubjeD them to the whole of their ceremonial law. Peter and Some others of the Apostles Seemed inclined to Savour the prejudice of the Jews in this particular, which the Apostle Paul thought would be attended with bad consequences j and accordingly, he combats this notion of the Jews with the whole force of his reafoning. “ If righteouf-“ nefs came by the law,” Says he, “ then “ Christ is dead in vain but whenever he has occasion to mention Saith with charity, and the works of the gofpel law, then he shews faith to be inferior, i Cor.
xiii.
;	[	i65 ]
<
xiii. I. Lhough I /peak with the tongues of men and of angels though I ha^'e faith j	to remove mountains ; yet if I have not
;	charity^ I am as founding brafs or as a
* tinkling cytubal; and in the last verSe of the Same chapter, he Says; And now aUdeth faiths hope and charity ; but the greateji of thefe is charity. By charity, here, he doth not confine himSelf to the mere giving of alms ; for he tells you plainly : Though I gave all my goods to feed the poor, and my body to be burnt; yet without charity it profiteth nothing.
By this kind oS charity, man is enabled to love man, to show a warm and compashonate Sympathy for the woes and distresses of his fellow creatures, and to do thoSe little kind offices to one another, which proceed Srom the warm effusions of an honest and benevolent
heart i
i: 166 ]
heart : A man of this turn cannot fail to give likewise, if his circumstances will allow of it; but if they will not, his diSpoSifion towards it will be equally acceptable in the sight of God, wdio fearcheth the hearts and tryeth the reins of the children of men : In short, my brethren, true Saving faith lies not in the literal, but in the experimental knowledge, Jews, Gentiles and Christians are all Saved by this kind of faith ; they feel the virtue and the power of it, and it is inwardly communicated to every good man, let him be of any nation or country whatsoever, ADs x. 34. Of a truthy fays Peter, I perceive God is no refpeder of perfons ; but, in every nation, he that fear-eth God and worketh righteoufnefs, is accepted of by him, John vii. 31. And ?na-tiy of the people believed on him, and faid,
vohen
i
i: 167 ]
when Chnjl cometh will he do more miracles than thofe winch this matt doth. They were ignorant at the time that it was Christ himSelf, but they felt inwardly the virtue and power of what he had Said and done ; So were reSolved to live according to the divine word.
I come now to the fecond head, namely, What is meant by the works of the law, and, in So doing, hope to make it plainly appear, that the Apostle did not mean to Set us Sree from the moral law, or to lessen our obligations, in the least, towards the pradlice of morality : No, my friends, this Same Apostle tells us, Rom. xii. 20. therefore if thine enemy hunger.^ feed him ; if he thirjl give him drink ; and in the next chapter, ver. 7,
8, 9. Lender therefore to all their dues:
Owe
\
[ i6B 3
'Owe no mart any thing, but to love one ano* then ; for this caufe, Lhou/halt not commit adultery. Thou /halt not kill. Thou /halt not Jleal, nor bear falfe witnefs ; and if there be any other commandment, it is briefly com^ , prehended in this, Love thy neighbour as thyfelf
I have already mentioned, that the Apostle had good reaSon to combat this-prejudice o£ the Jews in Savour of their ritual law, and to convince them that their justification could not come by the most strid observance of it.
It would appear that God had not given them this law, until he found them falling into idolatry, nor was it till after the worship of the golden calf that most of it was made necessary to be obferved, Ezek. XX. 25. Therefore I gave them alfo
fla-
C 169 ]
Jlatutes that were not good, and judgments ■ whereby they (hould not live, &c.
The learned allow two reaSons, then, for its being impoSed on them. Pirji, That it might occupy their minds So as to prevent them from falling into the opposite ceremonies of the heathens; and fecondly. To commemorate thoSe signal deliverances and Services conferred on them by God, Such as pasting over their first-born, and carrying them Safe thro" the Red Sea, <b^c. but in reality there could be little merit in shedding the blood of bullocks or lambs, or eating unleavened bread. The Apostle, therefore, at great length, shows how ineffectual thofe things would be, and how little essential to a difciple of Jefus Christ, who had established the pure and holy religion of the heart, instead of rites and ceremonies. God is a Spirit, fays our P	Saviour^
f .Do 3
Saviour, and myji he worjhipped in fpi-lit and in truth, I shall now make Some observations on tlie Subjed.
As the main foundation of piety is to entertain right notions and apprehensions of God, So we ought to be very careful how we reprefent him as harsh, partial or injurious, as fome people do, wdio raiSe up a God after their own tempers and dispositions, instead of the God and Father of our Lord Jefus Christ ; Such notions, instead of producing a ready and chearful obedience, influenced by love and gratitude, tend to create narrow prejudices, and to cast a gloom and flavifli dread on the mind. He Sent his Son into the world, not to condemn the world, but to fave it; and our Saviour is Said to be the propitiation not for our sins only, but for the Sms of the whole w^orld; Let us not, however,
continue
E 17' ]
continue in sin, that grace may abound? God forbid ; on the contrary, it is ex-peDed, that we should pradiSe better than thoSe nations who have only the light of nature to condud them : That fervant.^ Says our Saviour, that knozveth his maJieP s wilf and doeth it not-^Jhall be beaten with manyJiripes ; but he that hnow-eth it not, and doeth things worthy of flripes, jhall be beaten with few firipes ; for he to whom much is given, of him much will be required. If any of you live in the wilful pradice of any known fin, or in the negled of any known duty, and think to make atonement by running a great way to fermons and facraments. Remember thofe words of the great God, by the mouth of his Prophet Ifaiah, di-reded to the Jews ; you will find them in the first chapter, beginning at the 13th verSe : “ Bring no more vain oblations, P 2	“ incenSe
1
[	172	]
“ incenSe is an abomination to me, the ■ new moons and Sabbaths, the calling “ of assemblies I cannot away with, it is “ iniquity, even the Solemn meeting.
“ Your new-rnoons, and your appointed “ SeaSts, rny Soul hateth: They are a “ trouble unto me, I am weary to bear “ them. CcaSe to do evil, learn to do ‘‘ well. Seek judgment, relieve the op-‘‘ pressed, judge the fatherleSs, plead for the widow,’"	But it may be
alked, Are we then to be justified by cur own works in this sinSul and imper-fedl state.? I conSeSs freely, that no merit of our own can ever draw justification as a debt Srom God due unto us : Eternal life is and must be the reward of his free grace. The law indeed came by Mofes, but grace and truth came by Jefus Christ : Yet though we are not juf-tisied for our good works, w'e are justified
i
[ 173 3
t
, fiedin them, as caufa fine qua non,^ or the cauSe without which we cannot be justified. Except ye repent, fays our Saviour, ye cannot be faved; The works of the law are far inSerior, and quite different, my friends, from the works oS the goSpel; and though Christ died a Sacrifice for sins past, yet from the moment a perfon declares himfelf a Christian, he is bound to the obedience of the Christian duties, without which his faith is of no effe£l:. It is true, after all we can do, we must still be unprositable fervants, that is, unprofitable to God, but very profitable to ourfelves. He, it is true, is altogether independent of us, nor stands he in any need of the fervices of his creatures. The rules, therefore, that he hath given us for regulating our conduD, are all calculated to promote our own happinefs P 3 '	and
C '74 ]
and to render us sit Sor enjoying his pre-fence hereafter. The kingdom of heaven must take root here within us, otherwife we should be incapable of enjoying a heavenly state hereafter. Follow virtue, for her ways are ways of pleafantnefs, and all her paths are peace. The pleasures of bad men are Superficial and transitory, and fubjedted to the humours of men ; but the good man is fatissied from himfelf. In the exercife of every virtue, there follows a reward even in this life: Thus temperance begets health 5 diligence a competency; truth, justice and humanity, the love and esteem of mankind. True indeed, virtue is not always prosperous here, if So, where would be our state of trial and probation ; yet her prefent portion is fuch as to show that providence is engaged on her side.
Observe,
j	C >75 ]
■S ObServe, though that virtue, in relation ; to piety, cannot be complete without it ^ for where the latter is wanting, there can-
inot be the fame constancy or uniformity of mind : A just fenfe of the unmerited goodnefs of God cannot fail to excite ; in the mind, warm Sentiments of love and gratitude to our Creator and bountiful benefa£lor,and this will Serve to keep , the mind steady in the paths of virtue.
^ Living well, is the best, and, I may ^ fay, the only evidence of believing well. The Apostle James fays. Show me thy faith without thy worhs^ and I will Jhew thee my faith by my works. Lhou believeji there is one God; the devils alfo believe and tremble; but wilt thou know, 0 vain tnan, that faith without works is dead. Believe me, the glory and honour of God is best confulted in promoting
C 176 ]
ing the happineSs of mankind. Take' care of bad company. A man’s first * thoughts are naturally just and honest, and it is the influence of ill example which changes him. All the neceiTary truths in the Bible are fo plain, that he who runs may read them. Religion never was intended by our Saviour to be an intricate Science : No, my friends, the kingdom of heaven is faid to be revealed to babes and Sucklings: And James tells us, that pure religion and undesiled, is to vijit the fatherlefs and widow^ and to keep ourfelves unfpotted from the world. Religion and virtue must consist in doing good aDions, or in a disposition to do them. Hereby, Says our Saviour, Jhall it be known that ye are my difciples, or that ye believe in me, if ye do my will: And again, Not every one thatfaith to me, Lord„
Lord,
f
:	C 177 ]
I Lord, /ball enter into the kingdom of God / hilt he that doeth the will of my Lather who is in heaven. The Jews built their * j confidence in being deScended from Abra-I ham, and thought that if a Jew was guilty oS all crimes, yet his death would be reckoned a Sufficient expiation, and he would be entitled to his share of glory and happineSs. Beware lest a like confidence in the merits of our Saviour does not encourage Some of you to lead care-leSs or dissolute lives. This is downright AntinomianiSm, only changing Abraham for JeSus Christ, by whoSe death and Sufferings, though we are admitted into his kingdom, yet we are by no means out of the jurifdidtion of God Almighty, We should try, if possible, to live peaceably with all men, and, remember, that the true charaDeristic of a Christian is to forgive injuries: Vengeance is mine, faith
the
[ r/S ]
the Lord. We are told, my brethrcrr, of a noble instance of moderation in that great man the Emperor Saladine ; it was, I think, in the 12th century, when that religious fury and enthusiastic madneSs possessed the princes of Christendom, to fend, and Sometimes march themSelves, at the head of Croifades, into the holy land: They had taken Jerufalem, and committed shameful barbarities. Saladine marches and retakes it; but, instead of retaliating fuck cruelties, which are a difgrace to human nature, he ge-neroussy fet them free. When he found himfelf dying, he ordered ail his money to be equally divided amongst Jews, Saracens, and Christians ; thereby declaring, that he looked on them as the children of one common Father, and that God was not only the God of a particular
C "79	]
lar Set oS people, but the Father and-Preserver of all mankind.
To conclude, my brethren, read carefully the 25th chap, of Matthew, where , you will See everlasting Separation denounced against the wicked ; why, not becauSe they were of this or that perfua-Sion, Papists, and not Protestants, of the Church of England, and not of the Kirk of Scotland, Seceders, or Methodists; but, becaufe I was hungry and ye gave me no meat, &c. What, then, must become of thofe who defraud or opprefs their fellow-creatures, instead of doing thofe kind offices here required. Be but sincere in your endeavours, and you have a merciful God to deal with. It is recorded of that great and good man Socrates, just before he drank the poi-fon, that he thus addressed his friends '	w'ho
C I80	]
who were standing by; “I cannot be ‘‘ Sure, Says he, that God has always approved oS my adions, but I have “ always made it my endeavour to pleaSe him ; So am in great hopes that thoSe “ my endeavours will be accepted of by him.’"
May the Spirit of God dwell in us, and enable us to chooSe the good, and avoid the evil ; and may vtc sincerely endeavour to add to our faith, virtue, to virtue, knowledge, brotherly love and kindneSs; that thoSc things being in us, and abounding, we may be neither barren nor unfruitful in the w'orks of the Lord, &c,
FINIS.
1 i n-P P..
W'" '	'	' ‘ ‘	'	■ '*■
■	■	■ ■ '	' . A f ' ''
'	■ ''.	*.	■ ' x
t	•	'	■	■	> •	•	. .
■ 0' • • . \ ^‘ • • •. • ' . . ■ \
‘ • ■ .?■•••'
\	,	. \	. A	‘
■	. f'	'	■	'	' , -
iV ,.	i- = ;-	' ' '■ ■ b . ' / *' ' C "r
if -* ■
ir/ .	T v:	^ -	■ V ^	', ■ s
t ,':';. ■,	. , : ■	.''AS; A
, . ‘ • •••*•’' ? '	.. ' - V
'V \	^	■' ' ' ' ,
. c	^	’	' ‘Ar^
V.	,	.	.	f**
,* : ibi'Arj’-1 : ' r '	-	N ■	■ .	.
F ■ ■ • ■■
tf ■	.	■	^	. -Wr	■
r..	' ■.
V	»	•	•	'	;
I i' -'N ■■ ■
'•'I / ,	^
‘r.' .
, '■ ;	• ■ " :'	■ - ■■; •■r.:-
■ i-' "	-■■■	'	-'■ tStwC'rfi
S' • ‘ ■ '
.-,-■■■■	,	■	• ,	■'. ^	. . V-
■ "	^	^ ^	^	^ ^	- .J-J- ^
\rf’
A	.	•	•
' i' , S 'I
I
N ■	■ ...:
■ ; ■ ;■
■■■ ■•'•• . ■ • .	- ' S' ,	. .1
. • - ■
.	t.	‘	■-
V. ■ ’	■ >••- . ■
^ •
I	“
■	-	■	V	-	-
:^ ■ • '•
■ «.	;■ ■	: Vc, ■
r V
^F- ■•	■'/ ■.■	■■	- •■: ■	■ N
l:W“-^L	.. i-: :: X.:
■-..••*•'■ ' .*«
^ •'" ;v?u,':C
■'	ri'-''f:"riy- -^n:’ -..t
L ■■c,--Vsr'^r':-'-:h-. --MV-- -SWVV yf i'Arir: "■*-:. ■ :V iAfy -AA^VLA
:	■	.•"■	. - ' .	■'•	• T'"'- ' ■■ ■"’' '■	’■'■■''■"'stVfr;-i'>C
X. ■ '	. .	. ’	' !■!.' ■■■ '- ■	'••-	'.'T Tfe-'i:
- ■ .- ■	./’ *■■	^ 'V
• '> ': ’ ' . ■•
d.,N:
■	■■.■'■■..■.. ,-	■ '-Ni
. V ■	■•"■ V-C.-- /T-:
•	.	•	-	V-. L ’!■
. '-N V • .	■ . ■:■■- -	V
■	-	>-ui-	'•	■	-	■ A" '
^ ^ .	* \"V - '-A	'S'*’	■ f' ' '•'*
^ 'rSS'A. ..	L,	#:‘r.' - e
i ^ H / *^ '■	''■•( ^ ^ V	^	?
^	. i	't
^	T&V’S^J n	N ?“ r	Y A-
.	'1'	.	* c>. r " - V‘ -
- ; /i'^'’ Sf'h-	T % r.-’ c
-- ^*’Srv V^ ^ ?	i’‘AV’^ :	^	<■	1
c . ^ ^ ■ ' ■ ^ N	; S' ^
' i. ''L; •■'''	'”^-- '■->. I
S t.l'-*'.-■■ ..>',-N'v; i'D
> •» ^^ t '' d.- '' ^ ■
',- ' C > N'	.''-‘'S ’ '
‘	;	,	, /	'	^ ri*FH '** (
^	•'*® *	' L ■>'''‘'	'	*	^-	*■	" L V" . ;-	- -■
■-	- '	. ■ fit •'. ■''■ W
-	“ \	’	|:i, '
N4 C"}	4i^	■ - ■	S;	. -i
i	f' ’"	' " ■	' " ''T '
tj ‘/J'j^C;f^.;.c;r -vT ',	. -	I
"'' !' V .	^	h •>- i^|£ ■,
■ %-’	-	!|'J'
N V ■«• '	_ :ft
' ■*■ , <<":■ , .	. '. .; .,T ^'
■I'j'V ’Ll ■■
1. -	' I
‘ rv,T S, ■ • .D
■■■ILUNC'te'i
■ ’lARlM,!	' ■
• ^ T^atJijr i '	■ ,
. i»^T) I' ■
.fi-- i! ' I ^	■ ■	-
iSl'fr ■:
Am'-llr.
y	■ I 'j j | ■ ' ■
■ ;:;|V k| Ai ■
- vi
v!b '
■ . ji%wS ■ ' ^ . ■
., ^1- .'
S' ’■^■s:-rT.D!
'd'iMA fWi -
‘ ^VlAViAm -
m . , ,Lj-.'. |1ji ', ',i!i	■ ^
l*i|.Di;#, V,
I :	,■ ■■'/ii- i |■'■1^'
i Irist.fc',!
1	\ H’ '-	’ d*
Ld ' ■ ■ ■
.
" iF '	■	,
■ ' ■

