 

1 /' 

r i) (/ 
ldp r L ■ o — - 
'ixat ra - 
'i ^ .-' ■-, .-4, •: >; r >. ^. - 
WV'^^MVV 
— 4ifcva(’t. • .1^ T V 'arr.t ‘ 

? 



MEMOIRS 
OF THE LATE 
Edw. W — ty M — lague, Efqj 
IN TWO VOLUMES. 
j 
%, 4 


i;. 


1 

THE 
CONTENTS 
OP THE 
FIRST V b L U M EC 
H A P. I. 
je^eiiminary Positions and Remarks — Observations on Some Passages in the Letters of the late Lady M — W — M —. 
Page 
CHAP. it. 
Coiitiriuation of Remarks oti the before mentioned Letters — Some curious Inferences — A singular Detedion, in a Very singular Circumstance. 13 
CHAP. III 
The Artibassador taken ill — His Lady's Behaviour amorous prospensity of the b Turkish 
/ \ "V)) 
[ 1- 1 Turkish ^ -1 [Ui 1 Ladiesj. facility of Intri 
1 guing in Turlcey — The singular Ad 
1 venture of the Seraglio — Its conse 
1 quences. Page 22 

CHAP. IV 
Young W -- -- ^ly’s great natural Endowments 
— He is put to Westminster School — His, roving Disposition — Runs away from School — Finds him sels Advertized — Changes Clothes with a. Chimney sweeper, and commences Brother of iht 30 
CHAP. V 
A c'urious Adventure — Terrifies Some Gamesters, and Seizes their Money — Another whimsical Exploit — He is apprehended, carried before a Magistrate, and delivered to his Friends — The judicious Conduct: os the Master of Westminster School. 40 
CHAP. 
[ III 1 
CHAP. VI 
Runs away again — Goes to newmarket— — desrauded by Sharpers — A Relation Seizes him -- The Sharpers 
— ly is 
obliged to refund' -- W 
brought to London— — again to School, and treated with great Ri 
Page 
CHAP. VII 
absents himself a third Time — Is intoxicated and robb’d — Sequel of a villainous Confederacy — Roguery of a trading Captain — Embarks for Spain — Is very ill-used during the Voyage — Runs away from the Ship. 55 
W 
CHAP. VIII 
dy’s literary Acquisitions— — 
gauges to serve a Muleteer -- Bad Accommodations for Tmvellers in Spain — Inconvenience of the Spanish Inns -- Food — Excessive Heat— — cus b 2 toms 
[ IV ] 
toms — Frequent Murders — sandua ries — Character of the Spaniards 
rage 75 
CHAP. IX 
Spain, the Region of Love — The amorous Disposition of Young W -- -- ^ly 
— The early Age at which the Spaniards engage in Intrigues — Singular Method of unveiling a Woman without touching her — A Journey to Madrid — The Prelude of an Adventure at an Inn on the Road 88 
W. 
CHAP. X 
ly Smitten with the Charms oi 
a Spanish Nymph — Elogium on his iperson — His progress in the Spani^ Tongue -- Fortune favours his Wishes — Night Adventures — Some whimsical Mistakes — One Error pleasingly redisied by another — A rapturous 
Lave, 
( V) ■ 
Love scene —; a11 retire to their Separate Apartrnepts. Page 94. 
CHAP. XI 
Singular Appearance of the different 
Combatants — W -- -- -- ly’s Master 
thinks the Inn haunted — Arrive at madrid .descriptiqri of that City. 108 
CHAP. XII 
sameness in the Buildings and the Manners of the Spaniards — Furniture rich not elegant — Tables badly Supplied — 
Young W -- -- -- ly very particular in 
minuting down all that happens to his disadvantage in Spain — A billet-doux, delivered in the Dark --, Its singular Contents. 114 
CHAP. XIII 
The Opening of an Intrigue— — unlucky Omission — Runs into an Error — A ploomy Place, and gloomy Reflections 

r VI ] 
fie(fiions — His Hopes strangely revers’d 
. — Forms a resolution to grow mighty •vvise — His Reveries interrupted by a Tap on the Shoulder. Page 121 
CHAP. XIV 
A Singular address -- Our hero’s Resolutions vanish — Conduced into a Superb Apartment — A Beauty introduced - — An Error discovered — An Apology made — A right Understanding commenced — Anecdotes of a Spanish Lady. 
127 
, C H A P. XV 
Lucilla entirely Independent— — to live single, and become a prudent. Voluptuary — Some Account os Don Carlos d’aranda — Occasion of the mis take in delivering the billet-doux — Ealy Fluctuation in the Mind of an amorous Lady — Second Interview pro jedled. 138 
CHAP, 
[ 
ivil 
] 
C H A p; XVI 
V- -- -- Hilarity — A Spanish Custom 
— Our Hero unlike the Knights Errant of Old — Goes according to the Appointment— — to the‘lady love Protestations have no Meaning — r Taken at his Word— — to comply with a cruel and absurd cus stom. Page 144 
CHAP. XVII 
W -- -- -- ly’s Ressedions — An ingenious 
Contrivance, to avoid a Severe Flagellation — Gains the Approbation of his mistress by Deception, and retires happy in the success of his Contrivance. 
C FI A P. XVIII 
Again introduced to the Lady — Rewarded for the Supposed bloody Pi oof ol his A ffedion — Treachery of the Duenna — Horrid resolution of Don Carlos — consonant to the Custom of his Country. 155 
C H A P. 

■[ vlii ] 
CHAP. XIX 
Dbri Carlos employs a Bravo — Our Herb wounded, but shot mortally — The Russian frighted away — W — ■ — — ly taken into the English Ambassadors house — Sent to England — His Reception by his Friend. Page 155^ 
M E M O IRS 
OD THE LATE 
Mr. W -- -- LY M -- -- TAGUB. 
e H A P. I. 
Preliminary Pcfttions and Remarks. Ohjer^ vations on Jome Pajfages in the Letters’ of tis late Lady Mary W' ■ M -- -- -.. 
O be ever restless and dissatisfied, Is natural to mankind; and this disposition impels us to Seek pleasure in va -- riety, and happincss in Something unpos 
sess’d. -- That desirable Something none 
•ever attain, but all find amusement in its vol, L B pursuiu 
[ 2 J 
pursuit. Olir time being thus engaged,, and our passions employed, we pass thro’ life in a continual agitation, and often enjoy in idea, what providence never permits us to taste in reality, during the period of our mortal existence. 
Nor is it fit we should be entirely happy in this world, for if we V ere, V e should think of no other; and the necessary thoughts of futurity would be Sacrificed to the present enjoyments;. permanent bles fings would be forgot in the captivating charms of transitory pleasures; and mankind, lost to adstive bliss, would place all their happiness in a Serene apathy, and find their greatest luxury in laxiness. 
But Providence,, very wisely, to prevent the world from running to rufi^ if I may be allowed the expression, hath implanted 
t 3 J 
planted in our natures a perpetual desire of change; an impulsive principle which renders the Same objects Satiating, and the same situations irksome. It is this principle which hath occasioned the rise and fall of empires in all ages, and furnished the materials for all the histories and biographical producstions that ever were written. This hath impelled to the most important discoveries, and the noblest at chievements; and a more than ordinary share of this fire of impatience or active principle, is what forms the hero, philosopher, poet, or any other character which renders itself singular, or performs what is remarkable. Thus we may perceive, if order is heaveii’s first law, action is its greatest agent. 
But though this active principle is diffused through the whole human race, yet B 2 it' 
[ 4 I 
it has not a Similar operation in every individual; we find many whose natures are more heterogenious, and whose imaginations are more eccentric than the generality of mankind. It is the adlionsof Such that furnish entertainment for the more phlegmatic, the more Sedate, or the more Sedentary part of the creation. 
Mr. Pope very justly observes, that “Most Souls, Ms true, but peep out once “an age, 
“Dull Sullen prisdners in the body’s cage, “Dim lights of life, that burn a length of “years 
“ufeless, unseen, as lamps in Sepulchres, “Like eastern kings, a lazy state they “keep, 
“And close confin’d in their own palace steep.” 
Such form the bulk of mankind, who, if 
they 
t 5 ] 
they can in the least vary their daily amusements, never wish to change the place of their residence. Their passions are domestic, their curiosity limited, and the daily occurrences which may happen in the course os their bsisiness, or in the circle of their acquaintance, is all the variety they desire to know. The strange and Surprising they are content to take at Second hand, and being perfectly Satisfied with reading and hearing of things that are uncommon, they never wish to run any hazard in Seeing or knowing experimentally what others relate. The actions of Such are So little interesting, that a recital of their lives would appear extremely insipid and unencertaining. 
But we may naturally expect a fund of amusement as well as instrudion frorn the authentic memoirs of Such whose lives B 3 have 

\ / 
[ e 1 
have been a continual Scene of variety whose active Spirits have perpetually impelled them to a change of place, as vrell as Sentiments, and the greatness of whose Souls, Scorning to be prejudiced by vulgar customs transmitted by received opinions, or biass’d by common Systems, hath led them to Search for happiness, or Seek amusement in various countries and ia different capacities'. 
We have no doubt, but as the extraordinary character of the late, honourable Mr. W' -- -- -- y M -- -- -- -1 -- -- gue hath excited 
curiosity in many nations, and among all ranks of people, that it will prove infinitely agreeable to the public, ro lay before them an authentic narrative of his remarkable travels, entertaining adventures, and singular amours, which having all the merit of, are at the Same time 
So, 
t 7 ] 
So Surprising as to exceed the most celebrated productions of sidlion. 
But as this restless and uncommon phoe nomenon was the Son of a lady, whose personal and mental accomplishments have made a great noise in the world, and whose various adventures were likewise very extraordinary, it may not; be amiss 
to preface the life of Mr. M -- gue, by 
mentioning a few particulars relative to his noble mother. This Seems the more northeast cessary, as a very remarkable circumstance previous to his birth, and which was indeed the primitive cause of his etcijience^ Seems So intimately connected with these memoirs, that we could not with propriety begin them without it. 
Sometime in the year 1716, the celebrated Lady Mary W -- -- -- -- -- M -- -- -- -- -- 
B 4 Set 
[ 8 ] 
Set out with her husband, who was apt pointed to go to Confiantinople in a public capacity; for that famous city. 
They proceeded through Holland, Germany, Hungary, c. to the place of their destination : the particulars of their journey, and the principal curiosities of the places through which they palsed, are frequently described by the lady herself in a course of admirable letters written to many persons of the first distindion. 
In a letter written at Vienna, datecl Sept. 20, 1716, she Says, Speaking of the ladies os that court, “I have not Seen any ‘‘ Such prudes as to pretend fidelity to “their husbands, who are certainly the “best natured Set of people in the world, and look upon their wives gallants as favourably as men do upon their de“ 
“
[ 9 J 
puties that take the troublesome part of their business off their hands.” 
In what light this lady might hold that part of prudery called chastity, or how she might estimate her hushand’s temper, we cannot pretend to Say; a little farther however, she insinuates, that she had not imbibed the Austrian customs, by telling us the following tale: “One of the plea“ “adventures I ever met with in “my life was last night, and it will give you a just idea in what a delicate man“ “the belles pajfions are managed in this ‘‘ country; I was at, the assembly of the 
“countess of -- -- -- -- -- and the young 
“count of -- -- -- -- --, leading me down 
“stairs, ashed me how long I was to stay “at Vienna, I made answer that my stay “depended on the emperor, and it was P not in my power to determine it. 
“Well, 
I ^ 
t 10 ] 
Well, Madam, (Said he) whether your “time here is to be longer or shorter, I “think you ought to pass it agreeably, and to that end you must engage in a “little affair of the heart. — My heart an wered I, gravely enough) does not en“ “very easily, and I have no design: “os parting with it. I See, Madam, (Said “he sighing,) by the ill nature of that “answer, that I am not to hope for it, “which is a great mortification to me that am charmed with you, but how ever I ami still devoted to your Service, “and since I am not worthy of entertain ing you myself, do me the honour of letting me know whom you like best amongst us, and I’H engage to manage the affair entirely to your Satis ion. You may judge in what manner I fnould ‘‘ have received this compliment in my own country, but I was well enough ac 3 “quainted 
C 
11 
3 
quainted with this to know that he really “intended me an obligation; and I “thank’d him with a very grave curt’sey, “and only assured him that I had nooc cafion to make use of it.” 
Now, is this be fat, and who would be So impolite as to doubt the veracity of a lady, in Such a case especially, what conclusions must the mind acquainted with her ladyship’s character draw? We must naturally conjecture, that either the abruptness or indelicacy os the address, or the person from whom it came, displeased her, or that she certainly was, as she Says in a Subsequent letter of the 26th of the same month, “already infected with the “phlegm of the country, ” for it is most certain that the prolific and warm climate of Turkey greatly altered her ladyship’s 
Sentiments 
[ la ] 
Sentiments Soon after, and rendered her not quite So Scrupulous and phlegmatic. 
It must be conseffed, that if she had even had a little affair of the heart., it vrould have impeached her understanding to have confessed it, as not to have informed her fair correspondent that she had been addressed by a lover, would have Seemed a tacit confession that her charms had been neglected; an idea which her ladyship’s natural vanity could not on any accouni Suffer to take root. 
CHAP. 
C *3 I 
CHAP. II 
Continuation of Remarks on the beforemetu tioned Letters. — Some curious Inferences— — ^ singular petefuon in a very ftngular ‘ Circumfiance. 
The celebrated lady mentioned in the last chapter, might, with propriety, be termed the Sapho of the present century. 
In point of personal charm?, she eclipsed the Grecian poetess, and was her equal, if not her Superior, with respedt to the elegance of her wit, and her love of refinement in the most voluptuous pleasures. 
We should not have taken the liberty to make remarks on letters which are to 
be 
[ 14' ] 
be adrriired for the elegancy of their coiti posirion, and the accuracy of their information, nor to have Scrutinised the const ut of a ladyj whose great abilities we venerate, and whole faults none were to answer for but herself, had not our sub jedt, and truth rendered Such critical inquiries absolutely necessary. 
Though the lady herself, or her friends who published her letters aster her deaths took infinite pains not to betray Secrets, yet circumstances that have Since transpired, and Several passages in the epistles themselves, have given foundation to more than bare furmise. 
What are we to think of the expressions used in describing her visit to the lovely patima i the thahyd.s lady, when her young 
stamfels 
r s] ] 
are ordered to dance before our modern Sapho. 
This dance (she Says) was very different from what I had Seen before, nothing can be more artful, or more proper to raise certain ideas., the times So 
sost — the motions So languishing, accompanied with pauses and dying eyes — half falling back, and then recovering, themselves in So artful a manner, that I am very positive, the coldest and most rigid prude upon earth, could not have looked upon them without thinking of something not to be speak off 
Does not the soul of the lady Speak in these words? Warmed by the Subject her inclination appears without disguise; her prudence is lost in passion. — That frigid turn of thinking contracted in the dominions 
r is j 
itions of the house of Austria, Seenis (o' have vanished before the captivating Soft music, and languishing dances os the Turkish harams. We have no doubt but these Soft and Soothing incentives might overcome the purer tesolutions which her cooler reason might have wished to cherish. And that aided by Such blandishments, love inspiring climate had Sacrificed Sentiment at the throne os sensa tion, and by giving birth to certain ideas had stimulated the Sair voltiptuary to fome ihing not to he [poke of. 
In her 43d letter, she again Says', “sti^ certain what we feet and see is properly “(isany thing is properly) our own, but “the good of fame, the Solly of praise, are hardly purchased, and when ob tained, poor recompense for the loss of “time and health. We die, - or grow old ' <« before 
f >7 1 
before we can reap the fruit of our Id bours, considering what short liv’d, “weak animals men are, is there any “study So beneficial as the study of pre“ “pleasufe 
Is it not naturally to be supposed, that a person who held oiit Such a System as rational, and Seemed So fond osthe theory, would adopt the practical part, and miss no present opportunity of enjoying a more Substantial Satisfaction than what would accrue from the mere intellectual pleasures of platonic gratification. 
In another place she informs us that she is no enemy to pleasure “when it is pro perly Seafoned, and of a good composition.” 
Voi, L 
C 
The 
t i8 ] 
The above passages are Susticicnc t evince the nature of the jady’s ideas, and the bent of her inclinations. 
We do not wish to build upon what has been reported of her by common fame as common fame is' certainly a very great mag 7iifier offafls^ as well as inventor of falsehoods. Without therefore recurring to' the exaggerations of the chronicles of Scandal or Spleen, if the public only believe a fiftieth part of what hath been asserted concerning this remarkable personage, it will be Sufficient to corroborate what we mean to advance. 
This lady in her writings frequently insinuates that she never Saw the inside of the imperial seraglio yet she tells us, that she was informed by the Sultana Hafiten favourite of the Emperor Mttjiapha who was 
deposed 
[ 19 1 
dcposed, ‘‘ that the story of the Sultanas “throwing a hankerchief is altogether fa“ “and the manner upon that occa “Sion no other than this: — He Sends the “Kyjler Aga to signify to the lady the ho“ “he intends her, she is immediately “complimented upon it by the others, “and led to the bath, where she is per“ “and dressed in the most magni “ficent and becoming manner; the em“ “precedes his visit by a royal pre“ “and then comes into her apart“ “Neither is there any Such thing as her creeping in at the bed’s foot— — • “the Sultan diverts himself in “the company of all his ladies, who stand “in a circle around him; when they were ready to die with envy and jealousy of ‘‘ the happy Jlje that he distinguished by any appearance of preference.” 
C 2 
We 
[ 20 ] 
We are Sorry to be under the disagre^ able necessity of not assenting implicitly to what is advanced by a lady, but the character of a faithful biographer and a strict adherence to fads, render a contrary conduct absolutely requisite. 
We cannot condemn our modern fapho for the prudent concealment of an error, which perhaps was not intentional; but we must beg leave to Say that the Sultana Hafiten did not tell her the above particulars. 
This may Seem a bold assertion, but there is the strongest presumption of its being a, for the Ottomans of both Sexes would Sooner lose their lives than reveal to any one, upon any occasion whatever, the most trifling circumstance relative to the policy or internal management 
of 
[ 21 ] 
of their * feragliqs or harams, as they hold all connubial secrets sacred. 
W give the lady the credit of being a pleasing, as well as an elegant writer, and of describing things in a most striking, and minute manner. But whatever in other respecls she may have written upon hearsay, we are clearly of opinion, that in this point her intelligence is derived from personal knowledge, which she obtained by the following adventure. 
* None but the imperial recesses of sensuality j, re called seraglios, all others are termed haramsi 
c3 
CHAP. 
[ 22 ] 
CHAP. III 
sthe Amhajfador taken ill. — His Lady's leha~ viour. — Amorous propenjity of the Lurkijh Ladies. — -- Facility of intriguing in Ltirkey. — Lhe singular Adventures of the Seraglio. — Its confeq^uencesy c, 
The husband of our modern fapho had not been long at Constantinople, besore he was attacked by a kind of malignant disorder, which confined him for Some weeks to his bed, and for Some months to his chamber. 
His lady behaved with great respedt, and indeed tenderness during, his illness; but she was neither So passionately tender as to fall sick to keep him company, nor So doatingly fond as to become his nurse. 
She 
[ 23 J 
She knew that there were plenty of those about him who were much better qualified than herself to prescribe remedies, or administer necessaries to him. Knowing theresore that the utmost human care was taken of him, she left the event to providence with singular tesignatioi], and gave way to the propensities natural to her disposition; that is, she pursued knowledge with unwearied diligence, and then to Soften the Severity of her studies. Sought the relaxation of the amusements and pleasures of the east, or took every means to gratify her curiosity, which was excessive. 
She had frequently intimated a strong desire to gain admission into the imperial feraguo., that she might behold the internal wonders of that celebrated place. But all whom she ever mentioned this to, represented the thing as impossible, except a C 4 Jew 

( 24) 
Jew merchant, who informed her, thas Such favour he believed, might be procured, but the utmost privacy and precaution must be used. 
Eager to gratify her curiosity, she dicf not recur to consequenccs, and stimulated by the idea, perhaps mixed with vanity, of beholding So remarkable a place, Srom which all except those doomed to reside there, were excluded, she did not give ster felf time to reflect on a step, if not dangerous, at least indiscreet. 
It may not here be amiss to mention, that Soon after her arrival at Constantinople, she assumed the Turkish habit, fit order, upon any occasion, to gratify her curiosity with greater ease and privacy, and without being noticed, as she must have been in her own drels. 
With 
( ^5) 
With respedl to the Sacility of a lady’s going undiscovered wherever she pleases in a Turkish dress, and the ease with which the females os those eastern countries manage their intrigues, take her own words, 
“As to their morality (meaning the Turkish ladies) or good conduct, I can “Say like Harlequin, that it is just as it “is with you, and the Turkish ladies do not commit one sin the less for not being “Christians. Now that I am a little ac“ “with their ways, I cannot for bear admiring either the exemplary dis “cretion, or extreme stupidity os all the writers that have given accounts of “them : it is very easy to See, they have “in reality more liberty than we have; ‘‘ no woman of what rank Soever is per mitted to go into the streets without two muruns, one that covers her face all 
/> 
ut 
[ si ] 
ec 
CC 
c 
CC 
(( 
C 
c 
ce 
CC 
CC 
CC 
c 
CC 
CC 
CC 
CC 
CC 
but her eyes, and another, that hides the whole dress of her head, and hangs halfway dowri her back; their shapes arealso wholly concealed by a thing they call awhich no woman of any Sort appears without, this has strait sieeves that reach to their fingers ends, and It laps all arovmd them, not unlike a riding hood; in winter it is of cloth, and in Summer of plain stuff or silk. You may gstess then, how effedfually this disguises them. So that there is no distinguishing the great lady Srom her stave. It is impossible for the most jealous husband to know his wife when he meets her, and no man dare touch or follow a woman in the streets. This perpetual masquerade gives them entire liberty of following their inclinations without danger os discovery.” 
The 
[ 27 1 
The before mentioned Jew was as good ms his word, and in the above described difguise she was introduced into the Jeraglio i'of his Sublime highness, that Janfhtm sane torim of voluptuous gratification, and grand repository of terrestrial beauties. 
After she had gratified her.curiosity by examining the elegance of the apartments, the Splendour of the furniture, the beauties of the garden, and the charms of the ladies:, she vvas given ’ to understand That no female was ever permitted to enter ‘that place without being subservient to the inclinations of his Sublime highness.; that as it was a ceremonial never dispensed with, it was expected in the present instance that it would be complied with without resistance. 
Whe 
[ a8 ] 
Whether the lady made a virtue of necessity, and Submitted with a good grace to what she had no power to prevent — whether she affected to expostulate, — yielded with reludance, or was compelled into a compliance, we cannot pretend to assert; Suffice it to Say, that in the Spring of the year 1718, our hero came into the world. 
He was a fine boy, but it is Said Mr. 
M -- -- -- -- could not endure the sight of him; 
his mother however was fond of him to an excess, and though she had other children, took a singular pleasure in evincing upon every occasion a peculiar partiality for young W -- -- -- -- ly. 
In his maturer years he is Said frequently to have boasted of his illustrious lineage, 
and 
[ ^9 3 
many who have Seen the then Grand Signior have declared that he bore Some resemblance of that monarch. 
C H API 
t 3° ] 
C H A P. IV 
Tcung — lys great natural Endowments 
— He is put' to Wefiminjler School— — roving Difpojltion — Rtins away from school — Finds himself advertid.d — Changes Clothes with a Chimney Sweeper and commences brother of the hrujh.~ 
AS Young W — toly’s years encreased, the shining qualities of his mind were the admiration of all who knew him, - — He possessed all that elegance of wic and vivacity which distinguished his illus trious mother; together with the voluptuous disposition, and love of pleasure that marked the character of the great personage from whom he was always proud to deduce his origin. 
At 
[ 31 1 
At the proper age he was put to Westminster School, where the brilliancy, of his genius, the tenaciousness of his memory, and quickness of his penetration attradled the notice of the master of that Seminary • — while his whimsical temper afforded a continual fund of amusement to the young gentlemen who were the companions of his studies. 
Considering his volatile disposition he improved amazingly, but a restless temper, an impatience of control, and a roaming desire Seemed to evince them selves in his composition — he would frequently absent himself from School, and make excursions into the fields for a whole day together, for which he was as often corrected;; corredlion did not prevent him from repeating his fault, till he had been So often punished that chas 
3 
r 3i I 
tisement lost its terrors, and he determine ed to attempt quitting the School for ever, let what would be the event. 
In consequence of this determination, he one morning early made an elopement, and wandered about the chief part of the day wonderfully pleased with the enjoy ment of unrestrained liberty. 
Hunger at length compelled him to Seek Some refreshment, he immediately re ‘ paired to a pastry cook’s shop, and gratified his appetite with what he there thought most delicious, affuaging his thirst at the Same time with Some whey. 
As it was now in the midst of Summer, and the 'weather remarkably Serene and fine, he never once thought of a place to lodge in at night — however when it 
drew 
t 33 1 
drew towards evening, he rambled Into the fields, and very comfortably reposed himself upon a haycock. 
Another day and night passed exactly in a similar manner, and he began to think his new method of passing his time extremely insipid, if not tiresome. — Not being accommodated with Substantial food as customary, indispofed him very much, and he felt himself exceedingly stiff and full of pain in all his limbs, which he rightly attributed to the steeping in the open air. 
But another inconvenience appeared to him more disagreeble than the above, which was, not having any person to con verse with, or to cornmunicate his thoughts to — he began to wish himself at School a gain, or at least that he had enticed Some of vol I. D his 
[ 34 ] 
his schoolfellows to elope with hirti, and share the same fate as himself. 
He therefore determined to Seek Some better accommodation than he had had since his absenting himself from School, in a place of public entertainment, which stood near the field that had Served him as a bedchamber. 
He entered the house, and inquired if he could breakfast there; the landlady replied he might — but at the same time survey’d him with Surprise, on account of his youth. A certainnoble air which was natural to him, the elegance of his dress, and the hay, which everywhere hung about his deaths, and was entangled in his hair. 
Breakfast was Scarce over when a hawker brought in a news paper, and threw 
3 it 
r 35 ] 
k dovm near where young W sat. — 
lyle 
took it up in order to amuse himself— — what was his confusion, when casting his eyes over it, he found an advertisement fully describing himself; and offering a reward for Seizing and bringing him back again to the School. — — 
His perplexity is inexpressible. He fancied the people of the house knew the whole affair, and could read the misdemeanour he had been guilty of in his face, ' and began to be apprehensive that they were about to Seize him, and deliver him up to the master of the Seminary, from which he had eloped. 
These reflections alarmed him So much that he alked what was to pay in great disorder, and being told, threw down the D 2 money 
. [ 36 ] 
money in haste, and decamped with the utmost precipitation, frequently looking behind him with the greatest consusion and terror. 
aster he had run himself out of breath, and out os danger, as he fancied, he began to moderate his pace, and to con^’ Sider what was to be done in his present dilemma. 
While he was ruminating, a Chimney 
sweeper’s boy appeared in view. -- -- -- A 
thought immediately struck him — that if he should change his apparel with this boy, who was about his size, that the dress of a chimney sweeper would effectually disguise him. 
He made the proposal to the boy seeing the elegance of young W — 
who 
ly’s 
garb 
I ' 
[ 37 3 
; gaish very readily consented to a change kvhich appeared to be So greatly to his 
>wn advantage. 
They retir’d to an empty house to make the exchange — which was no sooner effect: d, than the chimney sweeper drily ash’d 
mung W' -- -- -- -- ly is, now he had the 
iress, he had a mind to learn the trade. 
W 
dy replied in the affirmative, 
irovided he could have a good master. 
“As Sor that (replied young Sable) Fll ' take you to my master, you can’t have ■ a better — he’ll fill your belly, if he ' beats your back.” 
This information did not intimidate 
oungw -- -- -- ly — The idea of commen 
ing chimney Sweeper tickled his imagina d ^ tion 
[ 38 ] 
tion, and Suited exactly with his natural inclination for novelty. 
His new comrade immediately com duffed him to his master, who was Sitting by the fireside with his wife. — 
The singularity of their appearance threw the Sooty couple into a great com sternation — they cou’d not conceive the meaning of Such a strange metamorphoses; figure to the imagination a boy as blaclf as Soot could make him, dress’d in an elegant Suit of light colour’d clothes, white silk stockings, and a filver lac’d hat while a comely youth appeared by the side of him, with a Ikin as fair as alabaster, yet clad in the sable garments os a chim ney fweeper, and whose fine head of hairj was covered with a dirty woollen nightcap full of holes. 
■ But 
[ 39 ] 
But their doubts were Soon solv’d by their apprentice, who inforrned them of the particulars of the whole affair, and of 
young W -- -- -- -- ly’s desire tq commence 
a brother of the brush. 
The master immediately consented to receive him as one of the fraternity, and to initiate him in the mysteries of the profession— — deeming our hero’s clothes to be too good a prize for his boy, he determined to convert them to his own use. — Therefore ordering the boy to strip, he gave him the same kind of apparel as he 
had lately parted from to young W -- ly; 
and promis’d to keep the others Safely for him, till he was out of his time. 
CHAP. 
r 
[ 40 ] • 
C H A P. V 
A curious Adventure. — Verrijies same Game jiers^ and seizes their Money. — Another whimjical Exploit, — He is apprehended, tarried before a Magifirate, and delivered to his Friends. — She judicious Behaviour cf the Majier of Wejtminfler School. 
^ISAGREEABLE as this dirty pror 
fession may Seeip, ypung W -- -- ly 
grew fond of it; and became So great a proficient in the Sooty bufiness, that his master was very happy in having met with him. 
Add to this, his comical humours, and whimsical ways, diverted all that he came near; So that wherever he went to Sweep fhimneys he was Sure to be well treated, 
nd[ 
[ 1 
and often had money given him as a recompense Sor the mirth he occasioned; this money he constantly Spent upon his Sable comrades, which made them exceed mgly fond of his company, and always ready to oblige him : thus he lived mufit happier than the idea of Such an employment could permit one to suppose. 
A publican who was an acquaintance and neighbour of his master, had Some company in his house one evening, who refused to leave the house wheia he wanted to retire to rest. 
They were in a back parlour pretty much intoxicated, and busily employed in gaming : a large Sum of money was deposited on the table, dependant on the play; while the effects of the liquor fhey had draqk, with eagerness and 
anj^i 
[ 42 ] 
anxiety on account of their stakes, occa* stoned them frequently to utter the most bitter imprecations. 
The landlord expostulated with them in vain, they positively refused either to quit the house or cease from Swearing. 
At length it came into the landlord’s head to apply to our hero’s master for one of his boys to execute a Scheme which he had conceived. 
Youno W 
■ly was Sent with him : 
he led him into a room adjoining to that in which the gamesters were at play, and directed him to ascend the chimney there and descend through that which belonged to the parlour where they were So busily engaged 
Our 
t 43 ] 
Our hero followed his instrudlions, and descended the chimney without their hear inghim, when creepingsoftly into the midst os the room unperceived, he Suddenly cried outwith aloud voice, “My master Lucifer has Sent me for you all.” Hearing the words, they all instantaneoussy turned their eyes to the place from whence the sound proceeded, and perceiving his Sable appearance, a general panic Seized them, they started up suddenly, crowded to the door with the utrnost terror, and made their escape with the greatest precipitation. 
This whimsical method of driving away troublesome company was attended with these further good consequences. ■ — The fright cured every individual of them of I the itch for gaming, and the habit of Swearing. 
As 
'[ 44 ] 
As they were too much terrified to refiedt, and; in too great a hurry to make their cscape, 'they never thought of their money, .which remained on the table, and was Seized upon by the landlord and our hero, who divided it equally between them as lawful prize money -- -- -- -- - 
: As there was Something whimsical in another os our hero’s adventures while he remained in the capacity of a chimney Sweeper, we shall recite it. 
Being Sent to Sweep Some chimneys at a house in Golden square, he got out at the top of the chimney, and after looking j; about for Some time from the leads of the r house, curiosity at length prompted him ill: to descend a chimney which belong’d to the next house. 
I 
He 
[ 45 3 
He descended into an elegant bedchamber, where he perceived a fine down bed, which the lady of the house had just quitted. 
As he had lodged but indifferently for sometime past, he determined to give his limbs a quarter os an hour’s indulgence, by creeping into the lady’s place, and covering himself over head and ear?, where he lay for Some time buried in down, and exulting in the success of the whim. 
At length a chamber maid came into the room to make the bed, and place everything in its proper order. 
This girl it Seems had for a long time made a practice of stealing her mistress’s 
mar 
4^ 3 
marmalade, and other Sweetmeats, which were deposited in a closet in this bedchamber, and which the girl got at by means of a salse key that she kept for that pur pose. 
According to custom file went to the 
closet and regaled hersels as long as she thought proper, with what site fancied the most deliciousv^ -- -- -- - 
As Soon as she was Satisfied, she care lessly approached towards the bed in bf der to make it, when pulling off the clothes, up started young W -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- ly. 
who retreated towards the chimney, and Scrambling up with great expedition and dexterity, got into the next house, finished his business, and went home 
As 

'C -47 ] 
As for the poor girl, she was So exceedingly terrified, that she only gave one violent Scream and fainted away. 
Alarmed by the noise, the rest of the Servants ran to See what had occasioned it. 
When they perceived her condition, they used their utmost endeavours to recover her, and Soon Succeeded. 
She had no Sooner recovered her recol ledlion, than she hastened to her rnistress, and throwing hersels at her feet, with tears in her eyes, implored her forgiveness for the wrong she had done her, confessing in what manner, and how long she had stolen her Sweetmeats, and delivering up the false key with which she had perpetrated the crime — at the Same time she 
Solemnly 

i j 
Solemnly promlied never to repeat that of any offence cf a similar nature, since a judgement had befallen her for what she had already done. 
She then in a most pitiful tone gave an account of the devil’s having appeared to her, exaggerating every circumstance, and giving all that dreadful magnitude to the suppos’d apparition, which a terrified imagination cou’d conceive. — She declared he was upwards of Seven feet in height, that his eyes were as large as Saucers, and as fierce as fire, that blue flames issued from his mouth and nostrils, that his tale was as big as a ship’s cable, and his cloven foot, of which she gave a particular description, was much larger than the foot of the largest ox — She concluded this monstrous detail by asserting 
that 
[ ’49 ] 
that he vanish’d away, in a stash of llghti 
The other Servants Corroborated what she Said, in respedt to Some circumstances Such as the room and bed being cover’d over with a Sort of black dirt, which, as they were wonderfully Sagacious, they fupposed must be hrimjtone ashes— — the Sooty Smell they insisted could proceed from nothing but Sulphur. 
Whatever the lady thought, shepre tended to credit the whole story, and took an occasion to give them a lecture on the moral duties — dwelling largely on the efficacy of the old proverb, that honesty is the hest policy and expatiating on the dreadful consequences attending a breach of the seventh commandment. 
vol I. 
This 
[ io i 
This whimsical adventure however, luckily reform’d the girl; who was naturally disposed to pilfer whatever came in her way, but the fright render’d her ever after concientioussy honest. Thus many 
of young W -- -- -- -- -- -- ly’s whims, which were 
infinitely diverting to himself, became beneficial in the end to others. 
As our hero was exceedingly liberal to his sable comrades upon all occasions, he Soon exhausted not only what money had been given him, but all which he had gained by frightening the gamesters. 
Many of the chimney Sweepers with whom he had contradled an intimacy, design’d to celebrate the ensuing 5th of November. They had prepared faggots for a bonfire, and purchased fireworks according to their respe<stive abilities. 
Our 
( 51) 
Our hero, who was naturally ambitious wished to outdo them all in the article of ifireworks; by making a Superior purchase 
But not having any money left, he determined tc) gratify his inclination by disposing of a gold watch, which had formerly been given him by a relation, and which he had not parted from when he chang’d apparel with the chimney sweeper’s boy. 
To this end, he went into a watchmaker’s shop, without having the least apprehension that he should meet with any dissiculty, — and asked the master of the shop, if he would purchase a watch. 
The watch maker finding it to be a very valuable one, could not conceive that it came honestly into the possession E 2 of 
[ 52 1 
of a chimney sweeper’s boy, in fact, he had no doubt but he had stolen it from Some house, where he had been employ’d to Sweep the chimneys. 
Full of this idea, he kept young V— — -- -- -- in talk while one of his men 
fetch’d a constable, who immediately carried him besore a magistrate. 
Our hero was now frightened out of his wits — in vain he pleaded that it was his own — the justice So far from believing l)im, was about to commit him to goal, that he might be tried for stealing it. 
reduc’d to this dilemma, he was obliged to confess his birth and family, who he had the watch as a present from, and bis elopement from Westminster School. 
The 
[ 53 3 
The justice immediately Sent an account of the whole transaclion to his relations, and the headmaster of the School, who all very Soon made their appearance. 
The magistrate vras sincerely thank’d by his friends — the master chimney Sweeper was Sent for, and Seve ely reprimanded for having concealed a youth of his appearance, in a clandestine manner — and 
young W -- -- -- -- -- ly was again commit -- 
ted to the care of the reverend gentleman, who then presided over that Seminary of learning. 
It requir’d a great deal of trouble and a considerable time to bring his Ikin to. its natural colour again, and to eradicate the particles of Soot which had penetrated into the very pores. 

As 
t 5i ] 
I 
As Severe methods had been formerly found to be ineffectual with young W — ly, his master judicioussy dtermin’d to try whatlenient measures wou’d do, and therefore, instead of chastizinghimfor absenting himself from School, he was forgiven, ca ress’d, and receiv’d every kind of indulgence. 
CHAP, 
r 55 ] 
CHAP. VI 
Runs away again. — Goes to New market. Is defrauded by Sharpers.<^a Relation seizes Him. — ~lhe Sharpers obliged to refund. — PV -- — — ^ is brought to london— — again to Schoof and treated with great Rigour. 
But ^ disposition constitutionally volatile, and a mind naturally ror ving, can only be check’d for a time. — Such a temper yvhen curb’d or restrain’d. Suddenly breaks, out, and evinces itself with a greater degree of violence. 
* i. 
Thus our hero, who had behawd pretty circumspeclly for a few months, began again to grow tir’d of the regularity of E 4 School 
[ s6 1 
fchooi discipline, and to resolve uponi another excursiori without the leave oshis preceptors. 
His imagination had lately been fir’d by the accounts he had heard os the horse races at New varket. — He determin’d to be an eyewitness ps what in descrip jtion appeared So pleasing. 
To this end, he again abser)ted himself from School one morning early, a few days previous to the commencement of the races, and having enquir’d the road to New marlcet, he made haste to quit the town, and being overtaken by the New market stagecoach, he got into stand arriv’d there that evening. 
Nor had he forgot the principal article, a large Sum of money; For he had been 
plenti 
[ 57 1 
plentifully Supplied by an usurer, who made it his business to get acquainted with, the young noblemen and gentlemen of Westminster School, that by administering to their propensity to vice, he might take the advantage of their follies, and by the help of his own cunning and artifice, reap the benefit of their carelessness ancji experience. 
The races at length began; young 
W -- -- -- -- ly was wonderfully delighted 
leith them, — and perceiving with what, ardour the bets were laid, he was desirous of commencing adventurer, — but did not know who to address himself to„ pr how to proceed. 
He was not suffer’d long to remain in this state of uncertainty and perplexity. Some sharpers had observed the elegance of 2 his 
[ 5^ ] 
his dress, and a certain noblenessosdeport? ment by which, from his infancy, he had always been peculiarly distinguished. — They justly judg’d that he was of Some considerable family, and concluded Srom his being at New market, that he was hardly deficient in point of cafit. -- these ideas were Sufficient to induce them to mark him as a proper object, to be made a prey of. 
One of the sharpers was therefore deputed from the rest to try the experiment. -- -- He addressed himself to young 
W -- -- -- -- ly, by asking him if he wou’ci 
bet, and choose to take odds. 
Tho’ our hero was ignorant of what he meant by odds he did not chuse to betray his ignorance, -- -- but briskly an? 
fwer’d in the affirmative. 
3 
They 
[ 59 ] 
They began to bet with great Spirit, and our hero lost his money with the greatest good temper and much Seeming siitisfadlion. — Indeed they found him touse the sharpers own technical phrases, a will ling Pigeon., mighty easy to be pluipd. We Scarce need to add that he was stripp’d of every shilling which he had about him. 
His youth and inexperience, the little knowledge he had of the use of money, and the novelty of the thing, prevented him from perceiving his losses in any other light, than as occurrences that must happen upon such occasions of course. nay So far was he from supposing that he had been defrauded, or any advantage taken of his simplicity or ignorance of Such affairs, — that he very willingly dis j posed of his watch, and a valuable ring he had with him, in order to continue the 
Sport, 
[ 6o ] 
Sport, as he called it, and indeed he did continue it, till he had nothing left. 
in the evening he retired from the course much fatigued, and repair’d to the inn where he had hitherto put up, wheit he Soon went to bed. 
The next morning he was rather cha •grin’d, that he had not money to repeat his diversion, — he however repair’d to the course at the usual time, thinking that he might meet with those who had wori his money the day before, and not doubting but they would lend him a trifle to. try his luck again. 
He had however not been above a quarter of an hour upon the course, besore he was perceiv’d by the very relation who, as before mentioned, gave him the gold 
watch. 
r 6i I 
watch, which he had the preceding day entirely parted with. 
This gentlemen had been appriz’d of young W — — ly’s elopement from School before he left London, and Was very happy to have an opportunity of Securing him, and Sending him to town a gain. 
He seiz’d him immediately, and taking him to an inn strictly interrogated, and 
Severely reprimanded him. — W -- -- -- -- -- -- ly 
confess’d the truth of everything with great candour, except the borrowing of the money of the usurer, and the Sum he had lost; he told his relation indeed that he had lost all he brought with him, as well as hb 
watch and ring. 
The 
t 62 1 
The gentleman now explain’d to hini in what manner he had been defrauded, — • insorm’d him, that those he had betted with, were no ocher than common sharpers, and warn’d him in the most lively manner against gaming in general; he then determin’d to take our hero to the course again, chat he might, if possible, point out these honest gentlemen, who So dextrously his feathers as they term 
it, that he might apprehend them. 
Young W — — ly accompanied his relation upon this expedition with great pleasure. — As his pride was piqued to‘ think he had believ’d those to be gentlemen, who in reality were only sharpers, and to have been defrauded at a time he fancied he had lost his money fairly. 
They 
[ 63 ] 
They had not been long upoh thb turf before our hero perceiv’d the black legg’d gen try, who had So egregioussy imposed upon him, he pointed them out to his noble relation, and those that were with him; they were easily seiz’d upon, and being Sensible of the consequence arid dignity os those in whose power they were, they gladly compounded Sor their rfelease, by a restitution of the watch and ring; they wou’d indeed have restor’d the: money, but that was generoussy refus’d, and very glad our hero was that it hap p’fened So, a the restitution wou’d have occasioned his intercourse with the usurer to have been detected, — for the largeness of the Sum wou’d have caus’d an inquiry into the manner by which he became pos sess’d of So much cash. 
In a few days his relation return’d with 
hirn 
54 
him to London, having, during the remainder of his stay at New market, caus’d him to be narrowly watch’d to prevent his escaping from him, is he meditated any Such thing. 
On his arrival in town, he underwent a great number of Severe lectures, and at length was return’d to School, wish pari 

ticular diredlions to his rnaster to chastise him with the utmost Severity. 
those diredlions were pundtually complied with, and he felt the terrors of School discipline in their greatest rigour, 
, This, instead of changing his dispofition, only Served to confirm him in a determination to quit the School entirely on the first opportunity, and to take Such measures as wou’d effedluaily prevent his being again retaken. 
C H A Po 
t 65 ] 
CHAP. VIL 
Absents himself a third dime— — intoxicated and robkd. — Sequel of a ‘villainous Confederacy, — Roguery of a trading Captain. -- ■ embarks for Spain. — Is very ill ud.d during the Voyage. — Runs away from the Ship. 
T was not long before he put his design in execution. He had a pretty considerable Sum with him, with which he was furnished by the before mentioned iisurer, who was always willing to accommodate any whom he knew to be heirs to ample fortunes, with whatever Sums their follies or vanities might require, — that is in consideration of being allowed to extort an unconscionable premium and exorbitant interest — for his kindness. 
vol. I. F ' i 
[ 66 1 
He made the best of his way to wap ping, where he inquired for the captain of a trading vessel of whom he had been previously informed. 
He Soon found him, the captain was bound to cadi&i and intended to Sail the next day, if the weather permitted. 
Yoiins W “
■ly had a passionate 
desire to See Spain, from the accounts be had heard and read concerning it; he determin’d to take this opportunity, and promised the captain to become a pafien^ ger. 
Willing to pass the last evening that he intended to remain in England in a convivial manner; he went into a tavern, and ordered an elegant Supper, — the people were Surprised at his youth, but did 
not 
[ 67 3 
hot hesitate to comply with his desire, they perceived he was possessed of money and had other valuables about him. 
The master of the tavern was himself a notable sharper, - — perceiving the simplicity and inexperience of his juvenile guest, he determined to make the moji of him. 
Young W — -- -- -- -- ly anticipated his desires 
by requesting him to give him his tompany at Supper — — This request he not only complied with, but introduced two of his intimates who were as great rogues as hirnself, to assist in the execution of his Schemes. 
After Supper the glass was pushed briskly about, and cards introduced, — intoxication Soon banished our hero’s re f 2 fiecstion 
[ ] 
fiedlion; he lost his money without repining. What little precaution, orprudenc'e he might have possessed when Sober, were drowned in copious bumpers of claret — At length'he was So far inebritcad, as to fink down senseless on the floor. 
This was what the honest gentry with whom he was in company wanted 
what they had not cheated him of before they now robb’d him of, — and then left him, without the least farther concern, to sleep off the fumes of those copious libations, which had reduc’d him to Such a shameful state of insenfibility. 
When he came to himself in the morning he Scarce recollected where he was, — for never having been usd to intemperance before — the cxcess had almost obliterated 

i 
terated the remembrance of everything 
that had happened. 
* 
He however 'called aloud; when the waiter appeared, he desired Some costee — which was presently brought him, accompanied by an enormous bill of the pre ceeding night’s expenses. 
When he had read the bill, he put his 
hand into his pocket to discharge it -- -- 
But words cannot express his astonishment, nor imagination paint his agonies, when he perceived that he had been plundered, not only of every sixpence he pos seffed, but of his watch, ring and every other movable of value about him. 
He called for the landlord with an air of desperation, which Sufficiently evinced the horror of his mind. 
F 3 The 
C 7° ] 
The landlord appeared -- -- -- he recited 
his misfortune — the landlord affected to fiy into a violent passion, called him a sharper, — tc>ld him he came there with ^ design to bilk hishouse, and thathe would Send for a constable; Saying these words he hastily flung out of the room. 
The mistress no\y appeared, and with an affected concern, pretended to have groat compassion upon his youth, and to pity his indiscretion, she represcnted her husband as a most terrible man, litigious and rash to the last degree, and exceedingly malicious when provoked; she therefore advis’d him to make his escape during her hushand’s absence, as he was gone for a constable, for Said she in a very moving accent “If you are carried before a ma gistrate, and committed to Newgate, 
[ 7‘ ] 
f heaven knows what will be the consequence 

Her artifice Succeeded — the very name of Newgate was Sufficient to terrify young W -- -- -- ly, to whom confinement Seemed 
terrible, tho’ under the most unexceptionable circumstances — and he was too much of a novice to See through the finesse of these consederated sharpers. 
He thanked the mistress for her kind ness, as he deemm it, and hasted from the house; wing’d by his fears, he hurried to the place of the captain’s residence, with whom he had conversed the day before. -- -- Here he repeated his dismai 
tale -- - and with the most doleful accents of unaffeded Sorrow, related his misfor timc to the captain. 
F 
Mr. 

t ] 
Mr. James, for that was the captain’s name. Saw into the whole 'affair immediately, he well knew the house and the people, and consequently could give a pretty near guess at the nature of the collusive transadion. 
Without Saying a word to our hero ( whom he left at his house) he repaired to the tavern, and calling the master aside, flatly accused him of the whole affair, telling him that the young gentleman whom he had defrauded, was os a great family, and had most powersul Sriends — that the consequence of a discovery of this iniquitous transadion, would be his inevitable ruin. 
After a little more conversation, the landlord perceived that the captain had taken this trouble upon himself, not as 
an 
[ 73 1 
an advocate for justice — but on the more Sordid motives of Self interest. 
They were not long now in understanding each other, * -- Upon a promise 
of Secrecy, the captain was admitted to partake liberally of what young W —. — ly had been despoil’d — and became in reality, an accejjary after the fafi. In return for this generosity of the landlord, he promised to let our hero work his passage to Spain, during which voyage, he would take care to use him So ill, that he should be glad to run away from the ship as Soon as he landed, and then it would be a miracle if ever he returned to England gain, to accuse them of defrauding him. 
Thus we may perceive that captain James was no honester than his worthy 
neighbours. 
That 

[ 74 ] 
That evening our hero embarked on board the ship, on the stipulated agreement of working his passage. -- -- -- -- 
During the voyage, the captain punctually performed the promise he had made to the landlord, for he used poor 
W -- -- -- -- ly So exceeding ill, that when 
they arrived at Cadiz, he took the first; opportunity of quitting the ship. 
The repeated misfortunes he had met with at So early an age, one would imagine, ought to have cur’d him of his roving disposition; but it had the contrary eff^dt -- his inclination encreased 
with difficulties, and a resolution which never forsook his mind. Supported him under ail misfortunes. 
CHAP. 
I 75 j 
CHAP. VIII 
W 
Ifs literary Acqiiifitions. — Engages 
to serve a Muleteer. -- Bad accommodations for Fravellersjn Spam. — Inconvenience of the Spanifj Inns. — Food. — Excejftve Heat. — Singular Customs— — Murders. — Sanliuaries. — Char after of the Spaniards. 
O U N G W 
dy thq’ of So 
volatile a disposition, had made an amazing progress in his studies. — The strength of his memory, and quickness of his penetration enabling him to make greater literary acquisitions than many of a much more fedkte turn of mind, and assiduous disposition. — 
He was exceedingly well acquainted with the Latsh classics, and had Some knowledge 


[ 76 ] 
led26 of the Greek. -- -- He was well versed 
in French, having been taught to 'Speak it from his infancy, and had a tolerable Smattering of the Spanish — So that he was not at So great a lols as might at first be conceived. 
Luckily in plundering him, the sharpers had overlooked a pair of Mocoa sseeve buttons Set in gold, — these he Sold at Cadiz and by that means procured Subsistence for Some days, 
When his money was just exhausted, he by chance Sell into conversation with a Muleteer, who wanted an assistant — 
V- -- -- -- -- readily offered his Service 
which was accepted. 
This employ, though one of the meanest in Spain, Seemed the most eligible and 3 pleasing 
[ 77 j 
fiieasing to our hero, as it would give him an opportunity of travelling unques tioned and unmolested, and of ieeing many parts os the kingdorn at his leisute. 
in travelling with his new master he found great pleasure, as every day presented him with Something new -- and every object was food for his ciiriosity, — but his satissadion was dashki with Some difficulties and inconveniences. — There are no beds in the inns to accommodate travellers; he was frequently obliged to lav on the boards, and even there was al most tormented to death with vermin. 
Sometimes by choice, he lay in the stables with the mules, but here another plague attended him, for he was fo pester’d with rats and mice, that he very Seldom could get a wink of Sleep. 
With 
r 78 ] 
Whth respe(5t to the inns in Spain it is remarkable that you enter the houses though the stables, nay even the stairs that lead to the different bed chambers are in the stables, and always appear exceedingly dark and dirty. 
Another disagreeable circumstance was the article of food, everything the Spaniards eat is So full of garlic. Saffron; ' Spice and pepper, that it is impossible Sor those who are not usd to Such high Seasoning, to Swallow their Sood -- and unluckily his master happened to be fond to an excess of iuch relishing dishes. So 
that poor W -- -- -- iy was often obliged 
to go without his dinner, or to eat only a piece of dry bread, which was as black as a coal, and often So stale and hard, that he was sorc’d to dip it in water to Soften it, before he was able to bite it. 
The 
t 79 ] 
The excessive heat in Spain occasions a 
copious perspiration; this young W -- -- ly 
who was naturally inclined to corpulency, found exceedingly troublesome. — He, however frequently relieved himself shy wiping the Sweat which trickled down his face, with a very fine and beaudshl India handkerchief 
His master frequently Saw this handkerchief with an envious eye, — One day he alked to look at it. 
W -- -- -- -- -- ly gave it hirn -- -- -- he admired 
it for Some time,, and at length kissing it very devoutly, put it into his pockety faying at the same time, that he did not think our hero had been of So liberal a temper — but that he should for ever esteem him for a prefenc which showed at once his generossty and good 
nature. 
t 8o ] 
stature- -- -- then kissed his thumb, laid 
across one of his fingers, and Swore to be his Sriend as long as he lived 
Our hero vva^ astonished at this proceeding- -- Said nothing to his master; he Was however Sorry for the loss of his handkerchief, as the yvant of it proved a great 
* i 
inconvemenee. 
To accostnt for this transadiiost of his rnaster, it is necessary to observe, that 
young W -- -- -- -- ly afterwards found that it 
was customary in Spain, Sor any one who had a desire Sor Something belonging to another, to ask to See it— — if they chuse to keep it, — they kiss it and return 
thanks 
^ This is the custom of Spain, and is looked upon as a most folenin manner of fwearing. the Spaniards 
hold ah oath fo made, as Sacred, and Seldom or never break it. 
[ 8i ] 
thanks for it, as if it had been given them. This method of converting one persons tproperty to the use of another, is So common in Spain, that the natives take no notice of its inconveniency. 
Being once near Berberana, a town in Old Castille — our hero perceived a gentleman lying in a ditch, weltering in his 
blood; -- -- he wou’d fain have gone to 
have Seen if he was quite dead, — but his 
master wouh not let him, ^ -- -- -- -- telling 
him to take mo notice of it, but to keep on his way, and not to mention a Syllable about the matter to any person. 
This at once alarmed young W -- -- -- -- ^ly 
and excited his'curiosity; he began to inquire more particularly into the customs and.manners os the country than he had hitherto done, — and his master who was vol. I. G not 
[ 82 ] 
not deficient in point of understanding, gave him a very judicious account, which in Substance was as Sollows. 
That the Spaniards affecst a Solemn deportment, Slow and steady pace, and Serious countenance, that this studied gravity is only a veil to cover an infinite 
fund of wit and humour -- -- -- They Speak 
with great deliberation, and a majestic tone— — when they utter a joke or piece of raillery, gives it a double force. They are brave without being rash; for they do not love to attack, but to stand on the defensive; and this indolent intrepidity they ascribe to prudence. -- -- - 
They are ostentatious in pageantry and show, yet unaffectedly liberal, — revengeful without appearing angry, — libidinous and uxurious with respedl to women, — but temperate and Sober, in regard to eating 
and 
[ s3 ] 
and drinking. — They are tenacious of their honour, and great observers of their words tho’ it cost them their lives. Patient, obstinate and great humourists, — ^ they are vivacious, — penetrating, — fluent in Speaking, but jealous to an excess; exceedingly Superstitious, and very bad oe 
conomists. -- -- Their behaviour is affected, 
formal and stiff, — they are naturally ingenious, but too lazy to employ their ingenuity, -- -- and of that implacable disposition, 
that they never forgive an injury or fail to resent an affront, which is Seldom done in an honourable manner, but usually by assassination. — Nay they not only causethose to be murdered who have affronted them, but likewise Such as they have affronted, — least they should take the Same advantage, for their maxim is kill or he kilkd 
G 2 
One 
[ 84 ] 
One great reason of the frequent murders in Spain, is the easiness with which the assassin can Screen himself Srom justice, for if he flies to a church or a convent, he is Safe, - — and he generally takes care to commit the crime near Some sanctuary. these Sanduaries are almost innumerable. 
i 
The Spaniards are short and lean — -- leaness indeed is deemed a beauty among them — but they are well made, and have fine features -- they have indeed a yellow or dusky complexion, but their eyes are remarkably bright, and their teeth regular and well Set— — have large legs and Small feet, their hair is parted in the middle, ' strait cut, and tuck’d behind the ears. 
They wear a large hat, their clothes are always black — over which they have a black frieze cloak. 
They 
[ 85 ] 
They have strait breeches and hanging sleeves, a long Sword and a poinard. 
Our hero Sound one advantage however in belonging to a Muleteer, which was, being better treated at the inns than even people of fashion, for as the Muleteers are constant customers and take their passengers to what inn they please, they are more caress’d by the innkeepers, than genteeler persons whom they may never See again. 
They have Seldom above one cup in an inn, and if the mule driver gets hold of it, even a nobleman must stay with patience till he has done with it, or drink' out of a wooden bowl or earthen pitcher. 
As there are no chimneys in the inns, but in lieu thereof a hole in the ceiling to G 3 let 
[ 86 1 
let the Smoke through, people in cold weather are almost choak’d and blinded -- ^ besides everything must be paid Sor before you have it, Sor the innkeeper is only allowed to lodge you — but not to find you either in eating or drinking, he is therefore (being very poor himself) obliged to alk the traveller for money, to go for what he wants, to the butcher, baker, fruiterer, vintner, c. 
The innkeepers are great extortioners, and will defraud you if they can — tho’ at the same time they pretend to do you the greatest honour, — for as Soon as ever you enter their house, they run to tiress themselves in their best, being perhaps the poorest and the proudest publicans in the universe -- the good woman of the house then brings all her children, if she has any, about you — and obliges them 
to 
t 8, 7 ] 
to touch your clothes — and rub their eyes, throats, cheeks and hands with them. 
in noblemen and gentlemens families, the Servants all live upon board wages, which are very low — and in fact, tho’ naturally abstemious they are half starved; this renders them So ravenous, that they pilfer as much as they can from what is dressed for their mafter’s tables; to prevent which, the grand dinners in Spain are usually Sent up in dishes and covers, which are padlock’d together, to prevent the depredation that wou’d otherwise be made between the kitchen and diningroom. 
G 4 
CHAP. 
[ 88 ] 
CHAP. IX 
Spain the Region of Love. — The amorous. difpo/ttion of Young W -- ly. — The 
early Age at which the Spaniards engage in Intrigues. — Singular method of unveiling a Woman without touching her. — A Journey to Madrid. — The Prelude of an Adventure at an Inn on the Road. 
P A I N is certainly the region of love and gallantry — the tender passion is here carried to its utmost excess of refinement — no people in the universe, are by nature more amorous than the Spaniards; the climate and manner of living, increases their natural disposition for voluptuous pleasures, and the great restraint under which the women are kept, is a Spur to their ingenuity, and adds to the 
ecstasy 
[ 89 ] 
ecstasy of every amour, by giving it the air of a deep intrigue. 
The inclinations of young W 
■ly 
were naturally as amorous, and his dis position to the full as voluptuous, as the most libidinous Spaniard existing. 
He could not but perceive, that in this country, Cupid found employment for many who were much younger than himself for he was now considerably turn’d of fifteen years otage — and here it frequently happens, that a youth of fourteen is married to a girl ol twelve — he therefore cou’d not but upbraid himself for having lived to fo advanced an age without having had a mistress, or engaging in any amour. 
twas his nature to be ardent in whatever 
C go ] ' 
ever he took in his head, these ideas were therefore no Sooner established in his imagination, than he began to sigh Sor every U'oman he Saw, or to languish aster ideal mistresses — Indeed he never Saw any woman but what was veil’d, unless a Sew by chance, who were either miserably poor, or very old and ugly. 
As he had not the liberty of indulging himself with a sight of their features, or permission to admire their complexions, he determined to do in fancy what the custom of the country denied him the enjoyment os in reality — he therefore never met a woman, but he began to unveil her (in imagination) and to strip her (ideally) from those envious robes that prevented him from gazing on her native charms — and we must do the brilliancy of his Sancy in this respe^cst, the justice to Say 
that 
t 9^ 1 
V — that he never beheld any Spanish nymph, by this method, but what was a persedt beauty, lor he took care to figure to himself, on these occastons, nothing but parragons os perfedions. -- -- -- -- 
But this amorous diet, was of too thin a consistency, to gratify the warmth of his appetite long — he Sound Speculative passion not at all Suitable to the ardour of his disposition, and, longed very rnuch to reduce the theory of love to practice. 
He was ambitious, but the Sphere of lise in which heat present mov’d, prevented him from entertaining the idea of Soaring to Such exalted beauties, whose rank nd charms merited that grandees 
alone should kneel before them. -- -- -- He 
began for the first time to be asham’d of his situation' — and to blame himself for 
a fi olick 
( 9») 
a frolic which had reduced him So low in the Scale of human consequence. 
As there was no remedy but patience— — determined to make a virtue of necessity, and not to lose the least opportunity of indulging himself in those pleasures which might lie within his reach — but to avail himself of every means of sensual gratification which chance might present, or fortune lay before him. 
these and similar ideas continually employed his mind, but he did not for Some time meet with any adventure worth recording. 
At length being obliged to make a journey to Madrid with his master, they put up one night at a little lone inn on the road. 
At 
( 93) 
At this inn another carrier besides his master had taken up his lodging, on his return from Madrid to Salamanca. 
The landlord had a niece, who happened to be of a very amorous complexion. 
This nymph who was well made and' very pretty, appeared without her veil. 
W — — ly was greatly struck with her appearance— — French 7v seat quod. which he found in her took entire pos seffion of his heart, and the tartness of her answers, which to & youthsul mind already pi^judic’d in her favour, might pass for wit, entirely riveted his chains. 
CHAP. 
[ 94 I 
CHAP X 
If— — _™ — smitten with the Charms of d spanijjj Nytnph. — Elogium on his P erf on. Ilis Pfogrefs in the Spanish Iongue. — Fortune favours his Wishes— — Adventures. — Some whimsical Mtfakes. — One Error pleasingly rectified by another. 
A rapturous love fcene. — All retire to their separate Apartments. 
^ur.hero could not keep his eyes Srorii being fixed on the agreeable' yeanot.^ who, Sor her part took every opportunity to exchange glances with him. Indeed we canno^e surpriz’d at this, as it is very probable, that she never in her life before, beheld So comely a youth— — ' W — — ly was very genteel in his per son, and perfedly well made; his features vere fine and regular, and tho’ hd 
was 
[ 95’ 1 
was a little Sunshurnt with travelling a bout, his complexion still far exceeded what was to be Seen among the natives of Spain. — Add to this he was Sprightly in his conversation, engaging in his manner, and had a most insinuating address. Neither was her eye disgusted by Seeing him in a dress to which she was not samiliar iz’d, for a little before his master had made him adopt the Spanish habit. 
Our hero, by means of the quickness of his .genius, and strength of his memory, had So well improved himself in the spanisn tongue, that he could Speak it almost as fluently as a native, and was Scarce to be distinguished for a foreigner by his accent. Thus was under no apprehension of being misunderstood, if he could but procure an opportunity of ad, * dressing himsels to Jeanot, 
Fortun 
[ 95 I 
Fortune was’propitious to his wishes — ■the hostess was called out of the house to a daughter of her’s in the neighbourhood, who was Suddenly taken ill. The landlord had employment enough in the stable, to keep him Sor Some time from interrupting them. — And with respect to his master, the only remaining Spy, Morpheus stood his friend by closing his eyelids with a leaden steep. 
W -- -- -- ly did not let stip this favourable 
opportunity — he pour’d forth the 'most rapturous expressions of love, with ■an amazing volubility; and took very tlose liberties, which tho’ not authorised by the customs of Spain, yet were by no means difpleasing to the blithe, blooming, and amorous Jeanot\ in sine, she let him know the situation of her bedchamber, and gave him to understand that if he 
tshould. 
[ 97 1 
Should happen to mistake it for his own in the night, that she should not be terrified, or Sancyshim to be a ghosts 
W -- -- -- ly was quite in raptures at these 
innuendo’s. — Heimpatiently wished for the hour of retiring to rest and could eat no Supper for the thought of his approach “ing happiness, ashe deemed it. 
At length the family retired to rest. — 
W -- -- -- - — ly was obliged to lay with his 
master, as there was no other bed vacant. — And happy was he, as Soon as he found by the melody of his nose, that he was in a profound fieep. 
He now crept Softly from his master, and pursued, as he thought, the directions given him by the pretty Ieanot> ^w^ entered the room, and felt about for the bed — having Sound it — he called his mis vol. L H tress 
[ 9^ '] 
tress by the most endearing epithets — and began to embrace her as he imagined, when he received a box on the ear that almost stunn’d him 
Putting his hands out to guard himself from another Salute of a similar nature, if Such a repetition should be intended, he vv’as amazed at encounc’ring a rougm face, and a pair of mustachios; these he was convinced could not appertain to the lovely jeanop., he therefore perceived that he had made a very essential mistake,, and thought it expedient to retreat with as much expedition as possible. 
He made the best of his way towards the door of the chamber, but unluckily m his hurry ran his nose against it, he not only felt an extremity of pain by the blow, but was covered with blood in a moment. To add to his embarrassmenr, 
his 
[ 99 1 
his whilkered antagonist had pursued himi to be revenged for having his repose dif’ turbed, and was distributing convincing prooss of his resentment about the back, shoulders, and head of poor W— — 
Our hero at length opened the door, and precipitately fled he knew not which way, nor whither, as his principal concern was to escape the Sury of his Silent assailant, for the person who was So liberal in the use of his hands, to the great mortification of poor W -- -- ly, made not the least 
tise of his tongue — nor did otir hero utter a groan, lest he should be discovered. 
But he made haste in vain for the o there pursued him with equal celerity— — a thought came into his head to throw himself Suddenly down, which would occasion his pursuer to fall over him, and H 2 by 

t .00 ] 
by this he imagined he might probably escape. 
He put this Scheme into execution — It succeeded to admiration — his antagonist had a terrible Sail, and broke his Sorehead against the wainscot. — He did not however bear his missortune with that degree of philosophic patience which young 
W -- -- -- ly had shown under the Severity 
os his blows — but roared out with amazing vociferation — The noise alarmed the whole house — our hero’s master heard it — 
he called W -- -- -- ly, but receiving no an 
fvver, he felt about the bed Sor him -- not being able to find him, he began to conjecture that he was either the cause of the disturbance, or by Some means interested in it. — He determined to be convinced of the truth of this surmise, So quitting his bed and room, he made as much 
haste 
[ sot 3 
haste as .the darkiiess would permit, towards the place from whence the sound seemed to proceed, and pacing along a gallery, drew nearer and nearer to it 
I'his noise was made by the muleteer, who, as before mentioned, was upon his return from Madrid to Salamanca. — Our hero having mistaken his room for Jeanofs was the occasion of this terribble fracas which in the Sequel was still more whimsical than what hath been already related. For the muleteer having made a tolerable noise, and curs’d our hero, himself and the inn Sufficiently, was about to Seek his chamber again — when turning Suddenly round, his head came exactly 
in contact with that of W -- -- -- -- ly’s master, 
and their foreheads rung and rcr bounded with the violence of the blow. — The luckless muleteer fancied that he was indebted for this new insult to the same H 3 perfbn 
[ 104 ] 
person as first disturbed him, and afterwards threw him down, — the additional pain rendered him outrageous — he bellowed like a wounded bull in the Sierra Rondd.^ — and laid about him like a fury. 
’W — ly’s master did not remain in debt for any of the blows he received — but honestly return’d the principal with Substantial interest, -- at length they clos’d with each other, and. Sailing together against a door in the gallery, they burst it open, and both Sell into the room with a terrible noise. 
This was the bedchamber belonging to the master and mistress of the inn, who as Soon as they heard the first alarm between the muleteer and W -- -- -- -- -- -- ly, had 
covered themselves over head and ears 
with 
* The place in Madrid, where the bull fights are kept. 
I log ] 
with the bedrcloaths, and instead of going. to inquire into the cause of the disturbance, were counting their beads, repeating ave marias, and addressing themselves to all the Saints in the kalender. — — 
But finding the danger So near them they grew Srantic, and began to verify the old proverb, which Says that cowards ■will fight valiantly when drove to defiperation. They jumped from the bed in a kind of frenzy left off Saying their prayers, to utter imprecations — and threw away their beads that they might have a better opportunity of using their hands, which they did in a most furious manner, So that the engagement now became what is usually term’d a battle royai for as they fought at random, it was irhposh ble to distinguish friend from foe — in sine, the noise of blows, oaths and cries in concert made an inexpressible confusion. 
H 4 During 
[ 104 3 
During these athletic adventures and manual operations in the dark- -- reader may be curious to know what became 
of young W -- -- -- -- ly, to Say the, truth, he 
was employed much more to his Satisfaction, than his master, or the rest of the combatants — for after having escaped from the Severity of the muleteer’s resentment— — very prudently thought it the most judicious thing to retreat with afi possible expedition to his chamber again, but endeavouring to execute this resolution — he again mistook another chamber lor his own — this Second ritistake was however mpeh more pleasing thm the first — for his error condudled him to the bedside of the lovely Jeanot, who had long expected him with impatience, but on hearing the various disturbances of the night, had lain for a considerable time panting with fear, 
1st 
[ >°5 ] 
In going to step into bed, our hero by chance put his hand upon her face — he was pleasingly surpriz’d at its softness — he knew it did not belong to his master — he felt no rolighness — no mustachio’s, and began to conceive that he had happily redlified one mistake by another, 
The lovers Soon understood each other “— a long parley wou’d have been the height of absurdity, for the disturbance still continued -- no time was to be lost -- the moments were precious -- and the enamoured pair, thus circumstanced, were under the necessity of heartily Snatching thole inexpressible raptures, which Sancy can better paint than words dcscribe. 
An ecstatic feaji was denied them — the gplden instant only permitted them just to tdjle of bliss — the adventure however 
was 
r io ] 
was So singular, and the gratification So pleasing, that the fleeting amour was impressed So Sorcibly on the imagination of our youthful voluptuary, as to stamp him ever after a votary of the Cyprian (^leen. 
He at length gained his bed besore his master -- and Jeanot having lighted a lamp, repaired to the field of battle, where the combatants were mutually astoniflied at the bloody fpe(stacie each other made, and equally enraged on account of what they felt. 
The muleteer Swore the house was 
haunted — W -- -- -- — ly’s master declared 
the Same — the innkeeper and his wife aver’d they were both mad — and Jeanot who looked mighty innocent upon the occasion, pretended to be frighted ah most to death. 
aster 

[ 107 ] 
aster a little more altercation, they retired to their separate apartments — be mg all So Sorely bruised, and So much exhausted by the Scuffle, that they had great rieed of a little repose. 
CHAP. 
{ io ] 
C H A P. XL 
Singular Appearance of the different Combat 
tants. — VV -- -- -- -- Ids majier thinks ih^ 
Inn haunted. -- - Arrive at mairid.^r defi cription of that City. 
N the ensuing morning, the appearance of every one of the comba^r tants was truly singular— — only one in the house not externally marked, was pretty Jeanot., who appeared as demure as a vestal virgin. 
The innkeeper appeared with a large plaster over one eye, and the other So bruised that he could Scarcely See out of it — his wife had covered her face almost entirely with gold beater’s shin, to hide 
the 
[ >09 I 
the marks of violence which had disfigured it -- So that she cut a very whimsr cal figure, the muleteer had bound up his head and jaws with as much cloth, as would have made a turban Sora Turkissi 
Bashaw — and young W -- -- -- -- -- ly made 
his appearance with a nose as big as his fist, and one eye entirely clos’d up,, he however, with the other, took care to ogle jeanot^ who now and then returned him a gracious glance. 
But our hero 00-110631^ being the primitive cause of this fracas, he avert’d that he had never been out of bed during there whole night, and that he received Several blows, which awaked him from his Sleep, and had done him the injury that was So extremely obvious on his countenance. 
As the master gave implicit credit to 
young 
[ no ] 
lyle lest the inn, fifrn 
young W — ly persuaded that it was haunted, and fully determined never to put up there again whenever he happened to travel that road 
The Same evening they arriveci at Madrid — very Sore with the bruises they had So re(?ently received, and greatly Satigued with their journey. 
Madrid which is about two English miles in circumference, has a pretty appearance from the country to a stranger as he approaches it The number of Spires, cupola’s^ and other large edifices, look very noble at a distance, ^but the idea of magnificence and Splendour, gradually decreases as the traveller enters the town. 
Its river, call’d the Manzanares, is for Several months in the year quite dry, at 
other 
V 
E 
in 
other times a muddy stream, but in the Ipring it contains a prodigious quantity of water, and indeed frequently overflows, by means of the torrents of rain and the melted Snow which pour down, from the neighbouring mountains. 
There Is a magnificent stone bridge over this river, which was built by Phi -- lip II Many travellers who have Seen the Manzanares only at the time of its. being dried up,, or at least a muddy puddle, have made themselves very merry at that monarch’s expense for building, So large a bridge, where there was no water, — but had these critics Seen the river ' at the time of its Swell, they would have ’been convinced, that their raillery was premature. 
Madrid is a very offensive place to 
the 
[ 112 1 
the olsaftory nerves, owing to the greas quantity of filth, which everywhere lies about the streets, and the number of stagnant ditches which are to be found in it, — So that the gai rets'are the most eligible apartments to live in, as they are the farthest removed Srom the foetid vapours that arise from the polluted ground. — Indeed the streets are pretty straight and tolerably wide, — and the houses handsome enough to look at, on the outside — but then the streets are So dusty in dry weather, and So dirty in wet weather, that you are either choak’d and blinded, or up to your knees in mud. 
The king’s palace, is exceedingly 
grand, 
* Since young W -- -- -- -- ly was in Spain, the 
tity of Madrid has been greatly improved — the streets have been paved, the filth removed, and proper regulations made to preserve it from the above Inconveniences, lb that at present, it is one of the cleanest cities in Europe, 
C "3 1 
|; rand, most of the buildings are lofcy^ but none of the windows are glazed, except they apjiertain to the houses of considerable persons. 
There are in Madrid twelve parochial, and above an hundred other churches, a great variety of public chapels and oratories, thirty nunneriesj forty convents. Seventeen hospitals, and ten colleges for the education of youth. 
vol. i 
CHAP, ' 
[ ] 
t 
CHAP XII 
Samsnefs in the Buildings and Manners of Ir - — Furniture rich., not elegant,. 
— Fables badly fapplied. — Toung W -- fy 
very particular iu minuting down all that. happens to him. — Difadv ant ages in Spain.: — A billet-doux delivered in the Dark. -- -- Its singular Contents. 
There is Such a sameness in the towns and houses, and Such a singularity of manners among the Spaniards in general, that, according to the best writers, mise who have Seen one town,, one house, or one Spaniard, may entertain a tolej/able idea of the towns, houses, and people in general. 
The houses of the Grandees and other 
capi[ 
[ 1 
capital people are magnificently suit nished; particularly with immense quantities of plate, but everything is rather intrinsically valuable than well executed; Superb than elegant, ' — almost all the common houses, besides being exceedingly inconvenient, are deficient in the most necessary utensils) 
) 
the cultivation of the land is much neglected, thro’ the natural indolence of the Spaniards, and as they are careless about, or rather despise commerce, their tables are, not over well Supplied, either with their own, or the commodit^s of other countries, — Indeed the poorer Sort, though naturally very abstemious, have Scarce enough to supply, even their temperate desires. 
Our Hero, tho’ young and volatile, I 2 yet 
il 
[ 1 
yet had an unbounded curiosity, and took bare to minutely observe whatever was in his reach, - — the preceediog and all Subsequent observations on different countries, were extradled from hie minutes and memoranda, which he carefully preserved through the course of his lise — and was always happy to think, that even in the wildness and profligacy os youth, he had never omitted to note down anything curious which occurred to him, anything remarkable which he Savour anything singular which besel him. 
Intjfed, in Spain he laboured under very great disadvantages, as the low station in which he appeared, prevented him from obtaining admittance into the houses of the great, which, had his real rank in life been known, his illustrious birth would undoubtedly have entitled 
him 
[ II ] 
him to — but his indesatigable inquiries of the most inrelligent people he could meet with, made, in Some measure, an atonement for what he could not possibly come personally at the knowledge of. 
Madrid was not the place to occasion 
a decrease of Young W — -- -- -- -- -- ly’s natu^ 
fal warmth of disposition and amorous temper — the recital of numerous intrigues equally pleasant and Surprising, that were continually poured into his ears, kept his mind perpetually awake to the tenderest sensations; while the idea of the agreeable Jeanod. made him wish for an intrigue in Madrid, equally delightful and more permanent, 
W 
•ly’s master was, on account 
of Some particular bufiness, obliged to remain in Madrid fra few weeks — our Is hero 
y 
[ ii ] 
hero had therefore a great opportunity of indulging his curiosity, by almost continually rambling about, as he had nothing else to do but to take care of his mules, and take his pleasures, nor was he very Solicitous concerning the hour at which he returned to his Pofada ^., as his pofa dera^ was a mighty good natur’d facetious man, and now and then would slip out with his guitar in his hand, and have a night ramble himsels — for in Spain, the nocturnal excursions, are productive of many pleasant intrigues — and indeed, as the climate is So exceedingly shot, the night is the most agreeable part of the twenty-four hours. 
One evening, as our hero was walking 
very Serioufiy in the a decent looking 

^ Pofada in Spanish, lignifies an Inn, and pofa dera"* an innkeeper. 
t A public place to walk in, like St. james’s Park 
I 
II 
[ ” 9 ] 
ing female as far as he could perceive, for at was almost dark, addressing herself tohim by the title of Cavellero., putanote into his hand, and desired him to read it as Soon as he conveniently could, and toobey the contents. 
Though he had great reason to suspect that the billet was given him by mistake, he bowed — and promised a pundfual observance of whatever directions it should contain; then repairing to a light he pe rused what follows. -- -- -- -- -- 
Unkind Don Juan 
It is above three nights since I Saw you — that time Seems to me an age — I will no longer conceal the place of my abode from you, but Suffer you to kifi my feet i 4 in 
[ 
120 
] 
Come precisely ae 
in my apartment ten o’clock tonight, next door to the 
Fontana d’oraj*, in the Alcazar Street, and the perlon who gave you this, will conduct you to 
the impatient 
Lucilla, 
* This expression may appear odd to the English reader — but none is more familiarly used in Spain. — A gentleman when he addreltes a lady, instead of saying hovj do you do with the Englifti, or I kifs your handswith the French — says 1 kifs your feet and when a lady says (he will permit her lover to kifs her feet in her chamber it is the most flattering invitation imaginable. 
•f The golden Fountain, one of the principal Inn in Madrid. 
CHAP, 

rr 
[ II ] 
I 
CHAP. : XIII 
Iihe Opening of an Intrigue. — An mhtcky qmijfion. -- Runs into an errora gk‘omy Place, and gloomy reflefhons. — His Hopes jirangety reverfd -- Forms a Resolution to grow mighty Wise. — His re’ueries interrupted by a lapon the Shoulder. 
\ 
TH E impatient Lucilla could not possibly be more impatient to ste 
her lover, than W- -- -- -- -- was for the 
hour os ten, to make, if possible, an advantage other messenger’s mistake. 
He deem’d this a Sair opening of an intrigue, and his heart was in the utmost palpitation, as he entered in tste Alcazar Street at the prescribed time, 
The 
r '22 I 
The billet unluckily did not mention, whether the house was on the right or left hand side of the Fontana d.dra. — 
-- -- -- ly however perceiving a door 
open on the left hand side, did not in the least doubt but that was the passage thro’ which he must steer to the elyzium of his fair and amorous lucilld.s apartment. 
Without hesitation he entered the house, and without ressedling on the consequences, crept shftly upstairs. 
* He perceived a glimmering light to jffue from a door, which was left a jar. 
He pushed it open and entered, but for Some moments could Scarce perceive what was in the apartments, a Small wax taper being the only light, it threw So dismal 

( '23) 
mal a gloom around, as to cast a damp upon the flame of our hero’s Sanguine cxt pedlations. 
aster rubbing his eyes Sor Some time, and advancing a step farther into the room, — instead of a beautiful young lady, ready to throw her veil aside and re ceive him with open arms, as his imagh nation had painted in the most glowing colours on the canvas of hope; he perceived at the farther end os the apartment, which was entirely hung with black — a coffin, containing a corpse in a winding sheet, decorated with abundance of flowers. On each side — Sat a female dressed in deep mourning, and covered with a long black veil, under which she frequently wiped the tears from her eyes with a white handkerchief. — these ladies beat their breasts, and sighed frequently, but did 
not 
[ '24 ] 
not utter a Syllable— — hero indeed Spoke no more than they, for he was dumb with astonishment. 
The whole was a strange contrast to what he naturally expected, Srom the contents of the billet dqux, — and a dismal reverse to a person of his amorous disposition, in the midst of his exaltat tion on the stilts of jiaitering fairy hope. 
Young W— — -- -- -- -- -- was exceedingly 
puzzled to account for So extraordinary a Scene, which So little coincided with the nature of the invitation contained in the 
billet 
* This custom in Spain of keeping filent upon such occasions, is llridtly observed, nor vvou’d the mourners who lit by a dead corpse either Jlir or ffeak., even if they law a russian enter to rob the 
house- -- -- a lady goes to condole with another 
for the loss of her hulhand, neither the visitor nor visited speak a syllable, but both lit down and vyeep, sigh and beat their breasts — then the visitor depart without having uttered a word. 
( 125 ] 
billet-doux — and as it is very probable that our readers may be as much puzzled as he was; we will not keep them any longer in suspence, but unriddle the whole affair. 
Our hero had mistaken the house, the habitation ol Lucilla being on the right hand side os the Fontana dora instead of the left, which he had entered, and which had been the residence of an eminent jeweller, lately deceas’d, whose widow and sister were mourning by bis coffin. 
doubtless they vvere surpriz’d and even alarmed at his appearance, but complying with their custom neither to stir nor Speak, our hero was Suffered to depart ubqnestioned, and unmolested for his intrusion. 
As 
[ 125 J 
As he lest the jeweller’s house, he began to blame himself greatly for his avidity, in gratifying his passions at the ex pence of his prudence, and even Safety, and was just about to enter into abundance of wise resolutions, by which be design’d to regulate his future conduct, curb his voluptuous disposition, and re press his inordinate curiosity — but just as he had determined to be vastly philoso phic and Sige, a female tapped him. upon the shoulder. 
C H A P, 

[ ‘27 ] 
CHAP, XIV 
A finguhr Address— — herds Kefolutiom vanish— — into a superb Apart -- ment. — A Beauty introduced. — An Error discovered— — Apology made. — A rightb Underfianding commenced. — Anecdotes of a Spanish Lady. 
TPI I S was the very person who had given him the billet-doux in the Prado. 
Cavellera Said she — you have been “very dilatory— — shou’d not think ‘‘ that one of your age would be fo tar“ “when a young lady of a noble fa“ “and at once So beautiful and fond 
“is in the case -- -- but follow me — i’ll 
“conduct you to her — and if she does 
not 
( 1^8 5 
** not chide you, you ought to “yourseu.” ' 
At these words, all our hero’s new form’d resolutions os being fnighty wife; vanished in an instant, So little are We to depend on any of our determinations, formed under the influence of passion. 
By the words of his condudlress, he easily perceived his previous mistake -- and resolved, since fortune had now thought proper to be propitious, to make himself amends for his late chagrin and disappointment. 
He was led into a Superb apartment, where his condudlress left him for a few minutes to fetch the lady. 
He past this interval in viewing the iichness of the furniture, and elegance of 
the 
[ 129 ] 
the tapistry, till the entrance of the lady presented him with an object more worthy of his admiration — 1 — without particularising her charms, or dwelling upon Single beauties — it is Sufficient to Say, that she was more than 
“All that painting can express, 
“Or youthful poets fancy when they love. 
Young W 
dy was So astonished 
with the Splendour of her charms, which like a stood of light overpower’d his fenses, that he stood motionless as a statue, and silent as a mute -- -- he totally forgot 
every Syllable of a fine compliment which he had taken great pains to form, in order to address her; nor, had he remembered it, was he able to utter it. 
vol. I. 
K 
The 
t 130 ] 
The lady no Sooner advanced towarcps 
young W -- -- -- ly, but she perceived 
the error of her confidant — and starting, back greatly alarmed~she Said with a tremulous voice — “you have ruin’d me — this is a stranger.” Then sinking into a chair, she appeared to be much terrified. 
Our hero having now a little recovered, threw himseif at the lady’s feet, and entreated her not to discompose her sels with needless Sears, Saying, that he' was exceedingly afflicted to find that the accident which made him the happiest of mortals, was to her a cause of uneasiness — that the interview was certainly founded on a mistake, but fortune who was the author of all mistakes, to make a mends for the errors she had occasioned, 
general! y 
r 
[ i 
generally rendered them' of ai propitious’ kind. 
Our hero was naturally ari orator, his action was gracessil, and his eloquence became him exceedingly — nor were his talents lost on an inanimate statue — the lady was n'otcoisipo's’d of ice, and the following Oircumstandes Of her life will evince, than 
fortune had not directed young W -- ly 
to an objedf, on whom his endowments were unlikely to make an impression, of his eloquence to be unavailing. 
This lady, as \ve have already mentioned, might be deem’d a perfedb beauty, *^ the natural warmth of her constitution rendered her pretty^amorous — and a disposition easily susceptible of the tender est impressions made her a willing victim to the shafts of gallantry. 
K 2 Her 
[ >32 ] 
Her family was noble, but not richv this made her father, while she was yet very young, readily listen to the overtures of a gentleman, illustrious by descent, andin possession os an ample Somme. 
Tho’ she felt no particular tenderness for this gentleman, as her heart was not pre engaged, she made not the least objection to the match. -- -- The union presented 
her with these two ideas, viz. Srom the gallantry os the gentleman — a greater degree of sensual felicity than a Single life could admit os, and from his large poffes ^ sions, a full indulgence of all her vanity could sigh for, or her ambition aspire to. Hence we may perceive she was strongly influenced by those two passions which Mr. Pope Says, predominate thro’ the whole Sex.. 
Two 
[ 133 1 
Two principles alone, the Sex obey, 
The love of pleasure, and the love of Sway, 
And was at “heart a Rake.’* 
The husband who was a profess’d libertine, and had travelled, was too v/dl acquainted with human nature in general, and the fair Sex in particular, not to perceive his young consort’s Sanguine disposition -- -- as passion had urged him to 
the match — the warmth of her constitution alarmed him into precaution. 
She daily grew fonder and fonder of her husband, and fancied, she entertained the most unbounded affection for him, — but he had too much philosophy not to perceive that her affection originated more from the blood, than the judgement — that it was a kind of volupttious K 3 gratitude. 
[ J 1 
gratitude, to one who was the principal gent in the indulgence os all her passions, and the' pleasing gratification of her sensations— — npt that pure ethereal loyc which is founded on esteem, and which, unites the platonic refinements to the Sympathies of nature 
Which fentiment^lly serap|iic glows. 
Yet in the stream of spst sensation stows. 
This was the passion he wished to ind • — this Sublimity of affection was what his youthful spouse was not qualified to bestow; -- -- She was more ardent 
than delicate, nd as a pqnnubial partner, / was formed at onceto pommunipate pleasure, and create distrust. 
The gentleman, with the Scrupulous nicety of a Spaniard, was alarmed for 
his 
[ ns 1 
blssionor, - — he deemed the warm disposition of unexperienced frailty, but a brit ue tenure for its Security. Such, and a thousand similar ideas passing thro’ his imagination, continually Sowered his temper, rendered him suspicious and watchful, while his inward anxiety of miod, destroyed that felicity which had been his only object in the marriage, So little do we know the consequence of possessing what Seems most desirable, and what we most eagerly pursue, and So totally ignorant are we,, of what would prove condur cive to our real happiness. 
II profess’d libertine, in the early pursuit of his pleasures, is gross in his appetites, and Seeks the sensual gratification of his wishes, with a kind of indelicate voraciousnefs, or brutality of craving, — shut with Satiety he grows delicate, and K 4 his 
[ >36 ] 
his libidinous pleasures losing their novelty, and consequently their zest, he becomes nice and difficult; -- -- -- whenever 
he Seriousiy Settles, he is more particular than a more temperate person, -- -- -- -- nothing 
but the utmost refinement of pas sion, the greatest delicacy of affection can please him, while a man of moderate disposition, who has lived a regular and chaste life, makes Sew objedlions, and even cannot lo easily perceive what is gross. — Nothing far short of angelic purity can Satisfy the reform’d libertine. 
Thus, our gentleman from being particular, became cautious; caution Soon degenerated into suspicion, suspicion bred jealousy, and jealousy rendered him completely miserable. 
Hence his house became a goal. 
himself 

[ 537 ] 
feis a wretched Argus, and his lady a disconsolate prisoner. 
They lived this miserable life Sora Sew years, — when an affair ol. the utmost consequence, called the gentleman lo Old Castille. 
besore he went, he Set Such a number of Spies about his wife, and made it So much the interest ol each to betray the others, that he departed with as much composure, as Such a mind could possibly be capable of knowing. He did not however live to return to Madrid, as he was murdered and robbed by Some russians before he reached the end os his iourney.* 
CHAP. 
^ Our hero afterwards discovered, that the murdered body he had seen in a ditch near Berberana.^ as mentioned in Chapter VIH, was the identical corpse of this gentleman. — He, however, never heard that the murderers were discovered[ 
[ } 
CHAP. XV 
Lucilla .entirpy independant. r ~determines its live Single, and become a prudent Voluptuary. — Some account of Don Carlos d Aranda. — Occasion of the Mifiake in dg’^ livening the billetaoux. — Easy Flufluation in the Mind of an amorous Lady. -- Second Interview projefled, 
LUCILLA was now freed from her tyrannical husband, her father had been dead for Some time, and she had neither brothers nor cousins to fear, who jear lous of the honour os their family, might have been curbs to her pleasures. 
Her remembrance of what she had already Suffered, joined to her natural 
love 
I 139 1 
t'ove of liberty, made her abhor the idea of a Second marriage, — her fortune was ample, and her situation independent — she determined therefore to enjoy her pleasures, but not at the ei^pence of her reputation -- her resolucion was to become a prudent voluptuary or rtitjonal li bertinet if propriety will admit the expression -- and criticism give it the 
stamp os currency. 
Having Sorrned, in imagination, this stnsual System, she determined to engage in an amour the very first opportunity, — but to proceed with the greatest precaution, and to enjoin the object of her gallantry, the utmost Secrecy. — Such a conduct she fancied would at once Secure her reputation, and give the intrigue a more ' pleasing air. 
Fraught 
[ HO ] 
Fraught with these maxims, she fixed her eye upon a young Cavalier, whom she had Sreqiiently Seen, taking the ever ning air in the Prado his name was Don 
Carlos d.aranda. -- -- They Soon came to a 
right understanding. Saw each other every night, but proceeded with Such precaution, that their amour was unknown to any, except her confidant., who by misr take, had given her billet to young 
W -- -- -- -- -- -- ly. --; This woman, from having 
been formerly retained by her husband, in the capacity of a duenna., to prevent her intriguing, was now become emififiary., to assist her in carrying on her intrigues. — A thing in Spain not uncommon, Sor the Jpy to turn pimp, and the guardian of a hushand’s honour, to become the pander of a wife’s pleasure. -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 
Pen Carlos at length, had been missing 
for 
[ Ht ] 
for three days — in fast, he had been ac eused of being concerned in Some treasonable practises, and was privately arrested, by order of government., 
Lucilla, not knowing the true reason of his absence, committed her Sentiments to writing, to upbraid him. for his apparent defeclion, and recall him to her embraces. 
Our hero was much about the size of Don Carlos, — lucilld.s emissary found him walking in the same place where that Cavalier usually Spent an hour or two every evening, — the black cloaks, which both wore over the rest of their garments, prevented her from distinguishing their difference by the other parts of their dress, and the darkness of the evening contributed to the mistake.~the consequent 
i 142 
Sequent interview has already been rela ted; proceed we now to the Sequel of this adventure. 
Lucilla found our hero much younger, ’ and much fiandsoitier than tonne Carlos -- -^ two circumstances highly in his Savour^’ with a lady of her cornpleiiion. 
The easy flow of his wit, and the ardent volubility of his expressions, pjeased her exceedingly, and she could not help preferring his vehemence of address, tet' the cold formal gallantry of her Spanissi lover. 
She did not, however, think proper to give him too much ericouragement the first time of meeting, but desired him to withdraw, alleging, that the fiirprize she had received by his first appearance, 
had 
t u3 ] 
Jiad greatly disordered her, yet with Such alanguishrrtg tone, and captivating glance was her mandate delivered, that it Seemed to entreat him to come again. 
The emissary, who persedtly Well understood her mistress’s nheaning, whis pered in his ear as he went out at the door, to be on the watch in the street, the ensuing evening, at the Same hour; lie promised obedience, bowed, and de ’ parted. 
C H A P. 
[ 144 ] 
C H A P. XVI 
W- -- -- -- Hilarity. — A spanijjj Cujiciiit 
— Our Hero unlike the Knights Errand of old. -- Gees according to the appointment- -- introduced to the Lady. — Love Protehiations have no Meaning— — at his hvord. — Engages to comply with a ^ cruel and hbfurd Cujiom. 
U R hero was in Such high Spirits with his success, that he Scarce felt the ground beneath his feet, but ran, or rather stew home to his Pofadoy with wonderful celerity; 
Tho’ it was late, he found the pofd dera up, and just going to Supper, for he 
was 
[ h5 i 
was in the action of touching th loaf. 
His mind, it is true, was full of love and admiration — but the finer passions had not destroyed his appetite, — he therefore eat very heartily of a dish -- corhpo fed of pilchards, chick peas, and gar lick, fryed together iri Oil, then retiring to rest he fiept as Soundly, as if he had never met with an adventure: unlike the Knights errant of old, who when they fell in love, could not help watching and fasting, till they became mere fpedlres. 
The next evenings young W — — ^ijr was pundual to his time— — Duenna vol. I. L fool 
* is a custom among the lower sort of people ih Spain, to touch the loaf with their right hand, as they cross themselves in saying grace. They touch the bread for want of holy water, which m Scarce among the vulgar. 
r 146 ] 
fbon appeared, and introduced him Lucilla — who condescended to receive him graciously, and, like the queen of love on her Cyprian throne. Suffered him to pour the incense of adulation on his knees, with wonderful complacency. 
As the rhapsodies of lovers are exal tedly pleasing to the parties concerned, blit extremely insipid to everybody else, we shall omit our hero’s conversation with the lovely Lucilla., and proceed to the mutual stipulation, with which it finally closed. 
It was agreed that young W -- -- -- -- -- ly, 
before the lady could admit him as a gallant with propriety, ought to give Some incontestable proof of the violence of his affection to her 
This 
t "47 3 
This he readily promised to do protesting that there was no torment he would not undergo, no torture he would decline bearing, nor any death but what he would willingly Suffer, to Serve the object of his affection, or gratisy her wishes. 
Tho’ this language is the common cant of lovers, and they utter it with vehemence, and under the Sandlion of innumerable protestations — yet nothing is farther from their intention, than to do as they say -- or from their will, than to Suffer, as they pretend they readily would 
do. -- -- They fancy as they are words of 
course, that they may be forgotten at pleasure. Hence the ancients used to Say, that the Gods themselves laughed at the perjuries of lovers. 
L 2 
But 
[ 14^ ] 
But luchla took our hero at his wordjf' in a more literal manner than he either expected, or desired; Sor she declared that she would never admit him to her pre lence again, unless he appeared the next day, in the character of a Disciplinarian, and Scourge himsels before her window,, to evince his affeflion. 
As he knew it was the feason os the year when the ladies expect Such Sanguine proofs of gallantry, and ashe was senfi* ble that he could not refuse without nip ping.the amour in the bud, he promised to comply with a good grace. 
To make the above request of the lady more intelligible, it is proper to observe, that during passion week, particularly from Wednesday to Friday, it is a custom in Spain, for the men to lash 
them Selves 

[ *49 ] 
diemfelves heartily about the streets, but more particularly before their mistresses windows. 
'For this purpose, their faces are hid, and their bodies covered with a garment, which leaves their shoulders, back, and Sides bare. They are provided with whips, whose lashes are composed either of whip cord, wire, or thongs of leather, — with these they lash themselves unmer cisully, the blood follows every stroke, and they Sometimes mangle their bodies in Such a manner, as to become Self murderers. 
This cruel custom is even formed into a System, — and masters, called difciplina rian Preceptors are employed to teach the novices, in what manner to whip them fejves with most effect. these masters 
3 arc 
( *5°) 
are held in greater esteem, than either dancing or fencing masters, and make a great parade in the manner of teaching this barbarous exercise. 
Some few perform this office of ssa^ gellation, on the Score of devotion — many on the affectation of it — but most .Difciplinarians place their lashes to the account of gallantry — when according to the rigour of what they inssidl upon themselves— — piety, or the fervour of their ^ffedtjon for their mistresses, is estimated. 
CHAP, 
t II ] CHAP XVII 
ifa. -- -- -- /y’s etflefhons. — An ingenious 
Contrivances to avoid a severe Flagellation— — the Approbation of his mif trefs by Deceptions and retires happy in the Success of his Contrivance. 
HEN our hero returned home, he entertained Some qualms in his mind, relative to this enjoined flagellation, he could not help thinking it a very foolish custom, nor could he conceive how a lover’s cutting his flesh to pieces, could be of any use to his mis tress. 
Upon the whole, he found, tho’ he loved Lucilla much, he loved himseif more — and discovered, that a lover may L 4 Say 
[ IS 1 
say a great deal, and meari little — prp? mise much, and design to perform nothing. 
His determination was therefore, neither to hurt himself, nor lose his mis llress; he had an abhorrence for the one, and a contrivance fof the other. 
Instead of Suppling himself with one of the usual y/hips, he Substituted in it place, a whip to all outward appearance similar, but in effect, totally different. 
The handle was like the common ones, but in lieu of three leather thongs, he had fastened three Small eel shins, filled with blood, to the end of it. 
1 
Thus provided, he repaired the next day to the Alcazar Street, and having 
just 
r. »53 ] 
just before he approached lucilld.s window, pricked the shins in Several places, he began to lash himsels to all appearance, in a most unmercisul manner. 
The blood plentifully ifiued from the apertures in the eel shins — his shoulders, back, and sides were dreadfully crimson ed over, and appeared in a condition So ghastsully Sanguine, that even Luciila, used as she had been to Such a custom, and cruelly vain of Such a token of ref pecst, thought he had Suffered too much, and given a proof Sufficiently bloody, of a fervent affection. 
She beckoned to him to cease lashing himself, and appeared perfeduy well Satisfied with his excessive gallantry. 
He bowed and retired, walking away 
as 
[ >54 ] 
as if almost fainting with the loss of blood, but laughing in his sseeve at the success of his stratagem, — pleasing him selt with the idea os the reward he was to receive for his ingenuity. 
C II A P, 
[ 155 ] 
CHAP. XVIII 
Again introduced to the Lady. — Reivarded for the juppofed bloody Proof of his Affection. — Preachery of the Duenna. — Hcrnd Resolution of Don Carlos. — Consonant to the Ctijiom of his Country. 
TH E ensuing evening, our hero repaired to the usual place, the duenna met him as besore, and introduced him to the lady, into whose presence he came, in Sull expedlation of a reward for his ingenious deception — and indeed it must be admitted, that he was much more deserving of it, than if he had really lashed himself as she fancied he had, in compliance with a custom, at once So cruel and absurd. 
As 
C *5^) 
As for the lady — she was Satisfied with the discipline as she imagined he had given himself — this consideration, joined to the natural warmth of her disposition, and a kind of prepossession in favour of 
young W -- -- -- - — ly, was Sufficient to 
make her recede from any more puncli lio’s, — she thought he had Sacrificed enough at the shrine of decorum, — and therefore as a just Saint, to whom as a votary, he had appeared affiduoufiy fervent, she determined to reward the ardency of his vows. 
In fine, our hero was as happy, as pleasures merely sensual could piake him. 
But as the lovers became mutually pleased, the duenna grew dilpleased. In the course of her mistress’s amour with Don Carlos, she had received many valuable 
[ 157 1 
gble douceurs — but this was not the cash with our hero — he had nothing worth her acceptance to give — nor indeed, did he entertain the idea that Such presents were necessary. 
, / 
As for Don Carlos., by the means of friends, and evincing his innocence, he sh)on obtained his liberty. 
The duenna no Sooner understood this; than she made him acquainted, that a happy rival had, during his confinement, Supplanted him in the affections of his mistress, — tho’ this rival, she cunningly added, was far his inferior, not only in family and fortune, but in personal and mental accomplishments. 
This information was Sufficient to' rouse the indignation of Don Carlos, who 
was 
C '58 ] 
was a true Spaniard, as far as a poffessloil of all the local follies of Spain could go. He thought his honour concerned — he felt his heart touched, and his pride exceedingly hurt. — He therefore Iwore by the blood of an -- old Christian, to have 
We have already mentioned, that when the Spaniards fancy themselves grossiy affronted, they do not Seek what in other parts of Europe is called an honourable revenge., but without remorse, have recourse to assassination. — This was the thought that occurred to Don Carlos,, and our hero was very near falling a victim to his vindictive temper, and the barbarous custom his country. 
CHAP. 
* The Spaniards in general, are exceedingly proud of arrogating to themselves this appellation — by which they insinuate, that, they are descended from an ancient christian family of Old Castille— — blood of which hath not been contaminated by any iuterinarriage, or intermixture with Moors or Jews. 
t 159 ] 
CHAP. XIX 
Pen Carlos employs a Bravo. — Dur Hero wounded, hut not mortally. — The Russian 
frighted away. — W -- -- -- ly taken into 
the engujjj Emhajfador’^ hgufe. — Sent to England. — His Reception hy his Friends. 
O N Carlos, deeming the office of assassin too mean for himself, employed a Bravo, (that is one who lets himsels out for hire, to execute the honourable office of murderer) to dis patch his rival. 
However, on the evening in which the fatal deed was to be perpetrated, — ■ young W — “-- -- -- ly’s fortunate star happened 
to predominate; the Bravo, who 
ways 
io J 
waylaid him coming from lucilld.s, intended to stab him in the heart with a dagger, but our hero, luckily giving a Sudden start, he only fiightly wounded him in the shoulder. 
\ 
Chagrined not tb have Ssicceededi he prepared to repeat his blow, which W — ^ly, ’ apprized of his design, attempted to ward off, by twisting his cloak round bis arm, a thing usual in Spain, when a rencounter happens V the stroke did not Succeed according to the rushan’s wish; but however, our hero was desperately wounded in the right side. He fell, and the villain would have dispatched him, had it not been for the Sciund of Some '^ceveerrd bells, which terrified him away, lest he 
should 
* The hells, which the mules in Spain wear as pack horfes do in England — or at least, as they did be to re the roads were made fo good, and the car tiages fo mueli more commodious as atprefent 
t ] 
\ 
should be taken by the muleteers, who must of consequence attend them., 
The russian happily left oiir hero,, but the mules turned down another street, and he remained for Soirie time‘ weltrino in his blood, till his cries were overheard in a house near where hejay. 
He was Soon brought in by the ier^ vants, and taken proper care of that 
night. 

This timely benevolence happened to be e:? tended to him by the domest?ic^n of the P, nglijh rer m^hose shot^l: 
he was attacked. 
The next day ■ wheff he was 'atseh^ed by the Stirgeon who had dressed his wotinds over Fiighti of ■ which, froiti*the loss of blood, he was then insensible,, he Soon perceived that he was an Englishman. 
vol. L M This 
C .62 ] _ 
This rejoiced him exceedingly, his misfortune had lessened his avidity for Spanish intrigues, and the loss of his blood, had cured him very expeditioussy of his passion for luciiuy — he, therefore without Scruple, informed the Surgeon who he was, and of everything which had befallen him. Since his last elopement from fchool 
This information was Speedily communicated to the ambassador, who no Sooner understood his rank and indiscre tion, than he resolved to Send him to his friends with all convenient expedition. 
His youth, and the skill of the Surgeon who attended him. Soon reestablished his health, and the disrelish which he now began to entertain for Spain, made him fall into the ambassador’s proposal of 
sending 
t 3 
lending him to England with great pleasure. 
He accordingly embarked for his native country, and after a pleasant voyage, arrived there in very good health and Spi. fits. 
Upon the ambassador's Serious representation by letter, his noble relations received him with caresses, instead of chi dings — and, without upbraiding him as he expected, treated him in Such a manner, as to make him forget that he had ever committed an indiscretion. 
It was concluded, that he should no more go to Westminster School, or any other public Seminary of learning, but regain what hehad lost, and complete the remainder of his education at home, un 3 der 
I 164 ] 
der the inspedlion os Some gentlemen, eminent in every branch os usesul and polite literature, who were employed as private preceptors for that purpose, 
n: j 
. j 
End of the First Volume., 
I 
MEMOIRS 
OF THE LATE 
I Edw, W — ly M — tague, Esq 
/ 
II 

E M O T R S 
OF TH H LATE 
3sdw. W -- -- L: Y M — TAG UT., Elq,; 
W IT H 
R E M A R K 
.Dn the Manners and Customs of the O RI E N TA L W O R L D; 
CO L I, E C T E u and Published from ORIGINAL POSTHUMOUS PAPERS. 
V O'L. II 
LONDON, 
•printed Sor J. Wallis, in Liidgate jireet. 
mdcc.lxxvm. 
n 

T H g 
CON TENTS 
O F T H E 
^ * 
SECOND VOLUME. 
CHAR I. 
Young W — ^ly’s progress in his Studies — Meets a Young Washerwoman in the Park — Addresses her — Has frequent Interviews with her — Marries her privately — The Affair is discovered by his Relations — They Send her into the Country upon an Annuity, and him to the Continent. Page I 
CHAP. II 
Purshes every Kind of Pleasure in Paris, and enters into Several Remarkable Societies 
[ II ] 
cieties — Goes to the French Comedy — An Adventure — it’s singular consequences— — his Philosophic Resignation to what could not be remedied. 
Page II 
CHAP. III 
Goes to the playhouse again — Meets the Female that robbed him — Intends to le cureher — She slips away — Some Surprising 
Occurrences — Unravel mem of whole Mystery. 
CHAP. IV 
the 
i6 
Determines not to apprise the Police of the Affair — Sends for Remittances from England — Goes by Land to Holland — Items to the Reader — Falls in Love with a 
Young Jewels -- -- A Marriage agreed 
upon. 27 
CHAP. 
t III ] 
CHAP. V 
Agrees to be married according to the Ceremonial of the Jews — Customs Solemnly observed previous to a Jew Marriage — A Jew Wedding fully described, with necessary Elucidations. Page 33 
CHAP. VI 
W 
ly grows tired of the young Jewess— — a great Coquet; her Father a Cheat — Our Hero determines to dissolve the conne6tion — His Artisices to blind the Jew — Succeeds and departs for 'Italy, 
CHAP. VII ' 
Lands at Leghorn — traverses Italy — Account of Genoa — Engages with a mistress— — her — Goes to Sicily — Singular' Anecdotes — Goes to Ghozzo — Remarkable 
I IV ] 
markable Industry of the Inhabitants of that Place. Page 42 
CHAP. VIII 
Goes to Malta -- -- Debauchery of the 
Knights — Town of Catania built with remarkable Materials — Singular Instance of Constancy — Italian Proverb — A Lady 
wants to engage Mr. M -- -- guc as lier 
Cecisheo — Reje(sbs the Overture. 52 
CHAP. IX 
consequences of our hero’s Delicacy— — a Duel — The Lady designs to 
poison Mr. M- -- — He is apprized 
of her Intentions, which determines him to quit Italy. 58 
CHAR X 
Embarks for Confianiimtple — Sees the Fiery Mountain Stromhoh — Sails between Scylla 
and 
[ V ] 
Cbaryidis — Corfu — Zente — Pursued by a 
Pirate — Cerigc — 6’cd, c- -- at; 
Rhodojfo — Proceeds to Conjiantinople in a scurkijh Qo2l<: h.. Page 61 
CHAP. XII 
Description of Conjiantinople — Different Colours worn as Mourning by different Nations — The reason and Meaning thereof — Slave Market — Is cordially received ■ by the Grand Signior — Is made an Aga, and has Permission to marry a Lurkijb Lady. 
C H A F. xm. 
Mr. M — — gue marries a Turkish Lady ^ Particular Description of the Ceremonies uled at a Lurkijh Wedding. yg,. 
CHAP. XIV 
His wise dies — Goes to Greece — Description of the Grecian i.adies — Mount Ida., 
Candia 
[ 
Vl 
] 
Candia or Crete — Whimsical Vanity of the Ladies of inaxia — Marries a Greek Girl — Ceremonies used at the Marriages of the Greeks Athens., c. Page 79 
C H A P. XV 
Settles at conflantinople aa\% Seraglio goes to Egypt — His Journey not political — Description of Egypt^grand Cairoy 
c. 
CHAP. XVI 
91 
Goes to the Lake of Natrum, and the Lake of Petrified Ships — Fallacy of a common Notion -- -- -- A Monkish Story 
Engages in Some Amours — Goes to Suez with a Caravan— — Method of Fishing -- Dolphins- -- Deception 
— Crocodiles — Artificial Method of hatching Chickens. 98 
CHAP. 
[ VII ] 
CHAP. XVII 
Goes to England — His Mother dies — Takes Pofiession of his large Fortune — His Enmity to Lord B -- -- -. Returns to Con 
Jiantinoph — Assumes the Armenian Habit — Description of that Habit. 
Page no 
CHAP. XVIII 
Makes the Tour of Perjia — Description of Perjia — Of Ifpahan — Intrigues with a Persian Lady — Combustible Earth — Capitation Tax -- -- Falls in Love with a 
circajjian Lady — Marries her — Marriage Ceremonies in Perjia. 11 ^ 
CHAP. XIX 
Goes to Arabia — Character of the Arahs.^ and Description of Arabia — Banyans ridiculous Notions — Customs of the Women 
t 
vlli 
men — A curious Intrigue — Mr. M — gue is apprehended and carried before the Governor. Page 125 
CHAP. XX 
The whimsical Charge against Mr. M 
gue — The Alternative offered him — Is married to the Arabian Lady — escapes from Arabia 13^ 
CHAP. XXL 
A Journey from Grmd Cairo to the written Mountains in the desert of Sinai, performed and written by E. W. M -- -- 
gue, esq. 139 
CHAP. XXII 
Mr. Sharp's Char after of our Hero — His Health declines — Determines to revisit England — A Scheme to disappoint his Relations — Advertises for a Wife — Dies at Venice. 170 
THE 
M E M O I R S 
OF THE LAT E 
f 
Mr. W -- -- XY M -- TAGUE. 
C H A P. J. 
spoung W -- -- -- ly’.f pr&grefs in his Studies — 
Meets a young wajiserwoman in the Park — Addrejfes her — "Has frequent Interviews with 'her— — her privately. — The Affair is discovered by his Relations — They send her into the Country upon an Annuity., and Em AO the Continent. ^ 
II 
Young W -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- ly’s private tuition answered 
the most Sanguine wishes of his relations an friends. His preceptors took .uncommon .pains with ^ genius naturally voltll. B bright 


2 ] 
bright and penetrating, and he repaid their assiduity by an improvement and perse verance in study little expected Srom one of his volatile turn of mind. — ‘in fine she happily blended the polite arts with the more abstracted Sciences and Solid parts of phi losophy, and gave the Sairest promise of ‘becoming the complete gentleman. 
One evening as he was taking his usua! 'Walk in the Park, a young woman tripped shy him with great Seeming expedition.. 
The Symmetry of her shape and her nim shleness, attradled his notice he redoubled his haste to get again besore her that he might have an opportunity of observing her countenance. 
He Soon overtook her, and viewed her with admiration. She blushed on rvotieing 
toe 
[ 3 ] 
the earnestness of his looks. The crimson glow of modesty which overspread her cheeks, gave an additional charm to her native beauty. 
Her features were regular; her complexion to the last degree lovely; while the brilliancy of her eyes, and ruddiness of her cheeks bespoke, both health and vivacity. 
She appeared to have been but little used •to‘company, or the addresses of men, by her manifest confusion, and Seemed by the simplicity of her dress, which was extremely plain, tho’ exceedingly neat, not to be above the ordinary rank. 
He determined to enter into conversation with her. At first she appeared very coy, but at length gave him pertinent answers to every question he alked. 
B 2 
From 
[ 4 ] 
From the conversation he had with her, he found that she was only the daughter of .a washerwoman; that her mother, who was a widow, had Sufficient business to enable them to live comfortably; that she assisted her mother, and was going to Pimlico to fetch a gentleman’s linen for whom they washed. 
ttle would fain have engaged her to meet him again, but this she absolutely refused, alleging that she would do nothing without the knowledge of her mother; she however at length agreed that he should call upon her, and gave him her address accordingly. 
He frequently visited her, and having gained upon her affections, made Several flattering proposals to Seduce her from her virtue. But he found his endeavours in vain; she had too much modesty to be[ 
[ ] 
come the victim of his artifices, and her mother too much affection for her child, as well as vigilance, not to prevent his success by any illicit means. 
A negative he had never expected was a double stimulative to his disposition, naturally amorous and impatient; the obstacles thrown in his way, encreased the flame that began to consume him. 
He determined to enjoy the fair Patty, for that was our juvenile washerwoman’s name, at any rate. He, therefore, mad with his passion and careless of the consequences, proposed marriage. This proposal was joyfully received both by mother and daughter, and the only stipulations which his Small remains of prudence Suggested, were to keep the affair a Secret still he became of age, as the publication of Such a Secret B 3 might 
[ 6 ] 
might materially affect his future fortune. 
This restridion was acceded to by both, for political reasons, as they imagined that the marriage being known would be the means of hurting both him and themselves. 
Our hero was not only become a poet, but a mighty essayist, and having quitted his bed one morning much earlier than usual, he Spent about an hour in penning an Essay on Prudence., then dressed himself, and repaired to his pretty washerwoman, with an intent to commit one of the most Imprudent actions he had ever done in his life, for he immediately took her to the Fleet and married her. 
Tho’ both mother and daughter had promised, and indeed knew it to be their 
interest, 
[ 7 ] 
interest, to keep this indiscreet step of our hero’s a Secret; yet it did not remain long So. 
The old woman, who was always fond of exhilirating her Spirits, and cherishing her heart with a vivifying cordial in Secret, thought upon her daughter’s good fortune, that she could not be too bountiful in regaling her neighbours, and pouring forth her thanks in copious libations to Bacchus. 
'One day, in the fulness of her joy, and plenitude of her cups, she could not forbear communicating her happiness to Some of her most particular associates. She informed them not only of her daughter’s Secret marriage, but of our hero’s rank, family, and expedancies. 
This information, instead of giving pleasure, raised the envy of her neighbours; 
B 4 without 
I 
[ 8 ] 
without considering her hospitality, they hated her for her good fortune, and most of them having daughters, could not without figliing see the success of poor Patty. Such is the caprice of human nature, that our neighbours good Seems our bane. 
On receiving the intelligence, they had promised the old woman the stridlest Secrecy, but as they could not imagine that So unequal a match was concluded with the approbation of our hero’s Samily, they determined it should not long remain a Secret. 
Malice is Seldom dilatory in effedling its purposes; it may therefore be naturally supposed, that young W — ly’s relations and friends were very speedily apprized of his imprudence. 
This information gave them more concern than any of his former follies, as it 
appeared 
[ 9 ] 
appeared irreparable, (the Fleet marriage at that time being good in law, and no re stridtive at having then pasted to prevent the indiscretion of minors.) 
But to preserve as much as possible the dignity of their Samily, and the credit of our hero, they thought proper to enter into a negotiation with our newly exalted washerwoman and her mother, who being threatened, persuaded and promised, and finding what powerful people they had to deal with, at length agreed to relinquish all manner of claim to and upon the young gentleman, to forego his name, preserve the most inviolable Secrecy in future, and retire upon a decent pension into the country. 
these were no Sooner Sent from the metropolis, than they thought proper to dispatch 

[ 10 1 
patch young -- -- -- -- ly to the continent, 
under the condufl of a gentleman every way qualified for So important a charge. 
C H A P. 
11 
CHAP. II 
Pursues every Kind of Pleasure in Paris and enters into several remarkable Societies — Goes to the French Comedy — An Adventure — Its singular Consequences— — his philo fophic Reftgnation te what could not he remedied. ' 
IN Paris our hero launched into every fashionable dishpation, and his tutor’s care and assiduity were too little to restrain him from engaging in all the polite follies, or rather vices, os that celebrated metropolis. 
He became Sfavoir Vivre., belonged to all the Societies then on the Lon.^ and being exceedingly fond of the occult Sciences, entered himsels into a Select association of rosicrucians, who went under the denomination 
[ 12 ] 
nation of the Myjiic Philosophers. These recommended to those os their Society to peruse the most abstruse of the polemic writers, the works of the hermetic philo’ Sophers, and Such authors as Cornelius Agrippa, trismegistus, Friar Bacon, al bertus Magnus, c. What the particulars were relative to this association we cannot tell, but believe from the Slight manner in 
which Mr. M -- -- -- -- gue used to mention it 
in his maturer years, that it promised more than it performed, and only revealed to its disciples a few Secrets that were either futile or dangerous to be put in experiment. 
As it is usual at the French camedie to Sup in the boxes, our hero having been one evening to See the celebrated comedy of [ Tartuffe., and the entertainment of Le Me dedn malgre lui ordered a cold collation. 
The 
1” J 
[ 13 ] 
The moment it was brought in, he perceived in one corner of the box a Smart female, whom he had not before observed. 
Having since his abode in Paris considered politeness as a Science, and studied it even upon Chefterfieldian principles it may be imagined that he could not hesitate to alk the lady to partake of his collation with him. 
He paid her that compliment; she accepted it, (for the French are easy in their manners, and Seldom resuse what is offered with a good grace.) 
Good-humour gave a relish to their entertainment, 
and their conversation was enlivened by repartee. 
aster 
[ H 
After they had * Supped, they Sat very close together till the conclusion of the entertainment, when he offered to accommodate her with his carriage to any place 
she might command. 
She accepted his proposal, but Hipped from him in the crowd, and on his return home he missed his watch, his purse and his pocketbook; he had no doubt but the lady who had partook of his collation, had made free with his property, and his only consolation was, the reflection that he might Send Sufficiently early in the morning to his banker to stop the payment of Some drafts to a considerable amount, which his pocketbook contained. 
* It is the cullom in the French Theatres for the company to sup in the boxes at the Playhouse. 
With 
[ 15 ] 
I 
With this idea he went to bed, but slept ’till it was late in the moriiing, and not having given any previous diredfcion to his Servant overnight to repair to the banker before he was up; on sending, he was informed that cash had already been given for the drasts. 
To curse his folly would avail nothing, he therefore put up with his loss, with a philosophic resignation, and did not in the least repine at what would have chagrined many. 
CHAP. 
[ >6 ] 
CHAP. III 
Goes to the play houfe again; meets the Female that robbed him; intends to Jecure her; frse Jlips away. — Somefurprizing Occurences \ Unravelment of the whole Myjiery. 
Few nights after his late accident our hero again repaired to the playhouse. Curiosity led him to Seat himsels in para difev where he had not been long besore he perceived the very lady to whom he had been So polite, and who had So gratefully rewarded shim. 
He formed the design os having her apprehended. She perceived his intent; and 
* As those in the upper gallery in the English theatres are called The Gods, the upper gallery itself in the French theatres is called Paradise. 
he 
[ 17 1 
he had no Sooner left his Seat, to go in qu^st of Some officers of justice, than she made her escape. 
She however ^ perceived enough to find that he would punish her whenever he met her, though he had not acquainted the Police of the affair. 
This Suggestion led her to keep herstlf private still she could put a Scheme, which her vindictive Spirit had furnished her with, into execution. 
A few nights afterwards our hero heard a loud knocking at his door at a very late hour. 
He looked out of the window and perceived a fiacre very near, and four men at the door. 
* A hackney coach. 
vol. II C 
He 
[ J 
He inquired who they were; they replied musqueteers, and that they must have immediate admittance. 
While he was parleying with them, the landlady, who heard with terror that tremendous name, opened the street door. 
They immediately burst in, and hastening to our hero’s chamber, broke into the room and Seized him without ceremony. 
He demanded the reason of this violent proceeding. 
They only replied that they belonged to the Bastile, and had an order from government to apprehend him. 
It was in vain for him to expostulate, for the only answer was, that they must 
obey 
[ I‘9 3 
obey their orders, that he had offended the state, and that their business was to Seize his person and Seal up his effects. 
To resist was impossible, and they prevented him Srom crying, out by gagging, him. 
Then dragging him to the fiacre, two of them confined him there, while the o thers were busied in Sealing up his effects, as they pretended. 
When they had effected' their purpose, they all four drove away in the coach with him; but before they had gone far had the precaution to blindfold himi. 
Having drove for a considerable time,, they at length stopped, and, taking him out of the fiacre, led him he knew not whither. 
C 2 
They 
r 20 j 
They now boundshim fast to Something.; he entreated to know the reason of his commitment, if they could inform him. 
A tdength one of them ashed him df he had not lately lost a pocketbook. 
He replied in the affirmative, at the same time telling them, that he had not only lost : his pocketbook but his watch and his money. 
As for the watch and the .'money, returned the person who appeared the most •communicative of the four, we know nothing about it, nor indeed of. the manner in which you, lost the whole;; this we know, that your .pocketbook, by Some means. Sell into the hands of government, who Sound Some offensive papers therein, 
■ which has occasioned.your apprehension., 
.•having 
E 20 j 
Having given him this insormation, they rifled his pockets and left him 
In this dismal situation he began to ruminate on the misfortune which had befallen him r he recolledled that in his pocketbook there was a Satirical poem, or kind o£jeu d.’ejpit'.^ entitled jioyal Ahfurdities., im which he had Severely lashed Some of the ’ follies to which his most Christian majesty was addicted. 
This he had no doubt was the ofienfivc paper alluded to;. but how it fell into the hands of government, after having had his pocket picked' of it„ he could not conceive. 
Indeed he conjedured that either the person, who had picked his pocket, after taking out the drafts and valuable papers,, had thrawn. it away, and Some per Son find 

ina 
i[ ^2 3 
n'ng it, had, on account of that poerr?, delivered it to the ministry, who'soon came to the knowledge of the author by hrs name being on the cover.of the book, and then‘had ordered shim to be apprehended; or that the lady, who had robbed hirri, finding that unfortunate paper, had thought it prudent to make her peace with the police., by Sacrificing shim to adminifiration. For in the arbitrary government of France, an offence against majesty will fupersede any against the public at large. 
Terrified with the thoughts of being in 'the Bajlile., and wearied with a thousand conjedures, he remained; under the most dismal apprehensions ^dll morning, when he was Surprised at hearing a voice say, tvhat do you do here? 
The absurdity of this interrogatory puzzled him exceedingly, more particularly as 
she[ 
[ ] 
he thought the person who uttered it, as one belonging to the prison, must know that he was gagged, and consequently unable to answer it. 
At length the bandage was taken from his eyes; and to his amazement, instead of the dismal walls of a goal to circumscribe his view, he beheld the glorious expanse of the heavens above his head, and a number of fniit trees around him; and inlieu of an inhuman goaler with a horrid aspedl, he Saw a peasant, with the Smiles of innocence on his countenance, who appeared to enjoy the Singularity of his situation, and to be laughing at him 
He pointed to his'mouth, the good-natured countryman conceived his meaning, and immediately released him from the 
, gs 
C 4 
As 
[ n ] 
As Soon as he had a little recovered Srom his Surprise, and brought his jaws, which, had been terribly distended, into Some degree of composure, he exclaimed in his turn, “where am 1, and who brought me “here?’" 
“As to where you are, ” replied the peasant, “I can inform you; you are tied to “a pear tree in my orchard, from which “confinement i’ll now release you, but “as to who brought you here, I can’t tell, ‘‘ unless the Devil was concerned in it.” 
Our hero let the peasant know as much of the affair as he thought proper; — the poor fellow took him into his cottage, and refreshed him with all the place could afford; he then conduced him towards Paris, which was at the distance of about a 
league. 
w — ly. 
C 25 1 
W -- -- -- ly, who was naturally generous, 
took him home to reward his hospitality. 
When he came there, he found his tutor under the utmost concern for him; being alarmed by the dismal account he had received from the landlady. 
W -- -- -- ^ly, having been stripped of all 
his money, borrowed Sufficient of his tutor to reward the peasant amply, who returned home perfectly well Satisfied. 
Our hero, on examining, found that these gentry, instead of carefully Sealing up his effects, had plundered him of everything valuable. 
The whole mystery was now unriddled; he easily conceived the bottom of the affair, for'it'was evident that these sham 
musqueteers 
I 2.6 3 
inusqueteers were emissaries and accomplices of the lady who had So dextroussy picked his pocket; by the direction on his pocketbook they Sound out the place of his residence, and the libel before mentioned gave them the idea, as a colourable pretext of Seizing his person in order to make them selves masters of his effedfs, by pretending to be officers of the Bastile, and accusing him of treasonable practises. 
C HAP. 
S ^7 1 
CHAP. IV 
Determines not to apprise the Police of the Affair — Sends for Remittances from England — Goes hy Land to Holland — Items to the Reader — Falls in Love with a Toung Jewess— — Marriage agreed upon, 
Notwithstanding his accumulated and great Ioffes, he determined not to .apprise the, P£!//V^ of his misfortunes. 
The artifices of this courtesan, and the resolution of her mjrmidons, were too fresh in his memory to permit him to entertain any idea of redress; for he had ino doubt, but was she to attempt to stir in tlte affair, assassination would be the inevitable consequence; and being released from the .terrors of the Bastile, Seemed a Solitary con xolation for his heavy Ioffes. 
He 
t 28 J 
He wtote to England for remittances and letters of credit upon Holland, determining to visit that place before he went to Italy, for he now began to grow dis gusted with France, 
As Soon ’ as his remittances arrived, he' Set off by land; nothing material happened during his journey, at least nothing worth relating, and the places thro’ whicte he pasted, have been So frequently and accurately described, that it is unnecessary to mention them. Nor shall we in the eourse of this work copy the trite sentii ments of other travellers, or the hackneyed descriptions of well known places;, which are to be found in other authors. We neither write as geographers, ichno graphers or navigators, but mean to present our readers with the most remarkable adventures which befell this Singular per 
r 
T =9 ] 
ssfonage, and at the Same time not to omit anything curious relative to the countries •thro’ which he travelled. 
According to our plan, therefore, as Holland is a country So univcrsally well ■ known, we shall not trouble the reader ’- with any prolis narrations or local descriptions, but pass to the only adventure worthy of record, which besel him during Jiis residence in the United Provinces, 
At Amjierdam he became, intimate with a Jew broker who transaded business for him. 
This broker had a daughter, who, tho’ a brunette, possessed the most regular Sec of Seatures imaginable, 
'yes. 
and had killing 
'She 
C 30 J 
She was vivacious and witty, but' verjr positive, and mighty fond of the ceremonials' of the Mosaic law, 
/ 
The charms of pretty Judith,, for So was our jewess named. Soon awakened all that was amorous in the composition of our hero.. 
At first, as usuaj, he attempted Seduction, but his artifices not Succeeding, he proposed marriage. This mode of proceeding Seems to have been our. hero’s invariable conduct through'' the whole of his eccentric life. 
Judith, knowing his rank and fortune, was proud of her conquest, and fond of his proposal, as she could not be indifferent to his person and accomplishments. 

f 31 1 
It is true, she was Scarce turned of thirteen years os age, but that made no difference to either. For, as on his part, youth could be no objection to a voluptuary; So on her’s, the want of a lover appeared more terrible than want of years. 
Nor could her juvenality be any impediment in the sight of her father; for, (by the laws of the Sfalmud) the Sons of Jews are allowed to marry at eighteen, and the daughters, when they have completed twelve years and a day. 
When the affair was proposed to the broker, he could not but be highly flattered by Such an overture from a person 
of W -- -- -- ly’s family; but yet, interesting 
as the prospedl might appear, he had Some reludfance to the idea of bestowing his daughter on one of the uncircumcised. But 
as 
[ 3^ ] 
fls W -- -- ly’s flame was not So intense as to 
engage him to undergo the operation, he absolutely refused to hear the affair mentioned, and the old Jew, Swayed by motives of avarice, at length agreed to waive So disagreeable a proposition, and to accede to the nuptials. 
C II A P. 
[ 33 1 
C H A P. V 
Agrees to he married according to the Ceremonial of the Jews— — solemnly observed previous to a Jew Marriage — A Jew Wedding fully described, with necejfary Elucidations. 
ONE stipulation, however, the old Jew insisted upon, which was, that our hero should consent to be married aster the Jewish cerenwniau and not according to the Chrijiian ritual. 
To this W -- -- ly had no objection;; 
fondness of novelty, without any other motive, would have induced him to come into the proposal; but in he well knew that he was legally married to his pretty washerwoman, and that it was immaterial by what ceremony he joined himfcls to any vol. II D other 
r 34 T 
other woman. Add to this, he had no very delicate notions of moral rectitude; his passion was sensual; he wished to enjoy our pretty jewess, and left to her and her father to fix upon the form by which he was to obtain the gratification of Isis desires. 
The preliminaries being fettled, the nuptial ceremony was Soon aster performed. 
As there is Something very curious in a Jew marriage and as many of our readers may be unacquainted with that ceremony, we shall present them with an account of it. 
Previous to the marriage. Several of the friends meet in a convenient place, each having in his band an earthen vessel; the contract is then read, notice given of the, (ay of marriage, and a declaration made,. 
that 
[ SS ] 
that the party who shall not stand to what is agreed, is to pay to the other a Stipulated Sum. 
Then wishing happiness to each other, the young Jews throw their vessels upon the ground, concluding (as the Jews say) that the breaking of them portends plenty znd good fortune. But we are rather inclined to think, that this part of the ceremony is an emblem of the Srailty of our worldly purposes and delights. 
On their departure a person at the door presents every one with a glass of wine, and Some comfits. This is emblematic of chearfulness and plenty. 
•he that is to bless the marrias e, takes a glass of wine, and having given it his benedidion, presents it to the married D 2 couple 
I 36 ] 
couple to drink •, thists to Signify that wc owe a grateful acknowledgment.df all our plenty to the bounty of the Almighty The young couple then must not stir a broad for eight days, during which space their friends are, however, permitted to visit and make merry with them. 
The day previous to the marriage, the Vv'onian is put into a bath of cold water, by the rest of her sex, who make a hideous noise while they are bathing her. 
The bridegroom then sends a matrimonial girdle to che.bride, with a gold buckle; the bride returns a similar present, with this difference, that the buckle is stiver, this signifies that the man does more honour to the woman by taking her to be his wife, than she does to him, by admit tins him to be her lord and .mailer. 
On 
r 37 ]■ 
On the nuptial day, the bride is con diidled to a chamber appointed' for thaf plirpose, by women who sing and dance before her, for a double motive.; as they look upon Such chearfulness to be both acceptable to God, and a preventative of gloominess or low Spirits, which would appear as bad omens. 
When the bridegroom is to receive the benediction, four young men carry a ca: nopy into a garden or open place, beneath which the Solemnity is performed. 
The bridegroom, accompanied by the males, and the bride by the females, preceded by music, meet under the canopy; every one Saying, “Bkjfed he hd thap 
comethv 
D 3 
71'.< 
t 
The biidegroom then, walks three times round the bride, .and takes her by the Land. 
The company then Scatter corn on them both, repeating at the Same time the Scripture phrase, crefcite Cf muuiplicamini^ that is, increase and multiply.. Hence probably arose the custom of having bride cakes among Christians. 
The whole is allegorical 
of an increase both in children and Substance. 
The bride then holds the'bridegroom by the right hand, and turns her face to the South, or to the meridian Sun, wshich is the emblem os genial and procreative power. 
The rabbi then taking a glass of ■and rehearsing the mahzor prayers. 
wine, 
gives 
it 

t 39 3 
it to the married couple to drink; if the bride is a virgin, he gives her a narrow glass; if a widow, a wide one. Then receiving a plain gold ring, the rahhi alks if it is gold; on being answered in the affirmative, he [puts it on the bride’s Second finger, and reads the marriage contrail:. 
Then taking another glass of wine, and giving thanks to God, that the new married couple have plighted their troth, he presents it them to drink again; the bridegroom having drank,, throws the glass with all his force against the wall or ground, in order to break it, in remembrance of the destruction of Jerusalem. 
Then black caps are placed on both their heads, to show they are affiidted for the destrudlion of the lemple t even i n their greatest rejoicings. 
D 4 
Being 
. E 40 I 
Being led to a banquet, the bridegroom sings a kind of hymn, then an egg and a hen, ready dressed, are Set besore him; ' he prescnts a Small piece to his bride, and immediately the company Scramble for the rest, and whoever gets the largest piece, is esteemed the most fortunate. 
The egg is then presented to the bride, as prognostic of her bearing children, as easily as the hen her eggs. 
They then sit down to a feast; after which, a dance begins; the noblest person in company takes the bridegroom by the hand; he another, and So the rest still they all join. 
The principal woman takes the bride by the hand, and the rest of the women join, in a similar manner, to the men. Thus 
the 
E 41 J 
the dance is long and confused, and the wedding, or rather the rejoicings, continue eight days. 
CHAP. 
[ 42 ] 
CHAP. VI 
/ 
IV — ly grows tired of the Young Jewtfs^ Judithy a great Coquet — Her Father a Cheat — Our Hero determines to dissolve the Connefiion — His Artifices to blind thejew^ Succeeds and departs for Italy. 
j^ur hero for Some time was passionately fond os his young bride, but at length his natural volatility and fickle ness prevailed, and he grew Satiated with the enjoyment of that to which he found no obstacle. 
Beauty soon grows familiar to the lover, 
“Fades in his eye, and palls upon the feafe.’* 
As her attraffions were only personal, So shis passion was not permanent. Besides he •shortly found Some real occasions of disgust: 
Judith 
t 43 1 
Judith was an absolute coquet, and the broker an egregious sharper. So that he perceived he was likely, in a short time, to have his head furnished by the daughter, while his pockets were unfurnished by the father. He determined, therefore, to put an end to a connexion from which he began to receive no pleasure, but knew he should Sustain great loss. 
But it behoved him to proceed with ^reat caution; the old Jew was crafty, and from being naturally a rogue, was naturally suspicious. 
He, therefore, .pretended that himscif and his w’ife were an encumbrance to the broker, besides not being Sufficiently ac -- eommodated them Selves; to remedy which, he took a genteel house, furnished it, and took his wife home. 
He 
J 
E 44 ] 
■ I 
He then, with as much precaution as? possible, drew his cash and notes out of the jew’s hands; not but the broker, though he deemed him his Son in law, made him pay Severely for having ever put any confidence in him. 
In a short time,, under a pretence of being obliged to attend on his friends in England, relative to Some affairs of the utmost consequence, he shipped his money and the principal os his effects. The youth and inexperience of Judith not permitting her to make Such shrewd observations on his conduct as her Sather, had he been in the Same house, would probably have done. Nor, indeed, as she was indulged in every pleasure and amusement, did she, in the least, suspeft his design. 
Having 
45 ] 
Having everything on board, which fie thought proper to take, he embarked himself and Set Sail, (not Sor England) as she imagined, but for Italy, leaving the house and Surnicure, with a Sum of money, as a recompense to Judith, for the loss of her fupposed husband, and to make her Some i^mends for his infidelity. 
CHAP. 

I 46 J 
CHAP. VII. 
Lands at Leghorn — Traverses Italy — As count of Genoa — Engages with a Mijirefs — ^ its her — Goes to Sicily — Singular Anec* ' dote — Goes to Ghozzo — remarkahu in dufiry of the Inhabitants of that Place. 
[ E landed at Leghorn, and after staying in that place a short time, where nothing material happened, he traversed the Italian slates, observed what hath been a thousand times observed, and Saw what hath been a thousand times Seen. He was, (as is usual with young travellers) astonished at the Roman antiquities; in raptures with the paintings of the Italian masters; in ecstasies with their music; in admiration of their women, and intoxicated by their wines. 
r 
He 
C 47 I 
He made Some stay at Lenoa.^ which from the Sea he observed, affords one of the finest prospecfls in the world, : as it stands partly on the declivity of a hill, and partly na fiat next to the shore. 
The houses are very lofty, and finely painted on the outside, which gives them a fine and Splendid appearance. 
The Genoese are industrious, cunning,, and more hardy than the rest of the Italians. 
As for jealousy, of which, the italians arc generally accused, the Genoese ought to be exempted from the charge, for their women are allowed as many liberties, and indeed take as many as any Set of people in the world. Hence the Italian poverhy 
which, 
, [ 3 
•which Says, that the “Gencefe have a sea 
without fi(h! land without trees I men with“ “faith I and women without Shame WHERE 
our hero was not under any necessity of using the arts of fedudion, or making matrimonial proposals. 
Money Soon procured him a mistress;; was beautiful and witty, but licentious in her principles, and disagreeablc in her 
temper. So that Mr. M -- -- -- -- gue Soon grew 
tired of her; For tho’ she took whatever freedoms she thought proper, without the least modest consideration, she was jealous of him to an excess, and So exceedingly capricious, that he determined to free himself from the uneasiness she gave him, by quitting the place. 
He proceeded to Sicilyand traversed the whole of that territory. He Sound the 
Sicilians 
[ 49 ] 
Sicilians polite, courteous, Sond of magnisi -- cence, and generous, but vindictive to the last degree; to evince which, the following fact will be Sufficient. For the Spirit of the modern Sicilians greatly resembles that of their ancestors. 
In the reign of the emperor Charles the Vth, a Society was formed at Trapam., under the title of the Society of St. Paclo; the members of which made a vow to take cognizance not only of the proceedings of their neighbours, and the lower order of the inhabitants of the town, but even of their magistrates and nobility. 
Whoever was condemned by this Society, was certain of death; for one of the members was deputed to assassinate the obnoxious party, and the person So chosen to the office of murderer, was obliged, without vol. II E any 
[ 3 
any excuse, privately to destroy the persohj So clandestinely condemned. 
The women of Sicily are beautisul, amorous, and exceedingly fruitful, for Some of them have been known to have had three or four and twenty children, 
Sicily is likewise deemed the granary of Europe, being, perhaps, the richest place ior grain in the universe. 
From Sidly our hero Sailed in a little bark, manned by one helm man and two rowers, to theifie os Ghozzo. There vessels, tho’ very Small, and Seemingly dangerous, are the Safest in the Mediterranean., as by their swiftness they escape pirates, and by their lightness are Secure from the waves. 
Ghozzoj of itself is a barren hard rock, but is well cultivated, by the most indesa 
tigable 

[ 5- 3 
tigable industry; Sor the upper crust is beaten off, pounded with immense labour, and converted into an excellent Soil. Nof does che husbandman envy the fertility of Sicily; if he can but marry an Arabian beauty, and eat his sill of white onions and garlic, he is careless of intense labour, and thinks himself complete happy. — — Would to Heaven every rational creature could So easily content himself in his st tuation !' 

E 2 
CHAP. 
t 52 1 
CHAP. VIII 
Goes to Malta — Debauchery of the Knights— — ^ of Catania fuilt with remarkable Materials — Singular Injlance of Constancy— —. Proverb — A Lady wants to engage 
Mr. M -- -- gue as her cecijheo^rejeks 
the Overture. 
proceeding to Malta., he Sound that issand cultivated much in the Same manner as Ghozzo. 
The Knights of Malta have rendered the manners of the inhabitants So depraved, that there is Scarce an honest Semale in the whole issand, except what belong to the Sailors. For these fellows, who are ready to Sacrifice their blood Sor the Sake of religion, and to do anything for the interest of the gf^and majier.i are nevertheless extremely 
[ 53 I 
tremely tenacious os the honour of their wives and daughters; if, therefore, any female belonging to them, is forced or decoyed from them, the Seducer is Sure of death. The women belonging to all the other inhabitants are at their disposal., 
The town os Catania at the foot of mount Etna., which was destroyed by the dreadful earthquake in 1693, is now rebuilding, not with stone or brick, but with the diso; or; CD from the mouth of that tremendous mountain. The streets are regular, but the houses low, in order the better to Sustain the shock of any future earthquake. Our hero Sent Some pieces of tyre lavci to the royal Society, and the British Mujeum, in which latter repository they may, at any time, be Seen by the curious,. 
The Sollowing anecdote is related as a, at Palermo. “A prince of one of the 
E 3 first 
[ 54 ] 
“first Samilies, had a Secret connedlion with “a Single lady, who was his equal in rank; 
at length he married her, but two months “after marriage, she was delivered of a “Son; from a motive of shame, the parents “determined to dervy the child, and to trust “its education to a peasant. 
This was Lept a Secret ’rill the mother, on her deathbed, discovered it. The youth being Sent Sor, showed more siirprise than joy, on being informed of his rank; but declared, that unless he was permitted to marry a young country girl, with whom he was in love, he would not accept of any advantage they might offer him. This article being denied him, he willingly resigned his claims, in favour of his brother, returned to the country, and lived happily with the object of his heart, in the station in which 
he 
ti 
CC 

(( 
<4 
«( 
[ 55 !■ 
t 
'che had been brought up.” A rare example os constancy! and worthy of imitation. Our hero made it his business to visit this happy couple, at their little town, and was mightily pleased with their apparent conjugal felicity. 
Our hero observed, that tho’ the power of the Pope was greatly on the decline, and his dominion in Italy considerably circumscribed, yet the ecdesiastical patrimony is exceedingly Sruitful and rich, which gives rlse to the Italian Saying, “That the Pepe Pas the jiejlo., and the great Duke of Tufeany “the hones of Italy V 
At Naples a very fine lady would willingly have engaged him as her Cecijheo. That is, .(as an obsequious gallant) to play with her, and iose what money She thinks proper to win; to be at a thousand expenses, in order 
to 
'E 4 
[ 5® I ’ 
to indulge her caprices; to murder all his time in her Service, escort her to every place of public resort, and privately to administer to her libidinous pleasures. 
This lady was the wife os a principal Neapolitan nobleman. For the ladies in Italy are permitted, by their husbands, to entertain lovers of this character. Custom hath established this infamous practice; the women look upon it as one of their privileges, and the men are So afraid of offending against So prevalent a fashion, that they quietly acquiesce with their dishonour, and even caress their wives gallants. 
Our hero however thought proper to reject the favour designed him; tho’ he was not over delicate in his amours, yet he had too much Sentiment to bear the idea of dividing the affections of a woman with another, or 
sharing 
f 57 ] 
sharing her persona! charms with a rivalv however that rival migiit be entitled to her principal consideration. ^ 
Nor could he bear the thoughts of having his liberty So much abridged, as Such a piece of gallantry would have rendered necessary. 
He loved to pursoe pleasure, not to be pursued by it; nor, however pleasing Such customs may be to the Italiane, could he approve of being a stave, at all times, to the satissadlion of another, when, perhaps his own inclinations pointed a different way. 
CHAR 
f 58 3 
C H A P. IX 
€ion[equences of our Herd's Delicacy — Fights a Duel — Lhe Lady dejigns to poison Mr, M — — gue — He is apprized of her Intensions., which determines him to quit Italy, 
OUR hero’s delicacy, however, in re jedling the overtures of the Italian lady, had very near cost him his life. For the hufoand took it as a signal affront., that any man should have the insolence to resuse becoming the cecisheo osa lady of his wife’s rank and distinguished beauty; he, therefore, Sent him a formal challenge upon the occasion. 
Our hero was furprised at the unaccountable humour of these people, and that the manners of even polished nations should she So diametrically opposite to each other. 
'' - ' In 
I 59 ] 
In England, Holland, France, Germany, and Spain, if one man attempts the honour of another’s wise, he runs the hazard of having his throat cut; but in Italy if you refuse to cuckold a man, according to the polite custom of the place, you are liable to be run thro’the body, even by the lius band himself. 
Our hero, who was not deficient in personal courage, accepted the challenge, the parties met, sought, and the husband was disarmed. Thus fortune decided, that his brow should not be equipped either by laurels or horns, at least upon that occasion; as doubtless, from the natural temperature of the lady, it is reasonable to suppose, that he did not die without the latter dignity. 
The lady was greatly exasperated to be disappointed both in her desires and revenge. 
I 
C ] 
Venge, and therefore determined (according to the Italian mode) to take off our hero by poison; of this intention he was Secretly apprized by a Sriend, which determined him to leave, with all possible expedition, a place where the inhabitants were So absurd in their notions, and So litigious and revengeful in their tempers. 
For the bigness of the place, there are, perhaps, more lawyers in Naples than any other part of the world; a certain proof of the litigious spirit of the people. It is asserted, that when Pope Innocent XI had desired the Marquis' de Carpioy the viceroy at Naples, to furnish him with 30, 000 head of swine, the Marquis replied, that with respect to his swine, h could not spare them; but if his holiness had occa fjon for 30, 000 lawyers, they were at his service. 
CHAP. 
T ] 
CHAP. X 
e77tharks for Constantinople — Sees the fiery Mountain Strombolo — Sails between scyjla m.d. Charybdis — Corfu — Zante — Pursued by a Pirate — Cerigo — Scio, t^c. — Lands at Rhodosto — Proceeds to Conjiantinople in a Lurkijh Coach. 
jur hero embarked at Naples as Soon as he conveniently could, in order to Sail Sor Cmftantinople., as he could no longer repress his ardent desire to See that celebrated city, which he used to term his paternal metropolis. 
The ensuing night he was called, upon deck, to See the famous Stromboloa mountain which stands in the Sea, like a Sugar loaf, and emits continual flames from its Summit. At Sea it appears even more terrible than either Vesuvius or Etna, 
They 
I 62 J 
They then steered between the celebrated rocks of fcylia and Charybdis, which are not near So dangerous as they have been formerly represented; indeed every place and circumstance which have been described. by the ancients prove that writers as well as poets have exaggerated. 
They passed Corfu., and steered towards zante', an issand famous for two remarkable fountains of piteh. 
» 
Here they were pursued by a pirate; for the coasts of Greece and Barbary Swarm with corsairs. This rover did not quit the pursuit hill they reached the first issand of the Archiplago., called Cengo% this was the Cytberea, or Seat of the goddess of beauty, of the ancients. 
From 
[ 63 1. 
From thence they proceeded to' the beautiful ifiand of Scio, one of the reputed birth places of Homer. 
Passing by myteune., they came to Lenedos^^. which is about two leagues distance from the shore of Lroy. 
** An ifle in ancient times, renown’d by fame, 
“Lies full in view, and Tentdos xi\c name : 
“Once blefs’d with wealth, while Prjam held the sway“ 
“now a broken, rough, and dangerous way.” 
Having passed the first castles of the Dardanelles they Soon made the Second, called Sejlos iccaahydos. Abydos being the celebrated place from whence Leander used to Swim across the Hellespont to Sejlos, in. order to See his mistress Hero, by which means he was at length drowned. 
Having 
t 64 ] 
'. Having cast anchor at rhcdojloi a cky .about sixty miles from Constantinople, our shero landed, and pursued the remainder of his journey in a Turkish coach, which he shired for that purpose. these coaches are ^covered with Scarlet cloth, and painted of lively colours on the outside, besides being embellished by a variety of beautiful flowers, painted on a gold and Silver ground intermixed; they are long, like a hearse,, and without Seats; instead of doors or glasses, they have painted lattices, and are entered by the means of a ladder. 
At length our hero entered that famous city, where his mother had enjoyed So much felicity. 
Lady Mary had been So attentive and minute an observer, that our hero found very little worth noticing, but what she 
had 
[ % ] 
had made Some observations upon, and ^ those were So accurate and just, that in his own minutes he had Scarce anything to add. 
vol. II 
F 
CH AK 
t 66 ] 
CHAP. XII 
Description of Constantinople — Different co lours worn as Mournings by different Nations — Lhe Reason and Meaning thereof — Slave Market — Is cordially received by the Grand Signior — Is made an Aga — And has Permission to marry a Purkijh Lady. 
\onfiantincple is one of the largest, and at the Same time best situated cities in the world; it is supposed to contain about 800, 000 Souls, and would be still more populous, did not the arbitrary Spirit of the government prevent it. 
The streets are paved and tolerably clean. The houses are but of wood or plaster, and make but an indifferent outside appearance, but are convenient, and Sometimes richly embellished within. 
The 
[ 6; ] 
The inhabitants are clean, and well dres ^ fed; the different occupations are distinguished by a variety of turbans, every one’s profession being known by the turban he wears. 
The markets are plentifully Supplied, and the best regulated in the world, which is owing to their being inspefled by the Grand Vizier himself, at certain times, 
Their police is excellent, perhaps the best in the universe. They have very few physicians here, fewer apothecaries, and no Surgeons at all, 
f 
They ad in direct opposition to the European customs, in many particulars; thus they Sit, lay, cat, and even write low, we high. 
F 
Theif. 
[ 68 ] 
Their clothes are long; ours short. * 
They have many wives, and many mis treffes allowed them by law. The law allows us but one wife and no mistress; how -- ever, that does not prevent many, who call themselves Christians, Srom making their will their law. ^ 
Our potentates send ambassadors to each other. The Grand Signior Sends none. 
We have many public prostitutes; they none; but it must be admitted, that no part of the world contains more libidinous females, or a greater number of private demireps. 
Their dead they carry out head foremost. We carry ours out feet foremost. 
When 
[ &9 J 
wh^n we mourn Sor the dead, we wear black. They wear blue or violet colour; indeed in this particular many countries differ. For in China their mourning is white, in dg'jyp/yellow, n Ethiopia while kings and cardinals mourn in purple. Indeed all these colours appear to be allegorical, for black being a privation os lights expresses the darkness of the grave; white denotes purity., and is typical of the fousts being freed from the dross of the body; him the colour of the Sky, fignisses the hap piness, we hope, the deceased enjoys in heaven; yellow alludes to the leaves of the trees, which become of that colour when they fall to. the ground; brown denotes the earth, whither the dead return; and purple expresses both sorrow and hope, being a mixture of black and blue. 
The stave market is in the middle of the city; it is a quadrangle, Surrounded with F 3 apart 
t 70 ] 
apartments for white staves; the black ones sit underneath. these latter are almost naked, but the white female staves, when shown for Sale, are handsomely dressed in blue, black or crimson velvet, embroidered. 
Our hero having made known who he was, easily obtained the honour of being introduced to the Grand Signior, by whom he was most cordially received, and treated with greater familiarity and affection, than was ever before experienced by any Christian. The reason must be obvious to any intelligent reader, when it is understood that the Grand Signior, to whom our hero was introduced, was the Son of him who ruled the Ottoman empire at the time lady M — y was at Constantinople; he, therefore, without any manner of doubt, beheld him with 
a kind of fraternal regard. 

I. 
The 
[ 71 ] 
The Grand Signior, as a proof of his affection, immediately created him an Aga which word implies commander. Thus the Aga of the Janizaries is their colonel, and the capi aga^ the captain of the gate of the Seraglio, But the title of Aga is frequently given by way of courtesy, as an honorary appellative, which was the cafe upon the present occasion. 
This was not the only favour, for he gave him permishon to marry a Turkish lady, if he thought proper; a favour never before granted to any Christian, for it is death by the Mahometan law, for a Christian even to cohabit with a Turkish woman. 
The titulary honour of Aga was less pleasing to our hero, than the permishon to F 4 marry 
[ 72 j 
marry a Turkish lady, of which he was very desirous, both from the native warmth of his disposition, and from motives of piiriosity, 
C H A p, 
[ 73 3 
i CHAP. XIII 
Mr. M — gue marries a Lurkijh Lady ^par ^ ticular Pefcription of the Ceremonies ujed at a Lurkijh Weddings ic. 
R. M -- -- gue Soon made use of the 
Grand signior’s permission, by entering 
into a matrimonial negotiation with a rich Emir, who had a daughter remarkable for her Singular beauty, and every accomplishment which the politest oriental education could bestow. 
The marriage being concluded on, the nuptials were persormed with great pomp. To gratify the reader’s curiosity, we shall describe the various ceremonies used at Turkish weddings.. 
In the first place, the friends on both Sides meet to Settle what dowty the husband is 
to 
I 74 ] 
to give his intended wife; for the parents * give nothing to their daughters. This renders a woman desirable only for herself. For on the contrary, he that has no other consideration for a woman in marriage than what she has, will Seldom regard what she is. 
The Sum being agreed upon, it is Sent to the father, or next relation. The bride continues covered eight days before marriage; on the wedding day she bathes, and 
* The following is an exact translation of a Turldlh song, which seems to Satirise the breach of the above custom“ 
“was a man had a daughter, whom he brought up to Spinning, and also he married her, “in hopes, that both by her work and her marriage, (he would enrich his family; but he found by experience, that (he Spent the price of her la 1, bour before ftie had earned it, and that her huf “band being poor, had Iain with her for nothing.” 
is 
[ 75 ] 
is washed by two or three women, with great form; nay. So Solemn is this bathing, that her nearest relations walk before her to the bath, with lighted torches in their hands. 
To make the bride’s hair red, which they look upon as the most, glorious colour, they Sprinkle it with a dust called elcana. They likewise make her nails, the palms of lier hands, her Seet and her heels red. 
Tshe nuptial day being come, the bridegroom Sends a present to the cadis; then the fagoisy or manager of the nuptials, accompanied by all the guests with musical instruments, goes to the bride’s house, where he and the company with him, are entreated to sit down. 
aster a banquet, the bride’s father takes her by the hand, and delivers her to the 
afois. 
[ 76 1 
fagoisy which Seems to intimate, that nature ought to Submit to policy; for the father Surrenders her to the magistrate, who becomes her civil parent, and disposes of her. 
The fagois then Sets her on horseback, and carries her to the bridegroom’s house; the guests follow, and are Succeeded by carts and horses that carry the furniture. 
The bride rides with a veil over her face, and an umbrella over her head, being Surrounded by her Servants, who lament the approaching loss of her virginity. During the cavalcade, she may Salute every one she meets, which Turkish women are never permitted to do but on the day of their marriage. 
When she arrives at the bridegroom’s, he conducts her into a chamber, distindt 
from 
t n ] 
from the rest; after Supper the fagois takes her by the hand, and leads her to the bridegroom’s chamber, and deliver her to the eunuchs, who look aster her still he comes. 
Vfhen he is with her, he takes off her Veil, then the rest of her clothes; she pretending Some resistance. 
The ensuing day the fagois compliments and jokes with the bridegrom, while the bride is taken by her relations to the bath. 
Mr. M" ....■ ■•gue was mighty fond of his 
Turkish wife,? and tho’of an amorous disposition, and naturally prone to change, did not entertain a thought os availing himself of the privilege allowed by the lavrs of that country, which permits a man to marry four lawful wives, and keep as many mis treffes as they can maintain. Nay, a Turk 
may 
[ 78 ] 
i 
may marry his sister, provided he begins with the eldest, (for if he begins with the youngest, he must not marry the others.) 
CH A?. 
[ 79 ] 
CHAP. XIV 
His Wife dies — Goes to Greece — dejcriphon of the Grecian Ladies ^mount Ida — Candia, or Crete — Whimjical Vanity of the Ladies of Nania — Marries a Greek Girl — Ceremonies tifed at the Marriages of the Greeks— — ' ic. 
T 
HE only time that Mr. M -- -- -- -- gue, 
during the course of his life. Seemed inclined to constancy. Fortune appeared determined to cross his laudable inclinations, by depriving him of the beautisul and accomplished Fatima. 
This lady died in childbed, as did the infant of which she was pregnant. 
Our hero was Sensibly affected by this ioss, as he sincerely loved this lady. 
As 
[ 8o i 
As his melancholy grew upon him, and Seemed to injure his health, his friends ad vised him to travel, in order to blunt the edge of affliction. 
This advice he the more readily received as he had always found travelling, not only capable with his natural curiosity, but a certain Specific against melancholy of every kind. 
In pursuance of his resolution, he begged the Grand signior’s permission to part from Constantinople,, 
Sublime highness was unwilling to depart from him, but out of regard to his health, gave him leave to go, and furnished him with proper passports To all parts of his extensive empire. 
His 
[ 8i ] 
His curiosity led him to see all that curious in Greece, and to compare the ruins and miserable state of that now wretched country, with it’s former Splendour and magnificence. 
He visited all the places which are usually visited by strangers, and examined all those remarkable antiquities, which have been So Srequentiy and minutely described by travellers. 
He perceived that the Greek ladies were remarkably handsorne, and that their limbs were Sormed with that beautiful Symmetry of proportion, which is observable in the works of their ancient statuaries. Indeed nothing can be more majestic or lovely than their persons; but to balance their beauty, they are exceedingly ignorant, very proud, 
vol. H. G and 
[ 82 ] 
and very coquettish; not but a kind of natural politeness makes Some amends for their want of the polish of education. 
He had the curiosity to ascend the celebrated mount Ida but was greatly disappointed, for instead of meeting with those beautiful prospedls, which the exaggerated descriptions of the ancients naturally led him to expect', he found it to be nothing but a prodigious large barren rock, without the least landscape to be Seen, to make any amends for the trouble of climbing it. 
After having Seen the famous labyrinth of Gortyna, he proceeded to Candia which ^ city, when in the hands of the Venetians., Sustained a siege by the Lurh., which lasted above twice as long as that of Vroy., that is, from the year 1645 to 1669. 
The 
t 83 ] 
The inhabitants of Candia or Crete as it was anciently called, were always celebrated as excellent archers, and even to this day are Skilled in the use os the bow, as Mr, M — gue Saw upon Several occasions. 
The Greek peasants here wear a red leather cap, a vest, and a pair of blue callicoe drawers, very wide, and So deep behind, as to be ridiculous. In the country they wear short boots of Turkey leather, which are very neat and lasting; but in the towns they wear pumps or Slippers. 
The women wear an upper garment of reddish cloth, full of plaits, with long fieeves, but put on in Such a manner as to leave their breasts naked. 
He then proceeded to Naxia, which is deemed one of the most fertile and agree g 2 able 
C 84 ] 
able islands of the Archipelago; as the country is So pleasant, every one who can afford it keeps a country house. 
As the gentlemen of Naxia frequently retire to their villa’s, it is humorous enough to observe the whimsical vanity of the Greek ladies, who, on retiring to the country, or returning to town, are attended by thirty or forty women. Some on foot. Some mounted upon asses; each of these carries upon her head, or in her hand. Some article of her mistress’s clothes, or of the move able furniture, which is exposed to the view of every one. For instance, one carries a pair of stockings, another a petticoat, a third an earthen dish, c. Thus they enter, the city, the lady riding at the head of the cavalcade, the children in the middle, and the husband on his mule, closing the pompous procession.’ 
After 
[ 85 ] 
After having taken a view of the isse of Paros, which produces the finest marble in 
the world, Mr. M -- -- -- -- gue proceeded to 
Lhermia, which receives it’s name from Some remarkable hot Iprings, with which the issand abounds. 
Here Mr. M -- -- -- -- gue Saw a beautiful 
Greek girl, whose charms easily made an impression on a heart So susceptible of tender emotions, and Seemed at once to banish his melancholy, and obliterate the memory of the lovely Fatima. 
Though the Greeks are not So reserved as the other nations, Subject to the Ottoman Sovereigns, yet their women are modesh ** 
Our pretty Qrecian, therefore, stood upon 
pundiliosa when Mr. M -- -- -- -- gue, not to 
Q 3 lose 
[ 86 ] 
lose time, or have any unnecessary trouble, had recourse to his old maxim, and freely proposed marriage : Matrimony now being So familiar to him, that the most trissing inclination would have induced him to rnar ry almost any woman, on condition it wasj in a country where the law could not take; cognizance of the affair. f 
The most remarkable circumstances in the marriage ceremonies os the Greeks are these. I 
The bride is obliged to let her husband know what fortune she has, and he is under the necessity of acting in the Same candid manner; the men Sitting round a long table, the women on benches raised behind it. 
When the bride receives the usual prej fents from the relations and guests, she sit 
witi 
t 87 ] 
with a gilt crown on her head, In the midst of the ginecoy or women’s apartment. 
As Soon as they have all drank wine and eaten Sweetmeats, they make an excursion to take the air, then they return to Supper, after which the new married couple go to bed together, without any farther ceremony or publication, as among the Rornat^ Catholics, 
This compendious method of marrying was mighty pleasing to our hero, who was no friend to long ceremonies. 
Indeed the young Greek understood So well the art of pleasing, that she fixed his wavering heart to constancy much longer than could have been expected; for her beauty and blandishments prevailed over his fickleness, during the Space of two years, in G 4 which 
[ 88 ] 
which he never left her, except to make a few excursions, in order to take a Survey of those parts of Greece, which he had not hitherto Seen, 
At Athens he could not lee, without Some painful refieftions on the uncertainty of all Sublunary things, the stupendous ruins of those beautiful strudures, which were once the admiration of the universe;; could he, without a variety of melancholy ideas, behold the barbarity and ignorance of those who now inhabit a place, which was celebrated once as the Seat of the muses. 
After having visited Megara and Corinth., So diminished Srom their former Splendour, •he proceeded to Lhebes., of which only one part is now inhabited, that is, what was formerly called the castle of Cadmus 
Though' 
[ 89 I 
Though the Anchorets live very retired, and the Hermits very austere lives, yet the Greek nuns know nothing of the Severities of a monastic lise; their charadleristic is that of being magdalens reformed, who towards the decline of life, make a vow to observe Some virtues they have neglected in their youth, and So retire into a monastery, there to lead a life less Scandalous, or perhaps less publicly So, under the inspection of a good-natured abbess, who is not very rigid. Hence travellers may be accommodated with certain favours, if they chuse to put up with the autumn of beauty. 
At length the volatility of our hero’s disposition prevailing, he grew tired of his wife, and quitting her without ceremony, which he Seldom used upon Such occasions, 
returned 
[ 90 ] 
returned again to Confiantinople; here as before, he was cordially received by the Grand Signior. 
CHAP, 
t 91 ]. 
CHAP. XV 
Settles at Constantinople — Ais Seraglio -- ^ Goes to Egypt — His Journey not politic al' -- * Description of Egypt, Grand Cairo, che 
now established a household at Constantinople, determining to reside there Some time. The reader may easily conceive, that he did not forget a seraglio in this establishment. 
His women consisted of various beautiful Slaves from diverse countries, which he purchased as essential to his scnsual felicity. 
But a life of inadivity and repose was not Suited to his restless disposition; in less than a twelvemonth Confiantinople grew insipid to him, and his roving temper being i predominant, he again took leave of the 
Grand 
[ 92 ] 
Grand Signior, and having received proper passports, resolved to See Egypt. 
Here it is proper to redlify a mistake which the public have been led into, by Several homespun newspaper paragraphs, which intimate that Mr. M -- -- -- -- -- gue’s journey 
to Egypt was chiefly political. 
But this is false; he was not entrusted with any commission of a political kind by the Grand Signior, nor would he willingly have been engaged in any Such matter, as his disposition led him to pursuits of a far different nature; besides tho’ he greatly re spedled the Grand Signior, he was not fond of the arbitrary Severity of that government to it’s respective officers, and therefore always preserved the following Turkish maxim in his memory, viz. Four things Should never flatter us Familiarity with princesy the 
“carejfes 
[ 93 1 
“earejfes of women, the smiles of our enemies, “and a warm day in wintex V for these things are not of long duration. 
Mr. M -- -- -- gue did not find Egypt to be 
that lertile country which it has been represented. 
By Egypt is understood a narrow tract of land, divided in two by the river N: 7c, in ciosed with high mountains on the east and west, beginning at the catarafis and ending near Cairo, together with what is called the Delta, 
The length of Egypt, from north to South is about 600 miles, the breadth in the Delta is 120 miles, but in the middle of the other part only 21. 
They have but one harvest sin the year in Egypt, any more than in other places, 
though[ 
[ ] 
C tho’ it hath been erroneoussy reported that I they have two. 
Egypt can hardly Supply its inhabitants \ with corn; many of the people live chiefly i upon barley flour, mixed with water; inv deed hals of them do not eat bread above r. once a week, and that bread is not made of wheat, but of coarse millet. 
V The Soil is clayey, mixed with salt petrc, t which renders the land So sterile, that few h plants or shrubs grow upon it; neither h tree or weed will vegetate there, without C being frequently watered; therefore neither S timber nor wood for fuel grow in Egypt. C 
t The vast rains which fall in Ahyjfinia and V Ethiopia occasion the overflowings of the i ilile. This river begins to Swell at the fi latter end of May or beginning of June, 
when 
[ 95 ] 
when the north winds Set in, and about the 24th of September the waters begin to fall 
It hath been Said that it never rains in Egypt, but that is a mistake, it frequently rains in lower Egypt, but in middle Egypt very rarely, and in upper Egypt never. 
The air of this country is very unhealthy, most of the people are afflicted with bad eyes, the humour of which is So inveterate, that abundance lose their sight. So that Egypt may well be called proverbially the ‘ land of the blind I 
A few hours after Mr. M -- -- -- -- gue’s arrival 
at Grand Cairo, he was witness to the opening the canal, when the waters of the iiile enter that city. The joy os the people is inexpressible, and indeed it is very natural it should, as they are much in want of water. 
In 
t 96 ] 
In the road from Mime to Cdro there is a fine pyramid at Benifuef. The Arabs Say, that joseph the Son of Jacob built it. Fifteen miles lower there are two more, in the form of a hat; and a about nine miles farther, at Sacarra., are thirteen large and a great number of Smaller pyramids, but the greater part of the latter are fallen into ruins. 
Cairo is supposed to contain as many inhabitants as London. There are Seven hundred and twenty mosques in it with priests, four hundred and thirty without, and southeast venty public baths. 
The streets are narrow, crooked, and without pavement, consequently dusty. The houses have many stories, and fiat roofs; the are built of brick; the windows have 
iron 
t 97 1 ' 
iron rails, and curtains to them. There is but one Square in the whole town, which lies before the castle. There are no trees, fountains, or any other ornaments to it. 
The castle is large, but irregular. An aquedudl of 320 arches carries the waters of the Aik into it. 
Modern Egypt is divided into twenty-four provinces, but no part of the country is So populous as it was formerly Said to be. 
In the desert of Ray an., there are Some craggy stones, which resemble and which the Superstitious believe to be petrified sheepi 
vol. IT. 
u 
CHAP. 
[ 98 ] 
CHAP. XVI 
(Ioes to the Lake of Natrum — And the Lake of Petrified Ships — Fallag of the common inotion — A Monkijlo Story — Engages in fame Amours — Goes to Suez with a Caravan — Curious Method of Fijhing — Dolphins — Remarkable Deception — Crocodile — Artificial Method of hatching Chickens. 
R. M -- -- -- gue having a great desire 
to See the lake from whence the n^ trum is taken, and the lake without water, where it is Said there are petrified ships. 
He accordingly let out for ferancy a place about 42 miles distant from cairoy situated on that branch of the Nile which goes to Rosetta; having applied to the governor, he ordered Some Arabs to attend him. 
They, 
[ 99 I 
They joined a drove of camels, who were bound to the desert of Scete to procure nrr trum. On the road they Saw the ruins of various towns; after passing along a Sandy plain, interse<51: ed by torrents, they arrived at the lake, which is 24 miles long and two broad. 
The Salt had formed a crust over the lake, which bore the whole company, and their camels. 
Having pasted over, Mr. M -- -- -- -- -- gueleft 
the caravan, and went to a Coptic monajier)\ where the monks showed him a stone, which greatly resembled wood, and which, they laid, was part of a mast belonging to one of the petrified ships. 
The next day he arrived at the lake without water, which is only a number of tor h 2 rents 
[ 100 ] 
rents united into one, and dry all the Summer. 
The petrified ships are nothing but pointed rocks, buried in the Sand; they resemble ships at a distance, and look very much like wood. Some pieces are Scattered about, which arc six or Seven feet in length, and five or six inches in diameter, and these are what are taken for pieces of masts. 
At the Coptic monastery, which is very mean, and does not deserve a description, they told him this ridiculous story : That formerly Some Arabians arrived in ships, in their lake without water; that these Arabians having been very troublesome to the hermits of the place, St. Ephraim who was then abbot of the monastery, prayed to God to dry up the lake; this God not only granted, but changed their ships into stone. 
On 
[ 
loi 
'On the road from this place to the monastery of St. Macarius there are three deserted 
glasshouses. 
It may not be improper to remark, that the Egyptians are of a very dark complexion, with very disagreeable features; they are timid, effeminate, incapable of hardships, have a very down look, owing perhaps to their sore eyes, are conceited, siiper stitious, and too often treacherous. 
The forbidding aspedl of the people of this country did not, however, deter our hero from engaging in Some amours, especially with the Arabian girls, with whom he diverted himself in many parts os Egypt. 
Elaving joined company with Some gentlemen, who were going to Suez he determined to visit that place. 
H 3 
At 
[ 102 ] 
At Heliopolis they were entertained by a Turk. They Sat down to dinner upon their heels; above threescore dishes were Served up, consisting or rice or flesh, boiled or roasted, prepared with Spices, milk of almonds and Sugar; other dishes of meat were prepared with milk and fruit. Many of the dishes were placed upon each other, in a very artful manner, and formed a pyramid. 
After dinner the company were Served with coffee, sherbet, and a pipe of tobacco. 
At noon they Set off with Some other travellers, who had joined them. 
The whole caravan consisted of fifty gentlemen, and their Servants on horseback, And thirty Slaves mounted on dromedaries, 
laden 
[ i ] 
laden with water and provisions. These were followed by 200 camels laden with money and merchandizes; those which carried the money were adorned with bushes of feathers, and other ornaments, and went first, the kettle drums beating before them. 
In the evening they passed a dangerous defile, where the Arabs usually watch, when they intend to attack the caravans going to or coming from Mecca. 
In two days they arrived at Suez, which is a very Small town, situated on a penin sula, at the extremity os the red sea. There is a governor, with a garrison of three hundred men; the inhabitants get all the neces saries of life, even their potherbs, from Cairo. 
He afterwards visited lake Menjlet, which is 64 miles long and 24 broad, being the 
H 4 
largest 
[ 104 1 
largest in Egypt. Here they have a curious method of catching fish, by means of a bird; having Set their nets, tfie fishermen let two tame pelicans Swim in the lake; they fasten a piece of thread tp their eyelids, by which means they can tie up their eyes during the whole fishery; this precaution is necessary, to prevent them from eating, too many sish^ The pelican having a strong Scent, pursues the fish around him, and the fishermen prevent their going off Sideways, So they are driven into the net. 
. In Some parts os the lake the dolphins pursue the fish into little ponds, full of reeds, from whence they cannot return, because the fishermen immediately shut up the entrance into the lake with large nets. The benefits which these people reap by means of the dolphin, induces them to look upon that fish with tfie utmost reverence; 
nay 

[ 
ioj 
] 
nay Some of thsm go So far as to deem dolphins good Spirits, Sent on purpose to do them a Service; on which account they would not destroy a dolphin by any means. 
From hence our hero passed to Damiata^ which next lo Cairo is the finest and largest city in Egypt. 
twenty-three miles from this cityisdii fetta, a town of great trade in flax, cottons, linens, rice, and leather. 
There is no other place of any great consideration in Egypt except Alexandria:, a town of considerable trade, supposed to contain about 15000 inhabitants. 
We shall here notice a circumstance which our hero thought worthy of a memorandum. 
I 
[ i06 ] 
On the cast fide of the Nile lies a village, called Eridy^ where a Jheik of the Same name resides. 
It is famed through Egypt for a Snake, of which many miraculous stories are related. 
The vulgar believe it to be the devil, banished into the mountains of upper Egypt by the aiigel Raphael., to prevent his strangling young Lobias^ as he had done with the six former husbands, which his bride had married. 
The Jheik keeps this Serpent in possession, as his predecessors for time immemorial had done. It is an inch thick, two feet long, and the Ikin is Smooth and reddish; it plays a thousand tricks, and will twine about the arms or neck os any person, without hurting them; what is remarkable, it is 
fonder 
[ i ] 
fonder of women than men. An annual feast is held in honour of this Serpent. The Jheik pretends that he can cut it in pieces at night, and find it whole in the morning. 
Mr. M -- -- -- gue looked upon this Serpent 
to be nothing but a tohbam, a Serpent common enough in Egypt; it hath more Sagacity than the European dogs, and may be taught a greater variety of tricks. 
The land crocodile of Egypt resembles the water crocodile in form, but it is Small and harmless. The water crocodile, or that which is commonly understood by the name, inhabits the Nile, and is particularly fond of the lakes, formed by channels, derived from thence; they fly from those parts which are near towns, and from boats'which contain many nien, but will attack a single man, or a boat with a Single man in it. This 
creature 
[ io ] 
creature is to the last degree voracious, terrible, and cruel; it is Sometimes thirty feet in length; it runs Swift, but cannot easily turn, and ifs chies strength lies in it’s tails. 
• With respedl to the artificial method of hatching chickens, it is to be observed that the inhabitants of Berme., a village 6o miles from Cairo., are the only possessors of the Secret, parents teach it their children, and keep it from strangers. The proprietors of ovens are therefore obliged to have re course to them, and pay them well for their trouble. 
The ovens have two stories, consisting of twenty-eight Small cells, into which the eggs are laid, round these there is a hollow, about an inch and half deep, and six inches broad; this contains the fire to heat the oven; the hollov/s are between the lower 
and 
[ lop ] 
and upper range of cells. So that the fire heats both stories. The floor which divides the stories is made of reedsv covered with cow dung; the walls are of brick. 
■ The eggs are put upon a mat, in the lowest cells; the fire is made of cakes of cow dung. 
The inspedor at various times increases or diminishes the heat, by giving the cells less or more air. 
In twenty-one days the operation is concluded, and all the chickens are Seen running about in the cells. 
CHAP. 
[ no ] 
CHAP. XVII 
Goes to England — ilis Mother dies — Lakes Pojfejfion of his large Fortune — His Enmity 
to Lord B -- --. Returns to Constantinople 
— Ajfumes the Armenian Habit — de fcripticn of that Habit. 
Having Seen all that is deemed curious in Egypt, Mr. M -- -- -- gue returned 
to coriftantifople, where finding Some dispatches for him from his relations, which appeared of the utmost consequence, he determimd to depart for England. 
He Soon embarked‘on board a trading vessel, and arrived; after a voyage in which nothing material happened, at Marftitles, from whence travelling by land to Calais, he went on board the packet, and in a few hours landed Safe at Dover, 
His 
[ III ] 
\ 
His reputed father, whose name he had always gone by, had been dead Sor Some years, and his mother, who had desired his presence in England, on account os her precarious state of health, was on the verge of a dissolution when he arrived. 
She died Soon after, and left him in pos fession of an immense fortune; indeed she went So far as to be exceedingly partial in his favour, with respedl to personals, contrary to the interest of his sister, the presens countess of B -- -- -, 
This occasioned a coolness betwixt Mr. 
M -- -- -- gue and lord B — ’s family, and that 
nobleman having done him Some disservices, he conceived a most implacable resentment against him, which continued still his death. 
Tho’ 
[ II j 
■ Tho’ his ample fortune would have enabled him to enjoy all the luxuries of the east, in the northern regions, where his patrimony was situated; yet a peculiarity of disposition induced him to Sigh for the effeminating pleasures of Asia. Grown fond of the eastern countries by familiarity, he determined to dissipate his income in the pleasures which those prolific climes afford. 
Before his departure, he made a present of Some curious medals and other antiquities to the royalfociety; on which account he was made a member of that learned body. 
He Soon after embarked on board a merchant ship, bound for Lurkey.^ and on his arrival at Confiantinople presented himself to the Grand Signior, by whom he was, as usualy, most cordially received. 
I 
He 
[ ITS ] 
He had formerly adopted the Lurkijh habit, but now he thought proper to assume the Armenian., deeming it not only Superior to the Lurkijld. but to all other dresses in the universe. 
As Mr. M -- -- -- gue never aster appeared 
in any other habit, it may not be improper to describe it. 
Pht Armenian then, consists of a 
magnificent turban; and it is to be observed, that the Armenians have a particular maxim to keep their heads very wanii. So that they never pull off their turbans out of respedt to any one; the other parts of their dress are Simple, neat, and elegant; next to their shin they wear callico shirts, then a vest, which reaches below the knee, girt with a Sash, and over that a loose garment, Somewhat shorter. 
vol. IL 
I 
Their 
C »'4 1 
Their clothes are, however, generally expensive, consisting os the richest furs, silks, mufiins, cottons, and the like valuable stuffs, embroidered in a very rich manner with gold and silver.' 
On their legs they wear loose boots, and slippers on their Seet; they wear a dagger in their Sash, and linen trowsers; their clothes and the collar of their shirts are open. So that their dress is better adapted to the purposes os health and activity, than the dress of the Turks, 
CHAP. 
E I 1 
CHAP. XVIII 
Makes the Tour of Persia — Dffcription of Persia — 0/lspahan — Intrigues witha^tv si an Lady — Combujlible Earth — Capitation Tax — Palls in Love with a Circassian Inidy — Marries her — Marriage Ceremonies in Persia. 
R. M -- -- ^guc, whose disposidon was 
ever restless, and his imagination always upon the wing, could not long remain inactive;; therefore made the tour of Ferfiay and Saw as much of that country as the distradted state of affairs would permit.. 
He perceived that the Soil itself was exceedingly Sruitful; but the government was So arbitrary, that the inhabitants could neither enjoy plenty or Safety. 
I 2 
There 
[ 116 ] 
There are vast mountains in this country. Such as cqucafus.i Ararats and Taurus; but no country in the world hath So few rivers. 
The women are Sufficiently handsome, but they are coquettes, and continue to heighten their beauty as much as possible by art. 
Ifpahan^ the capital city of Perjia, is i2 miles in circumference, but the streets are narrow and crooked; the chief amusement of the inhabitants is to walk upon the flat roofs of the houses, when the weather will permit; the houses are but of one story, and since the late troubles in Perjia^ not above 5000 of them are inhabited. 
With resped to jjia^ the Persians stand in the same predicament as the French do in 
Eurofte; 

I LV 
[ ] 
Europe; that is, they are the models os po litcness, and not to imitate their manners, and understand their language, argues low breeding. Indeed their manners are the most refined of any people in the eastern countries, and their language is the most poetical and nervous. In short, in a/ia the Arabic is to be considered as the learned language, the Perjian as the polite, and the lurki/h or the Coptic as the vulgar Ian guages. 
The women are So far from being as reserved as in most other eastern countries, that they will not Scruple to make advances to those they like. Of this our hero had a proof, while at Jfpahan; a widow lady had taken particular notice of him, and not being able to bridle her passion, she Sent him a billet-doux, written from the right hand to the left, (for \ht per/tansy like the Hebrews write in that manner.) 
o 
[ ] 
Mr. M -- -- -- gue was too much a cavalier 
not to do honour to the overture. The lady received him in a magnificent apartment, which was close shut; it was illuminated by a great number of wax tapers, as well as lamps, filled with the most odoriferous oil, and, on a hearth of the finest marble, there was a large fire of the wood of aloes, though the weather was warm; this rendered the room So hot, that our hero begged to remove to Some cooler place. To this request the ladyoomplied with great difficulty; for in her heart She was gaur or worshipper os fire. 
This lady was So extremely ceremonious in her amours, that the intrigue became troublesome to our hero, who left Ifpahan, and travelled to the north of Persia to See a celebrated natural phenomenon, near 
Baku, 
t II 1 
Baku. This is a combustible ground, filled with fiery and inflammable particles, being the chief Scene of the guehres devotion. Thtit guehres are the priests of thtgaurs or fire worshippers., Several temples are Scattered about this ground, in one of which the guehres pretend to preserve the Sacred flame of the universal fire. This rises from the end of a large hollow cane stuck into the ground, and filled with the purest Spirits. 
The Perftans certainly exceed all the ma nufadturers in the universe in Silk, woollen, carpets, leather, and mohair. They do not, however, pursue trade with that avidity which might be expected from people So excellently well situated for commerce. 
It is to be observed, that foreigners, who arc not Muslims, pay a ducat a head I 4 for 
I 120 J 
for being permitted to reside in the Persian territories. Tho’ this tax should only be paid once, yet the osticers take care to exact; it in almost every town, alleging that they are not certain it has been paid in any other place. Thus our hero was under the necessity of paying the tax above fifty different times. 
At Schiras, a fine open town, with beautiful invirons, Mr. M— — determined to remain for Some time. The country is fruitful to the last degree, .and the wines the best in j/ia. 
.Here our hero Sell in love with, or rather conceived a strong .inclination for a beautiful Circajfian lady. .Not being able to obtain her for a mistress, he as usual addressed her for a wife; he pretended to be an Armenian merchant, and lived in a 
very 
I >21 ] 
ii> cfy profuse manner, to captivate her by generosity. But liberality will not Succeed in this country, without the addition of a very absurd piece os'gallantry; that is, to evince his pashon, a lover must burn him sels in Several parts of his body, and in this Scarified manner present himself besore his mistress; if she accepts his love, she is considerate enough to Send him fillets and Scarfs of silk to bind up the Sores; but if bis passion is disagreeable to her, he has only the pain for his recompense. Where the lady likes the lover, her esteem rises in proportion to the torture he gives himself; and was he to make himself a cripple, his passion would be deemed the most Sublime imaginable. 
This method of wooing was not at all agreeable to our hero; he could flatter. Swear, and embellish beyond the truth, as 
well 
[ 122 ] 
well as any one, but a red hot iron did not fail in with his ideas of pleasure. 
Finding he could not obtain the lady without Some Such burning proof of his pas fion, he determined to have recoursc to art. 
In pursuance of this resolution, he stained itimself in Several parts, in a manner So ingenious, that the most discerning eye could not discover but what he was Scarified in a 'most terrible manner. 
Having made himself appear most dreadfully burnt, he presented himself besore his mistress, who, kind Soul was melted into compassion at the sight; the liquid pearls streamed from her eyes, and she presented him with her choicest Scarfs, and silk handkerchiefs, to bind up his wounds, entreating him to be careful of himself for her sake. 
When 
C ] 
When Sufficient time had elapsed, for him to appear to be well, the marriage was concluded on, as a matter of course; for the gift of the Scarfs implies an absolute consent. The ceremony is as follows. 
The bride goes from her house with her Telations and friends, all on horsebaclc, fingers precede them. 
The bridegroom leaves his house in the same manner. 
When the two troops meet, they return to the brides house, where they have a ball. 
The bridegroom is then condutsted to the bride’s chamber, by two men; the bride comes in another way, being led by two 
women; 
[ 124 ] 
women; the new married couple are then left together, and the company continue dancing during the whole night. 
CHAP. 
I 125 
CHAP. XIX 
Gttes to Arabia — Character of the Arab?, and Dejeription of Arabia — banyan’s ridiculous Notions — Customs of the women— — ' curious Intrigue — Mr. M — gue is apprehended and carried before the Governor, 
Mr. M -- -- -- -- -- gue, as usual, was not long 
Satisfied either with remaining in one place, or with one woman; he therefore packed up his baggage, that is, all but his spouse; for he deemed a wife a cumbersome commodity to travel with, and determined to proceed towards Arabia, 
It is remarkable that this country hath always preserved it’s ancient name, for the word Arab signifies a robber., and robbers the Arabians always were, and still remain So. 
It 

t ] 
It is well known that Arabia is divided into three parts, viz. Arabia Petrrea or stony, Deserta or desert, and Felix or happy, and that the celebrated mountains Sinai and Horeb are in Arabia Petraa^ east of the red Sea. 
I The desert part of Arabia is a most horrid place, composed of immcnse plains of Sand, and diversified only by frightful craggy mountains, or rocks. 
these plains of Sand are Sometimes moved by hurricanes, in the Same dreadful manner as the waves of the Sea are by storms. Beneath these terrible mountains of fand whole caravans have Sometimes been buried. 
The Southern parts of Arabia are indeed deservedly called the i^appy, as the air is 
exceedingly 
[ 12; ] 
exctedingly temperate, and the Soil fertile, producing balm of gilead, myrrh, manna, capia, aloes, frankincense, and other valuable gums; the finest Spices, and the most delicious fruits. But Arabia Felix is most celebrated for it’s coffee and dates. 
As the Arabians live in a wild manner, and continually rove about from place to place, they pitch their tents Sometimes as conveniency, and Sometimes as whim directs them. 

This occasions a prodigious Scarcity of towns in this immense country, as there are none worth observation except mochoy Aden Mufchaty and Suez, trading cities; and Meeca and Medina the cities whither the Mahometan pilgrims relbrt; the first being the place of Mahomet birth, and the latter of his burial. Every Mujfulman is obliged 
bx 
[ 3 28 1 
by his religion to visit Mecca once in his lifetime, or Send a deputy. 
The Banyans who are originally Indians but numerous in Arabia have many whimsical religious notions, particularly when they are dying, they are desirous of nothing So much as to hold a cow by the tail, to the end that their Soul may enter into the body of that beloved animal, which is the great object: of their adoration. 
Mr. M — gue took up his abode for Some time at Mocho; here he observed that the women Seldom appeared in the daytime; in the evening, however, They were allowed more liberty, and generally form themselves into Small parties to go upon visits. He has frequently met them at twelve o’clock at night, or one in the morning, in groups; but as Soon as they perceived 
'[ 129 ] 
ceived a man, they would turn their faces close to the wall, and remain in that posh tion still he was passed by. 
Mr. M. 
■nue lived next door to a 
considerable'merchant,, who tiled to trade to. Surat. 
This merchant had a daughter of about sixteen, who, tho’ like others ol that country, of a Swarthy complexion, might be deemed a very agreeable brunette; her features were regular, her eyes full of fire and vivacity, and her limbs were formed, with, the utmost Symmetry. 
Our hero had built a little lodge upon a terrace, exactly opposite to this lady’s chamber window, in order to enjoy the cool, breezes which came Srom the lea better than he could do in the hoiise. 
Vox. II 
K 
[ 13° 1 
Here he frequently amused himself by playing upon the German flute, which he did to admiration. 
The lady who was' concealed from his view by a lattice, one day listed up the lattice while he was playing, when he had a, full view of her, and was struck with a fomediing in, her features and manner, that appeared inexpressibly engaging. 
He Saluted her by touching his. turban, in the manner of the country; she blushed, but returned his courtesy. 
He made a practice now of going daily to the terrace, and playing Some of the most melting tunes he knew. 
She was always attentive to the music,, Seemed highly delighted with it, and frequently 
[ 
I q.l 
quently opened the lattice to loosi at our hero. 
He one day displayed to her view a great number of ribbons. Some giass toys, and a looking glass, intimating at the Same time fly Signs, that they were at her Service, provided he could by any means, convey them to her. 
She understood his meaning perfectly well, and presently dispatched a black female stave to his house, to whom he gave them, together with a letter for the young lady, written in the Arabic language, and filled with the most pashonate expressions. 
The lady Seemed highly delighted wdth the prefehts, as she opened the lattice ta thank him by signs. 
K 2. 
At 
[ 132 ] 
At night when he had retired to lest, he heard aloud knocking at the door; he ordered a Greek Slave, whom he had bought Several years before, and who acted in the capacity of his valet, to go and See the occasion of the disturbance. 
The fellow had no Sooner opened the door, than Several Soldiers rushed in, and 
making towards Mr. M 
gue’s chamber 
ordered him to dress himself immediately. 
and attend them to the governor. 
CHAP. 
l1 
[ «33 ] 
CHAP. XX 
f’he whimftcalcharge againji Mr. M — gue — Lke Alternative offered him — Is married to the Arabian Lady — Escapes Jrom Arabia. 
^UR hero could not conjedure on what account he was apprehended, nor could he get any insormation from the Soldiers, who Said they had received orders to Seize him, but for what reason they could not tell. 
When he came before the governor, he showed the Grand signior’s i^affport and prote; iom 
The governor, however, treated them very lightly, and insormed our hero, that .they were given to protect him from the S outrages 
{ 134 3 
outrages of others, but not to Screen him in injuring others with impunity. 
He begged to know who he had injured, as he was not Sensible that he had given the least offence to any person. 
A stave was than dispatched to call the person, who was to exhibit the charge against him, from another apartment. 
In a short time his next door neighbour, the Surat merchant, appeared. 
The mystery was, now explained 4 he presently understood that the crime alleged against him was making presents, and writing to that gentlemarsts daughter, and having Seensher face to face. 
The governor informed him, that they •were most heinous offences,; that now he 
had 
[ '35 ] 
had Seen the young lady, and made her presents, nobody else would marry her; that theresore he must either marry her himself, or lose both his eyes. 
As this was the alternative, the reader may easily conceive the choice, which a man of our hero’s constitution would naturally make. He did not hesitate a moment to consent to the marriage. 
He was immediately discharged; all parties were reconciled, and the nuptials .were Soon aster Solemnised. 
The marriage ceremony was the Same as that among the Lttrks^ with this addition, that the bride presents the husband with a ■bearded arrow, which she calls her portion. This present is meant to Seal the fidelity of ber promise, as she gives him an instru .k 4 itienc 
[ 13 S 1 
m.ent to use, either against jherseif, if she fitould prove untrue, or against them who should assault her virtue. 
When, as usual, he grew tired of his Arabian wife, he found more diiiiculty in getting rid of her, than he had ever done with resped to any os the former. As a foreigner he was naturally suspeded, and the idea of having been compelled to marry, increased the suspicions of the Arabians. 
He Soon perceived that he was but a prisoner at large, and that all his wife’s relations, and even his neighbours, were So many Spies upon him,; the ressedtions which Such a Situation naturally .gave rise to, were exceedingly disagreeable, and being under a consciousness of restraint, the time ap .peared extremely irksome. 
At 
t ‘J7 3 
At length an English East-india ship ar -- rived in the port; his Spirits began to revive at the event, and he now conceived hopes of a Speedy deliverance, from what he deemed .an absolute captivity. 
He Soon let the captain understand who he was, intimated the nature of his confinement, and expressed the desire he had to regain his liberty. 
The captain promised to do him every Service that lay in his power.; but the utmost precaution was necessary. On account of an englijjo ship being in the port, he was more closely watched than ever. 
The captain having taken a house near the strand, our hero repaired to it, when he was on the eve of departing from Mocco. He was Sent on board the ship in a chest, 
with 
[ 138 ] 
with holes borde in it to give him air, and his departure was not even suspeded ’dll the ship was under weigh. 
Indeed he was obliged to leave the property he had at Mottco behind him; but that he thought but tristing, when Set in competition with the liberty he obtained. 
During the voyage they met with a ship bound to Conftantinoplehe immediately went on board this vessel, after making the captain of the East-india ship a present of a draught on a banker at London., for his civility, and being the instrument of his deliverance, as he termed it. 
He Soon arrived at c onjiantinople, the emporium of the eastern part of the world, nand our hero’s favourite metropolis. 
C H A P. 
{ 139 ] 
CHAP. XXI 
A Journey from Grmd Cairo? the written Mountains., in the Desert of kines., performed and written by E. JV. m gue., Esq. 
R. M -- -- -- -- -- gue, ever restless in his 
difposition, made another excursion into Egypt,, 
Grand cairo.he Iet out on a journey to the celebrated written mountains in the descrt of Sinai. But as he has given an ample account of that journey in a letter to the royal feciety^ we shall Transcribe his own words. 
A letter from E. W. M — gue, esq; 
F. R. S. to W -- -- -- -- m W -- -- -- -- Son, M. D. 
F. R. S. containing an account of his 
journey 
I 140 ] 
journey Srom Cairo in Egypt., to the written mountains in the desert os Sinai., received January 3^, and read before the royalfociety., March j 3, 1776. 
It is with a good deal os difficulty that I have prevailed upon myself to write to you, for as coming now to Italy was quite unforeseen, and i am immediately going back to the east, I have not my journal with me, but luckily have the famous inscription. I am Sensible every paper I Send to the royal society exposes more and more my incapacity; however as these inscriptions are much wanted, I cannot avoid Sending them. I shall only Speak to Some of the points the bishop of Clogher mentions, but cannot avoid being now and then a little prolix 
I Set out from Cairo by the road known by the name os Lauricke Beni ifrael, after twenty-four hours trastlling, at about three 
miles 
i 
[ HI ] 
miles an hour, we passed by an opening in the mountains on our right hand, the mountains Maxattee. There are two more roads, one to the northward of this, .which the Mecca pilgrims go, and one to the South between the mountains,, but never travelled, (as it does not lead to Suez., which is thirty hours march from Cairo.) Thro’ this breach the children of jfraelairt Said to have entered the mountains, and not to have taken the most Southern road, which I think most probable; for those valleys, to judge by what are now Seen, could not be passable for pharaops chariots. This breach, the inhabitants told me, leads directly to a plain called Badeah., which in Arabic signifies Something new or extraordinary, and also the beginning, as the beginning of everything is new, r. e, was not before known. 
At 
[ 142 ] 
At Suez I found an. opportunity of going; to Lor by Sea, which I gladly embraced; that by going nearer the place, at which the Israelites are supposed to have entered the golf., and having, a view from the Sea. as well of that as of the opposite shore, I miu; ht be a little better able to form a 
judgement about it; besides I was willing. 
to have the views, bearings, and sounding 
t 
which I took. 
When we were opposite to Badeah., it 
Seemed to me (for I was not on shore) a 
plain capable of containing the ifraelitesy with a Small elevation in the middle of it, 1 saw Something too like ruins; the captain, and pilots told me, that this was the place where the Israelites entered the Sea, and the ruins were those of a convent (I Suppose built on the Spot in commemoration of the fad); they added that there was good water 
L 
[ h3 ] 
ter there. There is here a strong current, which Sets to the opposite shore, about southeast; it forms by it’s strength a whirlpool, where the Sailors Said ships were lost, if forced into it for want of wind, by a current. This pool is about six miles northward of cape karondei and just below this pool there is a Sand, a fiat issand at low water, which runs east and west about three miles. This Sand, I suppose, is thrown up by the force of the current, and the Same current by the resistance it meets with from this bank, being forced back into the cavity made by this excavation, forms the whirlpool. This pool is called Birque Pharoone, the pool or well of Pharaoh, and here they affirm his host was destroyed. I shall Say more of this, as I travel back by land.. We came to an anchor in 15 fathom water, within a mile and a half of the shore, to the Southward of this Sand,, and, in the Birque Karondd, to the northward 
of 
[ 144- ] 
of the cape; here the eastern shore is already mountainous, which, near this place is a Sandy beach.. The Egyptian shore from Suez to Badcah is likewise rocky and steep, lo no entering upon the gulf Srorn that shore, but at Badeah or Suez. 
It is high water always when the moon is at her meridian height, and it ebbs six hours. Itt Suez it flows six Sect, the Spring, tides are nine, and in the variable months, from the beginning of November to the end of aprii Sometimes twelve From the beginning of May to the beginning od. ousher a northerly wind generally arises, and goes down with the Sun; it is often very strong. This wind never Sails in these months, un less there be Some violent storm. The rest of the year the winds are variable, and when they blow hard at S. and S. S. E. tkese winds Set up the Sea thro’ the narrow 
straight 
r T 
straight os Bahel mandei and up this giihf thro’ it’s mouth, between Gthd el Zait on the west side of this Sea, and the Souther most point of the bay os vt?r,. on the east fide of this western branch of this Sea, where it is not above 12 or 14. miles oven I suppose Such a wind hindering .the water from going out, causes this extraordinary increasc in the Spring tides. We See the Same thing happen with the Same' winds at Venice both gulfs running nearly in the. Same dn redlion. 
The Egyptiany western, or Lhelaic shore,, Iiom Badeah Southward'to opposite on the eastern shore, is all mountainous and steep, and at Elim^ .the northermost point of the bay os Vhr, ends the ridge of mountains, which begin on the eastern shore of this western branch zt Karondel. Isiay nothing of Elim ov Lor, or the marine produc tol. IL L tion« 
[ 146 ] 
tions of this gulf, as this paper is intended to give an account of Sharme^ Meenah el jdzahab Kadejh Barman the stone which Moses struck twice, and the inscriptions; I however must Say, that from this place mount Sinai properly called, cannot be Seen, but only the ridge or group of mountains in which it is, and which altogether form that part of this tongue of land, called in general mount Sinai. The garden of the monks of mount Sinai., at Elim^ renders in dates, c. 20, 000 piastres per annum, or 2, 5ool. 
We from thence crossed the plain in about eight hours, and entered the mountains of Sinai; they are of granite of different colours. At the entrance of the nar row breach thro’which we passed, I .Saw on a large loose granite stone an inscription in unknown characters, given, I think, by 
doctor 
[ 148 ] 
docstor Pocock, bishop os ojfory. However, as the ijraelites had no writing that we know of when they passed here, I did not think it of consequence enough to stop for. The Arabs told me it was relative to a battjc fought here between Arabs ^ and indeed I do not See what point of history it can illus trate, besides there are not above five or six words. We arrived at the convent of mount Sind after the usual difficulties mentioned by other travellers, were received as usual, and Saw the usual places. I must Say that the monks were far from owning to me, that they had ever meddled with the print of the foot of Mohammed camel. I examined it narrowly, and no chisel has absolutely ever touched it; for the coat of the granite is entire, and unbroke in every part; and everybody knows, that if the coat of less hard stones than granite is once destroyed, it never returns. It is a most L 2 curious 
[ 14^ 
curious lusus naturre'y an'dsthe' Muslims turn it to their use. 
Merihah is, indeed, Surprisingly striking; -1 examined the lips of it’s mouth, and found that no chisel had ever worked there. The channel is plainly worn by only the course of water, and the bare iraspechon of it is Sufficient to convince any one it is not the work of man; amongst the innumerable cracks in rocks, which I have sen in this as well as other parts of the world, I never met with any like this, except that at Jerusalem and the two which are in the rock which Moses struck twice, of which hereafter. 
I had inquired of the captain and the two pilots of our ship about Sharme and Bzahab, on the western shore of the eastern branch of the red Sea; they told me that 
they 
^ [ IS] ] 
'were often forced .up.the el&mtic gvm., the eastern branch of the red Sea, and generally went to sharmc: ^ and Sometimes as high as jdzahalt. That they generally ran from cape .Mahomet,, the Southermost part of the peninsuia, between those two gulfs to. Sharme, in six hours,.; because they made as much more way as they commonly do, they very Seldom going there but in a storm. They generally run four knots. So this makes 48 miles, which brings it to the northward of Lor. Lor is in lat. 27 deg. -, 55 min. Cape Mahomet .30 miles Southward, lat. 27 deg. 25 min. Sharme 48 miles, nearly north lat. 28 .deg. 13 min. consequently about northeast of Sinm. The port is pretty large, Surrounded by high mountains, the entrance very narrow and the water deep, quite .to the rocks, which are So very steep that a stone dropped from '.the summit falls into the bafoii. No wind L 3 caa 
L 150 j 
can be felt here; they don’t cast anchor, but Sasten their cables to the rocks. There is good water; Some habitations are found on the sides of the mountains, and a pretty large village at top. This Seems to answer the idea of Neji ken. Dzahah lies as high again up the gulf, lb 48 miles more, or in lat. 29 deg. This port is considerably larger than the former, and very good, but not So closely Surrounded with mountains; it is however very Safe. There is a well of great antiquity, with very good water; very considerable ruins are Sound, and they Say there was a great city formerly, but no inhabitants now, except an .Arabian camp of 2000 men. There is a road from it to jerujalem, formerly much frequented. Thus far the captain and pilots. I inquired from the Monks as well as Arabs., about these places, as well as about the ruins, supposed by my learned friend the bishop of ojj'ory., 
to 
[ 1 
to be Kadejh Barnea. The former could only tell me, they had not received any fish from thsnce in many years; that it was two casy days journey off, but the road was mountainous; So one may suppose the distance less than 40 miles. The Arabs agreed as to the road, but they Said it was once a large place, where their prince lived, whose daughter Mojes married; that Moses was afterwards their prince, and the greatest of all prophets. these Arabs place Moses the first, Solomon the Second, Mahomet xx\t third, Christ the fourth, and then the prophets of the bible. As to Dzahab the monks only knew the distance to be four days journey, and that there was a road from it to Jerusalem; (the Arabs told me the Same) So the distance is about 80 miles. I inquired of them all about the ruins. They told me there were considerable ones about halfway to Pzahab.^ about 40 miles from Sinai 5. but 
L 4 I 
[ 152 I 
Ihshould think Kadejh must have been much nearer to Jerusalem. I would willingly have gone to these places, but as the four clans of arahs.t which inhabit this promontory, were then at war with the other, I could get'no condudlor. In another journey I hope to be more lucky, for this is all hearsay; however, combining the whole together, and comparing it with what we collect from Scripture, I think we may conclude Sharme to be Midian, and meenahalpzahab to ht Ezicngeherwhat the inteijacent ruins are, I cannot cxjnjedure.; but I believe I have ioundi Kadejh Barnea SX) ht elsewhere; I think it cannot be here, for the ijraeuies were on the borders of the 'holy land, or land f promise, when they were ordered back, and when they were stopped by the Moabites. They are Said to have been brought up Lorn Kadejh Barnea., and I meet with no place in Sacred writing, or any an 
tienc 
I 153 ] 
’^tieat geographer, neither Strata nor any “other, that draw the line between this promontory and the land of promise So low down; nor could they do it, as these ruins are within almost 70 miles os the extremity of it. There are two roads from mount Sinai xa Jerusalem \ the one through Pharan.^ the other by the vray of Dzahab. That through Pharan is eleven days journey, two 10 Pharan^ three to a station of the Mecca pilgrims, called Sheich Ali and one and a half to Some considerable ruins; all this. northward. From thence four and something more to Jerusalem., by the way of Hebrony leaving the Afphaltic lake on the ...right hand, to the foutteeast : The other way is longer, on account of the road being more mountainous; that too passes the. same ruins, and also Sheich Alt. I inquired about this when I was at jerufalewy and received the very Same ..account with this 
.additiohj, 
[ *54 ] 
additiou, that Such Muslims as went from Jerusalem to Mecca,, went that way to join the Cairo caravan as Sheich Ali. This Seems to be a situation opposite to Kadejh Barnea., as the line drawn by all the geographers; it is without mount Sinai., (taken for this whole tract) and just before the Moabites,, as the children of Israel passed by mount hr., now Acaba, leaving the Afphal lie lake on their lest hand to the northwest. The tradition too os the Arabs is, that they passed this way; therefore I think Kadefio Barnea must be near this Spot. There are here considerable ruins, and I know of no city that ever was here, for Petra lay more to the east, between the Afphaltic lake and the Elanitic gulf. To leave no inquiry wanting, I asked the ramins of Jerusalem where they placed Kadejh Barnea,, and they Said these ruins. 
Wc 
I 
[ '55 ] 
We Set out Srom mount Sinai by the way os Scheich Salem., and after we had passed Mahomet stone, came to the beautiful valley mentioned in the journal. Hay there, and did not Set out besore daylight, that I might not pass the rock which Moses struck twice; I Searched and inquired of my Arahs^ but could neither hear nor See anything of it. I Saw Several short inscriptions stained on Some parts of the mountains; the characters being the Same as those on mount Sinai., meiibah, See. given by the bishop of ojfory. About four miles before we arrived at Fharan., we passed thro’ a remarkable breach in a rock; each fide of it is perpendicular as a wall, about 8o feet high, and the breach is about 40 broad. It is at this breach, I imagine, the Hcrites were Smote, four miles beyond the present ruins of Pharan^ for having passed 
this 
■ [ '^5^ ] 
?his breach, they could make a stand, nor could they be pursued. Here on the tops ‘ os the mountains, to our right hand, were ruins of buildings, and one Seemed a castle. From Mtrihah to near this place we had always rather descendest. In most places there is the bed of a stream, and after rain the water runs; but a little before we came to this breach, it winded off towards the west; Tor the waters fall into that part of the desert we crossed from Lor. bctv/een i this breach and Pharan there are Several 1 Springs, and ont x. Pharan^ where we en » camped. There is the bed of 'the ■ river mentioned by the journal; the traditional. account of which agrees with what is Said by St. Paul. Waters Seem to have run from 'to within about six miles of this place; the bed of a stream is here again very plain, and a Spring at the upper end it, which docs not yield water enough to y make 
r «57 1' 
make a stream, the bed then is dry; four Valleys terminate here, and form a large area. I inquired about the road to fdem’y the people agreed in the distance and ruiivs. We travelled in the bed of the river, thro’the valley, to hhe north, and in about half an hour the sight and appearance of a large stone, not unlike Merihah, which lay at Some distance from the mountain, on our right hand, struck me; and L also observed it had many Small stones upon it. The Arabs., where they have any stone or Spot in veneration, as Mahcmefi stone, and the like, after their devotion lay Some Smooth stone upon it. I aiked what it wasj they'told me hagar Moufa., the stone of Moses. 1 told them that could not be, for that lay in rephidim'fahtyld.id that was true, but this"waschgtatain^ the stone of the two strokes; that he struck it twice, and more water came from it than 
from 
I 
[ 15§ 1 
from Merihah^ witness the river. The bed of the river winds to the eastward, about E. S. E. I alked how far it went; they Said this bed ran by Scheich All to those,, and quite away to the Sea; So the river must have began here and not at Pha~ ran and the bed from Pharan here is only formed, I fuppose, by winter torrents. If this is the bed .of the river mentioned by St. faui as I dare say it is, we have the Second rock. If it runs to the ruins, they will be pretty plainly those of Kadejh Barnea., and if it continues in the Same course to the Sea, it is probably the river at Rinocolura^ supposed by Eratojienes to be formed by the Arabian lakes, because he did not know it’s miraculous head. This river is doubted of by Strabo because dried up to the Source from the time the Israelites mttxtd the land of promise, and the tradition was then lost. Pardon this bold conjecture, but it conciliates 
[ 159 1 
hates and coincides Sacred history with ancient geography. This too Seems a proof, that it is really the Second struck rock; as to the Springs between the breach and Pharan., they certainly did not .exist in the time os Moses., or if they did, they would have been as nothing to So many people. 
We went down a large valley to the west, towards the Sea, and passed the head of a valley, a part of the desert of Sin which Separates the mountains of Pharan from those which run along the coast, and the same plain which we had passed from Lor. We had Scarce entered these mountains, and travelled an hour, when after passing a mountain, where there were visible marks of an extinguished Subterranean fire; we Saw on our left hand a Small rock, with Some unknown characters cut on it, not stained upon it as those hitherto met with, 
and 
[ io ]' 
aiid in ten minutes we entered a valley, - six miles broad, running nearly north and South, with all the rocks which inclose it on the west side,. covered with characters. these are called gehd el macataab^ the written mountains. On examining these characters, I was greatly disappointed in finding them everywhere interspersed with figures of men and beasts, which convinced me they were not written by that ifraeutes, iot if they had been after the publication of the law,, Moses could, not permit them to engrave images. So immediately he had received the Second commandment. If they went this way and not along the coast, They had then' no characters that we know of, unless Some of them vrere Skilled in hieroglyphics, and these have no connedlion with them. It will be difficult to guess what these inscriptions are; if conjedfure be permitted, I will give my very weak thoughts: They 
cannot 
[ ii ] 
cannot have been written by ifraeutes^ ox Muslims for the above reason; and if by Muslims they would have Some resem blance to Some Sort of Cwphic characters, which were the characters used in the Arabic language, before the introdudlion of the present Arabic letters. The first M. S. S. os the alcoran were in Cuphic. There is a fine one at Cairo., which I could not pur chase, as it is in the principal mosque, and the iman would not steal it for me under 400 Sequins, 200 1. these have not the least resemblance of them. Saracen characters are very unlike; I think it not improbable that they were written in the first ages of Christianity, when pilgrimages from Jerufalern to mount Sinai were fashionable, consequently frequent and numerous, by the new Christian Jews, who believed in Christ. Therefore I should believe them Hebrew' characters, used vulgarly by the Vgl. II M Jews, 
[ i62. ] 
Jews, about the time os Christ. I showed them at Jerusalem to the rabbis; they were of the Same opinion. It Seems much easier to Say what the inscriptions are not, than what they are. They can Scarce be of St. Helenas time, for they would have Some analogy with Greek charadders, and they have none. Perhaps Some gentlemen think them ancient Egyptian written by the colony, which, they suppose, went to inhabit China; but Such colony, if ever there was Such a one, probably went the strait road, from the head of one gulf to the head of the other, from Hieropolis to Eloth, the way the Mecca pilgrims now go. This place would have been far out of their way, being at least 6o miles to the South of the pilgrim’s road, unless they were fupposed to have had transports at Dzabab or Sharme, Here are on other parts of this rock Some Greek and Arabicas well as 
Saracew 
[ '62 ] 
Saracen inscriptions, and an Hebrew one. The Saracens and Arabic only Say, “Such an one was here at Such a time.” The Same Say the Greek ones, except one, which Says, as 1 remember, for 1 have it not with me, “the evil genius of the army wrote this, ” which can only prove that Some body of Greeks were worsted here. 
The third day from this place, travelling westward, we encamped at Sarondon^ as the journal calls it, but it is Korondaly where are the bitter waters Marah. I tried if the branches of any of the trees had any effect on the water, but found none; So the effect mentioned in Scripture must have been miraculous. these waters, at the Spring, are Somewhat bitter and brackish, but on every foot they run over the Sand is covered with bitumous Salts, grown up by the excessive heat of the Sun; they acquire M 2 much 
1(1 
[ 164 ] 
much saltness and bitterness, and very Soon become not potable. The place at which the ships cast anchor, is below the Sand, which I mentioned before, near the Birque Karondeh After nine hours and half march we arrived and encamped at the desert of Shur or Sour. The constant tradition is, that the Israelites ascended from the Sea here; this is opposite to the plain Badeah., to which the abovementioned pass in the mountains lead. From this place the openings in the mountain appear a great crack, and may be called a mouth, taking Hiroth for an appellative; however, I should rather adopt the signification of liberty. It could hardly have been neces dary for the Israelites to pass the Sea, if they were within two or three miles of the northern extremity of the gulf. The Space of, at most, two miiles the breadth of the gulf at Suez and at most three feet deep, at low 
vater[ 
[ ] 
water, for it is then constantly waded over, could not have contained So many people, or drowned pharaops army. There would have been little necessity for his cavalry and chariots to precipitate themselves after a number of people, on foot, encumbered with their wives, children and baggage, 
^ when they could Soon have overtaken them by going So little about.' these reasons, added to the significant names of the places, Lauriche Ben ifraei road of the children of Ifraef Attacah, deliverance, Phahiroth.^ whether an appellative or significative, Badeahy new thing or miracle, Baohorel po lounty Sea of destrudion, convince me that the Israelites entered the Sea at Badeah., and nowhere else. Besides all the rest of the coast from Suez and below Badeah is steep rocks. So there must have been another miracle to descend. The current too Sets from this place where we encamped, towards 
[ i66 ] 
wards the opposite shore, into the pool bir que Pharaone, pool of Pharaoh, where the tradition is his host vas drowned; a current formed, I fuppose, by the rushing and falling of one watery wall on the other, and driving it down; a current, perhaps, by God permitted to remain ever since in me moriam rei: The distance to the bitter waters is about 30 miles. The Ain Moufa, which the Israelites would have met with is they had passed at Suez, and the coast from hence South about a mile to Lor, being all rocky and steep, too induced me to believe that they entered the red Sea at ba deah, and ascended from it here. If anything I have Said can in the least Support that revelation, to which 1 declare myself a friend, even in this enlightened age, I shall be very happy; or is this trip of mine can be of any use whatever, as I had great pleasure in it, I may truly Say with Horace, “Omne tulit ■punfiump See. 
The 
[ '6? 3 
The denomination of I believe 
only regards the Hierapolitic branch, as the marine productions. Madrepores c. which form admirable torrents in the bottom of it, are not in the Elanitic branch or gulf. I mean the broad part below cape Mahomet; no more than that western branch was known to the Israelites at the time of their passage; if it was to the Egyptians. But the name descended to the whole, as their knowledge of it. The red Sea Seems to regard the broad part alone. For tho’ there are not the above Sea productions, yet there is So great a quantity os the tube coral (not Sound in the western branch of the hierapo litii gulf) and Such rocks, as one may Say of them, that the Gedda ships fasten themselves to them instead of casting anchor. It is of a deep red. So that possibly the first navigators entering at the straight of ba hd Mandel^ from the red they Saw, called it M 4 the 
[ *68 ] 
the red Sea, and that name descended to the whole with their navigation. This Sea is tempescuous, and Sull of shoals. There is no harbour on the Arabian coast after Tor, except one; I mean between Suez and Gidda, or Mecca, which is a day and half from Gidda. Gidda is it’s port, and there is only one on the other coast, Cojfire; but it is a very bad one, however ships Sometimes go thither, and caravans cross the country to Mcrjhout. The ships are as the bishop of ojfory has described them; the helm is on the outside, as I suppose with his lordship, St. pauvs was. They make use of but four Sails, and no compass, nor do they ever cast the lead; they Sail only by daylight from anchoring place to anchoring place, and are not above two days out of sight of land, from cape Mahomet to the Arabian main. If a gale happen they are often lost, about 
one 
[ 169, ] 
one in ten every year. I shall be glad to be honoured with the society’s commands, and in communicating this you will oblige, 
fijat Dec, 2, 1765. 
Sir, 
Your most humble Servant, E. V. M -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- CUE. 
C H A P.. 
A 
f 170 ] 
, • CHAP. XXII 
Mr. sharp’s Charafler of our Hero — His Health declines — Determines to revijit England — A Scheme to disappoint his Relatiofis Advertisement Jor a jvife — Dies at Venice. 
After this excursion to the written mountains, we find that Mr. M -- -- gue revisited Italy; since the ingenious 
Mr. Samuel Sharp, in his letters from Italy in the year 1767, makes the following mention of him, “One of the most curious sights amongst the curiosities of 
“Venice was the famous Mr. M -- -- -- gue. 
He was just arrived from the east; he “had travelled through the holy land, “Egypt, Armenia., c. with the old and new testament in his hands; he had vi“ “mount Sitmi., and ssattcred himsels he had been on the very part of the ' ‘‘ rock 
[ 'fl 1 
rock where Moses Spake face to face with God Almighty; his beard reached down to his breast, and the aress of his head was Armenian, He was in the most enthusiastic raptures with Arabia and the Arabs; his bed was the ground; his food rice; his beverage water; his luxury a pipe and coffee.’* 
This abstemious method of living in imitation of the Arabs ancf Armenians our hero adopted, in the latter part of his life, for he had formerly indulged himself in all the luxuries and sensualities of the east. 
Having rather blunted the edge of his curiosity by continual travel, he resided Several years at Conjiantinople, With relpedt to eating and tk'inking he affected great temperance, but he was never without a Seraglio, filled with the beauties of Georgia 
Circajfia 
[ j72 J 
Circajfia and Greece \ as he deemed a plurality of women consonant to the customs of the patriarchal ages os which he was So fond. 
At length growing very infirm, he began to fear an approaching dissolution;; determined him once more to revisit England., in order to Settle his temporal concerns. He ressedted with considerable chagrin, that his sister, the wife of the present 
Earl of B -- -- -- was his heir at law. For 
his enmity to that nobleman and his family continued, or rather had increased with his years, and he Seemed to have gathered additional malignity by time. 
By his several wives and concubines he had Several children, but was Sensible that they could lay no legal claim to his estate after bis demise, on account of his prior 
marriaoe 
[ 173 ] 
marriage with the pretty washerwoman, who had never been pregnant by him. 
But a letter he received from England gave him new Spirits, for it informed him of the death of the washerwoman, his first wife, who had ’till this time lived in the country upon her annuity, in a very inoffensive and retired manner. 
On the receipt of this intelligence a thought struck his imagination, which gave him a Sensible Satisfaction, as it presented him with the idea of throwing his estate into another channel, and disappointing those obnoxious relations who were in Sanguine expectation of it’s falling to them. 
His Scheme was to marry Some youno woman of indigent circumstances, who was pregnant, that the child being born in wedlock 
t 174 ] 
lock might become his heir. For he was too Sensible of his own imbecility from age and infirmities to suppose he should ever have a child of his own. 
Warm with the idea of this novel method of showing the most permanent resentment to those he So much disrelished, he Wrote to a friend in England to procure a proper young woman in a state of pregnancy, with all possible expedition. 
This request to his friend occasioned an advertisement to be inserted in the morning papers. 
In consequence of this advertisement Several unfortunate fair ones applied, who had been more prolific than their circumstances rendered convenient, and having been for saken by their faithless Swains, thought by 
, the 
[ »75 1 
the tenor of the advertisement that it was a favourable opportunity to alleviate their misfortunes. 
Four osthese were Selected for our hero’s choice. The first being in the' third; the Second in the fourth; the third in the fifth; and the fourth in the sixth morith of her pregnancy. 
\ 
They were informed that the person whosc happiness it should be to be chosen by Mr. M -- -- -- gue, would have a genteel Settlement 
for life; besides the child of which she was pregnant becoming by the marriage heir to a considerable estate; and that the three whose fortune it was to be rejected, would have a present of 200 /. each. per fedly Satisfied with this they were Sent to France, in order to proceed to Paris, where Mr. M — — gue was to meet them, that the 
hynienial 

[ *76 ] 
hymenial election might be made with all possible expedition; but the ladies were all 
disappointed, as Mr. M -- -- -- -- gue did not 
reach Pans., being Seized at Venice with a malignant fever, which carried him off in a few days. Thus his relations who were So obnoxious to him, were much more befriended by^fortune, than by his age dr impotency. 
FINIS. 
S H E R L O C K’S 
L ET 
X. K.J 
VOLUME THE FIRST. 
she LETTERS are enured at Stationer shall. 
1 

L E T X 
R S 
O N 
SEVERAL SUBJECTS, 
BY THE 
. Rev. MARTIN SHERLOCK, A.M.. Chaplain ta the Right Honourable THE Earl of Bristol. 
O that my Eftemy would publish a Book! 
L O N to N: 
Prihted for J. NICHOLS X CADELL, P. E L M S L H. P A Y N E, and Nv CONAN T. 
MDGCLXXXE 

o n 
i 
- 
.iu vil, 
O 

V - v^j t N rt'li t)? "f :; > 
C ■ X C : t il w t * -• > /*. i vx.v* 
<* C' ', 
.in T Y! ' ■, 
m kp^nsi^ am iitiiamnovi i V;; h sit fiteh|>; do ’^^ns C j “r'^’h o Ju'i 
‘ ■ ' .' V ims.. ■ i'. ■ ' < 
M 
! .'+•<>#, ',. fia^f ''irrn ■'■ t '*' • ’’ 
"IT' 
'tiki 

: /. r A Y V ^ Af' 
', ts(y ^ .T ^apbriiy 
h r Si ’. .-• Ki iy.ibn.i i •.*» 


br.y F yf'iy ai ^ 
. ^ 
[ ^ 3 
T O T H E 
RIGHT HONOURABLE 
THE COUNTESS OF 
B R I S T O L 
M A D A M, 
Xcufe me if I do not praise the brightness of your eyes, the isichnefs of your shape, or the uncommon nobieness of y our soul, I am ill at compliment, and’ do not chuse to be every body’s echo. 
A 3 You 
[ ] 
You know me, Madam, to be a modest man; but though modest, I am ambitious : I asprre to please readers of taste and talents. If I have your Suffrage, I staall have theirs. 
I am,. 
with the most perfect veneration and respect,; 
Madam, 
Your Lady strip’s; most obetlient, humble Servant, 
MARTIN SHERLOCK;. 
[ vif ] 
PREFACE. 
AM persuaded my mofher was' in a good-humour when I was made'; for it is very hard to put me out of temper. If anything could do it, it would be the Severity with which I have been treated by the critics. Mercy oit me I how they have maul’d me !' Their indignation, however, - has not fallen fo much on my works as on my person. They cllow my writings merit, but then I am the •vaineft creature— — A 4 Reader, - 
vni 
R E F A C E. 
Reader, I hope you don’t believe them. Sure you don’t think there ever was Such a character asa vain author. 
_0 that my enenly would publish a book, Said Solomon! and I always suspected that this royal writer had uttered this exclamation wdtiie he was Smarting under ’ the critlcisms of some unmerciful Reviewer. These reviev/ers have ever been a dangerous Set of men. What I dislike most in them is their Savage mode of attack. They Shoot at you from l>e. hind a tree : yo, u never See them. However, I believe their policy is good. obscurity gives weight to their oracles. If they were known, 
thein 
6. 
P R E F A C E.’ 
IX 
their names alone would kill their criticisms. 
I do not mean this as a declaration' of war ajrainsl: them all. I arhs not strong enough to fight the whole world, as England does. There are' among them men of parts and can ■ who have treated me with indulgence, who have Spared my person, who have done more than juslice to any feeble talent I may pofsess, and who have enlightened me by their remarks. To the other gentlemen I musl: beg leave to say, ' they are guilty of an error in attacking an author’s person. It is not’ their province. Their duty is tn inform the pulalic of the merits or, demerits 
X P R E F A C K 
demerits of his works. It is of importance to the public to know whether a' writer Speaks truth or falsehood, whether he writes sense or non sense. It is of no importance to it to.know whether he is a proud or a vain man. 
To prove that I am not a vain man, I make two appeals one to those who know me; and they, I am Sure, will bear witness in my favour. The other appeal shall be to my reader, I forced to begin with my own, praise; but as it is strict truth, and necejfary for my defence,,. the reader must pardon me, - I have written in Italian, in engllsh and in French,. The Reviewers, of 
France, 

P R E F A C E. 
XI 
France, of Italy, and England, have criiticised niy writings. They have all agreed in one point, in allowing me good t.ajle. I stake nay reputation upon this astertion,. that there is not among them all a Jingle exception. It is for my last book alone I am censured as vain. In this last book, which I publistied at Pai is, I have written a letter upon (i)taste. In a note on that letter,, there is a defence of the taste of this country, in which are these words : ■ “But if these letters prove: that I have no taste, I entreat the reader not to judge a nation by 
(i) Letter XXIV 

ail; 
XU 
PREFACE. 
an individual, and to be persuaded“ “there are ten thousand' men ‘‘ in England who have more taste “than I.” Reader, is that thdan gnage of vanity ^ 
T r' T[ 
[ ] 
L E 
T E, R S 
O N 
SEVERAL SUBJECTS. 
LETTER i. 
King of Prussia ashed me, What was the reason there was So little. Genius at this instant in Europe? I had, osten looked for an answer to this ques tion besore, but never could find one. I thought, however, it would be making a Sorry figure not to Say Something; So 
"I Said[ 
[ ] 
1 Said, Nature had exhausted herself in producing his Majesty.” This was nonfenfs, and old nonsense too; but the compliment at the end of it gave it an air of novelty. The king’s eye widened. He Said nothing. 
It is inconceivable how absurdly mete of sense Sometimes talk, and how often they deceive themselves and others by a jargon of words, without ever examining the idea they contain. For god’s Sake, what do men mean by Saying that Nature exhausted herself in the age of Pericles, and that she reposed to the days of Augustus? Weakened then, by the productions of Some few geniuses, she had again need to rest to the reign of Leo : and totally worn out, it Seems, 3 under 
[ 13 ] 
under Lewis the Fourteenth, site stow wants a repose os three or Sour centuries, to enable her to produce Something noble and Splendid. ‘ • ‘ C 
How many writers have printed .this idea! What they mean by’ “nature’s being exhausted” I could never penetrate. 
Some ages ago a man and a woman made Homer. This Homer, in every respedt like another man, had the good fortune to unite a nice ear, sine feelings, and a Solid judgement, to an extensive and vigorous imagination. these he had given him at his birth; and these he improved considerably by pradfice. His other acquirements wtre the conse quence of conversation, travel, and an attentive observation of nature. 
i\riosto 
C J 
Ariosto was born many centuries after. He came also into the world as you and I did; but gifted, like Homer, with a fine ear and a brilliant imagination. By labour and study he became master of the poetical language of his country; and, notwithstanding his many and great defects, he is justly to be •feckoned among the first geniuses that Nature has produced. 
, What connedfion there is between homer’s and ariosto’s coming into the world, is‘a mystery of which I have not yet been able to find the key. 
• An honest wmol merchant at Stratford got england’s glory. How far might have been exhausted in So doing I can r not tell, * but how that is to hinder another 
[.... 
'iher wool merchant at Stratford from .getting another shakspeare this night, is beyond my comprehension, 
I wish I knew how men of genius arc made, and I should gladly communicate the receipt to the world.' Every one who has pasted through (i) Aousta knows the way that fools are made. It is a custom, in the vintage nionths, for the husband and wife to go to their cellars ■ after dinner to drink the new wdne, and when they are both half intoxicated they 'make idiots. This place is full of naturals., * and they are almost all born nine mionths after the vintage feason. 
What a digression!! — the brightest genius of Europe to its intellectual 
(i) In Piedinont, 
vol. I. B 
Shoi 
C 18 ] 
abortions. But you know that Letter writing is naturally rambling, and that apology is Sufficient. 
His Majesty talked a great deal about shakspeare. He Speaks eloquently, and attacked our poet with vigour. He began, indeed, with gentleness and good ness in his manner — You admire ‘‘ shakspeare? (i)” — I do. Sire, as the greatest Genius that ever existed.” — Permit Jie to observe, ” he had the condescension to Say, “that when a man “undertakes to labour in any art, of which the rules are fixed and deter minate, he ought to confine himself “to those rules. Aristotle — ” and then he Spoke for Some minutes with great 
(i) He had s^cn it in my Book. 
strength 
C '9 ] 
strength and learning. I Soon Saw that Voltaire had corrupted him; and though I Said all I coukl, consistent with the respetst I owed a Royal Opponent, it was to no purpose. I was always obliged to agree that he was right, while I endeavoured to prove that he was wrong. I appealed from aristotle’s rules to the tribunal os Nature and reason. I insisted humbly upon the incontejuble prerogative os Genius to create, and that consequently shakspeare had the Same right to invent a Species os poetry that thespis had. The attack was a la Prujfietine; the defence was a lan gloife — I consess I liked the def — but I am afraid I was partial. 
B 
He 
r 20 3 
He ashed me after, Whether there was any Successor in England to shakspeare, Newton, and Humef^ I Said, None He ashed. Why was there So great a dearth of literary genius in a country which had produced So many great men? I Thought this question less difficult to be answered than his first. “The stteat 
O 
roads to emoluments and honours in that country. Sire, are the Bar and the houses of Parliament; and therefore' every man aims to render himself famous by his tongue rather than his pen.” — His Majesty Seemed Satisfied 'with this reason. 
LET. 
[ ] 
LETTER II 
"¥_TAVE Wtemen genius? I think they 'A A. have; and I could mention the names of Several living, both, in France and England, to Support my opinion,. But let us endeavour to have a clear idea of 'what genius is, and every one then may decide the question. for himself....... ....... 
is biit another word for Invention. Create anything new, that creation is a work of genius. The only faculty necessary to create is imagination. .Do produce ’an elegant, great,, or useful creation this imagination must B 3 be 
C 22 ] 
she diredsed by judgement. Genius then is the union of a Sound judgement and a Superior imagination. Originality is it’s, infallible criterion. 
I know of no man that ever existed, the whole of whose genius is not comprehended in this description. Archimedes, Newton, shakspeare, and richardson, were only Superior to other mortals by stronger judgements and Superior imaginations. 
The greatest effort of genius that perhaps was ever made, was forming the plan of Clarissa Harlowe. The Second was executing that plan. Here then was genius, upon its most elevated and most extensive Scale. The planning and 
execu 
C 23 ] 
execution of (i) Nourjahad were equally efforts of genius. They differ only in degree. 
The plan of the Iliad was formed in homer’s imagination, as that of alexander’s Ode was formed in.dryden’s. The conception and' execution of those two works were equally efforts of genius, and only differed in degree, like Clarisia and Nourjahad. 
The Species of genius arc as infinite as' its gradations. The General or Admiral who creates a new manoeuvre, proves that he has genius. If he forms a' grand plan for a campaign, he shows 
(i) Written by Mrs. Sheridan, author of Sidney Biddulph, The difcotcty, cone' of the first female Geninfes that ever wrote. 
b4 
himself 
[ ^.4, }■ 
hsinseif to be a Genius ot a Superior order : I believe no one doubts that.du. renne’s pretensions to. this title are as justly Sounded as those of Homer.. 
No men have Such frequent, and Such.: great occasions to display genius as. Mi -- 
I 
nisters have. The man who gave the best proof of the Superiority of his.in. -- vention since this war began,, was he who conceived the idea of the Armed, (i) Neutrality... 
Genius is often Seen in works of; very' little compass : 
Vidit erubuit lympha pudiea Leurn^ Was a line of genius which announced; n; and Bushy felt it. 
(i) This, by the way, is an idea that I hazard:. 
3 nope 
C ^5 ] 
aove fluu t ctdj redeuni fpeflucula matie.^ Divifam imperium cum joneelc^far habeti was a distich of genius which announced Virgil; and Augustus felt it. 
My notion is,., that every person wsho has strength of imagination flishcient to; produce anything new, be that pro, dudeion ever So Small, is a person of genius; and that confec^uently the inventor of the Bayonet and the author ofj the Sentimental Journey wme men of genius, as well as Shakespeare and the.. 
man who invented the art of Printing. 
I have quoted a line and a distich, as 
proofs of genius. I will go farther, and assert that it appears often, in a. single wmrd;. 
imparadid.d 
J 
[ ^6 ] 
imparadid.d in one another’s arms Says Milton: 
When, like an eagle in a dovecoat, I 
fluttepti your voiscians incbriolr; says Coriolanus. 
Emparadised and flutiera are words of genius, and none but men of Superior imaginations could have produced them. 
It would be easy to write a volume on this subjest; but I have already Said enough to prove what I advanced in the beginning of my Letter, that Women have genius; for I have Said that Sterne had Some, and every man knows Women who had more genius than Sterne had. 
LET 
[ ^7 ] 
LETTER III 
'ANY people consider Sensibility as a part of genius. They mistake. Sensibility is a distindt faculty; very distindt indeed; for it belongs to the Soul, with which genius has no necessary connexion. Is there any Soul in the works of Newton or Archimedes? in the architecture of Michael Angelo, or in that of Palladio } Yet thcse men’s title to genius is not to be disputed. 
What has led people into this error, is their finding Sensibility in a very eminent degree in Some men of Superior imagi 6 nations 
£ 3 
nations. Too happy they who unite' them! Human Nature is then arrived at hershighest summit os perse; ion; she can go no farther.. 
I request you will remember I am. not laying down Systems. I give you my ideas upon certain .points, as you. desired; ■ and; I. am now going only to mention my own particular. taste, of which you wist adopt or reject as much 2s you think proper. 
I prefer a man. of genius who has Sensibility to a man of imagiqation who has not One should imagine that all the wmrld would be of my way of thinking.. The fact • is not So; I have known, many men. prefer 
Horace 
T A 1 
.'Horace (S's (i) a foei to Virgil; and al anost ail the Italians preser ariosto' to‘ Tasso. Horace had certainly a sine' fancy, and ariosto’s iinagination^ was, * no doubt, Superior to Taffol3; shut Tasso' has many passages that'elevate’and sosten' the Soul, Ariosto Scarce any. And as to' Virgil, I confess I feel ten times the isteasure in reading his Sourth book, and part of his ninth, that IDO in all the ‘odes of Horace. ' ‘ 
, (0 His Satirejs and Epistles are^mit of the question : 'he is only a poet in his. Otks. If morality was to be considered, Horace is to be preferred to Virgil; and the author of the’ Ramblers to both of them put together. But this is a separate point. We are talking of them here only as poetsi 
It 
C 30 3 
It is inconceivable what a number of men there are in the world who are totally devoid of Sensibility. I remember to have heard a story in France of a young man, who just came from the country, and went with two Ladies to see the tragedy of Iphigenia. When the whole house was dissolved in tears at a very affecting Scene, the Ladies observed that their cousin remained totally unaffedted; and one of them ashed him, why he did not cry as they did. ‘‘why, ’* Says he, “for two reasons; first, I know “that what I see is not true; and next, “suppose it was, what is that to me •real sine feelings are a much rarer gift than is generally imagined. With what cold indifference do many people 
See 
I 31 ] 
see their fellow-creatures in distress, and read Clarissa, without shedding a tear! Clarissa, because they know it is not true; and human beings in misery, because, though it is true, what is that, to them? 
LETI 
3^ ] 
L : E TT E R ly. ' 
'.DU thifik 'voltaire’the first Bel Esprit that ever lived. So dol "You think he had genius. There I am Sorry we differ. If he had, it was So ilittle I could never discover it; and I ’'looked for it often. But I can find ge tiius ill almost every page of shakspeare. Though I have little dearning, I scarce fever discover a beauty in'voltaire, without being able to tell where the mother idea of it is to be found, 
'The works of'voltaire which should Test fiiew his genius, if he had any, are Canciide and a Poem which I dare not 
name. 
C 33 ] 
name. His imagination here was without restraint; and what has it produced? Ridiculous extravagancies and absurdities that disgush these however are the two productions that do most honour to his talents, particularly the lash There are as happy passages in it Sor de • licacy of wit and brilliancy of style as ever were read; but the number of horrors with which it abounds makes it shocking to men of decency, and dis gnsting to all readers of taste. 
'As to the invention of this poem, every one knows that it belongs entirely to Chapelain and Ariosto; as the ground w' ork of cand ide is borrowed from Swift. So that his admirers may give to these performances every other merit they vol. I. C please; 
C 3 4 .7 
please; but as to gbnius> it is out of the question;; - • 
ain voltaire’s friend and enemy. He is a very voluminous and a very unequal author. There is a great deal of good, and a great deal of bad in him. His writings Sometimes breathe a Spirit of humanity, and a love of tolerance, which must endear him to every reader, His style is charming; always rapid, easy,, Diction in writing is like colouring in a picture; it is the first thing that strikes, and with most persons the only thing. Splendid language and bright colours will dazzle ninety-nine people in an hundred, captivate their eye and their fancy, and impose upon their understanding. This has been the 
grand 
C 35 3 
grand magic by which this Seducing writer has sascinated almost all classes of readers. No man ever wrote with greater elegance, delicacy, or grace. So polished, So agreeable. So full of the tone of the best company, he must please every person who loves mankind, who admires writ, and who knows how to appreciate the charms of fine writing, 
'I'urn the medal, and what an unhappy reverse I Audacious preacher of infidelity, malignant calumniator of the most virtuous cliaracters, .odious encourager ef every Species of vice, he Sacrificed all human and divine ideas to his favourite pashons; and prosdtuted talents, formed to adorn humanity, to a miserable love of money and of same. A prostitute he C 2 was, 
[ 36 ] 
was, and of the most despicable class. Born to independence, and possessed of affluence early in lise, he could not plead the Solicitations of necessity; and the innumerable passages of invective, licen tiousness, and impiety, which abound in his works, make him fall an unpitied vicstim of his own innate baseness and depravity. 
Here let it not be imagined I declaim against a philosopher enlightened and humane. I declaim against him because he was not humane. Was that man the lover of his race who deprived the af fiidled of their most healing balm, and the aged of their greatest consolation? Let the aged and afflicted answer the question. — Where lies the chief alleviation 
[ 37 ] 
. tion of their Sufferings? Is it not in religion? Was that man then the friend of mankind, who endeavoured to rob So large a portion of it os their strongest hope, and of their most pleasing enjoy •? Was that man the Sriend of mankind, who brought the Chevalier de la Bar to be broke alive upon the wheel; and who Sowed unhappincss through the world as Sar as he propagated immorality? 
His tragedies, you’ll Say, are moral and instrud: ive. And why are they? becasise to sill them with noble Sentiments and Sound morality was the most likely method to insure their success. Individuals love their own private vices. Bodies of men ever love and countenance C 3 virtue. 
[ 38 ] 
virtue. A romance or poem is writteri for an individual in the dark. A tragedy is addressed to a collective body in the face of day. He knew all this, and, desirous only to please every palate, he Served up virtue to the virtuoiis, and vice to the debauched, and gave to both the highest seasoning a luxuriant fancy could compose. 
^ If you will permit me to follow this metaphor and return to his talents, I will say, Voltaire was a great literary cook. Give him good meats, no man knew better hov/ to dress them. But they must be given him, for he was not rich enough to provide them himself, 
don’t you think his works resemble Corinthian brass? He took the gold of 
shakspeare, 
t 39 ] 
shakspeare, Virgil, Corneille, Racine, Ariosto, and Pope, and the silver os La Fare, Chaulieu, Fontenelle, and Hamilton, and melted them together in the crucible os his brain. The metal produced was neither pure, nor gold, nor Silver; it was brass; but it was .corinthian'brass,. ic 
G 4 
h E T 
C 40 3 
LETTER V 
UT voltaire’s quantity astonishes. It never astonished me. He made verses at twelve years old. By eighteen he had published works, and was introduced by Ninon d.dnclos to the most polished people of Paris. From eighteen to eighty-four he never ceased to labour; and is it astonishing that in sixty-two years he produced about six good volumes? Will any impartial man say that there are more than six volumes of his forty which are really worth mentioning? 
Is 
[ 41 3 
Is there an advantage that an author can have that this man wanted? Born independent; situated at Paris; protect: ed by the great; courted, I may Say, by Sovereigns; his works purchascd with avidity by booksellers; devoured with greater avidity by the public; the advantages os learning, travel, and So long a life; what an assemblage of happy circumstances! Is it prodigious that one Sixth part os his works is worthy of praise? 
I think Dryden was a man of better parts than Voltaire. But how different their situations in lise! The one never obliged to enter his cabinet, till to enter it gave him pleasure; the other Sat shivering at his table, with Samine staring 

[ 4^ ] 
ing him in the face if he did not produce his four plays at the end of a year one enjoying every luxury of life; the other in want of all its necessaries: dry den* living in a climate unfavourable to fancy, and certainly forced to live upon malt liquors, which almost kill the imagination : the meat and manner of dreshng it, the milk, cheeie, and butter, and every other article of life, decidedly conducing to'thicken the blood, clog its motion, and consequently to deaden the fancy. Voltaire breathing a pure and vivifying air; no heavy liquors; no gross nourishment; every article of life the very reverseof what it is in England. The French poet living on the‘theatre of 'Europe (a most important circumstance); 
the 
[ 43 3 
tie English poet confined to the British dominions. If Voltaire, at a Supper, produced four happy lines, in six weeks they had gone farther than dryden’s same will poshbly ever reach : his ten guage universally understood; his merit of consequence universally felt. Everything that tends to raise and quicken the Spirits is of usesto a man who works from fancy; and what raises the Spirits higher than the idea of universal admiration?? circumstance in France is favourable to talents : every circumstance is against them in England, except one. They are recompensed here in a manner unknown to any other nation. The Earl of Southampton gave shakspeare more in one present than 
Voltaire 
II 
[ 44 1 
Voltaire ever received from all the nobility of France. Dr. robertson received, I dare Say, six times as much for his History of Charles V as he could have got for it in any other capital in Europe, Supposing the book had been written in the language of the country. Rewards like these conquer climate and every other disadvantage. But poor Dryden lived in a worthless reign, and was too happy not to die literally by hunger, as his. contemporary Otway did. 
All the ideas in these two last letters may be false. Perhaps they may make true ones arise in you. 
LET 
C 45 ] 
LETTER VI 
“Henriade is a finer epic poem 
“than the Iliad, the .Dneid, the jerusalerd Delivered, or than the pa radise Lost.” 
Well Said, Lord Chestersield. I like a man that has an opinion of his own; and this opinion was positively his lord * snip’s, unless, as I have more than once been tempted to suspedt, he stole it from Voltaire. 
To Support this singular judgement he Says, It is all good sense Srom beginning to end.” So it is; and So is the History of Lewis the Fourteenth; but 
that 
s 46 r 
that does not make it an epic poem. Lord Chesterfield might have Said a great deal more in its favour without annihilating poor Homer, Virgil, Milton, and Tasso. But he Seems to me to have loved Greek a little as a Frenchman does; and I am not Sure that he Had quite talents enough to praise well. ri chardson. remarks very justly, that poverty of genius is the reason that men eanst praise one woman but by robbing the rest:. 
The noble .wniter might have courted this author much better,, because more truly, by Saying, The Henriade is a fine poem, written with elegance, correct: ness, and dignity. The diction is rich and Splendid, the thoughts just, the Sentiments noble, 
C 47 ] 
blc, and the versification as harmonious as French versification can be.' He might; have told hirb; Your poem', notwithstanding its points and antitheses, has iess^ desects than either the ^neid or the Iliad; — and (this he need not have told him, but he should have thought it) — it’s only material faults are want of intereji^ want of enthsisiasm, and want; of original beauties. 
Some of his (i) Portraits are brilliant; and bold. .The Death of (2) Coligny, the description pf the (3) Massacre and of the (4) Temple of Love, deserve the warmest praise. 
(i) Particularly that of the Duke of Guise, Chant III (2) Chant II (3) Ibid. 
(4) Chant IX 
Theses 

C 4s ] 
these are the best passages in his poem; and they are truly excellent. However, I cannot think they are fuffi ’ cient to eclipse the greatest works that England, Italy, and Greece can boast of. Indeed my Lord Chesterfield Seems to have doubted himself of the truth of his assertion, for, forgetting his wonted good breeding, he has recourse to fomet of Lord peter’s (i) arguments, and abuses grossly every one who presumes to differ from him in opiniori. 
(i) Tale of a Tub. 
L E TI 
49 ] 
LETTER VII 
ido not know any writer whose irony is equal to voltaire’s for edge and polish; nor do I know any writer who. possessed the Graces in a more eminent degree than he did. There is an elegance in his manner, and a delicacy in his turns, wshich cannot be Surpassed, I. shall give here tw o short Specimens, in a Letter, and a quatrain 
You know that to have merit in any literary line, was Sufficient to excite the envy and hatred of this extraordinary man. M. le President de Pompignan, author of Dido, and a poet of real vol. I. D talents. 
C so ] 
talents, had the missortune to be singularly disagreeable to M. de Voltaire, who, according to his usual custom without respedt to truth or decency wrote a number of violent and atrocious calumnies against him., The brother of this Gentleman, who, as well as I recollect, was in the army. Sent a Letter to the Satirist, in wshich he told him, that, is ever he wrote against any of his family again, he should cut off his ears. M. de clioiseul was then in the ministry; and Voltaire Sent him the following Letter.: 
Monsieur, 
“Tout le Sang de.dompignan m’en veut; Ihin m’teorche les oreilles de puis, vingt ans; i’autre me mark rez ■ 
C 51 3 
cemment qusil veut me les couper“ “vous de ce Spadashn, monsieur & je me chargerai de Tecorcheur; car enfin je veux con server mes oreilles, northeast Seroit ce que pour entendre tout le bien qu’on dit fie votre ministere, 
“Je Suis, Monsieur, c.” 
isn’t that a charming Letter? You See he was almost frightened out of his wits; for he was a very timorous man. But with what address does he conceal his terrors! and at the Samie time how ingenious, lively, and graceful is his address to the Minister to preserve his ears! 
d2 
M. de 
[ ] 
M. de la Borde was going on a visit to Ferney; Madame du Barry begged of him to give Voltaire two kisses from her. He Sent her, in re, turn, these four lines: 
oi! deux baifers fur la fin de ma vie! ^elpaffeport daignez vous nfenvoyer! Ah! den efi trap, adorable Egerie, 
Je ferois mort de plaisir au premier. 
Only think of these verses, when he was almost eighty! 
If I had a mind to quote blernishes and abominations, God knows there is, a plentiful crop of them in his works. But, besides that I do not chuse to present anything offensive to my reader’s imagination, nor to pollute my own 
pages. 
C 53 I 
pages, I have more pleasure in pointing out beauties than faults; 
I love to praise with reason on my side.” * The unsortunate princess of brunswick, wdto was married to the Prince hoj^al of Prusha, was condemned, for conjugal infidelity, to perpetual confinement in the town of Stetin, where you know she now is. The King always liked this princess. She Sent to France for a handsome gown., All French goods pay very high duty in the Prussian domi nioit§^; and when the robe arrived, the officers of the customs refused to Send it to the princess till he had received the duty She Sent him a very civil mef sage, requesting he would bring the stuff, and that she would give him the money. 
D 3 As 
'C 54 ] 
Soon as she had taken it from himy and locked it up, she stew upon him, and gave him two most violent boxes m the Sace. The man complained to the King; Said he was dishonoured, and demanded redress. His Majesty wrote the following determination; 
“La perte du droit d’accise Sera Sur “mon compte. La robe restera a la Princess. Les deux Soustlets a celui qui les a remits. Quant au pretendu* deshonneur j’en releve le plaignant: jamais P application d’une belle main n’a psi deshonorer la face dshn doua nier. 
Frederic.” 
Though this decision is pretty generally known, I give it you here, that 
you 
C 55 ] 
you may compare voltaire’s manner witlt the King of prusha’s.. They are both of the same School; but there is a shade between them, which I defy language to express, though it is very perceivable, and very easily felt. 
^.4 
LETE 
56 3; 
LETTER Vllt. 
r..addison was a very fine writer: : elegant, graceful,, and polished. He has written (^1') profejfedly on' wit; and after having remarked that no author had entered into the bottom of this jnatter, he has,, with great judgement, divided his Subject: into three parts.. All that he Says upon mixed and salse wit appears to me to be perfect. I cannot Say I think him equally happy in wshat he Says on. true wit.' 
He begins with observing, that Mr., Locke has an admi” ble refiediion upon 
(i) Spestator,. 58, and the five following.; Papers, 
the 
t 57 I 
lliedifferencebetween wsit andjudgemenr,, whereby he endeavours to show the reason why they are not always the talents of the Same person. His words are as follow: 
“And (r) hence, perhaps, may be ^ given Some reason of that common observation, 
- 
(i) Becaiife Mr. Locke has said here, that men who have a great deal of wit have not au vjays the clearell judgement; and because he; has said alittle after,, that judgement, on the con» trarjy lies quite on the other Jide., _ many people have understood that he meant that wit andj judgement were at variance, and that they were, never, or at least very Seldom, to be met together. If people Speak about ordinary Wits, i give up the question; but if they mean Wits of the first rank, I contend for the direct contrary of this afiertion; and I affirm, that though aman may have an infallible judgement without 
pofle sting 
C fs] ] 
that men who have a great deal of wit and prompt memories, have not always the clearest judgement, or deepest reason. For wit lying most in the assemblage of ideas, and putting 
ct 
pofleliing a particle of wit, it is impossible for him to have wit without judgement; and that So far from judgement’s being opposite to wit, •it is it’s constant companion, and absolutely inseparable from it. Who do yot.1 think, Reader, were the three greatest Wits of this country? I believe you will answer. Swift, Congreve, and Mr. Sheridan. Which of those three men wanted judgement? 
When the fancy has discovered a relatiott stiip between two remote ideas. Surely the judgement must determine whether the difeovery be a just one. If there is not judgement to decide for the fancy, Ihe operates at random, and for one just trait of wdt that file produces, file will produce ten false ones, 
thosc 
C 59 ] 
those together with quickness and variety, wdierein can be Sound any resem blance or congruity thereby to make up “pleasant pictures and agreeable visions in the fancy; judgement, on the con trary, lies quite on the other side, in ‘‘ Separating caresully one from another, ideas wherein can be found the least difference, thereby to avoid being misted by similitude and by affinity to take one thing for another. This is a way of proceeding quite contrary to metaphor and allusion; wherein, for the most part, lies that entertainment and pleasantry of wit which strikes So lively on the fancy, and is therefore So acceptable to all peopled 
Mr. 
[ 6o ] 
Mr. addison adds to this, by tvay cif explanation, “that every resemblance os ideas is not that which we call wit, unless it be Such an one that gives delight and furfrlze to the reader: “these two properties Seem essential to wit, more particularly the last of them.” I have the good fortune to think entirely with Mr. addison, that those two properties are essential to wit; but. Speaking with all the deserence due to So great a man, I do not think it is more particularly the lafl of them: I think it is more particularly the jirfi. 
When I presume to differ Srom Such an author as this, 1 write with dissi dence; but Locke has justly advanced that no deference is to be paid to au“ 
“
C 6i ] 
thorlty and I explain myself by an instance; when Othellb Says, • 
• I caught by the throat, the uncircumcised dog, 
: And Smote him thus 
I am Sure no man living ever foresaw the close. Jnd smote him thus is a very high degree os Surprise; but it gives no delight, and no one ever thought of calling it wit. 
'There is generally a peculiar justness and perspicuity in the illustrations of this great critic, which render them at once agreeable and infirudtive. I am not Sure that I am not mistaken here; but what does the reader think? To Support and illustrate his idea that surprise 

C 62 ] 
prise more particularly is essential to wit, he Says, Thus when a poet tells us the bosom of his mistress is as white as Snow, there is no wit in the compa ‘‘ rison (because there is no surprise) : ^fbut when he adds, with a sigh, that it is.as cold too, it then grows into wit (because this last is unexpedled.) I con fess, this idea appears to me to be totally false. Who ever heard of a sighing Wit? Is Romeo a Wii? No; but Mercutio is. If a man’s .saying, the bosom of his mistress is as white as Snow, but alas! it is as cold too, ” be wv, there never was a wittier poet than Petrarch. Yet I, do not remember to have ever heard, that Petrarch was a Wit. dhighd is inse 
: parable 
C 63 ] 
parable from wit, and gaiety is the constant companion of delight (i). 
This is all that Mr. addison has Said of true wit, and this is the single example he has given of it: this, I alk his pardon, appears to me to be no example at all. 
He afterwards quotes Dry den’s definition of wit, which he very judiciousty (2) condemns, as not being So properly 
(I) Read over what Locke has Said in the beginning of this letter, and you will find the words plea -- fant^ agreeable .entertainment pleasantry., .lively There is nothing like this in a lover’s saying, his inilirefs’s bosom is as cold as snow. 
He might have condemned pope’s along with it, and nearly for the same reason;; 
“wit. is nature to advantage drefs’d.’* 
pope’s definition in prose is no better than his definition in verse;; is a quick conception, ■ “and.an easy delivery.’’ 
ade 
C 64 ] 
a definition of wit as of good writing in general. ‘‘ It is (fays Dry den) a pro“ “of words and thoughts adapted to the Subjetst.” Is it not extraordinary that So Sagacious a writer as ad dison did not See that, in condemning Dry den, he was passing judgement upon himself? Listen to him in the very next paragraph. 
Bouhours, whom I look upon to be the most penetrating of all the French critics, has taken pains to show, that it is imposhble for any thought to be beautiful which Is not just, and has not its foundation in the nature of things; that the basis of all' wit is truth; and ‘‘ that no thought can be valuable of which good sense is not the groundwork. 


■[ 6s ] 
work. Boileau has endeavoured tp inculcate the Same notion in Several parts of his writings, both in prose and verse. This is that natural way os writing, that beautiful simplicity, which distinguishes the ancients, and which nobody deviates from but those who want strength of genius to make a thought shine in its own native beau ties. Poets, who want strength of genius to give that majestic simplicity to Nature, ” c. Nobody, I believe, denies any part of this; but what has it to do particularly with wit? Are not truth and good sense the necessary groundwork of every Species of excellent composition } And is not all this as true of vol. I. E 
C 66 ] 
od wniing in general.,, as it is osvvit ?■ Bct qs all the ideas that were ever thought df,. what has wit to do with 2..majeftic fim^ flicityf Wit and Majesty are almost (t) opposites... Simplicity, I allow,, is the ■first grace of every work of every Species. Btit there are different sorts of .simplicity and that which belongs pe -- Culiarly to. vitis a. (2) brilliant simpl> city,, and not a tnajejiie Qne.„ 
(i) They met once in the King of Fruflia. 
(■2)" Brilliancy ever had, and ever ought to have, a powerful effect upon mankind. No eye jean be insensible tp the lustre of the diamond. All that can be guarded against is receiving false brilliant for true.. As a false stone highly poiifhed will deceive an ignorant eye; fo a false thought in Iplendid language wdll dazzle and irapofe on an uncultivated imagination. *•* A pun” (fays Dr. 
jehafen) 
C 67 j 
Johnfcn) “was the Cleopatra for which Shak *'‘ lpea’’e loll the world.” Antony lost the world for Cleopatra, and loll it to Aiigiiftus : but to whom did Shakespeare lose it? If the Augullus, cannot be named, Dr. johnfon’s brilliant phrase ia £dfe wit. 
E 2. 
L E .D 
C ] 
LETTER IX 
IT is compounded of imagination and judgement. So I Said genius was. Yet wit and genius are not two similar faculties which differ only in degree; they are very distinct.. Sound judgement is equally necessary to both; but the imagination in a man of genius differs not only in magnitude from the Same faculty in a man of wit, but seems to meto be almost of a different Species., In many respetsts they resemble each other, but the essential difference which I think Separates them is heat. Allow me a familiar image, and I’H make 
my 
[ 69 ] 
my meaning clear. Wit resemblcs a lively French lapdog; genius a highbred English foxhound : genius resem bles a conflagration; wit an artificial firework; or if you chuse a higher and perhaps a juster allusion; genius may be compared to a torrent os lava, and wit to a lively limpid rivulet. 
The object of wit is to please; the object; of genius is to invent. There never was a man of genius who was not a Ieef thinker: people may have wit who never think deeply; witness a hundred women who are full of wit, and who are incapable of deep thinking. Wit is pretty; genius is Sublime : that charms; this transports : wit Sparkles; genius blazes : that gives pleasure; this 
e3 
gives 
[ 7° 3 
•gives rapture. We love wit; we revere •genius. The lips os wit are dressed in Smiles, as were the lips os Sterne and Voltaire; the brow of genius is ploughed with wrinkles, as you See in the busts of newtonand Archimedes. wit’s laurels ilourish while they are protected by novelty; the bays of genius acquire fresh ■ness by the lapse of years. Am I partial, or am I true? Perhaps I deceive myself, but I mean to be just; shak •speare’s reputation increases daily, while voltaire’s Same is hourly decaying. 
I have Said that heat appears to me to be the quality that discriminates genius •from wit. A man may be witty in a very eminent degree, and not have a ray of that vigorous .and vivifying warmth 
which 
i n 2 
Wsiich is neceifary to imprcgn the fancy. 'Few men had more wit than Pope; yet wanting, like Voltaire, that male energy and burning glow, which alone clistin* guish the trueborn genius, he never can be ranked but in a secondary class. Compare him with Dryden. And since he thought iproper to enter the lists with that poet, in writing an ode on St. ceci lia^s day, letthose two odes determine between them. One is the cool, tame, pretty rivulet; the other the vesuvian torrent I Spoke of. 
The evident criterion of warmth in a writer is his heating his reader. And were I to decide from my own feelings I should Say, that shakspeare and Homer were the first poetic geniuses that ever E 4 wrote ■; 
[ 72 ] 
wrote : and that corneille’s s; enius was supeisior to racine’s. 
From all this diffcrtation on wit and genius, it is pretty evident on which side the Supeisiority lies. But let not the Wit. be discontented with his lot; perhaps it is the milder of the two. As works of genius are difficult to be produced, So they are not easy to be estimated. A trait of wit is produced in an instant; an instant is Sufficient to determine it’s value. The admiration acquired by genius is: partial and stow; the suceess of wit is rapid and universal. Richard Son is not yet arrived at the fullness of his glory f Voltaire gained admirers as fast as he got readers. Wit is relished by every class' of mankind; while heaven born genius 
is 
C 73 3 
is tasted but by few. Some months gave Sterne more reputation than Milton acquired in many years;; had it not been for a man of wir, perhaps the author of our Sublimest poem would have been still but little known., 
Grey beautifully Says; 
“Full many a gem of purest ray ‘‘ Serene 
“The dark unsathom’d caves of ocean bear; 
Full many a stower is born to blush unseen, 
“And waste its sweetness on the desert air.” 
And as many a genius remains uncultivated and unregarded in the world; So it is more than probable that many a 
Farad ise 
t 74 ] 
paradise Lost lies negledsed for want ot addisons to point out their merits. 
There are a hundred Species of wit. It would be easy to mention them all; but it would be useless, unless I illustrated each by a quotation. This would cost me a great deal of time and labour. I have the highest re Sped: for my reader, * shut I must request his permission to defer sthis to another opportunity. 
L E T. 
t : 75 3 
LETTER X 
IR, Says a man to swist, I have a mind to Set up for a Wit. Sir, Says swist, ' I advlse you to ‘sit down again. This was‘very good advice, particularly in this country, where, that Same author has observed, not one man in ten thousand has wit. Almost everybody is witty in France. Why then there, and not here? The reasons are purely physical; for Englishmen ought to have twenty times more wit than Frenchmen, Ideas are the matter os which wsit is made, and the English have infinitely more ideas than the French. This 
arises[ 
■[ ] 
arises froin their early education, from their being a more reading people, c. You See this is a very strong reason why' the English ought to be Superior to the French in this point. 
But if ideas are the materials, fancy is the instrument which operates on those materials; and here comes in the Superiority os the Frenclt. Their fancies are livelier, brighter, and quicker. 
The' force of the imagination depends .a great deal on the afstuence of the animal Spirits; its brightness, on the refinement of those Spirits; and its quickness, .on the celerity of their movement. Now, in point of copiousness of Spirits, the English, I believe, have the advantage of the French. A bull has more 
Spirits 
C 77 ] 
fjsirits in him than an ape; but the ape’s Spirits are always in motion, and it is very difficult to move the bull’s. This,, you See, is a case in point; and John Bull, I am pcrsuaded, has a greater quantity os Spirits than Jack Singe. But the frenchman’s Spirits are more refined and. cjuicker in their motions than ours, and this for a number of reasons. I shalst here mention Some of the principal., A Frenchman never tastes malt liquor; he eats no butter, and his bread is light the meat in France is not near So fat as it is here,, and it is much better: drested : the.. are poignant, ancf not greasy; he eats a great deal of Soup and light vegetables; he^drinks in moderation as much wine and .water 
as 
C 78 1 
tjs is necessary to dilute his dinner, anci then he takes as much good wine, coffee, and liqueurs, as is necessary to heat his stomach, and t}uicken the circulation of his blood, and no more. Add to thistle pureness of the air, and the light Society of the most amiable women in the world, in which he pastes So much of his time; and you will See reasons.. enough why his Spirits should be quicker in their motion and more refined than ours., 
I need not mention how opposite our manner of living is; the quantities of blood food we eat, the quantity of bad wine we drink, the grostiiels of our at mosphere, nor many other causes that hinder the celerity of our fancies, and 
confe 
[ 79 J 
consequently impede considerably the vivacity of our wit.. 
However, the English do not think muck, cs the Supcrioisity of the French, in this article. They pique themselves on having better. sense and more learning; than their neighbours; and they have more scnse and learning.. The French allow this, and it does not give them any uneasiness. They value themselves on being; wittier and more amiable than the English and they are wittier and more amiable.. When a Frenchman has knowledge, and is grown a, little steady, his company is delightful; when an Englishman has fancy and good manners, his Society, is enchanting.. I always thought that those two nations, blended 
together,. 
[ 8o ] 
together, would produce perfection in everything. 
To return to wit. If a man is full of quick and refined Spirits; if he has a number of ideas, and if he has a ready and Sound judgement to determine the justness of a combination as soon as it is made, that man cannot fail to have wsit. If he exercises his fancy much in this way, it will acquire a great facility from practice; and he will often be witty almost without knowing it. This is another reason why the French have wit, * they are continually running after it. I need not tell you why they seek it So much. You know nothing pleases more than wit does; and the whole nation has a desire to please. 
I knew 
t 8i ] 
I knew an odd fellow, ■ who told me That, whenever he had a mind to be 'wsitty<, he fed himself for it Some time ■before; as they do game cocks, to make them sight. i live. Sir, ” said he“ “eggs, oysters, cream, jellies, ^barley broth, succulent foods of all sorts, and drink porter. This sills me with blood and fpiisits; but at the “same time it sills me wsith gross hu mours; and I am as dull as an alder man. I then take a medicine or two, which 'carries off the coarser and heavier parts of those stuids: the fpb rits by this, you See, become purified and refined; it only remains to put them in motion; and this I do by a page of Shakespeare, a sprightly com vol. I. F panion. 
I 82 ] 
panion, a good gallop in atost chaise, by music, coffee, or applying a nap kin steeped in Spirits of wdne or bran dy to my Sorehead. I am then as witty as an angel, and happy is the “man or woman that comes in my way — while the sit lasts.” This was an eccentric Sort of Being; but I •thought there was good fense in what he Saici. 
Another thing in England which deadens our fancies is, “that Surly spi rit. Melancholy, bakes our blood, and makgs it heavy thick; which, in France, runs tickling up and down the veins, making that idiot laugh ter bold men’s eyes and strain their cheeks to idle merriment.” I quote 
Shak 
I 83 ] 
‘isliakspcare as a philosopher; and you See he Says melancholy clogs the motion of the blood, and consequently, if my System be a just one, annihilates fancy. Gaiety, on the contrary, accelerates the motion of the Spirits, and is at once the promoter and Supporter of wit. For this reason, and a thousand others, I shall conclude with a moral exhortation, in the words of an amiable (i) poet : 
let’s be gay, 
While we may, ” tec. cc. 
(1) Gay. 
¥ % 
LET 
C 84 ] 
LETTER XI 
world is unjust to polite writers. It Says they are only entertaining; but that, being of no Solid utility to mankind, they do not merit a place in the first rank of authors. IS it be .true that they are of no benefit to Society, I shall most readily agree that they are entitled to a very Small degree of esteem. Lo do good ought to be the great object of every worthy being; and the author or artist who loses sight of this object, be his talents what they may, must ah\^a5^s be looked upon in an inferior light. 
Whoever 
[ 85 J 
Whoever gives innocent pleasurc, docs good. And if these writers had no other merit, that alone would entitle them to a certain degree of consideration fronr the world.. But they appear to me to benefit mankind more than any other elass of authors; and consequently I think they deserve a degree of public fa -- your proportioned to the advantages that Society gains by their labours.. 
Ash any man. Who are the; writers of the highest dignity? He will ansvver, .Histbisians.. He has ansvvered a question which he has never examined and' which, probably, he learned by rote before he was able to examine it. Ash him a Second, and he will prove what I advance.. Desire him to tell yon, whe f 3, there 
C ] 
there he has received more pleasure and’ useful instruction from Mr. addisorrs Spectators, or from Dr. robertson’s History of Charles the (i) Fifth, and I will venture to Say he will answer, if he reflects a little, From the Spectators. Aik him then which of those t wo authors works have done most good to the people of the present age, men and women; and which will do most good to all succeed ing ages;, if he is capable of judging coolly, and knows the world, I am per suaded he will answer, Mr. addison. 
(I) I should be very Sorry that any one stioiild imagine I meant here to detradt from Dr. ro ber tfoa’s merits.. I am not ignorant that he has great and nniverfal same throughout Europe; and I well know that he deserves it. 
Ail 
t 87 i 
All the ideas which have ever paffest through my head, may have pasted, Sor auo'ht I know, throu2; h the heads of a thousand other men; and are, for aught 1 can tell, printed in a hundred books. What I have just Said, and what I am going to Say, may have often been Said and wn itten already. I shall not deny that, becaiisc I do not know it to be true. I shall only affirm, that I have copied no man, and that all I Say, good and bad, is drawn from myself, and from my own cbfervaticn. I have looked upon the vrorld a good while,, and I believe I know it. I read formerly a few .good books; and chance has procured me advantages which do not happen to everybody; those of conversing with a F 4 number 
[' 8s J 
number of the most polished and most enlightened persons now living. Front' all that I have ever been able to collett from reading, .Seeing, thinking, and conversation,, I have long since laid it up. as a fixed conclusion in my mind,, that refined taste and elevated morals were most intimately connedied; and that consequently the man who promotes the one, does infinite Service to the cause of the other. 
Good sense is the foundation of morality as wtii as of (i) taste; and the first point towards perfecting both is acquiring a just and Solid understanding. 
( i) “Toiit doit tender au bon fens.” 
“Scribendi recste fapere est principiuni Sc “fons.” 
The 
[ 89 1 
The great leading pisinciples of taste are also the first principles in morals., (i) Decency and truth are equally essential to both and what I Say is So certain, that those two Sentences which have been So osten quoted as principles of taste, are found in two epistles w'lsich are written entirely on moral Subjects. 
A very considerable part of the young; men of this country run into: vice, not from, natural vicious inclinations, but from vrant of knowing how to dispose off their time.. If they had a taste for let' ' and for the arts, that wmuld open to. 
them a never-failing fountain of amuser) 
“Quid verura atque decens 
Rica n’eft beau que Ie vrai, le vrai seul ell “ainnble. 
u 
ment; 
C 90 j 
ment and at the same time that it afforded them entertainment, would, by refining their understandings, and polishing their imaginations, make them loath the low pleasures of riot and debauchery, in which they now waste their time, and destroy their constitutions. 
Another advantage of taste is that of awakenino' the feclino; s. Few men are 
O O 
born without feelinp but it lies dormant 
O ^ 
in many; in many it is perverted; and in a great number it is hardened by their commerce with the worthiest part of the world. The power of taste is sufficiently strong, not only to call out the Seeds of humanity that lie, if I may So say, asteep within our breasts; but what is infinitely stronger, and indeed almost astonishing, 
it 
[ 91 ]' 
it is capable of correcting cruelty. I Speak from Sadt. Augustus was an uncommonly cruel man.. He delighted in bloodshed. While he was Seasting his senses with the inhuman Spcdtacle of gladiators butchering each other, Mscenas> who stood behind him, and was a man os taste and Seeling, no longer able to Support the sight,, cried, (i.) Landetn' define carnifex. ‘‘ Executioner, will you never have done Landem shows mxcenas’s 
(i) The boldest word that ever was Said to a Sovereign. The famous Duke de crillon’s answer to Henry the Fourth of France, though in a different style, was very bold. too. When the duke came one day into the circle, the king said;; le pus brave homme de non royaurne. Crillon replied diredhy; Vous aver., mentis Sire deft vous. 
impatience 
ic 1 
[ 92 1 
impatience, and that the exclamation burst Srom his Soul. Aumistus, no less struck with the animation of his minister’s manner, than with the force of his cxpreshon, instantly left the amphitheatre, and never returned to it again. 
What was this but a lessbn of taste? When they came home, wshat Mtecenas Said to him I cannot tell. I know his (i)text, I know it was a good one, and I have reason to believe he handled it like a master. I Say / have reason to hdievcy because I know the charadfer of Augustus changed.. Maecenas inspired him with a love of the arts, uave him a taste for the compositions and Society of 
(i) “Tandem define, carnifex.” 
men 

C 94 ] 
LETTER XII 
T HAVE Said (i) already that taste is a combination of judgement and feeling. it’s province is to chuse and to reject. A man of genius sits down to compost. He often rushes into matter from a Sudden impulse;; oftener his fancy grows heated by degrees. tie writes a phrase, and leans upon his elbow; he thinks a while, and then he finds another idea. As his imagination works, it warms; he starts from 
(i) Letter XXIV Vol. II of “Letters from English Traveller.” 
his 
C 93 ] 
Ills Seat, and walks about his room ideas and images crowd faster on him than he is able to wtste them down. This is not the moment for taste to be employed. Let him not check the current of his thoughts, but write them all in the disorder in which they come. The torrent, he maybe Sure, will bring rubbish along wsith it; the office os taste is to clear this rubbish away. He should then examine with Scrupulous Severity the lines that he has written, to preserve the true, the noble, and the fine; and to reject the low, the common, and the false. shakspeare wrote in the manner I have described; but he rarely read over what he had written. 
When 
( 96) 
. When Milton read over his episode of ■sin and Death, had his taste been pure, he would have thrown it in the sire; but he was in love with Some real beauties in it; and for their Sakie he pardoned it’s ilisgusting desedss, 
. One should imagine that taste was net ffo difficult to be acquired,; and yet how : many capital writers are there who want fit! Or .rather indeed how Sew are there who possess it I it’s grand points are contained in a very narrow compass; they lie in two words, truth and decency : verufii atque decent. Its 
minuteneffes are as impossible to be pointed out as they art to be enumerated. The man who never has a word or 
phrase 
C 97 ] 
phrase that violates decency or truth, will never have a gross fault of bad taste in his works. But there are different! degrees of good taste. To poffess the highest (as Lord Eriftol does) one must unite an unerring judgement to exquisite Sensibility. 
Every faculty of man is persedhed by pradsice. He acquires a jusmess in his J ear, a cliasteness in his eye, a Strength in his judgement, and a vivacity and delicacy in his feelings, by frequent use of those Several senses and powers. Few men are born without feeling, and consequently without a possibility of having taste. As judgement can only be the result of knowledge, to form it requires 
vol. I. G time 
C 98 ] 
time and labour; and unless the judgement be just, the more feeling a man has, the falser his taste will be. To Support this idea, I mention the Italians, who have great feeling; but, not having principles or isiglit grounds to judge on, have the falsest and most extravagant notions of any people in Europe. I Sueak here of the nation in o eneral, 
i. O’ 
and of their taste for poetry in particular. 
I do not write for men of the world, who are already formed, or for men of letters, many of whom are able to instruct me. I address myself only to uninstrudted youth. To form the judgement of a young man to any art, poetry for example. 
L 99 ] 
ample, let him read none but the best books of the chastest writers. Let Truth and Decency be his leading principles. Let Boileaii, Horace, and ' Longinus be his perpetual guides. They are the great legissators of taste. They have Said everything; but as, in confe quende of their good tajie, they have compressed their fense in a Small compass, they must be read often to be completely understood. Sometimes a line. Sometimes a word is pregnant with meaning. To comprehend them clearly, they must be meditated on. 
those three critics well digested, and joined to the reading of Homer, Sophocles, Virgil, Tasso, Metastasio, Racine, G 2 Pope 
[ ] 
Pope and addison, will Sorm a persedh taste. A competent knowledge of all those languages, and that taste I Speak os, may be acquired in infinitely less time than is generally imagined. 
LET 
L loi ] 
LETTER XIII 
Say the present generation is bad; and they asfure us the next will be worse. I do not know how true that may be; but I will venture to assert, that every young person who reads this Letter till he has fixed the principles it contains firmly in his mind, will be the better for it as long as he lives. 
This Letter, dear young Sir, will show neither wit, taste, nor talents in me : it will only show labour. It will be a short compilation of principles, drawn from my three favourite critics, 
Gj 
to 
[ 102 j 
to help you to form your taste. I flatter mysels that by this I may do you real Service; because I am persuaded, if I make your taste better, I shall make your morals better; and if I make your morals better, I shall make you happier. 
For Sear you should not feel the full force os the compliment I pay you in compiling for you, I must affure you,. that it costs me much less trouble to write than to quote. While I draw from mysels, writing is a pleasure to. me. While I copy Srom others, it is exceedingly tiresome; and while lam Searching for what is to be’ copied, it costs me both time and toil. 
There 
C >°3 ] 
There is a very intimate connexion between the arts. When you are capable os judging poetry perfectly, you will be able, with very little application, to acquire a just taste in the others. My object, then, is to give you Some general principles by which you may be enabled to judge most poetical compositions with tolerable justness, and to feel a certain degree of pleasure from their beauties. I suppose that you understand yet no language intimately but English. 
The three great points on which good taste depends are Truth (i), 
(i) “Qiiidverum atque decens... .” 
Rien n’ell: beau que le vrai, le yrai seul eft “amiable. 
“Tout doit tender au bon Sens.” 
G 4 Decen 
L 
[ ^04 ] 
d.eceis: cy, and Good Sense (1). If a line is ever So pleasing to the ear by it’s harmony, or ever So dazzling to the ■ imagination by brilliancy of thought or Splendour of expression, if it offends Sound sense, decency, or truth, it is not a good line. 
Consider what a poet is. He is not a person who by mechanical labour makes faultless verses. The man alone deserves this honourable distinction, who is possessed of genius; who has a Superior portion of enthusiasm, of that ethereal Spirit which Horace calls divine. 
(i) These are words which I have often mentioned; but they cannot be too often repeated. 
and 
4 
C ] 
and who has a capability of Saying great and elevated (i) things 
Examine is your poet is naturally (2) vehement and Sublime : if he is full of happy boldnejfes: if there is a Spirited 
(i) “Ingenium cul Sit, cui mens divinior, “atque os 
“Magna fonatnrum, des nomiriis hujus honoremf Os magna fonaturum is generally thought to refer to expressions. If I understand Latin, magna can refer only to things. 
(2) “Natura sublimis & 
(3) “Feliciter audet.” 
You must pay particular attention to the word happy. When Tullus insults Corinlanus, by calling him, 
“Thou boy of teirs!” the Roman anfwei s; 
“Boy!.. false stave, 
“If you have writ your annals true, his there “That, like an eagle in a dove coat, I “flutter’d your Volfcians in Corioli.” 
Fluttefd 
r 106 ] 
rited energy and force both in his words, and (4) things. 
Fliittedd is extremely bold, but very happily So. When this metaphor is examined, it is found to be a very daring one; but it is So well introduced by the simile, and So fortunately placed, that it Scarce appears to he a figurative expression;; that is an additional merit. 
"When Shakespeare makes Ccefar say; 
“Danger knows full well That c^far is more dangerous than he; 
“We were two lions litter’d in one day, 
“And I the older and more terrible he makes him say a moll wwhappy boldness. If you attend to the first principle, you can never mistake in deciding whether a thought or ex prestion is happily bold, or the contrary. Bring it before the bar of Good Sense, and it determines instantly. 
(f) -- -- -- - “Acer spiritus acvis 
“Et verbis et rebus inest.” 
lvmgs 
[ ‘°7 3 
Things here is a general term, wshich means thoughts, images, and Sentiments. 
It is not Sufficient that a poem is (i) beautiful; that it’s matter and language are both unexceptionable i it must also be harmonious, interesting, and agreeable;,, ^n2if, .what is of greater importance than, all the rest, it must assess the reader, and kindle in his Soul whatever passions or emotions it pleases. 
Another point, which "you are to consider as of particular importance, is the shjefi of your poet... Did he mean, te 
( i) “Non Satis eft pulchra esfe poemata, dub cia funto; 
“Et quocunque volimt animum auditoris “agunto, ’^ 
5-. pleafey 
[ io ] 
puafe, or to injirufl? If he has Succeeded .in neither, he is os the last class : if he has Succeeded in both, he is of the (2) first. 
these are the principal points. I shall only add to them a definition of the Sublime taken from Boileau; its five Sources mentioned by Longinus; and a description of it and of it’s effedfs, taken also from this Same critic. 
The Sublime is a certain force in ‘‘ discourse, proper to elevate and tran sport the Soul; and which proceeds “cither from grandeur of thought and nobleness of Sentiment, or from mag nisicence of words, or an harmonious, 
(2) “Aiit prodeffe volnnt aut delecstarepoetse : “Cmne tulit pundturn qui niifcuit utile “dulci.” 
lively. 
C 109 ■] 
lively, and animated turn or expres sion; that is to Say, from any one of these particulars regarded Separately. “or, what makes the persed; Sublime, ‘‘ from these three particulars joined together,,. > 
The first and most excellent Source of the Sublime is, a boldness and o randeur in the thoughts. 
The Second is the pathetic, or the power of raising the passions to a vio lent and even enthusiastic degree. 
The next consists in a Ikilful appli cation of figures. 
The fourth is a noble and gracesul manner of expression. 
(i) smith’s Longinus. 
» The 
r ” 0 ] 
The last is the structure or composition of periods, in all possible dignity and grandeur.... 
. The mind is naturally elevated by the true Sublime and So Sensibly as fedsed with ids lively strokes, that it Swells in transport and an inward pride, as if what was only heard had been the product: os irs own invention. 
He therefore, who has a competent share os natural and acquired taste, may. easily. discover the value of any performance from a bare recital os it. If he finds that it transports not his Soul, nor exalts his thoughts; that it calls not up into his .mind ideas more en larged than what the mere Sounds of 
“the 
[ I" T 
the words convey, but .on attentive ‘‘ examination it’s dignity lessens and de dines; he may conclude, that whatever pierces no deeper than the ears, “can never be the true Soublime. That on the contrary is grand and lofty, which the more we consider, the greater ideas we conceive of it • “whose Source we cannot possibly withstand;; immediately sinks deep, and makes Such impressions on the. ‘‘ mind, as cannot be easily worn out or effaced. In a word, you may pro nounce that Sublime, beautiful, and genuine, which always pleases, and takes equally with all Sorts of men. “For wlien persons of different hu mours, ages, professions, and inclina“ 
“
II 
ij I 
[. ].i 
tions, agree in the Same joint appro bation of any performance, then this union of assent, this combination of’ So many different judgements, stamps' an high and indisputable value on that performance, which meets with Such general (i) applausc.” 
If shakspeare had been a Sovereign, and Boileau, Horace, and Longinus hast been three of his courtiers, I shoulst have thought that every Syllable quotest here, hast been written on purpose to flatter Mm. 
(i) Whether the reader will thank me for this letter is more than I can tell; but I know it cost me a great deal of trouble. 
L E T[ 
[ ] 
LETTER XIV 
IN those letters upon wit, taste, and genius, you have observed that judgement is equally necessary to them all; that without it imagination runs riot, and feelings are false. I have called taste a union of judgement and feeling; wit, a combination of a sound judgement, and a lively fancy; and genius I have analysed into a glowing and vigorous imagination, operating upon a strong, and solid judgement. 
A man may have judgement without either wit, genius, or taste. He may have taste without wit or genius; wdt vol. I. H without 
C 'H ] 
without taste or genius; and genius without wit or taste. Happy the man who possesses the three; and happy is the author os they) School for Scandal. 
]^, len have indisputably more genius than women; but as far as I have been able to judge from what I have Seen of the world, women have more aptitude lor wit and taste than men. I do not Say they have more wit and taste, but I Say they have more aptitude for them. Their fancies are livelier; their feelings finer. The point they fail in is judgement. But judgement comes from cute 
(i) There is, in my mind, more genius in the Screen scene than in any play of voltaire’s; Rud voltaire’s theatre is his fort, 
; ' ture. 
[ >'5 ] 
turc. If women had nearly the Same pains taken to form their understandings that men have, I am persuaded they would be Superior to men in taste and wit. 
Of all the countries I know or have read of, England is that which has produced the greatest geniuses, and the greatest number of geniuses; France has produced the sinesi (i) Wits; and Athens the persons os the most perfcd: taste. 
(i) The country which has produced the flneft Wits, after France, is Ireland.. You laugh, perhaps, because it is a native of that country Who writes this phrase. you’ll cease to laugh, when you read the names of Congreve, Swift, ■farquhar, Sterne, goldsitiith, Jephfon, Burke, and Sheridan. 
h2 
LET 
ii ] 
LETTER XV 
IRTUE, propriety, and pleasurc lie in the middle : donst they. Madam There is a certain central point in .which (i) rectitude is j^laced., and above or below which are error and. absurdity. Prudence, for example, is. the mean between cunning and Solly; dignity, between abject humility and forbidding pride; courage, between cowardice and ferocity; and delicacy, which is to be the siibjedt of this letter, lies, if I 
(i) “Eft modus in rebus, sunt ccrti deniqu« “fines, 
“Quos ultra citraque nequit confillere “redtum.” 
mistake 
II 
[ "7 ] 
mistake not, between squeamishness and indecency. 
Delicacy, the daughter of Chastity, is no more known in Italy than her mother. She is knowti in France, but not Sowell as she is in England. Why') 
English 
(i) The women of England are stiperior to those of France in dtvicticy, and deep 
sensibility. The French ladies are Superior to the Englifii in wit, grace, vivacity, and amiablc ncfs. 1 would be underilood here, as everywhere elfe, to Speak with exceptions. I have known women in France polless all the great qualities that adorn the Engliili iadies; and women in England full of all the captivating (polities that belong to the ladies of France. Uig 1 nity and amiableness are the great points that distingiiifn the women of those two countries. An English woman of birth values herself on Supporting her daiity, a French woma: i of tiio Hj highest 
[ ii } 
English women should be Superior to all others in this point I cannot tell, more than I can why they have better shapes,, better shins, and more agreeable Speaking voices. Perhaps the general reason is, because they are chaster. Delicacy is only a refinement of decencyand decency is the inseparable companion of chastity. You will ash why are they chaster? because they have a colder cli miate, more pride, juster notions about religion, and because they receive better (i) educations. A "irl of condition is 
highest rank piques herself on being amiable. It is extremely difficult to unite dignity and amiableness. Lady Clermont unites them. 
X There is another reason, and a very strong one, why women are chaster in England than, elsewhere, but everybody knows it. 
much[ 
[ ] 
much better educated here than anywhere else. Her mother teaches her nothing but virtue and decorum, both by precept and example. She is also extremely attentive to. the Semales that come about her daughter, and to the company she keeps. Children study countenances; and a mother’s look, on an expreshon dropped besore her, is a lesion os delicacy, or the contrary, to her child. I have observed that English mothers pay a most particular attention to this (i)point. 
In 
(i) I do not know how an Engliili woman would have answered the question put by a French girl of ten years old to her mother: “Pray, Mama, what's the disterence between an Italian fingerand a man?” — “The same H 4 disterence. 
L 3 
In this country fev/ women of condition or character err in conversation against the stridsest decency either of thought or of expression. For one who rrespaffes against delicacy in company, there are twenty who deaden Society by prudery and squeamishness. these are either a particular class of women, who 
turn pale when the word love is mentioned, 
or the idea hinted; or they are affected women, who value thernselves upon their Superior nicety in this point, and then they are really insupportable. i'hcse dragons in delicacy do not con“ 
“my dear, that there is between a “bull and an ox.” — “And pray, Mama, what’s that?” — “Why, my love, the bull is the fa ‘‘ there of the calf; and the ox is his uncle.” 
4 sider 

. C ] 
sider that love is a very innocent as well as a very amiable passion; that all the ideas belonging to it are pleasing; and that a word in conversation which just lightens upon you, and raises a train of agreeable images, is not only not reprehensible, but deserves praise, because it cheats and animates Society. God knows there is sadness and dullness enough in the world, it is cruel to preclude any harmless gaiety; and Such Surely is all gaiety which does not inflame the pas sions, nor raise any gross ideas. 
People who live by themselves, or who live only for themselves, may ad; as they please; but all those who come into Society ought to consider that they owe Something to Society, and that the most 
useful 
[ 122 ] 
useful and agreeable contribution they can offer it is innocent pleasure. I Say the most useful, becaiise I am firmly per suaded that he who gives innocent pleasure does good; moral and physical 
good. 
The reverse is equally true. The per son who brings a gloom into company damps the vivacity of that company, checks the motion of their Spirits, retards, to a certain degree, the circulation of their blood, and does them positive harm. these are minute points; and the world in general wall not feel them; nor will a robust man, in full health, feel the truth of the example I am going to mention. suppose a woman of a delicate constitution has Supped wtii, and that a 
cheerful 
C 123 ] 
cheerful friend comes in when she has done, and chats an hour with her i I Say that woman will steep well, and will have a good digestion.. suppose the Sisiend that enters is a gloomy and melancholy eharadter; it is a hundred to one but this lady’s rest is broken, and that she has a head ach the next day.. 
squeamishness is certainly a Smaller fault than indelicacy; but it is a fault,, and a very disagreeable one. True delicacy lies between; equally remote from levity and moroseness, - 
LETE 
124 ] 
LETTER XVI 
OMEN are the Source of much good as well as os much evil to the world. To them men owe delicacy; and it is for that reason I went up to them as the fountain from which true delicacy stowed; and I believe all that I Said of that quality in them, is equally just when applied to writing. 
It is not then a little Surprising that, English women being indisputably Superior to all others in this point, English writers should err ap ainst it So sta grantly and So universally, Except a very Sewq theresis Scarce a man who has 
had 
U 
C '25 ] 
had the least pretension to wit that can be read by any person of common decency, not to Speak of people of a refined taste. Their grand leading ideas Seem to be that ribaldry is wit; that wit is charming, and that therefore enough wit is charming, and ribaldry may ■ be wdtty; but I will tell these writers that the wittiest ribaldry never did, nor ever can please but readers os debauched morals and vitiated tastes. Nay, even a man of loose morals, if. he has any taste, though he may be pleased at the jirjl reading of an indecent piece of wit, will be disgusted with it at the Second. 
Not to mention numbers that are Scandaloussy indecent, how shocking to delicacy are' Several of the most celebrated 
C 126 3 
brated and admired writers we have! How shamelessly have Congreve, Vanbrugh, and Sterne in his Trijtram Shandyy indulged themseives in writings worthy ^ only of the lowest authors! One is Sorry for it in Such men as these, because they had real talents; but we may affirm Safely, that it was in the moments in which they wanted talents they were forced to substitute indecency for wit. A sort of proof of this is, that there is no • Species of writing in which it is fo easy to excel; and that we See the very dregs of talents, all over the world, who are capable of nothing else, succeed wonderfully in this. lam glad I have lived to see the day that these mens works are fallen into the disrepute they merit, A single man, 
when 
C >27 ] 
when he has real abilities, is capable of producing an astonishing effect on the taste os a nation. Such a man does now exist. I See he has already opened the eyes of many; for even the multitude only admire bad till they See better; and i will venture to prophesy, that if Mr. Sheridan produces a few other pieces equal to the Schccl for Scandal, the representations of Congreve and Vanbrughi will not be Supported even by the galleries. 
I shall not Sully the purity of my page by quotations from these authors. Their faults are rocks above the Surface of the Sea, which the most unskilful mariner must See, and may avoid if he pleascs. But I am forced to quote Some passages, 
which. 
I ‘ 
[ 128 ] 
which, though they do not offend good 
morals, are a strong violation of delicacy 
of taste, I could wish that those sheets 
contained nothing but beauties. I quote 
defeats with reluctance. But these rocks 
are beneath the Surface; and if he 
is not warned, the youthful pilot may * 
easily be wrecked. The author I mean principally to quote, had all the advantages a writer could poffess. His birth was noble, and his talents great; born in an enlightened age, he lived habitually with it’s greatest ornaments. Nothing was wanting that could exalt his imagination, or refine his taste. He was full of learning, and full of labour. No man ever' paid more attention to his style. Is it not then amazing that a Secretary 
[ 129 r 
r^retary of state, the most Splenclid lumi mary of his time, the dazzling and all accomplished Bolingbroke, should osten descend to the language of the stews, and debase his writings by images that 
would have been condemned Sor vulgarity 
in the mouth of his footman? Bawd, bully, whore, are the terms he makes use of; particularly the two last. In his Idea of a Patriot King, his most elaborate performance; and the last of those three words I have quoted he uses at the end of that Letter, in the midst ■of a dissertation on decorum, decency, propriety, and grace. Could he be ignorant that those expreshons, wshich decency forbade him to utter in the hearing of his Sovereign, or of any woman, or vol. I. I leven' 
ll 
I if I 
C ’3° ] 
even man that he respefted; could he, y I Say, want to be informed, that what was an insult to the ear was not less an in Suit to the eye? and that what decorum forbade him to speak, decorum also forbade him to write? 
hrhere are men who will .defend these expressions. They will Say they are forcible and energetic. I grant they are., and that is a reason why they should be used; but they are indecent, and that is a stronger reason why they Snould net be used. In every instance the proper terms are the Strongest;, but when they. violate decency, no writer of taste ever .employed them. 
The truth is, man is an imitative aisi .mal. He copies, in despight of himself, 

LI 


3 
■siclf, the beings that Surround him. Lord ■bolingbroke was generally in the Society of Nobles like himself, and his style and ideas then rescmble his Society. But Lord bolingbrok e was a man he Sometimes forgot his dignity; and his treacherous writings betray him to the world, and show that he degraded himsels in the company os harlots, who eclipsed for a time the rays of a most glorious and brilliant imagination. 
In another place this great writer talks, hy allufiony of a race who carry on their shins, exposed to public sight, the cabs and blotches os their distemper.” Everything may be defended; and that, it may be Said, is palpable and striking. The thing, in na i 2 ture. 
T ^3^ ] 
■ture, was never Seen without loatkinp’ 
O 
the beholder. Can then the image of ‘it be offered wdthout disgusting the reader?? 
do not know a more offensive idea than this last, except one which he has in his Second Letter on the Study cf History. 
-- -- And the Hottentot, who returned 
from Europe, stripped himself naked as Soon as he came home, put on his Bracelets of guts and gar ‘‘ bage, and grew Jiinking and lousy as fast as he could.’’ My God! What writing is this! But no. Lord bolingbroke, I acquit you of these nauseous images, and of these indecent expressions. I blame you only for the choice of your company. The Women of the 
Town 
t 1ST ]' 
Town are to be censured for the due; ■ the (I) Dean of St. Patrick is to be condemned for the other. 
i) Swift had great parts; but the author of the lady’s dre£ing room never suspected there was such an idea as Delicacy oflajle. He ought to have followed lear’s advice, and to have taken a great deal of civet to Sweeten his imagination. 
t 3 
LETE 
134 ]- 
LETTER xvn., 
''phough Lard Bolingbroke made, a stip now and then, he was upon the wshole a man of fine taste: So was Pope,, and So was addison., addison, in my mind, had the best and Surest taste of the three. He begins one of his Spectators with n stroke of wit, that one. must be Squeamish indeed to quarrel, with. Though a. monosyllable, ” Says, he, be my delight.” Now that is., charming,. Madam it is,, a man that speaks; and what makes it admirable is, that it would have been equally good if it had been a woman,; because ycu know 
the 
[ ‘35 J 
the monosyllable meant is — love. Some of pope’s strokes are not ‘so Attic; in the Rape of the Lock, where he talks of bodies changed to clifferent forms by Spleen, he siiys. 
Men prove with child as powerful “fancy works, 
“And maids turned bottlesy call aloudfor corks 
Poor, paltry, pitiful 1 As Swift corrupted Bolingbroke, So Bolingbroke corrupted Pope. This is despicable; nor is the original of this turn, wretched as it is, his own; So that he not only stole, but stole awkwardly. He twould have been condemned for that theft both at Athens, and at Sparta. 
i4 A little 
C 136 
]■ 
A little Sarther on he is happier. Belinda closes her lamentation for the loss' of her Lock with these lines:, 
Oh! hadst thou cruel been, content to Seize 
Hairs less in sight, Or any hairs but theses’ 
I have known many. Squeamish people transtate that into indelicacy :, that is. their fault, and not the author’s: it is, indelicate; it is fair, light, elegant,. gay. It puts me in mind of an answer given by a Sprightly French girl to the Duke de Roquelaure.. As hew^as passing., through toulouse,. he Saw her at a, ball j he was struck with her figure, ansi desired one. of his aids de camp to tell her. 
she 
C 137 I 
she was beautisul as an angel, and that he would give fifty guineas for a single hair under her. eyebrows; meaning,. I sup pose, one of her eyelashes“ “my cornpliments to the duke, ” Says she; tell him I am happy to have pleased him; but that I am not a retail mer chantyune tnarchande an detaif) if he chuses the whole at that price, he shall have them with pleasure.” 
shakspeare has many strokes that are ■ exquisitely delicate. His plays are full of the coarsest and grossest things; but everybody knows how many excuses he had. I shall quote two passages, which' come into my mind now, in Support of • what I have advanced. If I looked for others, I am, Sure I should find enough. 
Ophelia's 
ll 
TV' 1 
C ] 
Ophelia tells Hamlet she had remembrances of his, which she wished' to give him back. ' 
Hamlet. I never gave you aught.. “'Ophelia. m’y honour’d'lord,, you; know right well, you did; 
And. with them word's of fucb fwect. breath cotnpos’dy 
As made the things more rich: that' ^'‘perfume lofty “Lake theft againd. 
The other example is in the fourth adt of Othello, 
“.Dmilia. Alas, lago, my Lord liad “So bewhor’d her, 
“Thrown Such despight and' heavy terms upon her, 
“That true hearts cannot bear it. 
“desdemona. 
L rj9 J 
dcsdemona.. Am I that name, lagol lago. What name,, fair Lady? 
Desi, Such as Jhe aid. mf Lord did say I zvas.y 
richardson is admirable for every Species of delicacy; for delicacy of (i), wit, Sentiment, image, language, action.. thing. I doubt whether he has: 
(i) The French writers and Frenchwomen are Superior to the women and writers of England in delicacy of wit; bnt inferior to them in delicacy of fentiraent.. Were I to mention a lady who joins refined wit to the mofl delicate sensibility,, fiiould be — but I dare not name her — I ami afraid of wounding her modesty — I know Lady Elizabeth Foster would biusti at her panegyric for, 
“Fast from herself stie tremblingly retires, “Nor trusts that worth vvhich.allthe world, admjres.’^' 
once 
r 
1140 ] 
once erred against this point in all hist' works, unless where he intended to do in. I mean by charasterijiic traits. It might be disputed whether it is allowable even there. ^ I remember a stroke of wit os his that appeared to me to be refined and delicate to a very high degree. ^‘ Lovers, ” says miss Byron, like Spaniels, will fawn at your feet, ol'^ be ready, to leap Into your lapv That is the touch of a: master. 
LET 

t 141 ] 
LETTER XVUI. 
YOU have wit, taste, sense, and Sentiment, and you don’t like Ri -- chardsom Well, that is to me astonishing. He has but one great fault, and unfortunately everybody Seels it. The ^defeo: might be cured; and it is, in ■my opinion, an object well worthy the attention of the .nation to have it.ireme id, ied(i). 
richardson’s 
(i) If any moral object could be thought 'Worthy the attention of the nation; or any robjedt which tended towards a perfect fyllem 'of education for youth. richarclfon’s genius was immense. His misfortune was that he did not ^ .know 
t 142 3 
richardson’s views were grand. His soul was noble, and his heart was exceh lent. He formed a plan that embraced all human nature. His object was to benefit mankind. His knowledge of the world showed him that happiness was to be attained by man, only in proportion as he pradsised virtue. His good fense then showed him that no prafucal System of morality existed’; and' the Same good sense told him that nothing but a 
know the Ancients. Had he but been acquainted with one iingle principle, Omne fuper vacmim pleno de petlore manat^ (all superfluities tyre); he would not have satiated his reader as he has done. There might be made out of eiarifla and Sir Charles Grandison two works, which would ht both the moll entertaining, and tyre moult useful, that ever were written, 
body 
T 143 ] 
Fody of morality,, info aflion, could work with efficacy on the minds of youth. Sermons and Essays, experience showed him, were ineffedsual. The manner of them was dry and umnte resting to young people and arguments addressed to what is weakest in youth, to their understandings, he clearly perceived, were without effect. He Saw farther, that example was the great point which formed the young; and he Saw, that man was composed of pashons and imagination as well as of understanding., those were his general principles.; and upon those principles he reasoned thus: Mankind is. naturally good, for it is rare to meet young people with bad shearts. A young man then coming into 
the 
'[ u4 ] 
the world wishes to be perfect. 'But how shall he learn? The world is a shad School; and precepts Scattered up and down in books of morality are of little use. An example would form shim; but where is it to be found? None exists. I will then create one for him. I will Set besore lima model of,, perfection. The more he imitates it, 
‘ the more perfect he will be; the more perfect he is, the happier he will be. 
As he reasoned upon man, So he reasoned upon woman. He aimed at no • less than bestowing felicity on the generation he Saw rising before him, and on every one that was to Succeed it. And had he not had powers to accomplish this aim, his wish was So grand, So 
noble. 
I 145 ] 
noble, and of Such a Superior order of benevolence, that that alone would have entitled Mm to immortality; I had almost Said canonisation. 
But Such is the perverseness and weak ness of mankind, that what constitutes richardson’s greatest merit, is considered by many as a capital defe.<st in hia conception. They objeist that Such a woman as Clarissa, and Such a man as Sir Charles grandison, having never existed, the author has created palpable chimseras, and consequently his creations are useless and imasseding. How consistent are the reasonings of men! Century after century, and country after country, have vied with each other in .praising the work and the author of the Vo I, I. R Venus 
iiji 
[ 146 ] 
Venus of Medici. Yet this work must be universally allowed to be farther from nature than riehardson’s Clarissa. No woman ever came near the beauty of this statue; yet, has that diminished the merits of the author? Has he not always been, and is he not hourly and justly admired for the ingenuity of his idea, though this idea is totally barren of profit to the world? 
Not So with Clarissa: : must profit every female that beholds her. Though the whole of thesc two imaginary beings did evidently'never : exist, yet So great has been the mastery of thesc uncommon artists, that there is not a particle in the composition of the. statue, nor a trait in 
the 
C 147 ] 
the character or conduct; os the heroine, that can be Said to deviate in the minutest degree from thettecise line of i nature and of truth. 
richardson has done no more than arsiftiate the Venus os Medici. ithe 'Grecian Sculptor had created > of every creatures heji, a mar shle body: the English writer ere ated equally of every creatures hefi^ a Soul, a mind, a genius for that body. - Can any man pretend to be consistent with, himseis, who admires the one, and V condemns the other? suppose the two "the work of the Greek, and I will venture to Say, this would have been the laneuafc os the world; When the 
K a 
Sculptor 
‘C 148 ] 
Sculptor created that form, he Sur ^ pasted men; but when he created that genius and that Soul, he rivalled the Gods.’^ 
LET. 
[ h9 1 
LETTER. XDC. 
HE writers of England excel thole - 
1 
os all other nations in the pathetic 
; and richardson in this point is, I think,. Superior to all his countrymen. He makes one cry too much : and by ar very singtilar talent, peculiar to himself alone, he sills our eyes almost, as osten by elevated Sentiments, as he does by tender ones. He abounds with strokes of greatness,.. Sometimes in. the actions and Sometimes in the Sentiments of his. eharadters, which raise the reader’s Soul,, and make the tear of generosity Spring intodiis eyeshe knows not whence.. 
K 3 Here 
!. I 
[ 150 ] 
Here are three strokes of pathos -;, tell me which of them you like best.. 
When the tyrannical Capulet Says to his daughter; 
Thursday is near; if you be mine, Fll give you to my Sriend : 
“If you be not, hang, beg, starve, die isth’ streets. 
For by my Soul! i’ll ne’er acknow -- lege thee.” 
Then Juliet; 
Is there no Pity sitting in the clouds. That Sees into the bottom of my gries ?' O Sweet my mother, .cast me not away.” j 
Is not that earnest appeal to heaven most Solemnly moving? and then that 
pafsionate 
■[ II ] 
pashonate address to her mother, as hest only resource aster Providence, is exceedingly affedring. The confusion too in placing her words, 0 sweet my mothers for 0 my sweet mothers is infinitely beau tisul it is Somewhat like virgil’s Me, 7iie adfum qui feci. 
The next is from Otway. When Jaffier gives Belvidera to Renault, and gives him wsith her a dagger, desiring him, when he proves unzvorthy, to Jlrike it to her heart; belvidera’s ansvver is inimitably fine. 
O thou unkind one! .... Have I deserv'd this from you ^ Look on me, tell me. 
Why am I Separated from thy love? 
K 4 ' “If 
[ 15^ •] 
« HI am false, accuse me; but If true, “dont, ppfthee, dovt in poverty forsake“ “
“But pity the heart thafs torn with pariingv 
No man can write better than this. That line',, “don’t, pr’ytstee, don’t in poverty forsake me, ” is above praise., Every word of it is a beauty. The words but if trues introduce this affecting close with peculiar happiness, because the audience, knowing that she is true, feels more deeply for her sorrows. 
The third is from Clarissa. After she has eshaped from Lovelace, .and is lodged at a glove shop, King street, Covent-garden, she writes a letter to her nurse, X Mr, su'. 

[ 153 ] 
Mrs. Norton, in which are these worsts t I am asraid my Poor, as I used to call the good creatures to whose neceshties I was wont to administer by your ‘‘ faithsul hands, have missed me of “late. But now, alas! I am, poor ray self.” When clariffa’a story is known, •and the whole of her character, and her present situation considered, “But now:, “alas! I am. four myfelfp is. irresistl ble(i). 
I db 
(t) It is injuring Richardson to quote a trait cf pathos from him, when he has whole volumes wdiich it is impofhble to read without crying and sobbing from beginning to end. 
I feel for the injustice that is done this author, who, I wall venture to assert, is Second to no man that ever wtote, It is astonistiing. however, 
how 
[ 154 1 
I do not believe any language, ancient 
or 
how many men of parts I hare met with 'who = of him with contempt. Most of them, it is true, have condemned him'without reading him;. and they have condemned him because he is a writer of Kovels or Romances. What is a name? What signifies how a work is called; whether it is a Romance, a Novel, a Story, or a History > No matter for the title; examine the work. Does it grapple the attention (to use shak fpeare’s expression) with hooks of steel? Does it move, does it elevate, - does it enlighten, does it amuse?? are the points to be encjuired into, and not how it is called. 
I have known many other clever people, who have dipped into Clarissa, and who hold it and it’s author very cheap. Some of these men have gone through a volume or two, others have read a number of Letters here and there, have then formed their opinions of it’s merits, and ihrown away the book. rich ardfon’s object was 
Hot 
C '55 ] 
or modern, can show three traits equal to these, 
not to write a volume or a letter; it was to • make a work. If the entire work be not examined, it is impossible to judge it. He built a palace. The staircase is too high : if it had " fewer steps, it would be better. One tyres Sometimes before one gets to the head of it. But ■goon; enter into the apartments; observe their distribution, their proportion, their effect; see their enjcmme; examine their Whole; and then -- answer if ever there was an edifice equal to it for beauty, grandeur, Sublimity, and magnificence. There never was in any country. The introduction into the story of clarilta is a /eetu too long; but when you pafs that, there never was a story equally interesting, or equally affecting; and I afiert, without dread of being, contradicted by any man of taste and talents ^vho reads it through that there does not exist,, in the universe, a work equal to it for WIT, 
, SENTIMENT 'and SENSE. 
LETE 
^56 J 
LETTER XX 
A Number of the shst wsits at Paris being assembled at the house of a famous Lady Bel Esprit, talked naturally enough, of literature. The elevation of Corneille, and the pathos of Racine, the purity of Boileau,. and the depth of Moliere,. were Supported By different advocates. At last Says one, suppose we were all this instant to be carried to the Bastile, and doomed to pass there the remainder of our days, : suppose that we were Suffered to have, each, any author’s works that we chose; but that we were' never to be permitted 
to 
[ HI 3 
to make a Second choice; who is the author each man would chuse, to cheer the dreariness of a perpetual Solitude? Let no one Speak, but let every man write the name of the author he would prefer. They all wrote the same nama It was that of La Fontaine. A greater compliment, I fupjpose, never was paid a writer. 
Had a similar question heen put at London among English Wits, I fancy shakspeare would have been named ^ In modern Rome, it would have been Ariosto ■: in ancient Rome, I believe, it twould have been Horace. 
La Fontaine appears to me to he the 
I 
Correggio of Poetry. The'graces con* ducted the pen of the one, as they did 
the 
the pencil of the other. They have both negligences and inaccuracies, which they Seem not to have troubled them selves about. La Fontaine wrote a Fable; when he read it. Says he, there’s a Syllable too much in that line; to cor >xe(5t it, I must change a word; that word expresses happily my meaning : if H lose it, I lose a beauty; and ..I gain a faultless, but insipid line. One beauty ' corhpensates; six faults : the fault and : the beauty shall both rest. My line' hobbles; but that word shall impress a Sentiment on the heart, or present a picture to the imagination. 
Correggio painted his Night. His object was the Virgin and Child. The canvass was large; and. Says he, I must 
2 sill 
t 159 ] 
isill it. What shall 1 put in the top ?' 
why Some angels : So he has Scattered' three or four Sprawling figures in the top os the pidiure. these, I suppose, he painted in a morning, and never: meant they should be looked at. If : the eye wanders to any other part of •my canvas, thought he, it will not fix there, it will Soon come back to my Child and Virgin. I meant to put my force thereto fiiew there the magie powers of my pencil; and I disregard the Suffrage of any man who is capable. of condemning me for weakness, where I did not mean to be strong. If I have a leg ill disposed, or a finger ill drawn, it is because I did not think the draw sing of that finger, or the disposition of 
.that 
iir 

C io 3 
that kg, of any importance, I sought effect. I strove to animate my cloth, to paint Soul and grace, to charm the eye, to touch the heart, to enchant the imagination. Have I Succeeded? 
There never were two more amiable artists than those. There never were two artists whose works excited more ^reeable sensations, nor whose productions ap^tear to have cost them less. Eafc and naturahefs (i) distinguish them equally. Other artists force you to admire them. these you feel yoursejf inclined to love. You are Satisfied with .knowing the works of other poets and painters but vou wish to have been, 
, ('i) I mean ndiveu. 
acquainted 
; 
; t ll ] 
acquainted with the persons os Correggio and La Fontaine — 0 fortunatl ambo! Ji quid mea — 
As I have Said Correggio is the La Fontaine os painting, So I think Albano is it’s Anacreon, Raphael it’s Virgil, and Rubens it’s Homer. 
vol. I. 
L 
LET 
t 3 
LETTER XXI 
ADAME cle la Sabliere, a woman ot condition in France, who ■shared with Lewis the Fourteenth the ■honour os patronising La Fontaine, used to call him her sable tree (fon fnhuer.) 'She Said he produced Sables Spontaneousty as an apple tree does apples. That is very, prettily Saicl. And the natural case which runs through all his works, •proves that this Saying is as Sensible as pretty. 
The French are, with great reason, proud of this writer. The only author who can expect his works to live, is he 
wh© 
I '63 ] 
who communicates instruction agteeably; who forms to himself a System of nevet departing from strict truth, and of presenting pictures, drawn only from Nature, in an agreeable and pleasing point of vsiew^^ This author is La Fontaine'. He is an insinuating moralist, who, while he Seems only to think of amusing his reader, steals into his heart the mildest and most amiable virtues. His sense is always just; but he had the art to dress philosophy with Smiles, and to render that goddess truly engaging, who Seems only formed to command. 
No mortal ever told a story better; ■gaiety and good Sense, reason and grace, are mixed in all his narrations; rapid, precise, and varied, he never astonishes, L 2- but, 
C '64 : d 
but never fails to charm. Reading his fables, you are surpisised to. find rhymes, for wshat you have read does not look like composition; it appears to be the language of an agreeable cornpanion, who converses with ease, wsith elegance, and Spirit. 
To many a.critic Such a writer will appear Superficial. They do. not feel the Superiority < of talent that is requisite to convey luminous truths, and deep reflections, with almost apparent careleff' ness. because 'wkdoyngenerally wears a frown, they do not conceive'that she can ever be taught to Smile; and that which constitutes ..a writer’s greatest merit, his being able to covaty interejiing matter in .an easy manner to them a proof : 2 ‘of 
C ^65 ]] 
of his inferiorsty. Enchanting La Fon -- taine! my model and my guide, dread not Such judges : it is thy greatest glory,, and will insure thy everlasting fame, that thou hast been able to attract: thy reader by an easy brilliancy, and engage him afterwards by sohd reason and profound •morasity*. 
I. 
LEU 
fft 
I 
[ i66 ] 
LETTER XXII 
A Fontaine was a singular charadfeiv His Soul was as simple as his un< ■derstanding was acute. On account of that simplicity,, and of his being often absent in comipany, which gave him frequently an appearance of silliness, he was called by his contemporary wits le bon hotnme. You know this phrase is. generally used by the French when they Speak of a good-natured man who has Scarce common-sense. As Boileau, mo liere, and Racine were one day walking together in the Park at versailles, they La Fontaine perched up in a tree, 
where 

C 167 1 
wshere he was poshbly composing a fable., Racine and Boileau began to laugh at him.. don’t laugh at him, ” fays mo lierc, the hc?i homme will go farther 
than any of us.” La fontaine’s 
hourly cncreasing same proves the Superiority 
of moliere’s penetration.. 
The object of this inimitable fabulist was to be usesul : to; be usesul, he knew he must be agreeable 1. to be agreeable, he knew he must have variety. He fully attained all his ends. He has So tiffued wit,, Sense, and Sentiment in his works, that he must please every Species of readers.. He has So many ideas, that, read him. ever So often,, he is always new.. He has so.many remarks which come home to every man’s bosom,, that he is always L 4 interesting,. 
1 
C 168 3 
interesting. Like Horace, he is read with miore pleasure as well as profit, in proportion as men advance in life. But a circumstance peculiar only to himself is, that the Same fable which charms the formed philosopher, shall delight the thoughl^lefs Schoolboy and the giddy coquet. 
“Deux ecqs vivoient en paix, une Soul “furvint, 
Et volla la guerre alhimee; 
“Amour, tu perdis Troye — ” 
How simple, how rapid that narration, f how lively, how graceful, how unex> petsted the apostrophe! and with what inconceivable address has he introduced into his apostrophe a moral reflection! See too how he has given dignity to his 
reflection. 
[ >^9 ] 
ri?fie£tion, by bringing in the destrucstion' of Troy, This is. another of La fontaine’s Secrets, to make a grand idea arise out of what is Seemingly, a Srivolous* situation. Here we are thinking only of tyro cocks, and by a single stroke of his pen .we. are placed in a. Superior order of 'things, and have brought before us the Iliad, the .Dneid, Agamemnon, Priam, Helen, and Achilles* 
Do me the pleasure to read that fable : Les deux Coqs.) You are lazy;., you’ll not read; otherwise I should recommend, to you, Les Ammaux malades de la pejie la Fille; le Payfan du Danube; le Chene & le Roseau;; Chat, da Belette & le pet id Lapin, You are a good creature, but an insolent and dishpated one. Do then, 
indulge 
[ 17° ] 
indulge your indolence and me together,, and abandon yoursels a single evening to the luxury of your slippers, to read this, child of nature, and favourite of the Graces. 
One fable I am determined you jjjall read that is, provided you read me j for here it is. 
Les Deux pigeo^xs. 
DFUXP igeons svimoient d’ainouf tcndi'sj l’un d’eux s’ennuyant au logis, 
Fut affcz fou pour entreprendre Un voyage en lointain Pays. 
l’autre lui dit: qistatez vous fair? voulez votis quitter votre fvere r l’abfence eft le plus grand des maux; 
Non pas pour vous, cruel. Au moins qne les travaux,, Les dangers, les foins du voyage, 
Changent un pen votre courage. 
Encor fi la saison s’avangoit davantage I 
Attende, 
C 17' 1 
Attendez ies Zephyrs: qui vous prefle? uacorbeaa tout a stheuve annon9oit malheur a quelqu’ olfeau. je northeast fongerai plus que rencontre funclle, 
Que Faucons, que rezeaux. Hclas! dirai jc, il pleuti - Mon here a t il tout ce qu’il veut, 
Bon loupe, bon gite, & le relle } 
Ce difeours ebranla le cccur De notre imprudent voyageur : 
Mais le delir de voir, & rhumeur inquiete l’emporterent enfin. II dir: northeast pleurez point: 
Tiois jours au plus rendront mon ame fatisfaite t Je reviendrai dans peu eonter de point en point Mes aventures II mon frere., 
Jele defennuierai: quiconque northeast voit gucre, 
n’a guere a direaufii. Mon voyage depeint Vous fera d’un plaisir extreme; 
Je dirai : jvtois la, telie choie m’avint: 
Vous y croirez etre vous meme, 
A ces mots, en pleurant, ils fe dirent adieu. 
Le voyageur s’eloigne; c voila qu’un nuage l’oblige de chercher retraite en quelque lieu.. 
Un seul arbre s’offrit, tel encor que Forage Maltraita le Pigeon en depit du feuillage. 
l’air devenu serein, il part tout morfondu, 
Seche du mieux qu’il peut fon corps charge de plulc's; Dans, un champ a i’ecart voit du bled repandu, 
Volt 
[ 172 J 
Volt un Pigeon aupres, cela lui donne envy: 
II y vole, il eft pris : ce bled couvroit d’un las Les menteurs & traitres appats. Le las etoit use j ft blen que de fon ail, 
De fes pleds, de fon bec i’oifeau le rompt enfin; Quelque plume y perit, & le pis du destin futqu’un certain Vautour, a laferre cruelle, 
Vit notre tnalheureux, qai trainant la ficelle,. 
Et les morceaux du las qui i’avolt attrape, Sembloirun forqat echappe., 
Le Vautour s’en alloit le lier, quand des nues ■ Fond a fon tour un Aigle aux ails etendues,. 
Le Pigeon profita du conflit des voleurs, 
s’envola, s’abattit aupres d’une mazure,, 
Grut pour ce coup que fes malheurs Finiroient par cette aventure: 
Mais un frippon d’enfant, cet age eft sans pi tie,. Frit fa frond, & du coup tua plus d’a moitie. 
La volatile malheureuse, 
Qui maudifiant fa curiofiie, 
Trainant Paile, & tirant le pied, 
Demi morte, & deini boiteufe. 
Droit au logis s’en retourna: 
Que bien que mal elle arriva. 
Sans autre aventure faeheiife. 

[ u3 ] 
u^ila nos gens rejoints; & je laisse II juger De combien de plaisirs Us payerent leurs peines. 
Amants, heureux amants, voulez^vous voyager? 
Que ce soit aux rives prochaines. 
soyez volis i’un a i’autre an monde toujours beau, Toujours diverse, toujours nouveau: tenez volts lieu de tout, comptez pour rien Ic rest. j’ai quelquefois aime; je n’aurois pas alors. 
Centre le Louvre & fes trefors, 
• Centre le firmament & fa voute celeste. 
Change les bois, change les Lieux, 
Honores par les pas, eclaires par les yeux De i’aimable & jeune Bergere, 
Pour qui, fous le fils de Cy there, 
Je servis engage par mes premiers ferments. thelas! quand reviendront de semblables moments:? 
'faut il que tant d objers fi doux & fi charmants Me laistent vivre au gre de mon ame inqulete? 
Ah! fi mon coeur ofoit encor fe renflammer! 
Northeast fentirai je plus de charme qui m’arrete? 
ai je paste le temps d’aimer? 
I 
Is that charming? It is indeed indescribably So. But la fontaine’s beauties 

C 174 ] 
ties need not be pointed out; like Lady (i) hervey’s, they are felt as Soon as Seen. 
(i) In this age of goddeltes and angels, when almost every woman is a Juno, a Venus, ora tenth Muse, this Lady can pretend to little merit. She is neither an angel nor a goddefsi She is only a very pretty Woman, very fenstble, weiy' amiable, and very well-bred. 
[)! 
L E T 
C u5 ] 
LETTER xxm, 
To MY Friend at Paris, 
OU cannot conceive the notions the common people of England have os your countrymen. When the maid (a very ugly woman) came into my room this morning to make my fire, I ashed her my two usual questions : what’s o’clock? and, wshat Sort of day is it? Sir, Says she, it is past nine; a very cold morning; and, the lord’s holy name be ever blessed and praised, ■god is above the Devil still, the French arc all killed! All? Says I. All, Says I she., 
I 176 ] 
she. I could not conceive wshat she meant! — I donst understand you. — Sir, hefe’s the story; I heard it'this moment. from a very genteel gentleman, a very pretty (I) gentleman indeed, in the grocer’s shop, where I went to buy Some Sugar for my mifirefs. The Count (d’estangus, r, Trought the whole 'french^fieet to the Issand os'jarseys, and made a landing os twenty thousand men; but the brave British boys (and she was ■almost crying with pleasure) ‘fell upon 
(•i) When Salisbury tells 'Lady Constance that Lewis is to be married to Blanch, and that France is to makepeace with England; fjie answers;; 
be gone; I cannot brook thy fight: 
thisihews hath made thee ashost ngly man. 
them. 
[■ >77 1 
them, and did not leave a mother’s babe of them alive. — How many brave British boys were there? Sir, there was but fifteen hundred. — Why that was a very Small number to kill twenty thousand men. Sir, they were only Frenchmen! oh, they axe a dastardly Set of dogs; they are daunted in a minute, Sir : but indeed it’s no wonder, Sor vou know they never eats but Salad and frogs. But they must be fools too as well as cowards: for what brouo ht them there? didn’t they S: now they’d be kilt? Yes, they know’d it well enough; for they no iooner got their legs on tile ground, than off they rim’d like a flock of geese. — But you Seem to be very violent against tyre French : did they vol. I. M ever 
[ ] 
ever do any harm? No, Sir, they never did me any harm in partiklar; but I eahst bear the name of them; I hate them worse than toads.; and every trueborn english woman and Englishman too ought to hate them as much as 'I do. don’t they come over here to dress hair, and cook, and ship and dance, and dance away with our money, and Suck the very blood out of this poor. country? ■ It is a shame for the nobility, to encourage them as they do; No it is, ' I wish the mob had killed them all. when they burnt the chapels for a nasty ■ papist! crew as they are: yes. Sir, they are all papishes, and, locuses, and caterpillars, and varmin. — Lord knows when 
i her 
C u9 ] ■ 
her eloquence would have ended, is I had not told her I wanted to get up. 
This is die only country in the world ■tvhere every human being is a politician. The lower classes of people here do not talk politics by way of amusement, as in other countries; they take a real 'hearted interest in everything that is cgoing forward. It is equal to them 'whether the Subject: is foreign or do miestic; whether it is possible for them to know anything of it or not; they, ‘catch a corner of it, their heads heat, 'they Support their opinions by the most furious oratory, and when words Sail them, they very frequently come to. blows. 
M 2 As 
t iso ] 
As I was passing through a court that leads into the Strand, a few days after the election for the City of Westminster was over, I heard a woman cry. Murder. A crowd had got into the entry; and I ashed a man that was there, what was the matter? It is a carpenter, Says he, that is beating Isis wise, and who has been beating her these three days. That, 'Said I, is very cruel : why is he suffered to beat her? O, Sir, she deserves it; ■she never lets the poor man have a moment’s peace; she has been tormenting him this great vrhile about his vote; ansi this is the cause of the quarrel : he voted for Lord Lincoln; and she wanted 
him 
J. 
t 'Si 3 
him to vote for Charles (i) Fox. Well, but Said I, she ought to be quiet now, the election is over, and Mr. Fox has .Succeeded. That, Sir, is the reason her husband has been beating her ever since. She is continually crozving qyer him, •and telling him that he is a dirty clog, that he wanted to enstave his country.; but that, thanks be to God, the City of 'Westminster will be free in Spite ot him. 
I was thinking aster, where this woman had got the idea of preserving the 
(i) When a man here, by great talents or any othei’ extraordinary merit, becomes a favourite, he frequently loses the title of Miilcr. Charles Fox and Horace vv^alpole are much oftener talked of, and better known, than hlr. Walpole or Mr. Fox. 
M 3 liberty 
[ ls, 2 ] 
liberty of the City of Westminster; and recolledsed that it must have been from the Song of the day, which I had heard at the hustings, and which I had bought. It was, as you may suppose, outrageousty violent against the ministry, and every verse ended with this chorus, to the 
rune of Langolee t 
‘‘ Novy is the time, my brave fellows, an ever. 
we’ll honour for Fox and Rodney for 
ever. 
And join heart and. hand in a noble endeavour. 
For Setting the City of Westmin sier free.” ' 
The. 
i. 
[ iss't 
The poetry you seeds brilliant, the rhymes rich, the Sentiments great, and the music popular. The whole; I dare Say, contributed not a little towards en staming the brain of. this patriotic female. 
P, S. It is^wmrth’your while to come to England, were it only to See an elcdtion and a cock match. There is a celestial Spirit of anarchy and enthusiasm in these two Scenes, that words cannot paint, and of Wvhich no countryman os'yours can ever form an idea. 
m4 
I. E .D 
T 184 } 

LETTER XXIW 
Made two observations in my tra vels; one, that the people of every country make Something well; the other, that every nation has a peculiar manner of ruining itself. The English ruin themselves by play; the French, by wometi; the Irish, by hospitality;. the swsiss, by drinking; and the Germans, by a multitude of Servants. I should not have Said every I should have Said almqfl every. The Italians donst ruin themselves, because they are ruined already. However, individuals among them do Some milanese, Sor 
example. 
[ J, 
example, by eating; Some Venetiansyby gallantry and gaming; Some Neapolitans, by equipages and embroidery; and Several Romans, by every Species of impurity. Neither do the Dutch ruin themdelves; it is not, however, because they are already ruined; but because they are too phlegmatic to ruin them selves any way. The few who do destroy themselves, do it by avarice, by lending money at exorbitant interest on bad Secuisities. 
There are Dutchmen too who ruin themselves by flowers. I do not guaranty the truth of this anecdote, though I heard it from persons of veracity in Holland. A man, whose pashon was for flowers, and who had an uncommon fine 
tulip 
L 3 
tulip root of a very particular kinst, heard that another florist had one as fine as his. He purchased it from him for a Sum of money So large, I dare not mention it; ' and when he had got it into his possession, he broke it to pieces with his heel, Saying, Now there is not in the world another tulip root equal to mine.” 
Every nation excels too in making Something. The French make gold and silver stuffs and political lies better than any people in ' the world. The Italians make ices, maccaroni, and religious lies to admiration. The Saxons make excellent porcelaine. The Dutch are famous for making sea landscapes. The Flemish, for making lace. And the 
English 
C 187 ] 
English — why the English, I thinks make men and women better than any nation I know. 
There is a better race of men and .women in England than I have ever Seen in any other country. If any one asks me why it is' So; I answer, I can’t tell. If he ashs me how lkno%v it is So; I ansvver, by looking at them<j There is also a better race of dogs (i) and horses here than in any other country I have Seen; but there are too a great many garrons and curs. 
P. S. Well, reader, you arc an unsuf pedting creature. With what easy good 
(i) Not to Speak of a great many very pro luifing puppies. 
nature 
[ i88 ] 
nature did you walk into the trap I laid for you! How were you delighted at hearing me call marine views, sea land~ capes! The blundering Irishman! Fll be Sworn, you Smiled; and that because you thought yourself cleverer than me. Now that you are not quite So sure of your Superiority, perhaps you look grave. 
let: 
C j89 ] 
LETTER XXV 
)RAY, Sir, Said I to a Frenchman in the playhouse, is that the third adt that is ended > “Yes, Sir, ” Says he, that is the third adt that is ended; it is the fourth which is going to begin.” His answer struck me; this man. Said I to myself, has answered my question thrice : yes. Sir; once — it is the third adt that is ended; twice — it is the fourth which is going to begin, was a third answer. We entered into conversation, and I found him a very Sensible man. 
At Supper, that night, I told a lady the answer I had received, and that it had 
Surprised 
'[ -] 
Surprised me. Why? Said she. Had he. aiked ?northeast the question. Madam, I should have thought him answered wsith, Yes, Sir. He was a politer man than you nre, fays'she. You'are a Spartan; he was an Athenian. I felt foolish, st don’t dee. Madam, how he was politer than 1 'should be : my answer gave all the information necessary to be given; to Say it thrice wtis Superfluous. — True, Sir; but your Oii/, Monfteur, would have been harsh' " (dar'). it is only as much as you are obliged to Say. It is cutting a man short, and telling himyoudon’t desire any farther conversation with him. whereas, shv Seeming to interest yourself in the question she ashs you, and taking Some pains to give him the fullest answer you can, you 2 show 
C 191 3 
^'fiiew a desire to oblige him, to continue. a conversation with him, and encourage him (particularly if he be a stranger) to Speak to you again. ‘I foutfd that she was perfedfly in the right; for his answer had exactly the effect: on me that she idescribed. Thesis a nothing : I mention it as Such; but it is very essential to be known by every traveller wsho wishes to render himself agreeable to foreigners. It is also a characteristic trait of the Trench nation. 
L E T[ 
[ 3 
LETTER XXVI. 

T is inconceivable how drfferently men talk about w^omen in this wmrld. Some say with Jasher^ - V - ' 
'■ Can there in woman be Such glorious faith? Sure all ill stories of thy sex are false. 
Oh woman! lovely woman! Nature made thee 
To temper man: we had been brutes without you. 
Angels are painted fair, to look like you; there’s in you all that we believe of heav’n, Amazing brightness, purity, and truth. Eternal joy, and everlasting love, 
4 And 
C 193 I 
And Some with (i) Castalio; 
Woman the fountain of all human frailty! What mighty ills have not been done by womani Who was’t betray’d the Capitol? A woman. v^ho lost Mark Antony'the world? A woman: Who was the cause of a long ten years war, And laid at last old Troy in allies? Woman : 
^ Destructive, damnable, deceitful woman. Woman to man first as a bleliing given, 
When innocence and lovd were in their primes, Happy a while in Paradise they lay, 
But quickly woman long’d to goaftray; 
Some foolifti new adventure needs must prove, And the first devil fly saw, fly chang’d her love; 
To his temptations lewdly (lie inclin’d Her soul, and for an apple damn’d mankind. 
^ I remember twenty years ago I used 
to converse osten on this subjeds, with a 
cousin of mine, an officer, who was a very 
(I) Reader, are you n jaffier or a Caftalio? 
vol. I. xn wild 
; C 194 ] 
wild young man. So opposite were our opinions on this head, that we never met, but we quarrelled. He Swore women were as wily as serpentsi aaid, “that they were harmless as doves.” I: was perpetually comparing them to lambs; he was continually comparing them to wildcats. 
He went abroad; and as he was a very amiable man, he made himself friends wherever be went. I have not Seen him these fitsieen years till yesterday. We dined together tete a tete^ and talked over the days of our youth and our travels. We talked of men and manners, women and things; and, in short, of a great variety of Subjects. Well, Says he to me, have you the Same ideas of the Sublime 
• virtues 
I 19s ] 
virtues and celestial sostness os the fair Sex you had when I knew you? Yes, Said I, I have never kept company but with good women ^ and I think more highly os them every day : you thought ill of them besorc you went abroad, and, I dare Say, you think much wwsc of them now that you are returned. Says he, you arc mistaken; when I knew you, I had Seen but few women; and those merited the character I gave them, Since we parted I have Seen a great many, both in England and on the continent,; and this is the refuk of my knowledge and observation. Women resemble a ladder; and this ladder resembles • (1) oak; its top points 
(0 “
Quantum ver: i; e ad auras 
“yethereas, tantum radice in tartara tendit, ” 
N 2 to 
I 196 ] 
to Heaven, it’s Soot to Tartarus: I have mounted every rung of it; I have studied women from the court to the cottage; and have, in consequence, divided the Sex into ten classes. The first class are angels; the last class are devils. Neither of these classes is large. The Second is charming; the ninth is wicked. thesc two classes are very considerable. The latter of them may justly be compared to apes, foxes, hyenas, wild cats; the former to everything that is amiable in the creation. Of the remaining six there are two that are Supremely ridiculous, and four as insipid as unseasoned melons. 
I told him. ma’am, I should write you our dialogue, and asked him in what chfs I should place you. I am afraid 
to 
C 197 1 
to tell you his answer. Had he ranked you in the first class, I should have told you with pleasure; but I dare not tell you he placed you only in the Second. ' 
n3 
LET[ 
[ I 
LETTER XXVIL 
OMAN is a very nice and a very ^ ^ complicated machine. Her Springs are infinitely delicate • and differ irom those os man pretty nearly as the work os a repetition watch does from that of a town clock. Look at her body; how delicately formed! Examine her senses; how exquisite and nice! Observe her understanding; how Subtle and acute! But look into her heart; there is the watch work, composed of parts So minute in themselves, and So wonderfully combined, that they must be Seen by a microscopie eye to be clearly comprehended. 
4; S' The 
[ 199 ] 
The perception of a woman is as' quick as lightning. Her penetration is intuition; I had almost Said instindt. By a glance os her eye she shall draw a deep and just conclusion. Aik her how she formed it; she cannot answer the question. The philosopher deduces inferences; and his inherences shall be right: but he gets to the head os the staircase, if I may So Say, by stow degrees, and mounting step by step. She arrives at the top (i) of " the staircase as well as he; shut whether she leapt or stew there, is more than she knows herself. while she trusts her instindst she is Scarce ever > deceived; she 
(i) I mull be understood to mean here within a certain circle of ideas. 
N A 
it 
[ 2.00 J 
is generally lost when she attempts to reason. 
As the perception of women is Surprisingly quick; So their Souls and imaginations are uncommonly susceptible. Few of them have (i) talents enough to 
(I) I should rather say culture than talents. I have known women very uncommonly endowed by nature, and more of them of this country than of any other. Lady Hamilton, for example, has a very Superior talent formufic. Her execution on’ the harpsichord is perfect;; llie composes extempore better than any wo mr4n in Europe. Lady Althorp too has a very uncommon talent for drawing. I have not Seen compositions of my amateufs equal to her’s for taste and invention. If those two ladies had applied themfeives to writing, I will venture to say, they would have been charming authors. How delightful a writer is Lady Mary Wortley Montague i 
write; 
[ 201 ] 
write; but when they do, how lively are their pictures! how animated their descriptions! But if few women write, they all talk; and every man may judge of them in this point, from every circle he goes into. Spirit in conversation depends entirely upon fancy; and women all over the world talk better than men. Let a (i) man and a woman of apparently equal understandings go together to an opera or to a masquerade : See which of them will enjoy the most 
(i) Let it rather be a boy and a girl of thh same age, who go to an opera or a play for the first time. The novelty is equally striking and interesting for both. See which will comprehend the quickest, which will receive the liveliest impressions, and retain longest the imprestions they receive, 
pleasure. 
iim 
[ 202 ] 
pleasure, and bring home the greatest number of interesting anecdotes. Have they a character to portray, or a figure to describe? They give but three traits of either one or the other, and the charadfer is known, or the figure placed before our eyes. Why? From the sus ceptibility of their imaginations : their fancies receive lively impressions from those principal traits, and they paint those impressions with the Same vivacity with which they received them. I remember Seeing an English lady at Geneva who had just come out of Italy. She painted the passage of the Alps in six phrases better than I could have clone by a fortnight’s labour upon paper. 
I look 
[ ] 
I look upon it that the elements are not only differently mixed in women from what they are in men, but that they are almost of different Sorts. Their sire is purer; their clay is more resigned.. The difference,! think, may be about the same that there is between air and there, between culinary and ele<strical sire. The aethereal Spirit is not given perhaps in So large a portion to women as to men; but it is a more Subtle, and it is a siner Spirit.. Let a woman of fancy warm in conversation, she Snail produce a hundred charming images, among which there shall not be one indelicate or coarse. Warm a man on the Same Subject; he shall possibly find stronger allusions, but 
they 
Hii, 
[ 2°4 ] 
they shall neither be So brilliant nor So chaste. 
As to gracefulness of expreshon, it belongs almost exclusively to women. 
But men, you Say, have Sounder judgements. That they unquestionably have; and for that, I confess, I never could See but one reason, the difference of their education. To the age os thirteen or fourteen girls are everywhere Superior to boys. At fourteen a boy begins to. get Some advantages over a girl, and he continues to improve, by means os education, till three or four and twenty, pos sibly till thirty. Her education. Such as it is, is over at eighteen. He has all the Sountains of knowledge opened to him; interest to stimulate him to excr 
cite 

C 205 ] 
cise his parts; rivals to emulate; opponents to conquer. His talents are always on the stretch. To this he adds the advantage of travel; and it he even should not go abroad, he can enter into an infinite number of houses in London, when she can be permitted to go into but Sew. A Sound judgement cannot be Sormed but by continual exercise, and frequent comparisons. It is imposhble for women to have these advantages; and thence, I believe, the principal cause of the inferiority of their judgements. The liveliness of their fancies and of their feelings, you will Say, contributes also to weaken their powers of judging. That probably does enter for Something; but education must be the grand cause; 
Sor 
-[ 2o6 ] 
for how many men are there among your acquaintance, who join Solid judgements to fine feelings and warm imaginations? 
Take a man and a woman who have never been out of the village in which they were born, and neither of whom knows how to reaec I question very much if his discretive faculties will be found to be stronger than her’s. 
As judgement then can come but from knowledge, I will readily agree, that the number of women who have Solid judgements is very Small. But if I do not contend for them on this point as equal to men, I believe you will not dispute the Superior Sensibility of their Souls. Their feelings are certainly more exquisite 

[ 2°7 ] 
Site than those os men; and their Sentiments greater and more refined. Though the Severity, ill temper, neglect: and perfidy of men often force women to have recourse to (i) dishmulation; yet when they have noble characters to deal with, how sincere and ardent is their love t how delicate and Solid their attachment !• Woman is not near So Selfish a creature as man. When a man is in love, the object of his passion is, if I may So say, himself. When a woman is enamoured 
(i) Even among those unhappy females who gain their miserable existence by cunning and falsehoods, there is Scarcely one who has not been taught perfidy by cruel experience, and who has not been deceived, before file ever thought of deceiving; for in love, as at play, most stiarpers were dupes in the beginning, 
of 
S 2q8 ] 
of a man, she forgets herself, the world, and all that it contains, and wishes to exist only for the object: of her affection. How few men make any violent Sacrifices to Sentiment! But how many women does every man know, who have Sacrificed fortune and honours to noble, pure, and disinterested motives! 
A man mounts a breach; he braves danger, and obtains a victory. This is glorious and great. He has Served his country, he has acquired fame, preferment, riches. Wherever he appears, resped awaits him, admiration attends him, crowds press to meet him, and theatres receive him with bursts of applause, His glory dies not with him. History preserves his memory from oblivion. 
C 209 ] 
vion. That thought cheers his dying hour; and his last words pronounced with feeble pleasure are, (i) I Shall not all die. 
A woman Sends her husband to the war; she lived but in that husband. Her Soul goes with him. She trembles for the dangers of the Sea; she trembles for the dangers of the land. Every billow that Swells she thinks is to be his tomb; every ball that sties she imagines is directed against him. A brilliant capital appears to her a dreary desart : her uni verse was a man; and that man’s life, her terrors tell her, is in danger. Her days are days of Sorrow; her nights are steepless nights. She sits immoveable. 
(i) Non omnis moriar. vol. I. O 
her 
[ 210 ] 
her mornings, in all the dignity and composure of gisief, like Agrippina in her chair; and when at night she Seeks repose, repose has fled her couch : the Silent tears steal down her clteek, and wet her pillow; or is by chance exhausted nature finds an hour’s stumber, her Sancy, sickened by her distempered Soul, Secs in that steep a bleeding lover or his mangled corse. Time pastes, and her gries increases; till, worn out at length by too much tenderness, she falls the vicdm of too exquisite a Sensibility, and sinks with Sorrow to her grave. 
No, cold unfeeling reader, these are not pictures of try creation. They are neither charged nor embellished; but both copied faithfully from nature — 
The 
C 
21 1 
] 
The Count (i) D’estaing and Lady Cornwallis. 
(I) He is now a Grandee of Spain, covered with ribbons, and aiming to arrive at the head of the state. His Sentiments, were very noble; but they had for object only himfelf’. This unfortunate lady thought not of herself; stie died for another. 
The circumstances I alluded to about this Officer I was an eyewitness oh I saw him last April Surrounded in the public gardens at Paris by crowds of admirers; and one night that he came to the opera, the whole theatre received him with repeated acclamations. 

O 2 
LET[ 
[ ] 
LETTER XXVIII 

F OR fe part age mais non pas la louange; 
And hence the reason why authors and beauties detest each other So sincerely. You, Madam, are an exception; and So undoubtedly, Sir, are you. You know too, each of you, one or two more exceptions; but I am Sure you will ad' ' the truth. os my assertion for all the other sister beauties and brother wits of your acquaintance. 
The iiistant a very beautiful girl begins to attract the admiration • of the world. Lord, Says an infeisior beauty, I wonder what the menscan See in.'miss — 
lam 
[ ^'3 ] 
I am Sure there are a hundred w'’o men in London handsomer than she is; rneaning by these hundred women one single woman only, that is, hersels. The certain proof of this is, that there is not one of these hundred beauties, whose merits this lady will not deny, as Soon as ever she hears her particularly praised. 
An author’s fate is nearly the Same. As Soon as he begins to be well Spoken of, there issues forth an intrepid band of Myrmidons, all ready to knock him down, for no other reason but became he has got up. Every author is a monopolist. He would have all the praise in the world for himself. He does not see that there is room for Horace and Vir 
O 3 
gii 

[ 214 ] 
gil on the same shelf. He cannot comprehend that shakspeare may be talked of for a quarter of an hour, and ri chardson Sora quarter of an hour after. No. Were he to sill a library for a frierd, he would put no man’s works in it but his own; and if he could effect it, he would never let people talk of any other Subject. I remember a prcpos of this a trait of Voltaire. He was jealous of a man that was hanged, because he thought he was too much talked of. A rem, arkably daring criminal was executed in Paris. Voltaire Supped that night in a large company, where the convcrlation turned principally upon this marss crime, and his behaviour at the place of execution. The Wit bore it as 
Ions: 

[ 215 ] 
long as he could; but at last, unable to contain himself, she cried out, “No con“ “but about this insamous mis creant, arid Merope was a<sted tonight!” The love of praisc is very laudable, A generous ambition ought to be the first paslion os every noble mind. Burr, dear Sirs, and dear Madams, do not think you are adding to your laurels by clipping those of other people. Permit me to affure you, you are doing the contrary; you are clipping your own. Wit and beauty, however enchanting they may be, are os insinitely less value than a benevolent heart. The world is. enlightened; you cannot deceive it; it Sees your motive. And when you lau ich a larcasm, or point an epigram, you may O j. possibly 
[ 2i6 ] 
possibly give your rival a Slight wound; but, be persuaded, you give a mortal one to yourself. 
Beauties, I have observed, are only jealous os Beauties that they See; but authors are jealous of authors whom they never have Seen. Some indeed carry it still farther; they envy the dead. Voltaire was one of these. He envied every man that had acquired fame in any part of the world, from Homer down to Jean Baptiste Rousseau. In this country, thank heaven, there is no envy; and if, by chance, a writer is criticised, it is only done through good nature, for the Sake of enlightening him. One consolation he is Sure of, that whenever he is ill fpoken of, it will be, at least, in 
delicate 

m 
[ 3 
delicate language. The matter may be Severe, but it will be Softened by the elegance of the manner. I had a sine banquet for my vanity one day in a bookseller’s shop, where I was unknown, and where I went to purchase Mr. hay ley’s Essay on History. The bookseller had it not; and while his boy was bringing it from another shop, I alked him Some questions about new publications. No, Sir, Says a genteel looking man that was there, there is no taste in this country; they buy all manner of trash; and, what is worse, they praisc it after. I wtote formerly; but Seeing the age had no discernment, I left it off; and now. Sir, there is Scarce anything but wretched scribblers in the whole 
kingdom. 

[ 218 ] 
kingdom. There certainly. Sir, Said I, are great numbers of bad writers in every country; but, I believe, there are Some authors here at prcsent who have as strong sense, as much ingenuity, and as highly polished taste as are to be found in any nation of Europe. — Who are they. Sir > I am. Sure I should be very glad to know them. — Dr. johnson, Sir, must be allowed to be a. nervous and prosound moralist; Mr., Burke, you must grant, is a fine writer; Ivir. Sheridan -- He begged to be cxciised; 
he Saw very little merit in any of them; and if they had fonie, it was buried under Such heaps of blcmisnes, as entitled them, on the whole, rather to censure than to praise. He then particularisesh 
a num 
‘ y[ 
[ ] 
2 number of their defects, seasonint^ his 
criticisms, every now and then, with most abusive epititets. As I am not fond either of abuse or falsehoods, I shall, not copy any of his remarks on these. gentlemen. I mentioned .to him afterwards two or three otlxers in different lines of literature One was a miountebank;. another had not common-sense; a third was wretched, execrable. Now here, thought I, is a sine occasion for me to fish out a compliment for myself. This man does not know me; and as he is So outrage ousiy violent against all the world, a ute praise from him will be doubly grateful. Pray, Sir, (addreshng him with an insinuating tone of voice, and Seeling all complacency within) have 
you 

C 3 
you xt2asherlocps Letters? Yes, Sir, I have read him; and a very laborious thick headed fellow he is — I looked like parsons in the Critic, when Sneer gives him his portrait. I strove to laugh, and repeat his words — Ha! ha! ha! Yes, Sir, he is a very laborious — I wanted to say the other word; but thick headed stuck in my throat; I could not get it out (i). You may judge I did not stay much longer; I had got enough of his conversation; So I took up my poem, and walked off, muttering to myself, like Sofia, “an enemy to the muses and to music.’’ 
(i) I plead guilty to/<2^cz/r. thick headed nejs I deny. 
LET[ 
[ 0 
L E T T E R XXIX 
WHILE Admiral Rodney was beating the Spaniards last winter, I was engaged in fighting with the French. He was teaching Europe to respedt the British stag; and I was teaching her to venerate the name of shakspeare. One advantage I had over this gallant Officer; 
only conquered on the ocean; but I carried the war into the very heart of the enemy’s country, and sought Voltaire before the gates of the Louvre. One advantage this gallant Officer hat over me; he gained Several hundret 
poundl 
[ 22 2 ] 
pounds a year by his campaign; and I lost Some hundreds by mine. The uncommon suceess os my books has ruined me. However, I do not repine; Sori not only acquired great literary Same, hut I endeavoured to Serve my country even in the war; I did all that I could ■to eat up her enemies, by dining and Supping with them almost every day of my lise. 
P. S. Congreve Said there was Something very like wit in cibber’s Plays, I declare, upon reading over these Letters, I thought once or twice, I Saw omething very like vanity in them. And, Leader, after all, who knows but the leviewers were in the right? May be ^ ' I am 
mm 

[ 223 ] 
I am a vain man. Well, is I am, it is not a crime. There is, no great harm in a little innocent vanity. If it was a sin, what would become os all the women in the world? And what would become of my friends the French? 
L E T 

i S 

[ • 224 3 
LETTER XXX 
Donst think the wcrse of a man Sor having a mail portion of vanity. j®neas, perhaps, is not less interesting, for having a little dash f the coxcomb in him. I am the pious Mneas has been objedied to a thousand times; and yet it was the judicious Virgil who made him say it. 
When a man is In a strange country, where nobody knows his merits, and where he wants to have them known, what would mu have him do? You would have him wait till people have time to weigh him, and is he has real 
merit 
C ^^5 ] 
merit it will then appear. That, I grant you, is the better way; but then it is. So xiresome to wait, and it costs others So much trouble to find out these per sedtions; whereas telling the world at once what you are. Saves it trouble, and yoiirfelf time. So thought .Dneas; and So think I. 
Readers are divided into two classes; people who have talents, and people who have none. those who have no parts cannot discover your merits; those who have, is they do not talk against you, poffess at least the Secret os holding their tongues. Now an author cannot have same unless he is praised : the ignorant cata praise him, id the know 
VOL. I. 

[ 226 ] 
ing wortt. I See no resource left him but to praise himself. 
Considering that this is my real tvay of thinking, I should imagine my reader ought to be Surprised at my modesty in paying myself So few compliments. However, as I have observed, there is no kind of writing less successful than panegyric; nor any Species of panegyric less relished than that which an author bestows upon himself; I here renounce ' vanity and all its works, and promise faithsully never to praise myself again as long as I live. ’ And that you may not be in doubt about my motives Sor this Sacrifice, I confess to you that it is Solely to pay my court to my readers, and particularly to my dear brother authors. 
3 All 
1^ 
C 227 ] 
All the world has condemned Virgil for that (i) ian the piousmneas. I will venture to astert, that Virgil is in the right; and that all the world is in the wrons;. .Dneas is not vain; he only praises his heart: the man a/one is vain who praises his understanding. The reason of this distinction is evident: it is in every man’s power to have a good heart, but no man can give himself a good understanding. 
Obvious conclusion : that 7 was not vain when I Said in my dedication to Lord Bristol, tny soul was pure; though it would have been unpardonable vanity in me to have hinted that I had a ray of common-sense. I hope I have now con (i) Sum pins Nneas, 
vinced 

■[ 228 ] 
vinced the reader, that, notwithstanding appearances are Somewshat aghinst us, j®neas and I are two very civil modest persons. 
i I 


i 
f ' 
(t77 
/ .’■ 
5 A 
>i^c^ssc, > np 



30358 
