 



■' - 
C ■ 1' f. 'i ’ 
-- - • 
■ ^'s 


‘ ■>r‘. 
* u 
■- 



.*• ' 


'I 
J'. 







A - : 
r. : ~r 
1^ •■"•■/. .' •. L ', -■ 
, 1 
ri 

^ - ' .■ r fr 
7^.''’t: V' ' V * 
► -■ ‘ ' • • ’ 
; CV ■ ' •: -. _ 

•t 
Peggy and. Patty; 
O R,, 
THE SISTERS 
O F 
A S H D A L E: 
VOL; I. 

'.I jtss' 
ffi 
-1 
, i 6 

it asi'., g:, HTFT. j 
‘t V 
Nt 1 
; “5 
t Kait '4 V 
T a'tt £ t, .a, 
■a II T 
..' .'j 3 M tj 4! ■ •/. if y 01 VI i 
■ '. ■ r ~ ■ tv r, 't 9 ■■?. 
t. „., .VI v. tv V i.. « 
■■ ■ ■ S' ' '* 
bl ’ S.N fldi^y 0 7 ^ 
♦rfw • •h«**e*4. 
, v 
rj«i 
'V rftstti 
■ • ■■: •■ ' ' ' ■ • i 
* C t : U? hai ■ • TN M crt 1$ S ix ' '1 
ri. - via ■ 1 

■■A. 
Peggy and Patty; 
O R, 
THE SISTERS 
O F 
A S H DA L E. 
IN FOUR VOLUMES. 
VOL. I. 
LONDON: 
PRINTED FOR J. DODSLEY, PALL mall. 
M, DCC, LXXXI1J« 
w t. 
r 



L 


^; T ia M a 2 I T a 3 V a A: 
Lt 
C TA 18 
i s a a A iovo^rli ■ ot. 
't’, V, ‘ 
: 1 ' 
■ ■X'V f1 

t Tv" " ■ 

-- «‘?>«w ft visi ■?^ib'w v 
■ : v \u^sfx^^vtilt^^ 
v etsif titt 
. 
.V' ' ' ' 
; 
\ t ...,. K. 1. ■■» V.... i Pi J) fi i 
l qx3 xvixiit, l >i't. 
liv: ?nod xlbiob stcv, ^3vfi 
'ikk' ' ■'.'5 ■• - 
i*%uv', : i j 
I V '] 
ADVERTI SOUTHEAST menti 
!Xo the .DEADER." 
“J" Hate apologies^^ ^cfays a fenfthk author) for if you have writ“ “well, there needs none; — and “ill, they will heaf littlefervicej' Tet the writer of the following history cannot submit it to the public 
t 
eye without dejiring the candid reader to observe., ahejiyle is intended to be rather affecting than pompous: the sentiments flowing from the heart; and rather warmly expres ■five, than coldly correct. 
2 Sthe 
[ VI ] 
he emellent author of the spebator chferves.^ that one peruses A hook with double delight, when we know who or what the writer is. — liepleafantly remarks, some readers are fo very curious in this particular “that they even “wish to know, if a work was “written by a married man, or a “hatchelor ', whether in London, or the country; — whether by the desire“ “a friend, or to amuse an idle “hour t' — nay, even if the author was “a brown, or a black man tall, or “Short, c. cv If the reader should entertain a wish to know who or what the writer of this little work is, — suffice it to say, a woman; — but whether a maid, wise, or widow; — ■ 
whether 
v ‘ [ VII ] ■ ’ • 
whether fair or hr owntall or Short whether it was written for a dinner or a new gown, — is of no great importance. She is convinced, the moral that may he drawn from the following Jheets, can never he too much inculcated being ultimately dejigned to warn the young, the unprotected, inexperienced part of the female world, to avoid the fatal effects of a too easy belief, and rash credulity; to excite the tear of pity for injured innocence; to reprobate vice in its certain path to misery \ to recommend those virtues which are alone, 
•* Sacred, fabftantial, never fading blifs.’’ 
PEGGY 
r • •, ■. 
b i __ 
CM. /.; r; ‘ ': SR ' 
f^ V •■ •• — 

1 - / v^ 1^. 
• * r. t • ^ ^ 

i * ■ - ^ 4 S V ’. *, / TV V 
ts’i if • '■ vis.., 
■■: .kv: d • 
.li ^ 
e Lr; :.; 
'' C i?ov» 

X VT. 
■■ ’^' ic TX - 
V 
"■<• \ rit't^j•., i r 'j' 
i v'.>* a’nvv4?. f>fh'*3*v 
; iten - 
T • '. -- ‘ ■ ' ' 
■*tstsir'ds4&i 


TV.' 
'■f 

PEGGY AND PATTY. 
LETTER I. 
Afhdale in Cumberland,, May 2, 
DEAR EMMA, 
T T 7 HEN Patty andl parted with 
vv 
you last night, at the style 
in the copse that leads to the little wood by the side of the valley, we still pursued the Subject, that we told you was' uppermost in our hearts, and in which you So much vol. I. B agree; 
[ -2 ] 
agree with us; namely, our desiring our parents to write to a cousin german they have in London (and who is patty’s godmother) to inquire among her acquaintance for Some creditable, little establishment for us (Such as waiting on a lady, c.) that So we might be able to earn a decent livelihood, without being any longer Such a burden, as I am Sure we must be, to our poor father: — indeed — indeed Emma, it grieves both your'peggy and Patty to the Soul, to think what a help less little family he has to provide for; — and all upon the Scanty pittance of a curacy of thirty pounds ^ ' .per 
t 3 3 
per annum for which Sum he is to walk over the bleak moors, eight miles (as he has, you know, two churches to Serve) every Sunday. In short, my Sister and I, being now arrived at the age of sixteen and Seventeen, can no longer bear to loiter away our time here (where v/e must still add to the ex pences of the family) when we might be So much more profitably employed; and perhaps at the year’s end, my Emma, be able from our industrious earnings to Send down a Small trifie to our dear parents— — and I never closed our eyes ■last night, for thinking of this jour b 2 ney, 
ney, and of the advantages that may arise from it. — We have had a good education, as to reading the best English authors, writing, and being, as you know, well instrudled in needlework: : — latter by our mother, and the former by my poor father, who you must remember formerly kept a little School in the next village; which joined with his curacy, enabled him to live more plentifully than he has since done. — But alas! that dreadful fit of illness he had last winter (which drove us to Such extremities, that my excellent mother was obliged to part with her chief apparel, to procure. 
[ 5 ] 
cure the best of husbands Some comfortable nourishment towards his recovery) that illness, Emma, I repeat, was our ruin: — but come, let us hope the best : — this journey to London will, I hope, produce Something in our favour. 
Our cousin bennet lives' in a very handsome manner, and doubt less must be acquainted with families of good fashion : for my part, I have no objection to attend an elderly lady (for you know I can bear confinement) nay to wait either on one or more children, is an employment I should be much pleased with : — our hands, my dear friend, JB 3 disdain 
( 6 1 
disdain not labour. — What (delight shall I have, and So will*my beloved Patty, to Send our poor mother now and then a new gown and every year Some useful cloth ing, for a present, to my little sisters. — My brother George, I hope, may yet live to visit England; — and it may please the Almighty disposer of all events to Send him home in Such circumstances as may be the making of us all: I was So very young, when a worthy gentleman in this county carried him over to Bengal with him as a writer, that I do not in the least remember his person : — I only remember, in a ^ former 
[ 7 ] 
former days, how my little heart used to throb with anxious fear, when. Sitting round our peat fire, in the winter evenings, I used to desire my father to tell about (whilst I Sliuddered to hear it) the lions, the tigers, and the frightful black people (as I then thought they were) where poor George was gone. 
You told us, my Emma, yesterday, that you are going Soon to your uncle waller’s at Carlisie So that, was this journey of ours even not to take place, you see we should lose you. — How should Patty and 1 Support your absence, were we to remain longer in this coun b 4 try? 
[ 8 ] 
try.?.? — a tree, ' under whosc shade we have So often sat and Sung together, or played in our careless infancy, but would remind us of cur loss : — • but now perhaps we iliall Set out much about the Same time — and then we will write, my Emma! — be Sure let us write by every opportunity : — but this moment I am called away to assist my mother in Some little family business— — bless you! — I must now conclude; — and believe us both, for my Sister will sign this as well as myself, to be 
your unalterable friends, 
Peggy and Patty Summers, 
; ^, P. S. Sorry 
[ 9 3 
P. S. Sorry am I to Say that the little goldfinch I intended to keep for your Sake, and which you ■brought us yesterday, died this morning, in my bosom.. — 
As Soon as we have broke the ice about our London journey, we will 
•write again. 
LETTER II 
Lhe same, to the same. 
^ Aflidale, Monday. VERY thing, my dear Emma, goes on towards our London journey, as our hearts can wish— — these last three weeks you 
have 
[ 10 I 
have been at Carlisie, my beloved father has written to our Cousin Bennet, on the affair, which engrosses our whole thoughts; and has received a very kind answer. She is a good woman, and a Sincere friend; and has not the least doubt of our Soon being Settled in Some respedtable family : — till which we are to remain with her, or her eldest daughter (lately married:) — how thankful are we to Providence for the great prospedl we have of being, as I may Say, now in alb likelihood provided for,., during the •remainder of our days. 
Patty and I are as busy as bees, 
% 
in 
C II ] 
in making up a neat cap or two' finery you know, my Emma, is out of the question with us. — My poor little sister Nancy has just now affected me with her kindness — her godmother lately gave her Sorne ribbons,, and other little matters; ■ — » these she has just now brought us, and insists on our taking to ourselves : — “You shall” (cried she, throwing her arms round my neck) “have “these, and my best frock into the “bargain; it will make Something, “to go to London.” — “Poor child, ” (Said my dear mother, wiping a fond tear from her pale cheek) thou knowest not what a place 
this 
. [ 12 ] 
“this London is.” — Emma, I shall be Sadly hurt when the time comes, after all, to part from our beloved parents, and these poor little things, my brothers and sisters. — Tommy will give me his buckles out of his shoes (being silver, the present of his uncle) — and Lucy, not five years old, is crying that she has nothing to give us. 
You must — indeed, Emma, you must come over to Ashdale (we will meet you at the old style in the copse) and stay with us the night before our departure. I often, happy as I am about this journey, cannot help Sighing but, as out 
good 
E 13 ] 
good father tells us, there can be no real happiness in this world without Some alloy. — Patty laughs at me when I sigh, but you know she is a little madcap, and has charming. Spirits. 
Do, my dear, come to us as; Sooa as you can: — and believe me, always, 
Your true and affectionate 
Peggy Summers. 
'P. S. As I know you love to hear all you can of our London journey, I have enclosed a copy of my father’s letter to our cousin,, and also her answer. I had almost forgot to tell you, how lucky Patty and I 
shall 
L H 3 
'shall be in having good Mrs. Carter go with us as far as Carlifie, from which place her married daughter, who is going to London, will go with us the whole journey from Carlifie — is not this a lucky circumstance? 

LETTER III ' 
Mr. Summers to Mrs. Bennett (enclosed in the ■preceding.) 
Afhdale, Cumberland. ' GOOD CQUSIN, 
will find, on the perusal of this, that I have not forgot the many kind profestions you 
made 
[ rs ] 
made my wife and me in yotir letter last year, relative to being of Some Service to my poor unprovided family : — indeed, I am now ygoing to give you the greatest proof an old fond father (as I am) can give, in begging you to' take my uwo eldest daughters under your protection; and to look out for them, in Some family of your ac <quaintance, for a little industrious employment, as you shall See most proper." — They are good children, and have been always kept to habits of industry: — they both (if their fond mother is not blinded by sher tender partiality) are very ex 2 pert 
[ i6 ] 
pert at their needle; and I have' taken care from their early years to instrudt them in their religious duties — in reading the best authors and in writing: — thus have they had a plain, and I hope an useful education. The showy accomplishments, as music, dancing, c. they are entirely ignorant of. Their dispositions are mild and good Peggy, my eldest child, is of rather a more Sedate turn of mind than my little lively Patty, who is however equally good and dutiful. The former would make an excellent attendant (being fond of reading, and can bear confinement), to Some 
old. 
t 17- ] 
aid lady; and the latter a very proper companion to a young one but I pretend not, my dear cousin,, to prescribe to you in this matter, as to the situation you may think most proper for each, as no one can < know the world better than your self, or be more proper to conduct two Such young creatures, as my Peggy and Patty, into it. My poor wife and myself shall hourly pray for every bleshng to attend you,. for your great and real friendship friendship indeed! my cousin — for,, alas! times have been dreadfully bad with us. — My old rheumatic complaints have returned last win 
vol. L 
ter. 
C 18 3 
ter, '"! and cbeen ’(for Hwas laidisip near five months) the ruin of tish — my little garden, from' which we drew our chief Subsistence, has failed, owing to my long want of inspedling it; and we had also the .very great misfortune of iofing our cow : this all together has been too much for us; — but I will be patient — I will be resigned, my cousin, under whatever it may pleasc Heaven to infiid:. — The truly devout soul can never be deprived of the comforts of religious aids, that has a conscience void of Ostende towards God and towards fnan. -' * 
If our hopes (as to our precious -- ^ children. 
[ »9 ] 
children, Bwe entrust, dearest Madam, toiyouljare favoured with your approbation, we have most luckily heard of a neighbour, who hasa daughter (a married. Sedate woman) who will take the care of my children quite from Carlisse to London; — a very fortunate circumstance 1 
- My most affectionate regards to your worthy husband, my old schoolfellow— — tell him, times are strangely altered with me, since those happy days: I question if he could even recollect his colleague, poor Ned Summers, in an old fiouched hat and threadbare 
C 2 
coat. 
[ 20 J 
coat, digging in his garden. — ex. ' cuse my. Scrawl, whichbl must now conclude, with my wife’s and my kindest love and respedls to u both, and heartily, wishing you the.; continuance of every blessing.. 
I remain (in expectation of your approving letter to our proposal^t, which we hope you will either parr don or grant) 
Dear, good Cousin, 
Your very obliged and 
affectionate kinsman, 
Edward Summers, 
P. S. My wife will take the liberty of Sending by the girls a pot of very fine honey (the produce of 2 our 
xci^.n3bt: £ 5 : !tb 
ourlittle garden) — of which wfi beg your acceptance. — The above dcau woman, I grieve to Say, breaks daily my illncss was too much for her to go through; — and from a constant complaint in her breast, I fear — alas! my cousin, I fear a cancerous disorder will be the consequence— — pray Say nothing of this to the two children — as they would be unhappy in the knowledge of it. 
t 
I live in hopes yet of embracing my Son George before I die. — If my worthy cousin could Send me down a few news papers, in which arc any tidings from Bengal, it C g would 
‘t 22 ] 
would rejoice our hearts, as our rc mote distance from ’ the Capital makes us often remain in ignorance how the world goes. Adieu." 
LETTER IV m 
Mrs. Sennet to the Rev. Mr. Summers, (etulofed with the preceding.) 
London. 
My GOOD COUSIN, 
"^^^ITH sincere pleasure I received your truly kind letter, in Vvshich you entrust me with the care of your two dear daughters. — Believe me, when I assure you, with the greatest truth, I shall not 5 only 
[ ] 
only receive them with an unfeigned pleasure, but .will in all respedfs treat them, whilst under my roof, with the Same tenderness as my own children : — and I have not the least doubt but that I shall very Soon meet with an establishment for both, equal to their and your most Sanguine wishes. — I am the more likely to Succeed in this matter, as our eldest daughter (Harriet) about a fortnight since, is married to a merchant in the city, of very large fortune, whose sister, a maiden lady of an exemplary character, would, I am certain, be glad to receive just such a young person to be her com c 4 panion 
I 24 '■] 
panion as my cousin Peggy: neither have I a doubt, but that among us we shall equally well provide for your lively Patty, as •you call her: but till they are provided for, my two unmarried daughters (much of their age) will rejoice as well as myself to have them with us. — Mr. Bennet at this moment looks over my shoulder, and bids me add on his .part, that the children of his old friend Ned Summers, will be ever dear to him as to myself: — he often wishes for a moment of your Sweet air in Cumberland, whilst from his profession he is obliged to be for ever poring 
over 
I 25 ] 
’over dull musty parchments, deeds, and Settlements. — You give us great concern, my much esteemed ‘cousin, in the account you give of your own health, and that of your most valuable wife : but in the imidst of our compassion, do you know that Mr. Bennet and I are downright angry with you both, that you would not inform us of your late melancholy Situation? — Why, my good kinsman, would you not make use of that friendship we have So often proffered to you? — Indeed, you are too delicately J'crupulous in this matter. — I know there is a dignity in distress, which 
will 
[ 26 ] 
will often" Sooner suffer^[j'avsilence than implore relief; — but Surely to my friend, you might have dis closed the melancholy recital. I hope your tender fears for good Mrs. Summers are groundless : — 1 will, however, consult the most eminent Surgeons we have, and Send you theinopinion. 
But now for a delightful subjed, which is the happy account V e have heard of your Son George, front a gentleman, our relation, just returned from Bengal; he tells us, he has made a large fortune, and that he has gained the esteem of all who know him, from the merit of 
his 
[ 27 3 
his condudlain alli occasions; and that there were the greatest hopes of his Soon arriving in England : on which happy news I heartily congratulate you. — — I shall expect the precious charge with which you entrust me, as Soon as possible : — the direction you will be very exact in, Mr. bennet’s, N “2, hatton street, Holborn. The Safest way will be, as Soon as they arrive at London where the coach Sets up, to dispatch a messenger to me, and our Servant and our chariot shall immediately attend them. 
I enclose a bank note of ten pounds, for the purpose of defraying 
I 28 ] 
iing the journey to London of my amiable young cousins. — Mr. ben net has Sent an enormous bundle of pamphlets and news papers, to let you See how the world goes on ^ and I have enclosed in the parcel Two pounds of best green tea, of which I beg Mrs. Summers acceptance; — and wishing you both all •siappiness, I remain ^ 
Your real friend, and 
r 
. affectionate kinswoman, 
Sarah benneu 
Mr, Bennet sends love. 
LETTER 
[ 29 
LETTER V 
Miss Emma Harveyto Miss Waller.. 
Moss Hill, Cumberland. J^UCY, my dear Lucy, wonder not to See my paper blotted with rears; — they are gone! — My poor Peggy and Patty fet out this, morning for the great city of London; — yes — the dear companions of my early infancy, to this present moment, are gone, perhaps for ever. — How selfish, my friend,, will you call this anxiety of mine, when this journey will be, in all probability. So much for the advantage of not only the 
dear 
t 30 1 
dear girls, ^ but ' most likely the whole family: — and yeti‘s Lucy, I felt a pang I cannou'express — I even shuddered when my Sweet Peggy, 'for the last time, pressed me to her heart. — I ssept with them (as I could not tear myself away) yesterday evening. — Slept, did I say? — alas! we never closed our eyes; — Patty, my lively Patty, was’ all prate — she has charming Spirits : — my Peggy I thought Seemed more affecsted with this Separation, — The parting this morning was Sad indeed! — the best of fathers and of men, Mr. Summers, called the dear girls into his little ■ study. 
t 3« ] 
study, wherejl believe a very ten -- der Scene ensued, — as when he came out to us, his eyes were red with weeping. — Mrs. Summers looked tenderly upon him — ‘‘ What! my “love” (Said that amiable woman) ‘‘ you would not give them your “blessing and advice before me, “lest the Solemn Scene should too much affect me — Here Mrs. Carter (whom you know) arrived in a chaise she had borrowed for the purpose of conveying her and my young friends to Carlisse; from which town they have taken places in the coach for tomorrow— — little children, who had been peeping 

f 32 ] 
ing out every •mostienc for a fight' of the'carfiagej'now: ‘cried out^‘ “The chaise is come l^^^he chaise “is come! ‘ — but indeed Peggy “and Patty shall not go cling -- ing round the necks of each — “
“ma — ’ they never — never — will “come shack again — indeed they “will not, — (Said thlese little in -- nocents, weeping bitterly.) — Mrs. ^ Carter was for kindly hurrying them away at once but the tender Mrs. Summers exclaimed, — ^ “Let .me have one more parting “embrace — I may perhaps have “nev^r she clasped her maternal arms round the beloved girls, 
'whilst 
C 33 ]' 
whilst Peggy fainted on her bofbm'' — being removed into the air, she Soon recovered. — We. then took a last adieu — and drew towards the little gate that' leads - into the road when,, what was wonderfully affcd: ing, a number of young:, maidens, the former Schoolfellows in the next village) - of' my Sweet, friends; -- were all assembled to take a last farewell; “God bless you both !’* was echoed from every mouth. — One presented a nosegay— — what is called a keep fake.^ — another, a. few little cakes,. c— — Patty, and I, looked umitlcrahu things,, for we. could not speak— — ■. I.. D Mrs. 
t 34 ] 
Mrs., ^catter got them at last into the chaise, — when the poor father once more caught their hands, and holding them to his heart, with a look I shall never forget, — “My “children, ” — (Said he, faltering) “may tiie Almighty : — remember “— be virtuous — and be” — happy — he would have Said, but the chaise that moment drove off. — Lucy, never shall I forget the Sound 'of the parting wheels; — the lejfening distant Sound Seemed to die upon the ear: — we ujiened as long as there was a possibility of hearing the Smallest sound of these wheels on the gravelly hill (which you 
well 
I ^35 ■] 
hv^lskno'w) stnd then we'pitcoufl}^ 
, Sdoked at each other, as ^iliuch a's tb Say, “Are they gone for ever?’* 
^ Mr. Summers, with a mournful tone of voice he could not Conceal, and a parental tear dowm his venerable cheek he couid not suppress', kindly ashed me, “if I would not return into the houle.” -^! held up my hand, but could not Speak, 'and with stow and melancholy steps bent my course homeward. 'When I gained the Summit of the hill, I thought perhaps I should have Seen, though at a distance, the carriage in the valley— — it was Lucy, there is Some 
D 2 thing 
[. <:? J 
8? TCW VS f nwcr 
thing wonderfully affe^iilg in being et by those we Iqve certairily 
is muchsmore Sehsibly, felt by th' remaining party at home, than by, the travellers theniselves. ^ The thousand objects that present to them — the change of place, 
cc. — all justify my assertion v.'hilstfthe poor friend that, 'stays at home, \ haso nothing to prevent the constant idea of those they have just parted from. — I felt assis I had just lost a limb. wellj.; to 
proceed; — I Sauntered home^ shu^ alas j ill'. passing through the, little copsenwherc; my sweet.girls and I have Spent Sci: many hours, I Sat 
down. 
t 37- ] 
down on the and gave way to § vicflellt^burst' oi ^ weeping; ^his telleved my Spirits moreothamj any thiing. — ’my parehti had. sheen.' waity* ihg diriher’ Sometime irandimy fa tfher, who though good m the mam, as he is, is Certainiyof a rough ak position, accosted me not in the gentlest manner — • “So, b emmai “you are come at last !>r+^what! with your eyes as red as ferntsi What a blubbering is here ■^^betwi^t myivife and you 1 (my oor mother, who is, you know, as ^ntle and mild as my father is otherwise, had been weeping too, I found, on the departure of the dear V D 3 i girls. 

■FQL} 
. t 28 1 
girhjf.ol^whom^she is very fond— — nonsense, ’’j(cried my father) ‘‘^jis all this todo— — for ^ what, I should be glad to know? “— Why because the very thing is “■ now come to pass for which ye “haye all been wifiting this twelve manth. — Here it was, last winter, “jpoor Mr. Summers will he ruined — ^ mufi he starved with such a family“ “then the, ..rich cousins were “blamed for not doing anything ‘‘ for them Well! — Is not every “thing now as heart can wish? — “the girls, and good girls they are, are now Sent for to london;; — Summers,, who I. - love 
f ?9 1 
ibve ak I do my eyes‘^ has^fold she *•' all V — and' now, I Say, the kind Londoner have' taken the girls, “and they are going to bemade for life, what a whining, and sighing is here! — were they laid “in their coffins and carried to “their graves, moregrief, I am cer tain, could not be fiiev/n on the “occasion : — but the best joke of “all is, your mother here had a dream last night; — and she is “Sure she shall never See them “again.” — — Dear sir, ” ' (Said I) how can you be So cruel ?- You know how I have loved the poor ^ girls from earliest * infancy — I D 4- wish 
ft 4° "P 
“wish — L wish — »fl.«was with tarn om narnv - tt 
3- h7firi wori, feo o. D 
„ The dinner being mow removed, 
jano; i & - 
my father having .lighted up Lis pipe, began to be in better humour : — “Emma, come hither “child,; kiss me.” — — pulling, irii'e on hisj. knee) — “v^here isi your “.ffrtjtidde and t^jotx^xjkmnefs., II “thus whimper without occasion]? ]? dowm ’on ^your^knees “this moment, and thank God the “girls are provided fpci’^t Ahf] sir, ” (Said I) ‘cth^ikfct J. amu 
.■3. 
I but — yet I fear I know not what; -^ “As tq fortitude and Jirmnefs^ as^you ‘^ cals jt,; to bp Swt€ thpfe words. “Sound 
k ^41 h 
tbuhd' well, — bu when trial“ “how hard is Child, ” t(faid my father after takirig’a long whiff of his''pipe) fortitudeand “the commandaf our pajftonssi^ the 
noblest — the best — and the” — swhilst my worthy parent wk^'going on with his harangue on h\s ]perfect command of the passions' ' man Fcter entered,! with a face ak long as my arm, withr the bld^itidihgs that miy father’s favounte share had staked herself: — unluckily, poor man, at that moment he ’forgot his fortitude ^md^firmnefs; for starting up (So far'fr’om^ havingthe'‘command of bis passions:) • * ” 
bnimr h, he 
t 42 I 
see cried, down went his pipe, bottle, arid glasses, into^a thoiisandl shivers, — and in a rbost exceshve rage he Sallied forth, to. vent hiisi passion on the man who had put the unfortunate mare into a wrong field, it Seems. — Ah! my poor father,, thought I, how clever, to sit in your casy chair after a plentiful meal,, and to preach fortitude and firmness where the iveart is untouched. but where it is., how difficult, alas!. those tryit^ virtues. 
My dear mother complaining of a pain in her head, I retired with, her to her chamber, where from the windows we Saw rny father Srer 

E 43 h 
ting and fuming in the fields among his rnen. — My poor Mr. Harvey (Said my excellent mother, in her calm, mild manner) “will be quite “ill with this excess of his passion— — !*’ replied, I, “what is his “loss in comparison of mine : — “but preaching and practice are— — • was running on, and I believe rather pertly when my mother interrupted me — “Emma! remem “ber, child, you are Speaking of “your father; — we have all our “foibles, — and possibly this in “him may be constitutional; — » “he is a worthy man as ever 
“livedn 
C “But. 
C 44 ] 
“But, my fieacinajam, ” (Said I) *^^pyay what vas'^ybupistearft ^lalf 
*'t23ibu£ orfj ni aistv r»c' bct 
night, about my poor '■ ireggy 
a ’ l*atty ?” • — stidl stocin 
“dwd^ repeat it, ” (rettirned she 
‘‘ Heaven grant tlje'deaf childreii ^ 
(( 
. ’ ii; 3j i • : ^ 'fri 1 ■. • •** 
(whbm I love as my own) every 
blessing: — Mrs. Bennet is a good 
(( 
worfian, I have seen'^her forrher 
XC finr /•. .cnw i - -, ' 
ly; — all Will turn out for the 
best, I doubt not. 
iotmo3 
Lucy, what could this drearia df 
33j5 - "■ 
my mother’s be Was it not 

strange she would not tell me? 
Have I told you — No, I think not — that a most happy account is arrived in England of Mr. summers’s 
ffffxt HO 
[ n J 
ilbidt), us 
jpers’s eldest Son, who.has been 
L .I,. -, i .rlvy yfilq 
many. years in the East, Indies? 
’ Lg' N iooq {pn Uf.: : T gm 
Mrs, Bennet writes this. I hope he 
H .oi;; J •, j’l; ' 
will return rich, and be a comfbrt 
L: 'ialo*)i doll 
to his .dear parents— — 
! my friend. r heigh ho!' 
yio ■ '■> Av/d LI ■: •n p, v; 
poor peg^^^and Patty; our, e now Some miles on your long iour.r ney. — '•pray write;, which will be a 
0*. j. .iv, 177’. ^ 
comfort to the present dropping Spirits of 
tonne 
Your very affectionate 
■07 
Emma liarvey*. 
diill: ’ I, .oi 
■25 ■TLL 
, 1 a f * 
2 '3'.!: 

LEXTER 
t 46 5 
nr ^lf»tecticqq; irb ojuis e ubw t m « he T T e'r^fi VI h 
-■ L.ti. TV y r „> ocj 
Peggy Summers to Mr. and Mrs. 
L;;, ■, : i 'A .J 
Summers. 
vd. r ■ " — iliv - * / MOV 
Carlisle ^ afternoons 
'oviv DEAR 4>arefits, 
J HAVE the satisfaction to act' ' you^we got Safe to this place • and Patty and I are both well, and endeavour all we can to keep "up our Spirits; ‘^’and as this journey will prove So much to our advantage, we have great hopes you will reconcile yourselves' the better to our Separation— — am Sorry I am obliged to Say wc have met I with 
[ 47 ] 
with a little disappointment, in that we shall not be able to have the company of Mrs. Harris (Mrs, carter’s daughter) to London; she very unluckily being taken last night with a violent cholic; — an inflammation in her bowels is coming on; and Mr. Harris has Sent for a physician, who Says she is in great danger, as she is, it Seems, breeding. We got here about noon, 
• but found the family in the greatest confusion, and Mr. Harris in Sad grief for this unhappy affair. — A messenger was dispatched, it Seems, to good Mrs. Carter, before, ^day bregk this morning, to fetch her 
over. 
[■ 4« 7 
over,, but by Some accident he di not arrive at her village till after we were Set out -. — She, poor good woman,, cries Sadly — it grieves my heart to - hear her : — indeed no one thinks her daughter will live, as she was Seized So violently, — Wear very, sorry to acquaint you with this affair;, but as our places are taken in the stagecoach, if we don’t go we shall lose all that money; to be Sure we are very troubled Mrsi Harris cannot go with us, but as that is impossible, we must do as well as we can. There is no fear but we shall have Some company in the coach. Mr. Harrisvlays. it is always full, .fa 
do 
, T Nf 'r 
rb '* « st ‘ ' 
do not fear, my dear parents, that we shall go tf is long journey quite alone. 
As fbon' as we get to London you ^ may depend on our writing; and you may as much depend, my believed father, on my treafurmg up in cur hearts the excellent advice you gave ns in the little study this morning I still Seem to feel my dear mother’s parting tears on my cheek. — Farewell; as we must now conclude, for farmer Grove, who is going your way, waits to carry this letter, ' and says you shall have it tomorrow. Pray do not be over concerned that Mrs. Harris 
vol. I. E cannot 
C ‘5° '] 
cannot go \v/ith .us, as there is no doubt 'but wcrshali .have .company in the coach, 
Withrour duty to ourshonoured parents, and love to the children vwe remain 
- ypur ever obedient, 
>• loving, dutiful daughters, 
^feggy and Patty Summers. 
"Mrs. Carter is almost distradled, as her poor daughter has just had a .convulsion fit — the Surgeon is run to fetch .again the physician. — Pray desire.little.dancy not to take .osir journey So much to heart; — .Once more farewelk! 
RETTER 
t 51 1 
LETTER VII 
Captain Jackal * to Lord Racket, 
Ferry bridge, Yorkshire m y GOOD LORD, 
J WISH it were in my power to 
give a happy account of the bu finess. I had the honour of nego 
tiating’ 
* This nxjorthy perlbnage had no real title to the honourable rank of captain, it being only a nick name given him by a let of gamblers and men of pleasure about town, of whom he led the gang; thlscon' temptible libertine had run through a genteel fortune in every vice and debauchery," and was now reduced to the most wretched of all occupations, that of being a pimp — a pander — to the profligate great; fomc* E 2 timec 

I fc .i 
isodoul boo: -. fib5^'|o3 I i£3b’ 
tiatingv for your lordship at; Yorl4. races; — but I shave chad de — — ^sht bad luck I picked up; the first, day a, cool five hundred in bets, '^ and the other uttk^m^x.ttr your lord -- fiiip entrusted me v/irh — but lost it all next, morning— — Sent word by. Jerry that, slimskin was beat hollow, ..and that miss shpider catcher lost both heats. — His Grace and„ 
Lord shad indeed damnable 
^ -; 
luckcurse them and their jockeys, Say I But, my 
times the drunken companion of their- -- revels; and as often kicked oxjlx. of company — fomecim, es employed to get, ia j their gambling debt?, or to look out for a, fresh' prey, 
dear 
'[ 53 1 
fdear 'lord, I hope did good success L have had in matters will be 
a .Dufficient rcompensation! for the whole string of plagues and^misfor' •tunes 1 met with at York races. — 
The bloom of opening flowers, 
Softness, and Sweeteft innocence “wear,,, ■ U 
T ^ •-.! ja r;; LI 
*' And look like nature in the world’s First Ipring.”. ' ' /! i 
; ■ .ll 
^ But L rave, — and So would, any, vman, to meet with what I have 
.. - I 
done — 
So young'l ^fo fair! — 
So innocent 1 — So Sweet !” — 
They are food for Jove, 'e’gadst — Your lordship will, pardon my pre, ■E 3 Sent 
[ 54 'J 
Sent i'stcbherence of style, I flatter m)^ielf, when I relate the cause of it. — But to lead to it in shrtid kind of order: — When I left Londost, the commands I had the hmwur to receive were (after the York busi ness was finished) to take a! tour into the adjoining northern counties, to look at Some horscs and Some pointers; and at parting, my good lord, you may remember, with 2, fqiieeze of the hand, your lordship desired I would look out for a little northern girl or two, ' that was ftesh and fair. — In the first article, the jjitrfesy I have had but middling luck : — I have howevep purchased 
a poney 
t' 55 ] 
a. poney of pretty figure, whose dam i wasmifs Slammaken (that won everything at nottingham last year) whose grand dam was Merope — whose grand grand dam was Cleopatra; — ' and whose grand - grandwas Otho. — horse fiesh in general runs 
high this year. -- -- But now for the 
dogs: — I have only purchased three little bitches, who promise to turn. out as fine pointers as any in your lordship’s possession of the kind; not a single hound did I meet with 
to please me. -- -- But for the last ar - 
— the girls! — I think I have now pleased your lordship, if man can be pleased. I have been for E 4 these 
r 56 ] 
T these last six days rambling, about rthe west riding of Yorkshire, and then into Cumberland, to see if J < could find any little tits worth pick ing up; but could meet with nothing in that style of beauty your, lordship likesi stopped at a farmhouse or two for the above purpose, but all I met with, damned and as ugly as the devil. — At length, finding my innocent labours lost and my mare Hipping her shoulder .a few miles on this fide Carlisse, .1 ’was resolved to get into the first .stagecoach I should meet with tra ■velling to London. Having left my: mare.at.a village, to be fent.up by 
ithe 
1'[->57 ] 
st^c'wa^bri'^^i plahted m^j^sels at an fishn bn hlie' rbad, in expectation of the Carlifie coach, which Soon made its appearance; and on my accosting the coachman, “Honest friend, are you quite full?” — “No sir! “— room in plenty, ” (Said the coachman, alighting from his box and opening the door.) — I instantly Sprung up"’the step, and threw myself on the back Seat, as the fore i Seat I Saw was occupied by two females; — but, O Heavens! what was my astonishment, when ori looking up I beheld two the most i beautiful young creatures that nature ever formed, sitting before me: 
upon 
r 58, y 
upon'trtiy soul, ' my lord, their" beauties struck me like a Sudden * flash of lightning, - and ■ I: could hardly forbear exclaiming aloud, — ' “Ye gods and goddesses !” — De scription must here fail: — Imagine • the blush of opening roses— — the pure unsiillied ..white off lilies, with all the glowing beauties of the Spring; — but even these will fall short. — The eldest cf these lovely young creatures could be • barely Seventeen — fiijenken ^ tall and full formed for that early age — with the Soft bltie eyes of lucy Collins!' — lips of'coral — and a neck L — butshert'imagination 
fails. 
t 59 I 
fails, 'she ybuh^st of thi^fe angelic sisters (for sisters they are) is a little lively brunette, about sixteen — a Sweet rogue! with eyes So black and piercing that they deal death and d'estrudion at every glance ^cheeks glowing with the carnation bloom — a mouth! — But how can I describe whaf is undescribable? “My stars!” ’(thought I) “are these two lovely girls tra “veiling by thmfelves P' 
As the Cnchanfing eyes of each had been, through a Sweet timid bashfulness' (ost the moment of my Seating myself) fixed ostthe road at that window of the side 
they 
[ 6o 3 
nhey each Sat (not a Single glance dill they bestow on mehow unlike • our london bred ladies, who .give a man .stare for stare!) — 'I, in Silence, from their'bewitching faces, cast my eyes on their..drefs* — which, was neatness itself they were ex aduy habited alike, in little Sprigged nighttgowns — • the profusion of their fine hair was partly covered by a Small pleated quoif, which for whiteness could only be excelled by •their other parts of decent mufiin, in the Scanty handkerchief, which con ‘cealed! — but if I give way to rap •tures I shall never have done: — a .plain little black bonnet still added. 
to 
[• 6i ]' 

to she simplicity of their figure, — * whilst a Small bunch of opening 
m 
rosebuds Seemed placed at their enchanting bosoms, by way of ornament.. 
From their being unattended and indeed from rather an awkward (slough bewitching) bashfulness in their mannerj I at once imagined they were offno very high rank in life : — upon my soul, my lord, there is' Something in ffuch«perfeft innocence — that — that — in short, I was perfectly awe ftruck^ ^yes, devil as I am — I was, ' for a few mfoments. — Still were the eyes of each charming'girl on the fide of the 
roadc, 
C 3 
road, as if lopking at thc' prospeiffs ' as we passed. • Not a single Syllable ' had as yet transpired A professed lover of the Sex, as I am, fand as professed a libertine, r i had mo Small difficulty to avoid taking a hand of each, and to press it to my bosom — or evemto clasp them in my arms — I Say with difficulty I refrained from this but as impudent a young fellow as I avowedly am, I only admired in filencei — ^ How, my good lord, would Kitty Sly, or any of our nymphs ftc ■- — -■ — '■*5, laugh to hear this! But tsiese lovely angels, I Soon Saw, were not that Sort of girls that a 
man 
dr 
t 6.3 I 
rm^n can Take liberties with on. Sudden acquaintance: — Determined still to feast my eyes in Silence for half an hour longer, and to reconnoitre : the ground,., I thought my wisest way would be to^jham steep — to Sham it, I repeat; for 1 defy any man living to Jleep in good earnest with two Such fine creatures So near him. ac *cordingly I drew myself up in the icorner of the seat whereon I Sat, .and .fetching a long yawn, pulled .my hat over my forehead, and, part vly my eyes, but yet in Such a man met, that from Squinting styly under it, I had the fullest view of thesc enchanting girls, and their every attk 2 Tilde, 
r 64 ]■ 
tilde, the whole time of my pretended nap : in about three minutes I began to breathe hard, as if fallen into a profound sstep (still peering under my hat all the tirne) when the youngest angel (Supposing I was in a deep lumber) in the Sweetest tone of voice cried, “Seel — See, “Peggy, that fine wood and val“ “I 'wish I'was walking there.” ' — ‘V Softly! — Softly, Patty, ” — (returned her charmingsiister) “you will wake xktgentkmanv — Sweet girl! The gentleman, „on hearing this tender Sentence, in a Soft tone; mild as the breath of zephyr, could hardly restrain himself from kishng at that 
r moment. 
[ 65 ] 
moment those lips of coral from whence the enchanting half whisper proceeded. — Patty and Peggy! — what pretty names, my lord! — I do not remember in your lordship’s whole liji.^ ariy of those names. — They now entered (believing me in the Soundest stum her, for I even Snored) into the prettiest whispering ■ imaginable, but yet loud enough for me to hear every Syllable.. — “I would give the “world if Ishad it, ” (Said the dove eyed Peggy), “to See what they are all doing now atashdale: — my “poor mother, how she wept 1” — 
^ Nay, So did my dear father, ” Yql. L F (cried 
[ 65 ] 
(cried Patty) — “Well! of all ‘‘things. Sure this pariittg from “friends is a very — very great 
“trial.” -- -- Nota single Syllable 
did I lose of this discourse. A deal more of their little innocent chat passed, in which they discovered the most beautiful simplicity — and total ignorance of the world. — I Soon gathered., during my pretended nap, that these lovely innocents were taking their jirfi excursion from home — (I will take care it shall be their last) — and had just parted from all their friends. I was in great hopes. Such was my vanity that they would Have made a few observations 
[ 67 J 
vations on my figure. At that moment I had stung myself into the most captivating attitude, with dishevelled hair hanging carelcssly on my glowing cheek : — I had changed my posture, as if steeping uneasily, and had varied my attitude — 'I know at that moment I exhibited as fine a figure as any in the kingdom. — But no 1 ^not the least word did I hear concerning my worships — — They now began to be a little cheerful their Smiles and Sallies of repartee to each other, were captivating beyond all Sufferance', their hearts still, however, F 2 Seemed, 
- E ^8 
ieemed, from the jieavy sighs which escaped them, to be too full of honfie to be quite at ease. I now. thought it high time to awakfc^ when stretching my limbs, — and yaw — yaw — — ning, in a kind of careless way, I asked — rubbing my eyes as just awaking — 
“Are you for London, ladies, or “only to the next town ?” 
On my Speaking to them, instantly a blush of the deepest vermilion dye covered at once their lovdjy cheeks, and even bosoms — 
O ' T': 
“We are going quite to Lon “don, ” Said the Sweet Peggy — 

[ 69 ] 
..... I‘ >) 
m a voice inimitably Soft. “Good 1 
'— thought I — very good — that 
“quite to London.” — ’ 
1 
I now was Silent, purposely for a few moments; 'when, after another yawn, and feeling carelessly in my pockets, I luckily found a few api 
t ■ 
pies. — 
I offered them to their acceptance; — and with the most Simple innocence of manner, yet still blushing, they took one each. — 
I now began to admire the beauty of the prolpedls; — but still took care to be devilishly circumfpefi. — After a few common observa rdons I made on the heat of the F 3 weather, 
[ 70 ] 
weather, I intended, by distant hints, to gather from their bewitching lips to what part of London they were to go, cc. — but, just as I Was preparing my question, the coach (devil take it) stopped at an inn on the road, to take up an old coughing woman, who, plague take her, came with us as far as this place, where the coach steeps this night. — This old cat Squatted herself down on my side of the coach, and by her presence prevented the hundred little attentions and questions I had artfully been preparing for the lovely girls : — I still however had their enchanting beauties before me; 
and 
[ 7* 3 
, ^ndi Sometimes heard the Sound of their Sweet voices, as the old woman began talking to them on indifferent Subjects— — was So heartily vexed at her making one in the coach, that I Sat Sulky in my corner, and never opened my lips till we arrived at this ferry bridge. — ^ I handed the two angels into a parlour, and left the ojd hag to hobble in after us. — 
The lovely girls are now retired to steep; — but the devil fetch me if 
al)‘ ‘ ’ 
I can close my eyes — So have been Scribbling thus far to your lordship— — already have Set down these fine young creatures as (my F 4 goad 
C - 72'j ] 
good lord) your : 7 — escape me they shall not; for I will safely convey them to the great Town. — In the mean time, if this cursed old woman leaves us (as I hope she will in the morning) 1 have no doubt of picking out of these two poor Simple innocents, who and what they are; — to whom thcyc, are going in town, and what are their expectations and connexions. — T dispatch this by^^the post from hence; — and willmost 
undoubtedly write * again from 
'ij A. 
, (j'northampton, 
.i 
• innocent reader — «« hackneyed in the ways of vice, may perhaps wonder that a Second letter should be thought northeast 
- i’ll)* celtarv 
■ I ris' 3 
■northampton, where the coach, it Seems, stays all night again. Your lordship, I am convinced, will be delighted with my acquijition; and will look upon my journey to York races as not entirely lost, as I have picked up on my way back these divine girls. May they very shortly be in your lordship’s pos scssion; for which desirable end, be 
ii, 
ceitary on the road: — but it mull be con lidercd, that the acquisition of a new mif fi tress, young; and exquisitely lovely, as were these devoted lifters, are, to Such fen -- "Jual wretches as Lord Racket (as it gratifies their darling vice) a matter of most Serious consideration; nor will their vile panders think any pains too great, to pro xnre thc^unhappy yistims... 
r. 3j*urcq^ 
[ 74 ] 
assured, every art shall be tiled, and every nerve strained, to approve myself, my good lord, 
# 
Your lordship’s most obsequious, faithful, and 
devoted Servant, 
Patrick Jackal. 
lbe T T E R VIII 
Sthe fame, to the same. 
, Northampton, 
One in the Morn. 
My GOOD LORD, 
ijf.ever man merited a bust to his miemory, for the most happy, ready invention, mine Surely does, 
to 
[ 75 ] 
to be stuck up for ages in a niche, in those temples which the great often build to perpetuate the memory of worthy personages, illustrious for genius, wit, cc. — O my lord, I am als ecstasy! Such an invention has befriended me! — Such success has attended it! — But take the following particulars: The old cat I mentioned to your lordship, as a har to my proceedings, most luckily left us after ten miles farther travel with us, this morning early. — When we stopped to breakfast — and where we were to stay an hour — lest Such another interruption should happen as the 
last. 
[ ^ 
last, I was resolved to “make my 
•'% -- i ■,;.; -1 : ' 
hay while the Sun shined an 
': )T' — 
being now just Seated at breakfast, 
; j 
the lovely Peggy busy in tea cup preparations, — 
I began: — 
“We shall now Soon See the “great city of London; was you “never there before 
(I will here Speak in the first per son, to avoid [ayshe.^ and faysjjjei) (Patty.) “No! never, sir; — we “came quite out of a distant part “of Cumberland.” — (Here a Soft sigh heaved her gentle bosom.) 
“But pray, ladies, ” — — Peggy“ “sir, don’t call us. “ladies! 
,, t 77 J 
'•1 ■: / ' e ' 
ladies! — we are not ladks^i indeed: — we are only two poor young “girls, that are going to a friend “in London to get us into Some “little industrious livelihood.” 
“Good !” — (thought I, holding my head down over my tea cup to hide a ray of hope that then Sparkled in my eye, to hear they were oor girls.) — “Good !” — thought I again. — - 
{patty.v “We must do Some“ “sir, to maintain ourselves, “with Such a family as our poor “father has — and my mother but Sickly; — we must, to be Sure, try, -^ tp do Something, !* 
O noj 
[ 78 ] 
“O no doubt — no doubt “— (Said I, with a most Sagacious countenance.) “You are both — both — “greatly to be commended for “your pious resolution; — I love “Such virtuous resolves in young “folks, it looks well; — and what, “— what profession, pray, is your “father 
(Peggy.) In the church, sir, — “but only a poor curate: — he “might for his great learning, as “I have heard, be a bishop; — but “what Signifies learning, with only “thirty pounds a year — and Such ‘‘ a family of children ?” * — 
I drew my chair doser, to join in I this 
[ 79 3 
this interesting conversation, — and began bitterly inveighing against the rich clergy., for oppressing the •lower order of that class. — “What “a shame ” (Said I, shaking my head) “that merit. Such as you describe your father’s to be, should go unrewarded! — Poor, good man! — he must have a hard matter to bring the year round “with Such a paltry income — and “in these — times — every ar tide of life So dear. — Poor ■ “man!” Sighed. 
O how the Sweet girls’ eyes Sparkled with pkasure, to hear their 
parent 
C 
ti 
tc 
CC 
t So ] 
parent Spoken of with respeft and pity! — 
“You are very — very goodi sir, ’’ — ■(said they both, with the Smiles of an angel) 
I thought my conscience (I think the parsons call it), had been long ago Seared with a red hot iron — but on hearing from Such lips, — “You “are very — very gottd, sir, ” I felt 
a plaguy twinge. -- 
“Yourmother sickly too; ” 
• — (Said I in a most pitying tone) — “that is another expensive ar“ “— I feigned here a long heigh ho!” — 
Hera 
t 8r ] 
Here, ^ I was offered by Peggy sugar for my tea and Patty hoped my toajl was to my liking: — one took my dish to fill; the other too was equally attentive to oblige me : - — Such favour had my pity for the Sufferings of their parents excited in their grateful bosoms. 
“And pray ” — (Said I, after a pause). “are you both the eldest of “the family — have you no bro“ “— 
(Peggy.) -- “O yes — yes, sir, we “have a brother — Several years “older than us, who has been' many years in the East Indies; ‘‘ — but he is now expected in vol.. I. G“ “
t .8 2 ] 
“England every day^j^^^ nay, he “may be come by this time : 7j]^he “s good young man — he ^ will “be a comfort to us all, I hope; “— has made a pretty fortune, I “hear : — Oh how I long to See “him! — nay, I should not know “him, for I was but five years old “jwhen he went to the Indies — he then was but twelve : — poor “George Summers !” — 
Whilst the charming girl was making the above artless Speech — the devil (I thank him) put such a thought in my head, that I in an ecstasy embraced it. — Peggy had Said she had never seen this brother; r. 
C 3, 
^wfiat then prevented m.d. 'from instantly persohating him? Your lofdship Sees at once the richness of the invention; — and that it is a ■plan worth the revenue of ten eastern nabobs : — at once — at least for the present (hang the future) it would throw these unsuspicious innocents under my protection— — pretended care: — the moment, then, Peggy had Sweetly pronounced the name of “poor Geoige sum shiers!” — I started from my chair — “My God !’* (exclaimed I) George Summers! — is it possible— — brother just come from the East Indies! say you? 
g2 r oh 
t 84 ] 
— Oh heaviensi'tanf — can it be? ^ oo iipeggy; brtd Patty 11 nl mynrd^ ''‘fif — dear sisters — I am)qthy brgli*^ 
0 
thert — thy long 'expelled brotheiri “xr^hiy poor father in Gumberland, f ‘ 1 was. hastening tp^uheer rbut'^rt rppbiimy Sisters! — shy fistersil’i — On Saying this I Sprang forward, and caught them in my arms; : ^(0 mydord! what a, mornent vtzsfhatl) — they/zreceived my embrace with joyful Surprise; — nor had they; it is plain, the least idea of a, deception— — God !” (they both exclaimed, whilst still encircled as they thought in the anps of their long lost, brother, — and whilst I 
jo 
x\oua: 

was 
t ] 
i od 31 niid f'b 852ri3^r.od do — ' was imprinting‘4^ hundredoklfibs ori their ««pollutedf rosy lips and blooming cheeks) “Good God I” (they both withuipufted hands exclaimed) what a wonderful happi “hess is this'! — But when did you “arrive — when did you quit “your ship V — was echoed from each. — “Come, my dear George, ’* (Said Patty) “let us sit down, ’and “tell us all about it. — Well— — ‘vis amazing to think that we “should meet thus!” — The Sweetly feminine and tender Peggy took out her little pocket handkerchief, and began weeping plentifully — the joyful Surprise having been too G ^ much 
; [ 8^ p 
mudi for her Spirits O, my 
6^; poors father, if you could but ‘i'know^* (Said she“ “joyful “meeting, what heart ^felt comfort “would it be !” — I took now out my own handkerchief, and held it to"'my eyes for a few: moments whilst I Sobbed out “the dear man! Are the \hildren ^ all ‘‘ well .^ -- O my mother! — never “shall I forget that morning when “you^^parted from your George.” — But, ” Said Patty, (the question was pertinent) “as you was tra veiling So near Carlifie (for to be “Sure, I take it for granted you tame into Cumsherland to go to 
“Afidale 
i % ] 
k’ir.ajhdale to feeius); how cair^ you - to return ib Soon back again to ‘u London, "without our fd there“ “! my dear, ” (always ready my lord, at invention)' you shall hear how that matter “happenedi arrived in Eng“ “but Seven days ago; ~ and ‘k was in Such haste to See my ho noured parents, and all of you, “that I flew down on the wings of “duty, ' and was got as far as where ‘‘ you Saw me taken into the coach, “Some miles on this fide Carlifie, •OS hoping to See Sweet Ashdale ^ (I was glad I had learned the name of their village) — “sin two days at G 4 farthest; 
[ ■[•.?88. ] 
; ^ j|j, fajrthesh; when a thought struck “me, a five hundred.pound bank “note I had brought for my fa“ “— (here the Sweet girls both lifted up their eyes to heaven, ' as if bleshng me for my filial piety) — ‘S a banknote, I Say, I had brought for my father, I had desired' a gentleman to get me. cash for at Carliste, thinking it would be 
cc 

(< 
more convenientbut this gentleman, who left London! ofi'ly “one day after myself, kindly in“ “me, if I didmot instantly “return to London, oath Custorii “house officers would 3 Seize and “maket^d wprkriwith mystbag 
X 89 I 
gauge V «ihd that my immediate nl‘' presextce> was absolutel^ 'necef* Saary: bcr blamed me for Setting out in So much haste for the Vt North, ill I had finished about • “my baggage being landed: — but jvl my impatience to See my dear B h parents got the better of every; thing.after Some littl^ talli -'-‘ with this gentleman, he Said, as 
- my father knew not I was arrived in England, it could be no dis 
- appointment to him: — we then fixed that I should return in 
■ “to London, Settle these ij^‘‘stroublesome miatters, about my ' “*» effects * the custom houle ' y officers, 
t 90 ] 
“officers, ^andmext weekil fully “purposed to Set off once more for j “dear Cumberland, as ray impa “tience to See my beloved parents “exceeds all things, — Thus, my “sisters, have I now informed you “the exasl Jiate of the case : — our “meeting now, you know, was “Surely the greatest joy, and most “unlooked-for accident in the “world.” — I held ashand of each of these poor simple innocents in mine, during the above improbable stuff of customhouse officers — my landing my effects, baggage, call which these unsuspedfing girls believed as So much gospel, t and i even 
C 9t ] 
even Said, I was quite what 1 
did as to returning to London“ “O, how happy is it, ” (Said Peggy, clasping her hands) “that “we have got Such a kind pro“ “Such a guard to take care “of us, as our brother — Your lordship knows my confeience^ as I before obseryed, is pretty well feared, otherwise there was something in the above Speech that would have touched it. — “But, ” (Said 1) “rny “dear sisters, tell me how all the “good folks our neighbours do at “Ashdale” — (I wanted, my lord, * to hear a few names there) — - “All pure well, ” — (Said Patty) 
‘‘ don’t 
10 
brother. 
E Ee ] 
ltiy 3u9 j 
^ .Dost y'oii^h e “'ersnia'slarvey at Most hill,"is the nit village? — she often used “to play with us, if' you recol “led “What, ” (irittermpted I) “my little Emma! — rirsed to call “her my wife — aye — litany a game “at blindmanst buff have we had “together: — she was a pretty ** girl!” — “She is the beauty of “Cumberland; ” (Said Peggy) fo “modeji'^sind Jb good! — she is Pat 
tyst and my only intimatev -- -- -- - 
They then began (poor innocents!) to Say how much I refemued their father ^'"*" Setting aside, ” (Said the youngest charmer) ^ the great dif 
“ference 
[ 93 ] 
ference of agev — “But you “have my mother's eyesp — (Said Peggy) — “and my brother Tom“ “features to 2, nicety I — Well! “good God, how happy^\s, it we “should meet thus ] — Little — “little could I think we had a 
i. 
“brother in the coach with us 
1.. 
“all day yesterday.” Here I looked mysterioufiy wife and began a grave; Speech about the wonder - working hand of Provi -- 
deuce — and. a few more moral Scraps I had picked up in former days out of.seneca^ — “But Say, my dear “girls, ” (continued I) “to whom “are you going in London_tr, te “*^ • dti ort; 
E 94 J 
(this was everything liot me to know) -- ^‘= Why, to our cousin’s — our cousin Bennet — (Said 
Peggy) “O aye !” — (returned I) what a stupid head have 11 — she “lives in” ■ — (here 'I was taken with a fit of coughing) she lives 
«< 
in ^in — I remember her formerly — she lives in” — — “In “hatton street, ” (Said Patty, pulu ing out of her pocket a little bit of paper) — I greedily cast my eye over it, and read, “N “2, hatton street," “Holborn : ” (this was quite enough form.) ' 
“What!” (Said Peggy) “did youihot call upon her on^your 
“arrival 
E 95 1 
Voarrival in town — the ques tion was proper; — these girls, my lord, want not good understandings — it is their extreme Simplicity, and ignorance of the world and its' ways, that will render them So easy a prey : they are as ignorant of life as a young wild American bred in a cave — So much the better for your lordship. — But now to business; — my plan is this: — Mother H - 
B -- -- court, shall personate this 
cousin Bennet of theirs, which she will doi^admirably well: and in the course of this day I have gathered, there are two daughters of the above lady — these poor innocents 9 having 
[ 9^' 1 
having been talking of their cousins Sophy and Charlotte : — now, my good lord, Sally Winter and Jenny Wilmot (two demure looking girlsj shall be the Miss Kmneti to a tittle. • — The moment I arrive in London,, having Safely left my fifiers at the inn where the coach Sets up (which, is a very creditable one). I shall whip away in a hack to our mo iheksy and give her full and particular diredlions how to look — how to speak. (for with all the girls ignorance we must be d — L -- sh circum -- fpeft) and how to manage in all things relative to this important matter your lordship will 
say 
[ 97., i 
say it is; — as I will be bold .to Jay, ^, two Such perfect masterpieces of. beauty (in different ftylcs) were never Seen in London before. — 
When we got into the coach af -- r ter breakfast, ncitlii.i.g could be more, easy, and mere happy,, than these two unsuspedling angels throughput the, day: — the nearness of my., rcla tionssiip gives me infinite advan tages; ^when we stopped to cline, ^ after I had given each a brotherly kifs — "and oh! with what kind of, chafiened rapture did they again re ^ it — Peggy Said, she thought the least we could do would be to sit down at the inn there, and • vol. I. H write 
C 980 r 
wrije a letter, to her poor father arid mother, to acquaint them, with the 
UO i.' A. ^ ' IL 
joysu|^|zi^expeded meeting of each other on the road : “We will all 
“three of us write in one letter A (Said the sweet girl) — : I, had like to have been d -- l— — .puzzled how to get off this matter, as I certainly could find no plausible excuse not to write to my parents on Such an occasion; however, my admirable presence of mind befriended me— — “dear girls, ’* (returned io“ “have by this time undoubt edly got my long letter I wrote ^ 
“them from Carlifie the day be ^ “I met with you(this 
they 
[ 9^ i 
cdul^'^tibc' dtfprovep'^ huv ''’‘'^wisth all my heart and Soul i^will 
write agairi; I will ring’the'bell “for paper no — ^ I think 1 will 
“go into the bar to order'some ** thing more for dinner, and there “' I will Scratch a few lines in a “'moment— — have not time now all dfus to write : What have you to Say Only Our duty 
‘‘‘ and love: and pray tell them “we will write the moment we get to our cousin bennet’s.” — Poor innocents! (thought I) — starting up in^'great haste, and looking at my watch “Good God! it is how two “o’clock — but I will just write a H 2. “line 
[ loo ] 
“line to eur dear'parentsp — Away I ran into the bar, where having chatted a quarter of an hour with the landlady (by the bye, a very pretty woman) and staid as long as it could be supposed a decent letter could he written, I returned to the girls; — “Have you wrote (Said they) — “Yes, and Sealed and Sent “she post, ” (replied I) — 
“Well, that is clever I ” (Said they, in high good-humour). — I now began a little romping, which the freedom of brother and sisters might authorise: — “My dear girls, ” (Said I, tucking the profusion of their fine hair under their little 10 round 
^ [ loi ■ 01 onii 
round eared caps) “all this hair, — this Shining hair, your cousin “Benner, when you get to lon don, will, I daresay, have drejf eda — “Dressed!” (Said Patty, innocently staring) — “we are not “going to Set up, brother, for sine “ladies, — we hope to get into a “Service.” — “So you will, my dears, I doubt not, ” — (replied I, 
with great gravity) -- -- If there is 
anything I value myself on, it is, my lord, on my perfe61; command of face: indeed, your lordship has often complimented me So far as to Say, that perfefhon would entitle me to shine on the ft age. 
H 3 But 
C 102 j 
But to be brief: — At^northamp tonne! we are now arrived; and heartily glad am I that I have So glo rioussy brought my tadmirahle plan to bear, with no other coach pas sengers being present; which would infallibly, have ruined my 'palming myself upon these simple angels for a brother., as few' people who knozv\ the world but would have Seen through the deception: and lucky % it that I have finished this interests ing business— — may say^ for these girls are now my property; -! to all intents and purposes) — lucky; too it. is, for it Seems rp morrow morning, here, year to take up; "cob L 'Siparfctti 
C 103 ] ' 
ay>i^iy^«; Lplague take hinv, he will 
be a d -- -- -- d bar upon nte and all 
my actions I had a view of him just now, in the bar — and I''see he appears quite Sensible and Jhtezvd ^a queery>«jf/, I doubt not I shall be 'Cautious how I behave to these Simple innocents before hm % but my relationship of brother will still give me many, and indeed the greatest advantages. O, my dear lord, what glorious Schemes shall I bring to bear by this deception! — already have I got the girls into my pos feffion and tomorrow night they shall be Safely lodged at mother'' — Your lordship>'stess V, i: : R H 4. doubt 
[ 104 ] 
doubt not, the richness of my contrivance: — besides an hundred other advantages I have gained by it (and all for the sake of your lordship) not a single letter shall either pafs from them or their friends— — I shall, out of extreme tenderness for my dear sisters, be So kind to take upon me the care of their letters to \ the post; and likewise constantly inquire for letters at the postoffice for them, which I will take care 
they shall -- -- never have. — — 
You may be certain, my good 
lord -- -- -1 had just got So far, when 
accidentally casting my eyes on a news paper, I See your lordship is. si d' >1 i now 
[ 105 ] 
now Set out for Newmarket -- -- -- -1 
am Sorry for this. — But why Sorry? — no human 'being shall See these divine creatures — (no man, I mean) till they are presented to you. 
I will write again when arrived in London; being anxious to prove with what zeal and indefatigable industry I remain Your lordship’s odrtio ^ most obsequious, 
and devoted Servant, Patrick Jackal. 

bocrtt i 
qujlb iu woir 
LETTER 
t io ] 
nooms^ i ni tugi Cl tou LET ter IX -- i te) 
Ljv i, n. 
tt>id? 
Captain Jackal to Lord Rackett^ at 
n. 
Newmarket. ■ - 
M ^ n eq ■■; ir;; > 
. i' London/? ■■ gmoo B — Court, -- -- -- -- ’s ftreet, 
Ui — " 
^'^rlw 
ctovij 0 ■ 
iifu ^tilj : 
My DEAR LORD, 
length I have Safely lodged my fair northern lasses at our good 1 mother’s last night, about eight o’clock. — ‘ ‘ fid 
As I may, without vanity Suppose my. descriptive narrations wilt be Some little entertainrrient, I proceed to Say, that the stagecoach drove us to the inn of its destination 

[ lo; ] 
non by four in the afternoon : — (by the way, I liked not the plaguy parson— — observed me with a very scrutinising tyt', — I shammed steep the chief part of the way, to avoid being alked impertinent questions.) — I did not, however, at the inn where we dined, abate at all in my assiduities to my ftfiers.^ or in any part of my tender behaviour to them; as, if I had would it not have appeared strange to these girlsy that the company of a third person should alter, my conducst towards them? — This might have awakened iufpidon i even in the bosom of Jim -- '' plicity itself;; minuti^e^iht mk 2 muiee.. 


: nolvjb [:, 'io '] 
nutiie, my lord, 'is what is always tb be regarded — and is what I chiefly value iityyry upon. 
When we arrived at our inn in London, (and had got rid of the parson) I conduced my ladies, with all the carefulafliduity of a brother indeed, ^ to the landlady, a respedtable woman— — (Said. I) to your care I “commit these young ladies till I return; which will be in the even“ “— they are strangers in Lon “don, therefore particularly beg “they may remain with you.” — She promised they should indeed, my lord, I would not for the world, So young, So beautiful as they are, have 
left 
[ 109 3 
left them without this caution. I flung myself into a hack, and flew to mother H — ’s: — she, good woman, enter’d at once into the richness of my plan, and assured me she would try to he Mrs. Bennet to a tittle; and that Jenny Wilmot and Sally Winter should take upon them to personate the miss Bennets: and that a quiet, handsohie apartment should be allotted the sisters. — When I mentioned your lordship’s name on this occasion, the good woman Said, “No more, no “more, dear captain — rest Satisfied — “everything shall be conduced in the “most handsome manner; for Viihat is it I would not do for that hefi 
“of 
[ 110’ 3 
*; ‘iof noblemeni” '(meaning ydiir lordship.) She assured me, she would' fawn her honour no man should See,, or even have the least glimpse "of 
them. 
io t? uiow 
)> 
“For a day or two, ” Said I, “my deari Mrs. H — i — let your other “nymphs not appear, at least not in your parlour, where these lovely“ “will dine.” — *■ “They shall “remain (returned she) in the other “apartments but, dear captain, if“ “meant, that perhaps the drefia of Some of my ladies might ap ’^ “pear odd to strangers, bred in the*f country, - — be assured, no women ^ can dress' more modcflly'xh^n they 
“do. 
[[ III ] 
“do. — ^sithought you knew^t? ('Said 
i" 
shcy laughing)’*^ that since ladies of “character, your modest or\tsa mean, “have chose to dress themselves like women of the town, and as fantaf “tically as, So many stage^dancers — “women ofjthe town dress in “, the most modest style imaginable: ' you, captain, a man of pleasure, *t^nd not know this!” ^ 
Having Settled all matters with the old beldame, away I flew for my' girls i — with what rapture did I hand them into a hackney coach! — and how would youc admirers of nature and beautiful Simplicity, have been delighted with the artless wonder Cob " ^ each 
[ 112 1 
each charmer expressed, at the new Scenes in the principal streets thro’ which we drove: — ‘.dock, Peggy, at “that finehouse!” — and, “See, Patty, “that grand building!” — then were they both wishing their little brothers and Sisters in Cumberland could See all these fine things. At length we arrived at the destined house; into which, with Secret rapture, I handed them: — at the door of a handsome parlour stood the fiffitious Mrs, Bennet. (O my lord! you would have died to have Seen how inimitably she topped her part., and how she bent her Jiiff fat arms, to clasp to herfincere bosom the beloved children of her worthy 
kinsman) 
[ II 3 
kinsman.) “Welcome, welcome, my “dear cousins, ’* (Said she) tenderly kissing the cheek of both — the dear innocents returned her embrace with • the most genuine marks of respedl: and gratitude, and with the greatest air of humility, as much as to Say, 
“we are overcome with your good“ “— 
Here I must say, as I had told the girls, when I left them at the inn, 
I was going to Mrs. bennet’s, it must be imagined her and my mutual joy, on our first meeting on my arrival in englanl made that subject now, on my appearance with my jijlers.^ needless. — Your lordship will Sup 
vol. I. I pose 
C 114 3 
ppse ^i^^pld the mpther everything relative to the whole family at Ash^ ^ dale in, Cumberland,. C- -- a this good woman has been conversant with beauty, and often with unttor^‘ rupted innocence, yet So much was she struck with the amazing loveli ness of these girls, that she could not forbear turning round to me, and Suddenly exclaiming, “Gopd Gocf !’* luckily they heard her. not, and wp sat down. — A number of kind quesp tions were asked by the feigned ivirsv ■ Bennet; as. How her dear old friend Mrs. Summers look’d; and how her kinsman did after his late illncss• And how many little brothers and 
sisters 
[ II ] 
Sisters have you? — I forget their “names, ” — (Said this etccelknt woman.) — “Mr. Benner, shy spouse, ” (continuedshe) “is gone today down “into the country; but he will re“ “on his arrival, to find you “both here — and how lucky was it “to meet your dear brother on the “road! — Well! the wonderful “works of Providence! ” — — To all this conversation, the Sweet girls made modest and Suitable answers; • but their timidity was So great un used to being in company) that they had Seated themselves almost on the cormr of their chairs, as if not chus ing to take up any room. — The lady of I 2 the 
i 
rx I 
r ^ ^ *1 
rti iltow liari h; jf wcyotot : .r.tiv'.y?tit the house now rang for tea; and no 
entered the supposed miss Bennets; rp both Jenny Winter and Sally will mot had indeed filled their parts; they enter’d with the chaste air of two veftals; — not a bit of rouge on their cheeks; not one dust of powder in their hair; — theirdress, plaited round caps, and brown lutestring nightgowns— — Such demure looking prudes I never Saw; I hardly knew them: — but an arch look they gave me (privately) obliged me to take out my pocket handkerchief, to stop my mouth, lest their very puritanical appearance should cause me to laugh outright; 
They. 
[ 117 3 
They entered each with their work III their hands; and with great modesty, Saluted their cousins, and welcomed them to London, c— — began admiring their works — “Surely (Said I) “cousin Bennet this will hurt their eyes.” — “O, no, (replied she) I “must have them always employ’d “•^ 'innocently employed: young folks “must not be idle, ” Said the old veteran. — Here she cast a look at the two Sweet angels, who Seemed, by their approving blushes, to think she Spoke like an oracle. — “After all “your English works of the needle, (Said I) you can none of you come up to our East-india manufac i 3 tures; 
« 
it 
c[ 
[ J 
tures;, the rich embroidery we “hav in Bengal, is beautiful' in“ “— I was then alked by my young cousins (the Bennets) a number of queffions, concerning the manners, customs, cc. of the inhabitants of Bengal; all which I answered with my usual ease slnd facility of invention; and with as much effrontery ^ Some rude folks would say, as if I had been all my life there. Our Sweet rujiics behaved with the utmost humility; and appeared overwhelmed with the civilities bestowed by all present. A very genteel Supper was provided, and everything conducted in the most decent., quiet 6 manner 
t ] 
manner imhgfiriikblewhat thee old bhdarti had done with all her nyrbphs (for not the fdmid of a female voice did I hear) I cannot conceive. — My lovely fifiefs now complained of being in want of rest after their journey. The good lady of the houle would herself conduct them to their apartment, which she assured these poor innocents '^z.^prfeflly air’d. 1^^ under the character of a fond brother saunter’d into the room with them, when, after taking a kiss of each, and Saying I would convey a letter to the general postoffice the next day for them, (as I must be obliged to go into the city on account of the I 4 cursed 
t 1201 ] 
cursed businefs of my East-india af x * fairs) I retired madam Benneti and her two daughters; p and we Satn over a bowl of arrack punch till two this morning; — they were in absolute raptures with ray acquisition: — “Upon my Soul (Said the mother) 
I hope my good lord will come to town Soon, for I am obliged to put Such a cursed restraint on my tongue, that I don’t know how I shall be able to hold out for a week, under Such a constraint: I was once or twice, forgetting my feign’d character, on the ' point of rapping out a broad oath; but I gave a great gulp, as lady. Townly Says in the play, and swallowed 

[) 121 
itamed it'^down.’’ jenny‘irtt ^^liy” both declared they should be Soon tired of acting mdeft ladies though • they Said they believed it was ofteti^ only an assumed character— — “““eyes (Said they has that Patty — “and what lips has Peggy !-’; — “I “envy them their bloom ” (Said the malicious Sally) “more than any “thing, as they have not the trouble “oi rouging f — well, well, they will “Soon be brought down to our level., ' “however, that is some comfort.” — We then, my lord. Settled ?Lplan for the above defirahk end: we apprehend Some little art must be used; the common ways of Sedudlion will 
never 
[ 122 3 
>1 
never do with girls like these, bred up under an old parson, who has given them a Set of notions, as stricst and starched as those of Rachel and Rebekah, in that old-fashioned book called the Bible. — We have' laid a pretty fcheme t which cannot fail of success. I - “isf 
.., j -1 Saturday noon, 
I have just called, this morning, on the lovely girls; they look more beautiful than ever, aster having recovered the fatigue of their journey; and what joy was lighted up in their enchanting eyes on the appearance of‘ their brother “Dear George, “(Said Peggy) we have wrote to 
“our 
[ 123 ] 
our parents.” Give me the ^ letter (saidi) to put in the post.” — I retir’d with it to my lodgings; and, as it will be neceffary that a letter should go from them on their arrival in town, to Satisfy the old doting fools in the country that ’they are Safe, on opening and reading their epistle I found it would be the very thing; that is (as I defy anycman' living to excel rne in a forgery) to carefully copy all they say concerning their kind reception at Mrs. bennet’s, and as carefully to fuit every Sentence relative to the finding their dear brother on the road, of which they give ^ the most circumstantial 
[ 124 ] 
ftantial account, and Speak of me kithe highest terms of fifierly affection. — I have accordingly extrafied. from their letter just what Served my purpose, in their own artless words; and So exactly have I forged their handwriting, that I defy the world to detefl me. — Your lordship will here Say — “But will not the “real Mrs. Bennet write down to “Ashdale, to express her Surprise, “her cousins are not yet arrived •^good, my lord, and pertinent is the question : to which I answer, — “if “she does, I hope and believe your “affair with these lovely innocents “will be So idiv jinijhed by that time 
“(as 
t f '^5 3 J 
‘‘ (as it will nearly take up a fort“ 
“in answers backward and forward into Cumberland) that it “will be of mighty Small conse “quence to a man of your lordships“ “rank in life, what this pious “old parson, his wife, or their cousin “Bennet, can say or do on this “occasion. ’ 
This instant, I am abruptly call’d away to white’s, to meet Sir Harry Ranter, and a few more of the Set; therefore must beg leave to conclude with assuring your lordship I am 
most inviolably, 
your ever devoted Servant, 
to all intents and purposes, Patrick jackall 
P. S. 
[ Hf ] 
P. S. I enclose a copy of the inm^ cents' letter to their parents, as altered^^y myself: >itirmay Serve CO' amuse your lordship, and give an idea of that Simplicity for 1 have altered nothing but what relates to finding their brother) which, I apprehend, 
added to the extreme beauty pf these girls, will give an mpatience cok behold them; — and I hope, before the week is over, they may be in your lordship’s arms: a “consummation de“ “to be wished, ” — as Hamlet ‘ says, on another occasion, ^ 


.LET. 
[ 127 ] 
■5" ■ ' : q - -- -- 
X; .-, I '; 
Peggy and Patty Summers to Mr. and Mrs. Summers' ' ^ 
altered by Captain jackd.ll.) 
3- ' 
London, Hatton Street, 
OUR DEAR AND HONOUR’D PARENTS, 
"O’ 
ER a very Safe and pleasant. ^ journey, we are got, blessed be Heaven! to the house of our kind and dear cousin, Mrs. Bennet; and though in a fine h^ndsome bedchamber, .just going to bed, yet we will not steep till we have paid our duty and affec -- tion to our beloved father and mother. We hope you have ceased your 
grief 
[ 128 ] 
grief on our departure, as it is im possible for words to express the tender kindness of this excellent re lation, Mrs. Bennet; — she behaves 

to us of all the world as if we were ladies indeed. We have reason to bless the day that we left Ashdale; for I am Sure we are made now for ever. — 'O what a regard has this excellent woman for my dear parents! she even shed tears when I mentioned your Sufferings last winter. — You cannot imagine what a handsome manner she lives in; — I never Saw Such a Supper in my life; — but you will Say, two Such poor novices as we. are in the world, have as yet Seen 
nothing. 
[ 129 ] 
nothing. Mr, Bennet is, ir Seems, 
gone into the country, but will Soon 
return. — My two amiable young 
cousins, Sophia and Charlotte, are 
both at home; they are Sweet young 
ladies; So affable, So kind, and not 
# 
one bit of pride belonging to them! — “stis impossible to tell you how very good they are to us; Patty and I shall love them greatly : but pray tell our dear old friend, Emma Harvey, not to be jeahut., for siic' will always be the first in our esteem and tenderest affeflion. My cousins are very pretty, quite beauties in our eyes, and dressed So neat! — very curious needle women, I find; — they vol. I. K are 
[ ] 
1 
are shivery kin Say, they vfi|l jshew us Some new patterns of fash ipji able works; is not this very kjn^ — Dear sirs! what a fine place thb London is! we Seem both of us 
: .i a 
quite amazed at all we See and hear; and shall be still more So, as our.,, cousin Bennet herself. Says she will show us all the fine Sights in London; — I suppose she means Sr. paul’s, the Tower, c— — for ye! — I am Sure we never can make her amends for her great goodness. — — We have no doubt but that she will Be as kind to my little Sister Nancy, when she is big enough to come to London; — nay, she as good as Said 
she 
C 131 3 
she would; and ashed how old she was. I dare say Mr. Bennet must have a great fortune, by everything bdng So handsome in the house; fine^^china and plate! — Dear sirs! how abash’d was Patty and I last mght at Supper! — a fine Supper, my dear parents, enough to Serve us in the country for a whole week for din patty thought a dish near her was eggs, and I desired her to give me one; but, dear heart! how was I dajpd, (I might have been struck down with a feather) when my cousin Charlotte Seemed to Smile, and Said they were not eggs, but — a French hard word she named, 
k2 We 
t i 3 
Ve have a very Mndfbinetifargc 
-,. .......................... ... 
bedchamber allotted ns; a Bible asid 
prayer - book, and nelfon’s Fast's 
and Festivals, we found lying onhsie 
table. Pray, my dear parents, da 
not imagine our being in London 
will make us forget our devotional 
dudes V which, be assured, we shall 
as stridfly perform 'as at Ashdale, 
where my honoured father read the 
Service, morning and evening, with 
all us his children kneeling round 
.... !i; 
him. 
I make no doubt but v/e ifia^il Soon get into Some pretty genteel 
', “'o:. ■ 
establishment. So as to be able to earn our livelihood : — and O how I happy 
r 133 ] 
hapjpy shall^jpatty^and I beto Send fipwp, every, ycn> handsome 
prefint for my little Sisters, and my jj^ar mother (I should Jirji have Said.) My cousin Bennet desires I would : present her kindest love to you both, 
, and her best wishes for all happiness fto attend you. We brought the 1st tie pot of honey Safe, and she returns many thanks for it, and thinks it the finest she ever Saw; I told her it was the produce of our little garden at Ashdale. — Pray tell Emma Harvey we will write very Soon to her. 
We now conclude, with duty to K 3 your 

t nfr. •] 
ypur.honoured Selves, and love; .to, ail the children, ever - 
your most affedlionate, dutiful daughters, ' 
^ i^^ssy Summers 
THESE poor, unfortunate Sistcijs' wrote the next day to their beloved friend, Emma Harvey; which they gave innocently to the vile wretch 'who personated their brotherjr — Iiie at once took an opportunity of.conft mitting it to the flames, not chusing to give himself the trouble of altering a long part of it, relative tx their joy in meeting their brother on the road but assured the poor innocent victims, that he had put the IQ letter 
[ 135' 3' 
letter into the post with hi 
hands. ■ sh. 
\ 
Here, gentle reader, with theshiost heartfelt anguish we must draw a veil over what pasted at the house of the infamous woman who had the audacity to personate Mrs. Bennet: : for Some few days, till the arrival of the vile lord Racket'in town, she maintained her feigned charafler So artfully, that even ladies more experienced in the world than these jimpk\ovt\y maids, might have been easily deceived. The abominable Jackal, till the arrival of his lordship, ’ visited them daily : under the villainy of his assumed character, he K 4. .took 
m 
^ E «36 ] 
"'took Several (though innocent) li berties^i often introduced difcburses of the love and gallantry of his East Indian friends; and endeavoured to find how far their Sentiments on wr had been improved : but found them, by general tenor of their difcourse (he had most artfully introduced the Subject) to have notions of the most inflexible kind, in that particular: these notions he as highly extolled to the Skies; as did also his shocking associates in vice, Sally and Jenny. -- h 
At length, in about five days, the vile lord Racket arrived in London from his Newmarket expedition: he ^ hi' was 
iil 
L r *37 ] 
was immediately (being all impa 2*;;. tience to See Wisprey) introduced, to them as a particular friend of their supposed brother, who came over from India in the Same ship with 
him. -- -- But here, we repeat, a veil 
must be drawn over what passed— — the first place, we shall not stain our spotless^page with the horrid transadions of a brothel; — and in A^idg the next, we should chuse to avoid a iif repetition. So frequently made ule of in modern novels, of bombast Speeches, and all the amorous non fense rehearsed on these occasions by men of intrigue, to gain their views on the young, the credulous, and inexperienced : 
110 
m 
un 
[ 138 j 
experienced Suffice it' to Say, that‘ here every infamous art was practised — and that, by the aid of the most hellish potions., and brutal forccy these poor innocents ‘became the miserable victims of the worst passion of the vilest of libertines. — 
ev’n pity’s nveep 
At fucji a Sacrifice!” 
i. yn I 
Reader, whoever thou art. Reader, disdain not the tribute of a tear for ruined innocence,, and that by arts which shock humanity to relate! — — 
these miserable victims, on their recovery from their fiupor (which 
the 
[ '39 ] 
the horrid drugs which had been administered had occasioned) fell into a strong delirium, on the knowledge of the shocking outrage they had Sustained : — they raved inces fantly>, for their brother George“ “— where is he?” (Said they alternately — still, poor, poor girls, believing the impious wretch who personated him to be their iden iical brother) “Our brother, our “dear brother, ” (Said they) “will “revenge this 1 — Let us crawl, my “Sister, upon our hands and knees “to Ashdale, and in our poor mo“ “bosom bury all our griefs! [[ No — no! — she never will receive 
“us 5 
I 14p 3 
V;; ^; lujijedl 
P — Where, where ^r^^youa^ my “Emma^harvey? robed in Spot“ “innocence, you are an angel of light, and fptfm. us from ‘‘ you !” -- Then would these pitiable 
unfortunates fall into Such dreadful fits of frenzy, that the infamous woman (at whose house 
T 
they still were) declared she was fearfuithey would lay violent hands on themselves, and that her poor houle would be a Scene of murder. “In my life ’* (the wretch exclaimed) “never did I hear girls make Such a fuss and for what? because a fine, young rich, and ' - ** accomplished 
cc 


t 141 3 
accomplished nobleman has shown them favour! — and all this from “their ridiculous starched edsica “tion of virtue. — Virtue, forsooth I “will it (as what’s his name says “in the play) will it buy a new garment? — will it purchase a good dinner .?• — or procure a place “in the fide shox at the opera.? — * “Tattered'virtue may walk on foot, “I believe, all its days^'for any reward it will meet with in this “world. — And who lives So grand as a kept lady.? — how infinitely is her situation to be preferred to a poor devil of a wife !' to whom t all the bickerings are reserved of a ‘‘ discontented 

CC 
4c 
[ «42 ] 
Tifiishontented husband ^ So the kind keeper he meets his be“ “girl with Smiles and rapture— — dresses So elegantly “as a kept lady? who : fis Sur“ “with greater elegancies “of life with more Servants, jew“ “toys, and trinkets — in short, 
“with everything that can make “life desirable*i have had your “fqueamijh., trouhlefome girls before now, but these northern lasses are beyond all sufferance’trs to be hoped his lordship will “make me ample recompense, as ‘ “even the business of my painstaking avocation let this tyre 
£ 1 
some out of the question) “has been, hindered in Some measure.” 
— — Thus did this scan to, .her Sex, and to human nature, exclaim to her nymphs. — At iength the miserable Sisters were, by the orders of their vile Seducer, removed;; — in a distradled state. Sometimes raving. Sometimes moping, and often in a senselessstupor.) 
— They were privately conveyed to Some very handsome apartments, in a private street, provided for them; 
— where we will leave them for the present, just to inquire after the good folks in Cumberland. 
The letter which poor Peggy had • written. 
t j44 J 
Written, or rather that which the infamous wretch (the feigned brother) had forged for that unsusped ing innocent, was received at ash dale with the utmost joy and transport. — With what fond delight did the enraptured parents devour the contents! — to find their beloved children were treated with even a parental tenderness, which promised the most flattering success to their future advantageous Settlement in life! — The little children hung round their delighted mother, whilst the tender tear of maternal joy glistened in her mild eye; — “And indeed !: ” (cried the Smiling innocents) “in -- 
‘‘ deed. 
i .145 j 
“deedy m^mrna, is our Peggy and ‘‘ Patty quite well, and got Safe to London “I thought, in“ “— I thought ” (Said the poor deceived father) “our worthy “cousin would have received them “with civility — but you see, my “dear, ” (to his tender wife) “you “See she is as kind as even yourself 
“could be!” -- -- -- -- 
(Ah! poor deluded parents! — little did you imagine, at that dreadful period, your lovely, precious 
children, fpotless when they left 
\ 
you as the unstained lily, were now the miserable victims of unbridled lust, in an infamous brothel: — little, vol, I. L alas! 
[ t: 6 J] 
^ aldi"?^(3rd you irti^ihc^i even at the lilbrtient that yewere tejoicshg at the Tappy ideas of their Sectirity and future felicity, that they were then under the horrid influence of hellish potions — raving for help at intervals, as their delirium occasioned, joined with the most poignant despair, when a ray of reason intervened: or shrieking for aid — when no aid was there.) — 
The neighbours now at ash dale were called in to hear this joyful letter; for Peggy and Patty were universally beloved in the little village, and the cottagers had expressed no Small anxiety at the wcm 7 derful 
/[ di47 i] 
yti^rful distance: London appeared to. .i^heip rejoiced, (Such isi^ncor 
. rupted nature, till hackneyed in the Otways of the world) at the happy situation of the beloved daughters. of their common friend and father : a cup of ale was fetched to regale : them, and they all Sat down on the i:, green turf bench, at the foot of a Spreading oak, whilst the delighted .parents pointed out afresh to the •shearers every interesting Sentence: the fond mother was full of the praises of the miss Bennets, in their offers of teaching her Peggy and ■ Patty curious needleworks. See. — 
, .whilst tyre father was equally pleased LI 2 his 
; [ 148 3 
(his little garden had, afforded him •to Send from his stock of bees, n. present to Mrs. Bennet, of So accep >table a kind as the pot of honey. ‘how blind are poor deluded mor j^ •tals! — but hold, my pen, let me not 'lament this blindness— — perhaps this total ignorance of events, and. of ' what passes (except before our eyes) ds one of our happiest privileges )n our present short state of existence. •had Mr. and Mrs. Summers not been in ignorance (as things are constituted to be y?, by the great Governor of the world) what must 'have been at this moment the dii trabied anguish of their tender 
hearts'! 
[‘ h9 ]■ 
Hearts I — misery — their children’s everlasting misery in this life, Would have appeared to them as unavoidable. — Vfhat wringing of hands, and bitter tears, would at this moment have ensued f — Whilst this prefeni^ little happy group were talking the joyous letter over, the good Mrs. Summers called her little boy; “Tommy, ” (criedshe) “run,. “child, to moss hill (a mile only) “and tell miss Emma we have had “a letter from our dear Peggy and“ “, with jc^ful 7tews in it.” — The little fellow flies like winged lightning, to impart the good tidings; but in passing the wood to L 3 moss[ 
[ j 
- nio J., sh. 
moss hih he rnet miss Harvey, who having long been impatient tb’ bear of her young friends, was taking a Sweet evening’s walk to ash dale, but on the way had Seated herself on the style, which So often had been the appointed plade of meeting of this young and lovely triumvirate— — and Patty had planted a few flowering shrubs round" a kind of rustic’arbour, entwined with eglantines and woodbines, in remembrance of the favourite Spot: in this Sweet retreat the faithful Emsha often Spenf an evening hour; — she cultivated the little wild parterre with her own 
hands. 
f 151 J 
hands. — V drooping roses, ’* (cried site) “why hang your bending Sweets!” — they were (though she knew it not) at that moment an emblem of their languid, lovely owners. The little boy from afii dale having imparted his glad tidings, it may easily be imagined with what joy the delighted Emma has tened to Ashdale, and with what heartfelt happiness she perused the fiflitiotis epistle of her beloved friends. “Ah! (Said she, laughing) “idle girls, not one line have “they yet Sent me! — A London journey, I fear, will make them forget their poor em.ma.*’ — — — l4 Alas! 
[ 152 T 
Aks, j,. she knewpnoc, the^miscrable Sufferers written as before mentioned,; and that the vilest of men had destroyed the letter. 
miss Harvey Sincerely rejoiced im what, she, like the rest of these 
worthy, deceived people, .thought 
r 
good news. This excellent young lady, .besides the loss of her Peggy and Patty, had Sustained also the grief of parting with another very particular friend of hers from Cumberland; namely, miss Waller; 
'sine being ten days already Set out' for Northamptonshire, to visit a near' relation. The friendfnip of this amiable young lady had been of the’ 2 utmost 
■ [ >53 J 
Utmost Service, as well as comfort,, to the poor brow beatem.mz.; whose'. rigid father (of whom mention has been already made, and will still > more) had absolutely refused her acquiring any of the genteel accomplishments of life, through excess of avarice : he held the female Sex in the most Sovereign contempt, and hardly allowed his amiable wife (the pattern of patience, and who had brought him So good a fortune, that she had been the making of him) to be but just dbovq rationality. This man (there are too many Such) valued himself Solely on what the world calls, being an honefi man; that is, 
he 
E 154 I 
he cer.b^njy.paid every .tfacfesman Ms cwiuryqbmt as. to any jpther virtue;, was as ignorant of it as.his horse t'jt he had, by dint of extreme parsi 
C 
money, got a good fortune, which, for want of male heirs, he grieved must be tack’d to a peuicoat. By his^own will, the little Emma would, never have been taught anything,, but just barely to readt'^btv tende mother had however privately taught her to write \ and the accomplished miss. Waller had not only taught her singing and French, but had 
s 
likewise lent her a great variety of books^for Some years, of the best and most elegant authors;,, and in > short, 
[ ^55 J 
shbrfv’ had taken no fmali patnv in the chiltiv'ation of her mindi^do thaf Emma harvey was nearly, through great application, and an excellent understanding, as accomplished as’ Her lovely friend. miss Waller, herself, owed her advantages of education to an aunt, a lady iff very genteel life, and who had not only given her niece a good, but also a’ very accomplished education. — Poor Emma looked to her Lucy, as to an oracle; as did, in a lower degree, our unfortunate sisters to their Emma. The father of this oppressed young lady, was the least beloved by bis neighbours" of ksiy'r?i^n 
merely 

[ 15^ r 
merely on account of being what he called an honejl man^\\t behaved with Such insolence, there was no enduring him : — he affected all that hlimt nefs and roughnejs of manner, which by the k» discerning is called honesty, but it has no more to do with honefiyy than haje cowardice has with gentleness and true tneeknefs. shakespear has well delineated this Sort of honest man, Avhere he Says, 
at - 
** • — is Some fellowi 
“Who having been prais’d for bluntness, doth affeft 
A fancy roughness; and constrains the ** garb 
Quite from his nature. — He cannot “flatter, he, 
** An honeji mind, and plain. ' ■ ■■■» 
-- -- These kind of knavts I know.” 
'* Poor 
t 157 ] 
.Poor Mrs. Harvey, had the general pity of the neighbourhood: — of late years, her tyrant Seldom permitted her to stir abroad : once or twice in hisdise he had indulged her to go with him to the affixes at car iifie; but this he thought too great a favour to be repeated. — This gentleman having lately purchased Some mines in an adjacent county, of a man, an old bachelor of large fortune, and who he understo!)^^vant ed a wife, took it into his head, that his daughter Emma, then barely eighteen, would be the very wise for him : — as to ever marrying his daughter to any man, but merely for 
money.y 
r, 3 
money he w9ui4 just as ^sopn have thought of marrying .h, er.to an animal of a different ffpecies. What gave rise to this curious thought of Mr, Harvey, was, that when Mr. Branville (which was the name of this rich old bachelor) and he had Settled the affair of the mines, the former (his heart being open over a glass of wine) - began telling how ill his nephew had used him : — “A young rogue, (added he) I have “^ great mind to marry, and to get “an. heir to my estate : ^ri am not “So old, Mr. Harvey, as you may 
“think.” -- -- -- “Old 1 .(replied he) 
what do ye t^lk ..of old? you are 
^ barely, 
t -159 ] 
t)arei^, 15r, but fifty whvt 'is sthai; ?why your very prime of life.’^softly — Softly— — ** Mr. Harvey, I have bten fey, near twenty years — ^buc I wear Wes \ and, Seriousty, could I meet with a young, pretty girl — ““she must be young and pretty, ‘‘"mr. Harvey — why — H don’t “know — but — have you any curii berland girls worth ari old man’s notice? ” — (here he cut' a caper) “Most worthy sir Said Mr, Harvey with great Solemnity) I have a daughter; — the girl is *• handsome, nay very hasidsome.” — “fivkt how Ad is she? (interrupted 

. ' ■[ i fio 3 
■rupted Mr. Branville) — “turned of eighteen (Said the father) — tall and strait, fair and blooming.’’ — “That will just do, ” answered the other. — “If you like there” ” Mr. Harvey) “she shall be yours“ “word: — the honour of your “alliance;, cannot admit of her be“ “otherwise .than all obedience “to my commands. If you will “favour me with your company to dinner, one day next week, you “shall see her r she is, I repeat, young and beautiful.” — “Say no “more, Say no more, ” (Said our old lover) “you have transacled the af fair of the lead mines with So 
much 
C ii 1 
much honejly^ that I have no doubt but the affair of your daughter “would be managed with equal hon“ “- as to the bargain.” — After much curious conversation (which we shall not repeat) had passed om this Subject, a promise was given by Mr. Harvey, he should have the giri if he lik’d her: — her own coa fent and approbation being no more in the question,, than if she had beem a downright idiot, or an inanimate piece of parchment. 
But now for a few words concerning Mr. Branville: He was a man, ’tis true, without vices, but without vir ’ tues too; — he possessed a clear estate of vol, I. M three 
£ 1^2 ] 
three thousand pounds a year, with a 
great deal of ready money; — as to his 
person, he was a well looking man, 
about Seventy years of age; his dress 
/ 
exafuy neat and curious. No coat was ever So brown., no shoes ever So glossy blacl or ruffles So formally plaited, as Mr. Bran ville’s. — He was in general esteemed; and as he was guilty of no vices as gaming, women, or drinking, he was always Spoken of as a good fharafler. -- But where all this time were his virtues? 
Mr. Harvey, after this day’s important business, of having bargained for the lead mines, and his daughter, sat out for moss Hill, 
which 
E i63 3 
which was about fifty miles distance. He happened to return the very evening in which the gentle Emma had been to Mr. summers’s, on occasion of the letter from her beloved friends. 
Whilst the poor innocent family at Ashdale were at present luirdmxk the comforts of believing their beloved daughters were in peace and Security — (ah vain delusion!) — we will visit moss hill, where by this timeemma, (having often stopped to listen to the nightingale, and as often to admire the beauty of the full moon, then rising, in milton’s beautiful language, ' 
»' in clouded) 
5 had 
[ 164 3 
h^d arrived. Her father met herat the parlour door, with a more [mlrking air than she had ever observed im him; — and, tapping heron the cheek, ashed her if she would take a turn in the grass walk, whilst Supper was preparing: this unusual strain of kindmfs amazed. Emma'but what he Said, or what she answered, will be found in the next letter, beginning the second volume. 
End of the First Volume. 



'' A 
•, A ^ 
■ \. ' ' i 
-# 

LI 
*. 
e. ■■■ ■ 
tr ' - 
VS -. 
■•'■■ ■ I A'A.'‘ ^; - '■ ’ ' ' 
■/" _ ~~ 'ri'i / ■*'~ 
■; V. -. 
C. ^. •. .^ 
A JC ' ' 
• ', S' ', 'T -, ■. V 
& 
■ricf: ■. 

, ■ 



»' y 
’i 



- 
% 
I 
'■til 
i A 

D. WEBSTER 
Bookseller, 
tunbbidoe Wells j1 
r' 
t. 

FK vv 
A ■:, : ■■■% : d" 

'.fstel' y - 'hr 
•f' 

1 
'"b “' 


. '■ : .' 
■ 
.. VI 
Kr Xr, ■:.. 

•■'., *> 
IF ' ^ ' 
A 
■• '. / - 
'. " ' VFV, 
» t *» ' -1 ' '. - 
■fc. VC.. ^- - 
H 


• ^/' 
o' ' ' ' • <■ ■ • y 
'ht'’ 
% y.. 
^ t 


jrr 
AF" ' 


‘ ll' 
'



Peggy and Patty; 
O R, 
THE SISTERS 
O F 
A S H D A L E. 
VOL. II 


'i/'‘ 
SO 
.j - VI 
r X >: ' 5 t.t '. 
vr>r ’ S ', ct H t ', 

V ■ '■'■ 't 
C > V .U 
. Ik -. ■ “il: 
:, i 
; ■'. ’i t. ti 
•i j 
SD I 

^ ^ o - ^ r 
• -!*-»••- — i 
ur d' :, ' 
: vronyoi 
.: ■ ??oq csitkilhs. 
; J di'. 
r; - i f' 

Peggy and Patty; 
O R, 
THE SISTERS 
o F 
t 
A S H D A L E. 
IN FOUR VOLUMES.. 
VOL. IL 
LONDON: 
PRINTED FOR J. DODSLEY, PALL mall. 
M, DCC, i.xxxnx» 
T '> 
^'' — I..J -‘- 
7 tfat 

. V 7 

’. o •’* ' - f^'y 
y^|fc**4 '■ V t, ■ *! 
, v'r*i’7.' a. l 0 ’<'?; ■'tot, rnobl: ’'^ ^ 


..: a / i: 
• 
st' fovi 

PEGGY AND PATTY. 
LETTER XI 
Miss Harvey, to Miss Waller. 
Moss Hill. 
^J'HERE is an old Saying, my Lucy, “that one misfortune “Seldom comes alone I can truly affirm the truth of this same adage. — Could I have imagined the Fates, having bereft me of my Peggy and Patty, should So Soon — So very 
vol. II 
B 
Soon. 
I 4 3 
Soon, have deprived me also of you! my charming friend, my guide, and my instrudrefs? ~ This stroke is indeed too much : — ^ But hold! - — am I not too Selfish? I fear I am; — away then these narrow minded murmurings let me rather rejoice that you, my dear miss Waller, are happy, and making all around you So; and that the Sweet girls of Ashdale are most happily arrived in London — have met with an extreme affcdlionate friend in their good cousin Bennet; and are, in short, in the highroad of happiness and advantage to themselves, and comfort to their parentsa charming letter 6 arrived, 
I 3 3 
ollr ^ 
arrived, my friend, last night, with 
i 
the above particulars, to Ashdale. ’ — Idle girls 1 they have not yet Sent me a single line, but I forgive them. 
O my Lucy! never did I require or wish for your udvice So much as at this moment, for I have such a subject to mention! — Good Heavens 1 Surely my father must be out of his fenses! — But let me lead to. it as well as I can, for my poor heart has not yet done stuttering since I heard it. — ‘‘ Heard what you Say; — have a moment’s patience, and you will know■ My father, last night, being just re b 2 turn eci 
X 4 ] 
turned from a iourney, called me 
r; - L • ■ C R 
into the garden to take a walk; — 
. iilj — ' ■' O ' 
this unusual kindness Surprised me; — when, after a profound silence of Some minutes, he turned round, and abruptly ashed, “Well! girl, have “you any objection to a hus“ “— I blushed as red as Scarlet, not dreaming what he had to communicate. aster Some little trembling hesitation, I replied — “As to objection, sir, — as to the “state of marriage — it may be a “very happy one if the parties “love each other; but, as my “chief objection” ” — my father violently interrupted' me, L 
“What 
[ 5 ] 
“What a parcel of woman’s cant is “here! — your ohjeftion'^^ldd your “chief ohjeffion — ^ and a pack of “stuff and nonsense! — I did not “call you out to hear your ohjec “tionsy but to order you to put on 
I 
“your best looks, and your best “bib and tucker, on Monday next, “as ’squire Branville, a gentleman “of great fortune (you must have “heard of him) will come to look “upon you, and also upon Some “young colts I have to dispose of.’* — I was thunderstruck. — “Mr. “Branville!” (Said I, when I recovered the use of my faculties— — “have always heard him Spoken of b3!! as 
I 6 1 
as a gentleman very^greatfy ad“ “in age !” • — “In age !’^ (Said my father) “pray, miss, hold“ “tongue: — he has three thou“ “a year; and as he will take you with nothing down, he all have you : — at my death, if you “marry with my approbation, you “shall have all my fortune; but “if not, ” (and he Swore a great oath) “not one shilling shall you “possess!! — brother Peter 
“has children.” -- -- -- But, good 
“God!” (Said I) “how know you “that Nit. Branville may like me, ?” — — “He has, ” Said he, “his.m “Jom for marrying, and will lik^, 
you 
»^ 
i J 
you well as any other young “girl of eighteen : — mark me, 
f 
“Emma! I will have no Iqueamish “mincing; — the affair is already “Settled; * stis a done thing. — He “has two fine Seats; one near Lon “don: I suppose that will Satisfy 
“you.’* -- -- - “If you please, sir, 
“to consult my mamma.” — — He stew into a violent rage : — “Con“ “I — your mother! — Do ye “think I would ever confulta “woman? — Consult indeed! — “No! my decrees are as absolute as those of the Medes and Per“ 
“-- -- We were now Sum 
mohed to Supper; but whilst we ■ B 4 were 
[ -8 ]1 
were going to the house^he turned round, — Be Sure you mind how “you behave^on Monday next.” — “I will take care ” (Said I) “not “to laughmy Lucy, you will Say, was too pert an answer: my father, however, heard me not, 
which was lucky. -- -- -- Imagine, my 
dear, what a night I have Spent! I See — I See the whole affair : — my father i going to Sacrifice me to this man, because he will take me with nothing down, as he 'calls it. — O! my friend, for heaven’s Sake write tome. I think I have often heard you accidentally mention the name of^this dreaded Mr, Branville, 

as 
t '9 ] 
as havifig Seen him in Some public place, I forget where: tell me tell me what is his cliaradler, I conjure you, as Soon as possible but, alas! was it the worst, that., I Sear, would make no difference with my despotic father. He has mentioned the affair to my mamma, not as consulting her (for, as a woman he holds her below everything of judging for her child) but merely as an upper feruant^ to give her orders that all things may be on Monday in the greatest order, relative to dinner, c • 
it not extraordinary, my Lucy, that parents in "general think money t ■ ' ^ ' 

[ 10 f 
(even more tender ones than my father) the one thing needful? How many poor unhappy girls are Sacrificed to this consideration only t Would you believe it, my dear, ^ that my excellent mother, good and tender to me as she has ever been, to a remarkable degree, is delighted • with this alliance above all description ^ She entered my chamber this morning, with a Smile, which I have not Seen her languid face a long while wear; — “So, Emma! — what an “amazing match, my beloved child, 
“will this be !” — — — “What, ma“ “?” (Said I; willing to hear 
i 
her opinion) — “Your father” (Said 
she. 
E II ] 
she, her eye Sparkling with joyj has told me the great and good “Mr. Branville, if he likes you — “and who can dijlike my Emma ?’* (Said my too fond, partial mother) “will make you his wife! — Good heavens !” (continued the dear woman, taking out her snuffbox, which is, you know, the accompany ment of these sort of matritnonial conferences) “who could ever have, “thought of such an alliance! — “the character of the man So unex 
“ceptionahle.” ....Ah! my dear 
“madam, are we not too apt to confound our ideas in Speaking “.of the rifh^ and to fancy, that 
because 
ic 
?? .^4.1 no. 3, V t 
because they poffessq^affluence,, they poffess likewise every dc“ “quality of the miiid?. But “I beg this gentleman’s pardon, — “he may be very good., as well as rich: — I always thought, for I “have often heard his name men tioned, that he was a very — 'very “old man.” — ‘‘ And suppose he “is, my child, ” (Said my mother) “twenty years older than yourself, ‘‘ what then? In short, 1 had rather “See you, Emma, married to even “a very old., good man, than to a young libertine., though even the “first duke in the land.”, — Much more conversation, my dear friend, 
had 
[ 13 ] 
had we on this Subject; — but my mother, hot finding me So much overjoyed as she imagined every girl in England must be at the profpeff of So much happiness, left me, she Said, to consider on the comforts of being united to 2igood man. (Dear madam, thought I, you do not, I am convinced. Separate the riches from the man for that will make, as the poet Says, “Soul, fair — — black, white “
cc.) — “You have, my dear, ” (Said she) “no prior engagement, I “am certain, therefore pray consent“ “a good gracev — — Saying which, she left the room. — — 
............Ah! 
'br ’ 
[ H 3 
Ahl my dear Lucy — Suppose— — after all — what you have long suspedled — namely, that I have no heart to bestowthat the amiable Edward, the stranger, at the Grove Farm (though he knows it not) reigns triumphant in this hap less bosom of mine! — What is to be done— — Secret attachment, you will Say, must be overcomewell! I will doall — all I can. — Writer my friend, as Speedily as may be, to rtlieve, or at least to advise my distressed mind. 
The preparations that are making for this visit of my dejiined lover make my very heartsick at least, 
the 
t 15 3 
the apprehension that I shall be made to marry him, already makes me So. Our old mansion is turning topsyturvy— — cleaning, floors dryrubbing, furniture moving, plate and china, which have not Seen the light since theday youremma was chiijien ed^2lve now brought forth; — chickens and ducks Set up to fatten; the tapestry parlour brushing, and the old Persian carpet laid down already: — my poor mother is here, there, and everywhere at once : she is really, ten years younger, she gives, her orders with Such alacrity., — Mr. Branville is to steep here, I find, on Monday night. So that all “hands 
are 
[ i6 ] 
are aloft ’* to Set in order the crimson mohair bed. My dear mother has just brought me a large quantity of old family tape lace to decorate a toilet for this best bedchamber; Come, Emma, ’* (Said she) “you must do Something in “this time of hurry; — you are“ “now let me see, what a “fmarf affair you will make of all “this ’* ~ laying the materials down. — “Ah, madam!” (Said I sighing) ‘ -1 have no ingenuity — not “a grain of Skill in decorating a “toilet.” — “Fie fie, Emma, ” (Said my mother, yet Smiling) “I am “really angry — why this relud 
“ance 
ic 
[ 17 ] 
ance? was it really for the wed“ “you could not “put on a more dismal face.” — “Ah! ” (Said I) “name it not.” — My father then joined us, which stopped our discourse he is overwhelmed with business. — Our old man, Jacob, is to have a new livery — the grass walks are already began mowing, and the garden is full of weeders: in short, the old venerable pile of moss hill house, and its environs, is undergoing a total alteration of modernising. Surely, * my Lucy, there must be Something in a wedding peculiarly delightful, when even the most distant prosped VOL, II C ' of 
[ i8 1 
, f. J, 
of one gives. Such an alacrity! — yes, my Sweet friend, it must, indeed, be delightful, where, as the old Song says, 
Two fond hearts in one unite 
But adieu, adieu; I must hasten to decorate the toilet. Pity, and write to, your most affectionate • ' 
Emma. 
F. S. The above was written two days ago, waiting to Send' to the post; — but I unseal it again to add a curious postscript; which is no less, than that a Servant is just arrived from my lover with the melancholy 
I 19 J 
‘^choiy news, that his poor master was Seized yesterday with the gout in both feet; (an annual fit, I understand;) So that it will be impossible, the Servant Says, for him to travel for many weeks; as he is generally laid up, he Says, a considerable time every year with this disease. — Fine encouragement for a wife 1 — Our preparations are now fiackening for the present — my father Says, this temporary sit of the gout will only retard the difpofmg of me and' the colts a little longer. — I shall, however, have Some respite for a few weeks, or months; for the gentleman is, I hear, confined to his bed. ‘C 2 *. at 
i II ] 
ti rvb aifb d [ b 20 jawoigib '*’'^ -- - 
at prefent.~write — write, I beg, as Soon as possible. 'P — 
LETTER XII 
Miss jvauety to Miss Harvey. \ 
west grove, northamptonfliire>.'''i^ ND So, your humble Servant, goodmrs. Branvillel — Upon my word, Emma, you manage finely! — i zyiiixet country bred giri in the very, depth of the Cumberland moors and mountains, to pick up a man of upwards of three thousand a year — a coach and six — two fine Seats, and I know not how many other fine things, the appendages of So large a fortune! 
— Pro[ 
[ 3 
— Prodigious! — ^rnd iall this done, forlooth, j i^hi^he most^clever^^nil^ijir^er, imaginable; without giving yourselfj the least trouble or thought about it. Whilst I, your poor unfortunate Lucy, in Spite of dreshng, dancing. Singing, ' cc! and figuring away with iimy,. good aunt, abrjialf the watering places, for these, ilast ifive years of, my life, vam, in, jalliljkeh hood, ’doomedrtq 'wnx.t long as I livec.is'not this provok ^ ingiprnat list, I suppose, if I, do,, notjudhusetto remain in thisfj(as, shakespear calls it) 
Single ftatc of blessedness” ” ^ I shall probably, commence - she w > 
u)) r, p 
*01 J. — - 
, >neqqf, ct! 
'. [ 22 1 of Some country curate, ih Some little dirty village an hundred miles from London; — be the mother of half a Score Squalling brats — and ride to church behind my husband, over a bleak com'rhon, perhaps thrice a year — whilst you, 
— — ** happy, happy Em mat 
Your angel has been watchful o’er its charge.” 
I positively, child, shall pull caps with you about this Mr. Branville. I once dressed at him, but it would not do. — But did good Mrs. Harvey put you in a tremor, by only desiring you to decorate the toilet in his bedchamber?? — dear! — I hope to live to drink caudle yet, in your 2 lady 
r 2? ] ' 
ladyship’s, on a occasion; for 
g 
I shall not at all despair of a Son and heir. — “Wicked, abominable Lucy !” you cry — Well! but now I will be grave and good, like yourself— — now for Some very Serious advice. — Indeed, from the bottom of my Soul, my dear Emma, the very wisest, best thing you can do, will be to marry this man. — Your father (pardon me, my friend) is of that despotic disposition, that he never will give his consent to a match merely of your own choice, nqr to any other that is not of his very own. chusing: — but really. Setting Mr. harvey’s pashon for money entirely C 4 aside. 
C [ 24s 31 
aside, .there is no fatherdti; England but would as eagerly rejoice as himself, ’ in Such an alliance as Mr. branville’s — the character of the man So unexceptionable! his fortune So noble! — I have Seen him. Some years since, at Bath; and he was universally esteemed as a man ’ free from all vice, ' and of great Sobriety: - — he is a remarkable well -- looking man of his years; nayirlv think, handsome: — I assure you, iialc^ a Score of us girls at^/bath were;, ready to pull caps for him; r rand*, yet you, Emma, are ready tot; turnv up youj nose at this man! — Ahi V my dear, had not a little, parr 
f. tiality 
il25ri’ 
tialityv t^ke'hi'^lace^'^' for'' ferfam young man^fjfiot an hundted miles from mos^hill, you woiild^ then have Seen with the Same eyes' that' your good mamma, myself, and every indifferent peidbn must do, in this business : — you wilfully shut your eyes against the merits of’a man' whom you have never yet Seensi and even make ?^jefi of, I assilrb yoji)i3a'i very respedtable character this' 
just.? — is it grateful.? but now fors i' 
a word or two of the gentle Edward s at the grove farm. It is absoluteljf impossible That ever you can be’ united; at least during your father’s' life jvwho would just as.soq^nthink” ^ 
of 
[ 26 ] 
of coupling you with any inferior animal that ranges in his pastures,, as give you to a young man, an utter stranger: besides, after all, my dear little romantic girl, how know you that this gentle Swain likes you? for you say he has never told you that he does. — “Why (you cry) he met “me once going a nutting; and, “having endangered his life in “fording a deep stream, to recover “a little dog, near drowning, of “mine, he climb’d the loftiest “hazel trees in the copse, to pro“ “me filberts; and because I “complained of thirst, ran, unknown !: tome, to a neighbouring farm,. 
“and 
tx 
[ 27 ] 
and procured a sillabub from“ “the cow— — kind and civil, this, most certainly! — and yob add, ‘‘ that he presented you, last Spring, with the fweetefi nosegay that ever grew in the gardens even of Arcadia; — that at church he sighs, and looks in So pitiable a manner, that you cannot, for the life, of you, read your prayer book with the proper attention : ” you add,, that he has been met many times by moonlight, lately, wandering om the banks of the great pond, in the middle of the heath, hear your house; — that you apprehend, ’* (my Sweet, little, simple friend!) — “to‘me 
tragical 
I A ] 
tragical cataftrophc\ and that (lastly) on happening to call at yoiifffather ^, with the gentleman at whose house he is residing, on your unfortunatelys stumbling over a branch of a tree (when you were all walking in the garden) he rushed forth from they group, raised you in his arms, and exclaimed, “0, Miss Harvey! are you Now, child, you will; have it, that there was Something So expressive in the looks, the voice, : and manner of this youth, whilst he uttered those few words, that they Jaid more, (as you say) than a volume of love letters. Now, for the Soul of me, I cannot see this. — You Sentimental 

C I 
yiflllj Jfirfj 29^ mentalgirlsiywho live retired in the country, become wonderfully fufcep tihle of the Soft passion; and fancy every man you See, is your lover. — Burr, my dear girl, take my word for it, was you a few weeks in the gay world, you would then See that that kind of exclamation you talk of, for the care of your person, is nothing on earth but mere words of courfe.n Nothing So common, child, as to hear a young fellow. So attentive one day to a fair 'lady, as to be even in pain “lest the winds of heaven should “visit her face too roughly, ” — (you will find. this expreshon in your shakespear) — and after he has told 
her. 
[ 30 3 
i^er, perhaps, at a had. “that death “alone.can make him ceaseto adore her” — this very man, when he Sees her the next morning at the pump room, has totally forgot he ever Saw' her in his life besore. — Words — mere words of course. — A man may walk by moonlight, my Sweet girl, and present a lady with a nose gay, and yet never dream of love, — ■ But the casc is this, my Emma; you are yourfeif in love with this young man; — and this unaccountable pas sion, among its other strange effects, converts everything you See into love; as the philosopher’s stone converts everything it touches to gold. 
It 
t 31 ] 
It is wonderful, ’methinks, you have 'never heard, who, or what, this young gentleman is; — you call him, the agreeable stranger, and, the gentle Edward; but that, I understand, is only his Christian name: Does not that little romantic head of yours, child, fancy he is Some wandering prince, or knight in disguise? " — But I should imagine the shooting season in Cumberland — on which •account, you Say, this lively unknown to speak m the language of romance) came into your country — is now pretty' well over; therefore we will drop the Arcadian shbjedt, after I' have most earnestly begged you, my dear 
Emma, 
[ 32 I' 
Emma, not to indulge So Simple ans vijionary^ So hopeless and idle a penchant. 
And now a few words of Mr. 'Branville, and I have done: — Indeed, his character, as far as I have heard, is unexceptionable. A few little oddities(for oddities there are in every character) you must, however, overlook; Such as his extreme formality: — with regard to our Sex, (but this I do not mention as a foible) he is most rigidly Scrupulous * as to any indelicacies in their behaviour; and with respedl to the imprudence and levities too often Seen ■'in women, he is beyond measure 
violent 
I 33 1 
violent in his censures in his opinion, as the old poet ’'hudibras says, 
** The nation ne’er will thrive, ■■ » 
** Till all the wh — es are burnt alive 
I have been told, lest the damsels of his household (his Servant maids) should be in danger (were they beautiful) of being Seduced by his foot* men, that such a Set of fcarecrows were never Seerithe housekeeper herself I have; Seen, and she is absolutely a fright; the rest, I am told:, are perfect antidotes to desire. ’lis amazing to ine how a man, ‘‘ whole V blood, ” (tovtise an expression ip shakespear). (l!‘iis very fnow^h^thp vol. II D could 
[ j4 1 
couldf ever think of a woman] — ((what a madcap, my grave Emma, you willcall me for this!) — much more how it should * now enter his head to take a wife: — you say, your father told you, “he hsidfeafons for marrying; ” — reasons? what can they be, 1 trow. — I have a Sort of Jaudabie pride, my dear, in .reflect: ing, how this man will, on the knowledge of your virtues, your uniform conduct in ail things, be ashamed of having So long contemned one half of the cj cation. 
* It was impossible this lady Should know the teal motive which induced Mr. bran ville to mhrry, which was merely to disinherit his nephew. 
2 He 
I 35 i 
He has a nephew (a most amiable young man, as I have been told,. for I have never Seen him) of whom he has been always immoderately fond, and who has been educated with the certain hopes of being his Ieiri how will he brook the disappointment, in cafe your ladyship should produce a little Branville? 
This most worthy and agreeable family where I am, are continually contriving parties of pleasure to amuse your Lucy : — this evening we are going to a ball at Northampton : — I shall wish for you, as I have never pleasure in So high a degree, as when those I love share it D 2 with 
[ 36 ] 
with me. But perhaps st would 
be no pleasure to you to be in a 
crowded ballroom;; — who 
are fond of wandering in woods — 
listening to the moaning stock dove: * 
— I will allow you, my dear, to enjoy these rural Scenes — but not to indulge in your solitude onp tender thought of this unknown stranger — this Edward. 
And So, those two idle, little girls, Peggy and Patty, have not yet written to you! — but do forgive them, pray. — Poor things! — what a new Scene of lise and comfort must open to them, in the genteel family of that excellent woman Mrs. Bennet! 
I rejoice 
[ 37 ] 
I rejoice extremely to hear they met with So kind a reception, and are in a fair way, through her means, of being most happily Settled for life: — how lucky was it, my Emma, that this journey was put into execution. You know I respedt and love their most worthy parents greatly : 
'— there is Something sacred to me in their father’s Sufferings — unrewarded merit! ~ and Sustaining the hardships that he does with So much fortitude. — How amiable, my dear, is virtue in its every extensive’ branch! 
Adieu! excuse Some flippancies in this letter; — but you know my D 3 hearts 
I 38 1 
. • yy. ^'ulloin) L. 
heart, which is never more serious. 
.. ' ‘. gb - 
when it affures her Emma,, 
L nr: > '.. C; 
. I am. most faithfully hers, 
Lucy JV.. 
LETTER XII.D 
Pram the same, to the fam&i^ 
West Grove, Nor th amp tonne Ihire. 
MY DEAR FRIEND, 
. J 
HAD just Sent to the post a. very long * letter to you this morning — ~ when I have heard a 
* The foregoing one. 
piece 
[, 39 r 
. ^ ' 
piece, of intelligence, which abso 
ij' uorn tov -- ' ■ lin lw, Vy..o. lutely petrifies me almost with a ■.. Ml Ar i' ■ !■ u3dw .mril mazement. — Good God! can it be?’ 
'— I muji impitrtnb strange^stvange story to yon, and yet how unwillingi^ am I to pain your gentle heart! yet you mufi be made acquainted: with the Surprising tale — that measures shay bev' — ■' But let me not. anticipate I have shut myself np in my closet, to give you the fullest and earliest intelligence I possibly can of this astonishing matter But to lead to it: I was sitting this morning, after breakfast, at my tambour in the parlour,, alone,, D 4 when. 
[ 40 3 
when my uncle Charles one of the worthiest of men .(a clergyman in this neighbourhood, whom you have often heard me mention) came into the room to alk me (he has been here Some days) if I would take a walk this fine morning. I told him I would attend him when I had finished a Small bunch of rosebuds in my work which whilst I was doing, he asked me, — “Lray, “Lucy, what is become of the poor “worthy curate — in Cumberland — 
* This is the clergyman who happened to travel to London from Northampton, In the ftage coach, with the infamous captain, and the two poor Mers. 
“Summers 
i 3 
.Summefisciia, I think, ' hrsmame? — I have often heard you Speak of; him, and I remember Seeing him at “a visitation at Carlisse: is nothing “done for that good man yet or “does he still continue to be a re“ “to Some unfeeling men in “power, who could, if they please, provide for So much merit. 
“The good man is still alive,? .(Said I) “and still starving on his “little paltry income, ^ with a sick, weakly wife, and a great number of children. Poor man !” (continued I, sighing.) “but I hope Fortune “is now going Soon to. do Something for part of his family, however, 
“which 
C 42 -3 
** which I rejoice to^ hear.” — 
“As how ?” Said my uncle. — 
I then, my Emma, in a few words, gave him an account of a. lady in London having Sent for the two eldest daughters, two beautiful, girls, bred under their pious father’s care, in every virtue; and that I imagined their being already gone to the lady would be attended with great advantages to them, and perhaps to the family. — My uncle was walking about the room all this time : — “I am glad to hear this (Said he) — ‘‘ a long journey for twoi Such young girls: — but who “went with them to London ?” 
— Why, ” 
C 43 ] 
■ -- -- “Why, ” (faid'n “I feally 
“think it rather adventurous ^ “but they arrived Safe, though they “went alone, at their relation’s, “house, and So it is all very well.” My uncle now Sat down; and after Some little musing, as if he was endeavouring to recollect: Some particular circumstance — “At “what time did these young sisters,, Lucy, go to London ?” (Said he) — “Good God'! — — but noi “— that is impossible — *• that can ^ be; ' '■ and yet — it must 
“-- -- -- but no — Good heavens 
‘‘ avert! — • God forbid! ” — — Whilst this worthy man was uttering 

[ 44 3 
ing these broken kind of uncon ne(5led mutterings.^ I stung down my needle, and looking earnestly on him, with eyes which I believe had speech in them — “My dear sir, ” (Said I) “for heaven’s Sake, if you “know anything of poor Peggy and Patty Summers, pray tell “.me : my Emma Harvey and they '<« gre ” — — Here my uncle interrupted me — “Patty and Peggy, “did you say? Nay, then it must “be So; — I am amazed! ” — He shook his head — « and again asked the time they went to London; which luckily I remembered, even the very daywell!” (Said the 
good 
[ 45 I 
good man) “I certainly went up “from Northampton, in the stagecoach, with these young women; “— but if they were those you “mention, I am exceedingly trou“ “at what I have to tell you “about them. — Innocent and mb 
r 
“dest, indeed! — good heavens! 
but you shall — and pray be at“ “■ — — I was extremely alarmed, as you may imagine; and begged him earnestly to inform me all he knew, as you were greatly interested in their welfare; and that I was also, on their account, as well as for their parents. And now, my Emma, prepare yourself, my 
friend, 
[ 46 1 
friend, for the wonderful things he told me, which I shall give you in his own words — (You will please to observe, the day he mentions was that very identical one in which these girls travelled to London.) “I ar “■ at the inn at Northarnp “tonne, ” (laid my uncle) “and was shown into a parlour, where I “was told the rest of the paffea gers were, to go in the coach : — ■ ‘ on my entering the room, I was ‘ extremely Surprised to See two ‘ very young, and I think the most ‘ beautiful girls I ever beheld, Sit ‘ ting very compofcdly on each ^ knee of an apparently gay young 
fellow. 

[ 47 ] 
fellow, who shad his arm tound “the waist of each — (Heavens! Emma! are you not mo petrified at this he gave a kiss to each 
of these very willing fair ones, who received it with mutual “pleasure; and, with a kind of “romping familiarity, he handed “them into the coach, into which “I likcwile got, not a little asto nished at my company. I could “by no means reconcile their dress, “which was remarkably neat and plain (in short, that of two simple ‘‘ country maidens) with the free dom of their behaviour to this young fellow bis hands were ‘‘ perpetually 
[ 48 I 
perpetually in their’s; a liberty “they permitted, as too trilling to “be restrained. — I looked earnest ly in the face of this man (who' “apparently was of the most liber“ “cast) and I observed he Seem“ “by of my notice : his dress ** was quite that of a man of fa“ “— I began alking him if he “had heard any news, of the public kind; but he Seemed desirous to “avoid any, even common ques“ “I asked. I thought he Seem“ “fearful of Some discovery of “himself, which still excited my “curiosity the more, and Set my “head to work, where I could pos 
sibly 
r 49 J 
sibly have before Seen this rakish fellow : — at last I perseftly remembered to have Seen him dangling about in London last year,, with that abandoned nobleman Lord Racket; and I recolledted having Seen him kicked out of a cofiee room near Temple bar, for a fraud he had committed about paying a draught — and called a vile' pimp^nd rascal. His name I have quite forgot, but am certain as to the identity of his pr fon. — I at once naturally concluded this wretch had been down in the country, where he had picked up thest two very Vo l. II E ‘‘ pretty 
t 50 ] 
pretty cgirlsi for his crnployer. — ‘VI looked'upon them .with the “utmost coihpashon; and what “Surprised me was, - though they “both .behaved to this .forward “Spark with the most unblushing “effrontery, yet, when I once or - twice ashed them Some trifling - “iquestion of the roads, c. See. 
their lovely cheeks were instantly “covered with blushes, — Yes, •V‘; Lucy, ” (continued my uncle) • “that kind of ingenuous blush which the innocent hand of bashfulness “only could lay on a complexion i “unsuliied : and there was exclu si vest of their behaviour to the 
“rakish 
or. 
4c 
<( 
ic 

<( 
4( 
(( 
C 
ct 
51 ] 
Takish you’ng man) an air methought of great Simplicity and innocence in their manner. — I pitied them from my Soul,, as looking on them in the jaws of ruin, and was determined to watch them narrowly. When we stopped at the inn to dine, the gentleman again Saluted them with great freedom; he called them? his dear Patty and Peggy continually; which impressed their names on my memory : at dinner he called extravagantly for jellies, cheesecakes, and Sweetmeats, to treat these girls; which still confirmed me in my first opi 
El rr. 
E 2 
c 
nion. 
Yii'' T st' 5®, Isiav nioni'^r asked if they came from ** Yorkshire, observing their dia“ “was of the northern kind.^’ No!” (Said the eldest) “wc “are both, my sister and I, from “cumherlandv — (O, my Emma! how my heart ached to hear this !') ' — My uncle continued; “A vio “lent game of romps ensued after “dinner : I left the room to them“ “and inquired if the coach “was ready; which being So, we Set out for London, during which “remainder of our journey I was ‘‘ indeed quite sick of my com“ “; though I heartily pitied hest two poor girls. At length 
(( 
we. 
[ 63 ] 
I 
we arrived'at the great city : we “all alighteti, at the inn; and whilst “I was Settling my fare ^ with the“ “I heard the libertine “gentleman desiring the mistress of “the house to take those twb ladies “into her care till he returned, in “about two hours, as he Said he “Snould : — ‘ For, Said he) ‘ they “are under my proteduon.’^'ah 1 “poor girls! thought I; and, .my “heart, Lucy, ” (continued the worthy man), “Seemed to bleed for “their parents, whoever they wtre. “The mistress of the house Took “them into the bar; and Seemed, from her Surveying the girls and ' >•• • LH E 3 r: = ^ the 

I 54 ] 
the gentleman, to think asrl did— — next day lihad occasion to call at the inn, to inquire for a gentleman there; when feeing the’^^mistress, I could not help alking what became of the two amiable young women left in her hands the evening before; — ‘ as fellow-travellers, ’ (Said I) ‘ I was a little uneasy about their fate; — two Such young creatures alone! — I cannot say I much liked the gentleman who left them with you: — pray did he return ■■■ ‘ You Speak my very Sentiments, sir, ’ (Said the hostessy who is a good kind of woman) ‘ my heart 
“achedv 
<( 
(( 
s 
c 
> 

CC 
c( 
«( 
(( 
«( 

tt 
5$ } 
ached, ' .for I am a rnothei: of daughters'my kliy to See two Such young girls under the care of that gentleman, who if ever there was a rake, I am Sure looks like a Jly one : — he did return for them in about three hours; my hus band did not like his looks; * *he Said he had brought a coach for the ladies, and he took one under each arm'; they Seemed indeed, ' I am Sorry to Say, very fond of him, and called him their dear George: my husband attended them to the coach, and had, as much curiosity as myself to learh where the coachnaan was to drive; but 
£4 
t .56 B 
the gentleman only>faid to him. You have your orders Saying which, he clasped the ladies round the waist, and away they drove : — ah! poor girls! ruined by this time, I doubt not. — My husband cast his eye, he Says, on the coach door, and Saw the number of the coach. So that one might easily find out the 
coach andcoachman.’ -- -- -- ‘pray, ’ 
(Said I) ‘ madam, what is the number of the coach ?’ She told me; and, most luckily, as I was that day walking through the Strand, I Saw a stand of coaches, and amongst them the very nuni 
“bcr 
I 57 ] 
— fber of, the coach the landlady', had mentioned. I beckoned the coachman; curiosity, and real “compassion for the two poor “country girls, impelled me to “ask; ‘ Pray, honest friend, where “did you Set down, yesterday even“ “the fare you took up from “Such an inn ?’ — I found the fel“ “impenetrably clofi, till I, took “out half a crown, and told him “I wanted a coach myself to carry“ “to dover street : at the. sight “of the money the fellow’s, mtis cles of his face began .to. relax, “and with a kind of halfigrin lie y Said, ‘ Your. honour, ^asked.’ttie 
“where 
[ 5s 3 
where I carried that fare last “night? — I don’t always tell where “I carry a pretty girl to; — but, “however, you Seem an honourable “gentleman, and I will tell you : “— I carried them to ’ — — and “here, Lucy, ” (continued my uncle) “the man named the most “noted brothel in town.” — • 
“O, for heaven’s Sake! sir, ” (interrupted I) “Say it not -- it can“ 
“cannot be! — O the poor “girls! — but indeed it cannot 
“be!” -- -- -- Indeed” ” my 
uncle, very gravely) “it can; and is an undoubted! Two days ‘‘ afterwards I mentioned this affair 
“to 
[ 59 J 
“to a ybung^ man in the army, a“ “of mine: we walked “by the house, which he under“ “to show me; I looked up at “the windows, and there I Saw both “my poor country lasses standing “and looking out: — they were at “the house, isolemnly affirm; — the “fatal consequences of their being in such a brothel, cannot be doubt“ “one moment. — And now, “Lucy, what do you think.?” — • “Think, sir! — O Heavens !” — I burst into tears — for them — for you, my poor Emma, who will be almost distradled at the news — but the exemplary Mr. Summers! ^ 
the 
t 6o ] 
the tender mother! — O, my dear, madness must be their portion! — inevitable distradlion. — Good God! — astonishing! — But what amazes me, is the forward boldness of these girls! (upon my word, Emma, you must have been greatly deceived in them) had a long, artsul train for their Sedudion been carried on, the wonder would not have been So great; but to behave with Such odious forwardness to this libertine, in the coach, is shameful” — shameful ’indeed! -- - 
But what is to be done, my dear? for Something must be done: — who can break the shocking talc to the 
poor 
t 6, ] 
poor parents? — Consider tljie indisputable word of Such a man as my uncle— — man who would not tell an untruth, if he might gain the world by it: what he Says of this horrid matter is fast— — fact— — is no vague, idle conjeflure. — My uncle and I have been consulting for two hours, what steps to take — but, as he wisely Says, they must be lost, ruined now, for ever. — At a bfo. thel! — good heavens! — suppose you write — and yet I hardly know what £0 advise — but suppose you write, to good Mrs. Bennet, irt the first place, and tell her the horrid tale: —. she isia lady of great prudence and 
[ 62 ] 
■goodness, and let her write to hftr cousin Summers : — she may perhaps break it better to them, than you can have Spirits to do: don’t you think this will be the best method? 
’ — for my part, I stand aghast! — Who can this wretch be, with whom my uncle Says these girls (for indeed, indeed, Emma, they must be very girls) — Seemed So extremely intimate, and even fond 1 — to permit a passenger in the coach, a stranger, to kiss them! — to romp with them !• — shocking— — my poor friend, you have been most egregioussy mistaken in these girls, take my word for it. My stars! — indeed, I have been 6 as 
I 63 ] 
much deceived as yoursels ^whac Sweet innocence, what a modest simplicity appeared in their every word and action 1 You may remember I was perfeduy charmed with their whole behaviour, when I Saw them last year at your house; — and now at once to throw themselves on the first * young fellow they met, is astonishing! — I own I am exceedingly displeased with them. — And how artful have they been, to write Such a letter to their poor, deceived, dote 
* reader cannot think Miss Waller ■too harih in her censure of the unhappy fillers, as ih^could not possibly know how ’cruelly they had been deceived, in believing they had found a brother, * yl. ^ 
at 
mg 
r 64 I 
ing parents! — I wonder not, indeed,, that they have not written to you; —;; vile girls! my dear. — Well, but you must write, I think, to good Mrs.. Bennet — for the Sake of the poor parents you must wtite; — as to the girls, as they could behave in the manner my uncle Says they did, (whose authority is unquestionable) to a stranger in a stagecoach— — afterwards put themsclves under his protetstion in the manner they did — • and be Seen publicly standing, and quietly So, at a window,, in the most noted, infamous brothel in London — may make one, indeed. Set them down for as far as there can be 
... w 
perdition. 
Adieu, 
[ 65 ] 
"Adieu, my Sweet friend you will be quite astonished, and equally grieved, at this miserable intelr ligence. — Poor Mrs, Harvey will weep[for their tender mother! — consult with your’s, my dear, what is best to be done. — The post is this instant Setting out, therefore I can only add, that I am, 
most faithfully, 
your’s ever, 
Lucy Waller, 
(The reader will easily conceive, what the heart of miss Harvey must suffer, on receiving the above amazing tidings! — she fainted in her mo vol, II F therv 
r., ]> 
■ W) J 
ther’s arms. — For Some days sh was 
to Tj ■ ] 
unable tb come to any rcsolution. 
o 
— Soshetirnes Mrs. Harvey was for going to Ashdale, to communicate 
i A 
the unhappy tidings : ^at other times poor miss Harvey was determined to write to Mrs. Bennet; this she at last resolved on; and Sat down with a heavy heart, to write the following letter.) 
- LETTER XIV 
Miss Harvey to Mrs. Bennet. MADAM, mofs hill, Cumberland. ^jphe unhappy cause of my addressing a lady, to whom I have not 
the 
f 6j ]‘ 
tile pteastit^e of Being known, 'cill, t hope, Sufficiently excuse the great liberty of my writing. ^ [Here miss Harvey gives ah account of her Connexion with the family Of the worthy Mr. Summers, and then proceeds to inform her of the interesting tale concerning her unfortunate friends, in nearly the same words as given by the clergyman; therefore we shall not again repeat it — she then continues— — madam! tliese dear girls, (for So, blameable as their conduct appears, I must yet call therh) have been connected with me in the rnost tender friendship from our earliest years, even before we knew the F 2 mean 
E 68 ] 
meaning of that Sacred tie;; ^^ our. affection for each other grew with our years; my Peggy and Patty made my happiness whilst their industry, their filial piety, their humility, and sweetness of manners, I endeavoured to make my pattern : — judge then, good madam, of my grief, my amazement, to hear of this astonishing fall of these, till now, most virtuous, indeed exemplary young women! — That they should at once give tbemselves up, in the manner I have related to you, a prey to infamy, should Seem an absolute impossibility, was it not. affirmed, by 
the 
t ^9 3 
the most worthy gentleriian abovementioned. Could there be, think you, madam, ' a chance of recovering them? — Ah, no! — I Sear they are lost — lost for ever! — To your wisdom, madam, I leave the discovery of this' miserable affair to their excellent parents: — tho’ I fear they will Hardly Survive it; yet it must be kriown to them; and Surely the Soonier the better. — Ah! poor, unhappy girls! — deluded and wretched; — my heart bleeds for them. In vain do I try to palliate their Jirange behaviour, to the gentleman in the coach— — alas! novxcuse can be found F 3 for 
or t 
i 0 
tjt focjf, p, L 
tino; themselves under his pfotec tjpp, when tbe]f arrived at London, is astqnishing ir^jhei^ ’ivriting frpm your house, and of tb? rf ceptipjn you gave t}iem., 
pr, shy clergymap asserts hp therri at the window of a.jt ipf^ rrjgus broteel, is an enigrj]a» ^ amazing as all the rest. 
My rnother, madarn, pcefents her respedful compfiments.; and, belifye$ she was, in former days, Schopl 
fellow of )puys at B -- 
Pray pardon this unconnedfed letter, or more properly the effusions of my present distressed heart. — If. 
my 
r ro'.; -| ■ 
[ 71 J 
bui: 
my Peggy ^ and Patty 'ard^lost for 
ever, 'never more can happihess be known to, * 
- I. hl'irjit ..j 
'Madam, 
your most obedient, 
! ' * i ' ^ ■ 
humble Servant, ' 
■: > 
Emma iiarvcy. 

on: 
P. S. You will have the gopdnefs, I doubt not, to write as Soon as possible. 
(The worthy Mrs. Rennet received the preceding letter with great amazement; nor was herfurprize less than her real concern, — By the next post she returned the following .letter to miss Harvey.) 
Xf’v F 4 LET 
on bib I baiabnovr. «b93bnt 
ndfo 
LETTER XV 
no‘u, 
Ishorll •• Jou aitt '/f 
Mrs. Bemet to Mijs Harvey. 
■ ■ ■, V L J 
London.' 
My GOOD younc lady, 
} 
J AM favoured with your’s; the contents of which give me equal grief and amazement. Lassfure you most truly I have neither seen nor beard a Single Syllable of my cousins Peggy and Patty Summers. — Surely it could not be your amiable friends whom; this worthy clergyman met with! — and yet his account is So .very particular; his veracity, you Say, So unquestionable, — J much, d.\k ' indeed, 
I s^73 : 3 
indeed, wondered I did not hear from ashdase, as these poor girls were not arrived; and should have written again to shavetheir visit, but, unfortunately, a kind of putrid sore throat, which broke out in my family, of the malignant kind, of which fatal distemper 'I lost .two of my Servants, prevented my Writing: — and indeed, to Say the truth, 
I almost wished my young cousiria might have deferred their journey for a few weeks longer, lest the Smallest infection might have remained : — my own girls I have Sent into the country on this account. — ^ be assured, dear madam,, Mr. jbennet,. and 
E 74 J 
and 11 will use our utrnost endea yours to find these unfortunate young women : rbut after you tell me, they h^ve been Seen at a window at mother H -- -- s— — fear— — 
inuch fear, they will be irrecoverable. — you may depend on it. Such fine young creatures as you describe them to be, will (for the present at least) be kept by the above infamous woman, and her vile employers. — Good God! what shall we say4 r i have been weeping over your very affetsting letter. — My poor cousin Summers! — this Sad stroke must be fatal! — for oh, I fear we shall never be able to trace these imprudent ijuru? girls ^ 
[ ?5 3 
girls | must repeat, in 
the yrqng step they first tgok^ in Setting pt (s you Say) from Carlisto 
Mr. benn^t and I hayq been consulting what measures to tajke, and yye both judge it will be best to ipake all possible inquiry after themj (tbopgh, indeed, I fear to very little pprpqs^) befpre I write to ray poor ^tinsqian. r theif ^ma^ing art, and tffronury I may add, to write an' accourit to their parents, that they were Safely arrived at my houle, and the reception, c. we had given’ them, i, s most wonderful! — it Seems shch a masterpiece of mtrivancey - that 
t 76 i 
Ji. C C 
that one should imagine two Such young inexperienced creatures could not be guilty of. — — I am per fefuy lost in a labyrinth : — but however, after their behaviour that you mention, and the Subsequent particulars of their So willingly going from the inn with a young rakish looking man, I think one can wonder at nothing. The more I consider of this wretched affair, the greater is every moment my perplexity. — If I gain any new lights, you may depend on hearing from me again: — but at all events, when I have made an inquiry concerning (I fear) thesc bad girls, I shall Set about the heart 9 breaking 
t n 3 
breaking talk of writing to, their poor parents. 
I am (my good young lady, with my respedful compliments to Mrs. Harvey) 
Your obedient, but 
at present greatly 
distressed Servant, 
Sarah Bennett 
THE indefatigable pains the above lady, her husband, and friends, took for Some weeks, in endeavouring to discover the two unfortunate Sisters, as it retarded the matter before their parents were written to, 
was 
[ 78'; ]^ 
was Vfcfy Unlucky si fdt tliosigh the motive was kind, III hopes they might have been ricmerahle) yet, 
, alas! these wretched victims were by this time, and had been So some weeks, in a state nearly bordering on distradlion : — on the return of their mental faculties from the pow > of the accursed drugs which had been administered — in moments of intervals from the frenzy of the fever under whi’ch these poor suffering; angels (for angels they were in their intention) were both labouring, — they were fully Sensible of the horrid outrage and cruelty they had both Sustained 5 and whilst their 
Emma. 
t 7^ ] j 
Emma, miss Waller, * Mr. and Mrd.’' 
C 
Bennet, g. were (as they thought) justly condemning theni, as having added to the list of infamous and abandoned young creatures, they were in a situation which would have drawn, as Milton says. 
Iron tears from even pluto’s cheek, ’^ — 
Whilst these unfortunate vidfims were in the most pitiable state the feeling heart can imagine, they were removed privately, at midnight, lest their cries should alarm the neighbourhood, to a private lodglng house, occupied by a cast-off misr tress of lord Racket (a creature en 7 ' tirely 
[ 8o } 
tirely at his devotion) and whom he had put into this house (which was a handsome one) for the infamous purpose of receiving young creatures (marked for his prey) on their first being, as he called it, broke into his Service. 
Mean time Mr. and Mrs. Bennet were indefatigable in their inquiries : — the above worthy gentleman, on hearing from his wife the poor girls had been Seen at Mother H — ’s, went himself to the house; and ashing to Speak with her, desired she would inform him if she ever had Seen two young ladies of Cumberland, of the name of 
Peggy 
E I 
Peggy and Patty Summers. She most Solemnly averred,, “by all V that was Sacred, and as she had a “Soul she hoped would be Saved, “she never knew or heard of the “persons he inquired for.” — After other fruitless inquiries, Mr. and Mrs. Bennet at length concluded our poor Sisters were totally lost; that they had renounced by this time all sense of shame, and were either gone into keeping or thrown themselves,, like other miserable prostitutes, in the casual way of every abandoned libertine they met. 
Alas! how far otherwise was the case! — And here let me observe, that, 
vol. IL G let 
t 82 3 
let appearames be what they will, we should never make a dedftve judgement till every Shadow of conjeflure is warranted by absolute 
During the above period of time, the infamous Captain Jackal concluded (as naturally he might) that the poor deluded Mr. Summers would write in answer to the artful letter he had vilely forged to Ashdale from these wretched girl's (as before mentioned;) he therefore thought it most expedient, to Serve his vile purposes, to intercept two letters, at the General postoffice, from' their then happyd^tctivtd parents; and had the additional vil i lany 
it 1 
iany to t^un^rfest.; t\vo. thf poor girls (which he did tustsus pecsed, being a master of, forging hand writings peggy’s he cpu 
easily imitate, having iier letter tofier •parents, which he had before stopp ped, in his possession.) these epis tles from daughters k inexpressibly dear, and wtitten in the most happy estate, as they Supposed, from Mrs. Bennet's, created much happiness at Ashdale, and lulled the worthy parents naturally into the most Satisfied state imaginable. The contents were imparted to miss Harvey; who having heard of the supposed lapse of her once dear friends, was lost in G 2 the 
t H ] 
the utmost amazeiment gt the artt 
dri : iooc • in;; zi 
and vile deceit (as she imagined) of the writers of these letters — thus 
; L 
to impose on their poor unfuspedt 
• ' i • ■ i‘1 
ing parents! — “But, good God !’^ (she exclaimed to herself) “thi^ VI Ie art of theirs, this wicked de ‘cceit,. is the natural consequence ‘lipf their shocking fall from vir“ “— When once a woman has “fell into this shame and infamy, adieu to all regard, to every “thing that is praiseworthy: : — “vicious habit will now be Soon, or is already contradled “virtue: (in this sense of the word) f is to ^our Sex the boundary every 6 “goodness 
t % ] 
goodnefsl — ah! my poor Peggy, my Patty! year lost, lost for 
“ever.” -- -- Then would this^'sweer, ' 
amiable girl weep by the hour in, the silent midnight for her losti friends: — “they onc€ were innocent” ” — she continually., repeat) “but, good God! howka, “pid has been their Swift progress “from virtue to vice !” — ' — 
f 
missharyey did not think st pro' 
V'’. 
per to inform Mr. and Mrs. Summers of what she had heard, and indeed relieved', — the dreadful dis 
*0 i 
covery Mrs. Bennet had undertook to make; — and though ouf poor 
.'LC, 7 roo“ “
endured infinite concern oti G 3 this 
[ 85! 
this occalioh, yet still she thoughi? it wnler (as did her ihotherysto wit for Mrs. bennevs final inquiries and discovery, before they revealed the miserable event. 
• miss Harvey may possibly incur Marne in this particular; but her distress in this respedt was critical — it was delicate : — thee was, she thoughr, a hare ft)£ihility her friends might be not So very, culpable as they now appeared; and whilst there was the least loop hole^ or even shadow of their being recoverable, she thought it most prudent, and indeed most kindj. to be silent: — burr, alls!' by this mistaken reasons 
1?7 ] 
rng of her (though meant for the best) the delay still stung our poor 
■ 1 ^! 'jt ■ 
unfortunates into, the absolute. ruin which awaited them. — But let us now return to these miserable sisters— — — 
were now, as before mentioned,, under the roos of a very Specious and artful woman she pasted in her neighbourhood (which was a genteel part of the town) for a lady of a pretty fortune, whose hus band was gone for a few years to Madras, in a lucrative post — and went by the name of Williams. — ■ Our poor girls were lodged in a very hand So me apart me rvt, where G 4 they 
I ^8 jl 
they had not as yet Seen, .since their 
'“.r “^.0 ■ ' ■; - ■ _ ' 
removal there, their .vile undoer 
(being both extremely ill); neither 
T.'. ‘S' 
had stheir infamousbrother made his appearance.: — they still imagined he was their brother; but that the villain who had ruined 
■. It 
their innocence, though brought by) him, as a particular friend, to Mrs. * 
>nuc 
bennet’s (as they still thought the' wicked mother H...... to be) yet 
; DO'. _ 
had, unknown to him, taken advan fil tage to commit the shocking out 
^. 
An angel might have stopped his radiant course, though .bent on an errand of mercy, to have shed a 
pitying 
[[S ] 
pitying teapbh the distreff of thesc 
ri ■ ' sisters; ^ when, just able 
(their fever and delirium 'giving 
'. t, ofl ' 
way at length to medicine) to leave their beds, they Sat weeping on each 
■ *'>; tm - ' 
other’s bosom. — “Where shall we go? — or what shall we do ?” (Said Peggy.) “Do you remem, “ber, my Patty, who brought us“ “this fine room ?” — “Mrs. “Williams Says, ” (returned her 
Sister) 
C 
our brother George order 
yj 
edus' to be brought here; and “that he is very angry with our 
'T ft 
“cousin Bennet for Suffering Such '^tedoings in her house, — for in 
evsfi 
1 
AO 
deed. 
i 5c5 i 
“deed, Peggy, she rrtust*, she muff “have known show we have been' “treated. — How kind of our bro“ “to lodge us with this good “lady! — don’t you like her, Peg“ “.?” (Said the poor, deceived innocent) Yes! indeed I do” — (returned the other) — • “she appears “kind and good. — Our poor pa 
* belief these poor girls entertained of their having been ill treated in the house of their relation (for they had 
not the least idea of a Mother H -- -- -- -- -- -) 
Sufficiently answers a question the critical reader might be led here to ask, namely. Why did they not write, if able to hold a pen, to the real Mrs. Bennet? the question is already answered, by their unfortunate belief. 
■ rents 
I 91 ] 
*■ rents but there distradlion lies) “will never outlive our calarnity; ‘‘ do you think they will, nay poor Patty r” — — In Such kind of movino; dialogues did these miser able girls Spend their hours when. Mrs. Williams was not with them;; which, however, she was as much as possible, to ingratiate herself into their confidence. 
This bad woman foresaw, from the youth and extreme beauty of these lovely girls, that they would, most probably deeply engage lord Racket,, or Some of his Set, .and exerted every art to bring them to her lure. She was a young woman of a. 
pleasing 
t 92 1 
nlijj • fnc,; v o, < —, 
Iplcafing countenance, which she 
. 3""ddbh 
'Could just as occasion Servea her turn to do. This artsul wretch, by pitying — by nursing these wretched girls — by administering every little nourishment herself in their illness : — by weeping over, them — and by an hundred nameless affiduitics and attentions, wonderfully wrought on the grateful and tender hearts'of‘our poor victims— — of that early age are extremely Sufeeptible of partialities: unfortunately, they esteemed, nay even, in a few weeks, began to have an affection for this woman. 
r‘ 
— Neither can it be wondered at 2 
— To 
[ 93 3 
— To whom could they turn their 
nr 
desolate hearts for pity? — to whom could they look up for aid? — — 
It has been. Said,, and I fear is too often true,, that a woman is frequently ruined by a woman: — however, be that fal, or not, most certain it is,, that our poor girls might never in the end. have been 
lost to utter shame and infamy, had 
^ in: 
they not known,, and been instir gated thereto by Mrs. Williams,. This c unninff wretch did not. affect to be a strano er to the cruel ou^ 
O' ... 
rage they had received : — she said 
it » 
dear brother (who was then •gone a. journey into the country,) 
t ■; vif '17 ■ 
would 
[ 94 3 
would revenge it: *-*• sh^’^ept over them; whilst the pooc* innocents 4hen'vi% pure in intention as angels, hid their languid faces in her perfidious bosom : “How good you 
“are, dear Mrs. Williams! — how “shall we ever return this load of “obligation! ” — these, and Suchlike effusions of their grateful hearts, were continually poured forth, 'from the yet ^» polluted lips of the poor devoted sisters. 
They even looked up to Mrs. Williams, as to a lady of a very genteel'rank in life, (everything about her indicated as much; her dress and manners were elegant Our 
poor 
C 05 ] 
poor unfortunates, (Such was their simplicity and humility) yvere often hurt that So genteel a lady should even attend them, in many little art tides relative to their recovery : — “Dear madam, ” (Sometimes they would Say) “do not give'yourself all “this troublewe are only 'poor “girls — poor country. girls; and “had we health, would wait on you., “instead of your kind care, and “troubling yourself thus on our 
account. 
What — what do 
“you advise us to do? ” (Said the lovely, languid Peggy, when So far recovered as to be able to rise every, day from her bed,, and her. 
had 

t 96 T 
had Subsided) “what, my dt^vygood ^ Mrs. Williams, do you advise us “to do? — 'O my beloved parents!*’ (cried she, wringing her hands, and bursting into tears) — “I cannot, — indeed I cannot commiunicate the “Sad tidings of our — our” — ruin — ^ she would have Said, but the fatal word was lost in Sobbings. — Mrs. Williams, on being ashed adviccy was quite transported; it being the very point She wanted to gain; — her work, she thought, was now half done; as she intended to manage her advice So very artfully, it could not fail of being not only taken kindly, but put in practice. She now, hear[ 
[ ] : 
ing poor Peggy ask her opinion, took out her pocket handkerchief, and feign’d to join tears with our lovely Sufferer: — “You ash wy ad“ “my dear miss Summers, ” Said she; “alas! what can I give? 
“As to writing to * your parents, “what can you Say — can you tell 
♦ The critical reader may perhaps wonder, these unhappy young women did not wish to write likewise to their old friend Miss Harvey: but what could they tell her? — minds fo ingenuous as theirs, (had they written) could no way reconcile, with the unbounded confidence and sincerity of such friends, the concealing what had fo recently happened: — on the other hand, to reveal the horrid tale, would have been just the same, in its consequences, as acquainting their parents with it — they therefore deferred writing for Some short time. 
'vol. II H “them 
[ 98 J 
“them the horrid tale i’ll tell “you what I think^ivill be bestl — “suppose/wrote a line, to Say, you “are both well, and that you will “both write Soon; that lama very “particular friend of your brother’s, “at least that my husband is So, “having met abroad; and that you “are both now at my house, ” — “But will it be true, ” Said the Sweetly ingenuous girls, “to say, ‘‘ we are well?'" — “If you tell them otherwise, you will alarm them; “— besides, where is the deception “in this? you are both, I bless “Heaven, and my cares shall not be 
, i 
wanting” — ( “You are allgoodnefs^ “madam, ’’ interrupted Patty) — 
“but 
[ 99 1 
‘‘ but you both, Rte, ” (this wicked womian continued) in a most fair “way of recovery; a few airings, “I hope, in Hyde Park, will com“ “your cure. — Well! I will “write then, my dear girls? ’* 
^ “Do as you please, dear madam, ’* (Said Peggy) — “but — but don’t you “think my poor father ought to be “told of his cousin bennet’s treach “ery to us? ” 
“Why no, my dear, ” (Said Mrs.' Williams) “I really think not; — • “we are not quite Sure, you knov/, “that she knew of the villainy of “the wretch who has behaved in this shameful manner; — Mrs. “, Bennet may,, or may not, be in 
jfjtj 
H 2 
nocent; 
[ loo ] 
“nocent: — - the dreadful affair is “^stj lind must s?buried in oblivion. — This T know, that were 
ri 
you, I never more would see or have the Smallest connexion with “any of the Bennet family: a vro man cannot be too delicate with “whom she associates in this great “wicked town. — Mercy on my 1 ^ “I shudder to think of So much “wickedness, as this cousin ” ^bf your’s (if privy to this bad affair) ‘‘ has been guilty of! — but I hope “you never more will take any notice of her.’* — That you may “depend on” ” Peggy. — Mrs. Williams’ having gained two material 
points"; whicff were, to prevent 
.; mo “? « H 
• any 
ooi 
^ loib£5t,; cl^don 
any farther connexion with the Ben 
} 
family, (for very obvious^^rea. Sons) and also to prevent our poor unfortunates from acquainting their parents they were ill, (as in that cafe the father, thro’ excess of tenderness, might have taken a journey to See them) now called for pens and paper, and wrote a letter to Mr. Summers: — Such an one as, for the present, might very well Satisfy him that they were in a very comfortable situation, with a friend 
pf their brother’s. — This letter she 
} 
read to our poor innocents;, who Said, they were greatly obliged to her 
-3 ' ■ 
for her goodness in taking So rnuch H 3 trouble: 
trouble“ “
gy 
[ ht)2 ] 
but^deaf'tiiada.m, ” Said ‘^you Say we are both well', -** indeed.that is not “What a 
“little Scrupulous girl you are, ’"’ (returned Mrs. Williams) “would “you give fain to Such tender parents? “Not for the world 
(saidtatty, sighing) — “but I think “we are well enough to hold a pen, “to add a postscript.” — “indem “7tctv (Said the artful woman) “you will make your heads ach — “I am your nurse., you know, and “have too great a regard for'you, “to Suffer you to hurt yourselves” ” — deceived sisters again called her “au goodnejsv — The letter was 10 now 
103 ] 
now Sealec} and directed; wheh|mrs. Williams rose, and Said, she would 
'' ri". 
carry it herself to the Servant, with a particular charge to be careful to put it in the post; when walking .very composedly into the parlour, she stung the letter into the fire. Lord Racket frequently called in Secret on Mrs. Williams, to inquire how Jhe went on she replied, “As “heart can wish : — O my lord, “never were two Such angels! and “I doubt not, in one poor fort“ “with a little of my advice“ “will be all your own, on your lordship’s terms— — tender and kind as man can wish, I H 4 doubt 
CC 
[ 104]] 
doubt not; — noi need,. I fancy, 
“ioxpotions againp^'rpiax^ lordship was ready to hug the .infamous woman, calling her “his good angel, “his incomparable Kitty; ’hr and laid he should leave all to her •wife management. « 
The poor Sisters now began gra dually^to get better; ■ — a chariot (which Mrs. Williams Said belonged to a brother of her’s) took them out with her, once or twice, an airing : this little amusement, with the benefit of the air, contributed great jy to the reestablishment of their health. — The artful woman now appliedi herself, with unremitting rat assiduity. 
! [1-105 ] 
'assiduityj^'to'^ the corruption of the hearts of these poor, — as yet imtocent creatures, with respect to their will. The wretch read to them plays of the most rapturous kind; novels of a dangerous tendency; and poems’ of the most "amorous nature. — This kind of amusement, file was pretty certain, would ’do her business young girls of the age of our Peggy and Patty, too naturally listen with avidity to love jiories.^ as they are called: besides, these kind of books had all the charms of novelty likewise to recommend them, as' they had never an opportunity of Seeing any'i book in ^ their 
[ io ] 
their father’s little study but .books, of piety. Sometimes thi? wicked woman would throw out an exclamation cf this kind : — • “Good. “God I Peggy, how handsome you “look today!! — I was a man I “should run distradled for So much ‘‘ beauty! — and you, my pretty “little Patty, look like an angel tapping her glowing cheek — which blushed a deeper dye at this kind of 
discourse. -- -- Mrs,. Williams Soon. 
found, that female vanity is an inhabitant of every fem.ak bosom, whether the moman be bred, in the wilds of Cumberland, or the precincts of the metropolis. — “Pear ■ ' a. ^ Mrs. 
[ 107 ]' 
“Mrs. Williams, Ncu you talk was all that was Said (accompanied by a blush) frorsi our simple country girls. They now began to Say, they thought themselves well enough to get a livelihood by their neetile., that they might no longer be a burden to their brother George, or to his friend (for fo they believed Mrs. Williams to be) and Sometimes they were for returning to' Cumberland. — Their vile landlady heard them with great patience; and calmly replied — As to get ting a livelihood by your needle, “it is a farce to talk of itpeople who do that, have acquired a fa -- ‘‘ cility 
[ 901 ] 
ui t‘j[ niosjablaqab Jnsh 
cility teshs'.doing k ‘fpomqtheii' “early days; “"have Served (an “prentieejhip to milliners; c: : — “dear girls, you would both “be Jiarved at Such employment; “take my word for it, in one fort“ “— • “We can work very “neatlyfl^{cr\td the innocent Patty) — “That may be, ” (returned Mrsi Williams) “but not with the re“ “quickness for the shops, I “am convinced: — drop therefore, “my good young women, all Such “vijionary schemes as getting a live v lihood by your needle a 
“young creature is reduced, in this Jh great city, to shame in the streets, 
“that 
[ 109 ] 
“that depended on her tieedle for “^support.’* — — “indeed{hid Peggy) thought indufiry al“ 
“meci with its reward.” — Mrs. Williams Smiled at her Cumberland ftmplicit)\ as site called it: — “Burr, ” (continued she) “how could So strange a thought enter “yosir heads as returning again to “your parents? — You have told “me they are already overwhelmed “with a large family of children; “— you would not, I am con vinced, add to that burden: — besides, ” (added the wicked wb man, t‘pretending to hideoao blush with her pocket handkerchief") — h I besides. 
I no.]] 
besides, ..how know wou — I cannot Speak it — my delicacy is hurt; — but — but how know you “but you may be pregnant by the 
“wretch who Seduced you?” -- -- -- -- 
This dreadful Supposition stung the poor girls into tears, and they even shuddered with the apprehension. — Nay, ’* (continued she) “I “know not it is So; — but if it “should — would you carry in ‘‘ famy down to your poor pa“ “? — would you drive them 
“quite distradted ?” -- -- O, for 
“heaven’s Sake name it not, good ‘‘ Mrs. Williams 1 ■ — no — no, we 
will 
[{ in ] 
will nbt gbv — we will in all things'^dd'hs you think' 
A letter now arrived fronc their feigned brother, to Say she was just arrived in town from Portsmouth, where he said he had been on a troublesome business with a •captain of an Indiaman; but that he would sty on the wings of love to •fee his dear sisters that evening. — The languid eyes of our lovely girls Sparkled with pleasure, at the notice ■of this unexpedled visit from their brother. — He arrived at Mrs. williams’s: — they embraced him with the most heartfelt joy, and even 
transport.: 
[ 112 ] 
transport: — they received his ardent kiss with the frankness of affedsionate Sisters; they then burst into tears. — And what a heart of petrified stone must this villain have, who So ’ basely assumed the name of brother to hear, unmoved, these lovely girls, with streaming eyes, exclaim — “You See us, my “dear George, but, alas! you See us “not NOW innocent — as when you “carried us to our relations house: — O, my brother, what have we “Suffered !” — They now endeavoured to hide their blushing faces in his bosom. — The hardened villain here execrated the shocking 
wretch 
C II 1 
wretch who had perpetrated the outrage on their innocence, and, throwingshimself into a violent rage, (a perfect master of every Species of art!) vowed eternal revenge on the villain “Nay, ” (Said he) “I have been already pursuing him to al“ “every seaport in England, “but the rascal has escaped my “vengeance! yet, by all the pow“ “of heaven and earth I Swear“ “will have Satisfaction. — Mrsi “Bennet, my Sisters, had told me the horrid tale. Soon after the Sad “affair happened; on which I im* “mediately Sat out to pursue the villain, with my passion of rage vol. II I ‘‘ nearly 
t II 3 
nearly worked to madness V but “he left London Some hours be“ “me : — that confounded wo man, Mrs. Ben net, with all her “civility, I think might have favm “you; she must have heard yout distress.” He now traversed the diningroom in a mighty passion at this villainy of the sea captain, (.as Jie called their undoer) vowingwcui geance, c— — rant had quite the desired effect; our poor girls called him their “good angel — their im “comparable brother; ” — whilst the vile hypocrite, Mrs. Williams. 
.. 
Said she perfectly adored him for the noble warmth he showed on this 
, r3 £ ip 
occasion. 
I *15 ] 
occasion— — suppose, ” '(faid'the infamous wretch) “you • cannot, 
“my dear Sisters, recoiled: the face, 
“the features, of the diabolical wretch: ” — (this circumstance he wished to know for obvious rea on; ■ Sons)' 
'• ‘uriin ' 
* This wretch was obliged to manage i^iis plot'with great art, as every guilty one must be managed : he had been fomec times fearful that on Lord racket’s being, 'now'*^toon to be introduced to them, they might' in him recollefl the Ship captain; — but his disguise, whem he assumed that character, was fo impossible to be discovered— — fears were unnecessary. He had blacked his eyebrows;; a patcl> on one eye; and likewise coloured his face with a kind oiyellonv hue, the eifeft, he said, of having been many voyages to. the eall lndies, and long living there. — 
■ I 2 His 
\ 1 
CRIB' n •), 
Soos) — ‘‘ O no — no ” — (Said the 
: i 
sweetly blushing Peggy— — ““ness, and next distradlion, was “our portion : — but if you remember, brother, you introduced him tous as a captain of a ship, and “he drank tea with us : we then “indeed Saw his person, but I did “not observe him much; I only remember he was a frightful“ “black old man.” — — Good! — (thought the vile, pretended brother) this is all right; —; 
His dress too on the fatal night was equally disguising as his face; having a Short, cropped, little black wig, and a black flock round his neck; and aifefted to be at least twenty years older than he was, and quite a downright seafaring tar, 
I defy 
r 117 I 
I defy even Satan himself now to discover the glorious plot! be sides, hord Racket was a fair man, remarkably handsome, and a very fine figure in person.) — “Buc “come, ” (Said he) “let us try to ” bury in oblivion what is past ** I mean your feeling sense of it, ^ my dear creatures; — as to wy ‘‘ own particular revenge — it is “deep — deep; — and I shall not rest “till I have plunged my dagger im “his perfidious breast. — But come, “my good girls, — I have Such' “delightful news to communicate, that for the present must make us at least forget our late calami 
i3 
C 
ties. 
tics.r I havbj nittvwith jkcb^a unfriend i•^onr dear father is made ‘h for ever! — 0, : my dear sisters 1 vcsuch an angel on earths have vl V met with!” — This preface .excited all the curiosity of our poor delighted girls, to hear their fathereza obtained Some advantage, - though they knew not what.~.‘‘ Tell — tell “us, my dear George, ^” (Said they, their fine eyes Sparkling with glad Surprise) “what — what is this joy“ “.news 
“Good Mrs. williamsp arch deceiver replied) “you are primarily the cause of the happy event: ^you know I brought over from 
abroad. 
I i ] 
abroad, a wvaltiableo. packet afroni’ your most 3 worthy husband, with a stridl injunction to deliver it, with my own hands, to .the noble and worthydilord Racket. — .In my late excursion, I took his lordship’s country Seat in my jqute : — I met with a most'genteel reception in the first placed Such politeness, Such hospitality united! — On hearing myi name (continued the wretch) was Summers, “Pray, sir, (Said his.lord ship). are you acquainted with any family in the north — in Cumberland, of that name? r My father, (continued he) .4 on his I 4 death 
.* 
['■ 120. ] ' 
deathbed, recommended to my care a worthy old clergyman, whom he Said he remembered at college, and to whom he desired I would, in remembrance of Some very particular old friendship betwixt them in former days, present with the very valuable living of L in Yorkshire, oui 
its becoming vacant; and till it was, (if I had an opportunity) to be kind to the worthy man and • hst family, if he had one : — but IHAVE never been able to learn any tidings of this clergyman, Mr. Summers.” -- -- -- -- - “Good Heavens 
! (cried I, in a transport 
of 
> or 
[ II ]. 
of joy) my lord, he is my father t — the worthiest, best of men; - — he is starving, with the resolution of a martyr, and the piety of a Saint, on barely thirty pounds a year, with a, large — very large family of children, and my deac mother always in an ill state of health.” — — “My stars! ” (interrupted his lordship) “how siugo larly fortunate is this! — ■ poor,, good man: — but I will reward his patient merit.” — — “O the; heavenly man! ” (cried the deceived, lifiening girls, whilst tears of grateful joy ran down their cheeks) 
. ' lo — “but 
[ lar ]} 
but go onr^deary dear with this blejfed account 
“I then proceeded to give this most generous nobleman a full and particular account of the Sufferings, the patience, in short, of the hundred virtues, of that best of meh and fathers; — of my absence in Bengal •j'^'and, in short, of every particular circumstance relative to our family; Such was his lordship's goodness and condescension to inquire minutely into the state of it But O my Sisters! — O Mrs. Williams! — how was I impressed, nay, absolutely overwhelmed with grati' ■ st'" ■ tude. 
[ 123 ] 
tudc, when his lordship (we were in his study) turned round, and, opening a drawer in an escrutore, took out a bank bill of five hundred pounds value, and desired I would instantly remit it to my father, as he Said the incumbent ori 
the living of L -- -- was stilhivingli’| 
r“ “heavens, ” (cried the poor sisters) “what a vast Sum of money I “O what an angel of'a man is this “lord Racket! “I was perfectly 
astonished at the greatness of this nobleman’s mind, ” (Said the infamous man) “it indeed beggars all description. — But to be brief; hi lordship having perfectly oppressed 
me 
[ 124 ] 
me with civilities of every kind, > brought me to town in his chariot and six; — and I having accidentally,, in Some common discourse on the road, happened to Say I had two sisters in town — what will you think, my dear girls, of the astonishing goodness and humility of this heavenly man! — (not the least Spark, of pride belonging to him) — what will you think, I repeat, when I tell you his lordship will call to See you both, as the daughters of the good man my father? — Yes, Mrs. Williams, he will drink tea here tomorrow evenings and — “What, ” (interrupted Peggy and Patty) 
“what 
t 125 ] 
what an angel upon earth is this “gentleman! — but indeed, brother, “we know not how to behave be“ “a lord; we shall be fo ashamed before Such a great person! — * “But have you Sent, ” (Said the Sweet, considerate Peggy) — ‘‘ have “you sent the noble present of the “bank bill down to our poor father?? “the very next post 
I did, ” replied the arch fiend— — gush of tears' relieved the affectionate hearts of our grateful, dutiful girls, at this moment: — what precious tears! the Sacred drops of filial piety! — “O, my be loved father, ” (cried they) “now 
“will 
I I26i> ] 
wilt yoii be made happy for life; ^ “now ease and comfort, at last, will “be your lot! ” 
Ah, poor deluded innocents! — my' heart bleeds, for Simplicity abused. 
Mrs. Williams now Said, “she rejoiced to have an opportunity, in per Son, of thanking his lordship for, ', h is i generous care of her dear husband's fortune; and fitould gee all things ready for So great an honour as this visit; and that tea and. coffee should be ready at six.” 
; Our poor girls now feared their dress was not handsome enough to appear in, before a lord, — As to ‘1 that matter, ” Cfaid the vile pimp) 
‘‘ make 
L 
it 
[ 1-27 } 
“make yourselves, my dear sisters, “quite easy; his lordship is above “all form and ceremony; as to “dress, these little round ear’d caps, and the red top knot, is quite “Sufficient.’* 
yat length our lovely unfortunates, dressed by the hand of neat simplicity — their innocent bosoms glowing with ardent gratitude for the expected noble visiter, who had acted, as they thought (ah, poor deluded girls!) So generoussy to their father — were now with Mrs. Williams in her drawing-room, expedf ing his arrival every moment; when at six o’clock, a thundering rap at sfisiu _ the 
t 128 ] 
the door, and a Servant entering, announced lord Racket: who in an instant appeared, dressed with all the elegance and finery of a birth night beau. — The figure of this vile man (as has been before Said) was fine; his face hand Some : — this, with the extreme advantages of dress, rendered him at that moment, |3erhaps5 one of the most pleasing objedfs in the world; -- “and as ian gerom as agreeable. He entered the room with a Smile of the most engaging humilitywe may here Say, with shakespear, 
“Heavens! that a man should fmikt and 
** /mihf 
** Yet be a villain.” 
Whilst 
[ 129 ] 
Whilst the Sweet Peggy and her amiable sister were covered with blushes, and almost ready to sink into the earth, at the conscious idea that they were then in the presence of ^ great lord: - — they Sa t down on the earner of their chairs, and were ready to shrink into themselves. Novices as they were in the gay world, they had never Seen any form that could attract Such admiration as lord racket’s they were even overwhelmed with their gratitude besides, as this fine man was thenoble friend that had relieved their parents wants. 
Perhaps a more artful plan of southeast dudfion was riever laid than this: — 
vol II K for 
I 3 
poqj .fseyoxed,, vi^ims^fancied they 
wep. under to this, f^yis^mqus mapj^ 
touchtjdr their gra.teful^^.hcartsq 
he tenderest manner. ■ ^ 
The vile, pretended brother ca^e 
d 
with hj^ lordship; — and now they, were all Seated. O for the descriptive pen of that great master pf tf\^ human heart, the inimitable rich ardson, to paint the disterent behaviour of the four Several parties,! — the perfidious Mrs, ^ williams topp’d her part to a miracle; and pretended to adt with all the dignity (to deceive our poor, girls) of the lady of fortune and fashion. 
The 
I is I 1 
’ loveiy'peggy and with hearts almost bursting with gratitude and astonishment at the fine man before them, Sometimes stole (as they thought unperceived) a Secret glance at the noble visiter Alas, deceived girls! little could you imagine, that the villain before you, whom you looked on as the guar dian angel of your familyj and to whom you could almost have fallen on your knees in humble gratitude to have thanked, nay, almost adored for his goodness and generosity — little I repeat, could you have imagined this man was that very 
.,. \. - A' T'. 
identical villain, who had So Ynhu k 2 manly 
t 
JZ2 
3 
manly committed the late shocking outrage on your innocence; and who was now meditating and devising by what steps he could Soonest eor 
..... D - 
rupt your heartsy and reduce you to the level of the most abandoned of 
Ch ■ - 
your Sex! 
,.. 
The grand deceiver, the feign -- i 
CD brother, was all life; nd gaiety it was Peggy and Patty at every word; interspersed with asking them questions relative to ash dale. — In answering him, their lovely confusion, their innocent bashfulness, and crimson blushes, on being obliged even ta peak before ^ So fine a lordy rendered them at that moment, perhaps, the most beauti lo Sul 
. ..ivp., i ill d II fstl oirls in the universe. .The arch) 
r - 'odonni ‘u - ' • 
fiend (his lortijhif) listened tp. their 
tirnid voices; devoured with his 
‘0 
greedy eyes their various beauties; and, horrid to tell! he formed a‘ thought of keeping both the unhappy girls; — So sure was he of his prey not escaping him. — How often did he,,, whilst gazing on their fine figures, run over in his abandoned mind, (that fink of corruption) that black and diabolical hour, which had af.. forded him a transient enjoyment > of two the finest girls iri the world 1; 
— but as his guilty joys were thenn. j imperfefl.^ he was determined, now \ enjoy all the transport which willing beauty can impart. 
K 3 This 
4 JJ 
I II evening wa&fpenit sti ith nf^c h Social gaiety, 'and libtstihg^'passed beyond the bounds'bf^stridfesh^de cency‘knd decorum : — his lordship was So much charmed, that, lookir^ on his watch at ten at night,. ‘ ’he protested he thought it had been only^'eight; he was ’(he Said); to haile been at Lady Bab faddle s tout— — the opera ^at the play * ^arid'ten' other places he named’: But, ^ my dear Mrs. Williams, ’* (Said he) “if you will give me a “welch rabbit, I will stay and chat ash hour longer— — testified her of this great honour zrji^untlefcenjiom 'm his lordship, in high terms. — After Supper the 
above 
if 1 
above daeiy. importuned our, pretty rustics to sing (they had both, she knew, pretty voices.) — Their con ^suslon now was above all description; — Such a request was even death. — “liear Mrs. Williams! — - “how can you” — (they both cried, their Sweet faces covered with blushes, ^his lordship now begged to hear them; — “v/ill you, “my good miss Summers, oblige “me, ” (Said he, with a voice and manner as the poet Says, 
, ** framed to make nvoman 
n. s;.,. k4 Can 
srf.' isitft. ' 
svocte 
.2r£175.1 ilois 
[ iv 3] 
“Can you deny |; his, ^cquest taking the trembling hand of Peggy in his, gently pressing it, whilst: { he passionately gazed on her enchanting eyes. — “Can you refuse his rr “lordship anything ?’* (Said mrs.iw Williams) — “N? indeed I cannot'vari was the soft answer timidly proti nounced from the coral lips of the blushing Peggy. — — - This answer, 
So Sweetly pronounced, filled the wretch, in whose favour it was Spoke, with the highest ecstasy : — a libertine, like a miser, turns everything to a construdlion favourable to his darling passion. — With the 
most 
el. 

moft'trembrmg''cori?ufion %r'^de stined hjifums tio^ began a Swcer, little, scotchf ‘^rustic air, called “Jockey and Jennywhich they performed very prettily, consistent with the extreme tremor which on this'occasion possessed them. — Lord Racket was in perfect raptures, and declared he had rather hear their 
** Wood notes - warbled wild ” 
than even Signora Sestini herself. — “Come, (Said his lordship) “I “will give you a Song myself; ’* and, tenderly taking the hand of. Peggy, (who did not dare to withdraw 
[ 3 
draw it, from, a and« who 
thought it a great cdndefcen^dkih 
him) shis lordship Sung with great 
taste, in a Soft, persuasive tone of 
voice and manner, a favourite air.; 
thd words of thd Song, swell as 
the rriusic, are particularly tender 
and pathetic -- 
** If love’s a Sweet palllon, 
** Why does it torment ?” cc. 
This Song, performed with infinite softness and fine execution, did not lose its effetft on the feeling heart of Peggy : she even breathed a Soft 
sigh, unknowing that she did So, it the conglufion of it. 
His lordship now ordered a chair 
■!7id. ' 
r j 
td'she calledte'a^nd insisted that Mrs.. *williams=should bting down, in two or three days, to his country Seat, a few miles from town, her young guests — the daughters (Said he) of that worthiest of men, Mr. Summers! “You will oblige me, la“ 
“” (Said he, with the most persuasive tone of voice) — “my gar“ “are large and pleasant, and you will be amused. — Your good friend, Mrs. Williams, will bring “you both (my carriage shall fetch you) on Wednesday next Our Sweet girls, overwhelmed with<^r^ iitude, curt’sied low, and hhjhed their affcnr. -' * - -- - 
Mrs. 
tr 
i4gj ]; 
Mrs. v/illiams waited, on his lordship to the passage, when he Softly whispered — “My good wo 
r“ 
“take care oi dhofe angels., of 
” my Peggy especially, for .1 am 
y 
“quite entrantdp 
She returned to the girls; who, all open frankness, declared they were persedtiy charmed. — “Sure“ “” (Said Peggy) “no man was “ever So good — So agreeable — So “noble! — for my part, I was quite “dazzled when he first appeared; — - 
“and how handsome he is.” -- -- -- -- -- 
“I am much mistaken if his lord“ 
“does not think you, Madam. 
..Ln.. » 
very handsome, ” (replied 
. Tl. V 

ri 0 t t t 
F 14^ J 
plied mrspv^lliarhs) — nay, ^, for “my part, ffe'feemed qliite charm“ “— Well! as wonderful things 
S'.. '.. 
“happened; — Lord S...... 
“married a clergyman’s (his cu“ “daughter I am Sure, if “Lord Racket is not in love, I northeast“ “Saw a man in love.” — “For “heaven’s Sake, ” (Said Peggy, covered with blushes, and holding the mouth of Mrs. Williams) “Say “no more on this subject— — “God! think ?northeast handsome, indeed! “— It is not for me So much as, 
“to dare even — — -- -- -- -- happy 
“will that lady be that Heaven or tt dains to be hi wife : — nay, Mrs. Tiq “Williams, ” 
C f 
.Williams, ’* (saisti^h^^ lovely gifh*' in all the Sweet Simple intmence os Sevehteea years of age) I declare, ^ “if I had about an hundred thou sand pounds, and was daughter“ “the first duke in the landp lord Racket should have the“ “: — I Say, if I •tjsas’ I “fine lady, mark thatv — — “/ 
“do IDO — my dear girl, ” an swered this faise friend;) “but even, ** “child, as you are, you might “contrast the most nome friendjbipf “— a friendship indeed much more “exalted than the married state., ’* — “Good God! ’ (Said both sisters) ‘‘ we thought marriage was“ 
“
G m 3 
“[the highest, rlst4te*lof frkfu^pim “i this, world.’frt ““Why, ” (Said Mrs. Wiliianrs) “there is still a' ‘1 greater; — for instance, ” conti tinued she, raising her voice, and alshtrsing an air of great wisdom and dignity; — u. for instance, two tender hearts, that are united in, one, may live the life of honour; “Ttlf their their Souls, are 
“united, why lyhat matters ouc^^ “ard forms*r — “Lhe life of honourv' (Said Peggy) “what is that rr i dpnst understand quite “your argument.” — • She how i. ever Sighed and; st artjng up, said'' '' Let ggj. tp. bed which ?irft "I they 
[ 144 3 
they then did : but certain it is, all was not quite at peace in the gentle bosom of Peggy; — she sighed, — was restless : — Patty renewed the dangerous conversation of Mrs. williams’s “life of ho'nourv — 
“What she meant, I dare Say, ” (Said she) “was very Sensible, “though we did not understand “it.” — From this Subject they adverted to the noble generosity of lord Racket; his goodness to their parents, cc. — in fact, they never closed their eyes till morning. 
The next day a Small box, directed for miss Summers, arrived, 
with 
[ h5 ] 
with two complete Suits of hand some laces for each sister, made up in fashionable caps and ruffles, also two very genteel pieces of silk for gowns for each : — no note, — no letter was with this box. — “Who “— who can it come from (Said the wondering — unsuspicious 
girls.) -- -- “I guess from whom, ” 
— (Said Mrs. Williams, with a mys terious air) — “there never was “Such a man! — he is an angel in“ “— Heavens! — how deli“ “noble I” — — “Why — “what — who do you think (Said Peggy) ** it must be Sent in vol. II L “a misi 
1 
a mistake — it cannot be for 
“us- -- -- -- 
. feigned brother now appeared, to make a morning visit. — • This, ” (Said he) is all lord racket’s doing; — he told me “yesterday, that probably your fi “■ in this great town might be low, and that, as the friend of our fatherhe would think of “Some little present that might be of real use; — you must never mention this — he is t<30 delicate to be thanked for it; — therefore take no Sort of notice, but have ' the gowns made. How considerate is this noble young man in 
“every 
ft h7 3 
every .incident in iisi; I — how dif “interestedly mhlev — The girls, astonished, did as their brother and Mrs. Williams advised, relative to this very genteel present. — ' “But «‘ the manner of it, ” (Said Peggy) “is So delicate /” -- Ah, poor deluded 
girl! — • 
The day now arrived in which this little party were to Set out for lord racket’s Seat in the country : — in fat, to our Sisters, believing all that they believed, there was not the least impropriety in this visit. They looked on his lordship as the chief friend of their beloved parent,, and his most noble benefadlor; 
L 2 they 
_ ?'4^ i 
I j48 3 
. noiiinimi, osic t; -’ 056 Ay 
they regarded Mrs. Williams as a 
most worthy, valuable woman; — • 
and their brother (as they thought 
the wretch to be) attended them on 
this little jaunt; So that in, impropriety 
was out of the question. 
Our party having now arrived 
at his lordship’s Seat, were received 
with the utmost kindness and pc 
■,, 
liteness. — The poor girls had an elegant apartment allotted for them, and a Servant to attend them : — they were lost in astonishment at all they Saw, — the magnificence of the house, — the Splendour of the furniture, — the beauty and variety of the gardens, — the temples, grottoes, 
c[ 
[ 3 
c. See, excited their admiration; 
■ ill.dhw.. V. - 
— Icenes So new were pertedfly en' 
■' • -}) ■ nn .v. 
chanting. — — Peggy rose the next 
, jil,., ■ '.fj: I .£ 
morning aster he arrival early, and wandered in the wilderness in the park, till she found a Small hermitage, where she Seated herself• she was deeply contemplating the beauties of the delightful Spot, and 
“Heavens, ” (Said she, Softly) “what 
6 
“a man is the noble owner of all “this! — how hospitable! — how ‘‘ affable! * — how considerate to “every living being! — May my “poor father but live to See hirrt “once to thank him for all his “goodness to his girls, and I L 3 could 
t 1 
goukj die eonteat.**' ■■ That ii¥ stant, on looking up, hshe Spied lord Racket coming down the little path that led to the hermitage : — she rose, and would have retired, and, blushing exceshvely at his appearance, (though she knew not whyj was walking out: — but his lord ship, who had purpofely followed her, entreated her to sit down for a few moments. His behaviour was guarded i but if it had been less So than it was, not the least shadow of doubt of his honour could have arisen in the mind of our poor blushing girl: — he artfully began a discourfe of her parents; — of what 
he 
r i 3 
he shtifnded tojdo for^thetft^ and' lik€wifeqfc«: rntbejchildrem —, Thi^ was too much for the dutifttl, grateful heart of ouriwbrthy girl to hear, without endeavouring to testify her sense, of it t — “O, my lord, < you. “are— — could only Say, bursting into tears. 
. His lordship clasped hereto his breast, and, tenderly kissing her cheek, begged her not to think of, trifling favours done to her family, — “I am has friend: — you are my. 
friend also, ” (Said the artful man, taking her hand and pressing it to, his bosom) — in friendjhip^^ms(s Peggy,, there can be. no refervesy L 4, - — what 
(( 
t ^ 
■vvhat Say you f will you be my friend V’ — The Sweet girl trembling, though she knew not why, (for site had not the least idea of being alarmed at his behaviour, or words) replied, “she should be most happy to oblige him in all things.” — How far this conversation would have been carried, is uncertain; as his lordship’s valet, who had been Searching for him in ^ the park, on y particular business, now appeared : 
. on delivering his message, lord Racket rose, and walked to the house, leaving our lovely girl in a sta^c of mind she had never before experienced her gentle bosom, in 
i) 
^ '53 ] 
fads, from this late beliaviour of lord racket’s^ was but tootuscep tible of a tender impression in hisi favour. — She,, however, knew it. not: — she sighed, — she fancied it 
jic was her gratitude that So much oppressed her heart — and with ssow b. steps advanced to the housc the Si infamous master of it vfas too deeply learned in the knowledge of a y female heart, not to See he was by no A means indifferent to his fair guest; and was meditating how he should most opportunely (violence now out of the question) reap all the ad > from if, he So ardently desired; 4; r.; g: 5rf r 
, ■ That 
C J 
That day arrived from towh^iih bertine baronet, (Sir Harry Ranger and three ladies of: >ipleafure; — * Worshipful Society, ” as Shake 1 ear Says. — Dancing, singing, romping, and much freedom of discourse,; began to be carried on. — The innocent sisters at first often thought what they heard and Saw “very: “frangc'v — but Mrs., Williams assured them it was quite the reigning fashion; or for the fine folks to talk and act without reserve or ceremony. — “Good sirs !” (Said Patty) “well! I am Surprised. 
at that! The baronet (associate in every vice with, lord Racket) 
singled; 
f 155 I 
singled out the younger sister (or his prey r — he romp’d with her, had stolen many kisses, and other little liberties had been taken: — all which passed for no more than the fajhiom of the times. 
Lord Racket, finding at length; that his fair guest, Peggy, had a heart as fully tender, and touched in hia favour, as he could desire (for Peggy he now Solely fixed on, and left Patty for the baronet) was determined to accomplish his wishes as Soon as possible: — for this end, he proposedthac evening in the wilderness (which, was to be illuminated with lamps) a kind of masqucd ball, and the tjianii most 
[ 15^ ] 
most enchanting music was provid 
fbi.. 
ed. -- -- The company met in this 
• jt -- '’ ■ 
beautiful Sequestered Spot at nine at night. 
Mrs. Williams had. dressed the destined vieiims with her own hands, in the most bewitching manner : — Peggy as a Flora, crowned with 
; r 'T 
roses; and Patty as a milkmaid: : — Racket wore the habit of a Sultan, and made a most dazzling appearance; — the baronet person ated a hay maker. After a very elegant collation, the company danced till two in the morning, when they began Separating into Small parties, to different parts of 
the 
[ 157 ] 
the close walks in the adjoining, wood! — the vile Seducer, lord Racket, having at length pursued his charming Peggy into the most retired part of this recess, by pleading an excess of passion, and by Softening her Soul (too much dispos ed in his Savour) with a most violent declaration of love, (we grieve to Say) completed the ruin of this unhappy young woman. — The southeast dudtion os her equally unfortunate sister was also finished the Same fatal night. 
Who knows not (at least has not heard of) the rapid progress of vice? • — In oiie fortnight from the above 
wretched 
T s -3 
wretched ^riod, the fifiers (wmu wc could still call them innocent) could listen without a blush to dis courses of the freefi kind; — could even begin to relish, and even to Smile at m^ny little liberties taken in their presence with the women of the town, who occasionally came down to this Seat of libertinism. these unfortunate girls were not left one Srngle moment for rcfiec tion; — every kind of dissipated pleasure • — every amusement that could Suspend thinkings was put in practice— — were now dressed with all the elegance of taste; and imagination could hardly picture two •, / 2 more 
[ -159 3 
•wore lovtf^'women. Milliners and mantua makers were Set to work, and a French frizeur employed to torture their naturally beautiful ringlets of the finest hair in the world, into an hundred different ridiculous fashions of the present hair dressing age. 
Mrs. Williams, who still made one of this virtuous group, on feeing their heads metamorphosed into the modern style, told the Sisters, they now looked y\\it chrijuans “Well — and pray, miss Summers, ’* fsaid the vile woman) “how do you “like the life of honour you now lead? — is it not delightful? do you 
not 
[ ifo ] 
“not abound with every superfiui ty this w’orld can afford.? — is not “this a thousand times better than “the melancholy notion you once “had of starving yoursels in a gar“ “in getting a livelihood by “your needle? — ridiculous! — “Here you live like a duchess! — “and then, how delightful to live “with the man one loves! as you do “this noble lord.” — “Indeed I do, ’* (Said Peggy, Sighing) — “love him — “tenderly love him.” 
His lordship now took Peggy to town, as did the baronet her Sister; — they were placed in extreme hand some lodgings, not far from each 
other, 
L 
other, and in fact were now in the style of high keeping— — — which deplorable state we will leave them for a while, to See what progress good Mr. and Mrs. Ben net made towards a discovery of the Sisters’ way of life and abode; which, by the merejt chance, they at length effected in the following manner: 
As Mr. Bennet was one diy walking through Pall mall, he was taken with a complaint in his stomach, called the heart burn; to which he was very Subject: : — felt in his pockets for Some lozenges that are efficacious in that disorder, but not finding any, he stopped at a per vol. II Mi sumer’s 
[ ' 1^2 ] 
lumer’s shop to purchase Some. Whilst a boy in the shop was looking for these lozenges, a very Smart footman entered, and, addreshng himself to the journeyman (a pert looking young fellow) asked him if the fau deluce bottle, and the Italian mille fieur essence, were ready for miss Summers? — At the name of Smn~ wers, Mr. Benner was all attention; and the footman being departed, “Pray, ” (Said he to the journeyman) “whatmiss Summers is that“ “— does she live — “It is “the famous Peggy Summers, ” (Said the coxcomb) “she is kept by “lord Racket. I think her siste, 
2 “who 
'[ i63 3 
‘‘ who is kept by sir Harry Range?, “the prettier girl. We fiiali have them upon the town in due time, “I suppose, for they have been in keeping Some months; — and their “gentlemen arc not the most con“ “men in the world.’* 
Poor Mr. Bennet had gained intelligence enough; — he walked home to his wife; and she received the news with many tears : though she could hardly imagine, but that they must be in So lamentable a state. — 'The next morning, after an hundred sighs, she Sat down to write to the poor parents. — It is necdless to insert her letter, as it consisted of M 2 what 
[ 1^4 3 
what the reader already knows: — she informed them, their daughters, were in the hands of lord Racket and sir Harry Ranger. 
This letter arrived at a period of time which made it doubly affecting— — came on the night of peggy’s birthday: this was a general day of joy and festivity; the children were indulged with a fiddler to play country dances, whilst the young men and maidens joined in this Scene of innocent merriment: — Mrs. Summers had made a little cake, in ccle^ bration of the festival; and the good man, her husband, had preserved a bottle of ale for the joyous occasion. — This happy group of innocent 
[ i65 ] 
cent people vvere^in the midst of their merriment, and drinking peggy’s health, when the fatal letter arrived. — “It is — it is — ” (cried the over joyed parents) “from our “dear cousin Bennet, ” (the moment they cast their eyes on the Superscription.) The young folks and children gathered round the now de< lighted Mr. Summers, whilst he broke the Seal, and at one*view; with eager eyes, devoured the horrid contents. — “My, God! ” he could only exclaim, and groaning, fell prostrate on the ground. — The neighbours instantly flocked in, where they found the miserable mo i M 3 there 
IL.; 
, t 
V 
C r66 ] 
there (who by this time had learned the shocking tidings) fallen on the breast of her husband, equally insensible — Happy had it been, had tltey never more returned to life but by the unremitting endeavours of all present, and of Miss Harvey, (who, dn the news, was bordering on distradlion) the wretched parents once more returned to feel their anguish. Their plaints would have moved an heart of stone. — What hothp (cried the father) — ^ both my children! O shame! — O infamy! — all but this I could “have born. — No, no, Mrs. ben net, it cannot be it is not rrrj * “children 
[ iky J 
children — wry precious girls, who ‘S have basely yielded to infamy.” The miserable, tender Mrs. Summers, fell into Successive faintings;. in which good Mrs. Harvey thought it most expedient to move her to her own house; as the wretched couple’sbeing together only increased their mutual grief. — Mr. Harvey was luckily gone a journey, therefore his tender wife (for tender she was to every Suffering objecst) 'veur tured to take poor Mrs. Summers to moss Hill; where we will leave her for a few days, to return, to the equally, wretched, father. — Before morning, he had raved. himself into, 
M 4. 
a strong 
[ i68 ] 
a strong delirium continually calling on the names of Peggy and Patty. — In this dreadful state he continued for Some days, when he became calm but, alas! it was the most terrible of all situations, the calmness of fixed despair. He arose in the morning, apparently composed, as the bye standers thought; and, having put Seven shillings in his pocket, (all the money he had) walked out of the house, as they imagined to go to Carlisse, to a friend there, whom he often consulted. — In this wretched state oi calm despair did the, worthy, distressed man, form the desperate resolution of Setting 
out 
t ’i69 3 
'Out for London in Search of his children. — He Soon reached the great turnpike muttering as he went; — the next day he overtook the coach, where, riding Sometimes on the top of it — for what would Seven shillings do towards a journey to London, of above two hundred miles? — and Sometimes walking, and by the help of returned chaises, che in one fortnight adually reached the great metropolis. Having an exact direction to Mrs. ben net’s, he immediately repaired there. But judge that lady’s amazement, on Seeing him enter her diningroom, in a Situation which — — but she will 
best 
[ i; o J 
best tell the Sad tale, in the following letter she Sent to miss Harvey., 
LETTER XVI 
Mrs. Bennet to Miss Harvey, ' 
t 
London. 
MADAM, 
O U can be no stranger to the melancholy account I was obliged to Send to Ashdale; — in con Sequence of it, I imagine, you have heard that poor Mr. Summers is. come to London. — O miss Harvey,, I have such a tale to relate! — and,. 
as 
t 171 I 
33 you'are particularly interested in the fate of this unhappy fantily,. I hasten to write, as Soon as ray Spirits have permitted me to take up my pen. — But, not to keep you in suspence— — asternoon last week,. Mr.bennetand I alone, drinking coffee, a Servant informed us a gen tie man, who Said his name was Summers, from Cumberland, desired to Speak with us. — “O Heavens! ” (Said I) “show him in.” — He entered the room with a countenance pale and haggard, and, advancing to us with quick steps, and a vrildness in his air, — “Cousin Bennet, ” (Said he to me) “where — where are my children 

[ 172 ] 
siren? I demand of you my Peggy., my Patty!” 
O what woe was impressed on his countenance! — “How do you, my “good old friend?” (Said both my husband and myself“ “will talk “of what you mention tomorrow.” No — no — no, ” (he eagerly cried) “this instant, I beseech you, to re“ “a father’s bursting heart! — “but for heaven’s Sake give me a “crust of bread — I faint for lack “of nourishment — ■ I have not “tasted food these two days.” — He here Sunk down into a chair, •through excess of grief and fatigue. O madam, judge my grief, my 
amaze 
C 175 ] 
amazement at this miserable moment! — I got Some mulled wine, which we poured down his throat; aster which he opened his eyes, and with a look which wounded my Soul, he Surveyed the room with a piercing glance, as if expecting to find his daughters : then looking 
up to me, most piteoussy, — They “arc not — are not herep cried he, bursting into tears, and weeping aloud; and Sat for Some moments in a situation that would have melted an heart of stint. — He then muttered Something of “vile — vile girls! ” and Suddenly starting up, caught my hushand’s arm, — “Come, my 
“old 
I 174 ] 
*‘^old friend, ” (Said he) “let us go “' — let us go this moment to the “holise of tiie villains who have “robbed my precious children of “their innocence.” — In vain Mr. Bennet, by the gentlest and most persuasive words, endeavoured to affure him the inquiry had better be made the next day, (knowing it could certainly not avail, and might probably be the means of Some bad con Sequence, if the infamous lord Racket, or the baronet, should happen to be at home:) but in vain did my husband argue; — in vain did I beseech the poor distradled man, not that evening at least to think of it. • 
— At 
[ 175 ] 
— At length Mr. Bennet, beckoning me to the window, whispered me, tha he was convinced, if not indulged in this request. Some fatal event might be the constquence, and that he feared he would even lay violent hands on his own life I will just go with him, ” Said he, and take a Servant with us, to the “door of lord Racket. No mischief can ensue, if I go with the mise rable man; and he certainly will “go, if I do not, and most likely “raise a mob in the street, the “consequences of which would be dreadful.” — I acquiesced with my husband, though terrified at 
the 
[■ 176 I 
the idea of their going at all. — At 
I 
length out they Sallied. -- -- You will 
imagine what I suffered’in their absence. — The distance from lord racket’s was but short, and in about an hour,, they returned : — but, heavens! what a picture of absolute despair was my wretched cousin : — he Sat calmly down : — not a sirgle Syllable escaped his lips,, and dropped into a little ssumber, during which Mr. Bennet gave me the following particulars : — That they actually went to lord racket’s, inn street; and inquired of the porter if his lordship was at hbme; — — ‘‘ Tell him, ” (Said Mr. Summers, 
with 
[ 177 ] 
with great firmness) “that a clergy“ “of the vizfr\t oi..summer ‘‘ from Cumsherland,. desires to “Speak with him.” — A, Servant went up (continued my hushancs) with this meffao; e, and Soon returned with these .words : “My lord. Says “the old parson may go back again to Cumberland as he came; “and bids him go about his busi “ness.” — ^ — This; answer (Said my husband) I thought'would justly irritate the worthy, abused man; but what was my astonishment, on beholding his countenance exhibit no marks of anger! — he Suddenly clasp ed his hand to his heart, — “cousin” ” he) “I am faint, very yol. II N faint.’* 
[ lys 1 
“faint.” — My Servant ran to a shop near, and got a few drops and Some water: we got into a hackney coach. ■ — “How do you, my dear “worthy friend (Said I, pressing his hand.) “Pretty well, ” — (Said he, faintly) “pretty well.” — Let a bed be got ready this instant (Said my husband) and a physician Sent for; alas! I fear, I fear he is very ill indeed! — “This Sleep ” (Said I) “may be of Service; ” (weeping) “O Heaven restore him !” 
“This Humber” (returned Mr.' Bennet) “I fear, is the last effort of “exhausted nature.” Alas! he presaged 
but too true. 
The 
[ h9 ] 
The poor man, after a short broken steep, fixed his eyes on me, 
and, with a look inexpressibly moving, “Cousin, ” (Said he, with a sort of half smile which cut me to the Soul) “have you any daughters — 
O miss Harvey, I must here lay down my pen, and weep at 
the heartrending words, — the 
saint, dying Sentences of this most Suffering man! 
We now tried to move him to a bedchamber. — “Where — where ” (Said he, his poor brain quite gone) — “where are my good little girls, 
Peggy and Patty.? — They used to N 2 “nurse[ 
[ 3 
mrfe me; — to talk to me; to sing to me Hark! indeel that “is peggy’s Soft Sweet pipe I “hear; ” (listening as if he heard a voice) — “and my little Sparkling Patty — See how she fleets before “my eager eyes! — Ah! do not ‘‘ think to escape me!” — — At length we got him into bed. — The physician arrived, who declared, at once, he was going very fast. — He fixed his dim eyes (what despair in them!) on the physician — “Have ‘‘ you children., sir? — hah! — who “— wsho are you? the villain who “has robbed me of my precious ” 
-- -- -- a convulsion fit prevented 
his 
[ ii ] 
his Saying more at that moment i — we thought him gone for ever but in a few hours he again appeared calm; — and, looking up, “Cousin Bennet, ” (Said he mournfully, and but just articulately) — “my heart, — my poor “heart is quite — quite broke j” — and with a heavy sigh expired. 
0 miss Harvey! — but what shall 
we Say? — poor mortals as we are! — I gazed Some time on the pallid corse." — “This, this” (exclaimed I) “is the cruel work of Seduc “tion !” • -- 
1 must for a few moments here lay down my pen; my mind is too 
5 ' much 
[ ls2 ] 
much oppressed to proceed at present. 

T uefday. 
Our poor, and ever to be lamented kinsman, was interred privately last night. 
Mrs. Summers, (my heart bleeds for her) can never Surely Survive this last Sad stroke. — I beg to hear, as Soon as possible, how she does, and if you have broke the mournful tidings (I now Send) to her. 
What a helpless little family! — but Mr. Bennet and I will do all we can for them; we are considering of measures for that purpose. 
It 
[ i83 ] 
It is Some comfort the poor children have your good family So near them in their present distress. 
I am, my good young lady, (with again entreating you to write as Soon as possible) 
Your obliged and Sincere (but at preseiit affiidled) Friend, Sarah Bennet. 
\ k 
P. S. I enclose a bank bill for poor Mrs. Summers and the children. 
End of the Second Volume. 



'.r. >rd.r. * ■ tr., 
’ ■ 1 t. kjra't: - 
'■ Ciel 
J -- i£te.d.vv 
. ■; ■"• r : A \ 
.50^, p^^^o^.oj'sa ooi SR il jsl: 
*> 
f. ' boog i«oy : ?viiii natix 
^ riirw) ^'^’bil ^ntjoif boog yrsivw£ I. 
Sv 8b '6iliw, ^.jjjf^bxdg!3ifr»^rjni 
see. fh T ■■ BS ficct i. ■ift: 
th 3t^0£ulsha£ b; gish>1t;, osf A 
sf aj' ?fi jfcti) «-, trdst '■ 
’' ■' « ' ' ■•’*, ca Tyv ■■'. T.D •■: ■.: »'■• .^ 
^ocvtatlisi. cr^ xiz ^ i'thrs'r^ •.>. 
‘jt ^ Vw !• • ^ 
y ^ '. I - ''^. hi.fv' k, ■, .^. 
nji liidctnad s ^lobnrl 
"; ff '■ " "'^ ■'■’' ■''''' “, ‘'*'*■■ ' V ■^•.5j 
^ n tl^bh b Mb buc, J 
"e - ‘ - -.-; -.: A. 
. ■ ‘ /’’*>: ■ "*'■ ■ 
.<.-; ♦'r isitlc fl' -' ..^ ' 
i' i;. ' i: ’ *0 

: 6 vo»; 
rf. • h, c 'x^rl' 
i.; 0 rr^4; t^f4i: r >-^: V V, 
, : ■ ■ > L 
- Sf ■ § -, J •• 
f"sfc 

, i; 

;, /■ 

: ^ *l 


rt 
VI V 


• V ' C L 
-. 't 

1 


, ' ■'?' — 


ts i i 
ftfe; :; 

=i r 
ifai^ ■ 
r 
3^’ 
fc ^l : ■■■ 

¥-■ 

# * 



.. 
I 

.' *-• ri 
15t 

"h, 

Wr: 
■sim i x ti — ss 
?k " 
^ F 
TV 
/7t3 V. Z 


; 5EG<JY; i 8< : : !J ATT Till 

,. 2 i 
t CV ft]! ' 
i Si ■ 


WEBSTER Bookseller 
tttvrwttinp! wwt.l 

p ' 
- 
« yt 
V 
- V 
■'ll 
•9 S 
t ^ 

■., ^ i 
k 
ha 

'4pf'fc.^ -- ^ .IS 
d: 
: ^ 
f' ' ■ 
. ‘ ^ 
r r 
'. rava 
^ ' V 

At 
o# 

A: -•.' -. 

rijsugissr^i. C 
<* '. «. /' 

# 


A 
Ft. 

F'. ‘ 
f' ’■ •' 
e > 






V 
Peggy and Patty; 
O R, 
THE SISTERS 
O F 
A S H D A L E, 
VOL. III 

VL -- A 
^ ' 
* V C 'te ' 
■1^' b ■ - 
'li' ' : iaiti f • 
- ' ■.' ’ 
fc - t. - \ -\ 
'•■ ■ < 
. 3 S. 1 V 1. d l1 Si 
_ .' *. C.. -• 
i s. ‘ 
1: ' -■ 
. ^ H w., C C' ' A t: *. ...^ 'J C s D / j. ri 0 X 
• ■ C 
f, \\\ ’ 
ib '*'', : ■-/.. rn .1 0 ^ 
V. /. ' in OM 
c07 1, io r vi.y.; 1 .H 
J j 1 A 'I 

Wv '‘ 
Peggy and Patty; 
O R, 
THE SISTERS 
o F 
A S H D A L E. 
IN FOUR VOLUMES,. ‘ 
VOL. III 
LONDON: 
PRINTED FOR J. ^ODSLEY, PALL m ALL. 
M, DCC, LXXXIII 

^ -* i ^ftim rf». 
l *_; tx. it. Jtk.;. 
fi’/t ?i ri 1 i 1 
— VT— — — — '■ — >; 
■ >l Qh’.^v^^a^ 
.'d:, w - V;; b ?>. 'I H f 
ali 
^ 
^jj: ut V 
C ba 
V i' a’ f' 'it ■■ ■■ i, 
, : ■ '.. « ' ■ • r ix....; -. 
_______________________iiikaa 
'S ' si sip U''" f. 
. F A 

ML A". 
aol; 
PEGGY AND PATTY. 
LETTER xvir. 
Miss Harvey to Mrs. Bennet. 
Moss hill 
MADAM, 
JAM favoured with yours; the melancholy contents of which fill my Sad heart with inexpressible Sorrow, and which is still aggravated by the mournful news I have to communicate. — Alas! madam • III B you 
I 2 3 
your .tender Solicitude for poor Mrs. Summers, your anxious fears for her Safety, and your generous bounty inclosed in your kind letter, now avail not: — she is beyond the reach of all human pity; and I doubt not her gentle Spirit has now joined that of her late most excellent husband, in that happy ' abode'', where the wicked cease “from troubling, and where the “weary are at rest.” 
But to lead to this afhiding event: My mother had the dear woman removed to our house immediately, on the dreadful news of her daughters being given up to infa« 
6 my. 
t 3 3 
my. — We imagined, under our own eye, our tender cares (for it was not proper her situation should add to the anguish of her beloved hus band) might in Some measure calm her griefs. — But oh i madam, vain were our tenderest endeavours! She lay in a kind of stupor, which Succeeded the fits she was at first seized with : — we Sent for the best phy sician this country affords, who immediately declared nothing could be doneshe languished for about four days; (poor Mr. Summers that “very morning Set out on his despe rate journey to London) — ahd she had never been heard to Speak since B 2 ^ the 
E 4 ] 
the fatal letter arrived; when, about an hour‘before she resigned her innocent Soul to heaven, she awaked as from steep, and feebly held up her hand to beckon me to her: — I kneeled by her, with an ineffectual cordial in my hand : — “Leggy Said she, (mistaking me for her daughter) in a faint Sort of whisper“ “my dear child, raisc my “head ^ (you will imagine, madatii, I did not deceive the dear dying woman.) She continued, — “‘pray, my dear, call Patty — bless God bless!” -- -- -- -- -^ she^fixed her 
c 
eyes; — “'O my hearts Peggy — ^ Patty were the last Syllables S which 
[ 5 ] 
which dwelled on her pallid lips! — she resigned her breath thiat moment in my arms: — ■! shrieked, and my mother flew to my assistance. 
O madam! — but it is not for me to moralise (a young, inexperienced girl as I am) to a lady like your self, So much more capable of giving me lessons of resignation. 
; The poor helpless children, the eldest not twelve years of age, are truly pitiable : — two of them my father has taken into our family, and their education shall be my care. ^ But, alas! my father, who though a good man, is particularly. rigid in regard to our sexj .has an -- .id Bs nexcd 
I 6 ] 
nexed this»shard condition to his above benevolence; that on m account whatever I hold in future the least connexion with the abandoned Peggy and Patty; — with whom he is perfectly outrageous; calling them the murderers of their mother, c— — no doubt when he hears of poor Mr. summers’s death, that too will be laid to their charge, and I fear too justly. — My father, madam, is So much enraged against these wretched girls, that he has extorted a promise from me, on pain of his eternal displea sure, that, be their distress what it will, in consequence of, their infamy -- - H and 
[ 7 i 
and shameful conduct— — should they be, like catxtxprofiitutes (do Hive to write the horrid word?) reduced to the streets — I shall in no shape relieve or countenance them : and peremptorily declares, that should I disobey him in this respedt, he will for ever reprobate me — for ever renounce me — and turn thesc poor children, little Molly and Billy Summers, out of the house. — Niiri, madam, is this! — very, hard : — not but I most heartily detest the abominable conduct of my once (O that once!) innocent friends. — I am indeed, to Say the truth, extremely exasperated at ^their infa -- - B 4 mous 
t s3 
mous way of life: — and their un paralleled falsehood, good madam, in writing letters (as they have done as from your house when mojst likely they have been all the time in a brothel, is beyond all conception of artful wickedoess.the whole of their condutst is, myste rioussy amazing. — I most certainly, given my Solemn promise to my father (and like wile to •my mother, whose notions of the delicacy of our Sex are high), ac •cording to the condition he has required : ’and yet, at 'The time I did So, a tremor invaded .all my limbs my weak heart throbbed 
with 
I 9 ] 
with unusuai perturbation; — ’tis true, I deleft the crime of these bad girls; but ah! madam, I pity them fellow-creatures. — At this moment ‘my cheek'iis bathed in. tears : — could such tears would 
ever flow for my Peggy and Patty! Heavens i is it poshble Such sweetness— — piety, — innate modesty, 
shquld at once !-; -- But I know not 
what I would Say : — I am indeed almost distradled, when I think what angels, adorned with spotless innocence, they once vere, and now Sunk — Sunk to the lowest degree of infamy! o / i t. 
. tlmadam, the miserable bf'x' girls 
[ lo ] 
girls could mot have been trepanned into this horrid way of life I — I would fain try to think them less culpable. — I almost shudder to think (if that has been the cafe) of my extorted vow, my Solemn promise 
to my parents. -- -- But nono 
— they must be vile — base — how else can it be that they now live in the manner you, madam. Say they do? • 
O what a wide spreading error is this horrid vice of Sedudlion! — the young, credulous girl, who is weak enough to be Seduced, is not the only Suffering person : — the dreadful consequcnces extend much, 
much 
E «« ] 
much farthera distra<fl: ed father, — a dying mother — a little, ruined, helpless family of children left; to perish. — these are too frequently the consequences of Seduftion, I believe, were we to look into that families where it has been praftised; whilst the criminal, deluded girls are at length, when Satiety and disease prevails (the common consequences of their guilty commerce) turned adrift to perish in the streets. 
The family of this most worthy Mr. Summers must, like many others in Similar circumstances, have been doomed to i the utmost dis tress, but for. the hope that you, '‘•ic : good 
[ it 
good madam, (as you most gene roussy iritimate) will think of Something in their favour: — two are with us,,; and the remainder of the little helpless group are now distributed among Some kind, but poor farmers in the neighbourhood: — my heart is pierced with anguish to hear the daily inquiries these little innocents make after their beloved father, — ^ their tender mother. 
Be assured I shall ever rank ^ur friendship, madam, among my most valuable acquisitions. 'And if a certain event, which I expect, relative to a change in my condkioni should 
t »3 ] 
take place, I shall be near'^lotldort Sometimes; when I shall take every opportunity (if agreeable) of cultivating • a more near acquaintance with So amiable a lady as Mrs. ben net; and beg leave to Subscribe my sclf her very sincere, 
and obedient Servant, 
Emma Harvey. 
■^r> nofii is 
■ [ Whilst the late melancholy deaths were happening, of the worthy Mr. Summers and his arsiiable wise, the unfortunate Sisters were become quite fajhionabk in 
dress and manners : — their presenc 
keeper^y. 
C »+ ] 
keepers lord Racket and sir Harry Ranger, as yet continued their vicious passion for them; and indulged them in every. extravagance. But whilst they were plunged in this shameful state of infamy and dissipation, we will, as a contrast, insert the following letter from the virtuous Emma Harvey; who had Sufficient fortitude to conquer an affection for the man she loved, and, thro’ duty to her parents, * to give her hand where they thought most proper — about this period she wrote the following letter to her bosom friend, misa Waller.] 

LETTER 
[ 15 ] 
LETTER XVIII 
Miss Harvey to Miss wemer. 
Moss Hill. 
gurely, my Lucy, there is an inexpressible something in a virtuous action, in its every form., which gives an alacrity to the mind, and wonderfully Supports it in its most trying moments! — Do you know, my dear, that I feel a Jatisfaflionr^ at least a felf approhatiom, that I have been enabled to triumph over my weakness, for the too amiable stranger at the Grove? Hard in 
\mrr 3. J 
deed. 
E »6 1 
deed, my friend, was the confikf; for well Says the poet, 
** Of all that e’er was taught a lover yet, 
** ’tis Sure the hardest science to forget: Ere such a soul regains its peaceful state 
** often mull it lonje^ how often hatct ** ‘how oft despair, resent, contemn, regret,. “Hope and desire; do all things but forgets 
By however, of reasoning, I have at length brought this I'rttle, foolish, wayward heart of mine, to banish every idea of what (had it been much longer indulged) would perhaps have been produdlive of much disqujetudeto my parents : as who knows, my Lucy, but I might have been So fondly simple as to have married this too amiable Edward? — 
But 
[ H ] 
— But not another word about him. — 
As another prwf of the Sentiment at the beginning of my letter, I even find a fathfafuon in behaving with as much gratitude as I can to Mr. Branville; becaufi I know I make, in accepting his addresses, my parents happy. And after all, my dear, perhaps we girls shall Seldom find from a husband, (except an extraordinary gmd one) all that tender Solicitude, and real attention to our every various wish, as we in general experience from a considerate father and a tender mother. — “Prithee, “child, (you cry) leave moralising vol. III C and 
.ri£fn 

pi. i8 3 
andrtell me if Mr. Branville is recovered from his fit of the gout? — if he has made his visit? — and 
"i 
when I mav expect a piece of bride cake.” 
Well then, my dear, impatient friend Entirely free from his late 
^ ^ ‘*OW 
gouty 'attack, and dressed with the 
ol'ooi 
most formal exadbness, my lover 
has made not only his first visit, but 
two or three more since • and they, 
■ n fl 
Seem (that is, my father, mother, 
j.. 
and Mr. Branville) to be hurrying on at a strange rate. 
So much, however, do I try to fulmit to my duty, that I think, — ' yes, I believe I shall live tolerably 
and 
[ 19 ] 
f 
and contentedly with this man. — Some author, one’of theshobks 
you lent rnel^i forget whom'i says, 
b 
“We often like what we do not 
10 i ^ - r 
love., and love what we do not likep^ 
This, Some would Say, is chopping 
logic, and merely playing upon 
words; — however, I have Sofar 
found the above Seeming pai^adox 
true, that I really like Mr. Bran 
3. 
ville, tho’ indeed I do notiiove Sim. — But I both loved and liked the 
yoij 
Again 
amiable Ed......: * 
cry; — no, my dear, I will not 
finish his name — it stowed un o: 
awares to my pen. ^ < ' r 
But TO procced^with my accourit 3v, i ilard ^ 
bnl 
^0 
I 
of Mr. branvule’s first visit: — He 
j • ■, d' ' C • 
Arrived at the preetyfmoment he Said 
he should, and was introduced to me 
by my father, in our tapestry parlour, 
where I Sat trembling, ready to 
receive him : ‘ — my father abrifptly^ ■' ' nifl 
left the room, and I, girl likc, inha 
gined he would then begin the dreaded Subject— — no Such matter; he only talked of the badntfs o' 
the roads; to which, on my making 
i3 * 
Some common answer, he told me, my reply, for fo young ^ jporfony was very judicious : he now fell upon iurnpfke roads in general, till we adjourned into the dining parloun _ But his ceremony and formality dur' ' shg 
h ar im'i. 
ing dinner, beggars all descripdpn., • — You used, my Lucy, to givefme the flattering epithet of a neat girl— — alas! I never can be half ex a6l enough, neat, or delicate, as himself. — rhe was a quarter of an 
fifr ■ ' 
hour cutting up a Small chickeri^ — 

tp 
my father, in his rough way, ^'th q* Smiling, Said,. “.Dome, Emma, shall ' I Send you a fiice of good old 
2fii>trrr O' ' ■'•o vtl., ji ti 
English roast beef? ” — byt was. 
orn ‘=’0. .creme.'? oh.. ‘ 
interrupted by Mr. Branville, wish 
?.CW ^.. .CO IV.. 
“Fie,, fie, Mr. Harvey I am 
“going to send her this little deli 
ch ■. : C --. 
“cate breast of a chicken, ^ which is 
Ac 
“prater food for her.’*. ^~ 
. ljubfino. l nr motod ain j... 
C 3 I re! 
! 

i 1 
Ins. wiwj rhk: [ 
i u .ioj'received the plate, after waiting cbrisiderable time, with an.'‘ i’m ^ much obligh .to^you, sir.” — This, I found, pleased him and hemming with a kind glance to me, he Said, ' “he knew what Such “young ladies liked: — Roast beef!” Said he, “no — that is too^coarse - diet for So young and delicate a sto ^ math‘ as I am Surer your fair daughter has.” He afterwards helped me to a whipped sillabub, which, he ■ " ‘ Said, ^ was light, and proper for me— — shall go near, my friend, d doubt, to be ftarvfd, with’this 'ovzvaelicdte. man. — All 'this kindness at dinner, 
and 
I 
[ 23 I 
and drinking my health twice, ana ctilling’^ouc afterwards Some of the nicest fruit for me, I Suppiofed was to be in part of courtship. — The afternoon and evening were Spent deplorably dull: — neither was there 
J 
■' anything in the least particular of ■ ^ notice to me, from Mr. Branville; except his” presenting me with a 
)lteo 
oil 
nosegay ini the garden, and desir ing me' to throw an handkerchief round my head, lestt fiiould get ^ f^^cbld ffoifi the damps of ^the even “'^ — attentions are fit dc_.*c for ladies, ” Said he. — — I 
thank heaven, my Lucy, I, am ex 'tremely healthy, hw% foriumtel)\ if C 4 Mr. 
C 34 5 
Mr 'Brauvilie likes thetappeatangc < of ‘.k' languid""cheek, rh 'm' ' know, 2 a3; ^<?/^ saced girlwith a com^exion.«as white as milk, except I get a little rouge., by*^the help 
of a walk, or a country dance...... — 
1 began to conclude I by no rheans pfeased my old gentleman’s fancy t but however in this I was deceived'; for as we'vvcre the next morning passing into the breakfast room', 
* Though lovely woman fpeaka in this degrading way of her own charms, fly was ancoriimonly beautiful; her complexion wis particularly fair, and, to use Mr. branville^s favourite word, delicate; and had more of the hi than the rose in her cheek, unless hsighfcened by the blalh of modesty. 
I Saw 
>1) ^ 
[ 25 0 
I fawghim^^fecmly Squeeze'shy fik ther’s hand, and heard him: whisper — ‘5 she s. tan angel — sheds Jelk'acy “itself.” 7 — there’s for ye, 'liajcyi ^: p and in an hour afterward, dlshad as full a declaration as I could desire from this delicate, man I had Sauntered into the garden, and was just Seated in a little, arbour, under a wide spreading oak, >iwhen I espied Mr. branvilky^iwiih lfiow 
steps, in a musing attitude, coming 
- .ir ij HT 
up the walk: — * he now Saw me, 
and Soon entered my little retreats 
After a few hems, and Sdme littsh 
‘•aii ■ ' w' 3; -1 
hesitation, Jie, began— — “, ma ‘‘ darn, you are cnjoyshg^fhe beku 
: ties 
[ 26 ] 
: ties ^df nature.” — i^replied, “I /biiy ..was i^ajrticularly fond of them.” 
“lovl'ish then, ” Said he, “miss Harvey would come and share 
“those 1 have round me in -- -- -- -- -- 
“shire, they are beautifully roman tic: Such a lovely companion 
as yourself” (remember, Lucy, I give you his own words) “would “render them still more agree“ 
“-- -- -- -- “Sir!”, (Said I, 
Somewhat stuttered) — He then, my dear, really very handsomely, made me an offer of his person, his fortune, c— — quite in the delicate style of ancient romance, proceeded ’oxi btto.sayr; ^ “Qiily pronouncetffpm those ti, rf coral 

C 
[ '2.7 ] 
coral'lips, that yoii do not 
me; ** -- (pity, my Lucy, Hhat 
my name was not Cleopatra, or Caffandfa! — Emma is very couth— — “you, sir!’* ( replied I) “no indeed.” — “Enough — enough!” (interrupted he) “I will not distress a delicacy “So extreme d' (by the way, what extraordinary delicacy had i.discover 
uibl 
’cd ?.) He then continued, in a Soft, ow voice; — “You give medeave then to hope, and^to address 
loi“ 
“parents on this head.?” — — ' 'S “I am all obedience to ' * them (Said I— — now rose, .oi.j takihg my hand (ffeiwould not 
have 
E 48 ] 
have kissed it for the world) lei (as it were)‘o'n it, and walked away with great form and ceremony. — ^ He told my mother, it Seems, he was glad to find I was not inex&rahk. 
"Since this visit, he has made many more; and, in short, all matters are So far concluded, that in a‘month from thts day I am to commence a hide. Indeed, I believe Mr. bran ville to be a worthy man; and I shall make it the study of my life to make him a grateful wife : — to Say I passionately love him, would be a falsehood; however, I have that kind of esteem for him which willi 4 tfust, ahvays excke me to bnshis behave 
^ C 29 J 
behave to, him with kindness. I, have a^^wonderful pleasure, my dear, iji the happiness,! give my pa ^r rents on this occasion. My mother (dear woman!) is all Spirits. — After all, my Lucy, what a dreadful ri/aue do those thoughtless girls run, who leap^walls, and sty over hedge and ditch, from the protection of the most tender and considerate of parents, to run into the arms of a worthless, libertine, who probably in 
one month may leave them to rei 
o; - ■ 0 i - '.. 
pent their rashness, a prey to last j 
ing anguish in this world r 
€ 
Ah! my, friend, irij the midst of the happy proqaefts^^which Seem toyrr 
sviirisd 
[ 3o\jl ] 
attend rsiyhshplicit duty to rnj^pa \. rents, a sigh — a heart rending^figh, often estapes me, when the lost, wretched sisters crowd into my too officious memory! — To what infamy are they reduced! — Heavens, 
I shudder to think what will be the end of this disease, — the streets; 
— famine: — O, I must sty from the Sad — Sad fubjedf! — Would their brother were returned from the Indies! — but, alas! why should I wish it? r — What a Scene of misery will he have to hear! — his ever lamented parents dead of broken hearts; — his Sisters (do I live to write it?) common prostitutesthe L Ji 1 T 3 J remainder 
E 31 ] 
remainder of the V retchec[ family reduced to every distress,; but for the kind hand of charity I — This — this is the fatal work of eduction!! 
have had a most Superb preseut of jewels from'mr. Branville : — my father too has given me a very beautiful pearl necklace and earrings; and is in Such good-humour with me! he Says I have reconciled him to the sex— — our wayward, obstinate Sex, as he calls us. ^ Write Soon, I conjure you; and believe me, in every condition of life. Your most faithful friend, 7* (E. H. 
^ LETTER 
I 32 ] 
■■ 

LETTER XIX 

F 
’ Mhft lva^cr to Miss Harvey, *- 
London. 
he ROIC Emma! incomparable girl! what a noble pattern have you Set to our Sex! — to conquer a passion for the man you love! — to Sacrifice every tender feeling in his favour! — to give your hand, in all the bloom of youthful beauty of eighteen years, to a man near seventy— — all this from motives of pure duty and affection, to oblige’your parents (one oi whom 
noi ttie most lender in the world) — r 
. 'A ■ 

IS 
[ 33 3 
sa triumph, my charming girl, which renders you a very heroine indeed. Depend on it, my excel lent Emma, you will be most amply rewarded for this : — the Father of mercies, — the God of all goodness. So wills, that we very rarely do not See, even in this bad world, but that comforts, and unforeseen incidents teeming with happiness, arc interwoven with the line of our duty. 
Mr. Branville, I doubt not, will, make a good, a tender husband— — find I was not mistaken in the charadber I had heard of his excess of delicacy: — there is, however, a 
vol. III D false., 
A 
I 34, ] 
hope.^ij is the latter you will have everything, my dear, that a reasonable woman can wish; ■ — foolish, girls ijiay prate off Sacrificing everything to kve^ as they call it, and Irving on bread and water in a cottage i” it requires a strong resolution to become a martyr; and few, when the test comes, can sius tain the^shock of poverty, especjally when the hushand’s damper, is J'purfd by that very poverty; which is almosh always the cast, and then adieu to all matrimonial felicity. — 
I am much inclined to think, that 
when the giant Poverty, jcntcfs the : ?nj m r* 
9 N door 
.[ 35 ] 
door (according to the hid adage) the little urchin Cupid sties out at window. ' ^ 
You See this dated, my Emtna, from the great metropolis; ■ where the kind friends I am with, are So obliging as to show me every mark of politeness, in carrying me to the various public amusements with which this gay place abounds. — taste night we were at the play; burr, O my friend! how shall I tell^you that 1 was shocked beyond expression at the following incident On happening accidentally to look ■^up from the side box where “I far, diretstly opposite, in one tfil^up 
D 2 
per 
; t 36 3 
j)cr^gai!efes^^ (where sthf wbrrien df the tow^^usually Sear themfelves)h ' espiedhhe once'innocent Peggy and Patty, drejffed in the shighest style 
i • • ' r 
of fashionable iijhahi^ki they were 
in hats, in the utmost extremity of 
■' 'lh. ?'. • T ■. 
mode, with ftreamets hanging 
from thern to their shoulders; '^ahd 
were visibly — f'was ready 
to fink into the earth to see them T 
j heavehs) (thought I) can it be 
"poshble'th'at these young creatures, 
i' ■' " __’ 
when I last Saw them re So 
timidly triodest, that ' >: m 
♦* Even their action bluih*d at itself, ’* 
■' ■ i ' GIN 
tfee*'words of my^*‘favourite ^ Shakelpeare) 
£ ^ S. 
shakfifp?ar5i a49j!)ed, wjth w mno.. ^ 
'*■* cl ‘ 
peiilshashfstloefs, which no words 
^ ’ * ..^ N • nwoj 9, It ■ 
m ^9?'* “. 
eats diese very girl should iipw, dressed with the rnost alluring ifanity, bp Uaring round them with, the utmofi:, ponfidence and effron, ftery at .eyei; yjfop they Seej — Ah! .my.hmmaj : what did I not.feel? — I. ihu^i ^eyostd conception, : — it rendered ^m^^jncapa, w?if*f3?5ig)'; na 5 
^eptep^inment on the stage; the brilliancy of the large audience,, or the pleasing effect of the very good band of rhiisic^^the untimely deaths of 
(9i£3ql3^cii0 3 pable 
[ 38 ] ' 
pable ybijng women, hashed into my rhind^wd asteas insenfibly stole down siiy^'^cheek; nor could I help w Secretly exclainiing, “Ah! wret'ch ’'*f^* ed girls, most probably the Sad ’^ff fate of a tender father, an amiable mother (who perished through your infamy) will but too soon*’d recoil on your own heads: — • 'sh poor ^ deluded wretches T hov^an Soon will this gay dfeahi of dil sipation glide away, arict'theri misery and black despair 'will at once Succeed !” — Thut did 1 sit, my friend, (absent to all the gay circle round me) full of the most melancholy refleeiions j iuid^hich 

were 
[ 39 1 ’ were heightened by thcit riage to twt> or three gei^tleh3en, >-^^ who canx backwards and|forwards into the vgallery where they were,, -} Sitting; after which - they all: went ' cmt together. •fgj V ' : 1‘* ' 
But a truce 'with this^jheart i * breaking subjest • — r/se, ’ my' ' dear, I did not at all, I repeat,; exaggerate my account of the extrernei “delicacy of your lover — ^' bayou • been a rebuft^ rojyaheeked gif^ jifhe • 
picture of health, you possibly ' 
might have made no impreshon on • a heart hitherto So inflexihley., .^xo Speak in the language of romance, as has been Mr. Branvilie?^ 
V t. X 4 that 
t 3, 
that little Eak face of your’s, with a langi^(^ aii^!‘^d'; a "^elieate frame, has done your business, child, at once % > ...; 
... ' •• > V * 
. Well! -- ‘ but, /niy.deiir friend, let me know when the happy day is ' fixed ^nd'which of yt)ur Seats ek^ you yifit firsts «* 'n^tspw aji • 
.T,.; hi^ven bless you, and itu^ke you h^ppy as, you jdeferve l ^is the most mar(^estt?wuh f vfii fiuct pfoqqi/l 
or!wyaudtenderly affcduonate friend, 
btrsijjslw, baru. N ^r\luty.fvklitr, bluocsi .djdbr.v : C ic'jlnhd ■5ih^ iu>5ki 'c’d : jsflj o; nt ^10 
qji I -- WV.. 
. .LETTER 
[ £ohi ■ I 
, ^rnlu L T E 
v .hli'b .zbnil .J .'nob Tufi Gregory Branville, Efti^ to Sir ja/ph 
f 
i - 
21 V sh 'St. maud’s abbey. 
, i.. io 'LIOY *0 ->. North waf^s* 
My WORTHY OLD fklekb, 
du 'aft idoubtless ^tatty fur, stem - priced !at the .r^por^^ which ii suppose must have re^c^heiiisyour V, mirenrient vh; namety; hthhc ii who shave ^fp lbng retitained fettered by the chains of wedlock, should' at length be just on the bripk of. precipitating myself into that adventurous state. — You possibly Sup: HHTTHJ. posh' 
E 4i }! 
pose tha^ the powerful eye of beau,, ty has influeneed me in this matter, 4 or that Some peculiar liking to the ni state has excited me thereto: — but isle no Such matter. — And I will, now, g my good Sir jasper, open my whole; st heart to you. — Resentment alone to my ungracious nephew, is the cause of my entering into a state I have .a really as hitherto thought a peril oiv ous one. You know I have al w v^ays intended the abovementioned young man for my heir; that T have brought him up as Such from a child, and educated him accordingly; that the world has ever looked upon him as Such — which 
r %3 ‘3 ' 
wor/i will, I doubt not, iii'dst vib ^® 1 lently exclaim against me fr disinheriting the young many *(lbf^by ' all that is Sacred, he shall not have'' a shilling from me) and I may perl haps be called unjufty after having' 
So long [buoyed the lad up with Such great expedations. — Tis true, I ’ ’ have heard of no exceffesr, of no ■ vices'ihe has Ann into — but not il withstanding this; he h^s mortally offended me, arid I give Him upt '^ — The cause? you cry — Wbj^ myte dear sir Jasper, I must have my • heir (whoever he be)j to say a4 /' 
ay— — have no will btit f 
to profess opinion bht'^ Whatl 
do 
[■ 4* 3 
doi^aeveftiq dsfej co^xbrnfaditst mew^inevef, in party principles es peci^lly/ tq controvert what I adi V ihce5*?^in short, lto be entirely des vot^ to my nod— — tny beck, tj~ to goto come— — laugh — to look • Sad — to be wholly in fact, .at.iriy devotion but^alas f my tcndutiful fie^phew 'has' failed' irijevery oneiof these^^mporfant ardclca'•a^c'iand hfrought home‘ withobish frooisthc uhlvferfity. Such a nuteber olnew ideas; that 1 was astonished; #t he, hid, I found, ^ a «; of his oy?nc: — 'Vfrbiild dare to Say, vwlien bdiked ililp6t, port 3‘was the iwholelbmer wine‘5'^afadfmoro Than 'once when 
HJO 
we 
c(( 
(( 
45 ] 
we’have been talking aw the American war, ’ would, afterrjdiffering from mev in opinion, ij the effrontery ta add, “My dear sir, give me leave to Set you yi^hb in 'cthis particular.” — Was thisi^ my friend, to" be born ^ — Set me right indecdl — intolerable! •^wherv I; have slid, the king’s troops wei; C in cantonmehts, which formed extensive chain from brunswick on the Raritoii! to the .river Delaware the^^poppy f has answered, beg to dijent in opinion • — the river Delaware extends, ” — then he has had the insolencc.dp Tetch the American map, ofsithe^ieat lof 5 our 
: E 46 ] 
our present war, pc confute mer — • 1 thank God, my geographical knowledge is not to be contradided by a" boy. ' If I have conimended one general in America, he has shook his head, and immediately began the praises of ’another. — If I have Said, I believed zpeace would be Soon on the carpet; he has flatly Said, “No, - no, sir, I am'vcredibly in >0^* formed from lord W -- ^4. — pior •ou Some of his Oxford friendsintstac “the ■»war will be carried on with unremitting vigour..” — When I t." Jiave been commending Some mo dern, delicateppetry^ — he has had the audacity to say, it was poor, ns thin 
[1.47 ] 
Lhin^ Vindflimfy., in comparison to the grandeur ofvthe ancienisd^' Give r“ “Homer, ” (Said he; “give snob me a few verses of Sweet Virgil 5 •doc which are worth auhousand modern 
productions.” — Was this, think you, my good sir jasper, (I f^rrepeat) to be born * ?” b; - In shortj wearied out with thus f.continually K being controverted I 
loformcd the (perhaps tie/perate) teso 3 jljtioa.of rnarrying some.young wo il man, who should, from her appear 
I r, Branvilie is not the only ibian who. capests a mean servility in thole to whom they intend to leave their riches,, when they .can no longer enjoy them; his worthy nephew, however, had aot that fervility>s. 
: ance. 
[ 48 ] 
ance, promise me an heir of mf own in wedlock; being determined not to leave my estate to So vain a coxcomb : — I care not, indeed, what beconies of him. — He has a Small — though a very Small, patrimony of his own, with which he may get. into O'tders, and commence a country curate; where he may Set up his own opinions, and be listened to as an oracle: — or he may get Some Isttle commission in the army I have done with him.^where he is at present!! not; those think ‘fomc of my, domestics told me (who •perfeflly idolise him, for be has infinite art in winning favour) they 
heard 
[ 49 3 
hearshshc' was gone over to France. 
Whenil ordered him. to. r^ntpye from my house, for that. had. highly dispieased me, he had, the effrontery to beg to know in what. he had offended.'., and feigned to be even Jhocked at my message— — begged to Sec. me; but no — I w^s inflexible. ‘'•v vr. 
<1 But tm the affair Qf:, my, matrimonyi have at length fixed^on.a •young lady:; who I believe.yvill anr fwer my purpose: she appears gopd natured, and is really a delicate girl. 
. — Vou, my friend, ^^ who Tpow. my way, my opinions, and mffthods, Vin. Ari E 5: ta. : 
t so ] 
willj eafil^^give me credit, when I say, that I shall m woman to introduce a new System o management into my family.’^this young lady I have made choice of, appears mild and inoffensive, and I am convinced will never coniradis me: — I shall bring her, immediately after our nutpiialst to this my Seat in Wales and if she does not bring me a Son and heir r'.vfithinthe twelvemonth, I shall te^tievouqy disappointed 
Adieu. You will perhaps call me an old fool for marrying; — but I trust, when you consider my reafins for So doing, you will 
applaud 
^ j ■ V 
’{ SI 3 ' 
Rpplaud proper refentnfent (to an ungrateful nephew) of ‘ 
Your very^faithful friend, ^ 
gnuo\( ?.! >gregory^branvitk, 
21£:; ’^q 
pn I, !>• 
C LETTER XXL 
ffa ‘ V ^ laa ' 
Mrs. Branvilk to Miss Waller. 
lu LI; i yiu wi ' r • 
•enind tonne ?.ob. St. maud’s Abbey ^ Wales. 
oillmvldear lucy, "f S 
M^ last letter’’^, which contained a large piece of bride cake, and a Silver wedding favour, I hope you receivedtafe. I now take up 
my' pen to tell you, we arrived^at 
- uo" - V. ..i yfr; 
* This letter appears not. 
.. [ 52 J 
^ io illo V .',, : '‘i: 
this venerable mansion a fortnlghs 
i.fr ad 03-,; ^, 
since : • I, am highly pleased with its t ombaori V ^,; i : - V 
roipantic situation, itswiei walls, and 
the Solemn air of melancholy which 
^ ".ioq 
reigns throughout. Happily I have a taste for retirement; and here I shall enjoy my enthusiastic passiom for the beauties of nature: — we are Surrounded with mountains, natural, cascades.. lofzy woods. My good husband, (which epithet I doubt not I shall always be enabled to give him,) behaves with great kindness; • — and has been So obli' ging as to permit me to bring from Cumberland the two poor little £hildren, Molly and Billy Summers. 
I But 
I 5.? 1 • 
But the worthy man (as part of hi 
f loi't’anv 
extreme delicacy of charadfer) has annexed just the Same condition lio their remaining with me, as my poor father did; namely, that I must for ever renounce., and on no account whatever relieve, projli tute ftfters* Mr. Branville is quite outrageous about them, having 
n 
heard the whole Sad story andin short, I renewed to him my promise: — indeed, how could I, my dear, have avoided So doing? — but yet, at the time, my heart assented not with my lips. 
I have been visited by Some agree able families, on coming here: — - 
i. r' shst » 
"h 3 party 
54 1 
particularly I find I shall hv& a Mrs. 
^ eelmojit, wife of a gentleman ol good fortune, within a little walk of the abbey; we are already upon, a free footing. — Both she and Sorna others lament greatly, it Seems, (tho’ I know not why) the fate of a nephew of Mr. branville’s; who, tho’ bred up quite in the Style of high life, as believing he was to be his uncle’s whole and Sole heir, has been Some time discarded, and is now it Seems wandering God knows where, in very reduced circumstances : — the Belmonts Speak of him in very high terms, as one of the finest young men in the king 
donn 
■ [ 55 3 
dom, both m ’manners and tir^der standing. — Poor young man pity him, tho’ I really know nob the merits of the cause on either Side : — and what makes his case ntore affecting is, he was the only child of a sister of Mr. bran ville; who, with her last breath, committed him to the care of her brother. — This, my dear, I have only gathered by broken hints front Mr. and Mrs. Belmont; for you may be certain they would not Say the least Syllable to me relative to llaming the conduct of my huff band in this matter, or in any other' ' 
re 4 We 
“ilvelre^o visit London'rome timi 
Mj mot: vp 
hence. With what happiness shall I 
meet^my dearest friend! — But pray, 
''ic bn ■, 'LL. 
Lucy, give me leave to ask, have 
'■ '. b 
you made no conquests in all the 
'j', ', .'O'! 
gay circle of agreeable people you are engaged in? do be honest, and eonfess the truth. — 
When I am in town, I shall cultivate the friendship of that excellent woman Mrs. Bennet. Ah my dear! if I iiiduki ever See those miserable girls, ^..deggy and Patty, (dressed and behaving in the manner you mention) sin a public place, I think I should' saint on the Spot. — Good ' Heavens show depraved — how 
lost 

^ 57 3 
lost are those deluded young crea 
!0' nor no.. ’ 
tures! -: But I must fly from the cutting Subiedl. 
’ maj yn.' I Write Soon, my beloved friend; 
trlr TB or ^ ^ ^ 
and he fare do not forget to rnention 
'A: nr;.. 
how many half score of conq^u^s you have made in the great town, 
ini. ' ^ 
Adieu! 
rn 
I am ever your’s ’ ^ 
most faithfully, ^ ^ Emma branviue. 
?!- L E T T E R XXIL 
f “Miss Waller to Mrs. branviue, 
(in answer to the precedingfktteri)r 
London. 
Y ES — yes— — dear friend, I have made a conqueft^^yiith a witness — 
■, uj; 
. [ 58 1 
1- • 
witness — at least I hope I have for most certain st is, that little hard bit oiadamant, my heart, is now conquered for ever. — Love, indeed, for my having So long defied his all powerful Sway, has now taken ample revenge. Alas! my dear, I am already most deeply — what fiiall I call it — never was any man So handsome, So agreeable. So Sensible — “But who” (you cry) is this “Narcissus, this demy god ?’* — I defy you to guess in ten thousand years. — ".Do not, Lucy, ” (you cry) tantalise me in this manner, “but prithee come to the matter ^ at once.” — Well then, my dear. 
[ 59 ] 
to begin my adventurc’^^or an ad: venture it certainly was, as worthy 
of that name as ever was recorded 
V ■ 
any novel or memoirs extant. 
About a week since I went with a Small but agreeable party to the ojiera; which party consisted of only two ladies, myself, and the hus band of one of them. — As the house had that night been much crowded,, in getting out of it we met V ith Some difficulties; for as we had only one gentleman with us, he had certainly enough to do, to take care of women. — However, with no Small danger of being Squeezed to death, v/e were got into the passages of the house, and trying to get to our 6 chairs. 
L 60 ] 
chairs, which waited for us, when 
: ION 
a Sudden a well dressed man, but evidently of the most libertine stamp. Seized me rudely round the waist, and instantly Separated me from my company. — I shrieked, thinking no less than that he was going to bear me off. As he still continued most rudely grasping me, I again shrieked; when, rushing from the crowd, came to my ashst ance, O my Emma, Such a man! — “Unhand the lady, sir, ” (Said he) “this instant, or by Heaven I “Swear, the next shall be your “last !” — putting his hand to his Sword.~the villain who had hold 
of 
.11. 
[ frl ] 
of me, after Swearing most bitterly, 
DU‘ 
now relinquished hisgrasp. — I was breathless, — ready to saint, — but my deliverer most kindly Supported me in his arms; for I trembled to So great a degree, I could hardly stand. — “I beg, madam, ” (Said he, with the utmost respetst) “you will “give me leave to escort you — Did ^ the rascal hurt you, madam? — a “rude fellow! — Heavens! what “can I do to assist you! ” (Seeing my extreme disorder! burst into tears, which relieved me, — he Seemed greatly affecsted. — “Good God!” Said he, (looking at'me with equal earnestnest and respedlful tender 
nest) 
t 62 h 
nefs) where shall I t you Some dropsr — Some water?*’ — He held 
a.o 
my hand all this time, assuring me, 
■» 
whilst under his protection no one should akrm me. — I told him, I 
■f 
thought I was a little recovered, and that I begged to be put into a chair; ^he conducted me with the greatest care through the remaining crowd, and calling a chair, put me You tremble still, madam, ’* Said he — ando rnyemmat what an air of humanity and tender compassion was Spread over his fine countenance! — “You tremble, *’ continued he) — “run this instant’* (to a effairman) ‘‘ and procure a 
tnto it. «( 
glass 
fi ] 
glass of water and Some harts horn drops, for this poor lady. — I will stay and protect you, madam, ” Said he, “therefore be V under no apprehensions, I beseech you : — no one shall hurt you.” • 
^ “Surely Heaven, ” (Said I) “Sent you, sir, to my aid.” — By this ume the water and drops arrived which this most amiable man gave me to drink with the tenderness. of a brother (or rather, you will Say, * with that of a lever;) and I theji found myself much better: he still held rny hand — I thought at the time, as if unwilling to^art yyith in — “\vill you give me leavet^. madam, ” 
[ ^4 ] 
dam, ’* (Said he, with eyes that were not safely to be looked on,) “to at“ “you home? — or at least, to “wait on you tomorrow to en“ “how you do, after this acci “dent.”; — “I shall certainly, ” (re,, I) “be glad to thank you, 
“sir, and So will my friends., for “the very great favour of your af“ “— My voice faltered when I pronounced the last Sentence : — he bowed respedtfully low, and on my giving orders to the chairmen where to go, took his leave. 
Never had I Seen a man sh infinitely amiable: — my thoughts were indeed full of him. In my 
way 
[ 65 ] 
way home, which was upwards of a mile: - — but, O heavens! how was I struck with the extreme politeness of his behaviour, or rather kindness., when on looking through the glasses, as I often did, I Saw him carefully attending me the whole way, and walking dole by the side of the chair. — At length I arrived at my friends’ house; the kind gentleman knocked at the door, and again alked me how I did after my fright. — I testified my gratitude for his extreme politeness: — “I beg, madam, ” (Said he) “you “will not even mention So trilling “a matter as a favour.” — Saying vol. III F which, 
[ 66 3 
which, he bowed; and, feeing the footman Safely conduct me into the house, instantly departed. — Gallant! was not thismy friends had been terrified to death, upon my account; and on missing my hold of them in the opera passage, had turned back, but unfortunately could not find me in the crowd. — You will judge their pleasure at my return So Safe, and a genteely guarded. — Whemwe were all a little composed, they rallied me on my deliverer prog ncjiicating a future lover— — retired to bed, my Emma; but Sleep, for the first tiifie in my life, had quite forsaken me. rl would fain here attribute 
[ 6 7 .] 
tribute my wakefulness throughout the night, to my preceding fright; but no — 'I will honestly confess, the agreeable stranger, the enchanting man who had rescued me, from per -- haps everlasting ruin, (for the impudent fellow who assaulted me, would certainly have carried me off) — I Say, my amiable deliverer, r‘ kept me waking all night: — me "tkought I. heard his Soothing voice, "Shd still Saw his fine figure, his expressive eyes, c— — sighed — This, - — this, ” (exclaimed I soft ‘ly) “' would be the man if every cir ‘'’3’ “cum stance were Suitablebut, “my starsd how "know I but that 

F 1 
lie 
t 68 ] 
■'l 
he may be already married? — most 
“likely he is: — such a form, — and 
“filch winning manners — mufi have 
“attradled our Sex. — Ah wretched 
“Lucy! — most probably he may be 
“the husband of another woman.’* 
ind ujirious are we (my dear) 
to torment ourselves! No Sooner 
had the above fear taken possession 
of me, than I at once found 
o 
the agreeable man had made no Small imprejjion on my heart, — “Nay, ’* (thought I) “if he be not “married, does it at all follow, “that his liking me should be the “consequence of this night’s ad ‘‘ venture : ” nrf arose after a steep 
iff. leis 
r ^9 ] 
less night • and, as I firmly^bdiilved my gallanf deliverer would Wait on me, (as he Said) I dressed rsiyse'lf (I will be So honest to confes^)'with more care than usual; my dishabille was a morning undress — a silver sprigged mussin nightgown, wdth a white lutestring flounced petticoat, and every other part of my dress equally elegant. — Precisely at the hour of twelve at noon, a rap at the door gave me to understand, * as well as a violent flutter at my heart, that my gentleman was arrived. — He entered with the most graceful air, and came up to xwt (tenderly f'^thoughtj' inquiring after my F 3 health: 
t 70 ] 
health he was dressed, I observed,. in 'deep mourning; a circumstance which the night before, being wrapped in a great coat, I did not observc. 
We were now all Seated : (I Say ali for my friends were in the room) — I stole a glance, unperceived, at my amiable guest. — Imagine the finest figure, with a countenance expressive of great Sentiment and benevolence; — eyes (what fiiould a man do with Such eyes?) black, piercing, and yet languish ingly tender but throughout his whole appearance there was an air inexpressibly melancholy, as if labouring under Some recent or deep 
affliction: 
I 7- •] 
affliction: : — thought I, he is in hve^ and not beloved again which occasions that pensive manner, which however was captivast 
ing.) 
And now, my dear, are you not upon the very top of the tenterhooks of female curiosity, to Jcnow who and what this man is? You will be amazed when I tell you; — but to lead to it: — We began talking of the last night’s adventure; “I have not the honour yev (Said I) “of knowing the name of “my gallant deliverer: ” — but guess my astonishment, my dear friend, when he instantly replied, F 4 “My 
t[ e72 1] 
Ni My name, madanii, is Summers; I ‘ ^arrived only a month since from “the East Indies.” “Good 
“heavens!” (Saidil) “Mr. Sum“ “from the east Indies !” * Why, ” (Said he)madam, ” (with quickness) have you ever ■ “heard of that name before? — • I “Surely came to England in an ill-fated hour, for I have not only “lost, I find, very lately, two of ‘‘ the most worthy parents • .'that ‘h ever existed, but also, ” *(hereihe sighed most deeply) “am iri the V utmost distress of mind on another • “account in my family.” — He pausedj’^he looked down, — whilst ’. I Saw 
[[ 73 1 
I Saw a teariglisten in his expressive eyes. — ‘shl did, indeed replied I, much moved) ‘‘kftow well r “oyour excellent parents; and I “can I never cease to regret their 
doss.” -- -- - “Then you must also 
“know, madam, ’" — he stopped; ■ — he walked to the window, — he took his handkerchief to his eyes : ywe were both silent for Some'mo iments. j 
jiui.d Emma! what a discovery was : this! — To change the? mournful, /ubje(st, »i’exclaimed, ‘1 Good hea vens! and am I So .much in p debted; to a gentleman, with 2** whom, by report, I was Sot well wrh • ■ acquainted? 
t 74 ] 
acquainted? You must remem “ber Mr. Harvey, sir, of Ashdale 
in Cumberland.” -- -- -- “Most in“ 
“madam.” -- -- -- -- “His 
“daughter, ” (meaning your ladyship) returned I, “is my most dear “and bosom friend.” -- -- -- - “How 
f 
“does she ?” — (Said he) “I re“ “her well — very well: “— a Sweet little girl; — we were “pi ay fellows.” — He sighed (his abominable jijlers that moment occurred, I doubt nor.) — I then, my dear, gave him a particular account of your late happy wedding; — of my long intimacy with you; — and lastly, that I was of Carlisie myself, 
and 
[ 75 ] 
and that my name is Waller — a name he might recollect“ 
“madam! yes indeed; “— my ever honoured father Spoke “of your’s in the highest terms.” He told me he was now at his cousin bennet’s, to whom he im.me diately on his arrival in England repaired; — “with an intention, ” (Said the worthy young man) “of “Setting off early the next morn“ “post haste, on the wings of “filial duty and affection, to the “best of parents : — but, gracious God! what was my shock, when Mr. Ben net revealed to me the howid story of the cause that' 
• 5 “bereaved 

t 76 ] 
bereaved me, I understand, 'of“ “; — both withth the Space of “a'week. — Alas! with what joy “on my landing in England, after “a long and dangerous voyage, 
\ “did I please myself with the fond hope, that by the bounty of Pro“ “having met with won“ “success in the Indies, I ‘ “had it now in my power, most “amply, to make my dear father’s' “lise not only easy, but affluent! “— there was Something peculiar“ “distressing in hearing they were 
“no more.” -- -- -- -- Here his voice 
Sunk, — and he melted into tears: - — O, miss Waller!” (contid ^ ' nued 
C 77 ] 
nued he, in broken accents) q‘‘ but “I will not dwell on my own afflic “tions!” — — “They are (Said I) “the affiisiions of all who know “them— — heart was Softened; — I wept — I could not help it• the excellent father at Ashdale rushed into my head, who So long and So ardently had wished once more to southeast this darling Son before he went down to his grave in peace. — Ah! little could he imagine his once dear Peggy and Patty could So focn bring his grey hairs with Sorrow to that grave. 
Our conversation now became more general.you will imagine 
we 
[ 78 ] 
we Gould not want discourse, after Such a discovery. — This most amiable man Sat with us till dinnertime,; — and at going, methought,, with particular earnestness, desired •I would give him leave to wait on me again. — “Nothing’’ (Said I, flushing extremely for which I was tvery angry with myself) “can give me greater pleasure than your “visits.” — The obliging family with whom I am, entreated him to, come often. — He has indeed visited lus very frequently; and each time I See him, if possible, I discover still • Some new and amiable quality. 
My friends here, for Some days 
[ 79 ] 
ji'ast, have tbld me he is most deeply Smitten with your humble Servant 
^ — to Say truth, I am quite a jieevish, lovesick girl: — within these last five days I have done nothing but Scold poor Kitty my maid tram grown absolutely thin, and look pale; with a face as long as your arm. — To confess the truth (O what a mean passion, aster all, is this love!) I have been a jedhus.^ an please ye, of Mrs. bennecs pretty daughters: — you will allow, it was not at all improbable but That Mr. Summers might love one of his very amiable cousins; and that Mr. b^nnetwould embrace the 
match: 
t 8o ] 
match : — this thought has given me much disquietude: : — adepts in love say there can be no lave without jealousy— — however, I have the inexpressible happiness of informing you, my dear, that yes terday evening, Mr. Summers finding me alone, a kind of tender conversation began (I know not how) on his Side; and aster much modest diffidence he declared himself my lover, in the strongest terms imaginable. — What I Said, or how I looked, I know not; I only remember that I gave him leave to hope. 
I leave you to guess, my friend, 
the 
the state of my mind at present. — My relations can but rejoice at this alliance : — his fortune is (my dear) upwards, I find, of thirty thousand pounds; all which he has made in the East Indies, by his proper con dikst and industry. — We have heard an amazing good charader of this amiable man, from a gentleman who well knew him there. * — O that it had pleased Heaven to have Spared his worthy father’s life, to have enjoyed Some of this good fortune I — But thesc abominable girls! — I must tell you, my Emma, that I Somcl times think Mr. Summers, when hfc fnsiles, ha/jfist Such a ditnf/k in his Yol. HL G cheek 
T '82 ] 
cheek as our poor Patty had p — and his fine dark eyes are as etcprejfive as 
• feggy’s were! — Where, or what may now be their situation? — - perhaps again in Some brothel; — for L should suppgise their very libertine keepers may by this time be weary of them.. 
You will, I am convinced, be agreeably Surprised m my deliverer as I call him, being the very agreeable Mr. Summerswhom we have been all So "long wishing to return. — Ah! would he hud returned a twelvemonth ago the girls, — the parents, 
• * * had then, perhaps, been Saved. 
^ -. Your felicity givfs me extreme ^ s, D pleafvirej 
a s3 ] 
pleasure;; you, my Sweet friend, have a fund‘d of contentment and good-humour, which renders^you .easy under every circumstance.'^i I thinks my dear Emma, I shall marry this man \^tunl do I Say p^what affectation!! — me honestly declare that I Shall certainly be his wife 'in due time. ■ d - 
sf’ Believe me, inost unalterably, in 
shall Situations, 
ihn ' Your own 
- Lucy. 
MANY letters between the arnica" able friends, Mrs.branville andmiss Waller, passed in the Space of the ensuing twelvemonth; but they are ^ G 2 not 
[ S 1 
not ihscrted; as containing nothing .essentially necessary to the thread of our history. — Some incidents however happened in that Space, with which we shall acquaint the reader; — namely. That miss Waller, in a few months after the preceding letter, gave her hand to Mr. Sum mers, and were now very genteely Settled in i London; his good fortune, with her’s, enabling them So to do. — During this period, the unfortunate sisters, Peggy and Patty, were discarded by lord Racket and sir Harry Ranger : the former being wholly engaged in Seducing the, young and beautiful daughter of a tenant of his in the 
■country V 
V S'5 T 
country; he theresore got rid of Peggy, and was mean enough to take a few jewels he had presented to her, her watch, c. before she departed; pretending to pick a quarrel with her; — and though his cruel behaviour, in the vile arts used to Seduce these poor innocent girls, defer ved exemplary punishment, and tho’ Some provision might have been expected (tho’ every donation, in his power to make, must have been very; far inadequate to recompense their injuries) yet the wretch turned the poor girl adrift, without So much as a Single guinea in her pocket. She immediately flew to her Sister, whom sir G 3 ' Harry 
[• ^ r 
harryranger had Sold toijews. few days before. — these miserable girls now experienced various keepers, and various miseries they were ini the possession, at times, of a sea captain, an old usurer, a colonel, a merchant, cc. — ■ Sometimes loaded with prestnts; Sometimes sitting in a garret without a shilling. — They had never heard of the death of their’•'^‘parents; — and Seldom, nova thought of their lost state of innocence, or even of gumbeh land, occurred; except that one day, as they happened to be together, aff'old news paper, (the date of which was six months before) in 
■’j 

O. 
which 
P r 
which Some tea was accidentally wrapped, was taken up by Peggy, who at the first glance Spied the following paragraph On Monday “last was married, at asndaie “church, in Cumberland, miss “Emma Harvey, of moss Hill, to “Gregory Branville, esq; of up“ “of three thousand a year; ‘ after the ceremony, the new mar “tied couple Sat out for his Seat in 
-- -- shire.” — “Heavens! ” (Said 
Peggy, exclaiming) — “See — * See, “Patty, — mr once Iear emma is “happily marriedp — Here a tear stole down her cheek; not at the good fortune of her fornier friend, /■ - y G 4- burr 
I., 88 r] 
but at the refledlion outtheir miseras ble way of life; which must neces sarily preclude them from allfuture Society with her. 
But leaving these wretched girls for the present, to the miserable state which must ever ^iz^ndproftitu von., we will See what the amiable Mrs. Branville is now, doing. — This lady, to the extreme joy of her hus band, had been declared pregnant Some time: — Mr. Branville behaveff even ridiculoussy on this occasion— — he doubted not now of having Son and heir to his estate, he had caused a new Set of bells to be .put up in .the church, near his house,; — 
he 
[ Sg 3 
he had pitched upon a Spot where an immense bonfire (on the night the young heir should be born) should blaze ‘to a height to be Seen for miles, to signify the joyful event; he had ordered an amazing stock of lamps to be provided, that a general illumination might be, not only in every ancient window of the abbey, but aso on every pinnacle, turret, L and pediment, from the top of it to the bottom. 
But alas — alas! how Soon are the hopes of poor mortals frustated! — As Mr. Branville was walking on his terrace — inly rejoicing, that his nephew nm, by the birth of this 
boy. 
[ 9® ] 
boy," (for a hoy h would have it to bct*" would even be drove to despair by disappointment, he was at once interrupted, in his benevolent reflcdtions, by a Servant running to inform him, '^ Mrs. Branville, in consequence of a fright she had just had, was Suddenly Seized with the pangs of childbirth; (Some weeks before the exact time) — and, dire to Say, every Synlp^ tom attended her, of the most imml nent danger : — at length, after laying near a week in agonies, and suf 'fering extremely, she was, by the Surgeons who attended her, delivered of a dead little girl. — This Sad news was related .immediately to 
Mr. 
Q 91 ] 
Mr. bran?ille, Iwho appeared mosh wonderfully concerned; — but whe* there his affliction proceededl frotitv hiss, being disappointed of his long expetsted heir, in a living boy., or from grief at the Sufferings of his poor wife, we will not pretend to Say; however, we will be So charitable as to htype the latter. 
'jthe abbey now was deplorably melancholy: poor Mrs. Branville: was Several weeks before she gained i strength Sufficient to leave her room; however, by degrees, she (lowly recovered, owing to her youth, and a good constitution. But as to Mr, Branville, he had ac.. tually 
[ 92 ] 
fretteti himself, at his late disappointment, into a very Severe fit of the gout; and was now grown So intolerably peevijh, there was no enduring his humours : but the patience and Sweet temper of the amiable Mrs. Branville enabled her, with unremitting assiduity and ten derness, to Sustain his froward pet tishness; which even increased, as he now began to give up all thoughts of an heir — the only reast for his entering into wedlock. 
Mrs. Branville was Surely a iern of conjugal tenderness; for though her peevish hushand’s behaviour to her, indicated that bis affect ion i 
t 93 ] 
section for her was declining ftt she never uttered complaint; — she would herself administer all his linedicines; and ordered a Small pallet bed to be prepared for her, in his sick chamber, that she might herself perform the office of nurse: — she had too much penetration not to See a visible alteration in his behaviour to her, but she had too much good sense to take the least notice of it. — “He is my husband” ” she Say to hersels) “it is my “duty to bear his little pettish “humours, his unkind answers, “c. i.trust, my conscious Satis“ “In fully endeavouring to h “imake 
t 94 3 
. make him happy, will Support me under every trial.” 
In this manner did she continually reason; — uncornmon prudence in a young creature of nineteen years of age, one of the most beautiful of women, and united to an old, peevish humourist of Seventy! 
Mr. Branvillels annual fit of the gout now Subsided; but his temper was entirely Soured from his late disappointment. ’ 
The families round the abbey (who all pitied and loved his charm jng wife) now began again to visit there as usual'and now we shall 
again 
t 95 ] 
again present the reader with a letter from Mrs. Branville to her fair friend •in town.' 
LETTER XXIII 
Mrs. 'Branville to Mrs. Summers. 
[ 
..I • 
Maudes Abbey, North "Wales, t' ' 
: MY BELOVED FRIEND, 
your letters have been my great comfort; for my poor Mr. Branville has had a very Severe fit of the gout; which, from the confijietnent that must necessarily 
attend 
[ 96 I 
attend a sick room, (Sor Ishad great satisfaction in being his Sole nurse)' has a good deal lowered my Spirits; ' — but I thank Heaven he is now perfedlly recovered, and I also am grown So stout as to be able to walk a mile every day. — I have instituted a little charity School at the end of our park, which I visit daily, and which gives me wonderful plea j Sure! ^ ' ■ — ’ Ict 
What infinite wisdom, my friend, has ’the great Creator' shown sh his appointments of all Sublunary events! and how loaden with obligations are we poor mortalsj' in that eternal change which is ever below 
[ 97 1 
low taking place! — There is no continuance, my Lucy, of either joy or Sorrow in this earthly state r grief gives way to 'patience ^ despair to hope — everything, in short. Seems modified in Such Succession, that a Sweet harmony results from all terrestrial things. 
The account you give me, my dear, of your happiness, is delightj full; — I never can enough esteem and love your most amiable hus band. 
Our agreeable neighbours, Mr. and Mrs. Belmont, are now in the country; we are going to Spend, this day with them : — I am quite 
vol. Ill, H upon 
f 98 r 
sip^ja free footing with that agree able^^dman; I hope there will not be a large party; — but an account of my day I will give you on my return in the evening, as I cannot nowiconclude, Mr. Branville having Sent * up to tell me the carriage waits— — we wives, Lucy, you 
know, muji be obedient. -- -- -- -- Adieu 
then till I return. 
\ 
f '. • ' 0: ' 
'Ti 
Mrs. Branville in Continuatton. 
Tuesday Night. 
O, my dear, I have such an incident to relate! wonderful indeed! 
_ 2 -- -- I 
ill! ' 
S 99 1 
-‘- “IHAVE been' So Surpriied ^S6 stuttered! — You never can guess the occasion of this Surprise. — Good Heavens! I even think I have been the whole day in a dream. ' ^ ■ 
Now is that little womans heaft of your’s beating with impatience. - — Well! I will give you a full and true account of this very ««looked for incident: — Mr. Branville and I wentthis day to dine, according to our appointment, at Mr. belmont’s. — We found nobody there, on our entering the drawing-room, neither did we inquire if any more company were to be there : before 
dinner ’^my charming friend, H 2 ^ Mrs. 
f ^ rot 1 
— [ S loo bf]'33n3 Jncflni p/frb.lbclmonr, ^ sa&odown to th6’ harpsicord, and desired me 'to accompany ‘her with my voice (to which she is too partial); — we were in the middle of our Song, and?! was standing close to the harpsicofd in the attitude of Singing, when the door was stung open, and a servaric announced the names of Sir ffhor mas .Douglas and'ri*’^ Mr. Ashley. 
'b Good God !’* ..(exclaimed Mil Branville) — my nephew I” — That 
^lustl V yl l^i lol 
* The reader may perhaps wonder tha! Mr? Alhley, the nephew, Should visti Mr. Belmont when his ‘uncle was there; but in he knew^^it not till he was entered the house, and then thought if he re firetmt would have an odd appearance, 
instant 
[ loi] 
instant entered aniold baronet; — but O my Lstcyif an univ§|sal, i mor Seized me, iwhen I in'the person, of, this nephewj, 7^shi% Mr. Ashley, ' — my once belovec; ?!, and never to be forgotten eaward’i, i\tq timiable stranger that appearqdodn gumberland.n 7 .o, my friend, il thoughts should have dropped into the earth! - — I trembled; — I felt mylface glow like fire. • — Ah! my dear, ''ii were my hopes thacl had cbnquered 'my affedstioti for this lovely youth : — I assure 
V. • VI ' 
you I was nbar fainting. So grisat was my perturbation. — He'too appeared 

most amazingly' ssuttef ed; 
, j t.n'' 3f1i raja 3d1 boi3j 
■i'st 
bbo II 3 uivo’/t Jl" 
•he 
rnafinj 
[ * 502 3 
**^her.«ven started at (Seeing me as the wife of Mr. Bfanville; Mrs. Belmont having Said, after the first usual compliments at stheir coming into the room, “Well! now let “OS finish our Song, Mrs. Bran ^ 
‘‘ Sir Thomas is Sond of music but alas! my dear, I was So violently — So Suddenly ’agitatedk tt I found it almost impossible te. proceed I was three notes below th£ key, and three bars out of time. — • “What ails you (cried rpy lively Mrs. Belmont) “what ‘b.on^a Sudden is come to youf — Mr. Afiiley, or rather my too amiable Edward — {mine 'do I calli •mno> him? 
t j03* d 
him? ah I no) ^bowed low fo rne^; r — his fine face.iii a glow. — He certainly, my dear, must remember me in the person of Emma Harvey • and I thought I heard him Secretly exclaim, “Good God !” - — — My husband gave him indeed' a most angry contemptuous look, whilst the polite Mr. Belmont addressed him with great kindness, and web corned him to England; where I understood he had been only a week arrived. ' ‘d 
. Dinner was now announced, and we all adjourned to the dining parlour. — ‘you will pity me, my Lucyj I am convinced, at this period, as 1 V ' H 4 found 
t 104 
foisnd it no Small difficulty to guard my idoksi^'m.r, Branville appeared, I isiust Say, in an exceeding ill humour.; I was terrified to death lest he had Seen my unusual tremor on the first appearance of his nephew; who all dinner time, and afterwards, appeared buried in thought — melancholy — pensive to the last decree. — Both Mr. and Mrs. bel mont most politely took great no tifd^of the ‘poor young man. — Mrs. Belmont and I retired after dinner into the drawing-room.: — What “a fine young fellow is Mr. Ash“ “!” (Said she) “I hope in ^ God your husband will do Soinie 
“thing 
ilfltv 
I 4^10 5 1 
thing for him; — the poor youth “has never offended; nay, knows L ‘ not to this moment what he hvi can have done to have incurred his displeasikt;; — do, my dear “Mrs. Branville, intercede for this amiable man: — aster having been bred as he has been, and now to be cast off rn thst man 4^0 ner !• — We did not know of their coming today— — Thomas .ai^vllouglas is a worthy man, and term pities him greatly; and dokt you “pity him, my dearsaid Mrs. Belmont; — “Indeed I do” (Said I, involuntarily Sighing. — The gen demen afterwards came toju^ : Mr. gnifb - Ashley 
'[ io 3 
Ashley was now .importuned to Sit down to the harpsicord.’ Alas! (m dear) of how many elegant accomplishments is this agreeable mana master! — perfedions which, owing to the slight acquaintance I had with him in Cumberland, I did not know. I'jb 
After Some modest diffidence, he Sat down to the instrumentjdand. performed an extempore concerto in the most masterly manner: never did I hear Such taste. Such execution! — Mrs. Belmont desired him to sing, — he begged to be excused, ' Saying, he was not in spirits. At length he obliged the, company ' ..i A with 
t t07 ] 
with a mostqsweet Iialianr Song of Sacchinsts, Southeast non felice, ” — his manner is So delicately tender, it is even dangerousao hear him. 
; l’fthe very instant we had Swallowed down our tea, and I thought’ rather abruptly, Mr. Branville ordered our carriage; — Mr. Ashley, ' when I left the room, gave me a look at parting, which convinced me he had not forgot Emma Harvey. 
The moment we were Seated in the carriage, and driving down the avenue, Mr. Branville accosted me ina tone of voice rather Severe ‘‘ One would imagine, from your a agitation when that coxcombj^ 

my 
[ io ] 
my nephew, carle irito the room ** to dpay, you had been'a^ former ac quainthnce of his‘f — or is it your 
A 
disposition to be thus in tremopf “at the sight of a young fellow— — “tell me truly, Emma, do you “know this young man? ” — (You, my Lucy, know I Scorn an evasion 
I 
or untruth) — “I have Seen him, sirb “as a'visiter at a gentlerrian’s house' “in Cumberland; but I give you“ “honour, I never sheard his' “name in my lise, till this day.” — “Indeed V — Said he very gravely, — and not another word did he Say, till we arrived home; when on entering the parlour, he ordered a 
bason 
[ oi ] 
i' 01^: ^/odqoft ym 
bason of water gruei and went:, to 
bed : — I came up to my closet, and Scribbled thus far to my Lucy 
My mind at present is much agitated. — Mr. branvillc’s unusual coldness to me this evening, fills me with a thousand Sears, lest he should entertain the “green eyed monjief^ in his bosom. — But I will not anticipate evils; — he could mean nothing— — I was conscious I had before Seen Mr. Ashley; though Heaven knows how innocently. — Nay, my dear, I know not to this moment, that he ever entertained a Single Sentiment in' my fayour^p 
After 

E no ] 
, After all, Lucy, don’t you thinks ' Mr. Branville ought something {ov xkqpooryomg nitm But adieui^* Write Soon; and believe me 
Most unalterably your’s, Emma Branville 
(1 ^ S A 
Wedhefday Morning. >n PSI unseal my letter to says that this morning my husband ha»‘t just informed me, he has received letters, which require his presence ‘ at his Seat at Ashgrove, near London; and if I choose to accompany him, I am to be ready to Set out the latter end of this week. You may be convinced I embraced his pro i posal 
[ III ] 
posal with great pleasure; — for, besides the extreme joy I shall have in Seeing and being So near you, my most beloved friend, I wish extremely to convince Mr. Branville (as you will perceive I Sear a tendency in his mind to jealousy) that I have no wish at this particular time to remain in the country, when he is in town : — I am glad, in short, to have an opportunity of being just now ahjent from the abbey. — Am I not right 
io 
i. 
LET 
I £” 1 
svbwj *, tnsu *nl xicsrj hsi 
* b5imm b.cn stmcvm 
— ^ XXIV 
■'^jqu’l I binw^, bn: sin ■ ■'> 
Mr ed.wardajhley.i to’^henry Scfei 
. '^ ady'r .r: y; V -: rind ^, r ^.. ' t Douglas House 
I f. ^ * 
O My friend, I have Veen. her t at length. I have again beheld, the lovely angel, * for whom T have ben So, long wretched. -*■ alas’j how have I Seest her? — dif trafiion ijs in the thought : t— — is — she is — the wife of my uncle! — Heavens! do I live to write it! — What — Emma! the r*enchanting. Emma Harvey, his wedded wife / — 
I had 
C >13 1 
I had heard in France, a twelvemonth since, he had married a beautiful young lady; but little — little, my friend, could I suppose the most lovely girl on earth could Sacrifice herself in this manner. — Imagine my amazement, my Henry, when I give you the following particulars of how and where I met this angel. — A few days Since, I. went with sir Thomas Douglas at whose 
shat I now am) to dine at Mr. Bel 
• 
who always showed me particular civility : — we alighted, and did not ask if there were company, till we were walking with Mr. belmont’s footman through the hallhe vol, III 1= siiid, 
I 5'4 1 
laid, V only Mr, Branviile and his 3hivilo£c fri, Ao luc — Toueligr “lady dine here.” Form (my 
3tpup bs r, : tov OV;;. > o 
friend) to have turned back, as if 
10 r?'.. y: yj: > AP: ’ '■ ' ■ 
I would avoid my uncle, (whe^ Heaven knows, I am conscious I never offended him) would have 
iu 
been a strange proceeding; we therefore went on to the drawing room^ the door of which being flung open by the Servant, O Heavens! what was my amazement, my perturbation, when the first objefl which 
: ■ .' ■ i 7 
presented, was the loveliest of women, the enchanting Emma, standing by the harpsicord in the attitude of Singing! — I was ready to fink into the earth, So great was^my 
agita 
agitation. ut oh, my sackvisfei 
.'irt) .'show 
shall I give you an adequate V 'A (bn “.!i 
idea of the equal confusion of the 
Sweet girl, on shy unexpedle^d api 
pearance? a deathlike palenels 
•<v 
first took place which was immediately Succeeded by the deep glow of a crimson blush, which rushed at once in her lovely cheeks : — a iohg she held in her hand, dropped to tiie ground, and her whole delicate frame discovered unusual tremors. “I pray Heaven my uncle did not discover her disordero — At that moment, a kind of languid joy rushed through my heart, as imagining she was still my Emma harvey (not 
I 2 
dream 
E ii 3 
drearning ^h\tcou}dht Mrs. Branville ^ who" 1' irnagined might be poffibiy ih^soshi^'other room'‘ in the houle.) But ah f my friend, was Soon too Soon, fatally convinced (by Mrsi belmont’s addreshng her 'by thd name of Branville) of the wretched Sacrifice she has made of herself. 
The whole day sh' appeared absefifj lost ill thought y^tendef metlfosig'ht; and''sometinhes her expressive Ay bi] xth^tt^imagic in thenri) were fimrdly diredied to me. — She Said but llmfc the whole day I" ekeh less; S strsick — So hurt — sh amazed’was I, at what I Saw. — The wife of my uncle! — O my friend," fnadness, 
Json IT 
I On. ’ 
tvhi■v?'■'t>’ " ^ ■.nnriirtjb 
distraction is in the thought Ir — Ah Emma! why in Such haste tq throvr yourself for ever into the arms of a nian whom you cannot love? — .dis tfue, my eyes — a few nameless attenr tions only — were all the tokens I dared, in my uncertain circumstances, to declare of the best, the truest, 
■ the; most tender passion which ever 
touched the heart of man. — ’sdeath! < 
sh girl, what have you done! — you might have waited, Surely, a few short months, to have Seen the result of an affeclion, which you mufi have observedno duty couldior, ce you to the altar: — no parents’ commands could justify So great a Sa i 3 crifice S 
[ J 
cyifke! — nono“ “— were led, J doubt not, a willing vi: i{ii.r — Did my^eyes (those f^thful interpretera of the heart) never distovcr the tender truth? alas! I sa ncied, vainly hoped, I Was not a'« beioved! — pngratesul as you have been! could nothing less thzin a with^j 
my awe Sushce.? A .‘uoi'ioq 
^O pardon me, angelicfjwom^d 1 ^^p^rdon my rashnessj 
iwhieh fcould ciare to.jarraign Such consummate goodness,. — What have I Said? — Sweet girl !r — mpst ..probor 
• In the present distraction of Mr. afli ley’s soil, he concluded it was very prof bable she might have heard at Alhdale, that he waj nephew to Mr. branvsife2 ^^d u.’m‘w 
bly 
[ iig I 
bly you wererfacrificed to youi**'fa^ ther’savarice: — forgive thy wtetch ed Ashley! — And will you too, my friend, forgive the mad effufidns of my heart, flowing to my pen, and filling that paper which I had dedicated to you? — Miser hopefes^^ despair, must now be my everlasting portion; for See you not, my'henry, the extent of my misfortune? — had thie lovely woman married any inan than him, o nearly related to me by ties of blood, if death had deprived her of him, I might possibly havehopedmy constantaffee 
tion might at last have been crow ned 
si d - i 
With isucccss dy 
\ 
4 
fated 
r 120 ]] 
fated alltame.^ every possibility, every shadow of hope is precluded : — her delicacy — the delicacy of an angel — would never wed with i^z nephew of her husband; though certainly he stands in no afiual consanguinity with her. 
You will, my kind friend, alk what notice my capricious uncle toc yof me in: this most interesting yifitf? — Evep none; — he turned/roirr rne, otk' my entering the .room, with (ft; look of thcimost Supercilious tempt imaginable. • — What I have tlone^ or what I have Said, is matter jostle utmost astonishment to me, to nhave incurred So settled an aversion. 
I find 
'^[ II 1 
I'find it extremely difficult, after ’having been bred in ease rid affluence, Surrounded by a nurriber of Servants, taught to believes was the tmdoubted, and should be the certain heir to upwards of three thousand a year; — ■! Say, I find it vtry difficult at once to Jhfhtk into the "thbusarid tsiortifications and petplex swhiclt' hiust*'"attehdfit(5ff!viry 'strittehedj^^i’row a pittanee^ iff d have'^ow fov my Support; xiwhicii is tt(o more' thran^ a Small itg^acy left a godfather : nota single shil ilrrig did “shy uncle bestow otinme^ 
when he stotneci she adrift Into .aoihavfi na oi barit/dot l^wide find I 
[ l J 
wide wory of difficulties j ^nay, he even took my Servant from me, who had long attended me: this, J own, hurt me,, as I loved the poor fellow extremely; and he shed many tears at parting. 
But nothing touches me So marly, as that my Emma is at onca^ ravished from me all — all else I 
could have born; but this stroke 
H. J ‘ 
unmans we wholly. C 
Slow will that hoard of charms, that bewitching fiveetness, be lost — be buried in oblivion! — the pre sent possessor of them canript enough be senfibk ^(^r, who holds the Sex 
III 
t m J 
m very /i?tercstmiation) — of thfe trea; -^ Sure he is master of. 
Ah I what Availa It, .that fabdnijig grace ** Fashions her lovely form? of what avail ^ That Ihe is gentle f Can her ingenuous “breast - 
soul of truth, unblemiflied and ** ferehe, 
^ The blufhof mode, the tender, hear ^ they awake the icy hand of? 
^ O (he is'lovely, 'and belov’d! ^ 
Her sinilfi gives rapture to the '* Sure ’tis Some hideous dream— — 
** horrid fantafyi that'haunts my Ibal With images of woe! — O that it were " A tranfientfantafy! too well my heart ** Feels her misfortune — feels the dreadful? ** truth. 
That emma’s lost to love and happi « nefs.’*^ - 
V rildriablv' 
.iu 
I have 
have not yet determined show I shall bestow mystlf, to gainshy my industry Some little Jivelihood : — Sometimes I think of entering on board a ship, and Setting Sail for the East Indies, from whence I will never return to see - — - Ah, Sack 
I. • 
ville! — I will not repeat her name. — At other times .1, am much inclined to enter a volunteer to Serve my king and country, and So shy death to end my life and Sufferings together. 
Let me, however, have your, advice: — at present I Vim fo unhinged this late unciipfled sight of tbs 
.1 
[ >25 ] 
mgd (ah! would I could change the little monosyliableto that I can resolve upon nothingy^ ^ 
O, I am^nought but love, dene. « Ipaif !♦» C w 
“dvdieu — adihi! 
Your faithful, 
but half distra(5l: ed 
: T 
Edward ajhl^i 
ni strain t: {, .rzil 7!>si30 
3713*1 32 OV II "'3.in3 otsh3’"' IJ 
yd ol bar *0' Jons gojx V 
^cwr'wilihow 'enquifc'after fio fate of the poor unfortunate sisters : — For Some' tirsie thef had Teen discarded by their last keepersi and had been whuf* is**called' 
towny 
t 1^6 3 
and owed their wretched fuppoit'of a miserable being, to casual prostitution they now fully experienced all the horrors of poverty; for disease, the certain consequence of Such a deplorable way of life, had obliged them to part with every garment they had in the world, excepting what vras merely on their backs : — not a trinket had they now left. Save one little garnet ring, the gift at parting of their unce intimate and still revered'emmz. Harvey, (for she appeared, to these poor, lost girls, * as a being of Some Superior order); — this little ring, itt the inside of which was engraved I these 
I lij 3 
these striking words, “Rememhet't, “friend” was often looked on, whilst a tear of fond remembrance (at the recolledlion of what they once were, and now were Sunk to) would steal down their languid cheeks“ 
“” (Said the poor Peggy, who one day with haggard eyes had been intently gazing on the above little memento of friendship) if “my wretched existence should be finished Sooner than thiiie, do “not, I conjure you, do not part, “on the last etnergency of dis tress, with this invaluable gift of our spotless Em 
cour 

angelic 
it 
ma. 
[ 128 J 
“ma— — the cold hand of “death arrests this shattered frame “of mine, I will hold this ring.. “litiie.nng to my heart, in the “last struggles of fainting na“ “
“But what ’* (Said Patty) “can “we now do for present Sup“ “
“What can h done ” (returned her sister, Sighing) “without mo ^ 
‘ ney — without clothes, or friend? 
‘ — who will receive us onto their ‘ houses? — who will employ us? 
‘ — miserable as we are! — no friend ‘ — no character to recommend! us! — — No — no, my sister — stis 
C 
m 
[' 129 T - - 
“in death — death alone, ?that“ “find a refuge: — the grave “’ will receive us — there will our “shame and Sorrows be all, bu 
“‘ried.” -- -- -- In this mournful discourse, 
with many a heart rending sigh, did'these poor unfortunates, weeping in each other’s arms. Spend often their wretched hours, when they, had crept up to their Sordid garret, 
** Sore pierc’d by wintery winds.” — - 
Ah I gentle reader, how many, at this present moment are experiencing the above nftiseries — caji cut lay perish in the streets. — Alas I they vol.ni. K oncer 
t 1301 r 
cncfiifqrt shnog€nt.r ^p father now* protedls, ^ — no mother’s arms now. 
shield her once dear child 
buto 
forgotten,, shunned, detested, disease. 1 and famine must at length close the. Sad Scene., S 
O ye daughters of wealth an^j case, who are now reposing in yjour^ji elegant apartments, or glittering ai,, midnight ball, listening i wsifjlr, greedy ipleasure perhaps to the^yery Seducers of the above unhappy, ^ victims; did you but know for one mornerrt the miseries ye might relieve, .the further ruin .ye might prevent, by the distribution of a few.guineas properly bestowed on ^ jeme 
t «3>' ] 
r^(far be ?r from me' to Iz'f ’d.ll) unfortunate young creatures, j like our poor Peggy and Patty, who hatte been drawn into fedudtion by arts which elude the most virtuous circumspeistion; did you but know the refined delight, I repeat, of relieving those pitiable autcaftsy who, in tyre emphatical words of Sacred writ, '^ “Lave no place to flee to, ” you would then acknowledge that'compassion shown to the unfortunate (not fa from their own k aty'y but from a train of infamous sedu<si: ron)»is the Sweetest fall virtuous fetisatrotis 1 ' • 
Pardon, 
r, i 
t Hi) 
v*’'good reader, this! Small' efigstssion; which is meant not to hsk^^iddijo'cate IOY but to Save frb'rtiturther'violence ruined imw^ 
it 
cence. 

•di bii.fi. 
• But to return to the poor sisters: • — With the last shilling they had in the world they wandered about Some of the villages near London, and at length were got about as far as ten miles from the metropolis; — they entered' a pleasant village, and b ihg saint, stopped at the house of a poor woman to beg a glass of cold water; whilst they were drinking it, they espied at a Small distance.! 
magnificent 
■ Lii 
>13 ] 
‘’magnificent Seat, Surrounded with a fine?park; — merely by chance, tstese unhappy wanderers enquired^w^ho it belonged to. — “The gentleman’s “name” (Said the woman) “is “Branville — it is called ash grove.” ni [v^ranville !”, !i(exclaimed they both, r?struck with the name, whjch they remembered, as before mentioned;; have read accidentally^inja news paper as.rhat of the man^tlteir ■beloved friend Emma had married) “Branville !” (Said they) “pray 
Lmwho did he marry ?” -- -- -- -- - “The 
n. fweetesc - tempered young lady, i^g and the best in the world, ’’^|(said ?vhe«woman) — “her name was. K “Harvey : 
I 134 s ] 
Harvey: — I have a daughtei* //' H. T lives housemaid at am grove,. 
nttiwn' CL tt 
“So I hear enough or Madam ** brahville’s goodnest : — O she is an angel upon earth !” 
At this moment a thought instan taneoufiy occurred to the unhappy girls’^: — but what that thought wasy the following letter from Mrs. Branville to her fair friend in London, will best explains 
10 aontm i - latoi II L I alut.otvj 
bf; '- t’v/t • 
b 
01 : 3v; 1 J Tiiw 
1c 
T i: 'ij dgooiib ‘itvniiia .im 
J jl‘d .taolcr 
; a l&iu 
•tin 
oq 
III jof 
JL 
^ f 
1 II - -^ 
LETTER 

E rsk 
■■ rrl ” 
LETTER 
] 
XXV 
"• _ kni iin*c''t 2^vrl ‘ 
A: P.s.. Branville to Mrs Summers. 
ngloar c^n [ o" " 
) 
a(h grovc. O My Lucy I what an affefling m |, / have I met with !■ — The poor unfortunate girls, my once jxidear Peggy and Patty, have been at ^tjhe very village at the end of our; ipark — have applied tome for Relief; and I, .wretch that I am! 
■ ••• •* C ■ ■ 
through the positive commands of Mr. Branville, joined to a former Solemn but ridiculous promise I made both him and my father, had k not in my power to afford them fijccolir. — Heavens! do I live to ^ TT J .dvi K 4* write 
I 13? 3 
write xhis ~ what 11 — to renounce — to shun relief to, the dearest friends I had on earth! — the companions of my prattling infancy, — the comfort of my riper years f —? and yet I -- -- -- O, my friend, language 
is insufficient to express what I feel on this trying occasion. 
Yes, my dear, they, have sheen (driven 1 suppose by .extreme ncn': ceffity) wandering about this village; — their attire, as well as theshj emaciated appearance (as I am in • variety of 
wretchednefsv 
Ah! who knows to what despair has by this time driven them! — 
* and 
t 1 
and what cutting anguish must they feci that their Emma their much loved friend, abounding as she does in every luxury and Superfluity of life, should rejedf, renounce, forget them! — I am almost distrafted with this reflection!! — tears flow too 
fast to let me proceed. -- -- -- -- A fit 
cf weeping has in Some Small measure relieved my oppressed heart' I Lucy, who knows, but that, after ail, these poor unfortunate girls mzy not perhaps she So culpable as we believe them to be? — or who knows what arts may have been made use of? — A), I shudder at the thought 1 ^mfi Branville (my dear) 
‘in 
t 138 J 

in this shatter'(though‘undoubtedly' a worthy man) yet has been too Scrupulotis, too Severe: — and I, fool that I have been, to bt drawn in to make So absurd a vow \ — And • yet, how could I help it? — Appearances,, fmb as they have been, against these wretched girls, were quite Sufficient to reconcile me to what I So rashly vowed but ah! my weak 'heart, — to know that they have been So near — without■ food — without shelter, -- ^ anguish insupportable! But I forget that I am all this time .Deeping you in suspence, with respect to the melancholy incident, which has made me thus wretched : 
'i — this 
1-139 1 
— this it was, my friend. Om Monday last, as Mr. Branville and ^ I were walking in the park, a poor middle-aged woman came up to mcy and humbly requested I would be fb good to read a paper she had in her hand,. Sealed up; “the distress of the writers, madam, ” (Said she) is great.” — On her mentioning. >rthe word dijlrefs, I hesitated not to ntalce the paper in my hand. — (I 1 should have told you,. Mr. Branville was at Some little distance from me at this minute, Speaking to Some workmen.) — On opening this paper, I found these heartrending words: 
: i “If 
t 140 1 
misery and'cdeep rembrsc can merit pity, the owners of the ** enclosed /ttt/e ring humbly pre ^ fume to Supplicate charity., if it be possible that still the names are remembered of the wretched 
and Summers 
O Lucy! I thought I should have Sunk into the earth, on reading the above, which was written in my poor peggy’s hand; — and my heart almost died within me, when I found, wrapped in Several Small bits of paper, (inclosed in the letter) a little garnet Xing I gave the dear girls at parting; on which is engraved these .word. Remember a friendv giiess what 
.1 fedt. 
C HI ] 
I'felt, on Seeing this little sacred mar morial of friendship! — I gave it the evening before the poor wanderers left Ashdale; and I well recollect: the sprightly innocence, the lively air, 
. with which they received it; Saying, “Emma, you will not forget this “token., if ever we produce it.” — Painful remembrance,, how dost thou distrad me! 
“Good Heavens!” exclaimed I — and was just going to alk the woman where the writers of that note were, when instantly Mr. Branville (having Seen a letter delivered to me) * came up with hasty steps : he Saw the letter open, in my, hand,, and " Snatched 
[ 142 T 
ffnatched it eagerly; ^irideed, could I have ficreted it, I would for what must he have thought, to havfe ^ Seen me hiding the contents from him? — He immediately read this fatal billet; wheti, raising his voice in a passion of anger, he violently exclaimed, “Good God 1 ‘ Mrs. 
“Branville, is it possible that you “will receive a letter from two ” common prostitutes? — I never “could have believed this this ‘ indeed exceeds all belief! — And who, ” (Said he to the woman, who stood shaking with fear) “who “are you that dare to come about my house, with Such an infamous ifionvi : : « letter?” 
t 143 3 
letter? ’’ — here he shook his cane over the poor woman’s head, who, terrified to death, fell prostrate on her knees before him. — As to you, madamp (turning to rne) “you “promised your father, you pro“ “me, you for ever renounced “any farther connexion with these abandoned hussies, who are a “disgrace to” — — “I call Heaven “to witness, ” (Said I trembling, and bursting into tears) “that I am innocent of .this matter; — neither “could I divine from whom the let“ “came!” — “Good God, ” (Said he, in high anger) “do you then re ceive and open letters from 
V whom 
C »44 ]■ 
whom you know not.?' can awoi'. man of delicacy a<fi; .in Such a manner? 1 am amazed! — How dare these impudent wretches have, the effrontery to address you, or to suppose that you would ever So much as hear even their names' mentioned in your presence, or in that of any other lady of delicacy \ much less to write to you! 
I make a very Serious matter of this — and I must use the.authority of an husband, ‘to desire you forthwith to walk up to your chamber- -- will have no letters 
brought from projlitutes Where are these.wickedhushes?’* 
. • Said 
[ >45 3 
Said he to the woman: — with whom I lefc him; and weeping bitterly, and indeed terrified at my hulband’s pas fion, with slow steps walked to the • house, and ascended my chamber; where, throwing myself on my bed, 
I gave way to a most violent fit of grief. Norris, my woman, (who has often heard from me the history of the wretched girls) Soon found, by my exclamations, what had’ happened : — fly gave me drops" and water, which Somewhat revived me. — In about two hours Mr. Branville came up; I was still on my bed; he stated himstif by me, and entered into a lon^ harangue on 
youiil 
L 
the[ 
[ ] 
the imprudence of my opening the note:; on the Sacred promise I had given,! never to have further connexion with these wicked hussies, (as he called them) c— — I am not going, my Lucy, to give you his long discourse verbatim; Suffice Jt to Say, it lasted near three hours; in which he fully expatiated on the delicacy (his favourite word) honour, virtue, cc. of our Sex; the infamy of prostitutes, ci 
<- leave you to judge what a night I Spent; ^had I been inclined to rest, Mr. Branville rendered it imposh ble, as, when he was not steeping, he was continually resuming the Sad iio Subjecfl 
E h7 I 
&ibj€(st of the preceding day, iand expatiating on the crime of breaking the propiife I had made to him, and. 
to my father. -- -- Fatal promise 1 — 
O, that I had never made it i cothe next morning I found myself very poorly in health; owing to the extreme inquietude' of my Spirits : — which were rendered even worse, by the following afflicting particulars I gathered from my faithful Norris. — She informed me, that the Monday evening, just as the glimmering of the moon, then rising, gave light enough to discern objects, the under gardener observed, as he was walking near the heads 2 of 
bif'oc I ^ ■ ^ 
of the rdervoir pond, in the mot?. Solitary partof the park, two young women, who arm in arm walked for Some minutes on the banks of the pond j that they often stopped as if musing i — ‘thomas the gardener, imagining, he Said, that they (whoever they were) had feme hi thoughts in their heads, stood behind a tree, for the purpose of watching them: — at length they sat down by the side of the water. — 
(O my Lucy, how did I shudder, to 
<• 
hear this dreadful account U 
It tsum be no other than our poor girls! — Thomas says, he watched shem near an hour when the nigfrt 1 grew 
'E *49 '] 
’ grew So dark ind cloudy (a shower ' coming on) that he no longer could i^feern them j but a mast he met the next inorning, on mentioning this, told him two young creatures had been sten wandering about that rooming on ash grove common, and that he Saw them go into a very sordid hut there. 
O, roy friend I had these unhappy girls committed the rash action that the gardener apprehends they were going to do, I never more could have known a moment’s .peace, or even held up my head, fo much should I have been convinced I. 3 my 
k'kirtg ipbuificthity iva$ that occa fsbh of it. 
Norris has wonderfully plcased rne, 'S she tells me, that on tuesday "lilght, hearing the poor wretches had beeh Seen wandering about the 
ZD 
common, and that they went into a little cottage there, she made up a bundle of apparel, lirten, c. into 'which she put two guineas, and 
• If it should here be alked why this good woman fhoold run the rifi^ue of her mailer’s displeasure by relieving the wretched girls? — it is necessary to inform the reader, that boih their worthy father and mother were well known to Mrs. Norris on which account Ihe would have done her ut ihdft ehdeavours to have assisted them. 
caused 
Or 
rt L 5^ ] 
caused it to be laid where, she'imagined they might meet with it; ^dj reded to Mils Summers — but, alas! they cither found it not, or would not take it, for there the, parked remained after they were Seen goiing from the village. — O, my, dear, how do these accounts of the wattdering girls distress and agitate jjfny mind X “Would it please Heaven to take them in mercy to itsels! — 
I ^ 
what would I Say? 
You will, my Lucy, I 'know, love my worthy Norris for her’kmd consideration in this distreshng'mat ter. she^has since been making, all possible inquiry after the poor' ' ■ wretches; 
t 152 ] 
wretches; as, could they be found, 
'Ol 
who knows, my friend, but that they might return to virtue / — could they have been traced from this village. So as that your good hus band might hear of them, and shelter them from further misery, it would be a most desirable event. 
We Set out tomorrow for the Abbey; — I only regret leaving ash grove, as I was in hopes of feeing you again here. — I wish the journey, and a change of Scene, may. amuse my oppreltcd Spirits. 
Pray Heaven poor Mr. Ashley may not be in the neighbourhood of the Abbey C -, 
nia 
■ 

♦ it Write to nie%on, very Soon, 3 
. n \ -- ', >'•» 
conjure you; ‘for I need the confola' .hon of friendship: — these wretched girls have fluhered my weak, heart beyond description. 
t 
Adieu! — be assured, my Lucy, of the constant affection of Your 
.Emma’b -- -- r. 
•giv - — 'A 
. dlh 
do i ■’k 
a 
r fx**clv ■ 
THE compassionate. reader may ' here, perhaps, wish to know whi v.ther the .poor sisters bent their course, ’^ after having been forfome days wandering in the environs of 
Ash 
t .54 3 
ash grove. — The worthy minister’s wife of the next parish, on meeting them, as she was walking with a certain lady of quality in that neighr bourhood, as eminent for her exalted charity as her cultivated understanding, on their applying her for a Small trifle to carry them to London, asked them a few questions. — She found, as did themoble lady she was walking with, that they were in the utmost distress; — 'that was a fusticient recommendation to the excellent Lady C' 
'she generoufiy gave them h^lf “a‘guinea; — the poor girls burst into tears, and most cjmph«tic»lly ex,, 
I 155 1 
tlaitacd, “God bless yourolady “ship !’* ' 
* Lady <1 -- —; - remarked to her companion, that they were sine young w6mcn. — “What j^ity F (Said she.) — I fear, ” (returned her friend) “they are not So good, “(wandering about in idleness) as they should be; your ladyship was very kind to relieve them.” “No matter what they are, ” 
replied Lady C -- -- -) “it k suhi 
cient to me that they appeared ema “ciated with vkint; — charity does' “not adopt its obje<5ls.” 
This unexpe<51: ed Supply of half a guinea, ythkh to the wretched sis omili. tersi 
i 
itars'feemed an inexhaustible sum, on their arrival in London enabled • them ta hire a Small hole, part of a. garret, for the ensuing weekbut, alas \ the cxceffivethe grief, they had Sustained in their once loved emma’s total (fi^pofid) negkfl of them, had almost driven them distradcd. — 'The joy, the umxpiihd happy hopes they naturally conceived, when they were told at Ash. grove Mrs. Branviile was' then at. her seat, on the very Spot, opened .a gleam of comfort to their op jpreffed minds, they had long been strangers to: — the disappointment vof thcse hopes was almost death to. ‘ them. 
.T. C‘ e 
them, especially as the woman who carried their letter to Mrs. bran ville, did mt at all often the asperity of Mr. branvillc’s mhu^ mn mestagc: they were indeed stimulated to the deed of desperation fufpe^fed by the gardener at ash grove i but by the sudden interposition of Providence, they were restrained from completing their design, and were rclcrved for future trials. 
Peggy, the very day of their afeending their garret' in London; through excels of grief and fatigue,, was Seized' with a fnrer: — Patty hung over her with unutterable anguish. 
t 158 ] 
guilb, incessantly crying, “What “■ shall I get for thee.? — What shall “I do for thee, — ’my pdr Sister ?” — “Procure me deathv (returned she) — “tis that alone can ease “my torments.” — Perhaps at this period a more distressing Scene could not be exhibited than these wretched girls. — Peggy lay delirious in a burning fever for Several days, rav o ing continually on her Emma, and often mistaking Patty for her; — whilst her miserable sister, with the few shillings they had remaining, was nursing her with unabated tenderness— — a few ineffectual medicines — holding her aching 
t' «59 ] 
ing head ■ — or kissing hershurmng cheek. — Ah! reader, let us exatnim the wretched receptacles about this great metropolis, and I fear we 'shall See many, • — many objects in nearly the Same pitiable condition! Let us relieve them : — let us apply the balmy hand of comfort to Sustain their miseries. — But to return to our history— — *; 
One day, when Patty believed her sister to be just fallen into a fiumber, she stole out to procure a little bread and milk; and meeting with a person she knew, was detained longer than usual from her Peggy; who, immediately on the departure 
C i66‘ 
parture of her sister, happening to' awake, and feeing paper and ink near her wretched bed, wrote in her delirious state a most afie^ting epistle to her beloved Emma; — with the rapisty which ever attends the delirium of. a fever, She wrote the letter, and‘ the woman of the house just after coming to her; she begged: her to convey it to the poft houfir,. which the woman did, imagining k to be a letter that Patty had written. — p^gy having now almost; cx itaufted heti. whole iitde share of strength, inicnsibly dropped into a Sweet lumber, in which her sister found her. — The letter was dire^cd. to 
Ash. 
[ ii ] 
ash grove; at which place it ac rived : Mrs. Branville was then Set out for their Seat in Wales, but it was forwarded to her. — Theeffedt this epistle had on that amiable lady, with the letter itself, .will be shown in the following one to Mrs. Summers in London. 
LETTER XXVI 
From Mrs. Norris to Mrs. Summers. 
St, maud’s Abbey, 
, North wales. MADAM, ' 
M Y poor lady being too ill to write herself, has ordered me to send the enclosed letter to you, vol, III M which 
- [ 162] 
vshich has given her inexpressible anguish: — you will See, madam, it is from the unfortunate miss Summers. Luckily, my master was from home when it arrived, on a journey of Some days into south .w^ales: — I Say luckily as you know, madam, how Severe he is in his judgement, on the unfortunate party concerned; as well as how^angry he has been with my poor lady, about what happened at ash grove. — One would imagine, madam, from the strange contents of the cnclosed, that poor miss Peggy (hew my heart yearns for her; for alas! I knew her from a child) should be 2 out 
[ 1 
out of her senses. — It is all soyadly unaccountable, and distressing to Such a degree, that my poor lady fainted on reading it; and yesterday was So ill, as not to be able to rise from her bed. — She was very feverish last night; — but good Mrs. Belmont thinks her rather better this 
morning. 
The enclosed letter, madam, will however enable you to guess, how the distradted contents of it must amaze and afflict my dear lady. She thinks, if these unhappy friends could be advertised, it might be the means of discovering the place of their abode; byt this she Submits to M 2 Mr. 
t i'64 1. 
Mt. sumrtiersc and your opinion.' She Sends her best love. — And, hop istg, ^^vgood madam, you will excuse this hasty writing, I beg leave to Subscribe myself, 
Your most obedient, 
^ humble Servant 
: _, i1 
to command, 
; ^ f.. Martha Norris. 
P. S. My lady begs you, madam, not to be alarmed about her, as she Says she is better; — and she certainly is So. — It was a happy thingjny master was from home, when the Sad letter arrived here. 
i’he 
[ is 1 
’ithe LETTER enclosed in the preceding one. : i. 
Peggy Summers to Mrs. Branville. 
-- -- AND could you indeed, my 
Emma, think I had forgot and renounced No, no, no, -^ — I never 
could forget, my Emrna, when she stood shivering at my gate, pinched with hunger, — without a friend, — 'Without a place to rest her head. — Well, but what had I to say to you? 
Confusion, and grief, and shame, ''all crowd So fast upon me — and my poor brain ^is quite gone. O now I have it: ' — when did you See niy poor parents, Emma Harvey? — Harvey! 
M? no 
[ ] 
no — no — you are married — honourably married tt^you are an angel of. light :, — you dazzle me with the glory that Surrounds you. — See See! an angel crowns my spotless friend ^ whilst I — — no more of that — no more of that. — Friend! — who talks of friends? — I have none, — no friend. 
Emma, are you happy? — tell me — tell your own Peggy. — I hope your husband is kind — is tender to you. — Well, but about my poor parents; — be Sure don’t tell them of our hard fate; — it' will break their hearts — indeed it will. — The ■ which fell from the rich .oiq man’s 
[ i6y ] 
man’s table would have been joyfully accepted. — Heavens! could I have thought it? — but no matter, no matter. 
O Emma, how I long to lay my ‘ aching head in your dear bosom! — I could tell you strange — strange things — of Such jiratagems] Such vile arts! Such — but you cry, 
“Avaunt! avaunt!” — and ' drive your poor shivering Peggy from you : — ah! there distradlion lies! 
Have you quite forgot Ashdale, my Emma, now that you are a * lady, a fne, rich lady? — Do you remember the little style in the wood? and the shazle copse^iwhere we ^ a lmt) pro[ 
[ ] 
procured our nuts? — and the rosc bush I planted with my own hands, that you promised to cherish for my Sake? — Yes, yes, you must have forgot all this; for you know you forgot the little garnet ring you gave at parting — quite forgot it. 
Your Patty is not the lively girl she was when we used to meet you in the woodno longer the rose blooms in her cheek; — all pale and emaciated : — my poor Patty will Soon be — cold — as I shall be. — One grave, remember, holds usa little grave, no matter where; — but yet methinks I could wifn, if not too great a favour to request that in 
ash grove 
[ .69 ] 
ash grove churchyard might sleep for ever: — and then, my, Emma, when you proudly step out of your fine gilt coachi and pass by the green grass turf that wraps our cold clay, will you not drop one pitying tear, my Emma? — No — no not you indeed : — you will walk proudly on — and, whilst the great Mr. Branville enquires whole little anew made grave that is, — you will nightly answer, “no matter.whose or perhaps tell him, “there lie ■ct two abandoned girls, — but they once were innocentdi — Abandoned we are, stis true — by our bestjand okiy friend. 7: oj X 
’voi§ iua, Alas! 
■[ '>7° ] 
■laks! yob could hot' know us now; ^sharp misery has worn us to uhe bonewant — want, my Emma, has Sorely afflicted us : — we would work for you, we would weed your fine gardens, we would Spin thread for your linen : — burr, no — no, you will not employ us. — O my poor brain — how dost thou torment me! 
Thanks to Heaven, however, we did not commit the rash action— — floating corpses would have remained «« buried, for Mr. Branville, I believe: — don’t you think So, Emma Well, well, — but let him be as unkind to us as he will — thank God 
he 
[ 
II 
] 
, he is not Aord: — detestable, vile! — I could tell you strange things; — but alas! I must now conclude; for I grow weary, — saint, — and O my aching headl^h\ix. what is that to my heart? ah, there the stroke is most Severely felt! 
I Sometimes dream I am in heaven, sitting by the side of my angelic friend; — yes — yes, I will call you friend'ir~'2lnd help yourself as you can. 
No matter from whence I write this; — perhaps from the streets. — But no, — I have forgot, — I have, stis true, a covering from the bleak wind and rain. 3^ 
enidia, 
[ 172) • 
Emma, this will be my last letter. -- -- Fare ye well, my love : — 
God bless you! — God bless you! 
I once was 
Peggy Simimcrs.^ now, no matter whom. 
End of the Third Volume, 


’V' ns ■ 






'i' 
'; ■- 
r' ' 
■ • ( -■ ■, 
:, iri .'.i ■ 
. ■ 
CV; ■■', 
rv. 
’ -- f; ■ 
-- cri; 

F ^ 
V,, 
1 V -*', C^ 


’-'■'> V..: 
..: 







- ' j. ■''.. 
^ IV ■ 
'■'■ 
.-■ : 1 
■ d.d.av -- '^ ' '■•' ' "'LA 
‘I 
'll 

Lr»^ 
V * ■ ■ ' 
^ V f ■ 

^ ' \ \ 
t!. ', fi 
■ ^ 1- ' - c • - 

V ^='* ■ i ■ s '.- -' '» -; tc/ ■'■ ^. •'■ ■ ■ ' ■ X'. 
ALL' - icvr r' •- r. ■; ■ 



i ■*< 
A 
. .mm 



V..; *.. 
. • V ■ ■• ',. ■ 
. - T ^ 


- ^. • t.. •' * ■ ‘ 
• • ’x t ■ 
<' - 
. A‘ 
fr. ' " 
y. 'v 

V 


V 
.-.*%'** 
^ ^ 
sv -.. 


VR ''■ 31<i) A 
- I 
IV. 


.: 
cisii 
'
'^-.. i ■ ■ ' ‘ 
■ } i ^ 
^' %; 
'A 
■'• ^ 
4. 








■''s - 
vi 
'• V 
■ ^. ■: ■ 
T • I, Tj 
'rrt i■'■5 
^ ■■ ■ - 
as.. - '• 
. -- •• 
Ah.,.. 

h. .‘- ■^' ' ■ *' - ' '" A' ' - 
y /, ■■ ’, -'... 
.h. ^3 
v. nb'‘''^, ■; 
I '• ' '., 
1 •... ’. .■ .!«► ■ ■ ■■*' 
#■ 
''4’’ 





V 


.; s ■ ' - ■■ ■, > 

'ya: '•: ' 
'-■ '^- 

- 
, vril 

■ •'K'N 1*5^ 

Peggy and Patty; 
O R, 
THE SISTERS 
O F 
A S H DA L E. 
VOL. IV 
XS., 

t' V 

T V C 
v*o “0*3"i * 
■* r • ^ 

;; ” aji T 
'TV 
. '. .^ nl ■ *■. r » - '..: - ‘ ■. 
pr 
7 
VI T 
’e' 
'A - ■. : - a /■> j 
‘■'^.'iuo'7 st * >': 0/ 
k T.: A t 
t ■ 1 — 

Peggy and Patty; 
O R, 
THE SISTERS 
O F 
ASH DA L E. 
■IN FOUR VOLUMES. 
V O L IV 
LONDON: 
PRINTED FOR J. DODSLEY, P A L L - M A L L 
M, DCC, i.xxxni« 
■ r.w; 
o; : f T d 1 d fi. H N 
. ' > 
7f ■•^ 
'•, S a V ?.. vy -.. 
‘ I 'AAAA o vi; 0 1 m:. 
.7i .ao'v 
C.; 7 V i[ 
NHA 0 ■ 
'i' >. ' 
♦ ♦i t' ji 33, M 

.- rcc 
I t ty 
PEGGY AND PATTY. 
LETTER XXVII 
Mrs. Summers to Mrs. Branvilk: — (the two frseeding letters not then received) relative to Peggy and .Patty. 
London. 
MY BELOVED FRIEND, 
OU will be grieved at the Sad intelligence I have to communicate. — But be not too much alarmed— — well — but, alas! vol. IV B my 
I? 
my poor Mr. Summers is very, very ill — has been dangeroufiy wounded : — but I hope to Heaven • the worst is over: — his Surgeon and physician begin now to Say they think, with care he may recover : — ’ his fever, in consequence of his wound, I thank God, now intermits. — O, my Emma! think what I have endured for this best of men, and dearest of husbands!! — write this by his bedside, whilst she k in a Sweet steep; — may it prove propitious! — I have watched by my poor George for these five nights; nor Suffered any medicine to be administered but by my hands— — let me hasten to relieve the 
anxious 
C 3 1 
anxious impatience you feel from what I have already Said relative to 2i wounded beloved husoand. 
Ah! my dear, I have wonderful things to teil you! — Poor Peggy and Patty were, it now fully appears, *, vilely betrayed. — Alas! my heart almost bleeds to •write it. — Yes, their Sedudion was the consequence of the most horrid • arts and Jhocking outrage. 
Poor unhappy girls! — I have wept at their fate till I can weep no longer. 
* The good-natured reader will here feel for poor Mrs. Branville, when (he received this account of her friend’s innocence, after the recent affair at afh grove, and poor peggy’s distracted letter. 
B 2 An 
'■ ■'H'W i4’’i] sljjsl < 
h^n execrable villain personated their brother (my husband) and in consequeiiec of that most wicked deception, all the rest has followed in course. — ?sih! • lovely innocents! what may be now their fate? — or where may they be wandering? 
I must, however, proceed with the Sad occasion of my poor Mr. summers’s wound, and of the shocking wretch who gave it. 
About five days since my husband went to dine with a large meeting of gentlemen, at a, tavern in Westminster. — After dinner Captain Fenwick, a most worthy friend of his, having Some particular business relative to the East Indies 
[ 5 ], 
dies to Settle with him, they retired' into a private room, which they observed was only parted from another by a kind of Aiding partition. So very thin that every word Spoken in the next room could be most distindly heard in theirs. They heard the voices of two gentlemen; but Mr. summers’s attention was excessively roused when he plainly heard the following words: ^ 
“But pr’ythee tell me, Jackal, “did you never hear what became “of those girls, Peggy and Patty “Summers? upon my Soul they “were fine girls. — What a glo “rious Scheme was that of your’s, “of personating their brother, then 
Bg 
in 
ll e }. 
f‘ ia Bengal; — you deserved a sta“ “to be erected to your me“ “— But do, Patrick, tell me how that affair happened.’’ — You will, my friend, easily imagine the astonishtnent of Mr. Summers : — Mr. Fenwick conjured him to rein in his impatience for a few moments, to hear the Sequel os this • amazing conversation; which continued in this manner. — The most wicked of wretches replied, “I’H “tell you how jt happened : — I ‘‘ had been down in the Nprth, on 
a few gomhiishons for Lprd -- -- -- --, 
“one of which was, to look, at “' Some girls for him, : — wihen rc “tj.irning, iju^ich chagrined at my 2 “bad 
I 7- •] 
bad luck, chance thremfshe into “the Carlifie coach; where I found alone, travelling to London, two “of the niost beautiful young crea “tures in the universe, this Peggy 
“and. Patty Summers; -- -- -- -1 Soon 
“found; by their extreme simph “city and blushes, that they were “quite the innocent young things “I wanted; and that it would be “at least a cool hundred in my 
V way.*’ -- -- - ^ 
Here my husband, starting up, ’ was going to exclaim 'aloud, but his friend once more begged him to have one moment’s patience, till the ultimate discovery was made. — The wretch they plainly heard pro -- ^ B 4s ceed 
I 8 ] 
ceed in’ his horrid account in these words - b^lv, 
“Never, Surely, were two Such ‘‘ Sweet rogues; Such was their “simplicity, that I Soon gathered ‘‘ from them their little history; ‘'•namely, that they were from a “remote village in Cumberland; that their father was a poor 
CC 

curate — ■ (good ground, was not “this, to work upon r) — that they “were going to London to Some re“ “to procure them a genteel “Settlement; — that they had a great “many brothers and Sisters; — but “it at last came out, that they had “a brother in Bengal, daily ex pe6ted to come over, who had 
“been 

t 9 I 
been gone So long they had no knowledge of his person. 
“It was not in nature to resist So delicious a plan as then opened itself at once to my view; — in short, my .impudent genius assisted me, and I at once took on me the character of this long absent brother. I affected to be overjoyed at the happy event of meeting with them So unexpectedly. Surely it was the richejl thought that ever entered the heart of man, and most fully answered my purpose; for the poor simple things, artless and unsuspedung as innocence itself, “at once took the bait, and with 
joy 
r 10 .] 
joy received my embrace. ^they called me their dear George, their“ “brother, and, in short, “permitted, during the whole jour ney, an hundred innocent liber“ “which the freedom of Such “near relations daily warrant.” Here, my Emma, I pass over the extreme agitation of Mr. Summers,, who with the utmost difficulty could be prevented from rushing in to the wicked villain who proceeded as follows: 
“If I had intended myself to have “Seduced these poor Simple girls,. “I certainly should not have per“ “their brother; — but I 
knew 
[ II ] 
knew hetkr my interest. — I 
knew lord -- -- -- is most bounth 
Sul on acquiring a new mistrrfs; and to Say truth, girls are now Such a mere drug., that one may at any time be stocked with half a hundred of, them. — Well, at London we arrived, in tiptop Spirits; — though we took up at Northampton a queer, formal parson” ” -^ poor uncle, Emma!) — I was cursedly afraid he would Smoke me; — but no — all wag Safe, and I carried off, that very night, my charming prize to good mother H -- -- -- s, who personated 
to a miracle a cousin Bennet of the little Simpletons.” ' (O Emma, 
[ 12 ] 
(O Emma, what a horrid plot was here!) 
“You may easily guess’* (continued this villain) “what fol ‘ lowed in Such a Situation; — you ‘ would have died to have Seen the ‘ old mother top her part to a ‘ miracle; and two of her girls ‘ for Miss Bennets. — We were ‘ obliged to have recourse to a few ‘ potions— — on those occasions; ‘ for it would have taken the time ‘ of the siege of Troy, to have Southeast ‘ duced them in the common way; ‘ — they had had a de -- sh strict ‘ education, of chastity and modef ‘ ty, c. forsooth, under the old put their father; So we were obliged 

’ "[ 13 ] 
liged to do what was done— — “methods you may guess.” — 
Mr. Summers could hear no more; but rushing from his friend, in a rage, as you may suppose, not to be described, ran at once into the room where the infamous reciter of the above horrid tale was sitting. — “Villain! Scoundrel!” (Saidhe, in an agony of passion, drawing his Sword) this instant I demand Satisfaflion “of you, for the shocking imposture “of daring to personate me George Summers in order to further your “horrid crime of Seducing my poor “wretched sisters; whose ruin, pri marily owing to thee, ^ thou exec“ “
[ 14 3 
crable villain! calls for vengeance “on thy head; — draw this instant, — thou infernal Scoundrel! 
Mr. Fenwick, who ran into the room after my husband, imagining bloodshed would be the conse quence, gave 'me an account of every .Syllable of this affair. — He Says, on this just rage of Mr. Summers, never did he See Such a contemptible figure of mean cowardice as the wretch before him: — he turned pale — hesitated — his lips quivered — he was absolutely (hardened in wickedness as he iriust be) ready to sink into the earth, at Such an un cxpefled Summons to fight. — Mean villain, (continued my hus— — ' 
[ rs ] 
’band) “draw this instant! — Hah!” (Said he, looking attentively in his face) “what have I another charge “against thee.? — Yes, — I See — I “See you are the very identical “rascal, who dared to affront grossly a lady (now my wife) coming “out of the opera-house; — insolent wretch! your design, I doubt not, 
‘ “was to carry her off.” — The rascal, trembling. Said, “if he must fight, “it must be in the garden behind “the house.” — Mr. Summers in -- stantly took him by the nose, and dragged him downstairs. — Being now arrived in the garden, he at Tength drew his Sword; — a Scuffle • cnsued, in which niy husband was 
wounded[ 
[ ] 
wounded; but believing it not the least dangerous, disregarded it, making a furious pass at his mean spirit ed antagonist, — who cowardly dropped his Sword, and begged his life. Mr. Summers, who has great person al bravery and knowledge of the Sword, stood over him for Some moments, but as the wretch had no weapon, Scorned to take advantage of that circumstance. — “I will “Submit to any punishment, ” (Said the rascal) “if you will but give “me y— — am not fit to die. — - 
“I will tell you all. — Lord......, 
“and sir — ....., kept your Sisters: 
“— I wrote to their parents in the country, feigning their hands: — 
“but 
[ 17 ] 
but indeed I know not now “where they are.” — Mr. Fenwick proposed kicking the mean Scoundrel through the room, where the gentlemen were assembled that had dined there; this was put in execution, the noise of a duel having drawn most of them to the parlour door, adjoining the garden. — Hah I “Jackal, (cried they) what still in “being! — we thought you had “been hanged at Tyburn above a “year ago, for the 'forgery on the 
“bank of England.” — Here he ran \ 
the gantlet indeed, and was at length fairly kicked out into the street, and pretty Severely pelted by the mob, with dirt, stones, c. 
vol. IV C Mean 
[ i8 3 
Mean time, my poor Mr. summers’s wound (neglected to be examined) had began to be very painful : — he was now put into a chair, and brought home, Mr. Fenwick attending him. — guess, my dear, my grief, my amazement, to See the most amiable of husbands in that condition! The best Surgeons were immediately procured; who declared the wound not to be So dangerous as the high fever, (owing to the extreme, just rage my poor George had been flung into) which disorder was now coming on apace; and for Several days he continued extremely ill; but, I thank Heaven, the fever now gives‘ way to medi 6 cine. 
[ 19 ] 
cine. — O my friend! what have I ■'suffered, to hear his delirious ravings of his poor Peggy and Patty! — 
Mr. and Mrs. Bennet, (who stand aghast at the matchless impudence of mother H — ’s personating the latter) i 
f 
and all other friends, are rastsacking London over, to find the dear, ruined girls — I fear, alas! in vain; they possibly are now no more, or perhaps hid in Some obscure corner, the very 
last resort of -- -. O I cannot dwell 
on the heartrending Subject! 
But .this moment my George awakes. — Adieu then for the present, 
I thank Heaven, he is better, — 
.i " ic 
2 
wonder[ 
[ ] 
wonderfully better; — able, my Emma, to sit up in his bed, and appears quite composed. 
Only think, my dear, of this infamous — Jackal!, I understand, is' his name — being the very impudent fellow who assaulted me in the opera-house; no doubt, but with the worst intentions — most probably to add to the numerous list of the vile lord racket’s Seraglio. — That as sault, however, (no thanks to this wretch’s intention) has been the means of making me the most happy of women. — I am interrupted : I will date again. 
Just Heaven! how awfully amaz 
[ 21 ] 
ing are thy doings! — Divine vengeance has indeed Seized the horrid' villain, who deceived the poor sisters— — infamous pander Jackal. Mr. Fenwick has just brought the followingaccount: That on the night he had Seen Mr. Summers, a capital forgery being laid to his charge, and, he apprehending it was impossible for him to elude, as he has often done, the justice due to him, in a fit of frantic desperation cut shis throat; but did not the business So effedlually as to occasion present deathfor he has lingered, it Seems, Some days, the most frightful object of horror and despair that ever was beheld.; Sometimes raving, C? Some[ 
[ ] 
Sometimes even howling, and cursing all about him : — his agonies, they Say, are beyond all description : — twice he has torn open the wound, to which the Surgeons attempted to apply Some remedy. — Yesterday, it Seems, he was absolutely mad, 
. and held down in his bed by Several men; who declare the blasphemies he uttered, and crimes he talked of having committed, were too shocking for repetition : — at length, cursing his own being (horrid to tell!) with a frightful groan he expired. 
I have no doubt but Divine juf tice will Soon reach all the parties of that black affair — the fedutstion of iwo the most innocent, lovely young 
women 
[ 23 3 
women on earth; — and no doubt of i many more, now wretclicd outcasts in the streets. ■■ 
Our good cousin Ben net is my. constant visiter; whilst her worthy husband is very busy with a neighbouring justice of peace, being about to lay an information against the, house of the wicked mother H —. • 
I could wish, methinks, to be Jack Catch for one five minutes, to hang that vile woman myself at Tyburn — though that would not be an adequate punishmentforher crimes. 
Adieu, my Emma. — I direct this to ash grove; for I hope you are not yet gone to the abbey; but if you are, it will be forwarded. 
C 4 Write 
d 24 ] 
^ Write Soon : — you would, if you knew how much comfort your observing that injunction would give to Your tenderly affectionate, 
Lucy Summers. 
LEXTER XXVIII 
Mrs Belmont to Mrs. Summers. 
Belmont Hall. 
DEAR MA dam, 
^jphough you have often kindly Solicited my correspondence, 
yet 
* Left the reader ftiould wonder at the familiar addresi of Mrs. Belmont, to a lady 
with whom it has not been mentioned Ihe 
was 
[ 25 ] 
yet it is with hiuch «» willingness I write; as, I am Sorry to Say, I must begin an intercourse So desirable to me, with a very melancholy circumstance; namely, with the death of Mr. Branville. Our dear friend begs I will acquaint you with this interesting event, which happened rather Suddenly. 
■you wjll excuse Mrs. branville’s writing at this time: — she could not atipresent be So minute in her account of this misfortune, as she Says 
was acquainted — it may be neceltary to observe, that Mrs. Summers had been, the first year of Mrs. Branville's marriage, at the abbey on a visi: j consequently was then well acquainted with the amiable Mrs. Bel. 3tumt. 
yoi>r 
[ 26 3 
your kind partiality, in everything relative to her concerns, induces you to desire. — I only wish I could open my correspondence with a more agreeable circumstance. 
Mrs. Branville hopes you receiv^ ed her late * congratulatory letter on the recovery of Mr. Summers from his wound; in which she endeavoured to give you an account of the extreme misery she has Suffered on the occasion of poor miss summers’s very affecting letter : — but I will not dwell on the Sad Sub 
* letter was not thought rieceltary to be inserted, as containing merely her congratulations for Mr. summers’s recovery, and Sorrow for not having had it in her power to relieve the poor fillers, 
b. r jedl: 
t 27 ] 
jedl: — Suffice it to say, the unfortunate prohibition she was laid under, relative to the wretched sisters, and her having since heard the circumstances of their cruel usage So fully authenticated, have been all together too much for her tender heart (the Seat of gentle compassion, and of every other virtue) to Sustain. 
I have mentioned the circumstance of Mr. branville’s dying Suddenly; but I have not related Some particular incidents relative to it, (which I wish I could conceal from every one, but Such a friend as yourself to our beloved Emma as, poor man! this event was certainly owing to his own imprudence, 
and 
■ [ 28 ] 
and merely an accident, occasioned by his ill judged and causeless curiosity. Thus it happened; One day last week our charming friend (her hufoand being gone out to Spend the day) favoured me with her company, to assist me in .the arrangement of someshell fiowers and fossils, with which I am goin^ to decorate a grotto, in a rock not far from our gardens. 
You will imagine, my dear madam, how happy the company of my beloved Emma made me; and we were singularly lucky, in not being interrupted in our amusement of the shell fiowers, the whole day, by company; till, just at teatime. 
. who 
t 29 ] 
who should drop in upon us but poor young Ashley, the unfortunate nephew of Mr. Branville. — He • is, without exception, the most amiable of men, and the delight of every company he appears in, — After tea he was So obliging to sit down to the harpsicord, and give us most of the sinest Songs in the Sacred oratorio of Handests Meshah; which he performed with inimitable taste and execution. The hours insensibly glided away; at length Mrs. Branville, lookingon her watch, exclaimed, “My stars! it is already eight o’clock! — Mr. Branville will think I am lost; though he will not return 
home till ten, at which ^ time I 
\ 
"ordered 
[ 30 ] 
ordered the chariot to come for me; ' 
I think you remember, my dear Mrs.' Summers, our little i music room, as I call it (in which we were sitting;) but perhaps you have forgot that it is hung with Some fine bid arras.y which has been many years in the family. This circumstance I mention, as once or twice that evening methought I Saw the arras move: “bless me” (Said I) what stirs the hangings — — • “It is only the wind, ” Said Mr. Ashley. He had now began another charming Song, when on a Sudden we heard a most violent outcry among the Servants, as if Some ’■'^ *8 dreadful 
r ] 
tlreadful accident had happened: — I heard the butler exclaim — “He “is dead j; — he is dead! — Mr. “Branviile is dead! — "ood God !’* 
o 
* — You will imagine our terror; and that we instantly rushed out of the room, to See the cause of this dreadful alarm. — Mr. Ashley (excellent young man!) darted forth like rapid lightning to the Spot; and, with a tenderness 'which docs him the highest honour, raised his dying uncle in his arms (from the bottom of Some stone steps, down which it Seems he had fallen) and. Supporting his bleeding head on his bosom, carried him into an adjoining parlour. — I' Screamed — Mrs. 
'' Branviile 
[ 32 ] 
Branville fainted. — To add to our distress, Mr. Belmont was gone a journey for Some days. — Mr. Ashley, still tenderly holding, and calling on his uncle’s name, as if, alas! he had been the dearest friend on earth, was almost covered with his blood, which flowed in a stream from a very large cut in his head:. — his Skull too appeared to be fractured; and one of his arms was broken : — in short, he was a terrible Spectacle. — I had a bed instantly prepared, and Surgeons were immediately Sent for, as there yet Seemed Some Small remains of life. — The incomparable asnley divided his tender assiduities betwixt his uncle 
and 
t,, J, • 
and our poor friend, who had fainted Successively. — I will not de. scribe the misery of this night, fof it .is impossible." — At length the Surgeons arrived, who declared Mr. •branviile to be then alive, but that •it was ipipossible he could live two days— — remedies being applied, in Some hours he opened his eyes; — his affectionate nephew was then kneeling by his bedside, bujt Mr. Branviile, I believe, knew hint nor. 
Before night he began to Speak a few. Sentences, broken, however, and disjointed; — yet we gathered from our Servants’ account, and what the dying man uttered, the 
Vql. IV D Sol. 
t 34 1 
following particulars: Our footman says, that about Seven in th evening of this fatal adventure, Mr. Branville alighting, came into the hall, and ashed if we had any company in the drawing-room r — that his answer was, “We “had no company but Mrs, Bran 
ville and Mr. Ashley.” .......* 
Mr. ajhleyv* he exclaimed, in great Seeming astonishment; — and “on the servant’s offering to light him to the mu sic room, he declined it. Saying, he knew the way very well, and that the lights in our great hall were Sufficient. — Here the Servant left him. r^and we just gathered from himsclf, that a jea 3 
1 35 ] 
lousy' he had conceived (but mentioned not for whom) had caused him to nip behind the arras., which is open to the passage that leads to the music*room, in order to hear what conversation passed. — Poor man! it hurts me to think he should descend to Such a mean shist, on So necessary an occasion. — How long he staid there we know not; but most certain it is, he lost his labour, as not a Single Syllable passed iri the music room, Mr. Ashley being playing, as I before have told you, all the time on the harpsicord. 
I now must proceed to the ac d 2 • count 
'[ 36 1 
count of our butler; who says. On going down to his pantry to prepare for Supper, he was astonished to See Mr. Branville lay as dead, and covered with blood, at the foot of a large pair of stone stairs. — I sup pose, poor wretch, in returning from his nii/i^ place, he had missed his way, and in the dark fell down those stairs. What followed his being found in.that deplorable condition, I have already related. ' •mrs. Branville, Sweet V oman! on hearing this strange confession of his, kneeled by him, and averred her innocence in regard to his very unjust Suspicions of her. — He Jooked at her with stedfastness, and 
replied, 
E 37 ] 
replied“ “believe thee, child; and “may god'i^less thee !” 
’ Poor Ashley here flung himself on his knees, and most pathetically begged for a blessing also. — bless me! — bless me !” — < (cried he) “my uncle, also bless your poor “Edward! who, I call God to wit ness, never offended you.'*’ — This Scene was So particularly affecting, I could Scarce refrain from weeping aloud. — the petition of the unfortunate nephew was however totally disregarded. n^hether the dying man observed him or not, I will not pretend to Say; but certain it is, he made no kind of answer; and'it is a most dis 
D 3 
treffmg 
[ 38 ] 
tressing arcumstance, that he should not take the least notice of this most admirable and affedlionate relation. — Mrs. Branville, with thfe piety of an angel, prayed for an hour by her dying husband, from the office for the sick, in our excellent liturgy. Never did she appear in So heavenly a light: — her fine eyes and hands lifted to Heaven, as if to Supplicate mercy for the departing Spirit of the dying man before us. We all kneeled round her. This was indeed the laji office that was performed to poor Mr. Branville: — he expired about an hour after, in a convulsion fit. — May Heaven have mercy on his Soul! — I only 
wish 
[ 39 ] 
wish he could have died ip persedb charity with his worthy nephew : — he certainly owed him Some ci grudge, which caused him to disinherit him; but on what account no one knows. — As to this ridiculous jealousy as he has acquitted his innocent wife, he also must acquit the poor young man. — But peace to his ashes! — — 
Mrs. Branville behaves on this occasion, as site does on every other, with the utmost propriety. To Say shat she grieves immoderately for a man, whom it is impojtible Ihe could •ever passionately love with an excess of affection, is Saying what no one could possibly believe. She how, 
, 
ever 
['40 ] 
ctcr laments his loss, as rworthy, * kind friend. — — 1 - 
'1‘how excessively to be pitied, ’my dear Mrs. Summers, are poor Mr. ' Ashley and our Sweet young friend: — they ’ certainly' love each other, 
■ with an affection, however, pure as that of angels; — but yet Such is the excels of honour and delicacy of both, that, nothing ‘voluntarily has ever transpired, on either side, that could warrant the least shadow of a well grounded jealousy in poor Mr. Branville. True if is, i the day these young folks first met at my house, the confusion of our dear Emma, ’ L observed, was great.’ — Some time afterwards I mentioned 

it 41 ] 
CD to her accidentally the name of Ashley; — she blushed we were alone, and I frankly asked her if she had formerly been acquainted with him. — At length, in her innocent unaffedted manner, fne related to me the prettiest little simple tale imaginable, which she Says you know as well as herself: — sit was indeed no more than what two of the most angelic of beings might have felt for each other. No doubt but fiie must be much Surprised to See this gentle youth, this unknown stranger — whose name she only knew to be Mr. Edward — turn out at last to be the nephew of 'her lord and master! 
Indeed 
[ 4? 1 
Indeed I think their cafe pitiable; — for you know, my friend, the above near alliance renders their being united, absolutely impossible: — not that the young man is in fact related to our Emma; yet the world, — the world — would censure Such a step; and her delicacy, I am convinced, would be shocked at the bare mention of it. — No, there is an everlasting bar, you See, placed between this most amiable pair for reasons, no doubt, the all wise dis poser of events Sees best, 
Mr. Branville was interred most pompoussy in the chapel of the abbey, among a long train of ancestors, ' in the family vault. He has left ibstyiq our 
t 43 ] 
our charming friend all his estate and a' noble .fortune besides in money.; but not one single shilling to jn?&r Edward. ^she is still with me, and will remain Some little time longer here, when I will return with her to the abbey — I must, I think, •be Some little comfort to her. 
Mr. Ashley, who remained here a .few days, till his uncle was interred, •did not See Mrs. Branville till the morning of his departure. He most •tenderly inquired after her health, d ashed to See him in my dressing toom, where she was sitting with ‘me : — never was a more affedfing interview— — they are most delicately circumstanced. — He approached 
[ 44 ] 
•proaclied her with tender confusion, — (and Ohow beautiful did sheappear in her widow’s dress!) — and, bow inglow, begged, if he could be of the least Service in Settling any family affairs, she would command him. — “She was, ” (she Said) “ob“ “exceedingly obliged ” — her voice trembled; she could not proceed : — she looked at me, I thought, at that mcment, with z‘; r treating tyqs., mt to leave the room; I certainly did not. — “You are go“ “then, ” (Said I) “Mr. Ash“ “” “Yes; madam, I have a “friend, who is So kind as to Soli“ “a Small commission for me in “the army, for I must think of — ” 
he 
[ +5 ] 
he shesitated — he looked down. — » 
I Selt a tear that moment glisten in mine eye: — his extreme youth, — his late cruel usage, I must call it) and his unprotected state. Seemed to demand it. The poor young man had put himselsin deep mourning, out of respecl to his uncle. — He now arose in order tojiepart: — Mrs. Branville drew a diamond brilliant ring from her finger, of about an hundred guineas value : — Mr. “Afnley, ” (Said she) “pray ac“ “this trifle, as an earnest of“ “futureshe laid a stress on the word friendjloip.^ which was equally kind and delicate; as if .file meant he fiiould understand she a would 
C 46 ] 
would be his friend to assist him, butin no character more near than a friend. The poor young man took the ring he could not Speak his eyes, however, looked din hundred tender Sentiments; and bowing low, left the room.' " -- At that moment, methinks, I would have given half what I am worth, that these most amiable young people had not Such an insurmountable bar of relatiohfbip placed between them: — ‘butfo it is, and must be Submitted to. — Our dear Emma Sat about a moment, in a. profound silence, after he had left the room; — then starting up. Said she was going to her apartment, as she believed it was near the hour of 
dressing 
[ 47 3 
dressing for dinner. -- -- She Sends an 
hundred loves to you. 
Need I Say, that a letter from her dear Mrs. Summers will give the greatest pleasure, both to her and to. Madam, 
Your very affectionate friend, Harriot Belmont? 
MANY letters, in the Space of the following three months, passed between Mrs. Summers and her charming friend; — but they are not inserted, containing nothing more than the Sentiments of a most sincere friendship, and nothing essentially necessary to the thread of our history. 

ji 
Mrs.’ 
t 48 1 
Mrs. Branville remained at the abbey, truly enjoying her large fortune, in relieving every objeo: of distress fi r miles around her. — It may indeed be juistly Said of this excellent young lady, “That she gave “raiment to the naked, bread to “the hungry, - and that the blessing “of those that were ready to perish, came upon her.” — Not content with exercising her extensive benevolence in that part of the country, she visited the place of her former abode (before marriage) in Cumberland : — the happiness of her parents, it must be imagined, was great, in the enjoyment of a visit from their darling child. — She diffused her benevolence, 
[ 49 1 
nevolenceto every object of distress, thro’ the villages of Ashdale, moss hill, c. She entered the cottages of the poor peasants, who had known her from infancy; — but they were amazed, that So fine. So great a lady as Madam Branville could (they Said) visit Such poor folks I — So little could these innocent beings Separate riches from its usual attendant, pride. 
Our lovely widow found the name of the ever lamented good Mr. and Mrs. Summers still remembered with tears; in which she sincerely joined. She one evening stole out alone to visit the favourite haunts, where she often used to meet her beloved Peggy and Patty ' vol. IV E Sum 
I 50 ] 
Summers: — the copse, — the style, — the wood, awakened an hundred tender Scenes : — she Sat down a few rnoments under the old oak, round which a beautiful honeysuckle was blooming in its highest perfection, and which had been planted by the hands of Peggy : — she gazed intently at this emblem of beauty : “Ah, ” (cried She) “lovely flower, which “abounds as much in moral in“ “as in sweetness, would 
“the hand that planted thee -- -- -- ” 
she could not proceed; she burst into tears; and left a Spot, so/a//of matter for refiedlion. In her way home she passed the hazel copse, 
- where she had first beheld her — yet ' too 
t 51 •] 
too dear, Edward “Here, ” (cried she) “a nosegay of the fairest fiow ‘‘ ers was presented me by that too “amiable youth here I first ob served that Sympathetic glance, 
“which conveyed unutterable 
“things -- -- but let me, ” (said she, 
deeply Sighing) “sty from a .Spot “which recalls Sentiments now to “be ever buried in oblivion; and “which it would be even criminal “in me to indulge : “let me hasten “Srom these tender Sceiies — it is “uot good for me to stay. — Ah! “poor Ashley !” 
But leaving this charming woman in the practice of every virtue, the compassionate reader fiiay perhaps E 2 wish 
t 52 ] 
vvish^ to know what initriz/v/y was now the fate of the poor disinherited, but worthy nephew rof Mr. bran ville. — ^distradtedly in love with his adorable Emma, he wandered from the country to London, ardently hoping, that could he obtain a commission in the army, by means of his friend’s interest, he might, in the first a<flion he should be engaged in with our treacherous * enemies in 'America, by a glorious death in defence of his king and country, at once lose all remembrance of his most unfortunate passion. — When he 
* This work was written during oar unhappy troubles with the Americans, and our other combined foes. 

refieded. 
t 53 ] 
refiedled, that the woman he adored had been the wife of his uncle, he was almost in a state of desperation; and was ready to lay violent hands on a life, he knew was doomed to wretchedness, from the above unfortunate circumstance; but with Hamlet he yet thought n 
** nobler in the mind to suffer 
The slings and arrows of outrageous ^ ** fortune. 
Than by opposing, end them.’* — — 
cto add to the distresses of this worthy young man, through an omis fion of the person who undertook to procure him a post in the army, he was entirely disappointed 'of if; — 
t 54 I 
and, to increase his vexations, hii^ Small stock of finances was nearly exhausted. 
One day, when this distressed youth was sitting in his apartment, in a most melancholy mood, meditating on that state of poverty, and all the horrors of its train, which must now Soon he Saw overtake him, a letter was brought him, carefully Sealed up, directed in a hand he knew not: — he opened it; and to his in expreshble astonishment found the contents were Bank bills, to the amount of ten thousand pounds — in fact, ten bills of a thousand pounds each. — He Sat for Some moments, almost deprived of motion. 
f 55 ] 
lion, at a gift So amazing — So unexpected— — a gift he found it was, as on a Small piece of paper (but in a hand he was not acquainted with) he Saw these words: — “Accept from friend the enclosed mark of esteem“ 
“God !” (cried he) “how ‘‘ wonderful — how inexplicable are “thy doings !” — - He was almost petrified, as well he might, with amazement! — who could remit him such a Sum, was the most wonderful thing in nature! — He ran over, in his almost distraded thoughts, a number of his friends; as, the worthy Mr. Belmont, Sir Thomas # 
Douglas, c— — belmont’s fore 4 tune 
. [ * 56 j 3 
tune he. knew was good, but^she could not think it possible or probable that he should remit him Such a Sum; — as little likely was it any other of his acquaintance would : — in short, it was a most inexplicable affair, and he looked upon it as the immediate gift of Heaven, Sent by Some ministering angel. 
We shall however, in due time, satissy the curiosity of the reader who was the donor of this most noble gift. 
Mr. Ashley, in a few days, wrote down to the worthy Mr. Belmont, to ask his opinion how he would advise him to place out this extraordinary/um to the greatest advan 
» 
L [ ^?57 i 3 
cage; whether it would not be prudent, with this of Heaven., tc?set out at once to trade in the East Indies, having now Such a stock in ^ hand : - — ''he was himself much inclined to travel, as he thought it would be the likeliest means of curing the hopeless pashon for his adorable Emma, which gave him inexpressible misery. 
lob 'mr. Belmont returned him for ^ answer to his letter, that he wished to See him in Wales, as Sir Thomas Douglas and he could better talk the matter over, than a written let bter could explain : — he also expressed equal joy and wonder at a present Sohnoble and unexpected— — 

[sis 3 
Mr. Ashley accordingly Sat out for Belmont hall; where we shall at present leave him, and inquire after the poor Sisters. 
We left Peggy in a most deplorable Situation; but by the tender cares of Patty she was at length restored to be just able to drag on a miserable being for Some time longer: — would we could Say, that with returning health it had been possible for these wretched girls to have got into Some honefi livelihood: but, alas! without 
friends, clothes, or money, an attempt to get into any family as a Servant was impradlicable: — who could recommend them? — or 
what 
[ 59 3 
what shop would employ in needlework two wretched prostitutes? — Peggy, stis true, had endeavoured, when her fever had left her, to get a few shillings by nettingbut this was precarious, and she could get no customers for her ingenuity : — the streets (horrid to say) were now ag; ain the wretched means of thesc truly miserable girls just Supporting a being, of all others in this life the most deplorable. — They detefiei this course, and yet from the horrors of their poverty were obliged to pursue it: — their misery was extreme they might justly have applied these emphatic lines of Shakespeare 

[ 6o ] 
Ipear to their wretched livelihood, though that admirable author uses them on another occasion 
- — My povertyt but not my voill, consents 
-- - 
Sharp misery had worn them to the ** bone.’* 
In vain had their excellent brother made the stridlest inquiry in vain had the worthy Mrs. ben net used her utmost endeavours to discover where the wretched girls had retired. — But a truce with this melancholy Subjeist for the present. 
The lovely widow remained Some time in Cumberland, from which lo place 
1/1 "TA 
[ 6i ] 
place frequent letters passed between Mrs. Summers, herself, and the amiable Mrs. Belmont; but they are by no means necessary to our hijiory. 
Mrs. Branville was now returned to the Abbey (business relative to her estate requiring her immediate presence there.) — We next present the reader with a letter from Mrs. Belmont to her fair correspondent in London, as it carries on the thread of our story. 
LETTER 
t 62 3 
LETTER. XXIX 
Mrs, Belmont to Mrs, Summers, 
y ■ 
belmont halu 
MVDEARMADAM, ’ 
W H AT an exalted character is our beloved Emma! — I am absolutely lost in astonishment at her unbounded generosity: - — what think you she has now done ^ 
Mr. Belmont and I have discovered, that she, Some little time since, in the most delicate manner, as from an unknown hand, has remitted to poor Ned Ashley the noble Sum in Bank bills of ten thousand poundstrue as you live! — ■ I What 
[ 63 ] 
What a magnanimity of mind — • what innate grandeur of Soul — does this charming woman poffess! I really look up to her as to a being of Some Superior order— — the Smallest, the most distant hint, has the angel given me of this matter herself: — neither would it, I sup pose (like many more of her noble benevolences) have ever been discovered, had not her lawyer, the only person privy to this generous gift, been Sitting over a bottle with Mr. Belmont, Sir Thomas Douglas, and poor Ashley, who has been alternately staying at douglas hali and with us for Some little time, till his -. affairs 
[ 64 J 
affairs are quite Settled, and fill if be determined whether the West or East Indies is to be the place in 
t 
which he is to bury his Sorrows and hopeless passion. 
In vain had we all been racking our brains who the generous donor of this ten thousand pounds could be; — nay, even before Emma herself have I expressed my pleasing astonishment at the event; — but, Jly girl as she is, not a wmrd escaped her relative to her knowledge of the giver; and indeed it had never entered my head, (generous to an extreme as she is) that she was that person... ^ 
But 
T 65 3 
But Mr. Forbes, her lawyer, Is, to use an expression of my favourite shakespear 
** loose of Soul -- - 
that in his cups, not one Secret whatever can he keep : — and from this ‘foible of his, he made the above discovery, in the following manner : 
As the gentlemen I have mentioned were sitting over their bottle, poor Forbes, half Seas over, filled out a bumper, — “Come, ” (Said he, being assced for a toast) “PH give “you an angel upon earth — here’s the noble widow Branville (here, my husband Says, poor ash vol. IV F lay 
t '66 J] 
lay In aimoment was She colour of Scarlet) — “she’s a dainty creature; “what a noble Soul does that wo“ “possess— — know — lo know “a little — but mum for thatbut “why should her exalted generosity “be concealed ^ noit ought to “be wrote in letters of gold.” — Then, turning Suddenly round to poor Ashley, “You little thought, “young man, from whom the ten “thoufanti pounds came: — but your “noble aunt your aunt branviut “was the benefadlress; and 1 Sealed “the notes up with these very hands of mine, and directed the letter. 
“— Come, here’s heraheakh in bumper.’* - A joii 
, oil I leave 
[ 67 ] 
to I leave you, my dear friend, to guess what the emotions of poor Edward were on this occasion : — he turned pale — he was not able to Support the Scene, but instantly arose and left the room the emphasis on the cutting words, auni Brhnville, Sunk deep I doubt not.. When we went to Supper, I inquired for Mr. Ashley; the Servants told me he was gone to bed with a violent headache: : next morning there was a melancholy and peculiar air of tenderness Spread through his fine countenance, which I can novexpress. — His knowledge of what this prating lawyer has revealed, will not be the means of curing his pass 
2 fion; 
r s fe ■] 
fipnf tut if it wiuld admit of an encrease, would certainly add to it. 
• 4 r t r. 
I pity him excessivelymy Mr. Belmont is quite wretched about him. — He says, he is convinced, hopeless as this unfortunate passion must be on both sides, (for he knows and Sees it) it will be the death of both. — Certain it is, the young man has every appearance of a declining state of health; — and a low fever, he continually has upon him, makes us very apprehensive of the event. Our Sweet Emma too has a languor about hei — has lost her appetite — can get no steep; — in short, they both love each other to distradion. 
A few 
j: i 
loi 
[ 69 -] 
A Sew days aster the above dis covery, fof the noble giver of the generous present, as abovementioned, I Saw her alone — I affected to look mysterioussy. 
“What a pity it is, ” (Said 1) “Mr. Forbes, who I’ really believe “to be a worthy man, should be Such a blah in his cups.” — Why, ” (Said she eagerly, and blushing) “what has he discover“ “? “Nay, ” Said 1, Smiling) 
I can have my fecreis, as well as lot youfs, my Emma; ” — “But, — but, what has he blabbed.?” — Nay, ” (returned I)' only that you “..Sent iked ajjoley ten thousand pounds. — Ah! my dear, I have 
F 3 
long 
[ 7o" ] 
long fufpefied you to be more than “human; now I am convinced of “it.” — I then extolled, as it justly deserved, So noble an a6tion. 
“bless me, ” (Said the loveliest of women) “there is nothing So ex ‘‘ traordinary in iti have more — rnore, my Harriet, than I can “Spend — and poor Mr. Ashley, “from his education — from his long expeded hopes of a large “fortune — from — from his re duced state of circumstances, merits justly everything that can “be done for him. — I only wish” (continued she) “to see two events happen; — one, that the poor young man was Settled as his birth 
CC 
CC 
t 71 ] 
and merits deserve: — the other, that he was married, ” (here she ftghed) “to Some woman that could “make him happy.” 
T tapped her cheek — “Ah! my “dear, ” .(Said I) “that sigh' of your’s convinces me thatjyc«r lafi wish was not quite So sincere as “your firji. But come, let us P walk in the garden.” 
Indeed, I make it a rule to Speak of him as little as possible; for, as they never can come together, you know it would be cruel to feed this hopeless passion on either fide. 
But this moment I See her coming up the avenue: she beckons fnej — you will, I know, think this' C F 4 a sufh 
[ 72 \ ] 
a I Sufficient excuse for my abrupt’ conclusion : Adieu, therefore— — ‘ Sieve me, : i ( n— — fi Most sincerely’your’s r 
Harriet Belmont. 
LETTER XXX 

Mrs Summers to Mrs. Branvillel 
London. 
MY DEAR EMMA, J 
E you really determined to excel every human being,? in every virtue, in every moral excellence? — Your charming friend Mrs. Belmont has told me «// — all your rivol^d noble 
t 73 J 
jquoble munificence to thesskmrable' Edward. — How do I revered your goodness! — and how do I rejoice,, that the friend of 
** iwty heart of hearts, ’^ 
(as Hamlet Says) has it So much inker power to reward Suffering virtue, in its every form. — Your noble con du6t (my incomparable friend) in this instance, as well as in '’'every other, naturally stowed to my pen; but I have, alas! a subject at my hearty which engrosses my almost T, every thought, except where your concerned.^ohy my dear! how shall I tell you? — In what language i 'can I paint the deep concern of my v'd r beloved 
[ 74 ] 
beloved husband and myself, when I Say, that he has at length Seen— — believe it to be her) — his poor Sister, 
the wretched Peggy, in -- -- (do I 
live to write it— — a night walker in the streets? — Oh my Emma! — your own heart, the Seat of tender compashon, will didlate to you what mine — what the most tender of brothers, must feel on this occasion. Mr. Summers cannot, however, be absolutely certain it was the miserable girl: — but yet there is every reason that can be supposed, next to entire conviction, that Jhe fnuft be the lost Sister we lament; you too will think as I do, when I relate the following particulars. 
About 
[ 75 ] 
About a week since, as Mr. Summers was returning from the Sc. alban’s tavern, past twelve o’clock at night, he was accosted in the haymarket by a young creature of the town, who asked him to give her a glass of wine; — as my husband is the very last man in the world who would comply with any request of one of the class she appeared to be of, he bid her be gone about her business. — — “Alas! sir, ’* (Said this unhappy woman) — “’tis “misery alone induces me to alk “your charity; I am prijhing “with hunger; I have a Sister dy ing with want.” — She wept. There was Something of mergy So 5 ‘ 'pathetic 
[ 76 ]’ 
pathetic (Mr. Summers says) in the plaintive voice and timid manner of this wretched girl, that he turned round' to look at the distressed object, (which he had not before done) and the moon shining extremely bright, he had a full view of her person; she was tall; and appeared finely shaped, and * a countenance, though' then emaciated and pale, yet beautiful : her dress was shabby to an extreme, but Seemed the remains of better days. The humanity of Mr. Summers was shocked to see 
* It was impofiible, that from a sight of' this unhappy girl’s person, Mr. summers could recognise his Jiftery as he had left England when she wa Quite a child. 
So 
■[ .77 3 
•so young. So amiable a girl in Such •evident distress. — She again begged she would bestow Some trifle on her, — adding, ‘4 f was not born to beg.” My husband instantly flung her half a crowns Lyhig, “There, young “woman, buy yourself Some food, “and get Some honest livelihood.” — He walked away hastily from .her; he observed fly burst into tears, .and heard her exclaim aloud — “God bless — God bless you, .sir! ‘‘ — Peggy Summers — Patty Sum“ “will bless you for ever.” — .My husband plainly heard this pathetic exclamation; — he was struck with astonishment. — “Heaven! ” .(cried hej what do I hear, !” Can 
a It 
[ 78 1 
“it be? — Nc — yes'did not the “poor wretch repeat the name of “Peggy, of Patty Summers ^ — “Yesshedid — O gracious God !” — He instantly stew back to the Spot in which he had Seen her, but alas! she had left it; — most probably had Slipped down into Some alley ov passage in or near the place. — Mr. Summers traversed that Spot, and the adjoining streets, for two hours after, in hopes of once more meeting this poor wretch, whom he doubted not to be his Jifter •, — for whom we have So long, and So vainly been Seeking. 
You will imagine, my dear friend, what I Suffered at the absence of 
my 
1 79 ] 
my beloved George that night, or rather morning; for he did not return till near two o’clock, having been all that time endeavouring (if by remaining'near the abovementioned Spot he could once more See her) to find this wretched girl. 
My fears that Some accident had happened to my dear husband, had made me most miserable; when at length he arrived : — pale and trembling, he flung himself into a chair, and alked for a glass of water O Lucy, ” (Said he, bursting into tears) “I have at last Seen ‘‘ my poor lost Peggy; — but, gra cious^heaven! how have I found Ad .s boidflui^ her! 
t So ] 
her! in what a wretched Situa“ “!” 
He then, my dear, told me the above particulars of meeting her in the street, c— — leave you to guess the misery this discovery has given us; — not but we have feared this to be their miserable resource — but yet -- -- 
I have not a shadow of a doubt but that this wretched girl is our poor Peggy — have you, my dear? 
Every night, since this affecting incident happened, has Mr. Summers, Mr. Fenwick, and another friend, been patroling that part of the town where he Saw her, and 
where 
[ 8i ] 
where he supposes her usual haunts are. — May Heaven grant us patience to bear this trying calamity I — As yet no traces can be found, which would lead us to a further discovery of their abode: — no doubt Some wretched garret; — nay, poshbly not even that; — O I shudder at the thought! 
Divine vengeance at length Seems to have overtaken, however, the abandoned man, who by his abominable arts first reduced these miserable helplcss girls to this infamous way of life yes, my friend. Lord Racket, I am informed, has been Some months in a Swift decline; — his body almost covered with pu vol. IV G trid' 
: [ 82 1 
: frid<ulcers, as. offensive to himself as to all about him — the conse quence of his exceshve debauches. He has attempted, it Seems, more than once to destroy himself by poison;; — other times execrates his being, and his very God — horrible to tell! — A worthy relation of his Sent a clergyman to pray by him; but he bid him depart, with the most dreadful curses. 
The fate of the insamous wretch, his pander, you already know. 
The vile baronet, the chief associate of the above abandoned nobleman, is in a miserable plight, being obliged to fly his country to avoid a prosecution of the most Sc 2 rious 
t % 3 
Jrious nature; shkving had the’ almost unparalleled cruelty and int 'pudence to attempt the virtue of Ills own niece, a child'^f eleven years. — To what heights of wick edness will Such infamous wretches arrive at, who make •vice their only 'pursuit! 
n I most imipatiently, my Sweet .friend, long to See you at the ab shcy; but 1 fear a trip now to North Wales, in my present state, will be impracticableat least Mr. Summers, whose tenderness is above description, would not Suffer me to run the hazard of So long a journey t this time: ^ he will hardly per -- H i,. ..io r O 2 ‘... q £ b; mit 
20011 .'t 
[ ] 
nnif meto iv, much less to tray above an hundred tniles. — Remember, my dear, if‘ the little stranger should p^ove to be a girl, and pfe? mise to be uncommonly Emma must be her name. ^ ' 
a 
Lenter, my incomparable friend, 
into all the delicate distress of yotir^^ 
Situation with poor Ashley. It 
certainly very singularly perplexing, 
\v'that the marriage with hils'^^ 
uncle should preclude (as it 
tainly' must) any'eohnexion'^mote'^^ 
near than that of friendship : the 
trial is great; but yu, my 
roic Emma, are equal to ittvyesss '. A S dt you "will nobly' triumph, I doubt 
not. 
t h 
np^t;, p^no doubt>chis everlasting ^!^' is placed between; you for great and wise ends.. mock, all human' 
'
foresight: — an alliance, : depend on it, gwas not good for either : — So has willed the Eternal Mind. — A tender * Providence., I doubt not, Saw'siome adyerse stroke, — Some imperiding‘'' evh, ~ gathering over your heads; ^. had the wishes of both been grati fied V kindlji drew the provident. • tiaicloud. — I always think the straj.nts^of Heaven are memful 

Well Says the poet, 
‘it u 
lr.."!j 

** Bravely we claim a right to our undoing, 
** The chaitzs that hold us, hold us frora t 
'- V ' ' 
^ our ruind 
•ion 

bit[ 
[ ] 
* But I forget that L iarri prekc and; moralising to^one'feuc capable of it than f bm; and Who is at this moment a6t'ually frauiftng the Severest duties of patience and resignation, as well as teaching, them to all around her. 
I almost envy our charming friend, 'Mrs.' belmont, the delight of Seeing you every day : — narrow minded wretch as I am! 
‘ You will write, I am convinced, very Soon; for you know .your letters, next to Seeing you, are it^'y choicest delight: and pray be vefy minute in your accounts *, for be'as surest no incident, shcrwever trifling it may appear to you, shut is of'irii'. portance 

t 87 ] 
‘ portance to me, if it relates .to my limma; Such is the tender regard of, my dear friend, 
. Your most faithful and 
affectionate, 
Lttcy S, 
P. S. Mr. Summers, who loves you as much as I do, Sends an hundred good wishes for your happiness— — everything to Mrs. Belmont that can assure her of my affectionate regard. Ah! my dear, how happy should I be, blessed with the most tender of husbands, and with the most amiable of friends; — pbut the poor wandering Sisters force me to sigh in the midst of 

G 4 
agreeable 
[ o88 ] 
agreeable prospedspity and pray for them. Once more adieu, nio 
oi bar i ‘ st binoni ?i3rn 
■ ■■. — rtm' 
'- V' ', 
XXXI ^ 
.Mrs. Branville to Mrs. Summers. 
St. maud’s Abbey, 
North Wales. 
Y ES! my Lucy, I pity from my Soul, and pray for, the.dear unhappy girls. — I have not a doubt but the wretched bbjed you So af fedingly describe must be our poor Peggy. — Heavens! — a falling tear here makes this blot — a tear far innocence, like that we must ever deplore. i V 
Ah I 
f t Sgg ] 
vci Ah! my dear, what a jpaihstk: •circumstance, that poor Mr. Summers should See his ruined, his lost sister, in Such a Situation! 
We have here too, for the last ten days, had a most distreshng Scene : — my heart — ‘my weak heart, is by no means calculated for So much anxiety. — 
.. Poor Ashley is ill: — alas— —; over by his physicians! — A fever for Some time has preyed on his Spirits, which has baffled all me fficine, and has at length brought him almost to the borders of the grave. — He was at Mr. ]3elmont’s, when his illness increased So as to threaten the most alarming conse hia ' quences. 
[ 9p ] 
quencesi, ’ and there he still remains extremely ill. — Mrs. Belmont (dear woman) will herself perform the office of nurse to the unhappy Edward; and indeed a most tender one she is. 
I own to you, my dearest Lucy, that I am wonderfully affected with' this illness of 'poor ashley’s Mrs, 
Belmont will have it, that since that prating fool, Mr. Forbes, made # discovery oi'who was the donor of a certain gift (of which you have had, I find, an account) — she, I repeat. Says she is convinced the above unhap'pj young man has been more than usually So, since his knowledge of who was [the donor 
. of 
[ 91 ] 
of a certain gift. — If /, my dear friend, have been the cause — • the innocent cause, I am beyond measure grieved; — how unfortunate how very unfortunate, the affair came to his knowledge! — I thought myselfy£> Secure! — But I must has ten to tell you the affe61: ing Scene I have been witness to. — 
A few evenings ago I received from Mrs. Belmont a short note, begging my immediate presence ad their house, on a very particular occasion she Said, ' bu t did not mention what. — I instantly ordered the chariot, and on my arrival found the above dear friend had been weeping : she told me poor Mr, 
Ashley, 
t 92 3 
Ashley, she believed, was dying.’’, r “(His being ill at belmont hall I had before heard, and had often Sent my compliments of inquiry after his health— — was ex ’ ceedingly shocked at the account she gave me, which she ended with an earnest request of poor ashley’s, it Seems, that I would See him for one minute only. — “Heavens !” (cried ‘ I, throwing myself into a chair) “for what purpose? — for what, “end ^ — It is wrong — wrong be ‘hyond expression, in him to asse" " “— for if he really does love’* — — I stopped at the little monosyllable— — ‘‘ (Said my friend) ‘‘ what impropriety is there 
It 
lucan 



[ 93 ] 
can there be, Mrs, branviuh^, 
“in an aunt visiting a nephew — This expression aunt was certainly most rightly urged in my dear Mrs. Belmont, as it was meant kindly to inspire me with all the proper dig -- mty of Such a relationjhip; and I at once took her whole meaning in. the right light: — I will be So honest to confess, my Lucy, I felt. myself ashamed— — at my girlijh,, foolish behaviour. — I now felt the littlenefs of my ridiculous fears, in, seeing my nephew,, ill (when it certainly was my dutylo to do) — and: with' all the fortitude I could as sume, or mufieno my aid, r desire’j "" Mrs. Belmont to conduct me to his 
apartment. 
[ 94 3 
apartment. ^' But how was I shocked at the melancholy object which first struck my sight! — my once beloved Edward pale, emaciated, Supported by pillows in his bed; his head reclining on the breast of good Mr. Belmont. — I approached the bed; — “How does my nephew P (Said I in trembling accents) — how does Mr. ajhleyp'" — At that moment methought a kind of faint blush overspread his cheek, and he feebly held out to me his emaciated hand : — “This — this is kind indeed” ” — the poor youth.) O Lucy, what did I Suffer at that moment! — but avaunt I these killing reflections. He continued, 
“IIQW 
I 95 ] 
jsfcw I shall,, die in pence “I have not a wish'left: — • to see “you, madam, is ample recom pence for — for all ” — — ^ 
At this moment Mr. Belmont, (which I was Sorry for) left the room; whether by the desire of poor Edward I know not: — he reclined his languid head on the pil jow: — “I could not” (Said he ip broken accents) “die till I had Seen “— had thanked you — most gene “■ (he was pleased to Say) V of women, for your — exalted “donation.” — — “I beseech you, Mr, Ashley, ” (interruptedi) “not to mention it; — you will oblige me, neye.r more io Speak pr^thmk r. of 
‘CC 
'[ 9^ J 
of it — it is too trifling — to” - — -‘‘ Well — well!” — (Said he) “Hea^ ** ven will reward you — when I “am — nothing. — I wish not in“ “to live — and yet I have ^ had attachments to this world — “nay have” — (sighing) — “"which'. “nothing can Subdue — no! — not “even the cold' hand of death.” ’ — Then, looking at me, with, inexpressible tenderness, as if he had forgot the circumstance of my having been the wife of hisv uncle,. “emmap' (Said he) “do you re“ “when I Saw you in the“ “grove at Ashdale? — Do“ “remember you once lost “little miniature picture at Moss- -- 
“
[ 97 ] 
** hill ?*’ — (This circumstance, my Lucy, I well recoiled, and never could find it.) — “7^’’ (continued he) was the thiefyou dropped “k£fom your pocket, in the little wilderness near your house and“ “unseen, there found it: ■ — and “here — here” — said he)' “next “my hearphavc T ever since worn “it; : — nor in the cold grave shall it ^ be Separated from me — it shall “mingle with my'duff” — — Indeed, next his heart! Saw this picture, i my dear friend; from the opening of his shirt bosom— — what I felt! — Rut, Emma, V (faidshe in the most tender accent) { vol.^iv.. H!! tclii 
t 98 3 
me you forgive this stheft — Say you pardon me.” 
’^‘ Forgive!” (Saidi“ “Hea “'yens! — yes — yes.” ™ (I was excessively fluttered, and hardly Lnew what I Said : — he looked at me earnestly a moment.) — “And ** will you — will you grant my last ** request ?” (‘said he in much tremor.) -- What is it” (returned 
d) — “indeed' I wish Mr. Ashley “happy.” — Then, ” (cried he) “let me once kiss your dear hand.” 
I gave him my hand; — I could not Speak : — he took it, — pressed It to his«beating heart. — “It is a!! cordial, ” — (Said 'he) — “for one 
“moment 
t, 99 '] 
'‘^moment let me hold it here in “Sacred Silence.” — (O, my Lucy, what a moment was that!) — he then imprinted a kiss on it, crying, Emma! this hand — this little .hand of yours — you gave awayi* that moment his delirium of the fever returning, he began to ramble— — “gave away your own — my happiness; -- -- -- -- -- -- -- yes — 
c 
cc— 
— — yes — ungrateful as you are.” — (Then peering in my face) 
CC V -- -- -- -- -- -- 77....... TT r 
You are not Emma iiarvey! See! — Seei you are led to church — ha! — my uncle 1 — but before you wed him, let us, my love, walk in yonder myrtle 
4c 
C 
. K.' 
h2 
c 
srove. 
E 100 ] 
“grove. Hark! — ^ what Sweet ” music! '■ 
O Lucy, what did I endure, to, hear these ibul harrowing reveries!’ >^1 Sat transfixed in silent grief. — How long this Scene would have continued, I know not; for at that instant the physician arrived with. Mrs. Belmont; ^he found his fever coming on, and I retired in^an agony of mind I cannot describe. — ‘‘ See, (Said I, afterwards, to Mrs, belm.onf) the wretched effect of this visisof “mine stis my, presence, I fear, “has occasioned, the fatigue which “has again brought on his Sever.” pasted a V retched night; — • 
blit. 
[ lox ] 
but, thank Heaven! yesterday and this morning I hear he is rather better. — Mrs. Belmont tells me he awaked yesterday from a long number, Seemingly refreshed and much composed. — “I have Seen her, ** (cried he) “I have had a visit from “— who do you think, Mrs. Bel“ “?” — “Nay, I know not, ** (Said she) — “don’t tell any one, ’* (returned he) not that old prat ing Forbes; — but indeed, my “Emma Harvey has kindly Seen “me; — was it not .good, very good “in her — Ah! Mrs. Belmont, I y old tell you — but eternal silence (putting his hand to his lips) “shall Seal the fatal Secret, ’* 
H 3 I pray 
C 102 ]. 
I pray incessantly for his recovery, tje is ordered, I find, by his physicians to try the Hotwell, Bristol. — I begin to hope those healing waters, joined.with his youth, and the life of strict temperance he has always led, will in time restore him. — You wished me, my dear, to be very mi 7iute\ and I think indeed I have now fully complied with your request. 
Pray tell Mr. Summers I wish fpx nothing So miuch as the sight of you at the abbey; — nay, remember I ttii/zhave no denial. — I insist, on it, that the, little stranger, which you tell me will now Soon make its ap pearimce, be one of the party; — I shall provide a nursery on purpose. 
in. 
P 103^ 31 
in>the most quiet part of the abbey: — whether it be a little George, or, as you kindly Say, an Ernma.^ it will be equally welcome as its dear mother, and very worthy father, to,;. 
My beloved Lucy, 
.Your tenderly affedllonate 
. Emma B- -- -- -- -■ 
S. Our charming Mrs. Belmont has much endeared herself to my es teem, from her very tender cares of poor Ashley. — She sends you an hsiiidred loves, and all imaginable good wishes. 
DURING the Space of the following three months, nothing happened H 4 mate 
iu 
[■ 104 -3 
material to the thread of our history. The amiable friends, as usual, corresponded; but their letters, as not necessary, are not inserted. — During this period, the good-natured reader will be pleased to hear, that poor Mr. Ashley began to find benefit from the Bristol water: after his reco very (if it should be perfeded) he firmly intended to leave England for ever. — Mrs. Summers had now presented her worthy husband with a lovely boy; and intended Soon, with her little one and its delighted father, to Set out for the abbey, on a visit to her charming friend; but whilst she was preparing for putting this long journey into execution, 
she 
I «°5 ] 
V she received, to her great astonishment, the following letter from her beloved Emma. 
. LETTER XXXII 
. Ms, Branville to Mrs, Summers. 
St. maud’s Abbey, 
^ ** Who, Providence, ftiall trace thy secret 
** 
V ** Meafnre thy counsels, or dire thy plans V 
My DEAR LUCY, ^ 
J Have a most extraordinary event to relate, which I am convinced will give you equal pleasure and astonishment. I should have written a fortnight Since, but have been N waiting 
[• io ] 
waiting, all that time to be able to give you the final fequd to a most wonderful affair that has happened’ here. — O my beloved friend! how shall I tell you — that Ashley — the atniable Ashley, — is noty it Seems, on the most indubitable proof, the nephewy aster ally of Mr. Branville' True as you live. — What an amazing discovery I 
Just Heaven! how can we ever enough adore thy wonder working hand, that, by means whichi mock all human foresight, has brought this astonishing matter to light? — But let me hasten to unravel to my Lucy (the friend of my soul) this mystery; as I know she is, at thist 
moment 
[ 107 ] 
moment on the very rack of curi ‘ osity. — Expect, however, no connexion— — is impossible in a mind Soindeed, no language can express what I have felt for this last fornight, whilst the matter remained doubtful; — but now all mysteries relative to the astonishing event are cleared up — ww we are all joy and rapture. — But it is cruel in me to keep you So long in anxious fuspence — here then, take the wonderful particulars. 
About a fortnight since, as Mrs."' Belmont was one evenings with me, rambling, in this Sweet month of June,, in the most Solitary part of a ’ ’■ little 
[ los ] 
little adjacent village, and stopping at two or three cottages to inquire after the health of Some of our patients there, a young woman, who Saw us pafs by the door of a Small farmhouse, instantly rushed out — For God's Sake, ” (Said the girl with great earnestness) “be So kind “to tell me which of you ladies is “madam Branville.” — “My name’* (Said I) ‘‘is Branville: — but what is. “' your business with me ^ “O 
“madam I ** (returned she) “my “mother lays at that little farm“ “very illindeed, ” (Said the girl, bursting into tears) “I be“ “she will die she came as far as out of Cheshire with me 2 last 
t l J 
^ last week, to unfold a Secret (she “has long had lay heavy at her ** heart) to Squire Branville;, but now hearing he is not living, it “must, ” (she says) “be revealed to.your ladyship. My poor mather was.took ill on her long jour“ “and with the greatest dissi “culty I got. her touhis place but yesterday. I heard you was now “pashng by, and Itook the libera ^ ty of coming out; ^ I hope, madam.. 
“No child, certainly, ” (Said I) and was turning round to go into the little wicket, that led. to the house, when my good friend Mrs Belmont,, wjio has more her wits 
about 
C MO 1 
about her at all times than* your poor Emma, .puhcd me by ‘the sleeve, Softly whisperingj ^ “This is, methinks, an odd story of this girl’s: * — why should she be So very pressing to See you? — It is very strangethe world is So full of mischief, I know not what to think; — it may be Some Scheme to. get you into the house. If you will take my advice, I tell you what I think you had better do; — tell the girl you will come tomorrow morning; when we will come with Mr. Belmont and sir Thomas Douglas, (who is, you know, now with us;) then if she has anything to declare, let her lo “Speak 
«< 
[ III ] 
Speak it.” — This good advice of my friend, I readily came into we accordingly told the girl, it was then So late in the evening, (being almost daric) that we would defer calling on her mother till the next morning, when we.certainly would, at the hour of eleven. 
We found Mr. 'Belmont and sir Thomas walking in the avenue, before B — shall, in great anxiety for our late stay. — Mr. Belmont, who is one of the most agreeable of men, rallied us much on the mystery of our staying out So late. — “Very fine, ladies, indeed, ” (Said he, when he found us safe., "and his fears were over —) i’ll lay my life ‘N' f “this 
C II J 
^ this is slime private assignation you have been upon : — what, ^ strolling all this time among the “Welch mountains? very pretty, “indeed !*’ — “Hear him, Emma!” (cried Mrs, Belmont, laughing.) — We now gave the gentlemen a particular account of the girl’s request; they, both thought we had done quite right in deferring our visit till the morning. Accordingly, at the appointed hour we all Sat out in the: coach, on this strange, and, .for aught we knew, perilous expedition. — Much pleasantry, however, pasted in our way to the farmhouse,, we were to find the old woman; wsho* had this strange mystery to discoven. 
r mte. 
[ i ] 
— Mr. Belmont laughed, and Said, he wished he had put a pistol in his pocket: — “We shall be decoyedp (Said he) “into Some old barn, 
“among a gang of gipsies, depend “on it. — Sir Thomas Douglas, ” (continued he) “is luckily a justice “of peace Something tells me“ 
“shall have the old lady laid by “the heels, ” r 
In this jocose manner we talked and laughed till we arrived at the house : — we were condiusted into a room, and there indeed Saw a very old woman, sitting in an armed wicker chair, apparently very ill, the woman of the house mvincr her drops and water, and the girl vol. IV I we 
t ih 1 
we' had Seen the 1 preceding everting holding her head. — I now advanced to the old woman: — “■ I am now come to hear what^you'have to “reveal, ” (Said I) — “I am the ” widow of Mr. f'branville; you “may unburthen youro mind to" “me. — these are all my'‘besh friends, ” (looking round on mrs and Mrs. Belmont) “you may“ “freely; but don’t hurry' “yourself, good woman — you ap“ “very ill.” — — “Ah! ma“ “” (returned she, bursting into tears) “I am not a good wo“ “I am a Sad wicked wretch, “■and the Lordjiave mercy on'n^^ “Soul; — bus I am hauntcdmight^ ^ s 1 and 
C h5 ] 
^n£st>d<l ay', still I shave cleared' my 
conscience : — I did a sad^thing, w to be Sure.” ^ — — “What is your tliname, ” (Said 1) “and who are My name, madam. 
oiiyou: <.1 
?»- 

u; is Perry; I have been all my lifetime a nurse by profession — more’s the pity: — I live down ‘bin Cheshire everybody there knows old nurse Perry. — To be ‘v Sure poor. sir.charles is in 'a bad ‘I state of health, but I am certairi Vbt: le will come up if the poor’ •‘g child i I call him Jlill) be 
yet aboveground.” -- -- -- This 
strange mysterious discourse of the' old woman encreas^d our curiosity” a: nd wonder, ad mij I ida — «ludl uas f 2 We 
,, t st‘6 1 
H 5d£d ^15701 i L ■ ’ 
.. We were now all Seated, my 
nl.no ^nofh 
frienest, she Said, might hear what 
»w'a La' v/ i.’jno .jg 
she had to unfold. She again took 
ri: ': u ” if. 
Some strops, to enable her to'begin 
her story; which, as near si can 
recollect, she did in the following. vd to ■■■ X 
words, whilst we all Sac round in the 
utmost astonishment.'"' * ' 
“About twenty years ago, ” 
(Said the old woman) “I was lent 
“for to go to Sir Charles Rich“ 
“his lady having been de“ 
“about a month of a love 
*• ‘ - j. t 
ly boy, and desired me to take it 
CI * 
home to nurse, as her ladyship Said she could then often See it, my cottage being close to the park — I took it home that very 
(( 
bo 
; i.. 
n.g'a, 
[ f 3 
“night, and a lovely babe it was 
- : V ’ ■ 
“as ever the Sun shone on. — In 
r ■ 
“a month afterwards maj 

‘‘ dam Ashley, sister to the great “‘squire Branville, ” — (O Lucy, what a twinge did I feel at my heart that moment at the name of ajh lay I an hundred thoughts at once rushed upon me — of yet 1 knew not what. The woman continued)r ^ “That good lady also was brought ‘V to bed of a Son Some little time ‘‘ before; — he was a puny sickly ‘‘ child, and madam Ashley desired I would take and nurse him 

‘‘ with little master Richmond : — “I did So for three months. — But 
d‘ 
drs( 
%( 
^ comes, my, great offence; 
0 ^ T >mofl 31 ji ^ I' ' ' 
. 13!! God 
« 
<>< 
[ m ] 
“’'.ddd for^ii^ shef~thc twb^gf^t 
V. -, .*'■ 
families were*"gone to London for the winter, and both the chil 
f i" 
” dfen I had to nurse were Seized “with the rtheafles master ash lay was Such a s>ocr weakly thing he died of the distemper ^ the third day *, and what did I do (wicked woman as I was) but ** write up word to London that it ^ was the Son of Sir Charles rrch mond that died, instead of Ash, 
/, “indliced yod to make use of that deceptibh ?” Ah! madam, ” ** ^ 
^ Very shafe temost: ■ Lady Rich 
ysiorid wfis*, io be Sure, a thvetous, 4* I “hard 
t J ] 
iq deal with, and; : the ‘‘^advantage I had from her was ‘j not near So great as from ma* ^ “i^^dam Ashley *, So, for the Sake of ‘j^.cursed'lucre, of gold, I palmed *‘r master Richmond on her for her 
Vj 
Son. She Soon came down into 
“the country, and thinking the child her’s, rewarded me largely “for my care. Lady Richmond ‘^mever returned, for she went to and there died; So that my wicked deceit .prospered as I q] could wish. — Six Charles was greatly astlidled for the death of ^ his^fon, it being his only child, and a great estate depexiding.” dame Perxy, ’q|fiaid *' I 4 Mr. 
t 120 1 ] 
’ M%biqimont, giving a most i?e ^ netrating look) you palmed Sir “Charles I richmond’s' only Son “and heir on Mrs. Ashley for “hers.'” ’ — Even So, sir, ” (continued she;) “he remained with me “till madam Ashley died, when “her brother, ’squire Branville, “took the child to himself, and “educated him.” — ( “O Heavens!” exclaimed I; and before Mrs. Belmont could reach me her Smelling. bottle, I was Sunk back in my chair in a fainting fit. What the old woman thought of my disorder I know not; but however, by the kind aid of my friends I was at length rie stored, laod we were once again all 
Seated) 
Seated— — (said'^thi^ nd/se) ii^‘ I have heard'down intilhhshirc n ff that’squire Branville had turned ** the poor young gentleman lately r“ “of doors; and then my con ^ began to haunt me day and night, as I had been the wicked cause, by my deceit, of bv keeping him from his father, and P all his great riches, his paternal stf inheritance, ” • — — “Should you *‘’‘know” st(said Sir Thomas dou ’glas) “the young gentleman if you were to See him Should 
“I know himv (Said the oldmurse) aye, that I should, among ten thousand : — I should know the Sweet fellow -? — I should know (.jjaiiai master 
[•^.122 ] 
•q rinaster - Edward o Richmond That “Edward was the name: of both ‘‘ the children; — besides, he had the “mark of a tulip on his breast.’’ ^ “That indeed.' (cried Mrs.. Belmont hastily) “she has*for in his fever “you know, my dear, ” (Said 'she to her husband“ “his physi “cian ordered a blister to be put “on his right side, I was presenc “when it was put on, and plainly L Saw the mark of a tulip on his “.breast, which I afterwards men tiohed.” IB 
The affair now really beginning to be of a very Serious nature. Sir Thomas and Mr. Belmont retired into tlk little garden bdongingito jeyal the 
[ >23 ] 
the house, to conscr on what steps Were mostproper to betaken in this interesting affair. — The result of their conference was, to Send direistly for Mr 'Ashley from the hot wells; and another Special messenger into Cheshire for ’sir Charles Richmond, who certainly, at all events, would take the journey on Such an interesting occasion. 
d The old woman mentions another proof of the identity of Mr. rich mond, which is a fear on his chin, and which is very obvious.* ^! have indeed - al ways observed this little fiary which is far from a blemish, and used tonbe frequently hid in a shifell ’mark^ the norse 
Says, 
[ JH ] 
t 
feys, was a burn; and Mrs. Belmont declares, she has often heard him 
I,. ■ 
Say it was So when he was a child 
i 
at nwrse... 
i yi 
We now returned to belmont hall. I leave you to guess my situation of mind: 1 took care 
not to be too sanguine., however, in my — hopesshall I lay } 
Air. Belmont instantly dispatched a Special messenger for the amiable Edward; another likewise Set off for the Seat of sir Charles Richmond, with the utmost haste. The old nurse was privately conveyed to belmont hall, to stay there till the arrival of the gentlemen, lest, in cafe of all this being noq more than a 
nierc 
t 125 ] 
i^cre Imposture, she should make her dfcape : — but the poor wretch, we found on her arrival at the hall. So extremely ill, that we were under the greatest apprehensions she could not live till the gentlemen that were Sent for came. — O my Lucy! what did I Suffer in that miserable interval! — I will be So honest as to Say, my whole earthly happiness depended on the authenticity of this very interesting discovery. — A week was Spent in this most anxious state of suspehce. At length the amiable Edward arrived; his health evidently better from the Bristol water. — Never did he appear So lovely; ' — an air of animation — of joy, had 
taken 
f' 126 } 
takenlpoffession of his fine courttd' 
9 
nance, from Some certain hints being given, in Mr. belmont’s letter to him, relative to this amazing dii covery; which, I flatter myself, were as agreeable, as interefiing to hint as to your Emma ‘it must however be imagined, till the actual arrival of sir Charles Richmond, his heart could not be in a very easy state. — Much, my dear friend, > dei pended on this very interesting eventa lost and most worthy farther, to whole affedionate.bosom he was going to be restored a nob}e> estate, the'paternal inheritance of an ancient and respedtable family and, shall I add, perhapsy2?»2^hopcs^o */(£)) 3 that 
I i27 1 
that as the har which opposedi.our mutual happiness was now going to be removed, in all probability we should avail ourselves of it. 
In the evening of the Same day which brought us Edward, the worthy sir Charles Richmond likewisc arrived : r never did I behold a more Sensible well-bred man.' *■ V? 
T.the parties were now conducted into the room of the old nurse : — sir Charles instantly remembered the face of the woman, and called her by her name; — whilst, with eager eyes, she hastily exclaimed, — “Yes. 
yes, that — that is indeed., my ** master Edward.” — She then tore open his shit;; Set herei” '* 
I (Says 
[ 128 ] 
(Says she) “the tulip on his breast, ^ “the Scar on his chin !” — ^ Si, Charles most perfectly remembered the above marks on his Son, when nursed by this woman; — adding the particular circumstance, that whilst lady Richmond was pregnant of. him, she was gathering a beautiful tulips from which flew out a large bee and stung her breast. — “Graci “ous Heaven, ” (Said he) “he is — 
“he is my Son!” — Indeed there wanted nothing of resemblance, to ascertain this interesting Sadt, greater than could be found betwixt the countenance of the father and Son the Same eyes — the Same mouth, — in short, the most striking likeness 
was[ 
[ 3 
was Exhibited betwixt both, the difference oiyears excepted. 
sto. finish this amazing discovery, sir Thomas Douglas, advancing to the old nurse, ashed her if she would, before him and another justice of peace, make an affidavit of this matter? — To this she most earnestly Said, she would that moment; and also, that she would take the Sacrament on it, by the hands of the minister of the parish, as her last dying words; but begged it might Soon be done, as she found her end very near approaching. — Accordingly she made a most Solemn affidavit of this discovery, and in the presence of twelve persons took the Sacra. vol. IV K merit 
t yo] ] 
On the truth of it. ^wc could, indeed, desire no greater affirrtia rtion s; — the proofs were as as possibility could rf produce. 
these — these, ^* Sakl the woman, b “are my last dying words.” — They were indeed So; she Soon after grew speechless, and fell into a convulsion, which carried her off.^it appeared as if Providence had shi* raculoussy preserved her existence to effect this discovery; for; it Seems, on the road from Cheshire hkhcr she travelled with a fever on her all the way, and Seemed only Supported by the ardent desire of clearing up this mystery. ir; - i h C S' 
I leave you to guess, my friend, 
•' - ' the 
t 13« 3 
the joy which now took jilatnjsti t •doubt was «<?«; at(an end. — The de slighted father, the'enraptured fon, hung on each other's necks in Specdv, less extasy : — “Have I then found ‘h thee, my poor boy?’* (Said the good sir Charles) “O heavenly — happy t meeting 1 ” — Young Richmond tno longer Ashley) was almost wild in * hisexprcffionsof joy. — Mrs.belmont will shave IV that when he paid his compliments to me, in return for my .congratulations on this happylcvent, we both showed Such marks 
how much interefied we were in the discovery, that she is convinced; sir Charles Richmond and all the>com ir. pnny 
')dc 

13^ 1 
pany observed our extreme tion. ^ Perhaps’ So Tucy — I can not help it. — am interrupted 
I will date again. — — oqq. 
ol 
Wednesday Evening. 
The above was written four days since, and I waited (it being too large a pacquet to go by the post) to send by a neighbouring gentleman, who is going to town as tomorrow— — sighs, and looks — but they are not the sighs of a defpd.iring lover : — his koh, however, tell me a great deal. — He Seems as if he wished I would him an opportunity of opening hrs ‘‘ ■' 6 ■ heart t 
•[ »33 ] 
heart : r he can tell me nothing, my dear, but what wy own Suggests: — 't have as yet not given him one single opportunity of Speaking to me alone; — - Mr, and Mrs. Belmont Say, I am as cruel as a tygrefs. — I have a vast belief, that this amiable lover elefl of mine, has already declared his Sentiments for me to his father; — (with whom, by the bye, I am absolutely delighted;) for the worthy man pays me Such uncommon fcspedl — looks on me with Such tenderness in his manner, ^ and Seems So much to observe my every word and affion, that I am convinced he suspedts something. is in the .wind, — He is, I think, of his 
K 3 
CL ’ 
[*• 134’ ] 
8g€l, the most agreeable man I know, but appears in an ill state of heakhp^ which Seems to threaten a Speedy de ci cay, - 
'I have written the chief part of this very long epistle at belmonc hall, where I have been staying with my charming friend. — “Ah! Emit 

raa, ” (you cry) “was there no “other reason.? — I rather suspedt “you could not — at \t2ik your heart ‘‘ would not permit you to return “to the abbey, till the interesting cjiseovery was fully ascertained.” — Well, Lucy, I give you leave to think as you will. 
I suppose at this hour there is not finder the cope of heaven fb happy 

a Set 
[[ '35i ]j 
a Sct, of^l^i^s(as..tlw)se npwun^r. th jfoof of belmontr hall : r^.q, that my Lucy was. here, * to, add. to the number! — But adieu : — it is not irnpossible but in a very short time I shall be addressed n form, by the - most amiable of men. — I shall write.; again very Soon; mean time believe < me, : i " ■ 
• Most truly and affectionately“ “
I V -, ' ' ' ■ ^ 
• Emma Branville^, 
ni;;. 'i V I. V -, - 
•omrs. Belmont is much your ’s. 
Sir Charles Richmond has proyid' ed^very handsomely for the daughter, and the rest of the, children .of the old nurse, who, made this very interesting dil^very.; ^! bcgan.j my 

k4 
letter, 
I ‘36 ] 
.f.jietter, Lucy, ywith a Scrap ta blank erse en it with the following, 
j ones in j j (the - author I forget) - .:,. - II G — i mtjib 
r ^ ^ ■ •’T^ 
** Virtue, rejoice, -' fronion awhile, 
V Thatfronun is but the earnest of a smile ** day of tears presages years of joy, *' Misfortunes only mend us, not destroy.” 
0- : '’f'*' 
tho’ Heaven may 
i ft! ' ‘''• 
■ LETTER XXXIII 
Mrs. Branville to Mrs. Summers 
St. maud’s Abbey. S, my Lucy, I have had a declaration of the most tender 
- * 4.1 
passion, at length, fromjthe amiable 
Richmond: 

I d j; i 137 ] 
^vuiarichmond : ^by»his'early lapplica -- woi tion, one should * inlagine he feared 1 10 slime one might Supplant him in my esteem; — but his fears were lieedless; for, without a blush, to you I con fess, my faithful friend, that Edward alone 
V 
** Possesses every thought. -- - 
“If Virtue were to take a human form, 
_ To light it with her Smiles and namelels ** grace, 
O! she would choose the person of my ** Richmond, ’* 
Hki 
It is certain this most amia ble of men has not been tardy for one single fortnight only elapsed. twhich I will suppose he gave to -- .delicacy) before the offer^of his hand, oldahis pcribh, and fortune, were mad bnpanbth : : rshali 
[ ] 
-- Shall I coiifesii to you, my deary?" an honest truth to you, who are So well acquainted with this wmv womarii heart of mine? — Do you know, (Such is the unaccountable impatience or petulance of the human mind !).that I began to be •very ferioujly alarmed that my lover deferred fa long \i\%‘ eclaircifferaent — the fortnight to me appeared, ’ten ' years“ “after all, ” (Said I to myself) “he may have now “dropped .all thoughts of me; — -' “or does he think; himself So fare “of me? — 'This Bristol journey “may possibly have effected as V wonderful, an alteration ia his 
** heart as in his hsdtbd 
■ public places, 
[ 139 3 
“places, as Bristol hot wells, Batlv Sic, abound with young i and “beautiful ladies; it is most likely “he has received Some new impres “Sion. — Ah! wretched Emma! 
‘‘ you have been much, much too ‘‘ Sanguine in your expedlations “and possibly I have mistaken a “few sighs and looks of his, since “his return (for Some lady he Whas left behind) to be>designed “for me • — woman as I? am! ' — 'Was I (ridiculous as I “am) to fuppose, that because, in ’ “the delirium of his fever at Bel,, “he rambled about our ” II former .siappy Maysj^ at meet' ' 
. L ulii Moss[ 
[ ] 
% mofsaill^ that any ^firkus' consequences would arise from it? — “Simple, simple Emma! — pos“ “after all, his father may have other views; — Some alliance “of a Cheshire lady, most likely: — ’ds true, Sir Charles Richmond “has behaved to me with much “partial regard; — but one is So “mighty apt to fancy, forsooth, “every little attention to be “— Most probably the re“ 
“he has shown me was on ac“ “of my being Mr. branvilvs widow (whom I think he Said he “formerly knew when they were “young men at Oxford) and not from anysthoughts hejhad con“ 
“

’ Tfigtsd 


t »4« ] 
ceived I should become his datcgh terv ^ '■ : 200n3i; p 
'Sthus, myclucy, did I torment my foolish heart; — was there ever any things equal to my petulance? 7 i had been returned to the abbey about a week, after all matters relative to the interesting difeovery had been fettled, but in that time Saw nothing of Mr. Richmond here. — “He might ” (thought I) “have walked over by this time, ‘lone should have imagined.” — (You remember, my Lucy, it is only one half>mile betwixt belmont hall and the abbey.) y *? it'i had really worked up my pettish impatience yesterday ito Such a b3vi3d height. 
[ 1 
height, that in muchsinquletuck of thought I Sauntered in the evening into a dittle wiklerness, .ini the most remote part of the gardens, merely to vent my chagrin. — I Seated myself in a romantic Small arbour, made of eglantine and honeyfuckles intermixed, and with a lute I carried'with me, the evening being remarkably fine, thought to amuse my pensive reflections with a Song. 
The moon just then rising, as Milton Says,,.. 
** In clouded majesty— — — ' - > 
balmy breath of furroundirtg roses; — the Solemn Silence that reigned throughoutall together made the Sweet Scene ravishifig. i 7 I tcok 
t >43 ] 
XI I took - up • my iute, andy after a;; sighs, Smig to the instrument a favourite air of that elegant cotn polcr; ' Dr. Arne, .to these words ‘ 
oft evfery hiss, in every grove, 
** Along the margin of each ftreara, 
** I rove, and Edward is iny theme; ^ 
■ The hills, the groves, the dreams re main. 
But — Edward there I seek in vaind* 
'■ 11 had Scarce finished this long with a sigh, when I heard, methought, a little rustling among the boughs, in a winding path that was ‘close to the bower, where I was sitting: : looked up; — but oh, Lucy { what was my emotion — my wond€r, 7 -- when I Saw the most amiable — the .beloved youth advancing ilo"' f p tu 
C 144 ] 
to the arbour: — I believe I was near fainting; — but, Summoning all my powers to my aid, — “bless “me! ” (Said I) “Mr. richmond— — you have Surprised 
« 
me j 
I” 
(Alas I my Lucy, he certainly heard my song and its fuhjefl: — I was ready to die with jhamej ^lit tenderly took my hand, — made a thou Sand apologies for his intrufiom, as he called it: — made me a most excessive fine Speech (which I shall not repeat) on my tafie in the choice of a retreat fit for the Queen of Love; and I know not what: — but his flutters — his tremors, were, as visible as my own. — 
A short 
t 145 ] 
A short silence now took place;; and I really, my friend, at that moment, would have given the world to have been absent, though but half an hour before I was sighing, — dying, for his presence : — Such strange unaccountable mortals are we! -- -- -- 
I broke silence first, in a kind of formal manner, observing how wonderfully better he was for the bris tol air, and the waters.' 
“No! madam, ” (Said he) “my “recovery is owing to another cause!” 
The har to his happiness (he Said) was now removed and you yol, IV L may 
[ 14$ 3 
may guess, Lucy, the subject {h^t now took place. 
'I cannot dejcnhe.^ what is «« de^ fcribable; Suffice it to Say, my lover made the most passionatej final dcr claration my heart could wish..,, Affefiatidn on my fide would have been preposterous : — I gave it to the winds, and most frankly conseffed my Sincere esteem esteem.! what a general word! — in short, I confessed an affefiiony tender as delicacy would permit. - i 
How long this interesting dis coursc would have lasted, I cannot say — had not my repeating watch struck Fine doings, Erp 
ma! 


t 147 0 
ma'l*’ you will Say— — then roscj ^ and with fiow steps wciwalked to the abbey. = • '. ^ t • * 
’I perceive I shall be importuned for an early day, all objedlions being now removed but my dear, most firmly shall I oppose giving * my hand to Mr. Richmond, till my year of widoijohood is expired : ■ — three months of that lime are yet • to come. — I know you, my Lucy, ' — I know Mr. and Mrs. belmohtv' will join with my Edward in Setting ' aside these’/6t»zt and pundilios: — ■ but I am, remember, * inflexible in this determination i shall ever pay that perfect respeft to the memory of Mr. Branville, his many good qua 1. 2 litics 
[ is' ] 
r' j T i■ Jr L < ' W T 
lities demand; — I owe to him my no 
■, V; -; / ■ 
fortune; and shall ever Speak asid think of him with the sincerest g'ra tkude. — I however arri now certain, 
, o:,. SI. '* 
ly" at liberty to disposc of my hand 
to a man every way unexceptionable. — 
f' /.. 
This instant have I received your kind * letter, in which you tell me, you purpose, with your little George, ^ to be at the abbey on thursdayi’ — Imagine my joy! — it can only be exceeded by the sight of my beloved friend; who I beg will believe I am. 
Most truly and affectionately her’s, Emma Branville, 
• This letter appears not. 
TWO 
[ 14? 3 
TWO months now passed, sh Or ■ „ '. 
Mr. and Mrs. Summers were 
with their amiable friend. at, the 
^ V hush 
abbey : nothing during that period happened, necessary to our history. — It may be easily supposed, our young and much enamoured Mr. Richmond was almost continually 
i 
with his charming Emma. — He pressed ardently (but vainly) she would fix an earlier day than her delicacy had Suggested : — but she remained invariable. Distant preparations were however begun to be made, when about this time died the worthy sir Charles Richmond; by whose death the ancient title of baronet, with a clear estate of eight .... L 3 thou[ 
[ r., 
thosisand pounds per annum, .'devolved to his excellent Son, now sir Edward Richmond. — Thus was this all accomplished youth, by the wonder working hand of Heaven,. taised in its own good time, by means which mock all human foresight, from the lowest depth of des' pendency, misfortune, and all the miseries of a dependent fortune, to wealth, honours, and, what was infinitely more precious to him, the approaching poffeshon of the lovely woman he had So long adored. May this be a lesson to be engrdved on the hearts of all: 
iii 
ro“ 
“never those defpatr who trust inv hea<vend*. - «. 
The 
t ] 
The marriage of these most teri der and amiable lovers was, it will naturally be imagined, now deferred for a few weeks, in respedt of the very recent death of sir Charles. — A ‘decent time on that account being now elapsed, and all matters duly adjusted, relative to So happy an event, as the marriage of sir Edward Richmond and the dovely widow; we shall next present thp candid reader with the following letter from Mrs. Summers to Mrs. Bennet, in London, of whom So much mention has been made in the former part of this history; and who, when Mrs. Branville was at any time in town, was well known d.' L 4 and 
[ 152 ] 
‘ C 
and much esteemed bythat^excel 
i'l^btewl.■: v.iirr.l 
lent lady. 
^; bib L' o ’ ' ' 

nom 
io‘3{nc' „•■ 
\.. ..ict C 
v»fu1 
LETTER XXXIV 
Mrs. Summers to Mrs. Bennet. 
• St. maud’s Abbey., DEAREST MADAM,, j; (. 
you kindly wished I would acquaint you of the long expedl ed and joyful event, that was here on the point of being finished 5 with the utmost pleasure I take up my pen to Say, that the loveliest of women has this morning, in the chapel of the abbey, given her hand to 
the 

r '5,? ] 
the equally amiable sir Edward Richmond. — Never, I believe, did So amiable a couple enter the temple of 
Hymen : — our Sweet Emma, blush 
\ 
“like the morn, ” was habited in white. Sprigged with silver, intermixed with Small bunches of.rol^ buds embroidered her fine hair and neck were ornamented with a profusion of jewels. — Sir Edward was the finest figure of a young man ■(who on his wedding day likewise came of age) imagination can form: — he was dressed in white, embroidered richly with silver. — The expreshon, the animation of his fine countenance, beggars all descriptionhad I not been told, he 2 had 
[ 154 i 
bad been ill, I never could have be sieved it; for to me he appears the picture of health and youthful grace. — &ndit maids Mrs. Belmont and I could certainly be; burr, as the dearest friends of the lovely bride, we assisted as attendants at the awful — joyful Solemnity. — W were habited in pink and Silver; — and if we may believe our hujhands^ never looked to So much advantage; ‘ — of this I am certain, that I never felt so sincere a delight, as in Seeing this most amiable couple united for life : — had the^happy event never happened, I should have been very wretched.. • < ■ i, 
, o • - ^ t We 
[ »55 ] 
We are to have a grand ball this, evening, in the great Saloon in the abbey; half the county are invited : — but that part of the entertainment I chiefly like is, the preparations which have been made for the poor for Several miles round • for their reception, tents are pitched in the park — sheep are roasting whole, — whilst the young men and maidens are to dance to the pipe and tabor, on the lawn before the house. — I was wonderfully pleased with the circumstance, that two Sweet little children of Mrs. belmont’s, of four and five years, dressed in the Arcadian style, each with a bashet on its arm, 7 slowly 
X 156 ] 
fiowly walked before: the bride and bridegroom, strewing the way with flowers. — The unexpedled appearance of these lovely little ones, with the innocence and order they preserved in the procession, made it beyond description pleasing! 
From the chapel we returned to a most ekganf breakfast; attended by. a band of music, chiefly clarinets and horns, with Soft Gerrr an flutes, properly placed in the high gallery, in the hall of the abbey. — Whilst we vere Seated at our elegant repast, joy in every eye, I Softly whispered lady Richmond, — “Can the world “afford Such a Scene of felicity? — Surely nothing new is to be wished 
“ford’ — 
t 157 ] 
for.” — “Ah, ” (Said my Sweet friend) “nothing Seems indeed left “now to wish — except ” (Said she, sostly sigh ing) — our poor Peggy — our 
Patty — could have been — and” — She stopped, whilst a tender tear of pity glistened in her mild eye, — O, my dear madam! what a heart has this charming woman! — few, I believe, in her present Situation, would have bestowed amuch less a tear., on the poor, lost unfortunates. 
I have only a minute left to finish my letter, being now inquired for • — \ida\ng Jiok from the company to write this. 
I howl 
«58 ] 
'I however cannot conclude without Saying, lady Richmond, sir Edward, ' Mr. and Mrs. Belmont, my beloved • husband and myself, and sir Thomas douglas,"all Set out tomorrow, with a grand retinue, for the seat of sir Edward, in Che > most beautifully Situated, and called richmond jjouse. 
, A Servant going to town, I dis patch this with bridal favours, and' a large quantity of bride cake for' your fair daughters, whom we ■ heartily wish were to grace our ball this evening. 
Lady Richmond presents all ' imaginable respeffs to yourself and ' jv - * family: 
[ '59 3 
family : — my George is much your’s; and my little boy has grown out of your knowledge; So much has the air of the Welch mountains improved him. 
Adieu, my dear madam. 
Believe me 
. most sincerely your’s* I m Lucy Summers 
asbt 
[ io ] 
rhe CONCLUSION. 
i.. 
HAVING at length brought our virtuous lovers to that happiness their Suffering merit So justly deserved; it.is now high time to inquire after thg twf^oor sisters, with whom our history began, and consequently with whom it should end. — Would we could Say, the wretched girls had, previous to their last hours, been found in a situation, however yet gaining a virtuous livelihood : — but, as faithful historians, we are obliged to recite the truth. 
We 
[ ii ■] 
We most commonly See, even in this uncertain state of things, that happiness, at least peace 'and comfort, stow from virtuous habits: and that. contrary habits are always produistive of distase, disgrace, and misery— — true, our poor unfortunate Peggy and Patty justly merit (from thft%yile arts .of their first Seducers), tie tear of tender humanity : — it was their pirfevering in the wretched course of life (difficult, indeed, .it was to obtain other means of Support) that .was reprehensible. — The certain conse quences of such a life, is too fatally proved in the following melancholy particulars. 
vol. IV M Seme 

[ I 3 
Some months after mr.^sfnd Mrs. Summers were returned from their delightful visit at Sir Edward richmond’s, after the happy celebration of his nuptials, as Mr. Summers was one afternoon walking through the Strand, he was accosted by a middle-aged poor woman, who begged charity. — As she did not show any very great 'marks of distress, and appeared in good health, Mr. Summers bid her get work, as she Seemed (he Said) very well able to earn a Support without begging charity. — “Alas! sir, ” (Said the woman) ’tis not for myself I ash relief: — ** it is for two poor young crea tures who lodge in a little garret ^ V ’ i ^ of 
£ i 3 
of mine in yonder alleyp they “are indeed, perishing with. want‘i 
“— two Sisters!” -- -- - “■ Sisters h” 
(Said the compassionate Mr, Summers, whose attention was, particularly excited, in the hope, he might hear Some traces of the poor girls he was always lamenting)'? — • “Sisters! did you Say V — (continued he) “how long have they “been with you? — what is their “way of lise — and do you know “thd.ii: nams F“ 
“way of life” (replied the woman) “has been, I fear, “what too many young creatures are driven too : — their name, I think, h^^ummersj but they alm 
2 
ways 
1 3 
^ Ways call each othk Peggy and •* Tattf ~ “O gracious Hea ^ veni’* (exclalshed Mr. Summers; and at the sound of those long lost arid efer to bfe regretted names, his heart feit sihsisual agitation) ^ — • Wherb ate these girls ?** (Said Be) “show me the hosish — let rnfe “see tbersi.” — — “Nay, ’* (Said she woshan) “they may be both “'dead by this time, for what I “know to the cohtra'ry; — I looked ‘ ** in upon them at eight o’clock “this morning, and they were very illthey could hardly Speak to 
rne.” -- -- - “Lead the way, mistress, 
” (Said the benevolent Mr, ' ‘stinnmefs) “to your abode.” — The 
woman 
I J 
wom^injjyid So:;, and, after <io\yn a street or two, ca, rp^, ja blind aliey, Tiand entering ^[]tq a wretched habitation, she calls house, showed her guest, up st^i rs, into a miserable kind of b^ck ga.rr. ret; where, in one corner, on an old y/retched bedstead, lay indeed two young women, pale and, qmac|^ted<, and in ^a Situation that .would,, h, ave moved a breast of marble. Summers mqst r^pderly astd considerately, lest his prescnce., should have too Sudden an esteist on.ihefe miserable objects, .stood for a few minutes behind a kind of Screen, which Served as a ^jdqor to this w.tetched hole; — but, good Beam 

ven 
[ i66hij ] 
venl 'what were the emotions'of this' worthy man, when he Saw Peggy (for So indeed she was) endeavour to raise the head of the other unhappy wretch (who was just departed) n her bosom “Patty, ” (Said she in feeble accents) “art ' “thou gone for ever — stay, — • ' “stay one moment for thy Peggy. 
“— Hah!! — more breathing !- “What! indeed gone for ever 1 “Well — well! — stis as it should “be. — O blessed comfort I that in a “my arms Patty resigned her dy“ 
“breath.” — — 
Gentle reader, if this Scene elicits ^ tear from you, I know not; but my own drops of acred pity compel 
1' 
me 
[ Isiystr] i 
me for a few moments to lay dowiri v 
my pen.; tvbi*o '~ rn •* di “ow - - - ~ 
Poor Mr. Summers, with a heart ^ almost bursting, now turned from • hiding-place to the woman ..of the house, and, giving her, money,. « desired her to fetch the richest cordial she could procure; — r and to ' introduce him to the Sad object, whom he believed (he Said) to be near death. — miss Peggy, ” (Said the woman) “here is a good genl.. 
“come to' relieve you.*t''^ 
■ “May I beg to know ” (Said Mr.' Summers, in a. Soothing accent) 
“your distress ?ri sm come to ■ " AI ‘‘ comfort, ^ • 
■ i ] 
^■ comfort, •r .to assist *-^ “"you— — is your name? — “and who were your parents? — Is “that your sister on your bosom ?’* — Mr. Summers here wept, in the most bitter anguish of Soul; whilst his wretched Sister, fixing her dying eyes on his — (too weak — too near death to be agitated with the sight of a stranger) — in broken feeble accents replied; — ■ “My name was “Summers; — it is nowrr Misery“ “— worthy parents * live at “Ashdale in .Cumberland. — My 
• The unhappy circumstance of the death of Mr. and Mrs. Summers had never come to the knowledge of the wretched girls. 
“Sister 
i V'ti, 
[ 1^9 ] 
“Sister here is gone a little while “before me : — See, — she lies dead “in my bosom. — We request of “Some charitable stranger a little “earth to cover us — — to shield us from — 
Here she fainted. — Mr. Summers (who with difficulty could prevent himself from weeping aloud, and whose tears in large drops fell on the dying girl, — whilst he kissed the cold lips of the already departed Patty) tenderly raised Peggy in his arms.? — The woman now returned with a cor dial, and Some warm wine he had 'drdered to be prepared : this af 
Qi tt 
jfeftionate brother tried to pour a 3 Small 
[ 170 ] 
small Ipoonful down the throat of the heart moving object he held ir •his arms: — she again^^opened her eyes, — “Who, sir — who — are “you ?’* (she asked, in a, voice just articulate) “pray — pray — for the“ “of my departing Soul; — let “me steep in the Same grave with 
“my cold Patty, here : -- -- -- hah!, 
‘‘ have I. got you Jlill /” (endeavouring feebly to grasp her hand.). 
Mr. Summers, almost distradted at this Scene, replied, — “I am — “I am thy brother — thy brother “George: — O live — my dearest “Sister, — live, and be happy still: “thy brother’s arms — thy emma’s arms — are open to receive thee.” 9 — At 
t ^71 1 
— Atihe name of Emma she breatfied a piteous sigh', and laid her emaciated hand on'her heart. — Brother! — did you Say?” cried she, in a hollow, dying accent, and faintly shook her head (most probably recolle6ling the fatal deception they had experienced in one under that endearing character— — looking at him with great earnestness, — “Indeed, my bro“ “-- -- -- -- (she just pronounced 
— “receive my dying breath !’* and instantly expired in his Supporting arms. 
FINIS. 
'- ". i 

V ■■■'^ d 
S ‘ s is ??r 5?5^ - • 
fri: i 'id bcl; ilfb^f{| : * 
■ S ' ts '. '.c 
0S * — I: : trid‘r.j hnrst heh, 
, -; ii uo ( bm - -1 lodi '* 
$': '' ^. I ns. (i nas V ^ " 
«iq aodt^vimk^ 
, no fii k ihnamqy) Hjd y hr ison 7 
- 4 ■■'■ ■" V, ■»»"'* ' •' 
gn: isj>bfr> 5ish, n: btist^ 
-' 3^513 di; *riii is gnlijeol, rir>i!j —; 
dri. yrn ** —; 5bnfi5<rte: > ^ \ 
. ^ nitonojci Apiy^) ^ 75113 ■’* 
t < *'! idltytd ^^niyb ym jt *'' —. 
if?!' ' •’* - -'; *, tl/ ’ ’ ' ' ' r ■ 
■■ 4>, ^q'?l il *r 1st bystqxt yboirflm ttv. — ''i' 
-■! - y ‘.?rntc sn.'fjtr, 
V 'rfi .-’' yud • ‘ ■ *" 
i' Cst,; '■'■'■■ ■ ■■ 
.. st 
\ 

.?. 1 W 1 'I 
r : ^ r T; - 
C -, : ^'. ’v ■ ’' ^ *■ y i.. ‘ ' cr 
^ -- 'A - .: 
■ '' 
* ivhstn^f!! 
'/ r > • / ' •'. " r.. N ' A 
-. * ■* -. - ^ ■..'* ’.r — ■ 
i' : ■ y,. y, .^^, i Nr" V' ' ^ ‘ f 'D - 
~ '•' 
i” ”, ^^ --,, _ ' Ini 
'■ ■■... V.. ■< */* ' " ■ 
U ■ ''*"- Ti.. C,. ■ V >' ' C 
■■'■'■ • ■ NO ■ '■ 
'A. ■ ■ r l r’ — ■> ■" '*: ■ y. ^) it • -■. ■% 
'- •' • S -- ' • p^r: V : - - "V.., - „ N 
-, y :, y<a^^y .t * r -, y ■>7' -., r 
•*ir~v>' ' ■*-■ — '■' vel. ' : T ■/.. •. i??. > 
:;,. ■ V ■ 
Nor ■ ' ' '. ' ' ' ~ ' 
; .i ' ^ ■ 
__ •. V 
'• - fd -\ .>^< „■. -,, t L L :; r '; ■■ • \ '-: 
‘ -- .: >'vr; ?tv?f A ■ ff 
’■■ - ■' ' ■■'. iv', ', „ 

•' 
% r 
., ‘ai 
■ r * * " •’ ^‘‘, V^ 
CL;;, 
*■■ ■ O -•, r: v _; •"• •. ' 
: : '’ -- N; V;;, ^\'mv: far: 

II '.; .• : •. V v \ •■•: -- • !t 
safetyob ■ ■ .■■T^ M 


AM 

.*sv 


A -' ' J' 
f: 
I 

. 'A 
■* ( 

i— — 

mr 
% L • ', ' 

■; 
%^-'- - >, T V' ' » 
-. ir, 
^, ■ 
, dl 
A m ‘ ■: ■ 

, “^- 
A 
^»- f 
'V 

.", *7. - 'TIS. j'. ' 
■ c - •,, -.-; 
* ■ '1^ 
Ac - 
■. '* 
^ - 
Tl -- “
.. 
'V X 
‘■^id ' -- rr - ' T.'"' ■ 
F * •1 '* 


30385 
