 

A 


^ V 
A' 
Hi K T, 

THE 
PHILOSOPHICAL QUIXOTE; 
O R, 
. ■ M E M O I E. S 
O P 
Mr, DAVID WILICINS. 
IN A 
SERIES of LETTERS 
VOL. I. 
LONDON. 
Printed for J. Johnson, in St. paul’s churchyard. 
MDCCLXXXII, 
’- fit 

mmm, dm 
W 
., • >, sc 
. > ■ ' '^. v 


'■i'n 
7 ■.’: ' lnr.‘, f’'' 

•■ i'."' V 
PREFACE. 
The private correspondence of some of the greatest geniusses of this nation has been made public without their knowledge; and in some cases, contrary to their inclination. If this be not admitted, as an excuse, it must be at least as a precedent, for the publication of the following epistles. 
The singularity of Mr. Wilkins’s character, as drawn by the correspondent of Mr. Dennis, occasioned the last mentioned gentleman to be liberal in showing the letters to his friends, in order that they might share with him in the entertainment. I, among many others, was favoured with the perusal of them and being perhaps more delighted with them than others, had the curiosity to take copies. The pleasure which they have afforded me has prompted me to give them to the public; I cannot but think that there are many who will thank me for having furnished them with such a repast. If I have guessed wrong, I have only to hope that the public will impute it to a natural, and may I add, benevolent desire of making others as happy as myself. On this ground I hope also for Mr. Dennis, and his ingenious correspondence pardon. Should this, however, not be obtained, I shall at least escape their personal resentment, as it will not be possible for them to disover, with certainty, who it is that has thus publish their letters. 
The reader will perceive that what follows is but part of Mr. Harcourt's correspondence, and as I have given his epistles in the order of time, it has so happened that the present ones are on subjects the most abstruse of any in the whole collection. There is also less bustle than is exhibited by those which succeed. In the latter the reader will not only be more deeply interested for the fate of the lovers, but Mr. Wilkins himself will become a more public man; and his singularities will also be such as to come wholly within the comprehension of readers of ordinary capacities. With these letters however, I shall not presume to trouble the world, if the present ones are not found acceptable. 
The EDITOR. 
P. S. The Editor residing at some distance from the press, and having, therefore, been obliged to leave the revisal of the sheets to others, several errata have escaped their notice, which the candid reader, for the reason 
given is earnestly requested to pardon. In the running title, for example, there are two t’s in Quixote, whereas there ought to be but one. Also 
Vol, I. Page 5, Line 10, for "by way of" read "as" 
P. 15, l. 15, dele "which was" 
P, 34, l. 3, for "effect" read "success" 
P 72,  l.3, read "repeat my request"
P. 81, l. 15, for "effects" read "effect" 
Vol. II Page 85, I. 165 for "discoveries" read "performances". 

THE 
PHILOSOPHICAL quixottei 
O R. 
MEMOIRS 
O F 
> Mr. DAVID WILKINS. 
LETTER I. 
To Mr. Samuel Dennis. 
Dear Sir, 
After a delightful journey of Sixteen hours, I arrived, on Friday last, at my new habitation; and have the Satisfaction to inform you, that only your company is wanting to render my situation, in every resped, vol. I. B “as 
2 PHILOSOPHICAL 
as agreeable as while at Mr. c >’s. 
The town in which we live, is Situated in an hollow between two ridges of.hills about five miles apart. We have trees in abundance, which I look upon as the life of a country prospcdl;; and as the fields in this part of the world are enclosed with lofty hedges, the Scene around us is perfectly rural. The town itself is pretty large. It is vrell Supplied with water from the numerous Springs in the neighbourhood; a rivulet running on each side of every street as clear as crystal. The inhabitants are much more civil and polite than I was taught to expect in a country town. An assembly is held, once a week, in an elegant room over the townhall, for dancing and cards. 
A como 

QUI X O T T E. 3 
A company of strolling players have fixed their residence here for the season; and though they are not equal to those which you and I have been accustomed to See in London, they perform tolerably well, considering the disadvantages under which they exhibit, and are highly applauded by the inhabitants, who have never been used to better. In London, people live for years in the Same street without, perhaps, ever Speaking to each other; but here it is very different. A Social intercourse is kept up by the 'gentry, under which term is included every tradesman of credit in the place. They regularly visit twice, a week, and the company meet at the house of each of the visitors in rotation. But the gen b 2 tlemen 
ON 
4 PHILOSOPHICAL 
tlemen keep up a good fellowship also in another way; for there is hardly a night but they assemble at Some reputable drinking house, where they Smoke, sing, ' and get drunk in the most convivial and amicable manner. In the neighbourhood there are two packs of hounds belonging to two of our ’iquires, one or other of which is out almost every day; and as that diversion is new to me, I have been indulged in it by my master Several times. In London, dear Dennis, a journeyman apothecary is looked upon as a mere negro; and a gentleman would think his table disgraccd by the presence of one of them. But the case 
is otherwise in SI am admitted 
without .Scruple among the sirst company 
QJLJIXOTTE. 
pany in the town; and being a Londoner, my acquaintance is even courted by them. You will not sus pedl me either of vanity or falsehood, when 1 inform you that the ladies in particular pay me the most flattering attention. With grief, however, 1 add, that my finances oblige me to deny myself those happinesses which my station entities me to, and by way of a colourable apology for my con du6t, I find it very convenient to pretend an attachment to Study, which by the way, has a wonderful effect on their opinion of my professional abilities. My father, though straightened in his circumstances, had yet the ambition to bring up his Son to a genteel calling. By his late letters I am B 5 
given 
6 PHILOSOPHICAL 
given to understand, that my apprenticeship being expired, farther assistance is not to be expected from him. That however desirous he may be to afford it me, the duty which he equally owes to his other children, forbids it: That having been at the expense of educating me in a liberal profession, I must now shist Sor myself; and that it will be my own fault, if, with these advantages, 1 do not make my fortune. This explanation was by no means in consequence of any solicitation on my part: Whatever were my hopes, I had not as yet asked him for a farthing; and I now cheerfully acquiesce in my doom : — Yet I cannot but rested on the hard fate of a journeynian apothecary under 
Such 
QUI X O T T E. 7 
Such circumstances. For example, I must appear like, and in every re spe6b Support the character of, a gentleman, with the Small Salary oi fifteen pounds, which is less than that given to the footman in our family; who has besides, his clothing, and many other emoluments, to which I have nothing equivalent. This does not appear very reasonable, when we consider the difference of the Sums expended on our respedlive educations. — But I will not enter on a Subject, concerning which you need no information. 
I meant to have given you an account of my present governor and his mansion in this letter; and perhaps it B 4 would 
S PHILOSOPFIICAL 
would have been more regular to have begun with those Subjects first; but we have not usually stood upon ceremonies; and the siieet is already So I full, that I must defer these matters to a future opportunity. 
I am, dear Dennis, 
Your Sincere, 
. And affedlionate Friend, J. H A R C O U R T. 
LETTER 
QUI X O T T E: 9 
LETTER II 
Dear Sir, 
T N my last I gave you a general idea of the town in which I Sojourn. In this, I shall confine myself to affairs domefiic, and give you an account of my Situation within doors. You will perceive it to be very different from, though not less agreeable, than at Mr. C -- -- ’s. 
My master Mr. David Wilkins, is of a middle stature, and about fifty years of age; though by his appearance, I should have taken him to be at least ten years older. This, as I since learn, is owing to his having of late years, 
greatly 
lo PHILOSOPHICAL 
greatly addidedhimsels to study, which indeed I conjedlured on sirst Seeing him, from his pale countenance and retired absent look. In his dress, he unites the plainness of a Quaker with the negligence of a philosopher. His temper appears to be good, though from his thoughts being continually absorbed in study, he has even more than the usual share of englisn taciturnity. His businesslike that of most country practitioners, extends to every branch of the medical profession. He is chemist, druggist, man midwife. Surgeon, and apothecary; V hich last, by the custom of England, includes both pharmacy and the practice of physic. He has for Some years enjoyed the business of the town and its environs, without a rival; 
for 
QJJHXOTTE. II 
for though Several have attempted to oppose him. So great was the opinion entertained of wilkins’s abilities, that they met with no encouragement. Of late, however, he has rather Sunk in the opinion of the town’s people, Sor reasons which I may hereafter explain. As he is by no means extravagant, he must by this time have amassed a considerable fortune. He is now a widower; and his wife, I am told, was Such a termagant, that he is determined against all thoughts of a Second venture. He has but one child, a daughter, now at the boarding school, of whom he is extremely fond. She is Said to be about Seventeen or eighteen years of age, of a temper the reverse of her mother, and perfectly accomplished and agreeable. 
Mr. 
12 PHILOSOPHICAL 
Mr. Vf ilkins appears to have had a good general education, at least of the modern kind. He Speaks French fluently, and is pretty well acquainted with Latin and Greek; he has also made considerable proficiency in the mathematics. But his principal forte, and which he most values himself upon, is his knowledge in natural philosophy, particularly the chemical and medical branches of it, of vv^hich he is an enthusiastic admirer. He constantly rises at six in the morning, and never goes out, unless in cases of emergency, till twelve. His time, between these hours, is wholly employed in his philosophical pursuits. Behind his dwell ing house, which contains nothing remarkable, is an outhouse, of one Story, 
which' 
QJQ IX O T T E. 15 
which he has built for the purpose of his philosophical and chemical experiments. The principal room in this building is the elaboratory, where we also prepare our medicines, chemical and galenical; many of the former in a manner Sufficiently Singular. Besides the usual apparatus of retorts, receivers, Sand heats, alembics, c. there is not, I believe, a chemical contrivance that has of late years been invented, with which it is not furnished; for example, the various apparatus for procuring the different kinds of air; for the distilling of acid, alcaiine, and aethe rial Spirits, c. together with tubes of all kinds, eudiometers, thermometers, barometers, air pumps, and a catalogue of others, which would require Homers 

t4 PHILOSOPHICAL 
mer’s hmgs of brass to enumerate. For as he reads all the new publications in this way, and makes a point of repeating the experiments, you will easily imiagine that he must have no inconsiderable variety. these, when not in use, are hung up around the walls, or placed on proper shelves, by way os ornament, like the armoury at St. james’s or the tower. v/e have a variety of processes continually going on, either for use or curiosity; and Some of the fires, for particular operations, have not been out for these twelve months pash The room on the right is destined to anatomical, physiological, eledlrical, and other Similar pursuits, and is accordingly decorated with a great variety of preparations, Skeletons, and 
the 
Q^UIXOTTE. 15 
the numerous Sets of instruments necessary to those inquiries. The left room is his study, in which is a considerable library, consisting chiefly of medical and philosophical books, almost wholly modern; Sorthe ancients are held by him in the utmost contempt. It is here that he pursues his lucubrations for the good of the human race, which will one day be benefited by the publication of his numerous performances. Sufficient of themselves to form a tolerable library. While employed in this way he wears a large old rusty black cap, a morning gown (which was formerly striped with red and white, but the traces of which colours are now hardly discernible) bound round his waist with an old red garter; in which, 
and 
i6 PHILOSOPHICAL 
and his worn out slippers, he makes a very grotesque appearance. Behind the building is a garden; part of which he has allotted to the purposes of botany, and experiments on vegetation. 
The other inhabitants of our mansion are, an old maid, and a footman. The former has lived in the house upwards of fourteen years; and that cir cumscance, together with her being Somewhat advanced in life, and the only female domestic, gives her, as she imagines, a kind of right to that degree of authority which is usually exercised by the mijirefs of a family. As she takes Sufficient care to maintain the dignity of the latter office. So does she likewisc the privilege of her fete; her tongue 
being 
Q^UIXOTTE^ ' 17 
being by no means the least noisy or loquacious that I have heard. She is now on the wrong side of forty, and seems * be heartily tired of her virginity But through want of even an ordin^y^ portion of beauty (for I think she is one of the rnost forbidding mortals I ever beheld) she Seems to be quite delperatcj' and therefore makes the utmost use of the privilege Said to be allowed to her Sex every fourth year; for it cannot So properly be Said that Solomon courts Deborah, as that Deborah courts Solomon; and that in Such a way, as, to a person of the least delicacy, would be perseduy nauseous and disgusting. With, the wrinkles of sixty she awkwardly apes the coquetry of eighteen; and in her fondfiess, is (like a cat) even outrage -- ] vol, L C ows; 
i8 philosopincal 
OU. Solomon, however, does not Seeqr to be one of the nicest, and as she is reported to have Saved money, he probably Sees Some more weighty charm in her than mere beauty. Solomon has lived the greatest part of his life in the medical way. He was originally errand boy to a druggist; afterwards, for many years footman to a physician, and since then has been in the joint capacity of porter and footman to Mr. Wilkins. He is greatly addicted to study; and with persons of his own rank pastes for a very deep man, his best qualification is as an assistant in the ’laboratory, of which employment he is very fond; and wherein indeed iic is extremely handy and useful, 
In. 
qjtjixotte. 19 
In tie partnership for life which is likely to commence, between this singular couple, Deborah, I imagine, is to find the money, and Solomon the judgement. For as the former will hardly be able to think of lowering her prefenc dignity, it Seems to be her intention to Set him up in an apothecary’s shop. where, I suppose, he is to drudge on for the remainder of life, to Support the intolerable vanity of his amiable fair one. By her discourse she Seems to entertain hopes of his Succeeding, or even coming into partnership with our Major Domo; and it would be pleasant enough to See how Wilkins would relish Such a proposah 
I cannot but observe that, was I of ' a less easy disposition than I am usu c 2- ' ally 
^0 PHILOSOPHICAL 
ally reckoned to be, it would be rather disagreeable to live in an house where there are a couple of Servants thus circumstanced; and who, by virtue of long Servitude, Seem to think themselves authorised to treat a journeyman, a new comer, and. much younger than themselves, as an inferior. But I am happy enough to divert myself at the expense of their follies : and as, on account of my having a little knowledge of philosophy, I am already rooted in wilkins’s good graces, he allows me every indulgence that a journeyman can wish for; which more than compensates for any little uneasi ness that might arise from the other quarter. 
I am, dear Dennis, 
your’s, sincerely, c. 
Q] I X O T T E. 
25 
LETTER III 
Dear Sir, 
R. WILKINS being gone our, curiosity led me, yesterday, into the ’laboratory to examine the nature of the processes which were going forward, as I learned that Some of them were not a little extraordinary; and as 1 should have been rather at a loss in understanding them myself, I prevailed on Solomon to give me Such information as he was capable of affording. I have Selected the following by way of Specimen. 
He first conduced me to an athanor furnace, in which was kept up a conti c 3 nual 
22 PHILOSOPHICAL 
nual fire; and where a number of processes, in little. Seemed to be going on. 
Among these, he showed me Several which were designed for the transrnu tation of acids; “an investigation to which his master had long applied himsels, but which he had not as yet in any one instance been able to bring “to persed: ion”; adding, “that he “Seemed to lament his want of success in what he still considered as pradli^ “cable.” 
In the Same furnace he showed me Several phials, c. containing pure water; which, he informed me, wereplaced there with a view to its conversion into earth. I could not but remark, that, like the bag of money in esop, and the 
philos 
QUIXOTTE. ^3 
philosopher’s stone, this experiment was probably proposed by Some ingenious lover of chemistry, rather with a view to the general improvement of the Science, than to the realising of that particular idea. 
In different furnaces were a variety of processes for the purpose of transmuting the metallic calces into one another, with a view to the converting fall, or Some of them, into those of silver or gold. A project not despaired of by others besides Mr. Wilkins, even in our'days. 
Experiments with quicksilver, in order to the rendering it Solid in the usual temperature of the atmosphere. 
C 4 adis 
24 PHILOSOPHICAL 
'A discovery which Solomon observed, would be attended with infinite advantages in the useful arts. 
At the farther part of the ’laboratory I observed a tremendous triple pile of large calks, oil jars, glass receivers, and other vessels, which attradfed my curiosity, but which, when I came to examine them, were empty; though Seemingly very carefully Secured. On alking Solomon concerning them, he informed me that they were store vessels, or reservoirs of the various kinds of air, which his master kept ready extricated for chemical and medical purposes. 
For example; if he wanted to make Spirit of Salt, he had pnly to impregnate 
QU IX O T T E. 
25 
nate water with marine acid air, which at once furnished him with this liquid, os a Superior kind to that usually employed. 
If he had occasion for the caustic Spirit of Sal ammoniac, he could immediately produce it in a very elegant way, by the mixture of water with alcaline air. If the mild Sort was wanted, the addition of a proper quantity of fixed air, produced the effect. By a similar process, without water, he made his dry volatile alcali, and common Sal ammoniac. 
For making the nitrous acid he had two methods. The first was, by im r pregnating water with the nitrous acid air, or red vapour: but that his usual 
way 
26 PHILOSOPHICAL 
way, and which he on Several accounts prest'rrcd, was to make it by means of nitrous and common air, by decom positing the former over water. — He was going on; but Mr. Wilkins happening to knock at the door, he was obliged to hurry away, and deser the remainder of his lecture to a future opportunity. I could not, however, but divert myself with these curious and roundabout methods of making officinal preparations; which, it generally adopted, will certainly be of infinite nfe to the public; an use which the illustrious discoverer of the Several kinds of air, I imagine, never once dreamed ol. 1 had now, however, a shfficient idea of the fnan, and dettr 
mined in Suture to make him an object: 
of 
Q U I X O T T E. 
27 
of more particular attention. Discoveries in philosophy, in proper hands., may certainly be applied to the most advantageous purposes in medici .e and the usefui arts. But it is not a talk for every one to attempt; and it requires, I believe, very different talents from those of Mr. Wilkins, to do it with any reasonable prospedt of success. 
I am, c. 
J. Harcourt. 
LETTER 
2.$ 
PHILOSOPHICAL 
LETTER IV 
'Dear Dennis, 
T? R O M what I had Seen in the esa boratory, I had concluded too hastily relative to the utility of Mr. wilkins’s philosophical pursuits, as will more fully be Seen in the course of tkis letter. 
One morning he Sent for me into the claboratory.v He appeared by his countenance to be exceedingly grave and thoughtful, not without an evident mixture of Sorrow. After mu Sing a while, he addressed me to the following effect“ 
“having in the course of con v^ersation had Several occasions to observe, 
QUIXOTTE. 29 
Serve, that I had, a tolerable knowledge of natural philosophy, hehadsentfer me in order to have my opinion relative to a business of the utmost importance to mankind. The investigation of it had been attended with infinite difficulties, which had perplexed him exceedingly; and So confused his ideas, that he might be compared to a traveller who had lost his way, and was wandering in a labyrinth. But that the eye of a disengaged and discerning Spedator might possibly enable him to extricate himself from the maze, by discovering the clue which might in future guide him in the right path.” 
He prefaced his explanation by observing, ‘‘ that the Sole end of philosophical 
30 PHILOSOPHICAL 
Sophical inquiries ought to b: the good of mankind; and that he who engaged in them from mere motives of interest or fame, was unworthy the name of a philosopher. Pie preferred the most trifling discovery, if it could he applied to real use, to the theory of a nlv/ton; and would rather have been the discoverer of the loadstone, than of the system of gravitation. His own inquiries were conducted vrholly on that liberal principle; and nothing could make him So happy, as to be able to strike out Something that might prove of general utility. He flattered himself, he had Succeeded in this way in more instances than one, as would, perhaps, hereafter appear to the world. That with 
respeist 
QJJIXOTTE. 35- 
respedl to the processes he was now carrying on, they were, in general, very important in their nature; and from which he entertained the most Sanguine expedsations. He was convinced there Vv'ere an infinite number os Secrets yet remaining in the womb of nature, which, when discovered, would be found in the highest degree beneficial to the world; and he by no means despaired of being able to bring Some of them to light. That let the event be what it would, no application should be wanting on his part r he was too Sensible of the numerous evils and distresses under which, mankind continued to labour, and was determined to exert his utmost abilities in order to alleviate or wholly remove 
32 PHILOSOPHICAL 
move them.” He Said a good deal more to the Same purpose; and indeed his general and obvious character is that of benevolence and humanity; though, • perhaps, there is one motive which will be found to take the lead of these, and I think, I can disccrn that it is the hope of the glory of having made an useful difcoveryy rather than the discovery itfelfi that adluates him to this kind of pursuit. 
Lie then informed me, that he had frequently had occasion to observe, with anguish of heart, the distresses of the poorer Sort os people, and the great difficulty which a man with a large family had in providing them the necessary means os Subsistence. That the prices 
of 
(^UIXOTTE. 33 
of provisions were of late years So much advanced, that the truly indigent could hardly procure Such as were fit to cat. 
He had therefore frequently rcvol ' ved in his mind, whether Some method might not be discovered to obviate their distresses; and in particular, whether it might not be possible, by means of the chemical art, to procure wholesome aliment, at once, from thosc .cheap, or rather, costless materials, from which it was daily formed by nature?. Common mould., mud, or earth, for example, is, by vegetables, converted into a Substance proper for animal nutriment, even as vegetable matters are, by animalization, brought still nearer to perfection. He had therefore tried ' vol, I. D a va 
34 PHILOSOPHICAL' 
* variety of methods, in order to effect So desirable a purposc, though hitherto, unfortunately without effect. 
His former experiments, he observed, were founded on the idea, that there is in nature ferment or leven capable of converting mineral Substances into vegetable or animal, as yeast converts flour into dough, or must into wdne; and that his rescarches had been directed to the attainment of Such a menstruum. That there is Such a ferment he observed, was too obvious to be disputed by him who considers the fads alluded to. He had endeavoured to extract it from almost every mineral Substance in which he could imagine it to reside, and by 
every 
QUI X O T T E. s5 every chemical process which his invention could Suggest, but had not been So happy as to meet with success. That after So infinite a variety of trials he despaired of finding it, except ill vegetables and animals themselves; his next view”, therefore, was to obtain it pure from the other parts of those Substances; and then, by investigating its chemical principles by a careful analysis, to learrt to Compound Such a ferment from those principles dircdtly. He had gone through a very great variety of processes, on an infinite number of vegetable and anirtial Substances, with this view, but without meeting with anything like the matter he was in quest of. Laying aside there d a sore 
js PHILOSOPHICAL 
therefore all hopes of procuring the ferment itself in a Separate state, he has 'since had recourse to vegetable and animal Substances as containing the desired menstruum; by which means he imagined, that though he could not bring the discqvery to the degree of perfection and cheapness which he first intended, he should yet approximate to it, and that in a very great degree. With this view, he had made a number of experiments with different vegetables, and different'parts of those vegetables, and also ■ with all the various kinds of Soil or earth; varying'their proportions and states, dn every mode that his invention could • devise : in heat, and cold, for _ example; in moi' 
'
Q^U 1 X O T T E. 37 sture and dryness, in open and close vessels, in all the different kinds of faflitious air, and in other circumstances too tedious to relate. That as it is known, that the infiuence of the sun’s light is necessary to the perfection of vegetables, he had placed his materials in that exposure, in which case too he: had varied the circumstances of the processes in every shape that he could invent; but hitherto in vain. Not finding vegetables alone to answ^r his purposq, he had mixed them with animal Substances, in a Sufficierit variety of ways; and had since even tried what could be done with animal Substance psed without vegetables. With the stomach, for example; the gall, shladder, D 3 ' the 
PHILOSOPHICAL 
the liver, the pancreas; the various juices of these; the nervous medulla, the blood, the Saliva, the flesh, the whole animal; in short, the experiments had been almost infinitely, but unsuccessfully varied, insomuch, that he was now wholly at a loss for further expedients; but that nevertheless he was still as confident as ever, that the thing was pradicable, from its being performed before our eyes by nature every day; and earnestly requested me to assist him in the investigation of a fatst So very interesting arid important. 
1 listened to this curious harangue with attention and astoniflimenr, and could hardly persuade mysdf he was, 
m 
QUI X O T T E. 39 
in earnest; though he Spoke with Such evident marks of real concern and dis tress as might have demonstrated that his heart was sincerely in the bufiness. But on repeating his request, in still more ardent and impassioned terms, and the hints which had been given me of his odd turn of mind occurring, I was Sufficiently convinced of his Quixotism; and after Suffering my Surprise to Subside a little, answered him to the following purport. 
“That his philanthropy, and good ness of heart, appeared transcendantly indeed! That the world was under infinite dbligations to gentlemen, who like him, Spent their lives for the common good; and that the highest ho d 4 nonrs 
40 PHILOSOPHICAL 
I \, f 
nours in its power to bestow, were an inadequate reward for Such benevolent endeavours, even though they should not be fortunate enough to be crowned with success. The sub je£t which he had chosen Sor investigation, was, in the highest degree, interesting; and if the discovery, which he was in quest of, could be per fedled, it would be, without exception, the most usefui that had yet been offered to mankind; but that in the present case, I humbly apprehended he was mistaken rather in the oh jefl than the means. That mineral matters were daily converted into vegetable, and asterwards into animal Substances, was a too obvious to be disputed; but we had no reason 

TUI X O T T E. 4£ 
Ibn to suppose, Srom what we could observe in nature, that this was practicable by any other means than by vegetation, and animalization; that is, by the action of living vegetables, and animals. That different kinds of animals and vegetables were neccs fary to the assimilation of different vegetable, and mineral Substances; but that these differences were Such Rs did not by any means fall under the ■cognizance of our senses. That therefore, unless he could form these parth «cular organised bodies, or others V hich would perform their effects, 1 conceived the fubjeet .off his inquiry would still remain a problem. For that dead animals and vegetables, instead of having power of assiniilating other Substances 
42 PHILOSOPHICAL 
stances to their nature, were on the contrary, by fermentation and putre fadlion, continually returning to the state of those mineral Substances, from which they were first extraded.’* I took Some pains to explain to him my ideas, and indeed found his prejudice So strong that the utmost force of my rhetoric was absolutely necessary. In So delicate a matter too, I was obliged to at with caution to prevent giving offence. However, I at length Succeeded, and he has since desisted from a prosecution of his visionary inquiry, though even yet he retains visible re liques of the keenest disappointment and mortification. 
The ressedlions which may be drawn from this curious relation with regard 
to 
Q U I X O T T E. 43^ 
to the direduon of philosophical inquiries, are too obvious to need pointing out, at least to you, As this affair has not a little raised my curiosity, I shall be more attentive to this sen tleman’s pursuits than hitherto; and shall not fail to entertain you with whatever S may discover in this way concerning him, in future. 
I am, dear Dsnnis, 
tout’s, c. 
LETTER 
+4 PHILOSOPHICAL. 
LETTER VI 
Dear Sir, • ■ 
AS I had acquired Some knowledge of Mr. wilkins’s disposition, I could not resist a violent inclination ./»• which Seized me, of putting a HUM upon him, and in consequence thereof, to have a little entertainment at his expense. In the Sequel you have * the result of my attempt in this way. 
I had observed that he reads everything that appears on philosophical and medical Subjects, and makes it a rule to repeat the experiments, not So much for the Sake of proving them, as to gratify a ridiculous curiosity. His, prejudice 
. Q_U 1x6 f T >5 
prejudice in favour of novelty Seemed to be So great that perhaps there was no doctrine, however absurd, which he would not readily Swallow, provided it carne with that recommendation : and it always' had the greater weight (a proof of his philanthropy) if it promised to be useful to man kind. 
To one of our country news papers, which he constantly reads, I Sent the under written pretended philosophical dis covery. It was written indeed, and Sent off in the heat of frolic, and I had no Sooner dispatched it, than I resiedled on the glaringness of the absurdity, and heartily repented of my precipitancy; for L could notjnragine, that even in Such a publication as that, a relation So 
evidently 
45 PHILOSOPHICAL 
evedently void of probability could be inscrted; I expected indeed to be handsomely trimmed ojfm their answers t correspondents. I had therefore began to draw up another paper; not less absurd indeed; but wherein the absurdity was So artfully covered that persons, not supposed to be adepts in philosophy, in the hurry of newspaper business, might not readily perceive it. besore I had finished this however, the former, to my utter astonishment, appeared; and not only had the desired effect on Mr. Wilkins, but (what you will think incredible) even imposed on Some whose names arc foremofi in the Republic of Science. The account ran as follows.; and as you are a philosophcr, you 
will 
QJJ IX O T T E; 47 
■ will be able to enter into the Spirit of the jell. 
A cheap and easy method of procure Dephlogisticated Air; calculated for the benefit of those afiiibfed with putrid and infiammatory diseases c. demonjirat ing that for fo small a price as one fhiu Ling, any person may breath that fah > iary medium during a tvhole day; a dif fevery, which will therefore be of inji~ nite benefit to mankind. 
Take one pound of nitre, and ex pell from it by heat, its dephlogis ticatcd air. Let the patient breath a Sufficient quantity of this through a bent tube, introduced into it throucyst 
j O 
Some lime water, in which the vessel 
containing 
4s PHILOSOPHICAL 
containing the air stoats, and then expire it back again. The air returning from the lungs, is infefied hy fixed air which is generated in the body and thrown out by this organ as excrementitious', but which is immediately absorbed by the lime water, and of course the air is restored very nearly to its former purity. The author of this account affirms, that the air thus breathed through lime water, will remain good thirty TIMES as long as it could when breathed in the ordinary way. Now we consume by each inspiration, about thirty inches of air, which is 450 inches in a minute, allowing fifteen inspirations for that time. And consequently the air usually employed in one minute, will now Serve for oreathing 
half 
QUIXOTTE. 49 
half an hour. But one pound of nitre yields 12, 000 inches of pure air, which therefore is more than a patient will consum.c in a whole day, as twelve hours at least must be allowed for Sleeping, and other necessary avocations; So that the whole expense will not amount e^aen to fo trifling a sum as that mentioned in the title., ^0. 
This is the Substance of the adver tiseihent itself, to which I have added et ceeteree, as I am really ashamed to give the extravagantand full some panegyric on the author, annexed to it in the original, in order that it might make the greater impres sion on wilkins’s* imagination. — For the benefits which I led the public vol. I. E to 
50 PHILOSOPHICAL 
to expect from fo glorious a difeovery were even infinite. 
I was out on business when the newspaper came in. As Soon as I returned, Mr. Wilkins (who, as appeared by his looksj as well as declarations, had waited with the utmost impatience for my return) stew into the shop, caught me eagerly by the hands, and with rapture in his eyes, told me “that he had just met with a most wonderful discovery in the newspaper, which promised to be of infinite Service to mankind. But that he wondered still more, if possible, at the modesty of the author, in publishing, without his name, a discovery that would immortalise shim, and stand in 
competi 
(TUIXOTTE. 51 
competition with the most celebrated that have yet been revealed to the world 1” He then informed me of the whole of the advertisement in general terms, and proposed immediately to Set about repeating the experiment. 
The manner in which he Spoke this, would not permit me to doubt of his being in earnest, and it was with the utmost difficulty that I kept my countenance; though had I betrayed risibility, he would not have observed it. So eager was he on the experiment that he did not even wait for my opinion on the Subject. 
To work, therefore, he immediately went. The air was expelled E 2 from 
52 PHILOSOPHICAL 
from the nitre; a barrel filled with it, was properly placed in limewater, and now for the test of the truth of the important faff, which he determined to try on his own respiratory organs. The quantity of air in the vessel would last, by my calculation, about fourteen or fifteen minutes. 
When Mr. Wilkins is engaged in an experiment, he is So intent on it that he will not Suffer himself to be interrupted by any concern either of bu siness or interest; which not unfrequently exposes him to inconvenien eics; and this unluckily happened to be the cafe in the present instance. For he had hardly began to breath the purs medium, when a Servant in livery 
arrived 
QUI X O T T E. 53 
arrived in haste with a note, requiring his immediate attendance on Lady S —, who lives about two miles fi-om the town, and who, in consequencc of a fright, was Suddenly taken in labour. I delivered to him the note, which he Snatched from me, opened, and read, without intermitting his pro cess, when Suddenly reddening with ire, he tore it in a thoutand pieces, and Surioussy threw it on the ground, uttering an oath (which I had never heard him do besore) that “she might 
deliver hersels and be d -- -- d, for be 
would not be disturbed Sor any one.” Taking it for granted that the fit was only momentary, and that, considering the importance of the family as patients, he would presently alter his E 3 resolution, 
54 PHILOSOPHICAL 
resolution, I returned to the Servant, and with a respeistful message, as Srom W. desired him to inform Sir John that he would attend his lady immediately. The Servant went away. But to my great Surprise, I did not find that Mr. Wilkins was making any preparation for hisjourney. After about ten minutes I took the liberty to remind him of the message, with the urgency of the case; but he flew in as great a passion as before, and Seemed rejolute not to be interrupted in his experiment. Dreading the consequence, I began to repent Sorely of my frolic; and in order to ^ undeceive him, and hasten his departure, was half inclined to confess to him the whole matter. But shame or fear restraining me, and still hoping 
that 
QUIXOTTE. 55 
that he would alter his determination, I waited a little longer for the event, especially as the time now drew near, when by .my computation the dephlo gisticated air would be rendered unfit for further respiratlon. At this instant however Sir John himself arrived, thundering at the door, his horse in a foam, and Splashed with dirt; and vociferated in a most violent passion at wilkins’s delay; threatening not only to discard him from employment in his family, but to prosecute him for neglect as an accoucheur. As Soon as his fury would permit me to inrer pose, I took the courage to assure him, that Mr. Wilkins was already on 
his journey to P -- -, and by this 
time certainly must be there. That E 4 he 
si PHILOSOPHICAL 
he was in So great haste to relieve her ladyship, that he did not even take time to dress himself, but rode off in his studying dishabille, without waiting to Saddle his horse, and had gone the nearest, though the worst and dirtiest way, in order that he might arrive there the Sooner, which was the reason that his Worship had not met him on the road. Satisfied with this answer, he rode off. I Slevv in stantly to the ’laboratory, and throwing mysels on my knees, earnestly entreated him to go to the lady, as he valued his interest or reputation, and told him the message 1 had delivered to Sir John. But in as violent a rage as before, he expressed his resolution of not Stirring for any one till the end of his process, So 
that 
QUI X O T T E. 57 
that I was now at my wit’s end, and was about either to acknowledge the whole trick, or to request that I miight go; and with a Seigned excuse of his having met with an accident on the road, offer to officiate in his stead; when recolleding that the fifteen minutes were now nearly expired, and perceiving that wilkins’s inspirations were much less Sree and easy than when he began, it occurred to the, that as he was well enoush acquainted with the doctrine of the test of the purity of air and that he must, according to his usual custom, have fallen into the present error merely through want of due rcstedtion, 
I Suggested to him (as indeed I might have done when the messenger first came, but that I was too much confused 

K 
58 PHILOSOPHICAL 
fused to think of it) that the whole experiment, which I had since carefully considered, was founded on a wrong principle. That it supposed the only noxious ingredient communicated to the air by inspiration to be fixed air which, as appeared by the tur bidness, was, I acknowledged, absorbed by the limewater. But notwithstanding its being deprived of that principle, it must, according to my idea, be at this time highly impure; for that it was phlogiston which rendered it noxious with resped to respiration; Srom which limewater, in the present process, was by no means calculated to free it. I earnestly requested he would make trial of it with the eudiometer, though I doubted not, but 
on 
CLU I X O T T E. ^9 
on his recolledling the circumstances mentioned, that test would be unnecessary. I had Scarce ended my request, when (aster a laborious respira tion, which caused him to be black in the face) he tumbled from his Scat, and fell down senseless on the floor. Alarmed at the event, I halloo’d aloud for Solomon; who running instantly to my assistance, we breathed into his lungs, rubbed his body, rolled him on the ground, and applied volatiles to his mouth and nostrils, till at length, with the utmost difficulty, he was revived, and recovered. Convinced by this accident, and my reasoning, of the fallacy of the and nettled at having thus exposed himfdf, and endangered the loss of 
a very 
6o PHILOSOPHICAL 
a very profitable family, he broke the whole apparatus in a violent fit of passion; bestowed very hearty censures on the lying author of the ac* count, begged pardon for the hastiness of his late expressions to me, and kindly and feelingly thanked me for the attention which I had manifested to his interest and life. He immediately ordered Solomon to bring out his horse, and was preparing to dress himself; but I prevented the latter by mentioning what I had told Sir John relative to his feigned departure. At the lame time I proposed to him, (and humbly hoped he would not consider it but as meant for his good) that in order to preserve the favour and confidence of the family, and furnish 
a Suf 
QUI X O T T E. 
a Sufficient excuse for not attending Sooner, he should take the road I hast described to the Baronet; roll himself in the mud, of which he would there find plenty; affect lameness; and arriving in that condition, excuse his delay, by telling them that “his horse, through his haste to arrive, had stumbled and thrown him; and that the hurt which he had received from the violence os the fall, had for more than half an hour rendered him incapable of pursuing his journey; the truth of all which was, he presumed, Sufficiently evident from the plight In which they beheld him.” This I observed, could not fail to be a Sufficient apology. He Smiled heartily at the proposal, which he immediately determined 
6i PHILOSOPHICAL 
termined to adopt, and accordingly actually put it in execution. Pie arrived in the plight proposed just in time to deliver the lady, and Save his see, which, had he been five minutes later, he would have lost; and the delivery was probably hastened by the lady’s risibility (notwithstanding her painful situation) at the ludicrous figure he made with his limping walk, bedaubed condition, and odd un dress; all which, not only procured him pardon, but furnished ample sub je6l of mirth to the lady and her gos fips, who were highly entertained with the adventure. The affair even endeared him to the family, but particularly to the lady, who considered him as a martyr, at least a Sufferer in 
her 
QJJIXOTTE. 63 
her cause. And you will believe me, when I tell you that the issue was matter of no less joy, than the occasion of it had been of merriment to. 
Your Sincere Friend, 
LETTER 
si PHILOSOPHICAL 
LETTER VII 
My Dear Friend 
TT VER since you knew me, (which was Some years before I arrived at the age of fourteen) though I have been a general admirer of the lex, and have had no little commerce with them, you do not remember me to have ever been So far attached to any particular object as to feel that Sentiment which is usually called love. You are consciou^ that I have always treated the very idea of that passion with ridicule; at you in particular I have laughed, and believed it impossible that I ever could become So weak as to fall into the Same situation. You recoiled;, no doubt, the 
bravado 
Q U I X O T T E. ^5 
bravado expressions which I have almost constantly used on those occasions, as if 1 defied the utmost power of the ideal deity. But, alas! I find myself a mere mortal, like the rest of my Sex; and the god whom I had So repeatedly and wantonly provoked, by my presumptuous sarcasms, has now taken his full revenge on me. 
Since I wrote last, the Easter holidays have intervened, and Mr. wilkins’s amiable daughter has been home from the boarding School. She is novr in her eighteenth year, rather taller than the usual stature : her shape is eles; ant, and not too (lender; her sea tures regularly beautiful, with a mixture of the lovely and majestic; her vol. I. F com 
€6 PHILOSOPHICAL 
complexion is fair, her hair flaxen, her deportment graceful and easy, her temper Sweetly mild, yet blended with becoming dignity and vivacity. Her countenance, though Sufficiently open, has an unaffeded but bewitching air of modesty, her conversation is Sensible and elegant, and her voice So Softly enchanting, that it is rather felt by the heart, than heard by the ear. All these charms, however, and many more, I observed without other emotion, than that usually felt on Seeing a beautiful and accomplished woman. But as a finer object than ordi ■ nary, of any kind, natural attrads our attention, as I constantly dined with her, and was besides often in her company by accident, or otherwise, and 
a 
(TU I X O T T Ei 67 
as I never had an opportunity of being So frequently in the company of a modest beauty before, it would not, I suppose, be wondered at by others, that she insensibly caught hold of my affections. Without reflecting on the consequences, however, I Suffered my, eyes to dwell with rapture on the charms of her person and mien; and my ears to be delighted with her enchanting tongue. When present she engaged my whole attention, and when absent she employed my thoughts. I dreamed of her when I happened tq sleep, and was never happy awake, but when iri her company. The night before she left us, we had a, route, consisting of the most respedlablc of Mr. wilkin’s patients, but chiefly of F a the 
68 PHILOSOPHICAL 
the young ladies their daughters; and at the request of Several who knew her musical abilities, she Sung Several Songs, which she accompanied on the guitar. Perhaps you will deem me partial or romantic. I have heard the most celebrated performers on the theatres and public places in London; blit in my judgement, hejr performance So far transcended theirs, that comparison was lost, I was not charmed, but transported; she could not be Said, like them, to delight the ear, she ravished the heart; and I imagine ed myself in heaven, hearing jln angel, After Supper, dancing was pro posed; and, heavens! shall I relate that miss Wilkins fell to he my partner! Language, dear Dennis, cannot 
describe 
- (TU I X O T T E. 69 
describe the ecstasy I felt during that blisssul period: I fancied my self, like St. Paul, caught up into the third heaven! — My transport was too visible not, to be observed by the amiable fair one, and might easily have been perceived by the whole company, had they deigned an attention to the meanest object in it; and I could not refrain from taking the first favourable opportunity to reveal to her the situation of my heart, and ardently to request the happiness of her countenancing my passion. She earnestly begged that I would be silent on the Subject then, and also to be careful of my behaviour, lest the company should observe; but assured me, that she would Speak, with me, on that F 3 particular 
70 PHILOSOPHICAL 
particular, the first favourable opportunity of our being alone. As I could not now doubt but my wishes were crowned with success, I leave you to guess at the unspeakable transports I felt, which yet, in compliance with her request, I Suppressed as much as possible during the evening. At twelve the company departed. I Sought eagerly for an opportunity of Speaking to my dear charmer alone that night; but my utmost vigilance was eluded, and I was obliged to retire, in this distracted situation, to my chamber. Sleep, you may veil imagine, was banished from my eyes. Anxious to hear the confirmation of my happiness from her dear lips, I came down early, and waited in the most impatient suspence till she arose. 
Mr. 
QUI X O T T E. 71 
Mr. Wilkins was busily engaged in hh study — I stew to the parlour where she was alone, threw myself at her feet, 'and in the most ardent though re spedlsul terms, requested that she would rclease me from my agony of doubt, by pronouncing the happy Sentence. She answered me as follows: 
“I must acknowledge myself, Sir, greatly obliged for the good opinion which you express concerning me; but were it even my inclination, which however is by no means the case, yet the duty I owe to the best and most indulgent of parents, would render it impossible for me to comply with your request. And if you have that’regard for me which you profess, you will F 4 show 
72 PHILOSOPHICAL 
show it by never mentioning the Subject again.” -1 attempted to remonstrate, 
and to repeat in still more ardent terms. But perceiving my intention, she feigned an excuse for retiring to her chamber, and notwithstanding my earnest endeavours to detain her, broke gently from me, and respedtsully withdrew. Though she continued at dinner time to treat me with respedt, I never after had an opportunity of being alone in her company; and she returned next morning to the boarding School. 
As yourself, dear Dennis, have lately been in a similar Situation, you will easily conceive the anguish which rends my heart at the thought of my 
disappoint 
cteu I X O T T E. 73 
disappointment; and the forlorn, and distrafted condition of my mind at the idea of her being anotheks, which her answer evidently implies. I shall only add, that I heartily implore for giveness for the ridicule which I threw on you on that occasion, as your dis trefs is now, I belieye, more than equalled by that of, 
, your’s, cc. 
lettex^ 
74 PHILOSOPHICAL 
LETTER VIII 
My Dear Friend, 
last letter concluded with informing you that I had felt, for the first time, the pangs of disappointed love, heightened by the exquisite torments of jealousy, For the expression of the dear enchantress, relative tosthe duty Jhe owed to a parenty left me no doubt that she was already engaged to the happy obje<5b of his choice. I doubt not that it has afforded you ample matter of triumph and revenge for my treatment of you when in a similar situation; and you have, I imagine, by this time, made yourself fu ficiently merry at my expense, as indeed 
QUI X O T T E. 73 
deed your truly facetious letter Sufficiently indicates. However, as I am not present with you, I can the better stand the brunt of your ridicule; and must give you the farther Satisfaction of declaring, that I either want your resolution, or that miy disorder is of a more violent kind. In six weeks you was pretty well recovered. But a month has now nearly elapsed, and I Seel myself in a more deplorable condition than even when I last wrote to you. To pass over the gloom of my mind, the anguish of my breast, at the thought of the object of my dearest affections being destined to the arms of another; my fieepless nights, my w'ither ed visage, my meagre carcase, and a long doleful catalogue of distresses, 
which 
si PHILOSOPHICAL 
which may be met with in every tale of love, the most convincing proof that I can give you of the reality of my flame, is, that I have hardly ate a pound of Solid food since Sentence was pronounced on me. In writing to you indeed, whom I have formerly So •severely rallied for the same weakness, 1 endeavour to assume ajocose air; in company too, I affect a gaiety which I am a stranger to in my private moments; and vainly strive to eat against my appetite, in order to prevent suspicion of the cause of my complaint, and the ridicule (which I dread) attending it. But those attempts Serve only to expose me the more. My acquaintance already conclude that love is the cause of my 
disorder 
(TU I X O T T E. 77 
disorder, and (very happily Sor me) imagine that I have left the fair oh jefi of it behind me, and even that I had fled from London in conse quence of the disappointment. My malady has not escaped the attention of Mr'. Wilkins himself, who So litttle troubles his head with matters foreign to his pursuits; though he does not Seem to have any Su’spicion that even love is the cause; a passion which he his long since forgot, and therefore is less likely to susped: that it should rage to Such excess in the breast of another. As he Seems to have conceived a Sincere affection for me, he has from time to time observed with concern the apparent decline of my health, and very kindly advised 

78 
PHILOSOPHICAL 
vised me to Such methods, as in his opinion were most likely to restore it. He has occasionally lent me his horse for the purpose of air and exercise; directed the maidservant to provide me proper restorative diet; and recommended the use of stomachic and corroborating medicines; though the two latter of these I have not paid much attention to. Still, however, he perceived that my health visibly declined, and that I was already in a consumption, or in the most imminent danger of it; and very kindly, and with all the Solicitude of real friendship and concern, took more pains than you will readily believe in considering my cafe. He Seemed indeed, even to have laidafide his 
philoso 
U I X O T T E. 79 
philosophical studies, and to have had my recovery alone at heart; when one day, after having, as he fondly imagined, hit on Something that would effectually relieve me, he ran into the shop, the joy of friendship Sparkling in his eyes; evidently proceeding from the rapture which his heartfelt at the thought of being at length able to do me Service; and after joyfully congratulating me on his discovery, and the assurances of the Speedy return of my health, he thus communicated both his prescription and its rationale. 
After the most attentive consideration of your cafe, my dear Har courts 1 discover the origin of it in loss of appetite, or to Speak more properly 

So PHILOSOPHICAL 
perly, want of digestion. Your own account confirms the idea; for you acknowledge that loss of appetite preceded the consumptive Symptoms, and theresore was the cause of them; for indeed, what is more likely to produce consumption, than want of nourishment? The intention therefore should be to restore the digestive power. To this end you have taken the most celebrated remedies usually administered on those occasions, but unfortunately to no effect. This, however, I Hatter myself will not be the cafe with the remedy I am now going to propose. It is the result of much study and at tentionsto thesubjedt; is founded on the very principles of digestion, and when mentioned you will instantly be struck 
with 
CLD I X O T T E. 8i' 
with a conviction of it eshcacy, and wonder that it could So Jong have been overlooked by the faculty. I am exceedingly happy also on your account, as having been the occafiori of the discovery., and of being the first person on whom was tried a remedy which will prove of Such infinite Service to mankind, because it will be the means of rendering your name equally immortal with that of the dis coverer. 
I need not inform you that digestionis now demonstrated to be the effects, not of muscular compressionj of attrition, of codlion, or of fer mention, but merely of solution, that the gastric juice is a proper menstruum 
vol. I, G for 
Si PHILOSOPHICAL 
for that purpose; and that animals whose aliments are different, have different kinds of thisjuice, answerable to the nature of the food to be digested. This fab is So certain, that we now know that the stomach is not necessary to the digestion of food. For if the gastric juice be taken from a dead animal, and put into a vial, with proper aliment, in a due degree of heat, that process will be performed as effedlually as in the stomach itself. Thus also eggs may be hatched by the heat of an oven, as completely as by incubation of the hen. — The stomach therefore may be considered as a mere vessel. And it Seems a matter of indifference, whether the Solvent of the food be furnished to it by the 
glandules 
au I X O T T E. 
glandules of that viscus, or frorh without. From the human stomach opportunities of obtaining this menstruum do not often occur; — though I think it may be contrived by means of a proper flexible Syphon, or rather by causing a fasting person to Swallow pieces of Sponge, which when Sufficiently wetted, may, by means of strings fastened to them, be withdrawn — But suppose we content ourselves at present with having re course to the gastric juices of those aninrtals whose food is of a similar nature to our own. The digestive faculties of dogs, and of Swine, come the nearest to ours; from them therefore it is most advisable to procure the liquid we are in quest of. 
G 2 I conn 
84 PHILOSOPHICAL 
I counsel then, that you take a certain quantity of gastric juice three or four times every day, and, immediately aster, a proper proportion of food: I infer from analogy, that the juice thus taken will even create that very sensation which we call hunger(and from hence also, and what has been Said, it is evident that your disorder proceeds originally from want of the Secretion of a proper quantity ofsthe irritating Solvent) and thus should we have an artificial digestive pro cess exadly Similar to the natural one. You may even vary the nature of your Solvent according to that of the food you wish to eat. Thus, if animal food be desired, the gastric juice of the animals before mention ^ 

QV I X O T T E. 85 
CD or even of the carnivorous ones will be proper; but if vegetable, that of a sheep, a bullock, or an horse. By this means, we fiiall even m prove upon nature. IS the mode proposed be, on any account, inconvenient, the process may be carried on out of the stomach; and when the Solution is completed, the chyle may be transferred, by an easy adt of deglutition, into that viscus. If you have any Suspicion of a deficiency of bile, or of pancreatic juice, a little of these may occasionally be added, according as the food be vegetable, or animal; agreeable to the discovery of an in .genious modern philosopher : to which I would wish to add, that the saliva also should not be neglected. This G 3 advice 
PHILOSOPHICAL 
advice is So perfectly consonant to the nature and principles of chylifi cation, that I am persuaded it must strike you too forcibly to render pcr suasives necessary to your adopting it; and the importance and general utility of the discovery, I presume, needs no illustration. I will theresore immediately make it my business to procure a Sufficient number of proper animals, in order that you may be daily Supplied with a due quari tjty of the required Solvent; So that in a very short time, I assure myself of the happiness of feeing you, my dear Harcourt, recovered to your former fleshiness and vigour 
Gloomy 
QUI X O T T E. y 
Gloomy as was the state of my mind, 
I could not but Smile heartily at my kind master’s odd proposal, and thanked him in the most cordial terms for his friendly anxiety and attention, relative to my health. Whatever was my own opinion of his Singular prescription, it would have been ungrateful to have affronted him by a refusal to make trial of it; nor indeed did he wait to know my Sentiments; but taking it for granted that they coincided with his own, left me immediately, in raptures at his discovery, in order to provide the animals he had mentioned. 
Dogs therefore, after having been Jcept long fasting, were regularly kill g 4 ed 
88 PHILOSOPHICAL 
ed four times a day; or in lieu of these the gastric juice was taken from the stomachs of sheep, hogs, or bullocks, killed by a neighbouring butcher, according to the nature of the food he imagined I should eat; and great indeed were his expectations of the event. But however I might endeavour to. Save appearances with him, to you I frankly acknowledge, that I have not yet had stomach to give his remedy a trial. ’tis now near three weeks that he imagines I have per fevered'in it; and as I have constantly made an unfavourable report of its sue cess,. and am now even worse than before, he has at length consented to my discontinuing the remedy, and given up (with what reluctancy and grief of heart 
I leave 
Q^lf 1 X O T T E, 89 
I leave you to guess) all the dazzling hopes which he had So fondly entertained concerning it. 
. I am, SIR,. * 
yosir’s, ‘&c. 
LETTER 
90 PHILOSOPHICAL 
LETTER IX 
Dear Sir, 
JN the variety of wild experiments which Mr. Wilkins makes himself, or his random application of those published by others, to the purposes of medicine, cit will not be wondered at if, once in his life, he should prove Successful. The following may Serve as an instance : 
Our neighbourhood has of late been much infested with the Smallpox; and as people are naturally alarmed at the ravages of that disorder, and are now pretty well convinced of the advantages of inoculation, they have at last very generally adopted the 
latter 
QUI X O T T E. 91 
latter method. As Mr. Wilkins is continually employing his thoughts for the good of mankind, he has given no little attention to this destruistive malady. His improvements on the cold regimen (as plunging the pa tiertt in cold well waters rolling him in fnowy c.) did not indeed appear to be attended with those capital advantages which he expel: ed would result from them; but this can by no means be Said of his new, and most elegant method of communicating the infection. As he very freely mentions his idea to me, I am enabled to acquaint you with his motives, and the analogical reafining which he employed on that memorable occasion. 
The 
92 PHILOSOPHICAL 
“The principal reason (he observed) that the Smallpox proves So much more fatal in the natural way, than in inoculation is, that in the former cafe the infedlion is received by the lungs., one of the principal vital organs of the body; whereas, in the latter, ’tis communicated to the arm., a part of infinitely less importance. The disorder makes its most formidable appearance in the part first infected. Thus, in inoculation, the arm violently inflames; and the like must be the cafe with the lungs in the natural way. But this inflammation even in the arm, So disa greeable at best, generally painful, and Sometimes even dangerous., I would wissi to prevent, as well as the terror and •pain arising frorn the usual manner of 
perform 
Q V I X O T T E. 93 
performing the oferatlon\ which frequently deter the timid from deriving the benefit of this Salu ary invention; and for which therefore it behoves the medical pradtitioner to find a remedy. I am much mistaken if the method I am going to pro pose, will not only remove these inconveniences, but even render the disorder itself more mild and innocent than is at present believed poshble. 
. It is well known, that if fitted air be breathed by the lungs, it becomies instantly fatal to animal life; whereas the Same fluid may be taken into the stomachwithout the least inconvenience. 
The 
94 PHILOSOPHICAL 
The poison of a n>iper infused iiito a would will presently inflame the part, and in a short time put a period to the animal’s existence; but the Same poison received into the stomach is perfc(5tly inoffensive.' 
From a consideration of these fads therefore, it Seems to me, that if the variolous infection be communicated to the blood by the usual way of our food, the like Salutary cffeds, with re spcd to this dreadful disease, will follow. For the matter being rendered less virulent by the process of digestion and being besides, presently and e qually distributed, by the circulation, throughout the body, not only no local inflammation can take place, but 
the 
CLU I X O T T E. 95 
the disorder itself will be So mild, that 
■ -- -- ■■ by heavens! 1 am resolved to 
make trial of it this very evening.” 
Ravished with the idea, and eager to put it in execution, he immediately took horsc and galloped away to the house of a poor labourer, in a neighbouring village, whose child he engaged to inoculate gratis. For this favour the parents, as you may imagine, were not a little thankful. After giving a cathartic or two, he made a puncture in the arm with an uninfeded lancet, in order to preserve appearances, and the same day brought home Some variolous matter, which he had just taken. This being mixed with a little milk, and corked up in a vial, 
he 
96. PHILOSOPHICAL 
he ordered me to direct“ “draught to be taken at night go“ “to bed, ” and it was actually Sent off, and administered accordingly, I consess I was curious to know the event of So Singular an experiment, which a few days determined : for the patient took the infedlion, and went regularly through the diseafe; and that in a more favourable manner than we usuallv observe even in inoculation. The success of the experiment has induced Mr. Wilkins to adopt it as his general method; though, for obvious reasons, he has as yet divulged it to no one but me: He only waits, however, fora Isisticient number of cafes in order to make it public; and you will acknowledge that So extraordinary a discovery 

Q^V I X O T T E. 97 
covery will make no little figure in the history of inoculation; 
Having mentioned thisi I cannot shut relate another Singular experiment of a similar kind. A gentleman in a neighbouring town had been troubled •with an ague, for which he had had the advice of his apothecary without success. He afterwards applied to various other pradticioners, physicians as well as apothecaries; and though they preseribed all those remedies which are usually found efficacious in that disorder, his paroxysms continued to return with as much violence as ever. He had now been ill hear ten months; at this period, he. vol. I. H was 
98 PHILOSOPHICAL 
was recommended to Mr. Wilkins, whose fame is by no means confined to his own parish. He likewise prescribed t variety of medicines, and those of the most powerful kind, the blue vitnol not excepted. Still however the disorder continued. Wilkins, chagrined at being thus b^stiy^and ambitious to Succeed in a case wherein all his neighbours of the faculty had failed, applied himself very attentively to the consideration of the cafe, and she following was the resuit of his meditation. 
He observed that the Bark was considered as the most capital remedy in intermittents i and believing it to 
be 
q^tr I X O T f E; 99 
be an absolute Specific himscif, concluded that its failure could only be owing to its being administered in an insussici ent quantity. That it was this circumstance which at first occasioned it to be in disrepute. But that its character was afterwards restored by the illustrious Sydenham, who judiciousty exhibited it in larger and more frequent dosesi That the Same had been Said to be the casc in our days, with respeft to the guaiacum in rheumatisms; For thesc reasons he was determined to try what a large quantity of the bark would do in the present cafe. He did not See reason to conclude that it was hurtful in any quantity, more than many other vegetable H 2 Sub 
100 PHILOSOPHICAL 
Substances which compose our daily fosd^, into which he did not doubt but it might be introduced, in proper cases, with good effect;; that he should, as Soon as the present fit was over, give the patient in question a much larger dosc of this celebrated drug than has hitherto been ventured on. 
He therefore ordered me to weigh up two ounces of the powder; and, without informing me of his intention, rode off with it to the patient. When he arrived, the fit had been over for Some time. He put the whole two ounces into a bowl, and pouring on it a Sufficient quantity of red wine, mixed them together, and made 
the 
QUI X O T T E. lot 
the patient drink it off at a draught. When he returned, I listened to his relation of the above circumstance with astonishment; but you will believe me when I inform you, that my astonishment was still greater when I learned that the patient had taken that enormous dose without the least inconvenience following, and that from that hour he had no return of his disorder. 
With respedt to myself, I am almost ashamed to inform you that I continue in the Same declining way as when I last wrote, and have not at present any hope of amendment. Of this at least I am certain, that there 
is but ane remedy -- -- could that be 
H 3 applied 
102 PHILOSOPHICAL 
applied, it would have a greater and more instant effect than even the very extraordinary one which I have been describing. — But that remedy must fop ever be despaired of by 
Your unfortunate Friend, 
LETTER 
U I X O T T E. 
10 s 
LETTER X 
Dear Sir, 
J Have the Satisfaction (if indeed it may be called one) to inform you that I am not only beloved and respected by Mr. Wilkins, but that I also enjoy the good opinion of Such of his patients as I have hitherto had occasion to visit. My succcss in this resped would be the more flattering in that I find, shy occasional hints, that W. is not at present So much esteemed in his medical character as he used to be Some years ago. The reason privately assigned for it is, that his intense application to the study H 3 of 
104 PHILOSOPHICAL 
of philosophy has by no means been favourable to his intelledls; and that he begins to make his praflicc too rnuch Subservient to his philosophical vagaries. As it is known that I had my medical education in London, and as I am not without a share of that gravity which is So becoming in a medical practitioner, (at least since Eafisr last) my opinion has, in more than one instance, been preferred even to that of Mr. W.' and Some are even partial enough tq send for me by choice; taking care however So to word the message, as to avoid giving Wilkins offence. Were I inclined to Settle here, I should undoubtedly use my endeavours to cherish this prejudice in iny favour, and should indeed have a fine opening. But as it is, I am not in the least desirous 
of 
QUI X O T T E. 105 
of embracing this advantage; because, for a reason which will easily occur, it. would now be inconsistent with, the peace of my mind, not only to Settle for life in S -- --, but even to continue 
long in this part of the country. Besides, my situation in Mr. wilkins’s Service is, on another account, very far from being So agreeable as I at first imagined. 
Whether the unhappy situation of my mind, and the relaxed state of my body in consequence thereof, render my temper more irritable and impatient than usual, I shall not determine; I confess I should be ashamed to mention what you will meet with in the Sequel to any other person; but as 
I do 
io PHILOSOPHICAL 
I do not Scruple to divulge the little Secrets, and even weaknejfes of my heart to you, I shall make no apology for the Subject matter of the remainder cf this epistle. 
I have already mentioned that our two culinary domestics are upon the most amicable, or rather amorous terms, and that the female is even the active person in the amour. Much of my time is necessarily Spent in their apartment. I generally Sup with them, frequently breakfast, and Sometimes dine, when Mr. Wilkins happens to be our, or otherwise engaged. And they are besides a thousand little occasions which bring me into the kitchen (Such as drcss, thirst, the fire, c.) which 
you 
Etui X O T T E. 107 
you need not be informed of. On these occasions I always endeavour to put myself on Such a level with them as to keep clear of their ill natured re iledtions, and you know me to be perfectly affable and free, despising those airs of Superiority, which many in our 
station are apt to assume. Mr. C -- -- -- » 
always took care that his apprentices and journeymen should be treated with a proper degree of respecst. But Mr. Wilkins is too much absorbed in Speculation to attend to affairs of So trivial a nature; though I am convinced that had he the least idea of my disagreeable Situation, he would take effectual methods to redress it. 
I have 
io PHILOSOPHICAL 
I have reason to think that they arc jealous of Mr. wilkins’s kindness to me. Being old Servants in the family, and my Seniors also with respedt to age they Seem to think they have a right to a Superiority over me, which wilkins’s partiality renders it particularly necessary for them to assert. At Mr. C— — the porter was duly Subordinate to the journeyman. But if I want Solomon to carry out a medicine, or do anything in the shop, he comes not but at his own convenience, unless W. happens to be in the way; and if Deborah has occasion for his assistance, llie must always be Served first. If the urgency of the patient’s case obliges me to be importunate, “They have no notion of If beihg commanded by servants; one 
master 
QJJ 1 X O T T E. 109 
“master is enough; Some folks are “very fond of taking the gentleman upon them, though they want the “msanse with a number of similar sar cafms; which though I do not think it worth while to make any reply to, yet as I am conscious that my behaviour does not merit Such treatment, I con fess it gives me Some uneasiness, and makes me more careful than I otherwise should be of my condu<st towards them. I even frequently do those little offices myself to avoid the disagreeable consequences of Setting him about them. Perhaps if I assumed a proper degree of firmness, and treated these ungenerous people in a more Spirited manner, their behaviour to me would be more obliging. But Seeing the 
easiness 
no PHILOSOPHICAL 
tasiness of my temper they impose ori me. The man Seems of himself to be civil enough, and would, I believe, go on very well, was ^ he not tutored and Set on by his virago. This is not the most disagreeable part of my situation. 1 may Safely venture to hint my Suspicion to you, that Deborah in the fury of her despair, has, if 1 may guess by her waist, Suffered Solomon to take a Sample of her cupidity; and that in consequence of dissiking the goods, he is grown cooler than she could wish; for she takes unusual pains to demonstrate to him on every occasion, that he has the greatest share of her attention and respedt, and Seems to endeavour to show her fondness for him, by her contempt of me. If I sic with them at 
night 
1 
QUI X O T T E. Ill 
night aster business is over, or at other intervals of leisure, her whole discourse is directed to Solomon, as if there was not a third person in company. If I venture to join in the conversation, (for you know me to be a lover of Society) the answer, if 1 get any, is as mud distinguished by the crolsness of its tone as that of her language to her paramour is by its affected fondness, she evidently intending that he should no tice the contrast. (N. B. Pont imagine that I am jealous.) Perhaps also a certain confeisufnejs Suggests to her, that if she be Seen to treat me with common civility, Solomon might, for good reasons, susped her virtue. You, I believe, are pretty well convinced that I by no means, make a God of my 
belly 
till PHILOSOPHICAL 
belly, and that I never had a wish tb fare better than the meanest Servant at Mr. C — i — stable. But how would you, and your fellow labourers feel yourselves, should your cook, immediately on Setting down to Supper, help your porters to the nicest and best parts of the entertainment, leaving the coarse refuse for you? Yet if the wing of a fowl, or the fragment of a nice pud ding, pie, or custard, happens to be left at dinner, I have the mortification to See an inferior Servant helped to if, while mysclf am left to feed on bread and checse, or other homely fare; and a bottle of wine, cribbed out of the 'cellar, is lovingly emptied by my two associates, while I, at the Safne table, am Suffered to regale myself with Small 
beer. 
Q^U 1 O T T E. Ill 
beer. To treat her favourite with fii bits is a privilege enjoyed by the cook time out of mind; but when it is done in the company of a third person, to alk him to taficy would be no more than a mark of common civility. As the party in question (for Solomon I consider only as a cypher) is Sensible that the state of appetitoy if not mere 
complimenty would have induced me to refuse, the light must be considered as the greater; and was evidently intended with that view, for reasons assigned. 1 impute this behaviour, however, to want of breeding, and pafs it off as 
well as I can. And in order to Subject ♦ 
myself to as little uneasiness in this way as possible, I have of late, especially as the weather is now warm, either Yol, I. I kept 
114 PHILOSOPHICAL 
kept mysels more in the shop, or gone out. perhaps also, my mere presence was one cause of their odd behaviour towards me, as it proved an impediment to their pleasures. 
On these accounts, however, and another which I need not mention, I shall by no means think of continuing 
here. I would even have left S -- -- -- -- - 
before now, but that it is no recommendation to have quitted a first place So Soon, and that Mr. wilkins’s kind treatment is an antidote to that which I meet with from his domestics. The moment that I can do it with reputation, I certainly shall get another master— — indeed the ill state of my health 
will 
QUI X O T T E. 
will permit me to engage in his Service. 
On a review of this letter, 1 cannot but aste pardon for its contents, which after all I should not have troubled you with, but that it may Serve to prepare you for the difficulties which you must expect; to meet with when you leave Mr. C -- -- -- --. The fate of a journeyman 
apothecary, without fortune, or friends, (though that is not your case) is truly deplorable; and though my situation is by no means agreeable, yet I have Sufficient reason to console myself on comparing it with that of Several of my old schoolfellows, now in the same undesirable capacity. 
1 am, my dear Friend, yours, cc. 
ii PHILOSOPHICAL 
I. E T T E R XL Dear Sir, 
T Must acknowledge myself greatly ^ obliged by your kind attention to my health, and should be ill deserving of your friendship, if I did not endeavour to put your judicious advice in practice. I am as much convinced as you can be, that nothing but resolution is wanting; but at the same time it must be remembered, that all men are not blessed with an equal portion of that virtue; and that they vary hardly in anything So much as their degrees of Sensibility. At tfic Same time that I am making my acknowledgments to you, it would be ungrateful not to mention 
the 
QUI X O T T E. 117 
the obligations of a Similar kind, which I am under to another, and which therefore shall be the Subject: of this letter. ' I lately gave you one instance of Mr. wilkins’s kind attention to my health; but he has Since been still more assiduous in his friendly endea vojurs to restore it; and a few days ago, after having been locked up in his study the whole forenoon, Solely intent on contemplating my cafe, he ran in haste into the shop, and with a mixture of real joy, and affecstionate concern in his countenance, took me by the hand, and thus addressed me. 
“I need not, my dear Harcourt, mention the concern with which I have observed the unhappy state of your I g health • 
118 PHILOSOPHICAL 
health; and it is with grief I perceive, that notwithstanding my utmost endeavours to remove your complaint, it, on the contrary, visibly increases. I lately flattered mysels that I had not only discovered an easy method of recovering but that the Same plan would have been of the most essential fbrvice* to the world in general. The grief which the failure thereof has occasioned me on your account, I need not mention; though I can hardly yet per suade myself but that it may be useful, and even effedlual in many cases; and I mean in future to give it another trial. That it has not Succeeded with you, may be owing to contingent circumstances, which I cannot at present explain. But waving that point, 1 have 
ever 
CLU I X O r T E. 119 
ever since, at times, most ardently applied my thoughts to your cafe, and flatter myself that I have now hit on a method which will not fail to produce the effect I have long So earnestly desired.” I cordially thanked him for his affectionate concern and attention; and he thus proceeded. 
“I 'at first meant to have proposed the injedlin^of proper nutriment, already animalized — our artificial chyle, for example — at once into the vascular .System; but as the operation must be attended with pain, I have laid aside that idea, cspecially as I flatter myself that the method which I am now about to mention will better answer the end: I 4 At 
120 PHILOSOPHICAL 
At all events wc can but have recourse to the other, if this fails. 
“It is the duty of the medical pradfh tioner, to avail himself of every discovery in philosophy, and to turn it to use in the healing art for the general good. I presume it would be Superfluous to attempt explaining to you the doctrine of animal abforptiont since it has 'of late been So clearly illustrated by a deservedly eminent anatomist of our own country, whose performance you doubtless have read; but it Seems to me that a very capital use may be made of that doctrine, which has escaped the attention of its justly celebrated dis coverer. We are to reflect, however, that Rotne was not built in a day. Improvements 
CLU I X O T T E. 121 
provements in philosophy advance by stow degrees. The age in which the loadflone was discovered, remained ignorant of the most important uses of it. 
“The lymphatics are proved to be a System of ahforbent vejfels; and fatsts have Sufficiently demonstrated, that besides the fluids which they absorb from the cavities of the body, they have also the power of inhaling Substances, lb extra, when these Substances are duly applied to the Ikin. Thus, mercury is imbibed by them in consequence of mercurial friftions, as is proved beyond controversy by the Salivation which Succeeds. There are other known proofs of extraneous ahforption., 
if 
1, 22 PHILOSOPHICAL 
if I may use the term; as in communicating the Smallpox by inoculation; and similar instances which I need not relate. But physicians have consigned their ideas in practice, to medical absorption; and it is matter of astonishment to me that they should So strangely have overlooked another, a daily obvious, and far more important effcdt of this power. 
“It is well known that butchers are 
n. 
usually fatter than other men, though they perhaps eat less; for as fat as a butchera proverbial expression. It is still more generally known that cooks are in like thriving condition, though it is also certain that cooks eat least of all other people; the heat to which they 
are 
QJJ I X O T T E. 1e3 
are exposed, and the Smell of the victuals, taking away their appetites. not withstai.ding, however, that the cook cats little, and yet grows big, she uses a very considerable degree of exercise, which, together with the evaporation from the Surface, in consequence of the heat of the kitchen, must necessarily occasion a great expense of fluids. The butcher too labours hard, and per spires Scarcely less than the cook. As nevertheless So great a quantity of nutriment is derived into the bodies of these people as to produce the effect mentioned; my quere is, whence this nutriment proceeds? That it does not get into the System by \.\\tprimee Are, appears from what has already been observed, and as there is but one alternative 
124 PHILOSOPHICAL 
tive, absorption is the only method by which it can be derived. Now, the hands of the butcher are continually greasy with the fat of his meat; but the fat is the most nutritive part of animal aliment; it is therefore absorbed by the lymphatics, and carried into the System, where it produces the effect noticed. The cook is not only in a Similar predicament with respeft to her hands, but the air which Surrounds her on every side is loaded with nutritive effluvia, exhaled from the various aliments exposed to the fire, which therefore are in like manner inhaled, and that as well by the lymphatics in the lungs, as by those throughout the whole sursace of the body; whence, by the Way, we have also the reason why cooks 
even 
QUI X O T T E. 115 
even exceed batchers in fatness. We have, therefore, a very natural and obvious method of nutrition in cases where the usual one fails; and I cannot but repeat my astonishment at its having been hitherto So unaccountably overlooked by the learned in these matters. 
“The fat being indisputable, that nutrition may be performed by means of the absorbent System, my advice is, that the idea be adopted with respedl: to yourself. I therefore earnestly recommend to you, to expose the Surface of your body and lungs occasionally, to the effluvia of proper aliments, ^ and also to rub, four or five times a day, a Sufficient quantity of these aliments into 
the 
126 PHILOSOPHICAL 
the most convenient parts of the sursacc of your body. I have the highest expectations from this admirable method, my dearharcourt, and advisc you to it in the full assurance of its success. From a consideration of the premises, a mind enlightened like yours must be too fully convinced of its efficacy to render arguments needful; I will, therefore, immediately give orders to the maid to furnish you with everything that may be requisite to So important a purpose, as L am determined that you shall begin this very evening.” 
He was So much in a hurry that he did not wait for my approbation; and tonight I am to commence the process with mutton Suet and vinegar. Whether 
QUI X O T T E. 127 
there or no he fuspefts that I deceived him in the digejtion affair, I cannot tell; but himself means to be my operator in the present instance. I find it impossible to evade; and as he Seems determined, I will not appear So un grateful 'as to affront his kindness by a refusal. Making a merit of necessity therefore, I shall Suffer myself (a providential return, perhaps, for my late jest upon him) to be put to bed tonight in as greasy a condition as the cook or the butcher, from whom he took the hint of the operation. And it is not unlikely that I shall dream of being turned Roman Catholic, and near my end., having already received extreme unfiion. When I write again, I will let you know the event; burr, believe 
\ • 
i PHILOSOPHICAL 
sieve me, I am heartily sick at thought of the course. And perhaps you will rather be inclined to be malicioussy pleased with, than to pity, my persecution. 

I am, Scc 
LETTER 
QUI X O T T E. 
129 
LETTER XII 
Dear Sir, 
Ventured to Sotetel the effedb which my Situation, as alluded to in rriy last, ‘would have on you;; your answer has by no means undeceived me. I could, however, better have born your good-humoured rallery, had it been free from the malidous pity with which you have occasionally scasoned it; and which only Serves to make your ridicule the • more keen and severe. This kind of writing is your forte, and I should be careful, in future, of giving you occasion to exercise in J eonfess, however, that my weakness, and former treatment of you, deserves vol. I. K fiven 
130 PHILOSOPHICAL 
even more than the pleasantry with which you handled mc; and I begin to flatter myself that you will not again have occasion to display your fatyrical talent on the former topic, though it will, at all times, give me pleasure to be the occasion of your exerting it, cither on that, or any other. 
My last letter gave you reason to conclude, that the present would treat wholly of alimentary fridtions, and their effect on my health. You wilf find, however, that I have since had occasion to employ my pen on a very different Sutjedt. 
In compliance with the friendly and importunate advice of my affedlionate 
masterj, 
QUI X O T T E. 131 
master, I Suffered my legs to be daily greased with mutton Suer, my thighs to be rubbed with vinegar, my hands and feet to be immersed for an hour or two at a time in milk, mutton porridge, or vegetable decodlions, and my lungs, together with the whole Surface of my body, to be exposed to a variety of vegetable and animal effluvia, properly corrected with acids and fixed air. It would have forced a Smile in the countenance of Diogenes to have beheld me under the operation, or to have viewed the earnest attention, and anxious expedancy, So strongly expressed in the features of my kind operator. I had not, however, undergone this course above three days (to little effect as you will easily ima k 2 gine) 
132 PHILOSOPHICAL 
gine) before I received the following letter, incloscd in a cover, and apparently directed in a male hand. 
Sir, 
The holidays for Michaelmas being at hand, I cannot but write to you, after what has past, to desire, and humbly to insist on your not again mentioning the Subject which occasioned my reserved behaviour to you previous to my leaving home. As Such a con du6h is quite unnatural to me, it will by no means be pleasing to re affumc it; and I have judged proper to advise you of this, previous to my return, b.c. cause it will otherwise be impossible for me to behave to you wsith that becoming freedom, and unreserve which your station in my father’s house entitles you 
to. 
QUI X O T T E. 133 
to. If that behaviour be not preserved, it may give him suspicions, which it will be necessary for me to clear up, though gratitude, in return for your good opinion of me, would rather incline me to be silent on that point. If however, you have reason to think you cannot observe this injundion, you will oblige me infinitely by taking proper measures, in order to prevent our meeting again. Was my real situation known to you, you would not deem this conduct the effect of pride, or of any other unworthy motive in 
Maria Wilkins.’^ 
P. S. I need not, I hope, request of you to destroy this letter as Soon as you have read it; but do not, any msam^ answer it.” 
K 3 When 
134 PHILOSOPHICAL 
When I opened the letter, and Saw it was written in a female hand, my curiosity led me to look at the signature previous to the perusal; and judge you, who have been in a similar situation, what was my surprise, my rapture! at Seeing the dear name of my beloved Maria, the fair cause of my Sufferings, and the only Source from whence 1 could Soon hope for a release from them! Transported, I pressed it ardently to my lips, and not doubting that its contents were propitious, already flattered myself with the fond assurance that heaven, in pity to my dis tress, and moved by rny earnest prayers, had altered her Sentiments in my favour; and in the ecstasy of gratitude and joy, fell involuntarily on my knees, 
pouring 
Q^UIXOTTE. 135 
pouring out the warm overflowings of my heart to the author of So great a blessing!! — figure to yourself also, dear friend, my feelings on reading its contents; the death cold damp which struck upon my heart, in a moment quenching all my fond dazzling hopes; and the torture that I felt at the idea of parting never to See her more! For a few moments I remained in a state of total insensibility; but recollection Soon returning, and painting my distress in the mostlively colours to my imagination, the agony of my breast was unutterable; roused by which I became for a while frantic, gave full loose to the whirlwind of pashon; and lucky it was that no one happened to be near, as from the unguarded manner in which I raved K 4 out 
i3fi PHILOSOPHICAL 
out my disappointment, the whole Secret must have been discovered. — But I will not troiiblc you with the remainder of a Scene, which however Serious it was to me, to you perhaps may appear unimportant, or even ridiculous. Suffice it that I am at this moment in the greatest imaginable distress of Soul; and that on pretence of a family misfortune, I have given Mr. wilkin’s notice of the necessity I am under of quitting his Service, previous to the approaching holidays, at which he Seems to be no less Sincerely grieved than myself. But to be daily in the company of all that my heart holds dear, and yet be obliged to behave to, and be treated by her with indifference, I cannot bear; and I would perish Sooner 
than 
QUI X O T T E. 137 
than give her offence. To See her again, however ardently it may be desired by me, can now only tend to dis tress her, and add to my own uneafi ness. I will therefore devote myself a voluntary Sacrifice to her repose, and for that purpose have written to request that you will endeavour to procure me either a lodging, or a place, as Speedily as possible; and if you hear of any deserving person, whom you think I may Safely recommend to Mr, Wilkins as my Successor, you will add greatly to th obligation by Sending him. — The pangs which I shall feel on my dear maria’s account, when I 
leave S -- --, added to my grief at 
parting with Mr. Wilkins, (for whom 
though 
138 PHILOSOPHICAL 
though I laugh at his oddities, I have a real affection, as he certainly has for me) will be better conceived by you, than described by 
Yoiir afflicted 
And unfortunate Friend, Scci 
LETTER 
CLU I X O T T E. 
3^ 
LETTER XIII 
To Mr. John Harcourt. Dear Jack, 
AD my Dulcinea given me as much reason to hope as yours, 
I should not have disgraced myself, nor' insulted a friend, with So desponding an epistle as that which I last received from you. You are, I perceive, a perfect novice in matters of love When a lady to whom I had freely declared a passion, and who had given me a denial, after So long an interval voluntarily writes me a letter, what am I to conclude but that she is either desirous of a renewal of my addresses, (which 
perhaps 
140 PHILOSOPHICAL 
perhaps she wondered I should have been So cold as not to have done in an epistolary way before; or at least that she has a regard for me; and in conse quence thereof, knowing her situation, and obligation elsewhere, is afraid to see she lest it should weaken her attachment where rigid duty commands? But it does not appear that you have ever ashed her but once; and what kind of a lover must you be to be Satisfied with the first refusal! The punctilio, the decorum of the Sex, requires that they should have opportunities given them of denying a man several times, and even at last to be as it were even forced into compliance, lest they should be thought too forward. They expect it; and I appeal to yourself, 
whether 
OUI X O T T E. i 
whether if she had yielded when you first put the question, you would ever have felt your present degree of passion?? is even a kind of inftinb which teaches this doctrine to every woman of discernment. But let us argue the case a little. The reason which she gave for refusing your request was, that duty forbade it. I do not recollect, however, that you make any mention of a rival. Had you made Such a discovery, you would have considered it of too important a nature to be passed over in silence. Was there one in the cafe, you would certainly have heard of it from Some quarter or other, as I doubt not you have been Sufficiently indirefily inquisitive in that respeft. She Seems indeed too young, and to have been 
too 
142 PHILOSOPHICAL 
• ’ too little in the company of our Sex to have thought much about wedlock; and Wilkins, by your account, is So much absorbed in his studies, that the very idea has probably never yet occurred to him. As to the mere word duty it may only imply, that being under age, and having a laudable idea of parental authority, she might not think herself at liberty to engage in an affair of Such importance to her future happiness, without her father’s consent; or perhaps, as Wilkins himsclf is Such an oddity, there may be Some whimsical circumstance in the case, which would never occur to a man of the world, but which may not only be discovered, but even overcome by Spirit and perseve rance. It doe not appear to me but 
that 
QUI X O T T E. 143 that you have everything to hope for in this bufiness, and nothing to fear. Did not the lady’s letter favour the opinion, yet the Sole circumstance of your being a likely and accomplished fellow (you know I am no flatterer) would be Sufficient to convince me of the probability of an unexperienced girl, just entered the age when the little god begins to be busy about the heart, falling in love with you; especially as you had already made the advance, in So warm a manner as you have represented. Your meagre appearance, loss of appetite, and the accounts which she will in course hear of your illness, will convince her of the reality of your flame 5 for vanity will not be wanting to Suggest to her the cause, If she has not 
an 
144 philosophical 
an unkind heart indeed, (and the contrary, together with a most generous and noble disposition, appears by her letter) mere gratitude will incline her to pity, and even relieve you; and is it be true that she is already Smitten, as I think I can venture to affirm, it will increase and completely rivet her affection. But even your cowardice may be turned to account; for the idea of your quitting her father’^s Service, merely to prevent giving her offence, however painful it must be to youisielf, will probably have greater influence with her than any other circumstance. It will be a tacit acknowledgment, that vou love her too well to be able to bear her indifference; and that you find it impossible to observe the like 
go ndirst 
QUI X O T T F. 145 
conduct towards her. In every light, therefore, in which I can view your case, you appear to be in a fair way with respedl to the lady; and your own account Sufficiently proves, that with the father there can be no danger of difficulty. He has conceived a friendship, or rather affefuon for you. You have him even under your thumb., by being in possession of his absurdities. His passion for study, and approaching age, will incline him Soon to take a partner, or reitire. In either case, who will be So proper as one already in the good graces of his patients, and with whom he has So fine an opportunity of happily fettling his only child? You may even treat him en cavalier., should he refuse his consentj and threaten to op vol, L L posfe 
14^ PHILOSOPHICAL 
pose him in his business. The predi ledion of his patients for you, (which iy all means endeavour to improve) and their declining opinion of him, (which it will also be to your interest to further) as he cannot but be Sensible of. So they will Scarce fail to have their due effect. Should this, however, not be the case, I advise you to put your threat immediately in execution, which you may do, in my opinion, with every prosped of success; when, if you are still determined on your matrimonial point, it is but waiting till the fair one is of age, (or what think you of a trip to Scotland?) m.d. it is much indeed if time does not reconcile a father to a once dearly loved, and deserving daughter; So that if you marry her at first 
- without 
QUI X O T T E. i47 
without a farthing, the fortune will come in time. If you want money in the interim, my purse, you know, is open to you. 
I have, therefore, written by the fc turn of the post, and in haste, as you will perceive by the style of my letter, to advise and request of you, by all 
* V 
means, as you value your own repose, not to leave Wilkins. Your future fortune and happincss, if I am capable of judging, depends on your continuing with him. As however, you have given him notice to leave him, do not at present inform him of your intention to stay; for I would have you appear to be leaving him when your fair inamorata returns. And that he might L 2 not 
148 PHILOSOPHICAL 
not engage another, tell him that you have written to a friend, who has engaged to furnish him with an assistant of indisputable character before you leave him, So that he need not inquire elsewhere. If others apply in the mean time by chance, either take measures to prevent his agreeing with them, or if ihesc fail, inform him that you shall now be able to stay; though if possible, avoid the latter; which with proper address, may easily be done. When she comes home, affect an unhappiness that you were not gone Sooner, and take Some method to make her Sensible of it. But this and your conduct in general in this important concern, I leave to be regulated by your own good fensc and discretion. I have, 
dear 
QUI X O T T E. 149 
my dear Harcourt, your interest in this business near at heart, and must be free to tell you, that in my opinion, it will be your own fault, if you do not fulfil the ardent wishes of 
Your sincere friend, c. 
Samuel Dennis. 
P. S. Lee me know the event as Soon as possible, as I am not a little anxious about it. And when convenient, do not forget to favour me with further anecdotes of Wilkins's quixotism; I am much delighted with it. 
LETTER 
ISO PHILOSOPHICAL 
LETTER XIV 
To Mr. Samuel Dennis. 
My Dear Friend, 
'■y^hough your truly affedlionate' letter did not inspire me with any considerable degtce of hope, yet in deference to your opinion, and that I might not have toaccuse myself, I re solved to follow your friendly advice. Under the daily operation of alimentary fridlions and fumigations, therefore, I past, in the most painful suspence and anxiety, an interval of near three weeks;. and was So far from receiving benefit, that even Wilkins was at length convinced, by the increase of my complain ty 
TUI X o T T e; 151 
plaint, of the ineshcacy of his remedy, and dropped it, though with visible marks of the most cutting disappointment. His concern and assiduity, were, however, unabated, and I had stronger proofs of his friendship, than I had ever before experienced, in the real grief which he manifested at the idea of parting with me; but which I shall not now trouble you with an account of. I managed matters agreeable to your dircdlion, till the fair cause of my uneasiness returned. She arrived in the forenoon, but I cautioully avoided Seeing her till dinner time. You will guess at the distressed state of my mind in the interval, when I tell you that I was frequently obliged to have recoursc to the volatile Salts, and that I more L 4 than 
152 PHILOSOPHICAL 
than once Sainted. The tears which I shed, I am ashamed to mention. At length I was called to dinner, and if you picture to yourself a thief brought into open court before his accusers, or going to be hanged, you will have a pretty exad idea of the figure I made at first entering the room. My eyes were cast toward the ground; my heart became Swollen, my knees knocked together, and from the manner in which I felt myself (more dead than alive) I cannot tell how it happened that I escaped fainting. You will pardon me when I tell you, that I inwardly cursed myself for having followed your advice, which had brought me into So awkward and painful a situation. I Summoned, however, asa last effort, 
all 
QUI X O T T E. 153 
^11 the resolution 1 could muster, and advanced to my Seat, but without daring to look in the face, the fair cause of my distress. The topic of discourse was, by Mr. Wilkins, immediately turned on me. He acquainted my charmer, (and in that, unwittingly becoming my advocate) “that I had been in a visibly declmino; state almost ever since she was last at home; and that every method had been ineffcdfually tried for my relief. That the cause mf it was apparently uneasiness of mind, in consc e^uence, as he imagined, of Some family misfortune; on which account I was now, to his unspeakable regret, about to leave him.” — It would, by no means, become me to repeat the eulogiums which he was So kind as to 
pass 
154 PMILOSOPHICAL 
pass on me. I was plcased, however, to hear him take occasion to observe, that “he should have lost me before now, but that he had not yet been able to procure another assistant.” I longed, I confess, to know whether this harangue had any visible effect on the countenance of the fair object to whom it was addressed; but dared not look up to Satisfy myself. At length, to my unspcakable transport, I heard Mr. Wilkins Say to her, “my dear Polly, why dont you cat r” — She cx cused hcrself in a faltering and hesitating tone of voice, adding, that “her journey had quite taken away her appetite.” There was, however. Something So strongly expressive of a distressed Situation of heart, in the manner 
in 
QUI X O T T E. 155 
in which this was Spoken, that I ventured to look up. I met her eyes fixed upon me with the most lively affeflion and anxious Solicitude; but she instantly turned them aside with a blush, which was Succeeded by a deathlike paleness, and presently after she fainted away. I ssew to her assistance, and heavens! what did 1 feel at having in my arms, all that my Soul held dear! — But these thoughts were instantly lost in my anxiety for her distressed situation, Resigning her therefore, to the care of her parent, J flew with a lover’s haste for proper volatiles; with which as quickly returning, I again Supported her to my aching breast, and with all the assiduity of fond affection, applied my remedies, he recovered, opened her eyes, and 
finding: 
156 PHILOSOPHICAL 
finding in whose arms she was, gave an involuntary shriek, and again fainted. Heavens! what were my feelings at that moment! increased as they were by the apprehension that in her insensi ble state she might utter Something that might betray her! To prevent this latter, I begged Mr. Wilkins to step into the shop for Some sether, in order to rub her temples; and in the mean time as she was recovering, and not yet restored to sense, I had the inexpressible happiness to hear from her heavenly lips, “My dear Harcourt, I have been the unkind cause of this.’* She opened her eyes, and fixed them on me with ineffable expression of affection and concern. 1 bathed her with kisses, pressed her to my melting bosom, 

TUI X O T T E. 157 
Some, and was proceeding to pour out the overflowings of an heart rcpletewith gratitude and love; but recolleding her Situation, and hearing her father’s steps, she conjured me to be silent and careful of my behaviour; then gently put me from her, and assumed a dignity and Sweet Serenity of behaviour. Mr. Wilkins being now arrived, she thanked him affectionately for his kind Solicitude, but begged him not to be alarmed, for that her fainting was only a consequence of the fatigue of her journey; and that she should Soon recover her Spirits, espccially if he would permit her to retire awhile to her chamber, and lay down; a step which Mr. Wilkins much approved of. 
Judge 
158 PHILOSOPHICAL 
Judge now, my dear friend, what were my feelings on this Sudden, and to me wholly unexpedled rcverse of fortune. I was a few moments before completely miserable, but now one of the happiest of mortals, as I had the strongest reasons to conclude that I was possessed of the affections of her on whom my felicity wholly depended. You will easily imagine how anxioussy I waited for an interview to clear up my remaining doubts. I sat down however, with Mr. Wilkins, during the remainder of his dinner, with more chearfulness than usual, taking care to talk as little on the Subject of his amiable daughter as possible, and introducing Some philosophical or medical .topic, whenever he mentioned 
hen 
QUI X O T T E. 159^ 
her. By this means, and the Serenity, or rather melancholy, which I assumed, I escaped suspicion. Dinner was now ended, and Mr. Wilkins, after feeing his beloved Maria, and finding her So well recovered as to come down, went to visit his patients. Taking care then to Send out Solomon on bufiness, and to engage the maid in cookery for myself, with a view to prevent detection, I flew to the parlour, and threw myself respedtfully at the feet of my adorable angel. I congratulated her on Tier recovery, thanked her for the unmerited honour of her letter, and apologised for not having yet quitted her father’s Service, agreeable to her injundtion. I took the freedom tq mention my own Sufferings, 1 the 
io PHILOSOPHICAL 
the account of which, I observed, shei had heard Srom Mr. Wilkins; the ef fehfs, her eyes must convince her of, and the cause, though it could not but be obvious to herself, remained as yet a mystery to all others; adding, that as I had once more the happiness, of perhaps misery, of living in her presence, I earnestly begged she would not be offended, if for the last time, as a few days would part us for ever — ■ 1 presumed to ash whether I might yet flatter myself with the hope that time and my Sufferings had wrought any change in her Sentiments? 
Her blushes evidently declared an inward painsul struggle between duty 
and 
QUI X O T T E, it 
and affection, and recovering her com posure, she answered me as follows: 
“Whatever doubt. Sir, I might at first have entertained of the Sincerity of your professions, it is now Sufficiently apparent that they were unfeigned; nd I have neither the ingratitude to refuse you my pity, nor the prudery to affect an insenfibility which I do not feel. Nevertheless, Sir, I must repeat, perhaps with regret, that my situation is Such that I can by no means be instrumental to your hap piness. I am the only child of the most affedlionate of parents, whose wishes, much less injunohons^ I would Suffer anything Sooner than transgress., And I have it in express command, as vol. I. M I va 
h62 PHILOSOPHICAL 
I value either his fortune, or what is infinitely more dear to me, his affection and blessing, never to think of entering into the marriage state. You may object, perhaps, that it is a singular humour. But it is not for me to question the propriety of his mandates, or the nature of his motives. He has had greater experience in life than 'me; is convinced that Estate of celibacy is infinitely preferable to that of wedlock; his circumstances are Such that he can have no other view than my happiness, and I am determined to abide by his command. I will yet. Sir, be frank enough to confess, that I feel for your Situation. But absence, and new objects, may in time enable you to get the better of your weak' ' • • 
QUI X O T T E. 163 
ness; and it will be a particular satis fadlion to me, to hear of your future felicity and welfare.” 
Thus, my dear Dennis, a damp was a Second time thrown on my glowing hopes, and even yourself must have approved, had I given up the contest. The latter part of this Speech, however, was accompanied with Such evident emotions of distress, notwithstanding her obvious struggles to sup press them, that I was tempted once more to interpose. Like a desperate gamester, therefore, I determined to put the whole issue upon a last cast ♦ and colleding my spirits, ventured the following reply : 
M ^ 
Forgive 
i64 PHILOSOPHIC AL 
“Forgive me, dear lady, if in an affair of Such consequence to my rcpose, 
I for once violate my engagement. I feared that the obstacle to my happiness was of a very different nature from what you have mentioned, and from the tenor of your former answer and letter, concluded that you were already engaged to another. But if this be the only one, I imagine it by no means difficult to be Surmounted. It needs no proof, I presume, that it is not only unjust, but impious, in a parent to presume to lay Such a restraint. It is contrary to nature, and the express com mand, as well as evident design of the creator, which ought to be obeyed before any human authority. It is even cruel, and that in the higheji degree. 
for 
QUI X O T T E. 165 
For, from the nature of thehumanframc, it must be So far from producing the cffedt intended, that it must necessarily involve in it your unhappiness, unless with his interdifbion he could also re verse the established laws of nature. But it appears to me. Madam, that it is a mere whim of Mr. Wilkins, which time, and circumstances, may overcome. He loves you, you Say, with the most ardent affection;; course he must naturally desire your felicity; which, when he finds that his unjust command impedes, the Same affection will induce him to reverse. But, Madam, I have other hopes than these I believe I may flatter myself that I enjoy his confidence and affection; gnd situated as I am with respedt to his M 3 business. 
i66 PHILOSOPHICAL 
businefs, and the good opinion of his patients, it must appear to him to be not only for his interest, but even hap piness, to make me blessed. From these motives, properly considered, he may possibly be prompted to Such a measure; by mere voluntary inclination; So that every obstacle, with respedt to him, ' Seems to be removed. In re sped! to yourself, Madam, is I may presume to judge from circumstances — if your late want of appetite and fainting, •were as little the effect of your journey, as my present unhappy condition is of family misfortune — if a most tender, and I will add passionate expression, joined with my name during your late inlensibility, (and which being involuntary, was natural) may be considered 
(TU I XOT T E. 
(idered as arguments of affection, I am not wholly indifferent to you. Do not, loveliest of your Sex, affect an apathy which you do not feel; make us both happy by the endearing acknowledgment, and it shall be my: fault if the objection you urge be noc removed.” — I was proceeding; butob. Serving the blushes to gather in her lovely countenance, her bosom to Swell, the big tear to steal from her eye, and her whole Soul to be overwhelmed with melting distress and Sweet confusion, I Seized the happy moment, and Springl ingfrom the ground, ventured to clalp her to my beating bosom, urging her by the most tender and endearing Solis citations, and had at length the inexpressible happiness to hear from her M 4 lovely 
j6k PHILOSOPHICAL 
lovely lips an indire(st acknowledgment of a mutual passion. Resuming presently, however, her wonted dignity, with an innate modesty which exceeds the power of description, and a thousand times more endeared her to my heart, she gently but rel pe^tfully put me from her. We entered into a discus fion of the particulars of our Situation, and it was at length agreed that the affair should as yet be kept Secret from the fa niily; that our behaviour in company should correspond; that I fiiould feign to Mr. Wilkins, though not immediately, for fear of suspicion, that my family affairs were Settled; that therefore it would now be convenient for me to remain jn his Service; and that the misfortune alliided to had been the cause of 
my 
QUI X O T T E. 169 
my uneasiness of mind, and consequent ill state of health, both which would nowin course be happily terminated. — That as she was to return to School till Christmas, when she was to come home for good, we were to content ourselves with mutual assurances of affedion and fidelity; and that in the mean time I should use my endeavours to ingratiate myself with Mr. Wilkins and his patients. So as to render it even necessary for him to consent to our happiness; for that notwithstanding what had past, she was still determined to abide by her duty, and resolution not to enter into any nuptial engagement without his approbation. As I had not the least doubt of overcoming Mr. wilkins’s Scruples, I joyfully acceded to the 
terms. 
Lyo PHILOSOPHICAL 
terms. The remainder of the time that she continued at home, was to me one continued Scene of ecstasy and bliss. Our opportunities of being together were frequent, I had repeatedly the happiness of hearing her sing, while, like the divine Cecilia, she accompanied her ravishing voice with a musical instrument. I danced with her more than once, (and she dances even more ’divinely, if possible, than she sings;) and in respeo: to cards, and other occasional amusements, Scarce a day past but I was engaged in parties with herself, andherformer companions. Among the latter were the finest and most accomplished young ladies in s and its 
environs. And not only my bliss was increased, but my vanity Battered in 
the 
QUI X O T T E. 171. 
the most exalted degree, by the comparison of these with my beloved angel, all whom she as much Surpassed, as themselves did the common run of their Sex. And I cannot but add, that of all the women I ever beheld, she, in my opinion, comes nearest to angelic perfedfion, whether I consider the sraces of her mien, the charms of her person, the perfection of her intel leds, the elegance of her conversation, the enchanting sweetness of her temper, or the exalted virtues of her mind. My wreak pen I am conscious, can give you no idea of her excellence; but were you like me, to have the happiness of being in her company, you would confess that all that 1 have. Said falls infinitely short of her per 
sections. 
lyi PHILOSOPHICAL 
sedions. To be united with her in wedlock, is the vv/hole wish of my heart, and would constitute my greatest possible happiness; the consummation of which is the Sole object: of my prayers! — You will probably Smile at the warmth of my language, and term it rhapsody; but I am carried beyond myself, in the endearing recollection of the uninterrupted and ravishing Scenes of bliss, which I have So lately enjoyed; and which therefore, (if any is necessary) must be my apology. I have now only to inform you, that aster a most affectionate and tender parting Scene, she 
left S -- on Tuesday last, and that 
all my thoughts and wishes are now turned towards that bsissful period 
when 
. TUI X O T T E. 17j when she will return to my arms never to depart! 
I have acquainted Mr. Wilkins with my fidfitious change of circumstances, c. and have the happiness to inform you‘that he Seemed Scarce less rejoiced at it than myself was at the late ecclairciffement with my lovely Maria; and in my next I shall, agreeable to your request, entertain you with fresh instances of his Singularities. 
I have now, my dearest friend, to thank you for all the happiness which I have been describing, as well as«for the much greater portion which I hope to enjoy in future To your friendly advice I owe my being again 
admitted 
X 
174 PHILOSO 

AL 
admitted to the regions of felicity from which I had considered myself as for ever banished. My most cordial acknowledgments are all that I can at present return; but trust that Some future occasion will offer, to demonstrate by facts, the gratitude of 
Your ever obliged Friend, 
And devoted humble Servant, 
'J. Harcourt, 
■ 
'
'2^'? I ' A 
w A 
End of Vol. I, 




i ' ' iv 
k 
kw V ctt / "■'' 
f.. 
£■- 

• • h ’ ■. •. 
ir 
fe. 
F" ‘ ■■■ ■ ‘ '''i ■ 
., 
•1 h'., j: |vy... ‘a - s 
\%eijrp V ,"...-.., •• -’ .' 


p 
^ 
V ■,,;, 


•'•• sif •>.‘fs ' 


aai 
V 4 ^ ■ ' < V 
:.; 'S 
, .i 
. .S 
tf 'Ari 


THE 
PHILOSOPHICAL QUIXOTE; 
O R, 
MEMOIRS 
O F 
Mr. DAVID WILKINS. 
I N A 
SERIES of LETTERS 
VOL. IL 
, LONDON. 
Printed scrj. Johnson, in St. paul’s churchyard ^ 

N''. 
V r' j. 
■ dr I 
•siif 

THE 
PHILOSOPHICAL QUIXOTTE 5 
, OR, 
M E M O.T R S 
O? 
Mr. DAVID WILKINS. 
LETTER XV 
\ _ ■ 
dear Sir, 
T MENTIONED in a former letter that I was greatly mistaken if our Amorous Deborah was not with child. You, however, are the only person.to whom I had ever communicated my Suspicion. But I have since met with vol, II B .a variety 
2 PHILOSOPHICAL 
a variety of circumstances to confirm me in that opinion. She has frequently been Squeamish and Sick at stomach. Plas artfully pretended to have been troubled with certain' ohftrufuons^ for which Mr. Wilkins preferibed the most powerful emmenagogues without effect. Is grown So large about the waist, that Mr. Wilkins, mistaking it for fat, produced her among others of her profession, as a proof of his doctrine of absorption. And I had observed that she had lately accustomed herself to lace So tight that she could hardly breathe. An incident, however, has since occurred, which has effectually demonstrated the truth of my Suspicion, as you will find by the st quel. 
solomon^f 
Q^V I X O T T E. g 
Solomon, among other of his stu' dies, catching his master's enthufiasm, entered on that of chemijiry; and pursued it with the greater avidity, as he found that Some of the books which he read on that art, treated; in high strains, of the transmutation of metals into gold. From the ridicule thrown on this Subject, by later writers, he remained for Some time in suspence about the pradlicabiiity of Such a Scheme. But when he found that the opinion of the great Boerhaave, and Some others, was in its favour, it at once determined his belief; and in the hope of making a rapid and princely fortune, applied himself intensely to the great inquiry. His investigation, however, was carried on with that profound Southeast b 2 crecy. 
4 PHILOSOPHICAL 
crecy, which the nature of the subject required; insomuch that no one but himself and Deborah, knew of his being engaged in the pursuit. The experiments, as it appears since, were usually made in deborah’s room, after the family was gone to bed;. and it Seems that he had made no little number of them without the least shadow of fuccess. He had frequently mentioned the subject in a cursory way to me; and as I now conclude, by way of fumpy for Such information as I was able to afford him. One morning in particular, after Seeming to laugh at the folly of those who prosecuted Such ridiculous researches, he asked me, with a degree of seriousnefs, which 1 could not but remark, whether I 
really 
QIJ i X O T T E. s 
'really thought that any one had ever been in possession of the Secret, and whether I was of opinion that the fact was possible? As I am not yet turned of fifty, I was Seized with an itch of having a little diversion at his expense; and replied, in' a more Serious style than I had usually observed on the occasion, “that it was certain that Some writers of credit had asserted the possibility of the thing; that from the testimony of the Same authors, it was probable that the Secret had formerly actually been known, and that I had read in an author of Some eminence, 
that the famous powder of projedion, or philosophers ftom, was composed of lac Sulphuris, Salt petre, and Salt of broom ashes, ” all which we had in the B 3 shop. 
6 PHILOSOPHICAL 
shop. I made use of these names that he might have no Suspicion of my design; as in the course of his reading I did not know but he might have met with the recipe for the puhis fulminant. He was particular in inquiring the proportions, and manner of preparation. 
I gave him the former; and with respect to the latter, told him that the ingredients reduced into powder, must be melted together in a crucible, kept in fusion for a certain time, and then the mass to be taken out for use; but that the particular manner of its application, in order to the transmutation of metals, was the part of the Secret which I could not inform him of, and which therefore he must endeavour to find out by proper experiments. I was 
in 
TUI X O T T E. 7 
in hopes that he would have taken the hint and sat about it immediately, and meant to have egged him on. But business happened to call me off at the instant, and (together with other matters of greater importance to myself) drove it out of my memory for the remainder of the day. It Seems, however, that he immediately prepared for the experiment, by powdering and mixing the Several ingredients. And that at night, when all others were gone to rest, our alchemist repaired, as ujtiau to the chamber of his Dulcinea; and having lighted a fire, entered on the important project, his charmer in bed waiting anxioully for the success. The mixture, however, had not lon^ been oh the fire before an event hap' B 4 pened. 
g PHILOSOPHICAL 
pened that he little expefled, which dishpated all his mighty hopes in fumo. For presently after the fusion, a most violent explosion took place, equal to the report of an ordinary cannon. The house, as with an earthquake, shook to the foundation. The operator fell instantly backward as a dead man. The fair one, frightened with the noise, uttered an horrid shriek, which was followed by another and still more dreadful one, on viewing her beloved’s exit, and instantly fell into fits. I heard the noise; even Wilkins heard it! We ran upstairs, and as Soon as we discovered the room which was the Scene of distress, forced open the door, and how did both Mr. Wilkins and myself stare at the sight we beheld! 
TUI X O T T E. 9 
held! Deborah (in fits) was undrest, and in bed; the door had been fastened inside, and part of solomon’s clothes were apparently put off as. in course. My Suspicion, and perhaps pique, led me to view this part of the affair in its proper light, though as yet I Said nothing. But Mr. Wilkins it Seemed judged otherwise. * He concluded that Solomon had forcibly entered the room, with intent to commit premature matrimony upon, and violate the chastity of the affrighted fair 1 I, however, was at a loss to account for the Sulphurous stench, and other appearances around. But Mr. Wilkins, it Seems, concluded that the chaste Lucretia had pistoled the villain in his libidinous attempt, of which, he imagined. 
ox PHILOSOPHICAL 
gined, she was aware in consequence of Some previous offer; whence he accounted for the explosion and Smell. But on approaching and examining •kirn, we could neither of us discern the least appearance of a wound. He felt warm, and on applying our fingers to his wrist, a pulsation was plainly to be perceived. Mr, Wilkins called him by name; and I, less tender. Severely pinched him. He presently came to himself; and looking around, and perceiving his Situation, took the opportunity, while we were engaged with Deborah, (who now began violently to Scream and struggle in her fit) sto give us the slip; and notwithstanding my pursuit of him, by the favour of a dak night, escaped. I returned 
QJJ I X O T T E. If 
turned to the room, where I found Mr. Wilkins attentively engaged in endeavouring to recover the struggling fair; and he Seemed much vexed when I informed him of the culprit's escape. But our attention was now' wholly demanded by the object before us, whose paroxysms continued with increasing violence, and threatened the most alarming consequences. We opened a vein, applied volatiles to her nos trils, bathed her temples with hartshorn, threw open the windows for air, and plied her both inwardly and outwardly with cold water, impregnated with volatiles and affafcetida. From Some incoherent expressions which she uttered in her delirious state, I was further convinced of the justness of rrry 
corijedurcs. 
12 PHILOSOPHICAL 
conjectures relative to her pregnancy; and appearances in the course of her fits put it beyond a doubt. I remained silent, however, on that point, and Mr. Wilkins, whosc ideas on the occasion were got into another track, did not appear likely to conceive the hint. At length she, in Some measure, recovered her fenses; and her confusion, on perceiving her situation, may be more easily imagined than described. She immediately, however, began to cast about for an excuse; and though Mr. Wilkins furnished her with an easy one, by officioufiy and condoling ly asking, if his conjedlures (which he stated) were not true, yet, perhaps, on feeling the approach of labour, hearing of the flight of her paramour, 
and 
QUI X O T T E. 13 
and judging that he would not Speedily return, she, to our great surprise, informed us that she was married, and about eight months gone with child 5 but that, for particular reasons, their nuptials had hitherto been kept Secret; after which she explained the circumstances which had occasioned the present confusion, as above related; adding, that she already foresaw the effects of her fright, for that she felt every Symptom of approaching travail. The latter indeed, proved to be the case, and a labour So painful, it would, perhaps, be difficult to parallel. Notwithstanding the no very good will that I bore her on account of her treatment of me, the groans, extorted by the agony of her 
pains. 
H pulldsophtcal 
pains, added to the circumstance of her being a married, and therefore virtuous woman, dissipated every idea of resentment, and melted my heart to the most tender pity; and certainly there is hardly a situation of human nature, which demands that Sympathy So much as this. Her Situation was the more dreadful, as besides the disturbances occasioned in her System by the fright. Successive fits, and anxiety of mind, the rigidness, and j **^**** were Such, (as is too Srequently the cafe, when the first labour docs not happen on this side forty) that Mr. Wilkins deemed it absolutely impossible that she could be properly delivered. She remained 
f The Seven or eight words following this were So blotted in the original, that they coaid sot he inde out. 
in 
QUI X O T T E. IB 
in this terrible state two whole days. Instruments, and all other methods usually employed on these occasions were tried in vain; and Seeing no other resource, I proposed to Mr. Wilkins, to Save the life of the unhappy mother, by destroying the child. Wilkins looked at me with a kind of horror : “What, Said he, would you be guilty of murder? Such advice, in the days of Harry the Eighth, would have been extremely proper; but now that the obstetric art has been So va rioufiy and capitally improved, it betrays either want of humanity, or of information. Have you not heard of the famous invention of those foreign heroes in Science, who, by dividing the Symphysis pubis, not only Save the life of the child, but render the 
delivery 
l6 PHILOSOPHICAL 
delivery easy to the mother? I replied that I had indeed insormed mysels of the particulars of that operationj though it, unaccountably, did not occur to me. In giving him my Sentiments on the mcasure, I observed that “it was the opinion of the first authority in this country, that it was not to be adopted but with great caution, and in cases of extreme necessity; that however, the present instance justified the having recourse to it, as it vas evident that the life either of the child or mother must else be Sacrificed; nd the agonising and truly pitiable Situation of the latter demanded the most immediate assistance.” It was therefore determined by Mr. Wilkins to perform the operation. But the terror of the unhappy patient at the idea of it 
QUI X O T T E. 17 
(for she conceived it to be dreadful indeed!) was past description; and as Some time elapsed before we Sat about ’ it, (for as neither Mr. Wilkins nor myself had ever Seen it performed, ^ it was necessary to consult the original papers) k will not, perhaps, appear miraculous, that the force, or rather fright of imagination, effected what arc had deemed impossible; for the delivery, actually commenced; but the Screams of the mother, in confequerree therefore, were enough to frighten one. She became quite raving, ^ and we were 'obliged to have proper assistants to hold her down. In this dreadful agony she continued Sevefai hours, and it was with the utmost difficulty, even>at last, with every expedient that art could vol. II C Suggest, 
i8 PHILOSOPHICAL 
Suggest, that the delivery could bd ef fcdted. The infant was to appearance dead; and the mother was Seized with a fainting sit, from which we had reason to fear she would never recover. By inflating the lungs of the former, and administering volatiles and cordials to the latter, both however, were, in Some measure, at length recalled, though it was a long time before either appeared anything like living; and the mother continued So ill, in consequence of the tortures she had undergone, notwith ’ standing Mr. wilkins’s Skilful treatment and assiduity, that her lise for Some weeks after was despaired of. 
As Mr. Wilkins is naturally of humane and tender disposition, you 
will 
QUI X O T T E. 19 
will not be Surprised that this affair made a very deep impression on him; especially as the patient was an old and favourite domestic, for whom he had a real regard, as you will judge when I inform you that he, had be >queathed her an annuity in his will, Sufficient to maintain her comsortably ffor life I observed him to be exceedingly pensive and thoughtful for Some days aster this melancholy affair ■ happened. He was wholly absorbed in deep meditation, and his mind secm "cd big with Some great, but as yet un* shnown event. 
I happened one morning to be in file study, posting the book; Mr. wil. kins entered in the thoughtful mpod C 2 described, 
20 PHILOSOPHICAL 
described, and in his usual morning dress. He walked about for Some time with his arms folded, and his hands locked in each other, alternately. He frequently paused;; pensive, with his eyes fixed on the ground;, and Sometimes lifted them up as towards the deling. At length he came up to me; and after remaining a while deeply intent, and heaving a profound sigh, not without an evident pleasure in his countenance, he at length broke silence in the manner following L 
“The late dreadful situation of my. unhappy Servant, to which you was witness, and the Sufferings of the tender Sex, in general, in the bearing of children, (which yet is necessary to the continuance of the Species) have excited 
Ct U I X O T T E. 2i - 
'Cited in my breast the deepest commis seration; and prompted me to explore, if possible, Some mode, either of freeing them entirely from their Subjedlion to So pain Sul and perilous a situation, or at least, in Some measure, to alleviate it. 1 wish, however, to remove it entirely; and my intense application to this important Subjedfc in the course of Several days past, has, I trust, been productive of Something that will answer to that idea.” Hiatus in MSS 
* ^ * * 
Mr. Wilkins, in His zeal for the good of His fellow creatures, then went on to propose- 
-- -- -- -- “other ^.vay.p 
“Fo propagate mankind 
Milton. 
This method (with a very Singular experiment Set on foot to prove it) appeared fo curious to several who Saw the original letters, that it took wind, C 3 and 
22 PHIL OS OP III 
This is the Scheme which I have formed, and to which L can at present' 
and numbers of gentlemen acquainted with Mr. Dennis, became desirous of a perusal. But one of the first of these gentlemen to whom they were lent, has, it seems, been ungenerous enough to monopolise the whole of this pleasure, by securing to himself that part of the present letter, in which this extraordinary proposal was contained. In this mutilated Rate the original was seen by the Editor; and (unfortunately for the public) he has not at present any means of supplying the deficiency. He can only therefore, inform the reader of what he has heard of this matter from others, viz. that Mr. Wilkins, by proceeding on the theory of a celebrated British physiologist now living, and attending to the various modes of generation in different animals, had been happy enough to reduce that process in the human species to such a state, that as we can hatch eggs without the incubation of the hen, fo we could, by means of Mr. wilkins’s wonderful discovery, hatch human beings nxithout tbs travail of the mother! 
But,. 
QUI XOT T E. 23 
Sent See no reasonable objection. And I cannot but consider it as the greatest and happiest discovery for man, or rather woman kind, that has yet been revealed to the world. The process is more advantageous than even in the class of animals from whom it was derived. For the happiness expected from the wedded state, will remain in its fullest extent, and yet every vestage of the numerous train of ills which have hitherto been the dismal conse quences of conception, be wholly removed. The mother will no longer be Subject to the evils attendant on 
But, alas! this important secret is now lost to the world; at least till Mr. Wilkins himself, or fqme gentleman to whom it is known, Shall be pleased to reveal it. 
C 4 gestation. 
24 PHILOSOPHICAL 
gestation, the dangers of abortion, or the excruciating tortures of labour.; all which, together with their too frequent bad consequences, the tender and indulgent husband must feel, by Sympathy, to an etjual degree. Their mutual h^ppiness will no more be damped by, a dread of the conse quences, since they may now, according to the old proverb, dance without saying Ahe, ppr. Gratitude to their benefactor will prompt them to erect eternal trophies to my memory; paeans will daily be Sung in my honour; and my name will be transmitted as first in the lists of fame, to the latest posterity.” * * (Hiatus in MSS.) 
I Scarce need mention, dear Dennis, that my appetite is restored, and that 
I am 
QUI X O T T E. 25 
1 am now Some pounds heavier than when I wrote to you last. My amiable Maria is well, as I bad the hap piness of hearing but yesterday; an happiness greater than even that which would be enjoyed by Mr. Wilkins, should his experiment of hatching human beings, without the gestation of the mother, turn out to be a demonstration of his theory. For this, as well as every other blessing that I may enjoy in future, I shall ever consider myself as indebted Solely to your good ness and friendship, of which the most lively sense of gratitude will ever be retained, by 
Yours, See. 
P. S. Since this epistle was finished, we shave received a letter from Solomon 
26 PHILOSOPHICAL 
mon, who it Seems, is returned to his own country; is about Settling there, and for that reason has wrote to Mr. Wilkins to Send him his movables. He has (to use a vulgar expression) let the cat out of the hag; painted Deborah in her proper colours; made it appear that she absolutely debauched him; and that they were not married, nor did he ever intend it. The discovery has quite disconcerted poor Deborah; and as for Wilkins, he is So incensed against her, on account of her fornication and hypocrisy., that he has paid her wages and turned her adrift, notwithstanding she was Scarce capable of walking out of the house. She is in a lodging in the neighbourhood till she is a little recovered, when she means, 
through 
QJJ I X O T T E. 27 
through shame, to quit this part of the country; though I think Mr. Wilkins ought to have treated her otherwise, were it only for the sake of the discovery, of which she was the occasion. Happily, however, for me, we have now both man and maid in the house who do not Seem calculated to give me any of hose little uneasinesses which I formerly complained of. So that I am now in every resped perfectly happy in my situation. 
LETTER 
2 8 
PHILOSOPHICAL 
LETTER XVI 
Dear Sir, 
YO U have had occasion to observe that Mr. wilkins’s philosophical inquiries are not confined to the narrow limits of his profeshon, but that they extend to every other Subject in which the good of the community is concerned. This will Sufficiently appear by the following relation. 
Among the many capital discoveries made by modern philosophers, those which tend to Secure us against external accidents and injuries, especially from the elements, are particularly deserving of applause and enough 
cannot 
(T u I X O T T E. 29 
cannot be Said of Dr. Franklin, for his invention of preserving us against the effects of lightning; of Dr. Priestley for enabling us to detect the noxious qualities of the air we breathe; or of the stupendous discovery, which has of late years been So Succelsfully practised, for restoring drowned people to life! The evil of which I am about to Speak, is not, indeed. So dreadful, or So Satal as these, yet is, in my opinion, one of the most disagreeable accidents to which we arc Subject,, when I have occasionally been exposed to it, I have imagined that no improvement in philosophy could be more valuable than one which would Secure us against its effects. How often have I, when 
caught 
30 PHILOSOPHIC A.D. 
caught in an heavy shower of rain, at a distance from any shelter, and unprovided with a great coat, wished, alas! vainly wished, for Such a disco very! It Seems that this idea had also occurred to Mr. Wilkins, and determined him to turn his talents to the inquiry. The following was the result of his deliberation. 
It is well known (he observedj that when it thunders and lightens, it most commonly rains. That clouds are electrified, Sometimes negatively, at others .positively; that rain discharges that electricity, and conducts it to the earth, and that experiments had actually demonstrated that falling drops of rain were eleclrified, and Sometimes 
QUI X O T T E. 3t 
times pretty strongly. Now he argued thus: 
Bodies possessed of contrary electricities, rush together, or attract each other. But bodies mutually eledrified, either or are, on the con 
■ repulsive. If therefore, a drop of rain be mplus., and the human body she also in they will mutually repel each other; and if the electricity be Sufficiently strong, the repulsion will be So great that the drop will be diverted from its perpendicular course, and fturned away obliquely from the body. The same thing will happen if the electricity be strongly negative. Consequently a man thus charged, may walk through 
the 
32 PHILOSOPHICAL 
the heaviest shower of rain that ever fell, without being in the least wcttedshy it.’* 
He was So rapt with his discovery, that he immediately communicated it to me, together with his design in Con sequence thereof. The absurdity of the conclusion was Sufficiently obvious; but it was not now, for Several reasons, my interest to contradict him. I therefore highly applauded his invention, as well as the proposal which he made, of at once verifying his theory by experiment, and blazoning it, with his fame, to the world. The nature of the discovery, therefore, was announced to the inhabitants of the country around, who were invited to assemble at Mr. wilkins’s house on the first appearance 
QUI X O T T E. 33 
pearance of a thunderstorm, to be witnesses of the truth of the fadh, and, if they chose it, to be the Subjects of. the experiment. 
The curiosity of the public was excited in course, and nothing was talked of but Mr. Wilkins, and his great discovery. His foes, (for all men have enemiesj represented it as a mad attempt, and of a piece with the known charadfer of the man. They therefore ridiculed it accordingly, and prognosticated that it would end in smoke. His more numerous friends as zea loussy propagated a contrary language; arguing, from the opinion of their opponents concerning the impojibility of the thing, thigreatmfs of the difeovery; vol. II D ' and 
54 PHILOSOPHICAL 
and justifying its likelihood by a late Similar one of the illustrious Dr. Franklin. But every one was eager for the arrival of the day. 
At length, the important period arrived. The forked lightning flashed — the big thunder rolled; “the sky was overcast, the evening lowered, and heavily with clouds, brought on the hour, the great, the important hour, big with the fate of Wilkins, and his projeisl: .’* The people eagerly assembled, and Mr, Wilkins, after havings ordered out (in a booth credted for the purpose) the elefirical apparatus, proceeded to demonstrate his important theory. 
His 
I X O t T E. 35 
His first step was to discover the nature of the cloud’s electricity;; he found it to be highly fofttive. Two dozen pair of Jhoes^ ‘ with foals of baked wooed, of a proper thickness, were presently put on by Some of those who were eager of the honour of being concerned in this great business; not a fourth part of whom, for want of a Sufficient quantity of elcdrical shod ding, could be admitted to share in the honour of the experiment. They were Scarcely prepared, but the rain began to descend; and in a short time it even threatened a deluge. The happy twenty-four, mounted on their magic Sandals, were strongly electrified and proper directions being given them not to touch any non D 2 electric 
§6 PHILOSOPHICAL 
electric Substance, they were turned a drift into the dreadful storm. The expeflation of Wilkins was immense! But, alas! the impcrsedtion of human inventions! The insulated heroes no Sooner trod on the ground, than (the wet, forming a connexion between their bodies and the earth) their electricity was Suddenly discharged. And as they had been strongly eled'trified indeed, in order to make the experiment Surer, the shock which they felt in consequence thereof was terrible! They Sprung aloft, with a loud Scream, into the air; many of them, rest of sense; and loosing their Self balance, fell forward on their faces, lying like brcathless corpse’ on mother earth, which was stained red with the fluid 
issuing 
-. 
QUI X O T T E. 37 
issuing from their bloody noses. They who retained their senses, Smartingfrom the violence of the shock, wet through, and concluding from the loud laughter, and cutting jests of wilkins’s foes, that they had been decoyed into that Situation, only to be made fools of, flew upon poor Wilkins in their rage, and would probably have demolished him, had he not happily been rescued by the better part of the company, and conveyed away in Safety. On his electrical apparatus, however, they had no mercy, but considering it as infernal instantly broke it piecemeal, burning the diabolical fragments.” — The poor fellows are the standing jests of the town to this hour, and will be So. I imagine during their lives. When d 3 ever 
38 PHILOSOPHICAL 
ever it rains, they arc drily asked, dorct you put in your ekflrtcal Jhoes? — * those people who are more knowing. Sec this affair, in course, to wilkins’s disadvantage. Others look upon it as a piece of philosophical fun, and imagine that he had designedly taken in the ignorant town’s people. Wilkins, though the disappointment has most terribly galled him, has sense enough to take the hint, and propagate the latter opinion; though even that has not a little injured his long established f: hara6ter, with resped to gravity. 
I am, dear Dinnis, 
Yours, c, 
LETTER 
TUI X o T T e; 
39 
LETTER XVIL 
Dear Sir, 
OU R neighbourhood has lately been infested with a very uncommon kind of fever, which, notwithstanding the utmost attention of Mr. Wilkins to the subject, made at first very considerable ravages, and carried off numbers. The usual methods of treatment in fevers Seemed in cffedual; and Such as happened to recover, evidently owed their lives, not to any Skill of the Doctor, but to the partiality of nature. Mr. wilkins’s pride was touched at being thus baffled; and he determined to Set all his D 4 faculties 
40 PHILOSOPHICAL 
faculties to work, in order to disco ver a method of repelling this formidable invader. 
.If a physician would do anything capital in practice, it is well known that he must be very Sedulous in observing nature. It is from that Source only that we can hope for real improvements in the medical art; and all theories that arc not built on that soun dation, ought to be considered as the mere reveries of a distempered imagination. Mr. Wilkins was Sufficiently Sensible of this important truth. 
The lady of an eminent attorney in the town, and one of Mr. wilkins’s most intimate friends, was Seized with 
the 
QUI X O T T E. 4f 
the reigning complaint; and notwith standing that Mr. w.’s utmost Skill was exerted in her favour, she daily grew worse, insomuch that himself, at length, despaired of her recovery. It was now the thirteenth day of her ill ness. Putrid Symptoms had for Some days appeared, and site had been delirious almost from the beginning of the disorder. The lady, it must be observed, was pregnant. She had a brother in the West of England, whom herself and spouse, a few weeks before, had taken a journey to visit. As this gentleman treated them with country fare, one of the liquors which they occasionally drank was strong beer and brandy; which, in those parts, is a ■ favourite potation; and, it Seems, particularly 
42 PHILOSOPHICAL 
ticularly hit our lady’s palate; So that her fancy had ran on It, at times, ever since. In the afternoon of the day mentioned, she appeared to be more Sensible than she had lately been, though the fever raged almost as high as ever, and (to the old woman’s no little Surprise) whisperingly asked the nurse, “if she could not help her to a tankard of beer and brandy? tor that she violently longed for it, was befidei, parching with thirst, and was certain that that alone would cure her disorder.” The nurse remonstrated with her on the impropriety of her request, and gave her to understand, that it could by no means be complied with. This, however. Served only to cncrease her desire. Her importunity redoubled 5 
QJJ I X O T T E. 43. 
led; and she, at length, became So outrageous, that her spousc thought proper to consult Mr. Wilkins on the occasion. He was immediately Sent for, and after examining the patient, and her request, gave it as his opinion, “that So inflammatory a liquid, in the lady’s present Situation, would infallibly be fatal to her.” At the same time he shook his head, and appeared greatly deje{fled. On being afkcd the reason by the lawyer, he replied, that from the Symptoms that appeared, he thought it his duty, as a friend, to warn him of the approaching melancholy event, for that the lady would certainly die before the morning.” Mr. wilkins’s interdidtion, by no means silenced the lady’s longing. Her 
desire 
44 PHILOSOPHICAL $ 
desire after the favourite potation increased; and she, at length, raved for it So violently, that her indulgent hus band, unable to behold her longer in Such agony, and considering that even Wilkins had given her over, ordered a tankard of it to be immediately prepared; adding, “that as she was past recovery, it was at least charity to make her as easy as possible during the little time she had to live.’* The liquor, theresore, was brought; I need not insorm you how ravished she was at the sight of it; with what greedy relish she Swigged it down, or what an immoderate quantity she drank before she was Satisfied, Her longing was thus Scarcely appeased before she appeared more tranquil and easy; and. 
not with 
QUI X O T T E. 45 
notwithstanding the quantity of in fiamable Spirit which had just entered her blood, her fever evidently abated; she fell into a Sweet steep; a kindly perspiration Succeeded; and next morning the disorder appeared to have in a manner left her, little besides the weakness in consequence of it remaining. When Mr. Wilkins called, he was Surprised to find that she was still living; but when he Saw the alteration in her health, he could hardly persuade himself but that it was a vision. Convinced, however, of the reality, he was very eager indeed, in questioning by what wonderful means So great a revolution in the state of the lady’s health had been effected? And being informed that it appeared to be 
owing 
46 PHILOSOPHICAL 
owing entirely to her having been iri^ dulged in the liquid which himself had forbade, an hint immediately struck him, and h remained for Some moments in one of those profound paroxysms of meditation usual to philosophers, who have got Scent of a capital discovery. But he was Soon awakened from thence by the discoursc addressed to him by the overjoyed husband. After heartily congratulating him on the unexpedled recovery, and Settling the measurcs to be adopted in future by the patient, he hurried home. When he entered the shop, I observed him to appear, as it were, lost in a pleasing reverie, and without taking notice of any onej' he hastened to his studyi 
Mr. 
QUI X O T T E. 47 
Mr. Wilkins has a book in which he daily writes down the history of his practice. It happened to be left out & few days after through neglect, and I found, among others, the following curious remarks. 
“Afhorifin. obscrvc nature, watch all her motions. In doubtful cafes, and nev: diseases, this is the phyfician’i only guide. Even when she cannot relieve hersclf, she yet (like a drowning man) in very intelligible language, points out the means to be adopted by art for assisting her. 
“Mem. In the case of the new fever, the divine oracle has, at length. Spoke. Her didlates have been obeyed, and > the disorder in consequence thereof has 
been 
4^ PHILOSOPHICAL 
been cured. Art was at a loss for ^ proper remedy. Nature cried out beer and brandy. 
“Corr. Beer and brandy therefore is a Specific for the new Sever.’* 
After he had remained in his study a considerable time, he went out and visited the remainder of his patients; and when he came home, to my very great Surprise, (for he did not at that time think proper to mention his reasons) directed Sor each of the patients labouring under the new disease, a draught composed of brandy and strong beer, every four hours. The remedy was continued daily. Burr the patients, to a man, evidently grew worse, 
the 
QUI X O T T E. 49 
the infiamable ingredients in the medicine, (as might have been foreseen) augmenting the Symptoms. Convinced, however, that the patient in the case related, owed her recovery entirely to this remedy, and the period at. .which she had taken that grand Specific occurring, he, at length, conceived that the success was owing to its having been given at the crisis of the disease. He tried it in a variety of cases in this way, in the young and old, in males and in females; and in different constitutions. He also varied the quantity in different patients, giving it to Some in great profusion; to others in a more moderate way; but not one of the patients Survived : on the contrary, their deaths were evidently hastened by the vol. II E medicine. 
50 PHILOSOPHICAL 
medicine. At length, he was So happy as to meet with an instance of recovery. As this, and the preceding, were the only successful ones, he considered attentively (as I afterwards learned) what similarity or connexion there was between the cases of the two happy patients? and he discovered that they were both with child; “beer and brandy therefore, he concluded, was a Specific when given to pregnant women at the crisis of this disease, but hurtful in all other cases.” He plumed liimself not a little on his Sagacity in having ascertained So curious a fact. A few days asterwards he administered the remedy to a lady in the situation mentioned, in full confidence os its sticccss. But contrary to his firm expectation, 

QUI X O T T E. 51 
peftation, her end was So visibly hastened by it, that it did not escape the notice of the friends and attendants; who, in the height of their grief, did not: even Scruple (to Mr. wilkins’s no little mortification) to hint to him their suspicions. He was once more, theresore, thrown on the wide ocean of doubt, from which all his Sagacity proved insufficient to rescue him. Struck with the first fact, he was still positive that it involved a real discovery, and concluded that his not having yet developed it, was owing Solely to his own want of Sagacity; So that being no longer able to bear the di stradion of his thoughts, and earnest: to, get at the truth, he, at length, deigned to disclose the whole matter, in E 2 ' con 
52 PHILOSOPHICAL 
confidence to me, and ardently pressed me to give him my best advice. 
Had I not been apprized of the bu siness, and had it been of a less Serious nature, it would have been impossible to have Suppressed my risibility. But being prepared, I kept my countenance tolerably composed; and aster he had ended his Solemn harangue, an swered him to the followed effect“ 
“the difficulty attending the treatment of a new disease, especially of the present kind, was So great that the public were infinitely indebted to him for the pains he had taken in So important a particular. The only method of acquiring that knowledge I owned 
was 
QJJ I X O T T E. 53 
was from ohfervaiion., or (as he had 
» 
more emphatically expressed it) by Uf tening to the voice of nature; but that in the present instance, I humbly apprehended he had not rightly interpreted her language. In the cafe of 
Mrs. B -- -- -- -, nature I imagined, had 
not Spoken with respedl to the general treatment of the disease under which she happened to labour. That longing in diseases, was by no means uncommon, but that Such longings, or the cures resulting from appeasing them, were not usually considered by practitioners as connected with the dis easc itsels, but with the particular situation of the patient at the time. It had not, for example, been uncommon for a person in a fever to crave E 3 for 
54 PHILOSOPHICAL 
for porter, and to receive a cure in consequence of that longing being gratified. But it had not been inferred from thence, that porter was a Spe -- cific in fevers, or even that it would have the Same effctst on the Same patient, if it was not preceded by the violent longing; which indeed was properly the disease cured by it; the fever being only mitigated in consequence of its removal, as it had before been exasperated by its presence. That the greatest possible care was required in generalising propositions, but. more especially in medicine, where the least error might be produftivc of the nnost Serious consequences. In the present case there was Something more than 1 had yet noticed, for that 
by 
(TU I X O T T E. 55 
by his account, the lady was pregnant. The liking to the liquid had been conceived previous to the illness; and 
probably -- -- -' I was going on, but 
wilkins’s good sensc (the mist being now dissipated) easily perceiving the strength of the argument, he was ashamed of his error, and begged that no public mention might be made of it. Indeed, though I, at times, laugh at his extravagancies, yet upon the whole, I cannot but admire his natural good fense, and benevolent and amiable disposition. What few failings he has, evidently proceed from an ex cess of the latter virtue, an ungoverna hk pajfion for difcoveringdhe ufefui wshich indeed is capable of leading a man into E 4 the 
56 PHIL OSOPHICAL 
the most glaring and ridiculous absurdities. 
As we have since repeatedly conferred together on the Subjecst of the disease, and mutually attended to its appearances, we have happily hit on a more isiccesssul method of treatment; As it begins with violent inflammatory Symptoms, we bleed and evacuate plentifully; and if we are called in time, a proper use of these, together vdth a temperate regimen, generally prevent any fatal consequences; and I have the happiness to inform you that the disorder is now visibly disappearing in diis Dart. 
Your sincere Friend, c. 
CU I X O T T E. 
57 
LETTER XVIII 
Dear Dennis, 
MONG Mr. Wilkinses other oddities, I wonder I have never yet written to you on his absence of mind, to which, on account of his intense meditation, he is very Subject; and frequently requires as much the assistance of a flapper, as the mathematicians in the flying island. I shall give you a few instances of it in this letter. 
As his thoughts are So much employed in Speculation, and as (like san cho) he cannot resist the impulse of any new and pleasing idea, he frequently starts up from dinner, or from company, as if Suddenly possessed, and retires 
58 PHILOSOPHICAL 
tyres to his study in order to Secure the precious remark. The like Sometimes happens even when most Serioussy engaged with his patients. A person unacquainted with his singularities, would at first conclude him to be disordered in his senses. 
One evening he had been writing a letter to the celebrated Dr. Huxham, (with which therefore he had taken Some pains) containing the case of a young lady in the neighbourhood, for the dodlor’s opinion. When he had finished, he proceeded to throw Some Sand over it; but, being totally absorbed in contemplating his performance, he took the ink glass by mistake, and very calmly shook out its contents. As the 
mere 
QUI X O T T E. 59 
mtre writing had cost him much pains, and as the post was that instant preparing to Set off, I do not remember to have Seen him in Such a passion, as on discovering his blunder. 
He had one day been deeply meditating on the emetic qualities of antimony; and in the midst os his Speculation, had occasion to write down a re ape for a chalybeate draught for Lady 
T -- -- --. But antimony running in his 
head, instead of writing vin. chalybeat. g fs. as he intended, he wrote njin. antitnonial. I took it for granted that he meant it for an emetic, and made it up as directed. The lady had not taken it many minutes before it began to operate violently indeed! Wilkins 
6o PHILOSOPHICAL 
kins was Sent for in haste; and learning the circumstance, took it for granted, that I had committed an error. When he returned he had Scarce began to inform me of it, but, casting his eyes on the day book, he discovered the mistake to be his own; and retired, Seemingly convinced of the danger of a medical praditioner, indulging reveries while engaged in businefs. Luckily, however, the ladies complaint proved to be a foul stomach. So that the emetic was of more Service to her than the chalybeat could possibly have been. — To this anecdote might be added, that it is by no means uncommon Sor Mr. Wilkins to forget his appointments. A patient Sends for him in a hurry. If he does not happen 
to 
QUI X O T T E. 
to note it in his list immediately, it is much if it does not slip his memory. I have known him engaged in a labour, where in an interval of ease, he has ashed leave of absence for a quarter of an hour to visit Some patient whose case was urgent. A philosophical reverie has driven all thought of the lady out of his head; and he has rode off half a dozen miles, the Lord knows where, in the usual course of his bu siness, leaving the unhappy patient to be delivered as she could. 
. A few weeks ago he had an invitation to dine at B — —, a village about fifteen miles distant As he had a patient or two to call upon in his way, to Save himself the trouble of coming 
back, 
62 PHILOSOPHICAL 
back, he ordered the porter, then newly come, to follow him, intending to send home by him the prescriptions. But neither of the patients happening to want anything, and forgetting the orders he had given to Thomas, he rode away on a full trot towards B —. Thomas followed as fast as his legs could carry him; and you will easily conceive the lathered and breathless condition in which he arrived at B —, as he kept pace with the horse all the way; and the weather was not a little Sultry. Wilkins was astonished to behold him on alighting, and imagined he was come for him to Some case of emergency. But on explaining the circumstance, Wilkins very humanely and genteely apologised for his forge tsulness, 
QUI X O T T E. '63 
getfulness; gave him a crowni bid him go to Some inn to rest and refresh himself and afterwards to walk home as leisurely as he could. But begged him particularly not to divulge the Secret; an injundlion which, as you will perceive by this letter, was rigidly observed. 
After having been hard at work in the elaboratory, and being quite exhausted and faint with fatigue, he repaired to his closet, in order to recruit his Spirits with a dram; an indulgence which he never allowed himself, but on Some extreme occasion. In the Same closet stood a bottle of lamp oil; and as his thoughts were still intent on his operations, he laid hold of the 
latter. 
64 PHILOSOPHICAL 
latter, (the first bottle that offered) and without examination, poured out a glass full, and drank it off. His thirst and absence hindered him from perceiving it at the instant. But presently after he discovered his mistake; a violent nausea and fickness was the consequence, and evacuations upwards and downwards employed him, at home and abroad, for the remainder of the day. 
One morning as he was dressing, and at the Same time deeply meditating on my case, the thought of the doctrine of ahforpion struck him just at the instant of pulling off his night shirt, and he'ffew to pen and paper to take it down. His fancy was So tickled with 
the 
(TU I X O T T E. 65 
., the discovery, that when he returned to his toilet, forgetting that he was in buff, she put on his coat and waistcoat, (without his fitirt) and as he was rather beyond his time, rode away in ■haste to visit the young daughter of Lady S —, of whose delivery I formerly gave you an account. After examining the patient, he Sat down to breathe a little; and beings over heated with the hurry of his journey, and the warmth of the day, threw open his waistcoat to cool himsels. — The blushes of the ladies on viewing his naked belly, the merry jokes of Sir John, and the confusion and awkward apologies of Wilkins, I leave to be Suggested by your own more Sruitful imagination, 
vol. II F About 
66 PHILOSOPHICAL 
About a fortnight since he was shaving himself, (Sor he never trusts that operation to a barber) and when he had done about one half of his face, the Other remaining covered with lather, (like the barber’s customer in the Upholsterer) a new and brilliant theory Suddenly dazzled his imagination, of which I mean to give you an account in Some future epistle. He immediately laid down his razor, and stew to his study; and as the idea was fruitful, and kept him in constant employ for more than half an hour, he was of course quite lost in his reverie. At 
this time the Countess of 
a patient 
of 'ours, whose Seat is at a village about three miles distant, called in her coach and desired an audience 
with 
QUI X O T T E, ' 67 
with Wilkins. I immediately ran to insorm him. He startled at the name, which dazzled him more than even the vision from which he was awakened, as he had by this time pretty well exhausted it on paper. But totally forgetting his bodily situation, he stew to the chariot at the door, in the condition described, heightened by an old greasy woollen night cap, which hacl formerly been red and white, neither of which colours were nov very distinguishable, and his old rusty morning gown, whose colours vere equally faded, bound round iiis waist with the ' red garter as formerly described. Mis stockings were down over his ankles, and his shirt collar tucked under his waistcoat, to Save it from the lather. 
F 2 My 
68 PHILOSOPHICAL 
My lady, knowing (I imagine) her man, could not refrain from a loud fit of laughter, on Seeing him in Such a pickle; which quite disconcerted Wilkins, who did not at first perceive the reason of it. But observing at the Same time a mob gathered round him, and hearing their Sarcastical remarks, he instantly recolledled himself; and overwhelmed with confusion, precipitately retired, stammering out an excuse as he fied; but unfortunately, in his haste, tumbled over the step at the door, which in his hurry, and retrograde retreat, he did not think of, which added not a little to the risibility of her ladyship, and the rest of the Spedlators. I obscrved his dilemma, went out immediately, and 
. made 
QUI X O T T E. 69 
made a proper apology to her ladyship, whom I easily prevailed on to walk into the parlour till Mr. Wilkins should be in a condition proper to appear before her. His apology on entering, and the agreeable manner in which she received and rallied it, added not a little to the entertainment, or to poor wilkins’s confusion; and he has not yet heard the last of it from the family. 
Mr. wilkins’s absence is So notorious that the very boys make their jest of it. One day as he was walking up the town in a very thoughtful mood, and Solemn pace, halting at times, as is customary with people in Such a Situation, he happened very unluckily F 3 to 
70 PHILOSOPHICAL 
to be espied by one of the fellows who engaged in the electrical experiments lately recited, and who had ever since been waiting for an opportunity of revenge. Perceiving him to be perfectly absorbed, he engaged Several boys, who were at play just by, to bring, Srom a neighbouring reservoir, a Ycffel full of a certain Something, of no very agreeable odour, the name of which I shall leave to your Sagacity to discover. The material was gently emptied out on the ground, and one of the boys, by the man’s direction, laid himself down about a quarter of a yard before it. When Wilkins arrived, he in coursc stumbled against the boy, (the fellow behind, at the Same instant, giving him a friendly 
push. 
(TU I XOT T E. 71 
push, lest the stumbling block should not have been Sufficient) and he fell plump into the quagmire. The plight in which he found himsclf, added to the exulting taunts of his foe, and the loud laughter of the boys, together with his discovering that Several of the first gentry of the town were oye witneffes of his unseemly condition, produced in poor Wilkins, a situation of mind, which, though it may be imagined by a lively fancy like yours, would be very awkwardly represented by the unssdlful pen of 
Yours, cf 
4 
LETTER 
72 PHILOSOPHICAL 
LETTER XIX 
Dear Sir, 
J H A D been half inclined to think,. 
notwithstanding a former remark, that Mr. wilkins’s principal inducement to philosophical pursuits, vas, (as himself believes) the hop of being useful to mankind. But have lately Seen Sushcient reason to alter my opinion. 
Being lately in one of his best humours, and when the fit of communication was on him, he took me into hu study, and opening his escrutore, took out a large bundle of manuscript papers, (a Spice of that vanity which is common to Scribbling mortals, evi 
ETUI X O T T E. 73^ 
dently appearing in his countenance) and addressed me C n the Subject of them in the Sollowing strain. 
“I have been labouring in the philosophical vineyard, for the gooch of mankind these twenty years past, my dear Harcourt, but the world is as yet very little benefited by my discoveries, as I have hitherto, through a natural diffidence, confined them to the sm^ll circle of my practice. But I now feel a Somethino; within me: which tells me that I do the world an injustice in withholding them, and that it is the indispensable duty of every one who makes an useful discovery, to communicate it. I compare the dis coverer of truth, to the rich man; he 
is 
74 PHILOSOPHICAL 
is only the steward, to whose care the good things of the world are committed, not to minister to his own pleasures, but to dispense' them for the good of others; and I hold the man who makes any other use of either to be highly criminal. I enter on this business the rather, because I am not now a young man; and should I happen to die, my executors, not knovr ing the value of my papers, they may either be wholly lost to the world, or at best very inaccurately and imper fedlly given. 
“As I have conceived an high opinion of your understanding in philosophical matters, I would wish to have your judgement on these papers, previous 
to 
(TU I X O T T E. 75 to their publication; and you will defeat my intention in this measure, if you do not give that judgement impartiallv. Authors are too apt to be blind to their faults; though I believe I may venture to Say that this is less the casc with me than with most others. I would beg, however, to hint that the papers which I am about to Submit to your Scrutiny, will require your utmost attention; for I have Sent Several of them to the Royal Society, the Council of which, through not being capadle of understanding them, have, I imagine, ignorantly concluded them to be of no value, for as yet I have not Seen any notice taken of them in the Philosophical transadtions. And I am Sorry j ^ to observe, that that once famous Society 
7^' 
PHILOSOPHICAL 
ciety is degenerated from what it was in the days when honoured with the name of the illustrious Newton. But permit me to repeat, dear Harcourr, that if you think my lucubrations will not do me honour by the publication, by all means inform me of it; criticise me without mercy, for by that I shall measure your friendship. Should works which have cost me Such immense labour, and So much study, be coolly received by the public, or gibbetted in the reviews, I do not know that I should be able to Survive the piercing grief which it would occasion me. Not that I have any fears from proper.. judges, but it is possible that others may be as incapable of comprehending the truth, and discerning the merit of 
the 
(iu I X O T T E. 77 
the doctrines contained in these papers as the Council of the Society. This age, alas! is not an age of Science!” 
From this Speech, which So evidently Spoke the man, and his real motive for studying for the good of mankind it was not difficult to take the hint of my conduct. It was obvious that the only way of obliging him was by a non ob servance of his injundion. The fate of Gil Bias would teach me as much; .and you well know that it is not now my interest to make Mr. Wilkins my enemy, as an honest compliance with his request would infallibly do. I there 'fore made him an answer expressive of my sense of the high honour which he did me, and the friendship he mani 
• 
; S PHILOSOPHIC AL 
felted for me, in this instance of his confidence, and asslircd him that his injunction should, to the best of my ability, be observed. The titles of Such of the papers as I recollect (for I have forgot the greatest part of them) were as follow t 
“A new and complete System of vi tality, demonstrating, by invincible arguments, that air is the vital principle in animal bodies, “from the little : arrow on the house top, to the lordly creature in the Superb mansion.” 
“A treatise on negative electricity.” In this paper it was proposed to be proved, that negative electricity is pos seffed of medicinal virtues, directly opposite 
. QUI X O T T E. 79 
posite to positive. That as one was a jhmulus.^ the other was a sedative'., as one increased the other must diminish per spiration, c“ 
“proposal for a new, easy, and pleasant method of curing diseases by conveying the virtues of medicines into the System by means of eledlricity.” — ■ The medicine whose virtues were to be introduced, was to be placed within the condudlor, or otherwise; the eledlricity discharged through which into the patient’s body, would carry with it into the System, part of the Substance of that remedy. 
'“A demonstration of the Superior efficacy of blunt' conduflorsy in Securing ■ buildings from lightning. 
“A new 
8o PHILOSOPHICAL 
A newpradtice of physic; proving that the bile is the cause of all the dis eases incident to the human body, and demonstrating the great importance and necessity of an universal antiphlogistic regimen. 
“A treatise on the medicinal uses of hemlock, henbane, and other poison ous plants. With cafes fnewing their efficacy in a variety of diseases. 
“An essay on the great utility and importance of admitting mathematical, mechanical, and metaphysical reasoning into medicine. 
“A new System of Surgery, demonstrating the impropriety and absurdity 
of 
qa I X O T T E: 8f 
of dressing wounds, fraftures, c.” In this treatise it is proposed only to bind up the wound, or fraflure, aster replacing the bone, and leave the cure entirely to nature. 
“A vindication of the general use of injiruments, in parturition, 
‘•an attempt to prove that the gout is an effort of nature to make a fore: sto which is Subjoined a proposal for curing that malady by the application of blistering plasters to the part. 
“A demonstration of the great utility of extradling Sugar from potatoes, and certain other vegetable Substances. 
“Chemical elements of agriculture; showing the .great advantages of ap 
vol, II G 
82 PHILOSOPHICAL 
plying the principles of the hermetic art, to that Science. 
“A new System of astronomy'; containing an account of the original formation of the planets, and their his tory, from the time of their being knocked off from the Sun by the comer, to the present age. 
“A treatise on light and sire; proving that they are compounds of phlogiston and empyreal air“ 
“dissertation tending to show, that phlogiston has a centrifugal force; and that it diminishes the gravity of bo 'dies. 
<chamelimia; 
QUI X O T T E. 83 
Chamelionia; or, a demonstration,, that animals are not nourished by the food they but by the air which they breathe. 
To these were added Several, treating os Subjects which have already been mentioned in my former letters, and therefore need not here be touched upon. 
On these persormances, and many others not noticed, I made occasional remarks; but they were Such as would either tickle, or at least not wound, the vanity os the author. I adopted the plan of the ingenious Editors of ' the Medical Register. They praise many books, but ccnsure none; Their silence, however, is considered as equivalent to the most Severe Satire, though Gz Mr. 
u PHILOSOPHICAL 
Mr. Wilkins, by no means, construed any paucity of praise of mine into Such meaning. As I have myself, occasionally Scribbled in the news papers, and magazines, 1 knew Something of an author’s weak side; and as my hap piness requires that I should make Mr. Wilkins my friend, I, by no means, missed the golden opportunity of tickling him in his tender part. His friendship for me in conscquence thereof, has risen even to enthusiasm. He therefore determined to publish his works as Soon as he could prepare them for the press, and has since beem indefatigable in revising them. But as he Seemed above all things to dread their not being So well received as he wished, and even died, as it were, at 
the 
UI X O T T E. s5 
the thought of being cut up by the Reviewers, (notwithstanding his pretence of publishing merely for the public good) the hope of still further Securing his friendship, prompted me to propose to him to insure succes to his labours, by adopting the following measure. 
‘‘ That as Soon as the volumes were published, he should get two or three of his friends to call them Selves the Mathematical Society, one of the members of which, should write him a letter, as in the name of the whole body, paying him the. highest compliments imaginable on his discoveries, describing their importance and great utility, pointing out the infinite obligations O 3 which 
s6 PHILOSOPHICAL 
which the world is under to him on account of them; and ranking him the foremost of all those who have benefited the world byuseful discoveries. That to this letter there should be Subjoined an answer, thanking the learned Society for their honourable and glorious testimony in his behalf; but at the Same time, intimating a consciousness that the applause was not unmerited. That these letters should be printed in all the news papers, and periodical publications. That the world would imagine it to be the aft of the Royal Society itself., flo other mathematical Society being known; which idea should be Seconded and industrioufiy propagated by him sclf and friends; and which by the way,, would afford him ample revenge on 
the 
(TU I X O T T E. 87 
the R. S. for their treatment of his invaluable papers. That this step would effedlually Secure the applause of the public; and perhaps awe even the reviewers themselves into reverence and adulation. If he thought he could not Succeed in Such a measure among his acquaintance, or did not like to propose Such a thing to them on the Score of delicacy., the letters might be fabricated by himself \ that to my own knowledge the trick had been played by an author now living with all imaginable success, -, 
He Smiled at my proposal, shut whether or no he means to adopt it, I cannot tell, for we were just then interrupted by an urgent message from a G 4- patient, 
88 PHILOSOPHICAL 
not tell, for we were just then interrupted by an urgent message from a patient, and I have not since had an opportunity of discoursing with him on the Subject. His virtue and good ^^nse, will undoubtedly lead him to despise Such a measure; but how far his vanity and fears may incline him to listen to it, must be left for experience to determine. ^ 
J am, 
LETTER 
QUI X O T T E. 
L E 1 T E R XX 
.lfjl 
Dear Dennis, 
R. Wilkins Supped and Spent the evening out about a week ago, (a thing which he very rarely does) and there happened, it Seems, a fracas between the lady and gentleman whom he visited. The former, to use the English phrase, wears the breeches. I heard of this lady’s same 
the first day after my arrival at S -- 
as the most noted Scold in this part of the country. She is indeed, a pcrfedt virago, as you may judge by the following relation. 
After Supper. Mr. M — — ■, (the lady’s husband) proposed to pass the 
remainder 
90 PHILOSOPHICAL 
remainder of the evening in making entertaining philosophical experiments, of which be was very fond. Mr. Wilkins, no doubt, would readily have consented, as it was just in his o’ue'u: way. But the lady proposed cards. As Mr. Wilkins was, by no means, fond of cards, he Seemed rather to savour the hushand’s proposal; and the latter, feeling that it became his dignity as master of the house, to Support his own nomination. Seconded as it was by the only person in company, repeated his motion in more urgent and peremptory terms. Mrs. M -- -, nettled at 
being eontradidled, reddened up and told him, that “Such nonsensical stuff she really detested; and that if he was determined on introducing it, she would 
leave 
QUI X O T T E. 9r 
leave the house for the evening, and go to Some neighbour who would be more indulgent of her desire, ” adding, “that it was hard indeed to be con ^ tradidfed in So trifling an affair. Had she proposed any thing unfashionable or uncommon, he then might have had Some reason for objedling.” Wilkins whispered to Mr. M — — to accede, for quietness Sake, to the lady’s proposal; but the latter, ashamed to be hen pecked before company, determined to maintain his authority, and insisted that no cards should be brought upon the table that evening; calling at the Same time to the Servant to bring up the philosophical apparatus. Mrs. M —, whose temper is highly choleric, stew from her Seat in a rage, and in the violence 
92 PHILOSOPHICAL 
lence of her passion, uttered an oath, that if a Servant dared to bring any instruments into herpresence, she would tear them in pieces, and throw them into the fireand the footman very unluckily entering at that instant with an electrical machine, and an air pump, she stew towards the door in a most violent fit of rage, and fairly did as she had threatened. Fired at the affront offered to himself and visitor, Mr. 
M -- -- vented his resentment (in 
words) at his beloved, who not being used to Such Spirited behaviour, from an hujband., and fearing that if she once gave way her dominion was at an end, not only returned him his own with interest, but not finding a Sufficient vent for her. mighty rage by the organs 
TUI X O T T E. 9^ 
gans of vociferation. Spit repeatedly in his face, with all the venom of d.fap> pointed woman; and Seizing the prime conductor which lay on the floor, beat it about his head, at a most unmerciful rate. The choler of M -- -- -- -- being 
roused by the start of the blows, he began to return the compliment; a pitched battle ensued; and, what you will Say is rather extraordinary, the grey mare proved the better horfs. For being a large masculine woman, and. M -- -- -- but a (lender man, her temper 
also being hot and violent, and his on the contrary, rather milky, the former, giving full loose to her ire, fell too without dread of the consequences, and even hoping for the worst; while the latter, more tenderhearted, and 
fearful 
•94- 
PHILOSOPHIC AL 
fearful of hurting his antagonist, may rather be Said to have acted only on the defenfrve. In five minutes time, however, the Skin of M -- -- -- ’s whole face 
had yielded to the fierce nails of his Amazonian opponent, who tore it away with 'as little remorse as an Indian Savage would the Scalp of an enemy. vshe had made her teeth meet in various parts of his body; and a knife being at hand (beheld, husbands! the dire effects of female rao e) she cut him in two places, and in all probability would have dispatched him, had he not instantly fied from the room, and fortified himself in another apartment. Mr, Wilkins, frightened at the uproar of which himself had been the unwitting cause, after striving in vain to reconcile 
QUI X O T T E. 95 concile the parties, especially when he 
found that M -- -- -- was fase, fled home 
in the greatest horror; but had Scarce entered the shop when M -- -- -- appeared 
at the door, in the bloody condition described, in order to have proper remedies applied to his wounds; for which purpose he had escaped out at 'the parlour window. His bodily wounds being dressed, his friend Wilkins very humanely and affeclionately endeavoured to pour the balm of comfort on those of his mind. But Soon found that the mutual tide of their grief V as as yet too great; and instead of acting the part of the calm mental physician. Swelled the stood of his friend’s Sorrows to its utmost height, by demonstrationaof the most tender Sympathy, 
96 PHILOSOPHICAL 
pathy, and melting pity. Hefelli on wilkins’s bosom, and gave full loose to the grief and agony os his heart, which was So great that he could not resrain from a violent and long conti nued stow of tears. The sense of his un happy Situation quite unmanned him. “O my dear friend, he cried, would that I had never married! And yet why do I give utterance to a wish which my heart even now recoils at? I loved her to distradlion before I wedded, and, found myself miserable without her.. 1 still love, I even dote on her, notwithstanding her faults. I know they, are involuntary, and proceed from a violence of temper which, unhappily for us both, is not in her power to con troul. Were her disposition but eyeiv 
tolerable. 
(T.D I X O T T E. 97 
tolerable, how blessed should I think myself in the poffcssion of her! Has heaven, alas! which has afforded Such. ample means of relief for the disordcrs of the body, provided no remedy for those of the mind? Were it possible, my dear friend, that her temper could be altered to what I once imagined it, what is there that I would not Suffer, what is there that I poffess, which I would not joyfully give, to the physician who should make the happy discovery 

• As Mr. M -- -- -- -- - durst not venture 
home, he was put to bed in wilkins’s house; and an anodyne being administered to him, he rested better than, from the circumstances, could have vol. II H been 
98 PHILOSOPHICAL 
been expected. But So great was the impreshon which the miserable situation of his bosom friend, and old School fellow, made on the tender breast of Mr. Wilkins, that he did not go to bed that night. The manner in which he passed the night, can only be imagined by those who are acquainted with the warmth of his friendship, and his extreme Sensibility. 
■next morning he appeared remarkably Solemn and thoughtsul, and af -- ter M — — was gone home, (peace having first been concluded with the enemy j locked hsimself up in his study till noon. He did the Same after finishing his business (for he ate nothing that stay) and we heard no more of him for 
■lip wards 
1 
QUI X O T T E. 99 
upwards of five hours. About nine o’clock at night he rang for me. I found him with a variety of books lying open besore him, which I imagined he had been consulting. He placed them a little aside, and begged me to 
t 
sit down. After Several painful sighs, and a variety of other evident tokens of grief of heart, he opened the bust. ness on which he had called me, in the manner following. 
He first informed me of the.preceding night’s disaster, as already related; and then poured our, in very lively and affecting strains, his grief for his unhappy friend's misfortune; after having given a loose to which he thus proceeded. 
^ H 2 Assiiredly 
100 PHILOSOPHICAL 
“Assuredly it is possible in nature to cure, or correds the irregularities of temper, as well as to heal bodily diseases. The Creator, who has been So caresul in the latter refpecb, cannot have wholly overlooked the former. It would be incongruous to sup pose it, feeing that our happiness depends not less on the harmony of the temper, than the health of the body. When, for example, a man and woman are joined together for life, and a fault in the temper of one of them turns that state into a curse, which was expected to have been a Source of happiness, the party not in fault is even made more miserable than the other. But this is evidently unjust; and, together with various other considerations. 
m 
QUI X O T T E. loi 
tions, which have occurred in the course of this day’s intense application to the Subject, have convinced me that nature has provided proper remedies for the tempery and that, as in physic, nothing but our industry is wanting to discover them. 
“On consulting Such authors as are likely to throw any light on this myi terious and difficult Subject, I find that Some of them propose to regulate 'the temper by means of proper diet. I - approve of the principle, but it would be a work of time. And besides there would hardly be a possibility of getting any patient, much Ids one of So violent a cast of temper as the lady in question, to renounce all other grati h ^ fications. 
102 PHILOSOPHICAL 
fications, and persevere for life in the regimen required. I have even rcason to think that the advantages to be derived from it, would, by no means, compensate Sor the inconveniences, especially in the case before us. But I flatter my ielf I have been So happy as to hit on a method which will not only effect the desired purposc at once, but in a far more effedlual and infallible manner, than could possibly be hoped for from the plan just mentioned. 
I find related in a celebrated author, that the blood of a dog, transfused into the body of a man, communicated to the latter the mental charadteris tic properties of the former. That the man, for example, barked, howled. 
Snarled, 
QUI XOT T E. 103 
Snarled, c, in every re Sped! like a dog. 'I'his fact, I cannot but observe, is demonstratively confirmed by the well known principle, that the life is in the blood for from thence it follows of course, that stich as the blood is, fiich is the animal. Hence appears the reason of a well known phenomenon, which has often struck me, but for which I have not, till now, been able to account. Animals of different Species have different and Specific tempers. The fox, for example, is Subtle; the ass dull. The lion is courageous, the hare timid; The tygei* is fierce; the lamb quiet and gentle. And in like manner we might run through the whole animal creation. these differences of temper evidently H 4 proceed 
x04 PHILOSOPHICAL 
proceed from the different and Specil sic nature of their blood. 
“From this theory the easiest inference imaginable follows, viz. that the temper or char aft erifiic state of the mind of an ammai may be varied by altering the nature of its blood. And it appears evident to me, that as different vegeta hies were calculated to heal Such and Such discases of the body., So the design of nature in thus varying the tempers of ariimals, was, that they might be applied to the curing the disorders of the temper. This observation indeed, has not escaped the notice of former philosophers. Thus, the hearts of lions eaten, have been thought to inspire courage; the flesh of goats, lust; and 
So 
Q^U 1 X O T T E. 105 
So of others. But they have evidently proceeded on a wrong principle; for not only the blood of animals when killed is purposely thrown away, but the parts eaten, by passing through the digestive organs, have their nature entirely altered; and as if they were not already dead enough, they are further changed by the destrudlive force of fire; though it is obvious, that not only the blood, but the living blood, is the only part of an animal on which, in the present business, we can have any dependance. From this reasoning therefore, as well as from the fact before recited, it is evident xhz.ithe blood dtfdf, in its natural and living Jlate, must he transfused immediately into the vafeu -- 
lar 
io PHILOSOPHTCAL 
lor fyjiem^ and then it will undoubtedly have the effect desired“ 
“discovery, therefore, of the great design of nature in varying the tempers of animals, and its cause., we are enabled to apply to the most important purposes, though evidently no other than those originally intended; alhcreatures having been made for the good of man, and subservient to his use. By tstansfusing the living blood of animals into the vessels of the human Species, we may vary their tern per as we please. If, for example, a man has a termagant wife, by transfusing into her the blood of a lamb, she shall become gentle and mild. If she be impatient,, the blood of an ass will, 
make. 
QUI X O T T E. roy 
make a' very Grizzle of her. If foolish;;,, the blood of a fox will make her a wit and if as cross as Juno, the blood of turtle doves will bring her down to be as kind and complying as Venus herself. And all this will be done without any trouble or expense, or Such at least as is not worth mentioning, which adds to the merit of the discovery, and is a farther proof that it had ' its foundation in an original'design o nature, agreeable to what has been already mentioned.. 
“Nowl mean to apply this discovery in the case of my unfortunate friend;; and am confident that the most happy effects will immediately result from it. Tshe only doubt,, that remains with me,, 
and, 
ro PHILOSOPHICAL 
and on which I would request your judgement, is, “whether the afs or the lamb is the ingredient most wanting in the composition of the lady in ques tion 
I could not suppress an immoderate fit of laughter on hearing So ridiculous a proposal So Seriousiy delivered. absurd as it was, yet for the Sake of Securing his friendship, I would willingly have forwarded it, could it have been done with the least prospedt of success. But as that was not the case, the following appeared to me to be the more elegiblc mode of conduct. 
After paving the way to my dissentient, by paying him the most fulsome 
compliments 
Q U I X O T T E. 109 
compliments on the ingenuity of his System, I replied, “that in my opinion the question was, not what animals should be employed on the occasion, but whether it was poshble So far to Subdue the tiger in the lady’s disposition as to get her to Submit to the operation at all For that very 
probably she would ring poor M -- -- -- 
no very agreeable changes on the words afs and lamb. That from the famous instance of the foreign nobleman, it was a doubt with me whether the operation could be performed with Safety. And, in, whether the relation in the author to whom he alluded, was not entirely fabulous, however conso nantit might be to his (wilkins’s) admirable theory. That Supposing it 
true. 
no p: hilosophic AL 
true, yet as the man animated with the blood of a dog, performed the actions of that animal, whether it would not equally follow that the haying of the afs, or the Meating of the lamb., among other properties of these animals, would not also be transferred to the lady? Though probably, her hus band would rather bear with those, than with her tongue in its present state. — That I Submitted to shim, whether it would not be prudent to try the event os the experiment previoussy on am mals?; For that if it would Succeed a greeable to the theory in human sub jetsts, it must equally in them. The ‘blood of a lion, for, example, trans fused into the vessels of an hare, would .give that timid animal courage, in the 
same 
Q^V I X O T T E. im 
■siame proportion as it would to man. And the blood of a fox would impart wisdom alike to the ass, and the dunce of the human Species.” Wilkins had difccrnment enough to perceive the justness of the last mentioned argument, and agreed to make the experiments, which we Set about that very evening. We procured Several dogs, cats, and lambs; an ass, an hare; and a fox, from a fellow in the town, who had Several, which he carried about for show; together with a variety of Such other animals as were attainable; and the two following days were Spent in transfusions; the particu lars.of .which it would be tedious to relate. The results, however, .were ‘such as that'in many gases,, either the 
animals 
112 PHILOSOPHICAL 
animals died, or else became So ill that no just inference could be drawn. But in general, the appearances with regard to the temper were, by no means, favourable to Mr. wilkins’s theory. The ass retained his stupidity, though animated with the blood of the fox. The lamb did not bark, though silled with the blood of the dog. The cat did not appear to be less irritable, notwithstanding that the blood of the gentle lamb glided through its vessels; neither was the hare more fierce, though adluated with the vital principal of the cat. In short, the results of the experiments, were So far from verifying Mr. wilkins’s theory, that himself at length, convinced of its absurdity, re.. gave it up. 
1 am, c. 
QUI X O T T E. 113 
LETTER XXL 
Dear Sir, 
OINCE I wrote last, we have been favoured with the company of our old friend and schoolfellow, Jack Steady. In return from a visit to a place not far from hence, his horse fell with him, and Mr. Wilkins being the nearest medical gentlcmari, he was brought hither for assistance. His bruises, however, proved to be but trifling; he vas more frightened than hurd’i and in consec]uence of iht former rather than the latter.y readily accepted wilkins’s invitation to take up his residence with him for that night. I did not happen to be at home when he VOL. II I came. 
114 PHILOSOPHICAL 
came, and you will guess at our mutual Surprise and pleasure at the unexpected rencounter on my entering the room. “Harcourt!” Said Steady, in amazement, “Is it really thee ?” Without waiting to answer, I ran up to him, caught his hand with both mine, poured out the joy os my heart at meeting him, together with the most ardent gratitude for his visit; and, imagining he had come purposely to See me, asked, “how he came to know that I lived here He replied, “that though he would gladly have gone twice that d Stance to See me, his present visit was not owing to design, for that he was ignorant till that moment of the place of my residence.’* And both himself, and }vilkins, proceeded 
QUI X O T T E. 115 
ceeded to insorm me of the particulars of the accident. Finding that his hurt was So trivial, I could not refrain from expressing my joy at his ndsfortune, since it had been the occasion of So happy an interview. Wilkins leemed delighted that he had obliged lo dear a friend of mine; and after dinner, very politely retired to his study, leaving us, with a bottle of wine, to ourselves. After much talk on domestic affairs, and inquiry after old acquaintance, (you, in particular, was not forgotten by him) he proceeded to question me concerning my present situation, of which I gave him a very particular account, together with the character, and Z variety of anecdotes of Mr. Wilkins, with which he Seemed greatly delight 
I 2 ed. 
ii PHILOSOPHICAL 
CD And after indulging a hearty laugh. Said, ‘‘ I also have to do with a genius little less singular than yours, though of a different cast and then in his turn proceeded to relate the history of the gentleman whom he was pleased to call h\s, principal. 
‘‘ I have lately, ” Said he, “taken up my diploma; and as my circumstances will not permit me to launch forth into practice on my own bottom, have put myself under the protection of the noted Hypocritus* Wriggle, with whom I live in the capacity of author., and medical ajftjiant. This gentleman has the shill to cover an artful and designing disposition, with the 
outward 
* Quere? Is not this/word mis fpeltf ought it not to be Hippocrates? 
UI X O T T E.. II 
outward Semblance os gravity and simplicity. He passes with the public for a man of humanity and deep learning; and has had the address to work himself into considerable practice by his Subtle conduct, an history of which might aptly enough be termed, “The “Art of Rising in Physic.” I shall not trouble you with a recital of his intriguing with apothecaries and nurscs, of being called out from company, and a long catalogue of other artifices, (all which he has adopted with success) but proceed directly to what may be properly called his own. 
“His first great maxim is, “bring your name often before the public; “k will, by degrees, become fami i 5 “liar. 
n8 PHILOSOPHICAL 
liar to them, and they will at length “think you a man of consequence.’* For this purpose, the dodor contrives to have his name appear every now and then in paragraphs in the newspapers, V ?hich everybody read. For example. 
“Yesterday as Dr. Wriggle was re“ “in his chariot from Such a V place, he was attaeked by two high“ “who demanded his money, 
c— — 
On Wednesday last, as Dr. Wriggle and his lady, &c.’* 
I interrupted him with observing, that the case was natural enough for a person when robbed to publish it’ in the newspapers. 
But 
QUI X O T T E. 119 
But replied Steady, “Dr. Wriggle was never robbed.’* 
Not robbed ?’* 
I 
“No. It was a mere invention, a pretext for bringing his name before the public! Half the robberies we read of in the, newspapers were never committed. — There are a variety of other methods by which a man may bring his name before the public in the newspapers, all which Dr. vsriggle has Successfully ernployed. 
adly. “Let everything about you “Speak learning and gravity.” 
I 4 
The 
120 PHILOSOPHICAL 
“The hall of the doftor’s house, for example, is a perfect museum. A patient no Sooner has the street door opened to him than he is struck with the appearance of mosses, shells, dried foreign animals, and the like. He is led immediately to conclude, that the Doctor (like your Solomon) is a very deep man; as indeed he is in one senscof the word. Dr. Wriggle has even had the address to unite both the foregoing maxims. He has made a present to a certain celebrated Repository of Natural Curiosities, of a mummy which he has taken care to have placed in a very conspicuous part of the collection. The mummy indeed is fastened up in a box, and is never Seen, or 
inquired 
QUI X O T T E. II 
inquired aster. But on the box itsclf, is written in characters Sufficiently legible, The Gift of Hvpocritus Wriggle, M. D. c. The visitants learn by this, that there is Such a man as Dr. Wriggle and that he would be thought a great virtuoso * is all that the Doctor meant by the present. 
3dly; 
* The following anecdote, related by Steady, will serve as a specimen of the dosor’s knowledge in his favourite study“ 
“Wriggle is fond of being thought a great naturalist, and on that subject will freely converse even with those who are by much his inferiors. He had, in particular, an old gardener, who used to procure him insects, c. in order that the Dr. might find them out by the de feriptions in his systematical authors. The old, • man 
i PHILOSOPHICAL 
^dly. “Engage in controversy with eminent men, ” a most excellent way os bringing a man into public notice. This was the dodstor’s motive for attacking Dr. Variolus, and others. It was the Same principle that led him to 
descend 
man, one day, desirous of trying the doflor’s skill, (hewed him a very particular and nvell known insect, asking“ “he could tell him what it was ?” Wriggle viewed it with attention, “Is it? (said he to himself) or 
? or rather } c” ” 
ning on with a number of generic and fpe clfic names, which the man (who told me the story) could neither recollect nor understand. At length, confessing his ignorance, he alked the gardener if he knew it? “I dont know what “you lamed men may call it in Greek and “Latin, (said the gardener) but we plain fel lows call it a cr — b 1 — e.” 
QJJ I X O T T E. 123 
descend to an altercation with the celebrated Dr. mareswater. Here indeed he had a double advantage; for the public were artsully led to believe that he engaged in this tassk from a principle of putgphilanthrophy! A principle of all others the most remote from the breast of Dr. Wriggle. 
4thly. “Always pretend that you have a deal of bufiness on your hands, and the world will conclude that you are in great practice.” With this view Dr. Wriggle is constantly out So many hours in the day; and always in a bus tle. At firji sitting out., he used to have a number of poor people whom he visited gratis. He Sat tbetn down in his 
list 
124 PHILOSOPHICAL 
list zsprime patients which list he took Sufficient care to display to his brethren of the faculty. With the poor thcm selvcs, who were incapable of diving into his motives, this passed for charity > But Dr. Wriggle always took care that his carriage should stop, not at the housc of pauper but of Some 
person of consequence in the neighbourhood; the inhabitants of which,, were, in coursc, imagined to be the doctor’s patients. 
“If a friend happens to be with him at home, and another friend chances to call on him at the time that the former is going away, the Doctor takes a guinea or two fiily out of his pocket, and displaying them in his hand with a 
Seemingly 
QUI X O T T E. 125 
Seemingly careless air. Says, — You “See, Sir, these arc the people we get “our money by.” — The visitor is thereby made to believe, that the gentleman was 2k patient, and that the two guineas had just been received as a see. 
5thly. “Force yourself into the company of great men, and the world will think you one of the number; according to the old maxim, tell me the company you keep, and I will tell you what you ares It partly with this view that he courted the acquaintance of the famous Dr. Worthy, * 
make 
* By the oversetting of an ink stand, the following paragraphs were fo blotted in the copy, hat the whole of them could not be made out. 
126 PHILOSOPHICAL 
make the world believe 
first in frienajhi'^ Succeed him in practice great man Saw motives 
turned him out 
last illness seen 
by, much less trust 
* health, called every day to inquire about him admitted no further than the hall, 
stop 
there a considerable time that people might see his carriage at the great marfs door; and you will easily conclude that Dr. Wriggle did not fail to make his advantage of this circumstance with the public. 
"“With 
Q^V I XOT T E. 127 
With a similar view, he has since announced the publication of his dear friend’s works 
unfinished papers, artfully 
obtained. 
for the publ 
letters never intended 
good round price 
The Doctor, besides, makes other advantages of his friend’s reputation 
imitates his hand writing in his prese,, 
of his unaf 
Gaoled same 
bensonian medal 
apothecaries, nurses, and others, in his interest and jay in different parts 
of 
128 PHILOSOPHIC AL 
of the town, who have it in instruction to blazon their patrorfs same. The language of the public now is, “The world has Suffered a great loss in the death of Dr. Worthy.” My intridf% puffers are directed to reply, “Why to be Sure, Dr. Worthy was a great physician. So was Philip of Macedon a great hero; but Philip was Succeeded by an /^lexan der, and Worthy by a Wriggle! 
After interrupting him with a hearty laugh at his description of his master’s character, my curiosity prompted me to ash him — “But what, pray, is your business with this gentleman? Though apothecaries employ assistants, 1 never heard that there were journeymen phy ftdansv 
“My 
QUI X O T T E. 129 
“My employment, he replied, “is chiefly in the capacity of Author and Puff Dr. Wriggle, as I observed before, is continually making his appearance in public, either in paragraphs or essays in the newspapers and magazines, or else in pamphlets. But the Doctor cannot write; and to me he has modesty (a quality by the way which you would not expect to meet with in Wriggle) to acknowledge it. He hints the nature of what he would have written, and L put it to paper. 
I have now been absent from him for' Some time, during which the public has heard nothifg from Dr. Wriggle. Novi am returning to London, you will Sec that the town will be deluged with his publications. The Doctor, 
vol. II K besides, 
130 PHILOSOPHICAL 
besides, is about removing to another quarter and we must contrive, (I Sear at poor wprthy’s expense) to appear frequently in print, in order that the public may know, from the date cs our Puffs, where he lives. A most excellent mode of advertisement! 
^ c. e the ink stand!) 
“You have Seen, I presume, Several treatises published with the dodtor’s name. these, though not very gra cioufiy received by the faculty, or applauded by the reviews, the Dodfor has had the interest to get well Spoken of in at least one publication, with the printer of which he is intimately acquainted. 
* Some palace, I think, or nobleman’s seat. 
QUI X O T T E. 131 
quainted. And you will judge of his modejiy by the following account of his own oration., written and Sent by him sels. 
“We have osten had occasion to “admire Dr. Wriggle as a phyjician; “we have more than once adrshred “him as 2. philosopher. We have now “to admire him in the character of an orator; to form which, (accord“ “to Cicero) Such an infinite num“ “of importanrqualifications must “concur. In the multiplicity of buss.. “in which this learned physician “is constantly engaged, we wonder “how he can possibly find time, c.” This, though it may be matter of amazement to iht printer, and even to K 2 ’ the 
132 PHILOSOPHICAL 
the puhlici is by no means So to Dr. Wnggk^ or — He was proceeding 
to anecdotes more curious than any of those related. But at that instant Mr. Vv ilkins, to my great regret and disappointment, imagining, I suppose, that we had Said all we had to Say to each other, retutned from his study, in order to Spend, with his guest, the remainder of the evening. Supper was theresore brought, (unwelcome meal!) a conversation of a very different nature was introduced; we cheerfully emptied a bottle or two, and then retired to rest. In the morning. Steady rose early to pursue his journey, and make up for his lost time. And after our taking a mutual and affectionate farewell, without waiting for the formality of breakfast, he rode off. 
As 
• See also the Gal —; in which he has himself styled the pivike Wriggle, 
TUI X O T T E. 13? 
As however, I have reason to think that Wilkins will be in London in the course of next Summer, (when he proposes to call on his visitor, in order to get introduced to Wriggle, of whose character I have given him the above account) and as Steady has promised to commence a correspondence with me, I hope I shall Soon be enabled to delineate to you the remainder of this extraordinary character, and even to introduce him to you in fropria per -- fona. Should that be the cafe, you may consider this as a mere introdufiion to the performance, the prokgue to the comedy which I doubt not will afford us both, ample matter of merriment and risibility. 
I am, dear Sir, 
Yours, c. 
k3 
134 PHILOSOPHICAL 
LETTER XXIL 
Dear Sir, 
R. Wilkins had lately been dipping at times into the Universal Hifiory; and one day at dinner our conversation turned on the various revolutions which had taken place in the different kingdoms of the world. He expatiated with great eloquence on the excellence of history in insorming us of the events which had happened previous to our own existence, and enlarged much on the happiness, as well, jrs important advantages, which mankind derived from that rich Source. At the Same time, not Satisfied with the. ^ajl his curiosity was also raised with, 
re Sped. 
QUI XOT T E. 135 
respedt to the future', and he lamented exceedingly, that in human affairs we had no means of obtaining the least ^ information in that particular. He expressed deep regt; et that the moral world was not governed by laws equally obvious with the natural; and that their events were not alike Subject to mathematical calculation. If we would know the state of the planetary System five hundred or a thousand years hence, we can Satisfy oursetees, by a proper calculus, with the greatest ex adtness and certainty; but in affairs which mere intimately concern usy we are left wholly in the dark Irr the planetary System, we have the requisite data from objects of sense. We know the laws'of their revolution; and by K 4 observing 
136 P HI LOSOPHICAL 
observing their places at present, can compute them to any future period. But in morals nothing of this kind takes place. The obje<5ls which only can afford the tiata, besides being fleeting and uncertain, come not under the cognizance of our senses. All is trans adted behind the curtain; So that the only method whereby we could possibly acquaint ourselvcs with future events, would be by rendering life 
— - — -- but that is imp —. Ha !” 
At that instant a new idea Seemed to have Struck him; he paused awhile, looked thoughtful, then started from the table, and hastened to his study, where he remained, lost to the little concerns of bufiness, .the whole afternoon. 
In 
ETUI X O T T E. 137 
In the evening he made his appearance, and took me with him into the parlour. He Seemed to be wonderfully pleased as with Some great disco very. After making an apology for his abrupt departure from dinner, he desired me to sit down, took his Seat by me, and then addressed me as follows: 
“I have been So happy, my dear friend, as to have hit on a method of acquiring the important Species of knowledge, which at dinner time I So pathetically lamented the want of; and cannot but 'congratulate mankind oil a discovery which will afford them Such infinite advantages and Satisfaction. The future will now be more 
completely 
138 PHILOSOPHICAL 
completely known to us than even the paji! -- l showed you at noon that the acquiring a knowledge of future moral events, by mathematical computation, was, in the nature of things, impossible; and as we have (now at least) no intelligence with those Superior be ings, who may be supposed capable of giving us information in these matters, the only method that remains would be to preserve our existence (if possible) to the period whose hijtory we want to be acquainted with. Now I flatter myself, that I have discovered a means whereby this effect, strange as it may Seem,. may be brought about. 
“But to proceed to the Subject— — the celebrated discovery of the Russian 
academicians,, 
QUI X O T T E. 139 
academicians, year enabled to correct our erroneous ideas, relative to freezing, and no longer confine them to chrystallized water, whitened fields, hoary trees, and aching singers. All bodies in a Solid state we now consider as So many Species of ice. Iron, for example, is the ice of the martial siuor, ^ and tallow the ice of animal oil. 
“Now it is to be noticed that the operations of nature are never performed' in a Solid, but always in a fluid or vapoury form. The ice of muji will nor ferment. The ice of animal oil will' not'burn. To these processes it is requisite that they Snould be thawed into fluids, or even ratified, by a still greater beat, into vapour. While they continue 
140 PHILOSOPHICAL 
tinue in a Solid form, they remain in a state of suspencc, of inadivity, of steep, of death. 
“A candle, for example, may be considered as ice; and therefore its powers, or active principles, are in a state of cessation, or suspence; even as a dock when it is standing still, but which art can again let a going at pleasure. If I put this candle into a proper state by means of heat, it kindles, it flames; and, if left to itself, would, in a few hours, burn entirely away. If I let this candle burn only a while, then put it out, or in other words, restore it to its state of inadlivity, I may keep it for any length of time; but its power of inflammation remains, and 
may 
U I X O T T E. 141 
may be renewed at pleasurc. I may, for instance, burn it a few minutes now, a few minutes a year hence, and So on till it be consumed. Rut by varying the time of its combustion, and the interval of its renovation, I may prolong its existence to any distant period I please. 
“We have every reason to infer from analogy, that flame and life are, at the bottom, one and the Same thing. Modern discoveries hare placed this matter even beyond doubt. Call therefore the inflammation of the candle its life. Let it burn, (that is live., or exiji) a little now, again a year hence, and So on, till its life be quite burnt out. Apply this to the life of an animal, and 
what 
si42 PHILOS O P H I CAL 
what a glorious idea prcsents itself to our view! I am astonished that it should never have occurred to a philosopher besore. 
“The period of our existence is usual ly confined to about threescore years, and we have hitherto lived it out in con tmuo. We are, therefore, confined as it were to a momenta mere Span of existence. We know indeed what has past, though very imperfetstly, from history; and our scnses in’form us of what is going forward during the short period of our being. But of futurity, alas! we remain in a state of total ignorance, for reasons already given. Yet how many thousands of our countrymen are at this instant anxious to 
know 
CL‘U I X O T T E. 143 
know what will be the state of Britain five hundred years hence? And what would they not give to be able to peep 'Up at thatdistant period to Satisfy them selves in So imporfant a particular! "What would not Halley have given could he have lived in the year 58, to be Satisfied of the truth or falsehood of his doctrine, relative to the cornetary System! And what pleasure would it not give a monarch, or a gentleman, to be able to know the state of his posterity, or an author that of his fame, atthedistanceof thirty centuries? But all this may be obtained with the greatest ease, by means of the disco very, which my good genius has this day Suggested to me. By living a lir_ tie now, and a little then, and So on 
repeatedly, ' 
144 vl H I L O S O P H I C AL 
repeatedly, I may know for example,, how the world goes an hundred, a thousand, or ten thousand years hence I may prolong the period of my existence even to the day of resurredlion. 
“That the analogy really holds good with regard to animals, is certain from facts that are frequent in our days, though an age or two ago they would have been deemed impossible. w’e See. the vital motions of human beings to stand still, during a whole hour. They, arc then in the State of an extinguished candle. At the end of that time, life is rekindled in them by the assistance of art,, as effectually as is the flame of the extinguished taper by fire. They then both equally burn on; and if life 
can 
qa I X O T T E. 145 
can be renewed after having been interrupted for an hour, it may equally be renewed at the distance of a year, or a century. We have only to preserve the body in the mean time from putrefadlion; and this may effectually be done by freezings which is the state of the non existent animal already Supposed. 
“Now as I am determined to have the honour of being the first sub jedl of this glorious experiment, I would v/iih to consult with you a little about the means. Shall I shut myself up in an icehouse?? the temperature of this climate be Sufficient to Secure me against the influence of the Suns resolvent beams? Or had I not vol. II L better, 
14-6 F H IL O S O P HICA L 
better, think you, retire to Some more northern region,, or to the Summit of Some Alpine mountain, where, in tombed in everlasting ice; or buried in eternal Snow, my automaton may be Safely preserved till twice fifty years at the expiration of which I mean to be revived for a while, in order to See what is doing in the world, and to learn what has gone forward during, the interval of my nonentity: : the people of that age will stare at me!) When this point is Settled,, if you,, my. dear friend,, will be So kind' as to take upon you, the management of my congelation, and: interment, L will take care to leave proper dircc tians, t.q my descendants,, in order to,. 
my 
QUI X O T T E. 147 
my being revivified at the desired period.” 
A person unacquainted with Mr. Wilkins, who should hear the rela* tion of this curious anecdote, would' think it romance. To have kept my countenance at this Singular proposal, would have argued an apathy beyond' that of a Stoic; and X was never more at a loss than for the manner in which' I should answer it. Christmas was now at hand.. To have given him the least offence, might have been fatal to my repose. Mere reasoning, I judged, from the firm confidence which he Seemed to have in his theory, would have been by no means Sufficient to undeceive him. After tickling his val 
2 
nity, 
148 PHILOSOPFIICAL 
nity, therefore, with a prolusion of compliments, expressive of my admira iion, and afionijhment at the depth of his genius, and the infinite merit of his discovery, I judged it most prudent to answer him in the manner following. 
That I by no means meant to deprive him of the glory of being the first person who should make this great experiment. But that as the business vas as yet merely Speculative, though to the eye of reason absolutely demonstrable, I had So great a regard for his valuable life (as well as for the welfare and happiness of my feilow creatures, which were So nearly connected •with it) that I would prerume to Submit 
QUI X O T T E. 149 
mit wshether it would not be better first to make the experiment on Some animal ^ If it proved successful, as indeed there was no doubt, he might still have the honour of being the first human being on whom it was tried, and even the first animal on whom it was made in the way he mentioned. 
As he had no doubt of its success, he consented to the proposal, not to Satisfy any Scruples of his own, but merely to convince me. As it happened at that very time to be frosty, he Sat about the experiment the Same evening. A little dog, partly by natural, and partly by artificial cold, was completely frozen; and you may easily guess how eager he was the next L 3 
ISO PHILOSOPHICAL 
morning to Satisfy me of the truth of his theory by the event. The animal was put into warm water, and the methods proposed by the Humane Society were made use of to revive him. He thawed indeed, but alas 1 life was not restored! It was only a thawed dead dog / 
Concluding that there was Some er ror in the mode he repeated the experiment, and applied the resolvent principle in different ways. By the vapour of water, for example; by warm quicksilver, oil. Sand, the open air, by friction, and by the human breath; but in neither instance did the revivis cence, in the Smallest degree, take place. 
At 
QUI X O T T E. it 
At length, it occurred to him, that in cold countries they restored the frozen parts of animals, by rubbing them with Snow; other means ps thawing, proving not only ineffe6tual, but even fatal to the part. As we had, a few days before, a fall of Snow, he tried the experiment in this mode; but it failed, alas! though repeated in every variety of circumstances which even Ms inventive genius could Suggest. 
Having thus lest him to undeceive himself by he was, by this time, 
I imagined, prepared to listen to ra' iiocination. 1 theresorc ventured to Submit to him “whether there was, in sad, the analogy which he imagined L 4 between 
152 PHILOSOPHICAL 
between the candle, and an animal? That the candle was a mere chemical Substance; whereas the animal was an organised body; the fine me chanism of which was probably destroyed by the expansion consequent on the congelation. That the instances os recovery after drowning, if they bore any analogy to siame, could only probably be compared to the Mowing in of a candle whose wick is not yet extinguijjoed; but that the analogy did nor, by any means, hold good when the vital power of the animal was once wholly Suppressed.” In short, though it vas hard for him to give up So darling and dazzling an hypothesis, yet by these reasonings, together with his own experiments, he Seemed at 
length 
QUI X O T T E. 153 
length to be convinced; and I believe he has now laid aside all thoughts of putting his congelation project in qkc cution. 
I am, cp. 
S. Chrijlmas is at hand. My next, I hope, will inform you of the completion of my happiness. O! how I long for the joyful period! 
LETTER 
354 PHILOSOPHICAL 
LETTER XXIII 
My Dear Friend, 
rp HE happy season approached; I 
1 
felt an increasing desire of its arrival, 
and the last week Seemed longer than all the preceding interval. As it was So long since I had Seen the dear angel (for to a lover what an eternity is three months!) my anxiety for an interview became the more ardent, and was encreased by a thousand little circumstances of not Sufficient con Sequence to you to mention. A child did not long more for the promised toy, on the approaching fair, than I did for the arrival of that blisssul tide which was to return to my arms the dear object of my wishes, on whom 
the 
QJJ I X O T T E. 155 
the whole happincss of my future lisc eniirelv rested. 
At length, the happy period arrived. The post chaise stopped at the door, and before I could run to hand her out, she entered the shop. Our eyes met instantly, and but that the laws of vitality forbade, our Souls would have rushed through them into union. We were constrained, however, to put our sdves to the mortification of affecting indifference by the arrival of Mr. Wilkins from the parlour, whither he concluded the dear charmer, whose expressive looks, gave me the pleasing assurance that her affection for merre matned in its full force 
Ic 
i5si PHILOSOPHICAL 
It Seemed an age to dinner time, but at length I was called. When I entered the diningroom, her anxious eyes met mine, as if waiting for them, and involuntarily declared her Sentiments in much stronger language than words. She Seemed conscious of this, and overpowered with blushes, instantly turned them aside, with a modest dignity which I even adored. I paid her those compliments before Mr. Wilkins, on the occasion of her return, which any indifferent person would have done from mere courtesy. And though I could not refrain from continual glances, yet Such was the majesty of her deportment, or the awe of parental presence, that I could not once catch her eyes during dinner time, 
nor 
QUI X O T T E. 157 
nor could I obtain that satisfaction even when I retired, which I own alarmed me. About an hour after dinner, Mr, Wilkins went out on business. I immediately stew to the parlour, and threw myself at the feet of my foul’s idol, expressing the transports which I felt at her return. Perceiving by her reception of me that my fears were ill-founded, and that her affection was even encreased, I Sprung from the ground, clasped her to my melting bosom, and wc remained for Some minutes mutually intranced in bliss. Recovering, I bathed her dear lips with kisses, and was proceeding to pour out the raptures of an heart overflowing with gratitude and love, after So long an absence from its object; but the 
first 
158 PHILOSOPHICAL 
first embrace at meeting over, which she judged it not improper to indulge, she gently put me away with her wonted ineffable modesty. I Seated myself by her side, and had the inexpressible happiness of being in her company near two hours; at the end of which time she expected her father’s return. I enjoyed during that blisssul period, all the happiness which honourable love could ash, or female virtue bestow. 
In the course of this blissful interview, it was agreed, - that as she was' now to remain at home, - our acquaintance should be continued, under proper rcstridlions, for a few weeks, im order to giv^ it the air of novelty; at 
the. 
Q^V I X O T T E. 159 
the end of which time, I had leave to propose the matter to Mr. Wilkins,, by whose determinationv however, she was still resolved to abide,, whether favourable or not, to her wishes (for that: was her endearing expression.) But he was not to know that we had, as yet, formed any connedhon y I was only to alk his permission to say my addrejfes ta her.. 
The days glided happily on,, and !> enjoyed in her company, at intervals, the full measure of bliss that nature was capable of Sustaining, I daily, dined, with her,, played with her occasionally, at cards; heard her divine voice, while she accompanied it with such strains, as only a celestial could 
equal’ 
io PHILOSOPHICAL 
equal. And my being constantly in her dear presence, and united with her in the Hymeneal band, were all that was now wanting to render my happi ness complete. I had the Satisfaction to find that her wishes entirely corresponded with my own. 
My assiduity to please Mr. Wilkins in the mean time, you will easily imagine, was not a little quickened. I had formerly ventured, on many occasions, to Speak my own Sentiments on his philosophical opinions and projects; but I now flattered him even in his absurdities, and (God forgive me) frequently applauded his wisdom, when I ought, in justice, to have ridiculed his folly. There was no instance, 
though 
silui X O T T E. il 
though ever. So trivi^^j^n which I did not strive to oblige him, and win his friendship. 
At length the three long weeks were past:, and the important period arrived when I should Solicit him for the completion of my happiness. 
I was with him in his study, and we had just been revising Some of his pieces for publication. I repeated, and urged more home, the puffing Scheme which I had lately Suggested ho him; he at length confessed himself to have been highly delighted with it; that he had already determined to adopt it, and only feared that I should one day or other betray the imposture. 
vol. II M But 
ii PHILOSOPHICAL 
But I pledged myself to him for Secrecy in Such ardent terms, that he was Satisfied of my confidence, and we even drew up a copy of the advertisement. In the course of our revise, I stuck at no flattery to tickle him in his weakest and most tender part; I found indeed that there was none So gross that he would not Swallow. And knowing the quarter from whence he had his fears, I even ventured to tell him, (pardon kind Venus the lie !)that “I “was acquainted with Several os the “gentlemen concerned in the reviews, “and could make interest with them to Speak in the highest terms of his “performance.” The man melted within him at this assurance;; heart Seemed entirely at my disposal; and to 
express 
q^tr I X O T T E. 163 
express the workings of his gratitude the more strongly, he clasped me ardently to his breast, and assured me, “that there was nothing that 1 could “ash, in his power to grant, which he “would not think himself infinite“ “obliged by giving him an op portunity to bestow, ” I immediately Seized the blessed occasion. My vanity even Suggested to me, that he had made this unreserved offer purpose ly to give me an opportunity of ashing the desired boon. I fell instantly at his feet, and Said “There is one favour. Sir, in your power to grant, by which you would make me the happiest of men. I asik not gold, nor any other bauble of worldly value. But you have a daughter! — Would you deign to M 2 permit 
i64 PHIL os OP HI CAL 
permit me to offer my addresses to her, and to use your interest with her in my behalf, all that I can do for you in Suture, I shall think infinitely too little 
for So great a blessing.” 
He started back at my proposal, and Seemed quite thunder struck! After a long pause, with visible emotions of agony and distrtss, he answered me in the manner following. 
End of the Second Volume. 
us I 
! Ur. 





